 
Protocol date :  7 / 0 6 / 2 0 2 0           
 
DEPARTMENT OF SURGERY  
Cancer Control Research Program  
Wilmot Cancer Institute 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EXERCISE INTERVENTION FOR LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL, AND 
TRANSGENDER (LGBT) CANCER SURVIVORS  
 
  
 
 
STUDY CHAIR:     Charles Kamen, Ph.D., M.P.H.     
 
STUDY CO-INVESTIGATORS:  Ka ren Mustian, Ph.D., M.P.H. 
   Gary R. Morrow, Ph.D., M.S. 
   Kathi Heffner, Ph.D. 
   Supriya Mohile, M.D. 
   Eva Culakova, Ph.D    James McMahon, Ph.D. 
   Michael Keefer, M.D. 
   Edward Messing, M.D. 
   Alexander Solky, M.D. 
 
STUDY MEDICAL MONITOR:    Richard Dunne, M.D. 
 
LABORATORY CHAIR:   Michelle Janelsins, Ph.D. 
 
STUDY COORDINATOR:   Nicole Murray, M.S. 
 
EXERCISE PHYSIOLOGIST:  Michelle Porto, Po-Ju Lin, Adam Szczupa kowski 
  
 
Funded by a National Cancer Institute K 07 Career Development Award, K07 CA190529 
 
Protocol date :  7 / 0 6 / 2 0 2 0            
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
 S E C T I O N          P A G E  
 Study Schema................................................... ............................................................... ........... 3 
 
1.     Study Overview, Purpose, Background .................... ......................................................... 4 
 
2.     Hypotheses and Aims .................................... ............................................................... ..... 7 
 
3.     Characteristics of the  Research Population.............. .......................................................... 8 
 
4.     Subject Identification, Recruitment, Consent ........... ......................................................... 10 
 
5.     Randomization .......................................... ............................................................... .......... 14 
 
6.     Methods and Study Procedures ........................... ...............................................................  15 
 
7.    Subject Consent and Withdrawal .......................... .............................................................. 22 
 
8.     Reportable Events ...................................... ............................................................... ......... 23 
 9.     Risk/Benefit Assessment ................................ ............................................................... .... 25 
 
10.    Data Collection and Measures ........................... ...............................................................  28 
 
11.    Confidentiality of Dat a and Data Storage ............... .......................................................... 34 
 
12.    Research Information in Medical Records ................ ....................................................... 36 
 
13.    Data Analysis and Data Monitoring ...................... ........................................................... 37 
 
14.    References ............................................. ............................................................... ............. 40 
 
Appendices .................................................... ............................................................... .............. 45 
 
 
         
   
Protocol date :  7 / 0 6 / 2 0 2 0           
 
 
FIGURE 1: Study Schema  
 
  
 
 
  
   
Protocol date :  7 / 0 6 / 2 0 2 0            
 
1. STUDY OVERVIEW, PURPOSE, AND BACKGROUND 
 
 1.1. Significance of Distress am ong lesbian, gay, and bisexual (LGBT) cancer survivors 
 
To date, LGBT survivors have been  invisible in the cancer contr ol literature.
1,2 Epidemiological studies of 
cancer prevalence often do not a ssess sexual orientation,2 and even studies of the n eeds of diverse populations 
of cancer patients and survivors have remained mute on the subj ect of sexual orientation.3-5 The few studies that 
have focused on LGBT cancer issu es have found that subgroups of  LGBT persons are up to 2.1 times more 
likely to be diagnosed with cancer  than their heterosexual coun terparts,6,7 and that physical and mental health 
disparities impact LGBT cancer survivors.7-9 Distress, a negative psychol ogical reaction to the cancer 
experience, is among the most co mmon side effects cited by surv ivors of any sexuality,10,11 is 1.7 times more 
common among LGBT survivors,12 and is linked to increased morbidity13 and mortality.14 Lesbian survivors 
report poorer qua lity of life8 and more anxiety and depression pos t-diagnosis than heterosexu al women,9 while 
gay male survivors report worse mental health and more fear of cancer recurrence than heterosexual men.15,16 
Given the large number of LGB T survivors (between 420,000-1,000 ,000 living in the United States17,18), higher 
rates of distress among these s urvivors, and the link between d istress, morbidity, and mortality, interventions 
targeting distress am ong LGBT cancer survivors are urgently nee ded.  There is also a need f or interventions that 
are socioculturally tailored t o the needs of this population.19,20 Targeting psychological distress in LGBT 
survivors through a partner-assis ted intervention could reduce the public health burden of long-term cancer 
survivorship by reducing chronic distress and morbidity among s urvivors21-23 and promoting intervention 
adherence.22-30 
 
1.2. Exercise as intervention to reduce distress 
Receiving a diagnosis of cancer ca n cause psychological distres s.31   Distress among LGBT cancer survivors is 
further exacerbated by LGBT-specifi c stressors, such as discrim ination based on sexual orientation and 
invisibility/non-rec ognition of caregivers.1,32 Exercise, including walking and r esistance training, is safe a nd 
well-tolerated and improves distre ss in heterosexual cancer sur vivors.33-36 Our intervention, EXCAP©® 
(Exercise for Cancer Patients) , is a standardized, daily, 6 wee k, home-based, progressive exercise program.  In 
phase II randomized controlled t rials (RCTs) of this program, s urvivors (N = 91) who completed EXCAP©® 
demonstrated improvements in d istress, quality of life, and mar kers of inflammation.33,37,38  Adherence to the 
intervention was good (79% complet ion rate), and there were no adverse events.33-36  As EXCAP©® is a 
standardized exercise program , it is easy to prescribe and tail or to survivors; it is home-based, exportable, and 
may be more palatable than weekly psychotherapy.39,40 
1.3. Support, distress, and exercise 
In our formative research, LGBT survivors reported feeling less  distressed when their car egivers were included 
in cancer care visits.41  We have also shown that partner support is directly linked to  reductions in LGBT-
specific stress among LGBT adults.12,42,43 In tailoring an intervention for L GBT survivors, it is critica l to 
welcome support from caregivers in order to reduce LGBT-specifi c stress. Also, two RCTs have shown that 
exercise interventi ons incorporating support from a caregiver m ay increase adherence and produce significant 
improvements in clinical outco mes among cancer survivors.44,45  In the first, survivors who exercised with a 
   
Protocol date :  7 / 0 6 / 2 0 2 0           caregiver were more adherent to t he intervention than those who  did not.45 In the second, survivors and 
caregivers receiving an exercise  intervention as a dyad reporte d less distress.44  However, neither study 
compared the efficacy of a partner- assisted exercise interventi on to a survivor-only intervention, nor were 
LGBT survivors recruited. Thus, w hile preliminary evidence indi cates that including car egivers in exercise 
interventions may be effective , no RCTs have evaluated the effi cacy of a partner-assisted e xercise intervention 
in reducing psychological dist ress among LGBT cancer survivors.21-23   
1.4 Integrated biopsychosocial mo del of the impact of exercise on distress: Cancer influences psychological 
distress on several levels. First , receiving a diagnosis of can cer can produce symptoms of depression and 
anxiety. 31,46 This 
distress has been 
shown to negatively 
impact both cancer 
survivors and their 
caregivers,2,45-49 
reduce the provision 
of social support 
within the 
survivor/caregiver 
dyad,10-11 and 
consequently 
increase 
psychological 
distress. Cancer and 
treatment also impact stress 
processes
47 and 
increase activation of 
markers of inflammation.48 Increased activation 
of the HPA axis and concomitant i ncreases in systemic inflammat ion can result in inc reased report of 
psychological distress.49-51 In previous studies, cortisol, C -reactive protein, and serum a myloid A are 
particularly linked t o report of distress.52-57  
Therefore, EXCAP©® is designed to reduce distre ss on two levels.  On a psychologi cal level, participation in 
exercise serves as a form of be havioral activation and increase s self-efficacy, factors that have been shown to 
reduce distress.22-30 On a physiological level, exercis e affects biological processe s associated with the stress 
response, as measured by reducti on in levels of distress-relate d biological endpoints (Figure 2).37 This study 
will test direct effects of exercise on reduction in psychologi cal distress and these biol ogical endpoints. Previous 
research on this model by our group has shown that exercise doe s improve distress and that changes in immune 
function significantly predict changes in distress (p<0.05, r=0 .12).38   
Including a caregiver in an exe rcise interven tion, similarly, c ould affect distress on a psychological level by 
increasing perception of  social support,58 and on a physiological level by in creasing intervention adhere nce.45 
1.5 Preliminary data 
The preliminary data presented il lustrates four key points: 1) Disparities exist among LGBT cancer survivors; 
Figure 2:  Biops ychosocial model of d yadic interventio n
   
Protocol date :  7 / 0 6 / 2 0 2 0           2) LGBT survivors and thei r partners want specific 
interventions, 3) EXCAP©® is effective in 
reducing distress, and 4) recruiting and retaining 
LGBT cancer survivors and caregivers is feasible.  
Study 1) Distress is prevalent among LGBT 
cancer survivors: In secondary data analyses of 
large datasets (BRFSS, LIVESTRONG), we 
found that LGBT cancer survivors reported 2.96 
more days per month of poor mental health 
(p=0.02), 60 fewer minutes of physical activity 
per week (p=0.01), and 1.9 times greater odds of 
difficulty with social support (p=0.04) than their 
heterosexual counterparts.12 (See Figure 3.) 
Study 2) LGBT cancer survivors and their 
partners want specific interven tions: In a focus group conducte d with 10 lesbian and gay cancer survivors and 
their caregivers, we (Dr. Kamen , with consultation from mentors ) found that both  cancer survivors and their 
partners experience psychologica l distress, including concerns about the impact of treatment on their 
relationship and about cancer recu rrence. Multiple dyads report ed that this distress directly affected their 
relationship with one another and that few resources are availa ble for cancer survivors in the LGBT community. 
All LGBT survivors and their caregivers we spoke with indicated th at they would be interested in a tailored 
exercise intervention. 
Study 3) The EXCAP intervention is effective in reducing distre ss: In a secondary analysis of Dr. Mustian’s 
study of EXCAP©® for prostate cancer survivor s (n=58), we found that EXCAP©® significantly reduced distress 
as measured by the POMS Total score.  Compared with usual care control, 6 weeks of EXCAP©® was 
associated with a 7.24 point reduction in the POMS Total score (p = 0.02; manuscript under review).38  This 
secondary analysis also included evaluation of immune function;  while markers of HPA axis function and early 
inflammation were not included in this dataset, preliminary ana lysis of immune function piqued my interest in 
exploring this biological mechanism further. 
Study 4) It is feasible to recruit and retain LGBT cancer survi vors and their partners in an exercise intervention: 
Dr. Kamen was recently (2013) awarded a seed grant to conduct a  feasibility study, entit led “Dyadic Exercise 
Intervention for Heterosexual a nd LGBT Cancer Survivors and The ir Caregivers.”  This study, conducted with 
the input of the mentorship team, was designed to assess the feasibility and acceptability  of delivering an 
exercise intervention to heteros exual and LGBT dyads, as well a s establishing preliminary efficacy of the 
same outcome measures to be used in the proposed Phase II RCT.  We developed a novel, dyadic delivery 
method for EXCAP©® (EXCAP-PA; see Appendix), involv ing training caregivers to sup port survivors in 
exercising, as well as new LGBT recruitment and retention metho dologies.  We have recruited and retained 20 
LGBT survivors and their divers e caregivers, successfully deliv ered the intervention, and had good adherence 
and acceptance.  We also built strong community collaborations and partnerships. 
  
Figure 3 : Z-scores comparing LGBT (N=293) and 
heterosexual (N =5,386) cancer survivors (all cancer types)
   
Protocol date :  7 / 0 6 / 2 0 2 0             
2. HYPOTHESIS AND AIMS 
 
 2.1. Overall Hypothesis  
 
The overall hypothesis of this st udy is that among LGBT survivo rs, EXCAP-PA, incorporating caregiver 
support, will be more efficac ious than survivor-only EXCAP
©® in improving biopsychosocial aspects of 
distress: both self-reported psyc hological distress and biologi cal endpoints associated w ith distress. Exploratory 
hypotheses are that improvement i n distress, increased social s upport from the caregiv er, and intervention 
adherence will be positively related, and that caregivers will also benefit from partner-a ssisted intervention. 
 
2.2 Primary Aim (in survivors)   
 
2.2.1 To determine the preliminar y effect of EXCAP-PA versus su rvivor-only EXCAP©® on self-
reported psychological distress (P rofile of Mood States [POMS] total score). 
 
2.3 Secondary Aims (in survivors) 
 
2.3.1 To determine the preliminar y effect of EXCAP-PA versus su rvivor-only EXCAP©® on 
biological endpoints associated w ith distress: markers of HPA a xis functioning (cortisol) and 
markers of early inflammation ( serum amyloid A [SAA], C-reactiv e protein [CRP])  
 
2.3.2. To determine the preliminary effect of EXCAP-PA versus s urvivor-only EXCAP©® on social 
support from the caregiver (Dy adic Support Questionnaire [DSQ])  and intervention adherence 
(actigraphy). 
 
2.4 Exploratory Aims (in survivors):  
 
2.4.1 To explore preliminary mechanistic relationships between self-reported distress, markers of HPA 
axis functioning and early inflamm ation, social support from th e caregiver, and intervention 
adherence. 
 
2.5 Exploratory Aims (in caregivers):  
 
2.5.1 To determine the preliminar y effect of EXCAP-PA versus su rvivor-only EXCAP©® on self-
reported psychological distress a nd biological en dpoints associ ated with distress among 
caregivers. 
 
  
   
Protocol date :  7 / 0 6 / 2 0 2 0            
3. CHARACTERISTICS OF THE RESEARCH POPULATION 
 
 
Targeted/Planned Enrollment Table 
 
Total Planned Enrollment: 140  
 
TARGETED/PLANNED ENROLLMEN T: Number of Participants 
Ethnic Category Sex/Gender 
Females Males Total 
 Hispanic or Latino 7 7 14 
 Not Hispanic or Latino 63 63 126 
 Ethnic Category: Total of All Participants 70 70 140 
Racial Categories   
 American Indian/Alaska Native 0 0 0 
 Asian 2 2 4 
 Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander  0 0 0 
 Black or African American  10 10 20 
 White 58 58 116 
 Racial Categories: Total of All Participants  70 70 140 
 
3.1 Subject Characteristics a nd Number of Participants 
 
Participants in this randomize d controlled trial will be 70 LGB T cancer survivors and thei r 70 caregivers (a total 
of 70 dyads/140 individuals).  A car egiver is defined as any in dividual whom the cancer survivor nominates as 
having provided emotional support  or tangible assistance withou t pay during the survivor’s  cancer experience.  
No restriction will be  placed on caregivers in terms of relatio nship with the cancer survivor; they can be family 
members, friends, romantic part ners, or community members. 
 3.2 Gender, Age, and Racial/Et hnic Origin of Participants 
 
Based on the characteristics of sam ples recruited for previous exercise studies  run out of the Physical Exercise 
Activity Kinesiology Laboratory ( PEAK  Lab) at the University of Roche ster, we anticipate that the sa mple for 
the current study will be 49% male and 51% female.  Average age  will be 67 years.  The ethnic composition of 
the sample will be approximate ly 92% White/Caucasian, 15% Afric an-American, and 3% Asian; 10% will 
   
Protocol date :  7 / 0 6 / 2 0 2 0           report a Hispanic/Latino ethni city. Children, as defined by the  National Institutes of Health Grants Policy 
Statement, will not be include d, as cancer survivors under 21 y ears of age are often c onsidered to fall under 
pediatric care, and may have a ve ry different experience of can cer and caregiving than a dult (age 21+)  cancer 
survivors. 
 
3.3  Inclusion Criteria (Survivors): To be included in the study, cancer survivors must: 
 
3.3.1 Have had a diagnosis of cancer  (any cancer type excluding  squamous and basal cell [skin 
cancers]) and have completed pri mary surgery, chemotherapy, and /or radiation therapy (those on 
continued, indefinite adjuvant treatment are still eligible),  
 
3.3.2  Identify as lesbian, gay, bi sexual, or transgender, or h ave a same-sex romantic partner,  
 
3.3.3 Have a caregiver willing to participate in the study (def ined as anyone who provided emotional 
support or tangible assistance dur ing the survivors’ cancer exp erience), 
 
3.3.4 Be able to read English,  
 
3.3.5 Be 21 years of age or older, and  
 
3.3.6 Give written informed conse nt or electronic consent.   
 
3.4 Inclusion Criteria (Caregivers): Caregivers must:  
 3.4.4 Be nominated by a cancer survivor,  
 
3.4.5 Be able to read English,  
 
3.4.6 Be 21 years of age or older,  
 
3.4.7 Give written informed conse nt or electronic consent.  
 
3.5 Exclusion Criteria: Participants must not:  
 
3.5.4 Have physical limitations (e.g., car diorespiratory, orthopedic)  contraindicating part icipating in a 
low- to moderate-intensity hom e-based walking and progressive r esistance program and physical 
function testing, as assessed by t heir medical oncologist, thei r primary care physician, and/or the 
study medical monitor (or any of these three physicians’ design ees), 
  
3.5.5 For caregivers, be currently unde rgoing active treatment for ca ncer. 
 
  
   
Protocol date :  7 / 0 6 / 2 0 2 0            
4. PARTICIPANT IDENTIFICATION, RECRUITMENT AND CONSENT 
 
 4.1 Human Subjects Involvement: The proposed RCT aims to recru it 70 lesbian, gay, bisexual, and  
transgender (LGBT) cancer survi vors who have completed treatmen t (surgery, radiation, or chemotherapy) or 
who are on continued, indefinite a djuvant treatment, so as to h ave a final, evaluab le sample of 60 LGBT 
survivors after attrition. The  proposed RCT will also recruit c aregivers (broadly defi ned) of the above cancer 
survivors.  Each recruited cancer  survivor will be asked to nam e a person who they feel provided care 
(emotional, informational, tangi ble, etc.) during their cancer experience, with no further s trictures placed on this 
relationship in terms of type or  duration. The caregiver will b e approached to participate in the RCT. Thus the 
sample will consist of 70 LGBT su rvivors (60 evaluable) and the ir caregivers (140 i ndividuals total/120 
evaluable).  Recruitment and primary analyses will specifically  target the LGBT cancer survivor.   
 
LGBT survivors will be randomized to one of 2 arms: Arm 1, a no vel, partner-assisted , LGBT-specific 
framework incorporating EXCAP©® (Exercise for Cancer Patient s, a standardized, daily, 6 week, progressive 
walking and resistance traini ng program), in which both survivo rs and caregivers will receive EXCAP©® 
materials and be instructed in t heir use together, or Arm 2, a survivor-only  version of EXCAP©®, in which only 
the cancer survivor will receive EXCAP©® materials and be instructed i n their use. There will be 35 LGB T 
survivors randomized to each arm  (30 evaluable), along with the ir 35 caregivers (30 evaluable).  Survivors and 
caregivers will be assessed before and after the 6 week interve ntion in both arms.  The LGBT survivor will be 
the primary unit of analysis; data  collected from caregivers wi ll be used for exploratory purposes only. 
 
Assuming an 85% retention rate a nd an initial sample of 70 surv ivors, 60 LGBT survivors will complete the 
study. Because LGBT survivors are the primary unit of analysis,  survivors will be invite d to return for follow-
up assessment even if their caregivers are unavailable.  Study interventions will begin on Study Day 0 and 
continue for 6 weeks (42 days) . The exercise intervention, EXCA P©®, is a standardized intervention developed 
and tested by the resear ch team at University of Rochester Medi cal Center (URMC).  T he actual list of 
exercises, and the framework f or the partner-assisted EXCAP-PA,  is provided in the Appendix.  Each 
participant will be monitored by a n American College of Sports Medicine Certified Exercise PhysiologistSM.  
Assessments will be made with validated and methodologically so und measures includ ing self-report 
questionnaires, assays for expr ession of biological endpoints, weekly diaries, and actigraphy monitoring.   
 
No special classes of participan ts such as fetuses, neonates, p regnant women, prisoners , institutionalized 
individuals or other vulnerable  populations will  be recruited. 
 
Children, as defined by the Nationa l Institutes of Health Grant s Policy Statement, will not be included, as 
cancer survivors under 21 years of  age are often considered to fall under pediatric care and may have a very 
different experience of cancer t reatment and caregiving than ad ult (age 21+)  cancer survivors.  
 
All data will be gathered at the PEAK Lab and the URMC Cancer C ontrol Unit. 
 
4.2 Method of Participant Ident ification and Recruitment 
 
   
Protocol date :  7 / 0 6 / 2 0 2 0           4.2.1 LGBT Survivor Recruitment:  All data will be gathered from p articipants 21 years of age or 
older.  Participants are cancer  survivors who have completed tr eatments or caregivers of cancer 
survivors; both survivors and caregivers are able to read and u nderstand English.  Potentially 
eligible cancer survivors will  be contacted through several cha nnels.   
 
1) Distal identification of URMC patients: First, the study team will monitor URMC patients 
over the age of 21 who have been di agnosed with cancer (any sit e), who have completed cancer 
treatment or are on indefinite t reatment, and who are LGBT iden tified or same-sex partnered.  
This monitoring will be done thr ough e-record as well as with T riNetX, a clinical query tool that 
allows researchers to pull specif ic subject criteria from e-rec ord.  Search criteria for TriNetX will 
include “malignant neoplasm” as well as other specific cancer d iagnoses, report of being 
“partnered” or having a “same-s ex partner” on sociodemographic questions, or identifying as 
lesbian, gay, bisexual, or transge nder.  Use of TriNetX softwar e requires an RSRB approved 
protocol; any data from this ser vice is transferred to the stud y team via a secure web-based 
interface.  If an LGBT cancer sur vivor identified via TriNetX i s deemed eligible after a review of 
their medical record, the study team will contact the survivors ’ physician to ensure eligibility and 
will then send the survivor a letter, from their physician and the study team, explaining the study 
and its requirements.  A brochur e providing further details wil l also be enclosed (see 
Recruitment Materials).  Survivors will have the option to opt out of further contact; if the 
survivor is willing to continue, a study team member will make contact to conduct screening.   
 
2) Direct referral of URMC patients: Second, study staff work with physicians, nurses, and 
other care providers in URMC c linics to identify patients who h ave been diagnosed with cancer 
(any site), who have completed can cer treatment or are on indef inite treatment, and who have 
identified themselves as LGBT  or same-sex partnered to their ca re providers.  After being 
referred by their care provider and deemed eligible following a  review of their medical record, 
survivors will be sent a lette r from their physician and the st udy team, explaining the study and 
its requirements.  Study team mem bers will also be present in t he URMC clinics of affiliated 
care providers so that cancer sur vivors who are scheduled for a ppointments and who might be 
eligible can be referred by the ir treatment team to the study.  Following the referral by the 
treatment team, the treatment t eam will introduce the study tea m member, who will meet with 
the survivor and explain the st udy either in person or over the  phone.  If a caregiver has 
accompanied the survivor to the clinic, they will be informed a bout the study at the same time, 
either in person or via phone.  If th e survivor (and caregiver)  is willing to continue, a study team 
member will conduct screening.  L etters and brochures describin g the study will be sent to the 
homes of survivors and caregiver s contacted at the clinic.   
 
3) Community recruitment and referral: We will also advertise the study on the University of 
Rochester Medical Center “Clin ical Trials” website, in local ne wspapers, through flyers posted 
in the community, and through the PEAK Lab Facebook page.  To e nsure recruitment of LGBT 
cancer survivors, we will also recruit through community groups , such as those hosted by the 
Out Alliance of the Genesee Valley and through providers at Tri llium Health, who specifically 
provide services to the  LGBT community; we will leave brochures  and tear-off posters at both 
locations and present the st udy to staff at both locations.  We  will recruit through newspaper 
   
Protocol date :  7 / 0 6 / 2 0 2 0           advertisements; through website pos tings targeting the LGBT com munity; and through word-of-
mouth, referrals, and snowball recr uitment within the LGBT comm unity.   
 
Snowball recruitment methods wil l involve askin g recruited part icipants to pass information 
about the study on to other intere sted LGBT cancer survivors an d/or their caregivers.  Due to the 
stigmatized nature of LGBT identities and cancer diagnoses, ste ps will be taken to ensure that 
recruited participan ts do not feel unduly coe rced to participat e in snowball recruitment and that 
the confidentiality of other LGBT  cancer survivors in the commu nity is maintained.  We will 
include verbiage in the consent form whereby recruited particip ants can indicate whether they 
are willing to contact other LG BT community members about the s tudy.  Those who consent to 
contact other LGBT community m embers will be provided with RSRB  approved brochures to 
give to potentially elig ible community members.  Research staff  will follow up with these 
participants while study recr uitment is ongoing to see if they need additional brochures; if so, 
additional brochures will be ma iled to participants’ home addre sses. 
 
Interested potential particip ants who contact the study through  any of these means will be mailed 
a letter and brochure and scr eened via phone by a member of the  study team. 
 
4.2.2 Caregiver Recruitment: A similar procedure will be followed for the caregiver; after b eing 
nominated by a survivor, the c aregiver will be told about the s tudy immediately (if the caregiver 
is present at a clinic visit or  with the cancer survivor during  telephone contact), or sent a letter 
from the study team explaining t he study and providing the opti on to opt out of future contact.  If 
the caregiver is wil ling to continue, the study team member wil l conduct screening.   
 
4.3 Screening : After a member of the treatme nt team has referred the potenti al participant, o r the potential 
participant has contacted th e research team, screening of poten tial study participants will be conducted either in 
person or over the phone by researc h staff trained to explain t he project, recruit, and s creen participants (see 
Telephone Script). Verbal consen t to conduct this screening wil l be obtained using the telephone script. 
Screening will focus on the cancer survivor’s eligibility, with  caregivers nominated by  survivors.  Individually 
identifiable information will  not be kept on potential particip ants who decline to participate in the study, though 
we will note gender and race/eth nicity for the purpose of monit oring our success in recruiting women and 
racial/ethnic minorities. 
 
Eligibility of the dyad will primarily be established using can cer survivors’ characteris tics.  After a member of 
the treatment team has referred the LGBT cancer survivor or the  survivor has contacted t he research team, the 
survivor will be screened for e ligibility either via telephone or face to face.  In both screening approaches, a 
trained staff member will ask s urvivors about: (1) cancer diagn osis and treatment, (2) identification as lesbian, 
gay, bisexual, or transgender, or pa rtnership with a same-sex r omantic partner, (3) medi cal contraindications to 
exercise, and (4) presence and ava ilability of a primary caregi ver.   
 
Following screening of the cancer survivor, a study team member  will ask for the survivor to nominate a 
caregiver.  Caregivers will then be screened either via telepho ne or face-to-face.  After t he caregiver has been 
contacted by the study team for screening, or  if the caregiver initiates contact with the study team, screening 
   
Protocol date :  7 / 0 6 / 2 0 2 0           will focus on assessing willingness to participate and ruling o ut medical contraindications to engaging in 
moderate walking and re sistance training. 
 
After completing screening of sur vivors and caregivers, a study  team member will schedule survivors and 
caregivers for an informed cons ent session at the PEAK Lab, or will offer the option for participants to 
complete an electronic consent form (e-consent).  If consent is  obtained in person, caregiv ers and survivors can 
attend this session either as a  dyad or as individuals; if cons ent is obtained electronically, caregivers and 
survivors will be sent individua l copies of the e-consent form (see section 4.4 below).  
 
After screening and establishing informed consent, but before t he baseline assessment, m edical eligibility for 
participants will be further veri fied by contacting the survivo r’s and caregiver’s oncologist or primary care 
physician.  With the participants ’ verbal consent, a study team  member will fax a form indicating that the 
participant has no medical cont raindications to participating i n a moderate intensity exercise program or 
physical function assessment (see Appendix).  The physician (or  designee) will verify a nd sign this form.  The 
form will be returned to the st udy team before the baseline ass essment meeting. Alternately, the medical 
monitor will assess the participant to rule out medical contrai ndications to participating in a moderate intensity 
exercise program. 
 
After consenting and verification t hat there are no medical con traindications to participating in an exercise 
program or physical assessment fo r either participant, dyads wi ll be scheduled to retur n to the PEAK Lab for a 
baseline assessment and random ization to an intervention arm.   
 
4.4 Consent Process  
 
4.4.1 In-person consent: To ensure appropriate safety precautions when conducting in-per son study 
procedures, the process for c onducting in-person visits outline d in the Guidance for Human 
Subject Research will be follo wed. After recruitment and screen ing, a time is scheduled for 
survivor and caregiver to come t o the PEAK Lab to complete the consent form, either separately 
or together.  If they arrive toge ther, the study team member wa lks each individual through the 
consent form to ensure comprehe nsion.  Survivors and caregivers  are given the option to sign the 
consent form. The study team member is available to answer any questions the survivor or 
caregiver may have about any asp ect of the study prior to conse nting and throughout the entire 
study period.   
 
4.4.2    Electronic consent:  In lieu of the paper-based consent document, consent may occur  remotely 
using the RSRB-approved eConsen t document provided via REDCap. The study staff will screen 
for potential participants using t he above screening procedures  and initiate initial contact via 
phone, briefly describing the st udy and asking them to contact us if they would like more 
information. If a potential partic ipant is interested, the stud y team will talk to the person on the 
phone and obtain verbal permission fro m the participant to send  an email or text message stating, 
“Because URMC can’t control the security of email or text messa ges once we send them, we 
need your permission to text o r email you. Do you want to recei ve a copy of the consent 
document and a link to the eCons ent via text or email?” Written  permission from the patient will 
be documented. We will then email or text a pdf version of the eConsent document for the 
   
Protocol date :  7 / 0 6 / 2 0 2 0           participant to read. We will then set up a phone call or Zoom m eeting (participant’s choice) to 
formally go over the consent document. During this phone or Zoo m meeting, we will provide a 
link to the REDCap eConsent docum ent as well as instructions on  how to access the eConsent—
we will use verification wit h a passcode based on known informa tion (e.g., the patient’s home 
zip code). No personal health inf ormation will be sent via any emails/texts. The eConsent 
documents may be viewed on computers, electronic tablets, or sm artphones. The pdf copy of the 
eConsent and the REDCap eConsent will have identical informatio n; it will be optional for the 
person to review the consent befo re the study team discusses it  with them. After a member of the 
study team reviews the consent doc ument with the participant ov er the phone or computer, they 
will have the opportunity to elect ronically sign the eConsent v ia REDCap. Signatures will be 
obtained by asking participants to t ype in their name. The pers on obtaining consent will then add 
their name and a timestamp to t he study participant’s signed eC onsent form in REDCap. In order 
to authenticate the identity of the participant signing the eCo nsent, we will again ask the 
participant to use a passc ode based on known information (e.g.,  the participant’s year of birth) 
for verification. Once the eConsent form is signed and submitte d, the patient and/or legally 
authorized representative will  be able to print a paper copy, d ownload a pdf, and/or receive an 
email with a PDF attachment of t he signed consent form.  A simi lar process will also occur with 
the identified caregiver.  
 
4.4.3 After providing written or el ectronic informed consent, t he survivor and caregiver, with the help of 
the study team member, will complete a Physical Activity Readin ess Questionnaire (PAR-Q+), an 
On-Study Data Form, a Clinical R ecord Form and a Medication For m providing demographic and 
clinical data.  The study team member will obtain information n ecessary to complete these three 
forms from the survivor’s electr onic medical records when the s urvivor is unable to provide this 
information in sufficient deta il (e.g., staging, surgical proce dures, types and doses  of treatments).  
Information from the caregiver ’s physician will be used to comp lete these three forms when the 
caregiver is unable to provide i nformation in sufficient detail . 
 
4.4.4 The study chair, study coordina tor, and Certified Exercis e PhysiologistSM have received 
appropriate training, as well as password secured access to use  the University of Rochester 
Medical Center’s electronic pa tient scheduling and clinical inf ormation systems to obtain medical 
information and appropriate source documentation for research f iles.   
 
  
   
Protocol date :  7 / 0 6 / 2 0 2 0            
5. RANDOMIZATION 
 
 Survivors and their caregivers who meet the eligibility criteri a, sign the informed consent form and complete all 
baseline assessments will immediately be randomized as a dyad t o one of two trial arms by means of a 
computer-generated randomization table. 
 
5.1 A total enrollment of 70 can cer survivors and their 70 prim ary caregivers is planned (70 dyads total, 35 
dyads per trial arm). 
 
5.2 The two trial arms will be as follows: 
 
 Trial Arm            Condition  
 
1 Dyadic Exercise Intervention (EXCAP-PA):  Progressive walking and 
resistance exercise treatment, pr escribed to both cancer surviv ors and their 
caregivers (daily walking and up t o 7 times/week r esistance pre scription for 
6 weeks).  Cancer survivor and car egiver are als o asked to disc uss ways they 
can support one another in a) rema ining adherent to exercise, a nd b) dealing 
with stress, including LGBT- specific minority stress. 
 
2 Individual Exercise Intervention (EXCAP):  Progressive walking and 
resistance exercise treatment, pr escribed solely to cancer surv ivors (daily 
walking and up to 7 times/week res istance prescription for 6 we eks).  The 
caregiver is told not to change his/ her exercise behavior in an y way. 
 
 
  
   
Protocol date :  7 / 0 6 / 2 0 2 0            
 
6. METHODS AND STUDY PROCEDURES 
 
 
6.1 Objective : This will be a two-arm randomized controlled trial examining th e efficacy of a dyadic, 
partner-assisted home-based walki ng and progressive resistance exercise program (EXCAP-PA) vs. an 
individual, survivor-only home-b ased walking and progressive re sistance exercise program (EXCAP) 
for the relief of psychological d istress among LGBT cancer surv ivors. This is an ancillary cancer control 
intervention, administered for  control of psychological symptom s caused by LGBT minority stress,  
caregiver stress, cancer, and/or cancer treatment. 
 
6.2 Recruitment and Screening : The study team will recruit and screen survivors prior to sched uling an 
initial visit to establish inform ed consent via several mechani sms, listed below. 
 
6.2.1 LGBT or same-sex partnered cancer survivors (any cancer t ype except squamous or basal cell 
skin cancers), finished with t reatment or on indefinite treatme nt, along with a caregiver (broadly 
defined and designated by the sur vivor), will be invited to par ticipate in the study.  
 
6.2.2 Potentially eligible LGBT can cer survivors will be contac ted through several channels: 
6.2.2.1 By a letter from the st udy team and physician, after be ing identified and screened for 
eligibility through e -record or i2b2 
6.2.2.2 Directly by a member of the s tudy team, after being int roduced by a physician or care 
team member at a URMC clinic   
6.2.2.3 Through the University of Roc hester Medical Center “Cli nical Trials” website 
6.2.2.4 Through advertisements posted in local newspapers (the Empty Closet, etc.) 
6.2.2.5 Through flyers posted in locations in the community (co ffee shops, etc.) 
6.2.2.6 Through the PEAK Lab Facebook page 
6.2.2.7 Through brochures and tear-off  posters left at local or ganizations serving the LGBT 
community (the Out Alliance of the Genesee Valley, Trillium Hea lth, etc.) 
6.2.2.8 Through advertisements posted on websites frequented by  members of the LGBT 
community (Craigslist Men Seekin g Men and Women Seeking Women, etc.) 
6.2.2.9 Through word-of-mouth (s nowball recruitment) 
 
6.2.3 The study team monitors URM C patients who may be eligible  to participate vi a e-record and 
i2b2. They also work with physicians  and care team members, inc luding co-investigators Drs. 
Mohile, Tejani, Keefer, Me ssing, Solky and Dunne, to identify L GBT cancer survivors who may 
be eligible for this study.  A m ember of the study team contact s the physician, their designee, or 
another care team member and lets them know that a survivor may  be eligible for the study; 
alternately, the physician, their  designee, or a care team memb er may recommend a survivor as a 
good study candidate.   
 
6.2.3.1 After identifying a potentia lly eligible participant, t he physician or care team member 
introduces the study and a membe r of the study team to the surv ivor during a scheduled 
   
Protocol date :  7 / 0 6 / 2 0 2 0           clinic visit.  The member of the  study team describes the study .  If the survivor is willing 
to continue, the study team mem ber conducts screening.  The phy sician or care team 
member (or their designee) then s igns a form that states the su rvivor has no medical 
contraindications to par ticipating in the study. 
6.2.3.2 Alternately, a letter fro m the study team and physician  is sent to the survivor’s home, 
explaining the study.  If the surv ivor is willing to continue, the study team member 
conducts screening.  The physician or care team member then sig ns a form that states the 
survivor has no medical contrai ndications to participating in t he study.   
 
6.2.4 A similar procedure will be f ollowed for the caregiver; a fter being nominated by a survivor, the 
caregiver will be sen t a letter from the study team, explaining  the study.  If the caregiver is 
willing to continue, the caregiver will be screened for eligibi lity. To establish medical eligibility, 
the caregiver’s primary care phys ician (or designee) will verif y and sign a form, created by the 
study team, indicating that the caregiver has no medical contra indications to partic ipating in the 
study.  Alternately, the medical m onitor will assess for medica l contraindications. 
 
6.2.5 If the survivor or caregiver  has made contact with the st udy team after hearing about the study 
through a community-based recruit ment channel, or if a study te am member has already made 
contact with the survivor or caregiver in person following refe rral by the survivor’s treatment 
team, the study team member continues by explaining the details  of the study.  In talking to the 
survivor, the study team member s creens for eligibility and con firms whether or not the survivor 
has a primary caregiver who ma y also be eligible  to participate  in the study.  In talking to the 
caregiver, the study team  member screens fo r eligibility.  Duri ng this discussion, the study team 
member uses the informed consent document as a guide, goes over  details of the study with 
potential participants eithe r in person or on the phone, and re cruits them to the study.   
  
6.3 Consent process and pre-baseline assessment  
 
6.3.1 Following recruitment and screen ing, a time is scheduled for survivor and caregiver to come to 
the PEAK Lab to complete the c onsent form, either separately or  together.  If they arrive 
together, the study team member walks each individual through t he consent form to ensure 
comprehension.  Survivors and car egivers are given the option t o sign the consent form. The 
study team member is available to  answer any questions the surv ivor or caregiver may have 
about any aspect of the study prio r to consenting and throughou t the entire study period.   
 
6.3.2    If participants prefer to c onsent to the study remotel y, an electronic consent will be provided to 
them; procedures for this were explained in section 4.4.2. 
 
6.3.2 After providing written or el ectronic informed consent, s urvivor and caregiver , with the help of the 
study team member, will complete a Physical Activity Readiness Questionnaire (PAR-Q+), an On-
Study Data Form, a Clinical Record  Form and a Medication Form p roviding demographic and 
clinical data.  The study team member will obtain information n ecessary to complete these forms 
from the survivor’s electronic medical records when the survivo r is unable to provide this 
information in sufficient deta il (e.g., staging, surgical proce dures, types and doses of treatments).  
   
Protocol date :  7 / 0 6 / 2 0 2 0           Information from the caregiver ’s physician will be used to comp lete these three forms when the 
caregiver is unable to provide i nformation in sufficient detail . 
 
 The study chair, study coordinato r, and Certified Exercise Phy siologistSM have received 
appropriate training, as well as password secured access to use  the University of Rochester 
Medical Center’s electronic pa tient scheduling and clinical inf ormation systems to obtain medical 
information and appropriate source documentation for research f iles.   
 
6.3.3 During the consent meeting, a ll participants will be give n a pedometer (or a f itness tracker such 
as the FitBit) and an Actigraph to wear for approximately 4-7 c onsecutive days before the 
baseline assessment.  The pedomet er (or fitness tracker) and ac tigraph will be co llected at the 
baseline assessment and returne d to all participants for approx imately 4-7 days of monitoring 
prior to the post-inte rvention assessment. 
 
6.3.4 The study team member will schedule a time for survivor a nd caregiver to return to the PEAK 
Lab to complete the baseline a ssessment.  The study team member  will make phone or e-mail 
contact with survivor and car egiver approximately 7 days before  their scheduled baseline 
assessment to remind them to wear  their pedometers (or fitness trackers) and actigraphs. 
 
6.4 Baseline assessment  
 
6.4.1 All assessments will be done on all study participants (cancer survivors and their 
caregivers).   Survivors and caregivers can com plete assessments either as a  dyad or individually.  
The sequence of assessments will  be the same at baseline and po st-intervention. 
 
6.4.2 Blood draw.  At the baseline assessment (and a gain at the post-intervention assessment), blood 
sampling will be done to estimate hematocrit, hemoglobin, lymph ocytes, monocytes, and 
biological endpoints of interest (serum amyloid A, CRP, cortiso l, along with mRNA 
concentrations of these endpoi nts).  Blood draws can be conduct ed with cancer survivor and 
caregiver together or separat ely, on the same day as the baseli ne assessment or up to a week 
before the baseline assessment.  The consent form will include a section asking whether 
participants agree to have their samples biobanked for addition al, future analyses.  Participants 
will have the option to check ye s or no to having their samples  biobanked. 
 
6.4.2.1 All blood draws will occur in t he General Clinical Rese arch Center (GCRC).  Survivors 
and caregivers will report for the blood draw fasted (for a min imum of 8 hours) on the 
day of the scheduled blood draw s.  The blood will be drawn by l icensed phlebotomists 
and participants will be offered br eakfast/a snack after the bl ood draw.  The time of day 
will be noted, with future assessm ents at approximately the sam e time of day during post-
testing.  (Note. A total of tw o blood samples will be taken: on e at baseline and one post-
intervention.  These time points are relevant to assess the inf luence of the activity 
intervention on biological endpoint s, as well as the associatio n between these biological 
endpoints and distress at follow- up.)  If a cancer survivor is having blood drawn by a 
licensed phlebotomist as part of a  clinical procedure and prefe rs to have blood drawn for 
   
Protocol date :  7 / 0 6 / 2 0 2 0           this study at the same time, rat her than at the GCRC, we will w ork with the survivor and 
phlebotomist to arrange for the  blood draw to occur per protoco l. 
 
6.4.2.2 A total of approximately  34 ml of blood (around 2 table spoons) will be drawn at each 
time point (baseline and post-in tervention assessment).  The bl ood draws for estimation 
of biological endpoint levels wi ll use 2 red top tubes for seru m (10 ml each, 20 ml total).  
These tubes will be inverted 3- 4 times, allowed to clot for 30 minutes at room 
temperature, centrifuged f or 10 min at 1500 x g and then frozen  at -20c or -80c.  The 
blood draw for estimation of biomarker genomics will use 1 purp le top EDTA-heparin 
tube (10ml total).  This EDTA tube will be rocked 10 times, sto red upright for minimum 
of 2 hours at room temperature a nd then frozen at -20c or -80c.  All tubes will be collected 
by a study team member and transfe rred to a secured -80c freeze r in lab space maintained 
by Dr. Janelsins in the Department of Surgery. 
 
6.4.2.3 Blood counts will be obtained either through the medica l record (for survivors) or by 
drawing blood into 1 purple top EDTA- heparin tube (approximatel y 4ml) and conducting 
standard CBC with differential pr ocedures (for caregivers and f or survivors when blood 
counts are not available in the medical record). 
 
6.4.3 Breakfast/snack and sequence of assessments . After having blood drawn, all  participants will be 
offered breakfast/a snack in the  PEAK Lab.  If participants arr ive together as a dyad, the cancer 
survivor will begin completing que stionnaires while the caregiv er completes physical function 
assessments.  If the survivor and c aregiver arrive separately, the survivor will complete 
questionnaires first, follo wed by physical function assessment,  while the caregiver will complete 
physical function assessments first, and followed by questionna ires. 
 
6.4.4 Questionnaires.  Psychosocial, survey-style questionnaire assessments will be co nducted at 
baseline and post-intervention, w ill take less than 1 hour, wil l consist primarily of quantitative 
(closed-ended) questions, and will employ the REDCap online sur vey system, licensed to the 
University of Rochester. The R EDCap questionnaires will be code d by a member of the study 
team who has experience coding a nd creating questionnaires and with the methodology of 
REDCap questionnaire entry.  RED Cap questionnaire s will also be  extensively tested prior to 
recruitment of participants.  T he quality of psychological and behavioral data is enhanced through 
use of REDCap because data entry errors due to skip patterns ar e removed. All participants are 
given an ID code that will be use d when the final dataset is de -identified. This de -identified dataset 
will be downloaded from the REDCap server space onto a password  protected server.  REDCap 
uses encryption algorithms t o protect participant data. 
 
 All survivors and caregivers will be given a demographics and treatment measure, as well as 
measures of mood (Profile of Mood States, POMS ), depression (Patient He alth Questionnaire-9, 
PHQ-9 ), anxiety (State/Trait Anxiety Inventory, STAI ), quality of life (Short Form Health Survey 
12, SF-12 ), support from their study partne r (Dyadic Adjustment Scale-7,  DAS-7 ; Dyadic Support 
Questionnaire, DSQ ; Social Provisions Scale, SPS), patient-reported health ( PROMIS  item 
banks), minority stress (Heteros exism and Identity Questionnair e), sleep and fatigue (Insomnia 
   
Protocol date :  7 / 0 6 / 2 0 2 0           Severity Index, ISI; Multidimensional Fatigue Symptom Inventory, MFSI ), interaction with their 
physician  (Personal Efficacy in Physician-Patient Interaction, PEPPI; the Human Connection, 
THC ; Stanford Self-Efficacy, SSE)  and physical activity (Aerobics C enter Longitudinal Physical 
Activity Questionnaire, ACLS ) to complete. 
 
6.4.5 Physical function assessments.  Additionally, participants will be evaluated on 1) body 
composition (bioelectrical impedance), 2) heart rate va riability, 3) muscular strength (Handgrip 
Dynamometry, isokinetic knee flex ion/ extension and shoulder di agonal), and 4) aerobic capacity 
(6 minute walk test), in that  order.  All physiological fitness  testing will be administered according 
to the Guidelines for Exercise Testing and Prescription (GETP) as outlined by the American 
College of Sports Medicine (A CSM).  (See section 10.2 for addit ional details.)   
 
6.4.6 Data from pedometers (or f itness trackers) and actigraphs  will also be collecte d for analysis.  Data 
from pedometers will be used to i nform the walking prescription  of the exercise interventions. 
 
6.4.7 Randomization.  Following completion of physica l functioning assessments, dyads  will be 
randomized to a trial arm.  Instr uctions and an exercise kit fo r the home-based walking and 
progressive resistance exercise  program will be given to surviv ors and caregivers together in Arm 
1 and cancer survivors alone in A rm 2.  Caregivers in Arm 2 wil l receive inst ructions and an 
exercise kit following the pos t-intervention assessment. 
 
6.4.7.2 Cancer survivors and caregiv ers in dyads randomized to Arm 1 (EXCAP-PA) will each 
receive a home-based walking and p rogressive resistance exercis e program to follow for a 
total duration of approximately 6 weeks.  These dyads will be i nstructed in ways to use the 
exercise kits together.  They will also meet briefly with a mem ber of the study team, who 
will guide them through a discussi on of barriers to exercise, w ays they can support one 
another in remaining adherent t o exercise, and ways of dealing with stress (including 
LGBT minority stress). 
 
6.4.7.1 Cancer survivors in dyads randomized to Arm 2 (survivor -only EXCAP) will receive a 
home-based walking and progressive  resistance exercise regimen to follow for a total 
duration of approximately 6 weeks .  Caregivers in dyads randomi zed to Arm 2 will be told 
not to change their exercise behavior in any way, will not rece ive an exercise regimen to 
follow during the study period and will not discuss dyadic supp ort with the cancer survivor. 
 
6.5 EXCAP: Home-Based Walking and Progressive  Resistance Exercise Program 
 
6.5.1 The Home-Based Walking and Progressive Resistance Exercis e Program is designed by an 
Exercise Scientist certified by t he American College of Sports Medicine (ACSM) and is in 
accordance with the guidelines f or exercise testing and prescri ption as set forth by the ACSM.   
 
6.5.2 The Home-Based Walking and Progressive Resistance Exercis e Program will follow the 
guidelines listed below. 
 
   
Protocol date :  7 / 0 6 / 2 0 2 0           6.5.2.1 The Home-Based Walking Prescription will be based on a participant’s (i.e ., survivor’s or 
caregiver’s) baseline pedometer assessment.  Participants will be given a pedometer (or 
fitness tracker) and encouraged to increase their total steps w alked by a minimum of 5% 
a week during the 6-week interve ntion while maintaining a moder ate intensity.  [Note: 
Walking intensity will be mon itored via the Rating of Perceived  Exertion (RPE) Scale, 
which is a visual analog scale ranging from 1 = no exertion at all to 10 = very strong 
exertion.  Participants will be i nstructed to aim for an RPE of  5-8, consistent with other 
studies of EXCAP for cancer survivors.]  The upper threshold of  the walking prescription 
of the EXCAP program w ill be 12,000 steps per day. 
 
6.5.2.2 The Home-Based Progressive R esistance Prescription will  be based on a participant’s 
baseline isokinetic strength a ssessment.  Participants will be instructed on the proper use 
of resistance bands.  Participant s will then be instructed to c hoose a resistance band with 
which they can perform 8-12 r epetitions of 5 upper body resista nce exercises (bicep curl, 
tricep extension , chest press , rows, and overhead press) and 5  lower body resistance 
exercises (leg curl, leg exten sion, squat, toe raises, and side  bends), plus core 
strengthening exercis es.   Participants will be instructed to b egin with 1 set of 8-12 
repetitions at a moderate to c hallenging level (RPE 5-8), up to  7 times per week.  
Participants will be instructed t o progressively increase to 4 sets for each exercise 3 times 
per week.  (Note. Survivors and caregivers in Arm 1 will both b e instructed in the proper 
methods for performing each exercise as a dyad.  Cancer survivo rs in Arm 2 will be 
instructed in the proper methods  for performing each exercise i ndividually.) 
 
6.5.2.3 Participants will be instructed in the proper methods f or performing each exercise by an 
ACSM Certified Exercise PhysiologistSM.  For those randomized to the dyadic 
intervention, this will involve  a 45-60 minute meeting between the Physiologist and both 
the survivor and the caregiver .  For those randomized to the in dividual intervention, this 
will involve a 45-60 minute meeting between the Physiologist an d the survivor alone.   
 
6.6 EXCAP-PA: Partner-Assisted Home-Based Wal king and Progressive Resistance Exercise Program  
 
 6.6.1 Those randomized to Arm 1, t he Partner-Assisted version of EXCAP, will receive the EXCAP 
program instruction as a dyad, as  described above.  After the P hysiologist has demonstrated 
proper methods for performing each exercise to the dyad, a trai ned member of the study team 
will meet with participants.  This meeting will involve a discu ssion of barriers that might reduce 
adherence to the intervention for each participant, ways that c ancer survivor and caregiver can 
support one another in remaining a dherent, and ways of dealing with stress (including LGBT 
minority stress).  Those randomi zed to Arm 2, survivor-only EXC AP, will not discuss dyadic 
support or ways of dealing with stress. 
 
6.7 Intervention contact and tracking 
 
 6.7.1  A study team member will make phone or e-mail contact wi th participants each week to answer 
any questions they may have regar ding the exercise program and to facilitate pr oper adherence 
   
Protocol date :  7 / 0 6 / 2 0 2 0           and compliance to the exercis e intervention.  In Arm 1, the tea m member will speak with both 
the cancer survivor and the care giver together.  In Arm 2, the study team member will speak with 
the cancer survivor alone.   
 
 6.7.2 Participants will also complete a daily diary throughout  the intervention period recording 
mood/psychological distress (a ll study participants) and physic al activity (those randomized to 
receive exercise only).  (Note: The daily diary will take appro ximately 30 seconds to complete.) 
 
6.7.3 All Walking and Progressive Resistance Exercises will be performed off-site from the University 
of Rochester Cancer C enter in a home-based p articipant-selected  environment.   
 
6.8 Post-intervention assessment  
 
6.8.1 Procedures for the post-intervention assessment will foll ow those from the baseline assessment.  
First, blood sampling will be done to estimate hematocrit, hemo globin, t-cells and biological 
endpoints (e.g., serum amyloid A , CRP, cortisol).  Again, a tot al of approximately 34 ml of blood 
(around 2 tablespoons) will be drawn, as was done in the baseli ne assessment. 
 
6.8.2 After having blood drawn, all pa rticipants will be offere d breakfast/a snack in the PEAK Lab.  
Survivors will then complete survey questionnaires via REDCap f irst and physical assessments 
second, while caregivers will complete physical assessments fir st and questionnaires second. 
 
6.8.3 Participants will be evaluated on skeletal muscle mass (b ioelectrical impedance), heart rate 
variability, muscular  strength (Handgrip D ynamometry, isokineti c knee flexion/ extension and 
shoulder diagonal), and aerobic capacity (6 minute walk test). 
 
 6.8.4 Following completion of a ll study procedures, dyads will  be fully debriefed and given the 
opportunity to provide final feedb ack about the intervention in  a meeting with the study chair.  The 
two arms of the study will be exp lained and careg ivers randomiz ed to Arm 2 (survivor only 
EXCAP) will be provided an EXCAP  exercise kit and a 45 minute i nstructional se ssion in the use 
of the EXCAP exercises with an A CSM Certified Exercise Physiolo gistSM. 
 
6.8.5 Weekly phone calls or e-mails  from a study team member, a s detailed above, will desist when 
the participant’s involvement in the study has ended, following  the post-intervention assessment. 
 
6.9 Costs/Payments : There will be no costs to survivor s or caregivers for the physi ological assessments (e.g. 
serum collection, bioelectrical i mpedance, and muscular strengt h), Resistance bands, Pedometers (or 
Fitness trackers), Actigraphs  or Home-Based Walking and Progres sive Resistance Exercise Prescription.  
All assessments, which are conduc ted and collected for research  purposes only, will be paid for from 
funds controlled by Dr. Charles Kam en in the Cancer Control Uni t within the James P. Wilmot Cancer 
Institute.  Parking costs will also be covered.   
 
Each participants will be pa id up to $100 for taking part in th is study ($200 total per dyad).  Each 
survivor and caregiver will be paid $40 for coming to the basel ine visit and $60 for coming to the 
   
Protocol date :  7 / 0 6 / 2 0 2 0           second visit.  In addition, each par ticipant will receive an ex ercise kit, including a pedometer and 
resistance bands, free of charge. 
 
6.10 Return of Research Results :  All data collected as part of t his study will be for research p urposes only.  
Should incidental findings ari se during testing and that might have health conseque nces (e.g., involving 
heart rate or blood pressure findings), participants will be re ferred back to the physician who approved 
their entrance into the study. 
 
 At the end of the study, after all data have been collected, p articipants will be alerted of the study’s 
overall findings.  
  
   
Protocol date :  7 / 0 6 / 2 0 2 0            
7. SUBJECT CONSENT AND WITHDRAWAL 
 
 7.1 Current, state, federal, and ins titutional regulations conc erning informed consent will be followed.  
Participation in this study is  voluntary.  Participants are fre e not to take part or to w ithdraw at any time, 
for whatever reason, without riski ng loss of present or future care they would otherwise expect to 
receive.  In the event that a pa tient does withdraw from the st udy, the information they have already 
provided will be kept in a confiden tial manner.  Participants m ay discontinue participation in the study 
at any time if they decide the y do not wish to take part any lo nger.  Participants may be withdrawn from 
the study by research personnel if it is deemed in their best i nterest to no longer  participate. 
 
 
  
   
Protocol date :  7 / 0 6 / 2 0 2 0            
8. REPORTABLE EVENTS 
 
 
8.1 Data and Safety Monitoring  
 
Clinical Trials Data Safety Monitoring Committee:  The Director  of the Cancer Ce nter delegates 
responsibility for continued rev iew and monitoring of all clini cal trials conducted by the URCC to the 
Clinical Trials Data Safety Monitoring Committee.  This committ ee provides oversight of study progress 
and safety by review of accrual and adverse events at annual me etings. Any adverse event requiring 
expedited review per protocol will be submitted to the Data Saf ety Monitoring Committee for 
determination as to whether f urther action is required.   
 
The study PI and the study medical monitor determine if the adv erse event requires expedited review.  
Interim meetings are scheduled, as needed, to address specific issues that require immediate attention to 
assure patient safety.   
 
 The Committee:   
 
a) Reviews assigned clinical trials conducted at the URCC for prog ress and safety 
b) Reviews all adverse events re quiring expedited reporting as def ined in the protocol 
c) Reviews reports generated by the URCC data quality control revi ew process 
d) Submits recommendations for corre ctive actions to the Protocol Review Committee and the  
      PI e) In general, outcome da ta is not made available to individuals o utside of the DSMC until accrual 
has been completed and all participants have completed the inte rvention.  At this time, the 
DSMC may approve the release of  outcome data on a confidential basis to the trial PI for 
planning the preparation of man uscripts and/or to a small numbe r of other investigators for 
purposes of planning future trials.  Any release of outcome dat a prior to the DSMC’s 
recommendation for general dissemination of results must be rev iewed and approved by the 
DSMC. 
 
Safety Coordinator:  The Medical  Director of the Cancer Center Clinical Trials Office appoints the Safety 
Coordinator.  The Safety Coordinator monitors adverse event rat es utilizing the URCC  Clinical Trials 
database.  If any DSMC assigned s tudy has had two or more of th e same SAEs reported in a month or more 
than six of the same SAEs in six months, the DSMC will review t he summary of SAEs, discuss events with 
the Study Chair, and conduct a more  detailed review with the St udy Chair.  The Data Safety Monitoring 
Chair will determine if fu rther action is required. 
 
The Safety Coordinator: 
a) Forwards all adverse events requiring expedited reporting to th e Data Safety Monitoring Committee Chair 
who determines if immediate action is required 
b) Maintains a database o f all adverse events requiring expedited reporting  
c) Insures all reports are available for all meetings  of the Data Safety Monitoring Committee 
   
Protocol date :  7 / 0 6 / 2 0 2 0           d) Monitors adverse event rates u tilizing the URCC Clinical Trials  database.   
 
8.2 Adverse Reporting Requirements: 
 
 8.2.1 Adverse reactions to the EXCAP or EXCAP-PA Exercise Progr ams will be reported to the 
University of Rochester Medical Center IRB using the University  reporting form and University 
of Rochester Medical Center ad verse event reporting procedures.    
 
8.2.2 Serious adverse events, w hile a participant is on study u ntil 14 days after the da te the participant 
goes off study, will be reported in writing to the IRB as per t heir requirements. 
 
8.2.3 A serious adverse event is  defined as any event that is f atal, life-threaten ing, disabling or 
incapacitating or resu lts in hospitalization, prolongs a hospit al stay or is associated with 
congenital abnormality, new cancer diagnosis or overdose. 
 
8.2.4 This study will make use of the Common Terminology Criter ia for Adverse Events (CTCAE), 
recommended by the National Cancer  Institute.  Th ese criteria u se five grades for adverse events.    
Grade refers to the severity of t he AE. The CTCAE displays Grad es 1 through 5 with unique 
clinical descriptions of sever ity for each AE based on this gen eral guideline: 
8.2.4.1 Grade 1: Mild; asymptomatic or mild symptoms; clinical or diagnostic 
observations only; inter vention not indicated. 
8.2.4.2 Grade 2: Moderate; minim al, local or noninvasive interv ention indicated; limiting 
age-appropriate instrumental ac tivities of dail y living (ADL). 
8.2.4.3 Grade 3: Severe or medica lly significant but not immedi ately life-threatening; 
hospitalization or prolongation of  hospitalization indicated; d isabling; limiting 
self-care ADL. 
8.2.4.4  Grade 4: Life-threatening c onsequences; urgent interve ntion indicated. 
 8.2.4.5  Grade 5: Death related to AE. 
 
  
   
Protocol date :  7 / 0 6 / 2 0 2 0            
9. RISK/BENEFIT ASSESSMENT 
 
 
9.1 Risks to participants:  There are four potential risks a ssociated with participation in  the proposed study:  
1) physical harm associated with  assessment procedures, 2) phys ical harm associated with intervention 
procedures, 3) emotional distre ss and 4) loss of confidentialit y.  
 
9.1.1 In terms of physical harm a ssociated with assessment proc edures, risks associated with a 6-
minute walk test are similar t o participation in a moderate to vigorous walking exercise program 
and are minimal for individuals  with no cardiopulmonary, orthop edic, or age identified risk 
factors as determined by a physicia n.  Risks include muscle cra mps, muscle stra in and/or joint 
injury, delayed muscle soreness,  lightheadedness, and fatigue.  Handgrip Dynamometry and 
Biodex isokinetic tests for stre ngth may cause minor stiffness and/or tenderness in muscles for a 
couple of days following testi ng.  The nature of these assessme nts will require a level of 
exertion; this exertion may cause  temporary changes such as an increase in heart rate and blood 
pressure, both of which are normal responses to vigorous exerci se.  There is a small risk of 
irritation to the skin from the electrodes used for the BIA ana lysis.   
 
9.1.2 In terms of physical harm asso ciated with intervention pr ocedures, commencement of a moderate 
walking and progressive resistanc e exercise program is not asso ciated with any severe side 
effects and risks are minimal f or individuals with no cardiopul monary, orthopedic, or age 
identified risk factors as d etermined by a physician.  The abso lute chance of a cardiac event 
among adults while engaging in vigo rous exercise is one per yea r for every 15,000 to 18,000 
people.59  A transient increase in blood pre ssure may occur with all types  of exercise.  Although 
unlikely, a moderate walking and pr ogressive resistance exercis e program may also cause 
musculoskeletal effects, such as mild muscle soreness, a muscle  strain, or other related accidental 
injuries such as tripping.  Overa ll, the risk level for partici pation in the moderate intensity 
EXCAP Home-Based Walking and Pr ogressive Resistance program is minimal. 
 
9.1.3 In terms of emotional distre ss, the quantitative assessme nts explore issues associated with the 
relationship between survivors and caregivers, feelings about t reatment, and mental health.  The 
sensitive nature of these items  may cause partic ipants to becom e distressed as they think about 
their responses.  Specific t o research with dyads, during the i ntervention or possibly as a result of 
responding to questionnaire items , issues may arise that could lead to tension between survivor 
and caregiver and possible conflic t and/or violence within the dyad.   
 
9.1.4 In terms of loss of confid entiality, both quantitative da ta and biological samples from 
participants will need to be  stored.  Though rigorous and well- tested data safety and security 
guidelines will be observed, there is still a chance that confi dentiality could be breached and 
sensitive medical information c ould become known to persons out side the research team.  
 
9.2 Adequacy of protection against risk:  Four potential risks have been a ssociated with participation in  this 
study: 1) physical harm associate d with assessment procedures, 2) physical harm associated with 
   
Protocol date :  7 / 0 6 / 2 0 2 0           intervention procedures, 3) emo tional distress and 4) loss of c onfidentiality.  
 
9.2.1 Physical harm associated w ith assessment and intervention  procedures:  Every effort will be 
made to minimize the risks asso ciated with study procedures for  all participants.  First, all 
participants (cancer survivors a nd caregivers) must have the ap proval of their physician to enter 
the study.  All testing and exerc ise prescription discussions w ill be supervised by an American 
College of Sports Medicine (ACSM)  Certified Exercise Physiologi stSM. A physician (or 
physician’s designee) will be p resent when necessary according to ACSM Guidelines; for 
example, in circumstances where  the participants ’ physician has  approved the participant to 
participate in the study, but rev iew of a participant’s medical  history reveals cardiorespiratory, 
orthopedic, or central nervous system conditions that do not pr eclude participa tion in exercise 
but might increase the particip ant’s risk of complications duri ng fitness testing.  This 
conservative policy is designed t o ensure the safety and minimi ze the risk to cancer survivors.  
EXCAP uses standardized guideline s for exercise testing and pre scription provided by the 
ACSM, which have been shown to be s afe to use with medically il l populations.   
 
Risks will also be minimized by following the documented and ap proved procedures for tests 
that are performed in the NIH -funded and approved University of  Rochester General Clinical 
Research Center (GCRC); their trained staff will perform these tests.  Specifically, to minimize 
the chance of bruising and the s light chance of infection assoc iated with blood collection, the 
GCRC employs standardized hosp ital procedures for blood collect ion, and uses a trained 
phlebotomist and sterile materials.   
 
Though the overall risks of partic ipating in a low to moderate intensity home-based exercise 
program are minimal, participan ts will be instructed to stop pe rforming the exercises if they 
experience cardiopulmonary sympt oms that may be indicative of a  more serious medical side-
effect.  An ACSM Certifie d Exercise PhysiologistSM will be available by phone or e-mail to 
assist participants in problem  solving and performing exercises  in a safe fashion. 
 
9.2.2 Emotional distress: Dr. Kamen has over ten years of exper ience conducting assessments with 
persons undergoing both acute and chronic stress, including ind ividuals who report extensive 
trauma histories and are living with chronic illnesses, as well  as combat veterans and their 
spouses.  It is rare for a participant to find self-report ques tionnaires to be psychologically 
distressing, even when responding to items that have asked dire ctly about trauma exposure and 
trauma symptoms.  To prevent dis tress, participants will be inf ormed that they are free to decline 
to answer any question for any rea son; furthermore, these optio ns will be explicitly stated in the 
consent forms. Research staff will be extensively trained to he lp minimize distress to 
participants. However, should par ticipants become depressed, an xious, agitated, or otherwise 
distressed during the assessment , Dr. Kamen or another trained member of the research staff will 
be notified and the participant wi ll be triaged and referred fo r care.  Should the participant 
already be receiving care, they w ill be referred to follow up w ith their care provider and a check 
in call will be made following t he assessment to establish part icipant safety and comfort.  For 
concerns related to violence within the dyad detected during th e course of the study, we will take 
the following precautions. As stated above, Dr. Kamen will be a vailable at all times to provide 
   
Protocol date :  7 / 0 6 / 2 0 2 0           clinical crisis intervention. H e has taken continuing education  courses specifically focused on the 
assessment and treatment of dome stic violence. In addition, a r esource list will be available 
which will include emergency housing shelters, and programs, cl inicians, and support groups 
specializing in relationship abus e and violence. For more minor  relationship disruptions that may 
result from participation, we w ill have referral information av ailable for therapists who treat 
dyads and families.  
 
9.2.3 Confidentiality:  This stu dy involves collecting biologic al samples and obtaining access to 
medical records, and steps must  be taken to protect both partic ipant data and identity. The 
following confidentiality protecti on steps will be taken: 1) Re search staff will participate in 
initial training, follow-up t raining, and ongoing monitoring an d supervision to ensure 
understanding of the ethical issues  involved in this research; 2) only the research staff will know 
the name, identification (ID)  number, and contact information o f participants. The list that links 
the participant’s name with I D number will be kept on an encryp ted drive accessible only by the 
research staff; 3) consent form s will be kept in locked filing cabinets in a locked office, again 
accessible only by research staff; and 4) any personal identifi ers linked to data will be removed 
and replaced by non-identifying ID numbers in all records. The electronic files that contain 
quantitative data will be sto red on a secure University of Roch ester Medical Center file server. 
These files will be password pr otected and accessible only by t he PI and the study coordinator.  
 
Due to the dyadic nature of t he proposed study, additional prec autions are necessary to avoid 
inadvertent transfer of confiden tial information from one partn er to another a s a result of 
participation in assessments.  Q uantitative assessments are con ducted separately with each 
partner so that it is not possibl e for research staff to reveal  information to one partner about the 
other partner.   
 
9.3 Benefits: There are no direct ben efits of the study t o the study particip ants. Potential s econdary benefits 
of the study include that all participants will receive an exer cise kit to keep at no charge. Caregivers in 
the individual intervention group w ill receive the kit and inst ructions after completing all of the study 
assessments.  Participants may or  may not receive any further b enefit from participating in this study.   
 
  
   
Protocol date :  7 / 0 6 / 2 0 2 0            
10. DATA COLLECTION AND MEASURES 
 
 10.1 Psychosocial Questionnaire Measures  
 
10.1.1 Psychological distress will be evaluated using three mea sures.  First, general mood (the primary 
outcome ) will be assessed through the short form of the Profile of Mood States (POMS) .  The 
POMS consists of 30 adjectives i n 6 subscales (e.g., anxiety, d epression), which participants rate 
on a five-point scale with “1” = “ Not at all” and “5” = “Extrem ely” to describe their moods over 
the past week.  The POMS has bee n used extensively in research with cancer patients and has 
demonstrated reliability and validity.
60,61  
 
10.1.2 Second, depression will be assessed with the  Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ-9).   The 
PHQ-962 is a 9-item multipurpose depre ssion scale developed and valida ted for use with a variety 
of populations.  It incorporates d iagnostic criteria for depres sion and is quick to administer.  Its 
diagnostic validity and reliabil ity have been tested in medical  populations.63  A total score of 10 
or higher will be defined as a de pressed case for analyses of p ossible subgroup changes in 
depression.64 If there is concern about the  degree of depression and/or poss ible risk of suicide 
based upon information from the PHQ-9, the participant will be referred to their physician and/or 
an appropriate source of  psychological care.   
 
10.1.3 Third, anxiety will be measured using the Spielberger State/Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI 
Form Y-1).   In order to reduce overall pa tient burden, we will use only t he state portion of the 
questionnaire.  This one-page, sel f-administered questionnaire consists of 20 short statements 
which people may use to describe t heir feelings.  Participants are asked to fill in a numbered 
circle to indicate th e degree to which they generally experienc e the particular feeling, ranging 
from 1 = “Not at all” to 4 = “Ver y much so” at that time.  It i s one of the most widely-used 
assessments of anxiety.  Internal consistency coefficients > 0. 90 have been shown, along with 
test/retest reliabili ty coefficients > 0.70.  Concurrent, const ruct, convergent and divergent 
validity have also been demonstrated.65,66 
10.1.4 Quality of Life (QOL) will be assessed with the Short Form Health Survey 12 (SF-12), a 12-
item, multi-purpose scale designed primarily to measure functio nal health and well-being in a 
parsimonious fashion.67  For the current study, mental and physical health summary sco res will 
be used to asses QOL.  Responses are  anchored using a Likert sc ale ranging from  1 to 5 (strongly 
agree, agree, neutral, disagree , and strongly disagree, respect ively).  Cronbach’s Alpha 
coefficients indicate  reliability of over .90.68,69 
10.1.5 Support between the patient and caregiver will be assess ed with three measures: the Dyadic 
Adjustment Scale-7; the Dyadic Support Questionnaire; and the S ocial Provisions Scale. 
10.1.5.1 The Dyadic Adjustment Scale-7 (DAS-7) is a 7-item scale designed to measure how 
individuals feel about their re lationship with their caregivers  using a unidimensional 
   
Protocol date :  7 / 0 6 / 2 0 2 0           global approach.  Responses are anchored on a Likert scale rang ing from 1 to 5 (strongly 
agree, agree, neutral, disagree , and strongly disagree, respect ively).  Cronbach’s Alpha 
coefficients indicate an intern al consistency range from .76 to  .87, and a test-retest 
reliability range from .63 to .85 among cancer patients.70   
10.1.5.2 The Dyadic Support Questionnaire (DSQ) is an 18-item survey based on four 
functions of social support (emo tional, appraisal, instrumental , and informational 
support).  Nine items measure rece ived social support, that is,  support provided by the 
partner; nine additional items measure support provided to the partner.  Items are 
anchored using a Likert scale ranging from 1 to 5 (from not at all to a great deal).  Items 
are summed to create scales f or received and provided support.  Cronbach's alpha 
reliability coefficients range  from .85 to .92, test-retest rel iability coefficients range 
between .74 and .92 for this measure.71 
10.1.5.3 The Social Provisions Scale – Short Form (SPS) is a 10-item survey designed to 
measure availability of emotiona l, tangible, and informational social support using a 
single general social support sc ale.  Items are anchored on a f our point Likert-type scale 
ranging from Strongly Disagree to  Strongly Agree.  Psychometric  properties for the 
measure are excellent, with Cronb ach's alpha reliability coeffi cients over .90.72,73  
10.1.6 Additional patient-reported health outcomes will be meas ured with several short item banks from 
the Patient-Reported Outcomes Measu rement Information System (PROMI S).  The 
PROMIS item banks were develope d by a National In stitutes of He alth (NIH) cooperative group 
and tested extensively on multiple waves of participants.  The item banks all display adequate 
reliability and excellent conve rgent validity with existing leg acy measures (e.g., the FACIT-F). 
The current study will include ite ms from the general health, a nxiety, and fatigue banks.74,75 
10.1.7 Sleep difficulties and fati gue will be assessed with two  measures: the Insomnia Severity Index 
and the Multidimensional Fa tigue Symptom Inventory.  
10.1.7.1 Insomnia symptoms will be assessed using the Insomnia Severity Index (ISI) , a 
commonly used, 7-item psychometrically reliable and valid measu re providing an 
insomnia total score and subscal e scores in cancer survivors.76,77 
10.1.7.2 Fatigue will be assessed using the Multidimensional Fatigue Symptom Inventory 
(MFSI) , a 30 item measure that assesse s the impact of fatigue using f ive subscales: 
general fatigue, physical fatigue , mental fatigue, reduced acti vity, and reduced 
motivation.78,79 Though developed to measure can cer-related fatigue, the scale has been 
used with non-cancer populations; items are generic and could a pply to both patients and 
caregivers.80-82  The MFSI is both valid and reliab le, with Cronbach alphas for  subscales 
ranging from .71-.86.83 
10.1.8 LGBT-specific minority stress will be assessed with the Heterosexism and Identity 
Questionnaire , a 41 item measure with nine s ubscales assessing harassment, d iscrimination, 
acceptance, concealment, identity, and homonegativity.  The pri ncipal investigat or has used this 
   
Protocol date :  7 / 0 6 / 2 0 2 0           measure previously in studies of  same-sex relationships, and it  demonstrates acceptable 
reliability and validity.42 
10.1.9 Finally, patient-physician i nteraction will be measured with a battery of short  questionnaires: the 
Perceived Efficacy in Patient-Physician Interactions  (PEPPI) scale, the Stanford Self-
Efficacy for Managing Chronic Disease Scale  (SSES) and The Human Connection  (THC) 
scale.  All three questionnaire s are rated on a L ikert-type sca le, measure multiple aspects of 
patient empowerment and communica tion in the context of medical  interaction, and have been 
used extensively in medical research.84-86  Psychometric properties for these scales are excellent 
and participant burden is minimal.85-87   
 
10.2 Physiological and Physical  Activity Measurements 
10.2.1 Physical Activity will be  assessed subjectively using th e Physical Activity Readiness 
Questionnaire (PAR-Q+), the Aer obic Center Longitudinal Study P hysical Activity 
Questionnaire and questions on the  daily journal.  In addition,  objective assessments of physical 
activity will be obtai ned via actigraphy, from the pedometer, a nd through heart rate  variability.  
10.2.1.1 The Physical Activity Readiness Questionnaire (PAR-Q+)  will be used following the 
consent process as an additional screen for medical contraindic ations to exercise.  The 
PAR-Q+ asks about a variety of  medical conditions and physical symptoms associated 
with contraindications to incre ased physical activity.  Reliabi lity (r=0.99) and sensitivity 
(0.90) are high when assessing hyperten sion and other risk fact ors for increased physical 
activity.88  In addition to the PAR-Q+, all pa rticipants will receive medi cal clearance 
from their physician (or the s tudy medical monitor, or designee s) to participate in the 
exercise intervention. 
10.2.1.2 The Aerobic Center Longitudinal Stud y Physical Activity Questionnai re (ACLS)  is 
a measurement instrument that includes assessment of lifestyle physical activity.89  The 
questionnaire requests that partic ipants report their engagemen t in fourteen different 
physical activities (frequenc y, intensity and duration) over th e last three months.  
Estimates of energy expenditure a re calculated using the follow ing equation: 
(sessions/week) * (min/session)* (hour/min) * MET [Note: MET = metabolic energy 
expenditure rate] for each ac tivity and then summed to provide total MET hours of 
energy expenditure for a wee k.  The index of walking, jogging, and running predicted 
treadmill performance time (beta = .31) and there is a moderate  relationship between 
energy expenditure estimates and treadmill performance (r = .41 ).   
10.2.1.2 The Daily Diary (as referenced e lsewhere in the protocol) is designed to track daily 
physical activity.  The participan t will be asked to complete t he journal each night 
immediately prior to sleeping a nd record steps walked, minutes of resistance training 
completed, and a Rating of Per ceived Exertion.  The daily diary  will also include an item 
assessing average daily distre ss, rated on a 0-10 scale.  All p articipants will complete this 
daily assessment of distress, but  only those randomized to the exercise condition will 
complete the exercise-relevant measures. 
   
Protocol date :  7 / 0 6 / 2 0 2 0           10.2.1.3 Actigraphy , as an objective measure of phys ical activity, will involve th e waist-worn 
actigraph.  The actigraph provides calculated energy expenditur e values for Active 
Energy Expenditure (AEE) in kiloca lories and total energy expen diture in Metabolic 
Equivalents per Time (METs) i n kilocalories/min/kg.  The actigr aph features a variable 
epoch length which can be set between 1 to 240 seconds and 16 M B non-volatile 
memory.  “Non-volatile” means th at even if the battery, which c an log 4000 hours of 
runtime, becomes exhausted, the  data remain intact. The actigra ph AEE Algorithm is 
based on validation studies, copies  of which are available upon  request.  Software 
supplied by the manufacturer wi ll be used to determine bouts of  moderate or higher 
activity during each assessment period (day -7 to day 0, day 35  to day 42). 
10.2.1.4 The Pedometer (or fitness tracker) will be us ed to assess duration of physica l activity 
via steps walked during the time out of bed.  Both pedometers a nd fitness trackers 
provide visual feedback of numb er of steps walked, and so can b e used in the same 
fashion.  The PEAK Lab is in the process of transitioning from standard pedometers to 
wearable fitness trackers. 
10.2.1.4 Heart Rate Variability  (HRV) will be measured using t he Firstbeat® Bodyguard 2 to 
assess the HRV at the beginning of  the first and the sixth inte rvention session. To 
measure HRV, participants will si t quietly for five minutes in the PEAK Lab wearing the 
Bodyguard 2 leads attached to the ir side and upper chest.  Five  biomarker outcomes will 
be assessed. Two time domain s will be assessed including SDNN (the standard deviation 
of all normal R-R intervals meas ured between consecutive sinus beats) and RMSSD (the 
root mean square of successive di fferences between adjacent nor mal R-R intervals). 
Three frequency domains will be assessed including RSA (Respiratory Sinus 
Arrhythmia), LF (natural log of low frequency, tot al spectrum pow er of all NN i ntervals 
between 0.04 to 0.15Hz), and LF/HF ratio (the ratio of Low Freque ncy Total Spectrum 
Power of all NN Intervals Between .04 to .15 Hertz to High Freq uency Total Spectrum 
Power of all NN Interval s between .15 to .40 Hertz). 
10.2.2 A 6 Minute Walk  test will be used to assess aerobic capacity.  This is a modif ied but still 
maximal measurement using a 6 m inute walk protocol, generating a valid assessment while 
ensuring participant comfort.  Par ticipants are given a short w arm up and cool down walking 
protocol in the test walking area in the University of Rocheste r PEAK Laboratory.  Participants 
walk for a total of 6 minutes a nd cover as much distance as the y can during this time.  Upon 
completion of the test, the total  distance walked is used to ca lculate an estimate of aerobic 
capacity (VO 2max; Maximal Oxygen Consumption) . A physician (or physician’s d esignee) is 
available onsite in the hosp ital during testing of patients dee med high risk by the ACSM 
Certified Exercise PhysiologistSM, as outlined by the ACSM fitness testing guidelines.   
10.2.3 Muscular fitness will be assessed using two measures: a handgrip dynamometer test and an 
isokinetic muscular strength test.   
10.2.3.1 The  Handgrip Dynamometer Test  is a grip strength test  used to assess the maximal 
voluntary contraction generated by the arm muscles.  The test i s administered with the 
   
Protocol date :  7 / 0 6 / 2 0 2 0           patient standing with the elbow j oint angle held constant at 18 0 degrees and the medial 
distal humeral epicondyl held 2 inc hes from the torso.  Trials will be performed in an 
alternating bilate ral sequence, for a tot al of six attempts (th ree with each arm).  The best 
score of the three trials will be  used for right and left limbs  to calculate static strength.   
10.2.3.2 The standard Isokinetic Muscular Strength Testing Protocol will use the Biodex 
System 4 Pro, a multi-mode computerized isokinetic dynamometer.   Muscular strength 
testing will involve isokinetic kn ee flexion/extension (lower b ody) and shoulder diagonal 
(upper body) movements.  A certif ied ACSM Exercise Physiologist  will provide a full 
orientation to the isokinetic m achine including: aligning subje ct into position, setting 
range of motion, and conducting a warm up set. The Physiologist  will be on hand 
throughout the test to ensure proper form and participant comfo rt.  After the warm up set, 
participants will complete a s ingle set of 10 repetitions of ea ch movement (isokinetic 
knee flexion/extension and shoulde r diagonal) per side. Partici pants will exert maximal 
force through their entire ra nge of motion, moving at a set spe ed in degrees per second 
against the lever arm.  Partici pants will also rest for approxi mately one minute between 
sets.  This isokinetic protocol w ill allow us to measure peak t orque, maximal work, total 
work, and average power for each movement. The Biodex System Pr o 4 has been used 
successfully in over 1,000 researc h studies and is both safe an d accurate in measuring 
muscular function.90  Risks of using the Biodex System  Pro 4 are comparable to usin g a 
fixed resistance machine and inc lude potential muscle soreness and fatigue after the 
conclusion of the test (see section 9.1.1 and 9.2.1); this prot ocol uses a single set of 
repetitions per movement, however , to minimize the risk of fati gue. 
For participants who are unable to  complete the Isokinetic Musc ular Strength Testing 
Protocol, a standard 7-10 Repetition Maximum Dynamic  Strength Testing Protocol 
will be used  to estimate patients’ 1-repetiti on maximums for the leg extensi on 
(quadriceps) and bench press (pect oralis and deltoid). The pati ents will receive a full 
orientation to the fixed resista nce machines and proper lifting  form by a certified (e.g., 
ACSM) certified professional.  Par ticipants will perform a ligh t warm up consisting of 8 
lift repetitions employing the li ghtest weight on the machine.  After the warm up, patients 
will be given a 1 minute rest br eak.  A weight will be selected  by the exercise testing staff 
based on the ease or difficulty of  completing the warm up for e ach patient and this weight 
will be lifted for 10 repetitions or until subjective fatigue.  Alternating rest breaks (2-3 
minutes) and lifting bouts will con tinue with the resistance we ight being adjusted by the 
exercise testing staff until the  patient reaches a level of res istance that results in 
subjective fatigue between 7-10 r epetitions.   Established algo rithms employing the 
weight lifted and the number of r epetitions completed will then  be used to estimate the 
patients’ 1-repetition maximum.91  
10.2.4 Skeletal muscle mass will be assessed using bioelectrica l impedance.   
10.2.4.1 The RJL Bioelectrical Impedance System  is a non-invasive, easy-to-administer and 
safe method of assessing lean body ma ss.  BIA involves passing a small electrical current 
through the body and evaluating the  reactance and r esistance to  flow, which are related to 
   
Protocol date :  7 / 0 6 / 2 0 2 0           fat-free mass (FFM) and total  body water.  Prediction of lean b ody mass from BIA is as 
reliable as skin-fold measurements and hydrostatic weighing.  P articipants lie supine on a 
flat surface for approximately 5 m inutes prior to the test, to ensure a resting metabolic 
state.  Electrodes are attache d to the right hand (distal end o f the 3rd and 4th metacarpal 
and distal end of the ulnar and r adius), and the right foot (di stal end of the 3rd and 4th 
metatarsal and distal end of the  tibia and fibula).  Skeletal m uscle mass will then be 
calculated from the lean body mass.92  
 
10.3 Serum Analysis  
 
10.3.1 All blood draws and serum analyses will be done on all s tudy participants (cancer survivors and 
their caregivers).  A total of  approximately 34 ml of blood (ar ound 2 tablespoons) will be drawn 
at each time point (baseline and post-intervention assessment).   As stated above in sections 6.4.1 
and 6.7.1, blood counts will be measured by standard CBC with d ifferential procedures.  These 
counts will be collected by the  study team and kept in the part icipant’s research file.  The blood 
sample (approximately 4 ml) f or blood counts will be drawn in 1  purple-top (EDTA heparin 
plasma) vacutainer by research per sonnel in the General Clinica l Research Center.   
 
10.3.1.1 Because this is a research and not a clinical care pro tocol, the CBC is collected only to 
inform assessment of biological e ndpoints.  No clinical care re commendations will be 
offered to participants on the ba sis of their CBC.  Should any question about the CBC 
arise, participants w ill be directed to speak with their medica l provider. 
 
10.3.2 Measurement of biological endpoints will be conducted in  Dr. Janelsins’ Cancer Control and 
Psychoneuroimmunology Laboratory in t he Department of Surgery.  Samples will be stored in 
freezers owned and maintained by Dr. Janelsins.  Serum cortisol , serum amyloid A, and C-
reactive protein will be measur ed by three separate ELISAs.  In flammatory biomarkers will be 
measured using multiplex assays.   
 
10.3.2.1 As stated above in secti on 6.4.1, the blood draws for estimation of biological endpoint 
levels will use 2 red top tubes for serum (10 ml each, 20 ml to tal).  These tubes will be 
inverted 3-4 times, allowed to clot for 30 minutes at room temp erature, centrifuged for 10 
min at 1500 x g and then frozen at -20c or -80c.  The blood dra w for estimation of 
biomarker genomics (i.e., mRNA c oncentrations related to produc tion of cortisol, serum 
amyloid A, and CRP) will use 1 pur ple top EDTA-heparin tube (10 ml total).  This EDTA 
tube will be rocked 10 times, s tored upright for minimum of 2 h ours at room temperature 
and then frozen at -20c or - 80c. All tubes will be drawn by res earch personnel in the 
General Clinical Research Cen ter (GCRC), processed by a technic ian in the GCRC, 
collected by a study team member a nd then transferred to lab sp ace maintained by Dr. 
Janelsins in the Department of S urgery for immediate storing of  serum or plasma, 
respectively. Mr. Bryan Thomps on is responsible for all storage  and analysis of samples 
in this laboratory.   
 
   
Protocol date :  7 / 0 6 / 2 0 2 0           10.3.3 Blood samples collected after regular hours will be cent rifuged by the GCRC technician, and 
samples will be stored temporar ily (overnight) at an appropriat e temperature in the secure 
laboratory until they are processed for long-term storage. For longer storage, the samples will be 
frozen at -20°C or below and kept in a secured -80c freezer.   
 
10.3.4 All human biological materia ls will be disposed of in ad herence with the University of Rochester 
Office of Environmental Safety B iosafety Level II requirements.   All laboratories used in the 
current study have received appr opriate biosafety certification s by the University of Rochester 
Institutional Biosafety Comm ittee and undergo routine inspectio ns.  All patient samples will be 
de-identified befo re being stored.  
 
  
   
Protocol date :  7 / 0 6 / 2 0 2 0            
11. CONFIDENTIALITY OF DA TA AND DATA STORAGE 
 
 11.1 Data Collection Table  
 
FORM  Baseline   
Post Intervention 
 
On Study Data  (Demographic and clinical data) X  
Clinical Record Information (Clinical data – survivor only ) X  
Medication Form X  
Physical Activity Readiness Questionnaire  (PAR-Q+)  X  
Profile of Mood States (POMS)  X X 
Aerobic Center Longitudinal Study Physical Activity 
Questionnaire (ACLS; 15-item physical activity history measure)  X X 
Patient Health Questionnaire - 9 (PHQ-9)  X X 
Spielberger State/Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI Form Y-1)  X X 
Short Form Health Survey 12 (SF-12)  X X 
Dyadic Adjustment Scale – 7 (DAS-7) X X 
Dyadic Support Questionnaire (DSQ) X X 
PROMIS Patient-Reported Item Batteries X X 
Insomnia Severity Index (ISI) X X 
Multidimensional Fatigue Symptom Inventory (MFSI) X X 
Heterosexism and Identity Questionnaire  X X 
Physician Interaction ( PEPPI, THC, and SSE ) Scales X X 
Physiological Fitness Test Evaluations  (6 min walk test, handgrip 
dynamometry, isokinetic strength t est, bioelectrical impedance)  X X 
Heart Rate Variability (Firstbeat Bodyguard 2) X X 
Biological Endpoints (via blood draw) X X 
Pedometer (or fitness tracker)  Continuous (for 
those exercising) Continuous (for 
those exercising) 
Actigraphy  7 days before 7 days before 
Daily Diary  Continuous (for 
those exercising) Continuous (for 
those exercising) 
 
 
11.2  All hardcopy research recor ds will be stored onsite in th e University of Rochester  Medical Center, in the 
Cancer Control Unit and the PEAK Lab of the James P. Wilmot Can cer Institute.  The Cancer Control 
Unit is located in the Saunders  Research Building, in an office  suite secured by electronic key cards.  
The PEAK Lab is located in the med ical center and is also secur ed by electronic key cards. Offices 
within the Unit and the Lab are again secured by key and data i s kept in locked file cabinets.  Electronic 
research records are stored on the  University of Rochester Medi cal Center’s password secured and 
   
Protocol date :  7 / 0 6 / 2 0 2 0           firewall protected networks.  The se are the same methods of sec urity used for patient  medical records.  
Human serum samples are stored in locked freezers, within locke d and alarmed laboratories that are 
accessible by key codes and electronic card swipes.  All study data will be kept for a  period of at least 6 
years after the study and all re ports and publications are comp lete.   
 
11.3 All data (information and human blood samples) collected f or the current study w ill be used in post hoc 
analyses as appropriate.  Blood s amples will be banked and data  will be used for fut ure studies only with 
prior consent of participants (cancer survivors and caregivers) .  The consent form contains appropriate 
language related to biobanking and participants are given the o ption to have their samples banked or to 
have them destroyed following a nalysis of the study hypotheses.   Participants’ indi vidual research 
records will not be shared wit h their treating physician, unles s they provide consent or the patient’s 
treating physician is a study physician, in whi ch case they wil l have access to study data as a study co-
investigator.  Overall study res ults will be presented to parti cipants, faculty and staff at the University of 
Rochester Medical Center aft er completion of the study.  Study results will be present ed at professional 
meetings and published.  
 
11.4 The study team will assign a numerical Study ID to each pa rticipant once they have  signed the consent 
form.  Study forms and questionnaires will use this number and the participant’s firs t and last initials as 
identifiers to ensure data int egrity.  Other identifying inform ation will not exist on these forms.  A 
complete list of study particip ants with study ID, name, and co ntact information will be maintained 
separately for the purpose of c ontacting participants for weekl y phone call or e-mail reminders; this 
database will be maintained until  the study is closed. This lin kage information will on ly be accessible to 
the study chair, study investigat ors, and the individual respon sible for maintaini ng the database.   
 
  
   
Protocol date :  7 / 0 6 / 2 0 2 0            
12. RESEARCH INFORMATION IN MEDICAL RECORDS 
 
 12.1 Documentation of study partic ipation will be included in t he medical record by means of uploading a 
signed consent form to each cance r survivor’s medical record, f or those participan ts enrolled in the 
research study from Wilmot Cancer  Institute/University of Roche ster Medical Center.  Participants’ 
blood draw at the Clinical Resea rch Center wil l also be noted i n the medical record as an outpatient 
appointment.  No further researc h-related information will be i ncluded in the medical record. 
 
  
   
Protocol date :  7 / 0 6 / 2 0 2 0            
13. DATA ANALYSIS AND DATA MONITORING 
 
 
13.1 Measures for the primary a nd secondary aims will be: 
 
13.1.1 Cancer survivor’s self-report ed psychological distress ( 30 item POMS Total Score) at post-
intervention (Primary Aim 1) 
13.1.2 Cancer survivor’s serum level s of stress-related biologi cal endpoints (cortisol, serum amyloid A, 
C-reactive protein) at post-i ntervention (Secondary Aim 2) 
13.1.3 Cancer survivor’s received su pport from the caregiver (D yadic Support Questionnaire) at post-
intervention (Secondary Aim 3)  
13.1.4 Cancer survivor’s physical activity, as measured by acti graphy, at post-inter vention (Secondary 
Aim 3)  
 
13.2 Measures for the explorator y aim in caregivers will be: 
 
13.2.1 Caregiver’s self-reported ps ychological distress (30 ite m POMS Total Score) at post-intervention  
13.2.2 Caregiver’s serum levels of  stress-relate d biological en dpoints (cortisol, ser um amyloid A, C-
reactive protein) at post-intervention 
13.2.3 Caregiver’s received support from the cancer survivor (D yadic Support Questionnaire) at post-
intervention  
13.2.4 Caregiver’s physical activit y, as measured by actigraphy , at post-intervention  
 13.3 Data Analysis  
 
13.3.1 The primary outcome measure fo r this study is the cancer  survivor’s self-reported psychological 
distress, as assessed by the 30 item Profile of Mood States (PO MS) Total score at the post-
intervention time point (~6 weeks after baseline). The primary analyses will involve a 
comparison of EXCAP-PA relative to survivor-only EXCAP©® using analysis of covariance 
(ANCOVA).  This procedure assesse s the statistical significance  of the difference in post-
intervention mean between the tw o arms, controlling for baselin e score and using intent to treat 
analyses with 30 evaluable survivors per arm.  The comparison o f EXCAP-PA to survivor-only 
EXCAP©® assumes a null hypothesis of no difference, using a two-sided alpha.  We will use 
ordinary least-squares estimati on and F-tests for testing the f ixed effects.  Primary aim analyses 
will treat the LGBT cancer survi vor as the unit of analysis.  T he mean difference between groups 
with associated 95% confidence in tervals will be estimated usin g the appropriate contrasts.  This 
study will establish initial efficacy of the dyadic interventio n and provide an initial effect size for 
the intervention that will inform the development of a larger P hase III trial.  
 
13.3.2 Secondary analyses will use standardized procedures deve loped by Dr. Janelsins and the 
Rochester Human Immunology Core to measure serum levels of dist ress-related biological 
endpoints (serum amyloid A, CRP , cortisol) via ELISAs. The effi cacy of EXCAP-PA relative to 
survivor-only EXCAP©® in improving markers of HPA axi s functioning (cortisol) and ea rly 
   
Protocol date :  7 / 0 6 / 2 0 2 0           inflammation (SAA, CRP) will be a ssessed using three separate A NCOVAs, each controlling for 
baseline biological marker valu es, and two ANCOVAs for dyadic s upport and intervention 
adherence.  Since the secondar y aims, relating to immune biomar kers of distress and provision of 
support within the dyad, are inte nded to gather preliminary eff icacy data for the development of 
a larger grant submission, the secondary analyses will also exa mine mean change scores (i.e., 
baseline assessment subtracte d from the post-intervention asses sment), standard deviations, and 
correlations on these variable s for the two study arms.  
 
13.3.3 The current study is neithe r structured nor powered to p ermit true analysis of mediation.  
However, exploratory analyses will involve examining associatio ns between outcomes of interest 
(distress and biological endpoint s) and potential mechanistic f actors (social support from a 
caregiver, adherence to the exerc ise interventi on).  Using the analysis techniques of Imai, I will 
evaluate whether change in soc ial support and change in interve ntion adherence are associated 
with the effect of the interve ntion on psychological distress a nd biological endpoints linked with 
distress. This will involve generating a correlation matrix to test bivariate relationships.  We will 
then conduct separate analyses for support and adherence with e ach outcome, using mixed 
effects ANCOVA models with arm, ba seline distress or biomarker score, with/without support 
and adherence pre-post change scores as model predictor terms. We will also evaluate change in 
caregiver distress sc ores from baseline t o post-intervention in  the EXCAP-PA condition using 
paired sample t-tests, to examine whether caregivers benefit fr om supporting LGBT cancer 
survivors.  We will also examine outcomes in L, G, B, and T sub groups and evaluate 
confounding and moderating factors.  Because of the many explor atory analyses involved, any 
results will only be used f or hypothesis generation. 
 
13.3.3 Additional analyses will examine between group differenc es in the other outcome measures.  
These will include:  physical activ ity (ACLS, Daily Diaries), a erobic capacity (6 minute walk 
test), muscular strength (handgr ip dynamometry, isokinetic stre ngth test), depression (CES-D), 
anxiety (STAI), minority stress (Heterosexism and Identity Scal e), relationship satisfaction 
(DAS-7), and quality of life (SF-12). 
 
13.4  Missing Data    
 
13.4.1 We expect some attrition due to loss to follow up, decli ning follow up, or illness.  We expect to 
retain 85% of the sample over th e short 6 week period from pre-  to post-intervention.  This 
estimate is conservative, as a  previous study of LGBT patients and partners retained 93% of a 
sample of 249 dyads after 15 mont hs and Dr. Kamen retained 100%  of participants in his 
feasibility trial.  With 85% ret ention, recruitment of 70 LGBT survivors will mean that we will 
have a sample of 60 survivors (a nd 60 caregivers) at the post-i ntervention assessment. 
 
13.4.1 In the event that a partic ipant willingly withdraws or i s removed from the study by the 
investigator, any data already c ollected will be analyzed as de emed appropriate, unless the 
participant asks to have his or her data removed from the study .  If a survivor or caregiver 
withdraws or is removed from t he study following the baseline a ssessment, his/her partner may 
continue in the study. 
   
Protocol date :  7 / 0 6 / 2 0 2 0            
13.4.2  Every effort will be made to encourage and facilitate p rovision of questionnaire and biological 
data.  In the event of missing da ta, we will use intent-to-trea t analyses and evaluate missing at 
random and missing not-at-random assumptions (MAR/MNAR) to dete rmine the impact on 
results. We anticipate using multiple imputation if data are MA R and pattern-mixture models if 
data are MNAR.  
 
13.5 Sample Size  
 
13.5.1 The primary aim of this study is to evaluate influence o f the partner vs. survivor-only exercise 
intervention on psychological distress in cancer survivors, as measured by the POMS total score 
at the post-treatment assessment .  Based on previous research o n EXCAP©® that we have 
conducted, and assuming a SD of 13.01 for the POMS total score and a correlation of 0.7 
between baseline and post-treatment, we will have 80% power to detect difference of 6.90 (a 
moderate effect size of 0.58) bet ween the two gro ups at the 0.0 5 level.  The power curve in 
Figure 5 shows the statistical pow er we have to detect differen ce between the two treatment arms 
in changes from baseline to post treatment on the POMS total sc ore should the proposed study 
yield smaller mean differences.   
  
Figure 5:  Model Power Curve 

   
Protocol date :  7 / 0 6 / 2 0 2 0            
14. REFERENCES 
 
 1. Institute of Medicine. The Health of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexu al, and Transgender People: Building a 
Foundation for Better Understanding . Washington (DC)2011. 
2. Howlader N, Ries LA, Mariotto A B, Reichman ME, Ruhl J, Cronin KA. Improved estimates of cancer-
specific survival rates f rom population-based data. Journal of the National Cancer Institute. Oct 20 
2010;102(20):1584-1598. 
3. Frisch M. On the etiology of anal squamous carcinoma. Dan Med Bull. Aug 2002;49(3):194-209. 
4. Grulich AE, van Leeuwen MT, Falst er MO, Vajdic CM. Incidence o f cancers in people with HIV/AIDS 
compared with immunosuppressed tran splant recipients: a meta-an alysis. Lancet. Jul 7 
2007;370(9581):59-67. 
5. Sell RL, Becker JB. Sexual or ientation data collection and pro gress toward Healthy People 2010. 
American journal of public health. Jun 2001;91(6):876-882. 
6. Frisch M, Smith E, Grulich A, Johansen C. Cancer in a populati on-based cohort of men and women in 
registered homosexual partnerships. American journal of epidemiology. Jun 1 2003;157(11):966-972. 
7. Boehmer U, Miao X, Ozonoff A. C ancer survivorship and sexual o rientation. Cancer. Aug 15 
2011;117(16):3796-3804. 
8. Boehmer U, Glickman M, Milton J , Winter M. Health-related qual ity of life in breast can cer survivors of 
different sexual orientations. Qual Life Res. Mar 2012;21(2):225-236. 
9. Boehmer U, Glickman M, Winter M. Anxiety and depression in bre ast cancer survivors of different 
sexual orientations. J Consult Clin Psychol. Jun 2012;80(3):382-395. 
10. Stanton AL. Psychosocial concer ns and interventions for cancer  survivors. Journal of clinical oncology : 
official journal of the American Society of Clinical Oncology. Nov 10 2006;24(32):5132-5137. 
11. Mao JJ, Armstrong K, Bowman MA , Xie SX, Kadakia R, Farrar JT. Symptom burden among cancer 
survivors: impact of age and comorbidity. Journal of the American Board of Family Medicine : JABFM. 
Sep-Oct 2007;20(5):434-443. 
12. Kamen C, Palesh O, Gerry A, et al . Disparities in health risk behavior and psycholog ical distress among 
gay versus heterosexual male cancer survivors. LGBT Health. 2014;1(2):86-92. 
13. Deimling GT, Bowman KF, Sterns S, Wagner LJ, Kahana B. Cancer- related health worries and 
psychological distress among older adult, long-term cancer surv ivors. Psycho-oncology. Apr 
2006;15(4):306-320. 
14. Hamer M, Chida Y, Molloy GJ. P sychological distress and cancer  mortality. Journal of psychosomatic 
research. Mar 2009;66(3):255-258. 
15. Hartman ME, Irvine J, Currie KL, et al. Exploring Gay Couples'  Experience With Sexual Dysfunction 
After Radical Prostatect omy: A Qualitative Study. J Sex Marital Ther. Jun 14 2013. 
16. Thomas C, Wootten A, Robinson P. The experiences of gay and bi sexual men diagnosed with prostate 
cancer: results from an online focus group. Eur J Cancer Care (Engl). Jul 2013;22(4):522-529. 
17. Gates G. How many people are lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender? Los Angeles: The Williams 
Institute, UCLA School of Law;2011. 
18. LIVESTRONG Foundation. Coming O ut With Cancer. Austin, TX: LIV ESTRONG Foundation; 2010. 
19. Boehmer U. Twenty years of public health research: inclusion o f lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender 
populations. American journal of public health. Jul 2002;92(7):1125-1130. 
20. Denney JT, Gorman BK, Barrera CB. Families, resources, and adu lt health: where do sexual minorities 
fit? Journal of health an d social behavior. Mar 2013;54(1):46-63. 
21. Mellon S, Kershaw TS, Northous e LL, Freeman-Gibb L. A family-b ased model to predict fear of 
recurrence for cancer survi vors and their c aregivers. Psycho-oncology. Mar 2007;16(3):214-223. 
22. Northouse LL, Mood DW, Schafenac ker A, et al. Randomized clini cal trial of a famil y intervention for 
prostate cancer patient s and their spouses. Cancer. Dec 15 2007;110(12):2809-2818. 
   
Protocol date :  7 / 0 6 / 2 0 2 0           23. Scott JL, Halford WK, Ward BG. U nited we stand? The effects of  a couple-coping intervention on 
adjustment to early stage br east or gynecological cancer. J Consult Clin Psychol. Dec 2004;72(6):1122-
1135. 
24. Martire LM, Schulz R, Helges on VS, Small BJ, Saghafi EM. Revie w and meta-analysis of couple-
oriented interventions  for chronic illness. Ann Behav Med. Dec 2010;40(3):325-342. 
25. Northouse L, Williams AL, Given B , McCorkle R. Psychosocial ca re for family caregivers of patients 
with cancer. Journal of clinical oncology : of ficial journal of the American Society of Clinical Oncology. 
Apr 10 2012;30(11):1227-1234. 
26. Hopkinson JB, Brown JC, Okamoto  I, Addington-Hall JM. The effe ctiveness of patient-family carer 
(couple) intervention for the man agement of symptoms and other health-related problems in people 
affected by cancer: a systematic  literature search and narrativ e review. J Pain Symptom Manage. Jan 
2012;43(1):111-142. 
27. Baucom DH, Porter LS, Kirby JS , et al. A couple-based interven tion for female breast cancer. Psycho-
oncology. Mar 2009;18(3):276-283. 
28. Mishel MH, Belyea M, Germino B B, et al. Helping patients with localized prostate carcinoma manage 
uncertainty and treatment side e ffects: nurse-delivered psychoe ducational intervention over the 
telephone. Cancer. Mar 15 2002;94(6):1854-1866. 
29. Giesler RB, Given B, Given C W, et al. Improving the quality of  life of patients with p rostate carcinoma: 
a randomized trial testing the  efficacy of a nurse-driven inter vention. Cancer. Aug 15 2005;104(4):752-
762. 
30. McCorkle R, Strumpf NE, Nuama h IF, et al. A specialized home c are intervention improves survival 
among older post-surgical cancer patients. J Am Geriatr Soc. Dec 2000;48(12):1707-1713. 
31. Holland JC, Bultz BD, National comprehensive Cancer N. The NCC N guideline for distress 
management: a case for making distress the sixth vital sign. Journal of the National Comprehensive 
Cancer Network : JNCCN. Jan 2007;5(1):3-7. 
32. Meyer IH. Prejudice, social stre ss, and mental health in lesbi an, gay, and bisexual populations: 
conceptual issues and research evidence. Psychological bulletin. Sep 2003;129(5):674-697. 
33. Mustian KM, Sprod LK, Palesh OG, e t al. Exercise for the manag ement of side effects and quality of 
life among cancer survivors. Curr Sports Med Rep. Nov-Dec 2009;8(6):325-330. 
34. Mock V, Frangakis C, Davidson N, et al. Exercise manages fatig ue during breast cancer treatment: a 
randomized controlled trial. Psycho-oncology. 2005;14:464-477. 
35. Payne JK, Held J, Thorpe J, et al. Effect of exercise on bioma rkers, fatigue, sleep disturbances, and 
depressive symptoms in older wo men with breast cancer receiving  hormonal therapy. Oncology Nursing 
Forum. 2008;Online. 35(4):635-642. 
36. Sprod LK, Palesh OG, Janelsins M C, et al. Exercise, sleep qual ity, and mediators of sleep in breast and 
prostate cancer patients r eceiving radiation therapy. Community oncology. Oct 2010;7(10):463-471. 
37. Mustian KM, Peppone L, Darling TV, Palesh O, Heckler CE, Morro w GR. A 4-week home-based 
aerobic and resistance exercise  program during radiation therap y: a pilot randomized clinical trial. The 
journal of supportive oncology. Sep-Oct 2009;7(5):158-167. 
38. Mustian K, Peppone L, Sprod L, et al. Exercise Improves Fatigu e, Cardiopulmonary Function and 
Strength: A Phase II RCT Among Ol der Prostate Cancer Patients R eceiving Radiation and Androgen 
Deprivation Therapy. Journal of clinical oncology : official journal of the Am erican Society of Clinical 
Oncology. 2012;50(15):558. 
39. Courneya KS, Friedenreich CM, S ela RA, Quinney HA, Rhodes RE, Handman M. The group 
psychotherapy and home-based physica l exercise (group-hope) tri al in cancer surviv ors: physical fitness 
and quality of life outcomes. Psycho-oncology. Jun 2003;12(4):357-374. 
40. Strohle A. Physical activity, e xercise, depression and anxiety  disorders. Journal of neural transmission. 
Jun 2009;116(6):777-784. 
   
Protocol date :  7 / 0 6 / 2 0 2 0           41. Kamen C, Smith-Stoner M, Heckle r C, Flannery M, Margolies L. S ocial Support, Self-Rated Health, 
and Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender (LGBT) Identity Dis closure to Cancer Care Providers. 
Oncology nursing forum. 2015 in press;42(1). 
42. Kamen C, Burns M, Beach SR. Mi nority stress in same-sex male r elationships: whe n does it impact 
relationship satisfaction? Journal of homosexuality. 2011;58(10):1372-1390. 
43. Burns MN, Kamen C, Lehman KA, B each SR. Attributions for discr iminatory events and satisfaction 
with social support in gay men. Archives of sexual behavior. Jun 2012;41(3):659-671. 
44. Badger T, Segrin C, Dorros SM, Meek P, Lopez AM. Depression an d anxiety in women with breast 
cancer and their partners. Nurs Res. Jan-Feb 2007;56(1):44-53. 
45. Mock V, Pickett M, Ropka ME, e t al. Fatigue and quality of lif e outcomes of exercise during cancer 
treatment. Cancer Pract. May-Jun 2001;9(3):119-127. 
46. Pirl WF, Greer JA, Goode M, Sm ith MR. Prospective study of dep ression and fatigue in men with 
advanced prostate cancer receiving hormone therapy. Psycho-oncology. Feb 2008;17(2):148-153. 
47. Bower JE, Ganz PA, Aziz N, Fahey  JL, Cole SW. T-cell homeostas is in breast cancer  survivors with 
persistent fatigue. Journal of the National Cancer Institute. Aug 6 2003;95(15):1165-1168. 
48. Bower JE, Ganz PA, Aziz N, Fah ey JL. Fatigue and proinflammato ry cytokine activity in breast cancer 
survivors. Psychosom Med. Jul-Aug 2002;64(4):604-611. 
49. Dantzer R, O'Connor JC, Freund GG, Johnson RW, Kelley KW. From  inflammation to sickness and 
depression: when the immune s ystem subjugates the brain. Nature reviews. Neuroscience. Jan 
2008;9(1):46-56. 
50. Benveniste EN, Benos DJ. TNF-al pha- and IFN-gamma-mediated sig nal transduction pa thways: effects 
on glial cell gene expression and function. FASEB journal : official publi cation of the Federation of 
American Societies for Experimental Biology. Dec 1995;9(15):1577-1584. 
51. Mesquita AR, Correia-Neves M , Roque S, et al. IL-10 modulates depressive-like behavior. Journal of 
psychiatric research. Dec 2008;43(2):89-97. 
52. Bower JE, Ganz PA, Aziz N. Alte red cortisol response to psycho logic stress in breast cancer survivors 
with persistent fatigue. Psychosom Med. Mar-Apr 2005;67(2):277-280. 
53. Vedhara K, Tuinstra J, Miles JN , Sanderman R, Ranchor AV. Psyc hosocial factors associated with 
indices of cortisol production i n women with breast cancer and controls. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 
Apr 2006;31(3):299-311. 
54. Brown DJ, McMillan DC, Milroy R . The correlation between fatig ue, physical functio n, the systemic 
inflammatory response, and psychol ogical distress in patients w ith advanced lung cancer. Cancer. Jan 
15 2005;103(2):377-382. 
55. Jeanmonod P, von Kanel R, Maly FE, F ischer JE. Elevated Plasma  C-reactive protei n in chronically 
distressed subjects who carry the  A allele of the TNF-alpha -30 8 G/A polymorphism. Psychosom Med. 
Jul-Aug 2004;66(4):501-506. 
56. Kling MA, Alesci S, Csako G, et al . Sustained low-grade pro-in flammatory state in unmedicated, 
remitted women with major depressive disorder as evidenced by e levated serum levels of the acute 
phase proteins C-reactive prot ein and serum amyloid A. Biological psychiatry. Aug 15 2007;62(4):309-
313. 
57. Moorman AJ, Mozaffarian D, W ilkinson CW, et al. In patients wi th heart failure elevated soluble TNF-
receptor 1 is associated with higher risk of depression. J Card Fail. Nov 2007;13(9):738-743. 
58. Badger T, Segrin C, Dorros SM, Meek P, Lopez AM. Depression an d anxiety in women with breast 
cancer and their partners. Nursing research. Jan-Feb 2007;56(1):44-53. 
59. Siscovick DS, Weiss NS, Fletc her RH, Lasky T. The incidence of  primary cardiac arrest during vigorous 
exercise. N Engl J Med. Oct 4 1984;311(14):874-877. 
60. Meek PM, Nail LM, Barsevick A, e t al. Psychometric testing of fatigue instruments for use with cancer 
patients. Nurs Res. Jul-Aug 2000;49(4):181-190. 
61. Shacham S. A shortened version of the Profile of Mood States. J Pers Assess. Jun 1983;47(3):305-306. 
   
Protocol date :  7 / 0 6 / 2 0 2 0           62. Spitzer RL, Kroenke K, Williams JB. Validation and utility of a self-report version of PRIME-MD: the 
PHQ primary care study. Primary C are Evaluation of Mental Disor ders. Patient Health Questionnaire. 
Jama. Nov 10 1999;282(18):1737-1744. 
63. Spitzer RL, Williams JB, Kroenke K, Hornyak R, McMurray J. Val idity and utility of the PRIME-MD 
patient health questionnaire i n assessment of 3000 obstetric-gy necologic patients: the PRIME-MD 
Patient Health Questionnaire  Obstetrics-Gynecology Study. Am J Obstet Gynecol. Sep 2000;183(3):759-
769. 
64. Kroenke K, Spitzer RL, Williams J B, Lowe B. The Patient Health  Questionnaire Somatic, Anxiety, and 
Depressive Symptom Scales: a systematic review. Gen Hosp Psychiatry. Jul-Aug 2010;32(4):345-359. 
65. Spielberger C, Gorsuch R, Lushene R. The State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI).  Palo Alto, CA: 
Consulting Psychologists Press; 1968. 
66. Spielberger CD, Sydeman SJ, Owe n AE, Marsh BJ. Measuring anxie ty and anger with the State-Trait 
Anxiety Inventory (STAI) and the  State-Trait Anger Expression I nventory (STAXI). In: Maruish ME, 
ed. The use of psychological testing for trea tment planning and outcomes assessment (2nd ed.) . 
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum As sociates Publishers; 1999:993-10 21. 
67. Lebeau T, Perrotte P, Valique tte L, et al. Validation of prost ate cancer index and SF-12 short forms. Can 
J Urol. Dec 2005;12(6):2873-2879. 
68. Ware J, Jr., Kosinski M, Kelle r SD. A 12-Item Short-Form Healt h Survey: construction of scales and 
preliminary tests of reliability and validity. Med Care. Mar 1996;34(3):220-233. 
69. Gandek B, Ware JE, Aaronson NK , et al. Cross-validation of ite m selection and scoring for the SF-12 
Health Survey in nine countries: results from the IQOLA Project . International Quality of Life 
Assessment. J Clin Epidemiol. Nov 1998;51(11):1171-1178. 
70. Hunsley J, Best M, Lefebvre M, V ito D. The seven-item short fo rm of the Dyadic Adjustment Scale: 
Further evidence for construct validity. Am J Fam Ther. Jul-Sep 2001;29(4):325-335. 
71. Vinokur AD, Vanryn M. Social S upport and Undermining in Close Relationships - Their Independent 
Effects on the Mental-Hea lth of Unemployed Persons. J Pers Soc Psychol. Aug 1993;65(2):350-359. 
72. Cutrona CE. Objective determinan ts of perceived social support . J Pers Soc Psychol. Feb 
1986;50(2):349-355. 
73. Baron RS, Cutrona CE, Hicklin D, Russell DW, Lubaroff DM. Soci al support and immune function 
among spouses of cancer patients. J Pers Soc Psychol. Aug 1990;59(2):344-352. 
74. Cella D, Riley W, Stone A, et al . The Patient-Reported Outcome s Measurement Information System 
(PROMIS) developed and tested its  first wave of adult self-repo rted health outcome item banks: 2005-
2008. J Clin Epidemiol. Nov 2010;63(11):1179-1194. 
75. Gershon RC, Rothrock N, Hanraha n R, Bass M, Cella D. The use o f PROMIS and assessment center to 
deliver patient-reported outcome  measures in clinical research.  J Appl Meas. 2010;11(3):304-314. 
76. Bastien CH, Vallieres A, Morin C M. Validation of the Insomnia Severity Index as an outcome measure 
for insomnia research. Sleep Med. Jul 2001;2(4):297-307. 
77. Savard MH, Savard J, Simard S, I vers H. Empirical validation o f the Insomnia Severity Index in cancer 
patients. Psycho-oncology. Jun 2005;14(6):429-441. 
78. Stein KD, Jacobsen PB, Blancha rd CM, Thors C. Further validati on of the multidimensional fatigue 
symptom inventory-short form. J Pain Symptom Manage. Jan 2004;27(1):14-23. 
79. Stein KD, Martin SC, Hann DM, J acobsen PB. A multidimensional measure of fatigue for use with 
cancer patients. Cancer Pract. May-Jun 1998;6(3):143-152. 
80. Mustian KM, Morrow GR, Carroll JK, Figueroa-Moseley CD, Jean-P ierre P, Williams GC. Integrative 
nonpharmacologic behavioral interve ntions for the management of  cancer-related fatigue. Oncologist. 
2007;12 Suppl 1:52-67. 
81. Jacobsen PB, Donovan KA, Vadaparampil ST, Small BJ. Systematic  review and meta-analysis of 
psychological and activity-based interventions for cancer-relat ed fatigue. Health Psychol. Nov 
2007;26(6):660-667. 
   
Protocol date :  7 / 0 6 / 2 0 2 0           82. Cramp F, Daniel J. Exercise fo r the management of cancer-relat ed fatigue in adults. Cochrane Database 
Syst Rev. 2008(2):CD006145. 
83. Smets EM, Garssen B, Bonke B, De Haes JC. The Multidimensional  Fatigue Inventory (MFI) 
psychometric qualities of an ins trument to assess fatigue. Journal of psychosomatic research. Apr 
1995;39(3):315-325. 
84. Lorig K. Chronic disease self-man agement - A model for tertiar y prevention. Am Behav Sci. May 
1996;39(6):676-683. 
85. Maly RC, Frank JC, Marshall GN , DiMatteo MR, Reuben DB. Percei ved efficacy in patient-physician 
interactions (PEPPI): validati on of an instrument in older pers ons. J Am Geriatr Soc. Jul 
1998;46(7):889-894. 
86. Mack JW, Block SD, Nilsson M, et al. Measuring th erapeutic all iance between oncologists and patients 
with advanced cancer: the Human Connection Scale. Cancer. Jul 15 2009;115(14):3302-3311. 
87. Lorig KR, Sobel DS, Ritter PL , Laurent D, Hobbs M. Effect of a  self-management program on patients 
with chronic disease. Eff Clin Pract. Nov-Dec 2001;4(6):256-262. 
88. Warburton DE, Bredin SD, Jamin ik VK, Gledhill N. Validation of  the PAR-Q+ and ePARmed-X+. 
Health and fitness journal of Canada. 2011;4(2):38-46. 
89. Wirth MD, Blake CE, Hebert JR , Sui X, Blair SN. Chronic weight  dissatisfaction pr edicts type 2 
diabetes risk: aerobic center longitudinal study. Health Psychol. Aug 2014;33(8):912-919. 
90. Croisier JL, Ganteaume S, Binet  J, Genty M, Ferret JM. Strengt h imbalances and prevention of 
hamstring injury in professional soccer players: a prospective study. The American journal of sports 
medicine. Aug 2008;36(8):1469-1475. 
91. Eston R, Evans HJ. The validity of  submaximal ratings of perce ived exertion to predict one repetition 
maximum. J Sports Sci Med. 2009;8(4):567-573. 
92. Janssen I, Heymsfield SB, Baumgartner RN, Ross R. Estimation o f skeletal muscle mass by bioelectrical 
impedance analysis. J Appl Physiol (1985). Aug 2000;89(2):465-471. 
93. Lejuez CW, Hopko DR, Hopko SD. A br ief behavioral activation t reatment for depression. Treatment 
manual. Behav Modif. Apr 2001;25(2):255-286. 
94. Hopko DR, Lejuez CW, LePage JP, Hopko SD, McNeil DW. A brief b ehavioral activation treatment for 
depression. A randomized pilot tr ial within an inpatient psychi atric hospital. Behav Modif. Sep 
2003;27(4):458-469. 
95. Emmons KM, Rollnick S. Motiva tional intervie wing in health car e settings. Opportunities and 
limitations. Am J Prev Med. Jan 2001;20(1):68-74. 
96. Rollnick S, Butler CC, Kinners ley P, Gregory J, Mash B. Motiva tional interviewing. Bmj. 
2010;340:c1900. 
97. Lundahl B, Moleni T, Burke BL, e t al. Motivationa l interviewin g in medical care settings: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis of r andomized controlled trials. Patient Educ Couns. Nov 2013;93(2):157-
168. 
98. Markman HJ. Application of a beha vioral model of marriage in p redicting relationship satisfaction of 
couples planning marriage. J Consult Clin Psychol. Aug 1979;47(4):743-749. 
99. Stanley SM, Ragan EP, Rhoades GK, Markman HJ. Examining change s in relationship adjustment and 
life satisfaction in marriage. J Fam Psychol. Feb 2012;26(1):165-170. 
100. Christensen A, Atkins DC, Bauco m B, Yi J. Marital status and s atisfaction five years following a 
randomized clinical trial compari ng traditional versus integrat ive behavioral couple therapy. J Consult 
Clin Psychol. Apr 2010;78(2):225-235. 
101. O'Farrell TJ, Choquette KA, Cutte r HS, Brown ED, McCourt WF. B ehavioral marital therapy with and 
without additional coupl es relapse prevention sessions for alco holics and their wives. J Stud Alcohol. 
Nov 1993;54(6):652-666. 
102. O'Farrell TJ, Choquette KA, Cu tter HS. Couples relapse prevent ion sessions after behavioral marital 
therapy for male alcoholics: outco mes during the three years af ter starting treatment. J Stud Alcohol. Jul 
1998;59(4):357-370. 
   
Protocol date :  7 / 0 6 / 2 0 2 0           103. Porter LS, Keefe FJ, Baucom DH , et al. Partner-assisted emotio nal disclosure for patients with 
gastrointestinal cancer: resu lts from a randomized controlled t rial. Cancer. Sep 15 2009;115(18 
Suppl):4326-4338. 
104. Kelly D. Partner-assisted emoti onal disclosure intervention ma y improve relationship quality in couples 
where one partner has gastrointe stinal cancer and has difficult y discussing cancer-related concerns. Evid 
Based Nurs. Feb 2010;13(1):14-15. 
105. Porter LS, Keefe FJ, Baucom DH , et al. Partner-assisted emotio nal disclosure for patients with GI 
cancer: 8-week follow-up and proces ses associated with change. Support Care Cancer. Aug 
2012;20(8):1755-1762. 
  
  
   
Protocol date :  7 / 0 6 / 2 0 2 0            
APPENDICES 
 
  
1. Letter from study team to c ancer survivor’s physician 
 
2. Letter from study team to caregiver’s physician 
 
3. Intervention protocols
 
PEAK  HUMAN PERFORMANCE CLINICAL RESEARCH LAB 
Wilmot Cancer Institute 
Department of Surgery 
URCC NCORP Research Base 
Cancer Control Research Program  
 
 
 
 
Cancer Control Unit 
601 Elmwood Avenue, Box 704 
Rochester, New York 14642 (585) 275-5513  Fax: (585) 461-5601 CANCER SURVIVOR ELIGIBLE FOR STUDY 
 
 
Y o u r  p a t i e n t ,         ,  i s  e l i g i b l e  f o r  t h e  s t udy: Exercise 
Intervention for Cancer Survivors (PI: Dr. Charles Kamen ).   
 
Your patient would like to parti cipate in a study being conduct ed at the James P. Wilmot Cancer 
Institute of the University of Rochester.  This study is being conducted by Dr. Charles Kamen, a 
clinical investigator in the Depa rtment of Surgery.  This inter vention is designed to see whether 
exercise can improve the health and well-being of cancer surviv ors and the health of their 
caregivers.   
 
Please confirm that the patient  has no physical limitations (e. g., cardiorespiratory, orthopedic, 
central nervous system) that contraindicate participation in ma ximal physiological fitness testing, 
and that you approve their parti cipation in this fitness testin g and a low to moderate intensity 
home-based walking and progressive resistance exercise program.  Please also note there will 
only be an exercise physiologist p resent for this fitness testi ng, unless on review of the patient’s 
medical history we feel that the presence of a physician (or th eir designee) is needed.  
 
 YES , this patient is physically and medically able to participate in maximal physiological 
fitness testing and a low to moderate home-based walking and pr ogressive resistance exercise 
program. 
 
Physician (or physician’s designee) Approval:       
 
D a t e :        
 Thank you!   
 
Charles Kamen, PhD, MPH 
Assistant Professor University of Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry 
James P. Wilmot Cancer Institute 
Department of Surgery 
 
PEAK  HUMAN PERFORMANCE CLINICAL RESEARCH LAB 
Wilmot Cancer Institute 
Department of Surgery 
URCC NCORP Research Base 
Cancer Control Research Program  
 
 
 
 
Cancer Control Unit 601 Elmwood Avenue, Box 704 
Rochester, New York 14642 
(585) 275-5513  Fax: (585) 461-5601 
 CAREGIVER ELIGIBLE FOR STUDY 
 
 
Y o u r  p a t i e n t ,         ,  i s  e l i g i b l e  f o r  t h e  s t udy: Exercise 
Intervention for Cancer Survivors (PI: Dr. Charles Kamen ).   
 
Your patient would like to parti cipate in a study being conduct ed at the James P. Wilmot Cancer 
Institute of the University of Rochester.  This study is being conducted by Dr. Charles Kamen, a 
clinical investigator in the Depa rtment of Surgery.  This inter vention is designed to see whether 
exercise can improve the health and well-being of cancer surviv ors and the health of their 
caregivers.  Your patient was a caregiver to an individual trea ted for cancer. 
 
Please confirm that the patient  has no physical limitations (e. g., cardiorespiratory, orthopedic, 
central nervous system) that contraindicate participation in ma ximal physiological fitness testing, 
and that you approve their parti cipation in this fitness testin g and a low to moderate intensity 
home-based walking and progressive resistance exercise program.  Please also note there will 
only be an exercise physiologist p resent for this fitness testi ng, unless on review of the patient’s 
medical history we feel that the presence of a physician (or th eir designee)is needed. 
 
 YES , this patient is physically and medically able to participate in maximal physiological 
fitness testing and a low to moderate home-based walking and pr ogressive resistance exercise 
program. 
 
Physician (or physician’s designee) Approval:       
 
D a t e :        
 Thank you! 
 
Charles Kamen, PhD, MPH 
Assistant Professor University of Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry 
James P. Wilmot Cancer Institute 
 
PEAK  HUMAN PERFORMANCE CLINICAL RESEARCH LAB 
Wilmot Cancer Institute 
Department of Surgery 
URCC NCORP Research Base 
Cancer Control Research Program  
 
 
 
 
Cancer Control Unit 601 Elmwood Avenue, Box 704 
Rochester, New York 14642 
(585) 275-5513  Fax: (585) 461-5601 
 Department of Surgery
 
 Intervention Protocols 
 
Description of Standardized EXCAP©® Intervention Clinical Protocol Components 
 
As noted above, each study participant r andomized to either the EXCAP-PA or the EXCAP©® 
condition is provided with an EXCAP©® Exercise Kit, which includes a pedometer, resistance 
bands, two assist strap handles, a written manual, and a carrying bag.   
 
The EXCAP©®  program was designed by an Exercis e Scientist cer tified by the American 
College of Sports Medicine (ACSM)  and is in accordance with the  guidelines for exercise testing 
and prescription as set forth by t he ACSM.  The prescription is  also guided by the “ACSM 
Exercise Guidelines for Can cer Patients and Survivors.”   
 The EXCAP
©® Walking Prescription will be ba sed on a patient’s baseline pedo meter assessment.  
Patients will be encouraged to inc rease their total steps walke d each day by a minimum of 5% 
and a maximum of 20% each week, w hile maintaining a moderate in tensity, during the 8-week 
intervention period.  Patients wi ll also be encouraged to conti nue increasing their steps and 
walking during the 3 months post-intervention.  [Note: Walking intensity will be monitored via 
the Rating of Perceived Exertion (RPE) Scale, which is a visual  analog scale ra nging from 1 = no 
exertion to 10 = very strong exert ion; this is part of the dail y diary that participants will keep.] 
 The EXCAP
©® Progressive Resistance Prescr iption will be based on a patient’ s optimal level of 
challenge.  Patients will be ins tructed on the proper use of re sistance bands.  Patients will then be 
instructed to choose a resistan ce band with which they can perf orm 8-12 repetitions of 5 upper 
body resistance exercises and 5 l ower body resistance exercises  listed below.  Patients will be 
instructed to begin with 1 set of  8-25 repetitions at a moderat ely challenging level (RPE 5-8) 
three days a week.  Patients will be instructed to progressivel y increase to a minimum of 3 and a 
maximum of 4 sets for each exercise up to seven times per week.   (Note. Patients will be 
instructed in the proper methods  for performing each exercise).  
 The program consists of an initi al 45-60 minute meeting with a certified exercise specialist.  
Participants will be shown the pr oper methods for performing th e exercises and given a 
prescription for both walking and pr ogressive resistance.  A me mber of the study team will then 
follow up with weekly phone calls t o the participants to check in on their progress, answer any 
questions, troubleshoot barriers a nd encourage patients to adhe re to the exercise prescription.  
Our previous study provided the  intervention over 4-6 weeks wit h excellent adherence and no 
adverse incidents.    Caregivers randomized t o the survivor-only EXCAP
©® condition will be instr ucted not to change 
their exercise behavior in any way.  A detailed list of the EXCAP
©® exercises is provided below.   
 Aerobic (Progressive Walking) 
Weekly increase in walking  
 
 Anaerobic (Progressive Resistance) 
S q u a t         C h e s t  P r e s s  
S i d e  B e n d s       R o w s  L e g  E x t e n s i o n       C o r e  s t r e n g t h  ( c r u n c h e s ,  p l a n k s )  L e g  C u r l        T o e  R a i s e s        O v e r h e a d  P r e s s       B i c e p s  C u r l        T r i c e p s  E x t e n s i o n         
 
 Description of the EXCAP-PA Dy adic Framework Components 
 As noted above, survivors and caregivers r andomized to the EXCAP-PA intervention arm will 
each receive EXCAP©® materials and be instructed in their use together.   
 
The EXCAP-PA dyadic framework w as developed by a clinical psych ologist (Dr. Kamen) with a 
training background in dyadic behavi oral interventions.  This f ramework uses clinical skills from 
other dyadic interventions to t rain caregivers of LGBT cancer s urvivors in motivational 
strategies that can be used to help  survivors adhere to the exe rcise program. 
 The program’s three components are discussion of LGBT specific stress , assessment of 
barriers , and elicitation of supportive behaviors . 
 In discussing LGBT specific stress , the interventionist asks th e LGBT cancer survivor open 
ended questions about experiences  as a sexual minority individu al seeking cancer care.  The 
LGBT survivor will guide the di scussion, but the interventionis t may ask about how being a 
sexual minority affected relati onships with care providers, unm et needs that arose during care, 
and how identity shapes experience of survivorship.  The caregi ver will then be asked to 
contribute any of their experien ces in providing care for the L GBT survivor.  Exercise is 
introduced in this context as a  way the dyad can support one an other, even in the stress of cancer 
or the stress of being a sexua l minority seeking cancer care. 
 In assessing barriers , the interventionist asks both pa rticipants about the barriers  that might 
interfere with their ability t o exercise over the next week.  B arriers could include daily 
obligations, physical concerns or  symptoms, or emotional or mot ivational concerns.  Both LGBT 
survivor and caregiver share t heir anticipated barriers with on e another and with the 
interventionist.  In behavioral activation resear ch, assessing barriers to accomp lishing a behavioral goal is a well-
validated method of ensuring goal completion.
93,94  The same technique is  used in Motivational 
Interviewing, to elicit “change t alk” and increase motivation t o engage in the behavioral 
change.95-97 
 In eliciting supportive behaviors , the interventionist f irst turns the focus onto the LGBT cance r 
survivor, asking what behaviors  by the caregiver would help to overcome the aforementioned 
barriers.  Gentle Socratic questio ning is used to refine the ex act form of and rationale for these 
behaviors.  The interventionist then checks in with the caregiver, asking w hat behaviors the caregiver will 
try over this next week in suppor ting the LGBT survivor in over coming barriers to exercise.  
Again, questioning is used to ensur e that the caregiver knows e xactly what behaviors would be 
most helpful.  A final check wit h the LGBT survivor sets the co llaborative goal and expectation 
for the week.  Supportive behavior exchange i s a common technique in many dyad ic interventions.
98-100  
Typically behavior exchange tech niques involve eliciting desire d behaviors from each member 
 
 of the dyad on a weekly basis; how ever, in situations where one  member of the dyad is a patient 
and the other a caregiver, suppor tive behaviors may be specific ally directed at the patient from 
the caregiver.101,102  This partner-assisted approac h has been used previously in ca ncer control 
interventions, as well.103-105103-105 
 In weekly phone calls in the EX CAP-PA condition, the same inter vention format is followed, 
with assessment of barriers followed by elicitation of supporti ve behaviors.  These calls are 
always made with both the LGBT cancer survivor and the caregive r together to troubleshoot the 
past week’s goal, establish a new goal for the week, and establ ish supportive behaviors that the 
caregiver will use.  In the survivor-only  EXCAP
©® condition, calls will be made to the LGBT cancer survivor alon e 
and will involve troubleshooting and setting a goal for the nex t week, without the dyadic support 
component.  
 