 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PILOT STUDY TO ANALYZE INTRAMUS CULAR MECHANISMS OF ANDROGEN 
DEPRIVATION RELATED SARCOPENIA 
 
[MIRB #01653] 
 
Funding Agency: Departm ent of Defense, SIBCR 
 
Principal Investigator: Jose M Garcia MD PhD 
 
01/11/2019 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Human	Subjects 	Protocol	
VA	Puget	Sound	IRB	
VA Puget Sound IRB Approved 
01/17/2019
[Version 4, 1/11/19]  VA Puget Sound IRB Protocol Template – Ve rsion: 2/2015 Page 2 of 17 
 Abstract 
 
Over 200,000 new cases of prostat e cancer (PCA) are diagnosed i n the U.S. 
annually. Over the last two decades there has been a trend towards diagnosing 
less advanced disease, but more recently with a decrease in PSA -based 
screening for PCA, there has been concern that the incidence of  metastatic 
disease will again rise. For the last 60 years androgen depriva tion therapy (ADT) 
has remained the standard treatm ent for advanced and metastatic  PCA. At this 
time, however, nearly 400,000 men remain on ADT for advanced PC A. As their 
disease progresses, additional  therapies rely on greater suppre ssion of androgen 
or inhibition of androgen targets. The impacts of ADT on men ar e great including 
sarcopenia, frailty, insulin resis tance, obesity, loss of quality of life, and increased 
cardiovascular disease. Furthermore, age related testosterone deficiency may 
exert similar effects on  aging men without PCA.  
 Despite the large number of men being treated with ADT, there i s a surprising paucity of 
research in humans to explain the mechanism of sarcopenia and i ts effects. How these 
changes are manifested histologic ally also remains unknown but may involve overall 
loss of muscle fibers, change in d istibtrution of muscle fiber types, and distribution of 
satellite cells. Several hypothes es have been developed to expl ain the mechanism of 
ADT-related sarcopenia but the mo st plausible seems to be based  upon an imbalance 
between opposing anabolic and catabolic pat hways and cross-talk  between these 
pathways. Androgens, the growth hormone/insulin-like growth fac tor-1 (GH/IGF1) axis, 
and follistatin activate anabolic pathways. While myostatin (a negative regulator of 
muscle mass and a member of the transforming growth factor β superfamily) and 
ubiquitin ligases regulat e catabolic pathways.  
 This is a pilot study to test  the hypothesis that men on ADT wi ll experience loss of 
muscle mass, loss of strength, l oss of bone density, increased adiposity, and increased 
insulin resistance and that thes e changes will correspond to hi stologic alterations in 
skeletal muscle and change in rel ative expression of anabolic and catabolic pathway 
markers.  
 
This is very relevant to our Vet erans since PCA remains one of the most commonly 
diagnosed cancers in this popula tion with profound side effects of ADT in this population 
that affect function, comorbidi ty, and quality of life (QOL).  
  
 
 
VA Puget Sound IRB Approved 
01/17/2019
[Version 4, 1/11/19]  VA Puget Sound IRB Protocol Template – Ve rsion: 2/2015 Page 3 of 17 
 List of Abbreviations 
 
6MWT: 6-minute walk test 
ADT: Androgen deprivation therapy 
AIDS: acquired immunodeficiency syndrome 
ALT:  alanine aminotransferase 
AST:  aspartate aminotransferase 
CHF:  congestive heart failure 
COPD:  chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
DXA: dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry  
EORTC QLQ-30:  European organization for the research and treatment of cancer 
quality of life questionnaire EPIC:
 expanded prostate canc er index composite 
FACT-P:  functional assessment of cancer therapy-prostate 
GH: growth hormone 
GnRH:  gonadotropin-releasing hormone 
HGS: hand grip strength IGF: insulin-like growth factor 
IGFBP: insulin-like growth factor binding protein  
MRS: magnetic resonance spectroscopy 
OS: optical spectroscopy 
PCA: Prostate cancer 
PHI: protected health information 
PSA:
 prostate specific antigen 
QOL: Quality of life 
SCP: stair climb power 
TCMI:  translational center fo r metabolic imaging 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VA Puget Sound IRB Approved 
01/17/2019
[Version 4, 1/11/19]  VA Puget Sound IRB Protocol Template – Ve rsion: 2/2015 Page 4 of 17 
 Contents 
Protocol T itle: ............................................... ............................................................... .... 5 
1.0 Study P ersonnel ........................................... ......................................................... 5 
2.0 Introduction ............................................................... ............................................. 6 
3.0 Objectives ............................................................... ............................................... 7 
4.0 Resources and Person nel ..................................................................................... 7 
5.0 Study Pro cedures .......................................... ........ Error! Bookmark not defined.  
5.1 Study Design ............................................................... ........................................... 7 
5.2 Recruitmen t Methods ....................................... .................................................... 10 
5.3 Informed Cons ent Procedures ............................... .............................................. 10 
5.4 Inclusion/Excl usion Criteria .............................. .................................................... 11 
5.5 Study Eva luations ......................................... ....................................................... 11 
5.6 Data A nalysis ............................................. .......................................................... 13 
5.7 Withdrawal of Subjects ............................................................... .......................... 14 
6.0 Repor ting ............................................................................................................. 14  
7.0 Privacy and C onfidentia lity .................................................................................. 16 
8.0 Communica tion Plan ........................................ ................................................... 17 
9.0 Refer ences .......................................................................................................... 17 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VA Puget Sound IRB Approved 
01/17/2019
[Version 4, 1/11/19]  VA Puget Sound IRB Protocol Template – Ve rsion: 2/2015 Page 5 of 17 
 Protocol Title:  INTRAMUSCULAR MECHANISMS OF ANDROGEN DEPRIVATI ON 
RELATED SARCOPENIA 
 
1.0 Study Personnel 
 Principal Investigator: Jose M Garcia MD PhD 
Clinician Investigator,  
Geriatric Research, Educat ion and Clini cal Center 
VA Puget Sound Health Care System Building 1, Room 815J 
1660 South Columbian Way (S-182-GRECC) 
Seattle, WA  98108-1597 
Phone: (206) 764-2984 
Fax: (206) 764-2569 
jose.garcia@va.gov  
 Co-Investigator: 
 
Atreya Dash, M.D. 
Associate Professor, Urology , University of Washington 
VA Puget Sound Health Care System Phone: (206) 764-2265 
atreya.dash@va.gov 
1660 S. Columbian Way Seattle, WA 98108-1597 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VA Puget Sound IRB Approved 
01/17/2019
[Version 4, 1/11/19]  VA Puget Sound IRB Protocol Template – Ve rsion: 2/2015 Page 6 of 17 
 2.0 Introduction 
 
Over 200,000 new cases of prostat e cancer (PCA) are diagnosed i n the U.S. 
annually. Over the last two decades there has been a trend towards diagnosing less advanced disease, but more recently with a decrease in PSA -based 
screening for PCA, there has been concern that the incidence of  metastatic 
disease will again rise. For the last 60 years androgen depriva tion therapy (ADT) 
has remained the standard treatm ent for advanced and metastatic  PCA. At this 
time, however, nearly 400,000 men remain on ADT for advanced PC A. As their 
disease progresses, additional  therapies rely on greater suppre ssion of androgen 
or inhibition of androgen targets. The impacts of ADT on men ar e great including 
sarcopenia, frailty, insulin resis tance, obesity, loss of quality of life, and increased 
cardiovascular disease. Furthermore, age related testosterone d eficiency may 
exert similar effects on  aging men without PCA.  
 
Despite the large number of men being treated with ADT, there i s a surprising paucity of 
research in humans to explain the mechanism of sarcopenia and i ts effects. How these 
changes are manifested histologic ally also remains unknown but may involve overall 
loss of muscle fibers, change in distribution of muscle fiber t ypes, and distribution of 
satellite cells. Several hypothes es have been developed to expl ain the mechanism of 
ADT-related sarcopenia but the mo st plausible seems to be based  upon an imbalance 
between opposing anabolic and catabolic pat hways and cross-talk  between these 
pathways. Androgens, the growth hormone/insulin-like growth fac tor-1 (GH/IGF1) axis 
and follistatin activate anabolic pathways. While myostatin (a negative regulator of 
muscle mass development and a member of the transforming growth  factor β 
superfamily) and ubiquitin ligases regulate catabolic pathways.   
 
This is a pilot study to test  the hypothesis that men on ADT wi ll experience loss of 
muscle mass, loss of strength, l oss of bone density, increased adiposity and increased 
insulin resistance and that thes e changes will correspond to hi stologic alterations in 
skeletal muscle and change in rel ative expression of anabolic and catabolic pathway 
markers.  
 
This is very relevant to our Vet erans since PCA remains one of the most commonly 
diagnosed cancers in this popula tion with profound side effects of ADT in this population 
that affect function, comor bidity, and quality of life.  
  
 
 
VA Puget Sound IRB Approved 
01/17/2019
[Version 4, 1/11/19]  VA Puget Sound IRB Protocol Template – Ve rsion: 2/2015 Page 7 of 17 
 3.0 Objectives 
 
This is a pilot study to test  the hypothesis that men on ADT wi ll experience loss of 
muscle mass, loss of strength, l oss of bone density, increased adiposity, and increased 
insulin resistance and that thes e changes will correspond to hi stologic alterations in 
skeletal muscle and change in rel ative expression of anabolic and catabolic pathway 
markers. We will also identify functional changes, as will cyto kine, chemokine, GH 
levels, and other markers of i nflammation and anabolic function  in subject plasma. 
Additionally, we will correlate m uscle changes with non-invasiv e testing with magnetic 
resonance spectroscopy (MRS) f or muscle energetics and optical spectroscopy (OS) for 
mitochondrial function and cell en ergetics. Data obtained in th e study will not be used 
for future research and will be used only for purposes outlined  in this protocol. 
 
4.0 Resources and Personnel  
 Work will be conducted 1) within the VA at Dr. Garcia’s dedica ted research 
space, at the Clinical Research Unit, and in the Urology clinic , and 2) at the 
Translational Center for Metabo lic Imaging (TCMI) located at the University of 
Washington School of Medicine. 
 Dr. Garcia is the PI of the study  and will overs ee all study p rocedures 
including recruitment, consenti ng, administering surveys, performing data 
analysis, and coordinating all regulatory activities. Dr. Dash will identify and 
recruit prostate cancer patient s seen in the Urology clinic at the VA and will 
be performing the study procedures occurring there. Lab technic ians at the 
TCMI will be conducting the MRS and OS. Only VA personnel liste d here will 
have access to protected heal th information (PHI). 
 
5.0 Study Procedures   
 
5.1 Study Design 
One group will be incl uded in this pilot study: Patients with a dvanced or 
metastatic PCA initiating treatme nt with primary ADT with a gonadotropin-
releasing hormone (GnRH) agonist. This group wil l include 60 subjects. 
  
There will be 4 study visits: 1 ) Screening, 2) Ba seline, 3) Thr ee-month visit and 
4) Six-month visit. Screening will be performed within 3 weeks prior to baseline. 
Informed consent will be obtained prior to a ny screening visit procedures. 
Informed consent will be scanned and entered into our electroni c medical records 
per current VA guidelines. The subject's PHI that will be neede d for pre-
screening and recruitment for this study is as follows; full me dical history, name, 
VA Puget Sound IRB Approved 
01/17/2019
[Version 4, 1/11/19]  VA Puget Sound IRB Protocol Template – Ve rsion: 2/2015 Page 8 of 17 
 date of birth, social security  number, demographics, age, telep hone number, and 
home address. The patients that will be identified via chart review are patients of 
the VAMC Cancer Center. 
 
Review of inclusion/exclusion cr iteria and completion of inform ed consent will 
occur at the Screening visit, follo wed by review of medical his tory and a blood 
draw for safety laboratory measures. 
 
The following procedures will take place at the Baseline visit:  Dual-energy x-ray 
absorptiometry (DXA) scan to mea sure body composition. Muscle p erformance 
as measured by hand grip strength  (HGS), stair climb power (SCP ), actigraphy, 
and 6-minute walk test (6MWT). Indirect calorimetry to measure VO 2 peak. 
Fatigue and HR-QOL assessments by  EORTC QLQ-30, EPIC Hormonal, and 
FACT-Prostate. Magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS), optical s pectroscopy 
(OS), and muscle biopsy to measure  muscular mitochondrial funct ion. Blood 
samples will be collected to assess degree of androgen deprivat ion (total and 
free testosterone).   
 
All study procedures performed at  baseline will be repeated at the 3- and 6- month 
visits with the exception of the muscle biopsy that will be performed at baseline and at the 6-month visit. Disease severity and disease progression will be assessed at each visit by measuring PSA level, and assessing stage, histologic g rade (Gleason score 
and pattern) metastatic volume , secondary therapy, and castrate  sensitivity status. 
Other clinical parameters to be captured will include demograph ics, comorbidities, and 
medication use. These parameters will be used as covariates in the analyses performed. Adverse events will al so be recorded at the 3- and 6 - month visits. 
 
Study procedures listed here may occur on multiple days per the  patient’s 
availability. Patient s may be exempt from completing some study  procedures due 
to physical inability from disease/treatment-rela ted symptoms. Determination of 
these exemptions will be left to  the discretion of the study personnel. 
 
Subjects' medical records will be monitored for up to 5 years to assess for the 
development of complications (tumor progression, chemo response , hospital 
admission) and for survival. 
 
Risks associated with study procedures : 
-Blood Drawing: The risks of bl ood drawing include pain, bleedi ng, and/or a 
bruise where the needle was insert ed. Serious complications suc h as blood clots 
or infection are very rare when proper precautions are taken. 
-DXA Scan: While we do not know whether any dose of radiation i s completely 
safe, this amount of radiation is  well within the limits consid ered safe by federal 
VA Puget Sound IRB Approved 
01/17/2019
[Version 4, 1/11/19]  VA Puget Sound IRB Protocol Template – Ve rsion: 2/2015 Page 9 of 17 
 and state regulations. The total amount of radiation used will be extremely 
small—approximately 0.04 milli -rem per examination or 1 milli-r em (0.001 mSv) 
total and less than one-tenth t he dose of a standard chest x-ra y, and less than a 
day's exposure to natural radi ation.  X-rays in the diagnostic range for these 
exams are expected to have no side effects. 
 
-VO2 peak: risks include abnorma l heart beats, abnormal blood p ressure 
responses, muscle cramps, muscle strain and/or joint injury, de layed muscle 
soreness (1 to 2 days afterw ards), light headedness, fatigue, a nd in rare 
instances, heart attack. This te st will be performed under the direct supervision of 
a trained physician in the hospita l where rapid access to emerg ency personnel 
and equipment including a crash ca rt, ECG, vitals assessment is  available. 
 
-Muscle Biopsy: The risks of muscle biopsy include pain, bruising, infection, 
bleeding (including rare bleedi ng requiring further interventio n), and/or hematoma 
where the biopsy nee dle was inserted. 
 
-Loss of confidentiality: The ri sks are deemed minimal and all necessary 
precautions as required by the IRB and VA R&D committee will be  taken. 
 
-Functional Performance: There is  a small risk of incurring inj ury during 
assessment of muscle performance. This risk will be minimized b y properly 
instructing the participants, and by performing these tests und er direct 
supervision of experienced research personnel. 
  
-MRS & OS: Some people may feel  claustrophobic when in the MRS or feel 
uncomfortable while remaining st ill and holding the same positi on during the session. 
This will disappear soon after getting up and walking around on ce MRS is done. There 
are no known risks to breathing more oxygen than normal for the  short periods of time 
we use in these experiments for OS. Breathing rate may speed up a little while breathing 
more oxygen than usual.  This will return to normal when the pa tient begins breathing 
standard room air. There may be discomfort when the blood press ure cuff is inflated 
including numbness or tingling, and the area under the cuff may  ache. This is often 
done by doctors during surgery a nd there are not known side effects of these 
discomforts. For people who are more likely to develop blood cl ots, we do not know if 
having the pressure cuff inflat ed for several minutes at a time will further increase the 
risk of forming a blood clot. Pa tients will be given a handout wi th information about deep 
vein thrombosis. The exercise m ay induce muscular fatigue which  will disappear soon 
after exercise is stopped.  There may be some mild muscular sor eness for a day or two 
after the exercise.  This is a normal response that disappears on its own. 
VA Puget Sound IRB Approved 
01/17/2019
[Version 4, 1/11/19]  VA Puget Sound IRB Protocol Template – Ve rsion: 2/2015 Page 10 of 17 
  
Fasting risks:  You may feel hungry or dizzy or have some stomach discomfort fr om 
not eating on the days you have to  fast before your visit.  If you are a frequent coffee 
drinker, you may experience discomfort or headache from not hav ing any caffeine. If 
you normally use nicotine produc ts, you may feel the effects of  not having nicotine in 
your system.  
Data and blood specimen banki ng will be done at the VAPSHCS Cac hexia 
Tissue Repository. This is a new bank under this PI.  
 
5.2 Recruitment Methods 
We expect subjects to be recruited from the VA Urology clinic t hrough Dr. Dash 
and his team.  Patients will be id entified via chart review (pre-screening). A full 
medical history is needed to det ermine if the subject meets enr ollment criteria 
and to analyze variables that mig ht influence outcomes measured . This will 
include medical prob lems, treatments, and medications. The subj ect's private 
health information that will be n eeded for this study is as follows:  full medical 
history, name, date of birth, s ocial security number, demograph ics, age, 
telephone number, and hom e address. The PI's relationship to th e subject will be 
investigational. 
 
5.3 Informed Consent Procedures 
1-Study staff identifies potential participants from Urology clinic via medical records,  
2-Study staff reviews records to  ascertain initial inclusion/ex clusion criteria,  
3-Study staff sends list of potential subjects to clinical staf f,  
4-Clinical staff brings up potentia l research study to patient at clinical visit and asks if 
they’re interested in learning more,  
5-Study staff then speaks with pat ients to provide more informa tion,  
6-If subject is interested they sign a consent form,  7-Study procedures are initi ated (i.e. Screening visit) 
 Patients will be assur ed of the voluntary nat ure of the trial a nd a member of the 
research staff will be available  to answer all questions regard ing the study. We will 
emphasize that their decision to participate in the clinical tr ial will not affect their 
treatment.  
 
A waiver of consent is requested  for identification/pre-screening. The use or disclosure 
of PHI involves no more than minimal risk to the individuals an d the waiver will not 
adversely affect the privacy ri ghts and the welfare of the indi viduals. The risk is minimal 
because: 1) only trained personnel  will have access to this inf ormation, 2) information 
will be accessed only from our  research office at the VA and ke pt in a locked cabinet 
VA Puget Sound IRB Approved 
01/17/2019
[Version 4, 1/11/19]  VA Puget Sound IRB Protocol Template – Ve rsion: 2/2015 Page 11 of 17 
 behind locked doors or in passwor d-protected computers and 3) o nly information 
absolutely required for resear ch will be obtained and recorded.   
 
The research could not practic ably be conducted without this wa iver and could not 
practicably be conducted withou t access to and use of the PHI b ecause accessing 
potential subjects’ medical reco rds and their last 4 digits of their SSN and name is 
required to approach them to exp lain the propos ed research and consent them. 
 
All study personnel are trained r egarding human s ubjects’ protections 
requirements and how to obtain and document informed consent as  it is required 
by local and Federal VA guidelines. 
 
5.4 Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
Inclusion Criteria:  
-Patients with histologically , cytologically or image based doc umented advanced or 
metastatic PCa initiating ADT with expected continuous treatmen t for a minimum of 6 
months -Willing/able to provide informed consent. 
 
Exclusion Criteria:  
-Other causes of sarcopenia such a s: Liver disease (AST or ALT ≥3x normal levels)  
-Renal failure (creat inine ≥2.5 mg/dL)  
-Untreated thyroid disease  
-Class III-IV congestive heart failure (CHF) -AIDS  -Other cancer diagnosed within  the past five years other than non-melanoma skin 
cancer -severe chronic obstructive pul monary disease (COPD) requiring home O
2 
-An active, uncontrolled infection or cardiovascular disease in cluding a recent 
myocardial infarction (MI), Cerebrovascular accident (CVA), arr hythmias or unstable 
angina (< 6 months) -Uncontrolled diabetes (HbA1c ≥9%) -Neuromuscular disorder contributing to sarcopenia –Current use (within one month) o f investigational agent or testosterone, high dose 
steroids (20 mg of prednisone/day  ≥1 month), megestrol, or anti coagulants 
-Previous treatment with ADT ot her than oral anti-androgen at i nitiation of ADT.  
 
5.5 Study Evaluations 
Body composition  will be measured by dual energy fan-beam DXA scan. DXA 
scan uses low-doseradiation to determine fat mass, bone mass, a nd fat-free 
mass (whole body and segment al). Fasting is required 
 
VA Puget Sound IRB Approved 
01/17/2019
[Version 4, 1/11/19]  VA Puget Sound IRB Protocol Template – Ve rsion: 2/2015 Page 12 of 17 
 Functional performance  will be assessed as follows: HGS, SCP, 6MWT, VO 2 
peak, and actigraphy. HGS and SCP have been shown to correlate with VO 2 
peak and are good tests of aerobic and functional capacity in c achectic states. 
HGS will be measured by a handheld dynamomet er (Jamar Hydraulic  
Dynamometer, J.A. Preston Corp., Clifton, NJ). SCP, which allow s measuring the 
maximal anaerobic power of the involved muscles, will be perfor med as follows: 
subjects will climb up ordinary stairs at the highest possible speed, according to 
their capabilities. The stairs will consist of 13 steps of 15.3  cm each, thus 
covering a total vertical distanc e of 1.99 m. An experimenter w ill measure the 
time employed to cover the test with a digital stopwatch. Anaer obic power (in 
Watts) will be calculated by usi ng the following formula: “(bod y mass x 9.81 x 
vertical distance)/time” where body mass, vertical distance (i. e., 1.99 m) and time 
are expressed in kg, m, and s, respectively, and 9.81 m/s2 represents the 
acceleration of gravity (2–3 prac tice trials will be allowed so  that the subjects 
gains a good control of the per forming technique). In a 6MWT, t he staff will ask 
subjects to walk for 6 minutes in a hallway at the facility and  the distance will be 
recorded. For the VO 2 peak test, participants will be instructed to put on a 
mask/mouth piece with a breathing valve to collect expired gase s. Participants 
will be instructed to use hand sig nals to notify researchers ab out the need to stop 
the test. Participants will then be asked to pedal an exercise cycle at 
progressively harder workloads. The test will continue until th e subject becomes 
fatigued and decides to stop, or other symptoms prohibit furthe r exercise.  Fasting 
is required for  the VO 2 peak test. Participants may be asked to rate their 
perceived exertion during the tes t using the Borg Rating of Per ceived Exertion 
Scale. Actigraphs will be mail ed to patients ahead of their vis it, information will be 
recorded for 7 days and collect ed at their visit day. The devices will be worn by 
the subjects on the wrist and tr ained research coordinators wil l demonstrate its 
use and provide subjects with instructions in person as well as  in writing. Data 
from returned monitors will be downloaded with companion softwa re and 
analyzed for activity counts, da ily steps, and estimates of ene rgy expenditure. 
 
Questionnaires:  The FACT-P, EORTC QLQ-30, and EPIC-Hormonal 
questionnaires/scales will be administered to assess changes in  symptoms that 
play a role in performa nce such as fatigue. 
 Muscle biopsy:  The purpose of the sample collection is the following: histolo gic 
analysis and measurement of inflammatory, anabolic, and catabolic markers, in addition to assessment of muscular mitochondrial function. Musc le biopsies will 
be taken from the vastus later alis. After anesthetizing the skin and muscle fascia 
with 2% lidocaine, a 1-cm incision will be made, where ~300 mg of muscle tissue 
VA Puget Sound IRB Approved 
01/17/2019
[Version 4, 1/11/19]  VA Puget Sound IRB Protocol Template – Ve rsion: 2/2015 Page 13 of 17 
 will be removed by using a 5mm biopsy needle.  After the proced ure is 
completed, pressure is applied fo r 5-10 minutes to establish he mostasis, the 
incision is closed with Dermabon d, and the leg is wrapped in an  ace bandage.  
Subjects are asked to remain supine with leg elevated for 20 mi nutes.  Subjects’ 
blood pressure will be rechecked before allowing to stand up. Subjects will be 
given post care instructions i ncluding a telephone number in ca se of problems 
related to the procedure. 
 
Blood draw (fasted morning sample): The purpose of the samp le collection is 
the following: 60mL sample for safety labs, inflammatory/cytoki ne profile, 
anabolic markers, and anabolic and sex hormones. Blood and musc le samples 
will be stored in a -80o freezer in the PI laboratory fo r no more than 5 years. The 
samples will be kept to allow ti me for analysis of the data. De-identified samples 
will be shared only with co-investigators listed in the IRB. Th e sample will be 
discarded after 5 years. If a subject withdraws from the study,  they will not have 
the option to get the remaining portion of their sample back. S amples will be 
retained if a subject revokes aut horization; however, in such as case, those 
samples will be stripped of ident ifiers and no code linking subject’s identity to the 
sample will be kept.  
 
MRS & OS:  Patients’ quadriceps muscle will  be imaged using MRS while in a 
relaxed state and while contract ing at various levels of effort . MRS and OS will 
also involve non-invasive imaging during an ischemic state while wearing a 
compression cuff and during reperf usion after the cuff is relea sed.  
 
5.6 Data Analysis 
We will include 60 subjects (n=60) . This is a pilot and exploratory study. The data 
generated through this trial will be used to power a future, la rger clinical study 
and grant submissions. The sample  size has been estimated based  on the 
availability of subjects.  
All variables will be summarized descriptively by treatment using non-parametric 
statistical methods including N, median, SEM and standard devia tion. When 
appropriate, analyses wil l be done using Kru skal-Wallis for con tinuous variables with 
Bonferroni's adjustments for mu ltiple comparisons and chi-squar ed for categorical 
variables. Appropriate transformations will be applied to the o utcome changes to 
improve distribution toward normality. The relationship between physiologic and histologic parameter s, anabolic and catabolic markers, and sarc openia will be 
established.   
VA Puget Sound IRB Approved 
01/17/2019
[Version 4, 1/11/19]  VA Puget Sound IRB Protocol Template – Ve rsion: 2/2015 Page 14 of 17 
 Potential confounding  factors are, body weight at diagnosis, ag e at diagnosis, and 
presence of COPD or other co-morbidity. We will adjust for pote ntial confounding 
factors by including them in t he analysis. To determine whether  there is a significant 
correlation between the histology , biomarkers, physiometry, and  body composition each 
parameter will be compar ed by linear regression. 
 
Full disclosure and complete description of all endpoints will be included in public 
presentations of data to avoid b ias. Safety, including adverse events, will be 
summarized descriptively by group.   
 5.7 Withdrawal of Subjects 
It is unlikely that subjects will be withdrawn without their consent. This may happen if 
regulatory authorities (VA) decide to terminate the study. Part icipation is completely 
voluntary and patient s may withdraw from this study at any time  without any negative 
consequences or penalty for study  withdrawal. To withdraw, patients will be instructed 
to advise study staff directly by calling the number in the con sent form. Subjects will not 
have the option to get the remain ing portion of their sample(s)  back. Samples will not be 
destroyed but the sample will be  kept anonymously and used for analysis.
  
 
 
6 Reporting 
 
Clinical research information will be collected in case report forms that will be 
kept under double lock at the re search site in accordance with local and Federal 
guidelines. Information collect ed will include an assessment of  adverse events 
(AE) at each visit after enr ollment in the study.  
 
Dr. Cyrus Zabetian is a neurologist and researcher who will be the monitor for this study. Dr. 
Zabetian will only serve in a mon itoring capacity and will not be engaged in research. Dr. 
Zabetian will meet the monitoring criteria as follows per DOD g uidelines below: 
 
Research monitor functions will include:  
 
• reviewing monitoring plans and UPIRTSO reports 
 
• overseeing data collection and analysis   
In addition, the research monitor:  
 
• may discuss the research protocol with the investigators, int erview human subjects, and 
consult with others outside of the study about the research;  
 
VA Puget Sound IRB Approved 
01/17/2019
[Version 4, 1/11/19]  VA Puget Sound IRB Protocol Template – Ve rsion: 2/2015 Page 15 of 17 
 • shall have authority to stop a research protocol in progress, remove individual human 
subjects from a research protocol, and take whatever steps are necessary to protect the 
safety and well-being of human subjects until the IRB can asses s the monitor’s report; 
Version: 15 April 2013 Page 4 of 7   
• shall have the responsibility to promptly report their observ ations and findings to the IRB 
or other designated official and the HRPO.  
 
The study coordinators will send Dr. Zabetian a detailed study report annually for his review. 
All AE/SAE’s will be reported to IRB by study staff as required  following IRB guidelines. 
 
 
Adverse Event Management 
Any untoward or  unfavorable event occurring following enrollmen t in the study 
and until conclusion o f the study procedures will be considered  an AE. A 
worsening of a pre-existing c ondition will be c onsidered an AE as well. A pre-
existing condition which occurs with a known temporal frequency  and severity 
(e.g., dysmenorrhea) will not be considered an AE unless the pa ttern or severity 
has changed.  
 
Seriousness: A serious adverse event (SAE) is any AE that resul ts in: death, 
permanent or significant disabili ty, hospitalization or a prolo ngation of an existing 
hospitalization; a congenital anomaly/birth defect; or is other wise medically 
alarming.  Severity: All adverse events will be rated according to the Nat ional Cancer 
Institute (NCI) Common Toxici ty Criteria (CTCAE v4.0).  
 
Relationship to Study Procedure: All AE will be assessed by the Investigator to 
establish the presumed causal relationship with the study proce dure considering: 
a) Temporal relationship, b) Patt ern consistent with known effect of the 
intervention, and c) Presence of  other potentia l etiologies.  A E will be assigned 
one of the following caus al relationships: a) Unrelated (The st udy procedure 
almost certainly did not cause  the event); b) Probably not rela ted (It is more likely 
that the event is due to another  etiology than due to the study procedure), c) 
Possibly related (It is equally likely that the event is due to the study procedure 
as it is due to another etiology), d) Probably related (It is m ore likely that the 
event is due to the study proc edure than due to another etiolog y) and e) 
Definitely related (the evidence is compelling that the study p rocedure caused 
the AE). 
 
Monitoring Adverse Events: Subjec ts will be monitored for the onset of AEs 
throughout the course of the study . Any ongoing AE will be assessed at 
VA Puget Sound IRB Approved 
01/17/2019
[Version 4, 1/11/19]  VA Puget Sound IRB Protocol Template – Ve rsion: 2/2015 Page 16 of 17 
 appropriate frequency to document t he date and time of resoluti on of the event. 
All events will be followed to res olution. Certain AEs (e.g., a  cerebrovascular 
accident) will not be expected to r esolve completely; in these cases, the date and 
time will be recorded when the ev ent reaches its new, stable eq uilibrium and any 
remaining residua of the event w ill be documented. All AEs will  be followed until 
resolution or until stable in cases where permanent sequelae are expected. 
All SAE will be reported to IRB with appropriate  forms per IRB regulations (within 
5 days of study staff becoming aware), all ot her AEs will be re ported to IRB 
annually. 
 
 
7 Privacy and Confidentiality 
 
Data collected in this VA resear ch study, including identifiers , will be maintained 
for no more than 5 years by the VA facility. All study document s containing PHI 
will be kept in a locked cabinet i nside a locked room (in Dr. G arcia’s research 
office 1/815) or behind VA firewa ll on VA password- protected computers on Dr. 
Garcia’s secured research drive. No data containing PHI will be  accessible 
outside the study site. The room  is kept locked with the door shut. No subject 
data is left out of the cabinet s. Confidential information will  be stored on servers 
managed and maintained by  the VA-IT program. 
 
Lab technicians will be provided  the subject study number in pe rson when study 
staff accompany the patient to  the TCMI lab. All paper and elec tronic data 
generated at UW for study purposes  will be securely held in HSB  AA025 in the 
TCMI. 
 
An adequate plan exists to prote ct health information identifie rs from improper use and 
disclosure to minimize the risk of loss of confidentiality as recommended by VA 
guidelines. No social securit y numbers will be requested from s ubjects or potential 
subjects via phone Adequate writt en assurances exist in order t o ensure that the PHI 
will not be reused or disclosed to  (shared with) any other pers on or entity, except as 
required by law, for authorized oversight of the research study , or for other research for 
which the use or disclosure of the PHI would be permitted under  the Privacy Rule to 
minimize the risk of l oss of confidentiality as recommended by VA guidelines. 
 
The PI, VA collaborators, and his research staff, and VA resear ch compliance 
monitors will have access to ident ifiable information. People w ho ensure quality 
from the institutions where the research is being done, federal , and other 
regulatory agencies w ill have access to all of the research dat a. No one else will 
VA Puget Sound IRB Approved 
01/17/2019
[Version 4, 1/11/19]  VA Puget Sound IRB Protocol Template – Ve rsion: 2/2015 Page 17 of 17 
 have access to identifiable resear ch data. An Accounting of Dis closure will be 
created and maintained for any di sclosure of individually identifiable information 
outside the VA. The manual spreadsheet will include the date of  the disclosure, 
nature or description of the individually i dentifiable information disclosed, purpose 
of each disclosure and the nam e and address of person or agency  to which the 
disclosure was made. 
 
8 Communication Plan 
This is a single center study . All SAEs will be reported within  5 business days of 
study staff becoming aware of the incident the IRB. 
 
9.0      Information S ecurity and Privacy 
Loss of confidentiality: The risks are deemed minimal and all necessary precautions as required by the IRB and VA R&D committee will be  taken. Loss of 
confidentiality risks will be mini mized by ensuring all personn el is properly trained 
in information security and by  keeping all information secured inside locked 
cabinets in locked rooms insi de the VA and on secure computer s ervers 
maintained by VA IT. 
 
Data collected in this VA resear ch study, including identifiers , will be maintained 
for no more than 5 years by the VA facility. All study document s containing PHI 
will be kept in a locked cabinet i nside a locked room (in Dr. G arcia’s research 
office 1/815) or behind VA firewa ll on VA password- protected computers on Dr. 
Garcia’s secured research drive. No data containing PHI will be  accessible 
outside the study site. The room  is kept locked with the door shut. No subject 
data is left out of the cabinet s. Confidential information will  be stored on servers 
managed and maintained by  the VA-IT program. 
 Lab technicians will be provided  the subject study number in pe rson when study 
staff accompany the patient to  the TCMI lab. All paper and elec tronic data 
generated at UW for study purposes  will be securely held in HSB  AA025 in the 
TCMI.  
No social security numbers will be requested from subjects or potential subjects 
via phone.  
 
10.0 References 
 
1. Shanely, J Vis Exp 2014  
VA Puget Sound IRB Approved 
01/17/2019