  
Inspiratory Muscle Rehabilitation in Children With Obesity 
(BREATHE Fit)  
 
Funding Sponsor:  
Derfner Foundation  
 
Protocol Date:  02-26-2022 
Protocol Version:  0.1 
  
NCT number:  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Principal Investigator:  Jason E. Lang, MD, MPH  
Associate Professor  of Pediatrics -
Pulmonary and Sleep Medicine  
Duke University Medical Center  
Duke Clinical Research Institute  
Durham, NC 27710  
Phone: 919-684-9590  
Fax: 919- 668-3750  
Email: Jason.Lang@duke.edu  
 
 STATEMENT OF COMPLIA NCE 
This trial will be conducted in compliance with the protocol, International Council  for Harmonisation 
(ICH) E6(R2) guideline for Good Clinical Practice (GCP), and the applicable regulatory 
requirements from the United States Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), including  45 CFR 46 
(Human Subjects Protection) ; 21 CFR  50 (Informed Consent), and 21 CFR 56 ( Institutional Review 
Board [IRB]) . 
All individuals who are responsible for the conduct , management, or oversight  of this study have 
completed Human Subject s Protection and ICH GCP T raining.  
 
 
 
 
   
Site Principal Investigator Name ( Print)  
   
   
Site Principal Investigator Signature   Date  
 
 
 STUDY PRINCIPAL INVES TIGATOR/IND SPONSOR SIGNATURE  
The signature below documents the review and approval of this pro tocol and the attachments (e.g.,  
MOP, package inserts), and provides the necessary assurances that this clinical study will be 
conducted according to all stipulations of the protocol, including all statements regarding 
confidentiality and according to local legal and regulatory requirements and to the principles 
outlined in applicable U.S. and international regulations and ICH guidelines.  
 
Jason E. Lang, MD, MPH    
Study Principal Investigator Name   
   
   
Study Principal Investigator  Signature   Date  
 
  
 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS  
STATEMENT OF COMPLIANCE  ii 
STUDY PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR/IND SPONSOR SIGNATURE  iii 
TABLE OF CONTENTS  iv 
LIST OF TABLES  ix 
LIST OF FIGURES  x 
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS  xi 
PROTOCOL HISTORY OF CHANGES  xiii 
PROTOCOL SYNOPSIS  xiv 
SCHEMATIC/DESCRIPTION OF STUDY DESIGN xvi 
1. KEY ROLES  1 
2. BACKGROUND INFORMATION AND SCIENTIFIC RATIONALE  3 
2.1  Background Information 3 
2.2  Potential Benefits  4 
2.3  Compensation  5 
2.4 Potential Study Risks  5 
2.4.1 Risks of Inspiratory muscle training 5 
2.4.2 Risks of Maximal inspiratory pressure measurement  5 
2.4.3 Risks of Stair -step challenge  5 
2.4.4 Potential Risk of Loss of Confidentialit y 6 
2.4.5 Unforeseen Risks  6 
 3. OBJECTIVES AND OUTCOME MEASURES  7 
4. STUDY DESIGN  9 
4.1 Randomization  9 
4.2 Blinding/Masking  9 
4.3 Study Intervent ions 9 
4.4 Duration of Participation for Participant  10 
4.5 Biological Specimen Testing  10 
4.6 Safety  10 
4.7 Events of Special Interest  10 
4.8 Rationale for Dose Selection  10 
4.9 Study Definition of Enrollment  12 
4.10 Study Definition of Completion  12 
5. STUDY POPULATION  13 
 Selection of the Study Population  13 
 Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  13 
 Screen Failures  13 
5.4. Treatment Assignment Procedures  13 
5.4.1 Randomization Procedures  13 
5.5. Participant Discontinuation/Withdrawal  14 
5.5.1 Participant Decides to Withdraw Consent  14 
5.5.2 Participant Decides t o Withdraw from Study Intervention/Product  14 
5.5.3 Study Investigator/Sponsor Decides to Withdraw Participant  14 
5.5.4 Individual Stopping of Dosing Criteria:  14 
 5.5.5 Handling of Withdrawals  14 
5.5.6 Replacements  15 
6. STUDY PROCEDURES  16 
6.1 Screening  16 
6.2 Summary of Procedures  17 
6.2.1  Visit 1 (goal timing: day - 10 to - 14) 17 
6.2.2  Visit 2 (day 0)  17 
6.2.3  Visit 3 (Day 42)  18 
6.3 Early Study Termination Visit  19 
6.4 Continuation Visit  Error! Bookmark not defined.  
6.5 Phone check -ins (days 7, 14, 21, 28, and 35)  Error! Bookmark not defined.  
6.6 Actigraphy/physical activity assessment  19 
6.7 Spirometry  19 
6.8 Maximal Inspiratory Pressure measurement  Error! Bookmark not defined.  
6.9 Questionnaires  20 
6.9.1  Baseline medical history questionnaire.  20 
6.9.2  Questionnaires during Exercise: Modified Borg dyspnea scale.  20 
6.9.3  Questionnaires during Exercise: Dalhousie Rating with exercise 20 
 
6.9.4  Retrospective Questionnaire assessing Dyspnea during daily activity: Baseline 
Dyspnea Index (BDI).  22 
6.9.5    Retrospective Questionnaire assessing Dyspnea during daily activity: MRC      
Breathlessness scale.   24 
6.10 Stair-step Challenge  Error! Bookmark not defined.  
6.10.1  Preparation for administration of Step Test  24 
 6.10.2  Administering the Step Test  24 
6.10.3  Recording HR and pulse oximetry  25 
6.11 Specimen Preparation, Handling, Storage and Shipping  25 
7. STUDY PRODUCT DESCRIPTION  26 
7.1 Dosage and Study Intervention Information 26 
7.1.1 Dose of Inspiratory muscle training 26 
7.1.2 Formulation, Packaging, and Labeling 26 
7.1.3 Product use and directions  26 
7.2 Accountability Procedures for the Study Product(s)  26 
8. ASSESSMENT OF SAFETY 27 
 Adverse Event  27 
 Guidelines for Assessing Association of an Adverse Event  27 
 Guidelines for Assessing Intensity of an Adverse Event  27 
 Guidelines for Assessing Causality  27 
 Collection Period and Reporting Procedures  28 
 Event of Special Interest  28 
 Pregnancy  Error! Bookmark not defined.  
 Safety Interim Analysis  29 
9. STUDY HALTING/TERMINATION  30 
9.1 Study or Site Halting/Termination Criteria  30 
9.2 Halting Rules  30 
10. STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS  31 
10.1 Study Hypotheses  31 
 10.2 Objectives and Endpoints  31 
10.3 Analysis Populations  32 
10.3.1 Exposure- Response Population Error! Bookmark not defined.  
10.3.2 Safety Population Error! Bookmark not defined.  
10.4 General Analysis Plan  32 
10.4.1  Statistical design and power.  Error! Bookmark not defined.  
10.4.2 Demographics and Baseline Characteristics  Error! Bookmark not defined.  
10.5  Sample Size Considerations  33 
11. ETHICS/PROTECTION OF HUMAN PARTICIPANTS  34 
11.1  Informed Consent Process  34 
11.2  Permission from Participants  34 
11.3  Documentation of Consent  34 
11.4  Confidentiality and Privacy  35 
12. DATA HANDLING AND RECORD KEEPING  37 
12.1  Data Handling  37 
12.2  Data Management Responsibilities  37 
12.3  Data Capture Methods  37 
12.4  Types of Data  37 
12.5  Timing/Reports  37 
12.6  Study Records Retention  37 
12.7  Protocol Deviations  38 
13. PUBLICATION POLICY  Error! Bookmark not defined.  
14. REFERENCES  40 
 LIST OF TABLES   
 
Table 1 Objectives an Outcomes Measures  ......................................................................... 7 
Table 2 Prior Duke IMR Projects  ........................................................................................ 10 
Table 3 Effects of Daily IMR treatment over 6 weeks on Respiratory Outcomes – 
Preliminary data  ........................................................................................................... 11 
Table 4 Study Procedu res .................................................................................................. 16 
Table 5 Statistical power based on effect size .................................................................... 33 
 
 
 
 LIST OF FIGURES  
 
Figure 1 Study schematic.  Mechanisms of action of (A) obesity leading to dyspnea and 
activity avoidance, and (B) IMR facilitating greater activity.  ......................................... xvi 
Figure 2 Mechanisms of action of (A) obesity leading to dyspnea and activity avoidance,  
and (B)  ........................................................................................................................... 3 
Figure 3 Change in validated asthma symptom scores with IMR. AC T – asthma control test, 
ACQ6 – asthma control questionnaire 6 item  ............................................................... 11 
Figure 4 Dalhousie Questionnaire  ...................................................................................... 21 
 
   
 LIST OF ABBREVIATION S 
Abbreviation  Definition  
AE Adverse Event  
ANCOVA  Analysis of Co variance  
ATS American Thoracic Society  
BPM  Beats Per Minute  
BMI Body Mass Index  
BPCA  Best Pharmaceu tical for Children Act  
CI Confidence Interval  
CmH2O  Centimeter of Water  
CoC Certificate of Confidentiality  
COVID -19 Coronavirus Disease 2019  
CVF Cardiovascular Fitness  
DCC  Data Coordinating Center  
DHBS  Duke Healthy Breathing Study  
DUHS  Duke Univers ity Health System  
ECG  Electrocardiogram  
eCRF  Electronic Case Report Form  
EDC  Electronic Data Capture  
FEF25 -75 Forced Expiratory Flow at 25% to 75%  
FEV1  Forced Expiratory Volume in 1 second  
FVC Forced Vital Capacity  
GPS  Global Positioning System  
HIPAA Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act  
HL Healthy Lifestyle s 
ICF International Council for Harmonisation  
ICS Inhaled corticosteroids  
IEC Institutional Ethics Committee  
IMR Inspiratory Muscle Rehabilitation  
IRB Institutional Review Boa rd 
ITT Intention to treat  
LAMA  Long -acting muscarinic antagonist  
LTRA  Leukotriene Receptor Antagonist  
m Meter  
Max Maximum  
MIP Maximum Inspiratory Pressure  
mm Millimeter  
MVPA  Moderate -Vigorous Physical Activity  
BDI Baseline Dyspnea Index  
FWA  Feder al-wide Assurance  
DMC  Data Monitoring Committee  
ACQ  Asthma Control Questionnaire  
MOP  Manual of Procedures  
NC North Carolina  
  
   NIH National Institute of Health  
O2 Oxygen  
PI Principal Investigator  
REB Research Ethics Board  
SAE Serious adverse event  
SAR Suspected adverse reaction  
SD Standard Deviation  
SUSAR  Suspected Unexpected Serious Adverse Reactions  
  
PROTOCOL HISTORY OF CHANGES  
Version  Date  Summary of Changes  
1.0 DD-MMM-
2021  N/A Original protocol  
   
 PROTOCOL SYNOPSIS  
Protocol Title:   
BRE ATHE Fit: Inspiratory Muscle Rehabilitation in Children with 
Obesity to Promote Physical Activity  
 
Phase:   
Pilot 
 
Product:   
PrO2 IMR ™ trainer  
 
Objectives:   
Primary: Demonstrate inspiratory muscle rehabilitation ( IMR) as an 
acceptable add- on interventi on in children with obesity.  
 
Secondary:  
1. Demonstrate changes in inspiratory muscle functioning and dyspnea reporting 
following IMR.  
2. Demonstrate changes in daily physical activity following IMR.  
 
Exploratory: Demonstrate changes in exercise capacity followi ng IMR . 
 
Study Design:   
Single-center, randomized, SHAM -controlled, parallel assignment, double 
masked, interventional study.  
 
Study Population:   
Inclusion Criteria  
1. Documented informed consent from legal  guardian and assent from 
participant as appropriat e. 
2. Children 8 to 17 years of age with obesity (BMI ≥ 95th percentile for age and 
sex) being seen at Duke Healthy Lifestyles clinic.  
3. Participants (or parent /guardian) must have access to the internet and an 
approved smart device/computer . 
4. Child must have a des ignated caregiver who expresses a commitment to 
encourage the participant to complete the study procedures . 
5. Participant and legal guardian must speak and read English or Spanish . 
 Exclusion Criteria  
6. Prior enrollment in an IMR program . 
7. Contraindications for  IMR including a history of recent lung surgery, recent 
pulmonary embolism, or history of recurrent spontaneous pneumothorax  
8. Progressive neurological or neuromuscular disorders  or need for  
chronic O2 therapy . 
 9. Inability to complete baseline measurements in a satisfactory manner 
according to the judgment of the research coordinator or PI . 
10. Current self-reported pregnancy  or planning to become pregnant . 
11. Body weight greater than 300 pounds . 
12. Any condition in the opi nion of the PI that would not allow safe conduct  of 
study procedures (including IMR, MIP testing or step- test), such as a 
physical disability, recent musculoskeletal injury  or illness , current and 
ongoing evaluation for undiagnosed cardiopulmonary or neurologic 
symptoms, undiagnosed chest pain, pneumothorax in the past 12 months, 
inner ear surgery in the past 12 months, o r undiagnosed syncopal episodes . 
 
Number of 
Participants:  
 Up to 30  
 
Number of Sites:  
 1 site  
 Duration of Participation:   
Planned participation will be approximately 56 days. Total participation may 
be up to  77 days.  
 
Intervention:   
Intervention:  Inspiratory Muscle Trainer  at 75% of the participant’s maximal 
inspiratory pressure (MIP). Target dose:  3 sets of 50 inspiratory breaths 3 
times per week.  
 
Sham comparator:  Inspiratory Mus cle Trainer  at 15% MIP . Target dose:  3 
sets of 50 inspiratory breaths 3 times per week.  
 
Estimated start:   
Q1 2022  
 
 
Estimated time to complete enrollment  
  
Q3-4 2022  
 SCHEMATIC/DESCRIPTIO N OF STUDY DESIGN  
 
 
 
 
Figure 1 Study schematic.  Mechanisms of action of (A) obesity leading to dyspnea and 
activity avoidance, and (B) IMR facilitating greater activity.  
 1. KEY ROLES  
Study Principal Investigator : 
Jason E. Lang, MD, MPH  
Associate Professor of Pediatrics- Pulmonary and Sleep Medicine  
Duke University Medical Center  
Duke Clinical Research Institute  
Durham, NC 27710  
Phone:  919- 684-9590  
Fax:  919- 668-7063  
Email:  Jason.Lang@duke.edu  
 
Co-Investigator :  
Zeni Scott, MD  
Pediatric Pulmonology Fellow  
Duke University Medical Center  
Durham, NC 27705  
Email: zeni.scott@duke.edu  
 
Co-Investigator :  
Sarah Armstrong, MD, FAAP  
Professor of Pediatrics and Department of Family Medicine and Community Health  
Duke University  Medical Center  
Duke Clinical Research Institute  
Durham, NC 27710  
Phone: 919- 620-5374  
Email: sarah.c.armstrong@duke.edu  
 
Co-Investigator :  
Cindy Green, PhD  
Associate Professor of Biostatistics & Bioinformatics  
Duke University Medical Center  
Duke Clinical Research Institute  
Durham, NC 27710  
Phone: 919- 308-5887  
Email: cindy.green@duke.edu  
 
Co-Investigator :  
Verónica M. Palacios  
Clinical Research Coordinator   
Duke Office of Clinical Research (DOCR)  
Duke University Sc hool of Medicine  
veronica.palacios@duke.edu  
 
Co-Investigator :  
Janna  B. Howard,  MPH  
 
  Research  Program  Leader  
Duke  Center  for Childhood  Obesity  Research  
Department  of Pediatrics,  Duke  University  Medical  Center  
Phone:  919-620-4793  
Email:  janna.howard@duke.edu  
 
Co-Investigator :  
Nicholas  Fitzpatrick, MD  
Pediatric Pulmonology Fellow  
Duke University Medical Center  
Durham, NC 27705  
Email: nicholas.fitzpatrick@duke.edu  
 
 
 
 
 
 2. BACKGROUND INFORMATION AND SCIENTIFIC RA TIONALE  
2.1  Background Information 
Improved mana gement of obesity is an urgent public health need.  Nearly 40% 
of US children and adolescents have a body mass index that markedly increases 
their risk for serious metabolic and cardiopulmonary sequelae. Current childhood 
obesity rates, for the first time i n US history, predict a decline in life US expectancy. 
Importantly, childhood obesity is a key driver of health disparities in the US, with 
obesity disproportionately affecting African- American, Hispanic -Latino and Native 
American children. A key contribut or to the sequelae of obesity is sedentariness. 
Thus, best practice in obesity management includes both reducing sedentariness 
and establishing durable increases in daily physical activity1,2, however, attrition fr om 
planned ex ercise programs remains high. 3 A key challenge to initiating and 
sustaining physical activity in children with obesity is the extreme dyspnea 
(breathlessness) they experience. This is due to the  altered thoracic mechanics of 
obesity which lead to enhanced inspiratory muscle fatigue and dyspnea, with even 
modest physical activity (Figure 2A). Our group has confirmed that among 
adolescents, higher body mass index (BMI) associates with lower inspiratory muscle 
endurance (r= - 0.680, p=0.049, n=14), and that this lower endurance correlates with 
more frequent dyspnea (r= -  0.672, p=0.023, n=12). Treating obesity -related 
inspiratory muscle impairment and dyspnea is a promising approach to support 
physica l activity in children with obesity, but is yet unproven.  
 
Inspiratory muscle rehabilitation (IMR) is a promising approach to reduce 
obesity -related dyspnea and 
boost physical activity. 
Pulmonary rehabilitation (in its 
various forms, including IMR) is 
a treatment cornerstone in 
adult medicine but is 
underutilized in pediatrics.4 In 
adults, IMR has been studied 
in healthy athletes5,6, and 
numerous lung 7-10 and neuromuscular 11-13 diseases. In adults, IMR consistently 
improves inspiratory muscle function, reduces dyspnea and improves exercise 
tolerance.14-19  Adding IMR to an exercise training regimen in healthy young adults 
who were obese led to significant improvements in subjective ratings of dyspnea and 
objectively measured exercise capacity.20 IMR has not been sufficiently studied in 
children with obesity.  However, recently in our pilot work at Duke, children with 
obesity (and asthma) underwent the ‘DHBS’ pilot IMR trial ( [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]). Children 
(n=11) were randomized to IMR (3 sets of 50 reps, three times/week), exercise or 
usual care for 6 weeks. Ten of 11 completed all visits, and 11 reported wanting to 
continue IMR after the study. IMR improved mean maximum inspiratory pressures 
(MIP) (+34 cm H 2O, p=0.014) and improved exercise capacity measured by 6-
minute walk distance (+115 meters) (p=0.136) compared to IMR. Based on these 
 
 Figure 2 Mechanisms of action of (A) obesity 
leading to dyspnea  and activity avoidance, and (B)  
 
 data, we are highly encouraged that IMR will help children with obesity increase their 
physical activity ( Figure 2B). 
 
 
Duke Pediatrics is expertly equipped to advance IMR in Children with Obesity . 
Duke Pediatrics’ Healthy Lifestyles (HL) clinic, led by Co- I Dr. Sarah Armstrong, 
treats >7000 children ages 8- 17 with obesity each year (>35% Black, >20% 
Hispanic).21 Treatment includes intensive lifestyle counseling, community -based 
physical activity, pharmacotherapy, or weight -reduction surgery.22 As part of routine 
clinical monitoring, patients in HL complete measures of exercise capacity to assess 
physical activity gains, and have (as part of consented research)  provided wearable 
accelerometers to track total daily activity (i.e. steps) and time achieving moderate to 
vigorous physical activity (MVPA) .23,24 Dr. Armstrong has led or facilitated multiple 
research studies within the obes ity clinic, with established protocols and regulatory 
processes for recruitment, consent, and follow up study visits.21,25- 27 This 
collaboration between the Pediatric Pulmonary and Healthy Lifestyles clinical 
research teams focuses on a completely new area of research for the investigators 
(IMR) and provides a superior environment for studying impactful innovations in 
pediatric obesity.  
Together, we propose BREATHE Fit , a randomized SHAM -controlled 6- week trial of 
inspiratory muscle rehabilitation in children aged 8- 17 years with obesity enrolled in 
the Duke HL.  Primary research question:  Is IMR an acceptable add- on 
intervention that promotes greater activity in children with obesity?  The BREATHE 
Fit trial will ad dress the following aims:  
Aim 1. Demonstrate the acceptability of IMR in children with obesity. 
Hypothesis 1a (H1a). More than 80% of participants will be satisfied with active IMR 
at study completion. H1b. Total IMR adherence will be >80% of planned activ e IMR 
repetitions. H1c. Active IMR will not be associated with any serious adverse 
reactions.  
Aim 2. Demonstrate changes in inspiratory muscle functioning and dyspnea 
reporting following IMR. H2a. IMR will significantly increase inspiratory strength 
(meas ured by mean change in MIP). H2b. IMR will reduce patient -reported 
retrospective dyspnea scores during  activities of daily living.   
Aim 3. Demonstrate changes in daily physical activity following IMR.  
H3a. IMR will lead to reduced sedentary time, increase d moderate- strenuous time 
and increased total daily activity measured by a wrist -worn continuous activity 
tracking monitor.  
 
2.2  Potential Benefits  
IMR is very likely to improve inspiratory muscle strength. These benefits in 
inspiratory muscle strength may reduce dyspnea (breathlessness) with daily activity 
and with exercise. In addition, IMR may improve exercise capacity and exercise 
tolerance. Although improvements in these outcomes are not guaranteed, 
improvements in general health, daily activity and w eight loss are a possibility.  
 
 Conclusions drawn from this study may benefit children with obesity by adding to the 
understanding of how IMR affects breathing.  All participants will have baseline lung 
function testing and will have their daily physical acti vity monitored.   
 
2.3  Compensation 
Participants  will be fairly compensated for their time and effort.  Successful 
completion of the study (visit 3) will result in a $75  monetary payment  (gift cards). In 
addition, participants will be gifted the Garmin Vivosmart 4 study activity tracker 
(retail value $10 0) on visit 1 . If participants do not complete the study, they will be 
asked to return the activity tracker and inspiratory muscle trainer.  Participants will 
receive a $25 gift card with the successful completion of visit 2, and $50 gift card 
with the successful completion of visit 3.  
 
VISIT #  COMPENSATION  
 
V1 Garmin Vivosmart 4 
study activity tracker 
(retail value $100)  
 
V2  
$25 Nike gift card  
 
V3  
$50 Nike  gift card  
 
 
2.4 Potential Study Risks 
2.4.1       Risk s of i nspiratory muscle training  
The risk of inspiratory muscle training is minimum.  Inspiratory muscle training 
is deep breathing exercises against a resistance. Risks are thought to be generally minimal and similar to daily living  or routine exercise.  No known 
systematic reports are known describing risks from IMR. However, patients will be advised that they may  experience mild, self -limited dizziness, 
headache, or dyspnea.  
2.4.2     Risks of m aximal inspiratory pressure measurement  
Inspiratory muscle strength t esting is a routine clinical test performed in the 
outpatient  setting. The side -effect profile is expected to be similar to that of 
inspiratory muscle training.  
2.4.3     Risks of s tair-step challenge  
The stair -step challenge is a generally safe exercise procedur e conducted in 
the outpatient setting. There is a small chanc e of tripping or falling during the 
procedure and possible resulting injury. Close supervision and spotting of the participant will take place to reduce the chance of injury.  
 
 2.4.4     Potential risk of  loss of c onfidentiality  
There is a potential risk of loss of confidentiality. Every effort will be made to 
protect the participant’s  confidential medical information, but this cannot be 
guaranteed.  
2.4.5     Unforeseen risks 
There may be other risks to the parti cipant from this research that are not 
known or foreseeable at this time.  
 
 3. OBJECTIVES AND OUTCO ME MEASURES  
 
Table 1 Objectives an Outcomes Measures  
Primary Objectives  Outcome 
Measures  Endpoints  Analysis  
Demonstrate IMR as 
an accept able add- on 
intervention in children 
with obesity.  1. completion of  
study Visit 3 (V3)  
2. adherence to active IMR 
3. participant satisfaction  among 
active IMR participants  1. prevalence of 
completer status  
2. prevalence of IMR completion (actual / 
planned reps over 
intervention period)  in 
active IMR group 
3. prevalence of agree or strongly agree to question of satisfaction 
with active IMR Simple 
descriptive statistics: calculation of prevalence  
 
Secondary 
Objectives  Outcome 
Measures  Endpoints  Analysis  
Dem onstrate changes 
in inspiratory muscle functioning and dyspnea reporting following IMR  1. Maximum 
inspiratory 
pressure (MIP)  
2. Baseline Dyspnea 
Index score  
3. MRC 
breathlessness 
scale  1. change in MIP over 
intervention period  
2. change in dyspnea 
scores over inter vention 
period Analysis of 
covariance 
(ANCOVA)  
Demonstrate changes in 
daily physical activity 
following IMR 1. moderate -
vigorous physical 
activity (MVPA) 
time 
2. sedentary  
physical activity  
(SPA) time 
3.   total steps  1. change in average daily 
MVPA time  
2. change in average daily 
SPA time  
3. change in average daily 
step count  Analysis of 
covariance 
(ANCOVA)  
Exploratory Objectives  Outcome 
Measures  Endpoints  Analysis  
Demonstrate changes in 
exercise capacity 
following IMR 1. heart rate during 3 
minute step test  1. heart rate change during 
3-minute step test  Analysis of 
covariance 
(ANCOVA)  
 
 
   
 
 4. STUDY DESIGN  
Overall Design  
Single-center, randomized, SHAM -controlled, parallel assignment, double masked, 
interventional study.  
4.1 Randomization 
Participant s (n=30) will be randomized to one of two  treatment arms.  
• Arm A  (n=15): IMR 
• Arm B (n=15): Sham  
4.2 Blinding/Masking  
Treatment assignment will be obtained through the Duke REDCap randomization 
system. All participant -facing study staff and participants will be blinded to t he 
treatment assignment. Participants may come to feel that they can surmise whether 
their device is set to the active resistance. Although complete masking may not be possible in all participants, participants will only be informed that they are receiving  
one of two resistances (low or active). However, all study staff that assess outcomes (and the l ead statistician ) will remain blinded. Participants will be instructed to not 
discuss their presumed IMR assignment with study staff.  
4.3 Study Interventions  
Activ e IMR  or SHAM  using the PrO2™  device. Each participant will be provided a 
PrO2™ device and trained on its use as well as its accompanying PrO2 Fit™ app. The PrO2™ is a flow -resistive device that provides inspiratory resistance via a fixed 
2mm orifice and h as Bluetooth connectivity to most IOS/Android devices or 
Mac/Windows computers. The PrO2™ device and app allows for both 100% adherence monitoring and immediate user biofeedback.  
Participants will be instructed at V isit 1 and V isit 2 to inspire forcefully  through 
PrO2™ until the device signals that the user has achieved the target resistance (via audible alarm and visible light signal). The research team will implement biofeedback signals at a specific inspiratory resistance to provide precise and individu alized training target. Successful IMR repetitions will require that subjects 
achieve a pressure target that is 75% of their MIP.   
SHAM intervention.  Participants in the control intervention will also use the same 
PrO2™ device but at a reduced peak resist ance of 15%  MIP. The research team will 
implement biofeedback signals at a specific inspiratory resistance to provide precise and individualized training target. Successful IMR repetitions will require that subjects achieve a pressure target that is 15% of  their MIP. 
Adherence monitoring. All device repetitions are automatically captured and 
documented via the Bluetooth connection with the PrO2™ app and end- to-end 
encrypted and transferred to a HIPAA -compliant cloud server (Amazon Web 
Services). Study staf f will review eac h participant’s adherence each week  and will 
provide encouragement as needed.  
 
 4.4 Duration of Participation for Participant  
The approximate duration of parti cipation is 56 days. The maximum duration of 
participation will be 77 days.   
4.5 Biological Specimen Testing  
No biologic specimens will be taken.  
4.6 Safety  
See Section 8. 
4.7 Events of Special Interest  
Not applicable.  
4.8 Rationale for Dose (inspiratory load) Selection  
We used published IMR regimens to select an initial resistive load (intensity), 
number of repetitions/sets per day, and weekly session number for our pilot work (Table 2 ). We first completed an IRB -approved pilot study called the Duke Healthy 
Breathing Study 1(DHBS1) of directly supervised IMR in 10- 17 year-olds with 
asthma. Using a commercially available IMR respiratory training device, participants with asthma completed and tolerated 4 sets of 60 reps of IMR at 60- 75% MIP. We 
solicited feedback from both adolescents and parents regarding tolerability, acceptability, and future interest in IMR as a potential chronic breathing intervention. Nearly 95% of participants were able to complete all repetitions at 60- 75% of MIP. 
This one- time session was wel l-tolerated in all participants without any significant 
adverse events. Thirteen of 14 (93%) participants wanted to continue daily IMR after study completion. Based on DHBS1, we initiated the DHBS2 study, an IRB -
approved ([STUDY_ID_REMOVED]) randomized, ‘usual care’ -controlled, parallel -group,  6-Table 2 Prior Duke IMR Projects  
Investigator 
(year)  Population  IMR characteristics  Results  
Lang/Jones (2017) 
DHBS1 (Duke 
funded)  14 children and 
adolescents (10-
17 years of age) 
with persistent 
asthma  Repetitions: 4 sets of 50 inspirations  No significant AEs  
100% acceptability  
13 of 14 were interested in 
a home int ervention  Intensity: 60- 75% MIP  
Duration: 1 session  
Lang/Jones (2018-
2020) DHBS2 (Duke 
funded)  Participants 10-
17 years of age 
with persistent 
asthma and 
obesity or 
sedentariness  Dose: 1 session twice daily, 3 
days/wk.  
Week 1: session= 1 set of 60 reps 
Week 2: session= 2 sets of 60 reps  
Week 3 -6: session= 3 sets of 60 reps 
(with automated IMR monitoring)  11 subjects have completed 
6-week intervention:  
10/11 (91%) completed all 
visits  
11 (100%) reported desire 
to continue IMR  
IMR treated participants 
showed non- significant 
improvements in inspiratory 
muscle strength/ endurance, asthma control 
and exercise tolerance  Intensity: 75% MIP  
Duration: 6 weeks  
MIP – maximal inspiratory pressure, IMR – inspiratory muscle rehabilitation, AE – adverse event  
 
 week  intervention trial in which we tested the IMR regimen (75% MIP) in 10-17 year-
olds with obesity and asthma.  
 
Participants randomized to the IMR treatment completed 3 sets of 60 repetitions at 
75% MIP three days per week. Preliminary IMR findings from 11 participants 
involving changes in respiratory muscle strength and endurance, 6- minute walk 
distance and asthma symptom scores are encouraging and support the aim s of this 
proposal (See Figure 3  and Table 3 ). Adherence o f IMR  (n=6) was 79.2% of 
prescribed repetitions over 6 weeks, which is superior to published adherence rates 
(47-57%) for daily asthma controller drugs . 
Table 3 Effects of Daily IMR treatment over 6 weeks on Respiratory Outcomes – 
Preliminary data  
Outcome type  Intervention    
 IMR 
(n=6)  No IMR  
(n=5)  p-value  Summary  
Asthma Symptoms: change in ACT,  
mean (SD) (for ACT, higher score 
means better asthma)  +1.0 (0)  -3.0 (2)  p=0.075  IMR-treated participants showed a 
near significant impr ovement in 
ACT compared to controls (Fig ure 
3) 
Asthma Symptoms: change in 
ACQ -6, 
Mean (SD) (for ACQ -6, lower score 
means better asthma)  -0.10 (0.56)  
 0.90 (0.90)  p=0.094  IMR-treated participants showed a 
near significant improvement in ACQ -6 compared to c ontrol (Figure 
3) 
Inspiratory muscle strength: change 
in baseline MIP (cm H 20), mean 
(SD)**  +37.0 (24.1)1 
 +12.5 (16.4)1 
 p=0.128  
 IMR-treated participants showed 
near significant greater MIP 
improvement compared to controls   
Inspiratory muscle strength:  change 
in post -exercise MIP (cm H 20), 
mean (SD)**  +14.6 (10.5)2 -19.0 (19.9)2 p=0.014  IMR-treated participants showed a 
significantly greater post -exercise 
MIP improvement compared to 
controls  
Exercise tolerance: improvement in 
six-minute walk distance ( meters), 
mean (SD)  119.1 (93.3)  
 4.0 (112.7)  p=0.136  IMR-treated participants showed 
non-significant improvement in  
Figure 3 Change in validated asthma symptom scores with IMR. ACT – asthma 
control test, ACQ6 – asthma control questionnaire 6 item  
 
 
 
  
4.9 Study Definition  of Enrollment  
  A participant will be considered enrolled in the active study once eligibility criteria are 
satisfied,  informed consent is signed , and the participant receives at least one dose 
of a study intervention (i.e. one training session) .  
 
4.10 Study Definition of Completion  
Participant study completion will be defined as a participant who has been enrolled 
and completes Visit 3.  
 
   
 
       6MW distance compared to 
controls  
**two MIP measures were analyzed at each visit because of acute strengthening. 1 – MIP1 start of visit (b efore exercise), 2 – MIP2 end 
of visit (after exercise).  ACQ -6 – score ranges from 0 to 6 with lower score meaning better asthma. Minimal important difference =0.4-
0.5. ACT – score ranges from 6 to 30 with higher score meaning better asthma. Minimal impor tant difference = 3  
 
 5. STUDY POPULATION  
 Selection of the Study Population  
Children 8 to 17 years  of age with obesity (BMI  ≥ 95th percentile for  age and sex) being seen 
for a visit at the Duke HL clinic, and meeting study inclusion and exclusion criteria will be 
enrolled. Both males and females are eligible, as are partici pants of any race or ethnicit y. 
Participants (or parent /guardian) must have access to the internet and an approved 
device/computer (see below).  
 Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
Inclusion 
Criteria   
1. Documented informed consent from legal guardian and assent from 
participant as appropriate.  
2. Children 8 to 17 years of age with obesity (BMI  ≥ 95th percentile for age 
and sex) being seen at Duke Healthy Lifestyles clinic.  
3. Participants (or parent/guardian) must have access to the internet and an 
approved smart device/computer.  
4. Child must have a designated caregiver who expresses a commitment to 
encourage the participant to complete the study procedures.  
5. Participant and legal guardian must speak and read English or Spanish.  
Exclusion 
Criteria   
1. Prior enrollment in an IMR program.  
2. Contraindications for IMR including a history of recent lung surger y, recent 
pulmonary embolism, or history of recurrent spontaneous pneumothorax  
3. Progressive neurological or neuromuscular disorders or need for  
chronic O2 therapy.  
4. Inability to complete baseline measurements in a satisfactory manner 
according to the judgment of the research coordinator or PI.  
5. Body weight greater than 300 pounds.  
6. Any condition in the opinion of the PI that would not allow safe conduct of 
study procedures (including IMR, MIP testing or step- test), such as a 
physical disability, recent musculos keletal injury or illness, current and 
ongoing evaluation for undiagnosed cardiopulmonary or neurologic 
symptoms, undiagnosed chest pain, pneumothorax in the past 12 months, 
inner ear surgery in the past 12 months, or undiagnosed syncopal 
episodes.  
 Screen Failures  
Participants who sign informed consent but are not enrolled in the active study are 
considered screen failures and will be recorded in the Screen Failures area of the electronic 
data capture ( EDC) . Participants who do not initially satisfy eligibility requirements may be 
rescreened up to 2 additional times. Re -consent is not required for rescreened participants  
unless a revised version of the consent that requires re -consent is made available.   
5.4. Treatment Assignment Procedures  
5.4.1  Randomization  procedures 
Treatment assignment will be 1:1 (IMR or sham intervention), and will be obtained 
through the Duke REDCap randomization system  using the randomization schedule as 
 
 designed by the unblinded statistician. All study staff and participants will be blinded to 
the treatment assignment  with the exception of one un- blinded clinical research 
coordinator . Participants may be able to tell whether their device is set to the active 
resistance. Although complete masking may not be possible in all participants, 
partic ipants will only be informed that they are receiving one of two resistances (low or 
active). However, all study staff that assess outcomes (and the lead statistician ) will 
remain blinded. Participants will be instructed to not discuss their presumed IMR assignment with study staff.  
5.5. Participant Discontinuation /Withdrawal  
5.5.1  Participant  decides to withdraw  consent  
A participant may voluntarily withdraw consent to participate in the study at any 
time. Participants are not obligated to state the reason for withdrawal. Participant 
withdrawal should not affect the participant’s medical care outside of this study. The reasons for withdrawal, or failure to provide a reason, must be documented by the investigator. No additional study procedures or data should be collect ed 
after consent has been withdrawn.  
5.5.2  Participant  decides to withdraw from study intervention/ product  
Participants may also withdraw from receiving the study intervention/product for any reason but continue to be followed for safety. Participants are not obligated to 
state the reason for withdrawal.  
5.5.3  Study investigator/ sponsor decides to withdraw participant  
The study investigators  or sponsor may decide to take the participant out of this  
study at any time without consent  if: 
• Participant’s condition changes and the study is no longer in his/her best interest ; 
• Participant  non-compliance with the study protocol ; 
• The entire st udy is stopped by the sponsor . 
5.5.4  Individual stopping of dosing criteria:  
The study investigators will  stop treatment of  study intervention and the participant 
will not receiv e additional doses of study intervention if:  
• Participant has a clinically significant severe AE or SAE related to the study 
intervention;   
• Participant becomes  pregnant ;  
• Participant  newly meets criteria for  study  exclusio n; 
• In the opinion of the investigator , the participant is at significant risk.  
 
If the intervention is discontinued for safety concerns, participants must be followed for 
safety until 7 days after the last study  training session. Participants who are disc ontinued 
from study intervention due to an AE, whether serious or non -serious, must be followed 
by the investigator until the AE is resolved or considered stable.  
If any of the above occurs, the participant  will be informed,  and the investigator 
will disc uss other options.  
 
5.5.5  Handling of withdraw als 
The reasons for withdrawal, or failure to provide a reason, must be documented by the investigator.  Reasons for withdrawal may include:  
 
 a. Participant withdraw s consent and request s no further follow -up; 
b. Participant  does not withdraw consent but withdraws from study  intervention;   
c. Study PI/Sponsor decision.  
Unless there is complete withdrawal of consent from the participant, every effort 
will be made to continue follow -up visits.  
 
5.5.6  Replacements  
Females who become preg nant during the study will not receive further  study 
intervention.  In cases of early withdrawal , an additional participant  may be 
enrolled.  
 
 
 6. STUDY PROCEDURES  
Procedures will occur as in 
Table 4.  
6.1 Screening  
The investigator will 
screen participants in acco rdance with the 
eligibility c riteria 
detailed previously . 
Research staff will document applicable informed consent for all participants who satisfy eligibility criteria , and will follow 
all site policies, 
procedures and criteria for control of COVID -19. 
Participant s must 
satisfy all 
Inclusion /Exclusion 
criteria  to be en rolled 
in the active study . 
Information will be recorded from the clinical medical record or from interview of the participant. The 
investigator will not exercise selectivity so that bias is  prevented.  
 Informed consent and collection of demographic information will be performed at screening. The following screening assessments must be done to confirm study 
eligibility: medical history (past medical/surgi cal history, medications, and 
smoking/ drug history), review of concomitant  medications , height /weight/physical 
exam , and confirm satisfaction of all eligibility criteria  (inclusion and exclusion) for 
the study. Assessments not recorded per standard of care, must be conducted as a 
study specifi c procedure.  
   Table 4 Study Procedures  
 Screen  
visit Randomization  
visit Completion  
visit 
Visit number  V1 V2 V3 
Timeline in days (target)  -10-14a 0 42 
(40-56) 
Consent/assent  x   
Height/Weight/BMI# x  x 
Eligibility assessment  x x5  
Study instructions  x x  
Actigraphy training1 x x  
PrO2 device/app training   x  
Retrospective Dyspnea scoring##  x x 
Dyspnea scoring with exercise2  x x 
Randomization   x  
Maximal inspiratory pressure (MIP)###  x x 
Stair Step Test   x x 
Adverse event monitoring   x x 
Follow -up actigraphy3   x 
Patient satisfaction questionnaire    x 
phone check -ins4 will occur on day (+/ - 2) 7, 14, 21, 28, and 35 
to assess any problems, encourage adherence 
and give appreciation for efforts  
1 – worn at least 7 full days (max of 14) prior to ra ndomization  
2 – Modified Borg Dyspnea scale and Dalhousie Dyspnea  
3 – worn at least 7 full days (max of 14) during week prior to V3; the follow -up actigraphy should 
occur during the last 14 days.  
4 – communication will be made by (IRB approved) mode of par ticipant’s choosing including 
voice call or direct messaging.  
5 – assess for eligibility for randomization (tracker adherence, no new exclusions prior to 
randomization)  
a – a date range of 10 -14 days prior to randomization is preferred but can be extended  up to -28 
days. A randomization visit can be scheduled beyond 28 days only at the discretion of the PI.  
# - should be taken from clinic visit data; may be performed as a research procedure only if needed  
## - Baseline Dyspnea index (BDI) and MRC Breathle ssness Scale  
### - MIP will be collected before and after the Stair step test  
 
 
 6.2 Summary o f Procedures 
6.2.1  Visit 1 (goal timing: day -10 to - 14 prior to randomization ) 
General Visit Description:  Eligibility criteria will be confirmed at  Visit 1  or via 
phone call before their visit to the Healthy lifestyle’s clinic, i f the researcher 
believes the participant meets eligibility criteria. Research staff will document 
informed consent from the parent/  guardian in eligible  participants . 
Participant s above the age of 12 years will also provide assent . Eligible 
participants w ill receive a Breathe Fit study packet  with study handouts and 
study materials . 
 Equipment/Supplies needed:  Body weight scale, stadiometer, el igibility 
checklist  (printed or electronic) , participant informational handouts  (for activity 
tracker  accompanying  smart device(s) to link with activity tracker ). 
 Anticipated duration:  Goal is 30- 45 minutes . 
 Visit 1 Procedures:  
1. Confirm eligibility (eligibility checklist) . 
2. Obtain consent and assent (if child is <12 years old) . The consenting process will 
include inst ruction about general study details (visits, durations, compensation)  
and participants will be given a study packet of instructions.  
3. Obtain participant demographics, including height, weight, and BMI  data (these 
data should be taken from the electronic health record if already collected) . If not 
obtained during routine care, these data will be collected by research staff.  
4. Questionnaires  (printed or electronic) . 
5. Actigraphy training (participants will be given a Vivosmart  4 activity  tracker in the 
correct siz e and taught on its proper fit and use).  
6. Following consent, if all V1 procedures are not able to be completed (due to 
participant time constraints or family preference) , an optional V1a (continuation 
visit) may be scheduled by phone or in- person home or by  follow -up clinic visit.  
7. Plan day - 7 phone check -in (see phone check -in section below) . 
 
6.2.2  Visit 2 ( Day 0)  
General Visit Description:  Visit 2 will be Day 0, will re -confirm eligibility  prior to 
randomization, will include randomization if eligible and will start the intervention and 
observation period. Participants must not newly meet any exclusion criteria and must 
continue to meet all inclusion criteria. Inclusion criteria for randomization will include 
collection of at least 7 days of valid actigraphy data (confirmed at V isit 2) .  
 Equipment/Supplies needed:  Activity tracker (from participant), accompanying 
smart device(s), printed questionnaires, participant informational handouts, PrO2 
trainer, Stair Step Test equipment . 
 Anticipated duration:  60 minutes . 
 
 
Visit 2 Procedures:  
1. Assessment of baseline actigraphy (participants must have worn the Vivosmart  4 
activity  tracker for at least 7  full days (max of 14) prior to randomization. If not, 
 
 the date of V isit 2 may be  extended for an additional 4 -14 days  for a continuation 
Visit 2 ). 
2. Questionnaires and eligibility assessment  (eligibility checklist, questionnaires can 
be printed or electronic) (see questionnaires section) . 
3. Interval history and event monitoring.  
4. Measure Maximal inspiratory pressure (MIP)  before and after step test (see MIP 
section) . 
5. Stair Step Test  (see stair step section) . 
6. Retrospective dyspnea scoring that assesses dyspnea from daily activities 
(Baseline Dyspnea Index (BDI), the MRC Breathlessness scale) , and during the 
step- test (Modifi ed Borg Dyspnea scale and Dalhousie Dyspnea/ Perceived 
Exertion Scale) . 
7. Randomization (see the randomization procedure section) . 
8. Study instruction refresher  and questions/answers . 
9. PrO2 Fit app and device IMR training . 
10. Refresher Training (question and answer s) on the u se of V ivosmart 4 activity 
tracker . 
11. Discuss plan for phone call visits and future study visit . Plan next phone call 
check -in visit (Day 7) . 
 
6.2.3  Continuation visit 
In the event that during the initiation of Visit 1, 2, or 3 , the participant is not able to complete 
the visit (but remains eligible for study participation), a continuation visit (e.g. 1b, 2b) can be 
scheduled to finish protocol -defined procedures.  The continuation visit will be scheduled at 
the earliest possible date but no later than 1 4 days from the previous visit. The continuation 
visits beyond 14 days out of this window must be approved by the study PI.   
 
6.2.4  Home visit  
Conducting all or part of a planned visit is allowed but will only be conducted as a last 
option, is requested by the participant and legal guardian, and meet s all home visit 
requirements. The home visit must be approved in advance by the PI and deemed to be an 
appropriate setting (adequate space available, approved by participant’s legal guardian, 
safe environment). Home visits will occur only when two or more IRB -approved study staff 
members are present and occurring during normal business hours.  
6.2.5  Phone check- ins (days -7, 7, 14, 21, 28, and 35)  
During phone check -ins, communication will be made by a (IRB approved) mode of 
participant’s choosing including voice- only or zoom call. R esearch staff will ask if there are 
any problems, concerns or questions about the study or intervention.  Study staff will 
encourage adherence, and give appreciation for the participant’s effort s.  
 
  
6.2.3  Visit 3 (Day 42)  Final In -person visit  
General Visit Description:  Visit 3 will be on approximately day 42, final assessment 
of the study. This visit is preferred as an in -person study visit , but may be conducted 
as an in- home visit if needed (as with V isit 2) . Day 42 (+/ - 5 days) will be the goal 
day for study V isit 3. With P I approval, V isit 3 may be conducted up to 14 days away 
from Day 42, if necessary.   
 
 
 Equipment/Supplies needed:  Scale, stadiometer, activity tracker (from participant), 
accompanying smart device(s), printed questionnaires  (or tablet -based REDCap 
questionnaires) , PrO2 trainer (from participant), Stair Step Test equipment, 
assignment and thank you letter . 
 
Anticipated duration:  60 minutes . 
 
 Visit 3 Procedures:  
1. Reassessment of participant height, weight, and BMI.  
2. Dyspnea scoring assessing daily activities [ Baseline Dyspnea Index (BDI), the 
MRC Breathlessness scale].  
3. Dyspnea scoring during the step -test (Modified Borg Dyspnea scale and 
Dalhousie Dyspnea and Perceived Exertion Scale).  
4. Adverse effect monitoring.  
5. Measure Maximal inspiratory pressure (MIP)  before and after step test . 
6. Stair Step Test . 
7. Follow up actigraphy (participants must have worn the Vivosmart  4 activity  
tracker for at least 7 full days (max of 10) during week prior to V isit 3) .  
8. Patient satisfaction questionnaire.  
9. Close out procedures :  
i. Assignment envelope;  
ii. Close out letter (i.e. thank you letter) . 
 
6.3 Early Study Termination Visit  
No clinic visit will be planned following termination (withdrawal of consent  or PI t ermination). 
Participants who stop the study intervention early due to a safety concern will still be 
followed according to the protocol.   
 
  
6.4 Actigraphy /Physical Activity  Assessment  
Actigraphy is non- invasive method used to assess cycles of activity and r est over several 
days to weeks.  Actigraphy will be measured using Vivosmart  4 activity  tracker, a wrist -band 
based device that tracks and displays participant fitness activity progress, including steps, 
floors climbed, calories burned, intensity minutes, oxygen saturation, and heart rate.  
 Participants will be asked to wear the tracker with the proper fitting (as directed in V isit 1) for 
at least 7 full days  (7 full 24 hour blocks)  (max of 14) prior to Visit 2 and at least 7 full days 
(max of 1 4) during the week prior to V isit 3.  
 
Participants will be given the safety and product information handout and user’s manual 
from the company that comes with the device. This will include information on battery life 
and handling, and dev ice precautions.   
 
https://www.garmin.com/en -US/p/605739/pn/010 -01995- 13#specs  
 
6.5 Maximal Inspiratory Pressure (MIP) Measurement   
Each participant w ill be asked to perform five MIP maneuvers, with a goal of matching the 
highest two within 10 cmH2O. MIP will be recorded using the PrO2 Fit device. The patient 
 
 will be  seated for the test. The study staff member will first demonstrate the correct 
maneuver. The participant will be  instructed to exhale slowly and c ompletely, seal lips firmly 
around the MIP mouthpiece, and then “ breathe in as hard as you can, like you are trying to 
suck up a thick milkshake.” The study staff member  will note the largest negative pressure 
sustained on the pressure reading . The partici pant will be allowed to rest for about 30 -45 
seconds  and then repeat the maneuver 5 times.  This procedure will be completed before 
and again after the 3- minute step test. The change in best MIP value (post minus pre) will 
be computed.  
 
6.6 Questionnaires/Data  Forms  
6.6.1  Baseline medical history form   
The baseline medical history form will ascertain general demographics, 
medical evaluation (for eligibility), degree of dyspnea at rest and related to 
daily activity, and other general respiratory symptoms.  This will be completed 
by the research staff using a combination of adjudicating the electronic health 
record and direct enquiry from the participant or guardian.  
 
6.6.2  Questionnaire during e xercise: Modified Borg  dyspnea scale  
 Ten-unit scale used to denote degree of dyspnea with exercise28,29 will b e  assessed  
at the 1-, 2- and 3 -minute marks during the 3 -minute step test , and again at post -1, 
post-2 and post -3.  
 
 Patient Instructions for Borg Dyspnea Scale 
“This i s a scale that asks you to rate the difficulty of your breathing. It starts at 
number 0 where your breathing is causing you no difficulty at all and progresses 
through to number 10 where your breathing difficulty is maximal. How much difficulty 
is your breathing causing you right now?”  
 
   
 
6.6.3 
 Questionnaire during Exercise: Dalhousie rating with exercise  
This will be assessed at the 1-, 2- and 3- minute marks during the 3 -minute 
step test.  
The purpose of this test is to assess breathing and leg and body fatigue 
during exercise. Participants will be told that t here is no right or wrong 
answer. The pictures in the Dalhousie questionnaire30 will be shown to the 0 Nothing at all  
0.5 Very, very slight (just noticeable)  
1 Very Slight  
2 Slight  
3 Moderate  
4 Somewhat severe  
5 Severe  
6  
7 Very Severe  
8  
9 Very, very severe (almost maximal)  
10 Maximal  
 
 participant and asked to rate their exper ience from no difficulty at all, to the 
most difficulty you can imagine. (Figure 4) 
 
Research staff will say, “You might feel this difficulty breathing in your chest or in your throat. Another scale simply asks you to tell us how hard it is to breathe— from nothing at all, to the hardest breathing imaginable. With the 
final set of pictures, tell us how your legs feel —from nothing at all, to the 
hardest imaginable. ”  
 
  
 
    
 
 
  
6.6.4  Retrospective questionnaire assessing d yspnea during daily activity: Baseline 
Dyspnea Index (BDI).  
The BDI  31 is a retrospective questionnaire assessing  perceived dyspnea during 
activities of daily living  ‘on a typical day’ over the past two weeks  and will b e 
assessed at V isits 2 and 3 .  
         
Baseline Dyspnea Index Questionnaire  
I. Functional impairment  
_____ Grade 4  No impairment  Able to carry out usual activities and occupation without 
shortness of breath.  
_____ Grade 3  Slight Impairment  Distinct impai rment in at least one activity but no activities 
completely abandoned.  
Reduction, in activity at work or in usual activities, that seems 
slight or not clearly caused by shortness of breath.  
_____ Grade 2  Moderate Impairment  Patient has changed jobs and/o r has abandoned at least one 
usual activity due to shortness of breath.  
_____ Grade 1  Severe Impairment.  Patient unable to work or has given up most or all usual 
activities due to shortness of breath.  
_____ Grade 0  Very Severe Impairment.  Unable to work and has given up most or all usual activities 
due to shortness of breath.  
_____ W  Amount Uncertain  Patient is impaired due to shortness of breath, but amount 
cannot be specified. Details are not sufficient to allow 
impairment to be categorized.  
_____ X  Unknown  Information unavailable regarding impairment.  
_____ Y  Impaired for Reasons Other than 
Shortness of Breath.  For example, musculoskeletal problem or chest pain. Usual 
activities refer to requirements of daily living, maintenance or 
upkeep of reside nce, yard work, gardening, shopping, etc.  
 
II. Magnitude of Task  
_____ Grade 4  Extraordinary  Becomes short of breath only with extraordinary activity such 
as carrying very heavy loads on the level, lighter loads uphill, 
or running. No shortness of breath  with ordinary tasks.  
_____ Grade 3  Major  Becomes short of breath only with such major activities as 
walking up a steep hill, climbing more than three flights of 
stairs, or carrying a moderate load on the level.  
_____ Grade 2  Moderate  Becomes short of b reath with moderate or average tasks such 
as walking up a gradual hill, climbing fewer than three flights of 
stairs, or carrying a light load on the level.  
_____ Grade 1  Light  Becomes short of breath with light activities such as walking 
on the level, wa shing, or standing.  
_____ Grade 0  No Task  Becomes short of breath at rest, while sitting, or lying down.  
_____ W  Amount Uncertain  Patient’s ability to perform tasks is impaired due to shortness 
of breath, but amount cannot be specified. Details are not  
sufficient to allow impairment to be categorized.  
_____ X  Unknown  Information unavailable regarding imitation of magnitude of 
task.  
_____ Y  Impaired for Reasons Other than 
Shortness of Breath.  For example, musculoskeletal problem or chest pain.  
 
 
         
III. Magnitude of Effort  
 
 _____ Grade 4  Extraordinary  Becomes short of breath only with the greatest imaginable 
effort. No shortness of breath with ordinary effort.  
_____ Grade 3  Major  Becomes short of breath with effort distinctly submaximal, bu t 
of major proportion. Tasks performed without pause unless the 
task requires extraordinary effort that may be performed with 
pauses.  
_____ Grade 2  Moderate  Becomes short of breath with moderate effort. tasks performed 
with occasional pauses and requiring longer to complete than 
the average person   
_____ Grade 1  Light  Becomes short of breath with little effort tasks performed with 
little effort or more difficult tasks performed with frequent pauses and requiring 50- 100% longer to complete than the 
averag e person might require.  
_____ Grade 0  No effort  Becomes short of breath at rest, while sitting, or lying down.  
_____ W  Amount Uncertain  Patient’s exertional ability is impaired due to shortness of 
breath, but amount cannot be specified. Details are not  
sufficient to allow impairment to be categorized.  
_____ X  Unknown  Information unavailable regarding limitation of ef fort. 
_____ Y  Impaired for Reasons Other than 
Shortness of Breath.  For example, musculoske letal problems or chest pain.  
 
  
 
 6.6.5    Retrospective questionnaire assessing d yspnea during daily activity: MRC   
 Breathlessness scale.  
The MRC breathlessness questionnaire is a retrospective questionnaire assessing 
perceived dyspnea during activities of daily living ‘on a typical day’ over the past two 
weeks and will be assessed at V isits 2 and 3.  The score ranges from 0 to 5 with 
higher score representing worse dyspnea.31,32  
 
 
6.7 Stair -step Challenge.  
The Stair -step T est is a recognized clinical procedure used to measure cardiovascular fitness in 
adults aged 18 and up. The Bench Stepping Test has been adapted for children aged 5 -18 for 
the purposes of this study. It has been validated in other clinical studies designed to measure 
the effectiveness of exercise and/or dietary interventions to improve cardiovascular fitness and 
other clinical measures related to obesity.33,34 
6.7.1  Preparation for administration of Stair -step Test  
1. Ensure that all of the necessary materials are present. Study materials include a 
stable step, 8 risers, metronome, timer, pulse oximeter, and chair.  
2. Step Setup  
a. For ages 8- 9: Have child set one foot on the floor and one foot on the step and 
measure with protract or. Protractor should read between 20 and 30 degrees. 
Add/remove risers as necessary.  
b. For ages 10- 17: Set step on two risers (8 inches).  
c. If patient is ≥ 6’0”, have them place one foot on the floor and one on the riser and measure with protractor. Add/remove a riser until protractor reads between 20 
and 30 degrees.  
d. Patients over 300 lbs. do not complete the step test  
3. Set metronome to bea t at 96 beats per minute.  
4. Set timer for 3 minutes.  
5. Train the subject to complete the Step Test.  
a. In time with the metronome, the subject will step one foot onto the step (1st 
beat), step the second foot up (2nd step), step down with one food (3rd beat ), 
and step down with other food (4th beat).  
b. Allow a short rest before beginning test.  
6.7.2  Administering the Step Test  
• Measure baseline (at time 0) heart rate with pulse- oximetry before child begins 
 step test.  
• Have child step up and down step at 96 bpm for 3 minutes.  
• Assess dyspnea scores at minutes 1, 2 and 3, and post -1, post -2 and post -3. The MRC Breathlessness scale  
Grade  Degree of breath lessness related to activities  
0 No breathlessness even with strenuous exercise  
1 Not troubled by breathlessness except on strenuous exercise  
2 Short of breath when hurrying on the level or walking up a slight hill  
3 Walks slower than most people on t he level, stops after a mile or so, or stops after 15 
minutes walking at own pace  
4 Stops for breath after walking about 100 yards or after a few minutes on level ground  
5 Too breathless to leave the house, or breathless when undressing  
 
 • After 3 minutes, end the stepping and check child’s heart rate on pulse- oximetry 
(post -1). 
• Direct child to sit in chair for one minute, then check heart rate again (post -2). 
• Direct child to remain in chair for another minute, then check heart rate (post -3). 
6.7.3  Recording heart rate  and pulse oximetry  
a. Heart rate at baseline, post -1, post -2 and post -3. 
b. Pulse oximetry at baseline, post -1, post -2 and post -3. 
 
6.11 Specimen Preparation, Handling, Storage and Shipping  
No biological specimens will be collected.  
 
       
 
 7. STUDY PRODUCT DESCRIPTION  
7.1 Dosage and Study Intervention Information  
7.1.1  Dose of inspiratory muscle training  
Arm A: The intervention group will be required to achieve a pressu re target that is 75% 
of their MIP  for each repetition. Participants will perform 3 sets of 50 inspiratory breaths 
3 times per week.  
Arm B: The sham group will be required to achieve a pressure target that is 15% of 
their MIP  for each repetition.  Participa nts will perform 3 sets of 50 inspiratory breaths 3 
times per week.  
7.1.2  Formulation, packaging, and l abeling  
The PrO2™ is a flow -resistive device that provides inspiratory resistance via a fixed 
2mm orifice and has Bluetooth connectivity to most IOS/Android devices or 
Mac/Windows computers. The PrO2™ device and app allows for both 100% adherence 
monitoring and immediate user biofeedback . 
7.1.3  Product use and directions  
Participants will be instructed to inspire forcefully through PrO2™ until the device signals that the user has achieved the target resistance (via audible alarm and visible light 
signal). The research team can implement biofeedback signals at a specific inspiratory resistance, which allows for a precise and individualized training target.  
At Visit 1: Participa nts will download the PrO2™  Fit App from the Apple App Store  or 
Google Play. They will be shown how to set up their own PrO2 Fit account and how to connect with their PrO2 ™ trainer. Research staff will review the planned dosing to start 
after visi t 2. They will be instruct ed to try to avoid inferring what treatment assignment 
they have been given, and to not share any impressions they have developed on 
treatment assignment. The proper use of the trainer will be taught, including safe 
storage, cleaning and maintenance. Participants will be taught to create an air -tight seal 
over the mouthpiece after maximal exhalation. The participant will be instructed to 
breathe in forcefully until the device alarms then continue to maximal inspiration. At V isit 
1, participants will be taught on the device while the alarm is set for 15% of their MIP. 
They will complete a set of 50 repetitions supervised so their technique is assessed and re-direction can occur if needed.  
At Visit 2: participants will have refresher training on the use of the PrO2™  Fit app and 
will repeat their supervised single set of 50 repetitions while supervised to ensure they 
have the proper technique and the device is working properly.  
Research staff will encourage participant and guardian to discuss a plan to optimize 
adherence to the IMR intervention. This may include picking particular days of the week 
(e.g. MWF, TuThS) and particular activities to link with IMR (e.g. in mornings before 
school, evenings before homework, etc.). Guardians will  be asked to commit to helping 
the participant remember their intervention days.  
7.2 Accountability Procedures for the Study Product(s)  
The PrO2 ™ devices will be purchased and provided by PrO2 Health Inc.  
 
 8. ASSESSMENT OF SAFETY  
 Adverse Event  
All adverse events during the study period will be collected.   
An adverse event (AE)  is any untoward medical occurrence in humans, whether or not 
considered study drug-related, which occurs during the conduct of a clinical trial. Any change in 
clinical status, ECGs, routine labs, x -rays, physical examinations, etc. , that is considered 
clinically significant by the study investigator is considered an AE.  
An unexpected Adverse Event  is defined as any adverse event, the nature, specificity, or 
severity of which is not consi stent with the applicable product information (e.g., package 
insert/approved label) or investigational plan.  
A suspected adverse reaction  (SAR)  is any adverse event for which there is a reasonable 
possibility that the study intervention caused the adverse event. A reasonable possibility implies 
that there is evidence that the study intervention caused the event.  An adverse reaction  is any 
AE caused by the study intervention.  
 Guidelines for Assessing Association of an Adverse Event  
A serious adverse event (S AE) or serious suspected adverse reaction or serious 
adverse reaction as determined by the investigator or the sponsor is an adverse event  
or suspected adverse reaction that results in any of the following outcomes : 
• Death  
• Life-threatening AE (“life -threat ening” means that the study participant was, in the 
opinion of the investigator or sponsor, at immediate risk of death from the reaction as it 
occurred and required immediate intervention)  
• Persistent or significant incapacity or substantial disruption of the ability to conduct 
normal life functions  
• Inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization  
• Congenital abnormality or birth defect  
• Important medical event that may not result in one of the above outcomes, but may 
jeopardize the health of the study participant or require medical or surgical intervention 
to prevent one of the outcomes listed in the above definition of serious event  
 Guidelines for Assessing Intensity of an Adverse Event  
The investigator/delegate (defined as a clinici an licensed to make a diagnosis) should 
use the following definitions when assessing intensity of an adverse event:  
• Mild - Participant is aware of symptoms or has minor findings but tolerates them well, 
and no or minimal intervention required .  
• Moderate  - Participant experiences enough symptoms or findings to require 
intervention.   
• Severe - Participant experiences symptoms or findings that require significant 
intervention.   
 
 Guidelines for Assessing Causality  
The investigator/delegate (defined as a clinician licensed to make a diagnosis) will use 
the following question when assessing causality of an AE to study intervention:  Is there 
a reasonable possibility that the intervention caused the event? “Reasonable possibility” 
means that there is evidence to sugg est a causal relationship between the study 
 
 intervention and the AE. An affirmative answer designates the event as a suspected 
adverse reaction. The investigator/delegate (defined as a clinician licensed to make a 
diagnosis) must document their assessment of severity and causality in the participant 
records in a timely manner and submit safety reports as required by their  IRB/REB/IEC .  
 
 Collection Period and Reporting  Procedures  
Adverse event information will be gained from direct monitoring of the study participants as well as from clinician observation and self -reporting by the study 
participants. The investigator/delegate (defined as a clinician licensed to make a diagnosis) must document their assessment of intensity  and causality in the 
participant records in a timely manner and submit safety reports as required by their IRB. 
 
8.5.1  Adverse Events and Serious Adverse Events  
Adverse events (AEs) and SAEs will be reported from the time of consent through the end of study participation.  
Participants who hav e study intervention stopped due to a safety concern will be 
followed for an additional 7 days from the time the intervention was stopped.  
Adverse events (AEs) will be followed until resolution, even if this extends beyond the study -reporting period. Resol ution of an AE is defined as the return 
to pretreatment status or stabilization of the condition with the expectation that it will remain chronic.  
Adverse events (AEs) will be entered in the data system within 7 days of identification. Serious adverse events (SAEs) will be entered in the data system within 24 hours of identification.  
Any SAE entered in the EDC system will generate an automatic email notification to the DCC, BPCA medical monitor, and the sponsor. The BPCA medical monitor will review all SAEs  at the time they are reported. The 
investigator/delegate (defined as a clinician licensed to make a diagnosis) must document their assessment of severity and causality in the participant records in a timely manner and submit safety reports as required by their Institutional Review Board (IRB)/ Research Ethics Board (REB)/ Institutional Ethics Committee (IEC).  
8.5.2  Suspected Unexpected Serious Adverse Reactions (SUSARs)  
Serious, unexpected, suspected adverse reactions related to terbutaline sulfate will be  reported from the time of first study procedure through the end of study 
participation.  SUSARs can be elicited at any time during the defined study 
period. SUSARs will be entered in the data system within 24 hours of site awareness.  
 Event of Special Inte rest 
Not applicable.  
 
  
 Safety Interim Analysis  
No interim analysis is planned.  
 
 9. STUDY HALTING/TERMIN ATION  
9.1 Study  or Site  Halting/Termination  Criteria  
This study may  be terminated at any time by the study PI or sponsor . Reasons for 
termination include but are not limited to, if in their judgment, there are no further 
benefits to be achieved from the study, or, if the treatment presents an unreasonable and significant risk to participants. If the study is terminated, notifications will be made to the regulatory authorities , inves tigators, or study participants,  as appropriate,  in 
accordance with all applicable regulations governing the study and site/investigator.  
9.2 Halting Rules  
No halting rules are planned.  
Individual participant stopping criteria are outlined in the section above titled Study  
Investigator/Sponsor Decides to Withdraw Participant  
  
 
 10. STATISTICAL CONSIDER ATIONS  
10.1 Study Hypotheses  
Primary  Specific Aims: Compare measures of satisfaction, adherence and safety between 
patients randomized to IMR as c ompared to sham  to demonstrate IMR as an acceptable 
add-on intervention that promotes greater activity in children with obesity  with no safety 
concerns .  More satisfaction and adherence are expected in the IMR group compared to 
sham.  
• Hypothesis 1: More than 80% of participants will be satisfied with active IMR at study 
completion.  
• Hypothesis 2: Total  active  IMR adherence will be >80% of planned IMR repetitions.  
• Hypothesis 3: Active IMR will not be associated with any serious adverse reactions.  
Secondary A im:  Compare inspiratory strength (measured by mean change in MIP) in IMR 
versus sham participants  to demonstrate changes in inspiratory muscle functioning and 
dyspnea following IMR.  Also, to demonstrate changes in daily physical activity following IMR 
versus sham participants.  
• Hypothesis 1: IMR will significantly increase inspiratory strength (measured by mean 
change in MIP)  with more improvements in IMR compared to participants receiving 
sham .  
• Hypothesis 2: IMR will reduce patient -reported dyspnea scores  from activities of daily 
living and during the step test .  
• Hypothesis 3: IMR will lead to reduced sedentary time, increased moderate-
strenuous time and increased total daily activity measured by a wrist -worn 
continuous activity tracking monitor.  
Explorato ry Aim:  Demonstrate changes in exercise capacity following IMR versus sham 
participants.  
• Hypothesis 1: IMR will reduce the peak heart rate  increase induced by the step test  
in IMR compared to sham participants . 
10.2 Objectives and Endpoints 
Aim 1 : 
• Satisfac tion with  active  IMR (yes/no) as an intervention rated at study completion 
measured as a percentage of study completers.   
• Active IMR adherence measured as a percent age of planned IMR repetitions  
(completer status) .  
• Serious adverse events  (yes/no) measured  as a percentage of participants receiving 
at least one active IMR intervention.  
Aim 2 : 
• Change in maximum inspiratory pressure as measured by maximal inspiration in 
centimeters of water.  
• Change in dyspnea as measured retrospectively of activities of daily  living . 
• Change in sedentary time measured by mean daily sedentary time assessed by the 
Vivosmart 4 activity tracker.  
 
 • Change in moderate -strenuous physical activity time measured by the mean daily 
MVPA time assessed by the Vivosmart 4 activity tracker.  
• Change in total daily activity measured by mean daily step count and mean daily 
calorie expenditure.  
Aim 3 : 
• Change in heart rate during step test.  
 
10.3 Analysis Population  
All participants who are randomized and receive at least one IMR  intervention will be  included 
in the modified intention- to-treat (MITT) population.  
 
10.4 Timing of Analyses  
 The final analysis will be performed when the last recruited patient has completed Visit 3 and 
after the finalization and approval of the statistical analysis plan document. The final analysis 
will be performed on blinded data transferred to the lead statistician following data cleaning 
conducted by a study research coordinator. Data cleaning will include checking for missing 
data/extreme values and outliers.  
  
10.5 Missing Data  
 Missing at random will be judged based on tabulating missing Visit 3 primary outcome values 
by intervention group and demographic characteristics. If there is a substantial amount of 
missing data and missingness is considered to be not random,  sensitivity analyses utilizing 
worst -case /baseline scenarios or  imputation will be used for descriptive and inferential 
assessments to address attrition bias.  
 
10.6 Multiple Testing  
 Adjustment for multiple testing will not be performed given the explorat ory nature of 
this study.   
 
10.7 General Summary of Study Data  
Statistical analyses will be overseen by Dr. Cindy Green, a faculty member within the 
Department of Biostatistics & Bioinformatics at Duke. She will serve as the unblinded 
statistician and ov ersee the lead statistician.  
Patient disposition, demographics , baseline measurements, outcomes and adverse events will 
be summarized overall and by intervention group.  We will use standard summary statistics to 
describe the distribution of outcome measures  outlined in each aim  by intervention group 
including mean, standard deviation (SD), median, 25th and 75th percentiles (Q1-Q3) and range  
for continuous variables and frequency counts with percentages for non -missing data . We will 
assess distribution and  normality assumptions, identify outliers, evaluate missing data and 
check for unusual patterns. We will use SAS version 9.4 or higher (SAS Institute, Inc., Cary 
NC) for all analyses , and a two- sided p- value <0.05 will be considered statistically significant . 
Data derivations, calculations and analysis programs will be archived to allow future 
replication of our results.  
 
  
10.8 Subject Disposition   
Some withdrawal from the study is expected for various reasons. A CONSORT diagram will 
be used to describe the number of patients that reached the various stages of the trial and the 
number of participants that dropped out and for what reasons.  
 
10.9 Protocol Deviations   
Protocol deviations are expected to be minimal and will be summarized in tables by 
randomized i ntervention group.  
 
10.10  Efficacy Analyses   
Aim 1:   We will use exact  95% confidence intervals and Fisher’s exact test to report and 
compare  the expected satisfaction, adherence and SAE percentages within the IMR 
compared to the sham group.   
Aim 2:   We will use analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) to estimate and test the difference in 
mean 6 -week change between treatment groups (IMR versus Sham) for each outcome 
adjusting for the baseline value of the outcome variable.  Given the small sample size, sex 
(male /female), age, and BMI will each be evaluated in separate ANCOVA models. We will 
report adjusted (least squares) means with 95% confidence intervals (CI) for each group, as 
well as the estimated between- group difference in means with 95% CI and p- value for  testing 
the null hypothesis of no difference between group means. The model assumptions will be 
verified for each outcome, and model fit will be assessed using residual plots.  
   
10.11  Sample Size Considerations  
For pilot studies, determining the sample size based on power calculations is problematic and 
often not recommended35,36 due to problems of type II error and the inability for a small study 
to reject the null hypothesis.  Pilot sample sizes between 10- 16 per intervention arm37-39 are 
justified.  Our plan of 15 participants in each IMR arm is feasible given past HL recruitment 
success and will result in reasonably good power estimates as shown in ( Table 5). 
 Table 5 Statistical power based on effect size  
 Attrition  
 0% 6.7%  13.3%  20% 
Effect size  N=30  N=28  N=26  N=24  
Cohen’s d=0.75  0.509  0.480  0.451  0.420  
Cohen’s d=0.85  0.613  0.581  0.548  0.512  
Cohen’s d=0.95  0.709  0.677  0.642  0.604  
Cohen’s  d=1.05  0.793  0.762  0.729  0.691  
Cohen’s d=1.15  0.860  0.834  0.803  0.768  
Cohen’s d=1.25  0.910  0.889  0.864  0.833  
 
 11. ETHICS/PROTECTION OF  HUMAN PARTICIPANTS  
11.1  Informed Consent Process 
Informed consent is a process that is initiated prior to the partic ipant agreeing to 
participate in the study and continuing throughout the individual’s study participation.  
11.2  Permission from Participants  
Consent forms describing in detail the study intervention, study procedures, and risks 
are given to the participant and written documentation of informed consent is required prior to starting study specific procedures or intervention.  
Extensive discussion of risks and possible benefits of participation in this study will be provided to the participant. Consent forms w ill be IRB -approved, and the participant 
will be asked to read and review the document. Upon reviewing the document, the investigator will explain the research study to the participant and answer any questions that may arise.  The participant will provide c onsent prior to being enrolled in 
the study. The participant may withdraw consent at any time throughout the course of the study. A copy of the executed informed consent document will be given to the participants for his/her records. The rights and welfare of the participants will be 
protected by emphasizing to them that the quality of their medical care will not be adversely affected if they decline to participate in this study.  
The IND sponsor, or designee will provide the investigator, in writing, any new information that bears significantly on the participant’s risk to participating in the study. This new information will be communicated by the investigator to participants who consent to participate in the trial in accordance with IRB requirements. The i nformed 
consent document will be updated, and participants will be re- consented, if necessary. 
Site staff may employ IRB -approved recruitment efforts prior to the participant 
consenting; however, before any protocol -specific procedures are performed to 
determine protocol eligibility, an informed consent form must be executed. By 
providing informed consent, the participant agrees to complete all evaluations required by the trial, unless the participant withdraws voluntarily or is involuntarily withdrawn from the trial for any reason. Participants may be asked to authorize exchange of 
information between the study staff and their primary care provider and/or other significant medical providers.  
11.3  Documentation of Consent  
Consent must be documented using forms and processes determined by the Duke 
University Health System (DUHS) IRB.   
Prior to enrollment of participants into this trial, the protocol, the applicable informed consent 
template, and any materials or advertisements presented to participants will be reviewed and 
approved by the DUHS IRB. The consent templates  approved by DUHS IRB will then be 
provided to sites and revised as necessary to comply with local regulations and institutional 
requirements. Sites are required to submit all changes to the tem plates to the BPCA  DCC, 
which ensures compliance with US and international regulations and sponsor (NIH) policies, 
prior to submission and approval to the IRB/REB/IEC of record for each site. Notification of the 
IRB/REB/IEC 's approval, its composition, and the institution’s federal -wide assurance number 
(FWA) will be provided to the BPCA  DCC.  
 
 Should amendments to the protocol and consent  documents be required, the 
amendments will be written by the sponsor, approved by the DUHS IRB, and provided 
to the site  investigator for submission to the site’s IRB/REB/IEC of record.  
Participants may be compensated for their participation in this study. Compensation will be in accordance with the local IRB/REB/IEC’s policies and procedures and requires IRB/REB/IEC approv al, and must be documented in the consent forms .  
For non- English speakers, a fully translated consent or an oral presentation 
accompanied by a short form may be used to obtain informed consent. The fully translated consent and the short form must be approved by the site’s IRB of record 
and executed according to local requirements.  
Participants must be informed that participation is voluntary and that they may withdraw from the study at any time, without prejudice. A copy of the executed informed consent document will be given to the participant for their records.  
Site staff may employ IRB/REB/IEC -approved recruitment efforts prior to the 
participant consenting; however, before any protocol -specific procedures are 
performed to determine protocol eligibility,  informed consent or waiver of informed 
consent must be obtained. The informed consent process will be conducted and the form fully executed e.g., signed and dated, before the participant undergoes any study -specific procedures. The rights and welfare of t he participants will be protected 
by emphasizing to them that the quality of their medical care will not be adversely affected if they decline to participate in this study.  
The IND sponsor, or designee will provide the investigator, in writing, with any new information that bears significantly on the participants' risk to receive the 
investigational product. This new information will be communicated by the site investigator to participants who consent to participate in the trial in accordance with IRB/REB/I EC requirements. The informed consent document will be updated, and 
participants will be re- consented, if necessary.  
 
11.4  Confidentiality and Privacy 
All research activities will be conducted in as private a setting as possible.  
Participant confidentiali ty and privacy is strictly held in trust by the participating investigators, 
their staff, and the sponsor(s) and their agents. This confidentiality is extended to cover 
testing of biological samples and genetic tests in addition to the clinical information relating to 
participants. Therefore, the study protocol, documentation, data, and all other information 
generated will be held in strict confidence. No information concerning the study or the data 
will be released to any unauthorized third party without p rior written approval of the sponsor.  
The PI will ensure that the use and disclosure of protected health information obtained during 
a research study complies with the HIPAA Privacy Rule. The rule provides U.S. federal 
protection for the privacy of PHI by implementing standards to protect and guard against the 
misuse of individually identifiable health information of participants participating in clinical 
trials. Authorization is required from each research participant (i.e., specific permission 
granted by  an individual to a covered entity for the use or disclosure of an individual’s 
protected health information. A valid authorization must meet the implementation 
specifications under the HIPAA Privacy Rule. Authorization may be combined in the informed 
cons ent document (if approved by the IRB).  
 
 The study monitor, other authorized representatives of the sponsor, representatives of the 
IRB/REB/IEC, and regulatory agencies may inspect all documents and records required to be 
maintained by the investigator, incl uding but not limited to, medical records (office, clinic, or 
hospital) and pharmacy records for the participants in this study. The clinical study site will 
permit access to such records.  
The study participant’s contact information will be securely stored at each clinical site for 
internal use during the study. At the end of the study, all records will continue to be kept in a secure location for as long a period as dictated by the reviewing IRB/REB/IEC, Institutional 
policies, or sponsor requirements. Bot h the site PI and the Institution at which the study is 
contracted to be conducted, will hold responsibility to maintain custody of all study records until the sponsor permits their destruction.  
Study participant research data, which is for purposes of statistical analysis and scientific 
reporting, will be transmitted to and stored at the BPCA -DCC. Individual participants and their 
research data will be identified by a unique study identification number. The study data entry 
and study management systems used by clinical sites and by the BPCA -DCC research staff 
will be secured and password protected.  
To further protect the privacy of study participants, this study is covered by a Certificate of 
Confidentiality (CoC) from the N IH. The CoC limits the ability o f courts and other agencies 
from forcing the study team to share participant information or body fluids during a legal or 
legislative action without the participant’s permission.  
 
 12. DATA HANDLING AND RE CORD KEEPING  
The investigator is obligated to conduc t this study in accordance with U.S. Federal Regulation 21 
CFR 312.60- 69 as specified on the signed form FDA 1572, applicable state and federal laws, and 
the International Council for Harmoni sation : Good Clinical Practice : Consolidation Guideline. The 
investigator is responsible for informing the IRB /REB/IEC  of any safety issues related to the study 
and the study intervention,  including reports of serious adverse events, and all IND safety reports , 
as required by their IRB /REB/IEC . 
12.1  Data Handling  
The i nvestigator is responsible for ensuring the accuracy, completeness, legibility, and 
timeliness of the data reported.  Data collection forms will be derived from the eCRFs to record 
and maintain data for each participant  enrolled in the study.  All source doc uments should be 
completed in a neat, legible manner to ensure accurate interpretation of data.  Permanent ink 
is required to ensure clarity of reproduced copies.  When making a change or correction, the 
original entry should be crossed out with a single line, and the change should be initialed and 
dated.  Do not erase, overwrite, or use correction fluid or tape on the original.  
Data reported in the eCRF should be consistent with the data collection form/source 
documents , or the discrepancies should be documented.  The sponsor and/or its designee will 
provide guidance to investigators on making corrections to the data collection forms and eCRFs.  
12.2  Data Management Responsibilities  
All data collection forms and laboratory reports must be reviewed by the clini cal team and 
data entry staff, who will ensure that they are accurate and complete.  Adverse events must 
be graded, assessed for severity and causality  by a licensed clinician, and reviewed by the 
site principal investigator  or designee.  Data collection , management and quality review  is the 
responsibility of the clinical trial staff at the site under the supervision of the principal 
investigator . During the study, the investigator must maintain complete , current  and accurate 
documentation for the study.  
The unblinded and lead statistician will be responsible for the statistical  analys es, and 
reporting of the final study results . 
12.3  Data Capture Methods  
Clinical data (including AEs) will be entered into a 21 CFR Part 11- compliant web-based data 
capture  system (REDCap) . The data system includes password protection and internal 
quality checks, such as automatic range checks, to identify data that appear inconsistent, 
incomplete, or inaccurate.  Clinical data will be entered directly from the data collection 
forms/source documents . 
12.4  Types of Data  
Data for this study  will include safety , efficacy,  and outcome measures . 
12.5  Timing/Reports  
No interim analysis is planned, so the final report will serve as a summary of the study.  
12.6  Study Records Retention 
Study records and source documents will be kept until the child is 21 years of age.  The 
research data collected in this study will be kept indefinitely.  
The disposition date related to FDA application will be posted on the PTN website for the 
Investigator ’s reference.  
 
  
12.7  Protocol Deviations  
A protocol deviation is any noncompliance/unplanned excursion from approved 
investigational plan (e.g., protocol, MOP), or ICH GCP guidelines. The noncompliance may 
be on the part of the participant, investigator, o r site staff. As a result of deviations, 
corrective actions are to be developed by the site and implemented promptly. For this study, 
certain procedures  obtained out of window will not be considered protocol deviations in 
order to facilitate retention of participants for later study assessments but  will be tracked and 
reported to the sponsor.   
Each investigator must adhere to the investigational plan as detailed in the study protocol and/or associated study materials (e.g. MOPs, Forms Instructions, User Gui des etc.). Each 
investigator will be responsible for the training of delegated staff and enrolling only those 
participants who have satisfied all protocol eligibility criteria.  
It is the responsibility of the site to use continuous vigilance to identify and report deviations 
within 5 working days of identification of the protocol deviation or within 5 working days of 
the scheduled protocol -required activity. All deviations must be promptly reported to the 
sponsor, via the BPCA DCC’s Electronic Data Capture ( EDC)  system . 
All deviations from the protocol must be reported in the study records/data system . Protocol 
deviations must be submitted to the local IRB/REB/IEC per their guidelines. The site 
investigator and study staff are responsible for knowing and adhering to their IRB/REB/IEC 
requirements.
  
 
 14. REFERENCES  
1. Epstein LH, Roemmich JN, Paluch RA, Raynor HA. Influence of changes in sedentary 
behavior on energy and macronutrient intake in youth. Am J Clin Nutr. 2005;81(2):361 -366. 
2. Epstein LH, Valoski AM, Vara LS, et al. Effects of decreasing sedentary behavior and 
increasing activity on weight change in obese children. Health Psychol. 1995;14(2):109 -115. 
3. Skelton JA, Goff DC, Jr., Ip E, Beech BM. Attrition in a Multidisciplinary Pediatric Weight 
Management Clinic. Child Obes. 2011;7(3):185- 193. 
4. Spruit MA, Singh SJ, Garvey C, et al. An official American Thoracic Society/European Respiratory Society statement: key concepts and advances in pulmonary rehabilitation. Am 
J Respir Crit Care Med. 2013;188(8):e13 -64. 
5. HajGhanbari B, Yamabayashi C, Buna TR, et al. Effects of respiratory muscle training on 
performance in athletes: a systematic review with meta -analyses. J Strength Cond Res. 
2013;27(6):1643 -1663.  
6. Illi SK, Held U, Frank I , Spengler CM. Effect of respiratory muscle training on exercise 
performance in healthy individuals: a systematic review and meta -analysis. Sports Med. 
2012;42(8):707 -724. 
7. Karadalli MN, Bosnak -Guclu M, Camcioglu B, Kokturk N, Turktas H. Effects of Inspi ratory 
Muscle Training in Subjects With Sarcoidosis: A Randomized Controlled Clinical Trial. Respir Care. 2016;61(4):483- 494. 
8. Gonzalez -Saiz L, Fiuza- Luces C, Sanchis -Gomar F, et al. Benefits of skeletal -muscle 
exercise training in pulmonary arterial hypertension: The WHOLEi+12 trial. Int J Cardiol. 2017;231:277 -283. 
9. Neves LF, Reis MH, Plentz RD, Matte DL, Coronel CC, Sbruzzi G. Expiratory and expiratory plus inspiratory muscle training improves respiratory muscle strength in subjects with COPD: 
system atic review. Respir Care. 2014;59(9):1381- 1388.  
10. Houston BW, Mills N, Solis -Moya A. Inspiratory muscle training for cystic fibrosis. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev. 2013(11):CD006112.  
11. Jones HN, Crisp KD, Moss T, et al. Effects of respiratory muscle trai ning (RMT) in children 
with infantile -onset Pompe disease and respiratory muscle weakness. J Pediatr Rehabil 
Med. 2014;7(3):255- 265. 
12. Jones HN, Crisp KD, Robey RR, Case LE, Kravitz RM, Kishnani PS. Respiratory muscle 
training (RMT) in late -onset Pompe disease (LOPD): Effects of training and detraining. Mol 
Genet Metab. 2016;117(2):120 -128. 
13. Human A, Corten L, Jelsma J, Morrow B. Inspiratory muscle training for children and 
adolescents with neuromuscular diseases: A systematic review. Neuromuscul Disor d. 
2017;27(6):503 -517. 
14. Geddes EL, O'Brien K, Reid WD, Brooks D, Crowe J. Inspiratory muscle training in adults 
with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: an update of a systematic review. Respir Med. 
2008;102(12):1715 -1729.  
15. Gosselink R, De Vos J, van den Heuvel SP, Segers J, Decramer M, Kwakkel G. Impact of inspiratory muscle training in patients with COPD: what is the evidence? Eur Respir J. 
2011;37(2):416 -425. 
16. Holm P, Sattler A, Fregosi RF. Endurance training of respiratory muscles improves c ycling 
performance in fit young cyclists. BMC Physiol. 2004;4:9.  
17. Leddy JJ, Limprasertkul A, Patel S, et al. Isocapnic hyperpnea training improves 
performance in competitive male runners. Eur J Appl Physiol. 2007;99(6):665- 676. 
18. Verges S, Boutellier U, Spengler CM. Effect of respiratory muscle endurance training on respiratory sensations, respiratory control and exercise performance: a 15 -year experience. 
Respir Physiol Neurobiol. 2008;161(1):16 -22. 
 
 19. Karsten M, Ribeiro GS, Esquivel MS, Matte DL. The effects of inspiratory muscle training 
with linear workload devices on the sports performance and cardiopulmonary function of 
athletes: A systematic review and meta- analysis. Phys Ther Sport. 2018;34:92- 104. 
20. Frank I, Briggs R, Spengler CM. Respirator y muscles, exercise performance, and health in 
overweight and obese subjects. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2011;43(4):714 -727. 
21. Pasquale E, Neshteruk CD, Howard J, et al. An Integrated Clinic -Community Model to Treat 
Childhood Obesity: Revisiting 2 Years Later . Clin Pediatr (Phila). 2020;59(12):1092 -1096.  
22. Health D. Weight Management for Children and Teens. 
https://www.dukehealth.org/pediatric -treatments/childhood- obesity . Publ ished 2021. 
Accessed.  
23. Kieu NTV, Jung SJ, Shin SW, et al. The Validity of the YMCA 3- Minute Step Test for 
Estimating Maximal Oxygen Uptake in Healthy Korean and Vietnamese Adults. J Lifestyle 
Med. 2020;10(1):21- 29. 
24. Ricci PA, Cabiddu R, Jurgensen SP,  et al. Validation of the two- minute step test in obese 
with comorbibities and morbidly obese patients. Braz J Med Biol Res. 2019;52(9):e8402.  
25. Jachthuber Trub C, Balikcioglu M, Freemark M, et al. Impact of lifestyle Intervention on 
branched- chain amino acid catabolism and insulin sensitivity in adolescents with obesity. 
Endocrinol Diabetes Metab. 2021;4(3):e00250.  
26. McCann JR, Bihlmeyer NA, Roche K, et al. The Pediatric Obesity Microbiome and Metabolism Study (POMMS): Methods, Baseline Data, and Early  Insights. Obesity (Silver 
Spring). 2021;29(3):569- 578. 
27. Armstrong SC, Windom M, Bihlmeyer NA, et al. Rationale and design of "Hearts & Parks": 
study protocol for a pragmatic randomized clinical trial of an integrated clinic -community 
intervention to tr eat pediatric obesity. BMC Pediatr. 2020;20(1):308.  
28. Borg GA. Psychophysical bases of perceived exertion. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 
1982;14(5):377 -381. 
29. Johnson MJ, Close L, Gillon SC, et al. Use of the modified Borg scale and numerical rating 
scale to m easure chronic breathlessness: a pooled data analysis. Eur Respir J. 
2016;47(6):1861 -1864.  
30. Pianosi PT, Huebner M, Zhang Z, Turchetta A, McGrath PJ. Dalhousie Pictorial Scales 
Measuring Dyspnea and Perceived Exertion during Exercise for Children and Adolescents. 
Ann Am Thorac Soc. 2015;12(5):718 -726. 
31. Perez T, Burgel PR, Paillasseur JL, et al. Modified Medical Research Council scale vs 
Baseline Dyspnea Index to evaluate dyspnea in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Int J 
Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis.  2015;10:1663- 1672.  
32. Williams N. The MRC breathlessness scale. Occup Med (Lond). 2017;67(6):496 -497. 
33. Yin Z, Gutin B, Johnson MH, et al. An environmental approach to obesity prevention in children: Medical College of Georgia FitKid Project year 1 res ults. Obes Res. 
2005;13(12):2153 -2161.  
34. Gutin B, Yin Z, Johnson M, Barbeau P. Preliminary findings of the effect of a 3- year after -
school physical activity intervention on fitness and body fat: the Medical College of Georgia 
Fitkid Project. Int J Pediat r Obes. 2008;3 Suppl 1:3- 9. 
35. Arain M, Campbell MJ, Cooper CL, Lancaster GA. What is a pilot or feasibility study? A review of current practice and editorial policy. BMC Med Res Methodol. 2010;10:67.  
36. Thabane L, Ma J, Chu R, et al. A tutorial on pilot  studies: the what, why and how. BMC Med 
Res Methodol. 2010;10:1.  
37. SA. J. Sample size of 12 per group rule of thumb for a pilot study. Pharm Stat. 2005;4:287 -
291. 
38. Birkett MA, Day SJ. Internal pilot studies for estimating sample size. Stat Med. 1994; 13(23-
24):2455 -2463.  
39. Browne RH. On the use of a pilot sample for sample size determination. Stat Med. 
1995;14(17):1933 -1940.  