Consent Cover Page 
 
Official Title of the Study: Project Q Pilot: Smoking Cessa tion for Light Smokers  
Study ID: [REMOVED]  
Date IRB Approved: 1/17/2020  
ent to Participate in a Research Stud y Cons 
 
 
Form 
M0345 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
You are being asked to take part in this research  study because you smoke between one to ten cigarettes 
every day. Research studies are volun tary and include only people who c hoose to take part. Please read 
this consent form carefully and take your time making your decision. As st udy staff discusses this 
consent form with you, please ask him/her to explain any words or information that you do not clearly 
understand. We encourage you to talk with your family a nd friends before you decide to take part in this 
research study. The nature of the study, risks, inconveniences, discomforts, and other important 
information about the study are listed below. 
 
Please tell study staff if you are taki ng part in another research study. 
 
Dr. Kathryn Pollak will conduct the study and it is funded by Duke Can cer Institute. Portions of Dr. 
Kathryn Pollak’s research team’s sa laries will be paid  by this grant. 
 
WHY IS THIS STUDY BEING DONE? 
The purpose of this study is to test whether people find a new program helpful as they attempt to quit 
smoking. The study includes counseling and texti ng about your smoking and cravings to smoke. 
 
HOW MANY PEOPLE WILL TAKE PART IN THIS STUDY? 
Approximately 30 people will complete this study at Duke. 
 
WHAT IS INVOLVED IN THE STUDY? 
If you agree to be in this study, you will be asked to sign and date this consent form. To make sure the 
study is right for you, you will be asked to answer 
 Questions on the following: how often you smoke, use of other tobacco products, depression, 
anxiety, drug and alcohol use, wi llingness to attend all study visits. 
 
Depending on the results of the questions, you may not be eligible for the study. 
 
 
DUHS IRB 
IRB NUMBER: Pro00089760 
IRB REFERENCE DATE: 01/17/2020 
IRB EXPIRATION DATE: 02/01/2021  
 
Page 1 of 7 Subject Initials   
DUKE UNIVERSITY HEALTH SYSTEM  
Project Q Pilot 
If you are interested in learnin g more about this stud y, please continue readin g below. CONCISE SUMMARY 
This is a research study to test whether people w ho smoke less than 10 cigarettes per day find a new 
program helpful as they attempt to quit smoking. A possible benefit from being in this study is 
quitting smoking.  Participants have a 1 in 2 chance of receiving th e more intensive counseling. One group will receive 
support through text messages to stop smoking and counseling. The second group will receive text 
messaging support, counseling and studies in th e lab to examine what cues trigger smoking. 
Depending on the group, participants will be asked to come to Duke up to 6 times and also use their 
phones to text the study staff. Participants will  be in the study for about 4-6 weeks total. 
ent to Participate in a Research Stud y Cons
 
 
 
Form 
M0345 DUKE UNIVERSITY HEALTH SYSTEM  
 
Project Q Pilot 
Enrollment and randomization: If you sign the consent and pass scre ening criteria, you may be in the 
study. If you are in the study, we will assign you ( like flipping a coin) to one of two groups.  
 
We will ask you to pick a smoking quit date that is about one week afte r your first study visit (today). 
Also, we will ask you to attend up to six study visits (i ncluding today’s visit), ea ch lasting about 1 to 1.5 
hours. 
 
 Study Visit 1 will occur after you sign this consent form . We will ask you to answer questions 
and give us a sample of your breath to test  for a chemical called carbon monoxide, which comes 
from smoking cigarettes. We also will ask you to  talk to our study staff about your smoking and 
make plans to try to quit. We will provide instructions on how to send us text messages to help us learn about your smoking. We will ask you to pi ck a quit date that is within 1-2 weeks. 
 Real time smoking data collection . (Second group only) After Study Visit 1, we will ask that 
you text us every time you smoke for 4 days. We  will ask you a few questions about what is 
going on for you when you are smoking. We will also  ask you to take a picture of where you are 
each time you smoke for those 4 days. 
 Study Visit 2 will occur approximately 1 week after Vi sit 1. We will ask you to answer a few 
questions about your smoking and provide another breath sample. We will ask you to meet with 
someone to talk about your smoking and how your attempt to quit smoking is going. 
o If you are assigned to the second group, we will go over the summary of the information 
you texted about your smoking. 
o If you are assigned to the second group, we will show you a mix of your photos and 
photos we have related to smoking, as well as other items that may remind you of smoking (such as cigarettes, a lighter, etc.). You will not be able to smoke while viewing 
the photos or holding these objects. We w ill ask you to answer questions about your 
desire to smoke afterwards. 
 Between Visit 2 and Visit 3: We will send you one or two text messages a day to help you not 
smoke. We will also ask you to text the study wh en you are craving a cigarette or if you smoke 
and the study will text you to help you not smok e at that time and to ask you questions about 
craving and stress level. 
 Study Visit 3 will occur approximately 1 week after Vi sit 2. Study Visit 3 is exactly like Study 
Visit 2. We will ask you to answer a few que stions about your smoking and provide another 
breath sample. We will ask you to meet with so meone to talk about your smoking and how your 
attempt to quit smoking is going. 
o If you are assigned to the second group, we will show you a mix of your photos and 
photos we have related to smoking, as well as, other physical items that may remind you 
of smoking (i.e. cigarettes, a lighter, etc.). You will not be able to smoke while viewing 
the photos or holding these objects. We w ill ask you to answer questions about your 
desire to smoke afterwards. 
 Between Visit 3 and Visit 4. We will send you one or two text messages a day to help you not 
smoke. If you are assigned to the second group, you will be asked to text the study when you are craving a cigarette or if you smoke and the study w ill text you to help you not smoke at that time 
and to ask you questions about  craving and stress level. 
 Study Visit 4 will occur approximately1 week after Vi sit 3. We will ask you to answer a few 
questions about your smoking and pr ovide another breath sample. 
DUHS IRB 
IRB NUMBER: Pro00089760 IRB REFERENCE DATE: 01/17/2020 
IRB EXPIRATION DATE: 02/01/2021  
 
Page 2 of 7 Subject Initials   
ent to Participate in a Research Stud y Cons
 
 
 
Form 
M0345 DUKE UNIVERSITY HEALTH SYSTEM  
 
Project Q Pilot 
o If you are assigned to the first gr oup, this will be your last vis it. In addition to the items 
listed above, you will also be asked to provide a saliva sample.  
o If you are assigned to the second group, we w ill ask you to meet with someone to talk 
about your smoking and how your attempt to quit smoking is going. We will also show 
you a mix of your photos and photos we have  related to smoking, as well as, other 
physical items that may remind you of smoking (i .e. cigarettes, a light er, etc.). You will 
not be able to smoke while viewing the phot os or holding these objects. We will ask you 
to answer questions about your desire to smoke afterwards. 
 Between Visit 4 and Visit 5 (Second group only) . We will send you one or two text messages a 
day to help you not smoke. If you are assigned to  the second group, you will be asked to text the 
study when you are craving a cigarette or if you smoke and the study will text you to help you 
not smoke at that time and to ask you que stions about cravi ng and stress level. 
 Study Visit 5 will occur approximately1 week after Visi t 4. Only those in the second group will 
attend Study Visit 4. We will ask you to answer  a few questions about your smoking and provide 
another breath sample. We will ask you to meet  with someone to talk about your smoking and 
how your attempt to quit smoking is going. 
o If you are assigned to the second group, we will show you a mix of your photos and 
photos we have related to smoking, as well as, other physical items that may remind you 
of smoking (i.e. cigarettes, a lighter, etc.). You will not be able to smoke while viewing 
the photos or holding these objects. We w ill ask you to answer questions about your 
desire to smoke afterwards. 
 Between Visit 5 and Visit 6 (Second group only). We will send you one or two text messages a 
day to help you not smoke. If you are assigned to  the second group, you will be asked to text the 
study when you are craving a cigarette or if you smoke and the study will text you to help you 
not smoke at that time and to ask you que stions about cravi ng and stress level. 
 Visit 6 will occur approximately1 week after Visit 5 for those in the second group. We will ask 
you to answer a few questions about your smokin g, provide another breath sample and provide a 
saliva sample. We will ask you if we can contac t you to ask you for feedback on the study. If 
you agree, we will call you or m eet you in-person to hear about your experience in the study. 
 
We may call or text you between visits to remind you of  visits. However, please call us immediately if 
you have any questi ons or concerns. 
 
We may audio record some of your answers to the surveys and your counseling sessions. We will seek 
verbal permission from you to a udio record your answers at the time of the surveys. The audio 
recordings will be stored electronically on a password protected, encrypted computer that will be kept in 
a locked office at Duke University. The recordings  will not be shared with anyone outside of the 
research team. Once the study is complete, the audio r ecordings will be destroyed. You have the right to 
refuse to be audio-recorded, and it will not imp act your ability to participate in this study. 
 
HOW LONG WILL I BE IN THIS STUDY? 
Your entire study participati on, including follow-up, will last approximately 7 weeks. 
 
WHAT ARE THE RISKS OF THE STUDY? 
 
 
DUHS IRB 
IRB NUMBER: Pro00089760 
IRB REFERENCE DATE: 01/17/2020 
IRB EXPIRATION DATE: 02/01/2021  
 
Page 3 of 7 Subject Initials   
ent to Participate in a Research Stud y Cons
 
 
 
Form 
M0345 DUKE UNIVERSITY HEALTH SYSTEM  
 
Project Q Pilot 
There is the potential risk of loss of confidentiality. Every effort will  be made to keep your information 
confidential; however, this cannot be guaranteed. Some of  the questions we will ask you as part of this  
study may make you feel uncomfortable. You may refuse  to answer any of the questions and you may 
take a break at any time during the study. You may stop your participa tion in this study at any time. 
 
As a result of your participation in  this study, you are at risk for the side effects described below. You 
should discuss these side effects w ith the study doctor or physician as sistant, as well as your regular 
health care provider if you choose. 
 
Smoking Withdrawal: 
When quitting smoking you may experience some, all or  none of the withdrawal symptoms: headache, 
nausea, constipation or diarrhea, decrease in heart rate and blood pressure, fatigue, drowsiness, and 
insomnia, irritability, difficulty concentrating, anxiet y, depression, tobacco cravi ngs, increased desire for 
the taste of sweets, and/or increased hunger and caloric intake leading to weight gain. 
 
ARE THERE BENEFITS TO TAKI NG PART IN THE STUDY? 
If you agree to take part in this  study, there may be direct medical  benefit to you. A possible benefit 
from participation in this study is quitting smoking. We  hope that in the future the information learned 
from this study will benefit people that smoke in the future. 
 
WHAT ALTERNATIVES ARE THERE TO PARTICIPATION IN THIS STUDY? 
If you do not wish to participate in this study, there are othe r alternatives to treat  tobacco use. You can 
talk with your doctor about pres cription medicines that may help you quit (including Varenicline or 
Bupropion), or nicotine-replacement products offered out side of this study, both over-the-counter and by 
prescription. Information about these resources is  available through the No rth Carolina Tobacco Use 
Quit line at http://www.quitnownc.o rg or by calling (800) 784-8669. 
 
WILL MY INFORMATION BE KEPT CONFIDENTIAL? 
Participation in research can invol ve some loss of privacy. We will do our best to make sure that 
information about you is kept confidential, but we cannot guarantee total conf identiality. Your personal 
information may be viewed by individuals involved  in this research and may be seen by people 
including those collaborating, funding, and regul ating the study. We will share only the minimum 
necessary information to conduct th e research. Your personal informa tion may also be given out if 
required by law. 
 
The texting gateway system used for delivering the text messages to and from your cell phone will store 
the phone number you use for sending and receiving messages, along with the content of the text 
messages you will receive or send. These messages will only be about your smoking. The texting system 
will be managed by People Designs in Durham, NC. Once the study is over, we will destroy all text 
messages. 
 
In addition, your records may be reviewed to meet federal or state regulati ons. Reviewers may include 
the Duke Cancer Institute, the Duke  University Health System Institu tional Review Board, and others as 
appropriate. If any of these groups review your research r ecord, they may also need to review your 
entire medical record. 
 
DUHS IRB 
IRB NUMBER: Pro00089760 
IRB REFERENCE DATE: 01/17/2020 
IRB EXPIRATION DATE: 02/01/2021  
 
Page 4 of 7 Subject Initials   
ent to Participate in a Research Stud y Cons
 
 
 
Form 
M0345 DUKE UNIVERSITY HEALTH SYSTEM  
 
Project Q Pilot 
 
If this information is disclosed to outside reviewer s for audit purposes, it may be further disclosed by  
them and may not be covered by the federal privacy regulations. 
 
Results of tests and studies done sole ly for this research study and not  as part of your regular care will 
not be included in your medical record. Finally, you should understand that the investigator is not 
prevented from taking steps, including reporting to au thorities, to prev ent serious harm to yourself or 
others. 
 
The study results will be retained in  your research record for at least six years after the study is 
completed. At that time either the research inform ation not already in your medical record may be 
destroyed or information identifying you will be removed from such study results at DUHS. Any 
research information in your medical record will be kept indefinitely. 
 
While the information and data resulting from this study may be presented at scientific meetings or 
published in a scientific journal, your name or other personal information will not be revealed. 
 
Some people or groups who receive your health information might not have to follow the same privacy 
rules. Once your information is shared outside of DU HS, we cannot guarantee that  it will remain private. 
If you decide to share private information with anyone not invol ved in the study, the federal law 
designed to protect your health in formation privacy may no longer a pply to the information you have 
shared. Other laws may or may not protec t sharing of private health information. 
 
A description of this clinical  trial will be available on http://www.ClinicalTrials.gov , as required by U.S. 
Law. This Web site will not include information that can identify you. At most, the Web site will 
include a summary of the results. You can  search this Web site at any time.  
 
WHAT ARE THE COSTS TO YOU? 
There will be no additional costs to  you as a result of being in this st udy. However, routine medical care 
you would have received whether or not you were in th is study will be charged to you or your insurance 
company. You may wish to contact your insurance co mpany to discuss this further. We will monitor 
your DUHS patient care charges to make sure that costs are direct ed appropriately. If you have any 
questions or concerns about  appropriate billing, cont act your study team coordina tor so that he/she can 
help find a resolution. These tests an d studies are not a part of routin e care, and people who are not part 
of the study do not usually have them performed. Pl ease ask Dr. Pollak or th e study staff if you would 
like to know more about which te sts and studies are being done solely for research purposes. 
 
WHAT ABOUT COMPENSATION? 
You will be reimbursed up to $150 for your expenses related to your participation (parking, gas, and 
time). You will receive $50 for completing Visit 1. You will be compensated $100 at your final visit 
(either Visit 4 or Visit 6 depe nding on which group you are in). 
 
WHAT ABOUT RESEARCH RELATED INJURIES? 
Immediate necessary medical care is available at Duke University Medi cal Center in the event that you 
are injured as a result of your part icipation in this research study. However, there is no commitment by 
 
DUHS IRB 
IRB NUMBER: Pro00089760 
IRB REFERENCE DATE: 01/17/2020 
IRB EXPIRATION DATE: 02/01/2021  
 
Page 5 of 7 Subject Initials   
ent to Participate in a Research Stud y Cons
 
 
 
Form 
M0345 DUKE UNIVERSITY HEALTH SYSTEM  
 
Project Q Pilot 
Duke University, Duke University Health System, Inc., or your Duke physicians to provide monetary 
compensation or free medical care to you in the event of a study-related injury.  
 
For questions about the study or rese arch-related injury, contact Dr. Kathryn Pollak at (919) 681-4757 or 
the study coordinator, Shayna Clancy at (919) 6 81-4558 during regular business hours and Dr. Pollak at 
(919) 602-2485 after hours and on w eekends and holidays. You can reach Dr. James Davis, the study 
doctor, 24-hours a day at (608) 217-9405. 
 
WHAT ABOUT MY RIGHTS TO DECLINE P ARTICIPATION OR WITHDRAW FROM THE 
STUDY? 
Being in this trial is voluntary. If you do not sign this consent form, you will continue to receive care, 
but not as part of this study. You may choose not to be in the study, or , if you agree to be in the study, 
you may withdraw from the study at any time. However,  if you decide to stop pa rticipating in the study, 
we encourage you to talk to study staff first. If you withdraw from the study, no new data about you will 
be collected for study purposes unless the data concern an adverse even t (a bad effect) related to the 
study. If such an adverse event occurs, we ma y need to review your entire medical record. 
 
Your decision not to participate or to withdraw from  the study will not involve any penalty or loss of 
benefits to which you are entitled, and will not a ffect your access to health care at Duke. If you do 
decide to withdraw, we ask th at you contact Dr. Pollak in writi ng and let her know that you are 
withdrawing from the study. Her mailing addres s is 2424 Erwin Road, Suite 602, Durham, NC 27705. 
 
We will tell you about new information that may affect  your health, welfare, or willingness to stay in 
this study. 
 
Your doctor may decide to take you off this study if your condition gets worse, if you have serious side 
effects, or if your study doctor determines that it is no longer in your best in terest to continue. The 
sponsor or regulatory agencies may stop this study at any time without  your consent. Reasons why this 
might occur include difficulty in study recruitment or  retention that will significantly impact the ability 
to evaluate the study endpoints or any new information becomes available during the study that 
necessitates stopping the study. If this occurs, you w ill be notified and your study doctor will discuss 
other options with you. 
 
Your samples and/or data may be stored and shared  for future research without additional informed 
consent if identifiable private info rmation, such as your name and medical record number, are removed. 
If your identifying information is removed from your  samples or data, we will no longer be able to 
identify and destroy them. 
 
The use of your samples may result in commercial profit. You will not be compensated for the use of your samples other than what is described in this consent form. 
A description of this clinical  trial will be available on https://clinicaltrials.gov/ as required by U.S. Law 
(Study Registry ID: [REMOVED]). This Web site will not include information that can 
identify you. At most, the Web site will include a summ ary of the results. You can search this Web site 
at any time. 
 
 
DUHS IRB 
IRB NUMBER: Pro00089760 
IRB REFERENCE DATE: 01/17/2020 
IRB EXPIRATION DATE: 02/01/2021  
 
Page 6 of 7 Subject Initials   
ent to Participate in a Research Stud y Cons
 
 
 
Form 
M0345 DUKE UNIVERSITY HEALTH SYSTEM  
 
Project Q Pilot 
WHOM DO I CALL IF I HAVE QUESTIONS OR PROBLEMS? 
For questions about the study or a re search-related injury, or if you ha ve problems, concerns, questions 
or suggestions about the researc h, contact Dr. Kathryn Pollak at (919) 681-4757 during regular business 
hours and Dr. Pollak at (919) 602-2485 afte r hours and on weekends and holidays. 
 
For questions about your rights as a research participan t, or to discuss problems , concerns or suggestions 
related to the research, or to obt ain information or offer input about  the research, contact the Duke 
University Health System Institutional Re view Board (IRB) Office at (919) 668-5111. STATEMENT 
OF CONSENT 
"The purpose of this study, procedures  to be followed, risks and benef its have been explained to me. I 
have been allowed to ask questions, and my questions  have been answered to  my satisfaction. I have 
been told whom to contact if I ha ve questions, to discuss problems, c oncerns, or suggestions related to 
the research, or to obtain information or offer input a bout the research. I have r ead this consent form and 
agree to be in this study, with the understanding that I may withdraw at any time. I have been told that I 
will be given a signed and dated copy of this consent form." 
 
 
Signature of Subject Date Time 
 
 
Signature of Person Obtaining Consent Date Time 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
DUHS IRB 
IRB NUMBER: Pro00089760 
IRB REFERENCE DATE: 01/17/2020 
IRB EXPIRATION DATE: 02/01/2021  
 
Page 7 of 7 