Signed copy on file at IRB  v. 11/15/13  New York State Psychiatric Institute  
Institutional Review Board  
February 0 8, 2019 
To: Dr. Bret Rutherford  
From : Dr. Edward Nunes, IRB Co-Chair  
Dr. Agnes Whitaker, IRB Co -Chair  
Subject : Approval Notice : Continuation Expedited per 45CFR46.110(b)(1)(f)( 8c) 
Your protocol # 7270 entitled: A STUDY OF L-DOPA  FOR DEPRESSION  AND SLOWING IN OLDER
ADULTS  Protocol version date 02/08/2019 has been approved by the New York State Psychiatric 
Institute - Columbia University Department of Psychiatry Institutional Review Board from March 
07, 201 9 to March 06 , 2020 .  
Consent requirements:  
√Not applicable: Data Analysis Only
   45CFR46.11 6 (d) waiver of consent  
      Signature  by the person(s) obtaining consent is required to document the consent process  
      Documentation of an independent assessment of the participant’s capacity to consent is also 
required.  
Approved for recruitment of subjects who lack capacity to consent :  No  Yes   
Field Monitoring Requirements:   Routine Special: ___________________ 
  Only copies of consent documents that are currently approved by the IRB may be used to obtain 
consent for participation in this study.  
  A progress report and application for continuing review is required 2 months prior to the 
expiration date of IRB approval.  
  Changes to this research may not be initiated without the review and approval of the IRB except 
when necessary to eliminate imme diate hazards to participants.  
  All serious and/or unanticipated problems or events involving risks to subjects or others must be 
reported immediately to the IRB.  Please refer to the PI -IRB website at http://irb.nys pi.org  for 
Adverse Event Reporting Procedures and additional reporting requirements.    
Cc: RFMH Business Office ( NIMH R61 MH110029; CU Subcontract ) 
EN/AHW /alw 
Protocol Summary  Form
7270
Rutherford, Bret
Page 1 of 43
Protocol Title:
A Study of L-DOPA  for Depression and 
Slowing in Older Adults
Protocol Number:
7270
First Approval:
03/10/2016
Expiration Date:
03/06/2020Version Date:
02/08/2019
Clinic:
Adult and Late  Life  Depression
Contact Principal Investigator:
Bret Rutherford, MD
Email: brr8@columbia.edu
Telephone: 646 774 8660Co-Investigator(s):
Patrick Brown, PHD
Research Chief:
Davangere Devanand, MD
Cover Sheet
Choose ONE  option from  the following that is applicable to  your study
If you are creating  a new protocol, select "I am submitting a new protocol." As 5 Year Renewals are no 
longer required,  this option  remains  for historical  purposes.
I am submitting an  annual continuation  without modifications 
Division & Personnel
Division
What Division/Department does the  PI belong  to?
PsychiatryWithin the division/department, what Center  or group are you affiliated with, if  any? 
program on healthy aging and  late life brain  disorders
Unaffiliated Personnel
List investigators, if any,  who will be participating in this protocol but  are not affiliated with  New  York 
State Psychiatric  Institute or Columbia University. Provide: Full  Name, Degrees and Affiliation.
Dr. Anissa  Abi-Dargham  (SUNY  Stony Brook)
Protocol Summary Form
7270
Rutherford, Bret
Page 2  of 43
Dr. Mark  Slifstein (SUNY Stony Brook) 
Application for  Continuation of Research
Status
Current Status of Study: 
All research interventions were completed. Only data analysis is ongoing.
Summary of Experiences to Date
Please provide a summary of scientific progress of the study and the experience of research participants, to 
date. This requirement is designed to allow for the investigator and the IRB to reassess the study’s risks and 
benefits in terms of developments in the field, changing practice patterns, and new IRB policies and 
procedures.
36 subjects participated who were 75.3 ± 7.5 years old and 44.4% male. Significant, dose dependent 
increases in processing and gait speed were observed with L-DOPA (450mg dose: processing speed factor 
score effect size [ES] = 0.41, p = 0.001; dual task gait speed ES = 0.43, p = 0.003). [11C]raclopride ∆BPND 
was significantly different from 0 in sensorimotor (t = -4.85, df = 24, p < 0.001) and associative striatum (t 
= -2.52, df 24, p = 0.019) but not in limbic striatum (t = 0.265, df = 24, p = 0.793). Depressive symptoms 
decreased significantly on the Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression (ES = -0.4, p = 0.01). Drop-out rate 
was 8.3%, and nausea was the most frequently-reported side effect. By enhancing availability of dopamine, 
L-DOPA improved processing and gait speed in depressed older adults and significantly decreased 
[11C]raclopride binding in selected striatal subregions.
Funding
Have there been any changes in funding status since the prior approval? 
No
Have the principal investigator and other investigators made all required disclosures of financial interest in 
the study sponsor/product?
Yes
Summary
Have there been any study findings, recent literature, or untoward events occuring here or at other sites in 
the past year which might affect the analysis of the safety, risks or benefits of study participation? 
No
Have there been any serious adverse events (serious and/or unanticipated problems involving risks to 
subjects or others at this site which occured in the past year)? 
Yes
Please describe them and indicate resultant protocol modifications made. 
Patient #30. SAE reported to IRB on 3/14/2018. We have attached the SAE report to this submission. 
Protocol Summary Form
7270
Rutherford, Bret
Page 3  of 43
Protocol was modified as follows: we revised PET scan day procedures such that a research staff person will 
stay with the subject at all times throughout the procedure and during transportation to and from the PET 
Center.
Have all study staff with a significant role in the design or implementation of the human subject components 
of this study received required training in human research subject protections?
Yes
Is the study covered by a certificate of confidentiality? 
No
Overall Progress
Approved sample size
60
Total
 number of participants enrolled to date
47
Number of participants who have completed the study to date 
33
Have there been any significant deviations from the anticipated study recruitment, retention or completion 
estimates? 
No
Comments / additional information 
Overall Participant Drop-out Summary/Circumstances of Discontinuation:
Eleven (11) participants dropped out prior to taking any study medication:
- Nine  (9) participants dropped out after initial evaluation/signing study consent and were lost to follow-up; 
study staff was unable to reach them.
- Two (2) participants dropped out due to previously existing health conditions; One (1) the PMD did not 
approve participation in the study; One (1) was scheduled for back surgery and no longer wished to 
participate.
Three (3) participants dropped out after beginning clinical trial:
- Two  (2) participants dropped out at/prior to week two of the study due to medication intolerance (mild 
nausea and drowsiness)
- One  (1) participants dropped out at week two of the study due to flare up of previously existing, chronic 
health condition. Participant was cleared by PMD to remain in the study but did not wish to continue.
Total of fourteen (14) participant drop-outs
Sample Demographics
Specify population
Adults
 aged >60 years
Total number of participants enrolled from this population to date 
47
Protocol Summary Form
7270
Rutherford, Bret
Page 4  of 43
Gender, Racial and Ethnic Breakdown 
Male: 17
Female: 30
White: 26
African American: 17
Asian: 1
Other: 3
Hispanic: 8
Non-Hispanic: 39
Summary of Current Year's Enrollment and Drop-out 
Number of participants who signed consent in the past year
14
Did the investigator withdraw participants from the study? 
No
Did participants decide to discontinue study involvement? 
Yes
Circumstances of discontinuation:
Three (3) participants dropped out prior to taking any study medication:
- Two  (2) participants dropped out after initial evaluation/signing study consent and were lost to follow-up; 
study staff was unable to reach them.
- One  (1) participant dropped out due to previously existing health conditions; PMD did not approve 
participation in the study
One (1) participant dropped out after beginning clinical trial:
- One  (1) dropped out at week two of the study due to flare up of previously existing, chronic health 
condition. Was cleared by PMD to remain in the study but participant did not wish to continue.
Total of four (4) participant drop-outs in the past year 
Procedures
To create the protocol summary form, first indicate if this research will include any of the following 
procedures
   Psychiatric  Assessment
   Neuropsychological  Evaluation
Protocol Summary  Form
7270
Rutherford, Bret
Page 5 of 43
   PET/SPECT Scan
   MRI
   Off-label  Use of Drug or Device
Population
Indicate which  of the following populations  will be included  in this  research
   Adults  over 50
Research Support/Funding
Will an existing internal account be used to support the project?NoIs the project  externally funded  or is external funding planned?
YesSelect the number of external  sources of funding that  will be applicable to  this study
Funding Source #1
Is the PI  of the grant/contract the same  as the PI of the IRB protocol? 
YesSelect one of the followingThe grant/contract application is a pending review or a funding decisionSource of FundingFederalInstitute/AgencyNIMHGrant NameTargeting Dopaminergic Mechanisms of  Slowing  to Improve Late Life Depression
Grant NumberR61 MH110029Select one of the followingSingle SiteBusiness OfficeRFMHDoes the grant/contract involve a  subcontract? 
YesSubcontracted?ToName institution(s)Columbia University
Protocol Summary Form
7270
Rutherford, Bret
Page 6  of 43
Study Location
Indicate if the research is/will be conducted at any of the following
   NYSPI
This
 protocol describes research conducted by the PI at other facilities/locations
No
Lay Summary  of Proposed Research 
Lay Summary of Proposed Research
Individuals with Late Life Depression (LLD) often have cognitive problems, particularly problems with 
memory, attention, and problem solving, all of which contribute to antidepressant non-response. Our group 
and others have shown that decreased thinking speed is the central cause of functional problems in patients 
with LLD. Similarly, decreased walking speed is associated with depression and carries additional risk for 
falls, hospitalization, and death. Available evidence suggests that declining functionality in the brain's 
dopamine system contributes to age-related cognitive and motor slowing. The central hypothesis of this 
R61/R33 Phased Innovation Award is that by enhancing dopamine functioning in the brain and improving 
cognitive and motor slowing, administration of carbidopa/levodopa (L-DOPA) will improve depressive 
symptoms in older adults. 
This IRB protocol pertains to the R61 Phase of this grant proposal, and a separate IRB will be submitted 
subsequently for the R33 Phase. In the R61 Phase 60 adults aged > 60 years with (1) a DSM 5 depressive 
disorder, (2) significant depressive symptoms, (3) decreased thinking speed, and (4) decreased walking 
speed will receive 3 weeks of treatment with L-DOPA up to 450mg. We will test  whether L-DOPA 
increases brain dopamine release using neuroimaging and whether it speeds up thinking and walking speed. 
If L-DOPA treatment achieves these goals, we will proceed to compare the best-tolerated dose of L-DOPA 
to placebo in the R33 Phase. 
Data collected in the proposed studies may help identify a new treatment for LLD, which could have large 
public health ramifications given the prevalence, frequent treatment resistance, and chronicity characteristic 
of LLD. This project also will elucidate the neurobiology of slowing at molecular, structural, and functional 
levels of analysis, increasing our understanding of the interplay between these aging-associated processes 
and the pathophysiologic changes underlying late life neuropsychiatric disorders. Exploring patient 
characteristics that predict response to L-DOPA may provide useful information to guide differential 
therapeutics and develop personalized medicine for LLD. 
Background, Significance and  Rationale
Background, Significance and Rationale
LLD
 affects 3% of community-dwelling adults over 60 years old (1), and 15% of older adults have 
Protocol Summary  Form
7270
Rutherford, Bret
Page 7 of 43
clinically significant depressive symptoms  (2). LLD increases an  older  adult’s risk of disability  by 67-73% 
over 6 year follow up (26), causes  twice  the functional impairment compared to those without LLD  (27), 
increases mortality  in patients with heart disease,  and is associated  with  high rates  of completed suicide in  
individuals over 65 (28-29). LLD is highly recurrent, can become chronic (30), and is  often  difficult  to treat 
(31).Executive Dysfunction (ED) is common in patients with LLD, predicts poorer  acute  response to  
antidepressants, and is associated with higher relapse rates during the continuation phase (5,32-33). Among  
the executive functions disturbed in LLD, decreased processing speed has been called “the  core  cognitive 
deficit (8,34).” Processing  speed  mediates performance on measures of verbal reasoning, fluency, and 
knowledge (35), and measures of working memory primarily depend upon speed of processing (36). Decreased processing speed  has been repeatedly found in  patients with  LLD relative  to healthy controls (8) 
and mediates the effects of depression  and ED on daily functioning (7). The development  of decreased 
processing speed places older individuals on a trajectory of poor outcomes, including increased  risk of  
dementia (37), dependence in activities of daily  living (ADL) (38), and driving cessation (39). 
Less well recognized is the fact that depressed older adults also experience motor performance  deficits, 
including problems with coordination (14), slowed movement (15),  and difficulties  with balance and gait  
(16). Depressive symptoms lead to the development of decreased gait speed,  and slowed gait speed  leads  to 
incident depression in older adults (12-13).  Decreased gait  speed has been associated  with  a greater risk of 
falls (40-42), disability (14), admission to the hospital (16,43), and all-cause as well as cardiovascular 
mortality (44-45).  While LLD and  decreased gait speed are each  independent  risk factors  for adverse health 
outcomes, their comorbidity synergistically  increases  mortality risk in  older adults (46).  For these reasons 
gait speed has  become  a fifth “vital sign”  to be monitored in older adults, and  it merits increased attention 
by mental health specialists treating LLD.Post-mortem experiments and in vivo neuroimaging studies have  shown that  aging is associated  with 
reduced dopamine levels,  decreased D1/D2 receptor  density,  and loss of dopamine  transporters (DAT) (17-
21). Mesolimbic dopaminergic tone modulates processing speed in both humans and animal  models (47),  
and decreased striatal dopamine transmission has been associated with  decreased motor speed  (48), 
deterioration in frontal functioning (23),  and impaired balance (49).  Cham et al (2008) examined gait speed 
and dopamine  metabolism in healthy  adults  aged 21-85 years, finding that lower  striatal DAT activity was  
associated with  decreased  gait speed and explained 23% of the variance in gait  after controlling for other 
factors (50). These age-associated  declines in dopaminergic functioning are  topographically distinct from  
the denervation pattern typical  of Parkinson’s disease (PD), being observed diffusely across  the striatum 
rather than predominantly posterior  putaminal in location (51-3). While  subtle Parkinsonian-like  phenomena 
may be observed with normal aging,  the non-specific  slowing associated with  aging  is clinically  distinct 
from the signs and  symptoms of PD. Thus, the hypodopaminergic state associated with aging  and LLD has a 
distinct neurobiology  from PD  and appears to represent a parallel  pathway  to developing cognitive and 
motor deficits.Pharmacologic augmentation of dopaminergic neurotransmission may ameliorate slowing and  treat  LLD.  
Studies in non-human primates  as well as older  adults with  and without PD suggest that  dopamine  receptor 
agonism improves  working  memory  (54), verbal fluency (55), problem-solving (56), and motor 
performance related  to ADLs (57).  Since slowed processing speed and gait  predict the  development of LLD 
Protocol Summary  Form
7270
Rutherford, Bret
Page 8 of 43
and mediate a large  portion of the disability associated  with  LLD, it is reasonable  to hypothesize that 
improving slowing will positively impact LLD.  Multiple case series from the 1960s onward report  improved 
depressive symptoms (particularly psychomotor retardation) with  levodopa (hereafter referred to as L-
DOPA) monotherapy or augmentation (58-61).  L-DOPA is the immediate precursor of  dopamine, is 
converted to  dopamine in presynaptic dopaminergic nerve terminals, and enhances dopaminergic 
transmission in multiple brain regions.  L-DOPA has been reported to  relieve depressive symptoms  in new 
onset PD, improving symptoms in 90.3% of patients (N=31) and resulting  in a mean Hamilton Rating Scale 
for Depression  (HRSD) decrease of  11.7 points  in one study (62). Relatedly,  augmentation with 
methylphenidate, which  also increases  synaptic  dopamine levels,  was recently shown to  accelerate and 
enhance antidepressant response in depressed older adults (63).Despite these promising  results, negative studies of L-DOPA, stimulants, and  dopamine  agonists  as 
monotherapies and augmentation  agents for depression also have been reported  (64). One reason for these 
heterogeneous results is the different diagnostic criteria and experimental  methodology used  in older 
studies, which makes their results difficult  to interpret. More importantly, no study examining dopamine 
augmentation as  a treatment for  depression  selected subjects based upon the presence of decreased 
processing and  gait speed. If the mechanism  by which enhancing  synaptic  dopamine  relieves depressive 
symptoms is by improving slowing,  then  including patients without slowing may contribute to negative 
results. By focusing on the subgroup  of patients with LLD and slowing, we believe it will be  possible to  
more clearly  demonstrate the efficacy of dopaminergic  agents  and contribute to the development of 
personalized medicine for LLD.Three types of interventions may be considered  to enhance dopaminergic  function and ameliorate  slowing: 
dopamine receptor agonists (e.g., piribedil,  pramipexole, ropinirole), stimulants (methylphenidate and 
amphetamine derivatives), and dopamine precursors  such as L-DOPA.  Among these options, L-DOPA  
enhances dopaminergic  neurotransmission globally, including increasing vesicular  storage, enhancing 
release, and stimulating post-synaptic receptors.  In contrast, stimulants may not  increase  synaptic dopamine 
in individuals with diminished vesicular storage,  and dopamine  agonists may have reduced  effects in older 
patients having fewer post-synaptic receptors.  Moreover, a large literature shows beneficial  effects of L-
DOPA on cognitive  performance and gait  in patients with PD (65-67),  whereas the few available studies in 
elderly patients show minimal effects of  dopamine agonists (68-70) or stimulants (71) on cognition. L-
DOPA, especially at  lower doses, is a safe and  well-tolerated medication that  is difficult to  differentiate 
from placebo in terms of  side effects (72). In contrast, a black box warning for adverse  cardiac  effects exists 
for stimulants, and  even modest elevations in heart  rate and blood pressure may  significantly increase  
cardiac work  in older  patients.  Similarly, dopamine  agonists are associated  with  sleep attacks  and increased 
impulsive behavior.  For these reasons,  this proposal focuses on L-DOPA as  the safest,  most  promising 
pharmacologic agent for the treatment of slowing and LLD.This study  will elucidate  the neurobiology  of slowing and LLD, identify a  novel  therapeutic target for 
depression, and  contribute  to the development of personalized treatment  regimens  for LLD. The multimodal 
neuroimaging methods detailed in this application will provide information about the neurobiology of aging-associated slowing  and LLD at molecular,  structural, and functional levels  of analysis. These  data  will 
fill a crucial  gap in our knowledge regarding what are the physiologic and  functional consequences of 
dopamine depletion occurring across  the lifespan in individuals without PD. Results from this project also 
will allow us to evaluate a novel therapeutic approach to LLD, which could have large public health 
Protocol Summary Form
7270
Rutherford, Bret
Page 9  of 43
ramifications given the prevalence, frequent treatment resistance, and chronicity characteristic of LLD. 
Even apart from patients with LLD, cognitive and motor slowing exact a large public health burden in terms 
of impaired functioning and increased morbidity and mortality, and this burden will only grow as the 
population ages. It is critical to develop treatments capable of altering the negative health trajectories 
associated with slowing in order to help older adults maintain independent functioning and live longer with 
an increased quality of life. Finally, while PET and MRI may prove critical to understand the neurobiology 
of slowing and LLD, their invasiveness and expense limit their roles in informing treatment decisions in 
clinical practice settings. For this reason we are also assessing the influence of genetic moderators such as 
interleukin-6 (IL-6) and catechol-O-methyl-transferase (COMT) genotype on baseline dopamine 
functioning and response to L-DOPA. This may facilitate the identification of both high-risk individuals and 
those most likely to benefit from treatment interventions.
Specific Aims  and Hypotheses
Specific Aims and Hypotheses
We hypothesize that treatment with levodopa (L-DOPA) will improve depressive symptoms in LLD by 
enhancing striatal dopamine release and improving cognitive/motor slowing. In the R61 Phase, 60 adults 
aged > 60 years with (1) a DSM 5 depressive disorder, (2) significant depressive symptoms (CES-D > 10), 
(3) decreased processing speed (1 SD below age-adjusted norms on the Digit Symbol Test) and decreased 
gait speed (average walking speed over 15’ course < 1m/s) will be  receive 3 weeks of treatment with L-
DOPA up to 450mg. A 300mg test dose will be tested for engagement of molecular target by determining 
whether L-DOPA displaces [11C]-raclopride on positron emission tomography (PET). If L-DOPA increases 
dopamine release and improves slowing at our proposed thresholds, we will proceed to compare the dose of 
L-DOPA exhibiting optimal target engagement to placebo in a subsequent R33 Phase.
R61 Phase. 
Aim 1: To determine whether L-DOPA administration increases dopamine release. 
Hypothesis 1: 300mg L-DOPA will reduce [11C]-raclopride binding potential (BP) in the caudate and 
putamen.
Aim 2: To determine whether L-DOPA increases processing and gait speed in depressed older adults. 
Hypothesis 2: 150mg, 300mg, and 450mg L-DOPA will increase processing and gait speed, with greatest 
improvement occurring at the 450mg dosage level. 
Exploratory aims: To obtain information on the dosing and tolerability of L-DOPA in our patient population 
as well as identify PET and MRI biomarkers associated with slowing.
Protocol Summary Form
7270
Rutherford, Bret
Page 10  of 43
Description of Subject  Population
Sample #1
Specify subject population
adults aged >59 years with a depressive disorder, decreased processing speed, and decreased gait speed
Number of completers required to accomplish study aims
48
Projected number of subjects who will be enrolled to obtain required number of completers
60
Age range of subject population
60 years or older
Gender, Racial and Ethnic Breakdown
On the basis of previous depression studies conducted in the Adult and Late Life Depression Research 
Clinic, it is anticipated that the sample will be composed of 60% women and 40% men as well as 
approximately 75% Caucasian, 15% African American, and 10% Hispanic subjects.
On the basis of previous depression studies conducted in the Adult and Late Life Depression Research 
Clinic, it is anticipated that the sample will be composed of 60% women and 40% men.
Description of subject population
This phase will enroll 60 outpatients who (1) are aged ≥ 60 years, (2) diagnosed with Diagnostic and 
Statistical Manual (DSM) 5 (107) MDD, Dysthymia, or Depression Not Otherwise Specified (NOS), (3) 
have Center for Epidemiologic Studies-Depression Rating scale (CES-D) (108) score ≥ 10, (4) have 
decreased gait speed (defined as average walking speed over 15’ course < 1m/s), and (5) are willing to and 
capable of providing informed consent and complying with study procedures. 
Exclusion criteria are (1) diagnosis of substance abuse or dependence (excluding Tobacco Use Disorder) 
within the past 12 months, (2) history of psychosis, psychotic disorder, mania, or bipolar disorder, (3) 
diagnosis of probable Alzheimer’s Disease, Vascular Dementia, or PD, (4) Mini Mental Status Examination 
(MMSE) ≤  24 (109), (5) HRSD suicide item > 2 or Clinical Global Impressions (CGI)-Severity (110) score 
of 7 at baseline, (6) current or recent (within the past 4 weeks) treatment with antidepressants, 
antipsychotics, or mood stabilizers, (7) history of allergy, hypersensitivity reaction, or severe intolerance to 
L-DOPA, (8) any physical or intellectual disability adversely affecting ability to complete assessments, (9) 
acute, severe, or unstable medical or neurological illness, (10) mobility limiting osteoarthritis of any lower 
extremity joints, symptomatic lumbar spine disease, mobility limiting history of joint replacement surgery, 
or history of spine surgery, (11) having contraindication to MRI scanning (such as metal in body) or unable 
to tolerate the scanning procedures, (12) history of significant radioactivity exposure (nuclear medicine 
studies or occupational exposure), and (13) presence of a clinically significant brain abnormality, significant 
anemia, insulin dependent diabetes, a history of cardiovascular disease, or uncontrolled/untreated risk 
factors for coronary artery disease. 
Protocol Summary  Form
7270
Rutherford, Bret
Page 11 of 43
Recruitment Procedures
Describe settings where recruitment  will occur
We will be specifically recruiting via advertisements for patients who  feel depressed as well as  slowed down 
physically and mentally. Advertisements  will include  research flyers and  brochures posted around  CUMC, 
advertisements in local newspapers and on radio stations, information  posted on departmental websites,  
Facebook ads, and flyer mailings . For  direct clinical or research referrals,  a clinical staff member known  to 
the patient will  approach him/her and  raise the possibility  of study participation.  We would also like to  
implement Columbia University's RecruitMe website as a recruitment method.How and by whom  will subjects be approached  and/or recruited? 
If the patient expresses a potential interest  in participating,  he/she  will then be  scheduled for a full
evaluation with  a study clinician. The nature of the study will be thoroughly reviewed with  its risks,
benefits, and alternatives  to participation, and  subjects’ questions regarding the study will be answered.
Subjects will be  notified  that they may leave the study at any time. Informed consent will be obtained in  a 
private research  office.  A study clinician will review study procedures and the consent form with  each
potential participant.  Each  individual  may take  as much time as they like to decide  if they do or do not  wish 
to participate. The consent form  specifies  (and  the study coordinator emphasizes) that participation  is 
voluntary and withdrawal  after signing  consent will not affect future care.  Subjects will be  given a copy of
the consent  form, and the  original will become  part of the clinical  record.
How will the study be  advertised/publicized? 
Advertisements will include research flyers and brochures posted around  CUMC, advertisements in  local
newspapers and on radio stations, Facebook  ads, and information posted  on departmental websites. 
Advertisements will also include research flyers mailed out individuals whom will primarily come from consumer marketing databases, which are compiled using  public information surveys,  subscription 
information, home  owner information, and phone directory information.
Do you have ads/recruitment material requiring  review at this time? 
YesDoes this study involve a  clinical trial?
YesPlease provide the NCT Registration Number[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
Concurrent Research Studies
Will subjects in this  study participate in or be recruited from other studies? 
YesDescribe concurrent research  involvement
Subjects completing IRB #6836 (Rutherford PI) who meet the selection criteria  for this study will be offered 
participation. Additionally,  subjects  who are  currently  participating  in #7289R, #7409, #7360, #7489, and/or 
#7379 and meet  the selection criteria  for this study will be offered  participation. Only an investigator  not 
directly involved with an eligible  subject’s care will approach the subject to describe this protocol and  have 
an informed consent discussion.
Protocol Summary Form
7270
Rutherford, Bret
Page 12  of 43
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria
Name the subject group/sub sample
Patients
Create
 or insert table to describe the inclusion criteria and methods to ascertain them
 Criterion Method of 
Ascertainmen
t
1. Age >59 years 1. Interview
2. DSM 5 non-psychotic Major Depressive Disorder,
Dysthymia, or Depression Not Otherwise Specified2. Clinical
interview
 and 
SCID
3. Center for Epidemiological Studies Depression (CES-D)
Rating Scale >93. CES-D
4. decreased gait speed (defined as average walking speed
over 15’ course < 1m/s)4. timing of
walking
 speed
5. willing to and capable of providing informed consent and
complying with study procedures5. Clinical
interview
6. prefer not to be treated with a standard treatment for
MDD, Dysthymia, or Depression NOS (e.g., antidepressant 
medication or psychotherapy).6. Clinical
interview.
Create or insert table to describe the exclusion criteria and methods to ascertain them
 Criterion  Method of Ascertainment
1. diagnosis of
substance
 abuse 
or dependence 
(excluding 
Tobacco Use 
Disorder) 
within the past 
12 months1. Clinical interview and SCID
2. history of or
current
 
psychosis, 
psychotic 
disorder, mania, 
or bipolar 
disorder2. Clinical interview and SCID
3. diagnosis of  3. Clinical interview, MMSE for AD and VD. PD will be
Protocol Summary Form
7270
Rutherford, Bret
Page 13  of 43
probable 
Alzheimer’s
 
Disease, 
Vascular 
Dementia, or 
PDruled out by satisfying (1) and (2) and (3 or 4) below:
(1) patient gives no history of PD during clinical interview
(2) patient’s primary doctor gives no history of PD
(3) there are no signs of PD on  physical exam in the LLDC 
(e.g., absence of asymmetric resting tremor, decreased arm 
swing, soft voice, decreased facial  expression, difficulty 
rising from chair, dystonia)
(4) If a patient does have one or more signs of
possible PD on exam as per (3), Dr. Ted Huey
will come examine the patient and comment on whether PD 
can be ruled out or whether PD is possible and patient needs 
further neurologic work up. If Dr. Huey cannot conclusively 
make a determination, Dr. Pietro Mazzoni will
evaluate the patient and make the
determination.
4. Mini Mental
Status Exam 
(MMSE) < 254. MMSE
5. HRSD ≥  25
or the
presence of 
significant
suicide risk5. Clinical interview, HRSD
6. current or
recent
 (within 
the past 4 
weeks) 
treatment with 
antidepressants, 
antipsychotics, 
dopaminergic 
agents, or mood 
stabilizers6. Clinical interview
7. history of
allergy,
 
hypersensitivity 
reaction, or 
severe 
intolerance to 
L-DOPA7. Clinical interview
8. acute,
severe,
 or 
unstable 
medical or 8. Clinical interview, physical exam
Protocol Summary Form
7270
Rutherford, Bret
Page 14  of 43
neurological 
illness
9. mobility
limiting
 
osteoarthritis of 
any lower 
extremity 
joints, 
symptomatic 
lumbar spine 
disease, 
mobility 
limiting history 
of joint 
replacement 
surgery, or 
history of spine 
surgery9. Clinical interview, physical exam
FOR 
SUBJECTS
 
RECEIVING 
PET SCANS 
ONLY:
10. having
contraindicatio
n
 to MRI 
scanning (such 
as metal in 
body) or unable 
to tolerate the 
scanning 
procedures10. MRI safety screening form
11. history of
significant
 
radioactivity 
exposure 
(nuclear 
medicine 
studies or 
occupational 11. Clinical interview
Protocol Summary  Form
7270
Rutherford, Bret
Page 15 of 43
exposure)
Waiver of Consent/Authorization
Indicate if you are requesting any of the following consent waiversWaiver of consent for  use of records that include protected health information (a HIPAA waiver of 
Authorization) NoWaiver or alteration of consentNoWaiver of documentation of consent NoWaiver of parental consent No
Consent Procedures
Is eligibility screening  for this study conducted under a different IRB protocol?
YesIndicate NYSPI IRB # 6395RDescribe Study Consent ProceduresFollowing the study screening procedures, a  study clinician authorized to obtain patient consent will explain 
the study procedures along with the attendant risks, benefits, and alternatives, including the anticipated outcome of doing nothing. The study clinician  will then leave the room while the potential subject reads the 
consent form and return to answer  any questions the subject has. Subjects  who wish to  participate will sign 
the consent  form, while those who do not wish to participate will receive  appropriate referrals.
Indicate which of  the following are employed  as a part of screening or main  study consent  procedures
   Consent Form
Persons designated to discuss and document  consent
Select the names of persons designated  to obtain consent/assent
Broft, Allegra, MDNoRutherford, Bret, MDType in  the name(s)  not found in the  above  list
Protocol Summary Form
7270
Rutherford, Bret
Page 16  of 43
Study Procedures
Describe the procedures required for this study
 Evaluation
1. Every subject evaluated for this protocol will receive a clinical interview by a psychiatrist or
psychologist, be administered the Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale (CES-D) and the
24-item Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression (HRSD), and have a SCID performed by a trained
rater. If a subject has a diagnosis of Major Depressive Disorder (MDD) or Dysthymia, he/she will be 
informed of this and educated about the availability of treatments for depression. If a subject is not 
interested in depression treatment and/or prefers to begin with an experimental treatment for slowing and 
depression, he/she will be offered participation in the present study provided their HRSD < 25 and there is 
no suicidal ideation present. Severe MDD (i.e., HRSD ≥ 25) and/or the presence of significant suicide risk 
(e.g., suicidal ideation, clinician judgement that there is significant risk of suicide) are exclusions for this 
study.
Patients with Depression NOS will be educated that as yet, there are no FDA-approved treatments for their 
condition. Based on the extant data supporting the efficacy of antidepressants for MDD and Dysthymia, 
they will be informed that antidepressant treatment would be a very reasonable option for their condition. 
These potential subjects will be offered the option of being referred out for depression treatment, and it will 
be clarified that L-DOPA is not as yet a treatment for MDD. Thus, all potential participants in this study 
must state their preference not to be treated with a standard treatment for depression.
2. Participants signing informed consent will have documentation of vital signs, medical history (including
history of head injury, stroke, hypertension, cardiac disease, thyroid disease, other medical conditions, 
surgeries, hospitalizations, and current medications), physical exam, urine drug screen, CBC, chemistries 
and electrolytes, thyroid profile, vitamin B12 and folate levels, urine analysis, standing/supine 
systolic/diastolic BP, and ECG.
3. Next, processing speed will be assessed using Digit Symbol test from the WAIS-III, the Trail Making
Test Part A, the Pattern Comparison Test, and the Letter Comparison Test. Previous research established 
that these tests were all reliable and valid (moderate to high loadings on the latent speed factor). Digit 
Symbol or Trails A will be used as a selection  criterion, with patients included in this study if they scored 
0.5 SD below the age-adjusted norms on Digit Symbol or Trails A. A latent factor (and subsequent factor 
score) will be extracted from the 3-test battery pre- and post-treatment and used as the main outcome in this 
pilot study. By extracting a latent factor and factor loadings we will utilize a more pure measure of 
processing speed for pre- post-testing than if we used the raw scores from an individual test or a sum total 
score from the three raw scores combined.
4. Patients’ gait will be assessed as walking speed in m/s on a 15’ walking course. Patients are  instructed to
walk at their usual or normal speed for a total of 27’ (starting and ending at a point 6 feet prior to and after 
the 15’ course to eliminate acceleration and deceleration effects). Two trials will be completed, and gait 
speed will be based on the average of 2 trials. Gait speed will be used as a selection criterion, with patients 
included in this study if they have a gait speed < 1 m/s.
Protocol Summary Form
7270
Rutherford, Bret
Page 17  of 43
5. Subjects will return the following week to review the results of the above testing. If subjects continue to
be
 eligible for the study after review of their processing speed and gait speed, they will continue as below. 
Subjects who do not meet selection criteria after processing and gait speed measurement will be referred 
out.
MRI Scanning
6. Half of the total sample will  undergo neuroimaging (N=30 of total N=60). Subjects will undergo a pre-
treatment MRI and PET scan and a post-treatment MRI and PET scan (i.e., 2 total MRIs, 2 total PET scans, 
separated by the 3 week clinical trial). Subjects who do not meet imaging selection criteria or who do not 
wish to undergo scanning will be allowed to participate in the clinical trial portion of the study only. MRI 
and PET scanning may occur on the same day if this can be scheduled (MRI occurring first, followed by 
PET scan). However, due to the tightness of scheduling for these scanners, it is more likely that the MRI and 
PET scans will occur on different days--one day for MRI scan and one day for the PET scan. Typically the 
MRI scanning day will come before the PET scanning day.
7. MRI of the brain will be acquired using a GE MR750 3.0T System. At the start of the session, a 3-Plane
localizer (scout) will be acquired to determine patient position. Subjects will then receive T1-weighted 3D 
SPGR (Spoiled Gradient Echo), T2 FLAIR, and EPI scans. Acquisition parameters for the EPI scans will 
be: TE/TR (ms) 20/2000; Flip Angle (deg) 72o; in-plane resolution (voxels) 112x112; slice thickness/gap 
(mm) 3/0; slices 41. 
8. For the MRI procedures, participants are instructed to lie as still as possible within the magnet.
The MRI scan is completed in one session, and lasts for a total of 60 minutes. All precautions and 
protections are given to the participant to ensure that they are as safe and as comfortable as possible. For 
participants’ comfort within the scanner, they lie on a padded table with a pillow to rest their heads on. A 
blanket is also provided to keep participants warm during the procedure. If the participant appears
nervous or anxious, a trained member of the research staff remains with them inside the scanning
suite for the duration of the scan. The participant is given a squeeze ball to terminate the scan at
any time. If he/she squeezes the ball, he/she will be removed from the scanner immediately.
Participants may decline the MRI scans at any time. If the participant chooses not to be scanned,
his/her participation in the study will not be affected. Of course, a structural MRI scan would be
required to participate in the PET scans. Any subject who cannot have at least a structural MRI
scan would not be able to participate in this protocol. All of the MRI procedures are conducted on
the 3-Tesla MRI scanner at the New York State Psychiatric Institute. Conducting these procedures
will be an accredited Magnetic Resonance Technologist and one member of the research staff
(Bachelor’s Level or Higher), or Dr Rutherford or Broft, present. 
PET Scanning
9. The neuroimaging subset of depressed subjects will have 2 [11C]-raclopride PET scans: (1) pre-treatment
and (2) post-treatment (at the end of the 3 week duration trial).
Protocol Summary  Form
7270
Rutherford, Bret
Page 18 of 43
10. PET experiments  will be conducted with the mCT scanner in the PET  Suite on the R1 level of the Public 
Health Building.  Subjects participating in the study will  be escorted on PET  scan  day by a research staff 
member to the R1  level of  the Public Health Building where the PET scanner  is located. A research staff 
person will stay with the  subject at all times throughout the procedure  and during transportation to  and from 
the PET Center.  The preparation of the subject will include the placement of a venous catheter. 
 
11. The radiochemistry  laboratory and  PET suite staff will be in frequent communication  regarding the 
status of preparation of  the research subject (such as placement of  venous line)  and the progress of the 
radiotracer synthesis. As  scan time approaches, the subject will be  placed  in a supine  position on the camera 
table and will  have vital  signs (blood pressure  and heart rate) obtained. Head will be positioned  and a  
headholder will be  used to decrease head movement during  the scan. 
 
12. Baseline scan: A low dose CT transmission scan is then obtained prior [11C] raclopride administration. At the end of  the transmission scan, a  maximum of 14 mCi of [11C] raclopride will be injected 
intravenously. The dose of [11C] raclopride, diluted in a 10 cc syringe, will be given as a  single bolus over  a 
period of 30 seconds. [11C] raclopride  will be  prepared by the central radio-ligand staff  of the PET Center 
and will be administered by an approved Nuclear Medicine physician (Drs. Arif Sheikh,  Esther  Coronel, or 
Randy Yeh). Study  physicians will  be present  for all radiotracer  injections. All  study physicians  have New  
York State Medical license and have  had extensive  training and  experience with  these types of PET studies. 
[11C] raclopride will be synthesized  and tested for purity and sterility  according to  our standard procedure. 
The injected dose of  [11C]-raclopride for each  scan will not
exceed 14 mCi,  and lower amounts will be permitted. The study physician or Nuclear Medicine physician 
will evaluate the  reconstructed PET image in order to ensure  tracer uptake in  the brain and  will inform the  
radiochemist if there is a  lack of expected  uptake in the brain. All subjects  will be  monitored by the study 
physician at the time of injection  and a study physician or nurse will be present in  the PET  suite. 
 
13. Post-treatment scan: As close to the end  of the 3 week study as possible (based on PET scheduling),  
subjects will undergo  their post treatment scan.  We will follow  standard procedures for measuring L-
DOPA-induced changes in synaptic dopamine  levels set forth  in PET studies of PD patients. Subjects will 
be given 75mg carbidopa/300mg L-DOPA approximately 1.5 hours  before scanning. Subjects in  week 3 of 
the protocol are  taking  450mg LDOPA per  day (150mg  three  times daily), so the 300mg administered prior 
to the post-treatment  PET scan will constitute 300mg of their usual  450mg daily  dose  on the scan  day. A 
low dose  CT transmission scan is obtained  prior to intravenous administration of 14mCi [11C] raclopride 
(or less). The  start of tracer  injection  will be timed  to coincide with the time of onset of L-DOPA effects 
(approximately 60-90 minutes following oral dose). Thus, the 60 minute PET scanning session will occur from 90 minutes  to 150 minutes following L-DOPA  dosing in all subjects. At the completion of the scan the 
IV catheter will  be removed, and the subject  will be evaluated (including mental  status and vital signs) by a 
study physician. Vital  signs, and physical  exam  will be performed prior to  discharge from  the PET  suite.
 
14. We are aware that the scanning dose  of 300mg given at once approximates but may not match  the CNS 
effects of subchronic dosing with 150mg tid. However, this method has the advantages of being consistent  
with imaging studies of  PD patients in which  L-DOPA doses  are typically 250-300mg  and avoiding 
confounding of ∆BPND estimates  by downregulation of D2 receptors occurring with subchronic  
administration. Since  nausea is a known side  effect  of L-DOPA, we will be particularly vigilant about 
monitoring for it. When nausea  occurs  patients generally feel warm  and sick to  their stomachs. It  will likely 
Protocol Summary Form
7270
Rutherford, Bret
Page 19  of 43
occur after PET scanning, but if vomiting were necessary, the MD would remove the subject from the 
scanner so that vomiting does not occur while supine. Removal from the scanner can occur immediately.
15. PET data will be reconstructed into images using the appropriate reconstruction protocols and
filters. PET images will be coregistered to the MRI and regional time activity curves will be measured.
Data will be fitted to pharmacokinetic models, and relevant pharmacokinetic parameters, including
the percent of receptors engaged by dopamine, will be estimated based on the model fitting
procedures.
16. Drs. Abi-Dargham and Slifstein continue to be Co-Investigators responsible for neuroimaging as part of
a
 subcontract executed between RFMH and SUNY-Stony Brook. They will lead analyses of neuroimaging 
data. In terms of on-site execution of PET and MRI scans, these are supervised by the study PI (Bret 
Rutherford) and/or Dr. Allegra Broft, who works with the Aging Program as a study clinician and has a 
research background in PET neuroimaging. 
Clinical treatment
16. An effort will  be made for all subjects to be titrated up to 450mg L-DOPA over a 3 week-duration study.
We chose 450mg as the target dose because it is higher than doses known to affect cognition (i.e., 150-
300mg) but lower than levels used for PD (i.e., 600-1200mg) that may have greater side effects. Each 
subject will start taking 37.5mg carbidopa/150 mg levodopa (1.5 25/100 sinemet tablets) once daily for one 
week, then increase to 75mg carbidopa/300mg levodopa (1.5 25/100 sinemet tablets twice daily) for one 
week, and finally increase to 112.5mg carbidopa/450mg levodopa (1.5 25/100 sinemet tablets three times 
daily) for one week. Each subject will be titrated to 450mg L-DOPA unless they cannot tolerate higher 
doses, in which case subjects will have their dosage reduced to the maximum tolerable dose.
17. Although each subject is titrated up to 450mg L-DOPA if it is tolerated, the study design allows us to
assess the effects and tolerability of three different L-DOPA doses (150mg, 300mg, and 450mg). Based on 
published work using L-DOPA for PD, we expect effects on cognition and gait to be apparent at each 
dosing level approximately 5 days after dosage increases. By performing assessments weekly, we will thus 
obtain measures of L-DOPA’s effect on processing and gait speed at each dosing level. We carefully 
reviewed the literature and consulted our Co-Investigator Dr. Pietro Mazzoni (neurologist and PD expert) 
for evidence of carry-over effects of L-DOPA dosing (such that prior experience with 150mg and 300mg 
may influence a subject’s experience of receiving 450mg). We found little evidence to suggest there are 
significant carry-over effects from previous L-DOPA doses, so each dose will be able to be assessed on its 
own merits. Similarly, we do not anticipate that the repeated assessments of processing and gait speeds will 
bias the study results.
18. In selecting L-DOPA doses, we balanced appropriate safety concerns regarding the use of this
medication in a novel patient population with the goal of causing a measurable effect. L-DOPA is an 
extremely well tolerated medication at doses < 600mg, which is substantially less than the doses often 
reached in the treatment of Parkinson’s disease (900-1200mg). L-DOPA has been administered to healthy 
subjects in single dose studies and found to be well-tolerated. In Parkinson’s disease, a recent clinical trial 
published in the New England Journal of Medicine randomized patients to receive 150mg, 300mg, or 
600mg L-DOPA for 40 weeks. In the 150mg and 300mg L-DOPA treatment groups, the only side effects 
Protocol Summary Form
7270
Rutherford, Bret
Page 20  of 43
observed that were different from placebo were headache and nausea. No dyskinesias or other 
neuropsychiatric effects were observed that were greater than the placebo group. In terms of effects, single-
dose studies have reported significant effects on cognition and neural activation with L-DOPA doses as low 
as 100mg. Thus, we believe the 150-450mg dose range to be used in this study will be both safe and likely 
to produce an observable effect.
Assessments
19. Subjects are expected to have a screening/evaluation visit, PET/MRI scanning day (for those receiving
imaging), and weekly visits from Week 0-3. 
20. At baseline, we will record each subject’s chief complaint, referral source, age of onset of mood and/or
cognitive decline, number prior depressive episodes, age, sex, marital status, race and ethnicity, years of 
education, employment status and income, years of education, family history. We also will document 
medical history, physical exam, urine drug screen, CBC, chemistries and electrolytes, thyroid profile, 
vitamin B12 and folate levels, urine analysis, and ECG. Vital signs will be measured at baseline and 
monitored weekly throughout the study. The Cumulative Illness Rating Scale-Geriatric (CIRS-G) (112) will 
be filled out at baseline to measure chronic medical illness burden. Subjects’ current physical pain will be 
assessed weekly using a 100mm Pain Visual Analog Scale (VAS) and used as a covariate in analyses of gait 
speed (113).
21. The following measures will be collected weekly throughout the study: 24-item HRSD, CGI Severity
and Improvement, Structured Pill Count Interview, Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) 
(questions 32 and 33 will be used in this study to assess the duration and disability of dyskinesias caused by 
L-DOPA), Treatment Emergent Side Effect Scale, and Inventory of Depressive Symptoms—Self Report 
(IDS-SR). 
22. In addition, processing and gait speed assessments will be performed weekly at 1pm to control for time
of day effects and the duration since the last morning L-DOPA dose (anticipated to be 4 hours). Processing 
speed will be assessed using the Digit Symbol test from the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale-III (WAIS-
III) (119) and the Pattern and Letter Comparison tests (120). These tests are all reliable and valid, with 
moderate to high loadings on the latent speed factor. A latent factor (and subsequent factor score) will be 
extracted from the 3-test battery pre- and post-treatment and used as the main outcome in the R61. By 
extracting a latent factor and factor loadings we will utilize a more pure measure of processing speed than if 
we used the raw scores from an individual test or a sum total score from the three raw scores combined 
(121-124). 
23. Gait will be assessed as both a single and dual task (ST, DT) on a 15' walking course in the LLDC. For
the ST, patients are instructed to walk at their usual or normal speed over the 15’ walking course. For the 
DT, patients are instructed to walk at their usual pace while simultaneously verbally listing as many animals 
as possible (fluency DT). In addition, a counting DT will be used in which patients are instructed to walk at 
their usual pace while simultaneously performing serial subtractions by threes starting at 100 (125). Patients 
will start and end at a point 2 meters from beginning of the 15' course to eliminate acceleration and 
deceleration effects. Each ST and DT will be assessed two times with the average used in the analyses. The 
ST assessment of walking speed in m/s will be used as the primary outcome measure for this study.
Protocol Summary Form
7270
Rutherford, Bret
Page 21  of 43
End of study procedures
24. Following the 3 week duration treatment study, endpoint assessments will be made. Patients will enter 3
month open treatment period provided free of charge as described below.
You can upload charts or diagrams if any
Criteria for  Early Discontinuation  
Criteria for Early Discontinuation
The risk of non-response or adverse events to L-DOPA during the study period is addressed by having close 
clinical follow up of study subjects and stringent withdrawal criteria. These criteria are (1) participant 
withdraws his or her consent; (2) significant clinical worsening as defined by a slowing assessment rating 
using the CGI-Improvement scale of 6 (worse) or 7 (much worse) for 2 consecutive visits; or (3) 
development of significant side effects or an adverse event. Any subjects meeting any of these criteria will 
be withdrawn from the study and treated clinically. Furthermore, subjects may be withdrawn if they 
repeatedly miss scheduled appointments or clinical worsening necessitates more intensive treatment. No 
treatment is currently available for slowing, so there is not a standard of care treatment to offer patients 
withdrawn from the study. Thus, withdrawn patients will be followed in the open treatment period, offered 
appropriate psychiatric treatments if they have any conditions requiring treatment (e.g., depression), and be 
referred to their internist for close medical follow up.
Blood and  other Biological Samples
Please create or insert a table describing the proposed collection of blood or other biological specimens
A 20cc blood sample will be drawn at baseline. General medical tests will be performed, such as CBC,
Chem 7, LFTs, TSH, cholesterol, B12, and folate.
Assessment Instruments
Create a table or give a brief description of the instruments that will be used for assessment
Structured Clinical Interview Diagnostic for DSM 5 (SCID) (114): this semi-structured diagnostic interview 
will allow determination of whether subjects meet selection criteria. 
Center for Epidemiologic Studies—Depression Scale (CES-D): depression screening measure chosen given 
its ease of administration and wide use in epidemiological studies. 
Protocol Summary Form
7270
Rutherford, Bret
Page 22  of 43
MMSE: standard means of assessing global cognition. The SCID, CES-D, and MMSE will be measured at 
baseline for the purpose of subject selection, while the following measures will be collected weekly 
throughout the study. 
24-item HRSD (115): standard measure of depression severity that measures changes in depressive 
symptoms, though L-DOPA effects on depression are not the focus of the R61 Phase. 
CGI Severity and Improvement: scales measuring the clinician’s view of subjects’ global functioning that 
will provide a clinical assessment of subjects at each visit and help maintain safety by identifying clinical 
worsening. 
Structured Pill Count Interview: assessment of study medication compliance accounting for each dose of 
prescribed
 study medication during the study period. 
Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) (116): standardized, reliable, and valid instrument for 
assessing the severity of the clinical features of PD; questions 32 and 33 will be used in this study to assess 
the duration and disability of dyskinesias caused by L-DOPA. While we include this measure, we are not 
expecting to observe dyskinesias in healthy subjects or at the L-DOPA doses being used in this study. 
Typically, such L-DOPA side effects emerge only in patients who have had Parkinson’s disease for a 
number of years and then only if the LDOPA dose is raised to 600 mg or more. 
Treatment Emergent Side Effect Scale: standardized general checklist used in our clinic for monitoring side 
effects associated with medication treatment. 
Inventory of Depressive Symptoms—Self Report (IDS-SR) (117): rating scale for depressive symptoms 
based on DSM criteria that has been increasingly used in antidepressant studies due to its equivalent 
weightings for each item, understandable anchor points, and inclusion of all DSM criteria (118).
Please attach copies, unless standard instruments are used
Off label  and investigational use of drugs/devices
Choose from the following that will be applicable to your study 
   Drug
   Radiolabeled  drug/compound
Select the number of drugs used in this study
1
Drug #1
Name of the drug 
carbidopa-levodopa
Protocol Summary  Form
7270
Rutherford, Bret
Page 23 of 43
Manufacturer and other informationWe will be using generic sinemet 25/100 tablets  in this study. We will purchase them through the pharmacy, 
using whichever generic  manufacturer is  recommended  by the NYSPI  pharmacy.
L-DOPA is currently  approved by the  Food  and Drug Administration  (FDA) for the treatment of the
symptoms of  idiopathic Parkinson's  disease, post-encephalitic parkinsonism, and symptomatic
parkinsonism. This project proposes off-label use of  L-DOPA in individuals with  significant
cognitive/motor slowing.  When we submitted an  NIMH grant application Oct  2014 for  this study, we
contacted the Division  of Neurology Products at the  FDA to  inquire whether an IND was  required  for 
LDOPA use in this project. We had a  phone conversation with  Cathleen Michaloski  (Sr. Regulatory Project 
Manager, Division of  Neurology Products), during which she listened to our description of the study 
methods and stated that an IND was  not required. She later sent us an email after discussion with Dr. David 
Podskalny (Team Leader, Division of Neurology  Products)  confirming  that in their  assessment an IND was 
not needed for a project such as this. Text of email  follows:
 
Dear Dr.  Brown [Co-Investigator on submission],  
Thank you for  your  time by phone. As we discussed  by phone and after consulting  with  our Team Leader, 
Dr. Dave  Podskalny, believes an IND  is not  required  (unless your IRB stipulates otherwise). The  
information provided in your email suggests that  the indication is covered in labeling. Also, as you may  
know we do not  regulate  off label,  “practice of medicine” usage.
 
Thank you.
Cathleen Michaloski, BSN,  MPH, RAC
Sr. Regulatory Project  Manager
Division of Neurology ProductsFDA / CDER / OND / ODEI /DNPWhite Oak Building 22 room 4342301-796-1123Cathleen.michaloski@fda.hhs.govApproval StatusNo IND is requiredChoose one of the  following options
FDA has determined  that IND is not  required
Off label and investigational use of radiolabeled  drugs/compounds
Radiolabeled Drug/Compound #1
Name of  the radiolabeled drug/compound
[11C] racloprideManufacturer and other information[11C]raclopride or
[C-11]-(S)-3,5-dichloro-N-(1-ethyl-pyrrolidin-2-yl-methyl)-2-hydroxy-6-methoxy-benzamide)
 
Protocol Summary Form
7270
Rutherford, Bret
Page 24  of 43
 [11C]raclopride is manufactured onsite in the Radioligand lab
Approval Status
IND
 is approved
IND#
115,349
Who holds the IND/IND sponsor?
Other
Enter Name
E. Alexander Wills
Research Related  Delay to Treatment
Will research procedures result in a delay to treatment?
No
Treatment
 to be provided at the end of the study
We will provide 3 months of additional free clinic visits following the end of this project. At the conclusion 
of the 3 week study, a non-study clinician in our research clinic will be given the data on the subject’s 
response to L-DOPA. This clinician will discuss with each subject on a case-by-case basis the risks and 
benefits of continuing L-DOPA treatment as well as other treatment options if warranted. Those who have 
benefited from the treatment and have not had significant side effects may elect to continue receiving 
LDOPA after receiving an explanation of the potential risks of chronic administration. If they do not want to 
continue L-DOPA, it will be discontinued after a 3 day step-down withdrawal of the drug. Transferring 
after-study care to a non-study clinician protects against the development of bias in the study clinicians and 
offers optimal clinical care to the subjects at the study conclusion.
Clinical Treatment  Alternatives
Clinical treatment alternatives
The
 alternative to participating in this study is to seek treatment outside the research project. Patients who
would rather receive treatment elsewhere will be given referrals to appropriate and affordable care.
Risks/Discomforts/Inconveniences 
Risks that could be encountered during the study period
1. Interview, emergencies, and possible suicidal ideation. Subjects may experience discomfort during the
clinical interview and evaluations when discussing symptoms and current life events. The study 
coordinators are experienced and skilled in interviewing depressed subjects. Half-way through the initial 
assessment, the coordinator will ask the subject if they would like to take a break, and this will be provided 
if desired. A study clinician will be available during all aspects of the assessment if there are any questions 
or problems. In addition, should the subject express suicidal ideation at any time during the interview, the 
Protocol Summary Form
7270
Rutherford, Bret
Page 25  of 43
study clinician will be contacted immediately to assess the subject and to determine the appropriate course 
of action. Options for addressing suicidal ideation will include contacting the individual’s mental health 
caregiver, referring for urgent (same day) evaluation and treatment in an outpatient clinic, or emergency 
room evaluation and hospitalization. Similar practices will be used for other emergencies, including but not 
limited to psychosis, homicidal or violent thoughts, or an acute change in a subject’s physical status.
2. L-DOPA Side Effects: Side effects will be assessed at each planned visit and if needed through additional
or unscheduled contacts. We will attempt to minimize side effects by slow dosage titration and allowance 
for dose reduction if needed. We will withdraw subjects from the study if they cannot tolerate the lowest 
dose of carbidopa/levodopa (L-DOPA) 37.5mg/150mg daily.
L-DOPA is a well-tolerated medication at the doses we will be using in this study. Older (i.e., 1960s-70s 
era) case studies report administering L-DOPA doses of 400-1200mg and in some cases much higher to 
depressed, non-PD patients over subacute time periods (4-12 weeks). Variable clinical results were 
observed, but few side effects were reported and no dyskinesias. More recently, a double-blind study 
(conducted by Co-Investigator Yaakov Stern and colleagues) of a single dose of L-DOPA 200mg vs. 
placebo investigated the role of dopamine in the impaired interval timing abilities observed in older adults. 
Thirty two healthy aged participants aged 71.2 ± 7.6 years were trained to produce two target time intervals 
(6 and 17 seconds in duration) in separate blocks corresponding to drug/placebo administration. Of the 16 
elderly subjects who took 200mg L-DOPA, no severe side effects were noted, and no individuals 
discontinued participation in the study. Forty-four percent reported mild nausea at some point during the 
experiment, which was the only side effect noted. There are sporadic other reports in the literature 
examining the effects of single-dose 200mg L-DOPA on cognitive outcomes in healthy controls (e.g., Rihet 
et al, Psychopharmacology 2002; Hasbroucq et al, Psychopharmacology 2003), but no other recent (i.e., 
post 2000) studies have been performed of subacute L-DOPA dosing in healthy controls.  
There are many studies of chronic L-DOPA administration for the treatment of PD, since this drug has been 
used since the 1960s. Perhaps the most relevant recent study was a clinical trial published in the New 
England Journal of Medicine in 2004 (72). In this study 361 patients with PD were randomized to receive 
150mg, 300mg, or 600mg L-DOPA for 40 weeks. In the 150mg and 300mg L-DOPA treatment groups, 
which are similar to the 100mg and 300mg treatment groups being used in the R61 Phase of this study, the 
only side effects observed that were different from placebo were headache and nausea. No dyskinesias or 
other neuropsychiatric effects were observed that were greater than the placebo group, and this study lasted 
40 weeks as opposed to 3 weeks in the R61 Phase of this study. Despite these reassuring data, and 
recognizing that we include a different patient population, we will carefully assess subjects with new 
complaints to determine if they may be related to study drug and if there is a need for closer monitoring or 
change in study drug dosing.
a. L-DOPA common side effects: In patients taking L-DOPA for the management of bradykinesia and
freezing associated with PD, the most common side effects are dyskinesias (i.e., choreiform, dystonic, and 
other involuntary movements) and nausea.
b. Other L-DOPA side effects: blood pressure changes, orthostasis, anorexia, dyspepsia, constipation,
psychotic episodes (e.g., delusions, hallucinations), vivid dreams, and nightmares.
Protocol Summary Form
7270
Rutherford, Bret
Page 26  of 43
c. Discontinuation Syndrome: A neuroleptic malignant-like syndrome (fever, akinetic crisis, rigidity,
autonomic disturbances) has been reported following withdrawal of levodopa in patients with PD.
3. PET imaging—Radiation Exposure: The dose of radiation will be submitted for approval to the
Columbia University Medical Center Joint Radiation Safety Committee (JRSC). All scans will be done in 
the presence of medical supervision and trained nursing staff in an institution specifically designed to 
support imaging studies. In the event of serious medical complications, the PET scan facilities have 
immediate access to, or consultation with, specialized medical units at the Columbia University Medical 
Center (CUMC). Preparation of radiopharmaceuticals and performance of PET scans will be by 
radiochemists, physicians, and technologists of the Department of Radiology, Columbia University Medical 
Center. These professionals are qualified by training and experience in the safe use and handling of 
radiopharmaceuticals. Subjects will be asked about their previous radiation exposure and those who have 
had research exposure within the past year will be excluded if their cumulative annual exposure (including 
the present study) exceeds FDA limits. The study doctor will be informed regarding subjects’ previous 
radiation exposure.
Dose estimates indicate that the maximum, permissible single study dosage of [11C]-raclopride in human 
subjects, to remain below the CFR 361.1 dose limits for research subjects, is 42.8 mCi (i.e., calculation 
based upon gallbladder as the critical organ; 5 rads per single study limit and 0.117 rads per mCi to the 
gallbladder). Thus, a dose of max 14 mCi per injection, and the dose associated with participation to this 
study (2 injections: 28 mCi) will be within this limit. Subjects will be instructed not to participate in any 
other research studies that include radiation exposure during the year starting on the day of the first study. 
Subjects exposed to radiation in the work place are excluded, as well as subjects exposed to nuclear 
medicine procedures during the previous year, including research protocols.
4. PET imaging—The dose of raclopride used in this study is negligible (equal or below 6.94 μg  per
administration) and is expected to induce less than 5% occupancy of D2 receptors. [11C]raclopride is a
radiotracer that has been extensively used to measure striatal D2 receptors both in the US and in
Europe. Side effects have never been reported at the tracer doses used in PET studies. In
addition, unlabeled raclopride has been tested at pharmacological doses in humans, as a potential
antipsychotic drug. Its safety and tolerability have been well characterized (Farde et al., 1989;
Farde et al., 1988; Cookson et al., 1989; The British Isles Raclopride Study Group, 1992) Therefore, we do 
not anticipate any pharmacological effects from the radiotracer used in the proposed studies. As with any 
drug, the possibility of idiosyncratic reaction exists and is mentioned in the consent forms. A physician is 
present at each experiment.
5. Magnetic Resonance Imaging: Although this procedure is generally low-risk, there are particular
concerns.
 Individuals will be screened for the presence of implanted metal (including but not limited to 
medical devices, shrapnel, tattoos or permanent makeup). Those who screen positive will be excluded from 
the study. Claustrophobia is also an issue for many potential subjects. During the MRI, subjects will have 
voice contact with a radiology technician, and they may request the scan be stopped at any time.
6. Incidental Findings: Magnetic Resonance Imaging: Another risk is the occurrence of incidental findings
on MRI. All scans are reviewed at time of acquisition and concerning findings are discussed with an 
attending neuroradiologist. Should any concerning findings be seen, the site PI will convey these findings to 
Protocol Summary Form
7270
Rutherford, Bret
Page 27  of 43
the subject along with recommendations for further evaluation, and facilitate referrals for such evaluation 
and treatment.
7. Breach of confidentiality: There is the potential risk of breach of confidentiality of clinical, genetic, and
laboratory information. Dr. Rutherford has extensive experience as a clinical investigator in dealing with 
sensitive information and assuring that data is adequately protected. Safeguards to protect confidentiality 
include locked records and firewalls around password-protected electronic data, and all study data being 
coded, with the key linking the code with a subject’s identity being kept in a separate, locked file.
8. a. Risks of placing an intra-venous catheter. Drawing blood from and inserting an intravenous line (IV) 
into an arm vein are safe and standard medical procedures. Sometimes a bruise will occur at the puncture 
site and rarely a blood clot or infection will occur in the vein. Certain individuals may feel light-headed 
during venipuncture. The volume of blood collected during this study, include screening laboratories, will 
be approximately 2-3 tablespoons. These are not expected to have any serious negative effects on the study 
participants. b. Risks of blood draw: In the obtaining a 20 cc blood sample, patients can experience side 
effects that include pain, fainting, bruising, light-headedness, and, on rare occasions, infection. The staff 
will take every precaution to avoid these difficulties. The staff members are all certified at the hospital to be 
drawing blood from patients, and are instructed to keep the comfort and welfare of our patients as their 
primary priority. 
9. Gait speed assessment: During the gait speed assessment, patients may feel unsteady and as such their
risk of falls may increase. To mitigate these risks, patients are accompanied by research coordinators and/or 
doctors during each of the performance-based assessments. Coordinators walk slightly behind and alongside 
the patients during the gait assessment, providing support for the patients should they become unsteady 
during the procedure.
Describe procedures for minimizing risks
1. The study coordinators are experienced and skilled in interviewing subjects with a variety of mental
health issues. Half-way through the initial assessment, the coordinator will ask the subject if they would like 
to take a break, and this will be provided if desired. A study clinician will be available during all aspects of 
the assessment if there are any questions or problems. In addition, should the subject express suicidal 
ideation at any time during the interview, the study clinician will be contacted immediately to assess the 
subject and to determine the appropriate course of action. Options for addressing suicidal ideation will 
include contacting the individual’s mental health caregiver, referring for urgent (same day) evaluation and 
treatment in an outpatient clinic, or emergency room evaluation and hospitalization. Similar practices will 
be used for other emergencies, including but not limited to psychosis, homicidal or violent thoughts, or an 
acute change in a subject’s physical status.
2. Side effects will be assessed at each planned visit and if needed through additional or unscheduled
contacts. We will attempt to minimize side effects by slow dosage titration and allowance for dose reduction 
if needed. We will withdraw subjects from the study if they cannot tolerate the lowest dose of
carbidopa/levodopa (L-DOPA) 37.5mg/150mg daily.
Protocol Summary Form
7270
Rutherford, Bret
Page 28  of 43
3. The dose of radiation will be submitted for approval to the JRSC. All scans will be done in the
presence of medical supervision and trained nursing staff in an imaging center specifically
designed to support imaging studies. In the event of serious medical complications, the PET scan
facilities have immediate access to a consultation with specialized medical units at New York
Presbyterian Hospital. Preparation of radiopharmaceuticals and performance of PET scans will be
by radiochemists, physicians, and technologists of the Department of Radiology at Columbia.
These professionals are qualified by training and experience in the safe use and handling of
radiopharmaceuticals. Subjects will be asked about their previous radiation exposure and those
who have had research exposure within the past year will be excluded if their cumulative annual
exposure (including the present study) exceeds FDA limits. The information on the previousradiation 
exposure of study subjects will be notified to the study doctor.
4. In terms of raclopride pharmacologic effects, we do not anticipate any pharmacological effects from the
radiotracer used in the proposed studies. As with any drug, the possibility of idiosyncratic reaction exists 
and is mentioned in the consent forms. A physician is present at each experiment. 
5. To minimize MRI risks, each subject will fill out the MRI Safety Questionnaire before the study. Only
subjects who fulfill the criteria by this questionnaire will be eligible for the study. In addition,
subjects will remove all metal (watch, hair pins, jewelry) before entering the MRI room. If the
subject has any metallic prostheses/implants they will be excluded from the study. If a subject
becomes anxious during the scan they can request that the MRI scan be stopped. 
6. Dr. Rutherford has extensive experience as a clinical investigator in dealing with sensitive information
and assuring that data is adequately protected. Safeguards to protect confidentiality include locked records 
and firewalls around password-protected electronic data, and all study data being coded, with the key 
linking the code with a subject’s identity being kept in a separate, locked file. 
7. Risks of bruising, clotting, and infection during IV placement and blood draw will be minimized by
having venipuncture performed by trained and experienced personnel under sterile conditions. To avoid 
injury due to fainting, the antecubital vein catheter will be inserted when the subjects are recumbent. 
8. The staff will take every precaution to avoid difficulties with gait speed assessments. Patients are
accompanied by research coordinators and/or doctors during the test of gait speed. Coordinators walk 
slightly behind and alongside the patients during the gait assessment, providing support for the patients 
should they become unsteady during the procedure.
Methods to  Protect Confidentiality
Describe methods to protect confidentiality
All records of the participating subjects will be kept in a locked room with access provided only to staff
members. Patients’ names will be linked with code numbers in a password protected file to which only the
research assistant has access. Only these code numbers will appear on all pill bottles and paper measures
collected during study. All data collected will be kept confidential and used for professional purposes only.
Protocol Summary Form
7270
Rutherford, Bret
Page 29  of 43
Publications using these data will be done in a manner that protects the subjects’ anonymity. All
electronically stored data will be accessible by password known only to the principal investigator and
research assistants for the study.
Data shared with the National Institute of Mental Health Data Archive (NDA) will maintain patient 
confidentiality by ensuring exclusion of all 18 identifiers (outlined by HIPAA) prior to data sharing. 
Will the study be conducted under a certificate of confidentiality?
No
Direct Benefits  to Subjects  
Direct Benefits  to Subjects
There is no direct benefit to subjects. If L-DOPA treatment is effective in ameliorating slowing, subjects
may experience improved quality of life and decreased of falls and other sequelae of slowing.
Compensation and/or Reimbursement 
Will compensation or reimbursement for expenses be offered to subjects?
Yes
Please describe and indicate total amount and schedule of payment(s). 
Include justification for compensation amounts and indicate if there are bonus payments.
Subjects will receive reasonable reimbursement for transportation related costs associated with study 
involvement as long as they provide receipts.
Subjects will receive $25 for each weekly study visit (Week 0, Week 1, Week 2, and Week 3) attended. This 
money will be paid by cash at the conclusion of each of these visits for a total of $100 if all study visits are 
attended.  
Subjects will receive $50 for each MRI scan ($100 total for the MRI) and $150 for completing each PET 
scan ($300 total for PET). Of note, subjects will be compensated for scheduled scans if they are brought to 
the MRI or PET suites and the scans are not completed that day due to chemistry failure or other similar 
issues.
Thus, subjects undergoing neuroimaging  may earn $400 in this study, which will be a lump sum payment 
mailed in the form of a check at the conclusion of the study, plus an additional $100 cash ($25 cash at the 
end of each weekly visit) if all weekly study visits are also completed. If a subject does not complete the 
study, payment is pro-rated to portions completed. Subjects are advised to allow 1-3 weeks for receipt of 
payment for neuroimaging.
Protocol Summary Form
7270
Rutherford, Bret
Page 30  of 43
References
References
1.
NIH Consensus Conference. Diagnosis and treatment of depression in late life. JAMA 1992; 268:1018–
1024.
2. Rothschild AJ. The diagnosis and treatment of late-life depression. J Clin Psychiatry 1996; 57:5–11.
3. Meeks TW, Vahia IV, Lavretsky H, Kulkarni G, Jeste DV. A tune in "a minor" can "b major": a review of
epidemiology, illness course, and public health implications of subthreshold depression in older adults. J 
Affect Disord 2011; 129:126-142.
4. Kalayam B, Alexopoulos GS. Prefrontal dysfunction and treatment response in geriatric depression. Arch
Gen Psychiatry 1999; 56:713–718.
5. Alexopoulos GS, Meyers BS, Young RC, et al. Executive dysfunction and long-term outcomes of
geriatric depression. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2000; 57:285–290.
6. Vaughan L, Giovanello K. Executive function in daily life: age-related influences of executive processes
on instrumental activities of daily living. Psychol Aging 2010; 25:343-355.
7. Brown PJ, Liu X, Sneed JR, Pimontel MA, Devanand DP, Roose SP. Speed of Processing and Depression
Affect Function in Older Adults with Mild Cognitive Impairment. Am J Geri Psychiatry 2013; 21:675-684.
8. Sheline YI, Barch DM, Garcia K, et al. Cognitive Function in Late Life Depression: Relationships to
Depression Severity, Cerebrovascular Risk Factors and Processing Speed. Biol Psychiatry 2006; 60:58-65.
9. Seidler RD, Alberts JL, Stelmach GE. Changes in multi-joint performance with age. Motor Control 2002;
6:19–31.
10. Diggles-Buckles V. Age-related slowing. In: Stelmach GE, Homberg V (Eds.), Sensorimotor
Impairment in the Elderly. Norwell, MA: Kluwer Academic, 1993.
11. Tang PF, Woollacott MH. Balance control in the elderly. In: Bronstein AM, Brandt T, Woollacott MH
(Eds.), Clinical Disorders of Balance, Posture and Gait. London: Arnold, 1996.
12. Demakakos P, Cooper R, Hamer M, de Oliveira C, Hardy R, Breeze E. The bidirectional association
between depressive symptoms and gait speed: evidence from the English Longitudinal Study of Aging 
(ELSA). PLoS One 2013; 8:e68632. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0068632.
13. Sanders JB, Bremmer MA, Deeq DJ, Beekman AT. Do depressive symptoms and gait speed impairment
predict each other’s incidence? A 16 year prospective study in the community. J Am Geriatr Soc 2012; 
60:1673-1680.
14. Guralnik JM, Ferrucci L, Pieper CF, et al. Lower extremity function and subsequent disability:
Protocol Summary Form
7270
Rutherford, Bret
Page 31  of 43
consistency across studies, predictive models, and value of gait speed alone compared with the short 
physical performance battery. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 2000; 55:M221-M231.
15. Montero-Odasso M, Schapira M, Soriano ER, et al. Gait velocity as a single predictor of adverse events
in healthy seniors aged 75 years and older. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 2005; 60:1304-1309.
16. Penninx BW, Ferrucci L, Leveille SG, Rantanen T, Pahor M, Guralnik JM. Lower extremity
performance in nondisabled older persons as a predictor of subsequent hospitalization. J Gerontol A Biol Sci 
Med Sci 2000; 55:M691-M697.
17. Kaasinen V, Vilkman H, Hietala J, et al. Age-related dopamine D2/D3 receptor loss in extrastriatal
regions of the human brain. Neurobiol Aging 2000; 21:683–688.
18. Haycock JW, Becker L, Ang L, Furukawa Y, Hornykiewicz O, Kish SJ. Marked disparity between age-
related changes in dopamine and other presynaptic dopaminergic markers in human striatum. J Neurochem 
2003; 87:574–585.
19. Backman L, Nyberg L, Lindenberger U, Li SC, Farde L. The correlative triad among aging, dopamine,
and cognition: Current status and future prospects. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 2006; 30:791-807.
20. Troiano AR, Schulzer M, de la Fuente Fernandez R, et al. Dopamine Transporter PET in Normal Aging:
Dopamine Transporter Decline and its Possible Role in Preservation of Motor Function. Synapse 2010; 
64:146-151.
21. Volkow ND, Gur RC, Wang GJ, et al. Association between decline in brain dopamine activity with age
and cognitive and motor impairment in healthy individuals. Am J Psychiatry 1998; 155, 344–349.
22. Wang Y, Chan GLY, Holden JE, et al. Age-dependent decline of dopamine D1 receptors in human
brain: a
PET study. Synapse 1998; 30:56–61.
23. Yang YK, Chiu NT, Chen CC, Chen M, Yeh TL, Lee IH. Correlation between fine motor activity and
striatal dopamine D2 receptor density in patients with schizophrenia and healthy controls. Psychiatry Res 
Neuroimag 2003; 123:191–197.
24. Servan-Schreiber D, Carter CS, Bruno RM, Cohen JD. Dopamine and the mechanisms of cognition: part
II. D-amphetamine effects in human subjects performing a selective attention task. Biol Psychiatry 1998;
43:723–729.
25. Ramaekers JG, Louwerens JW, Muntjewerff ND, et al. Psychomotor, cognitive, extrapyramidal and
affective functions of healthy volunteers during treatment with an atypical (amisulpiride) and a classic 
(haloperidol) antipsychotic. J Clin Psychopharmacol 1999; 19:209–221.
26. Penninx B, Leveille S, Ferrucci L, van Eijk J, Guralnik J. Exploring the effect of depression on physical
disability: Longitudinal evidence from the Established Populations for Epidemiologic Studies of the Elderly. 
Protocol Summary Form
7270
Rutherford, Bret
Page 32  of 43
Am J Publ Health 1999; 89:1346–1352.
27.
Callahan CM, Wolinsky FD, Stump TE, Nienaber NA, Hui SL, Tierney WM. Mortality, symptoms, and
functional impairment in late-life depression. J Gen Intern Med 1998; 13:746–752.
28. Blazer D, Bachar J, Manton K. Suicide in late life: review and commentary. J Am Geriatr Soc 1986;
34:519–526.
29. Conwell Y, Lyness J, Duberstein P, Cox C, Seidlitz L, DiGiorgio A. Completed suicide among older
patients in primary care practices: a controlled study. J Am Geriatr Soc 2000; 48:23–29.
30. Alexopoulos GS, Meyers BS, Young RC, Kakuma T, Feder M, Einhorn A, Rosedahl E. Recovery in
geriatric depression. Arch Gen Psychiatry 1996; 53:305–312.
31. Sneed JR, Rutherford BR, Rindskopf D, Roose SP. Design makes a difference: antidepressant response
rates in placebo-controlled versus comparator trials in late life depression. Am J Geri Psychiatry 2008; 
16:65-73.
32. Butters MA, Whyte E, Nebes RD, et al. The nature and determinants of neuropsychological functioning
in late-life depression. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2004; 61:587-595.
33. Pimontel MA, Culang-Reinlieb ME, Morimoto SS, Sneed JR. Executive dysfunction and treatment
response in late life depression. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry 2012; 27:893-899.
34. Salthouse TA. The Processing-Speed Theory of Adult Age Differences in Cognition. Psychol Rev 1996;
103:403-428.
35. Lindenberger U, Mayr U, Kliegl R. Speed and intelligence in old age. Psychol Aging 1993; 8:207-220.
36. Sliwinski M, Buschke H. Processing speed and memory in aging and dementia. J Gerontol Psychol Sci
1997; 52B:308–318.
37. Rapp MA, Reischies FM. Attention and executive control predict Alzheimer disease in late life: results
from the Berlin Aging Study (BASE). Am J Geriatr Psychiatry 2005; 13:134-141.
38. Iwasa H, Gondo Y, Yoshida Y, et al. Cognitive performance as a predictor of functional decline among
the non-disabled elderly dwelling in a Japanese community: A 4-year population-based prospective cohort 
study. Arch Gerontol Geriatr 2008; 47:139-149.
39. Edwards JD, Bart E, O’Connor ML, Cissell G. Ten years down the road: Predictors of driving cessation.
Gerontologist 2000; 50:393–399.
40. Barak Y, Wagenaar RC, Holt KG. Gait characteristics of elderly people with a history of falls: a
dynamic approach. Phys Ther 2006; 86:1501-1510.
Protocol Summary Form
7270
Rutherford, Bret
Page 33  of 43
41. Morita M, Takamura N, Kusano Y, et al. Relationship between falls and physical performance measures
among community-dwelling elderly women in Japan. Aging Clin Exp Res 2005; 17:211-216.
42. Verghese J, Holtzer R, Lipton RB, Wang C. Quantitative Gait Markers and Incident Fall Risk in Older
Adults. J Gerontol Med Sci 2009; 64:896-901.
43. Van Kan AG, Rolland Y, Andrieu S, et al. Gait speed at usual pace as a predictor of adverse outcomes in
community-dwelling older people: An International Academy on Nutrition and Aging (IANA) Task Force. J 
Nutr Health Aging 2009; 13:881-889.
44. White DK, Neogi T, Nevitt MC, et al. Trajectories of Gait Speed Predict Mortality in Well-Functioning
Older Adults: The Health, Aging, and Body Composition Study. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 2013; 
68:456-464.
45. Dumurgier J, Elbaz A, Ducimetiere P, Tavernier B, Alperovitch A, Tzourio C. Slow walking speed and
cardiovascular death in well-functioning older adults: prospective cohort study. BMJ 2009; 339:b4460.
46. Brown PJ, Roose SP, Zhang J, et al. Inflammation, Depression, and Slow Gait: A High Mortality
Phenotype in Later Life. Under review, J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci.
47. Eckart C, Bunzeck N. Dopamine modulates processing speed in the human mesolimbic system.
Neuroimage 2013; 66:293-300.
48. Hickie IB, Naismith SL, Ward PB, et al. Psychomotor slowing in older patients with major depression:
Relationships with blood flow in the caudate nucleus and white matter lesions. Psychiatry Res Neuroimag 
2007; 155:211-220.
49. Cham R, Perera S, Studenski SA, Bohnen NI. Striatal dopamine denervation and sensory integration for
balance in middle-aged and older adults. Gait Posture 2007; 26:516–525.
50. Cham R, Studenski SA, Perara S, Bohnen NI. Striatal dopaminergic denervation and gait in healthy
adults. Exp Brain Res 2008; 185:391-398.
51. Bohnen NI, Albin RL, Koeppe RA, Wernette KA, Kilbourn MR, Minoshima S, Frey KA. Positron
emission tomography of monoaminergic vesicular binding in aging and Parkinson disease. J Cereb Blood 
Flow Metab 2006; 26:1198–1212.
52. Volkow ND, Wang GJ, Fowler JS, et al. Parallel loss of presynaptic and postsynaptic dopamine markers
in normal aging. Ann Neurol 1998; 44:143–147.
53. Volkow ND, Logan J, Fowler JS, et al. Association between age-related decline in brain dopamine
activity and impairment in frontal and cingulate metabolism. Am J Psychiatry 2000; 157:75–80.
54. Castner SA, Goldman-Rakic PS. Enhancement of working memory in aged monkeys by a sensitizing
regimen of dopamine D1 receptor stimulation. J Neurosci 2004; 24:1446–1450.
Protocol Summary Form
7270
Rutherford, Bret
Page 34  of 43
55. Gierski F, Peretti CS, Ergis AM. Effects of the dopamine agonist piribedil on prefrontal temporal
cortical network function in normal aging as assessed by verbal fluency. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol 
Psychiatry 2007; 31: 262–268.
56. Peretti CS, Gierski F, Harris S. Cognitive skill learning in healthy older adults after 2 months of double-
blind treatment with piribedil. Psychopharmacology (Berl) 2004; 176:175–181.
57. Floel A, Vomhof P, Lorenzen A, Roesser N, Breitenstein C, Knecht S. Levodopa improves skilled hand
functions in the elderly. Eur J Neurosci 2008; 27:1301–1307.
58. Klerman GL, Schildkraut JJ, Hasenbush LL, Greenblatt VL, Friend DG. Clinical experience with
dihydroxyphenylalanine (DOPA) in depression. J Psychiatr Res 1963; 1:289-297.
59. Sanghvi I, Urquiaga X, Gershon S. Exploration of the Anti-Depressant Potential of L-DOPA.
Psychopharmacologia 1971; 20:118-127.
60. Matnssek N, Benkert O, Schneider K, Otten H, Pohlmeier H. L-DOPA plus decarboxylase inhibitor in
depression. Lancet 1970; 2:660-661.
61. Bunney WE, Janowsky DS, Goodwin FK, Davis JM, Brodie HKH, Murphy DL, Chase TN. Effect of L-
DOPA on depression. Lancet 1969; 292:885-886.
62. Kashihara K, Imamura T, Ohno M. Effect of levodopa on depression in de novo patients with
Parkinson’s disease. Movement Disord 2013, 28(Suppl 1):407.
63. Lavretsky H, Reinlieb M, St Cyr N, et al. Citalopram, methylphenidate, or their combination in geriatric
depression: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Am J Psychiatry 2015; 172:561–569.
64. Satel SL, Nelson JC. Stimulants in the treatment of depression: a critical overview. J Clin Psychiatry
1989; 50:241–249.
65. Costa A, Peppe A, Dell’Agnello G, Carlesimo G, Murri L, Bonuccelli U, Caltarigone C. Dopaminergic
modulation of visual-spatial working memory in Parkinson’s disease. Dem Geriatr Cogn Disord 2003; 
15:55–66.
66. Hayes AE, Davidson MC, Keele SW. Towards a functional analysis of the basal ganglia. J Cogn
Neurosci 1998; 10:178–198.
67. Lange KW, Robbins TW, Marsden CD, James M, Owen AM, Paul GM. L-Dopa withdrawal in
Parkinson’s disease selectively impairs cognitive performance in tests sensitive to frontal lobe dysfunction. 
Psychopharmacol 1992; 107:394–404.
68. Brusa L, Pavino V, Massimetti MC, Bove R, Iani C, Stanzione P. The effect of dopamine agonists on
cognitive functions in non-demented early-mild Parkinson’s Disease patients. Func Neurol 2013; 28:13-17.
Protocol Summary Form
7270
Rutherford, Bret
Page 35  of 43
69. Brusa L, Bassi A, Stefani A, et al. Pramipexole in comparison to l-dopa: a neuropsychological study. J
Neural Transm 2003; 110:373–380.
70. Brusa L, Tiraboschi P, Koch G, et al. Pergolide effect on cognitive functions in early-mild Parkinson’s
disease. J Neural Transm 2005; 112:231–237.
71. Halliday R, Callaway E, Naylor H, Gratzinger P, Prael R. The effects of stimulant drugs on information
processing in elderly adults. J Gerontol 1986; 41:748-757.
72. The Parkinson Study Group. Levodopa and the Progression of Parkinson’s Disease. New Engl J Med
2004; 351:2498-2508.
73. Nestler EJ, Barrot M, DiLeone RJ, Eisch AJ, Gold SJ, Monteggia LM. Neurobiology of Depression.
Neuron 2002; 34:13-25.
74. Salamone JD, Cousins MS, Bucher S. Anhedonia or anergia? Effects of haloperidol and nucleus
accumbens dopamine depletion on instrumental response selection in a T-maze cost/benefit procedure. 
Behav Brain Res 1994; 65:221–229.
75. De la Fuente Fernandez R, Sossi V, Huang Z, et al. Levodopa-induced changes in synaptic dopamine
levels increase with progression of Parkinson’s Disease: implications for dyskinesias. Brain 2004; 
127:2747-2754.
76. Cools R. Dopaminergic modulation of cognitive function-implications for L-DOPA treatment in
Parkinson’s disease. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 2006; 30:1-23.
77. Insel T, Cuthbert B, Garvey M, et al. Research Domain Criteria (RDoC): Toward a New Classification
Framework for Research on Mental Disorders. Am J Psychiatry 2010; 167:748-751.
78. Eckert MA, Keren NI, Roberts DR, Calhoun VD, Harris KC. Age-related changes in processing speed:
unique contributions of cerebellar and prefrontal cortex. Front Hum Neurosci 2010; 4:10. doi: 
10.3389/neuro.09.010.2010.
79. Chee MW, Chen KH, Zheng H, et al. Cognitive function and brain structure correlations in healthy
elderly East Asians. Neuroimage 2009; 46:257–269.
80. Schiavone F, Charlton RA, Barrick TR, Morris RG, Markus HS. Imaging age-related cognitive decline:
a comparison of diffusion tensor and magnetization transfer MRI. J Magn Reson Imaging 2009; 29:23–30.
81. Fjell AM, Walhovd KB. Structural brain changes in aging: courses, causes and cognitive consequences.
Rev Neurosci 2010; 21:187–221.
82. Cabeza R, Anderson ND, Locantore JK, McIntosh AR. Aging gracefully: compensatory brain activity in
high-performing older adults. Neuroimage 2002; 17:1394–1402.
Protocol Summary Form
7270
Rutherford, Bret
Page 36  of 43
83. Weinshilboum RM, Otterness DM, Szumlanski CL. Methylation pharmacogenetics: catechol-O-
methyltransferase, thiopurine methyltransferase, and histamine N-methyltransferase. Ann Rev Pharmacol 
Toxicol 1999; 39:19–52.
84. Mannisto PT, Kaakkola S. Catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT): biochemistry, molecular biology,
and clinical efficacy of the new selective COMT inhibitors. Pharmacol Rev 1999; 51:593–628.
85. Lotta T, Vidgren J, Tilgmann C, Ulmanen I, Melen K, Julkunen I, Taskinen J. Kinetics of human soluble
and membrane-bound catechol-O-methyltransferase: a revised mechanism and description of the 
thermolabile variant of the enzyme. Biochemistry 1995; 34:4202–4210
86. Liljequist R, Haapalinna A, Ahlander M, Li YH, Mannisto PT. Catechol-O-methyltransferase inhibitor
tolcapone has minor influences on performance in experimental memory models in rats. Behav Brain Res 
1997; 82:195–202.
87. Joober R, Gauthier J, Lal S, et al. Catechol-O-methyltransferase Val-108/158-Met gene variants
associated with performance on the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2002; 59:662–663.
88. Malhotra AK, Kestler LJ, Mazzanti C, Bates JA, Goldberg T, Goldman D. A functional polymorphism
in the COMT gene and performance on a test of prefrontal cognition. Am J Psychiatry 2002; 159:652–654.
89. Bilder RM, Volavka J, Czobor P, et al. Neurocognitive correlates of the COMT Val158Met
polymorphism in chronic schizophrenia. Biol Psychiatry 2002; 52:701–707.
90. Rosano C, Simonsick EM, Harris TB, et al. Association between physical and cognitive function in
healthy elderly: the health, aging and body composition study. Neuroepidemiol 2005; 24:8–14.
91. Inzitari M, Newman AB, Yaffe K, et al. Gait Speed Predicts Decline in Attention and Psychomotor
Speed in Older Adults: The Health Aging and Body Composition Study. Neuroepidemiol 2007; 29:156-162.
92. Verghese J, Lipton RB, Hall CB, Kuslansky G, Katz MJ, Buschke H. Abnormality of gait as a predictor
of non-Alzheimer’s dementia. N Engl J Med 2002; 347:1761–1768.
93. Camicioli R, Howieson D, Oken B, Sexton G, Kaye J. Motor slowing precedes cognitive impairment in
the oldest old. Neurology 1998; 50:1496–1498.
94. Marquis S, Moore MM, Howieson DB, Sexton G, Payami H, Kaye JA, Camicioli R. Independent
predictors of cognitive decline in healthy elderly persons. Arch Neurol 2002; 59:601–606.
95. Longstreth WT Jr, Arnold AM, Beauchamp NJ Jr, et al. Incidence, manifestations, and predictors of
worsening white matter on serial cranial magnetic resonance imaging in the elderly: The Cardiovascular 
Health Study. Stroke 2005; 36:56–61.
96. Brown PJ, Roose SP, Fieo R, et al. Frailty and Depression in Older Adults: A High-Risk Clinical
Protocol Summary Form
7270
Rutherford, Bret
Page 37  of 43
Population. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry 2014; 22:1083-1095.
97.
Rakitin BC, Scarmeas N, Tina L, Chariklia M, Stern Y. Single-dose Levodopa Administration and
Aging Independently Disrupt Time Production. J Cog Neurosci 2006; 18:376-387.
98. Martinez D, Slifstein M, Broft A, et al. Imaging human mesolimbic dopamine transmission with
positron emission tomography. Part II: amphetamine-induced dopamine release in the functional 
subdivisions of the striatum. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2003; 23:285-300.
99. Martinez D, Gil R, Slifstein M, et al. Alcohol dependence is associated with blunted dopamine
transmission in the ventral striatum. Biol Psychiatry 2005; 58:779-786.
100. Martinez D, Narendran R, Foltin RW, et al. Amphetamine-induced dopamine release: markedly 
blunted in cocaine dependence and predictive of the choice to self-administer cocaine. Am J Psychiatry 
2007; 164:622-629.
101. Thompson J L, Urban N, Slifstein M, et al. Striatal dopamine release in schizophrenia comorbid with 
substance dependence. Molecular Psychiatry 2013; 18:909-915.
102: Broft A, Shingleton R, Kaufman J, et al. Striatal Dopamine in Bulimia Nervosa: a PET Imaging Study. 
Int J Eat Disord 2012; 45:648-656.
103. Urban NB, Kegeles LS, Slifstein M, et al. Sex differences in striatal dopamine release in young adults 
after oral alcohol challenge: a positron emission tomography imaging study with [11C]-raclopride. Biol 
Psychiatry 2010; 68:689-696.
104. Kegeles LS, Abi-Dargham A, Frankle WG, et al. Increased Synaptic Dopamine Function in 
Associative Regions of the Striatum in Schizophrenia. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2010; 67:231-239.
105. Stern Y, Habeck C, Steffener J, et al. The Reference Ability Neural Network Study: Motivation, 
design, and initial feasibility analyses. Neuroimage 2014; 103:139-151.
106. Habeck C, Steffener J, Barulli D, et al. Making Cognitive Latent Variables Manifest: Distinct Neural 
Networks for Fluid Reasoning and Processing Speed. J Cog Neurosci 2014; 27:1249-1258.
107. American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). 
Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association Press, 2013.
108. Radloff LS. The CES-D scale: A self-report depression scale for research in the general population. 
Appl Psychol Meas 1977; 1:385-401.
109. Folstein MF, Folstein SE, McHugh PR. "Mini-mental state". A practical method for grading the 
cognitive state of patients for the clinician. J Psychiatr Res 1975; 12:189-198.
110. Guy W. Clinical Global Impressions. New Clinical Drug Evaluation Unit (ECDEU) Assessment 
Protocol Summary  Form
7270
Rutherford, Bret
Page 38 of 43
Manual for Psychopharmacology.  1976. Rockville,  MD: National Institute of Mental Health, 1976, p. 218-
222.111. Kelly C, de  Zubicaray G, Di Martino A, et al.  L-dopa modulates functional connectivity  in striatal 
cognitive and  motor  networks: a double-blind  placebo-controlled  study. J  Neurosci  2009;  29:7364-7368.
112. Miller MD, Paradis  CF, Houck PR, et al. Rating chronic medical illness burden in  geropsychiatric 
practice and  research:  application of the  Cumulative Illness Rating Scale.  Psychiatry Res 1992;  41:237–248.
113. Huskisson  EC. Measurement of pain. J Rheumatol 1982; 9:768–769.
114. First MB, Williams  JBW,  Karg RS, Spitzer RL. Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-5 —Research 
Version (SCID-5  for DSM-5, Research Version; SCID-5-RV). Arlington, VA, American Psychiatric 
Association, 2015.115. Hamilton M. A rating scale for depression.  J Neurol Neurosurg  Psychiatry 1960;  23:56-62.
116. Fahn S, Elton R,  Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating  Scale Development Committee. Unified 
Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale. In: Fahn S, Marsden CD,  Calne  D, eds. Recent developments in 
Parkinson's disease. New York: MacMillan,  1987:153-63.
117. Rush AJ, Giles  DE, Schlesser  MA, Fulton CL, Weissenburger JE, Burns CT.  The Inventory of 
Depressive Symptomatology (IDS): Preliminary  findings. Psychiatry Res 1986; 18:65-87.
118. Rush AJ, Gullion CM, Basco  MR,  Jarrett RB, Trivedi MH. The Inventory of Depressive 
Symptomatology (IDS): Psychometric  properties.  Psychol Med 1996;  26:477-486.
119. Wechsler D. Wechsler Memory Scale  – Third Edition.  San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation,  
1997.120. Salthouse TA, Babcock RL. Decomposing  adult age differences in working memory. Devel Psychol 
1991; 27:763–776.121. Salthouse TA, Pink JE, Tucker-Drob EM. Contextual  analysis  of fluid intelligence. Intelligence 2008; 
36:464–486.122. Salthouse TA. Effects of  age and ability  on components  of cognitive  change. Intelligence. 2013; 
41:501-511.123. Salthouse TA. Does  the meaning of neurocognitive change change with  age? Neuropsychology  2010; 
24:273–278.124. Salthouse TA. Implications  of within-person  variability in  cognitive and  neuropsychological 
functioning on  the interpretation of change. Neuropsychology 2007; 21:401–411.
Protocol Summary  Form
7270
Rutherford, Bret
Page 39 of 43
125. Baetens T, De Kegel A, Palmans  T, Oostra K, Vanderstraeten G,  Cambier  D. Gait analysis with 
cognitive-motor dual tasks to distinguish fallers  from nonfallers among rehabilitating stroke  patients.  Arch 
Phys Med Rehabil 2013; 94:680-686.126. Tedroff J, Pedersen M,  Aquilonius  SM, Hartvig  P, Jacobsson G, Langstrom B. Levodopa-induced 
changes in synaptic dopamine  in patients  with Parkinson’s disease  as measured by [11C]-raclopride 
displacement and PET. Neurology 1996; 46:1430-1436.
127. Pavese N, Evans  AH, Tai YF, Hotton G, Brooks DJ, Lees AJ, Piccini P.  Clinical correlates of 
levodopa-induced dopamine release in Parkinson’s disease: A  PET  study.  Neurology 2006; 67:1612-1617.
128. Lammertsma  AA, Hume SP.  Simplified reference tissue  model for PET  receptor studies.  NeuroImage  
1996; 4:153-158.129. Innis RB,  Cunningham  VJ, Delforge J, et al. Consensus  nomenclature for in  vivo  imaging of reversibly 
binding radioligands. J Cereb Blood Flow  Metab  2007; 27:1533-1539.
130. Sulzer D, Chen TK, Lau YY, Kristensen  H, Rayport S, Ewing A.  Amphetamine  redistributes dopamine 
from synaptic vesicles to the cytosol and  promotes reverse transport. J  Neurosci 1995; 15:4102-4108.
131. Sulzer D, Maidment  NT, Rayport S. Amphetamine and  other  weak  bases  act to promote  reverse 
transport of dopamine in ventral  midbrain neurons. J Neurochem 1993; 60:527-535.
132. Sulzer D, Sonders MS, Poulsen NW, Galli A. Mechanisms of neurotransmitter  release  by 
amphetamines: A review. Progr Neurobiol 2005; 75:406-433.133. Laruelle M, Iyer RN, Al-Tikriti MS, et al. Microdialysis  and SPECT measurements of amphetamine-
induced dopamine release in nonhuman  primates.  Synapse 1997; 25:1-14.
134. Endres CJ, Kolachana BS,  Saunders  RC, et al.  Kinetic modeling of [C-11]raclopride: Combined PET-
microdialysis studies. J  Cereb Blood Flow  Metab  1997;  17:932-942.
135. Laruelle M, DSouza  CD,  Baldwin RM,  et al. Imaging D-2 receptor  occupancy by endogenous 
dopamine in humans. Neuropsychopharmacology 1997; 17:162-174.136. Abi-Dargham A, Gil R, Krystal J, et  al. Increased striatal dopamine transmission in  schizophrenia:  
confirmation in a second cohort. Am J Psychiatry 1998;  155:761-767.
137. Carson RE, Breier  A, deBartolomeis A, et  al. Quantification of amphetamine-induced changes in [C-
11]raclopride binding with continuous infusion. J Cereb Blood Flow  Metab 1997;  17:437-447.
138. Cropley VL,  Innis RB, Nathan  PJ, et al.  Small effect of dopamine release and  no effect of dopamine 
depletion on [F-18]fallypride binding in healthy humans. Synapse 2008; 62:399-408.139. Riccardi  P, Li R, Ansari MS,  et al. Amphetamine-induced displacement of [F-18] fallypride in  striatum 
Protocol Summary  Form
7270
Rutherford, Bret
Page 40 of 43
and extrastriatal regions in humans. Neuropsychopharmacology  2006; 31:1016-1026.
140. Slifstein M, Kegeles  L, Xu X, et al. Striatal and  extrastriatal dopamine release measured with  PET and 
[18F] fallypride. Synapse 2010; 64:350-362.141. Breier  A, Su T P,  Saunders R,  et al. Schizophrenia is associated with elevated amphetamine-induced 
synaptic dopamine concentrations: Evidence  from a novel positron emission tomography method.  Proc  Natl 
Acad Sci USA  1997; 94:2569-2574.
142. Abi-Dargham A, Kegeles L, Zea-Ponce Y, et al. Amphetamine-induced  dopamine release in patients  
with schizotypal personality disorders studied by SPECT  and [123I]IBZM. Biol Psychiatry 2004;  55:1001-
1006.143. Martinez D, Broft A, Foltin R  W, et al. Cocaine dependence and D-2 receptor  availability in  functional 
subdivisions of the striatum: Relationship with cocaine-seeking behavior. Neuropsychopharmacology 2004; 29:1190-1202.144. Martinez D, Greene  K, Broft A, et  al. Lower Level  of Endogenous  Dopamine in Patients With Cocaine 
Dependence: Findings From PET Imaging  of D-2/D-3 Receptors Following Acute Dopamine Depletion. 
Am J Psychiatry 2009; 166:1170-1177.145. Abi-Dargham A, van  de Giessen E, Slifstein M, Kegeles LS, Laruelle M. Baseline  and Amphetamine-
Stimulated Dopamine  Activity Are Related in Drug-Naive Schizophrenic Subjects. Biol Psychiatry 2009;  
65:1091-1093.146. Walhovd KB, Westlye LT, Amlien I,  et al. Consistent neuroanatomical  age-related  volume differences 
across multiple  samples. Neurobiol  Aging 2011; 32:916-932.
147. Fischl  B, Salat DH, Busa E, et al.  Whole  brain segmentation: automated  labeling of neuroanatomical  
structures in the  human brain. Neuron  2002; 33:341-355.
148. Fischl  B, van der Kouwe A, Destrieux C, et al.  Automatically Parcellating the Human Cerebral  Cortex. 
Cereb Cortex 2004;  14:11-22.
149. Kennedy KM, Erickson KI, Rodriguez  KM,  et al., Age-related  differences in  regional  brain volumes: a 
comparison of optimized voxel-based morphometry  to manual volumetry. Neurobiol Aging 2009; 30:1657-
1676.150. Buckner RL, Head D, Parker J, Fotenos  AF, Marcus D, Morris JC,  Snyder AZ. A  unified approach for 
morphometric and functional data  analysis in young, old,  and demented adults using automated atlas-based  
head size normalization:  reliability and validation  against manual  measurement  of total  intracranial  volume. 
Neuroimage 2004; 23:724-738.151. Franceschi  C, Campisi J. Chronic inflammation  (inflammaging)  and its  potential contribution  to age 
associated diseases. J Gerontol  A Biol Sci Med Sci 2014;  69:S4-S9.
Protocol Summary  Form
7270
Rutherford, Bret
Page 41 of 43
152. Felger JC, Miller  AH. Cytokine effects  on the basal ganglia and dopamine function:  the subcortical 
source of  inflammatory  malaise. Front Neuroendocrinol 2012;  33:315-327.
153. Wechsler DA: Manual for the Wechsler  Adult Intelligence Scale–Revised. New  York: Psychological  
Corporation, 1981.154. Kramer JH, Mungas D, Possin  KL, et al. NIH  EXAMINER:  conceptualization and  development  of an 
executive function battery.  J Int Neuropsychol  Soc. Jan 2014;20(1):11-19.
155. Possin KL, LaMarre AK, Wood KA,  Mungas DM, Kramer JH. Ecological validity and  
neuroanatomical correlates  of the NIH EXAMINER executive composite score. J Int Neuropsychol Soc 
2014; 20:20-28.156. Guralnik JM, Simonsick EM, Ferrucci L, et  al. A short physical performance  battery assessing lower 
extremity function: association  with self-reported disability  and prediction of mortality and nursing home 
admission. J  Gerontol 1994; 49:M85-94.
157. Organization  WH.  Measuring Health and Disability: Manual for WHO Disability Assessment Schedule  
(WHODAS 2.0). Geneva,  Switzerland: WHO  Press;  2010.
158. Farias ST, Mungas D, Reed  BR, et al. The measurement of everyday cognition (ECog): scale 
development and psychometric properties.  Neuropsychology 2008; 22:531-544.
159. Greenberg SA.  Analysis  of measurement  tools of fear of falling for high-risk,  community-dwelling 
older adults. Clin  Nursing Res  2012; 21:113-130.
160. Tinetti ME,  Richman  D, Powell L. Falls efficacy as a  measure  of fear  of falling. J  Gerontol 1990; 
45:P239-243.161. Blair SN, Haskell WL, Ho P, et al. Assessment of habitual  physical activity by a seven-day  recall  in a 
community survey and  controlled experiments. Am J Epidemiol  1985;  122:794 –804.
162. US Department of  Health and Human Services.  Physical  activity  and health: a report of the Surgeon 
General. Atlanta: National Technical  Information Service; 1996.
163. National Institute  for Clinical Excellence. Depression: management of  depression  in primary  and 
secondary care. Clinical practice guideline  No 23. London: National Institute for  Clinical Excellence, 2004.
164. Kirsch I, Deacon  BJ, Huedo-Medina TB. Initial Severity and  Antidepressant Benefits: A Meta-
Analysis of  Data  Submitted  to the Food and Drug Administration. PLoS Medicine  2008; 5:260-268.
165. Fournier  JC, DeRubeis RJ, Hollon SD, et al. Antidepressant Drug Effects and Depression Severity: A  
Patient-Level Meta-Analysis. JAMA 2010; 303:47-53.
Protocol Summary  Form
7270
Rutherford, Bret
Page 42 of 43
166. Panel on Handling  Missing Data in Clinical Trials. The Prevention and Treatment of Missing Data in  
Clinical Trials. Washington, DC: National  Research Council,  2010.
167. Little RJ, Wang Y. Pattern-mixture models for multivariate incomplete data  with  covariates. 
Biometrics 1996;  52:98-111.
168. Herrman  H, Patrick  DL, Diehr P, Martin ML, Fleck M,  Simon GE, Buesching DP. Longitudinal 
investigation of depression outcomes in primary care in  six countries:  the LIDO  Study. Functional status,  
health service  use and treatment of  people with depressive symptoms. Psychol Med 2002;  32:889-902.
169. Petersen RC, Smith  GE, Waring SC,  Ivnik RJ, Tangalos EG, Kokmen E.  Mild  cognitive  impairment: 
Clinical characterization and outcome. Arch Neurol  1999; 56:303–308.
170. Aisen  PS, Petersen RC, Donohue MC, et al. Clinical Core  of the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative: progress and plans. Alzheimers Dement 2010;  6:239-246.
171. Verghese  J, Wang C, Holtzer  R. Relationship of clinic-based gait speed  measurement to limitations in 
community-based activities in older  adults. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 2011; 92:844-846.
172. Slifstein M, Hwang D, Martinez D, et al. Biodistribution  and Radiation Dosimetry of the Dopamine D2 
Ligand 11C-Raclopride Determined from  Human Whole Body PET. J  Nuc Med 2006; 47:313-319.
173. Oquendo  M, Stanley  B, Ellis S, Mann JJ. Protection of humans  in intervention research  for suicidal 
behavior. Am  J Psychiatry 2004; 161:1558-1563.
174. Paykel ES, Ramana R,  Cooper Z, Hayhurst H, Kerr J,  Barocka A. Residual  symptoms after  partial  
remission: an  important  outcome in depression.  Psychol Med 1995; 25:1171-1180.
175. Kennedy N, Paykel ES. Residual symptoms at remission  from depression: impact on long-term 
outcome. J  Affect Disord 2004;  80:135-144.
Uploads
Upload the entire grant application(s)Upload copy(ies) of unbolded Consent Form(s)Unified_PSF_AMEND-A_Study_of_L-DOPA_for_Depression_and_Slowing_in_Older_Adults_(07_23_2018-YH).pdfUpload copy(ies) of bolded Consent Form(s)Upload copy(ies) of recruitment  materials/ads to be reviewed
Upload evidence of FDA  Radiolabeled Drug approval(s)
Upload copy(ies) of JRSC approval(s)
Upload copy(ies) of the  HIPAA form
HIPAA 2018.pdf7270 Spanish HIPAA 2018.pdf
Statistical Analysis plan 
Descriptive statistics are expressed as m
eans and standard deviations or percentages. Chi-square 
analyses and independent sample s t-tests were used to analyze dose dependent increases in 
processing and gait speed.  Also the change s in Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression. 