 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bilateral Continuous Erector Spinae Blocks for Post -Sternotomy Pain Management: A 
Single Ar m Interventional Study . 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
10/25/2021  
  
 
 
 
CHeRP IRB Additional Protocol Information:  
     In addition to the CHeRP SmartForms, all protocols must inc lude the following sections. If a section is 
not applicable for the current protocol please indicate why this is the case. Please note that a complete 
protocol* consists of the CHeRP forms and the information provided in this form.  
  
TITLE:  
Bilateral Continuous Erector Spinae Blocks for Post -Sternotomy Pain Management: 
A Single Ar m Interventional Study . 
  
A. Specific Aims/Objectives:  
Overall Aim:  To evaluate the efficacy of bilateral continuous erector spinae block s 
(BESB) for postoperative analgesia in children and adolescents undergoing cardiac 
surgical procedures via sternotomy  in the Early Recovery After Surgery (ERAS) 
program  in a single arm, open label, interventional study . 
Specific Aims:  
1. Evaluate the utility of BESB in cardiac surgical patients by  assess ing the pain 
scores, opioid consumption, and complications related to BESB.  
2. Compare intra - and postoperative opioid use in patients receiving BESB vs.  
matched  historical controls who did not receive BESB in the ERAS program.  
3. Compare clinical  outcomes between the 2 groups: duration of mechanical 
ventilation, time to mobilization, pain scores  (median pain score  per period ), 
intensive care unit length of stay  (LOS) , incidence of postoperative nausea and 
vomiting, postoperative complications, hospital LOS, readmissions, mortality, 
recovery to baseline activity and sleep post discharge , total and rescue opioid 
pain medication requirements.  
4.  Evaluate quality of sleep and activity with ( Fitbit™ ) smart watch device of 
patients receiving BESB during the postoperative period.  
Hypothesis:  The investigators hypothesize that BES B is efficacious with  respect to 
pain control and will lead to a 15%  or greater  reduction of consumed opiate 
equivalents at 12, 24 and 48 hours , and the 24 -hour  perio d preceding both 72 and 

96 hours postoperatively  compared to matched  historical  controls  who received 
standard of care pain management (systemic opioid therapy) .  
 
B. Background and Significance:  
Regional anesthesia —and pediatric regional anesthesia in particular —is a rapidly 
evolving subfield of anesthesia practice driven with considerable urgency by the 
growing recognition that even appropriate perioperative opioid administration can 
have significant deleterious long -term effects1. 
Regional anesthetics can provide targeted, continuous analgesia to select 
dermatomes with minimal additional patient risk and as such , have become routine 
components of opioid -sparing intraoperative and postoperative pain management 
plans for non -cardiac surgical patients at BCH. In addition to the postulated benefit 
of reducing overall opioid exposure (and potentially reducing the risk for long term 
physiologic and behavioral dependence upon opioids ), regional anesthetics may 
allow for earlier  extubation after selected surgeries, shorter  intensive care unit  
(ICU) stays, shorter inpatient admissions, earlier mobilization, fewer 
gastrointestinal complications, and improved patient and care team  satisfaction 
scores.  
Historically, regional anesthetics have been avoided  in cardiac surger y as most 
patients are pharmacologically anticoagulated  during their procedures and are 
thus at increased risk for bleeding. 2-5 This is particularly worrisome  in the pediatric 
cardiac surgical population as many of these children remain intubated for an 
extended period of time postoperatively and therefore may not have reliable 
neurological exams in the setting of neuraxial regional anesthetics —potentially 
resu lting in unrecognized  hemorrhage -related  acquired neurological deficits.  
Recently, the erector spinae block (ESB) has become popular for providing 
analgesia after a number of anterior chest and abdominal procedures.7-10 This 
simple interfascial plane bloc k can reliably provide unilateral chest and/or 
abdominal wall analgesia.11 It has been described in numerous case reports and 
case series as an effective block for management of unilateral thoracotomies, 
unilateral rib fractures, unilateral abdominal incis ions and most notably,  for 
management of post -sternotomy pain  when applied bilaterally .12,13 New case 
reports and series involving the ESB are being published almost weekly  with a 
growing number of manuscripts specific to cardiac surgical applications.14,1 5 
Indeed , numerous randomized controlled trials have investigate d the analgesic 
efficacy of bilateral erector spinae plane blocks (BES B) compared with 
conventional treatment for pain after cardiac surgery in adult patients and have 
been published recently (2018 -2019) with promising results.16 
As an interfascial plane block in a compressible anatomical space, the ESB is 
considered safe in anticoagulated (or recently anticoagulated) patients.17 It is fast 
becoming a preferred anesthetic option at BCH for anti coagulated  patients  - as 
opposed to neuraxial (e.g. epidural) and paraneuraxial blocks (i.e. paravertebral) 
nerve blocks, which are largely contraindicated in this setting. Further, given its 
relative ease of placement, apparent efficacy and safety profile , it is increasingly 
becoming a standard option for patients undergoing a wide r ange of thoracic, 
abdominal and  thoraco -abdominal procedures.  
We are fortunate at BCH to have the largest pediatric cardiac surgical program  in 
the U nited States . We also have an active, and well organized regional anesthesia 
service.  We are in a unique position to more thoroughly evaluate the effectiveness 
and safety of regional anesthetics in children following cardiac surgery. 
Furthermore, we feel it is critical that institu tions such as BCH take a leading role 
in documenting the effects of regional anesthesia on the most important outcome 
measures when considering perioperative medicine. These include: overall pain 
management, surgical healing, functional recovery, long term  pain symptoms, and 
emotional/behavioral outcomes after surgery.  
Indeed, given these considerations,  our group recently investigated the feasibility 
of performing these blocks bilaterally in a pediatric cardiac surgical population 
undergoing sternotomy -based procedures  (IRB-P00031524 ).  At the conclusion of 
this 10 -patient pilot, our group found that performing these blocks was technically 
feasible , requiring 30 minutes or less of OR time, resulting in no known 
complications . Furtherm ore, our data suggested an approximate 25% reduction in 
rescue opioid requirements in the first 48 hours amongst the erector spinae group 
(p=0.048).  
During  the short time required to complete our pilot study, several additional adult 
studies of improved size and qu ality have been published demonstrating favorable 
outcomes with this block for a variety of indications, including post -sternotomy 
care. As such, it has effectively become a n accepted practice  in the larger 
community and here at BCH as well, with surgeons,  anesthesiologists, and families 
frequently requesting an ESB  (unilateral or bilateral) as a part of the care they 
either provide or receive. We believe we have reached a point of  clinical equipoise 
in relation to the existing standard of systemic opioid t herapy  and seek to  evaluate 
the relative efficacy of this technique in a pediatric cardiac surgical population at 
BCH . 
In order to best evaluate the efficacy of this block in the pediatric cardiac 
population, a blinded, randomized  and controlled trial would be ideal. However, 
given that randomization could be challenging  and the fact that blinding would not 
be feasible,  we believe an  observational prospective  cohort  study is most 
appropriate  at this time . 
As such, we propose to evaluat e the comparative efficacy of BESB versus  matched  
historical controls who received  standard of care pain management  (systemic 
opioid therapy ) for patients undergoing cardiac surgery via sternotomy by means 
of a single arm , open label,  interventional study  that will compare as the primary 
outcome rescue analgesic requirements, rendered as opiate equivalents, at 12, 24 
and 48 hours , and the 24 hour  period  preceding both 72 and 96 hours 
postoperatively . ‘Efficacy’ will be considered as  a threshold of clinical significance 
being defined as a 15% difference) . In addition to the primary endpoint, we plan to 
evaluate the duration of intubation, length of ICU stay,  median pain scores, 
incidence of PONV (postoperative nausea and vomiting; 0 -6h, 6-12h  and overall), 
time to mobilization and adverse events between these groups.  Postoperative  data 
collected from standard clinical follow -up tools, such as return to baseline sleep 
and activity  status  as well as pain medication requirement s at home , will also be 
compared.  In addition, we plan to evaluate the quality of sleep and activity with a 
smart watch ( Fitbit™ ) during the perioperative period  in the BESB group only . 
 
C. Preliminary Studies  
While the paravertebral block  and, increasingly, the ESB  are commonly used for 
postoperative management of numerous thoracic procedures in adults and 
children, there is little prospective data available evaluating the efficacy of these 
blocks  in this population  and no prospective data evaluating the utility of such 
blocks for management of post -sternotomy pain in a pediatric population.  
Retrospective studies and case reports exist that  suggest that ESBs are efficacious 
and low risk, but very few prospective data exist. The ESB has been described as 
having utilit y in the adult perioperative environment for patients undergoing 
breast surgery19, shoulder surgery20, thoracotomy/thoracoscopic surgery9,21, 
thoracic spinal surgery,22 and ventral abdominal surgery7.  Two case reports have 
also described its utility in tr eating patients with chronic pain in the thoracic 
dermatomes.23 As noted above, there is at least one published prospective study in 
adults,16 but similar studies in pediatric patients are yet to be undertaken. I n 
general, there is much less published evidence in children; however, there are case 
reports and case series describing its use for patients undergoing thoracic and 
abdominal surgery12,24 -26.  
Large retrospective analyses of multiple pediatric regional ane sthesia registries 
consistently report a very favorable safety profile for the provision of regional 
anesthetics in the pediatric population. A recent (2015) consensus statement from 
the American and European Societies of regional anesthesia (ASRA and ESRA ) 
reported the risk profile of administering regional anesthetics to anesthetized 
children, citing a risk of postoperative neurologic symptoms of 0.93/1000 cases 
(>90% of which resolve completely within 1 month) and a rate of local anesthetic 
systemic toxi city of 0.08/10000 cases.27 
As previously noted, our group recently investigated the feasibility of performing 
BESBs  in a pediatric cardiac surgical population undergoing sternotomy -based 
procedures at this institution. At the conclusion of this 10 -patient  pilot, we found 
that performing these blocks was technically feasible -- requiring 30 minutes or less 
of OR time -- and resulted in  an approximate 25% reduction in rescue opioid 
requirements in the first 48 hours amongst the BESB  group (p=0.048). There we re 
no significant adverse events noted during this pilot  with the exception of  a single  
instance of a kinked (but useable) catheter . 
While the numbers at BCH are relatively small, retrospect ive analys es of ESBs 
performed in this institution  in non -cardiac surgery  have  demonstrated  no 
evidence that this block type is associated with any greater risk than that 
demonstrated by aggregate block data from the various pediatric regional 
anesthesia registries. Information currently available suggests that regional 
blockade, when performed properly, carries a very low risk of morbidity and 
mortality in appropriately selected infants and children.28 Furthermore, we have 
found no evidence of increased adverse events present in the ESB patients when 
compared to patients  receiving other regional anesthetics in our local analysis. 
Indeed, two abstracts addressing the safety and efficacy of ESB blocks in BCH 
patients have recently been accepted for presentation at the major regional 
anesthesia conference.29,30  
 
D. Design and Methods  
(1)    Study Design  
We propose a single arm, open label, interventional  study to compare the opiate 
requirements of 45 patients  who consent to  receiv e BESB  catheters following 
cardiac surgery via sternotomy versus 90 matched historical controls  who had  
similar  surgical procedures but without BESBs . 
Patients meeting eligibility criteria will be recruited and enrolled to have BESB s 
placed for postoperative pain control as a part of their perioperative anesthetic 
plan. These patients will subsequently have a variety of preoperative demographic 
and functional data collected as well as  data related to their surgeries and 
postoperative  course all collected for later analysis. This enrolled group of patients 
will subsequently be compared regarding these outcome measures with a 1:2 
matched, retrospective analysis of patients in the cardiac surgical ERAS program 
who did not receive regiona l blocks as a component of their anesthetic care . (The 
ERAS Cardiac program is a heart center perioperative evidence -based quality 
initiative. Retrospective data analysis of outcomes for patients in this program is 
performed for quality improvement purpose s and outcomes research  [IRB 
P00029161  – PI: Nathalie Roy MD, co -investigators: Roland Brusseau MD, Morgan 
Brown MD ]). Children aged 2 years through 17 years  meeting entry criteria will be 
screened and recruited for participation from  the Boston Children’s Hospital  
cardiac surgical program . 
 
 (2)   Patient Selection, Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria and Recruitment 
Method  
Patients from BCH who meet the criteria below will be considered for recruitment:  
Inclusion Criteria:  
1. Scheduled as part of the cardiac surgical ERAS program : Patients scheduled 
for elective surgeries for the following congenital anomalies , or similar : atrial septal 
defects  (all type s), partial anomalous pulmonary venous connection (non -
obstructed ), cor-triatriatum, VSD, partial AV canal, sub -aortic membrane resection, 
anomalous aortic origin of the coronary arteries, and pulmonary valve/conduit  
implantation  
2. Scheduled to undergo a first time surgical pulmonary valve or right ventricle 
to pulmonary artery  conduit change in anatomic position , in the context of previous 
complete repair .    
3.     Ages 2 years  through 17  years . 
 
Exclusion Criteria:  
1.    Single ventricle physiology.  
2.    Significant scoliosis or other anatomic contraindications to ESB.  
3. Significant intraoperative hemodynamic instability or bleeding, as 
ascertained by clinicians taking care of the patient.  
4.    Patients with severe neurodevelopmental delays.  
5.    Patients with previous chronic pain syndromes.  
6.  Patients with a history of greater than 24 hours of postoperative or post -
procedural opioid treatment at any point in the 2 months prior to surgery.  
7.    Lack of parental consent and/or child assent.  
 
Recruitment Method:  
We plan to include pediatric patients who are scheduled for inpatient surgery 
at BCH over a period of 2 year s. Patients will be recruited by members of the 
study staff. We will contact all patients and/or families scheduled for an eligible 
ERAS procedure ( see below for details of contact method s) and otherwise meet 
criteria . 
Each morning, a designated member of the study staff will review the upcoming 
surgical schedule to identify pediatric cases that fit the study criteria 
(procedure type and age). If thes e criteria are met, the case will be sent to an 
investigator for further clinical review. A final eligibility decision will be made 
by the PI.  
 
1. Outpatients  with procedures scheduled >2 weeks from identification:  
Patients will be sent information on the study (cover letter, brochure, 
consent form) up to 2 weeks prior to their surgery or scheduled 
preoperative visit.  This will be sent either by USPS mail or by secure 
electronic mail if an e -mail is on file.  
2. Outpatients  with procedures scheduled 2 weeks or less from 
identification:  Patients will be contacted by secure electronic email and/or 
given informational materials at their preoperative visit if we are unable to 
send mailers reliably VIA USPS.  We will allo w at least a day for them to 
consider participating in the study.  
3.     Outpatient  telephone follow -up: Patients sent information packets 
either by USPS or secure electronic email may be contacted by telephone to 
confirm receipt of the materials and answe r any initial questions after such 
time as they would normally be expected to have received and reviewed the 
packets (the next week for USPS and no sooner than 1 day following email). 
If materials have not been received, patients will be given the opportun ity 
to have those materials sent or be contacted at a preoperative visit.  
4.    Inpatients  with no planned discharge and/or preoperative clinic 
appointments:  Patients who are already inpatient will be approached on the 
patient floor or other inpatient enco unter with study information. We will 
approach as soon as we have confirmed eligibility and will provide them 
with recruitment materials prior to their day of surgery and allow at least 
24 hours for a decision to be made.  
5.  International patients : For in ternational patients  meeting entry 
criteria , recruitment materials will not be mailed internationally. If an e -mail 
is available for an eligible international patient, a secure e -mail via BCH 
server will be sent to the family. The e -mail will include all a pproved 
recruitment documents. If we are unable to reach an international family via 
e-mail, eligible international patients and their families will be approached 
and provided materials in the preoperative clinic. At this time we will 
provide information a bout the study, answer all questions and allow at least 
24 hours for them to consider participating in the study.  
6.    When feasible, c onsent will be obtained either at the time of  the 
preoperative visit , on the day of surgery , or at the bedside for those who are 
inpatient (i.e. without pre -op appointments ). When in person consent is not 
feasible, the research team will have the consent discussion by phone prior 
to the day of surgery and families will be asked to provide written  consent 
following that discussion. Written consent may be done through the RCS e -
consenting platform or by sending the consent to the home by mail or email 
and receiving a signed copy of the consent back by mail or email.   
7. In the exceptional situation when bilateral  erector spinae blocks are used 
clinically and the patient or family were not approached  for the study 
because of changes in the surgical schedule or other special situation , the 
research team can approach the families to offer participation in the study 
if they meet entry criteria . 
We have numerous recruitment strategies as cardiac surgical scheduling is 
very fluid, often with cases added only days before. Our recruitment scheme 
allows for physical and electronic mail, on -site (clinic, inpati ent) encounters, 
and phone calls to assess interest. We allow ourselves a maximum of 3 
patient contacts. Consent may be taken at any time a patient feels 
comfortable to do so, but never with less than a day for patients/families to 
think or (re)consider. W hile we do allow ourselves to take consent on the 
day of surgery, we would not endeavor to meet the patient, describe the 
study, and take consent all at once on immediately prior to being taken into 
the OR for the procedure and would ensure that this would  be done a 
minimum of 24h prior.  
It will be made clear to all eligible participants that while BESBs are used in other types of 
patient groups, they are not typically used for patients undergoing congenital cardiac 
surgery via a sternotomy at BCH, and are therefore considered to be under investigation 
in this study. Families will be informed that the study  is being done  to better understand 
if using ESBs bilaterally is an effective form of pain management for  patients undergoing  
sternotomy  when comp ared to a set of matched historical patients who did not receive 
BESBs , and whose pain management includes a multimodal pain strategy, cornerstone of 
the ERAS Cardiac program . Research staff will stress that if families elect not to participate, 
they will not receive the BESBs  unless agreed upon with  their primary anesthesia team , 
but instead the standard of care pain management at BCH ( multimodal pain regimen 
including pain -score based systemic opioid therapy  as part of the ERAS Cardiac program 
guideline a nd orderset ).   
 (3)   Description of Study Treatments or Exposures/Predictors  
Participants will have their medical record reviewed following enrollment for 
demographic information including: gender, age, weight and height, procedure, 
surgeon, and current  and historical medication use.  
Any other routine standard -of-care data will be collected preoperatively as well in 
addition to research -specific data points.  
All e nrolled patients will have bilateral erector spinae blocks (with catheters for 
postoperative local anesthetic infusion) placed by the by a member of the BCH 
regional anesthesia team (under the supervision of  a member of the research team)  
in a sterile fash ion after the cardiac surgical procedure is complete d. The placement 
is as follows:  
 
 The patient is placed in a lateral decubitus position (left or right), with all 
pressure points padded in routine fashion.  
  The area for intervention is prepped with a chl orhexidine solution, and 
sterile drapes are applied to demarcate the block placement area.  
 The T4/5 transverse process on one side is identified with the ultrasound 
transducer in a parasagittal orientation.  
 An 18g Tuohy needle is advanced to the target are a under direct ultrasound 
visualization. The needle tip is advanced until it contacts the transverse 
process, just below the erector spinae muscle complex.  
 Normal saline is injected to confirm appropriate needle tip position.  The 
erector spinae muscle is visualized to be elevated up off of the transverse 
process with normal saline injection  
 With confirmation of appropriate needle tip position, the initial local 
anesthetic bolus is injected using a standard, weight -based dosing protocol.  
 Following the bolus  injection, a catheter is threaded into the space occupied 
by the local anesthetic bolus.  
 Catheter tip position is verified by one or more of the following: ultrasound 
visualization of the catheter tip, ultrasound visualization of instilled normal 
saline a nd/or ultrasound visualization of a small hyperechoic (i.e. bright on 
ultrasound) injection of air.  
 With the catheter tip position identified, the catheter is tunneled to a 
cutaneous exit point approximately 2 -3cm from the incision using a 
Crawford needle.  
 The catheter is dressed in standard fashion with an adhesive catheter 
anchor, Dermabond, Mastisol, Tegaderm and tape.  
 This is repeated for the contralateral side. To the extent possible, this will be 
done without repositioning in a contralateral decubitus  position.  
 A label indicating that each catheter is a nerve -block catheter with its 
laterality and date of placement noted is applied to each catheter.  
 Catheter placement is complete.  
 Postoperative infusion of local anesthetic  (ropivacaine)  via the nerve block 
catheter is initiated  and managed by the Acute Pain Service (per 
standardized, clinical weight -based protocol s). 
 Procedural notes:  
o Minor deviations from  the above procedure  (e.g. small changes in 
sequence, needle entrance locations, am ount of catheter deployed, 
etc.) are possible as the anatomy, positioning, etc. of individual 
patients varies. This is anticipated and allowable so long as such 
modifications  remain within what is currently considered standard 
of care  for the placement of these blocks  and what is done in a given 
case is considered the appropriate standard of clinical care for that 
patient by the clinical providers placing the block(s) . 
  
All patients  will have access to the multimodal pain regimen whic h is standard of 
care for all ERAS Cardiac patient and includes acetaminophen and ketorolac, when 
otherwise not contraindicated, as well as pain -score based opiate  rescue 
medications as needed. All patients have access to postoperative  pain management 
as n eeded by means of  a standard opioid -based PCA/NCA demand protocols  
utilized at BCH  if needed .  In addition, all enrolled patients  will be followed by the 
Acute Pain Service at BCH  as is the standard of care  for all patients receiving nerve 
blocks , enabling access to additional assessment, catheter and infusion 
management (where appropriate) and opioid treatment as needed 24 hours a day, 
7 days a week. In addition, one of the primary investigators will be available  to the 
Acute Pain Service  staff  for consultation 24 hours a day regarding  any desired 
consultation on study patients.    
 
Possible risks related to the block include bleeding, infection, local anesthetic 
systemic toxicity, local anesthetic insensitivity and incomplete block and/or block 
failure. These risks occur at no greater (or lesser ) frequency than when associated 
with the use of such blocks in routine clinical situations.  
 
Intraoperative and postoperative anesthetic and surgical data , routinely collected 
for the Society of Thoracic Surgery (STS) , will be collected from the EMR.  
 
In addition  to observational tools and subjective scoring , patient functional status 
(activity, sleep quality and other measures) will be assessed by actigraphic analysis  
using the  Fitbit™ Charge 3 smartwatch . A Fitbit ™ will be p laced on the non -dominant 
arm, if possible, after extubation  on the day of surgery . The Fitbit™ will remain on 
the patient until discharge from the hospital  (which on average is about 5 days 
post -op) and the actigraphic data subsequent ly will be downloaded to the secure 
research database and the data wiped from the device.  If a study subject  had an 
unfo reseeable complication and they no longer progress ed along the  standard 
recovery path (e.g. re -intubation, return to ICU),  or if the wat ch was interfering in 
clinical care in any way,  the Fitbit™ would be removed.  
Following primary data collection for the enrolled subjects, each subject will be 
matched by surgical procedure usi ng the STS procedure code, to 2 patients within 
the cardiac surgery ERAS program QI database  (IRB #P00029161  which  allow s 
retrospective data analysis of outcomes ) by the research team. All patients 
recruited for this study are themselves already part of the enhanced recovery after 
cardiac surgery clinical program [ QIP]. Matching will be performed 1:2 with respect 
to surgical procedure  and diagnosis using the STS codes , within 30% of the study 
patient’s age and according to gender  (if possible ) and will be blinded to outcomes .   
Thus, up to  90 additional patients will be included in this study,  retrospectively  in 
addition to  the 45 study patients  from the single arm interventional  cohort  study  
(BESB) .  
 
Groups will be compared for demographic data, risk factors ( from the STS 
database), diagnosis, procedure and car diopulmonary bypass and clamp times to 
ensure their similarities  
 
E. Definition of Primary and Secondary Outcomes/Endpoints  
 Primary:  
 Analgesic requirements, rendered as opiate equivalents, at 12, 24 and 48 
hours, and the 24 hours preceding both 72 and 96 hours postoperatively . 
 Secondary:  
 Analgesic requirements, rendered as total opiate equivalents, at 12, 24 and 
48 hours, and the 24 -hour  period  preceding both 72 and 96 hours 
postoperatively.  
 Duration of intubation following OR exit.  
 Duration of ICU stay following OR exit.  
 Duration of inpatient admission.  
 Median  pain scores  collected per standard of care  (VAS, NRS, INRS, or 
FLACC) at 0 -3h, 3 -6h, 6 -12h, 12 -24h, 24 -36h and 36 -48h.  
 Incidence of postoperative nausea and vomiting during the following time 
range s: 0-6h, 6 -12h, 12-24h, and overall  
 Time to mobilization (e.g. up to chair, ambulation).  
 Quality/Quantity of mobilization  and sleep  via postoperative actigraphy.  
 Outcome and satisfaction measures associated with routine perioperative 
questionnaire responses.  
 Adverse events. – catheter, hemodynamic instability during placement (new 
inotrope or vasopressor – including Ca, volume > 5ml/Kg, variation 10% 
baseline SBP and MAP)  
 All major Society of Thoracic Surgeons ( STS) standard indices of morbidity  
and mortality  
 
*Of note, all of the above data points are collected automatically (via the 
electronic medical record ) for all patients, as a part of their routin e clinical 
care, regardless of whether or not they participate in the study.   
 
F. Data Collection Methods   
All patients will be assigned a unique personal identifier that will not be linked to 
any patient identifying information. Data will be collected during the study in case 
report forms and then will be entered into a password -protected, secure database 
or automatically collected via the Regional Anesthesia Outcomes Database and 
uploaded to that same database.  
With the exception of actigraphic  data , all preoperative demographic information 
and intraoperative data will be extracted  from the patients’ EMR and loaded into 
the secure database.  
Each subsequent day, appropriate data will be extracted from the EMR to the secure 
database for later analysis. In addition to the parameters described above, various 
other catheter -related and a dverse outcome data points will be captured from the 
EMR and uploaded to the secure database for further analysis. Catheter boluses and 
catheter rate adjustments (if present) will be recorded as well.  
Research information collected on paper (or other physi cal media) during the study 
will be stored in locked cabinets with access limited to the Principal Investigator 
and research personnel affiliated with the study. Information that has been 
generated as, or transferred to, electronic media will be kept on pa ssword 
protected, secured data servers. All health information is protected by HIPAA 
(Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act) and all health records will be 
kept confidential. Patients’ birthdate, name, and all other identifying information 
will be removed when analyzing and reporting the data. Any personal identifying 
information will be stored separately from the other information provided by or 
about the patient and no personal identifying information will be reported in any 
publications or presentations. Identifying information will be kept in a password 
protected, secure file with limited access by research personnel. Once data 
collection is complete, identifying information will be destroyed.  
  
G. Data Management Methods  
All relevant information retrieved from the electronic medical record, by the PI 
and/or a member of the research team will be translated into an electronic form. 
Data collected on paper case report forms will be entered into a standard, secured 
database for intake and checking, and will be protected by encryption and 
password. Only authorized users are permitted access to the data files, and daily 
server back -up activities are executed to ensure data safety. All data will be stored 
on a password -secured research compute r, and all data entered into the computers 
will be password protected.  Procedures to ensure accurate and reliable data 
collection will include well -designed data forms and training.  
  
H. Study Timeline  
We plan to enroll a total of 45 patients in th is sing le arm, open label, interventional 
study.  We anticipate that it will take approximately 2 years  to complete enrollment 
and data collection for this study.  
  
I.  Adverse Event Criteria and Reporting Procedures  
Adverse or unanticipated events will be reported as required to the Boston 
Children’s Hospital IRB by the PI according to institutional reporting requirements.  
An Adverse Event refers to any untoward medical occurrence whether or not it is 
considered intervention -related.  
As noted above, analysi s of the retrospective outcomes data for the 45 BCH patients 
treated with ESBs, the patients in our trial study, and the national and international 
literature demonstrates no evidence that this block type is associated with any 
greater risk than that demon strated by aggregate block data from the various 
pediatric regional anesthesia registries. Information currently available suggests 
that regional blockade (including the erector spinae block), when performed 
properly, carries a very low risk of morbidity a nd mortality in appropriately 
selected infants and children.28 
Nevertheless, as there exist little prospective outcomes data related to the ES block, 
we will implement a rigorous system to follow and report any adverse events, 
including interim analyses by  a non -blinded statistician, as described below:  
  
Adverse Event Monitoring:  
Adverse outcomes will be carefully tracked for all patients enrolled in the study.   
Enrollment will be halted and the IRB informed by the PI if any of the following 
conditions ar e met:  
 
 1 of any of the following serious adverse events . 
o Patient death . 
o Pneumothorax  directly resulting from placement or removal of the 
blocks and catheters as evidenced by: 1 - lung puncture during 
placement resulting in a moderate to large pneumothorax on the side 
affected performed within 8 hours, and/or the development of a new 
air le ak in an existing chest tube collection system.  2- The development 
of a new moderate to large pneumothorax within 8 hours after removal 
of Erector Spinae plane catheters.  
o Hematoma at the site of the catheter/block —causing pain or any 
neurological symptoms for the patient.  
o Persistent neurologic symptoms lasting more than 3 days after a single 
shot block or catheter is removed.  
o Local anesthetic systemic toxicity (any symptoms leading to this 
diagnosis by a study team participant)  
 >2 of any of the following mi nor/moderate adverse events  in a given patient 
or >10  in aggregate:  
o Persistent bleeding at the site of the catheter insertion or block 
placement.  
o Leakage of local anesthetic from the catheter insertion site that leads 
to discontinuation of the catheter infusion.  
o Redness or superficial infection of the catheter site or site of the block 
placement.  
o Skin irritation at the site of the catheter insertion or block placement 
that results in greater than 3 cm of induration or is associated with 
pain.   
In additi on to these stoppage rules, we plan to have Dr. Meena Nathan MD (Director 
of Quality and Safety, Cardiac Surgery, BCH)  independently review the case outcomes, 
etc. to ensure patient/subject safety in a way that may not be captured by the above 
stoppage rul es. This monitor will make such assessments for each cohor t of 15 
patients. As Dr. Meena is not a part of the study team, these reviews need not be 
blinded/redacted/etc. in any way. Any c oncerns raised by Dr. Meena  will be brought 
to the attention of the PI directly and the I RB as well in a timely fashion.  
 
If there is a pause for any of the above reasons, continuance of the protocol will be at 
the discretion of the IRB in consultation with the study team. No indivi dual care data 
will be reported unless there is a serious adverse effect. Reports will be done in an 
aggregated fashion.  
  
Special note regarding ropivacaine:  
Ropivacaine use constitutes the standard of care at BCH for all nerve blocks and 
regional anesthe tics, including cardiac surgical ERAS patients . Known potential 
adverse consequences of this mode of delivery of this medication include 
hypersensitivity, allergic reaction, hypotension and cardiac arrhythmias if injected 
intravascularly. The presence of a ny of these will be assessed by the primary 
anesthesiologist intraoperatively and treated appropriately at the time of block 
placement and initial bolus and further assessed for such daily by members of the 
research team and Acute Pain Service. Any occurre nce of a possible adverse event 
or events will be documented and reported to the DSMB, the IRB and the 
Department of Anesthesia Quality Assurance Physician as appropriate. In the event 
of a serious adverse event, it will be reported to the DSMB and IRB imm ediately and 
the study halted until a thorough investigation into the cause can be made.  
The relative safety of ropivacaine for use in regional anesthesia is supported by the 
information contained the Pediatric Regional Anesthesia Network (PRAN) 
database. The PRAN is a consortium of major pediatric centers in North America 
that manages a prospective data registry on pediatric regional anesthesia. From 
their database, which at this time comprises more than 130,000 pediatric regional 
anesthetics from numerous  major centers in the US and Canada, ropivacaine is 
documented to be used in greater than 85% of pediatric regional with a safety 
profile at least equivalent to, if not better than, bupivacaine.31 
Further, ropivacaine is very well studied in pediatrics. There is an extensive body 
of prospective clinical trials and clinical outcomes studies on ropivacaine 
pharmacokinetics, safety and clinical outcomes from infancy through adolescence.   
Our prescribi ng practices at BCH in the Regional Anesthesia and Acute Pain 
Services are derived from that body of PK information and consensus 
recommendations.  
We therefore regard ropivacaine as the established standard of care for pediatric 
regional anesthesia and ha ve selected it for use in this study.  
  
J.  Quality Control Method  
Data quality control will be assured through automated and manual methods. The 
study database enhances data quality through required entry fields for critical data 
and automatic flags for m issing or out -of-range data. Efforts will be made to 
minimize data entry error by the development of a user -friendly database and all 
data entry will be double -checked with the source files. Data will be audited for 
accuracy by investigators after being en tered into the database.  
  
K.  Data Analysis Plan  
At the time of data analysis, de-identified datasets will be downloaded from the 
secure database and merged into secure statistical analysis tool for purposes of 
analysis. Missing data will be accounted for  when the data is coded into respective 
variables.  
Descriptive statistics will be generated in order to summarize demographic 
characteristics of patients enrolled. Data will be tested for normality using the 
Shapiro -Wilk test. Data will be presented as tot al n (%), means and standard 
deviations (SD) if the distribution appears normal, or medians and range when not.   
Assuming normality, t -tests will be conducted to investigate the differences 
between the two exposure groups (to compare total opioid equivale nts, time 
required to place the block, time to extubation, and time to discharge, etc.). If data 
does not appear to be normal, Wilcoxon Rank Sum/Mann -Whitney tests will be 
used for group comparisons. Repeated measure analysis will be used to compare 
pain s cores over time between groups and when compared to baseline values.  
Adverse events and complications (if any) associated with the blocks will be 
recorded and categorized. Fisher’s exact test will be used to compare the 
proportion of patients who reported  adverse events between the two groups. 
P<0.05 will be considered statistically significant.  
Should a clinically significant effect be demonstrated, healthcare costs  related to 
the surgical encounter  for both groups will be approximated and compared  in order 
to better assess  the added value of the intervention in a more global fashion.  
 
L.  Sample Size Considerations  
In order to evaluate the efficacy of BESB in this cardiac surgical population 
compared to those who did not receive blocks , we  have  defined ‘efficacious’ as 
denoting an at least 15% difference in  the total opioid consumption at 96hours 
based on  the historical rescue opiate data in the matched  cohort. Assuming an alpha 
of 5%, 80% power, and the mean opiate requirements found in our pilot study , we 
estimate that a total sample size of 38 patients undergoing sternotomy with BESBs 
and 76 matched controls  are needed to demonstrate efficacy  of the new treatment 
(BESB).  
Table 1  (below) demonstrates that, using a 1:2 ratio of BESB: standard ERAS 
patients, 38 BESB and 76 standard ERAS patients are required to detect a 0.18 mean 
difference (15% relative reduction associated with BESB) in square -root Total (96 -
hr) OME between groups with 80% power using a two -sided 0.05 -level test.  
Because the coeff icient of variation for 48 -hour OME is somewhat smaller, this 
sample size will provide 87% power to detect a 15% relative reduction (0.16 mean 
difference) in square -root 48 -hr OME between groups using a two -sided 0.05 -level 
test.  
Because the larger SD of the two groups from background data (see Table 2 ) was 
used in these calculations, and because the groups will be matched on several 
patient characteristics which will minimize variation, these assumptions are 
conservative and power  to detect the effect sizes shown in Table 1 may be even 
higher than shown.  
 
Table 1.  Required Sample Size to Detect BESB vs. ERAS  Group (1:2 Ratio)  
Reductions in 48 - and 96 -hour OME (square -root transformed) assuming two -
sided α=0.05 , 80%/85% Power , 48-hour mean sqrt OME 1.05 and 96 -hour mean 
sqrt OME 1.23 in ERAS Group.  
Outcome  
(sq. root)  SD %Reduction  Group 
Difference  Power  BESB N  ERAS N  
48 hr OME  0.26 15% 0.16 80% 32 64 
48 hr OME  0.26 15% 0.16 85% 36 72 
48 hr OME  0.26 20% 0.21 80% 19 38 
48 hr OME  0.26 20% 0.21 85% 21 42 
        
96 hr OME  0.32 15% 0.18 80% 38 76 
96 hr OME  0.32 15% 0.18 85% 43 86 
96 hr OME  0.32 20% 0.25 80% 20 40 
96 hr OME  0.32 20% 0.25 85% 23 46 
 
Table 2.  Background Data  
Group  N Obs  Variable  N Mean  Std Dev  Median  
ERAS  20 sqD0N0D1N1  
sqtotalome  
D0N0D1N1_OME  
Total_OME  
 20 
20 
20 
20 
 1.050  
1.231  
1.134  
1.557  
 0.181  
0.211  
0.390  
0.540  
 1.049  
1.227  
1.100  
1.505  
 
BESB  10 sqD0N0D1N1  
sqtotalome  
D0N0D1N1_OME  
Total_OME  
 10 
10 
10 
10 
 0.890  
1.120  
0.854  
1.346  
 0.261  
0.320  
0.528  
0.724  
 0.898  
1.157  
0.810  
1.340  
 
 
Given the possibility of patient withdrawal due to procedural changes, 
intraoperative exclusionary events, etc., we plan to enroll 45 patients for the BESB 
intervention group and 90 matched historical controls from the cardiac ERAS 
database ( IRB P00029161 ). 
 
M.  Study Organization  
Drs. Roland Brusseau,  Nathalie Roy , and  Morgan Brown will serve as principal 
investigators. Patient screening, recruitment, enrollment, and data collection will 
be performed by a designated member of the research team.  
  
N.  Potential Benefits  
It is possible that, as a result of receiving these blocks, a patient might a) be exposed 
to less narcotic and benzodiazepine than might otherwise be the case, b) be 
extubated sooner and as such be at less risk for ventilator -associated pneumonia, 
and/or c) mobilize earlier and therefore  avoid numerous possible pos toperative 
complications.  These are just putative benefits known to be associated with 
regional anesthetics and thus may occur in study participants.   
Results from our pilot study suggested an approximate 25% reduction in opioid 
requirements in the first 4 8 hours following surgery, but the study was too small to 
draw any significant conclusions.  Currently no data exists to recommend these 
blocks over conventional management  in congenital cardiac surgery via a median 
sternotomy .  The results of this study ma y allow the investigators to develop an 
appropriately powered, randomized controlled trial to evaluate the utility of this 
intervention which might be used to inform such management decisions for future 
patients.  
  
O.  Privacy Provisions  
Information will o nly be made available to individuals who are part of the research 
team. Medical information collected for this study will only become part of the 
child’s medical record if the information is determined to be pertinent to the care 
the child is receiv ing at Boston Children’s Hospital. Disclosure of personal 
information may occur only when required by law.  
  
P.  Confidentiality Provisions  
All identifying information such as dates of birth, names, and medical record 
numbers will be removed from the study database. All patients will be assigned an 
ID number that will not be linked to any patient identifying information. All data 
will be electronically secured in a password protected private folder. Only research 
investigators and personnel affiliated with t he study will have access to patient 
information.  
Every effort will be made by research staff to keep patient information confidential. 
To ensure patient confidentiality, all research data will be secured in locked filing 
cabinets in a locked office. Any p ublications that result from this study will not be 
linked with personal identifiable information that would disclose the identity of 
study subjects.  
  
Q.  References  
  
1. Harbaugh CM, Lee JS, Hu HM, McCabe SE, Voepel -Lewis T, Englesbe MJ, 
Brummett CM, Wal jee JF. Persistent Opioid Use Among Pediatric Patients After 
Surgery. Pediatrics. 2018 Jan;141(1). pii: e20172439. doi: 10.1542/peds.2017 -
2439. Epub 2017 Dec 4 . 
2.  Hemmerling T, Choiniere JL, Basile F, Prieto I. Regional anesthesia in cardiac 
surgery and immediate extubation after cardiac surgery: a different view. Can J 
Anaesth 2005;52:883.  
3. Djaiani G, Fedorko L, Beattie WS. Regional anesthesia in cardiac surgery: a 
friend or a foe? Semin Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 2005;9:87 -104.  
4.      Riedel BJ. Region al anesthesia for major cardiac and noncardiac surgery: more 
than just a strategy for effective analgesia? J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 
2001;15:279 -81. 
5.      Mychaskiw G, 2nd, Heath BJ. Regional anesthesia and pediatric cardiac surgery. 
Anesth Analg 2000;9 1:1562.  
6.      Peterson KL, DeCampli  WM, Pike NA, Robbins RC, Reitz BA. A report of two 
hundred twenty cases of regional anesthesia in pediatric cardiac surgery. 
Anesth Analg 2000;90:1014 -9. 
7.      Chin KJ, Adhikary S, Sarwani N, Forero M. The analgesic efficacy of pre -operative 
bilateral erector spinae plane (ESP) blocks in patients having ventral hernia 
repair. Anaesthesia 2017;72:452 -60. 
8.      Chin KJ, Malhas L, Perlas A. The Erector Spinae Plane Block Provides Visceral 
Abdominal Analgesia in Bariatr ic Surgery: A Report of 3 Cases. Reg Anesth Pain 
Med 2017;42:372 -6. 
9.      Forero M, Rajarathinam M, Adhikary S, Chin KJ. Erector spinae plane (ESP) block 
in the management of post thoracotomy pain syndrome: A case series. Scand J 
Pain 2017;17:325 -9. 
10.    Forero M, Rajarathinam M, Adhikary S, Chin KJ. Continuous Erector Spinae Plane 
Block for Rescue Analgesia in Thoracotomy After Epidural Failure: A Case 
Report. A A Case Rep 2017;8:254 -6. 
11.    Ivanusic J, Konishi Y, Barrington MJ. A Cadaveric Study Inv estigating the 
Mechanism of Action of Erector Spinae Blockade. Reg Anesth Pain Med 
2018;43:567 -71. 
12.    Kaushal, B., et al. "Efficacy of Bilateral Erector Spinae Plane Block in 
Management of Acute Postoperative Surgical Pain After Pediatric Cardiac 
Surge ries Through a Midline Sternotomy." J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth  2020; 
34(4): 981 -986. . 
13.    Wong J, Navaratnam M, Boltz G, Maeda K, Ramamurthi RJ, Tsui BCH. Bilateral 
continuous erector spinae plane blocks for sternotomy in a pediatric cardiac 
patient. J Clin Anesth 2018;47:82 -3. 
14.    Leyva FM, Mendiola WE, Bonilla AJ, Cubillos J, Moreno DA, Chin KJ. Continuous 
Erector Spinae Plane (ESP) Block for Postoperative Analgesia after Minimally 
Invasive Mitral Valve Surgery. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 2018;32:22 71-4. 
15.    Monahan A, Guay J, Hajduk J, Suresh S. Regional Analgesia Added to General 
Anesthesia Compared With General Anesthesia Plus Systemic Analgesia for 
Cardiac Surgery in Children: A Systematic Review and Meta -analysis of 
Randomized Clinical Trials . Anesth Analg 2019;128:130 -6. 
16.    Krishna SN, Chauhan S, Bhoi D, et al. Bilateral Erector Spinae Plane Block for 
Acute Post -Surgical Pain in Adult Cardiac Surgical Patients: A Randomized 
Controlled Trial.  
17.    De Cassai A, Tonetti T. Local anesthetic  spread during erector spinae plane 
block. J Clin Anesth 2018;48:60 -1. 
18.    Tsui BCH, Navaratnam M, Boltz G, Maeda K, Caruso TJ. Bilateral automatized 
intermittent bolus erector spinae plane analgesic blocks for sternotomy in a 
cardiac patient who underwent cardiopulmonary bypass: A new era of Cardiac 
Regional Anesthesia. J Clin Anesth 2018;48:9 -10. 
19.    Kimachi PP, Martins EG, Peng P, Forero M. The Erector Spinae Plane Block 
Provides Complete Surgical Anesthesia in Breast Surgery: A Case Report. A A 
Pract 2018.  
20.    Forero M, Rajarathinam M, Adhikary SD, Chin KJ. Erector spinae plane block for 
the management of chronic shoulder pain: a case report. Can J Anaesth 
2018;65:288 -93. 
21.    Adhikary SD, Pruett A, Forero M, Thiruvenkatarajan V. Erector  spinae plane 
block as an alternative to epidural analgesia for post -operative analgesia 
following video -assisted thoracoscopic surgery: A case study and a literature 
review on the spread of local anaesthetic in the erector spinae plane. Indian J 
Anaesth 2 018;62:75 -8. 
22.    Ueshima H, Otake H. Clinical experiences of ultrasound -guided erector spinae 
plane block for thoracic vertebra surgery. J Clin Anesth 2017;38:137.  
23.    Ramos J, Peng P, Forero M. Long -term continuous erector spinae plane block for 
palliative pain control in a patient with pleural mesothelioma. Can J Anaesth 
2018;65:852 -3. 
24.    Hernandez MA, Palazzi L, Lapalma J, Forero M, Chin KJ. Erector Spinae Plane 
Block for Surgery of the Posterior Thoracic Wall in a Pediatric Patient. Reg 
Anesth  Pain Med 2018;43:217 -9. 
25.    Munoz F, Cubillos J, Bonilla AJ, Chin KJ. Erector spinae plane block for 
postoperative analgesia in pediatric oncological thoracic surgery. Can J Anaesth 
2017;64:880 -2. 
26.    Holland, E. L. and A. T. Bosenberg . "Early exper ience with erector spinae plane 
blocks in children." Paediatr Anaesth  2020; 30(2): 96 -107 . 
27.    Ivani G, Suresh S, Ecoffey C, et al. The European Society of Regional Anaesthesia 
and Pain Therapy and the American Society of Regional Anesthesia and Pain 
Medicine Joint Committee Practice Advisory on Controversial Topics in 
Pediatric Regional Anesthesia. Reg Anesth Pain Med 2015;40:526 -32. 
28.    Polaner DM, Drescher J. Pediatric regional anesthesia: what is the current safety 
record? Paediatr Anaesth 2011; 21:737 -42. 
29.    Foz C ES, Alrayashi W, Kordun A, Cravero JP. Erector Spinae Plane block in 
children undergoing coarctation of aorta repair.  American Society of Regional 
Anesthesia. Las Vegas, NV2019.  
30.    Eklund SE FC, Alrayashi W, Kordun A, Cravero J P. Erector Spinae Plane Blocks in 
Patients Undergoing Periacetabular Osteotomy.  American Society of Regional 
Anesthesia. Las Vegas, NV2019.  
31.    Suresh S, De Oliveira GS, Jr. Local anaesthetic dosage of peripheral nerve blocks 
in children: analysis of 4 0&#xa0;121 blocks from the Pediatric Regional 
Anesthesia Network database. Br J Anaesth 2018;120:317 -22. 
  
 