 
Full Study Title: Harnessing social media to reduce cannabis use among adolescents and 
emerging adults in an urban emergency department  
 
 
1 
 Study Protocol  
Currently Approved Protocol: 11/8/2022  
 
 
  IRBMED #:  HUM00 139068 
 
Study Title:  SnapCoach  
 
Full Study Title: Harnessing social media to reduce cannabis use among adolescents and 
emerging adults in an urban emergency department  
 Principal Investigator: Erin E. Bonar, PhD  
 Co-Investigators:  Maureen A. Walton, MPH, PhD  
                                 Patrick M. Carter, MD  
                                    Jason E. Goldstick, PhD  
 
NCT:  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
   
 
    
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
 
Full Study Title: Harnessing social media to reduce cannabis use among adolescents and 
emerging adults in an urban emergency department  
 
 
2 
 Background 
 
     In the United States, cannabis use peaks during emerging adulthood (ages 18- 25)1 and there 
is a national trend of increasing cannabis use among emerging adults (EAs).2 Monitoring the 
Future (MTF) data show daily use increased from 2007 to 2014--  from 3.5% to 5.9% -- in both 
college and non- college EAs.3 These rates coincide with shifting cannabis attitudes,4 including 
decreasing risk perceptions,5 and the belief among youth that cannabis is easy to obtain.3 EAs 
living in urban, low socioeconomic areas comprise a population in need of focus due to their 
higher rates of cannabis use and cannabis use disorders.2  In addition, interventions initiated at 
healthcare visits, where youth tend to have higher rates of risky behavior, could have higher impact than if the intervention was given in a different location (i.e. college campus).  
     Cannabis use is associated with health risks and negative consequences among EAs. Early 
use of cannabis increases risk for substance use disorders and other problems into adulthood, including increased mortality.
6 Cannabis use is related to higher risk for both short and long term 
negative physical, psychiatric, and social outcomes.7 In addition, cannabis use may affect 
neuro- maturational development processes, causing adverse emotional and cognitive changes, 
8, 9, 10 and it can compromise decision making and inhibitory control. 10,11,12 Escalating use is 
attributed to social ecological factors such as individual level factors (i.e. mental health, delinquency, sex),  and social/environmental influences (i.e. peers, norms, parents, 
community).
13,14,15 However, acute use of cannabis also has alarming effects. Acute use alters 
executive function (i.e. attention, decision making, inhibition, impulsivity, risk taking, memo ry, 
concentration)9,16 and increases propensity for risky behaviors (i.e. risky sex 17,18, impaired 
driving 19,20). Reducing cannabis use is critical due to the high usage and potential negative 
impact of cannabis use for EAs, especially those in urban, underserved settings with disparities 
in access to services.  
The conceptual framework (Fig. 1) guiding our 
intervention incorporates theories of initiation and escalation of cannabis use and behavior change, including, motivational, behavioral, social cognit ive, social -ecological, and SM influence 
theories. We implicitly incorporate the trans -theoretical 
model,
79,80 strengths and resiliency -based approaches,81,82 and 
principles of harm reduction,83 with our intervention focus on 
eliciting alternatives to address motives for use in SnapCoach.       Given the role of peer influences in EAs’ drug use,
21 
harnessing peers for intervention delivery is a potentially viable 
strategy. Social media (SM) is an intervention platform which 
can extend healthcare interventions to EAs’ individual, social, and environmental context especially because SM has infiltrate d EAs’ daily lives.
22 A pervasive form of SM for EAs is 
Snapchat 23,24,25-- which is why we propose to harness this 
platform for intervention delivery to potentiate reach, engagement, and efficacy.  
          For these reasons, we seek to develop and test a social 
media based intervention for cannabis use among EAs, 
delivered by health coaches who will be similar age or slightly 
Figure 1. Guiding Framewo rk for 
Intervention.  
 
Full Study Title: Harnessing social media to reduce cannabis use among adolescents and 
emerging adults in an urban emergency department  
 
 
3 
 older peers (i.e. clinical practicum students, bachelor’s level psychology students, master’s level 
public health and social work students). The guiding framework  for this intervention can be 
found in Figure 1.  
  
Objective  
 
The specific aims of this clinical trial is to:  
 Conduct a randomized clinical trial of the SnapC oach intervention, where w e will examine 
feasibility and acceptability of the SnapC oach Intervention as our primary outcome measures. 
As exploratory, other outcomes we will examine the preliminary efficacy of SnapCoach (vs. 
usual care control with attention- placebo;  N=approximately  50 per group) on cannabis use 
(quantity, frequency) and consequences.   
We will conduct a randomized clinical trial (RCT), to examine  the feasibility, 
acceptability, and initial efficacy of the SnapCoach intervention. Our goal is to recruit N = 100 
participants  (as our target N)  meeting eligibility criteria, who will complete baseline measures, 
and be randomized to receive the SnapCoach intervention or a control condition. They will participate in the 4- week intervention/control condition, with a post -test administered at 1 -month 
post-baseline (i.e., end of 4 -week intervention period) and a follow- up assessment of outcomes 
at 3-months post -baseline.  
Primary outcomes are feasibility and acceptability of the Snapcoach intervention. Other 
exploratory outcomes include measures of cannabis quantity and frequen cy and consequences 
measured at the 3- month follow -up, examining the effect of the intervention on other substance 
use (alcohol, other drugs), analyses of moderators and mediators (e.g., sex, cannabis use 
motives), identification of the most engaging intervention content, dose -response analyses, and 
measurement of intervention delivery costs.  
 
Aim 2 Methods:  
Enrollment  
     Target enrollment is 100  emerging adults (approximately 50% males and 50% female s) 
between the ages of 18- 25, in a 2 -arm pilot RCT of SnapCoach compared to an enhanced usual 
care (EUC) with attention placebo for EAs with weekly cannabis use.   
 Recruitment Procedures 
Participants will be recruited either during or post -emergency department (ED; including 
urgent care)  visit at Hurley Medical Center (HMC) which is a public, academic, Level -1 Trauma 
Center located in Flint, Michigan. E nrollment  will focus on recruiting approximately 50% male s 
and 50 % female s. Potential participants will be screened for eligibility using a 5 -10 minute 
screening survey.  Randomization to conditions will be balanced based on sex (male, female), age 
(ages 18-20, ages  21-25), and more than once a day cannabis use, using urn randomization in 
blocks of 4.  
Modifications to recruitment procedures for the purposes of remote recruitment are 
described here:  
For remote recruitment, RAs will  contact ED patients  ages 18- 25 who meet  
screening inclusion criteria (listed below in “Study Eligibil ity Criteria”) within 60 days of 
discharge to invite them to consent and  complete a web- based screening survey .  RAs 
 
Full Study Title: Harnessing social media to reduce cannabis use among adolescents and 
emerging adults in an urban emergency department  
 
 
4 
 will determine who to contact by viewing HMC’s ED medical records (same records 
viewed as during in- person recruitment), they may send a text message to let the 
participant know we will be contacting them.  Using contact information obtained from 
the medical record, RAs will follow a phone recruitment script for these procedures, 
obtain verbal informed consent prior to starting the screening survey  and document RA 
name and date consent is obtained.   
After consenting, interested participants may choose to self -administer the 
survey online or complete an RA -administered version over the phone .  For verbally 
consented participants completing the survey online, a copy of the screening consent form will appear at the beginning of the survey.  Other participants may prefer to interact with us via text message, in this case we may adapt the phone script for text messaging, and we will obtain electronic consent at the beginning of the screening survey.  
Participants recruited remotely will not receive a token gift for c ompleting the screening 
survey.  
Those meeting eligibility criteria (see below) on the screening survey will be 
eligible for enrolling in the trial and completing the baseline procedures . RAs will explain 
the study to participants during the baseline consenting process . Interested participants 
will be enrolled in the study after completing verbal consent  over the phone and RAs will 
docum ent their name and date consent is obtained.  A copy of this consent form will also 
be shown online at the beginning of the baseline survey.  
 Briefly, because participants will be identified via reviewing the ED medical chart we are 
requesting an update to our waiver of HIPAA authorization to accommodate remote 
recruitment . We are also requesting an update to our waiver of documentation  to 
accommodate remote recruitment.  At screening, consistent with prior procedures, interested 
participants will be asked to complete an electronic informed consent  or verbally consent  to 
complete the screening assessment .  In addition, this waiver will apply to remote completion of 
baseline procedures allowing for verbal consent obtained over phone .  
      Study Eligibility Criteria  
Screening inclusion criteria: (1) Emerging adults (ages 18- 25) presenting to the Emergency 
Department (including Urgent Care)  on the day of in-person recruitment; presenting within 60 
days of contact for remote recruitment  and (2) owni ng a working smartphone. Additional 
baseline inclusion criteria: (3) weekly or more frequent non -medical cannabis use for the past 3 
months; and (4) any Snapchat use in the past month. Exclusion criteria: (1) Does not 
understand English; (2) presenting to the ED for sexual assault or acute suicidality; (3) unable to 
provide informed consent due  to medical/psychiatric reasons/having a legal guardian; (4) Aim 1 
participant.     
 
Study Procedures  
After enrolling in the study, EAs will complete a 15 -20 minute baseline survey, a 15- 30 minute 
RA administered  semi -structured Timeline Follow -Back calendar ( TLFB), and a urine drug 
screen (UDS)  (for in -person recruitment) , before they are randomized to condition ( SnapCoach 
or EUC). They will also complete a 3 -minute  immediate post-test and provide contact 
information.  F or these activities  participants  will receive $ 40. When a participant is recruited 
 
Full Study Title: Harnessing social media to reduce cannabis use among adolescents and 
emerging adults in an urban emergency department  
 
 
5 
 remotely, they  will not complete the UDS  during the baseline procedures. For these remote 
participants, and  when a n in-person  participant does not complete the UDS  during baseline 
procedures  for any other reason, those participants will still be compensated a total of $40 .  Our 
consents do not  reflect that a participant  will still receive $40 if they do not complete the UDS 
because doing so could adversely affect UDS completion rates among participants who would 
otherwise be willing to complete the test.   Participants will also complete their ass igned 
condition (i .e., SnapCoach initial session or EUC: review of health and community resource s, 
with the same information contained in a paper brochure or electronic format depending on type 
or recruitment ). Enrolled participants may also receive small items such as candy, water bottles, 
notebooks, etc., or small tchotchkes with project logo and phone number (e.g., lanyard or pen)  
during the study. These tokens are not used as a contingency of study participation. 
For those assigned to the intervention c ondition, t he SnapCoach initial session is an 
intervention  delivered in the ED and/or remotely (e.g., facetime, bluejeans , vidyo , or Skype for 
Business ) by research health coaches using a computer . The health coaches will use a 
computerized guide and Motivational Interviewing ( MI) to engage EAs and understand their 
cannabis use. Sessions will be followed by reviewing a  health and community resources that the 
participants keep ( provided electronical ly or on paper, dependent on type of recruitment ). This 
session will take about 30- 45 minutes  and will be audio- recorded .  
 Participants will receive  pre-selected snaps , up to 3 per day,  from health coaches over 4 
weeks . The final S napchat content was created based on focus testing participant ratings and 
feedback  and/or engagement data, and uses the Why/How model of MI. Messages address  1) 
Why (evoking reasons for change) , and/or  2) How (Tools for change). We also send 
encouraging greetings/affirmations  to enhance engagement.   
For those assigned to the control condition, they will receive a brochure and review 
health and community  resources  that the participants keep (provided electronically or on paper, 
dependent on type of recruitment ), exceeding current standard of care for drug using EAs at 
HMC.  As an attention- placebo, participants will add coaches on Snapchat, and receive 
messages that do not contain intervention content (e.g., entertainment, trending content such as 
memes or gifs , weather, current events ]). Coaches will thank participants for any responses via 
2-way messaging, but will not engage in MI . 
As additional enrollment activities, all participants  will watch brief introduction videos of 
the health coaches , who they  will be  communicating with on S napchat, welcoming them to the 
project and introducing themselves . Participants will also  “add” the coach es on Snapchat via 
their mobile phones and the RA will send a snap to confirm  the connection. Snapchat involves 
2-way messaging; when participants in the intervention condition reply to messages, coaches 
will discuss content, in a MI -consistent manner91 using reflections, open questions, and 
affirmations to participants during designated shift times . Participants who are unable to 
complete the baseline procedures and intervention while in the ER may be able to complete those activities within 72 hours by returning to the study site or remotely using telephone/video 
conference and web- based surveys. Likewise, participants who join remotely will have up to 30 
days after providing consent to complete baseline procedures. Coache s will use an electronic 
log to track ingoing/outgoing messages and metrics such as whether messages were viewed by the recipient and types of content discussed to quantify engagement. Coaches will monitor Snapchat to determine if messages were viewed and send periodic  reminders  (e.g., via SMS)  to 
 
Full Study Title: Harnessing social media to reduce cannabis use among adolescents and 
emerging adults in an urban emergency department  
 
 
6 
 prompt engagement when messages go unopened; these reminder messages will also be 
recorded on a log.    
There will be two follow -up assessments , at 1 -month and 3- month s post-baseline 
assessment. After the 4  weeks of interacting with health coaches on Snapchat, participants will 
be completing a 20 -minute  online, video,  phone or in- person (depending on participant 
preference) 1-month follow- up assessment  ($25), and an in- person, online, video or phone 
(depending on participant preference) 3- month follow -up assessment which includes  a web -
based survey, the RA- administered TLFB, and a  UDS  (if in-person)  to encourage accuracy of  
substance  use reporting. Participants will receive $40 for the 3-month  assessment . When a 
participant is recruited remotely, they will not complete the UDS for the 3 -month assessment.  
For these remote participants, and when an in- person participant does not complete the UDS at 
the 3 -month assessment for any other reason, those participants will still be compensated a 
total of $40.  Follow -up assessment reminders will be sent in a variety of ways which may 
include via e- mail, private Snapchat messaging,  SMS text message, mail and/or phone call  and 
other social media, based on contact information participants provide at the enrollment  
assessment .  Three- month follow -up assessments completed in- person may be done at the 
HMC, or other community locations for participant convenience. During the RA -administered 
TLFB, the participants will view pictures and response cards either on paper (when in person) or 
given the option to view them electronically when completed over the phone (sent to the 
participant via preferred method, e.g., email, text, or in a shared online document, etc.).  The 
RA-administered TLFB and intervention sessions will be audio- recorded.  Whenever possible, 
follow- up staff completing assessment s will be blinded to condition assignment. 
 
Measures  
     We will use reliable, valid measures from prior work with EAs, reflecting our conceptual 
model: demographics; SM involvement; cannabis use, motives, and consequences; and 
protective strategies, etc. (Table 1).  Some measures (e.g., intervention ratings) were created for 
use in this study.  
 
Full Study Title: Harnessing social media to reduce cannabis use among adolescents and 
emerging adults in an urban emergency department  
 
 
7 
 Table 1. Measures.   
(S=Screening, B=Baseline, I=Immediate Post -test, 1M=1-month follow- up, 3M=3-month 
follow -up  
Individual Level and Descriptive Characteristics  
Demographics: Age, Sex, Race, Ethnicity ( adapted from national 
surveys, e.g., the Youth Risk Behavior Survey 39)  S 
Demographics: Gender identity, Sexual Orientation, School Status, 
Employment, Living Situation, Children, Marital Status, Pregnancy 
(adapted from national surveys, e.g., the Youth Risk Behavior Survey 39) B,3M  
Demographic: Parents and Personal Income  86,87  B 
Service Utilization: ER and Urgent Care  86,87 B,3M  
1-minute delay discounting task  84 S,1M,3M 
Snapchat  involvement  (modified)  22,40,41,42  S 
Comprehensive Marijuana Motives  (modified)  43  B,3M 
Perceived risk of cannabis  (modified for different cannabis modalities)  44 S,1M,3M 
Importance, Self -Efficacy, Intention Rulers 45,46  B,I,1M,3M 
Cann abis acquisition, strain, and medical marijuana,47,48,49,50,51,74  
                                               Cannabis acquisition  
                                               Preferred Marijuana Strain  
                              Medical Marijuana    
B,1M,3M  
B 
S,3M  
NIDA modified ASSIST  65,66 ,85 S,3M 
Alcohol use frequency (AUDIT -C) 73 S,3M 
Tobacco and Nicotine use  (modified)  65 S,1M,3M  
Mental health:  Patient Health Questionnaire -2; Generalized Anxiety 
Disorder -2 52,53,54,55,56,57,58,59,60,61  B,1M,3M 
Protective Behavioral Strategies for Marijuana  (modified)  77 B,3M 
Gun Carriage 75,76 B 
Hope 78 B,1M,3M 
Peer/Social Influences  
Cannabis online norms and exposure 64,41  B,1M,3M 
Exploratory  Outcomes  
 
Full Study Title: Harnessing social media to reduce cannabis use among adolescents and 
emerging adults in an urban emergency department  
 
 
8 
  
 Data Management and Analysis  
 
Randomized participants will be included in intent -to-treat analyses, regardless of group 
engagement. By design, groups will be balanced based on sex, age, and more than once a day 
cannabis use, using u rn randomization in blocks of  4; we will validate randomization by 
evaluating covariate balance between groups. If significant differences that could be 
confounding emerge, we will adjust for those variables or conduct  stratified analyses.  
 
Analyses pertaining to primary outcomes of feasibility and acceptability of the intervention are 
pr
imarily descriptive in nature (e.g., % completing the assigned intervention condition, % 
engaging in Snapchat messaging, ratings of intervention satisfaction).  
 For analyses of other exploratory outcomes pertaining to cannabis use, alcohol, and drug use, 
we will first compare groups on cannabis quantity and frequency using basic two sample  
comparisons, operating on the pre -post differences (e.g., 3M -Baseline) to test for treatment 
effects. Our first ch oice will be a two -sample t-test to compare the pre- post differences between 
groups; considering non -parametric alternatives as needed. To assess changes in the 
dependent measures (e.g., use days, quantity, cannabis consequences) over follow -up we will 
use generalized linear mixed models (GLMMs) to jointly study the 1M and 3M outcomes, where 
possible, while adjusting for correlations between data points (e.g. repeated measurements on individuals). While adjustment for the baseline measurement is important for guarding against 
regression to the mean in RCTs
195, using this baseline adjustment at every time point can result Cannabis use  method, frequency  and quantity  74 (modified) 
                                Smoke, Vape, and Dab (frequency, quantity)  
                              Drink and all methods combined (frequency, quantity)  
                              Number of days all methods combined 
                              Number of days vaped   
S,3M  
B,3M  
B,1M,3M  
1M 
Cannabis  and Other Drug Use Frequency , Alcohol  
Quantity/Frequency (TLFB)67,68,69,70  B,3M 
Brief Marijuana Adolescent Consequences Questionnaire (modified)71  B,3M 
Impaired driving  (modified)  72 B,3M 
Primary Outcomes: Feasibility/Acceptability of Intervention  
Brief Intervention acceptability ratings  (created  for this study ) I 
Snapchat  acceptability ratings (created  for this study ) 1M 
Brief intervention feasibility (e.g., % of participants completing brief 
intervention)  I 
Snapchat health coaching feasibility (e.g., % of participants who 
complete process of adding health coach on Snapchat, % of participants 
who reply to at least 1 Snapchat message)  I,1M 
 
Full Study Title: Harnessing social media to reduce cannabis use among adolescents and 
emerging adults in an urban emergency department  
 
 
9 
 in overestimation of the treatment effect when there are multiple follow -up points. It has been 
shown that baseline adjustment at only the first follow -up (1M in this case) corrects this 
overestimation while also guarding against regression to the mean, which will be our approach. 
Within this framework, we will conduct exploratory sub- analyses of whether the intervention 
effect is accumulating or weakening over time, by including time- by-group interactions. If the 
need is ascertained, we will control for confounders through their inclusion in the model as covariates. Our initial specification will be a linear mixed effects model (with Gaussian error 
distribution) with only a random intercept to capture within- individual dependence, but this 
choice will be scrutinized by examining model diagnostics and evaluating the veracity of 
modeling assumptions. As the need is ascertained, we will examine other distributional choices 
(e.g., Poisson, Negative Binomial) and more complex random effects structures (e.g., autoregressive).  
 
Other analyses . Moderation: To assess potential moderators we will include interactions with 
treatment group in the GLMM models above. Potential effect modifiers will include sex and age. Mediation: To test if cannabis motives and other variables (e.g., mental health symptoms) 
mediate treatment effects, we will use Imai’s
 causal mediation analysis framework, that is 
robustly implemented in the R package mediation. Traditional mediation analysis can be susceptible to bias; one source of this bias is the limitation to the classes of statistical models 
(e.g. the linear structural model of Baron and Kenny), that can be accommodated
 in traditional 
mediation analysis. Under technical assumptions of sequential ignorability, mediation effects are identifiable using Imai’s framework when models for the mediator and for the outcome that are 
non-linear, have discrete (nominal or ordinal) or continuous outcomes, include random effects, 
or are non -parametric. Engagement: Daily content ratings assessed by tallies from Snapchat 
messages logs (e.g., content, messages sent/received) will be calculated for different content areas (e.g., free time, s tress, drug/alcohol -related) and assessed descriptively to see types of 
content with high response rates. Cost: To estimate intervention we will calculate summary 
statistics for the total intervention -specific costs and mean costs per participant, with confidence 
intervals. Costs will be reported with/without start -up and development, for example, including 
costs fo r recruiting and training coaches as well as their clinical supervision. As with prior work, 
net costs (savings) will be calculated by subtracting mean costs per participant in the control 
group from costs per participant for the assigned condition, also calculating the incremental cost 
effectiveness ratio (difference in mean cost of intervention vs. control divided by difference in 
mean effectiveness between intervention and control). Change in health benefits will be 
measured as the difference in cannabis  consequences per month for the intervention vs. the 
control, expressed in dollars per consequence averted. Sensitivity analyses to evaluate 
alternate assumptions for estimated costs will be conducted. Given likely skewness, we will 
identify appropriate methods for generating confidence intervals that do not rely on the normal 
distribution (e.g., non- parametric boot -strapping).  
 
P
ower calculation and sample size  
Aim 2: The sample size is N = 100 (approximately 50 per group). For our primary 
analytic goal – examining feasibility and acceptability this is acceptable. With regard to other 
exploratory analyses estimating treatment effects – we are comparing two groups of size n = 50. 
Assuming no substantial covariate adjustment is needed, testing the significance of the treatment effect at a single time point will be equivalent to the comparison of two means, for 
which we use Cohen’s D (0.2: small, 0.5: medium, 0.8: large) as an effect size. Under the 
expected sample size, we will have sufficient power (>80%) to  detect effects on both our 
cannabis and other substance use outcomes if d > 0.56, a medium effect size. Although the required effect size is non- negligible, the proposed pilot will provide the critical data necessary 
to inform the power analyses for a subsequent efficacy trial. While effect sizes from pilot studies 
 
Full Study Title: Harnessing social media to reduce cannabis use among adolescents and 
emerging adults in an urban emergency department  
 
 
10 
 can have large standard errors and be unstable, 202 we can use these pilot data to estimate point 
estimates and confidence intervals for our treatment effect sizes using the R package 
MBESS 203. 
 
Data Confidentiality Plans 
     Our study team will take the following steps to minimize potential confidentiality breaches.  
As done in prior research and deemed HIPAA compliant by the IRBs at University of Michigan 
(UM) and HMC by use of a waiver of HIPA A authorization, minimal clinical data will be collected 
on ED patients who refuse to participate in the screening survey, and on ED patients who the 
research assistants fail to approach  or contact (for remote recruitment) . ED-based intervention , 
TLFB assessment sessions and any phone interviews (e.g., in the event a person cannot attend 
a follow -up in person, or during remote recruitment, we can administer the TLFB by phone) will 
be audio- recorded and will be destroyed  after the conclusion of the study.  
     For each stage of the proposed research investigation, participants’ names and contact 
information will be stored in a secure, password- protected database, separate from their study 
data and only accessible to members of the research team for research purposes. Paper copies 
of signed consents and completed contact information forms will be stored in locked file cabinets only accessible to study staff, separate from study data. Any additional documents with 
identifying information linked to individual  ID number s will be  only accessible by study staff and  
stored separate from study data, and  in locked file cabinet s or in restricted access folder s on a 
secure server and destroyed at study completion.      Participants’ Snapchat IDs can be viewed on study cell phones; however, we will change the 
front page of coaches’ Snapchat apps to display  generic participant IDs . Study cell phones and 
tablets  (devices used for data collection and participant communication) will be password 
protected, use UM encryption  (e.g., Hub) whenever possible, and only accessed by study staff 
who have completed and maintain mandatory training in the protection of human subjects and good clinical practices.  
  
Potential Risks  
Every effort will be made to ensure that study particip ants are protected from risks. The 
major risk for participants in this study is the violation of confidentiality. This risk is due to the 
disclosure of personal information regarding the use of an illegal substance, and is heightened 
due to the audio recording and use of social media. The informed consent will contain a statement about exceptions to confidentiality which include if the participant expresses suicidality, homicidality, or the physical or sexual abuse of a child. We expect that partici pants 
will not disclose such information in the context of Snapchat messaging, but should information 
to this effect be shared, we will provide appropriate referrals to resources and follow appropriate 
reporting procedures. Coaches will review limits of confidentiality at enrollment, will always notify participants when mandatory reporting or breaking of confidentiality is required, and will only disclose the minimum information necessary as required by law.   
Consent forms will also explain that participants’ activity on Snapchat is still accessible 
t
o Snapchat and subject to the app’s terms of use. We will also encourage participants  to use a 
password/code on their phones and to view study messages in private spaces.  Messages 
received on the Snapchat app are not viewable until the phone is unlocked, the app is opened, and the message is clicked on.  Thus message content will not  be viewable: when a phone’s 
 
Full Study Title: Harnessing social media to reduce cannabis use among adolescents and 
emerging adults in an urban emergency department  
 
 
11 
 screen is locked, in the notification bar, or without opening the app and choosing to look at the 
message.  
       Participants will be informed that we will take steps necessary to secure their data. 
Survey  data collected will be stored in secure, password- protected databases on the secure U-
M network. When sending Snapchat messages, coaches  will do so in private spaces using 
privacy screens where others who are not part of the research team could not see the data. Study cell phones  and tablets  used to send Snapchat s will be password protected and use UM 
encryption  (e.g., Hub) whenever possible, which is required of all mobile devices accessing the 
U-M network. Encryption programs used by UM enables safeguards against data compromise, 
malware, and ransomware and have a user portal to manage devices in case of theft, loss, or 
forgotten passwords. The computerized surveys  are designed and administered using Qualtrics 
Research Suite through the University of Michigan ( http://www.qualtrics.com/ ),
 which meets the 
HIPAA standards, and is where data will be stored based on study ID securely and separate 
from any identifying information.   
 
P
rotections Against Risk 
To minimize the risk of violating confidentiality, RAs will make every effort to ensure that 
study data are always kept confidential. Staff training procedures will include information about 
the importance of confidentiality and techniques to maintain confidentiality of all information reported by research participants. Staff will maintain human subjects and confidentiality 
certifications through the U- M Program for Education and Evaluation in Responsible Research 
and Scholarship system and will complete CITI Good Clinical Practice Training. Staff will be 
trained to conduct assessments and the initiation session where no one can overhear the 
conversation. Participants engaging in remote recruitment or follow -up activities will be 
encouraged to complete interviews and assessments in private locations where no one can overhear. Consent documents will fully explain the study procedures, potential risks, and 
potential benefits.  At baseline, participants will also be asked to sign (for in -person recruitment) 
or verbally agree (for remote recruitment) to a User Safety Agreement that includes guidelines 
for interactions with coaches (e.g., agreeing not to send graphic images) based on a procedure 
used in our  recently completed Facebook study . 
Unique identification numbers will be assigned to participants. Any data forms will be 
coded with this number, rather than with a name. Computer data files will be saved with 
passwords on a secured network, and will not contain names, birthdates, etc.  See “Data 
Confidentiality Plan”  above for further information on protection of participants’ data.   
Furthermore, as is standard practice,  this study is covered by a Certificate of Confidentiality 
from the NIH to protect the confidentiality of our data from legal requests.  Finally, spec ific 
information collected during this research study will not be available for use outside of research purposes . All data will be collected specif ically for use on this project ; however , de-identified 
data may be used for future research studies or distributed to another researcher for future 
research studies . 
 R esearch staff and health coaches will be trained to respond to any emotional distress  
and to refer participants to appropriate resources as necessary.  All participants are free to terminate the study  at any time or refuse to respond to any questionnaire item. The integration 
of motivational interviewing techniques will be non- confrontational and eschew any form of 
coercion or threat. Further, the risk of potential coercion is minimized by using s tandard 
 
Full Study Title: Harnessing social media to reduce cannabis use among adolescents and 
emerging adults in an urban emergency department  
 
 
12 
 recruitment scripts to avoid undue influence.  All enrolled participants will also receive a 
substance use and mental health resources at baseline and follow -up. 
Regarding Snapchat messages, content of new messages do not appear on a 
participant’s notification screen and are only viewable when opened by the participant, taking at 
least 2- 3 clicks before content is viewable. Because Snapchat use is common among emerging 
adults , it is unlikely that others will know that the youth is in a research study just by seeing 
Snapchat or a new notification on their phone. We will instruct participants to view messages 
from the study Snapchat account where they cannot be seen and to consider using a 
password/passcode on their cell phone. Snapchat messages are automatically deleted after viewing, with the exception of immediately re-viewing one message per day  or if a participant 
chooses at the moment they receive it to save certain messages . Participants will be informed 
that they still risk having unread or saved messages viewed by others if anyone else accesses 
their cell phone or has access to their Snapchat account.  
Participants’ confidentiality will be breached by the research study only  t
 o protect the 
safety and welfare of research participants and only in accordance with state and federal law. Participants will be informed that coaches are not monitoring Snapchat 24/7 and that it should 
not be used for crisis situations, however s taff will receive training in crisis assessment and risk 
management procedures  in the unlikely event that participants reveal suicidal and/or homicidal 
ideation, or child physical/sexual abuse during study interactions (including Snapchat ).
 If staff 
becomes aware of any of these issues, they will follow our standard risk assessment guidelines 
for in -person encounters and our standard written guidelines for attempting to contact 
participants  remotely  in the Snapchat messaging phase (e.g., message/text/email hotline 
number and by phone). In cases of psychiatric distress, staff are trained in strategies that include privately messaging/contacting the individual using MI and empathically encouraging use of referral information or other coping skills. Staff will immediately page on- call supervisors 
(including Dr. Bonar, Dr. Walton, or Dr. Carter ) for consultation in cases where participants 
express moderate or high/imminent risk. Staff will also be trained  to manage responses to 
potentially inappropriate messages from participants (e.g., asking on dates, sending explicit image) .    
Regarding reporting of adverse events, we will follow the following procedures for UM 
I
RBMED and the National Institute on Drug Abuse (N IDA), as specified in the Data Safety 
Monitoring Plan approved by the NIDA Project Officer (PO). Life-threatening serious adverse 
events (e.g., hospitalization as a result of suicidal ideation uncovered during study interaction) 
related to the study  will be reported to IRBMED, NIDA, and the Medical Monitor no later than 72 
hours after learning of the event.  All other SAE’s (regardless of study relatedness) will be 
initially reported to the NIDA PO by phone/email no later than 72 hours  after learni ng of the 
event .  Non -threatening potentially serious adverse events that are causally related to the 
research will be reported to the IRBMED within 14 days of learning of the event.   A summary of 
the serious adverse events  that occurred during the previous year will be included in the annual 
progress report to NIDA.   We will follow the Hurley IRB guidelines for reporting both protocol 
deviations and adverse events to Hurley IRB, as well as follow the UM IRBMED guidelines for reporting protocol deviations to UM IRBMED.  
 Potential Benefits  
 
Full Study Title: Harnessing social media to reduce cannabis use among adolescents and 
emerging adults in an urban emergency department  
 
 
13 
      We believe the potential for benefits outweighs the minimal risks associated with this study. It 
is possible that the assessments may be beneficial to all participants by asking them to review 
their substance use. Therefore, these assessments may actually serve as a very minimal 
intervention (as could any study with interviews regarding risky behaviors). Indeed, participants 
in our previous investigations have commented that they have found the questions to be helpful.  Second, all participants will receive health and community resources (that will be updated from our prior studies), with referral information including suicide hotlines, and resources for 
substance use and mental health tr eatment.  
 
Importance of Knowledge to be Gained  
     Given that cannabis use behaviors often begin and reach a peak during adolescence and 
emerging adulthood, as well as the correlation with other substance use, the individual and 
societal cost of these be haviors, and the fact that many emerging adults may not receive 
traditional preventive services or access treatment, the development of effective targeted 
prevention programs is clearly needed. Given the current penetration of social media into the lives o f young people, the potential reach provided by extending clinical -care interventions 
through a popular and widely used medium is significant. In addition, the ability to harness peer influences to create behavior change and the knowledge to be gained from  this research is also 
significant. The risks to participants are reasonable in relation to the importance of this knowledge to be gained and potential public health impact of developing an effective program to reduce the use of and consequences associated with cannabis use among at -risk emerging 
adults.  
References  
 
1. Center for Behavioral Health Statistics and Quality. 2015 National Survey on Drug Use and Health: Detailed tables.  Rockville, MD: Substance Abuse and Mental Health 
Services Administration; 2016.  
2. Hasin DS, Saha TD, Kerridge BT, et al. Prevalence of marijuana use disorders in the United States between 2001- 2002 and 2012- 2013. JAMA psychiatry. 2015;72(12):1235 -
1242.  
3. Johnston LD, O'Malley P M, Bachman JG, Schulenberg JE, Miech RA. Monitoring the Future national survey results on drug use, 1975- 2014: Volume 2, College students and 
adults ages 19- 55. http://www.monitoringthefuture.org/pubs/monographs/mtf -
vol2_2014.pdf. Published July 2015. Accessed March 9, 2018.  
4. Salas -Wright CP, Vaughn MG, Perron BE, Gonzalez JM, Goings TC. Changing 
perspectives on marijuana use during early adolescence and young adulthood: Evidence from a panel of cross -sectional surveys. Drug Alcohol Depend.  2016;169:5- 10. 
5. Azofeifa A, Mattson ME, Schauer G, McAfee T, Grant A, Lyerla R. National estimates of marijuana use and related indicators - National Survey on Drug Use and Health, United 
States, 2002 -2014. MMWR Surveill Summ.  2016;65(11):1 -25. 
6. Manrique- Garcia E, Ponce de Leon A, Dalman C, Andreasson S, Allebeck P. Cannabis, 
psychosis, and mortality: A cohort study of 50,373 Swedish men. Am J Psychiatry. 2016;173(8):790 -798. 
7. Volkow ND, Baler RD, Compton WM, Weiss SR. Adverse health effects of marijuana 
use. N Engl J Med.  2014;370(23):2219 -2227.  
 
Full Study Title: Harnessing social media to reduce cannabis use among adolescents and 
emerging adults in an urban emergency department  
 
 
14 
 8. Castellanos -Ryan N, Pingault JB, Parent S, Vitaro F, Tremblay RE, Seguin JR. 
Adolescent cannabis use, change in neurocognitive function, and high- school 
graduation: A longitudinal study from early adolescence to young adulthood. Dev 
Psychopathol. 2016;29:1253- 1266.  
9. Crean RD, Crane NA, Mason BJ. An evidence based review of acute and long- term 
effects of cannabis use on executive cognitive functions. J Addict Med.  2011;5(1):1 -8. 
10. Gruber SA, Dahlgren MK, Sagar KA, Gonenc A, Killgore WD. Age of onset of marijuana use impacts inhibitory processing. Neurosci Lett. 2012;511(2):89 -94. 
11. Gruber S, Sagar K, Dahlgren M, Racine M, Smith R, Lukas S. Splendor in the grass? A 
pilot study assessing the impact of medical marijuana on executive function. Front Pharmacol. 2016;7.  
12. Lopez -Larson MP, Bogorodzki P, Rogowska J, et al. Altered prefrontal and insular 
cortical thickness in adolescent marijuana users. Behav Brain Res. 2011;220(1):164-
172. 
13. Abadi MH, Shamblen SR, Thompson K, Collins DA, Johnson K. Influence of risk and protective factors on substance use outcomes across developmental periods: A 
comparison of youth and young adults. Subst Use Misuse. 2011;46(13):1604- 1612.  
14. Tang Z, Orwin RG. Marijuana initiation among American youth and its risks as dynamic 
processes: Prospective findings from a national longitudinal study. Subst Use Misuse.  
2009;44(2):195 -211. 
15. Keyes KM, Schulenberg JE, O'Malley PM, et al. The social norms of birth cohorts and 
adolescent marijuana use in the United States, 1976- 2007. Addiction. 
2011;106(10):1790 -1800.  
16. Gilman JM, Calderon V, Curran MT, Evins AE. Young adult cannabis users report 
greater propensity for risk -taking only in non -monetary domains. Drug Alcohol Depend.  
2015;147:26 -31. 
17. Schuster RM, Crane NA, Mermelstein R, Gonzalez R. The influence of inhibitory control and episodic memory on the risky sexual behavior of young adult cannabis users. J Int Neuropsychol Soc.  2012;18(5):827 -833. 
18. Bonar EE, Cunningham RM, Chermack ST, et al. Prescription drug misuse and sexual 
risk behaviors among adolescents and emerging adults. J Stud Alcohol Drugs. 
2014;75(2):259 -268. 
19. Cook S, Sh ank D, Bruno T, Turner NE, Mann RE. Self -reported driving under the 
influence of alcohol and cannabis among Ontario students: Associations with graduated 
licensing, risk taking and substance abuse. Traffic Inj Prev. 2017;18(5):449- 455. 
20. Bondallaz P, Favrat B, Chtioui H, Fornari E, Maeder P, Giroud C. Cannabis and its effects on driving skills. Forensic Sci Int. 2016;268:92- 102. 
21. Marschall -Lévesque S, Castellanos -Ryan N, Vitaro F, Séguin JR. Moderators of the 
association between peer and target adolescent substance use. Addict Behav. 
2014;39(1):48 -70. 
22. Perrin A. Social media usage: 2005–2015. 
http://www.pewinternet.org/2015/10/08/social -networking- usage- 2005 -2015/. Published 
October 8, 2015. Accessed March 9, 2018.  
23. Snap Inc. Reports Fourth Quarter and Full Year 2017 Results [press release]. 
BusinessWire; February 6, 2018. 
 
Full Study Title: Harnessing social media to reduce cannabis use among adolescents and 
emerging adults in an urban emergency department  
 
 
15 
 https://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20180206006374/en/. Accessed March 9, 
2018.  
24. eMarketer. Snapchat usage penetration in the United States as of March 2017, by age 
group.  https://www.statista.com/statistics/373940/snapchat -us-age-reach/. Published 
March 2017. Accessed March 9, 2018.  
25. eMarketer.  Instagram, Snapchat Adoption Still Surging in US and UK. August 23, 2017. 
https://www.emarketer.com/Article/Instagram -Snapchat -Adoption- Still-Surging- US-
UK/1016369. Accessed February 5, 2018.  
26. Blow FC, Walton MA, Bohnert AS, et al. A randomized controlled trial of brief interventions to reduce drug use among adults in an inner city emergency department:  The HealthiER You Study. Addiction.  2017;112(8):1395- 1405.  
27. Walton MA, Chermack ST, Shope JT, et al. Effects of a brief intervention for reducing 
violence and alcohol misuse among adolescents: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 
psych iatry.  2010;304(5):527- 535. 
28. Walton MA, Bohnert K, Resko S, et al. Computer and therapist based brief interventions 
among cannabis -using adolescents presenting to primary care: One year outcomes. 
Drug Alcohol Depend.  2013;132(3):646 -653. 
29. Bonar EE, Walton MA, Cunningham RM, et al. Computer -enhanced interventions for 
drug use and HIV risk in the emergency room: Preliminary results on psychological precursors of behavior change. J Subst Abuse Treat. 2014;46(1):5- 14. 
30. Walton MA, Resko S, Barry KL, et al. A randomized controlled trial testing the efficacy of 
a brief cannabis universal prevention program among adolescents in primary care. 
Addiction. 2014;109(5):786- 797. 
31. Bonar EE, Cunningham RM, Collins RL, et al. Feasibility and Acceptability of Text Messaging to As sess Daily Substance Use and Sexual Behaviors among Urban 
Emerging Adults. Addiction Research & Theory. 2017;26(2):103 -113. 
32. Carter PM, Walton MA, Zimmerman MA, Chermack ST, Roche JS, Cunningham RM. Efficacy of a Universal Brief Intervention for Violence Among Urban Emergency Department Youth. Acad Emerg Med.  2016;23(9):1061- 1070.  
33. Bohnert KM, Walton MA, Ranney M, et al. Understanding the service needs of assault -
injured, drug -using youth presenting for care in an urban Emergency Department. Addict 
Behav.  2015;41:97 -105. 
34. Bonar EE, Goldstick JE, Collins RL, et al. Daily associations between cannabis motives and consumption in emerging adults. Drug Alcohol Depend.  2017;178:136- 142. 
35. Zhao X, Strasser A, Cappella JN, Lerman  C, Fishbein M. A measure of perceived 
argument strength: Reliability and validity. Commun Methods Meas.  2011;5(1):48- 75. 
36. Evans WD, Mays D. Design and feasibility of a text messaging intervention to prevent indoor tanning among young adult women: A pilot s tudy. JMIR mHealth uHealth.  
2016;4(4):e137.  
37. Zhao X, Nan X. Influence of self ‐affirmation on responses to gain‐ versus loss ‐framed 
antismoking messages. Human Communication Research.  2010;36(4):493- 511. 
38. Mays D, Zhao X. The influence of framed messages and self -affirmation on indoor 
tanning behavioral intentions in 18- to 30 -year-old women. Health Psychol. 
2016;35(2):123 -130. 
 
Full Study Title: Harnessing social media to reduce cannabis use among adolescents and 
emerging adults in an urban emergency department  
 
 
16 
 39. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2015 State and Local Youth Risk Behavi or 
Survey [questionnaire]. ftp://ftp.cdc.gov/pub/data/yrbs/2015/2015_hs_questionnaire.pdf. 
Published 2016. Accessed March 9, 2018.  
40. Bauermeister JA, Zimmerman MA, Johns MM, Glowacki P, Stoddard S, Volz E. 
Innovative recruitment using online networks: Lessons learned from an online study of alcohol and other drug use utilizing a web- based, respondent -driven sampling (webRDS) 
strategy. J Stud Alcohol Drugs.  2012;73(5):834- 838. 
41. Stoddard SA, Bauermeister JA, Gordon- Messer D, Johns M, Zimmerman MA. 
Permissive norms and young adults' alcohol and marijuana use: the role of online communities. J Stud Alcohol Drugs.  2012;73(6):968- 975. 
42. Duggan M. Mobile messaging and social media 2015.  
http://www.pewinternet.org/2015/08/19/mobile- messaging- and-social -media- 2015. 
Publis hed August 19, 2015. Accessed March 9, 2018.  
43. Lee CM, Neighbors C, Hendershot CS, Grossbard JR. Development and preliminary validation of a comprehensive marijuana motives questionnaire. J Stud Alcohol Drugs.  
2009;70(2):279 -287. 
44. Bachman JG, Johnston LD, O’M alley PM.  Monitoring the Future: Questionnaire 
Responses from the Nation’s High School Seniors, 2012.  Ann Arbor, MI: Institute for 
Social Research, The University of Michigan;2014.  
45. Miller WR, Rollnick S. Motivational Interviewing: Preparing People for Change.  2nd ed. 
New York, New York: The Guilford Press; 2002.  
46. Hesse M. The Readiness Ruler as a measure of readiness to change poly -drug use in 
drug abusers. Harm Reduct J . 2006;3(1):3.  
47. Cranford JA, Bohnert KM, Perron BE, Bourque C, Ilgen M. Prevalence and correlates of “Vaping” as a route of cannabis administration in medical cannabis patients. Drug Alcohol Depend.  2016;169:41- 47. 
48. Belendiuk KA, Babson KA, Vandrey R, Bonn- Miller MO. Cannabis species and 
cannabinoid concentration preference among sleep- disturbed  medicinal cannabis users. 
Addict Behav.  2015;50:178- 181. 
49. Harris KM. The National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add Health), Wave IV, 
2007- 2009 [codebook]. Chapel Hill, NC: Carolina Population Center, University of North 
Carolina at Chapel Hill;  2009.  
50. Comings D, Muhleman D, Gade R, et al. Cannabinoid receptor gene (CNR1): 
Association with iv drug use. Mol Psychiatry.  1997;2(2):161 -168. 
51. Ilgen MA, Bohnert K, Kleinberg F, et al. Characteristics of adults seeking medical 
marijuana certification. Drug  Alcohol Depend.  2013;132(3):654 -659. 
52. Spitzer RL, Kroenke K, Williams JB, Löwe B. A brief measure for assessing generalized 
anxiety disorder: The GAD -7. Arch Intern Med.  2006;166(10):1092 -1097.  
53. Kroenke K, Spitzer RL. The PHQ -9: A new depression diagnostic and severity measure. 
Psychiatr Ann.  2002;32(9):1 -7. 
54. Kroenke K, Strine TW, Spitzer RL, Williams JB, Berry JT, Mokdad AH. The PHQ -8 as a 
measure of current depression in the general population. J Affect Disord. 2009;114(1):163 -173. 
55. Skapinakis P. The 2- item Generalized Anxiety Disorder scale had high sensitivity and 
specificity for detecting GAD in primary care. Evid Based Med.  2007;12(5):149.  
 
Full Study Title: Harnessing social media to reduce cannabis use among adolescents and 
emerging adults in an urban emergency department  
 
 
17 
 56. Osorio FL, Carvalho AC, Fracalossi TA, Crippa JA, Loureiro ES. Are two items sufficient 
to screen for depression within the hospital context? Int J Psychiatry Med.  
2012;44(2):141 -148. 
57. Löwe B, Kroenke K, Gräfe K. Detecting and monitoring depression with a two- item 
questionnaire (PHQ -2). J Psychosom Res.  2005;58(2):163- 171. 
58. Kroenke K, Spitzer RL, Williams JB. The Patient Health Questionnaire- 2: validity of a 
two-item depression screener. Med Care.  2003;41(11):1284- 1292.  
59. Richardson LP, Rockhill C, Russo JE, et al. Evaluation of the PHQ -2 as a brief screen 
for detecting major depression among adolescents. Pediatrics.  2010;125(5):e1097 -1103.  
60. Seo JG, Park SP. Validation of the Generalized Anxiety Disorder -7 (GAD -7) and GAD -2 
in patients with migraine. J Headache Pain. 2015;16:97.  
61. Plummer F, Manea L, Trepel D, McMillan D. Screening for anxiety disorders with the 
GAD -7 and GAD -2: a systematic review and diagnostic metaanalysis. Gen Hosp 
Psychiatry.  2016;39:24 -31. 
62. Davis AK, Osborn LA, Rosenberg H, et al. Psychometric evaluation of the Marijuana 
Reduction Strategies Self -Efficacy Scale with young recreational marijuana users. Addict 
Behav.  2014;39(12):1750- 1754.  
63. Davis AK, Osborn LA, Leith J, et al. Development and ev aluation of the Marijuana 
Reduction Strategies Self -Efficacy Scale. Psychol Addict Behav.  2014;28(2):575 -579. 
64. Cabrera- Nguyen EP, Cavazos -Rehg P, Krauss M, Bierut LJ, Moreno MA. Young adults' 
exposure to alcohol- and marijuana- related content on Twitter. J Stud Alcohol Drugs.  
2016;77(2):349 -353. 
65. WHO ASSIST Working Group. The Alcohol, Smoking and Substance Involvement Screening Test (ASSIST): development, reliability and feasibility.  Addiction.  
2002;97(9):1183 -1194.  
66. Humeniuk R, Ali R, Babor TF, et al. Validation of the Alcohol, Smoking And Substance 
Involvement Screening Test (ASSIST). Addiction.  2008;103(6):1039 -1047.  
67. Robinson SM, Sobell LC, Sobell MB, Leo GI. Reliability of the Timeline Followback for 
cocaine, cannabis, and cigarette use. Psychol Addict Behav. 2014;28(1):154- 162. 
68. Sobell LC, Maisto SA, Sobell MB, Cooper AM. Reliability of alcohol abusers' self -reports 
of drinking behavior. Behav Res Ther. 1979;17(2):157- 160. 
69. Sobell LC, Sobell MB. Timeline follow -back. In: Litten RZ, Allen JP, eds. Measuring 
alcohol consumption: Springer; 1992:41 -72. 
70. Levy S, Sherritt L, Harris SK, et al. Test -retest reliability of adolescents' self -report of 
substance use. Alcohol Clin Exp Res.  2004;28(8):1236 -1241.  
71. Simons JS, Dvorak RD, Merrill JE, Read JP. Dimensions and sever ity of marijuana 
consequences: development and validation of the Marijuana Consequences Questionnaire (MACQ). Addict Behav.  2012;37(5):613 -621. 
72. Donovan JE. Young adult drinking- driving: behavioral and psychosocial correlates. J 
Stud Alcohol. 1993;54(5):600- 613. 
73. Bush, K., Kivlahan, D. R., McDonell, M. B., Fihn, S. D., Bradley, K. A. (1998). The AUDIT alcohol consumption questions (AUDIT- C): an effective brief screening test for 
problem drinking. Archives of Internal   Medicine, 158(16), 1789- 1795.  
 
Full Study Title: Harnessing social media to reduce cannabis use among adolescents and 
emerging adults in an urban emergency department  
 
 
18 
 74. Lapham, G., & Bradley, K. Medical Cannabis Use among Primary Care Patients: Using 
Electronic Health Records to Study Large Populations (NIDA CTN- 0077). Draft from 
9/27/2018.  Personal communication.  
75. Sheley , J. F., & Wright, J. D. (1995). Tulane University National Youth Study. Tulane 
University, New Orleans  
76. Sheley, J. F., & Wright, J. D. (1998). High School Youths, Weapons, and Violence: A National Survey. National Institute of Justice- Research in Brief,  NCJ 172857 
77. Pedersen, E. R., Huang, W., Dvorak, R. D., Prince, M. A., & Hummer, J. F. (2017). The Protective Behavioral Strategies for Marijuana Scale: Further examination using item response theory. Psychology of Addictive Behaviors , 31(5), 548.  
78. Lippman, L.  H., Moore, K. A., Guzman, L., Ryberg, R., McIntosh, H., Ramos, M. F., 
Caal, S., Carle, A., & Kuhfeld, M. A. (2014).  Flourishing children: defining and testing 
indicators of positive development.  Dordrecht,  Netherlands : Springer.  
79. Prochaska JO, DiClemente CC. Transtheoretical therapy: Toward a more integrative 
model of change. Psychotherapy: Theory, Research & Practice. 1982;19(3):276.  
80. Prochaska JO, DiClemente CC, Norcross JC. In search of how people change: 
Applications to addictive behaviors. Am Psychol. 1992;47(9):1102 -1114.  
81. Rutter M. Psychosocial resilience and protective mechanisms. Am J Orthopsychiatry. 
1987;57(3):316 -331. 
82. Garmezy N. Resilience in children's adaptation to negative life events and stressed 
environments. Pediatr Ann. 1991;20(9):459 -466. 
83. MacCoun RJ. Toward a psychology of harm reduction. Am Psychol. 1998;53(11):1199-1208.  
84. Koffarnus, M. N., & Bickel, W. K. (2014). A 5 -trial adjusting delay discounting task: 
Accurate discount rates in less than one minute. Experimental and clinical 
psychopharmacology , 22(3):222. 
85. National Institute on Drug Abuse. NIDA -Modified ASSIST -Prescreen V1.0. National 
Institute of Health. 
86. Smith, G. R., Kramer, T., Babor, T., Burnam, M. A., Mosley, C. L., Rost, K., Burns, B. 
(1996). Substance and Outcomes Module --User’s Manual.  1996 -2007 University of 
Arkansas for Medical Sciences, 4301 West Markham, Little Rock, AR 72205 
87. Smith, G.R., Burnam , M.A., Mosley, C.L., Hollenberg, J. A., Mancino, M., Grimes, W. 
(2006). Reliability and validity of substance abuse outcomes module. Psychiatric 
Services, 57, 1452- 1460.  
 
 
 
 
 