 
 
 
     
 
    
 
Implementation of PPI Medication PGX Testing  
 
ClinicalTrials.gov ID: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
Protocol ID:  744230  
10 APR 2015  
 
 
I. SPECIFIC AIMS (Not to exceed 1 page)  
The potential for incorporating genomic information into a patient’s clinical care for the purpose of improving 
drug therapy; i.e., personalized medicine (or precision medicine), has been anxiously anticipated since the publication of the Human Genome Project and the Hap Map project. The FDA has approved a list of 
pharmacogenomic tests, which can be ordered to guide drug treatment. However, clinical implementation of 
pharmacogenomic (PGX) testing has been disappointing owing to challenges and barriers relat ed to analytical 
uncertainties, misunderstanding of genetic testing among stakeholders and cost. Recently President Obama announced the Precision Medicine Initiative, which include PGX testing, and has earmarked $ 1 B to implement  it. The Precision Medicine Initiative is expected to move personalized medicine forward so that all 
patients including children will benefit. The Nemours Children's Health System is uniquely position to lead the effort to personalize medicine among pediatric patients. This proposal seeks to implement a pilot, proof -of- 
concept PGX implementation study in the GI clinic at Nemours Children’s Hospital in Orlando, and proposes to 
begin with PGX testing of the CYP2C19- proton pump inhibitor gene- drug pair. Proton pump inhibitors (PPI) 
are one of the most highly prescribed drugs in the world; are extensively used in pediatrics to treat 
gastroesophageal reflux (GER) and other related conditions; and are thought to be safe. All PPI are substrate for CYP2C19, which is expressed in the liver and encoded by the CYP2C19 gene. Loss - and gain- of-function 
SNPs yield poor and extensive metabolizer phenotypes respectively, which result in plasma levels that can vary 10 -fold depending on metabolizer phenotype following the administration of similar PPI  doses. Thus, the 
dosing of PPI to treat GER according to FDA -approved guidelines often results in under treatment and poor 
therapeutic response in extensive metabolizers and to toxicity in poor metabolizers. We have submitted an 
R01 application titled: Pharmacogenetic Approach to Optimizing Proton Pump Inhibitor Treatment in Children, 
which is in response to: PAR 14- 274 Pharmacogenetics, Pharmacoepigenetics and Personalized Medicine in 
Children (October 5, 2014 deadline). The PAR recommends that applications include a clinical trial in which we proposed to compare conventional and genotype- guided dosing of PPI in children with GERD. If funded, 
we will return the unused portion of this application to Nemours Research; if not funded, we will resubmit our 
R01 application using preliminary data gathered from the present project. The primary goal of the present 
project  is to test the feasibility  of a simple,  point -of-care PGX  testing*  service in Nemours  Children’s  Hospital.  
 
*Point -of-care testing (POCT) is defin ed as medical testing at or near the patient’s bedside, and can be 
accomplished using labor that requires no specialized or professional training. Although the device we 
propose to use (SPARTAN RX) is a POCT device it will be housed in the Division of Pathology at Nemours 
Children’s Hospital and not at the bedside or the GI clinical. Therefore, what we propose is technically not 
POCT.  
 
Aim 1: To implement pharmacogenomic (PGX) testing at the Nemours Health System 
 
1a: To determine the feasibility of point -of-care PGX testing the CYP2C19- PPI gene drug pair in children with 
GERD or other stomach acid mediated conditions for which a PPI is prescribed at Nemours Health Systems, Nemours Children’s Hospital, Orlando. 
 
1b: Evaluate the safety and efficacy of genoty pe-guided dosing of PPI in children.  
 
 
II. BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE (Not to exceed 3 pages)  
Clinical implementation of PGX testing has been disappointing owing to several barriers, which deny patients the benefits of safe and effective drug therapy. In this section we discuss those barriers and demonstrate how  
RESEARCH 
PLAN 
 
  
 
the Nemours Health System is uniquely poised to implement PGX testing. This will benefit Nemours patients 
and their families and will provide a model for other health systems, hospital and primary sites to emulate. The 
rationale for selecting the CYP2C19-P PI gene -drug pair is discussed in this section.  
 
II.1 Barriers to PGX implementation. The incorporation of genetic information into the individual patient’s 
medical record for the purpose of guiding drug treatment in this country is slow owing to challenges and 
barriers including some that are unique to the pediatric population (1- 4). The implementation of PGX testing at 
NHS will benefit Nemours patients and their families by improving efficacy and reducing the risk of adverse events related to drug treatment. Successful implementation of PGX testing at NHS can serve as a model for 
other pediatric health systems, hospitals and primary sites to follow thus accelerating the rate of PGX implementation in this country.  
 
The absence of clear guidelines that facil itate timely implementation of PGX into the clinic is a barrier that 
drove the establishment of Clinical Pharmacogenetics Implementation Consortium (CPIC) in 2009, by the 
Pharmacogenomic Research Network. One of the goals of CPIC is to provide evidence- based guidelines for 
gene -drug pairs that could be used to improve drug treatment 2. The CPIC has established a framework for 
applying the types and levels of evidence required to justify incorporating genetic information into a patient’s 
medical records to improve drug efficacy and/or reduce toxicity 2. The quality of the evidence linking genetic variation and drug effects can be stratified into 3 levels (and recommendations): level 1: consistent evidence 
from well designed studies (strongly recommended); level 2: sufficient evidence that is limited by number, 
quality and consistency of studies, or by the inability to generalize to clinical practice (moderate 
recommendation); level 3: insufficient evidence (optional recommendation)2.  
. 
II.2. Rationale for testing the CYP2C19- PPI gene pair for PGX  implementation.  
 
II.2.1. PPIs are used extensively for approved and unapproved conditions in pediatrics.  Proton pump 
inhibitors (PPIs) are the most potent and effective class of gastric acid suppressing drugs (5- 8) and are among 
the highest selling prescription (not including over -the-counter sales) drugs in the world (9- 11). More than 75% 
of patients receiving long- term PPI treatment have no approved indications for use (12). PPI are used in 
neonates and pre -term infants for unapproved conditions including gastric acidity, problems feeding, 
esophagitis and gastric pain (13- 16); asthma (17,18) and for food allergies (19 -21). This is of particular 
concern to the FDA (22) because of questions of PPI efficacy and safety in children (23- 25), and are not 
recommended without evidence of acid- induced disease (22,26). Dosages of PPI for unapproved use are 
based on the dose recommendations for GERD.  
 
II.2.2. PPI use is associated with gastric and respiratory infections. Chronic use of PPIs has been associated 
with unexpected side effects including gastric and respiratory infections, which are thought to be related to the 
gastric acid suppressive properties of PPIs (27,28). The acidic pH of the gastrointestinal tract represents a 
protective barrier from invasion by ingested pathogens (29,30). Chronic gastric acid suppression by PPIs (and 
H2antagonists) reduces the effectiveness of this protective barrier and increases the risk of bacterial 
colonization in the upper gastrointestinal tract (29- 33) (reviewed in:34- 40). Of critical importance, the adverse 
effects associated with PPI use are dose- dependent. For example, the risks of nosocomcial C difficile infection 
was proportional to the intensity of suppression (no suppressive treatment; H2 antagonists, daily PPI and twice 
or more PPI administration/day) among patients receiving gastric acid suppression C difficile infection 32 (see 
Figure 1; in appendix). If aspirated during reflux episodes infected gastric media increases the risk of upper 
respiratory infections (41,42). Several studies have reported that the chronic use of PPIs has been associated 
with community -acquired pneumonia in children and adults (34,43- 49). In a study of lansoprazole in infants, 
lower respiratory tract infections occurred more frequently in participants on drug compared to placebo (25). In a recent study of lansoprazole in children with asthma (ACRC study; PI is an author), the prevalence respiratory infection was higher among those getting the PPI compared to placebo (17). 

 
  
 
II.2.3. Pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics of PPI are dependent on CYP2C19 haplotype. The efficacy 
of PPIs is strongly correlated with plasma concentrations (50,51). The pharmacokinetics and 
pharmacodynamics of most PPIs are influenced by CYP2C19 polymorphisms (reviewed in 52- 55). Several 
loss-of-function alleles reduce drug clearance and increase plasma concentrations of PPI resulting in 
individuals being classified as either poor metabolizer (PM) or intermediate metabolizers. CYP2C19*1 alleles 
are wild type (WT), and are associated with a more rapid clearance and lower concentrations of PPI, which results in individuals being classified as extensive metabolizers  (EM) (56) 
(http://www.healthanddna.com/2C19tech.pdf).  CYP2C19*17 is a gain- of-function allele that increases the 
clearance of PPIs and decreases drug concentrations even below those observed in individuals classified as 
extensive metabolizers. Individuals carrying *1/*17 alleles contribute to the ultra rapid metabolizer (UM) phenotype (57,58). Individuals with GERD who carry 2 CYP2C19*17 alleles (homozygous ultra rapid metabolizers) require higher doses of PPI to obtain optimal acid suppression (52,53) (see Table 1 in 
Appendix).  The area under the plasma concentration vs. time curve (AUC) for omeprazole and lansoprazole 
(and other PPIs) is 3 - to 10- fold higher among poor metabolizers PMs compared to extensive metabolizers 
EMs given equal doses (54,55,59,60). While more studies are needed in children, CYP2C19 variation appears 
to influence PPI pharmacokinetics in children (58,61,62).  
 
II.2.4. Link between PGX and PPI efficacy and adverse events. The link between PPI efficacy and PGX is 
well established: cure rates for H pylori were significantly higher in PMs compared to EM (52,63). Additionally, high doses of PPI have been used to successfully treat EMs with H pylori (52,59). Thus the quality of the evidenc e linking PPI efficacy in GERD and related conditions to CYP2C19 variation is level 1 and PGX testing 
has been recommended to avoid treatment failures (55). In constrast the evidence linking PGX with PPI - 
associated adverse events is one authored by the PI  of this submission (64). The applicant compared the 
prevalence of respiratory infections in poor metabolizers (carriers of CYP2C19*2, *3, *8, *9; N=45) with extensive metabolizers (carriers of 2 WT CYP2C19*1 alleles; N= 91). The OR for upper respiratory i nfections 
(URI) was higher in PM compared to placebo: 2.46 (p<0.05) but not in EM compared to placebo: OR = 1.55 (p=0.15) (See Figure 2 in appendix). Mean ± SD plasma concentrations of lansoprazole were 57% higher in PM compared to EM, thus supporting reduced clearance of and greater exposure to lansoprazole in EM 
compared to PM. (see Figure 3 in appendix). Clearly, the evidence linking CYP2C19 variation and PPI - 
associated respiratory infection is level 3 owing to the fact that ours is the only published study to demonstrate a link between CYP2C19 variation and PPI toxicity. Notwithstanding the level evidence, we recommend PGX 
testing for the CYP2C19- PPI gene pair not only based on our work but also because of the following: (i) the 
body of knowledge about the link between PPI -induced acid suppression and dysbiosis and the association 
between PPI use and respiratory and gastric infections is unequivocal; (ii) the proportional relationship between PPI dose and C difficile infection and between PPI dose and the prevalence of community -acquired 
pneumonia is unequivocal. Failure to adjust the dose of PPI in poor metabolizer children will unnecessarily expose them to increased risk of infection. Implementing PGX testing for the CYP2C19- PPI gene pair at the 
Nemours  Children’s Hospital will allow us to personalize PPI dosing based on CYP2C19 genotype, which will 
reduce the risk of infection.  
 
III. PRELIMINARY STUDIES /PROGRESS REPORT (Not to exceed 3  pages)  
Preliminary Data. Conventional doses of PPI can result in inferior  response in EMs and a therapeutic 
response in PM. Some children undergo esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) and biopsy if they fail to respond to PPIs. It is possible that CYP2C19 genetic variation may contribute to poor response to PPI. We 
hypothesized that the frequency  of EM phenotype would differ  in EGD  patients  compared to controls.  First,  we 
genotyped biopsy samples in 29 individuals for the *2, *3, *8, *9 and *17 SNPs and compared them to saliva 
collected from the same individuals to establish congruency between the two samples. 28/29 genotypes were 
congruent; one sample of tissue did not produce a signal. Next we compared the frequencies of genotypes among biopsied samples who were either on or had been on PPI (N=18) and controls (90 adult asthma 
patients) and the results are shown in Figure 2 in appendix. The frequencies of *17 alleles did not differ (0.17 
vs. 0.15) but the frequency of *2 allele was significantly lower in EGD children (shaded bars) vs. control (un- 
shaded bars): 0.028 vs. 0.19 p =0.04. These data are consistent with PMs having a better acid suppressive 

 
  
 
response to PPI than other phenotypes and suggests that NMs and EMs who are prescribed EGD may be 
under -dosed with PPI. These data are important to the project because they show that CYP2C19 genetic 
variation influences response to PPI. In addition to tissue we have analyzed (Figure 2), we have received 
tissue from Nemours in JAX, ORL and in Wilmington for children who were on PPI and were tested in 4 distinct 
cohorts: GERD + pH probe; Cystic Fibrosis; Fundoplication; Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) + C difficile.  
We plan to obtain 100 samples from each cohort to explore our hypothesis in these children.  
 
IV. RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS INCLUDING STATISTICAL ANALYSIS (Not to exceed 10  pages)  
The Nemours Children’s Health System is uniquely positioned to implement PGX testing in pediatrics. We 
propose to initiate this pilot study at Nemours Children’s Hospital in Orlando. Long- standing and award- 
winning entities operating under the Nemours Health Informatics that continuously evaluates and updates CDS tools, professional educational tools and patient -family education tools is innovative. These programs will 
eliminate several of the barriers to PGX implementation including uncertainties about which test to order, how to act on this genetic information and the uncertainty among patients and their families about genetic testing.  
They will also rapidly and efficiently make changes as the need arises. Some of these programs (listed below) 
will be utilized in the proposed pilot study.  
 
IV.1. Nemours Health Informatics: Nemours was among the first institutions to use an electronic health record 
(EHR) (Epic Systems, Verona, WI) in a multispecialty pediatric group practice beginning in 1998 with rollout to 
all Nemours campuses completed by 2005. Because Nemours has been an early adopter of electronic health record implementation and has received awards for excellence in healthcare information, the institution is 
poised to embrace expansion of pharmacogenomic  efforts.  
 
IV.2. Medication List Review for Every Inpatient and Outpatient Encounter. The initiation of virtually all patient 
encounters  includes  the review  of active  medications  with the patient/family  and Nemours  exceeds  the national 
standard for medication reconciliation. At each visit, digitally created prescriptions (when e prescribing is not 
used) and supportive consumer content are provided at every visit. Prescription pads are not permitted. The accuracy of our medication lists has increased significantly as a result, and therefore the accuracy of clinical 
decision support has also increased.  
 
IV.3. Laboratory Testing: Lab results from external lab sources are digitally interfaced with the medical record 
using the SunQuest Laboratory Information System ( http://www.sunquestinfo.com/products - 
solutions/laboratory/ laboratory/). Test results will be integrated into NemoursOne (EPIC) template that 
provides interpretation and recommendations for dosing or alternative treatments.  
 
IV.4. Clinical Decision Support (CDS) Usage and Outcomes in Place at Nemours;. For over five years, each of 
the Nemours site -specific -physician specialties have identified one or more clinical quality process measures 
that if enhanced, could result in improved outcomes and quality of life. The corresponding metrics are gathered via NemoursOne and results are benchmarked against national standards. Furthering alignment with strategy, 
every clinician has 5% of salary “at risk” for their measured patient outcomes. An assortment of CDS tools are available to clinicians including; “Smart” tools provided by Epic (templates, forms, lists, phrases); a highly 
customized Epic configuration; library and web resources within the Epic desktop; custom (home grown) 
applications and applets; and commercial CDS solutions. Thus, Nemours has the infrastructure in place to 
develop the CDS tools to be used for PMT and CYP2C19 testing.  
 
IV.5. QlikView for Outcomes Analysis. QlikView is a business discovery tool at Nemours 
(http://home.nemours.net/clinical/ehr/mynemours.html) that integrates data from any source including the 
Nemours Data Warehouse, NemoursOne, external sources, and office programs. The Nemours Data Warehouse is a mission -critical facility that houses extracted data from NemoursOne, secondary Clinical 
Systems, expense cycle systems and other  applications  for reporting in support  of: clinical analysis,  research  

 
  
 
studies, revenue and expense analysis, compliance reporting, performance metrics, risk management and 
infection control, market analysis, patient satisfaction, reporting to external agencies and entities, and other ad - 
hoc areas. With QlikView, clinicians,  administrators, researchers and others can access de- identified 
aggregate data on demand.  
 
IV.6. Nemours University: Nemours University provides online computer based curriculum to all Nemours 
staff and has been the recipient of numerous awards including the Am erican Society for Training and 
Development BEST award and the Leaning! 100 Award. Nemours University will be used to develop online training programs for clinicians who will be ordering pharmacogenomic tests for CYP2C19 testing. Curricula 
can be included as part of required  training and will include general  training on genetics  as well as training  on 
the PGX section that will be newly added to  NemoursOne.  
 
IV.7. KidsHealth: KidsHealth at Nemours creates engaging, family -friendly online, video, and print media fo r 
parents, kids, and teens. KidsHealth’s flagship project, http://kidshealth.org/, is the largest provider of online 
and video content about children’s health and development in the world, and is a resource for fam ilies, 
educators, physicians, and the media. It is the #1, most -visited site devoted to children’s health in English and 
Spanish and on a typical weekday, KidsHealth gets more than 1 million visits per day. KidsHealth is winner of 
numerous awards. KidsHealth modules also include audio links to have the modules spoken aloud for those 
viewer who have low  literacy.  
 
IV.9. MyNemours: MyNemours (https://mynemours.nemours.org/) is a free, confidential, internet -based tool 
that gives parents and legal guardians secure electronic access to select portions of their child’s medical 
records and health history at home. In this proposal, MyNemours will serve several functions: to obtain 
electronic informed consent for genetic testing per the requirements of state laws as well as for storage and 
future use of genomic materials and data, to dessiminate explanations of individual genomic  testing results, 
and to query patient satisfaction with PGX information provided.  
 
IV.10.  Ensuring Consistent Clinical Care Across Nemours  Campuses.  
Nemours Clinical Management Program (NCMP) is an enterprise -wide initiative that focuses on reducing 
unwanted variability in clinical care. To achieve this, NCMP uses principles of evidence- based medicine to 
establish Nemours Standards of Care, creates tools to measure adherence to these standards, and analyzes 
the outcomes of care. By analyzing meta- tagged clinical data elements, NCMP can measure and model clinical 
outcomes and thus allow quality assessment teams to prospectively monitor care metrics and institute quality improvement initiatives..  
 
IV.11.  Nemours Office of Human Subjects Protection (NOHSP) and Nemours Institutional Review Board 
(IRB): The Nemours Office of Human Subjects Protection (NOHSP) has oversight of institutional policy and 
procedure regarding human subjects protection, including operational oversight of Nemours’ Institutional 
Review  Boards.  
 
In summa ry, the informatics infrastructure that Nemours has in place is well established and highly functional, 
and provides an optimum environment for expanding PGX services in the future. This pilot project will enable us to efficiently incorporte Nemours IT as we move forward with PGX testing at Nemours.  
 
Specific aim 1a: To determine the feasibility of point -of-care PGX testing the CYP2C19- PPI gene drug pair in 
children with GERD or another clinical condition for which a PPI is prescribed at Nemours Health Syst ems, 
Nemours Children’s Hospital, Orlando. 

 
  
 
Study design: Our study is an ‘open label’ design in which potential participants will be recruited by GI staff of 
NCH in Orlando. All potential participants will be children, 2 to 17 yo, presenting with symptoms of GERD or 
other stomach acid mediated conditions for which a PPI is prescribed . The pediatric gastroenterologist will prescribe PPI of his/her choice (PPIs used at Nemours include lansoprazole, omeprazole, esomerazole and 
pantoprazol). If patients/caregivers agree to participate, they will be asked to read and sign the informed 
consent/assent documents and undergo screening to determine if they meet the inclusion criteria (see below). 
Participants will volunteer to submit a saliva sample for the determination of CYP2C19 genotype and 
metabolizer phenotype. 
 
Genotyping.  Genotyping will be performed using Spartan RX.  Figure 5 in appendix depicts the device 
along  with a sample  print out showing  the haplotypes  and metabolizer  phenotypes  for *2, *3 and *17 alleles.  
 
Experimental Plan. The specific events between a diagnosis of GERD or other stomach acid mediated 
conditions for which a PPI is prescribed and the prescription for the PPI are summarized as follows:  
1. Diagnosis of GERD or other stomach acid mediated conditions for which a PPI is prescribed will be 
performed by a pediatric gastroenterologist at the Nemours Children’s Hospital. Dr. Franciosi will explain the 
experimental pilot study and plan to his Division; he has has committed to participating in this pilot project. 
Other GI pediatricians will be invited to participate (participation is not  required).  
2. After the diagnosis of GERD or other stomach acid mediated conditions for which a PPI is prescribed 
and decision to use a PPI are made, consent will be obtained from patient and family and the PGX test will be 
ordered (Molecular Diagnostic Lab). Consent will also be sought for storing saliva for future PGX testing. 
Patients are not required to provide a sali va sample or to agree to genotype- guided dosing of  PPI. 
3. Saliva sample will be collected; bar -coded; and analyzed by SPARTAN RX point -of-care system 
housed in Department of Pathology, NCH (CLIA- accredited). Genotype results are available <60 minutes.  
4. Test r esults will be integrated into NemoursOne (EPIC); Clinical decision support (CDS) tools will 
provide interpretation and recommendations for PPI dosing or alternative drug and an E prescription will be 
ordered. Tables for conventional and genotype guided dosing are shown in Tables 2 and 3 of  appendix.  
 
Outcome Metrics. Outcomes for evaluating the success of PGX implementation include the following:  
 
% of patients agreeing to volunteer for the study  
% of patients reporting efficacy and toxicity data  
% of prov iders agreeing to participate in study  
% of participants agreeing to future use of DNA  
 
Sub aim 1b: Compare safety and efficacy of genotype- guided for PPI. 
Outcome metrics for response to PPI.  
The primary outcome to assess the efficacy of PPI therapy will be scores calculated from a validated 
questionnaire specifically designed for children with GERD (65) (see Figure 6 in appendix). The PI and his 
team have experience using this tool (17). Briefly, participants and/or parents and guardians will assess frequency and severity of the following symptoms in the preceding 7 days: Abdominal Belly pain; 
Burping/Belching; Choking when eating; Difficulty swallowing; Refusal to eat; Vomiting/Regurgitation.  
Participants and/or Parents/guardians will assess severity using a scale for 1 (not at all severe) to 7 (most 
severe). An individual score for each symptom (ISS) will be calculated by finding the product of the number of times a symptom occurred (frequency) and the severity (1- 7) in the previous 7 days. Composite symptoms 
score (CSS), which defined as the sum of the ISSs, will be calculated. This questionaire will be completed weekly and submitted via REDCap.  

 
  
 
The primary outcome to assess safety (adverse event score) of PPI therapy will be scores from a 
questionnaire comprised of 7 respiratory symptoms: upper respiratory infection (cold); sore throat; strep throat; 
bronchitis; pneumonia; ear infection; acute sinusitis (sinus infection) (See figure 7 in appendix). The PI and his 
team have experience using this questionnaire to evaluate the safety of lansoprazole treatment in children(17). The prevalence of each respiratory symptom will be compared in participants receiving genotype- driven 
dosing . Additionally, the doses of PPI will be compared.  
In addition, each month, parent/legal guardian(s) and/or study participant(s) will briefly answer questions regarding the impact of gastrointestinal and sinus and/or nasal problems on the child’s quality o f life.  
Gastrointestinal problems such as: stomach pain and hurt; stomach upset; food and drinks limits; trouble 
swallowing; heartburn and reflux; gas and bloating; constipation; diarrhea; worry; medicines and 
communication will be measured. On the other hand; sinus infection; nasal obstruction; allergy symptoms; 
emotional distress; activity limitations and overall quality of life are some of the metrics to be evaluated for 
sinus and/or nasal problems. Each metric has its own scoring scale. Gastrointestinal  problems will range from 
0-100 for “Never” to “Almost always”, respectively. Sinus and/or nasal problems have a 1- 7 scale for “None of 
the time” to “All of the time”, respectively.  
Inclusion Criteria. The goal of this pilot is that it be pragmatic and parallel routine clinical practice. This is 
important because we expect that the results of our trial to be readily generalizable and that this be implemented in a routine clinical setting. The goal of patient selection is to enroll 120 children, between the 
ages of 2 and 17 years, with GERD or other stomach acid mediated conditions for which a PPI is prescribed. 
Participants must be either currently under a Proton Pump Inhibitor (PPI) therapy or will start a PPI therapy. Eligible participants must have access  to internet and a valid email adress to comply with weekly study surveys 
to be completed online.  
Exclusion Criteria. This study will exclude children who have had peptic ulcer surgery; with a history of PKU; 
with a history of previous adverse effects from  PPI treatment or a sensitivity to aspartame (NutraSweet, Equal); 
who are non- adherent including inability or unwillingness of the legal guardian to provide consent or 
unwillingness of the child to provide assent; who are unable to take study medications; who are unable to 
communicate via telephone or other device; who do not have access to a computer with internet access.  
 
V. FACILITIES REQUIRED /PHYSICAL LOCATION OF STUDY (Specify the facilities to be used for the conduct of the 
proposed research and extent  of availability  to the project.  List the most  important  equipment  items  required for 
this project, noting the location and availability of  each)  
Nemours Children’s Hospital- Orlando, FL:  
 
NCH has a fully equipped General Clinical Research Center (GCRC) on the 4th floor of NCH, supported by dedicated clinic rooms and inpatient rooms as required for research studies, and with additional space for equipment, supplies, staff and other resources . In addition, NCH maintains a GCRC at NCH’s Clinic at 1717 
Orange Avenue in Orlando for patient visits at that Clinic. The research effort is supported by the Pathology Department, whose resources include state- of-the-art testing facilities, as well as a newly acquired BD 
BioSciences FACSCanto II flow cytometer.  
 
NCH leases over 2,000 sq. ft. of laboratory and office space for its biomedical research projects located at the 
Sanford Burnham Medical Research Institute. NCH also leases over 4,000 sq. ft. of l aboratory and office space 
at the UCF College of Medicine’s Burnett School of Biomedical Sciences. With ample room to expand its activities as necessary, NCH houses its Offices of Clinical Research and Sponsored Projects at the CoM.  
 
Clinical:  
NCH is a sta te-of-the-art 137- bed free -standing Children’s Hospital in the Lake Nona Medical City region of 
Orlando, with robust satellite clinics in downtown Orlando, Viera, Lake Mary, and CMS sites throughout greater Orlando. The Nemours Division of Gastroenterology  has currently has 7 providers: 4 physicians, 3 Nurse 
Practitioners and 3 full time registered nurses with plans to expand to 6 physicians in 2015 who will all assist in 

 
  
 
patient recruitment. NCH has a Medical Staff of 120 physicians and 50 m id-level providers at NCH. Staff 
provides services to our affiliated sites, with close to 50,000 office- based encounters in 2012. The NCH 
outpatient center has 8 fully -equipped patient rooms, and a >2000 sqft family education and media center call 
Kidstrac k, specifically dedicating to teaching families about health. 
 
The NCH Division of gastroenterology has a state of the art pediatric endoscopy laboratory with full endoscopic 
capabilities, capsule endoscopy, breath hydrogen testing and pH -impedance (PH -MII) probe testing. GI 
Procedures are performed in the inpatient hospital, the operating rooms, special procedure rooms and the Hospital Outpatient Division (HOD). PH -MII analysis is performed on the 4th floor HOD area in the NCH GI 
laboratory using the ZepHr/ Z/pH recorder, calibration kit, laptop computer and printer. Specific to this project, our team has extensive experience with single use Z/pH catheters (external reference) that can assess 24 hour acid and nonacid gastroesophageal reflux and gastric pH in patients from birth to adulthood (Sandhill 
Scientific). Dr. Roberto Gomez is the Director of the NCH GI Laboratory who supervises the registered nurses 
and GI technicians all with specialized training in pediatric gastroenterology.  
 
 
Nemours Children’s Hospital Orlando houses two Spartan RX point -of-care (POC) platforms in the Pathology 
Lab. The instruments will be supervised by Dr. Kamran Badizadigan, Chief of Pathology and Director of the CLIA approved Clinical Lab. The Spartan RX CYP2C19 system is capable of genotyping *2, *3, and *17 
alleles in parallel from a single patient’s buccal swab with a prep time of 4 min and a run time of 60 min. The 
Spartan RX is reported to have a specificity of 100% and a first -pass call rate of >98% for CYP2C19 *2, *3, 
and *17 alleles.  
 
VI. REFERENCES (Specify all authors, title, source, inclusive page numbers and  year)  
1. Scott SA. Personalizing medicine with clinical pharmacogenetics. Genet Med 2011;13:987- 95. 
2. Relling MV, Klein TE. CPIC: Clinical Pharmacogenetics Implementation Consortium of  the 
Pharmacogenomics Research Network. Clin Pharmacol Ther  2011;89:464 -7. 
3. Gurwitz D, Zika E, Hopkins MM, Gaisser S, Ibarreta D. Pharmacogenetics in Europe: barriers and 
opportunities. Public Health Genomics  2009;12:134- 41. 
4. Johnson DA, Oldfield ECt. Reported side effects and complications of long- term proton pump inhibitor 
use: dissecting the evidence. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2013;11:458- 64; quiz  e37-8. 
5. Croom KF, Scott LJ. Lansoprazole: in the treatment of gastro -oesophageal reflux disease in children 
and adolescents. Drugs  2005;65:2129 -35. 
6. van Pinxteren B, Numans ME, Bonis PA, Lau J. Short -term treatment with proton pump inhibitors, H2- 
receptor antagonists and prokinetics for gastro -oesophageal reflux disease -like symptoms and endoscopy 
negative reflux disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev  2006;3:CD002095. 
7. Sachs G, Shin JM, Briving C, Wallmark B, Hersey S. The pharmacology of the gastric acid pump: the 
H+,K+ ATPase. AnnuRev P harmacol Toxicol 1995;35:277 -305. 
8. Richardson P, Hawkey  CJ, Stack  WA. Proton pump inhibitors.  Pharmacology  and rationale for use in 
gastrointestinal disorders. Drugs  1998;56:307 -35. 
9. Blake  K R, H. Treatment  of Pediatric  Asthma with Proton  Pump  Inhibitors:  Three Strikes,  Game  Over. 
Pediatric Allergy, Immunology, and Pulmonology  2012;25:119 -22. 
10. Dent J, El -Serag HB, Wallander MA, Johansson S. Epidemiology of gastro- oesophageal reflux disease: 
a systematic review. Gut  2005;54:710 -7. 
11. Martigne L, Delaage PH, Thom as-Delecourt F, Bonnelye G, Barthelemy P, Gottrand F. Prevalence and 
management of gastroesophageal reflux disease in children and adolescents: a nationwide cross -sectional 
observational study. Eur J Pediatr  2012.  
12. Reimers  M, Carey  VJ. Bioconductor:  an open source framework  for bioinformatics  and computational 
biology. Methods Enzymol 2006;411:119 -34. 

 
  
 
13. Omari  TI, Haslam  RR, Lundborg  P, Davidson GP. Effect of omeprazole on acid gastroesophageal 
reflux and gastric acidity in preterm infants with pathological acid reflux. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr 
2007;44:41 -4. 
14. Barron JJ, Tan H, Spalding J, Bakst  AW, Singer  J. Proton  pump  inhibitor  utilization  patterns  in infants.  J 
Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr 2007;45:421- 7. 
15. Ward RM, Tammara B, Sullivan SE, et al. Single- dose, multiple- dose, and population pharmacokinetics 
of pantoprazole in neonates and preterm infants with a clinical diagnosis of gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD). Eur J Clin Pharmacol  2010;66:555- 61. 
16. Kierkus J, Furmaga -Jablonska W, Sullivan JE, et al. Pharmacodynamics and safety of pantoprazole in 
neonates, preterm infants, and infants aged 1 through 11 months with a clinical diagnosis of gastroesophageal reflux disease. Dig Dis Sci 2011;56:425- 34. 
17. Holbrook JT, Wise RA, Gold BD, et al. Lansoprazole for children with poorly controlled asthma: a 
randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2012;307:373- 81. 
18. Martinez  FD. Children,  asthma,  and proton pump inhibitors:  costs  and perils  of therapeutic  creep.  JAMA 
2012;307:406 -7. 
19. Uzunismail H, Goksel S, Cagatay P, Cengiz M. PPIs and food allergy. Am J  Gastroenterol 
2010;105:963 -4. 
20. Pali-Scholl I, Jensen -Jarolim E. Anti -acid medication as a risk factor for food allergy. Allergy 
2011;66:469 -77. 
21. Diesner  SC, Pali-Scholl  I, Jensen -Jarolim  E, Untersmayr  E. [Mechanisms  and risk factors  for type 1 
food allergies: the role of gastric digestion]. Wien Med Wochenschr  2012;162:513- 8. 
22. Chen IL, Gao WY, Johnson AP, et al. Proton pump inhibitor use in infants: FDA reviewer experience. J 
Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr  2012;54:8- 14. 
23. van der Pol RJ, Smits MJ, van Wijk MP, Omari TI, Tabbers MM, Benninga MA. Efficacy of proton- pump 
inhibitors in children with gastroesophageal reflux disease: a systematic review. Pediatrics  2011;127:925- 35. 
24. Moore DJ, Tao BS, Lines DR, Hirte C, Heddle ML, Davidson GP. Double- blind placebo- controlled trial 
of omeprazole in irritable infants with gastroesophageal reflux. J Pediatr  2003;143:219 -23. 
25. Orenstein SR, Hassall E, Furmaga- Jablonska W, Atkinson S, Raanan M. Multicenter, double- blind, 
randomized,  placebo -controlled trial assessing the efficacy and safety  of proton pump  inhibitor  lansoprazole in 
infants with symptoms of gastroesophageal reflux disease. J Pediatr 2009;154:514- 20 e4. 
26. Putnam PE. Stop the PPI express: they don't keep babies quiet! J Pediatr  2009;154:475 -6. 
27. Altman KW, Radosevich JA. Unexpected consequences of proton pump inhibitor use. Otolaryngol 
Head Neck Surg 2009;141:564- 6. 
28. Abraham NS. Proton pump inhibitors: potential adverse effects. Curr Opin Gastroenterol  2012.  
29. Howden CW, Hunt RH. Relationship between gastric secretion and infection. Gut  1987;28:96 -107. 
30. Theisen J, Nehra D, Citron D, et al. Suppression of gastric acid secretion in patients with 
gastroesophageal  reflux  disease results  in gastric  bacterial  overgrowth and deconjugation of bile acids.  J 
Gastrointest Surg  2000;4:50- 4. 
31. Thorens  J,
  Froehlich F, Schwizer  W, et al. Bacterial  overgrowth during  treatment  with omeprazole 
compared with cimetidine: a prospective randomised double blind study. Gut  1996;39:54 -9. 
32. Howell MD, Novack V, Grgurich P, et al. Iatrogenic gastric acid suppression and the risk of nosocomial 
Clostridiu m difficile infection. Arch Intern Med 2010;170:784 -90. 
33. Rosen R, Johnston  N, Hart K, Khatwa  U, Katz E, Nurko  S. Higher  rate of bronchoalveolar  lavage 
culture positivity in children with nonacid reflux and respiratory disorders. J Pediatr 2011;159:504- 6. 
34. Canani RB, Cirillo P, Roggero P, et al. Therapy with gastric acidity inhibitors increases the risk of acute 
gastroenteritis and community -acquired pneumonia in children. Pediatrics  2006;117:e817- e20. 
35. Dial MS. Proton pump inhibitor use and enteric infections. Am J  Gastroenterol 2009;104 Suppl 2:S10- 6. 

 
  
 
36. Vesper  BJ, Jawdi  A, Altman  KW, Haines  GK, 3rd, Tao L, Radosevich JA. The effect of proton  pump 
inhibitors on the human microbiota. Curr Drug Metab 2009;10:84- 9. 
37. Canani RB, Terrin G. Gastric acidity inhibitors and the risk of intestinal infections. Curr Opin 
Gastroenterol  2010;26:31- 5. 
38. Turco  R, Martinelli M, Miele  E, et al. Proton  pump  inhibitors  as a risk factor  for paediatric  Clostridium 
difficile infection. Aliment Pharmacol Ther  2010;31:754- 9. 
39. Bavishi  C, Dupont  HL. Systematic  review:  the use of proton pump  inhibitors  and increased susceptibility 
to enteric infection. Aliment Pharmacol Ther  2011;34:1269 -81. 
40. Kwok  CS, Arthur  AK, Anibueze CI, Singh  S, Cavallazzi R, Loke YK. Risk of Clostridium  difficile  Infection 
With Acid Suppressing Drugs and Antibiotics: Meta- Analysis. Am J Gastroenterol  2012;107:1011- 9. 
41. Vakil N. Acid inhibition  and infections  outside the gastrointestinal tract.  Am J Gastroenterol  2009;104 
Suppl  2:S17- 20. 
42. Johnstone  J, Nerenberg K, Loeb  M. Meta -analysis:  proton pump inhibitor  use and the risk of 
community -acquired pneumonia. Aliment Pharmacol Ther  2010;31:1165 -77. 
43. Laheij RJ, Sturkenboom MC, Hassing RJ, Dieleman J, Stricker BH, Jansen JB. Risk of community - 
acquired pneumonia and use of gastric acid- suppressive drugs. JAMA  2004;292:1955 -60. 
44. Gulmez  SE, Holm  A, Frederiksen  H, Jensen  TG, Pedersen C, Hallas  J. Use of proton  pump  inhibitors 
and the risk of community -acquired pneumonia: a population- based case- control study. Arch Intern Med 
2007;167:950 -5. 
45. Rodriguez LA, Ruigomez A, Wallander MA, Johansson S. Acid- suppressive drugs and community - 
acquired pneumonia. Epidemiology  2009;20:800- 6. 
46. Myles PR, Hubbard RB, McKeever TM, Pogson Z, Smith CJ, Gibson JE. Risk of community -acquired 
pneumonia and the use of statins, ace inhibitors and gastric acid suppressants: a population- based case- 
control study. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf  2009;18:269 -75. 
47. Eurich DT, Sadowski CA, Simpson SH, Marrie TJ, Majumdar SR. Recurrent community -acquired 
pneumonia in patients starting acid -suppressing drugs. Am J Med 2010;123:47- 53. 
48. Hermos JA, Young MM, Fonda JR, Gagnon DR, Fiore LD, Lawler EV. Risk of c ommunity -acquired 
pneumonia in veteran patients  to whom  proton pump  inhibitors  were  dispensed.  Clin Infect  Dis 2012;54:33 -42. 
49. Littner MR,  Leung FW, Ballard ED, Huang B, Samra NK. Effects of 24 weeks of lansoprazole therapy 
on asthma symptoms, exacerbations, quality of life, and pulmonary function in adult asthmatic patients with 
acid reflux symptoms. Chest 2005;128:1128 -35. 
50. Yacyshyn BR, Thomson AB. The clinical importance of proton pump inhibitor pharmacokinetics. 
Digestion  2002;66:67- 78. 
51. Litalien C, Theore t Y, Faure C. Pharmacokinetics of proton pump inhibitors in children. Clin 
Pharmacokinet  2005;44:441- 66. 
52. Furuta T, Shirai  N, Sugimoto  M, Ohashi  K, Ishizaki  T. Pharmacogenomics  of proton pump  inhibitors. 
Pharmacogenomics 2004;5:181 -202. 
53. Furuta T, Shirai N, Sugimoto M, Nakamura A, Hishida A, Ishizaki T. Influence of CYP2C19 
pharmacogenetic  polymorphism  on proton  pump inhibitor -based  therapies.  Drug  Metab Pharmacokinet 
2005;20:153 -67. 
54. Zhang D, Wang X, Yang M, Wang G, Liu H. Effects of CYP2C19 polymorphism on the 
pharmacokinetics of lansoprazole and its main metabolites in healthy Chinese subjects. Xenobiotica 
2011;41:511 -7. 
55. Hagymasi  K, Mullner  K, Herszenyi  L, Tulassay  Z. Update on the pharmacogenomics  of proton pump 
inhibitors. Pharmacogenom ics 2011;12:873 -88. 
56. Desta Z, Zhao X, Shin JG, Flockhart DA. Clinical significance of the cytochrome P450 2C19 genetic 
polymorphism. Clin Pharmacokinet 2002;41:913- 58. 

 
  
 
57. Sim SC, Risinger C, Dahl ML, et al. A common novel CYP2C19 gene variant causes ultrarapid drug 
metabolism relevant for the drug response to proton pump inhibitors and antidepressants. Clin Pharmacol Ther 
2006;79:103 -13. 
58. Kearns GL, Leeder JS, Gaedigk A. Impact of the CYP2C19*17 allele on the pharmacokinetics of 
omeprazole and pantoprazole in children:  evidence for a differential  effect.  Drug  Metab Dispos  2010;38:894 -7. 
59. Furuta T, Shirai N, Xiao F, Ohashi K, Ishizaki T. Effect of high- dose lansoprazole on intragastic pH in 
subjects who are homozygous extensive metabolizers of cytochrome P4502C19. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2001;70:484 -92. 
60. Furuta T, Shirai N, Xiao F, et al. Polymorphism of interleukin- 1beta affects the eradication rates of 
Helicobacter pylori by triple therapy FURUTA2004. Clin GastroenterolHepatol  2004;2:22 -30. 
61. Gumus E, Karaca O, Babaoglu MO, et al. Evaluation of lansoprazole as a probe for assessing 
cytochrome P450 2C19 activity  and genotype- phenotype correlation in childhood.  Eur J Clin Pharmacol 
2012;68:629 -36. 
62. Knebel W, Tammara B, Udata C, Comer G, Gastonguay MR, Meng X. Population pharmacokinetic 
modeling of pantoprazole in pediatric patients from birth to 16 years. J Clin Pharmacol  2011;51:333- 45. 
63. Schwab M, Schaeffeler  E, Klotz  U, Treiber  G. CYP2C19  polymorphism  is a major  predictor  of treatment 
failure in white patients by use of lansoprazole- based quadruple therapy for eradication of Helicobacter pylori. 
Clin Pharmacol Ther  2004;76:201 -9. 
64. Lima JJ, Lang JE, Blake KV, Wong Y, Holbrook J, Wise RW, Teague WG. Association of CYP2C19 
Genotype on Lansoprazole-Associate d Respiratory Adverse Effects in Children. J Pediatr. 2013 
Sep;163(3):686- 91. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2013.03.017. Epub 2013 Apr  24 
65. Deal L, Gold BD, Gremse DA, et al. Age- specific questionnaires distinguish GERD symptom frequency 
and severity in infants and young children: development and initial validation. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr 
2005;41:178 -85. 
66. Lima JJ, Franciosi JP. Pharmacogenomic testing: the case of CYP2C19- proton pump inhibitor gene- 
drug pairs. Pharmacogenomics  2014;15:1471 -8. 
