Version Date: 20-November -2015 Page 1 of 5 1. Protocol Title : The effect of tranexamic acid on blood loss and transfusion rates  in major 
oncologic surgery.  
 
2. Investigator (s): G. Paul Wright, MD ; Mathew H. Chung, MD  
 
3. Version Date: 20-November -2015 
 
4. Objectives:  
• To determine the impact of pr eoperative adm inistration of tranexamic acid on blood 
loss and transfusion rates in major oncologic surgery.   
• To evaluate the cost -effectiveness of tranexamic acid in major oncologic surgery.  
 
5. Background:  
Tranexamic acid was first introduced in the 1960’s as a treatmen t for heavy menstrual 
bleeding.1 This medication inhibits fibrinolysis by inhibiting multiple plasminogen binding 
sites. In the past two decades, it’s use has been incorporated into surgical practice for 
patients u ndergoing open -heart surgery,  liver transp lantation, and urologic surgery .2-4 
Recent reports of decreased mortality in patients with traumatic hemorrhage receiving 
tranexamic acid have shown significant promise.5-6 A 2006 study published out of Taiwan 
demonstrated decreased blood loss, reduced tra nsfusion rates, and decreased overall 
hospital cost in patients undergoing liver resections for both benign and malignant 
conditions.7 
 
Major oncologic surgeries involving the liver and gastrointestinal tract involve extensive 
dissection , which can result in signific ant operative blood loss requiring  intra- or 
postoperative transfusion. Tranexamic acid may be a useful addition in procedures with 
significant blood loss , as previous studies indicate it is both safe and affordable. While 
reports of seizure act ivity have been published when used at high doses (100 mg/kg), 
standard dosing regimens  have proven to be safe and effective.8,9 The beneficial effect of 
reduction  in bleeding has been demonstrated without an  increase in thromboembolic  
events.6 We believe tranexamic acid has potential to reduce bleeding in major oncologic 
surgery resulting in reduced blood loss and lower transfusion rates. An improvement in the 
rate of surgical complications related to bleeding may also  result in decreased hospital costs 
as well. 
 
6. Setting of the Research:  
Spectrum Health Butterworth Campus.   Lemmen -Holton Cancer Pavilion.  
 
7. Resources Available to Conduct this Research:  
Approximately 15 major oncologic surgeries are performed on a monthly basis at  the 
Spectrum Health Butterwor th Campus. All individuals scheduled to undergo these surgeries  
that meet the eligibility criteria  will be recruited for enrollment. Study personnel will include 
surgical residents with experience in surgical oncology research and knowledge of surgical 
outcome measures , with monitoring by a staff surgical oncologist . 
 
8. Study Design:  
a. Recruitment Methods  
Potential subjects will be recruited at their preoperative office visit with their surgeon  
or, if applicable, during their inpatient stay prior to surgery . Informed consent will be 
obtained by the Spectrum Health Oncology Research staff.  The potential subjects 
include all patients scheduled to undergo major oncologic surgery that meet all of  the 
Version Date: 20-November -2015 Page 2 of 5 inclusion criteria , and none of the exclusion criteria . There will  be no payment to 
study subjects.  We plan to enroll a total of 200 subjects, unless planned interim 
analyses determine otherwise.  
 
b. Inclusion Criteria  
• Subjects  undergoing major oncologic surgery for standard of care purposes 
(to include , but not limited to : liver resections, radical cholecystectomy, 
pancreaticoduodenectomy (Whipple procedure ), esophagectomy, 
gastrectomy, colectomy, and debulking with hyperthermic intraperitoneal 
chemotherapy , prostatectomies, nephrectomies, and partial neprectomies ) 
• Male or female > 18 years of age  
• Subject  agrees to participate in this study and provides informed consent  
 
Exclusion Criteria  
• Subjects  with a history of hypercoagulopathy, deep vein thrombosis  or 
pulmonary embolism  
• Subjects that are on anticoagulation or antiplat elet medications at the time of 
surgery other than Aspirin  
• Subjects with a history of TIA or Stroke  
• Subjects with a history of atrial fibrillation  
• Subjects with a known thrombus  
• Baseline creat inine level greater than 2. 83 mg/dL  
• Subjects with known hyperse nsitivity to tranexamic acid  
• Adults unable to provide informed consent  
• Children  
• Pregnant women  
• Prisoners  
• Non-English speaking  subjects  
• Any other medical condition including mental illness or substance abuse 
deemed by the investigator to be likely to interf ere with a subject ’s ability to 
provide informed consent, cooperate and take part in this research study  
 
c. Study Endpoints  
The primary outcome measures will be operative blood loss  and transfusion rates in 
subjects undergoing the eligible procedures. Second ary outcome measures will 
include  cost of hospitalization, intensive care unit length of stay, and total hospital 
length of stay.  
 
d. Procedures Involved in the Research  
The study design will be a randomized, double -blind, placebo -controlled trial. 
Following satisfaction of inclusion /exclusion criteria  and enrollment into the study , 
designated pharmacy staff will be notified of the patient’s enrollment  and scheduled 
timing of surgery.  Designated pharmacy staff will randomize the patient  and assign 
the patient a unique study number. The subject will be randomized based on a 
predetermined algorithm by the pharmacy staff to  receive p reoperative intravenous 
tranexamic acid or preoperative intravenous isotonic electrolyte solution as  placebo. 
The preparation will be  indistinguishable by nursing , surgical , or anesthesia staff . 
The tranexamic acid group will receive a 1000  mg dose  immediately preceding 
surgery , administered by the anesthesiologist . Both the tranexamic acid and placebo  
will be administered via intraveno us piggyback over 15 minutes . Standard daily 
Version Date: 20-November -2015 Page 3 of 5 laboratory measurements will continue unless clinical conditions necessitate more 
frequent monitoring. Transfusion will take place for hemoglobin levels < 7.0 g/dL or 
hemoglobin level < 10 g/dL with clinical sym ptoms indicating need for transfusion , 
per standard practice . Final decision on transfusion will be made according to  the 
staff surgical oncologist’s discretion.  
 
Data to be recorded from operative records will include operative  blood loss, 
operative time,  amount of fluid received, and  intraoperative transfusion requirements. 
Postopera tive data including hemoglobin levels , transfusion requirements, surgical 
complications, thromboembolic events, length of ICU stay, length of hospital stay, 
and cost of inpati ent stay . Subjects will be followed for 90 days post operatively. 
Additionally , re-admission to the hospital during this time will also be recorded with 
associated complications.  
 
e. Data Management  
The study personnel will collect outcome data on a weekly bas is. Data will be stored 
in a password -protected file for security. Pharmacy staff will keep a secure record of 
subjects randomized to the tranexamic acid and placebo arms respectively, which 
will be blinded from the study personnel.  
 
f. Provisions to Monitor the Data for the Safety of Subjects  
Adverse events including thromboembolic events  and development of acute renal 
failure  will be monitored and recorded on a weekly  basis by study personnel.  In the 
event an increased number of unanticipated events occur, t he study will be 
temporarily stopped pending review . Review of unbli nded data will be performed by  
an independent clinician , pharmacist, and statistician  to determine the need to 
discontinue or resume the study. If a significant increase in adverse events is noted 
in the treatment arm, the trial will be terminated.  Decisions resulting from  the review 
will be discussed with the primary investigator.   
 
Interim reviews of unblinded data for statistically significant findings will be performed 
by an independen t clinician, pharmacist, and statistician after every 50 subjects  
complete the study . Findings will be reviewed with the investigators, and decisions 
will be made as to whether or not the research study continues. These interim 
reviews and outcomes will be  reported to the IRB.  
 
g. Withdrawal of Subjects  
Subjects will be withdrawn from the study if they experience an adverse drug 
reaction defined as anaphylaxis. Other potential side effects such as nausea, 
vomiting, or diarrhea will be treated symptomatically per standard of care . If 
refractory to standard treatment for these side effects , subjects will be withdrawn 
from the study.  Subjects experiencing any thrombotic event prior to completion of 
study drug dosing schedule will be withdrawn from study. Subject s may choose at 
any time to voluntarily withdraw from the study. If subjects choose to withdraw, t heir 
data will not be included for analysis if they did not complete the proposed dosing 
regimen.   
 
The primary investigator may remove a subject at any time fr om this research study 
if it is felt to be in the best interest of the subject.  
 
 
Version Date: 20-November -2015 Page 4 of 5 9. Statistical Plan  
a. Sample Size Determination  
We anticipate a 15 -20% reduction in transfusion rates  in the tranexamic arm when 
compared with placebo treatment . A sample size of 200 total  subjects , 100 in each 
arm of the study,  will be required to obtain a statistically significant result with p 
<0.05. Randomization will ensure an equal number of respective surgeries between 
the treatment and placebo arms of the study.  All subject s who consent to the trial 
who meet the above inclusion criteria  and complete the proposed dosing regimen  will 
be included in the sample size.  
 
b. Statistical Methods  
Summary statistics will be calculated.  Quantitative data will be expressed as the 
mean +SEM a nd nominal data will be expressed as a percentage.  Comparisons 
between groups for quantitative variables will be performed using the t -test. Nominal 
variables will be evaluated using the c2 test. Significance will be assessed at p<0.05.   
 
10. Risks to Subjects  
Tranexamic acid is an FDA approved medication. The safety of tranexamic acid has 
been demonstrated in a meta -analysis of the off-label use of tranexamic acid in the 
perioperative period . A theoretical risk of throm boembolic events exists, though  no 
signif icant adverse outcomes have been reported with the proposed dosing 
schedule.  Refer to Pfizer Physician Prescribing Information document  for a listing of 
potential adverse effects.  
 
11. Potential Benefits to Subjects  
Potential benefits include decreased surgica l blood loss resulting in decreased 
transfusion requirements. Transfusion of packed red blood cells has been associated 
with numerous potential adverse events. In addition, decreased overall hospital cost 
may occur if the study subjects experience decrease d complication rates.  
 
12. Provisions to Protect the Privacy I nterests of Subjects  
The study, potential risks and benefits of treatment will be discussed extensively with 
each potential subject at their preoperative office visit  (or as an inpatient, if 
applica ble) in a private space . Any questions they have  will be answered 
accordingly. Reported data will not contain identifiable information.  
 
13. Provisions to Maintain the Confidentiality of D ata 
Identifiable study data will be kept in a secure password -protected file or locked 
cabinets by study personnel. Pharmacy staff will have record of the randomization of 
each individual subject stored in a controlled , secure  area.  
 
14. Medical Care and Compensation for I njury  
Any medical or surgical complications experienced rel ative to this research will be treated in 
accordance with current standards of care. No study funds have been set  aside to 
compensate subjects for injury.  
 
15. Cost to Subjects  
Study drug, placebo, and preparation/administration will be paid for by funds 
allocated to the study, and not billed to the subjects. All other aspects of the subject’s 
care are considered standard of care, and will be billed to the patient and/or their 
insurance company.  
Version Date: 20-November -2015 Page 5 of 5 16. Consent P rocess  
Eligible subjects  will be recruited at their scheduled preoperative office visit. In rare 
circumstances recruitment will take place in the inpatient setting if a preoperative visit 
is not scheduled to occur . The potential risks and benefits of the s tudy will be 
discussed in detail by the Spectrum Health  Oncology Research staff  in a private 
space . All subjects will be ensured adequate time to read the research informed 
consent  form, and all questions will be answered to their satisfaction. Subjects will be 
informed that the research is a voluntary option.  The subject may choose to sign the 
research  consent at the time of the office visit. If the subject desires additional time to 
consider the study , they may take a research consent home for review purposes, 
and they may choose to consent to involvement in the study at any time up to the 
date of their scheduled surgical procedure . 
 
17. Vulnerable P opulations  
There will be no involvement of vulnerable populations in this study.    
 
18. Sharing of Results with Subjects  
Study r esults w ill not be shared with subjects unt il formal publication of the data.  
Results will be shared as requested at that time.  
 
19. References  
1) Vermylen J, et al. A double blind study of the effect of tranexamic acid in essential 
menorrhagia. Thromb Diath Haemorrh 1968;20(3):583 -7. 
 
2) Casati V, et . al. Tranexamic acid in off -pump coronary surgery: A preliminary, randomized, 
double -blind, placebo -controlled study.  Ann Thorac Surg 2001;72:470 -5. 
 
3) Massicotte L, et. al. Aprotinin versus tranexamic acid during liver transplantation: Impact on 
blood product requirements and survival.  Transplantation 2011;91:1273 -8. 
 
4) Crescenti A, et. al. Intraoperative use of tranexamic acid to reduce transfusion rate in patients 
undergoing radical retropubic prostatectomy: double -blind, randomized, placebo -control led trial.  
BMJ 2011;343:d5701.  
 
5) CRASH -2 trial collaborators.  Effects of tranexamic acid on death, vascular occlusive events, 
and blood transfusion in trauma patients with significant haemorrhage (CRASH -2): a 
randomized, placebo -controlled trial.  Lanc et  2010;376:23 -32. 
 
6) Cap AP, et. al.  Tranexamic acid for trauma patients: A critical review of the literature.  J 
Trauma 2011;71:S9 -14 
 
7) Wu CC, et al.  Perioperative parenteral tranexamic acid in liver tumor resection.  Ann Surg 
2006;243:173 -80. 
 
8) Kalavrouziotis D, et. al.  High -dose tranexamic acid is an independent predictor of early 
seizure after cardiopulmonary bypass.  Ann Thorac Surg 2011;(epub ahead of print).  
 
9) Henry DA, Carless PA, Moxey AJ, et. al.  Anti -fibrinolytic use for minimising p erioperative 
allogenic blood transfusion.  Cochrane Database Syst Rev.  2011;16(3):CD001886.  