Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  06-114A(6)  
Amended:  12/21/12  
Page  1 of 59  
  
 
 
A PHASE  II STUDY  OF HEPATIC  ARTERIAL  INFUSION  WITH  FLOXURIDINE  AND 
DEXAMETHASONE IN COMBINATION WITH INTRAVENOUS BEVACIZUMAB (A 
MONOCLONAL ANTIBODY TO VASCULAR ENDOTHELIAL GROWTH FACTOR - 
A), IN PATIENTS WITH UNRESECTABLE PRIMARY HEPATIC MALIGNANCY  
MSKCC  THERAPEUTIC/DIAGNOSTIC  PROTOCOL  
 
 
Principal  Investigator:  William  Jarnagin,  MD, Hepatopancreatobiliary  Surgery  Service  
Co-Principal  Investigator (s): Nancy  Kemeny,  MD, Gastrointestinal  Oncology  Service 
Kinh Gian Do, MD, Department of Radiology  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  06-114A(6)  
Amended:  12/21/12  
Page  2 of 59  
  
Investigator(s):  Ghassan  Abou -Alfa,  MD, Gastrointestinal  Oncology  Service 
Peter Allen, MD, Hepatopancreatobiliary Surgery Service 
Ki-Young Chung, MD, Gastrointestinal Oncology Service 
David D’Adamo, MD, Melanoma/Sarcoma Service  
David Ilson, MD, Gastrointestinal Oncology Service 
David  Kelsen,  MD, Gastrointestinal  Oncology  Service 
Mary Keohan, MD, Melanoma/Sarcoma Service 
Robert Maki, MD, Melanoma/Sarcoma Service  
Diane Riedy, MD, Gastrointestinal Oncology Service 
Eileen O’Reilly, MD, Gastrointestinal Oncology Service 
Leonard  B. Saltz,  MD, Gastrointestinal  Oncology  Service 
Gary Schwartz, MD, Melanoma/Sarcoma Service  
Neil Segal, MD, Gastrointestinal Oncology Service 
Manish Shah, MD, Gastrointestinal Oncology Service 
Archie Tse, MD, Gastrointestinal Oncology Service 
Yuman  Fong,  MD, Gastric/Mixed  Tumor  Surgery  Service  
Leslie  Blumgart,  MD, Hepatopancreatobiliary  Surgery  Service 
Michael D’Angelica, MD, Hepatopancreatobiliary Surgery  
Service  
Ronald  DeMatteo,  MD, Hepatopancreatobiliary  Surgery  Service 
Mithat Gönen, PhD, Department of Epidemiology and  
Biostatistics  
Jinru Shia, MD, Department of Pathology 
David  Klimstra,  MD, Department  of Pathology  
David  H. Gultekin,  PhD,  Department  of Medical  Physics 
Ioannis Konstantinidis, MD, Department of Surgery 
Laura Tang MD, Department of Pathology  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  06-114A(6)  
Amended:  12/21/12  
Page  3 of 59  
  
Consenting  Professional(s):  William  Jarnagin,  MD, Hepapancreatotobiliary  Surgery  Service 
Nancy Kemeny, MD, Gastrointestinal Oncology Service  
Peter Allen, MD, Hepatopancreatobiliary Surgery Service 
Ghassan  Abou -Alfa,  MD, Gastrointestinal  Oncology  Service 
Ki-Young Chung, MD, Gastrointestinal Oncology Service 
David D’Adamo, MD, Melanoma/Sarcoma Service  
David Ilson, MD, Gastrointestinal Oncology Service 
David  Kelsen,  MD, Gastrointestinal  Oncology  Service 
Mary Keohan, MD, Melanoma/Sarcoma Service 
Robert Maki, MD, Melanoma/Sarcoma Service  
Diane Reidy, MD, Gastrointestinal Oncology Service 
Eileen O’Reilly, MD, Gastrointestinal Oncology Service 
Leonard  B. Saltz,  MD, Gastrointestinal  Oncology  Service 
Gary Schwartz, MD, Melanoma/Sarcoma Service  
Neil Segal, MD, Gastrointestinal Oncology Service 
Manish Shah, MD, Gastrointestinal Oncology Service 
Archie Tse, MD, Gastrointestinal Oncology Service 
Yuman  Fong,  MD, Gastric/Mixed  Tumor  Surgery  Service  
Leslie  Blum gart, MD, Hepatopancreatobiliary  Surgery  Service 
Michael D’Angelica, MD, Hepatopancreatobiliary Surgery  
Service  
Ronald  DeMatteo,  MD, Hepatopancreatobiliary  Surgery  Service  
 
 
Please  Note:  A Consenting  Professional  must  have  completed  the mandatory  Human 
Subjects Education and Certification Program.  
 
 
 
Collaborating  Institution  (s): 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center 
1275 York Ave.  
New  York,  NY 10021  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  06-114A(6)  
Amended:  12/21/12  
Page  4 of 59  
 Table  of Contents  
MSKCC  THERAPEUTIC/DIAGNOSTIC  PROTOCOL  ................................ ...............................  1 
1.0 PROTOCOL  SUMMARY  AND/OR  SCHEMA  ................................ ................................  5 
2.0 OBJECTIVES  AND  SCIENTIFIC  AIMS  ................................ ................................ ..........  5 
3.0 BACKGROUND  AND  RATIONALE  ................................ ................................ ...............  6 
3.5 DYNAMIC  MRI ................................ ................................ ................................ .........  14 
4.0 OVERVIEW  OF STUDY  DESIGN/INTERVENTION  ................................ ...................  17 
4.1 DESIGN  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................  17 
5.0 THERAPEUTIC/DIAGNOSTIC  AGENTS  ................................ ................................ ..... 18 
6.0 CRITERIA  FOR  SUBJECT  ELIGIBILITY  ................................ ................................ ..... 20 
6.1 SUBJECT  INCLUSION  CRITERIA  ................................ ................................ ..........  20 
6.2 SUBJECT  EXCLUSION  CRITERIA  ................................ ................................ ... 22 
7.0 RECRUITMENT  PLAN  ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 24 
8.0 PRETREATMENT  EVAL UATION  ................................ ................................ .....................  24 
9.0 TREATMENT/INTERVENTION  PLAN  ................................ ................................ .........  26 
10.0 EVALUATION  DURING  TREATMENT/INTERVENTION  ................................ .........  29 
11.0 TOXICITIES/SIDE  EFFECTS  ................................ ................................ ............................  30 
12.1 FUDR  DOSE  MODIFICATIONS  ................................ ................................ ....................  32 
13.0 CRITERIA  FOR  THERAPEUTIC  RESPONSE/OUTCOME  ASSESSMENT  ...............  37 
14.0 CRITERIA  FOR  REMOVAL  FROM  STUDY  ................................ ................................  38 
16.0 BIOSTATISTICS  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............  45 
17.0 SUBJECT  REGISTRATION  AND  RANDOMIZATION  PROCEDURES  .....................  46 
17.1 SUBJECT  REGISTRATION  ................................ ................................ ..................  46 
17.2 RANDOMIZATION  ................................ ................................ ...............................  47 
18.0 DATA  MANAGEMENT ISSUES  ................................ ................................ ..................  47 
18.1 QUALITY  ASSURANCE  ................................ ................................ ....................  48 
18.2 DATA  AND  SAFETY  MONITORING  ................................ ...............................  48 
19.0 PROTECTION  OF HUMAN  SUBJECTS  ................................ ................................ ........  48 
19.9 PRIVACY  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................  50 
19.10  SERIOUS  ADVERSE  EVENT  (SAE)  REPORTING  ................................ ............  50 
ALL  SAES  MUST BE  ENTERED  INTO  THE  CRDB  SAE  FORM  PAGE  ....................  50 
20.0 INFORMED  CONSENT  PROCEDURES  ................................ ................................ ........  52 
20.1 RESEARCH  AUTHORIZATION  ................................ ................................ ........  52 
21.0 REFER ENCES  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................  54 
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  06-114A(6)  
Amended:  12/21/12  
Page  5 of 59  
  
1.0 PROTOCOL  SUMMARY  AND/OR  SCHEMA  
This phase II study evaluates the efficacy of regional chemotherapy  plus Bevacizumab in 
patients with unresectable primary hepatic malignancy.  Specifically, eligible patients with 
unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and intrahepatic or peripheral 
cholangiocarcinoma (ICC) will undergo hepatic artery pump placement for continuous 
infusion  of floxuridine  (FUDR)  combined  with systemic  IV Bevacizumab.  A recent  phase  II 
study at MSKCC evaluated hepatic arterial FUDR alone in this same group of patients and 
found an overall response rate of 39% with a median time to progression (TTP) of 7.3 
months.  At 1 year,  84.6%  of patients  were  alive, with  a median  follow  up of  8.8 months.  The 
current protocol seeks to improve on these initial encouraging results by enhancing FUDR 
delivery to liver tumors.  
Emerging data suggest that ‘normalization’ of tumor vasculature with subsequent 
improvement  in oxygenation  and delivery  of cytoto xic agents  is a major  mechanism  of action 
of Bevacizumab. We hypothesize that such changes in liver tumor vasculature will increase 
the response rate and prolong the time to progression in patients undergoing concomitant 
treatment with regional FUDR.  We fu rther speculate that the addition of Bevacizumab will 
result in measurable changes in tumor perfusion kinetics compared to baseline data with 
FUDR  treatment  alone.  The protocol  includes  radiological  and biological  correlative  studies.  
All patients enrolled  in the study will begin continuous HAI FUDR at 0.16 mg/kg/day.  A 
total of 55 patients with unresectable HCC or ICC will be treated with HAI FUDR plus 
systemic Bevacizumab. All patients will receive HAI FUDR (0.16 mg/kg X pump volume / 
pump  flow rate),  Dexamethasone  (Dex)  (1 mg/day  X pump  volume  / pump  flow rate) and IV 
Bevacizumab 5 mg/kg every other week.  
 
The primary objective of the study is to assess the median time to progression of HAI 
FUDR/Dex + Bevacizumab. The calculated sample size will provide 90% power to detect a 
50% improvement in TTP using HAI FUDR + BEV, over that observed using HAI FUDR 
alone . Improved  TTP will be considered  indicative  of improved  efficacy  and will serve  as the 
baseline for a future comparative study.  
 
The secondary  objective  is to further  investigate  the utility  of dynamic  contract  enhanced  MRI 
(DCE -MRI) for assessing initial  tumor perfusion prior to treatment, monitoring changes in 
tumor perfusion during treatment, and correlating these findings with radiographic tumor 
response.  
 
 
 
2.0 OBJECTIVES  AND  SCIENTIFIC  AIMS  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  06-114A(6)  
Amended:  12/21/12  
Page  6 of 59  
 2.1 PRIMARY  
To assess  the median  time to progression  of continuous  (HAI)  of FUDR/Dex  plus 
Bevacizumab in patients with unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and 
intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (ICC).  
 
2.2 SECONDARY  
To investigate  further  the utility  of dynamic  contrast  enhanced  MRI  (DCE -MRI) 
for assessing initial tumor perfusion prior to treatment, monitoring changes in 
tumor perfusion during treatment and in correlating these findings with 
radiographic tumor response.  
 
2.3 EXPLORATORY  
2.3.1 To assess  the expression  pattern  of VEGFR1,  VEGFR2,  and VEGFR3  and their 
cognate  ligands  (including  VEGF -A, VEGF -B, VEGF -C, VEGF -D, and P1GF), 
and correlate with patient progression and survival following therapy.  
 
2.3.2 To assess  the pro-angiogenic  activity  of peripheral  blood  before  and during 
treatment.  
2.3.3 To assess tumors for immunohistochemical markers of hypoxia (hypoxia 
inducible factor [HIF -1, carbonic anhydrase IX [CA IX], and the glucose 
transporters Glut -1 and Glut -3) for correlation with initial and treatment -related 
changes in perfusion and perme ability, as determined by DCE -MRI.  
 
 
3.0 BACKGROUND  AND  RATIONALE  
3.1 INTRODUCTION  
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and primary intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (ICC) 
account for nearly all primary hepatic malignancies.  HCC is among the most common 
cancers in the world, responsible for nearly 1 million annual deaths. Previously 
considered u ncommon in Western countries, HCC incidence and mortality have both 
increased substantially in the United States over the past several years.  ICC is much less 
common than HCC but its incidence and associated mortality  have likewise increased.  A 
recent anal ysis of Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Results (SEER) data showed a  
9% annual percentage increase in incidence of ICC and a 10 -fold increase in ICC -related 
mortality since 1973.  
 
Complete resection remains the most effective therapy for both tumors.  Resection is 
associated with 25 -40% 5 -year survival but is not possible in many patients. In most 
reported  series,  one-third  of patients  or fewer  with HCC  are amenable  to a potentially  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  06-114A(6)  
Amended:  12/21/12  
Page  7 of 59  
 curative resection.  The rarity with which ICC is encountered makes it difficult to 
accurately  assess  overall  resectability,  since  most  studies  only report  patients  submitted  to 
operation.  A report from MSKCC found a 62% resectability rate for ICC but did not 
include patients with unresectable disease at presentation. For both tumors, locally 
advanced disease confined to the liver is the predominant cause of unresectability.  In 
addition,  underlying  hepatic  parenchymal  disease  (ie, chronic  hepatitis,  cirrhosis)  is also a 
potenti ally treatment -limiting factor in patients with HCC, less so for those with ICC.  
 
Patients with unresectable primary liver cancer (HCC or ICC) have a median survival of 
12 months or  less, and non -resectional therapies have  had generally  disappointing  results. 
For both tumors, multiple systemic regimens have been evaluated and shown to have 
limited efficacy.  Modest activity (response rate of approximately 20%) of irinotecan - 
based regimens has been reported for both HCC and cholangiocarcinoma, although no 
complete responses. More recent studies using gemcitabine and oxaliplatin have not 
resulted in much improvement in response rates. Ablative approaches (cryoablation, 
ethanol injection, radiofrequency ablation) are often used in patients with unresectabl e 
HCC but their impact on disease natural history is unclear.  Furthermore, most patients 
present with large tumors (> 5 cm) or multifocal disease, neither of which can be 
effectively ablated. Hepatic artery embolization or chemoembolization may have some 
utility  in patients  with HCC  but there  are conflicting  data regarding  the survival  benefit  of 
this approach. In contrast to HCC, experience with ablative techniques for ICC is 
extremely limited.  ICC are typically firm tumors, making them unsuitable for etha nol 
injection,  and most  patients  present  with very large  lesions  that are inappropriate  for other 
ablative approaches.  
 
Thus, for many patients with HCC and ICC, effective treatment options are limited.  
Liver directed chemotherapy (HAI), delivered through a surgically implanted hepatic 
artery infusion pump, has been evaluated in several small series and appears to have 
greater efficacy than systemic therapy alone.  Although used predominantly in patients 
with hepatic colorectal metastases, HAI chemotherapy h as been shown to have efficacy  
in patients with primary liver cancer.  In an initial study from MSKCC, 10 patients with 
primary hepatic malignancy (8 HCC, 2 ICC) were treated with continuous intrahepatic 
FUDR (0.3mg/kg/day over 14 days, alternating with hep arinized saline for 14 days) 
combined  with Mitomycin  C 10 mg/m2 given  through a  side port injection every  4 weeks. 
Four of 9 evaluable patients had a partial response (> 50% tumor reduction) and 2 had a 
minor response (25 – 50% tumor reduction).  The median overall survival was 14.5 
months  after initiation  of HAI therapy.  In patients  without  cirrhosis,  median  survival  was 
27 months, compared to 5.2 months for  those  with cirrhosis.  Additionally, 2 of  3 patients 
previously treated with systemic chemotherapy had a partial response.  In this study, the 
treatment was well tolerated, with only 1 patient incurring any s ignificant liver related 
toxicity (biliary sclerosis after 18 months of treatment).  Furthermore, there was no 
evidence from this initial experience that patients with cirrhosis were less tolerant of  
liver-directed  therapy  than were  patients  with normal  parenchyma.   More  recently,  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  06-114A(6)  
Amended:  12/21/12  
Page  8 of 59  
 investigators at MD Anderson Cancer Center reported results of 25 patients with 
unresectable HCC treated with a variety of continuous infusion regimens.  In four  
patients (16%), tumor response was sufficient to allow f or subsequent resection or 
radiofrequency ablation.  Pathological analysis of resected specimens showed no viable 
tumor in one case and >90% necrosis in another.  As in the study from MSKCC, these 
investigators did not find significant toxicity associated wi th this treatment approach. 
Additionally, Clavien et al recently reported their results using liver -directed plus 
systemic chemotherapy in patients with unresectable HCC.  Using intrahepatic FUDR 
(0.2mg/kg/day) combined with bolus injection of cisplatin and  adriamycin, the authors 
found that 5 patients with initially unresectable disease subsequently underwent a 
complete resection.  
 
Experience with liver -directed chemotherapy in patients with biliary tract cancer is more 
limited, although results of small series have been reported.  Smith et al reported 1 
complete response (11%) and 6 partial responses (55%) out of 11 patients with 
cholangiocarcinoma and gallbladder carcinoma treated with bolus injection of hepatic 
arterial 5 -FU and mitomycin C.  Using continuous HAI FUDR through an implantable 
pump, Seeger et al. treated 3 patients with cholangiocarcinoma, 1 of whom had a 
complete patho logical response.  
 
A recent phase II study at MSKCC (IRB# 02 -120) evaluated the efficacy of HAI FUDR 
with no systemic component in patients with disease confined to the liver, 18 with ICC 
and 5 with HCC.  The overall response rate was 39% and the median TTP  was 7.3 
months.  Partial responses appeared to be more common with ICC than HCC (45% vs. 
20%), although the number of HCC patients was much lower (Figure 1).  To date, 12 
patients have developed disease progression, 6 (50%) of which were initially within th e 
liver.  Furthermore, the therapy was well tolerated, with only one grade 2 elevation in 
AST.  The response rate and TTP observed in this study are higher than those reported  
for any systemic chemotherapeutic regimen and suggest that regional chemotherapeut ic 
strategies have a potentially important role in the treatment of ICC and HCC.  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  06-114A(6)  
Amended:  12/21/12  
Page  9 of 59  
  
 
3.2 INTRAHEPATIC  FUDR  
Several studies have shown that hepatic parenchymal tumors larger than a few 
millimeters in diameter derive most of their blood supply  from the hepatic artery.  Direct 
infusion  of chemotherapeutic  agents  into the hepatic  arterial  system  therefore  exposes  the 
tumor to higher drug concentrations than can be achieved with systemic administration. 
Several studies have shown that tumor response rates are higher with HAI therapy than 
with systemic treatment.  In a prospective study of patients with metastatic colorectal 
cancer, patients were randomized to receive intrahepatic FUDR versus systemic FUDR. 
The partial response rate in the intrahepatic arm was 50% compared to 20% in the 
systemic arm.  Furthermore, in  a subsequent study, approximately one -third of patients 
with hepatic metastases that progressed on systemic therapy responded to intrahepatic 
FUDR.  In this study,  hepatic  toxicity  was dose-limiting.  The addition  of dexamethasone 
(20mg total dose for 14/28  days) has been shown to reduce hepatic toxicity, allowing 
administration of higher doses of FUDR and resulting in a higher response rate.  
 
Patients with 1o hepatic malignancies appear to tolerate intrahepatic FUDR well.  In the 
initial study from MSKCC, the median duration of treatment was 11.2 months; one 
patient experienced a transient rise in bilirubin and one patient developed biliary 
sclerosis.  Transient , reversible elevations of liver enzymes occurred in 9 patients.  It 
should be noted that 4/10 patients had cirrhosis and 3/10 had serologic evidence of 
chronic  hepatitis.  It should  further  be noted  that the dose of FUDR  used in this study  was 
0.3mg/kg/day,  nearly twice that used in the more recent phase II study (0.16mg/kg/day). 
In the latter study, there was only one grade 2 elevation of liver enzymes noted.  
 
 
 
3.3 SYSTEMIC  BEVACIZUMAB  
PR = 1 (20%)  
SD = 2 (40%)  
PD = 2 (40%)  
PR = 8 (45%)  
SD =9 (50%)  
PD =  1 (5%) 
HCC 
 
5 Patients  
ICC 
 
18 Patients  
Unresectable  1o Liver 
Cancer  
23 Patients  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  06-114A(6)  
Amended:  12/21/12  
Page  10 of 59  
 It is well established that tumor growth is critically depend ent on the development of 
neovasculature for delivery of oxygen, nutrients, growth factors and other agents that 
promote proliferation.  New blood vessel formation, or angiogenesis, is a complex 
process  regulated  by several  pro- and anti-angiogenic  factors.  Growth  of malignant  solid 
tumors is associated with predominance of pro -angiogenic mediators, the so -called 
angiogenesis switch that promotes new blood vessel formation.  This switch to a pro - 
angiogenic phenotype is a hallmark of m alignant disease, and the extent to which it 
occurs is prognostic for some tumor types.  
 
Of the known pro -angiogenic mediators, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is 
the most important.  Binding of VEGF to its receptor(s) (VEGFR) activates several 
signaling pathways that promote multiple pro -angiogenic events, including survival and 
proliferation of endothelial cells, mobilization of endothelial progenitor cells from bone 
marrow,  and increased  vascular  permeability.  VEGF’s  ability  to increase  permeabi lity of 
vascular beds led to its initial discovery (as vascular permeability factor) and results in 
deposition of several plasma proteins into the extra -vascular space that transform the 
normally anti -angiogenic stromal tissue into pro -angiogenic microenvi ronment. Over - 
expression of VEGF has been associated with poor prognosis in a number of different 
tumor types, and the VEGF/VEGFR pathway is now a major focus of anti -cancer 
research and drug development.  
 
There are several secreted glycoproteins that com prise the VEGF family of angiogenic 
and lymphangiogenic growth factors: VEGF -A, VEGF -B, VEGF -C, VEGF -D, VEGF -E 
and placenta growth factor (PlGF) -1 and -2. Of these proteins, VEGF -A (commonly 
referred to as VEGF) appears to be the most critical.  The domina nt isoform of VEGF -A 
is a 45 -kDa homodimeric glycoprotein with a broad range of pro -angiogenic functions, 
both normal and pathologic.  Alternative splicing of the VEGF -A gene gives rise to 
several  mature  isoforms,  all of which  are capable  of binding  to VEGF R (see below).  The 
roles of VEGF -B, -C, -D and PlGF in tumor angiogenesis and vasculogenesis are less 
clear; VEGF -C and VEGF -D appear to be more important in lymphangiogenesis, 
although  they may have  some  role in the development  of new blood  vessels  in pathologic 
states.  VEGF -E is a viral protein and not a mammalian VEGF homologue.  
 
The VEGF ligands mediate their effects through 3 different VEGFR: VEGFR -1 (or Flt - 
1), VEGFR -2 (or Flt-1/KDR)  and VEGFR -3 (or Flt-4). Expression  of VEGFR  is largely 
confined to endothelial cells, although VEGFR -1 and VEGFR -2 have been identified on 
some adult hematopoietic cells.  Certain tumor cells have also been recently shown to 
express VEGFR, the significance of which is unclear.  The various VEGF ligands have 
different rec eptor binding specificities: VEGF -A isoforms bind to VEGFR -1 and 
VEGFR -2; VEGF -B and PlGF bind only  to VEGFR -1; VEGF -C and VEGF -D can bind 
to both VEGFR -2 and VEGFR -3. Most of the downstream angiogenesis - related events 
orchestrated by  VEGF -A are mediated through VEGFR -2, and this interaction is among 
the most critical.  VEGFR -1 plays an important role in fetal development but its role in  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  06-114A(6)  
Amended:  12/21/12  
Page  11 of 59  
 tumor angiogenesis is less clear.  In adults, VEGFR -3 expression is limited to lymphatic 
endothelial cells, and through its interactions with VEGF -C and VEGF -D, mediates 
lymphangiogenesis.  Increased expression of VEGF -C and VEGF -D, combined with 
activation  of VEGFR -3, have  been  documented  in several  tumor  types  and are associated 
with lymph node metastases and m ay promote development of abnormal, tumor -related 
blood vessels.  While tumor cells have the capacity of simultaneous expression of 
multiple VEGF ligands, VEGFR expression is more specific: VEGFR -2 is expressed by 
nearly all endothelial cells but expression  of VEGFR -1 and VEGFR -3 is limited to 
distinct vascular beds.  
 
VEGF expression is regulated by several different factors, including hypoxia (hypoxia 
inducible  factor  or HIF-1), several  different  cytokines  and growth  factors,  oncogenes  and 
tumor suppressor genes (including p53).  
 
Substantial  direct  evidence  for a role of VEGF  in tumorigenesis  has been  provided  by 
numerous  studies  showing  that a murine  anti-VEGF  neutralizing  antibody,  alone  or in 
combination with cytotoxic chemotherapy (s ee below), inhibits the growth of several 
different tumor types.  
 
Bevacizumab  (rhuMAb  VEGF)  
Bevacizumab  is a recombinant  humanized  anti-VEGF -A monoclonal  antibody  composed 
of human IgG1 framework and antigen -binding complementarity -determining regions 
from  a murine monoclonal antibody (rhuMAb VEGF A.4.6.1) that blocks binding of 
human VEGF -A to its receptors. Approximately 93% of the amino acid sequence, 
including most of the antibody framework, is derived from human IgG1.  
 
Pre-clinical  Studies : 
This antibody  has been shown to recognize all isoforms of VEGF. It fails to recognize 
other peptide growth factors tested (fibroblast growth factor, epidermal growth factor, 
hepatocyte  growth  factor,  platelet -derived  growth  factor,  and nerve  growth  factor) . The 
binding affinity and specificity of rhuMAb VEGF (Bevacizumab) are essentially 
equivalent to those of its murine counterpart.  
 
 
a. In vitro  and in vivo VEGF  studies : 
 
A correlation  has been  noted  between  the degree  of tumor  vascularization  and the 
level of VEGF mRNA expression. In virtually all specimens examined, VEGF 
mRNA is expressed in tumor cells but not in endothelial cells. In contrast, as 
previously noted, mRNAs for VEGFR are up -regulated in tumor -associated 
endothelial cells. These findings are c onsistent with the hypothesis that VEGF is 
primarily a paracrine mediator. Freeman et al. suggested that lymphocytes  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  06-114A(6)  
Amended:  12/21/12  
Page  12 of 59  
 infiltrating  the tumor  might  constitute  an additional  source  of VEGF  that 
contributes to tumor angiogenesis  
b. In vivo efficacy  studies : 
 
In agreement with the hypothesis that inhibition of neovascularization is the 
mechanism of tumor suppression, the density of blood vessels is significantly 
lower  in sections  of tumors  from  antibody -treated  animals  compared  with control. 
These findings prov ided a direct demonstration that inhibition of endogenous 
VEGF can suppress the growth of established tumors in vivo.  Furthermore, 
substantial evidence has emerged showing improved anti -tumor activity when 
anti-VEGF therapy is combined with other chemother apeutic agents (see below).  
Clinical  Experience  
Phase I/II  Efficacy  Results : 
Antitumor activity has been demonstrated in multiple tumor types and with both 
single -agent Bevacizumab and combination therapy. Objective responses have 
been  reported  in a breast  cancer  trial (AVF0776g),  including  a complete  response 
of supraclavicular nodal disease and partial responses of cervical node, liver, and 
skin-subcutaneous disease. In a NSCLC trial (AVF0757g), the data showed that 
Bevacizumab at a dose of 15 mg/kg every 3 weeks and in combination with 
Carboplatin/Pa clitaxel chemotherapy, increased response rates and prolonged 
time to disease progression compared with chemotherapy alone.  
 
In a separate trial of patients with colorectal cancer (AVF0780g), based on 
blinded  assessments  by an independent  review  facility,  the hazard  of experiencing 
disease progression was reduced by 57% in subjects receiving 5 mg/kg 
Bevacizumab  plus 5 -FU/Leucovorin alone (p=0.005). Improvements in response 
rate and median survival were also seen for subjects treated with 5 mg/kg 
Bevacizumab  plus 5 -FU/Leucovorin versus 5 -FU/Leucovorin alone.  
 
In a randomized, open -label, Phase III study (AVF2119g, metastatic breast 
cancer), the results of the primary efficacy analysis showed that treatment with 
the combination  of Bevacizumab  plus Capecitabine  did not result  in a statistically 
significant  prolongation  in progression -free survival  compared with  Capecitabine 
alone. There was a statistically significant increase in objective response rate 
(secondary endpoint); however, this did not result in an im provement in 
progression -free survival.  
 
In a randomized, double -blind, placebo -controlled phase III study, AVF2107g,  
the addition of Bevacizumab (5mg/kg IV q2 weeks) to first line therapy for 
metastatic  colorectal  cancer  (Irinotecan/5 -Fluorouracil/Leucovo rin (IFL))  resulted 
in a statistically and clinically significant improvement in median survival as  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  06-114A(6)  
Amended:  12/21/12  
Page  13 of 59  
 compared to the IFL + placebo control arm (15.6 vs 20.3 months, HR 0.65, 
p=0.00003). Improvements in median progression -free survival (6.2 vs 10.6 
months,  p=0.00001),  objective  response  rate (34.7%  vs 44.9%,  p=0.0029)  and 
response  duration  (7.1 vs 10.4 months,  p=0.0014)  were  also achieved  with the 
addition of Bevacizumab to IFL chemotherapy.  
 
Safety  of Bevacizumab:  
In the initial Phase I and II clinical trials, four potential Bevacizumabd -associated 
safety signals were identified: hypertension, proteinuria, thromboembolic events, 
and hemorrhage.  Additional  completed  Phase  II and III studies  of Bevacizumab  as 
well as spontaneous reports have further defined the safety profile of this agent.  
Bevacizumab -associated adverse events identified in Phase III trials include 
congestive heart failure (CHF), gastrointestinal perforations, wound healing 
complications,  and arterial  thromboembolic  events  (ATE).  These  and other  safety 
signals are described in further detail in section 11.2. For further information 
regarding safety and adverse event rates, please refer to the Bevacizumab 
investigator’s brochure.  
 
3.4 Rationale  for HAI  FUDR/Dex  and Systemic  Bevacizumab : 
 
It was initially  postulated that anti -angiogenic therapy  would essentially  starve tumors of 
blood, thereby preventing growth beyond that sustainable with a rudimentary vascular 
supply.  While pre -clinical studies showed t hat anti -angiogenic therapy alone can cause 
substantial  regression  of solid  tumors,  the objective  response  rates  of such an approach  in 
human trials have been disappointingly low.  Subsequent studies have shown that anti - 
angiogenic therapy combined with cy totoxic agents significantly enhances disease 
control and survival.  A recent landmark report from Hurwitz et al (NEJM,  350;2335 -42, 
2004)  showed  that when  IFL (irinotecan,  5-FU, leucovorin)  chemotherapy  was combined 
with Bevacizumab, progression -free survi val increased from 6.2 months to 10.6 months 
and overall survival increased from 15.6 months to 20.3 months compare to IFL alone.  
From this and other observations, the concept of vascular normalization through the use 
of anti-angiogenic  agents has  been  put forward and  has data support  from  human  studies. 
The concept of enhanced efficacy as combination therapy would initially seem 
paradoxical, since anti -angiogenic agents would be expected to reduce rather than 
augment the delivery  of other anti -tumor drugs.  Although new blood vessel formation is 
critical for tumor growth, tumor vasculature is grossly abnormal, both structurally and 
functionally.  Tumor vasculature lacks the organized arrangement of normal vascular 
beds – vessels are tortuous and dilated, the system lacks defined arterioles, venules and 
capillaries, and connections between blood vessels are often incomplete.  The 
arrangement of endothelial cells is also irregular, with wide gaps in some areas, which 
contributes  to hyperpermeability.  In addition,  the lymphatic  system  within  tumors  is also 
abnormal.  All of these features contribute to interstitial hypertension and poor intra - 
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  06-114A(6)  
Amended:  12/21/12  
Page  14 of 59  
 tumoral  blood  flow,  which  result  in relative  hypoxia  and acidosis.  In short,  pathologic 
tumor vasculature creates a microenvironment that protects tumo rs from cytotoxic 
chemotherapy.  Transient reversal of these abnormalities should therefore improve 
delivery of chemotherapeutic agents and make them more effective.  
By combining Bevacizumab with HAI  FUDR, we  seek to improve control of  the primary 
liver dis ease, extend the time to hepatic and extrahepatic progression, and improve 
patient survival.  Increased expression of VEGF mRNA is common in both ICC and 
HCC, and there is some suggestion of correlation with survival.  The current study is 
based on the hypot hesis that the growth and progression of primary liver cancer are 
dependent  on the factors that  promote  angiogenesis  and lymphangiogenesis.  As signaling 
molecules regulating these two processes are driven by three different tyrosine kinase 
receptors – namely VEGFR1, VEGFR2 and VEGFR3 – we propose to assess the 
expression pattern of these receptors and their cognate ligands including VEGF -A, 
VEGF -B, VEGF -C, VEGF -D and P1GF, in primary liver tumors. Since Bevacizumab 
selectively  blocks  the activity  of VEGF -A, but not VEGF -C and  VEGF -D or P1GF,  these 
studies will provide important information as to whether inhibition of the VEGF - 
A/VEGFR -2 signaling pathway is sufficient to block tumor angiogenesis and 
lymphangiogenesis within the primary liver lesions.  
 
3.5 Dynamic  MRI  
The emergence and increasing use of therapeutic agents targeting tumor vasculature has 
made it necessary to develop imaging modalities th at assess changes in tumor perfusion 
in order to determine treatment efficacy.  Many  techniques have been used and reported 
for evaluating tumor angiogenesis.  Radiographic techniques are based on the fact that 
angiogenesis increases both the perfusion and p ermeability  of tumors with respect to the 
surrounding normal tissue.  
 
Standard  bi-dimensional  tumor  measurements  may underestimate  response  to agents  that 
target the tumor vasculature.  Conventional MRI is useful for assessing tumor size and 
burden.  Signal intensity  changes may  be assessed, but are  not reliable for demonstrating 
possible responses to treatment.  T1 weighted images alone cannot differentiate viable 
tumor from nonviable tiss ue or edema.  Furthermore, standard T2 weighted images 
cannot adequately distinguish tumor from necrosis and frequently overestimate lesion 
boundaries due to the presence of edema and hemorrhage.  While tumor shrinkage is 
useful and is the gold standard for response assessment, tumor measurements alone may 
underestimate tumor necrosis and do not consider changes in tumor vascularity.  By 
contrast, DCE -MRI can document changes in tumor perfusion kinetics.  
 
DCE -MRI has been used to study a variety of tumors, inc luding sarcoma, breast, brain 
and colorectal tumors. Injection of gadopentetate dimeglumine (Gd -DTPA) 
intravenously  is followed  by the agent  passing  from  the intravascular  space  to the 
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  06-114A(6)  
Amended:  12/21/12  
Page  15 of 59  
 interstitial space at a rate that depends on perfusion and tissue permeability. This 
perfusion and tissue permeability within tumors can be visualized and measured using 
dynamic contrast -enhanced MRI. The same area of the tumor can be imaged before and 
several times after the administration of contrast medium, prior to and following a 
therapeutic intervention. In this way, it is possible to depict the change in MRI signal 
intensity due to the perfusion of the contrast medium over time. In malignancy, the 
number of blood vessels and the trans -endothelial permeability of the vessels are often 
higher than in normal tissue  
 
DCE -MRI has been shown to be useful for detecting viable tumor and differentiating it 
from necrosis in patients undergoing chemotherapy (Ver straete et al., Dyke et al.). 
Necrotic tumor, viable tumor, normal hepatic parenchyma, and blood vessels display 
distinct time intensity curves in dynamic contrast enhanced studies.  Determining tumor 
necrotic fraction on static MRI during or after treatmen t is severely limited.  On the  
other hand, the rapid acquisition sequences used in the dynamic studies may provide 
more information on vascular uptake than either static MRI or static post contrast 
images.  Dynamic contrast enhanced images have the potential  to provide quantitative 
estimates of necrotic fraction through an analysis of the entire time course of contrast 
agent uptake.  
 
More recent studies have suggested that dynamic contrast enhanced MRI (DCE -MRI) 
can be used to assess tumor oxygen levels, whic h in turn correlate with response to 
treatment and outcome.  In studies on HCC, MRI findings have been shown to correlate 
with the degree of VEGF expression, which is also correlated with the degree of tumor 
hypoxia.  Additionally, in a recent study of 7 pat ients with HCC treated with the anti - 
angiogenic drug thalidomide, changes in the time -intensity curve -related parameters 
from tumor regions of interest correlated with response to therapy.  Additionally, in a 
recent MSKCC phase II study of HAI FUDR in pati ents with unresectable primary liver 
cancer, changes in the tumor perfusion kinetics on the first post -treatment DCE -MRI (2 
months) correlated with response as measured conventionally. In this study, the post - 
treatment changes in tumor perfusion, as measu red by the time intensity curve slope 
(TIC)  at an early  (2 months)  time point, were  a significantly  better  predictor  of treatment 
response compared to bi -dimensional tumor measurements at the same time point. In 
addition, the pre -treatment baseline (BL) sl ope values were found to be >300 (% 
increase/min) in all responders, and below this empirical value in non -responders. 
Similar trends were observed with the estimated compartmental model parameter AK ep 
 
In the present study, unidimensional tumor measuremen ts on standard MRI sequences 
will be used to assess response to therapy.  The purpose of the dynamic component is to 
further assess for changes in tumor perfusion during treatment.  Standard tumor 
measurements on conventional imaging may underestimate treatm ent response, and the 
dynamic component may offer a more complete assessment in that regard.  In addition, 
early  changes  in tumor  perfusion  may signify  a greater  likelihood  of a response  as 
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  06-114A(6)  
Amended:  12/21/12  
Page  16 of 59  
 determined by  reduction in tumor  volume, which typically  take longer  to manifest.  Data 
from the dynamic MRI  will be correlated with conventionally  measured tumor response, 
as determined on standard MRI sequences.  Data from the dynamic portion of the MRI 
will be used experimentally, as des cribed above, and will not be used to make clinical 
decisions.  
 
There is very little data derived from direct measurements of tumor perfusion changes 
during or after anti -angiogenic therapy. Most human studies use surrogate markers to 
detect improvement in  the perfusion characteristics, such as increased pO 2 and reduction 
in interstitial pressure. A recent study using DCE -MRI to monitor anti -angiogenesis 
treatment (PTK/ZK) of liver metastases demonstrated measurable differences in tumor 
perfusion kinetics a s early as 2 days after the first dose. It is uncertain, however, how 
tumor perfusion and permeability, as measured by DCE -MRI will be altered by a 
treatment  regimen  that combines  angiogenesis  inhibition  with direct  cytotoxicity.  In order 
to eliminate the risk of post -operative bleeding complications, Bevacizumab will not be 
given until 4 weeks after pump placement (see section 9.0, Treatment Intervention 
below). As in the previous protocol, patients will begin HAI FUDR at two weeks after 
pump placement, fo llowed by pump emptying and refilling with heparinized saline for 
two weeks. It is during this latter time period that systemic Bevacizumab will begin.  
Patients will undergo an initial postoperative baseline DCE -MRI followed by a repeat 
study after the fir st two weeks of FUDR alone, and a third study following the initial 
treatment with Bevacizumab alone. In this way, we will obtain DCE -MRI data regarding 
changes in tumor perfusion kinetics as a result of antiangiogenesis treatment alone. We 
expect that DCE -MRI  studies at this early  time will reveal changes in tumor permeability 
and overall  perfusion,  indicating  treatment  effect  of Bevacizumab.  Subsequent  MRI  scans 
will be  obtained at two -month intervals. We  expect that the  addition of  Bevacizumab will 
improve the overall delivery of HAI FUDR to liver tumors, thereby resulting in greater 
tumor killing, and that this will ultimately be reflected in later DCE -MRI studies as 
greater reduction in tumor perfusion compared to our baseline data  with HAI FUDR 
alone.  
 
3.6 Tumor  Hypoxia  
Tumor  oxygenation  is well recognized  as an important  determinant  of treatment  response 
and survival.  For a number of different solid malignancies, hypoxia correlates with a 
more malignant phenotype, greater metastatic potential and resistance to chemotherapy 
and radiation therapy.  As discussed above, the pro -angiogenic malignant phenotype is 
characterized  by grossly abnormal vasculature, leading to poor tumor perfusion, hypoxia 
and acidosis.  
 
Hypoxic  conditions  regulate  expression  of several  different  genes  with diverse  functions 
that are important in promoting tumor cell survival.  These include VEGF, hypo xia 
inducible transcription factor (HIF -1), carbonic anhydrase -IX (CA IX) and the glucose  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  06-114A(6)  
Amended:  12/21/12  
Page  17 of 59  
 transporters Glut -1 and Glut -3, among others.  HIF-1 is a central regulatory gene that 
controls expression of many downstream target genes with diverse f unction, including 
glucose transporters, angiogenesis and transmembrane carbonic anhydrases.  CA IX, 
Glut-1 and Glut -3 are both regulated through the HIF -1 pathway and are more specific 
endogenous  hypoxia -associated  markers.  CA IX is one of several  CA’s  that catalyzes  the 
conversion of C0 2 to carbonic acid and help maintain normal intracellular pH under 
hypoxic conditions.  Glut-1 and Glut -3 mediate cellular glucose uptake, thereby 
facilitating anaerobic glycolysis.  Increased expression of both proteins ha s been 
correlated with poor outcome for several different human cancers.  CA IX, in particular, 
appears to be among the most sensitive of the hypoxic markers.  HIF-1, the nuclear 
protein product of the HIF -1 gene, has also been shown to be a useful intrinsi c marker of 
hypoxia with prognostic relevance.  
 
Direct measurements of tumor oxygen levels have been shown to correlate with 
immunohistochemical  markers  of hypoxia;  however  there  is limited  data pertaining  to the 
results of DCE -MRI.  We expect that these st udies will yield important data that will not 
only improve our understanding of the biology  of primary  liver cancers but that will also 
improve our ability to interpret the DCE -MRI assessment of tumor perfusion and 
permeability.  
 
4.0 OVERVIEW  OF STUDY  DESIGN/I NTERVENTION  
4.1 Design  
A total of 55 patients  whose  liver lesions  have  been  deemed  unresectable  will be treated 
with HAI FUDR plus systemic Bevacizumab. Unidimensional tumor measurements on 
standard  MRI  sequences will  be used to assess  response  to therapy.  Patients  will remain 
on study  as long  as they  show  continued response as defined in section 13.0, and d o not 
experience significant toxicity as defined in Sections 11.0 and 14.0.  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  06-114A(6)  
Amended:  12/21/12  
Page  18 of 59  
 4.2 Intervention  
All patients  enrolled  in the study  will receive  HAI FUDR  (0.16  mg/kg  X pump  volume  / 
pump flow rate), Dexamethasone (1 mg/m2/day) and IV Bevacizumab at 5mg/kg.  
Chemotherapy  with HAI FUDR/Dex  will commence  no sooner  than 14 days post surgical 
placement of HAI pump; patients will receive their first treatment with Bevacizumab no 
sooner than 28 days post surgical placement of HAI pump.  
 
 
Cycle  Schema  q4 weeks  
Day 1  Day 15  
Systemic  chemotherapy  
IV Bevacizumab*  Systemic  chemotherapy  
IV Bevacizumab  
HAI  with FUDR+Dexamethasone  
(continuous 14 -day infusion)  Pump  emptied  and refilled  with heparinized 
saline (recycle with FUDR in 2 weeks)  
* The exception will be Cycle 1, Day 1, on which the patient will receive only HAI with 
FUDR/Dex.  Systemic  treatment  with Bevacizumab  will commence  no sooner  than Cycle  1, Day 
15, and patient will receive Bevacizumab every 2 weeks thereafter.  
 
The followin g doses will  be used:  
 
FUDR  
(mg/kg  x pump 
vol / flow rate) 
over 14 days  Dexamethasone  
(mg) 
Given 
concurrent  with 
pump  Bevacizumab 
(mg/kg)  
IV, over  
10 min 
0.16 25 5 
 
5.0 THERAPEUTIC/DIAGNOSTIC  AGENTS  
5.1 FUDR  
5.1.1 Floxuridine (FUDR) is an antimetabolite that blocks the methylation of 
deoxyuridylic  acid interfering  with the synthesis  of DNA.  It is also incorporated 
into RNA and interferes with its function. The drug is metabolized in the liver.  
5.1.2 FUDR is commercially available from Roche and Adria Laboratories in 500 
mg/10  cc ampules.  It is stable  (protected  from  light)  and is a colorless  aqueous 
solution. Store at room temperature.  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  06-114A(6)  
Amended:  12/21/12  
Page  19 of 59  
 5.1.3 Toxicities  associated  with the intrahepatic  administration  of FUDR  include  biliary 
sclerosis, chemical hepatitis, gastric ulcers.  
 
5.2 Dexamethasone  
5.2.1 Dexamethasone is an adrenocortical steroid, used for chronic inflammation, 
neoplastic  and autoimmune  diseases;  used in HAI treatment  as an agent to prevent 
liver damage.  
5.2.2 Common potential side effects include anxiety, mood alteration/lability, 
hyperglycemia,  insomnia,  peripheral  edema,  myopathy  (with  chronic  use),  acne, 
hirsutism.  
 
5.3 Bevacizumab  (rhuMab  VEGF)  
Description:  
Bevacizumab is a clear to slightly opalescent, colorless to pale brown, sterile liquid 
concentrate  for solution  for intravenous  (IV) infusion.  Bevacizumab  may be supplied  in 5-cc 
(100 mg), 20 -cc (400 mg), and 50 -cc (1000 mg) glass vials containing 4 mL, 16  mL, or 40 
mL of Bevacizumab, respectively (all at 25 mg/mL). Vials contain Bevacizumab with 
phosphate, trehalose, polysorbate 20, and Sterile Water for Injection (SWFI), USP. Vials 
contain no preservative and are suitable for single use only.  
 
The monoclo nal antibody  (Bevacizumab)  being  administered  is intended  for use only in 
clinical  trials. It  is expected  to be very similar  in safety  and activity  to the commercially 
marketed drug (Avastin), but it is possible that some differences exist.  
 
For further  details  and molecule  characterization,  see the Bevacizumab  Investigator 
Brochure.  
Administration:  
Bevacizumab  will be administered  as per MSKCC guidelines.  
 
Storage:  
Upon  receipt  of the study  drug,  vials are  to be refrigerated at  2ºC - 8ºC (36ºF  - 46ºF) and 
should remain refrigerated until just prior  to use.  DO NOT FREEZE. DO NOT  SHAKE. 
Vials should be protected from light.  
Opened vials must be used within 8 hours. VIALS ARE FOR SINGLE USE ONLY. Vials 
used for 1 subject  may not be used for any other  subject.  Once  study  drug has been  added  to 
a bag of sterile saline, the solution mu st be administered within 8 hours.  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  06-114A(6)  
Amended:  12/21/12  
Page  20 of 59  
 Bevacizumab  Dose  Modification  and Toxicity  Management:  
There  are no reductions  in the Bevacizumab  dose. If  adverse  events  occur  that require 
holding Bevacizumab, the dose will remain the same once treatment resumes.  
Any toxicities associated or possibly associated with Bevacizumab treatment should be 
managed  according  to standard  medical  practice.  Bevacizumab  has a terminal  half-life of 2 to 
3 weeks; therefore, its discontinuation results in slow elimination over several months. There 
is no available antidote for Bevacizumab.  
Subjects  should  be assessed  clinically  for toxicity  prior  to, during,  and after each infusion.  If 
unmanageable toxic ity occurs because of Bevacizumab at any time during the study, 
treatment with Bevacizumab should be discontinued.  
 
Infusion  Reaction:  
Infusion of Bevacizumab should be interrupted for subjects who develop dyspnea or 
clinically  significant  hypotension.  Subjects  who experience  a NCI CTCAE  v. 3.0 Grade  3 or 
4 allergic reaction / hypersensitivity, adult respiratory distress syndrome, or bron chospasm 
(regardless of grade) will be discontinued from Bevacizumab treatment.  
The infusion  should  be slowed  to 50% or less or interrupted  for subjects  who experience  any 
infusion -associated symptoms not specified above. When the subject’s symptoms have 
completely  resolved, the infusion may  be continued at no more than 50% of the rate prior to 
the reaction and increased in 50% increments every 30 minutes if well tolerat ed. Infusions 
may be restarted at the full rate during the next cycle.  
Adverse  events  requiring  delays  or permanent  discontinuation  of Bevacizumab  are listed  in 
the Table in section 12.3  
 
Toxicity : Toxicities associated with the intravenous administration of Bevacizumab include 
hypertension, hemorrhage, thromboembolic events, proteinuria, and diarrhea.  These are 
described in detail under section 11.2.  
 
 
6.0 CRITERIA  FOR  SUBJECT  ELIGIBILITY  
 
6.1 Subject  Inclusion  Criteria  
• Histologically confirmed and radiographicall y measurable hepatocellular carcinoma 
(HCC) or intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (also variously reported as peripheral 
cholangiocarcinoma, cholangiolar carcinoma or cholangiocellular carcinoma) (ICC) 
with no clinical  or radiographic  evidence  of extrahepatic  disease.  Confirmation  of the 
diagnosis  must  be made  at MSKCC.  If the patient  has a liver mass  that is 
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  06-114A(6)  
Amended:  12/21/12  
Page  21 of 59  
 radiographically consistent with HCC and a serum alpha fetoprotein (AFP) > 400 
ng/dl, then biopsies will be performed at the ti me of pump placement. 
Radiographically measurable disease are lesions for which 2 dimensional 
measurements can be made on a cross sectional image. Minimum lesion size is 2 cm 
in greatest diameter as per RECIST criteria.  
• Patients with suspected ICC will undergo radiographic evaluation to exclude the 
possibility of metastatic liver disease. For patients who have undergone pre - or 
postoperative  biopsies  that definitively  diagnose  ICC,  the diagnostic  studies  may be 
modified a t the discretion of the Principal Investigator.  
 
• Mixed HCC/ICC is an uncommon variant of primary liver cancer with histologic 
features of both HCC and ICC.  With respect to patient demographics and clinical 
behavior, mixed tumors are very similar to ICC.  Patients suspected of having mixed 
tumors will be eligible and will be exempt from the extensive radiographic  
evaluation; they will have biopsies performed at the time of pump placement.  
• Patients with hepatocellular carcinoma who are not eligible for first -line MSKCC 
protocols for hepatocellular carcinoma will be eligible for this protocol if they have  
no clinical or radiographic evidence of extrahepatic disease.  
• Patients with HCC or ICC undergoing exploration for a possible curative resection  
but found to have unresectable disease confined to the liver will be eligible.  
• <70%  liver involvement  by cancer.  
• Disease  must  be considered  unresectable at  the time of preoperative evaluation.  
• Patients  who have  failed  ablative  therapy  will be eligible.  
• Patients  who have  failed prior  systemic  chemotherapy  will be eligible.  
• KPS > 60% and be considered candidates for general anesthesia and hepatic artery 
pump placement.  
• Patients with chronic hepatitis and/or cirrhosis are eligible but must be Child -Pugh 
class A.  
• Preoperative  laboratory  values,  within 14  days of registration:  
➢ Serum  albumin  >2.5 g/dl 
➢ Total  serum  bilirubin  <1.8 mg/dl  
➢ WBC  >3500  cells/mm3 
➢ Platelet  count  >100,000/mm3 
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  06-114A(6)  
Amended:  12/21/12  
Page  22 of 59  
 ➢ International  normalized  ratio (INR)  < 1.5 (in patients  not on coumadin 
therapy)  
• Patients discovered to have > 2+ proteinuria at baseline will undergo a 24 -hour urine 
collection,  which  must  be an adequate  collection  and must  demonstrate  < 1g of protein/24 
hours.  
• Age > 18 years.  
• Patients  must  be able to understand  and sign informed  consent.  
 
6.2 Subject  Exclusion  Criteria  
• Prior  treatment  with FUDR.  
• Prior  external  beam  radiation therapy  to the liver.  
• Diagnosis  of sclerosing  cholangitis.  
• Diagnosis  of Gilbert's  disease.  
• Clinical  ascites.  
• Hepatic  encephalopathy.  
• Current, recent (with 4 weeks of the first infusion of this study), or planned 
participation  in an experimental  drug study  other  than a Genentech -sponsored 
Bevacizumab cancer study.  
• Life expectancy  of less than 12 weeks.  
• Inability  to comply  with study  and/or followup  procedures  
• Inadequately controlled hypertension (defined as systolic blood pressure >150 
and/or  diastolic  blood  pressure  > 100 mmHg  on antihypertensive  medications).  
 
• Any prior  history  of hypertensive  crisis or  hypertensive encephalopathy.  
• New  York  Heart  Association  (NYHA)  Grade  II or greater  congestive  heart 
failure.  
 
• Patients  with known  CNS  disease.  
 
• Significant  vascular  disease  (e.g. aortic  aneurysm,  aortic  dissection),  or 
symptomatic peripheral vascular disease.  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  06-114A(6)  
Amended:  12/21/12  
Page  23 of 59  
  
• History  of abdominal  fistula,  gastrointestinal  perforation,  or intra-abdominal 
abscess within 6 months prior to study enrollment.  
 
• History  of allergic  reactions  attributed  to compounds  of similar  chemical  or 
biologic composition to Bevacizumab.  
 
• Serious  or non-healing  active  wound, ulcer,  or bone  fracture.  
 
• Major surgical procedure, open biopsy or significant traumatic injury within 28 
days prior  to first treatment  with Bevacizumab,  or anticipation  of need  for major 
surgical procedure during the course of the study (surgery performed to place 
pump will not exclude patient from protocol; first treatment with Bevacizumab 
will take place no sooner than 28 days after surgery).  
 
• Core  biopsy,  or other  minor  surgic al procedure  (excluding  placement  of a 
vascular access device) within 7 days prior to treatment start.  
 
• Current  or recent  use of a thrombolytic  agent.  
• Patients must have adequate blood coagulation parameters: PT such that 
international  normalized  ratio (INR) is < 1.5 (or an in-range  INR,  usually  between 
2 and 3, if a patient is on a stable dose of therapeutic warfarin), and a PTT < 1.5 
times the institution upper limit of normal. Patients not meeting this criteria will 
be ineligible for study.  
 
• Chronic  daily  treatment  with aspirin  (> 325 mg/d)  or nonsteroidal  anti- 
inflammatory medications known to inhibit the platelet function.  
 
• Presence  of bleeding  diathesis or  coagulopathy.  
• Proteinuria  at screening  as demonstrated by  either  
➢ Urine  protein:  creatinine (UPC)  ratio > 1.0 at screening  OR 
➢ Urine dipstick for proteinuria > 2+ (patients discovered to have >2+ 
proteinuria  on dipstick  analysis  at baseline  should  undergo  a 24 hour urine 
collection  and must  demonstrate  <1g of protein  in 24 hours  to be eligible).  
 
• Patients  with history  of stroke,  transient  ischemic  attack,  unstable  angina,  or 
myocardial infarction MI) within 6 months.  
 
• Presence  of central  nervous  system  metastases.  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  06-114A(6)  
Amended:  12/21/12  
Page  24 of 59  
  
• Patients  who have  radiographic  evidence  of esophageal  varices  or history  of 
variceal hemorrhage.  
 
• Patients  with occlusion  of the main  portal  vein or of the right  and left portal 
branches.  
 
• Patients  that have  concurrent  malignancies  (except  localized  basal  cell or 
squamous cell skin cancers).  
 
• Patients  with active  infection.  
• Female  patients  who are pregnant  or lactating.  
 
 
7.0 RECRUITMENT  PLAN  
All patients meeting the eligibility requirements will be considered for enrollment 
regardless of sex, race, or religion. Patients will be accrued from the 
Hepatopancreatobiliary, Gastrointestinal, and Gastric/Mixed Tumor services, and from 
both the Depart ment  of Surgery  and Department  of Medicine . Eligibility  criteria  may not 
be waived by the investigator. Discussions regarding protocol enrollment and patient 
eligibility  will begin  with any of the investigators named  on the protocol.  Patients  will be 
made aware of the protocol, its specific aims and objectives, and the potential risks and 
benefits the patients may incur. Patients will be required to read, agree to, and sign an 
IRB-approved informed consent form prior to registration on this trial. Patients will be 
consented prior to surgery. Registration will consist of two steps: Step 1 will allow the 
procurement of preoperative blood samples and tissue at surgery and will take place 
preoperatively; Step 2 will register patient fully in order to receive che motherapy 
treatment. Only patients registered to both Step 1 and 2 will be treated per protocol.  
There  will be no financial  compensation  for patients  enrolling  on this protocol.  
 
 
8.0 PRETREATMENT  EVALUATION  
Prior  to treatment  start,  patients  will undergo  the following  procedures,  in order:  
 
1. CT angiogram  (direct,  MRI  or CT angiography)to  determine  arterial  structures; 
this may be done at any time prior to surgery  
2. Surgery  to undergo  cholecystectomy,  place  hepatic  arterial  infusion  pump,  and to 
obtain  tissue biopsy  
3. Perfusion  flow study  (Tc-99 MAA)  
4. Baseline  MRI  scan of the chest,  abdomen  and pelvis  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  06-114A(6)  
Amended:  12/21/12  
Page  25 of 59  
  
The following  tests are required  of ALL  patients:  
• CT or MRI  of the chest/abdomen within 6 weeks  of registration.  
• Hepatitis  serology  within  52 weeks  of registration  (if never  previously  tested  or if 
previously negative for hepatitis B or C).  
 
The following  tests are required of  all patients  with a  presumptive  diagnosis  of ICC: 
• Colonoscopy  within  2 years  of registration  (exemption  may be made  for patients  who 
have biopsy -proven ICC).  
• Bilateral  mammography  (females  only)  within  24 weeks  of registration.  
 
 
In addition,  the following  evaluations  will be required  at the indicated  times:  
 Within  14 days of 
Registration  Within  14 days of 
surgery  Post surgery, 
within  21 days of 
Cycle  1 Post surgery, 
within  48 hours  of 
Cycle  1 
EKG  X X1   
HX, PE, BP X X   
Pregnancy  test 
(females  of child - 
bearing  potential)  X    
DCE -MRI 
Abdomen2   X  
Tumor  Size 
measurements2   
X  
KPS3 X   X 
Ht / Wt4 X   X 
PT X    
CBC  with diff/plts  X   X 
Albumin  X   X 
Total  bilirubin  X   X 
BUN,  creatinine  X   X 
Alk Phos,  SGOT,  
LDH  X   X 
CEA,  AFP,  CA 
19-95 X   X 
Urinalysis  X   X 
Serum  electrolytes     X 
CT angiogram  or 
Celiac axis &  
SMA  angiogram6  
X 5    
Tc-99m MAA  
hepatic  artery      
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  06-114A(6)  
Amended:  12/21/12  
Page  26 of 59  
  
catheter  injection    X  
1 Required  within  7 days of operation  
2 Baseline MRI  kinetic study/scan will be obtained on all patients prior to starting  therapy 
and will be used for tumor  measurement(s)  and to assess  disease  response  or progression 
during and after therapy. Exception will be made for any patient who cannot undergo 
MRI; i n that case, CT scanning will be accepted.  
3 KPS will be determined  prior  to surgery  and prior  to initiating  chemotherapy.  KPS will 
also be evaluated on day 1 of each cycle while undergoing therapy.  
4 Height  will only be assessed  at initial  visit;  weight will  be assessed  at every  MD visit.  
5 Tumor markers will be measured as part of the patient’s standard bloodwork prior to 
initia ting chemotherapy,  and will be monitored  at the attending  MD’s  discretion  during 
treatment.  
6 Either  direct  angiography,  MR angiography,  or CT angiography  are acceptable,  and can 
be performed at any time prior to surgery.  
 
 
9.0 TREATMENT/INTERVENTION  PLAN  
9.1 Administration:  
Chemotherapy will be administered on a 4 -week cycle basis. Pump therapy with 
FUDR  and Dex plus heparinized  saline  to make  30cc  will be administered  on Day 
1 of each cycle. The pump will be emptied and re -filled with heparin and normal 
saline on Day 15. Bevacizumab (5mg/kg) will be administered on Days 1 and 15 
of each cycle, however initial treatment with Bevacizumab will not take place 
until Day 15 of C ycle 1. Treatment recycles on Day 29.  
On Day 15 of cycle 1, patients will receive their initial treatment with 
Bevacizumab,  administered  by IV, administered  per MSKCC  guidelines.  
 
9.2 Dose  Calculation:  
For the first cycle, doses of FUDR and Dex will be calcula ted based on the 
predetermined flow rate provided by the pump manufacturer. Thereafter, doses 
will be adjusted (lowered, if necessary, but never increased) based on actual 
observed  flow rate. The pump  will be filled  with FUDR,  Dexamethasone,  heparin 
and saline.  
 
FUDR  Calculation:  
FUDR:  0.16 mg/kg  X pump  volume  
pump  flow rate 
Dexamethasone:  1 mg/day  X pump  volume  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  06-114A(6)  
Amended:  12/21/12  
Page  27 of 59  
 pump  flow rate 
Overweight  patients:  
If a patient  is 25% above  ideal  weight,  dose of FUDR  and systemic  chemotherapy 
will be calculated as follows:  
Ideal  Body  weight  (kg): 
Males:  50kg  + (2.3 x height  in inches  above  5 ft) 
(ie: for a patient who is 5’10”, use 10)  
Females:  45.5 kg + (2.3  x height  in inches  above 5  ft) 
Example: Male who is 100 kg and 5’10” 
Ideal Body  Weight  is: 50 + (2.3 x 10) = 73 kg 
Therefore,  100 + 73 = 173 ÷ 2 = 86.5 would  be the Ideal  Average  Weight  to use. 
Heparin:  30,000  units total dose 
Normal  saline:  quantity  sufficient to  make  total reservoir  volume  of 30 ml. 
If no dose modification due to toxicity is required, the dosages given above 
(adjusted  for changes  in weight  and pump  flow rate) will be repeated  on Day 1 of 
Cycle 2 and all subsequent cycles.  
 
9.3 Pump  Empty  
On Day 15 of each cycle,  the pump  will be emptied  and then filled  with 30,000 
units of heparin in normal saline (q.s. 30cc) for 14 days.  
 
9.4 Hematologic  Criteria  
Patients must meet all hematologic and blood chemistry criteria outlined in 
Section  6.0 before  beginning  the first cycle  of therapy.  For subsequent  cycles, 
patients must meet the following criteria:  
WBC  > 2500 µL 
ANC  > 1500 µL 
Platelet  count  >  75,000 µL 
Creatinine  < 1.8 mg/dL  
Bilirubin  < 1.5 mg/dL  
If counts  are outside  these  levels  on date of scheduled  treatment,  therapy  will be 
delayed one week.  
Parameters  for treatment  with FUDR  via intrahepatic  pump  are outlined  in 
Section 12.  
 
9.5 Treatment  Duration : 
9.5.1 Patients will receive  treatment  until such time as progression  is noted,  or the 
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  06-114A(6)  
Amended:  12/21/12  
Page  28 of 59  
 patient  develops  unacceptable  toxicity,  or there  is a change  in diagnosis  (see 
section 14.0, “Criteria for Removal from Study”).  
9.5.2 If FUDR  is discontinued  due to patient  progression,  then patient  will be 
discontinued on study drug (Bevacizumab) as well  
9.5.3 If FUDR  is held for reasons  other  than progression,  patient  will continue  on 
Bevacizumab at the attending physician’s discretion.  
9.5.4 If Bevacizumab is discontinued due to toxicity (sections 11.0, 12.3), the 
patient  will continue  to receive  FUDR  as long as patient  continues  to respond,  and 
at the discretion of the attending  physician.  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  06-114A(6)  
Amended:  12/21/12  
Page  29 of 59  
 10.0 EVALUATION  DURING  TREATMENT/INTERVENTION  
 
 
 At time of 
surgery  Day 1* each 
Cycle  q2 weeks  q8 weeks  q 12 weeks  
HX,PE,  BP  X X   
Tox assessment   X X   
Weight   X    
KPS  X    
CBC,  Plts  X X   
BUN,  Creat   X X   
Bili, SGOT   X X   
Alk phos,  LDH   X X   
Electrolytes   X    
Tumor  markers1  X    
Urinalysis   X    
EKG4     X 
Chest x -ray/CT  
chest5     
X 
Dynamic  MRI 
abdomen2    X  
Tc-99m MAA  
hepatic artery 
catheter  injection       
      
Plasma 
levels3/VEGF  ** X X    
Tumor  tissue  
levels  / VEGF**  X     
* Or within  48 hours  prior  to Day 1 
** Tissue  and blood samples will  be stored  preparatory  to analysis.  
1Tumor  markers  (CEA,  AFP,  CA19 -9) will be drawn  if elevated  before  treatment,  or at the 
discretion of the attending physician.  
 
2All patients will undergo DCE MRI after initial treatment with FUDR, and again after 
initial treatment with Bevacizumab. DCE MRI will take place every 2 cycles thereafter, 
allowing for scheduling conflicts; a va riance in the timing will not be considered a 
protocol  deviation.  The timing  of the DCE  MRI  may be advanced at  the discretion  of the 
attending physician, in the interest of patient safety.  
 
3Patients  will have  one lavender -top tube (7 or 10cc)  and 1 8cc BD CPT tube of whole  blood  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  06-114A(6)  
Amended:  12/21/12  
Page  30 of 59  
 drawn on Day  1 of each cycle.  
4EKG  will be done  every  12 weeks,  allowing  for scheduling  conflicts;  a variance  in the timing 
will not be considered a protocol deviation. Other EKGs performed as deemed clinically 
necessary, at the discretion of the attending MD.  
5 CT of the pelvis may  be added at the  discretion of  the attending  MD. 
While  being  treated  with protocol  therapy , patients  will be seen on or prior  (within  48 hours)  to 
the first day of each cycle by their medical oncologist . 
 
Specific  Monitoring:  
Hypertension will be monitored through routine evaluation of blood pressure prior to each 
Bevacizumab  treatment.  Optimal  control  of blood  pressure  according  to standard  public  health 
guidelines is recommended for patients on treatment with or without Bevacizumab.  
 
Proteinuria  will be monitored  by urine  protein:creatinine  (UPC)  ratio or dipstick  at least every 
4 weeks, not to exceed 6 weeks.  
 
If patients on treatment with Bevacizumab require elective major surgery, it is recommended 
that Bevacizumab  be held for 4-8 weeks  prior  to the surgical  procedure.  Patients  undergoing  a 
major surgical procedure should  not begin/restart Bevacizumab until 4 weeks after that 
procedure (in the case of high risk procedures such as liver resection, thoracotomy, or 
neurosurgery, it is recommended that chemotherapy be restarted no earlier than 6 weeks and 
Bevacizumab no earlie r than 8 weeks after surgery).  
 
 
11.0 TOXICITIES/SIDE  EFFECTS  
All toxicities  will be rated  as per the NCI Common  Toxicity  Criteria  except  neurosensory 
and hepatic enzyme toxicities related to intrahepatic pump therapy (see section 12.5 
FUDR Dose Modifications and Table I).  
 
11.1 Toxicity  Related  to Regional  Chemotherapy:  
11.1.1  FUDR:  gastritis,  gastroduodenal  ulcers,  chemical  hepatitis,  biliary  sclerosi s 
with jaundice, pruritus, diarrhea.  
 
11.1.2  Dex: anxiety, mood alteration/lability, hyperglycemia, insomnia, peripheral 
edema,  myopathy  (with  chronic  use),  acne,  hirsutism,  sodium  retention,  fluid 
retention, hypertension, development of cushingoid state, seconda ry 
adrenocortical and pituitary hypo -responsiveness, decreased carbohydrate 
tolerance, manifestations of latent diabetes.  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  06-114A(6)  
Amended:  12/21/12  
Page  31 of 59  
  
 
 
11.2 Toxicity  Related  to Bevacizumab:  
In addition  to fever,  generalized  aches,  headache,  rash,  fatigue,  shortness  of breath,  reversible 
liver function elevation and allergic reaction, the following toxicities may be seen:  
Hypertension : Hypertension  has been  commonly  seen in Bevacizumab  clinical  trials  to date 
and oral medications have been used to manage the hypertension  when indicated. Grade 4 
and 5 hypertensive events are rare. Clinical sequelae of hypertension are rare but have 
included hypertensive crisis, hypertensive encephalopathy, and reversible posterior 
leukoencephalopathy syndrome (RPLS). RPLS may include signs  and symptoms of 
headache, altered mental function, seizures, and visual disturbances/cortical blindness and 
requires treatment, which should include control of hypertension, management of specific 
symptoms, and discontinuation of Bevacizumab.  
Bleeding : In a lung cancer trial, there were six life -threatening bleeding events among 66 
subjects.  There were  no life-threatening  hemorrhagic events  in completed Phase III  trials  in 
breast  and colorectal  cancers.  Minor  mucocutaneous  bleeding  (epistaxis)  has also been  seen 
in all Bevacizumab clinical trials at a rate of approximately 20 -40%.  
Thromboembolic events : Both venous and arterial thromboembolic (TE) events, ranging in 
severity  from  catheter -associated  phlebitis  to fatal,  have  been  reported  in patients  treated  with 
Bevacizumab in the colorectal cancer trials and, to a lesser extent, in patients treated with 
Bevacizumab in NSCLC and breast cancer trials. In the phase II pivotal trial in metastatic 
CRC, there was a slightly higher rate of venous T E events that was not statistically  
significant in patients treated with Bevacizumab plus chemotherapy compared with 
chemotherapy alone. There was also a higher rate of arterial TE events (3% vs. 1%) such as 
myocardial infarction, transient ischemia attack , cerebrovascular accident/stroke and 
angina/unstable angina. A pooled analysis of the rate of arterial TE events from 5  
randomized studies (1745 patients) showed that treatment with chemotherapy plus 
Bevacizumab increased the risk of having an arterial TE  event compared with chemotherapy 
alone. Furthermore, subjects with certain baseline characteristics (age > 65 years and/or a 
history of a prior arterial TE event) may be a higher risk of experiencing such an event.  
Proteinuria : Proteinuria  has been  common ly seen in Bevacizumab  clinical  trials  to date.  The 
severity of proteinuria has ranged from asymptomatic and transient events detected on 
routine dipstick urinalysis to nephrotic syndrome; the majority of proteinuria events have 
been grade 1 or 2.  Rare eve nts of nephrotic syndrome have occurred, and Bevacizumab 
should be discontinued in patients with nephrotic syndrome.  
Gastrointestinal  Perforation : Bevacizumab  should  be permanently  discontinued  in patients 
who develop gastrointestinal perforation. A causal  association of intra -abdominal 
inflammatory process and gastrointestinal perforation to Bevacizumab has not been 
established. Nevertheless, caution should be exercised when treating patients with intra - 
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  06-114A(6)  
Amended:  12/21/12  
Page  32 of 59  
 abdominal inflammatory processes with Bevacizumab. Gastrointestinal perforation has been 
reported  in other  trials  in non-colorectal  cancer  populations  (e.g. ovarian,  renal  cell, pancreas, 
and breast) and may be higher in incidence in some tumor types.  
CHF : CHF has been reported in Bevacizumab clinical trials and may be increased in 
incidence in patients with prior exposure to anthracyclines or prior irradiation to the chest 
wall.  Patients  receiving  anthracyclines  or with prior  exposure  to anthracyclines  should  have  a 
baseline MUGA or ECHO with a normal ejection fraction.  
Wound Healing : Wound healing complications such as wound dehiscence have been 
reported  in patients  receiving  Bevacizumab. In an analysis  of pooled  data from  two trials  in 
metastatic  colorectal  cancer,  patients  undergoing  surgery  28-60 days before  study  treatment 
with 5FU/LV plus Bevacizumab did not appear to have an increased risk of wound healing 
complications comp ared to those treated with chemotherapy alone. Surgery in patients 
currently receiving Bevacizumab is not recommended. No definitive data are available to 
define a safe interval after Bevacizumab exposure with respect to wound healing risk in 
patients rece iving elective surgery; however, the estimated half -life of Bevacizumab is 20 
days. Bevacizumab should be discontinued in patients with severe wound healing 
complications.  
 
11.3 Toxicity  Related  to the Pump  and Catheters  
11.3.1  Infection,  hepatic  artery  thrombosis,  pump  malfunction,  catheter  occlusion,  intra- 
abdominal bleed.  
 
 
12.0 DOSE  MODIFICATIONS  
 
12.1 FUDR  Dose  Modifications  : 
Elevations in SGOT, alkaline phosphatase, and serum bilirubin are common 
during treatment with intrahepatic FUDR and have been managed adequately by 
modifying the dose or delaying treatment, as reported in previous studies. 
Elevations in these laboratory v alues will be managed as outlined in the table 
below.  
Percentages listed under “FUDR Dose” refer to percentage of last dose of FUDR 
administered; however, changes in flow rate and weight must be considered. 
Therefore, the modified dose will be calculated u sing the indicated percentage of 
the desired  dose multiplied  by patient’s  weight  and pump  volume,  then divided  by 
current pump flow rate.  For example, if a 75 kg patient required a 50% dose 
reduction, and the pump had an actual flow rate of 1.6 ml/day, the n the FUDR 
dose would be calculated as follows:  
.16mg/kg/day  X dose attenuation [.50] X  75kg  X 30ml  = 131.3 mg  FUDR  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  06-114A(6)  
Amended:  12/21/12  
Page  33 of 59  
 pump  flow rate [1.6 ml/day]  
 
 
 
FUDR  DOSE  MODIFICATION  TABLE : 
 
 Reference  Value*  % FUDR  dose 
SGOT  (at pump  emptying  or 
day of planned retreatment, 
whichever is higher)  0 to < 2 x reference  value  100%  
2 to < 3 x reference  value  80% 
3 to < 4 x reference  value  50% 
> 4 x reference  value  Hold  
ALK PHOS (at pump 
emptying  or day of planned 
retreatment, whichever is  
higher)  0 to < 1.2 x reference  value  100%  
1.2 to < 1.5 x reference  value  50% 
> 1.5 x reference  value  Hold  
TOT  BILI  (at pump  emptying 
or day of planned  retreatment, 
whichever is higher)  0 to < 1.2 x reference  value  100%  
1.2 to < 1.5 x reference  value  50% 
> 1.5 x reference  value  Hold  
If SGOT  > 4X reference value,  alkaline  phosphatase  > 1.5X  reference  value,  total bilirubin  > 
1.5X  reference  value,  then treatment  will be held and will not be reinstituted  until values  come 
down to more normal levels, as indicated in section “Resuming Treatment After Temporary 
Discontinuation”.  
 
"Reference value"  is the  value obtained  on the day  the patient received  last FUDR 
dose.  To determine  if an FUDR  dose modification  is necessary,  compare  reference 
value to either the value obtained on the day the pump was emptied or on day of 
planned pump filling, whichever is higher.  
If a patient's  Alkaline  Phosphatase  or T bili shows a  continual  rise from  Day 1 of treatment,  then 
the Day 1 value will be  used as the  reference  value  for that patient when determining  whether  to 
hold treatment, and time of re -treatment after hold.  
 
12.2 Resuming  Treatment  After  Temporary  Discontinuation:  
 
REASON  FOR  
TREATMENT  DELAY  Chemotherapy  resumed  
when  value  has returned  to: % FUDR  dose 
SGOT  elevation  3 X reference  value  25% of last dose 
Alkaline  Phosphatase  
elevation  1.2 X reference  value  25% of last dose 
Total  bilirubin  elevation  1.2 X reference  value  25% of last dose 
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  06-114A(6)  
Amended:  12/21/12  
Page  34 of 59  
  
 
12.2.1  Biliary Toxicity:  If patient develops a total bilirubin > 3.0 mg/dl, the pump 
should be emptied and Dex 25 mg plus heparin 30,000 u and saline 30 cc placed in 
the pump  q 14 days.  Once  there  is no longer  evidence  of toxicity,  Dex dose should  be 
tapered in increments of 5 mg every  14 days. Tapering will continue unless enzymes 
increase. FUDR should be permanently discontinued unless there is evidence of 
disease progression (increasing CEA, worsening CT scan, worsening clinical status) 
AND bili rubin has returned to < 1.5 mg/dl. In this case, FUDR can be restarted as 
follows: Use 25% of the last FUDR dose given with Dex, heparin and saline in the 
pump for 7 days. Pump should be emptied after 7 days, and patients given a 3 -week 
rest period. This t reatment and treatment schedule should continue as long as 
bilirubin remains < 1.5 mg/dl and liver enzyme values do not increase.  
 
12.2.2  Epigastric pain unresponsive to oral H 2 blocker use is suggestive of 
gastroduodenal irritation or ulcer. Severe pain should prompt workup with an upper 
gastrointestinal  endoscopy.  Serum  amylase  should  be checked  along  with the routine 
blood  (screening  profile, creatinine, and  CBC)  in patients  with abdominal  pain. If  an 
ulcer or gastroduodenitis is documented, therapy should be held for one month to 
allow healing. If abdominal pain is severe, the pump should be emptied of FUDR 
until results of workup are available.  
12.2.3  Severe diarrhea (Grade 3 or 4) may result from extrahepatic perfusion of 
FUDR.  If a patient develops diarrhea at the level of dose limiting toxicity, the 
pump will be emptied of FUDR and a repeat flow scan will be obtained to  
exclude the possibility of extrahepatic perfusion.  If the flo w scan suggests 
extrahepatic perfusion, then an arteriogram will be obtained through the side port 
of the pump and all mis -perfusing arteries will be embolized.  Treatment will 
resume only after this is done and the diarrhea resolves.  If the flow scan is 
normal, then the possibility of infectious diarrhea will be investigated.  If such 
investigations are negative, then the diarrhea will be considered a dose -limiting 
toxicity (DLT).  Treatment may resume with FUDR at 0.14mg/kg/day.  
12.3 Bevacizumab  Treatment  Modifications  
Drug  treatment will be modified in the event of certain adverse events (as shown in the 
following  table).  Regardless  of the reason  for holding  the drug treatment,  the maximum 
allowable length of treatment interruption is 2 months (2 cycles).  
Bevacizumab  Dose  Modification  Table : 
 
Event  Action  to be Taken  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  06-114A(6)  
Amended:  12/21/12  
Page  35 of 59  
  
Hypertension  
Grade  3 
 
Grade  4 (including  RPLS 
[confirmed by MRI] or  
hypotensive  encephalopathy)  If not controlled  to 150/100  mmHg  with medication,  discontinue 
Bevacizumab  
Discontinue  Bevacizumab  
Hemorrhage  
Grade  > 2 pulmonary  or CNS 
hemorrhage  
Grade  3 nonpulmonary  and non- 
CNS hemorrhage  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Grade  4 Discontinue  Bevacizumab  
 
Subjects  who are also receiving  full-dose anticoagulation  will be 
discontinued from receiving Bevacizumab  
All other  subjects  will have study  treatment  held until all of the 
following criteria are met:  
• The bleeding  has resolved  and hemoglobin  is stable  
• There  is no bleeding  diathesis  that would  increase  the risk of 
therapy  
• There  is no anatomic  or pathologic  condition  that significantly 
increases the risk of hemorrhage recurrence  
Patients  who experience  a repeat  Grade  3 hemorrhagic  event  will 
be discontinued from receiving Bevacizumab  
Discontinue  Bevacizumab  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  06-114A(6)  
Amended:  12/21/12  
Page  36 of 59  
  
Venous  Thrombosis  
Grade  3/asymptomatic  Grade  4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Symptomatic  Grade  4 
Arterial Thromboembolic Event 
(Angina,  MI, TIA,  CVA,  and any 
other arterial thromboembolic 
event  
Any Grade  Hold study drug treatment. If the planned duration of full -dose 
anticoagulation is < 2 weeks, study drug should be held until the 
full-dose anticoagu lation period is over. If the planned duration of 
full-dose anticoagulation  is > 2 weeks,  drug may be resumed  during 
the period  of full-dose anticoagulation  if all of the following  criteria 
are met:  
• The patient  must  have  an in-range  INR (usually  between  2 
and 3)  on a stable  dose of warfarin (or other  anticoagulant) 
prior to restarting study drug treatment  
• The patient  must  not have  had a Grade  3 or 4 hemorrhagic 
event while on anticoagulation  
• The patient  must  not have  had evidence  of tumor  involving 
major blood vessels on any prior CT scan  
Discontinue  Bevacizumab  
 
 
 
 
 
Discontinue  Bevacizumab  
Arterial  Thromboembolic  Event 
(angina, myocardial infarction, 
transient ischemic attack, 
cerebrovascular accident, and any 
other arterial thromboembolic 
event)  
Any Grade   
 
 
 
 
 
Discontinue  Bevacizumab  
Congestive  Heart  Failure 
(Left ventricular systolic 
dysfunction)  
Grade  3 
 
Grade  4  
Hold  Bevacizumab  until resolution  to Grade  < 1 
Discontinue Bevacizumab  
Proteinuria  
Grade 3 (UPC > 3.5, urine 
collection  > 3.5 g/24 hr, or dipstick 
4+) 
Grade  4 (nephrotic  syndrome)   
Hold  Bevacizumab  treatment  until < Grade  2, as determined  by 
either UPC ration < 3.5, or 24 hr collection < 3.5 g  
Discontinue  the patient  from  the study  
GI Perforation  Discontinue  Bevacizumab  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  06-114A(6)  
Amended:  12/21/12  
Page  37 of 59  
  
Bowel  Obstruction  
Grade  1 
Grade 2 
Grade  3/4  
Continue  patient  on study  for partial  obstruction  NOT  requiring 
medical intervention  
Hold  Bevacizumab  for partial  obstruction  requiring  medical 
intervention. Patient may restart upon complete resolution.  
Hold Bevacizumab for complete obstruction. If surgery is 
necessary,  patient  may restart  Bevacizumab  after full recovery  from 
surgery, and at investigator’s discretion  
Wound  dehiscence  (requiring  
medical  or surgical  therapy)  Discontinue  Bevacizumab  
Other  Unspecified  Bevacizumab - 
Related Adverse Events  
Grade  3 
 
Grade  4  
Hold  Bevacizumab  until recovery  to < Grade  1 
Discontinue Bevacizumab  
Patients who have an ongoing bevacizumab -related Grade 4 or serious adverse event at the time 
of discontinuation  from  study  treatment  will continue  to be followed  until resolution  of the event 
or until the event is considered irreversible  
12.4 General  
If any patient on this protocol has a sudden change in condition, liver function tests will 
be checked immediately.  The pump will be emptied of chemotherapy if there is any 
suspicion of drug -induc ed toxicity.  
 
All reasonable efforts will be made to adhere to treatment and evaluation schedules, 
however variations to accommodate holidays, transportation issues, or patient's personal 
schedule will be permitted if these do not, in the opinion of the in vestigator, constitute a 
major safety or compliance issue. Additionally, evaluations (e.g. EKGs, scans) may be 
performed off -schedule if, in the estimation of the attending physician, patient condition 
so warrants.  Such  variations,  assuming  they do not occur with unreasonable  frequency  or 
regularity, will not be considered protocol violations.  
 
 
13.0 CRITERIA  FOR  THERAPEUTIC  RESPONSE/OUTCOME  ASSESSMENT  
The primary  objective  of this Phase  II study  will be  to assess anti -tumor  efficacy.  
 
13.1 Complete  Response  (CR):  The disappearance  of all target  and non-target  lesions. 
If necessary,  persistent  target  or non-target  lesions that  appear  to be residual  scar 
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  06-114A(6)  
Amended:  12/21/12  
Page  38 of 59  
 tissue  may undergo  biopsy  and the best overall  response  may be classified  as CR 
if no evidence of active cancer is found.  
 
13.2 Partial  Response  (PR):  A 30% decrease  in the sum of the longest  diameter  of 
target lesions, taking as reference the baseline sum longest diameter.  
13.3 Stable Disease (SD): Neither sufficient shrinkage to qualify  for partial response 
nor sufficient increase to qualify  for progressive disease, taking  as reference the 
smallest  sum longest diameter  since  the treatment  start,  or the persistence  of one 
or more non -target lesions.  
13.4 Progressive Disease (PD): At least a 20% increase in the sum of the longest 
diameter  of target  lesions,  taking  as reference  the smallest  sum longest  diameter 
recorded  since  the treatment  start,  or the appearance  of one or more  new lesions 
and/or unequivocal progression of non -target lesions.  
 
 
14.0 CRITERIA  FOR  REMOVAL  FROM  STUDY  
• If at any time the patient develops progressive disease he/she will be taken off 
study and referred for alternative therapy.  
• If at any time the patient develops unacceptable toxicity he/she will be removed 
from study.  
• If at any  time the patient is found to  be ineligible for the protocol as designated in 
the section on Criteria for Patient/Subject Eligibility (i.e., a change in diagnosis), 
the patient will be removed from the study.  
• Patient  elects  to discontinue  treatment.  
 
• Changes  in a patient’s  condition  which render  the patient  unacceptable  for further 
treatment in the judgment of the investigator.  
 
• Grade  4 hypertension  or reversible  posterior  leukoencephalopathy  syndrome 
(RPLS)  
• Nephrotic  syndrome  
• Grade  > 2 pulmonary  or CNS hemorrhage;  any Grade  4 hemorrhage  
• Symptomatic  Grade  4 venous  thromboembolic  event  
• Any grade arterial  thromboembolic  event  
• Grade  4 congestive  heart  failure  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  06-114A(6)  
Amended:  12/21/12  
Page  39 of 59  
 • Gastrointestinal  perforation  
• Wound  dehiscence  requiring  medical  or surgical  intervention  
• Inability  of subject  to comply  with study  requirements  
• Determination  by the investigator  that it is no longer  safe for the subject  to 
continue therapy  
• All Grade  4 events thought  to be  related  to bevacizumab  by the investigator  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  06-114A(6)  
Amended:  12/21/12  
Page  40 of 59  
 15.0 CORRELATIVE  STUDIES  
 
15.1 DYNAMIC  CONTRAST -ENHANCED  MRI  
MRI will be the primary imaging modality used to assess disease response. Standard 
sequences will be used for unidimensional tumor measurement, which is a primary 
outcome determinant. In addition, as part of each scan, dynamic contras t-enhanced 
images  will be obtained  to measure  parameters  related  to tumor  perfusion  (initial  slope  of 
the contrast uptake curve), and permeability (Ak ep, see below).  
 
Data  Acquisition  
DCE -MRI studies will be performed on a 1.5T GE (Milwaukee, WI) Signa LX scanner. 
Gadolinium (Gd -DTPA) will be administered at a concentration of 0.1 mmol/kg, 
resulting in a standard dose of 1mL gadopentetate dimeglumine per 10 kg of patient 
weight. A salin e flush will be administered at the same flow rate with a volume of 20 cc 
following gadopentetate dimeglumine administration, to ensure complete mixing of the 
bolus upon delivery. A power injector delivery  system (Medrad, Inc. Indianola, PA) will 
be used to provide  accurate  flow rates.  Patients  with a central  venous  silastic  catheter  will 
require a slower flow rate of 0.8 -1.0 cc/s to prevent damage to the catheter. All other 
patients will receive contrast at a rate of 2 cc/s. All patients will receive contr ast while at 
scan position in the magnet.  
Dynamic contrast -enhanced images will be acquired using a fast multi -phase spoiled 
gradient  echo  sequence.  Single  slice images,  passing  through  the center  of the tumor  and 
possibly covering aorta (whenever feasible) will be acquired with 9 ms repetition time 
(TR), a 2 ms echo time (TW), 30○ flip angle, 15.63 kHz receive bandwidth, 20 -24 cm 
(depending on patient size) field of view (FOV), and a 256 x 128 matrix, yielding a 
temporal resolution of ~1.0 seconds/image. This time resolution is sufficient to observe 
the initial uptake of Gd -DTPA into the region. The first 5 images obtained during the 
study  will be  pre-Gd-DTPA  injection, to assure  accurate  baseline  signal intensi ty. These 
data will also be used (in combination with the proton density image) to measure T 10. 
Dynamic  imaging  data will be obtained  under  shallow  breathing  for a total of 5 minutes 
to acquire 225 time points to characterize the time intensity curves (TIC ). 
 
Data  Analysis  
Following  on-line reconstruction,  data will be exported  to a Sun Ultra  20 workstation  for 
analysis. Software was been written to display and analyze the data using IDL 6.0 
(Research Systems, Inc., Boulder CO). Time intensity curves will be analyzed for each 
voxel in the image. The initial uptake slope will use a 5 -point sliding linear regre ssion 
applied to the first 2 minutes of the time intensity curve. A baseline signal intensity (SI) 
value, SI pre, will be calculated as the mean intensity of 3 points prior to injection. The 
percent  increase/minute  for each voxel  is then calculated  accordin g to equation  1 (fig. 1): 
 
Fig. 1 
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  06-114A(6)  
Amended:  12/21/12  
Page  41 of 59  
  
 
In addition, the data will be analyzed using a two -compartment model proposed by 
Hoffman, based on that of Brix , which incorporates rate constants of Gd -DTPA between 
the lesion to plasma compartments (k ep) and elimination by the plasma (k el). The plasma 
concentration is not directly  measured since  the clearance rate (k el) can be estimated from 
the measured tissue curve. After a bolus injection (τ = bolus duration), if one assumes  
kepτ < < 1 and k el τ < < 1 , Hoffman’s initial equation reduces to equation 2 (fig. 2) which 
has three fitted parameters: A (normalized amplitude), k ep (min -1), and k el (min -1): 
 
Fig 2: 
 
 
. 
 
At short times after injection (small values of t), the right side of equation 2 reduces to 
1+Ak ept, thus the initial  slope is proportional to Ak ep. This product will be  determined for 
each voxel in the ROI and placed in a histogram.  
 
DCE -MRI scans will be  obtained after hepatic artery pump placement but prior to 
treatment start (baseline). The first post -treatment scan will be obtained in the middle of 
cycle 1, immediately after completing the initial 14 -day infusion of FUDR, but before 
initial treatment w ith Bevacizumab; the second post -treatment scan will be obtained at  
the end of  cycle  1, after  initial  treatment  with Bevacizumab  only. DCE -MRI  scans will  be 
obtained at two month intervals thereafter. Comparisons will be made between the pre - 
and post-treatment  slope of  the contrast  uptake  curve  (perfusion)  and Akep (permeability). 
The initial and post -treatment changes in these parameters will also be correlated to 
disease response, as assessed on unidimensional tumor measurements, and 
immunohistochemical markers of tumor hypoxia (see below).  
 
15.2 VEGF  and VEGFR  Assays  
This clinical trial is based on the hypothesis that the growth and progression of primary 
liver cancer  is dependent  on the factors  that support  angiogenesis  and lymphangiogenesis. 
As signaling molecules regulating these two processes are driven by three different 
tyrosine  kinase  receptors, namely  VEGFR1 (hemangiogenesis), VEGFR2 (angiogenesis), 
and VEGFR3 (lymphangiogenesis), information regarding  the expression p attern of  these 
receptors and their cognate ligands (VEGF -A, -B, -C, -D, and P1GF) is essential in order 
to rationally interpret the results. Since bevacizumab selectively blocks the activity of 
VEGF -A, but not the other ligands, these studies will help cl arify if inhibition of the 
VEGF -A/VEGFR2 signaling pathway is sufficient to block angiogenesis and  

Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Pro tocol  
IRB#:  06-114A(6)  
Amended:  12/21/12  
Page  42 of 59  
 lymphangiogenesis  in primary  hepatic  malignancy.  It is anticipated  that tumors  primarily 
over-expressing VEGF -A/VEGFR2 will be more responsive to bevacizumab (anti - 
VEGF -A) therapy.  On the other hand, tumors that over -express both VEGF -A/VEGFR2 
and VEGF -C, -D/VEGFR3 signaling pathways may be less sensitive to bevacizumab, as 
angiogenesis  may be promoted  through  these  alternative  mediators.  Theref ore, evaluating 
the spectrum of VEGF ligand and receptor expression will help clarify  the mechanism or 
mechanisms through which primary hepatic malignancy maintains angiogenesis despite 
VEGF -A inhibition.  As new agents emerge that target other members of t he VEGF and 
VEGFR families, the results of these studies will help identify other potential sites of 
therapeutic intervention in primary liver cancer.  
In parallel  to these  studies,  VEGF -A, -B, -C, -D and  PlGF  levels  in plasma and  VEGFR - 
1, -2, and -3 expression on peripheral blood mononuclear cells will be measured.  In 
addition,  the number  of circulating  CD133+VEGFR2+  EPCs  and CD34+VEGFR1+  pro- 
angiogenic HPC’s will be quantified. These assays will be performed at baseline and on 
day 1 of each cycle during treatment.  The proposed studies will determine if these 
surrogate markers have utility in assessing response to treatment with bevacizumab.  
Since  no bio-marker  reliably  describes  the angiogenic  propensity  of primary  liver cancer 
or its response to anti -angiogenesis therapy, these data will provide insights regarding 
treatment -induced changes that are measurable in the peripheral blood.  
Planned  Experiments  
The correlative  studies  in this  section  will be performed  on biopsy  samples  of tumor  and 
non-tumor  bearing  liver taken  at operation  (pre-treatment)  and on peripheral  blood  taken 
before treatment and on day 1 of each cycle during treatment, as described above.  The 
methods used in these experiments have been previously described and are currently in 
routine use.  
 
1. Tissue.  Biopsy samples of tumor and non -tumorous liver will be o btained at the time 
of operation, some of which will be frozen and some embedded in paraffin.  Frozen cut 
sections  of the tumor  biopsy  sample  will be analyzed  for the expression  of VEGF -A, -B, - 
C, -D, PlGF, and VEGFR -1, -2, -3 using standard immunohistoche mical techniques and 
commercially available antibodies (Santa Cruz Biotechnology), as previously described. 
Non-tumor involved liver from each patient will be simultaneously stained.  Human 
umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) will be used as positive c ontrols for VEGF 
receptors and leukemia cell lines (KG1a, KG1 and HL60) will be used as positive 
controls  for VEGF  ligands.  Slides  will be reviewed  by a reference  pathologist  and scored 
for proportion of positively stained cells.43 
 
2. Peripheral Blood.  Samples of peripheral blood (~10 ml) will be collected and 
processed  to separate  plasma  and circulating  mononuclear  cells.  Plasma  levels  of VEGF - 
A, -B, -C, -D and PlGF will be measure d in triplicate by ELISA using commercially 
available assay kits (R&D Systems), taking precautions to eliminate contribution by 
activated platelets.  Both pro -VEGF -C and active VEGF -C will be quantified.44 
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Pro tocol  
IRB#:  06-114A(6)  
Amended:  12/21/12  
Page  43 of 59  
  
A portion of the peripheral blood monocytes will be set aside for protein extraction and 
subsequent analysis of VEGF -A, -B, -C, -D, PlGF, and VEGFR -1, -2, -3 using Western 
blot and commercially  available  antibodies  (see below).  The remaining  cells will be used 
for dual -color flow cytometry, according to well -established methods,45-47 to determine 
the proportion  of circulating  CD133+VEGFR2+  EPCs  and CD34+VEGFR1+  HPCs.  The 
mononuclear cell fraction is separated with Ficoll -Hypaque centrifugation and CD34 
purification is performed with a Clinimacs CD34 -separation kit (Miltenyi Biotech) and 
the purity assessed by flow cytometry.  CD34+ cells are then further analyzed for co - 
expression of CD133 and VEGFR2 by dual color flow cytometry using a PE -conjugated 
monoclonal  anti-body  to CD133  and FITC -conjugated  monoclonal  antibody  to VEGFR2; 
separate analyses will be performed to identify CD34+VEGFR1+ cells.  Assays will be 
performe d in triplicate  and expressed  as proportions,  which  have  been  shown  to be on the 
order of 10 -20%.32, 50 In separate studies, freshly isolated CD34+ cells will be analyzed 
for their capacity to form late outgrowth vascular colonies, a feature that is chara cteristic 
of progenitor cells.48-50 Approximately 105 CD34+ cells are cultured in endothelial 
culture medium containing VEGF.  Endothelial cell colonies are then quantified by co - 
staining with DiI -acetylated -LDL (DiI -Ac-LDL, PerImmune) and von Willebrand f actor 
(vWf).  DiI-Ac-LDL+vWf+ endothelial cell colonies formed after 14 days are scored as 
late outgrowth colonies.  Analyses will be performed in triplicate and expressed as the 
percent of late outgrowth colonies/105 peripheral blood monocytes.  Late outgrow th 
vascular colonies will also be harvested for protein extraction and analysis of VEGF and 
VEGFR expression by Western blot, as described below.  
 
In separate studies, a small portion of plasma will also be assessed with an in vitro 
functional  angiogenic  assay  using  human  umbilical  vein endothelial  cells (HUVEC -based 
angiogenic scale), modified from previously described methods.51 Early passaged 
HUVECs will be maintained in enriched endothelial cell culture medium until 
approximately 70% conflue nt, and then changed to serum -free medium.  Patient plasma 
will be added to the cells to final concentration of 2.5% (in triplicate).  After 24 hours, 
angiogenic morphology will be examined under light microscopy and scored by 2 
independent observers accordi ng to an angiogenic scale (Figure 2): 0 – well separated 
individual cells; 1 – cells begin to migrate and align; 2 – visible capillary tubes, no 
sprouting; 3 – sprouting of new capillary  tubes; 4 – polygonal structures begin to form; 5 
– presence of comple x mesh -like structures.  The HUVEC -based system provides a  
global assessment of the plasma angiogenic activity before and during treatment, and its 
simplicity makes it potentially ideal for use as a bio -marker for assessing treatment 
efficacy.  To evaluate t his further, changes in the HUVEC -score during treatment will be 
correlated with changes in the other circulating pro -angiogenic variables measured.  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Pro tocol  
IRB#:  06-114A(6)  
Amended:  12/21/12  
Page  44 of 59  
  
 
Figure  2. Summary  of HUVEC -based  functional  angiogenic  scale.  
 
Protein  extraction  and West ern blotting  
Western blotting will be used to detect and validate the expression of VEGFs and VEGFRs 
on the peripheral blood mononuclear cells and late outgrowth colonies (CFU -EC) from 
CD133+VEGFR2+ EPCs and CD34+VEGFR1+ HPCs isolated from the peripheral blood 
cells. E ndothelial colonies (CFU -EC) will be generated by incubating the peripheral blood 
mononuclear cells with VEGF; late outgrowth endothelial colonies and other hematopoietic 
mononuclear cells will be lysed in cold RIPA buffer in the presence of protease inhib itors. 
As controls, protein will also be extracted from HUVEC and leukemia cells.  HUVECs will 
be used as positive controls for the expression of VEGFR -1, -2 and -3. Leukemia cell lines 
(KG1a,  KG1  and HL60)  will be used as positive  controls  for the expressi on of VEGF -A, -B, 
-C, -D and PlGF.  After centrifugation to remove cell debris, supernatants (a total protein 
minimum of 500 ng) will be immunoprecipitated overnight at 4◦ C with protein G -agarose 
beads and an anti -phosphotyrosine antibody (Santa Cruz Biote chnology) to precipitate 
phosphorylated  proteins  or with a mouse  antihuman  VEGFs  or VEGF  receptors.  Precipitated 
proteins/antibody/beads are then washed, re -suspended in loading  buffer, and then subjected 
to sodium dodecyl sulfate -polyacrylamide gel electr ophoresis (7.5% gels) under reducing 
conditions. Proteins are subsequently blotted onto a nitrocellulose membrane following 
conventional protocols. Finally, blots will be blocked in 1% bovine serum 
albumin/phosphate -buffered salin -0.1%. Tween 20 for 1 hour  at room temperature followed 
by incubation with primary and secondary antibodies. Antibodies used will include 
commercially available mouse antihuman VEGFs or VEGFRs, and a secondary peroxidase - 
labeled goat antimouse antibody. The ECL chemiluminescence d etection system and ECL 
film will be used to visualize the presence of proteins on the nitrocellulose blots.  

Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Pro tocol  
IRB#:  06-114A(6)  
Amended:  12/21/12  
Page  45 of 59  
  
15.3 Analysis  of Tumor  Hypoxia  
Paraffin -embedded biopsy specimens, obtained during operation and processed as above, 
will be used for these studies. Immunohistochemical staining  will be overseen by  Dr. Jinru 
Shia of the Department of Pathology, MSKCC, and will be performed through the 
Immunohistochemical  Core  Facility.  Tumor  and tumor -free liver specimens  will be stained 
for HIF -1α, CA IX, Glut -1, Glut -3, and Ki -67 using well -characterized monoclonal  
antibodies and appropriate positive and negative controls. The slides will be evaluated and 
graded for both intensity and percentage of stained cells. Ki -67 will be scored as a 
continuous variable. For all other antibodies, <10% staining will be considere d negative, 
while >10% staining will be considered positive. Correlations will be made between the 
immunohistochemical markers of hypoxia and pre - and post -treatment DCE -MRI 
measurements of tumor perfusion and permeability.  
 
 
16.0 BIOSTATISTICS  
The primary obje ctive of this study is to assess the efficacy of continuous hepatic arterial  
infusion  (HAI)  of FUDR  plus systemic  bevacizumab  in patients  with unresectable  HCC  and ICC. 
The primary endpoint is median time to progression (TTP), as measured from time of pump  
placement to date of first documented progression. As explained in section 3.0, the median TTP 
was approximately 7 months in the investigator’s Phase II study of HAI FUDR. We hypothesize 
that addition of systemic bevacizumab will result in a 50% improveme nt. A total of 48 events 
will give us 90% power to detect the hypothesized improvement, therefore we will enroll 55 
patients, allowing  for 15% censoring. This calculation assumes a Type I error of 5%, a one -sided 
test, and a median  follow -up time of 2 years. It also assumes  that survival  times  are exponentially 
distributed. This last assumption is for planning purposes only, and actual analysis will employ 
non-parametric methods for estimating the survival distribution.  
 
The secondary objective is to assess dynamic MRI for measuring changes in tumor perfusion 
parameters during treatment. The measurements that will be obtained from this MRI scan are 
explained in detail above.  Initial and post -treatment changes related to tu mor perfusion (slope) 
and permeability  (Ak ep) will be compared  and correlated  with tumor  response  (as determined  on 
unidimensional measurements) using two -sample tests and logistic regression.  
 
The tertiary  objectives  include  evaluating  the expression  patterns of VEGFR -1, -2, and –3 
and their cognate  ligands  (VEGF -A, -B, -C, -D, and P1GF).  These  findings  will be correlated  to 
disease progression and survival using proportional hazards regression and Kaplan -Meier 
methods. Correlations will also be made between initial and post -treatment changes in tumor 
perfusion kinetics (as measured by DCE -MRI) and the tumor expression patt erns of VEGF 
ligands and VEGF receptors.  In addition, robust regression methods will be used to assess the 
relationship between baseline tissue and plasma levels of VEGF ligands and changes in the pre - 
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Pro tocol  
IRB#:  06-114A(6)  
Amended:  12/21/12  
Page  46 of 59  
 and post -treatment levels of VEGF ligand s, VEGFR+ peripheral blood mononuclear cells, the 
proportion of circulating CD133+VEGFR2+ EPCs and CD34+VEGFR1+ HPCs, and HUVEC - 
based functional angiogenic scale.  Correlation between treatment -related changes in the 
HUVEC scale and changes in other variab les measured on peripheral blood and plasma samples 
will be assessed.  Markers of tumor hypoxia (hypoxia inducible factor [HIF -1, carbonic 
anhydrase IX [CA IX], and the glucose transporters Glut -1 and Glut -3, and microvessel density 
[CD31]) will be assesse d on pre -treatment biopsies on a dichotomous scale. These data will be 
correlated with treatment efficacy and initial and post -treatment changes in tumor perfusion 
kinetics  using  logistic  regression  (for binary  data such as treatment  response)  or linear  regression 
(for continuous data such as tumor perfusion kinetics) analyses.  
 
 
17.0 RESEARCH  PARTICIPANT  REGISTRATION  AND  RANDOMIZATION 
PROCEDURES  
17.1 Subject  Registration  
The following  person(s) can  obtain  informed  consent:  
William  Jarnagin,  MD 
Nancy Kemeny, MD 
Yuman Fong, MD 
Peter Allen, MD  
Ghassan  Abou -Alfa,  MD 
Ki-Young Chung, MD 
David D’Adamo, MD 
David Ilson, MD  
 
David Kelsen, MD 
Mary Keohan, MD 
Robert Maki, MD 
Diane Reidy, MD 
Eileen O’Reilly, MD 
Leonard  B. Saltz,  MD 
Gary Schwartz, MD 
Neil Segal, MD 
Manish Shah, MD 
Archie Tse, MD 
Leslie Blumgart, MD  
Michael  D’Angelica,  MD 
Ronald DeMatteo, MD  
 
Confirm  in the electronic medical  record  that the patient  has received  the Notice  of 
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Pro tocol  
IRB#:  06-114A(6)  
Amended:  12/21/12  
Page  47 of 59  
 Privacy  Practice.  This must be obtained  before  the eligibility  confirmation  and obtaining 
of the research informed consent.  
Confirm  eligibility  as defined  in the section  entitled  Criteria  for Patient/Subject 
eligibility.  
Obtain  written  informed  consent,  by following  procedures  defined  in section  entitled 
Informed Consent Procedures.  
Patients must be registered to Step One, pending registration to Step Two before 
undergoing  surgery  in order  to obtain  liver tissue  biopsy  and research  bloodwork.  After 
pump placement, bef ore treatment start, the  Research Study  Assistant will proceed with 
Step 2 of the registration process, thus allowing the patient to commence protocol 
therapy.  
All participants must be  registered through the  Protocol Participant Registration (PPR) 
Office at Memorial Sloan -Kettering Cancer Center. PPR is available Monday through 
Friday  from  8:30am  – 5:30pm  at (646)  735-8000.  The PPR fax numbers  are (646)  735- 
0008 and (646) 735 -0003. Registrations can be phoned  in or faxed. The completed 
signature page of the informed consent form, the completed signature page of the 
Research Authorization and a completed Eligibility Checklist must be faxed to PPR.  
 
Registering  Individual  [Last,  First Name]  
Notice  of Privacy  Status  [Yes,  No, N/A]  
Research Authorization  [Date] 
MSKCC IRB Protocol #  
Attending  of Record  (if applicable)  [Last,  First Name] 
Consenting Professional  [Last,  First Name] 
Informed Consent Date  
Participant’s Full Name  [Last,  First Name] 
Participant’ s MRN  
 
17.2 Randomization  
This is a non-randomized  study.  
 
18.0 DATA  MANAGEMENT  ISSUES  
A Research  Study  Assistant  (RSA)  will be assigned  to the study.  The responsibilities  of 
the RSA include project compliance, data collection, abstraction and entry, data 
reporting, regulatory monitoring, problem resolution and prioritization, and coordinate 
the activities of the protocol study team.  
 
The data collected  for this study  will be entered  into a secure  database.  Source 
documentation will be available to support the computerized patient record.  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Pro tocol  
IRB#:  06-114A(6)  
Amended:  12/21/12  
Page  48 of 59  
 18.1 Quality  Assurance  
Weekly registration reports will be generated to monitor patient accruals and 
completeness  of registration  data.  Routine  data quality  reports  will be generated  to assess 
missing data and inconsistencies.  Accrual rates and extext and accuracy of evaluations  
and follow -up will be monitored periodically throughout the study period and potential 
problems will be brought to the attention of the study team for discussion and action  
 
Random -sample  data quality  and protocol  compliance  audits  will be conducted  by the 
study team, at a minimum of  two times per year, more frequently if indicated.  
18.2 Data  and Safety  Monitoring  
The Data and Safety Monitoring (DSM) Plans at Memorial Sloan -Kettering Cancer 
Center were approved by the National Cancer Institute in September 2001.  The plans 
address the new policies set forth by the NCI in the document entitled “Policy of the 
National  Cancer  Institute  for Data  and Safety  Monitoring  of Clinical  Trials”  which  can be 
found at:  http://cancertrials.nci.nih.gov/researchers/dsm/index.html . The DSM Plans at 
MSKCC were established and are monitored by the Office of Clinical Research.  The 
MSKCC Data and Safety Monitoring Plans can be found on the MSKCC Intranet at: 
http://mskweb2.msk cc.org/irb/index.htm  
 
There are several different mechanisms by which clinical trials are monitored for data, 
safety and quality.  There are institutional processes in place for quality assurance (e.g., 
protocol monitoring , compliance and data verification audits, therapeutic response, and 
staff education on clinical research QA) and departmental procedures for quality control, 
plus there are two institutional committees that are responsible for monitoring the 
activities of  our clinical trials programs.  The committees: Data and Safety Monitoring 
Committee (DSMC) for Phase I and II clinical trials, and the Data and Safety Monitoring 
Board (DSMB) for Phase III clinical trials, report to the Center’s Research Council and 
Instit utional Review Board.  
 
During the protocol development and review process, each protocol will be assessed for 
its level of risk and degree of monitoring required.  Every type of protocol (e.g., NIH 
sponsored, in -house sponsored, industrial sponsored, NCI co operative group, etc.) Will 
be addressed and the monitoring procedures will be established at the time of protocol 
activation.  
 
 
19.0 PROTECTION  OF HUMAN  SUBJECTS  
19.1 Risks  
Treatment -related  risks,  including  those  related  to pump  placement  and chemotherapy,  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Pro tocol  
IRB#:  06-114A(6)  
Amended:  12/21/12  
Page  49 of 59  
 were discussed in Sections 5.0 Hepatic Artery Infusion Pump Background , 12.0 
Toxicities/Side Effects and 13.0 Dose Modification.  
19.2 Potential  Benefits  
Liver -directed chemotherapy  for primary  hepatic malignancy  may increase the like lihood 
of tumor response and may extend life.  
19.3 Possible  Toxicities/Side -Effects  
Treatment -related toxicity was discussed in Sections 5.0 and 11.0.  Toxicity related to 
hepatic artery pump placement was discussed in Section 11.0.  
19.4 Costs  
Patients will be  charged for  physician visits, and routine  laboratory  and radiologic  studies 
required for monitoring their condition.  Patients will not be charged for protocol -related 
correlative study charges, which include the MRI imaging processing quan tification, and 
analysis charge and image processing for the nuclear flow scans, and tissue and blood 
processing charges for laboratory correlative studies.  
19.5 Alternatives  
Patients eligible for this protocol are not candidates for resection.  By virtue of the ir 
disease extent and relatively well -preserved hepatic function, these patients would not be 
considered for hepatic transplantation according to the current guidelines.  These patients 
will have been treated with and failed at least one systemic regimen.  The alternatives to 
the current protocol include systemic chemotherapy of a different type, either with 
standard or investigational agents, or ablative therapy.  None of these options has been 
shown to improve survival.  In addition, many patients will not be eligible for or will  
have failed ablative treatments.  All of these issues will be discussed with the patients.  
19.6 Patient  Safety  
All patients will be monitored in the outpatient clinic and chemotherapy unit, both of 
whic h are staffed by physicians and nurses familiar with clinical trials.  In case of an 
adverse reaction, trained staff is available to provide immediate medical care.  In the 
evenings and on weekends, medical attention is available through the Urgent Care  
Cent er, which is staffed at all times.  Also, the principal investigators or their designees 
are available at all times.  
19.7 Risk/Benefit  Ratio  
The treatment proposed in this study is aimed at patients with very limited, or no, 
effective alternatives.  The investiga tors hope that the proposed treatment will be 
beneficial but this cannot be guaranteed.  However, the investigators believe that the 
proposed treatment is based on sound scientific principles and draws on extensive 
experience from prior human studies.  Every  precaution has been and will be taken to 
ensure patient safety.  
 
19.8 Inclusion  of Children  in Research  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Pro tocol  
IRB#:  06-114A(6)  
Amended:  12/21/12  
Page  50 of 59  
 This protocol/project  does not include  children  because  the number  of children  is limited 
and because the majority are already accessed by a n ationwide pediatric cancer research 
network.  This statement is based on exclusion 4b of the NIH Policy and Guidelines on 
the Inclusion of Children as Participants in Research Involving Human Subjects.  
19.9 Privacy  
It is the responsibility  of the  Research  Staff  to ensure  that protocol  patients have  received 
the Center’s Notice of Privacy Practices.  If the subject has not already done so, MSK 
personnel  must  try to obtain  acknowledgment  before  the patient  participates  in this study.  
MSKCC’s Privacy Office may allow the use and disclosure of protected health 
information pursuant to a completed and signed Research Authorization form.  The use 
and disclosure  of protected  health  information  will be limited  to the individuals  described 
in the Research Authorization form.  A Research Authorization form must be completed 
by the Principal Investigator and approved by the IRB and Privacy Board.  
19.10  Serious  Adverse  Event  (SAE)  Reporting  
All SAEs  must  be entered  into the CRDB  SAE  form  page.  
Any SAE must be reported to the IRB as soon as possible but no later than 5 calendar 
days. The IRB required a Clinical Research Database (CRDB) AE report to be delivered 
to the Institutional  SAE  Manager  (307 East 63rd Street,  1st Floor)  containing  the following 
information:  
 
Fields  populated  from  the CRDB : 
 
• Subject’s  name  (generate  the report  with only initials  if it will be sent outside  of 
MSKCC)  
• Medical  record  number  
• Disease/histology  (if applicable)  
• Protocol  number  and title 
Data  needing  to be  entered:  
• The date the adverse  event occurred  
• The adverse  event  
• Relationship  of the adverse  event  to the treatment  (drug,  device,  or intervention)  
• If the AE was expected  
• The severity  of the AE 
• The intervention  
• Detailed  text that includes  the following  information:  
o An explanation  of how the AE was handled  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Pro tocol  
IRB#:  06-114A(6)  
Amended:  12/21/12  
Page  51 of 59  
 o A description  of the subject’s condition  
o Indication  if the subject  remains  on the study  
o If an amendment  will need  to be made  to the protocol  and/or  consent  form 
The PI’s signature and the date it was signed are required on the completed report.  
 
19.11  Reporting  of SAEs  to Genentech,  Inc. 
All SAE  reports  must  also be forwarded  as soon  as possible  to: 
Genentech  Drug  Safety  
Fax: (650)  225-4682  or (650) 225 -4683  
 
For questions  related  to safety  reporting,  contact:  
 
Genentech  Drug  Safety 
Tel: 1 -888-835-2555  
 
Genentech may contact the reporter for additional information, clarification, or current status of 
the subject for whom an adverse event was reported.  
 
Genentech  Adverse  Event  Reporting  Definitions  
A serious treatment emergent adverse event (STEAE)  is any  sign, symptom or  medical condition 
that emerges during Bevacizumab treatment or during a post -treatment follow -up period that (1) 
was not present at the start of Bevacizumab treatment and is not a chronic condition that is part  
of the patient’s medical his tory, or (2) was present at the start of Bevacizumab treatment or as 
part of the patient’s medical history but worsened in severity and/or frequency during therapy, 
AND that meets any of the following regulatory serious criteria:  
 
• Results  in death  
• Is life-threatening  
• Requires  or prolongs  inpatient  hospitalization  
• Is disabling  
• Is a congenital  anomaly/birth  defect  
• Is medically  significant  or requires  medical  or surgical  intervention  to prevent  one of 
the outcomes listed above  
 
Assessing  Causality:  
Investigators are required to assess whether there is a reasonable possibility that Bevacizumab 
caused or contributed to an adverse event.  The following general guidance may be used.  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Pro tocol  
IRB#:  06-114A(6)  
Amended:  12/21/12  
Page  52 of 59  
 Yes: if the temporal relationship of the clinica l event to Bevacizumab administration makes a 
causal relationship possible, and other drugs, therapeutic interventions or underlying conditions 
do not provide a sufficient explanation for the observed event.  
 
No: if the temporal relationship of the clinica l event to Bevacizumab administration makes a 
causal relationship unlikely, or other drugs, therapeutic interventions or underlying conditions 
provide a sufficient explanation for the observed event.  
 
 
20.0 INFORMED  CONSENT  PROCEDURES  
Consenting professionals are listed in section 17.0.  Physicians qualified to conduct the 
informed consent process must be certified in the protection of human subjects for research. 
Before protocol -specified procedures are carried out, investigators or the ir staff will explain 
full details of the protocol and study procedures as well as the risks involved to the patients 
prior to their inclusion in the trial.  Patients will also be informed that they are free to 
withdraw from the study at any time.  All patie nts must sign an IRB -approved consent form 
indicating their consent to participate.  This consent form will meet the requirements of the 
code  of Federal  regulations,  the Institutional  Review  Board  of this Center.  The consent  form 
will include the following:  
 
• The nature  of the objectives,  potential  toxicities  and benefits  of the intended study.  
• The length of  therapy  and the  likely  follow -up required  
• Alternatives to the proposed therapy.  This will include available standard and 
investigational  therapies.  In addition,  patients  will be offered  an option  of supportive 
care. 
• The name  of the investigator(s)  responsible  for the protocol.  
• The right  of the patient  to accept  or refuse  treatment  and to withdraw  from 
participation in this study.  
 
The original  signed  consent  forms  will become  a part of the patient’s  research  file, stored 
in the electronic medical record.  Each patient will receive a copy of the signed consent 
form.  
 
 
20.1 Resear ch Authorization  
Procedures for obtaining Research Authorization: Before any protocol -specific 
procedures are carried out, investigators and/or designated staff will fully explain the 
details of the protocol, study procedures, and the aspects of patient privacy concerning 
research specific information.  In addition to signing the IRB Informed Consent, all 
patients  must  sign the Research  Authorization  component  of the informed  consent  form. 
The Research Authorization requires a separate set of signatures from the patient.  The 
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Pro tocol  
IRB#:  06-114A(6)  
Amended:  12/21/12  
Page  53 of 59  
 original  signed  documents  will become  part of the patient’s  medical  record,  and each 
patient will receive a copy of the signed documents.  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Pro tocol  
IRB#:  06-114A(6)  
Amended:  12/21/12  
Page  54 of 59  
 21.0 REFERENCES  
1. Fan ST, Lo CM, Liu CL, Lam CM, Yuen WK, Yeung C, Wong J. Hepatectomy for 
hepatocellular  carcinoma:  toward  zero hospital  deaths.  Annals  of Surgery  1999;  229:322 - 
330. 
2. Fong  Y, Sun RL, Jarnagin  W, Blumgart  LH. An analysis  of 412 cases  of hepatocellular 
carcinoma at a Western center. Annals of Surgery 1999; 229:790 -799. 
3. Greenlee  RT, Murray  T, Bolden  S, Wingo  PA. Cancer  statistics,  2000.  Ca: a Cancer 
Journal for Clinicians 2000; 50:7 -33. 
4. El Serag  HB, Mason  AC. Rising  incidence  of hepatocellu lar carcinoma  in the United 
States. New England Journal of Medicine 1999; 340:745 -750. 
5. Patel  T. Increasing  incidence  and mortality  of primary  intrahepatic  cholangiocarcinoma  in 
the United States. Hepatology 2001; 33:1353 -1357.  
6. Weber  SM, Jarnagin  WR, Klimstra  D, DeMatteo  RP, Fong  Y, Blumgart  LH. Intrahepatic 
cholangiocarcinoma: resectability, recurrence pattern, and outcomes. Journal of the 
American College of Surgeons 2001; 193:384 -391. 
7. Leung  TW, Johnson  PJ. Systemic  therapy  for hepatocellular  carcino ma. Seminars  in 
Oncology 2001; 28:514 -520. 
8. Llovet  JM, Ruff P, Tassopoulos  N, Castells  L, Bruix  J, El Hariry  I, Peachey  M. A phase  II 
trial of oral eniluracil/5 -fluorouracil in patients with inoperable hepatocellular carcinoma. 
European Journal of Cancer 20 01; 37:1352 -1358.  
9. Gebbia  V, Maiello  E, Serravezza  G, Giotta  F, Testa  A, Borsellino  N, Pezzella  G, Colucci  
G. 5-Fluorouracil  plus high dose levofolinic  acid and oral hydroxyurea  for the treatment  of 
primary hepatocellular carcinomas: results of a phase II multicenter study of the Southern 
Italy Oncology Group (G.O.I.M.). Anticancer Research 1999; 19:1407 -1410.  
10. Chen  JS, Lin YC, Jan YY, Liau CT. Mitomycin  C with weekly  24-h infusion  of high-dose 
5-fluorouracil and leucovorin in patients with biliary tract and periampullar carcinomas. 
Anti-Cancer Drugs 2001; 12:339 -343. 
11. Poplin  E, Roberts  J, Tombs  M, Grant  S, Rubin  E. Leucovorin,  5-fluorouracil,  and 
gemcitabine: a phase I study. Investigat ional New Drugs 1999; 17:57 -62. 
12. Yang  TS, Lin  YC, Chen JS,  Wang  HM, Wang  CH. Phase  II study  of gemcitabine  in 
patients with advanced hepatocellular carcinoma. Cancer 2000; 89:750 -756. 
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Pro tocol  
IRB#:  06-114A(6)  
Amended:  12/21/12  
Page  55 of 59  
 13. Kubicka S, Rudolph KL, Tietze MK, Lorenz M, Manns M. Phase II study of systemic 
gemcitabine  chemotherapy  for advanced  unresectable  hepatobiliary  carcinomas.  Hepato - 
Gastroenterology 2001; 48:783 -789. 
14. Patt YZ, Hoque  A, Lozano  R, Pozdur  R, Chase  J, Carrasco  H, Chuang  V, Delpassand  ES, 
Ellis L, Curley S, Roh M, Jones DV. Phase II trial of hepatic arterial infusion of 
fluorouracil and recombinant human interferon alfa -2b for liver metastases of colorectal 
cancer refractory to systemic fluorouracil and leucovorin. J Clin Oncol 1997; 15:1432 - 
1438.  
15. Verderame  F, Mandina  P, Abruzzo  F, Scarpulla  M, Di Leo R. Biliary  tract cancer:  our 
experience with gemcitabine treatment. Anti -Cancer Drugs 2000; 11:707 -708. 
16. Sanz -Altamira  PM, O'Reilly  E, Stuart  KE, Raeburn  L, Steger  C, Kemeny  NE, Saltz  LB. A 
phase II trial of irinotecan (CPT -11) for unresectable biliary tree carcinoma. Annals of 
Oncology 2001; 12:501 -504. 
17. O'Reilly EM, Stuart KE, Sanz -Altamira PM, Schwartz GK, Steger CM, Raeburn L, 
Kemeny  NE, Kelsen  DP, Saltz  LB. A phase  II study  of irinoteca n in patients  with advanced 
hepatocellular carcinoma. Cancer 2001; 91:101 -105. 
18. Murren  JR, Peccerillo  K, DiStasio  SA, Li X, Leffert  JJ, Pizzorno  G, Burtness  BA, McKeon 
A, Cheng Y. Dose escalation and pharmacokinetic study  of irinotecan in combination with 
paclitaxel in patients with advanced cancer. Cancer Chemotherapy & Pharmacology 2000; 
46:43 -50. 
19. Adjei  AA, Klein  CE, Kastrissios  H, Goldberg  RM, Alberts  SR, Pitot  HC, Sloan  JA, Reid 
JM, Hanson  LJ, Atherton  P, Rubin  J, Erlichman  C. Phase  I and pharmacokinetic  study  of 
irinotecan  and docetaxel  in patients  with advanced solid  tumors:  preliminary  evidence  of 
clinical activity. J Clin Oncol 2000; 18:1116 -1123.  
20. Bilchik  AJ, Wood  TF, Allegra  DP. Radiofrequency  ablation  of unresectable  hepatic 
malignancies: lessons learned. Oncologist 2001; 6:24 -33. 
21. Wood TF, Rose DM, Chung M, Allegra DP, Foshag LJ, Bilchik AJ. Radiofrequency 
ablation  of 231 unresectable  hepatic  tumors:  indications,  limitations,  and complications. 
Annals of Surgical Oncology 2000; 7:593 -600. 
22. A comparison of lipiodol chemoembolization and conservative treatment for unresectable 
hepatocellular  carcinoma.  Groupe  d'Etude  et de Traitement  du Carcinome  Hépatocellulaire. 
New England Journal of Medicine 1995; 332:1256 -1261.  
23. Atiq OT, Kemeny  N, Niedzwieki  D, Botet  J. Treatment  of unresectable  primary  liver 
cancer  with intrahepatic  fluorodeoxyuridine  and mitomycin  c through  an implantable  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Pro tocol  
IRB#:  06-114A(6)  
Amended:  12/21/12  
Page  56 of 59  
 pump.  Cancer  1992; 69:920 -924. 
24. Meric F, Patt YZ, Curley SA, Chase J, Roh MS, Vauthey JN, Ellis LM. Surgery after 
downstaging  of unresectable  hepatic  tumors  with intra-arterial  chemotherapy.  Annals  of 
Surgical Oncology 2000; 7:490 -495. 
25. Robertson JM, Lawrence TS, Dworzanin LM, Andrews JC,  Walker S, Kessler ML, 
DuRoss  DJ, Ensminger  WD.  Treatment  of primary  hepatobiliary  cancers  with conformal 
radiation therapy and regional chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol 1993; 11:1286 -1293.  
26. Smith GW, Bukowski RM, Hewlett JS, Groppe CW. Hepatic artery infusion of 5 - 
fluorouracil  and mitomycin  C in cholangiocarcinoma  and gallbladder  carcinoma.  Cancer 
1984; 54:1513 -1516.  
27. Seeger  J, Woodcock  TM, Blumenreich  MS, Richardson  JD. Hepatic  perfusion  with FUdR 
utilizing an implantable system in patients with liver primary cancer or metastatic cancer 
confined to the liver. Cancer Investigation 1989; 7:1 -6. 
28. Clavien  PA, Selzner  N, Morse  M, Selzner  M, Paulson  E. Downstaging  of hepatocellular 
carcinoma and liver metastases from colorectal cancer by selective intra -arterial 
chemotherapy. Surgery 2002; 131:433 -442. 
29. Bierman  HR, Byron  RL, Kelly  KH. Treatment  of inoperable  visceral  and regional 
metastases by intra -arterial catheterization. Cancer Res 11 , 236 -236. 1951.  
Ref Type:  Abstract  
30. Breedis  C, Young  C. The blood  supply  of neoplasms  in the liver.  Am J Pathol  1954; 
30:969.  
31. Ensminger  WD,  Rosowsky  A, Raso  V. A clinical  pharmacological  evaluation  of hepatic 
arterial infusions of 5 -fluoro -2-deoxyuridine and 5 -fluorouracil. Cancer Res 1978; 
38:3784 -3792.  
32. Chang AE, Schneider PD, Sugarbaker PH, Simpson C, Culnane M, Steinberg SM. A 
prospective randomized trial of regional versus systemic continuous 5 -fluorodeoxyuridine 
chemotherapy  in the treatment  of colorectal  liver metastases.  Ann Surg  1987;  206:685 -693. 
33. Hohn  DC, Stagg  RJ, Friedman  MA, Hannigan  JF, Jr., Rayner  A, Ignoffo  RJ, Accord  P, 
Lewis BJ. A randomized trial of continuous intravenous versus hepatic intraarterial 
floxuridine in patients with colorectal cancer metastatic to the liver: The Northern 
California oncology group trial. J Clin Oncol 1989; 7:1646 -1654.  
34. Kemeny N, Daly J, R eichman B, Geller N, Botet J, Oderman P. Intrahepatic or systemic 
infusion  of fluorodeoxyuridine  in patients  with liver metastases  from  colorectal  carcinoma  - 
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Pro tocol  
IRB#:  06-114A(6)  
Amended:  12/21/12  
Page  57 of 59  
 A randomized  trial. Ann Intern  Med 1987;  107:459 -465. 
35. Kemeny N, Cohen A, Seiter K, Conti JA, Sigurdson ER, Tao Y, Niedzwiecki D, Botet J, 
Budd A. Randomized trial of hepatic arterial floxuridine, mitomycin, and carmustine 
versus  floxuridine  alone  in previously  treated  patients  with liver metastases  from  colorectal 
cancer. J Clin Oncol 19 93; 11:330 -335. 
36. Martin JK, O'Connell MJ, Wieand HS, Fitzgibbons RJ, Mailliard JA, Rubin J, Nagourney 
DM, Tschetter  LK, Krook  JE. Intra -arterial  floxuridine  vs systemic  fluorouracil  for hepatic 
metastases from colorectal cancer. Arch Surg 1990; 125:1022 -1027.  
37. Rougier P, Laplanche A, Huguier M, Hay JM, Ollivier JM, Escat J, Salmon R, Julien M, 
Audy  JR, Gallot  D, Gouzi  JL, Pailler  JL, Elisa  D, Lacaine  F, Roos  S, Ratman  N, Luboinski 
M, Lasse r P. Hepatic arterial infusion of floxuridine in patients with liver metastases from 
colorectal carcinoma: long -term results of a prospective randomized trial. J Clin Oncol 
1992; 10:1112 -1118.  
38. Kemeny  N, Seiter K, Conti J, et al. Randomized trial of hepatic arterial FUDR, mitomycin 
and BCNU  versus  FUDR alone:  Effective  salvage  therapy  for liver metastases  of colorectal 
cancer. J Clin Oncol 1993.  
39. Kemeny  N, Conti  J, Cohen  A, Campana  P, Huang  Y, Ji  Shi W,  Botet  J, Pulliam S, Bertino  
J. A phase II study of hepatic arterial FUDR, leucovorin, and dexamethasone for 
unresectable  liver metastases  from  colorectal  carcinoma.  J Clin Oncol  1994;  12:2288 -2295.  
40. Stagg  RJ, Lewis  BJ, Friedman  MA, Ignoffo  RJ, Hohn  DC. Hepatic  arterial  chemotherapy 
for colorectal cancer metastatic to the liver. Annals of Internal Medicine 1984; 100:736 - 
743. 
41. Venook  AP, Warren  RS. Regional  chemotherapy  approaches  for primary  and metastatic 
liver tumors. Surgical Oncology Clinics of North America 1996; 5:411 -427. 
42. Verstraete KL, De Deene Y, Roels H, Dierick A, Uyttendaele D, Kunnen M. 
Benign and malignant musculoskeletal lesions: dynamic contrast -enhanced 
MR imaging --parametric  "first-pass"  images  depict  tissue  vascularization  and 
perfusion. Radiology 1994; 192:835 -843. 
43. Salven  P, Mustjoki  S, Alitalo  R, Alitalo  K, Rafii  S. VEGFR -3 and CD133 
(AC133) identify a population of CD34+lymphatic/vascular endothelial 
precursor cell. Blood 101: 168-172, 2003.  
44. Rafii  S, Skobe  M. Splitting  vessels:  keeping  lymph  apart  from  blood.  Nature 
Medicine 9:166 -8, 2003.  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Pro tocol  
IRB#:  06-114A(6)  
Amended:  12/21/12  
Page  58 of 59  
 45. Rafii  S. Vaccination  against  tumor  neovascularization:  promise  and reality.  Cancer  Cell 
2:429 -31, 2002.  
46. Hattori K, Heissig B, Wu Y, Dias S, Tejada R, Ferris B, Hicklin DJ,Zhu Z, Bohlen P, 
Witte L, Hendrikx J, Hackett NR, Crystal RG, Moore MA, Werb Z, Lyden D, Rafii S. 
Placental  growth  factor  reconstitutes  hematopoiesis  by recruiting  VEGFR1  (+) stem  cells 
from bone -marrow microenvironment. Nature Medicine 8:841 -849, 2002.  
47. Heissig B, Hattori K, Dias S, Lyden D, Ferris D, Friedrich M, Hackett NR, Crystal RG, 
Moore MAS, Werb Z, Rafii S. Recruitment of stem and progenitor cells from the bone 
marrow  niche  requires  MMP -9 mediated  release  of Kit-ligand.  Cell 109, 625-637, 2002.  
48. Dias S, Choy M, Alitalo K, Rafii S. Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) -C 
signaling  through  FLT-4 (VEGFR -3) mediates  leukemic  cell proliferation,  survival,  and 
resistance to chemotherapy.  Blood, 99:179 -84, 2002.  
49. Dias S, Shmelkov  SV, Lam G, Rafii  S. VEGF(165)  promotes  survival  of leukemic  cells 
by Hsp90 -mediated induction of Bcl -2 expression and apoptosis inhibition. Blood 
99:2532 -40, 2002.  
50. Lyden D, Hattori K, Dias S, Chadburn A, Heissig B, Marks W, Witte L, Wu Y, Hicklin 
D, Zhu Z, Hackett  NR, Crystal  RG, Moore  MA, Hajjar  KA, Manova  K, Bene zra R, Rafii  
S. Impaired  recruitment  of bone -marrow -derived  endothelial  and hematopoietic  precursor 
cells blocks tumor angiogenesis and growth. Nature Medicine 7:1194 -1201, 2001.  
51. Dias S, Hattori  K, Heissig  B, Lane  Z, Zhu Z, Witt L, Bohlen  P, Moore  MAS,  Rafii  S. 
Inhibition of both paracrine and autocrine VEGF/VEGFR -2 signaling pathways is 
essential to induce long -term remission of zenotransplanted human leukemias. 
Proceedings, National Academy of Sciences, 98, 108057 -10862, 2001.  
52. Salven  P, Hattori  K, Heissig  B, Rafii  S. Interleukin -1 alpha  promotes  angiogenesis  in 
vivo via VEGFR -2 pathway by inducing inflammatory cell VEGF synthesis and 
secretion. Faseb Journal 16:1471 -3, 2002.  
53. Morgan B, Thomas AL, Drevs J, Henning J, Buchert M, Jivan A, Horsfield MA, Mross 
K, B all HA, Lee L, Mietlowski W, Fuxuis  S, Unger  C, O’Byrne K, Henry  A, Cherryman 
GR, Laurent  D, Dugan  M, Marme  D, Steward  WP. Dynamic  contrast -enhanced  magnetic 
resonance imaging as a biomarker for the pharmacological response of PTK787/ZK 
222584, an inhibito r of the vascular endothelial growth factor receptor tyrosine kinases, 
in patients  with advanced  colorectal  cancer  and liver metastases:  results  from  two phase  I 
studies. J Clin Oncol. 2003 Nov 1;21(21):3955 -64. 
54. Dyke J, Panicek D, Healey J, Meyers P, Huvos A, Schwartz LH, Thaler H, Tofts P, 
Gorlick  R, Koutcher  J, Ballon  D. Osteogenic  and Ewing  sarcomas:  estimation  of necrotic 
fraction during induction chemotherap y with dynamic contrast -enhanced MR imaging. 
Radiology 2003;228:271 -278. 
55. Glover  KY, Thomas  MB, Brown  TD, Hoff  PM, Iwasaki  M, Abbruzzese  JL. A phase  II 
study of oxaliplatin and capecitabine (XELOX) in patients with unresectable  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Pro tocol  
IRB#:  06-114A(6)  
Amended:  12/21/12  
Page  59 of 59  
 cholangiocarcin oma,  including  carcinoma  of the gallbladder  and biliary  tract. 
Proceedings, Am Soc Clin Onc (abst. 4123), 2005.  
56. Danso M, Jarnagin WR, Muruganandham M, Schwartz LH, Gönen M, Haviland D, 
Blumgart L, D’Angelica M, DeMatteo R, Kemeny N. Hepatic arterial infusion (HAI) 
therapy in patients with unresectable primary liver cancer: use of dynamic contrast 
enhanced  MRI  to evaluate  response.  Proceedings,  Am Soc Clin Onc (abst.  4129),  2005.  
57. Park JO, Kang  WK,  Kim T-Y, Lee MA, Ahn M-J, Kim H-K, Lee NS, Lim HY, Park BJ, 
Kim JS. A phase II trial of gemcitabine plus cisplatin (GP) in patients with inoperable 
biliary tract cancer (BTC ). Proceedings, Am Soc Clin Onc (abst. 4133), 2005.  
58. Funakoshi  A, Okusaka  T, Ishii H, Yamao  K, Ohkawa  S, Saito  H, Saito  S, Tsuyuguchi  T. 
A multicenter phase II  study  of gemcitabine (GEM) in patients with unresectable biliary 
tract cancer. Proceedings, Am Soc Clin Onc (abst. 4145), 2005.  
59. Shibata S, Yen Y, Doroshow J, Leong L, ,Wagman L, Marx H, Clarke K, Frankel P, 
Lenz  H, Gandara  D. Phase  II study  of oxaliplatin  in patients  with unresectable,  metastatic 
or recurrent hepatocellular cancer. Proceedings, Am Soc Clin Onc (abst. 4161), 2005.  
60. Chang HM, Ryu M -H, Lee J -L, Kim TW, Lee JS, Kim WK, Kang Y -K. Phase II trial of 
gemcitabine  plus capecitabine  in patients  with advanced  biliary  tract cancer.  Proceedings, 
Am Soc Clin Onc (abst. 4173), 2005.  
61. Shin D, Lee SI, Park J, Park SH, Bang  S-M, Cho EK, Lee JH. Systemic  chemotherapy 
with capecitabine, doxorubicin and cisplatin for metastatic hepatocellular carcinoma. 
Proceedings, Am Soc Clin Onc (abst. 4177), 2005.  