    
  
 
 
 
 
 
Post -Market Surveillance Study of the  
Preceptis Medical , Inc. 
Hummingbird TTS ™ Tympanostomy Tube System  
 
 
Protocol Date:  16 Feb 2021  
Revision:  7.0  
 
 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL:  
DO NOT COPY ANY PORTIONS OF THIS DOCUMENT WITHOUT WRITTEN 
PERM ISSION FROM Preceptis Medical , Inc.  
 
 
 
 
__________________________________  
  
 
 
Preceptis Medical , Inc.  
10900 89th Av N, Suite #4 
Maple Grove, MN  55369  USA 
Telephone:  612 -327-4795  
    
Preceptis Medical, Inc.  CONFIDENTIAL  Page 2 
16 Feb 2021  Rev 7.0 
   
INVESTIGATIONAL PLAN  SUMMARY  
1.0 BACKGROUND  
1.1 Device Name  
The Preceptis Medical , Inc. Hummingbird TTS ™ Tympanostomy Tube  System  (H-TTS)   
1.2 Device Description  
The H-TTS is a disposable surgical tool designed to  create an incision in the tympanic membrane and 
insert a ventilation tube ( VT) in one pass down the ear canal , thereby reducing surgical trauma for 
the patient . The VT used with the HTTS is a standard, commercially available Armstrong -style 
ventilation tube.  The H -TTS has received 510(k) clearance from the FDA under (i) general anesthesia 
in August 2014 , (ii) for children under moderate sedation with local anesthesia in April 2015 , and (iii) 
in-office in children 6 -24 months old with local anesthesia in June 2020 .   
1.3 Study Sites  
There will be 4 study sites:  St. Cloud ENT, the Mayo Clinic, Children’s Hospitals and Clinics of MN, and 
the University of Minnesota Children’s Hospital.  St. Cloud ENT will enroll patients prospectively.   
Data from the other three sites will be retrospectively procured from the previous multi -site 
moderate sedation study using data that was not previously submitted to FDA in support of the 510k 
application for use of the H -TTS in children under moderate sedation (K142282).  Th is clinical data 
was procured after K142282 had already been submitted.     
2.0 STUDY  OBJECTIVE  
The study is being initiated per section 522 of the  Food and Drug Cosmetic Act ( post -market 
surveillance ).  The objective of th is study is continued commercial evaluation of the intraoperative 
safety and performance of the H-TTS for the placement of VT in pati ents undergoing a tympanostomy  
procedure  under moderate sedation and local anesthetic.  
3.0 STUDY DESIGN  
3.1 Overview  
The study  will be a multi -site, prospective  and retrospective , treatment -only post -market study 
of the  H-TTS.   The study will be performed in a commercial environment.  Patients  will already 
have  a scheduled tympanostomy procedure  with the H -TTS under moderate sedation and local 
anesthetic .  A minimum  of one hundred  nine (109) subjects will be included  in the study  at 4 
sites , one site prospective ly (St. Cloud ENT) and three sites retrospectively ( the Mayo Clinic , 
Children’s Hospitals and Clinics of MN, and the University of Minnesota Children’s Hospital ).   
3.2 Timeline  
i. Expected enrollment completion date: Feb  2021 
ii. Expected date for final report submission Mar 2021 
 
 
    
Preceptis Medical, Inc.  CONFIDENTIAL  Page 3 
16 Feb 2021  Rev 7.0 
 3.3 Data oversight and analysis  
Data will be collected via an electronic data capture system (EDC) maintained by NAMSA , a 
contract research organization (CRO) .  
Sample size:  
The sample size was chosen to ensure an adequate precision in the estimation of the 
conversion rate. Based on an expected conversion rate of 15%, a sample size of 109 subjects 
will provide an upper, one -sided, Wilson 95% confidence bound that is no more than 6% 
greater than the estimated conversion rate with a probability of approximately 0.80.  
Poolability of prospective and retrospective patients : 
Subjects from the previous multi -site moderate sedation study who were not included in the 
previous 510k (K142282) data will be included  in this data analysis  if they met the following 
criteria:  children 6 months through 5 years of age, who are candidates for placement of VT and 
required use of the H -TTS under moderate sedation and accompanying local anesthetic.  
Poolability of the subjects prospectively enrolled in the  522 study and those retrospectively 
procured  through the multi -site conscious sedation study will be tested using Fisher’s Exact 
test.  The proportion of subjects requiring conversion will be analyzed in a 2x2 table where the 
rows consist of the study from which the subjects information came and the columns are 
whether or not the su bject required conversion.  If the p -value for this comparison is greater 
than 0.15, the data will be considered poolable for the purposes of statistical analysis.  
In addition to assessing poolability of the conversion rates between sites, additional 
comparisons between the sites providing retrospective data and the site providing prospective 
data will be completed.   Specifically, subject age, which is the only commo n demographic, will 
be compared between the combined data from sites supplying retrospective data and the site 
providing prospective data.   Age data will be compared using a two sample Wilcoxon test.  
An ad hoc analysis based on the outcome of any procedure  that was converted will also be 
attempted.  The outcome of converted procedures will be classified as successful or 
unsuccessful and the differences in successful outcomes will be compared between the sites 
providing retrospective data and the site provid ing prospective data.  A Fisher’s Exact Test will 
be used for this comparison.  This analysis is done only on converted cases therefore  it should 
be noted that the sample size for this analysis may be extremely small . 
Rates  will be calculated for the outcome variables  and d etailed summaries for all adverse 
events will be provided .   Statistical summaries will include number, mean, standard deviation 
and range for continuous parameters or frequency and percent for categorical  parameters. No 
formal statistical hypothesis tests are planned.  
Ad hoc  analyses using l ogistic regression models will be used to assess the relationship 
between selected parameters and the outcome of conversion to general anesthesia. The pre -
specified parameters will be assessed individually in univariable model s with a subset of these 
parameters being used in the multi -variate model . The pre -specified parameters are  age, sex, 
weight, type of anesthesia/ sedation, number of ears treated, surgeon experience , surgery 
duration , patient movement, anatomy and lack of visualization . After each parameter has been 
modelled univariately (stage 1) , those  parameters with a p -value less than 0.20 will be included 
in a multivariable model and a stepwise selection proces s will be employed to determine if any 
parameters have a statistically significant association with conversion. The nominal p -value for 
retention in the final reduced model will be 0.05.  
    
Preceptis Medical, Inc.  CONFIDENTIAL  Page 4 
16 Feb 2021  Rev 7.0 
 4.0 STUDY ENDPOINTS  
4.1  The rate of conversion from moderate sedat ion to general anesthesi a, along with surgeon 
experience, the patient and procedure characteristics associated with the decision to convert 
(age, sex, weight, type of anesthesia/ sedation, number of ears treated, surgery duration 
(tympanostomy time for each  ear),  patient movement, anatomy, and lack of visualization ). (Note: 
conversion to general anesthesia is not an adverse event, nor is it considered an additional risk to 
the patient.)  
4.2 The rate of intra -operative and pre -discharge AEs and rates for each  specific t ype of event .   
5.0 ENROLLMENT  
Prospective e nrollment in the study will begin after receipt of Institutional Review Board (IRB) 
approval.  A patient will be considered enrolled when the incision is made in the tympanic membrane 
and delivery of the VT is attempted  with the H -TTS. 
6.0 SAMPLE SIZE  
This study will include  a minimum of 109 treated patients .   
7.0 PATIENT POPULATION  
 Children 6 months through 5 years of age , who are candidates for placement of VT .  
 Required use of the H-TTS under moderate sedation and accompanying local anesthetic.  
8.0 SURGICAL PROCEDURE  
The tympanostomy procedures will take place in a hospital or ambulatory surgery center . The choice 
of anesth esia drugs for moderate sedation will be up to  the attending physicians .  The H-TTS will be 
used to make the myringotomy incision and place the VT. Patients will receive moderate sedation 
and local anesthetic . Per standard sedation procedure, a patient may be converted to  general 
anesthesia if deemed appropriate by the surgeon .  
9.0 CONSENT  AND HIPAA  
Since a ll subjects will be children  6 months  through 5 years of age , an IRB -approved  parental consent 
document will be used  for patients . The study w ill be explained to the parent or guardian prior to 
signing the consent document.  Parents will also sign a HIPAA authorization form . Some sites may 
incorporate the required HIPAA language within the consent document .  
The Consent document is  located in Attachment A . 
10.0  STUDY PROCEDURES  FOR PROSPECTIVE PATI ENTS  
10.1  Summary of Study Procedures  
Documentation of patient eligibility, anesthesia conversions , procedural and immediate post -
operative adverse events will be collected via electronic data capture (EDC).  Investigators will sign 
the CRFs via electronic signatures.  
 
 
    
Preceptis Medical, Inc.  CONFIDENTIAL  Page 5 
16 Feb 2021  Rev 7.0 
 CRFs  Type  of Form  Timing  
#1 Enrollment /Procedure  Time of surgery  
#2 Adverse events  Time of surgery  until discharge  
 10.2 Enrollment/ Surgical Procedure  
Subjects will undergo evaluation at the time of referral or at the time of the procedure to confirm  
that they are candidates for VT placement using the H-TTS under moderate sedation and local 
anesthetic. The type  of anesthesia and reason for conversion to general anesthesia , if needed,  will be 
documented.  Surgery duration will be defined for each ear as the time from when the H -TTS enters 
the ear  until a VT is in place across the tympanic membrane.  
10.3  Adverse Events  
All adverse event s (AE) that occur  from  when  the H-TTS enters the ear  through discharge will be 
reported.   The event type , treatment, severity  and relationship of the event to the procedure or to 
the study device  will be assessed by the surgeon .   
Anticipated adverse events and the definitions for serious adverse events are fou nd in Attachment C. 
Common occurrences (e.g., minor bleeding, purulent discharge) during a tympanostomy procedure 
are not considered AEs.  
10.4  Study Termination  
The study will begin for each patient at the time the H -TTS is first used to attempt delivery of the VT 
and will end at discharge  unless the patient experiences a n intra -operative or immediate post -
operative AE.  The study , for those patients , will end when the AE resolves, or at the study 
termination, 30 days after the last patient is discharged.  All unresolved AEs  will be detailed in the 
final clinical report.  
10.5  Stopping Rules/Safety Monitoring  
If any perceived safety issues arise, the trial may be suspended  and safety data will be anal yzed. If the 
Sponsor and the Site Investigator s agree that the study is safe to continue, the study may be 
resumed.  
10.4  Protocol Modifications  
The Investigator may not modify this protocol without written concurrence from the Sponsor.  
10.5  Study Materials  
Study materials will be provided by the Sponsor.  Sites will be responsible for securing, storage, and 
handling of study materials according to site -specific institutional processes.  
10.6  Parental Satisfaction Survey  
Sites participating in this s tudy may choose to utilize a parental satisfaction survey which is unique to 
their institution.  
 
    
Preceptis Medical, Inc.  CONFIDENTIAL  Page 6 
16 Feb 2021  Rev 7.0 
  
ATTACHMENT A  
 
CONSENT DOCUMENT  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
ATTACHMENT B 
 
CASE REPORT FORMS  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
Preceptis Medical, Inc.  CONFIDENTIAL  Page 2 
16 Feb 2021  Rev 7.0 
 ATTACHMENT C 
 
ADVERSE EVENTS  
 
ANTICIPATED INTRA -OPERATIVE ADVERSE EVENTS /DEFINITIONS  
 
 
 
SERIOUS ADVERSE EVENT DEFINITIONS  
 
1. Event resulted in death  
2. Event was life -threatening  
3. Event required new hospitalization (> 24 hours stay)  
4. Event required prolonged hospitalization (> additional 24 hours)  
5. Event resulted in disability or permanent damage (e.g., permanent hearing loss)  
6. Event required medical or surgical intervention to preclude permanent impairment of a body 
function, or prevent permanent damage to a bo dy structure, due to the use of a medical 
device.  
 
 
 Anticipated AE  Definition  
Acute tube extrusion  During the surgical procedure, a myringotomy incision is completed but 
the VT will not stay in the tympanic membrane.  
Tube dislocation into the 
middle ear space  VT passes completely through the tympanic membrane, falls into the 
middle ear cavity and is unable to be retrieved.  
Ossicular damage  Damage to the ossicular chain resulting in hearing loss.  