COMIRB Protocol  
COLORADO MULTIPLE INSTITUTIONAL REVIEW BOARD 
CAMPUS BOX: F -490 TELEPHONE: 303- 724-1055 FAX: 303- 724-0990 
Project Title:  PTH A nd C alcium R esponses to E xercise in Older Adults Experiment 2 (PACE  
Sr. 2)   
Principal Investigators: Sarah Wherry, PhD & Wendy Kohrt, PhD  
Version Date: 05/13/2024 
 
1. Specific aims and hypotheses  
 Physical activities that load the skeleton through ground-  and joint -reaction forces are essential 
to the maintenance of bone health. Although exercise training is typically thought to have 
favorable skeletal effects, there is evidence that it can sometimes lead to a decrease in bone 
mineral density (BMD). For example, we found a decline in hip BMD of - 1.5% in male  road 
cyclists over a year of training and competition,
1 a rate of loss similar to that of postmenopausal 
women. The decrease was not explained by changes in body weight or composition. Although 
cycling may not be an optimal bone -building activity because it is weight -supported, rather than 
weight -bearing, it r emains unclear why it would cause an accelerated loss of BMD. An exercise 
associated loss of bone mass has also been observed in response to weight -bearing exercise. 
Male college basketball players were found to have a decrease in bone mass over a year of 
training and competition.2 Interestingly, the loss was reversed the following year when additional 
calcium (Ca) supplementation was provided during practices. The mechanisms by which exercise 
training sometimes results in a loss of BMD, even when loading forces are seemingly high (e.g., basketball), are not known, but could include such possibilities as low energy availability, hypogonadism, metabolic acidosis, excess cortisol exposure, or disrupted Ca metabolism. The global aim of the proposed research is to investigate a novel and  plausible mechanism for 
exercise- related bone loss. We postulate that the 
disruption of Ca  homeostasis during acute exercise is 
a trigger for the activation of bone resorption. The 
working model (Fig 1) portends that excessive dermal Ca loss (i.e., sweating) causes a decline in serum ionized Ca (iCa; the  unbound fraction) and triggers an acute increase 
in parathyroid hormone (PTH).
3 PTH can defend serum 
Ca through multiple pathways, including reduced urinary Ca excretion, increased intestinal Ca absorption, and increased bone resorption to mobilize skeletal Ca. If an increase in bone resorption occurs repeatedly over multiple exercise sessions (i.e., exercise training), and is not accompanied by appropriate loading forces to stimulate bone formation, this could lead to a decrease in BMD over time (or diminish the increase in BMD).  
    

1.1 Overarching Hypothesis  
 
The overarching hypothesis for this line of research is that exercise that causes a decline in 
serum Ca as a result of  dermal Ca loss stimulates bone resorption via an increase in  
PTH . The working model for this line of research assumes that an exercise bout can activate 
both bone formation and resorption through distinct mechanisms. Whereas the loading 
characteristics of an activity are the primary determinant of how effectively bone formation is 
stimulated,2 the metabolic characteristics of an activity may determine the extent to which bone 
resorption is stimulated. Under this paradigm, the net effect of exercise training on BMD would reflect the cumulative effects of how individual exercise bouts disrupt the balance between bone resorptio n and formation. Although many studies have assessed changes in markers of  bone 
resorption and formation from the beginning to the end of an exercise training intervention lasting weeks to months, there is a paucity of knowledge of the acute effects of exercise on bone metabolism in humans. We will target this knowledge gap through experiments to exploit the working model by which we postulate exercise activates bone resorption (Fig 1). If the proposed experiment supports the global hypothesis, the long- term goal will be to determine whether the 
acute activation of bone resorption in response to exercise compromises the expected increases in BMD in response to exercise training.  1.2 Speci fic Aims (SA) and Hypotheses (H) 
 
SA2: Determine whether preventing the decline in serum iCa during exercise via intravenous Caadministration (i.e., iCa clamp) prevents an increase in serum PTH and c -telopeptide ( CTX ). 
EXP2 will manipulate serum Ca level during exercise to determine whether this is the trigger for downstream steps in Figure 1. This will be achieved by having participants perform two identical exercise bouts under conditions of saline (Fig 2, left) vs Ca infusion (Fig 2, right). 
 H2: When  compared with saline infusion, 
intravenous Ca infusion during exercise to prevent a decline in serum iCa will attenuate the increases in serum PTH (primary) and CTX (secondary).  
 Interpretation: Our expectation is that preventing a decline in serum iCa during exercise will p revent the 
increase in PTH. The goal of the iCa clamp will be  
to increase serum iCa by ~0.10 mg/dL above the pre -exercise level and maintain this during 
exercise; this should generate a dec rease in PTH (Fig 2, right). If preventing the decline in serum 
iCa during exercise is not fully effective in preventing the incre ases in serum PTH and CTX, this 
will suggest that other mechanis ms, such as increased metabolic a cidosis ,
4 contribute to the 
stimulation of PTH during exercise. Future experiments would challenge this possibility.  
 

2. Significance of this research  
 
Exercise is recommen ded for both the prevention and treatment of osteoporos is. Although there 
have been no randomized controlled trial s to document the anti -fracture efficacy of exercise, 
anima l studies demonstrate that even small increases in bone mass and density (4- 6%) in  
response to mechani cal loading generate very large improvements in bone strength (60- 90%).5 
This is in contrast to pharmacologic the rapies with proven anti -fracture efficacy, w hich generate 
increases in bone strength (10- 20%) in animals that are only proportional to the increases in bone 
mass.6,7 Such findings suggest that exercise is an important strategy for building and maintaining 
bone strength. Accordingly, identifying novel  factors that either com promise or enhance the 
skeletal adaptations to exercise is of high priority.  
 It is our hypothesis that the beneficial effects of exercise on BMD in humans may be attenuated by metabolic responses to exercise, and specifically the disruption of Ca homeostasis under conditions of high dermal Ca  loss. Importantly, despite the vast literature on the effects of 
exercise on bone in rodents, it is unlikely the  proposed mechanism has ever been considered 
because of the lack of a sweating response in rodents. However, as will be discussed further in the Research Strategy section, there is co mpelling preliminary  evidence from our lab and from 
others to support the proposed mechanism as a modifier of bone metabolism  in humans. 
 The new concept being advanced is that the skeletal response to exercise is determined by both the mechanical loading characteristics  and metabolic characteristics  of the exercise. 
Our premise is that exercise can acutely activate both bone formation and bone resorption, and that it is the balance of these  processes with repeated exercise bouts that is a determinant of the 
BMD adaptation to exercise training. Under  this paradigm, activities such as basketball, soccer, 
and cycling could all have similar metabolic characteristics  (i.e., could trigger the cascade in Fig 
1), but the more favorable loading characteristics of basketball and soccer  could explain the 
higher BMD in such athletes than in cyclists.
8 The proposed disruption of Ca homeostasis  
during vigorous exercise training could underlie the increased risk of stress fracture dur ing basic 
training in military recruits .9 This is supported by the finding that Ca (2000 mg/d) and vitamin D 
(800 IU/d) supplements t aken with morning and evening meals reduced the incidence of stress 
fractures in Navy recruits.9 The proposed experiments will develop mechanistic evidence for this 
conten tion and could lead to improved recommendations regarding the timing and dose of Ca 
supplementat ion to prevent unfavorable bone me tabolism responses to exercise. We believe that 
acute increases in PTH and bone resorption during and after exercise could increase risk for  
stress fracture and diminish the potential benefits of exercise on BMD. However, we also recognize that transient increases in PTH in response to exercise could have favorable  effects on 
bone m etabolism, similar to the benefits of transient increases in PTH with pharmacologic 
therapy.10-12 In future intervention trials, it will be important to advance the proposed acute 
exercise studies to more chronic i nterventions that challenge our hypotheses. 
      
3. Research Strategy  
 
SA: Determine whether preventing the decline in serum iCa during exercise via intravenous Ca administration (i.e., iCa clamp) prevents an increase in serum PTH and CTX. The experiment will manipulate serum iCa level during exercise to determine 
whether this is the trigger for downstream steps in Fig 1.  
 
Rationale  
 
The goal is to isolate the decline in serum iCa during exercise as the trigger for the increase in PTH. In 
healthy adults, Ca -sensing receptors in 
the parathyroid glands are exquisite ly 
sensitive to serum iCa. Small increases in iCa in response to Ca infusion result in a decline in serum PTH within minutes (Fig 3).
11 
  Importantly, changes in total serum Ca levels during exercise, which are m ore commonly measured than 
iCa, do not reflect the changes in iCa (Fig 4).
12 Our 
lab is currently in the process of investigating this protocol in younger adults. However, t o the best of 
our knowledge, this will be the fir st study to 
evaluate whether preventing the decline in serum iCa during exercise prev ents an increase in PTH and 
CTX in healthy older adults.  
 H: When compared with saline infusion, intravenous Ca infusion during e xercise to prevent a 
decline in serum iCa will prevent the increases in serum PTH and CTX.  
 In recent discussions with colleagues who study osteocytes, it has been noted that the changes we observe with exercise may be due to osteocytic osteolysis (bone resorption by the osteocyte)
13,14, 
rather than the assumed bone resorption by the osteoclast. Osteocytes are known to contribute to 
the regulation of bone remodeling in response to various stimuli, such as mechanical loading.15 
However, until the discovery of the osteoclast, osteocytes were also believed to be involved in calcium homeostasis in response to acute fluctuations in serum calcium.
14,16 Recently, research 
has resurrected the idea that osteocytes may contribute to mineral homeostasis, but the majority 
of research was done in vitro, which may not have direct implications for human physiology.14 
Studying osteocytic osteolysis in vivo  in humans is challenging because the majority of osteocyte 
research focuses on osteocyte isolation and culture.17,18 However, osteoporosis drugs that have 
direct action on osteoclasts (i.e. bisphosphonates) have the potential to determine the 
contribution of the osteocyte to calcium homeostasis via studies of exercise in older adults. 

 
Although we are generating the scientific basis to suggest that the decline in serum iCa during 
exercise is the driver behind increases in both PTH and CTX, our research to date does not provide information regarding which bone cell is responsible for regulating calcium homeostasis 
and increasing bone resorption during exercise. Given that this research is ongoing in older 
adults, it is possible to recruit participants who are already taking bisphosphonate medications and conduct the clamp experiments in this group. Because bisphosphonates slow bone loss by increasing osteoclast apoptosis, if those on bisphosphonate medication respond similarly to 
healthy older adults not taking bone altering medications (i.e., the decrease in iCa during 
exercise stimulates increases in PTH and CTX), the osteocyte is likely the cell responsible for regulating mineral homeostasis and increasing bone resorption. However, if we do not see similar responses (i.e., a failure of CTX to increase in response to a decline in iCa and i ncrease in 
PTH), this will suggest that the osteoclast is the cell primarily responsible for calcium homeostasis and bone resorption during exercise. Knowing which cell type is responsible for the large and sustained increases in CTX that we observe during long duration, high intensity exercise can help create targeted exercise and supplementation strategies to preserve bone health 
with age. Further, if those on bisphosphonates do respond differently, it will provide preliminary 
evidence to design more pers onalized exercise interventions for those taking those medications.  
 
Accordingly, we will repeat the calcium clamp (methods detailed below) in older women currently taking a bisphosphonate medication to generate pilot data as part of the larger research project . We will compare the iCa, PTH, and CTX responses between the saline and control 
conditions. We will also compare these results to those from the ongoing studies in healthy older adults not taking a bisphosphonate.  
 Approach  
 Study Overview . Healthy older adult men and women will undergo two 1- hour exercise bouts 
with concomitant intravenous infusi on of saline or CaCl2 (Fig 5). Because of a shortage of 
CaCl2, Ca gluconate may be used in some experiments. The exercise bouts will be held approximately 1 week apart.  Participant s will be asked to 
record their dietary intake the day before the first exercise bout  
and repeat that intake the day before the second exercise bout. A pre -exercise meal that 
contains <100 mg Ca will be c onsumed 4 hours before exercise (same meal on both days; Figure 
5). The macronutrient composition of the meal is as follows: CHO/protein/fat of 50%/15%/35%. 
Meals will contain 575 kcal for men and 335 kcal for women (20% of daily caloric intake). 
  
 

Participants  will be instructed to avoid Ca supplements for ~24 hours prior to testing. Blood 
samples will be obtained at 15- min intervals starting 15 min before exercise until 30 min after 
exercis e, and then at 1 hour intervals starting 1 hour after exercise and ending 4 hours after 
exercise for the m easurement of iCa, PTH and CTX. Samples will also be obtained every 5 min 
during exercise for the measurement of iCa (on  the Ca and saline days), which will be used to 
adjust the infusion of CaCl2 or Ca gluconate.   
 
Urine samples will be collected before exercise, immediately after exercise, 2  
hours after exercise and  4 hours after exercise for the measurement of urine Ca concentration.  
 Following completion of the testing visit, participants will receive a boxed lunch.  Subjects . Participants will be healthy older adult women and men aged 60- 80 y who are 
accustomed to vigorous walking (i.e., walking for intervals over 1 hour in duration at an intensity that causes sweating). Volunteers will undergo an orientation session and a screening session. The screening session will include a medical history, physical exam, blood chemistries (complete metabolic panel, complete blood count, TSH, 25- hydroxy- vitamin D (25(OH)D), dual -energy x-
ray absorptiometry (DXA) scan, and graded ex ercise test (GXT) on a treadmill for measurement 
of VO
2peak. Exclusion criteria are described in the section on the Protection of Human Subjects.  
 Blinding and randomization. Because of the nature of the experiments, neither the research team nor the participants will be blinded  because of the need to adjust the rate of CaCl2 or Ca 
gluconate infusion during the iCa clamp. However, samples (other than iCa) will be processed in a way that ensures the individual analyzing the samples will blinded to the test condition. The order of the test conditions will not be randomized. The iCa clamp will be performed first for all participants, for reasons described below.  
 Procedures . 
 GXT. The walking GXT will be done to determine whether the BP/ECG responses to exercise are normal and measure VO
2peak, 
which will be used to determine the exercise intensity for the two exercise bouts. VO
2peak 
will be measured by indirect calorimetry using a TruMax2400 metabolic cart (ParvoMedics, Sandy UT). GXT tests will be supervised by either the study physician (Dr. Rebecca Boxer) or the CTRC PA.  
 DXA.  Participants will undergo a DXA  (Hologic, Bedford, MA)  for the total body, left hip 
(unless metal/injury prevents this; in which case, right hip will be used), and lumbar spine. All 
three scans take approximately 30 minutes to complete, and the total radiation exposure is the equivalent of one day on Earth. All scans will be conducted by a certified technician who has undergone the appropriate training. 

Exercise bout.  The exercise bout will be 1 hour of walking at ~80% of walking VO 2peak. 3-  to 
5-min warm- up at a self -selected intensity will precede the exercise bout and a 3 - to 5- min cool -
down at a self -selected intensity will follow the exercise bout. This intens ity and duration is 
expected to result in a significant decrease in serum iCa and increase in serum PTH (Fig 6). The 
first exercise bout will be the iCa clamp. The volume of fluid infused intrave nously will be 
recorded and the same volume will be delivered in  the same manner during the subsequent saline 
infusi on. Participants will be  allowed to drink water ad libitum .  
Blood sampling and analysis. Two indwelling intravenous catheters will  be positioned 
approximately 30 minutes before the start of exercise for serial blood sampling. Baseline samples will be obtained 15 minutes before exercise , immediately before the start of exercise and then 
every 15 minutes during exercise and for 1 hour following exercise. Additional blood samples 
will be obt ained at 5 -min intervals during exercise for iCa.  
 Intact PTH will be measured using an Immulite two -site EIA (DPC). CTX and will be measured 
by ELISA (Nordic Bioscience). Ionized Ca will be measured using an iSTAT point -of-care 
whole blood analyzer (Abbott Point of Care, Inc; Princeton, NJ). The iSTAT analyzer will also measure hemoglobin and hematocrit, to allow adjustments for hemoconcentration), and pH, a potential modulator of PTH secretion.
4,19 
 Despite the wealth of information generated from preclinical (i.e., animal) studies of the effects of acute exercise or loading on bone metabolism, there have been relatively few studies that measured changes in bone metabolism in response to acute exercise in humans, as review ed in 
2010
20 and since.20-23 Recent studies evaluated the effects of training status23 and exercise 
intensity20 on the metabolic response of bone to acute exercise, but to the best of our knowledge 
no studies have specifically focused on dermal Ca loss as the determinant of the metabolic response. By obtaining blood samples every 15 minutes during and after exercis e, we should be 
able to capture the dynamic regulation of PTH by serum iCa because small changes in iCa trigger an increase in PTH within minutes.
24 Obtaining samples up to 4 hours after exercise 
should be sufficient time to observe a peak in CTX.25 
 Urine sampling and analysis . Urine samples will be collected immediately before and after  
exercise and 2 and 4 hours after exercise. Urinary Ca concentrations will be measured with an ion-sensitive electrode.  
 Data management. Ms. Anusha Guntupalli , who is the data manager for the PI’s research group, 
will create and maintain the database for all of the experiments in a secure centralized SQL server that meets the institutional requirements for security and regulatory compliance. Whenever possible, data will be uploaded electronically from the point of collection (e.g., core lab chemistries) to the database. When key outcomes data must be entered manually, they will be double -entered to provide a means of doing quality assurance checks. The user interface for 
manual entry will be Research Electronic Data Capture (REDCap), which is a secure, web -based 
application developed at Vanderbilt University for building and managing online surveys and 
databases. REDcap is av ailable to  investigators at UCD for use at no charge. Data entered via 
REDcap will eventually be merged electronically into the central SQL server to facilitate data 
analysis. Data verification and integrity for the database are imposed at the field, table , and 
relationship levels within the SQL backend. We have minimized data input error by eliminating 
manual input of most clinical data by using electronic upload. All data are automatically backed 
up to off -site servers on a nightly schedule. Voucher copies of the database and supporting 
documents are copied to permanent media and stored in a secure loca tion on a semi -annual basis.  
 Sample size  estimate and power calculation. The primary outcome for SA2 is the change in 
serum PTH from the beginning to the end of exercise. The  expectation is that PTH will increase 
under the saline condition by 74±63 pg/mL, as observed in previous  studies  using a similar 
exercise intervention (Fig 4).
11 Based on our hypothesis, we expect that serum PTH will be  
unchanged (or decrease) during the iCa clamp condition. Thus, the expected difference in the PTH response under the two experimental conditions is 74±63 pg/mL. Assuming the wit hin-
subject correlation between  exercise bouts is 0.5, a paired t test at the 0.05 level with a sample 
size of 10 w ill provide 91% power to detect this magnitude of difference between conditions. For 
a sample size of 8 (i.e., if  some of the iCa clamps are not successful), the power is 81% . In order 
to distinguish any potential sex dif ferences, w e will enroll both men and women ( 12 men and 12 
women to allow for attrition ). To generate pilot data, we will enroll 6 women taking a 
bisphosphonate medication for comparison with the women who are enrolled in the study and not taking a bisphosphonate. Because the purpose of this is to generate pilot data, sample size is based on w hat is feasible given available funds.  
 Statistical analysis plan. The primary statistical test will be a paired t test comparing the change 
in serum PTH from the beginning to end of exercise in the saline condition with the change in the iCa clamp condition. Secondary analyses will  include similar comparisons of the changes in 
serum iCa and CTX. For the primary and secondary outcomes, we will also estimate the changes in slope over time and the integrated responses using data obtained before, during, and after 
exercise. Depending on the appearan ce of changes over time, we will use linear or nonlinear  
mixed models.
6 Regression analyses will be used to explore the associations of change in serum 
iCa with the changes in serum PTH and CTX in a manner that informs the working model depicted in Figure 1 (i.e., upstream events as mediators of downstream events).
10 Potential 
confounding variables, such as training history or conditioning, will be collected to allow for adjustment of the model, if necessary.  
 For the comparison between the bisphosphonate and non- bisphosphonate users, the primary test 
will be a paired t  test comparing the change in serum CTX from the beginning to end of exercise 
in the saline condition with the change in the iCa clamp condition. Secondary analyses will include similar comparisons of the changes in serum iCa and PTH. Independent t  test analyses 
will be conducted on the calcium and saline conditions between groups (no bisphosphonate vs. 
bisphosphonate) to determine if the responses to the calcium clamp and/or saline infusions are 
different. Given the small sample size, negative findings wil l be interpreted with caution . We 
will be looking for trends and differences between groups to determine in further investigation of 
osteocytic osteolysis in humans is warranted.  
 
Data interpretation and limitations . The expectation is that preventing a decline in iCa will 
prevent an increase in PTH and the activation of bone  resorption. If PTH increases during the 
iCa clamp, this could indicate that: 1) Some factor other than serum iCa  mediated the increase in 
PTH. Because metabolic acidosis is known to stimulate PTH,
4,19 we will measure pH  
to evaluate this possibility; or 2) The iCa clamp was not successful in prevent ing a decline in 
iCa. Serum iCa concentrations will be measured in real -time during the clamp, so there  will be 
immediate knowledge of whether the clamp was successful. Clamps in which the iCa 
concentration dec reases below the baseline level will not be stopped because of the information 
that can potentially be gaine d regarding fluctuations of iCa during exercise and the PTH 
response. However, secondary statistical analyses will be performed using only data from 
successful clamps. If we do not have 8 subjects with successful clamps (needed to achieve >80%  
power), we will enroll additional volunteers; the likelihood that this will occur is low.  
 
For the comparison of the bisphosphonate and non- bisphosphonate users, it is possible that 
calcium homeostasis during exercise is regulated by both the osteoclast and osteocyte. If this is the case, we may see an intermediate CTX response that would indicate diminished osteoclast activity and normal osteocyte activity; this data would be difficult to interpret. However, the goal of this study is to determine if there is a preliminary signal for osteocytic osteolysis. Even if the results are not what we expect, it will provide some indication on if osteocytic osteolysis is a contributing factor to the bone resorption observed during exercise.  
 4. Protection of human subjects  
 4.1. Eligibility criteria  
 Volunteers who are eligible and willing to participate will undergo the procedures described in the Protocol. They will be healthy adults aged 60 -80 y. There will be no discrimination by race 
or ethnicity for enrollment in the trial. Based on the 2010 U.S. Census, the ethnic composition of the Greater Denver Metropolitan area is 21.8% of Hispanic or Latino origin and the  
racial composition is 0.1% Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander, 1.0% American Indian or 
Alaskan Native, 3.8% Asian, 5.2% Black or African American, 78.6% White, 3.5% multi -racial, 
and 7.8% other. Therefore, we plan that ~22% of our participants will be of Hispanic or Latino ethnicity and ~21% will be non- white or multi- racial.  
 Inclusion and exclusion criteria . Healthy adults aged 60- 80 y will be enrolled in the experiments. 
To ensure that participants are familiar  with the type of exercise to be performed, volunteers will 
be recreationally active (i.e., engage in moderate - or vigorous -intensity physical activities at least 
2 days per week based on self -report) and accustomed to walking bouts of 1 hour duration (based 
on self -report).  Volunteers will be excluded from participation for the following:  
 
• use of medications in the past 6 months known to affect bone metabolism (e.g., bisphosphonates, thiazide diuretics, oral glucocorticoids)  
• BMD t score < - 2.5 at the total hip or lumbar spine  
• known disease or condition associated with intestinal malabsorption 
• moderate or severe renal impairment defined as an estimated glomerular filtration rate of <60 mL/min/1.73m
2 based on the Modification of Diet in Renal Disease (MDRD) 
equation 
• chronic hepatobiliary disease, defined as liver function tests (AST, ALT) >1.5 times the upper limit of  normal; if such values are obtained on initial screening and thought to be 
transient in nature, repeated  testing will be allowed  
• thyroid dysfunction, defined as an ultrasensitive TSH <0.5 or >5.0 mU/L; volunteers with 
abnormal TSH  values will be re- considered for participation in the study after follow -up 
evaluation by the PCP with initiation or adjustment of thyroid hormone replacement  
• serum calcium <8.5 or >10.3 mg/dL  
• serum 25(OH)D <20 ng/mL; volunteers with abnormal serum 25(OH)D values may be re-considered for  participation in the study if serum 25(OH)D is >20 ng/mL after vitamin 
D supplementation 
• uncontrolled hypertension defined as resting systolic BP >150 mmHg or diastolic BP>90 
mmHg; participants who do not meet these criteria at first screening will be re -evaluated, 
including after follow -up evaluation by the PCP with initiation or adjustment of anti -
hypertensive medications  
• history of type 1 or type 2 diabetes  
• cardiovascular disease;  subjective or objective indicators of ischemic heart disease (e.g., 
angina, ST  segment depression) or serious arrhythmias at rest or during the graded 
exercise test (GXT) without  follow -up evaluation will be cause for exclusion; follow -up 
evaluation must include diagnostic testing (e.g., stress echocardiogram or thallium stress 
test) with interpretation by a cardiologist  
• diagnosis or history of asthma  
 The addition 6 women enrolled for the bisphosphonate comparison group will meet all the above criteria with two exceptions: 
• must be taking a bisphosphonate for a minimum of one year  
must have a t -score ≥ -3.0 at the total hip or lumbar since osteoporosis is often the diagnostic 
criteria necessary to be prescribed a bisphosphonate  
 
4.2. Potential risks   Exercise: The potential risks of exercise include development of ventricular arrhythmia, myocardial infarction, cardiac arrest, asthma, and death, as well as the less serious  problems of 
injury to tendons, ligaments, joints, and muscles.   Venipuncture: There is a small risk of local hematoma, infection, syncope, and thrombosis associated with intravenous blood sampling.  
 Confidentiality and privacy: The use of questionnaires, interviews, and collection of personal medical information poses a risk to confidenti ality and privacy and may cause embarrassment.  
 4.3. Adequ acy of protection against risks  
a. Recruitment and informed consent  
 Volunteer recruitment . Recruitment of volunteers for the study will rely on strategies that have 
proven successful in attracting volunteers to intervention trials the PI and CO -Is have conducted . 
Our intention is that the study cohort will be comprised of men and women with a race/ethnic  
distribution similar to that of the Denver metropolitan area. The recruitment stra tegies will be 
conducted by the research coordinator and the research assistant and will include:  
 
• radio advertisements – utilization of radio stations that target a demographic (age, race, 
ethnicity)  consistent with the study population 
• newspaper advertisements – the major publication in the Denver Metropolitan has a Health and  Fitness section that runs once per week; advertisements in these sections have 
targeted  appropriate individuals for our previous studies  
• suburban newspaper advertisements – there are many suburban journals in the Metro area that are issued on a weekly or monthly basis; we specifically advertise in those that target neighborhoods in relative proximity to our exercise training facility and those that target persons of under -represented  minorities  
• university advertisements – advertisements will be placed on a quarterly basis in the 
University of  Colorado Denver (UCD) publications that target faculty/staff and alumni  
• e-mail bulletins – system -wide (UCD, University of Colorado Hospital, The Childrens 
Hospital) email advertisements will be distributed quarterlyelectronic networks – 
electronic networks, such as Craigs List, have been a productive source of  study 
volunteers  
• study pamphlets – study pamphlets describing the study will be printed for a variety of purposes (for  study participants to give to family and friends who may be interested in 
participating; to place in the  UCD Primary Care Clinics and other relevant clinics; to 
place in community recreation centers; to  hand out when the investigators give 
community lectures)  
• RECRUIT - this offers a variety of recruitment (RECRUIT) tools which are intended to 
assist research teams in their recruitment efforts by providing a mechanism for teams to connect with UCHealth patients using My Health Connection. We will specifically use Epic Recruitment to recruit potential participants. Patients have the opportunity through My Health Connection to click the “I’m Interested” button and be on a list in Epic where 
interv entionist can further determine eligibility for the study and reach out to them 
through secure messaging. 
 Participants will receive  volunteer remuneration, although this will not be advertised as a study 
benefit . The amount of remuneration in the study will be $ 100 for the completion of the exercise 
test.  
 Informed consent process . The first interaction with volunteers is typically by telephone or 
email, initiated by individuals who have seen or  heard an advertisement and call to learn more 
about the study. A brief screening interview is conducted, either  by phone or by email (form 
containing the questions in the phone script). Callers who meet general study criteria and are interested in learning more about the study are scheduled for an orientation session. The  
consenting process is part of the orientation session, which typically takes ~60 min. Volunteers are either sent a copy of the consent form in advance or are given one at the start of the orientat ion; time is allowed for review of the consent form. Volunteers then meet with a member 
of the research team to a) have the study and what is expected of them explained in detail; b) discuss their reasons for wanting to participate to determine whether they are realistic; c) discuss any practical problems (e.g., sc heduling confl icts) that could interfere with participation; d) have 
their questions answered; and e) demonstrate their ability to provide informed consent by describing their understanding of the major study goals and what is expected of participants.  
 
Volunteers are given a signed copy of the consent form and a signed copy is maintai ned in the 
study chart for each participant. The HIPAA regulations are also explained at this session. 
The member of the research group who will obtain consent and HIPAA authorization from volunteers will have complied with IRB and HIPAA education requirements. The PI will have the responsibility of ensuring that research personnel are prepared to convey information to 
volunteers specific to the study protocol. 
 
b. Protections against risk  
 Plans to minimize risks . 
 Exercise testing: The risks of exercise testing will be minimized by  
adhering to the following strategies:  
 Endpoints for maximal exercise tests : In asymptomatic individuals wh o do not develop 
cardiovascular abnormalities, the endpoint for the maximal exercise tests will be severe f atigue 
that forces cessation of exercise.  
 The criteria that will be used to stop the exercise test before volitional fatigue include thedevelopment of: (a) ST -segment depression of more than 0.2 mV that is eit her horizontal, 
downsloping, or slowly upsloping (less than 1 mV/sec) and lasts for 0.08 sec, or ST -segment 
elevation greater than 0.1 mV; (b) chest pain or discomfort; (c) serious arrhythmias, including multifocal PVCs, ventricular  tachycardia, frequent (>10/min) PVCs or couplets, or sustained 
atrial tachyarrhythmias; (d) A -V block o r other c onduction defects; (e) a fall of systolic blood 
pressure of 10 mmHg or greater from the peak level with increasing exercise intensity; (f)  
diastolic blood pressure above 110 mmHg or systolic above 220 mmHg; (g) dizz iness; (h) ataxic 
gait; and (i) pallor or cyanosis.  Training of personnel : Study personnel assisting with the administration of screening cycling 
tests will have BLS certification. A physician will be immediately available in the facility if not directly administering these screening tests. A physician will interpret ECG and BP responses for all screening cycling tests.  
 Screening of volunteers : To minimize risks of exercise testing in subjects,  testing will be 
conducted only after the volunteer is examined by a clinician and after a resting ECG is  obtained 
and evaluated. During exercise testing, the ECG is monitored constantly and BP is measured frequently. Exercise tests are terminated if any of the ACSM absolute or relative stopping criter ia 
are met. The AHA -recommended emergency equipment and supplies will be available, 
including: automated ele ctronic defibrillator; portable oxygen tank, nasal cannula, ventimask, 
non-rebreathing mask, and appropriate tubing to connect to the oxygen tank; oral airways; bag -
valve -mask hand respirator; syringes and nee dles; IV tubing, solutions, and stand; and adhesive 
tape. The Exercise Research Laboratory operates as a 911 emergency response facility,  
as do al l other UCH outpatient clinics.  
   
Submaximal exercise tests: The intensity for the submaximal, 1- hour exercise tests for all  
experiments will be individualized, based on performance during the maxima l exercise tests, 
such that the relative intensity is similar for all participants. Eligible participants will be 
accustomed to the usual discomforts associated with vigorous exercise. For all experiments, and 
particular ly for the experiment in a warm environment, participants will be allowed (and 
encouraged) to drink water ad libitum . 
 Venipuncture: The risks of hematoma and infection are minimized by having trained personnel perform the procedures using sterile techniques.  
 Confidentiality and privacy: The risks will be minimized by not including personal  identifying 
information on the forms, when possible, and by conducting interviews and collection of personal information in a private setting.  Potential benefits to the subjects and others  
 The benefits to an individual participant in the study are not known. Ther e is potential benefit 
from the assessment of health status by medical history and physical examination, a nd screening 
for cardiovascular disease. The potential benefits of the study to women and men in general could be signif icant. The study is expected to lead to the scientific discovery of the role that 
calcium metabolism during e xercise affects changes in bone mineral density (BMD). This may 
lead to the development of strategies t o ma ximize improvements in BMD with exercise. In light 
of these potential benefits, the risks to subjects are reasonable.  
 Importance of knowledge to be gained 
 The current exercise recommendations for the prevention and treatment of  osteoporosis have 
evolved from preclinical research (i.e., animal models) on the loading characteristics of an activity that are important for the activation of bone formation (i.e., dynamic, high magnitude 
bone -loading forces, high strain rate). The current application is focused on whether vigorous 
exercise also activates bone resorp tion. Importantly, the proposed mechanisms to be investigated 
are thought to be triggered by the dermal loss of  calcium during exercise (i.e., sweating), which 
has not been a ddressed in preclinical studies because most laboratory animals do not lose  
calcium through this route. This line of research could lead to strategies to enhance the benef its 
of exercise on osteoporosis prevention.  4.4 Data and safety monitoring plan  
 The data and safety monitoring for the proposed experiments will be carried out by the research team and an independent Research Monitor. Kerry Hildreth, MD, Assistant Professor of Medici ne in the Division of Geriatric Medicine, will serve as the Research Monitor.  
Responsibilities and Authorities of the Research Monitor  The Research Monitor will: 1) approve the protocol and any changes to the protocol that have an impact on participant; 2) monitor recruitment, consenting, enrollment, and te sting of study 
participants; 3) review anticipated and unanticipated problems; 4) review study progress and data 
quality; and 5) submit reports on these activities and reco mmended action items to the PI, local 
IRB, and sponsor ( if applicable). Meetings with the Research Monitor will be held at least 
annually, or more frequently if requested by the IRB, Sponsor, or Monitor.  
 
Because of the nature of the studies (i.e., mechanistically -driven physiological experiments, not 
clinical trials), the Research Monitor will monitor safety only and not efficacy. In the event the 
Research Monitor determines an experiment should be stopped for reasons of safety, this will be 
communicat ed to the PI, IRB, and Sponsor.  
 The investigators will promptly report all anticipated (i.e., identified in the consent form) and 
unanticipated problems involving risk to subjects or others to the Research Monitor for r eview. 
The monitor will confirm whether the investigators have appropriately categorized the problem as an ticipated or unanticipated. The Research Monitor will have the authority to discuss the 
research protocol wi th the investigators, interview human subjects, and consult with others 
outside of the study about the research.  
  
References  
 1 Barry, D. W. & Kohrt, W. M. BMD decreases over the course of a year in competitive male cyclists. Journal of bone and mineral research : the official journal of the American Society for Bone and Mineral Research 23, 484 -491 (2008). 
https://doi.org:10.1359/jbmr.071203 
2 Klesges, R. C. et al.  Changes in bone mineral content in male athletes. Mechanisms of 
action and intervention effects. Jama  276, 226- 230 (1996). 
https://doi.org:10.1001/jama.1996.03540030060033 
3 Consolazio, C. F., Matoush, L. O., Nelson, R. A., Hackler, L. R. & Preston, E. E. Relationship between calcium in sweat, calcium balance, and calcium requirements. The Journal of nutrition 78, 78 -88 (1962). https://doi.org:10.1093/jn/78.1.78 
4 Lopez, I., Aguilera -Tejero, E., Felsenfeld, A. J., Estepa, J. C. & Rodriguez, M. Direct 
effect of acute metabolic and respiratory acidosis on parathyroid hormone secretion in the dog. Journal of bone and mineral research : the official journal of the American Society for Bone and Mineral Research 17, 1691- 1700 (2002). 
https://doi.org:10.1359/jbmr.2002.17.9.1691 
5 Turner, C. H. & Robling, A. G. Designing exercise regimens to increase bone strength. Exercise and sport sciences reviews  31, 45- 50 (2002).  
6 Mashiba, T. et al.  Effects of suppressed bone turnover by bisphosphonates on 
microdamage accumulation and biomechanical properties in clinically relevant skeletal sites in beagles. Bone  28, 524- 531 (2001). https://doi.org:10.1016/s8756- 3282(01)00414-
8 
7 Hirano, T. et al.  Anabolic effects of human biosynthetic parathyroid hormone fragment 
(1-34), LY333334, on remodeling and mechanical properties of cortical bone in rabbits. 
Journal of bone and mineral research : the official journal of the American Society for Bone and Mineral Research 14, 536- 545 (1999). 
https://doi.org:10.1359/jbmr.1999.14.4.536 
8 Pinheiro, J. C. & Bates, D. M. Mixed- effects models in S and S -PLUS. Mixed -effects 
models in S and S- PLUS  (2000).  
9 Lappe, J. et al.  Calcium and vitamin d supplementation decreases incidence of stress 
fractures in female navy recruits. Journal of bone and mineral research : the official 
journal of the American Society for Bone and Mineral Research 23, 741 -749 (2008). 
https://doi.org:10.1359/jbmr.080102 
10 Baron, R. M. & Kenny, D. A. The moderator -mediator variable distinction in social 
psychological research: conceptual, strategic, and statistical considerations. Journal of personality and social psychology  51, 1173- 1182 (1986). https://doi.org:10.1037//0022-
3514.51.6.1173 
11 Goodman, W. G. et al.  Calcium -sensing by parathyroid glands in secondary 
hyperparathyroidism. The Journal of clinical endocrinology and metabolism  83, 2765-
2772 (1998). https://doi.org:10.1210/jcem.83.8.4999 
12 Bouassida, A. et al.  Parathyroid hormone concentrations during and after two periods of 
high intensity exercise with and without an intervening recovery period. European journal of applied physiology  88, 339- 344 (2003). https://doi.org:10.1007/s00421- 002-
0721- 2 
13 O'Brien, C. A. et al.  Control of bone mass and remodeling by PTH receptor signaling in 
osteocytes. PloS one  3, e2942 (2008). https://doi.org:10.1371/journal.pone.0002942 
14 Wysolmerski, J. J. Osteocytic osteolysis: time for a second look? BoneKEy reports  1, 229 
(2012). https://doi.org:10.1038/bonekey.2012.229  
15 Belanger, L. F. Osteocytic osteolysis. Calcif Tissue Res  4, 1- 12 (1969). 
https://doi.org:10.1007/bf02279101 
16 Teti, A. & Zallone, A. Do osteocytes contribute to bone mineral homeostasis? Osteocytic osteolysis revisited. Bone  44, 11- 16 (2009). https://doi.org:10.1016/j.bone.2008.09.017 
17 Nijweide, P. J., van der Plas, A., Alblas, M. J. & Klein- Nulend, J. Osteocyte isolation and 
culture. Methods Mol Med 80, 41- 50 (2003). https://doi.org:10.1385/1- 59259- 366-6:41 
18 Shah, K. M. et al.  Osteocyte isolation and culture methods. BoneKEy reports  5, 838 
(2016). https://doi.org:10.1038/bonekey.2016.65  
19 Lopez, I., Aguilera -Tejero, E., Estepa, J. C., Rodriguez, M. & Felsenfeld, A. J. Role of 
acidosis -induced increases in calcium on PTH secretion in acute metabolic and 
respiratory acidosis in the dog. American journal of physiology. Endocrinology and metabolism  286, E780- 785 (2004). https://doi.org:10.1152/ajpendo.00473.2003 
20 Scott, J. P. et al.  The role of exercise intensity in the bone metabolic response to an acute 
bout of weight -bearing exercise. J Appl Physiol (1985)  110, 423- 432 (2011). 
https://doi.org:10.1152/japplphysiol.00764.2010  
21 Barry, D. W. et al.  Acute calcium ingestion attenuates exercise- induced disruption of 
calcium homeostasis. Medicine and science in sports and exercise  43, 617 -623 (2011). 
https://doi.org:10.1249/MSS.0b013e3181f79fa8  
22 Barry, D. W. & Kohrt, W. M. Acute effects of 2 hours of moderate -intensity cycling on 
serum parathyroid hormone and calcium. Calcif Tissue Int  80, 359- 365 (2007). 
https://doi.org:10.1007/s00223- 007-9028- y 
23 Scott, J. P. et al.  The effect of training status on the metabolic response of bone to an 
acute bout of exhaustive treadmill running. The Journal of clinical endocrinology and metabolism  95, 3918- 3925 (2010). https://doi.org:10.1210/jc.2009- 2516 
24 Grant, F. D., Conlin, P. R. & Brown, E. M. Rate and concentration dependence of 
parathyroid hormone dynamics during stepwise changes in serum ionized calcium in normal humans. The Journal of clinical endocrinology and metabolism  71, 370- 378 
(1990). https://doi.org:10.1210/jcem -71-2-370 
25 Guillemant, J., Accarie, C., Peres, G. & Guillemant, S. Acute effects of an oral calcium load on markers of bone metabolism during endurance cycling exercise in male athletes. Calcif Tissue Int 74, 407- 414 (2004). https://doi.org:10.1007/s00223- 003-0070- 0 
 