 
 
 
 
 
 
Metabolic Analysis for Treatment Choice in Gestational Diabetes Mellitus  
(MATCh -GDM)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Magee W omens’ Hospital of UPMC  
 
Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
March 1, 2018  
NCT# 03029702  
 
 
 
 
 
PI: Maisa Feghali, MD  
E-mail: feghalim@upmc.edu  
 
  
  
I. Abstract :  
Gestational diabetes (GDM) is a significant clinical and public health burden, affecting over  
400,000 pregnant women in the United States each year. Without adequate treatment, women 
with GDM and their infants are at risk for substantial morbidity. Because of this, experts 
recommend treatment focused on normalization of hyperglycemia to improve out comes. 
However, providers have limited capacity to predict which treatment will achieve glycemic goals. 
This results in a choice based on provider and patient preference and a trial and error approach, 
which can create delays in glycemic control within the  short (8 -10 weeks) window between 
diagnosis and delivery. Maternal and fetal morbidity may be related to a mismatch between 
glycemic pathophysiology and the mechanism of action of glucose lowering agents. In fact, 
GDM is heterogeneous, with predominant in sulin resistance (IR) in 50%, insulin secretion deficit 
(ISD) in 30%, and a combination of both in 20% of women as underlying mechanisms of 
hyperglycemia. This variation in GDM pathophysiology and clinical outcomes supports the use 
of an individualized tre atment approach. The overall goal of this project is to investigate an 
individualized treatment approach for GDM where treatment is based on each woman’s GDM 
mechanism.  
 
 
II. OBJECTIVES  
The overall objective is to perform a pilot study using an individualized treatment approach for 
GDM where treatment is based on each woman’s GDM mechanism.   
 
Aim 1: Evaluate the feasibility of conducting a pilot RCT comparing individualized GDM 
treatment and usual care (treatment chosen by provider and patient without regard for 
pathophysiologic heterogeneity).  
Sixty pregnant women with GDM will be randomized to individualized treatment based on GDM 
mechanism (determined at the time of a 3 -hour oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) vs. usual 
care. We will measure feasibility by the proportion of women who are eligib le, who enroll, and 
who remain in the study.   
 
Aim 2: Inform the design of a larger RCT comparing individualized GDM treatment and 
usual care.  
We will assess the consistency of the GDM causal mechanisms with a repeat OGTT two weeks 
after treatment initiation, adherence to treatment assignment and dose titration, and the 
distribution of adipose -related metabolism covariates (e.g. obesity, lipid pr ofile, free fatty acids). 
This data will be used to inform the study design, data collection procedures and outcomes 
measures of the large -scale RCT.   
 
Aim 3. Assess participant and provider acceptability of an RCT comparing individualized 
GDM treatment an d usual care.  
We will conduct individual semi -structured interviews with 3 groups: (1) pilot participants (n=16), 
to determine acceptability and burden of the study; 2) prenatal care providers (n=15) to 
determine their satisfaction with study procedures, and 3) women wh o are approached but 
decline to participate in the pilot study (n=15) to determine barriers to participation.  
  
 III. PARTICIPANTS  
Inclusion  criteria : 
Pregnant women 18 -45 years old, beyond 24 weeks of gestation, who are scheduled for a 3 -
hour oral glucose tolerance test.   
 
Exclusion  criteria:   
- Preexisting type 1 or type 2 DM  
 
- Multiple gestation  
 
- GDM diagnosis without 3 -hour OGTT  
 
- Oral or IV c orticosteroid use in the past 7 days  
 
- Major congenital anomaly with anticipated preterm delivery  
 
- Allergy to glyburide, metformin or sulfa  
 
- History of severe pulmonary disease(pulmonary requirement for oxygen therapy or daily 
treatment for restrictive of obstructive pulmonary disease)  
 
- History of hepatic disease (LFT's greater than two times of upper normal range)  
 
- History of renal disease (serum creatinine higher than 1.2 mg/dL)  
 
- History of heart failure or myocardial infarction   
 
IV. Outcome  Measures - The primary  objective  of the pilot study  is to evaluate  the feasibility  of 
conducting  a randomized  trial comparing  individualized  treatment  versus  usual  care for GDM.  
Our primary  feasibility  outcomes  will be the number  (proportion)  of women  who are eligible,  
screened,  enrolled  and remain  in the study  at each  outcome  assessment.  As pregnant  women  
are a difficult  population  to retain,  we will identify  any issues  related  to recruitment,  enrollment  
and retention  that will be necessary  to account  for when  determining  the sample  size estimated  
for the future  trial. Reasons  for exclusion  and subject  refusal  will be tracked  at the time of 
screening  by the research  team.  We will assess  reasons  for participant  attrition  through  a follow -
up call or e-mail at the time of withdrawal.  We will determine  the proportion  of women  who 
remain  on the treatment  assigned  at the beginning  of the pilot within  each  arm. We will review  
health  records  to determine  the reason  for changing  treatments.  We will measure  trough  levels  
at the time of the repeat  OGTT.  We will also review  treatment  titration  to assess  the proportion  
of participants  who are titrated  according  to the protocol.   
 
V. Analysis Plan – Demographic characteristics, such as race, age, parity, and insurance will 
be compared between study arms to assess balance and comparability. Descriptive summaries 
will include the mean and standard deviations (or medians and quartiles for skewed 
distributions) for continuous variables and frequencies and proportions for categorical variables. 
Due to the pilot nature of this RCT, hypothesis test ing is not the primary focus, but rather 
estimation within each study arm.  
 
 
VI. Sample  Size - We will introduce  the pilot trial to all women  undergoing  an OGTT.  We plan 
on screening  300 women  to allow  us to include  ~60 women  in the pilot study.  This sample  size 
 will allow  us to have  various  GDM  mechanisms  represented.  Assuming  30 women  within  each  
study  arm and a 5% type I error  rate, we will have  the ability  to estimate  within -arm 95% 
confidence  interval  margin -of-errors  of no more  than 0.18 for each  of our feasibility  outcomes.  
 
VII. Study Procedures:  
 
Screening Visit  
Participants are eligible to be screened if they have scheduled a 3 -hour oral glucose tolerance 
test, as recommended by their primary physician. Her medical records will be reviewed and she 
will be asked questions about her medical history, physical examin ations, laboratory tests, and 
medications to make sure she is eligible for the study.   She will be instructed on procedures to 
follow for the upcoming study visits. This screening visit will be performed by a member of the 
research team at the time of the scheduled 3 -hour oral glucose tolerance test. It is not expected 
to prolong the time of the clinical test.   
 
The 3 -hour oral glucose tolerance test is usually performed following an abnormal glucose 
screen during pregnancy. After completion of the consent form, subjects will undergo a standard 
oral glucose tolerance test in the outpatient laboratory unit. Samples will be collected at 0, 1, 2 
and 3 hours after ingesting a 100g oral glucose load. A standard oral glucose tolerance test 
includes blood collectio n for glucose determination at 0, 1, 2, and 3 hour after ingestion of a 
100g oral glucose load (3mL x4 = 12mL total). The study will include additional sample 
collection at the initial time point (0 hour) for lipid (6mL), and at 0, 1, 2 and 3 hour for insu lin and 
c-peptide (3 mL x4 = 12 mL) determination.   
Additionally, anthropometric measures including triceps, subscapular and suprailiac skin fold 
thickness will be performed.   
 
Materials needed per participant  
• Four  red top tubes for plasma samples (Insulin, C -peptide, free fatty acids)  
• One green top sodium heparin or lithium heparin tube for serum samples (lipid panel)  
• Lange skinfold caliper  
 
1. Blood Samples During screening  visit (Table 1)  
Time Intervals (in mins)   
Insulin; C -peptide, free 
fatty acids,  Lipids  
Tube top  Red Green  
0 X X 
60 X  
120 X  
180 X  
a. At time 0 (c-peptide, insulin, free fatty acids, and lipids)  
 
• Fill a pre -prepared red top tube with 4 mL of blood (insulin, c -peptide, 
free fatty acids)  
1. Gently invert tube five times to avoid clotting  
2. Place sample on ice  
3. Centrifuge sample at 1200 RFG (approximately 3000rpm) at 4°C 
for 15 minutes  
 
 • Fill a pre -prepared light green top tube with 4 mL of blood (lipids)  
1. Gently invert tube five times to avoid clotting  
2. Place sample on ice  
3. Centrifuge sample at 1200 RFG (approximately 3000rpm) at 4°C 
for 15 minutes  
 
b. At times 60, 120 and 180  (c-peptide, and insulin)  
 
• Fill a pre -prepared red top tube with 4 mL of blood (insulin, c -peptide, 
free fatty acids)  
1. Gently invert tube five times to avoid clotting  
2. Place sample on ice  
3. Centrifuge sample at 1200 RFG (approximately 3000rpm) at 4°C 
for 15 minutes  
Sample processing:  
1. Materials and equipment needed per participant  
a. During study visit:  
• 1.5mL cryovials (fill each with 1mL)  
• Labels for cryovials which should include subject ID, visit number and 
sample time following the study’s protocol. P lease indicate light green 
(LG) or red (R)  on the cryovials to help differentiate samples  
 
Cryovial Label appearance  
 
 
 
 
Notes:  
If blood draw exceeds indicated volume, please add any excess volume of blood to red 
top tubes and process the sample according to protocol.  
 
 
The blood specimens will be processed at the CTRC and vials will be transferred  WEEKLY  to 
the central lab for analysis as per Table 2. All remaining vials will be stored at the CTRC at least 
at -70. 
 
Table 2. Number of microvials  to be transferred to the central lab for analysis  
 
Time Intervals (in mins)   
Insulin; C -peptide, 
free fatty acids,  Lipids  
Microvial  Red Green  
0 2 1 
60 2  
120 2  
180 2  
 
 
Women who are diagnosed with gestational diabetes are eligible for the pilot study.   Feghali MATCh -GDM  
OGTT  
Subject (ID)  
Sample time (LG/R)  
  
Study visit #1  
Each woman will meet with a physician from the study team and be randomized to one of two 
study treatment groups: individualized therapy or usual care. A randomization sequence will be 
generated and incorporated into the database prior to recruitment. Perm uted block 
randomization with randomly varying block sizes will be performed by a web -based data entry 
system.  
 
All women diagnosed with GDM will be started with medical nutritional therapy as per clinical 
guidelines. The decision to start treatment is based on home glucose values after 1 -2 weeks of 
medical nutritional therapy. Pharmacologic treatment is recommended  if fasting values are 
greater than 95mg/dl or postprandial values are greater that 140mg/dL. Initiation of usual care 
vs/ individualized treatment will only occur once glucose values exceed these goals despite 
medical nutritional therapy. Following initia tion of pharmacologic therapy, and throughout 
gestation, home blood glucose levels will be reviewed weekly and the doses of drugs will be 
adjusted in person during a clinic visit or via telephone per the email.   
 
In women randomized to individualized treatment, women will be matched to therapy based on 
their GDM mechanism (metformin for predominant insulin resistance, glyburide or insulin for 
predominant insulin secretion deficiency, or a combination of metformin a nd glyburide or insulin 
for a mixed GDM mechanism). Women who are randomized to usual care will receive standard 
counseling about treatment options for gestational diabetes and be prescribed metformin, 
glyburide, or insulin. The medication will be prescrib ed and she will be instructed to take the 
study medications with food to decrease the side effects. Dosing will follow pre -specified 
strategies described in Appendix A and each woman will be given instructions regarding her 
dose upon weekly review of her h ome blood glucose values.   
 
Study visit #2:  
- If not performed within the past 8 weeks, then about a teaspoon (5ml) of blood will be drawn to 
check her hemoglobin level.   
- The study visit will be performed by a member of the research team during a routine  visit to her 
caregiver at Magee -Womens Hospital and should take no more than 10 minutes to complete.   
 
Study visit #3:   
This visit will take place two weeks after initiation of treatment for gestational diabetes. This visit 
will take about 3 -4 hours to complete in the Clinical Translational Research Center (CTRC) of 
Magee Womens Hospital of UPMC.   
 
Participants will come to the CTRC at MWH in the fasting state to complete their OGTT.   
 
A. Prior to the testing written consent will be confirmed  
 
B. Participants will receive the 100g glucose solution and have blood samples drawn at 
0,60,120, and 180 minutes by the CTRC staff.  
2. Materials needed per participant  
• Four  red top tubes for plasma samples (Insulin, C -peptide, free fatty acids)  
• Four  grey top tubes for plasma samples (glucose)  
• One green top sodium heparin or lithium heparin tube for serum samples 
(lipid panel)  
• Lange skinfold caliper  
  
3. Blood Samples During study  visit (Table 3 ) 
Time Intervals (in mins)  Glucose   
Insulin; C -peptide, free 
fatty acids,  Lipids  
Tube top  Grey  Red Green  
0 X X X 
60 X X  
120 X X  
180 X X  
a. At time 0 (glucose, c -peptide, insulin, free fatty acids, and lipids)  
 
•  Fill a grey top tube with 4mL of blood (glucose)  
1. Gently invert tube 5 times to avoid clotting  
2. Place sample on ice  
3. Centrifuge sample at 1200 RFG (approximately 3000rpm) at 4°C 
for 15 minutes  
 
• Fill a pre -prepared red top tube with 4 mL of blood (insulin, c -peptide, 
free fatty acids)  
1. Gently invert tube five times to avoid clotting  
2. Place sample on ice  
3. Centrifuge sample at 1200 RFG (approximately 3000rpm) at 4°C 
for 15 minutes  
 
• Fill a pre -prepared light green top tube with 4 mL of blood (lipids)  
1. Gently invert tube five times to avoid clotting  
2. Place sample on ice  
3. Centrifuge sample at 1200 RFG (approximately 3000rpm) at 4°C 
for 15 minutes  
 
b. At times 60, 120 and 180  (glucose, c -peptide, and insulin)  
 
• Fill a grey top tube with 4mL of blood (glucose)  
1. Gently invert tube 5 times to avoid clotting  
2. Place sample on ice  
3. Centrifuge sample at 1200 RFG (approximately 3000rpm) at 4°C 
for 15 minutes  
 
• Fill a pre -prepared red top tube with 4 mL of blood (insulin, c -peptide, 
free fatty acids)  
1. Gently invert tube five times to avoid clotting  
2. Place sample on ice  
3. Centrifuge sample at 1200 RFG (approximately 3000rpm) at 4°C 
for 15 minutes  
Sample processing:  
2. Materials and equipment needed per participant  
a. During study visit:  
• 1.5mL cryovials (fill each with 1mL)  
 • Labels for cryovials which should include subject ID, visit number and 
sample time following the study’s protocol. Please indicate light green 
(LG), red (R), or grey (G) on the cryovials to help differentiate samples  
Cryovial Label appearance  
 
 
 
Notes:  
1. If blood draw exceeds indicated volume, please add any excess volume of blood 
to red top tubes and process the sample according to protocol.  
2. Protocol allows for a volume up to 1ml of discarded blood for each blood draw  
 
C. Questionnaires: participants will complete a demographic sheet, and brief questionnaires 
assessing lifestyle factors such as physical activity, sleep quality and diet.  
 
D. Height and weight will be measured using standard protocols. Maximum hip circumference 
and skinfold thickness over biceps, triceps, subscapular and supra iliac regions will be 
measured using previously published methods.  
 
E. Once the OGTT is completed, the CTRC staff will assess for any problems with the testing 
and the participant will be discharged  
 
F. The blood specimens will be processed at the CTRC and vials will be transferred  to the 
central  lab for analysis as per Table 4 . All remaining vials will be stored at the CTRC at least at -
70. 
 
Table 4 . Number of microvials  to be transferred to the central lab for analysis  
 
Time Intervals (in mins)  Glucose   
Insulin; C -peptide, 
free fatty acids,  Lipids  
Microvial  Grey  Red Green  
0 1 2 1 
60 1 2  
120 1 2  
180 1 2  
 
  Feghali MATCh -GDM  
Visit#  
Subject (ID)  
Sample time LG/R/G  
 Interviews will occur at the time of the second OGTT for women who are enrolled in the study 
and at the time of refusal for those who opt out. Interviews will focus on participant/provider 
perception of study/treatment and whether they experienced any burdens. 16 participants (8 in 
each group) will be interv iewed along with 10 women who decline to enroll in the study but 
agree to an interview.   
 
Additional study visits:   
During a participant's routine prenatal visits (which typically occur every 1 -2 weeks) with her 
provider that occur between 29 and 40 weeks of gestation, she will also meet with a member of 
the research team who will record information about her blood glucose measurements, 
pregnancy, weight, and any side effects she had since the last study visit. These study visits ill 
occur in her provider's  office and will take no more than 10 minutes to complete.   
 
At the time of labor and delivery  
Delivery:  At delivery, the hospital research nursing team we will measure infant birth weight and 
length at delivery. We will collect umbilical cord venous blood  for assay of c -peptide. We will 
only collect these samples if it is safe to do so and possible to do so based on staffing.  
Air displacement plethysmography will be used to measure body composition (PEA POD; Life 
Measurement Inc, Concord, CA) in the newbor ns within 72 hours post -delivery to provide an 
estimate of percent body fat and lean body mass.   
 
Data abstraction: Once written consent if provided and participant completes the first study visit, 
a member of the research team will conduct at least two pr enatal and two postnatal EHR data 
abstraction from the prenatal and delivery records: type of delivery, prenatal and delivery 
complications. We will also collect information regarding any treatment for gestational diabetes 
as well as the number of ultrasou nds and tests for assessment of fetal well -being (biophysical 
profiles, non -stress tests).   
VIII. Participant withdrawal:  
Participants may withdraw from the study at any time.  
Participant s will be removed from the study if they eat at unscheduled times during/preparing for 
their study visit. This will also interrupt their oral glucose tolerance test. Since subjects will not 
be able to eat pr ior to breakfast on the day of the s tudy visit, the research team will be 
monitoring subjects for signs and symptoms of the hypoglycemia, which include, heart 
palpitations, sweating, hunger, confusion, abnormal behavior, and visual disturbances. If 
subjects develop any of these symptoms, sta ndard hospital protocols will be followed. Risks will 
be evaluated at the study visit through observation of the subject and by eliciting a verbal 
description of the subject’s comfort level.  
 
The principal investigator will terminate the involvement of a given subject in the research study 
if said subject develops a condition that precludes her from having blood draws or upon meeting 
any of the exclusion criteria during study participation. Thi s study will be terminated if the risk -to-
benefit ratio changes (i.e. risk outweighing benefits is identified during the study).   
IX. Compensation:  
Participants will receive $25 for completing the screening procedures, $75 for completing the 
repeat 3 -hour oral glucose tolerance testing, and $50 for completing the cord blood and 
 neonatal body composition assessment. She will be paid a total of $150 for completing all study 
procedures.  
All payments will be made in the form of a UPMC WePay debit card.  
No cash or money orders shall be exchanged between research staff and study participants.  
No compensation will be provided for partial completion of the research study.   
No cash or money orders shall be exchanged between research staff and study participants.  
  
 Skinfold Measurements  
 
- Take skinfold measurements directly on skin -not through clothing  
- Pick up and hold skinfold with thumb and forefinger of one hand (usually left). Apply the jaws 
of the caliper to the skinfold about ¼ to ½ an inch from the fingers holding the fold.  
- Measure all skinfold measurements on the right side . Do not release the fingers holding the 
fold. The caliper should only be used to measure the thickness of the fold, not to hold the skin 
folded. Any pressure placed on the caliper jaws as a result of their holding the skinfold in a 
folded state will resul t in an incorrect higher reading.  
- Record skinfold measurements to the nearest tenth of a millimeter (0.1 mm)  
- The protocol mandates that the skinfold consist of a double thickness of skin and 
underlying adipose (fat) tissue  
- Do not take a skinfold measurement reading if you cannot construct a fold that has two 
thicknesses of skin and underlying fat. Exhibits below depict examples of a correct and 
incorrect skinfold, respectively.  
- If you are unsure if you have pinched only skin and no underlying muscle tissue, ask the subject 
to flex the muscle while you have a pinch.  
 
 
Correct technique  
 
 Incorrect technique  
 
 
 
Triceps 
fold 
 
At the level of 
the mid -
point 
between the 
acromiale 
(lateral 
edge of the 
acromion 
process, 
e.g. bony tip 
of shoulder) and the radial  (proximal and lateral border of the radius bone, approximately 
the elbow joint), on the mid -line of the posterior (back) surface of the arm (over the triceps 

 muscle).  
The arm should be relaxed with the palm of the hand facing forwards (supinated).  
A vertical pinch, parallel to the long axis of the arm, is made at the landmark.  
-  

 Subscapular fold 
o Landmark: the lower angle of the scapula (bottom point of shoulder blade)  
o If there is difficulty finding this landmark, get the subject to reach behind their back with 
their right arm, while feeling for the movement of the scapula  
o The pinch is made following the natural fold of the skin, approximately on a line running 
laterally (away from the body) and downwards (at about 45 degrees).  
 

 Suprailiac fold 
- Landmark: immediately above the iliac crest (top of hip bone), on the most lateral aspect 
(side).  
- The fold is directed anteriorly and downward in line with the natural fold of the skin. The 
right arm should be held across the body to keep it away from the measurement area.  
 
 

 Metabolic Analysis for Treatment Choice for Gestational Diabetes Mellitus (MATCH -GDM)  
 
Screening Phone Script  
 
Thank you for calling to find out more about this research study.  My name is _________ and I 
will be telling you more about the study.  
 
The purpose of this research study is to determine the best way to choose medications to treat 
pregnancy -induced diabetes (called gestational diabetes). In usual care, medications to treat 
gestational diabetes include insulin, metformin and glyburide. They are used for treatment of 
diabetes in preg nant and non -pregnant patients. Each of these medications targets a pathway of 
diabetes and recent studies suggest that women have different pathways for gestational diabetes. 
We are proposing to match medications to treat gestational diabetes with a woman ’s unique 
pathway.  You may be eligible to take part  in this study because you are being tested for 
gestational  diabetes and may be  expected to need medications.  
 
This study includes one screening visit, a study visit and measurements after delivery and to be 
done here at Magee. The screening visit includes additional blood draws at the time of your 3 -
hour oral glucose test that was requested by your physician. If y ou are diagnosed with diabetes 
then you are eligible to continue in the study. During the course of the study, we will perform 
research tests and procedures such as drawing blood samples from a vein in your arm, 
performing brief physical exams, recording y our medical history and other research 
measurements, and asking you to complete a repeat 3 -hour oral glucose test 2 weeks after 
starting treatment. We also will collect blood samples at the time of your labor and delivery of 
your baby and assess the fat co ntent of your newborn before you leave the hospital.  
 
You will be compensated for your participation in this research study and could receive up to 
$150 for completing all portions of the study.  
 
Does this sound like something you would be interested in participating in?  
(If No):  Thank you very much for calling.  
 
(If Yes):  Before enrolling people in this study, we need to determine if you meet the eligibility 
criteria.  If it is alright with you, I would like to ask you a series of questions.  You do not have 
to answer these questions, and you need to know the pur pose of these questions is only to 
determine whether you are eligible for this study.  All information that I receive from you, 
including your name and any other identifying information, will be strictly confidential and kept 
under lock and key.  Please ke ep in mind that these are only a sampling of the inclusion and 
exclusion criteria.  There are other criteria, including the results of the screening blood work,  
that may make you ineligible for participation.  
 
Do I have your permission to ask you these questions?  
 
(If No):  Thank you very much for calling.  
 
(If Yes, ask the following questions):  
 (Date and time permission granted: _________ ; Interviewer signature:  _________ ____) 
 
How old are you?  
*Must be between 18 -45 years of age*  
 
The answers of these questions must be answered “Yes”:  
 
Are you pregnant with one baby at this time?  
 
Are you beyond 24 weeks’ of pregnancy?  
 
Has your doctor recommended a 3 -hour glucose test to check for diabetes during this pregnancy?  
 
 
This question must be answered “No”:  Are you taking any medications for the gestational 
diabetes yet?  
 
Was everything normal on your baby’s ultrasound?  
 
Do you have a history of diabetes outside of pregnancy?  
 
Have you taken any steroids by mouth or through injection in the past 7 days?  
 
Do you have an allergy to Glyburide, Metformin or Sulfa?  
 
Do you have any significant hepatic disease?  
 
Do you have congestive heart failure or a history of an MI?  
 
Do you have any severe pulmonary disease?  
 
 
Please check:   
 
___Volunteer is NOT ELIGIBLE to be screened for this study.  
 
(If NOT ELIGIBLE):  Thank you for your interest, but you are not eligible for this study.  The 
information that I collected from you will be destroyed.    
 
___Volunteer is ELIGIBLE to be screened for this study.  
 
(If ELIGIBLE):  You are eligible to participate in the study.  Would you like to schedule your 
first study visit?  
(If No): Thank you for calling.  
 
(If Yes): (Schedule the Volunteer)  
  
Do you have any questions at this time?  
 
Subject’s Name:________________________ Phone:_______________  
 
Date Scheduled:________________________  Time of Appointment:____________  
Phone Script reviewed by:____________________  
  
 APPENDIX  A 
Study  Protocol  – Treatment  Algorithms  
 
 
 
 
 

 BIBLIOGRAPHY  
 
1. Flegal KM, Carroll MD, Kit BK, Ogden CL. Prevalence of obesity and trends in the 
distribution of body mass index among US adults, 1999 -2010. Jama. 2012;307(5):491 -
497. 
2. Casey BM, Mele L, Landon MB, et al. Does Maternal Body Mass Index Influence 
Treatment Effect in Women with Mild Gestational Diabetes? American journal of 
perinatology. 2014.  
3. Langer O, Conway DL, Berkus MD, Xenakis EM, Gonzales O. A comparison of glyburide 
and insulin in women with gestational diabetes mellitus. The New England journal of 
medicine. 2000;343(16):1134 -1138.  
4. Kahn BF, Davies JK, Lynch AM, Reynolds RM, Barbour LA. Predictors of glyburide 
failure in the treatment of gestational diabetes. Obstetrics and gynecology. 
2006;107(6):1303 -1309.  
5. Moore LE, Clokey D, Rappaport VJ, Curet LB. Metformin compared with glyburide in 
gestational diabetes: a randomized controlled trial. Obstetrics and gynecology. 
2010;115(1):55 -59. 
6. Rowan JA, Hague WM, Gao W, Battin MR, Moore MP, Mi GTI. Metformin versus insulin 
for the treatment of gestational diabetes. The New England journal of medicine. 
2008;358(19):2003 -2015.  
7. Catalano PM, Drago NM, Amini SB. Longitudinal changes in pancreatic beta -cell 
function and metabolic clearance rate of insulin in pregnant women with normal and 
abnormal glucose tolerance. Diabetes care. 1998;21(3):403 -408. 
8. Holst JJ, Knop FK, Vilsboll T, Krarup T, Madsbad S. Loss of incretin effect is a specific, 
important, and early characteristic of type 2 diabetes. Diabetes care. 2011;34 Suppl 
2:S251 -257. 
9. Muscelli E, Mari A, Casolaro A, et al. Separate impact of obesity and glucose tolerance 
on the incretin effect in normal subjects and type 2 diabetic patients. Diabetes. 
2008;57(5):1340 -1348.  
10. Froslie KF, Roislien J, Qvigstad E, et al. Shape information in repeated glucose curves 
during pregnancy provided significant physiological information for neonatal outcomes. 
PloS one. 2014;9(3):e90798.  
11. Froslie KF, Roislien J, Qvigstad E, et al. Shape information from glucose curves: 
functional data analysis compared with traditional summary measures. BMC medical 
research methodology. 2013;13:6.  
12. Morbiducci U, Di Benedetto G, Gaetano L, Kautzky -Willer A, Pacini G, Tura A. Predicting 
the metabolic condition after gestational diabetes mellitus from oral glucose tolerance 
test curves shape. Annals of biomedical engineering. 2014;42(5):1112 -1120.  
13. Durnwald C, Huston -Presley L, Amini S, Catalano P. Evaluation of body composition of 
large -for-gestational -age infants of women with gestational diabetes mellitus compared 
with women with normal glucose tolerance levels. American journal of obstetrics and 
gynecology. 2004;191(3):804 -808. 
14. Matthews DR, Hosker JP, Rudenski AS, Naylor BA, Treacher DF, Turner RC. 
Homeostasis model assessment: insulin resistance and beta -cell function from fasting 
plasma glucose and insulin concentrations in man. Diabetologia. 1985;28(7):412 -419. 
15. Catalano PM, Kirwan JP. Clinical utility and approaches for estimating insulin sensitivity 
in pregnancy. Seminars in perinatology. 2002;26(3):181 -189. 
16. Huston Presley L, Wong WW, Roman NM, Amini SB, Catalano PM. Anthropometric 
estimation of maternal body composition in late gestation. Obstetrics and gynecology. 
2000;96(1):33 -37. 
 17. Sweeting AN, Ross GP, Hyett J, et al. Gestational Diabetes Mellitus in Early Pregnancy: 
Evidence for Poor Pregnancy Outcomes Despite Treatment. Diabetes care. 
2016;39(1):75 -81. 
18. Cypryk K, Vilsboll T, Nadel I, Smyczynska J, Holst JJ, Lewinski A. Normal secretion of 
the incretin hormones glucose -dependent insulinotropic polypeptide and glucagon -like 
peptide -1 during gestational diabetes mellitus. Gynecological endocrinology : the official 
journal of the International Society of Gynecological Endocrinology. 2007;23(1):58 -62. 
19. Lencioni C, Resi V, Romero F, et al. Glucagon -like peptide -1 secretion in women with 
gestational diabetes mellitus during and after pregnancy. Journal of endocrinological 
investigation. 2011;34(9):e287 -290. 
20. Catalano PM, Huston L, Amini SB, Kalhan SC. Longitudinal changes in glucose 
metabolism during pregnancy in obese women with normal glucose tolerance and 
gestational diabetes mellitus. American journal of obstetrics and gynecology. 
1999;180(4):903 -916. 
21. Hebert MF, Ma X, Naraharisetti SB, et al. Are we optimizing gestational diabetes 
treatment with glyburide? The pharmacologic basis for better clinical practice. Clinical 
pharmacology and therapeutics. 2009;85(6):607 -614. 
22. Scifres CM, Abebe KZ, Jones KA, et al. Gestational Diabetes Diagnostic Methods 
(GD2M) Pilot Randomized Trial. Maternal and child health journal. 2014.  
 
  
 Metabolic Analysis for Treatment Choice in Gestational Diabetes Mellitus (MATCh -GDM)  
 
PI:_Maisa Feghali (412 -270-1058, feghalim@upmc.edu)  
 
MATCh -GDM_ Form 1: Sample data  
 
Participant ID: ______________  
 
Date: _____________  
 
 
Research staff collecting data (initials):  
 
 
 Time of blood draw  Time of specimen 
processing  Number of 
cryovials  
0    
60    
120    
180    
 
 Metabolic Analysis for Treatment Choice in Gestational Diabetes Mellitus (MATCh -GDM)  
 
PI:_Maisa  Feghali (412 -270-1058, feghalim@upmc.edu)  
 
MATCh -GDM _ Form 2: Anthropometric data  
 
Participant ID:_ _____________  
 
Date: _____________  
 
Research staff collecting data (initials):  
 
 
Weight: ________________kg  
 
 
Height: ________________cm  
  
 
 
Skinfold thickness:  
 
Triceps fold: _______________mm  
 
 
Subscapular fold: _______________ mm  
 
 
Suprailiac fold: _______________ mm  
 
 
 
 