Cover	letter	for	[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]	Protocol	ID	17.101	Protocol	title	Feasibility	of	Aromatherapy	in	an	Awake	Craniotomy	Environment	Date:	November	21,	2020		The	document	listed	as	Protocol	Synopsis	reflects	the	full	Study	Protocol	and	Statistical	Analysis	Plan.	As	this	was	a	feasibility	study,	we	did	not	prepare	a	formal	study	protocol	or	statistical	analysis	plan.			Thank	you,		Richard	A	Rovin,	MD			
		Protocol	Summary		Title	A	Feasibility	Study	of	Lavender	Aromatherapy	in	an	Awake	Craniotomy	Environment	Principal	Investigator	Richard	A	Rovin,	MD	Research	Question(s)	Is	it	possible	to	utilize	lavender	aromatherapy	during	awake	craniotomy	Study	Aims	and	Hypotheses	H0:	Aromatherapy	is	technically	feasible	during	awake	neurosurgical	procedures	Aim	1:	To	determine	the	percent	of	patients	who	would	consent	to	participate	Aim2:	To	determine	the	study	completion	rate	for	the	consented	patients	Primary	Endpoint(s)	1. The	number	of	patients	consenting	to	participate	2. The	number	of	patients	completing	the	study	Secondary	Endpoint(s)	1. Anxiety	before	and	after	lavender	aromatherapy	intervention	2. Pain	before	and	after	lavender	aromatherapy	intervention	3. Patient’s	expectation	of	lavender	aromatherapy	4. Patient	satisfaction	with	lavender	aromatherapy	Study	Design	Open	label,	single	arm	Study	Population	Inclusion	Criteria:	an	adult	patient	undergoing	clinically	indicated	cranial	neurosurgical	procedure	Exclusion	Criteria:	allergy	to	lavender	(Lavandula	angustifolia);	aversion	to	lavender	scent;	history	of	asthma	or	COPD;	pregnancy;	history	of	contact	dermatitis	following	exposure	to	cosmetic	fragrances	Treatment	Inhalation	of	lavender	from	a	nasal	inhaler,	prior	to	the	start	of	surgery	and	every	30	minutes	thereafter,	or	if	requested	by	the	patient	Method	of	Randomization	N/A	Sample	Size	Calculation	N/A	Outcome	Measures	VAS-A,	VAS-P,	expectancy	questionnaire,	POPM	tool	Statistical	Analysis	Demographic	characteristics	were	noted	using	appropriate	descriptive	statistics	for	all	
categorical	and	continuous	variables.	As	both	VAS-A	and	VAS-P	were	assessed	multiple	times	for	the	same	patients,	mean	scores	of	these	measures	were	compared	using	the	repeated	measures	analysis	of	variance	(ANOVA),	including	multivariate	analysis	of	variance	(MANOVA)	tests	in	the	general	linear	model.	Expectancy	questionnaire	responses	were	analyzed	using	a	2-sided,	paired	t-test.	Mean	POPM	scores	were	compared	using	an	independent	t-test.	An	alpha	of	0.05	was	used	for	all	statistical	tests,	and	all	analyses	were	done	using	SAS®	9.4	(SAS	Institute	Inc.,	Cary,	NC).		Interim	Analysis	N/A	Subgroup	Analysis	N/A	Safety	This	trial	used	the	U.S.	Department	of	Health	and	Human	Services’	Common	Terminology	Criteria	for	Adverse	Events,	Version	4.0	(published	May	28,	2009;	revised	June	14,	2010)	for	toxicity	and	adverse	event	reporting.	Closure	The results will be submitted to medical meetings and peer reviewed journals 	