2017-0057 
January 9, 2019  
Page  1 
A Wi ndow of Opportunity Phase II Stu dy of Pembrolizumab in Patients  with Bladder Canc er 
Undergoi ng Radic al Cystectomy 
Princ ipa
l Investi gator: Dr. Neema Navai 
Assista
nt Professor  
Department of Urology 
UT M. D. Anderson Canc er Center  
1515 Holcombe Blvd. 
Unit 13 73 
Houston, TX 77030 
nnavai@mda nders on.org  
Co-PI: Dr. Arlene Siefker-Radtke  
Associate P rof essor 
Department of Genito urinary Medic al Onc ology 
UT M. D. Anderson Canc er Center  
asiefker@mda nderson.org  
Proprietary Information of MD Anderson
2017-0057 
January 9, 2019  
Page  2  
  
 
1.0 
 
 
 
Abbrevi ated Title  
A Window  of Opportunity Study of Pembrolizumab in 
Patients with Bladder  Cancer Undergo ing Radi cal 
Cystectomy  
Trial  Phase  2 
 
 
Clinical Indi cation  
Window  of Opportunity ther apy in patients who undergo 
radical cystectomy  without prior  chemothera py for both 
muscle invasive and non-muscle invasive bladder cancer 
Trial  Type Safety and prelimi nary efficacy study  
Name  of drug Pembrolizumab  (Keytruda®) 
Route  of administration IV 
Treat ment dosage  200 mg x 2 cycles 
Num ber of participants 20 
Estimated enrollment 
period  
12 months 
Estimated duration of 
trial  
24 months 
Duration of Participation Up to 25 weeks 
 
2.1 TRIAL DESI GN 
 
2.2 Trial Design  
 
T
his is an open-label window of opportu nity Phase II safety a nd prelimi nar y ef ficacy st udy in 
patients with u rot helial carcinoma (either non-muscle invasive or muscle i nvasiv e) that are  
scheduled to undergo ra dical cystectomy without prior neo adjuvant systemic chemotherapy. 
MD And erson employs a risk based approach to iden tif y those patients who require  
neoadjuvant chemotherapy prior to ra dical cystectomy, however ma ny patien ts fail to meet 
these preselect ed criteria (non- urothelial histology,  palpab le 3-di mension al mass,  
hydronephrosis, or lymphovascular invasion ), are  medically ineligible, or ref use 
chemotherapy. Ad ditionally, those pa tients  who harbor high risk non-muscle i nvasive bladder  
canc er who fail prior BCG do not require neoadjuvant ch emothera py prior to cystectomy. For  
the purpose of this  study, patients w ho fall into any of these cat egories will be eligible an d 
treat ed with p emb rolizumab during the routi ne waiting peri od (6-8 w eeks) bet ween 
diagnostic evaluation and ra dical cystectomy. 
Proprietary Information of MD Anderson
2017-0057 
January 9, 2019  
Page  3  
  
 
This st udy is divided in to 3 phases; the Scree ning Phase, the Treatme nt Phase, and the Follow- 
up Phase (post-surgery). All patien ts who sign  an informed consent will enter into the  
Screening Phase, where eligibility c rit eria will  be review ed and patie nts will  undergo a seri es 
of screeni ng procedures. Once all eligibility c riteria have b een met, the patient will  move int o 
the Treatment Phase, w hic h will  consist in two treatmen ts of ‘window of oppor tunity’ 
pembrolizumab followed by cystectomy. In the Follow- up Phase (post-surgery), patie nts will 
have
 follow up vis i ts 30 a nd 90 days after surgery. 
 
2.1.1 Dosing 
 
In the Treatment Phase, a stan dard 200 mg dose of pembrolizumab will  be tes ted f or safety 
and adverse events. T he study  coho rt will consist of a total of 20 patients in a sing le arm who 
will receive 200 mg of pembrolizumab every 3 weeks for a total of two cycles at weeks 1 an d 
4
 by IV infusion. These patien ts will be fol lowed f or safety assessmen ts 3 weeks after receipt 
of their second dose (w eek 7 ±3 days ). The following stopping rules will  apply on a rolling  
basis: if ≥ 3 pa tients experience a drug-rela ted grade 4 adverse event includi ng bowel 
perforati on or any drug-related grade 3 skin or gastroin testinal adverse event without clinical 
im
proveme nt within 2 w eeks of st udy drug disc ontin uation and/or initiation of cor ticost eroid 
thera py to treat the adverse event, no ad dit ion al patients  will be enrolled (see Section 5.3 for  
addition al stopping rules that apply). Onc e patients have received a max i mum of two doses,  
they will  undergo surgery at or around w eek 8. An asse ssment of tumor r esponse will not be 
made prior to radical cystectomy. 
 
2.1.2 Correlative Studies 
 
All
 participants will be required to partic ipate in t he collection of blood and tissue sample for  
banking a nd future research studies. Up to 60  mL of blood will be coll ected at each of t he 
followi ng time points: baseline or pre-treatmen t, after t he first cycle of treatment,  after the 
second cycle of trea tment a nd post cys tectomy. 
 
We will also collect arc hival tiss ue fr om a newly o btained core or excisional  biop sy of a tumor 
lesion. Newly-obt ained is defined as a specimen ob tained up to 6 w eeks (42 days) prior t o 
initiation of treatment on w eek 1. Su bjects for whom newly-obtained s amp les ca nnot be 
provided (e.g. inaccessible or subject safety concer n) may  collect tiss ue from a previously 
archived specimen. Additionally, archival tissue from t he surgic al specimen at t he time o f 
cystectomy will also be collecte d. 
 
 
 
 
Laboratory assays will be used to explo re our hypothesis that there will  be markers of immune  
activation/bi ologic r esponse in the tumors  of patien ts treated with pembrolizumab as 
c
ompared to control untreated tumor samples fr om similar pa tients or the same patient (i f 
tissue is available). This will i nclude, b ut not be limit ed to, studying  sig nals of anti -canc er 
Proprietary Information of MD Anderson
2017-0057 
January 9, 2019  
Page  4  
  
 
immu nological activity by evaluating the frequency of CD4 and CD8 T c ells in tumor tissu es 
(pre a nd post-therapy or u ntreated and treated cohorts). We will also evaluate tissue f or 
signals of biomark er activity by eval uating surgic al specime ns for established a nd not-so- 
established mar kers of response to pembroli zumab (e.g. TILS, PD-1 and PD-L1 levels)  
compared to pre-treatment biopsy samples. Imm une monitori ng as a com pone nt of interna l 
discovery studi es will incl ude b ut not limited to ev aluation of C D4 and C D8 T cells in periphera l 
blood and avail able tum or sampl es as previously published[1-4]. 
 
In addition, pre a nd po st-treatment tumors will be assigned to i ntrinsic basal a nd lumina l 
subtyp es by whole geno me mRNA expression profiling (with assistance of collaborat or David 
McConkey, PhD). Briefly, tumor areas will be macrodissected from 10-micron unstaine d 
f
ormalin-fixed, para ffi n- embedded (FFP E) slides using an H&E template mark ed by the 
collaborator path ologist. RNA will  be isolated using Roche High Pu re FFPET kit s, RNA quali ty 
and puri ty will  be analyzed by Nano Drop ND-1000 a nd an Agilent Bioanalyzer, and ge ne 
expression profiling will  be performed on 40-100 ng of RNA using Illu mina’s DASL platform a s 
described previously[5]. Slid es will be scanned wi th Bead Sta tio n 50 0X and sign al intensiti es 
will be quantified wi th GenomeStudio (Illu mina, Inc .). Quantile normalization in the Li nea r  
Models for Microarray Data (LIMM A) package in t he R language en vironment will  be used to 
normali ze the data, and tumor subtype assignments will be performed usi ng the one nearest  
neighbor (o neNN) classifier described previously [6]. Additionally, we will collabora te with 
M
erck Research Lab oratories (MRL) in looking at PDL1/PD1 a nd their panel of ge ne 
expression signatures of T-cell activity, APC activit y, etc. using, for example, t he nanostring 
platform. Blood for co rr elative s tudies will be ban k ed at MDACC; no specime ns are  
anticipated to be sent to Merck. 
 
Lastly we plan explora tory correlative studies t o examine the role of the human microbiome  
on Pembroliz umab efficacy and safety. To this end we plan to obtain pre treatme nt and post 
treatment microbio me s amples for further c orrelative  study. These will i nclude collec tio n of 
feces a nd urine at both timepoints. These studies come on the heels of recent publications 
im
plicati ng t he microbiome on disease re ponse to a nti PD1 therapy [ 10]. These studie s 
demonstrated a predictive pa ttern in the micro biome of melanoma pa tients treated with anti 
P
D1 therap y. The analysis of urinary and fecal microbiom es in the current study will  serve as 
backgrou nd to es tablish a pattern cu rrently unknown in bladder canc er therap y. 
 
2.1.3 Duration of S tudy  
 
It is an ticipat ed tha t 24 mont hs will be required to complete accrual and complete t he follow- 
up phase for those en rolled. T he prim ary analysis will  be performed when the last enrolle d 
patient completes foll ow-up. The end of the study will occur at t he same ti me as the prima ry 
analysis. No interim analys es are plan ned. 
 
2.1.4 Numb er of S ubjects 
Proprietary Information of MD Anderson
2017-0057 
January 9, 2019  
Page  5  
  
 
Twen ty patients will be treated if no dose li mit i ng toxicities (DLT) are enco unt ered. 
 
2.1.5 Study Population 
 
Patie nts with a diagn osi s of urothelial carci noma of the bladder, both non-m usc le invasive  
(NMIBC) and muscle i nvasive (MI BC) disease w ho are planned to undergo radic al cystectomy,  
without neoadjuvant chemothera py, will be eligible for enrollme nt. The s tudy popula tion will 
be enriched with those patien ts in whom primary BCG thera py has fail ed for high risk N MIBC. 
Patie nts who are either not eligible for, refuse, or do not risk stratify (based on sta ndard MD 
Anders on criteria) for neoadjuva nt chem otherapy will  be eligible. Thos e patients pretreated  
with convention al neoadjuvant ch emothera py prior to radic al cys tectomy will not be  
included. 
 
2.1.6 Study Drug Dose a nd Mode of Adminis tra tion: 
 
Two Dr ug Product (DP) dosage forms a re available f or pembroliz umab: a w hite to off-whi te 
lyophilized powder, 50 mg/vial,  and a liquid , DP 1 00 mg/vial, both in Type I glass vials 
intende d for sing le use only. A single dos e of dr ug will be used in the trial at 200 mg,  with 
a
dministrati on at two time points (w eek 1 and w eek 4). The drug formulatio ns and 
administrati on details are listed belo w: 
 
 P embrolizumab Po wder for Solution for In fusion, 50 mg/vial is rec onsti tuted with 
sterile water for injecti on prior to use. P embrolizum ab DP is fo rmulated with L- 
h
istidi ne as bufferin g agent, polysorbate80 as surfactan t, sucrose as stabilizer/tonicity  
modifier, and hydrochloric acid(HCl) and/ or sodium hydroxide (NaOH) for p H 
a
djustment (if necessary ). 
 
 
 
 
 P embrolizumab Solu tion for Infusion 100 mg/vial is a l iquid DP a nd has the i dentical 
formulation as  that of t he recons tituted lyophilized vial. Both dr ug produ ct dosage  
forms are stored und er refrigerated conditions (2 °C - 8°C). 
 
The product after reconstitution with sterile water f or injec tion a nd the liquid dru g p roduct  
are a clear to opalescent solution w hich may con tain proteinace ous and extra neous 
parti culates. T he reconstituted l yophilized product and the liq uid product a re intended for I V 
a
dministration. The reconstitut ed DP solution or the l iquid DP can be further dil uted with 
n
ormal saline in IV co ntainers ma de of polyvin yl chlori de (PVC) or non-PVC material. 
Reconstitut ed vials should be immediately  used to prepare the i nfusion solu tio n in the IV bag 
and the infusion solu tio n should be immediately administere d. If n ot used immediately, vials 
a
nd/or IV bags m ay be stored at 2-8 °C for up to a c umulati ve time of 20 hours. If refrigera ted, 
the vials an d/or IV bags should be allowed to equilibrate to room temp erature prior to 
subsequent  use.  Pembrolizumab  solutions  may  be  stored  at  room  temp erature  for  a 
Proprietary Information of MD Anderson
2017-0057 
January 9, 2019  
Page  6  
  
 
cumulative time of up to 6 hours. This  includes room temperature storage of reconstituted  
or liquid DP solution in vials, ro om tem pera ture storage of infusion solution in t he IV bag an d 
the durati on of infusio n. Additional  informa tio n c an be found in the P harmacy Manual. 
 
2.1.7 Criteria for Evalua tion 
 
Safety Measure: Safe ty will be eval uated for all treat ed patie nts using t he Nation al Canc er 
Institute (NCI) Common Termin ology Criteria for Adverse Events v4.0 (CTCAE). Sa fety 
assessmen ts will be based on medical review of adverse event reports a nd the resul ts of vital 
sign measurements, physical examina tions, a nd clinic al l aboratory tests. T he incidence o f 
adverse events will be tabulated and reviewed for potential significance a nd clinical 
im
portance. 
 
Efficacy Measure: Tr eatment efficacy of patien ts treat ed with pembrolizu mab  will be through 
histo pathologic examination of the final radical cystectomy  specime n. Those patients with 
N
MIBC w ho achie ve a complete r esponse (pT0) a nd those wi th MIBC w ho are found to harbor  
only res idual N MIBC (≤ pT1) will be considered responders. 
 
Biolo gical Activi ty: Tissue imm une response a nd activation will be evaluat ed as describe d 
earlier. This will inclu de a comparison of p ost-treatment tissue to pre-treatment tissue from 
the same patient when available a nd to similar patien ts when not. 
 
3.1 OBJECTIVES AND HYPOTHESES 
 
3.2 Primary Objective a nd Hy pothesis  
 
3.1.1 Primary Objective  
 
 To  characterize t he safety profile of pembroli zum ab in patien ts with uro thelia l 
carcinoma undergoing ra dical cystectomy. 
 
3.1.2 Hypothesis  
 
Pembrolizumab c an be safely  administered as a ‘window of opp ortunity’ monotherapy in 
patients underg oin g radic al cystectomy for bladd er cancer. 
 
3.2 Seconda ry Objectives and Hy pothes is 
 
3.2.1 Seconda ry Objectives  
 
 To explore a nti-canc er immu nological activity by evalua tin g surgic al specimens for  
evidence of post-treatment l ymphoc ytic infil tration and residual tumor compared to 
pre-treatment biopsy samples. 
Proprietary Information of MD Anderson
2017-0057 
January 9, 2019  
Page  7  
  
 
 To  explore biomark er activity by evalua ting surgic al specimens and blood s am ples for  
establi shed and not-so-establish ed markers of response to pembrolizumab. 
 
 To  report the tumor yi eld and s ufficiency of tum or for immunological and biomarker  
activity 
 
 To exami ne the interaction of the human  microbiome and pathologic r esponse to 
Pembrolizumab 
 
3.2.2 Hypothesis  
 
Tissue and blood markers will co rr elate a nd hel p predict response to therapy and provide  
biologic markers of activity. Su fficient tumor tissue will  be available in most patients to assess 
the planned markers. 
 
4.1 BACKGROUND AND R ATIONALE  
 
4.2 Backgrou nd 
 
Refer to the Investiga tor’s  Brochure (IB)/approved lab eling for detailed backgroun d 
information on pem broli zum ab. 
 
4.1.1 Pharmaceutical a nd Therape utic Background  
 
The importance of intact immune surveillance in controlli ng outgr owth of neoplastic 
t
ransforma tion has b een known for decades. Accumu lating evidence shows a correlatio n 
betwe
en tumor-i nfiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) in canc er tissue and favorable prognosis in 
various malignancies. In p articul ar, the presence of CD8+ T-cells a nd the ratio of CD8+  
effector T-cells / FoxP3+ regulatory T-cells seems to correlate with imp roved prognosis an d 
long-term surviv al in ma ny solid tumors. 
 
The PD-1 receptor-ligand interaction is a major pa thway hijack ed by tumors to suppress 
immu ne control. T he normal  function of PD- 1, expressed on the cell surface of activated T- 
cells under healt hy conditions, is to down-mod ulate unwanted or excessive  immu ne 
responses, incl uding autoimmune reactions. PD-1 (encoded by the gene Pdcd1) is an Ig 
superfamily member relat ed to CD28 a nd C TLA -4 w hich has been sh own to negatively  
regulate antigen receptor signali ng upon engage ment of i ts ligands (PD -L1 and/or PD-L2). T he 
structure of mu rine PD-1 has be en resolved. PD-1 and family  members  are type I  
tran smembra ne glycoprotei ns containing an Ig Variable-type (V-type)  domain r esponsible f or 
ligand binding a nd a cytoplasmic  tail w hich is responsible for the bi nding of signaling  
molecules. T he cytoplasmic tail of PD-1 contai ns 2 tyrosine-based signaling motifs, an 
imm
unoreceptor tyrosine-based in hib ition motif (I TIM) a nd an immu nor eceptor tyrosine- 
based  swi tch  moti f  (ITSM).     Followin g  T-cell  stimulation,  PD- 1  rec ruits  the  tyrosine 
Proprietary Information of MD Anderson
2017-0057 
January 9, 2019  
Page  8  
  
 
phosphatases SHP-1 and SHP-2 to t he ITSM motif within its c yto plasmic tail, leadi ng to the 
dephosphoryl ation of effector molecules such as CD3ζ,  PKCθ and ZAP70 which are involve d 
in the CD3 T-cell signal ing cascade. T he mec hani sm by w hich PD-1 down modulates T-cell 
respons es is similar to, but distinct from that of C TLA-4 as both molecules regulate a n 
overlap ping set of signaling prot eins. PD-1 w as shown to be expressed on activate d 
lymphocytes incl uding peripheral CD4+ a nd CD8+ T-cells, B-cells, T regs and Na tura l Kill er 
cells. Expressi on has al so been shown during thymic development on CD4-CD8- (double  
negative) T-cells as well as subse ts of mac rophages and dend ritic cell s. The ligands for PD-1  
(PD-L1 and PD-L2)  are con stitutively expressed or can be induc ed in a v ariety of cell types, 
including non-hematopoietic tissues as well as in various tumors. Both ligan ds are type I  
tran smembra ne recepto rs containi ng both IgV- and IgC-like domai ns in the extracellular 
region a nd contain s hort cytoplasmic regio ns with no k nown signali ng motif s. Binding of 
either PD-1 ligand to PD-1 i nhibit s T-cell activation triggered through t he T-cell receptor. PD- 
L1 is expressed at low levels on vario us non- hematopoietic tissues, most notably on vasc ular 
endotheliu m, whereas PD-L2 prote in is only detec tably expressed on antigen-presenti ng cells 
found in lymphoid tissue or chronic i nflammatory environments. PD- L2 is t houg ht to contro l 
immu ne T-cell activation in lymp hoi d organs, whereas PD- L1 serves to dampen unw arranted  
T-cell func tion in peripheral tissues. Although healt hy organs express  little (if an y) PD-L 1, a 
variety of cancers were d emonstra ted to express abun dant levels of this T-cell in hib itor. PD- 
1 
has b een suggested to regulate tumor-specific T-cell expan sio n in subjects with melanoma 
(ME
L). This sugges ts that the PD-1/PD-L1 pat hway plays a c ritical role in tumor immune  
evasion a nd should be considered as an attractive target f or therapeutic intervention. 
 
Pembrolizumab is a p otent a nd highly selective hum anized monoclonal anti body (mAb) of 
the IgG4/kap pa isotype designed to directly block the interaction betw een PD-1 a nd its 
ligan
ds, PD-L1 and PD-L2. Pembrolizumab has recently b een appr oved in the U nited S tates 
for t he treatme nt of patien ts with unresectable or metas tatic mel anoma a nd disease  
progression followi ng ipilumumab and, if BRAF V6 00 mutation positive, a BRAF inhi bit or. 
 
4.1.2 Preclinical and Clinical T rial Data 
 
Becau se of the success of P embrolizumab against advanc ed melanoma, there is con siderable  
enthusiasm th at Pem brolizumab can also be used to treat advanced u rothelial carcinoma o f 
the bladder. A recent Phase 1b trial demonstrated that Pembrolizumab thera py had anti- 
tumor activity wi th an acceptable safety profile in patients with locally advanc ed or 
metastatic u rothelial cancer [7]. Furthermore, a recent Phase III trial demonstrated that for  
patients  with advanc ed urothelial canc er that had recurred or progressed on primary  
plati num-based ch emotherap y, Pembroli zumab treatment co nferred a signifi cantly lo nge r  
overall surviv al with a l ower ra te of treatment-relat ed adverse events compared to secon d 
line c hem otherapy[8]. These positive results for Pembrolizumab in t he advance disease state  
are encouraging,  yet to date, the role of Pembrolizum ab in a neoadjuva nt setting prior t o 
radic al cystectomy h as  yet to be investigate d. 
Proprietary Information of MD Anderson
2017-0057 
January 9, 2019  
Page  9  
  
 
For f urther details, refer to the Invest iga tor’s  Brochure for Preclinic al and Clinic al data. 
 
4.2 Rationa le 
 
4.2.1 Rationa le for the T rial and Sele cted Su bject Population  
 
Urot helial c arcinoma of the bladder is a common malignancy notable for frequen t 
recurrenc es (non-muscle invasiv e) and l ethality (muscle invasive). Alt hough low grade an d 
stage disease can be adeq uately co ntrolled via local endoscopic resectio n, the mo re 
aggressive forms of the disease re quire surgic al r emoval of t he bladder wi th or without t he 
addition of platinum based chemotherapy. 
 
 
Whereas t he recomme ndation f or ra dical cystectomy in patients with muscle invasive  
bladder canc er (MIBC) is routine, for those with non-m uscle invasive (NMI BC) disease surgical 
removal of the bladder is generally reserved for those pat ients with high risk disease or those 
who have failed initial ther apy wi th intravesical therap y. Such pa tients are freq uently treate d 
with intravesical c hemotherapy (less c ommon) or immunotherapy (more common) wi th BCG, 
the agent with the strongest known activi ty for high risk NMIBC. E fficacy f or initial 
p
resentation of N MIBC c an approach 70%. Urothelial carcinoma c an be therefore effectively  
treat ed with immunothe ra py. 
 
Despi te the success, a signi ficant number of tumors progress to invasive urothelial 
carcinomas following intravesical therapy. Patien ts who develop r ecurrent N MIB C face  
limit ed therapeutic al ternatives and t hus necessitate radic al surgery. F or these patients, an d 
a
 subset of those with MIB C w ho are either i neligible f or effective c hemothe rapy or harb or 
localiz ed disease w hich may  be cured by surgery alone the administrati on of neoadju vant 
chemothera py is not necessary. In this stu dy we will test t he hypothesis that pem broli zuma b 
can be 
safely administer ed as a ‘wind ow of oppor tunity’ monothera py in patien ts treated f or 
NMIBC or MIBC wi th radic al cystectomy. 
 
4.2.2 Rationa le for D ose Selection/Reg imen/M odification  
 
An open-lab el phase I tri al (Protocol 001) is being conducted to eval uate the safety an d 
clinic al activity of single  agent pembroli zumab. T he dose escalation portion of this trial 
eval
uated three dose levels, 1 mg/k g, 3 mg/k g, and 10 mg/k g, administered every 2 w eeks 
(
Q2W) in subjects with advanc ed solid tumors. All three dose levels were well tolerated and 
no 
dose-li miting toxicities were observed. This  first in human study of pembrolizuma b 
showed evidence of t arget engageme nt and o bjective evidence of tumor size re duction at  
all dose levels (1 mg/k g, 3 mg/kg a nd 10 mg/kg Q2W). No MTD (maximum tolerat ed dose) 
has been ide ntifie d to date. Recent data from other clinic al studies wi thin the 
pembrolizumab program has shown that a lower dose of pem broli zum ab and a less  
frequent schedule may  be sufficient for target engageme nt and cli nical activity. 
Proprietary Information of MD Anderson
2017-0057 
January 9, 2019  
Page  10  
  
 
 
 
PK data analysis of pembrolizumab administer ed Q2W and Q3W showed slow systemic 
c
learanc e, limited volume of distrib ution,  and a lo ng half-life. Pha rma codynamic da ta (IL-2  
release assay) suggested that peripheral targ et engageme nt is durable (>21 days ). This 
early PK and pharmac odyna mic da ta provid es scientific rationa le for testing Q3W dosing  
schedule. 
 
A popula tion pharmacokinetic analysis h as been performed using serum concentrati on time  
data from 4 76 patients. Within t he resul ting  populati on PK model, clearance and volume  
parameters  of pembrolizumab were found to be dependent on body w eight. The 
relati onship between cl earance a nd body weigh t, with an allome tric expo nent of 0.59,  is 
within the range observed f or other antibodies and would su pport bo th body weight  
normalized dosi ng or a fixed dose across all body weights.  P embrolizumab has be en foun d 
to have a wide thera peutic range bas ed on the melanoma in dic ati on. The differences in 
exposu re for a 200 mg fixed dose regim en relative to a 2 mg/kg Q3W b ody  weight based 
regimen are anticipat ed to remain well wi thin the established exposure margins of 0.5 – 5.0 
for pembrolizuma b in the melanoma indica tion. The exposure margi ns are based on the  
notion of similar efficacy and safe ty in melanoma at 10 mg/kg Q3W vs. 2 mg/kg Q3W  (i.e. 5- 
fold higher dose and exposu re). T he populati on PK evaluation reveal ed that there w as no 
significant impact of tum or burden on exposure. In ad dit ion, exposure w as similar betwee n 
the NSCLC and melanoma in dic a tions. Therefore, there are no an ticipated c hanges i n 
exp
osure betw een different in dic ati on se ttings. 
 
The rationale for further exploration of 2 mg/kg a nd compa ra ble doses of pembrolizumab i n 
solid tumors is based o n: 1) similar efficacy and safe ty of pembrolizu mab  when dosed at 
either 2 mg/kg or 10 mg/kg Q3W in mela noma patients, 2) the flat expos ure-response  
relati onshi ps of pembroli zumab for bo th efficacy and safety in the dose ranges  of 2 mg/kg  
Q3W to 10 mg/kg Q3W, 3) the lack of effect of tumor burden or indicati on on distributio n 
behavior of pembrolizu mab  (as assessed by the populati on PK model) and 4) t he assumption 
that t he dynamics of pembroli zum ab ta rget engageme nt will n ot vary meaningfully wit h 
t
umor type. 
 
The choice of the 200 mg Q3W as an appropriate dose f or the switch to fixed dosi ng is based 
on simulations performed using the populati on PK model of pembroli zum ab showing tha t the  
fixed dose of 200 mg every 3 w eeks will provide exposures tha t 1) are optimally consiste nt 
with those obtain ed with the 2 mg/kg dose every 3 w eeks, 2) will maintain individual pa tient 
exposures i n t he exposure range establishe d in melanoma as associated with maximal 
e
fficacy response a nd 3) will main tain individual patien ts exposure in the exposure range  
establi shed in melanoma that a re well tole rated a nd safe. 
Proprietary Information of MD Anderson
2017-0057 
January 9, 2019  
Page  11  
  
 
A fixed dose regimen will simpli fy the dosi ng regimen to be more convenient for p hysician s 
a
nd to reduce potential f or dosing errors. A fixed dosing scheme will also reduce complexi ty 
in the logistic al chain at treatme nt facilities a nd reduce wastag e. 
 
4.2.3 Rationa le for E ndpoin ts 
 
4.2.3.1  Efficacy End points 
 
Although dr ug efficacy is not a primary objective of the study, effec ts on the tumor will be  
evaluat ed for both descriptive prese ntation and to aid in i nformi ng study size for futu re phase  
trials wi th an efficacy endpoint. The main mechanism f or doing so will be via histopathologic 
re
view of the radic al cystectomy specime n. Historically pa tients with MIBC w ho undergo 
‘window of opportuni t y’ chemothera py are defined as responders if they achie ve a pT1 stage  
or less. For the purposes of this st udy a similar ef ficacy end point will be utiliz ed for MIBC 
patients. In t he case of NMIBC a pT0 status will be used to i dentify complete response. 
 
4.2.3.2  Biom arker Research  
 
The i dentificatio n of specific signatures of tissue response a nd the ass ociation with a nti - 
tumor immune activa tion will serve a secondary ob jec tive to the prop osed study. Whenever  
possible normal tissue from t he same pa tient will be utilized as a contr ol to comparative  
analysis with tumo r specimens aft er trea tment. Analys es will incl ude, but not be limited to,  
studyi ng signals  of anti-canc er immun ological activity by evalua ting the fre quency of CD4 a nd 
CD8 T cells in tumor tissu es (pre- and p ost-therapy or untreated a nd treated cohor ts) . We will 
also evaluate tiss ue for signals of biomark er activity by evalua ting surgic al specime ns for 
establi shed and not-so-establish ed markers of respon se to pembroliz umab (e.g. TILS, PD-1  
and PD-L1 levels) c ompared to pre-treatme nt biop sy samples. In addition,  pre- and post- 
treatment tumors will be assigned to intrinsic basal and lumin al subtypes by whole  genome  
mRNA expression  pro filing (wi th the assistance of collaborat or David M cConkey, PhD). 
Additionally, we will collab orate with Merck Research Laboratories (MRL) in looking at  
PDL1/PD1 a nd their panel of gene expression signatures of T-cell activity, APC activity, etc . 
using, for example, t he nan ostring platform. 
 
5.1 METHODOLOGY  
 
5.2 Entry Criteria  
 
5.1.1 Diagnosis/Condition f or Entry into the Trial 
 
 Scenario 1: Muscl e invasive bla dder cancer (MIBC): Histolo gically confirmed,  by MD 
Anders on pathologic revie w, diagnosis of muscle invasive bladder canc er (cT2 or  
greater). No planned systemic che mothera py prior to ra dical cystectomy by standar d 
p
ractice risk strati ficatio n, patient refusal, and/or patient ineligibilit y. 
Proprietary Information of MD Anderson
2017-0057 
January 9, 2019  
Page  12  
  
 
 Scenario 2: Non-m uscle invasi ve bladder cancer (NMIBC): Histolo gically confirmed,  
by MD Anderson pathologic review, diagnosis of non-muscle i nvasive bladder cancer  
(cT1 or less). No plann ed systemic  chemotherapy prior to radical cystectomy by 
standa rd prac tice risk stratifi cation, pa tient ref usal, and/or pa tient ineligibilit y. Prior  
intravesical  therapies, whether BCG, chemoth erapy or otherwise, will remain eligible. 
 
5.1.2 Subje ct Inclusion Criteria  
 
In order to be eligible f or participati on in this trial, the subject mus t: 
 
1. Be willing and able to provide w ritten informed consent 
 
2. Be 18 years of age 
 
3. H
ave ab sence of metastatic disease as determ ined by conventional i maging studies 
a
nd be considered a g ood surgic al candi date by the trea ting physician. 
 
4. B
e willing to partic ipa te in the collecti on of blood a nd tissue for banking and fu ture 
correlative stu dies as specified in the St udy Flow Chart (Sec tion 6.0). 
 
5. Have a perfor mance s tatus of 0 or 1 on the ECOG Perfo rman ce Scale. 
 
6. Demonstra te adeq uate organ f unction as defined in Table 1 , all sc reening labs should 
be performed within 14 days of treatment i nitiation. 
 
Table 1 Adequate Organ Function Labo ratory Values: 
 
System Laboratory Value 
Hematol ogical  
Absolute neutrophil count  
(ANC)   
≥1,5 00 /mcL  
Plate lets ≥100,000 / mcL 
 
Hemoglobin ≥9 g /dL or  ≥5.6  mmo l/L without  transfusion or 
EPO dependency within 7 days  of assessme nt 
Renal   
Serum creatinine OR ≤1.5 X  upper limit  of normal (ULN) OR 
Proprietary Information of MD Anderson
2017-0057 
January 9, 2019  
Page  13  
  
 
 
Measu red or calcul ated 
creatinine clearance a 
 
(GFR can also  be used  in place  
of creatinine or CrCl)  
 
 
≥ 30 mL/min  for subject with creatinine levels >  
1.5 X institutional  ULN 
Hepatic  
Serum total bilirubin ≤ 1.5 X ULN OR 
 Direct  bilirubin ≤ ULN  for subjects with total 
bilirubin levels  > 1.5 ULN 
 
AST (SGOT) and ALT (SGPT) ≤ 2.5 X ULN  OR 
 
≤ 5 X ULN  for subjects with liver metasta ses 
Albumin >2.5 mg/dL 
Coagula tion 
 
 
International Normalized Ratio 
(INR) or Prothromb in Time (PT) 
 
 
 
 
Activat ed Partial 
Thromboplastin  Time  (aPTT) ≤1.5  X ULN unless subject is receiving 
anticoagulant ther apy 
as long as PT or PTT is within therapeutic range 
of intended use of anticoagula nts 
 
≤1.5 X U LN unless subject is receiving 
anticoagulant ther apy 
 
as long as PT or PTT is within therapeutic range 
of intended use of anticoagula nts 
aCreatinine clearance should be calcula ted per institutional standard. 
 
 
7. Female subject of childbearing potential should have a negative urine or serum 
pregnancy within 72  hours prior to receivi ng t he first dose of study medication. If the  
urine test is positive or cannot be confirmed as negative, a s erum pregnancy test wi ll 
be required. 
 
8. Female subjec ts of c hildbearing po tential (Se ction 5.7.2) must be willi ng to use an 
adeq uate method of contraception as outlined in Section 5.7.2 – Contrace ption, for 
the course of t he study through 1 20 days after the last dose of st udy medication. 
Proprietary Information of MD Anderson
2017-0057 
January 9, 2019  
Page  14  
  
 
Note: Absti nence is acceptable if this is t he usual lif est yle and preferred contraceptio n 
f
or the subjec t. 
 
9. Male subjec ts of childbearing potential (Secti on 5.7.2) must agree to use an adeq uate 
method of contrace ption as outlined in Section 5.7.2- Contraception, star tin g with the 
first dose of study therapy through 12 0 days after the last dose of study therapy. 
 
Note: Absti nence is acceptable if this is t he usual lif est yle and preferred contrac eptio n 
for the subject. 
 
5.1.3 Subje ct Excl usion Crite ria 
 
The subject must be excluded from participati ng in t he trial if the subject: 
 
1. Is currently participa tin g and receiving pembrolizumab or has participated in a study  
of an investigational agent and received pembroli zumab or us ed an i nvestigational 
d
evice within 4 w eeks of the first dose of study treatment. 
 
2. Has a diagnosis of immunodeficiency or is receivi ng systemic  steroid t herapy or any  
other form of immun osuppressive therapy within 7 days prior to the first dose of study  
treatment. 
 
3. Has a known history of active TB  (Bacillus Tuberculosis). 
 
4. Has a known history of hypersensitivity to pembrolizum ab or any of its excipients. 
 
5. Has 
had prior systemic a nti- canc er therapy f or the treatment of bladder cancer. P rior 
intravesical  therapies, whether BCG [including b ut not limited to: Persi stent high- 
grade disease or recurrence within 6 mon ths of rec eiving at least two courses o f 
intravesical BCG  (at lea st five of six induc tion doses a nd at least two of three  
maintenance doses ); or T1 high-grade disease at the first evaluati on following  
induction BCG  alone (at least five of six in duc ti on doses) ], chemothera py or otherwise,  
will remain eligibl e. 
 
6. Has any other malignancy diagnosed within 2 ye ars of sc reening wi th the exception 
of basal or squamous cell skin cancer, or non-invasive canc er of the cervix, or any  
other canc er deem ed by the treati ng physician to be of low-risk for progression or  
patient morbidity during the study period. 
 
7. Has known metastatic disease as determin ed by conventional staging studi es 
 
8. Has 
active autoimm une disease that has re quired sy stemic treatment in the past 2  
years  (i.e. with use of disease modi fying agents, cor ticosteroids or  
immu nosuppressive   drugs).   Replacement   the rapy   (e.g.,   thyroxine,   insulin,   or 
Proprietary Information of MD Anderson
2017-0057 
January 9, 2019  
Page  15  
  
 
physiologic cor ticosteroid replacement thera py for adrenal or pi tuitary insufficienc y, 
etc.) is not consider ed a form of systemic treatme nt. 
 
9. Has known history o f, or any evidence of active, non-infectious pneumonitis. 
 
10. Has a clinically sign ific ant active infection requiri ng systemic therapy. 
 
11. Has a history or curre nt evidence of any conditio n, therap y, or laboratory abnormality  
that might confou nd the resul ts of the trial, in ter fere with t he subj ect’s  participa tion 
for the full durati on of the trial, or is not in the best i nterest of t he subject t o 
participat e, in t he opinion of t he treating physician. 
 
12. Is 
pregna nt or breas tfeeding, or expecting to conceive or father c hil dren within t he 
project ed duration of the trial, s tarting with t he pre -screeni ng or screening visit 
through 120 days after t he last dose of trial treatment. 
 
13. Has received prior thera py with an anti-PD- 1, a nti-PD-L1, or anti-PD- L2 agen t. 
 
14. Has a known history of Human Immunode ficiency Virus (HIV) (H IV 1/2 antibod ies). 
 
15. Has known active Hepa titis B (e.g., HBsAg reactive) or Hepa titis C (e.g., HCV RNA  
[qualitative] is detected ). 
 
16. Has received a live  vacci ne within 30 days of initi ation  of stu dy therapy. Note:  
Season al influenza vaccines for in jec tion are generally i nactivated flu va ccines and are  
allowed; however i ntranasal infl uenza vacc ines (e.g., Flu-Mist®) are live atte nua te d 
vaccines, and are not allowed. 
 
5.2 Study Tr eatment 
 
The trea tment to be use d in this  trial is outlined below in Table 2  
Table 2: Trial Treatment: 
 
Drug   
Dose/ 
Potency  
Dose 
Frequency  
Route of 
Administration Regimen/ 
Treatment 
Period  
Use 
 
Pembrolizumab   
200 mg  
Q3W  x 2  
IV infusion Day 1 of each 3 
week cycle  
Experim ental 
Proprietary Information of MD Anderson
2017-0057 
January 9, 2019  
Page  16  
  
 
 
 
 
5.2.1 Dose Selection  
The rati onale for selec tio n of doses to be used in this trial is provided in Section 4.2.2. 
Det
ails on preparation a nd a dministration of pembrolizumab are provid ed in the Pharmacy 
Manual. 
 
5.2.2 Dose Modificati on and toxici ty management for i mmune-related AEs ass ocia ted 
with pe mbrolizumab 
 
AEs associat ed wi th pembroliz umab exposure may represe nt an immunologic etiology. These  
immune-related AEs (irAEs) may  occur shortly aft er the first dose or sever al mont hs after the  
last dose of pembrolizumab treatme nt and may  affect more than on bo dy system 
simulta neously. The ref or e, early recognition a nd initiation of trea tment is critical to reduce  
complications. Based on existi ng clini cal study data, most irAEs were reversible a nd could be  
managed with interru ptions of pembroliz umab, administrati on of cortic osteroi ds and/or  
other su pportive care. F or suspected irAEs, e nsure ade quate eval uation to con firm eti ology 
or exclude other causes. Ad ditional procedures or t ests such as bronchoscop y, endoscopy,  
skin biopsy may  be includ ed as par t of the evaluation. Based on the severi ty of irAEs, with hold 
or 
perma nently disco ntinue pembrolizumab and administer co rticost eroids. Dose 
modification a nd toxici ty manag ement guidelin es for irAEs associated with pembrolizu mab 
are 
provided in Table 3. 
 
 
 
 
Table 3 : Dose mo dification and toxicity ma nagement g uidelines f or immune-related AEs 
associat ed with pem broli zum ab 
 
General  instructio ns: 
 
1. Cortico steroid taper should  be initiated  upon AE impro ving to Grade 1 or less and conti nue to taper over at least 4 weeks. 
2. For situations where pembrolizumab has been withh eld, pembroliz umab can be resumed after AE has been reduced to Grade 1 or 0 
and cortico steroid  has been tapered. Pembroliz umab shou ld be permanently discontinued if AE  does not resolve within 12 wee ks of 
last dose or cortic osteroi ds cannot  be reduced to ≤10 mg prednisone or equivalent per day within  12 weeks. 
3. For severe and life-threatening irAEs, IV cortic osteroid  should be initiated  first followed by oral steroi d. Other immunosuppr essive 
treat ment should  be initiated if irAEs cannot  be contr olled by cortico steroi ds. 
Immun e-related  
AEs Toxicity grade  or 
cond itions 
(CTCA Ev4.0) Action  taken  to 
pembro lizumab  irAE management  with 
corticostero id and/or  other 
therap ies Monitor and follow-up 
Proprietary Information of MD Anderson
2017-0057 
January 9, 2019  
Page  17  
  
 
 
Pneumonitis  Grade  2 Withhold   Administer cortic osteroi ds (initial 
dose of 1-2 mg/kg prednisone or 
equivalent)  followed by taper  Monitor  participa nts for signs 
and sympto ms of pneumonitis  
 Evaluate participa nts with  
suspected pneumonitis  with 
radiographic  imaging and 
initiate  corticosteroid treatment 
 Add prophylactic  antibiotics  for 
opport unistic infections  Grade  3 or 4, or 
recurrent Grade  2 Permanently 
discontinue 
Diarr hea / Colit is Grade  2 or 3 Withhold   Administer cortic osteroi ds (initial 
dose of 1-2 mg/kg prednisone or 
equivalent)  followed by taper  Monitor  participa nts for signs 
and sympto ms of enterocolit is 
(ie, diarrhea, abdominal pain, 
blood  or mucus  in stool  with or 
without fever) and of bowel 
perforation  (ie, periton eal signs 
and ileus). 
 Participa nts with  ≥ Grade  2 
diarr hea suspecting  colitis  
should  consider GI consultation  
and performing endoscopy to 
rule out coliti s. 
 Participa nts with  diarrhea/co litis 
should  be advised to drink 
liberal  quantities of clear fluids. 
If sufficient oral fluid intake  is 
not feasible, fluid and 
electrolyt es should  be 
substituted  via IV infusion. Grade  4 Permanently 
discontinue 
AST / ALT 
elevation  or 
Increased 
bilirubin Grade  2 Withhold   Administer cortic osteroi ds (initial 
dose of 0.5- 1 mg/kg  prednisone 
or equivalent)  followed by taper  Monitor  with liver function  tests 
(consider weekly or more 
frequently until liver enzyme 
value returned to baseline  or is 
stable  Grade  3 or 4 Permanently 
discontinue  Administer cortic osteroi ds (initial 
dose of 1-2 mg/kg prednisone or 
equivalent)  followed by taper 
Type 1 diabetes 
mellitus (T1DM)  
or 
Hyperglyc emia Newly onset 
T1DM  or 
Grade  3 or 4 
hyperglyc emia 
associated with  
evidence of -cell 
failure Withhold   Initiate  insulin replacement 
therapy  for participa nts with  
T1DM 
 Administer anti-hyperglyc emic in 
participa nts with  hyperglyc emia  Monitor  participa nts for 
hyperglyc emia or other signs 
and sympto ms of diabetes. 
Hypophy sitis Grade  2 Withhold   Administer cortic osteroi ds and 
initiate  hormonal  replacements as 
clinically  indicated.   Monitor  for signs and symptoms 
of hypophy sitis (including  
hypopit uitarism and adrenal 
insufficiency)  Grade  3 or 4 Withhold  or 
permanently 
discontinue1 
Hyperthyroidi sm Grade  2 Conti nue   Monitor  for signs and symptoms 
of thyroid  disorders. 
Proprietary Information of MD Anderson
2017-0057 
January 9, 2019  
Page  18  
  
 
 
 Grade  3 or 4 Withhold  or 
permanently 
discontinue1  Treat with non-selective beta- 
block ers (eg, propranolol)  or 
thionamid es as appropriate   
Hypot hyroidi sm Grade  2-4 Conti nue  Initiate  thyroid  replaceme nt 
hormones (eg, levothyroxine  or 
liothyr oinine) per standard  of care   Monitor  for signs and symptoms 
of thyroid  disorders. 
Nephritis  and 
Renal 
dysfunction  Grade  2 Withhold   Administer cortic osteroi ds 
(prednisone 1-2 mg/kg  or 
equivalent)  followed by taper.  Monitor  changes of renal 
function  
Grade 3 or 4 Permanently 
discontinue 
Myocar ditis Grade  1 or 2 Withhold   Based on severity of AE 
administer corticosteroids   Ensure adequate  evaluation  to 
confirm etiology  and/or  exclude 
other causes Grade  3 or 4 Permanently 
discontinue 
All other 
immune-related 
AEs Intol erable/ 
persistent  Grade  
2 Withhold   Based on type  and severity of AE 
administer corticosteroids   Ensure adequate  evaluation  to 
confirm etiology  and/or  exclude 
other causes 
Grade  3 Withhold  or 
discontinue based 
on the type  of 
event. Events that  
require  
discontinuation  
inclu de and not 
limited to: Gullai n- 
Barre  Syndro me, 
encephalitis  
Grade  4 or 
recurrent Grade  3 Permanently 
discontinue 
1. Withhold  or permanently discontinue pembroliz umab is at the discretion of the investigator or treating  physician. 
NOT E: 
For participa nts with  Grade 3 or 4 immune-related endocri nopathy  where withhold  of pembroliz umab is required, pembroliz umab may  
be resumed when AE resolves to ≤ Grade 2 and is contr olled with  hormonal  replacement therapy  or achieved metabolic  contr ol (in case 
of T1DM). 
 
 
Dose modificati on and toxici ty management of infus ion-reactions related to 
pembrol izumab 
 
Pembrolizumab may  cause severe or li fe th reatening infusion-r eactions  includi ng severe  
hypersensitivity  or anap hylaxis. Signs a nd symptoms usually develop during or shortly after  
drug infusion and generally resolve completely within 24 hours  of completi on of infusion. 
D
ose mo dificati on a nd toxi city manageme nt guid elines on pembroli zum ab associate d 
infusion reaction a re provided in Table 4. 
Proprietary Information of MD Anderson
2017-0057 
January 9, 2019  
Page  19  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 4 Pem brolizumab Infusion Reaction Dose mod ification a nd Treatment Guidelines  
Proprietary Information of MD Anderson
2017-0057 
January  9, 2019  
Page  20  
  
 
 
NCI CTCAE Grade  Treat ment Premed ication  at Subse quent  
Dosing 
Grade 1 
Mild  reactio n; infusion 
interruption  not 
indicated;  inter vention  
not indicated  Increase monitoring  of vital signs as medically  indicated  until the participa nt 
is deemed medically  stable in the opinion  of the investigat or. None  
Grade 2 
Requires therapy  or 
infusion interruption  
but responds  promptly 
to sympto matic 
treat ment (e.g., 
antihistamines, NSAID s, 
narcotic s, IV fluids); 
prophylactic  
medications  indicated 
for ≤24 hrs Stop Infusion. 
Additional  appropriate  medical  therapy  may  include but is not limited to: 
IV fluids  
Antihi stamines 
NSAIDs  
Acetaminoph en 
Narcotics  
Increase monitoring  of vital signs as medically  indicated  until the participa nt 
is deemed medically  stable in the opinion  of the investigat or. 
If symptoms resolve within 1 hour  of stopping  drug infusion, the infusion 
may be restarted at 50%  of the origin al infusion rate (e.g. from 100 mL/hr to 
50 mL/hr).  Otherwise dosing will be held until symptoms resolve  and the 
participa nt should  be preme dicated  for the next scheduled dose. 
Partic ipants  who develop Grade  2 toxicity despite adequate  premed ication  
shou ld be permanently  discontinued from further study  drug treat ment Participa nt may be preme dicated 
1.5h  (± 30 minutes)  prior  to 
infusion of with: 
Diph enhydra mine 50 mg po (or 
equivalent  dose of 
antihistamine). 
Acetaminoph en 500-1000 mg po 
(or equivalent  dose of analg esic). 
Grades  3 or 4 
Grade  3: 
Prolo nged (i.e.,  not 
rapidly  responsive to 
symptomatic 
medication  and/or  brief 
interruption  of 
infusion); recurrence of 
symptoms following 
initial  improvement; 
hospitalization  
indicated  for other 
clinical  sequelae (e.g., 
renal impairment, 
pulmonary  infiltrate s) 
Grade  4: 
Life-threatening;  
pressor or ventilatory  
support  indicated  Stop Infusion. 
Additional  appropriate  medical  therapy  may  include but is not limited to: 
Epin ephrin e** 
IV fluids  
Antihi stamines 
NSAIDs  
Acetaminoph en 
Narcotics  
Oxygen 
Pres sors 
Cortico steroids  
Increase monitoring  of vital signs as medically  indicated  until the participa nt 
is deemed medically  stable in the opinion  of the investigat or.  
Hospitalization  may  be indicated.  
**In cases of anaphylaxi s, epin ephrine  should  be used immediately. 
Partic ipant  is permanently  discontinued from further study drug 
treatment. No subsequent dosing 
Appropriate resuscitation equipment should be available at the bedside and a physician readily available during the period of drug administration. 
For further informat ion, please refer to the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events v4.0  (CTCAE) at http://ct ep.cancer.gov 
Proprietary Information of MD Anderson
2017-0057 
January 9, 2019  
Page  21  
  
 
5.2.3 Timing of Dose Admi nistrati on 
 
Study trea tment sho uld be administered on Day 1 of each 3- week cycle after all 
procedures/assess men ts have been com pleted as detailed on the Study Fl ow Chart (Sec tion 
6.0
). Trial trea tment may be administer ed up to 3 days before or after the sc heduled Day 1  
of each cycle d ue to admi nistrative reason s. 
 
Study treatme nts will be ad ministered on an ou tpa tient basis. 
 
Pembrolizumab 2 00 mg will be admini stered as a 30 minu te IV infusion every 3 w eeks for a 
total 
of 2 cycles. 
 
5.2.4 Trial Blinding/Mask ing 
 
This is an open-lab el trial; theref ore, t he Sponsor, investigator a nd subject will  know t he 
treatment administere d. 
 
5.3 Randomization or Tr eatment Allocati on 
 
Pa
tients will be enrolled sequentially wi thout randomi zation. Accordi ng to a standardized, 
dose escala ting, phase 2 safety design a total of 20 pa tients  may  be enrolled. 
 
Initially 3 patie nts will be studied at 2 00 mg given at w eeks 1 and 4 by IV infusio n. These  
patients  will be follo wed for safe ty assessmen ts every 3 w eeks during the trea tment phase  
and at 30 and 90 days p ost-op visits during t he follow- up phase. If < 2 patien ts in the initial 
c
ohort of 3 experience a grade >3 drug related adverse event then a s ubsequent cohort of 17 
patients  at 200 mg dose will  be enrolled. 
 
The following stopping rules will apply: if at a ny time ≥ 3 patients experience a dru g relate d 
grade 4 adverse event includi ng bowel per foration or any drug related grade 3 skin or  
gastrointestinal adverse event wi thout clinic al improveme nt within 2 w eeks of study drug  
disconti nuation a nd/or initiation of c orticosteroid thera py to treat t he adverse event; n o 
addition al patients  will be enrolle d. If any grade 3 or higher adverse event that is possibl y, 
probably or definitely relat ed to stu dy drug, with the exc eption of a ny grade 3 or higher  
adverse events that is potentially treatable wi th steroi ds and improves to grade 1 or better  
within 2 w eeks of steroid thera py initiati on and/or stu dy treatme nt discon tinuation, the  
above stopping rule would ap ply. Also excluded will be grade 3 li pase elevation as this is 
common with this agent but is almost universally asymptoma tic. Grade 4 lipase ele vati on will 
be c riteria for stoppin g. If duri ng monitoring, a patient is found to have disease progressio n 
within the treatment stu dy peri od then this will be co unted as a grade 4 toxicity event an d 
the above stopping rule would a pply. If there is a >12 w eek delay to surgery d ue disease  
progressio n, then this wi ll be counted as a grade 4 toxicity event and the above stopping rule 
w
ould ap ply. If a patient suffers a dr ug relat ed toxicity w hic h results in an inability to p erform 
Proprietary Information of MD Anderson
2017-0057 
January 9, 2019  
Page  22  
  
 
radic al cystectomy f urt her study enrollment will be stopped. If there is a > 12 week delay t o 
surgery d ue to a drug related toxicity in 2 or more pa tients, fur th er enrollment will  be 
stopped. Once patients have received a maximum of two doses of pem brolizumab,  they will 
un
dergo surgery at approximately 6 - 8 w eeks. An assessment of tumor response will not be 
made prior to radical cystectomy. 
 
5.4 Stratification  
 
‘Window of opportunity ’ chemothera py is not ad vised or administered to pa tients with 
N
MIBC w ho undergo radic al cystectomy. As such, although there will not be an active attem pt 
to enrich the st udy population f or such pa tients, it is likely tha t the study cohort will contai n 
a
 signifi cant group wi th NMI BC. However, trial accru al will be se quential a nd accordi ng to the 
earlier describ ed eligibil ity criteri a. As such, no active attem pt at stra tification will be mad e. 
 
5.5 Concomitant Medications/V accinations  
 
Medications or vacc inations specifically prohi bited in t he exclusio n criteria are not allo wed 
during the ong oing trial. If there is a cli nical i ndication f or one of these or other me dication s 
or vaccinations specifically prohibited during the trial, disco ntinuation from study thera py or 
vaccination may  be required. The trea ting p hysician may  choo se to discuss any qu estions 
re
garding this with the PI of the study; however, t he final decision on any s upportive therapy  
or vaccinati on rests wi th the subj ect’s trea tin g physician. 
 
5.5.1 Acceptable Concomitant Medicatio ns 
 
All trea tments that the treating phys ician con siders necessary f or a subjec t’s welfare may  be 
administered at the discretion of the treati ng investigat or in kee ping wi th the communi ty 
standards of medic al care. All concomita nt me dications will be rec o rded in the medical 
rec
ord t hrougho ut the duration of t he study, i ncluding prescription, over- the-counter (O TC), 
herbal supplements, and IV medications. Me dic ations a nd fluids used f or  anesthesia a nd 
standa rd of c are pre and post-op c are will not be rec orded for protocol purposes. B lood 
products, if administer ed, will be recorded. 
 
Concomita nt me dic ati ons received within 28 days before t he first dose of pembroliz umab 
and 30 days aft er surgery will be record ed. Concomitant me dications administer ed beyond 
30 days after surgery will be recorded only f or serious adverse events (SAEs) and events o f 
clinic al importance (ECI s). 
 
5.5.2 Prohibited Concomita nt Medications  
 
Subjec ts are prohibited from receiving the following ther apies during the screening an d 
treatment phase of this trial: 
Proprietary Information of MD Anderson
2017-0057 
January 9, 2019  
Page  23  
  
 
 A nti neoplastic sy stemic chemothera py or biological therapy 
 
 Immu no therapy not specified in this protocol 
 
 Live vaccines within 30 days prior to t he first dose of study trea tment and during t he 
treatment phase of the study. Examples of live v acc i nes include, but are not limite d 
t
o, the following: measle s, mumps,  rubell a, varicella/ zoster , yellow feve r, rabies, BCG, 
typhoid vaccine and i ntranasal i nfluenza vaccine. 
 
 Sys temic glucocor ticoids for a ny purpose o ther than  to modula te sym ptoms from a n 
event of cli nical interest of suspected imm unologic eti ology. The use of physiologic 
doses of corticosteroi ds may  be a pproved after con sultation with t he pri ncipal 
investiga tor . 
 
Subjec ts who, in the assessment by the investigator, require t he use of any of the  
aforementioned trea tments for clini cal management s hould be removed from t he trial. At  
that time, subjec ts may  receive other treatme nt that t he in ves tigat or deems to be medically 
necessary. 
 
5.6 Resc ue Medications a nd Supportive Ca re 
 
5.6.1 Resc ue Medications & Suppo rtive Ca re 
 
Participa nts sho uld receive appropriate supportive care measures as deemed necessary by 
the treati ng investigator. Suggested supportive c are measures f or the manageme nt of AEs 
with pote ntial immun ologic etiology are outlined along with the dose modi fic ation gui delines 
in Section 5.2.2, [Table 3 ]. Where appropriat e, these guidelin es include the use of oral or IV 
treatment with cor ticost eroid s, as well as additional anti-inflammatory agen ts if symptoms 
do not improve with ad min istra tion of corticosteroid s. Note that several cours es of steroi d 
tapering may  be necessary as symptoms may  worsen when t he steroid dose is decreased . 
Fo
r each disorder, a ttemp ts should be made to rule out other causes such as metastatic 
disease or bacterial or vi ral infec tion, w hich might require ad dit ional su pportive care. T he 
treatment guidelin es are intended to be applied when the Investigat or dete rmines the events 
to be relat ed to pembroliz umab. 
 
Note: If after the evaluation of the event, it is determined not to be related to 
pembrolizumab, the Invest iga tor do es not ne ed to follow the treatme nt guidanc e. Refer t o 
[Table 3] in Section 5.2.2 for guidelin es regar ding dose modi fication a nd su pportive car e. 
 
It may  be necessary to perform co ndition al procedures such as bronchoscop y, endoscop y, or 
skin photogra phy as part of evalua tion of the event. 
Proprietary Information of MD Anderson
2017-0057 
January 9, 2019  
Page  24  
  
 
5.7 Die t, Activi ty and Other Consideratio ns 
 
5.7.1 Diet  
 
Subjec ts should maintain a norm al diet unless modifi cations are re quired to manage an AE 
such as diarrhea, nausea or vomi ting. 
 
5.7.2 Contra ception  
 
Pembrolizumab may  have adverse effec ts on a fe tus in utero. Fur thermo re, it is not k nown 
if pembrolizumab has transient adverse effects on the compositi on of sper m. 
 
For this tri al, male subjects  will be considered to be of non-re productive po tential if they have 
azoospermia (whe ther due to having had a vasecto my or due to an underlying medical 
c
ondition). 
 
Female subjec ts will be consider ed of non-repr oductive potential if they are either: 
 
(1) pos
tmenopausal (defin ed as at least 12 m onths with no menses wi thout an alter nat ive  
medical cause; in w omen < 45 years of age a high follicle stimul ating hormone (FSH) level i n 
the postmenopausal range may  be used to confi rm a post-meno pausal s tat e in w omen not  
using hormonal contracepti on or hormonal r eplacement therapy. In the absence of 12 
mont hs of amenorrhea, a single FSH measureme nt is ins uff ic ient.) ; 
 
OR 
 
(2) have h ad a hysterectomy and/or bilateral oophorectomy, bilateral salpingecto my or 
bilate ral tubal ligation/o cclusion, at least 6 w eeks prior to sc reening; 
 
OR 
 
(3) has a congenital or acquire d condition that pre ven ts childbearin g. 
 
Fe
male and male subjects of re productive potenti al must agree to avoid becoming preg nant 
or impr egnating a partner, respectively, while receivi ng st udy drug and for 120 days after t he 
last dose o f study drug by complyi ng wi th one of the following: 
 
(1) practice absti nence† from heterosexual activity; 
OR 
(2) use (or have their partner use) a cceptable c ontraception during he terosexual activity. 
Acceptable methods of contrace ption a re‡:  
Proprietary Information of MD Anderson
2017-0057 
January 9, 2019  
Page  25  
  
 
Single method (one of t he following is acc ep table): 
• intrauterin e device (IUD) 
• vase ctomy of a female subjec t ’s male partner 
• contraceptive rod imp lante d into t he skin 
• diaphragm with spermici de (cann ot be used in co njunction wi th cervical 
cap/spermicid e) 
• c
ontrac eptive spo nge (nulliparous w omen o nly) 
• male condom or female condom (cannot be used together) 
• hormonal contraceptive: oral contrace ptive pill (estrogen /progestin pill or progestin- 
only pill), contraceptive skin pat ch, vagin al contraceptive ring, or subcu tan eous 
contraceptive in jec tion 
 
†Abstinence (relative to heterosexual activity) c an be used as the sole me thod o f 
contrace ptio n if it is consistently employed as the subj ect’s p ref erred and usual lifes tyle and 
if consider ed acceptab le by local r egulatory agencies a nd ERC s/IRB s. Periodic abs tinence  
(e.g., calendar, ovulation, sympto- thermal, post-ovulation methods, etc .) a nd withdraw al are  
not a cceptable metho ds of contrace ption. 
 
‡If 
a contraceptive method listed above is restricted by local regulations/guidelines, then i t 
doe
s not qualify as an accep table meth od of contracep tion for subjects participatin g a t sites 
in this country/regio n. 
 
Subjec ts should be informed that taking the study medication may  involve unknown risk s to 
the 
fetus (u nborn baby) if preg nancy were to occur during the study. In order to partici pat e  
in the st udy subjects  of childbearing pote ntial must adhere to the contrac eption requirem ent 
(desc ribed above) from the day of st udy medication i nitiatio n (or 30 days prior to the  
initiation of study me dica tion for or al contraception) throughout t he study period up to 120  
days aft er the last dose of trial therap y. If there is any qu estion that a su bject of childbearing  
potential will  not reli ably comply with t he req uirements  for contracep tion, that subject  
should n ot be entered in to the st udy. 
 
5.7.3 Use in Pregnancy  
 
If a subject i nadvertently becomes pr egnant while  on trea tment with p emb roli zum ab, the  
subject will  imme diately be removed from the s tudy. Ad ditionally, t he study investigator will 
make every effort to obtain permi ssion to follow the outcome of t he preg nancy a nd report  
the conditi on of the fetus or newb orn. The site will contact t he subject at least monthly an d 
docume nt the subjec t ’s  stat us until the preg nanc y has been completed or terminated. The 
outcome of the preg nancy will  be reported to the Instit ution al Rev iew B oard (IRB),  IND Offic e, 
and to Merck without delay if t he outcome is a serio us adverse experience (e.g., deat h, 
abortion,  conge nital anomaly, or other disabli ng or life-threa ten i ng complicati on to the  
mother or newborn ). The  IND Office will  be notifi ed through t he eSAE system. 
Proprietary Information of MD Anderson
2017-0057 
January 9, 2019  
Page  26  
  
 
The stu dy invest igator will  make every effort to obtain permission to follow the outcome o f 
the pregnancy and repo rt the condition of the fet us or newborn to the Sponso r. If a male  
subject i mpregnates his female partn er the st udy perso nnel at the si te mu st be inform ed 
imme diately a nd the pre gnancy re ported to the Instit ution al Rev iew B oard (IRB), IND O ffice, 
and to Merck without delay. 
 
5.7.4 Use in Nursing Wom en 
 
It is unknown whe ther pembrolizumab is excreted in hu man  milk. Since ma ny drugs are  
excreted in human milk, and becau se of the potential for serious adverse reactio ns in the  
nursing in fant, subjec ts who are breast- feeding are not eligible f or enroll ment. 
 
5.8 Subje ct Withdrawal/Dis continuation Criteria  
 
Subjec ts may  withdraw con sen t at any time for any reason or be drop ped from the trial at 
the discretion of the inv estigator or trea ting physician should a ny untow ard effect occur. In 
a
ddition, a subject may  be wi thdrawn by the princip al investigator if enroll ment in to the trial 
is inap pro priat e, the trial plan is violate d, or f or administrative an d/o r oth er safe ty reason s. 
 
A subject must be discontinu ed fro m the trial for any of the followi ng reason s: 
 
 T he subject or legal representative (such as a parent or legal guardian) withd ra ws 
consent 
 
 Un acceptable adverse experienc es as described in Table 3 and section 5.6.1 
 
 Unexpecte d  intercurr ent  illness  that  prevents  further  administration  of  stu dy 
treatment 
 
 In vestigat or’s decision to withdr aw the subject 
 
 T he subject has a co nfirmed positive serum preg nancy test 
 
 Non compliance wi th study treatme nt or procedu re requirements  
 
 T he subject is lost to follow- up: two failed at tempts to contact the pa tient by pho ne 
or e-mail A ND one unansw ered cer tified letter sent to subjec t’s registered home 
a
ddress. 
 C ompleted stu dy partic i pation or of follow up fro m initiati on of stu dy treatment. 
Subjec ts who premature ly discontinue from the study treatment, will return to clinic within 
30
 days of trea tment discon tinuati on to comple te the safe ty assessmen ts listed under the 
Proprietary Information of MD Anderson
2017-0057 
January 9, 2019  
Page  27  
  
 
STUDY  PHASE   
 
SCREENING  
PHASE   
 
TREA TMENT PHASE   
 
FOLL OW-UP 
PHASE  EARLY 
TREA TMENT 
DISCONTIN  
UATION  
 
 
VISIT/ CYCLE   
 
SCREENING   
CYCLE  #1 
(Week 1)  
CYCLE  #2 
(Week 4) PRE-OP/ 
SAFETY 
VISIT  
(Week 7)  
SURGERY  
(Week 6- 8)  
 
FOLL OW-UP  
 
Sche duling window 
(day s)  
-28 to -1  
1(±3)   
21(±3)  
35-49(±3)   
42-56(±3)  30 day (±7) 
and 90 day 
(±7) Post Op  
Inform ed Consent X       
Inclusion/Exclusion 
Criteria  
X       
Dem ographics/Medic 
al history  
X       
Concomitant 
Medications  
X  
X  
X  
X  
X  
8  
8 
Pembrolizumab  
Administration   
X  
X     
Assessme nt of 
Disease  Extent 1  
X       
Review of Adverse  
Events  
X  
X  
X  
X  
X  
X  
X 
Full Physical Exam  X      X 
Direc ted Physical 
Exam    
X  
X  
X   
X  
Vital Signs and 
Weig ht  
X  
2  
2  
X   
X  
X 
ECOG Performan ce 
Status  
X  
X  
X  
X   
X  
X 
Preg nancy Test  X X3      
PT/INR  and aPTT X9 X X X  X X 
CBC with Diff X9 X X X  X X 
  
 
“Early Trea tment Discontinuation ” visit listed i n Section 6. All other subjects will continue on 
the follow-up phase through 90 days p ost-op. 
 
 
 
 
6.0  STUDY FLOW CHART  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X X 
Proprietary Information of MD Anderson
2017-0057 
January 9, 2019  
Page  28  
 Compre hensive 
Metabolic  Pane l4  
9  
X  
X  
X   
X  
X 
Urinaly sis5 X9 X X X  X X 
T3, FT4 and TSH X9 X X X  X X 
Pulmonary  Function 
Tests  
X       
ACTH,  Cortisol X X X     
ESR,  CRP X X X     
Testosterone, FSH,  
LH (males)   
X  
X  
X     
Estrogen, FSH,  LH 
(femal es)  
X  
X  
X     
Archival  Tissue 
Collection6  
X     
X   
Feces and Urine for 
micro biome  studies   
X    
X   
X10  
Blood for Correlative  
Studies 7  
X   
X  
X   
X  
Cystectomy      X   
 
1 A complete assessment of disease  extent will be made at screening per SOC g uidelines, and will i nclude but not be limited 
to diagnostic endoscopy with biopsy/resection of the index les ion for pat hologic diagnosis. Additionally an examination and 
asses sment  for palpable disease  will be made. Cross sectional imaging of the c hest, abdomen  and pelvis with the addition of 
whole  body nuclear  medicine bone imaging where  clinically indicated  will complete the staging evaluation. Exams per formed 
within  6 weeks pr ior to screening will be  accepted for inclusion in the stu dy if deemed ap propriate by the treati ng physician 
2 Pre a nd post pembrolizumab  dose during treatment administration  days  
3 Female su bjects of chi ldbearing potential  should have a ne gative urine or serum  pregnancy test within 72 hours prior to 
rece iving the first dose of study medication. If the urine test is positive or cannot be confirmed  as negat ive, a ser um 
pregnancy test will be required. 
4 Includes: Albumin, alkali ne phosphatase, ALT, A ST, LDH, electrolytes, uric aci d, calci um, g lucose, phosphorus, magnesium, 
total bilirubin, total protein, BUN  and creatinine 
5 Micros copic exam if ab normal results a re noted 
6 Archival tissue f rom a newly obtained core or excisional biopsy of a tumor lesion. Newly-obtained is  defined as a s pecimen  
obtained up  to 6 weeks (42 days) pr ior to initiation of treatment  on week 1.  Subjects for whom newly-obtained sa mples 
cannot be provided (e.g. inaccessi ble or subject safety concern) may  collect tissue from a previously arch ived speci men. 
Additionally, archival tissue  from the surgical specimen at the time of cystectomy will also be collected 
7 Up to 60 mL  of blood at baseli ne or pre-treatment, after t he first cycle of treatment,  after the second cycle of treatment 
and post-cystectomy will be collected and  banked for future re search  
8Concomita nt medications administered b eyond 30 d ays af ter su rgery will be recorded only for serious adverse events  (SAEs) 
and events of clinical importance (ECIs).  
9With in 14 days pr ior to first dose of pembrolizumab  
10 90 day  post op only 
  
 
 
X 
Proprietary Information of MD Anderson
2017-0057 
January 9, 2019  
Page  29  
  
 
 
 
 
7.1 STUDY PROCED URES 
 
The Study Flow Chart - Section 6.0 summarizes the tri al procedures  to be performed at each 
visit. Individual trial procedur es are describ ed in detail below. It may  be necessary to perform  
these proce dures at unscheduled time poi nts if d eem ed cli nically necessary by the  
investigator. 
 
F
urthermor e, additional  evaluations/testi ng may  be deemed necessary by the investiga tor 
for reaso ns related to subject sa fety. In some cases, such evaluation/tes ting may  be 
potentially sensitive in nature (e.g., HIV, Hepatitis C,  etc.), and th us local regulations may  
require that ad ditional informed consent be obtained fr om the subjec t. In these cases, such 
evaluations/testi ng will be per form ed in accordance with those reg ulati ons. 
 
7.2 Informed Consent  
 
The Investigator or qual ified designee must o btain docume nted conse nt from each potential 
subject prior to par ticipatin g in this  clinic al trial. T he i nformed consent process will  adhere to 
MDACC ’s Institutional guidelines and applicable laws and r egulation s. 
 
7.3 Inclusion/Exclusi on Criteria  
 
All inclu sio n and exclusion c riteria will be reviewed by the investigat or or qualified design ee 
to ensure that t he subject qualifies for the trial. 
 
7.4 Medical History  
 
A medic al history will be ob tained by the investigat or or qualified designe e. Med ical histo ry 
will inclu de all active conditions, and a ny co ndition diagnos ed within the prior 10 years tha t  
are consider ed to be cli nically signi ficant. Details regar ding bladder canc er status and a 
review of all prior canc er treatmen ts inclu din g systemic therapies, radiation and/or surgeries 
will be included. Additi onally, emphasis  on autoimmu ne disorders and treatments for t hes e  
conditions will  be made. 
 
7.5 Concomitant Medicatio ns Re view  
 
The investigator or qualified designee will  review and record all me dications taken by the 
subject within 28 days before the first dose of pembroli zum ab and 30 days after surgery.  
Medications a nd fluids used for an est hesia and stan dard of c are pre a nd p ost -op care will not 
be recorded. Blood products, if admi nistered, will be rec or ded. Conco mitant me dications 
a
dministered beyo nd 30 days aft er surge ry will be recorded only for serio us adverse events  
(SAEs) and events of clinic al impor tance (ECIs). 
Proprietary Information of MD Anderson
2017-0057 
January 9, 2019  
Page  30  
  
 
7.6 Adverse Event (AE) Mon itoring  
 
The investigator or qualified design ee will assess eac h su bject to evalua te for po tential new  
or worseni ng adverse even ts thro ughout the duration of the study. Adverse events will be 
grad ed according to NCI CTCAE Version 4.0. Toxi cities will  be characterized in te rms regar ding 
serio usness,  causalit y, toxi city grading, a nd acti on taken wi th regard to study trea tment. 
Refer to Section 8 for further details regardi ng ass essing and recordi ng adverse events. 
 
Any related adverse events Grade >1 which are present at the time o f 
disconti nuation/withdrawal should be follow ed until the resolution of the AE to Grade 0- 1. 
 
7.7 Full Physical Exam  
 
The in ves tigator or quali fied desig nee will  perform a complete p hysical exam du ring the 
screeni ng phase a nd early trea tment disco nti nuation visit. Cli nically signifi cant abnorma l 
findings d uring screening should be recorded as medical history. 
 
7.8 Dire cted Physical Exam  
 
The in ves tigator or qualified design ee will per fo rm a directed physi cal exam as clinically 
indic at ed duri ng the treatment a nd follow- up phases. Cli nically signifi cant ab normal changes  
from screeni ng will be recorded as adverse event s. 
 
7.9 Vital Signs  
 
Vital signs will be measur ed by triage clinic personnel as per standard of care during t he study. 
Additionally, vital signs will be meas ured pre and post-treatment on weeks 1 and 4. Vital 
signs should inclu de tem perature, pulse, r espiratory rate, weight a nd blood pressure.  Height  
will be measured at screeni ng onl y. 
 
7.10 Eastern Cooperati ve Oncology Group (ECO G) Perfor mance Scale 
 
T
he investigator or qualified design ee will  assess EC OG performance stat us at every protocol 
visit as specifie d in the St udy Flow Ch art. 
 
7.11 Tumor Imaging a nd Assessme nt of Disea se 
 
A complete assessment of disease extent will be made at screeni ng following standa rd of care  
guid elines, and will  include diagnostic end oscopy with biopsy /resection of t he index lesio n 
f
or pathologic diagnosis. Addi tionally an examination and assessment for palpable disease  
will be made. Cross section al imaging of the c hest, abdomen a nd pelvis  with the addition o f 
whole body nuclear me dicine bo ne imaging where cli nic ally i ndicated will comple te the 
staging evalua tion. Standard of care procedures/images performed within 6 w eeks prior to 
Proprietary Information of MD Anderson
2017-0057 
January 9, 2019  
Page  31  
  
 
screening will be acc ept ed for incl usion in t he study if deem ed appropriate by the treati ng 
physician. 
 
7.12 Tumor Ti ssue Co llection a nd Correlati ve Studies Blood Sampling  
 
All participants will  be required to partici pat e in t he collection of blood and tiss ue specimen s 
for banking and fut ure research st udies. 
 
7.13 Laborato ry Assessme nts 
 
Details regardi ng specific laborato ry assessm ents are specified in Table 6. Laboratory tes ts 
for sc reening should be performed within 14  days prior to the first dose of pembrolizumab . 
Labora tory assessmen ts for each subse quent vis it c an be conducted up to 72 hou rs prior to 
dosin g/clinic visit. Resul ts must be review ed by the investigator or qualified design ee an d 
f
ound to be acceptab le prior to each dose of pembroliz umab. 
 
7.14 Withdrawa l/Disco ntinuati on 
 
Subjec ts who prematurely discontinue from the study  treatment, will return to cli nic withi n 
30
 days of trea tment discon tinuation to comple te the safe ty assessmen ts listed under the 
“Early Trea tment Discontinuation ” visit liste d in Section 6. All other subjects will continue on 
to the follow-up phase (30 a nd 90  day visits after surgery). 
 
8.1 ASSESSING AND RECORDING ADV ERSE EVENTS  
 
An adverse event is defined as any untoward medical occurrence in a pa tient or cli nic al 
investigation subject ad min ister ed a pharmaceu tical product and w hich does not necessarily  
have to have a causal relationship with this treat ment. An adverse event c an there fore be 
any unfavorab le and u nintended sign (includi ng an abnormal laboratory finding, for example),  
symptom, or disease temporally associated wi th the use of a medicinal product or protocol- 
sp
ecified proce dure, whe ther or not considered relat ed to the medicinal product or protocol- 
specified procedure. Any worseni ng (i. e., any cli nically significant adverse change i n 
f
requency a nd/or inte nsity) of a preexisti ng condition that is temporally associat ed with the  
use of the Me rck’s product, is also an adverse event. 
 
Changes resul tin g from normal growth and development that do not vary signi ficantly in 
frequency or severi ty from expected levels are not to be conside red adverse events. 
Examples of this may  i nclude, b ut are not limited to, teething, ty pical crying in i nfants and 
children and onset of menses or menopause occurring at a physiologically ap propria te time. 
 
Merck product i ncludes any pharmace utical product, bi ological product, device, diagnostic 
agent or protocol-specifi ed procedure, whether investigation al (includi ng placebo or active 
Proprietary Information of MD Anderson
2017-0057 
January 9, 2019  
Page  32  
  
 
comparator medication) or mar keted, manufac ture d by, li censed by, provided by or 
distri buted by Merck for hum an us e. 
 
Adverse events may occur durin g the course of t he use of M erck product in cli nical trials, or 
as prescribed in cli nical practic e, from overdose (w hether accidental or inte nti onal), from 
abuse and from wit hdra wal. 
 
All adverse even ts that occur after the consent form is sign ed but before treatment  
allocati on/randomiza tion must be report ed by the in ves tigat or if th ey cause the subject to be  
excluded fr om the trial, or are t he result of a protocol-specifi ed intervention,  inclu din g but 
not limit ed to washout or disco ntinua tion of usual therapy, diet,  placebo treatment or a 
procedure. 
 
The investigator is responsible for ensu ring th at all AEs a nd SAEs that are observed or 
inform ed by the patient duri ng t he stu dy are collected and repo rted, a nd to assign 
appropria te attribution to t he study treatme nt. 
 
From t he time of initiation of pem broli zumab through 30 days after surgery, all adverse  
even ts must be reported by the investigator. Additionally, all adverse events meeting serious 
criteria, from time of treatment initiation through 90 days following cessation of study 
treatment, or 30 days following cessation of study treatment if the participant initiates new anti 
cancer therapy should be reported by the investigator. All adverse events will be logg ed i nto a 
protocol-specific REDC ap database. T he reporti ng timefra me for adverse events meeti ng 
any serious cr iteria is described in secti on 8.3.1. The in ves tigat or will  make every  attempt 
t
o follow all sub jects with related non-serious adverse events f or outcome or until 
resolution to grade 0- 1. 
 
8.2 Definition of an Overdose for This Protocol a nd Reporting of Overdose to the 
Sponsor a nd to Merck 
 
For p urposes of this trial, an overdose of pembroli zum ab will  be defined as any dose of 1,000 
mg or greater (≥5 times the indicated dose). No specific infor mation is available on the 
treatment of overdose of pembroli zum ab. Appropria te supportive treatment should be  
provided if cli nically i ndicated. In the event of overdose, the subject should be obse rved 
closely for signs of toxici ty. Appropriate supportive trea tment should be provid ed if clini cally 
indic ated. 
 
If an adverse event(s) is associated with (“res ults from”) the overdose of a Merck product, 
the adverse event(s) is reported as a serious  adverse event, even if no other seriousness  
criteria a re met. 
 
If a dose of Merck ’s product meeting t he protocol definition of overdose is taken without a ny 
associat ed clinical symptoms or abnorm al laboratory r esu lts, the over dos e is reported as a 
non-serio us Event of Cli nical Interest (ECI), using the terminology “accidental or in tentio nal 
overdose witho ut adverse effec t.” 
Proprietary Information of MD Anderson
2017-0057 
January 9, 2019  
Page  33  
  
 
All repor ts of overdose with a nd without an ad verse event mu st be reported within 5 w ork ing  
days to MD ACC’s IND Office and within 2 wor king days to Merck Glob al Sa fety. (A ttn: 
Worldwide Produc t Safety; FAX 2 15661- 6229) 
 
8.3 Repo rting of Pregnancy and Lactation to the Sponsor a nd to Merck 
 
Although pregnancy and lactation are not considered adverse eve nts, it is the responsibili ty 
of inv est igators or their design ees to re port any preg nancy or lactation in a subject  
(spontaneously re ported to them) that occurs during t he trial. 
 
Pregnancies a nd lacta tions tha t occur after the consent form is signed but before initiati on of 
pembrolizumab must be reported by the inves tigator if they cause t he s ubject to be excluded 
from t he trial, or are the result of a protocol-specified interve ntion, includi ng b ut not limit ed 
to washo ut or discontinuation of usual therapy, diet, placebo treatment or a proce dure. 
 
Pregnancies and lac tations that occur from the time of initiation of study treatment 
through 1 20 days following cessation ofstudy treatment,  or 30 days following cessation 
of study treatment if t he subject i nitiates n ew an ticanc er therapy, whichever is earlie r, 
must be reported by the inves tigator. All reported preg nancies must be followed to 
the completion/termi nation of the pregnanc y. Pregnancy outcom es of spontaneo us 
abor tion, missed a bortion, benign hydati diform mole, blighted ovum, fetal death, 
intrauteri ne death, misc arriage and stillbirth must be reported as serious events (Importa nt 
Med
ical Eve nts ). If the preg nancy co ntinues to term, the outcome (health of infant) must 
also be reporte d. 
 
Such events must be report ed within 5 w ork i ng days to MDACC ’s IND Office a nd within 2  
working days to M erc k Glob al Safety. (Att n: Worldwide P roduct Safety; FAX 215661-6229) 
 
8.4 Immedi ate Repo rting of Adverse Events to the S ponsor a nd to Merck 
 
8.3.1 Serious Adverse Events 
 
An adverse event or suspected adverse reaction is considered “seri ous” if, in t he view o f 
either the in ves tigator or the sponsor, it resul ts in any of the following outcomes: 
 
• D
eath 
 
• A life-threateni ng adverse drug experience – any adverse experience th at places the  
patient, in t he view of the initial reporter, at immedia te risk of death from the adverse  
experience as it occurre d. It does not inclu de an adverse experience t hat, had it occurred i n 
a more severe form, might have caused death. 
 
• In
patient h ospitaliza tion or prolongation of existi ng hospitalization 
Proprietary Information of MD Anderson
2017-0057 
January 9, 2019  
Page  34  
  
 
• A persiste nt or signif icant incapacity or substa ntial disrup tio n of the abili ty to conduct  
normal li fe function s. 
 
• A conge nital anomaly/birth defect. 
 
Imp
ortant me dical events that may  not result in death, be life-threatenin g, or re quire 
hospitaliza tion may  be considered a serious adverse drug experience w hen, based upon 
a
ppropria te medic al judgmen t, they may  jeop ardize the patient or subject and may  require  
medical or surgic al intervention to preve nt one of the outcomes listed in this def i nition. 
Examples of such me dical events inclu de allergic bronchospasm requiri ng intensive  
treatment in an emergency room or at home, blood dyscrasias or convulsions that do not  
result in i npatient hospitalization, or the develop ment of drug depe ndency or  drug abuse (21  
CFR 312.32). 
 
• Importa nt medical events as defined above, may  also be considered ser ious adverse  
events. Any im portan t medical eve nt c an and should be reported as an SAE if deeme d 
appropria te by the Principal Investigat or or the IND Sponsor, IND Of fice. 
 
• All events occurring duri ng the conduct of a protocol and meeting the de finition of a 
SAE must be report ed to the IRB in accordance with the timeframes a nd procedur es outline d 
in “The Universi ty of Texas M. D. Anderson Canc er Cent er Institu tional Review Board Polic y 
f
or Investigators on Reporting Serious U nanticipated Adverse Eve nts for Drugs and Devices”. 
Unless stated otherwise in t he protocol, all SAEs, expected or unexpecte d, must be reporte d 
to the IND O ffice, regardless of attribution (within 5 w ork ing days of knowledge of the eve nt). 
 
• All life-threa ten i ng or fat al events, that are unexpected, and related to t he study dru g,  
must have a w ritten report s ubm itted within 24 hours (next w orking day ) of knowledge o f 
the event to the Sa fety Project Manager in the IND Of fice. 
 
• Unless otherwise no ted, the electronic SAE application (eSAE) will be utilized for  
safety reporti ng to the IND Office and MDACC IRB. 
 
• Serious adverse events will be captured from the time of the first protocol-specific 
interve ntion, until 90 days after cessation of study treatment, or 30 days following 
c
essation of study treatment if the subject initiates new anticancer therapy, unless 
the participant withdraws con sent. Ser ious adverse even ts must be follow ed until clinic al 
r
ecovery is complete and laboratory t est s have  returned to baseline, progression of the 
event h as stabi lized, or there has been acceptable resolution of the event.  
 
• Additionally, any serious adverse events th at occur after the time period noted 
above that  are related to t he study treatment mu st be reported to the IND O ffice. This may  
include the  development of a secondary malignanc y. 
 
Reporti ng to FDA: 
Proprietary Information of MD Anderson
2017-0057 
January 9, 2019  
Page  35  
  
 
• Serious adverse events will be f orwarded to FDA by the IND S ponsor (Safety Project  
Manager IND Of fice) according to 21 CFR 312.32. 
 
It is the responsib ility of the PI a nd the research team to ensure serio us adverse events are 
reported according to the Code of Federal Regulation s, Good Cli nical Practi ces, the protoco l 
guidelines, the sponsor’s  guidelines, and Ins titution al Review Board policy. 
 
SAE 
reports and a ny other r elevant sa fety in forma tion are to be forwarded to the Merck  
Glob al Safe ty facsimile n umber: +1- 215-661-6229 
 
A copy of all 15 Day Rep orts a nd Annual Progress Repor ts is submitt ed as required by FDA, 
European Union (EU), Pharmaceu tical and Medic al Devices agency (PMDA) or other local 
regulators. Investigators will cross reference this submission acc ording to local regulations to 
the Merck Investiga tional Compound Numb er (IND, C SA, etc.) at the time of submission.  
 
8.3.2 Events of Clinical Interest  
 
Select ed non-serio us and serio us adverse events are also known as Events of Cli nical Interest 
(ECI) and mu st be report ed within 5 w ork ing days to t he Sponsor and within 2 w ork ing days  
to Merck Glob al Safety. (Att n: Worldwide Product Sa fety; FAX 215- 661-6229 ). 
 
For t he time peri od beginni ng when t he consent form is signed until ini tia tion o f 
pembrolizumab, any ECI ,  or follow up to an ECI, that occurs to any subject mu st be re ported 
within 5 w orking days to the Sponsor a nd within 2 w ork ing days to M erc k Glob al Safe ty if it 
causes  the subject to be excluded from t he trial, or is t he result of a protocol-specifie d 
interve nti on,  includi ng b ut not limited to washout or discontinuation of usual therap y, diet,  
placebo treatme nt or a procedur e. 
 
For the time period beginning at i nitiation of pembrolizumab through 90days following  
cessation of study treatment,  or 30 days following cessation of treat ment if the subject 
initia tes n ew anticancer  therapy, w hichever is earlier, a ny ECI, or follow up to an ECI, 
whether or not related to Merck  produc t, must be reported within 5 w or king days to t he 
Sponsor and within 24 hours to Merck  Glob al Safety. 
 
Even ts of clinic al interest for this trial includ e: 
 
1. an 
overdose of Merck produc t, as defined in Section 8.1 - Definition of an Overdose for  
This P rotocol a nd Report ing of Ov erdose to the S ponsor, that is not associat ed with clinical 
s
ymptoms or abnormal  laboratory results. 
Proprietary Information of MD Anderson
2017-0057 
January 9, 2019  
Page  36  
  
 
2. an elevated AST or ALT lab value that is greater than or equal to 3X the upper limit o f 
normal a nd an elevated tot al bilirubin lab value th at is great er than or equ al to 2X the upper  
limit of normal a nd, at the same time, an alkaline phosphatase lab value that is less  than 2 X 
the upper limit of normal, as det ermi ned by way of protocol-specified laboratory testi ng or 
unscheduled laboratory t est ing.* 
 
*Note: These c riteria are based upon available regulatory guidance documents. The purpose 
of the criteria is to specify a threshold of abnormal he pat ic tests that may  require an 
addition al eval uation for an underlying etiology. 
 
8.3.3 Evaluating Adverse Events 
 
An inves tigator w ho is a qu alified physician will evaluate all  adverse events according to the 
NCI Common Te rminology f or Adverse Events (CTCAE), version 4. 0. Any adverse event which 
changes CTCAE grade over t he course of a given episode will have eac h change of grade  
recorded on the adverse event case re port forms /worksheets.  
 
All adverse events regardless of CTCAE grade mu st also be evaluated f or seriousness. 
 
Table 5 Evaluating Adverse Events 
 
An invest igator who is a qualified p hysician, will  evaluate all adverse events as to: 
 
V4.0  CTCAE  
Grading Grade 1 Mild; asym ptomatic or mid symptoms;  clinical or diagno stic 
observa tions only; intervention not indicated. 
 Grade 2 Moderate; minimal, local or noninvasive interv ention 
indicated; limiting age-appropriate instrumental  ADL. 
 Grade 3 Severe  or  medically  significant  but  not  imm ediately  life- 
thre atening; hospitalization or prolongation or hospitalization 
indicated; disabling; limiting self-care ADL. 
 Grade 4 Life threa tening consequences; urgent intervention indicated. 
 Grade 5 Death related to AE 
Seriou sness  A serious adverse  event is any adverse  event occurring at any dose  or 
during any use of Merck product that: 
†Results in death; or 
†Is life threatenin g; or places  the subje ct, in the view  of the investigator, 
at imm ediate risk of death from the event as it occurred (Note: This does 
Proprietary Information of MD Anderson
2017-0057 
January 9, 2019  
Page  37  
  
 
 
 not include an adverse  event that, had it  occurred in a more seve re form,  
might have  caused  death.); or 
†Results  in a persistent or significant disability/incapacity  (subst antial 
disru ption of one’s ability to conduct normal  life functions); or 
†Results    in    or    prolongs    an    existing    inpatient    hospitalization 
(hospi talization is defined as an inpatient admiss ion, regard less of length 
of stay,  even if the hospitalization is a precautionary  mea sure for 
continued observa tion. (Note:  Hospitalization [including hospitalization 
for an elective  procedure] for a preexist ing condition which has not 
worse ned does not constitute a serious adverse  event.); or 
†Is a congenital  anom aly/birth defect (in offspring of subject taking the 
product regar dless of time to diagnosis);or  
Is a new canc er; (that is not a condition of the study)  or 
Is an overdose (whether accidental or intentional ).   Any adverse  event 
associa ted with an overdose  is considered a serious  adverse  event. An 
over dose that is not associated with an adverse event is considered a non- 
serious event  of clinical interest and must be reported within 24 hours. 
Other important  medical events that may  not result in death, not be life 
thre atening, or not require hospitalization may  be considered a serious 
adverse  event when, based  upon appropriate medical judgment, the 
event may jeopardize the subject and may  require medical or surgical 
intervention to prev ent one of the outcomes listed prev iously (desi gnated 
above by a †). 
Duration Record the start and stop dates of the adverse  event. If less than 1 day,  
indicate the appropriate length of time  and units 
Action  taken Did the adverse  event cause the Mer ck product to be discontinued? 
Rela tionship 
to test drug Did the Merck product cause the adverse  event?  The determination of the 
likelihood that the Merck produ ct caused the adverse  event  will be 
provid ed by an inve stigator who is a qualified physician. The inves tigato r’s 
signe d/dated initials on the source document or  worksheet  that supports 
the causality noted on the AE form,  ensures  that a medically qualified 
assessme nt of causali ty was done. This initialed docum ent must be 
retai ned for the required regulatory time  fram e. The criteria  below are 
intended as reference guidelines to assist the investiga tor in assessing  the 
Proprietary Information of MD Anderson
2017-0057 
January 9, 2019  
Page  38  
  
 
 
 likelihood of a relationship between the test drug and the adverse event  
based              upon              the               available               information. 
The following  components are to be used  to assess  the relationship 
between the Merck product and the AE; the greater the correlation with 
the components and their respective  elements (in number and/or 
intensity ), the more likely the Mer ck product caused the adverse  event 
(AE):  
Expos ure Is there evidence that the subject was actually exposed  to the 
Mer ck pr oduct such as:  reliab le history,  acceptable 
complia nce assessm ent (pill count, diary,  etc.), expec ted 
pharma cologic effect, or measure ment of drug/metabolite in 
bodily specim en? 
Time  
Course  Did the AE follow in a reaso nable temporal sequence from 
administration          of          the           Merck           product? 
Is the time  of onset of the AE compatible with a drug-induced 
effect (applies  to trials with investigational medicinal 
product)? 
Likely 
Cause Is the AE not reas onably expla ined by another etiology  such 
as underlying disease, other  drug(s)/vaccine(s), or other ho st 
or environmental factors  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rela tionship 
 
 
 
to Merck 
product 
 
(continued) The  following  components  are  to  be  used  to  assess  the  relationship 
between the test drug and the AE: (continued) 
Dechallenge Was  the Merck product discontinued  or 
dose/e xposure/frequency redu ced? 
If yes, did the AE resolve  or improve?  
If  yes,  this  is  a  positive  dechall enge.  If  no,  this  is  a 
nega tive dechallen ge. 
Proprietary Information of MD Anderson
2017-0057 
January 9, 2019  
Page  39  
  
 
 
  (Note:  This  criterion  is  not  applicable  if:  (1)  the  AE 
resul ted in death or permane nt disab ility; (2) the AE 
resolve d/improved despite continuation of the Merck 
product; or (3) the trial is a singl e-dose  drug trial); or (4) 
Mer ck product(s) is/are only used one time.) 
Rechallenge  Was  the subject re-exposed to the Merck product  in this 
study?  
 
If yes, did the AE recur or worse n? 
 
If yes, this is a positive rechallenge.  If no, this is a negative 
rechallen ge. 
 
(Note:  This criterion  is not applicable if: (1) the initial AE 
resul ted in death or permanent disabil ity, or (2) the trial 
is a singl e-dose drug tria l); or (3) Mer ck produ ct(s) is/are  
used  only one time). 
 
NOTE:  IF A RECHALLEN GE IS PLAN NED FOR AN ADVERSE 
EVENT WHICH WAS  SERI OUS AND WHICH MAY HAVE 
BEEN CAUSED  BY THE MER CK PRODU CT, OR IF 
REEXPOS URE TO THE MER CK PRODUCT POSES 
ADDITIONAL  POTENTIAL SIGNIFI CANT RISK TO THE 
SUBJECT,  THEN  THE RECHALLENGE  MUST  BE APPROVED 
IN ADVANCE BY THE U.S. CLINICAL MONITOR  AS PER 
DOSE  MODIFICATION GUIDELINES  IN THE PROTO COL. 
 Consiste ncy 
with Trial  
Treat ment 
Profile Is   the   clinical/pathological   pres entation   of   the   AE 
consiste nt with previo us knowle dge regar ding the Merck 
product or drug class pharma cology or toxicology? 
The assessme nt of relationship will be reported on the case report forms /worksheets by 
an investig ator who is a qualified physician according to his/her  best clinical judgm ent, 
including consideration of the above elements. 
Record one of the following Use the following scale of criteria  as guidance (not all 
criteria  must  be pres ent  to  be  indicative  of  a  Merck 
product relationship). 
Proprietary Information of MD Anderson
2017-0057 
January 9, 2019  
Page  40  
  
 
 
Yes,   there   is   a   reasonable 
possi bility  of  Merck  produ ct 
relationship. There is evidence of exposure to the Mer ck product.  The 
temporal  sequence of the AE onset  relative to the 
administration of the Merck product is reas onable. The 
AE is more likely explained by the Mer ck product than by 
another  cause. 
No, there is not a reasonable 
possi bility Merck produ ct 
relationship Subject did not receive the Merck product OR temporal 
sequence of the AE onset  relative to administration of the 
Mer ck product  is not reaso nable OR there  is another  
obvious cause of the AE. (Also entered for a subject with 
over dose without an associated AE.) 
 
 
8.3.4 Sponsor Responsib ility for Repo rting Adv erse Events 
 
All Adverse Events will be reported to regulatory aut horities, IRB/IECs and in ves tigato rs in 
accordance with all ap pli cable global laws and regulations. We will  record events accordi ng 
to phase I trials from the table below. 
 
 
 
 
Recommend ed Adverse Event Recordi ng Guidelines 
 
 
 
 
Attribution Grade 1 Grade 2 Grade 3 Grade 4 Grade 5 
 
Unrela ted  
Phase I  
Phase I  
Phase I 
Phase II  
Phase I 
Phase II 
Phase III  
Phase I 
Phase II 
Phase III 
Unlikely Phase I Phase I Phase I 
 
Phase II Phase I 
 
Phase II 
Phase III Phase I 
 
Phase II 
Phase III 
Possible  Phase I 
 
Phase II Phase  I 
 
Phase II Phase I 
 
Phase II Phase I 
 
Phase II Phase I 
 
Phase II 
Proprietary Information of MD Anderson
2017-0057 
January 9, 2019  
Page  41  
  
 
 
 Phase III Phase III Phase III Phase III 
Probable Phase I 
 
Phase II Phase I 
 
Phase II 
Phase III Phase I 
 
Phase II 
Phase III Phase I 
 
Phase II 
Phase III Phase I 
 
Phase II 
Phase III 
Definitive Phase I 
 
Phase II Phase I 
 
Phase II 
Phase III Phase I 
 
Phase II 
Phase III Phase I 
 
Phase II 
Phase III Phase I 
 
Phase II 
Phase III 
 
 
 
 
 
9.1 STATISTICAL CONSIDER ATIONS  
 
The p urpose of this stu dy is to assess the saf ety of trea tment with pembrol izum ab (two 
cycles) in t he ‘wind ow of opportu nity’  setting for bladder canc er patien ts who are sche duled 
to undergo radic al cystectomy. Secondary  endpoin ts f or efficacy and bio marker activity will 
be described a nd used to design future studies. 
 
9.2 Endpoin ts 
 
9.1.1 Toxicity  for Safe ty Monitori ng (TOX) 
 
TOX will be mo nitored for an approximate 3-month treatment time interval (2 cycles /6 weeks 
+
 surgery /2 week scheduling cushion + 30 day surgic al complication eva l uation ). A pa tient 
will be consider ed to have a toxici ty of concern (TOX) if any of the following ap ply : 
 
 Any 30-day grade 3 or higher surgic al complication at least possibly related to the  
treatment 
 A ny toxi city at least possibly related to t he treatment that preven ts surgery 
o Note, missing surgery d ue to progres sion or withdrawal will  not count as a TOX 
even t. Rapid progression is not seen with p emb rolizumab. 
 D eath between t he start of study and the 30-day post-surgic al assessm ent will count as 
lo
ng as it is toxic death at least possibly relat ed to the pembroliz umab or surgery. Deaths 
clearly unrelat ed to treatment will not count as  an event. 
Proprietary Information of MD Anderson
2017-0057 
January 9, 2019  
Page  42  
  
 
9.1.2 Adverse Events 
 
Adverse events will be rec orded as described in section 8, using C TC v4 and surgical 
complicatio ns 
 
9.1.3 Lymphocytic inf iltration pre a nd post treatment 
 
Pre and post treatment tumor specimens will be formalin- fixed and para ffin-em bedded on 
slides a nd stain ed with H &E a nd evaluated by the collaborat or pat hologist for t he 
presence /absence of lymphocytes within the tum or tissue. 
 
9.1.4 Resi dual tum or 
 
This will be re por ted as w hether there is any res idual tumor in the surgical specimen (prese nt 
/absent) as well as area of the surgic al specimen comprised of residual tumor. 
 
9.1.5 Biom arker activity  
 
Immu nological mar kers inclu de CD4 and CD8 T cells and biomark er activity includes TILS, PD- 
1 and PD-L1 levels. T hese will be meas ured fr om the biop sy samples and surgic al specimen s. 
 
9.1.6 Tumor Yield. 
 
The amo unt of res idual tumor available f or analysis and t he numbers of patien ts wit h 
assessab
le samples will be recorded. 
 
9.1.7 Human M icrobiome  
 
The hu mane microbiome profile by 16S ribosom al sequencing will be obtained from urine  
and feces. These data will then be us ed in an ad hoc correlation wi th our pathologic endpoint. 
 
9.2 Sample Size Considerations  
 
A pilot gro up of 20 patien ts will be assessed to con fir m t he saf ety of pre-sur gical 
pembrolizumab a nd also allow for preliminary studies of dru g efficacy and markers of tissue 
activity. With this sample size and the int eri m moni toring described below,  we will s top  th e 
trial early 6 8% of the time of the underlying population TOX rate is 30%, b ut only 16% at the 
target of 15%, a nd 0.7 % if it is 5%. If the trial TOX rate is 15% (3 /20), the 95% posterior 
credible in ter val would be (5.4%, 36 .3%) using a prior of b eta(1, 1). 
 
9.3 Safe ty Interim Analyses  
 
The safe ty analys es will monit or TOX as defined above using t he methods of Thall et al[9 ]. If 
there is high probability that the underlyi ng TOX rate is greater th an 15%,  the trial will be he ld 
Proprietary Information of MD Anderson
2017-0057 
January 9, 2019  
Page  43  
  
 
until all tre ated pa tients have completed 30 days post-surgery or gone off study prior to that  
time. T he trial will then be sto pped early if the risk of severe toxicity has bee n confirmed. 
Formally, denoting TOX probabili ty by pTOX a nd assumi ng this  follows a be ta (1, 1) prior 
distri bution,  the trial wi ll be held if P rob(pTOX > 0.15 | dat a) > 0.95. Moni toring will s tar t  
once the 5th patient has been on trial for 4 w eeks (at the end of the first w eek of cycle 2) . 
After that, monitorin g w ill continue monthly until the 20th patient has been followed f or the 
full treatme nt period. A 6th patient will  only be enrolled once there is sufficient evi dence that 
fewer than 2 patien ts have TOX, i.e. ≥4 of the first 5 patients complete 30 days after surgery  
with no TOX. F or the purposes of on going m onthly trial monitoring, pati ents will be eval uab le 
if they have been treated a nd then ei ther have a TOX or have gone 4 w eeks wi thout TOX. 
Pa
tients who are without TOX at 4 w eeks, but w ho devel op TOX later within t he treatment  
interval will  count as having a TOX at the next monthly evalua tion. Stopping rules an d 
operating characteristics were calculated in MultcLean 2. 1. 
 
Note, that since we expect enrollme nt of 1-2 patients per mo nth, it is possible that monthly 
monitoring may  allow a small overrun of patients, b ut this is expec ted to be only 1-2  
addition al patients  at any given look. 
 
If there  are this many (or more)  patients with TOX: 2 3 4 5 6 
Stop the trial if there  are this many (or fewer)  patients who are 
evaluable for TOX: 5 9 13 17 20* 
*Alway s  stop  wi th  20  patients,  but  if  6  or  more  patients  have  a  TOX  event,  then 
pembrolizumab is unsafe for ‘window of opportu nity’  use at this dose and sc hedule. 
 
The opera ting c haracteristics of this design based on simula tions are summariz ed in t he 
followi ng table. Note, since accrual will continue during monitoring, i t ’s possible that these 
re
sults un derestima te the n umbers of pa tients by 1-2 pa tients at the higher TOX rates. 
 
True  Prob(TOX)  Pr(stop) Median # Pts (25%,  75%) 
0.05  0.03 20 (20, 20) 
0.10 0.11 20 (20, 20) 
0.15  0.25  20 (16, 20) 
0.20  0.43 20 (5, 20) 
0.25 0.60 12 (5, 20) 
Proprietary Information of MD Anderson
2017-0057 
January 9, 2019  
Page  44  
  
 
 
0.30  0.75 7 (5, 19) 
0.35 0.86 5 (5, 12) 
0.40  0.93 5 (5, 8) 
 
 
The Investigator is res ponsible for completi ng a safety summary repo rt a nd subm itting it to 
the IND office Medical Monitor for review. This should be submitted after t he first 5  
evaluable patients complete 4 w eeks of study treatme nt prior to cys tectomy, and monthly 
thereafter. On every  new repo rt submission, the information from previous rep orted 
patients will ne ed to be update d, and the information fr om new pa tients added 
 
9.4 Analysis Plan  
 
TOX events will be re port ed with a 9 5% credible interval assuming a non-informative prior of 
beta (1,1). Specific even ts will also be summari zed. Then all adverse e vents and surgical 
complicatio ns will be report ed overall by grad e, attribution, and trea tment period (cycle 1, 
cycle 2, betw een the end of cycle 2 and actual surgery, 30 days following surgery) . 
Demo graphic and baseline laboratory resul ts will be summarized using descriptive an d 
grap hical statistic s. Changes in markers bet ween bio psy and surgi cal resecti on will be  
compared with a pai red t-test or non- paramet ric alternative as indic ated for co ntinuous 
measures, a nd with McN emar’s  test for binary or ordinal measures. The n umbers  of patients 
w
ith sufficient samples f or labo ratory analysis will be used to plan the numbers of pa tients 
need ed for enough evaluable sam ples fu ture trials. Similarly this experience will guide 
plan ning for t he numbers and types of m arkers that c an be reasonably assessed from surgic al 
specimens in this patient population after ‘w indow of opport unity’ pembroliz umab 
t
reatment. 
 
10.0 INVES TIGATIONAL P RODUCT  
 
The in ves tigator shall take responsibili ty for a nd shall take all s tep s to main tai n a ppropriate 
records and ensure appropriate sup ply, storage, han dling, distributi on and usage o f 
investigation al product in accordance wi th t he protocol and any a pplicable laws an d 
regulation s. 
 
Clinic al supplies  must  be store d  in  a secure, li mit ed- access locati on under t he storage  
conditions specifi ed on the label. 
 
Receipt and dispensing of trial medication must be recorded by an auth orized person at the 
trial site.  
Proprietary Information of MD Anderson
2017-0057 
January 9, 2019  
Page  45  
  
 
Clinic al supplies may  n ot be used for any purpose othe r than that stated in the protocol. 
 
Clinic al supplies will be af fixe d with a cli nical label in acc ordance with reg ulato ry 
requir ements. 
 
The in ves tigator is res ponsible f or kee ping accurate records of the clinical sup plies received 
from Merck or designee, the amount dispensed to and returned by the subjects  and the 
amount remaini ng at the concl usion of the trial. 
 
Upon com pletion or terminatio n of the study, all unused and/ or partially us ed 
investigation al product will  be destroyed at t he site p er institutional  policy. It is the  
Investigat or’s responsi bility to a r r a n g e f o r disposal of all empty containers, provided that  
procedures for proper disposal have been established acc ording to applicable federal, state,  
local and institu tional guidelin es a nd proce dures, and provid ed that appropriate records of 
disposal are kept. 
 
 
 
 
11.1 ADMINISTRATIVE AND R EGULATORY DETAILS  
 
11.2 Confidentiality 
 
All 
pathology specimen s, evalua tion forms, reports and other records will be i dentif ie d 
in a manner designed to maintain patient confidentiality. All records will  be kept in a 
secure storage area with limited acc ess. No patient i dentifiers  will be used when  
analyzing t he data or reporting t he results. 
 
11.3 Compliance wi th Financial Disclosu re Requ ireme nts 
 
Before the start of the study, t he investigator and each sub-in ves tigat or will disclose 
a
ny proprietary or financial interest s. T he investigator agre es to update this 
information duri ng the study or within o ne year of i ts com pletion. 
 
11.4 Compliance wi th Law, Audit a nd Debar ment 
 
The in sti tu tion rep resents and warrants that neither it,  the Princip al Invest igato r, nor  
any of the Institu tion’s employees  performi ng the Stu dy is (a) under investigation by the 
Food and Dr ug Administ ration (“FDA”)  or equivalent authori ty in connection wi th an 
action to debar, disqual ify, or prohib it such pers on or entity from participati ng in huma n 
research or (b) presently debarre d, disqualified or prohi bited pursua nt to 21 U. S.C.  § 
Proprietary Information of MD Anderson
2017-0057 
January 9, 2019  
Page  46  
  
 
335(a) and 335( b) or any other applicable law or by any regulatory authority or  
governme nt entity. 
 
11.5 Compliance wi th Trial R egistration a nd Results Posting Requ ireme nts 
 
Under the terms of t he Food and Drug Ad ministration Moderni zation Act (FDAM A) and 
the Food and Dru g A dministration Ame ndments Act (FDAAA), t he Sponsor of the trial is 
solely responsible for det ermini ng whether the trial and i ts resul ts are subject to the  
requir ements for submission to the Clinic al Trials Data Bank,  
http: //www . cli nicalt rials.gov. Informa tion post ed will  allow subjec ts to identify 
potentially ap propriate trials for their disease co nditions and pursue participati on by  
calling a central contact num ber for f urther in forma tion on a ppropriate trial loc ations 
and trial site contact in formatio n. 
 
 
 
 
12.1 APPENDICES  
 
12.2 ECOG Pe rformance Status  
 
Grade Descript ion 
 
0 Normal  activ ity.  Fully  active,  able  to  carry  on  all  pre-disease  
performa nce without restricti on. 
 
1 Symptoms,  but  ambulatory.  Restricted  in  physically  strenuous 
activity,  but ambulatory and able to carry out work of a light or 
sedentary nature (e.g., light housewor k, office  work). 
 
2 In bed <50% of the time.  Ambulatory and capable of all self-care, but 
unable to carry out any work activities.  Up and about  more than 50% 
of waking hours. 
 
3 In bed >50% of the time. Capable of only limited self-care, confined 
to bed or chair more than 50% of waking hours. 
 
4 100% bedridden. Comp letely disabled. Cannot carry on any self-care. 
Totally  confined to bed or chair.  
5 Dead.  
* As publi shed in Am. J. Clin. Oncol.:   O ken, M.M ., Creech,  R.H., Tormey,  D.C., 
Horto n, J., Davis,  T.E.,  McFadden, E.T.,  Carbone, P.P.:  Toxicity And Response Criteria Of 
Proprietary Information of MD Anderson
2017-0057 
January 9, 2019  
Page  47  
  
 
The Eastern Cooperative Oncology Grou p. Am J Clin Oncol 5:649-655,  1982. The Easter n 
Cooperative Oncology Grou p, Robert Comis M.D., Group Chair. 
 
 
 
 
12.3 Common  Termi nology Criter ia for Adverse Events V4.0 (CTCAE)  
 
The descriptions a nd grading scales found in t he revis ed NCI Common Te rminology Criteria 
for Adverse Events ( CTCAE) version 4.0 will be utilized for adverse event re porting. 
(http:/
/ctep.cancer.gov/repor ting/ctc.html)  
 
REFERENCES: 
 
1. Liakou, C.I ., et al., CTLA-4 block ad e increases IFNgamma -produci n g CD4+ICOShi cells 
t
o shift the ratio o f effector to reg ul atory T cells in c ancer patients. Proc Na tl Acad Sci 
U S A, 2008. 105(39): p. 14987-9 2. 
2. Chen, H., et al., CD4 T cells require ICOS-mediated PI3K signaling to increase T-Bet  
expression in the setting of anti-CTLA-4 th erapy. Canc er Immunol Res, 2014. 2(2): p. 
167-76. 
3. Ng Tang, D., et al., Increased frequency of ICO S+ CD4 T cells as a pharmacodynamic 
biomark er for anti-CTLA-4 th erapy. Canc er Immunol Res, 201 3. 1(4): p. 229- 34. 
4. Car
thon, B.C ., et al., Preop erative CTLA-4 block ade: toler ab ility and immune  
monitoring in the settin g of a presurgical clinical trial. C lin Canc er Res, 2010. 16(10):  
p. 2861-71. 
5. Choi, W., et al., Intrinsic basal and lu min al s ubtypes of muscle-invasi ve bladd er c ancer.  
Nat Rev Urol, 201 4. 11(7 ): p. 400- 10. 
6. Choi, W., et al., p63 expression defi nes a let hal s ubset of muscle-invasi ve bladder  
cancers. PLoS On e, 201 2. 7(1): p. e3020 6. 
7. Plim ack, E.R., et al., Safety and activity of p embrolizumab in pa tients with locally 
advanced or metastatic urothelial c ancer (KEYNOTE-012): a non-ran domised, ope n- 
label, pha se 1b study.  Lancet Oncol, 201 7. 18(2 ): p. 212-220. 
8. Bellmunt, J., et al., P embroli zumab as Sec ond-Line Therapy for Adv anc ed Urothelial 
Carci noma. N En gl J Med, 201 7. 376(11): p. 1015-1026. 
9. Thall, P.F.,  R.M. Simo n, and E.H. Estey, Bayesian sequential m onitoring desi gn s for  
single-a rm clinical trials with multiple outco mes. Stat Med, 199 5. 14(4 ): p. 357- 79. 
10. Gopalakrishnan V et al Scienc e. 2018 Jan 5;35 9(6371):97-10 3. doi: 
10.1126/science.aa n4236. Epub 2017 N ov 2. 
Proprietary Information of MD Anderson