Sick-Day Protocol to Improve Outcomes 
in Chronic Kidney Disease  
Study Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
10.21.2020  
10/21/2020   
  
   
Study Procedures  
 
If you uploaded a separate research protocol document in the ‘Research Protocol’ page, cite the applicable   
section and page numbers from that document in the answer boxes below. (If this study is a collaborative UM/VA 
study please list each procedure tha t is being conducted and the locations where it is being  conducted.)  
 
1 * Describe all procedures being performed for research purposes only (these procedures would not be done if individuals were 
not in the study) and when they are performed, including proc edures being performed to monitor subjects for safety or  to 
minimize  risks:  
Consented participants will undergo the following procedures:  
 
1) Baseline  Visit:  
All study  participants  will be surveyed  via telephone  or in person  for medical  history,  demographics,  co-morbidities,  and recent  medical  events.  Medication  ascertainment 
will include VA and non-VA, prescribed or OTC drugs per protocols employed in Safe Kidney Care (SKC). All study participants will be provided an in -service over the 
phone des cribing the features of a sick -day event ( e.g, vomiting, diarrhea, fever, and poor fluid intake) and the potential health consequences of a sick day includ ing 
volume depletion. Participants will be instructed on signs of volume depletion including thirst,  weight change, fatigue, lightheadedness, and the significance of such 
events should they persist more than a  day. 
 
Intervention participants (Sick -Day Protocol): They will be provided with detailed instructions on the elements of the protocol to be initia ted in the event of a sick -day 
which include holding of RAS blocker and diuretic (or NSAID or metformin) during the sick -day and resumption upon resolution of illness. Participants will be asked to 
obtain pre -ordered laboratories at their home clinic durin g the sick -day or as soon after the event as possible (unless they have need for ER visit or admission). The 
study coordinator and or study -associated staff in the Renal Inter -Disciplinary Safety Clinic (RISC) (described below) will monitor laboratory valu es in conjunction with 
primary care staff for alert findings.They will be provided with a tutorial and demonstration on use of the IVSRDS (described  below). Sick -day protocol participants will 
have  a weekly  IVSDRS  assessment  of the frequency  of sick-day events,  and will be tracked  for their use of the self-management  protocol  in the event  of a sick-day event 
They will have the option for the IVSDRS to call their usual care provider if needed or in the event the sick -day is protracted. RISC will also monitor participants for 
requests for follow -up call or prolonged  illness.  
 
Usual Care participants: The p articipants will be provided a card identifying the sick day features only. They will be provided with instruction to call their usual care 
provider,  or study -associated  RISC  staff in the event  of a sick-day event.  Participants  will be asked  to obtain  pre-ordered  laboratories  at their home  clinic  during  the sick- 
day or as soon after the event as possible (unless they have need for ER visit or admission). The study coordinator and RISC staff will monitor laboratory values in 
conjunction with primary care st aff for alert  findings.  
 
2) 6 month  Study  visit: (+ or - 2 weeks  to accommodate  scheduling  conflicts.  Note  : This is our target  visit range.  Due to the disease  burden  of this populations  and 
hospitalizations,  scheduling  conflicts  may occur,  in which  case,  study  visit will be completed  as soon  as possible.)  
All participants  will have  a medical  history  update,  medication  profile  update,  and confirmation  of final laboratory  testing.  IVSDRS  satisfaction  survey  will be administered 
to participants in the active arm. All study participants will be surveyed as to the occurrence of sick -days over the prior six months (the responses of the active arm 
participants will be compared to their IVSDRS  results).  
 
IVSDRS  procedure:  Upon  participant  randomization  to the active  Sick-Day Protocol  arm, the coordinator  will request  a designated  telephone  number  (wireless  or ground 
line) and preferred times for weekly IVSDRS calls. The automated voice -driven protocol will be delivered week ly to active arm participants. With each IVSDRS call, 
participants will verify identity with a unique study identifier. The initial query menu will elicit whether a sick -day event is ongoing or occurred during the prior 7 -day 
interval. In respondents with no sick -day occurrence, the call will end with the next call in 7 days. In participants who register a sick -day event in the previous 7 days, a 
follow -up query algorithm will determine self - initiated actions in response to the sick -day and whether the act ions are consistent with the self - management Sick -Day 
Protocol  to hold high risk drugs  (RAS  blocker,  diuretic,  metformin,  or NSAID)  and whether  these  drugs  were  resumed.  In participants  with an ongoing  sick-day at the time 
of the call, a follow -up call will be initiated in 3 days to determine the participants, status and whether all drugs have been resumed. The IVSDRS  has capability for 
participant to request speaking to a provider with an urgent incident, and providers  are notified via text when an urgent or frequent event is detected. All IVSDRS 
responses  are stored  centrally  and are accessible  to research  staff.  Entries  that require  timely  attention  will be flagged,  reviewed  by staff and decision -support  team,  and 
communicated  to the usual  care team  where  appropriate.  Note:  study  participants  will be tracked  in an intent -to-treat manner  and not considered  loss-to-follow -up unless 
unreachable at 6 -month close -out visit. 
 
Clinical measures: With the plan for all encounters in this protocol to be conducted remotely to accommodate recruitment of a  large sample size, there will be no in - 
center  collection  of vital sign or anthropometric  measures.  However,  clinical  encounter  in the VAMHCS  include  EHR  recording  of several  important  variables  which  can 
be utilized  for this study  including  weight,  calculated  BMI, automated  blood  pressure,  pulse,  and temperature  (with  the latter  protocol -pertinent).  Point -of-care measures 
of glucose, pulse oximetry, hemoglobin, and glycosylated hemoglobin readings are also available, and laboratory readings incl uding those for hemoglobin, lipids, and 
urinalysis  are prevalent.  For this study,  readings  will be utilized  within  90 days  or less following  registration  of a prescription  of RAS blocker  and diuretic,  with summary 
measures including mean, median, high and low values utilized for those with repeated  measures.  
 
Laboratory assessment: All participants will have baseline and end -of-study measurement of renal chemistry panel (including serum sodium, potassium, bicarbonate, 
BUN, creatinine, Ca, and P04) through VAMHCS laboratory services. The blood drawl will be no more than 3 teaspoons or 14.8 ml  at each visit. They will also be 
instructed  to obtain  serum  chemistry  tests  proximate  to a sick-day incident  to identify  acute  kidney  injury  and electrolyte  disturbances,  with standing  orders  at participants’ 
home  clinic  laboratory.  VAMHCS  laboratory  services  use CKD -EPI equation  for automated  reporting  of estimated  GFR.  
 
Decision -support  for Renal  Inter-disciplinary  Safety  Clinic  (RISC):  The VA RISC  is a referral  clinic  with a multi -disciplinary  staff dedicated  to assessment  of CKD  patients 
with adverse  safety  events.  The RISC  staff will be available  to all study  participants  who elect  to call providers  for guidance  on self-management  of a sick-day event.  
Primary  care providers  of all study  participants  will be provided  with contact  information  and services  available  through  the RISC.  For usual  care participants  this will be 
on a consultative  basis  in conjunction  with primary  care providers  when  their assigned  patients  are sick per standard  clinical  protocol.  For Sick-Day Protocol  participants, 
RISC staff will review a ll IVSDRS entries for alerts that require phone evaluation (e.g, failure of participants to pick up 3 -day post sick -day call, failure to resume RAS 
inhibitor or diuretic after sick -day, and additional medication starts or cessation). RISC staff will monito r labs obtained on all study participants over duration of the 
protocol for necessary  recommendations.  
 
COVID -19 Update:  Study  laboratory  assessments  will not be completed  during  this time to limit unnecessary  travel  and human -to-human  contact.  Participants  currently 
enrolled  will be contacted  by phone  at the timepoints  indicated  by protocol.  Telephone  phone  visits  will be conducted  by the study  coordinator  remotely.  Survey  data will 
be recorded on paper forms. The only identifiable information o n these forms are the patient’s name and date of the phone visit. Once the UMB telework period has 
ended, study coordinator will file the forms in the Baltimore VAMC research office and enter them electronically. We will add specific data entries to our el ectronic data 
capturing  system  (REDCap)  for information  such  as missed  study  visits  or study  discontinuations  due to current  state  of emergency  with COVID -19 status.  
 
 
 
 
10/21/2020   
  
   
Sample Size and Data Analysis  
 
If you uploaded a separate research protocol document in the ‘Research Protocol’ page, cite the applicable 
section an d page numbers from that document in the answer boxes below.  
 
1 * Provide the rationale and sample size calculations for the proposed target  population:  
With change  in renal  function  as our primary  outcome,  we utilized  a VAMHCS  data sample  to determine  a baseline  rate of renal  function  loss. From  CKD  patients  taking 
a RAS blocker and diuretic, and with a documented sick -day ICD -9 code, we selected the most proximate measure of renal function ≥ 2 weeks preceding the sick -day 
incident  as an index  measure.  Renal  function  trajectories  were  then tracked  up to 1 year after the sick day. The median  rate of GFR  change  was -0.02 per ml/min/1.73m2 
per month in the pilot sample, and 41% were designated as rapid progressors defined by a GFR loss of 0.2ml/min/1.73 m2 or gre ater per month (2.4 ml/min/.73 m2 or 
more annually). The sample data also showed that 27% of participants on a RAS bl ocker and diuretic experienced an ICD -9 code documented sick -day in 2014, but we 
assert this is an under -estimation of all sick -days since it only accounts for events linked to a hospitalization or clinic/ER visit. Of note: only about 10% of SKC 
participan ts reporting a GI illness at a study visit notified a provider or went to the ER/hospital. Therefore, we estimate the proport ion of participants experiencing a sick - 
day during the study period to be  33%.  
 
We also examined detectable rate differences in ur gent service utilization between the usual care vs sick -day protocol arm (with the latter set with lower rates of 
utilization) across a range of sample sizes. The SKC study results reveal at initial 6 -month telephone follow -up, > 30% of SKC participants ha d one or more 
hospitalization  since  enrollment  for a rate of 8.8 hospitalizations  per 100 patient -months.  Using  this count  data as the presumed  rate for the usual  care group  we can 
estimate  a median  hospitalization  rate of .528 hospitalization  over 6 month s ((8.8/100  patient -months)  x( 6 months)).  
 
Anticipating  33% of enrollees  will experience  a sick-day during  the protocol  a sample  size of 800 participants  is feasible  to be enrolled  given  the inclusion  criteria  and the 
proposed  2 year period.  This sample  size provide  the power  to detect  difference  in effect  of Sick-Day Protocol  on frequency  of rapid  renal  function  losers  and incidence 
of hospitalization. We view this sample size to be achievable given the PI and SKC program’s enrollment success, the target V AMHCS population, the plan for phone - 
based study visits, and the low burden remote data capture  protocol.  
 
2 * Provide the  plan for data analysis. Include in the description the types of comparisons that are planned (e.g., comparison of 
means, comparison of proportions, regressions, analysis of variance, etc.), which is the primary comparison/analysis,  and 
how the analyses pr oposed will relate to the primary purposes of the study:  
This trial’s  analysis  will adhere  to the principle  of intention -to-treat based  on participant  group  assignment.  Additional  analyses  will be conducted  with restriction  to those 
reporting  sick-days  within  each  assigned  group.  Expected  causes  of drop-out include  ESRD,  death,  and loss to follow -up (at last clinical  entry  for usual  care group,  and 
last IVSDRS entry for active group) if not contacted at final 6 -month  visit. 
 
Aim 1: The null hypothesis  for Aim 1 is there  is no difference  in the rate of renal  function  loss,  AKI episodes,  or urgent  service  utilization  between  the sick-day protocol  vs 
usual care arms. For examination of change in renal function from baseline to 6 -months in estimated GFR, we will employ linear regression, which accommodates 
continuous measure outcomes and adjusts for other covariates, and any difference in GFR at base line. Note: the model will permit an indicator for use of RAS blocker 
and diuretic  individually  if required  due to expanded  enrollment  of individuals  taking  RAS  blocker  AND/OR  diuretics  (see Enrollment).  To determine  difference  in count  of 
AKI episodes  between  the groups,  whether  defined  by health  system  encounters  with diagnostic  codes,  or by incidental  measures  of renal  function  during  a sick-day, we 
will use repeated -measures Poisson regression containing an indicator variable for group assignment (even when restricted to only those partici pants reporting a sick - 
day). With the potential for repeated events, we will employ generalized linear mixed models (SAS PROC GLIMMIX), which performs repeated measures analyses 
allowing for one of everal covariance structures (e.g. unstructured, compound symmetry, etc) to account for the correlation i nherent in repeated measures data. We will 
select the best cov ariance structure using AICC, a modified version of Akaike’s Information Criteria. We anticipate that our data may be over -dispersed and GLIMMIX 
can be programmed to use a negative binomial or Poisson distribution – both methods allowing analysis of over -dispersed data[69]. Since follow -up time may vary from 
individual  to individual  (if subjects  are lost to follow -up prior to the final 6-month  visit) we will use the offset  parameter  (capturing  person -months)  to convert  the number  of 
events  for each  subject  to an event  rate, and compare  event  rates  in the two groups.  Similar  analysis  method  will be employed  to determine  differences  in urgent  service 
use between the sick -day protocol and usual care  arms.  
 
Aim 2: The objective  of Aim 2 will be to determine  the rate of sick-day events  in high-risk CKD  patients,  who are tracked  by IVSDRS  or by survey.  We will use descriptive 
methods to evaluate the incidence rate of this discrete event. GLIMMIX with a Poisson distribution will be employed to accomm odate the potential for repeated events 
within individuals and also variable follow -up time given the possibility of ES RD, death of loss to follow -up. GLIMMIX can also accommodate the introduction of 
covariates  defined  such  that difference  in AKI rates  can be examined  across  pertinent  strata  (e.g, diabetics,  older  patients,  use of RAS  blocker  AND/OR  loop diuretic).  
Similar  analyses will be conducted using survey responses regarding of sick -day events obtained on all participants at study completion.  
 
Aim 3: The objective of Aim 3 is to assess the adherence of active -arm participants to the sick -day protocol. The analysis will be restricted to the active (IVSDRS) arm 
participants with determination of protocol adherence conditioned on the recording of a  sick-day. Descriptive statistics will be employed to determine the proportion of 
participant  sick-days  during  which  RAS blockers  and/or  diuretics  are ceased,  and then the proportion  of participant  sick-days  after which  these  agents  are resumed.  We 
will examine  what  factors  determined  at baseline  are predictive  of adherence  vs non-adherence.  We will also examine  frequency  of urgent  service  utilization  following  a 
sick-day due to failure  to resume  RAS  blockers  and/or  diuretics  (e.g urgent  CHF or hypertension  admissions).  
 
Covariates:  Several  variables  are clinically  available  and will be included  in the multivariate  analyses  along  with covariates  ascertained  as part of the study  protocol.  As 
described in Study Procedures, EHR vital sign and anthropometric measures along with several biochemical measures (e.g, HbA1C , hemoglobin, electrolytes) will be 
collected,  summarized  and updated  during  study  interval.  Measures  of co-morbidity,  case -mix, and pharmacotherapy  will also be ascertained  at baseline  and 6 months, 
and included in  analyses.  