BIOMEDICAL RESEARCH PROTOCOL  
UNIVERSITY OF MISSOURI  
 
Project Title:  A Prospective, Randomized, Non -Blinded, Crossover Controlled  
                     Clinical Trial E valuating the Efficacy of Face M ask Ventilation with 45  
                     Degree Head Rotation in Anesth etized Obese (BMI ≥ 35) Adults  
IRB Number:  2012364  
Version Number: 1  
Version Date: 08/24/2018  
Principal Investigator:  Boris Mraovic, MD  
Funding Source:  Departmental   
Clinicaltrials.gov Number:  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
 PI: Boris Mraovic, MD1, 2  
Associate Professor  
 
Co-I: Michael S. Lasky, BS2 
Medical Student  
 
Co-I: Noah Timko, BS , BHS1, 2  
Research Specialist  
 
1Department of Anesthesiology and Perioperative Medicine  
2School of Medicine  
University of Missouri  
Columbia, Missouri 65212  
 
 
 
Primary Contact:  Boris Mraovic , MD  
Department of Anesthesiology and Perioperative Medicine  
University of Missouri –Columbia  
One Hospital Drive, C2053 ; DC005.00  
Columbia, MO 65212  
Telephone: (573)  882-2568  
Fax: (573)  882-2226  
Email: mraovicb @health.missouri.edu  
2 
 2.1 Objectives:  
This prospective, randomized,  non-blinded,  crossover  controlled clinical trial will enroll 
subjects with a BMI ≥ 35 who are undergoing elective  surgical procedures . Subjects will 
be randomized to receive mask ventilation after general induction of anesthesia in either 
a neutral head position (practice standard position) or a head rotation position (45 
degree angle) to determine : 
 
Primary Endpoint:  
1. Maximal and average  expiratory  tidal v olume during mask ventilation  
 
Secondary Endpoints:  
1. Maximal and average  inspiratory  tidal volume during mask ventilation  
2. Maximal and average end -tidal CO 2 (ETCO 2) during mask ventilation  
3. Maximal and ave rage airway flow L/min  during mask ventilation  
4. Lowest and delta O2 saturation drop on SpO 2 during mask ventilation  
5. Lowest and delta O 2 saturation drop on SpO 2 during intubation  
 
2.2 Clinical Hypotheses:  
Primary Hypothesis:  
We hypothesize  that a 45 degree head rotation during mask ventilation  will: 
1. Increase the efficacy of mask ventilation  measured by tidal v olumes  
 
Exploratory  Hypotheses : 
We hypothesize that a 45 degree head rotation during mask ventilation  will: 
1. Decrease  upper airway obstruction measured by airway flow  
2. Improve  oxygenation measured by SpO 2 during  mask ventilation  
3. Improve oxygenation measured by SpO 2 during intubation  
 
 
3 
 3.1 Background  & Rationale : 
Mask ventilation is a foundation of airway management after the initial induction of 
anesthesia.  It allows for adequate oxygenation of the patient to  buy enough time for 
intubation , during which the patient is not ventilated.   However, in some patients mask 
ventilation may be difficult – older than 55  years , heavier ( BMI > 26 kg/m2), with no  
teeth, having a beard  or sleep apnea .1,2,3  Inadequate ventilation, if  not corrected, can 
result in decreasing oxygen saturation to dangerous levels – which could lead to 
devastating complications.  As a result,  the efficacy of mask ventilation is of critical 
importance to patient safety  after the induction of anesthesia .  
 
A recent study proposed that mask ventilation could be improved simply by turni ng a 
patient’s head.   The study showed  that rotating a patient’s head to a 45 degree angle 
significantly improved mask ventilation when compared with the he ad placed in a neutral 
position.4   However, this study was done i n patients with a BMI less than  35.  As such , 
the effects of head rotation on the efficacy of mask ventilation has not been studied in 
patients with a BMI of 35  and greater . 
 
Obesity (BMI ≥ 30  kg/m2) affects almost 40% of US adults  and is one of the most 
prevalent health concerns in our society.5  It is a predictor of difficult mask ventilation  
because it is associated with increased upper airway obstruction, decreased airway 
patency, and decreased lung volumes such as functional residual capacity (FRC) .1  If 
previous findings in regard to the effect of 45 degree head rotation on the efficacy of 
ventilation hold true in the obese patient, then this study will show that head rotation 
could  be used as a simple  way to improve the efficacy of mask ventilation  for patients 
with a BMI of 35 and above .4 
 
4.1 Study Design : 
This will be a prospective,  randomized,  crossover , non-blinded , controlled clinical trial 
performed at a single academic hospital.  
4 
 4.2 Study Design : 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.3 Study Procedures:  
I. Subject  Population : this study will enroll 38 adults undergoing elective surgery  
requiring general anesthesia  with intubation of the trachea .   
 
II. Inclusion Criteria : 
a. Age ≥ 18 years  
b. ASA I -III 
c. BMI ≥ 35  kg/m2  
 
III. Exclusion Criteria : 
a. Inability to obtain  written  informed consent  
b. Pregna nt or breast feeding  
c. Limited head rotation or neck extension  
d. Subjects with expected or history difficult  intubation  
e. Large beard  
f. OG/NG tube  
g. GERD  
Sample (38) 
Group A (19 ) 
Step 1: Neutral Position (1min)  
Step 2: Head Rotation (1min)  
Step 3: Neutral Position (1min)  
 
Randomization  
Group B (19 ) 
Step 1: Head Rotation (1min)  
Step 2: Neutral Position (1min)  
Step 3: Head Rotation (1min)  
 
5 
 IV. Randomization: On the day of surgery,  before the induction of anesthesia  subject s 
will be randomized into either Group A or Group B .  Randomization will be 
accomplished by the method  of randomized permuted block . The two groups will 
be stratified so that obe se subject s with a BMI ≥ 35 and ≤ 44 and those with a 
BMI ≥ 45  are equa lly distributed between both groups. Groups will be additionally 
stratified by the presence or lack of obstructive sleep apnea (OSA).  
 
V. Blinding: Group assignment will not be known by research staff at the time of subject 
recruitment. No blinding will occur during the clinical portion of the study or during  
data analysis.  
 
VI. Preoperative Data Collection and Measurements : Before the subject is taken into the 
operating ro om, we will record and measure a ge, BMI, sex, ASA status, preop 
diagnoses,  OSA,  procedure being done, Mal lampati  score , mouth opening, thyro -
mental distance, neck circumference, neck range of motion, lack of teeth , 
presence of beard,  and history of snoring .  
 
VII. Anesthetic Management  
a. Monitoring  
1. All subject s will be monitored with standard  perioperative  monitors : ECG, 
non-invasive blood pressure, pulse oximetry, esophageal temperature, 
and capnography.  
 
b. Anesthetic Technique  
1. All subject s will receive a standardized general anesthetic technique and 
all anesthetic medications  will be dosed on the ideal body wei ght rather 
than actual body weight .  
2. Preoxygenation  – 100% oxygen  delivered via face mask  for a minimum of 
3 minutes  
6 
 3. Induction – intravenous delivery of propofol, 1.5-2.0 mg/kg , fentanyl, 1 
µg/kg, and rocuronium , 0.6 mg/kg . Additional propofol or fentanyl may be 
administered at the discretion of the anesthesia provider . 
4. Mask Ventilation – start when subject loses consciousness. Ventilation 
settings will be pressure controlled ventilation 20 cmH 2O. Respiratory 
Rate will be 1 6. Group A will receive 1 minute of neutral head position 
followed by 1 minute of 45 degree head rotation to the right and then 1 
minute of neutral  head position.  Group B will be the opposite.  If mask 
ventilation is difficult  or SpO2 saturation drops below 90%  the subject will 
be excluded from the study. Immediately after exclusion the standard of 
care ventilation will be resumed.  
5. Intubation – will be in the standard of ca re fashion after the 3 sets of head 
positions are completed . Usually the endotracheal intubation is after 2 -3 
minutes after induction. Our study may increase that time by 1 or 2 
minutes . 
6. The study will conclude with intubation of the trachea. The rest of the 
subject management will be per anesthesia clinical team  standard of 
care. 
 
c. Extubation  
1. Standard of care.   
 
VIII. Postoperative Pain Management  
a. Standard of care. 
 
4.4 Costs : 
The cost of the Medline Top Valve Anesthesia Mask  used in this study will be billed to 
subjects’ insurance as normal standard of care  at University Hospital . Face masks are 
used on surgical  patients as standard of care following  University Hospital  Department 
of Anesthesiology and Perioperative Medicine  protocol . They are necessary for 
7 
 preoxygenation of patients before surgical procedures. Taking part in this study will 
bring no additional cost to subjects.  
 
4.5 Study Duration:  
Study will start  in September 2018  and last one year.  
 
5.1 Statistical Analysis and Sample Size Justification:  
A power analysis u sing a predicted tidal volume of 450  ml for group A and 52 0 ml for 
group B, with a standard deviation o f 75 ml, determined that 19  subject s per group  
would be needed  to achieve a power of 80% with an alpha  error  of 5%. 
 
6.1 Publication Plan  
We plan to present this data at anesthesiology meetings.  We will target the American 
Society of Anesthesiologists Annual meetings for abstract presentations and the journal 
Anesthesiology  for publication of the final data.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 7.1 References:  
1. Langeron O, Birenbaum A, Le Sache F, & Raux M. Airway management in obese 
patient.  Minerva Anestesiol . 2014;  80:382-392. 
 
2. Kheterpal S, Han R, Tremper KK, Shanks A, Tait  AR, O’ Reilly M, & Ludwig  TA. 
Incidence and predictors of difficult  and impossible mask ventilation. 
Anesthesiology  2006; 105:885 –891. 
 
3. Kheterpal S, Martin L, Shanks AM, & Tremper KK. Prediction and outcomes of  
impossible mask ventilation: A review of 50,000 anesthetics.  Anesthesiology  
2009; 110:891 –897. 
 
4. Itagaki T, Oto J, Burns SM, Jiang YJ, Kacmarek RM, & Mountjoy JR. The effect 
of head rotation on efficiency of face mask ventilation in anaesthetised apnoeic 
adults.  European Journal of Anesthesiology . 2017; 34:432-440. 
 
5. Hales CM , Carroll MD, Fryar CD, & Ogden CL.  Prevalence of obesity among 
adults and youth: United States, 2015 -2016 . National Center for Health Statistics  
288th ed. CDC; 2017:1 -8. 
 
6. Chapter 19. Airway Management.  In: Butterworth JF, IV, Mackey DC, Wasnick 
JD. eds. Morgan & Mikhail's Clinical Anesthesiology, 5e  New York, NY: McGraw -
Hill; 2013.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 