Clinical Trials #: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
October 22, 2023 
Grant Number: UH3DA047793 
Title: tDCS to Decrease Opioid Relapse 
MPIs: Ana Abrantes, PhD and Michael  Stein, MD 
ICF:	[Main,	Stage	1]	
Date	most	recently	revised	[ 410/2918/20221]	
Version	Number:	 109	  Page 1 of 9 		BUTLER	HOSPITAL	CONSENT	FOR	PARTICIPATION	IN	A	RE SEARCH	PROJECT		
	
	tDCS	to	Decrease	Opioid	Relapse 	
	
Sponsorship	
This	study	is	being	paid	for	by	the	National	Instit ute	on	Drug	Abuse .	
	
Research	Project	Summary	
You	are	invited	to	participate	in	a	study	designed	 to	understand	how	people	do	after	buprenorphine	or	
methadone	treatment	has	started	and	whether	a	brain 	stimulation	procedure	called	transcranial	direct	
current	stimulation	(tDCS)	affects	craving	for	opio ids.		You	have	been	invited	to	participate	because	y ou	
are	currently	in	treatment	for	opioid	use	and	are	s tarting	buprenorphine	or	methadone	treatment.	Your	
participation	in	the	study	will	last	approximately	 2	weeks.	Participation	may	be	in-person,	or	by	
phone/video	formats.	It	will	require	up	to	7	visits 	to	our	research	office,	and	approximately	10	hours 	of	
your	time.		At	these	visits,	you	will	be	asked	interview	ques tions	by	the	research	staff,	have	5	sessions	of	
transcranial	direct	current	stimulation	(tDCS),	and 	complete	2	electroencephalography	(EEG)	sessions.	 	
You	may	also	be	asked	to	complete	2	functional	magn etic	resonance	brain	imaging	(fMRI)	scans.		You	wil l	
be	compensated	for	your	time	(details	below).		
	
In	order	to	decide	whether	or	not	you	wish	to	be	a	 part	of	this	research	study,	you	should	know	enough 	
about	its	risks	and	benefits	to	make	an	informed	ju dgment.		This	consent	form	gives	you	detailed	
information	about	the	research	study	which	a	member 	of	the	research	team	will	discuss	with	you.		This	
discussion	should	go	over	all	aspects	of	this	resea rch:		its	purpose,	the	procedures	that	will	be	perf ormed,	
risks	associated	with	the	procedures,	possible	bene fits	of	participation,	and	possible	alternatives.		 Once	
you	understand	the	study,	you	will	be	asked	if	you	 wish	to	participate;	if	so,	you	will	be	asked	to	si gn	this	
form.		This	consent	may	contain	words	that	you	do	n ot	understand.		Please	ask	the	investigator	or	the	
study	staff	to	explain	any	words	or	information	tha t	you	do	not	clearly	understand.	
	
Description	of	Procedures	
If	you	decide	to	participate,	you	will	be	asked	to	 do	a	number	of	different	activities	as	part	of	this 	study.		
	
Assessment	Interviews :	You	will	be	asked	questions	by	the	research	staff 	either	in-person	or	via	a	
secured	videoconference.	These	questions	will	be	ab out	you,	your	physical	and	mental	health,	your	
substance	use,	and	your	craving	for	opiates.	These	 research	questionnaires	will	begin	today,	and	again 	in	
about	1-2	weeks.	The	assessments	will	be	confidenti al	and	may	be	audio-	or	video-recorded.	The	
recording	is	for	training	purposes,	to	ensure	the	s taff	are	consistent	in	conducting	the	research	
assessment.	We	will	tell	you	whenever	we	plan	to	us e	an	audio-or	video-recorder.	By	signing	this	conse nt	
form,	you	give	us	permission	to	audio-	or	video-rec ord.	You	may	refuse	audio-	or	video-recording	of	
interviews	at	any	time	and	still	participate	in	the 	study.	Recordings	will	be	destroyed	at	the	end	of	 the	
study.	You	will	be	asked	to	provide	a	urine	sample	 to	test	for	substance	use	at	each	study	appointment .	
You	will	also	be	asked	to	sign	a	health	information 	release	form	for	the	physician	that	prescribes	you r	
buprenorphine	or	methadone	so	that	we	may	verify	th e	date	that	you	were	prescribed	the	medication.	
	
tDCS:	You	will	have	five	sessions	of	tDCS	 	during	which	a	very	low	level	electrical	current	 	stimulation	is	
delivered	to	your	head.	These	five	sessions	will	ta ke	place	over	about	one	week.	You	will	be	randomly	
assigned	(like	the	flip	of	a	coin)	to	receive	eithe r	active	or	fake	(sham)	tDCS.	You	will	not	know	whi ch	
condition	you	are	assigned.	At	each	session,	you	wi ll	have	either	the	active	or	sham	stimulation	for	
approximately	20	minutes.		In	order	to	provide	the	 active	or	sham	stimulation,	two	wet	sponges	
containing	electrodes	will	be	placed	on	your	head.	 These	sponges	will	be	held	in	place	by	large	rubber 	
bands.	During	the	tDCS	period,	these	sponges	and	ru bber	bands	will	remain	on	your	head.		During	each	
20-minute	period,	you	will	also	engage	in	an	activi ty	that’s	like	a	computer	game.	
ICF:	[Main,	Stage	1]	
Date	most	recently	revised	[ 410/2918/20221]	
Version	Number:	 109	  Page 2 of 9 fMRI:	You	may	have	two	fMRI	scans	approximately	one	wee k	apart.	If	you	are	asked	to	participate	in	fMRI	
scanning,	we	will	either	bring	you	to	the	fMRI	faci lity	at	Brown	University,	about	a	mile	away,	or	you 	will	
meet	us	there,	where	you	will	meet	a	staff	member.	 	While	at	the	facility,	you	will	have	a	Functional	 MRI	
(fMRI)	scan	which	takes	a	picture	of	your	brain	wor king	when	you’re	asked	to	do	certain	things.		At	th e	
beginning	of	this	part	of	the	scan,	the	research	st aff	will	describe	the	equipment	and	what	you	will	b e	
asked	to	do,	and	answer	any	questions	you	have.		Yo u	will	then	put	on	earplugs,	lie	on	the	scanner	tab le,	
and	the	table	will	slide	you	into	the	scanning	area .		On	a	computer	screen	in	front	of	you,	there	will 	be	
several	different	computer	games	to	complete,	one	o f	which	will	include	seeing	images	of	opioids	on	th e	
screen.		During	the	whole	fMRI,	which	takes	about	a n	hour,	you	will	be	able	to	hear	and	to	talk	to	the 	
research	staff,	and	you	can	stop	the	task	at	any	ti me.			You	will	have	one	scan	this	week,	prior	to	be ginning	
your	tDCS	sessions,	and	another	about	7	days	later. 	Each	session,	including	travel	to	and	from	the	
scanning	facility	will	take	approximately	3	hours.	Y ou	will	be	provided	transportation	(cab	rides)	for	
research	procedures	at	Butler	Hospital	and	at	the	f MRI	scan	facility,	and	back	home	after	the	
appointments	are	completed.		
	
EEG:	In	addition	to	the	interview	and	questionnaires,	y ou	will	also	complete	a	computer	task	where	you	
have	to	match	letters	to	those	on	screen,	lasting	a pproximately	10	minutes.	The	task	is	designed	to	te st	
working	memory.	During	this	task,	you	will	have	a	r ecording	of	your	brain	waves	through	a	noninvasive	
procedure	called	electroencephalography	(EEG).		Neu rologists	have	used	EEG	for	many	years	to	evaluate	
the	functioning	of	nerves	(“neurons”)	in	the	brain	 and	to	diagnose	various	neurological	conditions.	Th e	
EEG	recording	in	this	research	study,	however,	will 	not	be	used	to	diagnose	any	specific	brain	conditi on.	
For	the	EEG	procedure,	a	trained	technician	will	ap ply	a	special	cap	to	your	head.	The	cap	contains	li ttle	
holes	and	special	surfaces	(electrodes)	that	make	c ontact	with	the	skin	on	your	head	to	record	electri cal	
signals	on	your	scalp.	A	special	gel	will	be	applie d	to	your	head	through	the	holes	in	the	cap	to	enha nce	
the	ability	to	detect	the	electrical	signals	from	y our	scalp.	Once	the	cap	is	on	and	the	gel	is	applie d,	you	
will	then	sit	quietly	in	a	chair	while	the	electric al	activity	of	your	brain	is	recorded.		After	sever al	minutes	
of	quietly	sitting,	you	will	complete	the	10-minute 	computer	task	while	the	EEG	is	recording	your	brai n	
activity.	One	EEG	session	will	be	completed	this	we ek,	prior	to	beginning	your	tDCS	sessions,	and	anot her	
about	7	days	later.	
		
Text	Messaging	
We	would	like	to	contact	you	by	text	message	for	th e	purposes	listed	below:		
1.	To	schedule	research-related	appointments	
2.	To	send	reminders	about	appointments		
	
How	do	Text	Communications	with	CNE	Researchers	Wor k?	
Text	messages	from	the	study	staff	will	be	sent	fro m	a	phone	that	is	dedicated	for	use	in	this	researc h	
study.		The	phone	will	not	be	monitored	for	return	 messages	constantly,	but	it	will	be	checked	
periodically	during	regular	office	hours.	You	can	r espond	to	messages	from	researchers	by	sending	them 	
text	messages,	but	there	are	only	certain	things	yo u	should	communicate	via	text	message.		
	
Risks	Related	to	Text	Communication 	
You	should	be	aware	that	there	are	risks	associated 	with	sending	your	health	information	via	text.		Th ere	
is	always	a	risk	that	the	message	could	be	intercep ted	or	sent	to	the	wrong	number.	Only	the	research	
team	will	have	access	to	your	text	communications.	 	We	will	only	communicate	by	text	to	send	you	the	
information	previously	listed.		We	will	not	send	te xt	messages	that	contain	urgent	information.	We	wil l	
not	send	text	messages	to	a	group	of	recipients.	If 	you	share	your	mobile	phone	or	messages	with	other s,	
you	risk	losing	privacy	surrounding	your	health	inf ormation	and	loss	of	privacy	surrounding	your	
participation	in	this	study.		You	should	make	sure	 to	protect	your	phone	with	a	password	if	you	send	o r	
receive	text	messages	during	participation	in	this	 study.	
	
ICF:	[Main,	Stage	1]	
Date	most	recently	revised	[ 410/2918/20221]	
Version	Number:	 109	  Page 3 of 9 Cautions	Related	to	Text 		Communication	with	Researchers 	
Text	messages	may	not	be	received	by	researchers	on 	a	regular	basis.	It	is	possible	that	a	message	you 	
send	will	go	unnoticed,	or	will	not	be	read	by	the	 research	team	for	days	or	weeks.	 You	should	use	the	
telephone	to	contact	the	research	team	for	any	urge nt	matters.	Medical	issues	(symptoms,	side	
effects,	injuries,	concerns	about	effects	of	study	 procedures,	etc.)	should	NOT	be	communicated	by	
text	message. 	These	should	be	directed	to	the	research	staff	by	 telephone	or	in	person.	To	discuss	
medical	issues,	please	contact	our	office	at	401-68 0-4160.	
	
Can	we	contact	you	via	text	messaging?			 YES____________(initial) OR NO___________ (initial) 	
	
Email	
We	would	like	to	contact	you	by	e-mail	for	the	purp oses	of	sending	you	web-links,	which	will	take	you	
online	to	a	secure	database	where	you	can	complete	 various	study	assessment	forms	during	participation 	
in	this	research	project.	
	
How	do	e-mail	communications	with	CNE	researchers	w ork?	
You	will	receive	an	e-mail	message	from	our	researc h	team	sent	to	you	from	a	secure	Care	New	England-
hosted	research	data	system	called	“REDCap.”	The	me ssage	will	include	a	link	for	you	to	click.	Clickin g	the	
link	will	securely	connect	you	with	REDCap,	where	y ou	will	see	your	study	survey.	You	will	respond	by	
clicking	on	buttons	you	see	on	the	screen.	The	e-ma il	messages	you	receive	will	not	identify	you	by	na me,	
and	the	links	to	surveys	you	get	through	REDCap	wil l	be	associated	only	with	your	e-mail	address.	Your 	e-
mail	address	and	any	other	information	that	persona lly	identifies	you	will	be	removed	from	the	final	
research	database	when	the	study	is	over.	
	
Risks	related	to	e-mail	communication	
You	should	be	aware	that	there	are	risks	associated 	with	sending	your	health	information	via	e-mail.		
There	is	always	a	risk	that	the	message	could	be	in tercepted	or	sent	to	the	wrong	e-mail	address.	E-ma il	
messages	from	research	staff	may	contain	health	inf ormation	that	identifies	you.	Information	sent	by	e -
mail	could	allow	others	to	identify	you	along	with	 your	medical	health	conditions	and	psychiatric	
diagnosis	(if	applicable).		Only	the	research	team	 will	have	access	to	your	e-mail	communications.		We 	will	
only	communicate	by	e-mail	to	send	you	the	informat ion	listed	above.		We	will	not	send	e-mail	messages 	
that	contain	urgent	information	or	results	of	medic al	tests	or	diagnostic	procedures.	We	will	not	send 	
messages	that	direct	you	to	get	medical	care.	
	
Using	this	secure	e-mail	system	will	help	reduce	th e	chance	that	you	will	experience	loss	of	confident iality	
when	using	e-mail.	If	you	share	a	home	computer	wit h	other	family	members	and	do	not	want	them	to	
know	you	are	participating	in	this	study,	make	sure 	you	provide	an	e-mail	address	that	only	you	can	
access.		Your	employer	or	school	will	have	access	t o	any	e-mail	communications	sent	or	received	on	a	
work	or	school	computer.	Additionally,	when	using	a ny	public	computer	you	should	be	careful	to	protect 	
your	username	and	password,	and	make	sure	you	log-o ut	before	getting	up	from	the	computer.	
	
Cautions	related	to	e-mail	with	researchers	
Study	participants	are	required	to	send	any	e-mail	 messages	they	write	to	the	research	team	through	th is	
secure	system.	 E-mails	may	not	be	received	by	researchers	on	a	reg ular	basis.	It	is	possible	that	a	
message	you	send	will	go	unnoticed,	or	will	not	be	 read	by	the	research	team	for	days	or	weeks.	You	
should	use	the	telephone	to	contact	the	research	te am	for	any	urgent	matters.	Medical	issues	
(symptoms,	side	effects,	injuries,	questions	about	 medications,	concerns	about	effects	of	study	
procedures,	etc.)	should	NOT	be	communicated	by	e-m ail.	These	should	be	directed	to	the	research	
staff	by	telephone	or	in	person.	To	discuss	medical 	issues,	please	contact	our	office	at	401-680-4160. 			
	
Can	we	contact	you	via	email?			 YES____________(initial) OR NO___________ (initial) 	
ICF:	[Main,	Stage	1]	
Date	most	recently	revised	[ 410/2918/20221]	
Version	Number:	 109	  Page 4 of 9 Risks	and	Inconveniences	
	
1) Questionnaires 	
You	may	refuse	to	answer	any	questions	that	make	yo u	feel	uncomfortable	and	you	can	stop	the	interview 	
at	any	time.	Most	people	do	not	experience	any	disc omfort	during	these	assessments,	but	others	may	fin d	
answering	these	questions	upsetting	and	uncomfortab le.		We	will	make	every	effort	to	minimize	any	
discomfort	you	may	feel	during	this	process.	Interv iews	will	be	conducted	in	a	private	area	in	the	hos pital	
or	via	a	secured	videoconference.	You	can	pause	the 	interview	at	any	time	if	you	need	a	short	break.		 	
	
All	information	obtained	will	be	kept	confidential. 		Your	responses	to	the	questions	will	not	be	linke d	to	
any	information	that	can	identify	you	as	an	individ ual.	Your	information	will	be	available	only	to	our 	
research	staff.		
	
2) tDCS	
tDCS	has	a	risk	of	skin	irritation	and	temporary	re dness	on	your	scalp	where	the	sponges	and	electrode s	
are	placed.	Local	skin	burns	are	also	possible;	how ever,	these	would	be	considered	extremely	rare	give n	
the	type	of	tDCS	used	in	this	study.	Hypomania	(fee lings	of	elevated	mood	or	too	much	energy),	has	als o	
been	reported	in	a	small	percent	of	people	who	rece ived	daily	tDCS	for	depression.	In	one	study	where	
daily	tDCS	was	used	for	depression	with	or	without	 antidepressant	medication,	as	many	as	5-6%	of	
people	developed	hypomania.	In	most	cases,	the	hypom ania	went	away	after	stopping	tDCS	or	by	making	
adjustments	to	medications.	However,	the	overall	ri sk	of	hypomania	occurring	with	tDCS	is	still	unclea r.	
Other	effects	such	as	temporary	headache,	nausea,	a nd	fatigue	are	sometimes	reported	with	tDCS.	It	is	
possible	that	tDCS	may	have	other	unforeseen	side	e ffects.	We	will	monitor	you	closely	but	if	you	
experience	discomfort,	please	tell	us	immediately.	 A	physician	will	be	on-call	during	all	tDCS	procedu res.	
We	will	also	check	in	with	you	regularly	during	you r	weekly	visits	about	any	side	effects	you	may	be	
experiencing.			
	
3) fMRI	
There	are	few	risks	associated	with	the	fMRI	proced ure,	although	some	people	report	feeling	nervous	
inside	the	loud	scanning	machine	or	uncomfortable	i n	small	spaces	(claustrophobia).	MRI	may	not	be	saf e	
if	you	have	metal	implanted	in	your	body	that	could 	interact	with	the	magnetic	field	in	the	scanner.	P lease	
tell	us	if	you	have	any	metallic	tattoos	or	implant ed	no	removable	metal	on	or	in	your	body.	You	may	
experience	some	frustration	from	the	computer	tasks 	you	complete	while	you	are	in	the	fMRI	facility.		
Also,	you	may	experience	distress	or	cravings	when	 you	see	the	images	of	opioids	during	the	fMRI.		At	 the	
end	of	the	fMRI	session,	we	will	provide	you	with	s trategies	for	managing	any	remaining	distress	or	
cravings.			
	
You	will	be	asked	to	sign	a	separate	consent	form	w hich	describes	the	fMRI	risks	in	more	details.		
	
Any	medical	treatment	or	procedure	may	have	unfores een	side	effects.		You	should	know	that	the	
prediction	of	effects	from	a	treatment	or	procedure 	for	any	individual	cannot	be	done	with	certainty,	 and	
unexpected	potentially	harmful	effects	occasionally 	occur	with	the	administration	of	any	type	of	
treatment.		If	you	have	questions	about	investigati onal	procedures	or	treatments,	or	if	you	experience 	any	
disturbing	side	effects	during	participation	in	thi s	study,	inform	study	personnel.			In	the	event	of	 any	
unexpected,	potentially	harmful	effects	of	any	trea tment	or	procedure	administered	in	this	study,	we	w ill	
monitor	your	condition	closely	and	institute	approp riate	treatment.	If	significant	new	knowledge	is	
obtained	through	the	course	of	the	research	which	m ay	impact	your	willingness	to	continue	participatio n,	
you	will	be	informed	of	this	knowledge.	
	
4) EEG	
EEG	recording	is	considered	“noninvasive”	and	is	th erefore	considered	to	be	generally	safe.	There	are	
minor	inconveniences	associated	with	EEG,	such	as	h aving	residual	paste	in	your	hair	or	on	your	scalp	
ICF:	[Main,	Stage	1]	
Date	most	recently	revised	[ 410/2918/20221]	
Version	Number:	 109	  Page 5 of 9 after	the	procedure.	The	paste	can	be	removed	with	 soap	and	water	but	we	do	not	have	a	facility	for	yo u	
to	shower	or	thoroughly	wash	your	head	in	the	area	 where	the	EEG	recordings	take	place.			It	is	possib le	
you	will	feel	some	minor	discomfort	from	having	you r	head	in	contact	with	the	EEG	cap.			Allergic	reac tion	
or	skin	irritation	from	the	neoprene	material	in	th e	EEG	cap	or	from	the	EEG	gel	is	very	rare.	
	
Women	Please	Note:			
The	effects	of	tDCS,	as	used	in	this	study,	during	 pregnancy	are	unknown.		An	fMRI	 scan	may	be	harmful	
to	a	developing	fetus.		Therefore,	you	may	be	teste d	for	pregnancy	at	the	time	of	your	admission	to	th e	
study.		Prior	to	your	beginning	the	study,	we	will	 discuss	with	you	in	more	detail	the	importance	of	
avoiding	pregnancy.		We	will	specifically	ask	you	t o	let	us	know	if	you	change	your	mind	and	decide	to 	
become	pregnant	during	the	study. 	
	
Benefits	
You	may	benefit	by	feeling	a	reduction	in	your	crav ings	for	opiates.	However,	we	cannot	guarantee	that 	
you	will	benefit.	The	main	benefits	of	this	study	a re	to	help	researchers	and	clinicians	develop	a	bet ter	
understanding	of	craving	and	substance	use	after	st arting	buprenorphine	or	methadone.		
	
Economic	Considerations			
You	will	receive	$75	for	the	baseline	interview,	$ 5025	for	each	of	the	5	tDCS	sessions,	$75	for	each	EEG	
recording	session,	and	$75	for	the	final	interview. 	If	you	are	asked	to	participate	in	fMRI	scanning,	 you	
will	be	paid	$75	for	each	fMRI	scan.	All	payments	w ill	be	in	the	form	of	a	gift	card	to	a	local	store	 or	
supermarket.	
	
Depending	on	the	amount	of	payment	you	might	receiv e	for	your	participation	in	this	study,	you	might	
have	to	provide	your	name,	address,	and	taxpayer	ID 	or	Social	Security	number	to	the	Butler/CNE	
Research	Accounting	Department.	In	order	to	receive 	payment	of	$300	or	more	for	participation	in	this	
research,	you	will	have	to	complete	and	sign	a	W-9	 form.		If	you	are	paid	$600	or	more	in	any	calendar 	
year	for	research	participation,	the	IRS	will	be	no tified	of	the	total	amount	you	were	paid,	in	accord ance	
with	federal	regulations.	You	should	ask	the	resear cher	for	more	information	if	you	have	questions	abo ut	
this	process.	
	
In	Case	of	Injury	 		
We	will	offer	you	services	in	Care	New	England	faci lities	as	needed	to	treat	any	injury	that	results	d irectly	
from	taking	part	in	this	research	study.		We	reserv e	the	right	to	bill	your	insurance	company	or	other 	
third	parties,	if	appropriate,	for	the	care	you	get 	for	the	injury.		We	will	try	to	have	these	costs	p aid	for,	
but	you	may	be	responsible	for	some	of	them.		For	e xample,	if	the	care	is	billed	to	your	insurer,	you	 will	be	
responsible	for	payment	of	any	deductibles	and	co-p ayments	required	by	your	insurer.			
	
Injuries	sometimes	happen	in	research	even	when	no	 one	is	at	fault.		There	are	no	plans	to	pay	you	or	 give	
you	other	compensation	for	any	injury,	should	one	o ccur.		However,	you	are	not	giving	up	any	of	your	
legal	rights	by	signing	this	form.			
	
If	you	think	you	have	been	injured	or	have	experien ced	a	medical	problem	as	a	result	of	taking	part	in 	this	
research	study,	tell	the	person	in	charge	of	this	s tudy	as	soon	as	possible.		The	researcher’s	name	an d	
phone	number	are	listed	on	the	last	page	of	this	co nsent	form.				
	
Alternative	Treatments/Alternative	to	Participation 		
There	are	no	known	effective	alternative	treatments 	to	manage	craving	or	reduce	drug	use	for	persons	
who	have	recently	begun	buprenorphine	or	methadone	 and	are	receiving	standard	medical	management.	
	
	
ICF:	[Main,	Stage	1]	
Date	most	recently	revised	[ 410/2918/20221]	
Version	Number:	 109	  Page 6 of 9 Financial	Disclosure			
None	
	
Voluntary	Participation	
You	are	free	to	decide	whether	or	not	to	participat e	in	this	study,	and	you	are	free	to	withdraw	from	 the	
study	at	any	time.		A	decision	not	to	participate	o r	to	withdraw	from	the	study	will	not	adversely	aff ect	
your	current	or	future	interactions	with	Butler	Hos pital	or	Care	New	England.	Your	participation	in	th e	
study	may	be	terminated	by	the	researchers	without	 regard	to	your	consent;	in	that	case,	you	are	entit led	
to	an	explanation	of	the	circumstances	leading	to	t hat	decision.	
	
Confidentiality		
Personal	identifiers	will	be	removed	from	any	ident ifiable	private	information	about	you	(and/or	your	
biospecimens)	in	the	final	research	dataset	created 	by	this	study.	The	de-identified	information	or	
biospecimens	may	be	used	for	future	research	studie s	or	distributed	to	another	investigator	for	future 	
research	studies	without	additional	informed	consen t	from	you	(or	the	legally	authorized	representativ e).		
You	will	not	be	personally	identified	in	any	report s	or	publications	that	may	result	from	this	study.	 	The	
confidentiality	of	the	information	you	provide	to	u s	will	be	maintained	in	accordance	with	state	and	
federal	laws. 		If	you	tell	us	something	that	makes	us	believe	that 	you	or	others	have	been	or	may	be	
physically	harmed,	we	may	report	that	information	t o	the	appropriate	agencies.	
	
Clinically	relevant	research	results,	including	ind ividual	research	results,	will	not	be	disclosed	to	 you.	To	
keep	your	information	safe,	we	will	store	all	infor mation	in	locked	file	cabinets	and	on	password	
protected	secure	computer	servers.	To	the	extent	po ssible,	we	store	identifying	information	(such	as	y our	
name	or	address)	separately	from	study	data	(such	a s	questionnaires	that	you	complete).	In	addition	to 	
keeping	research	data,	we	will	place	a	note	with	a	 brief	description	of	study	involvement	and	procedur es	
(including	tDCS	procedures)	in	a	Butler	Hospital	me dical	record.	You	will	not	be	identified	on	audio-	 or	
video-recordings	and	they	will	be	stored	on	a	secur e	server	which	is	password	protected	and	only	
accessible	to	research	staff.	All	identifying	infor mation,	except	what	is	part	of	your	medical	record	 at	
Butler,	will	be	destroyed	6	years	after	the	complet ion	of	the	study.	 	If	you	tell	us	something	that	makes	us	
believe	that	you	or	others	have	been	or	may	be	phys ically	harmed,	we	may	report	that	information	to	th e	
appropriate	agencies.	
	
General	information	about	this	study	has	been	or	wi ll	be	submitted	to	the	federal	clinical	trial	regis try	
databank,	which	can	be	accessed	on	the	Internet	at	 www.ClinicalTrials.gov.		
	
This	research	is	covered	by	a	Certificate	of	Confid entiality.	Unless	you	give	special	written	permissi on,	the	
researchers	and	Butler	Hospital	cannot	give	out	any 	information	about	you	that	could	potentially	ident ify	
you	or	be	used	as	evidence	in	a	legal	case	(includi ng	any	federal,	state,	or	local	civil,	criminal,	
administrative,	or	legislative	case).		
	
The	only	situations	where	researchers	would	share	y our	information	with	others	are:		
(1) when	a	specific	law	(federal,	state,	or	local)	requ ires	that	potentially	harmful	things	be	reported	to 	
the	authorities	(such	as	reporting	child	abuse,	eld er	abuse	or	spread	of	communicable	diseases);		
(2) when	you	have	given	permission	(consent)	for	the	in formation	to	be	shared	in	order	to	help	your	
medical	treatment;	or	
(3) when	your	information	will	be	used	for	other	scient ific	research,	as	allowed	by	federal	regulations	
protecting	research	subjects.	
	
Authorization	for	use/disclosure	of	Health	Informat ion	that	Identifies	you	for	a	Research	Study 	
If	you	sign	this	document,	you	give	permission	to	D rs.	Abrantes	and	Stein	(Study	Directors)	at	Butler	
Hospital	to	use	your	health	information	that	identi fies	you,	for	the	purpose	of	conducting	the	researc h	
study	described	above.		
ICF:	[Main,	Stage	1]	
Date	most	recently	revised	[ 410/2918/20221]	
Version	Number:	 109	  Page 7 of 9 Your	health	information	related	to	this	study	may	a lso	be	shared	with	and	used	by	individuals	outside	 of	
Butler	Hospital,	including:		
 The	Brown	fMRI	facility	staff.	
 Other	healthcare	and	public	safety	professionals,	i f	we	are	concerned	that	you	are	at	risk	of	
hurting	yourself	or	others.	
	
The	health	information	that	we	may	use	or	share	wit h	others	for	research	purposes	includes	any	
information	that	you	give	us	as	part	of	your	study	 participation,	information	in	your	ADP	medical	char t,	
and	results	of	any	assessments	that	we	do	as	part	o f	the	study	that	is	relevant	to	the	above	individua ls.	We	
will	not	collect	or	share	more	information	than	is	 necessary.			
	
Your	health	information	may	also	be	shared	with	a	p ublic	health	authority	that	is	authorized	by	law	to 	
collect	or	receive	such	information	for	the	purpose 	of	preventing	or	controlling	disease,	injury,	or	
disability,	and	conducting	public	health	surveillan ce,	investigations,	or	interventions.	The	U.S.	Food 	and	
Drug	Administration	(FDA)	may	inspect	all	study	rec ords	to	ensure	that	the	study	is	being	conducted	in 	
accordance	with	FDA	regulations.		
	
Butler	Hospital 	is	required	by	law	to	protect	your	health	informati on.	Individuals	outside	of	Butler	that	
receive	your	health	information	may	not	be	required 	by	Federal	privacy	laws	(such	as	the	HIPAA	Privacy 	
Rule)	to	protect	it,	so	we	cannot	guarantee	that	th ey	will	not	share	it	without	your	permission.	
	
Please	note	that:		
 You	do	not	have	to	sign	this	consent	form,	but	if	y ou	do	not,	you	may	not	participate	in	or	receive	
research-related	treatment	in	this	study.		 	
 Butler	Hospital	may	not	withhold	treatment	or	refus e	to	treat	you,	based	on	whether	you	sign	this	
consent	form.	 	
 You	may	change	your	mind	and	revoke	(take	back)	thi s	consent	and	authorization	at	any	time.	If	
you	no	longer	want	to	give	us	permission	to	use	you r	health	information	for	this	research	study,	
you	must	contact	the	Principal	Investigators,	Dr.	A na	Abrantes	or	Dr.	Michael	Stein,	and	you	will	
be	instructed	to	provide	a	written	statement.		
 Even	if	you	revoke	(take	back)	this	consent	and	aut horization,	Butler	researchers	may	still	use	or	
share	health	information	about	you	that	they	alread y	have	obtained,	when	doing	so	is	necessary	
to	maintain	the	integrity	or	reliability	of	the	cur rent	research.		
 You	generally	will	not	have	access	to	your	personal 	health	information	related	to	this	research	
until	the	study	is	completed.	At	the	conclusion	of	 the	research	and	at	your	request,	you	will	have	
access	to	your	health	information	that	Butler	Hospi tal	maintains	in	a	designated	record	set,	
according	to	the	Notice	of	Privacy	Practices	provid ed	to	you	by	Butler	Hospital.	The	designated	
record	set	includes	medical	information	or	billing	 records	used	by	doctors	or	other	health	care	
providers	at	Butler	Hospital	to	make	decisions	abou t	individuals.		
 Your	health	information	will	be	provided	to	you	or	 to	your	physician	if	it	is	necessary	for	your	
care.		
 If	all	information	that	does	or	can	identify	you	is 	removed	from	your	health	information,	the	
remaining	information	will	no	longer	be	subject	to	 this	authorization	and	may	be	used	or	
disclosed	for	other	purposes.	
	
This	Authorization	will	expire	when	all	the	activit ies	associated	with	this	research	study	have 	concluded.		
	
Questions	
Taking	part	in	this	study	is	entirely	voluntary.	We 	urge	you	to	discuss	any	questions	about	this	study 	with	
our	staff	members,	either	in-person	or	by	audio/vid eo	platforms.	You	should	take	as	much	time	as	you	
ICF:	[Main,	Stage	1]	
Date	most	recently	revised	[ 410/2918/20221]	
Version	Number:	 109	  Page 8 of 9 need	to	make	your	decision.	If	you	decide	to	partic ipate,	you	must	sign	this	form	to	show	that	you	wan t	to	
take	part.		
	 	
ICF:	[Main,	Stage	1]	
Date	most	recently	revised	[ 410/2918/20221]	
Version	Number:	 109	  Page 9 of 9 Authorization :			
I	have	read	this	form	and	decided	that	I,	_________ ___________________________________________________ _____	
	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	(print	name	of	participant)	
will	participate	in	the	project	described	above.		I ts	general	purposes,	the	nature	of	my	involvement,	 and	
possible	hazards	and	inconveniences	have	been	expla ined	to	my	satisfaction.	I	have	received	a	copy	of	
this	consent	form.	
	
___________________________________________________ _______	 	 _____________________________________	
Signature	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 Date	
	 	 	 	 	 	
___________________________________________________ _______	 	 _____________________________________	
Signature	of	Principal	Investigator	 	 	 	 	 Date	 	 	 	 	
	 	 	 	
~or~	
___________________________________________________ _______	 	 _____________________________________	
Signature	of	Person	Obtaining	Consent	 	 	 	 Date	
Telephone	Number	of	Principal	Investigator	or	Perso n	Obtaining	Consent_________________________	
	
If	you	have	further	questions	about	this	project	or 	about	research-related	injuries,	please	contact	An a	
Abrantes	401-455-6440.		If	you	have	questions	about 	your	rights	as	a	research	subject,	please	contact	
Paul	F.	Malloy,	Ph.D.,	Vice	Chair,	Butler	Hospital	 Institutional	Review	Board,	at	401-455-6355.	
	
THIS	FORM	IS	NOT	VALID	UNLESS	THE	FOLLOWING	BOX	HAS 	BEEN	COMPLETED	BY	THE	IRB	OFFICE 	
	 THIS	FORM	IS	VALID	UNTIL	 	
	 				DATE:		 	
	 				IRBNET	ID#	 	
				BUTLER	IRB	REFERENCE#		
	 				BY	(ADMINISTRATOR) :					 	
	 	 	
	
	
 
Rev. 10/22/23 
 
 
Grant Number: UH3DA047793 
 
Title: tDCS to Decrease Opioid Relapse 
 
MPIs: Ana Abrantes, PhD and Michael Stein, MD 
 
Medical Monitor: Dr. Michael Stein 
 
  
Rev. 10/22/23 
2. Summary of the Protocol: 
2.a, 2.b Brief Description of the Protocol, Primary  and Secondary Outcome Measures 
This study has two phases.   In phase one (UG3), we propose to use functional ma gnetic 
resonance imaging (FMRI) and electroencephalographi c (EEG) to quantify changes in brain 
function and reported craving before and after admi nistration of five sessions of transcranial 
direct current stimulation (tDCS) targeting the rig ht dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC).  
Opioid dependent participants (n=60) who recently i nitiated buprenorphine or methadone will 
be randomized to tDCS+Cognitive Control Network (CC N) priming stimulation vs. sham 
tDCS+CCN priming.  Participants in their first month of prescribed bup renorphine or 
methadone will be assessed using FMRI and EEG, once  prior to tDCS and again one week 
later after completion of 5 sessions of tDCS+CCN pr iming. With a focus on the craving 
outcome, we will use two task-based FMRI paradigms that challenge networks associated with 
craving (CR) and cognitive control (CCN), and will examine these and the salience network 
using resting state functional connectivity. We exa mine an additional validation measure of the 
effect of tDCS on the DLPFC – an oscillatory target  --  EEG frontal theta power during working 
memory(WM). In this UG3 phase, FMRI and EEG will be  expected to provide 1) validation of 
expected network and oscillatory changes from tDCS- targeting and 2) an effect size for 
DLPFC vs sham stimulation. Go/no go criteria for th e UG3 phase will be demonstration of 
greater FMRI change in any node of the CR or CCN networks or enhanced frontal theta power 
during a WM task AND greater change (at least 10% d ifference between conditions, 
controlling for baseline craving) in subjective cra ving measured during a cue reactivity task or 
outside the FMRI following the tDCS+CCN priming int ervention compared to sham tDCS+CCN 
priming. 
In the present study, we elected to keep aspects of  the tDCS protocol consistent with prior 
studies.  That is, we will place the anode over the  right DLPFC (F4 on the EEG 10-20 system) 
and the cathode over the left DLPFC (F3) using 25cm2 sponges at an intensity of 2mA. 
Stimulation will be delivered via two saline-soaked  surface sponge electrodes and a battery-
driven, constant current stimulator (NeuroConn DC S timulator Plus). This device includes a 
study mode, in which subject-specific codes are ent ered to deliver active or sham stimulation, 
keeping the administrator blinded.  Sham stimulatio n will use a method in which stimulation will 
be ramped up and back down over a 30-second period at the beginning and end of sham 
tDCS. This approach has been found to be an effecti ve sham condition in previous studies 
using tDCS at 2mA with no difference between sham a nd active tDCS groups in guessing their 
group assignment.  Each participant will receive 20 -minutes of either active or sham tDCS 
+CCN priming  during each of the five sessions. During the final 15 minutes of each stimulation 
session, once a participant is settled, s/he will e ngage in standardized tests from the NIH 
Toolbox that engage the CCN (i.e. CCN priming): Fla nker Inhibitory Control and Attention 
Test, List Sorting Working Memory Test, and Dimensi onal Change Card Sort Test). 
The optimal frequency, duration and number of tDCS sessions to maximize effects on 
craving, or any other construct in this young field , remain obscure. We chose to deliver 5 
sessions of tDCS because this number has been used in prior successful tDCS craving 
interventions and must be balanced against adherenc e concerns. While we are hopeful that 
participants will complete 5 consecutive days of tD CS, the interruption of weekends and the 
transition from the ADP setting (where the tDCS pro tocol will start) where days are structured, 
to the community setting, raises the possibility of  missed tDCS sessions and therefore we will 
allow these 5 sessions to occur over 10 days if nec essary, as has been described in prior 
studies, tracking both average number of sessions r eceived and period of treatment for 
analyses. The sham tDCS condition is included in ou r design to separate the effects of 
ongoing opioid treatment from the effect of active tDCS on craving. We decided not to include 
a third no-tDCS arm, as this would omit any nonspec ific treatment effects (match for attention, 
expectation) of entering a neurostimulation treatme nt protocol. This protocol will provide a 
basis for future studies of tDCS stimulation parame ters (frequency, duration, number) that 
could optimize adherence and treatment effects of d rug use outcomes.   
Rev. 10/22/23 
In phase two (UH3), we will perform a larger RCT us ing the same treatment protocol in 100 
opioid dependent participants who recently initiate d buprenorphine or methadone. Participants 
will be randomized to receive five sessions of tDCS +CCN priming  stimulation vs. sham 
tDCS+CCN priming. Phase two will address long-term (3-month) neurobehavioral outcomes, 
including opioid relapse, craving, and sustained fM RI changes during a paradigm that 
challenges networks associated with craving (CR) an d cognitive control (CCN). During the 12 
weeks of opioid maintenance treatment, we will exam ine our primary clinical outcome, relapse 
(opioid use on >4 days per month and having an opio id positive urine screen), as well as days 
of opioid use.  
 
2.c Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria: 
UG3/UH3 Inclusion Criteria:  (a) current opioid dependence, (b) between 21-50 ye ars of age, 
(c) recent initiation of buprenorphine or methadone  (<30 days) 
Exclusion Criteria:  (a) diagnosis of organic brain disorder, bipolar di sorder, schizophrenia, 
schizo-affective, schizophreniform, or paranoid dis order, (b) current suicidality, (c) evidence of 
neurocognitive dysfunction, (d) contraindications f or tDCS (e.g seizure disorder), (e) 
probation/parole requirements or an upcoming move t hat might interfere with protocol 
participation, (f) planning to terminate buprenorph ine or methadone in less than 3 months, and 
(g) scalp lesions near the tDCS electrode sites. 
Exclusion Criteria related to FMRI scanning are:  (a) history of neurological disorder (e.g., 
epilepsy, stroke, brain injury with loss of conscio usness>10 min), (b) impaired uncorrected 
vision, and (c) MRI contraindications (e.g., claust rophobia, specific metallic implants and 
injuries, and pregnancy). 
tDCS-related considerations: Careful consideration will be given when determining whether 
tDCS is safe for potential participants. Additional  exclusion criteria related to tDCS include: 
metal implanted in the cranial cavity, pacemaker, p oor cognitive functioning (i.e., Alzheimer’s 
disease or dementia), history of neurological disor der (e.g., epilepsy or other seizure disorder), 
or other significant or chronic medical conditions that affect the brain (e.g., Parkinson’s 
disease, Huntington’s disease, multiple sclerosis, traumatic brain injury). Dr. Stein will have the 
final decision regarding whether a participant is m edically stable enough to engage in this trial. 
 
2.d Power Calculation and Sample Size: 
       In the UG3 phase of this project, we plan to  enroll 60 participants. With an expected 
attrition rate of 20% (data loss over two sessions due to poor performance or movement 
artifact—a conservative estimate that is a larger l oss than in our ongoing FIRST study), our 
final sample size will be 48, or 24 per group. This  number provides 82% power for the 
expected effect size of .75, chosen based on prior tDCS studies and our belief that a large 
effect size should be required to continue to the U H3.  In the UH3 phase, we again anticipate a 
20% attrition rate over the 5 tDCS sessions and ini tial two FMRI scans. If the third scan (at 4 
weeks) is missed, we expect this will be due to tre atment drop-out or relapse. With 100 
participants enrolled, we will have a final sample of 80 patients which provides a power of .8 to 
detect a group difference in relapse between relaps e and sham of 15% vs 39% at 3 months 
follow-up.   
       Effect size estimates for baseline differenc es in FMRI signal based upon subsequent 
lapse are not available; however we have taken step s to maximize our ability to detect group 
differences, if present. First, we will use ROI met hods, which focus our analyses on more 
functionally homogenous brain regions related to ea ch task. Therefore, we predict larger and 
less variable effect sizes. Second, we have chosen FMRI paradigms with which we have 
already obtained reliable and valid response patter ns. Third, the constructs that we propose to 
assess in FMRI paradigms are significantly related to relapse in behavioral studies. 
 
3. Trial Management: 
3.a List of Participating enrolling clinics or data  collection centers 
Rev. 10/22/23 
All data will be collected for research purposes on ly and all records will be stored in locked 
files (physical or on computer) in locked rooms acc essible only to research staff. Data 
gathered from people are screened but who do not me et inclusion criteria or decide not to 
participate will be stripped of personal identifier s or links and only demographic characteristics 
and the reason for study exclusion will be kept. Pa per forms with personal identifiers (such as 
consent forms or contact information) will be store d in a locked file that does not contain 
subject code numbers. All other data will be stored  in files locked in a separate location with 
only code numbers identifying subjects, no personal  identifiers. A cross-index of code numbers 
and participant names will be kept in a separate, p assword-protected computer file that is 
available only to research staff (for collecting fo llow-ups), the PIs, and mandated auditing 
agencies during audits. 
All de-identified research data will be entered int o REDCap. REDCap is a secure, web 
application designed to support data capture for re search studies , providing user-friendly web-
based case report forms, real-time data entry valid ation (e.g. for data types and range checks), 
audit trails, and a de-identified data export mecha nism to common statistical packages (SPSS, 
SAS, Stata, R/S-Plus).  Participants may complete surveys in the laboratory  or anywhere they 
can access a web browser, including on their Intern et-connected smartphone or tablet. The 
system was developed by a multi-institutional conso rtium and was initiated at Vanderbilt 
University. The CNE RedCap is hosted on a CNE-based  server. Network transmissions (data 
entry, survey submission, web browsing, etc.) in RE DCap are protected via Secure Sockets 
Layer (SSL) encryption.  Access to REDCap can be restricted at different le vels (e.g., research 
assistant, PI, and Co-Investigators).  Exported dat a from REDCap will be stored on the 
Behavioral Medicine and Addiction Research’s secure  password-protected server. 
Final Storage of Paper Data. Only the participants’  study identification number will appear 
on any of the final paper data collection instrumen ts. Once data have been entered and 
passed audit verification, paper copies of data wil l be housed at a facility that specializes in the 
storage of medical/research information.  Only the subject's study identification number will be 
present on the forms.  Any indication of the subjec t's name will be removed from the 
questionnaires prior to archiving. The destruction date of these paper files will be at least 7 
years from the termination of the study and will be  authorized by the Principal Investigator of 
the research study.   
 
4.c Data Analysis Plan 
Neuroimaging. In the UG3, three sets of analyses wi ll be conducted to examine task-based 
responses to 1) the CR (craving) and 2) n-Back (CCN ) challenges, and 3) tonic changes in 
network coherence at rest. 
1) CR: Two 2x2 mixed ANOVAs will be used to determi ne whether mean response to cues 
during CR decline across nodes of the craving netwo rk (VS, amygdala, VMPFC), including 
salience network (AI, ACC) and increases in the CCN  (MFG, IPL). Significant pre-post main 
effects and group x treatment interactions are pred icted in each. Those who received 
tDCS+CCN priming are expected to exhibit greater ch ange. Follow up analyses of individual 
nodes within each network and whole-brain voxel-wis e contrasts will be conducted to inform 
phase 2 analyses.  
2) n-Back: Two 2x2 mixed ANOVAs will be used to det ermine whether mean response to the 
n-Back challenge increases across nodes of the CCN (MFG, IPL) and the salience network 
(ACC and AI). Significant pre-post main effects and  group x treatment interactions are 
predicted in each. Those who received tDCS are expe cted to exhibit greater change.  Follow 
up analyses of individual nodes within each network  and whole-brain voxel-wise contrasts will 
be conducted to inform phase 2 analyses.  
3) Resting state: Two 2x2 mixed ANOVAs will be used  to determine whether mean network 
coherence (functional connectivity) decreases acros s nodes of the craving network (VS, 
amygdala, VMPFC), including the salience network (A I, ACC) and increases in the CCN 
(MFG, IPL). Significant pre-post main effects and g roup x treatment interactions are predicted 
Rev. 10/22/23 
in each. Those who received tDCS are expected to ex hibit greater change.  Parallel 
exploratory analyses will be conducted to examine r esting state functional connectivity of the 
salience network and DMN. 
       In the UH3, neuroimaging analyses will gener ally parallel those described for UG3.  We 
will use a 2x3 ANOVA (three time points) to test th e hypothesis that tDCS+CCN priming will be 
superior to sham tDCS+CCN priming on both subjectiv e and fMRI measures of craving and 
cognitive control at the end of 5 sessions and at 3 -months post tDCS. This same analytical 
method will be used to test the effect of intervent ion on days of drug use at the end of 5 
sessions and at 3-months. We will use the Pearson χ2-test of independence to compare 
tDCS+CCN priming to sham tDCS+CCN priming on relaps e at 3-months. 
 
FMRI data analyses 
Whole-brain echoplanar FMRI will be conducted using  a Siemen’s TIM Trio 3.0 T scanner 
(TR/TE 2500/28ms, FOV=1922 mm, matrix=642, 3mm axial slices). Volumes acquired will be 
228 for the 2-Back, 384 for CR, and 120 during the rest-only imaging run. This procedure 
yields BOLD signal values across time for each voxe l.  A whole-brain, high-resolution 
(FOV=2402, matrix=2562) MPRAGE series will be conducted in 1mm sagittal s lice thickness for 
anatomical reference. All FMRI processing and stati stical analyses will be conducted using 
AFNI software. Data from subjects who exhibit inval id response patterns will be excluded. 
Processing includes concatenation of imaging runs, movement correction, slice-time 
correction, band pass frequency filtering, removal of linear drift, and application of a 6mm 
Gaussian kernel. For active tasks (n-Back and CR), GLM will be used to quantify task-related 
effects per voxel. Task-related response will be ca lculated compared to the appropriate active 
control tasks. The time course of the challenge of interest (2-Back blocks or opiate cues [CR]) 
and active control tasks (0-Back blocks or neutral images presentations [CR]) will be 
separately convolved with a gamma function and used  as predictors.  These procedures 
generate individual activation maps of task-related  effects per voxel. These individual datasets 
will be used as dependent measures in tests of our hypotheses using ROI analyses following 
quality control checks and stereotactic standardiza tion. 
A priori task-based FMRI ROI analyses will be our p rimary method for quantifying changes 
in the craving, salience and cognitive control netw orks and subsequent hypothesis testing, 
while analyses involving the functionally defined R OIs will serve to validate our a 
priori findings. Mean task-related effect will be d etermined for each ROI of each individual for 
each condition of each task by averaging all voxels  of each ROI. Results of these 
quantifications will be used as dependent measures in hypothesis testing. In primary analyses, 
mean effects will be examined across all nodes of e ach network, followed by analyses of each 
network node. Functional connectivity analyses will  be performed on all networks during 
crosshair fixation (resting). We will use the seed region method. Briefly, BOLD signal will be 
averaged from four 3mm3 seed voxels at the center o f mass of each ROI of each network (see 
Table 1) and extracted for each of the time points acquired. These reference series files will be 
used as predictors in one voxel-wise GLM analyses p er ROI to identify the strength of the 
relationship between each brain voxel and the avera ge of the seed region over time. Each a 
priori region will serve as a seed region once for its particular network. After Fischer’s 
transformation from r-values to z-values, the resul ting mean voxel-wise values will be 
averaged in each target node (i.e., ROI not serving  as the seed) following each GLM. For CR, 
these target ROI averages will then be averaged acr oss two seed region iterations (i.e., 
excluding the seed region; this step is not needed for the 2 ROI salience networks). The 
resulting means for the nodes of each network will be averaged across ROIs (3 for craving, 2 
for salience, 3 for CCN) to derive a network cohere nce metric. Substance use type (heroin, 
prescription pills) will be included as a covariate  in statistical models.  
 
EEG analyses. 
Rev. 10/22/23 
EEG Data Processing. Semi-automatic preprocessing f or artifact detection will be 
performed using the FASTER algorithm (Nolan, Whelan , & Reilly, 2010).  This EEGLAB 
toolbox uses Welch methods and removes muscle, hear t, motion, ocular artifacts, and other 
noise using a multiple step procedure consisting of  a) bandpass and notch filtering, b) 
Independent Component Analysis (ICA), c) rejection and/or interpolation of bad 
channels/epochs. The final step of preprocessing in cludes visual inspection of the data 
rejecting any remaining artifactual epochs. Windows  of 1400 ms (1100 -2500 ms after stimulus 
onset) will be included in analysis. Theta band (4 -8 Hz) power in frontal (Afz, Fz) electrodes 
will be averaged across both n-back levels. 
Working Memory and EEG Summary Indices. Working mem ory performance at each 
assessment will be represented by d’ to capture exe cutive skills without influence by 
demographic variables, psychiatric status, or intel ligence quotient (Haatveit et al., 2010).  For 
each participant, and within each n- condition, val ues for d’ will thus be calculated by dividing 
the difference of Z (false alarms) and Z (“hits”) b y the root mean square of 2; d’ captures the 
participant’s ability to discriminate between the t wo stimulus types (i.e., the 2-back target 
letters and the non-target letters). Difference in theta power between 0-back and 2-back 
conditions ( ∆theta) will also be calculated at EEG/n-back assess ment. Comparison of pre- 
versus post-treatment ∆theta will test the primary hypothesis that opioid dependent 
participants who received the active tDCS intervent ion will show greater increases in theta 
power after 5 intervention sessions than sham tDCS recipients. Estimation of power spectrum 
density (PSD) values in the beta band (13-30 Hz) wi ll be computed and averaged from 
channels in four regions (frontal, central, tempora l, and occipital-parietal) for analysis in 
relation to craving scores. 
EEG outcome measures analyses . We will conduct a repeated-measures ANCOVA with a 
within-subject factor of time (baseline and end-of- stimulation (EOS)), between-subject factor of 
intervention condition (active tDCS and sham) and c ovariates to test if there is a statistically 
significant difference in in the EEG outcome ( ∆theta) across treatment groups. Pearson 
correlations will be used to examine beta PSD value s in relation to craving scores. A separate 
ANCOVA with the same factors will be used to explor e treatment group differences in resting 
state EEG beta PSD values. Covariates for both anal yses will include the baseline measure of 
the evaluated outcome, as well as baseline variable s found to vary significantly (p < 0.05) by 
intervention arm, or which significantly (p < 0.05)  predict attrition at EOS. Post-hoc t-tests will 
be used to probe anticipated significant interactio ns.  
 
5. Quality Assurance 
All  research  personnel,  will  have  formal  trai ning  in  research  with  human  subjects  (e.g.,  
CITI  training,  NIH  Human  Subjects  training).  Drs.  Abrantes, Stein, and Carpenter  will  
provide  training  to  and  supervise  research  as sistants.  Research  assistants  will  also  
have  training  in  Good  Clinical  Practice.   
Drs. Stein and Abrantes will be responsible for qua lity control of this study. They will review 
recruitment and retention reports, and AE reports o n a weekly basis. The MPIs  (or  their 
designee)  will  inspect  BL  documents  (consent  forms,  release  of  information)  for  
completeness  within  a  week  after  they  are  si gned.    The MPIs (or their designee)  will  
also  conduct  protocol  and  data  quality  monito ring  twice  a  year  using  a  checklist.  This  
monitoring  will  include  reviewing  other  study  records  to  ensure  completeness. 
 
6. Regulatory Issues 
6.a, 6.c Reporting of SAEs, Non-Medication Trials 
Drs. Abrantes and Stein will be responsible for ove rseeing the daily safety of all 
participants. There are several ways in which they will become aware of adverse events. First, 
research staff will ask participants about serious adverse events (as defined by Office of 
Human Research Protections (OHRP); e.g., inpatient hospitalization) at each research contact 
point (UG3: baseline, week 2 assessment, 5 tDCS app ointments, 2 FMRI; UH3: baseline, 
Rev. 10/22/23 
week 2, 4, 6, 8, 12 assessments, 5 tDCS appointment s, 3 FMRI). For monitoring expected 
adverse effects of tDCS, we use the SAFTEE at each session that includes changes in 
physical health status. Deaths are reported by sign ificant others when we try to locate 
participants who missed appointments. Butler Hospit al has a psychiatric emergency room 
available 24 hours a day. All research procedures w ill be supervised by Drs. Stein and 
Abrantes who will be on call 24-hours a day.  
Second, all study staff will be trained in the OHRP  definitions of adverse events that are 
also unanticipated problems; serious adverse events ; or unanticipated problems that are not 
adverse events. All study staff are required to rep ort any event that might meet one of these 
criteria to one of the PIs immediately both verball y and in writing. When necessary, a report of 
a serious adverse event will result in one of the P Is contacting the participant to further assess 
the event. 
Drs. Stein and Abrantes will meet weekly with resea rch assistants to review staff 
experiences with participants. Based on the sources  of information detailed above as well as 
direct patient contact and/or consultation with the  scientific team, Drs. Stein and Abrantes will 
determine if the event is: a) a serious adverse eve nt that is also an unanticipated problem; b) 
an unanticipated problem that is not an adverse eve nt. The Butler Hospital IRB require that 
fatalities related to the study be reported within 24 hours, all other serious adverse events 
related to the study be reported within 5 business/ 7 calendar days, and other serious adverse 
events related to the study be reported at the cont inuing review (at least annually).  
 
6.d Reporting of IRB Actions to NIDA 
All SAEs will be reported to NIDA within 72 hours o f the MPIs becoming aware. 
 
6.e Report of changes of amendments to the protocol  
Changes to the proposal must be approved by NIDA pr ior to implementation 
 
6.f Trial stopping rules 
This  study  will  be  stopped  prior  to  its  com pletion  if:  (1)  the  intervention  is  associate d  
with  adverse  effects  that  call  into  question  the  safety  of  the  intervention;  (2) any  new  
information  becomes  available  during  the  trial   that  necessitates  stopping  the  trial;  or   
 
6.g Disclosure of Conflict of Interest  
Ana Abrantes: None 
Michael Stein: None 
Linda Carpenter: None 
Lawrence Sweet: None  
 
7. Trial Safety 
7.a Potential Risks and Benefits for Participants 
 
Potential Coercion.  
Risks. It is possible that individuals may feel coerced in to participating.  
Minimization.  Issues related to coercion can arise from the payme nts that participants can 
earn from assessment participation. The payments ma de amount to approximately $20 per 
hour as compensation for assessment and travel time . This rate is consistent with local 
standards for research. 
 
Risks due to tDCS.  
Risks. There is some inherent risk with application of tDC S, mainly risk of skin irritation 
and, as in a small number of case reports, local sk in burns where the electrodes are placed. 
Such cases have typically been seen only after repe ated daily stimulation to the same region 
(Palm et al., 2008), or after unintentional abrasio n of the skin with alcohol swabs prior to 
Rev. 10/22/23 
stimulation (Loo et al., 2011). Though a possible r isk, skin burns are rare. In a recent review of 
clinical research with tDCS, Brunoni and colleagues  (2012) noted that “tDCS has been tested 
in thousands of subjects world-wide with no evidenc e of toxic effects to date.” The most 
common side effects include mild local sensations a t the electrode sites, including tingling or 
itching, and moderate fatigue, and headache. In res earch experience totaling 567 tDCS 
sessions, Poreisz and colleagues (2007) reported th at no participants requested tDCS be 
stopped or required any medical intervention during  or after stimulation. Notably, adverse 
effects did not differ between healthy individuals and patients. Safety testing of tDCS has 
found high tolerability and no reports of discomfor t by participants when stimulating for 20 
minutes at either 1 or 2mA for 20 minutes (Iyer et al., 2005). There have also been a small 
number of case reports of hypomania induction durin g tDCS for depression interventions, in 
both individuals with bipolar and unipolar depressi on (Arul-Anandam, Loo, Mitchell, 2010; 
Galvez et la., 2011; Baccaro et al., 2010). Most re cently, Brunoni, et al (2013) reported during 
a factorial design testing tDCS and the antidepress ant sertraline, 7 of 120 participants 
developed mania or hypomania, with 5 of the 7 cases  occurring in the combined 
tDCS+sertraline group. As the participants in that study were all drug-free prior to study entry, 
it is unknown whether this was due to starting an a ntidepressant medication, tDCS, or the 
combination.  
Minimization.  To minimize risks due to tDCS, all participants wil l be carefully screened prior 
to tDCS for contraindications to tDCS. Those with a  history of mood symptoms suggesting risk 
for hypomania or bipolar disorder will be excluded.  Use of an electrically isolated power source 
(i.e., battery-powered DC stimulation device) also protects against delivery of more intense 
currents than intended. Participants with lesions o r open wounds on the scalp will be excluded. 
Participants will be closely observed for signs of skin burns, discomfort, or other stress. During 
stimulation sessions, participants will be closely monitored to ensure the electrode sponges 
stay moist with saline (to enhance conductivity) an d in good contact with the scalp in order to 
help prevent burns. Participants will have the opti on of discontinuing the study at any time and 
will be explicitly instructed to inform the tDCS ad ministrator immediately if they experience any 
discomfort. The tDCS administrator will inform the supervising physician about any participant 
who has significant discomfort or a skin lesion tha t emerges after tDCS delivery. A Butler 
Neuromodulation Research Facility covering physicia n is available during all procedures to 
evaluate any participant or research staff identify ing a concern related to study procedures. If 
there is any doubt about the mental or physical sta tus of an individual before or after testing, 
the supervising physician will evaluate the partici pant and make a recommendation for 
cancelling the research procedure and /or arranging  follow-up care, as indicated. Telephone or 
in-person follow-up will be arranged as needed and will not be considered a protocol deviation. 
Any participant that has experienced adverse effect s will be evaluated, treated as necessary, 
and withdrawn from the study if deemed necessary.  
All tDCS will be administered by a trained member o f the research staff who is supervised 
and credentialed by Dr. Carpenter. Butler Neuromodu lation Research Facility fees include 
access to a covering physician with neuromodulation  training who is versed in the procedures 
of the study and is available to supervise or consu lt on tDCS administration in this study. This 
physician will be immediately available for managem ent of emergent events. Prior to 
administering tDCS in this protocol, all staff invo lved in administration of tDCS will be required 
to undergo training and demonstrate competence in t he safe delivery of tDCS. Certification in 
Basic Cardiac Life Support, HIPAA, and Good Clinica l Practices training are also required for 
use of the Butler Neuromodulation Research Facility . There are multiple components of 
training required of investigators and staff in ord er to be able to administer tDCS, including 
initial didactic training to introduce concepts cri tical to tDCS, direct observation of tDCS 
procedures,  practice of the various steps of setti ng up/administering tDCS on non-patient 
volunteers, including role-plays of scenarios of wh en the covering physician should be 
consulted to further address adverse events related  to the study protocol, and demonstration 
of competency in all aspects of relevant subject as sessment and in administration of the entire 
Rev. 10/22/23 
tDCS procedure under direct observation of a qualif ied tDCS administrator. Competence in 
specific aspects of the procedure comprising best p ractice standards for tDCS will be 
documented and updated every 2 years. Subject feedb ack will be solicited to further aid 
training and refine the skills of research staff de livering tDCS in this protocol. 
In order to assess for and monitor presence and tol erability of adverse effects, we will use 
a modified version of a tDCS Side Effects Questionn aire informed by Brunoni and 
colleagues11.  This is a 10-item measure that assess such effec ts as headache, neck pain, 
scalp pain, skin redness, sleepiness, difficulty co ncentrating, and acute mood changes.  The 
measure will be administered after each tDCS sessio n.  For each item, participants are asked 
to report how bothersome each symptom on the form h as been with response options "None," 
"Mild," "Moderate," or "Severe." For any item rated  "severe," or any item which appears to 
significantly increase in severity over the course of the session, the evaluator will notify the 
covering physician immediately and the covering phy sician will provide further evaluation as 
medically necessary. tDCS administrators are encour aged to contact the covering physician 
about any additional tDCS related concerns and this  will not be considered a protocol 
deviation. Reported side-effects endorsed will be r eviewed during weekly meetings of study 
staff. Follow-up or further evaluation will occur a s necessary. 
In addition, in order to monitor participant safety  during the intervention period, we will also 
have participants complete self-report measures to assess for increased manic or hypomanic 
symptoms (from the Altman Self-Rating Mania Scale ( ASRM)). The ASRM will be 
administered at baseline and prior to the first and  last session of tDCS (sessions 1 and 5). 
Scores ≥ 6 will be considered clinically significan t and will require evaluation by a study 
clinician.  Further, we will assess significant cha nges in affect such as 
anxiety/activation/anergia/sedation from the PANAS scale at the baseline and week 2 follow-
up assessment. Lastly, changes in frequency and dos age of any medication will be monitored 
at every participant contact time point.  The study  physician will monitor affective symptom 
changes and make determinations as to whether the p articipant should discontinue the 
intervention and receive additional mental health t reatment. 
 
Risks due to FMRI.  
Risks. The primary FMRI contraindications are claustrophob ia, metal implants, and 
pregnancy. Some individuals may experience discomfo rt from loud noises inside the scanner. 
Minimization.  FMRI contraindications, such as claustrophobia or m etal implants, will be 
assessed at the time of study screening and again o n the day of the scan by research staff. 
The MR technician, who is trained by the Brown Univ ersity FMRI facility staff in safety 
procedures, will also screen for these concerns imm ediately prior to the scan and will be 
responsible for participant safety during the scan.  A pregnancy test will be required prior to 
study inclusion for all females who report the poss ibility of being pregnant.  
 
Risks due to cue-reactivity task. 
Risks. There is a risk that participants will find the exp osure to opioid-related images (e.g., 
needles, pills) during the cue-reactivity task dist ressing, due to the task’s intended goal of 
eliciting craving.   
Minimization. We have developed a standardized protocol for minim izing distress related to 
the cue-reactivity task that will be administered t o all participants at the end of the fMRI 
imaging session.  First, participants will be given  a tailored, pre-generated list of their personal 
motivations for opioid abstinence.  Second, partici pants will be given a handout with a list of 
various coping strategies (e.g., go to a meeting, c all a friend/sponsor, deep breathing, 
mindfulness exercises, etc.).  Third, based on the empirical support for playing Tetris as a 
craving reduction strategy (Skorka-Brown, et al., 2 015), they will play a game of Tetris on a 
study iPad for 5 minutes.  Fourth, they will be enc ouraged to use that day’s usual, prescribed 
buprenorphine or methadone dose. Lastly, Drs. Abran tes and Stein will be available to talk to 
any participant who continues to feel any distress following these minimization procedures. 
Rev. 10/22/23 
 
Emotional Discomfort due to assessments and/or inte rvention procedures 
 Risks. During the assessments we will ask particip ants about their thoughts, feelings, 
behaviors, and symptoms. It is possible that asking  participants about this information may 
increase distress or discomfort.  In addition, part icipants may become bored or tired during the 
EEG assessments and tDCS+CCN sessions. 
 Minimization. To minimize the risk of distress ari sing from the assessment procedure, only 
study staff that has been adequately trained in the  assessment battery will complete all 
assessments, and senior study staff will supervise all assessment procedures. Individuals will 
also be advised that they may choose not to answer any question which they find upsetting.  
Further, during EEG and tDCS+CCN sessions, particip ants will be reminded they can stop the 
procedure at any time, if they get tired. All study  procedures will be explained to the 
participants with an emphasis on the voluntary natu re of the study. Furthermore, staff 
members will be trained to respect participants’ wi shes regarding their participation in the 
study or certain aspects of the study’s procedure. There is minimal, if any, additional risk in 
having EEG data recorded; EEG is a safe and painles s noninvasive technique that is routinely 
used in clinical medicine.   
 
Benefits  
Participants may benefit by feeling a reduction in their cravings for opiates. However, we 
cannot guarantee that they will benefit. The main b enefits of this study are to help researchers 
and clinicians develop a better understanding of cr aving and substance use after starting 
opioid treatment.  
 
7.b. Collection and reporting of AEs and SAEs 
See 6.a 
 
7.c Management of SAEs and other study risks 
See 6.a and 7.a. 
 
8. Trial Efficacy 
8.a Plans for interim Analysis of efficacy data 
Go/no go criteria for the UG3 phase will be demonst ration of greater FMRI change in any node 
of the CR or CCN networks or enhanced frontal theta power during a WM task AND g reater 
change in subjective craving measured during a cue reactivity task or outside the FMRI 
following the tDCS+CCN priming intervention compare d to sham tDCS+CCN priming. 
 
9. DSM Plan Administration 
9.a Responsibility for data and safety monitoring 
The Data Safety Monitoring Board will be comprised of 2 individuals independent from this 
research project. No member of the board will be a collaborator with the MPI on any other 
studies or have co-published with the MPIs in the p ast 3 years. They  will  be  qualified  to  
review  the  patient  safety  data  generated  by  this  study.  
They will review rates of adverse events to determi ne any changes in participant risk and 
will make appropriate recommendations for changes i n protocol, which will be submitted to the 
Butler Hospital IRB and NIDA for review.   
 
9.b Frequency of DSM 
Study progress and safety will be reviewed by the M PIs monthly (and more frequently if 
needed). Semi-annually, a progress report will be g enerated for the DSMB’s review. The full 
DSMB will be convened twice per year to review the semi-annual report and discuss data and 
participant safety.  
 
Rev. 10/22/23 
9.c. Content of DSM Report 
The DSM report will include a brief description of the aim of the trial, baseline and 
demographic information, recruitment and retention,  regulatory issues or data quality issues 
that have arisen, and AE/SAEs. The DSM report will be sent to the NIDA Program Officer 
annually. 
The study team will specifically generate the follo wing for the DSM report: 
 Interim  CONSORT  document  (number  screened,  nu mber  consented,  reasons  not  
eligible,  status  of  all  participants  enrolled  in  the  study,  number  completed  the  study  vs .  
withdrawn)      
 Actual  vs.  expected  enrollment  numbers  
 Gender,  age,  race,  and  ethnicity  of  enrolled   participants  
 List  and  description  of  deaths,    unanticipat ed  problems,  and  SAEs   
 Summary  table  of  AEs    
 List  of  protocol  deviations,  if  any   
 Ongoing  quality  assurance  and  quality  control   procedures  and  findings.   
 
The DSMB will determine whether 1) AE rates are wit h pre-study assumptions, 2) whether 
continuation of the study is justified, and 3) cond itions under which the study would be 
prematurely terminated.  
  
 
10. DSM Board Plan 
10.a Members and Affiliation 
Noah S. Philip, M.D.  – Director of Neuropsychiatric Modulation at the P rovidence Veterans 
Affairs Medical Center; Associate Professor of Psyc hiatry and Human Behavior at the Alpert 
Medical School of Brown University. 
 
Edward V. Nunes, M.D.  – Deputy Director of Intervention Studies at the N ew York State 
Psychiatric Institute; Professor of Psychiatry at C olumbia University Medical Center. 
 
10.b Frequency of Meetings 
See 9.b 
 
10. c Conflict of Interest 
Pending 
 
10.d. Protection of Confidentiality 
Only de-identified data will be presented in DSMB r eports.  
 
10.e Monitoring Activities 
See 9.a 
 
10.f Communication plan to IRB, NIDA, and FDA 
DSMB reports will be submitted to both the Butler H ospital IRB and NIDA. 
 
 
References 
1. Arul-Anandam AP, Loo C, Mitchell P. Induction of  hypomanic episode with transcranial direct 
current stimulation. J ECT. 2010;26(1):68-69. doi:10.1097/YCT.0b013e3181a744b f 
Rev. 10/22/23 
2.  Baccaro A, Brunoni AR, Bensenor IM, Fregni F. H ypomanic episode in unipolar depression 
during transcranial direct current stimulation. Acta Neuropsychiatr . 2010;22(6):316-318. 
doi:10.1111/j.1601-5215.2010.00495.x 
3.  Brunoni AR, Valiengo L, Baccaro A, et al. The s ertraline vs electrical current therapy for 
treating depression clinical study. JAMA Psychiatry . 2013;70(4):383-391. 
doi:10.1001/2013.jamapsychiatry.32 
4.  Brunoni AR, Amadera J, Berbel B, Volz MS, Rizze rio BG, Fregni F. A systematic review on 
reporting and assessment of adverse effects associa ted with transcranial direct current 
stimulation. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol . 2011;14(8):1133-1145. 
doi:10.1017/S1461145710001690 
5.  Brunoni AR, Nitsche MA, Bolognini N, et al. Cli nical research with transcranial direct current 
stimulation (tDCS): Challenges and future direction s. Brain Stimul. 2012;5(3):175-195. 
doi:10.1016/j.brs.2011.03.002 
6.  Gálvez V, Alonzo A, Martin D, Mitchell PB, Sach dev P, Loo CK. Hypomania Induction in a 
Patient With Bipolar II Disorder by Transcranial Di rect Current Stimulation (tDCS). J ECT. 
2011;27(3):256-258. doi:10.1097/YCT.0b013e3182012b8 9 
7.  Iyer MB, Mattu U, Grafman J, Lomarev M, Sato S,  Wassermann EM. Safety and cognitive 
effect of frontal DC brain polarization in healthy individuals. Neurology. 2005;64(5):872-875. 
doi:10.1212/01.WNL.0000152986.07469.E9 
8.  Loo CK, Martin DM, Alonzo A, Gandevia S, Mitche ll PB, Sachdev P. Avoiding skin burns with 
transcranial direct current stimulation: Preliminar y considerations. Int J 
Neuropsychopharmacol . 2011;14(3):425-426. doi:10.1017/S1461145710001197  
9.  Loo CK, Alonzo A, Martin D, Mitchell PB, Galvez  V, Sachdev P. Transcranial direct current 
stimulation for depression: 3-Week, randomised, sha m-controlled trial. Br J Psychiatry . 
2012;200(1):52-59. doi:10.1192/bjp.bp.111.097634 
10.  Nolan H, Whelan R, Reilly RB. FASTER: Fully Au tomated Statistical Thresholding for EEG 
artifact Rejection. J Neurosci Methods . 2010. doi:10.1016/j.jneumeth.2010.07.015 
11.  Palm U, Keeser D, Schiller C, et al. Skin lesi ons after treatment with transcranial direct curren t 
stimulation (tDCS). Brain Stimul. 2008;1(4):386-387. doi:10.1016/j.brs.2008.04.003 
12.  Poreisz C, Boros K, Antal A, Paulus W. Safety aspects of transcranial direct current 
stimulation concerning healthy subjects and patient s. Brain Res Bull . 2007;72(4-6):208-214. 
doi:10.1016/j.brainresbull.2007.01.004 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rev. 10/22/23 
 