Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 2be added to this document is also confidential  and proprietary to BMS and must be kept in 
confidence in the same manner as the conten ts of this document. Any person who receives 
this document without due authorization fr om BMS is requested to return it to BMS or 
promptly destroy it. All other rights reserved. References to BMS in this protocol may apply 
to partners to which BMS has transferred obligations, eg, a Contract Research Organization (CRO).
Replace all previous version(s) of the protocol with this revised protocol and please provide a copy 
of this revised protocol to all study pers onnel under your supervision, and archive the previous 
versions.
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 4Document Date of Issue Summary of Change
Administrative 
Letter 0114-Oct-2016Section 4.5.4.1 Criteria to Resume Nivolumab Dosing.  Corrected a typographical error found in Revised Protocol v01 dated 21Sep2016, to 
the sixth bullet in regards to prednisone dosing. The ≥sign was 
inadvertently used in lieu of the ≤sign in front of the equivalent dose of 
prednisone 10mg/day.
Revised 
Protocol 0121-Sep-2016 Incorporates Amendment 01
Amendment 01 21-Sep-2016To increase sample size and some language adjustments on study 
objectives and stat analyses with added population of PD-L1>=50% and 
efficacy analyses in PD-L1 negative population.
Original 
Protocol09-Dec-2015 Not applicable
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
SUMMARY OF KEY CHANGES OF REVISED PROTOCOL 06
Section Number & Title Description of Change
Section 3.3.2  Exclusion 
Criteria Other Exclusion 
Criteria 5 e)
Section 3.4.1  Prohibited 
and/or Restricted TreatmentsExcluded/prohibited 
treatment with botanical preparations during study 
treatment
Section 4.5.1.1  Nivolumab 
and ipilimumab dosingSequence of study treatment 
administration updated. Additional language added to 
separate dosing for Part 1 and Part 2
Section 4.5.4.2 Criteria to Resume Ipilimumab Dosing
Section 4.5.5.1  Nivolumab 
Dose DiscontinuationAdrenal insufficiency 
requires discontinuation 
regardless of control with hormone repl acement.
Section 4.5.5.1 Nivolumab Dose Discontinuation Exceptions for Grade 3 non-
skin, drug-related adverse event lasting > 7 days 
updated
Section 5.3  Safety 
AssessmentsPulmonary toxicity 
evaluation added when pulmonary-related signs are 
present
Section 5.4  Efficacy 
AssessmentsAdded the collection of 
additional imaging that may 
demonstrate tumor response or progression
Section 5.6  Subheadings 
Table 5.6.2.6-1Language added to 
subheadings to differentiate 
procedures for Part 1 and Part 2
Table reformatted to identify 
biomarker collection Part 1 and Part 2
Section 7.1 Data Monitoring CommitteeRemoved DMC section
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 6
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v

Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
SYNOPSIS
Clinical Protocol CA209568
Protocol Title: A Study of Nivolumab in Combination with Ipilimumab (Part 1); and Nivolumab plus 
Ipilimumab in Combination with Chemotherapy (Part 2) as First Line Therapy in Stage IV Non-Small Cell 
Lung Cancer (NSCLC)
Investigational Product(s), Dose and Mode of Administr ation, Duration of Treatment with Investigational 
Product(s): Part 1: Nivolumab administered IV over 30 minutes at 3 mg/kg every 2 weeks combined with ipilimumab 
administered IV over 30 minutes at 1 mg/kg every 6 weeks until progression, unacceptable toxicity, or other reasons 
specified in the protocol. Treatment with nivolumab and ip ilimumab will be given for a maximum of 2 years from the 
start of study treatment in the absence of disease progression or unacceptable toxicity. 
Part 2: Nivolumab administered IV and ipilimumab administered  IV together with 2 cycles of histology based 
platinum doublet chemotherapy as induction treatment, followed by nivolumab a nd ipilimumab until disease 
progression or unacceptable toxicity. Treatment with nivolumab  and ipilimumab will be given for a maximum of 2 
years from the start of study treatment in the absence of disease progression or unacceptable toxicity. The 2 cycles of histology-based p latinum doublet chemotherapy include: 
Histology-based platinum doublet chemotherapy:
•Squamous histology: Carboplatin AUC6 + Paclitaxel 200 mg/m2
•Non squamous histology: Carboplatin AUC 5 or 6 + pemetrexed 500 mg/m2 or Cisplatin 75 mg/m2 + pemetrexed 
500 mg/m2. 
Study Phase: 2 
Research Hypotheses:
Part 1: In subjects with PD-L1 positive (membranous staining in ≥1% tumor cells ) and negative (membranous 
staining in < 1% tumor cells) stage IV NSCLC, the administration of nivolumab in combination with ipilimumab as 
first line treatment will lead to clinical benefit as d emonstrated by a clin ically meaningful objective response rate 
(ORR) and duration of response. 
Part 2: Nivolumab and ipilimumab combined with 2 cycles of standard of care chemotherapy are tolerable 
Objectives: Part 1 Primary Objectives (Part 1)
•To determine the ob jective respons e rate (O RR) in all treated PD-L1 positive ( ≥1%) subjects by blinded 
independent central review per RECIST 1.1 in stage IV NSCLC subjects treated with nivolumab in combination 
with ipilimumab as first line therapy.
•To determine the ORR in all treated PD-L1 negative (< 1%) subjects by blinded independent central review per RECIST 1.1 in stage IV NSCLC subjects  treated with nivolumab in combin ation with ipilimumab as first line 
therapy. 
Secondary Objectives (Part 1) 
•To assess ORR by blinded independent central review  per RECIST 1.1 in all tr eated subjects treated with 
nivolumab in combination with ipilimumab as first line therapy.
•To assess progression free survival (PFS) based on blinded independent central review assessment per RECIST 
1.1
•To assess overall survival.
•To assess ORR, PFS and OS by PD-L1 expression levels.
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 8
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
Part 2 Schema for Safety Lead-in:
The safety lead-in phase will be conducted to evaluate safe dose level: approximately 28 subjects (in order to achieve 
at least 22 DLT evaluable subjects) will receive 2 cycles of induction chemotherapy and nivolumab plus ipilimumab. The starting dose of nivolumab is 360mg every 3 weeks and ipilimumab is 1 mg/kg every 6 weeks. 
‘Safe’ is defined as 25% evaluated subjects or less exhibit DLTs (ie, 5 or less subjects with such events out of 22 DLT 
evaluable subjects).
A safety assessment will be performed on the fi rst 10 subjects after a minimum of 9 weeks of follow- up. If 20% or 
less of the first 10 subjects exhibit DLTs (ie, 2 or less subjects with such events), the regimen is determined safe and 
enrollment in subsequent studies using this combinati on may start while the safety lead in phase of CA209568 is 
ongoing. If more than 20% of the first 10 subjects exhibit DLTs, the full safety cohort will be evaluated prior to using this dose regimen in subsequent studies. If more than 25% of the overall DLT evaluable subjects exhibit DLTs, the 
protocol may be amended to evaluate different dose levels, depending on the toxicities observed.
After above 2 cycles of indu ction treatment, nivolumab and ipilimumab will continue until disease progression or 
unacceptable toxicity, withdrawal of consent, or for a max imum of 2 years from the start of study treatment in in the 
absence of disease progression or inacceptable toxicity. 
Study Population: Subjects must meet all eligibility criteria specified in Section 3.3 of the protocol, including the 
following:Key inclusion criteria include:
•Male and female subjects (≥ 18 years of age).
•Subjects with histol ogically confirmed stage IV NSCLC (per the 7th International Association for the St udy of 
Lung Cancer classification) squamous or non-squamous histology.
•No prior systemic therapy for stage IV disease. Prior definitive chemoradiation for lo cally advanced disease is 
permitted as long as the last administration of chemotherapy or radiotherapy (which ever was given last) occurred 
at least 6 months prior to enrollment. Locally advanced disease with recurrence after concurrent chemoradiation 
therapy (stage IIIB, specifically refers to patients with no curative treatment options) is eligible to enroll. Prior adjuvant or neoadjuvant chemotherapy for early stage lung cancer is permitted if completed at least 6 months 
before initiating study treatment. 
•EGFR/ALK wild type, and ECOG PS 0 or 1
•Subjects are to have tumor tissue sample available at cen tral lab for PD -L1 IHC testing during the screening 
period.
•Measurable disease by CT or MRI per RECIST 1.1 criteria
Subjects in safety lead in phase may initiate therapy before the result of IHC testing once the central lab has confirmed receiving of samples.  
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 10
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
Either a formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue block or unstained tumor tissue sections, with an associated 
pathology report, must be submitted for biomarker evalu ation prior to treatment. The tumor tissue sample may be 
fresh or archival if obtained within 6 months prior to Pa rt 1 enrollment (archival tissue is to be obtained within 
3 months prior to Part 2 enrollment), and there can have  been no systemic therapy (eg. adjuvant or neoadjuvant 
chemotherapy) given after the sample was obtained. 
Tissue samples must be collected by a core needle biopsy, ex cisional or incisional biopsy. Fine needle biopsies or 
drainage of pleural effusions with cytospins are not c onsidered adequate for biomarker review. Biopsies of bone 
lesions that do not have a soft tissue component or decalcified bone tumor samples are also not acceptable. 
Key Exclusion Criteria
•Subjects with known EGFR mutations which are sensitive to available targeted inhibitor therapy (including, but 
not limited to, deletions in exon 19 and exon 21 [L858R] substitution mutations) are excluded. All subjects with non-squamous histology must have been tested for EGFR mutation status. EGFR test is to be done locally. Use 
of an FDA-approved or local Health Authority approved test i s strongly encouraged. Tests other than PCR or next 
generation sequencing will be requested to repeat us ing PCR or next generation sequencing based method. 
Subjects with non-squamous histology with unknown or indeterminate EGFR status are excluded.
•Subjects with known ALK translocations which are sensitive to available targeted inhibitor therapy are excluded. ALK tests are to be done at local lab and use of a FDA-approved test is strongly encouraged. S ubjects with 
unknown or indeterminate ALK status may be enrolled.
•Subjects with untreated CNS metastases are excluded.
Subjects are eligible if CNS metastases are adequately tr eated and subjects are neurologically returned to baseline 
(except for residual signs or symptoms related to the CNS treatment) for at least 2 weeks prior to first dose. In addition, 
subjects must be either off corticosteroids, or on a stable or decreasing dose of ≤10 mg daily prednisone (or equivalent) 
for at least 2 weeks prior to first dose.
•Subjects with carcinomatous meningitis
•Subjects with an active, known or suspected autoimmune  disease. Subjects with  type I diabetes mellitus, 
hypothyroidism only requiring hormone replacement, skin disorders (such as vitiligo, psoriasis, or alopecia) not 
requiring systemic treatment, or conditions not expected to recur in the absence of an external trigger are permitted to enroll.
•Subjects with a condition requiring sy stemic tr eatment with either corticosteroids (> 10 mg daily prednisone 
equivalent) or other immunosuppressive medications within 14 days of first treatment. Inhaled or topical steroids, 
and adrenal replacement steroid > 10 mg daily prednisone equivalent, are permitted in the absence of active 
autoimmune disease.
•Subjects with history of screen failure to any anti-P D-L1 or anti-PD-L1 antibody clinical trial due to PD-L1-
negative status. 
Study Drug: includes both Investigational [Medicinal] Products (IP/IMP) and Non-investigational [Medicinal] Products (Non-IP/Non-IMP) as listed:
Study Drugs for CA209568
Medication Potency IP/Non-IP 
Nivolumab 10 mg/ml IP
Ipilimumab 5 mg/ml IP
Carboplatin 10 mg/ml  IP
Paclitaxel 6 mg/ml IP
Pemetrexed 500 mg/vial IP
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 11
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
Part 1:
•The objective response rate (O RR) in all treated PD-L1 positive ( ≥1%) subjects by blinded independent central 
review per RECIST 1.1 in stage IV NSCLC subjects treated with nivolumab in combination with ipilimumab as 
first line therapy.
•The ORR in all treated PD-L1 negative (< 1%) subjects by blinded independent central review per RECIST 1.1 in stage IV NSCLC subjects treated with nivolumab in combination with ipilimumab as first line therapy. 
Objective res ponse rate (O RR) is based on blinded independent central review assessment pe r RECIST 1.1 criter ia. 
ORR is defined as the number of subjects with a best overall response (BOR) of confirmed CR or PR, divided by the number of treated subjects among PD-L1 positive or PD-L1 negative subjects or all treated subjects. BOR is defined as the best response designation recorded between baseline and the date of objectively documented progression perRECIST 1.1 or the date of initiation of palliative local therapy or the date of initiation of subsequent anticancer therapy, whichever occurs first.
Blinded independent central review determined PFS is de fined as the time from the first dosing date for treated subjects
in Part 1) to the date of the first documented tumor progression as determined by blinded independent central review
(per RECIST 1.1), or death due to any cause. Subjects who did not progress or die will be censored on the d ate of their 
last evaluable tumor assessment. Subjects who did not have any on study tumor assessments will be censored at thefirst dose date for subjects. Subjects who started any palliative loc al therapy or subsequent anti-cancer therapy without
a prior reported progression will be censored on the date of their last evaluable tumor assessment prior to the initiationof the palliative local therapy or subsequent anti -cancer therapy, whichever procedure occurred first.
Part 2: 
•
To determine the incidence of DLT (dose limiting toxicity) during DLT evaluation period (within 9 
weeks after first dose)
•To determine the safety and tolerability of nivolumab and ipilimumab combined with chemotherapy.
Secondary Endpoints:
Part 1:
•ORR by blinded independent central re view per RECIST 1.1 in all treated subjects treated with nivolumab in 
combination with ipilimumab as first line therapy
•Progression free survival (PFS) based on blinded independent central review assessment per RECIST 1.1
•Overall survival (OS)
•ORR, PFS and OS by PD-L1 expression levels
•Tumor cell total somatic mutations and their association with ORR, PFS, and OS
Part 2:•To evaluate ORR and PFS by investigator assessment using RECIST 1.1, and OS 
OS is defined as the time between the date of the first dosing date and the date of death due to any cause.
Analyses: Demographics and baseline laboratory results will be summarized using descriptive statistics for all treated 
subjects in Part 1 and all treated subjects in Part 2.
Among all treated subjects, the ORR and PFS will be determin ed by investigator assessment and will be summarized 
by binomial response rates and their corresponding two-sided 95% exact CIs using Clopper-Pearson method. In parts
1 and 2, separately, time to event distribution such as PFS and OS will be estimated using Kaplan Meier techniques. To further characterize the response, time to objective res ponse, depth of response, and BOR by response category 
will be summarized using descriptive statistics. 
The safety analysis will be performed in all treated subjects. Descriptive statistics of safety will be presented using the 
National Cancer  Institute (NCI) Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) version 4.0. 
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 13
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
APPENDIX 3 RECIST 1.1 GUIDELINES ..................................................................  
APPENDIX 4 REVISED PROTOCOL SUMMARY OF CHANGE HISTORY ........  146
154Clinical Protocol
BMS-936558CA209568
nivolumab
Revised Protocol No: 06Date: 11-Jan-2018 18
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
 
 
 
 
 
1.2 Research Hypothesis 
Part 1: In
 subjects with PD-L1positive (membranous staining in ≥1% tumor cells) and negative 
(membranous staining in < 1% tumor cells) stage IV NSCLC, the administration of nivolumab in 
combination with ipilimumab as first line treatment w ill lead to clinical benef it as demonstrated 
by a clinically meaningful objective response rate (ORR) and duration of response.
In individual patient data meta-analysis of 2968 pa tients suggests that cisplatin or carboplatin 
based chemotherapy has response rate of 30% (cis platin based chemo) or 24% (carboplatin based 
chemo).25Clinically meaningful objective res ponse rate is defined as higher than 30% which is 
the ORR of cisplatin based standard of care chemotherapy, and/or considerably longer duration of 
response.
Part 2: nivolumab and ipilimumab combined with standard of care chemotherapy are tolerable in 
first line stage IV NSCLC unselected for PD-L1 expression.
1.3 Objectives(s)
1.3.1 Primary Objectives
Part 1:
•To determine the objective response rate (ORR) in all treated PD-L1 positive ( ≥ 1%) subjects 
by blinded independent central review per RECIST 1.1 in stage IV NSCLC subjects treated 
with nivolumab in combination with ipilimumab as first line therapy.
•To determine the ORR in all treated PD-L1 negative (< 1%) subjects by blinded independent 
central review per RECIST 1.1 in stage IV NSCLC subjects treated with nivolumab in 
combination with ipilimumab as first line therapy.
Part 2:
Primary Endpoints:
•To determine the incidence of  DLT (dose limiting toxicity) during DLT evaluation period 
(within 9 weeks after first dose)
•To determine the safety and tolerability of nivolumab and ipilimumab combined with 
chemotherapy.
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 38
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v

Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
The study will be conducted in compliance with the protocol. The protocol and any amendments 
and the subject informed consent w ill receive Institutional Review Board/Independent Ethics 
Committee (IRB/IEC) approval/favorable opinion prior to initiation of the study.
All potential serious breaches must be reported to BMS immediately. A serious breach is a breach 
of the conditions and principles of GCP in connection with the study or the protocol, which is likely to affect, to a significant d egree, the safety or physical or me ntal integrity of the subjects of 
the study or the scientific value of the study.
Personnel involved in conducting this st udy will be qu alified by education, traini ng, and 
experience to perform their respective tasks.
This study will not use the services of study personnel where sanctions have been invoked or where 
there has been scientific misconduct or fraud (eg, loss of medical licensure, debarment). 
2.2 Institutional Review Board/Independent Ethics Committee 
Before study initiation, the investigator must ha ve written and dated approval/favorable opinion 
from the IRB/IEC for the protocol, consent form, subject recruitment materials 
(eg, advertisements), and any other written informati on to be provided to subjects. The investigator 
or BMS should also provide the IRB/IEC with a copy of the Investigator Brochure or product 
labeling information to be provided to subjects and any updates. 
The investigator or BMS should provide the IRB/IEC with reports, updates and other information 
(eg, expedited safety reports, amendments, and administrative letters) according to regulatory 
requirements or institution procedures.
2.3 Informed Consent
Investigators must ensure that subjects are clearly and fully informed about the purpose, potential 
risks, and other critical issues regarding clinical studies in which they volunteer to participate. 
In situations where consent cannot be given to  subjects, their legally acceptable representatives 
(as per country guidelines) are clearly and fully informed a bout the purpose, po tential risks, and 
other critical issues regarding clinical studies in which the subject volunteers to participate. 
BMS will provide the investigator with an appropriate (ie, Global or Lo cal) sample informed 
consent form which will include all elements required by ICH, GCP and applicable regulatory 
requirements. The sample informed consent form w ill adhere to th e ethical principles that have 
their origin in the Declaration of Helsinki.Investigators must:A. Provide a copy of the consent form and written information about the study in the language in 
which the subject is most proficient prior to clinical study participation. The language must be 
non-technical and easily understood. 
B. Allow time necessary for subject or subject's legally acceptable representative to inquire about 
the details of the study.
C. Obtain an informed consent signed and personally dated by the subject or the subject's legally 
acceptable representative and by the person who conducted the informed consent discussion. 
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 46
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
D. Obtain the IRB/IEC’s written approval/favorable opinion of the written informed consent form 
and any other information to be provided to the subjects, prior to the beginning of the study, 
and after any revisions are completed for new information.
E. If informed consent is initially given by a subject’s legally acceptable representative or legal 
guardian, and the subject subsequently becomes capable of making and communicating his or her informed consent during the study, consent must additionally be obtained from the subject.
F. Revise the informed consent whenever important new information becomes available that is 
relevant to the subject's consent. The investigator, or a person designated by the investigator, 
should fully i nform the subject or the subject's legally acceptable representative or legal 
guardian, of all pertinent aspects of the study and of any new information relevant to the subject's willingness to continue participation in the study. This communication should be 
documented. 
The confidentiality of records that could identify subjects must be protected, respecting the privacy 
and confidentiality rules applicable to regulatory requirements, the subjects' signed ICF a nd, in the 
US, the subjects’ signed HIPAA Authorization.
The consent form must also include a statement that BMS and regulatory authorities have direct 
access to subject records. 
Subjects unable to give their written consent (eg, stroke or subjects with or severe dementia) may 
only be enrolled in the study with the consent of a legally acceptable representative. The subject must also be informed about the nature of th e study to the extent compatible with his or her 
understanding, and should this subject become capable, he or she should personally sign and date 
the consent form as soon as possible. The exp licit wish of a s ubject who is unable to give his or 
her written consent, but who is capable of forming an opinion and assessing information to refuse 
participation in, or to be withdrawn from, the clinical study at any time s hould be considered by 
the investigator.
The rights, safety, and well-being of the study s ubjects are the most important considerations and 
should prevail over interests of science and society.
3 INVESTIGATIONAL PLAN
3.1 Study Design and Duration
Adults (≥18 years) male and female subjects, with stage IV non-small cell lung cancer, previously 
untreated for advanced disease are eligible for enrollment, irrespectively of PD-L1 expressi on. 
Subjects will be assessed by PD-L1 expression, and categorized into 4 groups (PD-L1 positive, 
PD-L1 ≥50%, PD-L1 negative, and PD-L1 not quantifiable). PD-L1 status will be determined by 
Dako PD-L1 IHC 28-8 pharmDx test for immunohistochemical (IHC) staining of PD-L1 protein 
in the submitted tumor sample.
•PD-L1 positive ( ≥1% tumor cell mem brane staining in a minimum of a h undred evaluable 
tumor cells) 
•PD-L1 ≥50% (≥50% tumor cell membrane staining in a minimum of a hundred evaluable 
tumor cells) and is a subset of all PD-L1 positive subjects.
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 47
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
•PD-L1 negative (< 1% tumor cell membrane staining in a minimum of a hundred evaluable 
tumor cells)
•PD-L1 not quantifiable (subjects with tumor biopsy specimens without quantifiable PD-L1 
expression)
Throughout both parts of the study, subjects are to  have tumor tissue sample available for PD-L1 
IHC testing performed by the central lab during the screening period. In part 1, subjects can initiate 
therapy before the result of IHC testing. PD-L1 test will be used to track PD-L1 positive and PD-L1 
negative treated subjects. Subjects in safety lead  in phase may initiate ther apy before IHC result. 
Part 1 enrollment will end after at least 120 PD-L 1 positive and 100 PD-L1 negative subjects are 
treated, whichever comes later (Part 1 enrollmen t target was reached on Nov. 15 2016. Future 
enrollment will be in Part 2 study).
For the Part 2 safety lead in, only receipt of suitable tissue by the central lab is required for 
treatment. 3.1.1 Study design
3.1.1.1 Part 1 study design
Nivolumab is administered IV over 30 minutes at 3 mg/kg every 2 weeks combined with 
ipilimumab administered IV over 30 minutes  at 1 mg/kg every 6 weeks until progressi on, 
unacceptable toxicity, or other reasons specified in the protocol. In study CA 209568, tr eatment 
with nivolumab with ipilimumab will be given for a maximum of 2 years from the start of st udy 
treatment in the absence of dis ease progression or unacceptable toxicity. 
Treatment beyond initial investigator-assessed RECIST 1.1 defined progression is permitted if the 
subject as specified in Section 4.5.6 has investigator assessed clinical benefit and is tolerating 
nivolumab and ipilimumab. 
On-study tumor assessments will begin 6 weeks pos t first dose date (+/-7 da ys) and be performed 
every 6 weeks (+/- 7 days) until week 48. After week 48, tumor assessments will be performed 
every 12 weeks (+/- 7 days) until blinded i ndependent central review assessed progressi on. 
Subjects received nivolumab plus ipilimumab beyond investigator-assessed progression must also 
continue tumor assessments until further progression at subsequent tumor assessment as indicated in Section 4.5.6 .
The study design schematic is presented in Figure 3.1.1.1-1 .
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 48
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
Figure 3.1.1.1-1: Part 1 Study Design Schematic
Part 1:
3.1.1.2 Part 2 study design
Figure 3.1.1.2-1: Part 2 Study Design Schematic 
Safety lead-in phase will be conducted to evaluate safe dose level for the Part 2 st udy. 
Approximately 28 subjects will r eceive 2 cy cles of induction chemotherapy and nivolumab plus 
ipilimumab. The starting dose of nivolumab is 360mg every 3 weeks and ip ilimumab is 1 mg/kg 
every 6 weeks. Nivolumab will be administered with ipilimumab, plus 2 cycles of histology based 
platinum doublet chemotherapy as follows:
•Squamous histology: Carboplatin AUC6 + Paclitaxel 200mg/m2. 
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 49
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
•Non-squamous histology: Carboplatin AUC 5 or6 + p emetrexed 500mg/m2or Cisplatin 
75mg/m2+ pemetrexed 500mg/m2.
After above 2 cycles of induction therapy, nivolumab is administered IV over 30 minutes 
combined with ipilimumab administered IV  over 30 minutes until progression, unacceptable 
toxicity, or other reasons specified in the protocol. In study CA209568, treatment with nivolumab and ipilimumab will be given for a maximum of 2 years from the start of study tr eatment in the 
absence of disease progression or unacceptable toxicity. 
Treatment beyond initial investigator assessed RECIST 1.1 defined progression is permitted if the 
subject as specified in Section 4.5.6 has investigator assessed clinical benefit and is tolerating 
nivolumab and ipilimumab.
On-study tumor assessments will begin at week 6 post first dose date (+/- 7 days) and be performed 
every 6 weeks (+/- 7 days) until week 48. After week 48, tumor assessments will be performed every 12 weeks (+/- 7 days) until investigator assessed progression or treatment discontinuation (whichever occurs later). Subjects receiving nivolumab plus ipilimumab beyond investigator 
assessed progression must also continue tumor assessments until further progression at subsequent tumor assessment as indicated in Section 4.5.6 .
3.1.2 Study Phase
3.1.2.1 Screening Phase
•Begins by establishing the subject’s initial elig ibility and signing of the informed consent 
(ICF).
•Subject is enrolled using the Interactive Web Response System (IWRS).
•Tumor tissue (archival or recent tumor biopsy) must be submitted by the site to a third party 
vendor for determination of PD-L1 status. An email/fax communication will be sent by the 
third party vendor to site for confirmation upon receiving tumor tissue.
•Subject is assessed for study eligibility as described in Table 5.1-1 . 
•All screening assessments and procedures must be performed within 28 days prior to tr eatment.
Part 1 :
Subjects can initiate therapy before the result of IHC testing.
Part 1 treatment
•Nivolumab 3 mg/kg IV will be administered every 2 weeks.
•Ipilimumab 1 mg/kg IV will be administered every 6 weeks following the administration of 
nivolumab.
•On the day of infusion, nivolumab is to be ad ministered first. The s econd infusion will always 
be ipilimumab (if ipilimumab is scheduled to be given), and will start at least 30 minutes after completion of the nivolumab infusion.
•Nivolumab 3 mg/kg Q2 weeks and ipilimumab 1 mg/kg Q6 weeks will be continued until the 
progression of disease, discontinuation due to toxicity, withdrawal of consent, or study closure. 
In study CA209568, treatment with nivolumab with ipilimumab will be given for a maximum 
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 50
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
of 2 years from the start of study tr eatment in the absence of disease progression or 
unacceptable toxicity. 
Part 2 
Safety lead-in phase will be conducted to evaluate safe dose level for the subsequent studies using 
same drug combination. Approximately 28 subjects will receive 2 cycles of induction 
chemotherapy and nivolumab plus ipilimumab. The starting dose of nivolumab is 360 mg every 3 weeks and ipilimumab is 1 mg/kg every 6 weeks. Subjects can initiate therapy before PD-L1 testing results.
Dose limiting toxicities are defined as any of the items listed below which occur during the first 
9 weeks.*
•Any Grade 2 drug-related uveitis or eye pain that does not respond to topical therapy and does 
not improve to Grade 1 severity within th e re-treatment period OR requires systemic treatment
•Any Grade 2 drug-related pneumonitis or interstitial lung disease that does not resolve to dose delay and systemic steroids in 14 days (radiologic changes may take longer to resolve). The 
management algorithm for pneumonitis or pulmonary toxicity can be found in the appendix 
and in the current Investigator Brochure.
22
•Any Grade 3 non-skin drug-related adverse event with the exception of laboratory 
abnormalities that cannot be alleviated (defined as returning to grade 1, radiologic changes 
may take longer to resolve) or controlled by appropriate care within 14 days (appropriate care being defined as treatment outlin ed in AE management al gorithms in the investigators 
brochure).
•Any Grade 4 drug-related adverse event incl uding laboratory abnormalit ies except Grade 4 
leukopenia or neutropenia lasting < 14 days and asymptomatic amylase/lipase elevation
•Any of the following drug-related hepat ic function laboratory abnormalities:
−AST or ALT >5-10x ULN for > 2 weeks
−AST or ALT > 10x ULN
−Total bilirubin > 5 x ULN
−Concurrent AST or ALT > 3x ULN and total bilirubin > 2x ULN
−Grade 3 thrombocytopenia associated with bleeding
*During the first 9 weeks: subjects should discontinue treatment if they experience any adverse 
event, laboratory abnormality or intercurrent illness (regardless of causality) which, in the opinion 
of the investigator, presents a substantial clinical risk to the subject with continued nivolumab dosing. Such discontinuation, however, will not be considered a DLT unless it meets at least one 
of the DLT criteria defined above. Treatment delay, modification and discontinuation criteria are to be followed for management of safety lead in subjects as outlined in Sections 4.5.2 , 4.5.3, and 
4.5.5 .
Subjects in safety lead in will follow Part 2 study procedures, and will ha ve on study tumor 
assessment as outlined in Table 5.1-3 . Investigator assesse d efficacy evaluatio n will be based on 
RECIST 1.1. Independent radiology central review is  not required for safety lead in subjects. Upon 
completion of dosing, subjects will enter Follow-up phase Table 5.1-4 .
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 51
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
Nivolumab and ipilimumab will be continued until the progression of disease, discontinuation due 
to toxicity, withdrawal of consent, for a maximum of 2 years from the start of study treatment in the absence of disease progression, or unacceptable toxicity. 
3.1.3 Post-Treatment Follow-up
The post-treatment follow-up begins when the decision to discontinue a sub ject from all treatment 
is made.
•Subjects who discontinue treatment for reasons other than disease progression will continue to 
have tumor assessments (if clinically f easible) according to the schedule in Table 5.1-4 until 
progression confirmed by blinded independent central review.
•At the time of investigator-assessed radiographic progression per RECIST 1.1, sites must request a blinded independent central review from the third party radiology vendor for subjects 
in Part 1, as specified in Section 7.2 .
•Subjects will be followed for drug-related toxicities until these toxicities resolve, return to 
baseline or are deemed irreversible. All advers e events will be documented for a minimum of 
100 days after the last dose of study medication Section 6 .
•After completion of the first two follow-up visits, subjects will be followed every 3 months for survival. Survival Follow-up visits may be performed by phone contact or office visit 
(Section 5.1 ). BMS may request that survival data be collected on all treated subjects outside 
of the protocol defined window. At that time of this request, each subject will be contacted to 
determine their survival status unless the subject had withdrawn consent for all contact.
3.1.4 Duration of Study
Part 1:
The analysis of the primary endpoint ORR will be performed at least six month after last subject 
first treatment. Add itional survival follow-up may continue  for up to 5 years from the primary 
analysis. The study will end on ce survival follow-up has concluded.
Part 2:
The duration of the study is from the start of safe ty-lead in phase until the analyses of PFS and OS 
are complete, about 13.5 months after first subject in Part 2 is treated. Additional survival follow-
up may continue for up to 5 years from the primary analysis.
3.2 Post Study Access to Therapy
At the conclusion of the study, subjects who c ontinue to demonstrat e clinical benefit will be 
eligible to receive BMS supplied study drug. Study drug will be provided via an extension of the 
study, a rollover study requiring approval by res ponsible health authority and ethics committee or 
through another mechanism at the discretion of BMS. BMS reserves the right to terminate access to BMS supplied study drug if any of the following occur: a) the marketing application is rejected by responsible health aut hority; b) the study is terminated due to safety concerns; c) the subject 
can obtain medication from a government sponsored or private health program; or d) therapeutic 
alternatives become available in the local market.
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 52
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
3.3 Study Population
For entry into the study, the following criteria MUST be met.
3.3.1 Inclusion Criteria
1. Signed Written Informed Consent
a) Subjects must have signed and dated an IRB/IEC approved written informed consent form 
in accordance with regulatory and institutional guidelines. This must be obtained before 
the performance of any protocol related procedures that are not part of normal subject care.
b) Subjects must be willing and able to comply with scheduled visits, treatment schedule, and 
laboratory testing.
2. Target Population
a) ECOG Performance Status of 0-1
b) Subjects with histologically confirmed stage IV NSCLC per the 7th International 
Association for the Study of Lung Cancer classification (IASLC)53of squamous or 
nonsquamous histology, with no prior sys temic anticancer therapy (including EGFR and 
ALK inhibitors) given as primary therapy for advanced or metastatic disease. Prior 
definitive chemoradiation for locally advanced disease is permitted as long as the last 
administration of chemotherapy or radiotherapy (which ever was given last) occurred at 
least 6 months prior to enrollment. Locally advanced disease with recurrence after 
chemoradiation therapy (stage IIIB disease, specifically refers to patients with no curative 
options), is eligible to enroll. Prior adjuvant or neoadjuvant chemotherapy for early stage 
lung cancer is permitted if completed at l east 6 months prior to initiating study tr eatment.
c) Measurable disease by CT or MRI per RECIST 1.1 criteria ( Appendix 3 ); radiographic 
tumor assessment performed within 28 days before treatment.
i) Target lesions may be located in a previous ly irradiated field if there is documented 
(radiographic) disease progression in that site after the completion of radiation 
therapy.
d) Subjects are to have tumor tissue sample available at central lab for PD -L1 IHC testing 
during the screening period. Subj ects can initiate therapy before the result of IHC testing 
for Part 1 subjects.
Part 2 subjects must have PD-L1 IHC testing performed by the central lab. If results are not 
available during screening period, participants can initiate treatment. Subjects in safety lead in 
phase may initiate therapy before the result of PD-L1 IHC testing.
Subjects in safety lead in phase  may initiate therapy before the result of PD-L1 IHC testing.
Either a formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE ) tissue block or unstained  tumor tissue sections, 
with an associated pathology report, must be su bmitted for biomarker evaluat ion prior to treatment. 
The tumor tissue sample may be fresh or archival if obtained within 6 months prior to Part 1 enrollment,(archival tissue is to be obtained within 3 months prior to Part 2 enrollment), and there 
can have been no systemic therapy (eg, adjuvant or neoadjuvant chemotherapy) given after the 
sample was obtained. 
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 53
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
Tissue must be from a core needle biopsy, excisio nal or incisional biopsy. Fine needle biopsies or 
drainage of pleural effusions wi th cytospins are not considered adequate for biomarker review. 
Biopsies of bone lesions that do not have a soft tissue component or decalcified bone tumor 
samples are also not acceptable.
e) Prior palliative radiotherapy to non-CNS lesions must have been completed at least 
2 weeks prior to treatment. Subjects with symptomatic tumor lesions at baseline that may 
require palliative radiotherapy within 4 week s of first treatment are strongly encouraged to 
receive palliative radiotherapy prior to treatment.
f) Screening laboratory values must meet the following criteria (using CTCAE v4):
i) WBC ≥2000/μ L
ii) Neutrophils ≥1500/μL
iii) Pl atelets≥100 x 103/μL
iv) Hemoglobin ≥9.0 g/dL
v) Serum creatinine ≤1.5 x ULN or calculated creatinine clearance ≥50 mL/min (using 
the Cockcroft Gault formula)
Female CrCl = (140- age in years) x weight in kg x 0.85
72 x serum creatinine in mg/dL
Male CrCl = (140- age in years) x weight in kg x 1.00
72 x serum creatinine in mg/dL
vi) AST/ALT ≤3.0 x ULN ( ≤5 x ULN if liver metastases are present)
vii) Total bilirubin ≤1.5 x ULN except subjects with Gilbert Syndrome who must have a 
total bilirubin level < 3.0 mg/dL).
Subject Re-enrollment: This study permits the re-e nrollment of a subject who has discontinued the 
study as a pre-treatment failure (ie, subject has not been treated). If re-enrolled, the subject must 
be re-consented.
3. Age and Reproductive Status
a) Males and Females, ages ≥18 years of age
b) Women of childbearing potential (WOCBP) must have a negative serum or urine 
pregnancy test (minimum sensitivity 25 IU/L or equivalent units of HCG) within 
24 hours prior to the start of study drug.
c) Women must not be breastfeedingd) WOCBP must agree to follow instructions for methods(s) of contraception for the 
duration of treatment with nivolumab and 5 months after the last dose of nivolumab {ie 
30 days ( duration of ovulatory cycle) plus  the time required for nivolumab to undergo 
approximately five half-lives }
e) WOCBP must also agree to follow inst ructions for method(s) of contraception from the 
time of enrollment for the duration of treatment with chemotherapy plus 5 half-lives of 
chemotherapy plus 30 days (duration of ovulatory cycle) for a total of 30 days post 
treatment completion or a duration specified by the local labels of the chemotherapy 
drugs received, whichever is longer (for Part 2 subjects).
f) Males who are sexually active with WOCBP  must agree to follow instructions for 
method(s) of contraception for the duration of treatment with nivolumab and up to 
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 54
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
7 months after the last dose of nivolumab {ie 90 days (duration of sperm turnover) plus 
the time required for nivolumab to undergo approximately five half-lives }.
g) Males who are sexually active with WOCBP  must agree to follow instructions for 
methods(s) of contraception for the duration of treatment with chemotherapy plus 5 half-
lives of chemotherapy plus 90 days (duration of sperm turnover) for a total of 90 days 
poste treatment completion or a duration specified by the local labels of the chemotherapy drugs received, whichever is longer (for Part 2 subjects).
h) Azoospermic males and WOCBP who are continuously not heterosexually active are 
exempt from contraceptive requirements. However they must still undergo pregnancy 
testing as described in these sections.
Investigators sh all counsel WOCBP and male sub jects who are sexually active with WOCBP on  
the importance of pregnancy prevention and the implications of an unexpected pregnancy.
Investigators shall advise WOCBP and male subj ects who are sexually active with WOCBP on the  
use of highly effective methods of contraception. Highly effective methods of contraception have  
a failure rate of < 1% when used consistently and correctly.
Local Laws and Regulations may require use of alternative and/or additional contraception  
methods.
At a minimum, subjects must agree to use one highly effective method of contraception as listed  
below:
Highly Effective Contraceptive Methods That Are User Dependent 
Failure rate of <1% per year when used consistently and correctly.
a
•Combined (estrogen- and progestogen-contain ing) hormonal contraception associated with  
inhibition of ovulationb 
−oral 
−intravaginal 
−transdermal 
•Progestogen -only hormonal contraception associated with inhibition of ovulationb 
−oral 
−injectable 
Highly Effective Methods That Are User Independent
•Implantable progestogen-only hormonal contraception associated with inhibition of  
ovulationb
•Hormonal methods of contraception including oral contraceptive pills containing a  
combination of estrogen and proges terone, vaginal ring, injectables, implants and  
intrauterine hormone-releasing system (IUS)c
•Intrauterine device (IUD)c
•Bilateral tubal occlusion
•Vasectomized partner 
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 55
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
A vasectomized partner is a highly effective contraception method provided that the partner 
is the sole male sexual partner of the WOCBP and the absence of sperm has been confirmed.  
If not, an additional highly effective method of contraception should be used. 
•Sexual abstinence
Sexual abstinence is considered a highly effective method only if defined as refraining from heterosexual intercourse during the entire period of risk associated with the study drug. The reliability of sexual abstinence needs to be evaluated in relation to the duration of the study 
and the preferred and usual lifestyle of the participant.
•It is not necessary to use any other method of contraception when complete abstinence is  
elected. 
•WOCBP participants who choose complete abstin ence must continue to have pregnancy  
tests, as specified in Section 2. 
•Acceptable alternate methods of highly effective contraception must be discussed in the  
event that the WOCBP participants chooses to forego complete abstinence 
NOTES: 
aTypical use failure rates may differ from those when used consistently and correctly. Use should be consistent  
with local regulations regarding the use of contraceptiv e methods for participants participating in clinical studies.  
bHormonal contraception may be sus ceptible to interaction with the st udy drug, which may reduce the efficacy  
of the contraceptive method.  Hormonal contraception is permissible only when there is sufficient evidence that  
the IMP and other study med ications will not alter hormonal exposures such that contraception would be  
ineffective or result in increased exposures that could be potentially hazardous.  In this case, alternative methods  
of contraception should be utilized. 
cIntrauterine devices and intrauterine hormone releasing systems are acceptable methods of contraception in the  
absence of definitive drug interaction studies when ho rmone exposures from intrau terine devices do not alter  
contraception effectiveness
Unacceptable Methods of Contraception*
•Male or female condom with or without spermicide.  Male and female condoms cannot be 
used simultaneously
•Diaphragm with spermicide
•Cervical cap with spermicide
•Vaginal Sponge with spermicide
•Progestogen-only oral hormonal contraception, wh ere inhibition of ovulation is not the 
primary mechanism of action
•Periodic abstinence (calendar, symp tothermal, post- ovulation methods)
•Withdrawal (coitus interruptus).
•Spermicide only
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 56
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
•Lactation amenorrhea method (LAM)
Contraception Guidance for Male Participants with Partner(s) of Child Bearing Potential.
Male participants with female part ners of childbearing potential are eligible to participate if they 
agree to the following during the treatment and until the end of relevant systemic exposure.
•Inform any and all partner(s) of their participation in a clinical drug study and the need to 
comply with contraception instructions as directed by the investigator.
•Male participants are required to use a condom for study duration and until end of relevant 
systemic exposure defined as 7 months after the end of study treatment.
•Female partners of males participating in the study to consider use of effective methods of contraception until the end of relevant systemic exposure, defined as 7 months after the end of 
treatment in the male participant.
•Male participants with a pregnant or breastfeeding partner must agree to remain abstinent from 
penile vaginal intercourse or use a male condo m during each episode of penile penetration 
during the treatment and until 7 months after the end of study treatment. 
•Refrain from donating sperm for the duration of the study treatment and until 7 months after the end of study treatment.
3.3.2 Exclusion Criteria
1. Target Disease Exceptions
a)Subjects with known EGFR mutations which are sensitive to available targeted inhibitor 
therapy (including, but not limited to, deletions in e xon 19 and exon 21 [L858R] 
substitution mutations) are excluded. All subj ects with non-squamous histology must have 
been tested for EGFR mutation status. EGFR test is to be done locally. EGFR test is not 
provided by central lab. Use of an FDA-approved or local Health Authority approved testis strongly encouraged. Subjects of non-squamous histology with unknown or 
indeterminate EGFR status are excluded.
b) Subjects with known ALK translocations which are sensitive to available targeted inhibitor 
therapy are excluded. If tested, use of an FDA-approved test is strongly encouraged. 
Subjects with unknown or indeterminate ALK status may be enrolled.
c) Subjects with untreated CNS metastases are excluded. Subjects are eligible if CNS 
metastases are adequately  treated and subjects are neurol ogically returned to baseline 
(except for residual signs or symptoms  related to the CNS treatment) for at least 2 weeks 
prior to first treatment. In addition, subjects must  be either off corticosteroids, or on a stable 
or decreasing dose of <=10 mg daily prednisone (or equivalent) for at least 2 weeks prior to first treatment.
d) Subjects with carcinomatous meningitis
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 57
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
2. Medical History and Concurrent Diseases
a) Subjects must have recovered from the effects of major surgery or significant traumatic 
injury at least 14 days before first treatment.
b) Subjects with previous malignancies (except non-melanoma skin cancers, and in situ 
cancers such as the following: bladder, gast ric, colon, cervical/ dysplasia, melanoma, or 
breast) are excluded unless a complete remission was achieved at least 2 years prior to first 
treatment and no additional therapy is required or anticipated to be required during the 
study period.
c) Other active malignancy requiring concurrent intervention.
d) Subjects with an active, known or suspected autoimmune disease. Subjects with type I 
diabetes mellitus, hypothyroidism only requiring hormone replacement, skin disorders 
(such as vitiligo, psoriasis, or alopecia) not requiring systemic treatment, or conditions not 
expected to recur in the absence of an external trigger are permitted to enroll.
e) Subjects with a condition requiring systemic treatment with either corticosteroids (> 10 mg 
daily prednisone equivalent) or other immunosuppressive medications within 14 days of first treatment. Inhaled or topical steroids, a nd adrenal replacement steroid > 10 mg daily 
prednisone equivalent, are permitted in the absence of active autoimmune disease.
f) Subjects with interstitial lung disease that is symptomatic or may interfere with the 
detection or management of suspected drug -related pulmonary toxicity. 
g) Known history of testing positive for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) or known 
acquired immunodeficiency  syndrome (AIDS). (Testing for HIV must be performed at 
sites mandated by local requirements.)
h) Known medical c ondition that, in the investigator’s opinion, would increase the risk 
associated with study participation or st udy drug administr ation or interfere with the 
interpretation of safety results.
i) Prior treatment with an anti-PD-1, anti-PD- L1, anti-PD-L2, anti-CTLA-4 antibody, or any 
other antibody or drug specifically targeting T-cell co-stimulation or checkpoint pathways
3. Physical and Laboratory Test Findings
a) Any positive test for hepatitis B virus or hepatitis C virus indicating acute or chronic 
infection
b) Subjects with ≥Grade 2 peripheral neuropathy
4. Allergies and Adverse Drug Reaction
a)History of allergy or hypersensitivity to study drug components
5. Other Exclusion Criteria
a) Prisoners or subjects who are involuntarily incarcerated. (Note: under certain specific 
circumstances a person who has been imprisoned may be included or permitted to continue 
as a subject. Strict conditions apply and Bristol-Myers Squibb approval is required.
b) Subjects who are compulsorily detained for treatment of either a psychiatric or physical 
(eg, infectious disease) illness
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 58
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.5 Discontinuation of Subjects following any Treatment with Study Drug 
Subjects MUST di
scontinue investigational product (and non-investigational product at the 
discretion of the investigator) for any of the following reasons:
•Subject’s request to stop study treatment
•Any clinical adverse event (AE), laboratory abnormality or intercurrent illness which, in the 
opinion of the investigator, indicates that continued participation in the study is not in the best 
interest of the subject
•Termination of the study by Bristol-Myers Squibb (BMS)
•Loss of ability to freely provide consent through imprisonment or involuntarily incarceration 
for treatment of either a psychiatric or physical (e.g., infectious disease) illness
•Pregnancy*
*In the case of pregnancy, the investigator must immediately notify the BMS Medical 
Monitor/designee of this event. In most cases, th e study drug will be permanently discontinued in 
an appropriate manner. If the investigator determin es a possible favorable benefit/risk ratio that 
warrants continuation of study drug, a discussi on between the investigator and the BMS Medical 
Monitor/designee must occur, if local regulations allow.
All subjects who discontinue study drug should comply with protocol specified follow-up 
procedures as outlined in Section 5 . The only exception to this requirement is when a subject 
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 61
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v

Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
withdraws consent for all study procedures includi ng post-treatment study follow-up or loses the 
ability to consent freely (ie, is imprisoned or involuntarily  incarcerated for the treatment of either 
a psychiatric or physical illness).
If study drug is discontinued prior to the subject’s completion of the study, the reason for the 
discontinuation must be documented in th e subject’s medical records and entered on the 
appropriate case report form (CRF) page.
3.6 Post Study Drug Study Follow up
Subjects who discontinue study drug must continue to be followed for collection of outcome and/or 
survival follow-up d ata as required and in line with Section 5 until death or the conclusion of the 
study.
Follow-Up Visit 1 to occur 35 days from the last  dose (+/- 7 days) or coinciding with the date of 
discontinuation of study drug (+/- 7 days) if the date of discontinuation is greater than 42 days 
from the last dose. Follow-Up Visit 2 to occur 115 days from Follow-Up Visit 1 (+/- 7 days). 
Survival Follow-Up Visits to occur approximately every 3 months from Follow-Up Visit 2. 
Survival Follow-up visits may be performed by phone contact or office visit.
BMS may request that survival data be collected on all sub jects outside of the protocol defined 
window. At the time of this re quest, each subject will be con tacted to determine their survival 
status unless the subject has withdrawn consent for all contact.
3.6.1 Withdrawal of Consent
Subjects who request to discontinue study drug w ill remain in the study and must continue to be 
followed for protocol specified follow-up procedures. The only exception to this is when a subject 
specifically withdraws consent for any further c ontact with him/her or persons previously 
authorized by subject to provide this information. Subjects should notify the investigator of the 
decision to withdraw consent from future follow-up in writing , whenever possible. The 
withdrawal of consent should be explained in d etail in the medical records by the investigator, as 
to whether the withdrawal is from further tr eatment with study drug only or also from study 
procedures and/or post treatment study follow-up, a nd entered on the appropriate CRF page. In the 
event that vital status (whether the subject is alive or dead) is bei ng measured, publicly available 
information should be used to determine vital status only as appropriately directed in accordance with local law.
3.6.2 Lost to Follow-Up
All reasonable efforts must be made to locate subjects to determine and report their ongoing status. 
This includes follow-up with persons authorized by the subject as noted above. Lost to follow-up 
is defined by the inability to reach the subject after a minimum of three documented phone calls, 
faxes, or emails as well as lack of response by s ubject to one registered mail letter. All attempts 
should be documented in the subject’s medical records. If it is determined that the subject has died, 
the site will use permissible local methods to obtain the date and cause of death.
If investigator’s use of third party representative to assist in the follow-up portion of the study has 
been included in the subject’s informed consent, then the investigator may use a Sponsor-retained 
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 62
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
third party representative to assist site staff with obtaining subject’s c ontact infor mation or other 
public vital status data necessary to complete the follow-up portion of the study. The site staff and 
representative will consult publicly available sources, such as public h ealth registries and 
databases, in order to obtain updated contact infor mation. If after all attempts, the subject remains 
lost to follow-up, then the last known alive date as determined by the investigator s hould be 
reported and documented in the subject’s medical records.
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 63
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
4 STUDY DRUG
Study drug includes both Investigational [M edicinal] Product (IP/IMP) and Non-investigational [Medicinal] Product (Non-IP/Non-I MP) 
and can consist of the following:
Table 4-1: Product Description - Treatment Phase
Product Description 
and Dosage FormPotencyPrimary Packaging 
(Volume)/Label TypeSecondary Packaging 
(Qty)/Label TypeAppearanceStorage Conditions 
(per label)
BMS-936558-01 
nivolumab Solution for 
Injectiona100 mg 
(10 mg/mL)10 mL per vial/
Open-label5 or 10 vials per carton/ 
Open-labelClear to opalescent colorless to 
pale yellow liquid. May contain 
particles2 to 8 °C. Protect from 
light and freezing
Ipilimumab Solution for 
Injection200 mg
(5mg/mL)40 mL vial/Open-label4 vials per
carton/Open-labelClear to opalescent colorless to 
pale yellow liquid. May contain 
particles2 to 8 °C. Protect from 
light and freezing
Carboplatin Solution for 
Injectionb450 mg/vial 
(10 mg/mL)45 mL per vial/
Open label4 vials per
carton/Open-labelClear, colorless or slightly 
yellow solutionStore at or below 25°C 
Protect from light
Paclitaxel Solution for 
Injectionb100 mg/vialb
(6 mg/mL)16.7 mL vial/
Open-label4 vials per
carton/Open-labelClear, colorless or
slightly yellow viscous solutionStore at 15° C-30° C.
Protect from light.
Pemetrexed Powder for 
Concentrate for 
Solution for Infusionb500 mg/vial 500 mg per vial/
Open label1 vial per carton/ Open-
labelWhite to either light yellow or 
green-yellow lyophilised 
powderStore at 25° C. 
Excursions permitted 
(15-30° C)
Cisplatin Solution for 
Infusionb100 mg/vial 
(1 mg/mL)100 mL per vial/
Open-label4 vials per carton
Open-labelClear, colorless solution Do not store above 25 °
C. Do not refrigerate or 
freeze. Store in original 
container.
a May be labeled as either “BMS-936558-01” or “Nivolumab”.
b These products may be obtained by the i nvestigational sites as local commercial produ ct in certain countries if allowed by loc al regulations. In these cases, 
products may be a different pack size/potency than lis ted in the table. These products should be prepared/stored/administered in  accordance with the package 
insert or summary of product characteristics (SmPC).
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 64
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
4.1 Investigational Product
An investigational product, als o known as investigational medicinal product in some regions, is
defined a pharmaceutical form of an active substance or placebo being tested or used as a reference 
in a clinical study, including products already wi th a marketing authorization but used or 
assembled (formulated or packaged) differently than the authorized form, or used for an unauthorized indication, or when used to gain further information about the authorized form.
The investigational product should be stored in a secure area according to local regulations. It is 
the responsibility of the investigator to ensure that investigational product is only dispensed to 
study subjects. The investigational product must be dispensed only from offic ial study sites by 
authorized personnel according to local regulations. 
In this protocol, investigational product(s) is/are:
•Nivolumab
•Ipilimumab
•Carboplatin
•Pemetrexed
•Paclitaxel
•Cisplatin
4.2 Non-Investigational Product
Other medications used as support or escape medication for preventative, dia gnostic, or therapeutic 
reasons, as components of the standard of care for a given diagnosis, may be considered as 
non-investigational products. 
In this protocol, non-investigational product(s) is/are: any medications used to treat 
nivolumab/ipilimumab or chemotherapy infusion- related reactions (eg, steroids). These non-
investigational products should be sourced by the investigator sites if available and permitted by local regulations.
4.3 Storage and Dispensing
The product storage manager should ensure that the study drug is stored in accordance with the 
environmental conditions (temperature, light, and humidity) as determined by BMS. If concerns 
regarding the quality or appearance of the study drug arise, the study drug should not be dispensed 
and contact BMS immediately.
Study drug not supplied by BMS will be stored in accordance with the package insert.Investigational product documentation (whether supplied by BMS or not) must be maintained that 
includes all processes required to ensure dr ug is accurately administered. This includes 
documentation of drug storage, administration a nd, as applicable, storage temperatures, 
reconstitution, and use of required processes (eg, required diluents, administration sets).
Infusion-related s upplies (eg, IV bags, in-line filters, 0.9% NaCl solution) will not be supplied by 
the sponsor and should be purchased loca lly if permitted by local regulations.
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 65
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
For nivolumab and ipilimumab, please refer to th e current version of the Investig ator Brochures 
and/or pharmacy reference sheets for complete storage, handling, dispensing, and infusion 
information.
Nivolumab is to be administered as an approx imately 30-minute IV infusion. At the end of the 
infusion, flush the line with a sufficient quantity of normal saline or dextrose solution. Ipilimumab 
is to be administered as an approximately 30-minute IV infusion. At the end of the infusion, flush the line with a sufficient quantity of normal saline or 5% dextrose solution. When both study drugs 
are to be administered on the same day, separate i nfusion bags and filters must be used for each 
infusion. Nivolumab is to be administered first. The nivolumab infusion must be promptly 
followed by a saline flush to clear the line of nivolumab before starting the i nfusion. The second 
infusion will always be ipilimumab, and will start at least 30 minutes after completion of the 
nivolumab infusion.
4.4 Method of Assigning Subject Identification
After the subject’s in itial elig ibility is established and informed consent has been ob tained, the 
subject must be enro lled into the study by calling an interactive web response system (IWRS) to 
obtain the subject number. Every subject that signs the informed consent form must be assigned a 
subject number in IWRS. Specific instructions for using IWRS will be provided to the 
investigational site in a separate document. The investigator or designee w ill register the subject 
for enrollment by following the enrollment procedures established by BMS. The following information is required for enrollment:
•Date that informed consent was obtained
•Subject number
•Date of birth
Subjects enrolled will be gr ouped according to PD-L1 status (positive, negative, or not 
quantifiable, using membranous staining in ≥1% tumor cells vs  membranous staining in < 1% 
tumor cells). PD-L1 expression da ta will be transferred directly from analyzing lab to IWRS. 
IWRS will be used to track the enrollment number.
Part 1:
Enrollment will end after the last 120 PD-L1 positiv e and 100 PD-L1 negative subjects are treated, 
whichever comes later (part 1 enrollment target was reached on Nov. 15, 2016. Future enrollment 
will be in Part 2 only). The ex act procedures for using the IWRS will be detailed in the IWRS 
manual.
Part 2: 
The exact procedures for using the IWRS will be detailed in the IWRS manual.4.5 Selection and Timing of Dose for Each Subject
All subjects will be monitored continuously for AEs while on study treatment. Treatment 
modifications (eg, dose delay, reduction, retreatment, or discontinuation) will be based on specific 
laboratory and adverse event criteria, as described in Sections 4.5.2 , 4.5.3, 4.5.4 and 4.5.5.
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 66
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
Table 4.5-1: Part 1 Dosing Schedule*
Week 1
Day 1
±3 DaysWeek 
2Week 3
Day 1
±3 DaysWeek 4Week 5
Day 1
±3 DaysWeek 
6
Part 1 Nivolumab 3 mg/kg q 2 weeks
+ Ipilimumab 1 mg/kg q 6 weeksaDay 1
Nivolumab
+
IpilimumabDay 1
NivolumabDay 1
Nivolumab
a continues until disease progression, discontinuation due to  unacceptable toxicity, withdrawal of consent, or study 
closure, for a maximum of 2 years from the start of study treatment in the absence of disease progression or 
unacceptable toxicity. 
* Both nivolumab and ipilimumab should be administered as 30 minute infusions. Nivolumab is to be administered 
first. The second infusion will be ipilimumab, and will s tart at least 30 minutes after completion of the nivolumab 
infusion
Table 4.5-2: Part 2 Dosing Schedule*
Week 1
Day 1
±3 DaysWk 2 Wk 3Week 4
Day 1
+/- 3 daysWk 
5Wk 
6Week 7
Day 1 
±3 Days
Safety lead in phase
Part 2 Safety Lead-in
Nivolumab + ipilimumab 
+
Platinum-doublet 
chemotherapy q 3wk x 2 
cycles
followed by nivolumab 
(360 mg q 3wks) + 
ipilimumab 1mg/kg q 
6wksaCycle 1
Nivolumab
+
Ipilimumab
+
Histology based 
chemotherapyCycle 2
Nivolumab
+
Histology based 
chemotherapyCycle 3
Nivolumab
+
Ipilimumab
* Both nivolumab and ipilimumab should be administered as 30 minute infusions. Nivolumab is to be administered 
first. The second infusion will be ipilimumab, and will start at least 30 minutes after completion of the nivolumab 
infusion. Platinum-doublet will start at least 30 minutes after completion of the nivolumab or ipilimumab infusion (if ipilimumab is scheduled to be given).
aContinues until disease progression, discontinuation due to unacceptable toxicity, withdrawal of consent, or study 
closure. A maximum of 2 years from the start of study treatment in the absence of disease progression or 
unacceptable toxicity. 
4.5.1 Dosing
4.5.1.1 Nivolumab and ipilimumab dosing
For Part 1, subjects will receive treatment with nivolumab  as a 30 minute infusion 3 mg/kg every 
2 weeks and ipilimumab as a 30 minute i nfusion 1 mg/kg every 6 weeks, starting on Day 1, un til 
progression, unacceptable toxicity, withdrawal of consent, or the study ends, whichever occurs 
first. Nivolumab and ipilimumab will be continued until the progression of disease, discontinuation due to toxicity, withdrawal of consent, or study closure. In study CA 209568, treatment with 
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 67
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
nivolumab with ipilimumab will be given for a maximum of 2 years from the start of study 
treatment in the absence of disease progression or unacceptable toxicity. Participants should begin 
study treatment with in 3 calendar days of treatment assignment.
For Part 1 and Part 2: When study treatments (nivolumab a nd ipilimumab) are to be administered 
on the same day, nivolumab is to be administered first. Nivolumab infusion must be promptly 
followed by a flush of diluent to clear the lin e of nivolumab before starting the ipilimumab 
infusion. The second infusion will always be the ipilimumab study treatment and will start after 
the infusion line has been flushed, filters changed and patient has been observed to ensure no 
infusion reaction has occ urred. Nivolumab and ipilimumab may be diluted in 0.9% Sodium 
Chloride Solution or 5% Dextrose solution. 
Dosing calculations should be based on the body weight. If the subject’s weight on the day of 
dosing differs by > 10% from the weight used to calculate the prior dose, the dose must be 
recalculated. All doses should be rounded to th e nearest milligram. There will be no dose 
modifications allowed.
Subjects may be dosed with nivolumab no less than 12 days from the previous dose. There are no 
premedications recommended.
Subjects should be carefully monitored for infusion reactions. If an acute i nfusion reaction is noted, 
subjects should be managed according to Section 4.5.8 .
Doses of nivolumab and/or ipilimumab may be interrupted, delayed, or discontinued depending 
on how well the sub ject tolerates the treatment. Dosing visi ts are not skipped, only delayed. For 
more details, see Sections 4.5.2 (dose delays), 4.5.4 (resuming treatment), and 4.5.5
(discontinuation).For Part 2 only: On cycle 1 day 1, subjects will r eceive nivolumab by 30 minute i nfusion, then 
followed by ipilimumab by 30 minute infusion, followed by histology-based chemotherapy. One 
cycle is every 3 weeks. On cycle 2 day 1, subjects w ill receive 30 minute nivolumab i nfusion, 
followed by histology based chemotherapy. In safety lead-in phase, nivolumab dose during induction is 360 mg, and ipilimumab dose is 1 mg/k g. Participants should begin study treatment 
within 3 calendar days of treatment assignment.
At the time of completion of 2 cycles of ther apy, subjects who have not experienced disease 
progression will continue to receive nivolumab at a dose of 360 mg as 30 minute infus ion every 
3 weeks, and ipilimumab 1 mg/kg as 30 minute infusion IV every 6 weeks. Treatment will continue 
until progression, unacceptable toxicity, withdrawal of consent, for a maximum of 2 years from
the start of study treatment in the absence of disease progression or unacceptable toxicity. The 
maximum 2 years of treatment also applies to treatment beyond progression. Dosing calculations 
should be on the body surf ace area calculation and maybe capped per local standards. The dose 
may remain the same if the subject’s weight is within 10% of the baseline weight or prior dose 
weight.
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 68
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
4.5.1.2 Part 2-Chemotherapy Dosing for Safety Lead-in 
Histology based chemotherapy:
Squamous histology : Carboplatin AUC6 + Paclitaxel 200 mg/m2
Non squamous histology: 
•Carboplatin AUC 5 or 6 + pemetrexed 500 mg/m2or
•Cisplatin 75 mg/m2+ pemetrexed 500 mg/m2
All chemotherapy agents preparation, premedication, administration, monitoring, and 
management of complications are to follow local prescription guideline and regulation.  The dose of chemotherapy may be capped per local standards. 
Dosing calculations should be on the body surface area calculation and maybe capped per local 
standards. The dose may remain the same if the s ubject’s weight is within 10% of the baseline 
weight or prior dose weight
4.5.1.2.1 Paclitaxel 
Subjects may receive paclitaxel 200 mg/m
2 as a 180-minute IV infusion with carboplatin at a dose 
of AUC 6 as a 30-minute IV infusion, on Day 1 of a 3-week cycle, or at doses per the local 
prescribing information. The infusion time can follow local institutional standa rd. P aclitaxel is to 
be administered before carboplatin. 
Paclitaxel dosing calculations should be based on the body surface area calculation. The dose may 
remain the same if the subject’s weight is within 10% of the baseline weight or prior dose weight.
Premedications for use with paclitaxel: Oral c orticosteroid should be given according to local 
standard at a dose equivalent to dexamethasone 20 mg 12 hours and 6 hours prior to paclitaxel 
administration. Oral or intravenous (IV) diphenhydramine (or its equivalent) 50 mg and H2-blocker (per local standard of care) should be administered 30 to 60 minutes prior to paclitaxel 
infusion.
Doses of Paclitaxel and/or carboplatin may be interrupted, delayed, reduced, or discontinued 
depending on how well the subject tolerates the treatment. 
4.5.1.2.2 Pemetrexed 
Pemetrexed dosing calculations should be based on the body surface area calculation. The dose 
may remain the same if the subject’s weight is within 10% weight used to calculate the previous 
dose.
Premedication for use with pemetrexed: Oral corticosteroid should be given acc ording to local 
standards at a dose equivalent to dexamethasone 4 mg BID on the day prior to, the day of, and the 
day after the administration of pemetrexed. Oral folic acid 350 to 1000 mcg daily should be given starting 1 week prior to the first dose of pemetrex ed, with at least 5 doses of folic acid administered 
in the 7 days prior to the first dose. Oral folic acid s hould be continued d aily throughout the 
treatment with pemetrexed and for 21 days after  the last dose of pemetrexed. Intramuscular (IM) 
injection of vitamin B12 1000 mcg should be given approximately one week prior to the first dose of pemetrexed and repeated every 3 cycles thereafter during pemetrexed treatment. Subsequent 
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 69
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
injections of vitamin B12 may be given on the same day as pemetrexed. (Subjects with non-
squamous histology may begin folic acid and vitamin B12 prior to treatment in anticipation of 
pemetrexed). 
Doses of pemetrexed may be interrupted, delayed, reduced, or discontinued depending on how 
well the subject tolerates the treatment.
4.5.1.2.3 Cisplatin 
Cisplatin dosing calculations should be based on the body surf ace area calculation and may be 
capped per local standards. The dose may remain the same if the subject’s weight is within 10% 
of the baseline weight or prior dose weight.
Cisplatin will be administered to subjects at least 30 minutes following the end of the pemetrexed 
infusion. Pretreatment hydration for cisplatin can follo w local standard of care, or use 1 to 2 liters 
of fluid (per local standards) infused IV for 8 to 12 hours prior to cisplatin infusion is recommended. Adequate hydration and urinary output must be maintained for at least 24 hours 
following cisplatin administration. Administration and monitoring should be performed according 
to local standards. Use of mannitol following the cisplatin infusion s hould also follow local 
standards-of-care.
Doses of cisplatin may be interrupted, delaye d, reduced, or discontinued depending on how well 
the subject tolerates the treatment See the following sections for more details: 4.5.2 (dose delays), 
4.5.3.1 , 4.5.3.2 , 4.5.3.3 ,a n d 4.5.3.4 (dose reductions); 4.5.4 (retreatment), and 4.5.5 (dose 
discontinuations).All subjects who will be receivi ng cisplatin s hould have audiometric testing performed prior to 
initiation of therapy and prior to subsequent doses of cisplatin, or as per local standards of care.Subjects who discontinue cisplatin alone may, at the investigator’s discretion, be switched to 
pemetrexed/carboplatin for the remainder of the platinum doublet cycles.
4.5.1.2.4 Carboplatin 
The carboplatin dose will be calculated using the Calvert formula as follows:
•Carboplatin dose (mg) = Target AUC x [(CrCl (ml/min) + 25]
•Creatinine clearance (CrCl) calculation is based on the Cockcroft-Gault formula (see Inclusion 
criterion 2f in Section 3.3.1 ) and should include the most recent serum creatinine and most 
recent weight. NOTE: If calculation of the CrCl by the Cockcroft-Gault formula yields a result of > 125 mL/min, then a CrCl should be calculated by an alternative formula per institutional 
standards or capped at 125 mL/min. 
•The dose of carboplatin may be capped per local standards.
Premedications for use with carboplatin: may be employed at the discretion of the Investigator.
Carboplatin is to be administered after paclitaxel. 
Doses of carboplatin may be interrupted, d elayed, reduced, or disconti nued depending on how well 
the subject tolerates the treatment.
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 70
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
4.5.2 Dose Delay Criteria
4.5.2.1 Dose Delay Criteria for Nivolumab and IpilimumabTumor assessments for all subjects should continue as per protocol even if dosing is delayed.
Nivolumab and ipilimumab administration should be delayed for the following:
•Any Grade ≥ 2 non-skin, drug-related adverse event, except for fatigue and laboratory 
abnormalities
•Any Grade ≥3 skin drug-related AE
•Any Grade ≥3 drug-related laboratory abnormality with the following exceptions for 
lymphopenia, AST, ALT, or total bilirubin or asymptomatic amylase or lipase:
−Grade 3 lymphopenia does not require a dose delay
−If a subject has a baseline AST, ALT, or total bilirubin that is within normal limits, delay 
dosing for drug-related Grade 2 toxicity
−If a subject has baseline AST, ALT, or total bilirubin within the Grade 1 toxicity range, 
delay dosing for drug-related Grade ≥3 toxicity
−Any Grade ≥ 3 drug-related amylas e or lipase abnorm ality that is not associated with 
symptoms or clinical manifestations of pancreatitis does not require dose delay. The BMS 
Medical Monitor should be consulted for such Grade ≥3 amylase or lipase abnormalities.
−Any AE, laboratory  abnormality or inter-current illness which, in the judgment of the 
investigator, warrants delaying the dose of study medication.
•Subjects receiving ipilimumab in combination with  nivolumab that have drug-related toxicities 
that meet the criteria for dose delay, should have both drugs (ipilimumab and nivolumab) 
delayed until retreatment cr iteria are met. (Exceptions apply to the retreatment criteria after 
dose delay of ipilimumab and nivolumab for Grade ≥3 amylase and lipase abnormalities that 
are not associated with symptoms or clinical manifestations of pancreatitis and that are 
attributed to ipilimumab alone.)
Rescheduling:
•Nivolumab may be delayed until the next pla nned ipilimumab dose if the next ipilimumab dose 
is scheduled within the next 12 days. This will permit periodic ipilimumab dosing to be 
synchronized with nivolumab dosing.
•Ipilimumab s hould be dosed at the sp ecified interval regardless of any delays in intervening 
nivolumab doses. However, in order to maintain periodic synchronized dosing of ipilimumab 
and nivolumab, the dosing days of nivolumab and ipilimumab may be adjusted within the 
permitted +/- 5 day window, as l ong as consecutive nivolumab doses are given at least 12 days 
apart. Ipilimumab may be delayed beyond the 5 day window if needed to synchronize with the next nivolumab dose.
•If an ipilimumab dose is delayed beyond 6 weeks from the prior ipilimumab dose, then subsequent ipilimumab doses s hould rescheduled to maintain the 6 week interval between 
consecutive ipilimumab doses. 
•A dose delay of ipilimumab which results in no ipilimumab dosing for > 12 weeks requires 
ipilimumab discontinuation, with exceptions as noted in Section 4.5.5 .
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 71
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
4.5.2.2 Dose Delay Criteria for Chemotherapy
In Part 2, chemotherapy drugs should be delayed for any of the following on the Day 1 of each 
cycle:
•Absolute neutrophil count (ANC) ≥1500/μL
•Platelets < 100,000/mm3
•Any Grade ≥ 2 non-skin, non-hematologic, drug-related adverse event (excluding Grade 2 
alopecia, Grade 2 fatigue, and Grade 2 laboratory abnormalities)
•Any Grade ≥3 skin, drug-related adverse event
•Any Grade ≥ 3 drug-related laboratory  abnormality, with the following exceptions for 
lymphopenia, AST, ALT, or total bilirubin:
•Grade 3 lymphopenia does not require dose delay.
•If a subject has a baseline AST, ALT or total bilir ubin that is within normal limits, delay dosing 
for drug-related Grade ≥2 toxicity. 
•If a subject has baseline AST, ALT, or total bilirubin within the Grade 1 toxicity range, delay 
dosing for drug-related Grade ≥3 toxicity. 
•Any adverse event, laboratory abnorm ality, or interc urrent illness which, in the judgment of 
the investigator, warrants delaying the dose of study medication. Investigators should consult 
local labeling for the chemotherapy drugs being administered to any given subject for additional guidance on dose delays.
In addition, if subjects receiving carboplatin with paclitaxel and must discontinue carboplatin, the 
paclitaxel may be continued at the investigator’s discretion. If a ny non-hematologic adverse event 
meeting the dose delay criteria above is felt to be related to only one particular agent in the 
platinum doublet chemotherapy regimen, then that agent alone may be omitted for that cycle while 
the other agent is given. In order to maintain synchronized dosing of the regimen, the omitted agent should be resumed with the next scheduled cycle once the AE has improved and retreatment 
criteria are met. Please refer to Section 4.5.3.2 to determine if dose reduction of the resumed agent 
is required.
If both drugs in the platinum doublet chemotherapy regimen are delayed, then the subject should 
be re-evaluated weekly or more frequently if  clinically indicated until re -treatment cr iteria are met 
(as per Section 4.5.4.3).
Part 2 safety lead in : If any adverse event meeting the dose delay criteria for chemotherapy is felt 
to be related to only one particular agent in the platinum doublet chemotherapy regimen, then that 
chemotherapy agent alone may be omitted for that cy cle wh ile the other agents (nivolumab and 
one chemotherapy agent) are given. Dosing of nivolumab and both chemotherapy agents should 
be delayed if criteria for nivolumab or “both platinum-doublet chemotherapy agents” are met. 
Therefore nivolumab and chemotherapy can be given as combination.
4.5.3 Dose Reductions
4.5.3.1 Dose Reduction for Nivolumab or Ipilimumab in both Part 1 and Part 2
There will be no dose reductions for nivolumab or ipilimumab.
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 72
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
4.5.3.2 Dose Reduction for Chemotherapy in Part 2
Dose reductions of chemotherapy may be required, and will be performed according to Table
4.5.3.2-1 . Chemotherapy dose reductions are permanent; once the dose of any chemotherapy agent 
is reduced, it may not be re-escalated in subsequent cycles, except as noted when starting 
pemetrexed maintenance therapy. The dose redu ctions for each agent in the platinum doublet 
chemotherapy regimen are not linked and may be adjusted independently as summarized below.
Table 4.5.3.2-1: Dose Modifications of Chemotherapeutic Agents
Dose Level Carboplatin Pemetrexed Paclitaxel Cisplatin
Starting dose AUC 6 or AUC 5 
depending on 
regimen500 mg/m² 200 mg/m² 75 mg/m²
First dose reduction AUC 5 if starting 
dose is AUC 6
AUC 4 if starting 
dose is AUC 5375 mg/m² 150 mg/m² 56 mg/m²
Second dose 
reductionAUC 4 if starting 
dose is AUC 6
AUC 3 if starting 
dose is AUC 5250 mg/m² 100 mg/m² 38 mg/m²
Third dose 
reductionDiscontinue Discontinue Discontinue Discontinue
Any subjects with two prior dose reductions for one agent who experiences a toxicity that would 
cause a third dose reduction must be discontinued from that agent.
4.5.3.3 Dose Reductions for Hematologic Toxicity 
Dose modifications for hematologic toxicities (according to CTCAE version 4) are summarized in 
Table 4.5.3.3-1 . Dose adjustments are based on nadir blood counts (assessed as per local standards) 
since the preceding drug administration. Dose level adjustments for platinum doublet chemotherapy are relative to that of the preceding administration. Generally, both chemotherapy 
agents in the platinum doublet chemotherapy re gimen should be  dose reduced together for 
hematologic toxicity. After the first cycle, growth factors may be used to assist hematologic 
recovery. Use local standards of care in th e use of these supportive measures. Additionally, 
prophylactic antibiotics may be used according to local standards of care. Please report any antibiotic or growth factor use on the eCRF.
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 73
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
Table 4.5.3.3-1: Dose Modifications for Hematologic Toxicity (Based on Nadir 
Counts)
Toxicity Carboplatin Paclitaxel Pemetrexed Cisplatin
Neutrophil Count Decreased
Grade 4 
(< 500/mm3or < 0.5 x 109/L)Reduce one 
dose levelReduce one 
dose levelReduce one 
dose levelReduce one 
dose level
Platelet Count Decreased
Grade 3
(25,000 - < 50,000/mm3; 25.0 -< 50.0 x 109/L)Reduce one 
dose levelReduce one 
dose levelReduce one 
dose levelReduce one 
dose level
Grade 4 ( < 25,000/mm
3; < 25.0 x 109/L)Reduce one 
dose levelReduce one 
dose levelReduce one 
dose levelReduce one 
dose level
4.5.3.4 Chemotherapy - Dose Reductions for Non-Hematologic Toxicities 
Dose adjustments for chemotherapy for non-hematol ogic toxicities during treatment are described 
in Table 4.5.3.4-1 . All dose reductions should be made base d on the worst grade toxicity. Subjects 
experiencing any of th e toxicities during the previous cycle should have their chemotherapy 
delayed until retreatment criteria are met and then re duced for all subsequent cycles by 1 dose level 
or discontinued as appropriate. Dose lev els for the two drugs in the platinum-doublet 
chemotherapy regimen are not linked and may be reduced independently, as summarized in the 
Table 4.5.3.4-1 below
Table 4.5.3.4-1: Dose Modifications for Non-hematologic Toxicity
Toxicity Paclitaxel Carboplatin Pemetrexed Cisplatin
Febrile Neutropenia
Grade ≥3Reduce one 
dose levelReduce one 
dose levelReduce one 
dose levelReduce one 
dose level
Diarrhea Grade ≥3 Reduce one 
dose levelNo change Reduce one 
dose levelNo change
Allergic reactiona
Grade ≥3Discontinue Discontinue Discontinue Discontinue
Neuropathy
Grade 2Reduce one 
dose levelNo change No change Reduce one 
dose level
Neuropathy
Grade ≥3Discontinue Discontinue Discontinue Discontinue
Calculated creatinine clearance
< 50 mL/minNo change Discontinue 
if creatinine 
clearance < 
20 ml/minNo change Discontinue
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 74
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
Table 4.5.3.4-1: Dose Modifications for Non-hematologic Toxicity
Toxicity Paclitaxel Carboplatin Pemetrexed Cisplatin
Other Grade ≥≥3toxicity (except for fatigue 
and transient arthralgia and myalgia)Adjust as 
medically 
indicatedAdjust as 
medically 
indicatedAdjust as 
medically 
indicatedAdjust as 
medically 
indicated
aOnly the drug(s) causing the hypersensitivity reaction or acute infusion reaction ( ≥Grade 3) require(s) 
discontinuation. All other drugs may be continued.
4.5.4 Criteria to Resume Dosing
4.5.4.1 Criteria to Resume Nivolumab Dosing
Subjects may resume treatment with nivolumab when the drug-r elated AE(s) resolve(s) to 
Grade≤1 or baseline, with the following exceptions:
•Subjects may resume treatment in the presence of Grade 2 fatigue.
•Subjects who have not experienced a Grade 3 drug-r elated skin AE may resume treatment in 
the presence of Grade 2 skin toxicity.
•Subjects with baseline Grade 1 AST/ALT or total bilirubin who require dose delays for reasons 
other than a 2-grade shift in AST/ALT or total bilirubin may resume treatment in the presence 
of Grade 2 AST/ALT OR total bilirubin.
•Subjects with combined Grade 2 AST/ALT and total bilirubin values meeting discontinuation 
parameters (Section 4.5.5 ) should have treatment permanently discontinued.
•Drug-related pulmonary toxicity, diarrhea, or colitis must have resolved to baseline before treatment is resumed. Subjects with persistent Grade 1 pneumonitis after completion of a 
steroid taper over at least 1 month may be eligible for retreatment if discussed with and 
approved by the BMS Medical Monitor.
•Subjects who received systemic corticosteroids  for management of any drug-related toxicity 
must be off corticosteroids or have tapered down to an equivalent dose of prednisone 
≤10 mg/day.
•Drug-related endocrinopathies adequately c ontrolled with only physiologic hormone 
replacement may resume treatment.
•Subjects who delay study treatment due to any Grade ≥3 amylase or lipase abnormality that is 
not associated with symptoms or clinical manifes tations of pancreatitis, and that is assessed by 
the investigator to be related to ipilimumab and not to nivolumab, may resume nivolumab 
when the amylase or lipase abnormality has resolved to Grade < 3. The BMS Medical Monitor 
should be consulted prior to resuming nivolumab in such subjects.
•Dose delay of nivolumab which results in  treatment interruption of > 6 weeks requires 
treatment discontinuation, with exceptions as noted in Section 4.5.5 .
4.5.4.2 Criteria to Resume Ipilimumab Dosing
Subjects may resume treatment with nivolu mab and ipilimumab when drug-related AE(s) 
resolve(s) to Grade 1 or baseline value, with the following exceptions: 
•Subjects may resume treatment in the presence of Grade 2 fatigue.
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 75
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
•Subjects who have not experienced a Grade 3 drug-r elated skin AE may resume treatment in 
the presence of Grade 2 skin toxicity.
•Subjects with baseline Grade 1 AST/ALT or total bilirubin who require dose delays for reasons 
other than a 2-grade shift in AST/ALT or total bilirubin may resume treatment in the presence 
of Grade 2 AST/ALT or total bilirubin.
•Subjects with combined Grade 2 AST/ALT and total bilirubin values meeting discontinuation 
parameters ( Section 4.5.5 ) should have treatment permanently discontinued.
•Drug-related pulmonary toxicity, diarrhea, or colitis must have resolved to baseline before 
treatment is resumed.
•Subjects who received systemic corticosteroids  for management of any drug-related toxicity 
must be off corticosteroids or have tapered down to an equivalent dose of prednisone 
≤10 mg/day.
•Drug-related endocri nopathies adequately controlled with only physiologic hormone 
replacement may resume treatment after consultation with the BMS Medical Monitor. Adrenal insufficiency requires discontinuation regardless of control with hormone replacement.
•Dose delay of ipilimumab which results in no ipilimumab dosing for > 12 weeks requires 
ipilimumab discontinuation, with exceptions as noted in Section 4.5.5 .
•Ipilimumab may not be resumed sooner than 6 weeks (+/- 5days) after the prior ipilimumab 
dose.
•In general, subjects who meet criteria to re sume ipilimumab will also have met criteria to 
resume nivolumab, so it should be feasible to synchronize dosing of both drugs when resuming ipilimumab. In order to fac ilitate this, the dosing days of nivolumab and ipilimumab may be 
adjusted within the permitted +/- 5 day window, as long as consecutive nivolumab doses are 
given at least 12 days apart.
•One exception to note is when ipilimumab and nivolumab doses are delayed due to drug-
related Grade ≥3 amylase or lipase abnormalities not associated with symptoms or clinical 
manifestations of pancreatitis. If th e investigator assesses the Grade ≥3 amylase or lipase 
abnormality to be related to ipilimumab and not related to nivolumab, nivolumab may be 
resumed when the amylase or lipase abnormality resolves to Grade < 3 but ipilimumab may 
only be resumed when the amylase or lipase abnorm ality resolves to Grade 1 or bas eline. 
Investigator attribution of this toxicity to the ipilimumab dosing must be clearly noted in the 
subject’s medical chart. The BMS Medical Monit or should be consulted  prior to resuming 
nivolumab in such subjects.
4.5.4.3 Criteria to Resume Treatment with Chemotherapy 
•Subjects may resume treatment with chemotherapy when the ANC returns to 1500/ μl, the 
platelet count ret urns to 100,000/mm3, and all other drug-related toxicities have returned to 
baseline or Grade 1 (or Grade 2 for alopecia and fatigue).
•If a subject fails to meet criteria for re-treatment, then re-treatment should be delayed, and the 
subject should be re-evaluated weekly or more frequently as clinically indicated. Any subject who fails to recover from toxicity attributable to chemotherapy to baseline or Grade 1 (except 
Grade 2 alopecia and fatigue) within 6 weeks from the last dose given should discontinue the 
drug(s) that caused the delay.
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 76
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
•When resuming chemotherapy treatment, p lease follow the dose reduction recommendations 
in Section 4.5.3.2.
4.5.5 Treatment Discontinuation Criteria
For all subjects, global deterioration of health status requiring discontinuation of treatment without 
objective evidence of disease progression at that time s hould be reported as ‘symptomatic 
deterioration’ in the source data and in the case report form. Tumor assessments for subjects who 
discontinue study treatment without radi ographic progression, confirmed by independent 
radiology review ( Section 7.2 ), should continue as per protoc ol until radiographic progression is 
determined by blinded independent central review.
Part 2: If a subject is intolerant of nivolumab treatment during the chemotherapy cycles, the 
subject should be withdrawn from the study.Chemotherapy dose reduction is allowed on study. Any subject with two prior dose reductions to 
one agent who experiences a toxicity that would cause a third dose reduction must be discontinued 
from that agent. A subject in treatment arm who is discontinued from the chemotherapy treatment will remain on the study and r eceive nivolumab and ipilimumab therapy with option of p emetrexed 
maintenance (non-squamous histology only).
If the investigator assesses the drug-related AE to be related to ipilimumab only and not related to 
nivolumab, ipilimumab dosing alone may be discontinued while nivolumab dosing is delayed until the subject meets criteria to resume nivolumab treatment.
4.5.5.1 Nivolumab Dose Discontinuation
Treatment with nivolumab should be permanently discontinued for any of the following:
•Any Grade ≥ 2 drug-related uveitis or eye pain or blurred vision that does not respond to topi cal 
therapy and does not improve to Grade 1 severity within the re-treatment period OR requires 
systemic treatment
•Any Grade ≥ 2 drug-related pneumonitis or interstitial lung disease that does not resolve to 
dose delay and systemic steroids (also see Pulmonary Adverse Event Management Algorithm);
•Any Grade 3 drug-related bronchospasm, hypersensitivity r eaction, or i nfusion reaction, 
regardless of duration;
•Any Grade 3 non-skin, drug-related adverse event lasting > 7 days, with the following exceptions for drug-related uveitis, pneumonitis, bronchospasm, diarrhea, colitis, neurologic 
toxicity, hypersensitivity reactions, infusion r eactions, endocri nopathies, and laboratory 
abnormalities
•Grade 3 drug-related uveitis, pneumonitis, bronchospasm, diarrhea, colitis, neurologic tox icity, 
myocarditis, hypersensitivity reaction, or infusion r eaction of any duration requires 
discontinuation.
•Grade 3 drug-related endocrinopathies adequately controlled with only physiologic hormone 
replacement do not require discontinuation. Adre nal insufficiency requires discontinuation 
regardless of control with hormone replacement
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 77
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
•Grade 3 drug-related laboratory abnormalities do not require treatment discontinuation except:
−Grade 3 drug-related thrombocytopenia > 7 days  or associated with bleeding requires 
discontinuation.
−Any drug-related liver function test (L FT) abnormality that meets the following criteria 
require discontinuation (also see Hepatic Adverse Event Management Algorithm):
•Any drug related liver function test (LFT) abnormality that meets the follo wing criteria require 
discontinuation 
−Grade ≥3 drug-related AST, ALT or Total Bilirubin requires discontinuation*
* In most cases of Grade 3 AST or ALT elev ation, study drugs(s) will be permanently 
discontinued. If the investigator determines a possible favorable benefit/risk ratio that 
warrants continuation of study drugs(s), a discussion between the investigator and the BMS medical monitor or designee must occur.
−Concurrent AST or ALT > 3 x ULN and total bilirubin > 2x ULN
−Any Grade 4 drug-related adverse event or labor atory abnormality, except for the following 
events, which do not require discontinuation:
•Grade 4 neutropenia ≤7 days
•Grade 4 lymphopenia or leukopenia
•Isolated Grade 4 amylase or lipase abnormalities that are not associated with symptoms 
or clinical manifestations of pancreatitis and decrease to < Grade 4 within 1 week of 
onset. The BMS Medical Monitor should be consulted for Grade 4 amylase or lipase 
abnormalities
•Isolated Grade 4 electrolyte imbalances/abnormalities that are not associated with 
clinical sequelae and are corrected  with supplementation/appropri ate management 
within 72 hours of their onset
•Grade 4 drug-related endocrinopathy adverse events, such as hyper- or hypothyroidism, 
or glucose intolerance, which resolve or are adequately controlled with physiologic hormone replacement (corticosteroids, thyroid hormones) or glucose controlling 
agents, respectively, may not require discontinuation after discussion with and approval from the BMS Medical Monitor.
−Dosing delays lasting > 6 weeks from the previous dose that occur for non- drug-related 
reasons may be allowed if approved by the BMS med ical monit or. Prior to re-initiating 
treatment in a subject with a dosing delay lasting > 6 weeks, the BMS med ical monitor 
must be consulted. Tumor assessments should continue as per protocol even if dosing is delayed. Periodic study visits to assess safety and laboratory studies should also continue every 6 weeks or more frequently if clinically indicated during such dosing delays.
−Any adverse event, laboratory  abnormality, or intercurrent illness which, in the judgment 
of the Investigator, presents a substantial clinical risk to the subject with continued 
nivolumab dosing.
The assessment for discontinuation of nivolumab should be made separately from the assessment 
made for discontinuation of ipilimumab. Although there is overlap among the discontinuation 
criteria, if discontinuation criteria are met fo r ipilimumab but not for ni volumab, treatment with 
nivolumab may continue if ipilimumab is discontinued. 
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 78
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
If a subject meets criteria for discontinuation a nd investigator is unable to determine whether the
event is related to nivolumab, ipilimumab or chemotherapy (if chemotherapy is part of the 
treatment regimen), the subject should discontinue  nivolumab, ipilimumab and chemotherapy (if 
chemotherapy is part of the treatment regimen), and be taken off the treatment phase of the study. 
Continuation of ipilimumab after discontinuati on of nivolumab is not allowed on study. The 
assessment for discontinuation of nivolumab and ipilimumab should be made separately from the assessment made for discontinuation of chemotherapy doublet. If criteria for discontinuation for 
nivolumab and ipilimumab are met before the nivolumab and ipilimumab plus platinum doublet 
chemotherapy cycles have been completed, platinum doublet chemotherapy may continue until 2 cycles have been given in Part 2 study. 
4.5.5.2 Definition of DLTs in safety-lead in of Part 2
Dose limiting toxicities are defined as any of the items listed below which occur during the first 9 
weeks.
•Any Grade 2 drug-related uveitis or eye pain that does not respond to topical therapy and does 
not improve to Grade 1 severity within th e re-treatment period OR requires systemic treatment
•Any Grade 2 drug-related pneumonitis or interstitial lung disease that does not resolve to dose delay and systemic steroids in 14 days (radiologic changes may take longer to resolve). The 
management algorithm for pneumonitis or pulmonary toxicity can be found in the appendix 
and in the current Investigator Brochure.
22
•Any Grade 3 non-skin drug-related adverse event with the exception of laboratory 
abnormalities, that ca nnot be alleviated (defined as returni ng to grade 1, radiologic changes 
may take longer to resolve) or controlled by appropriate care within 14 days (appropriate care being defined as treatment outlin ed in AE management al gorithms in the investigators 
brochure).
•Any Grade 4 drug-related adverse event incl uding laboratory abnormalit ies except Grade 4 
leukopenia or neutropenia lasting < 14 days and asymptomatic amylase/lipase evaluation.
•Any of the following drug-related hepat ic function laboratory abnormalities:
−AST or ALT > 5-10x ULN for > 2 weeks
−AST or ALT >10 x ULN
−Total bilirubin > 5 x ULN
−Concurrent AST or ALT > 3 x ULN and total bilirubin > 2 x ULN
−Grade 3 thrombocytopenia associated with bleeding
Safety lead in sub jects should discontinue treatment if they experience any adverse event, 
laboratory abnormality or interc urrent illness (regardless of causality) which, in the opinion of 
the investigator, presents a substantial clinical risk to the subject with continued nivolumab 
dosing. Such discontinuation, however, will not be considered a DLT unless it m eets at least 
one of the DLT criteria defined above. Treatment d elay, modification, and discontinuation 
criteria are to be followed for management of safety lead in sub jects as outlined in 
Sections 4.5.2 , 4.5.3 , 4.5.5 .
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 79
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
4.5.5.3 Ipilimumab Dose Discontinuation
Ipilimumab should be permanently discontinued if any of the following criteria are met:
•Any Grade ≥ 2 drug-related uveitis or eye pain or blurred vision that does not respond to topical 
therapy and does not improve to Grade 1 severity within 2 weeks OR requires systemic 
treatment;
•Any Grade ≥3 bronchospasm or other hypersensitivity reaction;
•Any other Grade 3 non-skin, drug-related adverse with the following exceptions for laboratory 
abnormalities, grade 3 nausea and vomiti ng, grade 3 neutropenia and thrombocytopenia, and 
symptomatic endocrinopathies which resolved (with or without hormone substitution);
•Any drug-related liver function test (LFT) abnor mality that meets the following criteria require 
discontinuation:
−Grade ≥3 drug related AST, ALT or Total Bilirubin required discontinuation
•In most cases of Grade 3 AST, ALT evaluation study drug(s) w ill be permanently 
discontinued. If the investigator determines a possible favorable benefit/risk ratio that 
warrants continuation of study drug(s), a discussion between the investigator and the BMS medical monitor or designee must occur.
−Concurrent AST or ALT > 3 x ULN and total bilirubin > 2X ULN
•Any Grade 4 drug-related adverse event or laboratory abnormality, ex cept for the following 
events, which do not require discontinuation:
−Grade 4 neutropenia ≤7 days
−Grade 4 lymphopenia or leukopenia
−Isolated Grade 4 amylase or lipase abnormalities which are not associated with symptoms 
or clinical manifestations of pancreatitis. 
−Isolated Grade 4 electrolyte imbalances/a bnormalities that are not associated with clinical 
sequelae and are corrected with supplementation/appropriate management within 72 hours 
of their onset
−Grade 4 drug-related endocrinopathy adverse events such as adrenal insufficiency, ACTH 
deficiency, hyper- or hypothyroidism, or glucos e intolerance, which resolve or are 
adequately controlled with physiologic hormone replacement (corticosteroids, thyroid 
hormones) or glucose c ontrolling agents, resp ectively, may not require discontinuation 
after discussion with and approval from the BMS Medical Monitor.
•Any treatment delay resulting in no ipilimumab dosing for > 12 weeks with the following exceptions: Dosing delays to manage drug-related adverse events, such as prolonged steroid 
tapers, are allowed. Prior to re-initiating tr eatment in a subject with a dosing delay lasting 
> 12 weeks, the BMS medical monitor must be c onsulted. Tumor assessments should continue 
as per protocol even if dosing is delayed.
•Dosing delays resulting in no ipilimumab dosing for > 12 weeks that occur for non- drug-related 
reasons may be allowed if a pproved by the BMS medical monitor. Prior to re-initiating 
treatment in a subject with a dosing delay las ting > 12 weeks, the BMS medical monitor must 
be consulted. Tumor assessments should continue as per protocol even if dosing is delayed.
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 80
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
•Any adverse event, laboratory abnormality, or intercurrent illness which, in the judgment of 
the Investigator, presents a substantial clinical risk  to the subject with continued ipilimumab 
dosing
The assessment for discontinuation of ipilimumab should be made separately from the assessment 
made for discontinuation of nivolumab. Although there is overlap among the discontinuation criteria, if discontinuation criteria are met fo r ipilimumab but not for ni volumab, treatment with 
nivolumab may continue if ipilimumab is discontinued.
If a subject meets criteria for discontinuation and investigator is unable to determine whether the 
event is related to nivolumab, ip ilimumab or chemotherapy (if chemotherapy is part of the 
treatment regimen), the subject should disconti nue nivolumab, ipilimumab or chemotherapy (if 
chemotherapy is part of the treatment regimen) and be taken off the treatment phase of the study. 
The assessment for discontinuation of nivolumab and ipilimumab should be made separately from 
the assessment made for discontinuation of chemotherapy doublet. If criteria for discontinuation for nivolumab and ipilimumab are met before the nivolumab and ipilimumab plus platinum doublet 
chemotherapy cycles have been completed, platinum doublet chemotherapy may continue until 2 cycles have been given in Part 2 study. 
4.5.5.4 Chemotherapy Dose Discontinuation 
Except where specified below, chem otherapy drugs in the plati num doublet chemotherapy regimen 
or pemetrexed should be discontinued for any of the following:
•Any Grade ≥3 peripheral neuropathy
•Grade ≥3 drug-related thrombocytopenia associated with clinically significant bleeding
•Any drug-related liver function test (LFT) abnormality that meets the following criteria 
requires discontinuation:
−AST or ALT > 5-10x ULN for > 2 weeks
−AST or ALT > 10x ULN
−Total bilirubin > 5 x ULN
−Concurrent AST or ALT > 3 x ULN and total bilirubin > 2 x ULN
•Any drug-related adverse event which recurs after two prior dose reductions for the same 
drug-related adverse event requires discontinuation  of the drug(s) which was/were previously 
dose reduced.
•Any Grade ≥ 3 drug-related hypersensiti vity reaction or i nfusion r eaction requires 
discontinuation of the drug(s) felt to be causing the reaction. The drug not felt to be related to 
the hypersensitivity r eaction or infusion reaction may be continued.
•Any Grade 4 drug-related adverse event which the investigator deems is inappropriate to be managed by dose reduction(s) requires discontinuati on of the drug(s) felt to be causing the 
event. The drug not felt to be related to the event may be continued.
•Any event that leads to delay in dosing of any study drug(s) for > 6 weeks from the previous 
dose requires discontinuation of that drug(s) with the following exception:
−Dosing delays lasting > 6 weeks from the previous dose that occur for non- drug-related 
reasons may be allowed if approved by the BMS med ical monit or. Prior to re-initiating 
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 81
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
treatment in a subject with a dosing delay lasting > 6 weeks, the BMS med ical monitor 
must be consulted. Periodic study visits to assess safety and laboratory studies should also 
continue every 6 weeks or more frequently  if clinically indicated during such dosing 
delays.
•Any adverse event, laboratory abnormality, or intercurrent illness which, in the judgment of 
the Investigator, presents a substantial clinical risk to the subject with continued platinum 
doublet chemoth erapy dosing. Investigators should consult lo cal labeling for the chemotherapy 
drugs being administered to any given subject for additional guidance on dose discontinuation.
•In addition, subjects receiving cisplatin with pemetrexed must discontinue cisplatin if the calculated creatinine clearance decreases to < 50 mL/min based on the Cockcroft Gault 
formula) The other drug (pemetrexed) may be continued, and the platinum agent may, at the 
investigator’s discretion, be switched to carbop latin for the remainder of the platinum doublet 
cycles when the subject meets retreatment criteria.
Note: If the investigator is unable to determine whether an adverse event is due to nivolumab or 
ipilimumab or platinum doublet chemotherapy, then all drugs must be discontinued. The assessment for discontinuation of nivolumab and ipilimumab should be made separately from the 
assessment made for discontinuation of chemotherapy doublet. If criteria for discontinuation for 
nivolumab and ipilimumab are met before the nivolumab and ipilimumab plus platinum doublet chemotherapy cycles have been completed, platinum doublet chemotherapy may continue until 2 cycles have been given in Part 2 study. 
A subject who is discontinued from the chemotherapy treatment due to toxicities related to 
chemotherapy only, will remain on the study and receive nivolumab and ipilimumab therapy.
4.5.6 Treatment Beyond Disease Progression for Part 1 and Part 2 
Accumulating evidence indicates  a minority of  subjects tr eated with immunotherapy may derive 
clinical benefit despite initial evidence of PD.
21
Subjects will be permitted to continue on nivo lumab + ipilimumab for tr eatment beyond initial 
RECIST 1.1 defined PD, assessed by the investigato r, for a maximum of 2 years from the start of 
study treatment as l ong as they meet the following criteria:
•Investigator-assessed clinical benefit and no rapid disease progression
•Subject is tolerating study treatment
•Stable performance status
•Treatment beyond progression will not d elay an imminent intervention to prevent serious 
complications of disease progression (eg, CNS metastases)
•Subject provides written informed consent p rior to receiving additional nivolumab and 
ipilimumab treatment, using an ICF descri bing any reasonably foreseeable risks or 
discomforts, or other alternative treatment options .
The decision to continue tr eatment be yond initial investigator-assessed progression s hould be 
discussed with the BMS Medical Monitor and documented in the study records. A follow-up scan 
should be performed within six (6) weeks ±5 days of original PD to determine whether there has 
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 82
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
been a decrease in the tumor size, or continued progression of disease. Subsequent scans should 
be performed per protocol defined schedule ± 5 days until further progression is determined.
If the investigator feels that the subject continues to achieve clinical benefit by continuing 
treatment, th e subject s hould remain on the trial and continue to receive monitoring according to 
the Time and Events Schedule on Table 5.1-2 and Table 5.1-3 .
For the subjects who continue study therapy beyond progression, further progression is defined as 
an additional 10% increase in tumor burden with a minimum of 5 mm absolute increase from time 
of initial PD. This includes an increase in the sum of d iameters of all target lesions and/ or the 
diameters of new measurable lesions compared to the time of initial PD. Nivolumab and 
ipilimumab tr eatment should be discontinued permanently upon documentation of further 
progression.
New lesions are considered  measureable at th e time of init ial progression if the longest diameter 
is at least 10 mm (except for pathological lymph nodes which must have a short axis of at least 
15 mm). Any new lesion considered non-measureable at the time of initial progression may 
become measureable and therefore included in the tumor burden if the longest diameter increases 
to at least 10 mm (except for pathological lymph nodes which must have a short axis of at least 15 mm). In situations where the relative increase in total tumor burden by 10% is solely due to 
inclusion of new lesions which become measurable, these new lesions must demonstrate an 
absolute increase of at least 5 mm.
4.5.7 Management Algorithms for Immuno-Oncology Agents
Immuno-oncology (I-O) agents are associated with AEs that can differ in severity and duration 
than AEs caused by other therapeutic classes. Nivolumab and ipilimumab are considered immuno-
oncology agents in this protocol. Early recognition and management of AEs associated with immuno-oncology agents may mitigate severe toxicity. Management Algorithms have been developed to assist investigators in assessing and managing the following groups of AEs:
•Gastrointestinal
•Renal
•Pulmonary
•Hepatic
•Endocrinopathy
•Skin
•Neurological
 
4.5.8 Treatment of Nivolumab or Ipilimumab Infusion Reactions
Since nivolumab and ipilimumab contain only human immunoglobulin protein sequences, they are 
unlikely to be immunogenic and induce infusion or hypersensitivity reactions. However, if such a 
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 83
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v

Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
reaction were to occur, it might manifest wi th fever, chills, rigors, h eadache, rash, pruritus, 
arthralgias, hypo- or hypertension, bronchospasm, or other symptoms. All Grade 3 or 4 infusion 
reactions s hould be reported within 24 hours to the BMS Medical Monitor and reported as an SAE 
if criteria are met. Infusion  reactions shoul d be graded acc ording to NCI CTCAE (Version 4.0) 
guidelines.
Treatment recommendations are provided below and may be modified based on local treatment 
standards and guidelines, as appropriate:
For Grade 1 symptoms: (mild reaction; infusion interruption not indicated; intervention not 
indicated)
•Remain at bedside and monitor subject until recovery from symptoms. The following 
prophylactic premedications are r ecommended for future i nfusions: diphe nhydramine 50 mg 
(or equivalent) and/or acetaminophen/paracetamol 325 to 1000 mg at least 30 minutes before 
additional nivolumab or ipilimumab administrations.
For Grade 2 symptoms: (moderate reaction requ ires therapy or infusion interruption but 
responds promptly to symptomatic treatment [eg, antihistamines, non-steroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs, narcotics, cortico steroids, bronchodilators, IV fluids]; 
prophylactic medications indicated for ≤≤24 hours)
•Stop the nivolumab or ipilimumab infusion, begin an IV infusion of normal saline, and tr eat 
the subject with diphenhydramine 50 mg IV  (or equivalent) a nd/or acetaminophen/paracetamol 
325 to 1000 mg; remain at bedside and monitor subject until resolution of symptoms. 
Corticosteroid and/or bronchodilator therapy may also be administered as appropriate. If the 
infusion is interrupted, then restart the i nfusion at 50% of the original infusion r ate when 
symptoms resolve; if no further complications ensue after 30 minutes, the rate may be 
increased to 100% of the original infusion r ate. Monitor subject clos ely. If symptoms recur, 
then no further nivolumab or ipilimumab will be  administered at that visit. Administer 
diphenhydramine 50 mg IV, and remain at bedside and monitor the subject until resolution of 
symptoms. The amount of study drug i nfused must be recorded on the el ectronic case report 
form (eCRF).
•For future infusions, the following prophylactic premedications are recommended: 
diphenhydramine 50 mg (or equivalent) a nd/or acetaminophen/paracetamol 325 to 1000 mg 
should be administered at least 30 minutes before nivolumab or ipilimumab infusions. If 
necessary, corticosteroids (up to 25 mg of SoluCortef or equivalent) may be used.
For Grade 3 or 4 symptoms: (severe reaction, Grade 3: prolonged [ie, not rapidly responsive 
to symptomatic medication and/or brief int erruption of infusion]; recurrence of symptoms 
following initial improvement; hospitalization indicated for other clinical sequelae [eg, renal impairment, pulmonary infiltrates]. Grade 4: Life threatening; pressor or ventilatory support indicated)
•Immediately discontinue infusion of nivolumab or ipilimumab. Begin an IV infusion of normal 
saline and treat the subject as follows: Reco mmend bronchodilators, epinephrine 0.2 to 1 mg 
of a 1:1000 solution for subcutaneous adminis tration or 0.1 to 0.25 mg of a 1:10,000 solution 
injected slowly for IV administration, and/or diphenhydramine 50 mg IV with 
methylprednisolone 100 mg IV (or equivalent), as  needed. Subject should be monitored until 
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 84
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
the investigator is comfortable that the symptoms w ill not rec ur. Nivolumab or ipilimumab 
will be permanently discontinued. Investigators should follow their institutional guidelines for 
the treatment of anaphylaxis. Remain at bedsid e and monitor subject until recovery of the 
symptoms.
In case of late-occurring hypersensitivity sympto ms (eg, appearance of a localized or generalized 
pruritus within 1 week after treatment), symptomatic treatment may be given (eg, oral 
antihistamine or corticosteroids).
4.6 Blinding/Unblinding
Not applicable.
4.7 Treatment Compliance
Treatment compliance will be monitored by drug accountability as well as the subject’s medical 
record and eCRF.
4.8 Destruction of Study Drug
For this study, study drugs (those supplied by BMS or  sourced by the investigator) such as partially 
used study drug containers, vials and syringes may be destroyed on site. 
Any unused study drugs can only be destroyed after being inspected and reconciled by the 
responsible Study Monitor unless study drug contai ners must be immediately destroyed as required 
for safety, or to meet local regulat ions (eg, cytotoxics or biologics). 
On-site destruction is allowed provided the following minimal standards are met:
•On-site disposal practices must not  expose humans to risks from the drug.
•On-site disposal practices and procedures are in agr eement with applicable laws and 
regulations, including any special requirements for controlled or hazardous substances.
•Written procedures for on-site disposal are available and followed. The procedures must be 
filed with the site’s SOPs and a copy provide d to BMS upon request.
•Records are maintained th at allow for traceability of each container, including the d ate 
disposed of, quantity disposed, and identificati on of the person disposing the containers. The 
method of disposal, ie, incinerator, licensed sanitary landfill, or licensed waste disposal vendor 
must be documented.
•Accountability and disposal records are comp lete, up-to-date, and available for the Monitor to 
review throughout the clinical trial period.
If conditions for destruction cannot be met the responsible Study Monitor will make arrangements 
for return of study drug.
It is the investigator’s responsib ility to arrange for disposal of all empty containers, provided that 
procedures for proper disposal have been established according to applicable federal, state, local, 
and institutional guidelines and procedures, and provided that appropriate records of disposal are kept.
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 85
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
4.9 Return of Study Drug
If study drug will not be destroyed upon completion or termination of the study, all unused and/or 
partially used study drug that was supplied by BMS must be returned to BMS. The ret urn of study 
drug will be arranged by the responsible Study Monitor. 
It is the investigator’s responsib ility to arrange for disposal of all empty containers, provided that 
procedures for proper disposal have been established according to applicable federal, state, local, 
and institutional guidelines and procedures, and provided that appropriate records of disposal are 
kept. 
Arrangements for the return of study drug will be made by the responsible Study Monitor.
4.10 Retained Samples for Bioavailability / Bioequivalence
Not Applicable. 
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 86
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
5 STUDY ASSESSMENTS AND PROCEDURES
5.1 Flow Chart/Time and Events Schedule 
Table 5.1-1: Screening Assessments and Procedures (CA209568) - All Subjects
ProcedureScreening
VisitNotes
Eligibility Assessments
Informed Consent X Section 2.3
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria XSection 3.3 . 
All inclusion/exclusion criteria should be assessed prior to first dose
Medical History X Section 3.3and 5.3
Safety Assessments
Physical Measurements/Physical 
ExaminationX Section 5.3. Include Height and Weight Within 28 days prior to first dose
ECOG Performance Status X Section 5.3.1 and Appendix 1
Vital Signs and Oxygen Saturation XSection 5.3
Including BP, HR, & temperature. Obtain at the screening visit and within 72 hours prior to first 
dose
Assessment of Baseline Signs and 
SymptomsXSection 5.3
Within 14 days prior to first dose
Concomitant Medication Collection XSection 3.4
Within 14 days prior to first dose through the study treatment period 
Pregnancy Test (WOCBP only) XSection 5.3.2
Within 24 hours prior to Day 1/Negative pregnancy test required at Screening. (An extension up 
to 72 hours prior to start of study drug may be permissible in situations where results cannot be
obtained within the standard 24 hour window). 
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 87
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
Table 5.1-1: Screening Assessments and Procedures (CA209568) - All Subjects
ProcedureScreening
VisitNotes
Laboratory Tests XSection 5.3
CBC w/differential, Chemistry panel including: LDH, AST, ALT, ALP, T. bili, BUN or serum 
urea level, creatinine, albumin, Ca, Mg, Na, K, Cl, phosphate, glucose, amylase, lipase, TSH, 
Free T4, Free T3, within 14 days prior to first dose.
Hep B/C (HBV sAg, HCV antibody or HCV RNA), within 28 days prior to first dose.
ECG (12-lead) XSection 5.3.4
Obtained only for subjects who have met all eligibility criteria
Efficacy Assessments
Radiographic Tumor Assessments(chest, 
abdomen, pelvis, brain)XSection 5.4
Performed within 28 days prior to first dose. CT of chest, abdomen and pelvis, and MRI of brain 
(to rule out brain metastases) & all known or suspected sites of disease should be assessed at 
baseline 
Biomarker Assessments
Archived Tumor Tissue or Recent Tumor BiopsyXSection 3.3.1
Recent sample or archival, obtained within 6 months of Part 1 enrollment (archival tissue is to be 
obtained within 3 month prior to Part 2 enrollment).
One (1) formalin-fixed paraffin embedded tumor tissue block or a minimum of 10 unstained 
tumor tissue sections are acceptable.
Submission of fewer than 10 unstained slides may be acceptable in some circumstances 
following discussion with the BMS Medical Monitor.
Specimens must be tested by third party lab to determine PD-L1 status. An email or fax 
communication will be sent to site by third party lab for confirmation upon receiving tumor 
tissue. Subjects in Part 1can initiate therapy before the result of IHC testing. Subjects in safety 
lead in phase can initiate therapy before the result of IHC test.
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 88
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
Table 5.1-1: Screening Assessments and Procedures (CA209568) - All Subjects
ProcedureScreening
VisitNotes
EGFR Mutation ALK Translocation Status XSection 3.3.2 To be performed prior to first dose for all non-squamous subjects. EGFR and ALK 
tests are to be done locally (not by central lab). EGFR test is mandatory for subjects with non-
squamous histology, and to be performed using PCR based assay or next generation sequencing 
from tumor tissue. Tests other than PCR or next generation sequencing will be requested to 
repeat using PCR or next generation sequencing based methods.
IWRS /Clinical Drug Supplies
IWRS XSection 4.4
For subject number assignment at the time informed consent is obtained
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 89
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
Table 5.1-2: On Study Assessments Treatment Phase (CA209568)
Part 1 (2 weeks/cycle)
Part 1 ProcedureaCycle 1 
Day 1Each 
Subsequent 
Cycle
Day1
(±3 Days)Every 2 Cycles
Day 1
(±3 Days)Every 3 Cycles
Day 1
(±3 Days)Notes
For purposes of this table, a cycle refers to 
the nivolumab every 2 weeks regimen.
Safety Assessments
Physical Measurements & ECOG 
Performance StatusXX Section 5.3 , 5.3.1 & Appendix 1
Vital Signs and Oxygen Saturation X X Section 5.3
Adverse Event Assessments Continuously during the studySection 6 . SAEs should be approved in Trial 
Access Online (TAO) within 5 days from entry. 
Beyond 100 days from the last dose of study 
drug, subjects will be followed for ongoing 
drug-related adverse events until resolved,
return to baseline or deemed irreversible, or 
until lost to follow-up, withdrawal of study 
consent, or start of subsequent therapy
Laboratory Tests X X X (TSH)Section 5.3
Within 72 hrs. prior to dosing to include CBC 
w/ differential, AST, ALT, ALP, T. bili, BUN 
or serum urea level, creatinine, albumin, Ca, 
Mg, Na, K, Cl, LDH, phosphate, glucose, 
amylase, lipase, TSH (with reflexive Free T4 
and Free T3).
Thyroid Function Testing to be evaluated every 
6 weeks
Note: C1D1 labs do not need to be repeated if 
they were performed within 14 days of dosing.
Pregnancy Test (WOCBP only) X XSections 5.3.2 To be evaluated at least every 
4 weeks
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 90
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v

Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
Table 5.1-3: On Study Assessments Treatment Phase-
Part 2 - Nivolumab+ ipilimumab+ platinum-doublet chemotherapy combination (3 weeks/cycle)
Part 2 ProcedureCycle 1 
Day 1Each 
Subsequent 
Cycle
Day1
(±3 Days)Every 2 
Cycles
Day 1
(±3 Days)Every 3 
Cycles
Day 1
(±3 Days)Notes
For the purposes of this table, a cycle refers to the 
nivolumab +ipilimumab+ platinum-doublet 
chemotherapy every 3 weeks x2 cycles regimen 
Safety Assessments
Physical Measurements & ECOG 
Performance StatusXX Sections 5.3 , 5.3.1 Appendix 1
Vital Signs and Oxygen Saturation X Section 5.3
Adverse Event Assessments Continuously during the studySection 6 . SAEs should be approved in Trial
Access Online (TAO) within 5 days from entry.
Laboratory Tests X X X(TSH)Section 5.3
Within 72 hrs. prior to dosing to include CBC w/ 
differential, AST, ALT, ALP, T. bili, BUN or serum 
urea level, creatinine, albumin, Ca, Mg, Na, K, Cl, 
LDH, phosphate, glucose, amylase, lipase, TSH (with 
reflexive Free T4 and Free T3).
Thyroid Function Testing to be evaluated every 6 
weeks 
Note:   C1D1 labs do not need to be repeated if they 
were performed within 14 days of dosing.
Pregnancy Test (WOCBP only) X XSections 5.3.2 To be evaluated at least every 3 weeks 
for cycles 1- 4 and a minimum of every 4 weeks after 
cycle 4 dose, to align with clinic visits.
Efficacy Assessments
Radiographic Tumor Assessment 
(CT/MRI chest, abdomen, pelvis)Section 5.4 . 
FIRST tumor assessment should first be performed at 6 weeks ( ±7 days) from first dose date.
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 92
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v

Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
Table 5.1-3: On Study Assessments Treatment Phase-
Part 2 - Nivolumab+ ipilimumab+ platinum-doublet chemotherapy combination (3 weeks/cycle)
Part 2 ProcedureCycle 1 
Day 1Each 
Subsequent 
Cycle
Day1
(±3 Days)Every 2 
Cycles
Day 1
(±3 Days)Every 3 
Cycles
Day 1
(±3 Days)Notes
For the purposes of this table, a cycle refers to the 
nivolumab +ipilimumab+ platinum-doublet 
chemotherapy every 3 weeks x2 cycles regimen 
Clinical Drug Supplies
IWRS Vial Assignment X XSection 4.4 . 
Within 3 business days prior to first dosing
Nivolumab + ipilimumab + platinum-
doublet chemotherapy q 3w x2 cyclesXX Section 4.5 & Table 4.5-2
Note: If a dose is delayed, the procedures scheduled for that same time point should be delayed to coincide with when the time point’s dosing actually occur (except 
radiographic tumor assessments) continue until disease progression, discontinuation due to unacceptable toxicity, withdrawal of  consent, or study closure
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 94
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
5.1.1 Retesting During Screening or Lead-in Period
Retesting of laboratory parameters and/or other assessments during the Screening period will not 
be permitted (this does not include parameters that require a confirmatory result).
Any new result will override the previous result (ie, the most current result prior to first dose) and 
is the value by which study inclusion will be asse ssed, as it represents the subject’s most current, 
clinical state.
5.2 Study Materials
•NCI CTCAE version 4
•Nivolumab Investigator Brochure
•Ipilimumab Investigator Brochure
•Pharmacy Binder
•Laboratory manuals for collection and handling of blood (including PK, biomarker and 
immunogenicity) and tissue specimens
•Site manual for operation of Interactive Web Response System (IWRS), including enrollment 
worksheets
•Manual for entry of local laboratory data
•Pregnancy Surveillance Forms
•RECIST 1.1 pocket guide
•CA209568 study Imaging Manual
•Blinded Independent Central Review manual
•
5.3 Safety Assessments
At b
aseline, a medical history will be ob tained to capture relevant underlying conditions. The 
baseline examinations  should include weight, height, ECOG Pe rformance Status, blood pressure 
(BP), heart rate (HR), and temperature at rest, and should be performed within 28 days prior to 
first dose. Baseline signs and symptoms are those that are assessed within 14 days prior to first dose. Concomitant medications will be collected from within 14 days prior to the first dose through 
the study treatment period (see Section 5.1 ).
Baseline local laboratory assessments should be done within 14 days prior to first dose and are to 
include: CBC w/differential, LFTs (ALT, AST, total bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase), BUN or 
serum urea level, creatinine, albumin, Ca, Mg, Na, K, Cl, phosphate, LDH, glucose, amylase, 
lipase, Thyroid function tests includes TSH, free T4, and free T3.
The following baseline local laboratory assessments should be done within 28 days prior to first 
treatment: Hepatitis B and C testing (HBV sAg and HCV Ab or HCV RNA).
Pregnancy testing for WOCBP (done locally) must be  performed within 24 hours prior to the Day 1 
at baseline and then every 4 weeks (2 cycles) ±3 days. Pregnancy testing must be within 24 hours 
prior to Day 1 of each treatment cycle (prior to dosing).
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 96
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v

Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
While on-study the following local laboratory assessm ents are to be done within 3 days prior to 
each dose: CBC with differential, LFTs (ALT,  AST, total bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase), BUN 
or serum urea level, creatinine, albumin, Ca, Mg, Na, K, Cl, phosphate, LDH, glucose, amylase, 
and lipase. Thyroid function testing is to be done every 6 weeks.
Subjects will be evalu ated for safety if they have received  any study drug. Toxicity assessments 
will be continuous during the tr eatment phase. During the safety follow-up phase ( Table 5.1-3 ) 
toxicity assessments should be done in person. Once subjects reach the survival follow-up phase 
either in person or documented telephone calls to assess the subject’s status are acceptable. Adverse events and laboratory values will be graded according to the NCI-CTCAE version 4.0.On-study weight, ECOG performance status, and vital signs should be assessed at each on-study 
visit prior to dosing. Vital signs should also be taken as per institutional standard of care prior to, 
during and after infusions. The start and stop time of the study therapy infusions s hould be 
documented.
Physical examinations are to be performed as clinically indicated. If there are any new or 
worsening clinically significant changes since the last exam, report changes on the appropriate 
non-serious or serious adverse event page.
On treatment local laboratory assessments are to be completed within 72 hours prior to dosing.Additional measures, including non-study required laboratory tests, should be performed as 
clinically ind icated or to comply with local regu lations. Laboratory toxicities (eg, suspected drug 
induced liver enzyme evaluations) will be monitored during the follow-up phase via on si te/local 
labs until all study drug related toxicities resolve, re turn to baseline, or are deemed irreversible.
If a participant shows pulmonary-related signs (hypoxia, fever) or symptoms (eg. dyspnea, cough, fever) consistent with possible pulmonary adverse events, the participant should be immediately 
evaluated to rule out pulmonary toxicity, according to the suspected pulmonary toxicity 
management algorithm in the BMS-936558 (nivolumab) Investigator Brochure.
Some of the assessments referred to in this section may not be captured as data in the eCRF. They 
are intended to be used as safety monitoring by the treating physician. Additional testing or 
assessments may be performed as clinically necessary or where required by institutional or local 
regulations.
5.3.1 ECOG Performance Status 
Eastern Cooperative Oncology G roup (ECOG) Performance Status w ill be evalu ated and 
documented at Screening and within 72 hours prior to each dosing visit as outlined in Section 5.1 . 
See Appendix 1 for description of ECOG status.
5.3.2 Pregnancy TestingWOCBP are required to have pregnancy tests performed. WOCBP must exhibit a negative serum 
or urine pregnancy (minimum sensitivity 25 IU/L or equivalent units of HCG within 24 hours prior 
to Day 1 of each treatment period and safety follow-up visits. Pregnancy testing will be done 
locally and as outlined in Section 5.1. An extension up to 72 hours prior to start of study drug may 
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 97
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
be permissible in situations where results cannot be obtained within the standard 24 hour window. 
This is subject to med ical monitor/MST Chair a pproval.
5.3.3 Thyroid Function Testing
Thyroid function testing will be performed as outlined in Section 5.1
At Screening, thyroid function testing is to include  TSH, free T3 and free T4. At subsequent time 
points, thyroid function testing consists of TSH only. However, if the TSH is abnormal, reflexive 
testing of free T3 and free T4 are to be performed. 
Management algorithms for suspected endocrinopathy adverse events (including abnormal thyroid 
function) can be found in the nivolumab investigator brochure and Appendix 2 of the protocol.
5.3.4 Electrocardiogram (ECG)
All subjects who have met the eligibility criteria  are required to have  a 12-lead EC G performed 
during Screening. If clinically indicated, additional ECGs may be obtained during the study.
5.4 Efficacy Assessments
Images will be submitted to an imaging thi rd party radiology vendor for central review (for 
subjects participating in Part 1). Any additional imaging that may demonstrate tumor response or 
progression (including scans performed at unscheduled timepoints and/or at an outside institution) 
should be collected for RECIST 1.1 tumor assessment and submitted to the BICR. Sites w ill be 
trained prior to scanning the first study subject. Image acquisition guidelines and submission 
process will be ou tlined in the study Imaging Manual to be provided by the radiology vendor. 
Tumor assessments should be submitted to the third party radiology vendor as they are performed 
on an ongoing basis. At the time of investigator- assessed disease progression, the site must request 
a Blinded Independent Central Review from th e third party radiology vendor for confirmation of 
progression, as specified in Section 7.2 . 
Contrast enhanced CT with PO/IV contrast or contrast enhanced MRI are the preferred imaging modalities for assessing radiographic tumor response. If a subject has a known allergy to contrast 
material, local prophylaxis standards may be used to obtain the assessment with contrast if at all 
possible, or use the alternate mo dality. In cases where contrast is strictly contraind icated, a 
non-contrast scan will suffice. Should a subject have a contraindication for CT IV contrast, a non-
contrast CT of the chest and a contrast enhanced MRI of the abdomen and pelvis may be obtained. 
Every attempt should be  made to image each subject using an ident ical acquisition protocol on the 
same scanner for all imaging time points. (Applies to both Part 1 and Part 2 Safety Lead in).
Use of CT component of a PET/CT scanner: Combined modality scanning such as with 
FDG-PET/CT is increasingly used in clinical care, and is a mod ality/technology that is in rapid 
evolution; therefore, the recommendations outlined here may change rather quickly with time. At 
present, low dose or attenuation correction CT por tions of a combined FDG-PET/CT are of limited 
use in anatomically based efficacy assessments and it  is therefore suggested that they should not 
be substituted for dedicated di agnostic contrast enhanced CT scans for anatomically based 
RECIST measurements. However, if a site can document that the CT performed as part of a FDG-PET/CT is of identical diagnostic quality to a diagnostic CT (with IV and oral contrast) then 
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 98
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
the CT portion of the FDG-PET/CT can be used for RECIST 1.1measurements. Note, however, 
that the FDG-PET portion of the CT introduces additional data which may bias an investigator if it is not routinely or serially performed. 
MRI of brain is required at screening in order to rule out active metastatic disease.
Bone scan or PET scan is not adequate for assessment of RECIST 1.1 response in target lesions. 
In selected circumstances where such modalities are th e sole modality used to assess certain non-
target organs, those non-target organs may be evaluated less frequently. For example, bone scans 
may need to be repeated only wh en complete re sponse is identified in target disease or when 
progression in bone is suspected.
Screening assessments are to be performed within 28 days prior to first dose. In addition to the 
chest, abdomen, pelvis, and brain (to rule out brain metastases), all known sites of disease should 
be assessed at baseline. Subsequent assessments should include chest, a bdomen, pelvis, and all 
known sites of disease using the same imaging method and technique as was used at baseline.
Radiographic tumor response will be assessed at week 6 ( ±7 days) from first dose date, then every 
6 weeks ( ±7 days) for the first 12 months (until week 48) and every 12 weeks ( ±7 days) thereafter, 
until disease progression is documented or treatment is  discontinued (whichever occurs later). 
Subjects with a history of brain metastas is may have surveillance MRI approximately every 
12 weeks from the date of first dose, or sooner if clinically indicated.
Tumor measurements should be made by the same investigator or radiologist for each assessment 
whenever possible. Change in tumor measurements and tumor response will be assessed by the Investigator using the RECIST 1.1 criteria Appendix 3.
Tumor assessments should be submitted to the third party radiology vendor as they are performed 
on an ongoing basis, with the exception of safety lead in subjects. At the time of investigator-
assessed disease progression, the site must request a Blinded Independent Central Review from the third party radiology vendor, as specified in Section 7.2 . 
Subjects whose disease progression is not confirmed by the blinded, independent radiologist will 
be required to continue tumor assessments (i f clinically feasible) according to the protocol-
specified schedule. Subsequent tumor assessments  must be submitted to the third party radiology 
vendor for review by the blinded, independent radiologists and may be discontinued when the 
investigator and independent radiologists both assess the subject to have met RECIST 1.1 criteria 
for progression.
In addition, subjects receiving nivolumab a nd ipilimumab +/- chemoth erapy treatm ent beyond 
progression must continue tumor assessments until such treatment has been discontinued.If clinically acceptable, subsequent therapy should begin only after RECIST 1.1 progression has 
been assessed by Blinded Independent Central Review. Subjects who start palliative local therapy 
or subsequent therapy without prior assessment of RECIST 1.1 progression by central review, the Blinded Independent Central Review must cont inue tumor assessments (if clinically feasible) 
according to the protocol-specified schedule and submit them to the third party radiology vendor. 
When RECIST 1.1 progression is assessed by the investigator (whether assessed before or after 
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 99
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
the start of palliative local therapy or subsequent therapy), the Blinded Independent Central 
Review must be requested. Tumor assessments may be discontinued when the independent radiologist assesses the subject to have met RECIST 1.1 criteria for progression.
5.4.1 Primary Efficacy Assessment
Part 1 : The primary endpoint is objective respons e rate (ORR) based on blinded independent 
central review assessment in  all tr eated PD-L1 positive ( ≥1%) subjects and ORR in all tr eated 
PD-L1 negative (< 1%) subjects. All tr eated subjects w ill be monitored by radiographic assessment 
every 6 weeks ( ±7 days) until week 48 and every 12 weeks ( ±7 days) thereafter [beginning from 
the first on-study assessment on week 6 ( ±7 days)], to determine changes in tumor size. RECIST 
1.1 criteria will be used for the assessment. 
Part 2 : 
Primary Endpoints will be descriptive.
•The incidence of DLT (dose limiting toxicity) during DLT evaluation period (within 9 weeks 
after first dose)
•The safety and tolerability of nivolumab and ipilimumab combined with chemotherapy.
5.4.2 Secondary Efficacy Assessment
Part 1: Objective response rate (ORR) based on blinded independent central review assessment in 
all tr eated subjects. Progression free survival (PFS) based on blinded independent central review 
assessment, overall survival and ORR, PFS and OS by PD-L1 expression levels. 
Part 2: 
•ORR, PFS by investigator assessment, and OS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 100
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v

Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 ADVERSE EVENTS
An Adverse Event (AE) i
s defined as any new untoward medical occurrence or worsening of a 
preexisting medical condition in a clinical investig ation subject administered study drug and that 
does not necessarily have a causal relationship with this treatment. An AE can therefore be any 
unfavorable and unintended sign (suc h as an abnormal laboratory finding), symptom, or disease 
temporally associated with the use of study drug, whether or not considered related to the study 
drug.
The causal relationship to study drug is determined by a physician and should be used to assess all 
adverse events (AE). The causal relationship can be one of the following:
Related: There is a reasonable causal relatio nship between study drug administration and 
the AE.
Not related: There is not a reasonable causal relationship between study d rug 
administration and the AE. 
The term "reasonable causal relationship" means there is evidence to suggest a causal relationship. Adverse events can be spontaneously reported or elicited duri ng open-ended questioning, 
examination, or evaluation of a subject. (In order to prevent reporting bias, subjects should not be 
questioned regarding the specific occurrence of one or more AEs.)
BMS will be reporting adverse events to regulatory authorities and ethics committees according to 
local applicable laws including European Di rective 2001/20/EC and FDA Code of Federal 
Regulations 21 CFR Parts 312 and 320.
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 107
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v

Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
6.1 Serious Adverse Events
A Serious Adverse Event (SAE) is any untoward medical occurrence that at any dose: 
•results in death
•is life-threatening (defined as an event in which the subject was at risk of death at the time of 
the event; it does not refer to an event which hypothetically might have caused death if it were more severe)
•requires inpatient hospitalization or causes prolongation of existing hospitalization (see NOTE
below)
•results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity
•is a congenital anomaly/birth defect 
•is an important medical event (defined as a med ical event(s) that may not be immediately 
life-threatening or result in death or hospitalization but, based upon appropriate med ical and 
scientific judgment, may jeopardize the s ubject or may require intervention [eg, medical, 
surgi cal] to prevent one of the other serious outcomes listed in the definition above.) Examples 
of such events include, but are not limited to, intensive treatment in an emergency room or at 
home for allergic bronchospasm; blood dyscrasias or co nvulsions that do not result in 
hospitalization.) Potential drug induced liver injury (DILI) is also considered an important 
medical event. (See Section 6.6 for the definition of potential DILI.)
Suspected transmission of an infectious agent (eg, pathogenic or nonpathogenic) via the study d rug 
is an SAE. 
Although pregna ncy, overdose, cancer, and potential drug induced liver inju ry (DILI) are not 
always serious by regulatory definition, thes e events must be handled as SAEs. (See Section 6.1.1
for reporting pregnancies).Any component of a study endpoint that is considered related to st udy therapy (eg, d eath is an 
endpoint, if death occurred due to anaphylaxis, anaphylaxis must be reported) should be reported 
as SAE (see Section 6.1.1 for reporting details).
NOTE: 
The following hospitalizations are not considered SAEs in BMS clinical studies: 
−a visit to the emergency room or other hospital department < 24 hours, that does not result 
in admission (unless considered an important medical or life-threatening event)
−elective surgery, planned prior to signing consent
−admissions as per protocol for a planned medical/surgical procedure
−routine h ealth assessment re quiring admission for baseline/trending of health s tatus 
(eg, routine colonoscopy)
−medical/surgical admission other than to remedy ill h ealth and planned prior to entry into 
the study. Appropriate documentation is required in these cases
−admission encountered for another life circumstance that carries no bearing on health status 
and requires no medical/surgical intervention (e g, lack of housing, economic inadequacy, 
caregiver respite, family circumstances, administrative reason)
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 108
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
−Admission for administration of anticancer therapy in the absence of any other SAEs 
(applies to oncology protocols)
6.1.1 Serious Adverse Event Collection and Reporting
Sections 5.6.1 and 5.6.2 in the Investigator Brochure (IB) represent the Reference Safety 
Information to determine expected ness of serious adverse events for expedited reporting. 
Following the subject’s written consent to participate in the study, all SAEs, whether related or not 
related to study drug, must be collected, including those thought to be associated with protocol-specified procedures. All SAEs must be collected that occur during the screening period and within 100 days of discontinuation of dosing. For subjects randomized to tr eatment and never tr eated with 
study drug, SAEs should be collected for 30 days f rom the date of treatment. If applicable, SAEs 
must be collected that relate to a ny later prot ocol-specified procedure (eg, a follow-up skin biopsy). 
The investigator must report any SAE that occurs after these time periods and that is believed to 
be related to study drug or protocol-specified procedure. 
An SAE report must be completed for any event where doubt exists regarding its seriousness. 
If the investigator believes that an SAE is not related to study drug, but is potentially related to the 
conditions of the study (such as withdrawal of previous therapy or a complication of a study procedure), the relationship must be specified in the narrative section of the SAE Report Form.
SAEs, whether related or not related to study drug, and pregnancies must be reported to BMS 
(or designee) within 24 hours of awareness of the event. SAEs must be recorded on the SAE Report 
Form; pregnancies on a Pregnancy Surveillance Form  (electronic or paper forms). The preferred 
method for SAE data reporting co llection is t hrough the eCRF. The paper SAE/pregnancy 
surveillance forms are only intended as a back-up option when the eCRF system is not functioning. 
In this case, the paper forms are to be transmitted via email or confirmed facsimile (fax) 
transmission to:
SAE Email Address: Refer to Contact Information list.
SAE Facsimile Number: Refer to Contact Information list.
For studies capturing SAEs through electronic data cap ture (EDC), electronic submission is the 
required method for reporting. In the event the el ectronic system is unavailable for transmission, 
paper forms must be used and submitted immediatel y. When paper forms are used, the original 
paper forms are to remain on site.
SAE Telephone Contact (required for SAE and pregnancy reporting): Refer to Contact 
Information list.
If only limited information is initially available, follow-up reports are required. (Note: Follow-up 
SAE reports must include the same investigator term(s) initially reported.) 
If an ongoing SAE changes in its intensity or relationship to st udy drug or if ne w information 
becomes available, the SAE report must be updated and submitted within 24 hours to BMS 
(or designee) using the same procedure used for transmitting the initial SAE report.
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 109
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
All SAEs must be followed to resolution or stabilization.
6.2 Nonserious Adverse Events
Anonserious adverse event is an AE not classified as serious.
6.2.1 Nonserious Adverse Event Collection and Reporting
The collection of nonser ious AE information s hould begin at initiation of study drug. All 
nonserious adverse events (not only those deemed treatment-r elated) are to be collected 
continuously during the tr eatment period and for a minimum of 100 days following the last dose 
of study treatment.
Nonserious AEs should be followed to resolution or stab ilization, or reported as SAEs if they 
become serious (see Section 6.1.1 ). Follow-up is also required for nonserious AEs that cause 
interruption or discontinuation of study drug and for those present at the end of study treatment as 
appropriate. All identified nonserious AEs must be recorded and described on the nonserious AE 
page of the CRF (paper or electronic). 
Completion of supplemental CRFs may be requested for AEs and/or laboratory abnormalities that 
are reported/identified during the course of the study.
6.3 Laboratory Test Result Abnormalities
The following laboratory test result abnormalities  should be captured on the nonserious AE CRF 
page or SAE Report Form electronic) as appropri ate. Paper forms are only intended as a back-up 
option when the electronic system is not functioning.
•Any laboratory test result that is clinically significant or meets the definition of an SAE 
•Any laboratory test result abnormality that require d the subject to have study drug discontinued 
or interrupted
•Any laboratory test result abnormality that required the subject to r eceive specific corrective 
therapy. It is expected that wherever possible,  the clinical rather than laboratory term would 
be used by the reporting investigator (eg, anemia versus low hemoglobin value).
6.4 PregnancyIf, following initiation of the study drug, it is subsequently discovered that a st udy sub ject is 
pregnant or may have been pregnant at the time of study exposure, including during at least 
5 half-lives after product admin istration, the investigator must immediately notify the BMS 
Medical Monitor/designee of this event and complete and forward a Pregnancy Surveillance Form 
to BMS Designee within 24 hours of awareness of the event and in accordance with SAE reporting procedures described in Section 6.1.1 .
In most cases, the study drug will be permanently discontinued in an appropriate manner (eg, dose 
tapering if necessary for subject safety). Please call the BMS Medical Monitor within 24 hours of 
awareness of the pregnancy.
In the rare event that the benefit of continuing study drug is thought to outweigh the risk, after 
consultation with BMS, the pregnant subject may continue study drug after a thorough discussion 
of benefits and risk with the subject, if allowed by local regulations.
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 110
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
Protocol-required procedures for study discontinuation and follow-up must be pe rformed on the 
subject unless contraindicated by pregnancy (eg, x-ray studies). Other appropriate pregnancy 
follow-up procedures should be considered if indicated.
The investigator must immediately notify the BMS (or designee) Medical Monitor of this event 
and complete and forward a Pregnancy Surveillance Form to BMS (or desi gnee) within 24 hours 
of awareness of the event and in accordance with SAE reporting procedures described in Section 6.1.1 . 
Follow-up information regarding the course of the pregnancy, including perinatal and neonatal 
outcome and, where applicable, offspring infor mation must be reported on the Pregnancy 
Surveillance Form.
Any pregnancy that occurs in a female partner of a male study participant should be re ported to 
BMS. Information on this pregnancy will be collected on the Pregnancy Surveillance Form.6.5 Overdose
An overdose is defined as the accidental or intentional administration of any dose of a product that 
is considered both excessive and medically important. All occurrences of overdose must be 
reported as an SAE (see Section 6.1.1 for reporting details.).
6.6 Potential Drug Induced Liver Injury (DILI)
Wherever possible, timely confirmation of initial liver-rel ated laboratory abnormalities s hould 
occur prior to the reporting of a potential DILI event. All occurrences of potential DILIs, meeting 
the defined criteria, must be reported as SAEs (see Section 6.1.1 for reporting details).
Potential drug induced liver injury is defined as: 
1. AT (ALT or AST) elevation > 3 times upper limit of normal (ULN)
AND
2. Total bilirubin > 2 times ULN, without init ial findings of cholestasis ( elevated serum alkaline 
phosphatase),
AND
3. No other immediately a pparent possible causes of AT elevation and hyperbilirubinemia, 
including, but not limited to, viral hepatitis, pre-existing chronic or acute liver disease, or the 
administration of other drug(s) known to be hepatotoxic.
6.7 Other Safety Considerations
Any significant worsening noted during interim or final physical examinations, electrocardiogram, 
x-ray filming, any other potential safety assessment required or not required by protocol should 
also be recorded as a nonserious or serious AE, as appropriate, and reported accordingly.
6.7.1 Adverse Events of Interest
Definition of immune-mediated adverse events (IMAEs)
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 111
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
Immune-mediated AEs are specific events (that include pneumonitis, diarrhea/colitis, hepatitis, 
nephritis/renal dys function, rash, and endocrine (adrenal insufficiency, 
hypothyroidism/thyroiditis, hyperthyroidism, diabetes mellitus, and hypophysitis) for which 
subjects received immunosuppressive medication for treatment of the event, with the exception of endocrine events (hypothyroidism/thyroiditis,  hyperthyroidism , hypophysitis, di abetes mellitus, 
adrenal insufficiency), which are included regard less of treatment since these events are often 
managed without immunosuppression.
IMAEs include events, regardless of causality, occurring within 100 days of the last dose. This list 
is subject to change based on Health Authority feedback or change of MedDRA version. The final list used will be described in the CSR.
Table 6.7.1-1 below provides a summary of the IMAEs category and their respective PTs. This list 
is subject to change based on Health Authority feedback or change of MedDRA version. The final 
list used will be described in the CSR.
Table 6.7.1-1: Preferred Terms Included in Analysis of IMAEs to Support 
Warnings and Precautions
IMAE Category PTs included under IMAE Category
Pneumonitis Pneumonitis, Interstitial lung disease
Diarrhea/Colitis Diarrhea, Colitis, Enterocolitis
HepatitisHepatotoxicity, Hepatitis, Hepatitis acute, Autoimmune 
hepatitis, AST increased, ALT increased, Bilirubin increased, ALP increased
Adrenal insufficiency Adrenal insufficiency
Hypothyroidism/ThyroiditisHypothyroidism, Thyroiditis
Thyroiditis acute (collapsed with thyroiditis for 
frequency), Autoimmune thyroiditis (collapsed with thyroiditis for frequency)
Hyperthyroidism Hyperthyroidism
Hypophysitis Hypophysitis
Diabetes mellitus Diabetes mellitus, Diabetic ketoacidosis
Nephritis and renal dysfunctionNephritis, Nephritis allergic, Tubulointerstitial 
nephritis, Acute renal failure, Renal failure, Increased 
creatinine
Rash Rash, Rash maculopapular
7 DATA MONITORING COMMITTEE AND OTHER EXTERNAL 
COMMITTEES
When required, adjudicated events will be submitted to Health Authorities for review on a 
specified timeframe in accordance with the adjudication documentation.
7.1 Data Monitoring Committee (DMC)
Not applicable.
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 112
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
7.2 Blinded Independent Radiology Central Review 
At the time of investigator-assessed initial ra diographic progression per RECIST 1.1 in any given 
subject, the site must request the Independent Central Review from the third party radiology 
vendor for confirmation of progression for Part 1.
Tumor assessments for each subject s hould be submitted to the radiology vendor as they are 
performed on an ongoing basis. The blinded, independent radiologists w ill review all av ailable 
tumor assessments for that given subject and determine if RECIST 1.1 criteria for progression have 
been met. The independent assessment of wheth er or not the given subject met RECIST 1.1 criteria 
for progression w ill be provided to the site. Subjects whose disease progression is not confirmed 
centrally w ill be required to continue tumor assessmen ts (if clinically feasible) according to the 
protocol-specified schedule. Subsequent tumor assessments must be submitted to the third party 
radiology vendor for subsequent review and may be discontinued when the investigator and independent radiologists both assess the subject to have met RECIST 1.1 criteria for progression.
The Blinded Independent Central Review will also review tumor images in all treated subjects
(Part 1) to determine RECIST 1.1 response for the analyses of ORR or PFS. Details of the Blinded 
Independent Central Review responsibilities and procedures w ill be specified in the Blinded 
Independent Central Review charter.
At time of analysis of ORR or PFS, Independent  Radiology Review Committee will review tumor 
assessments in all tr eated subjects to determine RECIST 1.1 progression and response for the 
analyses of PFS and ORR. Details of the IRRC responsibilities and procedures w ill be sp ecified 
in the IRRC charter.8 STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS
8.1 Sample Size Determination
The reported objective response rate for the investigational treatment based on 77 treated subjects 
treated with nivolumab plus ipilimumab in phase I st udy CA 209012 was 43% in August 2015-
database lock. The reported objective response rate based on 23 PD-L1 positive subjects was 48%. 
However, given the small sample size in that cohort, the observed ORR in CA209568 might be lower.
Table 8.1-1 summarizes the 95% exact CI for some scen arios of observed ORRs and 95% 
confidence intervals. The part 1 sample size of at least 120 PD-L1 positiv e subjects, can provide 
95% confidence that the observed ORR can be estimated to within 9.5% of the estimates. With an 
observed ORR of 48%, the lower bound of the observed ORR is not  less than 39%. In addition, 
the 95% exact CI for the target ORRs for a sample size of 60 PD-L1 ≥50% population and 
100 PD-L1 negative subjects are summarized. The sample sizes of approximately 300 all tr eated 
subjects, 60 PD-L1 ≥50% subjects and 100 PD-L1 negative subjects, can provide 95% confidence 
that the observed ORR can be estimated to within 5.8%, 13.5% and 10.5% of the estimates. 
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 113
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
Table 8.1-1: Observed ORR with Exact 95% CI
ORR # Responders 95% Exact CI
N=300 All Treated
30% 90 [24.9, 35.5]
40% 120 [34.4, 45.8]
50% 150 [44.2, 55.8]
N=120 PD-L1 positive
40% 48 [31.2; 49.3]
44% 53 [35.1; 53.5]
48% 58 [39.1; 57.6]
57.5% 69 [48.1, 66.5]
N=60 PD-L1 ≥50%
60% 36 [46.5; 72.4]
65% 39 [51.6; 76.9]
70% 42 [56.8; 81.2]
N=100 PD-L1 negative
10% 10 [4.9, 17.6]
20% 20 [12.7, 29.2]
30% 30 [21.2, 40.0]
40% 40 [30.3, 50.3]
95% CI based on Clopper-Pearson method
Assuming 35% screening failure rate and 50% of all tested tissue samples are PD-L1 positive, it 
is estimated that approximately 440 subjects w ill be e nrolled in order to achieve approximately 
300 subjects treated which including at least 120 PD-L1 positive and 100 PD-L1 negative treated.
For Part 2 lead-in phase, there are 22 DLT evaluable sub jects within 28 subjects who initiate 
treatment assuming 20% of subjects do not complete the 9 week DLT evaluation period for reasons 
other than dose limiting toxicities. With a sample size of 22 DLT evaluable subjects with a safety 
event incident rate as 10%, there is above 90% probab ility to observe 1 or more cases of this safety 
event in this group. The goal is to identify safe regimens for future development, and safe is defined 
as 25% evaluated subjects or less exhibit DLTs (i e, 5 or less subjects with such events out of 
22 subjects). With 22 evaluable subjects, the false rej ection rate is 10% if the true toxicity rate is 
15%, the false acceptance rate is 16% if the true toxicity rate is 35%. The false rejection and false 
acceptance rates are deemed acceptable.
8.2 Populations for Analyses
Part 1:
•All enrolled subjects: all subjects who signed an informed consent form and were registered 
into the IWRS
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 114
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
•All treated subjects: all subjects who received at least one dose of any study medication.
•All treated PD-L1 positive subjects: all treated subjects with PD-L1 membranous staining in 
≥1% tumor cells.
•All treated PD-L1 negative subjects: all treated subjects with PD-L1 membranous staining in 
<1% tumor cells. 
•All Treated PD-L1 ≥50% subjects: all treated subjects wi th PD-L1 membranous staining in 
≥50% tumor cells). This is a subject set of subjects in all treated PD-L1 positive subjects.
Part 2:
•All enrolled subjects: all subjects who signed an  informed consent form and were registered 
into the IWRS
•All treated subjects: all subjects who received at least one dose of any study medication. This 
is the primary dataset for dosing and safety analysis.
Safety lead in subjects will be described separately on safety and efficacy (ie overall response rate and DLT incidence).
Additional specific populations will be described in the statist ical analysis plan
8.3 Endpoints
8.3.1 Primary Endpoint(s)
Part 1:
•ORR in all tr eated PD-L1 positive (≥ 1%) subjects by blinded independent central review per 
RECIST 1.1 in stage IV NSCLC subjects with nivolumab in combination with ipilimumab as 
first line therapy. 
•ORR in all treated PD-L1 negative (< 1%) subjects by blinded independent central review per RECIST 1.1 in stage IV NSCLC subjects treated with nivolumab in combination with ipilimumab as first line therapy. 
ORR is defined as the number of subjects with a best overall response (BOR) of confirmed CR or 
PR divided by the number of treated subjects. BOR is defined as the best response designation, as determined by the blinded independent central review, recorded between baseline and the date of objectively documented progression per RECIST 1.1 or the date of initiation of palliative local 
therapy or the date of initiation of subsequent anticancer therapy, whichever occurs first. For 
subjects without documented progression or palliative local therapy or subsequent anti-cancer therapy, all available response designations will contribute to the BOR determination. For subjects who continue treatment beyond progression, the BOR w ill be determined based on response 
designations recorded up to the time of the init ial RECIST 1.1-defined progression.
Complete or partial responses may be claimed only if the criteria for each are met at a subsequent 
time point of ≥4 weeks later.
Further characterization of the response will in clude time to objective re sponse (time from first 
dosing date to first CR or PR) and depth of response (maximum tumor shrinkage in target lesions).
The analysis of the primary endpoint ORR will be performed at least six month after last subject 
first treatment.
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 115
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
8.5 Interim Analyses
Not applicable
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 119
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v

Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
9 STUDY MANAGEMENT
9.1 Compliance
9.1.1 Compliance with the Protocol and Protocol Revisions
The study shall be conducted as described in th is approved protocol. All revisions to the protocol 
must be discussed with, and be prepared by, BMS. The inve stigator should not implement any 
deviation or change to the protocol without  prior review and documented approval/favorable 
opinion from the IRB/IEC of an amendment, except where necessary to eliminate an immediate 
hazard(s) to study subjects. 
If a deviation or change to a protocol is implemented to eliminate an immediate hazard(s) prior to 
obtaining IRB/IEC approval/favorable opinion, as soon as possible the deviation or change will be 
submitted to:
•IRB/IEC for review and approval/favorable opinion
•BMS
•Regulatory Authority(ies), if required by local regulations
Documentation of approval signed by the chairperson or designee of the IRB(s)/IEC(s) must be 
sent to BMS.
If an amendment substantially alters the study desi gn or increases the potential risk to the subject: 
(1) the consent form must be revised and su bmitted to the IRB(s)/IEC(s) for review and 
approval/favorable opinion; (2) the revised form must be used to obtain consent from subjects 
currently enrolled in the study if they are a ffected by the amendment; and (3) the new form must 
be used to obtain consent from new subjects prior to enrollment.
If the revision is done via an administrative letter, investigators must inform their IRB(s)/IEC(s).
9.1.2 Monitoring
BMS representatives will review data centrally to identify potential issues to determine a schedule 
of on-site visits for targeted review of study records. 
Representatives of BMS must be allowed to visit all study site locations periodically to assess the 
data quality and study integrity. On site they w ill review study records and directly compare them 
with source documents, discuss the conduct of the study with the investigator, and verify that the 
facilities remain  acceptable. 
In addition, the study may be evaluated by BMS internal auditors and government inspectors who must be allowed access to CRFs, source documents, other st udy f iles, and study facilities . BMS 
audit reports will be kept confidential.
The investigator must notify BMS promptly of any inspections scheduled by regu latory aut horities, 
and promptly forward copies of inspection reports to BMS. 
9.1.2.1 Source Documentation
The Investigator is responsible for ensuring that the source data are accurate, legible, 
contemporaneous, original and attributable, whether  the data are hand-written on paper or entered 
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 120
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
electronically. If source data are cr eated (first entered), modified, maintained, archived, retrieved, 
or transmitted electronically via computer ized systems (and/or any other kind of electronic 
devices) as part of regulated clinical trial activities, such systems must be compliant with all 
applicable laws and regulations governing use of electronic records and/ or electronic signatures. 
Such systems may include, but are not limited to, electronic medical/health records (EMRs/EHRs), 
adverse event tracking/reporting, protocol re quired assessments, and/or drug accountability 
records).
When paper records from such systems are used in place of electronic format to perform regulated 
activities, such paper records should be certified copies. A certified copy consists of a copy of original information that has been verified, as  indicated by a dated signature, as an exact copy 
having all of the same attributes and i nformation as the original. 
9.1.3 Investigational Site Training
Bristol-Myers Squibb will provide quality investig ational staff training prior to study initiation. 
Training topics will include but are not limited to: GCP, AE reporting, study details and procedure, 
electronic CRFs, study documentation, inform ed consent, and enrollment of WOCBP.
9.2 Records
9.2.1 Records Retention
The investigator must retain all study records and s ource documents for the maximum period 
required by applicable regulations and guidelin es, or institution procedures, or for the period 
specified by BMS, whichever is longer. The investigator must contact BMS prior to destroying 
any records associated with the study.
BMS will notify the investigator when the study records are no longer needed.If the investigator withdraws from the study (eg, relocation, retirement), the records sh all be 
transferred to a mutually agreed upon designee (eg, another investigator, IRB). Notice of such 
transfer will be given in writing to BMS.
9.2.2 Study Drug Records 
It is the responsibility of the investigator to en sure that a current disposition record of study drug 
(inventoried and dispensed) is maintained at the study site to include investigational product and 
the following non-investigational product(s) Records or logs must comply with applicable 
regulations and guidelines and should include:
•amount received and placed in storage area
•amount currently in storage area
•label identification number or b atch number 
•amount dispensed to and returned by each subject, including unique subject identifiers
•amount transferred to another area/site for dispensing or storage
•nonstudy disposition (eg, lost, wasted) 
•amount destroyed at study site, if applicable
•amount returned to BMS
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 121
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
•retain samples for bioavailability/bioequivalence, if applicable 
•dates and initials of person responsible for Investigational P roduct dispensing /accountability, 
as per the Delegation of Authority Form.
BMS will provide forms to facilitate inventory control if the investigational site does not have an 
established system that meets these requirements.
9.2.3 Case Report Forms
An investigator is required to prepare and maintain adequate and accurate case histories designed 
to record all observations and other d ata pertinent to the investig ation on each i ndividual treated 
or entered as a control in the investigation. Data that are derived from source documents and 
reported on the CRF must be consistent with the source documents or the discrepancies must be 
explained. Additional clinical information may be coll ected and analyzed in an effort to enhance 
understanding of product safety. CRFs may be requested for AEs and/or laboratory abnormalities that are reported or identified during the course of the study.
For sites using the BMS electronic data capture tool, electronic CRFs will be prepared for all data 
collection fields except for fields specific to SAEs  and pregnancy, which will be reported on the 
electronic SAE form and Pregnancy Surveillance form, respectively. If electronic SAE form is not 
available, a paper SAE form can be used. 
The confidentiality of records that could identify  subjects must be protected, respecting the privacy
and confidentiality rules in accordance with  the applicable regulatory requirement(s).
The investigator will maintain a signature sheet to  document signatures and initials of all persons 
authorized to make entries and/or corrections on CRFs. The completed CRF, SAE/pregnancy CRFs, must be promptly reviewed, signed, and dated by the 
investigator or qualified physician who is a subinve stigator and who is delegated this task on the 
Delegation of Authority Form. For electronic CRFs, review and approval/signature is completed electronically through the BMS elect ronic data capture tool. The investigator must r etain a c opy 
of the CRFs including records of the changes and corrections.
Each individual electronically signing electronic CRFs must meet BMS training requirements and 
must only access the BMS electronic data capture tool using the unique user account provided by 
BMS. User accounts are not to be shared or reassigned to other individuals.
9.3 Clinical Study Report and Publications
A Signatory Investigator must be selected to sign the clinical study report. 
For this protocol, the Signatory Investigator will be selected as appropriate based on the following 
criteria:
•Subject recruitment (eg, among the top quartile of enrollers)
•Involvement in trial design
•Other criteria (as deter mined by th e study team)
The data collected during this study are confidential and proprietary to BMS. Any publications or 
abstracts arising from th is study must adhere to the publication requir ements set forth in the clinical 
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 122
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
trial agreement (CTA) governing [Study site or Investigator] participation in the study. These 
requirements include, but are not limited to, s ubmitting proposed publications to BMS at the 
earliest practicable time prior to submission or presentation and otherwise within the time period 
set forth in the CTA.
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 123
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
10 GLOSSARY OF TERMS
Term Definition
Complete AbstinenceComplete Abstinence is defined as complete avoidance of heterosexual 
intercourse and is an acceptable form of contraception for all study drugs. 
This also means that abstinence is the preferred and usual lifestyle of the 
patient. This does not mean periodic abstinence (eg, calendar, ovulation, 
symptothermal, profession of abstinence for entry into a clinical trial, 
post-ovulation methods) and withdrawal, which are not acceptable 
methods of contraception. Women must continue to have pregnancy tests. 
Acceptable alternate methods of highly or less effective contraception’s 
must be discussed in the event that the subject chooses to forego complete 
abstinence.
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 124
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
11 LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
Term Definition
AE adverse event
ACLS advanced cardiac life support
AI accumulation index
AI_AUC AUC Accumulation Index; ratio of AUC(TAU) at steady state to 
AUC(TAU) after the first dose
AI_Cmax Cmax Accumulation Index; ratio of Cmax at steady state to Cmax after the first dose
AI_Ctau Ctau Accumulation Index; ratio of Ctau at steady state to Ctau after the 
first dose
ALT alanine aminotransferase
ANC absolute neutrophil count
ANOVA analysis of variance
aPTT activated partial thromboplastin time
AST aspartate aminotransferase
AT aminotransaminases
AUC area under the concentration-time curve
AUC(INF) area under the concentration-time curve from time zero extrapolated to 
infinite time
AUC(0-T) area under the concentration-time curve from time zero to the time of the 
last quantifiable concentration
AUC(TAU) area under the concentration-time curve in one dosing interval
A-V atrioventricular
β-HCG beta-human chorionic gonadotrophin
BA/BE bioavailability/bioequivalence
%BE percent biliary excretion
BID, bid bis in die, twice daily
BLQ below limit of quantification 
BMI body mass index
BMS Bristol-Myers Squibb
BP blood pressure
BRt Total amount recovered in bile
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 125
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
Term Definition
%BRt Total percent of administered dose recovered in bile
BUN blood urea nitrogen
C Celsius
C12 concentration at 12 hours
C24 concentration at 24 hours
Ca++ calcium
Cavg average concentration
CBC complete blood count
Cexpected-tau expected concentration in a dosing interval
CFR Code of Federal Regulations 
CI confidence interval
C1- chloride
CLcr creatinine clearance
CLD Dialysate clearance of drug from plasma/serum
CLNR nonrenal clearance
CLR renal clearance
CLT total body clearance
CLT/F (or CLT) apparent total body clearance
CLT/F/fu or 
CLT/fuApparent clearance of free drug or clearance of free if (if IV)
cm centimeter
Cmax, CMAX maximum observed concentration
Cmin, CMIN trough observed concentration
CNS Central nervous system
CRC Clinical Research Center
CRF Case Report Form, paper or electronic
Ct Expected concentration at a certain time, usually at the end of an 
expected future dosing interval (eg, concentration at 24 hours, 
concentration at 12 hours, etc.)
Ctau Concentration in a dosing interval (eg, concentration at 24 hours, concentration at 12 hours, etc.)
Ctrough Trough observed plasma concentration
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 126
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
Term Definition
CV coefficient of variation
CYP cytochrome p-450
D/C discontinue
dL deciliter
DRt Total amount recovered in dialysate
%DRt Total percent of administered dose recovered in dialysate
DSM IV Diagnostic and Statist ical Manual of Mental Dis orders (4th Edition)
EA extent of absorption
ECG electrocardiogram
eCRF Electronic Case Report Form
EDC Electronic Data Capture
EEG electroencephalogram
eg exempli gratia (for example)
ESR Expedited Safety Report
F bioavailability
Fb fraction of bound drug
FDA Food and Drug Administration
FI fluctuation Index ([Cmax-Ctau)/Cavg])
FRt total amount recovered in feces
%FRt total percent of administered dose recovered in feces
FSH follicle stimulating hormone
%FE percent fecal excretion
fu fraction of unbound drug
gg ram
GC gas chromatography
GCP Good Clinical Practice
G criteria adjusted R2 value of terminal elimination phase
GGT gamma-glutamy l transferase
GFR glomerular filtration rate
h hour
HBsAg hepatitis B surface antigen
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 127
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
Term Definition
HBV hepatitis B virus
HCV hepatitis C virus
HCO3- bicarbonate
HIV Human Immunodeficiency Virus
HR heart rate
HRT hormone replacement therapy
ICD International Classification of Diseases
ICH International Conference on Harmonisation 
ie id est (that is)
IEC Independent Ethics Committee
IMP investigational medicinal products
IND Investigational New Drug Exemption
IRB Institutional Review Board
IU International Unit
IV intravenous
K slope of the terminal phase of the log concentration-time curve
K3EDTA potassium ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
K+ potassium
kg kilogram
λz terminal disposition rate constant
L liter
LAM Lactation amenorrhea method
LC liquid chromatography
LDH lactate dehydrogenase
ln natural logarithm
Lz_Start The time point starting the log-linear elimination phase defining the 
terminal half life
Lz_End The time point ending the log-linear  elimination phase defining the
terminal half life
Lz_N Number of time points in the lo g-linear elimination phase defining the 
terminal half life
mg milligram
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 128
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
Term Definition
Mg++ magnesium
MIC minimum inhibitory concentration
min minute
mL milliliter
mmHg millimeters of mercury
MR_AUC(0-T) Ratio of metabolite AUC(0-T) to parent AUC(0-T), corrected for 
molecular weight
MR_AUC(INF) Ratio of metabolite AUC(INF) to parent AUC(INF), corrected for 
molecular weight
MR_AUC(TAU) Ratio of metabolite AUC(TAU) to parent AUC(TAU), corrected for 
molecular weight
MR_Cmax Ratio of metabolite Cmax to parent Cmax, corrected for molecular weight
MR_Ctau Ratio of metabolite Ctau to parent Ctau, corrected for molecular weight
MRT mean residence time
MS mass spectrometry
MTD maximum tolerated dose
μg microgram
N number of subjects or observations
Na+ sodium
N/A not applicable
ng nanogram
NIMP non-investigational medicinal products 
NSAID nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug
pAUCe Extrapolated partial AUC from last quantifiable concentration to infinity
Pb percent of bound drug
PD pharmacodynamics
PK pharmacokinetics
PO per os (by mouth route of administration)
PT prothrombin time
PTT partial thromboplastin time
Pu percent of unbound drug
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 129
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
Term Definition
QC quality control
QD, qd quaque die, once daily
R2 coefficient of determination
RBC red blood cell
SAE serious adverse event
SD standard deviation
SOP Standard Operating Procedures
sp. species
Subj subject
t temperature
T time
TAO Trial Access Online, the BMS implementation of an EDC capability
T-HALF Half life
T-HALFeff_AUC Effective elimination half life that explains the degree of AUC 
accumulation observed
T-HALFeff_Cmax Effective elimination half life th at explains the degree of Cmax 
accumulation observed)
TID, tid ter in die, three times a day
Tmax, TMAX time of maximum observed concentration
TR_AUC(0-T) AUC(0-T) treatment ratio
TR_AUC(INF) AUC(INF) treatment ratio
TR_Cmax Cmax treatment ratio
UR urinary recovery
%UR percent urinary recovery
URt total amount recovered in urine
%URt total percent of administered dose recovered in urine
UV ultraviolet
Vss/F (or Vss) apparent volume of distribution at steady state
Vz Volume of distribution of terminal phase (if IV and if multi-exponential 
decline)
W washout
WBC white blood cell
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 130
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
Term Definition
WHO World Health Organization
WOCBP women of childbearing potential
x g times gravity
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 131
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
 
 
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 132
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v

Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
APPENDIX 1 ECOG PERFORMANCE STATUS 
ECOG PERFORMANCE STATUSa
0 Fully active, able to carry on all pre-d isease performance without restriction
1Restricted in physically strenuous activity but ambulatory and able to carry out work of a 
light or sedentary nature, eg, light house work, office work
2Ambulatory and capable of all selfcare but unable to carry out any work activities. Up and 
about more than 50% of waking hours
3 Capable of only limited selfcare, confined to bed or chair more than 50% of waking hours
4 Completely disabled. Cannot carry on any selfcare. Totally confined to bed or chair
5 Dead
 
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 137
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v

Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
APPENDIX 3 RECIST 1.1 GUIDELINES
1 EVALUATION OF LESIONS
At baseline, tumor lesions/lymph nodes will be categorized measurable or non-measurable as 
follows:
1.1 Measurable
Tumor lesions: Must be accurately measured in at least one dimension (longest diameter in the 
plane of measurement is to be recorded) with a minimum size of:
1. 10 mm by CT scan (CT scan slice thickness no greater than 5 mm)
2. 10 mm caliper measurement by clinical exam (lesions which cannot be accurately measured 
with calipers should be recorded as non-measurable)
3. 20 mm by chest x-ray
Malignant lymph nodes: To be considered pathologically enlarged and measurable, a lymph 
node must be ≥15 mm in short axis when assessed by CT scan (CT scan slice thickness 
recommended to be no greater than 5 mm).
Lymph nodes merit special mention since they are normal anatom ical structures which may be 
visible by imaging even if not involved by tumor. Pathological nodes which are defined as 
measurable and may be identified as target lesions must meet the criterion of a short axis of 
≥15 mm by CT scan. Only the short axis of thes e nodes will contribute to the baseline sum. The 
short axis of the node is the diameter normally used by radiologists to judge if a node is involved 
by solid tumor. Nodal size is normally reported as two dimensions in the plane in which the 
image is obtained (for CT scan this is almost always the axial plane; for MRI the plane of 
acquisition may be axial, saggital or coronal). The smaller of these measures is the short axis. 
For example, an abdominal node which is reported as being 20 mm x 30 mm has a short axis of 20 mm and qualifies as a malignant, measurable node. In this example, 20 mm should be 
recorded as the node measurement. All other pathological nodes (those with short axis ≥10 mm 
but < 15 mm) should be considered non-target lesi ons. Nodes that have a short axis < 10 mm are 
considered non-pathological and should not be recorded or followed.
1.2 Non-Measurable
All other lesions are considered non-measur able, including small les ions (longest diameter 
< 10mm or pathological lymph nodes with ≥10 to < 15 mm short axis) as well as truly 
non-measurable lesions. Lesions considered truly non-measurable in clude: leptomeningeal 
disease, ascites, pleural or pericardial effusion, inflammatory breast disease, lymphangitic 
involvement of skin or lung, abdominal masses/abdominal organomegaly identified by physical exam that is not measurable by reproducible imaging techniques.
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 146
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
2 BASELINE DOCUMENTATION OF ‘TARGET’ AND ‘NON-TARGET’ 
LESIONS
When more than one measurable lesion is present at baseline all lesions up to a maximum of five 
lesions total (and a maximum of two lesions per organ) representative of all involved organs 
should be identified as target lesions and w ill be recorded and measured at baseline (this means 
in instances where patients have only one or two organ sites involved a maximum of two and four lesions respectively will be recorded).
Target lesions should be selected on the basis of their size (lesions  with the longest diameter), be 
representative of all involved organs, but in addition should be those that lend themselves to 
reproducible repeated measurements. It may be the case that, on occasion, the largest lesion does 
not lend itself to reproducible measurement in which circumstance the next largest lesion which 
can be measured reproducibly should be selected.
A sum of the diameters (longest for non-nodal lesions, short axis for nodal lesions) for all target 
lesions will be calculated and reported as the ba seline sum diameters. If lymph nodes are to be 
included in the sum, then as noted above, only the short axis is added into the sum. The baseline 
sum diameters will be used as reference to f urther characterize any objective tumor regression in 
the measurable dimension of the disease.
All other lesions (or sites of disease) including pathologi cal lymph nodes s hould be identified as 
non-target lesions and should also be recorded at baseline. Measurements are not required and 
these lesions should be followed as ‘present’, ‘absent’, or in rare cases ‘unequivocal progression’ 
(more details to follow). In additi on, it is possible to record multiple nontarget lesions involving 
the same organ as a single item on the case record form (eg, ‘multiple enlarged pelvic lymph nodes’ or ‘multiple liver metastases’).
3 RESPONSE CRITERIA
3.1 Evaluation of Target Lesions
Complete Response (CR): Disappearance of all target lesions. Any pathological lymph nodes 
(whether target or non-target) must have reduction in short axis to < 10 mm.
Partial Response (PR): At least a 30% decrease in the sum of diameters of target lesions, taking 
as reference the baseline sum diameters.
Progressive Disease (PD): At least a 20% increase in the sum of diameters of target lesions, 
taking as reference the smallest sum on study  (this includes the baseline sum if that 
is the smallest on study). In addition to the relative increase of 20%, the sum must 
also demonstrate an absolute increase of at least 5 mm. (Note: the appearance of one or more new lesions is also considered progression).
Stable Disease (SD): Neither sufficient shrinkage to qualify for PR nor sufficient increase to 
qualify for PD, taking as reference the smallest sum diameters while on study.
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 147
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
3.1.1 Special Notes on the Assessment of Target Lesions
3.1.1.1 Lymph nodes
Lymph nodes identified as target lesions s hould always have the actual short axis measurement 
recorded (measured in the same anatomical plane as the baseline examination), even if the nodes 
regress to below 10 mm on study. This means th at when lymph nodes are included as target 
lesions, the ‘sum’ of lesions may not be zero even if complete response criteria are met, since a normal lymph node is defined as having a short axis of < 10 mm. Case report forms or other data 
collection methods may therefore be designed to have target nodal lesions recorded in a separate 
section where, in order to qu alify for CR, each node mu st achieve a short axis < 10 mm. For PR, 
SD and PD, the actual short axis measurement of the nodes is to be included in the sum of target 
lesions.
3.1.1.2 Target lesions that become ‘too small to measure’
While on study, all lesions (nodal and non- nodal) recorded at baseline s hould have their actual 
measurements recorded at each subsequent evaluation, even when very small (eg, 2 mm). 
However, sometimes lesions or lymph nodes which  are recorded as target lesions at baseline 
become so faint on CT scan that the radiologist may not feel com fortable assigning an exact 
measure and may report them as being ‘too small to  measure’. When this occurs it is important 
that a value be recorded on the case report form. If it is the opinion of the radiologist that the 
lesion has likely disappeared, the measurement should be recorded as 0 mm. If the lesion is believed to be present and is faintly seen but too small to measure, a default value of 5 mm 
should be assigned (Note: It is less likely that this rule will be used for lymph nodes since they 
usually have a definable size when normal and are frequent ly surrounded by fat such as in the 
retroperitoneum; however, if a lymph node is believed to be present and is faintly seen but too small to measure, a default value of 5 mm should be assigned in this circumstance as well). This 
default value is derived from the 5 mm CT slice thickness (but should not be changed with varying CT slice thickness). The measurement of these lesions is potentially non-reproducible, therefore providing this default value will prevent false respons es or progressi ons based upon 
measurement error. To reiterate, however, if the radi ologist is able to provide an actual measure, 
that should be recorded, even if it is below 5 mm.
3.1.1.3 Lesions that split or coalesce on treatment
When non-nodal lesions ‘fragment’, the longest diameters of the fragmented  portions should be 
added together to calculate the target lesion sum. Similarly, as lesions coalesce, a plane between 
them may be maintained that would aid in obtaining maximal diameter measurements of each 
individual lesion. If the lesions have truly coalesced such that they are no longer separable, the vector of the longest diameter in this instance should be the max imal longest di ameter for the 
‘coalesced lesion’.
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 148
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
3.2 Evaluation of Non-Target Lesions
This section provides the definitions of the criteria used to determine the tumor response for the 
group of non-target lesio ns. While some non-target lesions may actually be measurable, they 
need not be meas ured and instead should be assesse d only qualitatively at the time points 
specified in the protocol.
Complete Response (CR): Disappearance of all non-target lesions and normalization of tumor 
marker level. All lymph nodes must be non-pathological in size (< 10mm short 
axis). 
Non-CR/Non-PD: Persistence of one or more non-target lesion(s) and/or maintenance of tumor 
marker level above the normal limits.
Progressive Disease (PD): Unequivocal progression (s ee comments below) of existing non-
target lesions. (Note: the appearance of one or more new lesions is also considered progression).
3.2.1 Special Notes on Assessment of Progression of Non-Target Disease
The concept of progression of non-target disease re quires additional explanation as follows:
3.2.1.1 When the patient also has measurable diseaseIn this setti ng, to achieve ‘unequivocal progressi on’ on the basis of the non-target disease, there 
must be an overall level of substantial worsening in non-target disease such that, even in 
presence of SD or PR in target disease, the overall tumor burden has increased sufficiently to merit discontinuation of therapy (see examples in Appendix 2  and further details below). A 
modest ‘increase’ in the size of one or more non-target lesions is usu ally not sufficient to qualify 
for unequivocal progression status. The designation of overall progre ssion solely on the basis of 
change in non-target disease in the face of SD or PR of target disease will therefore be extremely rare.
3.2.1.2 When the patient has only non-measurable disease
This circumstance arises in some trials when it is not a criterion of study entry to have 
measurable disease. The same general concepts apply here as noted above, however, in this 
instance there is no measurable disease assessment to factor into the interpretation of an increase 
in non-measurable disease burden. Because worsen ing in non-target disease cannot be easily 
quantified (by definition: if all lesions are truly non-measurable) a useful test that can be applied when assessing patients for une quivocal progression is to consider  if the increase in overall 
disease burden based on the change in non-measurable disease is comparable in magnitude to the increase that would be required to declare PD for measurable disease: ie, an increase in tumor burden representing an additional 73% increase in ‘volume’ (which is equivalent to a 20% increase diameter in a measurable lesion). Examples include an increase in a pleural effusion 
from ‘trace’ to ‘large’, an increase in lymphangi tic disease from localized to widespread, or may 
be described in protocols as ‘sufficient to require a change in therapy’. If ‘unequivocal progression’ is seen, the patient s hould be considered to have had overall PD at that point. While 
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 149
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
it would be ideal to have objective criteria to a pply to non-measurable disease, the very nature of 
that disease makes it impossible to do so; therefore the increase must be substantial.
3.2.2 New Lesions
The appearance of new malignant lesions denotes disease progression; therefore, some 
comments on d etection of new lesions  are important. There are no specific criteria for the 
identification of new radiographic lesions; however, the finding of a new lesion s hould be 
unequivocal: ie, not attributable to differences in scanning technique, change in imaging modality or findings thought to represent something other than tumor (for example, some ‘new’ bone lesions may be simply healing or flare of pre-existing lesions). This is particularly important when the patient’s baseline lesions show partial or complete response. For example, 
necrosis of a liver lesion may be reported on a CT scan report as a ‘new’ cystic lesion, which it is 
not.
A lesion identified on a follow-up study in an anatomical lo cation that was not scanned at 
baseline is considered a new lesion and will i ndicate disease progression. An example of this is 
the patient who has visceral disease at baseline and while on study has a CT or MRI brain 
ordered which reveals metastases. The patient’s brain metastases are considered to be evidence of PD even if he/she did not have brain imaging at baseline.
If a new lesion is equivocal, for example because of its small size, continued therapy and 
follow-up evaluation will clarify if it represents t ruly new disease. If repeat scans confirm there 
is definitely a new lesion, then  progression should be declared using the date of the init ial scan. 
While FDG-PET response assessments need additi onal study, it is sometimes reasonable to 
incorporate the use of FDG-PET scanning to complement CT scanning in assessment of progression (particularly possible ‘new’ disease). New lesions on the basis of FDG-PET imaging 
can be identified according to the following al gorithm:
1. Negative FDG-PET at bas eline, with a positive FDG-PET at follow-up is a sign of PD based 
on a new lesion.
2. No FDG-PET at baseline and a positive FDG-PET at follow-up: If the positive FDG-PET at 
follow-up corresponds to a new site of disease confirmed by CT, this is PD. If the positive 
FDG-PET at follow-up is not confirmed as a new site of disease on CT, additional follow-up 
CT scans are needed to determine if there is truly progression occurring at that site (if so, the 
date of PD will be the date of the initial abnormal FDG-PET scan). If the positive FDG-PET at follow-up corresponds to a pre-existing site of disease on CT that is not progressing on the basis of the anatomic images, this is not PD.
3.3 Response Assessment
3.3.1 Evaluation of Best Overall Response
The best overall response is the best response r ecorded from the start of the study treatment until 
the end of treatment taking into account any requirement for confirmation. The patient’s best 
overall response assignment will depend on the findings of both target and non-target disease and 
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 150
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
will also take into consideration the appearance of new lesions. Furthermore, depending on the  
nature of the study and the protocol requirements , it may also require confirmatory measurement.
3.3.2 Time Point Response
It is assumed that at each protocol specified time point, a response assessment occurs. Table 
3.3.2-1 provides a summary of the overall response status calculation at each time point for  
patients who have measurable disease at baseline. When patients have non-measurable (therefore  
non-target) disease only, Table 3.3.2-2 is to be used. 
Table 3.3.2-1: Time Point Response: Patients With Target (+/- Non-Target) 
Disease
Target Lesions Non-Target Lesions New Lesions Overall Response
CR CR No CR
CR Non-CR/non-PD No PR
CR Not evaluated No PR
PRNon-PD or not all 
evaluatedNo PR
SDNon-PD or not all 
evaluatedNo SD
Not all evaluated Non-PD No NE
PD Any Yes or No PD
Any PD Yes or No PD
Any Any Yes PD
CR = complete response, PR = partial response, SD = stable disease, PD = progressive disease and NE = inevaluable
Table 3.3.2-2: Time Point Response: Patients with Non-target Disease Only
Non-Target Lesions New Lesions Overall Response
CR No CR
Non-CR/non-PD No Non-CR/non-PDa
Not all evaluated No NE
Unequivocal PD Yes or No PD
Any Yes PD
CR = complete response, PD = progressive disease and NE = inevaluable
aNon-CR/non-PD is preferred over SD for non-target disease since SD is increasingly used as endpoint for  
assessment of efficacy in some trials so to assign this category when no lesions can be measured is not advised.
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 151
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
3.3.3 Best Overall Response 
Best response determination of complete or partial response requires confirmation: Complete or  
partial responses may be claimed only if the criteria for each are met at a subsequent time point  
of ≥4 weeks later. In this circumstance, the best ove rall response can be interpreted as in Table 
3.3.3-1.
Special note on response assessment: When nodal disease is included in the sum of target  
lesions and the nodes decrease to ‘normal’ size (< 10 mm), they may still have a measurement  
reported on scans. This measurement should be recorded even though the nodes are normal in  
order not to overstate progression s hould it be based on increase in s ize of the nodes. As noted 
earlier, this means that patients with CR may not have a total sum of ‘zero’ on the case report  
form (CRF).
Table 3.3.3-1: Best Overall Response (Confirmation of CR&PR Required)
Overall Response 
First Time PointOverall Response 
Subsequent Time PointBEST Overall Response
CR CR CR
CR PR SD, PD or PRa
CR SDSD provided minimum criteria for SD durationbmet, 
otherwise, PD
CR PDSD provided minimum criteria for SD durationbmet, 
otherwise, PD
CR NESD provided minimum criteria for SD durationbmet, 
otherwise, NE
PR CR PR
PR PR PR
PR SD SD
PR PDSD provided minimum criteria for SD durationbmet, 
otherwise, PD
PR NESD provided minimum criteria for SD durationbmet, 
otherwise, NE
NE NE NE
CR = complete response, PR = partial response, SD = stable disease, PD = progressive disease, and 
NE = unevaluable
aIf a CR is truly met at first time point, then any disease seen  at a subsequent time point, even disease meeting PR  
criteria relative to baseline, makes the disease PD at that point (since disease must have reappear ed af ter CR). 
Best response would depend on whether minimum dur ation for SD was met. However, sometimes ‘CR’ may be 
claimed when subsequent scans suggest small lesions were likely still present and in fact the patient had PR, not  
CR at the first time point. Under these circumstances, the original CR should be changed to PR and the best 
response is PR.
bMinimum duration for SD is 6 weeks.
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 152
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v
Clinical Protocol CA209568
BMS-936558 nivolumab
3.3.4 Confirmation Scans
Verification of Response: To be assigned a status of CR or PR, changes in tumor measurements 
must be confirmed by consecutive repeat assessments that should be performed no less than 
28 days after the criteria for response are first met. For this study, the next scheduled tumor assessment can meet this requirement.
Verification of Progression: Progression of disease should be verified in cases where progression 
is equivocal. If repeat scans confirm PD, then  progression should be declared using the date of 
the initial scan. If repeat scans do not confirm PD, then the subject is considered to not have 
progressive disease.
Revised Protocol No: 06
Date: 11-Jan-2018 153
7.0 Approved 930096650 7.0v