Official Title:  The Effect of Brimonidine on Intraocular Pressure When Dilating Routine 
Patients, Pressure Control and Pupil Effects  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  IRB-Approved Date:  7/1/2019   
Study Title: The Effect of Brimonidine on Intraocular Pressure When Dilating Routine 
Patients, Pressure Control and Pupil Effects.  
 
Principle Investigator, Co -investigator(s): Keith Walter MD , Chaunhi Van MD, Ken 
Weinlander MD , Eva Kiehl, Richard He sse, Eloise Joubert 
 
Sponsor or funding source : Wake Innovations  
 
Background, Rationale and Context 
 
Many biological parameters are dynamic and vary within a 24 -hour cycle. Intraocular 
pressure (IOP) is one of these parameters. In addition to nat ural fluctuations, IOP can 
vary in relation to external factors such as exercise, medications, and eye movements [1]. 
Although patients experience daily IOP fluctuates, p rolonged elevated IOP can be 
harmful. Sustained elevated IOP levels have been linked to optic nerve damage and diseases such as glaucoma. If IOP is not controlled, damage to the optic nerve can cause multiple dise ase states culminating in blindness. In patients with no disease, normal IOP 
ranges from 8-21 mm Hg, while glaucoma p atients’ have range 20 – 50+ mm Hg. Due to 
the damage that elevated IOP can have, i t is highly important for physicians to monitor 
IOP. 
 Mydriatic eye drops  that are routinely used to dilate pupils in patients presenting to 
ophthalmology clinics have also been shown to increase IOP [2] . Increased IOP has been 
seen with both parasympatholytic and sympathomimetic mydriatics [3 -5].  In practice, a 
combination of tropicamide, an anticholinergic drug, and phenylephrine , an alpha -1-
adrenergic drug, is used to achieve the pupil dilation needed for routine eye exams or perioperative situations [6, 7]. The combination of tropicamide 1% and phenylephrine 2.5% has been safe, effective and reliable in clinical use to adequately dilate the pupi l for 
clinical examination and procedures [12]. However, t hese drugs have shown to increase 
IOP, and drugs such brimonidine, a selective alpha -2 agonist, have shown to reduce IOP 
[8, 9] . Brimonidine can lower IOP through a few methods. Chronic use of brimonidine 
acts through stimulating aqueous humor outflow, while using brimonidine in an acute setting will reduce IOP by reducing the amount of aqueous humor produce [10, 11].  
 We propose to observe whet her pre -treating patients with Brimonidine 0.2% 
(brimonidine) prior to pupil dilation and/or post- treating will be effective in  controlling 
the fluctuations in IOP seen when using mydriatics. In addition to observing IOP, w e will 
also observe the effects o f how differing the sequence of administration of Tropicamide 
1%/Phenylephrine 2.5%  combined (standard dilation  drops) and brimonidine 
impacts pupil size and reactivity.  
 
Objectives  
 Primary Objective :  To observe how differing the sequence of administration  of  
Tropicamide 1%/Phenylephrine 2.5%  and Brimonidine 0.2% (b rimonidine  0.2%) 
influences intraocular pressure.  
• Hypothesis 1 : The administration  of Brimonidine 0.2% prior to 
Tropicamide 1%/Phenylephrine 2.5%  will result in lower intraocular 
pressure rise than when administering Brimonidine 0.2% after initiating 
dilation with Tropicamide 1%/Phenylephrine 2.5% . 
• Hypothesis 2 : The administration of both Brimonidine 0.2% and 
Tropicamide 1%/Phenylephrine 2.5%  will result in lower intraocular 
pressure rise than when just administering Tropicamide 1%/Phenylephrine 2.5%  alone.  
 Secondary Objective:  To observe effect of differing the sequence of administration of 
Tropicamide 1%/Phenylephrine 2.5%  and Brimonidine 0.2% on pupil size and pupil 
reactivity  
• Hypot hesis 1 : The administration of Brimonidine 0.2% prior to 
Tropicamide 1%/Phenylephrine 2.5%  will blunt or block, or delay pupil 
dilation compared to  just using Tropicamide 1%/Phenylephrine 2.5%  
alone  
• Hypothesis 2: The administration Tropicamide 1%/Phenylephrine 2.5%  
prior to Brimonidine 0.2% will lead to large pupil dilation with quicker 
reversal in pupil size than just Tropicamide 1%/Phenylephrine 2.5% . 
 
Methods and Measures  
 
• Design  
 
An interventional  study looking at what order  of eye drops is more effective i n reducing 
intraocular pressure with pupil dilation. We will recruit 10 volunteers in each of the two groups  
(20 subjects total). In both groups, the participant’s right eye will serve as a control wi th only 
Tropicamide 1%/Phenylephrine 2.5%  given. In the  first grou p, the  left eye will receive 
Brimonidine 0.2%  prior to Tropicamide 1%/Phenylephrine 2.5% . The second group will 
receive Tropicamide 1%/Phenylephrine 2.5%  prior to Brimonidine 0.2 %, in their left eye . We 
will observe  and record  the IOP lowering benefits of the addition of brimonidine over the 
Tropicamide 1%/Phenylephrine 2.5%  alone and determine if pre -treating is any bette r than 
post-treating. In addition, we will monitor pupil response,  as we know that brimonidine  may have 
some effect on the pupil dilation.  
 
We will collect the following demographic data :  age, gender, and iris color. In addition, non-
identifying color photos of the pupils may be recorded on a few representative patients in each group. Photos will be taken in a manner to protect patient confidentiality. Photos will be framed 
from the participants lower eyebrow, to the sides of their faces, and to the uppers nose. Photos 
will be stored on a password protected and encrypted computer  or cloud-type website.  
 
• Setting  
 
The study will be performed at Wake Forest Baptist Hospital  and/or Davie Medical Center . Each 
subject will be consented and have their measurements taken in a private exam room.  They will 
be returned to a waiting area in between measurements.  All concerns with measurements will be handled privately in the respective examination to ensure subject privacy.  
 
Subject selection criteria  
 
Subjects will be recruited through recruitment flyers and internet methods  (email)  (appendix 2) 
and selected to participate based on the following inclusion and exclusion criteria.  
 
• Inclusion criteria : Ages 18 -50. Healthy with no major medical conditions . Contact lens 
wear is ok but must be not worn on the day of the study.  
• Females of childbearing potential must agree to use a reliable method of birth control 
while participating in this study. Reliable methods of birth control are: abstinence, oral contraceptives, intrauterine device (IUD), DepoProvera, tubal ligation or vasectomy of the partner (with confirmed negative sperm counts) in monogamous relationship (same partner). An acceptable, although less reliable, method involves the careful use of 
condoms and spermicidal foam or gel and/or cervical cap or sponge. A pregnancy test is 
required at least 10 days from the last normal menstrual period, if the patient is a sexually active female of childbearing potential.  
 
• Exclusion criteria : Diabetic, history of glaucoma, history of iris trauma, history of eye 
surgery  except LASIK o r PRK, pregnancy, a nisocoria  (unequal pupils) .  
 
Sample size : 20 patients total.  
 
Study Procedure  
 
• Informed Consent Process:  After the patient has been evaluated and meets all of the 
inclusion and exclusion criteria, Dr. Walter, or another investigator will introduce the 
study. This will occur 10 min to 24 hours before pupil dilation. The study will be discussed in detail and consent (appendix 1) will only be obtained once the patient has 
been given time to fully understand the study. If the  patient agrees, patients will be 
dilated and intraocular pressure and pupil size will be measured at 6 time points: Baseline 
(pre drop), 15 min,
 after last Tropicamide 1%/Phenylephrine 2.5%  drop given,  
30 min, 1 hour, 2 hours, 4 hours  
• Study Procedure  (App roximately 4 hours) : Participants will be come to the 
ophthalmology clinic where the study will be completed. Participants  will be  randomized 
and separated into two groups. In both groups, the participant’s  right eye will serve as a 
control with only Tropicamide 1%/Phenylephrine 2.5%  given. In the first group, the 
left eye will receive Brimonidine 0.2%  prior to Tropicamide 1%/Phenylephrine 
2.5% . The second group will receive Tropicamide 1%/Phenylephrine 2.5%  prior to 
Brimonidine 0.2 .  
o IOP will be measured using the iCare tonometer device  
o Pupil size and reactivity will be measured  under bright lights  using a pupil gauge , 
and slit -lamp micrometer .  
• To prevent the dilution of the eye drops through tearing, 0.5% proparacaine 
hydrochloride (Alcaine®, Alcon Co., USA) will be delivered to each eye 5 minutes 
before administering the dilating drugs. All eye drops will be placed within the 
conjunctival sac of the lower eyelid, and patients will be directed  to close their eyes 
approximately 1 minute after drop delivery to prevent loss of medication through the 
punctum in the conjunctival sac.  
  
 
Study Schematic: 1 X 4 hour participant visit  
 
Group 1  Group 2  
Right Eye  Left Eye  Right Eye  Left Eye  
 Sham drop (none)  
 Wait 5 minutes  
 1 drop Tropicamide 
1%/Phenylephrine 
2.5% 
 1 minute 
 2nd drop  
Tropicamide 
1%/Phenylephrine 
2.5%  2 drops Brimonidine 
0.2%  
 5 minutes  
 1 drop Tropicamide 1%/Phenylephrine 
2.5% 
 1 minute  
 2nd drop 
Tropicamide 
1%/Phenylephrine 
2.5%   1 drop 
Tropicamide 1% 
/Phenylephrine  
2.5%  
 Wait 1 minute  
 2nd drop 
Tropicamide 1%/Phenylephrine 
2.5% 
 15 secs  later  
 Sham drop (none)   1 drop Tropicamide 
1% /Phenylephrine 
2.5% 
 Wait 1 minute  
 2nd drop Tropicamide 
1%/Phenylephrine 2.5% 
 15 secs  later 
 2 drops  Brimonidine 
0.2%  
 15 min. collect Data  
set  15 min. collect Data  
set 15 min. collect Data  set  15 min. collect Data  
set  
 
Outcome Measures  
 
• Intraocular pressure at 6 time points: Baseline (pre- drops ), 15 min after last drop 
given, then 30 min, 1 hour, 2 hours, and 4 hours  
• Pupil size at 6 time points: Baseline (pre drop), 15 min, 30 min, 1 hour, 2 hours, 4 
hours . We will measure the pupils under bright light conditions (photopic) and 
dim light conditions (scotopic).  
• Pupil’s reaction to light will be measure at 6 time points: Baseline (pre drop), 15 
min, 30 min, 1 hour, 2 hours, 4 hours . Pupil reaction will be measure either as 
none, poor, or brisk.  
 
Analytical Plan  
 
Results will be analyzed initially using des criptive statistics.  Comparison between groups 
will be done using chi square tests for proportions, and t -tests or ANOVA procedures for 
continuous variables.  Regression analysis will be performed to identify independent 
outcome predictors.  Other inferen tial statistical analysis will be conducted as appropriate. 
 
Human Subjects Protection   
 
Pregnancy testing will be done on all female patients, after consent and prior to enrollment to ensure no pregnant participates are included in the study.     
Subject Recruitment Methods  
 
Subjects will be recruited though placed recruitment flyers as well as electronically through an 
email  with wordage directly from the flyer  (appendix 2) and no students or residents will be 
recruited that are under the direct supervision of Dr. Walter. I f any ophthalmology residents wish 
to volunteer (not recruited), no credit will be given for participating and their evaluations will not be affected . Participants  will be compensated with a $ 30.00  Starbucks  gift card.  
 
  
Informed Consent  
 
Signed informed consent will be obtained from each subject. The study will be introduced by 
both Dr. Walter and the study coordinator and informed consent will be obtained formally by Dr. 
Walter once the subject fully understands  the st udy. Informed consent will be given 1-2 days or 
more prior  to the subject  eyes being dilated , giving them plenty of time to decide and fully 
understand the study. Final written consent will be obtained on the day the study.  
 
Confidentiality and Privacy  
 
Confidentiality will be protected by collecting only information needed to assess study outcomes, 
minimizing to the fullest extent possible the collection of any information that could directly 
identify subjects, and maintaining all study information in a secure manner.  To help ensure 
subject privacy and confidentiality, only a unique study identifier will appear on the data collection form.  Any collected patient identifying information corresponding to the unique study identifier will be maintained on a linkage file, store separately from the data.  The linkage file will be kept secure, with access limited to designated study personnel.  Following data collection subject identifying information will be destroyed 3 years after the study is published. They will be 
destroyed by deleting all files and shredding any documents consistent with data validation and 
study design, producing an anonymous analytical data set.  Data access will be limited to study staff.  Data and records will be kept locked and secured, with any computer data password protected.  No reference to any individual participant will appear in reports, presentations, or publications that may arise from the study.  
 
Data and Safety Monitoring  
 
The principal investigator will be responsible for the overall monitoring of the data and safety of study participants.  The principal investigator will be assisted by other members of the study staff.  
 
Reporting of Unanticipated Problems, Adverse Events, or Deviations  
 
Any unanticipated problems, serious  and unexpected adverse events, deviations or protocol 
changes will be promptly reported by the principal investigator or designated member of the research team to the IRB and sponsor or appropriate government agency if appropriate.  
 
 
1. Bakke, E.F., J. Hisdal, and S.O. Semb, Intraocular pressure increases in parallel 
with systemic blood pressure during isometric exercise.  Invest Ophthalmol Vis 
Sci, 2009. 50(2): p. 760-4. 
2. Kim, S.H. and K.S. Choi, Changes of intraocular pressure during experimental 
vitrectomy.  Curr Eye Res, 2012. 37(8): p. 698-703. 
3. Siam, G.A., et al., The amount of intraocular pressure rise during 
pharmacological pupillary dilatation is an indicator of the likelihood of future 
progression of glaucoma.  Br J Ophthalmol, 2007. 91(9): p. 1170-2. 
4. Harris, L.S., Cycloplegic -induced intraocular pressure elevations a study of 
normal and open- angle glaucomatous eyes. Arch Ophthalmol, 1968. 79(3): p. 
242-6. 
5. Rengstorff, R.H. and C.B. Doughty, Mydriatic and cycloplegic drugs: a review of 
ocular and systemic complications. Am J Optom Physiol Opt, 1982. 59(2): p. 
162-77. 
6. Ishikawa, S. and S. Oono, [Comparative study on mydriatic effects of tropicamide 
and its c ombination with phenylephrine (author's transl)]. Nippon Ganka Gakkai 
Zasshi, 1977. 81(9): p. 1515-20. 
7. Mitsui, Y. and T. Miki, [A trial of new diagnostic mydriatic]. Nihon Ganka Kiyo, 
1961. 12: p. 1026. 
8. Cantor, L.B., Brimonidine in the treatment of g laucoma and ocular hypertension. 
Ther Clin Risk Manag, 2006. 2(4): p. 337-46. 
9. Walters, T.R., Development and use of brimonidine in treating acute and chronic elevations of intraocular pressure: a review of safety, efficacy, dose response, and dosing studies.  Surv Ophthalmol, 1996. 41 Suppl 1: p. S19- 26. 
10. Toris, C.B., C.B. Camras, and M.E. Yablonski, Acute versus chronic effects of 
brimonidine on aqueous humor dynamics in ocular hypertensive patients. Am J 
Ophthalmol, 1999. 128(1): p. 8-14.  
11. Toris, C.B., et al., Effects of brimonidine on aqueous humor dynamics in human 
eyes.  Arch Ophthalmol, 1995. 113(12): p. 1514-7. 
12.  Eyeson-Annan ML, Hirst LW, Battistutta D, Green A. Comparative pupil dilation 
using phenylephrine alone or in combination with tropicamide.  
Ophthalmology. 1998 Apr; 105(4):726-32. 
    