07/27/15  Version Date 1 
 
 
 
Title of Research Project: Effectiveness of ASTYM treatment when added to   traditional therapy for 
treatment of de Quervain’s tenosynovitis  
 
     Principal Investigator: Stephen Van Lew, MS, OTR/L  
 
     Co-Investigators: April O’Connell, OTR/L, CHT; Monica Seu, OTR/L, CHT, Francoise Cherry,     
     OTR/L,CHT; Daniel Geller, MS, MPH, OTR/L; William Finley, OTR/L, Julie Fernandez, OTR/L,  
     CHT  
 
IRB#   s14-01059  
NCT#   [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
  
07/27/15  Version Date 2 
 
 
Table of Contents  
I. Purpose of Study and  Background     2-7 
1) Purpose of Study      2 
2) Background       2-5 
3) Study Design       6 
II. Characterist ics of Research Population    7 
1) Number of Subjects      7 
2) Gender of subjects      7 
3) Age of Subjects       7 
4) Racial and Ethnic Origin      7 
5) Inclusionary criteria      7 
6) Exclusionary criteria      7 
7) Subject withdrawal criteria     7 
8) Vulnerable subjects      7 
III. Methods and Procedures      8-13 
1) Methods and Procedures     8-11 
2) Schematic Diagram      12 
3) Data Analysis and Monitoring     13    
4) Data Storage and confidentiality    13 
IV. Risk and Benefit analysis      12-13 
1) Risk       12 
2) Protection against risk      12-13 
3) Potential benefits to subjects     13 
V. Investigators q ualification and experience    13 
VI. Subject identification, recruitment and Consen t/Acc ent  13-14 
1) Method of subject id entification and recruitment  13 
2) Process of consent      13 
3) Subject capacity      13 
4) Subjects r epresentative comprehension   13 
5) Debriefing procedures      13-14 
6) Consent forms       14 
7) Documentation of consent     14 
8) Cost t o subjects      14 
9) Payment for participation     14 
VII. References Cited       15-17 
VIII. Appendix        18 
 
 
 
 
Title of Research Project : Effectiveness of ASTYM treatment when added to   
traditional therapy for treatment of de Quervain’s tenosynovitis  
07/27/15  Version Date 3 
 
 
 
     Principal Investigator: Stephen Van Lew, MS, OTR/L  
     Co-Investigators: April O’Connell, OTR/L, CHT; Monica Seu, OTR/L, CHT, Francoise Cherry,     
     OTR/L,CHT; Daniel Geller, MS , MPH, OTR/L; William Finley, OTR/L, Julie Fernandez, OTR/L,   
     CHT  
 
IRB# -s 14-01059  
 
 
I.Purpose of Study and Background  
• Purpose of study :  
To determine if the addition of Astym treatment to traditional therapy produces a more positive outcome 
than traditional therapy alone for the treatment of de Quervain’s tenos ynovitis.  
 
• Background : 
de Quervain's disease is caused by a stenosis of the first dorsal compartment of the wrist 1, 2 and 3 that 
contains the tendons and synovial sheaths of  the abductor pollicis longus (APL) and the extensor pollicis 
brevis (EPB) muscles. 4 The APL acts at the base of the first metacarpal to abduct  the thumb while the 
EPB extends the metacarpophalangeal joint and contributes to radial abduction of the thumb. 5 The 
narrowing of the compartm ent is a result of the thickening of its septum 2 and 3 with no sign of acute 
inflammation 1, 3, 6 and 7 but with signs of chroni c degeneration. 2, 8 and 9 During menopause age, 1, 3, 7 and 9 
women are especially vulnerable to this condition. A higher prevalence is also noted during pregnancy or 
in the postpartum period. 10 and 11 Neither ethnicity 1 nor hand dominance 1 and 7 have an influence on the 
appearance of symptoms. The disease affects 1.3% of working women and 0.5% of working men in 
general. 12 
The main presenting symptom is pain on the radial side of the wrist, which can radiate proximally or 
distally and is aggravated by thumb or wrist movements. 1, 2, 3, 6 and 9 Other possible symptoms include 
impaired functio n of the thumb, 1, 3 and 6 stiffness, 1 paresthesia, 1, 6 and 9 sleep disturbance, 1 and 6 swelling or 
tenderness over the radial styloid process, 1, 2, 3, 6 and 7 and thumb weakness. 13 and 14  
07/27/15  Version Date 4 
 
 
To date, there is no recognized, standardized, or consistent therapeutic treatment program that has been 
documented for the management of de Quervain’s. Traditional treatments for de Quervain’s tenosynovitis 
include: (1) injection of corticosteroids into the first dorsal compartment; (2) immobilization of the wrist 
and thumb in a neutral position with a forearm based thumb spic a splint; (3) a combination of both.  
Several case series and clinical trials have studied corticosteroid injections alone and in combination with 
other modalities includ ing splinting and NSAIDS. The success rate with injections of various 
corticosteroid formulations ranges from 62 -93% 15, 16 and 17. Other conservative treatments include 
adjusting the work environment, non -steroidal anti -inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS), ultrasound, 
manipulation, nerve an d tendon gliding, stretching, and strengthening 15, 16 and 17. Although NSAIDS, 
splinting, and local corticosteroid injection often show promise in relieving symptoms initially, several 
researchers have found that long -term successful outcomes are poor 20
 
In a 3-armed study, Weiss et al. studies use of corticosteroid injections and splinting together and 
separately to determine their clinical effect. They observed a 67% improvement with injection alone, 
57% improvement with both injection and splinting, and 19% improvement with splinting alone. 21
Lane et al. separated their study population into minimal, moderate, and severe illness based on clinical 
symptoms. They identified a success rate of 88% with use of NSAIDS and splints in patients with 
“minimal” symptoms  but only a 32% success rate with “moderate to severe” symptoms 22. There are 
surprisingly few scientific studies that identify the efficacy of treatment for this relatively common 
condition.  Systematic reviews that show inconclusive results because of poor  quality studies indicates 
that clinicians have yet to discover the ‘‘magic bullet’’ that will resolve the most recalcitrant 
tendinopathies of the elbow, wrist, and hand 20. This is especially true if patients are hesitant or unwilling 
to receive a corticos teroid injection.  
07/27/15  Version Date 5 
 
 
 
The Astym treatment technique (Performance Dynamics, Muncie, IN) has been used in the NYU 
Langone Medical Center for 4 years with level 5 evidence as an alternative to corticosteroid injections for 
the treatment of de Quervain’s tenosyno vitis. Astym is based on an expansion of soft tissue massage and 
manual therapy concepts. It incorporates the use of specially designed hand -held instruments that enable 
clinicians to deliver a controlled amount of microtrauma into specific areas of connec tive tissue 
structures.  Astym t ools are not FDA approved and meet  the definition of a non -significant  risk device 
secondary t o not meeting the criteria for a  significant risk device because:  
1. It is NOT an implant with potential serious risk to subjects’  health, safety or welfare . 
2. It is NOT purported or represented for use supporting or sustaini ng human life with potential  serious 
risk to subject s’ health, safety, welfare . 
3. It is NOT for substantial importan ce in diagnosing, curing, mitig ating, or treating disease  or otherwise 
preventing impair ment or human health w ith potential serious risk to subject health, safety, welfare . 
4. It does NOT present a potential for serious risk to subject health, safety, welfare.  
 It is theorized that this treatment  process leads to the re absorption  of fibrosis and soft tissue regeneration.  
 
In a study by Davidson et al 24 Astym was utilized to introduce a controlled amount of micro - trauma into 
enzyme -induced injured rat Achilles tendons. This controlled injury caus ed a small amount of 
microvascular trauma and hemorrhage that induced a localized inflammatory response. In Davidson's 
study, a light microscope demonstrated increased fibroblast proliferation in the Astym study group 24. 
They concluded that although healin g in rats may not translate directly to humans, the findings suggest 
that Astym treatment approach may promote healing via increased fibroblast recruitment. In a follow -up 
study by Gehlsen et al, 25 they examined morphological changes in the rat Achilles te ndon after enzyme -
07/27/15  Version Date 6 
 
 
induced injury with collagenase and subsequent pressure variations with the Astym process. A pressure 
transducer was embedded into one of the Astym instruments and interfaced to a computer which 
controlled the pressure variations. They co ncluded that morphological evidence indicated that application 
of heavy pressure promoted the healing process to a greater degree than light or moderate pressure.  
During the Astym treatment process, a lubricant is applied to the patient's skin prior to tre atment to 
reduce the coefficient of friction and prevent abrasive trauma to the overlying skin. The angled edge of 
the instruments `catches' on the areas of fibrosis and triggers a localized inflammatory response. The 
instruments are then moved via longitu dinal strokes along the affected musculotendinous structures 23. As 
the instruments glide over the skin, the clinician and patient can detect changes in the underlying soft 
tissues through the resonant properties of the instruments. The patient is treated i n a seated position, 
addressing the extremity (hand, wrist, forearm, and elbow). In addition to the treatment at the wrist, the 
entire upper extremity is evaluated for compensatory strain patterns that may manifest as fibrosis.  
In therapy related research,  Fowler et al. 26 examined cumulative trauma disorders in a large 
manufacturing plant and found that 25 out of 29 extremities treated with the Astym system resolved. The 
criteria utilized for resolution were full return to pre -injury activities and functio nal ability with less than 
or equal to 3/10 pain on a visual analog scale.  
 
In a case report by Baker and Wilson 23 examining Astym in the treatment of a bilateral carpal tunnel 
syndrome (CTS) patient, they found that Astym was shown to be an effective treatment approach for 
resolving the patient's symptoms. An article by Ettema et al 27 reported on the physiological ch anges that 
occur in the subsynovial layer of tissue during carpal tunnel. An electron microscope found fibrotic 
changes as a result of a shearing injury. The anatomy of the flexor tendons are similar to that of the 
tendons involved in de Quervain’s. If Ast ym has been shown to be an effective treatment approach for 
07/27/15  Version Date 7 
 
 
CTS, then it is reasonable to hypothesize that Astym would be an effective treatment for de Quervain’s 
tenosynovitis. But does the Astym treatment along with stretching and exercise work better th an the gold 
standard of care of splinting and exercise alone .
 
• Study design:  
 
The research question for this study is : 
 
Does adding an Astym treatment protocol to existing standard of care treatment of de Quervain’s  
tenosynovitis increase outcomes of individuals with this condition?  
 
 
       
       The Alternative Hypothesis for this study is:  
 
              Participants receiving the Astym treatment protocol will have greater improvements in pain  
              reduction and function as compared to those subjects in the control group receiving the  
              standard of care therapy treatment   
 
             This is a randomized controlled study using repeated measure design with 2 groups:             
                            
A. Control group who will receive standard of care rehabilitation intervention for the 
treatment of de Quervain’s tenosy novitis.  
 
B. Experimental group will receive standard of care rehabilitation interventions plus 
Astym treatment protocol.  
 
             Three outcomes  measures  will be used for the study:  
 
1. Numeric Rating Scale for Pain - This scale is a single point scale fr om 0 -10. The 
participant picks one number to represent their pain, where 0 represents no pain and 10 
represents worst pain imaginable.  
 
2. Quick Dash -This is an 11 item questionnaire in which participants self -score themselves 
using a 1 -5 point scale.  One re presents no difficulty in performing task whereas 5 
represents unable to perform task.  
 
 
3. Sequential Occupational Dexterity Assessment -This is a test to measure dexterity and 
bimanual abilities in activities of daily living. It includes 12 tasks with participants being 
scored on their ability, difficulty and pain during the task.  
 
07/27/15  Version Date 8 
 
 
II. Characteristics of research population  
• Number of subjects : N=32 (16 in each group)  
 
• Gender of subjects : Both male and female participants will be included in the study. 
Demographic data will be included in the analysis of results.  
 
• Age of subjects : 18-65yrs old  
 
• Racial and ethnic origin : There will be no racial or ethnic restrictions to this study. Data on 
racial/ethnic origin will not be gathered by the researcher s. It is assumed based on current 
client population that the sample will be diverse.   
 
• Inclusion criteria : 
i. Positive Finkelstein’s test: The client will report pain over the first compartment of the 
extensor retinaculum when the thumb is tucked in the hand  and deviated ulnarly.  
ii. Persistent symptoms for >3 wks which have not resolved after an additional 3 weeks of 
splinting  
iii. A diagnosis by a physician of “de Quervain’s”, “fist compartment tenosynovitis”,  or 
“radial styloid tenosynovitis”  
iv. Patients must agree and comply to a predetermined splinting regimen  
 
• Exclusion criteria : 
i. History of cortical steroid injection to affected wrist and/or thumb  
ii. Comorbidity such as osteoarthritis, rheumatoid arthritis, auto -immune disease or 
inflammatory conditions . 
iii. Clotting de ficits  
iv. Positive Cozen’s sign which would indicate intersection syndrome 38 
v. Post-partum mothers <6 months and pregnant women 10-11 
vi. Cleared c -spine via Spurling’s Test 34-35 performed by combining cervical extension, side -
bending, and axial compression to the cervical spine.  
 
• Vunerable subjects : 
No vulnerable subjects will be included in this study  
 
 
III. Methods and Procedures:  
• Methods and procedures:  
i. Randomized selection of 2 groups both seen for one evaluation and  12 therapy 
sessions scheduled 2x/week for 6 weeks  (total of 12 sessions)  for either traditional  
therapy  including splinting and exercises or traditional  therapy with  Astym  protocol . 
At least 2 days in between t herapy sessions to allow sufficient healing.  
ii. Randomization using computer -generated random numbers. The 3 Outcome  
measurements  will be  taken during evaluation and re -evaluation will be collected by 
two designated hand therapists other than the treating therapist. The data collectors 
will be blinded.  
 
 
 
07/27/15  Version Date 9 
 
 
iii. Data collection are taken at baseline, and  after 12 sessions  of therapy at discharge. . 
Quick DASH and VAS scale scores  and questionnaire regarding patient compliance 
will be completed by phone interview at 3 month  follow up.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Research design : 
Patients with the diagnosis of de Quervain’s from referring physician will be provided with a  pre-
fabricated Ossur thumb spica splint for use as indicated in splinting program 13,15 -17 ,instructed on a home 
exercise program  as part of  standard of care along with being  educated about the research study.  If 
interes ted, they will be consented, and scheduled for a follow -up visit 3 weeks later .  If not interested, 
they will be scheduled for a 3 week follow -up session and treated if needed. Upon their return, the 
patients will be screened by the researcher OT  for inclu sion and exclusion criteria. If subject meets the 
criteria, they will be randomized into either (1) control or  (2) Astym group   and then evaluated by a  
blinded Certified Hand Therapist or hand therapist Fine motor coordination will be tested by using the 
Sequential Occupational Dexterity Assessment (SODA)  39.  Pain and functional loss will be measured via 
the Visual Analog Scale (VAS) 40 and Quick Dash 41-45. They are then seen for formal therapy 2/x for  6 
weeks  for a total of 12 therapy session .  If the  subject does not meet criteria or decide not to  participate in 
 
 
07/27/15  Version Date 10 
 
 
the study, they are deemed a screen failure , dismissed from study , and will continue with treatment if 
needed.  
The subjects  will be seen  twice a week for 6 weeks for 30 minute sessions by a separate treating therapist 
from the evaluating therapist. The patient will  start at phase I; however, will  not progress to the next 
phase of treatment if symptoms and pain are provoked.. When he/she to lerates exercises without pain or 
exacerbation of symptoms, the patient is progressed to Phase II  and then phase III  .Prior to discharge,  if 
the subject has not achieved phase III,  the therapist will incor porate Phase I II exercises, for strengthening 
and f unctional movements of the hand, forearm, elbow and shoulder  to be completed at home. . All 
subjects, either in control or Astym group, will receive only 12 sessions of therapy regardless if they 
progress through the all 3 phases. Astym group will receive traditional  therapy  with Astym  every session, 
while the control group will only receive  traditional therapy . See protocol below.  
Control group: Traditional therapy for de Quervain’s Tenosynovitis 17-19, 21 -22, 30 -33:  
 
Phase I:  Reduction of splint use andstrengthening initiated once patient can perform pain free AROM 
(monitor symptoms to not exacerbate condition)  
o Goals include: teaching self -management techniques for long -term control, 
ergonomics education, regaining flexibility and tolerance to light f unctional 
tasks without pain, initiation of splint wean off program  
o Moist heat pack for 10 minutes 28 at beginning of treatment session  
o Stretching 4x/day for 30 -45 seconds, including stretching prior to and after 
exercise:  
▪ UD of wrist with thumb tucked un der fingers and wrist in neutral  
▪  Wrist flexion with elbow extended forearm pronated  
▪ Wrist extension with elbow extended forearm supinated  
o Isometric grip/pinch strengthening  
▪ Submaximal contractions to avoid increased microtrauma to 
musculotendinous unit  
▪ Strengthening started at 1 set of 5 reps with 2 second hold per repetition 
and working up to 6 seconds (as pain allows) 3x/day  
Phase II:  Progress to strengthening of wrist and hand with emphasis on eccentric loading  
o Goals include: increasing patient tolera nce to heavier demands of tasks without 
exacerbation of symptoms, return to normalcy of function without use of splint  
o Moist hot pack for 10 minutes 28 at beginning of treatment  
o Advance patient once they can perform AROM, passive stretching of wrist, 
thumb  and composite wrist/thumb, and isometrics pain free  
o Using light theraband, 2 second count concentric motion followed by 4 second 
count eccentric motion for wrist strengthening in flexion, extension, radial and 
ulnar deviation with elbow flexed at 30 -45 de grees and forearm supported  
o Gentle grip, chuck pinch, lateral pinch and thumb opposition strengthening into 
soft- medium putty starting at 15 repetitions building to 30 repetitions each 
without exacerbation of symptoms  
o Thumb abduction and extension with ye llow power web or light resistance 
rubber bands 3 sets of 10 reps  
o Continue stretching 4x/day for 30 -45 seconds, with stretching prior to and after 
exercises:  
▪ UD of wrist with thumb tucked under fingers and wrist in neutral  
▪  Wrist flexion with elbow extende d forearm pronated  
▪ Wrist extension with elbow extended forearm supinated  
07/27/15  Version Date 11 
 
 
 
Phase I II: Continue therapy, incorporate strengthening and functional movements for forearm, elbow 
and shoulder and prepare patient for discharge to home exercise program  
o Goals include: Pain free functional use of affected extremity during all tasks 
without use of s plint 
o Replace moist heat pack with Upper Body Ergometer for 10 min  
o Continue stretching 4x/day for 30 -45 seconds, with stretching prior to and after 
exercises:  
▪ UD of wrist with thumb tucked under fingers and wrist in neutral  
▪  Wrist flexion with elbow exten ded forearm pronated  
▪ Wrist extension with elbow extended forearm supinated  
o Adding multi joint strengthening exercises to match job demands using 
dumbbells  
Patient discharged to home exercise program after 12 sessions of therapy with review of ergonomics, 
stretches, and exercises at last session. Astym group:  Traditional therapy WITH  Astym protocol  for 
De Quervain’s Tenosynovitis 17:  
Phase I I:  Reduction of splint use and s trengthening once patient can perform AROM pain free (monitor 
symptoms to not exacerbate condition)  
o Goals include: teaching self -management techniques for long -term control, 
ergonomics education, regaining flexibility and tolerance to light functional 
tasks without pain, initiation of splint wean off program  
o Moist  heat pack fo r 10 minutes 28 at beginning of treatment  
o Astym treatment to affected extremity per de Quervain’s protocol, 
including de Quervain’s strokes (See Appendix I)  
o Stretching 4x/day for 30 -45 seconds:  
▪ UD of wrist with thumb tucked under fingers and wrist in neutr al 
▪  Wrist flexion with elbow extended forearm pronated  
▪ Wrist extension with elbow extended forearm supinated  
o Isometric grip/pinch strengthening  
▪ Submaximal contractions to avoid increased microtrauma to 
musculotendinous unit  
▪ Strengthening started at 1 set of 5 reps, 2 seconds per rep working up to 
6 seconds (as pain allows) 3x/day  
 
Phase II:  Progress to strengthening of wrist and hand with emphasis on eccentric loading  
o Goals include: increasing tolerance to heavier demands of tasks without 
exacerbation  of symptoms, return to normalcy of function without use of splint  
o Moist heat pack for 10 minutes 28 at beginning of treatment  
o Continue Astym to affected extremity per de Quervain’s protocol, 
including de Quervain’s strokes  
o Advance patient once they can p erform AROM, passive stretching of wrist, 
thumb and composite wrist/thumb, and isometrics pain free  
o Using light theraband, 2 second count concentric motion followed by 4 second 
count eccentric motion for wrist strengthening in flexion, extension, radial an d 
ulnar deviation with elbow flexed at 30 -45* and forearm supported  
o Gentle grip, chuck pinch, lateral pinch and thumb opposition strengthening into 
soft- medium putty starting at 15 repetitions building to 30 repetitions each 
without exacerbation of sympto ms 
07/27/15  Version Date 12 
 
 
o Thumb abduction and extension with yellow power web or light resistance 
rubber bands 3 sets of 10 reps  
o Continue stretching 4x/day for 30 -45 seconds, with stretching prior to and after 
exercises:  
▪ UD of wrist with thumb tucked under fingers and wrist in n eutral  
▪  Wrist flexion with elbow extended forearm pronated  
▪ Wrist extension with elbow extended forearm supinated  
 
Phase I II: Continue therapy, incorporate strengthening and functional movements for forearm, elbow 
and shoulder and prepare patient for discha rge to home exercise program  
o Goals include: Pain free functional use of affected extremity during all tasks 
without use of splint  
o Replace moist heat pack with Upper Body Ergometer for 10 min  
o Continue Astym to affected extremity per de Quervain’s protocol,  
including de Quervain’s strokes for a max of 12 sessions  
o Continue stretching 4x/day for 30 -45 seconds, with stretching prior to and after 
exercises:  
▪ UD of wrist with thumb tucked under fingers and wrist in neutral  
▪  Wrist flexion with elbow extended forearm pronated  
▪ Wrist extension with elbow extended forearm supinated  
o Adding multi joint strengthening exercises to match job demands using 
dumbbells  
o Patient discharged to HEP after 12 sessions of therapy with review of 
ergonomics, stretches, and exercises at last session.  
 
 
Three months after discharge from CMC, Quick DASH and VAS scale scores and questionnaire 
regarding patient compliance will b e completed by phone interview .  
 
Data Analysis and Monitoring  
 
            Descriptive statistics will be used along with inferential statistics . The alternative  
              hypothesis will be addressed using a mixed design analysis of variance to test for  
              differences between -groups and within -groups .  In addition we will also analyze the  
              interaction effect between study group and time. All analyses will have an alpha of 0.05.  
              Malchy’s test for sphericity will be performed along with a Bonferroni comparison.  If  
              Malchy’s test for sphericity is significant then a Greenhouse -Geisser or Huynh -Feldt  
              correction will be used.   In addition a repeated measure MANOVA may be used to test the  
              dependent variables in a multivariate method if  in fact the dependent variables  
              demonstrate a relationship of linearity.  
     
             Based upon the planned analyses for the primary hypothesis, a mixed repeated measure       
             design with 1 between factor (group membersh ip) and 1 within factor (repeated measures)    
             has 2 groups with 16 subjects each for a total of 32 subjects. This design achieves a 80%  
             power to test the between factor using the above mentioned mixed methods ANOVA using a    
             5% significance level with an actual Cohen’s F effect size of .398             
 
Data Storage and Confidentiality  
07/27/15  Version Date 13 
 
 
           All written data will be stored in a locked draw of a locked office. For data analysis purposes   
            all data w ill also be stored using Microsoft Excel/ReCap Software.  To ensure confidentiality      
            all participants will be categorized alphanumerically.  
 
IV. Risk/Benefit Assessment  
• Risk 
 Potential side effects of Astym treatment include:  
1) Ecchymosi s to the treatment area, typically where fibrotic tissue and healing is indicated.  
2) Increased pain or soreness for 24 -48 hrs after treatment.  
3) Increased inflammation of affected extremity after treatment.  
4) Vagal response during treatment due to neur al effect on tissue from the Astym treatment that include 
but are not limited to light headedness, feeling faint and nausea.  
 
• Protection against risks  
Patient education of these risks will help the patient understand some of the temporary side effects that  
they may experience. Icing 3 -4 hrs after treatment can limit some of the side effects and help with pain 
and inflammation. Eating 1 hour prior to treatment will also limit vagal response during the Astym 
treatment. Prior to therapy, the patients will be e ncouraged to tell their therapist to stop treatment if they 
do not wish to continue if they are experiencing any of these symptoms and/or do not wish to continue in 
the study.  
 
• Potential benefits to subjects:  
Patients will receive Astym treatment to the af fected extremity in addition to traditional therapy they 
would normally receive when being treated for de Quervain’s tenosynovitis. Astym treatment will be 
delivered by a qualified, specially trained occupational therapist where instruments will be applied  
topically to the skin with moderate pressure to stimulate a healing and regenerative response. .  We 
believe the additional Astym protocol will increase functional levels for patients along with a greater 
social benefit of the knowledge gained from this ex perimental study.  
 
• Subject Compensation:  
There will be no compensation to patients for this study.  
 
 
V. Investigators Qualifications & Experience  
• Curriculum Vita for each investigator in study related documents  
 
VI. Subject Identification, Recuitment and Consent/Assent  
 
 
Method of subject identification and recruitment  
Clients referred to NYU Langone Center for Musculoskeletal Care with a diagnosis of de Quervain’s, 
radial styloid tenosynovitis, or first compartment tendonitis will be screened by investigators. After initial 
evaluation by a non -treating, blinded therapist, the patient will be provided with consent form and 
information on study (Appendix VIII). The client will be given the opportunity to ask questions to 
clinician and/or  any member of the research team at this time or throughout the course of their treatment.  
 
Process of Consent  
                    Clients will be provided with consent form and information on study following the  
07/27/15  Version Date 14 
 
 
                    clinician’s inspection  and determination of appropriateness to participate.  
 
                    Subject Capacity  
All clients who are unable to provide informed consent will not be included in this research study.  
 
Subjects Representation Comprehension  
 
                    Clients who are unable to understand the informed consent sheet and/or the educational  
                    hand outs and home exercise plan will not be considered for this study. The participants  
                    will be able to ask questions and reques t further information upon consent.  
  
                 Debriefing  Procedures  
                   Clinicians will provide participants with measurements and results at any time  
                   throughout this study upon participant request. As is standa rd procedure at NYU   
                   Langone Medical Center clients have the right to access their medical records at any time    
                   which will include all measurements.  
 
                   Consent forms -See study related documents  
                   Documentation of Consent  
                  All signed consent forms will be stored in a locked draw of a locked office. Consent forms  
                  along with all patient documentation will also be scanned into Epic and be  available  
                  within the clients chart as is standard protocol here at NYU Center for Musculoskeletal  
                  Care.  Participants will also be provided with a copy of signed consent form.  
                   
                  Costs to Subjects  
                  There will be no additional cost to subjects for participation in this study. The use of   
                  the ASTYM therapy technique is combined with other therapeutic techniques and  
                  modalities and is  billed accordingly at NYU Center for Musculoskeletal Care.  
 
                  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References Cited:  
1. J.S. Moore, De Quervain's tenosynovitis. Stenosing tenosynovitis of the first dorsal 
compartment. J Occup Environ Med, 39 (1997), pp. 990 –1002  
2. de Quervain, On a form of chronic tendovaginitis by Dr. Fritz de Quervain in la Chaux -de-
Fonds. 1895. Am J Orthop, 26 (1997), pp. 641 –644 
07/27/15  Version Date 15 
 
 
3. F. de Quervain, On the nature and treatment of stenosing tendovaginitis on the styloid 
process of the radius. (Translated article: Muenchener Medizinische Wochenschrift 1912, 59, 
56) J Hand Surg, 30B (2005), pp. 392 –394 
4. F.H. Netter, Atlas of Human Anatomy . (2nd ed.)ICON Learning Systems, New Jersey (1997) . 
5. J.M. Hunter, E.J. Mackin, A.D. Callahan, Rehabilitation of the Hand: Surgery an d Therapy . 
(4th ed.)Mosby, St. Louis (1995)  
6. H. Finkelstein, Stenosing tendovaginitis at the radial styloid process . J Bone Joint Surg, 12A 
(1930), pp. 509 –540 
7. N.R. Kay, de Quervain's disease. Changing pathology or changing perception?  J Hand Surg, 
25B (200 0), pp. 65 –69 
8. M.T. Clarke, H.A. Lyall, J.W. Grant, M.H. Matthewson, The histopathology of de Quervain's 
disease . J Hand Surg, 23B (1998), pp. 732 –734 
9. R.D. Muckart, Stenosing tendovaginitis of abductor pollicis longus and extensor pollicis 
brevis at the rad ial styloid (de Quervain's disease) . Clin Orthop Relat Res, 33 (1964), pp. 201 –
208 
10. S.E. Anderson, L.S. Steinbach, D. De Monaco, H.M. Bonel, Y. Hurtienne, E. Voegelin. “Baby 
wrist”: MRI of an overuse syndrome in mothers . AJR Am J Roentgenol, 182 (2004), pp.  719–
724 
11. J.R. Ritchie, Orthopedic considerations during pregnancy . Clin Obstet Gynecol, 46 (2003), pp. 
456–466 
12. K. Walker -Bone, K.T. Palmer, I. Reading, D. Coggon, C. Cooper, Prevalence and impact of 
musculoskeletal disorders of the upper limb in the genera l population . Arthritis Rheum, 51 
(2004), pp. 642 –651 
13. V.H. Coates, C.M. Turkelson, R. Chapell, W. Bruening, M.D. Mitchell, J.T. Reston, J.R. 
Treadwell, Diagnosis and treatment of worker -related musculoskeletal disorders of the 
upper extremity . Evid Rep Tec hnol Assess (Summ), 62 (2002), pp. 1 –12 
14. K. Fournier, D. Bourbonnais, G. Bravo, J. Arsenault, P. Harris, D. Gravel, Reliability and validity of pinch and 
thumb strength measurements in de Quervain's disease . J Hand Ther, 19 (2006), pp. 2 –10 
15. J.M. McKenzie, Conservative treatment of de Quervain's disease. Br Med J, 4 (1972), pp. 659 –
660 
16. F.J. Harvey, P.M. Harvey, M.W. Horsley, De Quervain's disease: surgical or nonsurgical 
treatment . J Hand Surg, 15A (1990), pp. 83 –87 
17. J. Witt, G. Pess, R.H. Gelberman, Treatment  of de Quervain tenosynovitis A prospective study 
of the results of injection of steroids and immobilization in a splint . J Bone Joint Surg Feb, 73A 
(1991), pp. 219 –222 
18. Ilyas. A, Non-Surgical Treatment for de Quervain’s.  J Hand Ther, Vol34 (2009), pp. 928 -929. 
07/27/15  Version Date 16 
 
 
19. Fedorczyk, J, Tendinopathies of the Elbow, Wrist, and Hand: Histopathology and Clinical 
Considerations.  J Hand Ther, (2012) 25:191 –201. 
20. Wilson, J. K., Sevier, T.L., A Review of Treatment for Carpal Tunnel Syndrome. Disability 
and Rehab, (2003) 25:3, pp. 113 -119. 
21. A.P. Weiss, E. Akelman, M. Tabatabai, Treatment of de Quervain's disease.  J Hand Surg, 19A 
(1994), pp. 595 –598 
22. L.B. Lane, R.S. Boretz, S.A. Stuchin, Treatment  of de Quervain's disease: role of conservative 
management. J Hand Surg, 26B (2001), pp. 258 –260 
23. Baker D, Wilson JK. Bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome in a piano teacher . Physical Therapy 
Case Reports (1999); 2(2): 73 -76. 
24. Davidson CJ, Ganion L, Gehlsen GM, Verhoestra B, Roepke J, Sevier TL. Rat tendon 
morphologic and functional changes resulting from soft tissue mobilization . Medicine, 
Science in Sports and Exercise (1997); 29(3): 313 -319. 
25. Gehlsen GM, Ganion LR, Helfst RH. Effects of pressure variations on t endon healing . 
Medicine, Science in Sports and Exercise (1999); 31(4): 531 -535. 
26. Fowler S, Wilson JK, Sevier TL. Innovative approach for the treatment of cumulative trauma 
disorders . WORK: A Journal of Prevention, Assessment, and Rehabilitation 2000; 15: 9 -14. 
27. Ettema et al. Changes in the Functional Structures of the Tenosynovium in idiopathic Carpal 
Tunnel Syndrome: A scanning electron microscope study.  Journ of Plast Surg (2006); Vol 
118. 
28. Hartzall, Rubiinstein, Herman. Therapeutic Modalities - An updated re view for the hand 
surgeon.  Journ Hand Surg (2012); 37A: 597 -621. 
29. Diagnosis and Treatment Manual for Therapists and Physicians, 4 th Edition. Pg 276.  
30. Kasch, Mary. Therapist’s Evaluation and treatment of upper extremity cumulative trauma 
disorders.  Rehab of t he hand (2002); pg 1005 -1020.  
31. Lea & Febiger. Guidelines for exercise testing and prescription . American Council of Sports 
Medicine (1986); 3 rd Edition.  
32. Higgs, PE, et al.  Upper extremity impairment in workers performing repetitive tasks.  Plastic 
Reconstruc tive Surgery (1992); 90:614.  
33. Komi, P. Stretch -shortening cycle.  Strength and power in sports. Blackwell Scientific 
Publications (2002) Oxford, UK, pp 184 -202. 
34. Sandmark H, Nisell R: Validity of five common manual neck pain provoking tests,  Scand J 
Rehab Med  (1995) 27:131.  
35. Spurling R, Coville W:  Lateral rupture of the cervical intervertebral discs.  Surg Gynecol 
Obstet (1944) 78:350.  
07/27/15  Version Date 17 
 
 
36. Palmer K, Walker -Bone K, Linaker C, et al. The Southampton Examination Schedule for the 
Diagnosis of Musculoskeletal Disorders o f the Upper Limb.  Annal of Rheum Disease (2000) 
59: 1 5 -11. 
37. Kutsumi K, Amadio PC, Chunfeng Z, et al. Finkelstein’s Test: A biomechanical Analysis.  The 
Journ of Hand Surg (2005) 30A: 130 -135. 
38. Grundberg AB, Reagan DS. Pathologic anatomy of the forearm: intersection syndrome: an 
experimental study in humans.  Jour Hand Surg (1985) 10A: 299.  
39. Lankveld, Bosch, Bakker, Terwindt, Franssen, & van Riel. Sequential Occupational Dexterity 
Assessment (SODA): A new test to measure hand disability . Journ Hand  Therapy . (1996) 9:27 -
32. 
40. Hoang -Kim, A., Pegreffi, F., Moroni, A. & Ladd, A. Measuring wrist and hand function: 
Common scales and checklists . Injury (2010) 42, 253 -258. 
41.  Beaton, D.E., Wright J.G. & Katz, J.N. Development of the Quick DASH: Comparison of 
Three Item -reduction Approaches. The Journal of Bone and Joint Surgery, Incorporated (2005) 
87, 1038 -1046.  
42. Whally, K. & Adams, J. The Longitudinal Validity of the Quick and Full Versions of the Arm 
Shoulder and Hand Questionnaire in Musculoskeletal Hand Outpatients.  Journ Hand 
Therapy (2009)14,  22-25.  
43. Dale, L.M. & Strain -Riggs, S.R. Comparing Responsiveness of the Quick Disabilities of the 
Arm, Shoulder and Hand and the Upper Limb Function Test . Work (2012)10, 1 -8. 
44. Hass, F., Hubmer, M., Rappl, T., Koch, H., Parvisi, I., et. Al Long Term Subjective and 
Functional Evaluation after Thumb Replantation with Special Attention to the Quick DASH 
Questionnaire and a Specially Designed Trauma Score Called Modified Mayo Score . The 
Journal of Tra uma Injury Infection and Critical Care (2011)71 , 460-466.  
45. Wong, J.Y., Fung, B.K., Chu, M.M. & Chan, R.K. The Use of the Arm, Shoulder, and Hand 
Questionnaire in Rehabilitation after Acute Traumatic Hand Injuries .  Journal of Hand 
Therapy (2007)20,  49 -56. 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix I  
Astym Protocol for de Quervain’s Tenosynovitis  
Patient sitting, forearm pronated  
Forearm and arm from wrist to deltoid tuberosity (E,L) 2 strokes in each direction  
Thumb muscles (EPB, APL) (L) (only distal to proximal) 4 strokes  
Lateral ep icondyle (L,I) 2 strokes both directions; straight into upper arm, fan into forearm  
Wrist retinaculum (I) 2 strokes both directions  
Patient sitting, forearm supinated  
Forearm and arm from wrist crease through biceps (E, L) 2 strokes both directions  
FCU fro m wrist to just below medial epicondyle (L on tip) 2 strokes both directions  
Medial epicondyle (L,I) 4 strokes away from epicondyle only; straight proximal, fan distal  
07/27/15  Version Date 18 
 
 
Wrist retinaculum and around pisiform (I), 2 strokes both directions  
Flexor retinaculum in palm (E) with 90* pivots 2 strokes in each direction  
Flexor retinaculum (L,I) distal to proximal only, “walk” instruments if necessary, 2 strokes per 
instrument  
Thenar eminence (I) 2 strokes in each direction  
Hypothenar eminence (I) 2 strokes in each direction  
Thumb flexors (I) 2 strokes in both directions  
Patient sitting, radial surface facing up  
EPB and APL tendons and muscle bellies (I) 2 strokes in each direction  
Anatomical Snuff Box (I) 2 strokes in each direction  
Web space (I) 2 strokes in e ach direction  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
07/27/15  Version Date 19 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 