STUDY PROTOCOL AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS PLAN  
 
 
Official title: As Safe As  Possible (ASAP): A BALANCED, 2X2 DESIGN 
TO TEST CONJOINT AND UNIQUE EFFICACY OF AN INPATIENT 
INTERVENTION AND AN EMOTION REGULATION/SAFETY PLANNING 
APP IN PREVENTING SUICIDE ATTEMPTS POST -DISCHARGE.  
 
NCT number: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
IRB approved date: 10-01-21 
STU112016 -057, Kennard, FormA- ResearchProtocol, Mod_16, 10- 01-21   1 As Safe As Possible (ASAP) : A BALANCED, 2X2 DESIGN TO TEST CONJOINT AND UNIQUE 
EFFICACY OF AN INPATIENT INTERVENTION AND AN EMOTION REGULATION/SAFETY 
PLANNING APP IN PREVENTING SUICIDE ATTEMPTS POST -DISCHARGE. 
 
Abstract  
Aims:  One of the highest risk periods for suicidal behavior is in the first 6 months after discharge from 
psychiatric hospital.  In this 2 -site study (University of Texas Southwest ern Medical Center ; UTSW and 
Western Psychiatric Institute and Clinic; WPIC ), we propose to conduct a randomized clinical trial 
(RCT) in  250 hospitalized suicidal adolescents,  examining the single and additive effects of  two 
components of an  inpatient unit intervention for suicidal adolescents, As Safe As Possible (ASAP) , 
which focuses on emotion regulation and safety planning,  and an emotion regulation/safety plan phone 
app ( BRITE ).   In a recently completed pilot RCT of 6 5 suicidal adolescent inpatients, ASAP + BRITE  
reduced the hazard of suicide attempts over the subsequent 6 months compared to treatment as usual 
(AU) substantially ( adjusted HR=0.22 , p=0.03 ), especially in youth with a previous history of a suicide 
attempt (HR=0.12, p<.05).  Methods:   We will randomize 2 50 hospitalized suicidal adolescents with a 
history of a suicide attempt  or ideation with plan to one of 4 conditions in a 2 by 2 design: (1) ASAP + 
BRITE  + TAU ; (2) BRITE  + TAU;  (3) ASAP + TAU ; or (4) TAU  alone to determine the single and 
additive effects of ASAP and BRITE  on suicide attempts in the subsequent six months . Expected 
Outcomes:   We hypothesize that ASAP and BRITE  will each effective ly reduce suicide risk post -
discharge compared to TAU and that the combination will be superior and more cost effective relative 
to each individual intervention as well as to TAU.   
Project Description  
I. SPECIFIC AIMS/HYPOTHESES  
The transition from inpatient to outpatient care is a time of extremely  high risk for suicidal behavior and 
suicide and accounts for a significant proportion of suicides that occur while patients are in mental 
health care (Appleby, Dennehy, Thomas, Faragher, & Lewis, 1999; Appleby , Shaw,  et al., 1999 ). There 
are currently no established interventions for suicidal teens  transitioning from inpatient to outpatient 
care. By implementi ng a treatment that can be delivered on an inpatient unit prior to the transition to 
outpatient treatment, we anticipate being able to lower suicidal risk  during this critical high- risk period, 
which can contribute to reversing the more than decade- long increase in adolescent suicide (Curtin, 
Warner, & Hedegaard, 2016) . To address this issue, we developed brief, 3- hour intervention for 
adolescents who were psychiatrically hospitalized for suicide risk, termed ASAP (As Safe As Possible). 
ASAP focuses on the development of a safety plan, teaching emotion regulation and distress tolerance 
skills , along with 1 -2 post -discharge follow -up calls to encourage adherence  to use of the safety plan 
and to outpatient treatment. ASAP was supplemented by a smartphone  app (BRITE ) that supported 
daily emotion regulation and a safety plan that was personalized to the needs and preferences of each  
adolescent.   We conducted a two- site clinical trial in 65  psychiatrically hospitalized suicidal adolescents, 
randomized to ASAP + BRITE  + TAU or treatment as usual (TAU)  alone. ASAP showed a reduced 
hazard for post -discharge suicide attempt over the subsequent six months  (adjusted hazard ratio (HR) 
= 0.22 , p=0.03) , and ASAP effects were even stronger in those participants (n=52, 80%) who had a 
history of a suicide attempt (HR=0.12 ; p=0.04 ). BRITE  appears to contribute to this effect, insofar as  
declines in suicidal ideation and emotion dysregulation, and, increases in reasons for living,  were 
proportional to the frequency of use of the app(r’s=0.37 ). We believe that ASAP and BRITE  have the 
potential to be widely disseminated because: (1) 64 % of eligible participants enrolled in the study; (2) 
the interventions are brief and inexpensive; and (3) patients and families gave very positive feedback with regard to both ASAP and BRITE .   
STU112016 -057, Kennard, FormA- ResearchProtocol, Mod_16, 10- 01-21   2 In order to identify the most cost -effective component of this intervention , we propose to  build on our 
pilot work by : (1) recruiting a larger, more demographically diverse sample to replicate  these  findings; 
(2) disaggregating the effects of ASAP and BRITE  through the use of a 2 by 2 design ; (3) testing for 
mediators of treatment outcome; and (4) determining which treatment arm is most cost -effective, and 
therefore most likely to be acceptable to payers and providers.   
Therefore, we aim to randomize 25 0 adolescents hospitalized , either in a psychiatric unit or a medical 
unit for a suicide attempt,  to one of four treatment arms: (1) ASAP + BRITE  + TAU; (2) BRITE  + TAU; 
(3) ASAP + TAU; and (4) TAU alone and assess suicidal ideation and behavior at  1, 3, and 6 months 
post-intake , in order to:  
1. Assess the relative efficacy of ASAP, BRITE  and the combination on suicidal ideation, non- suicidal 
self-injury ( NSSI ), and suicide attempts , and re- hospitalizations.  
H1: Both ASAP and BRITE  will be superior to TAU alone, and ASAP  + BRITE  + TAU will be superior to 
BRITE or  ASAP alone.  
2. Examine mediators and moderators of treatment outcome  
H2: The effects of ASAP and BRITE  will be mediated by increases in reasons for living, decreases in 
dysfunctional emotional regulation, increases in functional emotional regulation, and decreases in 
implicit associations with death, and will be moderated by previous history of an attempt, and family 
engagement in treatment . In addition, the impact of BRITE will be proportional to the frequency of use.  
3. To examine the costs and cost efficacy of ASAP and BRITE  and the combination. 
H3: Both ASAP and BRITE  will be more cost -effective than TAU , and the combination of ASAP and 
BRITE will be more cost -effective than either individual component alone.  
 
II. BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE  
Background. Adolescent suicidal behavior is common, with more than 2,000,000 adolescents 
presenting to emergency departments (EDs) each year with suicidal behavior . Nearly 7% of 
adolescents in any one year make a suicide attempt, and an equal number have clinically significant suicidal ideation with a plan (
Lewinsohn, Rohde, & Seeley,  1996 ). Suicid e is the 2nd leading cause of 
death among 12 -17 year olds, and suicidal behavior is associated with functional impairment  and 
significant costs to the  health care  system, other service systems, and families  (Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention, 2010; Curtin et al ., 2016 ; Florence, Haegerich, Simon, Zhou, & Luo, 2015; 
Shepard, Gurewich, Lwin, Reed, & Silverman, 2015). Short -term costs include costs of medical care for 
youth with suicide attempts, lost productivity for youth who die , and costs to families such as lost 
productivity for family members caring for youth in crisis.  While Healthy People 2020 has as its 
objective to reduce suicide and suicide attempts in adolescents, trends  for more than a decade  have 
shown an increase in teen suicide ( Curtin  et al., 2016).  
Focus early in treatment . In clinical populations, one of  the times of greatest risk for recurrent suicidal 
behavior and completed suicide is  during transition of care (transition between inpatient and outpatient 
care; prior to or at the onset  of outpatient care ), and quality improvements in this window of time have 
been shown to decrease the suicide rate in adults (Appleby , Dennehy,  et al., 1999; Appleby , Shaw,  et 
al., 1999; While, et al., 2012) . The window of greatest risk is in the 1 -4 weeks after the initial  suicid e 
attempt , with 25-50% of all suicidal events  (defined as a suicide attempt or an increase in suicidal 
ideation)  occurred within the first 4 weeks of treatment  (Brent, Greenhill , et al. , 2009 ; Vitiello, Silva et 
al., 2009 ; Wilkinson, Kelvin, Roberts, Dubicka, & Goodyer, 2011) . Thus, providing a brief, target ed 
intervention prior to discharge that protects  against  acting on  suicidal urges  in early outpatient 
STU112016 -057, Kennard, FormA- ResearchProtocol, Mod_16, 10- 01-21   3 treatment could make a substantial contribution towards reducing the incidence of youth suicidal 
behavior.  
Early -onset of suicide event, even in high- quality treatment  of suicidal ideation.   In clinical studies  
of adolescents with treatment resistant depression, in which participants received close monitoring and 
either medication management alone, or in combination with CBT, the rate of suicidal events was 28% 
in the first 12 weeks of treatment, with a median time to event of 3 weeks ( Brent, Emslie , et al. , 2009). 
In an open trial of a  CBT intervention  especially designed to reduce suicide attempts in depressed 
adolescent suicide attempters, 40% of all suicidal events took place within the first 3 weeks of treatment 
(Brent , Greenhill,  et al., 2009).  Moreover, one of the most potent predictors of an eventual attempt or 
suicidal event is high baseline suicidal ideation ( Brent, Emslie , et al. , 2009 ; Brent, Greenhill , et al. , 
2009; Vitiello, Silva , et al. , 2009; Wilkinson  et al. , 2011) . In community samples, 56%  and 29%  of 
adolescents with suicidal ideation with or without a  plan, respectively,  will make  a suicide attempt within 
a year of assessment (Nock et al. , 2013 ).  
Safety Planning . The safety plan, a structured set of coping strategies that a suicidal individual can 
deploy to de -escalate suicidal risk in the face of suicidal urges or identified precursors thereof (e.g., 
anger, sadness) is considered best practice for the management of high risk patients. The plan, 
developed with a mental health clinician, consists of: (1) activities the suicidal individual can do 
independently or alone (e.g. distraction, deep breathing); (2) reaching out to supportive individuals; and 
(3) finally, see king clinical attention ( Samra & Bilsker , 2007; Stanley  et al. , 2009) . A safety plan is 
developed in the context of treatment, in which a chain analysis of the events leading up to the suicidal episode is conducted, a more comprehensive treatment plan to reduce suicidal risk is developed, and motivational techniques are deployed to enhance use of the safety plan and follow -up with treatment.  
While safety plans have become a mainstay of clinical care, methods to facilitate their implementation 
have not yet been critically evaluated, nor has the efficacy of safety plans in preventing future suicidal 
acts been carefully evaluated ( Knox et al. , 2012) . In order for a youth in crisis to deploy his or her safety 
plan, the plan has to be accessible.  Youth at high risk for suicide who are being treated for suicidal ity 
may have a written safety plan as part of their treatment; however, this plan may not always be 
accessible when they experience suicidal urges. Therefore, identifying an alternative mechanism to 
increase accessibility and utility of safety plans could be quite helpful. 
A precursor of the modern safety plan was developed by Rotheram -Borus and Bradley ( 1991) , in which 
youth in a shelter for homeless runaways were taught a  5-step program for coping with suicidal 
ideation: 1. Identify 3 positive compliments about self; 2. Identify 3 people to go to for support; 3. Learn 
how to monitor and regulate emotion using an “emotion thermometer” in order to cope with suicidal 
urges ; 4. Develop a concrete alternative to acting on suicidal impulses; and 5. Make a commitment  to 
refrain from engaging in suicidal behavior.  The number of suicide attempts in these shelters prior to 
implementation of the program was 9 in the previous 3 months, compared to 2 in the subsequent 18 
months, which, when corrected for the period of observation, is a 27- fold decrease in the incidence of 
suicide attempts (assuming a similar number of youth in both conditions ). This suggests that a brief 
intervention using emotion regulation techniques  and mobilization of social support  to cope with suicidal 
urges can be effective in reducing the probability that an adolescent will act on his or her suicidal 
ideation. However, to our knowledge, other than this study, the efficacy of safety planning has never 
been critical ly evaluated, particularly in adolescents . 
ASAP is designed to target known protective and risk factors for suicidal behavior, namely reasons for 
living (Bagge, Lamis, Nardoff, & Osman, 2013; Bakhiyi, Calati, Guillaume, & Courtet, 2016) and 
adaptive emotion regulation ( Zlotnick , Donaldson, Spirito, & Pearlstein,1997; Polanco- Roman, Jurska, 
Quinones, & Miranda, 2014) , and to decrease the frequency of maladaptive emotion regulation. We 
STU112016 -057, Kennard, FormA- ResearchProtocol, Mod_16, 10- 01-21   4 found that ASAP +  BRITE  + TAU , compared to TAU, increased reasons for living and adaptive emotion 
regulation, and decreased dysfunctional emotion regulat ion, as described in more detail below. 
Utilizing technology for  improving distress tolerance and safety planning. Approxima tely 73 % of 
American youth have or have access to  smart phones  (Lenhart, 2015). Close to 80% of homes have 
internet access , and for  21% of teens (up to 44% of minority teens), a cell phone is the teen’s sole 
means  of access to the Internet (Lenhart , 2010) . Consequently, use of technology in this population to 
extend treatment is logical and timely.  There are no empirically tested phone apps for safety planning, 
especially for teens, but there is a randomized trial to evaluate a safety planning app in adults currently 
underway  (Andreasson  et al., 2017). While there are cell phone applications related to safety planning 
in adults with suicidal behavior ( Emory N ews, 2013; De la Torre, Castillo, Arambarri, Lopez -Coronado, 
& Franco,  2017; Larsen, Nicholas, & Christensen, 2016; Stanley & Brown, 2012;) . We propose to 
supplement standard care by evaluating a safety plan smart phone application (which has been 
developed with promising outcomes ; Kennard et al., 2015)  that teens can easily access to provide tools 
to cope with suicidal urges and preserve safety . 
Significance.   Adolescent suicide is the second- leading cause of mortality in adolescents, and adolescent  
suicidal behavior is a common cause  of morbidity associated with significant functional impairment . The 
rates of  both adolescent suicide and suicidal behavior has been increasing. This proposal aims to reduce  
the likelihood of a suicide attempt  during a very high- risk period of time, which is the transition from inpatient 
to outpatient care. Currently, even with high quality treatment, there is a high incidence of early suicidal 
events  in outpatient care. 
 Innovation: In our previous pilot RCT, we found that the combination of BRITE and ASAP  with TAU resulted 
in a significant reduction in the hazard for suicide attempts.  This is novel, as there are no established interventions to prevent suicidal behavior during the transition from inpatient to outpatient care for hospitalized suicidal adolescents . . This study would provide a replication of these findings in a larger, and 
more demographically diverse sample (larger minority recruitment and higher proportion of males).  This is 
important, as ethnicity may moderate the impact of psychosocial interventions (W eersing et al., 2017) and 
risk factors for suicidal behavior differ between adolescent males and females (B rent, Baugher, Bridge, 
Chen, & Chiapp etta, 1999;  King, Jiang, Czyz, & Kerr,  2014) . Moreover, this new study will disaggregate the 
effects of ASAP and BRITE. With respect to BRITE,  this would be one of the first studies  to evaluate the 
added value of  a structured safety plan. Finally, we will evaluate the cost -efficacy of BRITE, ASAP, and the 
combination. While there are an increasing number of suicide prevention apps, almost none are geared to 
adolescents, and none have been critically evaluated.   Moreover, this study also aims to assess the 
incremental costs and benefits of these brief interventions, which is critical to widespread dissemination of 
these interventions .  Moreover, the cost analysis will include costs to the families of youth who attempt 
suicide, and these costs have rarely been studied.  
 
Impact : This study will identify the most cost -effective components of ASAP + BRITE  + TAU  (i.e. BRITE , 
ASAP, or BRITE  + ASAP) to prevent suicidal behavior in adolescents after discharge from the hospital, 
which can lea d to larger scale dissemination studies. In our initial pilot studies , ASAP  + BRITE  + TAU  cut 
the suicide attempt rate 2.5 fold and reduced re- hospitalizations as well. Hence, this intervention has the 
potential to reduce suicidal behavior  and to prevent rehospitalization, which could in turn prevent future 
pain and suffering and save costs  to health systems and families  as well.  
  There are no established interventions  to prevent the recurrence of adolescent suicidal behavior  after 
discharge from psychiatric hospital . This proposal has the potential to assess and improve upon a major 
component of best clinical care for suicidal teens, which is the transition from inpatient to outpatient care. By focusing  on the time -period of greatest risk for recurrence— the transition from a higher level of care to 
outpatient treatment , this project directly aligns with the mission of the recently convened National Action 
STU112016 -057, Kennard, FormA- ResearchProtocol, Mod_16, 10- 01-21   5 Alliance for Suicide Prevention Research Prioritization Task Force that calls for the development and testing 
of interventions  that will reduce the rate of suicide and suicide attempts, particularly among high- risk groups  
(National Action Alliance for Suicide Prevention Research Prioritization Task Force, 2014) . 
The addition of the BRITE  app could potentially  improve suicidal adolescents’ ability to resist acting 
upon suicidal urges, be easily and widely deployed, and save lives. Since many suicides in this 
population are impulsive, the  BRITE  app could be an easily accessible tool to manage suicidal  urges 
that could foster greater resiliency among youth at high risk for suicide. As such, the proposed work is 
expected to have a significant impact on high risk children, their families, and clinicians.    
Feasibility:  The investigators have worked productively together in the past  through  collaborations on 
2 multisite trials  (the Treatment of SSRI -Resistant Depression in Adolescents (TORDIA) and the 
Treatment of Adolescent Suicidal Adolescents TASA ), resulting in several publications that inform this 
proposal (Brent et al. , 2008; Brent, Emslie , et al. , 2009; Brent, Greenhill , et al,. 2009; Emslie et al., 
2010; Kennard et al. , 2009; Lynch, Dickerson, Clarke, et al., 2011 ; McMakin et al., 2012; Stanley et al. , 
2009; Vitiello, Brent, et al. , 2009; Vitiello et al. , 2011).   
Additionally, the investigators work ed together to successfully complete a two-site NIMH funded 
treatment development trial  for the ASAP intervention ( Kennard et al., 2017) . Both sites are very 
familiar with the management of suicidal adolescents and proper rescue procedures  in the contexts of 
both research and clinical care. Both groups also have experience in treatment development, with 
Kennard (2014 ) developing a wellness -oriented cognitive behavior therapy (CBT) that effectively 
prevents depressive relapse ( HR = 0.31, p = .01 ). Both groups have met or exceeded recruitment 
targets for multiple adolescent treatment trials. Both sites see at least 200 new suicidal adolescent 
inpatients per year, with an average length of stay of  5 to 7 days . Retention in previous studies of 
similar populations has been in excess of 85% for the year. 
Previous work informing this study:  The motivation for this study is that , despite delivering “state of 
the art” psychosocial interventions in TORDIA and TASA, a high proportion of the suicidal events that 
occurred in these studies happened within 3 -4 weeks of intake ( Brent, Emslie , et al. , 2009; Brent, 
Greenhill , et al. , 2009) . Hence, some additional intervention is needed early in treatment to protect 
against suicidal urges. The investigators conducted focus groups with patients, parents, and clinicians, which informed the development of the ASAP intervention and BRITE  phone application for this 
proposal (Kennard et al., 2015). The phone app has been developed and piloted with good preliminary 
outcomes (see below).  
Preliminary Data: The pilot study (N=65)  for ASAP/BRITE was conducted  by these two sites. 
Adolescents (ages 12 to 17) who were hospitalized with recent ideation with plan or intent and/or a 
recent suicide attempt were randomized to receive ASAP + BRITE  + TAU or  TAU alone. Participants 
were balanced both within and across sites on age (12 -15 vs. 16 -17.11), gender, and past attempt.  
Suicidal ideation ( Suicidal Ideation Questionnaire – Junior) and behavior (Columbia Suicide Severity 
Rating Scale,  C-SSRS) were  assessed at weeks 4, 12, and 24 by independent evaluators.  The 
intervention was accepted by a high proportion of those patients who were eligible (65%) .  Those in the 
ASAP group, compared to those in TAU had fewer attempts over time (13.3% vs. 31.0%, p=.10, 
Hedge’s g = .44), and a longer time from baseline to attempt than TAU ( adjusted HR=0.22, 95% CI: 
0.05, 0.85, z= -2.19, p = 0.03).  Prior attempts moderated treatment, such that those who had a prior 
attempt  (2/3 of the sample)  and received ASAP had a much lower hazard of time to reattempt 
(HR=0.12, 95% CI: 0.01,  0.94, z= -2.02, p=0.04) . There was a non -significant trend for those assigned 
to ASAP to be less likely to be re -hospitalized (10.0% vs. 24.1%, χ
21=2.09, p=0.15, g=-0.38). Also, 
ASAP + BRITE  + TAU , in moderator analyses,  reduced suicidal ideation in those with lower reasons for 
living  and more dysfunction emotion regulation. , Participants whose families participated in the 
intervention showed slightly lower rates of attempt during the study (11.1% vs. 14.3%, p>0.99), lower 
STU112016 -057, Kennard, FormA- ResearchProtocol, Mod_16, 10- 01-21   6 hazard of attempt (HR=0.72, 95%CI: 0.07, 6.88, p=0.77) and more decreasing SIQ scores over time 
(β=-0.61, 95%CI: -1.12, -0.11, p=0.02) . Of those participants who received the phone app, 72.7% 
viewed the app, and of these 75% added content with an average use of almost  30 times . More 
frequent response to prompts from the app for mood check -in, was associated with improvement on 
reasons for living (ρ=0.37, p=0.08)  and declines in suicidal ideation (rho= -0.37)  over the 24- week 
follow- up period (see figure below) .
 
Using the Client Satisfaction Questionnaire, CSQ, where higher scores indicate more satisfaction with 
their treatment (range 8 to 32), the ASAP group showed greater satisfaction than the TAU group 
([N=26], M=26.6, SD=3.8 vs. [N=20], M=24.1, SD=5.2, z = 1.5 7, p =0.12, g  = 0.56). The satisfaction 
scores on the app using the Post -Study Satisfaction and Usability Questionnaire (PSSUQ; where lower 
scores indicat e more satisfaction , range 10 to 70) were as follows: week 4: M = 17.6, SD = 7.1, N=21; 
week 12: M = 18.6, SD = 10.4, N=24; week 24: M = 18.4, SD = 8.0, N=25.  
 
Our data demonstrate that the intervention is feasible, acceptable, and effective.  We propose to build on 
the pilot RCT to include a  larger sample. This will allow us to test each aspect of the intervention 
separately, as well to  test the additive effects of the combined intervention, against treatment as usual  
(TAU) .  
Previous studies related to cost -effectiveness analysis . The long- term goal of this study is to 
develop and implement evidence based care for youth with suicidal behavior and ideation into health 
systems that serve such youth.  To this end, it is critical that we provide practical information about the cost of r unning the interventions, and the longer -term impact of the interventions on health care and 
other costs.  This type of information could be critical to the future adoption of these interventions int o 
routine practice.  In order to achieve this aim, we have added Frances Lynch, a health economist to our 
-100 -50 0 50 100Change in Score
0 20 40 60 80 100 120
# Mood Ratings Added
SIQ
Reasons for Living
STU112016 -057, Kennard, FormA- ResearchProtocol, Mod_16, 10- 01-21   7 study team.  Dr. Lynch has extensive experience in designing and leading cost -effectiveness analyses 
in the context of randomized controlled trials (Lynch, Dickerson, Pears, & Fisher,  2017; Lynch, 
Dickerson, Clarke,  et al. , 2011; Lynch , Dickerson, Garber,  et al., 2011; Beardslee et al ., 2013), and she 
has previously worked with the lead investigators in the proposed study (Ken nard, Brent) in examining 
the cost effectiveness of interventions for youth with treatment resistant depression (Lynch, Dickerson, 
Clarke,  et al., 2011; Lynch, Dickerson, Garber,  et al., 2011 ). Dr. Lynch has particular expertise in the 
economics of youth mental health conditions (Lynch & Dickerson, 2017), and suicide prevention 
(Lynch, 2014).   
 
III. RESEARCH METHODS   
Overview of Study Design.   
Participants  
 
Participants will include adolescents 12 -17.11 years of age (N=250) who either 1) present to the 
inpatient psychiatry unit with recent suicidal ideation with plan or intent and/or a recent suicide attempt , 
or 2) are hospitalized on a medical floor for a suicide attempt .  Participants must be English speaking 
because the treatment is not validated in any language other than English. Additionally, adolescents 
must own a smartphone, tablet, or device on which the Brite app can be utilized.  Exclusion criteria 
include current (i.e., within the past two weeks) psychosis, mania, <85% of ideal body weight, and any 
cognitive disabilities necessitating additional testing (e.g., IQ <70, recent concussions with ongoing 
symptoms, etc.), as these conditions may require more intensive interventions or limit comprehension 
of the intervention components. Additionally, we will exclude participants being discharged to a 
residential treatment facility due to the level of supervision by professional adults in those facilities. The 
idea of the study is that the youth will return to his/her environment and will have the ability/need to use 
her/her safety plan while facing her/her real life problems. R esidential treatment is very similar to the 
inpatient setting in that it is very treatment oriented and there are numerous restrictions about 
electronics. Lastly, youth who does not have a responsible adult who has the ability/authority to consent 
for research participation (e.g., youth in the custody of child protective services) will be excluded. We 
will oversample males and ethnic minorities so that each group constitutes at least 25% and 35% of the 
total sample, respectively.  
 
Treatment Intervention (ASAP)  
 
The ASAP intervention model is designed to increase protection against adolescents acting on their suicidal urges and attempting suicide.  We use a motivational interviewing (MI)  framework for the 
intervention. The four modules are as follows: 1. treatment overview and psychoeducation about suicidal 
behavior, chain analysis, reasons for living, and safety planning; 2. distress tolerance techniques 3. 
savoring techniques for the maintenance of positive mood by reminiscing on recent positive events are 
taught, along with the practice of “switching” strategies designed to build resilience to stressors that may 
destabilize mood (29); and 4. review of the ASAP skills and safety plan with the teens and their family 
members (as available).  Quality assurance ratings will be  obtained on a random sample of 20% of ASAP 
sessions.  Up to two bridging calls (2) to the participant will be made at 1 and 2 weeks after discharge to 
review use of safety plan and ASAP components, and assess adherence to follow -up care.  
 
Phone App/ BRITE  (See also description about how app is personalized below)  
A HIPAA -compliant web- based phone application (Fig 1) provides the participants with guidance, social 
support, and convenient access to distress tolerance strategies and their safety plan via the patients’ 
STU112016 -057, Kennard, FormA- ResearchProtocol, Mod_16, 10- 01-21   8 phone. The app is compatible with both IOS and Android platforms.  The study therapist  will have access 
to a setup interface and web interface in order to customize the content of the participant’s view usage.  
Participants get  daily text reminders to rate their level of emotional distress (1-5, 5 the most upsetting) 
and on the basis of their level of distress, they are offered distress tolerance and emotion regulation skills, and support material that they have chosen. For participants at a high level of distress, the app offers the 
safety plan, including individual, interpersonal, and clinical contact options. The therapist, with the patient , 
will have the capacity to input  hypertext links to offsite techniques such as videos, images, sound memos, 
and support systems. For example, if a standard safety plan might recommend distraction or review of reasons for staying alive, we can link these recommendations to a video or text that might outline reasons 
for living, reasons to be hopeful, or an image that would serve as a distraction or a cue to savoring that is personalized for that individual. If initial “personal strategies” do not work, and the patient wanted to contact a parent, friend, or professional, the app provides a direct link  (call or text)  to the supportive or 
professional contacts developed as per the safety plan.  Up to two bridging calls (2) to the participant will 
be made at 1 and 2 weeks after discharge to review use of safety plan and ASAP components, and 
assess adherence to follow -up care.  
 Figure 1.  
  
 
 
BRITE  ALONE  
The BRITE  only condition will consist of a one session (1  hour) visit with a study therapist  who will 
conduct safety planning, specifically identifying the triggers of the suicide attempt/event using a chain 
analysis approach. In addition, the therapist will assist the patient in recognizing existing coping skills. 
The BRITE ALONE intervention will also include up to two bridging calls (2) to the participant that will be 
made at 1 and 2 weeks after discharge to review use of BRITE, and assess adherence to follow -up care.  
 The BRITE  app intervention will include using an emotional thermometer to identify markers of “point  of 
no return" and ask the participant  to identify strategies  that could be used to de-escalate (avoid triggers, 
distraction, calling family support / professionals, reasons for living, deep breathing, mindfulness, 
emergency contacts ). Information from the chain analysis, coping skills assessment, and emotional 
thermometer discussion will assist the therapist  and patient in populat ing the BRITE  app. Finally the 
therapist  and patient will identify barriers that might interfere with the patient’s ability to use  their plan.  
The Safety Plan will include: (1)  a family component that  includes the following: asking the patient to 
explain the safety plan to the parents, getting parental feedback, asking both parents and patient what 
might get in the way of implementing the plan, considering either ways to overcome those barriers or revising the plan, and (2) removing/securing lethal agents. The patient should be referred for 
emergenc y evaluation if they clearly express suicidal intent and are unwilling to commit to the safety 
plan. Clinical conditions that would impede ability to adhere to a safety plan include: psychosis, bipolar 
disorder  (rapid cycling or mixed state), alcohol and drug abuse, and a traumatic brain injury.  

STU112016 -057, Kennard, FormA- ResearchProtocol, Mod_16, 10- 01-21   9 ASAP + BRITE  + TAU :  
 
In this treatment condition, we will combine treatment as usual with ASAP and the phone app as we did in 
the pilot study (N = 65). The study therapist will provide the ASAP components that are described above, 
and assist the patient in populating the app with the ASAP strategies (safety plan, reasons for living, 
distress tolerance, savoring, supportive and professional contacts). The family  will be included in  the 
treatment  to review ASAP skills and the phone app.  
 
Treatment as Usual. The focus of inpatient care across sites is on diagnosis, safety assessment, 
development of a safety plan, stabilization, initiation or adjustment of pharmacotherapy, psychoeducation for patients and families, and disposition. Clinical referrals for outpatient treatment will be  provided prior to 
discharge. Unit therapists develop a safety plan with the patient and family, although there is  no standard 
protocol for doing so.  For participants in the ASAP  only group, BRITE  only group, and ASAP + BRITE  + 
TAU, therapists will expand  on the inpatient safety plan to include emotion regulation and distress 
tolerance st rategies . 
 
The ASAP  + TAU , BRITE  + TAU , and ASAP  + BRITE  + TAU  treatment will be front -loaded, meaning that 
each will either precede discharge or commence within one week of discharge to recommended 
outpatient psychiatric treatment. Study therapists will be trained to deliver all three active treatment arms . 
TAU will be provided by inpatient staff. Researchers will also send a letter regarding participation in the 
study to the subject’s outpatient therapist.  
  Randomization.  Participants will be randomized centrally at WPIC by a  web-based computer program 
that has been used successfully in other studies ( Brent et al. , 2008; Garber et al. , 2009 ).The study 
coordinator at each site will complete a Randomization Request form on the secure website. Once the 
form is completed, a database trigger will run the randomization program to determine the group  
assignment. The program will automatically generate and send an email to the study coordinator and 
the data coordinating center to notify them of the assignment. Participants will be balanced both within 
and across sites  on age (12-15 vs. 16- 17.11), and past attempt vs. high ideation. To increase the 
gender and ethnic diversity in the overall sample, we will oversample males and individuals f rom 
minority groups to include 25% males and 35% minority groups.  
 
 
Assessments (see Table 1) : 
 
Follow -up assessments using independent evaluators blind to treatment condition will be conducted at 
Weeks 4, 12, and 24.  TAU or s tandard care on the inpatient unit includes  diagnosis, safety assessment 
and stabilization, initiation or adjustment of pharmacotherapy, psychoeducation of patients and families, and disposition. It is standard care for the inpatient units to provide clinical referrals for outpatient 
treatment and typically a follow- up appointment occurs about 1 week after discharge.   We will also directly 
measure TAU services post hospitalization using a service use assessment instrument (CASA – see 
measures section).   
 Demographic s, including gender identity and sexual orientation (as per requirements by AFSP research 
grants) will be collected at baseline. We will compare the four treatment conditions  with respect to three 
main set s of outcomes:  (1) efficacy at reducing suicidal ideation, and increasing time to suicidal attempt  
and ( 2) moderators and mediators related to suicidal outcomes, (3) cost effectiveness of each 
intervention alone and combined compared to TAU.  
 
STU112016 -057, Kennard, FormA- ResearchProtocol, Mod_16, 10- 01-21   10 To shorten the diagnostic assessment, dimensional measures of psychopathology will be obtained from 
the parent, using the Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire (SDQ ; Goodman, 1997) and the 
corresponding Youth Self Report (YSR) from the participant ( Achenbach , 1991) at intake. D iagnostic 
assessment will include dimensional measures of anxiety (the Screen for Anxiety Related Disorders 
[SCARED, 5 item scale ]) (Birmaher et al. , 1999 ), depression (Patient Health Questionnaire [PHQ -9]) 
(Johnson, Harris , Spitzer, & Williams,   2002; Richardson et al. , 2010 ), alcohol and drug use ( CRAFFT - 
self report substance use screening tool)  (Knight  et al. , 1999) , and sleep disturbance ( Pittsburgh Sleep 
Quality Index [ PSQ ]; Buysse, Reynolds, Monk, Berman, & Kupfer, 1989). These measures will be 
obtained at each follow up , since these are often targets of group and individual treatment  and because 
these may be potential moderators of use of the safety plan and of suicidal ideation change.  
Outcome measures:  
 Suicidal ideation and behavior .  Information about past and current suicidal behavior and non- suicidal 
self-injury will be  assessed using the Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C -SSRS)  (Posner et al.,  
2011) .  NSSI, while not a primary outcome of this study, is important because of recent findings that 
NSSI is an even stronger predictor of eventual suicidal behavior than  past suicidal behavior (Asarnow 
et al. , 2011 ; Wilkinson et al. , 2011; Cox, Stanley , et al. , 2012 ). Factors related to the risk of suicide 
attempt or completion will also be measured using the Concise Health Risk Tracking scale (CHRT; 
Trivedi et al., 2011).  As a secondary outcome, we will track r easons for living, using the Reasons for 
Living Inventory  questionnaire, with the expectation that over time, as a result of treatment and the 
safety plan, that adolescents will show an increased score on this scale, which has been shown to be 
protective against future suicidal behavior (Osman et al. , 1998).  
Assessment of Moderators and Mediators . We will be comparing the efficacy of ASAP, BRITE , and the 
combination of both on change in suicidal ideation, suicidal  behavior  free days, and time to suicide 
attempts . It is important to assess those variables most likely to contribute to differences in outcome, or 
that may moderate the effects of the intervention.  Based on our preliminary results, we anticipate th at 
the effects of ASAP and BRITE will be mediated by changes in emotion regulation ( Difficulti es in 
Emotion Regulation Scale [ DERS ]; Gratz & Roemer, 2004) , distress tolerance ( Distress Tolerance Scale; 
Simons & Gaher, 2005), reasons for living ( RFL-A; Osman et al. , 1998) , and motivation (Readiness, 
Importance, & Confidence Ruler [RICTC]; Moyers et al., 2009). 
Possible moderators of outcome include history of child maltreatment  (Childhood Trauma 
Questionnaire [CTQ];  Bernstein, Fink, Handelsman, & Foote, 1997), social support  (Multidimensional 
Scale of Perceived Social Support [ MSPSS] ; Zimet, Dahlem, Zimet , & Farley, 1988) , and family climate 
(Family Adaptability  and Cohesion Evaluation Scale [ FACES- IV]; Marsac &  Alderfer , 2011). As noted 
above, we will also test whether history of a suicidal attempt moderates treatment response , as it did in 
our pilot study. 
Client Satisfaction.  Client satisfaction will be obtained from the patient and caretaking parent using an 
adaptation of the Computer System Usability Questionnaire (C SUQ) to assess satisfaction with the 
phone app. The PSSUQ will be filled out by the participant, and is based on earlier measures designed to predict the adoption of technology, based on two main factors: ease of use (easy to learn, access, 
flexibility, qu ality of sound, quality of visual display) and usefulness (able to access when needed, 
helpful when used), which are scored along a 7- point Likert Scales with good psychometric properties 
(Davis, 1989; Lucas & Spitler, 1999). Exit interviews will also take place to measure satisfaction. Participants who are randomly selected to complete an Exit interview assessment will be given an 
additional $25 payment. Participants will only be paid after completion of the assessment.  
STU112016 -057, Kennard, FormA- ResearchProtocol, Mod_16, 10- 01-21   11 Treatment Utilization.  Treatment history will be obtained at baseline, including services received for 
psychiatric complaints and medications taken. History will also be obtained at baseline and recent use 
during all follow -up assessment calls using the Child and Adolescent Ser vices Assessment [CASA] 
(Ascher & Farmer, 1996).  
 
Suicide Free Days . The adolescent version of the Longitudinal Interval Follow -Up Evaluation (A -LIFE): 
Psychiatric Status Ratings (PSR) score sheet (Keller et al,, 1987) will be used to evaluate suicide free 
days. This measure is used to record symptom variations that have occurred since the last 
assessment. The extent of the subject’s recovery from previous episodes of DSM -IV disorders as well 
as the occurrence and degree of severity of any new disorders is recorded using a 4 -point rating over 
monthly inter vals on the PSR score sheet.  
  
Rescue procedures and disclosure of suicidal ideation on interview . Upon entry into the study, we 
obtain permission to discuss the patient’s care with one of three supportive individuals  nominated by 
the participant who can help the participant to obtain emergency treatment, if he or she is judged to be Table 1. Assessments  
 Completed By:  Assessment Of:  Baseline  Wk 
4 Wk 
12 Wk 
24 
SDQ  P Symptoms  X    
YSR SR Symptoms  X    
C-SSRS  C, IE  Suicidal behavior  X X X X 
CASA  C, IE  Service Use  X X X X 
Trauma (2-items)  SR Trauma  X    
PHQ -9 SR Depression  X X X X 
SCARED (5 
item)  SR Anxiety  X X X X 
DERS  SR Emotional Regulation  X X X X 
DTS SR Distress Tolerance  X X X X 
RICTC  C, IE  Motivation  X X X X 
MSPSS  SR Social Support  X X X X 
FACES -IV SR Family Support  X    
CRAFFT  SR Substance  X X X X 
PSQI  SR Sleep  X X X X 
RFL-A SR Reasons for Living  X X X X 
CSUQ  SR (app users ) Satisfaction  with app   X   
PedsQL  SR, P Quality of Life  X X X X 
FEII-E P Parent missed time from 
work  X X X X 
ALIFE  IE Suicide free days   X X X 
CHRT  SR Suicide Risk  X X X X 
Exit interview  SR Satisfaction   X   
GENINFO  C Demographics  X    
IE: Independent Evaluator; C: Clinician/Therapist; SR: Self -Report; P: Parent; B: 
Behavioral Marker completed by patient  
STU112016 -057, Kennard, FormA- ResearchProtocol, Mod_16, 10- 01-21   12 a high suicidal risk  during the follow -up period, after discharge from inpatient care.  If the patient 
endorses suicidal ideation on a clinical assessment, we ask if the participant can keep him - or herself 
safe, and assess the degree of intent and planning related to suicidal ideation. Participants judged to be 
at high risk will be discussed with either Drs. Kennard or Brent .  If upon discharge, during the follow -up 
period, the patient is judged to be at high risk, participants and/or their parents  will be  referred for 
emergency care. Both sites have access to 24 -hour psychiatric emergency care .  
 
Removal from the study.  The main reason to be removed from the intervention is if the participant 
develops a condition that makes it impossible to cooperate with case management (e.g., acute psychosis, mania).  However, we will follow- up all participants at their scheduled assessments.  
 
Personalization of the App: A HIPAA -compliant web- based application has been designed to provide 
the participants with guidance, social support, and convenient access to their safety plan via the patients’ phone. If a participant does not have a cell phone or a device that can access the application, 
the study will supply the participant with one for the duration of the study (24 weeks). Phones that are 
provided to the participants will have all data removed prior to reassigning to a new participant. All 
phones will be password protected in case it is lost or stolen . The research c oordinator  and PIs will 
have access to a setup interface and web interface in order to customize the content of the participant’s  
app and view usage. The  app goes beyond the current practice of writing a safety plan that the patient 
can carry with them.  Instead, the app will not only list the steps in the plan, but has  the capacity to 
support  these steps through hypertext links to offsite techniques such as videos, images, sound 
memos, and support systems.  
The BRITE App includes the following components , which are in accordance with accepted best 
practice for developing and implementing such plans:  Personal Strategies : Distraction (take a walk),  
listen to music (link to audio), think about a favorite spot (beach picture), reasons for living (link to family 
picture, picture of pet, image of a college s/he wants to attend , friend talking about how important the 
patient is to them), or other techniques (exercise, self -talk, savoring).  Reaching out : Talking with friends, 
family and other supports; (participant clicks on one and autodials  or autotexts ). Professional help: 
therapist, guidance counselor, family physician, psychiatrist, emergency numbers; (list of contacts, the patient clicks on one, and autodials).  
Clinical studies and real- time analyses of contributors to suicidal behavior find that the following are 
contributors to the decision to make a suicide attempt in the face of suicidal urges: (1) inability to generate alternative solutions; (2) inability to  manage or cope with negative affect; (3) hopelessness 
and inability to consider reasons for living; and (4) perception of being a burden, and hence not reaching out for support (Joiner, Pfaff , & Acres,  2002) . The app  provides technological aids to combat 
these common characteristics of suicidal adolescents. The application has  a list of alternative solutions 
to suicide which the adolescent has generated when calm. By having such a list handy and stored on the phone, the teen does not have to re- generate this list  when  under duress. In addition to poor 
problem -solving, youth who are at risk for suicidal behavior show difficulty with emotion regulation: they 
experience more subjectively distress, and are less adept at coping and attenuating negative emotion 
(Nock et al. , 2013) . The first step in the safety plan is to review techniques, chosen by the teen that can 
be effective in achieving emotional de -escalation. Joiner has articulated a model of suicidal behavior 
that includes perceived burdensomeness (Joiner et al. , 2002 ). The dangerous part of this perception is 
that support can be protective against suicidal risk, but a person who perceives her/himself  to be a 
burden will not reach out. Thus, we have the capacity to include, when appropriate, short videos of a 
person in the patient’s social network who says how important s/he is to them. The second and third tier 
of interventions are to reach out to  other people in his/her social network, and to seek clinical 
attention—either from the therapist, ED, or  24-hour hotline that is programmed into the app.  All these 
techniques serve to help the participant cope with suicidal urges and defuse the suicidal crisis.  Since 
STU112016 -057, Kennard, FormA- ResearchProtocol, Mod_16, 10- 01-21   13 the phone will record the patient’s response to, and use of , the different techniques of the safety plan, 
this provides a framework for the therapist to evaluate the efficacy of the plan and to make changes 
accordingly.  
Treatment blinding.  During the RCT, the independent evaluator (IE ) will be blind ed to the assigned 
condition and will take the following steps to preserve the blind: participants and families are asked not 
to share with the IE which condition they are assigned to; at staff meetings when cases are reviewed, 
IEs are not present; IEs are asked to guess what the treatment assignment is at the end of each 
interview, and they will notify the project coordinator if they become unblinded. Also, we obtain 
complement ary self -report forms that will not be influenced by interviewer bias.  
Research Clinician dashboard:  The study therapist  whose patient is assigned to BRITE  and ASAP + 
BRITE  + TAU  will have a dashboard for that patient set up that will display information gathered from  
use of the app, namely frequency of use. The BRITE  clinician dashboard contains information about 
each individual participant’s activity on the app. From the dashboard, research and clinical staff are 
able to view the date and time participants downloaded and registered the app onto their phone.  Study staff are also able to view other app activities including how many times they log in, how they rate their 
mood at each login (on a 1- 5 scale) and which activities they viewed, modified to make more personal, 
or deleted.  The duration of time in which the app remains open and any navigation the participant does 
within the app is logged and time stamped.  After completing an activity, participants are also prompted 
to submit if they feel better, worse, or the same after the activity and are offered a chance to re- rate 
their mood post activity.  We will, with the permission of the participant and family, provide their 
outpatient clinician with regular updates about app use and efficacy of different strategies.  
Quality Assurance.  
Assessments. IEs will be supervised by trained and experienced evaluators on the C -SSRS. A ll 
assessments will be taped, and 20% will be reviewed by the supervisors at each site .  IEs must 
maintain at least 80% agreement with the supervisors  in order to continue in this role.  
 
Safety planning.  There are three aspects to quality assurance for case management. First, each 
assessment will be staffed at each site by the PIs  or co -Is (Drs. Brent , Goldstein, or Douaihy  or Dr s. 
Kennard, Foxwell, Stone ). Second, after the chain analysis, assigned site investigators  will review the 
chain analysis and subsequent safety plan that is developed at their respective sites .  Third, the quality 
of the safety planning will be reviewed using the Safety Plan Rating Scale (SPRS)  (Kennard et al., 
submitted). 
Treatment.  Therapists will have at least a master’s level training or will be currently enrolled in a doctoral 
program with experience and expertise in treating suicidal youth. ASAP t herapists will have a 2- day 
training (by Skype or ooVoo) on the components of treatment prior to beginning formal intervention and 
will also attend a day -long training in MI principles, skills and strategies with study with Co -I Dr. Douaihy, 
an experienced member of the MI Network of Trainers (MINT) and Dr. Tina Goldstein, who has expertise 
in the application of MI  principles. Dr. Dana McMakin ( Co-I) will provide training in savoring, switching 
strategies for improving access to positive mood. Therapists will record all of their sessions; all sessions 
will be reviewed for the open trial, and then a random 20 % of sessions will be reviewed in the RCT for 
adherence and competence. Therapists will also receive training on BRITE  during the 2 day training. 
Study therapists will be able to provide ASAP only, BRITE  only, and ASAP + BRITE  + TAU .  
Statistical analysis.  
We will begin with a preliminary analysis of data, for example to examine missingness patterns, 
outliers, and consider transformations and dimension reduction methods. Next, we will compare the 
four groups on demographic and clinical variables to identify any differences between groups. In the regression analyses below, we will include those variables that are related to the main outcomes of the 
STU112016 -057, Kennard, FormA- ResearchProtocol, Mod_16, 10- 01-21   14 study. We will also assess site effects and control for them if indicated. Our initial analysis for each 
hypothesis will be a test of equality of the two or four cells without covariates, using the appropriate (t or 
F, chi -square, Kaplan- Meier) test for continuous, discrete, and time -to-event data. We will then use 
appropriate (GLM) regression methods developed by Hedeker and colleagues (Hedeker, Mermelstein, & Demirtas, 2008; Hedeker, Mermelstein, & Demirtas, 2009) for both continuous and discrete data. We  
will also use the Cox models to study the time to suicidal event, with appropriate modifications if the 
proportional hazards assumption is in doubt. We will try to ascertain the reason(s) for any missing data 
in order to decide on how to deal with missingness. We adopt the general approach of Little and Rubin 
(2002): we will do sensitivity analyses, comparing the results of completers only, last value carried 
forward, and multiple imputation by chained equations (MICE) and report inferences that are well 
supported by those analyses. Next, we will address the three secondary aims: our approach to mediation and moderation analysis, and cost -effectiveness analysis are described below. We will also 
do extensive exploratory analyses to assess the potential effects of other covariates we measure, such as adherence, gender identity, emotion regulation, and sexual orientation. Finally, for all regression 
analyses, we will use standard regression diagnostics (residual plots, influence measures) to assess the fits of our models, and refine them if indicated by the data.  
 
Primary aims . 
Hypothesis 1. Both ASAP and BRITE will be superior to TAU alone, and ASAP + BRITE  + TAU will be 
superior to BRITE or ASAP alone.  
Our main analysis will be the use of two- way ANOVA with an interaction term. We will use the 
assessments from the instruments listed in Table 1 to study the three main outcomes. For SI severity, 
we will use a linear model; for NSSI and suicide attempts , we will use a Poisson model; and for the time 
to attempt, we will use the Cox model. We will include as covariates the following: site, the three 
covariates we balanced on in our randomization, and any covariates we find in our preliminary analyses 
to be  associated with the outcome; we will consider mixed effects models if they provide a better fit. We 
do not expect a strong interaction term; if so, our inferences will be based on the main effects. As additional analyses, we will use post -hoc tests for th e four main comparisons: the combination vs. each 
component, and each component vs. TAU.  
 H2: The effects of ASAP and BRITE will be mediated by increases in reasons for living, decreases in 
dysfunctional emotional regulation, increases in functional emotional regulation, and decreases in 
implicit associations with death, and will be moderated by previous history of an attempt, and family engagement in treatment. In addition, the impact of BRITE will be proportional to the frequency of use.  
For moderator and mediator analyses, we use the standard approach of Baron and Kenney (1986) and 
later explicated by Kraemer and colleagues (2002) and Kraemer (2008) for moderators. The search for 
moderators is typically an exploratory analysis because it involves the testing of interaction terms, for 
which power is usually limited. Thus, we will use the recent optimal weighted moderator profi les 
developed by Wallace, Frank, and Kraemer (2013) that combine potential (weaker) moderators. For 
mediator analyses, we will follow the approach of Preacher and Hayes (2008) for handling multiple mediators. In particular, we will begin by including the candidate mediators listed above in a single 
model and test their significance using both standard errors using the Gaussian model or the bootstrap 
if the Gaussian model is not a good fit.  
 H3: Cost per outcome achieved will by will be lower for each of the interventions (ASAP + BRITE  + 
TAU; ASAP alone; BRITE  alone) compared to TAU at Week 24 Week s follow- up. Cost per outcome 
achieved will be most advantageous  for ASAP + BRITE  + TAU.  We will adopt a societal perspective on 
costs, assessing the cost of all usual health services, costs of services in other sectors (e.g., school), 
STU112016 -057, Kennard, FormA- ResearchProtocol, Mod_16, 10- 01-21   15 and costs to the families (e.g., out -of-pocket costs, missed time from work).  This perspective will 
provide the type of data relevant to health care managers and health policy makers who would make 
decisions about  whether or not to adopt these  interventions .  We will conduct a series of incremental 
cost- effectiveness analyses (CEA) comparing ASAP  + BRITE  + TAU , ASAP, BRITE , and TAU.  
Cost effectiveness ratio (CE ratio) .  Below, we provide a sample computation of a CE ratio, comparing 
ASAP to TAU and using change in quality -adjusted life years (QALYs)  as the clinical outcome metric.  
 
Experts have noted that there are numerous empirical challenges to accurately estimating incremental cost- effectiveness ratios (Gold et al., 1996).  We next describe our procedures for assessing each 
component of the CE ratio, namely, the CE clinical metric and the costs of the ASAP and BRITE  
interventions , other services and family costs.    
Clinical metrics .  We will conduct cost -effectiveness analyses using several clinical metrics that may 
be useful to decision- makers.  First, w e will calculate CE ratios using QALYs, this is the recommended 
metric by experts (Gold, Siegel, Russell, & Weinstein,  1996).  Specifically, we will calculate QALYs 
using the PEDSQL (Varni , Seid, & Rode,  1999) .  However, this may not be the most meaningful 
outcome to clinical decision -makers.  For this reason, we will also calculate CE ratios using a n 
additional clinical metric , number of days free from suicide attempt and/or ideation (SFD).  We will 
follow methods used in studies of the cost -effectiveness of depression treatment (Lave, Frank , 
Schulberg, & K amlet,  1998; Lynch et al. , 2017 ; Lynch, Dickerson, Clarke , et al. , 2011 ). We will calculate 
SFDs using data from our suicide attempt and ideation outcome measures . Total S FDs will be 
calculated by summing estimated daily S FD values over the 6- month  study period.  
Overall approach to measurement of cost . In our analysis, costs will be assessed with the following 
general strategy: (a) calculate direct costs of ASAP and BRITE , including intervention (labor, 
equipment, supplies, facilities, management); (b) calculate total other service use and expense for each 
participant, in each  arm of the study ( ASAP, BRITE , ASAP+ BRITE +TAU , TAU) using the CASA; and 
(c) family costs (out -of-pocket expenses, parent missed time from work).  Note that this approach 
includes all services  as “costs” for youths in each arm, not simply the cost of the new intervention 
program s.  This methodology will allow us to capture any cost -offset of participation in the ASAP, 
BRITE , or ASAP + BRITE  + TAU  program s or, conversely, any increase in costs associated with 
additional service utilization by youths in the se arms.  This same strategy will be used for determining 
costs of the TAU arm ( counting all service utilization as a cost associated TAU). 
Measurement of direct intervention costs . An intervention “input” will be defined as  any service 
provided to the intervention groups that is not provided to the TAU  control group by the research team. 
We will not include research- specific inputs on either side of this calculation, such as time spent 
conducting baseline assessments.  The direct costs of the intervention program s are the salary and 
fringe benefits for labor inputs (e.g., therapists, appointments clerks); costs of medical office space to Incremental Cost -Effectiveness =  
(Direct ASAP  Intervention Costs) + (Total Service  & Family Cost ASAP - Total Service & Family  Costs TAU) 
[∆Mean QALY ASAP - ∆Mean QALY TAUl] 
STU112016 -057, Kennard, FormA- ResearchProtocol, Mod_16, 10- 01-21   16 conduct the intervention meetings; costs of treatment manuals and materials and therapy supplies; and 
general administration and overhead. Purchased inputs (e.g., manual printing) will be valued at their invoiced cost.  Professional labor inputs will be valued using unit cost estimates developed from a 
national database (see costing algorithm).  
Measurement of utilization of services (Total Service Costs) . Comprehensive service use  profiles 
will be developed on every participant.  We  will obtain data on utilization with the CASA, Child Health 
Services Screen. The CASA collects comprehensive data on all types of health services received by 
the participant in any health care setting, associated with treatment for the target conditions o f the study 
(i.e., internalizing symptoms).  We will also collect family out -of-pocket expenses from the CASA.  
Parent time missed from work will be assessed using the Family Economic Impact Interview, 
Employment module (FEII -E) (Lynch & Dickerson, 2012) .   
Costing algorithm.  To assign costs to the utilization data and the mental health professional services 
used in the interventions , we will develop a set of unit cost coefficients using the Medical Expenditure 
Panel Study (MEPS), a nationally representative survey of health care utilization and cost that includes comprehensive assessment of health care services including mental health services  (Agency for 
Healthcare Research and Quality, 2004).   Similar approaches have been used by other investigators 
conducting CEA of mental health interventions (Schoenbaum et al., 2001). Health care costs will be converted to constant dollars by using the cost conversion coefficients for a year in the middle of the 
study period. This approach eliminates the effects of inflation on expenses and removes the burden of adjusting for inflation from the cost and cost -effectiveness models.  
Model fitting .  We will collect detailed data to minimize the need to estimate resource consumption. 
This will not alleviate all uncertainty in measurement of the CEA, however.  To address the remaining 
uncertainty, we will conduct sensitivity analyses to ascertain the effects of  variations in the key 
parameters.  If these analyses indicate considerable uncertainty, we will use simulation modeling such as bootstrapped estimates to reduce uncertainty.  We have used these methods successfully in previous studies (Lynch et al.,  2017 ; Lynch , Dickerson, Clarke,  et al. , 2011; Lynch et al. , 2005 ). The 
CEA will be conducted by Dr. Lynch in coordination with the lead investigators (Ken nard, Brent).   
Power Analyses  
All power calculations assume size alpha= 0.05 two- sided tests and requiring power 0.80, and 
assuming 85% retention (we had 92% retention in our pilot study), so we have 51 subjects per cell. For 
Hypothesis 1, with a total of 204 patients, we can detect a small effect size of approximately f2 = 0.06 
for the two -way models with an interaction term. For post -hoc direct comparisons involving only the 
cells of size 51 we have power to detect medium effects of size approximately d=0.55. For Hypothesis 
2, the results of Hedges and Pigott (2004) show  that we have power to detect large effects for individual 
cells. It is well known that tests for moderation can have low power; however, we do expect that our use 
of optimally comb ined moderators will enhance our  ability to identify key moderators. Finally, for testing 
potential mediators, previous simulation studies indicate that we have power to detect medium to large 
effects sizes  for the individual cells (MacKinnon, Lockwood, Hoffman, West, & Sheets, 2002).  
Strengths, Limitations, and Future Plans.   
To our knowledge, this is the first attempt to establish the efficacy of brief interventions to prevent post -
discharge suicide attempts in psychiatrically hospitalized suicidal adolescents, the first to establish the 
STU112016 -057, Kennard, FormA- ResearchProtocol, Mod_16, 10- 01-21   17 efficacy of safety planning as an intervention, and the first to test the efficacy of a smartphone 
intervention to reduce suicidal behavior.  However, we cannot control the duration and types of 
treatments that the participants experience while on the inpatient unit and thereafter, although we can document and adjust for the effects of differences to pre - and post -discharge intervention. For example, 
we can conduct analyses stratified by length of hospitalization as a sensitivity check. In addition, there 
may be differences with respect the type, intensity, and duration of outpatient care, although we will 
gather this information and covary its impact on outcome.    
Based on our cost -effectiveness analyses, we will identify the most cost -effective component of our 
intervention for future dissemination studies, by training inpatient staff on the intervention, and 
evaluating the effectiveness of this intervention as delivered by inpatient clinicians.  
 
HUMAN SUBJECTS RESEARCH Human Subjects Issues. A full IRB application has been submitted and will be modified to include this 
increased sample size . We are aware that any study of suicidal patients requires special attention to 
issues of participant safety and confidentiality.  All participants will be in inpatient  treatment with close 
monitoring by the treatment staff. However, we will take several steps to ensure participant safety. We 
will include provision of rescue procedures for patients at high suicidal risk, including involvement of 
significant others and involvement of emergency mental health services if necessary.  
 Protection Against Risk. The risks due to interview are three- fold: discussion of potentially upsetting 
information, loss of confidentiality, and assessment burden. The interviewers will all be trained and skilled 
interviewers who can assess and monitor the reaction to questioning about sensitive topics; interviewees 
will be given the option of not responding or ending the interview. We will provide the patient and family 
with emergency contact numbers regardless of treatment assignment. If upon follow -up, participants are 
not in treatment and we identify serious psychopathology and/or suicidal risk, we will provide referral 
information to the participant and parents. If at any of these points, we perceive that the patient is in 
imminent suicidal risk and the parent/patient is not willing to address this issue, then we will contact 
emergency mental health services to initiate an emergency assessment. To protect against violations of 
privacy, we try to have the respondent take the phone call in a private place. To protect the adolescent who may  be suicidal, we only conduct phone interviews when know we will be able to reach the 
participant’s  parent . In particular , teens will be evaluated at weeks 4,  12, and 24  to assess suicidal 
ideation and behaviors, as well as specific psychiatric illnesses, and may be given recommendations for additional treatment options should concerns arise during the evaluation. The risk of lack of improvement 
or worsening of psychiatric illness will be addressed by monitoring subjects closely during assessments. 
For all groups at 4 , 12, and 24 weeks, if we detect untreated psychiatric disorder, or non- adherence, and 
there is not imminent risk, then we will pass this information to the parent and provide recommendations.  
 Because of the sensitive nature of the phone app, the phone application will follow HIPAA compliance 
best practices to ensure the privacy of the users’ information at all times. Security will be integrated 
throughout the app, and accomplished with device login timeouts; ensuring all sensitive information is encrypted when stored and transmitted; two- factor authentication, which is an approach to 
authentication that requires the presentation of “two or more” factors (e.g., phone UID and login 
password); and ensuring that no sensitive data is stored on the device itself. Most of these features will prevent loss of confidentiality in the event that the phone is lost; however, we will also ensure that the 
app can be remotely deactivated to make sure all information remains confidential.   
 
STU112016 -057, Kennard, FormA- ResearchProtocol, Mod_16, 10- 01-21   18  
We will convene an independent Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) to review adverse events across 
the study and within each intervention arm. Prior to any clinical interview confidentiality is discussed with 
the patient and family during the consent process. This includes state guidelines for reporting abuse. All 
research  personnel are trained and certified in ethical conduct of research, all information stored securely 
and separately from identifying information, phones will contain no identifying data and the phone app will be password protected, and communication between participant and research staff will be encrypted. 
Because its sensitive nature, the phone application will follow HIPAA compliance best practices to ensure 
the privacy of the users’ information at all times.  
 
Project Timeline  
 
  
 
Year 1  Year 2  Year 3  Year 4   
1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 
Technical support, app training    
Training                 
 Recruitment, consent, and enroll patients to RCT    
 Data entry and cleaning >   
               Outcome 
papers  
 
Months 1 – 3 ( June 1, 2018 – August  31, 2018) 
Study implementation preparations  
− Training in ASAP intervention and BRITE  
− Meet with inpatient staff  
 
Months 3-43 (September 1, 2018 – December 1 , 2021) 
− Recruitment of participants  for RCT 
− Data entry  
 
Months 44 – 48 (December  1, 2022 – May 31, 2021) 
 
− Data entry continued  
− Data cleaning on completed participants  
− Write primary outcome paper  
 
MULTIPLE PI LEADERSHIP PLAN  
Drs.  Kennard and  Brent will jointly provide oversight of the entire project and development and 
implementation of all policies, procedures, and processes, including the scientific agenda, specific 
aims, study design, and training of personnel. In addition, both will oversee the study procedures to 
STU112016 -057, Kennard, FormA- ResearchProtocol, Mod_16, 10- 01-21   19 ensure that systems are in place and function in a way so as to remain in compliance with local IRB 
policies, US laws, DHHS and AFSP policies including human research, data and facilities.  
Governance:  We will operate on consensus whenever possible. The process will be to encourage 
all to have a voice in decisions and to move the group toward consensus. In the multi -site TORDIA 
project, for which WPIC and UTSW were the two largest sites, we were always able to achieve consensus. If we cannot come to consensus,   will consult with other senior colleagues and reconvene.  
Executive Committee (EC):  The EC will have a weekly conference call to discuss the status of the 
study, recruitment, intervention, adherence, and adverse events. The EC will consist of each of the PIs and 1 Co- I from each site (Brent, Kennard, Goldstein, Foxwell), and Dr. Kennard will serve as the chair. 
The EC will make all decisions regarding the protocol, budget, and publication policy.  
Publication Policy:  The EC will establish a publication policy at the start of the study. The core 
papers are listed under the products at the end of the application will include papers on the description 
of the model and feasibility, the utility of the phone app, and the results of the RCT with respect to proximal (e.g., positive affect) and more distal (suicidal events) outcomes. Additional papers will be 
proposed by individual authors at the sites, and the EC will review and approve all papers. Each site will be represented on all outcome papers.  
Study Coordinator Conference Calls: The study coordinators, research assis tants, and data 
manager (WPIC) from each site will have a biweekly conference call to discuss day -to-day study 
procedures, patient management, reliability of assessments, and review for data completeness and 
data management.  
Dispute resolution. As noted above, we strive to make all decisions by consensus, and in the past 
decade of working together, always have been able to do that. However, should we not be able to 
reach consensus, we will turn to our respective chairpersons who will confer and decide. 
 
 
References  
 
Achenbach, T. M. (1991).  Integrative Guide to the 1991 CBLC/4 -18, YSR, and TRF Profiles . Burlington, VT:  
University of Vermont . 
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. (2004). Medical Expenditure Panel Survey [online]. Retrieved 
from https://meps.ahrq.gov/mepsweb/  
Andreasson, K., Krogh, J., Bech, P., Frandsen, H., Buus, N., Stanley, B., Kerkhof, A., Nordentoft, M., & 
Erlangsen, A. (2017). MYPLAN - mobile application to manage crisis of persons at risk of suicide: Study 
protocol for a randomized controlled trial. BioMed Central , 18, 171. doi:10.1186/s13063- 017-1876-9 
Appleby, L., Dennehy, J. A., Thomas, C. S., Faragher, E. B., & Lewis, G. (1999). Aftercare and clinical 
characteristics of people with mental illness who commit suicide: A case -control study.  The Lancet , 
353(9162), 1397 -1400. doi:10.1016/S0140 -6736(98)10014-4 
Appleby, L., Shaw, J., Amos, T., McDonnell, R., Harris, C., McCann, K., Kiernan, K., Davies, S., Bickley, H., & 
Parsons, R. (1999). Suicide within 12 months of contact with mental health services: A national clinical 
survey. The British Journal of Medicine, 318(7193), 1235- 1239. doi:10.1136/bmj.318.7193.1235  
Asarnow, J. R., Porta,  G., Spirito, A., Emslie, G., Clarke, G., Wagner, K. D., Vitiello, B., Keller, M., Birmaher, 
B., McCracken, J., Mayes, T., Berk, M., & Brent, D. A.  (2011). Suicide attempts and nonsuicidal self -
injury in the treatment of resistant depression in adolescents: Findings from the TORDIA s tudy. Journal 
of the American Academy of Child & Adolescet Psychiatry,  50(8), 772-781. 
doi:10.1016/j.jaac.2011.04.003  
Ascher, B. H., & Farmer, E. M. Z. (1996). The Child and Adolescent Services Assessment (CASA): Description 
and psychometrics. Journal of Emotional & Behavioral Disorders , 4(1), 12 -20.  
STU112016 -057, Kennard, FormA- ResearchProtocol, Mod_16, 10- 01-21   20 Bagge, C. L., Lamis, D. A., Nardoff, M., & Osman, A. (2013). Relations between hopelessness, depressive 
symptoms, and suicidality: Mediation by reasons for living. Journal of Clinical Psychology , 70(1), 18- 31. 
doi:10.1002/jclp.22005  
Bakhiyi, C. L., Calati, R., Guillaume, S., & Courtet, P. (2016). Do reasons for living protect against suicidal 
thoughts and behaviors? A systematic review of the literature. Journal of Psychiatric Research , 77, 92-
108. doi:10.1016/j.jpsychhires.2016.02.019  
Baron, R . M., & Kenny , D. A. (1986) . The moderator -mediator variable distinction in social psycological 
research: Conceptual, strategic and statistical considerations. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology , 51, 1173 -1182.   
Beardslee, W. R., Brent, D. A., Weersing, R., Clarke, G. N., Porta, G., Hollon, S. D., Gladstone, T. R. 
G.,Gallop, R., Lynch, F. L., Iyengar, S., Debar, L., & Garber, J. (2013). Prevention of depression in at -
risk adolescents: Longter -term effects. JAMA Psychiatry , 70(11), 1161 -1170. doi: 
10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2013.295  
Bernstein, D. P., Fink, L., Handelsman, L., & Foote, J. (1994). Initial reliability and validity of a new 
retrospective measure of child abuse and neglect. A merican  Journal  of Psychiatry,  151(8), 1132 -1136.  
doi:10.1176/ajp.151.8.1132 
Bird, H.R., Andrews, H., Schwab- Stone, M., Goo dman, S., Dulcan, M., Richters, J., Rubio -Stipec, M., Moore, 
R. E., Huang Chiang, P. O., Hoven, C., Canino, G., Fisher, P., & Gould, M. S. (1996) Global measures 
of impairment for epidemiologic and clinical use with children and adolescents.  International Journal of 
Methods in Psychiatric Research, 6(4), 295- 307.  
Birmaher, B., Brent, D. A., Chiappetta, L., Bridge, J., Monga, S., & Baugher, M. (1999). Psychometric 
Properties of the Screen for Child Anxiety Related Emotional Disorders (SCARED):  A replication study.  
Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry , 38(10), 1230- 1236.  
doi:10.1097/00004583 -199910000- 00011  
Brent, D. A., Baugher, M., Bridge, J., Chen, T., & Chiappetta, L. (1999). Age- and sex -related risk factors for 
adolescent suicide. Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry , 38(12), 1497-
1505. doi:10.1097/00004583- 199912000- 00010  
Brent, D., Emslie,  G., Clarke, G., Wagner, K. D., Asarnow, J. R., Keller, M., Vitiello, B., Ritz, L., Iyengar, S., 
Abebe, K., Birmaher, B., Ryan, N., Kennard, D., Hughes, C., DeBar, L., McCracken, J., Strober, M., 
Suddath, R., Spirito, A., Leonard, H., Melhem, N, Porta, G.,  Onorato, M., & Zelazny, J.  (2008). 
Switching to another SSRI or to venlafaxine with or without cognitive behavioral therapy for adolescents with SSRI -resistant depression: The TORDIA randomized controlled trial.  JAMA , 299(8),  901-913. 
doi:10.1001/jama.299.8.901 
Brent, D. A., Emslie, G. J., Clarke, G. N., Asarnow, J., Spirito, A., Ritz, L., Vitiello, B., Iyengar, S., Birmaher, B., 
Ryan, N. D., Zelazny, J., Onorato, M., Kennard, B., Mayes, T. L., DeBar, L. L., McCracken, J. T., 
Strober, M., Suddath, R., Leonard, H., Porta, G., & Keller,  M. B. (2009). Predictors of spontaneous and 
systematically assessed suicidal adverse events in the treatment of SSRI- resistant depression  in 
adolescents (TORDIA) study. The American Journal of Psychiatry , 166(4),  418-426. 
doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.2008.08070976  
Brent, D. A.,  Greenhill, L. L., Compton, S., Emslie, G., Wells, K., Walkup, J. T., Vitiello, B., Bukstein, O., 
Stanley, B., Posner, K., Kennard, B. D., Cwik, M. F., Wagner, A., Coffey, B., March, J. S., Riddle, M., 
Goldstein, T., Curry, J., Barnett, S., Capasso, L., Zelazny, J., H ughes, J., Shen, S., Gugga. S. S., & 
Turner, J. B. (2009). The Treatment of A dolescent Suicide Attempters study (TASA): Predictors of 
suicidal events in an open treatment trial.  Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent 
Psychiatry ,  48(10) , 987-996. doi:10.1097/CHI.0b013e3181b5dbe4 
 Buysse, D. J., Reynolds, C. F., Monk, T. H., Berman, S. R.,  & Kupfer, D.J. (1989). The Pittsburgh Sleep 
Quality Index: A  new instrument for psychiatric practice and research. Psychiatry Research ,  28(2), 
193-213.  
STU112016 -057, Kennard, FormA- ResearchProtocol, Mod_16, 10- 01-21   21 Centers for  Disease Control and Prevention:  National Center for Injury Prevention and Control. (2010). Web -
based Injury Statistics Query and Reporting System (WISQARS) [online].  Retrieved 
from www.cdc.gov/injury/wisqars  
Cox, L. J., Stanley, B. H., Melhem, N. M., Oquendo, M. A., Birmaher, B., Burke, A., Kolko, D. J., Zelazny, J. M., 
Mann, J. J., Porta, G., & Brent, D. A. (2012). Familial and individual correlates of nonsuicidal self -injury 
in the offspr ing of mood- disordered parents. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry , 73(6),  813-1500.  
doi:10.4088/JCP.11m07196 
Cox, L. J., Stanley, B. H., Melhem, N. M., Oquendo, M. A., Birmaher, B., Burke, A., Kolko, D. J., Zelazny, J. M., 
Mann, J. J., Porta, G., Brent, D. A. (2012). A longitudinal study of nonsuicidal self -injury in offspring at 
high risk for mood disorder. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry , 73(6), 1501 -1508.  
doi:10.4088/JCP.11m07250 
Curtin S. C., Warner M., Hedegaard H. (2016). "Increase in suicide in the United States." 1999– 2014. NCHS 
data brief, no 241. Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health Statistics  
Davis, F. D. (1989). Perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, and user acceptance of information 
technology.  MIS Quarterly , 13(3), 319-340. doi:10.2307/249008  
De la Torre, I., Castillo, G ., Arambarri, J., Lopez -Coronado, M., & Franco, M. A. (2017). Mobile apps for suicide 
prevention: Review of virtual stores and literature. JMIR Mhealth Uhealth, 5(10), e130. 
doi:10.2196/mhealth.8036 
Emslie, G. J., Mayes, T., Porta, G., Vitiello, B., Clarke, G., Wagner, K. D., Asarnow, J. R., Spirito, A., Birmaher, 
B., Ryan, N., Kennard, B., DeBar, L., McCracken, J., Strober, M., Onorato, M., Zelazny, J., Keller, M., 
Iyengar, S., & Brent, D. A. (2010). Treatment of Resistant Depression in Adolescents (TORDIA): Week 
24 outcomes. American Journal of Psychiatry , 167(7), 7150 -791. doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.2010.09040552 
Florence, C., Haegerich, T., Simon, T., Zhou, C ., & Luo, F. (2015). Estimated lifetime medical and work -loss 
costs of emergency department -treated nonfatal injuries – United States, 2013. Morbidity and 
Mortality Weekly Report , 64(38), 1078– 1082. Retrieved from 
http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6438a5.htm  
Garber, J., Clarke,  G. N., Weersing, V. R., Beardslee, W. R., Brent, D. A., Gladstone, T. R., DeBar, L. L., 
Lynch, F. L., D'Angelo, E., Hollon, S. D., Shamseddeen, W., & Iyengar, S.  (2009). Prevention of 
depression in at -risk adolescents: A  randomized controlled trial." JAMA , 301(21), 2215 -2224.  
doi:10.1001/jama/2009.788 
Glenn, J. J., Werntz, A. J., Slama, S. J. K., Steinman, S. A., Teachman, B. A., & Nock, M. K. (2017). Suicide 
and self -injury -related implicit cognition: A large scale examination and replication. Journal of Abnormal 
Psychology , 126(2), 199.211. doi:10.1037/abn0000230 
Gold, M. R., Siegel, J. E., Russell, L. B., & Weinstein, M. C. (Eds.). (1996). Cost- effectiveness in health and 
medicine. New York: Oxford University Press.  
Goodman,  R. (1997)  The Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire: a research note.  Journal of Child 
Psychology and Psychiatry , 38, 581– 586. 
Gratz, K. L. & Roemer, L. (2004). Multidimensional assessment of emotion regulation and dysregulation: 
Development, factor structure, and initial validation of the Difficulties in Emotion Regulation Scale. Journal of Psychopathology and Behavioral Assessment , 26, 41 -54. 
doi:10.1023/B:JOBA.0000007455.08539.94  
Hedeker, D., Mermelstein, R. J., & Demirtas, H. (2009). A mixed ordinal location scale model for analysis of 
Ecological Momentary Assessment (EMA) data. Biometrics , 2(4), 391-401. doi:10.1111/j.1541-
0420.2007.00924.x  
Hedeker, D., Mermelstein, R. J., & Demirtas, H. (2008). An application of a mixed- effects location scale model 
for analysis of Ecological Momentary Assessment (EMA) data.  Biometrics , 64(2),  627-634. 
doi:10/1111/j.1541- 0420.2007.00924.x  
Hedges, L. V., & Pigott, T. D. (2004). The power of statistical tests for moderators in meta- analysis. 
Psychological Methods , 9(4), 426 -445. doi:10.1037/1082- 989X.9.4.426  
Johnson, J. G., Harris, E. S., Spitzer, R. L., & Williams, J. B. W. (2002). The Patient Health Questionnaire for 
Adolescents:  Validation of an instrument for the assessment of mental disorders among adolescent 
STU112016 -057, Kennard, FormA- ResearchProtocol, Mod_16, 10- 01-21   22 primary care patients. Journal of Adolescent Health, 30(3), 196- 204. doi:10.1016/S1054 -
139X(01)00333-0 
Joiner, T. E., Pfaff, J. J., & Acres, J. G. (2002). A brief screening tool for suicidal symptoms in adolescents and 
young adults in general health settings: Reliability and validity data from the Australian National 
General Practice Youth Suicide Prevention Project. Behaviour Research and Therapy , 40(4), 471-481.  
Keller, M. B., Lavori, P. W., Friedman, B., Nielsen, E., Endicott, J., McDonald- Scott, P., & Andreasen, N. C. 
(1987). The Longitudinal Interval Follow -up Evaluation: A comprehensive method for assessing 
outcome in prospective longitudinal studies. Archives of General Psychiatry , 44(6), 540 -548. 
doi:10.1001/archpsyc.1987.01800180050009  
Kennard, B.D ., Biernesser, C., Wolfe, K.L., Foxwell, A.A., Lee, SJC., Rial, K.V., Patel, S., Cheng, C., 
Goldstein, T., McMakin, D., Blastos, B., Douaihy, A., Zelazny, J., & Brent, D.A. (2015). Developing a 
brief suicide prevention intervention and mobile phone application: a qualitative report. Journal of 
Technology in Human Services , 33(4),  345-357. doi:10.1037/a0017411  
Kennard, B. D., Clarke,  G. N., Weersing, V. R., Asarnow, J. R., Shamseddeen, W., Porta, G., Berk, M., 
Hughes, J. L., Spirito, A., Emslie, G. J., Keller, M. B., Wagner, K. D., & Brent, D. A. (2009). Effective 
components of TORDIA Cognitive- Behavioral Ther apy for adolescent depression: Preliminary findings. 
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology , 77(6), 1033 -1041.  doi:10.1037/a0017411  
Kennard, B. D., Goldstein, T., Foxwell, A. A., McMakin, D. L., Wolfe, K., Biernesser, C., Moorehead, A., 
Douaihy, A., Zullo, L., Wentroble, E., Owen, V., Zelazny, J., Iyengar, S., Porta, G., & Brent, D. (2017). 
As Safe As Possible (ASAP): A brief app- supported inpatient intervention to prevent post -discharge 
suicidal behavior in hospitalized, suicidal adolescents . Manuscript submitted for publication.  
  
King, C. A., Jiang, Q., Czyz, E. K., & Kerr, D. C. (2014). Suicidal ideation of psychiatrically hospitalized 
adolescents has one -year predictive validity for suicide attempts in girls only. Journal of Abnormal Child 
Psychology , 42(3), 467 -477. doi:10.1007/s10802- 013-9794-0 
Knight, J. R., Shrier, L. A., Bravender, T. D., Farrell, M., Vander Bilt, J., & Shaffer, H. J. (2012).  A new brief 
screen for adolescent substance abu se. Archives of Pediatrics & Adolescent Medicine , 153, 591– 596. 
Knox, K. L., Stanley, B., Currier, G. W., Brenner, L., Ghahramanlou -Holloway, M., & Brown, G. (2012). An 
emergency department -based brief intervention for veterans at risk for suicide (SAFE VET). American 
Journal of Public Health, 102, S33-37. doi:10.2105/AJPH.2011.300501  
Kraemer, H. C. (2008). Toward non- parametric and clinically meaningful moderators and mediators. Statistics 
in Medicine, 27(10), 1679- 1692. doi:10.1002/sim.3149 
Kraemer, H. C., Wilson, T., Fairburn, C. G., & Agras, W. S. (2002). Mediators and moderators of treatment 
effects in randomized clinical trials. Archives of General Psychiatry , 59(10), 877 -883. 
doi:10.1001/archpsyc.59.10.877  
Larsen, M. E., Nicholas, J., & Christensen, H. (2016). A systematic assessment of smartphone tools for suicide 
prevention. PLOS One , 11(4), e0152285. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0152285 
Lave, J. R., Frank, R. G., Schulberg, H. C., & Kamlet, M. S. (1998). Cost -effectiveness of treatments for major 
depression in primary care practice. Archives of General Psychiatry , 55(7), 645- 651. 
doi:10.1001/archpsyc.55.7.645  
Lenhart, A. (2010). "Teens, cell phones, and texting."   Retrieved 05/31/12, 2012, from 
http://pewresearch.org/pubs/1572/teens -cell-phones -text-messages  
Lenhart, A. (2015). "Teens, social media & technology overview 2015." Retrieved from 
http://www.pewinternet.org/2015/04/09/teens -social -media- technology -2015/  
Lewinsohn, P. M., Rohde, P., & Seeley, J. R. (1996). Adolescent suicidal ideation and attempts: Prevalence, 
risk factors, and clinical implications. Clinical Psychology Science and Practice, 3(1), 25 -46. 
doi:10.1111/j.1468- 2850.1996.tb00056.x  
Little, R. J. A., & Rubin , D. B. (2002). Statistical analyses with missing data . Hoboken, NJ:  John Wiley & Sons, 
Inc. 
Lucas, H. C. , & Spitler , V. K. (1999). Technology use and performance: a field study of broker workstations.  
Decisions Sciences , 30(2), 291-311. doi:10.1111/j.1540- 5915.1999.tb01611.x  
STU112016 -057, Kennard, FormA- ResearchProtocol, Mod_16, 10- 01-21   23 Lynch, F. L. (2014). Population health outcome models in suicide prevention policy. American Journal of 
Preventive Medicine, 47(3 Supplement 2), S137 -S143.   
Lynch, F. L., & Dickerson, J. F. (2017). Societal costs of child and adolescent mental health disorders: Oxford 
handbook of clinical child and adolescent psychology.  New York: Oxford University Press.  
Lynch, F. L., & Dickerson, J. F. (2012). PS2 -21: Validity and reliability of the Family Economic Impact 
Interview: A new instrument to measure costs related to child mental health conditions. Clinical 
Medicine & Research, 10(3), 181. doi:10.3121/cmr.2012.1100.ps2- 21 
Lynch, F. L., Dickerson, J. F., Clarke, G., Vitiello, B., Porta, G., Wagner, K. D., Emslie, G., Asarnow, J.R., 
Keller, M. B., Birmaher, B., Ryan, N. D., Kennard, B., Mayes, T., DeBar, L., McCracken, J. T., Strober, 
M., Suddath, R. L., Spirito, A., Onorato,  M., Zelazny, J., Iyengar, S., & Brent, D. (2011). Incremental 
cost- effectiveness of combined therapy vs medication only for youth with selective serotonin reuptake 
inhibitor -resistant depression: Treatment of SSRI -resistant depression in adolescents trial  findings. 
Archives of General Psychiatry, 68(3): 253 -262. doi:10.1001/archgenpsychiatry.2011.9  
Lynch, F. L., Dickerson, J. F., Garber, J., Clarke, G. N., Weersing, V. R., Beardslee, W. R., Brent, D. A., 
Gladstone, T. R. G., DeBar, L. L. (2011). Cost -effectiveness of a cognitive behavioral intervention to 
prevent depression in at -risk teens. Journal of Mental Health Policy and Economics , 14, S19.  
Lynch, F. L., Dickerson, J. F., Pears, K. C., & Fisher, P. A. (2017). Cost effectiveness of a school readiness 
intervention for foster children. Children and Youth Services Review, 81, 63-71. 
doi:10.1016/j.childyouth.2017.07.011  
Lynch, F. L., Hornbrook, M., Clarke, G. N., Perrin, N., Polen, M. R., O'Connor, E., & Dickerson, J. (2005). Cost -
effectiveness of an intervention to prevent depression in at -risk teens. Archives of General Psychiatry , 
62(11), 1241 -1248. doi:10.1001/archpsyc.62.11.1241 
MacKinnon, D. P., Lockwood, C. M., Hoffman, J. M., West, S. G.,  & Sheets, V. (2002). A comparison of 
methods to test mediation and other intervening variable effects. Psychological Methods , 7(1), 83-104.  
Marsac, M. L., & Alderfer , M. A. (2011). Psychometric properties of the FACES -IV in a pediatric oncol ogy 
population. Journal of Pediatric Psychology , 36(5), 528-538. doi:10.1093/jpepsy/jsq003  
McMakin, D. L., Olino, T. M., Porta, G., Dietz, L. J., Emslie, G., Clarke, G., Wagner, K. D., Asarnow, J. R., 
Ryan, N. D., Birmaher, B., Shamseddeen, W., Mayes, T., Kennard, B., Spirito, A., Keller, M., Lynch, F. 
L., Dickerson, J. F., & Brent, D. A. (2012). Anhedonia predicts poorer recovery among youth with 
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor treatment -resistant depression.  Journal of the American Academy 
of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry ,  51(4),  404-411. doi:10.1016/j.jaac.2012.01.011  
Moyers, T. B., Martin, J. K., Houck, J. M., Christopher, P.J., & Tonigan, J. S. (2009). From in -session behaviors 
to drinking outcomes: A causal chain for motivational interviewing. Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 77(6), 1113 -1 
National Action Alliance for Suicide Prevention Research Prioritization Task Force. (2014). A prioritized 
research agenda for suicide prevention: An action plan to save lives.  Rockville, MD: National Institute of 
Mental Health and the Research Prioritization Task Force.  
Nock, M. K., Green, J. G., Hwang, I., McLaughlin, K. A., Sampson, N. A., Zaslavsky, A. M., & Kessler, R. C. 
(2013). Prevalence, correlates, and treatment of lifetime suicidal behavior among adolescents: R esults 
from the National Comorbidity Survey Replication Adolescent Supplement.  JAMA Psychiatry, 70(3),  
300-310. doi:10.1001/2013.jamapsychiatry.55  
Osman, A., Downs, W. R., Kopper, B. A., Barrios, F. X., Baker, M. T., Osman, J. R., Besett, T. M., & Linehan, 
M. M. (1998). The Reasons for Living Inventory for Adolescents (RFL- A): D evelopment and 
psychometric properties. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 54(8),  1063 -1078.   
Polanco- Roman, L., Jurska, J., Quinones, V., & Miranda, R. (2014). Brooding, reflection, and distraction: 
Relation to non -suicidal self -injury versus suicide attempts. Archives of Suicide Research, 19(3), 35 -
365 doi:10.1080/13811118.2014.981623  
Posner, K., Brown,  G. K., Stanley, B., Brent, D. A., Yershova, K. V., Oquendo, M. A., Currier, G. W., Melvin, G. 
A., Greenhill, L., Shen, S., & Mann, J. J.  (2011). The Columbia- Suicide Severity Rating Scale: I nitial 
validity and internal consistency findings from three multisite studies with adolescents and adults. 
American Journal of Psychiatry, 168 (12), 1266 -1277.  doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.2011.10111704  
STU112016 -057, Kennard, FormA- ResearchProtocol, Mod_16, 10- 01-21   24 Preacher , K. J., & Hayes , A. F. (2004). SPSS and SAS procedures for estimating indirect effects in simple 
mediation models. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers , 36(4), 717-731. 
doi:10.3758/BF03206553 
Radloff , L. S. (1977). The CES -D scale: A  self-report depression scale for research in the general population. 
Applied Psychological Measurement , 1, 385-401. doi:10.1177/014662167700100306 
Reynolds, W. (1988). Suicidal Ideation Questionnaire: Professional Manual . Odessa, FL:  Psychological 
Assessment Resources.  
Richardson, L. P., McCauley, E., Grossman, D. C., McCarty, C. A., Richards, J., Russo, J. E., Rockhill, C., & 
Katon, W. (2010). Evaluation of the Patient Health Questionnaire- 9 Item for detecting major depression 
among adolescents.  Pediatrics , 126(6),  1117- 1123.  doi:10.1542/peds.2010- 0852  
Rotheram -Borus, M. J., & Bradley , J. (1991). Tria ge model for suicidal runaways. American Journal of 
Orthopsychiatry , 61(1), 122-127. doi:10.1037/h0079228Samra, J., & Bilsker . D. (2007). "Coping with 
suicidal thoughts."   Retrieved 05- 30-2012, 2007, from 
http://www.comh.ca/publications/resources/pub_cwst/CWST.pdf.  
Schoenbaum, M., Unutzer, J., Sherbourne, C., Duan, N., Rubenstein, L. V., Miranda, J., Meredith, L. S., 
Carney, M. F., & Wells, K. (2001). Cost -effectiveness of practice- initiated quality improvement fo 
depression: Results of a randomized controlled trial.  JAMA , 286(11), 1325 -1330. 
doi:10.1001/jama.286.11.1325  
Simons, J. S. , & Gaher, R. S. (2005). The Distress Tolerance Scale: Development and validation of a self -
report measure.  Motivation and Emotion, 29(2) , 83-102. doi: 10.1007/s11031- 005-7955 -3 
Singh, B.,  & Wright, F. (1996) Testing order restricted hypotheses with proportional hazards. Lifetime Data 
Analysis , 2(4), 363- 389. doi:10.1007/BF00127308 
Shepard, D. S., Gurewich, D., Lwin, A. K., Reed, G. A., Jr., & Silverman, M. M. (2016). Suicide and suicidal 
attempts in the United States: Costs and policy implications. Suicide and Life- Threatening Behavior , 
46(3), 352- 362. doi:10.1111/sltb.12225  
Stanley, B., Brown,  G., Brent, D., Wells, K., Poling, K., Curry, J., Kennard, B. D., Wagner, A., Cwik, M., 
Klomek, A. B., Goldstein, T., Vitiello, B., Barnett, S., Daniel., S., & Hughes, J.  (2009). Cognitive -
behavioral therapy for suicide prevention (CBT- SP): Treatment model, feasibility, and acceptability. 
Journal of American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry , 48(10): 1005- 1013.  
doi:10.1097/CHI.0b013e3181b5dbfe  
Stanley, B. , & Brown, G.  K. (2012). Safety planning intervention: A brief intervention to mitigate s uicide risk.  
Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, 19(2), 256-264. doi:10.1016/j.cbpra.2011.01.001  
Suicide prevention app awarded $50,000 prize at White House conference. (2013, September 17). Retrieved 
November 10, 2016, from http://news.emory.edu/stories/2013/09/kaslow_relieflink_app/campus.html  
Trivedi, M.H., Wisniewski, S.R., Morris, D.W., Fava, M., Gollan, J.K., Warden, D., Nierenberg, A.A., Gaynes, B.N., Husain, 
M.M., Luther, J.F. and Zisook, S.  (2011) . Concise Health Risk Tracking scale: a brief self -report and clinician 
rating of suicidal risk.  Journal of Clinical Psychiatry , 72(6), p.757.  
Varni , J. W., Seid, M., & Rode, C . A. (1999). The PedsQL: Measurement model for the pediatric qual ity of life 
inventory. Med Care, 37(2):126 -39. 
Vitiello, B., Brent, D. A., Greenhill, L. L., Emslie, G., Wells, K., Walkup, J. T., Stanley, B., Bulkstein, O., 
Kennard, B.D., Compton, S., Coffey, B., Cwik, M.F., Posner, K., Wagner, A., March, J. S., Riddle, M., 
Goldstein, T., Curry, J., Capasso, L., Mayes, T., Shen, S., Gugga, S. S., Turner, J. B., Barnett, S., & 
Zelazny, J. (2009). Depressive symptoms and clinical status during the Treatment of Adolescent 
Suicide Attempters (TASA) Study.  Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolsecent 
Psychiatry , 48(10), 997-1004.  doi:10.1097/CHI.0b013e3181b5db66 
Vitiello, B., Emslie, G., Clarke, G., Wagner, K. D., Asarnow, J. R., Keller, M. B., Birmaher, B., Ryan, N. D., 
Kennard, B., Mayes, T. L., DeBar, L., Lynch, F., Dickerson, J., Strober, M., Suddath, R., McCracken, J. T., Spirito, A., Onorato, M., Zelazny, J., Porta, G., Iyengar, S., & Brent D. A. (2011). Long -term outcome 
of adolescent depression initially resistant to selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor treatment: A  follow-
up study of the TORDIA sample. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry , 72(3), 388-396. 
doi:10.4088/JCP.09m05885blue 
STU112016 -057, Kennard, FormA- ResearchProtocol, Mod_16, 10- 01-21   25 Vitiello, B., Silva, S., Rohde, P., Kratochvil, C., Kennard, B., Reinecke, M., Mayes, T., Posner, K., May, D. E., & 
March, J. S. (2009). Suicidal events in the Treatment for Adolescents With Depression Study (TADS). 
Journal of Clinical Psychiatry,  70(5): 741 -747.  
Wallace , M. L., Frank , E., & Kraemer , H. C. (2013) A novel approach for developing and interpreting treatment 
moderator profiles in randomized clinical trials. JAMA Psychiatry , 70, 1241- 1247.  
Weersing, V. R., Brent, D. A., Rozenmann, M. S., Gonzalez, A., Jeffreys, M., Dickerson, J. F., Lynch, F. L., 
Porta, G., & Iyengar, S. (2017). Brief behavioral therapy for pediatric anxiety and depression in primary 
care: A randomized clinical trial. JAMA Psychiatry, 74(6), 571 -578. 
doi:10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2017.0429  
While, D., Bickley, H., Roscoe, A., Windfuhr, K., Rahman, S., Shaw, J., Appleby, L., & Kapur, N.  (2012). 
Implementation of mental health service recommendations in England and Wales and suicide rates, 
1997- 2006: A cross -sectional and before- and-after observational study.  The Lancet , 379(9820), 1005-
1012.   doi:10.1016/S0140- 6736(11)61712-1 
Wilkinson, P., Kelvin, R., Roberts, C., Dubicka, B., & Goodyer, I. (2011). Clinical and psychosocial predictors of 
suicide attempts and nonsuicidal self -injury in the Adolescent Depression Antidepressants and 
Psychotherapy Trial (ADAPT). The American Journal of Psychiatry , 168(5),  495-501. 
doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.2010.10050718  
Zimet, G. D., Dahlem, N. W., Zimet, S. G., & Farley, G. K. (1988). The Multidimensional Scale of Perceived 
Social Support. Journal of Personality Assessment, 52(1), 30 -41. doi:10.1207/s15327752jpa5201_2 
Zlotnick, C., Donaldson, D., Spirito, A., & Pearlstein, T. (1997). Affect regulation and suicide attempts in 
adolescent inpatients. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry , 36, 793 -798. 
 
 