A text-based reduction intervention for smokeless 
tobacco cessation  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
01/28/2022  
2. SIGNIFICANCE  
Smokeless tobacco use is associated with morbidity and mortality and disproportionally affects rural 
and medically underserved populations . Underserved smokeless tobacco users  (those who live in rural 
areas and /or those who live in medically underserved areas, areas with high poverty levels and few primary 
care providers10) are at increased risk for poor health outcomes, given high rates of smokeless tobacco usage.   
Smokeless tobacco is used mostly by males, with n ational rates of use reported to be more than  twelve  times 
higher among mal es (6%) compared to females (0.4 %).11  Smokeless tobacco use rates in certain sub -
populations of the U.S., such as male residents of South ern and Western states (13 -17%) and rural residents 
(6%), are  significantly higher  than population norms .11,12 Clearly, we need effective interventions to reduce 
smokeless tobacco use targeted to those most at risk in these underserved areas, where  residents  have little 
access to and use of proven  tobacco cessation treatments . The high rate of use coupled with less access to  
programs creates a disparity that  increas es underserved  residents’ risk for in the short term  oral mucosal 
lesions13 14,15, periodontal disease16, and precancerous oral lesions .17 Long -term use may increase the risk for  
ischemic heart disease 18 and head and neck  cancers  especially  oral cancer s.19 Just one year of smokeless 
tobacco use is associated with over 6 million Disability Adjusted Life Years lost and over a quarter of a million 
deaths .18 This disparity is compounded by the  lack of health care providers and  the burden of traveling far  
distance s to health care facilities  in underserved populations . Further, many rural Americans do not receive 
consistent cessation advice and  have less access to cessation services than their urban counterparts.20 
Therefore, innovative interventions that provide consistent access to cessation services are needed.   
Reducing smokeless tobacco use in response to situational cues is imperative for  cessation success.  
Research supports that people use tobacco in response to stimuli  or environmental and situation al cues ,21 22 
yet many smokeless tobacco cessation interventions do not address stimulus control . For example, Coffey and 
Lomardo  examined the importance of sensory and behavioral cues in smokeless tobacco use and found that 
cues modulated urge, affect , and stress.22 Current smokeless tobacco cessation interventions do not address 
chewing behaviors that may be driven by cravings in response t o situational cues (e.g. , cup of coffee, meals).  
Behavioral techniques that focus on self -regulation and restraint have the potential to help smokeless tobacco 
users manage their responses to situational cues .23 In fact, investigators found that cue extinction (which 
consisted of each participant identifying 2 -3 situations that were associated strongly with smokeless tobacco 
use and breaking those associations by not chewing or dipping for 30 minutes twice a day ) produced 
smokeless quit rates of 66% at 9 months .24 Results of this trial should be interpreted with caution given the 
small sample size and lack of comparison arm. However, addressing cues is an  important  intervention  target 
for an intervention. To date this strategy has been l argely unexplored in the  smokeless tobacco cessation  
literature , and our study was designed to fill this gap.  
Scheduled Gradual Reduction (SGR ) helps users to self -regulate and practice restraint in response to 
tobacco use cues and has great potential to i mprove cessation rates. Scheduled Gradual Reduction 
(SGR) may be especially efficacious in helping smokeless tobacco users to quit as it addresses self -regulation 
of situational cues to chew. SGR is a reduction -based cessation method that first assesses sm okeless tobacco 
user patterns, t hen gradually reduces the number of chews/dips used per day by lengthening the time interval 
between use ending with a definitive quit date at the end of the reduction period. SGR has been minimally 
studied in smokeless tobacco users .9 However, the few studies ava ilable  demonstrate that SGR promotes 
cessation among smokeless tobacco users .9,25 Our SGR intervention  is unique compared to other smokeless 
tobacco cessation interventions in that it  provide s chewers with a spec ific schedule for chewing , encouraging 
use of chewing restraint techniques during intervals between alerts to chew. Chewing on a schedule has two 
important function s: (1) nicotine use is evenly spaced to manage withdrawal symptoms; and (2) it provides 
multiple opportunities to employ restraint, defined as conscious, chronic restriction of chewing based on set 
limits.23 Evidence from studies with cigarette smokers have shown that successful use of restraint during 
reduction is predictive of quitting . 5 Very few interventions for smokeless tobacco users have addressed self -
regulation and restraint through scheduled chewing. Our intervention  provides a schedule for chewing and 
chewers are asked to chew only when alerted . As a result,  chewing  becomes unlin ked from the cues ( i.e., 
psychological, behavioral, and environmental) and smokeless users can learn how to manage cravings  using 
restraint  during the reduction period prior to quitting.  
Our SGR intervention  also helps participants manage withdrawal sympt oms, an important determinant 
of cessation success  through scheduled chewing that gradually reduces their tobacco use down to 
zero. The gradual reduction of the SGR intervention provides even spacing between nicotine self -
administration leading to the down  regulation of nicotine receptors over time.26 Given nicotine depend ence is a 
predictor of smokeless tobacco cessation and smokeless tobacco users report a similar severity of withdrawal 
symptoms compared to cigarette smokers ,27 addressing withdrawal symptoms during a quit attempt is critical 
to success. Prior SGR intervention  work in both cigarette smokers and smo keless tobacco users report 
reductions in withdrawal symptoms over the schedule d gradual reduction period .7,8,9 
SGR  combined with CBT support texts  strengthens 
our intervention and  will improve cessation rates 
compared to  other evidenced -based cessation 
interventions  in this group of tobacco users . Our 
SGR intervention was designed  to supplement a 
cognitive behavioral intervention delivered via text 
messaging to he lp smokeless tobacco users quit .  Past 
SGR studies used a combination of cognitive -behavioral 
telephone counseling to help smokeless tobacco users 
cope with quitting along with the SGR program .8,9 We 
will comb ine the SGR program with text -based support 
messages to provide participants with advice and 
support for quitting.   Our team adapted t he support 
messages for this program from text  messages 
developed by Dr. Herbert Severson  for local health 
department use and are based off constructs of the 
Social Cognitive Th eory  28 and the Health Belief Model  29 including perceived benefits, perceived susceptibility, 
perceived barriers , and self -efficacy. This is an important addition to the SGR program , as smokeless toba cco 
users need to be motivated to quit, believe  that quitting will be beneficial, feel confident they can quit, and 
believe  that barriers to quitting are  surmountable . See Figure 1 . 
Deliveri ng our SGR  intervention vi a text message has great potential to increase access to cessation 
services and reach more rural and medically underserved smokeless tobacco users, helping to 
eliminate health disparities.  Web-based cessation interventions for adult smokeless tobacco users have 
been modestly effective in reduc ing smokeless tobacco use, with quit rates around 12% .30 However, many 
underserved Americans often lack consistent computer  skills and  access; therefore, they are less likely to 
access existing web -based interventions  consistently . 2 Text messaging is a me thod that has strong potential 
to deliver cessation interventions to smokeless tobacco users given its availability, low cost, and widespread 
use.  In addition, text messaging requires a low level of technological expertise and does not require expensive 
equipment  or data plans .31 A recent Cochrane review of mobile phone -based interventions for smoking 
cessation supports the use of mobile phone -based smoking cessation interventions in helping people to quit.32 
However, there are no available text -based interventions to help smokeless tobacco users quit. Delivery of 
behavioral interventions via text messaging has the potential for efficacy and widespread dissemination in 
underserved smokeless tobacco users, as c ell phone use is widespread. Further, our pilot work supports the 
feasibility and acceptability of a text -based smokeless tobacco cessation approach. Thus, the potential impact 
and reach of a text -based intervention warrants investigation in helping unders erved smokeless tobacco users 
quit. Our stud y was designed to fill this gap.  
Summary . Rural and medically underserved smokeless tobacco users represent a vulnerable group for 
tobacco use. Despite their high risk for tobacco -related cancers, underserved smo keless tobacco users have 
not been  widely  targeted for cessation intervention trials. Text -based interventions have the potential to 
consistently reach many more underserved smokeless tobacco users compared to both clinic -based and web -
based interventions.  Our SGR intervention  has the potential to increase quit rates compared to  the current 
standard of care  as our SGR intervention addresses common barriers (withdrawal symptoms and situational 
and environmental chewing cues) to quitting.  Our pilot work supports the feasibility and acceptability of a text -
based smokeless tobacco cessation intervention  approach . The proposed study has public health relevance as 
it will determine if our intervention performs better than standard of care and i s worthy of larger scale 
dissemination, will  add to evidenced -based cessation treatments for smokeless tobacco users and shed light 
on the important mechanisms of intervention effects in this understudied group of tobacco users.   
2. Innovation  
The proposed  project has the potential to improve  the health of underserved smokeless tobacco users and will 
have implications for future tobacco cessation initiatives in rural and underserved communities. This project is 
innovative for multiple reasons.  
• We propose  one of the first large -scale studies using SGR  aimed at an underserved group of tobacco 
users.  Therefore, this study aims to decrease a tobacco -related health disparity by decreasing rates of use 
and bringing innovative interventions to those with limited  access.  

• Our study is innovative in that  it is the first RTC to compare a text -based reduction intervention to a 
standard of care intervention .  The results of this innovative study have public health relevance and can be 
used to determine if our SGR interv ention should be disseminated broadly.  
• Our study will explore mechanisms of  cessation  intervention effects to expand the limited literature in the 
field on this area.  This information will provide valuable data on  important intervention targets that can b e 
used to inform future  more targeted treatment strategies in this group of tobacco users  
• Our study targets b ehavioral techniques that focus on self -regulation and restraint have the potential to 
help smokeless tobacco users manage their responses to situa tional cues. To date , this strategy has been 
largely unexplored in the  smokeless tobacco cessation  literature .  
• Delivering  SGR via text messaging is an innovative way that is a more convenient format and increases the 
potential reach of the intervention to  more vulnerable groups of tobacc o users at high risk for tobacco -
related morbidity/mortality.  
3. APPROACH  
Research Team  
Our experienced, multidisciplinary research 
team collaboratively developed the SGR 
intervention for the current study. (Table 1 ). 
This team obtained our initial funding for our 
pilot (1R15CA198841 -01) and have worked 
together on this grant application. 
Collectively, our team brings a wealth of 
experience in designing and implementing 
tobacco cessation interventions  and working 
with underserved populations . 
Preliminary Data  
Our pilot study of an  SGR intervention shows promise for helping  participant s gradually reduc e their 
tobacco use down to zero.  We are the first to test a text -based delivered SGR intervention for rural and 
underserved smokeless users (1R15CA198841) . Our team conducted a pilot study with 98 rural and medically 
underserved smokeless tobacco users to determine the feasibility and acc eptability of an SGR program 
delivered via text message paired with text -based support messages aimed at  decreasing smokeless tobacco 
use and promoting cessation . We recruited s mokeless tobacco users primarily from social media  targeting 
rural and underser ved areas in North Carolina and  four rural northern counties  in South Carolina  and 
randomized in a 2:1 fashion to either: (1) the SGR program (N= 65), a text-based p rogram aimed at reducing 
chewing  over a four -week plus text -based support messages; or (2) text-based support messages only (N= 33). 
Participants completed surveys at basel ine and  end of program  to assess feasibility, acceptability , self-report 
and biochemically validated 7-day point prevalence of cessation.  We also conducted a 6 -month survey to 
assess self -report cessation.  To determine rural status,  we used  Rural -Urban Continuum Code s (RUCC) 
designated as non -metropolitan (designated as a RUCC code of 4 or above)  33 and Medical Underserved 
Areas were define d using Health Resources and Serv ices Administration (HRSA)  index of Medical 
Underservice  with a score of 62 or indicating medically underserved .34  
We recruited 98 rural and medically underserved smokeless tobacco users in 1 7 months. We moved to a 
solely social media recruitment approach  as clinic recruitment did not work well. With social media, w e 
recruited 70 smokeless tobacco users over one year (averaging about 5 -6 per month). We retained 7 0% of the 
study sample . Sensitivity analyses revealed no diffe rences between completers and non -completers on key 
demographic (age, education, marital status and income) and tobacco use variables (baseline number of 
chews and dependence). The mean age of the sample was  35 (SD=11.7), 97% were male and 98% were 
Caucasi an. We had solid intervention penetration. Almost all participants in both groups (96%) read all the 
messages they received.  Over half of all participants in both groups found the intervention useful in helping 
them quit smok eless tobacco  and over 90% would recommend it to a friend. In the SGR arm , participants 
responded via text to their alerts to chew the majority of the time ( 72% median response rate/person ). At end 
of treatment  follow -up, the SGR arm had a higher rate of self -report cessation (Inten t-to-treat where missing 
data were coded as using smokeless : SGR= 2 2% vs Control= 9%). As is consistent with the field, biochemical 
validation proved not to be feasible in this text -based intervention .  
Common themes from 16 semi -structured interviews  at end of program  with SGR participants revealed that 
many thought the program was to o short and “if it was just a couple more weeks I probably could have quit” Table 1. Study Team  
Team Member  Unique contribution to project  
Devon Noonan, PhD, MPH, FNP -BC 
Principal Investigator  Oversee all aspects of  study  recruitment, 
enrollment, implementation , and dissemination 
of results  
Laura Fish, PhD, MPH  
Co-Investigator  Intervention  development , implementation and 
interpretation of the real -time text data  
Kathryn Pollak, PhD  
Co-Investigator  Recruitment and intervention implementation 
and delivery  
Susan Silva, PhD  
Co-Investigator  Statician; Statistical analysis and quantitative 
methods  
Leigh Ann Simmons, PhD, MFT  
Co-Investigator  Recruitment of rural smokeless tobacco users  
Herb Severson PhD  
Consultant  Consult on recruitment, intervention delivery , 
Enough Snuff intervention and retention  
and “I will be honest it will probably take more than 4 weeks because it was just too hard som e of the drops”.  
Participants also commented that the SGR program  helped them manage cravings and helped them to not 
take chew when they were feeling the urge …” I had confidence that I could wait it out and I would get an alert 
to chew soon”.  Participants also found support messages that talked about health effects and money saved 
from quitting very beneficial.  Further, SGR participants noted that stopping the support messages on the quit 
day or last day of reduction  was like “dropping them off  a cliff” with no support when they needed it most.  
We completed self -report follow -up assessments with all participants at 6 -months to determine the 
sustainability of our intervention effects  and found that cessation rates  did not significantly differ  between the 
two treatment arms  (Intent -to-treat: 
SGR=22%  vs Control=21% ). We believe d ue 
to the high level of missing data and the intent  
to treat analysis  we did not show a difference 
between interventions  and these results need 
to be interpreted with caution . However,  it is 
noteworthy that 75% of SGR participants who 
were quit at end of treatment  remained quit at 
6-months speaking to the sustainability of the  
SGR  intervention . These results support the 
need to add an additional assessment at 3 -
months to determine the more proximal time 
to quitting.  
Strengths of our pilot work include strong 
evidence of feasibility and acceptability of the 
intervention . The SGR group had an excel lent 
response rate to the SGR texts (72%),  
showing that smokeless tobacco users will interact with our intervention.   Further, our  self-report quit rates 
were  promising and much  higher in the SGR group (22% vs 9% , Cohen’s d equivalent =0.55, medium effect ) in 
the short term , and these quit rates were sustained in the SGR group at 6 -months ; most chewers who quit at 
end of treatment remained quit at 6 -months  (75%) . After critically evaluating our pilot work, we found areas for 
improvement for the current stud y (see Table 2). Thus, our pilot work found that a  text-based SGR 
intervention is both feasible and acceptable among underserved smokeless tobacco users  and 
warrants  further  testing. For the current study we have  included an evidenced -based control  condition  
to determine if our SGR intervention improves quit rates compared to  an available evidenced -based 
cessation intervention. Results of this study will inform future treatment strategies in this population of 
tobacco users .   
Overall Strategy  
We w ill recruit s mokeless tobacco users (N=500) and randomize  them  to receive 
the SGR intervention (N= 250) or the Enough Snuff  intervention  (N=250). We will 
conduct phone -based  or smart phone -based  assessments  with participants at 
baseline prior to randomization, end of treatment, 3 and 6 -month follow -up after 
intervention completion . The primary outcome will be self -report ed 7-day point 
smokeless tobacco use at 6 -months (yes/no).  We will biochemically confirm  a 
subset of participants  who report quitting  via saliva samples using NicAlert test 
Strips (20% of sample who report quitting split between intervention an d control 
group ). NicAlert strips  can be used with all tobacco types and  have been used  
with smokeless tobacco users.35 We will randomly select these participants at 
end of program, 3 and  6-month survey time point s as to not confound 
intervention results. We will conduct a  supplemental a nalysis to compare self -
report and biochemically confir med quit results. The secondary aims  are to 
assess : 1) the efficacy of the text -based SGR intervention compared to the 
control intervention on changes in withdrawal, craving, self -regulation and restraint across the 6 -month period  
and 2) explore whether changes in withdrawal, craving, self -regulation and restraint mediate intervention effects 
on self -reported cessation at 6 months post -intervention  (Figure 2) . We will follow p articipants regardless of 
whether they complete or adhere to the intervention.   
Design Considerations . We chose our control comparator using guidance from the Pragmatic Model for  
Compartive selection in Health Related Behavioral Trials .36 The main goal of our trial is to compare our new 
SGR intervention to a well established evidenced -based alternative like the Enough Snuff Intervention. We 
decided against adding nicotine replacement therapy or varenicline for smokeless tobacco users. A rec ent 

Cochrane review found that the quality of evidence for NRT among smokeless tobacco users is low.37 
Varenicline has shown efficacy in the short term for smokeless tobacco cessation, however this is based on a 
recent meta -analysis that contained only thr ee published trials.  38 Further, varenicline has increased exclusion 
criteria, side effects an d low adherence levels in smokeless tobacc o users.36 Our goal is to have a trial that has 
the broadest inclusion criteria to reach the largest number of underserved smokeless tobacco users possible.   
We also decided against biochemical verification of cessation in this study given that we found it was not 
feasible in our pilot. Other smokeless tobacco cessation studies also use self -report cessation as the primary 
outcome.37,39 Much like these studies, our study is community -based and has comparable demand 
characteristics as both arms are interactive. Thus, according to the SRNT Subcommittee on Biochemical 
Verification (2000) guidelines ,40 biochemical verification is not feasible or warranted  as there is no reason to 
believe that one treatment will group will lie or give false information relative to another treatment group  in this 
study . However, to further assess feasibility for future work we will biochemically confirm via saliva samples 
using NicAlert test strips. Twenty percent of the sample who report quitting (split between intervention and 
control group) of participants will be randomly selected at end of treatment, 3 and 6 -month survey time points 
as to not confound intervention results. We will conduct an analysis to compare self -report and biochemically 
confirmed quit results overall and by each treatment group . 
We chose our primary  outcome  follow -up time -point at 6 months for several reasons. First, most comparable 
behavioral smokeless tobacco trials have us ed 6-months as the primary outcome37,39 therefore we can easily 
compare our results  to these previous trials . Further relapse following cessation usually occurs within six 
months, with no significant changes from 6 to 12 months.41 A 6-month rather than a 1 2-month follow -up also 
allows for more rapid decisions on treatment efficacy.42  
Study Setting and Sample.  We will leverage 
successful recruitment str ategies from our pilot 
study,  our previ ous work , and work of our consultant 
Dr. Herbert Severson, who has recruited smokeless  
tobacco users via social media  for several cessation 
studies . Further , we now will work with Kevin 
Danaher Consulting to aid in recruitment  (See Letter 
of Support  and Recruitment and Retention Plan ). 
This is the same recruitment consultant firm that Dr. 
Severson has worked with to recruit thousands of 
smokeless tobacco users to treatment trials. We will 
recruit nationally, specifically target ing states with high smokele ss tobacco use rates ( Table 3). We will  recruit 
from the  Rural and Medically Underserved Areas in these states. Rural status will be determined by Rur al-
Urban Commuting Codes (RUC C) designated as non -metropolitan 
(designated as a RUC C code of 4 or above)  33 and Medical Underserved 
Areas as designated by Health Resources and Services Administration 
(HRSA) by an index of Medical Underservice of 62 or less .34 We will 
recruit participants and verify  upon screening  that each participant county 
address has a 4 or higher RUC C code and/or has an IMU of 62 or lower.  
This is easily done by having participants provide their zip code.  A large 
percentage of the counties in the states we are  specifically targeting are 
rural (Table 4) and >75% of the counties are medically underserved.  
Most rural counties also qualify as medically underserved counties . 
However , many non -rural counties are also designated as medically 
underserved and would benefit from our intervention given th e lack of medical providers and high poverty rates 
in these counties.10 
We plan to recruit all participants for the current study using social media and other media advertisement 
outlets  (i.e., Facebook, Instagram,  Google Ads). As we did in our pilot , we will create an advertising profile for 
the study targeted to our study population (e.g., smokeless tobacco users (chewer/dipper), over age 18, 
profiled for tobacco use) for rural and medically underserved counties in  the U.S . The advertisement briefly 
describes the study and li nks to a project -specific landing page that includes project branding (e.g., study  logo, 
name, and Duke University  association), a simple contact form with name, phone number, email and  two 
simple baseli ne questions (e.g., “Do you  use smokeless tobacco (chew/dip) every day and use at least one or 
more tins/cans per week  or more ?” and “Please provide your zip code ”). After they enter their information , a 
member of the study team can call to collect more information  to determine if they meet the criteria  for 
participation in  the study . Targeting rural and medically underserved counties in North Carolina  and four rural 
counties in South Carolina  for our pilot study , we were able to recruit 70 smokeless tobacco users  in one year 

(approx imately  5-6 per month) using these methods. Data from our targeted marketing profiles show Facebook 
and Instagram ads reach ed 15,147 people  total over 30 days  resulting in 22,055 ad views and 121 link clicks 
per month with a mont hly advertisement budget  of $200 . To increase our recruitment numbers for the current 
study we plan to: 1) target rural and medically underserved count ies nationally  with high smokeless tobacco 
use rates;  2) increase our Facebook budget and work with Kevin Danaher recruitment consul ting firm  to 
manage our media platforms  and 3) change ad m essaging, demographic targeting and  geographic targeting  
weekly  to ensure we are recruiting a diverse sample . Even i f we estimate similar , very conservative  recruitment 
metrics  as seen in our pilot , given  our increased reach  with national recruitment  we anticipate we can recruit  at 
least  168 participants a year (or 14  per month) from our proposed (social) media recruitment methods. Given 
our 3 -year recruitment time  frame , we anticipate having ample t ime to achieve the target enrollment of 
participants for this study.  
Inclusion criteria  will include: 1) 18 years of age and older,  2) Have used smokeless tobacco for the last year, 
currently (past 30 days) uses smokeless tobacco daily, and use of at least one or more tins/cans per week 3) 
Have an address in a rural census  tract defined by a RUC C code of 4 -10 and/or an IMU of 62 or lo wer; 4) 
Interested in participating in a cessation program; and 5) Have access to a cell phone with unlimited texting 
ability. Exclusion criteria  include: 1) Non -English speaking; 2) Have smoked cigarettes or used any other 
tobacco product in the past 30 d ays (i.e., dual user); and 3) Curr ently participating in a smokeless tobacco  
cessation study . We are excluding dual users (those who use both cigarettes and smokeless tobacco)  who plan 
to continue to smoke cigarettes . It is too challenging to promote sched uled gradual reduction when participants 
use more than smokeless  tobacco . We will track how many participants are not eligible for this study because 
they do not meet this eligibility requirement. We did not exclude any one from our pilot for not having his  or her 
own cell phone or for using multiple tobacco products .   
Recruitment and Data Collection.  Advertisements for the study will be  placed on Facebook, Instagram  and 
Google Ads . For example,  Facebook  users will be shown an adverti sement 
that shows a quit smokeless tobacco related image and quit smokeless 
tobacco  related messaging  (Figure 3 ). Users who click on that advertisement 
will then be taken to a project -specific landing page that includes proje ct 
branding (e.g., study  logo, name, and Duke University  association), a simple 
contact form with name, phone number, email and simple baseli ne question 
(e.g., “Do you use smokeless tobacco (chew/dip) every day and use at least 
one or more tins/cans per we ek or more ?” and “Please provide your zip 
code ”).  Research staff will call these participants to screen them for eligibility 
and set up a baseline/enrollment phone visit where informed consent will be 
obtained and baseline study measures collected.  All participants will be asked 
to provide the three best contact methods and times to reach them and 
contact information of two people the study staff could contact should they have issues reaching the participant. 
Follow -up assessments will be conducted over the phone  or a smartphone option will be available for survey 
completion at the end of treatment , 3 and  6-months  post-intervention . Study data collectors will be blinded to 
study arm . Our two research assistants will document who randomized each participan t and will not conduct the 
follow -up assessment with those participants . We will obtain follow -up data on all participants regardless of 
adherence or completion of treatment.  The follow -up rate in our pilot study was >70% , and we will use similar 
strategi es to obtain follow -up data. To increase this follow -up rate , we also will maintain regular contact with 
participants in -between the end of program 3 and  6-month follow -up using  cards, e -mails, and study updates 
summarizing study results. We will  also use a graded compensation for surveys with $10 for baseline $15 for 
end of program , $20 for 3 months  and $ 25 for 6-month follow -up. Participants will receive a bonus of $25 for 
completing all assessments.   
Randomization.  The target sample will be eligible and enrolled participants randomized to either the SGR 
(N=250) or control (N= 250) intervention group . Computerized randomization  will be used to deliver a permuted 
block randomization with block sizes of four that will be used to randomly assign participants to one of the two 
intervention groups.  The randomization scheme generated by the study statistician  will be administered using 
the REDCap system.  
Intervention s:  
SGR Intervention Group.  We will send those in the SGR intervention group a  6-week  text-based scheduled 
gradual reduction i ntervention and 6 weeks of support text -messages.  Typical SGR interventions have lasted 
for 4 weeks.  We have increased our program to 6 weeks based on feedback from our pilot.   
Figure 3. Facebook Ad  
SGR program:  The SGR  program will occur over a six-week period to reduce frequency of smokeless tobacco  
use to zero by program completion. On the baseline survey, we will ask participants to report their typical wake 
and sleep times to determine average waking hours per day. During Week 1  of the program, we will ask 
participants to use smokeless tobacco acc ording to their usual habit and text “s” before they chew. The purpose 
of this is to have participants self -monitor their behavior and become more aware of their smokeless tobacco 
use habit.  At the completion of week one, the average number of times they chewed per day will be calculated 
and texted to participants, who will be asked to confirm the average number of chews per day.  This will confirm 
that we are basing our reduction on the correct number of chews/dips, as under - or overestimating the number 
of chews/dips in our reduction schedule could impact quitting success. For example, if we underestimate the 
amount of smokeless tobacco use at baseline and base our reduction on this, the reduction schedule may be 
too difficult for participants and lead to  failure.   
For t he reduction schedule we will use an 
algorithm similar to that of Cinciripini  7 8 and 
colleagues as well as Jerome and colleagues ,9 
which involves taking the average number of 
chews or dips per day and reducing this 
number by 1/3 each wee k by progressively 
lengthening the interval between 
chewing/dipping and lengthening the time to 
first chew. The program ends at the end of  Week 6 with a reduction to zero chews/dips (quit day) . During the 
reduction period ( Weeks 2 -6), we will ask participants to only chew when they receive a text message telling 
them to do so. We also will ask them  to only keep chew or dip in their mouth for 30 minutes and then remove it 
as smokeless tobacco users may try to compensate for fewer dips by leaving the ir current dip in longer. We will 
ask them  to respond to the aforementioned text with an “s” when they chew. They will be asked to respond within 
30 minutes of receiving the message; reminder texts will be sent if responses are not received within 30 minut es 
to bolster adherence  and stress the importance of following the schedule in order to successfully quit . We also 
will ask them to  text us if they chew at different times than when we text them. We will also text participants at 
the end of each day and as k how many times they chewed that day and compare that to what they texted to us 
during the day.  This will help us to learn 
when participants are not following the 
schedule. Should participants indicate they 
are regularly chewing off -schedule, we will 
continue the intervention but contact the 
participants through automated SMS 
messages to reassess their smokeless 
tobacco use patterns and adjust their 
schedule as needed. Table 5 provides a 
sample SGR schedule.   
Support  Messages:  SGR group participants 
will receive text -based support messages three times per day over six weeks.  They will start receiving these 
messages 2 weeks before their quit date (e.g. last day of reduction) and will continue to receive these support 
messages for 4 -weeks post  quit date or  reduction  to zero chews . This will prevent the SGR group from getting 
an intolerable number of messages during their reduction period.  The messages are based on constructs of 
Social Cognitive  Theory28 and the Health Belief Model . 29 Messages were develop ed from our pilot work and 
work from our consultant Dr. Herbert Severson . We interviewed 21  smokeless tobacco users  (5 pre - pilot 
intervention and 16 post - pilot intervention)  to obtain feedback on our messages, including readability, and gather 
informatio n on what type of messages wou ld be helpful when quitting. We found that m essages around money 
and the health effects of chewing/dipping were  most effective , so we have increased the number of these 
messages in the current study. Messages contain informati on on the health effects of chewers, benefits and 
barriers of quitting, making a quit plan, self -efficacy and motivatio n, and dealing with cravings,  relapse  and cost -
savings (Table 6). Much like commonly available cessation interventions like smokefree.TXT  and Dipfree.TXT , 
pre-quit messages will focus on health benefits of quitting, building confidence, and making a quit plan.  Post -
quit messages will focus on dealing with cravings and urges a nd relapse prevention.  The text -based system with 
have interactiv e capabilities, can text the word CRAVE if they are having a craving and will receive a message 
to help them deal with the craving.  Participants can also text the word SLIP if they have a slip after their quit 
date and will receive a message to get them b ack on track.  Finally. participants can text MOOD if they need a 
positive message to boost their mood (Table 7 ).  
 

Control Intervention Group  (Enough Snuff Cessation Booklet and 
Motivational Text Messages)  
Original Enough Snuff 
Intervention : The Enough Snuff 
Intervention  is a self -help 
cessation booklet paired with two 
brief motivational phone 
counseling  calls that occur  one 
week after the cessation booklet  
is sent  and the week of the set 
quit date .  The first call focuses 
on increasing motivation for 
quitting (e.g.  reasons for quitting ), 
setting a quit date, and choosing a quit method.  The second call 
focuses on dealing with tough situations when quitting  and follow ing 
through on quit plans.  The Enough Snuff program has been shown to 
be efficacious in promoting smokeless tobacco cessation with quit 
rates ranging from 16 -18%  43,44 and is an intervention endorsed by the 
NCI in their Research -Tested Intervention Programs (RTIPs).45 For the 
curre nt study we are delivering the program as follows:  
Enough Snuff Cessation Booklet : We will provide a ll control participants with the Enough Snuff Cessation Booklet 
developed by our consultant Dr. Herbert Severson.  The manual is organized around four key steps to quitting: 
1) evaluating readiness and motivation to quit; 2) setting a quit date and selecting a quit plan; 3) dealing with 
withdrawal symptoms; and 4) maintain ing quit status.  We will send a ll participants a link to the manual via text -
message a s well as mailed a hard -copy of the booklet.  
Motivational Text -Messages:  To deliver  the most 
equivalent intervention to the original Enough Snuff  
Program , we will send participants motivational text 
messages that map to the content of the phone 
counselin g sessions.  One week after the cessation 
booklet is sent we will text participants twice a week for 
the next 5 weeks.  We will model the messages after 
the phone content and messages will focus on: 
motivation to quit (Week 1), setting a quit date (Week 
2), picking a quit plan (Week 3), motivation to follow -
through with plan (Week 4)  and dealing with tou gh situations when quitting (Week 5) . Messages will  refer to the 
Enough Snuff booklet  ask for a response from participants  (See Table 8). We chose to send t ext messages to 
participants instead of phone calls as texting is consistent  with our mode of contact with participants, less  
expensive, expands our reach, and is highly acceptable according to  our pilot work . 
Intervention Delivery . Mosio  will manage the technical aspects of the SG R computer -based program , the support 
messages and the motivational  messages  in the control group . Mosio  will provide the two -way text messaging 
platform that we will use for this study. This platform allows to c ommunicate with participants, collect data and 
contact participants via mobile text -messaging for follow -up. This is the same company and program our team 
successfully used  as the texting platform  for our pilot  and was approved by our Information Security Office . The 
Participant  interface  with the intervention will be entirely through SMS messaging. Outbound messages from 
the intervention to participant will pass through an SMS gateway that queues each message, delivers it to the 
cell provider (which passes to the participant’s phone), and returns delivery status (success or failure) to the 
intervention application. Inbound message s from participant s to the intervention, such as a reply indicating 
whether they chewed , will be queued at the gateway and retrieved each minute by the application. Study staff 
interface  with the intervention through a web -based dashboard and email messages from the application. 
Through the dashboard, staff will see aggregate information  and can identify individual participants by criteria 
such as SGR status and drill down to their detailed data. Manual outbound SMS messages can be delivered 
from the dashboard using templates or freeform (for example, to respond to a participant who has r equested 
help via SMS).  
 
 Table 7. Example of Interactive text messages  
Content  Example Message                               
CRAVE  When you have an urge 
to chew ride it out by 
taking five deep breaths. 
It will go away, but don’t 
fool yourself into thinking 
you can have just one 
dip. ( 160 characters ) 
MOOD  Talk and do things with 
other people, even if you 
don’t feel up for it. This 
will increase your mood. 
(100 characters ) 
SLIP  Having a slip does not 
mean you can’t quit. It 
does not mean you can’t 
quit for good. You can do 
it! (100 characters ) 

Measures  
Outcome s and Mediators  
Self-report smokeless tobacco cessation will be assess ed at  the end of treatment , 3 and 6 -months  post-
intervention.  Self-report smokeless tobacco cessation at month  6 will be the primary outcome . 
Secondary outcomes, which will be subsequently evalu ated as mediators of the intervention effects, will be 
assess ed at baseline , end of treatment , and 3 and 6-months post -intervention . 
Primary Outcome : Smokeless Tobacco Cessation Outcome . Self -reported abstinence from tobacco us e will be 
collected at end of treatment , 3 and 6 -months post -intervention. We will measure 7 -day point prevalence 
abstinence by asking participants, “In the past 7 days, have you used smokeless tobacco (chew or dip)?” This 
binary outcome will be dichotomized as 0=no and 1=yes.  We will also random ly select a 20%  (10% in control 
and 10% in intervention arm)  of those who report quitting at the end of treatment , 3 and  6 months  to 
biochemically confirm cessation using saliva cotinine strips . NicAlert Semiquantitative test strips will be used 
and a 10 n g/ml cutoff will indicate exposure. Biochemically validated cessation at each of these assessment 
points will be coded as 0=no and 1=yes.  
Mediator : Craving . We will assess craving  using  the Smokeless Tobacco Evaluation Questionnaire (STEQ) 
based on the Cigarette Evaluation Questionnaire (mCEQ)  modified for ST users.46 The STEQ  is a 12 -item 
scale assess ing the degree to which participants  experience the  reinforcing effects of smokeless tobacco  on a 
7-point Likert scale . The  scale has five domains: chewing  satisfaction, psychological reward, enjoyment of 
sensations in cheek/gum, craving reduction, and aversion.   
Mediator : Withdrawal . We will assess withdrawal using the self -report seven item Minnosota Nicotine 
Withdrawal Scale47 as has been used in other sm okeless tobacco cessation trials assessing withdrawal. This 
seven -item scale measures withdrawal symptoms (i.e., irritability, anxiety, difficulty concentrating, restlessness, 
increased appetite or weight gain, depression, and insomnia) and measured on an ordinal scale (0= not 
present) to 4 (severe).  A total score ranging from 0 to 28 will be derived to measure severity of withdrawal 
symptoms, with higher total scores representing greater withdrawal. Internal consistency of the scale s are 
reported to be between α= 0.76-0.91. 
Mediator : Self-regulation . We will assess self -regulation  using the Short -form Self-Regulation Q uestionnaire, 
which is a 31 item self -report survey measuring the ability to regulate behavior and achieve goals.48 
Partic ipants indicate the extent to which they agree with each item using a 5 -point Likert scale: 1 (Strongly 
Disagree), 2 (Somewhat Disagree), 3 (Neutral), 4 (Somewhat Agree), and 5 (Strongly Agree). The measure 
has a total scale computed by summing the items , with higher total score s indicating increased self -regulation . 
Internal consistency of the scale is reported to be α=0.92.  
Mediator : Restrain t. We will measure restraint using a modified version of the Smoking Restraint 
Questionnaire49 for smokeless tobacco  by replacing all smoking references with smokeless tobacco .  The 
Smoking R estraint Questionnaire is a four -item survey. The two binary questions of the questionnaire are 
scored 1 (No) and 5 (Yes). The two multiple -choice items are sc ored from 1 to 5. Total smokeless tobacco 
restraint is calculated as the sum of the four items. The minimum possible score is 4 and the maximum 
possible score is 20 , with higher total scores indicating higher levels of restraint . Internal consistency of th e 
scale is reported to be α=0.74.  
Sample Characteristics : Baseline sociodemographic and clinical measures will be collected to describe the 
characteristics of the total sample and intervention arms. Many of these measures are potential important 
moderator s or mediators of intervention effects that will be explored after the specific aims are fully examined . 
• Demographics and Relevant Biological Variables . We will assess age, sex, race, education, marital status, 
and socio -economic status (SES) at baseline using measures adapted from our prior research.  
• Smokeless  and other  Tobacco Use History . At baseline, participants will be asked about their tobacco use 
habit including: number of chews/dips per day, number of quit attempts in the past year, age of chewing/dipping 
initiation and past use of other tobacco products including electronic cigarettes.  
• Nicotine Replacement Therapy (NRT) Use : We will ask participa nts at all follow -up time points if they have 
used any NRT including the patch, gum or lozenge.  
• Nicotine Addictio n. We will assess nicotine addiction at all time -points using the Severson Smokeless Tobacco 
Dependence Scale -Short Form  (SSTDS ). The SSTDS  is a validated questionnaire has eight  items with a range 
of scores from 0 -19 with higher scores  being most addicted to nicotine.47    
• Self-efficac y. At all time -points we will measure self -efficacy using a similar 9 item scale to the Temptations 
scale . We will adapt the scale by switching out smoking with chewing/dipping. Sample items read, "How 
confident are you that you would not chew  in the following situations: when you are very angry about something 
or someone, when you feel you need a lift, etc.” ( 1=Not at all confident and 5=Extremely confident).  
•Alcohol Use Disorder Identification Test (AUDIT -3).  At all time -points we will use the AUDIT, a 3 item self -
report scale that measures risky drinking, as this may influence quit rates.  50
Process Measures : Process measures that could impact outcomes  will be  collected at baseline , during 
intervention administration , at the end of treatment , 3 and 6 month  follow -up. 
•Adherence  (Intervention Group) . Adherence to the SGR intervention will be calculated two ways. First, we will
measure time to response from the SGR message. Second, we will create a categorical variable (0=respond
in more than 30 minutes, 1=respond after 30 minutes. If a participant responds to less than half of
chewing/dipping prompts in one day, we will exclude this day from the adherence analysis examining whether
overall adherence predicts quit rate and/or smok eless  reduction in the SGR group.
•Adherence (Control Group) . Participants will be asked at all follow -up time points how often they  read the
cessation booklet using a using a 5 -point Likert scale (1 = none, 2 = some, 3 = most, 4 = the entire guide,
and 5 = the entire guide more than once ). 44
•Satisfaction with Intervention . Participants  in both arms  will be asked at end of treatment survey 1) “How
useful was the intervention in helping you to quit smokeless tobacco?” (Not at all useful=1, Extremely useful
=5) and 2) “Would you recommend the program to a friend?” (Definitely would not recommend=1, Def initely
would recommend=5).