The Cellular Pharmacology of F-TAF in dried blood spots  
“TAF-DBS” 
 
 
 
 
IDENTIFIERS: 
Colorado Multiple Institutional Review Board: 16-0972 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
  
FUNDING SUPPORT:  
Gilead Sciences 
 
PHARMACEUTICAL SUPPORT: 
Study Drug Donated by Gilead Sciences  
   
IND SPONSOR: 
Exempt  
    
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR 
Peter L. Anderson, Pharm.D. 
   
 
 Version 2.0 
22 June 2017 
 
 
      
 
    
 
 
  
PROTOCOL 
 
Full Title: The Cellular Pharmacology of F-TAF in dried blood spots   
 
Short Title:  TAF-DBS  
Clinical Phase:  I-II 
 IND Sponsor:  Exempt  
 Principal Investigator: Peter L. Anderson, Pharm.D. 
 Sample Size: Approximately  36 who complete the study tim eline. IRB approvals will be 
sought for 72 subjects to allow for screen failures and drop ou ts.  
 Study population:  HIV-uninfected adult participants at low risk for HIV infectio n. All participants 
must have a creatinine clearance  >60 ml/min (MDRD equation) an d no 
contraindicated medical conditions or medications. 
 Participating sites: The University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus. 
     
Study Design: Approximately 36 HIV negative subjects will be enrolled. Enroll ment will target 
approximately half women and one third African-Americans or Latino. However, 
strict quotas will not be imposed. Enrollment will proceed with out the need to 
meet specific race/gender targets. Participants will be randomi zed to one of 6 
sequences consisting of two direct ly observed dosing regimens, 33%/67%, 
33%/100%, 67%/33%, 6 7%/100%, 100%/33%, a nd 100%/67%, expressed as % 
of daily dosing. Each dose regime n will have a duration of appr oximately 12 
weeks. DBS/blood will be collect ed every week and hair will be collected at 3 
week intervals. There will be a 12 week washout period between dose regimens.  
Additional samples will be collected during this washout period to determine 
elimination kinetics in hair and DBS/blood.  
 
The 33% and 67% dosing regimens  will skip doses spaced by days (i.e. 67% is 
two daily doses followed by skipping a day, repeated for 12 wee ks; 33% dosing 
is a daily dose followed by two skipped days, repeated for 12 w eeks).  
 Study Duration: For participants, the study lasts for approximately 36 weeks. Recruitment and enrollment will continue for approximately one year, the total study duration is 
approximately two years.  
 Study Regimen: Volunteers will receive 200mg and 25mg of emtricitabine and ten ofovir 
alafenamide fumarate (F-TAF) according to the regimens outlined above. This medication will be donated by G ilead Sciences, and managed by t he University 
of Colorado Hospital Investigational Pharmacy. 
 
 
  
 
Primary objectives: 
1)  Define the expected concen trations and dose-proportionality  for TFV-DP in 
DBS using directly observed F-TAF therapy at 33%, 67%, and 100% of daily dosing.  
 2) Establish a model to predict a dherence rate to F-TAF by leve l of TFV-DP in 
DBS. 
 
  
STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS  
Primary outcomes 
 Primary outcome 1.  The study was powered on dose proportionality of TFV-DP in DBS . Means, 
variances and dose proportionalit y will utilize measured concen trations at steady-state (Css at 12 weeks). 
Measured values will be validated with fitted values from PK mo deling approaches (eg NONMEM).(22) 
The sample size was based upon  demonstrating dose proportionality. Under the power model, 
Css=a(dosing)be, dose proportionality dictates the 90% CI for b is in (0.8, 1 .25).(23) We assume an 
incomplete block design with each subject receiving 2 (of 3) do ses, providing 6 permuted dose sequences 
(figure 2). An estimate of within subject CV was 2*max(CV) = 0. 20 based on 5 replicate TFV-DP DBS 
samples from 2 subjects. Assuming a significance level of 0.05,  we estimate a sample size of n=36 
subjects (6 per dose sequence).(23) If dose proportionality is not shown, we will consider dose as a 
predictor of log(Css) as a linear (b≠1) or a categorical effect interacted with time. Secondary outcomes 
such as the effects of race, gender and genetics, will be evalu ated with models utilizing likelihood ratio 
tests and AIC to compare nested and non-nested models. (23-27) 
 
Primary outcome 2.  The goal is to determine DBS TFV-DP cut points associated with  adherence levels. 
For the primary analyses, we will attempt to discriminate 33%, 67% and 100% dosing based upon TFV-
DP in DBS. Power calculations conservatively assume a single me asured Css observation at week 12, 
dose as a categorical predictor and 1 dose regimen per subject.  Sample sizes of n=16 for each regimen 
achieve 90% power to detect a difference of 0.27 (0.30) between  the area under the ROC curve (AUC) 
under the null hypothesis of 0.50 and an AUC under the alternat ive hypothesis of 0.77 (0.80) using a two-
sided z-test at a significance level of 0.05. In practice, a pr oportional odds logistic approach which allows 
for an ordinal outcome (25, 26, 28) and extensions which control for correlations between repeated measurements on a subject will be utilized. (29) Finally, we wi ll employ PK models from aim 1 to 
simulate TFV-DP for other dose regimens to estimate cut points for adherence rates other than 33%, 67% 
and 100%. 
 
 
 
Enrollment/Stratification/Randomization/Blinding Procedures 
This is a randomized open label observational study. Each subject will be randomized to one of 6 possible 
dosing regimens shown in the tab le below (Table 1).  For each s tudy period, block randomization will be 
used to ensure that Dosing Groups  are balanced across enrollmen t time. The randomization will be 
programmed using R software (http://cran.r-project.org/ , The R  Foundation for Statistical Computing). 
   
Table 1: All possible randomization scenarios  
Dosing group 1 2 3 4 5 6 
Period 1 33 33 67 67 100 100 
Period 2 67 100 33 100 33 67 
N (36 total) 6 6 6 6 6 6 
 
Participant Enrollment Follow-Up 
Enrollment will be discussed at PSRT meetings every 6 months.  
  Planned Interim Analyses and Stopping Guidelines  
Because the study is non-therap eutic and relatively small (N<100) the study team will monitor for safety 
as described above, but not efficacy.  
 Assays will be performed real time for the first 6 participants  to evaluate if the half-life of TFV-DP in 
RBC is similar for TAF vs TDF. An analysis will be conducted at  week 6 or 8 to assess TFV-DP by 
fitting the following equation:  Ct=Css*(1-e
-K*t), where Ct is TFV-DP in DBS at time t, Css is the fitted 
steady state concentration, k is the fitted first-order elimina tion rate constant. Note th e dose is not required 
for this equation. For comparis on, we will run simulations of T FV-DP in DBS during TDF therapy using 
data from our ongoing DOT-DBS study (COMIRB 13-0427). If TFV-DP  kinetics are similar for TAF and 
TDF, we would expect the fitted k to be similar between DOT-DBS  and the present study. This interim 
analysis will only detect very large differences. We will meet as a study team (PSRT and Dr. Sam 
MaWhinney) to assess comparability, and will make decisions about potential study design alterations at this meeting. If study alterati ons are deemed to be needed, the y will be submitted to the IRB prior to 
implementation.  