 
 
  
 
 
Statistical Data Analysis Plan  
 
 
Anti-influenza Hyperimmune Intravenous Immunoglobulin Clinical Outcomes 
Study (INSIGHT 006:  FLU -IVIG)  
 
 
 
 
August 1 7, 2018  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
 I. INTRODUCTION  
 
A. Background and o bjective of data analysis plan  
 
This data analysis plan (DAP) is intended to provide a description of the general 
analytic strategy and the statistical methods that will be used to compare the IVIG group 
with the placebo group of INSIGHT 006 (FLU -IVIG)  upon completion of the trial .  
 
For the initial sample  size estimation as described in the protocol, category percentages 
for the control group for the primary 6 -category ordinal endpoint at day 7 were obtained 
using data from the INSIGHT FLU 003 study.1,2  The protocol team carried out a 
sample size re -estim ation using the pooled (both treatment groups combined) day 7 
outcome data in August 2017.  At that time , day 7 outcome data were available for 170 
of the planned 320 participants. The pooled category percentages for the primary 
ordinal outcome were simila r to those used from FLU 003 in the design of FLU -IVIG 
and power for detecting an odds ratio of 1.77, as specified in the protocol, remained 
0.80.  Considering this, the low percentage of participants with missing data  at day 7 , 
and the low percentage of p articipants who were not infused following randomization, 
no change to the planned sample size of 320 participants was made.  
 
At the end of April 2018 the protocol team decided to stop enrollment on June 1, 2018 
because the targeted enrollment had been ach ieved . The last participant enrolled in the 
FLU IVIG trial was on May 28, 2018 bringing the total to 313.  The FLU -IVIG protocol 
stipulated that the 16 participants from the INSIGHT IVIG pilot trial (FLU 005)3 who met 
the eligibility criteria for the FLU -IVIG trial  would be included in the final analysis.  Thus, 
a total of 329 randomized participants will be considered for the primary analysis.    
 
The analysis plan described below was prepared by blinded statisticians on the protocol 
team and the protocol c o-chairs.  It is similar to the one  stated in the protocol  with the 
following exceptions:  
 
 The analysis set both for the primary analysis and for sensitivity analyses are 
defined.   
 The subgroup of participants with influenza A infection is identified as a key 
subgroup for whom the benefit is expected to exceed that of the overall group 
randomized  (i.e., the treatment effect for those with influenza  A is expected to 
be greater than for with influenza  B infection)  (see section C.) .  Power is 
estimated for th e subgroup  with influenza A . 
 Outcomes  other than the primary endpoint are divided into key secondary  
endpoints,  supportive efficacy endpoints , and safety endpoints .  The three key 
secondary endpoints are listed  in terms of their importance.  
 
B. Protocol summar y and history  
 
2 
 FLU-IVIG is a randomized, double blind multicenter, international clinical trial.  
Hospitalized patients with a National Early Warning (NEW) score of 2 or greater will be 
randomized in a 1:1 allocation ratio to either IVIG plus standard of c are (SOC) therapy 
or to placebo for IVIG (a comparable volume of normal saline) plus SOC, and followed 
for 28 days. A total of 320 adult patients were to  be enrolled over multiple influenza 
seasons. A schematic of the design is given below.  
 
FLU-IVIG Desig n 
 
 
 
The primary endpoint is an ordinal outcome at Day 7 that has 6 mutually exclusive 
categories:  
1. Death 
2. In the intensive care unit (ICU);  
3. Non-ICU hospitalization, requiring supplemental oxygen;  
4. Non-ICU hospitalization, not requiring supplemental oxygen;  
5. Discharged , but unable to resume normal activities; or  
6. Discharged  with full resumption of normal activities.  
 
Sample size was estimated assuming the following:  
 A proportional odds model would be used to compare the IVIG and p lacebo 
groups for the primary ordinal outcome.4   
 Type 1 error of 0.05 (2 -sided) and power=0.80 to detect an odds ratio of 1.77 (an 
odds ratio greater than 1.0 corresponds to a more favorable response to IVIG 
than placebo).  
For the primary analysis, in add ition to a treatment indicator, the model w ill include 
indicators for whether the participant was enrolled in the ICU or general ward and 
whether oxygen was required, and w ill be stratified by geographic region.   
Version 1.0 of the protocol was available on September 5, 2014.  Version 2.0 of the 
protocol was released on May 31, 2016.  The major change with version 2.0 was to 
remove the following exclusion criterion due to confusion among the clinical sites: 
“Strong clinical evidence (in the judgment of the  site investigator) that the etiology of 
illness is primarily bacterial in origin.”  In addition, the 5th inclusion criterion was 
changed to: “Hospitalized (or in observation unit) with influenza, with anticipated IVIG + SOC  
 
N=160  Hospitalized Adults with Influenza A or B  
Placebo for IVIG + SOC  
    (n = 3,000)       (n=3,000)  
N=160  
3 
 hospitalization for more than 24 hours.”  The sentence stating “Criteria for 
hospitalization will be up to the individual treating clinician” was removed.  
 
As mentioned in the protocol (section 6.2), a sample size re -estimation using pooled 
outcome data at day 7 was to be carried out when approxim ately 50% of patients had 
been enrolled.  The sample size re -estimation was carried out in August 2017 when 
53% of the 320 planned pa rticipants (170)  had day 7 primary outcome data.  
 
The FLU -IVIG trial was  overseen by an independent Data and Safety Monitor ing Board 
(DSMB) appointed by NIAID. The DSMB last met on January 18, 2018.  
 
C. Trial Objectives  
The primary objective is to compare the clinical status of participants in the IVIG and 
placebo groups at day 7 of follow -up using the previously defined 6-catego ry primary 
ordinal outcome .  Other efficacy outcomes and safety outcomes will also be evaluated.  
 
Over the course of the trial, 5 batches of IVIG were prepared.  Laboratory testing of the 
IVIG indicated that HAI titers were substantially greater for influe nza A strains than 
influenza B  strains .  Whether the HAI titers of the IVIG are good surrogates for the 
clinical response is uncertain.  However, it is biologically plausible that the benefit of 
IVIG on the day 7 clinical outcomes will be greater for parti cipants infected with 
influenza A as compared to influenza B  as a consequence of the IVIG used . 
 
Thus, the main secondary objective is to compare  the clinical status of participants 
infected with influenza A virus in the IVIG and placebo groups at day 7 of  follow -up 
using the 6-category primary ordinal outcome.   
 
The null hypothesis for the primary and main secondary objective is that there is no 
difference between the IVIG and placebo group in the day 7 primary ordinal outcome.  
 
Sample size for the primar y objective  (N=320; 160 per group)  assumed equal allocation 
of participants to each treatment, type 1 error of 0.05 (2 -sided) , power= 0.80 to detect 
an odds ratio of 1.77  
 
Category percentages assumed in the design and given in the protocol are shown 
below in Table 1 for the primary ordinal outcome.   
 
In the discussion that follows, unless otherwise stated, the numbers shown for both 
treatment groups combined include the 16 participants from the IVIG pilot study.   These 
results are referred to as “FLU IVIG P ooled Outcome Data”.  
4 
 Table 1  
 Percent in Each Category  
Outcome at Day 7  IVIG  Placebo  
Death  1.0 1.8 
ICU (for FLU 003, assumed 
those ventilated were in the 
ICU) 2.1 3.6 
Non-ICU hospitalization, O 2 9.9 15.6 
Non-ICU hospitalization, no O 2 10.3 14.1 
Discharged, not back to 
normal activities  38.4 39.0 
Discharged, back to normal 
activities  38.2 25.8 
 
As previously mentioned, the pooled FLU IVIG outcome data at day 7 after 170 
participants were enrolled are similar to pooled data used in the design (see Table 2 
below).  
 
Table 2  
 Percent in Each Category  
Outcome at Day 7  FLU IVIG Pooled Outcome 
Data (N=170)  Average of Design 
Estimates for the IVIG and 
Placebo Groups  
Death  1.8 1.4 
ICU 7.1 2.9 
Non-ICU hospitalization, O 2 10.6 12.8 
Non-ICU hospitalizatio n, no 
O2 7.6 12.2 
Discharged, not back to 
normal activities  35.9 38.7 
Discharged, back to normal 
activities  37.0 32.0 
 
Pooled FLU IVIG outcome data (category percentages) at day 7 for 220 participants 
with influenza A infection  as of April 30, 2018  are also similar to the overall category 
percentages above (see Table 3 ). 
5 
 Table 3    
Outcome at Day 7  FLU IVIG Pooled Outcome 
Data for Participants with 
Influenza A Infection (N=220)  
Death  1.4 
ICU 4.6 
Non-ICU hospitalization, O 2 10.5 
Non-ICU hospitalizatio n, no O 2 8.2 
Discharged, not back to 
normal activities  35.5 
Discharged, back to normal 
activities  40.0 
 
We assume that 232 of the participants ultimately randomized to FLU IVIG will be 
infected with influenza A.   Assuming the design assumptions  stated i n the protocol and 
given in Table 1, with 232 participants, power is 0.67 to detect an odds ratio of 1.77  at 
the 0.05  level of significan ce (2-sided) .  An odds ratio of 1.95 can be detected  with 
power=0.80 with 232 participants .  The IVIG and placebo categ ory percentages  for 
participants with influenza A infection  corresponding to an odds ratio of 1.95 are given 
in Table 4.   
 
 Table 4  
 Participants with Influenza A;  Assumed Percent ages in Each 
Category  
Outcome at Day 7  IVIG (N =116) Placebo (N=116)  
Death  1.0 1.8 
ICU (for FLU 003, assumed 
those ventilated were in the 
ICU) 1.9 3.6 
Non-ICU hospitalization, O 2 9.1 15.6 
Non-ICU hospitalization, no O 2 9.7 14.1 
Discharged, not back to 
normal activities  37.8 39.0 
Discharged, back to normal 
activities  40.5 25.8 
 
D. Analysis Set  
The analysis set for the primary efficacy and safety analys es and all other analyses will 
exclude 21 randomized  participants : 
 4 participants who declined to receive an IVIG/placebo infusion; and  
 17 participants at a single site in Thaila nd for whom eligibility based on the NEW 
score could not be confirmed and data alteration of the vital signs used to 
compute the NEW score was suspect ed. 
 
One other participant  (at a different site)  did not meet strict eligibility criteria .  This 
participa nt had a locally determined positive influenza test 4 day s prior to randomization 
instead of within 2 days as stated in the protocol .  This participant will be retained in the 
6 
 primary analysis because this was not considered to be major, there was no evide nce 
that it was intentional, and it is in keeping with the intention to treat principle.   Thus, 
analyses in the final report will be restricted to 30 8 randomized participants.  These 
analyses will be referred to as modified intention to treat.     
 
For the  primary efficacy analysis, missing day 7 outcomes (4 participants  have missing 
outcomes among those infused ) will be imputed for participants who were infused.   
 
Sensitivity analyses will be carried out  to assess the impact of including participants 
from the pilot study, to assess the impact of imputation for the primary outcome, and to 
assess the impact of the exclusion  of participants  from the site in Thailand .  
 
The four sensitivity analyses are:  
 
1) An analysis that excludes participants enrolled in the IVIG pilot (16 participants).  
2) An analysis that excludes participants for whom the day 7 outcome is missing (4 
participants).  
3) An analysis  that includes the 17 participants who may not have met the NEW 
score eligibility criteria at the site in Thailand.  
4) An analysis that excludes all participants at the site in Thailand (80 total) for 
which the eligibility of 17 participants could not be confirmed.   
 
The first two sensitivity analyses listed above  will be carried out for the primary endpoint 
analysis only.   The 3rd and 4th sensitivity analyses  will be carried out for all of the 
baseline and outcome analyses described in this plan .  The 3rd sensitivity analysis is 
being done because there is a possib ility that the 17 participants excluded were eligible , 
there w as no evidence from the monitoring carried out that data collected post -
randomization were modified, and it is in keeping with intention to treat.   The 4th 
sensitivity analysis is being done because the site employed correction fluid and 
overwriting in the ir medical record (source documents, not research case report forms) 
routinely to modify data even though they were advised in 2014 by site monitors for 
another influenza study that this was not good practice.  Thirteen  additional  participants 
had vital sig ns used to determine the screening NEW score modified .  These 
modifications did not change eligibility (they appeared to inflate the NEW score, but the 
participants were eligible before the modifications to the vital signs ).  
 
E. Primary Efficacy Analysis  
For the primary endpoint, the percent of pa rticipants  in the following 6 categories , on 
day 7,  will be compared:  
1) Death  
2) ICU  
3) Non-ICU hospitalization , on supplemental oxygen  
4) Non-ICU hospitalization,  not on supplemental oxygen  
5) Discharged,  norm al activities have not been resumed   
7 
 6) Discharged,  normal activities resumed  
 
We refer to his endpoint in the remainder of the statistical analysis plan as the “primary 
ordinal outcome” in order to differentiate it from another ordinal outcome  defined at  day 
3 that ha s been defined  as a key secondary endpoint.     
 
The following special situations will apply to the categorization of participants at day 7:  
 Participants in the hospital on day 7 or who die on day 7 will be categorized 
according to the worst c ategory measured on day 7, i.e.,  a participant 
hospitalized on day 7 who is later discharged on day 7, will be categorized in the 
worst of categories 2 to 4.  
 Participants discharged before day 7 will be categorized using the date they 
report be ing back to normal activities, i.e., a participant who reports they 
resumed normal activities on day 7 will considered in category 6, i.e., it will be 
assumed that they were in this category all of day 7.   
 Currently there are 4 participants who were infused and for w hom the  day 7 
outcome is missing.  All 4 of the participants were discharged (3 to their home 
and one to a shelter).   A brief summary of each of these 4 participants is given 
below:  
o Participant #1:  Withdrew consent 4 days after randomization; discharged 
on day 1 on oxygen.  New score on day 1 = 2.    
o Participant #2: Last contact  on day 5 following discharge.  New score at 
day 3 = 0 and no symptoms reported on day 3.   Participant is known to be 
alive on day 28.  
o Participant #3: L ast contact  on day 3 following  discharge.  New score on 
day 2 = 1.  Symptoms were reported on day 3.   Participant is known to be 
alive on day 28.  
o Participant #4: L ast contact  on day 4 following discharge. On day 3 the 
New score = 2 and symptoms were reported.   Participant is known to be 
alive on day 28.  
 
 For the primary endpoint analysis  and for the key subgroup of participants 
infected with influenza A  only, m ultiple imputation based on  baseline and follow -
up data will be used to estimate  participant status at day 7 for th ese 4 
partic ipants.   Specifically, for the day 7 primary outcome , it will be assumed that 
these 4 participants remain discharged and whether these participants have 
resumed normal activities or not following discharge will be imputed.   For this 
imputation the followin g baseline covariates will be considered  in addition to an 
indicator for treatment group : age, geographic region, duration of symptoms  prior 
to enrollment , strain (A versus B) , status at enrollment (ICU, general ward on O 2, 
general ward not on O 2), an indi cator for whether the participant was in the IVIG 
pilot trial (FLU 005) or the FLU -IVIG trial (FLU 006), and presence of 
comorbi dities. In addition to these baseline covariates , the last NEW score 
measured and the date of discharge will be used in the impu tation . 
8 
  Ten rounds of imputation will be used to obtain the summary odds ratio.  
 
A proportional odds model will be used to estimate a summary odds ratio.4  The model 
will include an indicator for treatment , indicators for the patient’s clinical state at entry 
(ICU, general ward on supplemental oxygen, general ward not on supplemental 
oxygen) , and an indicator for whether the participant was in the IVIG pilot trial (FLU 
005) or the FLU -IVIG trial (FLU 006) .  The model will be stratified by geographic region 
(United States /South America /Mexico , Europe /Australia , and Thailand ). 
 
To supplement the overall summary odds ratio, separate odds ratios will be estimated 
for each dichotomized definition of improvement that c an be formulated from the 
components of the ordinal outcome.  A test for the proportionality assumption will also 
be made.  
 
Analyses identical to those described above  (including the imputation)  will be carried 
out for participants with influenza A virus i nfection.   If the central determination of 
influenza resulted in negative or indeterminate results, the local determination will be 
used.  For participants with a co-infection with A and B  influenza subtypes, the 
participant will be classified as A.  
 
The analyses described above will be carried out for the primary efficacy analysis and 
for the two planned sensitivity analyses.  
 
These analyses will be supplemented with summaries which give the category 
percentages for the primary ordinal outcome by treatmen t group for days 1 -7. 
 
F. Subgroup Analysis  
Analyses will be carried out for the following baseline -defined subgroups:  
 
 Influenza s train (A, B) and subtype (pH1N1, H3N2,  B) 
 Age (<40, 40 -59, ≥ 60 years)  
 Gender (men, women)  
 Race/ethnicity (White/ Hispanic/ other, Black, Asian)  
 Enrollment ward/use of O 2 (ICU, general ward on O 2, general ward not on O 2) 
 Geographic region (United States /South America/Mexico,  Europe/Australia, 
Thailand)  
 Northern/Southern hemisphere /Equatorial  (United States, Mexico, and Europe vs 
Australia  and South America  vs Thailand)  
 Duration of symptoms prior to randomization (≤ 3, 4 , ≥ 5 days)  
 New score (≤ 3, 4 -5, ≥ 6)  
 Influenza season (Oct2013 -Sep2014, Oct2014 -Sep2015 , Oct2015 -Sep2016, 
Oct2016 -Sep2017, Oct2017 -Jun2018)  
 Co-morbidities (CVD, COPD /asthma, diabetes , none  of these ) (as hierarchy)  
 Other conditions  (sepsis, p neumonia, immune suppression)  (each considered 
separately versus not having the condit ion) 
9 
     Influenz a strain /viral load (A and viral load > 100,000 /≤ 100,000 , B and viral load 
> 1,000,000 /≤ 1,000,000 ) (4 categories)  
    Influenza vaccination (yes, no , unknown ) 
 Smoking status (current smoker, non -smoker)  
    IVIG lot (1 -5) 
    HAI titer (highest titer measured)  
    HAI titer corresponding to subtype of in fection (highest titer measured)  
    Risk score tertile for hospitalization or death at day 7   
 
The following special situations will apply to the categorization of participants for 
subgroup analyses:  
 If central laboratory results are negative or indetermin ate for influenza 
strain/ subtype, the local laboratory result will be used for classifying 
strain/subtype . 
 Influenza vaccination was recorded differently on different versions of the 
baseline case report form.  Participants will be considered as vaccinated  if they 
report be ing vaccinated in the past 6 months or report being vaccinated in the 
season  of their enrollment.   
 IVIG lot will be imputed for participants assigned to placebo using the lot of the 
closest (in time) enrolled participant who received IVI G at that site.  
 For the risk score for hospitalization or death at day 7, the following baseline 
covar iates will be considered: age, gender, race/ethnicity, geographic region, 
duration of symptoms prior to enrollment, status at enrollment (ICU, general war d 
on O 2, general ward not on O 2), vaccination in current season,  influenza strain , 
comorbidities (see above), other conditions (see above) , and season of 
enrollment .  The score for each participant will be determined using a logistic 
model that includes pa rticipants from both treatment groups.    
The interaction between each subgroup and treatment will be assessed with expanded 
proportional odds models.  Terms for each subgroup and a cross -product term with 
treatment will be added to the proportional odds m odel described above  for the primary 
analysis .  Interaction p -values for age , duration of symptoms,  risk score for 
hospitalization or death at day 7, and N EW score  will be based on the measured 
variable (1 df) not the categorical variable.  
   
G. Secondary End points  
Some new secondary efficacy endpoints  were defined , some in the protocol were 
dropped , and some are now defined as supportive.  Reasons for this are:  
 Approximately 40% of par ticipants were discharged b y day 3 .   
 The NEW score at day 3 was only deter mined for hospitalized participants.  
Thus, measuring change in NEW score at day 3 (as originally defined in the 
10 
 protocol) is potentially biased due to missing data . 
 The NEW score encompasses several factors that have been included as 
outcomes in recent in fluenza trials (e.g., normalization of respiratory rate and 
oxygen saturation , or clinical stability /clinical resolution  that also considers 
temperature, heart rate, and systolic blood pressure ).5,6,7  Considering this and 
the large number of participants discharged in the first 3 days, a second ordinal 
outcome with 5 categories was defined based on day 3 outcomes that includes 
the NEW score and does not consider whether  participant s discharged have 
resumed normal activities.  The latter change was made bec ause the outcome is 
assessed at day 3, shortly after the acute illness, when resumption of normal 
activities is less likely.  Th e categorization by the participant of resumption of 
normal activities was also the most subjective component of the primary ord inal 
endpoint.  
 
Key Secondary Endpoints  
These 3 key secondary outcomes and the supportive efficacy outcomes will be used to 
compare all randomized participants in the primary analysis set of participants (see D. 
for definition ) and in those with influenza A infection who are in the primary analysis set.  
     
 Five category ordinal outcome on day 3:  
o Death  
o ICU 
o Non-ICU hospitalization , NEW score ≥ 3  
o Non-ICU hospitalization , NEW score < 3  
o Discharged  
 Primary 6-category ordinal outcome on day 3  
 
 Favorable outcome at day 7 taking in  to account enrollment from the ICU or 
general ward  (also referred to as a sliding dichotomy8) defined as : 
o ICU at enrollment to general ward or discharge before  day 7  
o General ward at enrollment to discharge before  day 7  
 
Power Considerations for the Key Secondary Endpoints : 
 For the 5 -category ordinal outcome at day 3, an odds ratio of 1.78 can be 
detected with po wer = 0.80 a t the 0.05 level of significance (2 -sided).  
 For the 6 -category primary ordinal outcome at day 3, power is 0. 80 to detect an 
odds ratio of 1.7 8. 
 For the favorable outcome at day 7, p ower is 0.80 to detect a 12.5% absolute 
difference in the perce ntage with a favorable outcome at day 7 (86% versus 
73.5%).   For both treatment groups combined, approximately 80% have a 
favorable outcome at day 7.  
11 
 The percentage of participants in the 5 - and 6 -category ordinal outcomes described 
above and that are basi s for power estimates are given in Table 5 for both treatment 
groups combined as of May 23 , 2018.  
Table 5  
Outcome at Day 3 FLU IVIG Pooled 
Outcome Data at 
Day 3  (N=324)  Outcome at Day 3  FLU IVIG Pooled 
Outcome Data at 
Day 3 (N=3 23) 
Death  0.3  Death  0.3 
ICU 6.5  ICU 6.5 
Non-ICU 
hospitalization, NEW 
score ≥ 3  17.3  Non-ICU hospitalization, 
on O 2 21.4 
Non-ICU 
hospitalization, New 
score < 3  34.0  Non-ICU hospitalization, 
not on O 2 30.0 
Discharged  42.0  Discharged, not back to 
normal activities  34.7 
Not a pplicable (NA)  NA  Discharged, back to 
normal activities  7.1 
 
In summary, with both the 5 -category and 6 -category day 3 ordinal outcomes, the odds 
ratio which can be detected with power=0.80 is approximately 1.77 (assuming 32 4 
participants and a 2 -sided t ype 1 error of 0.05). This is very similar to the odds ratio 
specified in the design (1.77) for day 7.   Even if the proportional odds assumption is 
violated, power is expected to be similar to 0.80 if the overall assumed odds ratio is 
maintained.  However , considering the category percentages in Tables 2 for day 7 and 
in Table 5 for day 3, the significance of the final result is likely to be more heavily 
influenced by differences in the  non-ICU hospitalization  and discharge (overall or not 
back to normal)  categories at day 3  and by the diff erences in the two discharge 
categories  (not back to normal and back to normal) at day 7 .9 
Analysis Considerations for the Key Secondary Outcomes  
The analysis of the day 3 ordinal outcomes will follow the same plan as for  the primary 
ordinal outcome at day 7 .  Logistic regression will be used to summarize the difference 
between the IVIG and placebo group in the favorable outcome  at day 7.  This model will 
be stratified by geographic region and include indicators for the pa rticipant’s clinical 
status at entry (ICU, general ward on supplemental oxygen, general ward not on 
supplemental oxygen), and an indicator for whether the participant was in the IVIG pilot 
trial (FLU 005) or the FLU -IVIG trial (FLU 006).  
For participants i n the IVIG Pilot, the NEW score was not collected.  It will be estimated 
using the reported vital signs each day.  Level of consciousness  was not collected .  It 
will be assumed to be zero , therefore  NEW scores for these participants may be 
underestimated .  For participant s in FLU -IVIG (FLU 006), NEW scores were to be 
collected twice daily through day 3 while hospitalized.  Thus, the NEW score on day 3 
12 
 will use the average of 2 readings if available, otherwise the single reading collected will 
be used.  
If a NEW score is not available on Day 3, the last available follow -up NEW score will be 
used.  
For the favorable outcome on Day 7, for the 4 participants who are missing the primary 
outcome on Day 7, it is presumed that they did not die or were re -hospitalized  following 
discharge , i.e., they will be considered as having a favorable outcome.  
H. Supportive Efficacy Endpoints  
The following efficacy outcomes are defined as supportive:  
 Time to discharge  
 Time to death  
 Percent age alive and out of the hospital at day 28  
 Change in nasopharyngeal viral load from baseline to d ay 3  
 Change in HAI titers  from baseline to day 1, 3 and 7  
 Percentage dying or requiring re -hospitalization after discharge  
 Percentage with a diagnosis on or after the day of randomization and before the  
day 28 visit developing acute respiratory distress syndrome, acute renal failure, 
sepsis, pneumonia , enteritis or bronchitis (considered individually and also any of 
the diagnoses)    
 Ordinal outcome on day 14  
 Percent age alive and out of the hospital at day 14  
 Resumption of normal activities at day 14.  
 Ordinal outcome on day 28  
 
Analysis Considerations for Supportive Efficacy  Outcomes  
Kaplan -Meier curves will be used to summarize the time to discharge  and time to death , 
overall and through 7 days.  The med ian number of days from randomization to 
discharge will be estimated.    Deaths during hospitalization will be censored after day 
28 (or day 7) for analyses  of time to discharge .  A logrank test will be used to compare 
treatment groups .   
For participants who experienced multiple hospitalizations during follow -up, the time to 
the last discharge before day 28 will be considered.   As the  visit window for the day 28 
visit extends to day 35 , events after day 28 but prior to the final visit will be included in 
these analyses.  
The difference between the IVIG and placebo group for c hange in log-transformed 
nasopharyngeal viral load from baseline to d ay 3 will be summarized using stratified 
analysis of variance with baseline viral load as a covariate.  Viral loads v ary by subtype. 
Therefore, s trata will be defined by influenza virus subtype ( H1N1, H3N2,  or B)  as well 
as geographic region .  In these analyses, levels below 75 copies, the lower limit of 
detection , will be imputed as 75 copies.  For this analysis, deaths  (currently one 
13 
 participant) on or before day 3 will be excluded , as will participants with undetectable 
RNA .  
The IVIG and placebo group will also be compared for the percentage with 
undetectable viral RNA  at day 3 using logistic regression with baseline viral load as a 
covariate and geographic region and influenza subtype as stratifying factor s.  For this 
analysis,  exclusions will be as per the previous paragraph; however,  participants dying 
on or before day 3 (currently one participant) will be included in these analyses and 
considered as having detectable  RNA .   
Ordinal outcomes will be summarized using a proportional odds model as described for 
the primary ordinal outcome  (see E.) . 
Binary outcomes will be summarized with logistic models that are stratif ied by 
geographic region and include indicators for the participant ’s clinical stat us at entry 
(ICU, general ward on supplemental oxygen, general ward not on supplemental 
oxygen), and an indicator for whether the participant was in the IVIG pilot trial (FL U 
005) or the FLU -IVIG trial (FLU 006).  
Reference viruses used for HAI titers changed over the course of the study  
corresponding to the circulating viruses .  Longitudinal random effects models stratified 
by subtype (H1N1, H3N2, B) will be used to estimate differences in log -transformed HAI 
titers  between the IVIG and placebo group at days 1, 3 and 7.  Baseline HAI levels will 
be included in these models as a covariate. Each HAI titer assessed will be used to 
compare the two treatment groups.  In addition , analyses specific to the virus of 
infection, will be carried out.  F or participants infected with H1N1 , A/California/2009 and 
A/Michigan/2015 will be used; for those infected with H3N2, A/Hong Kong/2014 , 
A/Switzerland/2013 and A/Texas/50/2012  will be used; and for those infected with 
influenza B virus, B/Phuket/2013 , B/Brisbane/2008  and B/Massachusetts/2012 will be 
used.  
I. Safety Endpoints  
Targeted symptoms  are collected at baseline day 3 and day 7.  Unsolicited grade 3 or 4 
adverse events are collected on day s 1-3, 7, 14, and 28 . SAEs are collected throughout 
the 28 day follow -up.  The following will be summarized:  
 
 Percentage of participants for whom infusion was interrupted.  
 Percentage of participants with adverse event s of grade 3 or 4 severity.  
 Percentage of participants with a serious adverse event  (SAE) . 
 Percentage with a composite outcome of death, SAE, infusion interruption, or 
any grade 3 or 4 adverse event.  
 Percentage of participants with each targeted symptom  on day 3 and on day 7  
 Change in serum che mistries and complete blood count (CBC) between baseline 
and day 7.  
 
Analysis Considerations for Safety  Outcomes  
14 
 Adverse events  will be compared for the IVIG and placebo groups and summarized 
using chi -square statistics  stratified by geographic region .  Serum chemistry and CBC  
measurements will be summarized as changes from baseline to Day 7  using analysis of 
covariance  stratified by clinical site (local laboratories were used) .    
 
J. Baseline Characteristics  
Tabulations will be prepared by treatment group fo r a number of baseline variables:   
 Influenza subtype  
 Age  
 Gender  
 Race/ethnicity  
 Enrollment ward/use of O 2 
 Geographic region  
 Northern/Southern hemisphere /Equatorial  
 Duration of symptoms prior to randomization  
 New score  
 Influenza season  
 Co-morbidities  
 Compl ications  
    Subtype/viral load  as defined for subgroups  
    Influenza vaccination  
    Smoking status  
    Use of a ntiviral medication  at time of randomization and of those given antivirals 
the percentage given oseltamivir.   
 
Summary statistics will include N, mean, SD, median, 25th, 75th percentiles , and 
percent ages for categorical variables.   Categorical variables will be defined as for the 
subgroup analysis.  
 
K. Infusion Summary  
The following statistics will be used to summarize the infusion in each treatment gr oup: 
 Number and percent age of participants  receiving complete infusion, partial 
infusion, or not infused.  
 Among participants infused, the day of infusion (same day as randomization, 
next day, > 1 day after randomization).  
 Among participants infused, time b etween randomization and beginning of 
infusion (median minutes, 25th, 75th percentiles).  
 Among participants infused, estimated dosage administered (median mL, 25th, 
75th percentile).  
 Among participants receiving full infusion, duration of infusion (median minutes, 
25th, 75th percentiles).  
 Number and percentage of participants with a grade 3/4 AE or SAE during the 
infusion.  
15 
  Listing of problems reported during the infusion.  
 
L. Completeness of Follow -up 
According to protocol, pa rticipants  are to be seen for data collection at day 1, 3 and 7 
after randomization .  In addition, data collection (by telephone or in person) was 
required at day 2, day 14, and day 28.  The completeness of follow -up will be 
summarized by treatment group with the following statistics  for the participants infused : 
 
   Number and percent of pa rticipants attending each required visit . 
   Number and percent of pa rticipants  with known primary ordinal outcome  at day 
7. 
   Number and percent of pa rticipants  with known ordinal outcome  at day 28.  
   Number and percent of pa rticipants  with known vital status at day 7.   
   Number and percent of pa rticipants  with known vital status  at day 28.  
   Listing of participants who withdrew consent, including dates of randomization, 
infusion, and date of withdrawal.   
 
M. Assessment of Blinding  
On the final visit (day 28 for most participants), an assessment of the treatment blind 
was made.  Participants were asked to guess their treatment assignment and a staff 
member responsible for evaluating the participant’s symptoms  was asked to guess the 
participant ’s treatment assignment (IVIG or placebo).  
 
The percentage of correct guesses by treatment group will be determined separately for 
study  participants and for staff members.  
  
N. Exploratory Analyses  
If the IVIG and placebo groups differ for the primary ordinal outcome at day 7, either 
overall or for the subgroup of participants with influenza  A infection, the time course of 
the differences in the 6 -category ordinal outcome will be evaluated using longitudinal 
regression mode ls.  In addition, the extent to which the treatment differences can be 
explained by HAI titers and other biomarkers determined on stored specimens will be 
investigated.   
16 
 References  
                     
1 Lynfield R, Davey R, Dwyer DE, et al.  Outcomes of influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 virus 
infection: results from two international cohort studies.  PLos One 2014; 9: e101785.  
  
2 Dwyer DE, Lynfield R, Losso MH, et al.  Comparison of the outcomes of individuals 
with medically a ttended influenza A and B virus infections enrolled in 2 international 
cohort studies over a 6 -year period: 2009 -2015. Open Forum Infectious Diseases 2017; 
DOI: 10.1093/ofid/ofx212.  
  
3 INSIGHT FLU005 IVIG Pilot Study Group.  INSIGHT FLU005: An anti -influenza virus 
hyperimmune intravenous immunoglobulin pilot study.  JID 2016; 213: 574 -578. 
 
4 Whitehead J. Sample size calculations for ordered categorical data. Stat Med 1993; 
12: 2257 -2271. 
 
5 Ison MG, Hui DS, Clezy K, et al.  A clinical trial of intravenous peramivir compared with 
oral oseltamivir for the treatment of seasonal influenza in hospitalized adults. Antiviral 
Therapy 2013; 18: 651 -661. 
 
6 De Jong MD, Ison MG, Monto AS, et al.  Evaluation of intravenous peramivir for 
treatment of influenza in hospitalized patients.  CID 2014; 59: e172 -185. 
 
7 Beigel JH, Tebas P, Elie -Turenne MC, et al.  Immune plasma for the treatment of 
severe influenza: an open -label, multicenter, phase 2 rando mised study.  Lancet Respir 
Med 2017; 5: 500 -511.  
 
8 Murray GD, Barer D, Choi S, et al.  Design and analysis of phase III trials with ordered 
outcome scales: the concept of the sliding dichotomy.  J Neurotrauma 2005; 22: 511 -
517. 
 
9 Peterson R, Vock DM, P owers JH, et al.  Analysis of an ordinal endpoint for use in 
evaluating treatments for severe influenza requiring hospitalization. Clinical Trials 2017: 
14: 264 -276.   