Sleep Promotion to Improve Diabetes Management in Adolescents 
With T1D
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
August 20, 2017
NIDDK  
Sleep P romot
ion to Improve Diabetes 
Management in Adolescents with T 1D 
Pilot Study  
Sarah Jaser, PhD, Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, VUMC  
Sarah S. Jas
er, PhD, Associate Professor  
Department of Pediatrics  
Vanderbilt University  
NIDDK  
 
 
 
 
Table of Contents: 
 
Study Schema  
1.0 Background  
2.0 Rationale and Specific Aims  
3.0 Animal Studies and Previous Human Studies  
4.0 Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
5.0 Enrollment/Randomization  
6.0 Study Procedures  
7.0 Risks of Investigational Agents/Devices (side effects)  
8.0 Reporting of Adverse Events or Unanticipated Problems involving Risk 
to Participants or Others  
9.0 Study Withdrawal/Discontinuation  
10.0  Statistical Considerations  
11.0  Privacy/Confidentiality Issues  
12.0  Follow -up and Record Retention  
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
NIDDK  
 
 
 
 1.0 Backgroun d 
 
Type 1 diabetes (T1D) is one of the most common chronic health conditions in youth, 
with o ver 18,000 new cases  diagnosed each year, and the prevalence is increasing. The 
recommended treatment regimen is complex and demanding,  including frequent blood 
glucose monitoring, insulin administration (via injections or pump), careful tracking of diet 
and activity levels, and frequent insulin adjustments. Adherence to this regimen is linked 
with better glycemic control and reduces the risk for acute and long- term medical 
complications. However, this intensive level of self -care is difficult to  maintain and can 
negatively impact quality of life in adolescents. Problems with adherence are reported by the majority of  adolescents with T1D (up to 93%), and poor diabetes- specific quality of 
life has been shown to contribute to suboptimal  glycemic control. Despi te recent 
advances in technology (e.g., insulin pumps, continuous glucose monitoring), many  
adolescents continue to have suboptimal glycemic control; a recent national study found 
that only 17% of adolescents  were meeting the American Diabetes Associations ' 
recommended targets. Thus, novel interventions are needed to  improve glycemic 
control, adherence, and quality of life in adolescents with T1D.   
 
Sleep disturbances have recently gained attention as a potential risk factor for 
individuals with diabetes, but  the associations between sleep and diabetes outcomes are 
complex and bidirectional - poor sleep contributes to problems  with glycemic control, and 
diabetes -related distress and poor glycemic control are likely to cause sleep disruptions. 
In laboratory studies with adults with T1D, reduced sleep duration and sleep 
disturbances have been shown to increase  evening cortisol and growth hormone levels 
(hormones counter -regulatory to insulin) and increased insulin resistance.  Results from a 
national survey indicate that nearly 70% of adolescents in the general population obtain insufficient sleep (defined as <8 hours/night), and similar rates have been reported in 
adoles cents with T1D. Nevertheless, sleep  characteristics, such as total sleep time, 
sleep/wake times, or sleep quality, are not routinely addressed in standards of 
care for youth with T1D, and the role of sleep in self -management and adherence is not 
fully understood.  
 Adolescents with T1D are at high risk for poor adherence and suboptimal  glycemic 
control. Sleep disturbances, such as  poor quality and insufficient sleep, are a potentially 
modifiable risk factor for poor diabetes outcomes in adolescents with T1D.  We propose 
to pilot test a sleep- promoting intervention tailored for this population. By improving 
sleep quality and/or  increasing duration of sleep, we may improve outcomes in 
adolescents with T1D through both an indirect, behavioral  pathway (i.e., adherence) and 
a direct, physiological pathway (i.e., glycemic control). The proposed research is innovative in its plan to target sleep promotion in adolescents with T1D as a way to 
improve diabetes management, glycemic control,  and quality of life.   
 
2.0 Rational e and Specific Aims  
 
Working from a biopsychosocial and contextual model of sleep, which highlights the 
need to consider the social environment and psychosocial factors, we propose to intervene on the modifiable aspects of sleep disturbance in adolescents.  We have 
NIDDK  
 
conducted interviews with adolescents and their caregivers to  identify barriers, 
facilitators, and consequences of insufficient sleep for adolescents with T1D. The results 
of these interviews have informed the development of an intervention pr otocol that is 
tailored to the needs of this population. We propose to pilot test a behavioral sleep 
intervention for adolescents with type 1 diabetes. This low- cost, innovative  intervention is 
designed to induce greater sleep duration and higher quality of sl eep in adolescents 
(age 13 -17) through tailored exercises in sleep hygiene education, cognitive 
restructuring, and relaxation.  
 
The specific aim  of this project is: 
To evaluate the feasibility and preliminary efficacy of this novel intervention with a pilot 
randomized trial of adolescents with T1D. The primary outcomes will be sleep quality 
and glycemic control, and secondary outcomes include adherence and quality of life.  
Hypothesis: Adolescents who receive the sleep- promoting intervention will 
demonstrat e improved sleep quality and glycemic control, as well as fewer 
problems with adherence and quality of life, as compared to those who receive 
usual care.  
 
3.0 Animal Studies and Previous Human Studies  
 
Dr. Jaser and colleagues conducted qualitative interviews with 25 adolescents with type 1 
diabetes  and their caregivers , which identified se veral barriers and facili tators to  
achieving sufficient sleep (PMCID:  PMC6460925 ). Results from this study informed the 
intervention tested in the pilot study. 
 4.0 Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
 List the criteria:  
• adolescent age 1 3-17  
• adolescent has been diagnosed with type 1 d iabetes for at least 12 months  
• adolescent  reports insufficient sleep (<8 hours /night  most school n ights)  
• adolescent do es not have a diagnosed sleep disorder or other health problem  
that would interfere with  sleep 
• adolescent and parent able to speak and read English  
 
5.0 Enrollment/Randomization  
 
Participants will be enrolled at the Children’s  Diabetes Program at Vanderbilt (Vanderbilt 
University Medical Center, , Nashv i
 lle, TN 3 ). A trained 
research analyst (RA)  will approach families ( teen and parent) in the diabetes clinic. The 
teen and their parent s will be described, in -depth, details regarding the format and  
procedures of the study and address any questions or concerns the participants may have in a private space.  After consenting/assenting and completing all baseline 
questionnaire data, teens will be given i nstructions to wear an actigraph watch and 
complete a sleep diary for 7 nights.  
 
When the sleep watch and diary are returned  in the  pre-paid envelope , the teen  will be 
randomly assigned to the intervention condition (Sleep Coach) or usual care . 
Randomizati on will be stratified by the adolescents' treatment type (insulin pump vs. 

NIDDK  
 
injecti ons) to remove the possibility of confounding by differences related to insulin 
regimen. Randomization will be determined by a computerized program created by the 
biostatisti cian on the project (Chris Slaughter).  
 
6.0 Study Procedures  
 
At baseline  and 3 months, teens and parents will complete surveys consisting of 
measures are widely validated  and have been used successfully by our research team in 
previous studies. Q uestionnaire data collection is timed to correspond  with regular ly 
scheduled clinic visits. The measures take about 30 minutes to complete.  
 
In addition, teens will receive 7 days of automated text messages to collect data on 
sleep habits 6 weeks after  randomization. Each day, they will receive a series of 4 text 
messages, asking them to confirm the date, report the time they fell asleep the night 
before, the time they woke up that morning, and rate the quality of their sleep.  
All data will be collected using REDCap.  
 
Clinical data (H bA1c v alues, blood glucose dat a) will be extracted from participants ’ 
medical charts.   
 Teen Measures:  
Self-Care Inventory (SCI -C): assesses key elements of the treatment regimen for T1D: 
diet, exercise, blood glucose monitoring, insulin administration, and attending medical 
appointments. The wording applies to various insulin regimens  (i.e., pump and 
injections). It has been shown to have good reliability and validity. The mean score  will 
be used in data analyses
.  
 
Pediatric Quality of Life (PedsQL)  diabetes -specific measure. The 28 items will be 
summed to create a total diabetes -related quality of life score. S caled s cores range from 
0-100, and higher scores reflect better quality of life.  
 
Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ -9) will be used as a measure of current depressive 
symptoms. The P HQ consists of 9 items, and  higher scores indicate higher current 
levels of depression, with a score of 11 or higher suggesting clinical levels of depression, 
with sensitivity of 89.5% and specificity of 77.5% for detecting major depression.  
 
The Child Hypoglycemia Fear Survey (C- HFS)  is a measure of worries and behaviors 
that stem from fear related to  hypoglycemia. The C -HFS consists of 33 items  and has 
been shown to have good reliability and validity in this population.  
 The Daytime and Nighttime Activity Modules  consists of six questions regarding daytime 
and nighttime activities that can impact sleep
. 
 
Epworth Sleepiness Scale for Children and Adolescents (ESS -CHAD): an eight item 
measure of how likely an adolescent  is to doze in various situations. This scale has been 
shown to have good reliability and validity in children and adolescents.  
 
Morningness -Eveningness Questionnaire: a widely used, ten item questionnaire that 
assesses perceived alertness acr oss times of day to determine circadian rhythms.  
NIDDK  
 
 
Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI): a widely used, 19 -item questionnaire assessing 
sleep habits and disturbances. It  has been shown to have good validity and reliability.  
 
Problem Areas in Diabetes: Teen  Version (PAID -T): assesses feelings of day -to-day 
burdens and hassle related to  diabetes. It is comprised of 26 items and has been 
demonstrated to have good reliability and validity in teens.  
 
Adolescents will wear the Phillips Actiwatch Spectrum Plus, a wrist-worn accelerometer,  
continuously for 7 days, and will  be asked to press the event marker at "lights out" and 
"lights on" times to demarcate time in bed. Actigraph data will be scored with Phillips 
Spectrum Plus software. Descriptive statistics will b e used to summarize each of the 
primary sleep variables (% wake after sleep onset, time in bed, sleep efficiency, sleep 
latency, duration) over the 7 day week interval,  and these will be entered in the REDCap 
database.  
 
Parent Measures:  
Self-Care Inventor y - Parent (SCI -P): assesses key elements of adherence to the 
treatment regimen for T1D: diet,  exercise, blood glucose monitoring, insulin 
administration, and attending medical appointments. The wording applies to various insulin regimens (i.e., pump and injections). It has been shown to have good 
reliability and validity.  
 The Parent Hypoglycemia Fear Surv ey (P -HFS): a measure of parent worries and 
behaviors that stem from fear surround  their child experiencing hypoglycemia. The P -
HFS consists of 33 items,  and has been shown to have good reliability and  validity in this 
population.  
 Problem Areas in Diabetes: Parent Revised Version (PAID -PR): assesses feelings of 
day-to-day burden and hassle associated with their child's diabetes. It is comprised of 18 
items and has been demonstrated to have good reliability and validity. 
 
Nighttime Behaviors Module: a six item questionnaire covering habits surrounding 
parent's nocturnal caregiv ing.  
 WHO -5 Well -Being Index (WHO -5): a brief, five item questionnaire that meas ures 
subjective quality of life, with higher  scores indicating better quality of life. It has been 
shown to exhibit good psychometric properties.  
 
Satisfaction Survey – completed by teens and parents  at 3 month follow- up 
 
Interventions  
 
Participants random ized to the Sleep Coach condition (n=20) will receive a binder  of 
study materials . These materials will include educational information on healthy sleep 
habits and how to implement strategies to improve sleep.  Over the course of the study, 
teens will  participate in three phone sessions with a trained Master's level interventionis t 
(who  will be supervised by a licensed clinical psychologist). During these sessions, the 
interventionist will go over informational  materials with the teen and walk them through 
exercises designed to help the teen prepare for and practice health sleep habits. The 
NIDDK  
 
phone calls will take place at a time that the teen has indicated are convenient to them. 
The first phone call will  last approximately 30 minutes. The second call will last 
approximately 10- 15 minutes and take place about one week after  the initial phone 
session. The third call will last approximately 10 -15 minutes and will take place about 
three weeks after  the second call. Parents will not participate in phone calls  but will be 
provided with materials designed to help them support their teen in implementing healthy 
sleep habits.  
 
Teens assigned to the Usual Care group (n=20) will have access to regular diabetes 
care. 
 7.0 Risks 
 Data collection requires participants (teens an d parents)  to spend approximate ly 30 
minutes at each collection (baseline, 3 months ) completing surveys . Teens will also 
spend a few minutes completing sleep diaries for 7 ni ghts at baseline and 3 months . 
 
Teens in the sl eep coach condition will engage in 3 intervention phone calls that will l ast 
10-30 minutes This is not anticipated to be an undue burden for t he participants.  
 
The potential benefit of this study is to gain knowledge on how to improve sleep in 
adolescents with Type 1 Diabetes. The  results f rom this study will info rm providers and 
caregivers on how to most effectively motivate adolescents to improve  their sleep habits, 
which may have positive effects on glycemic control and diabetes management. In sum, 
there are more  compelling benefits than risks.  
 
Several steps will be taken to protect the subjects against risk. First, participants will be 
informed that they are free to skip any questions that they feel uncomfortable answering 
and that they are free to withdraw from the study at any time wi thout  penalty. There are 
no potential legal or social risks to participants consenting to participate in this 
investigation.  
 
Additionally, if teen participant s indicate self -harm on the  9th item  of the PHQ -9 
questionnaire or score  11 or higher , RAs will a dministered the Self -Harm Assessment 
and will notify the PI and the social worker. The PI and/or the Social Worker will  
determine the steps that need to be taken to  ensure safety of the participant. RAs will 
not be asked to determine the  clinical significa nce of the harm. RAs will speak with 
parents describing the results of the assessments  and provide the family with a list of  
resources.  
 
All children will recei ve clinical care throughout the course of the study. All diabetes 
treatment decisions will be made by the diabetes treatment team. All pati ents have 
access to the treatment team 24 hours/day and 7 days per week. Participants will be 
informed that they may discontinue the study at any time or skip any questions they do 
not feel comfortable answering. There are no potential legal or social risk s to 
participants consenting to participate in this investigation. Parents will be told to follow 
the diabetes clinic providers' guidance on any questions related to diabetes 
management.  
 
 
NIDDK  
 
The PI will ensure that the trial is conducted according to the approved protocol and will 
be responsible for carrying out the data safety monitoring plan, which includes:  
- Review of study components for data completeness and accuracy as well as protocol 
compliance  
- Evaluate ad verse events (AEs, described below) for severity, relationship to the 
research and actions to be taken  
- Promptly report all severe AEs and unanticipated problems to the data and safety 
officer , IRB, and NIH  
 
KSP will complete human subjects training prior  to any contact with participants and 
maintain annual training. KSP will also complete Good Clinical Practice training for social 
and behavioral research annually.  
 
Data Safety and Monitoring  
 
Randi Streisand, PhD, CDE will serve as the Safety Officer for the project. Dr. Streisand is a clinical health psychologist  and certified diabetes educator working in a clinical 
research  setting with roles in research, clinical service, and training.  
She a Professor of Psychology & Behavioral Health and Pediatrics, and she serves as 
the Director for  Psychology Research across Children's National Health System, as well 
as the  Diabetes Team's Director for Psychosocial Research and Service. Her current 
work is funded by the NIH and focuses on managing type 1 diabetes in young children,  
and she has served as PI or Co- I for several interventions focused on stress reduction 
and/or adherence in families of  children with chronic illness.  
 
Safety reports will be sent bi -annually (every six months) to the Safety Officer and 
annually to NIDDK and the Vanderbilt  University IRB. The PI will prepare data for interim 
analyses, which will be conducted every 6 months by the biostatistician. The Safety 
Officer will review the safety reports in an aggregate fashion, blinded to treatment groups.  
 
Safety Reports will provide a study summary and identify any problems or issues and 
will include details on the status of  the study and/or preliminary findings. In addition, any 
deviations from protocol will be noted. Each safety report will include the following:  
A table indicating the expected vs. actual enrollment per month, including number of 
patients approached, ineligible, and refused.  
A table of overall subject status, as well as detail on each participant's progress through 
the study. This t able will include  information on the number of active participants, the 
number of participants who have completed the study, participants  who drop out 
(including reasons) of the study and those who are unable to be reached (lost to follow 
up).  
An enrollment report, indicating the racial ethnic characteristics of the study sample A table indicating the demographic and key baseline characteristics (including A1C, depression, and adherence) by  group.  
A table listing all adverse events, actions taken, and outc omes.  
 
8.0 Reporting of Adverse Events or Unanticipated Problems involving Risk 
to Participants or Others  
 
NIDDK  
 
Any adverse events occurring during the course of this trial will be collected, 
documented and reported by the PI (D r. Sarah Jaser), to the Safety Office r (Randi 
Streisand, PhD, CDE), along with reporting to the NIDDK and institutional review boards 
as required. Although not anticipated, if any event is identified that may have caused any type of harm to a participant, study accrual will be immediately hal ted until the 
study team and DSMB can review the event and determine if any study procedur es need 
to be revised. Study accrual will only resume after review of study protocol has been completed and any recommended revisions made as suggested by the DSMB.  
 9.0 Study Withdrawal/Discontinuation  
 
Study participants may contact the study team if they wish to withdraw.  
 10.0  Statistical Considerations  
 
Power Analysis:  Based on effect sizes from cognitive- behavioral interventions to treat 
insomnia showing medium to large effect sizes for total sleep time after 3 months ( d = 
.71), we would need a sample of 52 to have sufficient power to detect a treatment 
difference in sleep time. With a sample of 40, we will have power of .71 to detect a significant treatment difference. The small sample size of this pilot study does not 
provide the power to test the efficacy of the intervention. The focus of this study is to see 
initial evidence for an effect on the direct target – improvement in adolescents’ sleep 
duration and quality – as well as feasibility  of the trial. By collecting A1C data for 6 
months, we will be able to determine if there is an impact on glycemic control.  
 
Preliminary Analyses:  Preliminary Analyses:  We will conduct unadjusted tests of the 
association of demographic covariates including gender, race/ethnicity income,  fear of 
hypoglycemia,  and circadian preference with sleep habits. While we anticipate our 
randomized design will mitigate confounding, adjusting for covariates associated with the 
sleep outcomes will improve the precision of our estimate of the treatment effect. 
Actigraph data will be scored with Phillips Spectrum Plus software with guidance from 
Vanderbilt’s Sleep Core. Objective actigraph data will be supplemented with sleep 
diaries to determine bedtime and wake time.  Descriptive statistics will be used to 
summarize each of the primary sleep variables: sleep efficiency, sleep latency, and total 
sleep time (duration) over the 7-day interval.   
 Longitudinal models will be conducted using baseline and follow -up data to determine 
the preliminary effect of the intervention on the primary outcomes (sleep quality and glycemic control), as well as the secondary outcomes of adherence and quality of life. The longitudinal responses will be analyzed using generalized least squares to account 
for correlation arising from taking repeated observations on the same subject over time.  We anticipate that two measurements made more closely in time will be more highly 
correlated than measurements made distant in time, and we anticipate some longitudinal 
measures could have negative correlations (e.g. poor sleep on one night leading to better sleep on the next night).  To those ends, we will use an unstructured correlation 
for the primary analysis. The choice of unstructured will be compared to other correlation 
structures using AIC.  Mean time -response profiles over time will be flexibly modeled 
using restricted cubic splines.  Analyses will provide estimates of effect sizes, within-subject variances, and between- subject variances to be used in power analyses for a full 
scale trial.   
NIDDK  
 
 
Feasibility and Acceptability:  To determine the feasibility of the intervention, we will 
examine recruitment and retention data. Our benchmark for retention is > 85%. In 
addition, fidelity checks will be conducted by audiotaping 20% of the telephone sessions, 
which will be coded for content by an independent rater. We propose a feasibility 
benchmark of >90% fidelity. Logistic regression will be used to determine if baseline 
covariates can be used to predict retention or fidelity  
 
To evaluate acceptability of the intervention, we will examine participation (attendance), 
adherence (completion of homework), and satisfaction ratings. We propose a feasibility 
benchmark of > 80% attendance. We will also conduct exit interviews with adolescents, 
including those who did not complete the study, to find out what they liked and did not 
like about the intervention. Interviews will be transcribed and analyzed with a content 
analysis approach to identify themes across participants. By integrating input from 
participants, we plan to maximize engagement with and increase feasibility in a large-
scale trial.   
 
11.0  Privacy/Confidentiality Issues  
 Confidential participant data will be safeguarded by multiple password protecti on 
requirements, data encryption, and locked  secure storage of paper documents.  
 Only Key Study Personnel (KSP) will have access to research information, and all KSP 
will complete training in Good Clinical Practice.  
 
Participants will be identified with an  ID number; names will not be included on any data 
outside of RedCAP. Only research staff who have completed IRB training and have been added as KSP have access to the study RedCAP. All identifying information will be destroyed at the earliest possible tim e following completion of the study. All data will be 
analyzed by groups, with no potential for individual patients to be identified. Any publications arising from the study will not contain personal information.  
Digital files will be erased after completi on of the study.  
 12.0  Follow -up and Record Retention  
 
Duration of the study is anticipated to be 2 years. All data will be analyzed by groups, 
with no potential for individual patients to be identified. Any publications arising from 
the study will not contain personal information.  
 
Research records will be maintained for at least  three (3) years from the date the 
research is closed with the IRB. All Health Insurance  Portability and Accountabi lity Act 
(HIPAA) related documentation will be maintained for at leas t six (6) years from the 
date of the last use or disclosure of the Protected Health Information (PHI).  