Official Title: Multicenter, Randomized, Double-blind Placebo-controlled, Crossover Study to 
Investigate Effects of V117957 in Female Subjects with Overactive Bladder Syndrome
NCT #:  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Date of Document: 25-Aug-2023 
Purdue Pharma  L.P. Confidential  
Protocol: OAG1030  
Amendment 2: 25-Aug -2023 1Pro
tocol Number: OAG1030  
Pr
otocol Title:  Multicenter, Randomized, Double-blind Placebo-controlled, 
Crossover Study to Investigate Effects of V117957 in Female Subjects with Overactive Bladder Syndrome  
Brief Title:  Study of V117957 in Overactive Bladder Syndrome 
Compound:  V117957 Tosylate 
Phase :  Phase 1b  
Sponsor: Purdue Pharma L.P.  
One Stamford Forum 
Stamford, CT 06901-3431  
USA  
Protocol Approval Date: 11-Oct-2021
Am
endment Number  2 
GCP Statement: This study is to be performed in compliance with International 
Conference on Harmonisation (ICH)  and applicable Good Clinical 
Practices (GCPs) and federal and local regulations.  
Confidentiality:  This document is confidential. It contains proprietary information of Purdue Pharma. Any viewing or disclosure of such information that is not authorized in writing by the Sponsor (or designee) is strictly prohibited. Such information may be used solely for the purpose of reviewing or performing this study.  
Purdue Pharma  Confidential  
Protocol: OAG10 30 
Amendment 2: 25-Aug -2023  6 AEs will be categorized into Preferred T erm (PT)  and associated System Organ Class ( SOC) 
using the Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities (MedDRA). Treatment -emergent adverse 
events (TEAEs) will be defined as AEs that start after or increase in intensity after the first dose 
of study drug. TEAEs will be summarized by pr esenting the incidence of AEs for each treatment 
group by the MedDRA PT , nested within SOC for the safety population. Medical history will be 
coded to MedDRA terms. Coded medical history terms will be summarized for all subjects in the randomized safety population. 
Laboratory evaluations and vital signs will be summarized by treatment and time point for the 
randomized safety population. Concomitant and prior medications will be coded using the latest 
version of the World Health Organization Drug Dictionary ( WHO -DD) and presented in tables 
and listings. 