PROTOCOL AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS PLAN 
 
 Study Title: Trial of Chemotherapy in Ovarian, Fallopian Tube and Peritoneal Carcinoma  
Institution/Site:  University of Kentucky 
Document (Approval/Update) Date: 11/11/2014 
Study ID: [REMOVED] 
IRB Number 11-0903 
Coversheet created: 11/10/20 
 
 
11-GYN-098-MCC 
 
 
Neoadjuvant Platinum-based Chemotherapy in Advanced Ovarian, Fallopian Tube, 
and Primary Peritoneal Carcinoma Trial Protocol 
 
A non-randomized phase II study of neoadjuvant chemotherapy with interval 
surgical debulking in patients with advanced ovarian, fallopian tube, primary 
peritoneal carcinoma 
 
PI:   Rachel Ware Miller, MD  Co-investigators:   J.R. van Nagell, MD 
Frederick R. Ueland, MD Christopher P. DeSimone, MD Paul DePriest, MD 
 Biologics:  Daret St. Clair, PhD    D. Allan Butterfield, PhD  Statistician:  Emily Van Meter, PhD 
 
Pathologist:  Michael Cibull, MD and Rouzan Karabakhtsian, MD 
 
Participating Institutions:  University of Kentucky       
 
Protocol Version 9.2 dated 11/11/2014 
 
11-GYN-098-MCC 2 
 
SCHEMA 
 
Patients with FIGO Stage IIIC/IV ovarian, fallopian tube, primary peritoneal carcinoma 
↓ 
 
3 Cycles Neoadjuvant Chemotherapy* 
 
↓ 
 
Interval Surgical Debulking** 
 
↓ 
 
3-5 Cycles Adjuvant Chemotherapy+ 
 
 
*Paclitaxel 175mg/m2 IV over 3 hours followed by Carboplatin AUC 6 IV over 30 minutes 
every 21 days  
 **Approximately 3-4 weeks after 3
rd cycle of chemotherapy 
 
+Preferably starts  within 2 weeks of surgery (exceptions may be made by the 
Principal Investigator) with same dos e parameters as neoadjuvant chemotherapy; 
adjuvant chemotherapy consists of 3-5 cycles based on discretion of treating 
physician with the goal that patients are treated with one cycle beyond normalization of CA 125/no radiographic or clinical evidence of disease
 
 
 
     
 
    
 
 
 
11-GYN-098-MCC 3 
 
OUTCOME MEASURES 
PRIMARY ENDPOINT 
 Rate of maximal surgical cytoreduction (ie, no gross residual disease) 
 
SECONDARY ENDPOINTS 
 Progression-free survival (PFS) 
 Overall survival (OS) 
 Response rate (RR) 
 Toxicity related to treatment 
 Surgical outcomes 
 Quality of life 
 Correlative studies (blood, tumor tissue) 
 
 
 
11-GYN-098-MCC 4TABLE OF CONTENTS 
       P A G E  
 
1.0 OBJECTIVES           5           
 
2.0 BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE        6          
 3.0  PATIENT ELIGIBILITY AND EXCLUSIONS     15 
 
4.0 STUDY MODALITIES        17 
 
5.0 TREATMENT PLAN        21 
 6.0 TREATMENT MODIFICATIONS      25 
 7.0 STUDY PARAMETERS       31 
 8.0 EVALUATION CRITERIA       32 
 
9.0 DURATION OF STUDY       40 
 
10.0 STUDY MONITORING AND REPORTING PROCEDURES   41 
 11.0  BIOLOGIC STUDIES         42 
  
12.0 STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS      43 
 
13.0 BIBLIOGRAPHY        45 
  
APPENDIX I  FIGO Staging System for Primary Carcinoma of the Ovary (1985) 
APPENDIX II  FACT-O TOI APPENDIX III  Anaphylaxis Precautions  APPENDIX IV  Carboplatin Dose Calcification APPENDIX V  Standards for Operative Note Details APPENDIX VI  Chemotherapy Standard Order Set 
APPENDIX VII Biological Correlative Processing Instructions 
 
 
11-GYN-098-MCC 51.0 OBJECTIVES 
 
 This is a prospective study to evaluate the hypothesis that:    
 
 a) platinum-based neoadjuvant chemotherapy followed by interval surgical 
debulking with platinum-based adjuvant chemotherapy is associated with 
improved maximal surgical cytoredu ction rates, comparable survival, 
decreased morbidity, and increased quality of life in patients with International Federation of Gynecologic Oncology (FIGO, Appendix I) 
stages IIIC and IV ovarian, primary peritoneal, or fallopian tube cancer 
when compared to historical controls 
20,45, and  
 
b) cancer induced inflammation is a predictor of poor prognosis and response to therapy in this group of ovarian cancer patients. 
  1.1 Primary Objectives 
    1.11 To determine maximal surgical cytoreduction debulking rate (see 
Appendix V), i.e. no gross residual disease, in a group of patients with 
FIGO stages  IIIC and IV ovarian, primary peritoneal, or fallopian tube 
cancer who received 3 cycles of platinum-based neoadjuvant chemotherapy. 
  1.2 Secondary Objectives 
  
  1.21 To determine progression-free survival in a group of patients with 
FIGO stages IIIC and IV ovarian, primary peritoneal, or fallopian 
tube cancer treated by neoadjuvant  chemotherapy followed by 
interval debulking and adjuvant chemotherapy. 
  
  1.22 To determine overall survival in a group of patients with 
FIGO stages IIIC and IV ovarian, primary peritoneal, or fallopian 
tube cancer treated by neoadjuvant  chemotherapy followed by 
interval debulking and adjuvant chemotherapy. 
   1.23 To determine response rate to chemotherapy in patients who  
   undergo neoadjuvant chemotherapy followed by interval debulking 
   and adjuvant chemotherapy. 
   1.24 To evaluate the toxicity from  chemotherapy, as measured by the  
Common Toxicity Criteria for Adverse Events v4.0.  
     1.25 To evaluate operative outcomes including length of surgery,  
  length of hospital stay, ICU admissions, transfusions, and     intraoperative  complications (blood loss >1500mL, unintentional    damage to organs requiring repair). 
 
  1.26  To evaluate Quality of Life (QOL, as measured by the FACT-O  
   TOI) following treatment with this regimen. (Appendix II)  
 
11-GYN-098-MCC 61.27 To assess, in an exploratory manner, the correlation between 
biologic indicators of inflammation and oxidative stress, including 
TNF-a, TNF receptor II, protein oxidation, CRP, Il-6 and Il-8 and 
tumor tissue oxidation before and after neo-adjuvant therapy, and 
clinical outcomes, including overall survival, tumor response, and quality of life variables. 
 
   2.0 BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE 
  2.1 Standard Management of Advanced Ovarian, Primary Peritoneal, and  
  Fallopian Tube Carcinoma 
 
With over 200,000 new cases of ovarian cancer diagnosed worldwide 
each year, ovarian cancer is the 2nd most common gynecologic cancer 
and the most common cause of gynecologic cancer death.  It is estimated 
that there will be an estimated 21,880 new cases of ovarian cancer and 13,850 deaths from the disease in 2010 in the United States
1.  The 
standard management of advanced epithe lial ovarian, primary peritoneal, 
and fallopian tube cancer is primary debulking surgery followed by systemic chemotherapy with  carboplatin and paclitaxel
2-7.  The extent of 
surgical cytoreduction or debulking at the time of primary surgery improves patient survival
8.   While rates of optimal tumor debulking, 
defined as less than 1cm residual disease, at centers with experienced gynecologic oncologists have been reported to be as high as 70% in 
selected institutions, most centers will achieve optimal surgical debulking 
in only 30-60% of patients with Stage IIIC/IV ovarian, primary peritoneal, or fallopian tube cancer
9,10.   
 
 2.2 New Strategies to Improve Outcomes 
 Five-year overall survival for ovarian cancer is around 50% for all patients.  Unfortunately, over 2/3 of patients have stage III or stage IV disease at the time of diagnosis.  The 5-year survival for these patients is 30%, as opposed to 90% for patients with disease confined to the ovary.  Despite advancements in surgical techniques and chemotherapy, trends 
in survival have changed little over the past 30 years. 
 Initial surgical debulking has been the standard of care for patients with ovarian cancer since the 1930’s.  The landmark study by Griffiths in 1975 showed an inverse relationship between the extent of residual disease 
after primary surgery and survival
11.  The concept of surgical debulking to 
improve survival is based on several principles including:  1) elimination 
of pharmacologic sanctuaries by removal of poorly vascularized masses, 2) increased sensitivity to chemotherapy secondary to higher growth fraction of small residual tumors, and 3) less resistance to chemotherapy as a result of fewer chemotherapy cycles.  Bristow published a meta-
analysis in 2002 showing that optimal cytoreductive surgery was the most 
significant determinant of patient survival in those patients with stage III or IV ovarian cancer treated with platinum-based chemotherapy
8.  The 
definition of “optimal” with respect to surgical debulking for ovarian cancer 
 
11-GYN-098-MCC 7has evolved over time.  Initially, ≤ 2 cm residual disease was considered 
optimal, which was subsequently reduced to ≤  1 cm.  More recently, the 
concept of optimal surgical debulking to less than or equal to 1 cm of 
residual disease has shifted to maximal surgical debulking, which is 
defined as no gross residual disease.  Frequently patients with advanced ovarian cancer have disease involving the rectosigmoid and the upper abdomen including the liver, porta hepatis, spleen, distal pancreas, and diaphragm.  In order to achieve maxi mal surgical cytoreduction resulting 
in no gross residual disease, surgeons must perform aggressive surgical 
procedures including en bloc resection of the uterus, ovaries, and sigmoid 
colon, liver resection, diaphragm stripping, splenectomy, and distal pancreatectomy.  Several reports have indicated acceptable complication rates and feasibility of performing these procedures for the purpose of cytoreductive surgery in ovarian cancer
12-19.  However, maximal and 
optimal surgical cytoreductive rates vary widely among institutions, ranging from less than 25% to 75% in more experienced centers
8.   
Patients with extensive liver disease, pulmonary metastases, or extensive disease throughout the small bowel mesentery generally cannot be maximally debulked to no gross residual disease status prior to initiating 
adjuvant chemotherapy. 
 Neoadjuvant chemotherapy, followed by interval surgical cytoreduction 
and adjuvant chemotherapy, has been proposed as an alternative to initial surgical cytoreduction in patients with advanced ovarian cancer.       
 2.3 Rationale for Neoadjuvant Chemotherapy and Interval Debulking 
 There is no evidence to support initial surgical debulking in patients with advanced ovarian cancer that is unlikely to be surgically resectable.  There is evidence to suggest that there is survival benefit when surgical 
debulking to less than 1 cm residual disease is possible.  However, the 
greatest benefit is seen in patients with no gross residual disease after initial cytoreductive surgery.  It is also clear that there is no benefit of initial cytoreductive surgery in patients with ovarian cancer when more than 1 cm residual disease remains after attempted debulking. 
 
 2.4 Role of Neoadjuvant Platinum-based Chemotherapy and Interval   
  Debulking in Ovarian, Primary Peritoneal, and Fallopian Tube Carcinoma 
 
Vergote et al. conducted a randomized phase III trial comparing upfront 
debulking surgery with neoadjuvant chemotherapy in patients with Stage 
IIIC or IV epithelial ovarian carcinoma (EORTC 55971)20.  Patients were 
randomized to either primary debulking surgery followed by at least 6 
courses of platinum-based chemother apy (Arm A) or 3 courses of 
platinum-based neoadjuvant chemotherapy, interval debulking surgery (in patients with a response or stable disease) and at least 3 more courses of platinum-based chemotherapy (Arm B).  Seven-hundred eighteen 
patients were enrolled and 670 were randomized.  Less than half of the 
patients (41.6%) undergoing primary surgery had ≤1cm residual disease 
at the completion of cytoreductive surgery, as opposed to 80.6% of patients who had ≤1cm residual disease after interval debulking.  Only 
 
11-GYN-098-MCC 819.4% of the patients undergoing primary surgery had no residual tumor 
(maximal surgical debulking) after cytoreductive surgery, compared to 51.2% of patients in the neoadjuvant chemotherapy group.  Overall 
survival and progression-free survival were similar in the two groups.  In 
the primary surgery group, the medi an overall survival was 29 months, 
versus 30 months in the neoadjuvant chemotherapy group.  The median 
progression-free survival was 12 months in both groups.  In multivariate analyses, absence of residual tumor after surgery was the strongest independent predictor of survival (P<0.001), followed by stage IIIC 
disease (P=0.001), small tumor size before randomization (P=0.001), 
endometrioid histologic type (P=0.005), and younger age (P=0.005).  They concluded that “neoadjuvant chemotherapy is not inferior to primary cytoreductive surgery for patients with stage IIIC or IV ovarian carcinoma,” and that there were “no significant advantages” observed in 
either arm of the trial “with respect to survival, adverse effects, quality of 
life, or postoperative morbidity or mortality”.    Kumar et al. presented findings from a similar randomized trial at the 2007 Annual ASCO meeting
21.  The trial included 128 patients with 
epithelial ovarian cancer, who were randomized to either upfront debulking surgery followed by 6 cycles of paclitaxel and carboplatin (Arm A) or neoadjuvant chemotherapy with 3 cycles of paclitaxel and carboplatin followed by interval debulking surgery then 3 more cycles of the same chemotherapy (Arm B).  Patients in the neoadjuvant chemotherapy arm had a higher optimal debulking rate (p < 0.0001), 
decreased blood loss during surgery (mean loss 520 ml vs. 373 ml, p < 
0.003), and reduced postoperative infections (14.8% vs. 2.5%, <0.04).  Mean operative time and hospital stay were similar in both arms.  The median overall survival and disease fr ee survival were 42 vs. 29 months 
(p=0.07) and 20 vs. 25 months (p = 0.11) for arms A and B, respectively, 
which is not significantly different at a median follow up of 41 months.  
Quality of life scores were significantly better in the neoadjuvant 
chemotherapy arm (93 vs. 114, p < 0.001).  They concluded, “neoadjuvant chemotherapy in advanc ed epithelial ovarian cancer is 
associated with a higher optimal debulking rate with reduced postoperative morbidity and improved quality of life”.  
In 2009, Onda et al. published “Feasibility study of neoadjuvant 
chemotherapy followed by interval debulking surgery for stage IIIC/IV ovarian, tubal, and peritoneal cancers:  Japan Clinical Oncology Group Study JCOG0206” in Gynecologic Oncology
22.  The study included 56 
patients with clinically diagnosed staged III/IV müllerian carcinomas based on imaging studies, cytology, and tumor markers.  All patients underwent diagnostic laparoscopy to confirm the clinical diagnosis.  The patient subsequently underwent 4 cycles of paclitaxel and carboplatin followed by interval debulking then 4 more cycles of the same chemotherapy.  The primary endpoint was complete clinical remission 
and the secondary endpoint was the positive predictive value of clinical 
diagnosis.  The authors found that the positive predictive value of clinical diagnosis was 95% for tumor origin, histology, and stage of disease.  Complete clinical response was seen in 42% of patients, which was 
 
11-GYN-098-MCC 9confirmed with diagnostic laparoscopy at the end of treatment.  The 
median overall survival was 45 m onths and the median progression-free 
survival was 14 months. 
  2.5   Rationale for Clinical Trial Design 
 
2.51 Study Population 
  A study population limited to patients with probable Stage IIIC or 
 Stage IV ovarian, fallopian tube, or primary peritoneal carcinomas 
 was selected because of the relatively high frequency of these  cases and the limited probability that optimal cytoreduction (no  visible disease) could be achieved by primary surgery alone.   Furthermore, the results of this trial would be better generalized to 
 the population at large with epithelial ovarian and primary 
 peritoneal cancers by including the largest subset of these  patients.  Patients with early stage epithelial ovarian cancers were  not included because > 95 percent of these cases can be  optimally debulked by primary surgery, and selective 
 chemotherapy can be given postoperatively. 
 2.52 Sample Size Considerations 
 
Using previous results from a European study of neoadjuvant chemotherapy, 51.2% of patients in the neoadjuvant arm achieved 
maximal surgical debulking as compared to 19.4% of patients in 
the primary debulking control arm.
20 Therefore, based on a 
hypothesis test of a single proportion with 90% power and a two-sided type I error rate equal to 0.05, the first-stage sample size necessary for this single arm study to detect the same 
improvement in the percentage of neoadjuvant chemotherapy 
patients achieving optimal surgical debulking as compared to the European controls is 9 patients. The trial will be terminated if no more than 2 patients achieve maximal surgical debulking, as defined by no gross residual disease.  If the 9
th patient is enrolled 
and only two prior patients meet requirements for maximal 
surgical debulking, then enrollment will be on hold until after 
surgery for the 9th patient.  If maximal surgical debulking is 
achieved in 3 or more of the 9 patients enrolled, the trial will continue to a second stage, which will involve enrollment of an additional 14 patients for a total of 23. Conservatively allowing 
20% drop out or loss to follow up, we plan to enroll 28 total 
patients. 
 
  2.53 Diagnostic Criteria   
 
In the aforementioned publication (see 2.4) by Onda et al. 
concerning the feasibility of neoadjuvant chemotherapy followed 
by interval debulking for stage III/IV ovarian, tubal, and peritoneal cancers, the authors reported that the positive predictive value of a combination of imaging studies, cytology, and tumor markers 
 
11-GYN-098-MCC 10was 100% for tumor origin and histology, and 95% for stage of 
disease.22  Furthermore, they concluded that it would be 
acceptable to omit diagnostic laparoscopy as a staging test in the 
future.  Based on this data, the diagnostic criteria needed for entry 
into this trial include evidence of metastatic disease on imaging studies (CT, CT/PET, MRI), cytologic examination of ascites and/or pleural fluid, or fine-needle aspirate of a tumor mass. 
-   2.54 Choice of Cytotoxic Chemotherapy and Optimum Number Cycles 
 Since the mid 1980’s, platinum-based chemotherapy has been the standard of care in the treatment of ovarian cancer.  In GOG 47, 227 patients were randomized to either doxorubicin-cyclophosphamide versus cyclophosphamide-doxorubicin-
cisplatin.  Patients in the cisplatin arm had statistically significant 
improved progression-fr ee and overall survival
23.  In a search for 
better tolerated platinum agents, carboplatin was found to be as effective, and with fewer side effects than cisplatin, including emesis, nephrotoxicity, and neurotoxicity
24-27.  In GOG 111, over 
400 patients were randomized to receive cisplatin-cyclophos-phamide versus cisplatin-paclitaxel.  The paclitaxel arm resulted in significantly prolonged progression-free and overall survival
28.  
Because of the convenience of avoiding pre- and post- chemotherapy hydration, and improved side effect profile, carboplatin was evaluated as a possible combination with 
paclitaxel in two randomized trials.  This combination was 
equivalent in efficacy to cisplatin-paclitaxel, but much better tolerated
29,30. In 2004, carboplatin-paclitaxel was identified as the 
standard first-line therapy for ovarian cancer by the Ovarian Cancer Consensus. 
 
There is no prospective data on the recommended number of cytotoxic chemotherapy cycles fo r advanced epithelial ovarian, 
fallopian tube, or primary peritoneal carcinoma.  However, 6-8 cycles are generally recommended based on historical phase III clinical trials.  There is no prospective data indicating that 
cumulative dose intensity, or number of cycles impacting overall 
survival.  
  2.55 Selected Substitution of Docetaxel for Paclitaxel 
 
Publication of results from GOG Protocol 011128 and a confirmatory 
European trial31 led to adoption of paclitaxel and carboplatin as 
the standard primary therapy for patients with advanced epithelial and peritoneal primary cancer. However, it is estimated that on the order of 5% of patients in the population eligible for participation in the current trial will develop peripheral neuropathy 
or refractory acute hypersensitivi ty infusion reactions which would 
necessitate discontinuation of paclitaxel. Docetaxel is a novel taxane with reduced potential for neurotoxicity compared with paclitaxel. In addition, docetaxel has been safely substituted for 
 
11-GYN-098-MCC 11paclitaxel in patients experiencing severe acute hypersensitivity to 
paclitaxel refractory where re-challenge is either unsuccessful or 
deemed unsafe .  
 
With regard to efficacy, there is  evidence that docetaxel is an 
alternative treatment option to paclitaxel for patients with epithelial 
ovarian and peritoneal primary cancer. Docetaxel has b een 
combined with cisplatin or carboplatin extensively in phase II and III clinical trials.  Docetaxel has substantial activity against platinum-refractory ovarian carcinoma
32 and is also active as primary therapy 
in ovarian cancer.33,34,34,36 A phase III randomized trial (SCOTROC) of 
docetaxel and carboplatin versus paclitaxel and carboplatin in patients with advanced epithelial ovarian cancer has recently been published.
37 In this trial, patients received carboplatin at an 
AUC of 5 with either docetaxel at 75 mg/m2 1-hour IV infusion or 
paclitaxel at 175 mg/m2 3-hour IV infusion. Results of this trial 
demonstrated no significant difference in median progression-free survival (15.0 months versus 14.8 months), two year overall survival (64.2% versus 68.9%) or objective tumor response (58.7% versus 59.5%) for the combination of docetaxel and carboplatin versus the combination of paclitaxel and carboplatin,
 
respectively. While docetaxel and carboplatin produced more neutropenia (Grade 3-4 neutropenia 94% for docetaxel and carboplatin versus 84% for paclitaxel and carboplatin, p < .001) and neutropenic complications than treatment with paclitaxel-carboplatin, the docetaxel and carboplatin regimen was significantly less neurotoxic (Grade 2 neurosensory toxicity in 
11% for docetaxel and carboplatin versus 30% for paclitaxel and 
carboplatin, p 
< .001).   
 
The results of the SCOTROC trial have led many oncologists to select substitution of docetaxel for paclitaxel in first line therapy for 
patients with advanced epithelial and peritoneal primary cancer. Thus, in order to optimize cytotoxic therapy in all arms of the current trial, reduce the likelihood of protocol violations and avoid imbalances in the type of taxane utilized in each treatment arm, in the current trial docetaxel will be selectively substituted for paclitaxel in circumstances in which peripheral neuropathy or hypersensitivity 
warrants discontinuation of paclitaxel.
  
 
  2.56 Post-Remission Therapy 
 
It is expected that all of the chemotherapy regimens employed in 
this trial will achieve an overall response rate of greater than 75%. 
However, as many as 90% of patients with stage III and stage IV  
epithelial ovarian, peritoneal primary and fallopian tube cancer in clinical complete remission will ultimately recur and die of disease. Therefore, a number of strategies are under active 
consideration to delay or prevent recurrence. Among these 
strategies include “consolidation” treatment with cytotoxic, 
 
11-GYN-098-MCC 12hormonal, or biologic targeted agents.    For example, recent data 
have revealed that continuation of single-agent paclitaxel on a 
monthly schedule for 12 cycles significantly extended 
progression-free survival.38 Certainly consolidation therapy has 
been implemented variably in clinical practice outside clinical trials 
with the decision based on physician and patient preference, with no evidence that overall survival is influenced by either treatment of patients in complete clinical remission or for that matter, at the time of clinical disease progression.  Due to the lack of evidence 
that any current consolidation approach is associated with an 
improvement in overall survival, and our desire to preserve the integrity of the progression-free interval, consolidation therapies will not be used. 
          
  2.57 CA-125 as a Biological Marker of Progressive Disease 
 
Serum levels of CA-125, a tumor-associated glycoprotein antigen, are elevated in 80% of patients with epithelial ovarian cancer.
39 CA-125 has been monitored, often on a freq uent basis, 
to verify response to therapy, presence of residual disease, and as early evidence of recurrence. However, CA-125 is not entirely tumor specific, and can be elevated in a variety of benign conditions, such as endometriosis, uterine fibroids, and pelvic inflammation; this is particularly true in pre-menopausal women. In addition, levels of CA-125 can be discordant with tumor response, 
both as false-positive and false-negative trends.  Nonetheless, 
because imaging modalities such as contrast computed tomography appear to be relatively insensitive in detecting disease progression, it has been standard practice for patients and physicians to interpret a progressive rise in CA-125 post-
therapy as evidence of recurrent or progressive disease, and will 
make therapeutic decisions based solely on the CA-125. This has complicated the assessment of PFS in prior randomized trials, as patients will receive new therapy prior to clinical documentation of progressive disease on the basis of physical examination or radiographic findi ngs. The current trial will employ 
a conservative formula to define progressive disease based on serial elevation of CA-125 
40 (in addition to other standard 
definitions in the management of solid tumors), but only following completion of initial chemotherapy. Although imperfect, it is preferable to apply uniform criteria that include CA-125 rather 
than absorb uncharacterized events that would compromise the 
secondary endpoint of PFS.  Progression during the period of cytotoxic chemotherapy will require radiographic or physical confirmation.
  
  2.6 Quality of Life (QoL) 
      
Most women with stage III and stage IV epithelial ovarian, primary  
  peritoneal, and fallopian tube cancer will succumb to their malignancy    therefore, QoL is an important consideration in determining optimal  
 
11-GYN-098-MCC 13  treatment regimen.  The primary objective of measuring QoL in this  
  trial is to determine if the use of neoadjuvant chemotherapy, followed    by interval debulking reduces disease related symptoms (improves  
  QoL).   In the current trial, QoL will be assessed using the Trial   
  Outcome Index of the Functional  Assessment of Cancer Therapy- 
  Ovary (FACT-O TOI).
41,42  This 26-item summary score captures the  
  FACT-G QOL dimensions of Physical Well-Being (7 items), Functional   Well-Being (7 items), and the Ovarian Cancer Subscale (12 item).  By    combining these three subscales, one is assured of capturing the full  
  range of physical aspects of QOL in advanced ovarian cancer,   
  including pain, fatigue, abdominal symptoms and functional status.  By   combining questions GP4, O1, and O3, which assess abdominal pain,   swelling, and cramps respectively, a comprehensive patient reported    assessment of disease related abdominal symptoms including ascites  
  can be evaluated.
  
 
  The timing of the QoL assessments is critical to capture data useful  
  for this regimen.  This is complicat ed by the fact that the acute affects  
  of cytotoxic therapy may cause a decrease in QoL.  In order to avoid  
  the confounding affects of acute chemotherapy related toxicity,   
  questionnaires will be completed just before (21 days after the last    dose) the next cycle of chemotherapy and focus on QoL within the last   seven days.  Thus assessments will be made:
  
  
    1. Prior to cycle 1 (t=0 weeks) 
    2. Prior to surgery (after 3 doses of chemotherapy, t=9  
     w e e k s )      3. Prior to cycle 4 (after 3 doses of chemotherapy and at       least 1 after surgery, t=10 weeks)     4. 3 weeks after completion of chemotherapy (t=19 weeks) 
    5. 3 months after completion of chemotherapy (t=28  
     w e e k s )  
 2.7 Biologic Correlates 
 
Human and experimental epithelial cell cancers induce a vigorous innate 
immune response at both primary and metastatic sites. On cellular level 
this innate immune response is mediated by tumor associated macrophages (TAMs) and to a lesser extent platelets, mast cells, granulocytes, NK-cells, and fibroblasts. Despite the failure of this innate immune response to induce an adaptive response to the cancer and 
failure to eliminate the cancer, this innate response intensifies with cancer 
progression.  Macrophages and other immune cells secrete cytokines which induce and maintain this process. At tumor sites these cytokines such as interleukin (IL-) 1,6,8, and 10, tumor necrosis factor (TNF-), α and 
β, TNF receptor II and tumor growth factor (TGF), and vascular 
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) play  important roles in suppression of 
the adaptive immune response, induction of a pathologic tumor 
vasculature and interstitial fluid space, tumor neo-vascularization, progression, metastasis, and resistance to chemo-  and radio-therapy. Once in the systemic circulation these cytokines contribute to 
 
11-GYN-098-MCC 14development of cachexia, weight loss, protein wasting, decreased 
performance status and an increase in chemotherapy toxicity. It is now clear that reactive oxygen species (ROS) and reactive nitrogen species 
(RNS) generated by this process are critical in the regulation and 
induction of the toxic effects of cytokines. By measuring ROS and RNS of tumor tissue obtained after neoadjuvant chemotherapy, we will be able to determine how measures of tumor protein damage relate to response.  In patients, the intensity of the innate response to cancers may predict for 
survival and poor response to therapy. Serum levels of certain cytokines 
such as TNF, IL-6 and the combination of CRP and serum albumin predict negatively for overall survival in some cancers (e.g. lung, colorectal), although this has not been explored in ovarian cancer.   
We hypothesize that in patients with  ovarian cancer, systemic biologic 
markers of the innate immune response (i.e cytokines and surrogates for 
levels of oxidative stress) will correlate with overall survival and allow for the identification of patient subsets that may benefit from anti-inflammatory interventions. Specific ally we will capture TNF-a, TNF 
receptor II, protein oxidation, CRP, Il-6 and Il-8 at three time points and tumor tissue oxidation in operative s pecimens.  This study will provide an 
exploratory evaluation of this hypothesis and determine the feasibility of assessing the hypothesis in a randomized clinical trial.  
 2.8 Inclusion of Women and Minorities 
  This trial will not exclude potential subj ects from participating in this or 
 any study solely on the basis of ethnic origin or socioeconomic status.   Every attempt will be made to enter all eligible patients into this protocol  and therefore address the study objectives in a patient population 
 representative of the entire epithelial ovarian, fallopian tube, and 
 peritoneal primary cancer population treated by participating institutions.   
 
11-GYN-098-MCC 15 
 3.0 PATIENT ELIGIBILITY AND EXCLUSIONS 
 
3.1   Eligible Patients 
  
3.11  Patients with biopsy proven stage IIIC/IV epithelial ovarian cancer, 
primary peritoneal, fallopian tube carcinoma.  If a core biopsy is not possible, fine-needle aspirate showing adenocarcinoma is 
acceptable in the setting of a pelvic mass and presence of 
metastasis outside the pelvis measuring at least 2 cm, regional lymph-node metastasis or proof of stage IV disease, and ratio of CA 125 to CEA greater than 25.  If CA 125 to CEA ratio is 25 or lower, barium enema, gastroscopy, and mammography must be 
negative.
20 
 
3.12 Patients must have adequate: 
  
Bone marrow function:  Absolute neutrophil count (ANC) greater 
than or equal to 1,500/µl, equivalent to Common Toxicity Criteria 
for Adverse Events v4.0(CTCAE) Grade 1.  This ANC cannot have been induced or supported by granulocyte colony stimulating factors.  Platelets greater than or equal to 100,000/µl, CTCAE Grade 0-1. 
 
Renal function:  Creatinine ≤1.5 x institutional upper limit of normal 
(ULN), CTCAE Grade 1.  Hepatic function:  Bilirubin ≤ 1.5 x ULN, CTCAE Grade 1.  SGOT 
and alkaline phosphatase ≤ 2.5 x ULN, CTCAE Grade 1. 
 Neurologic function:  Neuropathy (sensory and motor) less than or equal to CTCAE Grade 1.  Blood coagulation parameters:  PT such that international 
normalized ratio (INR) is ≤ 1.5 (or an in-range INR, usually 
between 2 and 3, if a patient is on a stable dose of therapeutic 
warfarin for management of venous thrombosis) and a PTT <1.2 x ULN.  
3.13  Patients must have a World Health Organization Performance  Status ≤2.  
 3.14 Patients must be a candidate for surgery.  3.15  An approved informed consent must be signed by the patient. 
 
3.2 Ineligible Patients 
 
 
11-GYN-098-MCC 16 3.21 Patients who have received prior radiotherapy to any portion of  
  the abdominal cavity or pelvis are excluded.  Prior radiation for    localized cancer of the breast, head and neck, or skin is permitted, 
  provided that it was completed more than three years prior to  
  registration, and the patient remains free of recurrent or metastatic   disease.   
3.22 Patients who have received prio r chemotherapy for any abdominal 
or pelvic tumor are excluded.  Patients may have received prior 
adjuvant chemotherapy for localize d breast cancer, provided that 
it was completed more than three years prior to registration, and 
that the patient remains free of recurrent or metastatic disease.   
3.23 Patients with a known synchronous primary endometrial cancer, 
or a past history of primary endometrial cancer, are excluded, unless all of the following conditions are met:  Stage not greater than IA, no more than superficial myometrial invasion, without vascular or lymphatic invasion, no poorly differentiated subtypes (including papillary serous, clear cell or other FIGO Grade 3 
lesions).  
 
3.24 With the exception of non-melanoma skin cancer and other 
specific malignancies noted above, patients with other invasive malignancies who had (or have) any evidence of the other cancer present within the last five years or whose previous cancer 
treatment contraindicates this therapy are excluded.  
 
3.25 Patients with acute hepatitis or active infection that requires  parenteral antibiotics are excluded. 
 
3.26 Patients with World Health Organization Performance Status of 3  or 4. 
 
3.27 Patients who are pregnant or nursing.  
 
3.28 Patients under the age of 18. 
 
3.29 Patients with a pelvic mass of any size that is causing pain, or  other subjective symptoms that are intolerable to the patient.  3.30 Patients who are not candidates for interval surgical debulking 
secondary to significant medical comorbidities. 
 
11-GYN-098-MCC 174.0 STUDY MODALITIES 
4.1 Paclitaxel (NSC #673089) 
4.11 Formulation: Paclitaxel is supplied as a 6mg/mL non-aqueous 
solution in multi dose vials containing 30mg/5mL, 
100mg/16.7mL, or 300mg/50mL of paclitaxel. In addition to 6mg 
of paclitaxel, each mL of sterile non-pyrogenic solution contains 527mg of purified Cremophor® EL (polyoxyethylated castor oil) and 49.7% (v/v) dehydrat ed alcohol, USP. 
4.12 Storage: Unopened vials of paclitaxel are stable to the date 
indicated on the package when stored between 20 to 25°C (68 to 77°F). Protect from light. 
4.13 Preparation: Paclitaxel must be diluted prior to infusion. 
Paclitaxel should be diluted in 0.9% Sodium Chloride for Injection, USP; 5% Dextrose Injection, USP; 5% Dextrose and 
0.9% Sodium Chloride Injection, USP; or 5% Dextrose in 
Ringer’s Injection to a final concentration of 0.3 to 1.2mg/mL. The solutions are physically and chemically stable for up to 27 hours at ambient temperature (approximately 25°C / 77°F) and room lighting conditions. 
NOTE: In order to minimize patient exposure to the plasticizer 
DEHP, which may be leached from PVC infusion bags or sets, diluted paclitaxel solutions should be stored in bottles (glass, polypropylene) or plastic (polypropylene, polyolefin) bags and administered through polyethylene-lined administration sets. 
Paclitaxel should be administered through an inline filter with a 
microporous membrane not greater t han 0.22 microns. Use of 
filter devices such as IVEX2® or IVEX-HP®, which incorporate short inlet and outlet PVC-coated tubing, has not resulted in significant leaching of DEHP. 
All patients should be premedicated with corticosteroids, 
diphenhydramine, and H
2 antagonists prior to paclitaxel 
administration in order to prevent severe hypersensitivity reactions. 
     4.14 Adverse Effects: Consult the package insert for the most current  
  and complete information. 
 
4.15 Supplier: Commercially available both from Bristol-Myers Squibb 
Oncology as well as generic manufacturers. Consult the American Hospital Formulary Service Drug Information guide, 
Facts and Comparisons, or the package insert for additional 
information. 
 
11-GYN-098-MCC 18 
 4.2 Carboplatin (Paraplatin® - NSC #241240) 
 
   4.21  Formulation: Carboplatin is supplied as a sterile, pyrogen-free,  
   10mg/mL aqueous solution in multi-dose vials containing  
   50mg/5mL, 150mg/15mL, 450mg/45mL, or 600mg/60mL of  
   carboplatin. 
    4.22  Storage: Unopened vials of carboplatin are stable to the date  
   indicated on the package when stored at 25°C (77°F).      Excursions from 15 to 30°C (59 to 86°F) are permitted. Protect  
   from light. Carboplatin multi dose vials maintain microbial,  
   chemical, and physical stability for up to 14 days at 25°C     following multiple needle entries.  
       4.23 Preparation: Carboplatin aqueous solution can be further  
   diluted to concentrations as low as 0.5mg/mL with 5%      Dextrose in Water or 0.9% Sodium Chloride for Injection, USP.     When prepared as directed, carboplatin aqueous solutions are     stable for 8 hours at room temperature (25°C / 77°F). Since no     antibacterial preservative is c ontained in the formulation, it is  
   recommended that carboplatin solutions be discarded 8 hours  
   after dilution.  
  NOTE: Aluminum reacts with carboplatin causing precipitate 
 formation and loss of potency; therefore, needles or  
 intravenous sets containing aluminum parts  that may come in  contact with the drug must NOT be used for the preparation or 
 administration of carboplatin. 
 4.24 Adverse Effects: Consult the package insert for the most 
 current and complete information.  
 4.25  Supplier: Commercially available both from Bristol-Myers 
 Squibb Oncology as well as generic manufacturers.  Consult the American Hospital Formulary Service Drug 
 Information guide, Facts and Comparisons, or the package  insert for additional information.  
 4.26  Dose Calculations 
  See Appendix IV 
4.3  Docetaxel (Taxotere® RP-56976, NSC #628503) 
4.31 Formulation: Docetaxel is supplied as a sterile, non-
pyrogenic, non-aqueous viscous solution in single dose 
vials containing 20mg/0.5mL or 80mg/2mL of docetaxel. 
Each mL contains 40mg docetaxel (anhydrous) and 1040mg polysorbate 80.  
 
11-GYN-098-MCC 19  Docetaxel requires dilution prior to use. A sterile, non-
pyrogenic, single dose diluent is supplied for this purpose. 
The diluent for docetaxel contains 13% (w/w) ethanol in 
water for injection and is supplied in vials.  
4.32  Storage: Unopened vials of docetaxel are stable to the 
date indicated on the package when stored between 2 
and 25°C (36 and 77°F). Protect from light.  
4.33  Preparation: Docetaxel must be combined with its 
supplied diluent (final concentration = 10mg/mL) and then 
further diluted prior to infusion. Docetaxel should be diluted 
in 0.9% Sodium Chloride for Injection, USP or 5% Dextrose Injection, USP to produce a final concentration of 0.3 to 0.74mg/mL. The fully prepared docetaxel infusion solution should be used within 4 hours (including the infusion 
duration).  
 NOTE: In order to minimize patient exposure to the 
plasticizer DEHP, which may be leached from PVC 
infusion bags or sets, the final docetaxel dilution for infusion 
should be stored in bottles (glass, polypropylene) or 
plastic (polypropylene, polyolefin) bags and administered 
through polyethylene-lined administration sets.  
 All patients should be premedicated with oral 
corticosteroids for 3 days starting 1 day prior to docetaxel administration in order to reduce the incidence and severity of fluid retention as well as the severity of 
hypersensitivity reactions.  
 4.34  Adverse Effects: Consult the package insert for the most current 
 and complete information.  4.35  Supplier: Commercially available from Aventis. 
Consult the American Hospital Formulary Service Drug Information guide, Facts and Comparisons, or the package insert for additional information. 
  
4.4 Quality of Life Measures 
 The FACT-O TOI has been selected as the multidimensional, combined  generic and disease-specific QOL questionnaire for use with ovarian  cancer patients. The questionnaire is a 26-item self-report measure  developed specifically for cancer patients and designed to be used in a  variety of settings, including clinical trials
.  
  FACT-O TOI displays the QOL measures in the following order,  recognizing the need for ease of administration and scoring: (1) FACT-G,  (2) Additional Concerns: Ovarian component, (3) Additional items: stomach  pain.
  (See Appendix II) 
 
11-GYN-098-MCC 20 
 
5.0 TREATMENT PLAN  
  5.1 Treatment Plan 
        
SCHEMA 
 
Patients with FIGO Stage IIIC/IV ovarian, fallopian tube, primary peritoneal carcinoma 
↓ 
 
3 Cycles Neoadjuvant Chemotherapy* 
 
↓ 
 
Interval Surgical Debulking** 
 
↓ 
 
3-5 Cycles Adjuvant Chemotherapy+ 
 
 
*Paclitaxel 175mg/m2 IV over 3 hours followed by Carboplatin AUC 6 IV over 30 minutes 
every 21 days   **Approximately 3-4 weeks after 3
rd cycle of chemotherapy 
 
+Preferably start within 2 weeks of surgery (exceptions may be made by the Principal 
Investigator) with the same dosing parameters as neoadjuvant chemotherapy; adjuvant chemotherapy consists of 3-5 cycles based on discretion of treating physician with the goal that patients are treated with one cycle beyond normalization of CA 125/no radiographic or clinical evidence of disease 
 
 
   
 
11-GYN-098-MCC 21  5.12 Methods of Chemotherapy 
  5.121 All drugs are dosed to a maximum body surface area 
(BSA) of 2.0 m2 as per GOG Chemotherapy Procedure Manual, 
and BSA is only recalculated if there is a +/- 10% weight change 
(either up or down). 
  
  5.122 Sequence and timing of drug administration:  
 Paclitaxel will be infused over 3 hours. Due to the risk of 
immediate hypersensitivity reaction, paclitaxel should 
always be the first drug to be infused during any 
combination. (Note, for circumstances in which 
docetaxel should be substituted for paclitaxel: Docetaxel will be administered as a 1 hour IV infusion at a starting 
dose of 75 mg/m
2).  
 Carboplatin will be administered as a 30 minute infusion, 
following paclitaxel (or docetaxel) administration.  
    5.123 Pre-Medication:  
 
    5.1231 Paclitaxel  
      For all courses where paclitaxel is to be        administered, it is recommended that a preparative  
     regimen be employed  one hour prior to the   
     treatment regimen on that day, to reduce the risk       associated with hypersensitivity reactions to these       drugs. This regimen should include a standard       dose of dexamethasone (12mg IV or PO), an  
     anti-histamine H1 (diphenhydramine 25-50 mg IVP 
     or PO, or an equivalent dose of an alternate H1       blocker such as loratadine 10mg PO), and a       standard dose of antihistamine H2 (famotidine            20mg IV or PO). 
 
    5 . 1 2 3 2   D o c e t a x e l   
      For all courses in which docetaxel should be       substituted for paclitaxel: Docetaxel will be   
     administered as a 1 hour IV infusion at a starting  
     dose of 75 mg/m
2, it is recommended that patients  
     be premedicated with dexamethasone 8 mg orally       taken the night before, morning of, and evening       after each treatment (total dose, 24 mg/wk), and       an anti-histamine H1 (diphenhydramine 25-50 mg  
     IVP or orally, or an equivalent dose of an alternate  
     H1 blocker such as loratadine 10mg PO) one       hour prior to docetaxel.  
 
11-GYN-098-MCC 22      5.124 Antiemetic Regimens 
    It is anticipated that nausea and vomiting may be a 
    significant side effect of each regimen. The following 
    representative antiemetic regimens are suggested:  
    • Ondansetron 16 mg IV 30 minutes prior to  
    administration of chemotherapy and dexamethasone 10    mg IV 30 minutes prior to drug administration  
    O R  
    • Granisetron 2 mg PO, 30     
   minutes prior to chemotherapy, with or without  
   lorazepam 0.5 mg IV 30 minutes prior to      chemotherapy. 
  5.125 Dosing of Carboplatin 
  
 (See Appendix IV) 
    5.126 Prohibited Concomitant Therapeutic Modalities 
   Prior to documented disease progression, the following  
   therapeutic modalities are prohibited:  
 
 Reassessment or cytoreductive surgery 
 
 Anti-neoplastic therapy not otherwise specified in 
the current protocol, including cytotoxic, biologic, 
hormonal, or radiation therapy, regardless of 
indication (treatment of measurable disease or 
consolidation therapy). 
   
 5.2 Quality of Life Assessment Intervals 
 
  When determining the specific asse ssment times, the investigator  
  must balance treatment toxicities, the natural history of the disease,  
  and time since initiating therapy along with an acute awareness of the    study objectives. The investi gators for the proposed study recommend 
  five assessment points to include (time references are estimates and 
are acceptable plus or minus one week): 
   5.21 Baseline, defined as prior to  cycle 1 (t = 0 weeks). This   
   assessment allows a pretreatment baseline against which to     compare later results.  
  5.22  Prior to interval surgical debulking, 3 weeks after 3
rd cycle of  
   platinum-based chemotherapy (t = 9 weeks) 
 
 
11-GYN-098-MCC 235.23  Prior to the 4th cycle of platinum-based chemotherapy (after 
patient has received 3 doses of chemotherapy and is post 
surgery, t = 10 weeks)  
   5.24  3 weeks after completion of platinum-based chemotherapy (t =     19 weeks)     5.25  3 months after completion of platinum-based chemotherapy (t  
   = 28 weeks)   
 
 5.3 Biologic correlate sample procurement    5.3.1 One serum sample (10 cc red top) and one plasma sample (5 cc   purple top) will be obtained at three time points: 1) Before the first  
  cycle of chemotherapy is administered; 2) Immediately prior to surgery 
  after neoadjuvant therapy is completed; and 3) 
within 24-72 hours after  
surgery. 
 
5.3.2 Tumor tissue (approximately 2 grams) will be saved at the time 
of surgery and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen. 
 
5.3.3 Samples will be collected and stored by the Markey Cancer 
Center Biospecimen Shared Resource Facility.  (See Appendix VII,  Biologic Correlates Processing Instructions)
 
11-GYN-098-MCC 24 
 
 
6.0 TREATMENT MODIFICATIONS 
 
 In order to maintain dose-intensity and cumulative dose-delivery on this  study, reasonable efforts will be made to minimize dose reduction and  treatment delays as specified. Any patient whose treatment is delayed must  be evaluated on a weekly basis until adequate hematologic and non-
 hematologic parameters have been met. No dose escalation is planned for 
 this study.  
 6.1 Individual Dose Modification Levels 
 
All modifications are relative to the actual starting doses for the specific 
regimen. For application of individual  dose modifications, see specific 
guidelines below. Allowable drug dose levels and instructions are 
summarized in Tables A, B, C, and D. 
   
 General Guidelines for Hematologic Toxicity (Section 6.2) 
 Hematologic Nadirs, Table A (Section 6.3) 
 Dose Levels for Docetaxel, Table B (Section 6.3) 
 Delayed Hematologic Recovery, Table C (Section 6.4) 
 Non-Hematologic Toxicity Table D (Section 6.5) 
 
 6.2 General Guidelines for Hematologic Toxicity 
 
   6.21 Initial treatment modifications  will consist of cycle delay and/or  
   dose reduction as directed. 
 
   6.22  Treatment decisions will be based on the absolute neutrophil  
   count (ANC) rather than the total white cell count (WBC). 
 
6.23 Lower Limits for ANC and Platelet Count  
 
6.231 Cytotoxic Chemotherapy -     
Courses of treatment with cytotoxic chemotherapy (carboplatin, paclitaxel, docetaxel) will not begin until the ANC is ≥ 1000 cells/mm
3 (CTCAE Grade 1) and the 
platelet count is ≥ 75,000/mm3. All treatment will be 
delayed for a maximum of three weeks until these values are achieved. Patients who fail to recover adequate counts within a three-week delay will no longer receive protocol-directed cytotoxic therapy. 
  
6.24  Use of Hematopoietic Cytokines and Protective Agents 
 The use of hematopoietic cytokines and protective reagents 
are restricted as noted:  
 
11-GYN-098-MCC 256.241 In general, patients will NOT receive prophylactic 
filgrastim (G-CSF), PEG-filgrastim (Neulasta), or 
sargramostim (GM-CSF) unless they experience 
treatment delays or recurrent neutropenic 
complications after treatment modifications as specified. In particular, hematopoietic growth factors should not be used to avoid initial chemotherapy dose modifications as stipulated in the protocol. However, patients may also receive growth factors for 
management of neutropenic complications in 
accordance with the NCCN clinical treatment guidelines and facility standard of care treatment practices (note: Neulasta may be administered on the same day as the chemotherapy if prescribed by the 
attending physician).  
6.242 Patients will NOT receive prophylactic thrombopoietic 
agents unless they experience recurrent Grade 4 
thrombocytopenia after treatment modifications as specified below.  
6.243 Patients should not receive erythropoietin (EPO).  
Patients may receive iron supplements, and/or transfusions as clinically indicated for management of 
anemia.  
6.244 Patients may NOT receive amifostine or other 
protective reagents.  
6.25  Dose Modifications for Paclitaxel and Docetaxel  
 There will be no dose modifications for paclitaxel based on 
 hematologic toxicity. Dose modifications for docetaxel (if  substituted for paclitaxel according to protocol guidelines)  for hematologic toxicity should be made according to 
 parameters below in Table A, Table B and Table C. 
6.3 Modifications for Hematologic Toxicity (Nadirs)  
6.31 Initial occurrence of dose-limiting neutropenia (defined in 
 6.32) or dose limiting thrombocytopenia (defined in 6.33) will  be handled according to Table A, using the regimen  modifications in Table B.   
6.32 Dose-Limiting Neutropenia (DLT-ANC) is defined by the 
occurrence of febrile neutropenia or prolonged Grade 4 
neutropenia persisting ≥ 7 days, delay of treatment for more 
than 7 days because of neutropenia, ANC of 1000-1499 cells/mcl on day 1. There w ill be no modifications for 
uncomplicated Grade 4 neutropenia lasting less than 7 
 
11-GYN-098-MCC 26days. Febrile neutropenia is defined within the CTCAE as 
fever with or without  clinically or microbiologically 
documented infection with ANC less than 1,000 /mm3 and 
fever greater than or equal to 38.5°C. 
 
6.33 Dose-limiting thrombocytopenia (DLT-PLT) is defined by any 
occurrence of Grade 4 thrombocytopenia (<25,000/mm3) or 
bleeding associated with Grade 3 thrombocytopenia (25,000 to <50,000/mm
3), delay of treatment on day 1 of a cycle by 
more than 7 days because of thrombocytopenia. There will be no modifications for uncomplicated Grade 3 thrombocytopenia.  
 
Table A: Modification Instructions for Dose-Limiting Hematologic Toxicity  (In conjunction with Table B when docetaxel substituted for paclitaxel) 
DLT 
ANC DLT 
PLT First Occurrence Second Occurrence Third Occurrence 
Yes No Reduce carboplatin one AUC unit (and docetaxel one dose 
level*)
 Add G-CSF and Discontinue 
Protocol-Directed 
Cytotoxic 
Therapy current drug doses  
Yes Yes Reduce carboplatin 
one AUC unit (and docetaxel one dose level*)
 Add G-CSF and Discontinue 
Protocol-Directed Cytotoxic 
Therapy carboplatin one AUC 
unit (and docetaxel 
one dose level*)  
No Yes Reduce carboplatin 
one AUC unit (and 
docetaxel one dose 
level*)  Decrease carboplatin one AUC unit (and 
docetaxel one dose 
level*) Discontinue Protocol-Directed 
Cytotoxic 
Therapy 
 
* See Table B below, for patients in whom docetaxel has been substituted for paclitaxel 
according to guidelines in Section 6.51.  
Table B: Dose Levels for Docetaxel * 
Starting Dose Level Dose L evel -1 Dose L evel -2 
75 mg/m2 65 mg/m2 55 mg/m2  
* For patients in whom docetaxel has been substituted for paclitaxel according to guidelines in Section 6.51.  
 
11-GYN-098-MCC 27 6.4 Modifications for Delayed Hematologic Recovery:  
6.41  Delay on the basis of neutropenia (Delay-ANC) is defined if 
 the ANC is less than 1,000 cells/mm3 (CTCAE Grade 2 or 
 worse) within 24 hours prior to scheduled therapy, or less than  1,000 cells/ mm
3, if the patient received G-CSF during the 
 previous cycle.  
6.42  Delay on the basis of thrombocytopenia (Delay-PLT) is 
 defined if the platelet count is less than 75,000/mm3 within 24 
 hours prior to scheduled therapy.  
6.43  Modifications noted below are only required for management 
 of delays in the absence of dose reductions stipulated by nadir  DLT-ANC and/or DLT-PLT (as noted above).  In other words, if  the patient experiences DLT-ANC and Delay-ANC, make the  modifications as indicated for the nadir counts without 
 additional modifications based on delayed recovery.  
 
Table C. Modifications for Delayed Hematologic Recovery 
Category Delay 
(days) Modification 
Delay-ANC 1-7 No Change 
8-21 Add G-CSF with Next Cycle  
>21 Discontinue Protocol-Directed 
Delay-PLT 1-7 No Change 
8-21 Decrease carboplatin one 
AUC unit (and docetaxel one 
dose  level*)
>21 Discontinue Protocol-Directed 
Cytotoxic Therapy**  
 * For patients in whom docetaxel has been substituted for paclitaxel according to guidelines in Section 6.51. 
**Applies to platinum/taxane therapy. 
 
 
11-GYN-098-MCC 28 6.5 Adjustments for Non-Hematologic Toxicity 
 
 
Table D: Modifications for Non-Hematologic Toxicity 
Drug Regime
n -2 Regimen -1 Regimen Starting Dose 
Paclitaxel 110 mg/m2 135 mg/m2 175 mg/m2 
Carboplatin 4.0 5.0 6.0 
Docetaxel 55 mg/m2 65 mg/m2 75 mg/m2 
 
 Table D should be used for dose level modifications for non-hematologic 
 toxicity only as indicated specifically in the sections below.   
 
  6.51 Grade 2 (or greater) peripheral neuropathy requires reduction  
   of one  dose level in paclitaxel and delay in all subsequent  
   protocol-directed therapy for a maximum of three weeks until     recovered to Grade 1. If peripheral neuropathy fails to recover     to Grade 1 by a maximum delay of three weeks from time     therapy is due, then paclitaxel should be withheld from all  
   subsequent chemotherapy cycles and docetaxel at the starting  
   dose level of 75 mg/m
2 substituted for paclitaxel unless   
   medically contraindicated.  
 In such cases where docetaxel has been substituted for  paclitaxel, if CTCAE Grade 3 or 4 peripheral neuropathy  occurs during or after the firs t cycle of docetaxel substitution 
 then subsequent doses of docetaxel will be delayed for a  maximum of three weeks until recovered to CTCAE Grade   2. If peripheral neuropathy fails to recover to Grade  2 by a  maximum delay of three weeks from time therapy is due,  then all docetaxel should be withheld from all subsequent 
 chemotherapy cycles.  
There will be no dose modifications in Carboplatin for 
neurotoxicity. 
 
  6.52 Renal toxicity (associated with reduction in GFR) is not   
   expected as a direct complication of chemotherapy in this  
   untreated patient population using the prescribed dose and     schedule of each regimen. As such, there are no specific dose     modifications for renal toxicity. However, the target AUC dose     of carboplatin must be recalculated each cycle in any patient     who develops renal insufficiency, defined by serum creatinine  
   greater than 1.5 x institutional upper limit normal (ULN). 
   6.53 Hepatic toxicity is not expected as a direct complication of     chemotherapy in this untreated patient population using the     prescribed dose and schedule for each regimen. However, the  
   development of Grade 3 (or greater) elevations in SGOT  
 
11-GYN-098-MCC 29   (AST), SGPT  (ALT), alka line phosphatase or bilirubin requires  
   reduction of one dose level in paclitaxel and delay in   
   subsequent therapy for a maximum of three weeks until   
   recovered to Grade 1.  
   6.54 There will be no dose modifications for alopecia, nausea,     constipation, or diarrhea. It is recommended that routine     medical measures be employed to manage nausea,      constipation, and diarrhea.  
 
  6.55 In general, the occurrence of a hypersensitivity reaction to     paclitaxel, carboplatin, or docetaxel is not considered a dose-    limiting toxicity. Patients may be retreated at full doses after     administration of medication to prevent hypersensitivity   
   reactions, and adjustments in infusion rates should be made.    However, if despite these safety measures repeat      attempt at infusion of the inciting drug results in a recurrent     hypersensitivity reaction, the inciting drug should be      discontinued for the remainder of the study. In the event of  
   recurrent grade 4 hypersensitivity reaction to paclitaxel,  
docetaxel should be substituted for paclitaxel.  
 
  6.56 Potential modifications for ot her non-hematologic toxicities with 
   an impact on organ function of Grade 2 (or greater) require     discussion with one of the study co-chairs.  
 
 
 
11-GYN-098-MCC 307.0 STUDY PARAMETERS 
 
 Pre-
treatment_ 
Prior to initial 
chemo-therapy During platinum-based neoadjuvant chemotherapy 
 
Cycle 
    1     Cycle     2     Cycle     3 
  
 
Interval  
Debulking  During platinum-based Adjuvant chemotherapy  
Cycle     4 Cycle     5 Cycle     6 Cycle     7 Cycle     8 
 Post-treatment 
Every 3 months 
for 2 yrs, every  
6 months for 3  yrs, then  
annually  
History and physical X Prior to each cycle  Prior to each cycle X 
Toxicity Assessment X Prior to each cycle  Prior to each cycle X 
Urine or serum 
pregnancy test (if applicable) X     
CBC/ Differential/ 
Platelets  
X  
Weekly*   
Weekly* As clinically indicated 
Complete 
metabolic 
panel (including 
Creatinine 
and liver function 
tests), 
Ca/PO4/Mg  
 
 
X  
 
 Prior to each cycle*   
  Prior to each cycle*  
 
As clinically  indicated 
PT/INR, PTT X    As clinically 
indicated 
EKG X     
CEA X     
CT or MRI X 3 weeks after cycle 3, prior to 
interval debulking  3 weeks after final cycle of chemotherapy X 
Chest X-Ray X 
(unless 
CT/MRI 
already 
performed)     
Serum CA-125 Level X Prior to each cycle  Prior to each cycle X 
Blood for biologic study*** X  X**   
Tumor tissue for biologic 
study   X   
QoL Survey X 3 weeks after cycle 3, prior to 
interval debulking surgery  Prior to cycle 4 and 3 weeks after final cycle of 
chemotherapy At first  3 month visit 
 *Laboratory studies may be obtained up to three days prior to each specified time point. 
**Prior to surgery and within 24 to 72 hours after surgery 
***5 ml Purple top (protein bound HNE, RNS, and protein oxidation) and 10 ml red top (IL-6, IL-8, TNF α, 
TNF receptor II, CRP) 
 
11-GYN-098-MCC 318.0 EVALUATION CRITERIA 
 
 Response and progression will be evaluated in this study using the
 international criteria proposed by the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid 
 Tumors (RECIST  v1.0 ) Committee.43 Changes in only the largest diameter 
 (unidimensional measurement) of the tumor lesions are used in the RECIST  criteria. Note: Lesions are either measurable or non-measurable using the 
 criteria provided below. The term “evaluable” in reference to measurability  will not be used because it does not provide additional meaning or accuracy. 
 
 8.1 Definitions 
   8.11 Measurable Disease  Measurable lesions are defined as those that can be accurately 
 measured in at least one dimension (longest diameter to be 
 recorded) as ≥ 20 mm with conventional techniques (CT, MRI, 
 x-ray) or as ≥ 10 mm with spiral CT scan. All tumor 
 measurements must be reco rded in millimeters (or decimal 
 fractions of centimeters). 
   8.12 Non-Measurable Disease      All other lesions (or sites of disease), including small lesions     (longest diameter <20 mm with conventional techniques or <10    mm using spiral CT scan), are considered non-measurable  
   disease. Bone lesions, leptomeningeal disease, ascites,  
   pleural/pericardial effusions, lymphangitis cutis/pulmonis,     inflammatory breast disease, abdominal masses (not followed     by CT or MRI), and cystic lesions are all non-measurable.  
  8.13 Target Lesions 
 
All measurable lesions, up to a maximum of five lesions per organ, and 10 lesions in total, representative of all involved organs, should be identified as target lesions and recorded and measured at baseline. Target lesions should be selected on 
the basis of their size (lesions with the longest diameter) and 
their suitability for accurate repeated measurements (either by imaging techniques or clinically). A sum of the longest diameter (LD) for all target lesions will be calculated and reported as the baseline sum LD. The baseline sum LD will be used as 
reference by which to characterize the objective tumor 
response. 
   8.14 Non-target lesions     All other lesions (or sites of disease) should be identified as  
   non-target lesions and should also be recorded at baseline.  
   Non-target lesions include measurable lesions that exceed the     maximum numbers per organ or total of all involved organs as     well as non-measurable lesions. Measurements of these  
 
11-GYN-098-MCC 32   lesions are not required but the presence or absence of each  
   should be noted throughout follow-up.  
 8.2 Guidelines for Evaluation of Measurable Disease 
 
  8.21 Method of Measurement     8.211 General Aspects of Tumor Measurement  
    All measurements should be taken and recorded in  
    metric notation using a ruler or calipers. All baseline      evaluations should be performed as closely as possible      to the beginning of treatment and never more than 4      weeks before the beginning of the treatment. 
    Note: Tumor lesions that are situated in a previously  
    irradiated area might or might not be considered   
    measurable.      The same method of assessment and the same   
    technique should be used to characterize each   
    identified and reported lesion at baseline and during      follow-up. Imaging-based evaluation is preferred to      evaluation by clinical examination when both methods      have been used to assess the anti-tumor effect of a      treatment. 
 
   8.212 Specific Methods of Tumor Measurement  
     8.2121 Clinical lesions. Clinical lesions will only be  
     considered measurable when they are superficial 
     (e.g., skin nodules and palpable lymph nodes). In 
     the case of skin lesions, documentation by color       photography, including a ruler to estimate the       size of the lesion, is recommended. 
      8.2122 Chest x-ray. Lesions on chest x-ray are   
     acceptable as measurable lesions when they are      clearly defined and surrounded by aerated lung.       However, CT is preferable. 
 
     8.2123 Conventional CT and MRI. These techniques  
     should be performed with cuts of 10 mm or less       in slice thickness contiguously. Spiral CT should       be performed using a 5 mm contiguous        reconstruction algorithm. This applies to tumors       of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis. Head and       neck tumors and those of extremities usually  
     require specific protocols. 
      PET scanning information will not be evidence of      disease progression or measurable disease.  
 
11-GYN-098-MCC 33     PET CT Fusion studies may not meet technical  
     requirements. Any CT used must use criteria for       assessing according to RECIST. 
 
     8.2124 Ultrasound (US). When the primary endpoint of  
     the study is objective response evaluation, US  
     should not be used to measure tumor lesions. It       is, however, a possible alternative to clinical       measurements of superficial palpable lymph  
     nodes, subcutaneous lesions, and thyroid   
     nodules. US might also be useful to confirm the  
     complete disappearance of superficial lesions       usually assessed by clinical examination. 
 
8.2125 Endoscopy, Laparoscopy. The utilization of  these techniques for objective tumor evaluation  has not yet been fully and widely validated.  
However, such techniques can be useful to confirm complete pathological response when 
biopsies are obtained. 
 
     8.2126 Tumor markers. Tumor markers alone cannot be 
     used to assess response. If markers are initially       above the upper normal limit, they must        normalize for a patient to be considered in  
     complete clinical response. 
 
     8.2127 Cytology, Histology. These techniques can be  
     used to differentiate between partial responses       (PR) and complete responses (CR) in rare  
     cases. 
 
     The cytological confirmation of the neoplastic  
     origin of any effusion that appears or worsens       during treatment when the measurable tumor       has met criteria for response or stable disease is  
     mandatory to differentiate between response or  
     stable disease (an effusion may be a side effect       of the treatment) and progressive disease. 
 
 
11-GYN-098-MCC 34 8.3 Response Criteria  
 
  8.31  Evaluation of Target Lesions 
 
   8.311 Complete Response (CR): Disappearance of all       target lesions      8.312  Progressive Disease (PD): At least a 20% increase in      the sum of the LD of target lesions, taking as reference  
    the smallest sum LD  recorded since the treatment  
    started or the appearance of one or more  new lesions 
 
    8.313  Stable Disease (SD): Neither sufficient shrinkage to  
    qualify for PR nor sufficient increase to qualify for PD,  
    taking as reference the smallest sum LD since the  
    treatment started 
 
  8.32 Evaluation of non-target lesions  
    8.321  Complete Response (CR): Disappearance of all non- 
    target lesions and normalization of tumor marker level     Note: If serum CA-125 levels are initially above the  
    upper normal limit, they must normalize for a patient to      be considered in complete clinical response.  
   8.322 Incomplete Response: 
  
     8.3221 Stable Disease (SD): Persistence of one or more 
     non-target lesion(s) and/or maintenance of tumor      marker level above the normal limits 
          8.3222 Progressive Disease (PD): Appearance of one  
     or more new lesions and/or unequivocal        progression of existing non-target lesions 
 
     Although a clear progression of “non-target”  
     lesions only is exceptional, in such    
     circumstances the opinion of the treating   
     physician should prevail.       8.32221 Progression Based On Serum CA- 
       125 
       Progression can be based upon         serum CA-125, only during the         period following completion of         cytotoxic chemotherapy, if one of         the three conditions are met: 
 
 
11-GYN-098-MCC 35   1.  Patients with elevated CA- 
   125 pretreatment and      normalization of CA-125 must  
   show evidence of CA-125 greater  
   than or equal to two times the     upper normal limit on two      occasions at least one week apart  
       o r  
 
   2.  Patients with elevated CA-125  
   pretreatment, which never      normalizes must show evidence of     CA-125 greater than or equal to  
   two times the nadir value on two  
   occasions at least one week apart           o r   
   3.  Patients with CA-125 in the  
   normal range pretreatment must     show evidence of CA-125 greater     than or equal to two times the     upper normal limit on two      occasions at least one week apart 
               When disease progression is         defined by CA-125 criteria alone,         imaging using the same modality         and encompassing the same field  
       as in the initial pretreatment  
       evaluation should be obtained         w i t h i n  2  w e e k s  t h a t  s u c h           progression is documented   
      8.32222 Progression Based on   
       Development or Worsening of         Ascites or Pleural Effusions   
       Suspected progression based         solely on developing or worsening         ascites or pleural effusions must  
       be verified cytologically 
 
  8.33  Evaluation of Best Overall Response 
    The best overall response is the best response recorded from     the start of the treatment until disease progression/recurrence  
   (taking as reference for progressive disease the smallest  
   measurements recorded since the treatment started). The     patient's best response assignment will depend on the      achievement of both measurement and confirmation criteria.  
 
11-GYN-098-MCC 36  
Target Lesions Non-Target Lesions New Lesions Overall Response 
CR CR No CR 
CR Incomplete 
response/SD No PR 
PR Non-PD No PR 
SD Non-PD No SD PD Any Yes or No PD 
Any PD Yes or No PD 
Any Any Yes PD 
Note:  
X Patients with a global deterioration of health status requiring 
discontinuation of treatment without objective evidence of 
disease progression at that time should be classified as having “symptomatic deterioration.” 
Every effort should be made 
to document the objective progression, even after 
discontinuation of treatment. 
X In some circumstances, it may be difficult to distinguish residual 
disease from normal tissue. When the evaluation of complete 
response depends on this determination, it is recommended that the residual lesion be investigated (e.g., fine needle 
aspirate/biopsy) before confirming the complete response status. 
X In rare cases when there is evidence of disease on CT, MRI or 
physical examination, a discrepancy may exist between trends 
in CA125 levels and data from either imaging or physical examination. If there is evidence of disease on CT, MRI or physical examination, such disease is shrinking, and there is no 
evidence of new disease, then rising CA125 levels according to Section 8.32221 would be insufficient to determine disease progression.  
X Patients who are not evaluated fo r response will be classified as 
either: having no target lesions at the time of enrollment onto the 
study, not reassessed due to early death, or unknown (not 
assessable, or insufficient data), 
  8.4 Confirmatory Measurement/Duration of Response
 
 
11-GYN-098-MCC 37 8.41 Confirmation 
 In order for a patient to be assigned a status of PR or CR,  
  changes in tumor measurements must be confirmed by  
  repeat assessments that should be performed no less than 
  4 weeks after the criteria for response are first met 
 8.42  Duration of Overall Response 
 The duration of overall response is measured from the time  measurement criteria are met for CR or PR (whichever is first  recorded) until the first date that recurrent or progressive 
 disease is objectively documented (taking as reference for 
 progressive disease the smallest measurements recorded since the  treatment started). 
 The duration of overall CR is measured from the time 
 measurement criteria are first met for CR until the first date that 
 recurrent disease is objectively documented. 
 
 8.5 Definitions Related to Evaluation Unrelated to Objective Response 
   8.51 Overall Survival is the observed length of life from entry into the 
   study to death, regardless of cause or the date of last  
   c o n t a c t .  
   8.52  Progression-Free Survival is the period from study  
   entry until disease progression, death or date of last 
   contact. 
The time to progression will be determined by the clinical investigator. 
   The defined date of dise ase progression will depend on 
   the method of determination as follows: 
   8.521 For disease progression defined by imaging or  
   palpation of at least a 20% increase in the sum of the    LD of target lesions, the appearance of one or more 
   new lesions, or unequivocal progression of existing  
   non-target lesions, the date of progression will be     defined as the date such lesions were first found to be    progressed by imaging or palpation. 
   8.522 For disease progression defined by development or 
   worsening of ascites or pleural effusions, the date of 
   progression will be defined as the date of cytologic  
   verification. 
 
11-GYN-098-MCC 38   8.523  For disease progression defined by CA125 criteria 
   alone, the date of progression will be defined as the 
   first date of the initial CA125 of greater than or equal 
   to two times the nadir value or upper limit of normal, 
   whichever of these is applicable. Given that imaging    using the same modality and encompassing the same    field as in the initial pretreatment evaluation is required    within 2 weeks of the confirmatory (second) CA125    value, if imaging criteria are met for progression, then 
   the date of progression would be defined as the date of 
   the imaging study. 
   8.53  Recurrence-Free Survival (patients with no measurable  
   disease) is the period from study entry until disease recurrence,    death or date of last contact. 
  8.54 Subjective Parameters including performance status,  
  specific symptoms, and side effects are graded according to   the CTCAE v4.0. 
 
  Response and progression will be evaluated in this study using  
  the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST), v1.0. 
 
11-GYN-098-MCC 39 
 
 
9.0 DURATION OF STUDY 
  9.1 Patients will receive treatment until disease progression, the     development of adverse events requiring discontinuation of protocol    treatment, or completion of 8 cycl es of carboplatin/paclitaxel   
  chemotherapy, whichever comes first. The patient may voluntarily  
  withdraw from the study at any time. 
  
 
 9.2 All patients will be followed for disease status and toxicity until death    or voluntary withdrawal from study to a maximum of five years. In  
addition, following study therapy, patients will be monitored for  
delayed toxicity every three months for the first two years, every six  
months for the next three years, and then annually (or at disease progression or death) to a maximum of five years. 
 
  9.3 Adequate Duration of Study to Evaluate Toxicity. The minimal length  
  of trial to evaluate toxicity is defined as receiving one course of   
  therapy and receiving any follow-up information for evaluation of    toxicity.
 
 
 
11-GYN-098-MCC 4010.0 STUDY MONITORING AND REPORTING PROCEDURES 
 
Informed consent must be obtained and an IRB approved consent form must be 
signed by the patient prior to initiating any study procedures. 
 All data will be reported using the University  of Kentucky’s Markey Cancer Center 
OnCore data system. Range checks on variables will be in place to reduce the amount of data entry errors.  
The Lucille P. Markey Cancer Center Data Safety Monitoring Committee (DSMC) 
will serve as the data safety monitoring board for this study. The PI is responsible for ensuring that study data is supplied to the DSMC as requested. The PI, in accordance with cancer center policies, is responsible for data management and quality.  
 
11-GYN-098-MCC 4111.0  BIOLOGIC STUDIES 
 
 11.1   Collection and handling of specimens 
 
One serum sample (10 cc red top SST tube) and one plasma (5 ml EDTA 
containing tube) sample will be obtained at three time points:  1) Before the first cycle of chemotherapy is adm inistered; 2) Immediately prior to 
surgery after neoadjuvant therapy is completed; and 3) within 24-72 hours after surgery.  Serum levels of cytokine (TNF, TNF receptor II, IL-6 and 
IL-8) and CRP will be determined and plasma levels of oxidative modified 
proteins will be measured and the resulting adducted proteins will be identified. Samples will be collected and stored by the Markey Cancer Center Biospecimen Shared Resource Facility.  
 11.2   Collection and handling of tumor specimens    
Tumor tissue (approximately 2 gms) will be saved at the time of surgery and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen.   
 
 11.3  Site performing biologic studies 
All laboratory testing will be performed in the laboratories of Dr. Daret St. 
Claire, 306 Health Sciences Research Building, and Dr. Allan Butterfield, 249 Chemistry-Physics Building, University of Kentucky. 
11.4 Residual specimen will be stored long-term in the Biospecimen Shared 
Resource Facility. 
 
 
11-GYN-098-MCC 4212.0 STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS 
 
 12.1 Study Design 
 
 This study is a single arm feasib ility study of neoadjuvant chemotherapy 
with interval surgical debulking in patients with advanced ovarian, fallopian tube, and primary peritoneal carcinoma to determine the percentage of patients that achieve maximal surgical debulking as defined by no gross residual disease following a Simon’s 2-stage 
design.
44 Other endpoints include overall survival, progression-free 
survival, surgical and toxicity outcomes, quality of life measures and 
exploratory biologic correlative studies.  
  12.2 Sample Size 
 
The primary objective of this study is to determine the percentage of 
patients that achieve maximal surgical debulking with the use of neoadjuvant chemotherapy in advanced ovarian, fallopian tube, and primary peritoneal carcinomas. The selection of this primary endpoint 
was due to previous research that suggests complete resection of all 
macroscopic disease has been shown to be the most important prognostic factor in advanced ovarian carcinoma.
5,20,41,42,43 Using 
previous results from the larger European study of neoadjuvant chemotherapy, 51.2% of patients in the neoadjuvant arm achieved maximal surgical debulking as compared to 19.4% of patients in the 
primary debulking control arm.
20 Therefore, based on a hypothesis 
test of a single proportion with 90% power and a two-sided type I error 
rate equal to 0.05 the first-stage sample size necessary for this single arm study to detect the same improvement in the percentage of neoadjuvant chemotherapy patients achieving maximal surgical 
debulking as compared to the European controls is 9 patients. The 
trial will be terminated if 2 or fewer patients achieve maximal surgical debulking as defined by no gross residual disease. If the trial continues to the second stage, an additional 14 patients will be enrolled for a total of 23. Conservatively allowing 20% drop out or loss to follow up, we plan to enroll 28 total patients. 
 
 12.3 Statistical Analysis 
 
Following study completion, the percentage of subjects achieving maximal surgical debulking will be estimated along with exact 95% 
binomial confidence interval.  A chi-square test for one proportion will be 
employed to test the null hypothesis that the percentage of subjects achieving maximal surgical debulking is equal to 19.4%. Various partial response rates (i.e. proportion of patients with various sizes of residual tumor after debulking) will also be estimated along with exact 95% binomial confidence intervals. We plan to explore options to adjust results 
for the two-stage design. Analyses of secondary outcomes will include 
Kaplan-Meier mean estimates of overall and progression-free survival rates. This will be primarily descriptive in nature due to the small patient 
 
11-GYN-098-MCC 43numbers; however, these results will be compared against historical US 
controls as well as the larger European study45,20. 
 There will also be information collected on any adverse events, surgical outcomes, biomarkers, and quality of life (QOL) surveys. Toxicities will be graded according to Common Toxicity Criteria (CTCAE) v4.0.  Incidence tables will be generated to summarize incidence of patients reporting at least one episode of each specific adverse event, incidence of adverse events causing withdrawal, and incidence of serious adverse events. 
Descriptive statistics (means, stand ard deviations, medians, and ranges) 
will be calculated for quality of life survey outcomes collected throughout 
the study at baseline, 9, 10, 19, and 28 weeks. Percent change in scores from baseline to each of the weeks collected will be calculated for each patient and plots will be constructed to show trends over time for mean 
scores. 
 
The requested biospecimens from 28 patients will be used for the following purposes and analysis: i) correlation between several inflammation and oxidative stress markers (measured up/down regulated) using the Kappa statistic ; ii) comparisons of biomarker 
status (measured up/down regulated) using McNemar’s test for paired pre vs. post-
treatment samples; and iii) estimating association of each marker (up versus down-regulated) with survival time using Kapl an-Meier survival curves, estimating tumor 
response using proportions and chi-square or Fisher’s exact test for comparison of 
proportions between up vs. down-regulated and two-group comparisons of QOL variables measured quantitatively using either two-sample t-tests or nonparametric 
analogs between each level (up/down regulated) of each marker.  The patient numbers 
will be adequate for detecting moderate/large correlations for the (i) analysis while analyses (ii) and (iii) will be primarily exploratory.            
 
11-GYN-098-MCC 4413.0  BIBLIOGRAPHY 
 
1. National Cancer Institute.  Estimated new cancer cases and deaths for 2010. 
 SEER Cancer Statistics Review 1975-2007. 
 
2. McGuire WP, Hoskins WJ, Brady MF, Kucera PR, Partridge EE, Look KY et al. 
 Cyclophosphamide and cisplatin compared with paclitaxel and cisplatin in  patients with stage III and stage IV ovarian cancer. N Eng J Med 334:1-6, 1996. 
 
3. Piccart MJ, Bertelsen K, James K, Cassidy J, Mangioni C, Simonsen E et al.  Randomized intergroup trial of cisplatin-paclitaxel versus cisplatin- cyclophosphamide in women with advanced epithelial ovarian cancer: three-year 
 results. J Natl Cancer Inst 92:699-708, 2000. 
 
4. Alberts DS, Green S, Hannigan EV, O'Toole R, Stock-Novack D, Anderson P et  al. Improved therapeutic index of carboplatin plus cyclophosphamide versus  cisplatin plus cyclophosphamide: final report by the Southwest Oncology Group 
 of a phase III randomized trial in stages III and IV ovarian cancer. J Clin Oncol  10:706-17, 1992. 
 
5. du Bois A, Luck HJ, Meier W, Adams HP, Mobus V, Costa S et al. A randomized   clinical trial of cisplatin/paclitaxel versus carboplatin/paclitaxel as first-line  treatment of ovarian cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst Sep.3;95.(17):1320.-9. 95:1320,  2003. 
 
6. Ozols RF, Bundy BN, Greer BE, Fowler JM, Clarke-Pearson D, Burger RA et al.  Phase III trial of carboplatin and paclitaxel  compared with cisplatin and paclitaxel 
 in patients with optimally resected stage III ovarian cancer: a Gynecologic  Oncology Group study. J Clin Oncol 21:3194-200, 2003. 
 
7. Swenerton K, Jeffrey J, Stuart G, Roy M, Krepart G, Carmichael J et al.  Cisplatincyclophosphamide versus ca rboplatin-cyclophosphamide in advanced 
 ovarian cancer: a randomized phase III study of the National Cancer Institute of  Canada Clinical Trials Group.  J Clin Oncol 10:718-26, 1992. 
 
8. Bristow RE, Tomacruz RS, Armstrong DK, Trimble EL, Montz FJ.  Survival effect 
 of maximal cytoreductive surgery for advanced ovarian carcinoma during the  platinum era:  a meta-analysis.  J Clin Oncol 20:1248-59, 2002. 
 
9. Covens AL.  A critique of surgical cytoreduction in advanced ovarian cancer.   Gynecol Oncol 78:269-74, 2000. 
 
10. Dauplat J, Le ABouedec G, Pomel C, Scherer C.  Cytoreductive surgery for  advanced stages of ovarian cancer.  Semin Surg Oncol 19:42-8, 2000.  
 
11. Griffiths CT.  Surgical resection of tumor bulk in the primary treatment of  ovarian carcinoma.  Natl Cancer Inst Mongr 42:101-4, 1975. 
 12. Bridges JE, Leung Y, Hammond IG, McCartney AJ.  En bloc resection of  epithelial ovarian tumors with concomitant rectosigmoid colectomy:  the KEMH  experience.  Int J Gynecol Cancer 3:199-202, 1993. 
 
11-GYN-098-MCC 45 
13. Gilette-Cloven N, Burger RA, Monk BJ, McMeekin DS, Vasilev S, DiSaia PJ, et 
 al.  Bowel resection at the time of primary cytoreduction for epithelial ovarian 
 cancer.  J Am Coll Surg 193:626-32, 2001. 
 
14. Mourton Sm, Temple LK, Abu-Rustum NR, Gemignani ML, Sonoda Y, Bochner 
 BH, et al.  Morbidity of rectosigmoid resection and primary anastomosis in  patients undergoing primary cytoreductive surgery for advanced epithelial  ovarian cancer.  Gynecol Oncol 99:608-14, 2005. 
 
15. Aletti GD, Podratz KC, Jones MB, Cliby WA. Role of rectosigmoidectomy and  stripping of pelvic peritoneum in outcomes of patients with advanced ovarian  cancer.  J Am Coll Surg 203:521-6, 2006. 
 
16. Chi DS, Franklin CC, Levine DA, Akselrod F, Sabbatini P, Jarnagin WR, et al.   Improved optimal cytoreduction rates for stages IIIC and IV eptithelial ovarian,  fallopian tube, and primary peritoneal cancer:  a change in surgical approach.   Gynecol Oncol 94:650-4, 2004. 
 
17. Eisenhauer EL, Abu-Rustum NR, Sonoda Y, Levine DA, Poynor EA, Aghajanian  C, et al.  The addition of extensive upper abdominal surgery to achieve optimal  cytoreduction improves survival in pat ients with stages IIIC-IV epithelial ovarian 
 cancer.  Gynecol Oncol 103:1083-90, 2006. 
 
18. Chi DS, Eisenhauer EL, Zivanovic O, Sonoda Y, Abu-Rustum NR, Levine DA, et 
 al.  Improved progression-free and over all survival in advanced ovarian cancer 
 as a result of a change in surgical paradigm.  Gynecol Oncol 114:26-31, 2009.. 
 
19. Zivanovic O, Sima CS, Iasonos A, Hoskins WJ, Pingle PR, Leitao MM Jr, et al.  
 The effect of primary cytoreduction on outcomes of patients with FIGO stage IIIC 
 ovarian cancer stratified by the initial tumor burden in the upper abdomen 
 cephalad to the greater omentum.  Gynecol Oncol 116:351-7, 2010. 
 
20. Vergote I, Trope CG, Amant F, Kristensen GB, Ehlen T, Johnson N, Verheijen  RH, van der Burg M, et al.  Neoadjuvant Chemotherapy or Primary Surgery in  Stage IIIC or IV Ovarian Cancer.  N Engl J Med 363:943-953, 2010. 
 
21. Kumar L, Hariprasad R, Kumar S, Bhatla N, Thulkar S, Vijayaraghavan M, Deo  S, et al.  Neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NACT) followed by interval debulking 
 surgery versus uprofront surgery followed by chemotherapy (CT) in advanced  epithelial ovarian carcinoma (EOC):  A prospective randomized study—Interim 
 results.  Presented at 2007 ASCO Annual Meeting.   
 
22. Onda T, Kobayashi H, Nakanishi T, Hatae M, Iwasaka T, Konishi I, et al.  
 Feasibility study of neoadjuvant chemot herapy followed by interval debulking 
 surgery for stage III/IV ovarian, tubal, and peritoneal cancers:  Japan Clinical  Oncology Group Study JCOG0206.  Gynecol Oncol 113:57-62, 2009. 
 
23. Omura G, Blessing JA, Ehrlich CE, Miller A, Yordan E, Creasman WT, et al.  A  randomized trial of cyclophosphamicde and dox orubicin with or without cisplatin 
 
11-GYN-098-MCC 46 in advanced ovarian carcinoma.  A Gy necologic Oncology Group Study.  Cancer 
 57:1725-30, 1986. 
 
24. Alberts DS, Green S, Hannigan EV, O’Toole R, Stock-Novack D, Anderson P, et 
 al.  Improved therapeutic index of carboplatin plus cyclophosphamide versus  cisplatin plus cyclophosphamide:  final report by the Southwest Oncology Group 
 of a phase III study randomized trial in stages III and IV ovarian cancer.  J Clin  Oncol 10:706-17, 1992. 
 
25. Swenerton K, Jeffrey J, Stuart G, Roy M, Krepart G, Carmichael J, et al.   Cisplatin-cyclophosphamide versus carboplatin=cyclophosphamide in advanced  ovarian cancer:  a randomized phase III study of the National Cancer Institute of  Canada Clinical Trials Group.  J Clin Oncol 10:718-26, 1992. 
 
26. Gurney H, Crowther D, Andersen H, Murphy D, Prendiville J, Ranson M, et al.   Five year follow-up and dose delivery analysis of cisplatin, iproplatin or  carboplatin in combination with cyclophosphamide in advanced ovarian  carcinoma. Ann Oncol 1:427-33, 1990. 
 
27. Conte PF, Bruzzone M, Carnino F, Chiara S, Donadio M, Facchini V, et al.   Carboplatin, doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide versus cisplatin, doxorubicin  and cyclophosphamide:  a randomized trial in stage III-IV epithelial ovarian  carcinoma.  J Clin Oncol 9:658-63, 1991. 
 
28. McGuire WP, Hoskins WJ, Brady MF, Kucera PR, Partridge EE, Look KY, et al.  
 Cyclophosphamide and cisplatin compared with paclitaxel and cisplatin in 
 patients with stage III and stage IV ovarian cancer.  N Engl J Med 334:1-6, 1996. 
 
29 Ozols RF, Bundy BN, Greer BE, Fowler JM, Clarke-Pearson D, Burger RA, et al.   Phase III trial of carboplatin and paclitaxel  compared with cisplatin and paclitaxel 
 in patients with optimally resected stage III ovarian cancer:  a Gynecologic  Oncology Group Study.  J Clin Oncol 21:3194-200, 2003. 
 
30. Piccart MJ, Bertelsen K, James K, Cassidy J, Mangioni C, Simonsen E et al.  Randomized intergroup trial of cisplatin-paclitaxel versus cisplatin- cyclophosphamide in women with advanced epithelial ovarian cancer: three-year 
 results. J Natl Cancer Inst 92:699-708, 2000.  31. Rose PG, Blessing JA, Ball HG, Hoffman J, Warshal D, DeGeest K et al. A  phase II study of docetaxel in paclitaxel-resistant ovarian and peritoneal  carcinoma: a Gynecologic Oncology Group study. Gynecol Oncol 88:130-5, 
 2003. 
 32. Dieras V, Guastalla JP, Ferrero JM, Cure H, Weber B, Winckel P et al. A  multicenter phase II study of cisplatin and docetaxel (Taxotere) in the first-line  treatment of advanced ovarian cancer : a GINECO study. Cancer Chemother 
 Pharmacol 53:489-95, 2004. 
 
33. Pfisterer J, du BA, Wagner U, Quaas J, Blohmer JU, Wallwiener D et al.  Docetaxel and carboplatin as first-line chemotherapy in patients with advanced  gynecological tumors. A phase I/II trial of the Arbeitsgemeinschaft 
 
11-GYN-098-MCC 47 Gynakologische Onkologie (AGO-OVAR) Ovarian Cancer Study Group. 
 Gynecol.Oncol 92:949-56, 2004.  
34. Vasey PA, Atkinson R, Coleman R, Crawford M, Cruickshank M, Eggleton P et 
 al. Docetaxelcarboplatin as first line chemotherapy for epithelial ovarian cancer.  Br J Cancer 84:170-8, 2001.  35. Vorobiof DA, Rapoport BL, Chasen MR, Cohen GL, Mahomed R, Karime M.  Phase II clinical trial of carboplatin and docetaxel in patients with metastatic 
 ovarian cancer: active combination with low incidence of peripheral neuropathy. 
 Int J Gynecol Cancer 13:287-91, 2003.  36. Vasey PA, Jayson GC, Gordon A, Gabra H, Coleman R, Atkinson R et al. Phase  III randomized trial of docetaxel-carboplatin versus paclitaxel-carboplatin as first-
 line chemotherapy for ovarian carcinom a. J Natl Cancer Inst 96:1682-91, 2004. 
 
37. Markman M, Liu PY, Wilczynski S, Monk B, Copeland LJ, Alvarez RD et al.  Phase III randomized trial of 12 versus 3 months of maintenance paclitaxel in  patients with advanced ovarian cancer after complete response to platinum and 
 paclitaxel-based chemotherapy: a Sout hwest Oncology Group and Gynecologic 
 Oncology Group trial. J Clin Oncol 21:2460-5, 2003. 
 38. Bast RC, Jr., Klug TL, St John E, Jenison E, Niloff JM, Lazarus H et al. A  radioimmunoassay using a monoclonal antibody to monitor the course of  epithelial ovarian cancer. N Engl J Med 309:883-7, 1983. 
 
39. Rustin GJ, Marples M, Nelstrop AE, Mahmoudi M, Meyer T. Use of CA-125 to  define progression of ovarian cancer in patients with persistently elevated levels.  J Clin Oncol 19:4054-7, 2001.  
40. Basen-Engquist K, Bodurka-Bevers D, Fitzgerald MA, Webster K, Cella D, Hu S 
 et al. Reliability and validity of the functional assessment of cancer therapy- ovarian. J Clin Oncol 19:1809-17, 2001.  41. Cain JM, Wenzel LB, Monk BJ, Cella D. Palliative care and quality of life  considerations in the management of ovarian cancer. In: Gershenson DM, 
 McGuire WP. Ovarian Cancer:  Controversies in Management. New York: 
 Churchill Livingstone 281-307, 1998.  40. Therasse P, Arbuck SG, Eisenhauer EA, Wanders J, Kaplan RS, Rubinstein L et  al. New guidelines to evaluate the response to treatment in solid tumors. 
 European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer, National Cancer 
 Institute of the United States, National Cancer Institute of Canada. J Natl Cancer  Inst 92:205-216, 2000.  41. Vergote I, Amant F, Leunen K. Neoadjuv ant chemotherapy in advanced ovarian 
 cancer: what kind of evidence is needed to convince US gynecological 
 Oncologists? Gynecol Oncol 119: 1-2, 2010.  
 42. Dewdney SB, Rimel BJ, Reinhart AJ, et al. The role of neoadjuvant  chemotherapy in the management of patients with advanced stage ovarian 
 
11-GYN-098-MCC 48 cancer: survey results from members of  the society of gynecologic oncologists. 
 Gynecol Oncol 119:18-21, 2010. 
 
43. Bristow RE, Tomacruz RS, Armstrong DK, Trimble EL, Montz FJ.  Survival effect 
 of maximal cytoreductive surgery for advanced ovarian carcinoma during the 
 platinum era:  a meta-analysis.  J Clin Oncol 20:1248-59, 2002.  44. Simon R.  Optimal two-stage designs for phase II clinical trials.  Controlled  Clinical Trials 10:1-10, 1989. 
 
45. Bookman MA, Brady MF, McGuire WP, Harper PG, Alberts DS, Friedlander M, et   al.  Evaluation of New Platinum-Based Treatment Regimens in Advanced-Stage  
 Ovarian Cancer:  A Phase III Trial of the Gynecologic Oncology Group.  J Clin   Oncol 27(9):  1419-1425, 2009. 
   
 
11-GYN-098-MCC 49APPENDIX I 
 
FIGO STAGE GROUPING FOR PRIMARY CARCINOMA OF THE OVARY  
 
(2009) 
 
These categories are based on findings at clinical examination and/or surgical 
exploration. The histologic characteristics are to be considered in the staging, as are results of cytologic testing as far as effusions  are concerned.  It is desirable that a biopsy 
be performed on suspicious areas outside the pelvis.  Stage I  Growth limited to the ovaries.    Stage IA  Growth limited to one ovary; no ascites. 
    No tumor on the external surface; capsule intact. 
  Stage IB  Growth limited to both ovaries; no ascites.     No tumor on the external surfaces; capsules intact.   Stage IC*  Tumor either Stage IA or IB but with tumor on the       surface of one or both ovaries; or with capsule   
    ruptured; or with ascites present containing    
    malignant cells or with positive peritoneal        w a s h i n g s .   Stage II  Growth involving one or both ovaries with pelvic extension.  
  Stage IIA  Extension and/or metastases to the uterus and/or tubes. 
   Stage IIB  Extension to other pelvic tissues.    Stage IIC*  Tumor either Stage IIA or IIB but with tumor on the surface  
    of one or both ovaries; or with capsule(s) ruptured; or with  
    ascites present containing malignant cells or with positive      peritoneal washings.  Stage III  Tumor involving one or both ovaries with peritoneal implants outside the    pelvis and/or positive retroperitoneal or inguinal nodes. Superficial liver  
  metastasis equals Stage III.  Tumor is limited to the true pelvis but with  
  histologically verified malignant ext ensions to small bowel or omentum. 
 Stage IIIA  Tumor grossly limited to the true pelvis with negative nodes but with   histologically confirmed microscopic seeding of abdominal peritoneal  
  surfaces
.  
 
Stage IIIB  Tumor of one or both ovaries with histologically confirmed implants of 
  abdominal peritoneal surfaces, none exceeding 2 cm in diameter. Nodes   negative.  Stage IIIC  Abdominal implants >2 cm in diameter and/or positive retroperitoneal  
  or inguinal nodes.  
 
11-GYN-098-MCC 50Stage IV  Growth involving one or both ovaries with distant metastasis. If pleural  
  effusion is present there must be positive cytologic test results to allot a    case to Stage IV. Parenchymal liver metastasis equals Stage IV. 
 
* In order to evaluate the impact on prognosis of the different criteria for allotting cases to Stage IC or IIC, it would be of value to know if rupture of the capsule was (1) spontaneous or (2) caused by the surgeon and if the source of malignant cells detected was (1) peritoneal washings or (2) ascites.  
  
 
11-GYN-098-MCC 51APPENDIX II 
 
See attached FACT-O TOI 
 
11-GYN-098-MCC 52
 
 
11-GYN-098-MCC 53
 
 
11-GYN-098-MCC 54APPENDIX III 
 
Anaphylaxis Precautions 
 
 Equipment Needed __ Tourniquet __ Oxygen __ Oral and endotracheal airways and intubation equipment 
__ Epinephrine 1:1000 solution for IV or endotracheal injection 
__ Antihistamines __ Corticosteroids __ IV infusion solutions, tubing, catheters, and tape  
 
11-GYN-098-MCC 55APPENDIX IV 
 
CARBOPLATIN DOSE CALCULATION INSTRUCTION 
 
1) The Cockcroft-Gault formula will be used in GOG trials (not the Jelliffe formula).  2) Conversion of IDMS creatinine levels to “non-IDMS” values will not be permitted.  3) The carboplatin calculation tool on the GOG website has been updated. A legacy 
 carboplatin calculator (using the Jelliffe formula and IDMS to “non-IDMS” 
 conversion) is also available, if needed for dose modifications (see below). 
 
Dosing of Carboplatin:  
1) The carboplatin dose will be calculated to reach a target area under the curve 
 (AUC) according to the Calvert formula using an estimated glomerular filtration rate  (GFR) from the Cockcroft-Gault formula.  2) The initial dose of carboplatin must be calculated using GFR. In the absence of 
 renal toxicity greater than or equal to CTCAE Grade 2 (serum creatinine >1.5 x 
 ULN) or toxicity requiring dose modification, the dose of carboplatin will not need 
 to be recalculated for subsequent cycles, but will be subject to dose modification  for toxicity as noted in the protocol.  3) Carboplatin doses will be based on the subject’s weight at baseline and will remain 
 the same throughout the study. However, the doses will be recalculated if the 
 patient has a weight change of greater than or equal to 10% from baseline.  4) In patients with an abnormally low serum creatinine (less than 0.7 mg/dl), the  creatinine clearance should be estimated using a minimum value of 0.7 mg/dl . If 
 a patient is currently being dosed using a creatinine value less than 0.7 mg/dl,  adjust dose with next planned treatment.  5) For trials where patients enter and are treated within less than or equal to 12  weeks of surgery: If a more appropriate (higher) baseline creatinine value is  available from the pre-operative period (within 4 weeks of surgery date), that value 
 may also be used for the initial estimation of GFR. 
  CALVERT FORMULA:    Carboplatin dose (mg) = target AUC x (GFR + 25)  
 
 NOTE: the GFR used in the Calvert formula should not exceed 125 ml/min.    Maximum carboplatin dose (mg) = target AUC (mg/ml x min) x 150 ml/min.  
 
 The maximum allowed doses of carboplatin are:  
 
 AUC6=900mg   AUC5=750mg  AUC4=600mg 
 
11-GYN-098-MCC 56 
 For the purposes of this protocol, the GFR is considered to be equivalent to the 
 estimated creatinine clearance. The estimated creatinine clearance (ml/min) is 
 calculated by the method of Cockcroft-Gault using the following formula: 
 
 Creatinine Clearance (mL/min) = [140-Age (years)] x Weight (kg) x 0.85  
        72 x serum creatinine (mg/dl) 
Notes:   
1) Weight in kilograms (kg):   a. Body Mass Index (BMI) should be calculated for each patient. A BMI     calculator is available at the following link: http://www.nhlbisupport.com/bmi/  b. Actual weight should be used for estimation of GFR for patients with BMI of  
  less than 25.  
 c. Adjusted weight should be used for estimation of GFR for patients with BMI  
  of greater than or equal to 25 .  
  d. Adjusted weight calculation:  
  Ideal weight (kg) = (((Height (cm)/2.54) – 60) x 2.3) + 45.5 
 
  Adjusted weight (kg) = ((Actual weight – Ideal weight) x 0.40) + Ideal  
  weight 
  e. If a patient with BMI of greater than or equal to 25 is currently being dosed  
  using actual weight, adjust dose with next planned treatment.  2) The Cockcroft-Gault formula above is specifically for women (it includes the 0.85  factor).  
 
At the time of a dose modification for toxicity : 
 1)   If the creatinine at the time of a dose modification is lower than the creatinine used  to calculate the previous dose, use the previous (higher) creatinine; if the  creatinine at the time of a dose modification is higher than the creatinine used to 
 calculate the previous dose, use the current (higher) creatinine. This will ensure 
 that the patient is actually receiving a dose reduction.  2)  If the dose of carboplatin (mg) at the time of dose modification, is higher than the  previous dose due to the use of the Cockcroft-Gault formula [when the previous 
 dose was calculated using the Jelliffe formula and IDMS to “non-IDMS” conversion 
 (if applicable)+, use the same method that was used to calculate the previous dose  *Jelliffe formula and IDMS to “non-IDMS” conversion (if applicable)], to calculate  the dose of carboplatin (mg) at the time of dose reduction. A legacy carboplatin  calculator is available on the GOG website for this purpose. This will ensure that 
 the patient is actually receiving a dose reduction.
 
11-GYN-098-MCC 57APPENDIX V 
 
Standards for Operative Note Details 
 
Surgeon is responsible for indicating the extent of surgical cytoreduction in operative 
findings in dictated operative report.  Detail must include one of the following statements regarding the extent of surgical cytoreduction:   “Maximal surgical cytoreduction”  No evidence of gross residual  
       d i s e a s e  
  “Optimal surgical cytoreduction”  ≤ 1cm gross residual disease* 
  “Suboptimal surgical cytoreduction”   > 1cm gross residual disease* 
 *For any evidence of gross residual disease, surgeons must specify the location of residual disease and approximate amount or si ze of residual disease, preferably with 
measurements (i.e., “5 cm tumor plaque in left upper quadrant”), but alternatively with anatomical description (ie, “coating entire right hemidiaphragm” or “confluent disease 
throughout majority of small bowel mesentery”). 
 
11-GYN-098-MCC 58APPENDIX VI 
 
See attached Standard Chemotherapy Order Sets 
 
11-GYN-098-MCC 59 

 
11-GYN-098-MCC 60

 
11-GYN-098-MCC 61APPENDIX VII 
BIOLOGICAL CORRELATIVE PROCESSING INSTRUCTIONS 
 
 
 
A.  Pertinent Study Objective:   
Secondary Objective 1.27:  To assess the correlation between biologic indicators of 
inflammation and oxidative stress, including TNF- α, TNF receptor II, protein 
oxidation, CRP, IL-6 and IL-8 and tumor tissue oxidation before and after neo-
adjuvant therapy, and clinical outcomes, including overall survival, tumor response, 
and quality of life variables.   
 B. Samples required:   
5.3.1 – One serum sample (10 cc SST tube) and one plasma sample (5 cc purple top) will be obtained at three time points: 
1. Before the first cycle of chemotherapy. 
2. Immediately prior to surgery after Neoadjuvant therapy is completed. 
3. 24 TO 72 hours after surgery. 
5.3.2 –Tumor tissue (2 gms) will be obtained at the time of surgery and snap frozen 
in liquid nitrogen.   
 
C. Sample Processing Instructions:   
Serum Sample 
 Samples will be collected in a 10 mL red top tube (serum separator tube) at the patient’s bedside.  This collection will allow for an adequate volume of serum to perform the listed laboratory correlative studies. Samples should be allowed to clot 
for 30 minutes before centrifugation and processing into aliquots.  Samples will be 
centrifuged at 1000 g for 15 minutes at 4 ˚ C.  Samples will then be aliquoted into 5 
cryovials containing a minimum of 0.3 ml (300 µL) and stored in a -80 Celsius freezer to be batched and run at a later date.  
 
Plasma 
Samples will be collected in a 5 mL purple top tube at the patient’s bedside and placed on ice immediately and until time of processing.  This collection will allow for an adequate volume of plasma to perform the listed laboratory correlative studies. After collection at the bedside, the samples should be transported to the lab within 15 minutes for processing and separation into aliquots.  Samples will be centrifuged at 
3000 rpm for 10 minutes at 4 ˚ C.  Samples will then be aliquoted into 3 cryovials 
containing a minimum of 0.5 ml (500 µL) and stored in a -80 Celsius freezer to be 
batched and run at a later date.  Tumor Tissue  
 
A 2 gram sample of tumor tissue will be obtained at the time of surgery and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen.
 