Title: Evaluation of Prototype for Simulation for Environmental Exposure Education (SE3)  
NCT #:  05875467 
Document date: 12/ 20/2024  
Study Protocol 
Objective:  
This study was designed to establish the technical merit and feasibility of producing and using a 
serious game to improve environmental health literacy among young people. We conducted 
play tests and a simultaneous evaluation with fifty  middle school age participants from 
communities disproportionately impacted by environmental risk. The objective was to test the 
usability and playability of the prototype and assess the games impact on outcomes.  
Design 
This is a single arm study  with all participants receiving the intervention. This intervention is a 
prototype of online game, about 50 minutes in duration. The online game provides gameplay that allows the user, with a gameplay narrative, to identify and remove sources of environmental 
hazards in the home environment. Participants  play the prototype game for about 50 minutes at 
which time the intervention is complete. Partic ipants will take an online pre-test pri or to the 
intervention, have one week to use the intervention,  and complete a similar online post-test after 
using the intervention.  
Methods  
Recruitment and consent. Under the supervision of the Principal Investigators, subjects w ere 
recruited through expert advisors on the project. One middle school  teacher (two classrooms) 
made the opportunity available to her classes, utilizing two class sessions. The opportunity was 
announced to students, and they were provided with consent forms to take home for 
parent/guardian signature and an assent form for participant signature. The form included 
information on whom to contact if the subject has any questions about the study. Fifteen remote 
testers were recruited through expert advisors on the project. They forwarded the study 
information to teachers to pass along to students who may want to participate. Interested 
parents/students were contacted by study staff and had the study and procedures explained. If 
they chose to participate, they returned signed consent/assent forms. All materials and consent 
forms described the nature of the project, potential risks, payment offered, other potential 
benefits, an d participant rights. They made clear that participation is voluntary, can be 
discontinued by the child or parent at any time. Project staff were available to answer any questions about the study in person for classroom participants and via phone or email for 
remote participants .  
Study participation. For remote tests the participant completed  a short online pre-test 
assessment (environmental health knowledge and intentions), was provided with a tablet if 
needed and was allowed to use the game for one week. A t the end of the one-week period they 
completed  a brief online posttest assessment.  
In-person play testers participants completed  a short online pre-test assessment (environmental 
health knowledge and intentions) . During class they used the game and provided feedback on 
game play. One week later they played the game again and took a post-test survey. For all participants the game collected metrics on usage, player performance, and conditional 
knowledge including the ability to apply concepts in context.  
Participants received  a $100 gift card  at the conclusion of the study . 
 