Title: The Role of a Nasal Bridle in the Frequency of Repeat Endoscopic Procedures for Endoscopic Naso-
enteric Tube Placement 
ClincalTrials.gov ID: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
Documenta Ɵon upload dat e: 3/22/2023 
IniƟal IRB approval date : 06/13/2019 
Brief Summary:  
In criƟcally ill pa Ɵents, nutri Ɵon is a major part of healing and recovery. In pa Ɵents unable to tolerate 
oral feeding, nasoenteric tube feeding (a tube placed from the nose to the stomach or small intes Ɵne) 
provides a safe alterna Ɵve for feeding. Some pa Ɵents require these tubes to be placed endoscopically 
due to numerous pa Ɵent factors including diﬃcult anatomy, need for post -gastric feeding, among 
others). In pa Ɵents that require endoscopically placed tubes, there is risk of perfora Ɵon, infecƟon, 
bleeding, aspira Ɵon, and rarely even death. In pa Ɵents that have recurrent dislodgement of 
endoscopically placed tubes, the need for repeat endoscopy increases pa Ɵent exposure to these risks. 
TradiƟonal securing mechanism with adhesive tape to reduce dislodgment o Ōen fail in cri Ɵcally ill 
paƟents requiring pa Ɵents to have repeat endoscopies to replace nasoenteric feeding tubes and subjects 
paƟents poten Ɵally to increased cumula Ɵve risks associated with each endoscopy.  
The inves Ɵgators propose to collect data for one year, the inves Ɵgators will prospec Ɵvely follow via chart 
review endoscopically placed nasoenteric tubes placed with a Standard AMT Bridle securement device 
and assess if there is a reduc Ɵon in accidental tube removal requi ring replacement endoscopically. 
 
Outcomes: 
Primary objec Ɵve is to see if nasal bridles versus standard adhesive tape to secure nasoenteric tubes 
decreases the need for repeat endoscopy to replace dislodged nasoenteric tubes. The number of 
endoscopies and repeated nasoenteric tubes placed will be tracked at six and twelve months. Secondary 
objecƟves can assess if reduces tube dislodgement frequency. Hypothesis: We hypothesize that nasal 
bridles in endoscopically placed feeding tubes will reduce the number of unnecessary endoscopies 
reducing health care costs and complica Ɵons. 
Detailed Descrip Ɵon:  
PaƟents to be recruited are those who are scheduled to undergo rou Ɵne upper endoscopy with 
nasoenteric tube placement. Pa Ɵents will be randomized into two groups: control arm and device arm.  
Control arm includes pa Ɵents that will have nasoenteric tubes secured with standard protocol, adhesive 
tape. Device arm includes pa Ɵents that will have nasoenteric tubes secured with Standard AMT Bridle. 
The nasal bridles will be placed by the endoscopist. Upper endoscopy will not be aﬀected. Placement of 
nasal bridle will take 1- 2 minutes a Ōer endoscopic procedure completed. No addi Ɵon sedaƟon, 
medicaƟon or exposure necessary.  
PaƟents will be randomized by sealed envelope randomiza Ɵon. Clinicians a re given randomly generated 
treatment alloca Ɵons within sealed opaque envelopes. Once a pa Ɵent has consented to enter the study 
trial an envelope is opened and the pa Ɵent is then oﬀered the allocated treatment regimen. Pa Ɵents will 
be consented by a m ember of the research team prior to endoscopy. Randomiza Ɵon will be singly 
blinded only to the paƟent prior to endoscopy. Endoscopist will not be blinded as they will be placing the 
securement device and in order to reduce selec Ɵon bias. 
In the eve nt of tube dislodgment, the pa Ɵent will receive same treatment.  
Follow-up of paƟents will occur via chart review un Ɵl the Ɵme of discharge, at 6 months and at 12 
months a Ōer feeding tube placement via chart review. Data collected with include repeat EGD, length of 
endoscopy, length of hospital stay, and mortality. The number of endoscopies and repeated nasoenteric 
tubes placed will be tracked at six and twelve months. 
 
StaƟcal Analysis 
DescripƟve staƟsƟcs (means, medians, percentage) will be used to deﬁne the pa Ɵent characteris Ɵcs. Chi-
square will be used for categorical variables. T-test will be used to analyze conƟnuous variables.  