PRO32037 – HD-tDCS in lvPPA [ Protocol v 5.0]    1 High -Definition Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation (HD -tDCS) in 
logopenic variant Primary Progressive Aphasia (lvPPA): Effects on 
Language and Neural Mechanisms.  
 
Principal Investigator:  Elias Granadillo, MD  (Department of Neurology ).  
 
Co-investigator:   Jeffrey Binder , MD (Department of Neurology)  
   Sara Pillay, PhD (Department of Neurology)  
                                   Priyanka Shah, PhD (Department of Neurology)   
   Vahab Youssofzadeh , PhD (Department of Neurology)  
                                    
Address  
Medical College of Wisconsin 8701 Watertown Plank Road Milwaukee, WI 53226  
 Funding Sponsor: Neurosciences Research Center .  
 Version: 5 
 
Version Date: May 26 , 2022 
 
PRO32037 – HD-tDCS in lvPPA [ Protocol v 5.0]    2 PROTOCOL SUMMARY 
 
Title  High -Definition Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation (HD -
tDCS) in logopenic variant Primary Progressive Aphasia 
(lvPPA): Effects on Language and Neural Mechanisms.   
Principal Inv estigator  Elias Granadillo , MD  
Study Site  Medical College of Wisconsin  
Device  Trial Phase  Pilot Study  
Study Disease  logopenic variant Primary Progressive Aphasia  (lvPPA)  
Main Eligibility 
Criteria  • Clinical lvPPA or imaging -supported lvPPA  
• Age 45 years  and older   
• Structu ral brain MRI  done within  the 3 years prior to enrollment.  
Study Rationale  The logopenic variant of Primary Progressive Aphasia (lvPPA) is a  
neurodegenerative disorder often referred to as the ‘language form’ 
of Alzheimer’s Disease (AD).  The current conceptual disease 
framework assumes a relatively widespread neurodegeneration 
which causes patients to continue to use pre- existing, specific neural 
areas with declining efficiency . 
tDCS  is a non-invasive, painless brain stimulation technique that 
appears to  enhance language production when delivered during 
language training.  To date, studies  utilizing tDCS in lvPPA patients  
have been limited to conventional montages that are not suitable for 
focal  targeting of brain tissue. High-Definition  tDCS (HD- tDCS) is a 
recent ly developed system that allows for more focal stimulation 
based on increased c urrent focality and intensity, and the 
individual ized modelling of the patient’s brain tissue.  
Considering this, use of HD -tDCS to ta rget the most consistent 
neural correlate of lvPPA (the left posterior temporo- parietal cortex ) 
should be explored .  
Primary Objectives  Determine the efficacy of HD -tDCS for the improvement of  
language performance in lvPPA .  
Secondary Objectives  (ii) evaluate the effects of HD -tDCS on functional connectivity using 
functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI), and (iii) elucidate 
its effects on spontaneous neuronal oscillatory patterns using 
Magnetoencephalography (MEG) .  
Endpoints  • Primary outcome meas urement s: Language performance  
changes  as assessed at baseline and after  tDCS  stimulation 
procedures (time frame: 2 weeks).  
• Secondary outcome measurements: (ii) Changes in brain 
functional connectivity as assessed  at baseline and after tDCS 
stimulation (time frame: 2 weeks)  (iii) Changes in abnormal 
patterns of neuronal frequencies and synchronizations as 
assessed at baseline and after tDCS stimulation procedures 
(time frame: 2 weeks).   
PRO32037 – HD-tDCS in lvPPA [ Protocol v 5.0]    3 Study Design  This clinical utility study is a randomized, double -blind, sham -
controlled trial in which stimulation  or sham will be administered to 
20 subjects  over the age of 45 year s, with the order of treatments 
counterbalanced in a within- subject crossover design. Stimulation 
and sham sessions last 20 minutes and occur for 10 days over a 2-
week period.  
 
The study consists of Pre -screening (Visit −1), Baseline (Visit 1), a 
2-week Treatment Period (Visit s 1-10), a 16 -week Washout Period , 
an Interim Assessment (Visit 11), a second 2-week Treatment 
Period (Visit s 12-21), and a Final Assessment (Visit 22 ).  
Study Agent/
Intervention 
Description  tDCS and sham s timulation session s lasting 20 minutes at a 
current intensity of up to 2mA in the targeted cortical tissue  
Number of Subjects  20 
Subject Participation 
Duration  28 weeks: 2 weeks of tDCS /sham , followed by a 16-week washout, 
followed by 2  weeks of tDCS /sham , followed by an  8-week final 
assessment .  
Duration of Follow up  None  
Estimated Time to 
Complete Enrollment  18 months  
Statistical 
Methodology 
 The collection of pilot data  from this study will provide initial 
estimates of the variability and the effect sizes. This information will 
then be used for the more formal calculations of power and sample 
size necessary to conduct a pivotal  trial. All future statistical testing 
will use repeated measures ANOVA once a large enough sample 
is reached.  
Safety Assessments  Data safety monitoring board meetings will be scheduled to 
monitor progression of the study and review drug adverse events  
Efficacy Assessments  (i) Consent rate and t reatment completion rate  (ii) Statistically 
significant differences  between baseline and post - tDCS 
stimulation performance on a series of language metrics .   
Unique Aspects of this 
Study  This is the first study to evaluate the efficacy of HD-tDCS for the 
treatment of language deficits  of lvPPA, a neurodegenerative and 
progressive condition with no known effective treatment.  It would 
also be the first study to acc ess whether HD -tDCS can in crease 
brain functional  connectivity and  regulate  abnormal patterns of 
neuronal frequencies and synchronizations in this patient 
population.   
PRO32037 – HD-tDCS in lvPPA [ Protocol v 5.0]    4 
 Table of Contents  
1. Study Objectives  ........................................................................................................................................ 5 
2. Background and Significance ..................................................................................................................... 6 
3. Rationale .................................................................................................................................................... 7 
4. Study Design  .............................................................................................................................................. 8 
5. Study Visits and Procedures  ....................................................................................................................... 9 
6. Data Management  .................................................................................................................................... 15 
7. Data Safety Monitoring Plan ..................................................................................................................... 16 
8. References  ...............................................................................................................................................  21 
  
PRO32037 – HD-tDCS in lvPPA [ Protocol v 5.0]    5 
 1. STUDY  OBJECTIVES 
The logopenic variant of Primary Progressive Aphasia (lvPPA) is an untreatable neurodegenerative disorder that 
is often referred to as the ‘language form’ of Alzheimer’s Disease (AD).  Transcranial  Direct Current Stimulation 
(tDCS) has emerged as a safe and potentially effective tool that appears to enhance language production when delivered during language training (Tippet et al., 2015). This technology provides a critical opportunity to  conduct 
disease intervention. In this study, we will test our hypothesis that High -Definition tDCS (HD -tDCS) will 
improve performance on language tasks by increasing functional connectivity and by regulating abnormal neuronal oscillatory patterns. T he rationale for this project is that a determination of the therapeutic 
efficacy and the associated neural mechanis ms of HD -tDCS in lvPPA is likely to offer a scientific framework 
whereby new stimulation parameters, conditions, and target sites can be deciphered.   
 
1.1. Justification of Selecting lvPPA  Subjects for HD- tDCS Treatment   
The sparse number of studies done so far presuppose a conceptual framework predicated on the idea that because of relatively widespread neurodegeneration, these patients do not remap language functions to novel 
networks, but that instead they continue to use pre -existing neural areas with declining efficiency (Rogalski et 
al., 2011). This stands in contrast to the working models for post -stroke aphasia recovery where the assumption 
is that patients will engage in the recruitment of unaffected brain areas as  an important compensatory mechanism 
(Abel et al., 2015). The aforementioned ‘neurodegeneration’ model would suggest that in the case of lvPPA an 
appropriate neuromodulation approach would lead to the tailored and narrow stimulation of disease- specific 
affected brain regions. Notwithstanding the biological plausibility of this model, all the published studies on lvPPA 
and other PPA subtypes have used conventional tDCS montages, a method incapable of focally targeting specific brain regions. High- Definiton t DCS (HD- tDCS) on the other hand, is a recently developed system that 
allows for more focal stimulation based on increased current focality and intensity (Villamar et al., 2013). What 
remains lacking is knowledge of the therapeutic efficacy and neural mechanisms of HD- tDCS when used in 
lvPPA. There is, therefore, a critical need  to evaluate the effects on language performance and the underlying 
neural mechanisms of active HD -tDCS aimed at the left posterior temporo- parietal cortex (TPC), the most 
consistent neural correlate of this condition (Gorno- Tempini et al., 2011). Without such information the promise 
of disease -specific and personalized tDCS procedures for the treatment of this neurodegenerative aphasia will 
likely remain limited.  
 1.2. Objectives   
To determine whether active HD- tDCS targeting the dominant posterior TPC can improve language performance , 
increase language network  functional connectivity, and improve abnormal patterns of resting state neuronal 
frequencies and synchronizations .   
 Specific Aim 1.  Determine changes in language performance after 10 HD-tDCS stimulation sessions  (QD)  
lasting 20 minutes at a current intensity of up to 2mA in the left TPC in a randomized, double- blind, sham -
controlled, within -subject cross -over study with 2 0 lvPPA subjects ages 4 5 years and greater .  
 
Specific Aim 2 . Determine the effects of the conditions described in specific Aim 1 on the resting state Language 
network -level changes in left TPC functional connectivity between the conditions described in Specific Aim 1.  
 Specific Aim 3. Determine the effects of the conditions described in Specific Aim 1 on the neuronal frequenc y 
distribution and connectivity measures associated with the left TPC  as assessed by MEG.  
 
1.3. Outcome M easurements  
The following outcome measurements will be used to test our proposed hypothesis:  
 
• Primary outcome measures:  Language performance as assessed at baseline and post -stimulation 
procedure (time  frame:  2 weeks)  
• Secondary outcome measures:  Language network  resting state changes after stimulation procedure 
(time  frame:  2 weeks)  
• Tertiary outcome measures: Resting -state neuronal frequencies and synchronizations  changes  after 
stimulation procedure (time frame:  2 weeks)  
PRO32037 – HD-tDCS in lvPPA [ Protocol v 5.0]    6 
  
1.4. Impact of the P roposed Study  
Currently, no FDA -approved therapy exists for lvPPA despite it being the most prominent cognitive impairment 
in approximately 27% of patients with early onset Alzheimer’s Disease  (Mendez et al., 2012) .  If this mechanistic 
approach is successful, we will lay a conceptual framework for the future develop ment of  optimal 
neuromodulation avenues for the rehabilitation of multiple neurodegenerative aphasias and other related 
conditions . We hope the technique will effectively  enhance l anguage production for this population.  
 
2. BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE  
2.1. Background  
lvPPA is a neurodegenerative condition with no known effective treatment despite its relatively common 
occurrence in patients with AD and its associated catastrophic effects on work and home life. The disorder is typically characterized by word  retrieval difficulties, word and sentence repetition deficits, and overall, by a type 
of language impairment that leads to a disturbance of the phonemic buffer for words (Meyer et al., 
2015).   Alzheimer’s disease is the most common underlying neuropathology, and in accordance with the role of 
the posterior perisylvian region in phonological processing (Pillay et al., 2014), focal degeneration of the 
dominant posterior TPC is the most frequently identified pattern of brain involvement (Gorno -Tempini et al.,  
2008).   
 
With the advent of tDCS as a promising therapeutic and rehabilitation tool in both post -stroke and 
neurodegenerative aphasias, it seems likely that these conditions will differ in their optimal neuromodulation 
approach as a direct result of their distinct underlying pathophysiologic mechanisms: Stimulation of spared 
perilesional and contralateral areas in the former, and of disease- specific and growingly inefficient brain regions 
in the latter. Our overall scientific premise  is strongly supported by the exi sting scientific literature, with stroke -
related studies showing major neuroanatomical reorganization after the initial injury (Dancause et al., 2005; Abel 
et al., 2015), and PPA studies revealing early reductions in language- specific effective connectivit y and  relatively 
rapid neurodegenerative changes, two findings consistent with the absence of any major reorganizational 
changes of brain functional networks (Sonty et al., 2007; Rogalski et al., 2011). Despite the soundness of the 
previously discussed mo dels, all published studies of tDCS in PPA have relied on the broad stimulation of left 
hemispheric structures using conventional montages, and none of them have sought to use HD -tDCS to focus 
the stimulation on the more discretely affected brain areas tha t typify the different PPA variants. (i.e. left TPC in 
lvPPA, the left Inferior Frontal Gyrus (IFG) in the non- fluent/agrammatic variant, and the left temporal pole in the 
semantic variant). Correspondingly, an additional element of our overall scientific premise  is the fact that HD -
tDCS as a technique, can increase current focality and intensity (Datta et al., 2009; Muthalib., 2017). This focality 
is robust to tissue (modeling) parameters (Datta et al., 2012) , and clinical neurophysiological studies have 
confirmed the focal current delivery (Edwards et al.,  2013). E ven though no published literature exists on the use 
of HD -tDCS in the PPA population, its feasibility, tolerability, and its non- inferiority to tDCS have been 
documented in patients with chronic post stroke aphasia (Richar dson et al., 2015). HD -tDCS has  also been 
shown to produce longer lasting after -effects when compared to conventional tDCS (Kuo et al., 2013), and others 
have already speculated about its potenti al role in the rehabilitation of neurocognitive impairments resulting from 
localized brain injury (Hogeveen et al., 2016).   
 
Despite its promise for the treatment of PPA, knowledge of its mechanism of action and a demonstration of its 
therapeutic effectiv eness in this population are still critically needed. In the absence of such knowledge, 
realization of the therapeutic potential of this cutting- edge technique will likely remain difficult, not only in the 
case of PPA, but also for the treatment and rehabi litation of other related neurodegenerative conditions.  
 
2.2. Significance  
If this mechanistic study succeeds, we will be able to 1)  provide conceptual proof that language performance 
can be improved by targeting specific dysfunctional neural networks during the clinical phase of disease.  2) 
determine whether stimulation intervention reaches specific neural network targets and assess the network level 
responses; 3) predict if the network activity modulation can concurrently improve language performance;  and 4) 
provide essential information needed to prepar e future pivotal device  trials .  
PRO32037 – HD-tDCS in lvPPA [ Protocol v 5.0]    7 
   
3. RATIONALE  
3.1 Scientific Premise  
Aim #1. Evaluate the therapeutic efficacy of HD -tDCS.  Anodal (positive) tDCS appears to increase both the 
amount and the speed of learning by promoting mechanisms of long -term potentiation (Fritsch., 2010). From a 
behavioral perspective, these changes in synaptic activity seem to outlast the initial period o f stimulation only 
when the stimulation is delivered ‘online’ during  a behavioral training task (Monti et al., 2008; Baker et al., 2010; 
Marangolo et al., 2013), and when compared to the ‘offline’ method, only ‘online’ tDCS was capable of reducing 
vocal r esponse times in a study of elderly adults (Fertonani., 2014). These findings are in support of a pivotal 
part  of our scientific premise : that ‘online’ HD -tDCS is preferable in elderly persons with aphasia.  
Only a small number of  tDCS studies exist in t he the PPA population; some excluded the lvPPA subpopulation 
altogether (Cotelli et al., 2014; Teichmann et  al., 2016) and another  included lvPPA patients, but with what we 
believe are relative weaknesses in its design: The use of a conventional tDCS montage without individualized 
modelling of current delivery, the use of a ‘locked’ target site without consideration of the specific PPA variant at 
hand, and a relatively short 2 -month “wash out” period as evidenced by the persistence of behavioral gains at 
the 2- month follow up (Tsapkini et al., 2014). An additional small number of studies that included lvPPA patients 
have been published, all of them relying on the use of conventional tDCS, a single stimulation target for all PPA 
subtypes, or the absence of a sham condition for comparison (e.g. McConathey et al., 2017; Hung et al., 2017). 
Based on the support from the discussed studies our scientific premise  is that  tDCS when combined with 
language training interventions can improve language performance in PPA. Neverthessless, what remains 
unknown are the effects of using ‘online’ HD -tDCS when tailored to each PPA variant and guided by the 
individualized modelling of target sites.  
 
Aim # 2. Identify the effects of HD -tDCS on language network functional connectivity. We hy pothesize that 
tDCS is able to modulate abnormal neuronal processing in patients with aphasia as measured by fMRI. This 
premise is supported by a recent study of post -stroke aphasia in which patients named pictures of common 
objects during fMRI and concurrently received anodal or sham stimulation to the left primary motor cortex. In this experiment anodal tDCS selectively enhanced the activity in a larger language- related network, but not in other 
task-related components (Darkow et al., 2017 ). Of note, the authors themselves mentioned that the use of 
conventional tDCS (and not HD -tDCS) made it impossible to dissect the exact source of the neural modulation.  
In the specific case of PPA, all PPA syndromes are associated with distinctive functional neuroanatomical profiles 
of abnormal language processing relative to healthy older individuals (Hardy et al., 2017). The syndromic 
signatures found in this particular study were in accord with prior predictions and as  expected, the logopenic 
variant was characterized by decreased activation of the posterior superior temporal cortex that correlated with performance on post -scan behavioral testing. What remains lacking is knowledge of the effects of tDCS in 
general, and HD- tDCS in particular, on measures of brain functional connectivity in the PPA population.   
 
Aim # 3. Determine the effects of HD -tDCS on spontaneous neuronal oscillatory pattterns. tDCS can 
reshape brain networks and increase global connectivity in healthy adults as measured by MEG (e.g. Garcia-Cossio et al., 2016). In the case of PPA a recent MEG study demonstrated a distinct spatiotemporal pattern of 
altered functional connectivity that was unique to each individual variant (Ranasinghe et al., 2017). Wha t remains 
to be elucidated is the effect that HD -tDCS has on these neurophysiological signatures of network -specific 
neuronal dysfunction.   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PRO32037 – HD-tDCS in lvPPA [ Protocol v 5.0]    8 
  
 
4. STUDY  DESIGN  
4.1. Overall Design  
This study will test our hypothesis that HD -tDCS will improve performance on language tasks by increasing 
functional connectivity and by regulating abnormal neuronal oscillatory patterns. The language performance and 
functional connectivity changes will be determined in a randomized, double- blind, sham -controlled crossover 
manner, in which a stimulation of up to 2mA in the targeted cortical tissue or sham  is administered to 20 lvPPA 
subjects age 45 years and older.  Th e order of treatments is counterbalanced in a within- subject crossover design, 
as illustrated in Fig. 2 below. In brief, study participants will receive sham  during one treatment period and 
stimulation  during the other treatment period.   
 
Subjects
(n=20 )Stimulation
ShamStimulation
Sham
10 Days 10 Days 16 WeeksRandomizationTx Period 2 Washout
PeriodTx Period 1 Baseline
(Visit 1) (Visits 1-10 ) (Visits 12-21)Final Visit
(Visit 22)
8 WeeksFigure 2.  Study Design and tDCS Treatment Protocol
 
  
The Screening Visit  includes medical history , Language Assessment b attery, MRI safety screening,  and TMS 
Neuronavigation. Visit 1 (Baseline) will include fMRI and  MEG . Additionally  at Visit 1, and for 9 additional days 
in a two -week period (Tx Period 1), each subject will undergo real stimulation or sham and simultaneous word 
and non -word  reading  and repetition  tasks.  At the end of Tx Period 1, a 16-week  washout period begins.  After 
the first 8  weeks of the 16-week  washout period,  subjects return for Assessment Visit 1 wher e they receive the 
Language Assessment battery, including the reading and non- word repetition tasks  tested at baseline, and 
‘trained’ during each of the stimulation sessions .  After the 16 -week  washout period, Tx Period 2 begins.  Subjects 
undergo  stimulation or sham and the  simultaneous  word and non- word reading and non- word repetition  tasks 
for 10 day s over a two- week pe riod.  Eight  weeks after the end  of Tx Period 2, subjects receive the Language 
Assessment Battery at Assessment Visit 2, which is the last study visit.   
 
An unblinded member of the study team  having no contact with the study subjects  will randomize them  to the 
treatment conditions , while t he language assessment battery  of tests  will be delivered by a  blinded member of 
the study team . The language training exercises used during each tDCS session as well as  the tDCS intervention 
itself will be delivered by a blinded, qualified and formally tDCS -trained member(s) of the study team.  
 
PRO32037 – HD-tDCS in lvPPA [ Protocol v 5.0]    9 
 Data safety is monitored by three data safety monitoring board (DSMB) members who are not related to the 
study .  
 
4.2. Inclusion and Exclusion C riteria  
Inclusion Criteria  
• Diagnosed with lvPPA subtype, defined as either clinical lvPPA or imaging- supported lvPPA  in 
accordance with the most recent diagnostic criteria (Mesulam., 2001; Gorno- Tempini et al., 2011).  
• Fluent in English.  
• 45 years of age or older  (Individuals with lvPPA are extremely rare below this age cut -off).  
• Structural brain MRI done within the 3  years prior to enrollment.  
 
Exclusion criteria  
• Severe cognitive, auditory or visual impairments that would preclude cognitive testing.  
• Presence of major  untreated or unstable psychiatric  disease.  
• A chronic medical condition that is not treated or is unstable .  
• The presence of cardiac stimulators or pacemakers  
• Any m etal implants in the skull  
• Contraindications to MRI  
• History of seizures  
• History of dyslexia or other developmental learning disabilities . 
 
4.3. Subject Recruitment  
To enroll a total of 20 study participants, we anticipate pre-screening  and approaching  about 50 lvPPA patients  
who are seen in the MCW Neurology clinic s and the MCW Geropsychiatry clinic for standard care.  These 
patients will range in age from 45–85 years .  Recruitment efforts will be conducted exclusively in the MCW 
Neurology  and Geropsychiatry  clinic s initially but  may be expanded to in clude the greater metropolitan 
Milwaukee , WI area if needed.  The Medical College of Wisconsin ( MCW ) Dementia Research Team  has 
extensive experience recruiting patients from the clinic and the Milwaukee community, using flyers , press 
releases, and community presentations.    
 
5. STUDY VISIT S AND PROCEDURES  
5.1. Schedule of V isits 
A screening (Visit -1) session will be  conducted . This could take place  after a routine clinic visit , or by phone , 
to perform the Informed C onsent (I FC) discussion,  review inclusion criteria, collect demographics and basic 
medical history, and begin MRI safety screening.  The Language Battery will also be completed as part of the 
screening visit.  Additionally  (in the case  of those meeting criteria) , patients might visit the Tosa Health  Center  or 
Medical College of Wisconsin for stimulation planning.  This would entail  the use of a Transcranial Magnetic 
Stimulation (TMS) neuronavigation system . The Language battery and TMS can occur on two separate days 
prior to the first treatment visit  of Treatment Period 1.  Subjects will also  be invited to baseline  (Visit 1). At 
baseline, the study team will  complete fMRI and MEG scans and randomize participants to a treatment group.  
Procedures within Visit -1 and Visit 1 may be completed in any  reasonable order , and may overlap,  up to 3 
months  prior to the first treatment visit of Treatment Period 1.  At Visit 1 , subjects will receive tDCS while 
simultaneously completing the  reading and repetition “trained  tasks . Subjects will then return for 9 additional 
treatment sessions (Visits 2 -10) where they will receive stimulation or sham, along with trained task 
administration . At Visit 10 , subjects will receive MRI, MEG scans,  and the Language Battery . These procedures 
may be completed one month  after the last treatment session of Treatment  Period 1 .  At 8-weeks from the last 
Treatment  Period 1 visit, subjects will return for the first assessment session (Visit 1 1), in which  the Language 
battery, including the trained tasks will be repeat ed.  Subjects will then return 8 weeks later to begin the second 
series of treatments ( Treatment  Period 2, Visits 12-21) and receive MRI , MEG , and Language Battery  on visits 
12 and 21.  MRI, MEG, and the Language battery will be completed no greater than 3  month s prior to the first 
treatment session of Treatment Period 2,  then again no greater than one month  after the final treatment session 
of Treatment Period 2.   At each visit d uring Treatment  Period 2 , subjects will receive the cross- over treatment  
(either sham or stimulati on) while simultaneously completing the reading and non- word trained tasks . The final 
PRO32037 – HD-tDCS in lvPPA [ Protocol v 5.0]    10 
 assessment session (Visit 2 2) will be conducted 8 weeks post T reatment  Period 2. The Language battery , 
including the trained tasks , will be repeated at this final study visit.    
 
Refer to Table 1 for a schedule of study procedures.  
 5.2. Subject Retention  and Compensation  
Contact by telephone will be maintained with the subjects during the 16 -week washout period.  Subjects will be 
contacted at weeks  4, 8, and 16  of the wash -out period.  During  these calls , the study coordinator will inquire 
about potential adverse events  (AE) and remind subjects about their 8- week assessment visit and first Tx Period 
2 visit . Telephone contact will also be maintained during the 8- week  period between the end of Tx period 2 and 
the final assessment . Subjects will be contacted 4 and 8 weeks  after Tx period 2. During these calls the study 
coordinator will inquire about potential AE and remind subjects about thei r 8-week final assessment. The study 
staff will follow the data and safety monitoring plan described below  to monitor AEs .  
 
Subjects will be compensated for participation in the study. We will pay no stipend for the screen visit, $30 for 
visits 1, 10, 12, and 21, $7 for visits 2 -9 and 13 -20, and $17 for visits 11 and 22. The total stipend if all visits are 
completed is $266.  
 Subjects  may be reimbursed for any reasonable travel  expenses  as needed to attend study visits.  If subjects live 
25 miles or more one way from the study site, they will be reimbursed at the standard  MCW travel rate  of 
$0.56/mile.   
 If a study visit requires an overnight stay, subjects  will receive a $25 meal reimbursement per night.  
 
Subjects may be eligible to lodge at Kathy’s House if they  reside at a permanent address 50 miles or greater 
from Milwaukee. Kathy’s House is located on the Froedtert Hospital campus and provides housing f or research 
subjects who require a stay greater than 3 days.  
 
Payment for lodging at Kathy’s House will be arranged and covered by the study team. Care givers are expected 
to lodge with subjects to the extent possible.  
 
With the subject’s verbal consent, a referral can be sent by the study team to Kathy’s House. The following 
personal information will be included in the referral to Kathy’s House: subject and care giver name, date of birth, 
gender, city, state, zip code, phone number, email address, and reason for visit.  
 
Upon reception of the referral, Kathy’s House will conduct a formal background check using TruthFinder.com. 
The subject and caregiver’s names and birthdates will be used to check for any criminal charges associated with 
either person. Kathy’s House has the right to reject any referral based on this background check.  
 
The study team does not plan to reimburse for any other type of lodging.  
 5.3. Early Termination Visit  
If a subject decides  to exit the study, a termination visit will be scheduled. This will include all Language 
assessments normally performed at assessment  visits. In addition, any incidental imaging findi ngs will be 
addressed.  
 5.4. Study Procedures  
5.4.1. Informed Consent  
Participants will provide written informed consent  at the Visit -1. When feasible, informed consent will  be obtained  
right after a routine  clinic visit . The consent process will involve distributing a full consent form to the potential 
study participant and a thorough presentation of  the purpose and risks of the study, and an explanation of study 
procedures by the staff member obtaining consent. Sufficient  time for questions, discussion, and the subject’s 
decision will be allowed for proper informed consent by the participant. Once the participant fully understands the study protocol as outlined in the consent form, he/she will acknowledge his/her consent w ith a signature that 
PRO32037 – HD-tDCS in lvPPA [ Protocol v 5.0]    11 
 is placed directly below the text on the consent form. Each participant will receive a complete copy of the signed 
consent form for his/her personal records. The study coordinator will keep the original signed copy for study 
records.  
 5.4.2. Demographics, Medical History, and MRI Safety Screening  
Demographic information,  basic  medical history , and MRI safety screening begin at the screening visit  and are 
completed at baseline prior to any study participation by the subject.  Data are collected from participants 
including demographic information (age, gender, race, ethnicity), medical and surgical history, hospitalization 
history, medications and  supplements, and family history of illness. We will also ask questions pertaining to 
fluency in languages, education,  history of dyslexia or other developmental learning disabilities
, and work history .   
 
5.4.3 . Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (TMS)  neuronavigation  
The TMS can be used to determine optimal electrode positioning. Each patient’s individual head and brain 
anatomy can be modeled along with a  de-identified structural  brain MRI obtained prior to the visit. Once optimal 
electrode positions are determined, the patient’s structural MRI and the coordinates of the electrode positions 
will be uploaded into a neuronavigation software; the electrode positions can be converted into 3D spheres, 
which can then be loaded into the software. The neuronavigation software comes equipped with automatic 
segmentation algorithms that allow cortical and surface (3D curvilinear and skin) reconstructions based on the 
patient’s raw structural MRI. The electrode locations are then ov erlaid onto the reconstructed curvilinear brain.  
 
5.4.4. Language and Cognitive Assessments and Language Tasks  
Picture naming. A standardized set of 160 pictures will be tested (80 for each treatment period). The pictures 
are black and white drawings executed according to a set of rules to provide consistency of pictorial 
representation. Pictures will be presented on a computer sc reen and at the start of the task patients will be asked 
to name carefully and consistently. Each picture will be presented for a period of up to 10 seconds, and answers 
will be digitally recorded for later transcription and scoring. Approximate total time  will be 10 minutes. With this 
test we seek to detect changes in spontaneous word production resulting from the tDCS stimulation procedure. (Snodgrass & Vanderwart.,1980) . 
 
Alternatively, we will use the Neuropsychological Assessment Battery (NAB) naming sub -test. The NAB naming 
sub-test involves showing the examinee color photographs of objects, as opposed to black and white line 
drawings. The NAB naming test has fewer items (31), and all items are administered to test -takers, with no 
setting of a basal  level or discontinue criteria. Patients are allowed 10 seconds to freely recall the name of the 
item, and then are given 5 s after the semantic cue and 5 s after the phonemic cue, for a total of 20 possible 
seconds per item (Stern & White, 2003).  
Approximat e total testing time will be 10 minutes. 2 different versions of the test will be used (one for each 
treatment period).  
 
Letter and category fluency . We will test 3 letters and 2 categories using the Verbal fluency test from the Delis -
Kaplan Executive Function System (Delis et al., 2001a) . This subtest will require  the individual  to randomly 
generate words based on given parameters such as words beginning with the letter F. This test is based on the 
original FAS  verbal fluency test. The test  builds upon this by including a semantic  fluency test  that requires  
generating boy’s names and animal names .   
Estimated testing time: 6 minutes.  
 Digit span test.  Auditory attention span and working memory will be assessed using the digit span forward (DSF) 
and digit span backwards (DSB) subtests of the Wechsler memory scale –Fourth edition (Benson et al., 2010). 
The task was chosen due to its reliance on phonological short -term memory (STM), a function often impaired in 
lvPPA (Meyer et al. 2015). With this test we seek to detect changes in phonological STM resulting from the tDCS 
stimulation procedure.  
Estimated testing time: 5 minutes.  
 
Phonological Short -term Memory Test . This test assesses the capacity to retain speech sound information in a 
short -term memory store across a  5-second maintenance interval. The m aterial  is presented in the form of  
PRO32037 – HD-tDCS in lvPPA [ Protocol v 5.0]    12 
 digitally recorded na tural utterances  by a single talker , with syllable trains containing 1- 5 syllables (24 trials per 
length condition) . Participants will be asked to identify:  same pairs = first train followed by a different recording 
of the same items , versus different pairs = first train followed by a train differing in a single syllable . Testing will 
include a total of 120 items (60 for each treatment period), and responses will be selected by the patient using a 
touch screen system (Pillay et al., 2017). This experimental measure complements the more standard Digit Span 
test by assessing phonological short -term memory w ithout the articulatory demands of the Digit Span test.  
Estimated testing time: 10 minutes.  
 Word and non -word rhyme matching. This test assesses the ability to mentally access the sound of a printed 
word  (Pillay et al., 2014 ) or nonword (Pillay et al., 2017, 2018)  prior to articulation. Each trial consists of a sample 
word  or nonword  presented in the center of a computer display with two similar choice ite ms below the sample.  
The patient's task is to select the item that rhymes with the sample.
 Trials ar e constructed such that phonologic  
similarity is uncoupled from orthographic similarity  (e.g., does snow  rhyme with plow  or blow).  
Word rhyme matching: 40 word- triads (20 for each treatment period). 20 regular word triads with all regular 
words, and 20 irregular word triads with  one irregular  word.  
Nonword rhyme matching: 72 triads of w ord-like nonwords (36 for each treatment period). M atched on length 
and orthographic neighborhood size with the word triads used  in the word rhyme matching portion.  
Estimated testing time: 10 minutes.  
 
Spontaneous Speech Sample.  This task consists of picture description from the Boston Diagnostic Aphasia 
Examination (“Cookie Theft Picture”), in which the participant is asked to “Tell me everything you see going on 
in thi s picture.” Responses will be digitally recorded and later transcribed and analyzed. Since diagnostic criteria 
for lvPPA includes changes to spontaneous speech, obtaining an objective measure of discourse can detect 
subtle changes to speech and language that may be clinically meaningful (Ahmed et al., 2012; Wilson et al., 
2010). Specifically, through automated analyses we will measure semantic content, speech fluency, and timing 
measures such as words -per-minute (Ahmed et al., 2013; Mueller et al., 2017).  
Estimated testing time: 4 minutes.  
 Alternatively, we will use the o ral production sub-test of the NAB.  This sub-test uses a speech output task in 
which the examinee orally describes a picture of a family scene (Stern & White, 2003). 2 different versions of the 
family scene will be used (one per treatment condition).  
Estimated testing time: 4 minutes.  
 Reading Comprehension . We will use the reading comprehension sub-test of the NAB.  A two -part sub-test that 
requires the examinee to demonstrate reading comprehension of single words and of sentences by pointing to multiple choice sentences that match the visual stimuli  (Stern & White, 2003). 2 different versions of the test will 
be used (one for each treatment peri od).  
 Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA).  MoCA  is a widely used screening assessment for detecting cognitive 
impairment. It is a one- page 30- point test administered in approximately 10 minutes (Nasreddine et al. 2005). 3 
different versions of the test exist in English, and 2 will be used for each patient (one per treatment condition).  
 ‘Trained’ tasks . This includes  items tested at baseline and after treatment periods, with half of them also practiced  
(i.e. trained)  during all stimulation procedures (either sham or real  tDCS ). It will include the reading of words and 
non-words  and the repetition of non- words ( approximately  480 items , a total of 2 88 items for reading and 192 for 
repetition, divided across two treatmen t periods ). Non -word tasks were selected due to their reliance on the kind 
of phonologic mechanisms subserved by the dominant temporo- parietal cortex and impaired in lvPPA  (Pillay et 
al., 2017).  We will test vocal reaction times and the data will be analyzed using a Matlab custom script.  
Estimated testing time: 25 -30 minutes.  
 5.4.5. Neuroimaging Assessments   
The acquisition strategy for lvPPA  participants is to collect datasets that include resting- state fu nctional MRI (rs -
fMRI) , diffusion MRI (dMRI), and resting state magnetoencephalography ( rsMEG).  
 
PRO32037 – HD-tDCS in lvPPA [ Protocol v 5.0]    13 
 MRI Acquisition Protocols  
All lvPPA patients will undergo four 60 -minute 3T MRI scanning sess ions (total 4  hrs), including high- resolution 
T1 and T2 structural MRI, dMRI,  and rs -fMRI as summarized below. In the case of left handed participants  
(approximately 80% are left hemispheric dominant) , they will undergo a quick  fMRI test (~ 6 min) to confirm  their 
left hemispheric dominance (Binder et al. 1995).  
 
3T MRI Hardware:  Scanning will be done on GE MR 750 3T clinical scanners (50 mT/m & 200 T/m/s gradients) 
with a Nova 32- channel neuroimaging phased array receive head coil and whole- body rf transmission.  
 
3T MRI Pulse Sequences: fMRI and diffusion MRI acquisitions will use prototype GE pulse sequences from the 
"ProtoPak2" software package, made available to us by a research agreement with GE. These state- of-the-art 
sequences provide multi -band acquisition of fMRI and dMRI data, greatly accelerating the acquisitions and 
allowing reductions in voxel size and repetition time to match those of the HCP protocol.  
 
Resting -State FMRI (rs -fMRI) Protocol.  The rs -fMRI parameters will be  identical to the HCP Lifespan protocol, 
including an eyes -open fixation task, 30 minutes of rs -fMRI data divided into six 5-minute runs, and a 50:50 
alternation of phase encoding direction.   
 
Structural MRI Protocol.  T1-weighted structural images will be acquired using the GE "BRAVO" pulse sequence 
and "Cube" with "ARC" for T2- weighted images, which is a 3D fast spin echo sequence using GE’s autocalibrated 
parallel imaging technology. These vendor -supplied sequences provide comparable image quality to those of 
the HCP at the same 0.8 mm isotropic voxel size.  
 
Prior to fMRI scans, subjects will undergo MRI safety screening and, as detailed in sections 7.3. and 7.4., 
respectively.  
 
MEG Acquisition Protocol  
MEG offers relatively good spatial localization of neural activity sources together with millisecond temporal 
resolution not possible with hemodynamic imaging methods. All lvPPA patients will undergo resting state MEG 
recordings.  
 Our MEG is a V ectorview whole- head 306- channel system (Elekta Neuromag Ltd., Helsinki, Finland) that 
combines 102 magnetometers with 204 planar gradiometers. MEG Data will be acquired at 2000Hz with a 650Hz 
antialiasing lowpass filter.  Patients will be in the supine position and will focus on projection screen displaying a fixation crosshair. The recording protocol for rs -MEG will follow those of the Human Connectome Project.  
 Continuous Recognition Memory  task, (CRM task) : To be performed during MEG acquisition. The stimuli consist  
of 5 target words and 40 distractor words  repeated in 4 consecutive blocks , which are  read by a digitized native 
English speaker . The auditory stimuli  will be presented using E -Prime 1.2 software (Psychology Software Tools, 
Pittsburgh, PA) and delivered binaurally to the patient using Tubal Insert Earphones (TIP -300, Nicolet 
Biomedical, Madison, WI). Prior to the start of the MEG recording, the 5 target words w ill be  presented to the 
patient several times. During the language task patients keep  their eyes open and maintain visual fixation on a 
small square presented on a screen while listening to the words. Patients  are instructed to lift an index finger
 
when they recognized a target word. Alternatively, we may ask the patients  to press a button in order to document 
responses (Raghavan et al. 2017).  
Approximate duration: 30 minutes.  
 5.4.5. Randomization, Treatment  Dosing and Administration  
An unblinded member of the study team  will randomize participants to the treatment conditions .  Study Group 
assignment will be based on random number generation (in blocks of 4) followed by the creation of numbered 
envelopes.  
 
In Tx Period 1, study participants will receive either  stimulation (up to 2 mA in the targeted cortical tissue ) or 
sham ; in Tx Period 2, all subjects will crossover and receive the other treatment. This is a double- blind study, so 
PRO32037 – HD-tDCS in lvPPA [ Protocol v 5.0]    14 
 both the participants and the study team  members involved in language training, tDCS delivery,  and assessment 
of outcomes will be blind to the treatment received.  
 
The Soterix MXN -9 High -Definition stimulator will be used for focal current delivery; this device is cur rently 
housed at the ‘Computational Neuroscience and Neurotechnology lab’  at MCW (See Images 1 and 2).  
 
                                       
 
Images 1 and 2 : To the left (Image 1) , 9-channel HD -tDCS device (MXN -9, Soterix Medical Inc.). To the right (Image 2),  Soterix Medical 
HD-Cap  showing 4 X 1 High Definition montage.   
 When conducting HD-tDCS, specially designed insets, electrodes, stimulation pr otocols, and conductive gels 
will be  used. Appropriate instrumentation, electrode design, and protocols are considered important for HD -tDCS 
safety and comfort. All materials were purchased from Soterix Medical (New York, USA) . A flexible plastic EEG 
cap or a latex swim cap will be  placed on  each participant’s head.  The EEG cap will be held in place with a chin 
strap and if using a  swim cap, the latex material snuggly fits the participant’s head without a strap . To guarantee 
individualized targeting of the left  posterior  TPC, we will follow t he steps below with minor variations as required:  
1) The Soterix HD -Targets and/or  HD-Explore software programs  can be used to determine the optimal 
electrode positioning and stimulation current  based  on the identif ied brain target and the subject -specific 
predicted current flow . For this purpose, each patient’s individual head and brain anatomy can  be 
modeled by Soterix Medical  (prior to visit using the de-identified structural  brain  MRI obtained prior to 
enrollment as part of rou tine, clinical standard of care (see Image 3).  There are  freely available software 
packages such as SimNIBS 2.1 (Saturnino et al., 2018 bioRxiv) that can also be employed for 
individualized current  modeling. We will explore these alternative packages  to de termine the electrode 
positions and for current flow simulations. Guidelines from prior HD -tDCS modeling studies (Alam et al., 
2016) will also be considered for improving the focality of stimulation.  
2) Once optimal electrode positions are determined, the pa tient’s structural MRI and the coordinates of the 
electrode positions will be uploaded into a neuronavigation software; the electrode positions can be 
converted into 3D spheres, which can then be loaded into the software. The neuronavigation software 
comes equipped with automatic segmentation algorithms that allow cortical and surface ( 3D curvilinear 
and skin) reconstructions based on the patient’s raw structural MRI. The electrode locations are then 
overlaid onto the reconstructed curvilinear brain.  
3) During one of the pre -stimulation (baseline) visits, the cap will be  fitted to the patient and using the optical 
tracking tools and the neuronavigation software, we will navigate to the electrode locations from the brain 
surface onto the patient’s scalp. A permanent marker will be used to mark the electrode locations directly 
on the cap.  
 
 
 
 

PRO32037 – HD-tDCS in lvPPA [ Protocol v 5.0]    15 
  
Image 3:  Visualization example of HD -tDCS 
current flow model ing for an individual subject’s 
anatomy (depicted target site is the left posterior 
TPC, oblique view to the Left and coronal view to 
the Right ). Heat map color cor responds to higher 
field intensit y (mo deling was done at the 
Computational Neuroscience and 
Neurotechnology  lab using the Soterix Medical 
Neuro-Targeting Software).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
The electrode casings  or holders  will be secured in the cap at the marked locations. The skin prepping guidelines 
as listed in Villamar et al. (2013) will be followed: separating the hair inside the electrode casings  until the scalp 
is exposed, removing hair products and dirt on the scalp using an alcohol swab and then filling the electrode 
casings with 3 mL of Signa Gel (Parker Laboratories, NJ)  or HD -GELTM (Soterix Medical)  with more applied if 
needed. The electrodes will be placed on a platform inside the casings so that they are completely immersed in 
the gel. M ore gel will be applied to cover the electrodes and then they will be held in place with the casing caps. 
Impedance values will be examined for each of the 5 electrodes  (4 X 1 montage seen on image 2 ) and will all  
be verified to be <2 quality units (Turski  et al., 2017).  
 Stimulation sessions will consist of daily 20 -min sessions with a current of  up to 2 mA (sham or anodal) to the 
targeted cortical tissue for five consecutive days per week and for 2 consecutive weeks (10 sessions in total) .  
The device contains a double- blind switch  that can be turned to ON or OFF from the back of the device. Once  
the double- blind  mode is turned  ON, the device will not show any sham settings on the front and will not display 
any true current that is being delivered.  
 
Before treatment begins , a blinded member of the study team will fit the  cap, prep skin, and place  and immerse  
electrodes  into casing using gel . The  blinded study team member may be a research coordinator and/or research 
assistant, who are trained in the theory and application of the HD -tDCS device. An unblinded member of the 
study team  will program the device for each stimul ation setting,  turn the double- blind switch ON, and then leave 
the room. A blinded member of the team  will then deliver the stimulation without knowing if it is an active session 
or a sham session. The safe delivery of tDCS, even by non -professional caregivers, has been previously 
documented  (see Im et al, 2019) .  
 
Auto-sham automatically calculates and produces a sham waveform based on the indicated “real” waveform. 
For example, for a corresponding real waveform of 1.5 mA and 20 minutes, auto -sham will provide a ramp 
up/down to 1.5 mA at the start of stimulation  (for 30 seconds), and again after 20  minutes with the timer 
automatically adjusted such that the total run time is exactly matched to the real case (Poreisz et al.,  2007) .   
 
6. DATA MANAGEMENT  
6.1. A secure  web-based  system  will be used to enroll patients  and obtain the rando mly assigned treatm ent 
group.  Data forms will be printed,  completed, an d entered  into the database using  a secure  web-based  
application.  The database will be monitored for completeness,  consistency,  accuracy, and  timeliness. No  patient-
identifying information  will be stored in the database.  To ensure that data  are secure  from external  violation, 
computer sy stems containing study  data will be  password  protect ed, and physical access to the computer 
systems will be limited .  
 
6.2. Determination of c hanges in Language Function and Concurrent Improvement in Network Activity.  
The language and MRI/rfMRI  datasets will be obtained at baseline (before sham/active tDCS administration) and 
on the last day of each 2- week treatment period. These two time points will be denoted t = 1, 2. The two 10-

PRO32037 – HD-tDCS in lvPPA [ Protocol v 5.0]    16 
 subject groups, both of which will receive both sham and active tDCS at different treatment phase, will be denoted 
g = 1, 2. The set of Language (LG)  scores for subject s, from group  g, at time t will be denoted LG (s,g,t), where 
s = 1, …, 10 ; g = 1 , 2; and t = 1, 2. The Language -Network functional connectivity ( LFC) calculated between the 
left posterior temporal and inferior parietal  cortex for subject s, from group  g, at time t  will be denoted L FC(s,g,t).  
 
6.3. Language Changes Due to Stimulation.  Scores across all tests within the language battery will be 
combined into one composite measure to facilitate assessment of overall language performance across 
domains.  All seven  scores will be normalized to  a Z-score by transforming individual raw test scores according 
to the mean and standard deviation of the scores for all subjects. Then, Z-scores of each test will be averaged 
to obtain an individual composite language Z-score (McConathey et al., 2017) . We will employ  age, years of 
education, gender, and gray matter (GM) volume as time -invariant covariates to obtain res idual variables to 
determine the LG  changes due to stimulation. We will model the LG score as a function of these nuisance 
regressors . This regr ession will be performed using all the data (i.e., all subjects, all groups, and all times) : 
 
 
Define  𝜟𝜟𝜟𝜟𝜟𝜟� (𝒔𝒔,𝒈𝒈,𝒕𝒕)≡ 𝑹𝑹𝑹𝑹𝒔𝒔(𝒔𝒔,𝒈𝒈,𝒕𝒕). We will test the residuals 𝜟𝜟𝜟𝜟𝜟𝜟� (𝒔𝒔,𝒈𝒈,𝒕𝒕) using a three -factor crossed -nested 
ANOVA, with fixed factors group and time, and random factor subject  nested within group. We will test for group 
and time main effects, as well as the group × time interaction. If we find significant main effects or interactions, 
we will perform post hoc procedures to determine which time and group combinations are significantly different .  
 
6.4. Functional -Connectivity Changes Due to Stimulation.  We will use the well established Human 
Connectome Project (HCP) fMRI processing pipelines implemented by Dr. Binder's group at MCW, which include 
state -of-the-art noise removal, spatial normalization, and surface- based cortical parcellation methods.  
 
Func tional connectivity matrices will be computed by first parcellating the brain into multiple regions of interest 
(ROI), averaging the preprocessed fMRI signal over each ROI, and then computing the Z- transformed correlation 
coefficient between every ROI pair . The functional connectivity of a number of different parcellation schemes will 
be examined. This includes anatomical atlas based parcellation, such as the Harvard Oxford atlas, a validated 
probabilistic atlas implemented in FSL that divides each hemisphere into 56 regions corresponding to portions 
of cortical gyri and subcortical gray matter nuclei; combined anatomical and functional parcellation of regions 
that tend to co- activate during resting state, as implemented in S tatistical Parametric Mapping  (Tzourio -Mazoyer, 
N., et al., 2002)  and purely functional delineations such as the Crad- 200, a constrained spectral clustering of 
resting state fMRI data into 200 parcels encompassing both cortical and subcortical regions, and a high model 
order Independent  component analysis ( ICA), as advocated by HCP investigators. Targeted exploration of 
connectivity driven by current understandi ng of the pathophysiology of lvPPA  will also be pursued.  
We will employ  age, years of education, gender, and gray matter (GM) v olume as time- invariant covariates to 
obtain res idual variables to determine LFC  changes  due to stimulation. We will model the L FC as a function of 
these nuisance regressors, using the following multiple linear regression equation, and retain the residuals as 
𝐿𝐿𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅+(𝑠𝑠,𝑡𝑡) for further analysis:  
 
 
where 𝐿𝐿𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹+� (𝑠𝑠,𝑔𝑔,𝑡𝑡)≡ 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑠𝑠(𝑠𝑠,𝑔𝑔,𝑡𝑡). This regression will be performed using all  of the data (i.e., all subjects, all 
groups, and all times). We will test the residuals 𝐿𝐿𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹+� (𝑠𝑠,𝑔𝑔,𝑡𝑡) using three -factor crossed -nested analysis of 
variance (ANOVA) , with fixed factors of group and time and a random factor of subject  nested within group (i.e., 
all subjects will be tested at all times, but the sham and stimulation groups will contain different t reatment phases. 
We will test for both group and time main effects, as well as for the group × time interaction. If we find significant 
main effects or interactions, we will perform post hoc procedures to determine which time and group (i.e., sham 
Vs. stimulation) combinations are significantly different.  
 6.5. Prediction of Changes in C orrelation Between LFC and LG  Before and After tDCS . A multiple linear 
regression is used to model LG as a linear function of LFC and test the difference in slope and intercept between 
the active stimulation and sham  groups. If the subject  is in the active stimulation  group, A(s,g) = 1; if the subject 
is in the sham  (placebo)  group,  A(s,g) = 0.
  𝜟𝜟𝜟𝜟𝜟𝜟 (𝒔𝒔,𝒈𝒈,𝒕𝒕)=𝜷𝜷𝟎𝟎+𝜷𝜷𝟏𝟏𝑨𝑨𝒈𝒈𝑹𝑹(𝒔𝒔)+ 𝜷𝜷𝟐𝟐𝑬𝑬𝑬𝑬𝑬𝑬 (𝒔𝒔)+𝜷𝜷𝟑𝟑𝜟𝜟𝑮𝑮(𝒔𝒔)+ 𝜷𝜷𝟒𝟒𝜟𝜟𝑹𝑹𝑮𝑮𝑬𝑬𝑹𝑹𝑮𝑮 (𝒔𝒔) +𝑹𝑹𝑹𝑹𝒔𝒔(𝒔𝒔,𝒈𝒈,𝒕𝒕) 
   
 
𝜟𝜟𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹(𝑠𝑠,𝑡𝑡)=𝛽𝛽0+𝛽𝛽1𝐴𝐴𝑔𝑔𝑅𝑅 (𝑠𝑠)+ 𝛽𝛽2𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸 (𝑠𝑠)+𝛽𝛽3𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺(𝑠𝑠)+ 𝛽𝛽4𝐺𝐺𝑅𝑅𝐺𝐺𝐸𝐸𝑅𝑅𝐺𝐺(𝑠𝑠)+𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑠𝑠(𝑠𝑠,𝑔𝑔,𝑡𝑡)  
PRO32037 – HD-tDCS in lvPPA [ Protocol v 5.0]    17 
 𝜟𝜟𝜟𝜟(𝒔𝒔,𝒈𝒈)=𝜷𝜷𝟎𝟎,𝟎𝟎+𝜷𝜷𝟎𝟎,𝟏𝟏𝑨𝑨(𝒔𝒔,𝒈𝒈)+ 𝜷𝜷𝟏𝟏,𝟎𝟎𝜟𝜟𝑳𝑳𝑳𝑳 (𝒔𝒔)+𝜷𝜷𝟏𝟏,𝟏𝟏𝜟𝜟𝑳𝑳𝑳𝑳 (𝒔𝒔)𝑨𝑨(𝒔𝒔,𝒈𝒈) +𝑹𝑹𝑹𝑹𝒔𝒔(𝒔𝒔) 
Here, LFC(s) represents baseline LFC for subject s (for simplicity, nuisance regressors are not shown).  
 
6.6. Changes in Spontaneous Neuronal Oscillatory Patterns and synchronizations due to Stimulation   
The rsMEG  datasets will be obtained at baseline (before sham/active tDCS administration) and on the last day 
of each 2 -week treatment period. For data analysis w e will use the well established Epilepsy Connectome Project 
(ECP) MEG methods, currently used at MCW.  A scalp digitization will be generated during each session of the 
MEG procedure that includes anatomical landmarks and localizer coils.  The MEG data will be co -registered to 
the MRI  using a minimization of the distance from the digitized headshape to the MR I derived scalp surface.   
The localizer coils will provide the position of the patients head relative to the MEG sensors.  Sensor level activity 
will be projected to the cortical surface using minimum norm based spatial filters with anatomical priors.  The  
cortical surface will be downsampled to approximately 8000 vertices; the orientation and location will act as priors 
on solving the transformation from sensor space to source space, known as the inverse solution.  Data from the 
cortical surface will be sp atially averaged over the anatomical parcellations.  These parcellated timeseries will 
be used to calculate band- limited connectivity measures.  Targeted exploration of connectivity driven by current 
understanding of the pathophysiology of lvPPA will also be pursued.  
 
Connectivity between all ROI -pairs w ill be calculated in the theta (4- 8 Hz), alpha (8- 12 Hz), beta (13 -30 Hz), and 
low-gamma (30- 55 Hz) frequency bands using three different metrics: coherence (COH), phase lag index (PLI), 
and debiased weighted phase lag index (d- wPLI). Mean connection strengths w ithin 3 intra -hemispheric 
language- specific ROI -groups, and those between all intra -hemispheric ROIs will be  computed. We will also 
compute  mean connection strengths between language ROI -groups and all remaining brain ROIs, and those 
between each hemispher ic ROI and all other brain ROIs.  
 The same multiple linear regression models used for the analysis of rsfMRI data will be used for the analysis of 
rsMEG data (for simplicity, regression equations are not shown). See above for details.  
 
6.7. Expected Resul ts, Deliverable,  and Problems  
Through this study , we expect to realize two goals: Scientifically,  we will demonstrat e that active HD -tDCS can 
increase language- network functional connectivity and  improve abnormal patterns of resting state neuronal 
frequencies and  synchronizations .  Clinically, we expect that the changes in network activity  after the 2 -week 
stimulation  period will lead to  language improvement.  This study can provide conceptual proof for a rehabilitation  
intervention.    In addition, t his study will provide information and address the power of adequate enrollment, 
protocol adherence, subject retention, and safety for future pilot and pivotal trials.  
 
6.8. Data Sharing  
Subjects  will provide written informed consent via an addendum consent form, noting their  permission for the 
study team to share all data collected throughout their participation in the study  with UW-Madison collaborator 
PRO32037 – HD-tDCS in lvPPA [ Protocol v 5.0]    18 
 Kimberly Mueller, PhD in the Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders and her  team . Dr. 
Mueller and her team  will analyze the study data and provide statistical support to the MCW  study team.  
 
The following data will be sent to Dr. Mueller in a secure and protected manner : 
• Study ID number  
• Dates of visits and consent  
• Demographic information, such as age, year of birth, sex, handedness, race, ethnicity, educational 
history, and childbearing potential  
• Medical history, such as medical/neurological diagnoses and medications  
• Randomization information 
• Adverse events  
• TMS Neuronavigation data 
• Performance on cognitive and language tests  
• Voice recordings and speech samples  
• Images from MRI scan 
• Recordings from MEG scan  
 
Once data analysis and statistical support are complete, Dr. Mueller send results back to the study team, 
where they will be stored for the duration of the study.  
 
The data we provide will not contain any information that can directly identify  subjects.  
 7. DATA SAFETY  MONITORING PLAN  
An appointed DSMB will  discuss the ethical conduct of the trial, review event definitions and the subject ICF 
form, and further develop plans for monitoring the data and safety of the trial.  The DSMB  will meet at least 
annually  to review the course of the trial.  The DSMB agrees to communicate with institutional review board 
(IRB)/human subject committees to provide reassurances, as appropriate . There will be three DSMB members 
with th e following areas of expertise:  
 
• Neural mechanism underlining language and memory  disorder s.  
• Neuroimaging 
• Psychology of Language and Memory Loss .  
 
7.1. Safety Plan 
The safety issues in  this study are related to use of HD-tDCS and acquisition of fMRI  and MEG  data. This study 
uses a well-known HD-tDCS montage at a safe dose of current .  Previous studies on the safety and tolerabi lity 
of tDCS have shown that a  2-mA current applied for 20 minutes is associated with no serious AEs  (Brunoni et 
al., 2011 ).  The AEs most often associated with HD -tDCS are not associated with long -term, deleterious effects , 
and instead are typically mild and transient  in nature. The most commonly reported AEs are itching, tingling, mild 
headache, mild fatigue and localized burning sensation  at the site of stimulation.  (Brunoni et al ., 2011) .  We will 
assess AEs using a customized questionnaire ( Attachment 1).  The questionnaire will be performed immediately 
after each tDCS session and during the phone follow -up calls scheduled between treatment periods.   
  
7.2. MRI Safety  
The MRI scanner device is a U.S. Food and Drug Administration ( FDA)-cleared device for safe and noninvasive 
imaging of the interior of the human body. The GE MR75 0 MRI uses a 32 -channel receive- only head coil, which 
is an investigational device. See  below for further information on the 32 -chanel receive -only head coil.  The 
proposed MRI scans are NOT for a use of substantial importance in diagnosing, curing, mitigating, or treating disease or otherwise preventing impairment of human health,  and they do not present a potential for serious risk 
to the health, safety, or welfare of a subject. The scanner also restricts the software from exceeding FDA safety 
levels. The scanner monitors the SAR for research scans just as it does for all other scans. Thus, the scanner 
PRO32037 – HD-tDCS in lvPPA [ Protocol v 5.0]    19 
 with the software fully engaged operates, from a technical design and functional standpoint, as a nonsignificant 
risk device in accordance with 21 CFR 812. By staying below these limits, the operating conditions of the MRI 
device are generally deemed, in and of themselves, to make the MRI device a nonsignificant r isk device.  
 
The Nova Medical 32- channel head coil (model number NMSC075- 32-3GE-MR750) is an investigational device 
that is not approved by FDA for clinical use. This coil device includes multiple features for safe operation involving 
human studies. The 32 -channel coil is designed and constructed as a receive- only detector of RF signals that 
are emitted by the brain following the RF excitation generated by the GE Healthcare MRI scanner, which is FDA approved. During the RF excitation by the scanner, the coil device is decoupled (made inactive) through 
redundant circuitry; thus, the coil device never transmits RF to the subject and, therefore, it has no impact on 
subject risk or safety.  
 
More specifically, the coil design and construction include the follow ing safety features: 1)  High-voltage 
breakdown (>2  kV) UL -94V0 flame retardant housing. 2) Rugged  construction to ensure safe operation in case 
of rough handling. 3) Active detuning circuitry providing greater than 35 db  isolation per element. 4)  High power 
passive  detuning circuits in case primary detuning circuitry fails. 5)  Multiple common mode traps in all receive 
coil cables. 6)  Minimum of 5 mm spacing between coil conductors  and patient contact.  
 Additionally, the c oil was designed and manufactured under an ISO 13485 certified quality management system. 
As part of this quality system, Nova Medical has conducted  a failure means and effects analysis (FEMA) of this 
produc t, and we feel that it is a  nonsignificant risk under foreseeable normal conditions when used on the 3T GE 
X750 MRI scanners at MCW . 
 7.3. MRI Safety Screening 
MCW -specific magnetic resonance ( MR) safety screening procedures will be followed. All participants will be 
screened for medical devices, implants, and metal prior to undergoing MRI, first at  the screening  and baseline 
visits (Visit s -1 and 1 ) and again prior to V isits 10, 12, and 22.  If it is necessary to review medical records to 
confirm contraindication, a review of medical records (e.g., previous surgeries) will take place prior to the 
scheduled visit. During the screening process, participants will also be questioned abou t their ability to 
temporarily remove transdermal patches (such as birth control or nicotine patches). Women of child- bearing 
potential will be asked to confirm that they are not pregnant when signing the ICF. If a woman has concerns or 
is uncertain of her  pregnancy status, she will be excluded, as the risks of an MRI scan to pregnant women are 
currently unknown. The risks related to an MRI are minimal for a properly administered visit. The MR technicians are trained and prepared to deal with any problems t hat may arise.  
 7.4. Incidental Findings  by MRI  
The study subjects to be recruited for this study are generally  healthy. Sometime s, however, a few incidental 
abnormalities may be found in study subjects, s uch as brain tumors, vascular lesions, moderate to severe white 
matter lesion load, and other neuroradiological abnormalities that would preclude subjects from being included 
in the analysis, or that are clinical abnormalities requiring follow -up. These subjects will be advised to see their 
physicians for formal assessment. Dr. Granadillo is a board -certified neurologist  at MCW . He will consult with 
the subjects in such cases.  
 
7.5 Magnetoencephalography (MEG) Risks:  
There are no health risks associated with MEG, but there is some risk of discomfort. During MEG recording, due 
to restriction of head movements and being in a small room, some people may experience an unpleasant feeling 
of confinement or discomfort from sitting still for a long tim e. 
 7.6. Subject Safety  
Due to the duration and low dose of stimulation,  we anticipate this study to present  minimal risk to subjects . We 
do not expect frequen t or sever e AEs to occur . Subjects will be instru cted to call the study site concerning any 
adverse events or illnesses  that may occur . The DSMB will review the frequency and severity of any AEs. 
Stopping rules will be invoked for the subject and study if AE s are reported above the 5% threshold. Subject 
safety will be closely monitored during the study period, and individual participation in the study may be 
PRO32037 – HD-tDCS in lvPPA [ Protocol v 5.0]    20 
 suspended or terminated pending resolution of the AE. Safeguards to ensure subject confidentiality will consist 
of maintaining records in a locked cabinet in a locked room in the Department of Neurology research offices. All 
computers are password protected  and encrypted to further ensure safety.  
 
7.7. Data   
The time frame for data analysis will be at the time point when 50% of subjects have been recruited. AE  data 
analysis will be performed every 6  months. Plans for unexpected problems involving risk to participants or others 
will consist in notification of the principal investigator  in order to activate appropriate medical or professional 
intervention as needed.  
 
7.8. Efficacy   
Given the pilot nature of this study, two feasibility outcomes will be included: Consent rate and treatment 
completion rate. Only four  patients are sufficient to calculate a 90% exact binomial confidence interval of (.56, 1) 
if all four are observed to complete treatment.  Thus, this sample size would be large enough to potentially  
exclude completion rates of 56%  or lower. The collection of pilot data from this study will provide initial estimates 
of the variability and the effect sizes. This information will then be used for the more formal calculations of power 
and sample size necessary to conduct a future trial.  
 
7.10. Feedback Mechanism   
Evaluation and response to any subject  complaints will be reviewed by the DSM B. The IRB will be notified of 
protocols violations  and emergence of unexpected AEs at  any time during the study. In addition,  a report by the 
DSMB will be provided to the IRB at the end of the study.  
 
Table 1 . Schedule of Study P rocedures.   
Period  
Screen  Treatment Period 1  Assessment 1ab  
Treatment Period 2  Assessment 2b 
Visit  -1 1 2-9 10 11  12 13-20 21 22 
Visit 
window  -3 months  -3 
months  +1 
mo
nth +1 
month  ±1 month  -3 
months  +1 
month  +1 
month  ±1 month  
Informed 
Consent  X         
Inclusion/E
xclusion 
Criteria  X         
Demograph
ics X         
Medical 
History  X         
MRI Safety 
Screening  X     X    
Language 
Battery  Xj   Xfh X Xi  Xfh X 
Training  
Tasks   X X X X X X X X 
fMRIc  Xg  Xh  Xi  Xh  
MEG   Xg  Xh  Xi  Xh  
Randomizat
ion  X        
tDCS   X X X  X X X  
Phone 
Follow Up/      X     
PRO32037 – HD-tDCS in lvPPA [ Protocol v 5.0]    21 
  
 
 
  Visit 
Reminderd 
Adverse 
Eventsd  X X X X X X X X 
TMS 
Neuronavig
ation (for 
stimulation 
planning)e Xj         
a Assessment 1, Visit 11  occurs in the middle of the 16 -week washout period.  
b In the case of early termination, Assessment Visit procedures will be performed.  
c Subjects will undergo mock scanner training. If a subject has been previously engaged in MRI as part of 
research, the subject may be excused from mock scanner training.  
d Phone Follow -Ups will be conducted during the 16- week washout period.  They will be conducted 4 
weeks post T reatment  Period 1, 1 week prior to Assessment Visit 1, and 1 week prior to T reatment  
Period 2.  AE review will be completed, and reminders for upcoming visits provided.  
e TMS Neuronavigation will occur at the investigators discreti on. 
f Language assessment sessions will be conducted after T reatment  periods 1 and 2 (visit 10 for period 1 
and visit  21 for period 2).  
g These procedures can occur on 2 or more separate days, but within 3 months before the first treatment 
session of Treatment Period 1. They may overlap with Visit - 1 procedures.  
h These procedures can occur on 2 or more separate days, but within 1 month after the last treatment 
session of Treatment Period 1 or the last treatment session of Treatment Period 2.  
i These procedures can occur on 2 or more separate days, but within 3 months before the first treatment 
session of Treatment Period 2.  
j These procedures will take place after  Informed Consent is signed, but can occur on 2 or more days 
prior to first treatment visit. They may overlap with Visit 1 procedures.  
PRO32037 – HD-tDCS in lvPPA [ Protocol v 5.0]    22 
 8. REFERENCES :  
 
1. Abel S, Weiller C, Huber W, Willmes  K, Specht K. Therapy -induced brain reorganization patterns in 
aphasia. Brain. 2015 Apr;138(Pt 4):1097- 112. doi:10.1093/brain/awv022. Epub 2015 Feb 15. PubMed 
PMID: 25688082.  
2. Ahmed, S., de Jager, C. A., Haigh, A. M. F., & Garrard, P. (2012). Logopenic aphasia in Alzheimer's 
disease: clinical variant or clinical feature?  J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry , 83(11), 1056- 1062.  
3. Ahmed, S., de Jager, C. A., Haigh, A. M., & Garrard, P. (2013). Semantic processing in connected 
speech at a uniformly early stage of autopsy -confirmed Alzheimer's disease.  Neuropsychology , 27(1), 
79. 
4. Alam, M, Truong D, Khadka, N, Bikson, M (2016). Spatial and polarity precision of concentric high-
definition transcranial direct current stimulation (HD -tDCS). Phys Med Biol, 61(12), 4506- 21. 
5. Baker JM, Rorden C, Fridriksson J. Using transcranial direct -current stimulation to treat stroke patients 
with aphasia. Stroke. 2010 Jun;41(6):1229- 36. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.109.576785. Epub 2010 Apr 
15. PubMed PMID: 20395612; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC2876210.  
6. Benson N, Hulac DM, Kranzler JH. Independent examination of the Wechsler Adult  Intelligence Scale-
Fourth Edition (WAIS -IV): what does the WAIS -IV measu re? Psychol Assess. 2010 Mar;22(1):121- 30. 
doi: 10.1037/a0017767. PubMed PMID:  20230158.  
7. Binder JR, Pillay SB, Humphries CJ, Gross WL, Graves WW, Book DS. Surface errors without semantic 
impairment in acquired dyslexia: a voxel -based lesion- symptom mapping study. Brain. 2016 May;139(Pt 
5):1517 -26. doi:10.1093/brain/aww029. Epub 2016 Mar 10. PubMed PMID: 26966139; PubMed Central 
PMCID: PMC5006249.  
8. Binder JR, Rao SM, Hammeke TA, et al. Lateralized Human Brain Language Systems Demonstrated by Task Subtraction Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging. Arch Neurol.  1995;52(6):593 –601. 
doi:10.1001/archneur.1995.00540300067015.  
9. Brunoni AR, Amadera J, Berbel B, Volz MS, Rizzerio BG, Fregni F. A systematic review on reporting and assessment of adverse effects associated with transcranial direct current stimulation.  Int J 
Neuropsychopharmacol.  2011 Sep;14( 8):1133- 45. doi: 10.1017/S1461145710001690. Epub 2011 Feb 
15. 
10. Cotelli M, Manenti R, Petesi M, Brambilla M, Cosseddu M, Zanetti O, Miniussi C, Padovani A, Borroni B. 
Treatment of primary progressive aphasias by transcranial direct current stimulation combined with 
language training. J Alzheimers Dis. 2014;39(4):799- 808. doi: 10.3233/JAD -131427. PubMed PMID: 
24296814.  
11. Dancause N, Barbay S, Frost SB, Plautz EJ, Chen D, Zoubina EV, Stowe AM, Nudo RJ. Extensive cortical rewiring after brain injury. J Neurosci. 2005 Nov 2;25(44):10167 -79. PubMed PMID: 16267224.  
12. Darkow R, Martin A, Würtz A, Flöel A, Meinzer M. Transcranial direct current stimulation effects on neural processing in post -stroke aphasia. Hum Brain Mapp. 2017 Mar;38(3):1518- 1531. doi: 
10.1002/hbm.23469 . Epub 2016 Nov 11. PubMed PMID: 27859982.  
13. Datta A, Bansal V, Diaz J, Patel J, Reato D, Bikson M. Gyri -precise head model of transcranial direct 
current stimulation: improved spatial focality using a ring electrode versus conventional rectangular pad. 
Brain Stimul. 2009 Oct;2(4):201 -7, 207.e1. PubMed PMID: 20648973; PubMed Central PMCID: 
PMC2790295.  
14. Datta A, Truong D, Minhas P, Parra LC, Bikson M. Inter -Individual Variation during Transcranial Direct 
Current Stimulation and Normalization of Dose Using MRI -Derived Computational Models. Front 
Psychiatry. 2012 Oct 22; 3:91. doi:10.3389/fpsyt.2012.00091. eCollection 2012. PubMed PMID: 
23097644; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC3477710.  
15. Delis, D.C., Kaplan, E., & Kramer, J.H. (2001a). The Delis -Kaplan Executive Function System: 
Examiner's Manual. San Antonio: The Psychological Corporation.  
16. Edwards D, Cortes M, Datta A, Minhas P, Wassermann EM, Bikson M. Physiological and modeling 
evidence for focal transcranial electrical brain stimulation in humans: A basis for high- definition tDCS. 
PRO32037 – HD-tDCS in lvPPA [ Protocol v 5.0]    23 
 NeuroImage. 2013; 74:266- 275. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.01.042. PMCID: PMC4359173 
NIHMSID: NIHMS655109 PMID: 23370 061.  
17. Fertonani A, Brambilla M, Cotelli M, Miniussi C. The timing of cognitive plasticity in physiological aging: 
a tDCS study of naming. Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience. 2014; 6:131. doi:10.3389/fnagi.2014.00131.  
PMCID: PMC4068214 PMID: 25009493.  
18. Fritsch B, Reis J, Martinowich K, Schambra HM, Ji Y, Cohen LG, Lu B. Direct current stimulation 
promotes BDNF- dependent synaptic plasticity: potential implications for motor learning. Neuron. 2010 
Apr 29;66(2):198 -204. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2010.03.035. PubMed PMID: 20434997; PubMed Central 
PMCID: PMC2864780.  
19. Garcia -Cossio E, Witkowski M, Robinson SE, Cohen LG, Birbaumer N, Soekadar SR. Simultaneous 
transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) and whole- head magnetoencephalography (MEG): 
assessing the impact of tDCS on slow cortical magnetic fields. Neuroimage. 2016 Oct 15; 140:33- 40. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.09.068. Epub 2015 Oct 9. PubMed PMID: 26455796; PubMed Central 
PMCID: PMC5108059.  
20. Gorno -Tempini ML, Brambati  SM, Ginex V, Ogar J, Dronkers NF, Marcone A, Perani D, Garibotto V, 
Cappa SF, Miller BL. The logopenic/phonological variant of primary progressive aphasia. Neurology. 
2008 Oct 14;71(16):1227- 34. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000320506. 79811.da. Epub 2008 Jul 16. PubMed 
PMID: 18633132; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC2676989.  
21. Gorno -Tempini ML, Hillis AE, Weintraub S, Kertesz A, Mendez M, Cappa SF, Ogar JM, Rohrer JD, lack 
S, Boeve BF, Manes F, Dronkers NF, Vandenberghe R, Rascovsky K, Patterson K, Miller BL, Knopman DS, Hodges JR, Mesulam MM, Grossman M. Classification of primary progressive aphasia and its 
variants. Neurology. 2011 Mar 15;76(11):1006 -14. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e31821103e6. Epub 2011 
Feb 16. PubMed PMID: 21325651; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC3059138.  
22. Hardy CJD, Agustus JL, Marshall CR, Clark CN, Russell LL, Brotherhood EV, Bond RL, Fiford CM, 
Ondobaka S, Thomas DL, Crutch SJ, Rohrer JD, Warren JD. Functional neuroanatomy of speech signal 
decoding in primary progressive aphasias. Neurobiol Aging. 2017 Aug; 56:190 -201. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2017.04.026. Epub 2017 May 10. PubMed PMID: 28571652; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC5476347.  
23. Hogeveen J, Grafman J, Aboseria M, David A, Bikson M, Hauner KK. Effects of High- Definition and 
Conventional tDCS on Response Inhibition. Brain Stimul. 2016 Sep- Oct;9(5):720 -9. doi: 
10.1016/j.brs.2016.04.015. Epub 2016 Apr 22. PubMed PMID: 27198577.  
24. Hung J, Bauer A, Grossman M, Hamilton RH, Coslett HB, Reilly J. Semantic Feature Training in Combination with Transcranial Direct Current  Stimulation (tDCS) for Progressive Anomia. Frontiers in 
Human Neuroscience. 2017; 11:253. doi:10.3389/fnhum.2017.00253. PMCID: PMC5432627 PMID: 28559805.  
25. Im JJ, Jeong H, Bikson M, Woods AJ, Unal G, Oh JK, Na S, Park JS, Knotkova H, Song IU, Chung YA. Effects of 6 -month at -home transcranial direct current stimulation on cognition and cerebral glucose 
metabolism in Alzheimer's disease. Brain Stimul. 2019 Jun 4. pii: S1935- 861X(19)30228 -1. doi: 
10.1016/j.brs.2019.06.003. [Epub ahead of print] PubMed PMID: 31196835.  
26. Kuo HI, Bikson M, Datta A, Minhas P, Paulus W, Kuo MF, Nitsche MA. Comparing cortical plasticity 
induced by conventional and high- definition 4 × 1 ring tDCS: a neurophysiological study. Brain Stimul. 
2013 Jul;6(4):644 -8. doi: 10.1016/j.brs.2012.09. 010. Epub 2012 Oct 13. PubMed PMID: 23149292.  
27. Lomas J, Pickard L, Bester S, Elbard H, Finlayson A, Zoghaib C. The communicative effectiveness index: 
development and psychometric evaluation of a functional communication measure for adult aphasia. J 
Speech H ear Disord. 1989 Feb;54(1):113- 24. PubMed PMID: 2464719.  
28. Marangolo P, Fiori V, Calpagnano MA, et al. tDCS over the left inferior frontal cortex improves speech production in aphasia. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience. 2013; 7:539. doi:10.3389/fnhum.2013.00539.  
PMCID: PMC3764371 PMID: 24046740.  
29. McConathey EM, White NC, Gervits F, et al. Baseline Performance Predicts tDCS -Mediated 
Improvements in Language Symptoms in Primary Progressive Aphasia. Frontiers in Human 
Neuroscience. 2017; 11:347. doi:10.3389/fnhum .2017.00347. PMCID: PMC5492829 PMID: 28713256.  
PRO32037 – HD-tDCS in lvPPA [ Protocol v 5.0]    24 
 30. Mendez MF, Lee AS, Joshi A, Shapira JS. Nonamnestic presentations of early -onset Alzheimer's 
disease. Am J Alzheimers Dis Other Demen. 2012 Sep;27(6):413- 20. doi: 10.1177/1533317512454711. 
Epub 2012 Aug 7. PubMed PMID:22871906; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC3625669.  
31. Meyer AM, Snider SF, Campbell RE, Friedman RB. Phonological Short -Term Memory in Logopenic 
Variant Primary Progressive Aphasia and Mild Alzheimer’s Disease. Cortex; a journal devoted to the 
study of the nervous system and behavior . 2015; 71:183- 189. doi: 10.1016/j.cortex.2015.07.003.  PMCID: 
MC4521400 NIHMSID: NIHMS709257 PMID: 26232551.  
32. Monti A, Cogiamanian F, Marceglia S, Ferrucci R, Mameli F, Mrakic -Sposta S, Vergari M, Zago S, Priori 
A. Improved naming after transcranial direct current stimulation in aphasia. J Neurol Neurosurg 
Psychiatry. 2008 Apr;79(4):451 -3. Epub 2007 Dec 20. PubMed PMID: 18 096677.  
33. Mueller, K. D., Koscik, R. L., Hermann, B. P., Johnson, S. C., & Turkstra, L. S. (2018). Declines in 
Connected Language Are Associated with Very Early Mild Cognitive Impairment: Results from the 
Wisconsin Registry for Alzheimer’s Prevention.  Fronti ers in aging neuroscience,  9, 437.  
34. Muthalib M, Besson P, Rothwell J, Perrey S. Focal Hemodynamic Responses in the Stimulated 
Hemisphere During High- Definition Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation. Neuromodulation. 2017 Jul 
17. doi: 10.1111/ner.12632. [E pub ahead of print] PubMed PMID: 28714545.  
35. Nasreddine ZS, Phillips NA, Bédirian V, Charbonneau S, Whitehead V, Collin I, Cummings JL, 
Chertkow H (2005). "The Montreal Cognitive Assessment, MoCA: a brief screening tool for mild 
cognitive impairment". J Am G eriatr Soc. 53 (4): 695– 9. doi:10.1111/j.1532 -5415.2005.53221.x. PMID 
15817019 
36. Pillay SB, Gross WL, Graves WW, Humphries C, Book DS, Binder JR. The Neural Basis of Successful 
Word Reading in Aphasia. J Cogn Neurosci. 2018 Apr;30(4):514 -525. doi: 10.1162/jocn_a_01214. Epub 
2017 Dec 6. PubMed PMID: 29211656.  
37. Pillay SB, Ivory A, Humphries C, Book DS, & Binder JR. (2015). Neural correlates of impaired articulation 
speed in aphasia: A voxel -based lesion- symptom tms study. Society for the Neurobiology of Language, 
Baltimore, MD, USA.  
38. Pillay SB, Kraegel P, Book DS, & Binder JR. (2017). Lesion localization of a shared phonologic 
representation deficit on reading, rhyming, repetition, and short -term memory tasks. Society for the 
Neurobiology of Language, Balt imore, MD, USA.  
39. Pillay SB, Stengel BC, Humphries C, Book DS, Binder JR. Cerebral Localization of Impaired Phonological 
Retrieval During Rhyme Judgment. Annals of neurology . 2014;76(5):738 -746. doi:10.1002/ana.24266. 
PMCID: PMC4214892 NIHMSID: NIHMS624987 P MID: 25164766.  
40. Poreisz C, Boros K, Antal  A, Paulus W. Safety aspects of transcranial direct current stimulation 
concerning healthy subjects and patients. Brain Res Bull. 2007 May 30;72(4- 6):208- 14. Epub 2007 Jan 
24. PubMed PMID: 17452283.  
41. Ranasinghe KG, Hinkley LB, Beagle AJ, Mizuiri D, Honma SM , Welch AE, Hubbard I, Mandelli ML, Miller 
ZA, Garrett C, La A, Boxer AL, Houde JF, Miller BL, Vossel KA, Gorno -Tempini ML, Nagarajan SS. 
Distinct spatiotemporal patterns of neuronal functional connectivity in primary progressive aphasia 
variants. Brain. 2017 Oct 1;140(10):2737- 2751. doi: 10.1093/brain/awx217. PubMed PMID: 28969381.  
42. Raghavan M, Li Z, Carlson C, Anderson CT, Stout J, Sabsevitz DS, Swanson SJ,  Binder JR. MEG 
language lateralization in partial epilepsy using dSPM of auditory  event -related fields. Epilepsy Behav. 
2017 Aug;73:247- 255. doi: 10.1016/j.yebeh.2017.06.002. Epub 2017 Jun 26. PubMed PMID: 28662463.  
43. Richardson J, Datta A, Dmochowski J, Parra LC, Fridriksson J. Feasibility of using high- definition 
transcranial direct current stimulation (HD- tDCS) to enhance treatment outcomes in persons with 
aphasia. NeuroRehabilitation. 2015;36(1):115- 26. doi: 10.3233/NRE -141199. PubMed PMID: 25547776; 
PubMed Central PMCID: PMC5764169.  
44. Rogalski E, Cobia D, Harrison TM, Wieneke C, Weintr aub S, Mesulam M -M. Progression of language 
decline and cortical atrophy in subtypes of primary progressive aphasia. Neurology . 2011;76(21):1804-
1810. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e31821ccd3c. PMID: 21606451PMCID: PMC3100122.  
45. Saturnino, GB, Puonti, O, Nielsen, J D, Antonenko, D, Madsen, KH, Thielscher, A (2018). SimNIBS 2.1: 
A comprehensive pipeline for individualized electric field modelling for transcranial brain stimulation. 
www.simnibs.org . bioRxiv 500314 doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/500314.  
PRO32037 – HD-tDCS in lvPPA [ Protocol v 5.0]    25 
 46. Snodgrass JG, Vanderwart M. A standardized set of 260 pictures: norms for name agreement, image 
agreement, familiarity, and visual complexity. J Exp Psychol Hum Learn. 1980 Mar;6(2):174- 215. 
PubMed P MID: 7373248.  
47. Sonty SP, Mesulam MM, Weintraub S, Johnson NA, Parrish TB, Gitelman DR. Altered effective 
connectivity within the language network in primary progressive aphasia. J Neurosci. 2007 Feb 
7;27(6):1334 -45. PubMed PMID: 17287508.  
48. Stern, R. A., & White, T. (2003). Neuropsychological assessment battery: Administration, scoring, and 
interpretation manual. Lutz, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources, Inc.  
49. Teichmann M, Lesoil C, Godard J, Vernet M, Bertrand A, Levy R, Dubois B, Lemoine L, Truong DQ, 
Bikson M, Kas A, Valero- Cabré A. Direct current stimulation over the anterior tempor al areas boosts 
semantic processing in primary progressive aphasia. Ann Neurol. 2016 Nov;80(5):693- 707. doi: 
10.1002/ana.24766. Epub 2016 Sep 19. PubMed PMID: 27553723.  
50. Tippett DC, Hillis AE, Tsapkini K. Treatment of Primary Progressive Aphasia. Curr Treat  Options Neurol. 
2015 Aug;17(8):362. doi: 10.1007/s11940 -015-0362- 5. PubMed PMID: 26062526; PubMed Central 
PMCID: PMC4600091.  
51. Tsapkini K, Frangakis C, Gomez Y, Davis C, Hillis AE. Augmentation of spelling therapy with transcranial direct current stimulation in primary progressive aphasia: Preliminary results and challenges. 
Aphasiology. 2014;28(8- 9):1112- 1130. PubMed PMID: 26097278; PubMed Central PMCID: 
PMC4470615.  
52. Turski CA, Kessler -Jones A, Chow C, Hermann B, Hsu D, Jones J, Seeger SK, Chappell R, Boly M, 
Ikonomidou C. Extended Multiple- Field High -Definition transcranial direct current stimulation (HD -tDCS) 
is well tolerated and safe in healthy adults. Restor Neurol Neurosci. 2017;35(6):631- 642. doi: 
10.3233/RNN -170757. PubMed PMID: 29172010; PubMed Cent ral PMCID: PMC5730273.  
53. Tzourio- Mazoyer N, Landeau B, Papathanassiou D, Crivello F, Etard O, Delcroix N, Mazoyer  B, Joliot. 
Automated anatomical labeling of activations in SPM using a macroscopic anatomical parcellation of the 
MNI MRI single -subject brain. Neuroimage. 2002 Jan;15(1):273- 89. PubMed PMID: 11771995.  
54. Villamar MF, Volz MS, Bikson M, Datta A, DaSilva AF, Fregni F. Technique and Considerations in the 
Use of 4x1 Ring High- definition Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation (HD -tDCS). Journal of Visualized 
Experiments: JoVE. 2013;(77):50309. doi:10.3791/50309. PMID: 23893039PMCID: PMC3735368.  
55. Wechsler, 1997. The Psychological Corporation . Wechsler Memory Scale, version 3. Harcourt Brace & 
Company; San Antonio: 1997b.  
56. Wilson, S. M., Henry, M. L., Besbris, M., Ogar, J. M., Dronkers, N. F., Jarrold, W., ... & Gorno- Tempini, 
M. L. (2010). Connected speech product ion in three variants of primary progressive 
aphasia.  Brain , 133(7), 2069- 2088.  
 
 