  1  
K5-C200 
BALAJI K TAMARAPPOO , MD,  PHD  11NOV2019  
Section 1.0  General Information 
  
TITLE :   AN EXPLORATORY , PHASE II, OPEN LABEL , SINGLE -CENTER , NON-RANDOMIZED 
STUDY OF [F-18]  RGD-K5  POSITRON EMISSION TOMOGRAPHY (PET)  IN 
PARTICIPANTS WITH CAROTID ARTERY STENOSIS ; K5-C200 
 
PI:   B ALAJI K TAMARAPPOO , MD,  PHD 
 Study Support Provided By:  NHLBI-NIH
  
 ( N ATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH ) 
 Section 2.0  Background information 
 
Atherosclerotic vascular disease is the primary cause of heart attacks and stroke. The rupture 
and downstream embolization of unstable plaque in the carotid a rtery can result in stroke or 
transient ischemic attack (TIA) . Stroke is the fourth leading c ause of mortality in the United 
States. In addition, rupture of unstable atherosclerotic plaque  in the coronary artery results in 
myocardial infarction (MI), the major cause of death in the Uni ted States.  A noninvasive 
imaging test that can detect unstable plaque is critical for id entification of high-risk patients who 
would benefit from aggressive medical therapy, carotid artery s tenting or percutaneous coronary 
intervention.  Among patients with carotid artery stenosis, a s ignificant number of them undergo 
carotid endarterectomy (CEA) or stenting purely based on the pr esence of plaque causing ≥70% 
stenosis even though they may have never had a stroke or TIA [1 , 2].  A non-invasive imaging 
test that can accurately identify unstable plaque may prevent u nnecessary surgical and 
endovascular procedures and could potentially reduce cardiovasc ular mortality.  
Current State of the Art for Noni nvasive Detection of Unstable Plaque  
CTA:  Carotid plaque is usually detect ed by Doppler ultrasound and al ternatively by CTA and 
magnetic resonance imaging (MR I) [3].  CTA can identify high-ri sk plaque features such as 
spotty calcification, plaque ulceration and enriched lipid comp osition [4].  However, dense 
calcification can mask high-risk plaque features on CTA. 
MRI:  Morphologic features associated with unstable plaque such as a necrotic lipid core and 
intraplaque hemorrhage can be imaged with MRI [5-10].  Even sti ll, MRI is not widely used for 
detection of unstable plaque due to the technical challenges as sociated with obtaining high 
resolution images in smaller arteries [11]. Ultrasmall paramagn etic nanoparticles (USPIO) have 
been used in clinical studies to bind to vulnerable plaque base d on the high density of 
macrophages; however, there have been no clinical trials of USP IO for routine identification of 
vulnerable plaque in the  United States [12, 13]. 
18F-Sodium fluoride (NaF) : NaF has been shown to bind to culprit lesions in the coronary  
artery of patients who have suffered a myocardial infarction an d in carotid artery plaque in 
patients who have suffered a stroke or TIA [14, 15].  However, there are no prospective studies 
demonstrating the ability of NaF to predict plaque rupture at t his time. 
18F-labeled deoxyglucose (FDG) :  FDG is the only molecular imaging agent that has been used 
for positron emission tomography (PET) of atherosclerotic plaqu e in large clinical studies [16, 
17]. In 2002, Rudd et al. showed that FDG uptake was preferenti ally increased in carotid artery 
plaque of patients with symptoms of stroke or TIA compared to a symptomatic patients. Plaque 
removed from patients with high carotid FDG uptake was enriched  in macrophages and was 
  2  
K5-C200 
BALAJI K TAMARAPPOO , MD,  PHD  11NOV2019 characterized by a large necrotic core. This study concluded th at FDG uptake may be a marker 
of plaque vulnerability; however, there are no studies that hav e tested the benefit of FDG PET 
imaging of plaque for clinical d ecision-making.  FDG is extract ed by a number of metabolically 
active cellular targets cells including macrophages, lymphocyte s and smooth muscle cells found 
in plaque.  A plaque imaging agent with selective affinity for macrophages and neovascular 
endothelial cells might significantly improve our ability to id entify vulnerable plaque compared 
to FDG.  Molecular imaging agents that target proteins that are  presumably enri ched in plaque 
such as matrix metalloproteases and annexinVa have been used in  animal models of 
atherosclerosis; however, clinic al translation of these imaging  tracers is still in progress [18]. 
 
Most importantly, there is lack of data in support of clinical decision making based on the 
presence of high-risk plaque-features-using CTA, MRI, FDG-PET a nd NaF-PET in individuals 
with plaque that causes <70% luminal stenosis. 
Need for Alternate Tracers for Plaque Imaging  
There is an unmet clinical need f or a plaque imaging agent that  preferentially binds to cells and 
proteins that are present in unstable plaque and will thereby i dentify patients at risk for stroke or 
MI.  Vulnerable plaque is charact erized by high inflammatory ac tivity and an overabundance of 
macrophages and neovessels.  An imaging agent that selectively binds to macrophages and (or) 
neovascular endothelial cells may allow identification of infla med vulnerable plaque.  Such a-
specific-tracer will provide higher lesion-to-background ratio and will improve clinical accuracy 
in identifying vulnerable plaque. 
18F-flotegatide :  18F-flotegatide, a PET imaging agent with high specificity f or αVβIII and 
α5β1 integrin present on macrophages and neovascular endothelia l cells may offer the 
opportunity to detect vulnerable plaque.   
The objective of this proposal is to evaluate the use of 18F-fl otegatide to noninvasively 
detect unstable plaque in clinical subjects. I propose to accomplish th is objective by first 
testing the hypothesis that 18F-flotegatide can bind to atheros clerotic plaque with morphologic, 
histologic and clinical features of vulnerability using PET-MR imaging in patients with carotid 
atherosclerosis. 
 
INNOVATION  
Advantages of using 18F-Flotegatide for the identification of vulnerable plaque  
Integrins are heterodimeric glycoproteins composed of α and β s ubunits.  They are key 
molecules involved in angiogenesi s and mediate cell locomotion through the extracellular matrix 
[19, 20]. The integrin αVβIII plays an important role in the de velopment and progression of 
atherosclerotic plaque and is considered to facilitate inflamma tory cell recruitment to the 
damaged vessel wall and angiogene sis [20-23]. The α5β1 integrin  is known to be involved in 
macrophage recruitment and angiogenesis in atherosclerotic plaq ue [24-26]. There is prominent 
expression of αVβIII on the endothelial cell surface of adventi tial vasa vasorum and plaque 
neovessels [27].  Integrin αVβIII and α5β1 are also expressed b y macrophages in atherosclerotic 
plaque [26, 28, 29].  Until recently, the most promising tracer  for non-invasive detection of 
αVβIII expression in humans using PET has been 18F-Galacto-RGD [30, 31]. On the basis of 
the αVβIII receptor binding, the glycosylated cyclic tripeptide , 18F-Galacto-RGD demonstrates 
high affinity and selectivity for the receptor in vivo [32, 33] . Recently, 18F-Galacto-RGD was 
shown to bind to carotid artery plaque in a small group of pati ents with atherosclerosis [34].  
However, the long labeling time (4h) and complex chemistry requ ired for the synthesis of 
18F-Galacto-RGD makes it less amenable for routine clinical app lications [30].  Our 
  3  
K5-C200 
BALAJI K TAMARAPPOO , MD,  PHD  11NOV2019 proposal to use 18F-Flotegatide (18F-RGD) for clinical plaque i maging in patients with carotid 
atherosclerosis is innovative for the following reasons: 
1. The relatively short labeling time (75min) achieved through the  use of click chemistry for its 
synthesis in comparison to the synthesis of 18F-GalactoRGD make s 18F-flotegatide an 
attractive agent for large scale clinical investigation. 
2. Blood and background clearance is f aster due to the triazole, a  by-product of the click 
reaction. The plasma clearance half time is 12min. This in turn  provides higher target to 
background ratio (TBR). 
3. The synthesis of 18F-flotegatide is automated (unlike other RGD -tracers), which makes 
production of this tracer manufacturing-friendly and adaptable to various synthesis platforms 
at different clinical sites. 
4. The high affinity of 18F-flotegatide for both αVβIII and α5β1 ( Kd of 7.9nM for αVβIII and 
26.5nM for α5β1 measured by inverse surface plasmon resonance) increases the number of 
potential cell surface targets for binding of 18F-flotegatide i n atherosclerotic plaque. This 
translates to an improved signal to background ratio of 18F-flo tegatide for in-vivo PET 
imaging relative to other integrin targeted agents. 
5. We propose to use PET-MR instead of PET-CTA for the following r easons: 
(a)  MR offers superior tissue characterization for assessment of plaque vulnerability 
compared to CTA. 
(b)  PET-CT and CTA are often performed independently and accur ate co-registration 
can be limited. The use of PET-MR allows simultaneous MR and PE T imaging and 
allows accurate co-regi stration of plaque by MRI with the PET u ptake of 18F-
flotegatide. 
6. Carotid plaque is removed surgi cally by CEA in patients with st roke, TIA or significant 
luminal obstruction. This offers a unique opportunity to direct ly compare observations from 
noninvasive imaging to histologic and immunohistochemical chara cterization of the same 
plaque after endarterectomy. 
 
7. A significant number of patients with carotid atheroma are sent  for carotid stenting with 
optical coherence tomography (OCT) to assess plaque composition  at the time of stenting. 
In-vivo information f rom OCT can be correlated to the tracer up take and MRI plaque 
features.  
 
8. Our study is conducted by an inter disciplinary, highly synergis tic team comprised of a 
cardiologist (PI), neurologist, vascular surgeon, PET-radiochem ist, PET and MR physicists 
and radiologists. 
 
Based on our preliminary data with PET-CTA, we strongly believe  we will be able to 
reproducibly detect significant 18F-flotegatide uptake in plaqu e from symptomatic patients.  
Ultimately, demonstrating prefer ential 18F-flotegatide uptake i n symptomatic patients will 
significantly impact the way in which patients with carotid pla que (at risk for stroke) are 
treated and it may prevent unnecessary surgical and endovascula r procedures in this 
population. 
 
  4  
K5-C200 
BALAJI K TAMARAPPOO , MD,  PHD  11NOV2019 Overall Study Design Background: The rupture of unstable plaque i n the carotid artery is one of 
the most common causes of stroke. Plaque rupture is followed by  activation of the thrombotic 
cascade and formation of an intravascular thrombus. Downstream embolization of all or part of 
the thrombus causes ischemia of brain tissue thus precipitating  a stroke.  Smaller emboli that 
originate from unstable plaque may result in TIA.  
Currently Accepted Model for Testing New Tracers for Imaging Vulnerable Plaque:  PET 
imaging studies that investigated the use of FDG, and NaF for d etection of unstable carotid 
plaque have used stroke as the clinical surrogate marker for pr esence of unstable plaque [15, 17].  
Although, patients were imaged with FDG or NaF several days aft er plaque rupture had 
occurred, these studies still showed tracer uptake in the remai ning carotid plaque.  We propose to 
use a similar approach to test our hypothesis that 18F-flotegat ide is extracted by atherosclerotic 
plaque ( Specific Aim I ). We also propose to determine if plaque removed from patients  who 
exhibit 18F-flotegatide uptake by PET exhibits MRI features and  histologic markers of 
vulnerability ( Specific Aim II ). 
Rationale:  Carotid artery plaque serves as  an ideal model system for testi ng molecular 
imaging agents designed to bind t o biological targets in unstab le plaque. The carotid artery 
wall is perfused by vasa vasor um similar to the aorta and coron ary arteries making 
observations made in the carotid artery broadly applicable to c linically important vascular beds 
in the human body [35-37].  Carotid artery plaque can be locali zed and imaged by multiple 
noninvasive techniques including ultrasound, CTA and MRI. The r elatively large size of 
carotid plaque lends itself to better visualization of intrapla que targets using imaging 
techniques including PET. 
 
Section 3.0  Trial objectives and purpose  Primary Objectives:  
 Aim 1:  To validate that 18F-flotegatide may be extracted and differen tially retained by carotid 
artery plaque in patients with c linical symptoms of stroke or T IA (vulnerable plaque) compared 
to asymptomatic control patients with stable plaque using PET-M R imaging. Our hypothesis is 
that noninvasive PET imaging of 18F-flotegatide  uptake can clinically distinguish unstable 
plaque from stable plaque.  
• We propose to validate our preliminary results (that were obtai ned using PET-CT and 
CTA) by demonstrating that atherosclerotic plaque can be detect ed by PET-MRI using 18F-
flotegatide. 
• We propose to accomplish this aim by performing in-vivo PET ima ging of patients with 
unstable carotid plaque (within 96h of a stroke or TIA). We pro pose to quantify plaque uptake 
of 18F-flotegatide relative to 18F-flotegatide uptake in segmen ts of the carotid vessel wall that 
are free of atherosclerosis. 
• We also propose to test our hypothesis that 18F-flotegatide is preferentially retained by 
unstable plaque and may be used to distinguish unstable plaque from stable plaque.  
• We propose to achieve this by comparing 18F-flotegatide uptake in patients who have 
been free of antecedent stroke or TIA (asymptomatic-control gro up) to 18F-flotegatide uptake 
of patients with unstable plaque with recent stroke or TIA.   
  5  
K5-C200 
BALAJI K TAMARAPPOO , MD,  PHD  11NOV2019 • In the section “Aim 1. Preliminary results”, we demonstrate the  relative increase in 18F-
flotegatide uptake by vulnerable atherosclerotic plaque in the carotid artery in 3 patients with 
stroke compared to 2 asymptomatic patients with similar degree of carotid artery stenosis. 
 
Aim 2a and 2b: 
To test our hypothesis that 18F-flotegatide uptake is reflected by histologic markers of plaque 
vulnerability and mediated by an integrin-targeted mechanism. To achieve this goal, we 
propose to characterize the extent of macrophage infiltration a nd neovascularization in 
atherosclerotic plaque removed during endarterectomy and its as sociation with 18F-flotegatide 
uptake. 
 Background: 
 
Aim 1:  Macrophages and Neovessels as Markers for Vulnerable Plaque  
Rupture of the fibrous cap on the plaque surface and accelerate d intravascular thrombus 
formation in response to plaque rupture is the primary event th at precedes stroke, TIA and 
myocardial infarction.  Atherosclerotic plaque develops in resp onse to entry of LDL into the 
intimal layer of the vessel wall and endothelial injury.  In re sponse to this injury, monocytes are 
recruited into the vessel wall and differentiate into macrophag es, whose primary role is the 
phagocytosis of modified LDL [38-40]. The inflammatory cascade initiated by the phagocytosis 
of oxidized LDL by macrophages stimulates angiogenesis and the formation of intraplaque 
neovessels allows the entry of red blood cells (RBCs), leukocyt es, lipids and oxidized 
lipoproteins [35, 41].  Phagocytosis of RBCs further stimulates  recruitment of new macrophages.  
Macrophage apoptosis and the release of matrix metalloproteases  destabilizes the extracellular 
matrix and is thought to cause plaque rupture [39, 42].  Intuitively, a noninvasive imaging 
technique that can detect plaque hemorrhage, neovascularization , and macrophage 
infiltration would enable identification of plaque that is vuln erable and may provide a 
means of distinguishing unstable plaque from stable plaque.  
Imaging of 
Neovessels and Macrophages with Integrin Targeted Imaging Agents  
Due to the relative 
enrichment of macrophages and neovessels in unstable atherosclerotic 
plaque, they have 
been used as surrogates for noninvasive detection of atherosclerotic plaque. The expression of 

  6  
K5-C200 
BALAJI K TAMARAPPOO , MD,  PHD  11NOV2019 αVβIII integrin on the cell surface of macrophages, smooth musc le cells and neovascular 
endothelial cells has offered a c onvenient target for designing  molecular imaging agents with 
improved specificity for unstabl e atherosclerotic plaque. Multi ple ligands can bind to αVβIII 
integrin in an Arg-Gly-Asp (RGD )- dependent manner and the high  affinity binding of this 
tripeptide sequence has been exploited for MRI and for PET imag ing.  PET tracers designed for 
in vivo imaging of integrin expression u tilize the R-G-D peptide motif,  usually within a cyclic 
peptide structure. Examples of current tracers include 18F-Gala ctosyl-RGD [43] a cyclic 
pentapeptide, which enables integrin imaging [34, 44, 45].  Sci entists at Siemens Medical 
Solutions, Culver City, CA have synthesized 18F-flotegatide whi ch has a number of advantages 
over other RGD-based imaging agents [46]. 18F-flotegatide is ea sily labeled through click 
chemistry, without requiring protecting groups, by the reaction  of 18F-fluoropentyne and an 
azide precursor in the presence of in situ generated Cu(I) ( Figure 2(A)) with a synthesis time of 
75min [47]. 18F- flotegatide is m etabolically stable for 2 hour s and exhibits favorable 
biodistribution and clearance properties characterized by fast blood washout (plasma clearance 
half time of 12 min) and favorable renal excretion [48] ( Figure 2(B )).  In oncologic studies, 
intra-tumor tracer distribution of 18F-flotegatide matches the patterns of integrin and CD31 
expression [47]. We hypothesized that 18F-flotegatide may function as an ideal m olecular 
imaging agent for noninvasive detection of unstable plaque sinc e macrophages and 
neovascular endothelial cells express integrin αVβIII and α5β1 and vulnerable plaque is 
characterized by neovascularization and macrophage infiltration . 
MRI for anatomic localization of plaque and PET-MR of 18F-flotegatide uptake  
In order to anatomically localize the plaque, we propose to per form MRI for visualization of 
vulnerable plaque characteristics and to localize the plaque al ong with time of flight (TOF) 
Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) of the carotid artery for quantification of stenosis 
severity.  PET images will be co-registered with MRI and 18F-fl otegatide uptake will be 
compared to plaque features suggestive of vulnerability includi ng presence of necrotic lipid 
core and intraplaque hemorrhage.  MRI is especially robust for visualization of inflammation 
and neovascularization with the use of specialized pulse sequen ces and contrast agents.  
Enhancement of atherosclerotic plaque with Gadolinium (Gd) base d contrast agent, Gd-
diethylenetriaminepentaacetic aci d (DTPA) has been used to diff erentiate between the fibrous 
cap and the lipid core [49, 50]. Gd enhancement has been shown to correspond to zones of 
neovascularization and inflammation [9, 51]. The extent of plaq ue neovascularization can also 
be measured by dynamic contrast enhancement (DCE) MRI [57]. The  ability to detect 
intraplaque hemorrhage, lipid ric h core and neovascularization illustrate the superiority of MRI 
based plaque imaging over CTA.  Furthermore, MRI is not associa ted with ionizing radiation 
and is therefore safer than CTA and thus lends itself to serial  imaging in high risk patients. We 
propose to use MRI in our plaque imaging studies to both locali ze atherosclerotic plaque in the 
carotid artery and to i dentify high risk morphologic plaque fea tures such as presence of a lipid 
rich core and a thin fibrous cap. 
Aim 2a and 2b:  
Macrophage density and neovascularization as surrogate markers of unstable plaque  
In clinical studies of atherosclerotic plaque imaging with radi olabeled molecular imaging 
agents, macrophage infiltration and neovascularization have bee n used as the gold standard 
among histologic biomarkers to adjudicate plaque vulnerability [14, 15, 17, 34]. In an early 
plaque imaging study with FDG, Rudd et al. used ex-vivo incubat ion of plaque to demonstrate 
that carotid plaque uptake of FDG was confined to macrophage- r ich areas of plaque [17]. 
  7  
K5-C200 
BALAJI K TAMARAPPOO , MD,  PHD  11NOV2019 This has been used as evidence that FDG uptake is specific for plaque with histologic features 
consistent with vulnerability [17]. The important role played b y macrophages in causing 
plaque rupture has been documented in histologic examination of  carotid artery plaque. In 
plaque removed during endarterectomy, macrophage density was in creased in patients with 
symptoms of stroke or TIA compared to presumably stable plaque removed from 
asymptomatic patients [55, 56]. The strong association between an increase in plaque 
microvessel density, plaque pr ogression and pla que vulnerabilit y has been demonstrated in ex-
vivo studies [39].  Plaque collected during endarterectomy from  patients with antecedent 
stroke contained more staining for CD31, an endothelial cell ma rker when compared to plaque 
from asymptomatic patients [57] Histologic studies show that dy smorphic neovessels are seen 
more often in patients with symptomatic carotid artery disease [58]. We propose to use a 
similar approach to demonstrate that plaque with increased 18F- flotegatide uptake is 
highly enriched for one or several histologic biomarkers of pla que vulnerability 
including inflammation and angiogenesis.  
A positive correlation between 18F-flotegatide extent and enric hment for necrotic lipid-rich 
zones, increased macrophage density and (or) neovascularization  would support to our 
hypothesis that uptake of this radiotracer reflects plaque vuln erability at the hi stologic level.   
Most importantly, we will perform ex-vivo imaging with a portio n of plaque from 3 
symptomatic patients to evaluate 18F-flotegatide binding in the  presence or absence of 
unlabeled RGD peptide. The goal of this experiment is to demons trate that 18F-flotegatide 
uptake occurs through an integrin mediated mechanism.  Absence of ex-vivo 18F-flotegatide 
binding to plaque in the presence of unlabeled RGD peptide woul d suggest that 18F-flotegatide 
uptake is mediated by a specific integrin-RGD interaction. 
 
Experimental Approach  
 
Aim 1.   
18F-flotegatide will be synthesized as described previously and  PET imaging of the carotid 
arteries will be performed with MR based attenuation correction .  18F-flotegatide uptake will 
be quantified using commercially available software and plaque uptake of 18F-flotegatide by 
the carotid artery plaque implicated in the stroke will be comp ared to the contralateral carotid 
artery or other healthy reference vessel.  18F-flotegatide upta ke of carotid plaque will also be 
compared between patients with stroke and asymptomatic patients . 18F-flotegatide uptake of 
carotid plaque will be compared to MRI based plaque features of  vulnerability. 
Chemical formulation and synthesis of 18F-Flotegatide and dosage for PET imaging  
Pent-4-yn-1-yl 4-methylbenzenesulfonate (pentyne tosylate) will  be reacted with anhydrous 18F-fluoride in the presence of Kryptofix® 2.2.2 and K 2CO3 in MeCN at 110°C with the 
resulting 18F-fluoropentyne distilling into a collection vial for the click  reaction [52]. The 
collection vial contains Flotegatide azide precursor, Cu(I) (ge nerated by the in situ reduction 
of CuSO 4 with sodium ascorbate), and tris[(1-benzyl-1H-1,2,3-triazol-4- yl)methyl]amine 
(TBTA) in aqueous ethanol/acetonitrile [53]. TBTA will be remov ed during the semi- 
preparative RP-HPLC step and is not detected in the final dose.   After reacting for 10 to 30 
minutes at room temperature, the crude reaction mixture will be  transferred to an intermediate 
HPLC loading vial containing wat er for dilution prior to semi-p reparative HPLC purification.  
After purification of the crude reaction mixture by semi-prepar ative RP-HPLC 
(acetonitrile:aqueous TFA), the product will be reformulated vi a C18 cartridge reconstitution 
as a solution in a maximum of 10% EtOH:water.  The total process time is 75 minutes, i.e. 
  8  
K5-C200 
BALAJI K TAMARAPPOO , MD,  PHD  11NOV2019 less than one half-life. The final drug product formulate d in a hydroalcoholic vehicle 
containing up to 10% ethanol w ill be administered intravenously  at a target imaging dose of 
10mCi per patient. Even at the lowest specific activity allowed -under the IND-for injection 
(0.4Ci/μmol), the mass is only 27μg. 
 
Aim 2a.  
Collection of plaque and pro cessing for histologic studies  
Carotid artery containing the plaque (specimen) from 3 symptoma tic and 3 asymptomatic 
patients will be obtained at the time of endarterectomy and lab eled with sutures to identify 
cranio-caudal orientation. The specimen will be divided into th ree segments (cranial, middle 
and caudal). This will allow us to identify any particular slic e on axial PET images with high 
18F-flotegatide uptake (based on SUV max) as located in a specific segment of the specimen. We 
propose to pick the slice corresponding to the segment (cranial , middle or caudal) with the 
highest SUV max. This segment of the specimen containing the plaque will be ex cised and placed 
in formalin for processing prior to immunohistochemical studies  (Aim 2a. Preliminary Results 
Figure 8) . 
Histological Evaluation of Plaque Composition 
Plaque will be placed into 10% Neutral Buffered Formalin for 24  hours after which the samples 
will be decalcified (Cal-Rite, Richard-Allen Scientific, Kalama zoo, MI). After fixation and 
decalcification transferred to 70% Ethanol until processing.  5  μm thick sections will be taken 
at 1 mm steps.  Plaque samples w ill be processed using the Leic a Peloris with a xylene free 
processing protocol and embedde d in paraffin.  Sections, 5 micr ons thick, will be made with a 
Leica microtome and placed on pos itively charged slides.  Secti ons will be stained using H&E 
and Movat’s pentachrome staining. H&E staining will identify nu clei (black), calcium (purple), 
and hemorrhage(magenta) in contrast to the general pink stainin g of other tissues. The Movat 
pentachrome can distinguish fibrous regions (dark yellow-green)  from lipid rich zones 
(turquoise). The prior presence of cholesterol appears as “clef t” voids after processing. 
Immunohistochemistry (IHC) will be performed on a Benchmark XT (Ventana Medical 
Systems Inc, Tucson, AZ) automated stainer.  Slides will be dep araffinized and blocked with a 
hydrogen peroxide solution.  Antigen retrieval will be performe d using Cell Conditioner 1 
(Ventana, 950-124) and a Tris/borate/EDTA buffer, pH 8.0-8.5 @ 95C for 60 minutes.  Slides 
will be incubated with primary antibody for approximately 32 mi nutes @ 37C followed by 
incubation with secondary antibody, a biotinylated Mouse/Rabbit  mixture. The secondary 
antibody and the HRP-based detection are part of the i-View DAB  detection kit (Ventana, 790-
091). The slides will be counters tained with Hematoxylin II (Ve ntana, 790-2208) and Bluing 
Solution (Ventana, 760-2037). Tissue sections will be imaged in  their entirety at 20X 
magnification (0.5um/pixel) using a Leica SCN 400FL Slide Scann er (Leica Microsystems, 
GmbH, Wetzlar, Germany) .  Antibody staining will be measured using ImagePro Plus Analysis  
software (Media Cybernetics, Inc., Rockville, MD).  The program ’s Color Segmentation tool 
will identify regions of HRP staining (brown) for IHC and fibro us regions (dark yellow-green) 
or lipid rich zones (turquoise) for MOVATS in each tissue secti on. The area of stained tissue 
will be compared to a measuremen t of the total tissue area to g ive the “percent area stained.”  
CD31 (JC70), ventana, 760-4178 and CD68 (KP-1), Ventana, 790-29 31 will be used to detect 
and quantify macrophage infiltration and endothelial cell densi ty respectively.  Smooth muscle 
proliferation will be identified and quantified using αSMA anti bodyDako, M0851.  In order to 
  9  
K5-C200 
BALAJI K TAMARAPPOO , MD,  PHD  11NOV2019 correlate 18F- flotegatide uptake with integrin expression, we will use an Integrin αVβIII 
antibody from R&D Systems, MAB 3050 and α5β1 integrin antibody f rom Bioss, bs-2016R. 
Comparison of Immunohistoche mical and Movat Pentachrome Staining with 18F-flotegatide 
Uptake 
IHC staining will be quantified as the percent area that is sta ined with the particular antibody 
for the marker of interest (CD68, macrophage; CD31, neovessel e ndothelium; αSMA, smooth 
muscle and Integrin αVβIII and α5β1).  Percent area of lipid ri ch necrotic core and fibrous 
zones will be quantified from Movats staining. Correlation betw een the TBR of the segment 
with the highest 18F-flotegatide uptake on PET imaging for each  individual patient to the 
percent area with lipid, fibrous e lements, macrophage staining,  endothelial staining and smooth 
muscle staining of the tissue se ctions from this segment will b e evaluated in all patients ( Aim 2. 
Preliminary Results Figure 8 and 9 ). We will also quantify and compare staining in patients 
with symptoms (unstable plaque) vs asymptomatic patients (stabl e plaque) ( Aim 2a. 
Preliminary Results Figure 10 ). 
Aim 2b.  
Ex-vivo Competition Study to De monstrate Integrin Mediated  Binding of 18F-flotegatide 
A 5mm segment of plaque from 3 symptomatic patients will be col lected for assessment of 18F-
flotegatide uptake ex-vivo.  This plaque segment will be embedd ed in optimum cutting 
temperature compound (Tissue- Plus, Fisher Scientific), snap-fr ozen in liquid nitrogen and 
stored at –70°C. Samples will be sectio ned using a cryostat (Leica Microsystems,  Wetzlar, 
Germany) and placed on electric ally charged glass slides.  20 µm sections will be warmed to 
room temperature (RT), preincuba ted for 5 min in PBS buffer, an d incubated with   10 nM 18F-
flotegatide (specific activity 2.5Ci/μmol) in PBS buffer for 30  min at RT. Every alternate section 
from each plaque will be pre-treated with 10 mmol of unlabeled cyclic RGD (Siemens) prior to 
incubation with 18F- flotegatid e. After incubation, the slides will be washed twice for 5 min 
with PBS, rinsed in cold water , air dried, and placed on an aut oradiography imaging plate (Fuji 
Imaging Plate BAS-MS2040, Fuji Photo Film Co., Ltd., Japan). Af ter overnight exposure, 18F 
activity in the imaging plates will be measured with Fuji Analy zer FLA- 2000. After co-
registration of autoradiography and H&E-stained histological im ages of the sections, count 
density (PSL/mm2) of plaques will be quantified. 18F activity ( PSL/mm2) in the absence of 
unlabeled competing tracer will be compared to 18F activity in the presence of competing tracer. 
 
Expected Results 
 
Aim 1.   
1. A detectable increase in the (uptake) TBR of 18F-flotegatide in  atherosclerotic plaque 
compared to the unaffected arterial wall. 
2. An increase in TBR (18F-flotegatide uptake) in plaque that is i mplicated in the stroke or TIA 
compared to plaque that may be present in the contralateral car otid artery in symptomatic 
patients. 
3. Most importantly, a detectable increase in atherosclerotic plaq ue uptake (TBR) of 18F-
flotegatide in patients with stroke or TIA compared to 18F-flot egatide uptake in plaque in 
patients without symptoms of stroke or TIA. 
4. A positive correlation between v olume of lipid rich necrotic co re and 18F-flotegatide 
uptake and a negative or lack of correlation between thickness of fibrous cap and 18F-
flotegatide uptake. 
  10 
K5-C200 
BALAJI K TAMARAPPOO , MD,  PHD  11NOV2019 Aim 2a and 2b.  
1. Percent area of lipid rich necrotic core quantified from MOVATS  staining may be 
positively correlated with TBR of the 18F-flotegatide uptake on  PET imaging whereas, 
percent area stained for fibrous elements is expected to exhibi t a negative correlation with 
18F-flotegatide uptake. 
2. We expect % area of plaque with CD68 (macrophage infiltration) and (or) CD31 staining 
(endothelial cell) to be higher among patients with increased 1 8F-flotegatide uptake 
relative to plaque fro m patients with lower levels of 18F-flote gatide uptake detected by 
PET imaging ( Figure 9 ).  Staining for α-smooth muscle actin may be increased in stab le 
plaque with reduced 18F-flotegatide uptake. We also expect to f ind a strong correlation 
between area of staining with integrins αVβIII, α5β1 and 18F-fl otegatide uptake. 
2. We expect to find % area with macrophage staining and neovascul ar endothelial cell staining 
to be greater in plaque from patients with symptoms of stroke o r TIA compared to plaque 
from those who are asymptomatic ( Figure 10 ). 
3. Ex-vivo binding studies:  we expect 18F activity (PSL/mm2) of p laque sections measured 
by (autoradiography) in the absence of unlabeled RGD to be sign ificantly greater than 18F 
activity in the presence of competing unlabeled RGD (Similar to  Figure 11 ). 
 
Feasibility 
 
Aim 1.  
Tracer Synthesis and PET Imaging: The Cleveland Clinic Department of Nuclear Medicine 
has a radiochemistry laboratory for the synthesis of novel PET tracers for research.  The 
radiochemistry laboratory has synthesized several batches of 18 F-flotegatide for imaging over 
the last 3 years ( see Aim 1. Preliminary Results ). In our preliminary studies, the average 
isolated yield of 18F-Flotegatide  was 26.9% ± 10.3% with specif ic activity of 2.6 +/- 1.4 
Ci/umol. We have injected this tracer in 5 patients without any  adverse effects.  Siemens has 
allowed us to use the tracer and has expressed support for this  project (see letter from Siemens 
in the original RO1 application).  We have injected 18F-flotega tide in 5 patients without any 
adverse effects.  Siemens has a llowed us to use t he tracer and has expressed support for this 
project (see letter from Siemens).  Furthermore, the PI has pre viously held an IND from the 
FDA for use of this tracer in human subjects for carotid plaque  imaging and will be reapplying 
for an IND from Cedars Sinai Medical Center. Our preliminary re sults in Table 1 , show an 
increased uptake of the radiotracer by carotid plaque that is a ssociated with a recent stroke. In 
these same patients, plaque in the contralateral carotid artery  which was not associated with 
stroke (and may therefore represent a relatively stable plaque)  did not exhibit significant 18F-
flotegatide uptake ( Table 1 ). We also observed that plaque  associated with a stroke (unsta ble 
plaque) exhibited a higher uptake of 18F-flotegatide relative t o stable plaque (asymptomatic 
patients) ( Aim 1. Preliminary Results Table 1 and Figure 5 ). 
PET-MR :  PET-MR is routinely perfo rmed in our imagi ng laboratory ( Aim 1. Preliminary 
Results Figure 4) . We have the technical expertise of Dr. Zhaoyang Fan at Cedars  Sinai 
Medical Center (see letter attached in original RO1 application ) and he will be able to help us 
with pulse sequences and quantitative image analysis. 
Aim 2a and 2b.  
We have been able to stain carotid artery sections successfully  with CD68 and CD31 ( Figure 
8 and 10 ). We have been able to detect prominent staining with CD68 and  CD31 in plaque 
  11 
K5-C200 
BALAJI K TAMARAPPOO , MD,  PHD  11NOV2019 from a patient who underwent CEA 8 weeks following a stroke ( Figure 8 ). We are currently 
optimizing staining conditions for α-SMA, αVβIII and α5β1 antib odies.   
Furthermore, we show an association between uptake of 18F-flote gatide and macrophage density 
in 5 patients who underwent plaque imaging with 18F-flotegatide  (Figure 9). We have also 
demonstrated that atherosclerotic plaque uptake of 18F-flotegat ide occurs via an RGD-specific 
mechanism in a mouse model of atherosclerosis ( Figure 11). We expect to find similar 
specificity of 18F-flotegatide binding in human plaque samples.  
 
Limitations and Alternative Strategies  
 
Aim 1.  
Radiotracer Synthesis, PET-MR and Plaque Uptake : We have synthesized and labeled several 
batches of 18F-flotegatide and we do not expect to encounter an y technical difficulties in the 
synthesis of 18F-flotegatide.  We have technical support from S iemens for trouble shooting if 
any issues relating to the synthesis of 18F-flotegatide were to  arise.  High affinity binding of 
purified 18F-flotegatide to αVβIII and α5β1 has been confirmed in-vitro with inverse surface 
plasmon resonance [53, 54].  Documentation of radiotracer purit y from our synthesis will also be 
verified by the FDA (IND to be obt ained). In the unlikely event  of difficulties in performing 
PET-MR, we will be able to seamlessly switch to PET-CT imaging for detection of 18F-
flotegatide uptake. We have 3 PET/CT scanners located in the De partment of Nuclear Medicine.  
Our preliminary data in Figure 5 and 6 and Table 1 indicates that we are likely to be successful 
in demonstrating that atherosclerotic plaque extracts 18F-flote gatide and that uptake of 18F-
flotegatide is increased in unstable plaque compared to stable plaque.  Since we are using 
clinical criteria to define plaque vulnerability, there is the possibility that we may be 
misclassifying some patients. We may be able to include LDL and  C-reactive protein (CRP) 
levels in our analysis and consider matching symptomatic and as ymptomatic patients based on 
these serum markers (classified as normal vs abnormal). This wi ll allow for comparisons to be 
made between symptomatic and asymptomatic patients with a simil ar inflammatory and lipid 
profile and minimize potential confounding effects. 
 
Aim 2a and 2b.  
Macrophages and neovascular endothelial cells are considered go ld standard histologic 
biomarkers for adjudication of unstable plaque in clinical stud ies [12, 13, 17, 50, 56, 59]. Based 
on our preclinical study of 18F-flotegatide uptake in a mouse m odel of atherosclerosis and our 
preliminary data from 5 patients with carotid atheroma, there i s a high likelihood of detecting an 
association between macrophage density and 18F- flotegatide upt ake. We also plan to compare 
18F-flotegatide uptake to histologic plaque features such as ar ea of fibrous elements and lipid 
core. This will serv e as an alternate method by which we can co nfirm that 18F- flotegatide 
uptake is associated with features of plaque vulnerability.  To  maximize sampling of 
macrophages, endothelial cells and smooth muscle cells, we prop ose to obtain multiple sections 
from the plaque segment with the highest 18F-flotegatide uptake . We have optimized the 
conditions for immunohistochemical staining of CD68 and CD31.  For our proposed studies, we 
will use commercially available antibodies to α-SMA and αVβIII that have been used by other 
investigators with formalin fixed, paraffin embedded plaque sam ples. The histology core is well 
equipped and has expertise for optimization of staining conditi ons and has access to other 
vendors of antibodies if this becomes necessary. 
  12 
K5-C200 
BALAJI K TAMARAPPOO , MD,  PHD  11NOV2019 
Preliminary results  
 
Aim 1.   Carotid MRI for plaque characterization ( Figure 4 ) and 18F-flotegatide PET-CT in 5 patients (3, 
with stroke due to carotid plaque rupture) with. Preliminary re sults confirm uptake of 18F-
flotegatide by atherosclerotic p laque in the carotid artery ( Figures 5 and 6) and increased uptake 
of 18F-flotegatide by plaque in patients with stroke compared t o asymptomatic patients ( Figure 
5 and Table 1 ).  
 
    
  13 
K5-C200 
BALAJI K TAMARAPPOO , MD,  PHD  11NOV2019 Aim 2a and 2b.  
             
 
        TIMELINE (ALL AIMS)  
 
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 FUTURE DIRECTIONS  
Our long-term goal is to translate the use of 18F-flotegatide f or identification of vulnerable 
plaque in individuals with carotid atherosclerosis. The R56 bri dge award will enable us to 
optimize PET-MRI of carotid plaque with 18F-flotegatide, demons trate that 18F-flotegatide 
uptake in carotid plaque can be imaged with PET-MRI and will es tablish that flotegatide uptake 
in carotid plaque is integrin mediated.  Results from the studi es proposed in this R56 application 
will be used as preliminary data (demonstrating the feasibility  of using 18F-flotegatide for 
imaging unstable plaque with PET-MRI) in an RO1 application.  I n the future RO1 application 

  14 
K5-C200 
BALAJI K TAMARAPPOO , MD,  PHD  11NOV2019 we propose to test our hypothesis that 18F-flotegatide may be p referentially extracted and 
retained by carotid artery pla que in patients with clinical sym ptoms of stroke or TIA (vulnerable 
plaque) compared to asymptomatic  control patients (stable plaqu e) in a larger cohort of 20 
symptomatic patients and 20 asymptomatic controls.  
 
Section 4.0  Trial Design 
  
APPROACH  
PET-MR of Carotid Plaque  
PET-Protocol:   
A total of 6 patients (3 with stroke or TIA and 3 asymptomatic)  will undergo noninvasive PET-
MR imaging (Imaging protocol is described below) after injectio n of 18F-Flotegatide. Our 
preliminary studies show that there is maximal plaque to blood pool contrast at 2h after injection 
of 18F-flotegatide . A dose of 10-12.5 milliCurie (370MBq-462.5MBq) of 18F-flotegati de will 
be injected intravenously and PET-MR imaging will be performed 2 hours (+/- 30 mins) after 
injection on a Siemens Biograph mMR (Siemens Healthcare Erlange n, Germany) using a 
dedicated head and neck coil (Siemens Healthcare). Scout images  will be obtained for 
localization of the carotid arteries. An mMR standard Dixon wat er-fat MR sequence will be 
obtained and segmented (into air, lung tissue, soft tissue and fat) for MR-based PET attenuation 
correction (MR-AC) [54]. PET acquisition will begin with the st art of the Dixon MR sequence 
in the same bed position. PET acquisition time will be 15 min i n three-dimensional list mode. 
The PET data from the PET-MR scan will be reconstructed using o rdered-subsets expectation 
maximization iterative reconstruction algorithm (OSEM 3D) (6 it erations, 21 subsets, zoom 2.0) 
with MR based attenuation correction yielding 512 x 512 image s lices (voxel size: 0.70 x 0.70 x 
2.03 mm). Attenuation maps for correction of the PET data from the PET-MR scanner will be 
generated on the basis of the Dixon water-fat MR sequence using  the postprocessing software of 
the scanner. Once plaque is localized on the MR images, the cor responding coregistered PET 
image will be visually evaluated for 18F-flotegatide uptake. Th e region corresponding to the 
plaque on the PET image will be analyzed with commercially avai lable software (MIM) to 
quantify standard uptake value (SUV) and TBR of 18F-flotegatide . MRI of plaque will be 
examined for markers of vulnerability including, fibrous cap, l ipid rich necrotic core and 
intraplaque hemorrhage. 
 
MRI-MRA for visualization and co-reg istration of atherosclerotic plaque:   
The MRI protocol will consist of high- spatial resolution 3D im aging sequences in order to 
detect major vulnerable plaque features and minimize partial vo lume effects due to tortuous 
carotid arteries. The sequences will be: a) 3D MP-RAGE -a heavi ly T1- weighted imaging 
sequence for detection of intraplaque hemorrhage; b) 3D time-of -flight (TOF) for definition of 
luminal stenosis; and c) pre- and post-contrast T1-weighted 3D turbo spin echo (SPACE) to 
detect and quantify the lipid-rich necrotic core and fibrous ca p. This will be followed by 
contrast injection (Gadolinium- DTPA, single dose 0.1 mmol/kg b odyweight, injection rate 2-3 
cc/sec). Post-contrast SPACE will be acquired 5 minutes post in jection. In addition, contrast-
enhanced MRA may also be added into the protocol to obtain high - quality MRA.  Typical 
imaging parameters are:  3D MP-RAGE axial acquisition, TR/TE = 15/3.5 msec, FOV = 
160x160 mm2, resolution = 0.6x0.6 mm2, slice = 2 mm interpolate d to 1 mm, flip angle = 15º, 
inversion time = 500 msec, turbo factor = 30.  3D TOF axial acq uisition, TR/TE = 20/4.6 msec, 
  15 
K5-C200 
BALAJI K TAMARAPPOO , MD,  PHD  11NOV2019 FOV = 160x160 mm2, resolution = 0.6x0.6 mm2, slice = 2 mm inter polated to 1 mm, flip angle 
= 20º.  3D SPACE coronal acquisition, TR/TE = 100/15 msec, FOV = 160x160 mm2, resolution 
= 0.6x0.6 mm2, slice = 0.6 mm, echo train = 50.  Image quality review, processing (multi-planar 
reconstruction, MPR), and tissue characterization (outlining an d size quantification) will be 
conducted on an image workstation with FDA-approved carotid pla que analysis software, MRI-
Plaqueview (VPDiagnostics, Seattle, WA). From each of 3D sequen ces, contiguous cross- 
sectional slices that are perpendicular to the common carotid a rtery will be reconstructed. 
Intraplaque hemorrhage will be identified on 3D MP-RAGE as a hy per-intense area. Lipid rich 
necrotic core and fibrous cap will be identified on post-contra st 3D SPACE as hypo-intense and 
hyper-intense areas, respectively, with pre- contrast SPACE as r e f e r e n c e .  V e s s e l  w a l l ,  l u m e n ,  
and individual components will be outlined in a semi- automatic  fashion. Their volumes will 
then be reported by the software. 
 
Figure 1. Overall Experimental Scheme  
 
 
Patients will be enrolled when they present to the neurologist for evaluation of stroke or TIA or 
when they are seen by vascular surgeon for CEA or an interventi onal cardiologist for carotid 
stent ( Figure 1).  All patients will have fasting lipid levels, C- Reactive protei n and HgBA1C 
measured as routine standard of care.  Symptomatic patients wou ld be required to have plaque 
≥70% in at least one carotid artery that would be implicated as  the source of embolus responsible 
for the stroke. We propose to enroll 3 patients with stroke or TIA for PET imaging. They will 
undergo PET-MR of the neck (to image the bilateral carotid arte ries) with 18F-Flotegatide 
within 96h of stroke or TIA and a simultaneous MRI and magnetic  resonance angiography 
(MRA) of the carotid arteries for anatomic localization of the plaque ( Specific Aim 1 ).  In 
addition to providing an anatomic map for coregistration of the  images obtained by PET, MRI 
  16 
K5-C200 
BALAJI K TAMARAPPOO , MD,  PHD  11NOV2019 will provide morphologic information about the carotid plaque.  Plaque removed during CEA or 
carotid stenting in all patients (within 7d of carotid PET-MR) will be used for histologic 
examination ( Specific Aim 2a ).  A small portion of the plaque from 3 symptomatic patients w ill 
be used for ex-vivo 18F-flotegatide uptake-competition studies to confirm integrin specific 
binding ( Specific Aim 2b ). We propose to also enroll 3 asymptomatic patients with a lum inal 
stenosis of ≥70% in at least one carotid artery (stable plaque)  referred for CEA or carotid 
stenting. These patients will be age-matched by deciles to symp tomatic patients.  These 
patients will undergo PET-MR of the neck (to image the bilatera l carotid arteries) with 18F-
flotegatide along with an MRI and MRA of their carotid arteries .  Plaque removed from 
asymptomatic patients at the time of CEA or carotid stenting (w ithin 7d of PET-MR) will be 
used for histologic examination. Exclusion criteria include, st roke due to atrial fibrillation, 
preexisting carotid stents in the artery of interest, renal dys function defined as glomerular 
filtration rate <40ml/min, allerg y to gadolinium based contrast  a g e n t s ,  m e t a l  i m p l a n t s  
incompatible with MRI, pregnancy , inability to provide informed  consent and age ≤18 years. 
We propose to enroll a total of 6 patients over a period of 1 y ear. 
 Section 5.0.  Selection of Subjects 
 Inclusion Criteria: 1.   Patients presenting  
a. to the neurologist for evaluatio n of stroke or TIA (Symptomatic ) with: 
i. Symptomatic patients with plaque ≥70% in at least one carotid a rtery that would be 
implicated as the source of embolus responsible for the stroke/ TIA. 
b. or to the vascular surgeon for CEA (Asymptomatic) with: 
i. asymptomatic patients with a luminal stenosis of ≥70% in at lea st one carotid artery 
(stable plaque) referred for CEA 
ii. age-matched by deciles to symptomatic patients 
c. or to the interventional cardio logist for evaluation and possib le carotid stenting with:  
i. asymptomatic patients with a lu minal stenosis of ≥50% in at lea st one carotid artery 
(stable plaque) referred for carotid stenting 
ii. age-matched by deciles to symptomatic patients 
 
Exclusion criteria: 1. stroke due to atrial fibrillation,  
2. preexisting carotid stents in the artery of interest,  
3. renal dysfunction defined as glomerular filtration rate <40ml/m in,  
4. allergy to gadolinium based contrast agents,  
5. Volunteers who have had four or m ore prior previous gadolinium contrast scans 
6. metal implants incompatible with MRI or other condition that pr ohibits MRI,  
7. pregnancy,  
8. allergy to animal  dander or animal -instigated asthma  
9. inability to provide informed consent and  
10. age ≤18 years.  
 We propose to enroll a total of 6 patients over a period of 1 y ear.  
  17 
K5-C200 
BALAJI K TAMARAPPOO , MD,  PHD  11NOV2019 Section   6.0  Treatment of Subjects  All eligible subjects will undergo PET-MR of the neck (to image  the bilateral carotid arteries) 
with 18F-Flotegatide within 96h of stroke or TIA and a simultan eous MRI and magnetic 
resonance angiography (MRA) of the carotid arteries for anatomi c localization of the plaque 
 Plaque removed from asymptomatic patients at the time of CEA or  carotid stenting (within 7d of 
PET-MR) will be used for h istologic examination. 
 Section 7.0   Assessm ent of Efficacy 
 
Validation of the atherosclerotic plaque detected by PET-MRI us ing 18F-flotegatide will 
be completed via in-vivo PET imaging of patients with unstable carotid plaque. Plaque will 
be quantified by measuring the plaque uptake of 18F-flotegatide  relative to 18F-flotegatide 
uptake in segments of the carotid vessel wall that are free of atherosclerosis. 
 
Section 9.0.    Statistics 
 Image Analysis of plaque using MRI and MRA: Hemorrhage appears bright on MP-RAGE 
(Figure 4 , panel A, yellow arrow).  On con trast enhanced T1W images, fib rous portions of 
atherosclerotic plaque appear bright ( Figure 4 Panel B, arrowhead) and necrotic core in the 
plaque will be identified on the postcontrast T1W image as the area with no or slight contrast 
enhancement ( Figure 4 panel B yellow arrow).  The percent stenosis will be quantified  from 
TOF images (panel C, bright lumen is shown by the yellow arrow) .  Thickness of the fibrous cap 
and volume of lipid rich necrotic core will be quantified and p laque features including 
hemorrhage, and intact vs ruptured fibrous cap will be recorded . 
 
Image Analysis of PET-MR:  PET-MR images will be fused with the simultaneously acquired 
MR images. Coregistration of PET images with MRI will be perfor med using anatomic 
landmarks.  Plaque is normally present in the carotid bifurcati on and the proximal internal 
carotid artery. Plaque localized on the axial MR images will be  correlated with PET signal.  
Uptake of 18F-flotegatide will be quantified in regions of inte rest (ROI) including both the 
vessel wall and the vessel lumen. The standard uptake value (SU V) in each slice position on 
the axial images will be quantified as SUV mean and SUV max using commercially available 
software (MIM software Inc, Cleveland, OH). These are derived f rom the injected dose, time 
to acquisition to account for decay and patient weight. The SUV max and SUV mean of 
unaffected segment of the carotid artery as well as the uptake of the tracer in the same level in 
the contralateral carotid artery will be quantified.  SUV mean of the blood pool in the aortic 
arch will be quantified to derive background uptake.  SUV max of the target ROI is divided by 
the background SUV mean to derive a target to background ratio (TBR). The TBR of 18F-
flotegatide in the plaque will be compared to TBR of unaffected  vessel wall. 
Comparison of morphologic markers of vulnerability with 18F-flotegatide uptake:  MRI based 
plaque features including, volume of lipid core and thickness o f fibrous cap will be directly 
compared to plaque uptake of 18F-flotegatide expressed as TBR f rom PET-MR images. 
  18 
K5-C200 
BALAJI K TAMARAPPOO , MD,  PHD  11NOV2019 Figure 3.  Power Calculations 
 Statistical Analysis Aim 1.  
The statistical analysis is provi ded to demonstrate how we prop ose to analyze data when we are 
able to test our hypothesis in a larger group of patients as pa rt of our future RO1.  18F-
flotegatide uptake will be analyz ed as a continuous variable.  The thickness of fibrous cap and 
volume of lipid rich necrotic c ore will also be treated as cont inuous variables. We will evaluate 
the use of a parametric test or a transformation of the data (e .g. log transform) prior to using a 
parametric test.   However, if this is not appropriate due to d istributional assumptions etc., we 
will use a nonparametric Mann Whitney U test with the following  null hypotheses: 
1. 18F-flotegatide uptake by carotid  plaque (TBR of plaque) in pat ients with symptoms 
of stroke or TIA is similar to 18F-flotegatide uptake by the un affected vessel wall. 
2. 18F-flotegatide uptake by carotid plaque (TBR of plaque) implic ated in stroke or TIA in 
symptomatic patients is similar to 18F-flotegatide uptake by st able plaque in asymptomatic 
patients. 
3. There is no correlation between 18F-flotegatide uptake and area  of the fibrous cap or 
volume of necrotic lipid core quantified by MRI. 
With a sample size of 17 per group, we will have 90% power to d etect a 1.2-fold difference in 
the TBR of the 
plaque responsible for causing stroke/TIA compared to TBR of un affected vessel wall (based on 
level of significance of 0.05 and the standard deviation of 0.3  for TBR measurements).  For our 
correlation studies 
between TBR of 18F-flotegatide uptake and MRI based characteris tics of vulnerability, a sample 
size of 19 will 
provide 80% power to detect at least moderate association (corr elation coefficient of 0.6) at a 
level of significance of 0.05. 
The goal of our proposed studies  in this R56 application is to demonstrate that detection of 
18F-flotegatide by PET-MRI is fea sible and that there is a dete ctable difference in 18F-
flotegatide uptake between unstabl e and stable atherosclerotic plaque.  Even though it may not 
be statistically si gnificant due to the limited number of patie nts who will be enrolled during the 

  19 
K5-C200 
BALAJI K TAMARAPPOO , MD,  PHD  11NOV2019 
1-year time-frame, we will be able to observe qualitative diffe rences in plaque uptake of 18F-
flotegatide between symptomatic  and asymptomatic patients. 
Aim 2a and 2b.  
Figure 7.  Power Calculations for Estimating Sample Size for Hi stologic 
Comparison Studies  
 
 
We propose to use a Spearman 
correlation (a nonparametric test of association) that does not assume linearity or normal distribution of the values of 18F-flotegatide uptake and staining density for macrophages, smooth muscle cells and endothelial cells. An overall sample size of 19, will provide 80% power to detect moderate to strong associations (correlation coefficient of 0.6 or greater) at a level of significance of 
0.05 ( Figure 7 ). Our plan to enroll 40 patients  is significantly greater than  the sample size 
needed for 80% power.   
 
The goals of Aims 2a and 2b in thi s R56 application are to demo nstrate that 18F -flotegatide 
uptake in carotid plaque is asso ciated with markers of vulnerab ility and is mediated by 
integrin-flotegatide inter action.  Even though our planned enro llment will not be powered to 
reach statistical significance for Aim 2a, we will be able to d emonstrate qualitative differences 
in histologic markers of plaque  vulnerability between symptomat ic and asymptomatic patients.  
We will also be able to unequivoc ally demonstrate that 18F-flot egatide uptake in 
atherosclerotic plaque  is mediated by int egrin binding with our  ex-vivo assay (Aim 2b).  
 
Section 10.0.    Quality Control and Quality Assurance  Descriptive summaries will be p rovided for all primary and seco ndary end-points. All 
analyses and reports will be de veloped per Good Clinical Practi ces. 
 Section 11.0     Ethical consid erations relating to the trial 
This study will be conducted in accordance with Good Clinical P ractice (GCP) 
requirements described in the cur rent revision of International  Conference on 
Harmonization of Technical Requireme nts of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH) 
Guidelines and all applicable re gulations, including current Un ited States Code of 
Federal Regulations (CFR), Title 21, Parts 11, 50, 54, 56, and 312 and Title 45, 
Part 164. Compliance with these r egulations and guidelines also  constitutes 
compliance with the ethical prin ciples described in the current  revision of the 
Declaration of Helsinki. This study will also be carried out in  accordance with local 
legal requirements. 
  20 
K5-C200 
BALAJI K TAMARAPPOO , MD,  PHD  11NOV2019 Section 12.0.   Data Handling and Recordkeeping 
 Patients’ names will remain confidential and will not be includ ed in the database. Only patient 
number, patient initials, and birth date will be recorded in th e data system. If the patient name 
appears on any other document co llected (e.g., hospital dischar ge summary), the name will be 
obliterated before the document  is transmitted. All study findi ngs will be stored in paper CRFs. 
The patients will give explicit pe rmission for representatives of the Sponsor, regulatory 
authorities, and the IRB/IEC to i nspect their medical records t o verify the information collected. 
Patients will be informed that a ll personal inform ation made av ailable for inspection will be 
handled in the strictest confid ence and in accordance with all state, local, and federal data 
protection/privacy laws, inclu ding, without limit ation, the HIP AA. All participants in the study 
will provide written a uthorization to discl ose private health i nformation either as a part of the 
written ICF or as a separate aut horization form. The authorizat ion will contain all required 
elements specified by 45 CFR 164 a nd ICH E6 as applicable, and will contain a waiver of 
patient access to study-relate d private health information unti l the conclusion of the clinical 
study. The authorization will rema in valid and in full force an d effect until the first to occur of 
(1) the expiration of 2 years af ter the study therapy is approv ed for the indicat ion being studied, 
or (2) the expiration of 2 years after the research program is discontinued. 
 Individual patient m edical information obtai ned during this stu dy is confidential and its 
disclosure to third parties (ot her than those mentioned in this  section) is stric tly prohibited. In 
addition, medical information obta ined during this study may be  provided to the patient's 
personal physician or to other ap propriate medica l personnel wh en required in connection with 
the patient's continued health and welfare.  
The study site will maintain a pe rsonal patient identification list (patient and treatment numbers 
with the corresponding patient name s) to enable records to be i dentified. 
 In accordance with 21 CFR 312.62, an Investigator participating  in this study shall retain 
records, including the CRFs a nd supporting data including signe d and dated consent forms, and 
medical records, progress notes o f the physician, the individua l's hospital chart(s), and the 
nurses' and staff notes.  
  21 
K5-C200 
BALAJI K TAMARAPPOO , MD,  PHD  11NOV2019 Section 13.0 FLOWCHART OF PROCEDURES  
 
Procedures  Visit 1 3 
Baseline Visit 2  
(Pre-Operative 
PET Scan) Follow-up 
Phone Call Visit 3 
(Surgical Day) 
 (-28 days) (-7 to 0 days) (-4 - +3 Days) Day 0 
Standard of Care Procedures: I tems, drugs and services that are  part of regular care and 
would be done even if you did not take part in this research st udy.  These will be billed to you 
and/or your insurance company. 
Medical History 
Review X    
Medication Review X  X X 
Vital Signs x 3   X  
Physical Exam   X    
Electrocardiogram x 
3   X    
Pre-op blood tests  
including Fasting lipid panels, C-reactive protein and HgBA1C1  X
1 X1    
Pregnancy test, if 
applicable    X   
IV (intravenous) line 
inserted   X   
Carotid 
Endarterectomy or 
Stenting of Carotid 
Artery     X 
MRI/MRA Imaging2  X  
Research Related Procedures: Ite ms and services done for resear ch purposes only.  These will 
NOT be billed to your insurance company. 
Subject Informed 
Consen t X       
Inclusion/Exclusion 
Criteria X       
PET/MR2 Imaging 
with 18-flotegatilde  X    
Adverse Events As they occu r
Sample of carotid 
artery plaque 
removed       X 
1If labs been collected within 30  days prior to the research ima ging tests, no blood will be drawn to 
check your kidney function. 
2 Within 96 hours of stroke or TIA (if applicable; “Symptomatic”  subjects only) 
3 Baseline visit (Visit 1) may  be combined with Visit 2.
 