 
 Page 1 of 5 
  
 Mrs. A and Mr. B  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
April 27, 2017 
  
 
 Page 2 of 5 
  
 Title of the Research Study: Mrs. A and Mr. B 
Consent for Clinician  
Unique Protocol ID: AD-12-11-4567 Principal Investigator: Hillary R. Bogner, MD 
University of Pennsylvania 
928 Blockey Hall 
423 Guardian Drive 
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6021 215-746-4181 Hillary.Bogner@uphs.upenn.edu
 
AnnaMeg Resident (Second Life avatar name) 
 
Head of Virtual Ability Community: Alice Krueger, Virtual Ability, Inc., 2220 S. 
Fraser Unit 1, Aurora, CO 80014, 303-400- 3306; Email: akrueger@virtualability.org  
 
You are being asked to take part in a research study. This is not a form of treatment 
or therapy. It is about your perceptions of healthcare access and quality as a health professional. Your participation is voluntary which means you can choose whether on 
not to participate. Please ask the res earcher to explain anything you do not understand. 
If you decide to participate, you will be asked to sign this form and a copy will be given 
to you. Keep this form because in it you will find contact information and answers to questions about the study.  At the end of this form, we will ask you to sign the consent form using your avatar name. If the avatar name is your real name or if your avatar name is well known, then you will be asked to create a new avatar with an anonymous name and be re-consented for the purpose of this study. This way, no information collected in Second Life can be linked to your actual name or to a well- known avatar name that can 
be linked to the actual name. 
 
What is the purpose of the study?  
The purpose of this research is to get your opinion about how health care access and 
quality may be affecting people with and without disabilities.  
 
Why was I asked to participate in the study?  
You are being asked to join this study because you are a practicing health 
professional 21 years of age or older without a disability who has clinical experience in the provision of care to people with and without disabilities. 
 
How long will I be in the study?  
The study will take place over a period of 3 years. You may be asked to participate in 
one or more focus group sessions.  Each session will last at a maximum of 1 ½ hours. 
Researchers may participate in future activities with you and take notes on the 
conversations and behaviors. 
 
Where will the study take place?  
You will use your home computer or a computer somewhere else.  
 
 Page 3 of 5 
  
  
What will I be asked to do? 
We will ask you to complete an online survey about your type of practice and the 
disabilities and health conditions that you see in your patients. You may also be asked to 
participate in one or more focus group sessions in Second Life with up to 5 or 6 other clinicians.  
In the focus groups, you will be asked about access to and quality of healthcare based 
on your clinical observations. We also may show you research findings about healthcare and ask you what you think those findings. You may be approached for follow-up conversations after the focus groups, and your conversations and behaviors may be observed. 
 
What are the risks?  
There are no  known physical risks associated with this research study. The research 
includes the time and effort involved in answering questions about your own experiences in caring for a variety of patients. If you get tired, you can take a break and come back later.  You can decide to stop participating at any time. You should not answer any 
questions that make you uncomfortable. 
 
How will I benefit from the study?  
There is no direct benefit to you. However, your participation could help us 
understand ways to improve access to and quality of healthcare, which can benefit you and your patients indirectly. In the future, this may help other people to live healthier and more independent lives. 
 
What other choices do I have? 
Your alternative to being in the study is to not be in the study. 
 
What happens if I do not choose to join the research study?  
You may choose to join the study or you may choose not to join the study. Your 
participation is voluntary. There are no negative consequences should you not choose to participate.  
 
When is the study over? Can I leave the study before it ends?  
You can stop completing the survey or leave the focus group session at any time. 
 
How will confidentiality be maintained and my privacy be protected?  
We will do our best to make sure that the personal information obtained during the 
course of this research study will be kept private. However, we cannot guarantee total privacy. Your personal information may be given out if required by law. If information from this study is published or present ed at scientific meetings, your name and other 
personal information will not be used. 
Your comments will identify you only by avatar name. Your privacy will be further 
protected by research analysts replacing your study avatar name with a study 
identification number. 
Focus groups will be held in a non- public restricted access area within Second Life. 
As within any Second Life venue or any focus group, the information you share can be 
 
 Page 4 of 5 
  
  
read or heard by anyone in your focus group. Consequently, we ask that you not share 
anything you are not comfortable disclosing in that venue. You can use the "instant 
message" function in Second Life to share information with the researchers that you do not want to share with other members of the focus group. 
Information from the focus group session chat will be combined from many clinicians 
and patients with and without disabilities. It will be analyzed by a research team and may be published or disseminated in other ways. The information you share with us will be shared with a researcher from the University of California, Irvine. If any publications or presentations result from this research, neither your avatar nor professional name will be included. Occasionally, short quotes from the focus group chat might be published. Any personally identifying information that you might have provided will be removed from those quotes. 
 
What happens if I am injured from being in the study?  
No physical injury will result from the research procedures. If a topic upsets you, you 
may leave the focus group discussion. We would also encourage you to contact any research team member to discuss your concerns or feelings. See contact information above or at www.healthcareequitability.org .
  Anything discussed will not be shared 
outside the research staff team.  
 
Will I have to pay for anything? 
There are no costs associated with participating in the research study.  
 
Will I be paid for being in this study?  
If you complete the qualifying survey, you will receive a thank you gift of 200 
Lindens (worth about eighty cents in US currency). If you are invited to participate in a focus group session, you will receive a gift of 1000 Linden dollars (worth about $4.35 in US currency) for completing the session. These are small ways for us to say "Thank you for helping!" 
 
Who can I call with questions, complaints or if I’m concerned about my rights as a research subject?  
If you have questions, concerns, or complaints regarding your participation in this 
research study or if you have any questions about your rights as a research subject, you should speak with the Principal Investigator listed on page one of this form. If a member of the research team cannot be reached or you want to talk to someone other than those 
working on the study, you may contact the Office of Regulatory Affairs with any question, concerns, or complaints at the University of Pennsylvania by calling (215) 898- 2614. 
 
 
CONSENT:  
Within Second Life, we will collect your consent using “gifting” of a notecard.  
Gifting the notecard is considered to be the same as getting your signature. 
 
By “signing” this notecard and gifting it to the researcher, you will be:  
 
 Page 5 of 5 
  
  
a. Agreeing to participate in this research  and 
b. Telling us you understood this form.  
 
Type your Avatar Name (as it appears in  SEARCH):    
 
Type your professional name and credentials:    
 
Today’s date:    
 
Name of Person Obtaining Consent:    