Bioavailability of SPMs in Obese Humans  
NCT number [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
Document Date 06/05/2020 
 1 Complete  Title: Bioavailability of Specialized Pro -resolving Mediators in Obese Humans  
  
Short  Title: Immunometabolic  Response  to SPMs   
 
Drug or Device  Name (s): SPM Active   
 
FDA IND/IDE (if applicable ): N/A 
 
Sponsor : NC TracS Grant # 550KR242033   
 
Protocol  Date: 2/10/20  
 
Amendment  1 Date: 6/05/20  
Amendment  2 Date:  
Amendment  3 Date: 
Amendment  4 Date: 
 
 
NC Translational  and Clinical  Sciences  Institute  (TraCS ) 
Brinkhous -Bullitt  Building , Dental  Cir 
Chapel  Hill, NC 27599  
USA 
Saame  Raza Shaikh , PhD 
2203 McGavran -Greenberg  
Chapel  Hill, NC, 27514  
Phone  (919) 843 -4348   
email : shaikhsa@email .unc.edu 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2  
PROTOCOL  TITLE : Bioavailability  of Specialized  Pro-Resolving  Mediators  in Obese  Humans     
 
Short  Title:  Immunometabolic  Response  to SPMs  
 
          Lead Investigator : 
Saame  Raza Shaikh , Ph.D. 
 University  of North  Carolina  at Chapel  Hill 
Protocol  Version : 2 
Version  Date: June 5th 2020 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6/5/20  
 3 TABLE  OF CONTENTS  
Table  of Contents  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 3 
Abbreviations  and Definitions  of Terms  ................................ ................................ ....... 4 
Protocol  Synopsis  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 5 
1 BACKGROUND   AND RATIONALE  ................................ ................................ .............  8 
2 STUDY  OBJECTIVES  ................................ ................................ ................................ . 9 
3 INVESTIGATIONAL  PLAN  ................................ ................................ ........................  10 
4 STUDY  PROCEDURES ................................ ................................ .............................  12 
5 STUDY  EVALUATIONS  AND MEASUREMENTS  ................................ ..........................  13 
6 STATISTICAL  CONSIDERATIONS  ................................ ................................ ..............  14 
7 STUDY  INTERVENTION  (DEVICE  OR OTHER  INTERVENTION ) ................................ ..... 17 
8 STUDY  INTERVENTION  ADMINISTRATION  ................................ ...............................  17 
9 SAFETY  MANAGEMENT  ................................ ................................ .........................  17 
10  DATA  COLLECTION  AND MANAGEMENT  ................................ ................................  17 
11 RECRUITMENT  STRATEGY  ................................ ................................ ......................  18 
12 CONSENT  PROCESS  ................................ ................................ ...............................  18 
13 PUBLICATION  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 19 
14 REFERENCES  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  19 
Appendix  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................  20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4  
ABBREVIATIONS  AND DEFINITIONS  OF TERMS  
  
 
Abbreviation  Definition  
14-HDHA  14-hydroxy  docosahexaenoic  acid 
17-HDHA  17-hydroxy  docosahexaenoic  acid 
18-HEPE  18-hydroxy  eicosapentaenoic  acid 
BMI Body  mass  index  
CyTOF  Cytometry  at time of flight  
DHA Docosahexaenoic  acid 
EPA Eicosapentaenoic  acid 
HDL high density  lipoprotein  
LDL Low density  lipoprotein  
NSAIDs  non-steroidal  anti-inflammatory  drugs  
PBMC  Peripheral  blood  mononuclear  cells 
PCA Principal  component  analysis  
PHI Personal  health  information  
PUFA  Polyunsaturated  fatty acid 
SPMs  Specialized  Pro-resolving  Mediators  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 PROTOCOL  SYNOPSIS  
Study  Title Immunometabolic  Response  to Specialized  Pro-Resolving  
Mediators  in Obese  Humans   
Funder  Departmental  funds  
Clinical  Phase  Pilot study  
Study  Rationale  Obesity  is associated  with chronic , low-grade  inflammation  and 
impaired  immunity , which  contributes  to the development  of 
metabolic  complications  such as diabetes , cardiovascular  disease , 
and increased  susceptibility  to infection  due to impaired  humoral  
immunity . The metabolism  of immune  cells has emerged  as a 
major  therapeutic  target  for improving  chronic  inflammation . 
Specialized  pro-resolving  mediators  (SPMs ) in particular  are lipid-
derived  metabolites  critical  in orchestrating  the resolution  phase  
of inflammation . However , SPMs  are lowered  with obesity . The 
innovation  lies in the study  of SPMs  as therapeutic  agents  for 
immune  resolution  of chronic  inflammation  that can lead to an 
improved  humoral  immune  response  in the obese . Our first 
objective  is to establish  the concentration  of SPMs  in plasma , 
serum and peripheral  blood  mononuclear  cells (PBMCs ) of obese  
subjects  in response  to dietary  supplementation  of SPMs  (aim 1a) . 
We will further  determine  the immunologica l fitness  of the 
leukocyte  pool, specifically  examining  B cell antibody  production  
in response  to ex-vivo stimulation  (aim 1 b). Finally, we will 
correlate metabolic profiles with SPM concentrations (aim 2). 
Overall, this will help us determine  whether  SPM 
supplementation  mitigates  the impaired  humoral  immune  
response  of obese  subjects  and determine  the use of SPMs  as 
potential  therapeutic  agents  for the obese . 
Study  Objective (s) Primary  Aim 1: To compare  immunological  fitness  pre- and post- 
oral SPM administration  in the obese .  
• Aim 1a: To quantify  SPM concentrations  in plasma  
(pg/mL) , serum  (pg/mL)  and PBMCs  before  and after SPM 
supplementation . 
• Aim 1b: To measure  antibody  response s of B cells in PBMC  
pool with in vitro stimulation  and cytokine  production  
before  and after SPM supplementation .  
Secondary  Aim 2: To compare  metabolic  profiles  pre- and post - 
supplementation  in response  to an oral dose of SPMs  in the 
obese .  
• Aim 2a: To measure  fasting  insulin  (ng/dL)  and fasting  
glucose  (mg/dL) before  and after intervention . 
• Aim 2b: To correlate  pre- and post- metabolic  
measurements  with measured  pre- and post- SPM 
concentrations . 
 6 Test Article (s) 
(If Applicable ) The ‘SPM Active ’ dietary  supplement  will be supplied  by 
Metagenics  for intervention .  
Study  Design  
 A non-randomized uncontrolled clinical trial  with convenience  
sampling . At total of 24 individuals  (12 males  & 12 females ) will 
be selected  against  inclusion /exclusion  criteria . Pre- and post- i-
ntervention  measurements  will be collected  and analyzed .  
Subject  Population  
key criteria  for Inclusion  
and Exclusion : Inclusion  Criteria  
1. Male and (post-menopausal ) female  subjects  age 50-65 
years  with BMI 30-40 ( obese ) who are euglycemic  and 
pre-diabetic   
Exclusion  Criteria  
1. Subjects  with active  autoimmune  disease , liver disease , 
coagulopathy , hypothyroidism , known  allergy  to fish or 
shellfish , those  taking  active asthma medications,  
anticoagulants , estrogen , testosterone , daily aspirin  or 
NSAIDs , anyone  with inability  to give informed  consent  
2. Subjects  receiving  immunomodulatory  or 
immunosuppressant  therapy , with known  active  
malignancy  or under going  treatment  for malignancy , and 
those  consuming  n-3 PUFA  supplements  or high 
consumption  of fatty fish (>2 servings  per week ) 
Number  Of Subjects   24 
Study  Duration  The entire study  is expected  to last 6-9 months . This includes  an 
enrollment  period  of 3-4 months  and data analysis . 
Study  Phases  
Screening  
Study  Treatment  
Follow -Up   (1) Screening : Screening  for eligibility  will be performed  by Dr. 
Butler and his designated study  coordinator  at UNC Family  
Medicine  Center  during  standard  pre-operative  checkups  in a 
private , closed -door room . Subjects  will be asked  questions  orally  
during  the primary  visit to determine  if eligibility  criteria  are met, 
at which  time informed  consent  and HIPPA  authorization  will be 
obtained .  
(2) Intervention : The intervention  is the dietary  supplement  ‘SPM 
Active ’ supplied  by Metagenics . All subjects  will be administered  4 
capsules  per day for 4 weeks  +/- 2-4 days. 12-hour fasting  blood  
and serum  will be drawn  pre- and post-intervention  for each 
subject  by a licensed  phlebotomist  at the UNC Family  Medicine  
Lab and under  the direction  of Dr. Butler .  
(3) Follow -Up: The study coordinator  will follow  up twice  by 
phone  at the end of week  1 and week  3 of supplementation  and 
relay any health  concerns  to Dr. Butler  who may determine  if an 
in-person  visit is necessary . Following  4 weeks  intervention , 
patients  will discontinue  supplementation  follow  up in a routine  
manner  as designated  by their UNC Family  Medicine  physician . 
 7 Efficacy  Evaluations  If SPM administration  does not lead to increased  uptake  of SPMs  
in PBMCs  or serum  with the first 9 subjects , then we will not 
conduct  CyTOF . Instead , we will spend  the funds  in conducting  a 
pilot metabololipidomic  study  of 9 subjects  of one sex to 
determine  if 8 weeks  of intervention  leads  to an elevation  in the 
three metabolites  of interest . We envision  no technical  limitations  
to the study  as all the proposed  protocols  are optimized . 
Safety  Evaluations  While  adverse  events  are unlikely , if 50% or more  of total study  
participants  report  intolerable  adverse  reactions  from taking  the 
supplement , we will stop the study . 
Sample Size Rationale  The primary  aim of the study  is designed  and powered  to 
measure  an increase  in 18-HEPE , 17-HDHA , and 14-HDHA  in Aim 
1. Additional  measures  in Aim 2 are exploratory , but necessary  
for future  grant  applications  to demonstrate  the feasibility  of the 
approach . At a family -wise error rate of 5% controlling  for testing  
of three  metabolites  mentioned  above , n=9 will provide  more  
than 80% power  to detect  a 50%-fold change  increase  in 
metabolite  levels  within  each subject . We are assuming  a similar  
effect  size for both males  and females  and are doubling  the 
sample  size (n=18, 9 per sex) to allow  us to subset  the data in 
case we find divergent  results  between  sexes . To account  for 
possible  loss-to-follow  up, we increased  the sample  size to 24 
(n=12 male + 12 female ). Power  analysis  was conducted  
assuming  a paired  t-test on pre- and post-treatment  metabolite  
levels  for three  pre-specified  metabolites . Expected  variability  of 
within  subject  differences  in metabolite  levels  was assessed  from 
a previous  dataset  and the median  standard  deviation  was 
calculated  across  all metabolites .1 Power  analyses  were calculated  
by Dr. Michael  Love in the UNC Department  of Biostatistics . 
Statistical  & Analytic  
Plan  Generally, most datasets will be assessed for normality and 
homogeneity of variance using the Shapiro -Wilks test and Bartlett 
test respectively. However, normality will also be assessed via a 
qqplot of the standardized residuals and we will visualize the 
distribution of our data w ith a histogram. In addition, to 
corroborate the Bartlett test we will check the homogeneity of 
variance of the residuals (homoscedasticity) using a scale -location 
plot where the square root of the standardized residuals is plotted. 
Data that passes both a ssumptions will be analyzed via a paired 
two sample Student T -test. Data that fails the assumption of 
heteroscedasticity will be analyzed using a paired Welch T -test. 
Another alternative would be to apply a log or square root 
transformation  to achieve hete roscedasticity  or approach a 
Gaussian distribution . However, if the data still fails the 
assumptions of normality and heteroscedasticity it will be analyzed 
with a paired Wilcoxon rank sum test. All p -values from these 
 8 analyses will undergo either a Bonfer roni or Benjimani -Hochberg  p-
value adjustment  at a 5% false discovery rate . 
DATA AND SAFETY  
MONITORING  PLAN Data will be kept on an encrypted  desktop  computer  protected  by 
multiple  passwords  in a lab, located  on a hall protected  by card 
access  in Michael  Hooker  Research  Center , Chapel  Hill, NC. De-
identified  data will be stored  on REDCap  for use by research  team  
personnel  only. Data management  will be performed  by the PI 
and the study  coordinator s. All data acquisition  will meet  HIPPA  
and confidentiality  standards . The PIs will be responsible  for 
monitoring  and reviewing  subject  data, lab results , study  
progress , subject  safety  and confidentiality , and the accuracy  and 
security  of the emerging  data. They will also be responsible  for 
running  the assays  and entering  all data into redcap  for statistical  
analysis . The co -I, Dr. Butler, will follow -up with patients as  
necessary; his contact information and that of the study 
coordinator will also be given  to the study subjects.  
 
 
1 BACKGROUND  AND RATIONALE  
1.1 Introduction  
Chronic  inflammation , a central  component  of obesity , contributes  toward  the development  of numerous  
metabolic  complications  such as type 2 diabetes , cardiovascular  diseases , and increased  susceptibility  to 
infection . The metabolism  of immune  cells has emerged  as a major  therapeutic  target  for improving  chronic  
inflammation , and thereby , whole -body metabolism . Specialized  pro-resolving  mediators  (SPMs ) in particular  
are lipid-derived  metabolites  that have been shown  to orchestrate  the resolution  of inflammation , 
regeneration  of damaged  tissues , and even improve  outcomes  to infections .2,3 However , SPMs  are lowered  
with obesity . It is therefore  hypothesized  that exogenous  administration  of SPMs  to obese  humans  may 
have therapeutic  value  as insulin  and glucose  sensitizing  agents  by targeting  chronic  inflammatory  pathways  
in obesity . Until recently , a major  roadblock  in the field of obesity  and SPMs  is that translation  of findings  
from the preclinical  level to humans  has remained  limited . However , this obstacle  can now be overcome  as 
the first oral formulation  of SPMs  has emerged  on the market  as a dietary  supplement . We will lead the 
field by taking  the first steps  toward  precision  admini stration  of SPMs  as therapeutic  agents  for immune  
resolution  of chronic  inflammation  in the obese . Specifically , we will establish  the concentration  of SPMs  in 
plasma , serum  and peripheral  blood  mononuclear  cells (PBMCs ) of obese  subjects  in response  to dietary  
supplementation  with ‘SPM Active ’. We will further  determine  the immunological  fitness  of the leukocyte  
pool, specifically  examining  B cell antibody  production  in response  to ex-vivo stimulation . This will 
determine  whether  SPM supplementation  mitigates  the impaired  humoral  immune  response  of obese  
subjects . Overall , this work will help determine  the use of SPMs  as potential  therapeutic  agents  for the 
obese . 
 
1.2 Name  and Description  of Investigational  Product  or Intervention   
The study  will provide  the dietary  supplement  ‘SPM Active ,’ manufactured  by Metagenics , as intervention . 
Each capsule  contains  145 mg of the specialized  pro-resolving  mediators  (SPMs ) 18-HEPE  (25 mg) , 17-HDHA  
(40 mg) and 14-HDHA  (80 mg)  from fractionated  marine  lipid concentrate . SPMs  are synthesized  
enzymatically  from n-3 polyunsaturated  fatty acids (PUFA ) known  as eicosapentaenoic  (EPA) and 
 9 docosahexaenoic  acids (DHA) and are known  to play a critical  role in resolving  chronic , low-grade  
inflammation .  
 
1.3 Non-Clinical  and Clinical  Study  Findings  
The same  ‘SPM Active ’ dietary  supplement  to be administered  to obese  subjects  in this clinical  trial was 
previously  used as intervention  in a human  clinical  trial by Dalli et al, and found  to be safe at doses  up to 
4.5g in healthy  individuals .4 The investigators  concluded  that SPM supplementation  lead s to an increase  in 
peripheral  blood  SPM concentrations  and reprograms  peripheral  blood  cells, thus indicating  a role for SPMs  
in mediating  immunological  activity .4  
 
1.4 Relevant  Literature  and Data 
 
Obesity  is a growing  national  and global  epidemic . In the United  States ; over 35% of Americans  are 
currently  obese  (Body mass index  (BMI) >30 kg/m2), and another  one-third overweight  (BMI: 25-29.9 
kg/m2).5 Obesity  is associated  with numerous  chronic  health  conditions , including  insulin  resistance , type-2 
diabetes , hyperlipidemia  and hypertension , leading  to what is termed  as the metabolic  syndrome .6 Chronic  
inflammation , a central  component  of obesity , significantly  contributes  to the development  of these  
metabolic  complications  and has been associated  with accumulation  of visceral  adipose  tissue  and immune  
cell infiltration .7-9 Recently , the metabolism  of immune  cells has emerged  as a major  therapeutic  target  for 
improving  chronic  inflammation  and whole -body metabolism , as immune  cells have fundamentally  different  
metabolic  programming  between  pro- and anti-inflammatory  subsets .10-13  
 
Specialized  pro-resolving  mediators  (SPMs ) have recently  emerged  as a target  for improving  chronic  
inflammation . SPMs  known  as protectins , resolvins , lipoxins  and maresins , are potent  metabolites  
enzymatically  synthesized  from n-3 polyunsat urated  fatty acids (PUFA ) eicosapentaenoic  (EPA) and 
docosahexaenoic  acids (DHA).14 Our research , in agreement  with other  labs, have discovered  that 
metabolites  of the SPM family  are decreased  across  a range  of tissues  in mouse  models  of obesity  and in 
circulation  of obese  individuals .15-18 To exemplify , we have reported  that the DHA-derived  SPMs  14-HDHA  
and 17-HDHA  are lowered  in the spleens  of obese  C57BL/6J mice.15 We are also finding  a strong  reduction  
in the EPA-derived  SPM known  as 18-HEPE  in white  adipose  tissue  and liver of obese  mice relative  to lean 
controls  (Fig. 1). Overall , our results  are highly  consistent  with data from a recent  study  to show  that 
14HDHA , 17-HDHA , and 18-HEPE  are lowered  in circulation  of obese  subjects .17 
 
SPMs  have insulin /glucose -normalizing  properties . Rigorous  literature  reports  demonstrate  that EPA- and 
DHA-derived  SPMs  improve  varying  aspects  of murine  metabolism  including  insulin  resistan ce and hepatic  
steatosis .20-22 We have investigated  the effects  of resolvin  E1 (the downstream  product  of 18-HEPE ) on 
hyperglycemia  and hyperinsulinemia  of obese  male C57BL/6J mice. Administration  of resolvin  E1 to obese  
male mice at 300ng per mouse  per day for 4 days prior to sacrifice  has no effect  on body weight  (Fig. 2A) 
or food intake  (data not shown ). Resolvin  E1 completely  restores  high fat diet-induced  hyperglycemia  (Fig. 
2B) and strongly  improves  hyperinsulinemia  (Fig. 2C). 
 
2 STUDY  OBJECTIVE   
The purpose  of the study  is to determine  the efficacy  of SPM supplementation  on chronic inflammation in 
obese  human  subjects . The premise  is based  on the notion  that SPMs  are lowered  in obese  individual . 
Therefore , it is hypothesized  that exogenous  administration  of SPMs  to obese individuals  may have 
therapeutic  value  as insulin /glucose  sensitizing  agents  by targeting inflammatory  pathway s.19 This application  
breaks  new ground  by taking  the first steps  toward  translating  SPMs  from the pre-clinical  level to obese  
 10 humans . We propose  a bioavailability  study  in which  we will establish  the concentration  of SPMs  in plasma  
and PBMCs  of obese  subjects  (primary  aim) in response  to dietary  supplementation  with SPMs . Additional  
exploratory  measurements  that correlate metabolic parameters with SPM concentration are proposed  in 
our secondary  aim. 
 
2.1 Primary  Objective  
Our primary  objective  is to compare  immunological  fitness  pre- and post- oral SPM administration  in the 
obese :  
- Aim 1a: To quantify  SPM concentrations  in plasma , serum  and PBMCs  before  and after oral SPM 
supplementation . We will measure  SPMs  in 100µl of plasma  and 2 x 106 PBMCs . PBMCs  will be isolated  
with establish ed protocols  in our lab.15, 26 The rationale  for PBMCs  vs. plasma  is to compare  whether  
SPM levels  in PBMCs  are higher  than plasma  or vice versa , indicating  SPM uptake  into the immune  cells 
or lack thereof . We will also measure  other  lipid metabolites  involved  in the inflammatory  resolution  
process  including  thromboxanes , leukotrienes , prostaglandins , epoxy  fatty acids, eoxins , mono -, di-, and 
tri-hydroxy  fatty acids, and hepoxilins . Blinded  samples  will be shipped  to our collaborator  Dr. Reisdorph  
for two-dimensional  reverse  phase  HPLC  tandem  mass spectrometry . 
 
- Aim 1b: To measure  antibody  responses  of B cells in PBMC  pool with in vitro stimulation  and cytokine  
production  before  and after SPM supplementation . B cells will be directly  stimulated  in the PBMC  isolate  
to mimic  their natural  environment . Then , antibody  concentrations  will be measured  from the 
supernatants  of the cultured  cells via ELISA  for pre- and post-intervention  samples . 
 
2.2 Secondary  Objective  
Our second ary objective  is to compare  metabolic  profiles  in response  to an oral dose of SPMs  in the obese :  
- Aim 2a: To measure  fasting  insulin  and fasting  glucose  before  and after intervention . Blood  samples  
from baseline  and post-intervention  will be used to measure  fasting  glucose  (mg/dL) and fasting  insulin  
(ng/mL) through  McClendon  labs. Exploratory  studies  will test if obese  adult  participants  taking  a daily 
dose of SPMs  have lower  mean  fasting  levels  of serum  insulin  and glucose  after 4 weeks  of SPM 
administration , relative  to baseline . Participants  will be asked  by the study coordinator about  the extent  
to which  they complied  with dosing  at the end of week  2 and week  3 following  the start of 
supplementation  
 
- Aim 2b: To correlate  pre- and post- metabolic  measurements  with measured  pre- and post- SPM 
concentrations . Anthropomorphic  and blood  pressure  measurements  will be taken . Each subject  will 
have his/her insulin  (in ng/dL)  and glucose  (in mg/dL) measured  pre/post supplementation  through  
Family  Medicine  and the Reisdorph  lab will determine  SPM concentrations  in the plasma  pre/post 
supplementation . Insulin  and glucose  measurements  will then be correlated  with measured  SPM levels . 
-  
3 INVESTIGATIONAL  PLAN  (brief overview ) 
3.1 Study  Design  
We will conduct  a non-randomized uncontrolled clinical trial  to measure  the efficacy  of SPM administration  
in the obese . We will selectively  recruit  (n=24) obese  subjects  (BMI 30-40 kg/m2) and administer  an SPM 
formulation  (“SPM Active”) provided  by Metagenics  for 4 weeks . The study  design  will rely on blood  
samples  collected  at baseline  and at the end of the 4-week  intervention . All analyses  will rely on 
 11 comparisons  between  pre- and post-intervention . The concentration  of SPMs , in addition  to other  PUFA -
derived  metabolites  that share  the same  enzymatic  pathways  as SPMs , will be established  at baseline  and 
post-intervention  using  mass spectrometry -based  metabololipidomics . The concentration  of all metabolites  
will be measured  for plasma  and peripheral  blood  mononuclear  cells (PBMCs ). 
 
Overview  of Study  Phases  
 
Screening /Baseline : Subjects  will be recruited  in person  at UNC Family  Medicine  Center  at 540 Manning  
Drive , Chapel  Hill, NC 27599 in a private , closed -door room  during  a regularly  scheduled  office  visit with Dr. 
Butler . We are using  a convenience  sample  method , therefore  everyone  age 50 -65 will be screened  
according  to the criteria  set forth for the study . During  their visit, Dr. Butler  will ask subjects  if they wish to 
learn  more  about  the study . If yes, the subjects  will be directed  to meet with the study  coordinator . If the 
study  coordinator  is unavailable , Dr. Butler  can complete  the consent  process  during  the office  visit. 
Recruitment  and informed  consent  will then follow  the support  documents  provided , with either  
preoperative  or post-operative  consent  and scripts  being  read by the study  coordinator  to the potential  
study  subject . Upon  full understanding  and answering  of any questions , the study  coordinator  will obtain  
written  and verbal  informed  consent  along  with providing  a copy of the consent  form for the subject  to 
keep themselves . We will recruit  a total of 24 ( n=12 men + 12 women ) obese  (BMI 30-40 kg/m2) 
euglycemic  and pre-diabetic  subjects  who will have similar distributions in their age  (50-65 years ), race, and 
smoking  status . There  will be no randomization  for this study .  
 
Intervention /Treatment : All 24 subjects  will be administered  4 capsules  of ‘SPM Active ’ per day for 4 weeks  
+/- 2-4 days. There  are 3 metabolites  of the SPM family  in the capsule , which  are 17-HDHA  (40mg) + 14 -
HDHA  (80mg) + 18 -HEPE  (25mg). All three  metabolites  feed into pathways  shown  to improve  insulin  
resistance  and all three  metabolites  are decreased  in obese  subjects .15, 17, 19, 24 The rationale  for the dosing  
and time of intervention  is based  on the recommendations  by the manufacture .  The supplement  will be 
provided  by Metagenics . Note the manufacturer  has not conducted  bioavailability  studies  focused  on the 
obese . Subjects  will be instructed  to consume  2 capsules  with breakfast  and 2 with dinner  (4 total per day) . 
Fasting  blood  will be drawn  pre- and post-intervention  using  phlebotomy  available  under  the direction  of Dr. 
Butler . 
 
Baseline  measurements  will be taken  prior to intervention  so that each subject  may serve  as his/her own 
control . 12-hour fasting  blood  and serum  will be drawn  pre- and post-intervention  for each subject  by a 
licensed  phlebotomist  at the UNC Family  Medicine  Lab and under  the direction  of Dr. Butler , the co -I. Each 
blood sample  will be the size of 10 10 mL plasma  and serum  tubes  (9 plasma  tubes  + 1 serum  tube) to 
ensure  that enough  B cells are collected  from PBMCs  for activations  (see section  4.1 below ). Therefore , a 
total of 10 tubes  or ~100 ml of blood  will be drawn  twice  during  the study , 4 weeks  apart . Finally , each 
subject  will have his/her height  (ft), body weight  (lbs), blood  pressure  (mmHg) , and pulse  (bpm) taken  at 
baseline  and 4 weeks  of intervention . 
 
Follow  up: Subjects  will have two face-to-face visits and two phone  contacts  during  the study . The first visit 
will be at baseline  (pre-intervention ) and the second  visit will conclude  the study  (post-intervention ). We 
will continuously  monitor  subject  health  status  throughout  the study  via phone  contact  at the end of week  1 
and week  3 following  the start of supplementation . At the end of the study , all patients  will follow  up in a 
routine  manner  as designated  by their physician  at UNC Family  Medicine . 
 
Unscheduled  Visits : If the study  coordinator  relay s health  concerns  to Dr. Butler  that will necessitate  in-
person  visit.  
 12  
3.2 Allocation  to Treatment  Groups  and Blinding  (if applicable ) 
There  will be no randomization  or blinding  for this study . All 24 subjects  will receive  the “SPM Active ” 
intervention . Baseline  measurements  will be taken  prior to intervention  so that each subject  may serve  as 
his/her own control . 
 
3.3 Study  Duration , Enrollment  and Number  of Subjects  
Each subject ’s participation  will last up to 4 weeks  +/- 2-4 days, with no additional  time involved  in this 
study  outside  normal  pre- and post-operative  care. The entire  study  is expected  to last 6-9 months . This 
includes  an enrollment  period  of 3-4 months  and data analysis . 
 
3.4 Target  Population  
Inclusion  Criteria :  
- Male  and female subjects with age 50-65 years and obese (i.e. BMI 30 -40) who are 
euglycemic and pre -diabetic (i.e. fasting glucose 70 -125 mg/DL or HbA1c of 5.7-6.4%).  
- Only post-menopausal  females  will be recruited  in the female  cohort  to reduce  the confounding  
inflammatory  effects  of estrogen  with supplementation .  
Exclusion  Criteria : 
- Those  with fasting  glucose  values  > 126 mg/dL or known  type 2 diabetes   
- Females  who are pre-menopausal , pregnant , planning  to become  pregnant , breastfeeding  or 
lactating   
- Subjects  consuming  n-3 PUFA  supplements  in the last 3 months  prior to enrollment , high 
consumption  of fatty fish (>2 servings  per week ), and subjects  with active  autoimmune  disease , 
liver disease , coagulopathy , hypothyroidism , known  allergy  to fish or shellfish , inability  to give 
informed  consent , or taking  anticoagulants  (e.g. warfarin  and direct  acting  anticoagulants ), those  
taking  estrogen  or testosterone , and anyone  taking  daily aspirin , NSAIDs , or active asthma 
medications .  
- Subjects  receiving  immunomodulatory  or immunosuppressant  therapy  (corticosteroids  or 
monoclonal  antibodies ) in the 4 weeks  prior to study  enrollment , and subjects  with known  active  
malignancy  or undergoing  treatment  for malignancy  will be excluded . 
 
Demographics : No exclusions  will be made  based  on race, gender , or ethnicity . Since all female subjects will 
be post -menopausal, this study will not include female s ubjects  who are pregnant  or become  pregnant . This 
is not because  we expect  risk to mother  or fetus in pregnancy but rather  because of the  hormonal  effects  
of high estrogen in pre -menopausal women on the lipidomic  profile  that we are studying . Moreover , the 
inflammatory  effects  of estrogen  will confound  the lipidomic  profile  measured  from the subjects . For this 
reason , the female  cohort  will include  only post-menopausal  women .  
 
4 STUDY  PROCEDURES   
4.1 Screening /Baseline  Visit procedures  
Insulin  (ng/dL) , glucose  (mg/dL) , BMI (kg/m2), weight  (lbs), height  (ft), disease  status , and medications  will be 
abstracted  from medical  charts . These metabolic measurements will be compared pre - and post - 
 13 supplementation for aim2a, and used to investigate their association with SPM concentrations for 
aim2b.  
 
12-hour fasting  blood  and serum  will be drawn  for each subject  by a licensed  phlebotomist  at the UNC 
Family  Medicine  Lab and under  the direction  of Dr. Butler  at baseline . Each blood  sample  will be the size of 
10 10 mL plasma  and serum  tubes  (9 plasma  tubes  + 1 serum  tube). PBMCs will be isolated from each 
blood sample. SPM concentration will be compared in the plasma, serum and PBMCs obtained for 
each patient, in accordance with aim 1a. For aim 1b, we will plate 15 wells of B cells (isolated from the 
PBMCs) for activations  with 200,000 B cells per well (3 x 10^6 total). We are assuming  1 mL blood  yield s 
approximately  1 x 10^6 PBMCs . We also assume  0.5 x 10^6 PBMCs  per well with 5% B cells. Since , on 
average , 7-8 mL of blood  is collected  per 10mL tube, we will collect  10 tubes  to ensure  we have at least 60 
mL blood  for the 60 x 10^6 PBMCs  needed  to collect  3 x 10^6 B cells for activations . Therefore , a total of 
10 tubes  or ~100 ml of blood  will be drawn .  
 
In addition to blood collection, each subject  will have his/her height  (ft), body weight  (lbs), blood  pressure  
(mmHg) , and pulse  taken  (bpm) .  
 
4.2 Intervention /Treatment  procedures  
All subjects  will receive  the dietary  supplement  “SPM Active ”, provided  free of cost by  Metagenics . Subjects  
will be responsible  for taking  4 capsules  per day (2 at breakfast  and 2 at dinner ) for a total of 4 weeks .  
 
4.3 Follow - up procedures  
There  is no scheduled  follow  up procedure  apart  from that detailed  in the study  design . The patients  will 
follow  up in a routine  manner  as designated  by their physician  at UNC Family  Medicine . 
 
4.4 Unscheduled  visits  
The study  coordinator  may relay  health  concerns  to Dr. Butler  that will necessitate  an in-person  visit.  
 
4.5 Concomitant  Medication  documentation  
All prescription  or OTC drugs  taken  by study  subjects  will be examined  by Dr. Butler  and his team  prior to 
enrollment  in the study . No previous  adverse  events  have been observed  in previous  studies  (such as the 
human  clinical  trial done by Dalli et al.) with “SPM Active ,” though  we will continuously  monitor  subject  
health status  via phone  contact  at the end of week  1 and week  3.  
 
4.6 Subject  Completion / Withdrawal  procedures  
Subjects  will be compensated  $250 cash for their participation  and completion  of the study  ($100 at 
baseline  visit + $150 at week  4 visit upon  completion ). No prorated  compensation  will be applied  for this 
pilot study . This amount  of comp ensation  is not deemed  coercive ; the incentive  is meant  to compensate  
subjects  for their time in the study  which  include  two study  visits, two phone  visits, and two blood  draws .   
 
This is a voluntary  research  study . Refusal  to participate  or withdrawal  of participation  and/or consent  can 
occur  at any time, for any reason . Subjects  may be withdrawn  if: (1) they experience  intolerable  adverse  
reactions  or allergic  reaction  to study  supplement  or (2) are not at least 90% compliant  with taking  study  
supplement  during  the 4 weeks  active  phase . In the event  of withdrawal , all personal  health  information  
(PHI), electronic  or hard copy, will be immediately  purged  and permanently  destroyed . Withdrawal  or 
 14 refusal  will not influence  ability , timing , or quality  of clinical  care, type of clinical  care administered , standing  
with UNCHC  system , or ability  to participate  in future  research  studies . The investigators  also have the right 
to stop participation  at any time. This could  be because  participants  have chosen  to stop supplementation , 
or have failed  to follow  instructions  or because  the entire  study  has been stopped .  
 
4.7 Screen  failure  procedures  
Study  participants  will be checked  to determine  if they meet  the inclusion  and exclusion  criteria . Those  that 
are not eligible  will be excluded  from the study . If the study  coordinators  are not able to contact  study  
subjects  in the follow -up phone  calls they will be considered  as “loss to follow -up” and no longer  enrolled  in 
the study .  
 
5 STUDY  EVALUATIONS  AND MEASUREMENTS   
Samples  taken  from pre- and post-intervention  visits will be immediately  transferred  to Michael  Hooker  
Research  Center  Room  2204 ( Shaikh  Lab) for immediate  processing . Tubes  will be labelled  with a de-
identified  research  code and will not include  any PHI. We will measure  SPMs  in 100µl of plasma  and serum  
and 2x106 PBMCs . PBMCs  will be isolated  with established  protocols  in our lab 1, 2. The rationale  for PBMCs  
vs. plasma  and serum  is to compare  biomarkers  for SPM uptake . We will also measure  other  lipid 
metabolites  including  thromboxanes , leukotrienes , prostaglandins , epoxy  fatty acids, eoxins , mono -, di-, and 
tri-hydroxy  fatty acids, and hepoxilins . Blinded  samples  will be shipped  to our collaborator  Dr. Reisdorph  
(pay-for-service , see support  letter ) for two-dimensional  reverse  phase  HPLC  tandem  mass spectrometry . 
Blood  samples  from baseline  and post-intervention  will be used to measure  fasting  glucose  (mg/dL) , fasting  
lipid panel  (total cholesterol  in mg/dL , LDL in mg/dL , HDL in mg/dL , triglyceride  levels  in mg/dL ) and fasting  
insulin  (ng/mL)  through McClendon  labs. 
 
5.1 Efficacy  Evaluation  
There will be no efficacy evaluation due to the pre -/post - study design, which requires that data be obtained 
through the end of the clinical trial. However, the study may be stopped due to safety concerns (see safety 
evaluation section 5.2).  
 
5.2 Safety  Evaluations  
Any health  conditions  that arise over the course  of the study  that were not present  in the subjects  prior to 
their enrollment  will be monitored  by Dr. Butler  who will evaluate  whether  to withdraw  the subject  from 
the study .   
 
6 STATISTICAL  CONSIDERATION     
6.1 Primary  Endpoint  
The primary  aim of the study  is designed  and powered  to measure  an increase  in 18-HEPE , 17-HDHA , and 
14-HDHA  in Aim 1. At a family -wise error rate of 5% controlling  for testing  of three  metabolites  mentioned  
above , n=9 will provide  more  than 80% power  to detect  a 50%-fold change  increase  in metabolite  levels  
within  each subject . We are assuming  a similar  effect  size for both males  and females  and are doubling  the 
sample  size (n=18, 9 per sex) to allow  us to subset  the data in case we find divergent  results  between  
sexes . To account  for possible  loss-to-follow  up, we increased  the sample  size from 18 to 24 ( n=12 male + 
12 female ). Power  analysis  was conducted  assuming  a paired  t-test on pre- and post-treatment  metabolite  
levels  for three  pre-specified  metabolites . Expected  variability  of within  subject  differences  in metabolite  
levels  was assessed  from a previous  dataset  and the median  standard  deviation  was calculated  across  all 
 15 metabolites .1 Power  analyses  were calculated  by Dr. Michael  Love in the UNC Department  of Biostatistics . 
Note that all analyses  will be conducted  in the R statistical  software . 
 
- Aim 1a: SPM lipidomic  measurements  will be analyzed  pre/post supplementation . Each SPM metabolite ’s 
distribution  will be assessed  for normality  and homogeneity  of variance  using  the Shapiro -Wilks  test and 
Bartlett  test respectively . However,  normality  will also be assessed  via a qqplot  of the standardized  
residuals  and we will visualize  the distribution  of our data with a histogram.  In addition , to 
corroborate  the Bartlett  test we will check  the homogeneity  of variance  of the residual s 
(homoscedasticity)  using  a scale -location  plot where  the square  roots of the absolute  values  of the 
standardized  residuals  are plotted.  If the metabolite ’s distribution  satisfies  the assumption  of 
normality  & homogeneity  of variance  then a paired  two-tailed  Student ’s T-test will be used to generate  
p-values  corresponding  to differences  before  and after supplementation . If the assumption  of 
heteroscedasticity  is not met, the data will be analyzed  using  a paired  Welch  T-test. Another  alternative  
would  be to apply  a log or square  root transformation . However,  if the data still fails the assumptions  
of normality  and heteroscedasticity  it will be analyzed  with a paired  Wilcoxon  rank sum test. All p-values  
will under go a Benjimani -Hocherberg  adjustment  (optimal  for large-scale multiple  hypothesis  testing ) at 
a false discovery  rate of 5% to account  for multiple  hypothesis  testing  between  metabolites . 
  
 
- Aim 1b: Antibody  concentrations  measured  via ELISA  will be tested  for the assumptions  of normality  and 
homogeneity  of variance  using  the Shapiro -Wilks  test and Bartlett  test respectively . However,  normality  
will also be assessed  via a qqplot  of the standardized  residuals  and we will visualize  the 
distribution  of our data with a histogram.  In addition , to corroborate  the Bartlett  test we will check  
the homogeneity  of variance  of the residuals  (homoscedasticity)  using  a scale -location  plot where  
the square  root of the standardized  residuals  is plotted.  Data that passes  both assumptions  will be 
analyzed  via a paired  two sample  Student  T-test. Data that fails the assumption  of heteroscedasticity  will 
be analyzed  using  a paired  Welch  T-test. Another  alternative  would  be to apply  a log or square  root 
transformation . However,  if the data still fails the assumptions  of normality  and heteroscedasticity  it 
will be analyzed  with a paired  Wilcoxon  rank sum test. All p-values  from these  analyses  will undergo  a 
Bonferroni  p-value  adjustment  (optimal  for smaller -scale multiple  hypothesis  testing ). 
  
 
6.2 Secondary  Endpoint  
 
- Aim 2a: The data will be assessed  for normality  and homogeneity  of variance  using  the Shapiro -Wilks  test and 
Bartlett  test respectively . However,  normality  will also be assessed  via a qqplot  of the standardized  residuals  
and we will visualize  the distribution  of our data with a histogram.  In addition,  to corroborate  the Bartlett  test 
we will check  the homogeneity  of variance  of the residuals  (homoscedasticity)  using  a scale -location  plot 
wher e the square  root of the standardized  residuals  is plotted.  Data that passes  both assumptions  will be 
analyzed  via a paired  two sample  Student  T-test. Data that fails the assumption  of heteroscedasticity  will be 
analyzed  using  a paired  Welch  T-test. Another  alternative  would  be to apply  a log or square  root 
transformation . However,  if the data still fails the assumptions  of normality  and heteroscedasticity  it will be 
analyzed  with a paired  Wilcoxon  rank sum test. All p-values  from these  analyses  will undergo  a Bonferroni  p-value  
adjustment . 
 
- Aim 2b: The data will also be assessed  for normality  using  the Shapiro -Wilks  test, qqplots,  and we will 
visualize  the distribution  of the data  with  a histogram . If the data are normal  or it cannot  be 
transformed  to approximate  a Guassian  distribution,  we will utilize  a Pearson  correlation  to 
 16 determine  associations  between  SPM concentration  and metabolic  outcomes  (insulin /glucose  measures ). 
If the data is not normal  we will utilize  a Spearman  correlation . All p-values  from these  analyses  will undergo  
a Bonferroni  p-value  adjustment . 
 
6.3 Statistical  Methods  
 
Data will be assessed  for normality  and homogeneity  of variance  using  the Shapiro -Wilks  test and Bartlett  test 
respectively.  However,  normality  will also be assessed  via a qqplot  of the standardized  residuals  and we will 
visualize  the distribution  of our data  with  a histogram.  In addition,  to corroborate  the Bartlett  test we will 
check  the homogeneity  of variance  of the residuals  (homoscedasticity)  using  a scale -location  plot where  the 
square  root  of the standardized  residuals  is plotted.  Data  that passes  both  assumptions  will be analyzed  via a 
paired  two sample  Student  T-test. Data  that fails the assumption  of hete roscedasticity  will be analyzed  using  a 
paired  Welch  T-test. Another  alternative  would  be to apply  a log or square  root  transformation.  However,  if 
the data  still fails the assumptions  of normality  and heteroscedasticity  it will be analyzed  with  a paired  
Wilcoxon  rank  sum  test. All p-values  will undergo  either  a Bonferroni  or Benjimani -Hocherberg  p-value  
adjustment.  
 
Further  analyses  include  determining  patterns  of metabololipidomic  signatures  and immune  cell phenotypes  
from both aims. To do this we will conduct  a principal  component  analysis  (PCA) on the metabololipidomics  
and ex-vivo B cell antibody  production  data. PCA will aid in reducing  the biological  noise  in the dataset  and 
identify  trends  between  metabolites  and B cell function  to determine  correlated  metabololipidomic  
signatures . To identify  clusters  of signatures  shared  among  individuals , k-means  clustering  on the PCA 
analysis  will be conducted  to visualize  the partitioned  metabolite -cellular  landscapes  pre- and post-
intervention . Moreover,  statistical  estimates  of population  parameters  will be tabulated  along  with  
corresponding  confidence  intervals  (CIs)  and/or  standard  errors  (SEs)  to convey  levels  of precision  / 
imprecision . 
 
6.4 Sample  Size and Power  
Experimental  rigor is ensured  through  the analyses  of blinded  samples . The study  is designed  and powered  
to measure  an increase  in 18-HEPE , 17-HDHA , and 14-HDHA  in Aim 1. Additional  measures  in Aim 2 are 
exploratory , but necessary  for future  grant  applications  to demonstrate  the feasibility  of the approach . At a 
family -wise error rate of 5% controlling  for testing  of three  metabolites  mentioned  above , n=9 will provide  
more  than 80% power  to detect  a 50%-fold change  increase  in metabolite  levels  within  each subject . We 
are assuming  a similar  effect  size for both males  and females  and are doubling  the sample  size (n=18, 9 per 
sex) to allow  us to subset  the data in case we find divergent  results  between  sexes . To account  for possible  
loss to follow -up, we will increase  sample  size from 18 to 24 ( n=12 male + 12 female ). Power  analysis  was 
conducted  assuming  a paired  t-test on pre- and post-treatment  metabolite  levels  for three  pre-specified  
metabolites . Expected  variability  of within  subject  differences  in metabolite  levels  was assessed  from a 
previous  dataset  and the median  standard  deviation  was calculated  across  all metabolites .1 Power  analyses  
were calculated  by Dr. Michael  Love in the UNC Department  of Biostatistics .  
 
6.5 Interim  Analysis  
Given the pre -/post - design of the study,  doing an interim analysis in the middle of the study is not feasible, 
for we will have to obtain  and compare pre - and post - data. Additionally , the  metabolipidomic s analyses that 
 17 we are performing will take several months to complete. Finally, with the small number of subje cts, this study 
is not expected to span a long period of time.  
 
7 STUDY  INTERVENTION   
The “SPM Active ” supplement  will be shipped  all at once from Metagenics  at room  temperature  to the UNC 
Family  Medicine  clinic with expiration  that covers  the full duration  of the intervention . Study  participants  
will be instructed  to keep the supplement  at room  temperature . Subjects  who have consented  to the study  
will receive  the exact  number  of tables  required  for the study . They will be instructed  to consume  4 
capsules  per day (2 capsules  with breakfast  and 2 with dinner ) of “SPM Active ” for 4 weeks . Each capsule  
contains  145 mg of SPMs  for a total daily dose of 580 mg. There  are 3 metabolites  of the SPM family  in the 
capsule , which  are 17-HDHA  (40mg) + 14 -HDHA  (80mg) + 18 -HEPE  (25mg). All three  metabolites  feed into 
pathways  shown  to improve  insulin  resistance  and all three  metabolites  are decreased  in obese  subjects .15, 
17, 19, 24 The rationale  for the dosing  and time of intervention  is based  on the recommendations  by the 
manufacturer . Appropriate  dosing  will be monitored  with the follow -up phone  calls at weeks  2 and 3. 
Participants  who have chosen  to stop supplementation , or have failed  to follow  supplement  instructions  will 
be withdrawn  from the trial.  
 
8 STUDY  INTERVENTION  ADMINISTRATION   
No randomization  or blinding /unblinding  procedures  will be used for study .  
 
9 SAFETY  MANAGEMENT  
Safety  standards  will be overseen  by Co-Investigator , Dr. Erik Butler , DO and his designated study 
coordinator . Subjects will be screened for adverse events during two follow -up phone calls at Weeks 1 
and 3  of intervention , as well during last study visit, Week 4.  Subjects will be given the study 
coordinator’s phone number to report any Adverse Events or Serious Adverse Events.    All reported 
Adverse Events (AEs) will be given to the co -investigator, Dr. Butler, each week of the stud y.   
 
Should a Serious Adverse Event (SAE) occur, Dr. Butler, co -investigator, will be immediately notified.  
The subject will be instructed to stop study drug, and seek immediate medical attention.  SAEs 
include but are not limited to bleeding, chest pain /pressure, shortness of breath, weakness, altered 
mental status, vision changes or extreme pain.  
 
A log of all AEs will be maintained throughout the study and wil l be assigned to each patient. Note 
that t his study will not require a Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) due to its small sample size 
and the low risk of study drug.  However, Dr. Erik Butler, co -Investigator, will review weekly the 
adverse event reporting log for all subjects.  Any clinically significant AEs will be follow -up by Dr. 
Butler and the  study coordinator to ensure resolution.  Patients will be further evaluated by Dr. Butler 
or other health care professional for ongoing AEs.   
 
Though highly unlikely, i f 50% or more  of total study  participants  report  intolerable  adverse  reactions  from 
taking the supplement , we will stop the study .  
 
10 DATA  COLLECTION  AND MANAGMENT   
 
Personal  identifiers  and medical  history  will be collected  following  patient  recruitment  and informed  
consent .  
 
 18 Data from this study  will be kept in electronic  and hard copy forms  with the respective  security  measures . 
Electronic data will be kept on an encrypted  desktop  computer  protected  by multiple  passwords  in a lab, 
located  on a hall protected  by card access  in Michael  Hooker  Research  Center , Chapel  Hill, NC. De-identified  
data will be stored  on REDCap  for use by research  team  personnel  only. Data management  will be 
performed  by the PI and the study  coordinators . All data acquisition  will meet  HIPPA  and confidentiality  
standards . Electronic  data will be stored  for a minimum  of five years  in the case that this data needs  to be 
verified . When  deemed  appropriate , all files will be purged  and permanently  deleted  from research  
computers . Hard copy data will be shredded . Human  biological  samples  (serum /plasma ) will be stored  for a 
minimum  of five years  in the case that these  samples  are needed  for duplication  of or verification  of study  
results . Please  see Part C for further  details . These  samples  will be stored  in locked  freezers  in locked  
research  laboratories  in secure  facilities  that require  card access . When  all analysis  of human  biological  
samples  is completed , all samples  will be disposed  of according  to university  and environmental  health  
guidelines . Data that links dummy  identifiers  to any personal  identifying  information  will be shredded  and 
disposed  of, or, in the case of electronic  data, will be permanently  deleted . Limited  clinical  data (glucose , 
insulin , lipid panel ) may be part of subjects ’ secure  electronic  medical  record  in Epic. 
Note that the biological samples and data collected from subjects who are lost to follow -up will be 
handled in this way as well.  
The PIs will be responsible  for monitoring  and reviewing  subject  data, lab results , study  progress , subject  
safety  and confidentiality , and the accuracy  and security  of the emerging  data. They will also be responsible  
for running  the assays  and entering  all data into redcap  for statistical  analysis . 
 
11 RECRUITMENT  STRATEGY  
Subjects  will be recruited  at UNC Family  Medicine  Center  at 540 Manning  Drive , Chapel  Hill, NC 27599. Dr. 
Butler  and the study  coordinator  will be responsible  for recruiting  subjects . We are using  a convenience  
sample  method , therefore  everyone  age 50 -65 years  will be screened  according  to the criteria  set forth for 
the study . Subjects  will be asked  questions  orally  during  the primary  visit to determine  if eligibility  criteria  
are met, at which  time informed  consent  and HIPPA  authorization  will be obtained . Recruitment  will take 
place  in a private  room  during  a normally  scheduled  clinical  visit. Subjects  will be briefed  on the scientific  
premise  of the study  along  with details  on participation  involvement , risks, benefits  to the individual , 
benefits  to scientific  knowledge , ability  to refuse  participation  and/or ability  to withdraw  participation  at any 
time. 
 
12 CONSENT  PROCESS  
Subjects  will be asked  questions  orally  during  the primary  visit to determine  if eligibility  criteria  are met, at 
which  time informed  consent  and HIPPA  authorization  will be obtained . Subjects  will be recruited  and 
consented  in a private , closed -door room  with preoperative  or post-operative  consent  and scripts  being  
read by the study  coordinator  to the potential  study  subject . Upon  full understanding  and answering  of any 
questions , the study  coordinator  will obtain  written  and verbal  informed  consent  along  with providing  a 
copy of the consent  form for the subject  to keep themselves . Dr. Butler  or the study  coordinator  will 
consent  subjects  in a profes sional  and non-coercive  manner . 
 
 
 
 19 13 PLANS  FOR PUBLICATION  
If our hypothesis  is correct , data from aims 1 and 2 will provide  a solid foundation  for an NIH R21 grant . 
The lead PI, after consultation  with the others  on the investigative  team , will communicate  with program  
officials  to tailor  an R21 grant  to NIDDK  PA-18-104 that would  focus  on the mechanistic  links between  
adipose  tissue  pro-resolving  lipid mediators  and lymphocyte  metabolism . 
 
14 REFERNECES   
1. Guesdon  W, Kosaraju  R, Brophy  P, Clark A, Dillingham  S, Aziz S, Moyer  F, Willson  K, Dick JR, Patil SP, 
Balestrieri  N, Armstrong  M, Reisdroph  N, Shaikh  SR. Effects  of fish oils on ex vivo B-cell responses  of 
obese  subjects  upon  BCR/TLR stimulation : a pilot study . J Nutr Biochem . 2018;53:72 -80.  
2. Serhan  CN, Levy BD. Resolvins  in inflammation : emergence  of the pro-resolving  superfamily  of 
mediators . J Clin Invest . 2018;128:2657 -2669.  
3. Serhan  CN. Pro-resolving  lipid mediators  are leads  for resolution  physiology . Nature . 2014;510:92 -
101. 
4. Souza , P. R., Marques , R. M., Gomez , E. A., Colas , R. A., Matteis , R. D., Zak, A., … Dalli, J. (2020). 
Enriched  Marine  Oil Supplements  Increase  Peripheral  Blood  Specialized  Pro-Resolving  Mediators  
Concentrations  and Reprogram  Host Immune  Responses . Circulation  Research , 126(1), 75 –90. doi: 
10.1161/ circresaha .119.315506  
5. Ogden , C. L., Carroll , M. D., Fryar, C. D. & Flegal , K. M. Prevalence  of Obesity  Among  Adults  and 
Youth -  United  States , 2011 –2014. NCHS  data brief no 219 (2015).  
6. Mitchell , N. S., Catenacci , V. A., Wyatt , H. R. & Hill, J. O. Obesity : overview  of an epidemic . Psychiatr  
Clin North  Am 34, 717 -732, doi:10.1016/ j.psc.2011.08.005 (2011) . 
7. Despres , J.-P. & Lemieux , I. Abdominal  obesity  and metabolic  syndrome . Nature  444, 881 -887 
(2006).  
8. Nishimura , S. et al. CD8+ effector  T cells contribute  to macrophage  recruitment  and adipose  tissue  
inflammation  in obesity . Nat Med 15, 914 -920, doi:10.1038/ nm.1964 (2009).  
9. McLaughlin , T. et al. T-cell profile  in adipose  tissue  is associated  with insulin  resistance  and systemic  
inflammation  in humans . Arterioscler  Thromb  Vasc Biol 34, 2637 -2643, 
doi:10.1161/ ATVBAHA .114.304636 (2014).  
10. Ganeshan , K. & Chawla , A. Metabolic  regulation  of immune  responses . Annu  Rev Immunol  32, 609 -
634, doi:10.1146/ annurev -immunol -032713 -120236 (2014).  
11. Park, B. V. & Pan, F. Metabolic  regulation  of T cell differentiation  and function . Mol Immunol  68, 
497-506, doi:10.1016/ j.molimm .2015.07.027 (2015).  
12. Gerriets , V. A. et al. Metabolic  programming  and PDHK 1 control  CD4+ T cell subsets  and 
inflammation . J Clin Invest  125, 194 -207, doi:10.1172/ JCI76012 (2015).  
13. Gerriets , V. A. et al. Foxp3 and Toll-like receptor  signaling  balance  Treg cell anabolic  metabolism  for 
suppression . Nat Immunol  17, 1459 -1466, doi:10.1038/ ni.3577 (2016).  
14. Serhan  CN, Levy BD. Resolvins  in inflammation : emergence  of the pro-resolving  superfamily  of 
mediators . J Clin Invest . 2018;128:2657 -2669.  
15. Crouch  MJ, Kosaraju  R, Guesdon  W, Armstrong  M, Reisdorph  N, Jain R, Fenton  J, Shaikh  SR. Frontline  
Science : A reduction  in DHA-derived  mediators  in male obesity  contributes  toward  defects  in select  B 
cell subsets  and circulating  antibody . J Leukoc  Biol. 2019;106:241 -257. 
16. Clària  J, Dalli J, Yacoubian  S, Gao F, Serhan  CN. Resolvin  D1 and resolvin  D2 govern  local 
inflammatory  tone in obese  fat. J Immunol . 2012;189:2597 -2605.  
17. Lopez -Vicario  C, Titos E, Walker  ME, Alcaraz -Quiles  J, Casulleras  M, Duran -Guell  M, Flores -Costa  R, 
Perez -Romero  N, Forne  M, Dalli J, Claria  J. Leukocytes  from obese  individuals  exhibit  an impaired  
SPM signature . FASEB  J. 2019;33(6):7072 -7083.  
 20 18. Neuhofer  A, Zeyda  M, Mascher  D, Itariu  BK, Murano  I, Leitner  L, Hochbrugger  EE, Fraisl  P, Cinti S, 
Serhan  CN, Stulnig  TM. Impaired  local production  of proresolving  lipid mediators  in obesity  and 17-
HDHA  as a potential  treatment  for obesity -associated  inflammation . Diabetes . 2013;62:1945 -1956.  
19. Sima C, Paster  B, Van Dyke TE. Function  of pro-resolving  lipid mediator  resolvin  E1 in type 2 
diabetes . Crit Rev Immunol . 2018;38:343 -365. 
20. White  PJ, St-Pierre  P, Charbonneau  A, Mitchell  PL, St-Amand  E, Marcotte  B, Marette  A. Protectin  DX 
alleviates  insulin  resistance  by activating  a myokine -liver glucoregulatory  axis. Nat Med. 
2014;20:664 -669. 
21. Jung TW, Kim HC, Abd El-Aty AM, Jeong  JH. Protectin  DX ameliorates  palmitate - or high-fat diet-
induced  insulin  resistance  and inflammation  through  an AMPK -PPARalpha -dependent  pathway  in 
mice. Sci Rep. 2017;7:1397.  
22. Jung TW, Ahn SH, Shin JW, Kim HC, Park ES, Abd El-Aty AM, Hacimuftuoglu  A, Song KH, Jeong  JH. 
Protectin  DX ameliorates  palmitate -induced  hepatic  insulin  resistance  through  AMPK /SIRT1-mediated  
modulation  of fetuin -A and SeP expression . Clin Exp Pharmacol  Physiol . 2019.  
23. Hellmann  J, Tang Y, Kosuri  M, Bhatnagar  A, Spite M. Resolvin  D1 decreases  adipose  tissue  
macrophage  accumulation  and improves  insulin  sensitivity  in obese -diabetic  mice. FASEB  J. 
2011;25:2399 -2407.  
24. Spite M, Clària  J, Serhan  Charles  N. Resolvins , Specialized  proresolving  lipid mediators , and their 
potential  roles in metabolic  diseases . Cell Metab . 2014;19:21 -36. 
25. Titos E, Rius B, Lopez -Vicario  C, Alcaraz -Quiles  J, Garcia -Alonso  V, Lopategi  A, Dalli J, Lozano  JJ, 
Arroyo  V, Delgado  S, Serhan  CN, Claria  J. Signaling  and immunoresolving  actions  of resolvin  D1 in 
inflamed  human  visceral  adipose  tissue . J Immunol . 2016;197:3360 -3370.  
26. Kosaraju  R, Guesdon  W, Crouch  MJ, Teague  HL, Sullivan  EM, Karlsson  EA, Schultz -Cherry  S, Gowdy  K, 
Bridges  LC, Reese  LR, Neufer  PD, Armstrong  M, Reisdorph  N, Milner  JJ, Beck M, Shaikh  SR. B cell 
activity  is impaired  in human  and mouse  obesity  and is responsive  to an essential  fatty acid upon  
murine  influenza  infection . J Immunol . 2017:198:4738 -4752.  
27. Nowicka , Malgorzata  M., et al. CyTOF  Workflow : Differential  Discovery  in High-Throughput  High-
Dimensional  Cytometry  Datasets . BioC 2017 Workshop ., www .bioconductor .org/help/course -
materials /2017/ BioC2017/ Day2/Workshops /CyTOF /doc/cytofWorkflow_BioC 2017 workshop .html#intr
oduction . 
 
15      APPENDIX  
 
Fig. 1: A metabolite  of the EPA-derived  SPM family  is lowered  in obese  mice. C57BL/6J male mice 
were administered  a lean control  or high fat diet for 15 weeks . Visceral  white  adipose  tissue  and 
liver were subjected  to mass spectrometry  based  metabololipidomics  for PUFA -derived  mediators . 
For simplicity , we present  18-HEPE . Data are average  ± SEM from 5 mice per diet. *p<0.05. 
Experiments  with females  are underway . Analyses  were conducted  blinded  to ensure  strong  rigor. 

 21  
Fig. 2: Short -term administration  of EPA-derived  SPM improves  fasting  glucose /insulin  levels  of 
obese  mice. Male C57BL/6J mice were fed as described  in Fig.1. Prior to sacrifice , a cohort  of mice 
was i.p. injected  daily for 4 days with 300ng resolvin  E1 or vehicle  control . (A) Body weights , (B) 
fasting  glucose , and (C) fasting  insulin  levels . Data are average  + SEM from 11-18 mice per diet. 
**p<0.01, *** p<0.001, **** p<0.0001.  
 
 
 
 
