Cover Page for Protocol  
Sponsor Name  Duke Cancer Institute 
NCT Number  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Official title of Study  Abi Race :  A Phase II open -label, parallel group study of Abiraterone  
Acetate plus Prednisone in African American and Caucasian men 
with metastatic castrate -resistant prostate cancer  
Document date  24 April 2018 
Abiraterone and Race  Page 1 of 72
DukeUniversity  A Phase II open -label, parallel group study of Abiraterone A cetate plus Prednisone 
in African American and Caucasian men with metastatic castrate -resistant 
prostate cancer  
An Investigator -initiated study, sponsored by Dr Daniel George, MD 
and Duke  Univers ity Health System  
Principal Investigator  Statistician  
Daniel George, MD  
 Susan Halabi, PhD 
 
Sub-Investigat ors 
Andrew Armstrong, MD, ScM  
 
Michael Harrison, MD  
 Responsible St udy Coordinator  
Carol Winters,  RN, OCN, CCRC  
 
Regulatory Coordinator  
 Steven Gray , PhD , RAC  
  
Correlative S cience Investigator s 
Andrew Nixon, PhD  
Jennifer Freedman, PhD  
Janssen Scientific Affairs , LLC – providing funding 
support and study drug  
Correlative studies will be funded in part by National 
Cancer Institute.  
Protocol Date: September 12 , 2013  
Protoc ol Version 1.0 
Amendment 1: December 2 , 2013  
Amendment 2: January 21 , 2014  
Amendment 3: July 31, 2014  
Amendment 4: November 17, 2014  
Amendment 5: December 29, 2014  
Amendment 6: January 14, 2015  
Amendment 7:  March 20, 2015  
Amendment 8: April  2, 2015  
Amendme nt 9: June 8 , 2015  
Amendment 10: June 25, 2015  
Amendment 11: August 25, 2015  Amendment 12: October 15, 2015  
Amendment 13: October 23 ,2015  
Amendment 14: November 11, 2015  
Amendment 15: November 24 , 2015  
Amendment 16: March 30 , 2016  
Amendment 17: November 30 , 2016  
Amendment 18: December 20 , 2016  
Amendment 1 9: January 26 , 2017  
Amendment 20: March 29 , 2017  
Amendment 21: June 26, 2017  
Amendment 22: October 19, 2017  
Amendment 23: January 26, 2018  
Amendment 24: April 2 4, 2018
 
 
 
 
 
 

Abiraterone and Race   Page 2 of 72
DukeUniversity    Responsible Study Personnel  
Medical Direc tor/Monitor  Daniel George , MD  
 Deliveries:   
 
 
   
    
Study Coordi nator/Data Manager  Carol Winters , RN, OCN, CCRC  
  
 
   
   
Monika Anand, Ph D, CCRP  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Regulatory Coordinator  Steven Gray , PhD , RAC  
 
 
  
     
    
  
 
 
 
  
 
DUHS Affiliated Sites  Participating in This Study  
  
Duke Cancer Network  
Site PI  : Dr. Daniel George, MD  
DLP Maria Parham - Henderson  
Scotland Memorial - Laurinburg  
Southeastern Regional - Lumberton  
Johnston Memorial - Smithfield  
Spartanburg  Regional - Spartanburg SC  
 
 
 Virginia Oncology Associates  
Site PI  : Dr Mark Flemming, MD  
 
 
 
 
  
  

Abiraterone and Race   Page 3 of 72
DukeUniversity     
 
 
External Sites Participating in This Study  
  
Birmingham VA Medical Center  
Site PI  : Dr. Devika Das , MD  
 
Karmanos Cancer Institute  
Site PI  : Elizabeth Heath  
 
Salisbury VA  
Site PI  : K.C. Balaji  
 
 
 Tula ne University  
Site PI  : Alton O. Sartor, MD  
 
University of North Carolina  
Site PI  : Matthe w Milowsky  
 
Wake Forest University  
Site PI  : K.C. Balaji  
 
  
  
Abiraterone and Race   Page 4 of 72
DukeUniversity    TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 
List of abbreviations …………………………… ………………………………………………………………………………. ….06 
 
1.0  Synops is................................................................................................. ............................... .07 
2.0  Study flow chart ..................................................................................................... .............. .13 
3.0  Current treatment for metastatic CRPC …………………………………………………………………….…... 16 
4.0  Abiraterone  acetate ......................................................................... ............................... ......21 
4.1 Abiraterone  acetate  and mechanism of action  
4.2 Clinical trials with abiraterone acetate and prednisone  
 4.3 Rationale for current study  
5.0  Study objectives and endpoints ............................................................ .............................. .25 
 5.1 Study objectives  
 5.2 Study endpoints   
6.0  Investigational plan ................................................................................................... ...........2 6 
6.1 Overall study design  
6.2 Study population  
6.3 Inclusion and exclusion criteria  
7.0  Patient registration .............................................................................................................. 31 
 7.1 Informed consent  
7.2 Lead Site  registration  
7.3 Institutional registration  
8.0  Treatments ....................... .................................................................................................... 32 
8.1 Abiraterone  acetate  formulation  
8.2 Abiraterone  acetate  administration  
8.3 Concomitant therapy  
8.4 Treatment c ompliance  
9.0  Study assessments ………………. .……………………………… ………………………………………………………... .35 
 9.1 Vital signs, performance status, physical exam  
 9.2 La boratory evaluations  
 9.3 ECG 
 9.4 Imaging  
 9.5 Exploratory correlative studies  
 9.6 Follow up period  
10.0  Monitoring an d management of suspected Abiratero ne acetate  toxicity .…………………… 39 
 10.1 Management of Drug -related Adverse Events   
10.2 Interruption or discontinuation of treatment   
11.0  Safety assessments and reporting …………………………………………………………………………… …….44 
 11.1 Definitions  
11.2 Management of Adverse Events,  Serious Adverse Events and Special Reporting 
Situations  
11.3 Recording of Adverse Events, Serious Adverse Events and Special Reporting 
Situations  
 11.4 Maintenance of Safety Information  
Abiraterone and Race   Page 5 of 72
DukeUniversity     11.5 Reporting Timelines  
 11.6 Transmission Methods  
11.7  Procedures for Reporting Adverse Events (AE), Serious Adverse Events (SAE), 
Special Reporting Situation, and Product Quality Complaints (PQCs) to JANSSEN 
SCIENTIFIC AFFAIRS  
11.8 Dissemination of Safety Information from JANSSEN SCIENTIFIC AFFAIRS  to 
INSTITUTION/PRINCI PAL INVESTIGATORS  
12.0  Efficacy assessments ................ ............................................................. ........................ ......51 
 12.1 Baseline tumor evaluation  
 12.2 Response criteria  
 12.3 Confirming time -to-event outcomes  
 12.4 Duration of overall response  
 12.5 Progression free survival  
 12.6 Secondary endpoint a ssessments  
 12.7 Exploratory assessments  
13.0  Statistical plan ............................................................................. ............................. .......... .57 
14.0  Data reporting and regulatory requirements ………….…………………………………..……………… …57 
 14.1 Data entry  
14.2 Study monitoring and quality assurance  
14.3 Data safety and monitoring  
15.0  Protocol amendments or changes in study conduct ………............... ................................. 60 
16.0  Procedures and instructions .............................................................................................. 60 
16.1 Disclosure and confidentiality  
16.2 Discontinuation of study  
16.3 Ethics and Good Cl inical Practice  
17.0  References ................................................................................ ......................................... ..63 
 
APPENDICES ………………………………………………………………………………………… …….………… ……………… .67 
 
Appendix 1:  Performance status cr iteria  
Appendix 2:   Known CYP 450 isoenzyme inducers, inhibitors, and substrates  
Appendix 3:  NCI Common Toxicity Criteria  
Appendix 4:  Prostate cancer wor king group 2 (PCWG2) guidelines  
Abiraterone and Race   Page 6 of 72
DukeUniversity     
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS  
 
ADT Androgen Deprivation Therapy  
AE Advers e Event  
AKT  See PKB (protein Kinase B)  
ALT  Alanine aminotransferase  
ANC  Absolute Neutrophil Count  
AST  Aspartate aminotransferase  
BUN  Blood Urea Nitrogen  
CBC  Complete Blood Count  
CK  Creatine Kinase  
CK-MB  Creatine Kinase - Muscle and Brain isoenzyme  
CR  Complete Response  
CRF Case report forms  
CRD  Clinical Research and Development  
CRPC  Castration resistant prostate cancer  
CS  Cowden Syndrome  
CT  Computed Tomography  
CTC  Circulating Tumor Cells  
CTCAE  Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events  
DLT  Dose Limiting Toxicity  
ECG  Electrocardiogram  
ECHO  Echocardiogram  
EGFR  Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor  
18F-FDG [18F] -Fluorodeoxyglucose  
FPG  Fasting Plasma Glucose  
GCP  Good Clinical Practice  
GI  Gastrointestinal  
HIV  Human Immunodeficiency Virus  
ICH  International Conference on Harmonization  
HDL  High density lipoprotein  
IEC  Independent Ethics Committee  
IRB  Institutional Review Board  
 LDL  Low density lipoprotein  
LVEF  Left Ventricular Ejection fraction  MRI  Magnetic Resonance Imaging  
MTD  Maximum Tol erated Dose  
MUGA  Multiple Gated Acquisition Scan  
PC Prostate cancer  
PD  Pharmacodynamic  
PET  Positron Emission Tomography  
PFS Progression free survival  
PI3K  Phosphatidylinositol 3’ -kinase  
PIN Prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia  
PK  Pharmacokinetic  
PKB  Protein Kinase B (or AKT)  
PR Partial response  
PT  Prothrombin Time  
PTEN  Phosphatase and Tensin homolog  
PTT  Partial Thromboplastin Time  
QTc QT interval (corrected)  
RBC  Red Blood Cells  
REB  Research Ethics Board  
RECIST  Response Evaluation In Solid Tumors  
RP Radical prostatectomy  
S6K  Protein Kinase S6  
SAE  Serious adverse event  
SD Stable disease  
SNP         Single Nucleotide Polymorphism  
SOP  Standard Operating Procedure  
SUV  Standardized Uptake Value  
TdP Torsades de Pointes  
TTE Transthoracic echocardiogra m 
TTP  Time to Progression  
ULN  Upper Limit of Normal  
WBC  White Blood Count  
WCBP  Women of Childbearing Potential  
WHO  World Health Organization  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abiraterone and Race   Page 7 of 72
DukeUniversity    1.0  SYNOPSIS  
Study Title:  A Phase II open -label, parallel group study of abiraterone acetate in Afr ican American and Caucasian men 
with metastatic castrate -resistant prostate cancer  
 
Protocol Number  Pro00046383  Phase  II Type  Interventional  
Condition/Disease:  Castration resistant metastatic prostate cancer, chemo -naive  
Number of Subjects  100 Duration  of Subject Participation  Up to 24 months on study drug  
Number of Study Centers  5 Duration of Study   3 years  Anticipated 30 months accrual time,  
up to 24 month follow up  
Rationale:   African American men have a 60% greater incidence of being diagnosed wi th prostate cancer and nearly a 2. 5 
fold greater chance of mortality from the disease, yet the underlying cause for this increased mortality remains 
controversi al [1].  Hormonal levels vary in men by race, with African American men having higher dihy drotestosterone 
(DHT), androstenedione (ASD) and sex hormone -binding globulin  (SHBG) than Caucasian men with localized prostate 
cancer  [2, 3]. Historically, African American men with prostate cancer have a worse overall survival than Caucasian men, 
however, this is confounded by the timing of androgen deprivation therapy (ADT)  and access to other therapies [4, 5].  To 
what extent race affects response to therapy in prostate cancer is not clear.    
Germline polymorphisms of genes involved in androgen signaling have been shown to vary significantly by race and may 
have important implications with regard to response to therapy targeted towards this pathway. P olymorphisms within the 
promoter region of the androgen receptor (AR) (specifically CAG repeats) have been well documented and vary 
significantly according to race, with African American men having significantly shorter CAG repeats resulting in greater AR 
activity  [6].  These CAG repeats have been associated with more aggre ssive disease characteristics [6].  Recently, germline 
polymorphisms in androgen metabolism genes have been shown to have prognostic value in regards to the time to 
development of CRPC in men with prostate cancer on ADT.  Ross et al tested 129 polymorphisms across 20 genes 
associated with androgen metabolism and identified three polymorphisms in separate genes ( CYP19A1 , HSD3B1 , and 
HSD17B4 ) that were significantly associated with prolonged time to progression (TTP) on ADT [7].  Specifically, individuals 
carrying more th an one of the polymorphisms were associated with improved  time to CRPC than individuals carrying zero 
or one ( P< .0001).  More re cently this group identified polymorphisms in two androgen transporter genes, SLCO2B1 and 
SLCO1B3  that were associated with a s ignificantly shorter  time to  CRPC alone and in combination [8].  Incidences of these 
polymorphisms ranged from 15 to 81%; unfortunately, the cohort of patients used to identify these polymorphisms had 
limited numbers of African American patients or other racial and ethnic groups.   
Recent  stud ies have focused on discovering molecular mechanisms underlying prostate cancer disparities using DNA 
microarrays and bioinformatics.  These studies have compared the gene expression profiles between African American 
and Caucasian American cancers and betw een prostate cancer and patient -matched normal prostate from African 
Americans and Caucasian Americans.  By integrating gene expression profiling and pathway analyses, multiple 
components within the androgen receptor signaling pathway were revealed to be u p-regulated in African American 
prostate cancer specimens along with the up -regulation of genes within other signaling pathways that converge on 
androgen receptor signaling, portending that androge n receptor pathway activation is a key component of prostat e 
cancer health disparities.  Overall the comparison of African American and Caucasian American prostate cancer specimens 
has led to the identification of a number of differentially expressed genes, including CYP19A1, AMFR, CXCR4, MMP9, 
SRD5A2, ADIPOQ, AKT 1, ALOX12, ALOX15, ALOX15B, BMP2, CGA, ERG, FASN, IL1B, IL6, IL8, NFKB1, PIK3C3, PIK3CA, 
PI3K3R1, PLA2G2A, TGFB1, TIMP3, TNF, P38MAPK, STAT1, RHOA, ITGB5, MAPKAPK2, CSNK2A1, PIK3CB, ARA55, GNA01, 
GNB3, POLR2L, PRKCE, PRKD1, TBP, CALR, GNG2, GNG11, GNG12, C ALM1, NFKB2, STAT2, RHOU, FGF13, EIF3B, and GIT1  
[9-12].  Thus, germline polymorphisms of these differentially expressed genes also may have important implications  with 
regard to response to therapy targeted towards the androgen signaling pathway.  
To what extent racial differences affect response and time to progression on abiraterone acetate is unknown. Secondarily, 
to what extent differences in systemic hormonal l evels as well as androgen transport gene polymorphisms affect response 
to abiraterone  acetate  is unknown. Understanding any potential differences in response to therapy by race and/or by 
Abiraterone and Race   Page 8 of 72
DukeUniversity    hormonal/genetic factors could impact on both our clinical use of abi raterone acetate  as well as future clinical trial design. 
Finally, as other agents targeting the androgen/androgen receptor pathways become available, it will be important to 
differentiate their activity according to race, genetics and hormonal milieu.   
We propose a pilot study to evaluate in a prospective, parallel group design, radiographic PFS in men with mCRPC  treated 
with abiraterone acetate/prednisone  by race. Secondary endpoints will describe the response to abiraterone 
acetate/prednisone, PSA kinet ics, and safety and tolerability. Exploratory en dpoints will describe the incidence and 
associations of key hormonal levels as well as germline polymorphisms in androgen signaling g enes and genes that have 
been shown to be differentially expressed in Afric an American versus Caucasian American prostate cancers in both African 
American and Caucasian cohorts.  
Primary Objective :  The primary goal is to prospectively estimate the median radiographic PFS of African American and 
Caucasian men with mCRPC to abira terone acetate and prednisone.  
Secondary Objectives:   
1) PSA kinetics: to determine  the duration of PSA response, time to nadir, and percent of men who achieve a PSA < 0.1;  
2) Radiographic assessments: to estimate the rate of objective respons e and inci dence of bone flares  
3) Safety (NCI CTC v4.0) and tolerability, particularly incidence and grade of hypertension in the two populations  
4) Overall survival  
Exploratory Objectives:  
1) Describe the baseline profile of serum hormone levels (including testoste rone, DHT, DHEA, DHEAS, estradiol)  and 
lipidomics , the change in levels with subsequent therapy ( Cycle 4), and their correlation with response to abiraterone 
acetate.  
2) Describe the germline SNP profiles of target genes involved in androgen signaling  and target genes that have been 
shown to be differentially expressed in African American versus Caucasian American prostate cancers as well as a 
genome wide analysis (GWAS) in both African American and Caucasian men with mCRPC and their associations with 
resp onse to abiraterone acetate.  
Design:  This is a non -comparative pilot open -label, parallel arm, multicenter study of abiraterone acetate in African 
American and Caucasian men with mCRPC. The primary goal is to prospectively estimate the median  radiographi c PFS in 
African American and Caucasian men with mCRPC cancer treated with abiraterone acetate. Patients will self -report on 
race and 50 patients will be enrolled into each group.  Patients will be treated on open -label treatment until evidence of 
disease progression as defined by Prostate Cancer Working Group Two (PCWG2) definition [13] or until two years at which 
point they will roll over to the standard of care a t that time.   
  Study schema is shown below . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Study Population:  This will be a Duke University Health System study conducted through the Duke Cancer Institute, 
composed of a large tertiary referral center and network sites, which treat a hi gh volume of metastatic CRPC patients and 
who prioritize African American patient accrual to clinical trials.  It is anticipated that the Duke Cancer Network and 6 
satellite sites will be needed to accrue 100 subjects ( 50 African American and 50 Caucasian)  over a 30 month accrual R 
E 
G 
I 
S 
T 
R 
A 
T 
I 
O 
N Disease 
Progression  
or 
Adverse 
Event   Metastatic, CRPC  
 No history of chemotherapy  for CRPC  
 Karnofsky performance status ≥ 70  
 Adenocarcinoma of the prostate  
 No evidence of neuroendocrine ca  
 Abiraterone 1000 mg po 
daily  
Prednisone 5 mg po BID  
 
Abiraterone and Race   Page 9 of 72
DukeUniversity    period.  Typically 20 -30 African American subjects per year would be eligible for this protocol at Duke University Medical 
Center alone but this number would be substantially more by including the D uke Cancer Network  and outreach s ites.  A 
parallel population of Caucasian patients will be accrued. All samples will be analyzed to determine the germline SNP 
profiles of target genes involved in androgen signaling and target genes that have been shown to be differentially 
expressed in A frican American versus Caucasian American prostate cancers.  In addition, for GWAS,  all samples will be 
genotyped using Illumina’s 2.5M beadchip .  
Main Inclusion Criteria:   
 Male, a ge ≥ 18 years  
 Karn ofsky performance status ≥ 70 (Appendix 1)  
 Life expectan cy of ≥ 12 months  as determined by treating investigator  
 Written Authorization for Use and Release of Health and Research Study Information  (HIPAA authorization per 
institutional requirements)  
 Willing/able to adhere to the prohibitions and restrictions spe cified in this protocol  
 Willing to take abiraterone acetate on an empty stomach; no food should be consumed at least two hours before and 
for at least one hour after the dose of abiraterone acetate is taken  
 Patients who have partners of childbearing pote ntial must be willing to use a method of birth control with adequate 
barrier protection as determined to be acceptable by the principal investigator and sponsor during the study and for 1 
week after last dose of abiraterone acetate  
 Adequate laboratory para meters  
 Adequa te bone marrow function as shown by: ANC ≥ 1.5 x 109/L, Platelets ≥ 100 x 109/L, Hb>9 g/dL  
 Serum potassium > 3.5 mEq/L  
 AST/SGOT and ALT/SGPT ≤ 1.5 x Institutional Upper Limit of Normal (ULN)  
 Serum bilirubin ≤ 1.5 x Institutional ULN  
 Serum cre atinine ≤ 1.5 x Institutional ULN or 24 -hour clearance ≥ 50 mL/min  
 Serum albumin of > 3.0 g/dl  
 Histologically confirmed diagnosis of adenocarcinoma of the prostate.   Histologic variants of prostate cancer, 
including neuroendocrine features and small cell c arcinoma of the prostate are excluded.  
 Radiographic evidence of metastatic disease ; evaluable no n-target lesions and /or bone only metastasis  are permitted.  
 Ongoing ADT using an LHRH agonist (e.g. leuprolide, goserelin) or antagonist (e.g. degarelix) must c ontinue on therapy  
unless prior bilateral orchiectomy has been performed.  Screening serum testosterone must be <50 ng/dl .   
 PSA ≥ 2.0 ng/mL  
 Evidence of castration resistant disease on ADT as evidenced by  one of the following : 
 Absolute rise in PSA of 2.0 ng/mL or greater, minimum 2 consecutive rising PSA levels with an interval of ≥ 1 
week between each PSA level, OR 
 2 consecutiv e PSA levels 50% or greater above the PSA nadir achieved on ADT and separated at least 1 week 
apart, OR 
 CT or MRI based evidence of disease progression (soft tissue, nodal or visceral disease progression) according 
to modified PCWG2 criteria or modified RECIST 1.1 criteria, or at least 1 new bone scan lesion as compared 
to the most immediate prior radiologic studies.  
 A minimum of 2 weeks elapsed off of antiandrogen therapy prior to start of study drug (i.e. flutamide, nilutamide , 
bicalutamide )   
 A minimum o f 4 weeks elapsed off of sipuleucel -T prior to start of study drug    
 A minimum of 4 weeks from any major surgery prior to start of study drug .   
 Self-reported race of either African American or Caucasian.  
 Ability to swallow, retain, and absorb oral medica tion.  
 Ability to understand and the willingness to sign a written informed consent document.  If the subject is unable to 
understand the consent due to comorbidity, such as Alzheimer’s disease, consent by a legally authorized 
representative and assent by th e subject will be obtained.  
 
Main Exclusion Criteria:   
Patients who meet any of the following criteria will be excluded from the study:  
Abiraterone and Race   Page 10 of 72
DukeUniversity    1. Prior treatment with abiraterone acetate  or enzalutamide  
2. Active infection or other medical condition that would mak e prednisone/prednisolone (cort icosteroid) use 
contraindicated  
3. Any chronic medical condition requiring a higher dose of corticosteroid than 5mg pr ednisone/prednisolone bid  
4. Have known allergies, hypersensitivity, or intolerance to abiraterone acetate or pre dnisone or their excipients.   
5. Pathological finding consistent with small  cell carcinoma of the prostate  
6. Symptomatic Liver or visceral organ me tastasis  
7. Have a history of gastrointestinal disorders (medical disorders or extensive surgery) that may interfere with the  
absorption of the study agents  
8. Known brain metastasis  
9. Prior cytotoxic chemotherapy or biologic th erapy for the treatment of CRPC  
10. Previously treated with ketoconazole for prostate  cancer for greater than 7 days  
11. Prior systemic treatment with an azol e drug (e.g. fluconazole, itraconazole) within 4 weeks of Cycle 1, Day 1.  
12. Uncontrolled hypertension (systolic BP ≥ 160 mmHg or diastolic BP ≥ 95 mmHg). Patients with a history of 
hypertension are allowed provided blood pressure is controlled by anti -hypert ensive tre atment  
13. Poorly controlled diabetes  
14. Active or symptomatic viral hep atitis or chronic liver disease  
15. History of p ituitary or adrenal dysfunction  
16. Clinically significant heart disease as evidenced by myocardial infarction, or arterial thrombotic events  in the past 6 
months, severe or unstable angina, or New York Heart Association (NYHA) Class II -IV heart disease or cardiac ejection 
fraction m easurement of < 50% at baseline  
17. Atrial Fibrillation, or other cardi ac arrhythmia requiring therapy  
18. Other malignan cy, except non -melanoma skin cancer, with a ≥ 30% probability  of recurrence within 24 months  
19. Administration of an investigational therapeutic w ithin 30 days prior to  Cycle 1, Day 1  
20. Any condition which, in the opinion of the investigator, would preclude  participation in this trial  
Concomitant Treatment:   
Prohibited :  
 Chemotherapy, radiation therapy, or immunotherapy, or any anti -cancer therapy other than abiraterone  acetate  and 
prednisone and  those descri bed below . 
 Immunosuppressive doses of systemic c orticosteroids greater than prednisone 5mg twice daily or the equivalent.  
 Agents known to significantly prolong the QTc interval (Appendix 2).   
 Coumadin or other vitamin K antagonists.  
Permitted:  
 Standard therapies for preexisting conditions, medical/surg ical complications including nausea and diarrhea, and 
palliation.  
 Non-potent P450 CYPs  isoenzyme inhibitors and/or inducers (Appendix 3) . 
 LHRH agonists  or antagonists . 
 Anti-hypertensive medications . 
 Diabetic medications.  
 Antidepressants or other medication s for mood disorders .   
 Analgesics including opioids.  
 Bisphosphonates  and/or denosumab.  
 Erythropoietic agents.  
 Systemic anticoagulation with low molecular weight heparin.  
 Focal therapies for localized non-prostate cancers  
Study Intervention  and Administra tion:  The study agent  abiraterone  acetate  will be administered at a dose of 100 0mg 
orally once  daily with prednisone 5 mg BID in 4-week cycles throughout the treatment period.    Abiraterone acetate must 
be taken on an empty stomach. No food should be cons umed for at least two hours before the dose of abiraterone 
acetate is taken and for at least one hour after the dose of abiraterone acetate is taken. Abiraterone  acetate  should be 
Abiraterone and Race   Page 11 of 72
DukeUniversity    taken with a glass of water and consumed over as short a time as possible.  Patients should swa llow the capsules whole 
and not chew them.   Study drug will be provided by Janssen Scientific Affairs  and distributed by DCI Investigational 
Chemotherapy Service . Patients will be instructed to take a 5 -mg prednisone tablet, twice daily.   It is not required for the 
prednisone to be taken at the same time as abiraterone acetate. The dose of prednisone will remain unchanged in the 
event that the study drug dose is changed. If a prednisone dose is missed, it should be omitted and will not be  made up.   
Should a dose modification  of the prednisone be needed due to toxicities , the site will need to discuss this with the 
medical monitor.  
Study Assessments:   
Vital signs, performance status, and physical exam will be assessed at each visit.   The following laboratory studies will be 
obtained at intervals specified in the study flow chart to assess subject safety, specifically the risk of infection, 
hyperglycemia, and/or bone marrow, liver, and kidney abnormalities:  complete blood count, blood ure a nitrogen (BUN), 
creatinine, sodium, potassium, calcium, magnesium, phosphorus, glucose, albumin, total protein, total bilirubin, alkaline 
phosphatase, AST (SGOT), ALT (SGPT) .   
 
For efficacy assessment, sta ndard -of-care biomarkers including PSA will be d rawn prior to initiation and after each cycle 
of thera py.  A CT scan with contrast of chest, abdomen, and pelvis , a bone scan and a circulating tumor cell count will be 
performed withi n 42 days prior to the intended  cycle 1 day 1  visit and every 3 cycles ( 12 weeks) .  
 
Correlative Sciences:  
Whole blood will be collected in purple top EDTA tubes at baseline for DNA isolation and characterization of SNPs for 
androgen metabolism genes as well as genes that have been shown to be differentially expressed in Afric an American 
versus Caucasian American prostate cancers  and ancestral  genotyping . Additionally, a genome wide analysis (GWAS) is 
planned in both African American and Caucasian men with mCRPC and their associations with response to abiraterone 
acetate , in li ne with the specified endpoints and biomarkers defined in the trial .  In addition baseline assessments of 
lipidomics and hormonal levels including testosterone, DHT, DHEA, DHEAS, estradiol and their change after  12 weeks on 
therapy will be evaluated.  Fin ally additional baseline and 4 week plasma samples will be drawn to explore additional 
biomarkers that may have prognostic or predictive value.  
Safety Evaluation:   
Subjects receiving at least one dose of abiraterone  acetate  will be evaluable for safety.    
 Safety will be assessed by physical exam, laboratory assessments, review of concomitant medications, adverse event 
(AE) and serious adverse event (SAE) evaluations every cycle throughout the study.  
 Electrocardiogram prior to initiation and subsequently at the discretion of the treating physician   
 NCI Common Toxicity Criteria (v 4.0) will be used to record and monitor for adverse events (Appendix 3). 
Treatment will be held and/or dose reduced for certain specified grade 3 or 4 adverse events until resolu tion to 
grade 1 as specified in the protocol  
Efficacy Evaluation:   
The primary endpoint  will be radiographic progression free survival  (rPFS) based on PCWG2 criteria or based on the 
onset of a skeletal related event.  Imaging will be obtained every 12 weeks. 
Secondary endpoints  will include:  
1. RECIST 1.1 defined radiologic response rates  and incidence of bone flares  
2. PSA response, time to nadir, and percent of men who achieve a PSA < 0.1   
3. Safety (NCI CTC v4.0)  and tolerability , particularly incidence and gra de of hypertension in the two populations  
 
Statistical Considerations :  Based on Ryan et al. the median time to radiographic progression free survival (rPFS) is 16.5  
months  [14]. This trial is non -comparative. F ifty (50) patients will be enrolled in each group (AA and Caucasians). With an 
accrual rate of 50 patients/group over 30-month accrual period,  24 -months follow -up, and assuming that rPFS follows an 
exponential distribution, based on 5000 simulations the a verage width of a two -sided 95% confidence interval for the 
median rPFS is 16.  
 
Ethical Considerations:  
This study will be conducted in accordance with applicable laws and regulations including, but not limited to, the ICH GCP 
Abiraterone and Race   Page 12 of 72
DukeUniversity    and the ethical principles that have their origins in the Declaration of Helsinki.  The IRB must review and approve the 
protocol and ICF before any subjects are enrolled.  Before any procedures specified in the protocol are performed, the 
subject must sign and date the IRB -approved ICF. 
 
Abiraterone and Race   Page 13 of 72
DukeUniversity    2.0  STUDY FLOW CHAR T 
 
 
Procedure  Screening / 
Baseline  
Testinga  
On-treatment visits  
(+/- 3 for first cycle then +/ - 7 days)  
  
End of Treatment &  
Follow -up Visits  
 
 Within 30 
days of 
dosing       
Intended/ 
Cycle 1  
Day 1p  
Cycle 1  
Day 15  
(+/- 5 da ys) Cycle 2, 3  
 Day 1  Cycle 4 Day 1 & 
every 3rd cycle  
(Cycles 7, 10, 13, 
etc.)  End of 
Treat - 
mentc Follow -
up 
safety 
visitd Follow -up visits 
(until disease 
progression  or 
new 
treatment )d Follow up -
survivald 
Informed consent  X         
Inclusion / exclus ion criteria  X         
Demographic data  X         
Prior and concomitant medications  X X X X X X X   
Prior and concomitant non -pharmacologic 
treatments  X X X X X X X   
Medical history and AE assessmente X X X X X X X   
Vital signs, height, and weightf X X X X X X X   
Karnofsky performance statusg X X  X X X X    
Physical examinatione X  X X X X X X   
Electrocardiogramh X         
Tumor Site Assessments: CT scans (chest, 
abdomen, pelvis) and bone scansi Xi    Xi  Xd X  
Abiraterone  acetate  dispensedj  Xp  X X     
Assess survival          Xd 
Standard -of-care laboratory assessmentsk          
CBC with differential  X Xb X X X X X   
Serum chemistriesk X Xb X X X X X   
PSA X Xb  Xk Xk X  Xk  
Testosterone  X    Xk     
Circulating tumor cell count  (opti onal) k X    Xk X    
Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) X         
Correlative/research studies           
Serum Hormone Levelsl X    Xl Xl    
Plasma and serum markersm X   Xm      
DNA isolation and characterization of SNPsn X         
Archival tissue collectio no X         
Abiraterone and Race   Page 14 of 72
DukeUniversity    New cancer therapies         X  
Abiraterone and Race   Page 15 of 72
DukeUniversity    Footnotes to Study Flow Chart : 
a. Screening/baseline evaluations must be completed within  30 days prior to  the intended cycle 1 day 1  visit, with the exception of informed consent (42 days) and scans (42 
days) .  
b. If the CBC with diff ,Serum Chemistries , and PSA are performed within 7 days of intended Cycle 1 Day 1  visit, do not repeat these at the intended Cycle 1 Day 1 visit unless 
requested by the site’s PI.  
c. The end of treatment visit is to occur +/- 7 days after the last dose of study agent.     
d. The follow -up safety visit is to occur 28 days (+/- 7 days) after the last dose of study agent.  CT and bone scan will be done at the safety follow up visit if scans  have not been 
done within the last 8 weeks of the visit.   After the Day 28 safety follow up visit, patients  will visit the clinic once every 3 months for up to 24 months  (+/- 14 days)  from the 
start of therapy . Subjects who  discontinue treatment due to reasons other than radiographic progressive disease  will b e followed until a new treatment is started or 
disease progression . Abiraterone prescribed  off-study is  not be considered a new treatment. Disease progression will be obtained  through Standard of Care scans.  Subjects 
who discontinue due to progression will  not be followed. Survival will be assessed by chart review or phone call.  
e. Medical history, physical examination and AE assessments will be performed prior to study agent administration , on Day 1 and 15 of cycle 1 and on Day 1  only of each 
subsequent cycle s  2, 3, 4 7, 10 and every 3 cycles .  An end -of-study medical history,  physical exam,  and AE assessment will be performed at the end of treatment or at 
progression.  In add ition, one safety follow -up visit with medical history,  physical exam,  and AE assess ment will occur 28  +/- 7 days of  the last dose of study drug.  
f. Vital signs (BP, pulse, respirations, temperature and weight) will be recorded at each visit.  Height will be measured at scr eening only.     
g. Karnofsky performance status (Appendix 1) will be ev aluated and recorded on all clinic visits on study and at the end of treatment.   
h. Electrocardiogram prior to initiation and subsequently at the discretion of the treating physician   
i. As part of routine tumor assessment, CT and bone scans will be performed within 42 days prior to  intended  cycle 1 day1  visit and every 3 cycles (approximately every 12 
weeks) thereafter (i.e., baseline, Day 1 of cycles 4, 7, 10  and every 3 cycles ).  The timing of the scans will be within 7 days of the next planned cycle initiat ion.  A CT scan will 
be performed at the above described timepoints with contrast as per radiology protocol of chest, abdomen, and pelvis. If the chest CT at baseline is clear, chest x -rays may 
be used for subsequent assessments  at the enrolling physician’ s discretion .  These tumor assessments will be performed locally, in strict accordance with the RECIST 1.1 
guidelines .  A total body bone scan will be performed at the above described timepoints and interpreted according to PCWG2 guidelines (Appendix 4).  CT and bone scan 
modalities per standard institutional practices may be used, but the same modality should be used throughout the study for ea ch subject.  Scans during follow -up will be 
performed according to standard clinical practice and interpreted as de scribed above .        
j. Abiraterone acetate  will be dispensed directly from clinic.  
k. Standard -of-care laboratory assessments at the times indicated include:   
Complete blood count (CBC) with differential : WBC count with differential, platelet count, hemoglobi n, and hematocrit at baseline, Cycle 1 Day 15, Day 1 of  cycles  2, 3, 4 
7, 10 and every 3 cycles , at the end of treatment visit and at safety follow -up visit.  
Serum chemistries:   Sodium, potassium, chloride, b lood urea nitrogen (BUN) , creatinine, glucose, carbon dioxide or bicarbonate, calcium, magnesium, phosphorus, total 
protein, albumin, aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alanine aminotransferase (ALT),  total bilirubin, and alkaline phosphatase  at baseline,  Cycle 1 Day 15, Day 1 of cycles  
2, 3, 4 7, 10 and every 3 cycles , at the end of treatment visit, and at the end of Safety Follow -up Visit.  
PSA:  Drawn at baseline, Day 1 of Cycle 1 and cycles  2, 3, 4 , 7, 10 and every 3 cycles , and at the end of treatment visit.  During follow -up for subjects who discon tinue 
treatment due to reasons other than radiographic progressive disease, PSA will be collected every 3 months (+/ - 28 days)  and additionally as clinically appropriate . 
Testosterone :  Drawn at baseline  and the en d of cycle 3 (at Cycle 4 Day 1).  
Circulati ng tumor cell count  (if available) :  Standard Cellsearch ® CTC test is drawn at baseline,  Day 1 of every 3 cycles (i.e. cycles 4, 7, 10, etc.), and a t the end of 
treatment visit.   
Note : Intended Cycle 1 Day 1 CBC, Serum Chemistries , &PSA  lab tests do not h ave to be repeated if screening lab tests are obtained within 7 days  prior to the intended 
Cycle 1 Day 1 visit .   
l. Serum hormone levels include Testosterone (ultrasensitive) DHT, DHEA, DHEAS, and estradiol : One 5ml gold top tube will be collected  at baselin e, the end of cycle 3 (at 
Cycle 4 Day 1), and at the end of treatment visit , end of treatment research labs may be drawn at safety follow up visit if needed . Lipidomics will also be assessed at 
baseline and cycle 4 day 1 and the samples should be collected  after fasting.  See lab manual for detailed instructions.  
m. Plasma for blood -based  biomarkers : One 6ml lavender top tube and one 4.5ml light blue top tube  will be collected  at baseline and end of cycle 1 (Cycle 2, Day 1).  
Abiraterone and Race   Page 16 of 72
DukeUniversity    n. DNA isolation and characterization of SNPs: One 4ml lavender top tube  will be collected at baseline  See lab manual for detailed instructions.  
o. If available and consistent with local regulations, banked tumor tissue (unstained slides and/ or a paraffin -embedded block) will be obtained and eva luated to assess somatic 
expression of target genes involved in androgen metabolism, target genes that have been shown to be differentially exp ressed in African American versus Caucasian 
American prostate cancers, and AR splice variants, potentially predic tive of abiraterone acetate antitumor activity.  See lab manual for detailed instructions.  
p. All assessments must  be performed on the intended cycle 1 day 1 visit.  However,  Cycle 1 day 1 is the first day of treatment and must occur within 2 weeks of the inten ded 
cycle 1 day 1 visit.  
Note: Screening/baseline correlative research studies may be drawn on screening/baseline or  Intended  Cycle 1 day  1 visit.
Abiraterone and Race   Page 17 of 72
DukeUniversity    3.0   CURRENT TREATMENT FOR METASTATIC CRPC  
 
3.1 Metastatic Castrate Resistant Prostate Cancer  
 
Prostate can cer has become an increasingly important health issue globally. With 903,500  
men diagnosed  in 2008 , prostat e cancer is  the second most diagnosed cancer worldwide  [15]. It 
is estimated by the Amer ican Cancer Society that in 2012 , prostate cancer will be  diagnosed in 
241,740  men in the United States alone and that 28,17 0 will die  [1]. 
 
The most significant mo rbidity of prostate cancer is bone metastasis. It develops initially in  the 
axial skeleton and late r in the appendicular skeleton  in advanced prostate cancer and  
metastasis to bone is present in > 90% of patients  [16-18]. These lesions can cause pain, 
skeletal  fractures, spinal cord compression, anemia and thrombocytopenia. Clinical sequelae 
can include pain, paralysis, diminished mobility, fatigue and increased ris k of infections. Side  
effects such as constipation and delirium from analgesics required to palliate pain are also  
significant. They further compromise patient quality of life.   In addition, soft tissue metastasis 
occurs in about 40% of advanced patients. Pelvic  lymphadenopathy may lead to anatomic 
obstruction of the u reters, or fistula formation  [16]. When tumor recurs in the prostate gland or 
bed, urethral obstruc tion may also ensue.   
 
Prostate cancer is hormone sensitive at the time of initial diagnosis. Although most patients  
with advanced metastatic disease initially respond to conventional androgen deprivation with  
medical or surgical castration, the median dur ation of diseas e control has been 13 -22 months 
and historically overall survival may be as short as 28 -36 months from starting androgen 
deprivation therapy  [19-21]. The clinical status of patients after  failure of castration is 
commonly referred to as hormone -refractory prostate cancer (HRPC),  or androgen -
independent prostate cancer (AIPC). However, recent investigations have  established that 
tumor progression  often remains androgen -dependent albeit at much reduced  systemic 
androgen levels after castration. Although used widely in clinical settings, the  terms HRPC and 
AIPC do not reflect the biology of advanced prostate cancer where  androgen receptor (AR) and 
its ligand remain pivotal in tumor growth. Prostate cancer  progression after conventional 
medical or surgical castration should, therefore, be considered  castration -resistant prostate 
cancer (CRPC). Patients with metastatic CRPC have a very  limited life expectancy and most 
often die of their prostate cancer.  
 
In the castrate state,  remaining  ligands to the AR have been thought to be derived primarily 
from the  adrenal glands. Conventional androgen deprivation therapy removes 90% of 
circulating  androgens produ ced in the gonads. As much as 10% of circulating testosterone 
remains, in  part due to the peripheral conversion of adrenal steroids to testosterone. In 
addition, several  recent studies suggest that androgen levels in the microenvironment of 
prostate cancer  may  be maintained in spite  of reduced systemic levels  [22, 23].  In patients with 
castrate levels o f testostero ne, the tissue levels of dehydroepiandrosterone, 
dihydrotestosterone, and  androstenedione all remain sufficient to activate the AR. 
Furthermore, the ARs are  predominately located in the nucleus in biopsy tissue, indicating 
Abiraterone and Race   Page 18 of 72
DukeUniversity    ligand -binding and the  activation  of androgen -dependent gene expression. Increased 
expression of the AR is  common in advanced prostate cancer, and allows lower ligand levels to 
more strongly  activate the AR  [24]. A recent investigation made the observation that in high risk 
primary  prostate tumors and in metastatic biopsies, CYP17A1 gene expression i s highly 
upregulated, suggesting the possibility of in situ production of androgens as autocrine or 
paracrine  growt h factors despite castration .[25, 26] Similarly, investigators at MD Anderson 
Cancer  Center also detected CYP17 expression by immunohistochemistry in bone marrow 
metastasis  in CRPC  [27]. Although these preliminary findings require further corroborati ng 
evidence,  the need to suppress androgen production in adrenal glands and possibly at tissue 
levels  persists in CRPC.  
 
Complete androgen independence in CRPC is thought to be rare. A few patients (9%) have  
mutations in the AR ; these changes could allow t he AR to be activated by non -androgen  ligands, 
or might allow ligand -independent AR association with coactivator molecules. [28] 
 
Although gene fusions are well kn own to drive the development of blood cancers and  
sarcomas, only rarely have they been detected in the common solid cancers. Recent evidence  
indicates that a gene fusion may be important in the pathogenesis of prostate carcinoma. [29-
33] Chromosomal translocations involving the androgen -responsive gene  transmembrane 
protease serine 2 (TMPRSS2) and erythroblast transformation –specific  (ETS) -related 
transcription fac tors ETV1, ETV4, and ETV5, have been identified in 50% to  70% of prostate 
cancer cases .[29, 30] Translocatio n of TMPRSS2 to the ERG gene, found in  a high proportion of 
human prostate cancer, results in overexpression of the 3' -ERG sequences joined to the 5' -
TMPRSS2 promoter. ERG and other ETS family members are  transcription factors that are 
implicated in the co ntrol of cell growth and differentiation and  the chimeric protein product of 
the gene translocation appears to retain hormoneresponsiveness. [31] Specific translocations in 
primary tumors have been associated with  more aggressive natural clinical history, more 
advan ced disease at diagnosis and greater  lethality. [32-35] These gene rearrangements may be 
associated with tumor response to  androgen deprivation therapy, including abiraterone  acetate   
[36]. 
 
3.2 Asymptomatic or Mildly Symptomatic Patients with C RPC 
 
Approximately 50% of patients with metastatic prostate cancer will have no noticeable  
symptoms related to the tumor. [37] The optimal management of these patients with  
asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic metastatic prostate cancer refractory to androgen 
deprivation therapy remains undefined .[38] There are no approved second -line hormonal  
therapies for this popula tion, and cytotoxic chemotherapies  (docetaxel , cabazitaxel, or 
mitoxantrone) are ordinarily reserved for patients with symptomatic  or rapidly progressive 
cancer .[39] The American Society of Clinical Oncology / Cancer Care of Ontario and EAU 
guidelines for the  cytotoxic treatment of CRPC  emphasize the need to individualize the timin g 
of nonhormonal therapy for prostate cancer and consider routine docetaxel questionable in 
men  who have metastatic disease but lack symptoms. [40, 41] Similarl y, the current ESMO 
guidelines for metastatic prostate cancer recommend that patients with castrate -resistant 
Abiraterone and Race   Page 19 of 72
DukeUniversity    disease should  receive second and possibly third line hormonal therapies, while chemotherapy  
with  docetaxel given every three weeks should be considered for patients with CRPC who are  
symptomatic .[42] Thus the non -cytotoxic treatment of pati ents with CRPC who are  
asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic remains a significant unmet medical need.  
 
Patients with metastatic CRPC who are not good candidates for immediate chemotherapy  may 
still benefit from alternate therapies since they develop symptoma tic disease progression  in a 
short period of time. This adverse natural history of patients with asymptomatic or  mildly 
symptomatic CRPC was documented in two recent Phase III trials of novel agents in  this 
population. A multinational, double -blind, placeb o-controlled trial of the endothelin  antagonist 
atrasentan in patients with meta
static CRPC who had not received chemotherapy  and did not require opiates for cancer related 
pain enrolled 809 men. [43] Patients were  randomized 1:1 to receive either atrasentan 10 mg 
per day or placebo. The primary endpoint  was time to disease progression (TTP), which was 
determined according to radiographic and  clinical measures. A nalyses of overall survival and 
changes in biomarkers also were  performed. Greater than 50% of patients on both the 
experimental and control arms  developed protocol defined progression in less than 100 days, 
with 87% of the progressions  by radiographic cri teria. In addition more than half of patients on 
the control arm had a 50%  worsening of the Pain Catastrophizing Scale (PCS) pain score within 
12 months of study  entry, primarily due to increasin gly painful bone metastases .[44] The 
median survival was  20.5 months for atrasentan treated patients and 20.3 months for the 
control patients.  
 
A second  smaller Phase III study compared the investigational immunotherapy product  
Sipuleucel -T with placebo in patients with CRPC who had not received chemotherapy. [45] 
Patients with cance r-related bone pain, those requiring opioid analgesics for cancer pain, and  
those with visceral metastases were not eligible. Disease progression events included  
radiographic progression, cancer pain, and clinical events, with the great majority  radiograph ic. 
The median for time to disease progression (TTP) for Sipuleucel -T was 11.7  weeks compared 
with 10.0 weeks for placebo. Median survival was 25.9 months for  Sipuleucel -T and 21.4 
months for placebo. These results demonstrate that patients with  asymptomat ic or mildly 
symptomatic CRPC have short times to disease progression and to  the rapid appearance of 
painful metastases, with an approximate overall survival of two years  or less. Therefore the 
development of an alternate non -cytotoxic therapy with an impr oved  safety and toxicity 
profile, capable of delaying tumor progression, blocking onset or  worsening of pain, and 
improving survival would be of significant clinical benefit to patients  with CRPC.  
 
3.3 Second line hormonal therapies for CRPC  
 
Second line h ormonal therapies in prostate cancer have limited efficacy, and none have  
received regulatory approval for this use. Historically, bilateral adrenalectomy was the first  
second line hormonal therapy to be eva luated .[46] Several of the adrenalectomized patients  
with widespread bone metastases had decreases in the bulkiness of their prostate tumor,  
reductions in prostatic acid phosphatase levels, increases in hemoglobin and red blood cell  
Abiraterone and Race   Page 20 of 72
DukeUniversity    levels, and strikingly, 5 of 7 patients had complete relief of their cancer pain within 48 hours  of 
the surgery. However, patient and physician acceptance of adrenalectomy was low, due to  the 
morbidity of major surgery in an advanced stage cancer patient population.  
 
3.3.1 Adrenal Androgen Inhibitor  
 
Historical attempts to obtain the benefits of total adrenalectomy medically without the side  
effects of surgery have met with limited success. Aminoglutethimide and ketoconazole both  
inhibit several adrenal enzymes involved with adrenal androgen synthesis. Modest  therapeutic 
activities  on prostate cancer were observed. However, the side effects were  significant. For 
example, in combination with hydrocortisone, aminoglutethimide resulted in  a PSA response 
proportion of 37% with the median duration for responders of nine months in  a Phase  2 study  
at the expense of lethargy, skin rash, hypothyroidism, nausea and  vomiting. Its use has been 
limited. [47, 48] 
 
Ketoconazole inhibits several adrenal enzymes required for steroid biosynthesis. Its efficacy  in 
prostate cancer in terms of PSA response is comparable to that of aminoglutethimide.  Pilot 
studies in patients after failure of combined androgen blo ckade where ketoconazole was  given 
simultaneously with anti -androgen withdrawal (AAWD) showed that 55% of patients  achieved a 
50% PSA decline .[49] When administere d after AAWD, 36% -62.5% of patients  had a 50% PSA 
decline .[50, 51] In a Phase 3 study conducted by Cancer an d Leukemia  Group B, PSA response 
rate was 27% with a median duration of response of 9 months in the  group of patients 
randomized to the combination arm of AAWD and ketoconazole plus  hydrocorti sone versus the 
AAWD alone arm .[52] However, ketoconazole inhibits CYP3A4  with substantial risk of drug -drug 
interactions , such as warfarin and statins .[53] It is often  poorly tolerated by patients, with 
commonly occurring side effects including diarrhea,  nausea, vomiting, and depression .[50-52] 
Ketoconazole is not approved for the treatment  of CRPC.  
 
3.3.2 Glucocorticoids  
 
Glucocorticoids appear to possess both hormonal and direct anti -tumor effects in prostate  
cancer. Patients with CRPC may still have hormone -sensitive disea se that is stimulated by  weak 
androgens of adrenal origin, and these androgens are suppressed by prednisone through  its 
negative feedback on secretion of adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH). Tannock et al  have 
demonstrated that low -dose prednisone treatmen t (7.5 to 10 mg daily) led to a  decrease in the 
concentration of serum testosterone in seven of nine patients where it was not  initially 
suppressed below 2.0 nmol/mL, and caused a decrease in serum levels of  androstenedione and 
dehydroepiandrosterone sulfa te in more than 50% of patients. [54] These  changes were 
associated with symptomatic and clinic al improvement. Glucocorticoids may  also have direct 
inhibitory effects on prostate cancer cells through enhanced growthinhibitory  TGF-ß1 signaling 
and suppression of the transcriptional activities of NF –κB.[55, 56] 
 
Prednisone, dexamethasone, and hydrocortisone have been frequently administered as   
standard of care in advanced prostate cancer because of their mod est antitumor activity and   
Abiraterone and Race   Page 21 of 72
DukeUniversity    alliative effects on disease. Two prospective Phase 3 studies have documented the adverse  
event profile and palliative benefit of prednisone. Prednisone 7.5 -10 mg daily was examined  
among 81 patients in one arm of a Phase 3 tria l, with 22% of patients achieving a 50% PSA  
decline and a median tim e to progression of 4.0 months .[57] Likewise, in a randomized  study 
control arm where 201 pat ients were treated with prednisone 5 mg twice daily, PSA  decline of 
≥ 50% was observed in 21% of patients .[58] Significant improvements in pain,  quality of life and 
fatigue were also reported.  
 
Other glucocorticoids have  similar activity in advanced prostate cancer. Hydrocortisone has  
been evaluated as a control arm in prospective Phase 3 studies. In one study, 231 patients  
treated with hydrocortisone alone (control arm) showed that 16% of patients achieved a PSA  
decline of ≥50% with a median dura tion of response of 2.5 months .[59] Similarly, 14% of  
patients given hydrocortisone 40 mg daily achieved a PSA decline ≥ 50% lasting a me dian of  2.3 
months in a Cancer and Leukemia Group B (CALGB) study .[60] The antitumor activity  of 
hydrocortisone was slightly lower than prednisone in these Phase  3 studies (14% -16%  PSA 
response rate for hydrocortisone versus 21% -22% PSA response rate for prednisone;  median 
duration of response also favored prednisone). Likewise, dexamethasone has  antitum or activity 
in prostate cancer .[61-63] No prostate cancer trials have directly  compared 2 glucocorticoids . 
 
3.3.3 Estrogens  
 
Prostate cancer normally expresses estrogen receptors, and estrogenic compounds have been  
used fo r the treatment of CRPC. The most commonly used estrogen is diethylstilbestrol  (DES), 
although DES -diphosphate, and the herbal phytoestrogenic supplement, PC -SPES,  have also 
been investigated in clinical trials.  
 
Recently, DES has  been evaluated in two stu dies including 21 and 32 patients. [64, 65] A positive 
PSA response was achieved in 43% and 80%, respectively; t he estimated survival at  2 years was 
63%. However, even at low doses, 31% of the patients developed deep venous  thrombosis and 
7% experienced myocardial infarction. In another prospective randomized  phase II trial, the 
clinical efficacy of the herbal suppl ement PC -SPES and DES were tested in  a cohort of 90 
patients, with PSA progression following i nitial androgen deprivation .[66] A PSA decline > 50% 
was noted in 40% wi th PC -SPES and in 24% with DES. Median time to  progression was 5.5 
months with PC -SPES and 2.9 months with DES; the differences were  statistically not significant.  
 
Although estrogens remain an option for the secondary ho rmonal treatment of CRPC, their use 
is limited by concerns reg arding cardiovascular toxicity .[41] 
 
3.4 Chemotherapy and Bisphosphonates for CRPC  
 
Several agents have been approved as palliative the rapy for prostate cancer. Estramustine  was 
approved in the 1970s. However, in a randomized study where overall survival was  compared, 
diethystilbesterol was found to  be superior to estramustine. [67] In 1996,  mitoxantrone and 
prednisone were approved in the United States for palliation of pain and  improvement in 
Abiraterone and Race   Page 22 of 72
DukeUniversity    quality of life in a randomized st udy with prednisone as control .[57] However, there was no  
survival benefit. Recently, zoledronic acid was approved for  reduction in skeletal morbidity in 
solid tumors, includ ing prostate cancer .[68] None of these  agents improved the overall or 
prostate cancer -specific survival of patients with CRPC.  
 
Docetaxel is the only agent to date that has demonstrated a survival benefit in CRPC. A 3 - 
weekly docetaxel regimen had a median overall survival of 18.9 months (95% confidence  
interval 17.0 – 21.2), compared with the mitoxantrone control arm of 16.5 months (95%  
confidence interval 14.4 – 18.6 months). The hazard ratio for death was 0.76 (95%  conf idence 
interval 0.62 – 0.94, p =0.009) in the docetaxel regimen as compared with control. [69] 
 
Results from the SWOG Study 99 -16 trial of 770 men (3 -weekly docet axel + estramustine +  
dexamethason e vs mitoxantrone + prednisone ), median overall survival 17.5 months vs  15.6 
months, respectively, p=0.02 were consistent with the TAX -327 data. [70] 
 
Results from TAX -327 were updated at ASCO 2007. Overall survival results were  maintained 
after the additional 2 years of follow -up and an additional 276 deaths  [71]. The  median surviva l 
in the docetaxel 3 -weekly arm and mitoxantrone arms were the same as  previously reported in 
2004, 18.9 months (95% confidence interval 17.0 -21.2) for docetaxel  every 3 weeks plus 
prednisone, and 16.5 months (95% confidence interval 14.4 -18.6) for  mitoxan trone plus 
prednisone. In an exploratory subset analysis, benefit was seen in patients  who were free of 
pain at the time therapy was initiated. However, this analysis confirmed  only consistency of 
effect across subpopulations, and the study was not powered  to demonstrate survival 
advantage in  symptomatic patients. Also, the similar benefit produced  by docetaxel treatment 
in patients with or without pain suggests that holding chemotherapy  in reserve for 
asymptomatic patients is a reasonable option.  
 
4.0 ABIRATERONE ACETATE (JNJ212082 )  
 
4.1  Abiraterone Acetate and Mechanism of Action  
 
Abiraterone ( JNJ589485 ) is [17 -(3-pyridyl)androsta -5,16 -dien -3β-ol] and is a steroidal inhibitor  
of CYP17 (17α hydroxylase/C17,20 -lyase) that blocks two important enzymatic activities in  the 
synthesis of testosterone (Figure 1), based on the observation that nonsteroidal 3 pyri dyl esters 
improve selectivity for inhibition of 17α -hydroxylase/C17,20 lyase. Abiraterone acetate  is a 
potent inhibitor with an apparent inhibition constant of 0.5 nM. Pharmacodynamic studies  
demonstrated that its effects on adrenal steroid synthesis were  consistent with its mechanism  
of action. Antitumor effects were evident with PSA response and durable objective  responses 
using Response evaluation criteria in so lid tumors (RECIST) criteria in Phase  1 and Phase 2 
studies conducted to date. [72] 
 
Abiraterone acetate ( JNJ212082 ) is the 3 -acetylated analog of abiraterone and thus a pro -drug 
of abiraterone. The chemical nomenclature of abiraterone acetate is 3β acetoxy -17-(3- pyridyl)  
androsta -5,16 -diene ; its empirical formula is C26H33NO2 and molecular weight is  391.55. Once 
Abiraterone and Race   Page 23 of 72
DukeUniversity    absorbed after oral administration, abiraterone acetate is rapidly converted to  the active form, 
abiraterone (Figure 2). In initial research studies, abiraterone  acetate  was the  pred ominant, if 
not the only, metabolite of abiraterone acetate detected in blood, both in  preclinical studies  
and in previously conducted clinical studi es.[73, 74] 
 
Figure 1. The Enzyme Complexes Inhibited by Abiraterone  acetate  
 
Figure 2. Prodrug Abiraterone Acetate is Converted to Abiraterone after Absorption  
 
 
4.2  Clinical Trials with Abiraterone Acetate an d Prednisone  
 
COU-AA- 301 was a randomized, double -blind, International Phase III study comparing 
abiraterone acetate, given at 1000 mg once daily with pr ednisone 5 mg BID to placebo and 
prednisone 5 mg BID in men with mCRPC previously treated with doceta xel-based 
chemotherapy  [75].  Overall survival was the primary endpoint and 1195 patients were 
enrolled.  A planned interim analysis after 534 patients met the p rimary endpoint revealed a 
statistically significant difference in overall survival between the abiraterone acetate and 
Abiraterone and Race   Page 24 of 72
DukeUniversity    prednisone arm (median OS 14.8 months; 95% CI 14.1 - 15.2) and the placebo and prednisone 
arm (median OS 10.9 months; 95% CI 10.2 -12.0) w ith a hazard ratio of 0.646 and a p < 0.0001  
[75]. Secondary endpoints were all statistically significant in favor of abiraterone  acetate  
including time to PSA p rogression, radiographic progression, and PSA response.  Subgroup 
analysis revealed all parameters in favor of abiraterone  acetate .   Side effects in this large phase 
III heavily pre -treated population were relatively low and balanced in both arms except f or fluid 
retention, hypokalemia, hypertension and cardiac disorders; however, grade 3 or greater 
incidence of these toxicities were less than 5%.  These results have led to the FDA -approval of 
abiraterone acetate with prednisone for patients with mCRPC who  have failed doectaxel -based 
chemotherapy.   
 
Early Phase II experience suggested that abiraterone acetate and prednisone was active and 
well tolerated in men with chemo -naïve mCRPC.  A phase II study in 33 men revealed a 67% PSA 
response rate and a median  time to PSA progression of 16.3 months  [76]. These early results 
led to the COU -AA-302 study, a randomized, double blind, international phase III study 
comparing a biraterone acetate and prednisone to placebo and prednisone in men with mCRPC 
who were chemotherapy -naïve  [77]. 1088 patients were randomized in a 1:1 ratio and treated 
until radiographic progression .  Radiogra phic progression -free survival and overall survival were 
co-primary endpoint.  Three interim analyses were pre -planned.  At the time of the second 
interim analysis, following after 311 events (43% of events) the independent data safety 
monitoring committee  recommended halting the study and unblinding the patients due to a 
statistically significant positive effect in favor of abiraterone  acetate  for radiographic 
progression -free survival (HR 0.43; 95% CI 0.35 -0.52; p < 0.0001), a strong trend in favor of 
overall survival  (HR: 0.75; 95% CI 0.61 -0.93; p = 0.0097) and posit ive secondary endpoints as 
well [77].  These results led to the FDA -approval of abiraterone acetate with prednisone for 
patients with mCRPC in De cember 2012 .    
 
For the most comprehensive clinical information regarding the efficacy and safety of 
abiraterone acetate, refer to the latest version of the Package Insert for abiraterone acetate.  
 
4.3 Rationale for the current study  
 
African American me n have a 60% greater incidence of being diagnosed with prostate cancer 
and nearly a 2 .5 fold greater chance of mortality from the disease, yet the underlying cause for 
this increased mortality remains controversial  [1].  Hormonal levels vary in men b y race, with 
African American men having higher dihydrotestosterone (DHT), androstenedione (ASD) and 
sex hormone -binding globulin  (SHBG) than Caucasian men with  localized prostate cancer  [2, 
23]. Historically, African American men with prostate cancer have a worse overall survival than 
Caucasian men, however, this is confounded by the timing of androgen deprivation  therapy 
(ADT) and  access to other therapies  [4, 5].  To what extent race affects response to therapy in 
prosta te cancer is not clear.    
Germline polymorphisms of genes involved in androgen signaling have been shown to vary 
significantly by race and may have important implications with regard to response to therapy 
Abiraterone and Race   Page 25 of 72
DukeUniversity    targeted towards this pathway. P olymorphisms with in the promoter region of the androgen 
receptor (AR) (specifically CAG repeats) have been well documented and vary significantly 
according to race, with African American men having significantly shorter CAG repeats resulting 
in greater AR activity [6].  These CAG repeats have been associated with more aggressive 
disease characteristics [6].  Recently, germline polymorphisms in androgen metabolism genes 
have been shown to have prognostic value in regards to the time to development of CRPC in 
men with prostate cancer on ADT.  Ross et al tested 129 polymorphisms across 20 genes 
associated with androgen metabolism and identified three polymorphisms in separate genes 
(CYP19A1 , HSD3B1 , and HSD17B4 ) that were significantly associated with pr olonged time to 
progression (TTP) on ADT [7].  Specifically, individuals carrying more than one of the 
polymorphisms were associated with improved  time to CRPC than individuals carrying zero or 
one ( P< .0001).  More recently this group identified polymorphisms in two androgen 
transporter genes, SLCO2B1 and SLCO1B3  that were associated with a significantly shorter  time 
to CRPC alone and in combination [8].  Incidences of these polymorphisms ranged from 15 to 
81%; unfortunately, the cohort of patients used to identify these polymorphisms had limited 
numbers of African American pati ents or other racial and ethnic groups.   
Recent studies have focused on discovering molecular mechanisms underlying prostate cancer 
disparities using DNA microarrays and bioinformatics.  These studies have compared the gene 
expression profiles between Afr ican American and Caucasian American cancers and between 
prostate cancer and patient -matched normal prostate from African Americans and Caucasian 
Americans.  By integrating gene expression profiling and pathway analyses, multiple 
components within the andr ogen receptor signaling pathway were revealed to be up -regulated 
in African American prostate cancer specimens along with the up -regulation of genes within 
other signaling pathways that converge on androgen receptor signaling, portending that 
androgen rece ptor pathway activation is a key component of prostate cancer health disparities.  
Overall the comparison of African American and Caucasian American prostate cancer 
specimens has led to the identification of a number of differentially expressed genes, incl uding 
CYP19A1, AMFR, CXCR4, MMP9, SRD5A2, ADIPOQ, AKT1, ALOX12, ALOX15, ALOX15B, BMP2, 
CGA, ERG, FASN, IL1B, IL6, IL8, NFKB1, PIK3C3, PIK3CA, PI3K3R1, PLA2G2A, TGFB1, TIMP3, TNF, 
P38MAPK, STAT1, RHOA, ITGB5, MAPKAPK2, CSNK2A1, PIK3CB, ARA55, GNA01, GNB3, P OLR2L, 
PRKCE, PRKD1, TBP, CALR, GNG2, GNG11, GNG12, CALM1, NFKB2, STAT2, RHOU, FGF13, EIF3B, 
and GIT1 [9-12].  Thus, germline polymorphisms of these differentially  expressed genes also 
may have important implications with regard to response to therapy targeted towards the 
androgen signaling pathway.  
To what extent racial differences affect response and time to progression on abiraterone 
acetate is unknown. Secondari ly, to what extent differences in systemic hormonal levels as well 
as androgen transport gene polymorphisms affect  response to abiraterone acetate  is unknown. 
Understanding any potential differences in response to therapy by race and/or by 
hormonal/genetic  factors could impact on both our clinical use of abiraterone acetate  as well as 
future clinical trial design. Finally, as other agents targeting the androgen/androgen receptor 
pathways become available, it will be important to differentiate their activity  according to race, 
genetics and hormonal milieu.   
Abiraterone and Race   Page 26 of 72
DukeUniversity    We propose a pilot study to evaluate in a prospective, parallel group design, radiographic PFS in 
men with mCRPC treated with abiraterone acetate/prednisone by race. Secondary endpoints 
will describe the r esponse to abiraterone acetate/prednisone, PSA kinetics and safety and 
tolerability. Exploratory endpoints will describe the incidence and associations of key hormonal 
levels as well as germline polymorphisms in androgen signaling genes and genes that have  been 
shown to be differentially expressed in African American versus Caucasian American prostate 
cancers in both African American and Caucasian cohorts.  
 
5.0  STUDY OBJECTIVES AND ENDPOINTS  
 
5.1 Study objectives  
 
5.1.1 Primary objective  
 
The primary goal is to prospectively estimate the median radiographic PFS of African American 
and Caucasian men with mCRPC to abiraterone acetate and prednisone.  
 
5.1.2 Secondary objectives  
 
1) PSA kinetics: to determine  the duration of PSA response, time to nadir, and perce nt of 
men who achieve a PSA < 0.1;  
2) Radiographic assessments: to estimate the rate of objective response and incidence of 
bone flares  
3) Safety (NCI CTC v4.0) and tolerability, particularly incidence and grade of hypertension 
in the two populations   
4) Overall S urvival  
 
5.1.3 Exploratory objectives  
 
1) Describe the baseline profile of serum hormone levels (including testosterone, DHT, 
DHEA, DHEAS, estradiol)  and lipidomics , the change in levels with subsequent therapy 
(Cycle 4 ), and their correlation with response to abi raterone acetate.  
2) Describe the germline SNP profiles of target genes involved in androgen signaling 
and target genes that have been shown to be differentially expressed in African 
American versus Caucasian American prostate cancers as well as a genome wid e 
analysis (GWAS) in both African American and Caucasian men with mCRPC and their 
associations with response to abiraterone acetate.  The status of the aforementioned 
targets as well as AR splice variants will also be assessed in archival tumor tissue, if 
available, by sequencing, IHC and qRT -PCR.  
 
5.2 Study endpoints  
  
Abiraterone and Race   Page 27 of 72
DukeUniversity    5.2.1 Primary endpoint  
 
The primary endpoint  will be radiographic progression free survival  (rPFS) based on PCWG2 
criteria or based on the onset of a skeletal related event.  Imaging will be obtained every 12 
weeks.  
 
5.2.2 Secondary endpoints  
 
Secondary endpoints  will include:  
1) RECIST 1.1 defined radiologic response rates  and incidence of bone flares  
2) PSA response, time to nadir, and percent of men who achieve a PSA < 0.1   
3) Safety (NCI CTC v4.0) and to lerability, particularly incidence and grade of hypertension 
in the two populations  
4) Overall survival  
 
Exploratory correlative sciences endpoints : 
 
Whole blood will be collected in purple top EDTA tubes at baseline for DNA isolation and 
characterization of SNPs for androgen metabolism genes  (including CYP19A1 , HSD3B1 , 
HSD17B4,  SLCO2B1 and SLCO1B3 ), AR CAG repeats,  as well as genes that have been shown to 
be differentially expressed in African American versus Caucasian American prostate cancers 
(including , but not limited to,  SLCO2B1, SLCO1B3, CYP19A1, HSD3B1, HSD17B4,AR CAG repeats, 
AMFR, CXCR4, MMP9, SRD5A2, ADIPOQ, AKT1, ALOX12, ALOX15, ALOX15B, BMP2, CGA, ERG, 
FASN, IL1B, IL6, IL8, NFKB1, PIK3C3, PIK3CA, PI3K3R1, PLA2G2A, TGFB1, TIMP3, TNF, P38MAPK, 
STAT1,  RHOA, ITGB5, MAPKAPK2, CSNK2A1, PIK3CB, ARA55, GNA01, GNB3, POLR2L, PRKCE, 
PRKD1, TBP, CALR, GNG2, GNG11, GNG12, CALM1, NFKB2, STAT2, RHOU, FGF13, EIF3B, and 
GIT1)  and ancestral  genotyping .  A genome  wide analysis (GWAS) is planned in both African 
America n and Caucasian men with mCRPC and their associations with response to abiraterone 
acetate , in addition to the aforementioned analyses of germline SNP profiles .  In addition 
baseline assessments of hormonal levels including testosterone, DHT, DHEA, DHEAS, estradiol 
and their change after 12 weeks on therapy will be evaluated  along with lipidomics analysis .  
Finally additional baseline and 4 week plasma samples will be drawn to explore additional 
biomarkers that may have prognostic or predictive value.  The s tatus of the target genes 
involved in androgen metabolism and the target genes that have been shown to be 
differentially expressed in African American versus Caucasian American prostate cancers as well 
as AR splice variants will also be assessed in archiva l tumor tissue, if available, by sequencing, 
IHC and qRT -PCR.  
 
6.0  INVESTIGATIONAL PLAN  
 
6.1 Overall study design  
 
This is a non -comparative pilot open -label, parallel arm, multicenter study of abiraterone 
acetate in African American and Caucasian men wit h mCRPC. The pr imary goal is to 
Abiraterone and Race   Page 28 of 72
DukeUniversity    prospectively estimate the median radiographic PFS in African American and Caucasian men 
with mCRPC cancer treated with abiraterone acetate. Patients will self -report on race and 50 
patients will be enrolled into each group.   Patients will be treated on open -label treatment until 
evidence of disease progression as defined by Prostate Cancer Workin g Group Two (PCWG2) 
definition [13] or until two years at which point they will roll over to the standard of care at that 
time.   
 
Study schema is shown below . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.2 Study population  
 
This will be a Duke University Health System study conducted through the Duke Cancer 
Institute,  composed of a large tertiary referral center and network sites, which treat a high 
volume of metastatic CRPC patients and who prioritize African American patient accrual to 
clinical trials.  It is anticipated that  the Duke Cancer Network and  6 satellite s ites will be needed 
to accrue 50 African American subjects over a 30 month accrual period.  Typically 20 -30 African 
American subjects per year would be eligible for this protocol at Duke University Medical 
Center alone but this number would be substantiall y more by including outreach sites.  A 
parallel population of Caucasian patients will be accrued to this trial . 
 
6.3 Inclusion and exclusion criteria  
 
Patients must have baseline evaluations performed prior to the first dose of study drug and 
must meet all  inclusion and exclusion criteria.  Results of the baseline evaluations, which assure 
that all inclusion and exclusion criteria have been satisfied, must be reviewed by the Principal 
Investigator at Duke University, or his/her designee prior to enrollment of that patient.  In 
addition, the patient must be thoroughly informed about all aspects of the study, including the 
study visit schedule and required evaluations and all regulatory requirements for informed 
consent.  The written informed consent must be o btained from the patient prior to any R 
E 
G 
I 
S 
T 
R 
A 
T 
I 
O 
N Disease 
Progression  
or 
Adverse 
Event   Metastatic, CRPC  
 No history of chemothe rapy  for CRPC  
 Karnofsky performance status ≥ 70  
 Adenocarcinoma of the prostate  
 No evidence of neuroendocrine ca  Abiraterone 1000 mg po 
daily  
Prednisone 5 mg po BID  
 
Abiraterone and Race   Page 29 of 72
DukeUniversity    screening procedures being performed .  The following criteria apply to all patients enrolled 
onto the study unless otherwise specified.  
 
 
Inclusion criteria:  
 
 
1. Male, a ge ≥ 18 years  
2. Karnofsky performance status ≥ 70 (Appendix 1)  
3. Life expectancy of ≥ 12 months  as determined by treating investigator  
4. Written Authorization for Use and Release of Health and Research Study Information  
(HIPAA Authorization per institutional req uirements)  
 
5. Willing/able to adhere to the prohibitions and restrictions specified in this protocol  
  
6. Willing to take abiraterone acetate on an empty stomach; no food should be 
consumed at least two hours before and for at least one hour after the dose of  
abiraterone acetate is taken , and should be able to swallow tablets whole, without 
crushing/chewing tablets.   
 
7. Patients who have partners of childbearing potential must be willing to use a 
method of birth control with adequate barrier protection as determ ined to be 
acceptable by the principal investigator and sponsor during the study and for 1 week 
after last dose of abiraterone acetate  
 
8. Adequate laboratory parameters  
 Adequa te bone marrow function as shown by: ANC ≥ 1.5 x 109/L, Platelets ≥ 100 x 
109/L, Hb >9 g/dL  
 Serum potassium > 3.5 mEq/L  
 AST/SGOT and ALT/SGPT ≤ 1.5 x Institutional Upper Limit of Normal (ULN)  
 Serum bilirubin ≤ 1.5 x Institutional ULN  
 Serum creatinine ≤ 1.5 x Institutional ULN or 24 -hour clearance ≥ 50 mL/min  
 Serum albumin of > 3.0 g/dl  
9. Histologically confirmed diagnosis of adenocarcinoma of the prostate.  Histologic 
variants of prostate cancer, including neuroendocrine features and small cell 
carcinoma of the prostate are excluded.  
Abiraterone and Race   Page 30 of 72
DukeUniversity    10. Radiographic evidence of metastatic disease ; evaluable no n-target lesions and /or 
bone only metastasis are permitted.  
11. Ongoing ADT using an LHRH agonist (e.g. leuprolide, goserelin) or antagonist (e.g. 
degarelix) must continue on therapy unless prior bilateral orchiectomy has been 
performed.  Screening serum testo sterone must be <50 ng/dl.   
12. PSA ≥ 2.0 ng/mL  
13. Evidence of disease progression on ADT as evidenced by one of the following:  
 Absolute rise in PSA of 2.0 ng/mL or greater, minimum 2 consecutive rising PSA 
levels with an interval of ≥ 1 week between each PSA le vel, OR 
 2 consecutive PSA levels 50% or greater above the PSA nadir achieved on ADT and 
separated at least 1 week apart, OR 
 CT or MRI based evidence of disease progression (soft tissue, nodal or visceral 
disease progression) according to modified PCWG2 cri teria or modified RECIST 1.1 
criteria, or at least 1 new bone scan lesion as compared to the most immediate prior 
radiologic studies.  
14. A minimum of 2 weeks elapsed off of antiandrogen therapy prior to start of study 
drug (i.e. flutamide, nilutamide , bicalut amide ) .  
15. A minimum of 4 weeks elapsed off of sipuleucel -T prior to start of study drug . 
16. A minimum of 4 weeks from any major surgery prior to start of study drug .   
17. Self-reported race of either African American or Caucasian.  
18. Ability to swallow, retain, an d absorb oral medication.  
19. Ability to understand and the willingness to sign a written informed consent 
document.  If the subject is unable to understand the consent due to comorbidity,  
such as Alzheimer’s disease, consent by a legally authorized representat ive and 
assent by the subject will be obtained.   
 
Exclusion criteria:  
 
Patients who meet any of the following criteria will be excluded from the study:  
1. Prior treatment with abiraterone  acetate  or enzalutamide  
Abiraterone and Race   Page 31 of 72
DukeUniversity    2. Active infection or other medical condition tha t would make 
prednisone/prednisolone (corticosteroid) use contraindicated.  
3. Any chronic medical condition requiring a higher dose of corticosteroid than 5mg 
prednisone/prednisolone bid.  
4. Have known allergies, hypersensitivity, or intolerance to abiraterone a cetate or 
prednisone or their excipients . 
5. Pathological finding consistent with small cell carcinoma of the prostate.  
6. Symptomatic Liver or visceral organ metastasis.  
7. Have a history of gastrointestinal disorders (medical disorders or extensive surgery) 
that may interfere with the absorption of the study agents . 
8. Known brain metastasis.  
9. Prior cytotoxic chemotherapy or biologic therapy for the treatment of CRPC.  
10. Previously treated with ketoconazole for prostate cancer for greater than 7 days.  
11. Prior systemic trea tment with an azole drug (e.g. fluconazole, itraconazole) within 4 
weeks of Cycle 1, Day 1.  
12. Uncontrolled hypertension (systolic BP ≥ 160 mmHg or diastolic BP ≥ 95 mmHg). 
Patients with a history of hypertension are allowed provided blood pressure is 
control led by anti -hypertensive treatment.  
13. Poorly controlled diabetes  
14. Active or symptomatic viral hepatitis or chronic liver disease.  
15. History of pituitary or adrenal dysfunction.  
16. Clinically significant heart disease as evidenced by myocardial infarction, or arter ial 
thrombotic events in the past 6 months, severe or unstable angina, or New York 
Heart Association (NYHA) Class II -IV heart disease or cardiac ejection fraction 
measurement of < 50% at baseline.  
17. Atrial Fibrillation or other cardiac arrhythmia requiring t herapy.  
18. Other malignancy, except non -melanoma skin cancer, with a ≥ 30% probability of 
recurrence within 24 months.  
19. Administration of an investigational therapeutic within 30 days of Cycle 1, Day 1.  
Abiraterone and Race   Page 32 of 72
DukeUniversity    20. Any condition which, in the opinion of the investigator, would preclude participation 
in this trial.  
 
7.0  PATIENT REGISTRATION  
After signing informed consent and completing eligibility screening, patients who are selected 
to participate will be registered with the lead site  (Duke) and  with their study site/inst itution.  A 
record of patients who fail to meet entry criteria (i.e., screen failures) will be maintained.  
Patients who are registered and do not start  study drug within 2 weeks  of intended Cycle 1 Day 
1 will be replaced. Patient registration must be comp lete before beginning any treatment .  
 
7.1  Informed Consent  
Authorized study personnel should fully explain the scope of the study to each patient before 
obtaining informed consent.  If the patient is not able to fully understand the informed consent 
due to a known comorbidity, such as Alzheimer’s disease, a legally authorized representative 
will be included in the consent process. Patients , and a legally authorized representative if 
appropriate,  should be advised of any known risks inherent in the planned  procedures, of any 
alternative treatment options, of their right to withdraw from the study at any time for any 
reason, and of their right to privacy. If a legally authorized representative signs the consent, the 
patients’ assent will also be documented.  
 
When obtaining informed consent, study personnel should:  
First : Confirm that the patient is a potential candidate for study participation.  
Next : Obtain dated and signed informed consent.  
Finally : Confirm that the patient is eligible as defined in Section 6.3 (Inclusion/Exclusion 
Criteria).  A record of patients who fail to meet entry criteria (i.e., screening failures) will 
be maintained.  
For patients consented at the lead site ONLY, registration in the Duke clinical trial subject 
registry must be complete d within 1 business day of the patient providing informed consent.  
 
7.2  Lead Site Registration  
 
Patient registration for all patients signing informed consent will be completed by Duke 
University Medical Center Genitourinary Oncology Group. Following cons ent and completion of 
the Eligibility Checklist, documents will be submitted for review and registration of subject. All 
subjects will be assigned a unique study ID.  
 
Refer to Subject Registration Instructions for details.   
 
Patients will be enrolled onl y after all pre -treatment screening evaluations are completed and 
all eligibility criteria are met. Once the patient has signed consent and been found to meet all 
eligibility criteria, the subject will be registered. The patient will be considered enrolled  on the  
Abiraterone and Race   Page 33 of 72
DukeUniversity    day of first treatment . A unique patient study identification number will be assigned  upon 
consenting .  Treatment must not commence until the patient has received his approved 
documentation  from the lead site . Treatment will commence according to t he guidelines in the 
protocol.  
7.3  Institutional Registration  
Patient registration at each study site/institution will be conducted according to the 
institution ’s established policies.  Prior to registration, patients will be asked to sign and date an 
Institutional Review Board (IRB) -approved consent form.  Patients must be registered with their 
local site/institution and with the lead site before beginning any treatment or study activities.  
  
8.0  TREATMENTS  
 
8.1  Abiraterone  acetate  formulation  
 
Abirate rone acetate 250 -mg tablets are oval, white to off -white and contain abiraterone  
acetate and compendial (USP/NF/EP) grade lactose monohydrate, microcrystalline cellulose,  
croscarmellose sodium, povidone, sodium lauryl sulfate, magnesium stearate, colloidal  
silicon dioxide, and purified water, in descending order of concentration (the water is  
removed during tabletting).  
Handling abiraterone acetate tablets  
This medicine may cause harm to the unborn child if taken by women who are pregnant. It 
should not be taken by women who are breast -feeding. Women who are pregnant or who may 
be pregnant should wear gloves if they need to touch  abiraterone acetate tablets . You should 
notify any caregivers and staff personnel of this information, to ensure the appropriate 
precautions are taken.  
 
8.2  Abiraterone acetate administration  
 
The study agent abiraterone  acetate  will be administered by the patient at a dose of 1000mg 
orally once daily with prednisone 5 mg BID in 4 -week cycles throughout the treatment period.  
Abirat erone acetate must be taken on an empty stomach. No food should be consumed for at 
least two hours before the dose of abiraterone acetate is taken and for at least one hour after 
the dose of abiraterone acetate is taken.  Abiraterone  acetate  should be taken  with a glass of 
water and consumed over as short a time as possible.  Patients should swallow the capsules 
whole and not chew them.  Study drug will be provided by Janssen Scientific Affairs  and 
distributed by DCI Investigational Chemotherapy Service , whi ch will be distributing drug to the 
satellite sites . 
 
Abiraterone acetate must be taken on an empty stomach. No food should be consumed for at 
least two hours before the dose of abiraterone acetate is taken and for at least one hour after 
Abiraterone and Race   Page 34 of 72
DukeUniversity    the dose of abira terone acetate is taken. Abiraterone Cmax and AUC0 -∞ (exposure) were 
increased up to 17 - and 10 -fold higher, respectively, when a single dose of abiraterone acetate 
was administered with a meal compared to a fasted state. The safety of these increased 
expo sures when multiple doses of abiraterone acetate are taken with food has not been 
assessed.  
 
Patients will be instructed to take a 5 -mg prednisone tablet, twice daily  with food .  It is not 
required for the prednisone to be taken at the same time as abirate rone acetate. The dose of 
prednisone will remain unchanged in the event that the study drug dose is changed. If a 
prednisone dose is missed, it should be omitted and will not be made up.  Should a dose 
modification of the prednisone be needed due to toxicit ies, the site will need to discuss this 
with the medical monitor.  
 
Each treatment cycle consists of 28 consecutive days . No cycle will be delayed .  If doses of study 
drug are held or missed , they will not be made up. The subject could complete a maximum of  
26 cycles during the 24 month duration of the study.  During the study period, s tarting with 
cycle 4 , the patient will return to clinic every 3 cycles .  The patient  will be given enough study 
drug to last for 12 weeks.  Patients may take abiraterone aceta te plus prednisone until 
radiographic disease progression and/or unequivocal clinical progression (as defined in Section 
12.5 ), at which time study treatment will be discontinued. The dose of prednisone may  be 
gradually reduced if clinically indicated.  
 
If vomiting occurs during the course of treatment, no redosing of the patient is allowed before 
the next scheduled dose.  If the patient forgets to take her/his dose before 12:00 noon, then 
the dose should be withheld that day and abiraterone  acetate  should be restarted the following 
day.  
 
Effects of Abiraterone Acetate on Drug Metabolizing Enzymes  
Abiraterone acetate  is an inhibitor of the hepatic drug -metabolizing enzyme CYP2D6. In a 
CYP2D6 drug -drug interaction trial, the Cmax  and AUC of dextromethorphan ( CYP2D6 
substrate) were increased 2.8 - and 2.9 -fold, respectively, when dextromethorphan was given 
with abiraterone acetate 1,000 mg daily and prednisone 5 mg twice daily. Avoid co -
administration of abiraterone acetate with substrates of CYP2D6 with a narro w therapeutic 
index (e.g., thioridazine). If alternative treatments cannot be used, exercise caution and 
consider a dose reduction of the concomitant CYP2D6 substrate drug.  
  
In a CYP2C8 drug -drug interaction trial in healthy subjects, the AUC of pioglitaz one (CYP2C8 
substrate) was increased by 46% when pioglitazone was given together with a single dose of 
1,000 mg abiraterone acetate. Therefore, patients should be monitored closely for signs of 
toxicity related to a CYP2C8 substrate with a narrow therapeut ic index if used concomitantly 
with ZYTIGA.  
 
Drugs that I nhibit or Induce CYP3A4 Enzymes  
Abiraterone and Race   Page 35 of 72
DukeUniversity     
Based on in vitro data, abiraterone acetate is a substrate of CYP3A4.  In a clinical 
pharmacokinetic interaction study of healthy subjects pretreated with a strong CY P3A4 inducer 
(rifampin, 600 mg daily for 6 days) followed by a single dose of abiraterone acetate 1000 mg, 
the mean plasma AUC∞ of a biraterone was decreased by 55% . 
 
Strong inducers of CYP3A4 (e.g., phenytoin, carbamazepine, rifampin, rifabutin, rifapentin e, 
phenobarbital) during treatment with abiraterone acetate  are to be avoided, or used with 
careful evaluation of clinical efficacy . 
 
In a separate clinical pharmacokinetic interaction study of healthy subjects,  coadministration of 
ketoconazole, a strong i nhibitor of CYP3A4, had no clinically meaningful effect on the 
pharmacokinetics of abiraterone . 
 
All dosages prescribed and dispensed to the patient and all dose changes during the study must 
be recorded.  If a patient requires a abiraterone  acetate  dose d elay of >21 days from the 
previous dose, the patient must b e discontinued from treatment  (unless unrelated to study 
drug and approved by the medical monitor) , return for an end of treatment visit  +/- 7 days of 
the last dose  or the day of the decision to r emove from the study , and return for a follow -up 
safety visit 28 days (+/ - 7 days) from date of last dose.  
 
Medication labels will comply with US legal requirements and be printed in English.  They will 
supply no information about the patient.  The storage  conditions for study drug will be 
described on the medication label.  
 
8.3  Concomitant therapy  
 
All medications (excluding prior chemotherapy and biologic, immunologic or radiation therapy) 
taken within 4 weeks prior to the administration of abiraterone  acetate  and all concomitant 
therapy administration during the study with reasons for therapy should be recorded.   
Patients on chronic medications that can be given concomitantly with abiraterone  acetate  
should be maintained on the same dose and dose schedu le throughout the study period, as 
medically feasible.  The investigator should instruct the patient to notify the study site about 
any new medications he takes after the start of th e study drug.  All new medications, changes in 
medication dosing, and sign ificant non -drug therapies (including herbal medicines, physical 
therapy and blood transfusions) administered after the patient starts treatment with study drug 
will be recorded.  
 
The following  concomitant medication/therapies are permitted if deemed neces sary for the 
care of the patient :  
 Standard therapies for preexisting conditions, medical/surgical complications including 
nausea and diarrhea, and palliation.  
 Non -potent CYP3A4 isoenzyme inhibitors and/or i nducers . 
 LHRH agonists or antagonists.  
Abiraterone and Race   Page 36 of 72
DukeUniversity     Anti-hyper tensive medications.  
 Diabetic medications.  
 Antidepressants or other medications for mood disorders.   
 Analgesics including opioids.  
 Bisphosphonates and/or denosumab.  
 Erythropoietic agents.  
 Systemic anticoagulation with low molecular weight heparin.  
 Proveng e, after the first 3 cycles  on treatment are completed.  
 Focal therapies for localized non-prostate cancers  
 
The following medications/therapies are prohibited while the patient is on study:  
 Other investigational therapies must not be used while the patient  is on the study.  
 Chemotherapy, radiation therapy, or immunotherapy, or any anti -cancer therapy other 
than abiraterone acetate  and prednisone  and those described above and below . 
 Coumadin or other vitamin K antagonists.  
 Herbal preparations/medications are not allowed throughout the study.  These herbal 
medications include, but are not limited to: St. John’s wort, Kava, ephedra (ma huang), 
gingko biloba, dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA), yohimbe, saw palmetto, ginseng.  Patients 
should stop using these herbal m edications 7 days prior to first dose of study drug.  
 In lieu of surgical castration, t he use of an LHRH agonist or antagonist must continue while 
on this study.  However, antiandrogens, ketoconazole, estrogens, and all other forms of 
hormonal manipulation are not permitted  for the treatment of cancer . 
 Investigators should keep in mind the possibility that abiraterone acetate  may interact with  
concomitant medications, particularly those that are metabolized or activated by P450 CYPs  
2D6 and 1A2  (see Appendix  2 for prohibited medications) .    Please see comment s above 
regarding interactions.  If at any time an investigator suspects a drug -drug interaction due 
to abiraterone acetate therapy, an adverse event repor t should be completed and Duke 
University notifi ed. 
 
 8.4  Treatment c ompliance  
Participating sites will be provided with a medication diary for each patient to document his 
self-administration of Abiraterone Acetate per cycle.  A current and accurate account of the 
number of study treatment tablets the  investigator received from Duke University, dispensed to 
the patients, the number of units returned to the investigator by the patient, and the number 
of units returned to Duke University during and at the completion of the study must be 
maintained.  A de tailed inventory must be completed for the study treatment.  Records of study 
medication used, dosages administered, and intervals between visits will be recorded during 
the study.  Drug accountability will be noted and patients will be asked to return all unused 
study medication.  
 
9.0  STUDY ASSESMENTS  
 
9.1  Vital signs, performance status, and physical exam  
Abiraterone and Race   Page 37 of 72
DukeUniversity     
Vital sign assessment consists of height (first visit), pulse, blood pressure, respiration rate, 
temperature and weight  per the visit schedule .   
 
Performance status will be assessed at screening and per the visit schedule using the Karnofsky 
performance status scale (Appendix 1).  
 
Physical examination will comprise a total body examination (general appearance, skin, 
including eyes, ears, nose, throat,  lungs, heart, abdomen, back, lymph nodes, extremities and 
basic nervous system).  Significant findings made after the start of study drug which meet the 
definition of an Adverse Event must be recorded . 
  
9.2  Laboratory evaluations  
 
The following laborato ry studies will be obtained at specified intervals to assess subject safety, 
specifically the risk of infection, hyperglycemia, and/or bone marrow, liver, and kidney 
abnormalities.  Abnormalities will be captured as AEs only if deemed clinically significant  by the 
treating physician/provider/investigator.  This does not include the labs designated as an 
adverse event of special interest in 11.1.  
 Hematology:   Complete blood count (CBC) consisting total white blood cell count (WBC) 
with differential (total n eutrophil count, lymphocyte, monocyte, eosinophil, and 
basophil counts), hemoglobin, hematocrit, and platelet count.  
 Blood chemistry:   Blood urea nitrogen (BUN), creatinine, sodium, potassium, calcium, 
chloride, bicarbonate (CO 2), magnesium, phosphorus, g lucose, albumin, total protein, 
total bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase, AST (SGOT), ALT (SGPT ). 
 PSA to be obtained at baseline, Day 1 of intended Cycle 1 and cycles  2, 3, 4, 7, 10 and every 3 
cycles, and at the end of treatment visit. During follow -up for subjects who discontinue 
treatment due to reasons other than radiographic progressive disease, PSA will be collected 
every 3 months (+/ - 28 days)  and additionally as clinically appropriate . Testosterone to be 
obtained at baseline  and the end of cycle 3 (at  Cycle 4 Day 1).  
 
9.3 ECG 
 
A standard 12 -lead ECG is to be performed at screening and significant findings must be 
recorded.  Additional EKGs may  be performed at the discretion of the treating physician.   
 
 
9.4  Imaging  
 
A CT scan with  contrast  of chest, abdo men, and pelvis will be performed within 42 days pr ior to 
the intended C1D1  visit, and every 3 cycles (approximately every 12  weeks) as part of routine 
tumor assessment.  These scans are to be p erformed on day 1 of every 3  cycle s (i.e. baseline, 
Day 1 of cycles 4, 7, 10 , etc.) with in 7 days prior to starting the next cycle .  If the chest CT at 
baseline is clear, chest x -rays may be used for subsequent assessments  at the enrolling 
Abiraterone and Race   Page 38 of 72
DukeUniversity    physician’s discretion . The tumor assessments will be performed locally, in st rict accordance 
with the RECIST 1.1 guidelines.  A total body bone scan will be performed within 42 days of the 
intended C1D1 visit and every 3 cycles (approximately every 12  weeks) and interpreted 
according to PCWG2 guidelines.  CT and bone scan modalities  per standard institutional 
practices may be used, but the same modality should be used throughout the study for each 
subject.  
 
 
Because the primary endpoint is progression free survival based upon radiographic disease 
progression, patients will continue t o have CT scans and Bone Scans performed according to 
standard clinical practice even if study treatment  is discontinued for  reasons other than 
radiographic disease progression.  
 
9.5  Exploratory correlative studies  
 
  9.5.1  SNP Analysis  
 
Human whole blo od will be collected in a 4mL lavender  top K2EDTA tube at baseline for DNA 
isolation and characterization of SNPs.  Mix by gentle inversion 8 -10 times. Do not centrifuge. 
Freeze t ubes at -20oC.  Genomic DNA will be purified using the Qiagen QiaAmp DNA Bloo d Mini 
Kit or equivalent.  Starting material used will be 200 µl whole blood per column.  Genomic DNA 
will be considered of appropriate quantity and quality if at least 300ng (preferably 1200ng) of 
A260nm/A280nm > 1.5 is obtained.  Characterization of SNPs for androgen metabolism genes  
(including CYP19A1 , HSD3B1 , HSD17B4,  SLCO2B1 and SLCO1B3 ), AR CAG repeats,  as well as 
genes that have been shown to be differentially expressed in African American and Caucasian 
American prostate cancers (including , but not li mited to,  SLCO2B1, SLCO1B3, CYP19A1, 
HSD3B1, HSD17B4,AR CAG repeats, AMFR, CXCR4, MMP9, SRD5A2, ADIPOQ, AKT1, ALOX12, 
ALOX15, ALOX15B, BMP2, CGA, ERG, FASN, IL1B, IL6, IL8, NFKB1, PIK3C3, PIK3CA, PI3K3R1, 
PLA2G2A, TGFB1, TIMP3, TNF, P38MAPK, STAT1, RHOA, I TGB5, MAPKAPK2, CSNK2A1, PIK3CB, 
ARA55, GNA01, GNB3, POLR2L, PRKCE, PRKD1, TBP, CALR, GNG2, GNG11, GNG12, CALM1, 
NFKB2, STAT2, RHOU, FGF13, EIF3B, and GIT1)  and ancestral  genotyping will be performed.  A 
genome wide analysis (GWAS) is planned in both Africa n American and Caucasian men with 
mCRPC and their associations with response to abiraterone acetate . The GWAS will be done 
using Illumina’s 2.5M beadchip .  The local site will process these samples and prepare them for 
shipment to the lead site per shippin g instructions belo w.  The lead site will perform the 
laboratory analysis.  Neither the l ocal sites nor the patients will receive i nformation regarding 
individual subjects’  results.  
 
An additional 4mL lavender top K 2EDTA tube may  be collected from subjects  whose tube 
collected at baseline yielded no usable sample after DNA isolation. This additional tube would 
be used for DNA isolation and characterization of SNPs as described above.  
 
 9.5.2  Hormonal Levels  
Abiraterone and Race   Page 39 of 72
DukeUniversity     
Serum testosterone, DHT, DHEA, DHEAS, and estra diol will be collected at baseline, the end of 
cycle 3 (at Cycle 4 Day 1), and the end of treatment visit.   
 
For hormone levels, collect blood into one 5mL gold top SST vacutainer tube. Invert 5 times. 
Allow blood to clot for 30 minutes. Centrifuge for 10 minutes at 1100 -1300 x g. Aliquot the 
serum into 1.8mL cryovials . Label according to instructions below and freeze cryovials  at     -
80°C . Samples should be frozen within 2 hours of collection.  If a -80°C  freezer is not available 
and samples are being stor ed at -20°C, then all samples will remain frozen and shipped within 
48 business hours on dry ice following the directions below.  
 
 9.5.3 Plasma samples  for blood -based biomarkers  
 
Plasma samples will be collected at baseline and at the end of cycle 1 (at C ycle 2 Day 1)  to 
explore additional biomarkers that may have prognostic or predictive value.  These additional 
biomarker analyses will be in support of the specified endpoints in the protocol.  
 
For plasma samples, collect blood into one 6mL lavender top (K 2EDTA coagulant vacutainer) 
AND  one 4.5 mL light blue top (3.2% sodium citrate) vacutainer.  Invert the tubes several times 
and centrifuge for 15 minutes at 2500 x g.  Remove the plasma and transfer to a clean 5 mL 
glass test tube.  Repeat centrifuge at 250 0 x g for 15 minutes.  Aliquot the plasma – 0.5 mL into 
the provided 1.8mL cryovials.  Label according to instructions below and freeze cryovials at -
80°C . If a -80°C  freezer is not available and samples are being stored at -20°C, then all samples 
will rem ain frozen and shipped within 48 business hours on dry ice following the directions 
below.  
 
Storage and Shipping Instructions  
 
See Laboratory Manual for further details regarding sample collection  and shipping . 
 
Once complete, these samples will be analyze d for their appropriate endpoints as indicated in 
the study (i.e. SNP analysis, lipidomics, hormone or plasma biomarker levels). SNP analysis will 
be done in collaboration with the Duke University DNA Analysis Facility,  
 ancestral genotyping by Rick Kittles, PhD, City of Hope, Duarte, CA and 
lipidomics, hormone , and plasma biomarker levels will be done in collaboration with Andrew 
Nixon, PhD, Phase I Biomarker Laboratory, Duke University Medical Center,  
  Access to these samples will be limited to Drs George , 
Freedman,  Nixon , Kittles  and their proxy staff.  These samples will be maintained indefinitely or 
until they are exhausted.  Any future analyses not specified in this protoco l will be agreed upon 
by prior approval from Janssen Scientific Affairs , LLC .   
 
 
 
9.5.4  Collection of Archival Tumor Tissue  for somatic SNP assessments  

Abiraterone and Race   Page 40 of 72
DukeUniversity     
Formalin -fixed, p araffin -embedded archival  tumor  tissue will be collected from all patients 
whenever a vailable.  This tissue will come from diagnostic core biopsies and/or surgical 
specimens (prostatectomy or metastatic sampling).  Tissue should be labeled and sent to the 
address in the lab manual .  Up to f ive 10 micron thick sections from tumor blocks  and/or 20 
unstained slides  should be de -identified except for protocol and subject number and sent at 
room temperature  (see Laboratory Manual for further details regarding sample collection ).  
Samples will be batched and evaluated collectively by sequencing, IHC, and qRT -PCR for the 
status of target genes involved in androgen metabolism and signaling, target genes that have 
been shown to be differentially expressed in African American versus Caucasian American 
prostate cancers, and AR splice variants.  Section s of the FFPE tumor tissue will be utilized to 
assess the status of the aforementioned targets by IHC and DNA as well as RNA isolated from 
the FFPE tumor tissue will be utilized to assess the status of the aforementioned targets and AR 
splice variants by s equencing and qRT -PCR.  
 
In patients without target SNP alterations, it will be important to confirm that there are not 
somatic tumor alterations within these genes.  In order to evaluate for somatic tumor 
alterations within our target genes we will perform  SNP analyses in available specimens.  
Discrepancies between germline and somatic mutations will be further evaluated by 
sequencing.  Samples will be stored by Dr. Jennifer Freedman, PhD with access limited to key 
personnel .  DUHS will maintain these sampl es indefinitely or until they are exhausted . Any 
future analyses not specified in this protocol will be agreed upon by prior approval from 
Janssen Scientific Affairs , LLC .    
 
9.6  Follow -Up Period  
 
During the Follow -up Period, subsequent therapy for prost ate cancer should be assessed every 
3 months for up to 24 months after the first dose of study drug .  Since the primary endpoint is 
progression free survival based upon radiographic disease progression, patients will continue to 
have CT scans and Bone Scan s performed according to standard clinical practice  and their PSA 
measured every 3 months  and additionally as clinically appropriate  until they have radiographic 
progression or untill they have started another therapy. All subjects will be followed up for 
survival every 6 months +/ - 1 month by phone or chart review.  
 
10.0 M ONITORING AND MANAGEMENT OF SUSPECTED ABIRATERONE TOXICITY  
 
10.1  Management of Drug -Related Adverse Events  
 
The most common advers e drug reactions (≥ 10%) reported in clinical studies were  fatigue,  joint 
swelling or discomfort,  edema,  hot flush, diarrhea, vomiting, urinary tract infection, cough, 
hypertension, dyspnea, and contusion.   The administration of prednisone is expected to 
mitigate these side effects by supplementing cortisol and abrogating ACTH drive.  
 
Abiraterone and Race   Page 41 of 72
DukeUniversity    Following prolonged therapy with corticosteroids, subjects may develop Cushing’s syndrome 
characterized by central adiposity, thin skin, easy bruising, and proximal myopathy.  Withdrawal 
of the corticosteroid may result in symptoms that include fever, myalgia, fatigue, arthralgia, and 
malaise. This may occur even without other evidence of adrenal insufficiency.  
 
For guidance on management of side effects of glucocorticoid usage , symptoms related to 
castration (androgen deprivation), severe and refractory headaches, fatigue, or other toxicities 
the Principal Investigator at Duke University should be contacted.    
 
 
10.1.1  Management of h ypokalemia  
 
Subjects who experience hypokal emia are to be managed as presented in Table 1.  
Table 10.1: Hypokalemia Management  
Serum K+  Grade of  
Hypokalemia  Action  Further Action or  
Maintenance  
Low K+ or history  
of hypokalemia   Weekly (or more frequent)  
laboratory electrolyte  
evaluations  Titrate do se to maintain a serum  
K+ >3.5 mM <5.0 mM  
 
(maintenance of subjects at  
>4.0 mM is recommended)  
<3.5 mM – 3.0 mM  Grade 1  Initiate oral or i.v. K+ 
supplementation.  
 
Consider monitoring magnesium 
and replace if needed  Titrate dose to maintain a serum  
K+ >3.5  mM <5.0 mM  
 
(maintenance of subjects at  
>4.0 mM is recommended)  
<3.5 mM – 3.0 mM  
Symptomatic  
 Grade 2  Initiate oral or i.v. K+  
Supplementation  
 
Consider monitoring magnesium 
and replace if needed  Titrate dose to maintain a serum  
K+ >3.5 mM <5.0 mM  
 
(main tenance of subjects at  
>4.0 mM is recommended)  
<3.0 mM – 2.5 mM  Grade 3  Withhold abiraterone acetate 
and initiate oral or i.v. K+ and 
cardiac monitoring.  
 
Consider monitoring magnesium 
and replace if needed  Call the  Duke  Principal Investigator  or 
Project manager  prior to re -initiating 
study treatment  
 
<2.5 mM  Grade 4  Withhold abiraterone acetate 
and initiate oral or i.v. K+ and 
cardiac monitoring  
 
Consider monitoring magnesium 
and replacement if needed  Call the Duke Principal Investigator  
prior to  
re-initiating study treatment  
 
i.v.=intravenous; K+=potassium; mM=millimole  
 
Correct hypokalemia before and during treatment with abiraterone acetate.  Monitor serum 
potassium at least monthly  until stable . 
 
10.1.2  Management of hypertension  
Abiraterone and Race   Page 42 of 72
DukeUniversity             
 If Grade 1 or 2 adverse events occur, management per investigator.  No study medication 
dose reduction.  
 If Grade 3 or 4 adverse events occur, hold study medication. Adjust or add medications to 
mitigate the toxicity or consider the specific mineralocorticoid recept or blocker, 
eplerenone. When hypertension improves to <1 40/90  (< Grade 1) , resume study 
medication at full dose.  
 If toxicity recurs, hold study medication, and adjust or add medications to mitigate the 
toxicity. When blood pressure improves to <140/90  (< Grade 1) ,, resume study medication 
with the first dose level reduction (3 tablets, 750 mg of study medication).  
 If toxicity recurs, hold study medication, and adjust or add medications to mitigate the 
toxicity. When hypertension improves to <140/90  (< Grad e 1), resume study medication 
with the second dose level reduction (2 tablets, 500 mg of study medication).  If blood 
pressure remains <140/90  (< Grade 1) , for at least one month, the site investigator has the 
option of increasing the patient’s dose by (1 tablet) 250mg to 750mg (3 tablets).  
 If toxicity recurs despite optimal medical management and 2 dose level reductions, 
discontinue study medication.  
 
Control hypertension before and during treatment with abiraterone acetate.  Monitor blood 
pressure at lea st monthly.  
 
10.1.3  Management of edema, fluid r etention  
 
 If pedal edema occurs, supportive management per in vestigator. No study medication dose 
reduction.  
 If anasarca or pulmonary edema requiring supplem ental oxygen occurs, hold study 
medication. Adjust or add medications to mitigate the toxicity and  consider the specific 
mineralocorticoid receptor blocker, eplere none. When toxicity resolves to ≤Grade 1, 
resume study medication at full dose.  
 If toxicity recurs, hold study medication, and adjust  or add medications to mitigate the 
toxicity. When resolved to ≤Grade 1, resume study  medication with the first dose level 
reduction (3 tablets, 750 mg of study medication).  
 If toxicity recurs, hold study medication, and adjust  or add medications to mitigate the 
toxicity. When resolved to ≤Grade 1, resume stu dy medication with the second dose level 
reduction (2 tablets, 500 mg of study medication).  
 If toxici ty recurs despite optimal medical manageme nt and 2 dose level reductions, 
discontinue study medication  
 
Monitor for symptoms of fluid retention at least monthly.  
 
 
  10.1.4 Monitoring and management of adrenocortical insufficiency  
 
Abiraterone and Race   Page 43 of 72
DukeUniversity     Monitor for symptoms and  signs of adrenocortical insufficiency.   
 
 Use caution and monitor for symptoms and signs of adrenocortical insufficiency, 
particularly if patients are withdrawn from prednisone, have prednisone dose 
reductions, or experience unusual stress.  Symptoms and signs of adrenocortical 
insufficiency may be masked by adverse reactions associated with mineralocorticoid 
excess seen in patients treated with abiraterone acetate.  If clinically indicated, perform 
appropriate tests to confirm the diagnosis of adrenocorti cal insufficiency.  Increased 
dosage of corticosteroids may be indicated before, during and after stressful situations.  
 
10.1.4  Management of abnormal liver function t ests 
 
Hepatic Impairment  
 
 Baseline Moderate Hepatic Impairment (Child -Pugh Class B)  
o Redu ce recommended abiraterone acetate dose to 250 mg once daily. A once 
daily dose of 250 mg in patients with moderate hepatic impairment is predicted 
to result in an area under the concentration curve (AUC) similar to the AUC seen 
in patients with normal hep atic function receiving 1,000 mg once daily. However, 
there are no clinical data at the dose of 250 mg once daily in patients with 
moderate hepatic impairment and caution is advised.  
o Monitor ALT, AST, and bilirubin  
 Prior to starting treatment with Abirater one Acetate  
 Every week for the first month  
 Every two weeks for the following two months  
 Monthly after completing three months of treatment  
 If ALT and/or AST > 5 x ULN (upper limit of normal), discontinue 
abiraterone acetate and do not retreat  
 If total bili rubin > 3 x ULN, discontinue abiraterone acetate and do not 
retreat  
 
 Baseline severe hepatic impairment (Child -Pugh Class C) – Avoid treating with 
Abiraterone Acetate.  
 
        Hepatotoxicity  - For patients who develop hepatotoxicity during treatment with 
abiraterone acetate  
 
 If Grade 3 hepatotoxicity occurs (ALT and/or AST greater than 5X ULN or total bilirubin 
greater than 3X ULN), interrupt treatment with abiraterone acetate.  Treatment may be 
restarted at a reduced dose of 750 mg once daily following re turn of liver function tests 
to the patient’s baseline or to AST and ALT less than or equal to 2.5X ULN and total 
bilirubin less than or equal to 1.5X ULN. For patients who resume treatment, monitor 
serum transaminases and bilirubin at a minimum of every t wo weeks for three months 
and monthly thereafter.  
Abiraterone and Race   Page 44 of 72
DukeUniversity     
 If hepatotoxicity recurs at the dose of 750 mg once daily, re -treatment may be restarted 
at a reduced dose of 500 mg once daily following return of liver function tests to the 
patient’s baseline or to AST  and ALT less than or equal to 2.5X ULN and total bilirubin 
less than or equal to 1.5X ULN.  
 
 If hepatotoxicity recurs at the reduced dose of 500 mg once daily, discontinue treatment 
with abiraterone acetate. The safety of abiraterone acetate re -treatment o f patients 
who develop AST or ALT greater than or equal to 20X ULN and/or bilirubin greater than 
or equal to 10X ULN is unknown.  
 
10.1.5  Management of other non-mineralocorticoid based side effects  
 
 If Grade 1 -2 toxicities occur, give supportive care p er institutional guidelines. No study 
medication dose reduction.  
 If Grade 3 or higher toxicities occur, including headache (interferes with a ctivities of daily 
living), nausea (total parenteral nutrition/intr avenous fluids), vomiting (6 or more episodes 
in 24  hours, total parenteral nutritio n/intravenous fluids), diarrhea (intravenous fluids, 
hospitalization, hemodynamic collapse), or any other  toxicity judged related to study 
treatment is observed where the subjects safety is jeopardized, hold study medicatio n. For 
unrelated Grade 3 adverse events, study medication can be held per PI discretion.  
 When toxicity resolves to ≤Grade 1, the patient may resume study medication at full dose  
or with a dose level reduction . 
 If toxicity recurs, hold study medication, and adjust or add medications to mitigate  the 
toxicity. When resolved to ≤Grade 1, resume st udy medication with the first dose level 
reduction (3 tablet s, 750 mg of study medication).  
 If toxicity recurs, hold study medication, and adjust or add medications to mitigate  the 
toxicity. When resolved to ≤Grade 1, resume s tudy medication with the seco nd dose level 
reduction (2 tablets, 500 mg of study medication).  
 If toxicity recurs despite aggressive medical manageme nt and 2 dose -level reductions, 
discontinue study medication.  
 
10.2 Interruption or discontinuation of treatment  
 
All interruptions or ch anges to study drug administration must be recorded.  
 
It will be documented whether or not each patient completed the clinical study.  If for any 
patient either study treatment or observations were discontinued the reason will be recorded.   
 
Reasons that a patient may discontinue participation in a clinical study are considered to 
constitute one of the following:  
i. Disease progression by PCWG2 criteria  
ii. Clinical progression by the discretion of the treating physician  
Abiraterone and Race   Page 45 of 72
DukeUniversity    iii. Need for radiation or new systemic therapy  for prostate cancer  
iv. Unacceptable toxicity requiring cessation of therapy, including adverse 
event(s), abnormal laboratory value(s), or abnormal test/procedure result(s) :  
Patients who have sustained toxicities that do not return to  NCI CTCAE (version 
4.0) Grade 1 or less with appropriate medical management,  should be 
discontinued from the study treatment.  
v. Protocol violation  
vi. Patient withdrawal of consent  - the reason(s) for withdrawal must be 
documented and clarification  requested whether withdrawal of cons ent 
applies only to the Treatment Phase (i.e.  patient has not withdrawn consent 
for data collection during the post -treatment  Follow -Up Phase) or to both the 
Treatment and Follow -Up Phases. A patient’s  decision to take part in the study 
is voluntary, and h e may choose not to take part in  the study or to stop taking 
part at any  time. If he chooses not to take part or to stop at  any time, it will not 
affect his future medical care.  
vii. Death  
 
Patients whose treatment is interrupted or permanently discontinued due  to an adverse event 
must be followed in clinic at 4 -week intervals or closer until resolution to Grade I or less.  For  
clinically significant laboratory changes resulting in treatment interruption or discontinuation , 
patients must have their values monito red at least once a week for 4 weeks , and subsequently 
at 4-week intervals, until resolution  to < Grade II  or stabilization of the event, whichever comes 
first.  If a patient requires a dose delay of >21 days from the intended day of the next scheduled 
dose, then the patient should be discontinued from the study  (unless unrelated to study drug 
and approved by the medical monitor) .  If the patient requires more than 2 dose reductions, 
the patient should be discontinued from the study .  All patients must be f ollowed for adverse 
events a nd serious adverse events for 30  days following the last dose of Abiraterone  acetate .  
All SAEs must be reported to Duke University  as detailed in section  11.2 -3. 
 
An investigator may withdraw a patient from the study Treatment Phase at any time based on  
clinical judgment or for any of th e following reasons listed above .  
 
11.0  SAFETY ASSESSMENTS AND REPORTING  
 
Safety assessments will consist of monitoring and recording all adverse and serious adverse 
events, the regular monitor ing of hematology  and blood chemistry values, regular 
measurement of vital signs and the performance of physical examinations.  
 
These assessments should be performed within ±3 days of the scheduled day of assessment for 
the first cycle and +/ - 7 days there after except for adverse events that will be evaluated 
continuously through the study.  Safety and tolerability will be assessed according to the 
NIH/NCI CTC AE v. 4.0.  
 
11.1  Definitions  
Abiraterone and Race   Page 46 of 72
DukeUniversity     
Definition of Adverse Event (AE)  
 
Any untoward medical occurrence in  a patient or clinical investigation subject administered a 
medicinal product and which does not necessarily have to have a causal relationship with this 
treatment. An AE can therefore be any unfavorable and unintended sign (including an abnormal 
laborator y finding), symptom, or disease temporally associated with the use of a medicinal 
product, whether or not related to the medicinal product.  Lab a bnormalities will be captured as 
AEs only if deemed clinically significant by the treating physician/provider/i nvestigator.  This 
does not include the labs designated as an adverse e vent of special interest.  
 
Adverse Events of Special Interest  
 
For Abiraterone acetate, the adverse events of special interest are:  
 Mineralocorticoid excess (Hypertension, Hypokalemia,  Fluid retention)  
 Hepatotoxicity  
 Cardiac disorders  
 Osteoporosis including osteoporosis -related fractures  
 Increased exposure with food  
 Rhabdomyolysis/myopathy  
 Acute liver failure/hepatitis which might be fatal  
 Drug -drug interaction (CYP2D6)  
 Allergic alveoli tis 
 
Note: H ypertension will be reported as an adverse event of special interest if there is a one 
grade increase from a baseline grade of ≥ grade 1.  See 11.5 Reporting Timelines   
Definition of Adverse Drug Reaction (ADR)  
 
A noxious and unintended respons e to any dose of the drug (or biological) product for which 
there is a reasonable possibility that the product cause the response.  ‘‘Reasonable possibility’’ 
means there is evidence to suggest a causal relationship between the drug and the adverse 
event. Suspected adverse reaction implies a lesser degree of certainty about causality than 
adverse reaction, which means any adverse event caused by a drug.  
J&J Medicinal Product  
 
The specific J&J drug under study and any other J&J medicinal product.  
 
Product Qu ality Complaint (PQC)  
 
Any discrete concern that questions the identity, quality, durability, reliability, safety, efficacy 
or intended performance of a drug product.  
Abiraterone and Race   Page 47 of 72
DukeUniversity    A complaint may allege an injury or malfunction associated with the use of the drug produ ct. It 
may also involve the design, literature, packaging, advertising, availability, physical appearance 
or promotion of the drug product.  
 
Serious Adverse Event (SAE)  
 
An adverse event or suspected adverse reaction is considered ‘‘serious’’ if, in the vi ew of either 
the treating physician or PI , it results in any of the following outcomes:  
 Death,  
 a life -threatening adverse event,  
o Life-threatening adverse event or life -threatening suspected adverse reaction .  
 An adverse event or suspected adverse reacti on is considered ‘‘life -threatening’’ 
if, in the view of either the treating physician or PI , its occurrence places the patient or 
subject at immediate risk of death. It does not include an adverse event or suspected 
adverse reaction that, had it occurred in a more severe form, might have caused death . 
 inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization,  
 a persistent or significant incapacity or substantial disruption of the ability to 
conduct normal life functions, or  
 a congenital anoma ly/birth defect.  
Important medical events that may not result in death, be life -threatening, or require 
hospitalization may be considered serious when, based upon appropriate medical judgment, 
they may jeopardize the patient or subject and may require med ical or surgical intervention to 
prevent one of the outcomes listed in this definition. Examples of such medical events include 
allergic bronchospasm requiring intensive treatment in an emergency room or at home, blood 
dyscrasias or convulsions that do not  result in inpatient hospitalization, or the development of 
drug dependency or drug abuse.  
 
Special Reporting Situations   
 
When a report contains a J&J product, an identifiable patient, and identifiable reporter, the 
following events represent Special Repo rting Situations:  
 overdose of  a Johnson & Johnson medicinal product  
 pregnancy exposure (maternal and paternal)  
 suspected abuse/misuse of  a medicinal Johnson and Johnson product  
 inadvertent or accidental exposure to  a medicinal Johnson and Johnson   
prod uct 
 any failure of expected pharmacological action (i.e., lack of effect) of  a 
Johnson & Johnson medicinal product  
 unexpected therapeutic or clinical benefit from use of  a Johnson & 
Johnson medicinal product  
 medication error involving a Johnson & Johnson  product   
 suspected transmission of any infectious agent via  a medicinal product . 
 
Abiraterone and Race   Page 48 of 72
DukeUniversity    11.2  Management of Adverse Events, Serious Adverse Events and Special Reporting 
Situations  
 
In general, the PI or designate  must immediately report to JANSSEN SCIENTIFIC AF FAIRS  any 
serious adverse event and Special Reporting Situations, whether or not considered drug 
related. Study endpoints that are serious adverse events (e.g., all -cause mortality) must be 
reported in accordance with the protocol unless there is evidence suggesting a causal 
relationship between the drug and the event (e.g., death as a result of anaphylactic reaction or 
fatal hepatic necrosis). In that case, the investigator must immediately report the event to 
JANSSEN SCIENTIFIC AFFAIRS . The PI must record  non-serious adverse events and report them 
to JANSSEN SCIENTIFIC AFFAIRS  following completion of the accrual and follow up period  or to 
fulfill regulatory reporting requirements.  
 
For each subject, AEs SAEs, and Special Reporting Situations should be reco rded after informed 
consent is obtained until the subject has completed participation in the study as follows:  
 
A Serious Adverse event or Special Reporting Situations must be reported if it occurs during a 
subject’s participation in the Study (whether rec eiving Study Product or not) and within 30 days 
of receiving the last dose of Study Product.  
 
Any serious adverse event or Special Reporting Situations that is ongoing when a subject 
completes his/her participation in the Study must be followed until any o f the following occurs:  
 -the event resolves or stabilizes;  
 -the event returns to baseline condition or value (if a baseline value is available);  
 -the event can be attributed to agents(s) other than the study product , or to factors 
unrelated to Study conduc t. 
 
11.3  Recording of Adverse Events, Serious Adverse Events and Special Reporting 
Situations  
 
Recording should be done in a concise manner using standard, acceptable medical terms.  
 
The adverse event recorded should not be a procedure or a clinical measur ement (i.e. a 
laboratory value or vital sign) but should reflect the reason for the procedure or the diagnosis 
based on the abnormal measurement.  
 
Preexisting conditions that worsen in severity or frequency during the Study should also be 
recorded (a preex isting condition that does not worsen is not an adverse event).  
 
Further, a procedure or surgery is not an adverse event; rather, the event leading to the 
procedure or surgery is considered an adverse event. Any event requiring in -patient 
hospitalization t hat occurs during the course of a subject’s participation in a trial must be 
reported as an SAE. Hospitalizations that do not meet the criteria for SAE reporting are:  
A: Reasons described in the Protocol, e.g. drug administration, Protocol -required testing  
Abiraterone and Race   Page 49 of 72
DukeUniversity    B. Surgery or procedure planned prior to entry into the Study.  
 
If, in the PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR ’s judgment, a clinical significant worsening from baseline is 
observed in any laboratory or other test parameter (e.g. electrocardiogram (ECG), angiogram), 
physical exam finding, or vital sign, a corresponding clinical adverse event should be recorded.  
 
If a specific medical diagnosis has been made, that diagnosis or syndrome should be recorded 
as the adverse event, whenever possible.  However, a complete desc ription of the signs, 
symptoms and investigations which led to the diagnosis should be provided. For example, if 
clinically significant elevations of liver function tests are known to be secondary to hepatitis, 
“hepatitis” and not “elevated liver function tests” should be recorded. If the cause is not 
known, the abnormal test or finding should be recorded as an adverse event, using appropriate 
medical terminology (e/g/ thrombocytopenia, peripheral edema, QT prolongation).  
 
 
11.4  Maintenance of Safety Inform ation  
 
Safety information will be maintained in a clinical database/repository in a retrievable format. 
At a minimum, at the end of the treatment phase (=”last patient off treatment”) as well as the 
end of the follow -up phase (=”last patient out”) of the S tudy, the PI shall provide all adverse 
events, both serious and non -serious, in report format. However, in certain circumstances more 
frequent review of the safety data may be necessary, e/g/ to fulfill a regulatory request, and as 
such the data shall be m ade available within a reasonable timeframe at JANSSEN SCIENTIFIC 
AFFAIRS ’s request.  
 
11.5 . Reporting Timelines  
 
Serious  safety information (SAEs, Adverse Events of Special Interest, Special Reporting 
Situations, and PQCs) , whether or not considered drug r elated,  should be reported to the lead 
site/sponsor  within 24 hours  of becoming aware of the event(s) , using the provided Janssen  
SAE Report Form and the DCI SAE Review Form (Site Assessment). These documents should be 
sent to:  
 
The DCI Safety Desk fax:  
 
 
If the safety desk cannot be reached within 24 hours, the Medical Director/Monitor should be 
contacted: Dr. Daniel George  
 
 
The initial report for each SAE or death should include at minimum the following information:  
• protocol # and title  
• patient initials, study identifi cation number, sex, age  
• date the event occurred  

Abiraterone and Race   Page 50 of 72
DukeUniversity    • description of the SAE  
• dose level and cycle number at the time the SAE occurred  
• description of the patient’s condition  
• indication whether the patient remains on study  
• causality  
 Signature by physi cian 
 
Follow -up information including severity, action taken, concomitant medications, and outcome 
should be communicated to Duke as soon as possible.  
 
Upon receipt of the Serious Adverse Event Reporting form by DCI Safety Desk, the PI will be 
notified and  be required to complete the PI assessment of the DCI Safety SAE Report Review 
Form.  The DCI safety desk will, in turn, send the Janssen SAE Report Form to Janssen Scientific 
Affairs . Safety information will be sent to Janssen Scientific Affairs  by encryp ted email using 
Cisco Registered Envelope Service to  Delivery and read 
receipt of the secure email will serve as evidence of successful communication.  
 
 11.5.1   Reporting SAEs at Participating Institutions  
 
Staff at partic ipating sites are responsible for reporting all SAEs to the lead site/sponsor within 
24 hours of becoming aware of the event. The DCI Safety Desk at Duke University  
should be contacted  
when reporting an SAE or death.  If this person cannot be reached within 24 hours, the Principal 
Investigator should be contacted:  Dr. Daniel George  
 
 
All non -serious AEs s hould be reported according to the timeframe outlined in the Research 
Funding Agreement section entitled Reporting of Data.  
 
 11.5.2   FDA Reporting Requirements  
 
The Sponsor/Investigator (Duke) is responsible for reporting serious adverse events to the FD A 
in accordance with applicable IND Safety Requirements (21 CFR 312.32).  
 
11.6 . Transmission Methods  
 
The following methods are acceptable for transmission of safety information to JANSSEN 
SCIENTIFIC AFFAIRS : 
 Facsimile (fax), receipt of which is evidences  in a successful fax transmission report,  
 Electronically subject to strict compliance with the following condition: Reporting may 
be done electronically only upon written approval by JANSSEN SCIENTIFIC AFFAIRS , which 
approval must acknowledge that the elec tronic transmission is in an acceptable encrypted 
email format. Without such acknowledgement, the approval to use an electronic transmission 
shall not be valid. The Parties hereby acknowledge the importance of strict precautions with 

Abiraterone and Race   Page 51 of 72
DukeUniversity    the use of electronic transmission for the security, protection and maintenance of 
confidentiality of patient health information contained in the reports, or  
 Telephone (for business continuity purposes, if fax or authorized electron ic system is 
non-functional).  
 
Please use the contact information and process information provided by JANSSEN SCIENTIFIC 
AFFAIRS   
 
11.7  Procedures for Reporting Adverse Events (AE), Serious Adverse Events (SAE), 
Special Reporting Situation, and Product Quality Complaints (PQCs) to JANSSEN 
SCIENTIFIC AFFAIRS  
 
A: Serious Adverse Events (SAE), Adverse Events of Special Interest, and Special 
Reporting Situations  
In clinical trials (including reports unblinded as to treatment for blinded studies) involving the 
Study Product regardless of whether causality with the administration of the Study Product is 
suspected by the PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR.  
 
The INSTITUTION/PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR will transmit these reports in a form to be provided 
(or a form substantially similar to the form provided and approved for us e by JANSSEN 
SCIENTIFIC AFFAIRS  in writing) in accordance with Section VII Transmission methods, in English 
within 24 hours of becoming aware of the event(s) along with their determination of whether 
the event was caused by a J&J product.  
 
All available cl inical information relevant to the evaluation of an SAE, Adverse Events of Special 
Interest, and Special Reporting Situations including pregnancy reports (with or without an AE) 
including paternal exposure are required.  
 
 The INSTITUTION and/ or PRINCIPAL I NVESTIGATOR is responsible for ensuring that 
these cases from clinical studies are complete and if not are promptly followed -up. 
This includes ensuring the reports are fully investigated and thoroughly documented 
by the PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  and that foll ow-up information is summarized e.g. 
hospital records, coroner’s reports, autopsy results and recorded on the appropriate 
forms.  
 A study case is not considered complete until all clinical details needed to interpret 
the case are received and the event has resolved, or otherwise explained, or the 
patient is lost to follow -up. Reporting of follow -up information should follow the 
same timeline as initial reports.  
 Copies of any and all relevant correspondences with regulatory authorities and 
ethics committees r egarding any and all serious adverse events, irrespective of 
association with the Study Drug in the course of the Study, by facsimile within 24 
hours of such report or correspondence being sent to applicable health authorities.  
 
B. Product Quality Complain ts 
Abiraterone and Race   Page 52 of 72
DukeUniversity     
Any PQC, with or without an AE, (including reports of suspicion of counterfeiting, diversion, or 
tampering, and suspected transmission of pathogens) will be transmitted by the INSTITUTION 
and the PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR in the form provided by JANSSEN SCIENTIFIC AFFAIRS  in 
accordance with Section VII Transmission methods, in English, within 24 hours  of becoming 
aware of the event(s).  
 
C. Reconciliation of SAEs  
 
At a minimum, on a quarterly basis and at the end of the Study, JANSSEN SCIENTIFIC AFFAIRS  
will provide to the INSTITUTION and/or PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR, a listing of all SAEs reported 
to JANSSEN SCIENTIFIC AFFAIRS .  SPONSOR and/or PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR will review this 
listing and provide any discrepancies to the JANSSEN SCIENTIFIC AFFAIRS . 
 
Upon  request, INSTITUTION and PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR shall provide JANSSEN SCIENTIFIC 
AFFAIRS  with a summary list of all SAEs, and AEs of Special Interest and Special Reporting 
Situation reports to date, for reconciliation purposes.  
 
 
11.8  Dissemination of Saf ety Information from JANSSEN SCIENTIFIC AFFAIRS  to 
INSTITUTION/PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATORS  
 
JANSSEN SCIENTIFIC AFFAIRS  will provide to the  INSTITUTION/PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR IND 
safety reports/SUSAR (Serious Unexpected Suspect Adverse Reaction) reports genera ted by the 
JANSSEN SCIENTIFIC AFFAIRS  for the Study Product as they become available until all subjects in 
the Protocol have completed their last Study visit according to the Protocol   (i.e. Last Subject 
Last Visit has occurred).  
 
12.0  EFFICACY ASSESSMENT S 
 
12.1  Baseline tumor evaluation  
 
Response and progression will be evaluated in this study using a combination of the 
international criteria proposed by the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) 
Committee  [78]and the guidelines for prostate cancer endpoints developed by the Prosta te 
Cancer Clinical Trials Working Group (PCWG2 ) [13]. 
 
Traditional measures of response reflect when a treatment is working and measures of 
progression indicate wh en a drug should be stopped.  Because assessing response in bone (the 
most common site of prostate cancer spread) is uncertain and the clinical significance of PSA 
changes in response to therapy is not a reliable predictor of response, measures of response  
have been expanded in consortium trials to include measures of progression.  
Patients will be reevaluated for response every cycle according to the guidelines below:  
 
Abiraterone and Race   Page 53 of 72
DukeUniversity    Measurable disease :   According to RECIST 1.1, measurable disease is defined as at least 1 
lesion ≥ 10 mm in its longest diameter as measured by CT scan with slice thickness ≤ 5 mm, ≥ 10 
mm by clinical exam with caliper measurement, or ≥20 mm by CXR.  A lymph node is 
measurable if it is ≥ 15 mm in the short axis when assessed by CT scan.   All tumor 
measurements will be taken using a ruler or calipers and recorded in millimeters.  
 
Nonmeasurable disease :  Following RECIST 1.1, all other lesions (or sites of disease) will be 
considered nonmeasurable disease.  This includes small lesions (longest diameter < 10 mm) and 
any of the following:  
1. Leptomeningeal disease  
2. Ascites  
3. Pleural or pericardial effusion  
4. Lymphagitic involvement of the skin or lung  
5. Abdominal mass or organomegaly identified by physical exam but not by imaging 
techniques  
6. Bone lesions  
7. Lesions occu rring within a previously irradiated area unless they are documented as 
new lesions since the completion of radiation therapy  
 
Target (nodal and visceral) lesions :  Following RECIST 1.1, progression in a nodal or visceral site 
(i.e., liver and lung) is suf ficient to document disease progression.  The presence or absence of 
nodal and visceral disease before and after treatment should be recorded separately.  All 
measurable lesions (up to a maximum of 2 lesions per organ and 5 lesions in total) will be 
identi fied as target lesions to be measured and recorded at baseline.  The target lesions should 
be representative of all involved organs.  Target lesions will be selected on the basis of size (i.e., 
the largest area) and suitability for accurate, repeated measu rements.  Lymph nodes can be 
considered a target lesion if the short axis is ≥ 15 mm by CT.  The sum of diameters (long -axis 
for non -nodal lesions and short -axis for nodal lesions) of all target lesions will be calculated and 
reported as the baseline sum diameter .  The baseline sum diameter will be used as a reference 
by which to c haracterize the objective tumor response.   
 
Non -target lesions :  All other lesions (or sites of disease) will be identified as nontarget lesions 
and recorded at baseline.  Nontarget lesions will include measurable lesions that exceed the 
maximum number pe r organ (2) or total of all involved organs (5), as well as nonmeasurable 
lesions.  The presence or absence of these lesions will be recorded on the CRF and should be 
evaluated at the same assessment time points as all target lesions.  
 
PSA:   Because the r ate of rise has known prognostic significance, estimate a pretreatment PSA 
doubling time (PSA -DT) if at least 3 values are available, but do not delay either treatment or 
enrollment onto a trial simply to estimate PSA -DT.   
 
12.2  Response Criteria  
 
  12.2.1  Evaluation of target lesions:  
Abiraterone and Race   Page 54 of 72
DukeUniversity     
Table  5 RECIST 1.1 response criteria for target lesions  
Response  Evaluation of Target Lesions  
Complete response (CR)  The disappearance of all target lesions.  Any pathologic 
lymph nodes (target or non -target) must hav e reduction 
in short axis to <10 mm.   
Partial response (PR)  A ≥30% decrease in the sum diameter of target lesions as 
compared to the baseline sum diameter.  
Progressive disease (PD)  A ≥20% increase in the sum diameter of target lesions as 
compared to th e smallest sum diameter on study.  This 
must show an absolute increase of at least 5 mm.  
The appearance of one or more new lesions.   
Stable disease (SD)  Neither sufficient shrinkage to qualify for PR nor 
sufficient increase to qualify for PD based on th e smallest 
sum diameter on study.  
  
 
Target lesions that are too small to measure will be given a measurement of either 0 mm, if the 
radiologist believes the lesion has disappeared, or 5 mm, if the lesion is felt to be present.  In 
some circumstances, i t may be difficult to distinguish residual disease from normal tissue.  
When the evaluation of complete response depends on this determination, the residual lesion 
will be investigated with a fine needle aspirate or biopsy before confirming the complete 
response status.   
If lymph nodes have been identified as target lesions, the short axis measurement will be 
recorded even if the nodes regress to < 10 mm.  Therefore, the sum diameter may not be zero 
even if complete response criteria are met.       
 
 
 
  12.2.2 Evaluation of non -target lesions:  
 
Table 6   RECIST 1.1 response criteria for non-target  lesions  
Response  Evaluation of Non -target Lesions  
Complete response (CR)  The disappearance of all non -target lesions.  All lymph 
nodes must be <10 mm by short a xis.  
Non -CR, Non -PD The persistence of one or more non -target lesions.  
Progressive disease (PD)  Unequivocal  progression of existing non -target lesions 
and/or the appearance  of one or more new lesions.  
 
Abiraterone and Race   Page 55 of 72
DukeUniversity    A clear progression of nontarget lesions only is e xceptional.  In such circumstances, the 
progression status, as assigned by the investigator, may be reviewed by a PCCTC panel.  
 
New lesions :  If unequivocal, the appearance of new lesions denotes disease progression.  If a 
new lesion is equivocal, therapy will be continued and this lesion will be reevaluated on follow -
up imaging as planned in the study flow chart.  If repeat scans confirm the new lesion, 
progression will be documented using the date of the initial equivocal scan.  New brain 
metastases ident ified while on study are considered new even if there was no baseline brain 
imaging.  
 
  12.2.3 Bone lesions  
 
Record post -treatment changes as either “ no new  lesions” or “new lesions.”  When the bone 
scan is the sole indicator of progression, disease progre ssion in bone is defined as 2 or more 
new lesions seen on bone scan compared with the baseline scan used for trial entry.  In 
situations where scan findings suggest a flare reaction or where new lesion(s) may represent 
trauma, confirm these results with ot her imaging modalities.  In the absence of clearly 
worsening soft -tissue ( nodal  and visceral) disease or disease -related symptoms, progression at 
the first sched uled assessment should be confirmed on a second scan performed 6 or more  
weeks later.   
 
  12.2.4 PSA  
 
To report PSA -based outcomes, PCWG2 recommends that the percent of change in PSA from 
baseline to 12 weeks (or earlier for those who discontinue therapy) and the maximum decline 
in PSA that occurs at any point after treatment be reported for each p atient using a waterfall 
plot.  Because declines in serum PSA, if they occur, may not do so for several weeks, PSA 
measurements obtained during the first 12 weeks should not be used as the sole criterion for 
clinical decision making.  As long as patient sa fety is the primary concern, in the absence of 
other indicators of disease progression, therapy should not be discontinued solely on the basis 
of a rise in PSA.   
 
  12.2.5 Symptoms  
 
Transient increases in pain may occur before improvement, and those occur ring in the first 12 
weeks should not affect the course of treatment in the absence of other compelling evidence of 
disease progression.  Changes in symptoms should be documented and confirmed as per other 
outcome measures.   
 
12.2.6 Evaluating best overal l response  
 
The best overall response is the best response recorded from the start of treatment until the 
end of treatment. The investigator ’s determination of best overall response will be based both 
on response criteria and on confirmation criteria.  To be assigned a status of partial response or 
Abiraterone and Race   Page 56 of 72
DukeUniversity    complete response, changes in tumor measurements must be confirmed by repeat assessment 
performed 6 -8 weeks after the criteria for response are first met.  To confirm stable disease, 
follow -up measurements must m eet SD criteria at a minimum interval of 6 weeks after SD was 
first documented.  Table 7 will be used as an assessment tool.  
 
Table 7. Assessing Overall Response  
Target Lesions  Nontarget Lesions  New Lesions  Overall 
Response  
CR CR No CR 
CR Incomplete 
resp onse/SD  No PR 
PR Non -PD No PR 
SD Non -PD No SD 
PD Any Yes or No  PD 
Any PD Yes or No  PD 
Any Any Yes PD 
Abbreviations: CR, complete response; PD, progressive disease; PR, partial 
response; SD,  stable disease.  
 
Patients with global deterioration of heal th status who require treatment to be discontinued 
without objective evidence of disease progression should be classified as having symptomatic 
deterioration.  Every effort should be made to document their objective progression, even after 
discontinuing tr eatment.  
Patients who do not have tumor response assessment due to rapid progression or toxicity will 
be considered nonresponders, will be included in the denominator for the response rate, and 
will be classified into one of the categories listed below:  
 Death attributed to disease progression  
 Early discontinuation attributed to disease progression  
 Death attributed to drug toxicity  
 Early discontinuation attributed to drug toxicity  
 
Note :  If a patient receives subsequent therapy before tumor progression is d ocumented, the 
reason for changing therapy must be reported.  Reasons include clinical progression, drug 
toxicity, or secondary therapy for maintaining tumor response.  
 
12.3 Confirming time -to-event outcomes  
 
Any post treatment change in disease status, be  it favorable or unfavorable, should be 
confirmed using a second assessment at a later time point, either 6 weeks later or at the next 
scheduled scan.  
Abiraterone and Race   Page 57 of 72
DukeUniversity     
12.4 Duration of overall response  
 
Duration of overall response is measured from the time when partial r esponse or complete 
response is first noted until the date when recurrent or progressive disease is objectively 
documented.  Duration of overall complete response is measured from the time the criteria for 
complete response are first met until the first da te that recurrent disease is objectively 
documented.  Duration of stable disease is measured from the start of treatment until the 
criteria for progression are met.  
 
12.5 Progression -free survival  
 
The primary endpoint is r adiographic p rogression -free surv ival ( rPFS),  a composite endpoint 
using the time from study entry to disease progression.   
 
Progression is defined as :  
1) Radiologic progression by RECIST 1.1 [78] and/or bone sca n progression by PCWG2 
criteria [13](Appendix 4) , or  
2) Symptomatic progression, including clinical deterioration requiring new systemic 
therapy or a new a skeletal -related event (pathologic fracture, need for radiation to 
tumor site , malignant spinal cord compression).   
 
A rise  in PSA alone or CTC number alone, in the absence of radiologic or symptomatic indicators 
of disease progression, will not be considered disease progression.   Increased pain alone, in the 
absence of changes in imaging or need for radiation therapy, will not be considered disease 
progression.  
 
All assessments of disease  should be collected at the same time interval .  Post -treatment 
changes will be confirmed based on measurable target lesions, radionuclide bone scans, and 
symptoms as indicated below.   Patien ts who withdraw from study treatment for reasons 
other than radiographic disease progression should continue to have results of their CT and 
Bone scans collected and recorded during the Follow -Up phase until demonstration of 
radiographic progression.  
 
12.6   Secondary endpoint assessments  
 
 12.6.1  RECIST 1.1 defined radiologic response rates   
 
Tumor assessments by CT chest/abdomen/pelvis and bone scan will be made at baseline and 
every 12 weeks while on therapy.   If the chest CT at baseline is clear, ches t x-rays may be used 
for subsequent assessments  at the enrolling physician’s discretion . Response rates will be 
calculated based on RECIST 1.1 criteria, as detailed in section 12.2 above  centrally .   Response 
rates will be analyzed using objective (defined  as CR or PR) parameters. Response rates and 
Abiraterone and Race   Page 58 of 72
DukeUniversity    exact 95% confidence intervals based on the binomial distribution for the response rates will be 
computed.  
  
12.6.2  Post -therapy changes in PSA 
 
The proportion of patients achieving 30%, 50%, and 90% declines i n PSA from baseline within 3 
months on study and overall will be assessed.  Response rates and exact 95% confidence 
intervals based on the binomial distribution for the response rates will be computed.  Time to 
PSA progression as defined by the PCWG2 defini tion will also be captured . 
 
12.6. 3  Safety and toxicity monitoring  
 
National Cancer Institute Common Toxicity Criteria (v 4.0) will be used to record and monitor 
for adverse events (Appendix 4).  Data for safety and severe adverse events will be monitored  
on an ongoing basis through monthly investigator and staff meetings, including data from all 
centers involved.  
 
12.7 Exploratory endpoints  
 
i. Hormonal levels  
We will describe the baseline profile of serum hormone levels (including testosterone, DHT, 
DHE A, DHEAS, estradiol), the change in levels with subsequent therapy ( Cycle 4 ), and their 
association with response to abiraterone acetate as well as with race  (self -reported and 
ancestral genotyping ).  
 
ii. SNP Analyses  
We will describe the germline SNP pr ofiles of target genes involved in androgen signaling as 
well as genes that have been shown to be differentially expressed in African American and 
Caucasian American prostate cancers as well as a genome wide analysis (GWAS) in both African 
American and Cauc asian men with mCRPC and their associations with response to abiraterone 
acetate.  
  
 
 
13.0  STATISTICAL METHODS  
  
Sample Size Computation  
This trial is non -comparative. Based on Ryan et al. the median time to radiographic progression 
free survival (rPFS) i s 16.5  months  [14]. Fifty (50) patients will be enrolled in each group (AA 
and Caucasians). With an accrual rate of  50 patients/group over 30-month accrual period,  24 -
months follow -up, and assuming that rPFS fo llows an exponential distribution, based on 5000 
simulations the average width of a two -sided 95% confidence interval for the median rPFS is 16.  
Abiraterone and Race   Page 59 of 72
DukeUniversity    Because of the small sample size  and short follow -up period , 26 radiographic  PFS events /group  
are expected. Con sequently, the radiographic  PFS distribution by racial group will not be 
estimated with high precision.  
Data Analysis  
The proportion of patients who experience PSA decline of at least 30%, 50% and 90%   at 
3months from baseline and over the entire treatmen t period  will be estimated with exact 95% 
confidence intervals based on the binomial distribution will be computed. In addition, post 
therapy changes in PSA will be explored as a continuous outcome. The Kaplan -Meier product 
limit method will be used to est imate the rPFS.  Interim results at 3 months will not be reported, 
but will be used in the planning of larger trials.  
 
The GWAS analysis will be mostly exploratory as the trial limited sample size will not permit 
definitive analyses.  The SNP will be summar ized using descriptive statistics.  
 
14.0  DATA REPORTING AND REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS  
 
14.1 Data Entry  
 
Data collected during this study will be entered into a secure Oracle database.  Staff a t Duke 
University  will be responsible for the initial study conf igura tion and setup in the electronic  
database as well as for any future changes.    
  
14.1.1 Case report forms  
Electronic c ase report forms (CRFs)  will be generated by Duke University for the collection of all 
study data.  Site Investigators or designee will be responsible for ensuring that the CRFs are 
kept up -to-date.  Each site will enter their own data into CRFs from source documents on site.   
 
  14.1.2 Source documents  
 
Study documentation includes all paper case report forms, data correction forms, so urce 
documents, monitoring logs and appointment schedules, sponsor -investigator correspondence 
and regulatory documents (e.g., signed protocol and amendments, Ethics or Institutional 
Review Committee correspondence and approval, approved and signed subject  consent forms, 
Statement of Investigator form, and clinical supplies receipts and distribution records).  
 
The investigator will prepare and maintain complete and accurate study documentation in  
compliance with Good Clinical Practice standards and applicab le federal, state, and local laws, 
rules and regulations; and, for each subject participating in the study, promptly complete all 
original case report forms and such other reports as required by this protocol following 
completion or termination of the clin ical study or as otherwise required pursuant to any 
agreement with the Sponsor -Investigator.  
Abiraterone and Race   Page 60 of 72
DukeUniversity    By signing the protocol, the investigator acknowledges that, within legal and regulatory  
restrictions and institutional and ethical considerations, study documenta tion will be promptly 
and fully disclosed to the Sponsor -Investigator/Regulatory Specialist  by the investigator upon 
request and also shall be made available at the investigator ’s site upon request for inspection, 
copying, review and audit at reasonable ti mes by representatives of Sponsor -Investigator  or 
responsible government agencies as required by law.  The investigator agrees to promptly take 
any reasonable steps that are requested by Sponsor -Investigator  as a result of an audit to cure 
deficiencies in the study documentation and case report forms.  
 
14.1.3 Record retention  
 
The investigator will maintain adequate and accurate records to enable the conduct of the 
study to be fully documented and the study data to be subsequently verified.  After study 
closure, each participating site’s PI  will maintain all source documents, study -related 
documents, and CRFs.  Because the length of time required for retaining records depends upon 
a number of regulatory and legal factors, documents should be stored until the  investigator is 
notified that the documents may be destroyed.  In this study, records are to be retained and 
securely stored for a minimum of 6 years after the completion of all study activities.  
 
 
14.2  Study monitoring and quality assurance  
 
The Sponsor -Investigator is responsible for monitoring the protocol to ensure that the 
investigation is conducted in accordance with the general investigational plan and all applicable 
regulatory requirements.  In addition, the protocol will be monitored independentl y via the 
Duke Cancer Center (DCI) Monitoring Team  
The DCI Monitoring Team will conduct monitoring visits to ensure subject safety and to ensure 
that the protocol is conducted, recorded, and reported in accordance with the protocol, 
standard operating proc edures, good clinical practice, and applicable regulatory requirements.   
As specified in the DCI Data and Safety Monitoring Plan, the DCI Monitoring Team will conduct 
routine monitoring after the third subject is enrolled, followed by annual monitoring of 1 – 3 
subjects until the study is closed to enrollment and subjects are no longer receiving study 
interventions that are more than minimal risk.    
 
The DCI Safety Oversight Committee (SOC) will perform annual reviews on findings from the DCI 
Monitoring Tea m visit and additional safety and toxicity data submitted by the Principal 
Investigator.  
 
Additional monitoring may be prompted by findings from monitoring visits, unexpected 
frequency of serious and/or unexpected toxicities, or other concerns and may be i nitiated upon 
request of DUHS and DCI leadership, the CPC, the Safety Oversight Committee (SOC), the Duke 
CTQA, the sponsor, the Principal Investigator, or the IRB.   All study documents must be made 
available upon request to the DCI Monitoring Team and oth er authorized regulatory 
authorities, which may include but is not limited to the National Institute of Health, National 
Abiraterone and Race   Page 61 of 72
DukeUniversity    Cancer Institute, and the FDA.   Every reasonable effort will be made to maintain confidentiality 
during study monitoring.  
 
14.3  Data S afety and Monitoring  
 
Data for safety and severe adverse events will be monitored on an ongoing basis through 
monthly investigator and staff meetings, including data from all centers involved.   
 
In addition a recruitment and withdrawal summary will be  discussed at these meetings .  
Withdraws will be broken down into those due to AEs and what they were.  
  
In terms of internal review, the Investigator will continuously monitor and tabulate adverse 
events.  Appropriate reporting to the DUHS IRB wil l be made.  If an unexpected frequency of 
Grade III or IV events occurs, depending on their nature, action appropriate to the nature and 
frequency of these adverse events will be taken.  This may require a protocol amendment, dose 
de-escalation, or closure  of the study.  The Investigator of this protocol will also continuously 
monitor the conduct, data, and safety of this protocol to ensure that:  
 Risk/benefit ratio is not altered to the detriment of the subjects  
 Appropria te internal monitoring of adverse ev ents and outcomes is done  
 Over -accrual does not occur  
 Under -accrual is addressed with appropriate amendments or actions  
 Data is being appropriately collected in a reasonably timely manner  
 
This protocol is being conducted at additional sites external to Du ke University Health Systems.  
The Sponsor -Investigator is responsible for monitoring these sites to assure the safety and 
protection of all subjects, and to assure that the study is conducted, recorded, and reported in 
accordance with the protocol and app licable regulations.  To assure that the investigator 
obligations are fulfilled and all applicable regulations and guidelines are being followed, the 
Sponsor -Investigator will designate the DCI Monitoring Team to assure that the external site 
facilities ar e acceptable, the protocol and investigational plan are being followed, the IRB/IEC has 
been notified of approved protocol changes as required, complete records are being maintained, 
appropriate and timely reports have been made to the Sponsor -Investigator  and the IRB/IEC, study 
drug and study drug inventory are controlled and the Investigator is carrying out all agreed 
activities.  Monitoring also includes review of regulatory and eligibility, conduct, data quality and 
adverse event reporting for select ca ses.  
 
As pre -arranged b y the Sponsor -Investigator, DCI  Monitoring Team will monitor 1 -3 subjects 
annually at external sites until closed to enrollment or subjects are no longer receiving study 
drug or other interventions that are more than minimal risk.  Study teams will provide 
requested data for remote monitoring when possible.  If feasible, the first visit will be 
conducted on site.  Additional on -site visits will be completed as deemed necessary and as 
requested.  Additional review will be performed on  a site -by-site basis, as warranted by the 
findings of previous monitoring visits.  Key variables (demographics, inclusion/exclusion criteria, 
Abiraterone and Race   Page 62 of 72
DukeUniversity    and safety) on the CRFs will be compared with select subject’s source documents.  Any 
discrepancies will be noted  and resolved.  
 
15.0  PROTOCOL AMENDMENTS OR CHANGES IN STUDY CONDUCT  
 
Any change or addition to this protocol requires a written protocol amendment that must be 
reviewed  by Duke University and Janssen  Scientific Affairs  before implementation.   
 
16.0  PRO CEDURES AND INSTRUCTIONS  
 
16.1 Disclosure and confidentiality  
 
The investigator agrees to keep all information provided by participating sites and by Janssen 
Scientific Affairs  in strict confidence and to request similar confidentiality from his/her staff and 
the IRB/IEC/REB.  Study documents provided by participating sites and Janssen Scientific Affairs  
(investigators' brochures and other material) will be stored appropriately to ensure their 
confidentiality. The information provided by participating sites  and Janssen Scientific Affairs  to 
the investigator may not be disclosed to others without direct written authorization from 
Janssen  Scientific Affairs , except to the extent necessary to obtain informed consent from 
patients who wish to participate in the trial.  
 
16.2  Discontinuation of study  
 
Duke University or Janssen  Scientific Affairs  reserve s the right to discontinue any study under 
the conditions specified in the clinical trial agreement.  
 
16.3 Ethics and Good Clinical Practice  
 
This study must be ca rried out in compliance with the protocol and the principles of Good 
Clinical Pract ice, as described in ICH Harmonized Tripartite Guidelines for Good Clinical Practice 
1996. Directive 91/507/EEC, The Rules Governing Medicinal Products in the European 
Commu nity.  US 21 Code of Federal Regulations dealing with clinical studies (including parts 50 
and 56 concerning informed consent and IRB regulations).   The investigator agrees to adhere to 
the instructions and procedures described in it and thereby to adhere to the principles of Good 
Clinical Practice that it conforms to.  
 
16.3.1 Institutional Review Board/Independent Ethics Committee  
 
Before implementing this study, the protocol, the proposed informed consent form and other 
information to subjects, must be re viewed by a properly constituted Institutional Review 
Board/Independent Ethics Committee/Research Ethics Board (IRB/IEC/REB).  A signed and 
dated statement that the protocol and informed consent have been approved by the 
IRB/IEC/REB must be given to Jansse n before study initiation.  Any amendments to the 
Abiraterone and Race   Page 63 of 72
DukeUniversity    protocol, other than administrative ones, must be reviewed by Janssen  Scientific Affairs , and  
approved by this committee.  
 
16.3.2 Informed consent  
 
The investigator or designee must explain to each subject (or legally authorized representative) 
the nature of the study, its purpose, the procedures involved, the expected duration, the 
potential risks and benefits involved and any discomfort it may entail.  Each subject must be 
informed that participation in th e study is voluntary and that he may withdraw from the study 
at any time and that withdrawal of consent will not affect his /her subsequent medical 
treatment or relationship with the treating physician.  
 
This informed consent should be given by means of a s tandard written statement, written in 
non-technical language.  The subject should read and consider the statement before signing 
and dating it, and should be given a copy of the signed document.  If the subject cannot read or 
sign the documents, oral prese ntation may be made or signature given by the subject’s legally 
appointed representative, if witnessed by a person not involved in the study, mentioning that 
the patient could not read or sign the documents.  No patient can enter the study before 
his/her informed consent has been obtained.  The informed consent form is considered to be 
part of the protocol, and must be submitted by the investigator with it for IRB/IEC/REB 
approval.  
 
16.3.3 Declaration of Helsinki  
 
The investigator must conduct the trial in accordance with the principles of the Declaration of 
Helsinki and amendments, concerning medical research in humans (Recommendations Guiding 
Physicians in Biomedical Research Involving Human Subjects). Copies of the Declaration of 
Helsinki and amendments w ill be provided upon request or can be accessed via the website of 
the World Medical Association at http://www.wma.net/e/policy/17 -c_e.html . 
Abiraterone and Race   Page 64 of 72
DukeUniversity    17.0  REFERENCES  
 
1. Siegel, R., D. Nais hadham, and A. Jemal, Cancer statistics, 2012.  CA Cancer J Clin, 2012. 62(1): p. 
10-29. 
2. Litman, H.J., et al., Serum androgen levels in black, Hispanic, and white men.  J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab, 2006. 91(11): p. 4326 -34. 
3. Mohler, J.L., et al., Racial dif ferences in prostate androgen levels in men with clinically localized 
prostate cancer.  J Urol, 2004. 171(6 Pt 1): p. 2277 -80. 
4. Carson, A.P., et al., Trends and racial differences in the use of androgen deprivation therapy for 
metastatic prostate cancer.  J Pain Symptom Manage, 2010. 39(5): p. 872 -81. 
5. Holmes, L., Jr., et al., Impact of androgen deprivation therapy on racial/ethnic disparities in the 
survival of older men treated for locoregional prostate cancer.  Cancer Control, 2009. 16(2): p. 
176-85. 
6. Giovannucci, E., et al., The CAG repeat within the androgen receptor gene and its relationship to 
prostate cancer.  Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 1997. 94(7): p. 3320 -3. 
7. Ross, R.W., et al., Inherited variation in the androgen pathway is associated with the efficacy of 
androgen -deprivation therapy in men with prostate cancer.  J Clin Oncol, 2008. 26(6): p. 842 -7. 
8. Yang, M., et al., SLCO2B1 and SLCO1B3 may determine time to progression for patients receiving 
androgen deprivation therapy for prostate cancer.  J Clin Oncol, 2011. 29(18): p. 2565 -73. 
9. Powell, I.J., et al., Genes associated with prostate cancer are differentially expressed in African 
American and European American men.  Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev, 2013.  
10. Reichardt, J.K., et al., Genetic v ariability of the human SRD5A2 gene: implications for prostate 
cancer risk.  Cancer Res, 1995. 55(18): p. 3973 -5. 
11. Wallace, T.A., et al., Tumor immunobiological differences in prostate cancer between African -
American and European -American men.  Cancer Res , 2008. 68(3): p. 927 -36. 
12. Wang, B.D., et al., Androgen receptor -target genes in african american prostate cancer 
disparities.  Prostate Cancer, 2013. 2013 : p. 763569.  
13. Scher, H.I., et al., Design and end points of clinical trials for patients with pr ogressive prostate 
cancer and castrate levels of testosterone: recommendations of the Prostate Cancer Clinical 
Trials Working Group.  J Clin Oncol, 2008. 26(7): p. 1148 -59. 
14. Ryan, C.J., et al., Abiraterone in Metastatic Prostate Cancer without Previous C hemotherapy.  
New England Journal of Medicine, 2013. 368(2): p. 138 -148.  
15. Jemal, A., et al., Global cancer statistics.  CA: A Cancer Journal for Clinicians, 2011. 61(2): p. 69 -
90. 
16. Scher, H.I., et al., Prostate cancer clinical trial end points: "RECIST "ing a step backwards.  Clinical 
Cancer Research, 2005. 11(14): p. 5223 -5232.  
17. Petrylak, D.P., et al., Docetaxel and estramustine compared with mitoxantrone and prednisone 
for advanced refractory prostate cancer.  New England Journal of Medicine, 2004. 351(15): p. 
1513 -1520.  
18. Tannock, I.F., et al., Docetaxel plus prednisone or mitoxantrone plus prednisone for advanced 
prostate cancer.  New England Journal of Medicine, 2004. 351(15): p. 1502 -1512.  
19. Eisenberger, M.A., et al., Bilateral orchiectomy with or without flutamide for metastatic prostate 
cancer.  N Engl J Med, 1998. 339(15): p. 1036 -42. 
20. Crawford, E.D., et al., A controlled trial of leuprolide with and without flutamide in prostatic 
carcinoma.  N Engl J Med, 1989. 321(7): p. 419 -24. 
21. Schmitt , B., et al., Combined androgen blockade with nonsteroidal antiandrogens for advanced 
prostate cancer: a systematic review.  Urology, 2001. 57(4): p. 727 -32. 
Abiraterone and Race   Page 65 of 72
DukeUniversity    22. Forti, G., et al., Three -month treatment with a long -acting gonadotropin -releasing hormone 
agon ist of patients with benign prostatic hyperplasia: effects on tissue androgen concentration, 
5 alpha -reductase activity and androgen receptor content.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab, 1989. 68(2): 
p. 461 -8. 
23. Mohler, J.L., et al., The androgen axis in recurrent prostate cancer.  Clin Cancer Res, 2004. 10(2): 
p. 440 -8. 
24. Chen, C.D., et al., Molecular determinants of resistance to antiandrogen therapy.  Nat Med, 2004. 
10(1): p. 33 -9. 
25. Stigliano, A., et al., Increased metastatic lymph node 64 and CYP17 expression  are associated 
with high stage prostate cancer.  J Endocrinol, 2007. 194(1): p. 55 -61. 
26. Montgomery, R.B., et al., Maintenance of intratumoral androgens in metastatic prostate cancer: 
a mechanism for castration -resistant tumor growth.  Cancer Res, 2008. 68(11): p. 4447 -54. 
27. Logothetis CJ, W.S., Molina A, Chieffo N, Smith P, Troncoso E, et al. Identification of an androgen 
withdrawal responsive phenotype in castrate resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) patients (pts) 
treated with abiraterone acetate (AA). AS CO 2008; 26:Abstract 5017.  
28. Taplin, M. -E., et al., Androgen receptor mutations in androgen -independent prostate cancer: 
Cancer and Leukemia Group B Study 9663.  Journal of clinical oncology : official journal of the 
American Society of Clinical Oncology,  2003. 21(14): p. 2673 -8. 
29. Tomlins, S.A., et al., Recurrent fusion of TMPRSS2 and ETS transcription factor genes in prostate 
cancer.  Science, 2005. 310(5748): p. 644 -8. 
30. Setlur, S.R., et al., Estrogen -dependent signaling in a molecularly distinct sub class of aggressive 
prostate cancer.  J Natl Cancer Inst, 2008. 100(11): p. 815 -25. 
31. Helgeson, B.E., et al., Characterization of TMPRSS2:ETV5 and SLC45A3:ETV5 gene fusions in 
prostate cancer.  Cancer Res, 2008. 68(1): p. 73 -80. 
32. Perner, S., et al., TMP RSS2:ERG fusion -associated deletions provide insight into the 
heterogeneity of prostate cancer.  Cancer research, 2006. 66(17): p. 8337 -41. 
33. Demichelis, F., et al., TMPRSS2:ERG gene fusion associated with lethal prostate cancer in a 
watchful waiting coho rt. Oncogene, 2007. 26(31): p. 4596 -9. 
34. Mehra, R., et al., Heterogeneity of TMPRSS2 gene rearrangements in multifocal prostate 
adenocarcinoma: molecular evidence for an independent group of diseases.  Cancer Res, 2007. 
67(17): p. 7991 -5. 
35. Attard, G., et al., Duplication of the fusion of TMPRSS2 to ERG sequences identifies fatal human 
prostate cancer.  Oncogene, 2008. 27(3): p. 253 -63. 
36. Attard, G., et al., Phase I clinical trial of a selective inhibitor of CYP17, abiraterone acetate, 
confirms that cas tration -resistant prostate cancer commonly remains hormone driven.  J Clin 
Oncol, 2008. 26(28): p. 4563 -71. 
37. Logothetis, Provenge , F. Presentation, Editor.  
38. Nabhan, C., Is chemotherapy the standard for asymptomatic androgen -independent prostate 
cancer ? J Clin Oncol, 2008. 26(14): p. 2413 -4; author reply 2414 -5. 
39. Calabro, F. and C.N. Sternberg, Current indications for chemotherapy in prostate cancer patients.  
Eur Urol, 2007. 51(1): p. 17 -26. 
40. Basch, E.M., et al., American Society of Clinical Oncol ogy endorsement of the Cancer Care 
Ontario Practice Guideline on nonhormonal therapy for men with metastatic hormone -refractory 
(castration -resistant) prostate cancer.  J Clin Oncol, 2007. 25(33): p. 5313 -8. 
41. Heidenreich, A., et al., EAU guidelines on pr ostate cancer.  Eur Urol, 2008. 53(1): p. 68 -80. 
42. Horwich, A., C. Parker, and V. Kataja, Prostate cancer: ESMO clinical recommendations for 
diagnosis, treatment and follow -up. Ann Oncol, 2008. 19 Suppl 2 : p. ii45 -6. 
Abiraterone and Race   Page 66 of 72
DukeUniversity    43. Carducci, M.A., et al., A phase 3 randomized controlled trial of the efficacy and safety of 
atrasentan in men with metastatic hormone -refractory prostate cancer.  Cancer, 2007. 110(9): p. 
1959 -66. 
44. Sleep D. Atrasentan, O.P., Sept 13, 2005 and 
http://www.fda.gov/ohrms/dockets/ac/05/slides/2005 -4174S1_Slide -Index.htm . 
45. Small, E.J., et al., Placebo -controlled phase III trial of immunologic therapy with sipuleucel -T 
(APC8015) in patients with metasta tic, asymptomatic hormone refractory prostate cancer.  J Clin 
Oncol, 2006. 24(19): p. 3089 -94. 
46. Huggins, C. and D.M. Bergenstal, Inhibition of human mammary and prostatic cancers by 
adrenalectomy.  Cancer Res, 1952. 12(2): p. 134 -41. 
47. Kruit, W.H., G. S toter, and J.G. Klijn, Effect of combination therapy with aminoglutethimide and 
hydrocortisone on prostate -specific antigen response in metastatic prostate cancer refractory to 
standard endocrine therapy.  Anticancer Drugs, 2004. 15(9): p. 843 -7. 
48. Dawson , N., et al., Phase II study of suramin plus aminoglutethimide in two cohorts of patients 
with androgen -independent prostate cancer: simultaneous antiandrogen withdrawal and prior 
antiandrogen withdrawal.  Clin Cancer Res, 1998. 4(1): p. 37 -44. 
49. Small, E .J., A. Baron, and R. Bok, Simultaneous antiandrogen withdrawal and treatment with 
ketoconazole and hydrocortisone in patients with advanced prostate carcinoma.  Cancer, 1997. 
80(9): p. 1755 -9. 
50. Millikan, R., et al., Randomized phase 2 trial of ketoconaz ole and ketoconazole/doxorubicin in 
androgen independent prostate cancer.  Urologic oncology, 2001. 6(3): p. 111 -115.  
51. Small, E.J., et al., Ketoconazole retains activity in advanced prostate cancer patients with 
progression despite flutamide withdrawal.  J Urol, 1997. 157(4): p. 1204 -7. 
52. Small, E.J., et al., Antiandrogen withdrawal alone or in combination with ketoconazole in 
androgen -independent prostate cancer patients: a phase III trial (CALGB 9583).  J Clin Oncol, 
2004. 22(6): p. 1025 -33. 
53. Itakura , H., et al., Rhabdomyolysis from cytochrome p -450 interaction of ketoconazole and 
simvastatin in prostate cancer.  J Urol, 2003. 169(2): p. 613.  
54. Tannock, I., et al., Treatment of metastatic prostatic cancer with low -dose prednisone: 
evaluation of pain and quality of life as pragmatic indices of response.  J Clin Oncol, 1989. 7(5): p. 
590-7. 
55. Nishimura, K., et al., Potential mechanism for the effects of dexamethasone on growth of 
androgen -independent prostate cancer.  J Natl Cancer Inst, 2001. 93(22): p . 1739 -46. 
56. Li, Z., et al., Glucocorticoid up -regulates transforming growth factor -beta (TGF -beta) type II 
receptor and enhances TGF -beta signaling in human prostate cancer PC -3 cells.  Endocrinology, 
2006. 147(11): p. 5259 -67. 
57. Tannock, I.F., et al.,  Chemotherapy with mitoxantrone plus prednisone or prednisone alone for 
symptomatic hormone -resistant prostate cancer: a Canadian randomized trial with palliative end 
points.  J Clin Oncol, 1996. 14(6): p. 1756 -64. 
58. Fossa, S.D., et al., Flutamide versus prednisone in patients with prostate cancer symptomatically 
progressing after androgen -ablative therapy: a phase III study of the European organization for 
research and treatment of cancer genitourinary group.  J Clin Oncol, 2001. 19(1): p. 62 -71. 
59. Small , E.J., et al., Suramin therapy for patients with symptomatic hormone -refractory prostate 
cancer: results of a randomized phase III trial comparing suramin plus hydrocortisone to placebo 
plus hydrocortisone.  J Clin Oncol, 2000. 18(7): p. 1440 -50. 
60. Kanto ff, P.W., et al., Hydrocortisone with or without mitoxantrone in men with hormone -
refractory prostate cancer: results of the cancer and leukemia group B 9182 study.  J Clin Oncol, 
1999. 17(8): p. 2506 -13. 
Abiraterone and Race   Page 67 of 72
DukeUniversity    61. Morioka, M., et al., Prostate -specific antigen l evels and prognosis in patients with hormone -
refractory prostate cancer treated with low -dose dexamethasone.  Urol Int, 2002. 68(1): p. 10 -5. 
62. Saika, T., et al., Treatment of androgen -independent prostate cancer with dexamethasone: a 
prospective study in  stage D2 patients.  Int J Urol, 2001. 8(6): p. 290 -4. 
63. Storlie, J.A., et al., Prostate specific antigen levels and clinical response to low dose 
dexamethasone for hormone -refractory metastatic prostate carcinoma.  Cancer, 1995. 76(1): p. 
96-100.  
64. Smit h, D.C., et al., A phase II trial of oral diethylstilbesterol as a second -line hormonal agent in 
advanced prostate cancer.  Urology, 1998. 52(2): p. 257 -60. 
65. Klotz, L., I. McNeill, and N. Fleshner, A phase 1 -2 trial of diethylstilbestrol plus low dose wa rfarin 
in advanced prostate carcinoma.  J Urol, 1999. 161(1): p. 169 -72. 
66. Oh, W.K., et al., Prospective, multicenter, randomized phase II trial of the herbal supplement, PC -
SPES, and diethylstilbestrol in patients with androgen -independent prostate cancer.  J Clin Oncol, 
2004. 22(18): p. 3705 -12. 
67. Hedlund, P.O., et al., Treatment of high -grade,  high -stage prostate cancer with estramustine 
phosphate or diethylstilbestrol. A double -blind study. The SPCG -1 Study Group. Scandinavian 
Prostate Cancer Group.  Scand J Urol Nephrol, 1997. 31(2): p. 167 -72. 
68. Saad, F., et al., Long -term efficacy of zoled ronic acid for the prevention of skeletal complications 
in patients with metastatic hormone -refractory prostate cancer.  J Natl Cancer Inst, 2004. 96(11): 
p. 879 -82. 
69. Tannock, I.F., et al., Docetaxel plus prednisone or mitoxantrone plus prednisone for ad vanced 
prostate cancer.  N Engl J Med, 2004. 351(15): p. 1502 -12. 
70. Petrylak, D.P., et al., Docetaxel and estramustine compared with mitoxantrone and prednisone 
for advanced refractory prostate cancer.  N Engl J Med, 2004. 351(15): p. 1513 -20. 
71. Berthold , D.R., et al., Docetaxel plus prednisone or mitoxantrone plus prednisone for advanced 
prostate cancer: updated survival in the TAX 327 study.  J Clin Oncol, 2008. 26(2): p. 242 -5. 
72. Attard G, R.A., Barrett M, Karavasilis V, Molife R, Thompson E, et al. I nhibition of androgen 
synthesis results in a high response rate in castration refractory prostate cancer. In: American 
Association for Cancer Research Annual Meeting: Proceedings; 2007 Apr 14 -18; Los Angeles, CA. 
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; 2007, Abstract LB -180.  
73. Barrie, S.E., et al., Pharmacology of novel steroidal inhibitors of cytochrome P450(17) alpha (17 
alpha -hydroxylase/C17 -20 lyase).  J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol, 1994. 50(5-6): p. 267 -73. 
74. O'Donnell, A., et al., Hormonal impact of the 17alpha -hydr oxylase/C(17,20) -lyase inhibitor 
abiraterone acetate (CB7630) in patients with prostate cancer.  Br J Cancer, 2004. 90(12): p. 
2317 -25. 
75. de Bono, J.S., et al., Prednisone plus cabazitaxel or mitoxantrone for metastatic castration -
resistant prostate cance r progressing after docetaxel treatment: a randomised open -label trial.  
Lancet, 2010. 376(9747): p. 1147 -54. 
76. Ryan, C.J., et al., Phase II study of abiraterone acetate in chemotherapy -naive metastatic 
castration -resistant prostate cancer displaying bone  flare discordant with serologic response.  
Clin Cancer Res, 2011. 17(14): p. 4854 -61. 
77. Ryan, C.J., et al., Interim analysis (IA) results of COU -AA-302, a randomized, phase III study of 
abiraterone acetate (AA) in chemotherapy -naive patients (pts) with m etastatic castration -
resistant prostate cancer (mCRPC).  J Clin Oncol, 2012. 30(Suppl).  
78. Eisenhauer, E.A., et al., New response evaluation criteria in solid tumours: revised RECIST 
guideline (version 1.1).  Eur J Cancer, 2009. 45(2): p. 228 -47. 
 
Abiraterone and Race   Page 68 of 72
DukeUniversity    APPENDI X 1:  PERFORMANCE STATUS CRITERIA  
Karnofsky Performance Scale  
% Description  
100 Normal, no complaints, no 
evidence of disease  
90 Able to carry on normal 
activity, minor signs or 
symptoms of disease  
80 Normal activity with effort, 
some signs or symptoms  of 
disease  
70 Cares for self, unable to carry 
on normal activity or to do 
active work  
60 Requires occasional assistance 
but is able to care for most 
needs  
50 Requires considerable 
assistance and frequent 
medical care  
40 Disabled, requires special care  
and assistance  
30 Severely disabled, 
hospitalization indicated. 
Death not imminent.  
20 Very sick, hospitalization 
indicated. Death not 
imminent.  
10 Moribund, fatal processes 
progressing rapidly  
0 Dead  
 
 
Abiraterone and Race   Page 69 of 72
DukeUniversity    APPENDIX 2:  CYP450 ISOENZYME INHIBITORS AND IN DUCERS   
PROHIBITED CYP450 ISOENZYME INHIBITORS AND INDUCERS  
Strong CYP3A4,5,7 inhibitors  Moderate CYP3A 4,5,7 inhibitors  CYP3A4 inducers  
Clarithromycin   Amprenavir   Avasimibe  
Conivaptan  Aprepitant   Bosentan  
grapefruit juice  Atazanavir  Carbamazepine  
Indinavir  Cimetidine  Efavirenz  
Itraconazole    Modafinil   
Ketoconazole  Darunavir  Nafcillin  
Lopinavir  Diltiazem  Oxcarbazepine  
Mibefradil  Elvitegravir  Phenobarbital  
Nefazodone  Erythromycin  Phenytoin  
Nelfinavir  Fluconazole  pioglitazone  
Posaconazole  Fosamprenavir  Rifabutin  
Ritonavir  Tofisopam  Rifampin  
Saquinavir  Tipranavir  St. John's wort  
Telithromycin  Verapamil  Topiramate  
Troleandomycin    
Voriconazole    
This database of CYP inhibitors was compiled from the Indiana University School of Medicine’s “Clinically Relevant” Table and from the 
University of Washington’s Drug Interaction Database based on in vitro  studies. Strong inhibitors are predicted to increase Abiraterone acetate 
AUC > 5 -fold, and moderate inhibitors are predicted to increase Abirate rone  AUC ≥ 2 -fold but < 5 -fold.  
This database of CYP inducers was compiled from the FDA’s “Guidance for Industry, Drug Interaction Studies;” from the Indiana  University 
School of Medicine’s “Clinically Relevant” Table; and from ( Pursche et al. 2008 ). 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abiraterone and Race   Page 70 of 72
DukeUniversity     CYP450 SUBSTRATES TO BE USED WITH CAUTION  
 
CYP2C8  CYP2C9  CYP2C19  CYP3A4,5,7**  
amodiaquine  celecoxib  amitriptyline  Adinazolam  fentanyl2 
cerivastatin  diclofenac  citalopram  alfentanil1,2 flunitrazepam  
pioglitazone  flurbiprofen  clobazam  alpha -
dihydroergocryptine1 fluticasone1 
repaglinide  fluvastatin  clomipramine  alprazolam  lovastatin1 
rosiglitazone   glibenclamide 
(glyburide)  clopidogrel  amlodipine  maraviroc1 
torsemide  gliclazide  diazepam  aripiprazole  midazolam1 
troglitazone  glimepiride  fluoxetine  atorvastatin  nifedipine  
 glipizide  imipramine  brotizolam1 nisoldipine  
 indomethacin  lansoprazole  budesonide1 nitrendipine  
 irbesartan  moclobemide  buspirone1 perospirone1 
 ketobemidone  omeprazole  cerivastatin  quinine  
 lornoxicam  pantoprazole  chlorpheniramine  sildenafil1 
 losartan  progesterone  cyclosporine2 simvastatin1 
 meloxicam  propranolol  darifenacin1 sirolimus1,2 
 naproxen  quazepam  Diazepam  tipranavir1 
 nateglinide  rabeprazole  diergotamine2 trazodone  
 piroxicam  sertraline  ebastine1 triaz olam1 
 S-ibuprofen  S-mephenytoin  eletriptan1  
 sulfamethoxazole   eplerenone1  
 tenoxicam   ergotamine2  
 tolbutamide   Estazolam   
 torsemide   everolimus1  
 valdecoxib     
* This database of CYP substrates was compiled from the Indiana University School  of Medicine’s “Clinically Relevant” Table, and from 
(Zhou et al. 2009 ) 
** CYP3A4,5,7 substrates were compiled from the Indiana University School of Medicine’s “Clinically Relevant” Table; and supp lemented by 
the FDA’s “Guidance for Industry, Drug Interact ion Studies” and the University of Washington’s Drug Interaction Database.  
1 Sensitive substrates: Drugs whose plasma AUC values have been shown to increase 5 -fold or higher when co -administered with a potent 
inhibitor of the respective enzyme.  
2 Substrate s with narrow therapeutic index (NTI): Drugs whose exposure -response indicates that increases in their exposure levels by the 
concomitant use of potent inhibitors may lead to serious safety concerns ( e.g., Torsades de Pointes).  
 
 
Abiraterone and Race   Page 71 of 72
DukeUniversity    APPENDIX 3:  NCI COMMON TOXICITY CRITERIA  
NCI Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) version 4.0 can be found here:  
http://evs.nci.nih.gov/ftp1/CTCAE/About.html  
Abiraterone and Race   Page 72 of 72
DukeUniversity    APPENDIX 4:  CRITERIA FOR DISEASE PROGRESS ION 
PROSTATE CANCER WORKING GROUP 2 (PCWG2) GUIDELINE S [13] 
 
Variable  Assessments  Progression  
Soft-tissue lesions  Use RECIST 1.1 criteria, except:  
 Only report cha nges in lymph 
nodes that were ~2 cm in 
diameter at baseline  
 Record changes in nodal and 
visceral soft tissue sites separately  
 Record complete elimination of 
disease at any site separately  
 Confirm favorable change with 
next planned scan 8 weeks later  Use RE CIST 1.1 criteria for progression, except:  
 Progression at first assessment must  
be confirmed by a second scan 6 -8 
weeks later  
(For some treatments, a lesion may increase in size 
before it decreases)   
Bone  Record as either new lesions  or  
no new lesions  
 
If no new lesions, continue therapy  
 
If new lesions:  continue therapy but 
perform a confirmatory scan 6-8 weeks 
later.  
 
If confirmatory scan has no new lesions, 
continue therapy.  If there are additional  
new lesions, this is progression.  The appearance of  ≥ 2 new lesionsAND  
 
A confirmatory scan 6-8 weeks later showing at 
least 2 additional  new lesions  
 
The date of progression is the date of the first 
scan that shows the change  
Symptoms  
 Consider independently of other outcome measures  
One or more of the fo llowing criteria indicates disease progression:  
 Need for  new systemic therapy  
 Need for palliative radiation therapy  
 Develop ment of  a new skeletal -related event   
 
  