Document Type: Protocol 
Protocol Title: MOMENTUM (Maximizing Outcomes in Treating Acute Migraine): A Randomized, 
Double-blind, Single-dose, Placebo-controlled Study to Assess the Efficacy and Safety of AXS-07 
(meloxicam and rizatriptan) for the Acute Treatment of Migraine in Adults.
Study Registry ID: [REMOVED]
Document Date: January 16, 2019 
Certain information within this protocol has been redacted to protect either personally identifiable 
information (PII)  or compan
y confidential information (CCI). 
This may include, but is not limited to, redaction of the following: 
•Named persons or organ izations a ssociated with the study.
•Proprietary information, such as scales or coding systems, which are 
considered confidential  
information.
•Other information as needed to protect the confidentiality of Axsome Therapeutics, personal 
information, 
or to otherwise protect the integrity of the clinical study.
Axsome Therapeutics , Inc. Confidential   
AXS -07-301 
Version Date : January 16, 2019 Page 1   
PROTOCOL 
 
COMPOUND 
NAME/NUMBER:  
 AXS -07 
PROTOCOL NUMBER:  
 AXS -07-301 
 
  
DEVELOPMENT PHASE:  
 Phase 3 
PROTOCOL  TITLE:  MOMENTUM (Maximizing Outcomes in Treating Acute Migraine ): 
A Randomized, Double -blind, Single -dose, Placebo -controlled 
Study to Assess the Efficacy and Safety of AXS -07 (meloxicam and 
rizatriptan) for the Acute Treatment of Migraine in Adults. 
 
PROTOCOL VERSION: 
 Original  
PROTOCOL DATE : 
 January 16, 2019  
 
This study will be performed in compliance with Good Clinical Practices and applicable 
regulatory requirements, including the archiving of essential documents. Information contained 
in this protocol is confidential in nature, and may not be used, divulged, published, or otherwise 
disclosed to others except to the extent necessary to obtain approval of the institutional r eview 
board or independent e thics committee, or as required by law. Persons to whom this information 
is disclosed should be informed that this information is confidential and may not be further 
disclosed without the express permission of Axsome Therapeutics, Inc . 
  

Axsome Therapeutics , Inc. Confidential   
AXS -07-301 
Version Date : January 16, 2019 Page 2   
APPROVAL SIGNATURES  
 
PROTOCOL NUMBER:  AXS -07-301 
PROTOCOL TITLE:   MOMENTUM (Maximizing Outcomes in Treating Acute Migraine ): 
A Randomized, Double -blind, Single -dose, Placebo- controlled Study 
to Assess the Efficacy and Safety of AXS -07 ( meloxicam and 
rizatriptan) for the Acute Treatment of Migraine in Adults. 
 
Protocol Version:  Original: January 16, 2019 
 
I, the undersigned, have read this protocol and confirm that to the best of my knowledge it 
accurately describes the planned conduct of the study.  
    
  

Axsome Therapeutics , Inc. Confidential   
AXS -07-301 
Version Date : January 16, 2019 Page 4  1. SYNOPSIS  
 
PRODUCT 
NAME/NUMBER  AXS -07  
PROTOCOL NUMBER  AXS -07-301 
DEVELOPMENT PHASE  Phase 3  
PROTOCOL TITLE  MOMENTUM ( Maximizing Outcomes in Treating Acute Migraine ): 
A Randomized, Double -blind, Single -dose, Placebo -controlled Study to Assess the Efficacy and 
Safety of AXS -07 (meloxicam and rizatriptan) for the Acute Treatment of Migraine in Adults with 
Inadequate Respons e to Prior Acute Treatments . 
INDICATION  Acute treatment of migraine with or without aura in adults . 
OBJECTIVES Primary Objective:  
To evaluate the effect of AXS -07 as compared to placebo in the acute treatment of migraine 
headache in adults  as evaluated by the following two co -primary efficacy variables:  1) pain freedom 
at Hour 2 and 2) absence of the most bothersome symptom (MBS; nausea, photophobia, or 
phonophobia) at Hour 2. 
Key Secondary Objectives:  
To assess the effect of AXS -07 on sustained headache pain free dom between Hour 2 and Hour 24. 
Secondary Objectives:  
To assess the effect of AXS -07 on: 
• Percentage of subjects with headache pain relief at Hour 2 . 
• Change from baseline in headache pain relief over time.  
• Percentage of subjects with heada che pain freedom over time.  
• Time to headache pain freedom.  
• Time to headache pain relief.  
• Time to sustained headache freedom through Hour 24.  
• Percentage of subjects able to perform normal activity over time.  
• Patient Global Impression of Change (PGI -C) score s at Hour 2.  
• Percentage of subjects with absence of MBS over time.  
• Percentage of subjects MBS free over time.  
• Percentage of subjects with headache pain freedom between Hours 2 and 48 (48 -hour 
sustained pain -free).   
• Percentage of subjects with pain relapse, where relapse is defined as the return of headache 
within 48 hours after dosing, for subjects who were pain free at Hour 2.  
• Percentage of subjects using rescue medication.  
• Time to rescue medication.  
• Treatment response based on presence of allodynia , BMI, pain intensity, presence of 
depression, and use of preventive medication . 
STUDY DESIGN  This study is a Phase 3, multicenter, randomized, double -blind, 4-arm, parallel group,  single -dose, 
placebo -controlled  trial to evaluate the efficacy and safety of AXS -07 in subjects with migraine 
attacks . The co-primary efficacy endpoints are the 1) percentage of subjects with headache pain 
freedom  at Hour 2, with headache pain freedom  defined as a reduction in headache severi ty from 
moderate or severe pain to no pain  and 2) absence of the MBS (nausea, photophobia, or 
phonophobia) at Hour 2, with the MBS defined at the onset of migraine, prior to drug administration. 
The k ey secondary endpoint, which will be used to establish c ontribution of the individual 
components of AXS -07 to efficacy , is sustai ned freedom from headache pain between Hour 2 and 
24.  

Axsome Therapeutics , Inc. Confidential   
AXS -07-301 
Version Date : January 16, 2019 Page 5   
 
To qualify for the study, subjects must be 18 to 65 years of age, have an established diagnosis of 
migraine (history indicating the presence of migraine for at least 1 year) with or without aura as 
defined by the International Classification of Headache Di sorder , 3rd Edition (ICHD -3), experience 
an average  of 2 to 8 moderate or severe migraine attacks  per month (no more than 10 migraine days 
per month)  over the past 3 months , and have a history of inadequate response to prior acute migraine 
treatments . An i nadequate response is defined as a score of ≤7 on the Migraine Treatment 
Optimization Questionnaire ( m-TOQ- 4), corresponding to moderate or worse response to prior 
treatments over the preceding 4 weeks . 
Subjects who successfully complete the Screening  visit (Visit 1)  and continue to meet all entry 
criteria, will be randomly  assigned at Visit 2 (randomization) to receive, in a 2:2:2 :1 ratio , AXS -07, 
rizatriptan 10 mg, meloxicam 20 mg, or placebo, dispensed for at -home treatment of a single 
migraine attack. S ubjects will have approximately 12 weeks to complete the study, which consists 
of a 14-day screening period followed by 10 weeks to complete treatment. A follow -up visit (Visit 
3) will occur after treating one attack (to be scheduled as soon as possible but within 1 week after 
dosing), or within 10 weeks after randomization ( Visit 2 ) if the study medication  is not used. 
Treatment and Assessments:  
After randomization, upon the occurrence of the next qualifying migraine attack  (defined as the 
onset of moderate or severe pain intensity ) subjects will take the study medication  (one tablet) . The 
study medication is to be taken orally with wa ter. 
Headache Diary  
Headache pain intensity ( measured by a 4-point  rating scale; none, mild, moderate, or severe), will 
be recorded by subjects in the Headache Diary  immediately prior to taking study medication, and at 
the following time points after taking study medication: 15, 30 and 45 minutes, and 1, 1.5, 2, 4, 12,  
16, 24, and 48 hours after dosing.   
Prior to dosing, the subject will define their most bothersome symptom (nausea, photophobia, 
phonophobia) and assess the presence or absence of each symptom at the  following timepoints : 30 
minutes and 1, 2, and 4 hours  after dosing. In addition,  functional disability with regard to daily 
activities ( on a 4-point scale) will be recorded  pre-dose and at 30 minutes , 1, 2, 4, 12 , and 24 hours  
after dosing . Subjects will assess PGI-C 2 hours after dosing.  
Subjects  will be  instructed to follow restrictions regarding use of other medications, including rescue 
medications, and  must not  sleep or nap for at least 2 hours after taking study drug. 
A physical examination will be performed at Screening. Samples for clinical laboratory testing 
(hematology  and chemistry) will be collected at Screening. A urine  pregnancy test will be pe rformed 
at Screening  and randomization (Visit 2). At each visit, vital signs will be assessed and concomitant 
medications will be reviewed.  Adverse events will be assessed following dosing with study drug.  

Axsome Therapeutics , Inc. Confidential   
AXS -07-301 
Version Date : January 16, 2019 Page 7  administration and for the duration of the trial. Reliable methods of contraception include 
hormonal, double -barrier methods (e.g., condom and diap hragm, condom and foam, 
condom and sponge, each with spermicidal jellies or cream) and intrauterine devices.  
12. Is willing and able to complete the Headache Diary . 
Exclusion criteria : 
A subject will be excluded  from the  study if the subject meets any of the following criteria: 
1. Has a known history of allergic reaction, hypersensitivity, or clinically significant 
intolerance to rizatriptan or another triptan, acetaminophen, aspirin, or any NSAIDs, 
including meloxicam; history of NSAID -induced bronchospasm (subjects with the triad of 
asthma, nasal polyps, and chronic rhinitis are at greater risk for bronchospasm and should 
be considered carefully); or hypersensitivity, allergy, or significant reaction to any 
ingredients of the study drug. 
2. Has experienced > 8 migraine attacks monthly during either of the 2 months before 
screening.  
3. Is suffering from cluster  headaches  (every day or every other day) , or other types of 
migraine.  
4. Has experienced chronic daily headache (≥ 15 days per month of non- migraine headaches 
during each of the 3 months before screening).  
5. Has a  history of brain stem aura, ophthalmoplegic or hemiplegic migraine headache, or any 
potentially serious neurological condition that is associated with headache.  
6. Has confirmed or suspected cardiovascular or cerebrovascular disease.  
7. Has history, symptoms, or significant risk factors for ischemic heart (e.g., silent ischemia, 
angina, myocardial infarction); coronary artery vasospasm; arrhythmia (e.g., atrial 
fibrillation or fl utter, frequent premature ventricular contractions, atrioventricular block); 
clinically significant findings on ECG; cardiac accessory conduction pathway disorder 
(e.g., Wolff -Parkinson -White syndrome); or other cardiovascular disease . 
8. Has history of strok e, transient ischemic attack or other cerebrovascular syndrome; 
peripheral vascular disease; or ischemic bowel disease.  
9. Has uncontrolled hypertension (diastolic blood pressure > 95 mm  Hg or systolic blood 
pressur e > 160 mm Hg). 
10. Is a female subject and i s taking estrogenic contraceptives who, in addition, smokes and 
has experienced migraine attack with aura.  
11. Has a concurrent medical condition(s) that requires the chronic use of analgesics, narcotic 
analgesics, steroidal or non -steroidal anti -inflammatory age nts, tranquilizers, sedatives -
hypnotics, antipsychotics, or nitrates or their use for prevention of migraine attacks.  
12. Clinically significant abnormalities indicated from the medical history, physical exam, 
clinical chemistry, hematology, urine drug screen.  
13. Had a diagnosis or suspicion of drug induced or chronic daily headaches within 1 year.  
14. Has used MAO inhibitor,  lithium,  methylergonovine, or cimetidine in the 2 weeks before 
randomization,  
15. Has a history or current diagnosis of any clinically significant c ardiac, pulmonary, 
neurological, immunological, hematological, gastrointestinal, hepatic, renal, or endocrine disease or any other condition which, in the opinion of the investigator, could compromise 
the subject’s welfare, ability to communicate with the 
study staff, or otherwise 
contraindicate study participation.  
16. Has a history or current diagnosis of schizophrenia, or another significant psychiatric 
disorder which, in the opinion of the investigator, would affect the subject’s ability to comply with the study requirements.  Stable bipolar disease and stable major depressive 
disorder is allowed .
  

Axsome Therapeutics , Inc. Confidential   
AXS -07-301 
Version Date : January 16, 2019 Page 8  17. Is receiving systemic chemotherapy, has an active malignancy of any type, or has been 
diagnosed with cancer within 5 years before Screening (excluding squamous or basal cell 
carcinoma of the skin).  
18. Has a known or suspected history of alcoholism or drug abuse or misuse within 1 year 
before Screening or evidence of tolerance or physical dependence before study drug 
administration.  
19. Has, or has had within 1 year, any clinically significant gastrointestinal (GI) disorder, 
including peptic or gastric ulcers or GI bleeding.  
20. Has a medi cal or surgical condition of the GI system (including motility dysfunction) or 
renal system that might significantly alter the absorption, distribution, or excretion of any drug substance.  
21. Is considered by the investigator, for any reason (including, but not limited to, the risks described as precautions, warnings, and contraindications in the current version of the 
investigator’s brochure for AXS -07 tablets), to be an unsuitable candidate to receive the 
study drug.  
22. Is using or expects to u se concurrent analgesic, NSAIDs (except aspirin at a dose of 
≤ 325 mg daily for cardiovascular prophylaxis) during the trial.  
23. Is currently receiving or expects to use anticoagulants (e.g., heparin, warfarin, nutritional 
supplements having anticoagulant properties); or has  bleeding problems, coagulation 
abnormalities, active blood dyscrasia, hemorrhagic disease, anemia, porphyria, 
phenylketonuria, bone marrow suppression, or immunosuppression.  
24. Is currently receiving propanol or has received propranolol withi n 2 weeks prior to 
randomization.  
25. Has been treated with agents that could affect the analgesic response (such as central alpha agents adrenergic [clonidine and tizanidine] ) 
within 2 weeks before randomization or 
expects to use such agents during the treatment period.  
26. Has tested positive for drugs of abuse (including medical marijuana) on the urine drug 
screen  at randomization (Visit 2) . Subjects who test positive at Screening and can produce 
a prescription for the medication from their physician may be con sidered for study 
enrollment at the discretion of the investigator.  
27. Has clinically significant abnormalities indicated from the medical history, physical exam, and laboratory findings at Screening that in the investigator’s opinion contraindicates study participation.  
28. Is HIV positive.  
29. Has p reviously participated in another clinical study of AXS -07 or received any 
investigational drug or device or investigational therapy within 30 days before Screening.  
30. Has significant difficulty swallowing tablets or is unable to tolerate oral medication.  
INVESTIGATIONAL PRODUCT  AXS -07 (20 mg meloxicam/10 mg rizatriptan)  tablet for oral administration.  
REFERENCE PRODUCT  Matching meloxicam, rizatriptan, and placebo tablet s for oral administration.  
TREATMENT REGIMENS  The study drug (AXS -07, meloxicam, rizatriptan, or placebo) is to be taken orally  with water  within 
30 minutes of onset of a migraine attack of moderate to severe pain intensity .  
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  Multi- center  
PLANNED STUDY SITES  Up to  100 study sites in North America  

Axsome Therapeutics , Inc. Confidential   
AXS -07-301 
Version Date : January 16, 2019 Page 10  STUDY AND 
TREATMENT DURATION  The duration of participation will be up to 12 weeks as follows:  
Screening Period: 14 days.  
Treatment  Period: up to 10 weeks.  
