Official title:  Antiplatelet Strategy for Peripheral Arterial Interventions for 
Revascularization of Lower Extremities   
 
 NCT number:  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Document date:  February 2 3, 2018, Version A1.5  
 
1 
ASPIRE	Trial	Protocol;	Version	A1.5:	2‐23‐18  
ASP iRE 
Antiplatelet Strategy for Peripheral Arterial Interventions for  
Revascularization of Lower Extremities  
Principal investigator : Subhash Banerjee, MD   
Primary institution:         University of Texas  Southwestern Medical  Center  
1801 Inwood Rd,  
Dallas, TX 75235  
 
Trial Monitoring: Preeti Kamath, MHA  
4500 S Lancaster Road 
151/3S 
Dallas, TX 75216  
Coordinating  
Investigators: Principal Investigator  
4500 S Lancaster Road 
111a  Dallas, TX 75216  
 
Trial Centers: See the trial Ma nual of Operations for a list 
of trial centers   
Date of Issue: Feb 23 2018  
Version A1.5  
Date(s) of Amendment(s): Version A.1: Jan 1, 2014  ; Version A1.2 Mar 30, 2016                                                 
                                                  Version A 1.3: Mar 13,2017 ;Version A 1.4: May 11 2017 
   
 
 
Do not copy or distribute without written permission.  
 
  
  
 
    This protocol contains confidential information for use by the Investigators and their designated  
representatives participating in  this clinical investigation. It should be held confidential and  
maintained in a secure location.  
 
THESE DOCUMENTS ARE THE PROPERTY OF THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS SOUTHWESTERN MEDICAL CENTER. AND SHALL  
NOT BE REPRODUCED, DISTRIBUTED, DISCLOSED OR USED FOR MANUFACTURE OR SALE OF APPARATUS WITHOUT THE  
EXPRESS WRITTEN CONSENT OF   THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS SOUTHWESTERN MEDICAL CENTER 
 
2 
ASPIRE	Trial	Protocol;	Version	A1.5:	2‐23‐18  
 
 
Investigator’s signature page 
 
ASP iRE 
Antiplatelet Strategy for Peripheral Arterial Interventions for  
Revascularization of Lower Extremities 
 
 
TRIALCENTER:         ______________________________________ 
    P r i n t  N a m e  o f  T r i a l  C e n t e r )  
 
I, the undersigned, have read and understand the protocol specified above and agree on its  
content. I agree to perform and c onduct the trial as described in the protocol and according to  
GCP and other applicable regulat ory requirements. In addition, when applicable, I agree to enlist  
sub-investigators who also agree  to perform and conduct the tri al as described in the protocol.  
 
  
___________________________ ____ ______________          _______ __ 
Principal Investigator  Print name:   Signature   Date  
 
3 
ASPIRE	Trial	Protocol;	Version	A1.5:	2‐23‐18  
 
Protocol Synopsis 
 
ASP iRE 
Antiplatelet Strategy for Peripheral Arterial Interventions for  
Revascularization of Lower Extremities 
 
  
PI Name: Subhash Banerjee, MD 
 
Phone number: 214-857-1608 
 Email: Subhash.banerjee@utsouthwestern.edu
  
 
TRIA L OBJECTIVE  
Primary Objective To evaluate whether clopidogrel 75 mg daily on a background of aspirin 81 mg/d for U.S. sites (75-100 mg/d for international s ites) for 
clinically indicated duration or an additional 12 months will l ead to 
an increased rate of
 primary patency, limb salvage, non-fatal 
myocardial infarction (MI),  ischemic stroke, and survival, in patients 
receiving endovascul ar treatment of  PAD at end of study treatment 
 
Control Arm  clopidogrel 75 mg daily on a background of aspirin 81 mg/d for U.S. 
sites (75-100 mg/d for internatio nal sites) for clinically indi cated 
duration with a minimum of 30 days. 
 
Test Arm  (as applicable)  clopidogrel 75 mg daily on a background of aspirin 81 mg/d for U.S. 
sites (75-100 mg/d for internatio nal sites)  for clinically indicated 
duration + 12 months 
 
Endovascular  
interventions  included  Iliac  
Femoropoliteal  
Below-the knee 
 
TRIAL DESIGN 
Trial Design Prospective, two-arm, multicenter randomized clinical trial. 
 
Planned Number  of 
Subjects 202 subjects will be e nrolled in each arm (total subjects = 404 ) 
Clinically i ndicated dual 
antiplatelet therapy 
(DAPT) duration Clinically indicated DAPT duration will be  based on the longest  pre-
discharge following an index per ipheral intervention procedure,  
DAPT duration. This will be determined based on: peripheral 
intervention device IFUs, preceding coronary intervention, acut e 
coronary syndrome or other guideline-based clinical or device 
 
4 
ASPIRE	Trial	Protocol;	Version	A1.5:	2‐23‐18  
specific DAPT durations.   
 
Planned Number  of Sites 
/ Countries  Approximately 18 investigatio nal centers in the U.S.. are  expected 
to participate.  
 
No center will be allowed to enr oll more than 40% of planned to tal 
enrollment.  
Primary  Endpoint  Primary Endpoint (subject-based):  
The first occurrence of index limb arterial occlusion, surgical  
intervention, endovascular inte rvention, amputation of the 
affected  limb (vessel occlusion or fai lure), MI, ischemic stroke 
or death at 12 months from index procedure or end of study 
treatment, whichever is longer 
 
Secondary  Endpoints Secondary Endpoints throu gh end of study treatment:  
 The first occurrence of any i ndividual component of the 
primary  endpoint  
 First occurrence of the following during follow-up: 
cardiovascular  death, or MI, or ischemic stroke, or any 
amputation above the ankle.  
 Severe bleeding defined accord ing to the Global Utilization 
of Streptokinase and Tissue pl asminogen activator for 
Occluded  coronary arteries (GUSTO) classification  
 
Tertiary Endpoints  Moderate bleeding defined accord ing to the Global Utilization o f 
Streptokinase and Tissue plas minogen activator for Occluded  
coronary arteries (GUSTO) classification 
 
Randomization • Patients scheduled for a plann ed discharge will be randomized 
on a 1: 1  basis using a computeri zed central randomization 
portal available  through RedCap ® to either of the following 
treatment groups:  
• ASA (81 mg U.S. sites; 75-100 mg international 
sites) + clopidogrel: for clinically indicated 
duration (control arm)  
• ASA (81 mg U.S. sites; 75-100 mg international 
sites) + Clopidogrel 75mg:  for clinically indicated 
duration +12m (treatment arm)  
Randomization will be performed at the within 2 weeks of an eligible  
procedure 
 
Follow-up  schedule All potential subjects will be e valuated for enrollment after t he index  
procedure pre-discharge or within  14 days of the procedure. Fol low-
up schedule will include patient vis its at 30 days and q6 months t ill 
the end of study treatment  The trial will be considered complete with 
regard to the primary endpoint  after all enrolled subjects have 
 
5 
ASPIRE	Trial	Protocol;	Version	A1.5:	2‐23‐18  
completed a 12-month or end o f study treatment follow-up  
evaluation, have died, have a documented premature 
discontinuation, or  whose follow-up window  has closed. Follow-
up window is +7 days for the 30-da y visit and +15 days for all other 
visits. 
 
Key Inclusion  Criteria  General:  
 Signed informed consent  
 At least 18 years old  
 Documented symptomatic ilia c, femoropopliteal (FP) or 
below-the knee  artery (BTK) atherosclerotic disease 
(Rutherford/Becker category 2, 3 or ≥4) 
 Undergone clinically indicated uncomplicated endovascular 
intervention to  one or more locations of the iliac, 
femoropopliteal below-the knee arteries  
 Estimated survival ≥1 year in the judgment of the primary 
operator  
 Pre-index procedure use of ASA, clopidogrel or both at any dose  
 
Angiographic:  
 De novo or restenotic lesions in the common and/or external 
iliac artery,  superficial femoral artery (SFA), popliteal artery, 
tibio-peroneal (TP) trunk,  anterior tibial (AT) artery, peroneal 
artery (PA) or posteri or tibial (PT) artery  (applies to all target 
lesions if multiple)  
 Subjects with multiple planned procedures can be enrolled after  the 
completion of  the last planned procedure.  
 
Key Exclusion  Criteria General:  
 Complicated qualifying procedur e (perforation, flow limiting 
dissection, distal  embolization requiring re-intervention, need 
for repeat endovascular, surgical  revascularization, amputation 
or blood transfusion prior to hospital discharge  following index 
procedure  
 Extended hospital stay >7 days following the index procedure  
 Allergy to aspirin or clopidogrel  
 Life expectancy less than 12 m onths due to other medical co-
morbid  condition(s) that could limit the subject’s ability to 
participate in the trial, limit  the subject’s compliance with the 
follow-up requirements, or impact the  scientific integrity of the 
trial 
 Known hypersensitivity or co ntraindication to contrast 
dye that, in the  opinion of the investigator, cannot be 
adequately pre-medicated.  
 Intolerance to antiplatelet, a nticoagulant, or thrombolytic 
medications  
 Platelet count <90,000 mm3 or >600,000 mm3 
 
6 
ASPIRE	Trial	Protocol;	Version	A1.5:	2‐23‐18  
 Serum creatinine >2.5 mg/dL  
 Dialysis-dependent end  stage renal disease  
 Pregnancy  
 Current participation in another drug or device trial that requ ires 
interruption of  dual-antiplatelet ther apy with aspirin or 
clopidogrel for  the duration of this study  
 Planned surgeries, en dovascular or other non-vascular or cardiac 
procedures  
 Warfarin or other chronic oral anticoagulant use  
 Contraindication(s) to the use of antithrombin o r antiplatelet 
agents (history of  intra-cerebral bleed, presence of intracerebral 
mass, recent or <6 weeks  gastrointestinal bleed, blood 
transfusion within the last 6 weeks, any trauma  requiring surgery 
or blood transfusion within the  last 4 weeks or any surgical  
procedure within the last 4 weeks.  
 
Angiographic:  
 Endovascular int ervention to iliac, FB or BTK 
artery bypass  graft  
 Persistent, intraluminal thrombus of the 
proposed target  lesion at the completion of 
the index procedure  
 Perforated vessel as evidenced by extravasation of contrast med ia 
 Vascular graft, aneurysm or postsurgical stenosis of the target  
vessel  
Multiple  Interventions  
During Index  Procedure  Multiple interventions during an index procedure will be allowe d as 
long as the procedure is deemed successful and uncomplicated by  the 
primary operator and no additional procedures are planned 
 
Statistical Methods 
Sample size  parameters  • The occurrence of the primary endpoint is expected 
to be  approximately 49% at 12 months in the 
control group17 
• A 30% relative risk reduction in the incidence of primary 
endpoint  would be clinically important  
• To detect a 30% relative reduction in the 1-year primary event rate
 from 49% to  34.0%17 with 80% power at the 
two-sided, .05  significance level, assuming a 12-month 
recruitment period and a 10% dropout rate at 1 year, a total 
of 404 (368+36) patients will be  randomized (202 in each 
group) and followed-up for endpoints for 12 months or until end of study treatment , whichever is longer 
 
 
Statistical analysis • Continuous variables will be summarized as mean±standard 
deviation  and compared using the t-test or the Wilcoxon rank-
sum test, as  appropriate  
• Discrete variables will be presented as frequencies and 
group  percentages and compared using the chi-square 
 
7 
ASPIRE	Trial	Protocol;	Version	A1.5:	2‐23‐18  
test 
• For all comparisons a two-sided probability of <0.05 will be 
considered  statistically significant  
• All analyses were performed using the SAS 9.1 or recent 
version (SAS  Institute Inc., Cary, North Carolina)  
• Primary endpoint will be assessed as per an intention-to treat 
principle  
• Subsequent analysis will also be performed based on as treated groups
 
• Pre-specified subgroup analyses will include:  
• Stent vs. non-stent groups  
• DES vs. BMS  
• Above and below-the knee treatment  
• Claudication vs. CLI groups  
 
 
     
 
    
                    
 
8 
ASPIRE	Trial	Protocol;	Version	A1.5:	2‐23‐18  
 
   
 
Table of Contents  
Investigator’s Signature Page ................................. ......................................... 2  
Protocol S ynopsis .............................................................................................. 3  
Table of Content .............................................. .................................................. 8  
Introduction and Rationa le .................................... ......................................... 10  
Clinical outcomes following lowe r extremity endovascular interv entions ... 10  
Antiplatelet agents following lo wer extremity endovascular inte rvention .... 10  
Trial objective ............................................... .................................................. 12  
Trial hypot hesis .............................................. ................................................. 12  
Trial e ndpoint s ............................................... ................................................. 12  
Trial Design ................................................................................................... 14  
Justification for the Trial Design ................................................................... 14  
Method of Assigning Subjects to Treatments ................................................ 15  
Trial Population (inclusi on/exclusion criteri a) ............... ................................ 15  
Withdrawal and Replacement of Subjects ..................................................... 17  
Trial Procedures .............................................. ................................................ 18  
Written Informed Consent ...................................... ...................................... 19  
Sample Size Estimate .......................................... ............................................ 19  
Control of Systema tic Error/Bias .............................. ..................................... 19  
Eligibility of Subjects, Exclusions, and Missing Data .................................. 20  
Analysis Sets ................................................. .................................................. 20  
Availability of aspiri n and clopi dogrel  ........................................................... 20  
Statistical Analysis .......................................................................................... 20  
Postprocedur e Endpoi nts ....................................... ......................................... 21  
Data Management ............................................... .......................................... 22  
 
9 
ASPIRE	Trial	Protocol;	Version	A1.5:	2‐23‐18  
Monitoring Procedures .................................................................................. 22  
Adverse Events ................................................ ............................................... 23  
Risk Benefit Analysis ......................................... ............................................ 25  
Ethical Considerations ........................................ ............................................ 27  
Appendices .................................................................................................... 30 
References…………………………………………………………………..31  
 
                   
 
                
 
10 
ASPIRE	Trial	Protocol;	Version	A1.5:	2‐23‐18  
 
   
1. Introduction 	and	Rationale 	
Peripheral arterial disease (PAD) is extremely prevalent worldw ide and affects over 206 
million  people.1 Over 36 million patients with PAD are estimated to be present i n the 
United States.  Percutaneous revascularization therapies have evolved dramatica lly, yet the 
long-term success of  these therapies remains modest and the morbidity and mortality 
associated with PAD remains  high, with up to 30% mortality risk at 5 years 2. Nearly, 3.2 
million endovascular procedures are  performed annually.3, 4 Though, this exceeds 
interventional procedure s performed for coronary  artery disease (CAD), the current PAD 
guidelines are silent regarding the need and optimal  duration of antiplatelet therapy (APT) 
for patients following an endovascular procedure for  claudication or critical limb ischemia 
(CLI). 5 The lack of data and clinical studies is by far the  greatest impediment to the 
formulation of such guideline recommendations critically needed  by providers and patients 
alike, especially given the current limited durability of lower extremity  endovascular 
procedures.6 
 
2. Clinical	outcomes 	following 	lower	extremity 	endovascular 	
interventions 	
Endovascular or surgical revascul arization procedures are perfo rmed on individuals with 
lifestyle-lim iting claudication or CLI.7 Percutaneous transluminal angioplasty (PTA) is a well- 
established endovascular techni que for revascularizing obstruct ed lower limb arteries. This 
technique is associated wit h good patency in iliac artery inter ventions; however with dismal 
patency rates for infra-inguina l interventions.8 Stents have im proved patency of lower 
extremity arterial interventions, mainly applied at the aortic bifurcation or in iliac segments.9 
Until recently stents in the femoropopliteal district were asso ciated with a higher risk of re-
occlusion because of the smalle r diameter of these vessels.6 However, the new generation of 
self-expanding nitinol stents or paclitaxel-coated balloons hav e yielded better re sults than those 
obtained with standard balloons a t the femoropopliteal level.10 Compared to surgical 
procedures, endovascular techni ques are less invasive and are a ssociated with lower morbidity 
and mortality and shorter recovery time.11 The main disadvantage of e ndovascular intervention 
is the low rates of long-term success, with relatively frequent  clinical deterioration and 
restenosis during follow-up. Thus, reintervention is often nece ssary in patients treated with 
endovascular intervention f or symptomatic with PAD.12 In addition to the type of intervention, 
early studies have demonstrate d the impact of clopidogrel disco ntinuation on acute thrombotic 
occlusion of the limb post- endovascular intervention.13 In addition clopidogrel use in patients 
with PAD has been associated with improved mortality and non-fatal myocardial infarction (MI) events.
14 
 
3. Antiplatelet	 agents	following 	lower	 extremity 	endovascular 	
intervention 	
It has been shown that dual antiplatelet therapy is a very impo rtant factor for short- and long-
term success in coronary interventions. Thus, based on the resu lts of randomized clinical trials, 
 
11 
ASPIRE	Trial	Protocol;	Version	A1.5:	2‐23‐18  
current guidelines recommend dual an tiplatelet th erapy consisti ng of clopidogrel and aspirin 
for 12 months after percutaneous  coronary intervention (PCI) fo r acute coronary syndromes 
and/or use of drug-eluting stents.15 
After peripheral artery interve ntions, there is  still some unce rtainty regarding the optimal peri-  
and post-interventional antiplate let treatment of clopidogrel a nd/or aspirin 
.6 The results of the Management of  peripheral arterial intervent ions with mono or dual 
antiplatelet therapy  (MIRROR) study showed that patients treated with clopidogrel+aspirin 
compared to aspirin alone had sig nificantly lower target lesion revascularization (TLR) rates at 
6 months.17 Nevertheless, the duration of dual antiplatelet therapy remain s unknown and not 
been addressed by well-powered ran domized clinical trials. The investigators of the MIRROR 
study therefore conducted an additi onal clinical follow-up of M IRROR patients at  12 months to 
evaluate the persistence or ex tinction of the clinical advantag e of dual antiplatelet therapy.18 At 
6 months, clopidogrel patients had significantly lower r ates of TLR compared to place bo 
patients [2 (5%) vs. 8 (20%),  p=0.04]. None of the TLR was due to thrombotic occlusion 
of previously recanalized arteries.  There were no significant d ifferences in the rate of 
binary restenosis at 6 months. After stopping  clopidogrel/placebo, the significant 
difference in TLR disappeared [9 (25%) clopidogrel vs. 12  (32.4%) placebo (p=0.35)]. 
Thus in contrast to the first report of a reduction in the TLR at 6  months in the MIRROR 
study, this advantage of dual an tiplatelet therapy does not per sist after  stopping 
clopidogrel. The investigators concluded that prolonged dual th erapy (>6 months)  should 
be considered in patients who are at high risk for restenosis.  
 
Peripheral catheter interventions  are performed under local anesthesia allowing early and full 
mobilization. However, as a resu lt of this intervention, athero sclerotic plaques are ruptured and 
platelets aggregate at the site of injury.19 Extensive vessel wall damage coupled with low shear 
stress and poor infra popliteal outflow are mostly responsible f or the occurrence of 
reocclusion.20 
Additionally, in the initial phase  after catheter intervention,  a hypercoagulable state prevails, as 
parameters of activated coagula tion, including thrombin-antithr ombin complexes (TAT), D- 
Dimer and Fibrinopeptide A (Fa) become elevated in the plasma.21 This activated coagulation 
system produces conditions favorable for early thrombotic occlu sion, where ‘early’ is usually 
defined as a period covering the f irst four weeks after the intervention. Subsequently, intimal 
hyperplasia may follow which is re sponsible for intermediate an d late-term restenosis and 
reocclusion. Intimal hyperplasia  occurs as a result of denudati on (tearing off of the inner lining)   
of the endothelium caused by manip ulation of the vessel wall wi th the catheter. Reported rates 
of arterial reocclus ion or symptomatic restenosis following fem oropopliteal PTA are between 
five and twenty-five per cent fo r early events and about 40% on e year.6 The five year patency 
rate was reported to be 83% for iliac and 58% for femoropoplite al PTA, whilst patients with 
stenoses or occlusions of less than 3 cm had a favorable long-term patency rate of 74%.22 
Patients with CLI or those subjec ted to local thr ombolysis show  higher incidences of 
reocclusion.23 The implantation of drug-eluti ng or nitinol ste nts, or treatme nt by intravascular 
brachytherapy following PTA are cons idered as interventions wit h the capacity of reducing the 
occurrence of intimal hyperplasia , however may be associated wi th delayed endothelialization 
 
12 
ASPIRE	Trial	Protocol;	Version	A1.5:	2‐23‐18  
and increased risk of thrombosis. 
Drug interventions with antiplate let agents to prevent thrombos is and/or reocclusion of the  
treated  segments would make an important contribution to the sustained success of 
endovascular  treatment, along with its contribution towards reducing overall  mortality in 
patients with PAD.  Current peri-interventional treatment strategies mostly include aspirin 
intake before and after  PTA, initial administration of either unfractionated heparin (E llis 
1989) followed mostly by  antiplatelet drugs or anticoagulants on a long-term basis (Do 
1994; Hess 1985; Shammas 2003b;  Watson 2000). However, these practices have never 
been tested in the setting of an adequately  powered randomize controlled trial.  
The Swedish trial on aspirin (50 mg daily) use after PTA was a negative study, whereas the 
study by Heiss et al showed greate r patency and a dose effect f avoring a higher dose of aspirin 
(100- 300 mg daily).24 At time points three and 12 months there  were 798 and 575 patients 
included with OR 1.38 (95% CI 0.85 to 2.23) and 0.98 (95% CI 0. 64 to 1.48), respectively, for 
primary occlusion. In fact, one cli nical trial called CAMPER (C lopidogrel and Aspirin in the 
Management of Peripheral Endovasc ular Revascularization) (CAMPE R) was started in the 
USA evaluating clopidogrel combi ned with ASA versus ASA after f emoropopliteal 
angioplasty. Unfortunately, t his study had to be stopped due to  insufficient randomization 
numbers after one year. 
 
4. Trial	Objectives 	
To evaluate whether clopidogrel 75 mg QD on a background of ASA  81 mg/d for U.S. sites 
(75-100 mg/d for international sites)  for clinically indicated duration with a minimum of 
30 days or an additional 12 months will lead to an increased ra te of primary patency, limb 
salvage, freedom form  ischemic stroke and survival, in patients receiving endovascular 
treatment of PAD. 
 
5. Trial	hypothesis 	
We hypothesize that DAPT with ASA  and clopidogrel administered for an additional 12 
months after a clinically indi cated duration following iliac, F P or BTK endovascular 
intervention will improve primary patency, limb salvage, freedo m form ischemic stroke and 
survival, in patients with symptomatic PAD. 
 
6. Trial	endpoints 	
Clinical endpoints will be anal yzed in all subjects who are enr olled, regardless of whether the 
trial treatment administered suc cessfully completed for the des ired duration. A subject will be 
considered enrolled in the trial w hen he/she is randomized to one of the treatment arms of the 
study. All endpoints are subject-ba sed unless otherwise specifi ed. 
 
The primary endpoint is  subject- based of the longer of a 12-mo nth or end of study treatment 
endpoint of the first oc currence of index limb arterial occlusi on, surgical intervention, 
 
13 
ASPIRE	Trial	Protocol;	Version	A1.5:	2‐23‐18  
endovascular intervention, amput ation of the affected limb (primary patency and limb salvage), 
MI, ischemic stroke or death (survival) 
The secondary endpoints are s ubject-based  on the longer of a 1 2-month  or end of study 
treatment endpoints that include : (a) the first occurrence of a ny individual component of the 
primary endpoint, (b) the first oc currence of the following dur ing follow-up: cardiovascular 
death, or MI, or ischemic stroke , or any amputation above the ankle and (c) severe bleeding 
defined according to the Global Utilization of Streptokinase an d Tissue plasminogen activator 
for Occluded coronary arterie s (GUSTO) classification 
The tertiary endpoint is base d on the longer of a12-month  or e nd of study treatment moderate 
bleeding according to th e GUSTO classification 
 
Clinically indicated DAPT duration will be based on the longest  pre-discharge following 
index peripheral intervention procedure DAPT duration. This wil l be determined based 
on: peripheral intervention device IFUs, preceding coronary int ervention, acute coronary 
syndrome or other guideline-based clinical or device specific D APT duration.    
Study treatment will be discontinued at the first occurrence of  a primary endpoint as 
defined in the table below. Patie nts, however, can resume takin g aspirin, Clopidogrel, 
or both based on their provi der’s clinical decision.  
 
Primary endpoint definition(s)  Secondary/Tertiary  endpoint  definition(s)  
Occlusion of the target limb documented by 
any imaging  procedure performed clinically  
 Any surgical or endovascular revascularization procedure
 on the index 
limb  
 Amputation above the ankle of the index limb
 Death from any cause 
 
Ischemic stroke: An epi sode of neurological 
dysfunction  caused by focal cerebral, spinal, 
or retinal infarction  confirmed by a 
neurologist 
 
MI: Detection of a ri se in cardiac troponin 
(cTn) with at  least one value 3x above the 
99th percentile upper reference  limit (URL) 
and with at least 1 of the following:  
 Symptoms of ischemia  
 New or presumed new significant (≥1 mm) ST-
 segment–T wave (ST–T) 
changes or new left  bundle branch 
block (LBBB)  As described in section 6, except for:  
GUSTO bleeding criteria:  
1. Severe or Life-threatening: Intracerebral hemorrhage resulting in substantial hemodynamic compromise requiring treatment
 
2. Moderate: Requiring blood transfusion 
but not resulting in  hemodynamic 
compromise 
3. Mild: Bleeding that does not meet above 
criteria  
 
14 
ASPIRE	Trial	Protocol;	Version	A1.5:	2‐23‐18  
 Development of pathological Q 
waves in the ECG  
 
 
 
7. Trial	design	
This is a prospective, multi-center, two-arm randomized clinica l trial to evaluate whether 
clopidogrel 75 mg QD on a background of ASA 81 mg for U.S. sites (75-100 mg/d for 
international sites)  for clinically indicated duration with a minimum of 30 days or an 
additional 12 months will lead to an increased rate of primary patency, limb salvage and 
survival, in patients receiving endovascular treatment of PAD. 
Up to 404 subjects at approximately 18 centers in the United St ates are planned. Assuming 
10% attrition at 12 months, enrollment of a minimum of 404 woul d yield at least   368 
evaluable subjects for the longer of a12-month or end of study treatment endpoint. No center will be allowed to enroll more than 40% of the subjects. 
 A schematic of the trial design is provided in Figure 1.  
 
Figure 1: Trial design 
 
 
 
Patients following Iliac, FP, BTK 
Endovascular intervention 
      
 
 
    
8. Justification 	of	trial	design	
A multitude of clinical studies a nd analyses have attempted to address the question of 
optimal DAPT duration  following endovascular peripheral arterial intervention for 
symptomatic PAD and have either not been  adequately powered or have been 
abandoned. This study needs to be undertaken as a randomized co ntrolled trial  to try 
and conclusively answer the question in an unbiased fashion. Th is modification will 
facilitate recruitment and make  the study consistent with curre nt clinical practice. The 
relevance of the study results w ill is significantly elevated.  
ASA + Clopidogrel For clinically indicated duration (at 
least 30 days) 
12-month f/u 
or end of study treatment, whichever is longer (q6m 
f/u Randomized 1: 1 
ASA + Clopidogrel 
For clinically indicated duration + 
12m  
 
15 
ASPIRE	Trial	Protocol;	Version	A1.5:	2‐23‐18  
 
 
  
9. Method	of	assigning 	subjects 	to	treatment 	
Patients scheduled for a planned discharge will be randomized on a 1: 1 basis using a central 
computerized randomization porta l available through RedCap® to either of the following 
treatment groups: 
ASA ( 81 mg/d for U.S. sites; 75-100 mg for internati onal sites) + clopido grel:for clinically  
indicated duration with a minimum of 30 days (control arm) ASA (
81 mg/d for U.S. sites; 75-100 mg for international site s) + clopidogrel 75 mg: for  
clinically indicated dura tion + 12m (treatment arm) 
An inclusion and exclusion checklist needs to be completed via computerized 
randomization portal available  through RedCap® prior to randomization of the subject.  
 
10. Trial	population 	
Table 1 on the following pages out lines the specific inclusion and exclusion criteria for the 
trial, according to general and a ngiographic categ ories. Before  enrollment in the trial, a subject 
must meet all of the inclusion a nd none of the exclusion criter ia. 
 
Key Inclusion Criteria General:  
 Signed informed consent  
 At least 18 years old  
 Documented symptomatic iliac, 
femoropopliteal (FP) or below-the knee
 artery (BTK) atherosclerotic 
disease (Rutherford/Becker category 2, 3 or ≥4)
 
 Undergone clinically indicated 
uncomplicated endovascular intervention to
 one or more 
locations of the iliac, femoropopliteal below-the knee arteries
 
 Estimated survival ≥1 year in the 
judgment of the primary operator  
 Pre-index procedure use of ASA, clopidogrel or both at any dose
 
 
Angiographic: 
 De novo or restenotic lesions in the 
 
16 
ASPIRE	Trial	Protocol;	Version	A1.5:	2‐23‐18  
common and/or external iliac artery, 
superficial femoral artery (SFA), popliteal artery, tibio-peroneal (TP) trunk, anterior tibial (AT) artery, per oneal artery (PA) or 
posterior tibial
 (PT) artery (applies to all 
target lesions if multiple) 
 Subjects with multiple planned procedures can be enrolled after t he completion of the 
last planned procedure. 
 
Key Exclusion Criteria General: 
 Complicated qualifying procedure (perforation, flow limiting dissection, 
distal embolization requiring re-intervention, need for repeat endovascular, surgical revascularization, amputation or blood transfusion prior to hospital discharge following an index procedure 
 Extended hospital sta y >7 days following 
the index procedure 
 Allergy to aspirin or clopidogrel 
 Life expectancy less than 12 months due to other medical co-morbid condition(s) that could limit the subject’s ability to participate in the trial, limit the subject’s compliance with the follow-up requirements, or impact the scientific integrity of the trial 
 
Known hypersensitivity or contraindication to contrast dye that, in the
 opinion of the investigator, cannot 
be adequately pre-medicated.  
 Intolerance to antiplatelet, anticoagulant, or thrombolytic medications
 
 Platelet count <90,000 mm3 or 
>600,000 mm3 
 Serum creatinine >2.5 mg/dL  
 Dialysis-dependent end stage renal disease
 
 
17 
ASPIRE	Trial	Protocol;	Version	A1.5:	2‐23‐18  
 Pregnancy  
 Current participation in another drug or 
device trial that requires interruption of  
dual-antiplatelet therapy with aspirin or clopidogrel for the duration of the study
 
 Planned surgeries, endovascular or other non-vascular or cardiac procedures
 
 Concurrent warfarin or other chronic oral anticoagulant therapy
 
 Contraindication(s) to the use of AT (history of intra-cerebral bleed, presence of
 intracerebral mass, recent 
or <6 weeks gastrointestinal bleed, blood transfusion
 within the last 6 
weeks, any trauma requiring surgery or blood transfusion
 within the last 4 
weeks or any surgical procedure within the last 4 weeks.
 
 
Angiographic: 
 Endovascular intervention to iliac, FB or BTK artery bypass graft 
 Persistent, intraluminal thrombus of the proposed target lesion a t the completion of 
the index procedure 
 Perforated vessel as evidenced by extravasation of contrast media 
 Vascular graft, aneurysm or postsurgical stenosis of the target vessel 
 
 
11. Withdrawal 	and	replacement	 of	subjects 	
 
While trial withdrawal is discour aged, subjects may withdraw from the trial at any 
time, with or without reason  and without prejudice to fur ther treatment. Withdrawn 
subjects will not undergo a ny additional follow-up, nor  will they be replaced (the 
justified sample size considers an estimated allowance for attr ition).  
Potential reasons for subject d iscontinuation are as follows:  
 
18 
ASPIRE	Trial	Protocol;	Version	A1.5:	2‐23‐18  
I. Withdrawal of consent  
II. Secondary to an Adverse Event  
III. A Principal Investigator, IRB or a regulatory body deemed safet y concern  
IV. Lost to follow-up  
 
12.	Trial	procedures 	
The schedule of observations and  assessments to take place duri ng the trial are listed in Table  
2. 
Table 2: Trial Event Schedule 
 
 enrollment 30day (±7days) 6m4,5 (± 15 days) 12m and q6m till 
end of study 
treatment 3, 4,5 (±15 
days) 
Informed consent +    
Inclusion/Exclusion +    
Physical Examination 1 +  +  +  +  
Rutherford Classification + + + + 
ABI + + + + 
TASC classification +    
Serum creatinine + + + + 
Hemoglobin + + + + 
Platelet count + + + + 
Recommended Anti-Coagulant Therapy Assessment + + + + 
WIQ (section 1) + + + + 
AE assessment 2  + + + 
Concomitant medications + + + + 
1. Physical examination includes gross assessment of standard organ systems (e.g., cardiac, 
pulmonary, etc).  
2. AE assessments and reporting include AE, SAE and MAE. 
3. End of study treatment visit w ill be performed when patient com pletes duration of assigned 
study treatment. This visit may fall between q6m visit schedule  for some patients . 
4. Phone visits can be done if patient s refuse in-clinic visit dur ing the follow up period, or 
who are do not show up to their fol low up visits. Labs and ABIs  will be collected and 
 
19 
ASPIRE	Trial	Protocol;	Version	A1.5:	2‐23‐18  
documented, if available in their  medical records during the fo llow up period. Study 
team should document 2 attempts to s chedule in-clnic visits bef ore phone visits are 
completed during follow-up  
5. Patients who do not complete thei r follow up visits in -clinic will not be provided a refill 
of aspirin and Plavix (if ra ndomized to the long arm) They will  remain on the study as 
ITT and phone follow-up may be compl eted to collect data. Presc riptions may be 
renewed when patients compl ete an in-clinic visit.  
 
13. Informed 	consent	
All subjects who are potential trial candidates must provide wr itten informed consent before  
enrollment.  
Subjects must sign the trial-specific, most recent version of the Institutional Review Board  
(IRB) approved Informed Consent form before any trial-specific interventions. Trial  
personnel should explain to the s ubject that even if a he or she agrees to participate in the  
trial and signs an Informed Consent form, careful assessment of  inclusion/exclusion criteria  
may demonstrate that the subject is not a suitable candidate fo r the trial, and, therefore, the  
subject will not be allowed to participate.  
Trial Center personnel will maintain a Screening/Enrollment Log  to document enrolled  
subjects and select information about candidates who fail to me et the general or angiographic  
entry criteria.  
 
14. Sample	size	estimate 	
The occurrence of the primary endpoint is expected to be approximately 49% in  the control 
group, derived on the basis of current literature review and pr eliminary data form  XLPAD 
registry.18 
A 30% relative risk reduction i n the incidence of primary endpo int would be clinically  
important. To detect a 30% relative reduction in the primary ev ent rate from 49% to34% 17 
with 80% power at the two-sided, 0.05 significance level, assuming a 12-month  recruitment 
period and a 10% dropout rate at 1 year, a total of 404 patients will be randomized  (202in 
each group) and followed-up for endpoints for longer of a 12-mo nth or end of study 
treatment period.  
 
15. Control	of	systematic 	bias/errors	
In determining subject eligibil ity for the trial, the Investiga tor or his/her designee’s  
assessment of inclusion/exclusion parameters will be used.  
An independent Clinical Events Committee (CEC) will review clin ical events that occur  
during the trial. The CEC will be blinded to the trial center a nd subject identification to the  
extent possible. An independent Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) will review adverse  
events that occur during the trial. 
 
 
20 
ASPIRE	Trial	Protocol;	Version	A1.5:	2‐23‐18  
16. Eligibility 	of	subjects,	 exclusions 	and	missing	data	
 
All subjects who are enrolled will be eligible for evaluation, regardless if they receive the  
control or active arm drug trea tments for the assigned duration s or not. Sensitivity analyses  
to account for missing data will be performed and may include i mputation of missing data  if 
deemed appropriate. The distribution of prognostic factors betw een subjects with and  
without data will be examined. Statistical models that account for censored data will be  
employed in appropriate circumstan ces, e.g., for time-to-event outcomes. Outlier values will  
be evaluated for their validity. All data will be included unle ss judged to be invalid. The  
robustness of the primary endpoint  conclusion will be assessed based on these analyses. 
 
17. Analysis 	set	
The primary endpoint will be analyzed on an intent-to-treat bas is and on a per-protocol basis 
analysis will also be performed. F or intent-to-treat analysis, all subjects who sign the IRB/EC- 
approved written Informed Consen t form and are enrolled into th e trial will be included in the 
analysis, regardless of whether they receive the control or act ive arm drug treatments for the 
assigned durations or not. For per-protocol analysis, only subj ects who receive the control or 
active arm drug treatments for the assigned durations will be i ncluded in the analysis. 
The primary analysis set for te sting of the primary endpoint is  the intent-to-treat  analysis set. No 
formal interim analyses are pl anned for the purpose of stopping  this trial early for efficacy. 
 
18. Availability 	of	aspirin	 and	clopidogrel 	
As both these drugs are approved wo rldwide and used routinely i n post endovascular 
interventions, they would be  used on the basis of use as per routine clinical practice and a s 
per local/regional drug procurement and dispensing  practices.  
 
19. Statistical	 analysis	
Continuous variables will be summarized as mean±standard deviat ion and compared 
using the t-test or the  Wilcoxon rank-sum test, as appropriate. Discrete variables will  be 
presented as frequencies and group  percentages and compared using the chi-square test. 
For all comparisons a two-sided probability of <0.05 will be  considered statistically 
significant. All analyses were pe rformed using the SAS 9.4 or r ecent version (SAS  
Institute Inc., Cary, North Carolina). Primary endpoint will be  assessed as per an intention-
to treat principle.  
Subsequent analysis will also be performed based on per-protoco l basis.  Pre-specified 
subgroup analyses will include:  
1. Stent vs. non-stent groups  
2. DES vs. BMS  
3. Above and below-the knee intervention  
 
21 
ASPIRE	Trial	Protocol;	Version	A1.5:	2‐23‐18  
4. Claudication vs. CLI groups  
 
20. 	Post‐procedure 	endpoints 	
Post-procedure information will be  collected at regularly scheduled follow-up examinations, as 
detailed in the clinical trial schedule, and will be summarized  using the descrip tive statistics 
described above. 
 
Primary 	Endpoint 	
 
For the primary endpoint of 12-month composite of primary paten cy, limb salvage, MI, 
ischemic stroke and  survival, with 95% confidence bound s will be calculated in the 
active arm and compared to control treatment  duration. If this bound is less than that of 
control, then the primary endpoint will be considered met. All enrolled  subjects are to be 
assessed for adverse events at follow-up visits. Assuming a max imum of 10% attrition 
due to  non-compliance, loss to follow-up or death or non-compliance wi th follow-up, a  
minimum of 184 subjects in each arm are expected to be evaluabl e for the primary 
endpoint.  
Secondary 	Endpoints 	
Secondary endpoints will be summa rized at the specified time po ints using the descriptive  
statistics described above, individually or in comparison between the treatment groups.  
Statistical analyses of the following secondary endpoints will be summarized for descriptive  
purposes and without adjustments for multiplicity:  
 Changes in ABI from baseline to hospital discharge, 30 days, 6 months and 12  
months post-procedure will be analyzed using paired two-sided S tudent t-tests.  
 Changes in Walking Impairment Questionnaire scores from baselin e to 30 days,  
6 month, and 12 months post-proc edure will be analyzed using pa ired two-sided  
Student t-tests.  
 Freedom from Target Lesion Revascularization Kaplan-Meier estim ates and plots  
will be presented to 12 months post-procedure  
Pooling	Across	 Institutions 	
Analyses will be performed using d ata pooled across institution s. Analyses to justify pooling 
will include the following: 
 The primary endpoint presented by institution. 
 An assessment of the ‘poolability ’ of the institutions using a 2-by-(number of 
institutions) contingency table of outcome versus institution. Fisher’s Exact Test will be 
used to assess homogeneity. Inst itutions with fewer than five s ubjects will be combined 
based on geographic region if possible. 
 If the institutions are found to be significantly heterogeneous  with respect to the 
 
22 
ASPIRE	Trial	Protocol;	Version	A1.5:	2‐23‐18  
primary endpoint, additional analyses will be conducted to asse ss differences  between 
institutions in baseline and procedural variables that might ex plain  differences in 
primary outcome.  
 
Other	 Analysis 	Methods 	
Kaplan-Meier plots of time-to-e vent variables will be construct ed for clinical outcomes.  
 
 
21. Data	 management 	
 
Data	collection 	and	processing 	
 
Subject data will be collected in a secure electronic data capt ure (EDC) system via the  
Internet.  The Principal Investig ator or Sub-investigator must ensure the accuracy and  
completeness of the recorded data entered into the EDC and also  by providing his/her  
electronic signature on the a ppropriate paper Case Report Forms (CRF). The 
Investigator’s  signature for specific CRF will be documented in compliance wit h local 
regulations.  
Changes to data previously submitted to the sponsor will requir e a new signature by the  
Investigator to acknowledge and approve the changes. The coordi nating or primary 
study site  team will compare the data entered into EDC and paper CRF for d iscrepancy 
and require a  response from the site PI/Sub-I.  
Audits may be performed for quality assurance of data handling against source 
documents  
Visual and/or computer data review will be performed to identif y possible data 
discrepancies.  Manual and/or automatic queries will be created in the EDC syst em and 
will be issued to the  site for appropriate response. The trial center will be responsible 
for resolving all queries in the database in a timely  manner. 
 
22. Monitoring 	
Monitoring of trial centers will be made periodically during th e trial, as outlined in the 
trial monitoring plan, to ensure that all aspects of the current, app roved 
protocol/amendment(s)  are followed.  
Original source documents will be reviewed for verification of data in the electronic 
database.  The Investigator/institution guarantees direct access to origin al source 
documents, including  electronic medical records, if applicable, by monitoring 
personnel, their designees, and  appropriate regulatory authori ties. In the event that the 
original medical records cannot be  obtained for a subject that is seen by a non-trial 
physician at a non-trial institution,  photocopies of the original source documents must 
be made available for review. In the event  such records cannot be released, the study 
site will allow verification of the source data by  passive viewing of th e source electronic 
 
23 
ASPIRE	Trial	Protocol;	Version	A1.5:	2‐23‐18  
medical record screen handled exclusively by the site  coordinator/investigator(s).  
The trial also may be audited for quality assurance by monitors  or its designees, as well 
as inspected by appropriate regulatory authorities.  
It is important that the Investigator and relevant trial person nel are available during  
monitoring visits, audits and in spections, and that sufficient time is devoted to the 
process.  
Monitoring 	plan	
Designated monitor(s) funded a nd supported by the PI will under take site monitoring. 
Such monitoring visits will  be conducted for. sites o n a six monthly basis  
 
23. Adverse 	Events	
All Adverse Events (AE) and Seri ous Adverse Events (SAE) will b e reported through  
EDC and analyzed through study follow-up period. 
 
Term Definition 
Adverse Event (AE) Any untoward medical occurrence in a 
subject. This definition  does not imply 
that there is a relationship between the adverse
 event and the treatment under 
investigation.  
Note 1: In addition, the definition of AE 
applies to any event  with an onset post-
randomization procedure or to any  
underlying diseases, present at baseline, 
that exacerbate in  severity post-
randomization procedure. Therefore, any  
underlying disease that was present at the 
time of enrollment  is not to be reported as 
an AE, but any increase in the  severity in 
the underlying disease is to be reported as 
an AE.  This definition includes events 
occurring in the follow-up  period . 
Serious Adverse Event (SAE) 
 An adverse event that:  
• led to death;  
• led to a serious deterioration in the 
health of the subject  that: 
 resulted in a life-threatening illness 
or injury,  
 resulted in a permanent 
impairment of a body structure  or 
a body function,  
 
24 
ASPIRE	Trial	Protocol;	Version	A1.5:	2‐23‐18  
 required in-hospitalization or 
prolongation of existing  
hospitalization,  
 resulted in medical or surgical 
intervention to prevent  
permanent impairment to body structure or a body
 function  
 
 
Clinical events to be considered  and reported as expected SAE i nclude, but are not limited 
to: 
 MAE (see definitions)  
 Stent Thrombosis  
 Bleeding complication as per GUSTO definition  
 Vascular event requiring target limb surgical or 
endovascular intervention or  amputation  
 Any hospitalization  
Relationship  
The Investigator must assess the relationship of the adverse ev ent to the participation in the 
study  and use of antiplatelet drugs using the following criteria cate gories and definitions:  
 Unrelated: The adverse event is determined to be due to a concu rrent illness or 
effect of  another device/drug and is not r elated to the st udy related dru gs 
 Possible: The adverse event is determined to be potentially related to the study 
related  drugs, and an alternative etiology is equally or less likely co mpared to the 
potential  relationship to the study related drug  
 Probable: There is a strong relationship to study related drug or recurs on re-  
challenge, and another etiology is unlikely  
 Highly Probable: There is no other reasonable medical explanati on for the event  
The Investigator must assess th e relationship of the adverse event to the study related drug 
using  the following categories and definitions:  
 Unrelated – The adverse event is determined to be due to a concurrent illness or 
effect of  a device/drug and is not related to the study related drug use  
 Possible – The adverse event is determined to be potentially re lated to the index  
procedure, and an alternative etiology is equally or less likel y compared to the 
potential  relationship to study related drug use  
 Probably – There is a strong relationship to index procedure, o r recurs on re-
challenge,  and another etiology is unlikely  
 Highly Probable – There is no other reasonable medical explanat ion for the event  
 
25 
ASPIRE	Trial	Protocol;	Version	A1.5:	2‐23‐18  
 
Outcome  
The Investigator must document the outcome of the AE using the following categories:  
 Resolved without residual effects  
 Resolved with residual effects  
 Recovering/Resolving  
 Not Recovered/Not Resolved  
 Death  
 Unknown  
 
Reporting Requirements  
Trial personnel must report to the study PI’s office any SAE or MAE by fax within 24 
hours of  learning of the event. When faxi ng in notification of an event,  a fax confirmation 
report must be  retained at the site as adequate  documentation of timely event reporting. 
Source documentation  should record when the site became aware of the event. Trial 
personnel must forward follow-up  information and the completed adverse event CRF to 
the as the event continues and/or resolves.  
All adverse events will be recorded in the electronic database managed by the primary 
study  team at the primary institution and report them at each DSMB me eting. A 
description of the  event, including the start date , resolution date, action taken,  assessment, 
and outcome should be  provided, along with the Investigator’s assessment of the 
relationship between the AE and the  trial treatment. All adverse events also need to be 
reported to the local IRB within 24 hours of  knowledge of the study team.  
 
24. Risk-benefit analysis  
Based on review of the scientific literature, outcomes of desig n verification, the results of  
preclinical studies, and known adverse drug effects, the benefi t of treatment with the 
aspirin and  clopidogrel post-iliac, FP and BTK endovascular intervention ou tweighs the 
risks. However, the  effect of unknown factors accoun ting for unanticipated side eff ects 
cannot be completely  excluded, therefore observation and follow-up of subjects is 
required as outlined in the protocol.  
 
Risks associated with aspirin and clopidogrel drug therapy may include:  
a. Allergic reaction  
b. Amputation  
c. Aneurysm  
d. Angina/coronary ischemia 
e. Arrhythmia  
f. Arteriovenous fistula  
g. Death  
 
26 
ASPIRE	Trial	Protocol;	Version	A1.5:	2‐23‐18  
h. Drug-drug interactions 
i. GI bleeding  
j. Hemorrhage/hematoma  
k. Hypotension / Hypertension  
l. Myocardial infarction (MI)  
m. Need for urgent intervention or surgery  
n. Pseudoaneurysm  
o. Renal insufficiency or failure  
p. Restenosis of stented artery  
q. Rupture of the retroperitoneum or other organ  
r. Stroke  
s. Thrombosis / Thrombus  
t. Tissue ischemia/necrosis 
u. Vasospasm  
v. Vessel injury, examples include  perforation, dissection, intima l tear, rupture  
w. Vessel occlusion  
 
Risk	 minimization 	
The risks associated with the a spirin and clopidogrel use are r elatively well established, and 
the preceding risks represent the mo st up-to-date understanding of risks associated. The 
study team  will employ measures throughout the course of this investigation, to minimize 
these risks to  subjects choosing to participate. In general, efforts will be m ade to 
minimize these risks by:  
i. Selecting Investigators who are experienced and skilled clinici ans and 
expert in endovascular procedures  
ii. Clearly defining inclusion/exclus ion criteria to ensure only ap propriate 
subjects are  enrolled  
iii. Ensuring that the treatment and follow-up of the subjects are c onsistent 
with current  medical practices  
 
Specifically, every subject participating in this trial will undergo the following:  
a. Medical history, physical exami nation, and laboratory assessmen t prior to the 
procedure  to identify factors which may increase risk  
b. Required review of anti-coagulant and anti-platelet medication before and after  
enrolment into the trial  
 
27 
ASPIRE	Trial	Protocol;	Version	A1.5:	2‐23‐18  
Data	safety	 monitoring 	board	 (DSMB)	
A DSMB will meet every 6 months a s scheduled or sooner based on reported AE and 
review all adverse events at  these meetings and make recommendations to the study 
executive committee regarding the conduct and  continuation of the trial, with/without 
recommendations for the study team(s) and or the executive comm ittee/PI.  The 
DSMB will include 5 members with a chair and all decisions will be adopted by a 
clear majority and all  proceeding minutes recorded and stored with the primary study 
team/PI’s office. A minimum of 3 members will be  required to conduct the 
proceedings of the DSMB.  
 
Clinical	events	committee 	(CEC)	
A Clinical Events Committee with pertinent expertise that reviews and adjudicates 
important endpoints and relevant  adverse events reported by trial Investigators.  
Committee membership will include practitioners of peripheral e ndovascular 
procedures, as well as other experts  with the necessary therapeutic and subject matter 
expertise, to adjudicate the event categories outlined above. C EC responsibilities, 
qualifications, membership, a nd committee procedures are outlin ed in the CEC charter.  
The CEC will adjudicate the following events:  
 All Deaths  
 Myocardial infarction (MI) that occurs during index hospitaliza tion 
 Target lesion revascularizatio n (TLR), surgical or endovascular  
 Target vessel revascularizatio n (TVR), surgical or endovascular  
 Target limb/extremity revascularization (TER), surgical or endo vascular  
 Amputation of index limb or any amputation  
 Stent Thrombosis or target iliac, FP or BTK vessel occlusion  
 Any urgent limb/extremity revascularization surgical or endovas cular procedure  
 Bleeding events  
 Any stroke  
 
25. Ethical	considerations 	
 
Declaration 	of	Helsinki 	
The Investigator will ensure that this trial is conducted in fu ll conformity with the 
recognized version of the  Declaration of Helsinki per cou ntry regulation, and with the 
regulations and guidelines of the Food and Drug  Administration (FDA) and all 
country/state/local regulations; whichever affords the greater protection to the subject.  
 
 
 
28 
ASPIRE	Trial	Protocol;	Version	A1.5:	2‐23‐18  
Institutional 	Review	Board	
A copy of the protocol, proposed Informed Consent form, other w ritten subject information, 
and any proposed advertising material must be submitted to the IRB for written approval. 
A copy of  the written IRB approval of the protocol and Informed Consent f orm and a copy 
of the  Investigator Signature Page must be received by primary study s ite/team before 
recruitment of  subjects into the trial.  
The Investigator must submit and , where necessary, obtain appro val from the IRB for all  
subsequent protocol amendments and changes to the Informed Cons ent form. The 
Investigator  must notify the IRB of deviations from the protocol or MAE (i.e . death, MI, 
TLR, or amputation)  and stent thrombosis occurring at  their site, and other AE/SAE 
reports.  
The Investigator is responsible  for obtaining annual IRB approv al and renewal throughout 
the duration of the trial. Copies of the Investigator’s reports and  the IRB continuance of 
approval must  be sent to primary study coordinating site/team.  
 
Amending 	the	Protocol	 and/or	Informed 	Consent 	
This protocol is to be followed exactly, and can be altered onl y by written amendments.  
Administrative changes that do not affect the subject benefit/r isk ratio (e.g., editorial 
changes for  clarity) may be made without an y further approvals. Any change that would 
require alteration of  the Informed Consent form must r eceive approval from appropriat e 
coordinating site/PI’s office  personnel and from the IRB prior to implementation. 
Following approval, protocol  amendment(s) will be distributed to all protocol recipients 
with instructions to append them to  the protocol . 
 
Emergency	 Actions	
Study coordinating site/PI accepts the right of the Investigato r to deviate from the protocol 
in an  emergency when necessary to safe guard the life or physical well -being of a trial 
subject. The  Investigator must give notice of any emergency deviation, and j ustification for 
the deviation, to  the study coordinating site/PI and the IRB as quickly as possib le, no later 
than 24 hours  after the  emergency.  
 
Protocol	 Adherence 	
Prior to beginning the trial, the Investigator must sign the In vestigator Agreement and 
Signature  page documenting his/her agreem ent to conduct the trial in acco rdance with the 
protocol. An  Investigator must not make any changes or deviate from this pro tocol, except 
to protect the life  and physical well-being of a subject in an emergency. Each devi ation 
from the protocol must be  documented with the date and reason for the deviation and 
reported to the st udy coordinating  site/PI and to the IRB, per local guidelines and 
government regulations . 
 
 
29 
ASPIRE	Trial	Protocol;	Version	A1.5:	2‐23‐18  
Trial	Administration 	
Investigators are required to conduct the trial in accordance w ith Good Clinical Practice 
(GCP)  and other applicable regulatory requirements.  
 
Record	Retention 	
The Investigator/study coordinating site/PI’s office will maint ain all essential trial 
documents and  source documentation, in original format, that support the data  collected 
on the trial subjects in  compliance with the GCP guidelines. Documents must be retained 
for at least 2 years after  completion of the study, unless extended by the coordinating si te 
IRB.  
 
Criteria	 for	Terminating	 Trial	
Study coordinating site/PI reserve s the right to terminate the trial, but intends only to 
exercise  this right for valid scientific or administrative reasons and r easons related to the 
protection of  subjects. Investigators and asso ciated IRB will be notified in writing in the 
event of termination.  
 
Criteria	 for	Suspending/Terminating 	a	Trial	Center	
Study coordinating site/ PI reserves the right to stop the enrol lment of subjects at a trial 
center at  any time after the trial initiation visit if no subjects have b een enrolled or if the 
center has  systemic or major protocol non-c ompliance without justification  or fails to 
follow remedial  actions.  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
30 
ASPIRE	Trial	Protocol;	Version	A1.5:	2‐23‐18  
1. Appendix: 	
 
 
Walking	 impairment 	score	
Patients will be asked to complete a walking impairment questio nnaire (score range: 0 to 
14,080)  at baseline, and then every 6 months for 12 months or until the end of study 
treatment visit depending on the randomization arm. A patient with a total score of 0 on 
question 2  would not be able to walk indoors around his/her home without c laudication, 
while a maximum  score of 14,080 would be achieve d by a patient who can walk 5 b locks 
(1,500 feet) without  claudication. The questionnaire will exclude patients with bila teral 
superficial femoral artery  interventions, to minimize patie nt bias resulting from partial 
symptomatic improvements  following successful intervention of one extremity, later 
followed by treatment of the contra-  lateral superficial femoral artery.  
All , clinical adjudication and adverse events  monitoring will be performed by an 
independent data oversight a nd safety monitoring board.  
 
 
 
 
    
Reference: 	
1. Hirsch AT, Duval S. Lancet . 2013 Oct 19;382(9901):1312-4.  
2. Parikh SV, Saya S, Divanji P, Ba nerjee S, Selzer F, Abbott JD, Naidu SS, Wilensky  
RL, Faxon DP, Jacobs AK, Holper EM. Risk of death and myocardia l infarction in  
patients with peripheral arterial  disease undergoing percutaneo us coronary 
intervention  (from the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute Dynamic 
Registry). Am J Cardiol.  2011 Apr 1;107(7):959-64.  
3. Diehm C, Schuster A, Allenberg JR, et al. High prevalence of pe ripheral arterial  
disease and co-morbidit y in 6880 primary care patients: cross-s ectional study.  
Atherosclerosis.  2004;172:95–105. 
4. Hankey GJ, Norman PE, Eikelboom JW. Medical treatment of peripheral arterial  
disease. JAMA. 2006;295:547–53.  
5. ACC/AHA Guidelines for the Management of Peripheral Artery Dise ase. 
ACC/AHA  Task Force on Practice Guidelines. J Vasc Interv Radiol. 2006 
Sep;17(9):1383-97.  
6. Banerjee S, Das TS, Abu-Fadel MS, Dippel EJ, Shammas NW, Tran D L, Zankar A,  
Varghese C, Kelly KC, Weideman RA, Little BB, Reilly RF, Addo T , Brilakis ES.  
Pilot trial of cryoplasty or conve ntional balloon post-dilation  of nitinol stents for  
 
31 
ASPIRE	Trial	Protocol;	Version	A1.5:	2‐23‐18  
revascularization of peripheral arterial segments: the COBRA tr ial. J Am Coll 
Cardiol.  2012 Oct 9;60(15):1352-9.  
7. Hirsch AT, Haskal ZJ, Hertzer NR, et al. ACC/AHA 2005 Practice Guidelines for 
the management of patients with peripheral arterial disease (lower extremity, renal,  
mesenteric, and abdominal aortic): a collaborative report from the American  
Association for Vascular Surgery/ Society for Vascular Surgery,  Society for  
Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, Society for Vascu lar Medicine and  
Biology, Society of Interventional Radiology, and the ACC/AHA T ask Force on  
Practice Guidelines (Writing Committee to Develop Guidelines fo r the 
Management  of Patients With Peripheral Arterial Disease): endorsed by the 
American Association  of Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Rehabilitation; National 
Heart, Lung, and Blood  Institute; Society for Vascular Nursing; TransAtlantic 
Inter-Society Consensus; and  Vascular Disease Foundation. Circulation. 
2006;113:e463–654.  
8. Rocha-Singh KJ, Jaff MR, Crabtree TR, Bloch DA, Ansel G; VIVA P hysicians, 
Inc. Performance goals and endpoint assessments for clinical trials of 
femoropopliteal bare  nitinol stents in patients with symptomatic peripheral arterial  
disease. Catheter  Cardiovasc Interv. 2007 May 1;69(6):910-9.  
9. Goode SD, Cleveland TJ, Gaines PA; STAG trial collaborators. Ra ndomized 
clinical  trial of stents versus angioplast y for the treatment of iliac a rtery occlusions 
(STAG  trial). Br J Surg. 2013 Aug;100(9):1148-53.  
10. Schönefeld E, Torsello G, Osada N, Herten M, Bisdas T, Donas KP . Long-term  
outcome of femoropopliteal stenting. Results of a prospective s tudy. J Cardiovasc  
Surg (Torino). 2013 Oct;54(5):617-23  
11. Hunink MG, Wong JB, Donaldson MC , et al. Revascularization for 
femoropopliteal  disease. A decision and cost-effectiveness analysis. JAMA. 
1995;274:165–171.  
12. Norgren L, Hiatt WR, Dormandy JA, et al. Inter-Society Consensus for the  
Management of Peripheral Arteria l Disease (TASC II). J Vasc Sur g. 2007;45 Suppl 
S: S5–67.  
13. Bonvini R, Baumgartner I, Dai Do D, et al. Late acute thromboti c occlusion after  
endovascular brachytherapy and stenting of femoropopliteal arte ries. J Am Coll  
Cardiol.  2003;41:409–12. 
14. Bhatt DL, Fox KA, Hacke W, et al. Clopidogrel and aspirin versu s aspirin alone for  
the prevention of atherothrombotic events. N Engl J Med. 2006;3 54:1706–17.  
15. Steinhubl SR, Berger PB, Mann JT, et al. Early and sustained du al oral antiplatelet  
therapy following percutaneous coronary intervention: a randomi zed controlled 
trial.  JAMA.  2002;288:2411–2420. 
16. Norgren L, Hiatt WR, Dormandy JA, et al. Inter-Society Consensus for the  
Management of Peripheral Arteria l Disease (TASC II). J Vasc Sur g. 2007;45 Suppl 
S: S5–67.  
 
32 
ASPIRE	Trial	Protocol;	Version	A1.5:	2‐23‐18  
17. Tepe G, Bantleon R, Brechtel K, e t al. Management of peripheral arterial 
interventions  with mono or dual antiplatelet therapy-the MIRROR study: a 
randomised and double-  blinded clinical trial. Eur Radiol. 2012;22:1998–2006.  
18. Strobl FF, Brechtel K, Schmehl J,  Zeller T, Reiser MF, Claussen  CD, Tepe G.  
Twelve-month results of a random ized trial comparing mono with dual antiplatelet  
therapy in endovascularly treated patients with peripheral arte ry disease. J 
Endovasc  Ther. 2013 Oct;20(5):699-706  
19. Fuster V, Falk E, Fallon JT, Badimon L, Chesebro JH, Badimon JJ . The three  
processes leading to post PTCA restenosis: dependence on the lesion substrate.  
Thrombosis and Haemostasis 1995;74(1):552–9.  
20. Wentzel JJ, Gijsen FJ, Stergiopulos N, Serruys PW, Slager CJ, K rams R. Shear 
stress,  vascular remodeling and neoin timal formation. Journal of Biomec hanics 
2003;36(5):  681–8.  
21. Tschöpl M, Tsakiris DA, Marbet GA, Labs KH, Jaeger K. Role of h aemostatic risk  
factors for restenosis in peripheral arterial occlusive disease  after transluminal  
angioplasty. Arteriosclerosis, Thrombosis & Vascular Biology 19 97;117 
(11):3208–  14. 
22. Gallino A, Mahler F, Probst P, Nachbur B. Percutaneous translum inal angioplasty 
of the arteries of the lower limb s: a 5 year follow-up. Circulation 1984;70(4):619–
23. 
23. Parent FN 3rd, Bernhard VW, Pab st TS 3rd, McIntyre KE, Hunter G C, Malone JM.  
Fibrinolytic treatment of residua l thrombus after catheter embo lectomy for severe  
lower limb ischemia. Journal of Vascular Surgery 1989;9(1):153–60.  
24. Heiss HW, Just H, Middleton D, Deichsel G. Reocclusion prophyla xis with  
dipyridamole combined with acety lsalicylic acid following PTA. Angiology  
1990;41(4):263–9.  
 