 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Virtual  Reality  Exercise  in a 
Community  High  school  for 
Children With Disabilities  
2/13 /2024 
Design  
This feasibility study was a community -based participatory research design with two 
phases, namely, a development phase and an implementation phase. The development 
phase  included  a 4-month  preparation  phase,  where  study  staff  worked  with  a community 
engagement group to modify a working Virtual Reality (VR) randomized controlled trial 
home -based protocol to a local public high school setting. The 9 -month implementation 
phase  utilized  a “learn -as-you-go” approach  with  a single group pre - to post -trial design  to 
test the implementation of the developed VR HMD (Head Mount Display) school -based 
protocol. The study was implemented at a public high school within the United States, 
which had adapted education support for children with special needs. The study was 
approved by the University Institutional Review Board prior to enrolling participants.  
Participants  had to provide  informed  consent  and assent  documentation  prior  to joining 
the study. The principal of the high school approved and supported the study.  
Community  Engagement  Group  
The community engagement group included a case manager of the high school, a young 
adult with cerebral palsy (male; 19 years of age) with mild intellectual disability and 
mobility disability who was a student at the school, and his caregiver. The group was 
involved across the study, starting from the design in the development phase to the 
completion of the study in  the implementation phase. The group met weekly with the 
research staff during the development phase, then biweekly during the first half of the 
implementation phase, and monthly thereafter. The purpose of the community 
engagement  group  was to make  protocol  modifications to  intervention  and data  collection 
procedures of an existing clinical intervention that would best fit in real -world, daily 
operations at the school.  
Participants  
This feasibility  study  aimed to recruit  a convenient  sample of 12  participants, which  is a 
general recommendation for exploratory studies targeting implementation process 
metrics, as opposed to group -effect comparisons that would need larger samples.  
Eligibility  criteria  are listed  below.  Participants  were  recruited  through  word -of-mouth  and 
flyers by the community engagement group (case manager and young adult).  
 
Inclusion  criteria  for the study  included:  
1. Between  the ages  of 10-19 years  of age 
2. Enrolled  in school  special  education  or self-reported  disability  
3. Note from physician permitting participation in moderate -intensity exercise or 
cleared  for sports  participation  through  physical  examination  that  was on file by the 
school  
4. Ability  to communicate  in English  (or a caregiver)  
Exclusion  criteria  for the study  included:  
1. Complete  blindness  or deafness  
2. Condition  that  may  make  participation  unsafe  
Supplies  
Participants  used  a VR HMD  for exercise  (Quest  3, Meta,  USA),  which  came  with  two hand - 
held  controllers.  Active  video  games  were  purchased  through  the Meta  Oculus  digital  
cloud  server.  The games  were  purchased  for a standard  Meta  account  created  for the 
study.  Games  included  Beat  Saber,  Les Mills  Body  Combat,  Creed:  Rise  to Glory,  Smash 
Drums,  Power  Beats  VR, and Thrill  of the Fight.  
Intervention  Development  and Protocol  
During the development phase of the study, the community engagement group worked 
with the research team to modify a home -based VR HMD clinical trial protocol [20] to be 
more easily implemented in a high school setting. In summary, the original intervention 
prescription  included  150 minutes  of moderate -intensity  activity  per week  using  the Quest 
3 at home, for a total of 12 weeks. Home exercise was supported by theory -driven 
behavioral tele coaching calls. In that study, caregivers were the primary intervention  
agents  who  managed  their  child’s  exercise  schedules  and study  activities.  
 
Through the four -month development phase for the present study, meetings with the 
community  engagement  group  resulted  in the following  finalized  exercise  protocol  to test 
in high school:  
• Frequency:  three  times  per week  
• Intensity:  moderate  intensity  exercise  as indicated  by a rating  of perceived  exertion 
of 5 to 7 on the Borg 0 -10 scale  
• Time: as many minutes of exercise as possible that could be fit within students’ 
school schedules (e.g., either within their physical education period or a study hall 
or gap period)  
• Type:  VR exercise  at home  or in the school  setting,  at the choice  of the caregiver  and 
participant. At enrollment, caregivers were asked whether they preferred the child 
to perform the exercise at school or home with a borrowed headset. Home -based 
participants were not given more attention than those who exercised at school. For 
example, no behavioral coaching calls were given to home participants as is done in 
the protocol from which the present study was modified.  
Intervention  Procedures  
Participants  and their  caregivers  who  were  interested  in the program  were  referred  to study 
staff by the community engagement case manager. Participants were contacted by 
research staff and screened through phone calls. Eligible participants were directed to an 
online electronic data capture platform (REDCap) to provide informed consent and assent, 
participant demographics, and complete the physical activity survey. Next, they were 
scheduled for an onsite visit at the school to complete the physical fitness tests. Next, 
study staff scheduled the exercise sessions within a gap period or physical education  
period for participants who chose to exercise at school. Exercise sessions were performed  
at the school for six weeks, and all sessions were supervised by at least one research team 
member.  For participants  who  chose  to exercise  at home,  they  were  provided  with  a Quest 
3 with the preinstalled games in a convenient carrying case. They were provided with the 
same exercise prescription as those who chose to exercise in the school. Home -based 
participants were not provided with additional attention or behavioral coaching. Quest 3 
headsets were returned to  the school  once the home -based  participant  completed the six - 
week  program.  
Measures  
Participant  Characteristics  
Age, sex, height, weight, and ethnicity were descriptively reported for the enrolled 
participants.  The use of a mobility  device  and wheelchair  was recorded.  As a gauge  for how 
physically active participants were upon joining the study, physical activity level was 
measured using the NIH PROMIS Pediatric Physical Activity Short Form 8 -item survey. The 
survey results in a total T -score. T -scores range from 20 -80, with a mean of 50 ± 10. A 
higher T -score indicates high levels of participation in physical activity. Scores that were 
0.5-1 SD below the mean indicate “mild” difference or impairment; scores 1.0 -2.0 SD  
below  the mean,  “moderate”  impairment;  scores  ≥2.0  SD below  the mean,  “severe”  
impairment.  
Research  Question  1: Exercise  Output  
Exercise  volume  was measured  weekly  by two variables,  namely,  mean  “move” minutes  
and rating  of perceived  exertion.  Move  minutes  were  automatically  recorded  by the Quest  
3. The Quest 3 includes a built -in fitness tracker application, referred to as Meta Quest 
Move. The application tracks calories and move minutes, and these data were stored in 
cloud -based  Meta  servers  through  end-to-end encryption.  Meta  does not  provide  specifics 
on how these data are calculated, but the calculations are reported by Meta to be 
estimated through  an algorithm  that  includes basal  metabolic rate along  with the headset, 
controller, and hand movements. At school, the maximum possible number of active 
minutes that a participant could exercise each week was 75 minutes because of  
designated three -hour class periods. Home -based exercise participants were asked to 
match the school prescription (three sessions per week for a total of 75 minutes). Mean 
move minutes were averaged each week across the six -week program. To provide a 
measure of the intensity of the exercise, participants were asked immediately after 
exercise to provide a single rating of perceived exertion score that summarized each 
session, using the Borg 0 -10 scale. In summary, a score of 0 represents “nothing at all,” a 
score of 3 is indicative of moderate intensity, a score of 5 indicates “strong” exercise, a 
score of 7 indicates “very strong,” and 10 indicates “extremely strong.” The mean calories 
were also used as an indicator of exercise output. Adverse events or problems were 
reported and documented in accordance with the policies established by the university.  
Research  Question  2: Student  Attendance  
Student attendance was expressed as a percentage value, measured by the number of 
exercise sessions attended, divided by the total sessions prescribed. The exercise 
prescription was a total of 18 sessions, broken up into three sessions per week for six 
weeks.  
Research  Question  3 and 4: Student  Enrollment and  Payment  Incentives  
Student enrollment was measured by the number of students enrolled per school 
semester. The  program lasted  a total  of two  school  semesters and  was completed  prior  to 
summer  break. Payment  incentives were  planned  to be increased  if the target sample  size 
of 12 was not met from the first school semester. Payment incentives started at $50 for 
each of the two data collection visits, for a total of $100. Because of inadequate 
enrollment in the first semester, the payment incentive for the second semester was 
increased to $100 per data collection visit, for a total of $200.  
Research Question 5: Potential Effect Estimates of the Program on Physical 
Fitness Tests  
Physical fitness was measured by walking endurance and hand -grip strength. Walking 
endurance  was measured  using  a six-minute  walk  test (6MWT). A  six-minute  push  test was 
planned to be used for students who used wheelchairs, but this was never utilized. The 
6MWT measures the distance walked within six minutes around a designated course. The 
course was a long unobstructed hallway that allowed the participant to freely walk for the 
duration  of the test.  When  participants  reached  the end of the hall they  were  instructed  to 
turn and continue down the hallway. The rationale for choosing this location was that the 
study staff found there was limited space to set up and conduct a larger circular track 
during school hours, particularly without interference from other students. The 6MWT is 
suggested  to be valid  and reliable  among  children  without  disabilities.  However,  the 6MWT 
has conflicting evidence regarding validity for various pediatric clinical groups. Hand -grip 
strength was measured by the mean value of three maximal grip trials on a hand -held 
dynamometer (Camry Digital Hand Dynamometer, Camry, USA), while the participant was 
in a seated position. Grip -strength has evidence to support its use among children with 
intellectual  disabilities.  
Research  Question  6: Ideal  Exercise  Environment  
To identify the ideal method for how schools can implement the exercise program for 
students in a future trial, outcomes were compared between exercise settings (home 
versus school). Compared outcomes included enrollment, exercise volume, attendance, 
and fitness tests.  
Research  Question  7: Qualitative  Evaluation  of Factors  for Future  Trials  
The qualitative  component  of this study  utilized  a mini -ethnographic  design,  whereby  the 
interventionists were immersed in the culture at school with participants. At post - 
intervention, the interventionists were interviewed (semi -structured) to gain insight into  
feasibility issues and possible programs that should be considered in a future trial. 
Specific questions were: 1) What were critical issues that impeded or facilitated the 
implementation  of the program  at school?  and 2) What  potential  health  or fitness -related 
benefits did participants experience throughout the program (particularly, benefits that 
were  not measured)?  When  considering  these  questions,  the interventionists  were  asked 
to recall and talk through their experience with each of the onsite exercise students.  
Interventionists  were  asked  to take  notes  throughout  the study.  Interviews  were  audio 
recorded and analyzed by the lead interventionist, a qualitative analyst (BL), who had 
conducted more than 400 interviews related to disability and health.  
Analyses  
Descriptive statistics, including means, standard deviations, and confidence intervals, 
were obtained for  all study  variables. Changes in  means were compared primarily  using 
descriptive comparisons with 95% confidence intervals, with t -tests as appropriate.  
Analyses were performed using IBM SPSS Statistics version 29. Qualitative data were 
analyzed using a thematic analysis approach.  