UPCC# 01615: Tissue Collection Study of Pembrolizumab in Advanced Melanoma  
 
Version Date: 06/18/201 8   1 
      CLINICAL RESEARCH PROTOCOL  
 
 
A Phase Ib Tissue Collection Study of Pembrolizumab (MK -3475 ) in Subjects with 
Resectable Advanced Melanoma  
Regulatory Sponsor  
Principal Investigator : Tara  Mitchel l, MD  
Abramson Cancer Center 
3400 Spruce Street  
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104  
 
Funding Sponsor:  
 
 
 Merck Sharp & Dohme Corp., a subsidiary of Merck & Co.  
One Merck Drive  
P.O. Box 100 
Whitehouse Station, NJ 08889 -0100  
 
Statistician:  Rosemarie Mick, MS  
 
Study Product:  Pembrolizumab (MK -3475)  
 
Protocol Number:  UPCC 01615  
 
Sub- Investigators :    Giorgos Karakousis, MD  
 Lynn M. Schuchter, MD  
 Ravi K. Amaravadi, MD  
 Naomi Haas, MD  
 Robert Vonderheid e, MD, DPhil  
 Gerald P. Linette, MD, PHD  
Basic Science Collaborators:  John Wherry, PhD 
 Erica Carpenter, PhD  
 Alexander Huang, MD  
 
Medical Monitor :    Arati Desai, MD 
Initial Version:  03/25/2014  
Amendment 1:  07/22/2015  
Amendment 2:  01/23/2017  
Amendment 3:  06/18/2018  

UPCC# 01615: Tissue Collection Study of Pembrolizumab in Advanced Melanoma  
 
Version Date: 06/18/201 8   2 
 1.0 TRIAL SUMMARY  
Abbreviated  Title  Phase Ib Tissue Collection Study of Pembrolizumab (MK-
3475)  in Subjects  with Resectable Advanced Melanoma  
Trial Phase  Ib 
Clinical Indication  Clinical stage III (nodal and/or intransit disease) or 
resectable stage IV melanoma (MEL), with or without  prior 
treatment  
Trial Type  Clinical study  
Type of control  None  
Route of administration  IV 
Trial Blinding  None  
Treatment Groups  1 
Number of trial subjects  30 evaluable subjects  
Estimated duration of 
trial 7 year s 
Duration of Participation  5 year s 
 
2.0 TRIAL DESIGN  
2.1 Trial Design  
Subjects will undergo a tumor tissue collection biopsy prior to treatment, followed by one 
dose of pembrolizumab  200 mg , then undergo a curative intent resection of all remaining 
disease 3 weeks  after the initial dose of pembrolizumab . Post -operatively, subjects will 
receive up to 1 year of  pembrolizumab  200 mg  every 3 weeks.  
 
 
UPCC# 01615: Tissue Collection Study of Pembrolizumab in Advanced Melanoma  
 
Version Date: 06/18/201 8   3 
 3.0 OBJECTIVE(S) & HYPOT HESIS(ES)  
3.1 Primary Objectives & Hypothesis  
1.  To collect tumor tissue pre - and post-  treatment with MK- 3475 for studies of mech anism 
of action of PD-1 blockade with pembrolizumab . 
Hypothesis: Collection of paired tumor tissue samples will be feasible. P embrolizumab will 
result in a measurable change in tumor immune biomarkers.  This is a hypothesis generating 
trial which will evaluate change in numerous tumor immune biomarkers.  
2.  To evaluate safety, tolerability and adverse experience profile of pembrolizumab  in the 
peri-operative setting.  
Hypothesis: Safety profile of pembrolizumab  administered in the peri - and post- operative 
setting is similar to the overall safety profile with an infrequent occurrence of grade 3/4 
adverse events related to the surgical procedure.  
3.2 Secondary Objectives  
1.  To define the effect of PD- 1 blockade with pembrolizumab  on other immune regula tory 
pathways, including T cell activation, in paired tumor tissue samples from subjects with 
melanoma before and after treatment with a single dose of pembrolizumab . 
2.  To define the effect of PD- 1 blockade with pembrolizumab  on immune biomarkers in 
PBMC  and serum from subjects before and at serial time points after treatment with a 
single dose of pembrolizumab . 
3.  To evaluate the disease -free-survival ( DFS) in subjects with high risk MEL receiving 
pembrolizumab  peri-operatively.  
4.  To evaluate overall survival ( OS) in subjects with high risk MEL receiving pembrolizumab  
peri-operatively.  
5.  To describe the rate of recurrence and time to disease recurrence for subjects on the 
study.  
4.0 BACKGROUND & RATIONA LE 
4.1 Background  
Advanced melanoma remains a very high risk malignancy with high mortality despite recent 
advances and new drug approvals. Even after curative intent surgery, up to 70% of patients 
with high risk stage III melanoma develop recurr ent metastatic disease and die.  
UPCC# 01615: Tissue Collection Study of Pembrolizumab in Advanced Melanoma  
 
Version Date: 06/18/201 8   4 
 Immune directed therapy has been e ffective in treating advanced unresectable melanoma 
with recent promising results with PD- 1 blocking agents, which may affect  an anti -tumor 
response by blocking the PD- 1 mediated negative regulation on T lymphocytes, which are 
prime mediators of tumor immu nosurveillance. Programmed Death -1 (PD -1) signaling 
involves binding to several discrete ligands, including PD -L1 and PD- L2. PD -L1 is often 
expressed within the tumor microenvironment including cancer cells and macrophages 
whereas PD -L2 is expressed primarily on professional antigen presenting cells. PD- 1 
negatively regulates the effector phase of the T cell response after ligation of PD- L1 to the 
receptor. Antibodies that block the PD- L1/PD -1 interaction prevent the down- regulation of 
the anti -tumor immune  response, hence releasing the cytotoxic func tion of tumor -specific T 
cells.  
Additional studies in human tumor tissue are needed to define the mechanism of action of 
PD-1 inhibition. Defining the mechanism is the first step in developing predictors of 
response to treatment with PD- 1 inhibition, which would allow for more strategic 
development of combination immune therapy strategies, ultimately with the goal of 
increasing objective response rates to immune therapy in melanoma and other tumor 
types. This  proposed study will generate mechanism of action data , as well as , neoadjuvant 
and adjuvant administration feasibility data.  
Currently , standard options for patients with resected high risk melanoma include close 
observation, high dose interferon, or clin ical trials, as high dose interferon has not 
demonstrated a definite overall survival benefit in this patient population. Effective 
therapies that reduce the risk of recurrence a nd improve survival are needed.  
4.1.1 Pharmaceutical and Therapeutic Background 
The importance of intact immune surveillance in controlling outgrowth of neoplastic 
transformation has been known for decades [1].  Accumulating evidence shows a 
correlation between tumor -infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) in cancer tissue and favorable 
prognosis  in various malignancies [2; 3; 4; 5; 6].  In particular, the presence of CD8+ T -cells 
and the ratio of CD8+ effector T -cells / FoxP3+ regulatory T -cells seems to correlate with 
improved prognosis and long -term survival in many solid tumors.  
The PD -1 recep tor-ligand interaction is a major pathway hijacked by tumors to suppress 
immune control.  The normal function of PD -1, expressed on the cell surface of activated T -
cells under healthy conditions, is to down- modulate unwanted or excessive immune 
responses, including autoimmune reactions.  PD -1 (encoded by the gene Pdcd1) is an Ig 
superfamily member related to CD28 and CTLA -4 which has been shown to negatively 
regulate antigen receptor signaling upon engagement of its ligands (PD- L1 and/or PD -L2) [7; 
8].  The  structure of murine PD- 1 has been resolved [9].  PD -1 and family members are type 
I transmembrane glycoproteins containing an Ig Variable -type (V -type) domain responsible 
for ligand binding and a cytoplasmic tail which is responsible for the binding of si gnaling 
molecules.  The cytoplasmic tail of PD -1 contains 2 tyrosine -based signaling motifs, an 
UPCC# 01615: Tissue Collection Study of Pembrolizumab in Advanced Melanoma  
 
Version Date: 06/18/201 8   5 
 immunoreceptor tyrosine -based inhibition motif (ITIM) and an immunoreceptor tyrosine -
based switch motif (ITS M). Following T -cell stimulation, PD -1 recruits the tyrosine 
phosphatases SHP -1 and SHP -2 to the ITSM motif within its cytoplasmic tail, leading to the 
dephosphorylation of effector molecules such as CD3ζ, PKCθ and ZAP70 which are involved 
in the CD3 T -cell signaling cascade [7; 10; 11; 12].  The mechanism by which PD- 1 down 
modulates T -cell responses is similar to, but distinct from that of CTLA -4 as both molecules 
regulate an overlapping set of signaling proteins [13; 14].  PD -1 was shown to be expressed 
on activated lymphocytes including peripheral CD4+ a nd CD8+ T -cells, B- cells, T regs and 
Natural Killer cells [15; 16].  Expression has also been shown during thymic development on 
CD4-CD8- (double negative) T -cells as well as subsets of macrophages and dendritic cells 
[17].  The ligands for PD -1 (PD -L1 and  PD-L2) are constitutively expressed or can be induced 
in a variety of cell types, including non- hematopoietic tissues , as well, as in various tumors 
[18; 19; 20; 13].  Both ligands are type I transmembrane receptors containing both IgV - and 
IgC-like domains in the extracellular region and contain short cytoplasmic regions with no 
known signaling motifs.  Binding of either PD- 1 ligand to PD -1 inhibits T -cell activation 
triggered through the T -cell receptor.  PD -L1 is expressed at low levels on various non -
hematopoietic tissues, most notably on vascular endothelium, whereas PD -L2 protein is 
only detectably expressed on antigen -presenting cells found in lymphoid tissue or chronic 
inflammatory environments.  PD -L2 is thought to control immune T -cell activation in 
lymphoid organs, whereas PD -L1 serves to dampen unwarranted T -cell function in 
peripheral tissues [13].  Although healthy organs express little (if any) PD -L1, a variety of 
cancers were demonstrated to express abundant levels of this T -cell inhibitor.  PD -1 has 
been suggested to regulate tumor -specific T -cell expansion in subjects with melanoma 
(MEL) [21].  This suggests that the PD- 1/PD -L1 pathway plays a critical role in tumor 
immune evasion and should be considered as an attractive target for therapeutic 
intervention.  
Pembrolizumab  (previously known as SCH 900475 and MK- 3475) is a potent and highly 
selective humanized monoclonal antibody (mAb) of the IgG4/kappa isotype designed to 
directly block the interaction between PD- 1 and  its ligands, PD -L1 and P D-L2. 
4.1.2 Preclinical and Clinical Trial Data  
Refer to the Investigator’s Brochure for Preclinical and Clinical data.  
4.2 Rationale  
Pembrolizumab  is a highly selective, humanized monoclonal antib ody (IgG4/kappa isotype) 
that di rectly blocks the interaction between PD- 1 and its ligands, PD- L1 and PD -L2, with 
safety and efficacy demonstrated in melanoma and other advanced solid tumors . 
Unfortunately, little is known about the mechanism of action of pembrolizumab  in tumor 
tissue and its interaction with other immune regulatory pathways.  
 
UPCC# 01615: Tissue Collection Study of Pembrolizumab in Advanced Melanoma  
 
Version Date: 06/18/201 8   6 
 Currently , standard options for patients with resected high risk melanoma include close 
observation, high dose interferon, or clinical trials, as high dose interferon has not 
demonstrated a definite overall survival benefit in this patient population. Effective 
therapies that reduce the risk of recurrence a nd improve survival are needed.  
Anti-cancer activities by anti-  PD-1mAb seen in MEL patients thus far provide a strong 
rationale for evaluation of pembrolizumab  in MEL patients with high risk resectable disease. 
Pembrolizumab  has been well tolerated with dose levels up to 200 mg  and has shown a 
promising response rate of 41% in patients with advanced melanoma, which is much higher 
than the 10 -15% response rate ob served in ipilimumab registration trials. The existing data 
from the ongoing pembrolizumab  study PN001 support the evaluation of the safety and 
efficacy of pembrolizumab  in patients with resectable high risk MEL, for whom additional 
treatment options are needed.  
Additional studies in human tumor tissue are needed to define the mechanism of action of 
PD-1 inhibition. Defining the mechanism is the first step in determining factors that predict 
response to treatment with PD- 1 inhibition, which would allow for more strategic 
development of combination immune therapy strategies, ultimately with the goal of 
increasing objective response rates to immune therapy in melanoma and other tumor 
types. We do not expect any increased toxicity with pembrolizumab  in the peri -operative 
period. This proposed study will generate mechanism of action data , as well as , neoadjuvant 
and adjuvant a dministration feasibility data.  
4.2.1 Rationale for the Trial and Selected Subject Population 
A total of 30 evaluable  subjects will be enrolled in this study. Patients with a diagnosis of 
clinical stage III or resectable stage IV melanoma may be considered for enrollment. This 
patient population is selected as their risk of r ecurrence is very high, but there are no 
effective systemic therapy options that prolong survival in this population. Subjects  will be 
recruited from the Clinical Practices of t he University of Pennsylvania.  We plan to consent 
sufficient subjects such that 30 evaluable subjects are enrolled . Subjects will be considered 
evaluable if they undergo both tumor tissue collection procedures and receive at least 1 
dose of pembrolizumab . 
4.2.2 Rationale for Dose Selection/Regimen/Modification  
The dose of pembrolizumab , 200mg intravenous every 3 weeks is selected as it has been 
observed to be safe and effective in prior clinical studies of pembrolizumab . Subjects will 
receive one dose of neoadjuvant therapy followed by one year of adjuvant pembrolizumab  
200 mg intravenous  every 3 weeks. One year of adjuvant therapy is selected based on the 
rationale that subjects with advanced disease who are treated with pembrolizumab  for at 
least 6 months and have a complete response are able to stop therapy with an ongoing 
durable clini cal response. Durable complete responses have not been observed with 
stopping pembrolizumab  at an earlier time point . Furthermore, 1 year is the standard 
UPCC# 01615: Tissue Collection Study of Pembrolizumab in Advanced Melanoma  
 
Version Date: 06/18/201 8   7 
 duration of treatment for adjuvant high dose interferon, which is the only approved 
adjuvant therapy for melanoma.  
Biosamples (blood and tumor) obtained from subjects before and at serial time points 
during treatment will be analyzed. High priority assays will be performed as indicated 
below. Second priority assays will be performed as the budget allows.  
High priority  assays:  
1.  Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) will be obtained at various time 
points at baseline and during this protocol, including before and after treatment and 
before and after surgery. PBMC s will be analyzed by flow cytometry to  measure 
important T cell subsets. This assay will include intracellular staining for multiple T 
cell cytokines  and transcription factors in order to determine multifunctionality. 
Expression of inhibitory receptors including PD- 1 and others will be examine d in 
PBMC populations to test whether changes in such pathways on T occurs following 
treatment.  
 
2.  Tumor -infiltrating lymphocytes (TIL) will be harvested from tumor biopsies before 
and after treatment to analyze treatment- induced effects on TILs using a similar 
multiparameter flow cytometry assay described above for PBMC.  
 
Second priority  assays:  
1.  Inflammatory cytokines/chemokines. Serum obtained at various times at baseline 
and during the protocol will be analyzed using Luminex bead array and Invitrog en 
30-plex kits, which can simultaneously quantify/determine concentrations of 30 
important factors, including IL- 1, TNF -alpha, IL -6 and others.  
 
2.  T-cells within TIL can also be further expanded in vitro when possible using 
artificial APC systems routinely used in the laboratory to facilitate further study T -
cell specificity and function.  
 
3.  Deep sequencing of the TCR (along with tumor and germline DNA) will also be 
performed when feasible from blood and tumor as a novel way to measure tumor -
spec ific T -cell responses induced by treatment. This method does not require a priori 
understanding of a particular tumor antigen or MHC. Of particular interest will be 
evidence of TCR clones increasing in the circulation after therapy that are also found 
in the subject’s tumor, per novel analytic methodologies noted in the preliminary 
data section. Such observations would be consistent with a vaccine effect of 
therapy.  
UPCC# 01615: Tissue Collection Study of Pembrolizumab in Advanced Melanoma  
 
Version Date: 06/18/201 8   8 
  
4.  Antigen- specific T -cell responses will be measured when possible using 
established assa ys in which PBMC pre and post therapy will be tested in vitro in T -
cell responder assays. For patients who are HLA- A2+, functional responses and 
peptide -MHC quantification will be measured for a panel of melanoma associated 
antigens , as well as , viral antigens as a control. Functional measurements can 
include cytokine production, CD107a mobilization, and lysis against peptide -pulsed 
targets or tumor cells lines expressing the melanoma antigen. In addition, for 
functional assessments of T cells without regar d to the patients MHC, we will use 
autologous CD40- activated B cells electroporated with viral or tumor antige n mRNA 
as in vitro stimulators.  
 
5.  New antibodies with reactivity to defined antigens will be measured in serum 
collected before and during trea tment. When possible, we will use the ProtoArray 
protein array, which uses chip- based technology to profile 9,000 proteins. Analysis 
will be by Prospector software. The induction of high titer antibodies to defined 
tumor antigens not only reflects a humora l immune response to treatment but also 
a cellular response.  
 
6.  Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) and circulating tumor DNA will be measured in the 
blood pre - and post- treatment using promising cell surface markers in collaboration 
with Dr. Erica Carpenter.  Levels of circulating tumor material will be correlated to 
tumor burden and can potentially afford important information with regards to 
response to therapy and prognosis . 
 
Assays noted above may be performed by the specific collaborators currently 
indica ted or other academic/industry collaborators as relationship s are developed in 
the future.  
 
 
 
 
UPCC# 01615: Tissue Collection Study of Pembrolizumab in Advanced Melanoma  
 
Version Date: 06/18/201 8   9 
 5.0 METHODOLOGY  
5.1 Entry Criteria  
5.1.1 Diagnosis/Condition for Entry into the Trial  
5.1.2 Subject Inclusion Criteria  
In order to be eligible for participation in this trial:  
1.  The subject must have  clinical stage III or resectable stage IV MEL. Subject’s may 
not have a diagnosis of uveal or mucosal melanoma.  
2.  The subject must be expected to have an adequate amount of tumor burden to 
yield 2 -4 pre -operative research core b iopsy (14 -gauge needle) specimens or the 
equivalent amount of tissue (4 -6 mm punch biopsy) , in addition, to the tissue 
required for diagnostic purposes.  
3.  The subject must be expected to have an adequate amount of residual tumor 
after their pre -operative  research tumor tissue collection, such that their operative 
research tumor collection will also yield at least 4 -6 research core biopsy specimens 
or the equivalent amount of tissue . 
4.  The subject must be willing  to undergo the two paired tumor tissue biopsy 
procedures to obtain samples for biomarker analysis. Tissue obtained must not be 
previously irradiated.  
5.  Either the subject or the subject’s legal representative must be willing and able to 
provide written informed consent for the trial.  
6.  The subject must be ≥ 18 years of age on day of signing informed consent.  
7.  The subject must have a performance status of 0 or 1 on the ECOG Performance 
Scale.  
8.  The subject must demonstrate adequate organ function as defined in Table 1, all 
screening labs must be performed within 10  days of treatment initiation.  
Table 1  Adequate Organ Function Laborato ry Values  
System  Laboratory Value  
Hematological   
Absolute neutrophil count 
(ANC)  ≥1500/mcL  
UPCC# 01615: Tissue Collection Study of Pembrolizumab in Advanced Melanoma  
 
Version Date: 06/18/201 8   10 
 Platelets  ≥100,000 / mcL  
Hemoglobin  ≥9 g/dL or ≥5.6 mmol/L  
Renal   
Serum creatinine OR 
Measured or calculateda 
creatinine clearance  
(GFR can also be used in place 
of creatinine or CrCl)  ≤1.5 X upper limit of normal (ULN) OR 
 
≥50 mL/min for subject with creatinine levels > 
1.5 X institutional ULN  
Hepatic   
Serum total bilirubin  ≤ 1.5 X ULN OR 
 Direct bilirubin ≤ ULN for subjects with total 
bilirubin levels > 1.5 ULN  
AST (SGOT) and ALT (SGPT)  ≤ 2.5 X ULN  OR 
≤ 5 X ULN for subjects with liver metastases 
Coagulation  
International Normalized Ratio 
(INR) or Prothrombin Time (PT)  
 
Activated Partial 
Thromboplastin Time (aPTT)  ≤1.5 X ULN unless subject is receiving 
anticoagulant therapy  as long as PT or PTT is 
within therapeutic range of intended use of 
anticoagulants  
≤1.5 X ULN unless subject is receiving 
anticoagulant therapy  
as long as PT or PTT is within therapeutic range 
of intended use of anticoagulants  
aCreatinine clearance should be calculated per institutional standard.  
 
9.  Female subject s of childbearing potential must have a negative serum pregnancy 
test within 72 hours prior to receiving the first dose of study medication.  
10.  The subject must be willing to use protocol defined method(s) of contraception:  
Female subjects of childbearing potential must be willing to use 2 methods of 
contraception, or abstain from heterosexual sexual intercourse for two weeks 
before  the time of the first dose of study medication, while on study, through 120 
days after the last dose of study medication.  
UPCC# 01615: Tissue Collection Study of Pembrolizumab in Advanced Melanoma  
 
Version Date: 06/18/201 8   11 
 Female s ubjects of childbearing potential are  defined as  those  women  who have not 
been surgically sterilized or have not been  free from menses for > 1 year.  
Male subjects must agree to use an adequate method of contraception starting with 
the first dose of study medication, while on study, through 120 days after the last 
dose of study medication . 
Acceptable forms of birth control include condoms, diaphragms, cervical cap, an 
intra -uterine device (IUD), surgical sterility (tubal ligation or a partner that has 
undergone a vasectomy), or oral contraceptives, OR the subject must agree to 
completely abstain from  heterosexual  inter course .  Abstinence at certain times of 
the cycle only, such as during the days of ovulation, after ovulation and withdrawal 
are not acceptable methods of birth control.  
5.1.3 Subject Exclusion Criteria  
The subject will be excluded from participating in the trial if:  
1.  Subject has unresectable disease; i.e . in the opinion of the surgical oncologist, al l 
of the subject’s melanoma can not be completel y removed with a clear margin.  
2.  Subject i s currently participating in or has participated in a study of an 
investigational agent or us ing an investigational device within 4 weeks of the first 
dose of study treatment.  
3.  Subject h as a known hypersensitivity to pembrolizumab or any of its ingredients.  
4.  Subject h as a diagnosis of immunodeficiency  or is receiving systemic steroid 
therapy or any other form of immunosuppressive therapy within 7 days prior to  
enro llment . 
5.  Subject h as had a prior monoclonal antibody within 4 weeks prior to study Day 1 
or who has not recovered (i.e., ≤ Grade 1 or at baseline) from adverse events due to 
agents administered more than 4 weeks earlier.  
6.  Subject h as received prior therapy with an anti- PD-1, anti -PD-L1, anti -PD-L2, anti -
CD137, or anti -Cytotoxic T -lymphocyte -associated antigen -4 (CTLA -4) agents 
(including ipilimumab), interferon, high dose IL -1 or any other antibody or drug 
specifically targeting T -cell co -stimulation or checkpoint pathways.  
7.  Subject h as had prior chemotherapy, targeted small molecule therapy, 2 weeks 
prior to study Day 1 or who has not recovered (i.e., ≤ Grade 1 or at baseline) from 
adverse events due to a previously administered agent  
Note:  Subjects with ≤ Grade 2 neuropathy are  an exception to this criterion  
UPCC# 01615: Tissue Collection Study of Pembrolizumab in Advanced Melanoma  
 
Version Date: 06/18/201 8   12 
 8.  For subjects who have  received major surgery , the subject must have recovered 
adequately from the toxicity and/or complications from the intervention prior to 
starting s tudy therapy.  
9.  Subject h as had radiation therapy to the tumor selected for research collection, 
or has had radiation therapy to any site within 4 weeks prior to study Day 1.  
10.  Subject h as received transfusion of blood products (including platelets or  red 
blood cells) or administration of colony stimulating factors (including G -CSF, GM -CSF 
or recombinant erythropoietin) within 4 weeks prior to study Day 1.  
11.  Subject h as a known additional malignancy that is progressing o r requires active 
treatment.  
12.  Subject h as known active central nervous system (CNS) metastases and/or 
carcinomatous meningitis.  
Note: Subjects with previously treated brain metastases will be eligible to 
participate provided they are stable (without evidence of progression by 
imag ing for at least four weeks prior to the first dose of trial treatment and 
any neurologic symptoms have returned to baseline), have no evidence of 
new or enlarging brain metastases, and are not using steroids for at least 7 
days prior to trial treatment.  
13.  Subject has an active autoimmune disease requiring systemic treatment within 
the past 3 months or a documented history of clinically severe autoimmune disease, 
or a syndrome that requires systemic steroids or immunosup pressive agents.  
Note: Subjects with vitiligo or resolved childhood asthma/atopy are  an 
exception to this rule.  Subjects that require intermittent use of 
bronchodilators or local steroid injections w ill not be excluded from the 
study.  Subjects with hypothyroidism stable on hor mone replacement or 
Sjorgen’s syndrome will not be excluded from the study.  
14.  Subject h as evidence of interstitial lung disease , active, non -infectious 
pneumonitis  or has a history of non- infectious pneumonitis which required steroids . 
15.  Subject h as an active infection requiring systemic therapy , including active 
tuberculosis  
16.  Subject h as a history or current evidence of any condition, therapy, or 
laboratory abnormality that might confound the results of the trial, interfere with 
the subject’s par ticipation for the full duration of the trial, or is not in the best 
interest of the subject to participate, in the opinion of the treating investigator.  
UPCC# 01615: Tissue Collection Study of Pembrolizumab in Advanced Melanoma  
 
Version Date: 06/18/201 8   13 
 17.  Subject h as known psychiatric or substance abuse disorders that would interfere 
with cooperation with the requirements of the trial.  
18.  Subject i s pregnant or breastfeeding, or expecting to conceive or father a child 
within the projected duration of the trial  participation (from 2 weeks prior to the 
first dose of study treatment, while participating  on the study and through 120 days 
after the last dose of trial treatment ). 
19.  Subject has severe cardiovascular disease, i.e. arrhythmias, requiring chronic 
treatment, congestive heart failure (NYHA Class III or IV) or symptomatic ischemic 
heart disease . 
20.  Subject has hepatic decompensation (Child- Pugh score >6 [class B and C]).  
21.  Subject has uncontrolled thyroid dysfunction 
22.  Subject has uncontrolled diabetes mellitus  
23.  Subject h as a known history of Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) (HIV 1/2 
antibodies)  as determined by medical record review . 
24.  Subject h as known active Hepatitis B (e.g., HBsAg reactive) or Hepatitis C (e.g., 
HCV RNA [qualitative] is detected)  as determined by medical record review . 
25.  Subject h as rece ived a live v accine  within 30 days prior to the fi rst dose of trial 
treatment.  
5.2 Trial Treatments  
The treatment to be used in this trial is outlined below in Table 2 
Table 2  Trial Treatment  
Drug  Dose/Potency  Dose 
Frequency  Route of 
Administration  Regimen/
Treatment 
Period  Use 
Pembrolizumab  200 mg  Q 3 wk s IV infusion  1 year  Experimental  
The pembrolizumab  dosing interval may be increased due to toxicity as described in Section 
5.2.1.2.  
 
UPCC# 01615: Tissue Collection Study of Pembrolizumab in Advanced Melanoma  
 
Version Date: 06/18/201 8   14 
 5.2.1 Dose Selection/Modification  
5.2.1.1  Dose Selection  
The rationale for selection of doses to be used in this trial is provided in Section 4 .0 – 
Background and Rationale.  
5.2.1.2  Dose Modification  
Dose Limiting Toxicity  (DLT) : Surgical outcomes will be evaluated as the effect of 
Pembrolizumab after surgery, and the effect of pembrolizumab on surgical complications is 
unknown. Dose Limiting toxicity will be defined as Grade 3 non- hematologic, and Grade 4 
hematologic toxicity that is not expected for  surgery alone or pembrolizumab alone. DLTs 
will be monitored for up to 6 weeks post- surgery.  
Pembrolizumab  will be withheld for drug -related Grade 4 hematologic toxicities, non -
hematological toxicity ≥ Grade 3 including laboratory abnormalities, and severe or life -
threatening AEs as per Table 3 below.  
Table 3: Dose modification guidelines for drug -related adverse events.  
Toxicity Hold 
Treatment 
For Grade  Timing for Restarting Treatment Treatment Discontinuation  
Diarrhea/Colitis  2-3 
 Toxicity resolves to Grade 0- 1 Toxicity does not resolve within 12 weeks of last dose  or inability 
to reduce corticosteroid to 10 mg or less of prednisone or equivalent 
per day within 12 weeks  
4 Permanently discontinue Permanently discontinue 
AST, ALT, or 
Increased Bilirubin 2 Toxicity resolves to Grade 0- 1 Toxicity does not resolve within 12 weeks of last dose 
3-4 Permanently discontinue  
(see exception below)a Permanently discontinue 
Type 1 diabetes 
mellitus (if new 
onset) or 
Hyperglycemia  T1DM or  
3-4 Hold pembrolizumab  for new onset Type 
1 diabetes mellitus or Grade 3- 4 
hyperglycemia associated with evidence of 
beta cell failure  Resume pembrolizumab when patients are clinically and 
metabolically stable  
Hypophysitis  2-4 Toxicity resolves to Grade 0- 1. Therapy 
with pembr olizumab can be continued 
while endocrine replacement therapy is 
instituted  Toxicity does not resolve within 12 weeks of last dose or inability 
to reduce corticosteroid to 10 mg or less of prednisone or equivalent 
per day within 12 weeks  
Hyperthyroidism  3 Toxicity resolves to Grade 0- 1 Toxicity does not resolve within 12 weeks of last dose  or inability 
to reduce corticosteroid to 10 mg or less of prednisone or equivalent 
per day within 12 weeks  
4 Permanently discontinue  Permanently discontinue  
Hypothyroidism   Therapy with pembrolizumab can be 
continued while thyroid replacement 
therapy  is instituted  Therapy with pembrolizumab can be continued while thyroid 
replacement therapy is instituted  
 
Infusion Reaction  2b Toxicity resolves to Grade 0 -1  Permanently discontinue if toxicity develops despite adequate 
premedication  
3-4 Permanently discontinue Permanently discontinue 
Pneumonitis  2 Toxicity resolves to Grade 0- 1 Toxicity does not resolve within 12 weeks of last dose or inability 
to reduce corticosteroid to 10 mg or less of prednisone or equivalent 
per day within 12 weeks  
UPCC# 01615: Tissue Collection Study of Pembrolizumab in Advanced Melanoma  
 
Version Date: 06/18/201 8   15 
 Toxicity Hold 
Treatment 
For Grade  Timing for Restarting Treatment Treatment Discontinuation  
3-4 or 
Recurrent 
Grade 2  Permanently discontinue Permanently discontinue 
Renal Failure or 
Nephritis  2 Toxicity resolves to Grade 0- 1 Toxicity does not resolve within 12 weeks of last dose or inability 
to reduce corticosteroid to 10 mg or less of prednisone or equivalent 
per day within 12 weeks  
3-4 Permanently discontinue  Permanently discontinue  
All Other Drug -
Related Toxicityc 3 or Severe  
 
 Toxicity resolves to Grade 0- 1 Toxicity does not resolve within 12 weeks of last dose or inability 
to reduce corticosteroid to 10 mg or less of prednisone or equivalent 
per day within 12 weeks  
4 Permanently discontinue  Permanently discontinue  
Note: Permanently discontinue for any severe or Grade 3 (Grade 2 for pneumonitis) drug -related AE that recurs or any life -threatening event.  
a For patients with liver metastasis who begin treatment with Grade 2 AST or ALT, if AST or ALT increases by greater than or equal to 50% relative to baseline 
and lasts for at least 1 week then patients should be discontinued.  
b If symptoms resolve within one hour of stopping drug infusion, the infusion may be restarted at 50% of the original infusion rate   (e.g., fro m 100 mL/hr to 50 
mL/hr).  Otherwise dosing will be held until symptoms resolve and the subject should be premedicated  for the next scheduled dose; Refer to  Table 4 – Infusion 
Treatment Guidelines for further management details.  
c Patients with intolerable or persistent Grade 2 drug -related AE may hold study medication at physician discretion.  Permanently discontinue study drug for 
persistent Grade 2 adverse reactions for which treatment with study drug has been held, that do not recover to Grade 0 -1 withi n 12 weeks of the last dose.  
 
With investigator and medical monitor agreement, subjects with a laboratory adverse event 
still at Grade 2 after 12 weeks may continue treatment in the trial only if asymptomatic.  For 
information on the management of adverse  events, see Section 5. 4.1. 
Subjects who experience a recurrence of the same severe or life- threatening event at the 
same grade or greater with re -challenge of pembrolizumab  should be permanently 
discontinued from trial treatment.  
5.2.2 Timing of Dose Administra tion 
Trial treatment should be administered on Day 1 of each cycle after all 
procedures/assessments have been completed as detailed on the Trial Flow Chart (Section 
6.0).  Trial treatment may be administered up to 5  days before or after the scheduled Day 1  
of each cycle due to administrative reasons.  
All trial treatments will be administered on an outpatient basis.  
Pembrolizumab  will be administered as a 30 minute IV infusion every 3 weeks .  Every effort 
should be made to target infusion timing to be as cl ose to 30 minutes as possible.  
The treatment cycle interval  may be increased by 1  wee k when  restarting  pembrolizumab 
that was held due to:  
• Grade 2 toxicities that did not resolve to Grade 0 -1 within 4 weeks  
• Grade 3 or  4 toxicities  
Trial Blinding/Masking  
This is an open -label trial; therefore, the Sponsor -investigator , sub -investigators  and subject 
will know the treatment administered.  
UPCC# 01615: Tissue Collection Study of Pembrolizumab in Advanced Melanoma  
 
Version Date: 06/18/201 8   16 
 5.3 Concomitant Medications/Vaccinations (allowed & prohibited) 
Medications or vaccinations specifically prohibited in the exc lusion criteria are not allowed 
during the ongoing trial. If there is a clinical indication for one of these or other medications 
or vaccinations specifically prohibited during the trial, discontinuation from trial therapy or 
vaccination may be required.  The investigator must  discuss any questions regarding this 
with the Sponsor -Investigator and medical monitor. The final decision on any supportive 
therapy or vaccination rests with the investigator and/or the subject's primary  physician. 
However, the decision to continue the subject on trial therapy or vaccination schedule 
requires the mutual agreement of the Sponsor -Investigator, the treating investigator , 
medical monitor and the subject.  
5.3.1 Acceptable Concomitant Medications  
All treatments that the investigator considers necessary for a subject’s welfare may be 
administered at the discretion of the investigator in keeping with the community standards 
of medical care.  
All concomitant medications will be recorded on the case report form (CRF) including all 
prescription, over- the-counter (OTC), herbal supplements, and IV medications and fluids.  If 
changes occur during the trial period, documentation of drug dosage, frequency, route, and 
date will also be included on the CRF.  
All concomitant med ications received within 28 days before the first dose of trial treatment 
and 30 days after the last dose of trial treatment must  be recorded.  Concomitant 
medications administered after 30 days after the last dose of trial treatment should be 
recorded for  SAEs and ECIs as defined in Section 7.2.  
5.3.2 Prohibited Concomitant Medications  
Subjects are prohibited from receiving the following therapies during the Screening and 
Treatment Phase (including retreatment for post- complete response relapse) of this trial:  
1.  Anti -cancer  systemic chemotherapy, immune  or biological therapy  
2.  Investigational agents other than pembrolizumab  
3.  Radiation therapy  
Note:  Radiation therapy to a symptomatic solitary lesion or to the brain may 
be allowed after consultation with Sponsor -Investigator and medical 
monitor . 
4.  Live vaccines within 30 days prior to the first dose of trial treatment and while 
participating in the trial.   Examples of live vaccines include, but are not limited to, 
the following: measles, mumps, rubella, chicken pox, yellow fever, rabies, BCG, and 
typhoid (oral) vaccine. Seasonal influenza vaccines for injection are generally killed 
UPCC# 01615: Tissue Collection Study of Pembrolizumab in Advanced Melanoma  
 
Version Date: 06/18/201 8   17 
 virus vaccines and are allowed; however intranasal influenza vaccines (e.g. Flu -
Mist®) are live attenuated vaccines, and are not allowed.  
5.  Oral g lucocorticoids for any purpose other than to modulate symptoms from an 
event of clinical interest of suspected immunologic etiology .  The use of physiologic 
doses of corticosteroids may be approved after consultation with the Sponsor -
Investigator and medical monitor.   Inhaled and topical steroids are permitted.  
Subjects who, in the assessment by the investigator, require the use of any of the 
aforementioned treatments for clinical management should be removed from the trial.  
Subjects  may receive other medications that the investigator or qualified designee  deems to 
be medically necessary.  
The Exclusion Criteria describes other medications which are prohibited in this trial.  
There are no prohibited therapies during the Post- Treatment Follow -up Phase.  
5.4 Rescue Medications & Supportive Care  
5.4.1 Supportive Care Guidelines  
Subjects should receive appropriate supportive care measures as deemed necessary by the 
treating investigator or qualified designee .   Suggested supportive care measures for the 
management of adverse events with potential immunologic etiology are outlined below. 
Where appropriate, these guidelines include the use of oral or intravenous treatment with 
corticosteroids as well as additional anti-inflammatory agents if symptoms do not improve 
with administration of corticosteroids.   Note that several courses of steroid tapering may 
be necessary as symptoms may worsen when the steroid dose is decreased. For each 
disorder, attempts should be ma de to rule out other causes such as metastatic disease or 
bacterial or viral infection, which might require additional supportive care. The treatment 
guidelines are intended to be applied when the investigator determines the events to be 
related to pembrol izumab.  
Note: if after the evaluation the event is determined not to be related, the investigator does 
not need to follow the treatment guidance (as outlined below). Refer to Section 5.2.1 for 
dose modification.  
It may be necessary to perform conditional procedures such as bronchoscopy, endoscopy, 
or skin photography as part of evaluation of the event.  
• Pneumonitis:  
o For Grade 2 events, treat with systemic corticosteroids. When symptoms 
improve to Grade 1 or less, steroid taper should be started and continue d 
over no less than 4 weeks.  
UPCC# 01615: Tissue Collection Study of Pembrolizumab in Advanced Melanoma  
 
Version Date: 06/18/201 8   18 
 o For Grade 3 -4 events, immediately treat with intravenous steroids.  
Administer additional anti- inflammatory measures, as needed.  
o Add prophylactic antibiotics for opportunistic infections in the case of 
prolonged steroid adminis tration . 
Diarrhea /Colitis : 
Subjects should be carefully monitored for signs and symptoms of enterocolitis (such as 
diarrhea, abdominal pain, blood or mucus in stool, with or without fever) and of bowel 
perforation (such as peritoneal signs and ileus).  
o All subjects who experience diarrhea/colitis should be advised to drink liberal 
quantities of clear fluids.  If sufficient oral fluid intake is not feasible, fluid 
and electrolytes should be substituted via IV infusion.  For Grade 2 or higher 
diarrhea, conside r GI consultation and endoscopy to confirm or rule out 
colitis.  
o For Grade 2 diarrhea/colitis, administer oral corticosteroids.  
o For Grade 3 or 4 diarrhea/colitis, treat with intravenous steroids follow ed by 
high dose oral steroids.  
o When symptoms improve to  Grade 1 or less, steroid taper should be started 
and continued over no less than 4 weeks.  
• Type 1 diabetes mellitus (if new onset, including diabetic ketoacidosis [DKA]) or ≥ 
Grade 3 Hyperglycemia, if associated with ketosis (ketonuria) or metabolic acidos is 
(DKA)  
o For T1DM  or Grade 3- 4 Hyperglycemia  
 Insulin replacement therapy is recommended for Type I diabetes 
mellitus and for Grade 3 -4 hyperglycemia associated with metabolic 
acidosis or ketonuria.  
 Evaluate patients with serum glucose and a metabolic panel, urine 
ketones, glycosylated hemoglobin, and C -peptide.  
• Hypophysitis : 
o For Grade 2  events, treat with corticosteroids. When symptoms improve to 
Grade 1 or less, steroid taper should be started and continued over no less 
than 4 weeks. Replacement of appropriate hormones may be required as the 
steroid dose is tapered.  
o For Grade 3 -4 events , treat with an initial dose of IV corticosteroids followed 
by oral corticosteroids. When symptoms improve to Grade 1 or less, steroid 
UPCC# 01615: Tissue Collection Study of Pembrolizumab in Advanced Melanoma  
 
Version Date: 06/18/201 8   19 
 taper should be started and continued over no less than 4 weeks. Replacement 
of appropriate hormones may be required as t he steroid dose is tapered.  
• Hyperthyroidism or Hypothyroidism : 
Thyroid disorders can occur at any time during treatment. Monitor patients for 
changes in thyroid function (at the start of treatment, periodically during treatment, 
and as indicated based on c linical evaluation) and for clinical signs and symptoms of 
thyroid disorders.  
o Grade 2 hyperthyroidism events (and Grade 2- 4 hypothyroidism):  
 In hyperthyroidism, non- selective beta -blockers (e.g. propranolol) are 
suggested as initial therapy.  
 In hypothyroidism, thyroid hormone replacement therapy, with 
levothyroxine or liothyroinine, is indicated per standard of care.  
o Grade 3- 4 hyperthyroidism  
 Treat with an initial dose of IV corticosteroid followed by oral 
corticosteroids. When symptoms improve to Grade 1 or less, steroid 
taper should be started and continued over no less than 4 weeks. 
Replacement of appropriate hormones may be required as the steroid 
dose is tapered.  
• Hepatic : 
o For Grade 2 events, monitor liver function tests more frequently until returned 
to baseline values (consider weekly).  
 Treat with IV or oral corticosteroids  
o For Grade 3- 4 events, treat with intravenous corticosteroids for 24 to 48 hours.  
o When symptoms improve to Grade 1 or less, a steroid taper should be started 
and continued over no l ess than 4 weeks.  
• Renal Failure or Nephritis : 
o For Grade 2 events, treat with corticosteroids.  
o For Grade 3 -4 events, treat with systemic corticosteroids.  
o When symptoms improve to Grade 1 or less, steroid taper should be started 
and continued over no less than 4 weeks.  
• Management of Infusion Reactions : Signs and symptoms usually develop during or 
shortly after drug infusion and generally resolve completely within 24 h ours of 
completion of infusion.  
 
Table 4 below  shows treatment guidelines for subjects who experience an infusion reaction 
associated with administration of pembrolizumab . 
UPCC# 01615: Tissue Collection Study of Pembrolizumab in Advanced Melanoma  
 
Version Date: 06/18/201 8   20 
  
Table 4 Infusion Reaction Treatment Guidelines  
NCI CTCAE Grade  Treatment  Premedication at subsequent 
dosing  
Grade 1  
Mild reaction ; infusion 
interruption not indicated; 
intervention not indicated   
Increase monitoring of vital signs as 
medically indicated until the subject is 
deemed medically stable in the opinion of 
the investigator.   
None  
Grade 2  
Requires infusion interruption but 
responds promptly to 
symptomatic treatment  (e.g., 
antihistamines, NSAIDS, IV fluids); 
prophylactic medications 
indicated for < =24 hrs   
Stop Infusion  and monitor symptoms . 
Additional appropriate medical therapy 
may include but is not limited to:  
     IV fluids  
     Antihistamines  
     NSAIDS  
     Acetaminophen  
 
Increase monitoring of vital signs as 
medically indicated until the subject is 
deemed medically stable in the opinion of 
the investigator.  
If symptoms resolve within one hour of 
stopping drug infus ion, the infusion may be 
restarted at 50% of the original infusion 
rate (e.g. from 100 mL/hr to 50 mL/hr).  
Otherwise dosing will be held until 
symptoms resolve and the subject should 
be premedicated for the next scheduled 
dose.  
Subjects who develop Grade 2 toxicity 
despite adequate premedication should 
be permanently discontinued from further 
trial treatme nt administration.   
Subject may be premedicated 
1.5 h (± 30 minutes) prior to 
infusion of pembrolizumab  
(MK-3475)  with:   
 
Diphenhydramine 50 mg po  (or 
equivalent dose of 
antihistamine). 
 
Acetaminophen 500 -1000 mg 
po (or equivalent dose of 
antipyretic ). 
Grades 3 or 4  
 
Grade 3:  
Prolonged (i.e., not rapidly 
responsive to symptomatic 
medication and/or brief 
interruption of infusion); 
recurrence of symptoms 
following initial improvement; 
hospitalization indicated for other 
clinical sequelae (e.g., renal 
impairment, pulmonary 
infiltrates)  
 
Grade 4:  
Life-threatening; pressor or 
ventilatory support indicated   
Stop Infusion  and Monitor Symptoms . 
Additional appropriate medical therapy 
may include but is not limited to:  
     IV fluids  
     Antihistamines  
     NSAIDS  
     Acetaminophen  
 
     Oxygen  
     Pressors  
     Corticosteroids  
     Epinephrine  
 
Increase monitoring of vital signs as 
medically indicated until the subject is 
deemed medically stable in the opinion of 
the investigator.  
Hospitalization may be indicated. 
Subject is permanently discontinued from 
further trial treatment administration.   
No subsequent dosing  
UPCC# 01615: Tissue Collection Study of Pembrolizumab in Advanced Melanoma  
 
Version Date: 06/18/201 8   21 
 NCI CTCAE Grade  Treatment  Premedication at subsequent 
dosing  
Appropriate resuscitation equipment will be available in the room and a physician readily available during the 
period of drug administration.  
 
 
5.5 Diet/Activity/Other Considerations  
5.5.1 Diet  
Subjects should maintain a normal diet unless modifications are required to manage an AE 
such as diarrhea, nausea or vomiting.  
5.5.2 Contraception 
Pembrolizumab  may have advers e effects on a fetus in utero. Furthermore, it is not known 
if pembrolizumab  has transient adverse effects on the composition of sperm. Non -pregnant, 
non-breast -feeding women may be enrolled if they are willing to use 2 methods of birth 
control or are considered highly unlikely to conceive.  Highly unlikely to conceive is defined 
as 1) surgically sterilized, or 2) postmenopausal (a woman who is ≥45 years of age and has 
not had menses for greater  than 1 year will be considered postmenopausal), or 3) not 
heterosexually active for the duration of the study. Male subjects of reproductive potential 
must agree to avoid impregnating a partner while receiving study drug and for 120 days 
after the last do se of study drug either by practicing total abstinence from heterosexual 
activity or with a female partner using  2 methods of birth control .  The two birth control 
methods can be either two barrier methods or a barrier method plus a hormonal method to 
prevent pregnancy. Subjects should start using birth control from study Visit 1 throughout 
the study period up to 120 days after the last dose of study therapy.  
The following are considered adequate barrier method s of contraception: diaphragm, 
condom, copper intrauterine device, sponge, or spermicide. Appropriate hormonal 
contraceptives will include any registered and marketed contraceptive agent that contains 
an estrogen and/or a progestational agent (including or al, subcutaneous, intrauterine, or 
intramuscular agents).  
Subjects should be informed that taking the study medication may involve unknown risks to 
the fetus (unborn baby) if pregnancy were to occur during the study. In order to participate 
in the study , they must adhere  to the contraception requirement (described above) for the 
duration of the study and during the  follow -up period defined in section 7. 6.2-Reporting of 
Pregnancy and Lactation to the Sponsor -Investigator  and to Merck. If there is any question 
that a subject will not reliably comply with the requirements for contraception, that subject 
should not be entered into the study.  
UPCC# 01615: Tissue Collection Study of Pembrolizumab in Advanced Melanoma  
 
Version Date: 06/18/201 8   22 
 5.5.3 Use in Pregnancy  
If a subject inadvertently becomes pregnant while on treatment with pembrolizumab , the 
subject will immediately be removed from the study. The site will contact the subject at 
least monthly and document the subject’s status until the pregnancy has  been completed or 
terminated. The outcome of the pregnancy will be reported to the Sponsor -Investigator  and 
to Merck without delay and within 24 hours if the outcome is a serious adverse experience 
(e.g., death, abortion, congenital anomaly, or other disabling or life -threatening 
complicat ion to the mother or newborn). The study investigator will make every effort to 
obtain permission to follow the outcome of the pregnancy and report the condition of the 
fetus or newborn to the Sponsor.  If a male subject impregnates his female partner the 
study personnel at the site must be informed immediately and the pregnancy re ported to 
the Sponsor -Investigator  and to Merck and followed as described above and in Section 
7.6.2. 
5.5.4 Use in Nursing Women  
It is unknown whether pembrolizumab  is excreted in human milk. Since many drugs are 
excreted in human milk, and because of the potential for serious adverse reactions in the 
nursing infant, subjects who are breast- feeding are not eligible for enrollment.  
5.6 Subject Withdrawal/Discontinuation Criteria  
Subjects may withdraw consent at any time for any reason or be dropped from the trial at 
the discretion of the investigator should any untowar d effect occur. In addition, a subject 
may be withdrawn by the investigator or the Sponsor if enrollment into the trial is 
inappropriate, the trial plan is violated, or for administrative and/or other saf ety reasons.  
Specific details regarding discontinuation or withdrawal a re provided in Section 7.1. 2 – 
Other Procedures.  
A subject must be discontinued from the trial for any of the following reasons:  
1.  The subject or legal representative withdraws consent.  
2.  Confirmed radiographic disease progression  
3.  Unacceptable adverse experiences as described in Section 5.2.1.2  
4.  Intercurrent illness that prevents further administration of treatment 
5.  Investigator’s decision to withdraw the subject 
6.  The subject has a confirmed positive serum pregnancy test 
7.  Noncompliance with trial treatment or procedure requirements  
UPCC# 01615: Tissue Collection Study of Pembrolizumab in Advanced Melanoma  
 
Version Date: 06/18/201 8   23 
 8.  The subject is lost to follow- up 
9.  Administrative reasons  
After the end of treatment (C4 of pembrolizumab  per trial flow chart,  section 6.0) , each 
subject will be followed for 30 days for adverse event monitoring (serious advers e events 
will be collected for 90 days after the end of treatment as described in Section 7.2).  
Subjects will have post- treatment follow- up for disease st atus until disease recurrence, 
withdrawing consent or becoming lost to follow -up. After documented disease progression 
each subject will be followed by telephone for overall survival until death, withdrawal of 
consent, or the end of the study, whichever oc curs first.  
5.7 Clinical Criteria for Early Trial Termination  
The study will be terminated early if there is evidence that the rate of DLTs  is greater than 
33%. A DLT is defined as any grade 3 or higher hematologic or non -hematologic toxicity that 
is at least possibly related to Pembrolizumab and is not an expected adverse event for 
Pembrolizumab or surgery and which occurs anytime from the  initiation  of study therapy to 
6 weeks post- surgery.  
Early termination  rules will be used to monitor DLTs  during the enrollment and treatment of 
patients. Toxicity data will likely be reviewed after groups of 5  patients  have been treated 
and followed for 6 weeks post- surgery . Enrollment will be terminated if the data indicate 
that the rate of DLTs , as defined above, is > 33%. There are published data on the safety of 
Pembrolizumab  in other populations of melanoma patients . Thus, w e will assume a 
modestly  informative beta  (.5,1.5) prior which is equivalent to  information on 2 treated 
patients. Given the prior and the observed data, the Bayesian posterior probability that the 
toxicity rate exceeds 33% , is calculated. If the number of patients with a DLT equals or 
exceeds  the numbe r in the table below, then it is likely  that the toxicity rate is 
unacceptable, as noted by Ba yesian posterior probabilities.  
Bayesian Early Termination Rules for Toxicity  
Patients treated  5 10 15 20 25 30 
Patients with toxicity  3 5 7 9 11 13 
Posterior Prob[tox rate  > 33%] 0.81  0.81  0.82  0.83  0.84  0.85  
Action  Terminate accrual, re -evaluate trial  
 
Early trial termination will be the result of the criteria specified below:  
1.  Quality or quantity of data recording is inaccurate or incomplete  
2.  Poor adherence to protocol and regulatory requirements  
3.  Incidence or severity of adverse drug reaction in this or other studies indicates a 
potential health hazard to subjects  
UPCC# 01615: Tissue Collection Study of Pembrolizumab in Advanced Melanoma  
 
Version Date: 06/18/201 8   24 
 4.  Plans to modify or discontinue the development of the study drug  
In the event of Merck decision to no longer supply study drug, ampl e notification will be 
provided so that appropriate adjustments to subject treatment can be made.  
 
 
UPCC# 01615: Tissue Collection Study of Pembrolizumab in Advanced Melanoma  
 
Version Date: 06/18/201 8   25 
 6.0 TRIAL FLOW CHART  
6.1 Study Flow Chart 
Study Therapy      
 Screening 1 
(Within 28 
days of 
cycle 1)  Week/Cycle (21 Days ± 5  Days)   Post -
Treatment 
Visit  
(notes  13-16) 
Week   0 3 6 9 12 15 18 21 24 27 30 33 36 Until 
Wk52  N 
Cycle   1 22 3 4  5 6   7  8 9 10  11  12  13  N   
Study Procedures                  
Informed Consent 3 X                
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  X                
Demographics/Medical History/ 
Prior Medications 4 X                
Vital Signs/Weight 5 X X X X X X X  X X X X X X X X X 
Physical Examination  X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X 
ECOG Performance Status  X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X 
UPCC# 01615: Tissue Collection Study of Pembrolizumab in Advanced Melanoma  
 
Version Date: 06/18/201 8   26 
 Study Therapy      
 Screening 1 
(Within 28 
days of 
cycle 1)  Week/Cycle (21 Days ± 5  Days)   Post -
Treatment 
Visit  
(notes  13-16) 
Week   0 3 6 9 12 15 18 21 24 27 30 33 36 Until 
Wk52  N 
Cycle   1 22 3 4  5 6   7  8 9 10  11  12  13  N   
Review Adverse Events 6  X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X 
Review Concomitant Medications   X  X X X X X X X X X X X X X X 
Tissue collection 7 X7  X7             X 
(recurrence )7 
Research Blood Collection  
(up to 120mL per draw)  X17 X X X X X   
X   X   X 
(every 
3rd 
cycle)  X 
(recurrence)17 
CBC with Differential 8 X  X X X X X X X X X X X X X X 
Comprehensive Serum Chemistry 
Panel 9 X  X X X X X X X X X X X X X X 
Pregnancy Test -Serum β -HCG 10 X                
UPCC# 01615: Tissue Collection Study of Pembrolizumab in Advanced Melanoma  
 
Version Date: 06/18/201 8   27 
 Study Therapy      
 Screening 1 
(Within 28 
days of 
cycle 1)  Week/Cycle (21 Days ± 5  Days)   Post -
Treatment 
Visit  
(notes  13-16) 
Week   0 3 6 9 12 15 18 21 24 27 30 33 36 Until 
Wk52  N 
Cycle   1 22 3 4  5 6   7  8 9 10  11  12  13  N   
HLA type11  X               
T3, FT4 and TSH12 X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X 
Survival status13                   X15 
Tumor Imaging14 X     X    X    X   
Pembrolizumab   X X X X X X X X X X X X X X  
Blood collection (up to 10 mL) for 
DNA7  X               
1 Routine laboratory tests (serum chemistry; hematology) for screening should be performed within 10 days of Cycle 1 Day 1 . 
2 Cycle 2 pembrolizumab  may occur up to 9 weeks after cycle 1 to allow for full surgical recovery. All subsequent cycles will be 
every 21 days (+/ -5 days) up to week 52.  
UPCC# 01615: Tissue Collection Study of Pembrolizumab in Advanced Melanoma  
 
Version Date: 06/18/201 8   28 
 3 Written consent must be obtained prior to performing any protocol specific procedure. Results of a test per formed as part of 
routine clinical management are acceptable in lieu of a screening test if performed within the specified time frame (e.g. within 
28 days prior to Cycle 1, Day 1).  
4 Includes history of treatment for the primary diagnosis, including prior systemic, radiation treatment and surgical treatment, 
and best response to prior systemic treatments. Date of last prior cancer treatment must be documented.  Radiographic 
studies performed prior to study entry may be collected for review by the investigator. Report complete medication history 
for 30 days prior to th e screening visit (Visit 1).  
5 Vital signs to include temperature, pulse, respir atory rate and blood pressure.  
6 Adverse experiences and laboratory safety measurements will be graded per NCI CTCAE version 4.0. All adverse experiences, 
whether gradable by CTCAE or not, will also be evaluated for seriousness.  
7 Tumor tissue collection sample #1 to be collected during screening.  C1 (Week 0) treatment to occur within 7 days of sample 
#1 collection. Collection of s ample #2 (complete surgical resection of all remaining tumor) is to be performed approximately 3 
weeks after administration of pembrolizumab  C1 (Week  0). There will be a 7 day window of flexibility to receive the first dose 
of pembrolizumab (up to 14 days after the initial screening biopsy ). A tissue sample of at least one tumor lesion is mandatory 
at baseline (prior to Cycle 1) and at the time of complete resection. Additional biopsy  samples at disease progression are 
highly desirable when it is feasible. The tissue samples should have proper size to enable all planned biomarker analyses. Fine 
needle aspiration will not be acceptable. The biopsy techniques allowed in the study include core biopsies or surgical biopsies. 
The same biopsy techniques should be used as routinely used for a given  tumor lesion/location  and specimens will be 
processed and stored according to the standard process . For patients who give consent to the optional Future Biological 
Research, the remaining tissue samples after the study biomarker analyses will be retained for future biological analyses. DN A 
sample for analysis should be obtained pre -dose , on Day 1 (or with any subsequent scheduled blo od draw) . 
8 PT/INR and aPTT should be collected at Screening. Coagulation parameters should be determined throughout the study when 
clinical ly indicated.  After Cycle 1, pre -dose laboratory procedures can be conducted up to 72 hours prior to dosing.  
9 Comprehensive s erum chemistry panel must include sodium, potassium, BUN, Creatinine, AST, ALT, alkaline phosphatase, 
total bilirubin  and lactate dehydrogenase .  After Cycle 1, pre- dose laboratory procedures can be conducted up to 72 hours 
prior to dosing.    
10 For women of reproductive potential, a serum  pregnancy test will be performed within 72 hours of the first dose. Women 
with amenorrhea for < 1 years and who have not had a hysterectomy and oophorectomy will only be considered not to be of 
reproductive potential if they have a documented FSH valu e in the postmenopausal range.  
UPCC# 01615: Tissue Collection Study of Pembrolizumab in Advanced Melanoma  
 
Version Date: 06/18/201 8   29 
 11 HLA can be drawn once, at the time of any scheduled blood draw, or may be omitted, per PI decision.   
12 Analysis of T3, FT4 and  TSH will be performed by the local study site laboratory.   TSH is recommended with each cycle; T3 and 
T4 as indicated.  
13 Once a subject completes 12 months of pembrolizumab therapy, experiences disease recurrence or starts a new 
antineoplastic therapy, the subject will complete the below noted safety  follow up and move into the survival follow -up phase 
and should be contacted by telephone every 12 weeks  to assess for survival status.  
14 Tumor imaging will be performed at timepoints in accordance with standard of care anticipated to be within 30 days prior to 
enrollment and every 3 -6 months on and post- treatment.  
15 The mandatory Safety Follow -Up visit will be conducted within 4 weeks after the last dose of study drug or before the 
initiation of a new antineoplastic tre atment, whichever comes first. Patients with an AE of Grade >1 will be further followed 
until the resolution of the AE to Grade 0 -1 or until beginning of a new antineoplastic therapy, whichever occurs first.  
16 AEs occurring within 30 days after the last dose of study drug should be rec orded. After this time, record only AEs that are 
considered related to study drug.   SAEs that occur within 90 days of the end of treatment or before initiation of a new anti -
cancer treatment should also be followed and recorded.  
17 Whole blood samples will be drawn on biopsy and resection days, every cycle for the first 5 cycles, then every 3 cycles while 
on pembrolizumab , with final sample as recurrence sample for PBMC analysis  if available .  
UPCC# 01615: Tissue Collection Study of Pembrolizumab in Advanced Melanoma  
 
Version Date: 06/18/201 8   30 
 7.0 TRIAL PROCEDURES  
7.1 Trial Procedures  
The Trial Flow Chart -  Section 6.0 summarizes the trial procedures to be performed at each 
visit.  Individual trial procedures are described in detail below.  It may be necessary to 
perform these procedures at unscheduled time points if deemed clinically nec essary by the 
investigator.  
Furthermore, additional evaluations/testing may be deemed necessary by the Sponsor -
Investigator and/ or Merck for reasons related to subject safety. In these cases, such 
evaluations/testing will be performed in accordance with those regulations.  
7.1.1 Administrative Procedures  
7.1.1.1  Informed Consent  
The Investigator or qualified designee  must obtain documented consent from each 
potential subject prior to pa rticipating in a clinical trial.  
Consent must be documented by the subject’s dated signature or by the subject’s legally 
acceptable representative’s dated signature on a consent form along with the dated 
signature of the person conducting the c onsent discussion.  
A copy of the signed and dated consent form should be given to the subject before 
participation in the trial.  
The initial informed consent form, any subsequent revised written informed consent form 
and any written information provided to the subject must receive the IRBs 
approval/favorable opinion in advance of use.  The subject o r his/her legally acceptable 
representative should be informed in a timely manner if new information becomes available 
that may be relevant to the subject’s willingness to continue participation in the trial.  The 
communication of this information will be provided and documented via a revised consent 
form or addendum to the original consent form that captures the subject’s dated signature 
or by the subject’s legally acceptable representative’s dated signature.  
Specifics about a trial and the trial populatio n will be added to the consent form template at 
the protocol level. 
The informed consent process will adhere to IRB requirements, applicable laws and 
regulations and Sponsor -Investigator  requirements.  
UPCC# 01615: Tissue Collection Study of Pembrolizumab in Advanced Melanoma  
 
Version Date: 06/18/201 8   31 
 7.1.1.2  Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
All inclusion and exclusio n criteria will be reviewed by the investigator or qualified designee 
to ensure that the subject qualifies for the trial. Waivers to the eligibility criteria will not be 
granted.  
7.1.1.3  Medical History  
A medical history will be obtained by the investigator or qualified designee.  Medical history 
will include all active conditions, and any condition diagnosed within the prior 10 years that 
are considered to be clinically significant by the Investigator. Details regarding the disease 
for which the subject has enrolled in this study will be recorded separately and not listed as 
medical history.  
7.1.1.4  Prior and Concomitant Medications Review  
7.1.1.4.1  Prior Medications  
The investigator or qualified designee will review prior medication use, including any 
protocol -specified washout requirement, and record prior medication taken by the subject 
within 28 days before starting the trial.  Treatment for the disease for which the subject has 
enrolled in this study will be recorded s eparately and no t listed as a prior medication.  
7.1.1.4.2  Concomitant Medications  
The investigator or qualified designee will record medication, if any, taken by  the subject 
during the trial. All medications related to reportable SAEs and ECIs should be recorded as 
defined in Section 7.2.  
7.1.1.5  Disease Details and Treatments 
7.1.1.5.1  Disease Details 
The investigator or qualified designee will obtain prior and current de tails regarding disease 
status.  
7.1.1.5.2  Prior Treatment Details  
The investigator or qualified designee will review all prior cancer treatments including 
systemic treatments, radiation and surgeries.  
7.1.1.5.3  Subsequent Anti -Cancer  Therapy Status  
The investigator or qualified designee will review all new anti- neoplastic therapy initiated 
after the last dose of trial treatment.  If a subject  initiates a new anti -cancer  therapy prior to 
4 weeks after the last dose , Safety  Follow -up visit must occur before the first dose of the 
UPCC# 01615: Tissue Collection Study of Pembrolizumab in Advanced Melanoma  
 
Version Date: 06/18/201 8   32 
 new therapy. Once new  anti-cancer  therapy has been initiated the subject will mov e into 
survival follow -up. 
7.1.1.6  Adverse Event (AE) Monitoring  
The investigator or qualified designee will assess each subject to evaluate for potential new 
or worsening AEs as specified in the Trial Flow Chart and more frequently if clinically 
indicated. Adverse experiences will be grade d and recorded throughout the study and 
during the follow- up period acc ording to NCI CTCAE Version 4.0 .  Toxicities will be 
characterized in terms regarding seriousness, causality, toxicity grading, and action taken 
with regard to trial treatment.  
All AEs of unknown etiology associated with pembrolizumab  exposure should be evaluated 
to determine if it is possibly an event of clinical interest (ECI) of a potentially immunologic 
etiology (irAE ). 
Please refer to section 7.2 for detailed information reg arding the as sessment and recording 
of AEs.  
7.1.1.7  Full Physical Exam  
The investigator or qualified designee will perform a complete physical exam during the 
screening period.  Clinically significant abnormal findings should b e recorded as medical 
history. A full physical exam should be performed during screening . 
7.1.1.8  Vital Signs  
The investigator or qualified designee will take vital signs at screening, prior to the 
administration of each dose of trial treatment and at treatment discontinuation as specified 
in the Tri al Flow Chart (Section 6. 0). Vital signs should include temperature, pulse, 
respiratory r ate, and blood pressure.  Height will be measured at screening only.  
7.1.1.9  Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) Performance Scale  
The investigator or qualified designee will assess ECOG status (see Section  11.1) at 
screening, prior to the administration of each dose of trial treatment and discontinuation of 
trial treatment as spec ified in the Trial Flow Chart.  
7.1.1.10  Tumor Imaging and Assessment of Disease  
Investigators may use CT, PET or MRI imaging for baseline screening imaging and to assess 
for disease recurrence  in accordance with standard of care . 
UPCC# 01615: Tissue Collection Study of Pembrolizumab in Advanced Melanoma  
 
Version Date: 06/18/201 8   33 
 7.1.1.11  Tumor Tissue Collection and Correlative Studies Blood Sampling  
Biosamples (blood and tumor tissue) obtained from subjects before  and at serial time points 
during treatment will be analyzed. Tissue will be collected according to the Trial Flow Chart -  
Section 6.0.  
7.1.1.12  Laboratory Procedures/Assessment  
Laboratory tests for screening or entry must be performed within 10 days prior to the first 
dose of treatment. After Cycle 1, pre -dose laboratory procedures can be conducted up to 72 
hours prior to dosing. Results must be reviewed by the investigator or qualified designee 
and found to be acceptable prior to each dose of trial treatmen t. 
The total amount of blood/tissue to be drawn/collected over the course of the trial (from 
pre-trial to post -trial visits), including approximate blood/tissue volumes drawn/collected 
by visit and by sample type per subject may vary depending upon clinica l course of the 
subject and length of time on trial.  
In melanoma patients, presence of tumor infiltrating lymphocytes correlates with improved 
prognosis with CD8 T cells being the primary mediators of tumor  lysis, while CD4+FoxP3+ 
Tregs result in immune su ppression. As a result , a high CD8:Treg ratio correlates with a 
balance in favor of anti- tumor immunity. Indeed, CD8:Treg ratio has  been shown to 
correlate with survival in ovarian cancer (Sato PNAS 2005), and therefore is an ideal primary 
endpoint that is  reasonable biologically and may be meaningful clinically.  
 
We will analyze a population of terminally exhausted T cells defined as Eomeshi PD1hi by 
flow cytometry. Previous work from the Wherry lab has shown differential exhaustion 
profiles including a terminally exhausted Eomeshi PD1hi population of cells which do not 
respond to anti -PDL1 therapy in vitro in contrast to a TbethiiPD1int (less exha usted 
phenotype) population of T cells that do respond well to PD -L1 blockade in vitro. (Paley, 
Wherry Science 2012) Quantification of the terminally exhausted T cell population (Eomeshi 
PD1hi population) may be of prognostic significance as we hypothesize  that a higher 
percentage of Eomeshi PD1hi T cells pre and post PD- 1 therapy would be expected to 
correlate with treatment resistance. We will also do functional assessment of these T cell 
subsets pre and post anti PD- 1 therapy via flow cytome try with Ki67  and Granzyme B to see 
if pembrolizumab is able to restore T cell function in the terminally exhausted (Eomeshi 
PD1hi population) T cell populations, as indicated by increased Ki67 and Granzyme B in the se 
T cells after PD -1 blockade.  
 
Analysis of multiple other inhibitory T cell markers including CTLA4, LAG3, TIM3, 2B4, and 
CD160 will be done with quantification of MFI. Tumor specific T cells from melanoma TILs 
show significant exhaustion with upregulation of multiple inhibitory markers. (Baitsch J Clin 
Invest 2011)  PD -1 blockade may have differential effects on these markers (may increase or 
decrease their expression).  For example, disruption of the PD1 -PDL1 axis by anti - PDL-1 
UPCC# 01615: Tissue Collection Study of Pembrolizumab in Advanced Melanoma  
 
Version Date: 06/18/201 8   34 
 therapy results in decreased expression of LAG -3 and upregulation of PD- 1 in a T cell 
exhaustion model (chronic viral infection model). In this T cell exhaustion model, 
combination therapy with anti - LAG3 and anti – PDL1 increased antigen specific T cells, T cell 
function, as well as viral control. (Blackburn, Wherry Nat Immunol 2009 ).  As a result, 
assessing the effect of PD- 1 blockade on other inhibitory molecules will be valuable in 
determining immune target candidates for combination immunotherapies with PD- 1 
blockade.  
 
7.1.2 Other Procedures  
7.1.2.1  Withdrawal/Discontinuation 
When a subject discontinues/withdraws prior to trial completion, all applicable activities 
scheduled for the final trial visit  should be performed at the time of discontinuation.  Any 
adverse events which are present at the time of discontinuation/withdrawal should be 
followed in accordance with the safety requirements outlined in Section 7.2 -  Assessing and 
Recording Adverse Events.  
7.1.3 Visit Requirements  
Visit requirements are outlined in Section 6.0 -  Trial Flow Chart. Specific procedure -related 
details are provided above in Section 7.1 -  Trial Procedures.  
7.1.3.1  Screening  
Screening requirements are outlined in Section 6.0 -  Trial Flow Chart. The first tumor biopsy 
is collected during the screening period after informed consent. If the subject is able to 
undergo collection of the screening period tumor specimen and meets all other eligibility 
requirements, the subjec t can be enrolled in the study.  
Subjects may be rescreened after initially failing to meet the inclusion/exclusion criteria. 
Results from assessments performed during the initial screening period are acceptable in 
lieu of a repeating a screening test if performed within the specified time frame and the 
results meet the inclusion/exclusion criteria.  
7.1.3.2  Treatment Period  
Subjects who have signed informed consent, are eligible for the study and who have 
undergone the screening tumor biopsy can be enrolled on the study and must receive the 
week 0 (cycle 1) treatment with pembrolizumab  within 1 week of enrollment.  
There will be a 7 day  window of flexibility to receive the first dose of pembrolizumab (up to 
14 days after the initial screening biopsy). If therapy cannot be started within this time 
frame, the patient will be remov ed from the study and replaced.  
 
UPCC# 01615: Tissue Collection Study of Pembrolizumab in Advanced Melanoma  
 
Version Date: 06/18/201 8   35 
 Subjects must then undergo a complete resection of their remaining tumor within 3 weeks  
(up to 1 week later, or up to 3 days earlier)  after C1 of pembrolizumab  treatment date.  
In the event that there is a complete response after the first dose of study drug, and there is 
no surgical tissue available, the patient will have the option to continue with the study drug 
for up to one year, but will be considered non- evaluable and replaced for the study.  
If the resection surgery is delayed by more than one week after the 3 week  window (more  
than 28 days after the first dose of pembrolizumab), the patient may continue with surgery 
and pembrolizumab afterwards. Patients are expected to initiate adjuvant pembrolizumab 
within 9 weeks of cycle 1  to allow for post- surgical recovery . Patients will be evaluated by 
both the surgeon and the oncologist or qualified designee to determine adequate surgical 
recovery before initiation of study drug. In the event of delays, there is no timeframe 
restriction in terms of when adjuvant pembrolizumab is initiated.  
Up to 12 months of pembrolizumab  are given every 3 weeks after C1 per the Trial Flow 
Chart, Section 6.0.  
7.1.3.3  Post- Treatment Visits  
Subjects are evaluated within 4 weeks of their last dose of pembrolizumab  and then 
according to the  Trial Flow Chart, Section 6.0.  
7.1.3 .3.1 Safety Follow -Up Visit  
The mandatory Safety Follow -Up Visit should be conducted within 4 weeks  after the last 
dose of trial treatment or before the ini tiation of a new anti -cancer  treatment, whichever 
comes first. All AEs that occur prior to the Safety Follow -Up Visit should be recorded.  
Subjects with an AE of Grade > 1 will be followed until the resolution of the AE to Grade 0 -1 
or until the beginning of a new anti -neoplastic therapy, whichever occurs first. SAEs that 
occur wi thin 90 days of the end of treatment or before initiation of a new anti -cancer  
treatment should also b e followed and recorded.  
7.1.3.4  Follow -up Visits  
Subjects will  move into the Follow -Up Phase after completing pembrolizumab  and should 
be assessed every 3 -6 mont hs by radiologic imag ing to monitor disease status  (Section 6.0 -  
Trial Flow Chart ). Every effort should be made to collect information regarding disease 
status until the start of new anti -neoplastic therapy, disease progression, death, or end of 
the study . 
7.1.3.4.1  Survival Follow -up 
Once a subject experiences confirmed disease progression or starts a new anti -cancer  
therapy, the subject moves into the survival follow- up phase and should be contacted by 
UPCC# 01615: Tissue Collection Study of Pembrolizumab in Advanced Melanoma  
 
Version Date: 06/18/201 8   36 
 telephone every 12 weeks to assess for survival status until d eath, withdrawal of consent, 
or the end of the  study, whichever occurs first.  
7.1.3.4.2  Defin ition of E valuable Patients  
A patient who has both adequate tissue collected prior to surgery and adequate tissue 
collected at surgery, will be deemed evaluable. Patients who do not have adequate tissue 
collected at either time point or who do not undergo surgery, are deemed unevaluable and 
will be re placed. If such patients received Pembrolizumab, then they will be evaluated in all 
safety analyses.  
7.1.3.4.3  Definition of Time -to-event Outcomes  
Disease -free survival (DFS) is defined as the time from date of surgery to date of first 
documented disease progressio n, death due to any cause or last date that patient was 
documented to be disease -free (i.e., scan date). DFS is the prefe rred outcome because 
patients are rendered NED from surgery. Overall survival (OS) is defined as the time from 
date of surgery to date of death due to any cause or last patient contact alive. Both DFS and 
OS outcomes will be measured from date of surgery, and not date of pre -surgery single 
dose Pembrolizumab, in order to compare DFS and OS estimates to published outcomes 
from other trials  in this population. Both DFS and OS will be estimated by the Kaplan- Meier 
method.  
7.2 Assessing and Recording Adverse Events  
An adverse event is defined as any untoward medical occurrence in a patient or clinical 
investigation subject administered a pharmaceu tical product and which does not 
necessarily have to have a causal relationship with this treatment. An adverse event can 
therefore be any unfavorable  and unintended sign (including an abnormal laboratory 
finding, for example), symptom, or disease temporally associated with the use of a 
medicinal product or protocol -specified procedure, whether or not considered related to 
the medicinal product or protocol -specified procedure.  Any worsening (i.e., any clinically 
significant adverse change in frequency and/ or intensity) of a preexisting condition that is 
temporally associated with the use of the pembrolizumab , is also an adverse event.  
Adverse events may occur during the course of the use of Merck product in clinical trials or 
within the follow- up period specified by the protocol, or prescribed in clinical practice, from 
overdose (whether accidental or intentional), from abuse and from withdrawal.  
Adverse events may also occur in screened subjects during any pre -allocation baseline 
period as a result of a protocol -specified intervention, including washout or discontinuation 
of usual therapy, diet, placebo treatment or a procedure.  
All adverse events will be recorded from the time the consent form is signed through 30 
days following cessation of treatment and at each examination on the Adverse Event case 
UPCC# 01615: Tissue Collection Study of Pembrolizumab in Advanced Melanoma  
 
Version Date: 06/18/201 8   37 
 report forms/worksheets.  The reporting timeframe for adverse events meeting any serious 
criteria is described in section 7.2. 1. 
Adverse events will not be collected for subjects during the pre -screening period (for 
determination of archival tissue status) as long as that subject has not undergone any 
protocol -specified procedure or intervention.  If the subject requires a blood draw, fresh 
tumor biopsy etc., the subject is first required to provide consent to  the main study and AEs 
will be captured according to guidelines for standard AE reporting.  
7.2.1  Applicable reporting to Abramson Cancer Center Data and Safety Monitoring 
Committee ( DSMC ) will occur as follows:  
On-Site subjects  (this includes any subjects enrolled at other sites on an in- house study)  
Every effort should be made to report an event as a diagnosis, not as a list of symptoms. 
Symptoms that led to the diagnosis should be included in the event description, but should 
not be the actual event.  
 
     1. Unless covered by exclusions below G rade 3 or higher events must be reported within 
10 days of knowledge.  
     2. All unexpected deaths within one business day of knowledge.  
     3. All others deaths within 30 days of knowledge. Deaths of subjects off -study for greater  
than 30 days from the last study treatment/intervention are not reportable  unless a 
longer time frame is specified in the protocol.  
 
EXCEPTIONS to AE/SAE Reporting:  
 
a. Grade 3 or 4 events that are judged by a study investigator to be cl early 
unrelated to protocol therapy.    The reason for determining that the event is 
unrelated must be clearly documented in the EMR.  
b. Grade 3 or 4 events that are probably or definitely related to progression of 
disease as judged by a study investigator. The fact that this event is related to 
disease progression must be clearly document ed in the EMR.  
c. Grade 3 or 4 events that are probably or definitely related to an FDA 
approved agent. The fact that this event is related to the FDA approved agent 
must be cle arly documented in the EMR.  
 
 
7.3 7.3  Exceptions  
 
UPCC# 01615: Tissue Collection Study of Pembrolizumab in Advanced Melanoma  
 
Version Date: 06/18/201 8   38 
 A one time, intentional  action (planned prospectively) or process that departs from the IRB 
and CTSRMC approved study protocol, intended for  one occurrence.  Advance  documented 
IRB and DSMC approval is required . 
For in -house studies with a Medical Monitor or Safety Monitoring Committee (not DSMB), 
approval must be obtained from the Medical Monitor or Safety Monitoring Committee prior 
to submitting the exception reques t to the DSMC.   The following information must be 
contained in your exception request:  
• When it is needed and why it is needed in that timeframe  
• Has the Medical Monitor or Sponsor approved and provide the documentation of 
approval 
• Is this an exception from eligibility, treatment, disease progression, study calendar 
windows, etc.  
• Why the exception is needed (cite the section(s) of the protocol) along with the full 
clinical details of the subject. This must be determined by the sub- Investigator or PI.  
• The re ason why the protocol currently doesn't allow the situation for which an 
exception is being requested. This must be determined by the sub- Investigator or PI.  
• If there are plans to amend the protocol and if not, why not.  
• If additional follow -up or interventions will be required in order to protect the 
subject as a result of this exception.  
 
Study Exceptions the DSMC may Reject : 
 
Exceptions to eligibility, treatment/dosing, contraindicated treatment/therapies/  
interventions or safety tests for the following types of studies  may be rejected by the 
DSMC :1. Any investigator -initiated treatment study.  
2. Any treatment study involving on- campus manufacturing of any component, regardless 
of sponsor.  
  
To seek approval, you must provide the DSMC with strong and compelling scientific and 
clinical information to support your request. You should also include a statement explaining 
whether or not the protocol will be amended. If the protocol will not be amended your 
reasoning must be provided. If this situation is likely  to happen again, the DSMC will require 
a protocol amendment.  
 
 
7.4 7.4  Deviation  
 
Any unintentional  action or process that departs from the IRB and DSMC approv al and is 
identified retrospectively .  The deviation is reportable to the DSMC and the IRB within 10 
UPCC# 01615: Tissue Collection Study of Pembrolizumab in Advanced Melanoma  
 
Version Date: 06/18/201 8   39 
 days from the time the event becomes known to the study team only when: one or more 
participants were placed at increased risk of harm, or, the event has the potential to occur 
again, or the eve nt has the potential to qualify as serious or continuing noncompliance.  
 
 
If the PI determines that a deviation has any potential to impact participant safety (harm 
and/or risk), or the integrity of data produced from the participant, or some other overall 
impact on the study, the PI must report the deviation to the IRB and DSMC as described 
above. The IRB will make the final assessment of the impact. The DSMC will assess for 
additional safety and scientific integrity concerns.  
 
The following information mu st be contained in your deviation report:  
• When it happened? When the study team (any member) became aware  
• The full description of the deviation including important dates, test results, actions 
taken towards the subject, etc. Also, why it happened and how i t was identified.  
• Was the Medical Monitor or Sponsor notified. If so, their response?  
• The PIs assessment of the impact on risk, safety and/or outcome. If no impact, why. 
If impact, what and what will happen next.  
• The corrective actions that have been imple mented to date and the impact of those 
corrective action plans.  
• Future corrective action plans (if applicable) and the impact of those plans.  
• If there are plans to amend the protocol (if applicable to prevent future deviations) 
and if not, why not.  
 
If the  PI determines that the event had no potential to impact participant safety (harm 
and/or risk) or the integrity of data produced from the participant, the PI must fully 
document his/her rationale for each category (risk, harm, and participant data).  
 
. 
 
7.5 7.5  Events Requiring Prompt Reporting to the IRB including Unanticipated Problem 
Involving Risks to Subjects or Others Reporting Requirements  
Federal Regulation  21CFR §56.108(b)(1)  and 45 CFR 46.103(b)(5)  require the IRB to "follow 
written procedures for ensuring prompt reporting to the IRB…any unanticipated problems 
involving  risk to human subjects or others."    
In alignment with 21 CFR 312, investigators are required to promptly report to the IRB:  
 (1) Unanticipated problems including suspected adverse reactions and adverse reactions.  
UPCC# 01615: Tissue Collection Study of Pembrolizumab in Advanced Melanoma  
 
Version Date: 06/18/201 8   40 
 • An event is considered a “suspected adver se reaction” when there is  reasonable 
possibility  that the drug/investigational product caused the adverse event.   For these 
reporting purposes,  reasonable possibility  means there is evidence to suggest a 
causal relationship between the drug/investigationa l product and the event.  
• For University of Pennsylvania IRB reporting, this means an event should be  
considered  probably  or definitely related to the research procedures.  
• An event is “unexpected” if it is not listed in the investigator’s brochure/package 
insert, or, is not listed at the specificity or severity that has previously been observed 
with the specific drug/investigational product; if an investigator’s brochure/package 
insert is not available, is not consistent with the risk information described in the 
general investigational plan.)  
• “Unexpected” also refers to events that are mentioned in the investigator’s 
brochure/package insert as occurring with a class of drugs or as anticipated, but, are 
not mentioned as to have been occurring (have been seen ) with the particular 
drug/investigational product under study.   
 (2) Unanticipated adverse device reaction. Any serious adverse effect on health or safety or 
any life -threatening problem or death caused by, or associated with, a device, if that effect, 
problem, or death was not previously identified in nature, severity, or degree of incidence 
in the investigational plan or application (including a supplementary plan or application, or 
any other unanticipated serious problem associated with a device that re lates to the rights, 
safety, or welfare of subjects.  
• For drug/investigational product and device events, “serious” is defined as any 
death, life -threatening adverse event, inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of 
existing hospitalization, a persistent or significant incapacity or substantial 
disruption of the ability to conduct normal life functions, or a congenital 
anomaly/birth defect.   Other events that may be considered “serious” but not meet 
the prior criteria include: those events that may jeopard ize the patient or subject 
and may require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the outcomes 
noted above.  
 (3) In addition to unanticipated problems, the IRB also requires prompt reporting of the 
following events:  
• Complaint of a participant when the complaint indicates unexpected risks or the 
complaint cannot be resolved by the research team.  
• Violation or deviation (meaning an accidental or unintentional change to the IRB 
approved protocol) only when: one or more participants were placed at increased 
risk of harm, or, the event has the potential to occur again, the event represents 
serious or continuing noncompliance.   
UPCC# 01615: Tissue Collection Study of Pembrolizumab in Advanced Melanoma  
 
Version Date: 06/18/201 8   41 
  (4)  Breach of confidentiality.  
 (5) Incarceration of a participant when the research was not previously approved under 
Subpar t C and the investigator believes it is in the best interest of the subject to remain on 
the study.  
7.6 7.6 Reporting to the Sponsor and to Merck  
7.6.1 7.6.1  Definition of an Overdose for This Protocol and Reporting of Overdose 
to the Sponsor and to Merck 
For purposes of this trial, an overdose is any dose higher than 20% over the prescribed dose  
for pembrolizumab . No specific information is available on the treatment of overdose of 
pembrolizumab .   Pembrolizumab should be discontinued and the subject shoul d be 
observed closely for signs of toxicity.  Appropriate supportive treatment should be provided 
if clinically indicated.  
If an adverse event(s)  is associated with (“results from”) the overdose of a Merck  product, 
the adverse event(s) is reported as a ser ious adverse event, even if no other seriousness 
criteria are met.  
If a dose of Merck ’s product meeting the protocol definition of overdose is taken without 
any associated clinical symptoms or abnormal laboratory results, the overdose is reported 
as a non -serious Event of Clinical Interest (ECI), using the terminology “accidental or 
intentional overdose without adverse effect.”  
All reports of overdose with and without an adverse event must be reported within 24 
hours to the Sponsor -Investigator  and within 2 working days  hours to Merck Global Safety . 
(Attn: Worldwide Product Safety; FAX 215 993 -1220)  
7.6.2 7.6.2 Reporting of Pregnancy and Lactation to the Sponsor -Investigator  and 
to Merck  
Although pregnancy and lactation are not considered adverse events, it is the responsibility 
of investigators or their designees to report any pregnancy or lactation in a subject 
(spontaneously reported to them), including the pregnancy of a male subject's female 
partner that occurs during the trial or within 120 days of completing the trial  or 30 days 
following cessation of treatment if the subject initiates new anticancer therapy, whichever 
is earlier.  All subjects and female partners of male subjects who become pregnant must be 
followed to the completion/termination of the pregnancy.  Pregnancy outcomes of 
spontaneous abortion, missed abortion, benign hydatidiform mole, blighted ovum, fetal 
death, intr auterine death, miscarriage and stillbirth must be reported as serious events 
(Important Medical Events).  If the pregnancy continues to term, the outcome (health of 
infant) must also be reported.  
UPCC# 01615: Tissue Collection Study of Pembrolizumab in Advanced Melanoma  
 
Version Date: 06/18/201 8   42 
 Such events must be reported within 24 hours to the Sponsor -Investigator  and within 2 
working days to Merck Global Safety. (Attn: Worldwide Product Safety; (FAX 215 993- 1220)  
7.6.3 7.6.3 Immediate Reporting of Adverse Events to the Sponsor and to Merck  
7.6.3.1 7.6.3.1 Serious Adverse Events 
A serious adverse event is any advers e event occurring at any dose or during any use of 
Merck ’s product that:  
-Results in death;  
-Is life threatening;  
-Results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity;  
-Results in or prolongs an existing inpatient hospitalization;  
-Is a congenital a nomaly/birth defect;  
-Is a new cancer (that is not a condition of the study);  
-Is associated with an overdose;  
-Is an other important medical event  
SAE reports and any other relevant safety information are to be forwarded to the Merck 
Global Safety facsimil e number:  +1 -215- 993-1220 within two (2) business days of learning 
of the information.  
Refer to Table 10 for additional details regarding each of the above criteria.  
Progression of the cancer under study is not considered an adverse event unless it results in 
hospitalization or death.  
Additionally, any serious adverse event, considered by an investigator who is a physician or 
qualified designee  to be related to Merck product that is brought to the attention of the 
investigator at any time outside of the time period specified in the previous paragraph also 
must be reported immediately to the Sponsor -Investigator  and to Merck.  
All subjects with serious adverse events must be followed up for outcome.  
7.6.3.2  Events of Clinical Interest  
Selected non- serious and serio us adverse events are also known as Events of Clinical 
Interest (ECI) and must be recorded as such on the Adverse Event case report 
forms/worksheets and reported within 24 hours to the Sponsor and within 2 working days 
to Merck Global Safety. (Attn: Worldwide Product Safety; FAX 215 993 -1220)  
UPCC# 01615: Tissue Collection Study of Pembrolizumab in Advanced Melanoma  
 
Version Date: 06/18/201 8   43 
 Events of clinical interest for this trial include:  
1.  A n overdose of Merck product, as defined in Section 7.2.1 -  Definition of an Overdose for 
This Protocol and Reporting of Overdose to the Sponsor, that is not associated with clinical 
symptoms or abnormal laboratory results.  
2.  A n elevated AST or ALT lab value that is greater than or equal to 3X the upper limit of 
normal and an elevated total bilirubin lab value that is greater than or equal to 2X the upper 
limit of normal and, at the same time, an alkaline phosphatase lab value that is less than 2X 
the uppe r limit of normal, as determined by way of protocol- specified laboratory testing or 
unscheduled laboratory testing.*  
*Note:   These criteria are based upon available regulatory guidance documents. The 
purpose of the criteria is to specify a threshold of abnormal hepatic tests that may 
require an additional evaluation for an underlying etiology.  
Subjects should be assessed for possible ECIs prior to each dose.  Lab results should be  
evaluated and subjects should be asked for signs and symptoms suggestive of a n immune -
related event.  Subjects who develop an ECI thought to be immune -related should have 
additional testing to rule out other etiologic causes.  If lab results or symptoms indicate a 
possible immune -related ECI, then additional testing should be perfo rmed to rule out other 
etiologic causes.  If no other cause is found, then it i s assumed to be immune -related.  
ECIs that occur in any subject from the date of first dose through 90 days following 
cessation of treatment, or the initiation of a new anticance r therapy, whichever is earlier, 
whether or not related to the Merck’s product, must be reported within 24 hours to the 
Sponsor -Investigator  and to Merck Global Safety within 2 working days.  
7.6.4 Evaluating Adverse Events  
An investigator who is a physician or qualified designee  will evaluate all adverse events 
according to the NCI Common Terminology for Adverse Events (CTCAE), version 4.0. Any 
adverse event which changes CTCAE grade over the course of a given episode will have each 
change of grade recorded on the adverse event case report forms/worksheets.  
All adverse events regardless of CTCAE grade must also be evaluated for seriousness.  
UPCC# 01615: Tissue Collection Study of Pembrolizumab in Advanced Melanoma  
 
Version Date: 06/18/201 8   44 
  
Table 10  Evaluating Adverse Events  
An investigator who is a physician  or qualified designee , will evaluate all adverse events as to:  
V4.0 CTCAE 
Grading  Grade 1  Mild; asymptomatic or mid symptoms; clinical or diagnostic observations only; intervention not 
indicated.  
 Grade 2  Moderate; minimal, local or noninvasive intervention indicated; limiting age -appropriate 
instrumental ADL.  
 Grade 3  Severe or medically significant but not immediately life -threatening; hospitalization or 
prolongation or hospitalization indicated; disabling; limiting self -care ADL.  
 Grade 4  Life threatening consequences; urgent intervention indicated.  
 Grade 5  Death related to AE  
Seriousness  A serious adverse event is any adverse event occurring at any dose or during any use of Merck product that:  
 †Results in death ; or 
 †Is life threatening; or  places the subject, in the view of the investigator, at immediate risk of death from the 
event as it occurred (Note: This does not include an adverse event that, had it occurred in a more severe form, 
might have caused death.); or  
 †Results in a persiste nt or significant disability/incapacity  (substantial disruption of one’s ability to conduct 
normal life functions); or  
UPCC# 01615: Tissue Collection Study of Pembrolizumab in Advanced Melanoma  
 
Version Date: 06/18/201 8   45 
 Table 10  Evaluating Adverse Events  
 †Results in or prolongs an existing inpatient hospitalization  (hospitalization is defined as an inpatient admission, 
regardless of length of stay, even if the hospitalization is a precautionary measure for continued observation. 
(Note: Hospitalization [including hospitalization for an elective procedure] for a preex isting condition which has 
not worsened does not constitute a serious adverse event.); or  
 †Is a congenital anomaly/birth defect  (in offspring of subject taking the product regardless of time to 
diagnosis);or  
 Is a new  cancer;  (that is not a condition of  the study)  or 
 Is an overdose  (whether accidental or intentional).  Any adverse event associated with an overdose is considered a 
serious adverse event. An overdose that is not associated with an adverse event is considered a non- serious event 
of clinical interest and must be reported within 24 hours.  
 Other important medical events  that may not result in death, not be life threatening, or not require 
hospitalization may be considered a serious adverse event when, based upon appropriate medical judgment, the 
event may jeopardize the subject and may require medical or surgical interve ntion to prevent one of the outcomes 
listed previously (designated above by a †).  
Duration  Record the start and stop dates of the adverse event. If less than 1 day, indicate the appropriate length of time 
and units  
Action 
taken  Did the adverse event cause the Merck product to be discontinued?  
UPCC# 01615: Tissue Collection Study of Pembrolizumab in Advanced Melanoma  
 
Version Date: 06/18/201 8   46 
 Table 10  Evaluating Adverse Events  
Relationship 
to test drug  Did the Merck product cause the adverse event? The determination of the likelihood that the Merck product 
caused the adverse event will be provided by an investigator who is a physicia n or qualified designee . The 
investigator’s signed/dated initials on the source document or worksheet that supports the causality noted on the 
AE form, ensures that a medically qualified assessment of causality was done. This initialed document must be 
retained for the required regulatory time frame. The criteria below are intended as reference guidelines to assist 
the investigator in assessing the likelihood of a relationship between the test drug and the adverse event based 
upon the available information.  
The following components are to be used to assess the relationship between the Merck product and the AE ; the 
greater the correlation with the components and their respective elements (in number and/or intensity), the more 
likely the Merck product caused the adverse event (AE):  
 Exposure  Is there evidence that the subject was actually exposed to the Merck product such as: reliable 
history, acceptable compliance assessment (pill count, diary, etc.), expected pharmacologic effect, 
or measurement of drug/metabolite in bodily specimen?  
 Time 
Course  Did the AE follow in a reasonable temporal sequence from admin istration of the Merck product?  
Is the time of onset of the AE compatible with a drug -induced effect (applies to trials with 
investigational med icinal product)?  
 Likely Cause  Is the AE not reasonably explained by another etiology such as underlying disease, other 
drug(s)/vaccine(s), or other host or environmental factors  
UPCC# 01615: Tissue Collection Study of Pembrolizumab in Advanced Melanoma  
 
Version Date: 06/18/201 8   47 
 Table 10  Evaluating Adverse Events  
  Dechallenge  Was the Merck product discontinued or dose/exposure/frequency  reduced?  
If yes, did the AE resolve or improve?  
If yes, this is a positive dechallenge. If no, this is a negative dechallenge.  
(Note: This criterion is not applicable if: (1) the AE resulted in death or permanent disability; (2) the 
AE resolved/improved d espite continuation of the Merck product; or (3) the trial is a single -dose 
drug trial); or (4) Merck product(s) is/are only used one time.)  
 Rechallenge  Was the subject re -exposed to the Merck product in this study?  
If yes, did the AE recur or worsen?  
If yes, this is a positive rechallenge. If no, this is a negative rechallenge.  
(Note: This criterion is not applicable if: (1) the initial AE resulted in death or permanent disability, 
or (2) the trial is a single -dose drug trial); or (3) Merck product(s) is/are used only one time).  
NOTE: IF A RECHALLENGE IS PLANNED FOR AN ADVERSE EVENT WHICH WAS SERIOUS AND WHICH 
MAY HAVE BEEN CAUSED BY THE MERCK PRODUCT, OR IF REEXPOSURE TO THE MERCK PRODUCT  
POSES ADDITIONAL POTENTIAL SIGNIFICANT RISK TO THE SUBJECT, THEN  THE RECHALLENGE MUST 
BE APPROVED IN ADVANCE BY THE U.S. CLINICAL MONITOR AS PER DOSE MODIFICATION 
GUIDELINES IN THE PROTOCOL.  
 Consistency 
with Trial 
Treatment 
Profile  Is the clinical/pathological presentation of the AE consistent with previous knowledge  regarding the 
Merck product or drug class pharmacology or toxicology?  
UPCC# 01615: Tissue Collection Study of Pembrolizumab in Advanced Melanoma  
 
Version Date: 06/18/201 8   48 
 Table 10  Evaluating Adverse Events  
The assessment of relationship will be reported on the case report forms /worksheets by an investigator who is a physician or 
qualified designee  according to his/her best clinical judg ment, including consideration of the above elements.  
Record one of the 
following  Use the following scale of criteria as guidance (not all criteria must be present to be indicative of 
a Merck product relationship).  
Yes, there is a reasonable 
possibility of Merck 
product relationship.  There is evidence of exposure to the Merck product.  The temporal sequence of the AE onset 
relative to the administration of the Merck product is reasonable.  The AE is more likely explained 
by the Merck product than by another cause.  
No, there is not a 
reasonable possibility 
Merck product 
relationship Subject did not receive the Merck product OR temporal sequence of the AE onset relative to 
administration of the Merck product is not reasonable OR there is another obvious cause of the AE.  
(Also entered for a subject with overdose without an associated AE.)  
UPCC# 01615: Tissue Collection Study of Pembrolizumab in Advanced Melanoma  
 
Version Date: 06/18/201 8   49 
 7.6.5 Sponsor Responsibility for Reporting Adverse Events  
All Adverse Events will be reported to regulatory authorities, IRB and investigators in 
accordance with all applicab le global laws and regulations.  
8.0 8.0    STATISTICAL CO NSIDERATIONS 
 
8.1       Design 
This a single arm Phase 1b trial in patients with resectable advanced melanoma that will: 
1) establish the safety and feasibility of Pembrolizumab as adjuvant therapy and 2) 
investigate the immunologic effects of Pembrolizumab in tumor and peripheral blood. 
Patients will have tumor tissue collected at study entry, and then they receive one dose 
of Pembrolizumab prior surgical tumor resection. After surgery, patients receive 
adjuvant Pembrolizumab for up to one year, during which time serial blood samples will 
be taken.  
 
8.2      Objectives  
The primary objectives are to:  
1. Collect tumor tissue before and after a single dose of Pembrolizumab for explorat ory 
analyses of the  immunologic effects of Pembrolizumab and to generate testable and 
reasonable hypotheses. These analyses will examine immunologic components of tumor 
infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs).  
2.  Evaluate safety, tolerability and adverse events of P embrolizumab when given peri -
operatively and as adjuvant therapy.  
The secondary objectives are to: 
1. To examine the effects of Pembrolizumab on other immune regulatory pathways, from 
paired tumor tissue samples after treatment with a single dose of Pembroliz umab.  
 
2. To examine the effects of Pembrolizumab on immune biomarkers in PBMC and serum at 
serial time points during and after treatment with Pembrolizumab.  
 
3. To evaluate the disease -free-survival (DFS) and overall survival (OS) in patients receiving 
Pembrolizumab as adjuvant therapy.  
 
4. To describe the rate of recurrence and time to disease recurrence in patients receiving 
Pembrolizumab as adjuvant therapy.  
 
UPCC# 01615: Tissue Collection Study of Pembrolizumab in Advanced Melanoma  
 
Version Date: 06/18/201 8   50 
 8.3       Endpoints  
Evaluability . A patient will be deemed evaluable for immune biomarker analysis if the 
patient received one pre -operative dose of Pembrolizumab and had adequate tissue 
collected at both baseline and tumor resection. Non- evaluable patients will be replaced.  
 
Toxicity.  CTCAE version 4.0 grades will be employed. Any patient who receives any 
amount of Pembrolizumab will be inc luded in the toxicity analysis.  
 
Immune biomarkers.  Priority assays will include: characterization of Tregs, CD8 T cells, 
exhausted T cells defined as  EomeshiPD1hi and Ki67 and Granzyme B in TILs. A full 
description of all immunologic outcomes and hypotheses is included in Section 7. 1.1.12.  
 
Disease -free and overall survival.  Disease -free survival (DFS) is defined as the time from 
date of surgery to date of first documented disease progression, death due to any cause 
or last date that patient was documented to be disease -free (i.e., a scan date). Overall 
survival (OS) is define d as the time from date of surgery to date of death due to any 
cause or last patient contact alive. Both DFS and OS outcomes will be measured from 
date of surgery to allow us to compare DFS and OS estimates with those of other 
adjuvant trials.  
8.4     Moni toring Toxicity  
The study will be terminated early if there is evidence that the rate of serious adverse 
events is greater than 33%. A serious adverse event is defined as any grade 3 or higher 
hematologic or non -hematologic toxicity that is at least possibly related to 
Pembrolizumab and is not an expected adverse event for either Pembrolizumab or 
surgery and which occurs anytime from the initiation of study therapy to 6 weeks post-
surgery. Early termination rules are defined in Section 5.7 . 
8.5     Plans for Data Analysis  
Patient Evaluability.  Only evaluable patients will contribute to the primary analysis that 
characterizes the immunologic effects of Pembrolizumab in tumor tissue and secondary 
analyses on other immune regulatory pathways . All patients, regardless of time o n study 
and procurement of tissue, will contribute to the primary analysis of safety and to the 
secondary analyses of immunologic effects of Pembrolizumab in peripheral blood and of 
disease -free and overall survival.  
 
Toxicity: All observed adverse events which occur anytime from the initiation of study 
therapy to 30 days after the final dose of Pembrolizumab will be graded and tabled. All 
grade 3 or higher hematologic or non -hematologic toxicities that are at least possibly 
related to Pembrolizumab and not an expected adverse event for either Pembrolizumab 
or surgery and which occur anytime from the initiation of study therapy to 6 weeks post-
surgery will be described separately.  
 
UPCC# 01615: Tissue Collection Study of Pembrolizumab in Advanced Melanoma  
 
Version Date: 06/18/201 8   51 
 Immune biomarkers:  Immunologic outcomes will be described using scatter and box 
plots and descriptive statistics (e.g., mean, median, SD, range). Pre -treatment to post-
treatment paired comparisons will employ paired Student’s t -test or Wilcoxon signed 
ranks test, as appropriate. With several post -treatment blood samples intended, trends 
over time will be described using scatter and box plots, descriptive statistics (e.g., fold 
changes from baseline). Comparisons of post -treatment values to the baseline value will 
be performed by repeated measures ANOVA. Longitudinal modeling using l inear mixed 
effects models will also be attempted, in order to extend this investigation to 
characterized trends over time and could include modeling jointly the inter -dependency 
among several longitudinally  measured immunologic outcomes.  
 
Disease -free and  overall survival:  will be estimated by the method of Kaplan and Meier. 
Median and 1 -year DFS and OS rates  and 95% CIs will be estimated.  
 
8.6       Sample Size  
This study will enroll 30 evaluable patients. Assuming that at most 5% of enrolled 
patients will not be evaluable, we expect that no more than 32 patients will be enrolled.  
 
Primary objective: Treatment of 30 -32 patients will firmly establish the safety of the 
treatment. If the true underlying serious adverse rate is as low as 10%, then the failure 
to observe at least one adverse event in 32 treated patients, is <5% (binomial 
probability is 0.042). If the observed serious adverse event rate is 16.7% (5 of 30 
patients), then the true event rate is likely to be no higher than 30%, since the upper 
bound of the 2 -sided 95% confidence interval is 30%.  
 
Primary objective: For exploratory analyses of immunological effects of Pembrolizumab 
in tumor tissue, we anticipate conducting many paired comparisons. Due to multiple 
parameters tested, we will control the false positive rate by calculating adjusted p 
values using  the Bonferroni -Holm method.  
 
We have estimated the detectable effect sizes for two of our immunologic endpoints, 
CD8/Treg ratio and Granzyme  B level using data on peripheral blood. In 17 melanoma 
patients treated with Pembrolizumab, the mean pre - and maximum post -treatment 
Granzyme B levels in peripheral blood were 27.49 and 41.72, respectively. The standard 
deviation of paired differences (s d) was 15.90, yielding an effect size of 0.89s d. The 
mean pre - and maximum post -treatment CD8/Treg ratio in peripheral blood were 5.61 
and 11.82, respectively. The standard deviation of paired differences (s d) was 8.61, 
yielding an effect size of 0.72s d. With 30 evaluable patients, there is 99% power to 
detect an effect size of 0.89s d and 96% power to detect an effect size of 0.72s d using a 
paired Student’s t -test at 2 -sided 5% error.  
 
These two endpoints were selected because they had the most dramatic post- treatment 
increases in peripheral blood. More heterogeneity and smaller effect sizes are possible 
in tissue. But we still have sufficient power to detect smaller effect sizes. For example, 
UPCC# 01615: Tissue Collection Study of Pembrolizumab in Advanced Melanoma  
 
Version Date: 06/18/201 8   52 
 an effect size of 0.55s d can be detected with 82% power by a paire d t-test at 2 -sided 5% 
significance level.  
 
8.7       Study Duration 
With an estimated accrual of 5 patients  per month, it is anticipated that accrual will 
continue for 6 months. We plan to follow patients for an additional 2 years after 
enrollment has bee n completed, in order  to better estimate DFS and OS.  
9.0 LABELING, PACKAGING,  STORAGE AND RETURN OF CLINICAL SUPPLIES  
9.1 Investigational Product  
The investigator shall take responsibility for and shall take all steps to maintain appropriate 
records and ensure appropriate supply, storage, handling, distribution and usage of 
investigational product in accordance with the protocol and any applicable laws and 
regulations.  
Clinical Supplies will be provided by Merck as summarized in  Table 11.  
Table 11 Product Descriptions  
Product Name & Potency  Dosage Form  
Pembrolizumab  100 mg/ 4mL  Solution for Injection  
 
9.2 Packaging and Labeling Information  
Clinical supplies will be affixed with a clinical label in accordance with regulatory requirements.  
9.3 Clinical Supplies Disclosure 
This trial is open-label; therefore, the subject, the trial site personnel, the Sponsor -Investigator, sub -
investigators and/or designee are not blinded to treatment. Drug identity (name, strength) is included in 
the label text; random code/disclosure envelopes or lists are not provided.  
9.4 Storage and Handling Requirements  
Clinical supplies must be stored in a secure, limited-access location under the storage conditions 
specified on the label.  They will be stored in the PCAM Investigational Drug Ph armacy as part of the 
Abramson Cancer Center.  
Receipt and dispensing of trial medication must be recorded by an authorized person at the trial site.  
Clinical supplies may not be used for any purpose other than that stated in the protocol.  
UPCC# 01615: Tissue Collection Study of Pembrolizumab in Advanced Melanoma  
 
Version Date: 06/18/201 8   53 
 9.5 Returns and Reconciliation  
The investigator is responsible for keeping accurate records of the clinical supplies received from Merck 
or designee, the amount dispensed to and returned by the subjects and the amount remaining at the 
conclusion of the trial.  
Upon  completion or termination  of the study,  all unused  and/or  partially used investigational product 
will be destroyed at the site per institutional policy. It is the Investigat or’s respon sibility to arrange 
for disposal of all empty containers, provided that procedures for proper disposal have been 
established according to applicable federal, state, local and institutional guidelines and procedures, and 
provided that appropriate records of disposal are kept.  
10.0  ADMINISTRATIVE AND R EGULATORY DETAILS  
10.1 Confidentiali ty 
Information about study subjects will be kept confidential and managed according to the requirements 
of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA). Those regulations require a signed 
subject authorization informing the subject of the following: 
- What protected health information (PHI) will be collected from subjects in this study  
- Who will have access to that information and why  
- Who will use or disclose that information 
- The rights of a research subject to revoke their authorization for use of their PHI.  
In the event that a subject revokes authorization to collect or use PHI, the investigator, by regulation, 
retains the ability to use all information collected prior to the revocation of subject authorization. For 
subjects that have revoked authorization to collect or use PHI, attempts should be made to obtain 
permission to collect at least vital status (i.e. that the subject is alive) at the end of their scheduled study 
period.  
10.2 Compliance with Trial Registration and Results Post ing Requirements  
Under the terms of the Food and Drug Administration Modernization Act (FDAMA) and the Food and 
Drug Administration Amendments Act (FDAAA), the Sponsor of the trial is solely responsible for 
determining whether the trial and its results are  subject to the requirements for submission to the 
Clinical Trials Data Bank, http://www.clinicaltrials.gov.  Information posted will allow subjects to identify 
potentially appropriate trials for their disease conditions and pursue participation by calling  a central 
contact number for further information on appropriate trial locations and tri al site contact information.  
10.3 Quality Management System  
The Data Safety and Monitoring Committee (DSMC) of the University of Pennsylvania’s Abramson 
Cancer Center will m onitor the data quality and adherence to safety rules. Additionally, the DSMC will 
review all safety/toxicity data for the trial and recommend trial suspension or termination as needed. 
UPCC# 01615: Tissue Collection Study of Pembrolizumab in Advanced Melanoma  
 
Version Date: 06/18/201 8   54 
 Specific details of monitoring and audit frequency will be included in  the Monitoring Plan, but will be at 
least every 6 months.  
Medical monitor  
This study will be monitored in accordance with the DSMC monitoring plan.  Dr. Arati Desai , an 
independent clinician in the Department of Medicine, Di vision of Hematology Oncology, will serve as 
medical monitor and will consult on decisions made as a part of this trial as noted above.  The medical 
monitor will perform a regular review and assessment of the number and type of serious adverse events  
(at minimum yearly, but may occur mo re frequently as  needed) . 
It is the responsibility of the Principal Investigator to oversee the safety of the study. This safety 
monitoring will include careful assessment and appropriate reporting of adverse events, as noted above, 
as well as the construction and implementation of a site da ta and safety monitoring plan.  
Monitoring Plan:  
Please see the DSMC Monitoring Plan.  
10.4 Data Management  
Data collection and management will be carried out by the staff of the Clinical Research Unit at 
Penn’s Abramson Cancer Center. The study case report form (CRF) is the primary data 
collection instrument for the study. All data requested on the CRF must be recorded. All entries 
will be entered into an electronic data capture system (EDC) via VELOS.  
10.5 Compliance with Auditing and Inspecting  
The investigator will permit the Cancer Center’s Administrative Director of Compliance and 
Auditing  or her designee, and the Abramson Cancer Center Data Safety and Monitoring 
Committee (DCOM) , to review records, data and facilities at mutually agreeable times  in 
accordance with the DSMC monitoring plan.  
The investigator also agrees to allow IRB review and regulatory authority  (FDA) inspection of 
trial- related documents and procedures and provide for direct access to all trial -related source 
data and documents.  
The investigator shall prepare and maintain complete and accurate trial documentation in 
compliance with Good Clinical Practice standards and applicable federal, state and local laws, 
rules and regulations; and, for each subject participating in the trial, provide all data, and, upon 
completion or termination of the clinical trial, submit any other reports to the Sponsor-
Investigator and Merck as required by this protocol.  
10.6 Compliance with Trial Registration and Results Posting Requirements  
Under the terms of the Food and Drug Administration Modernization Act (FDAMA) and the 
Food and Drug Administration Amendments Act (FDAAA), the Sponsor of the trial is solely 
UPCC# 01615: Tissue Collection Study of Pembrolizumab in Advanced Melanoma  
 
Version Date: 06/18/201 8   55 
 responsible for determining whether the trial and its results are subject to the r equirements for 
submission to the Clinical Trials Data Bank, http://www.clinicaltrials.gov.  Information posted 
will allow subjects to identify potentially appropriate trials for their disease conditions and 
pursue participation by calling a central contac t number for further information on appropriate 
trial locations and trial site contact information.  
10.7    Ethical Considerations  
This study is to be conducted according to US and international standards of Good Clinical 
Practice (FDA Title 21 part 312 an d International Conference on Harmonization guidelines), 
applicable government regulations and Institutional research policies and procedures. This 
protocol and any amendments will be submitted to the University of Pennsylvania IRB and 
CTSRMC for formal ap proval of the study conduct. The decision of the IRB concerning the 
conduct of the study will be made in writing to the investigator and a copy of this decision will 
be provided before commencement of this study.  
All subjects for this study will be provide d a consent form describing this study and providing 
sufficient information for subjects to make an informed decision about their participation in 
this study. This consent form will be submitted with the protocol for review and approval by the 
IRB and CTSR MC for the study. The formal consent of a subject, using the IRB -approved consent 
form, must be obtained before that subject is submitted to any study procedure. This consent 
form must be signed by the patient or legally acceptable surrogate, and the physi cian-
investigator obtaining the consent.  
11.0  LIST OF REFERENCES  
Disis ML.  Immune regulation of cancer. J Clin Oncol 2010; 28(29):4531 -8. 
Dong H, Strome SE, Salomao DR, Tamura H, Hirano F, Flies DB, et al. Tumor -associated 
B7-H1 promotes T- cell apoptosis: a p otential mechanism of immune evasion. Nat Med 
2002;8(8):793- 800. 
Sharpe AH, Freeman GJ. The B7 -CD28 superfamily. Nature 2002;2:116- 26. 
Brown JA, Dorfman DM, Ma F- R, Sullivan EL, Munoz O, Wood CR, et al. Blockade of 
programmed death -1 ligands on dendritic c ells enhances T cell activation and cytokine 
productio n. J Immunol 2003;170:1257- 66. 
Francisco LM, Sage PT, Sharpe AH. The PD -1 pathway in tolerance and autoimmunity. 
Immunol Rev 2010;236:219- 42. 
Thompson RH, Dong H, Lohse CM, Leibovich BC, Blute ML, Chevi lle JC, et al. PD -1 
expressed by tumor -infiltrating immune cells and is associated with poor outcome for 
patients with renal cell carcinoma. Clin  Caner Res 2007;13(6):1757 -61. 
Talmadge JE, Donkor M, Scholar E. Inflammatory cell infiltration of tumors: Jeky ll or 
Hyde. Cancer Metastasis Rev 2007;26:373 -400.  
UPCC# 01615: Tissue Collection Study of Pembrolizumab in Advanced Melanoma  
 
Version Date: 06/18/201 8   56 
 Usubütün A, Ayhan A, Uygur MC, zen H, klu C, acan S. Prognostic factors in renal cell 
carcinoma. J Exp Clin Cancer Res 1998;17(1):77- 81. 
Al-Shibli KI, Donnem T, Al- Saad S, Persson M, Bremnes RM, Busund L -T. Prognostic effect 
of epithelial and stromal symphocyte infiltration in non -small cell lung cancer. Clin 
Cancer Res 2008;14(16):5220- 7. 
Deschoolmeester V, Baay M, Van Marck E, Weyler J, Vermeulen p, Lardon F, et al. 
Tumor infiltrating lymphocytes: an intriguing player in the survival of colorectal cancer 
patients. BMC Immunol 2010;11:19. 
Diez M, Pollán M, Enriquez JM, Dominguez P, Santana A, Tobaruela E, et al. 
Histopathologic prognostic score in colorectal adenocarcinomas. Anticancer Res 
1998;18:689 -94. 
Galon J, Costes A, Sanchez -Cabo F, Kirilovsky A, Mlecnik B, Lagorce -Pagès C, et al. Type, 
density, and location of immune cells within human colorectal tumors predict clinical 
outcome. Science 2006;313:1960- 4. 
Hiraoka N. Tumor- infiltrating lymphocytes and hepatocellular carcinoma: molecular 
biology. Int J Clin Oncol 2010;15:544- 51. 
Nobili C, Degrate L, Caprotti R, Franciosi C, Leone BE, Trezzi R, et al. Prolonged survival of 
a patient affected by pancreatic adenocarcinoma with massive lymphocyte and 
dendritic cell infiltration after interleukin -2 immunotherapy. Report of a case. Tumori 
2008;94:426 -30. 
Hodi FS, Dranoff G. The biologic importance of tumor- infiltrating lymphocytes. J Cutan 
Pathol 2010;37(Suppl 1):48- 53. 
Kloor M. Lymphocyte infiltration and prognosis in colorectal cancer. Lancet 
2009;10(840):841.  
Hillen F, Baeten CIM, van de Winkel A, Creytens D, van der Schaft DWJ, Winnepenninckx 
V, et al. Leukocyte infiltration and tumor cell plasticity are parameters of aggressiveness 
in primary cutaneous melanoma. Cancer Immu nol Immunother 2008;57:97- 106.  
Lee HE, Chae SW, Lee YJ, Kim MA, Lee HS, Lee BL, et al. Prognostic implications of type 
and density o f tumour -infiltrating lymphocytes in gastric cancer. Br J Cancer 
2008;99(10):1704- 11. 
Leffers N, Gooden MJM, de Jong RA, Hoogeboom B -N, ten Hoor KA, Hollema H, et al. 
Prognostic significance of tumor -infiltrating T -lymphocytes in primary and metastatic 
lesions of advanced stage ovarian cancer. Cancer Immu nol Immunother 2009;58:449 -59. 
Nishimura H, Honjo T, Minato N. Facilitation of β selection and modification of positive 
selection in the thymus of PD- 1-deficient mice . J Exp Med 2000;191(5):891- 7. 
UPCC# 01615: Tissue Collection Study of Pembrolizumab in Advanced Melanoma  
 
Version Date: 06/18/201 8   57 
 Liotta F, Gacci M, Frosali F, Querci V, Vittori G, Lapini A, et al. Frequency of regulatory T 
cells in peripheral blood and in tumour- infiltrating lymphocytes correlates with poor 
prognosis in renal cell carcinoma. BJU Intern 2010;107:1500- 6. 
Ropponen KM, Eskelinen MJ, Lipponen PK, Alhava E, Kosma V -M. Prognostic value of 
tumour -infiltrating lynmphocytes (TILs) in colorectal can cer. J Pathol 1997;182:318- 24. 
Dudley ME, Wunderlich JR, Yang JC, Sherry RM, Topalian SL, Restifo NP, et al. Adoptive 
cell transfer therapy following non -myeloablative but lymphodepleting chemotherapy 
for the treatment of patients with refractory metastatic melanoma. J C lin Oncol 
2005;23(10):2346- 57. 
Hunder NN, Wallen H, Cao J, Hendricks DW, Reilly JZ, Rodmyre R, et al. Treatment of 
metastatic  melanoma with autologous CD4+ T cells against NY -ESO-1. N Engl J Med 
2008;358(25):2698- 703. 
Ölcher M, Braun M, Friedrichs N, Rudlowski C, Bercht E, Fimmers R, et al. Foxp3+ cell 
infiltration and granzyme B+/Foxp3+ cell ratio are associated with outcome in  
neoadjuvant chemotherapy -treated ovarian carcinoma. Cancer Immunol Immunother 
2010;59:909 -19. 
Okazaki T, Maeda A, Nishimura H, Kurosaki T, Honjo T. PD -1 immunoreceptor inhibits B 
cell receptor -mediated signaling by recruiting src homology 2 -domain -containing 
tyrosine phosphatase 2 to phosphotyrosine. PNAS 2001;98(24):13866 -71. 
Greenwald RJ, Freeman GJ, Sharpe AH. The B7 family revisted. An nu Rev Immunol 
2005;23:515 -48. 
Homsi J, Kashani- Sabet M, Messina JL, Daud A. Cutaneous melanoma:  prognostic 
factors. C ancer Control 2005;12(4):223- 9. 
Iannone R, Gergich K, Cong C, Kang P, Daud A, Dronca R, et al.  Efficacy and safety of 
MK-3475 in patients with advanced melanoma.  Pigment Cell Melanoma Res 
2012;25:836 -903.  
Topalian SL, Hodi FS, Brahmer JR, Gettinger SN, Smith DC, McDermott DF, et al. Safety, 
activity, and immune correlates of Anti- PD-1 antibody in cancer. N Engl J Med 20 12:doi: 
10.1056/NEJMoa1200690.  
Lyford- Pike S, Peng S, Young GD, et al.  Evidence for a role of the PD -1:PD -L1 pathway in 
immune resistance  of HPV- associated head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.  Cancer 
Res 2013;73(2): Published online January 3. 
Eisenhauer EA, Therasse P, Bogaerts J, Schwartz LH, Sargent R, Ford R, et al.  New 
response evaluation criteria in solid tumors: Revised RECIST gu ideline (version 1.1). Eur J 
Cancer 2009;45(2):228- 47. 
UPCC# 01615: Tissue Collection Study of Pembrolizumab in Advanced Melanoma  
 
Version Date: 06/18/201 8   58 
 Wolchok JD, Hoos A, O’Day S, Weber JS, Hamid O, Lebbe C, et al.  Guidelines for the 
evaluation of immune therapy activity in solid tumors: immune -related response 
criteria.  Clin Cancer Res 2009;15(23) :7412- 20. 
Blum JL, Jones SE, Buzdar AU, LoRusso PM, et al. Multicenter Phase II Study of Capecitabine 
in Paclitaxel -Refractory Metastatic Breast Cancer. J Clin Oncol 17: 485 -493, 1999  
Martin M, Ruiz A, Munoz M, Balil A, Garcia- Mata J, Calvo L, et al. Gemcitabine plus 
vinorelbine monotherapy in patients with metastatic breast cancer previously treated 
with anthracyclines and taxanes: final results of the phase III Spanish Breast Cancer 
Research Group (GEICAM) trial. Lancet Oncol. 2007;8(3):219.  
Sledge GW, Ne uberg D, Bernardo P, Ingle JN, Martino S, et al.  Phase III Trial of Doxorubicin, 
Paclitaxel, and the Combination of Doxorubicin and Paclitaxel as Front -Line Chemotherapy for 
Metastatic Breast Cancer: An Intergroup Trial (E1193).   J Clin Oncol. 2003;21(4) :588.  
Stewart JSW, Ezra E.W. Cohen EEW, Licitra L, Van Herpen CML, et al.  Phase III Study of 
Gefitinib Compared With Intravenous Methotrexate for Recurrent Squamous Cell 
Carcinoma of the Head and Neck.  J Clin Oncol. 2009;27(11):1864.  
Vermorken JB, Trigo J, Hitt R, Koralewski P, Diaz -Rubio E, et al.  Open -Label, 
Uncontrolled, Multicenter Phase II Study to Evaluate the Efficacy and Toxicity of 
Cetuximab As a Single Agent in Patients With Recurrent and/or Metastatic Squamous 
Cell Carcinoma of the Head and Ne ck Who Failed to Respond to Platinum -Based 
Therapy.   J Clin Oncol. 2007;25(16):2171.  
Bellmunt J, Théodore C, Demkov T, Komyakov B, Sengelov L, et al.  Phase III Trial of 
Vinflunine Plus Best Supportive Care Compared With Best Supportive Care Alone After a 
Platinum -Containing Regimen in Patients With Advanced Transitional Cell Carcinoma of 
the Urothelial Tract.  J Clin Oncol. 2009;27(27):4454  
Sweeney CJ, Roth BJ, Kabbinavar FF, Vaughn DJ, Arning M, et al.  Phase II Study o f 
Pemetrexed for Second -Line Treatment of Transitional Cell Cancer of the Urothelium.  J 
Clin Oncol. 2006;24(21):3451  
Clopper C and Pearson ES. The use of confidence or fiducial limits illustrated in the case 
of the binomial. Biometrika 1934;26:404 -413.  
12.0  APPENDICES  
12.1 ECOG Performance Status  
Grade  Description  
0 Normal activity. Fully active, able to carry on all pre -disease 
performance without restriction.  
UPCC# 01615: Tissue Collection Study of Pembrolizumab in Advanced Melanoma  
 
Version Date: 06/18/201 8   59 
 Grade  Description  
1 Symptoms, but ambulatory. Restricted in physically strenuous 
activity, but ambulatory and able to carry out work of a light or 
sedentary nature (e.g., light housework, office work).  
2 In bed <50% of the time. Ambulatory and capable of all self -care, 
but unable to carry out any work activities. Up and about more than 
50% of waking hours.  
3 In bed >50%  of the time. Capable of only limited self -care, confined 
to bed or chair more than 50% of waking hours.  
4 100% bedridden. Completely disabled. Cannot carry on any self -
care. Totally confined to bed or chair.  
5 Dead.  
* As published in Am. J. Clin. Oncol .:  Oken, M.M., Creech, R.H., Tormey, D.C., 
Horton, J., Davis, T.E., McFadden, E.T., Carbone, P.P.: Toxicity And Response Criteria Of 
The Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group. Am J Clin Oncol 5:649 -655, 1982. The 
Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group, Robert Co mis M.D., Group Chair.  
 
12.2 Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events V4.0 (CTCAE)  
The descriptions and grading scales found in the revised NCI Common Terminology Criteria for 
Adverse Events (CTCAE) version 4.0 will be utilized for adverse event reporting. 
(https://ctep.cancer.gov/protocoldevelopment/electronic_applications/ctc.htm ) 
Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) 1.1 Criteria for Evaluating Response in 
Solid Tumors  
RECIST version 1.1* will be used in this study for assessment of tumor response. While either CT 
or MRI may be utilized, as per RECIST 1.1, CT is the preferred imaging technique in this study.  
* As published in the European Journal of Cancer:  
 E.A. Eisenhauer, P. Therasse, J. Bogaerts, L.H. Schwartz, D. Sargent, R.  Ford, J. Dancey, S. 
Arbuck, S. Gwyther, M. Mooney, L. Rubinstein, L. Shankar, L. Dodd, R. Kaplan, D. Lacombe, J. 
Verweij. New response evaluation criteria in solid tumors: Revised RECIST guideline (version 
1.1). Eur J Cancer. 2009 Jan;45(2):228- 47. 
In addition, volumetric analysis will be explored by central review for response assessment .