 FORM: IRB Proposal – Secondary Use Submission  
NUMBER  VERSION DATE  
HRP -UT903  4/27/2023  
 
Page 1 of 16 
 
Clinicaltrials.gov cover page  
 
Official Title of the study  
Evaluation of Driscoll Health Plan's Nurture program  on nutrition education and food support for 
pregnant  women  
 
NCT number  
To be assigned  
 
Date of the document  
January 24th, 202 4 
 
Unique Protocol ID:  
STUDY0000 5622 (IRB Review Exempt)  
 
Principal Investigator : 
Maninder “Mini” Kahlon  
Associate Professor  
Population Health, Dell Medical School, University of Texas at Austin  
 
  
 
Page 2 of 16 
 STUDY INFORMATION  
Submit this form when seeking determinations for human subject research using secondary data or biospecimens.  
 
1 Confirmation of Secondary Use of Data or Specimen  
Click on the following check box (or double click and type an “X” if using  Google Docs).  
 
 ☒ The data or specimens have been or will be collected for purposes unrelated to 
the purpose of this study.  
 If this is not the case, please complete HRP-UT901 IRB Proposal Standard Submission or HRP -UT902 IRB 
Proposal Exempt Submission form.  
 
2 Study Information  
Describe the purpose of the research, study background, and hypothes es. 
To input text click in the light grey area below.  
Purpose : 
To assess  the impact of Driscoll Health Plan’s Nurture program on pregnancy outcomes among 
participating members.  
 
Background : 
Driscoll Health Plan (DHP) is a non -profit, community -based health insurance plan that 
provides coverage to South Texas and the Rio Grande  Valley communities. Their insurance 
products include STAR Medicaid, STAR Kids, CHIP, and CHIP Perinatal. Affiliated with Driscoll 
Children’s Hospital, DHP offers healthcare services at specialty centers and clinics in various 
locations, including McAllen,  Harlingen, Brownsville, Laredo, Rio Grande City, Eagle Pass, 
Edinburg, Victoria, and Weslaco.  
 
Maternal health has gained increasing attention . Senate Bill (S.B.) 750, 86th Legislature, 
Regular Session, 2019, Section 3 , for example,  mandates the Texas Hea lth and Human Services 
Commission (HHSC) to develop or enhance statewide initiatives for improving the quality of 
maternal health care services  (Kolkhorst, 2019). It specifies initiatives that contracted managed 
care organizations (MCOs) must implement and  requires progress reporting to the legislature 
MCOs are also encouraged to incorporate their own initiatives to enhance maternal healthcare 
services.  
 
In response, DHP , with input from our Factor Health lab at Dell Med ical School , introduced the 
Nurture p rogram  for its members  as a quality improvement initiative , designed to expand 
members ’ access to nutrition education and food purchase support to improve health and 
pregnancy outcomes.  
 
DHP’s Nurture Program:  
 
Page 3 of 16 
 The Nurture  program focuse d on promoting healt hy eating through nutrition education and 
food purchasing support with monthly  gift cards for a main  local grocery store  at the Corpus 
Christi area . Specifically, t he program includes the following components:  
 
1. Nurture Monthly Packages:  Sent every four wee ks until the member reaches the end of 
pregnancy (delivery or other reasons, e.g., miscarriage), with a maximum of eight 
packages. Each package includes:  
• A US$40 gift card (2 x $20 each) to a grocery store . 
• A healthy eating information sheet selected from Brighter Bites project 
(https://brighterbites.org/ ).  
• A set of three recipes.  
• Nutrition -related Frequently Asked Questions (included in four out of the eight 
packages).  
 
2. Two 30 -Minute Nutritional Consultations  over the phone : Designed by a Registered 
Dietitian Nutritionist (RDN) who trained a bilingual nutrition specialist to deliver the 
consultations . Topics revolved around healthy eating during pregnancy, such as food 
choices, portion sizes, budget -friendly sh opping, food safety, and food preparation.  No 
nutrition therapy advice to manage diseases was provided.  
 
Members ha d the flexibility to opt out of the program at any time and discontinue receiving 
packages. Consultations were  optional . If they opted out, t hey continued to receive the DHP 
benefits as part of their regular coverage . 
 
Secondary Data Analysis Proposal:  With funding from the Episcopal Health Foundation, we 
will conduct a secondary data analysis to evaluate  the DHP’s  Nurture program using their 
existing administrative data from claims.  
 
Kolkhorst  (2019). Relating to maternal and newborn health care and the quality of services provided to women in this state 
under certain health care programs . (S.B. 750). 86th Legislature, Regular Session . 
https://capitol.texas.gov/BillLookup/History.aspx?LegSess=86R&Bill=SB750 .   
 
 
3 Design, Methodology, and Data Analysis  
 Provide information regarding study design or data collection methodologies . Describe the data analysis plan, 
including any statistical procedures or power analysis.  
 
To input text, click in the light grey area below.  
  
We will evaluat e the impact of DHP’s quality improvement pilot program (called, 
Nurture ), which included nutrition education and food support  offered  to a subset of 
pregnant women age d 30 years and above and were covered by the Medicaid Managed 
 
Page 4 of 16 
 Care Organization (MCO) plan in their “STAR” and “CHIP” programs during October 
2022 and Ju ly 2023 .  
 
From this population, DHP randomly selected a subset of approximately 500 women 
during that period , from which approximately 200 were in the program , the “exposed  
group .” The women who were covered during the same period but were not selected  
were not exposed  to the program  and will compose the “ comparison group .” 
 
The objective is to compare maternal and neonatal outcomes between those who 
participated in the program  (exposed group) and those who did not  (comparison 
group) . 
 
Analysis Plan:  
Claims data will be pulled retrospectively from the insurer's database  and other 
administrative sources . Informati on will include healthcare utilization, maternal 
outcomes  during pregnancy , and neonatal outcomes at and post -delivery . The primary 
analysis i nvolve s comparing the outcomes of the exposed  group with the comparison 
group . Statistical methods appropriate for this type of administrative  data will be 
employed to assess the differences between the two groups, adjusting for potential 
confounders.  
 
The Nurture  program’s impact will be evaluated using  claims data received from DHP  
concerning two composite outcomes: adverse maternal health outcomes (Composite 1) 
and adverse neonatal outcomes (Composite 2), as shown in Table 1 below. In addition, 
we wil l explore single outcomes, such as delivery mode (vaginal vs c -section) , cost data,  
and birthweight,  adding nuance to our understanding of the program's impact.  
 
We will primarily use logistic regressions to predict the primary, binary composite 
outcomes for mothers and newborns, adjust ed for risk factors such as maternal age, 
gestation al age at the time of enrollment, pre -existing diabetes, hypertension, and 
being overweight pre -pregnancy (shown in Table 2). The program “dose ” variables are 
anticipated to  be continuous predictors that include both ‘usual care’ (i.e., prenatal care 
visits) and Nurture  program elements (the dollar value of the gift cards spent up to 30 
days after stopping the program, total number of nutrition consult minutes); see Table 
3.  
Because we expect cost data to be continuously distributed, linear regressions are 
expected to be more appropriate. The predictors will remain the same in all models 
irrespective of outcome, including the “dose ” variables.  
 
 
Page 5 of 16 
 Table 1. Program outcomes  from health claims  
Composite outcome 1:  
Adverse health events during 
pregnancy   Composite outcome 2:  
Adverse health events at 
birth and newborn -related   
Exploratory outcomes:  
 
• Gestational Diabetes Mellitus  
• Excessive weight gain during 
pregnancy  
• Pregnancy -associated 
hypertension   • Pre-term birth (<37 weeks)  
• Neonatal Intensive Care 
Unit (NICU)  
• Small for gestational age  
• Large for gestational age  
• Stillbirths   • Emergency Department 
visits  
• Cost (outpatient, 
inpatient, pharmacy, 
total)  
• Delivery mode (vagi nal, 
c-section)  
• Birthweight collected 
from hospitals  
 
Table 2. Population descriptors and demographics  from health claims  
Demographics   Health history  (dichotomous)  
• Age (years)   • Family history of diabetes mellitus  
• Ethnicity   • Pre-pregnancy diabetes mellitus  
• Location (Nueces/Hidalgo)   • Pre-pregnancy overweight/obesity  
• Gestational age at enrollment   • History of gestational diabetes  
• Gestational age at delivery   • Chronic hypertension  
 
Table 3. “Dose” variables from program implementation tracking and health claims  
Nurture Program uptake   Care Received  
Gift card usage  (dollar amount)   Prenatal visits  (counts)  
Packages received  (counts)   Referral to Case Management  (dichotomous)  
Nutritional consults (duration)    
 
DHP’s Nurture enrollment : 
1. DHP receive s daily new health plan enrollees from the TX State. Their data 
analytics team identified new pregnant members aged 30 or older  in bi -weekly 
“cycles”  and ran an algorithm to randomly select a list of names to be notified 
and contacted by DHP’s Community Health Workers (CHWs).  
2. Notifications: Members on the roster to be called received an SMS text with a 
URL to an informational page , which was also mailed as  a hard copy to the 
member’s address  on file . 
3. Welcome calls: DHP’s CHWs called up to 3 times on consecutive days to welcome 
the women  to the Nurture  program, explain what to expect, confirm address for 
mailing out the packages, and book two phone nutrition al consultations.  
o Individuals who could not be reached by the CHW did not receive the 
packages and the consultations but continued to receive their regular 
benefits as part of their DHP membership.  
 
Page 6 of 16 
  
The end of participation in the program is marked by the termination of pregnancy (in 
the form of a claim to the health plan that would flag delivery or a 
miscarriage/abortion/stillbirth ). If such a claim does not reach DHP’s system  in a timely 
manner , the woman in the Nurture  program could receive up to 8 mailo ut packages.  
 
The Texas Health and Human Services Commission (HHSC) reviewed and approved key 
member -facing materials, such as SMS text and the informational letter , as part of their 
regular review process of member -facing materials.  
 
Third group: The wom en who were selected to be offered the program, but DHP staff 
could not connect during telephonic outreach , compose a third group. Administrative 
data on this group will enable us to explore how they compare with the other two 
groups in terms of their popu lation descriptors and demographics shown in Table 2 
above . Answering evaluation questions such as how do those who were reached by the 
CHWs differ from those who weren’t, helping to assess reach from an equity 
perspective.  
 
  
 
 
4 Data or Specimen Information  
Provide information about where the data or specimens will come from (e.g., 
pathology lab, commercial sources) and what type of data or specimens you will 
obtain.  
To input text click in the light grey area below.  
 
DHP  data analysis team will le verage internal databases to compile the required 
administrative data for analys es, which will be shared as Excel spreadsheets via secured 
File Transfer Protocol (sFTP).  
 
DHP  also contracted the Dell Med lab ( Factor Health ) services for the delivery of the  
nutritional consultations  and to track gift card balances. T hese data are owned by 
Driscoll,  who will receive the full data set, de -identify and anonymize it, and merge it to 
the other  relevant sets they will generate for analysis.  
 
The staff  involved in the deliver y of the nutrition consultation  service will not be 
involved in the data analysis  in any way.  
 
Page 7 of 16 
  
 
5 Identifiers  
List all identifiers the researcher will obtain even if the researcher plans to make the 
data or specimens anonymous. Include information that can be linked directly or 
indirectly to the subject.  
To input text click in the light grey area below. List all identifiers collected.  
 
No identifier will be shared for this data analysis. Only basic demographics information 
(age, ethnicit y, and service location [Nueces/Hidalgo]) will be shared.  
 
DHP analytics team will anonymize and de -identify the data before shar ing them  with 
our team for the analysis. Anonymization will be done in a way so that  no information 
can be linked back to the i ndividuals.  
 
 
Re-identification and DUAs  
Review all statements and check those that apply.  
 
Click on the following check box (or double click and type an “X” if using Google Docs).   
 
6 ☐ The researcher will receive/collect directly identifiable data or specimens with 
identifiers.  
 
7 ☒ The researcher will only receive/collect coded or pseudonymized data or 
specimens.  
 
8 ☐ The researcher will have the ability to re -identify participants.  
 
 
9 ☐ The researcher will sign a DUA or MTA with the entit y(ies) providing the data or 
specimens.  
 
 9a ☐  If so, the DUA(s) or MTA(s) prohibit the researcher from ever receiving 
identifiers from the entit y(ies) providing the data or specimens and 
prohibit the researcher from seeking to learn the identities of 
participants.  
 
Page 8 of 16 
 If available, upload a copy of the DUA(s) or MTA(s) to the RMS system under “Other 
Documents.”  
 
10 ☐ The secondary data or specimens are publicly  available.  
 
 
11 ☒ The secondary data or specimens are not publicly  available.  
 
 
12 Describe the restrictions (if any) that apply to this data source (e.g., access to data 
requires log in, one must join an online community to access the data, one must sign 
a data use agreement)  
To input text  click in the light grey area below.  
 
A secured File Transfer Protocol via UT Box will be put in place for the data transfer.  
Only the individuals directly involved in the analysis will have access to the transfer 
folder.  
 
The administrative d ata belong to  Driscoll Health Plan and are not publicly available.  
 
  
13 ☐ Subjects provided consent for their participation in research when the data or 
specimens were originally collected.  
13a  ☐ If so, the consent form authorizes researchers to share data or specimens 
for future research.  
If available, upload a copy of the original consent forms to the RMS system under “Other 
Documents.”  
 
14 Research Participant Information  
Provide information regarding the participant population (e.g., age, 
gender, inclusion/exclusion criteria, disease state).  
To input text click in the light grey area below.  
 
Members of the Driscoll Health Plan could be enrolled in the program if they were 
pregnant and aged 30  years or older at the time of DHP enrollment.  
 
15 Total Sample Size  
To input text click in the light grey area below.  
 
We expect to receive data from approximately 1700 DHP members broken down as the 
following (approximate numbers):  
 
Page 9 of 16 
 • Exposed group: DHP selected 511  members between October 2022 and July 
2023 , of whom 224 were contacted and opted into the Nurture program.   
o CHWs could not reach t he remaining 287 women on the list and, therefore, 
could not confirm address and book consultations . We will rec eive the 
demographic data on this group to explore how they compare with the 
other two groups  in terms of their population descriptors  (Table 2 in 
section 3) . 
• Comparison group: approximately 1200 women who were 30 years old or older 
and pregnant during the  same enrollment period  and were not selected during 
the DHP’s enrollment process.  
 
 
16 Sample Size Rationale  
Provide justification for the sample size and its adequacy for answering the 
research question.  
To input text  click in the light grey area below.  
 
Data coming from claims are mostly binary, which is characterized by limited variability 
and increased uncertainty in proportions . This fact makes detect ing statistically 
significant differences more challenging , requi ring l arger sample sizes to ensure the 
reliability of the findings in such studies using these binary  outcomes —which is the case 
of Nurture.  
 
Statistical power is critically dependent  on the base rate of the outcome metrics among 
the comparison subjects . But, when the comparison group is composed of  unmatched 
subjects that is at least  four times the size of the exposure group, s tatistical power  
tends to be maximize d.  
 
That being said, the analysis needs to include all women as described in the previous 
section.  
 
Because we do not know the incidence rate of the outcomes of interest, w e estimated 
the effect sizes we can capture at 80% power with alpha = 0.05 assuming different rates 
among comparison subjects  (30% and 35%) and four different rates among exposed 
subjects  (25%, 23%, 20%, 18%).  
 
Table 4 demonstrates the statistical power to detect differences between the exposed 
and comparison groups, assuming Nurture  produces certain effects . If the composite 
outcome rate is around 30% among comparison subjec ts, we have enough power to 
 
Page 10 of 16 
 detect rates of 20% or lower among exposed subjects  (yellow highlight) . If the rate is 
closer to 35% among comparison subjects, we have enough power to detect rates of 
25% or lower among exposed subjects  (blue highlight) .  
 
Table 4. Statistical power at alpha = 0.05 to detect the program effects of interest 
assuming two different base rates  among comparison subjects .  
  % rate among exposed  
  25%  23%  20%  18%  
% rate among comparison 
subjects  35%  78 90 98 99 
30%  28 46 80 93 
 
 
 
17 Confidentiality and Data Security Plan  
Describe how you will protect confidentiality of the subjects and the security of the 
data or specimens.  Describe where you will store the data or specimens, who will 
have access to data or specimens; and the data and specimen retention and 
destruction timelines.  
To input text click in the light grey area below.  
 
DHP’s data analysis team will a nonymiz e and r emove all PHI from all data sets prior to 
sharing in a way so that no information can be linked back to the individuals.  
 
Data for analysis will be saved as Excel files and, subsequently, in formats specific for 
analyses using specialized statistical softw are, in a UT Box folder accessible only to team 
members involved in the data analysis, such as the PI and the biostatistician.  
 
Data sets  will be destroyed (permanently deleted) 3 years after all analyses are 
completed.  
 
 
 
 
WAIVER OF INFORMED CONSENT  
Complete this section if you are seeking a waiver of informed consent for the collection  of iden tifiable data or 
biospecimens.  
 
 
Page 11 of 16 
 To approve a waiver or alteration of informed consent all  of the following criteria below must be justified by the 
researcher.  
 
Only complete the sections below if requesting a waiver of informed consent  for the use of readily identifiable data or 
specimens and the data use is not regulated by HIPAA . 
 
If research solely involves HIPAA protected data, skip this section and complete the Waiver of HIPAA Authorization 
section below.  
 
 
 
 
 
PROTECTED HEALTH INFORMATION  
Complete this section if you need to attest to the first (21) question.  18 The research involves no more than minimal risk to the subjects.  
To input text click in the light grey area below. Provide protocol specific rationale as to how this study meets this 
requirement.  
  
 
19 The waiver or alteration will not adversely affect the rights and welfare of the 
subjects.  
To input text click in the light grey area below. Provide protocol specific rationale as to how this study meets this 
requirement.  
  
 
20 The research could not  practicably be carried out without the waiver or alteration (it 
is impracticable to perform the research if obtaining informed consent is required and 
not just impracticable to obtain consent).  
To input text click in the light grey area below. Provide pro tocol specific rationale as to how this study meets this 
requirement.  
  
 
21 If the research involves using identifiable private information or identifiable 
biospecimens, the research could not practicably be carried out without using such 
information or  biospecimens in an identifiable format.  
To input text click in the light grey area below. Provide protocol specific rationale as to how this study meets this 
requirement.  
  
 
 
Page 12 of 16 
  
22 ☐ As part of this research, the research will obtain, use, or disclose Protected 
Health Information (PHI).  
 
23 Type of Authorization(s) Requested  
Select only those waivers being sought.  
Click on the following check boxes (or double click and type an “X” if using Google Docs).  
a ☐ Obtaining participant authorization for access to PHI  
b ☐ Waiver or alteration of HIPAA authorization  
c ☐ Partial waiver for subject identification or recruitment  
 
24 Health Information Use Request  
 To input text click in the light grey area below. List covered entities providing PHI  
  
 
 
25 HIPAA Defined Identifiers Recorded  
Select all identifier associated with the PHI.  
Click on the following checkboxes (or double click and type an “X” if using Google Docs).  
 ☐ Names  
 
 ☐ Dates (including month/year):  
Admission, birth, death, or procedure 
date, ages over 89  
 
 ☐ Telephone numbers  
 
 ☐ Vehicle identifiers and serial numbers  
 
 ☐ Facsimile numbers  
 
 ☐ Web universal resource locators (URLs)  
 
 ☐ Electronic mail addresses  
 
 ☐ Internet protocol (IP) address numbers  
 
 ☐ Medical record numbers  
 
 ☐ Biometric identifiers, including fingerprints 
and voiceprints  
 ☐ Health plan beneficiary 
numbers  
 ☐ Geography subdiv isions  
E.g. (addresses, census block, zip  codes, city, state)  
To input text, click in the light grey area below.  
 
 
 
Page 13 of 16 
  ☐ Account numbers  
 
 ☐ Certificate/license numbers  
 
 ☐ Any other unique identifying number, characteristic, or code, unless otherwise 
permitted by the Privacy Rule for re -identification  
To input text, click in the light grey area below.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 List the data points or attach a list of the data to be collected about each subject 
from their medical records or other HIPAA protected data sources.  
Select either question 26a or 26b and provide additional information as requested.  
 
Click on the followi ng checkboxes (or double click and type an “X” if using Google Docs).  
 
26a ☐ Attach a list of all data points collected from PHI.  
Upload a document with data points collected from PHI to the UT RMS system under “Local Site 
Documents”  
 
26b ☐ Or, l ist the data points.  
To input text click in the light grey area below.  
•  
 
 
 
Waiver or Partial Waiver of HIPAA authorization (as required)  
Complete this section if seeking a waiver of HIPAA authorization or a partial waiver to identify potential participants.  
 
27 Describe why the research could not practically be conducted without access to and 
use of the PHI  
To input text, click in the light grey area below.  
 
 
 
 Date Range of Records  
 
28 Start Date  
To input text, click in the light grey area below.  
 
 
 
29 End Date  
To input text, click in the light grey area below.  
 
Page 14 of 16 
  
 
 
 
 
30 State why obtaining written authorization is imprac ticable  
To input text click in the light grey area below.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Data Retention and Security  
Attest to question 31 and select either question 3 1a or 3 1b and provide additional information as requested.  
 
Click on the following checkboxes (or double click and type an “X” if using Google Docs).  
 
31 ☐ Attest that the protected health information will not be reused or 
disclosed to any other person or entity, except as required by law, for 
authorized oversight of the research study, or for other research where the 
use or disclosure of protected health information meets IRB and HIPAA 
requirements  
 
31a ☐ Identifiers will be destroyed at earliest opportunity  
 
  Describe the dest ruction plan and timeline  
 To input text click in the light grey area below.  
 
 
   
31b ☐ Ident ifiers will be retained indefinitely  
 
  State rationale for retaining identifiers indefinitely  
To input text cli ck in the light grey area below . Complete the repository supplemental form.  
 
 
 
 
Partial Waiver of HIPAA Authorization  
For Activities Preparatory to Research and Subject Identification  
Attest to question s 32 and 3 3 if seeking a partial waiver of HIPAA authorization to identify potential participants and 
collect their contact information to obtain authorization at a later date.  
 
Page 15 of 16 
  
32 ☐ Attest that PHI will be accessed only by individuals who have authorization to 
access the records  outside of the research context . 
 
33 ☐ Attest that r esearchers will not move or transmit identifiable PHI from the 
covered entity.  
 
 CONFLICTS OF INTEREST  
This section is required  for all studies. Please confirm that all research personnel who meet the definition of “ covered 
individuals ” are designated as such in the Local Study Team M embers  section of the SmartForm application in UTRMS -
IRB.  
34 Financial Conflicts of Interest  
Financial interest include s utilizing your licensed intellectual property in the study; serving as a paid consultant, or 
advisory board member, or officer/director with a related entity; and equity or business ownership in a company 
that is related to this project .  Additional guida nce on financial conflicts of interest is available on the COI website  
 
A or B must be checked.  
  
 A ☐ The PI and/or other covered individual(s)  has/have a financial interest 
related to this study   
  i If A is checked above, please provide the name(s) of the covered 
individuals involved, and briefly describe the interest:  
   To input text, click in the light grey area below.  
    
 
 B ☐ To the  best of your knowledge, no one on the study team has financial 
interest related to this study   
 
35 Non -financial Conflicts of Interest  
Non-financial Interests could include such things as:  
- utilizing your unlicensed intellectual property in the study,  
- serving as an unpaid advisory board member or officer/director with a related entity,  
- equity or business ownership in a company that has yet to make a profit and is related to this project , 
- conflict of time/effort,  
- personal and professional relati onships/affiliations,  
- intellectual passions or personal beliefs  
- other factors that could create bias in the  study   
 
A or B must be checked.  
 
Page 16 of 16 
  
 
  
 A ☐ The PI and/or other covered individual(s)  has/have a non-financial interest 
related to this study   
  i If A is checked above, please provide the name(s) of the covered 
individuals involved, and briefly describe the interest:  
   To input text, click in the light grey area below.  
    
 
 B ☐ To the best of your knowledge, no one on the study team has non-
financial interest related to this study   