American Cancer  Society, Inc.   
Version# 2 04/01 /2020  Page 1 of 28  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Self- Monitoring Activity: a Randomized Trial of Game -oriented Applications  
(SMARTGOAL)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Principal Investigator:  
Elizabeth J. Lyons, PhD, MPH  
301 University Blvd., Galveston, Texas 7555 -1124  
Phone: (409) 772 -2575, Fax: (409) 772 -2577  
Ema il: ellyons@utmb.edu  
 
American Cancer  Society, Inc.   
Version# 2 04/01 /2020  Page 2 of 28  
RESEARCH PLAN   
A. HYPOTHESIS AND SPECIFIC AIMS  
Physical activity produces health benefits in breast cancer (BC) survivors, including improved quality of life and 
decreased risk of recurrence and mortality.1-3 However, many breast cancer survivors do not meet activity 
recommendations ,4 and racial/ethnic disparities in activity rates5 may exacerbate disparities in health 
outcomes.6 Activity interventions among BC survivors improve activity levels in the short term,7 but inc reases 
are rarely sustained after 6 months.8,9 Since habitual activity produces greater quality of life benef its than do 
briefer increases ,10 creating sustainable interventions should be a cancer control priority.11  
Breast cancer survivors consistently include lack of motivation  as one of their primary barriers to physical 
activity . Autonomous (volitional) motivation is associated with long -term increases in physical activity.12-14 
Active video games are a promising medium for intervention with demonstrated ability to increase autonomous 
motivation ,15 fitness ,16,17 and quality of life.18 These games are also acceptable to older19 and chronically ill 
adults and women .20 Because of their easy indivi dualization and user -centeredness, games hold the potential 
for reaching a broad, diverse audience.  
Games that include involved narratives may be particularly effective. Narrative transportation , or 
engagement , is highly effective in persuasion to change h ealth behaviors.21 Narrative tra nsportation increases 
enjoyment directly22,23 and also likely impacts autonomous motivation by increasing perc eptions of autonomy, 
competence , and relatedness. We hypothesize that narrative -based active games in which users role -play as 
fit characters will lead to greater autonomous motivation, in turn leading to greater physical activity.  
The goal of this researc h is to develop a sustainable intervention that is broadly acceptable and efficacious 
across a diverse population of breast cancer survivors. This study will test a 6-month game -based physical 
activity intervention among a sample of sedentary, overweight p ostmenopausal breast cancer survivors. The 
enhanced intervention will provide a mobile device (iPod touch) and two narrative -based walking game 
applications (apps). These apps include audio narratives that can change based upon player input and include 
rich feedback on physical activities. The standard exercise intervention will provide a mobile device with a 
simple activity monitor and feedback application. Both interventions will include self-monitoring and feedback 
through the mobile apps and additional feedback through weekly brief counseling phone calls. Thus, 
comparing the two interventions will allow the investigators to draw conclusions about the unique motivating 
aspects of the narrative games. A follow -up assessment at 12 months will further allow investigation of 
intervention effects on activity maintenance over time. The study will address the following specific aims:  
Aim 1. Compare a motivationally enhanced intervention to a standard intervention in a 6 -month 
randomized controlled trial. Sedentar y, overweight postmenopausal breast cancer survivors (N = 120) will 
be randomized to the enhanced intervention or to a standard intervention. We will test objective measures of 
physical activity, physical function, and fitness at the conclusion of interven tion contact (6 months) and after a 
6-month maintenance phase (12 months).  
Aim 2. Compare quality of life and psychological outcomes across the two interventions at 6 and 12 
months . We will investigate quality of life  (physical, social, emotional, function al, and breast -related) , 
depression, anxiety, and fatigue at 6 and 12 months.  
Aim 3. Compare autonomous motivation across the two interventions at 6 and 12 months.  Hypothesized 
psychosocial predictors (Self -Determination Theory constructs and narrative tr ansportation) will also be 
investigated . 
Aim 4. Investigate the cultural appropriateness of the two interventions.  At the 6 month assessment  or 12 
months assessment (if not collected at 6 months) , we will conduct brief interviews with participants (N = 120) 
and stakeholders (N = 10) to investigate acceptability of  intervention components. Qualitative analyses will 
examine racial and ethnic differences.  
We hypothesize that the narrative -based enhanced intervention will produce greater increases in activity, 
physiological outcomes, and quality of life outcomes as compared to a standard intervention. This study will 
provide crucial information to inform future research and practice related to cancer control and survivorship 
care. Its results will provide the fo undation for future efficacy and dissemination studies with the potential to 
quickly and significantly improve public health at a population level.  
American Cancer  Society, Inc.   
Version# 2 04/01 /2020  Page 3 of 28 B. BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE  
Breast cancer is the most prevalent cancer in women worldwide.24 Physical activity improves mood,25,26 
reduces inflammation,27,28 improves physical functioning,29 and reduces pain,29 leading to improvements in 
quality of life and fatigue.1,30 Both duration and in tensity appear to have a dose -response relationship with 
improved health,10 but large improvements can result from as little as 15 minutes per day of moderate -intensity 
activity.10,31-33 In BC survivors, > 150 minutes  of physical activity per week has been associat ed with decreased 
BC recurrence and mortality, as well as improved quality of life.2,27,34,35  
However, activity levels decrease after cancer diagnosis and remain low in survivors.36,37 Objective measures 
of activity have shown that BC survivors accumulate approximately four minutes per day of moderate to 
vigorous intensity activity, compared to eleven minutes  in non -BC controls.38 Only 37% of BC survivors meet 
recommendations for 150 minutes per week of moderate -intensity activity.4 The downward trend appears to 
begin one to two years after diagnosis, and levels remain low afterward.37,39  
African -American and Hispanic women are at greater risk than non -Hispanic White (hereafter referred to as 
“White”) women for outcomes exacerbated by low activity rates. Cancer mortality is higher  in African -American 
than in White women,40 and disease -free survival, quality of life, and physical function are lower in African -
American and Hispanic women.5,41 Comorbidities and differences in health behaviors appear to be partially 
responsible for poorer survival.42 Though physical activity could produce beneficial effects for survival, 
comorbidities, and quality of life, minority BC survivors are less active than White su rvivors.5,43 
Breast cancer survivors are in serious need of effective physical activity intervention. Skills -based interventions 
(e.g., those based on SCT that target self -regulation, self -efficacy, etc.) are effective, but adherence decreases 
markedly and quickly over time.8 For example, by week 9 of a 12 -week intervention, only 53% of participants 
reached their activity goals.9 What little is known about sustained activity com es mostly from longer -term 
intervention trials; measurement of behavior maintenance after investigator contact ceases is rare in physical 
activity studies, particularly in BC survivors.44 Several secondary investigations of intervention trials and review 
papers have suggested that targeting autonomous motivation may be one of the most promising methods for 
increasing long -term activity maintenance among survivors.45,46  
Thus , there is a need for improved physical activity interventions that specifically target autonomous 
motivati on. We propose that a patient -centered, individualized intervention would best adapt to the needs of 
breast cancer survivors of all races and reduce ethnic/racial disparities in outcomes. Active video games that 
include motivating game mechanics and persua sive narratives hold promise as a medium for delivering such 
an intervention. Below, we discuss the theoretical background and rationale for a game -based study,  
B.1. Theoretical framework: Self -determination theory   
Figure 6.1. Conceptual model                               The theoretical framework for this 
intervention (see Fig. 6.1) includes 
constructs from Self -Determination Theory 
(SDT) and theories of narrative 
transportation.  
SDT proposes a continuum between 
autonomous and controlled motivation,47,48 
with autonomous motivation being more 
strongly associated with physical activity 
over time.13,14 Autonomous motivation for 
activity includes both completely intrinsic motivation (that is, motivation in the absence of  external 
rewards/demands) as well as integrated and identified regulation (relatively autonomous forms of motivation 
that involve valuing the outcomes of activity). According to SDT, autonomous motivation is predicted by the 
fulfillment of psychological n eeds for competence, autonomy, and relatedness.47 Several large -scale 
autonomy -promoting interventions have produced excellent results, including long -term maintenance of 
physical activity49 and weight loss.50,51 
B2. Narrative tra nsportation  
Narrative transportation (also called narrative engagement) occurs when an individual is mentally immersed in 
a narrative storyline. Transportation is typically described as consisting of empathy and mental imagery related 
to a story.52 Narratives can increase enjoyment and motivation generally22,23 and specifically towards physical 

American Cancer  Society, Inc.   
Version# 2 04/01 /2020  Page 4 of 28 activity .53 We hypoth esize that in addition to a direct effect on autonomous motivation due to enjoyment, 
narrative transportation also exerts an effect on autonomy, competence, and relatedness.  
When implemented as part of a video game, narratives can be particularly autonomy -supportive. Interactive 
storytelling involves the player by providing a series of choices that affect the rest of the narrative. Interactive 
narratives can be even more enjoyable than standard narratives, as they combine the suspense and 
enjoyment of a sto ry with the autonomy of creating a personalized experience.54 Further, active video games 
may be a powerful medium for such storytelling, as embodied role -play ( physically acting out the story) could 
amplify feelings of autonomy and mastery.55,56 
The use of nar rative to deliver health -related information can increase persuasion and result in greater 
behavior change as compared to standard information provision.57 This persuasion is implicit and emotional 
rather than overt and analytical, which may produce more enduring effects.52 It is possible that active video 
games with a compelling narrative could persuade players that they are competent,  via identification with 
competent characters.58,59 Role-play as a fit character could also increase perceived competence via social 
cognitive means, by providing opportunities for practice, modeling, and mastery experiences.60  
Narrative also has the power to change behavior by influencing individuals’ attitudes and beliefs. Identification 
with characters can lead to “trying on” their personality traits and values.59,61-64 Video game studies have found 
that playing as a soldier increased feelings of bravery, for exam ple.59 The more individuals relate a story  
character to themselves, the greater the impact on related health behavior.65 Thus, narrative transportation 
may influence autonomous motivation by increasing perceptions of relatedness to story characters.  
B3. Using active video games to increase autonomous motivation  
Active video games are video games that require      Table 6.1. How games impact autonomous motivation  
or encourage body movement  during play. 
Increasing evidence suggests that some of these 
games are an appropriate delivery method for 
behavioral physical activity interventions. Active 
games are interactive and highly individualizable. 
They contain many of the behavior change techni ques that are found in clinical interventions.66 Active games 
improve mood,18 fitness,17 and physical function67-69 in older adults. Though these health outcomes should be 
mediated by increased physical activity, measurement of physical activity in game studies among older adults 
is extremely rare. Studies in other age groups suggest that these health improvements are indeed likely 
mediated by increased motivation leading to increased physical activity.15,16,70 
Games likely produce these behavior and health benefits by increasing perceptions of autonomy, competence, 
and relatedne ss and, in turn, autonomous motivation. Several empirical studies of video games have found 
that part of their appeal is their potential to fulfill the se psychological needs,71,72 and that games that increase 
these perceptions more are more likely to be played again in the future.73 For example, games can encourage 
autonomy by allowing meaningful choices.74,75 They can encourage perceptions of competence (similar to self -
efficacy) via modeling, practice, role -play, verbal persuasion, and mastery experiences.76 Perceptions of 
relatedness can be increased using multiplayer game options or by encouraging parasocial interaction with 
engaging, compelling characters.64,77,78 Table 6.1  displays common methods by which games may influence 
these perception s.75,79  
Games that include an engaging narrative with compelling characters may further increase these percepti ons. 
For example, a recent study that manipulated feelings of identification with a character in an active video game 
found greater exercise motivation in the high identification group.80 Because video games involve enactive role 
playing rather than just passive observation of a narrative, they may exert a greater influence on motivation 
and health behavior than typical narratives.60 
B4. Using active video games to decrease disparities in motivation and activity  
There is a need for interventions that are easily adaptable to be effect ive across a range of races and 
ethnicities, as many current programs appear to be less effective for minority women. In a recent example, 
poor adherence to lifestyle change recommendations among minority breast cancer survivors was 
hypothesized to have in fluenced disappointing results of a large -scale dietary intervention.81 Thus, racial/ethnic 
minority BC survivors are in unique need of lifestyle interventions t hat can be individualized to suit their 
personal values and barriers, but current intervention techniques do not appear to be adequate to produce 
behavioral change.  Construct  Mechanisms  
Autonomy  Choices, motion  controls , embodied role -play 
Competence  Practice, feedback, mastery experiences  
Relatedness  Multiplayer  modes , character identification  
American Cancer  Society, Inc.   
Version# 2 04/01 /2020  Page 5 of 28 Video games are an ideal medium for broad tailoring and specific individualization. In fact , video games are by 
definition individualized, as user inputs guide the experience of the game and make it unique to each player. 
Active games can be adapted to suit player fitness levels, use music the player prefers, and to be played 
according to the pl ayer’s schedule. A qualitative investigation of African -American older adult women with 
lupus found that individualization was one of the reasons they enjoyed using an active video game.82 Video 
games played on mobile devices may also be more likely to reach ethnic and minority women than 
interventions delivered via personal computer. More African -American and Hispanic individuals use 
smartphones than non -Hispanic W hites.83 
Narrative persuasion has been suggested as well -suited for ethnic and racial minority groups when narratives 
involve characters who reflect their experiences and who resemble them.84,85 Effects of narratives on health 
behavior appear to be greatly influenced by personalization. The more characters resemble the 
reader /viewer/player, the more effective the narrative.65 Narrative is also a cultura lly appropriate intervention 
method that may contribute to greater adherence.86 Thus, interactive video games that promote physical 
activity and that include an e ngaging narrative show great promise for meeting the needs of a broad range of 
breast cancer survivors, regardless of their ethnicity or race.  
B.5. The role of evidentiary trials in moving forward research and practice  
Evidentiary trials represent a step b etween pilot testing and fully -powered efficacy testing.87 These trials are 
powered to detect effects in intermediate outcomes – typically behaviors such as physical activity. Using 
physical activity as an outcome at an early stage in intervention development is very important, as large -scale 
trials often fail to show health outcome changes due to failures  to produce sustained behavior changes in 
activity.88 Evidentiary studies allow for true tests of intervention effects on outcomes of importance while also 
providing effect sizes, formativ e data, and a convincing rationale for investment in a large efficacy trial. It has 
been suggested that such trials will ultimately result in improved outcomes and cost savings.87 
B.6. Summary of rationale  
Breast cancer survivors are a large population with an unmet need for sustainable physical activity 
intervention. Autonomous motivation is associated wi th better physical activity maintenance, and both active 
video games and narrative storylines are predictive of autonomous motivation. A theory -based intervention that 
uses narrative -based active video games could produce a large impact at the public healt h level, reducing 
morbidity and mortality in this high -risk population. Further, because these strategies are easily individualized , 
such an intervention may be more effective across races and ethnicities than a standard intervention . This 
project will adv ance the survivorship research literature and potentially impact clinical practice . 
C. STATEMENT OF CANCER RELEVENCE  
There is a grave need for programs that encourage increased and sustained exercise among breast cancer 
survivors.  Habitual physical activity improves physical and emotional health in BC survivors, with proven 
effects on recurrence, side effects, late effects, and quality of life. Preliminary evidence suggests that new 
technology, such as video games, may be an effective method for increasing mo tivation to be active. In 
comparison to traditional interventions, this technology may increase motivation by increasing feelings of 
autonomy, competence, and relatedness.  
The purpose of this study is to test whether an intervention that uses active video  games improves upon a 
standard physical activity intervention. We will test the intervention in a diverse sample of inactive 
postmenopausal breast cancer survivors. In the short term, the study will provide valuable information about 
the potential of mobi le technology for improving health behaviors, intermediate health outcomes 
(cardiovascular fitness, physical function etc.), and mood. In the longer term, the results of the study have the 
potential to improve cancer control on a large scale, and ultimatel y decrease the morbidity and mortality of  BC. 
If the intervention is ultimately successful, it could be included in survivorship care plans as a standard tool for 
improving physical activity, benefiting millions of survivors and lowering overall cancer bur den. Because the 
intervention was designed to be easy to individualize, similar programs could easily be targeted to other 
cancers or chronic conditions.  
D. INNOVATION  
This project is an innovative step forward for the discipline in several ways: 1) The prima ry focus of the 
intervention is activity maintenance, with a strong theoretical rationale for each intervention component’s effect 
on long -term change. To our knowledge, this will be the first large -scale investigation of the use of video game 
mechanics in  an intervention among older adult cancer survivors. This strategy holds potential for a large 
American Cancer  Society, Inc.   
Version# 2 04/01 /2020  Page 6 of 28 public health impact but has received little research attention. 2) The individualized and user -centered nature 
of the intervention may be able to address barrie rs that contribute to racial/ethnic disparities in physical activity 
rates and health outcomes. 3) The intervention incorporates tailoring and patient -centered outcomes in a way 
that does not decrease the potential ease of dissemination. The applications w ill allow for simple customization 
and autonomous choices.  
E. PRELIMINARY STUDIES  
Dr. Lyons has extensive experience in the areas of technology and physical activity. The research mentors 
have been carefully chosen to complement these strengths and to fill g aps in knowledge and experience. The 
major areas of preliminary evidence for this research study are outlined below.  
E.1. Video games and physical activity   
In her previous studies, Dr. Lyons has found that significant differences exist across active video  game types in 
both energy expenditure and enjoyment89 and that enjoyment of an active video game predicted energy 
expenditure.90,91 Comparison of a “game” themed around exercise simulation (jogging) and a game themed 
around a true game (hula hooping) found that framin g an activity as a playful game produced greater 
enjoyment than did simulating an exercise activity.90 Taken as a whole, the results of this line of research 
indicate that more enjoyable programs that integrate video game mechanics will likely produce greater 
improvements than do standard pr ograms.  
E.2. Cancer survivors and older adults using technology to increase activity   
Dr. Lyons began her research career performing mixed methods analyses of social support provided in online 
mailing lists for cancer survivors and caregivers.92,93 Together with Dr. Basen -Engquist, she has recently 
analyzed the results of a large (N = 1053) survey of BC survivors r egarding technology and health promotion. 
Breast cancer survivors reported using computers and the Internet (86%), and were more interested than other 
cancer survivors in computer (36%) and mobile interventions (though interest in smartphone interventions was 
low, 12%). In fact, interest in computer interventions was greater than interest in clinic or telephone based 
interventions.  
A series of focus groups and interviews with postmenopausal breast cancer survivors (N = 20, 4 ethnic/racial 
minority ) found t hat these apparent low levels of interest in smartphone interventions were informed by 
survivors’ expectations. For example, one participant stated that she did not like video games or smartphones. 
Later in the discussion, she mentioned playing Angry Birds  on her tablet. She saw no contradiction in these 
two statements, echoing attitudes of many of the other participants. They did not count the kinds of casual 
video games that they played as “video games,” nor did they believe that other mobile devices (tab lets, iPods) 
and smartphones were similar. Thus, some video games and mobile devices are actually highly acceptable to 
older adult breast cancer survivors, despite self -reports (such as in the above study) that suggest the contrary.  
A pre-experimental pil ot study (N = 10, 4 ethnic/racial minority) using mobile devices in older adults included 
two women who were long -term BC survivors. The study protocol, which involved provision of a tablet and 
activity monitor, was found to be feasible and acceptable over  the brief intervention period (6 weeks). 
Participants wore the monitors as instructed and synced their data daily or multiple times per day. Adherence 
was very good, with monitors worn and synced 402 out of a possible 420 days. Participants significantly 
improved their fitness and function compared to baseline. Measures of acceptability showed that participants 
found the tablet, monitor, and application to be useful and enjoyable.  
An additional pre -experimental pilot (N = 10, 3 ethnic/racial minority) is investigating one of the games to be 
used in the proposed study ( Zombies, Run! ). We provided smartphones with the game app to adult women (18 
– 69), six of whom were over 55. The study is not yet complete, so we cannot estimate adherence . However, 
qualitati ve acceptability measures taken at the midpoint  indicate two major reported reasons for non-
adherence: preference for using the participant’s own phone and preference for measuring lifestyle activity 
rather than (or in addition to) planned activity. All pa rticipants had no problems using the smartphones provided  
and reported finding the game and story very motivating. Despite these positive feelings, the requirements 
surrounding use of the game were felt to be onerous . Unlike in the above trial, participant s were required to 
remember to turn on the app prior to planned walking bouts. Several women mentioned forgetting to carry a 
second phone (since they already had their own cell phone), or felt that the requirements to remember a 
second phone and to remembe r to turn on the app were burdensome . We hypothesize that using a non -
smartphone mobile device  (like an iPod or iPad) , allowing use of participants’ own phones, and providing a 
choice of apps that include lifestyle monitoring  (i.e., that doesn’t require pr e-planned activity bouts ) would 
improve adherence.  
American Cancer  Society, Inc.   
Version# 2 04/01 /2020  Page 7 of 28 E.3. Behavior change techniques and game mechanics  
Table 6.2. Differences between game and monitor apps      Dr. Lyons and colleagues  recently compared   
the content of active video games and activity 
monitors to standard taxonomies of behavior 
change techniques.66 These analyses were used 
to choose games and activi ty monitors suitable 
for this study. Table 6. 2 compares two narrative -
based active game apps to an electronic activity 
monitor app. Both the game apps and the 
monitor app include techniques that, when 
implemented, are associated with increased 
physical activity.94,95 Thus, standard intervention 
components are equivalent across the two app 
types . The major diffe rences lie in game 
mechanics , which are common in the two games 
and entirely absent from the monitor app. Thus, 
a comparison of the games to the monitor would 
isolate the effects of game mechanics while 
providing both groups with the standard social -
cognit ive intervention components necessary in 
a behavioral physical activity intervention.  
E.4. Mentor areas of expertise and previous studies  
The three co -mentors were chosen to address specific areas in which Dr. Lyons requires more training and 
education. Dr . Goodwin is an expert in aging, health disparities, and comparative effectiveness research in 
cancer. His perspective as a practicing geriatrician and health services researcher will be extremely useful for 
refining intervention components to be feasible for dissemination. He has authored or co -authored many 
papers on topics related to this research program, including on aspects of race related to obesity,96,97 breast 
cancer treatment,98,99 physical activity as an indicator of health in older adults,100-102 patient -oriented outcomes 
in older adults,103,104 interventions to improve outcomes in BC patients,105-107 and psychosocial aspects of 
cancer treatment and survivorship.106,108-111   
Dr. Basen -Engquist, at nearby M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, will provide expertise and mentoring specific to 
behavioral physical activity i ntervention in women cancer survivors. She is a leading expert in this field with 
significant expertise in intervention testing112 and adaptation.113 Her primary area of expertise lies in the 
application of health behavior theory to understanding physical activity in this population.29,114-117 She has 
implemented multiple large -scale interventions among survivors, including breast cancer survivors.112,118,119 
Dr. Volpi is an e xpert in muscle metabolism,120,121 sedentary behavior,122 aerobic exercise,123 and aging.124,125 
She has conducted numerous clinical trials involving exercise program implementation among older adults. 
She will assist with conducting objective outcome measures of physical activ ity, function, and fitness.  
Additionally, consultant Dr. Berenson is an expert in women’s health research with extensive experience in 
recruiting diverse samples of women in the Galveston area for energy balance research.126-128 Several of her 
research studies have specifically investigated the use of new media for health information among minority 
women.129-131 
F. RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS  
F.1. Overview and study flow  
The primary purpose of the SMART GOAL (Self -Monitoring Activity: a Randomized Trial of Game -Oriented 
AppLications) study is to investigate the impact of an e nhanced motivational physical activity intervention 
among sedentary postmenopausal breast cancer survivors. We will conduct a randomized controlled trial 
(RCT; N = 120) comparing the enhanced intervention to a standard self -monitoring intervention. The enh anced 
intervention will consist of provision of two active video games and a mobile device on which to play them. 
Participants will also receive weekly brief counseling/check -in calls.  The standard intervention will consist of 
provision of an electronic a ctivity monitor and a mobile device, with the same phone call content and schedule.  
The trial will be conducted over the course of three years, in three yearly cohorts. Participants in the trial will 
each attend four visits: a baseline assessment/orientati on one week later , an initial counseling/goal -setting  Games  Monitor  
Zombies
Run!  The 
Walk  App 
Behavior change techniques     
  Goal -setting   x x 
  Self-monitoring  x x x 
  Feedback  x x x 
Game mechanics     
  Competition/conflict  x   
  Freedom of choice  x x  
  Dynamic/ephemeral goals   x  
  Narrative  x x  
  Novelty/surprises  x x  
  Pick-ups x   
  Reso urce management  x   
  Rewards  x x  
  Social status/reputation/support  x   
  Time limits/pressure  x x  
American Cancer  Society, Inc.   
Version# 2 04/01 /2020  Page 8 of 28 meeting;  an assessm ent at 6 months, and a final assessment  at 12 months.  Participants may attend an 
additional visit for randomization if we do not have a valid physical activity measurement.  A battery  of 
physiological and anthropometric measures will be performed at all assessments, and psychosocial outcomes 
will be measured by questionnaire. Questionnaires will also be completed by mail at 3 and 9 months. The 
study is designed such that regular interv ention contacts will occur for the first 6 months. The period between 6 
and 12 months will be monitored as a maintenance period, to determine whether behaviors are maintained in 
the absence of further counseling. Participants will receive $25 gift cards at  the 6 month and 12 month 
assessments for a total of $50 incentive. They will also keep the mobile device as an additional incentive. The 
flow of the trial is displayed in Table 6. 3. This pattern will be repeated for each cohort.  
Personnel conducting the s tudy will include a clinical research coordinator and two graduate research 
assistants. The research coordinator and one of the graduate research assistants will perform counseling calls, 
oversee monitor data, and provide technical assistance, while the ot her research assistant (blinded to 
participant group assignments) will conduct assessments. During the maintenance phase of this intervention (6 
– 12 months), the research coordinator will continue to make monthly phone and mail contact to encourage 
contin ued participation (e.g., thank you and reminder postcards, calls to check for changes in contact 
information). No counseling content will be offered during these contacts.  
Table 6. 3. Timeline of trial assessments and phone contact by month  
Month  0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 
Assess - 
ments  Base - 
line   By 
mail   6 
month    By 
mail   Final  
Calls   Weekly calls  Monthly calls  No counseling calls; maintenance period  
Study 
materials   Participants use mobile apps daily  
F.3. Participants and procedure (Aims 2 – 4) 
For the trial, we will recruit participants in three cohorts of 40 participants each, 20 per group, with 
oversampling of African American and Hispanic women (at least 30% of the sample). Participants will be 
randomly assigned to receive an enhanced or a s tandard intervention. Major eligibility criteria will include 
female gender, postmenopausal status (cessation of menses for at least 12 months), aged 45 -75, current 
inactivity (< 90 minutes moderate -vigorous activity per week), BMI > 25 and < 40, no psycho logical issues that 
would interfere with study completion, ability to walk for physical activity, safety of physical activity, and not 
currently using the monitor/application to be provided. The PAR -Q+ will be used to screen for potential 
contraindications  to exercise 132. Endorsement of any of its items will require physician clearance to participate 
in the study.  
Based on incidence data from the Texas Cancer  Registry, we estimate that approximately 1950 female breast 
cancer survivors aged 55 – 75 and diagnosed in the last 10 years currently live in Galveston county, 500 of 
whom are African -American or Hispanic. We will also sample from nearby counties (includ ing Harris county, 
which includes Houston). Dr. Basen -Engquist successfully recruited a sample of 60 breast cancer survivors in 
two years for a physical activity intervention study112 (37% African American and Hispanic) as well as larger 
samples for cross -sectional research (36% African American and Hispanic).29 Recently, 6 of 10 older adults 
recruited for a similar study were African American or Hispanic. Thus, we believe our recruitment targets of 40 
per year for three years and 30 - 40% minority recruitment ( 12 or more  per year) to be feasible. We will u se a 
combination of advertisement, community engagement,  pre-screen via medical record for eligibility  and clinic -
based solicitation to recruit potential participants. We will sample from Galveston as well as other nearby 
counties (including at UTMB and MD  Anderson clinics in Harris county, which includes Houston , and up to 
Victoria County ). The clinical research coordinator also coordinates a UTMB program that encourages 
recruitment of ethnic/racial minorities into clinical trials, and has ample experience  in recruiting from local 
communities.  
F.4. Enhanced i ntervention  
The intervention consists of several complementary components:  
1) Provision of a mobile device (iPod Touch) with armband and headphones  
2) Provision of one mobile game application  
3) Provision of online currency  (e.g., iTunes gift cards)  to purchase music to be used in the game ($50)  
4) Brief counseling phone calls that occur weekly for 3 months, then monthly until 6 months  
American Cancer  Society, Inc.   
Version# 2 04/01 /2020  Page 9 of 28 Participants will be able to use their own smartphone devices shou ld they wish to; however, we will provide an 
iPod Touch mobile device to ensure that they have access to a device compatible with the chosen apps. (It will 
also serve as an incentive, as iPod Touches can hold much more music and data than most smartphones and 
take high -quality pictures.) The iPod Touch is similar to an iPhone, but does not require cellular service for use 
and is primarily an app and music use device. Thus, we believe that it should be perceived as a more 
acceptable mobile device than a smar tphone, despite its very similar functionality. In our preliminary studies 
(see pages 6.5 - 6.6) we found that smartphone -based interventions are acceptable among older women, but 
that allowing use of their own phone and/or providing a non -phone mobile dev ice is preferred.  
The game to be used is Zombies, Run! , created by developers Six to Start. Th is gam e was chosen due to its 
unique blending of an involved narrative storyline with game mechanics and extensive interactive behavioral 
tools. Zombies, Run!  is a game that encourages bouts of 30 – 60 minutes of walking , jogging, or running. The 
accelerometer of the mobile device measures steps taken and provides extensive feedback. Table 6.2  on 
page 6 show s several of the game mechanics most commonly used in the game , and Figure 6. 2 shows 
screenshots of the game. Players use the mobile device to set up the game, but during exercise the device is 
held or worn on the arm (armbands and headphones are included with the mobile device ). The game plays 
user-chosen music and places clips of an audio narrative in between those songs, to provide an illusion of 
other characters “radioing in” while the player travels by foot in a post -apocalyptic world. While songs are 
played, the game provides audio cues when players “pick up ” virtual supplies or are chased by zombies. 
Zombie chases (which can be turned off) require players to increase their speed by 20% for one minute in 
order to out -run their pursuers. If the zombies catch the player, they “drop” some of their virtual suppli es to 
distract the zombies and escape.  
The game consists of over 120 missions in the main storyline, with complementary side missions that provide 
additional insight into some of the characters. Additional missions will be released in April, 2015 , so the 
storyline is long enough to sustain activity over the year -long period. The narrative is written by a professional 
writer and includes main characters of multiple genders and races. The player character is never referred to by 
name and is always addressed in second -person as “you” or “Runner 5.” Players can assume that their 
character is any gender, race, ethnicity, etc. Participants in the preliminary study reported high levels of 
parasocial interaction with the two main non -player characters (one of whom is an African -American woman).  
Thus, we believe that this narrative will be appropriate for testing hypotheses related to 
transportation/engagement.   
*Please note: A similar game called The Walk  will be pre -loaded onto the iPod device. During orientation,  
interventionists will briefly reference it as a potential back -up should participants find the content of Zombies, 
Run! aversive. The Walk  is made by the same developers and includes very similar content, but the story is 
different and less violent. Our i ntent is for participants to use Zombies, Run!,  but we will provide the option of 
The Walk  as a backup for cases in which participants feel strongly that they cannot use the zombie game.  
Counseling content for the narrative game group was adapted from the narrative counseling used in the PACT 
study133 and extended to include appropriate constructs of interest in this study . Discussions will draw from the 
Zombies, Run!  game and make suggestions related to future play. For example, some se ssions will call 
participants’ attention to the exercise imagery they engage in during walking sessions, and others will 
encourage participants to imagine their ideal selves when playing as their character. Participants in this group 
will also receive the basic counseling provided to the self -monitoring group that covers self -monitoring, 
feedback, action -planning, and problem -solving.  
 
During the COVID -19 pand emic, the following  consenting/interview methods will be implemented : 
 
In response to the COVID -19 pandemic and related Institutional guidelines, the following modifications are 
being implemented effective immediately:  
 
 
All visits will be conducted entirely by teleconference call. We are done with enrollment  for the protocol. 
Ongoing participants will receive a phone call by study s taff to inform t he subject of the implemented  
modificatio ns. We will r ead the modi fication le tter to the subject over the phone . If the subject a grees with the 
modifications,  we will document the subject verbal response in a note to file.  If we are not able to reach the 
subject,  we will mail the subject a letter .   
 
American Cancer  Society, Inc.   
Version# 2 04/01 /2020  Page 10 of 28 Session 1: Orientation (this meet ing, approximately 1 hour)  
 
We will not have any Session 1: Orientation. We are no longer recruiting for this study. We are done w ith 
enrollment.  
 
Session 2: Baseline assessment and goal -setting (about 1 we ek later, approximately 2 hours)  
 
We will not hav e any Session 2: Baseline assessments and goal setting since we are no longer recruiting for 
this study.  
 
 
Session 3: Six -month a ssessment (approximately 2 hours)  
 
The visit will be conducted using teleconf erence communication (examples: via phone, skype,  zoom)  
 
Ongoing participants will complete Session 3: Six -month assessment using teleconference. Some of the 
assessment will need  some modification due to our current situation and to ensure the safety of o ur subjects, 
staff and community. The following a ssessment will be conducted via teleconference:  
1. Height and weight - we will obtain self -reported height and weight. If possible,  we will obtain 
measurements at a future face to face visit if available.  
2. Physical fitness - we will not collect this infor mation during our schedule d visit. If possible, we will 
conduct this at a future face to face visit if available.  
3. Physical fun ction - we will not collect this information during our schedule d visit. If poss ible, we will 
conduct this at a future fac e to face visit if available.  
4. We will ask the participants questions about their physical activity, their motivation for exercise, and 
their physical and emotional quality of life using teleconference call. Stu dy staff will document the answers.  
5. We will mail an activity monitor.  For the participant to wear for 7 days, for at least 10 hours per day. We 
will also mail a time log f or participants to document the time they wear th e activity monitor. We will provide 
mailing supplies to use to mail back the activity monitor.   
6. We will ask the participants several questions about their feelings about the study during a brief 
intervie w. The questions will be similar to those in the questionnaires, but the interview will allow the participant 
to provide more detailed answers. Topics will include how they felt about the mobile device, aspects of the 
game or monitor that were motivating t o the participant. The interview will be audio re corded.  
 
We will give the option to participants to complete an assessment visit when the recommended guidelines are 
lifted, and we are able to have a face to face visit. The visit may be completed only if participant is within a two -
month period from their schedul ed appointment.   
 
 
Session 4. 12 -month assessment (approximately 1 hour)  
 
The visit will be conducted using teleconference communication (examples: via phone, skype, zoom)  
 
Ongoing participants wil l complete Session 4: 12 -month assessment using teleconfere nce. Some of the 
assessment will need some modification due to our current situation and to ensure the safety or our subjects, 
staff and community. The following assessment will be conducted via te leconference:  
1. Height and weight - we will obtain self -reported height and weight. If possible, we will obtain 
measurements at a future face to face visit if available.  
2. Physical fitness - we will not collect this information during our schedule d visit. If possible, we will 
conduct this at a future face to face visit if available.  
3. Physical function - we will not collect this information during our schedule d visit. If possible, we will 
conduct this at a future fac e to face visit if available.  
4. We will  ask the participants questions about their physical activi ty, their motivation for exercise, and 
their physical and emotional quality of life using teleconference call. Study staff will document the answers.  
American Cancer  Society, Inc.   
Version# 2 04/01 /2020  Page 11 of 28 5. We will mail you an activity monit or. For the participant to wear for 7 days, for at least 10 hours per day. 
We will also mail a time log for participants to document the time they wear the activity monitor. We will provid e 
mailing supplies to use to mail back the activity monitor .  
6.  If we did no t perform the brief interview during the six -month visit. We will ask the participants several 
questions about their feelings about the study during a brief interview. The questi ons will be similar to those in 
the questionnaires, but the  interview will all ow the participant to provide more detailed answers. Topics will 
include how they felt about the mobile device, aspects of the game or monitor that were motivating to the 
partici pant. The interview will be audio recorded.  
 
We will give the option to parti cipants to complete an assessment visit when recommended guidelines are 
lifted, and we are able to have a face to face visit. The visit may be completed only if participant is wi thin a two -
month period from their scheduled appointment.  
 
 
Mailed questionnai re assessments  
 
We will contact participants to ask to complete a set of questionnaires via teleconference.  
 
Additional study -related procedures  
 
Participants will continue to pa rticipate in brief (<15 minute) phone calls during the init ial six month perio d of 
the study.  
 
During the intervention period, we will continue tracking participants activities at a distance by “friending” 
participants on the mobile applications. Though we  will carefully watch participants pattern of activity, we will 
not be persona lly supervising the exercises. Each week, participants will be able to ask questions and receive 
tips and feedback on their progress during the phone calls. However, we will not be providing participants with 
specific oversight or guidan ce during their exe rcise sessions themselves. Study staff will not encourage 
exercise outside the participants home but rather other alternatives at the participants home will be encourage.  
 
Unsch eduled Visits/Phone calls: If we encounter any technical difficulties with the  study material, we will 
troubleshoot the equipment by phone. We will be available by email and phone for technical consultation.  
 
We will reply to texts/emails/phone calls  during business hours for technical problems or to schedule 
calls/assessments. Aft er hours texts or calls will only occur if pre -arranged. We may contact participants via 
phone, text, or email to schedule appointments, the day before an appointment as a r emind er, and if we have a 
question or concern regarding their participation such as  following up on questionnaire responses or adverse 
events. Additional calls/texts/emails may occur to arrange mailing of accelerometers prior to 6 month and 12 
month assess ments .  
 
Figure 6.2. Screenshots from Zombies, Run!  game  
American Cancer  Society, Inc.   
Version# 2 04/01 /2020  Page 12 of 28 
 
  
  
  
The first screensh ot above shows the timeline of a walk. An audio cl ip from the story (which involves reuniting 
a father and child the player rescues) is followed by a song of the user’s choosing.  In this case, immediately 
upon beginning the song, a zombie chase occurred an d was successfully completed. The player then pick ed 
up several virtual supplies during the rest of the song. Once the song was complete, another audio clip began. 
The third scre enshot shows the base building portion of the game. Players use their virtual supplies to build 
their home base. Using supplies poorly or failing to protect the base adequately can have negative 
consequences in-game.  
Table 6. 4 displays how several theoret ical behavioral change strategies are matched to Self -Determination 
Theory con structs and narrative transportation in the games chosen for this intervention.  
Table 6.4. Examples of t heoretical constructs matched to behavior change methods and strategies  
Construct  Behavior change method  Specific strategies  
Autonomy support  Meaning ful choices  Base building, choosing paths, choice of music, choice of character actions  
Haptic/motion controls  Inputs are task -specific and realistic, e.g. players walk as they  “walk” in -game  
Competence support  Verbal persuasion  Other characters reinfor ce competence, e.g. “You did it!”  
 Modeling  Role-play as fit character, other fit characters serve as models  
 Feedback  Run logs, charts, zombie moans get louder as they get “cl oser”  
Relatedness support  Identification  Wishful identification, perceived si milarity  
 Parasocial interaction  Become invested in compelling characters; feel like part of a social group  
Narrative 
transportation  Second -person narrative  “You” are addressed  by other characters  
Engaging story  Suspenseful storyline with twists, actio n, character development  
 Well-liked characters  Two main non -player characters and a large supporting cast  
 F.5. Self-monitoring  Intervention  
Participants randomized into the s elf-monitoring  intervention will receive  a walking app preloaded onto an iPod 
touch device, headphones and an armband for using the device, and $55 in credit towards purchasing music 
and/or additional in -app features. The app Runkeeper (FitnessKeeper, Inc. , Boston, MA ) was chosen because 
it includes the self -regulatory tools typical  of walking/running apps without additional game - or narrative -related 
components. Users set up music playlists to listen during walks and indicate when they wish to begin and en d 
their walk. On the iPod, the app measures length of time as well as steps us ing the device’s accelerometer. 
Participants may a lso enter additional self -reported information, such as their mood upon completing the walk.  
Counseling will include standard s elf-regulatory skill building content from interventions based on Social 
Cogni tive Theory, addressing behavior change techniques  related to goal -setting, self -monitoring, feedback, 
problem solving, and action planning. In order to ensure that equal attenti on is offered to both intervention 
groups, counselors will spend additional ti me with the self -monitoring group participants by discussing 
monitoring and feedback topics in greater depth and with specifics related to the app (e.g., longer discussion of 
comparisons to past performance along with a guided tour through the app’s walkin g logs). The purpose of the 
extra time spent with these participants is to match the time spent in the narrative and game group discussing 
narrative -specific topics.  
F.6. Measure ment  
Table  6.5 displays information on the physiological and anthropometric ou tcomes to be assessed. Physical 
activity will be m easured objectively using Actigraph wGT3X BT monitors. Wear time will be seven days at 
American Cancer  Society, Inc.   
Version# 2 04/01 /2020  Page 13 of 28 each assessment point. Because continuous  measurement is not feasible, a week -long sample will be taken at 
the three as sessment periods. Estimates will be valid if the m onitor is worn ≥ 10 hours per day on ≥ 4 days . 
Non-wear time will be determined by 60 or more of consecutive minutes of zero activity counts. Based on 
criteria used for the NHANES surveys, epoch length will be one minute, and activity counts over 2020 per 
minute will be considered moderate -vigorous intensity .134 Physical activity will be measured as minutes per 
week of moderate -vigorous intensity  activity . Measurements from the mobile devices will also be abstracted 
and used as an exploratory se condary measure of physical activity. A validated and widely used self -report 
measure (CHAMPS) will also be used to estimate total caloric expenditure at all time points, including follow -
up. The objective measure of minutes per week  (measured by the armb and) at 6 months will be the primary 
endpoint of the study, with the self -report measure providing additional insight into activity types and overall 
caloric expenditure.  
Specific quality of life -related outcomes (depression, pain interference, anxiety, se lf-reported function, and 
sleep disturbance) will be measured using PROMIS computer adapted testing at 0, 6, and 12 months.135 
Participants will be emailed links to the assessment website (which stores information by ID number on a 
secure server). All item banks for each construct include a number of items. The computer adapted testing 
procedure uses item response theory to determine which items are shown to partic ipants based upon their 
previous responses. No more than 12 items per construct will ever need to be answered by participants. Table 
6.5. Measurement of outcomes  
Variable  Measure  Specific measurement  Months 
Assessed  References  
Physical 
activity  Actigraph wGT3X BT  Minutes of moderate -vigorous PA over 7 
days  0, 6, 12  136 
Objective measurement from application  Freque ncy and duration of MVPA, 
steps, miles walked pe r day  weekly  N/A 
CHAMPS self -report questionnaire  Kilocalorie expenditure from physical 
activity per week  0, 6, 12 137 
Physical 
function  Senior Fitness Test  Chair stand, back scratch, chair sit and 
reach, 8 foot up and go  0, 6, 12  138 
Fitness  Six-minute walk test  Yards walked in 6 minutes on standard, 
marked track area  0, 6, 12  139 
Anthropo-
metrics  Height , weight (Tanita, Arlington 
Heights, IL), waist circumference  Centimeters, kilograms  0, 6, 12  N/A 
Quality of 
life Functional Assessment of Cancer 
Therapy - Breast  Physical, social, functional, emotional, 
breast specific  0, 6, 12  140 
Intermediate outcomes  
We hypothesize in our conceptual model that several motivational and identity variables may mediate 
the relationship between group assignmen t and physical activity. Exercise identity will be measured using the 
Exercise Identity Scale ,141 a 9-item scale with subscales of exercise role identity (“Others see me as someone 
who exercises regularly”) and exercise beliefs (“E xercise is something I think about often”).  Responses range 
from 1 (“Strongly disagree”) to 7 (“Strongly agree”). This measure is widely used with a reported Cronbach’s 
alpha of .94, and several factor analyses have confirmed this factor structure .142,143 
 Motivation will be measured using the 19 -item Behavioral Regulation in Exercise Questionnaire -2, 
which measures external (“I exercise because other people say I should”), introjected (“I feel guilty when I don’t 
exercise”), and identified regulation (“I value the benefits of exercise”), amotivation (“I don’t see why I should 
have to exercise”), and  intrinsic motivation (“I exercise because it’s fun”) .144 We will also include four items to 
measure integrated regulation (“I consider exercise a fundamental part of who I am”), which is not traditionally  
included in exercise measures but which has been found to be an important predictor of exercise behavior .145 
Responses are provided on a 5 -point Likert scale from 0 (“Not true for me”) to 4 (“Very true for me”). The 
complete questionnaire with integrated regulation questions has shown reliability (between 0.70 and 0.93 for 
the subscale s) and predictive validity .145 A psychometric investigation showed discriminant va lidity between 
integrated regulation and exercise identity; though similar, these measures represent conceptually different 
latent constructs .143 
Other variables  
We will measure several other variables in the conceptual model that relate to games and narrative. 
Narrative transport ation will be measured using Green and colleagues’ Narrative Transportation Scale .146 A 15-
item version will be used, which will include four items related to “imagery” th at are specific to characters in the 
game (“While playing the game, I had a vivid image of Sam Yao”) as well as the standard 11 items relating to 
cognitive (“I was mentally involved with the game while playing it”) and affective (“The game affected me 
American Cancer  Society, Inc.   
Version# 2 04/01 /2020  Page 14 of 28 emot ionally”) aspects of transportation. Responses will be provided on a seven -point Likert scale with anchors 
“very much” and “not at all.” This scale is widely used and has demonstrated reliability (alpha > .70) in previous 
experiments using video games147 and diverse samples of adult women viewing cancer -related narrati ves.148  
Only participants in the narrative game group will complete this scale, as its questions do not make sense in 
the absence of a storyline.  
We will pilot test use of the Presence Self -Assessment Manikin as a crude indicator of immersion 
applicable to both applications. This measure consists of a row of  five pictures corresponding to a nine -point 
Likert scale and has demonstrated predictive validity in a previous study of narrative video games .149 The 
pictures show a figure at various distances from a TV screen. Respondents are told that “the pictures go from a 
person who feels he or she is inside the picture, a part of the story, a part of the action on the left end, to a 
person who feels he or she is outside the picture, removed or separated from the story, not part of the action 
on the right end.”  
The Exercise I magery Questionnaire is a widely -used measure that includes three subscales: 
appearance (“I imagine a leaner -me from exercising”), techniques (“When I think about exercising, I imagine 
my form and body position”), and energy (“To get me energized, I imagin e exercising”) .150 An additional 
subscale related to enjoyment (“When I think about exercise, I imagine myself having fun while exercising”) will 
be included .151 The resulting scale has 12 items and responses range from 1 (“Never”) to 9 (“Always”). 
Cronbach’s alphas ranged between 0.79 and 0.93 for the four subscales151. Tests of predictive validity have 
found relationships in the expected directions; for example, appearance imagery predicted controlled 
motivation, whereas enjoyment and technique imagery predicted autonomous mo tivation151. 
Character identification cannot be accurately compared across groups, as the monitoring app does not 
include characters. To provide a proxy for ch aracter identification, we will use the procedure described by 
Przybylski and colleagues for investigating discrepancy between the ideal self and self while playing the 
game/using the app .61 Participants will complete the Ten Item Personality Inventory with reference to their ideal 
self (at baseline), then regarding themselves while using the app (other time points). Correlations between 
ideal self and game -self for each of the items will be averaged, with neuroticism items reverse -coded, to create 
a number between -1 and 1 that indicates ideal -self and walking -self convergence. This convergence will be 
considered a proxy measure of the extent to which identific ation with the player character led to “trying on” of 
her characteristics.  
The Play Experience Scale is a 16 -item scale made up of four subscales: freedom (“I was able to make 
the game do what I wanted it to”), no extrinsic (“I was not worried about someon e judging how I performed in 
the game”), play -direct (“I would characterize my experience with the game as playing”), and autotelic -focus 
(“When I was using the game, I was focused on the task at hand”). Responses range from 1 (“Strongly 
disagree”) to 6 (“ Strongly agree”). This is a relatively new scale with few published studies using it, but it has 
demonstrated reliability (alpha > .80) and convergent validity with intrinsic motivation (r = .79) .152 
The Basic Psychological Needs in Exercise Scale will measure autonomy (“I feel that the way I exercise 
is the way I want to”), competence (“I feel that exercise is an activity which I do very well”), and relatedness 
(“My relationships with the people I exercise with are very friendly”). Responses  to this 11 -item scale use a 1 – 
5 Likert scale (“I don’t agree at all” to “I completely agree”).  Reported alphas for the subscales were 0.75 or 
higher .153 This scale has been used similarly in past studies, for ex ample to investigate the relationship 
between perceived competence and exercise role identity (partial r = 0.20) .142 
At baseline, demographic information will be collected regarding gender, race, and age. Cancer -specific 
information will also be collected regarding time since diagnosis, type/stage of breast cancer, and type of 
treatment.  Participants will complete the Transportability Scale to investigate t heir tendency towards narrative 
transportation.154 We will include treatment status as a covariate in our outcomes models to take into account 
any variability associated with treatment status . 
 
Acceptability and process  measures  
  
 
Acceptability and usability items will be adapted from Vandelanotte and colleagues .155,156 Process measures 
for both groups will include logs of completed counseling phone calls, attrition, and adverse events. Objective  
process measures will also be recorded from the two apps. Zombies, Run!  and Runkeeper will  send exercise 
session information to the Runkeeper  service, where an interventionist account will “friend” the participant’s 
account. (Participants will not have a ccess to the Runkeeper account.) Number of walks per week, total 
minutes per week, and steps during walks per week will be abstracted from the website.  
American Cancer  Society, Inc.   
Version# 2 04/01 /2020  Page 15 of 28 For the self -reported measures, participants will have the option to complete them on paper or on a sec ure 
website. The same website that houses PROMIS measures can be adapted to include our other questionnaire 
items for those who choose the Internet option.  
At the 6 month assessment  or 12 month assessment (if not collected at 6 months) , participants will d iscuss 
intervention acceptability and individualization during in -depth interviews , which have been recommended as a 
method for improving the cultural sensitivity of interventions .157 The interview guide will include questions 
related to how well the app met their individual needs  and if they felt it could be tailored to their preferences.  
We will concentrate on personal barriers to physical activity and how apps could be individualized to better 
address those barriers. The questions about narrative, for the enhanced group only, will qualitatively 
investigate potential effects of narrative transportation on attitudes, motivation, and behavior . In addition to 
interv iews with participants, we will also recruit 10 stakeholders from the community and ask them the same 
questions after a brief orientation to the study materials to be discussed. Stakeholders will be identified via pre -
existing stakeholder networks and prev ious participants who have expressed interest in helping with 
intervention adaptation. Results of these interviews will be used to further adapt the intervention for better 
cultural sensitivity.  Table 6.7  shows example questions.  
Table 6.7. Selected questi ons from interview guide  
Topic  Question  
Individualization  Did you feel that the app was something you could easily adapt to fit your needs and preferences?  
 Is there a way the app could have been better designed to be more appropriate for you or someone like you?  
Narrative  How much did you feel like the characters in the game resembled you?  
 Did playing as the main character make you feel differently about yourself?  
F.7. Power and sample size  
This study is powered to detect differences between the two groups in minutes of moderate -vigorous physical 
activity at 6 months. We used G*Power to calculate sample size based on several studies that are similar to 
this one. Similar t rials of telephone counseling and activity monitoring among BC survivors produced  effect 
sizes ranging from 0.53 to 0.82.158-160 Because our study includes a low -intensity control group that we 
anticipate will produce a weak effect  at 6 months , we have powered for a conservative effect size for physical 
activity at 6 months of approximately d = 0.65, which would require an N of 78 for 80% power at an alpha of 
0.05. This effect size transl ates to a between groups difference of approximately 20 minutes per week  (SD =  
30 minute s). An N of 120 would allow a fully powered test of physical activity even in the case of 20% attrition  
and higher variability than expected (i.e., lower effect size) .  
Similar studies that investigated maintenance are so few (three to our knowledge) and show such disparate 
results that power was difficult to calculate for this effect. For example, Rogers et al. report large differences in 
change scores between groups fr om baseline to the end of maintenance (79 vs. -22 minutes per week; 3 
month follow -up),161 whereas Vallance et al. report smaller differences (24 vs. -14 minute s per week; 6 month 
follow -up).162 Even assuming large standard deviations for these change scores, our sample should be 
sufficient to detect group differences during the maintenance period as well.  
F.8. Statistical analysis   
The primary endpoint of thi s study will be behavioral change in physical activity at 6 months (Aim 1). Our 
primary hypothesis is: Participants who receive the enhanced  interventi on will spend more minutes per week in 
moderate -vigorous  physical activity  at 6 months than will those in  the standard group . To test this hypothesis, 
we will use an analysis of covariance to test the difference between groups at 6 months, controlling for 
baseline. Missing data will be imputed. As a secondary analysis, w e will  use linear mixed modeling to 
investigate changes in physical activity over time at baseline,  6, and 12 months . This procedure will provide 
necessary information for powering a subsequent larger trial that will require complex modeling of multiple time 
points. We will also use multiple im putation techniques prior to all analyses to ensure that missing data due to 
attrition do not bias our results. Analyses will be performed using SAS  9.2 (SAS, Inc., Cary, NC). Dr. Lyons and 
the research assistants will conduct all analyses in collaboration  with biostatisticians from the biostatistics key 
resource in the Institute for Translational Sciences. Outcomes and effect sizes for other variables will be 
assessed using the same protocol.  
Interviews with participants and stakeholders will be transcribe d and coded by two trained coders. Code lists 
will initially be derived from Self -Determination Theory and theories of narrative transportation. Then, coders 
will use grounded theory to derive codes based on themes brought up by participants.163 We have successfully 
used this procedure in the past.92 NVivo qualitative software will be used to code and compare codes across 
American Cancer  Society, Inc.   
Version# 2 04/01 /2020  Page 16 of 28 multiple coders.  
F.10. Potential limitations and alternative approaches  
Several limitations might hinder the project’s progress.  
F.10.a. Recruitment difficulties.  First, w e may h ave difficulty recruiting a sufficiently large sample.  We will 
approach appropriate cancer and volunteer registries for recruitment such as  the UTMB cancer registry  and 
MD Anderson registries (email and/or phone calls).  We have partnered with several area  volunteer groups 
through which we plan to recruit, and we have budgeted for continuous newspaper, radio , and television  
advertisements  throughout the three year data collection period . UTMB has extensive resources for assisting 
with recruitment,  including  volunteer registries and  a recruit ment core . If we fell behind schedule in recruitment 
progress, we would  increase our efforts and expand recruitment to include neighboring counties (including 
southern Harris County, location of Houston , and up to Victori a County ) and additional UTMB and M.D. 
Anderson clinics . Recruitment from M.D. Anderson clinics is  feasible , as long drives are very commo n in the 
Houston -Galveston area.  Recruitment of MD Anderson patients will occur in person at MD Anderson and joint 
MD Anderson/UTMB clinics as well as by phone (following the same procedures used to identify UTMB 
patients to approach , except by phone rather than in -person ). For the two pilot studies Dr. Lyons is currently 
conducting, many participants live in surrounding areas ≥ 30 minutes’ drive away from UTMB but are still 
willing to come in for assessments . The Breast Health Center at UTMB’s mainland facility (approximately 30 
minutes from Galveston and 30 minutes from downtown Houston) offers the opportunity to conduct 
asses sments closer to Houston . We will accommodate based on location and travel convenience.  We have 
collaborated with oncologists at various clinics to expand our effort in recruitment. A HIP AA waiver request 
form has been completed. With the oncologists appro val, we will pre -screen patients via medical records for 
eligibility. The oncologists will refer their patients. We will not approach patients unless we have oncologists 
and patients permission.   
We have allowed additional time during the five -year award period such that if recruitment is not complete in 
the first three years, we can continue data collection through the fourth year and still have one year for analysis 
and dissemination. If absolutely necessary, we can expand our inclusion criteria to inclu de women with other 
cancers ; we do not anticipate this being necessary, however.  
F.10.b. Retention difficulties. The intervention and maintenance periods of the study together equal 12 
months of follow -up. We have developed procedures, both within the lab and on a larger scale in the Clinical 
Research Core of the Claude Pepper Older Americans Independence Center at UTMB, for regular participant 
contact to ensure continued participation. These contacts include reminder postcards, brief phone 
confirmations of  contact information, and collection of information on friends/family who can be listed as 
secondary contacts in case contact information for a participant changes unexpectedly.  We will send a Thank 
you/holiday card during the study participation.  
F.10.c.  Technical difficulties.  The monitors and/or application may present technical obstacles to some less 
tech-savvy participants. We will provide extensive technical assistance as needed. We will be available by 
email and phone for technical consultation (whi ch we will log and measure), and will provide in -depth illustrated 
instructions with troubleshooting tips and frequently asked questions as part of the manual.  We will allow up to 
one in -person meeting for technical support.  We will reschedule an assessmen t visit twice if necessary . Based 
on our interventions  thus far with older adults using tablets and smartphones, we believe that technical issues 
will not be so great as to reduce feasibility or acceptability.  In case of a broken/lost ipod, we will lend on e ipod 
for the duration of the study . We will  also replace a lost charging cord one time if necessary . 
F.10.d. Phone Calls /Communication . The calls will be generated by the research staff weekly for 3 months 
and monthly until 6 months (we will call two tim es within 15 minutes of weekly counseling phone call and 
arrange one make -up per week if necessary) from their randomization date. Staff will view the list on a weekly 
basis to make sure that calls are made on time. Once the call has been successful and th e forms completed, 
or after 3 attempts are made, we will document the number of attempts made, the date of the last phone call 
and if it was successful. If a counseling call lasts longer than 20 minutes, we will end the call as quickly as 
possible. We will  reply to texts/emails/phone calls during business hours for technical problems or to schedule 
calls/assessments. After hours texts or calls will only occur if pre -arranged for the purposes of picking up study 
materials or after -hours counseling calls. We may contact participants via phone, text, or email to schedule 
appointments, the day before an appointment as a reminder, and if we have a question or concern regarding 
their participation such as following up on questionnaire responses or adverse events. Additional 
calls/texts/emails may  occur to schedule dropping off accelerometers prior to 6 month and 12 month 
American Cancer  Society, Inc.   
Version# 2 04/01 /2020  Page 17 of 28 assessments.  Text messages are optional . Message and data rates may apply.  Any in -person contact that 
occurs to drop off an accelerometer will be minimal and only for the purposes of providing the monitor and 
instructions for its wear.  
F.11. Timeline  
We anticipate  that data collection for this project will occur during the first 4 years of the award period, with the 
final year dedicated to data clea ning, evaluation, dissemination, and intervention protocol refinement (or, in the 
case of delays, completing data collection as well). The timeline for the award period is displayed in Table 6. 8. 
Table 6. 8. Timeline  
 Year  1  Year 2  Year 3  Year 4  Year 5  
 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 
Materials purchasing and preparation                      
Recruitment                      
RCT participant contact period                      
RCT maintenance observational period                      
RCT evaluation                      
Results d issemination (manuscripts, gran ts)                     
Deliverables for this project include conference presentations, published manuscripts, counseling scripts, study 
protocols, and grant applications. We anticipate at leas t one publication related to the study per year, with 
potential examples shown in Table 6. 9. Because this trial uses novel technology -based methods, is one of few 
studies that includes a maintenance period, and is fully powered on its primary behavioral ou tcome, we expect 
the outcomes papers to be published in high -impact journals. Targeting high -impact medical journals that are 
read by practitioners in addition to researchers (e.g., JAMA Internal Medicine, J Clin Oncol,) is part of our 
strategy for speedin g dissemination. Ancillary papers on motivation, qualitative results, and methodology will 
be submitted to well -regarded discipline -specific journals.  Data or specimens collected in this research might 
be de -identified and used for future research  or distr ibuted to another investigator for future research without 
your consent .   
Table 6. 9. Examples of potential manuscripts based on study findings  
Upon completion of data collection for the randomized controlled trial, we will draft an application for an 
independent research award (e.g., R01, Research Scholar Award, etc.) to fund a follow -up project. The 
intervention content will be modifi ed based on process and outcome evaluation findings. The larger sample 
and funding of such an award will allow adequate power to detect differences in more distal health outcomes 
over longer intervention and maintenance periods, to formally test mediation,  and to investigate moderation by 
race/ethnicity. Our overarching goal is to create a successful program that can eventually be incorporated into 
survivorship care plans and implemented on a large scale. The preliminary data provided by this research 
proje ct, in combination with the training activities discussed elsewhere in this application, will provide the 
necessary foundation upon which a truly disseminable program can be built.   Year  Paper subject  
1 Protocol and rationale for the study  
2 Review/meta -analysis related to video game  interv ention studies  
3 Lessons learned paper regarding recruitment, retention, and process evaluation  
4 6-month outcomes paper  
5 12-month outcomes paper  
 Quality of life and psychological outcomes paper  
 Qualitative cultural appropriateness and acceptabil ity paper  
American Cancer  Society, Inc.   
Version# 2 04/01 /2020  Page 18 of 28 G. EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS  
Randomization details  
Participants will be randomi zed using sequentially numbered opaque sealed envelopes. Group assignments 
will be written on pieces of paper, placed under a piece of carbon paper, wrapped in aluminum foil, and then 
sealed one per opaque envelope. The envelopes will be then thoroughly sh uffled and numbered sequentially. 
Envelopes will be assigned to participants after baseline assessment (which will occur after orientation) in 
order of presentation by a member of the research team blinded to the original randomization process. The 
partici pant’s ID number will be written on the envelope to ensure that the carbon paper serves as an audit trail.  
Questionnaire content  
Table s 6.9 and 6.10 display the content of several of the questionnaires to be used in this intervention, to 
provide context as  to the nature of the theoretical constructs measured. All of the measures shown below use 
Likert -type response scales  
Table 6.9. Questionnaire items  related to Self -Determination Theory  
The nature of narrative transportation scales renders comparisons across groups difficult. Thus, we have 
included several different scales to measure different aspe cts of the construct. For measurement within the 
enhanced group, we will use the Transportation Scale,146 which is widely used in the literature, and the 
Narrative Engagem ent Scale,164 which provides subscales that may point to interesting areas for future work 
(narrative understanding, attentional focus, narrative presence, and emotional engagement).  To compare the 
two groups, it was necessary to use a more general measure of presence (also known as engagement or 
immersion). Table 6.10 shows the items from the two narrative -related scales. Below the table, we have 
included a self -assessment manikin th at is commonly used for brief but valid investigations of a general sense 
of engagement during a mediated experience (using an app, watching TV, playing a game, etc.).165 Motivation  I exercise because other people say I should  
I feel gui lty when I don’t exercise  
I value the benefits of exercise  
I exercise because it’s fun  
I don’t see why I should have to exercise  
I take part in exercise because my friends/family/partner say I should  
I feel ashamed when I miss an exercise session  
It’s important to me to exercise regularly  
I can’t see why I should bother exercising  
I enjoy my exercise sessions  
I exercise because others will not be pleased with me if I don’t  
I don’t see the point in exercising  
I feel like a failure when I haven’t exercised in a while  
I think it is important to make the effort to exercise regularly  
I find exercise a pleasurable activity  
I feel under pressure from my friends/family to exercise  
I get restless if I don’t exercise regularly  
I get ple asure and satisfaction from participating in exercise  
I think exercising is a waste of time  
Basic 
psychological 
needs  I feel I have made a lot of progress in relation to the goal I want to achieve  
The way I exercise is in agreement with my choices and  interests  
I feel I perform successfully the activities of my exercise program  
My relationships with the people I exercise with are very friendly  
I feel that the way I exercise is the way I want to  
I feel exercise is an activity which I do very wel l 
I feel I have excellent communication with the people I exercise with  
I feel that the way I exercise is a true expression of who I am  
I am able to meet the requirement of my exercise program  
My relationships with the people I exercise with are cl ose 
I feel that I have the opportunity to make choices with regard to the way I exercise  
American Cancer  Society, Inc.   
Version# 2 04/01 /2020  Page 19 of 28 Table 6.10. Questionnaire items related to Narrative Transportation  
Below is the presence Self Assessment Manikin, with the instructions provided to participations:  
Please use the figures below to indicate your feelings or emotional response to the game. The pictures g o from 
a person who feels he or she is INSIDE THE PICTURE, A PART OF THE STORY, A PART OF THE ACTION 
on the left end, to a person who feels he or she is OUTSIDE THE PICTURE, REMOVED OR SEPARATED 
FROM THE STORY, NOT PART OF THE ACTION on the right end. Plea se circle the number for the picture, 
or the space between any two pictures, that best represents how you felt while using the app.  
 
 
 
         1          2         3         4          5          6        7          8         9  Transportation 
Scale  While I was playing the g ame, I could easily picture the events in it taking place.  
While I was playing the game, activity going on in the room/space around me was on my mind.  
I could picture myself in the scene of the events described in the game.  
I was mentally involved in  the game while playing it.  
After finishing the game, I found it easy to put it out of my mind.  
I wanted to learn how the game ended.  
The game affected me emotionally.  
I found myself thinking of ways the game could have turned out differently.  
I found my mind wandering while playing the game.  
The events in this game are relevant to my everyday life.  
The events of the game have changed my life.  
While playing the game I had a vivid image of my character.  
Narrative 
Engagement 
Scale  At points, I had a hard time making sense of what was going on in the game.  
My understanding of the characters is unclear.  
I had a hard time recognizing the thread of the story.  
I found my mind wandering while using the game.  
While using the game I found myse lf thinking about other things.  
I had a hard time keeping my mind on the game.  
While using the game, my body was in the room, but my mind was inside the world created by the story.  
The game created a new world, and then that world suddenly disappeare d when the game ended.  
At times during the game, the story world was closer to me than the real world.  
The story affected me emotionally.  
During the game, when a main character succeeded, I felt happy, and when they suffered in some way, I felt sad  
I felt sorry for some of the characters in the game.  
American Cancer  Society, Inc.   
Version# 2 04/01 /2020  Page 20 of 28 Counseling content  example  
Below, we present an example from our weekly brief counseling guides. The content and structure of the 
guides was taken from previous studies performed by co -mentor Karen Basen -Engquist. The themes for each 
week reflect standard behavior change counseling  content and techniques, such as stimulus control, problem -
solving, goal -setting, etc.  
Week 3. Uncovering Barriers   
[Discuss exercise progress report  abstracted from application – ask for totals from the feedback screen(s)]  
Last session we discussed findin g times to fit in exercise. You mentioned that you wanted to try fitting in exercise 
______________. Did you try it? Did you develop plans for the rest of the week? (YES NO)  Were you able to fit 
in exercise in times that you hadn’t before? What were they? _________________________________  
We are going to use something called the IDEA process to examine ways to overcome barriers to exercise. The 
IDEA process stands for Identify, Develop, Evaluate, and Analyze. Let’s choose one barrier and problem -solve 
that b arrier.  
I-Identify problem.____________________________________________________  
D- Develop creative solutions. What are some possible solutions? (just brainstorm as many as you possibly can) 
________________________________________________________________ ____  
E- Evaluate the solutions and select the one you are most likely to implement and develop a specific plan to 
implement._____________________________________________________________________  
Which solution do you think would be the easiest for you to im plement? This week try implement _____________ 
and we can review next week.  
A- After implementing, analyze how well it worked and revise if necessary .  
HMWK: This week, think about the barrier that you chose and implement the plan. Next week we will analyz e 
how the plan went.  
 
American Cancer  Society, Inc.   
Version# 2 04/01 /2020  Page 21 of 28 I. REFERE NCES  
 
1. Loprinzi PD, Cardinal BJ. Effects of physical activity on common side effects of breast cancer 
treatment. Breast Cancer. Jan 2012;19(1):4 -10. 
2. Irwin ML, McTiernan A, Manson JE, et al. Physical activity and survival in postmenopausal women with 
breast cancer: results from the women's health initiative. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). Apr 2011;4(4):522 -
529. 
3. Craft LL, VanIterson EH, Helenowski IB, Rademaker AW, Courneya KS. Exercise Effects on 
Depressi ve Symptoms in Cancer Survivors: A Systematic Review and Meta -analysis. Cancer 
Epidemiology Biomarkers & Prevention. Jan 2012;21(1):3 -19. 
4. Blanchard CM, Courneya KS, Stein K. Cancer survivors' adherence to lifestyle behavior 
recommendations and associati ons with health -related quality of life: results from the American Cancer 
Society's SCS -II. Journal of clinical oncology : official journal of the American Society of Clinical 
Oncology. May 1 2008;26(13):2198 -2204.  
5. Paxton RJ, Phillips KL, Jones LA, et a l. Associations among physical activity, body mass index, and 
health -related quality of life by race/ethnicity in a diverse sample of breast cancer survivors. Cancer. 
Jan 17 2012.  
6. Schmitz KH, Neuhouser ML, Agurs -Collins T, et al. Impact of Obesity on Ca ncer Survivorship and the 
Potential Relevance of Race and Ethnicity. Journal of the National Cancer Institute. Sep 18 
2013;105(18):1344 -1354.  
7. Fong DY, Ho JW, Hui BP, et al. Physical activity for cancer survivors: meta -analysis of randomised 
controlled t rials. BMJ. 2012;344:e70.  
8. Matthews CE, Wilcox S, Hanby CL, et al. Evaluation of a 12 -week home -based walking intervention for 
breast cancer survivors. Supportive care in cancer : official journal of the Multinational Association of 
Supportive Care in Ca ncer. Feb 2007;15(2):203 -211. 
9. Pinto BM, Rabin C, Dunsiger S. Home -based exercise among cancer survivors: adherence and its 
predictors. Psycho -oncology. Apr 2009;18(4):369 -376. 
10. Sattelmair J, Pertman J, Ding EL, Kohl HW, Haskell W, Lee IM. Dose Respon se Between Physical 
Activity and Risk of Coronary Heart Disease A Meta -Analysis. Circulation. Aug 2011;124(7):789 -U784.  
11. Dzewaltowski DA, Estabrooks PA, Glasgow RE. The future of physical activity behavior change 
research: what is needed to improve tran slation of research into health promotion practice? Exercise 
and sport sciences reviews. Apr 2004;32(2):57 -63. 
12. Duncan LR, Hall CR, Wilson PM, Jenny O. Exercise motivation: a cross -sectional analysis examining 
its relationships with frequency, intensity , and duration of exercise. International Journal of Behavioral 
Nutrition and Physical Activity. Jan 26 2010;7.  
13. Rhodes RE, Fiala B, Conner M. A Review and Meta -Analysis of Affective Judgments and Physical 
Activity in Adult Populations. Annals of behavi oral medicine : a publication of the Society of Behavioral 
Medicine. Dec 2009;38(3):180 -204. 
14. Teixeira PJ, Carraca EV, Markland D, Silva MN, Ryan RM. Exercise, physical activity, and self -
determination theory: A systematic review. Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act. Jun 22 2012;9(1):78.  
15. Rhodes RE, Warburton DER, Bredin SSD. Predicting the effect of interactive video bikes on exercise 
adherence: An efficacy trial. Psychol Health Med. Dec 2009;14(6):631 -640. 
16. Warburton DER, Bredin SSD, Horita LTL, et al. The  health benefits of interactive video game exercise. 
Applied physiology, nutrition, and metabolism = Physiologie appliquee, nutrition et metabolisme. Aug 
2007;32(4):655 -663. 
17. Mejia -Downs A, Fruth SJ, Clifford A, et al. A Preliminary Exploration of the E ffects of a 6 -week 
Interactive Video Dance Exercise Program in an Adult Population. Cardiopulmonary physical therapy 
journal. Dec 2011;22(4):5 -11. 
18. Rosenberg D, Depp CA, Vahia IV, et al. Exergames for Subsyndromal Depression in Older Adults: A 
Pilot Stu dy of a Novel Intervention. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. Mar 2010;18(3):221 -226. 
19. Maillot P, Perrot A, Hartley A. Effects of interactive physical -activity video -game training on physical 
and cognitive function in older adults. Psychol Aging. Nov 28 2011.  
20. Yuen HK, Holthaus K, Kamen DL, Sword DO, Breland HL. Using Wii Fit to reduce fatigue among 
African American women with systemic lupus erythematosus: A pilot study. Lupus. Oct 
2011;20(12):1293 -1299.  
American Cancer  Society, Inc.   
Version# 2 04/01 /2020  Page 22 of 28 21. de Graaf A, Hoeken H, Sanders J, Beentjes H. The rol e of dimensions of narrative engagement in 
narrative persuasion. Communications -Ger. Dec 2009;34(4):385 -405. 
22. Hall AE, Bracken CC. "I Really Liked That Movie" Testing the Relationship Between Trait Empathy, 
Transportation, Perceived Realism, and Movie E njoyment. J Media Psychol -Ger. 2011;23(2):90 -99. 
23. Green MC, Brock TC, Kaufman GE. Understanding media enjoyment: The role of transportation into 
narrative worlds. Communication Theory. Nov 2004;14(4):311 -327. 
24. Jemal A, Bray F, Center MM, Ferlay J, Wa rd E, Forman D. Global cancer statistics. CA: a cancer 
journal for clinicians. Mar-Apr 2011;61(2):69 -90. 
25. Poole L, Hamer M, Wawrzyniak AJ, Steptoe A. The effects of exercise withdrawal on mood and 
inflammatory cytokine responses in humans. Stress. Jul 2 011;14(4):439 -447. 
26. Ekkekakis P, Parfitt G, Petruzzello SJ. The Pleasure and Displeasure People Feel When they Exercise 
at Different Intensities Decennial Update and Progress towards a Tripartite Rationale for Exercise 
Intensity Prescription. Sports Med icine. 2011;41(8):641 -671. 
27. Ballard -Barbash R, Friedenreich CM, Courneya KS, Siddiqi SM, McTiernan A, Alfano CM. Physical 
activity, biomarkers, and disease outcomes in cancer survivors: a systematic review. Journal of the 
National Cancer Institute. Jun 6 2012;104(11):815 -840. 
28. Hamer M, Stamatakis E. Physical activity and risk of cardiovascular disease events: inflammatory and 
metabolic mechanisms. Med Sci Sports Exerc. Jun 2009;41(6):1206 -1211.  
29. Basen -Engquist K, Hughes D, Perkins H, Shinn E, Taylo r CC. Dimensions of physical activity and their 
relationship to physical and emotional symptoms in breast cancer survivors. Journal of cancer 
survivorship : research and practice. Dec 2008;2(4):253 -261. 
30. Duijts SFA, Faber MM, Oldenburg HSA, van Beurden M, Aaronson NK. Effectiveness of behavioral 
techniques and physical exercise on psychosocial functioning and health -related quality of life in breast 
cancer patients and survivors -a meta -analysis. Psycho -oncology. Feb 2011;20(2):115 -126. 
31. Lee IM, Rexrod e KM, Cook NR, Manson JE, Buring JE. Physical activity and coronary heart disease in 
women: is "no pain, no gain" passe? JAMA : the journal of the American Medical Association. Mar 21 
2001;285(11):1447 -1454.  
32. Brown JC, Huedo -Medina TB, Pescatello LS, et  al. The efficacy of exercise in reducing depressive 
symptoms among cancer survivors: a meta -analysis. PLoS One. 2012;7(1):e30955.  
33. Wen CP, Wai JPM, Tsai MK, et al. Minimum amount of physical activity for reduced mortality and 
extended life expectancy: a prospective cohort study. Lancet. Oct 2011;378(9798):1244 -1253.  
34. Beasley JM, Kwan ML, Chen WY, et al. Meeting the physical activity guidelines and survival after 
breast cancer: findings from the after breast cancer pooling project. Breast Cancer Res T r. Jan 
2012;131(2):637 -643. 
35. Chen X, Zheng Y, Zheng W, et al. The effect of regular exercise on quality of life among breast cancer 
survivors. Am J Epidemiol. Oct 1 2009;170(7):854 -862. 
36. Kwan ML, Sternfeld B, Ergas IJ, et al. Change in physical activ ity during active treatment in a 
prospective study of breast cancer survivors. Breast Cancer Res Tr. Jan 2012;131(2):679 -690. 
37. Littman AJ, Tang MT, Rossing MA. Longitudinal study of recreational physical activity in breast cancer 
survivors. Journal of c ancer survivorship : research and practice. Jun 2010;4(2):119 -127. 
38. Lynch BM, Dunstan DW, Healy GN, Winkler E, Eakin E, Owen N. Objectively measured physical 
activity and sedentary time of breast cancer survivors, and associations with adiposity: findin gs from 
NHANES (2003 -2006). Cancer causes & control : CCC. Feb 2010;21(2):283 -288. 
39. Emery CF, Yang HC, Frierson GM, Peterson LJ, Suh S. Determinants of physical activity among 
women treated for breast cancer in a 5 -year longitudinal follow -up investigat ion. Psycho -oncology. Apr 
2009;18(4):377 -386. 
40. Silber JH, Rosenbaum PR, Clark AS, et al. Characteristics associated with differences in survival 
among black and white women with breast cancer. JAMA : the journal of the American Medical 
Association. Jul 24 2013;310(4):389 -397. 
41. Brawley OW. Health disparities in breast cancer. Obstetrics and gynecology clinics of North America. 
Sep 2013;40(3):513 -523. 
42. White A, Pollack LA, Smith JL, Thompson T, Underwood JM, Fairley T. Racial and ethnic differences i n 
health status and health behavior among breast cancer survivors --Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance 
System, 2009. Journal of cancer survivorship : research and practice. Mar 2013;7(1):93 -103. 
43. O'Neill SC, DeFrank JT, Vegella P, et al. Engaging in hea lth behaviors to lower risk for breast cancer 
recurrence. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e53607.  
American Cancer  Society, Inc.   
Version# 2 04/01 /2020  Page 23 of 28 44. Spark LC, Reeves MM, Fjeldsoe BS, Eakin EG. Physical activity and/or dietary interventions in breast 
cancer survivors: a systematic review of the maintenance of outco mes. Journal of cancer survivorship : 
research and practice. Mar 2013;7(1):74 -82. 
45. Vallance J, Plotnikoff RC, Karvinen KH, Mackey JR, Courneya KS. Understanding physical activity 
maintenance in breast cancer survivors. Am J Health Behav. 2010;34(2):225 -236. 
46. Pinto BM, Ciccolo JT. Physical activity motivation and cancer survivorship. Recent results in cancer 
research. Fortschritte der Krebsforschung. Progres dans les recherches sur le cancer. 2011;186:367 -
387. 
47. Deci EL, Ryan RM. The "what" and "why"  of goal pursuits: Human needs and the self -determination of 
behavior. Psychol Inq. 2000;11(4):227 -268. 
48. Deci EL, Ryan RM. Intrinsic motivation and self -determination in human behavior . New York, NY: 
Plenum Press; 1985.  
49. Silva MN, Vieira PN, Coutinho  SR, et al. Using self -determination theory to promote physical activity 
and weight control: a randomized controlled trial in women. J Behav Med. Apr 2010;33(2):110 -122. 
50. West DS, Gorin AA, Subak LL, et al. A motivation -focused weight loss maintenance p rogram is an 
effective alternative to a skill -based approach. Int J Obes (Lond). Feb 2011;35(2):259 -269. 
51. Gorin AA, Powers TA, Koestner R, Wing RR, Raynor HA. Autonomy Support, Self -Regulation, and 
Weight Loss. Health psychology : official journal of th e Division of Health Psychology, American 
Psychological Association. Jun 3 2013.  
52. van Laer T, de Ruyter K, Visconti LM, Wetzels M. The Extended Transportation -Imagery Model: A 
Meta -Analysis of the Antecedents and Consequences of Consumers' Narrative Tra nsportation. J 
Consum Res. Feb 2014;40(5):797 -817. 
53. Day RM. Impact of Reading for Pleasure Versus School During Exercise on Affective State Responses : 
Department of Exercise and Sport Science, East Carolina University; 2010.  
54. Klimmt C, Roth C, Vermeu len I, Vorderer P, Roth FS. Forecasting the Experience of Future 
Entertainment Technology: "Interactive Storytelling" and Media Enjoyment. Games and Culture. May 
2012;7(3):187 -208. 
55. Mellecker R, Lyons EJ, Baranowski T. Disentangling Fun and Enjoyment in  Exergames Using an 
Expanded Design, Play, Experience Framework: A Narrative Review. Games for Health Journal: 
Research, Development, and Clinical Applications. 2013;2(3):142 -149. 
56. Dow SP. Understanding user engagement in immersive and interactive stori es. Atlanta, GA: School of 
Interative Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology; 2008.  
57. Hinyard LJ, Kreuter MW. Using narrative communication as a tool for health behavior change: A 
conceptual, theoretical, and empirical overview. Health Education & Be havior. Oct 2007;34(5):777 -792. 
58. de Graaf A, Hoeken H, Sanders J, Beentjes JWJ. Identification as a Mechanism of Narrative 
Persuasion. Commun Res. Dec 2012;39(6):802 -823. 
59. Klimmt C, Hefner D, Vorderer P, Roth C, Blake C. Identification With Video Gam e Characters as 
Automatic Shift of Self -Perceptions. Media Psychology. 2010;13(4):323 -338. 
60. Peng W. The Mediational Role of Identification in the Relationship between Experience Mode and Self -
Efficacy: Enactive Role -Playing versus Passive Observation. Cyberpsychology & Behavior. Dec 
2008;11(6):649 -652. 
61. Przybylski AK, Weinstein N, Murayama K, Lynch MF, Ryan RM. The ideal self at play: the appeal of 
video games that let you be all you can be. Psychol Sci. Jan 2012;23(1):69 -76. 
62. Igartua JJ. Identific ation with characters and narrative persuasion through fictional feature films. 
Communications -Ger. Nov 2010;35(4):347 -373. 
63. Klimmt C, Hefner D, Vorderer P. The Video Game Experience as "True" Identification: A Theory of 
Enjoyable Alterations of Players ' Self -Perception. Communication Theory. Nov 2009;19(4):351 -+. 
64. Gabriel S, Young AF. Becoming a Vampire Without Being Bitten: The Narrative Collective -Assimilation 
Hypothesis. Psychol Sci. Aug 2011;22(8):990 -994. 
65. de Graaf A. The Effectiveness of Ada ptation of the Protagonist in Narrative Impact: Similarity Influences 
Health Beliefs Through Self -Referencing. Human Communication Research. Jan 2014;40(1):73 -90. 
66. Lyons EJ, Hatkevich C. Prevalence of behavior changing strategies in fitness video games:  theory -
based content analysis. J Med Internet Res. 2013;15(5):e81.  
67. Maillot P, Perrot A, Hartley A. Effects of interactive physical -activity video -game training on physical 
and cognitive function in older adults. Psychol Aging. Sep 2012;27(3):589 -600. 
American Cancer  Society, Inc.   
Version# 2 04/01 /2020  Page 24 of 28 68. Maillot P, Perrot A, Hartley A, Do MC. The Braking Force in Walking: Age -Related Differences and 
Improvement in Older Adults With Exergame Training. J Aging Phys Activ. Nov 13 2013.  
69. Schoene D, Lord SR, Delbaere K, Severino C, Davies TA, Smith ST. A  randomized controlled pilot 
study of home -based step training in older people using videogame technology. PLoS One. 
2013;8(3):e57734.  
70. Ijsselsteijn WA, de Kort YAW, Westerink J, de Jager M. Virtual fitness: Stimulating exercise behavior 
through media t echnology. Presence -Teleoperators and Virtual Environments. Dec 2006;15(6):688 -
698. 
71. Ryan RM, Rigby CS, Przybylski A. The motivational pull of video games: A self -determination theory 
approach. Motiv Emot. 2006;30(4):347 -363. 
72. Przybylski AK, Ryan RM,  Rigby CS. The Motivating Role of Violence in Video Games. Personality and 
Social Psychology Bulletin. Feb 2009;35(2):243 -259. 
73. Przybylski AK, Rigby CS, Ryan RM. A motivational model of video game engagement. Rev Gen 
Psychol. 2010;14(2):154.  
74. Salen K , Zimmerman E. Rules of play: game design fundamentals . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press; 2004.  
75. Peng W, Lin JH, Pfeiffer KA, Winn B. Need Satisfaction Supportive Game Features as Motivational 
Determinants: An Experimental Study of a Self -Determination Theory G uided Exergame. Media 
Psychology. 2012;15(2):175 -196. 
76. Bandura A. Self-efficacy: the exercise of control . New York, NY: WH Freeman; 1997.  
77. Bartsch A. Emotional Gratification in Entertainment Experience. Why Viewers of Movies and Television 
Series Fin d it Rewarding to Experience Emotions. Media Psychology. 2012;15(3):267 -302. 
78. Derrick JL, Gabriel S, Hugenberg K. Social surrogacy: How favored television programs provide the 
experience of belonging. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology. Mar 2009; 45(2):352 -362. 
79. Song H, Peng W, Lee KM. Promoting Exercise Self -Efficacy With an Exergame. Journal of Health 
Communication. 2011 2011;16(2):148 -162. 
80. Kastenmuller A, Greitemeyer T, Fairclough S, Waite D, Fischer P. Playing Exergames and Sporting 
Activity The Impact of Identification with One's Game Character. Soc Psychol -Germany. 
2013;44(4):264 -270. 
81. Paxton RJ, Jones LA, Chang S, et al. Was Race a Factor in the Outcomes of the Women's Health 
Eating and Living Study? Cancer. Aug 15 2011;117(16):3805 -3813.  
82. Yuen HK, Breland HL, Vogtle LK, Holthaus K, Kamen DL, Sword D. The process associated with 
motivation of a home -based Wii Fit exercise program among sedentary African American women with 
systemic lupus erythematosus. Disabil Health J. Jan 2013;6 (1):63 -68. 
83. Smith A. Smartphone Ownership 2013. 2013; http://www.pewinternet.org/2013/06/05/smartphone -
ownership -2013/ . Accessed Mar 19, 2014.  
84. Houston TK, Allison JJ, Sussman M, et al. Culturally Appropriate Storytelling to Improve Blood 
Pressure A Randomized Trial. Annals of internal medicine. Jan 18 2011;154(2):77 -+. 
85. Bollinger S, Kreuter MW. Real -time moment -to-moment emotional responses to narrative and 
informati onal breast cancer videos in African American women. Health Educ Res. Jun 2012;27(3):537 -
543. 
86. Raffel KE, Goddu AP, Peek ME. "I Kept Coming for the Love": Enhancing the Retention of Urban 
African Americans in Diabetes Education. The Diabetes educator. Feb 13 2014.  
87. Stevens J, Taber DR, Murray DM, Ward DS. Advances and controversies in the design of obesity 
prevention trials. Obesity (Silver Spring). Sep 2007;15(9):2163 -2170.  
88. Jeffery RW, Drewnowski A, Epstein LH, et al. Long -term maintenance of wei ght loss: current status. 
Health psychology : official journal of the Division of Health Psychology, American Psychological 
Association. Jan 2000;19(1 Suppl):5 -16. 
89. Lyons EJ, Tate DF, Ward DS, Bowling JM, Ribisl KM, Kalyararaman S. Energy Expenditure an d 
Enjoyment during Video Game Play: Differences by Game Type. Med Sci Sports Exerc. Oct 
2011;43(10):1987 -1993.  
90. Lyons EJ, Tate DF, Komoski SE, Carr PM, Ward DS. Novel approaches to obesity prevention: effects 
of game enjoyment and game type on energy ex penditure in active video games. J Diabetes Sci 
Technol. 2012;6(4):839 -848. 
91. Lyons EJ, Tate DF, Ward DS, Ribisl KM, Bowling JM, Kalyanaraman S. Engagement, Enjoyment, and 
Energy Expenditure During Active Video Game Play. Health psychology : official jou rnal of the Division 
of Health Psychology, American Psychological Association. Mar 25 2013.  
American Cancer  Society, Inc.   
Version# 2 04/01 /2020  Page 25 of 28 92. Meier A, Lyons EJ, Frydman G, Forlenza M, Rimer BK. How cancer survivors provide support on 
cancer -related internet mailing lists. J Med Internet Res. 2007 2007 ;9(2).  
93. Rimer BK, Lyons EJ, Ribisl KM, et al. How new subscribers use cancer -related online mailing lists. J 
Med Internet Res. 2005 2005;7(3).  
94. Williams SL, French DP. What are the most effective intervention techniques for changing physical 
activity  self-efficacy and physical activity behaviour -and are they the same? Health Educ Res. Apr 
2011;26(2):308 -322. 
95. Michie S, Abraham C, Whittington C, McAteer J, Gupta S. Effective techniques in healthy eating and 
physical activity interventions: a meta -regression. Health psychology : official journal of the Division of 
Health Psychology, American Psychological Association. Nov 2009;28(6):690 -701. 
96. Al Snih S, Graham JE, Kuo YF, Goodwin JS, Markides KS, Ottenbacher KJ. Obesity and disability: 
relation amo ng older adults living in Latin America and the Caribbean. Am J Epidemiol. Jun 15 
2010;171(12):1282 -1288.  
97. Amador LF, Al Snih S, Markides KS, Goodwin JS. Weight change and mortality among older Mexican 
Americans. Aging Clin Exp Res. Jun 2006;18(3):196 -204. 
98. Giordano SH, Duan Z, Kuo YF, Hortobagyi GN, Goodwin JS. Use and outcomes of adjuvant 
chemotherapy in older women with breast cancer. Journal of clinical oncology : official journal of the 
American Society of Clinical Oncology. Jun 20 2006;24(18):27 50-2756.  
99. Goodwin JS, Freeman JL, Mahnken JD, Freeman DH, Nattinger AB. Geographic variations in breast 
cancer survival among older women: implications for quality of breast cancer care. J Gerontol A Biol Sci 
Med Sci. Jun 2002;57(6):M401 -406. 
100. Fishe r SR, Kuo YF, Sharma G, et al. Mobility after hospital discharge as a marker for 30 -day 
readmission. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. Jul 2013;68(7):805 -810. 
101. Fisher SR, Ottenbacher KJ, Goodwin JS, Ostir GV. Chair rise ability and length of stay in hospi talized 
older adults. J Am Geriatr Soc. Oct 2009;57(10):1938 -1940.  
102. Ostir GV, Berges IM, Kuo YF, Goodwin JS, Fisher SR, Guralnik JM. Mobility activity and its value as a 
prognostic indicator of survival in hospitalized older adults. J Am Geriatr Soc. Apr 2013;61(4):551 -557. 
103. Ostir GV, Markides KS, Black SA, Goodwin JS. Emotional well -being predicts subsequent functional 
independence and survival. J Am Geriatr Soc. May 2000;48(5):473 -478. 
104. Ostir GV, Goodwin JS. High anxiety is associated with an increased risk of death in an older tri -ethnic 
population. Journal of clinical epidemiology. May 2006;59(5):534 -540. 
105. Goodwin JS, Satish S, Anderson ET, Nattinger AB, Freeman JL. Effect of nurse case management on 
the treatment of older women with brea st cancer. J Am Geriatr Soc. Sep 2003;51(9):1252 -1259.  
106. Goodwin JS, Zhang DD, Ostir GV. Effect of depression on diagnosis, treatment, and survival of older 
women with breast cancer. J Am Geriatr Soc. Jan 2004;52(1):106 -111. 
107. Jennings -Sanders A, Kuo  YF, Anderson ET, Freeman JL, Goodwin JS. How do nurse case managers 
care for older women with breast cancer? Oncology nursing forum. May 2005;32(3):625 -632. 
108. Baillargeon J, Kuo YF, Lin YL, Raji MA, Singh A, Goodwin JS. Effect of mental disorders on di agnosis, 
treatment, and survival of older adults with colon cancer. J Am Geriatr Soc. Jul 2011;59(7):1268 -1273.  
109. Bui QU, Ostir GV, Kuo YF, Freeman J, Goodwin JS. Relationship of depression to patient satisfaction: 
findings from the barriers to breast c ancer study. Breast Cancer Res Tr. Jan 2005;89(1):23 -28. 
110. Osborne C, Ostir GV, Du X, Peek MK, Goodwin JS. The influence of marital status on the stage at 
diagnosis, treatment, and survival of older women with breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res Tr. Sep 
2005;93(1):41 -47. 
111. Goodwin JS, Hunt WC, Key CR, Samet JM. The effect of marital status on stage, treatment, and 
survival of cancer patients. JAMA : the journal of the American Medical Association. Dec 4 
1987;258(21):3125 -3130.  
112. Basen -Engquist K, Tayl or CL, Rosenblum C, et al. Randomized pilot test of a lifestyle physical activity 
intervention for breast cancer survivors. Patient Educ Couns. Dec 2006;64(1 -3):225 -234. 
113. Tortolero SR, Markham CM, Parcel GS, et al. Using intervention mapping to adapt a n effective HIV, 
sexually transmitted disease, and pregnancy prevention program for high -risk minority youth. Health 
promotion practice. Jul 2005;6(3):286 -298. 
114. Basen -Engquist K, Carmack CL, Li Y, et al. Social -Cognitive Theory Predictors of Exercise B ehavior in 
Endometrial Cancer Survivors. Health psychology : official journal of the Division of Health Psychology, 
American Psychological Association. Feb 25 2013.  
American Cancer  Society, Inc.   
Version# 2 04/01 /2020  Page 26 of 28 115. Basen -Engquist K, Scruggs S, Jhingran A, et al. Physical activity and obesity in endom etrial cancer 
survivors: associations with pain, fatigue, and physical functioning. American journal of obstetrics and 
gynecology. Mar 2009;200(3):288 e281 -288. 
116. Trevino RA, Vallejo L, Hughes DC, Gonzalez V, Tirado -Gomez M, Basen -Engquist K. Mexican -
American and Puerto Rican breast cancer survivors' perspectives on exercise: similarities and 
differences. Journal of immigrant and minority health / Center for Minority Public Health. Dec 
2012;14(6):1082 -1089.  
117. Perkins HY, Waters AJ, Baum GP, Basen -Engq uist KM. Outcome expectations, expectancy 
accessibility, and exercise in endometrial cancer survivors. J Sport Exercise Psy. Dec 2009;31(6):776 -
785. 
118. Basen -Engquist K, Carmack CL, Perkins H, et al. Design of the Steps to Health Study of Physical 
Activi ty in Survivors of Endometrial Cancer: Testing a Social Cognitive Theory Model. Psychol Sport 
Exerc. Jan 1 2011;12(1):27 -35. 
119. Carmack Taylor CL, de Moor C, Basen -Engquist K, et al. Moderator analyses of participants in the 
Active for Life after cancer trial: implications for physical activity group intervention studies. Annals of 
behavioral medicine : a publication of the Society of Behavioral Medicine. Feb 2007;33(1):99 -104. 
120. Fry CS, Drummond MJ, Glynn EL, et al. Skeletal muscle autophagy and prote in breakdown following 
resistance exercise are similar in younger and older adults. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. May 
2013;68(5):599 -607. 
121. Markofski MM, Volpi E. Protein metabolism in women and men: similarities and disparities. Current 
Opinion in Cli nical Nutrition and Metabolic Care. Jan 2011;14(1):93 -97. 
122. Drummond MJ, Timmerman KL, Markofski MM, et al. Short -term bed rest increases TLR4 and IL -6 
expression in skeletal muscle of older adults. American journal of physiology. Regulatory, integrativ e 
and comparative physiology. Aug 1 2013;305(3):R216 -223. 
123. Fujita S, Rasmussen BB, Cadenas JG, et al. Aerobic exercise overcomes the age -related insulin 
resistance of muscle protein metabolism by improving endothelial function and Akt/mammalian target of 
rapamycin signaling. Diabetes. Jun 2007;56(6):1615 -1622.  
124. Volpi E, Nazemi R, Fujita S. Muscle tissue changes with aging. Current Opinion in Clinical Nutrition and 
Metabolic Care. Jul 2004;7(4):405 -410. 
125. Volpi E, Sheffield -Moore M, Rasmussen BB, Wolfe RR. Basal muscle amino acid kinetics and protein 
synthesis in healthy young and older men. JAMA : the journal of the American Medical Association. 
Sep 12 2001;286(10):1206 -1212.  
126. Berenson AB, Breitkopf CR, Newman JL, Rahman M. Contribution of fat -free mass and fat mass to 
bone mineral density among reproductive -aged women of white, black, and Hispanic race/ethnicity. 
Journal of clinical densitometry : the official journal of the International Society for Clinical Densitometry. 
Apr-Jun 2009;12(2):2 00-206. 
127. Berenson AB, Rahman M, Wilkinson G. Racial difference in the correlates of bone mineral 
content/density and age at peak among reproductive -aged women. Osteoporosis international : a 
journal established as result of cooperation between the Euro pean Foundation for Osteoporosis and 
the National Osteoporosis Foundation of the USA. Aug 2009;20(8):1439 -1449.  
128. Rahman M, Berenson AB. Self -perception of weight gain among multiethnic reproductive -age women. J 
Womens Health (Larchmt). Mar 2012;21(3):3 40-346. 
129. Laz TH, Berenson AB. Association of web -based weight loss information use with weight reduction 
behaviors in adolescent women. The Journal of adolescent health : official publication of the Society for 
Adolescent Medicine. Oct 2011;49(4):446 -448. 
130. Laz TH, Berenson AB. Racial and ethnic disparities in internet use for seeking health information 
among young women. J Health Commun. 2013;18(2):250 -260. 
131. Roncancio AM, Berenson AB, Rahman M. Health Locus of Control, Acculturation, and Health -Related 
Internet Use Among Latinas. J Health Commun. Jan 2 2012.  
132. Warburton DE, Gledhill N, Jamnik VK, et al. Evidence -based risk assessment and recommendations for 
physical activity clearance: Consensus Document 2011. Applied physiology, nutrition, an d metabolism 
= Physiologie appliquee, nutrition et metabolisme. Jul 2011;36 Suppl 1:S266 -298. 
133. Midtgaard J. Theoretical and practical outline of the Copenhagen PACT narrative -based exercise 
counselling manual to promote physical activity in post -therap y cancer survivors. Acta Oncol. 
2013;52(2):303 -309. 
American Cancer  Society, Inc.   
Version# 2 04/01 /2020  Page 27 of 28 134. Tudor -Locke C, Camhi SM, Troiano RP. A catalog of rules, variables, and definitions applied to 
accelerometer data in the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, 2003 -2006. Preventing 
chroni c disease. 2012;9:E113.  
135. Yost KJ, Eton DT, Garcia SF, Cella D. Minimally important differences were estimated for six Patient -
Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System -Cancer scales in advanced -stage cancer 
patients. Journal of clinical epidemio logy. May 2011;64(5):507 -516. 
136. Mackey DC, Manini TM, Schoeller DA, et al. Validation of an armband to measure daily energy 
expenditure in older adults. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. Oct 2011;66(10):1108 -1113.  
137. Stewart AL, Mills KM, King AC, Haskel l WL, Gillis D, Ritter PL. CHAMPS physical activity questionnaire 
for older adults: outcomes for interventions. Med Sci Sports Exerc. Jul 2001;33(7):1126 -1141.  
138. Rikli RE, Jones CJ. Senior Fitness Test Manual . 2nd ed. Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics; 2013 . 
139. Enright PL. The six -minute walk test. Respiratory care. Aug 2003;48(8):783 -785. 
140. Brady MJ, Cella DF, Mo F, et al. Reliability and validity of the functional assessment of cancer therapy -
breast quality -of-life instrument. Journal of clinical onco logy : official journal of the American Society of 
Clinical Oncology. Mar 1997;15(3):974 -986. 
141. Anderson DF, Cychosz CM. Development of an Exercise Identity Scale. Percept Motor Skill. Jun 
1994;78(3):747 -751. 
142. Vlachopoulos SP, Kaperoni M, Moustaka F C. The relationship of self -determination theory variables to 
exercise identity. Psychol Sport Exerc. Jun 2011;12(3):265 -272. 
143. Zafeiridou MP, Sarafi VD, Vlachopoulos SP. The mediating role of exercise identity in the relationship 
of exercise motivation al regulations with strenuous, moderate and mild exercise. The Journal of sports 
medicine and physical fitness. Dec 2014;54(6):816 -827. 
144. Markland D, Tobin V. A modification to the behavioural regulation in exercise questionnaire to include 
an assessmen t of amotivation. J Sport Exercise Psy. Jun 2004;26(2):191 -196. 
145. Wilson PM, Rodgers WM, Loitz CC, Scime G. "It's who I am...really!" The importance of integrated 
regulation in exercise contexts. J Appl Biobehav Res. 2006;11(2):79 -104. 
146. Green MC, Br ock TC. The role of transportation in the persuasiveness of public narratives. J Pers Soc 
Psych. Nov 2000;79(5):701 -721. 
147. Lu AS, Thompson D, Baranowski J, Buday R, Baranowski T. Story immersion in a health videogame for 
childhood obesity prevention. Games for health journal. 2012;1(1):37 -43. 
148. Murphy ST, Frank LB, Chatterjee JS, Baezconde -Garbanati L. Narrative versus Nonnarrative: The Role 
of Identification, Transportation, and Emotion in Reducing Health Disparities. Journal of 
Communication. 2013;6 3(1):116 -137. 
149. Schneider EF, Lang A, Shin M, Bradley SD. Death with a story - How story impacts emotional, 
motivational, and physiological responses to first -person shooter video games. Hum Commun Res. Jul 
2004;30(3):361 -375. 
150. Gammage KL, Hall CR, Rodgers WM. More about exercise imagery. Sport Psychologist. Dec 
2000;14(4):348 -359. 
151. Stanley DM, Cumming J, Standage M, Duda JL. Images of exercising: Exploring the links between 
exercise imagery use, autonomous and controlled motivation to exercise, and exercise intention and 
behavior. Psychology of Sport and Exercise. Mar 2012;13(2):133 -141. 
152. Pavlas D, Jentsch F, Salas E, Fiore SM, Sims V. The Play Experience Scale: Development and 
Validation of a Measure of Play. Human Factors. Apr 2012;54(2):21 4-225. 
153. Vlachopoulos SP, Ntoumanis N, Smith AL. The basic psychological needs in exercise scale: translation 
and evidence for cross -cultural validity. International Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology. 
2010;8:394 -412. 
154. Dal Cin S, Zanna MP, Fon g GT. Narrative persuasion and overcoming resistance. In: Knowles ES, Linn 
JA, eds. Resistance and Persuasion . New York, NY: Routledge; 2013:175 -191. 
155. Vandelanotte C, De Bourdeaudhuij I. Acceptability and feasibility of a computer -tailored physical act ivity 
intervention using stages of change: project FAITH. Health Educ Res. Jun 2003;18(3):304 -317. 
156. Vandelanotte C, De Bourdeaudhuij I, Brug J. Acceptability and feasibility of an interactive computer -
tailored fat intake intervention in Belgium. Health  promotion international. Dec 2004;19(4):463 -470. 
157. Ayala GX, Elder JP. Qualitative methods to ensure acceptability of behavioral and social interventions 
to the target population. J Public Health Dent. Win 2011;71:S69 -S79. 
158. Vallance JK, Courneya KS , Plotnikoff RC, Yasui Y, Mackey JR. Randomized controlled trial of the 
effects of print materials and step pedometers on physical activity and quality of life in breast cancer 
American Cancer  Society, Inc.   
Version# 2 04/01 /2020  Page 28 of 28 survivors. Journal of clinical oncology : official journal of the American Soci ety of Clinical Oncology. 
2007;25(17):2352 -2359.  
159. Rogers LQ, Hopkins -Price P, Vicari S, et al. A randomized trial to increase physical activity in breast 
cancer survivors. Med Sci Sports Exerc. Apr 2009;41(4):935 -946. 
160. Pinto BM, Papandonatos GD, Go ldstein MG. A randomized trial to promote physical activity among 
breast cancer patients. Health psychology : official journal of the Division of Health Psychology, 
American Psychological Association. Jun 2013;32(6):616 -626. 
161. Rogers LQ, Hopkins -Price P , Vicari S, et al. Physical activity and health outcomes three months after 
completing a physical activity behavior change intervention: persistent and delayed effects. Cancer 
epidemiology, biomarkers & prevention : a publication of the American Associatio n for Cancer 
Research, cosponsored by the American Society of Preventive Oncology. May 2009;18(5):1410 -1418.  
162. Vallance JK, Courneya KS, Plotnikoff RC, Dinu I, Mackey  JR. Maintenance of physical activity in breast 
cancer survivors after a randomized tri al. Med Sci Sport Exerc. 2008;40(1):173 -180. 
163. Glaser B. Theoretical sensitivity: advances in the methodology of grounded theory . Mill Valley, CA: 
Sociology Press; 19 78. 
164. Busselle R, Bilandzic H. Measuring narrative engagement. Media Psychology. 2009;12(4):321 -347. 
165. Lang A. Self Assessment Manikin (SAM) Measure (9 -point). 2000; 
http://www.temple.edu /ispr/frame_measure_t.htm . Accessed April 15, 2013.  
 
 
 