 Tobacco Cessation Treatment Preferences among Veteran Smokers 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
07/25/2022 
Tobacco  Cessation  Treatment  Preferences  among  Veteran  Smokers  
Research  Protocol,  version  date  7/25/2022  Page  1 of 25  
 Research Protocol:  Tobacco  Cessation Treatment  Preferences  among  Veteran  Smokers 
Principal Investigator: Sarah M. Wilson, Ph.D. (Clinician; Clinical Psychologist)  
PURPOSE  
 
The overall goal  of this study  is to understand  and improve tobacco  abstinence rates  among  Veteran 
smokers receiving specialty medical care. The specific aims of the study are to:  
AIM  1a: To qualitatively explore smoking  cessation  treatment  preferences among Veteran smokers 
living with  HIV, and to quantitatively evaluate perspectives on relapse-prevention messages  among 
Veterans and smokers living with HIV.  
AIM  1b: To quantitatively evaluate  satisfaction  with  relapse-prevention  messages among a de-identified 
online sample of Veterans and smokers living with HIV, and general-population smokers.  
 
AIM  1c: To qualitatively explore smoking  cessation  treatment perspectives among ID health care  staff 
who serve Veterans living with HIV.  
AIM 2: To quantitatively examine trends and determine health disparities by HIV status and 
demographic  characteristics  in use of smoking  cessation  aids among patients  receiving VHA clinical  care.  
 
AIM  3: To use a successive  cohort  design  to develop a technology -assisted  health (eHealth) smoking 
cessation intervention tailored for Veterans living with HIV.  
AIM  4: To conduct a randomized  clinical trial of an eHealth smoking  cessation  intervention in medical 
specialty care clinics.  
BACKGROUND  AND  SIGNIFICANCE  
 
There are significant barriers to tobacco cessation treatment for patients and providers in specialty care clinical settings (Rojewski et al., 2019). Specialty providers in general cite several prominent barriers to delivering evidence-based tobacco cessation care, including insufficient time, lack of training in tobacco 
cessation, a perception of low motivation in their patients, and concerns about tob acco cessation 
discussions being a sensitive topic to discuss (Meijer et al., 2019). There is also great variability in the 
extent to which specialty providers believe that tobacco cessation care is consistent with their specific medical role (Meijer et al., 2019). Beyond difficulties accessing cessation services, a large proportion of 
patients who are prescribed NRT or initiate behavioral treatment do not achieve initial abstinence 
(Piper, Vasilenk, Cook, & Lanza, 2016). Given the reality of treatment non-response, it could be immensely effective to offer smoking cessation treatment plans that can be personalized to patients as they progress through treatment. Use of healthcare technology (i.e., telehealth, electronic health record, and computerized  treatme nt algorithms  based  on patient  data)  to personalize treatment has the 
potential to increase patient engagement and proactively address treatment non -response.  
There is a lack of research on strategies to bring patient -centered care to tobacco cessation in specialty 
clinics. Given that tobacco cessation is most efficacious using an intensive, combined pharmacological - 
counseling approach, this new care model has the potential to increase long -term tobacco abstinence 
rates  within  specialty care  clinical  popul ations.  This study  will design and pilot test a novel  model  of care  
Tobacco  Cessation  Treatment  Preferences  among  Veteran  Smokers  
Research  Protocol,  version  date  7/25/2022  Page  2 of 25  
 for tobacco  cessation  in two specialty  care  VA clinics, the Infectious  Disease  Clinic and the Cardiology 
Section.  
Rationale for Infectious Disease Clinic  
Among the over 1 million people living with HIV in the U.S., the smoking rate is two to three times 
higher than in the general U.S. population (Kariuki et al., 2016; Moscou -Jackson, Commodore -Mensah, 
Farley, & DiGiacomo, 2014). Similarly, people living wit h Hepatitis C smoke at three times the rate of 
those  without Hepatitis C (Kim et al., 2018).  Estimates  from  studies  of VHA patients  indicate  that 63%  of 
HIV-positive Veterans currently smoke cigarettes (Crothers et al., 2005) and 58% of Veterans living with 
Hepatitis C currently smoke cigarettes (Lynch et al., 2018). Tobacco use disproportionately increases health risks for people living with HIV and/or hepatitis C (Mallat et al., 2008; Pacek & Cioe, 2015). Given the health risks of smoking for individuals with chronic infectious diseases, it is imperative to address 
tobacco use for this population.  
 
Few smoking cessation interventions have been rigorously tested in people living with HIV or in people 
living with hepatitis C, and to date there have been no r andomized controlled (RCT) trials of eHealth 
smoking cessation interventions for Veterans living with HIV and/or hepatitis C . One RCT tested the 
effectiveness of an NP -led counseling/NRT intervention, but tobacco abstinence at follow up was not 
biochemical ly verified (Reid  et al., 2020).  According  to two recent systematic  reviews, there  are only  five 
known large randomized smoking cessation trials among smokers with HIV (Moscou-Jackson et al., 2014; Cooperman, 2016). One of the most promising smoking cessation interventions for people living with HIV to date consisted of telehealth CBT (Vidrine, Marks et al., 2012), but did not show long-term 
efficacy. Despite a nearly 80% session completion rate (Vidrine, Marks et al., 2012), at 6 -month follow - 
up, the smoking abstinence rate was only 5% (Gritz  et al., 2013).  This high  treatment  adherence  and low 
quit rate  indicate that this population  would likely benefit  from an approach that  is more accessible and 
more intensive. Thus, there is a need for novel, intensive eHealth approaches to smoking cessation in 
this population. 
 
Veterans living with HIV and/or Hepatitis C face numerous barriers to both treatment access and smoking  abstinence.  In groups  who  experience marginalization,  common  barriers to abstinence  include 
lack of support for quitting from health care providers, high prevalence of smoking in the community, 
difficulties with stress management, and chronic pain (Twyman, Bonevski, Paul, & Bryant, 2014). For 
smokers with HIV specifically, barriers to abstinence include poor access to smoking cessation treatment,  social  networks that  support smoking,  alcohol  and drug use,  poor  health, and mental  health 
comorbidity (Karuiuki  et al., 2016). Additionally, Veterans living with HIV have reported in qualitative 
interviews that referral to substance use treatment outside of the ID or primary care setting is 
burdensome (Minick et al., 2016). These patients further note that receivin g HIV -specific care for 
addictions  would  help overcome  this barrier (Minick  et al., 2016).  Individually  tailored and HIV-targeted 
approaches to follow -up messaging have been recommended in the literature (Moscou -Jackson et al., 
2014; Pacek  & Cioe, 2015), but  are yet to be tested  as part of a multi -component  approach  for smokers 
with chronic infectious disease. 
 
Rationale for Cardiology Section  
The causal link between tobacco use and cardiovascular disease is well-established (Burns, 2003). 
Nationally representative data indicates that while a recent myocardial infarction increases motivation 
to quit tobacco,  it has no effect  on likelihood of tobacco  cessation  (Gaalema et al., 2018).  Although  many 
cardiac patients are motivated to quit tobacco, meta -analytic data suggests that low -intensity 
counseling for hospitalized patients  does  not significantly  increase the odds  of tobacco  cessation  (Rigotti  
Tobacco  Cessation  Treatment  Preferences  among  Veteran  Smokers  
Research  Protocol,  version  date  7/25/2022  Page  3 of 25  
 et al., 2012). Rather, intensive counseling in addition to adaptive pharmacotherapy are indicated to be 
most  effective for tobacco  cessation  among cardiac  patients  (Benowitz  & Prochaska, 2013).  There  is also 
evidence that intensive counseling for tobacco cessation among cardiac patients is both effective and cost-effective (Lapado  et al., 2011).  
 
In the VA -BEST Trial, an implementation package designed to increase delivery of the 5 A’s tobacco 
cessation intervention for hospitalized Veterans (Katz et al., 2014). Although adherence to the 5 A’s increased, and more Veterans in the implementation  arm received tobacco  cessation  care,  there  was no 
significant difference in likelihood of tobacco cessation. In this study, the authors concluded that “more 
intensive interventions are needed to promote long- term cessation” (Katz et al., 2014) . 
 
Despite these calls for personalized, intensive counseling, there is a lack of intensive care models 
designed  to optimize  integration into existing clinical  care  models  while promoting highly  effective, 
intensive tobacco cessation interventions. 
 
AIM  1 METHODS  – QUALITATIVE  FORMATIVE  ANALYSIS  
A qualitative patient sample ( N = 20 or until saturation is reached) will include VHA patients with HIV 
who currently smoke or recently quit smoking. These patients will complete in -person qualitative 
interviews. A separate  qualitative  sample of ID health care  staff  who  serve  Veterans  living with  HIV will 
be collected ( N = 15).  
 
In qualitative coding and analysis, two complementary methodologies will be used: conventional content analysis (Hsieh & Shannon,  2005)  and inductive  thematic  analysis (Braun  & Clarke, 2006).  Using 
these two sequential, complementary approaches will maximize the validity of findings and minimize researcher bias (Miles, Huberman, & Saldaña, 2014).  
 
QUALITATIVE SAMPLE RECRUITMENT. Purposive sampling will be used to identify participants for the 
qualitative patient  sample  (N = 20). We anticipate  that we will have to screen  30 participants  to reach  20 
completers.  The sample will include 20 HIV -positive VHA patients who either currently smoke ≥ seven 
cigarettes per week or are lifetime smokers (smoked ≥ 100 lifetime cigarettes) who quit within the past  
2 years.  Veteran  patients  with  an HIV diagnosis  and documented  tobacco  use within the past 2 years  will 
be identified from patient records  of the Durham VAHCS via a data pull from VA’s Regional Data 
Warehouse. We will sample VHA patients with diverse backgrounds with respect to gender identity, sexual orientation, race/ethnicity, age, and medical/psychiatric comorbidities. Potential participants will be sent an introductory letter signed by the PI that describes the study and invites participation. 
Veterans who do not decline will be called to determine interest in the study and basic study eligibility. 
We will also recruit by presenting info rmation about the study to clinicians throughout the medical 
center, who can then provide a referral to Dr. Wilson by adding her as a co -signer to CPRS notes. The 
third  recruitment  method  will involve  pre-screening potential  participants  who  have  clinic appointments 
in the Infectious Diseases clinic (8A). Study staff will monitor whether pre-screened patients have  
arrived in the clinic  via VetLink.  Study  staff  will indicate  potential participants  to 8A  clinic staff,  and clinic 
staff will inquire whether patients interested in hearing about an observational, single-visit research study about smoking. If a patient affirmatively indicates to their provider that they would like to hear about the study, they will be approached by a study staff member for screening and informed consent. The sample size has a high likelihood of reaching data saturation, which we define as the point in data 
collection when additional interviews do not result in new themes (Guest, Bunce, & Johnson, 2006).  
Tobacco  Cessation  Treatment  Preferences  among  Veteran  Smokers  
Research  Protocol,  version  date  7/25/2022  Page  4 of 25  
 Guest  et al. have  experimentally  demonstrated  that after  12 interviews, there  are diminishing  returns  on 
new themes; furthermore, at 18 interviews, 96% of themes are coded (Guest, Bunce, & Johnson, 2006). 
A convenience sample  of 15 local  ID health care  staff  will be recruited  from  the Durham  VA Health Care 
System. A wide variety of staff will be contacted in order to gather diverse opinions and perspectives 
regarding smoking cessation care, including physicians, nurse practitioners, physician assistants, social workers, psychologists, nurses, and pharmacists. A number of recruitment methods will be used: 1) 
recruitment email sent to clinic staff, 2) recruitment brochures and flyers displayed in the staff room in the 8A clinic, 3) announcements made during the ID clinic s taff meeting, and 4) clinic staff will be 
approached  during  the 8A ID clinic (after  receiving an email) to ascertain  whether  they  would be willing 
to participate.  
 
QUALITATIVE PROCEDURES. All interviews will be completed by either Dr. Wilson or trained study staff. 
For patients following informed consent, the interviewer will complete a 60 -minute semi -structured 
interview with the participant. The format of the interview is funnel-shaped (B rinkman & Kvale, 2015), 
such that interview questions are initially broad and gradually narrow. An example of initial broad questions includes “For you personally, what would [be/have been] the best treatment to get to help 
you quit smoking?” Later intervi ew questions will elicit feedback on specific examples of treatment 
options  and relapse-prevention  messages.  For example, participants  will be asked,  “I’d like for you to tell 
me about the pros and cons of some different types of messages (I’ll give examples of each type).” The 
qualitative interviewers will take notes during each interview, and all interviews will be audio recorded and transcribed by members of the study team at Durham. Veteran participants will be compensated  
$30 for completing the interview. Based on the first interview transcript, a codebook will be developed under  the following categories:  areas for expansion/tailoring for Veteran smokers  with  HIV;  new  themes 
for relapse -prevention messages; and reactions to messages. Following creation of the codebook, the 
coding scheme will be updated as necessary following each of the first three participant interviews. Once  the final  codebook  is established, interview transcripts  will be dually coded  by the PI and another 
study staff member, with coding discrepancies resolved by consensus. 
 
The medical  records  of participants  will be reviewed to determine  HIV disease  status, use of smoking 
cessation medications and/or specialty clinic visits, comorbid diagnoses, and healthcare utilization 
patterns.  
 
For clinic staff, documentation of informed consent will be waived. No HIPAA authorization will be 
collected, as no protected health inf ormation is being collected by clinicians. At the beginning of each 
interview, the interviewer will capture consent on the audio record. Interviews will last approximately 
30 minutes,  and will consist of questions  derived from  the Consolidated Framework  for Implementation 
Research (CFIR; Damschroder et al., 2009). Questions will center on the following CFIR constructs: 
intervention characteristics, outer setting, and inner setting. Based on the first interview transcript, a codebook will be developed under the following categories: evidence strength and quality, relative 
advantage, adaptability, complexity, patient needs and resources, structural characteristics, tension for 
change, and compatibility. Once the final codebook is established, interview transcr ipts will be dually 
coded by the PI and another study staff member, with coding discrepancies resolved by consensus.  
 
QUANTITATIVE PROCEDURES. The study team will receive a dataset from Duke University Health 
System, where Dr. Wilson will collect data from  Amazon Mechanical Turk (MTURK; 
https://www.mturk.com).  Data from  MTurk will be collected by the Duke  team via an anonymous  survey 
hosted by Duke Qualtrics. Data will be moved to VA from Duke in accordance via a VA-owned  
Tobacco  Cessation  Treatment  Preferences  among  Veteran  Smokers  
Research  Protocol,  version  date  7/25/2022  Page  5 of 25  
 thumbdrive. All data will be de -identified, such that the study team will neither collect nor retain any PII 
or PHI. Data will include: HIV, smoking, and veteran status; demographic information (age; race; 
ethnicity; relationship status; sexual orientation; gender identity; U.S. state/territory; education; income; VHA patient  status);  and for HIV-positive participants  only,  age at HIV diagnosis,  last CD4 count, 
and last viral  load).  Data will also include  participants’  ratings  of satisfaction  with  148 relapse prevention 
text messages used in the SmokefreeVET library, as well as additional messages developed by the Duke research team.  
AIM  2 METHODS  – QUANTITATIVE  GAP  IN VHA  CARE ANALYSIS  
To identify potential  treatment  moderators  and further  understand  current  health  services for smoking 
cessation  among Veterans, it is essential to determine existing health disparities in cessation  treatment 
among VHA patients with a variety of chronic care conditions.  
 
For this study  aim,  the data  source  will be a data  request from  Corporate  Data Warehouse (CDW).  We 
will create two complimentary datasets. First, we will investigate predictors of tobacco cessation pharmacotherapy  fills among a cohort  of Veteran tobacco  users  (FY 2018).  Second,  we will investigate 
overall rates of tobacco cessation pharmacotherapy fills over time (2011 to present).  
 
Pharmacotherapy  Disparities  among  a Cohort  of Tobacco  Users  
Veteran health data, which may include PHI (e.g., dates of care and patient address), will be gat hered 
starting from FY18 (pre -pandemic). After requesting data access via the Data Access Request Tracker 
(DART), Veterans who have positive tobacco use health factors will be identified from VA’s Regional and/or Corporate Data Warehouse. During the retros pective observation period, tobacco use will be 
determined based on a validated algorithm for identifying smoking status from the EMR (Calhoun et al., 2017; McGinnis et al., 2011). Data will be extracted on tobacco use health factors, pharmacy records of 
medications dispensed, primary care/ID clinic outpatient healthcare encounters, pain intensity vital sign 
data, history of positive homelessness screening, history of positive food insecurity screening, patient demographics (race, ethnicity, service -connect ed disability, birth sex, gender identity, county, address), 
and diagnosis codes for comorbid disorders of interest (including but not limited to HIV, Hepatitis C coinfection, cardiovascular  disease, cancer,  and psychiatric  disorders). Number  of clinic vis its attended  in 
the 12 -month period prior to the positive health factor will be collected as a control variable. Patient 
county and address will be used to extract data on neighborhood deprivation (Bhavsar et al., 2018) and economic inequality (GINI; Bee, 2012).  
 
For each  the year12-month  period following each patient’s  positive tobacco  use health factor,  in which 
patients are determined to be smoking, three outcomes will be assessed: pharmacotherapy orders for 
any tobacco  cessation  pharmacotherapy  (NRT,  bupropion,  or varenicline), pharmacotherapy  orders  for 
best-practice tobacco cessation pharmacotherapy (dual pharmacy dispensation of NRT [patch plus 
lozenge/gum/inhaler] or varenicline), and pharmacotherapy fills for any tobacco cessation pharmacotherapy, bupropion, or any smoking cessation pharmacotherapy (NRT, bupropion, or 
varenicline). Specifically, pharmacotherapy dispensation prescriptions will be coded dichotomously 
(yes/no) based on presence/absence of a pharmacy record within each 12- month observation period. 
Among those who received any pharmacotherapy prescriptions, pharmacotherapy fills will also be coded dichotomously. 
 
We will examine a range of variables to detect disparities in pharmacotherapy utilization prescriptions and fills. Demographic  information  will include age,  race,  and ethnicity, and service-connected  disability. 
Social determinants  of health  will include  food  insecurity,  homelessness, neighborhood  deprivation,  and 
Tobacco  Cessation  Treatment  Preferences  among  Veteran  Smokers  
Research  Protocol,  version  date  7/25/2022  Page  6 of 25  
 neighborhood economic inequality. HIV, Hepatitis C, and psychiatric disorder will be based upon the 
ICD-9 and ICD-10 codes.  Given  previous  work  in the area of treatment access disparities, we will include 
the following psychiatric disorders as variables: psychotic disorder, bipolar disorder,  PTSD, other 
anxiety/mood disorder, and any substance use disorder (all time- invariant, coded in year 1). Pain is 
coded 0 -10 at each VHA healthcare visit as the fifth vital sign,  and will be averaged over each 12 -month 
monitoring period and dichotomized as  severe (≥ 7) vs. mild/moderate (0 -6) (Volkman et al., 2015). 
Pharmacotherapy  Prescriptions  Over  Time  
Veteran health  data,  which  may  include  PHI (e.g., dates  of care),  will be gathered  starting  from  FY15 
through  present.  After  requesting  data  access  via the Data  Access  Request Tracker  (DART),  Veterans 
who  have  positive tobacco use health factors  will be identified from  VA’s  Regional  and/or  Corporate 
Data Warehouse.  
 
The population of tobacco users will be determined by fiscal year using health factors. For each fiscal year, the pharmacotherapy prescription rate will be calculated for each type of pharmacotherapy by dividing  the total  number  of Veterans receiving a prescription for tobacco  cessation  pharmacotherapy 
by the total number of Veterans  who meet criteria for current tobacco use.  
 
We will examine trends  over time, as well as systems-level determinants,  including geographical  region, 
facility-level proportion of Veteran patients who live rurally (extracted by year and by facility from the Rural Veterans Health Care Atlas), and state -level tobacco use prevalence.  
 
AIM  3 METHODS  – SUCCESSIVE  COHORT  DESIGN  FOR TREATMENT  REFINEMENT  
We will use a successive cohort design to integrate and user -test the proposed intervention. The 
successive cohort design is an iterative process that is designed to refine behavioral treatments in the initial development stage  (Epstein  et al., 2007).  This design  involves multiple steps  of development: 1) 
identifying theoretically-supported treatment models; 2) identifying key intervention elements; 3) 
developing preliminary intervention materials; and 4) revising the intervention iteratively based upon qualitative and quantitative data collected during successive patient cohorts. See below for proposed preliminary intervention methodology,  as well as methodology  for iteratively revising the intervention 
based upon patient qualitative feedback. 
 
SAMPLE  RECRUITMENT  
A total  of 3 cohorts  of 5 patients  each  (N = 15) will complete  the intervention and provide  feedback after 
the treatment phase is complete. Participants will be recruited from the Durham VAHCS. Inclusion criteria are: VHA patient, HIV positive serostatus, currently smoking ≥ 7 cigarettes per week, and willing 
to complete study procedures. Exclusion criteria are: current hospitalization, acute risk for suicide 
documented in the medical record, or inability to complete study procedures.  
 
We will primarily recruit by presenting information  about  the study  to clinicians in the Infectious  Disease 
(ID) Clinic, who can then provide a referral to Dr. Wilson by adding her as a co -signer to CPRS notes. In 
order  to facilitate  provider  referral, Veteran  patients  with  an HIV diagnosis  and documented  tobacco  use 
within the past 2 years who have clinic appointments in the Infectious Diseases clinic (8A) will be 
identified from patient records of the Durham VAHCS via chart review in the Computerized Patient Reporting System (CPRS). Study staff will indicate potential participants to 8A clinic staff, and clinic staff will inquire whether patients interested in hearing about the study. If a patient affirmatively indicates to 
their provider that they would like to hear about the study, they will be approached by a study staff 
member for screening and informed consent. If an insufficient number of patients are recruited in this  
Tobacco  Cessation  Treatment  Preferences  among  Veteran  Smokers  
Research  Protocol,  version  date  7/25/2022  Page  7 of 25  
 manner, potential participants with an HIV diagnosis and documented tobacco use within the past 2 
years will be sent an introductory letter signed by the PI that describes the study and invites participation.  Veterans  who  do not decline will be called to determine interest in the study  and basic 
study eligibility.  
 
PROCEDURES  
Immediately following screening and informed consent (Session 0), pa tients will complete baseline 
measures and will begin the active treatment, Mesh (see below for details). Table 2 describes the 
measures that will be used in Aim 3 as well as their administration schedule. Whenever possible, we 
have  selected Common Data Elements  from  the PhenX  Toolkit  (Hamilton et al., 2011; Version 13.3)  in 
order to maximize the impact of the proposed study. Participants will be scheduled for counseling 
session 1 with a stop smoking interventionist within 7 days of study enrollment.  
Participants enrolled in the first cohort will be invited to utilize SmokefreeVET, a mobile text messaging 
service for military Veterans  trying  to quit smoking.  SmokefreeVET was developed by a joint effort  of the 
National Cancer Institute and the U.S. Dep artment of Veterans Affairs. The program was created to 
provide 24/7 encouragement, advice, and tips to help smokers quit smoking and stay quit. It is a 6 to 8 
week program, depending on when you set your quit date. Users will receive 1 -5 messages per day and 
can receive additional quit support at critical points in the quit process by using one of SmokefreeVET’s 
keywords  (URGE,  STRESS,  or SMOKED). Participants  can opt out of supportive  text messaging  at any time 
by sending the keyword STOP. Consistent with the structure of SmokefreeVET, participants interested in utilizing it will be assisted  in signing  up for the program within  two weeks before their planned  quit date. 
Participants will not be required to use the texting program. Participants of cohort 2 and 3 and in the RCT (Aim 4) will be invited to sign up for personalized text messaging support (see details of this treatment component below) using the VA Annie app. Annie is an automated, short message ser vice 
(SMS) text message  system  designed to promote  Veteran  self-care.  At the baseline  session,  Veterans will 
be asked to complete an agreement to use Annie, and will be walked through the process of registering  
a personal phone number and setting message p references. The SMS feature of Annie will function on 
either a basic cell phone or a smartphone. During this time, Veterans will be informed that Annie is not designed for direct communication with a provider, and should a medical emergency arise to contac t 
their provider or emergency services through traditional means.  
 
Treatment  sessions with  the interventionist and the qualitative interview will be audio  recorded.  These 
recordings will be used to develop a fidelity system as a secondary goal of the cohort design.  
 
Following completion of all intervention components  (through  end of treatment),  each  participant will 
complete  a structured  interview. Post -treatment interviews will include questions  regarding strengths 
and weaknesses of the intervention a s well as suggestions for ways to improve the overall treatment 
approach. See Data Analysis section for details on qualitative coding and analysis.  
 
Participants will also be followed up at 3 -months and at 6 -months to assess clinical outcomes and 
treatment  acceptability. Study  measures  are shown  in Table 1. Secondary  smoking outcomes  will include 
7- and 30 -day point prevalence abstinence at each assessment. Abstinence will be verified by salivary 
cotinine assay (≤ 10 ng/ml), which improves self -report validity. When in-person visits are allowed post - 
COVID -19 pandemic, participants will also be asked to provide expired carbon monoxide (CO) breath 
readings at baseline, post -treatment, and 3 - and 6 -month follow -up. 
Tobacco  Cessation  Treatment  Preferences  among  Veteran  Smokers  
Research  Protocol,  version  date  7/25/2022  Page  8 of 25  
 Following treatment co mpletion for each cohort of n = 5 participants, qualitative data will be analyzed 
and based  upon  results, the intervention structure  and content  will be revised. Intervention content  that 
may be subject to revision includes the computerized algorithms, CBT module content, and content and 
timing of SMS text messages.  
 
Table  1. Aim 3 Measures  
Measure  No. 
Items   
Completed  by Month   
Sessions  0 Quit  
Date  3 6 
BACKGROUND  AND  PROCESS  VARIABLES  
1. Demographics  32 Self-report  X - - - - 
2. Smoking  history/current  
smoking  6 Self-report  X - - - - 
3. HIV Disease  Progression  – 
CD4,  Viral  Load  (EMR)  - Self-report  X - - - - 
4. Fagerstrom  Test  for 
Nicotine  Dependence  7 Self-report  X - - - - 
5. The Everyday  
Discrimination  Scale  10 Self-report  X - - - - 
6. Pain, Enjoyment of Life, 
and General Activity  (PEG)  
Scale  3 Self-report  X - X X - 
7. Smoking  and Nicotine  
Knowledge  14 Self-report  X - X - - 
8. Non -VA Treatment  
Utilization  9 Self-report  X - X X - 
TREATMENT  PERSONALIZATION  MEASURES  
9. Smoking  Cessation  
Motivation  1 Self-report  X X X X - 
10. Smoking  Cessation  Self- 
Efficacy  1 Self-report  X X X X - 
11. Stages  of Change  2 Self-report  X - X X - 
12. PTSD  Checklist  of DSM -5 
(PCL -5) 20 Self-report  X - X X - 
13. Patient  Health  
Questionnaire  (PHQ- 9) 9 Self-report  X - X X - 
14. Alcohol Use Disorders 
Identification Test  (AUDIT - 
C) 3 Self-report  X - X X - 
15. Non -Cigarette  Smoking  
Behavior  6 Self-report  X - X X - 
16. Smoking  Cessation  
Weight -Grain  Concerns  2 Self-report  X - - - - 
17. Smoking  to Cope  with  Pain 1 Self-report  X - - - - 
18. Exposure  to Smoking  Cues  1 Self-report  X - - - - 
19. Pharmacotherapy 
Adherence – Visual  Analog 
Scale (personalized to  
pharmacotherapy  use)  
1-3  
Self-report   
-  
X  
X  
X  
- 
20. Tobacco  Exposure  
Questionnaire  6 Self-report  X - X X - 
Tobacco  Cessation  Treatment  Preferences  among  Veteran  Smokers  
Research  Protocol,  version  date  7/25/2022  Page  9 of 25  
  
CLINICAL  MEASURES  
21. 7-day,  30-day Point  
Prevalence  Abstinence  2 Research  
Interventionist  X - X X - 
22. Prolonged  Abstinence  2 Research  
Interventionist  - - X X - 
23. Timeline  Follow -back  
(cigarettes  per day) 1 Research  
Interventionist  - - X X - 
OUTCOME  MEASURES  
24. Patient  Recruitment  - Research  
Interventionist  X - - - - 
25. Treatment  Retention  - Research  
Interventionist  - X X X - 
26. Withdrawals  - Research  
Interventionist  X X X X - 
27. Patient  Satisfaction  – 
Treatment  Acceptability  8 Self-report  - X   X 
28. Therapist  Satisfaction – 
Treatment Feasibility  7 Research 
Interventionist’s Self- 
report  - X   
X 
29. Clinician  Time  4 Research  
Interventionist  X X - - - 
 
Mesh  Treatment Components  
Treatment Personalization Algorithm. During  session  1, the interventionist will complete  a treatment 
personalization algorithm with the participant. This algorithm requires participant self-report  data  in 
addition to data from the electronic health record. Data inputs are shown in Table 2.  
 
Table  2. Treatment Personalization Algorithm Components 
ALGORITHM  CONSTRUCT  MEASURE  
Baseline  CBT Algorithm  Motivation;  Self-efficacy,  Social 
influences; Substances and 
Alcohol; Mental Health; Pain; 
Pharmacotherapy  Smoking Cessation Motivation; 
Smoking  Cessation  Self- Efficacy; 
Stages of Change; PTSD Checklist of DSM -5 (PCL -5); 
Patient Health Questionnaire 
(PHQ -9); Alcohol U se Disorders 
Identification Test (AUDIT);  
Non-Cigarette Smoking Behavior; Smoking to Cope  with  
Pain;  Exposure  to Smoking  Cues  
Quit  Week  CBT Algorithm  Relapse prevention; Weight 
gain;  Self-efficacy;  Motivation; 
Pharmacotherapy adherence;  Relapse Situation Efficacy 
Questionnaire (RSEQ); Smoking 
Cessation Weight -Grain 
Concerns; Pharmacotherapy 
Adherence – Visual  Analog  Scale 
(personalized to 
pharmacotherapy use); 
If necessary:  Smoking  Cessation 
Motivation; Smoking Cessation 
Self-Efficacy;  Stages  of Change  
Tobacco  Cessation  Treatment  Preferences  among  Veteran  Smokers  
Research  Protocol,  version  date  7/25/2022  Page  10 of 25  
  
Post -Quit  Relapse -Prevention 
Messaging Algorithm  Preferences  regarding  message 
type: Inspirational; Medication 
reminders; Help with lapses; Trigger  information; Behavioral 
skills  Preference  ratings  
Baseline  Pharmacotherapy  Willingness;  Preference; 
Contraindications  Self-report  
Quit  Week  Pharmacotherapy  Status;  Adherence;  Willingness  Self-report  
Quit Week Algorithm for 
Revising Pharmacotherapy 
Regimen  (Initially Prescribed 
Dual -NRT)  Willingness;  Contraindications  Self-report  
Quit Week Algorithm for 
Revising Pharmacotherapy 
Regimen  (Initially Prescribed 
Varenicline)  Willingness;  Preference  Self-report  
Quit Week Algorithm for 
Revising Pharmacotherapy 
Regimen  (Initially Prescribed 
Bupropion)  Willingness;  Preference  Self-report  
Quit Week Algorithm for 
Revising Pharmacotherapy Regimen  (Initially Prescribed 
Single -Formulation  NRT)  Willingness;  Preference; 
Contraindications  Self-report  
 
Personalized Smoking Cessation Facilitation Meetings. Mesh facilitators will meet with participants between 5 to 7 sessions. For completion of stop smoking facilitation sessions, participants will be offered  the choice  of whether  to complete  sessions using a personal  telephone, a personal  digital  device 
(i.e., tablet, laptop, or desktop computer with webcam), or a VA -issued digital device (i.e., 4G-enabled 
tablet with webcam). For  those who request a VA-issued personal digital device,  a consult will  be plac ed 
to Prosthetics Service to issue the Veteran a 4G -enabled tablet in order to complete subsequent 
counseling sessions via VA Video Connect.  
 
Core CBT modules include: identifying reasons for quitting, setting a quit date, breathing relaxation technique, identifying smoking triggers, identifying social support, and education about relapse prevention. We will also use the Session 1 treatment personalization algorithm to individually tailor counseling to provide an adaptable  selection of discrete  counseling modules  in addition  to core  modules 
that all participants  will receive. CBT  treatment personalization algorithms  are based  upon the following 
assessments: self -efficacy, motivation for quitting, depression, PTSD, alcohol use, comorbid non - 
cigarette smoking, tobacco exposure, smoking to cope with pain, adherence to pharmacotherapy, and concerns about weight gain. Two to three of these 5 - to 15 -minute modules will be included in each 
session, and modules  will focus  on building each participan t’s skills that are  needed to achieve  cessation 
and long- term abstinence. Optional modules will address low motivation to quit, low self -efficacy for 
quitting and relapse prevention,  comorbid  psychiatric concerns,  alcohol/drug use, tobacco  exposure and 
poly-tobacco use, pain management, pharmacotherapy adherence, and healthy eating/exercise. Each 
session will last 30 -60 minutes.  
Tobacco  Cessation  Treatment  Preferences  among  Veteran  Smokers  
Research  Protocol,  version  date  7/25/2022  Page  11 of 25  
 At Session 3 (1 week post -quit), the participant will be asked several treatment personalization 
questions  (see Tabl e 1). These responses  will be entered  into the treatment personalization algorithm  to 
determine additional post-quit modules depending on  the following: self-reported quit status at Session 
3 (defined as complete abstinence since most recent quit date), self -efficacy, motivation, 
pharmacotherapy adherence, and barriers to abstinence. Additional modules to be added to counseling 
include: relapse prevention, motivational interviewing, decisional balance, pharmacotherapy adherence (or pharmacotherapy motivational interviewing), and review of barriers and protective factors.  
Personalized  Smoking  Cessation  Pharmacotherapy. Participant pharmacotherapy  recommendations will 
be based upon  the study treatment personalization  algorithm and will  be sent to the participant’s  clinic 
team. All pharmacotherapy prescriptions will be managed as part of routine clinical care by the participant’s VA healthcare providers, who may choose to follow study pharmacotherapy 
recommendations at their discretion.  
 
At the baseline session, a study staff member will ask questions regarding tobacco cessation 
pharmacotherapy preferences and contraindications directly to the study participant. The 
interventionist will also review the participant’s electronic medical record to note any additional 
potential  contraindications  to pharmacotherapy. Pharmacologic  recommendations  will be based  upon  a 
recent meta -analysis of smoking cessation pharmacotherapy as well as VA Pharmacy Benefits 
Management Services guidelines (Cahill et al., 2013). Similar to Cropsey et al.’s (2015) algorithm 
methodology,  participants  will be followed 1 week post -quit  to assess abstinence and pharmacotherapy 
adherence. If they are using tobacco and have poor adherence (<70% adherence) and are willing to 
increase pharma cotherapy use, then adherence will be more heavily targeted in CBT. If, however, they 
are using tobacco in the context of adherent use, the algorithm will suggest an alternative medication 
regimen if possible (e.g., switching from single-formulation NRT to  dual -NRT). 
 
Personalized Annie Messaging Support. If the participant has a working cell phone and is willing to 
receive SMS text messages, supportive SMS text messages will be sent to the participant starting after 
Session 1 and extending through 6 months  post -quit. Individual tailoring of follow -up messages will be 
based  upon  the post -quit  patient mHealth survey, which  will measure the following: desired frequency 
of messages (1-3 per day);  specific abstinence-related concerns  (i.e., weight  gain,  difficulty  coping with 
stress); preferred types of messages (skills -focused, health informational, encouragement); and 
personalized reasons for staying quit. Participants can opt out of follow -up messaging at any point. All 
messages will be sent via the VA  Annie texting capability. As stated above, Annie is a standard VA SMS 
text message capability designed to promote Veteran self-care.  
 
AIM  4 – PILOT  FEASIBILITY  RANDOMIZED CONTROL  TRIAL  (RCT)  
 
The proposed RCT is a two -arm experimental design to demonstrat e the feasibility of a larger trial and 
the acceptability of the intervention design. Participants ( N = 30) will be stratified by clinic and 
randomized to either the active treatment or to standard of care VA Quitline (telehealth intervention including 5 s essions of CBT) plus SmokefreeVET (text -messaging intervention). The comparison group 
was selected in order to assess the feasibility of recruitment, retention, and randomization procedures. We will assess acceptability of the active  treatment  among  patien ts, providers,  and key VA stakeholders.  
 
SAMPLE  RECRUITMENT  
A total of N = 30 will be enrolled in the study. Participants will be recruited from the Durham VAHCS. 
Inclusion  criteria are: Durham  VA patient,  willing to complete study  procedures,  appointment  in Durham  
Tobacco  Cessation  Treatment  Preferences  among  Veteran  Smokers  
Research  Protocol,  version  date  7/25/2022  Page  12 of 25  
 VA Infectious Disease (ID) Clinic or Durham VA Cardiology Section within the past 12 months, and 
currently  smoking  ≥ 7 times per week (cigarettes, cigars, cigarillos, hookah,  etc.)  and/or  using  ≥ 1 can of 
smokeless tobac co per week. Exclusion criteria are: participation in Aim 3 (already received the 
intervention), current hospitalization (recent hospitalization is acceptable), currently not using 
combustible or smokeless tobacco (vaping only), acute risk for suicide documented in the medical 
record, or inability to complete study procedures.  
We will recruit in several different ways. First, clinicians in the ID Clinic and Cardiology Section can provide a direct study referral by adding the PI and/or Project Coordinator as a co -signer to a CPRS 
notes.  Second,  study  information  sheets  will be made available  in ID Clinic and Cardiology  Service clinical 
spaces for potential participants to peruse and self -refer to the study. Third, potential participants with 
documented tobacco use within the past 2 years who have been seen within the past 2 years in the ID 
Clinic or Cardiology Service will be sent an introductory letter signed by the PI that describes the study 
and invites participation. Veterans who do not decline will be called to determine interest in the study and basic study eligibility.  
 
PROCEDURES  
Screening  
Veterans who are interested in study participation will be screened via telephone or in clinic for study inclusion criteria. Potent ial participants will be asked questions regarding current weekly tobacco use 
and current hospitalization at any location, and CPRS documentation will be screened to ensure the 
Veteran is a patient in one or both of the identified clinics, is not currently  hospitalized at Durham VA, 
and does not have a high -risk suicide flag in their chart. Potential participants will then complete 
informed  consent with a trained study  staff member.  Where  possible, we will utilize  DocuSign to obtain 
informed consent and HIPAA authorization. Immediately following screening and informed consent 
(Session 0), patients will complete baseline measures and randomization.  
 
Communication with  Enrolled  Participants  
Communication with enrolled participants will take place via mail, telephone, VA Video Connect,  
another approved telehealth platform ( http://vaww.telehealth.va.gov/technology/covid19 -tech.asp ), or 
Azure  RMS  (in accordance  with guidance issued in VA document  “Use  of Protected  Health Information in 
Microsoft Office Applications”).  
 
Measures  
Table 3 describes the measures that will be used in Aim 4 as well as their administration schedule. 
Whenever possible, we have  selected Common Data Elements  from  the PhenX  Toolkit  (Hamilton et al., 
2011; Version 13.3) in order to maximize the impact of the proposed study.  
 
Table  3. Aim 4 RCT Measures  
 
 
Measure   
 
Completed  by Time  Point  
 
Baseline  3- 
Month 
Follow  
Up 6- 
Month 
Follow  
Up 
BACKGROUND  AND  PROCESS  VARIABLES  
1. Demographics  Self-report  X - - 
2. Tobacco  use history/current  
tobacco  use Self-report  X - - 
Tobacco  Cessation  Treatment  Preferences  among  Veteran  Smokers  
Research  Protocol,  version  date  7/25/2022  Page  13 of 25  
  
3. Fagerstrom Test for Nicotine 
Dependence  (Cigarette and ST 
Versions)  Self-report  X - - 
4. The Everyday  Discrimination  Scale  Self-report  X - - 
5. Pain,  Enjoyment  of Life, and 
General  Activity  (PEG)  Scale  Self-report  X X X 
6. Smoking  and Nicotine  Knowledge  Self-report  X X - 
7. Non -VA Treatment  Utilization  Self-report  X X X 
8. Stages  of Change  Self-report  X X X 
9. Smoking  Cessation  Motivation*  Self-report  X X X 
10. Smoking  Cessation  Self-Efficacy*  Self-report  X X X 
11. PTSD  Checklist  of DSM -5 (PCL -5)* Self-report  X - - 
12. Patient  Health  Questionnaire  (PHQ - 
9)* Self-report  X - - 
13. Alcohol  Use Disorders  Identification  
Test  (AUDIT -C)* Self-report  X X X 
14. Non -Tobacco  Smoking  Behavior*  Self-report  X X X 
15. Smoking  Cessation  Weight -Grain  
Concerns*  Self-report  X - - 
16. Smoking  to Cope  with  Pain*  Self-report  X - - 
17. Exposure  to Smoking  Cues*  Self-report  X - - 
18. Pharmacotherapy  Adherence  – 
Visual  Analog  Scale*  Self-report  - X X 
CLINICAL  MEASURES  
19. Tobacco  Exposure  Questionnaire  Self-report  X X X 
20. Timeline Follow -back (TLFB; 
tobacco used per day, tobacco 
cessation  medication used  per day, 
quit attempts, control group  
treatment  sessions)  Study  Staff  Member  
 
-  
X  
X 
21. Abstinence  Outcomes  (7-day,  30- 
day,  Prolonged)  Study  Staff  Member,  
based  on TLFB  - X X 
22. Exhaled  Carbon  Monoxide  (CO)  Biochemical  Measure  - X X 
23. Salivary  Cotinine  Biochemical  Measure  - X X 
OUTCOME  MEASURES  
24. Patient  Recruitment  Study  Staff  Member  X - - 
25. Treatment  Retention  Study  Staff  Member  - X X 
26. Withdrawals  Study  Staff  Member  X X X 
27. Patient  Satisfaction  – Treatment  
Acceptability  Self-report  - X X 
28. Therapist  Satisfaction  – Treatment  
Feasibility  Research  
Interventionist  Immediate  Post -Treatment  
29. Clinician  Time  Research  
Interventionist  During Treatment  Period  
CPRS  DATA  EXTRACTION  
30. HIV Disease  Progression  – CD4,  
Viral  Load  Study Staff Member  X - - 
31. Tobacco  Cessation  Medication  
Prescriptions  and Fills Study Staff Member  - X X 
* Measure  also used  for treatment personalization in Mesh intervention  
Tobacco  Cessation  Treatment  Preferences  among  Veteran  Smokers  
Research  Protocol,  version  date  7/25/2022  Page  14 of 25  
 Randomization  
Immediately  following completion of baseline measures,  participants  will be randomized 1:1 to either 
the active treatment (Mesh) or to a best practice comparison condition (described below).  
Randomization will be concealed, stratified, and blocked. Given the two separate recruitment settings, 
randomization will be stratified by clinical setting (ID clinic and cardiology). For participants who are 
involved in both clinical settings, stratification arm will be decided by a virt ual coin toss 
(https://cgi.cs.duke.edu/~des/vct/vct.cgi ). In order to ensure consistent referrals for sessions with 
intervention facilitators,  randomization will be blocked for every five participants  recruited. Allocation  to 
study condition will be computer -generated in random blocks of four and six, with the allocation block 
sizes and sequence only accessible by a non-investigator study staff member who is not involved in  
study recruitment or treatment delivery. 
Intervention  Arms  
Participants randomized to the Mesh treatment arm will be scheduled for a first session with a quit facilitator within 10 business days of randomization. See section above “Mesh Treatme nt Components” 
for a description of the intervention arm, which includes personalized recommendations for tobacco cessation pharmacotherapy, 5 to 7 sessions, and Annie messaging. Participants will be asked to select 
their preferred  frequency  of Annie  messaging:  standard (about  3 times  per day)  or low (about  1 time  per 
day). Study therapists  will be asked to audio record a selection of sessions.  A random sample of  sessions 
will be selected for fidelity rating by a PhD -level study staff member. 
 
Participants randomized to the best practice comparison condition arm will receive best -practice VA 
telehealth. This includes information on medications, referral to VA quitline, and referral for tobacco 
cessation  text messaging.  Study  staff  will provide  the participant  with  a VA information  sheet on tobacco 
cessation medications (copied directly from https://www.mentalhealth.va.gov/quit -tobacco/how -to- 
quit.asp ). Participants will also be offered a warm handoff to Quit Vet, VA’s Quitline 1 -855-QUIT -VET (1 - 
855-784-8838). If they are no t interested in a warm handoff during the baseline session, they will be 
provided with an information sheet about Quit Vet and encouraged to call as soon as possible to initiate counseling. Participants will be asked to sign up for SmokefreeVET. Participants will be informed that standard text messaging rates apply for this texting program. Veterans will not be required to  
participate in SmokefreeVET. Participants can also opt out of text messaging at any time by sending the 
keyword STOP. Participants will be signed up for SmokefreeVET during the initial visit either by visiting 
https://veterans.smokefree.gov/tools-tips -vet/smokefreevet  or by texting VET to 47848 on the 
participant’s mobile phone. If the Veteran declines at the baseline session to be signed up for SmokefreeVET, they will be provided with an information sheet on how to sign up.  
Participant Compensation 
Participants will receive $50 for the baseline visit. For the 3 - and 6 -month follow -up visits, participants 
will receive $100 for coming in for CO and cotinine sample. If a participant is not able to attend the follow-up in person,  they  will receive $50 for a telephone-only  follow -up and mailed saliva sample  (with 
payment contingent upon receiving saliva sample via mail).  
COVID -19 Temporary  Study  Procedures  
Participants  in the study  will be asked  to follow medical  center procedures  for mitigation of COVID -19 
risk (e.g., mask-w earing, physical distancing). When possible, participants will be asked to complete 
study procedures via phone, VA Video Connect, another approved telehealth platform 
(http://vaww.t elehealth.va.gov/technology/covid19 -tech.asp ), or via Azure RMS (in accordance with  
Tobacco  Cessation  Treatment  Preferences  among  Veteran  Smokers  
Research  Protocol,  version  date  7/25/2022  Page  15 of 25  
 guidance issued in VA document  “Use  of Protected  Health Information in Microsoft  Office 
Applications”).  
 
 
PRIVACY,  CONFIDENTIALITY,  AND  INFORMATION SECURITY  
 
1. Lists  of Data  Reviewed  and/or  Collected for Screening/Recruitment  and Conduction  of Study:  
The Personal  Health Information that will be obtained,  used,  and/or  shared  for this study  includes:  
Identifier(s)  Source(s)  of Health  Information  
 Names   Medical  history  & physical  exam  
information  
 All geographic  subdivisions  smaller  than  a State, 
including street address, city, county, precinct, and zip code.  Describe: Participants’ addresses will be 
collected during the study in order to pay them for  
participation.   Photographs,  videotapes,  audiotapes,  or 
digital or other images  
 All elements of dates (except year) for dates 
directly related to an individual, including birth date, admission date, discharge date, visit or 
treatment dates, etc.; and all ages over 89, 
Describe: Date of participation will be collected. In  
addition,  treatment  records, laboratory  results, etc. 
will be collected.   Biologic  specimens  (e.g.,  blood,  tissue,  urine, 
saliva). Describe: Collection of saliva samples  
for salivary assay.  
 Telephone numbers   Progress notes  
Fax numbers   Diagnostic  / Laboratory  test results  
 Electronic mail addresses  Operative  reports  
 Social Security Numbers  Imaging  (x-ray, CT, MRI,  etc.)  
 Medical record numbers  Discharge  summaries  
Health  plan  beneficiary  numbers   Survey  / Questionnaire  responses  
 Account numbers  Billing  records  
Certificate  and/or  license  numbers   HIV testing  or infection  records  
Vehicle  identifiers  and serial  numbers,  including 
license plate numbers  Sickle  cell anemia  information  
Device  identifiers  and serial  numbers   Alcoholism  or alcohol  use information  
Web  Universal  Resource  Locators  (URLs)   Drug abuse information  
Internet  Protocol  (IP) address  numbers  Mental  health  (not psychotherapy)  notes  
Biometric  identifiers,  including  finger  & voice 
prints  Psychological  test results  
Full-face  photographic  images  and any 
comparable  images  Genetic  testing  
 Any other unique identifying number, linked 
study  ID, characteristic,  or code,  describe: study  ID 
number  Other,  describe:  
 
 
2. Data and/or  Specimen Acquisition:  
Data for this study  will be collected through  (check  all that apply ): 

Tobacco  Cessation  Treatment  Preferences  among  Veteran  Smokers  
Research  Protocol,  version  date  7/25/2022  Page  16 of 25  
  Prospective data and/or specimen collection obtained from participants.  Aim 1 patient data will be 
obtained  through  a 60-minute,  semi-structured  interview. Aim 1 VA staff  data  will be obtained through  a 
30-minute, structured interview. No data collection is involved in Aim 2.  
 Retrospective  data  collection and/or  specimens  obtained  from  medical  chart  review/data access. 
Describe how data will be obtained (e.g., fileman, CDW, etc.): 
Aim 1: In accordance  with  a Waiver or Alteration of HIPAA  Authorization,  names,  addresses, telephone 
numbers,  social  security  numbers,  and diagnostic  information  of potential  participants  will be obtained 
from the VA’s Regional Data Warehouse. For study Aim 2, health data will be obtained from VA’s Corporate Data Warehouse. 
 Retrospective data collection and/or specimens obtained from an IRB -approved data and/or 
specimen  repository.  Indicate the repository source  including  name,  VA location,  and IRB number:  Aim 
1b: Survey data from Duke University Health System will be shared with the VA team via a VA-owned thumbdrive. Note:  for data and/or specimens obtained  from  a VA approved data repository, a Data  Use Agreement 
(DUA) must be executed prior to obtaining data and/or specimens.  See VHA Handbook 1200.12 for 
further information.  
3. Level  of Data:  
The following level(s) of data  will be acquired/maintained for this study  (check  all that apply ): 
 Identified (e.g., names, addresses or other identifiers included)  
 Coded  (direct  and/or  all identifiers removed,  but study  code/ID  included) 
 De-Identified (all HIPAA 18 and  study ID/code removed):  
 Verified Statistically 
OR 
 Verified by Absence  or Removal  of HIPAA  18 and study  ID 
 Limited Data Set  
 Other: Describe:  
 
4. Location  of Data  and/or  Specimens, a nd Data  Retention Plan:  
A. Data and/or  Specimen  Location:  
Aims  1, 3, and 4: 
Data will be stored electronically in \\ vhadurhsmcifs01.v06.med.va.gov \Mesh. For Aim 1, data that will 
be stored  electronically include  name,  address, phone number,  social  security  number,  amount  of study 
payment earned, and date of visits (in Study Logbooks location). The study logbook will contain the key connecting PHI and the study identification number. Paper records of data include study consent form and HIPAA authorization (identified) and interview notes (coded); these will be stored in a locked filing 
cabinet in a locked office suite in Bldg. 1, Room C10006; Building 8, Room 206 of the main Durham VA 
Health Care System campus; or in Legacy Tower Suite 600 (HSR&D).  Audio recordings of qualitative 
interviews and to establish interrater reliability will be captured using VA’s WebEx. Recordings will be moved from WebEx to the “Study Logbooks” location listed above. For long term storage, audio recordings may  be moved  to an encrypted DVD  that is password -protected.  Any encrypted  DVDs will be 
stored in a locked filing cabinet in a locked office.  Transcriptions from the study interviews will be 
stored electronically at the Study Logbooks location listed above. Data received from Duke University Health System will be moved to \\ vhadurhsmcifs01.v06.med.va.gov \Mesh for storage and analysis.  
 
Aim 2: 
Data collected via a DART  pull will be stored locally at \\v06.med.va.gov \DUR \Mesh . 

Tobacco  Cessation  Treatment  Preferences  among  Veteran  Smokers  
Research  Protocol,  version  date  7/25/2022  Page  17 of 25  
  Data will be also be placed at the VA Informatics and Computing Interface (VINCI; 
http://vaww.vinci.med.va.gov/vincicentral/VINCIWorkspace.aspx ). The VA Informatics  and Computing 
Infrastructure is a partnership between the VA Office of Information Technology and the Veterans’ 
Health Administration Office  of Research  and Development. Researchers and operations staff  can use 
VINCI to access data and statistical analysis tools in a virtual working environment through a certified VHA network computer using the VA Intranet or Virtual Private Network (VPN). 
B. Data Retention  Plan 
 Research records will be maintained and destroyed according to the National Archives and Records 
Administration, Records Schedule Number:  DAA -0015-2015-0004. Records des truction, when 
authorized, will be accomplished using the then current requirements for the secure disposal of paper and electronic records.  Currently, destruction of research records (see DAA -0015-2015-0004, section  
7.6 “Research  Investigator  Files” for materials included in research records)  is scheduled for 6 years  after 
the cut-off (the cut -off is the completion of the research project) and may be retained longer if required 
by other federal agencies. Records will not be destroyed without pre-notificati on to the facility records 
manager.  
 Other data retention plan, describe:  
5. Data  Access  and Data Recipients:  
Aims  1, 3, and 4: 
Only members of our DVAMC research team will have access to identifiers and coded data. All VA research personnel  who  have  access to VHA records  are instructed,  in accordance  with VA policy, on the 
requirements of Federal privacy and information laws and regulations, VA regulations and policies, and VHA policy. All study personnel who are VA employees working within the VA sys tem have fulfilled all 
required HIPAA and other VA security and privacy policy training requirements and have agreed to follow guidelines pertaining to the protection of patient data. All research staff sign VA Rules of Behavior, and all study staff are up -to-date with VHA Privacy Policy Training and the VA Office of Cyber 
and Information Security Awareness Training Course. The data security and privacy procedures 
summarized in that course include logging off or locking the computer when walking away from i t; no 
sharing of access  codes,  verify codes  or passwords;  not allowing anyone else to use the computer under 
one’s password; and disposing of sensitive information using VA -approved methods (e.g., shredder 
bins). Access to study data will be removed for all study personnel when they are no longer part of the 
research team.  
 
Aim 2: 
Only  Dr. Wilson (PI) and  study  statistician  will have  access to identifiers  and coded  data.  All VA research 
personnel who have access to VHA records are instructed, in accordance with VA policy, on the requirements of Federal privacy and information laws and regulations, VA regulations and policies, and 
VHA policy. All study personnel who are VA employees working within the VA system have fulfilled all 
required HIPAA and  other VA security and privacy policy training requirements and have agreed to 
follow guidelines pertaining to the protection of patient data. All research staff sign VA Rules of Behavior, and all study staff are up -to-date with VHA Privacy Policy Training  and the VA Office of Cyber 
and Information Security Awareness Training Course. The data security and privacy procedures 
summarized in that course include logging off or locking the computer when walking away from it; no 
sharing of access codes,  verify codes or passwords;  not allowing anyone else to use the computer  under 
one’s password; and disposing of sensitive information using VA -approved methods (e.g., shredder 
bins). Access to study data will be removed for all study personnel when they are no longer  part of the 
research team.  

Tobacco  Cessation  Treatment  Preferences  among  Veteran  Smokers  
Research  Protocol,  version  date  7/25/2022  Page  18 of 25  
  
6. Data and/or  Specimen Transportation and/or  Transmission for all data and/or  specimens  involved 
in the study:  
I.   Data and/or specimens will not  be transported or transmitted outside of Durham VAMC 
environment.  Plea se note:  Data will not be transported  outside the Durham VA environment. 
Specimens will, see item IIIb below.  
II.   Data and/or specimens will be transported BETWEEN sites that are under the auspices of 
the Durham VA Medical Center.  Please describe what is being transported, who will be 
responsible for transporting (study titles rather than names) how it will be secured during 
transport, and whether additional stops will be made while transporting the data/specimens. 
Study mail and correspondence will either  be stored in Legacy Tower, Suite 600 (HSR&D space) 
or will be moved from HSR&D space at Legacy Tower to DVAMC, Building 1, C10006. The study coordinator  will be responsible  for moving these  documents.  Data will be secured  in a briefcase 
or lock bag with the notice below attached. No stops will be made while transporting the 
documents. 
 
a.   Local DVAMC memorandum “Authorization to Use, Process, Store, or Transmit VA 
Sensitive Information Outside VA Owned or Managed  Facilities” has been pre-filled out for 
each study team member who may transport the data and/or specimens off -site. This 
(these) forms are included with the IRB materials.  
b.   Containers  (e.g.,  briefcase, bin) are labeled with the following notice  (label placed on 
the outside of container):  
NOTICE!!!  
Access to these records is limited to: AUTHORIZED PERSONS ONLY.  
Information may not be disclosed from this file unless permitted by all applicable legal  
authorities, which  may  include  the Privacy  Act; 38 U.S.C.  §§ 5701,  5705, 7332; the Health 
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act; and regulations implementing those provisions, at  
38 C.F.R.  §§ 1.460 – 1.599 and  45 C.F.R. Parts  160 and 164.  Anyone  who  discloses information  in 
violation of the above provisions may subject to civil and criminal penalties.  
 
III.  Data and/or specimens will be transmitted to other VA sites  using the following method(s):  
A. Data  
 Data are de-identified and thus  will be sent  via unencrypted  e-mail  or unencrypted  disk 
(encryption is optional).  
 Data are coded  or contain  identifiers and thus  will be sent 
 Other, describe:  
B. Specimens  
 Specimens  are de-identified and thus  will be sent via standard  carrier (tracking  is 
optional).  
 Specimens  are coded  or contain  identifiers and thus  will be sent via VA-authorized 
carrier with tracking.  
 Other, describe:  
IV.   Data and/or  specimens  will be transported  to non-VA/VHA  sites (e.g.,  academic  affiliates, 
laboratories, etc.)  using the following method(s):  
A. Data  
 Data are de-identified and thus  will be sent  via unencrypted  e-mail or unencrypted  CD. 

Tobacco  Cessation  Treatment  Preferences  among  Veteran  Smokers  
Research  Protocol,  version  date  7/25/2022  Page  19 of 25  
  Data are coded  or contain  identifiers and thus  will be sent via <chose  method  of transfer 
such as FIPS 140 -2 encrypted CD or FIPS 140-2 encrypted hard drive/flash drive> using VA — 
approved carrier with tracking.  
 Data are coded  or identified and will be uploaded  to sponsor  website  using  electronic 
case report form (eCRF) < insert information including sponsor name and URL and the 
encryption the site uses.>  
 Other, describe:  
B. Specimens  
 Specimens are de-identified and thus will be sent via standard carrier (tracking is 
optional)  or will be hand-delivered by research study  personnel.  Specify  method  of delivery: 
 
 Specimens  are coded  and thus  will be sent  via VA-approved  carrier with tracking  or will 
be hand -delivered by research study personnel. Specify method of delivery:  
 
In accordance with the HIPAA and the Privacy Act, for any coded or identifiable data or specimens 
released from  the Durham VAMC  (with the exception of Limited Data Sets),  an Accounting  of Disclosure 
(AOD) will be maintained  (e.g.,  in a database  or spreadsheet) that includes  the participant’s  name,  date 
of the disclosure, description of the nature of the Individually Identifiable Information (III) disclosed, purpose of each disclosure, and the name and address of the person/agency to whom the disclosure 
was made.  
 
7. Risk Mitigation  Strategies:  
 Data are fully  de-identified (stripped of HIPAA  18 and study  ID/code)  before  being  shared  outside  of 
Durham VAMC. 
 Specimens  are fully de-identified (stripped of HIPAA  18 and study  ID/code before  being shared 
outside of Durham VAMC.  
 Direct identifiers will be maintained separately from data and or specimens by using a code to 
“identify” subjects.  In a separate  database  (i.e.,  a “linking”  or “cross -walk”  database)  this code  will be 
linked to identifying subject information. 
 Other, specify:  
8. Suspected Loss  of VA Information:  
Should any incident such as theft or loss of data, unauthorized access of sensitive data or non - 
compliance with security controls occur it will be immediately reported according to VA policy. All incidents regarding information security/priva cy incidents will be reported to the ISO and PO within 1 
hour  of acknowledgement of issue  and done  so using the VHADUR  Research Events  Report  e-mail  group 
(VHADURResearchEventReport@va.gov ). 
 
9. Reporting  of Results:  
 Reporting  of results, such  as in scientific papers  and presentations, will never identify  individual 
subjects.  Data will be presented in aggregate and individual-level data will not be published.  
 Other results reporting plan, describe:  
 
10. Future Use of Data:  
 Data will be retained for future  use. This is described elsewhere in the protocol  and is noted  in the 
HIPAA authorization.  
 Future  Use of data  is optional  (i.e.,  not required by the research subject). 
 Future Use of data is required for participation in the study.  

Tobacco  Cessation  Treatment  Preferences  among  Veteran  Smokers  
Research  Protocol,  version  date  7/25/2022  Page  20 of 25  
  No future use of data is currently planned.  
11. Use of Mail Merge Technology  
 Mail merge programs  will be used to generate letters  and/or  addre ss labels for mailings  to potential 
or already enrolled research subjects.  The study  team is aware  that to reduce risk of mail  merge related 
privacy incidents, use of mail merge programs requires a 25% accuracy check to verify that (potential) 
research subject name and mailing address are properly “matched”. If discrepancies are found, a 100% 
accuracy check is required before letters may be mailed.  
 
DATA  ANALYSES  
Aim 1: 
Sequential Exploratory Mixed Analysis. Qualitative data collection will constitute the initial idea - 
generation step in treatment development, and thus findings will be used to do the following: 1) conceptualize ways to adapt intervention content to increase its specificity and appropriateness for a population of Veteran smokers l iving with HIV; 2) identify additional CBT content needed to increase 
relevance to the population;  and 3) generate  relapse-prevention message  content specifically  needed 
for this population. After qualitative data collection and analysis are completed, appropriate updates will be made to the CBT treatment manual and relapse-prevention message library.  
Qualitative Analysis. Data will be analyzed in two phases – an initial phase of conventional content 
analysis followed by an inductive, thematic  approach  to identify patterns  in the data.  Coded data  will be 
analyzed for emergent patterns and themes that may adhere to or contradict the investigators’ expectations. Data management and coding will use NVivo8 software on VA VINCI website, or ATLAS.ti on a VA secured computer.  
 
Quantitative  Analysis. Regarding quantitative  data  received from  Duke,  data  from  veterans who  smoke, 
people living with HIV who smoke, and members of the general public who smoke will be analyzed separately. First,  data  will be  cleaned.  Participants  will be excluded  from  analysis if they  meet any of the 
following criteria: greater than 2 endorsed bogus items, self -reported “very little” or “no” effort or 
attention, or a “no” response to the question “In your honest opinion, should we use your data in our analyses in this study?” After data cleaning, the following descriptive statistics will be calculated for 
satisfaction ratings on each SmokefreeVET message: range, mean, and standard deviation. Items falling below an 8 on mean  satisfaction  will be reviewed by the study  staff  in the context  of qualitative  findings 
to make final decisions regarding their inclusion in the final relapse -prevention message library. 
 
Aim 2: 
In order to examine disparities in healthcare delivery of smoking cessation prescriptions, we will use a longitudinal retrospective design. Generalized linear mixed modeling (GLMM) with a logit link and binomial variance will be used to determine differences by variables of interest in likelihood of pharmacotherapy dispensation following positive tobacco heal th factors screening. GLMMs 
appropriately accommodate multi -level data structures with unbalanced design for analyzing repeated 
observations across multiple individuals nested within clinics. Clinic - and person -level random effects 
will be included in statistical models to account for correlation among patients within the same clinic and repeated measurements  on the same  individual  over time, respectively. Covariates will be assessed 
for collinearity before entering them simultaneously into the GLMM.  
 
Aim 3: 

Tobacco  Cessation  Treatment  Preferences  among  Veteran  Smokers  
Research  Protocol,  version  date  7/25/2022  Page  21 of 25  
 We will use rapid qualitative analytic methods to analyze participant feedback from post-treatment 
qualitative interviews (Watkins, 2017). For each study cohort  of 5 participants, study staff will complete 
written  summaries of interview audio recordings,  and will enter these summaries  into a study  database. 
Interview summaries across participants will be displayed by their structural content (i.e., intervention 
strength,  intervention weaknesses,  and areas for improvement). Then,  thematic analysis will be used to 
code  emergent themes  and patterns  within each content area. Given the sample size for  this successive 
cohort study ( N = 15), it is estimated that we will identify and be able to address 97% of usability 
problems in the treatment personalization program (Faulkner, 2003). 
 
Aim 4: 
Analysis and interpretation will focus on describing the acceptability of the intervention and the 
feasibility of the trial approach. Given power limitations of using a small sample in a two -group study, it 
is not appropriate to perform any efficacy analyses. Regarding feasibility, we will describe patient recruitment, treatment retention, the proportion of patients who withdraw after randomization, and 
the proportion of patients who withdraw from treatment. I n order to ascertain acceptability of the 
intervention, we will describe patient  satisfaction, therapist satisfaction, and app utilization metrics.  We 
will describe the proportion of patients that quit in each arm (but will not test group differences in 
abstinence).  
Tobacco  Cessation  Treatment  Preferences  among  Veteran  Smokers  
Research  Protocol,  version  date  7/25/2022  Page  22 of 25  
 References 
Bee, A. (2012).  Household income  inequality within US counties:  2006-2010. US Department  of 
Commerce, Economics and Statistics Administration, US Census Bureau.  
Benowitz,  N. L., & Prochaska,  J. J. (2013).  Smoking  cessation  after  acute  myocardial  infarction.  Journal of 
the American College of Cardiology, 5, 533-535. 
Bhavsar, N. A., Gao, A., Phelan, M., Pagidipati, N. J., & Goldstein, B. A. (2018). Value of neighborhood 
socioeconomic  status in predicting  risk of outcomes  in studies  that use electronic health  record 
data. JAMA network open , 1(5), e182716-e182716.  
Braithwaite, R. S., Fang,  Y. X., Tate,  J., Mentor,  S. M., Bryant, K. J., Fiellin, D. A., & Justice, A. C. (2016).  Do 
alcohol  misuse,  smoking,  and depression  vary  concordantly  or sequentially? A longitudinal  study 
of HIV -infected and matched uninfected veterans in care. Aids and Behavior, 20 (3), 566-572. 
doi:10.1007/s10461 -015-1117-8 
Braun,  V. & Clarke,  V. (2006).  Using  thematic  analysis in psychology.  Qualitative Research  in Psychology , 
3, 77-101. 
Brinkman,  S. & Kvale, S. (2015).  Interviews:  Learning the Craft  of Qualitative Research Interviewing.  3rd 
ed. London: Sage Publications, Inc.  
Burns,  D. M. (2003).  Epidemiology  of smoking-induced  cardiovascular  disease. Progress  in cardiovascular 
diseases, 46(1), 11-29. 
Cahill, K., Hartmann-Boyce,  J., & Perera. R. (2015).  Incentives for smoking  cessation.  Cochrane Database 
of Systematic Reviews , (5).  
Cahill K, Stevens S, Perera R, &  Lancaster, T. (2013). Pharmacological interventions for smoking 
cessation:  An overview and network  meta -analysis.  Cochrane Database of Systematic  Reviews , 
(5). 
Calhoun,  P. S., Wilson, S. M., Hertzberg, J. S., Kirby, A. C., McDonald,  S. D., Dennis,  P. A., . . . Beckham,  J. 
C. (2017).  Validation of veterans affairs  electronic medical  record  smoking  data  among Iraq- and 
Afghanistan -era veterans. Manuscript submitted for review.  
Centers for Disease  Control  and Prevention. (2008).  Smoking-attributable  mortalit y, years  of potential 
life lost, and productivity losses - United States, 2000 -2004. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly 
Report, 57, 1226-1228. 
Christofferson, D.E.,  Hertzberg, J.S., Beckham,  J.C., Dennis,  P.A.,  & Hamlett-Berry, K. (2016).  Engagement 
and abstinence among users of a smoking cessation text message program for veterans.  
Addictive Behaviors, 62, 47-53.  
Cooperman,  N.A. (2016).  Current  research on cigarette  smoking  among people  with  HIV.  Current 
Addiction Reports , 3, 19-26.  
Cropsey KL, Jardin BF, Burkholder GA, et al. (2015). An algorithm approach to determining smoking 
cessation  treatment for persons  living with  HIV/AIDS:  Results  of a pilot trial. JAIDS , 69, 291-298.  
Crothers, K., Griffith,  T.A.,  McGinnis,  K.A. et al. (2005).  The impact  of cigarette  smoking on mortality, 
quality  of life, and comorbid  illness among HIV-positive  veterans.  Journal of General  Internal 
Medicine , 20, 1142-1145. 
Department  of Veterans Affairs.  (2012).  The State  of Care  for Veterans with  HIV/AIDS. In. Washington, 
D.C.: Public Health, Veterans Health Administration, Department of Veterans Affairs; 2012.  
Dunn,  K.E.,  Sigmon,  S.C.,  Reimann,  E.F.,  Badger,  G.J.,  Heil, S.H.,  & Higgins,  S.T. (2010).  A contingency - 
management intervention to promote initial smoking cessation among opioid -maintained 
patients. Experimental and Clinical Psychopharmacology , 18, 37-50. 
Epstein EE,  McCrady  BS, Morgan  TJ, et al. (2007).  The successive cohort  design: A  model for  developing 
new  behavioral  therapies for drug use disorders. Addictive Disorders  & Their  Treatment, 6, 1-19 
Tobacco  Cessation  Treatment  Preferences  among  Veteran  Smokers  
Research  Protocol,  version  date  7/25/2022  Page  23 of 25  
 Faulkner  L. (2003).  Beyond  the five-user  assumption:  Benefits of increased sample  sizes in usability 
testing. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 35, 379-383.  
Fu, S.S., McFall, M., Saxon,  A.J. et al. (2007).  Post -traumatic  stress  disorder and smoking: A systematic 
review. Nicotine and Tobacco Research, 9, 1071-1084. 
Gaalema,  D. E., Pericot -Valverde, I., Bunn,  J. Y., Villanti, A. C., Cepeda-Benito, A., Doogan,  N. J., ... & 
Higgins,  S. T. (2018).  Tobacco  use in cardiac  patients:  perceptions,  use, and changes  after a 
recent myocardial infarction among US adults in the PATH study (2013 –2015). Preventive 
medicine , 117, 76-82. 
Gritz,  E. R., Danysh,  H. E., Fletcher, F. E., Tami -Maury,  I., Fingeret, M. C., King, R. M., . . . Vidrine,  D. J. 
(2013). Long -term outcomes of a cell phone-delivered intervention for smokers living with 
HIV/AIDS. Clinical Infectious Diseases, 57 (4), 608-615. doi:10.1093/cid/cit349  
Guest,  G., Bunce,  A., & Johnson,  L. (2006).  How many  interviews are enough?  Field Methods,  18(1),  59- 
82. doi:doi:10.1177/1525822X05279903  
Haskell, S. G., Brandt,  C. A., Krebs, E. E., Skanderson,  M., Kerns, R. D., & Goulet,  J. L. (2009).  Pain among 
Veterans of Operations  Enduring  Freedom and Iraqi  Freedom: do women  and men  differ? Pain 
Med, 10 (7), 1167-1173. doi:10.1111/j.1526-4637.2009.00714.x  
Hoerster, K.D.,  Lehavot,  K., Simpson,  T., McFall, M., Reiber, G., & Nelson, K.M.  (2012).  Health and health 
behavior differences: U.S. Military, veteran, and civilian men. American Journal of Preventive 
Medicine, 43 , 483-489.  
Hsieh, H.F. & Shannon,  S.E. (2005).  Three approaches  to qualitative content analysis.  Qualitative Health 
Research, 15 , 1277-1288. 
Justice,  A. C .,  Dombrowski,  E., Conigliaro,  J., Fultz,  S. L., Gibson,  D., Madenwald,  T., . . . Bryant,  K. (2006). 
Veterans Aging Cohort Study (VACS) - Overview and description. Medical Care, 44 (8), S13-S24. 
doi:10.1097/01.mlr.0000223741.02074.66 
Kariuki, W., Manuel,  J.I., Kariuki, N., Tuchman,  E., O’Neal,  J., &Lalanne,  G.A.  (2016).  HIV and smoking: 
Associated risks and prevention strategies. HIV/AIDS , 8, 17-36. 
Katz, D. A., Holman, J. E., Johnson, S. R., Hillis, S. L., Adams, S. L., Fu, S. S., ... & Vander Weg, M. W. 
(2014).  Implementing best evidence in smoking cessation  treatment for hospitalized veterans: 
results from the VA -BEST Trial. The Joint Commission Journal on Quality and Patient  
Safety , 40(11), 493-AP1.  
Kim, R. S., Weinberger, A. H., Chander, G., Sulkowski, M. S., Norton, B., & Shuter, J. (2018). Cigarette 
smoking in persons  living with  hepatitis  C: The National  Health and nutrition  examination survey 
(NHANES), 1999-2014. The American journal of medicine , 131(6), 669-675.  
Ladapo, J. A., Jaffer, F. A., Weinstein, M. C., & Froelicher, E. S. (2011). Projected cost -effectiveness of 
smoking ces sation  interventions  in patients  hospitalized with  myocardial  infarction. Archives of 
internal medicine , 171(1), 39-45. 
Lifson, A.R. & Lando,  H.A. (2012).  Smoking and HIV:  Prevalence, health  risks, and cessation  strategies.  
Current  HIV/AIDS  Report,  9, 223-230.  
Lynch,  S. M., Wilson,  S. M., DeRycke,  E. C., Driscoll, M. A., Becker,  W. C., Goulet,  J. L., ... & Bastian, L. A. 
(2018).  Impact of cigarette smoking  status  on pain  intensity among  veterans with  and without 
hepatitis C. Pain Medicine , 19(suppl_1), S5 -S11.  
Mallat, A., Hezode, C., & Lotersztajn,  S. (2008).  Environmental  factors  as disease  accelerators  during 
chronic hepatitis C. Journal of hepatology , 48(4), 657 -665.  
McGinnis, K. A., Brandt, C. A., Skanderson, M., Justice, A. C., Shahrir, S., Butt, A. A., . . . Crothers, K. 
(2011).  Validating smoking data  from  the Veteran's Affairs  health factors  dataset,  an electronic 
data source. Nicotine & Tobacco Research, 13 (12), 1233-1239. doi:10.1093/ntr/ntr206 
Tobacco  Cessation  Treatment  Preferences  among  Veteran  Smokers  
Research  Protocol,  version  date  7/25/2022  Page  24 of 25  
 Mdodo, R., Frazier, E.L., Dube. S.R. et al. (2015). Cigarette smoking prevalence among adults with HIV 
compared  with  the general adult  population  in the United States.  Annals of Internal Medicine, 
162, 335-344. 
Meijer, E., Van der Kleij, R. M. J. J., & Chavannes, N. H. (2019).  Facilitating smoking cessation  in patients 
who smoke: a large-scale cross-sectional comparison of fourteen groups of healthcare 
providers. BMC health services research , 19(1), 1 -16. 
Miles, M.B.,  Huberman,  A.M.,  & Saldaña, J. (2014).  Qualitative Data Analysis:  A Methods  Sourcebook,  3 
ed. Los Angeles, CA: Sage Publications, Inc.  
Minick,  S.G.,  Stafford, C.L.,  Kertz,  B.L. et al. (2016).  Veterans’ perspectives on interventions to improve 
retention in HIV care . PLoS ONE, 11(2), e0148163.  
Moadel , A.B., Bernstein, S.L., Mermelstein, R.J., Arnsten, J.H., Dolce, E.H., & Shuter, J. (2012). A 
randomized controlled trial of a tailored group  smoking cessation  intervention for HIV-infected 
smokers. Journal of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndromes, 61, 208-215.  
Moscou -Jackson, G., Commodore -Mensah, Y., Farley, J., & DiGiacomo, M. (2014). Smoking-cessation 
interventions in people  living with HIV infection:  A systematic  review. Journal of the Association 
of Nurses in AIDS Care, 25, 32-45.  
Pacek,  L.R. & Cioe, P.A. ( 2007).  Tobacco  use, use disorders,  and smoking  cessation  interventions in 
persons living with HIV. Current HIV/AIDS Reports, 12, 413-420.  
Petry, N. (2010).  Contingency  management  treatments:  Controversies and challenges. Addiction, 105,  
1507- 1509.  
Piper, M.E.,  Vasilenko, S.A.,  Cook,  J.W.,  & Lanza,  S.T. (2017).  What a difference  a day makes:  Differences 
in initial abstinence response during a smoking cessation attempt. Addiction, 112 , 330-339. 
Rasmussen,  L.D.,  Helleberg, M., May, M. et al. (2015).  Myocardial  infarction  among Danish  HIV-infected 
individuals: Population attributable fractions associated with smoking. Clinical Infectious Diseases, 60, 1415-23. 
Reid, C., Fenech, M., Jones, L., & Salehi, N. (2020). Nurse practitioner interventions for smokers with 
chronic  hepatitis C. Journal of the American Association  of Nurse Practitioners , 32(5), 380-389.  
Rigotti,  N. A
.,  Clair, C., Munafò,  M. R., & Stead,  L. F. (2012).  Interventions  for smoking cessation  in 
hospitalised patients. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews , (5).  
Rojewski, A. M., Bailey, S. R., Bernstein, S. L., Cooperman, N. A., Gritz, E. R., Karam-Hage, M. A., ... & 
Warren, G. W. (2019).  Considering  systemic  barriers  to treating  tobacco  use in clinical  settings  in 
the United States. Nicotine and Tobacco Research, 21(11), 1453-1461.  
Scott- Sheldon, L.A.J., Lantini, R., Jennings, E.G. et al. (2016). Text messaging-based interventions for 
smoking  cessation:  A systematic  review and meta -analysis.  Jmir Mhealth  and Uhealth, 4, 337- 
360.  
Shelley, D., Tseng,  T.Y.,  Gonzalez,  M. et al. (2015).  Correlates of adherence to varenicline among  HIV plus 
smokers. Nicotine and Tobacco Research, 17, 968-974. 
Tesoriero, J.M.,  Gieryic,  S.M.,  Carrascal,  A., & Lavigne,  H.E. (2010).  Smoking among HIV positive New 
Yorkers:  Prevalence, frequency, and opportunities  for cessation.  AIDS  Behavior, 14, 824-835. 
Twyman, L., Bonevski, B., Paul, C., & Bryant, J. (2014). Perceived barriers to smoking cessation in 
selected vulnerable groups:  a systematic  review of the qualitative and quantitative  literature. 
BMJ Open , 4(12), e006414. 
Vidrine, D.J., Arduino,  R.C.,  Lazev, A.B.,  & Gritz,  E.R. (2006).  A randomized  trial of a proactive  cellular 
telephone intervention for smokers living with HIV/AIDS. AIDS, 20, 253-260.  
Vidrine, D.J., Marks, R.M., Arduino, R.C., & Gritz, E.R. (2012). Efficacy of cell phone-delivered smoking 
cessation  counseling for persons  living with  HIV/AIDS:  3-month  outcomes.  Nicotine and Tobacco 
Research, 14 , 106-110. 
Tobacco  Cessation  Treatment  Preferences  among  Veteran  Smokers  
Research  Protocol,  version  date  7/25/2022  Page  25 of 25  
 Volkman,  J. E., DeRycke, E. C., Driscoll, M. A., Becker,  W. C., Brandt,  C. A., Mattocks,  K. M., . . . Bastian, L. 
A. (2015).  Smoking Status  and Pain Intensity  Among OEF/OIF/OND  Veterans. Pain Medicine, 
16(9), 1690-1696. doi:10.1111/pme.12753 
Watkins  DC. (2017).  Rapid  and rigorous  qualitative data  analysis:  The “RADaR”  technique  for applied 
research. International Journal of Qualitative Methods, 16 (1), 1609406917712131.  