1  BOSTON CHILDREN ’S HOSPITAL  
EVALUATION OF THE MOMENTARY AFFECT REGULATION  SAFER 
SEX INTERVENTION  
OFFICE OF POPULA TION AFFAIRS TEEN PREGNANCY PREVENTION PROGRAM   
 
ST A TISTICAL ANAL YSIS  PLAN 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
OCTOBER 2023  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Submitted by: 
The Policy & Research Group  
www.policyandresearch.com  
 
8434 Oak St.  
New Orleans, LA 70118  
 
107 Spring St.  
Seattle, WA 981 04 
 

2  INTRODUCTION  
 
OVERVIEW  
In January 2023, The Policy & Research Group (PRG) submitted its Analysis Plan for the 
evaluation of the Momentary Affect Regulation Safer Sex Intervention  (MARSSI) to Mathematica. 
In May 2023, Mathematica provided feedback to PRG on the plan.  
 
In an effort to provide detail to other reviewers of this Analysis Plan (who may have similar 
questions ), we include  brief responses to key questions raised by Mathematica to offer further  
clarity on decisions made and how we intend  to proceed with our analysis.  
 
Reporting plan. In light of the number of research questions specified below, we want to be clear  
on how we intend to report findings from this evaluation. Our first priority will be to report results 
relevant to the three  primary research questions using our benchmark analytic approach . This may 
include additional analyses , as needed , to clarify any analytical complications that invariably arise 
in the analysis of the impacts of complex social programs . We have noted some potential 
complexities in this Analysis Plan. Although it is not a requirement for an RCT with low attrition, 
we will include baseline  equivalence statistics for each of the analytic samples used to produce 
findings for the three primary research questions . We may opt to include findings from secondary 
and exploratory research questions  if we find that they  elucidate  or supplement  the primary 
research  findings .  
 
We have asked an array of secondary and exploratory questions that aim to investigate hypothetical 
relationships that undergird MARSSI’s theory of change. These questions have been designated as 
subordinate  because are not reviewable by the TPP Evidence Review , because they are ancillary  in 
the theory of change, or because they are not  yet understood as confirmatory in the eyes of the 
program’s developers. We investigate these questions to test hypothesized relationships and 
develop our theoretical understanding of how MARSSI works. Findings to  these questions are 
necessarily of interest to the developers of MARSSI , but may also be generally informative to the 
field in terms of how a complex intervention like MARSSI influences behavior change. We will 
report results with interpretation  to the program developers for future development and theory 
refinement.  We may also  choose to disseminate exploratory results more broadly in the form of 
peer-reviewed articles, conference papers, or possibly shorter briefs.  
 
Modification to benchmark analytic approach.  After receiving written feedback from and 
discussing options for a  benchmark analytic approach  with peer reviewers , we have decided  to 
estimate impacts using ordinary least squares ( OLS ) regression  for each of our three primary 
outcome s. We will use  count models  as sensitivity tests  to test the robustness of those estimates . 
Any substantive differences between benchmark and sensitivity estimates  will be reported in the 
results section of our impact manuscript.   
 
Correction in the description of blocking variables . In reviewing our analysis plan, we noticed 
that we had mischaracterized  how we intended to construct variables to account for the 
stratification of random assignment procedures in our analytic models . Prior to random allocation, 
participants were stratified sequentially into separate pools  by: the state in which they indicated 
they would seek reproductive health care (51 possible options with the inclusion of Washington, 
DC) and the study coordinator who enrolled them into the study (5 options). Operationally, this has 
created separate randomization list s for each state -coordinator combination , for a  maximum 
3  potential set of  255 separate randomization blocks  (51 states * 5 coordinators ). In revising  this plan, 
we have clarified that the dummy blocking variables we intend to include in our analytic models 
reflect this randomization structure.  
 
Rationale for assessing motivation as a short-term outcome. In our list of secondary research 
questions, we indicate that we will assess three outcomes - motivation to use prescription birth 
control,  motivation  to use condoms, and motivation to abstain from sex – at just one time point 
(three  months post -intervention). Our rationale for limiting this assessment to the single time point  
is based on two factors. First, in conversations  with the intervention developer  on the MARSSI 
theory of change , we discussed  how motivation is a behavioral antecedent that likely takes time to 
be realized and isn’t expected  to shift  immediately after receiving an intervention. MARSSI aims to 
first build an individual’s confidence that they can use contraceptives and communicate effectively 
with their sexual partners. Once this confidence has been built,  they may feel more motivated (over 
time) to use contraceptives and/or abstain from risky sex.  
 
Second , we were concerned about both the b urden of response on the participant  and cognizant of 
limiting items to only those most critical to assess at specific time points.  
 
Defining participation threshold for Complier Average Causal Effect (CACE) analyses. The 
CACE analyses we intend to conduct (and which are describe d below) are exploratory in nature; 
our intent is not for them to be used as our benchmark approach. Given this, we plan to assess the 
impact of varying levels of  MARSSI  participation  (dosage)  on outcomes of interest  to better 
understand the potential dose -response relationship and do not specify a set threshold for 
participation .  
  
4  Impact  and Program  Implementation  Evaluation  Analysis  Plan  for Boston 
Children’s Hospital – June 2023  
The Evaluation  of the Momentary  Affect  Regulation  Safer  Sex Intervention  in the United  States  
 
1. Impact  Study  Research  Questions  
This section presents the primary and secondary research questions that will be assessed in the 
impact evaluation of the Momentary Affect Regulation Safer Sex Intervention (MARSSI). Our 
classification of primary and secondary research questions aligns with  categorization rules 
provided in the Instructions For TPP20 Tier 2 Phase II Impact And Program Implementation 
Evaluation Analysis Plan .1 While the Participant Questionnaire collects data on many outcomes 
that may be affected by the intervention, following categorization rules, the research team has 
designated a select set of short -term behavioral outcomes as primary, which the program 
devel oper (in consultation with the research team) believes are most important for understanding 
the efficacy of MARSSI to achieve its goal of reducing unplanned pregnancy and STIs in the 
target  population.  Secondary  research  questions  cover  the broader  array  of outcomes  measured  in 
the Participant Questionnaire, as well as alternative analytic methods, that are designed to  
explore the impact of the program on other theoretically important behaviors and antecedents 
within the full sample and subgroups of interest.  
 
a. Primary  research  questions2 
1. What  is the short -term impact  (three  months  post-intervention)  of the offer  to participate 
in MARSSI (treatment) relative to the offer to participate in the control condition on 
participants' reported frequency of having vaginal sex without condoms in the past 30 
days?  
2. What  is the short -term impact  (three  months  post-intervention)  of the offer  to participate 
in MARSSI (treatment) relative to the offer to participate in the control condition on 
participants' reported current use of effective non -barrier contraception?  
3. What  is the short -term impact  (three  months  post-intervention)  of the offer  to participate 
in MARSSI (treatment) relative to the offer to participate in the control condition on 
participants' reported number of sexual partners in the past 3 months?  
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 According to guidance for Impact study research questions (p3), in order to reduce opportunities for Type I errors and simplify reporting,  
researchers  should  designate  as primary,  research  questions  that are “focused  on the outcomes  most  important  to gauging a program’s 
effectiveness in improving adolescent reproductive health.” Findings for primary research questions are the basis for assessi ng program 
efficacy and “will be used to guide interpretation and conclusions about the effectiveness of the pr ogram being tested.” By contrast, 
“secondary research questions examine impacts on other outcomes (aside from those examined as primary research  questions)  that 
might be  influenced  by the  intervention  or other justifiable  explorations of program effectiveness.” Guidance (p4)  suggests  that secondary  
outcomes  are not considered  “critical”  to evaluating  effectiveness  but are none  the less important  to key interested parties (e.g., grantee 
or researchers).  
2 The primary outcomes are the principal measures on which we will assess the impact of the MARSSI intervention. These reflect sexual  
and reproductive  health  (SRH)  behaviors  targeted  by MARSSI  and identified  in the logic model  as the causal  mechanisms  that explain 
longer term SRH program objectives. Primary outcomes have been pre -specified in our design summary and the study’s clinicaltrials.gov 
registration ([STUDY_ID_REMOVED]) . 
5  b. Secondary  research  questions3 
We include  below  three  groups  of secondary  research  questions,  which  will be used to 
assess the impact of MARSSI on different outcomes at different time points and with 
different groups. The first group of secondary research questions will explore the 
impact  of MARSSI  on the full analytic  sample  for specified  outcomes  using  an intent - 
to-treat (ITT) framework. The second group of questions will explore the impact of 
MARSSI on specified subgroups, again using an ITT framework. The third group of 
questions will explore the impact of MARSSI using a complier average causal effect 
(CACE) analytic approach.  
 
Outcomes that are starred (*) indicate those for which the construction of the measure 
will result in the formation of an endogenous subgroup because inclusion in the group 
will be defined  by a participant’s  response  to items  at follow -up time points.  We intend 
to use principal stratification analysis to estimate program effects for these measures.  
 
Analysis  of secondary  outcomes  in full sample  using  ITT approach  
1.  What  are the post-intervention  impacts  of the offer  to participate  in MARSSI 
(treatment) relative to the offer to participate in the control condition on the 
following theoretical antecedents of sexual health and health behavior?  
a. Sexual  communication  self-efficacy  
b. Condom  planning  self-efficacy  
c. Contraceptive  planning  self-efficacy  
d. Coping  self-efficacy  
e. Condom knowledge  
f. Contraceptive  knowledge  
g. Pregnancy  ambivalence*  
 
2. What are the short -term (three months post -intervention period) impacts of the offer 
to participate  in MARSSI  (treatment)  relative  to the offer  to participate  in the control 
condition on the following sexual health behaviors, health outcomes, and theoretical 
antecedents of sexual health and health behavior?  
a. Motivation  to use prescription  birth control  
b. Motivation  to use  condoms  
c. Motivation  to purposefully  abstain  from  sex 
d. Depressive  symptoms  (in past 2 weeks)  
e. Frequency  of vaginal  sex (in past 30 days)  
f. Frequency  of vaginal  sex without  effective  non-barrier  contraceptive 
use (in past 30 days)  
g. Frequency  of emergency  contraception  use after vaginal  sex (in past 
30 days)  
h. Frequency of dual contraception (combined condom and effective 
non-barrier  contraceptive  use) during  vaginal  sex (in past 30 days)*  
 
3 Secondary outcomes reflect: a) theoretically relevant determinants/mediators of behavior and health targeted by the program a s a 
means  of achieving  both short  and long-term SRH  outcomes;  b) additional  short -term outcomes  the research  team  hypothesizes  may be 
affected by the program but are not considered critical in evaluating the program’s efficacy to achieve its ultimate goal; c)  long- term 
outcomes  the research  team  hypothesizes  may be affected  by the program  but are not as likely  to be realized  within  the timeframe of the  
study; and  d) alternative  conceptualizations of  primary  outcomes. Secondary research  questions are  intended  to more  broadly explore  
the impacts of MARSSI  to better  understand  how and for whom  the program  is working. These  outcomes  are not considered by  the 
program  developer  or researchers  to be critical  to evaluating  the efficacy  of MARSSI  on adolescent  SRH,  but they are of interest to both.  
6  i. Use of effective  non-barrier  contraception  during  last vaginal  sex 
j. Use of condoms during  last vaginal sex 
k. No effective  contraception  used during  last vaginal  sex 
l. Use of dual contraception  (combined  condom  and effective  non- 
barrier contraceptive use) during last vaginal sex  
m. Frequency  of oral sex (in past 30 days)  
n. Frequency  of anal  sex (in  past 30 days)  
o. Frequency  of anal  sex without  condoms  (in past 30 days)  
p. Frequency  of using  alcohol  or drugs  before  having  any type of sex 
(vaginal, anal, or oral) (in past 30 days)  
q. Pregnancy  ambivalence*  
 
3. What  are the long-term (six  months  post-intervention  period)  impacts  of the offer  to 
participate in MARSSI (treatment) relative to the offer to participate in the control 
condition  on the following  sexual  health  behaviors,  health  outcomes,  and theoretical 
antecedents of sexual health and health behavior?  
a. Depressive  symptoms  
b. Frequency  of vaginal  sex (in past 30 days)  
c. Frequency  of vaginal  sex without  effective  non-barrier  contraceptive  use 
(in past 30 days)  
d. Frequency  of emergency  contraception  use after vaginal  sex (in past 30 
days)  
e. Frequency  of dual contraception  (combined  condom  and effective  non- 
barrier contraceptive use) during vaginal sex (in past 30 days)*  
f. Use of effective  non-barrier  contraception  during  last vaginal  sex 
g. Use of condoms during  last vaginal sex 
h. No effective  contraception  used during  last vaginal  sex 
i. Use of dual contraception  (combined  condom  and effective  non-barrier 
contraceptive use) during last vaginal sex  
j. Frequency  of oral sex (in past 30 days)  
k. Frequency  of anal  sex (in  past 30 days)  
l. Frequency  of anal  sex without  condoms  (in past 30 days)  
m. Frequency  of using  alcohol  or drugs  before  having  any type of sex 
(vaginal, anal, or oral) (in past 30 days)  
n. Current  use of effective  non-barrier  contraception  
o. Frequency  of vaginal  sex without  condoms  (in past 30 days)  
p. Number  of sexual  partners  (in past 3 months)  
 
Analysis of primary and secondary outcomes in subgroups using ITT approach  
What  are the post-program,  short -term,  and long-term impacts  of the offer  to participate  in 
MARSSI  (treatment)  relative  to the offer  to participate  in the control  condition  on primary 
and secondary outcomes for subgroups defined by the following baseline data: 1) PHQ -8 
7  depressive  symptoms  score;  2) age; 3) race;  4) ethnicity;  5) gender;  6) Medicaid  
eligibility (proxy measure of healthcare access); 7) educational level; 8) recent receipt 
of sexual and reproductive  health  (SRH)  information;  9) recent receipt  of health  services 
(mental  health, SRH, and/or primary health care); 10) non -barrier contraceptive use; 11) 
main reason for using non -barrier contraception; 12) relationship status; 13) pregnancy 
intentions; and 14) feelings toward pregnancy.  
 
CACE  analysis  of primary  and secondary  outcomes  
What  are the post-program,  short -term,  and long-term impacts  of threshold  participation  
in MARSSI on primary and secondary outcomes for a subgroup of participants assigned 
to treatment relative to a similar group of assigned to control?  
 
2. Impact  Study  Design  
This section  provides  a brief  description  of the study  design  and the process  for creating 
intervention and comparison groups.  
 
The BEhavior And Mindfulness Health (BEAM) study is an individual randomized controlled 
trial in which evaluators randomly assign eligible, consenting participants to intervention or 
comparison conditions at a one -to-one ratio. Random assignment occurs after participants’ 
consent and before the provision of any programming or collection of baseline data. 
Following submission of the baseline questionnaire, participants are implicitly informed of 
assignment through  the discussion  of next steps.  Participants  are enrolled  on a rolling  basis  
and randomized by the state where they would most likely seek reproductive health care and 
by the research coordinator who is enrolling them.4 See the Random assignment process 
section below for further details.  
 
The treatment condition, MARSSI, is a motivational interviewing -based intervention 
designed specifically for adolescent and young adult (AYA) biologic females with depressive 
symptoms and  sexual  risk behavior.  It aims  to enhance  motivation  to change  risky  behaviors,  
provide  skills to address depression’s effects on behavior, and prompt and reinforce health -
related affect regulation, cognitive behavioral skill use, and behavior change in daily life. 
MARSSI has three components: 1) a manualized counseling session with a 
sexual/reproductive health (SRH) counselor; 2) a mobile health application (mHealth app); 
and 3) a booster counseling session with the SRH counselor.  
 
The main counseling session lasts ~60 minutes and uses motivational interviewing techniques 
to help the AYA identify a risk -reducing goal for their sexual behavior and develop a change 
plan. The  session  also provides  depression  education  and skills,  based  on cognitive  behavioral  
therapy. Counseling sessions are conducted by SRH  counselors who have at least a bachelor’s 
degree  and one  to two years of  experience  working with young people  in SRH  and/or  mental 
health settings. Counselors receive approximately 24 hours of training in the intervention 
through self -study (assigned readings, videos), live sessions with trainers (brief didactic 
 
4 From June 2021 until December 2022, individuals were randomized by the state where they would most likely seek reproductive 
health  care at a Planned  Parenthood  health  center,  but this stipulation  was removed  from the eligibility  screening  question  in December 
2022 in order to expand recruitment opportunities. From January 2023 forward, individuals were randomized by the state where they 
would most likely seek reproductive health care, regardless of which type of health center.  
8  presentations, discussions,  role plays),  and practice  (with  other  counselors  using  assigned  
participant  scenarios,  and with a mock patient followed by an evaluation/de -brief and coaching 
session with trainers).  
 
Participants download the mHealth app onto their personal smartphone during the main 
session; the app is intended to be used four times a day for four weeks. There are three app -
prompted reports and one scheduled report per day. The reports ask the partici pant to report 
their affective states and SRH risk precursors (e.g., self -efficacy to use condoms, to use 
contraceptives, and to refuse sex, desire for sex and reasons). When the participant reports 
poor affect, low contraceptive  or condom  self-efficacy,  pregnancy  desire,  or desire  for sex to 
regulate  affect,  they receive  automated personalized messages prompting healthy behaviors 
and cognitive  behavioral skill use. Intended dosage is approximately two minutes per day.  
 
The booster session is designed to last ~20 minutes and is intended to be delivered after four 
weeks of app use. Participants speak with the SRH counselor to review behavior and 
relationships,  discuss  progress  toward  the participant  goal,  and learn  a new skill 
(affirmations).  
 
As originally  developed,  the main  counseling  session  was intended  to be delivered  in 
person, while  the booster  session  was designed  to be delivered  either  in person  or by secure  
phone  or video call. However, in response  to the  COVID -19 pandemic, both counseling 
sessions have been adapted for virtual implementation via secure video call.  
 
The control  condition  is a 20-minute  podcast  episode  from  the Susan  G. Komen  Foundation  
Real Pink Podcast originally aired in June  2019. It provides introductory information 
regarding breast health, family health history, and the way in which family health history 
influences individual risk of developing breast cancer; it contains no sexual health content. 
Participants receive a link to the podcast via email and self -administer the intervention on their 
own personal devices.  
 
The study is being conducted virtually and recruiting participants throughout the United 
States. To support recruitment, the study team has partnered with several Planned Parenthood 
(PP) affiliates. Individuals have  the potential to learn about the  study through both active  and 
passive recruitment methods. Active recruitment methods include having PP staff at affiliate 
health centers mention the study to patients and sending text messages and patient portal 
messages directly to patients in PP affiliate heal th systems which have partnered with the 
study. Passive recruitment  methods  include  hanging  posters  and distributing  handbills  at 
affiliate  health  centers and posting information on the PP website notices and study -specific 
or -affiliated social media accounts. All study advertisements contain a QR code and/or link 
to the online self -screener.  
 
When an individual takes the online self -screener, they are automatically notified whether 
they are eligible for the study. If they are eligible, they are routed to a page where they enter 
and submit their contact information. When they submit their contac t information, it is 
immediately  available  to all SRH  counselors  at select  PP affiliates  who are working  on the 
study (study coordinators). Study coordinators self -assign themselves to an eligible individual 
and then use the contact information provided to reach out and schedule enrollment.  
9  To be eligible  for enrollment,  individuals  must  meet  all of the following  criteria:  1) 
biologically able to become pregnant; 2) 16 -21 years of age;5 3) fluent in English; 4) own a 
smartphone; 5)  have the technical capacity to participate; 6) not currently pregnant; 7) not 
trying to become pregnant;  8) not have  given  birth  during  the six months  preceding  eligibility  
screening;  9) not be married or engaged to be married at the time of eligibility screening; 10) 
report having penile - vaginal sex in the past 3 months; 11) report having penile -vaginal sex at 
least once a week, on average; 12) score at least 8 on the PHQ -8 depression screen ing tool;6 
13) self -report visiting a reproductive health provider in the past two years;7 14) report having 
done at least one of the following during the 3 months preceding eligibility screening: a) not 
used a condom every time they had sexual intercourse; b) used condoms, a diaphragm, 
cervical cap, spermicide, sponge, fertility awareness, or withdrawal as a primary form of birth 
control; c) had sexual intercourse with more than one person; d) had sexual intercourse within 
two hours after using drugs or alcohol;  or e) been  treated  for a sexually  transmitted  
infection/disease;  15) consent  to participate in the study; and 16) not identified as fraudulent.8  
The intent -to-treat sample  (ITT)  is comprised  of eligible  individuals  who are enrolled  into 
the study during the enrollment period (June 2021 to April 2023).  
 
a. Random  assignment  process  
i. Unit  of randomization:  Random  assignment  occurs  at the individual  participant  level.  
 
ii. Random assignment procedure:  The Policy & Research Group (PRG) is 
responsible for  all aspects of  random assignment. Random assignment blocks of  
varying sizes assign participants  to treatment  or control  condition  at an equal  (i.e., 1:1) 
assignment  ratio.  PRG produced this allocation list with an existing algorithm 
available in Stata (random allocation command, ralloc ) and did so separately for each 
of the potential 255 study coordinator -state combination s.9 The allocation lists were 
produced by a PRG senior research analyst and stored on a secure server.  
 
Electronic random assignment is conducted just prior to the administration of the 
online baseline questionnaire and is carried out by the study coordinators. Study 
coordinators were each given a sequential list of unique study IDs for every U.S. state. 
They assign a number (based on the state where the individual would seek 
 
5 From June 2021 until November  2022, only individuals aged 17 to  20 years were eligible  for enrollment into  the study. However, in 
December 2022, the study team expanded the criteria to include 16 and 21 years old in an effort to recruit more participants.  
6 From June 2021 until August 2021, only individuals with a PHQ -8 score of 10 or higher were eligible for enrollment into the study. 
However, in  September 2021, the  study team expanded the criteria  to include those with a  score of 8 or higher in an effort to recruit 
more participants.  
7 From  June  2021  until October  2021,  only individuals  who reported  having  a virtual  or an in-person  visit in the past year at a Planned 
Parenthood  health  center  in Alaska, Hawaii,  Idaho,  Indiana,  Kentucky,  Washington,  or Wisconsin  were  eligible  for enrollment  into the 
study.  In November  2022,  the study  team  expanded  the criteria  to include  anyone  who reported  having  a visit in the past two years at 
a PP health  center  in one of these  states.  The criteria  were  expanded  again  in December  2021  to include  anyone  who reported  having 
a visit in  any U.S.  state  where  PP health  centers  are located.  The criteria  were  expanded  one final time in December  2022  to include 
anyone  who reported  receiving  a virtual  or in-person  visit in the past two years  with a reproductive  health  provider.  All of these  changes 
were made in an effort to recruit more participants.  
8 Review  of potential  fraudulence  is done  automatically  using  a feature  called  RelevantID  ®, which  is integrated  in the Qualtrics  online 
survey software that the study team uses for data collection. This was added as an eligibility criterion in December 2022, wh en we 
expanded recruitment to individuals who visited any type of reproductive  health provider, in an  effort to  ensure that only truly eligible 
individuals are enrolled into the study.  
9 Blocking  is done  at both the coordinator - and state -level.  Coordinator -level blocking  is used  for administrative  purposes.  State -level 
blocking is used to account for regional differences in the availability of SRH services and population characteristics.  
10  reproductive health care) to each eligible and consented individual who is able to take 
the questionnaire through an online  data collection  platform.  An individual  is 
considered  enrolled  in the study  and part of the ITT sample when they have been given 
a study ID number and completed the baseline questionnaire. Random assignment 
occurs when the unique study ID number is  entered into a field in a web -based 
Randomization Generator . It is at this point that the ID number is associated with an 
assignment condit ion (treatment or control) in the random allocation sequence. At each 
baseline administration (after eligibility is confirmed),  the study  coordinator  types  in 
the ID number  that was next on the list (going in ascending numerical order) into the 
study ID field of the Randomization Generator ; the application then provides a 
message to the study coordinator that indicates the condition associated with that ID. 
While the participant completes the baseline questionnaire, the study coordinator 
records the partici pant’s ID number and allocation into the study’s electronic Consent 
and Enrollment Form . 
 
Study participants are not explicitly informed of which condition (treatment or 
control) they are assigned; however, following their submission of the baseline 
questionnaire, a study coordinator implicitly informs the participant of assignment 
through the discussion of  next steps  (e.g.,  treatment  participants  are provided  with the 
MARSSI  main  counseling session, control participants are provided with information 
for how they can listen to the podcast episode and are informed that they will be 
contacted in a month to complete the first follow -up questionnaire, to be administered 
one month post -baseline). With regards to messaging, the treatment and control 
interventions are never discussed as such; instead, study coordinators are trained to 
acknowledge that participants are randomly assigned to a particular intervention: a 
health program involving one -on-one video sessions with the study coordinator; or a 
health program that involves listening to a 2 0- minute podcast episode.  
 
In addition to carrying out the random assignment, PP -based study coordinators are 
responsible  for monitoring the  assignment process and ensuring fidelity to assignment 
is maintained. Every two weeks throughout the enrollment period, a PRG senior 
research analyst reviews participant IDs and assignment allocations recorded by study 
coordinators in the Consent and Enrollment Form database to ensure that they are 
both consistent  with those  in the original  assignment  list, and that participant  IDs are 
assigned in sequential order as intended.  
 
iii. Probability  of assignment  to treatment  group : The probability  of assignment  to 
the treatment group is intended to be equal to the probability of assignment to the 
control condition; that is, p (assignment to treatment) =.5.  
 
iv. Potential for crossover/contamination: To mitigate potential for both crossover10 
and contamination11, PRG study coordinators are trained in detailed study procedures; 
 
10 PRG monitors crossover through routine data monitoring. Every two weeks, a senior research analyst checks to ensure that 
individuals assigned  to the treatment condition  are offered  the MARSSI intervention , and that those  assigned  to the control  condition 
are offered the podcast episode.  
11 In addition to crossover, it is possible that contamination may occur through interaction among participants. While it is pos sible 
 
11  expectations regarding randomization are clear before implementation. Study 
coordinators commit to ensuring that participants randomly assigned to treatment 
participate  in MARSSI  and receive  the intervention  to fidelity,  and participants  
randomly  assigned to control receive information about how to access the podcast 
episode and do not  receive  any MARSSI  content.  Despite  these  efforts,  there  still 
remains  the possibility that MARSSI participants may not receive some or all of the 
intervention program components, and control participants may receive some 
MARSSI content if study procedures  are not followed  by study  coordinators  or if SRH  
similar  to MARSSI  content is inadvertently delivered to a control participant.  
 
that some  participants  may know  each  other,  the evaluators  believe  that the private  and personal nature  of the intervention  
coupled with the personalization of messaging received in one -on-one sessions serves to deter the diffusion of MARSSI content 
from treatment to control participants. However, we do not have data that allow us to assess this issue and recognize it is 
plausi ble that treatment may be diffused in some way.  
12  3. Program  Implementation  Analysis  
This section  lays out plans  for analyzing  implementation  data for understanding  and documenting  program  implementation.  
 
Table  1. Planned  implementation  analysis  
Research  question  Measure  Operationalization  Data sources  
Fidelity  
How much of the 
program  was delivered 
as intended?  Counselor - and observer - 
reported average percent of 
required  MARSSI  activities  that 
are completed,  by session  and 
overall  For each  individual  session,  the proportion  of 
required  activities  completed  will be calculated  as 
the number  of required  activities  that the 
counselor/observer  reports  were  completed 
divided  by the total number  of required  activities 
for that session.  There  are 13 total activities  that 
can be completed  in the main  counseling  session 
and 10 total activities  that can be completed  in the 
booster session.  
 
Activities  are counted  as having  been  ‘completed’ 
if the counselor/observer  reports  that the activity 
has been completed in full.  
 
The average  percent  of required  MARSSI  activities 
completed  will be calculated  for each  session  type 
(main  counseling  or booster  session)  and overall 
(combining main counseling and booster session).  Counselors complete an 
electronic MARSSI Main 
Counseling  Session  Self-Report 
Form after delivering a main 
counseling session and an 
electronic MARSSI Booster 
Session  Self-Report  Form  after 
delivering  a booster  session.12  
 
Observers  complete  an electronic 
MARSSI Main Counseling 
Session Observer Form after 
observing a selected main 
counseling session and an 
electronic MARSSI Booster 
Session Observer Form after 
observing a selected booster 
session.13  
Percent  of MARSSI  participants 
who received their booster  The number  of treatment  group  participants  who 
completed  their booster  session,  divided  by the 
total number  of treatment  group  participants  • Counselor  Self-Report  Form  – 
Booster Session Form  
 
 
 
12 Note:  For the purposes  of this study,  delivery  as intended  requires  that participants  complete  all MARSSI  program  components  within  six weeks  of being  enrolled  into the study.  
13 Session  observation  entails  trained  MARSSI  observers  watching  recordings  of the counselors  delivering  sessions  to participants  (virtually).  Counselors  are asked  to record  a certain 
number  of each  type of session  per month, with  the goal of recording  and observing  a minimum of  10% of all main  counseling  sessions and  booster  sessions  delivered  during  the study 
period. Each recording is first viewed by two observers and then data are reconciled so that there is one final Observation F orm associated with each video recording. Observers complete 
Observer Forms within one month after each recording.  
13   
Research  question  Measure  Operationalization  Data sources  
 counseling  session  during  
designated  two-week  window    
Dosage  
How much 
programming  was 
received by 
participants?  Percent of participants who 
completed  the main counseling 
session  Number  of treatment  participants  who are 
indicated  as having  received  the main  counseling 
session  divided  by the total number  of treatment  
participants  enrolled  in the study  Counselors complete an 
electronic  Consent  & Enrollment 
Session Form in which they 
indicate  if they delivered  the main 
counseling session and an 
electronic  One-Month  Follow -Up 
Data Collection Form in which 
they indicate  if they delivered  the 
booster session.  
 
App usage  dated  are collected  in 
the MetricWire platform and a 
dataset with select variables is 
sent to PRG  on a monthly  basis.  Percent of participants who 
completed  at least 14 days of 
app use Number  of treatment  participants  who have  an 
indicator  of at least 14 days of submitting  at least 
one response  in the app divided  by the total 
number  of treatment  participants  enrolled  in the 
study14 
Percent of participants who 
completed  the booster  session  Number  of treatment  participants  who are 
indicated  as having  the received  booster  session 
divided by  the total number  of treatment  
participants  enrolled  in the study  
Average  percent  of all sessions 
attended by treatment 
participants  For each treatment  participant:  
• Sum of main session  completed  (counted  as 2 
sessions)15 + indicator  of at least  14 days  of 
submitting  at least  one response  in the app + 
booster  session  completed  = total sessions 
completed  
• Total  sessions  completed/4  total sessions 
possible  = Proportion  of sessions  completed  by 
each  participant  
 
Overall  average  percentage  will be calculated  for 
treatment group participants.  
 
 
 
 
14 Although  the app is set to deliver  three  app-prompted  reports  and one scheduled  report  per day, the intervention  developer  has indicated  that sufficient  app use is considered  to be at least 
one response per day to any of the reports on at least 14 days of the 28 -day app use period.  
15 This main  counseling  session  is counted  as 2 sessions  for the two reasons.  First,  the intended  length  of the  main  session  is 60  minutes,  which is  two times  the intended  length  of the 
booster session (30 minutes). Secondly, the intervention developer has indicated that the main counseling session is the most  critical component of the intervention and should be 
weighted two times more heavily than the booster session.  
14   
Research  question  Measure  Operationalization  Data sources  
 Percent  of participants  who 
received  at least 75% of the 
program  The number  of treatment  group  participants  who 
completed  either:  1) the main  counseling  session 
and 14 days of submitting  at least one response  in 
the MARSSI  app; or 2) the main  session  and the 
booster  session,  divided  by the total number  of 
treatment  group  participants.   
Quality  
What  was the quality  of 
staff–participant 
interactions?  Counselor - and observer - 
reported average quality of 
motivational  interviewing  and 
cognitive behavioral therapy 
(MI/CBT)  skills and techniques 
used during the session, by 
session and overall  For each individual  session,  counselors/observers 
are asked  to report  on a five-point  scale  ranging 
from not at all (=1) to a great  extent  (=5) the 
degree  to which  the following  twelve  MI/CBT  skills 
and techniques  were  used  during  the session:  
• Interpersonal  effectiveness  
• Setting agenda  
• Pacing  the session  
• Eliciting  participant’s  own perspectives  
• Reflective  listening  
• Use of summaries  to bring  together  what 
participant  said 
• Obtaining  permission  from participant  to offer 
advice  
• Sensitivity  to participant’s  concerns  and 
understanding  
• Partnership  with participant  
• Support  and encouragement  for participant 
autonomy  
• Affirmation  of participant’s  strengths  or efforts  
• Guiding  participant  in developing  change  plan 
 
Each  MARSSI  session  delivered  will receive  a 
Counselor -Reported MI/CBT Skills and 
Techniques  Quality  rating  and each  MARSSI 
session  observed  will receive  an Observer - 
Reported  MI/CBT  Skills  and Techniques  Quality  Counselors complete an 
electronic MARSSI Main 
Counseling  Session  Self-Report 
Form after delivering a main 
counseling session and an 
electronic MARSSI Booster 
Session  Self-Report  Form  after 
delivering a booster session.  
 
Observers  complete  an electronic 
MARSSI Main Counseling 
Session Observer Form after 
observing a selected main 
counseling session and an 
electronic MARSSI Booster 
Session Observer Form after 
observing a selected booster 
session.  
15   
Research  question  Measure  Operationalization  Data sources  
  rating.  Both of these  ratings  are calculated  as the 
average  score  of all twelve  items  in the form.  
 
The average  counselor - and observer -reported 
ratings  will be calculated  for each  session  type 
(main  counseling  or booster  session)  and overall  
(combining  main counseling  and booster  session).   
Observer -reported  average 
quality of session 
implementation  and delivery  of 
information, by session and 
overall  For each  individual  session  that is observed, 
observers  are asked  to indicate  the quality  of the 
session  on a five-point  scale,  from the lowest 
quality  (=1) to the highest  quality  (=5), for each  of 
the following domains:  
• Clarity  of implementer’s  explanation  of activities 
(1=not  clear,  3=somewhat  clear,  5=very  clear)  
• Extent  to which  implementer  kept track of time 
during  the session  and activities  (1=not  on 
time,  3=some  loss of time,  5=well  on time)  
• Extent  to which  presentation  of materials 
seemed  rushed  or hurried  (1=very  rushed, 
3=somewhat rushed, 5=not rushed)  
• Extent  to which  participant  appears to 
understand  the material  (1=little  understanding, 
3=some understanding, 5=good 
understanding)  
• Degree  to which  participant  is engaged  in 
discussion  and activities  (1=little  participation, 
3=some  participation,  5=active  participation)  
 
The implementer’s  skills are also rated  on a five- 
point scale  from poor (=1) to excellent  (=5) in the 
following  areas:  
o Knowledge  of the program  
o Level  of enthusiasm  
o Poise  and confidence  Observers  complete  an electronic 
MARSSI Main Counseling 
Session Observer Form after 
observing a selected main 
counseling session and an 
electronic MARSSI Booster 
Session Observer Form after 
observing a selected booster 
session.  
16   
Research  question  Measure  Operationalization  Data sources  
  o Rapport  and communication  
o Effectively  addresses  questions  and 
concerns  
 
A final question  asks observers  to report  on a five- 
point  scale  from poor (=1) to excellent  (=5) the 
overall quality of the session.  
 
Each  observed  MARSSI  session  will receive  an 
Observer -Reported  Implementation  Quality  rating , 
which  is calculated  as the average  score  for all of 
these  items.  (Note:  implementer’s  skills  will be an 
average  score of  all five skill areas.)  
 
The average  observer -reported  rating  will be 
calculated  for each  session  type (main  counseling 
or booster  session)  and overall  (combining  main 
counseling  and booster  session).  The rating  will be 
reported  on a scale  from 1 to 5, where  1 = low 
quality,  3 = average  quality,  and 5 = high quality, 
based upon the following scale:  
• 1 = average  score  of 1 to 1.4 
• 2 = average  score  of 1.5 to 2.4 
• 3 = average  score  of 2.5 to 3.4 
• 4 = average  score  of 3.5 to 4.4 
• 5 = average  score  of 4.5 to 5  
Average  participant -reported 
quality of interaction with 
counselor, by session and 
overall  Participants  are asked  to indicate  their level of 
agreement  on a five-point  scale,  from strongly 
disagree  (=1) to strongly  agree  (=5), with each of 
the following  statements  about  their counselor:  
• The counselor  treated  me with respect.  
• I felt I could  trust the counselor.  
• I felt that the counselor  listened  to what I had to 
say. Participants complete an 
electronic MARSSI Main 
Counseling  Session  Feedback 
Form  after receiving  the main 
counseling session and an 
electronic MARSSI Booster 
Session  Feedback  Form  at the 
17   
Research  question  Measure  Operationalization  Data sources  
  • I felt the counselor  understood  me. 
• I felt comfortable  with the counselor.  
• I felt free to ask the counselor  questions.  
• The counselor  helped  me to believe  that I could 
change  and improve  my life. (Main  Counseling 
Session ); I felt the counselor  remembered  what 
I said in the first session.  (Booster  Counseling 
Session ) 
 
Each  session  for which  we have  a completed 
feedback  form will receive  a Quality  of Interaction 
with Counselor  rating , which  is calculated  as the 
average  score for all seven items.  
 
The average  participant -reported  rating  will be 
calculated  for each  session  type (main  counseling 
or booster  session)  and overall  (combining  main 
counseling  and booster  session).  The rating  will be 
reported  on a scale  from 1 to 5, where  1 = low 
quality,  3 = average  quality,  and 5 = high quality, 
based on the following scale:  
• 1 = average  score  of 1 to 1.4 
• 2 = average  score  of 1.5 to 2.4 
• 3 = average  score  of 2.5 to 3.4 
• 4 = average  score  of 3.5 to 4.4 
• 5 = average  score  of 4.5 to 5 end of the booster  session 
delivery window.  
What  was quality  of 
participant 
engagement with 
program?  Average  participant -reported 
engagement with the main 
counseling  session  Participants  are asked  to indicate  their level of 
agreement  on a five-point  scale,  from strongly 
disagree  (=1) to strongly  agree  (=5),  for each  of 
the following  statements  about  the MARSSI  main 
counseling session activities:  
• Our discussion  helped  me understand  ways  to 
change my behavior.  Participants complete an 
electronic MARSSI Main 
Counseling  Session  Feedback 
Form  after receiving  the main 
counseling  session.  
18   
Research  question  Measure  Operationalization  Data sources  
  • I could  use what the counselor  and I discussed 
in my daily life.  
• The discussion  about  effective  contraception 
methods was helpful.*  
• The discussion  about  using  condoms  correctly 
and consistently was helpful.*  
• The discussion  about  choosing  not to have  sex 
was helpful.*  
• The discussion  about  having  healthy 
relationships was helpful.*  
• The discussion  about  talking  about  sex with my 
partner was helpful.*  
• My Game  Plan helped  me think about  how I 
will change  the behavior  I chose  to change.*  
• The audio  exercise(s)  helped  me to relax 
during the discussion.*  
• Learning  the Catch  It, Check  It, Change  It! skill 
for managing  unhelpful  thoughts  was helpful.*  
• Role-playing  a conversation  with the counselor 
acting as my partner was helpful.*  
• Overall,  the session  with the counselor  was 
helpful.  
 
Each  participant  for whom  we have  a completed 
feedback  form will receive  a Participant 
Engagement  with the Main  Counseling  session 
rating . This will be calculated  as the average  score 
for all items  in which  the participant  did not select 
the response  “Not covered  in my session”;  items 
marked  with a * are items  where  this is an 
available  response.  
 
The rating  will be reported  on a scale  from 1 to 5, 
where  1 = low engagement, 3  = average   
19   
Research  question  Measure  Operationalization  Data sources  
  engagement,  and 5 = high engagement,  based  on 
the following scale:  
• 1 = average  score  of 1 to 1.4 
• 2 = average  score  of 1.5 to 2.4 
• 3 = average  score  of 2.5 to 3.4 
• 4 = average  score  of 3.5 to 4.4 
• 5 = average  score  of 4.5 to 5  
 Average  participant -reported 
engagement with MARSSI 
smartphone app  Participants  are asked  to indicate  their level of 
agreement  on a five-point  scale,  from strongly 
disagree  (=1) to strongly  agree  (=5), for each  of 
the following  statements  about  the MARSSI 
smartphone app:  
• I liked completing  the app phone  surveys.  
• The app phone  surveys  were  too long. 
(reverse -coded)  
• The app phone  surveys  helped  me to become 
more  aware  of my thoughts,  feelings,  and 
behaviors.  
• There  were too many  app phone  surveys. 
(reverse -coded)  
• I was annoyed  by the app notifications. 
(reverse -coded)  
• The app messages  helped  me to feel better.  
• The app messages  helped  me to make  the 
changes I want to make.  
• There  were too many  app messages.  (reverse - 
coded)  
• I liked the way the app messages  were  written.  
 
Each  participant  for whom  we have a completed 
feedback  form will receive  a Participant 
Engagement with the App rating . 
The rating  will be reported  on a scale  from 1 to 5, 
where  1 = low engagement,  3 = average  Participants complete an 
electronic MARSSI Booster 
Session  Feedback  Form  at the 
end of the booster session 
delivery window.  
20   
Research  question  Measure  Operationalization  Data sources  
  engagement,  and 5 = high engagement,  based  on 
the following scale:  
• 1 = average  score  of 1 to 1.4 
• 2 = average  score  of 1.5 to 2.4 
• 3 = average  score  of 2.5 to 3.4 
• 4 = average  score  of 3.5 to 4.4 
• 5 = average  score  of 4.5 to 5  
Contrast  and Context  
What other sexual 
and/or reproductive 
health  programming 
was available or 
offered to study 
participants?  Percent  of participants  reporting 
exposure  to sexual/reproductive 
health  topics  in the recent  past, 
reported  by data collection  time 
point (baseline, four -, and 
seven -month  follow -up) Participants  are asked  whether  they received  the 
following  sexual/reproductive  health  topics  in the: 
1) past 12 months  at baseline;  2) past 3 months  at 
the four months  post-baseline  time point;  and 3) 
past 6 months  at the seven  months  post-baseline 
time point:  
• Abstinence  from sex or how to avoid  having 
sex 
• Methods  of birth control  or where  to get birth 
control  
• Condoms  
• Sexually  transmitted  diseases  or infections  
• How to talk to a partner  about  consent  and 
whether or not to have sex 
• How to talk to a partner  about  whether  or not to 
use condoms or birth control  
• How to say no to sex 
• Pregnancy  
• Safe sexual  relationships  
 
The percent  of participants  who report  receiving 
each  of these  topics  will be calculated  as the 
number  reporting  exposure  to the topic  at a 
particular  time point  divided  by the number  of 
participants  who completed  the questionnaire  at 
that respective  time point.  Participants complete a 
Participant Questionnaire at 
baseline, one month post - 
baseline, four months post - 
baseline,  and seven  months  post- 
baseline  
21   
Research  question  Measure  Operationalization  Data sources  
 Percent  of participants  reporting 
receipt  of health  services  in the 
recent past, reported by data 
collection  time point  (baseline, 
four-, and seven -month  follow - 
up) Participants  are asked  whether  they received  the 
following  health  services  in the: 1) past 12 months 
at baseline;  2) past 3 months  at the four months 
post-baseline  time point;  and 3) past 6 months  at 
the seven  months  post-baseline  time point:  
• Mental  health  services  
• Sexual/reproductive  health  services  
• Primary  health  care services  
 
The percent  of participants  who report  receiving 
these  services  will be calculated  as the number 
reporting  receipt  of a certain  service  at a particular 
time point  divided  by the number  of participants 
who completed  the questionnaire  at that 
respective  time point.   
What  external  events 
affected 
implementation?  List of external  events  that may 
have affected program 
implementation  Description  of external  events  that occurred  during 
the project  period  that could  have  affected 
participants’  receipt  of programming  or 
reproductive health services.  The PRG  Lead  Research  Analyst 
records any notable external 
events that may have affected 
program implementation in a 
Project  Log. 
 
PRG  Research  Assistants  also 
log policies  and legislation  that 
may affect  individual  access  to 
contraception and abortion 
services.  
22  4. Impact  Analysis  
This section lays out plans for cleaning data and handling missing data, constructing outcomes, 
defining  the analytic  sample,  assessing  baseline  equivalence,  addressing  potential  crossover  and 
contamination, and finally the analytic models for estimating program impacts and planned 
sensitivity analyses.  
 
a. Data  cleaning  
Prior to analysis, PRG staff will systematically screen or review the analytic data (baseline and 
outcome) to identify invalid, outlying, missing, and unreliable observations.16 In our benchmark 
approach, new variables are created in which data that are deemed unusable (i.e., invalid) are 
coded as missing and flagged according to missing data type; all other data are retained, 
unchanged.  Missing data that are not invalid will be updated through logical editing when  
possible,  and all missing  covariate  data will be updated  using  dummy  variable  adjustments. 
Details  of our data cleaning  steps  and rationale  for our missing  data approach  are outlined  below. 
In addition,  we will assess  the robustness  of these  analytic  decisions  with sensitivity  analyses  and 
report on any substantive inconsistencies, as detailed in the Sensitivity analyses section.  
 
i. Item -Level Procedures. Data cleaning begins with a thorough review of all 
questionnaire items. The goal of item -level procedures is to prepare data for analytic 
variable  construction.  To this end, we ensure  data are as complete  as possible  and that all 
recorded values are valid.  
 
a. Identify and flag invalid responses : The first step in the data screening process  
is to inspect the data for instances in which responses are invalid because they are 
outside of a pre -determined range of plausible or acceptable values. Each 
questionnaire type (e.g., baseline, follow -up) has a codebook, prepared by a PRG 
staff person, th at contains variable names, pre -specified and valid variable values 
or ranges of values, and when applicable, value labels.17 Referring to the 
codebook, a research analyst performs diagnostics in Stata to ensure that values 
for all variables used in analysis are valid (i.e., data are within ranges specified in 
the codebook).  A data analyst inspects the data using two commands in Stata. 
First,  the analyst  uses the command  sum variable_name,  which  provides  summary 
statistics (mean, minimum, maximum, standard deviation) for all numeric 
variables. The analyst checks that the minimum and maximum values are valid. If  
this command reveals there are values out of range, the analyst then inspe cts the 
 
16 With regards to the potential for inconsistent responses, during instrument construction, the study team considered what type s of 
questions  may lead to inconsistencies  – both internal  (within  the same  instrument)  and over-time (across  instrument)  inconsistencies. To 
avoid  internal  inconsistencies in our  primary outcomes, we built  skip patterns into  the online  questionnaire. If participants indicate they 
have  not recently had a  particular type of sex,  they are  skipped  out of more  specific questions related  to that type  of sex. If they state  they 
have  not recently  had any sexual  partners,  they are then skipped  out of a question  asking  about  the types  of sexual  partners they have had. 
In addition, participants are precluded  from indicating they had a particular  type of sex without a  condom more  times than they said they 
had that type of sex. Furthermore, given the eligibility criteria for this study require participants to be recently sexually  active, there was 
not a need to ask questions about whether participants have ever had certain types of sex; as a result, there are no items in the instrument 
that offer the potential for over -time inconsistencies to exist.  
17 Regardless as to whether data are nominal, ordinal, or continuous, all response options are coded in Stata as numeric values;  
values are labeled according to corresponding category names when data are nominal or ordinal. As an example, the variable ge nder 
is a nominal variable; however, each response option (female, male, transgender female; transgender male; non - 
binary/gendergueer,  unsure/questioning,  other)  is coded  as a pre-specified,  unique  numeric  value  (1-5). The only acceptable  values 
for this variable then are 1 -7; any other values are out of range.  
 
23  data using  the command, tab variable_name,  missing , which  provides  a frequency 
table of all values (including missing values) so the analyst can identify and flag 
all values that are out of  range  as invalid and recode  these  values to missing (code 
as “.k”).  Data  that are recoded  to missing  are treated  according  to our missing  data 
approach. Briefly, our benchmark approach is to impute missing  baseline data 
and include in analysis; we exclude observations with missing outcome data from 
analysis.  
 
b. Assess missingness: The second step in the data screening process is to assess 
missingness.  In this step, a research  analyst  reviews  and reports  the prevalence  of 
unit and item missingness (which results from nonresponse) for both treatment 
and control samples.  
 
c. Conduct logical data edits: The third step is to determine if logical edits are 
possible for any variables that may have missing values due to skip patterns and 
nonresponse  and logically  edit where  that may be the case.18 We will not logically 
edit where the missing values are previously determined to be invalid.  
 
ii. Analytic variable level procedures. After review and updates to individual items, we 
construct our analytic variables and review resulting measures for outliers.19 Outliers are 
values that are extreme compared to other observations but are not plainly invalid. In the 
data cleaning process, we inspect outliers so that we can try to ascertain whether they are 
in fact true (or plausible) values or potentially a result o f measurement error. The only 
variables for which we inspect outliers are those used in the construction of our outcome 
variables (frequency of having vaginal sex, frequency of having vaginal sex without 
condoms, frequency of having vaginal sex without bei ng protected by some form of 
prescription birth control, frequency of using emergency contraception after vaginal sex, 
frequency  of having  vaginal  sex using  both a condom  and prescription  birth  control  at the 
same time, frequency of having oral sex, freque ncy of having anal sex, frequency of 
having anal sex without condoms, frequency of  using drugs or  alcohol before  any type  of 
sex, and number of sexual partners) because they have no upper limit (all other variables 
used in analysis are either categorical or have predicated upper and lower bounds). Our 
approach is to identify and flag influential observations in our data.  
 
Our benchmark analytic approach is to include data flagged as outliers in analysis, 
because we  do not know for  certain whether  the values are  true or invalid. However, we 
also run sensitivity  analyses  that exclude  these  data and report  substantive  differences  in 
the results section of the report.  
 
iii. Instrument level procedures. Once analytic variables have been constructed and 
reviewed,  we review  entire  cases  to determine  if they are reliable  and conduct  dummy 
variable adjustment on our baseline analytic variables.  
 
18 PRG’s  general  approach  to logically  editing  a specific  variable  is to use as few other  variables  as possible.  Variables  that are missing due 
to a skip pattern are updated to their logical value of zero. For variables in which an item should have been answered but was not, we 
use only the variable that directly preceded it to update its value.  
19 After constructing our analytic variables, we conduct the first step of the data review again (identify and flag invalid responses). 
Although this has already been done at the item -level, this additional check allows a better understanding of variable construction.  
 
24   
a. Identify  and flag unreliable  cases:  The final step in the data screening  process  is 
to identify and flag entire cases (i.e., entire questionnaires) that are unreliable. By 
unreliable, we mean that we have sufficient reason to believe that the  
respondent’s answers are not honest representations of their behaviors, 
knowledge,  and beliefs.  Cases  are flagged  as unreliable  if the participant  indicates 
they have not been honest in responding to the questionnaire or if project staff 
indicate in project logs specific issues encountered during data collection that are 
cause for treating a case as unreliable. Honesty during questionnaire 
administra tion is assessed from the following item on the Participant 
Questionnaire . 
 
• Have  you been  as honest  as possible  in responding  to all of the questions 
in this questionnaire?  
 
Persons who indicate No, none of the time are flagged as unreliable. In addition, 
cases may be flagged as unreliable if project log notes indicate a notable issue 
during data collection (e.g., participant determined to be fraudulent). Each 
suspected  unreliable  case is reviewed  by the project  lead and a senior  analyst  for a 
final determination of reliability. Data for cases that are deemed unreliable are 
included in the  benchmark analyses. However, sensitivity analyses that exclude 
the unreliable data will be conducted and results will be reported in an appendix 
of the report.  
 
b. Adjustment of baseline data: In the final step of the data cleaning process, we 
determine if any individuals who are in the randomized sample (for each 
outcome) are missing baseline covariates or the baseline measure of the outcome 
variable. If this is the case, our proposed benchmark  approach is to use dummy 
variable adjustment procedures, i.e., we code missing data to either zero or the 
mean of non -missing observations (for dichotomous and count/continuous 
variables,  respectively).  We construct  dummy  indicators  to identify  missing  cases 
imputed to the constant/mean value and we adjust estimates by including these 
dummy indicators in analytic models.  
 
iv. Missing data approach: Assuming that our study design and procedures are sound, 
missing  data pose perhaps  the greatest  threat  to the internal  validity  of our RCT  study  and 
the ITT framework (Puma et al. 2009; Moher et al., 2010).20 Randomization at the point 
of offer allows us to make causal statements about the effect of that offer because 
treatment and comparison samples are equal in expectation. For the ITT framework to 
remain internally valid, however, the treatment and comparison groups must remain  
equal in expectation at the  point of  analysis. When the  analytic  sample  is diminished by 
attrition or non -response, non -random differences (i.e., self -selecting) between the 
treatment and comparison groups may be introduced into the sample and estimates of 
program  impacts  may become  biased.  Although  there  is no consensus  on how to resolve 
 
20 Puma,  M.J., Olsen, R.B.,  Bell, S.H.,  Price, C. (2009). What  to Do When  Data  Are Missing  in Group  Randomized  Controlled  Trials. 
(NCEE 2009 -0049). Washington, DC: National Center for Education Evaluation and Regional Assistance, Institute of Education 
Sciences, U.S. Department of Education. Moher, D. et al. (2010). CONSORT 2010 Explanation and Elaboration: Updated 
Guidelines  for Reporting Parallel Group Randomised Trials. BMJ 2010;340:c869.  
25  this, practical guidance on how to address and mitigate the problems associated with 
missing data have been published in education (Puma et al., 2009).  
 
Our six -step decision process for addressing this problem, as detailed below, is informed 
by this guidance. These steps (which are incorporated into our data cleaning procedures) 
articulate how we will deal with missing outcome and baseline/covariate data (variables 
outlined  in the Model  specification  and covariates  section,  necessary  for the estimation  of 
impacts). The benchmark approach that we have selected aims to mitigate the 
introduction of bias into our impact estimates and maximize the use of availa ble data by 
adjusting missing baseline/covariate data. To test the robustness of this approach, and to 
verify these findings, we will report comparative findings using sensitivity analyses that 
also employ an alternative method which includes no adjustment  (as outlined in step 6).  
 
a. Using data cleaning procedures outlined in the Data cleaning section, identify 
outlying,  unreliable,  and invalid  data in any analytic  (i.e., outcome,  baseline,  or 
covariate) variables. Recode invalid data as missing, and flag outlier and 
unreliable data for sensitivity analys es.21  
 
b. Report  prevalence  of unit and item missingness  (which  result  from  nonresponse 
and invalid data ) for both treatment and control samples.22  
 
c. Determine if logical edits are possible for any analytic variables that may have 
missing  values  (due to nonresponse)  and logically  update  missing  values  where 
this is the case. We will not logically impute where the missing values are 
previously invalid.  
 
d. Determine if any individuals who are in the randomized sample (for each 
outcome)  do not have  outcome  data at the  follow -up time  point. If  this is the  case, 
our proposed benchmark approach is to use case  deletion, as we  feel it is the  most 
straightforward  and prudent  approach  for missing  follow -up data recommended  in 
Puma et al. (2009). These cases will be deleted from the analytic sample and 
attrition statistics will be reported.  
 
e. Determine if any individuals who are in the analytic sample (for each outcome) 
are missing  baseline  covariates  or the baseline  measure  of the outcome  variable.  If 
this is the case, our proposed benchmark approach is to use dummy variable 
adjustment procedures, as we feel it is the most straightforward and prudent 
approach  for missing  baseline/covariate  data recommended  in Puma  et al. (2009).  
 
f. Conduct sensitivity analyses by estimating results with missing baseline data 
excluded from the analysis (i.e., use case -wise deletion for all cases with missing 
baseline  and outcome  data).  In an appendix,  we will report  our benchmark  results 
next to the sensitivity analysis results to verify findings.  
 
 
 
21 We will code missing responses with a unique missing code that identifies or flags these missing values according to the reas on they 
are missing (i.e., nonresponse, invalid, inconsistent). See the Data cleaning section for details on how missing data are coded.  
22 For item missing values, we will only report prevalence of missing data for variables that are included in our model specific ations 
and could therefore influence the constitution of the analytic sample.  
26  b. Outcome  measures  
Our primary  research  questions  ask to what  extent  the offer  to participate  in MARSSI  relative  to 
the offer to listen to a breast health podcast impacts participants’ reported: 1) frequency of 
having vaginal sex without a condom (in past 30 days); 2) current use of effective non -barrier 
contraception; and 3) number of sexual partners (in past 3 months), at short -term follow -up 
(three months post -intervention period). Below, we describe the specific operationalization of 
these three outcome measures.  
 
Frequency  of having  vaginal  sex without  condoms  (in past 30 days)  
We operationalize condom  use as a risk outcome; that  is, we measure  the frequency  with which 
participants  engage  in the risk behavior  of having  vaginal  sex without  a condom,  rather  than the 
frequency with which they engage in the safe sex practice of using condoms. Constructing the 
variable in this way allows us to examine the self -reported sexual behaviors of the full analytic 
sample of participants, regardless as to whether or not they are recently sexually active.  
 
Specifically, the frequency of having vaginal sex without condoms is constructed as a count 
measure - the total number of times a respondent reports not using a condom during vaginal sex 
in the past 30 days.  As constructed,  the measure  of risk is cumulative.23 A score  of 0 indicates  no 
risk (i.e., the  individual has not engaged in vaginal sex without a  condom either  because  they are 
sexually active and always use condoms or they are not sexually active); higher values indicate 
more discrete instances of risk. Data used to assess the impact of the treatment (MARSSI) on 
condom use during vaginal sex are obtained from the follow ing item on the Participant 
Questionnaire, which is administered to both the treatment and control groups at baseline, short - 
term follow -up (three months post -interventio n period), and long -term follow -up (six months 
post-intervention period).  
 
• In the past 30  days,  how many  times have  you had vaginal  sex without using  a condom?  
 
Persons  who indicate  that they have  not had vaginal  sex in the past 30 days are coded  as having 
vaginal sex without a condom zero times.24 MARSSI will be considered to have a positive 
impact on frequency of having vaginal sex without  condoms  if the frequency  (number  of times)  
of vaginal  sex without  condoms  reported  by participants assigned to MARSSI three months 
post-intervention period is smaller than the frequency reported by control participants and the 
difference between groups is statistically significant.  
 
Current  use of effective  non-barrier  contraception  
Use of effective non -barrier contraception is constructed as a dichotomous variable – 
 
23 We have elected to construct vaginal sex without a condom as a count instead of proportionate measure because we believe it p rovides 
a clearer depiction of an individual’s magnitude of risk. For  example, if we operationalized risk as a  proportionate  measure, an individual 
who reports having vaginal sex two times in the past 30 days, once without a condom, would have the same risk ratio as an ind ividual 
who reports having vaginal sex 50 times in the past 30 days, with 25 instances when a condom wasn’t used (50% risk). Operationalizing 
risk as a cumulative measure allows us to take into account the frequency with which an individual is having sex. 
24 The Participant  Questionnaire  contains  sexual  behavior  questions  that use a 30-day recall  period.  Research  has consistently  found 
that memory  of behaviors/events  decreases  over time and accuracy  of recall  is negatively  associated  with length  of recall  period  
(Clarke et al. 2008; Schwarz and Oyserman 2001), especially for more frequent behaviors. Since participants must have reporte d 
engagement in recent vaginal sex and some  sexual risk to  be eligible, we assume for  this group sexual activity is more  common. As 
such, we use  items with  a 30-day recall  period  to construct our  measures of  sexual  behaviors as we believe  these  should  elicit more 
accurate responses than a potentially more traditional, but longer recall period (e.g., three -month).  
 
 
27  participants are either coded as currently using effective non -barrier contraception or not 
currently using effective non -barrier contraception. Data used to assess the impact of the 
treatment (MARSSI) on contraceptive use are obtained from the following i tem on the 
Participant Questionnaire , which is administered to both the treatment and control groups at 
baseline,  short -term follow -up (three  months  post-intervention  period),  and long-term follow -up 
(six months post -intervention period).  
 
• Please  indicate  which  method of  prescription  birth  control you  are currently  using.  
o Oral  contraceptives  (for example,  the pill) 
o The patch  (for example,  Ortho  Evra)  
o The shot/injection  (for example,  Depo -Provera)  
o The ring (for example,  NuvaRing)  
o The implant  (for example,  Implanon  or Nexplanon)  
o IUD (for example,  ParaGard,  Skyla,  Mirena,  Kyleena,  Liletta)  
o None  of the  above  
 
Persons  who indicate  that they are currently  using  any of the listed  methods  are considered  to be 
currently using effective non -barrier  contraception and are coded as 1. Persons who select None 
are considered to not be currently using effective non -barrier contraception and are coded as 0.  
 
MARSSI will be considered to have a positive impact on non -barrier contraceptive use if, as 
compared to participants who are assigned to the control group, a larger proportion of 
participants who are offered MARSSI report using effective non -barrier contra ception at the 
three -month  post-intervention  period  and the difference  between  groups  is statically  significant.  
 
Number  of sexual partners  
Number of sexual partners is constructed as a count variable – the number of sexual partners the 
participant reports that they have had in the past three months.25 Data used to assess the impact 
of the treatment (MARSSI) on number of sexual partners are obtained from the following item 
on the Participan t Questionnaire,  which  is administered  to both the treatment  and control  groups 
at baseline, short -term follow -up (three months post -intervention period), and long -term follow - 
up (six months post -intervention period).  
 
• How  many  sexual partners  have  you had in  the past 3 months?  
 
Persons  who indicate  that they have  not had any sexual  partners  in the past three  months  are 
coded as having zero sexual partners.  
 
MARSSI  will be considered  to have  a positive  impact  on number  of sexual  partners  in the past 
three months if the number of sexual partners reported by participants assigned to MARSSI  at 
the three -month post -intervention follow -up is smaller than the number of sexual partners 
reported by control participants and the difference between groups is statistically significant.  
 
25 We elected to use a three -month  recall period for this outcome measure as it measures a behavior that is likely to occur with less 
frequency than individual acts of sex, and thus represents a quantity that would be easier to recall over  a longer period of time.  
 
28   
Table  2. Outcomes  used  for primary  research  questions  
Outcome name  Source item(s)  Constructed measure  Timing of measure  
Frequency of  
having vaginal 
sex without 
condoms in the 
past 30 days  Participant 
Questionnaire  The risk outcome is operationalized as the number of times in the past 30 days  a person reports 
having vaginal sex without  using a condom.  
 
The measure is calculated from the following item:  
• In the past 30 days , how many times have you had vaginal sex without using a condom?  
 
The resulting variable is continuous with values that range from 0 to k, where 0 indicates that a 
person has not engaged in vaginal sex without a condom in the past 30 days , and k indicates the 
number of times the person has engaged in vaginal sex without a condom (risk behavior) in the 
past 30 days . 
 
Note: All respondents who have three -month post -intervention  follow -up data  and have provided a 
response to either this question or have indicated they have not had vaginal sex in the past 30 
days will be included in the construction of this measure . Persons who indicate that they have not 
had vaginal sex in the past 30 days  are coded as having vaginal sex without a condom zero times  . Three months post -
intervention (four 
months post -
baseline)  
Current u se of 
effective non -
barrier 
contraception  Participant 
Questionnaire  The protective outcome is operationalized as a dichotomous variable indicating whether a person 
reports currently using effective non -barrier contraception  or not.  
 
The measure is calculated from the following item:  
• Please indicate which method of prescription birth control you currently using : 
o Oral contraceptives (for example, the pill)  
o The patch (for example, Ortho Evra)  
o The shot/injection (for example, Depo -Provera)  
o The ring (for example, NuvaRing)  
o The implant (for example, Implanon or Nexplanon)  
o IUD (for example, ParaGard, Skyla, Mirena , Kyleena, Liletta ) 
o None of the above  
 
A person who selects Oral contraceptives, patch, shot/injection, ring, implant, or IUD is given a 
value of 1 for the measure. A person who selects None  is given a value of 0 for the measure.  
 
The resulting variable is dichotomous with values 0 or 1, where 0 indicates a person who does not 
currently use effective non -barrier contraception  and 1 indicates a person who does currently use 
effective non -barrier contraception .  
 
Note: All respondents who have three -month post -intervention  follow -up data  and have provided a 
response to this question will be included in the construction of this measure.  Three months post -
intervention (four 
months post -
baseline)  
29  Number of 
sexual partners  
in the past 3 
months  Participant 
Questionnaire  The risk outcome is operationalized as the number of sexual partners in the past three months .  
 
The measure is calculated from the following item:  
• How many sexual partners have you had in the past 3 months ? 
 
The resulting measure is the total number of sexual partners reported by the participant . 
 
The resulting variable is continuous with values that range from 0 to k, where 0 indicates that a 
person has had no sexual partners in the past three months, and k indicates the number of sexual 
partners in the past three months.  
 
Note: All respondents who have three -month post -intervention  follow -up data  and have provided a 
response to this question will be included in the construction of this measure.  Three months post -
intervention (four 
months post -
baseline)  
 
  
30  Table  3. Outcomes  used  for secondary  research  questions26 
Outcome  name  Source  item(s)  Constructed  measure  Timing  of measure  
Sexual  communication 
self-efficacy  Participant 
Questionnaire  Participants  are asked  the following  series  of questions  and asked  to rate on a 7- 
point scale, how confident or sure are they that they could:  
• Tell someone you  plan to have  sex with that you want  to use  condoms.  
• Convince  a partner  to use condoms,  even  if you are using  some  other 
kind of birth control (for example, the pill)  
• Insist  that a condom  be used 
• Refuse  to have  sex if  a partner  won’t  use a condom  
• Tell a partner  that you do not want  to have  sex 
Response  values  range  from 1 to 7, where  1 indicates  that the respondent  is not at 
all confident , and 7 indicates the respondent is extremely confident . The measure 
is calculated as the average response to all five items.  Post-intervention (one 
month  post-baseline)  and 
three months post - 
intervention (four months 
post-baseline)  
Condom  planning  self- 
efficacy  Participant 
Questionnaire  Participants  are asked  the following  series  of questions  and asked  to rate on a 7- 
point scale, how confident or sure are they that they could:  
• Use a condom  every  time that  you have sex. 
• Use a  condom  correctly  every  time you have  sex 
• Use a  condom  after you have  been  drinking  
Response  values  range  from 1 to 7, where  1 indicates  that the respondent  is not at 
all confident , and 7 indicates  the respondent  is extremely  confident . The measure is 
calculated as the average response to all three items.  Post-intervention (one 
month  post-baseline)  and 
three months post - 
intervention  (four months 
post-baseline)  
Contraceptive  planning 
self-efficacy  Participant 
Questionnaire  Participants  are asked  the following  series  of questions  and asked  to rate on a 7- 
point scale, how confident or sure are they that they could:  
• Use prescription  birth control  as directed  
• Resist  having  sex if you are not using  some  form of prescription  
birth control  
Response  values  range  from 1 to 7, where  1 indicates  that the respondent  is not at 
all confident , and 7 indicates the respondent is extremely confident . The measure is 
calculated as the average response to both items.  Post-intervention (one 
month  post-baseline)  and 
three months post - 
intervention (four  months 
post-baseline)  
Coping  self-efficacy  Participant 
Questionnaire  Participants  are asked  the following  series  of questions  and asked  to rate on a 7- 
point scale, how confident or sure are they that they could:  
• Make  unpleasant  thoughts  go away  
• Take  your mind  off unpleasant  thoughts  
• Stop yourself  from being  upset  by unpleasant  thoughts  
• Keep  from feeling  sad 
Response  values  range  from 1 to 7, where  1 indicates  that the respondent  is not at 
all confident , and 7 indicates the respondent is extremely confident . The measure 
is calculated as the average response to all four items.  Post-intervention (one 
month  post-baseline)  and 
three months post - 
intervention (four  months 
post-baseline)  
 
 
 
26 For each of the scale measures listed in this table, while we detail the items we have included in the Participant Questionnaire that we intend to use to construct each measure, we plan 
to assess the dimensionality and internal consistency of each scale before using it in analysis to ensure they are reliable m easures.  
31   
Condom  knowledge  Participant 
Questionnaire  Participants are provided with the following series of statements and asked to 
indicate  whether  each  is True or False.  Participants  may also indicate  they Don’t 
know:  
• Condoms  have  an expiration  date.  
• Condoms  work  well to prevent  sexually  transmitted  infections.  
• Condoms are not as effective at preventing pregnancy as prescription 
birth control  methods  (for example,  IUDs,  the implant,  the pill, the patch, 
the ring, the shot).  
Correct  answers  are coded  as 1, incorrect  answers  are coded  as 0. The measure 
is constructed as the number of correct responses out of total 3 items.  Post-intervention (one 
month  post-baseline)  and 
three months post - 
intervention (four  months 
post-baseline)  
Contraceptive  knowledge  Participant 
Questionnaire  Participants are provided with the following series of statements and asked to 
indicate  whether  each  is True or False.  Participants  may also indicate  they Don’t 
know:  
• Birth control  pills are effective  even  if a woman  misses  taking  them  for 
two or three days in a row.  
• Long -acting  methods  like the implant  or IUD cannot  be removed  early, 
even if a woman changes her mind about wanting to get pregnant.  
• The birth control  pill, ring, and patch  are just as effective  as IUDs  and 
the implant  
• Plan B and Ella are pills that can be taken  shortly  after having 
unprotected sex to prevent pregnancy.  
• Some  methods  of emergency  contraception  (such  as Plan B or Ella) 
require a prescription.  
Correct  answers  are coded  as 1, incorrect  answers  are coded  as 0. The measure 
is constructed as the number of correct responses out of total 5 items.  Post-intervention (one 
month  post-baseline)  and 
three months post - 
intervention (four  months 
post-baseline)  
Motivation to use 
prescription  birth control  Participant 
Questionnaire  Participants  are asked  to indicate  on a 5-point  scale,  how motivated  they are to do 
the following thing in the next six months:  
• Use prescription  birth control  
Response  values  range  from 1 to 5, where  1 indicates  not at all motivated  to do 
this in the next six months  and 5 indicates  extremely  motivated  to do this in 
the next six months. The measure is single -item measure.  Three months post - 
intervention  (four months 
post-baseline)  
Motivation  to use condoms  Participant 
Questionnaire  Participants  are asked  to indicate  on a 5-point  scale,  how motivated  they are to do 
the following thing in the next six months:  
• Use condoms  if you have  sex 
Response  values  range  from 1 to 5, where  1 indicates  not at all motivated  to do 
this in the next  six months and  5 indicates extremely motivated to  do this in the 
next six months. The measure is single -item measure.  Three months post - 
intervention  (four months 
post-baseline)  
Motivation  to purposefully 
abstain from sex  Participant 
Questionnaire  Participants  are asked  to indicate  on a 5-point  scale,  how motivated  they are to do 
the following thing in the next six months:  
• Purposefully  abstain  from sex 
Response  values  range  from 1 to 5, where  1 indicates  not at all motivated  to do this 
in the next  six months and  5 indicates extremely motivated to  do this in the next six 
months. The measure is single -item measure.  Three months post - 
intervention  (four months 
post-baseline)  
32   
Pregnancy  ambivalence  Participant 
Questionnaire  The outcome  is operationalized  as a dichotomous  variable  indicating  if someone  is 
ambivalent about pregnancy or not.  
 
The measure  is calculated  from the following  items:  
• Thinking  about  your life right now,  how important  is it to you to avoid 
becoming pregnant?  
o Very important  
o Somewhat  important  
o A little important  
o Not important  
• If you found  out today  that you were  pregnant,  how would  you feel?  
o Very upset  
o A little upset  
o A little pleased  
o Very pleased  
Respondents are coded as being unambivalent (=0) about wanting to prevent a 
pregnancy  if they indicate  that it is Very important  for them  to avoid  pregnancy  and 
that they would be Very upset or A little upset by a pregnancy.  
 
Respondents  are coded  as being  unambivalent  (n=0)  about  wanting  a pregnancy 
if they indicated that it was N ot important for them to avoid pregnancy and that 
they would be V ery pleased or A little pleased about discovering a pregnancy.  
 
All other respondents are coded as ambivalent (n=1). This group includes 
respondents  who provide  inconsistent  or conflicting  responses  to the two items 
(e.g., V ery important to avoid pregnancy yet V ery pleased if a pregnancy 
occurred), those who give midscale responses for both  
items  (e.g.,  Somewhat  important  to avoid  pregnancy  and A little pleased  if a 
pregnancy were discovered).27 A person who indicates they are currently  
pregnant  at that time point  are excluded  from this analysis.  Post-intervention (one 
month  post-baseline)  and 
three months post - 
intervention (four  months 
post-baseline)  
 
27 This scale  construction  is based  on the work  of Higgins,  J. A., Popkin,  R. A., & Santelli,  J. S. (2012).  Pregnancy  ambivalence  and contraceptive  use among  young  adults  in the United 
States. Perspectives on sexual and reproductive health , 44(4), 236 -243. 
33   
Depressive  symptoms  in 
the past 2 weeks  Participant 
Questionnaire  Participants  are asked  to indicate  for each  of the following  items  how often  during 
the past two weeks they were bothered by:  
• Little  interest  or pleasure  in doing  things  
• Feeling  down,  depressed,  or hopeless  
• Trouble  falling  or staying  asleep,  or sleeping  too much  
• Feeling  tired or having  little energy  
• Poor  appetite  or overeating  
• Feeling  bad about  yourself,  or that you are a failure  or have  let yourself  or 
your family down  
• Trouble  concentrating  on things,  such  as reading  the newspaper  or 
watching television  
• Moving  or speaking  so slowly  that other  people  could  have  noticed.  Or 
the opposite – being so fidgety or restless that you have been moving 
around a lot more than usual  
Response values are 0= not at all , 1=several days, 2=more than half the days , 
3=nearly  every  day. Scores  to all eight  items  are summed  for a summative  score.  Three months post - 
intervention  (four months 
post-baseline) and six 
months  post-intervention 
(seven months post - 
baseline)  
Frequency of having 
vaginal  sex in the past 30 
days Participant 
Questionnaire  The measure  is operationalized  as the number  of times  in the past 30 days  a 
person reports having vaginal sex.  
 
The measure  is calculated  from the following  item: 
• In the  past 30 days,  how many  times have  you had vaginal  sex? 
 
The resulting variable is continuous with values that range from 0 to k, where 0 
indicates  that a person  has not engaged  in vaginal  sex in the past 30 days,  and k 
indicates the number of times the person has engaged in vaginal sex in the past  
30 days.  Three months post - 
intervention  (four months 
post-baseline) and six 
months  post-intervention 
(seven months post - 
baseline)  
Frequency of having 
vaginal sex without 
effective non -barrier 
contraceptive  use (in past 
30 days)  Participant 
Questionnaire  The measure is operationalized as the number of times in the past 30 days a 
person  reports  not using  effective  non-barrier  contraception  during  vaginal  sex. 
 
The measure  is calculated  from the following  item: 
• In the past 30 days,  how many  times  have  you had vaginal  sex without 
being protected by some form of prescription birth control?  
The resulting variable is continuous with values that range from 0 to k, where 0 
indicates that a person has not engaged in vaginal sex without using prescription 
birth control in the past 30 days, and k indicates the number of times the person 
has engaged in vaginal sex without using prescription birth control in the past 30 
days.  Persons  who indicate  that they have  not had vaginal  sex in the past 30 days  
are coded  as having  vaginal  sex without  prescription  birth control  zero times.  Three months post - 
intervention  (four months 
post-baseline) and six 
months  post-intervention 
(seven months post - 
baseline)  
 
34   
Frequency of using 
emergency  contraception 
after vaginal sex in the 
past 30 days  Participant 
Questionnaire  The measure  is operationalized  as the number  of times  in the past 30 days  a 
person reports using emergency contraception.  
 
The measure  is calculated  from the following  item: 
• In the past 30 days,  how many  times  have  you had used  emergency 
contraception after vaginal sex to prevent pregnancy?  
 
The resulting variable is continuous with values that range from 0 to k, where 0 
indicates  that a person  has not used  emergency  contraception  in the past 30 days, 
and k indicates the number of times the person has used emergency  
contraception in the past 30 days. Persons who indicate that they have not had 
vaginal sex in the past 30 days are coded as using emergency contraception zero  
times.  Three months post - 
intervention  (four months 
post-baseline) and six 
months  post-intervention 
(seven months post - 
baseline)  
Frequency of using dual 
contraception during 
vaginal  sex in the past 30 
days Participant 
Questionnaire  The measure  is operationalized  as the number  of times  in the past 30 days  a 
person reports using dual contraception during vaginal sex.  
 
The measure  is calculated  from the following  item: 
• In the past 30 days, how many times did you have vaginal sex using 
both a condom  and one of the list forms  of prescription  birth control  at 
the same time?  
 
The resulting variable is continuous with values that range from 0 to k, where 0 
indicates  that a person  has not used  dual contraception  during  vaginal  sex in the 
past 30 days, and k indicates the number of times the person has used dual 
contraception in the past 30 days. Persons who indicate that they have not had  
vaginal  sex in the  past 30 days  are excluded from  this analysis.  Three months post - 
intervention  (four months 
post-baseline) and six 
months  post-intervention 
(seven months post - 
baseline)  
Use of effective non - 
barrier contraception 
during  last vaginal  sex Participant 
Questionnaire  The measure  is operationalized  as a dichotomous  variable  indicating  if someone 
used effective non -barrier contraception or not during last vaginal sex.  
 
The measure  is calculated  from the following  item: 
• Considering  the LAST  time you had vaginal  sex, which  of the following 
did you use?  Three months post - 
intervention  (four months 
post-baseline) and six 
months  post-intervention 
(seven months post - 
baseline)  
o Oral contraceptives  (for example,  the pill) 
o The patch  (for example,  Ortho  Evra)  
o The shot/injection  (for example,  Depo -Provera)  
o The ring (for example,  NuvaRing)  
o Implant  (for example,  Implanon  or Nexplanon)  
 
35   
  o IUD (for example,  ParaGard,  Skyla,  Mirena,  Kyleena,  Liletta)  
o Emergency  contraception  (ella,  Plan B) 
o Condoms  
o The sponge  
o Diaphragm  
o Foam  or spermicide  
o Natural  family  planning  (rhythm  method)  
o I did not use any of these  
 
A person  who selects  Oral contraceptives,  The patch,  The shot/injection,  The ring, 
Implant, or IUD is given a value of 1 for the measure. A person who selects 
anything else is given a value of 0 for the measure.   
Use of condoms  during 
last vaginal sex  Participant 
Questionnaire  The measure  is operationalized  as a dichotomous  variable  indicating  if someone 
used condoms or not during last vaginal sex.  
 
The measure  is calculated  from the following  item: 
• Considering  the LAST  time you had vaginal  sex, which  of the following 
did you use?  
o Oral contraceptives  (for example,  the pill) 
o The patch  (for example,  Ortho  Evra)  
o The shot/injection  (for example,  Depo -Provera)  
o The ring (for example,  NuvaRing)  
o Implant  (for example,  Implanon  or Nexplanon)  
o IUD (for example,  ParaGard,  Skyla,  Mirena,  Kyleena,  Liletta)  
o Emergency  contraception  (ella,  Plan B) 
o Condoms  
o The sponge  
o Diaphragm  
o Foam  or spermicide  
o Natural  family  planning  (rhythm  method)  
o I did not use any of these  
 
A person  who selects  Condoms  is given  a value  of 1 for the measure.  A person 
who selects anything else is given a value of 0 for the measure.  Three months post - 
intervention  (four months 
post-baseline) and six 
months  post-intervention 
(seven months post - 
baseline)  
No effective  contraception 
used during last vaginal 
sex Participant 
Questionnaire  The measure  is operationalized  as a dichotomous  variable  indicating  if someone 
did not use effective contraception during last vaginal sex.  
 
The measure  is calculated  from the following  item: 
• Considering  the LAST  time you had vaginal  sex, which  of the following 
did you use?  
o Oral contraceptives  (for example,  the pill) 
o The patch  (for example,  Ortho  Evra)  
o The shot/injection  (for example,  Depo -Provera)  
o The ring (for example,  NuvaRing)  Three months post - 
intervention  (four months 
post-baseline) and six 
months  post-intervention 
(seven months post - 
baseline)  
   
36    o Implant  (for example,  Implanon  or Nexplanon)  
o IUD (for example,  ParaGard,  Skyla,  Mirena,  Kyleena,  Liletta)  
o Emergency  contraception  (ella,  Plan B) 
o Condoms  
o The sponge  
o Diaphragm  
o Foam  or spermicide  
o Natural  family  planning  (rhythm  method)  
o I did not use any of these  
 
A person  who selects  I did not use any of these  is given  a value  of 1 for the 
measure. A person who selects anything else is given a value of 0 for the 
measure.   
Use of dual contraception 
during last vaginal sex  Participant 
Questionnaire  The measure  is operationalized  as a dichotomous  variable  indicating  if someone 
used both effective non -barrier contraception AND condoms or not during last 
vaginal sex.  
 
The measure  is calculated  from the following  item: 
• Considering  the LAST  time you had vaginal  sex, which  of the following 
did you use?  
o Oral contraceptives  (for example,  the pill) 
o The patch  (for example,  Ortho  Evra)  
o The shot/injection  (for example,  Depo -Provera)  
o The ring (for example,  NuvaRing)  
o Implant  (for example,  Implanon  or Nexplanon)  
o IUD (for example,  ParaGard,  Skyla,  Mirena,  Kyleena,  Liletta)  
o Emergency  contraception  (ella,  Plan B) 
o Condoms  
o The sponge  
o Diaphragm  
o Foam  or spermicide  
o Natural  family  planning  (rhythm  method)  
o I did not use any of these  
 
A person  who selects  at least  one of the following:  Oral contraceptives,  The patch, 
The shot/injection, The ring, Implant, IUD and Condoms is given a value of 1 for 
the measure. A person who selects anything else is given a value of 0 for the 
measure.  Three months post - 
intervention  (four months 
post-baseline) and six 
months  post-intervention 
(seven months post - 
baseline)  
Frequency  of having  oral 
sex in the past 30 days  Participant 
Questionnaire  The measure  is operationalized  as the number  of times  in the past 30 days  a 
person reports having oral sex.  
 
The measure  is calculated  from the following  item: 
• In the  past 30 days,  how many  times  have  you had oral  sex? Three months post - 
intervention  (four months 
post-baseline) and six 
months  post-intervention  
37   
  The resulting variable is continuous with values that range from 0 to k, where 0 
indicates  that a person  has not had oral sex in the past 30 days,  and k indicates 
the number of times the person has had oral sex in the past 30 days.  (seven  months  post- 
baseline)  
Frequency  of having  anal 
sex in the past 30 days  Participant 
Questionnaire  The measure  is operationalized  as the number  of times  in the past 30 days  a 
person reports having anal sex.  
 
The measure  is calculated  from the following  item: 
• In the  past 30 days,  how many  times  have  you had anal sex? 
 
The resulting variable is continuous with values that range from 0 to k, where 0 
indicates  that a person  has not had anal sex in the past 30 days,  and k indicates 
the number of times the person has had anal sex in the past 30 days.  Three months post - 
intervention  (four months 
post-baseline) and six 
months  post-intervention 
(seven months post - 
baseline)  
Frequency  of having  anal 
sex without condoms in 
the past 30 days  Participant 
Questionnaire  The measure  is operationalized  as the number  of times  in the past 30 days  a 
person reports having anal sex without  using a condom.  
 
The measure  is calculated  from the following  item: 
• In the past 30 days,  how many  times  have  you had anal sex without 
using a condom?  
 
The resulting variable is continuous with values that range from 0 to k, where 0 
indicates that  a person  has not  engaged  in anal  sex without  a condom  in the past 
30 days,  and k indicates  the number  of times  the person  has engaged  in anal sex 
without a condom (risk behavior) in the past 30 days. Persons who indicate that  
they have  not had anal sex in the past 30 days  are coded  as having  anal sex 
without condoms zero times.  Three months post - 
intervention  (four months 
post-baseline) and six 
months  post-intervention 
(seven months post - 
baseline)  
Frequency of using 
alcohol or drugs before 
having  any type of sex in 
the past 30 days  Participant 
Questionnaire  The measure is operationalized as the number of times in the past 30 days a 
person  reports  using  alcohol  or drugs  before  having  any type of sex in the past 30 
days.  
 
The measure  is calculated  from the following  item: 
• In the past 30 days,  how many  times  did you use alcohol  or drugs  before 
having any type of sex (vaginal, oral, or anal)?  
 
The resulting variable is continuous with values that range from 0 to k, where 0 
indicates that a person has not used alcohol or drugs before having any type of 
sex in the past 30 days, and k indicates the number of times the person has used 
alcohol or drugs before having any type of sex (risk behavior) in the past 30 days. 
Persons  who indicate  that they have  not had vaginal,  anal,  and oral sex in the past 
30 days are coded as having using alcohol or drugs before any type of sex zero 
times.  Three months post - 
intervention  (four months 
post-baseline) and six 
months  post-intervention 
(seven months post - 
baseline)  
38 
 c. Analytic  sample(s)  
The study sample is comprised of individuals who have met the study eligibility criteria (see 
Section 2. Impact Study Design for a detailed description of these criteria), chosen to enroll into 
the study, and been randomized into the treatment (MARSSI) or control condition (podcast 
group ). The act of randomization constitutes the offer to participate and is the point at which the 
individual becomes a participant in the study. The analytic sample for our primary research 
questions will be all participants wh o were randomized into either the treatment or control 
conditions and who have reported the necessary outcome data to construct the primary outcome 
measure of interest. We will impute missing baseline data for any participants in this group who 
are missing  either  baseline  covariate  data and/or  baseline  outcome  data.  Missing  data procedures 
are outlined in Data cleaning, subsection iv above.  
 
d. Assessment  of baseline  equivalence  
Baseline equivalence will be reported for all baseline measures of each outcome variable as well 
as relevant demographic and sexual behavioral measures.  We first list and describe  the measures 
we will use  to examine  the equivalence  of our treatment and control groups at baseline. After  we 
identify the measures, we provide details on the diagnostic methods that we will use to assess 
any baseline  differences  that may exist  between  the treatment  and control  groups  in the measures 
outlined below.  
 
Demographic  Measures  
Baseline equivalence will be assessed for four demographic variables. Age is constructed from 
data gathered by PRG study coordinators in the Eligibility Screening Form . Race, gender, and 
ethnicity  are constructed  using  participant  self-responses  to questions  in the baseline  Participant 
Questionnaire . For the race variables, categorical responses to a single question are used to 
create multiple dichotomous variables . We provide details on variable coding below; details on 
variable construction can be found in Table 4.  
 
Demographic:  
• Age at screening  (continuous;  range  16-21)28  
• Gender29 
• Race30 
• Hispanic/Latin o/a 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28 Age at screening  is calculated  using  the individual’s  reported  date of birth.  
29 At baseline, participants are asked “What is your gender?” and provided with a list of the following response options: Female; Male; Transgender female; 
Transgender male; Non -binary/genderqueer; Unsure/questioning; I do not identify as any of these (Would  you like to indicate  how you identify  yourself?) . 
A dummy  variable  is generated  using  the data reported  for this item,  where 1= participants who self -identified as female at baseline and 0= participants 
who self -identified as one of the other categories at baseline.  
30 At baseline, participants are asked “What is your race/ethnicity?” and are provided with a list of the following response opt ions: American 
Indian or Alaskan Native; Asian; Black or African American; Hispanic or Latino/a; Native Hawaiian or other Pacific Islander; White; or Some 
other race/ethnicity (please specify) . Participants can select more than one category and they can also specify  some  other  race/ethnicity.  
This item is used  to create  one dummy  variable  (White). For  this dummy  variable,  individuals  are coded as 1 if they self -identified only as 
“White” and 0 if otherwise.  
 
39  Baseline  Outcome  Measures  
In addition to the demographic variables, we will assess baseline equivalency of 
baseline measures  of the outcome  measures.  We provide  details  on variable  
coding  below;  details  on variable construction can be found in Table 2.  
 
• Frequency of having vaginal sex without condoms in the past 30 days at 
baseline (continuous;  values  range  0 to k, where  0= has had vaginal  sex 
without  condoms  0 times  in past 30 days and k= number of times having 
vaginal sex without condoms in past 30 days)  
• Current  use of effective  non-barrier  contraception  at baseline  (dichotomous;  
values  of 0 or 1, where 0= not currently using effective non -barrier 
contraception and 1= currently using effective non -barrier contraception)  
• Number  of sexual  partners  in the past 3 months  at baseline  (continuous;  
values  range  0 to k, where 0= has 0 sexual partners in past 3 months and k= 
number of sexual partners in past 3 months)  
 
Balance  Assessment  Methods  
We propose to assess baseline equivalence of the treatment and control groups 
according to a multi -step procedure.  Baseline  equivalence  statistics  will be 
produced  for each analytic  sample.31 Only participants who provide sufficient 
baseline and primary outcome data (i.e., non -missing) will be included in the test 
for baseline equivalence of the analytic sample for the specified outcome; thus, 
the analytic sample used for each research questio n may vary slightly because of 
the exclusion of non -responders.32 As required by the “Identifying Programs that 
Impact Teen Pregnancy, Sexually Transmitted Infections, and Associated Sexual 
Risk Behaviors” review protocol version 6.0, we will report the standardized 
mean difference of each baseline variable for the trea tment and control groups.33  
 
To establish baseline equivalence, we propose to generate model -based point 
estimates of the difference  between  the treatment  and control  group  means  for the 
identified  baseline  equivalence variables. We will report the adjusted means of the 
difference in adjusted means of the baseline variable of interest for the treatment 
and control groups. We will then compute the pooled standard deviation of these 
variables. Finally, we will produce a standardized difference of means by dividing 
the first term by the s econd. The steps for establishing baseline equivalence using 
standardized mean difference are outlined below:  
 
 
 
 
31 Due to item-missing  outcome  data,  we expect  there  may be slight  differences  in analytic  samples  for each  research  question.  
32 Note  that our  benchmark approach is to  produce diagnostic estimates of baseline equivalence  on the  sample  of observations that 
have non-missing baseline and outcome data, without any adjustments to missing baseline data. We  will conduct a sensitivity test, 
however, that  calculates baseline  equivalence  using  the exact  same  samples of observations  that we will use in our primary  analysis 
by applying the missing data approach outlined in Data cleaning, subsection iv . 
33 Mathematica  Policy  Research.  (2022).  Identifying  Programs  that Impact  Teen  Pregnancy,  Sexually  Transmitted  
Infections,  and Associated Sexual Risk Behaviors: Review Protocol, Version 6.0.  
 
40  step 1. First, we generate a model -based estimate of the difference 
between treatment and comparison groups on the baseline  measures 
identified above. Separate models will be run for each of the baseline 
variables. The empirical model will be estimated with OLS  (using  Stata).  
If the measure  is dichotomous,  we propose  to use a linear  probability 
model to estimate the predicted probability of group membership. The 
model is a  reduced -form  variation  of the model  that we use to estimate  
program  impact  (as detailed in the Model specification and covariates 
section, below).34  
𝑌𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑒 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1𝑇 +∑(𝛽𝑛𝐷𝑛)+ 𝜀 
where:  
𝑌𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑒  – is the baseline measure of the variable that we use to establish 
baseline equivalency. This variable is included as a covariate in the 
benchmark analytic model (see Table 4 for details on variable coding). 
Separate models will be estimated for each base line measure specified 
above.  
𝛽0 – The intercept term, which represents the adjusted mean value of the 
baseline equivalency measure for participants in the control sample, with 
all other variables in the model held constant at zero.  
𝛽1 – This represents the adjusted (but not standardized) mean difference 
in the baseline equivalency variable between treatment and control 
participants.  
T - A dummy treatment indicator variable whose value equals 1 if the 
participant is randomized into the treatment group and zero otherwise.  
D – An n -1 vector of blocking  variables (i.e., subgroups within which 
random assignment occurred) , where n represents the full enumeration of 
all state by coordinator blocks  from  which participant s were  randomly 
assigned to a condition.  For each of these n coordinator -by-state blocks , 
we include in the baseline equivalence  model a dummy  indicator  variable  
that will identify  whether a  study participant was randomized within that 
block  (1) or not (0).  
𝜀− The residual or random variation that remains for each observation 
after the structural components of the model are estimated. It is the 
difference between the observed and the predicted values at the 
individual level.  
 
step 2. Report  the adjusted  means  of the differences  in the baseline  
variable  of interest for the treatment and control groups.  
 
step 3 (continuous  variables  only).  If the baseline  measure  is continuous,  
we propose  to use  the following  formula  to calculate  the pooled  within -
group  standard  deviation  of the outcome measure:  
 
34 It is a reduced -form because  individual -level,  demographic  covariates are  omitted.  It is a  variation  because  the 
dependent  variable is the baseline equivalence variable, not the outcome measure.  
 
41  𝑆𝑝=√(𝑛𝑡−1)𝑆𝑡2+(𝑛𝑐−1)𝑆𝑐2
(𝑛𝑡+ 𝑛𝑐−2) 
 
where: n t and n c are the sample sizes, and S t and S c are the participant -
level standard deviations for the baseline measures for the analytic 
treatment and comparison groups, respectively.  We will produce  separate  
calculations  of the pooled  standardized  deviation for each variable used to 
establish baseline equivalence (as noted above).  
 
step 4. Produce  the standardized  difference  of means.  If the pre-intervention  
measure  is continuous, we will use the formula for Hedges’ g to compute the 
standardized difference of means for the treatment and comparison  groups : 
 
𝑔= 𝛽1
𝑆𝑝 
where:  𝛽1 is the adjusted mean difference in the variable selected to 
establish baseline equivalence  for the treatment  and comparison  groups  
(calculated  in Step 1), and Sp is the pooled standard deviation (produced in 
Step 3).  
 
For dichotomous baseline variables we will use the Cox index, which yields effect size 
values  similar  to the values  of Hedges’  g that one would  obtain  if group  means,  standard 
deviations, and sample sizes were available, assuming the dichotomous outcome 
measure is based on any underlying normal distribution. Following this guidance, we 
propose to use the Cox index to estimate baseline equivalence for dichotomous baselin e 
covariates. The formula is as follows:  
 
𝑑𝐶𝑜𝑥= [𝑙𝑛(𝑝𝑡
1−𝑝𝑡)−𝑙𝑛(𝑝𝑐
1−𝑝𝑐)]
1.65⁄ 
 
where: 𝑝𝑡 and 𝑝𝑐 represent the probability of occurrence of the event (or 
characteristic) within the treatment and comparison groups, respectively.  
 
e. Benchmark  analytic  approach  for primary  research  questions  
As detailed in our primary research questions, this study investigates whether offering 
MARSSI to participants impacts their reported frequency of having vaginal sex without 
condoms, use of effective non -barrier contraception, and number of sexual partners. We 
do this within the intent to treat (ITT) framework, w hich does not measure the effect of 
the participant’s exposure to the treatment itself but rather the effect of the offer of the 
treatment relative to the offer of receiving the control condition. This framework 
maintains the integrity of the experimental structure by including all participants who 
were  randomized (except those  who attrite)  in the  analytic  sample, thereby  maintaining  
an exogenous  assignment  of participants  to experimental  condition.  Bias can be 
insinuated, however, through self -selection if any participant who is randomized fails to 
provide outcome data.  
42   
i. Estimation  approach  
The primary research questions under investigation in this study are whether 
offering MARSSI  to participants impacts their: 1) reported frequency of having 
vaginal sex without condoms , 2) use of effective non -barrier contraception, and 3) 
reported number of sexual partners (see Table 2 for  variable constructions ).  
We propose to estimate these impacts using a regression -based approach that will 
model intervention  effects as a function of assignment to MARSSI  (i.e., treatment), 
relevant baseline covariates, a baseline measure of the outcome variable, and the 
combined  state and coordinator -level ( dummy blocking) indicators (see Table 4 for  
variable constructions) .35 In addition, missing baseline data indicators will be 
included in the model for each baseline variable in which missing values are 
imputed through dummy variable adjustment. Although a straight difference -of-
means approach should provide unbiased estimates of the effect of the treatment, 
we propose a model -based approach because it will increase the precision of those 
estimates and purge any small differences associated with baseline imbalance. The 
empirical model will be estimated with an OLS regression (using Stata).  We 
present the empirical model here:  
 
𝑌𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑡 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1𝑇 + 𝛽2 𝑌𝑃𝑟𝑒+ ∑(𝛽𝑃𝑋𝑃) + ∑(𝛽𝑛𝐷𝑛)+∑(𝛽𝑝𝑀𝑝)+ 𝜀 
 
where:  
𝑌𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑡 - The outcome of interest, either: 1) times  having vaginal sex without 
condoms in the past 30 days (continuous; values range 0 to k, where 0= has had 
sex without condoms 0 times in past 30 days, and k= number of times having 
vaginal sex without condoms in past 30 days); 2) number of sexual partners in 
the past 3 months (continuous; values range 0 to k, where 0= has 0 sexual 
partners in past 3 months, and k= number of sexual partners in past 3 months) ; 
or 3) current use of effective non -barrier contraception (dichotomous; where 1= 
currently using eff ective non -barrier contraception and 0= not currently using 
effective non -barrier contraception)  reported by participant i three months post -
intervention  (see Table 2 for full details on the variable construction).  
𝛽0 – The intercept term, which represents, depending on the outcome measure 
of interest in the analysis, the outcome for the average control participant with 
all other variables in the model held constant at zero.  
𝛽1 – This is the parameter estimate of substantive interest. 𝛽1 represents, 
depending on the outcome measure of interest in the analysis, either: 1) the 
 
35 With the assumption that we maintain low overall and differential attrition and that the study otherwise executes the RCT wit h integrity, we 
should be able to estimate an un -biased estimate of the average treatment effect of MARSSI  by comparing differences in the means of the 
outcome variable reported by the treatment group with those reported by the control group. We could then provide a compelling  response to 
our research question by testing the hypothesis that there is no differen ce between the two groups using straight -forward hypothesis testing 
statistics (t -test). With that said, we propose a regression -based model that includes covariates, because randomization should ensure 
covariates are uncorrelated with the treatment variab le (i.e., they should not affect the estimate of the treatment effect), and the inclusion of 
covariates may improve the precision/efficiency of the estimate of the treatment effect. See: Angrist, J. D., & Pischke, J. ( 2009). Mostly 
harmless econometrics: A n empiricist's companion. Princeton: Princeton University Press; Rosenblum, M. and van der Laan, M. J. (2009), 
Using Regression Models to Analyze Randomized Trials: Asymptotically Valid Hypothesis Tests Despite Incorrectly Specified Mod els. 
Biometrics, 65:  937-945. doi:10.1111/j.1541 -0420.2008.01177.x. Robinson, L.D. & Jewell, N.P. (1991). Some Surprising Results About 
Covariate Adjustment in Logistic Regression Models. International Statistical Review, 58(2), 227 -240. 
43  adjusted mean difference between treatment and control participants’ self -
reported times having vaginal sex without condoms in the past 30 days three 
months post -intervention; 2) the adjusted mean difference between treatment 
and control participants’ self -reported number of sexual partners in the past 3 
months three months post -intervention ; or 3) the adjusted mean difference 
between  the proportion of  treatment participants who self -report using effective 
non-barrier contraception and control participants who self -report using 
effective non -barrier contraception  three months post -intervention .  
𝑇 –A dummy treatment indicator variable whose value equals 1 if the participant 
is randomized into the treatment group and 0 otherwise.  
𝑌𝑃𝑟𝑒– The baseline measure of the outcome variable of interest reported by 
participant i at baseline (see Table 2 for full details on the variable 
construction); variable will be re -centered at the grand mean for analysis.  
𝑋 – A p vector of baseline (i.e., measured prior to receiving intervention or 
exogenous to treatment) participant -level covariates to account for the variation 
in outcomes associated with these groups. These covariates, listed in detail in 
Table 4, will include:  
a) Age – self-reported age (based on date of birth) at screening (continuous; 
range 16 -21); variable will be re -centered at the grand mean for analysis.  
b) Gender – gender of participants as self -reported at baseline (coded as 1 if 
female and coded as 0  if otherwise); variable will be re -centered at the 
grand mean for analysis.  
c) Race – race of participant as self -reported at baseline (coded as 1 if 
participant self -identified as only White and 0 if otherwise); variable will 
be re -centered at the grand mean for analysis.  
d) Ethnicity – Hispanic/Latino(a) ethnicity of participant as self -reported at 
baseline (coded as 1 if identify as Hispanic/Latino(a) and 0 if do not 
identify as Hispanic/Latino(a)) ; variable will be re -centered at the grand 
mean for analysis.  
D – An n -1 vector of blocking  variables (i.e., subgroups within which random 
assignment occurred), where n represents the full enumeration of all state -by-
coordinator blocks from which participants were randomly assigned to 
condition.  For each of these n coordinator -by-state blocks, we include in the 
analytic  model a dummy  indicator variable that will identify whether a study 
participant was randomized within that block (1) or not (0).  The v ariable s will be 
re-centered at the grand mean for analysis.  
𝑀 – A p vector of missing baseline data indicator variables representing each  of 
the p  baseline covariate s that had missing observations (coded as 1 if the 
observation for that variable is missing and 0 if it is non -missing).  
 
Using a vector of dummy variables  (LSDV)  in a regression to account for a blocked 
randomization scheme is a conventional choice for a situation where each block has 
the same probability of assignment.36 This is consistent with our design specification 
and so we have adopted the dummy variable modeling strategy here. As Angrist 
(1998) and others have pointed out, however, scenarios exist where the strategy may 
fail to identify the estimand of interest for a variety of reasons. Of particular interest 
 
36 Gerber, A. S., & Green, D. P. (2012). Field Experiments: Design, Analysis and Interpretation. W.W. Norton & & Company.  
44  here is that the dummy -blocking scheme may exclude blocks/cases from  the full 
randomized sample. Regardless of what the nominal randomization probabilities 
may be, one feature of the blocking model is that  it will assign zero weight to any 
block partition where the actualized probability of treatment equals 0 or 1 . That is, 
study assignment blocks that contain only a single participant (who is then assigned 
to either treatment or control) are functionally excluded from the treatment effect 
estimate.  
 
If this is pervasive enough in the analytic sample – where multiple cells exist with 
just a single participant – impact estimates may fail to  identify  the treatment effect 
for the fullest possible ITT sample . In this case we will alter our benchmark 
approach and substitute the LSDV procedure  with an almost -equivalent inverse -
probability -of-treatment -weighted (IPTW) regression , which should mitigate th e 
exclusion problem , while still weighting cells accordingly . This estimation approach 
is almost equivalent to the LSDV blocking procedure  except that it is functionally 
saturated with respect to the treatment and dummy variables (but not covariates) , 
and it can be constructed to broaden the analytic sample to include cells where only 
a single case was randomized and (calculated) probability of treatment i s 0 or 1 .37 
When we use a normalized  IPTW and  estimate the propensity score with the linear 
probability model he single -case blocks are given reduced but not zero weight.  
 
If we use the IPTW regression as the benchmark approach, we will weight each 
observation by the inverse probability of assignment for their condition in their 
block. For the treatment group, the weights will be  1
𝑒(𝑥); for the control group, 
weights will be 1
1−𝑒(𝑥). Where e(x) is the propensity score estimated by the by the 
linear probability model using the following specification:  
 
𝑒(𝑥)= 𝛼0+∑(𝛽𝑛𝐷𝑛)+ 𝜀 
 
 
Prior to estimation we will  normalize weights  such that the sum of all weights will  
be equal to 1.  
 
We will report model -estimated effects and the results of significance tests in the 
findings section of the final impact report. Statistical significance will be based on 
test statistics produced by Stata for the coefficient 𝛽1 using a two -tailed test, with p 
< .05.  
 
ii. Adjustment  for baseline  differences  
 
As described in the Estimation approach subsection above, we will include 
covariates for  the identified  demographic  characteristics  and a baseline  measure  of 
the outcome  of interest in each our benchmark models to increase the precision of 
our estimates and account for any small baseline differences between the treatment 
 
 
45  and control groups.  
 
iii. Additional  covariates  
 
We do not intend  to include  any further  covariates  beyond  those  specified  in the 
Estimation  approach  subsection  above.  
  
46   
Table  4. Covariates  included  in impact  analyses  
Covaria
te Description  of the covariate  
Baseline  primary  outcome  measures  
Frequency of 
vaginal sex without  
condoms in the past 
30 days The risk outcome  is operationalized  as the number  of times  in the past 30 days  a 
person reports having vaginal sex without  using a condom.  
t 
The measure  is calculated  from the following  item on the Participant  Questionnaire : 
• In the past 30 days,  how many  times  have  you had vaginal  sex without  
using  a condom?  
 
The resulting  variable  is continuous  with values  that range  from 0 to k, where  0 
indicates  that a person has not engaged in vaginal sex without a condom in the past 
30 days, and k indicates the number of times the person has engaged in vaginal sex 
without a condom (risk behavior)  in the past 30 days.  
 
Note: All respondents who have baseline data and have provided a response to 
either this question or have indicated they have not had vaginal sex in the past 30 
days will be included  
in the construction  of this measure.  Persons  who indicate  that they have  not had 
vaginal  sex in the past 30 days are coded as having vaginal sex without a condom 
zero times.  
Current  use of 
effective non - 
barrier 
contraception  The protective  outcome  is operationalized  as a dichotomous  variable  indicating  
whether  a person reports currently using effective non-barrier contraception or not.  
 
The measure  is calculated  from the following  item on the Participant  Questionnaire : 
• Please  indicate  which  method  of prescription  birth control  you currently  
using:  
o Oral contraceptives  (for example,  the pill) 
o The patch  (for example,  Ortho  Evra)  
o The shot/injection  (for example,  Depo -Provera)  
o The ring (for example,  NuvaRing)  
o The implant  (for example,  Implanon  or Nexplanon)  
o IUD (for example,  ParaGard,  Skyla,  Mirena,  Kyleena,  Liletta)  
o None of  the above  
 
A person  who selects  Oral contraceptives,  patch,  shot/injection,  ring, implant,  or IUD 
is given  a value of 1 for the measure. A person who selects None is given a value of 
0 for the measure.  
 
The resulting  variable  is dichotomous  with values  0 or 1, where  0 indicates  a person  
who does not currently use effective non -barrier contraception and 1 indicates a 
person who does currently use effective non -barrier contraception.  
 
Note:  All respondents  who have  baseline  data and have  provided  a response  to this 
question will be included in the construction of this measure.  
Number  of sexual 
partners in the past 
3 months  The risk outcome  is operationalized  as the number  of sexual  partners  in the past 
three months.  
 
The measure  is calculated  from the following  item on the Participant  Questionnaire : 
• How many  sexual  partners have  you had in the  past 3 months?  
 
The resulting  variable  is continuous  with values  that range  from 0 to k, where  0 
indicates  that a person has had no sexual partners in the past three months, and k 
indicates the number of sexual partners in the past three months.  
 
Note:  All respondents  who have  baseline  data and have  provided  a response  to this 
question will be included in the construction of this measure.  
 
47  Individual -level  covariates  
Age The variable  is measured  as the respondent’s  self-reported  age in years  at 
screening.  
 
The measure  is constructed  from the following  item on the Eligibility  Screening  
Form : 
• Date  of birth 
 
The variable  is calculated  by subtracting  the reported  date of birth given  from the 
date when the screening was completed.  
 
The resulting  variable  is continuous  with values  ranging  from 16 to 21. 
Gender  The measure  is operationalized  a dummy  variable,  where  0 = identify  otherwise ; 
1 = identify as female.  
 
The measure  is taken  from the following  item on the baseline  Participant  
Questionnaire:  
• What  is your gender?  
o Female  
o Male  
o Transgender  female  
o Transgender  male  
o Non-binary/genderqueer  
o Unsure/questioning  
o I do not identify  as any of these  (Would  you like to indicate  how 
you identify yourself?  ) 
 
Variable  will be coded  as 1 if participant  self-identified  as female;  if female  is not 
selected, the response will be coded as 0.  
Race The measure  is operationalized  as a dummy  variable,  where  0 = identify  as 
another  race and/or ethnicity ; 1 = identify  only as white.  
 
The measure  is taken  from the following  item on the baseline  Participant  
Questionnaire:  
• What  is your race/ethnicity?  (Participants  can select  more  than one 
response)  
o American  Indian  or Alaska  Native  
o Asian  
o Black  or African  American  
o Hispanic  or Latino/a  
o Native  Hawaiian  or other  Pacific  Islander  
o White  
o Some  other  race (specify)   
 
Variable will be coded  as 1 if participant self -identified as white only; if another 
race and/or ethnicity is selected  or the respondent  identifies  as multiracial , the 
response  will be coded  as 0. 
Hispanic
/Latino/a  The measure  is operationalized  as a dummy  variable,  where  0 = identify  as 
another ethnicity/do not identify ethnicity; 1 = identify as Hispanic or Latino/a.  
 
The measure  is taken  from the following  item on the baseline  Participant  
Questionnaire:  
• What  is your race/ethnicity?  (Participants  can select  more  than one 
response)  
o American  Indian  or Alaska  Native  
o Asian  
o Black  or African  American  
o Hispanic  or Latino/a  
o Native  Hawaiian  or other  Pacific  Islander  
o White  
48  o Some other race (specify)   
 
Variable  will be coded  as 1 if participant  self-identified  as Hispanic  or Latino/a , 
regardless as to whether other races/ethnicities are specified; if Hispanic/Latino/a 
origin is not selected, the response will be coded as 0.  
Blocking  covariates  
Study coordinator  
by State  blocks  A set of n -1 dummy variables, where n refers to the full set of  study  coordinator  
by state blocks within which participant s are randomly assigned to  the treatment or 
control condition. Participants are enrolled within one of 255 possible blocks 
defined by (1) the research coordinator who enrolled  the participant  into the study  
and (2) the state (or District of Columbia) where the participant indicated they 
would be most likely to seek reproductive health care.  To clarify, each of the 5 
research coordinators assign participants within one of their own 51 separate 
(state -and DC -based) random allocation lists, for a total potential 255 random 
allocation blocks.  
 
Data  for the measure  are obtained  from the Enrollment  Log database  
(coordinator) and the Eligibility  Screening  Form (state) . 
 
Each dummy will be coded as 1 if the individual was jointly enrolled by a 
particular study coordinator  and indicated they would be most likely to seek 
reproductive health care in a particular state, and 0 if otherwise.  Dummy  variables  
will be grand  mean -centered  so that the intercept will then reflect the un -
weighted mean study coordinator *state  effect.  
 
f. Analytic  approach  for secondary  research  questions  
For the secondary  research  questions  listed  under  the subsection  Analysis  of secondary  
outcomes in full sample using ITT approach in the Impact Study Research Questions 
section, we will use the same analytic approach as described above under the 
Benchmark analytic approach for primary research questions subsection. For the 
secondary research questions listed under the subsection Analysis of primary and 
secondary outcomes in subgroups using ITT approach , models will also include a 
measure for the subgroup of interest and an interaction term for the subgroup and 
treatment to assess differences in subgroup impacts. For the secondary research 
questions listed under the subsect ion CACE analysis of primary and secondary 
outcomes , we will use CACE analysis. For this, we will assess the effect of MARSSI 
when individuals participate in (comply with) the program using two analytic methods 
derived from the principal stratification framework that estimate impact conditioned on 
endogeno us (post -randomization) compliance: principal score weighting and two -stage 
least squares regression.38 We will use the CACE methods described below when 
assessing these questions in both the full study sample and specified subgroups.  
 
i. Principal  score  method  
The first method  we will use to estimate  the CACE  is a balancing  procedure,  
based  on propensity score methods, which can be used in settings where 
principal stratum membership (compliance) is observable under one treatment 
condition. The use of propensity  scores  is a common  technique  to balance  
treatment  and comparison  groups  in nonexperimental  studies;  however,  
 
38 Frangakis,  C. E., & Rubin,  D. B. (2002).  Principal  stratification  in causal  inference.  Biometrics,  58(1),  21–29. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.0006 -
341x.2002.00021.x  
 
49  propensity  score  methods  have  also been  used to address noncompliance in 
RCTs as well.39  
 
Within the context of a randomized trial using a 1:1 assignment ratio, there is 
an expectation that principal stratum membership should be equally allocated 
to the treatment and control groups. In other words, if there are compliers in 
the treatment group,  we would expect there exists a similar group of 
individuals in the control group who would have complied if the program had 
been offered to them. Whereas the conventional use of propensity scores aims 
to model treatment group membership (where  treatment  group membership  is 
the same  as intervention  receipt),  the aim here is to use propensity  scores  to 
model  treatment  receipt  (compliance)  in the treatment  group and subsequently 
predict probability of principal stratum membership among members of the 
control group.  
 
In accordance with Hill et al. (2002), to distinguish this latter prediction step 
for the control group, we refer to their probability of principal stratum 
membership as the principal score.40 The core assumption in propensity score 
methods is that of  conditional ignorable treatment assignment, or the assertion 
that treatment assignment  is independent of the potential outcomes, given a 
set of observed covariates (Rosenbaum  & Rubin,  1983).  When  we use a 
probability  score  to balance  treatment  and control groups to estimate CACE in 
an RCT, this assumption now applies to principal stratum membership 
(compliance). In other words, principal stratum membership is independent  of 
the potential  outcomes  given  the observed  set of covariates  (Jo & Stuart, 2009).  
 
We will follow the steps outlined in Stuart & Jo (2015) to estimate the CACE 
using principal score weights. Briefly, these will include: 1) using the same 
baseline covariates used in the benchmark analysis to predict compliance 
among the treatment group; 2 ) predicting the  probability of  compliance 
(principal score)  among members of the  control  group;  3) creating  analytic  
weights  reflecting  the probability  of compliance; and 4) estimating CACE by 
fitting the outcome model using the principal score weights.  Consistent  with 
the ITT analysis,  we will use an appropriate  regression  model (OLS for 
continuous/scale measures, logit for dichotomous, count for frequency) for 
each outcome. We will include the following covariates in each model: age, 
gender, race, ethnicity, randomization blocks, and the baseline measure of the 
outcome.  
 
 
 
39 Rosenbaum, P. R., & Rubin, D. B. (1983). The central role of the propensity score in observational studies for causal effects . 
Biometrika,70(1), 41 –55.https://doi.org/10.1093/biomet/70.1.41. Follmann, D. A. (2000). On the effect of treatment among would -be 
treatment compliers: An analysis of the multiple risk factor intervention trial. Journal of the American Statistical Associat ion,95(452), 1101 –
1109.https://doi.org/10.1080/01621459.2000.10474306. Jo, B., & Stuart, E. A. (2009). On the use of propensity sc ores in principal causal 
effect estimation. Statistics in Medicine,28(23), 2857 –2875.https://doi.org/10.1002/sim.3669. Stuart, E. A., & Jo, B. (2015). Assessing  the 
sensitivity of methods  for estimating  principal  causal  effects.  Statistical  Methods  in Medical  Research,24(6), 657–
674.https://doi.org/10.1177/0962280211421840.  
40 Hill, J., Waldfogel,  J., & Brooks -Gunn, J. (2002).  Differential  effects  of high -quality  child care.  Journal  of Policy  Analysis  and 
Management,21(4), 601 –627.https://doi.org/10.1002/pam.10077.  
 
50  ii. Instrumental  variable  method  
The second method we will use is an instrumental variable approach that uses 
the random  assignment  mechanism  to act as an instrument  for compliance  to 
estimate  the CACE.  We will produce  the CACE  with a joint model  that first 
estimates  participation, given  treatment  assignment  and subsequently  
estimates  the outcome, given participation; this is known as Two -Stage Least 
Squares (TSLS) regression.41 Instrumental variable analysis is a common 
technique in evaluation to estimate the CACE in randomized trials.42  
 
We will estimate the CACE with the ivregress 2sls command in Stata 16.1 
(StataCorp, 2019).The  first stage  model  predicts  compliance  (full participation)  
using  the instrument (treatment assignment). The second stage predicts the 
outcome, given participation.  
 
This simultaneous  estimation  framework  allows  the user to calculate  accurate  
standard errors that account for the uncertainty in the first stage model (Stuart 
et al.,2008).  
 
The benefit of the TSLS model is that it allows for the inclusion of baseline 
covariates that predict both participation and the outcome, which can help 
further reduce the amount of error in the estimation and possibly reduce bias 
due to exclusion restrict ion violations.43 As with the benchmark  approach  and 
principal  score  method  approach,  we will include the following covariates in 
both stages: age, gender, race, ethnicity, a baseline measure of the outcome of 
interest, and a series of dummy variables representing the randomization 
blocks.  
 
g. Sensitivity  analyses  
We will conduct sensitivity analyses to test the robustness and validity of our 
benchmark approaches outlined above. These include: 1) estimating program effects 
using OLS regression without  baseline covariates  and blocking variables ; 2) 
implementing  alternative  models  to test for bias; 3) excluding  baseline  covariates; 4) not 
imputing or adjusting for missing data; 5) excluding unreliable data; 6) excluding 
outliers; 7) condensing data collection windows to exclude late responders; and 8) using 
alternative model specifications to estimate program effects.  
 
 
 
41 Angrist,  J., & Imbens, G.  W. (1995). Two -stage  least  squares  estimation  of average  causal  effects in  models  with variable 
treatment intensity. Journal of the American Statistical Association,90(430), 431 –442.https://doi.org/10.2307/2291054.  
42 Connell,  A. M. (2009).  Employing  complier  average  causal  effect analytic  methods  to examine  effects  of randomized 
encouragement trials. The American Journal of Drug and Alcohol Abuse,35(4), 253 – 
259.https://doi.org/10.1080/00952990903005882. Schochet,  P. Z., & Chiang,  H. S. (2011).  Estimation  and identification  of the 
complier average causal effect parameter in education RCTs. Journal of Educational and Behavioral Statistics,36(3), 307 – 
345.https://doi.org/10.3102/1076998610375837. Stuart,  E. A., Perry,  D. F., Huynh -Nhu,  L., & Ialongo,  N. S. (2008).  Estimating 
intervention effects of prevention programs: Accounting for noncompliance. Prevention Science,9(4), 288 – 
298.https://doi.org/10.1007/s11121 -008-0104 -y. 
43 Jo, B. (2002).  Statistical  power  in randomized  intervention  studies  with noncompliance.  Psychological  Methods,7(2),  178– 
193.https://doi.org/10.1037/1082 -989x.7.2.178.  
 
51  i. Difference of means. Our benchmark approach is to include baseline covariates and 
blocking variables in a n OLS regression model to improve the precision of our effect 
estimates. Assuming our sample is sufficiently large, this approach should generate  
unbiased  estimates.44 To test this, we will conduct  sensitivity  analyses  that use OLS  
and only the treatment indicator included as an independent variable. This approach 
should approximate a difference of means t -test. We will report any substantive 
differences in the results section of the final manuscript  and analytic findings for both 
approaches will be presented alongside each other in an appendix.  
 
ii. Alternative models. Our benchmark approach includes covariates and accounts for 
blocking procedures either using fixed effects for the study coordinato r-by-state 
assignment blocks  or an IPTW approach that is similar but does not zero -weight 
single -case cells . This strategy offers a compromise between the unbiasedness of the 
difference -of-means approach and the added precision and statistical power offered 
by regression adjustment. Heterogeneous treatment effects, however, remain a 
possible threat to this approach. As such, we propose to fit a model that constructs a 
treatment effect from a weighted averag e of a fully saturated OLS regression model. 
We will use the weighted least squares version of this model proposed by Lin ( 2013, 
p.10). We will report any substantive differences in the results section of the final 
manuscript and analytic  findings  for both approaches  will be presented  alongside  
each other  in an appendix .  
 
iii. Without baseline covariates. Our benchmark approach is to include baseline 
covariates in our model to improve the precision of our estimates. To test this, we 
will conduct sensitivity analyses  that involve  running  identical  empirical  models  
without  the baseline  covariates  included.  We will report any substantive differences 
in the results section of the final manuscript and analytic findings for both 
approaches will be presented alongside each other in an appendix.  
 
iv. Without adjusted baseline data. As outlined in the Missing data approach section, 
our benchmark approach is to adjust baseline data as published guidance suggests 
that this may produce unbiased impact estimates and maximize the use of available 
data. We will test this by way of sensitivity analyses that involve running identica l 
empirical models without the adjusted data. As outlined in the Assessment of 
baseline equivalence section, we will also produce diagnostic estimates of baseline 
equivalency on the b aseline outcome variables according  to our benchmark  
approach.  We will report  any substantive  differences  identified  in these analyses in 
the results section of the final manuscript and analytic findings for both approaches 
will be presented alongside each other in an appendix.  
 
v. With out unreliable data. As discussed in the Data cleaning section, data for cases 
that are deemed unreliable are flagged, but still included in  benchmark analyses. We 
will also conduct  sensitivity  analyses  that involve  running  identical  empirical  models  
with the unreliable data excluded . We will report any substantive differences in the 
 
44 Angrist, J. D., & Pischke, J. -S. (2009). Mostly harmless econometrics: An empiricist's companion. Princeton: Princeton University 
Press; Lin, W. (2013). “Agnostic Notes on Regression Adjustments to Experimental Data: Re -Examining Freedman’s Critique” 
The Annals of Applied Statistics. 7(1) 295 -318. 
 
52  results section of the final manuscript and analytic findings for both approaches will 
be presented alongside each other in an appendix.  
 
vi. Without outliers . As discussed in the Data cleaning section, extreme data values are 
investigated and flagged as outliers. Our benchmark analytic approach is to include 
data flagged  as outliers  (i.e., extreme  values  that are not considered  invalid)  in 
analysis.  We will also conduct sensitivity analyses that exclude these data. We will 
report any substantive differences in the results section of the final manuscript and 
analytic findings for both approaches will be presented alongside each other in an 
append ix. 
 
vii. Condensed data collection windows . Our benchmark approach is to include follow -
up data from  all participants  who completed  a questionnaire  during  their open  data 
collection  window, regardless of the time point in that window when it was 
completed. Data collection windows are broad to minimize attrition from the analytic 
sample. To examine whether or not this influences our results – and, in particular, 
whether or not study pa rticipants who respond later report different outcomes from 
those who respond earlier – we will conduct an analysis that examines the difference, 
if any, in response time between treatment and control participants and compares 
impact estimates for analytic  samples without late responders. Late responders will 
be defined as those participants who complete their long -term questionnaire more 
than one month after the initiation of the three -month data collection window. We 
will report any substantive differences in the results section of the final manuscript 
and analytic findings for both approaches will be presented alongside each other in 
an appendix.  
viii. Statistical modeling. We have proposed  using OLS regression as the benchmark 
statistical method for producing impact estimates . We will conduct analyses to test 
robustness of this choice and to  assess whether there are substantive differences in 
the point estimates of interest produced by OLS  and alternative estimators.45 
Specifically, f or each research question, we will compare OLS estimates with those 
derived from models that may fit the distribution of the data better . For the two count 
outcomes (frequency of having vaginal sex without condoms and number of sexual 
partners), t he treatment effect will be estimated with an appropriate count model 
(using Stata); for the dichotomous outcome, the effect will be estimated using a logit 
model.46 If there  is a substantive  difference  in the impact  estimates of  interest, we will 
report the results of each . 
 
h. Bayesian  interpretation  
 
In addition to assessing our primary research question findings using a traditional 
frequentist approach, we will supplement our presentation of impact estimates with a 
Bayesian  interpretation based on posterior probabilities of program effectiveness. To do 
 
45 To account for potential violations of model assumptions (e.g., heteroskedasticity, overdispersion), we will use robust stand ard 
errors in all analyses.   
46 For count models, we will assess model fit using diagnostic model -fit methods, including the Stata command countfit, AIC and BIC 
model fit statistics, and by assessing predicted versus observed count probabilities for competing models. See Hilbe, J. M. ( 2014). 
Modeling count data. New York: Cambridge University Press.  
53  this, we will rely upon the BAyesSian Interpretation of Estimates (BASIE) framework.47 
The prior distributions for our Bayesian estimate will be informed by the meta -analysis 
of teen pregnancy prevention intervention  program  effects  conducted  by Juras  et al.48 
We will calculate  the precision -weighted average  of the traditional  estimate  (i.e., 
shrunken  estimate)  based  on this prior  evidence  using  the BASIE probability tool 
provided by Deke et al. The shrunken estimates will be treated as sensitivity analyses to 
our traditional estimates. We will report the shrunken estimates alongside the  estimates  
derived  from  our impact  study  data and interpret  them  using  posterior  probabilities.  
 
47 Deke, J., Finucane, M., & Thal, D. (2022). The BASIE (BAyeSian Interpretation of Estimates) Framework for Interpreting Findin gs 
from Impact Evaluations: A Practical Guide for Education Researchers. Toolkit. NCEE 2022 -005. National Center for Education 
Evaluation and Regional Assistance.  
48 Juras, R., Kelsey, M., Steinka -Fry, K., Lipsey, M., Layzer, J., & Tanner -Smith, E. (2022). Meta -analysis of Federally Funded 
Adolescent Pregnancy Prevention Program Evaluations. Prevention Science , 23(7), 1169 -1195.  
54  5. Additional  planned  analyses49 
In addition to the primary and secondary research questions described above, we intend to 
investigate  the effect  of mediating  factors  on primary  outcomes  of interest  and one secondary 
outcome of interest.  
 
Effects  of Mediators  on Primary  and Secondary Outcomes  of Interest  
a. What  are the are the short -term (three  months  post-intervention)  and long-term (six months 
post-intervention) impacts of the offer to participate in MARSSI  (treatment) relative to the 
offer to participate in the control condition on participants’ reported frequency of having 
vaginal sex without condoms considering the following potential mediators:  
a. Sexual  communication  self-efficacy  
b. Condom  planning  self-efficacy  
c. Condom knowledge  
d. Contraceptive  knowledge  
b. What are the are the long -term (six months post -intervention) impacts of the offer to 
participate  in MARSSI  (treatment)  relative  to the offer  to participate  in the control  condition 
on participants’ reported frequency of having vaginal sex without condoms considering the 
following potential mediators:  
a. Motivation to use  condoms  
c. What  are the are the short -term (three  months  post-intervention)  and long-term (six months 
post-intervention) impacts of the offer to participate in MARSSI  (treatment) relative to the 
offer to participate in the control condition on participants’ reported use of effective non - 
barrier contraception considering the following potential mediators:  
a. Sexual  communication  self-efficacy  
b. Contraceptive  planning  self-efficacy  
c. Contraceptive  knowledge  
d. What are the are the long -term (six months post -intervention) impacts of the offer to 
participate in MARSSI (treatment) relative to the offer to participate in the control condition 
on participants’  use of effective  non-barrier  contraception  considering  the following  potential 
mediators:  
a. Motivation  to use prescription  birth control  
e. What  are the are the short -term (three  months  post-intervention)  and long-term (six months 
post-intervention) impacts of the offer to participate in MARSSI  (treatment) relative to the 
offer to participate in the control condition on participants’ reported number of sexual 
partners considering the following potential mediators:  
a. Sexual  communication  self-efficacy  
b. Condom  planning  self-efficacy  
c. Contraceptive  planning  self-efficacy  
d. Coping  self-efficacy  
e. Condom knowledge  
f. Contraceptive  knowledge  
 
 
 
49 Note that we have not included a  research question examining how COVID -19 may have influenced program implementation and participant 
outcomes because the  MARSSI intervention was implemented exclusively in a  virtual format during the full course of the study. As such, we 
are not able to explore differences between in -person and online implementation.  
 
55   
f. What are the are the long -term (six months post -intervention) impacts of the offer to 
participate  in MARSSI  (treatment)  relative  to the offer  to participate  in the control  condition 
on participants’ reported number of sexual partners considering the following potential 
mediators:  
a. Motivation  to purposefully  abstain  from  sex 
g. What  are the are the short -term (three  months  post-intervention)  and long-term (six months 
post-intervention) impacts of the offer to participate in MARSSI  (treatment) relative to the 
offer to participate in the control condition on participants’ reported depressive symptoms 
considering the following potential mediators:  
a. Coping  self-efficacy  
 
These  questions  pertaining  to potential  mediators  will be explored  only if the main  relationship 
between treatment and the  primary outcome  of interest is found to be  statistically significant at 
the p < .05 level. In this scenario, we will conduct mediation analysis to estimate the total, 
indirect,  and direct  effects  of treatment  on the outcomes  listed  above,  considering  the specified 
mediators, using an appropriate modeling approach based on the type of outcome being 
explored.  
56  Appendix  A: Participant  Questionnaire  
 
 
 
 
 
BEAM Health Study 
Participant  Questionnaire  
 
[authenticator] Please enter your ID number:    
Please re -enter your ID number:   
 
 
q1 What  is your  race/ethnicity?  Select  all that apply.  
 
□ American  Indian  or Alaska  Native  
□ Asian  
□ Black  or African  American  
□ Hispanic  or Latino/a  
□ Native  Hawaiian  or other  Pacific  Islander  
□ White  
□ Some other  race/ethnicity  (please specify):   SECTION  1: BACKGROUND  INFORMATION  
In this first section, we’d like to get some general information about you, your family, and 
your education.  This information  is used only for reporting  purposes  to describe  the types  of 
individuals completing this questionnaire. Your name is NOT on this questionnaire, and the 
information you provide will be kept completely confidential. Please be honest in your 
responses.  

57  q2 What  is your  gender?  Select  one answer.  
 
 Female  
 Male  
 Transgender  female  
 Transgender  male 
 Non-binary/genderqueer  
 Unsure/questioning  
 I do not identify as  any of these (Would  you like  to indicate  how you identify  yourself?  
  ) 
 
q3 Are you (or your  family)  eligible  for Medicaid  or a similar  state -sponsored  health  insurance 
plan?  
 
 Yes 
 No 
 Don’t  know  
 
q4 What  grade  or level  of school  are you currently  in? If you are enrolled  in school  but 
between grades right now, select the most recent grade or level of school that you 
completed.  
 
 Grade  1 
 Grade  2 
 Grade  3 
 Grade  4 
 Grade  5 
 Grade  6 
 Grade  7 
 Grade  8 
 Grade  9 
 Grade  10 
 Grade  11 
 Grade  12 
 GED  program  
 Technical/vocational  training/college  
 Ungraded  (school without formal  grade  levels)  
 Not currently  in school  
58   
q5 What  is the highest  grade  in school  that your  mother  finished?  
 
 Did not finish  high school  
 Received  a high school  diploma  or general  equivalency  diploma  (GED)  
 Completed  some  college  
 Finished  college  
 Finished  graduate  school,  law school,  or medical  school  
 Don’t  know  
 
 
q6 Think of the scale below as a way of showing where people stand in the United States. At 
the top (number 10) are the people who are most well off  – those who have the most 
money,  the best  education,  and the most  respected  jobs.  At the bottom (number  1) are the 
people  who are least  well off – those  who have  the least  money,  the poorest  education,  and 
the least respected job or no job. On the scale, select the number that best represents 
where you think you stand at this time of your life, relative to other people in the United 
States.  
 
 10 – Most  well off 
 9 
 8 
 7 
 6 
 5 
 4 
 3 
 2 
 1 – Least  well off 
59   
q7 In the last 12 months , have  you received  any information  on or learned  something  about 
any of the following  topics?  Select  all that apply.  Please  indicate  information  received 
from any type of source,  for example  at school  or church,  from health  professionals,  or 
from  friends  or family  members.  
 
□ Abstinence  from  sex or how to avoid  having  sex 
□ Methods  of birth control  or where  to get birth control  
□ Condoms  
□ Sexually  transmitted  diseases  or infections  (STDs  or STIs)  
□ How  to talk to a partner  about  consent  and whether  or not to have sex 
□ How  to talk to a partner  about  whether  or not to use condoms  or birth control  
□ How  to say no to sex 
□ Pregnancy  
□ Safe sexual relationships  
□ I haven’t  received  any information  or learned  anything  about  these  topics  in the past 
12 months  
 
 
 
q8 Did you receive  or learn  about  any of this information  from  a formal  class/program  or a 
health care provider?  
 
 Yes 
 No 
 
 
 
 
q9 In the last 12 months , which  of the following  types  of health  services  have  you received? 
Select all that apply.  
 
□ Mental  health  (for example,  counseling  for depression  or anxiety)  
□ Sexual/reproductive  health  (for example,  fertility  services,  sexually  transmitted 
infection and HIV testing and treatment, or to get birth control)  
□ Primary  health  care services  (for example,  an annual  physical  examination, 
vaccination, or treatment for an illness)  
60   
 
 
q10 In the past 30 days , on how many  days  did you smoke  cigarettes ? If you do  not know  the 
exact number, provide your best guess. If you have not smoked cigarettes in the past 30 
days, your  answer  will be 0  days.  
 
 day(s)  
 
 
 
q11 In the past 30 days , on how many  days  did you have  at least  one drink of  alcohol ? If you do 
not know  the exact number,  provide  your best guess. If you  have not had any alcohol in 
the past 30 days,  your  answer  will be 0 days.  
 
 day(s)  
 
 
q12 Please  indicate  which  method  of prescription  birth  control  you are currently  using?  Select 
only one.  
 
 Oral contraceptives  (for example,  the pill) 
 The patch  (for example, Ortho  Evra)  
 The shot/injection  (for example,  Depo -Provera)  
 The ring (for example,  NuvaRing)  
 Implant  (for example,  Implanon  or Nexplanon)  
 IUD (for example,  ParaGard,  Skyla,  Mirena,  Kyleena,  Liletta)  
 None  of the above  
 
 
q13 What  is your  main  reason(s)  for using  prescription  birth  control?  Select  all that apply.  
 
□ Pregnancy  planning  and spacing  
□ Pregnancy  prevention  SECTION  2: RECENT  BEHAVIORS  AND  EXPERIENCES  
Now we will ask you some questions having to do with your recent behaviors and 
experiences.  There are no  right or wrong answers. For each question, choose the answer that 
best represents  YOUR  experience.  The information  that you provide  is very valuable  and will 
help us understand the experiences of people your age. If you are not certain of an answer, 
please provide your best guess. Remember, your answers are strictly confidential. Your name 
is not on this questionnaire and will not be associated with any of your respons es. 
61  □ Reduction  in menstrual -related  side effects  (for example,  PMS,  acne,  or migraines)  
□ Reduction  in risk for certain  types  of cancers  (for example,  endometrial  cancer  or 
ovarian cancer)  
□ Treatment  for menstrual -related  symptoms  (for example,  severe  menstrual  pain or 
heavy bleeding)  
□ Other  (please  specify):  
 
 
 
 
 
q14 In the past 30 days , how many  times  have  you had vaginal  sex? If you do  not know  the 
exact number, provide  your best guess. If you  have not had vaginal sex in the  past 30 
days, your  answer  will be 0  times.  
 
 time(s)  
 
 
 
q15 In the past 30 days , how many  times  have  you had vaginal  sex without  using  a condom? 
If you  do not know  the exact number,  provide  your best guess. If you  have not used a 
condom  during  vaginal sex in the past 30 days, your answer will be X - the number of 
times  you said you had vaginal  sex in the past 30 days.  
 
 time(s)  
 
q15_alt  In the past 30 days , how many  times  have  you had vaginal  sex without  using  a condom?  
If you do not know  the exact  number,  provide  your best guess.  
 
 time(s)  TIP:  In the next set of questions,  when  we ask about  vaginal  sex, we mean  when  a penis  is put 
in a vagina. Please do not report on episodes of oral or anal sex here; we will ask about these types of sex in a 
later section of the questionnaire.  
62   
 
 
q16 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
q16_alt  In the past 30 days , how many  times  have  you had vaginal  sex without  being  protected 
by some  form  of prescription  birth  control?  If you do  not know  the exact  number,  
provide your best guess. If you have not used prescription birth control in the past 30 days, 
your answer  will be X - the number  of times you said you had vaginal  sex in the past 30 
days.  
 
 time(s)  
 
In the past 30 days , how many  times  have  you had vaginal  sex without  being  protected 
by some  form  of prescription  birth  control.  If you do  not know  the exact  number, 
provide  your  best guess.  
 
 time(s)  
 
 
 TIP:  Below,  when  we ask about  prescription  birth control,  we are talking  about  the following  methods 
of birth control that might be prescribed or administered to you by a health care provider (for  
example, a doctor or nurse practitioner).  
 Oral contraceptives  (for example,  the pill) 
 The patch  (for example,  Ortho  Evra)  
 The shot (for example,  Depo  Provera)  
 The ring (for example,  NuvaRing)  
 The implant  (for example,  Implanon  or Nexplanon)  
 IUD (for example,  ParaGard,  Skyla,  Mirena,  Kyleena,  or Liletta)  
Remember,  being  “protected”  means  you used your birth control  correctly  as directed  or prescribed . 
TIP:  Below,  when  we ask about  prescription  birth control,  we are talking  about  the following  methods 
of birth control that might be prescribed or administered to you by a health care provider (for  
example, a doctor or nurse practitioner).  
 Oral contraceptives  (for example,  the pill) 
 The patch  (for example,  Ortho  Evra)  
 The shot (for example,  Depo  Provera)  
 The ring (for example,  NuvaRing)  
 The implant  (for example,  Implanon  or Nexplanon)  
 IUD (for example,  ParaGard,  Skyla,  Mirena,  Kyleena,  or Liletta)  
Remember,  being  “protected”  means  you used your birth control  correctly  as directed  or prescribed . 
63   
q17 In the past 30 days , how many times  have you used emergency contraception (for 
example,  ella or Plan  B) after  vaginal  sex to prevent  pregnancy?  If you have  not used 
emergency contraception  in the past 30 days, your response  will be  0 times.  
 
 time(s)  
 
q18 In the past 30 days , how many times did you have vaginal sex using both  a condom 
and one of the listed  forms  of prescription  birth  control  at the same  time ? If you do  not 
know  the exact  number,  provide  your best guess.  If you used  two methods  of 
protection  every  time you had sex, your answer will be X – the number of times  you 
said you had vaginal  sex in the past 30 days.  
 
 time(s)  
 
q18_alt  In the past 30 days , how many times did you have vaginal sex using both  a condom 
and one of the listed  forms  of prescription  birth  control  at the same  time ? If you do  not 
know the exact number, provide your best guess.  
 
 time(s)  
 
q19 Considering  the LAST  time  you had vaginal  sex, which  of the following  did you use? 
Select all that apply.  
 
□ Oral contraceptives  (for example,  the pill) 
□ The patch  (for example,  Ortho  Evra)  
□ The shot/injection  (for example,  Depo -Provera)  
□ The ring (for example,  NuvaRing)  
□ Implant  (for example,  Implanon  or Nexplanon)  
□ IUD (for example,  ParaGard,  Skyla,  Mirena,  Kyleena,  Liletta)  
□ Emergency  contraception  (ella, Plan B) 
□ Condoms  
□ The sponge  
□ Diaphragm  
□ Foam  or spermicide  
□ Natural  family  planning  (rhythm  method)  
□ I did not  use any  of these  
64   
 
q20 In the past 30 days , how many  times  have  you had oral sex? If you do not know  the 
exact number,  provide  your best guess. If you  have not had  oral sex  in the past 30 days, 
your  response will be 0  times.  
 
 time(s)  
 
 
 
q21 In the past 30 days , how many  times  have  you had anal sex? If you do not know  the exact 
number,  provide  your best guess. If you  have not had  anal sex in the past 30 days, your 
response will be 0 times.  
 
 time(s)  
 
 
 
q22 In the past 30 days , how many  times  have  you had anal sex without  using  a condom?  If 
you do not know  the exact number,  provide  your best guess. If you  have not used  a 
condom  during  anal sex in the past 30 days, your answer  will be X – the number  of 
times  you said you had anal sex in the past 30 days.  
 
 time(s)  
 
q22_alt  In the past 30 days , how many  times  have  you had anal sex without  using  a condom?  If 
you do not know  the exact number,  provide  your best guess.  
 
 time(s)  
 
 
 
q23 In the past 30 days , how many times  did you use alcohol or drugs before having any 
type of sex (vaginal,  oral, or anal)?  If you do not know  the exact  number,  provide  your 
best guess. If you have not used alcohol or drugs before sex in the past 30 days, your 
response will be 0 times.  
 
 time(s)  TIP:  Below,  when  we ask about  oral sex, we mean  when  one person  puts their mouth  in 
contact with another person’s genitals – meaning the penis, vagina, or anus. You are 
considered to have had oral sex regardless as to whether you “gave” or “received” it.  
TIP:  Below,  when  we ask about  anal sex, we mean  when  a penis  is put into another  person’s 
anus, or butt.  
65   
q24 In the past 12 months , have  you conducted  a self-breast  exam?  
 
 Yes 
 No 
 
 
 
 
q25 Have  you ever had a conversation  with a family  member  about  your  biologic  family’s 
health  history?  When  we say family  health  history,  we mean  the diseases  and health 
conditions  experienced  by any member of your  biologic  family  with whom  you are 
genetically  connected.  
 
 Yes 
 No 
 
 
 
 
 
q26 How  many  sexual  partners  have  you had in the past 3 months ? If you have  not had any 
type of sex (vaginal, oral, or anal) in the past 3 months, your answer  will be 0. If you do not 
know the exact number, provide your best guess.  
 
  partner(s)  
 
 
 
q27 Thinking  of your  interaction(s)  with your  sexual  partner(s)  in the past 3 months , please 
indicate how many sexual partner(s) you have had in each category:  
 
Serious relationship:   partner(s)  
Casually dating, but not serious:    partner(s) 
Sleeping with, but not dating:   partner(s)  
One-night stand:   partner(s)  TIP:  Below,  when  we say sexual  partner , we mean  anyone  with whom  you have had anal, oral, 
or vaginal sex.  
66   
 
q28 Please  indicate  whether  the following  statements  are True  or False.  If you are not 
certain  of the correct  answer,  please  select  Don’t  know.  
 
 
True  or False?  
 True False  Don’t 
know  
 
Condoms  have  an expiration  date.   
  
  
 
Some  methods  of emergency  contraception  (such  as ella or 
Plan B) require a prescription.   
  
  
 
Birth  control  pills are effective  even  if someone  misses 
taking them for two or three days in a row.   
  
  
 
Condoms  work  well to prevent  sexually  transmitted 
infections (STIs).   
  
  
 
Long -acting  methods  of contraception  like the implant  or 
IUD cannot be removed early, even if someone changes 
their mind about wanting to get pregnant.   
  
  
 
Plan  B and ella are pills that can be taken  shortly  after 
having unprotected sex to prevent pregnancy.   
  
  
 
The birth  control  pill, ring,  and patch  are just as effective  at 
preventing pregnancy as IUDs and the implant.   
  
  
 
Condoms are not as effective at preventing pregnancy as 
prescription  birth  control  methods  (for example,  the pill, the 
patch, the ring, the shot, IUD, or implant).   
  
  
 SECTION  3: CONDOM  AND  CONTRACEPTIVE  KNOWLEDGE  
In this section,  we ask about  different  methods  people  use to prevent  pregnancy  and sexually 
transmitted infections or diseases (STIs or STDs). We are interested in your personal 
knowledge of these different methods of protection. Remember, your name is not on this 
questionnaire, and your answers are confidential.  
67   
 
 
q29 Please  rate on a scale  from  1 to 7 how confident  or sure you are that you could 
do each of the things described. The higher the number you select, the more 
confident  you are that you could  do it. An answer  of 1 means  you are not at all 
confident that you  could  do what the  statement is describing; an answer of 7 
means  you are extremely  confident  that you could  do what the statement  is 
 
 
How  confident  are you?  
(1) 
Not at all 
confident   
 
(2)  
 
(3) (4) 
Somewhat  
confident   
 
(5)  
 
(6) (7) 
Extremely  
confident  
Tell someone  you plan 
to have sex with that 
you want to use 
condoms?   
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
Convince  a partner  to 
use condoms, even if 
you are using some 
other kind of birth 
control (for example,  
the pill)?   
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
Insist that a 
condom  be used?   
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
Refuse  to have  sex 
if a partner won’t 
use a condom?   
  
  
  
  
  
  
 SECTION  4: EMOTIONS  AND  FEELINGS  
In this section, we want to ask you about your emotions and feelings. For each question, 
choose the answer that best represents how YOU feel or what YOU think. Some of these 
questions ask about your emotions and feelings related to sex. If you are not havi ng sex nor 
intending  to have sex, please  answer  how you think  you WOULD  feel if you were having  sex. 
TIP:  As a reminder,  below,  when  we ask about  prescription  birth control,  we are talking  about 
the following methods of birth control that might be prescribed or administered  to you by a 
health care provider (for example, a doctor or nurse practitioner).  
 Oral contraceptives  (for example,  the pill) 
 The patch  (for example,  Ortho  Evra)  
 The shot (for example,  Depo  Provera)  
 The ring (for example,  NuvaRing)  
 The implant  (for example,  Implanon  or Nexplanon)  
 IUD (for example,  ParaGard,  Skyla,  Mirena,  Kyleena,  or Liletta)  
68  Tell a partner that 
you do not want  to 
have sex?   
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
Use a condom  every 
time that you have 
sex?  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
Use a condom 
correctly  every  time  
you have  sex?  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
Use a condom 
after you have 
been  drinking?   
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
Use prescription 
birth control as  
directed?   
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
Resist  having  sex 
if you are not 
using some form 
of prescription  
birth  control?   
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
Make unpleasant 
thoughts  go away?   
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
Take your mind off 
unpleasant  thoughts?   
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
Stop  yourself  from 
being upset by 
unpleasant 
thoughts?   
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
Keep  from  feeling 
sad?  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
q31 Are you currently  pregnant?  
 
 Yes 
 No 
 Not sure 
69   
q32 Thinking  about  your  life right  now,  how important  is it to you to avoid  becoming 
pregnant?  
 
 Very important  
 Somewhat  important  
 A little important  
 Not important  
 
 
q33 If you found  out today  that you were  pregnant, how  would  you feel?  
 
 Very  upset  
 A little upset  
 A little pleased  
 Very  pleased  
70   
 
q34 Have  you been  as honest  as possible  in responding  to all of the questions  in this 
questionnaire?  
 
 Yes, all of the time 
 Yes, almost  all of the time 
 Yes, but just some  of the time 
 No, none  of the time 
 
 
q35 Did you have  enough  privacy  when  completing  the questionnaire?  
 
 Yes 
 No 
 
 
q36 Were  there  any disruptions  while  you completed  the questionnaire?  
 
 Yes (please  
explain):   
 No 
 SECTION  5: QUESTIONNAIRE  EXPERIENCE  
In this final section, we ask a few questions about your experience while completing this 
questionnaire.  When  you are finished,  please  make  sure to click the SUBMIT  button  at the 
bottom of the page.  