Version 4 
9/6/2019  1 Official Title:  ASPIRE: A Study Promoting Critical Illness Recovery in the 
Elderly   
NCT0296355 8 
IRB-Approved:  3/21/2023   
Version 4 
9/6/2019  2 ASPIRE : A Study Promoting Critical Illness Recovery in the Elderly  
 
Principal Investigator : 
D. Clark Files, MD  
 
Co-investigator(s) : 
Michael Berry, PhD  
 
Sponsor or funding source:  
Wake Forest University Translational Science Center  
Wake Forest University Pepper Center  
Wake Forest University Critical Illness Injury and Recovery Research Center  
Wake Forest Center for Diabetes, Obesity, and Metabolism  
Departmental  Start -Up Funds  
Ri, LLC (providing equipment only)  
NIA 1R03AG060076 - 01A1  
 
Background , Rationale  and Context  
Advances in the care of critically ill patients have led to increased survivorship. However, survivors of 
critical illness are faced with a variety of short - and long -term complications, the most notable of which 
is intensive care unit acquired neuromuscul ar weakness (ICUAW) .1 Older patients have a higher 
incidence of acquiring a critical illness, and muscle wasting in this population appears more severe.2,3 
Though we and others have shown that exercise administered during an intensive care unit (ICU) stay 
(early rehabilitation) can attenuate the severity of ICUAW,4,5 not all studies of rehabilitation have yielded 
positive outcomes.6,7  
 
Both pre -clinical animal studies from our lab and clinical studies suggest timing of rehabilitation may be 
key— EARLY (within 1 -2 days) but not LATE (days 5 and beyond) initiation of ICU rehabilitation therapies 
in critically ill patients have generally le d to improved functional outcomes.4,5,8-11 Unfortunately, 
significant barriers exist to the early implementation of ICU rehabilitation, most notably delirium and the 
use of sedating medications in the early phases of critical illness.12-14  
 
In this proposal, we will test the 
hypothesis that EARLY application of a 
novel early rehabilitation therapy in 
critically ill patients will improve 
functional outcomes, and change the 
functional trajectory of this population.  
We will perform a pilot study of early 
mobilization with a cycle ergometer  
(MOTOm ed, see Figure 1) and translate 
into humans the pre -clinical 
mechanisms that may mediate the 
effects of early mobility . 
 
  
 
Figure 1: Use of a MOTOm ed in a mechanically ventilated patient  
Version 4 
9/6/2019  3  
Objective s 
1) To assess the feasibility of the 
application of a novel ICU 
early rehabil itation 
intervention .  
2) To obtain preliminary data to 
estimate the treatment effect 
size. This will allow power 
calculations for a larger, NIH -
funded clinical trial.  
3) To understand if the 
application of a novel early 
ICU rehabilitation intervention 
attenuates the loss of muscle 
mass over time through 
inhibition of the E3 ubiquitin 
ligase muscle ring finger 1 
protein.  
4)  To determine the effects of 
exercise on energy utilization, 
mitochondrial function, and 
CPT-1 activity.  
5) To determine the effects of 
the early ICU rehabilitation 
intervention on muscle mass.  
6) To determine the effect of the early ICU rehabilitation intervention on quality of life in critically ill 
older adults.  
 
Methods and Measures  
Design : 
Single -center randomized controlled pilot /phase II  trial of a novel  ICU early rehabilitation intervention.  
 
Setting : 
Wake Forest Baptist Medical Center Intensive Care Unit  
 
Subject  selection criteria : 
Older adults with age ≥ 55 years old who are critically ill with acute hypoxic respiratory failure requiring 
mechanical ventilation with an expected duration of ≥3 days.  
 
• Inclusion Criteria  
 Age ≥ 55 years old  (Rationale: Older patients have a higher incidence of acquiring a critical illness, 
and muscle wasting in this population appears more sever e. Therefore, this intervention may be most 
effective in this population.)  
 Admission to  a Wake Forest Baptist Medical Center Intensive Care Unit  
 Acute Hypoxic respiratory failure  on mechanical ventilation  (MV)  for < 48 hours  with a P:F ratio of 
<300  (or equivalent S:F ratio)  with expected MV for at least 24 more hours  
Aim 4: 
Quality of Life
Aim 3: 
Mechanistic 
Outcomes, Muscle
Aim 2: 
Clinical Outcomes
Aim 1: 
Feasibility
30 older acute respiratory failure patients 
requiring mechanical ventilation
21 Patients 
Intervention Arm:
Passive Cycler +
Early Exercise
Feasibility
Physical Function
Muscle 
Ultrasound
SF -36
21 Patients 
Control Arm: 
Standard of Care
Feasibility
Physical Function
Muscle 
Ultrasound
SF-36Figure 2:  
Flow Diagram of Study  
Version 4 
9/6/2019  4  Previously Functional (over past 3 months, as reported by proxy): Physical Function: Able to walk 4 
m (with or without assistive device)  
 
• Exclusion Criteria  
 Neuromuscular Disease  
 Cardiopulmonary Arrest  with return of spontaneous circulation  <6 hrs  
 Palliative Goals of Care ; withholding life -sustaining therapy  
 Raised I ntracranial Pressure  (>20 mm Hg)  
BMI>45 ; absolute weight >= 150 kg  
Inability to cycle (including absent limbs, body length <1.5m, body habitus not fitting the cycle , 
inflammatory arthritis, significant joint problems including inability to bend arms/legs ; pelvic and/or 
lower extremity fracture, lower extremity vascular bypass surgery ) 
Pregnancy  
Use of continuous neuromuscular blockade  
Temporary Pacemaker or Swan Ganz catheter  or femoral ECMO catheter/IABP  
Rhabdomyolysis with most recent CK > 5000  
Clinical Diagnosis of Dementia on Medication  
Moribund  
Possible Exclusion: If the patient is on spine precautions, a discussion with the spine team will be 
necessary to determine eligibility for this study  
 
Sample Size  
 We w ill randomize 21 subject s to the intervention group (novel ICU early rehabilitation)  and 21 
subject s to the control group. This sample size is based on the fact that this is a pilot proposal  and that 
we want to optimize study procedures.  We also have preliminary data which shows that this sample size 
might be large enough to detect a difference between groups based on SPPB at ICU discharge.  
 
The primary analysis of the phase II part of the study is to compare SPPB at ICU discharge between the 
two groups using analysis of covariance (ANCOVA), adjusted for age, sex, and BMI. Under our 
assumptions of attrition (estimated at 15%) and mortality (SPPB=0 if patient has passed), with the 
current sample size (n=42), we will be able to detect an effect size of 0.98 or higher in the SPPB at ICU 
discharge with a power of 81% and a two -sided significance level of 0.05. This effect size is based on our 
pilot  data and corresponds with the known minimal clinically important difference in SPPB of 0.5 -1.3.15,16 
 
Intervention s and Interactions  
We will randomize patients to intervention or control groups. Patients will receive therapies according 
to their group assig nment until hospital discharge or day 14, whichever comes first.   
 
The intervention group will receive in -bed cycle ergometry within 48 hours of randomization  if safety 
criteria (below) are met . In-bed cycle ergometry has been shown to be safe and feasible in the critically 
ill and is FDA -approved for use in this population.8,17-19 Subjects enrolled in the intervention arm will be 
screened at least 5  days per week  to evaluate if  they meet pre -defined safety criteria based on other 
studies of early mobilization and cycling in the ICU  (see Table 1).4,5,8,17-20 Patients  who meet the safety 
criteria  will be positioned in the semi -recumbent position for cycling as per ICU guidelines. The cycler 
will provide 3 different possible modes of cycling —passive, active -assisted, and active. We will start with 
passive cycling and the patient may progress to active -assisted and active cycling. The goal duration of 
cycling will be 30 minutes. Subjects will receive in -bed cycling  at least 5  times per week  for the duration 
Version 4 
9/6/2019  5 of the ICU stay or until day 14, whichever comes first.  During cycling and therapy sessions, study staff  
will also complete a case report form noting vital signs , level of mobilization,  and other  safety measures.  
 
We have updated our safety criteria based on other completed and ongoing cycle trials in the critically ill  
([STUDY_ID_REMOVED] and [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] and [STUDY_ID_REMOVED].)  See table below.  
 
 
 
 
In addition to cycling, the intervention arm will receive early physical therapy. This physical therapy  (PT) 
will be performed according to a protocol of additional ICU and hospital -administered rehabilitation 
strategies previously developed in the Wake Forest MICU.4 Patients will receive 30 minutes of PT at least 
5 times per week  when they are conscious. If unconscious (as in Level 1 below), then they will only 
receive passive range of motion (PROM) for 10 repetitions per body part  daily . Once conscious, subjects 
will progress through the different levels of PT with an emphasis on ambulation.  
 
Therapy for the intervention arm patients will continue while on the floor. Outpatient therapy will be 
provided at the discretion of the patient’s treating physicians.  
  Daily Exemption Criteria  In-Session Stopping Criteria  
Neurologic 
Criteria  • Uncontrolled Pain  
• Severe Agitation with a RASS +3 or +4  • Severe Agitation with a RASS +3 or +4  
Respiratory 
Criteria  • PEEP >1 5 
• FIO2 > 80%  • Unplanned Extubation  
• Sustained O2 desaturation <85%  
• Marked vent asynchrony  
Circulatory 
Criteria  • An increase in vasopressor/inotrope  by >5 
mcg/min  in past 2 hrs  
• Levophed > 50 mcg/min to maintain goal 
MAP  
• Active myocardial ischemia  
• Unstable or uncontrolled arrhythmia  • Sustained symptomatic bradycardia (HR<40), 
tachycardia (HR>140), hypotension 
(MAP<60), or hypertension (MAP >1 30) 
• Concern for myocardial ischemia  
• New unstable or uncontrolled arrhythmia  
Other Criteria  • Change in goals of care to comfort  
• Team perceives therapy to be 
inappropriate (eg new hemorrhage, new 
wound)  
• Patient Refusal  • Catheter or tube dislodgement  
• Team, subject, or surrogate request 
termination of session  
Version 4 
9/6/2019  6  
 
 
The control group will  receive usual care physical therapy as ordered by the treating team  both in the 
ICU and on the floor through hospital discharge . These subjects will also receive therapy as outpatients 
only as ordered by their regular physicians.  
 
Outcome Measure(s)  
1) To assess the feasibility of the application of a novel ICU early rehabil itation intervention .  
a. Primary Outcome  for the pilot phase : Feasibility will be assessed by quantifying the ability to 
apply the MOTOmed device for a t least a 15 -minute session within 48  hours of 
randomization and meeting safety criteria.  
2) To obtain preliminary data to estimate the treatment effect size. This will allow power calculations 
for a larger, NIH -funded clinical trial.  
a. Short Physical Performance Battery (SPPB). We will measure SPPB at ICU  and hospital  
discharge . Our primary outcome for the phase II study will be SPPB at ICU discharge.  
b. Handgrip strength  and dynamometry  at ICU discharge  and hospital discharge . ICU length of 
stay, Hospital length of stay  will also be measured.  
c. Healthcare utilization (ED visits, re -admissions) at 1, 3, and 6 months  
d. Ventilator free days at 28 days . 
e. Mortality at ICU discharge, hospital discharge, and 3 and 6 months  
f. Short Form -36 (SF -36)  at hospital discharge (in -person) and  3 and 6 months  (by phone)  
3) To understand if the application of a novel early ICU rehabilitation intervention attenuates the loss 
of muscle mass over time through inhibition of the E3 ubiquitin ligase muscle ring finger 1 protein.  
a. Serial Skeletal Muscle Ultrasounds at days 0, 3, 5, ICU discharge, hospital discharge  
Muscle thickness, size and echogenicity  in the vastus  and the rectus femoris  muscles  
b. Serial Plasma at days 0, 1, 3, and 5 and ICU and hospital discharge  
i. Plasma acylcarnitine profile  
ii. Will be banked for future studies  
c. Blood on 1st day of exercise (for 5 intervention patients only) will be evaluated for leukocyte 
kinetics in response to exercise (exploratory analysis) based on animal data . This is 
completed.  

Version 4 
9/6/2019  7 4) Pilot study: To determine the effects of exercise on energy utilization, mitochondrial function, and 
CPT-1 activity.  Phase II: To determine the effects of exercise on energy utilization.  
a. Continuous non -invasive CO2 monitoring, day 0 through day 5  
b. Accelerometer activity monitor, day 0 through 2 weeks post -discharge.  
c. Nutritional Assessments, blood sugar levels, day 0 through ICU discharge  
 
 
Updated Testing Battery:  
 
 
NB—Inpatient assessments may be completed up to 1 day before or after the specified time point, and 
may be carried over to another assessment.  Outpatient assessments may be completed up to 2 weeks 
before or after the specified time point.  Muscle biopsies may be performed up to 1 day before or 2 days 
after the specified time point.  
 
Data Collection for demographics and baseline information: Demographic Information will be obtained 
on all patients. Additionally, the Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation (APACHE), Charlson 
index, and the comorbidity indices will be calculated. Other variables which will be collected will include 
medications and information about ICU and hospital stays.  
 
Muscle ultrasounds will be completed per protocol with standard views required to examine the size 
and echogenicity of patient muscles. Gel will be applied to the skin, the ultrasound probe will be placed 
on the gel, and then with minimal pressure, the re quired images will be obtained. A Sonosite ultrasound 
machine will be used. Bony landmarks will confirm that the probe is placed perpendicular to the muscle. 
Images will be saved on a laptop computer and then analyzed with Image J software.   
 
 
  TABLE 5:  
TESTING BATTERY  Day 
0 Day 
1 Day 
3 Day 
5 ICU 
D/C Hosp  
D/C Phone: 3 
months  Phone: 6 
months  
Aim 1: Physical Function : 
  Feasibility  
  MAT -sf 
  SPPB  
  Handgrip/ quad strength  
MoCA / MoCA Blind   
X 
X  
X 
  
X  
X  
X 
X 
X* 
X 
X  
X 
X 
X 
X 
X  
X 
 
 
 
X  
X 
 
 
 
X 
Aim 2 Muscle Mass : 
  Ultrasound   
X   
X  
X  
X  
X   
Aim 3: Quality of Life : 
  SF-36      
  
X  
X  
X 
Exploratory Outcomes:  
  ICU LOS  
  Hospital LOS  
  Vent -Free Days (28)  
  Healthcare Utilization  
  Mortality  
  Blood  
  Energy   
 
 
 
 
 
X 
X  
 
 
 
 
 
X 
X  
 
 
 
 
 
X 
X  
 
 
 
 
 
X 
X  
X 
 
X 
 
X 
X 
X  
 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
X  
 
 
 
X 
X 
 
  
 
 
 
X 
X 
 
 
Version 4 
9/6/2019  8 The Short Physical Performance Battery (SPPB) is based on timed measures of standing balance, walking 
speed, and ability to rise from a chair. Each measure is assigned a score ranging from 0 to 4, with a total 
possible summary score of 12. The SPPB was dev eloped for functional evaluation of the geriatric 
population. Given the target population of this study, this is an ideal instrument to measure physical 
function in this cohort.  
 
Handgrip will be assessed with a Jamar hand -held dynamometer. Three trials with brief pauses will be 
performed for each hand. A recording of hand dominancy will also be made.  
 
Skeletal muscle strength will be measured in the lower extremities. An electronic strength dynamometer 
(MicroFET 2MT Dynamometer, Hoggan Health Industries, Salt Lake City, UT) will be used to collect 
strength measures of the ankle and knee, bilaterally. Th ree trials with brief pauses will be performed for 
each muscle group. The best performance of three trials will be selected for each side.  
 
Non -invasive continuous volumetric C02 (vC02) will be performed using either a NM3 device ( Phillips -
Respironics) or ventilator capable of vC02 measurements.   Daily energy expenditure (divided into 12 
hour segments) will be calculated using the formula validated by Stapel et al.   vC02 measurements will 
not be used for clinical decision making.   The use of NM3 device p oses minimal harm to enrolled 
patients.  
 
The activity monitors will be given to the patients when enrolled in the study to wear throughout their 
hospitalization. Patients will be asked to wear the accelerometer  and return it  in with a pre -paid 
envelope .  
 
Health related quality of life will be assessed using the S hort Form-36.  The SF -36 is a self -reported 
generic measure of health related quality of life.  It consists of 36 items which can be used to provide 
summary measures of physical and mental health a nd eight distinct dimensions of health.  
 
The Montreal Cognitive Assessment  (MoCA) and the MoCA - BLIND  will be used to measure cognitive 
status. The MoCA  and the MoCA -BLIND  are validated tool s of 22 -30 questions which assesses: short -
term memory recall, visuospatial abilities, executive function, attention, concentration, and working 
memory, language, conceptual thinking, calculations, and orientation to time and place. They are  highly 
sensitive and specific to detect mild cognitive impairment.  
 
The Mobility Assessment Tool short form (MAT -sf) is a video animated tool for assessing self -perception 
of mobility. Items consist of a video and a corresponding measurement item. The video depicts a 
wooden mannequin performing a wide range of physical act ivities and the measurement item consists 
of a question about the participant’s ability to perform the task, measured on a discrete scale.  
 
Healthcare utilization and mortality will be determined through a variety of mechanisms including a 
review of the electronic medical record, phone calls to patients/ families/ contacts provided at the start 
of the study, and a query of the NC State Death I ndex.   
 
Analytical Plan  
Phase I pilot study:  
Given that this is a pilot study, all analyses other than the feasibility assessment and basic descriptive 
statistics will be performed solely to inform a larger trial. Power calculations will not be utilized for this 
study given it is a pilot study.  
Version 4 
9/6/2019  9  
We have a growing ICU population over the past 5 years. In 2013 alone, we had >1300 older adults 
admitted to just the MICU. Thus, we should have a large population of patients on which to draw from 
for enrolment in the study.  
 
Patient demographics will be evaluated with descriptive statistics. The objectives will be evaluated as 
described below.  
 
1) The feasibility of compliance to the application of the novel ICU early rehabilitation intervention will 
be assessed by the number of patients in the intervention arm out of the total intervention patients 
(10) who are able to undergo  a 15 minute cycling session within the first 48 hours of randomization 
and meeting safety criteria.  
2) SPPB, handgrip strength /dynamometry, calorimetry , ICU and hospital lengths of stay, healthcare 
utilization  (SPPB) , ventilator -free days, mortality, and SF -36 and MoCA scores will all be analyzed 
with descriptive statistics. Tests for trend will be evaluated and adjusted analyses will also be 
performed. Analysis of co -variance will be used, adjusted for age, gender, and BMI and other 
adjusted analyses will be performed as necessary. We will also explore the longitudinal effect of the 
intervention with linear  mixed effect models.  
3) And 4)   Muscle ultrasound measures, skeletal muscle biopsy measures, and plasma analyses will 
also be analyzed with descriptive statistics, tests for trend  including with linear mixed effect models , 
and adjusted analyses.  
 
In sum, r esults will be analyzed initially using descriptive statistics.  Comparison between groups will be 
done using chi square tests for proportions, and t -tests or ANOVA procedures for continuous variables.  
Regression analysis will be performed to identify independent outcome predictors.  Other inferential 
statistical analysis will be conducted as appropriate.  
 
Phase II : The primary analysis is to compare SPPB at ICU discharge between the two groups using 
analysis of covariance (ANCOVA), adjusted for age, gender, and BMI. Under our assumptions of attrition 
(estimated at 15%) and mortality (SPPB=0 if patient has passed), wi th the current sample size (n=42), we 
will be able to detect an effect size of 0.98 or higher in the SPPB at ICU discharge with a power of 81% 
and a two -sided significance level of 0.05. This effect size is based on our pilot data and corresponds  
with the known minimal clinically important difference in SPPB of 0.5 -1.3.15,16 We will perform similar 
analyses for SPPB at hospital discharge and explore the longitudinal effect of the intervention, using 
linear mixed effect models to compare the trajectories of SPPB over time. We will analyze secondary 
outcomes including hand grip , quadriceps dynamometry, RF CSA and echogenicity, quadriceps depth, TA 
depth and echogenicity, and QOL in a similar fashion. For this study, the services of the Pepper Center 
Biostatistics and Research Information Systems Core will be used.  
 
Human Subjects Protection  
Please see attached document.  
 
Subject Recruitment Methods  
Our ICU research team will screen patients admitted to the ICU for inclusion/ exclusion criteria for entry 
into the study.  We will only access necessary information (using a minimal amount of PHI) for screening 
through the electronic medical record . PHI necessary will include name, geographic information, dates, 
telephone number, medical record, and access to this information will be sought under a limited HIPAA 
waiver . All information will remain confidential in a password protected file on a password protected 
Version 4 
9/6/2019  10 computer.  If deemed eligible, s ubjects (or their surrogates if unable to consent for themselves) will be 
approached for consent. If the patient/ surrogate does not consent for the study, the study team will 
maintain a record of those not enrolled which will be kept in a password protected file on a password 
protected computer. This record will be destroyed 3 years after study comple tion and publication.  
 
We will not differentially approach women or minorities for inclusion in this study. However, please 
note that given the small sample size of this project, we will likely have imbalances.  
 
Informed Consent  
Signed informed consent will be obtained from each subject  or from a surrogate decision -maker. If a 
surrogate decision -maker is used for initial consent, then when the patient is mentally able to consent 
for him/herself, he/she will be re -approached by the study coordinator or investigators for consent . All 
consents will take place in the ICU.  
 
Confidentiality and Privacy  
Confidentiality will be protected by collecting only information needed to assess study outcomes, 
minimizing to the fullest extent possible the collection of any information that could directly identify 
subjects, and maintaining  all study information in a secure manner .  To help ensure subject privacy and 
confidentiality, only a unique study identifier will appear on the data collection form.  Any collected 
patient identifying information corresponding to the unique study identifier will be maintained on a 
linkage file, store d separately from the data .  The linkage file  will be kept secure, with access limited to 
designated study personnel.  We will input data into the RedCAP web based data entry system as it is 
highly secure and is regularly backed up. Following data collection subject identifying information will be 
destroyed  three years after publication of the study , consistent with data validation and study design , 
producing an anonymous analytical data set.  Data access will be limited to study staff.  Data and records 
will be kept locked and secure d, with any compu ter data password protected .  No reference to any 
individual participant will appear in reports, presentations, or publications that may arise from the 
study.  
 
Data and Safety Monitoring  
The principal investigator will be responsible for  the overall monitoring of the data and safety of study 
participants .  The principal investigator will be assisted by oth er members of the study staff.  
 
Additionally, a Data and Safety Monitoring Board will be convened by the PI. This DSMB will monitor all 
serious/unexpected adverse events as well.  
 
Reporting of Unanticipated Problems, Adverse Events or Deviations  
Any unanticipated problems, serious and unexpected adverse events, deviations or protocol changes 
will be promptly reported  by the principal investigator or designated member of the research team  to 
the IRB and sponsor or appropriate g overnment agency if appropriate.  
 
Appendix  
Copies of each questionnaire  or surveys that will be used  
Consent form  
  
Version 4 
9/6/2019  11 References:  
1. Herridge MS, Tansey CM, Matte A, et al. Functional disability 5 years after acute 
respiratory distress syndrome. N Engl J Med;364:1293 -304. 
2. Herridge MS, Chu LM, Matte A, et al. The RECOVER Program: Disability Risk Groups 
& One Year Outcome after >/= 7 Days of Mechanical Ventilation. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 
2016.  
3. Ely EW, Wheeler AP, Thompson BT, Ancukiewicz M, Steinberg KP, Bernard GR. 
Recovery rate and prognosis in older persons who develop acute lung injury and the acute 
respiratory distress syndrome. Ann Intern Med 2002;136:25 -36. 
4. Morris PE, Goad A, Thompson C, et al. Early intensive care unit mobility therapy in the 
treatment of acute respiratory failure. Critical care medicine 2008;36:2238 -43. 
5. Schweickert WD, Pohlman MC, Pohlman AS, et al. Early physical and occupational 
therapy in mechanically ventilated, critically ill patients: a randomised controlled trial. Lancet 
2009;373:1874 -82. 
6. Denehy L, Skinner EH, Edbrooke L, et al. Exercise rehabilitation for patients with critical 
illness: a randomized controlled trial with 12 months of follow -up. Crit Care 2013;17:R156.  
7. Moss M, Nordon -Craft A, Malone D, et al. A Randomized Trial of an Intensive Physical 
Therapy Program for Patients with Acute Respiratory Failure. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 
2016;193:1101 -10. 
8. Burtin C, Clerckx B, Robbeets C, et al. Early exercise in critically ill patients enhances 
short -term functional recovery. Critical care medicine 2009;37:2499 -505. 
9. Files DC, Liu C, Pereyra A, et al. Therapeutic exercise attenuates neutrophilic lung injury 
and skeletal muscle wasting. Science translational medicine 2015;7:278ra32.  
10. Walsh TS, Salisbury LG, Merriweather JL, et al. Increased Hospital -Based Physical 
Rehabilitation and Information Provision After Intensive Care Unit Discharge: The RECOVER 
Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA internal medicine 2015;175:901 -10. 
11. Files DC, Sanchez MA, Morris PE. A conceptual framework: the early and late phases of 
skeletal muscle dysfunction in the acute respiratory distress syndrome. Crit Care 2015;19:266.  
12. Bakhru RN, Wiebe DJ, McWilliams DJ, Spuhler VJ, Schweickert WD. An 
Environmental Scan for Early Mobilization Practices in U.S. ICUs. Critical care medicine 
2015;43:2360 -9. 
13. Jolley SE, Dale CR, Hough CL. Hospital -Level Factors Associated with Report of 
Physical Activity in Patients on Mechanical Ventilation across Washington State. Annals of the 
American Thoracic Society 2015;12:209 -15. 
14. Jolley SE, Regan -Baggs J, Dickson RP, Hough CL. Medical intensive care unit clinician 
attitudes and perceived barriers towards early mobilization of critically ill patients: a cross -
sectional survey study. BMC anesthesiology 2014;14:84.  
15. Guralnik JM, Ferrucci L, Simonsick EM, Salive ME, Wallace RB. Lower -extremity 
function in persons over the age of 70 years as a predictor of subsequent disability. N Engl J Med 
1995;332:556 -61. 
16. Guralnik JM, Simonsick EM, Ferrucci L, et al. A short physical performance battery 
assessing lower extremity function: association with self -reported disability and prediction of 
mortality and nursing home admission. Journal of gerontology 1994;49:M85 -94. 
17. Camargo Pires -Neto R, Fogaca Kawaguchi YM, Sayuri Hirota A, et al. Very early 
passive cycling exercise in mechanically ventilated critically ill patients: physiological and safety 
aspects --a case series. PloS one 2013;8:e74182.  
Version 4 
9/6/2019  12 18. Kho ME, Martin RA, Toonstra AL, et al. Feasibility and safety of in -bed cycling for 
physical rehabilitation in the intensive care unit. J Crit Care 2015;30:1419.e1 -5. 
19. Parry SM, Berney S, Warrillow S, et al. Functional electrical stimulation with cycling in 
the critically ill: A pilot case -matched control study. J Crit Care 2014;29:695 e1 -7. 
20. Needham DM, Korupolu R, Zanni JM, et al. Early physical medicine and rehabilitation 
for patients with acute respiratory failure: a quality improvement project. Archives of physical 
medicine and rehabilitation;91:536 -42. 
 