ENHANCING ENGAGEMENT WITH DIGITAL MENTAL HEALTH CARE  
STUDY00010958  
07/03/20 24 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 1 of 70 
  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  
 
 
 
The Human Subjects Division (HSD) strives to ensure that people with disabilities have access to all services and content.  If you 
experience  any accessibility -related issues with this form or any aspect of the application process, email 
hsdinfo@uw.edu  for assistance.  
 
INSTRUCTIONS  
• This form is only for studies that will be reviewed by the UW IRB . Before completing this form, check HSD’s website  to 
confirm that this should not be reviewed by an external (non -UW) IRB.  
• If you are requesting a determination  about w hether the planned activity is human subjects research or qualifies for exempt 
status, you may skip all questions except those marked with a          . For example 1.1 must be answered.  
• Answer all questions . If a question is not applicable to the research  or if you believe you have already answered a question 
elsewhere in the application , state “ NA” (and if applicable, refer to the question where you provided the information) . If you 
do not answer a question , the IRB does not know whether the question was overlooked or whether it is  not applicable. This 
may result in unnecessary “back and forth” for clarification. Use non -technical language as much as possible.  
• To check a box, place an “X” in the box.  To fil l in a text box, make sure your cursor is within the gray text box bar before 
typing or pasting text.  
• For collaborative or multi -site research, describe only the UW activities unless you are requesting that the UW IRB provide 
the review and oversight for non-UW collaborators or co -investigators as well.  
• You may reference other documents (such as a grant application) if they provide the requested information in non -technical 
language. Be sure to provide the document name, page(s), and specific sections, and upload it to Zipline . Also, describe any 
changes that may have occurred since the document was written (for example, changes that you’ve made during or after the 
grant review process). In some cases, you may need to provide additional details in the answer space as well as referencing a 
document .  
 
INDEX  
1 Overview  6 Children (Minors) and Parental Permission  10 Risk / Benefit Assessment  
2 Participants  7 Assent of Children (Minors)  11 Economic Burd en to Participants  
3 Non -UW R esearch Setting  8 Consent of Adults  12 Resources  
4 Recruiting and Screening Participants  9 Privacy and Confidentiality  13 Other Approvals, Permissions, and 
Regulatory Issues  
5 Procedures    
 
1 OVERVIEW  
Study Title:  Enhancing Engagement with Digital Mental Health Care  

Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 2 of 70 
 1.1 Home institution . Identify the institution through which  the lead researcher listed on the IRB application  will 
conduct the research . Provide any he lpful explanatory information.  
In general, the home institution is the institution (1) that provides the researcher’s paycheck  and that considers him/her to be 
a paid employee, or (2) at which the researcher is a matriculated student. Scholars, faculty, fellows, and students who are 
visiting the UW and who are the lead researcher: identify your home institution  and describe the purpose and duration of your 
UW visit, as well as  the UW department/center with which you are affiliated while at the UW.  
 
Note that many UW clinical faculty memb ers are paid employees of non -UW institutions . 
 
The UW IRB provides IRB review and oversight for only those researchers who meet the criteria  described in the SOP: Use of 
the UW IRB . 
 University of Washington  
1.2 Consultation history . Has there been any consultation with someone  at HSD about this study?  
It is not necessary to obtain advance consultation. However, if advance consultation was obtai ned, answering this question 
will help ensure that the IRB is aware of and considers the advice and guidance provided  in that consultation .   
  No  
 X Yes → If yes, briefly describe the consultation: approximate date, with whom, and method (e.g., by email, 
phone call, in -person meeting).     
 Emails during the grant proposal process with Elizabeth Falsberg  
Emails with Reliance team during grant proposal process for letter of support for UW’s IRB to serve 
as the single IRB on this project  
1.3 Similar and/or related studies . Are there any related IRB applications that provide context for the proposed 
activities?  
Examples of studies for which there is likely to be a related IRB application: Using samples or data collected by another study; 
recruiting subjects from a registry established by a colleague’s research activity; conducting Phase 2 of a multi -part project, or 
conducting a continuation of anothe r study; serving as the data coordinating center for a multi -site study that includes a UW 
site. 
 
Providing this information (if relevant) may significantly improve the efficiency and consistency of the IRB’s review.  
 X No  
  Yes → If yes, briefly describe the other studies or applications and how they relate to the proposed 
activities. If the other applications were reviewed by the UW IRB, please also provide: the UW IRB 
number, the study title, and the lead researcher’s name.    
       
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 3 of 70 
 1.4 Externally -imposed urgency or time deadlines . Are there any externally -imposed deadlines or urgency that affect 
the proposed activity?  
HSD recognizes that everyone would like their IRB applications to be reviewed as quickly as possible. To ensure fairness, it is 
HSD policy to review applications in the order in which they are received. However, HSD will assign a higher priority to 
research with externally -imposed urg ency that is beyond the control of the researcher. Researchers are encouraged to 
communicate as soon as possible with their HSD staff contact person when there is an urgent situation (in other words, before  
submitting the IRB application). Examples: a rese archer plans to test an experimental vaccine that has just been developed for 
a newly emerging epidemic; a researcher has an unexpected opportunity to collect data from students when the end of the 
school year is only four weeks away.  
 
HSD may ask for doc umentation of the externally -imposed urgency. A higher priority should not be requested to compensat e 
for a researcher’s failure to prepare an IRB application in a timely manner. Note that IRB review requires a certain minimum 
amount of time; without sufficient time, the IRB may not be able to review and approve an application by a deadline.  
  No  
 X Yes → If yes, briefly describe the urgency or deadline as well as the reason for it.  
   We have received a JIT request from NIMH. Due to their funding year (ending in September), 
they’ve requested IRB approval (along with other JIT materials) prior to Council review.  
1.5 Objectives  Using lay language, d escribe the purpose, specific aims, or objectives  that will be met by this specific 
project . If hypotheses are being tested, describe them.  You will be asked to describe the specific procedures in a 
later section.  
 
If this application involves the use of a HUD “humanitarian” device: describe whether the use is for “on -label” 
clinical patient care, “off -label” clinical patient care, and/or research (collecting safety and/or effectiveness data).  
 Digital mental health (DMH) is the use of technology to improve population well -being through rapid disease 
detection, outcome measurement, and care. DMH is a rapidly evolving sector, and it is estimated that the market 
share will reach $509.2 billion by 2 025. Several randomized clinical trials have demonstrated that DMH tools are 
highly effective and capable of incredible reach with impressive return on investment. However, most consumers 
do not fully engage; the average length of engagement is only 2 -4 we eks, with most consumers discontinuing use 
within hours of downloading. Studies on the impact that limited DMH engagement has on consumer outcomes are 
mixed. For instance, our work found that DMH engagement may be cyclical, with consumers engaging in short  
bursts over time, depending on current needs and goals. Research on the relationship between engagement and 
outcomes is mixed, indicating the study of engagement is incomplete without careful tracking of DMH’s impact 
on improving mental well -being. Thus, the field currently lacks an understanding of DMH engagement patterns 
and which practices are effective at sustaining engagement or re -engaging users who are likely to benefit. In this 
partnership among Mental Health America (MHA), Talkspace (TS) and the U niversity of Washington (UW), we 
aim to study 1) how consumer engagement in DMH varies, 2) the association between engagement and positive 
outcomes, and 3) the effectiveness of personalized strategies for optimal engagement with DMH treatment. We 
leverage established theories of health behavior change and the use of DMH to achieve health goals (the Health 
Action Process Approach and the Lived Informatics Model). This study will prospectively follow a very large, 
naturalistic sample of MHA and TS consumers, and will apply micro -randomized trials to address the following 
aims:  
AIM 1 : To characterize patterns of DMH engagement, the proportion of DMH consumers who fall into different 
engagement categories, and the outcomes associated with different engagement ca tegories.  
H1a: Engagement longevity, content, and selected DMH services will vary across baseline characteristics 
(symptom severity, stated goals, demographics).  
H1b: DMH engagement will cluster into (1) non -engagers (visit MHA or TS, do not use any servic es), (2) pre -
intenders  (use screen, use materials about condition), (3) intenders (e.g.: review psychoeducation materials or 
conduct an initial intake), (4) actors (click on MHA services or communicating with TS therapist) and (5) cyclers 
(re-engage with s creens, materials, providers over time). Data will include observational data from webpage and 
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 4 of 70 
 app use behavior (demographics, logins, time between logins, re -enrollments, time between re -enrollments, click -
throughs, time on pages, text frequency between T S consumers and therapists) and self -report measures currently 
collected by MHA and TS (self -reported goals/needs, self -efficacy, symptom severity, working alliance, service 
satisfaction, perceived match of service to needs).  
AIM 2 : Create predictive engag ement subtypes based on descriptive findings in Aim 1 and identify consumer  
engagement characteristics and behavior that predict future DMH engagement.  
H2a: Using supervised machine learning approaches with existing and prospectively collected data, we pr edict that 
new engagement subtypes will emerge based on consumer demographics (e.g.: age, gender, income level, 
ethnicity, symptoms severity), engagement patterns identified in Aim 1, reasons for disengagement (self -efficacy; 
perceived need; outcome expect ations; goals were met, not met, or changed), and satisfaction with the DMH tools. 
We predict these subtypes will vary in their engagement patterns and will be predictive of outcomes from 
prospective micro -trials of engagement strategies based on HAPA and LIM principles conducted in Aim 3.  
H2b: (TS only) Enable language content in machine learning methods for subtype discovery. We will analyze text -
based consumer -therapist interactions using Natural Language Processing (NLP) approaches to identify language 
markers predictive of engagement and HAPA -informed constructs: task, maintenance and recovery self -efficacy, 
planning quality, perceived risks/needs of behavior change, and outcome anticipation.  
AIM 3a : Develop and test the effectiveness of engagement stra tegies using a series of micro -randomized trials on 
thousands of consumers, to be developed based on what we learn about engagement subtypes that are at risk of 
poor outcomes.  
AIM 3b. Using a SMART designed trial of 10,000 TS consumers, of which 250 will p articipate in a survey after 
they discontinue treatment for two weeks, we will compare effective engagement strategies tailored to subtypes 
developed under Aim 2 to study the mediated impact of engagement strategies on consumer mental health 
outcomes (e.g.  PHQ9). This activity will occur in Y04 of the partnership. We will prospectively recruit 
participants into micro -randomized and SMART trials to collect additional survey information on participants 
about self -efficacy (task, coping and recovery), perceive d risk/needs, planning skills and anticipated outcomes. We 
will determine if engagement strategies targeted to consumer engagement subtype will enhance engagement and in 
turn result in improved clinical outcomes. These will be compared to generic strategie s that are not subtype 
targeted.  
Update August 2023: Talkspace will no longer be involved for year 4 of the project and will not complete 
activities for aim 3B. All aim 3B activities will occur with MHA , broken down into two parts: (1) a Sequential 
Multipl e Assigment Randomized Trial ( SMART ) of a projected 50,000+ participants and (2) a DIY tool 
longitudinal randomized control trial (RCT) .  This is possible with no change in our aim purpose or final budget.  
1.6 Study design . Provide a one -sentence description of the general study design and/or type of methodology.   
Your answer will help HSD in assigning applications to reviewers and in managing workload. Examples: a longitudinal 
observational study; a double -blind, placebo -controlled randomized study; ethnographic interviews; web scraping from a 
convenience sample of  blogs; medical record review; coordinating center for a multi -site study.  
 This is a prospective, longitudinal and iterative study, divided into three phases:  
Phase 1: Data analysis of existing data from 100,000 MHA and TS of data collected between 2020 and the end of 
Y01 of the project.  
Phase 2: Building off findings from Phase 2, rapid and iterative micro -trials (MRTs) of engagement strategies  
Phase 3: a culminating sequential multiple assignment randomized trial (SMART) used to optimize match between 
client subtypes identified in Phase 2 and engagement strategies identified in Phase 1.  
 
This initial IRB application is for Phase 1 activities only. Subsequent modifications will be submitted for Phase 2 
and Phase 3 once appropriate.  
 
February 2022: This  modification is for Phase 2 activities. A modification for approval of Phase 3 activities will be 
submitted when appropriate.  
 
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 5 of 70 
 August 2023: This modification is for Phase 3b, including modifications requiring approval for phase 3 B related 
activities , and with the pivot of aim 3B to be conducted with MHA, we will be carrying out two studies to meet 
our aims. Study 1 will use a SMART to examine methods to optimize engagement with MHA’s website ( 50,000  
participants) and Study 2 will r ecruit 300 participants for a longitudinal monthlong study where they are randomly 
assigned to a control group, the use of a DIY tool without AI, or the use of a DIY tool with AI to examine the 
efficacy of using a digital too to improve mental health funct ioning.  
1.7 Intent . Check all the descriptors that apply to your activity. You must place an “X” in at least one box.  
This question is essential for ensuring that your application is correctly reviewed. Please read each option carefully.  
 Descriptor  
  1. Class project or other activity whose purpose is to provide an educational experience for the researcher 
(for example, to learn about the process or methods of doing research).    
  
  
2. Part of an institution, organization, or program’s own internal operational monitoring.    
  
  
3. Improve the quality of service provided by a specific institution, organization, or program.    
  
  4. Designed to expand the knowledge base of a scientific discipline or other scholarly field of study , and 
produce results that:  
• Are expected to be applicable to a larger population beyond the site of data collection or the specific 
subjects studied, or  
• Are intended to be used to develop, test, or support theories, principles, and statements of 
relationships, or to inform policy beyond the study.   X 
  
  5. Focus directly on the specific individuals about whom the information or biospecimens are collected 
through oral history, journalism, biography, or historical scholarship activities, to provide an accurate and 
evidence -based portrayal of the individuals.    
  
  6. A quality improvement or program improvement activity conducted to improve the implementation 
(delivery or quality) of an accepted practice, or to collect data about the implementation of the practice 
for clinical, practical, or administrative purposes. This does not include the evaluation of the efficacy of 
different accepted practices, or a comparison of their efficacy.   X 
  
  7. Public health surveillance activities conducted, requested, or authorized by a public health authority for 
the sole purpose of identifying or investigating potential public health signals or timely awareness and 
priority setting during a situation that  threatens public health.    
  
  
8. Preliminary, exploratory, or research development activities (such as pilot and feasibility studies, or 
reliability/validation testing of a questionnaire)    
  
  
9. Expanded access use of a drug or device not yet approved for this purpose    
  
  
10. Use of a Humanitarian Use Device    
  
  
11. Other. Explain:    
  
         
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 6 of 70 
 1.8 Background, experience, and preliminary work . Answer this question only  if the proposed activity has one or 
more of the following characteristics. The purpose of this question is to provide the IRB with information that is 
relevant to its risk/benefit analysis.  
• Involves more than minimal risk (physical or non -physical)  
•  a clinical tr ial, or  
• Involves having the subjects use a drug, biological, botanical, nutritional supplement, or medical 
device.  
“Minimal risk” means that the probability and magnitude of harm or discomfort anticipated in the research are not greater 
than those ordinarily encountered in daily life or during the performance of routine physical or psychological examinations o r 
tests.  
 a. Background . Provide the rationale and the scientific or scholarly background for the proposed activity, based 
on existing literature (or clinical knowledge). Describe the gaps in current knowledge that the proje ct is 
intended to address.  
 This should be a plain language description. Do not provide scholarly citations. Limit your answer t o less than one page, or 
refer to an attached document with background information that is no more than three pages long.  
 Digital mental health (DMH) is the use of technology to improve population well -being through rapid disease 
detection, outcome measurement, and care. DMH is a rapidly evolving sector, and it is estimated that the 
market share will reach $509.2 billion by 2025. Several randomized clinical trials have demonstrated that 
DMH tools are highly effective and capable of incredible  reach with impressive return on investment. 
However, most consumers do not fully engage; the average length of engagement is only 2 -4 weeks, with most 
consumers discontinuing use within hours of downloading. Studies on the impact that limited DMH 
engageme nt has on consumer outcomes are mixed. For instance, our work found that DMH engagement may 
be cyclical, with consumers engaging in short bursts over time, depending on current needs and goals. 
Research on the relationship between engagement and outcomes i s mixed, indicating the study of engagement 
is incomplete without careful tracking of DMH’s impact on improving mental well -being. Thus, the field 
currently lacks an understanding of DMH engagement patterns and which practices are effective at sustaining 
engagement or re -engaging users who are likely to benefit.  
 b. Experience and p reliminary work . Briefly describe experience or preliminary work or data (if any) that you , 
your team , or your collaborators/co -investigators  have that supports the feasibility and/or safety of this study.   
 It is not necessary to summarize all discussion that has led to the development of the study protocol. The IRB is interested 
only in short summaries about experiences or preliminary work that suggest the study is feasible and that risks are 
reasonable relative to the benefits. Examples: You r team  has already conducted a Phase 1 study of an experimental drug 
which supports the Phase 2 study being proposed in this application ; you r team has  already done a small pilot study 
showing that the reading skills intervention describe d in this application  is feasible in an after -school program with 
classroom aides; you r team has  experience with the type of surgery that is required to implant the stud y device; the study 
coordinator is experienced in working with subjects who have significant cognitive impairment.  
  The three institutional partners have deep expertise relevant to the current proposal.  The scientific team 
consists of experts in mobile m ental health technology, remote  research methods, mental health clinical trials 
and engagement in mental health services, and machine learning/natural  language processing . 
 
1. Ability test hypotheses with a very large sample of DMH consumers . We propose to  test our hypotheses 
with a very large sample of DMH consumers, proposing to analyze 100,000 consumers in Aim 1, 50,000 in 
Aim 2 and 10,000 in Aim 3, where we will also prospectively recruit and collect ground truth data on 250 
consumers at TS. MHA Screeni ng (mhascreening.org) is a confidential and anonymous screening and self -
guided service platform. Nearly 3,000 people complete MHA’s online mental health screens every day, 
resulting in nearly 5 million screens to date. An average of 2,000 individuals a mo nth will click through to 
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 7 of 70 
 educational materials, testimonials, videos, forums and self -guided strategies. Currently, an average of 700 
users per month will continue onto one of several recommended service providers. TS is a digital mental 
health platform t hat provides access to licensed clinicians via text -messaging and video chats. Talkspace 
experiences similar numbers to MHA. Their website receives 50,000 visits daily and has 30,000 individuals 
receiving care on average at any given time. Given the volume  of users that use MHA and TS services, we will 
easily meet our needed sample of 100,000 for Aim 1, 50,000 for Aim 2 and 10,000 for Aim 3.  
 
2. Ability to create DMH engagement subgroups using data currently collected by MHA and TS . Both MHA 
and TS currently collect a considerable amount of objective and subjective information from their consumers 
regarding their demographics, symptom severity, goals for seeking care, and their use of services. 
Demographically, the two organizations  serve similar populations. At MHA, consumers are primarily a help -
seeking population with higher percentages of low -income individuals (over 50% report household income 
below $40,000 a year), who are at risk for mental health conditions (74% of screeners score “positive” or 
above criteria of concern), and have never been treated for their condition (65% of those who screen positive 
report having no current or past mental health diagnosis). TS consumers are also primarily first -time treatment 
seekers (60% r eport no prior mental health treatment) and most report symptoms at baselines that indicate risk 
for a mental health condition (70% score above clinical thresholds). Whether paying out of pocket or using 
insurance, TS users tend to be middle -higher income individuals and 75% report a Bachelors’ degree or 
higher. Information on service use differs between MHA and TS because of the differences in their platforms 
and DMH offerings. MHA service use is defined by the use of self -help tools, use of services MHA 
recommends (including therapeutic video games, forums and linkages to Talkspace), and time using MHA 
created tools. Self -reported tools at MHA include screeners, reasons for searching, and satisfaction with tools 
offered and used. TS service use is defined by number of texts sent, time between texts, use of educational 
materials TS creates, completion of self -rating scales, and text content. Self -report measures collected by TS 
include measures of working alliance, treatment satisfaction and an exit intervie w at time of termination. See 
Table 1 for full details. The wealth of data available for analysis will allow us to create rich, informative 
engagement clusters that will inform future subgroups for Aim 2 and to be tested in Aim 3.  
 
3. DMH services at MHA a nd TS . MHA has been testing use and engagement of DMH in four categories: 
mental health information (Like WebMD), referrals to care, peer to peer communities and forums, and “Do it 
Yourself” internet interventions and apps. Included in this are therapeutic  games, and app -based CBT 
strategies. Talkspace offers three plan types: unlimited texting (92% of consumers choose this plan), unlimited 
texting plus monthly video chat (6%), and unlimited texting plus weekly video chat (2%). Therapists respond 
to text wi thin 15 minutes to an hour during office hours, and within 3 hours outside of office hours (except at 
night when up to 10 hours can separate responses). Thus, texting is not fully synchronous. This enables 
therapists to deliver care to a larger number of p atients than is possible under synchronous methods by 
disentangling the therapist’s time to respond from the patient’s time to generate a message. It also has the 
potential to improve quality as it gives the therapist time to think through the most effecti ve response and 
intervention. Texting is based on CBT, PST or IPT intervention strategies. In addition to this standard of care, 
consumers also may access mental health apps focused on relaxation, mindfulness training and goal setting. 
Between the two plat forms, MHA and TS offer the most common forms of DMH on the market: screening, 
symptom monitoring, educational materials, peer communities, therapeutic games, CBT based tools and apps, 
message -based care and video chat care.  
 
4. Preliminary work to create  engagement subgroups . MHA has conducted research to identify and better serve 
user subtypes based on presenting need and other issues, and worked to improve access and relevance of the 
site to these users. As one example, in 2019 MHA focused on Bipolar Di sorder. Nearly half of a million 
people either took a screen for Bipolar Disorder or read resources. MHA found that these people were more 
likely than average to be seeking information and treatment resources, especially urgently. This led to the 
developme nt of additional articles and materials to support this subgroup of consumers, such as a podcast, and 
to better organize online materials relevant to this population. TS has also been involved in research to 
uncover engagement patterns and search for metho ds to increase engagement. We conducted preliminary 
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 8 of 70 
 analyses on over 10,000 TS consumers to identify engagement patterns that determine initial predictors of 
DMH engagement. TS collected the PHQ -9 on consumers every 3 weeks. Completion of these measures is  
a good indicator of clinical engagement in treatment. Results indicated engagement was a function of plan type 
and symptom severity. Of the three plan types, weekly video chat had the largest early disengagement, with 
only 17% of those enrolled engaged lo nger that 6 weeks (fig 2a). 40% of consumers initiate treatment but do 
not engage for 3 weeks, 21% do not engage longer than 6 weeks and another 12% do not engage past 9 weeks. 
Only 2% engage for a full year (fig 2). Consumers who exhibit more symptoms at intake assessment are less 
likely to disengage from treatment, with the odds of disengagement decreasing by 3.3% for each additional 
point on intake PHQ -9. However, higher symptoms over the course of care results in greater disengagement, 
with the odds of disengagement increasing by 5.3% for each additional point on the final PHQ -9 assessment 
completed. Both MHA and TS are highly motivated to understand engagement and the impact engagement has 
on clinical outcomes.  
 
5. Ability to conduct micro -randomized tr ials and SMART trials of engagement strategies . Both MHA and TS 
continuously conduct marketing -based research to improve their outreach and engagement of consumers with 
mental health needs. MHA conducts experimental user testing on engagement such as modif ying tone, 
placement, and medium (written vs audio) of education materials, modifying language and linkages to services 
like telehealth partners, adding relevant links to other materials, and improving the formatting of articles for 
clarity. These efforts reduced the bounce rate (the rate at which users leave a page without taking any further 
actions on the site) for edited pages from 91% to 68% on average, and increased the average time spent on the 
site during a session by 15%. MHA has conducted microtria ls evaluating user experiences comparing 
algorithm -driven resource selection to manually selected resources, and found users prefer manually selected 
resources. These tests have used simple pre -post manipulation of website materials; the current grant prop osal 
would provide funding for more complex, causal design testing using MRTs and SMART methods. The goal 
of the projects is to understand what level of engagement users in the earliest stages of recovery are willing to 
engage in and what factors might inc rease utilization of high investment services. TS has similarly designed 
and tested  onboarding and treatment engagement strategies that seek to 1) increase likelihood of beginning 
treatment, and 2) increase the likelihood of treatment completion. Onboardin g strategies include modifying 
informational pages with different media (testimonials, therapist background information, patient education 
and self -assessment materials, an interactive chatbot experience, etc.), therapy benefits, financial incentives, 
and calls to action. Once individuals begin treatment, TS shifts effort to improving treatment completion rates 
by providing therapist match recommendations, collecting and reporting outcomes to users and therapists, 
integrating evidence -based exercises/worksh eets in an interactive interface, and providing feedback to 
therapists regarding user engagement and pacing of therapy.  
 
In summary, these preliminary data point to our ability to test critical questions about DMH engagement and 
its impact on outcomes with  a very large and representative sample of DMH users in the time frame we 
specify for this project, owing to exiting data, a continuous stream of consumers, existing platforms to conduct 
clinical trials and expertise in engagement research and big data ana lysis.  
1.9 Supplements . Check all boxes that apply, to identify relevant Supplements that should be complete d and 
upload ed to Zipline . 
This section is here instead of at the end of the form to reduce the risk of duplicating information in this IRB Protocol form that 
you will need to provide in these Supplements.  
 Check all 
That A pply  Type of R esearch  Supplement N ame  
    
Department of Defense  
The research involves Department of Defense funding, facilities, data, or 
personnel.  SUPPLEMENT 
Department of Defense      
    
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 9 of 70 
     
Department of Energy  
The research involves Department of Energy funding, facilities, data, or 
personnel.  SUPPLEMENT 
Department of Energy      
    
    Drug, biologic, botanical, supplement  
Procedures involve the use of any drug, biologic, botanical or 
supplement, even if the item is not the focus of the proposed  research  SUPPLEMENT Drugs      
    
    Emergency exception to informed consent  
Research that requires this special consent waiver for research involving 
more than minimal risk  SUPPLEMENT Exce ption 
from Informed Consent 
for Emergency Research 
(EFIC)      
    
    
Genomic data sharing  
Genomic data are being collected and will be deposited in an external 
database (such as the NIH dbGaP database) for sharing with other 
researchers , and the UW is being asked to provide the required 
certification or to ensure that the consent forms can be c ertified  SUPPLEMENT Genomic 
Data Sharing      
    
    Medical device  
Procedures involve the use of any medical device, even if the device is 
not the focus of the proposed  research, except when the device is FDA -
approved and is being used through a clinical facility in the manner for 
which it is approved  SUPPLEMENT Devices      
    
    Multi -site or collaborative study  
The UW IRB is being asked to review on behalf of one or mo re non-UW 
institutions in a multi -site or collaborative study.  SUPPLEMENT: Multi -site 
or Collaborative Research    X  
    
    Non -UW Individual Investigators  
The UW IRB is being asked to review on behalf of one or more non -UW 
individuals who are not affiliated with another organization for the 
purpose of the research.  SUPPLEME NT: Non -UW 
Individual Investigators      
    
    
None of the above       
    
1.10 Confirm by checking the box below  that you will have (a) developed and implemented the Return to In -Person 
Research Plan  and (b) completed all of the relevant activities listed on the CHECKLIST Human Subjects Research 
During the COVID -19 Pandemic  before beginning your research. Failure to meet the applicable requirements in 
these Checklists will be conside red non -compliance.  
Review the HSD website  for current guidelines about which in -person research activities are allowable.  
 X Confirmed  
 
 
2 PARTICIPANTS  
2.1 Participants . Describe the general characteristics of the subject populations or groups , including age range, 
gender, health status, and any other relevant characteristics.  
 The initial IRB application is for Phase 1 activities only. Modifications will be submitted when appropriate for 
Phase 2 and 3 procedures.  
 
Phase 1  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 10 of 70 
 Phase 1  data analysis  (100,000) participants will be consumers who are seeking services from Mental Health 
America (MHA) and Talkspace (TS). MHA and TS offer services in both English and Spanish, thus we will 
include both English and Spanish speakers . English and Spanish speaking MHA consumers will be identified as 
such based on the language in which they choos e to interact with the website (e.g. taking an English language or 
Spanish language screen). For TS consumers, previous data analysis shows that 99.5% of services are provided 
in English. If services are provided in Spanish, this information is available v ia the site’s meta -data and will be 
noted in the dataset.  Participants will be largely female, representative of the US population and who have 
screened positive to any mental health problem. While we anticipate that most participants will be 14 and older , 
MHA consumers may be as young as 6. We anticipate that most will be suffering from depression or anxiety.  
 
Phase 1 focus group participants will be randomly chosen from MHA and TS English speaking consumers aged 
18 and over.  
 
During Phase 1, Talkspace will invite consumers to complete a survey about communications from Talkspace. 
These survey respondents will be English speaking, TS consumers aged 18 and over who choose to respond to 
invitations received in -app, by email, or as a push notifica tion.  
 
Phase 2  
Phase 2 micro -randomized trial (MRT) participants will be the same as Phase 1 participants: consumers seeking 
services from MHA and TS, including both English and Spanish speakers with no exclusion criteria around age, 
gende r, clinical presentation or other attribute.  
 
Phase 2 focus group participants will be English speaking MHA and TS consumers aged 18 and over.  
 
Phase 3b: Participants for data collection of Study 1, ( SMART trial ) will be consumers seeking services from 
MHA who have chosen to start  the PHQ -9 mental health test in English  on the MHA platform . They will 
include those who can read English, with no exclusion criteria around age, gender,  or clinical presentation or 
other attributes.  
 
The inclusion/exclusion cri teria for Study 2 ( the survey data collection on 250 participants ) will be more 
selective. These participants will  be consumers seeking services from MHA, and more specifically those who 
based on either of these screeners have identified as experiencing at  least moderate symptoms of depression 
and/or anxiety. Participants will be 18 and older with little to no experience with the concept of cognitive 
reframing.   
2.2 Inclusion and exclusion criteria.   
a. Inclusion criteria.  Describe the specific criteria that will be used  to decide who will be included  in the research  
from among interested or potential subjects. Define any technical terms in lay language.  
 Phase 1  
Phase 1 data analysis activities: Consumers seeking services  from MHA and TS, English and/or Spanish 
speaking  
 
Phase 1 Focus Group participants will be randomly chosen from MHA and TS English speaking consumers 
aged 18 and over   
 
Phase 1 Talkspace Survey: English speaking TS consumers, aged 18 and over  
 
Phase 2  
Phase 2 micro -randomized trials (MRTs): Consumers seeking services from MHA and TS, English and/or 
Spanish speaking  
 
Phase 2 focus groups: MHA and TS consumers aged 18 and over  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 11 of 70 
 • Talkspace only: Focus groups launching in November 2022 will focus on users’ th oughts and 
reactions to receiving nudges (e.g., push notifications, emails) and their impact on engagement with 
the platform. For these focus groups only, inclusion criteria will be TS consumers aged 18 and over 
who have used Talkspace messaging -based ther apy in the past 3 months, and have the Talkspace 
mobile app installed on their mobile device  
Phase 3   
 
Phase 3b  Study 1  SMART trial participants will be consumers seeking  to take a mental health test from MHA  
and able to read English  
 
Phase 3b Study 2 longitudinal survey participants will be consumers who have completed a n English  PHQ or 
GAD test from MHA and scored greater than or equal to 10 either of the measures. They will be 18 years or 
older, residing i n the United States and who indicate that they have little or no familiarity with the concept of 
cognitive reframing.  
  
 
b. Exclusion criteria. Describe the specific criteria that will  be used  to decide who will be excluded from the 
research  from subjects who meet the inclusion criteria listed above. Define any technical terms in lay 
language.  
 Phase 1  
Phase 1 data analysis activities: Non -English or Spanish speaking  
 
Phase 1 Focus Group participants: non-English  speaking, younger than 18  
 
Phase 1 Talkspace Survey: Non -English speaking , younger than 18  
 
Phase 2  
Phase 2 MRTs: non -English or Spanish speaking consumers  
 
Phase 2 Focus Groups: non -English speaking, younger t han 18  
Talkspace only: Focus groups launching in November 2022 will focus on users’ thoughts and reactions to 
receiving nudges (e.g., push notifications, emails) and their impact on engagement with the platform. For these 
focus groups only, exclusion crite ria will be TS users younger than 18, and/or have not used TS messaging -
based therapy in the past 3 months (e.g., have only used non -messaging based TS services such as video based 
services, couples counseling, or psychiatry services), and/or do not have t he TS mobile app downloaded on 
their mobile device  
 
Phase 3b  
Data collection of Study 1 SMART: Consumers outside of the US, non -English speaking consumers will be 
excluded  
 
Data Collection of longitudinal surveys  in Study 2 : Consumers outside of the US, non -English speaking, 
younger than 18, scoring below 10 on neither the GAD nor PHQ, those who indicate they are familiar with 
and have practiced cognitive reframing will be excluded  
 
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 12 of 70 
 2.3 Prisoners . IRB approval is required in order to include prisoners in research, even when prisoners are not an 
intended target population.  
a. Will the proposed research  recruit or obtain data from individuals that are known  to be prisoners?  
For records reviews: if the records do not indicate prisoner status and prisoners are not  a target population, select “No ”. 
See the WORKSHEET Prisoners  for the definition of “ prisoner”.  
 X No → If no, skip the rest of part a. and continue to 2.3.b  
  Yes → If yes, answer the following questions  (i – iv). 
 i. Describe the type of prisoners, and which prisons/jails:  
       
 ii. One concern about prisoner research is whether the effect of participation on prisoners’ 
general living conditions, medical care, quality of food, amenities, and /or opportunity for 
earnings in prison will be so great that it will make it difficult for prisoners to adequately 
consider the research risks. How will the chances of this be reduced?  
       
 iii. Describe what will be done  to make sure that (a) recruitment and subject selection 
procedures will be fair to all eligible prisoners and (b) prison authorities or other prisoners 
will not b e able to arbitrarily prevent or require particular prisoners from participating.  
       
 iv. If the research will involve prisoners in federal facilities or in state/local facilities outsid e of 
Washington State: c heck the box below to provide assurance that study team members will 
(a) not encourage or facilitate the use of a prisoner’s  participation in the research to 
influence parole decisions, and (b) clearly inform each prisoner in advance (for example, in a 
consent  form) that participation in th e research  will have no effect on his or her parole.  
  Confirmed   
 b. Is the research likely to have subjects who become prisoners while participating in the study?   
For example, a longitudinal study of youth with drug problems is likely to have subjects who will be prisoners at some 
point during the study.  
 X No  
  Yes → If yes, if a subject becomes a prisoner while participating in the study, will any study 
procedures and/or data collection related to the subject be continued while the subject is a 
prisoner?   
  No  
  Yes → If yes, describe the procedures and/or data collection that will continue with 
prisoner subjects    
       
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 13 of 70 
 2.4 Protected populations . IRB approval is required for the use of the subject populations listed here. Check the 
boxes for any of these populations that will be purposefully include d. (In other words, being a part of the 
population is an inclusion criterion for the study.)  
The WORKSHEETS describe the criteria for approval  but do not need to be completed and should not be submitted . 
 Population  Worksheet  
  
Fetuses in utero  WORKSHEET Pregnant Women    
  
  
Neonates of uncertain viability  WORKSHEET Neonates    
  
  
Non -viable neonates  WORKSHEET Neonates    
  
  
Pregnant women  WORKSHEET Pregnant Women    
  
a. If you check any of the boxes above, use this space to provide any information that may be relevant for the IRB 
to consider.   
       
2.5 Native Americans or non-U.S. indigenous populations.  Will Native American or non -U.S. indigenous populations 
be actively recruited through a tribe, tribe -focused organization, or similar community -based organization?  
Indigenous people are defined in international or national legisla tion as having a set of specific rights based on their 
historical ties to a particular territory and their cultural or historical distinctiveness from other populations that are often 
politically dominant.  
 
Exam ples: a reservation school or health clinic; recruiting during a tribal community gathering  
 X No  
  Yes → If yes,  name the tribe, tribal -focused organization, or similar community -based  organization. T he 
UW IRB expects that tribal/indigenous approval will be obtained before beginning the research . 
This may or may not involve approval from a tribal IRB. The study team and any 
collaborators/investigators are also responsible for identifying any tribal laws that may affect the 
research.     
       
2.6 Third party subjects.  Will the research collect private identifiable  information about other individuals  from the 
study  subjects? Common examples include:  collecting medical history information or contact information about 
family members, friends, co -workers.  
“Identifiable” means any direct or indirect identifier that, alone or in combination, would allow you or another member of 
the research team to readi ly identify  the person. For example, suppose that the research is about immigration history. If 
subjects are asked  questions about their grandparents but are not asked for  names or other information that would allow 
easy identification  of the grandparents, then private identifiable information is not being collected about the grandparents  
and the grandparents are not subjects .  
 
 X No  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 14 of 70 
   Yes → If yes, these individuals are considered human subjects in the study. Describe them and what 
data will be collect ed about them.     
       
2.7 Number of subjects . Is it possible to  predict or describe the maximum number of subjects (or subject units) 
need ed to complete the study, for each subject group?  
Subject units  mean units within a group. For most research studies, a group will consist of individuals. However, the unit of 
interest in some research is not the individual. Examples:   
• Dyads such as caregiver -and-Alzheimer’s patient, or parent and child  
• Families  
• Othe r units, such as student -parent -teacher  
Subject group  means categories of subjects that are meaningful for  the specific study . Some research has only one subject 
group – for example, all UW students taking Introductory Psychology. Some common ways in which subjects are grouped 
include:  
• By intervention – for example, an intervention group and a control group.  
• By subject population or setting – for example, urban versus rural families  
• By age – for example, children who are 6, 10, or 14 years old.  
 
The IR B reviews the number of subjects in the context of risks and benefits. Unless otherwise specified, if the IRB determines 
that the research involves no more than minimal risk: there are no restrictions on the total number of subjects  that may be 
enrolled . If the research involves more than minimal risk: The number of enrolled subjects must be limited to the number 
described in this  application. If it is necessary later to increase the number of subjects, submit  a Modification . Exceeding the 
IRB-approved numb er (over -enrollment ) will be considered non -compliance.   
  No → If no, provide the rationale in the box below. Also, provide any other available information about 
the scope/size of the research. You do not need to complete the table.    
  Example: It may not be possible to predict the number of subjects who will complete an online survey 
advertised through Craigslist, but you can state that  the survey will be posted  for two weeks and the number 
who respond is the number who will be in the study.  
        
 X Yes → If yes, for each subject group, use the table below to provide the estimate of the maximum 
desired number of individuals (or other subject unit, such as families) who will complete the 
research.    
 Group name/description  Maximum desired number of individuals (or other 
subject unit, such as families) who will complete 
the research  
Provide numbers for the  site(s) reviewed by the UW IRB 
and for the study -wide total number ; example: 20/100  
 Phase 1: Data Analysis Activities  100,000  
 Phase 1: Focus Groups  48 
 Phase 1: Talkspace Survey  Approx.. 500  
 Phase 2: Micro -randomized Trials (MRTs)  50,000  
 Phase 2: Focus Groups  48 
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 15 of 70 
  Phase 3: SMART Study 1  50,000  
 Phase 3:  Longitudinal Surveys Study 2  300  
 
2.8 COVID -19 Screening . If there will be any in -person interactions with the subjects, describe how you will screen 
them for COVID -19 symptoms within the 24 hours before the interaction. Also, describe the COVID -19 screening 
procedures for the study staff who will interact with  the subjects.  
Acceptable procedures include some type of symptom check or attestation, or a SARS -CoV-2 test with quick access to 
results. Symptom attestation involves an individual reviewing a list of symptoms and declaring the presence or absence 
of those symptoms. HSD strongly encourages adapting this Washington State Department of Health Screening Tool  
https://www.doh.wa.gov/Portals/1/Do cuments/1600/coronavirus/Employervisitorscreeningguidance.pdf  or the UW 
EH&S Example Symptom Self -Attestation in this document: 
https://www.ehs.w ashington.edu/system/files/resources/guidance -symptom -monitoring -COVID -19.pdf . If you will test 
for the virus, you must also describe here whether the testing lab is CLIA -certified and how the results will be reported to 
the subjects.  
 N/A – all procedure s are remote  
 
 
3 NON -UW RESEARCH SETTING   
Complete this section only if UW investigators  and people named in the SUPPLEMENT: 
Non -UW Individual Investigators  will conduct research procedures  outside of UW and 
Harborview  
3.1 Reason for locations . Describe the reason(s) for choosing the location s.  
This is especially important when the research will occur in locations or with populations that may be vulnerable to 
exploitation. One of the three ethical principles the IRB must consider is justice: ensuring that reasonable, non -exploitative, 
and well -considered procedures are administered fairly, with a fair distribution of costs and potential benefits.  
       
3.2 Local context . Culturally appropriate  procedures and an understanding of local context are an important part of 
protecting subjects. Describe any site -specific cultural issues, customs, beliefs, or values that may affect the 
research , how it is conducted, or how consent is obtained or documen ted. 
Examples: It would be culturally inappropriate in some international settings for a woman to be directly contacted by a male 
researcher; instead, the researcher may need to ask a male family member for permission before the woman can be 
approached. It may be appropriate to obtain permission from community leaders prior to obtaining consent from individual 
members of a group.  In some distinct cultural groups, signing forms may not be the norm.  
 
This federal site maintains an international list of human resea rch standards and requirements:  
 http://www.hhs.go v/ohrp/international/index.html   
       
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 16 of 70 
 3.3 Location -specific laws . Describe any  local laws that may affect the research (especially the research design and 
consent procedures). The most common examples are laws about:  
• Specimens  – for example, some countries will not allow biospecimens to be taken out of the country.  
• Age of consent  – laws about when an individual is considered old enough to be able to provide consent vary 
across states, and across countries.   
• Legally authorized representative  – laws about who can serve as a legally authorized representative (and who 
has priority when more than one person is available) vary across states and countries.  
• Use of healthcare records  – many states (including Washington State) have laws that are similar to the 
federal HIPAA law but that have additional requirements.  
       
3.4 Location -specific administrative or ethical requirements . Describe local administrative or ethical requirements 
that affect the research.  
Example: A school district may require researchers  to obtain permission from the head district office as well as school 
principals before approaching teachers or students; a factory in China may allow researchers  to interview factory workers  but 
not allow the workers to be paid for their participation . 
       
3.5 If the PI is a s tudent: Does the research involve traveling outside of the US?   
  No  
  Yes → If yes, confirm by checking the box that (1) you will register with the UW Office of Global Affairs  
before traveling; (2) you will notify your advisor when the registration is complete; and (3) you will 
request a UW Travel Waiver if the research involves travel to the list of countries  requiring a UW 
Travel Waiver.  
 Confirmed  
 
 
4 RECRUITING and SCREENING PARTICIPANTS  
4.1 Recruiting and Screening . Describe how subjects will be identified, recruited, and screened.  Include information 
about:  how, when, where, and in what setting. Identify who (by position or role, not name) will approach and 
recruit subjects, and who wil l screen them for eligibility.  
 Phase 1  
Phase 1  Data Analysis : Participants will not be actively  recruited into this phase of the study. Participants will be 
all consumers who naturalistically engaged with MHA and/or TS over the past 2 years (2018 -2020) and who 
naturalistically engage during the study. Both MHA and TS, as part of routine practice and  as part of their terms 
and conditions, explain to consumers that their information may be used for research purposes and shared with 
researchers in academic settings to better understand mental illness and for quality improvement purposes.  
 
Phase 1 Focus Groups: Potential participants will be randomly selected from MHA and TS consumers who will 
receive an invitation to participate in the focus groups.   
 
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 17 of 70 
 Phase 1 Talkspace Survey: Potential participants will be TS consumers who choose to respond to invitati ons 
received in -app, by email, or as a push notification. This method of recruitment follows procedures used by TS 
marketing for non -study related surveys.  
 
Phase 2  
Phase 2 MRTs: Participants will not be actively recruited into this phase of the study. Pa rticipants will be 
consumers who naturalistically engage with MHA and/or TS during this phase. Both MHA and TS, as part of 
routine practice and as part of their terms and conditions, explain to consumers that their information may be used 
for research purp oses and shared with researchers in academic settings to better understand mental illness and for 
quality improvement purposes.  
 
Phase 2 Focus Groups: Potential participants will be randomly selected from MHA and TS consumers who will 
receive an invitation  to participate in the focus groups.  
• Talkspace will host focus groups in Phase 2 where participants are invited based on their previous 
experience with therapy. TS consumers that have recently signed up for services  will receive an invitation 
to complete a brief screening survey about previous engagement with therapy and demographic questions. 
Invitations to participate in the focus groups will be extended to individuals based on their responses to the 
screening survey.  For example, individuals with no pre vious experience in therapy will be invited to a 
focus group with other individuals with no previous experience in therapy.  All individuals that respond to 
the survey will receive an invitation to a focus group (the specific focus group they are invited to  will 
depend on their response to the survey).  
 
Phase 3b Study 1 MHA SMART of 50,000 consumers:  Participants will not be actively recruited into this phase of 
the study. Participants will be consumers who naturalistically engage with MHA and the optional mental health 
questions and tests, and content connected to this study on the MHA website. A s part of routine practice and as 
part of their terms and conditions, MHA explain s to consumers that their information may be used for research 
purposes and shared with researchers in academic settings to better understand mental illness and for quality 
improv ement purposes.  
 
Phase 3b Study 2 MHA longitudinal surveys of 250 consumers: Recruitment  will be conducted  through  the 
Mental  Health  America  website  (MHA).  MHA  hosts  a wide  range  of tools  for mental  health  screening.  
Users  who take the depression  (PHQ -9) or anxiety  (GAD -7) screening  and score  greater  than or equal  to 
10 on either  of those  will be shown  the recruitment  invitation.  This invitation will be displayed on the MHA 
website using methods standard for marketing and R&D research at MHA (e.g., pop up b ubble on web page). If 
consumers are interested in learning more, they can respond to the invitation by clicking on a link, which will 
direct them to a landing page (displayed via REDCap survey) with more information about the study and where 
they can then  proceed with the screening survey if interested  
 
 
4.2 Recruitment materials .  
 
a. What materials (if any ) will be used  to recruit and screen subjects?  
Examples: talking points for phone or in -person conversations; video or audio presentations; websites; social media 
messages; written materials such as letters, flyers for posting, brochures, or printed advertisements; questionnaires filled 
out by potentia l subjects.  
 Phase 1 & Phase 2 Focus Groups: Potential participants will receive an invitation to participate in focus groups. 
These invitations will be distributed on the platforms (either MHA or TS) using methods that are standard for 
marketing and R&D research at both MHA and TS (including but not limited to  emails,  pop-ups, messages from 
chat bot features, or messages in the participant’s inbox on the system). If consumers are interested in learning 
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 18 of 70 
 more, they can respond to the invitation by clicking on a link, which alerts study team members at MHA or TS. 
Please refer to section 5.1 for additional focus group procedures.  
 
Here is sample text for those invitations: “ University of Washington and [Mental Health America OR Talkspace] 
are collaborating to  learn more about how individuals engage with digital mental health resources. Would you be 
willing to talk with our team? ” We request flexibility in the language used in these invitations.  
• For the phase 2 focus groups at Talkspace, potential participants  will receive an initial email with an 
invitation to complete a screening survey. Here is sample text for that invitation: "University of 
Washington and Talkspace are collaborating to learn more about how individuals engage with digital 
mental health resou rces. If you would be interested in talking with our team, please complete this brief 
questionnaire.”  
 
Phase 1 Talkspace Survey: TS consumers will be invited to participate in the survey via push notification, in app 
messaging, and/or email. A document with sample invitation text for each of these methods has been uploaded to 
Zipline  in the modification to the Talkspace site  (DOC: Talkspace_Nudge Survey Invitation Options_MHATS) . 
 
Phase 3b Study 2 :  
Potential participants will be shown an invitation to participate in this portion of the study.  This invitation will be 
displayed on the MHA website using methods standard for marketing and R&D research at MHA ( e.g., pop up 
bubble on web page). If consumers are interested in learning more, they can respond to the invitation by clicking 
on a link, which  will direct them to  a landing page (displayed via REDCap  survey) with  more information about 
the study and  where they can then proceed to  the screening survey if interested. A document with the sample 
invitation text, landing page text and screening survey questions has been to Zipline in the modification (DOC:  
‘MHA DIY Study – Recruitment and Screening Materials’)  in the recruitment material templates section.  We 
request flexibility in the recruitment language  used. 
 
 
  
 
b. Upload descriptions of each type of material (or the materials themselves) to Zipline . If letters  or emails  will be 
sent to any subjects, the se should include a statement about how the subject’s name  and contact information  
were obtained . No sensitive info rmation about the person (such as a diagnosis of a medical condition) should 
be included in the letter.  
HSD encourages researchers to consider uploading descriptions of most recruitment and screening materials instead of the 
materials themselves. The goal is to provide the researchers with the flexibility to change some information on the materials  
without s ubmitting a Modification for IRB approval of the changes. Examples:  
• Provide a list of talking points that will be used for phone or in -person conversations instead of a script.   
• For the description of a flyer, include the information that it will provide the study phone number and the name of a 
study contact person (without providing the actual phone number or name). This means that a Modification would 
not be necessary if/when the study phone number or contact person changes. Also, instead of listing the 
inclusion/exclusion criteria, the description below might  state that the flyer will list one or a few of the major 
inclusion/exclusion criteria.  
• For the description of a video or a website, include a description of the possible visual elements and a list o f the 
content (e.g., study phone number; study contact person; top three inclusion/exclusion criteria; payment of $50; 
study name; UW research er).  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 19 of 70 
 4.3 Relationship with participant population . Do any members of the study team have an existing relationship with 
the study population(s)?  
Examples: a study team member may have a dual role with the study population (for example, being their clinical care 
provider, teacher, laboratory directory or tribal leader in addition to recruiting them for his/her research).  
 X No  
  Yes → If yes, describe the nature of the relationship.  
         
4.4 Payment to participants . Describe any payment that will be provide d, including:  
• The total amount/value  
• Whether payment will be “pro -rated” so that participants who are unable to complete the research may still 
receive some part of the payment  
The IRB expect s the consent process or study information provided to the subjects to include information about the number 
and amount of payments, and especially the time when subjects can expect to receive payment. One of the most frequent 
complaints received by HSD is f rom subjects who expected to receive cash or a check on the day that they completed a study 
and who were angry or disappointed when payment took 6 -8 weeks to reach them.  
 
Do not include a description of any expenses that will be reimbursed.  
 Phase 1 & Phase 2 Focus Group participants will be paid $40 for 90 -120 minutes of their time. MHA and 
Talkspace will be responsible for distribution of these incentives  via gift codes or secure transfer (e.g. PayPal, 
Cash App, Zelle). Each of these distrib ution methods requires only the participants’ email address.  
 
Phase 1 Talkspace Survey Participants: Participants who complete the survey will be entered into a drawing to win 
a $100 Amazon gift card.  
 
Phase 3b  Study 2  MHA longitudinal survey participant s: Participants will be compensated up to $ 40-60 in the form 
of Amazon gift cards for their participation in the study, with the total potential amount depending on their 
randomly assigned mental health resource condition .  For participants in the control condition,  they will earn up to 
$40 total across the 6 surveys they complete after consenting – they will earn $5 for ea ch of the surveys in weeks 
1-4, and $10 for the exit survey in Week 5 and $10 for the follow up survey at week 8.  For both DIY tool 
conditions, they will be eligible to earn up to $60 for their participation, and they will be compensated for the 
surveys the same as those in the control . DIY condition participants will also be eligible for an additional $5 each 
week f or the first four weeks of the study, which will be awarded when they use the DIY  tool at least 3 times in the 
week.  Payments  for all participants  will be split up into 6 sections  and sent out on a weekly basis.  Payment will 
not be dependent on completion  of the entire study, and $ 5 payments will solely be based on completion of surveys  
(and engagement with DIY tool for relevant conditions)  at each timepoint . This distribution method requires only 
the participants’ email address. UW will be responsible for  the distribution of these incentives . 
4.5 Non -monetary compensation . Describe any non -monetary compensation that will be provide d. Example: extra 
credit for students; a toy for a child. If class credit will be offered to students, there must be  an alternate way for 
the students to earn the extra credit without participating in the research.  
 N/A  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 20 of 70 
 4.6 Will data or specimens be accessed or obtained for recruiting and screening procedures prior to enrollment?   
Examples: names and contact information; the information gathered from records that were screened; results of screening 
questionnaires or screenin g blood tests; Protected Health Information (PHI) from screening medical records to identify possible 
subjects.  
  No → If no, skip the rest of this section; go to question 5.1. 
 X Yes → If yes, describe the data and/or specimens (including PHI) and  whether it will be retained  as part of 
the study data.  
   Phase 1 & 2 Focus Groups: MHA and TS will send focus group invitations to randomly selected  
English -speaking adult (age 18 and over) consumers. Metadata collected from user engagement 
with the MHA and TS websites as well as information provided directly by the participant (e.g. 
forms, surveys) provide information on age and language spoken, whic h will be used to ensure that 
participants are sent only to the target population for focus groups.  
 
Talkspace will host focus groups in Phase 2 where participants are invited based on their previous 
experience with therapy. TS consumers that have recentl y signed up for services will receive an 
invitation to complete a brief screening survey about previous engagement with therapy and 
demographic questions (race, ethnicity, gender, age/date of birth). Invitations to participate in the 
focus groups will be e xtended to individuals based on their responses to the screening survey. Here 
are examples of questions from the screening survey:  
• Before joining Talkspace, had you tried any of the following types of therapy? Select all 
that apply.  
o Traditional/face -to-face individual therapy (in person or via phone/video)  
o Traditional/face -to-face couples or family therapy (in person or via phone/video)  
o Traditional/face -to-face group therapy (in person or via phone/video)  
o Another digital/online therap y platform (e.g., BetterHelp, Ginger, Lyra, Noom 
Mood)  
▪ Please specify  
o Talkspace was the first therapy provider I tried.  
• Since joining Talkspace, have you tried any of the following therapy types? Select all that 
apply.  
o Traditional/face -to-face individual t herapy (in person or via phone/video)  
o Traditional/face -to-face couples or family therapy (in person or via phone/video)  
o Traditional/face -to-face group therapy (in person or via phone/video)  
o Another digital/online therapy platform (e.g., BetterHelp, Ginger,  Lyra, Noom 
Mood)  
▪ Please specify  
o I have not tried any other forms of therapy since joining Talkspace.  
We request flexibility in these questions . This survey will be completed via Google Forms hosted 
by Talkspace; Talkspace has a BAA (business associate ag reement) with Google Workspace and is 
HIPAA compliant.  
 
Phase 3b Study 2 MHA  longitudinal survey participants:  Metadata collected from user engagement 
with the MHA website as well as information provided directly by the participant (e.g. forms, 
surveys) p rovide information on age, US residence, and language spoken, which will be used to 
ensure that participants are sent only to the target population for the longitudinal study. Responses 
to screening questions will also be collected on the  Institu tion of Tr anslational Health Sciences  
(ITHS ) instance of REDCap and stored on their server. A document with the sample invitation text, 
landing page text and screening survey questions has been to Zipline in the modification (DOC: 
‘MHA DIY Study – Recruitment and Sc reening Materials’) in the recruitment material templates 
section.  We request flexibility with the  questions  used. This information will be retained as a part of 
study data.  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 21 of 70 
 4.7 Consent for recruiting and screening . Will consent be obtained for any of the recruiting and screening 
procedures? (Section 8: Consent of Adults  asks about consent for the main study procedures).  
“Consent” includes: consent from individuals for their own participation; parental permission; assent from children; consent 
from a legally authorized representative for adult individuals who are unable to provide consent.  
 
Examples:   
• For a study in which names and contact information will be obtained from a registry: the registry should have consent 
from the registry participants to release their names and contact information to researchers.  
• For a study in which possible subjects are i dentified by screening records: there will be no consent process.  
• For a study in which individuals respond to an announcement and call into a study phone line: the study team person 
talking to the individual may obtain non -written consent to ask eligibili ty questions over the phone.  
 X No → If no, skip the rest of this section; go to question 5.1. 
  Yes → If yes, describe the consent process.  
         
 a. Documentation of consent . Will a written or verifiable electronic signature from the subject on a 
consent form be used to document consent for  the recruiting and screening procedures ? 
  No → If no, describe the information that will be provide d during the consent process  
and for which procedures.  
          
  Yes 
→ If yes, upload the consent form to Zipline .    
 
 
5 PROCEDURES  
5.1 Study procedures . Using lay language, p rovide a complete description of the study procedures , including the 
sequence,  intervention or manipulation (if any),  drug dosing information (if any) , blood volumes and frequency of 
draws (if any), use of records,  time required, and setting/location. If it is available: Upload a study flow sheet or 
table  to Zipline .  
For studies comparing standards of care : It is important to accurately identify the research procedures. See  UW IRB POLICY : 
Risks of Harm from Standard Care  and the draft guidance from the federal Office of Human Research Protections, “Guidance 
on Disclosing Reasonably Foreseeable Risks in Research Evaluating Standards of Care”;  October 20, 2014.  
Information about pediatric blood volume and frequency of draws that woul d qualify for expedited review can be found in  this 
reference table  on the Seattle Children’ s IRB website . 
 Phase 1  
Phase 1 will consist of analysis of  existing data curated from the beginning of 2020 (prior to award) and to the 
end of Y01, for a total of 100,000  consumers. Data include meta -data collected from MHA and TS websites as 
well as surveys and screens  routinely collected at MHA and TS for marketing and QI pur poses.  
 
Screens & Surveys  
Both MHA and TS collect information from consumers about their demographics such as age, gender, marital 
status, race/ethnicity, income status and education. MHA and TS also collects these symptom measures at initial 
engagement with services:  
• PHQ9 (depres sion),  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 22 of 70 
 • GAD7  (anxiety),  
• Prodromal Questionnaire -Brief Version (PQ -B; psychosis);  
• Brief Bipolar Test;  
• SWED (eating disorders),  
• PC-PTSD (PTSD),  
• CAGE -AID (Substance Use Disorder);  
• Work Health Survey,  
• caregiver status, and the  
• Duke Social Support Scale, a measure of perceived social  support .  
These variables will be used to characterize consumers, and may serve as moderators of engagement (Aims 1, 2 
and 3a) and clinical outcomes (Aim  3b). These measures have been uploaded to Zipline.  
 
Meta -Data  
To document engagement patterns, we will use meta -data (MD), which consists of passive data that is curated 
from each website and describes how consumers initiate, use and disengage from DMH services. Meta -data 
includes behaviors such as click throug hs to pages and links, time spent on a page, mouse/cursor movement 
between screening and material selections on a webpage, number of text interactions, time texting, and time 
between texts. These data are collected on the order of milliseconds (cursor hove rs), seconds (clicks), minutes 
(page views, time between sessions), and hours, days, weeks (number of texts, visits over time).  
 
Identifiability of Data  
All data from MHA and TSwill be  transferred to UW via a secure BOX account for analyses. Both MHA and T S 
have internal processes for deidentifying data:  
• Talkspace  (TS): A program called MixPanel tracks a website user using a random identifier. If and/or 
once a user signs up for the service, only then can TS attach any identifier (e.g. email) to their websit e 
behavior, which is done retroactively by replacing MixPanel’s random identifier with a new random, 
numeric identifier given by the system to all user accounts. TS does have access to identifiable 
information from participants, including PHI, but all iden tifiable information and PHI are removed prior 
to transfer to UW for analyses. Data transferred for analyses will only include the random, numeric 
identifier, which is the only information needed to analyze, store, and connect data tables.  Data transferred  
will include dates of service, which will be transformed upon receipt by the UW team by altering all dates 
of service based on their relationship to a randomly selected date.   
• Mental Health America (MHA): A user’s IP address is automatically recoded using a hashtag (a 
randomized, unique set of characteristics). This hashtag can be used to track user activity on MHA’s site 
and can be coded to follow users when they enter into  TS. Participants may enter identifiable information 
into the website (e.g. email addresses, names). Any identifiable information is deleted from the data set 
prior to transfer to UW for analyses. While MHA does not provide direct service, if any dates are  included 
in the data set, data transferred may include these dates and will be transformed by the UW team by 
altering all dates of service based on their relationship to a randomly selected date.  
 
Characterization of DMH Engagement  
This data will be used  to characterize patterns of DMH engagement, consumer engagement characteristics and 
behavior that predict time to disengagement. During this phase, we will periodically review our findings (in 
samples of approximately 25,000 consumers), to determine if ne w information is needed to help build predictive 
models. For instance, we may find that consumers engage in DMH in ways we did not anticipate. To better 
understand these unanticipated patterns of behavior, we will work with MHA and TS focus groups to rapid ly 
identify what information is needed, and the most efficient way to obtain that information. This is a process that is 
very common for marketing and R&D research at MHA and TS.  (See below for more information on Phase 1 
focus groups.)  
 
• Non-engagers are c onsumers who visit MHA and TS websites once and do not return.  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 23 of 70 
 • Pre-intenders are those who complete screens on both websites: at MHA pre -intenders will also be 
those who read and spend time on informational pages (e.g., “Will This Feeling Last Forever?”) and 
at TS be those who begin exploring the TS app but have not moved onto using the app.  
• Intenders are those who spend time in self -directed readings, videos and other self -directed materials 
aimed at reviewing different types of treatment, or motivational  readings (MHA) and who complete 
an initial intake with a TS therapist.  
• Actors are those who start treatment with a TS therapist and engagement/disengagement will be 
measured over the course of days and weeks.  
• Cyclers are those who return to MHA screening s and materials and those who stop and restart 
treatment at TS.  
 
Transition between phases will be measured by consumer behavior change in meta -data. For instance, transition 
from pre -intender to intender may be modeled by a consumer who completed an MHA s creen and then clicked 
through to pages or tools covering information about mental health. Transition from intender to actor maybe 
modeled by downloading the TS app and beginning a chat with a therapist. Transition from actor to cycler will be 
measured by number of returns to TS after initiating treatment. Although we will use these constructs to initially 
define theory -driven engagement patterns, we will also use these meta -data to explore whether unanticipated 
engagement patterns exist.  
 
Focus Groups  
Phas e 1 
Focus group participants will be randomly chosen from MHA and TS adult consumers. Focus groups will be 
recruited at 3 different  time points (6 groups, 3 for TS and 3 for MHA). Potential participants will receive an 
invitation to participate in focus groups. These invitations will be distributed on the platforms (either MHA or TS) 
using methods that are standard for marketing and R&D research at both MHA and TS (including but not limited 
to emails, pop -ups, messages from chat bot features, or mes sages in the participant’s inbox on the system). If 
consumers are interested in learning more, they can respond to the invitation by clicking on a link, which alerts 
study team members at MHA or TS.  
- Talkspace Focus Groups: A member of the study team will reach out to the consumer to provide more 
information, schedule activities, and provide information on engaging in the focus group (e.g. Zoom info).  
- MHA Focus Groups: After viewing/receiving the invitation, consumers  complete an interest form to indicate 
their interest in the focus group . A member of the study team emails interested participants to provide 
information about the focus group, which is all done online including instruction, options for anonymity, and 
any recording that may happen.  
Participants will first be presented with the study we are conducting, its purpose and then results from  initial  data 
analysis on engagement patterns. Participants will be asked their impressions of the data  and potential engagement 
subtypes and patterns t hat have been identified (e.g. preintender, intender, actor) . If from the discussion we 
determine that more information is needed in the form of a survey to the next cohort of consumers, we will the ask 
them to help us write and design the survey  (which wi ll be submitted to IRB via a modification if needed) . If they 
determine that we do not require more information, we will thank the participants for their time and ask their 
interest in participating in a future focus group.  Focus groups may be audio and vi deo recorded; consent for this 
audio  and video recording will be provided by participants in order for any recordings to take place , and 
participants may choose to turn their video off prior to the start of video recording .. Focus group participants will 
receive $40 for 90 -120 minutes of their time.   
 
Talkspace Nudge Survey  
Talkspace nudge survey respondents will be English speaking TS consumers  aged 18 and over  who has a 
messaging therapy or messaging + live therapy plan  and who choose to respond to invitations received in -app, by 
email, or as a push notification.  The invitations will contain a link to the survey, which has been programmed in 
Qualtrics hosted by UW. The TS consumers will review the statement that contains all necessary elements of 
consent and confirm their age. If the consumer indicates that they are younger than 18, the  survey will not allow 
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 24 of 70 
 them to continue.  Respondents are made aware that their responses to this survey are tied their other information 
on Tal kspace (e.g., the meta -data described above).  
 
The survey asks questions about how receiving communication from Talkspace may change a consumer’s use of 
the services  including requesting feedback on language used in different types of communications, freq uency of 
communications, and preferences around communications.  Respondents are asked demographic questions (e.g., 
age, race, ethnicity, education, income, household size, health status, and language) and questions about which 
device(s) they use Talkspace on. Participants are then given a vignette about a Talkspace user and shown example 
text for potential push notifications. The exact copy (language, etc.) seen by each participant will be randomized 
but all respondents will answer the same questions. Examp les of the copy that participants will be randomly 
exposed to have been uploaded to Zipline  in the Talkspace site  (“Talksapce_Nudge Survey Copy 
Options_MHATS”). They are then asked to respond to questions about how that language may impact their 
utilizatio n of Talkspace (e.g., would they be more or less likely to message their therapist after seeing that 
language). Respondents are then asked questions about their preferences related to receiving push notifications 
(e.g., how often, how many, do they current ly receive push notifications from TS) and whether or not seeing a 
push notification impacts their utilization of TS. We request flexibility in the specific language of both the copy 
and survey questions ; we will submit a modification if any edits go beyon d the scope described here. We expect 
that the survey will take approximately 10 minutes to complete.  
 
Phase 2  
Micro -Randomized Trials (MRTs)  
Phase 2 will consist of rapid deployment of micro -randomized trials (MRTs) on both MHA and TS platforms to 
understand what factors and engagement strategies may lead to increased engagement with digital mental health 
services. As with Phase 1, we are requesting a waiver of consent for these activities Data collected in Phase 2 
MRTs will include meta -data and co ntent data. Meta -data includes behaviors such as click throughs to pages and 
links, time spent on a page, mouse/cursor movement between screening and material selections on a webpage, 
number of text interactions, time texting, and time between texts. These  data are collected on the order of 
milliseconds (cursor hovers), seconds (clicks), minutes (page views, time between sessions), and hours, days, 
weeks (number of texts, visits over time).  Content data includes survey measures, transcripts (TS only), 
demog raphics, type of articles/resources accessed. All data types are routinely collected by MHA and TS.  Both 
MHA and TS, as part of routine practice and as part of their terms and conditions, explain to consumers that their 
information may be used for researc h purposes and shared with researchers in academic settings to better 
understand mental illness and for quality improvement purposes.  
 
We will perform micro -randomized trials  (MRTs)  using methodology of simultaneous A/B trials. In these trials, 
full access  to all tools, resources, and other information provided by the platforms for users will be maintained for 
participants in the trials. Participants will not lose access to any information or features of the sites of which they 
previously had access to. Alr eady existing features, tools and/or information may only be modified in their visual 
presentation on the platforms. The MRTs will be deployed on both MHA and TS, with some requiring 
coordination across both platforms, throughout Phase 2. The following describes  the type and scope of activities 
that will be conducted for each organization : 
 
Mental Health America  
MHA trials will focus on modifying current features on the website. In the past, MHA has conducted 
experimental user testing on engagement such as modifying tone, placement, and medium (written vs 
audio) of education materials, modifying language and linkages to services like telehealth partners, adding 
relevant links to other materials, and improving the formatting of articles for clarity. The futur e trials use 
this testing as a foundation for experimentation. For example, one focus of a future trial will be to present 
different online resources to MHA site users after they complete a survey that evaluates where they are in 
their help -seeking journey .  
 
Talkspace   
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 25 of 70 
 Trials conducted with Talkspace may focus on similar elements of user design in search of understanding 
better what design and presentation of information best helps potential and actual clients get the 
appropriate care that is the best fit for them and where they are at in their mental health journey. Strategies 
may include modifying informational pages in their visual presentation, adjusting the onboarding process 
to address areas of likely attrition, integrating new tools and information i nto treatment interface .  
 
We have uploaded a table of example potential MRTs to Zipline to provide further clarification (File Name: 
MHATS_Proposed MRTs). While we are providing these examples, we request flexibility to implement MRTs 
within the scope of the project (understanding what factors and engagement strategies lead to increase utilization 
of digital mental health services).  
 
Data Transfer, Identifiability, and Analysis  
All procedures regarding data transfer, identifiability, and analysis in Phase 2 are the same as those in Phase 1.  
 
Focus Groups  
Phase 2 focus group procedures are the same as those in Phase 1.  
 
Talkspace will host focus groups in Phase 2 where participa nts are invited based on their previous experience with 
therapy. TS consumers that have recently signed up for services will receive an invitation to complete a brief 
screening survey about previous engagement with therapy and demographic questions. Invita tions to participate in 
the focus groups will be extended to individuals based on their responses to the screening survey. For example, 
individuals with no previous experience in therapy will be invited to a focus group with other individuals with no 
previ ous experience in therapy. All individuals that respond to the survey will receive an invitation to a focus 
group (the specific focus group they are invited to will depend on their response to the survey).  While the focus 
group the individual is invited to  will be based on their response to the screening survey, the structure, content, 
and procedures for the focus groups are all the same as previously described in Phase 1. As part of the informed 
consent process, focus group participants will have the optio n to give consent for their responses during the focus 
group to be linked to data on their usage of the Talkspace platform (e.g., engagement with TS platform, number of 
texts sent, response to push notifications). All data will be anonymized prior to trans fer from TS to UW using the 
procedures outlined previously.  
 
Phase 3  
 
Phase 3:  
Study 1 (SMART): We will use a Sequential Multiple Random Assignment Trial (SMART) with an expected 
50,000  users, with the goal of optimizing engagement strategies so that web users engage with MHA resources 
most relevant to their needs, including psychoeducation, links to  treatment providers, or self -help tools. 
Participants will be randomized to type of screening results language, with conditions including results -as-usual, 
or tailoring by: 1) demographics (race, LGBTQ status, age) or 2) mental health severity (screening results) & 
perceived need. Subsequent randomization will determine whether single -item self -help tools embedded in 
content pages serve to engage users in active mental health strategies.  Participants will be MHA consumers who 
land on the PHQ -9 mental healt h test page on the MHA website.  
 
Recruitment Procedures  
No recruitment measures will be put in place, as we will be collecting data on participants who enter the PHQ 
screening page naturalistically.  
 
Consent Procedure  
As MHA consumers will be engaging wi th the website naturalistically, and the terms and conditions in the site 
include provisions around the use of user data for research, we will not be collecting formal consent from 
participants.  
 
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 26 of 70 
 Screens/Surveys  
PHQ -9 
Mini quiz/Next Steps Quiz  (DOC: Study 2 Next steps brief survey)  – we request flexibility with the language used 
for these questions  
 
Metadata collection  
We will use metadata , which consists of passive data that is curated from each website and describes how 
consumers initiate, use and d isengage from DMH services. Metadata includes behaviors such as click throughs to 
pages and links, time spent on a page, mouse/cursor movement between screening and material selections on a 
webpage, number of text interactions, time texting, and time betwe en texts. These data are collected on the order 
of milliseconds (cursor hovers), seconds (clicks), minutes (page views, time between sessions), and hours, days, 
weeks (visits over time).  
 
Randomization sequence  
The drafted randomization sequence is outlined on the MHA SMART Flow.pdf uploaded to zipline.  Participants 
will be randomized first between a standard demographics survey to start or demographics along with a mini quiz 
focusing on asking a participant’s primary website action intention (e.g., reading more about depression, 
connecting with therapists, using a DIY tool)  and perceived need  to do something to improve their mental health . 
Participants will then be randomized to types of screening results pages,  with combinations of tailored responses 
and resources based on  their responses to the demographics quiz and/or the mini quiz. For instance, i f the 
participant chooses to continue to visit further content, they will be randomized to conditions of different  
presentations of a DIY question or tool on the page. Length of engagement, bounce rates , and  other variables 
listed under metadata collection will be used to examine the impact of tailoring on engagement, which conditions 
and combinations of conditions re sult in increased engagement, and how the use of DIY tools impact engagement.  
 
Study 2  
 
As previously proposed in Aim 3, we have developed an  AI tool that uses machine learning / NLP / AI methods to 
personalize and tailor  an intervention to improve engagement and completion outcomes.  We focus on a specific, 
popular DIY tool (~10,000 users / month)  that teaches cognitive restructuring.  Our pilot work found that  (1) 
engagement and completion rates on DIY tools can be low, and (2) a pilot AI tool had significantly higher 
engagement and completion rates. These differences may arise due to AI support, UI/UX/design differences, other 
factors, or a combination thereof. Additionally, the efficacy of the digital tool to improve mental h ealth 
functioning is unknown. Study 2 will recruit 300 participants who will be randomly assigned to one of three 
groups for a longitudinal month -long study: twice -weekly DIY tool use with AI, without AI, or a control group.  
 
Recruitment Procedures  
Potential participants will be shown an invitation to participate in this portion of the study and displayed on the 
screening results page for users after the PHQ -9 and GAD -7 mental health tests. If consumers are interested in 
learning more, they can respo nd to the invitation by clicking on a link, which will direct them to a landing page 
(displayed via REDCap survey) with more information about the study and the screening survey.   
 
Screens/Surveys : All measures in this section will be completed using REDCa p – refer to DOC:  DIY Study – 
Measures for all measures listed in this section , and refer to DOC: Demographic ques tions for the demographics 
measure . Participants will receive links to complete these surveys via email and/or text message using Twilio, a 
REDCap extension that allows for SMS communication with participants. Participants will complete an initial 
screening assessment to determine eligibility, and then complete the same list of measures for 4 weeks while using 
intervention (consistent to each co ndition), an exit survey at week 5 and follow up measures consistent with the 
weekly measures at week 8 follow up. All participants will be asked to complete the demographics measure in 
addition to the measures included in the first week ’s battery of asses sments.  
Participants will be asked to complete the following measures in the screener:  
- PHQ -9 
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 27 of 70 
 - GAD -7 
- Hopefulness Item  
- Emotion Mechanisms  
 
At the end of weeks 1 -4 and week 8 follow up, participants will be asked to complete the following measures, 
some measures adjusted depending on condition:  
- Questions Post DIY AI [DIY Tool, AI condition ONLY]  
- PHQ -9 
- GAD -7 
- Hopefulness Item  
- Emotion Mechanisms  
- Competencies of Cognitive Therapy Scale – Self Report  
- Tool Use (sustain) [DIY Tool, No AI condition ONLY WEEKS 1 -4, BOTH DIY TOOL CONDITIONS at 
WEEK 8]  
- Tool Use (AI) [DIY Tool, AI condition ONLY, JUST WEEKS 1 -4] 
Demographics Measure (just week 1)  
 
At week 8 only, participants will be asked the following questions (in addition to those previously approved):  
- What is your total annual household income? (Less than $20,000; $20,000 - $39,999; $40,000 - $59,999; 
$60,000 - $79,999; $80,000 - $99,999; $100,000 - $149,999; $150,000 or more; Prefer not to answer)  
- To what extent did you participate in the study for each  of the following reasons (answer scale is 1 (strongly 
disagree) to 5 (strongly agree): For fun; Was curious to learn about mental health; Really needed the money; 
Wanted the money, but didn’t need it; Other [open text field]; Prefer not to answer  
 
 
For th e exit survey, participants will be asked to complete:  
- Exit Survey (Control) [Control condition ONLY]  
- Exit Survey (DIY) [DIY Tool, AI and DIY Tool, no AI conditions ONLY ] 
 
Consent Procedure  
We have uploaded the consent form   
 
Randomization Procedures  
Once consenting to the study, upon  beginning the REDCap screening survey, potential participants will 
automatically be random ly assigned to one of three conditions . .This random assignment will not impact their 
screening process, eligibility, or  the consent  process. Their randomly assigned condition will not be revealed to 
them until after they consent to the study . Upon their consent, the  information will be delivered to them via email , 
informing them of their assigned condition, outlining the s tudy tasks and payment structure.   
 
The three conditions are as follows: Control condition with psychoeducational reading material, a DIY worksheet, 
or a DIY tool with artificial intelligence, and  are all concerned with the idea of thinking traps and learn ing how to 
apply the concept of cognitive reframing to situations in one’s own life. Folks in both DIY tool conditions will be 
prompted to use their tools 3x a week, and all participants will be asked to respond to weekly surveys for the 
duration of 4 week s.  
 
Conditions:  
DIY Tool  with AI  
This tool uses AI to help users learn about thinking traps and cognitive reframing, and practice applying these 
concepts to situations in their own life. Participants will be asked to describe a thought and a situation they are 
struggling with. They will t hen identify potential “thinking traps” (or cognitive distortions) in the thought and 
reframe it in a way that is more positive, realistic, or helpful. The tool uses artificial intelligence to help generate 
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 28 of 70 
 reframed thoughts.  Please refer to the document W ith-AI-DIY-Tool -Static -Pages.pdf that has been uploaded to 
zipline.  
 
- Metadata collection: We will use metadata, which consists of passive data that is curated from the host site 
for the DIY tool and describes engagement patterns from the DIY tool.  This me tadata includes the length of 
time spent on the measure, percentage of measure completion, counts of tool visits and frequency of visits   
 
 
DIY Tool (no AI)  
3x weekly, participants will be prompted to use the DIY tool which covers the concept and practice of cognitive 
restructuring  using the same framework as from the DIY tool with AI, however without the AI component , as 
shown in the document Without -AI-DIY-Tool-Static -Pages.pdf that has been uploaded to zipline . 
 
 
- Metadata collection: We will use  metadata, which consists of passive data that is curated from the host site 
for the DIY tool and describes engagement patterns from the DIY tool.  This metadata includes the length of 
time spent on the measure, percentage of measure completion, counts of t ool visits and frequency of visits   
 
 
Control Psychoeducation  
At the start of participation after consenting, participants in the control condition will be asked to read the 
psychoeducation materials  that describe types of cognitive restructuring and tips for practicing them  in the 
document DIY Study – Psychoeducation.docx that has been uploaded to zipline.  
 
 
 
5.2 Recordings . Does the research involve creating audio or video recordings?  
  No → If no, go to question 5.3. 
 X Yes → If yes, verify that you have described what will be record ed in 5.1 and answer question  a. 
 a. Before recording, will consent for being recorded be obtained from  subjects and any other 
individuals who may be recorded?  
  No → If no, email hsdinfo@uw.edu  before submitting this application in Zipline. In 
the ema il, include a brief description of the research and a note that 
individuals will be recorded without their advance consent.     
 X Yes  
5.3 MRI scans.  Will any subjects have a Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) scan as part of the study procedures?  
This means scans that are performed solely for research purposes or clinical scans that are modified for research purposes (f or 
example, using a gadolinium -based contrast agent when it is not required for clinical reasons ).  
 X No → If no, go to question  5.4. 
  Yes → If yes, answer questions a through c. 
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 29 of 70 
 a. Describe the MRI scan(s).  Specifically:  
• What is the purpose of the scan(s)? Examples: obtain research data;  safety assessment 
associated with a research procedure.  
• Which subjects will receive an MRI scan?  
• Describe the minimum and maximum number of scans per subject, and over what time period 
the scans will occur. For example: all subjects will undergo two MRI scans, six months apart.  
       
b. Use of gadolinium . Will any of the MRI scans involve the use of a gadolinium -based contrast agent 
(GBCA?)  
  No  
  Yes → If yes, which agents will be used? Check all that apply.  
 Brand Name  Generic Name  Chemical Structure  
  Dotarem  Gadoterate meglumine  Macrocylic  
  Eovist / Primovist  Gadoxetate disodium  Linear  
  Gadavist  Gadobutro  Macrocyclic  
  Magnevist  Gadpe ntetate dimeglumine  Linear  
  MultiHance  Gadobenate dimeglumine  Linear  
  Omniscan  Gadodiamide  Linear  
  OptiMARK  Gadoversetamide  Linear  
  ProHance  Gadoteridol  Macrocyclic  
  Other, provide name:        
 1.) The FDA has concluded that gadolinium is retained in the body and brain for 
a significantly longer time than previously recognized, especially for linear 
GBCAs. The health -related risks of this longer retention are not yet clearly 
established. However, the  UW IRB expects researchers to provide a 
compelling justification for using a linear GBCA instead of a macrocyclic 
GBCA, to manage the risks associated with GBCAs.  
 Describe why it is important to use a GBCA with the MRI scan(s). Describe 
the dose that will be used  and (if it is more than the standard clinical dose 
recommended by the manufacturer) why it is necessary to use a higher 
dose . If a linear GBCA  will be used , explain why a macrocyclic GBCA  cannot 
be used . 
        
 2.) Information for subjects. Confirm by checking this box that subjects will be 
provided with the FDA -approve d Patient Medication Guide for th e GBCA 
being used in the research  or that the same information will be inserted into 
the consent form.  
  Confirmed  
c. MRI facility . At which facility(ies) will the MRI scans occur? Check all that apply.  
  UWMC Radiology/Imaging Services (the UWMC clinical facility)  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 30 of 70 
   DISC Diagnostic Imaging Sciences Center (UWMC research facility)  
  BMIC Biomolecular Imaging Center (South Lake Union research facility)  
  Harborview Radiology/Imaging Services (the Harborview clinical facility)  
  SCCA Imaging Services  
  Northwest Diagnostic Imaging  
  Other: identify in the text box below:  
        
Personnel. For MRI scans that will be conducted at the DISC or BMIC resear ch facilities: The role, qualifications, and 
training of individuals who will operate the scanner, administer the GBCA (if applicable), and/or insert and 
remove the IV catheter should be described in question 12.3 . 
5.4 Data variables.  Describe the specif ic data that will be obtained  (including a description of the most sensitive items). 
Alternatively, a list of the data variables  may be uploaded  to Zipline . 
 Phase 1  
Both MHA and TS collect information from consumers about their demographics such as age, gender, marital 
status, race/ethnicity, income status and education. MHA and TS also collect these symptom measures at initial 
engagement with services:  
• PHQ9 (depress ion),  
• GAD7  (anxiety),  
• Prodromal Questionnaire -Brief Version (PQ -B; psychosis);  
• Brief Bipolar Test;  
• SWED (eating disorders),  
• PC-PTSD (PTSD),  
• CAGE -AID (Substance Use Disorder);  
• Work Health Survey,  
• caregiver status, and the  
• Duke Social Support Scale,  a measure of perceived social  support .  
These measures have been uploaded to Zipline.  
 
Phase 1 Talkspace Survey: Demographics (e.g., age, race, ethnicity, education, income, household size, health 
status, and language); Device usage; Opinions on sample l anguage for push notifications; Opinions on how push 
notifications and specific language in those notifications impact or may impact their utilization of TS services  
 
Meta -Data  
To document engagement patterns, we will use meta -data (MD), which consists of passive data that is curated 
from each website and describes how consumers initiate, use and disengage from DMH services. Meta -data 
includes behaviors such as click throughs to pages and links, time spent on a page, mouse/cursor movement 
between screening and material selections on a webpage, number of text interactions, time texting, and time 
between texts. These data are collected on the order of milliseconds (cursor hovers), s econds (clicks), minutes 
(page views, time between sessions), and hours, days, weeks (number of texts, visits over time).  
 
Phase 2  
Data collected in Phase 2 MRTs will include meta -data and content data. Meta -data includes behaviors 
such as click throughs t o pages and links, time spent on a page, mouse/cursor movement between 
screening and material selections on a webpage, number of text interactions, time texting, and time 
between texts. These data are collected on the order of milliseconds (cursor hovers),  seconds (clicks), 
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 31 of 70 
 minutes (page views, time between sessions), and hours, days, weeks (number of texts, visits over time).  
Content data includes survey measures, transcripts (TS only), demographics, type of articles/resources 
accessed.  Talkspace transcrip ts are of message -based therapy interactions. A ll identifiable information 
(e.g., names, usernames, links) are scrubbed from the transcripts  by an automated process internal to TS  
prior to transfer to UW. Additional anonymization occurs on secure servers a t UW including 
generalizing specific mentions of places (e.g., changing Seattle to Pheonix or Duluth) and proper nouns 
(e.g., changing UW to USC), and adding or removing filler words with less unique word choices or 
phrases (e.g., changing ‘My girlfriend’s  XBOX playing irritates me’ to ‘My sister’s game playing makes 
me angry’). These methods are outlined in our Data Security Protocol (previously uploaded to Zipline).  
 
Phase 3  
Data collected in Study 1 and Study 2 of Phase 3B will both include metadata from MHA and 
content/survey data. Meta -data includes behaviors such as click throughs to pages and links, time spent 
on a page, mouse/cursor movement between screening and material selections on a webpage, number of 
text interactions, time texting, and time between texts. These data are collected on the order of 
milliseconds (cursor hovers), seconds (clicks), minutes (page views, time between sessions), and hours, 
days, weeks (number of texts, visits over time).  At initial engagement for Study 1 , the PHQ -9 and for 
study  2, either the PHQ or GAD measures will be collected on the MHA website. The following 
describes more specific data variables for each study:  
Study 1 – 
- PHQ -9 
- Mini quiz/next steps quiz --two items, collecting the participant’s primary websit e action intention . The 
first question asks,  “What is the main thing you want to do after taking this mental health test” and answer 
choices such as “Take another mental health test”, “Understand what depression is like”, “Find a treatment 
provider near you”. The second question asks “Do you feel lik e you need to do something to improve your 
mental health?” (Yes, No, Don’t know)  
 
 
Study 2 –  
DIY Tool M etadata  (both with AI and without AI)  
In addition to metadata collected from the MHA website, metadata will also be collected from the DIY 
tool which is hosted on the Microsoft Azure platform . These specific variables will be measured:  
- Engagement in length of time spent on the measure  
- Completion rate of measure  (% of measure completed)  
- Dosage, in number of times/sessions using /visiting  measure or psychoeducation  
- Amount of use on the MHA websit e 
 
Participants will be asked to complete the following measures in the screener:  
- PHQ -9 
- GAD -7 
- Hopefulness Item  
- Emotion Mechanisms  
 
 
At the end of weeks 1 -4 and week 8 follow up , participants will be asked to complete the following 
measures:  
- Questions Post DIY AI [DIY Tool, AI condition ONLY]  
- PHQ -9 
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 32 of 70 
 - GAD -7 
- Hopefulness Item  
- Emotion Mechanisms  
- Competencies of Cognitive Therapy Scale – Self Report  
- Tool Use (sustain) [DIY Tool, No AI condition ONLY WEEKS 1 -4, BOTH DIY TOOL 
CONDITIONS WEEK 8]  
- Tool Use (AI) [DIY Tool, AI condition ONLY , JUST WEEKS 1 -4] 
- Demographic questions (JUST WEEK 1)  
 
For the exit survey, participants will be asked to complete:  
- Exit Survey  (Control) [Control condition ONLY]  
- Exit Survey (DIY) [DIY Tool, AI and DIY Tool, no AI  conditions ONLY]  
 
5.5 Data sources.  For all types of data that will be access ed or collect ed for this research: Identify whether the data are 
being obtained  from the subjects (or subjects’ specimens) or whether they are being obtained  from some other 
source (and identify the source).  
If you have already provided this information in Question 5.1, you do not need to repeat the information here.  
 Surveys and screeners are completed by participants (MHA and TS consumers). Meta -Data is curated from each 
website (MHA and TS)  
 
Focus group data is provided by participants.  
 
Phase 3B Study 2: Screener and surveys are completed by participants. Meta -data is also curated from DIY tool 
website.  
5.6 Identifiability of data and specimens . Answer these questions carefully and completely. This will allow HSD to 
accurately determine the type of review that is required and the relevant compliance requirements.  Review the 
following definitions before answering the questions:  
Access means to view or perceive data, but not to possess or record it. See, in contrast, the definition of “obtain”.  
Identifiable  means that the identity  of an individual is or may be readily (1) ascertained by the researcher or any other member 
of the study team from specific data variables or from a combination of data variables, or (2) associated with the informatio n.  
Direct ide ntifiers  are direct links between a subject and data/specimens. Examples include (but are not limited to): name, date 
of birth, medical record number, email or IP address, pathology or surgery accession number, student number, or a collection 
of data that is (when taken together) identifiable.  
Indirect identifiers  are information that links between direct identifiers and data/specimens. Examples: a subject code or 
pseudonym.   
Key refers to a single place where direct identifiers and indirect identifiers a re linked together so that, for example, coded data 
can be identified as relating to a specific person. Example: a master list that contains the data code and the identifiers li nked to 
the codes.  
Obtain  means to possess or record in any fashion (writing, e lectronic document, video, email, voice recording, etc.) for research 
purposes and to retain for any length of time. This is different from accessing , which means to view or perceive data.  
a. Will you or any members of your team have access  to any direct  or indirect identifiers?  
 X Yes → If yes, describe which identifiers and for which data/specimens.  
   Phase 1 Data Analysis Activities  & Phase 2 MRTs : Both MHA and TS have access to 
identifiers (including names, email addresses, etc) provided by users. We have described 
the processes for deidentification of this data in Section 5.1. UW will have no access to 
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 33 of 70 
 any direct identifiers; all direct identifie rs will be removed from data sets prior to transfer 
via a secure BOX folder. All team members will have access to indirect indentifiers (e.g. 
random, numeric identifier generated by TS, hashtag generated by MHA).  
 
Phase 1 & Phase 2 Focus Groups: MHA and T S will have access to names, email 
addresses, and contact information.  MHA, TS, and UW will have access to direct 
identifiers as a result of video recordings. For TS focus group participants that have given 
permission for their focus group data to be linke d to their platform usage data, the platform 
usage data will be anonymized prior to transfer to UW (using previously described 
methods) and the focus group data used in these analyses will be an anonymized transcript. 
The anonymized transcript will be stor ed separately from the video and analysis will take 
place only with the deidentified transcripts and usage data so that the personnel completing 
the analysis do not have the ability to link the datasets.   
 
Phase 1 Talkspace Survey: TS and UW will have acc ess to email addresses and names (the 
survey requests first names only in order to personalize the copy reviewed by each 
respondent). The survey information is tied to respondents’ TS metadata via the email 
address provided. Email addresses will be removed and the unique, indirect identifiers will 
be applied prior to analysis.  
 
Phase 3 Study 1 SMART: MHA has access to user IP addresses . We have described the 
processes for deidentification of this data in section 5.1 UW will have no access to any 
direct identifiers; all direct identifiers will be removed from data sets prior to transfer via a 
secure BOX folder. All team members will have  access to indirect identifiers (e.g. , 
generated hash ed IP address ) 
 
Phase 3 Study 2 Screening Survey: MHA and UW will have access to email addresses and 
phone numbers, which will be stored separately from study data within REDCap.  
  No → If no, select the reason(s) why you (and all members of your team) will not have access to 
direct or indirect identifiers.  
  
There will be no identifiers.    
  
  
Identifiers or the key have been (or will have been) destroyed before access.    
  
  
There is an agreement with the holder of the identifiers (or key) that prohibits the 
release of the identifiers (or key) to study team members under any circumstances.    
  
  This agreement should be available upon request from the IRB.  Examples: a Data Use Agreement, 
Repository Gatekeeping form, or documented email.  
  
There are written policies and procedures for the repository/database/data 
management center that prohibit the release of the identifiers (or identifying link). This 
includes situations involving an Honest Broker.    
  
  
There are other legal requirements prohibiting the release of the identifiers or key. 
Describe them below.    
  
        
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 34 of 70 
 b. Will you  or any study team members  obtain  any direct or indirect identifiers?  
 X Yes → If yes, describe which identifiers and for which data/specimens.  
   
 Phase 1 Data Analysis Activities  & Phase 2 MRTs : Both MHA and TS will obtain  
identifiers (including names, email addresses, etc) provided by users. We have 
described the processes for deidentification of this data in Section 5.1. UW will 
neither obtain nor  have  access to any direct identifiers; all direct identifiers will be 
removed from data sets prior to transfer via a secure BOX folder. All team members 
will have access to indirect indentifiers (e.g. random, numeric identifier generated 
by TS, hashtag ge nerated by MHA).  
 
Phase 1  & Phase 2  Focus Groups: Focus group participants ONLY: MHA and TS will 
obtain names, email addresses, and Names, contact information.  UW will receive 
identifiable video recordings which will transferred via a secure BOX folder.  For 
TS focus group participants that have given permission for their focus group data to 
be linked to their platform usage data, the platform usage data will be anonymized 
prior to transfer to UW (using previously described methods) and the focus group 
data used in these analyses will be an anonymized transcript. The anonymized 
transcript will be stored separately from the video and analysis will take place only 
with the deidentified transcripts and usage data so that the personnel completing the 
analysis do  not have the ability to link the datasets.   
 
Phase 1 Talksapce Survey: TS and UW will obtain names and email addresses in the 
Qualtrics survey hosted by UW.  
 
Phase 3 Study 1  SMART: : MHA has access to user IP addresses. We have described 
the processes for deidentification of this data in section 5.1 UW will have no access 
to any direct identifiers; all direct identifiers will be removed from data sets prior to 
transfer via a secure BOX folder. All team members will have access to indirect 
identifiers (e.g. generated hash ed IP address ) 
 
Phase 3 Study 2 Screening Survey: MHA and UW will obtain email addresses  and 
phone numbers, which will be stored separately from study data within REDCap.  
Phase 3 Study 2 DIY tool: The Microsoft Azure service is used to host the tool data 
entered by participants while using the tool. The tool does not request any 
identifying information, however there is the possibility that participants share 
indirect identifiers  in qualitative responses to tool prompts.  
  No → If no, select the reason(s) why you (and all members of your team) will not obtain direct 
or indirect identifiers.  
  
There will be no identifiers.    
  
  
Identifiers or the key have been (or will have been) destroyed before access.    
  
  
There will be an agreement with the holder of the identifiers (or key) that prohibits the 
release of the identifiers (or key) under any circumstances.     
  
  This agreement should be available upon request from the IRB.  Examples: a  Data Use Agreement, 
Repository Gatekeeping form, or documented email.  
  
  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 35 of 70 
   There are written policies and procedures for the repository/database/data 
management center that prohibit the release of the identifiers (or identifying link). This 
includes situati ons involving an Honest Broker.  
  
There are other legal requirements prohibiting the release of the identifiers or key. 
Describe them below.     
  
        
c. If any identifiers  will be obtained , indicate how the identifiers will be stored (and for which data).  NOTE: Do 
not describe the data security plan here – that information is requested in section 9.6.  
  Identifiers will be stored with the data . Describe the data to which this applies:  
 
 
 
  X 
  
  Focus groups ONLY: Identifiers will be stored with the data due to the nature of video 
recordings.  
  
Identifiers and study data will be stored separately but a link will be maintained between 
the identifiers and the study data (for example, through the u se of a code) . Describe the 
data to which this applies:   X 
  
  Both MHA and TS have internal processes for handling identifiers . At TS, a program 
called MixPanel  tracks a website user using a random identifier; if and/or once a user 
signs up for the service, only then can TS attach any identifier (e.g. email) to their website 
behavior which is done retroactively by replacing MixPanel’s random identifier with a 
new random identifier given by the system to all user accounts. At MHA, a user’s IP 
address is automatically recoded using a hashtag (a randomized, unique set of characters). 
Any identifying information that users may enter into the website (e.g. email addres ses, 
names) is deleted from the data set prior to sending to UW.  
 
Phase 1 Talkspace Survey: All identifiers will be obtained by Qualtrics hosted by UW. 
The data collected will be accessible to both UW and TS study team members . The 
survey information is ti ed to respondents’ TS metadata via the email address provided. 
Email addresses will be removed and the unique, indirect identifiers will be applied prior 
to analysis.  
 
For TS focus group participants that have given permission for their focus group data to  
be linked to their platform usage data, the platform usage data will be anonymized prior to 
transfer to UW (using previously described methods) and the focus group data used in 
these analyses will be an anonymized transcript. The anonymized transcript wil l be stored 
separately from the video and analysis will take place only with the deidentified 
transcripts and usage data so that the personnel completing the analysis do not have the 
ability to link the datasets.   
 
Phase 3 DIY Study 2 Longitudinal Surveys : All identifiers will be obtained by REDCap 
hosted by ITHS. The data collected will be accessible to both UW and MHA study team 
members. The survey information is tied to respondents’ MHA metadata via the email 
address provided. Email addresses will be re moved and the unique, indirect identifiers 
will be applied prior to analysis.  
 
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 36 of 70 
 DIY tool data storage details   
The Microsoft Azure service is used to host the tool data entered by participants while 
using the tool. The tool does not request any identifying information, however there is the 
possibility that participants share indirect identifiers in qualitative responses to tool 
prompts. For data that is entered by participants while using the tool, in -transit data 
is encrypted. A validated cryptographic modu le is used for the storage encryption 
for data at rest.  24-hour threat management protects the infrastructure and platform 
against malware, distributed denial -of-service (DDoS), man -in-the-middle (MITM), and 
other threats.  
 
  
Identifiers and study data will be stored separately, with no link between the identifiers 
and the study data. Describe the data to which this applies:    
  
        
d. Research collaboration . Will individuals who provide coded information or specimens  for the research also 
collaborate on other  activities for this research? If yes, identify the activities and provide the name of the 
collaborator’s institution/organization.  
Examples include but are not limited to: (1) study, interpretation, or analysis of the data that results from the coded 
information or specimens; and (2) authorship on presentations or manuscripts related to this work.  
 N/A  
5.7 Protected Health Information (PHI).  Will participants’ identifiable PHI be  access ed, obtain ed, use d, or disclose d for 
any reason (for example, to identify or screen potential subjects, to obtain study data or specimens, for study 
follow -up) that does not involve the creation or obtaining of a Limited Data Set?  
PHI is individually identifiable  healthcare record infor mation or clinical specimens from an organization considered a “covered 
entity” by federal HIPAA regulations, in any form or media, whether electronic, paper, or oral. You must answer yes to this 
question  if the research involves identifiable health care r ecords (e.g., medical, dental, pharmacy, nursing, billing, etc.), 
identifiable healthcare information from a clinical department repository, or observations or recordings of clinical 
interactions.  
  No → If no, skip the rest of this question; go to question  5.8 
 X Yes → If yes, answer all of the questions below.  
  a. Describe the PHI and the reason for using  it. Be specific.  For example, will any “free text” fields 
(such as physician notes) be accessed, obtained, or used?   
 MHA is not a covered entity, therefore no information included in the MHA dataset is not 
considered PHI. Talkspace is a covered entity, thus information  included in the TS dataset is 
considered PHI. This information includes demographics such as age, gender, marital status, 
race/ethnicity, income status and education ; PHQ9 (depression) ;  GAD7 (anxiety) ; Prodromal 
Questionnaire -Brief Version (PQ -B; psychosis);  Brief Bipolar Test; SWED (eating disorders) ; PC-
PTSD (PTSD) ; CAGE -AID (Substance Use Disorder); Work Health Survey ; caregiver status ; the 
Duke Social Support Scale, a measure of perceived social sup port; and meta -data collected from 
consumers’ interaction with the TS website. Only members of TS’ study team will have access to 
any identifiable information , with the exception of information provided during the Phase 1 
Talkspace Survey.  
 
Phase 3B Study  2 ONLY: PHQ -9 scores, GAD -7 scores are used in the screening process for the 
study in REDCap and to determine eligibility for the study.  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 37 of 70 
 b. Is any of the PHI located in Washington State?  
 X No  
  Yes  
c. Describe the pathway of how the PHI will be accessed or obtained, starting with the 
source/location and then describing the system/path/mechanism by which it will be identified, 
accessed, and copied for the research . Be specific.  For example: directly view records; search 
through a department’s clinical database; submit a request to Leaf.  
 Consumers provide information on demographics and complete surveys within the Talkspace 
platform. All TS metadata is collected within the Talkspace platform.  
 
Phase 3B Study 2 ONLY: The PHQ -9 and GAD -7 information gathered at eligibi lity screening 
will be  provided by participants within the REDCAP instance hosted by ITHS at the University of 
Washington.  
d. For which PHI will subjects provide HIPAA authorization  before the PHI is accessed, obtained 
and/or used ?  
 N/A  
 Confirm by checking the box  that the UW Medicine HIPAA Authorization  form maintained on the 
HSD website will be used to access, obtain, use, or disclose any UW Medicine PHI.  
  Confirmed    
e. For which PHI will HIPAA authorization NOT be obtained from the subjects?  
 All PHI listed above.  
 Provide the following assurances by checking the boxes.  
 
 
The minimum necessary amount of PHI to accomplish the purposes described in this 
application will be accessed, obtained and/or used.   
X 
 
 
 
 
The PHI will not be reused or disclosed to any other person or entity, except as required by 
law, for authorized oversight of the research study, or for other research for which the use or 
disclosure of PHI would be permitted.   
X 
 
 
 
 
The HIPAA “accounting for disclosures” requirement will be fulfilled, if applicable. See UW 
Medicine Compliance  Policy # 104.   
X 
 
 
   
 
There will be reasonable safeguards to protect against identifying, directly or indirectly, any 
patient in any report of the research.     
X 
   
 
5.8 Genomic data sharing . Will the research  obtain or generate genomic data ? 
 X No  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 38 of 70 
   Yes → If yes, answer the question below.  
 a. Will genomic data from this research be sent to a national database (for example, NIH’s dbGaP 
database)?  
   No  
   Yes → If yes, complete the SUPPLEMENT Genomic Data Sharing  and upload it to 
Zipline . 
5.9 Whole genome sequencing. For re search involving biospecimens: W ill the research include wh ole genome 
sequencing?  
Whole genome sequencing is sequencing of a human germline or somatic specimen with the intent to generate the genome or 
exome sequence of that specimen.  
  No  
  Yes  
5.10 Possible secondary use or sharing of information, specimens, or subject contact information. Is it likely  that the 
obtained or collected information, specimens, or subject contact information will be used for any of the following:  
• Future research not descr ibed in this application (in other words, secondary research)  
• Submission to a repository, registry, or database managed by the study team , colleagues, or others for 
research purposes  
• Sharing with others for their own research  
Please  consider the broadest p ossible future plans and whether consent will be obtained now from the subjects 
for future sharing or research  uses  (which it may not be possible to describe in detail  at this time).  Answer  YES 
even if  future sharing or uses will use de -identified informat ion or specimens. Answer  NO if sharing is unlikely or if 
the only sharing will be through the NIH Genomic Data Sha ring described in question 5. 8. 
Many federal grants and contracts now require data or specimen sharing as a condition of funding, and many journals require 
data sharing as a condition of publication. “Sharing” may include  (for example) : informal arrangements to share banked 
data/specimen s with other investigators; establishing a repository that will formally share with  other  researchers  through 
written agreements; or sending data/specimens to a third party repository/archive/entity such as the Social Science Open 
Access Repository (SSOAR) , or the  UCLA Ethnomusicology Archive.  
  No  
 X Yes → If yes, answer all of the questions below.  
 a. Describe what will be store d for future use,  including whether any direct or indirect (e.g., subject 
codes) identifiers will be stored.  
 All data will be stored for future use.  
 
Phase 1 Assessment & Phase 2 MRTs data & Phase 3 Study 1 SMART data : Both 
MHA and TS assign random identifiers to consumers, which will be stored with the 
data, to allow for longitudinal analysis. The random identifiers are indirect; the data sets 
used and stored for analyses will not contain direct identifiers.  
 
Focus g roup data: All data , other than video recordings,  will be stored separately from 
identifiable information. Focus group data is coded with a unique study ID number, 
which cannot be used to identify the participant. The ID number will be stored along 
with th e focus group data for data transfer  and data analysis. This ID number is not tied 
to any identifiers. Video recordings will be stored in a secure BOX folder separate from 
all other data.  
 
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 39 of 70 
 Phase 1 Talkspace Survey: The survey information is tied to respon dents’ TS metadata 
via the email address provided. Email addresses will be removed and the unique, 
indirect identifiers will be applied prior to analysis and storage.  
 
Phase 3 Study 2 Longitudinal surveys: All assessment data will be stored separately 
from  identifiable information. Assessment data is coded with a unique study ID number, 
which cannot be used to identify the participant; the ID number will be stored along 
with the assessment data for future use.   
 
Phase 3 Study 2 DIY Tool MetaData:  All metada ta collected from the DIY tool that will 
be stored for future use does not contain direct or indirect identifiers. A unique ID will 
be connected to participant  REDCap data.  
 b. Describe what will be shared  with other researchers or with a repository/database/registry , 
including whether direct identifiers will be shared and (for specimens) what data will be 
released with the specimens.  
 All assessment data may be shared with other researchers. No direct id entifiers , 
including video recordings,  will be shared.  
Phase 3B Study 2 ONLY: Participants consent to this sharing of data during informed 
consent.  
 c. Who will oversee and/or manage the sharing?  
 The oversight/management of the sharing will be the responsibility of the PIs (Dr  
Althoff).  
 d. Describe the possible future uses , including limitations or restrictions (if any) on future uses or 
users.  As stated above, consider the broadest possible uses . 
 Examples: data will be used only for cardiovascular research; data will not be used for research on 
population origins.  
 Possible future uses of this data include ongoing data analysis for publication and 
informing future grant proposals for clinical trials.  
 e. Consent . Will consent be obtained now from subjects for the secondary use, banking and/or 
future sharing?  
  No  
 X Yes → If yes, be sure to include the information about this consent process in the 
consent form (if there is one) and in the answers to the consent questions in 
Section 8.  
 f. Withdrawal . Will subjects be able to withdraw their data/specimens from secondary use, 
banking or sharing?  
 X No  
  Yes → If yes, describe how, and whether there are any limitations on withdrawal.  
 Example: data can be withdrawn from the repository but cannot be retrieved after they 
are released.  
       
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 40 of 70 
  g. Agreements for sharing or release . Confirm by checking the box that the sharing or release will 
comply with UW (and, if applicable, UW Medicine) policies that require a formal agreement 
with  the r ecipient for release of data or specimens to individuals or entities other than federal 
databases.  
 Data Use Agreements or Gatekeeping forms are used for data; Material Transfer Agreements are used for 
specimens (or specimens plus data ). Do not attach  any template agreement forms; the IRB neither reviews nor 
approves them  
 X  Confirmed  
5.11 Communication with subjects during the study . Describe the types of communication (if any) the research team 
will have with already -enrolled subjects during the study. Provide a description instead of the actual materials 
themselves.   
Examples: email, texts, phone, or letter reminders about appointments or about returning study materials such as a 
questionnaire; requests to confirm contact information.   
 Phase 1 Data Analysis & Phase 2 MRTs Activities: The study team will have no communication with 
participants.  
Phase 1 & Phase 2 Focus Groups: The study team may email or call participants to schedule the focus 
groups and/or send reminders. Study team members from MHA and TS will communicate with 
participants to distribute the incentive.  
Phase 1 Talkspace Survey: The study team wil l email those participants that are selected to receive a 
$100 Amazon gift card.  
Phase 3B Study 2: Participants will receive reminders vi a email and/or SMS from REDCAP to complete surveys 
throughout the study protocol. Participants will be directed to rai se any study related questions responding to 
emails from the study team or contacting the study team via email. The study team will email participants to 
distribute each of their  weekly  incentives . 
5.12 Future contact with subjects . Is there a  plan to retain any contact information  for subjects  so that they can be 
contacted in the future ? 
  No  
 X Yes → If yes, describe the purpose of the future contact, and whether use of the contact information will 
be limited to the study  team; if not, describe who else could be provided with the contact 
information.  Describe the criteria for approving requests for the informa tion.    
 Examples: inform subjects about other studies; ask subjects for additional information or medical record access 
that is not currently part of the study proposed in this application; obtain another sample.  
 Phase 1 & Phase 2 Focus Group Participants ONLY: Focus group participants will be offered 
the opportunity to participate in future groups, if those future groups take place. If future 
groups are needed, those participants may be contacted for potential participation.  
5.13 Alternatives to participation . Are there any alternative procedures or treatments that might be advantageous  to 
the subjects ? 
If there are no alternative procedures or treatments, select “No”. Examples of advantageous alternatives: earning extra class  
credit in some time -equivalent way other than research participation; obtaining supportive care or a standard clinical 
treatment from a health care provider instead of participating in research with an experimental drug.  
 X No  
  Yes → If yes, describe the alternatives.  
         
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 41 of 70 
 5.14 Upload to Zipline  all data collection forms  (if any) that will be directly used by or with the subjects, and any  
scripts/talking points that will be used to collect the data . Do not include data collection forms that will be used 
to abstract data from other sources (such as medical or academic reco rds), or video recordings.  
• Examples : survey, questionnaires, subject logs or diaries, focus group questions.  
• NOTE: Some times the IRB can approve the general content of surveys and other data collection instruments rather than 
the specific form itself. Thi s prevents the need to submit a modification request for future minor changes that do not add 
new topics or increase the sensitivity of the questions. To request this general approval, use the text box below to identify  
the questionnaires/surveys/ etc. for  which you are seeking this more general approval. Then briefly describe the scope of 
the topics  that will be covered  and the most personal and sensitive questions. The HSD staff person who screens this 
application will let you know whether this is sufficient or whether you will need to provide more information.  
• For materials that cannot be uploaded : upload screenshots or written descriptions that are sufficient to enable the IRB to 
understand the types of data that will be collected and the nature o f the experience for the participant. You may also 
provide URLs (website addresses) or written descriptions below. Examples of materials that usually cannot be uploaded: 
mobile apps; computer -administered test; licensed and restricted standardized tests.  
• For data that will be gathered in an evolving way : This refers to data collection/questions that are not pre -determined 
but rather are shaped during interactions with participants in response to observations and responses made during those 
interactions. If  this applies to the proposed  research, provide a description of the process by which the data 
collection/questions will be established during the interactions  with subjects, how the data collection/questions  will be 
documented , the topics likely to be add ressed , the most sensitive type of information likely to be gathered , and the 
limitations (if any) on topics that will be raise d or pursue d. 
Use this text box (if desired) to provide:  
• Short written descriptions of materials that cannot be uploaded, such a s URLs  
• A description of the process that will be used  for data that will be gathered in an evolving way.  
• The general content of questionnaires, surveys and similar instruments for which general approval  is being 
sought . (See the NOTE  bullet point in the in structions above.)  
       
5.15  SARS -CoV-2 testing . Will the subjects be tested for the SARS -CoV-2 coronavirus?  
If the only testing is to screen the subjects (question 2.8), you do not need to answer this question  
 X No  
  Yes → If yes : 
• Name the testing lab  
• Confirm that the lab and its use of this test is CLIA -certified or certified by the Washington 
State Department of Health  
• Describe whether you will return the results to the participants and, if yes, who will do it and 
how (including any information you would provide to subjects with positive test results).    
        
5.16 Research equipment and COVID -19. Does you research involve any equipment that will be used on more than 
one subject that is not part of a clinical facility?  
Examples: a computer tablet, a portable research ultra -sound device).  
 X No  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 42 of 70 
   Yes → If yes : confirm by checking the box below that the disinfection and cleaning of the equipment will 
meet the enhance d UW Environmental Health & Safety requirements described here: 
https://www.ehs.washington.edu/system/files/resources/cleaning -disinfection -protocols -covid -
19.pdf   
   Confirmed  
 
 
6 CHILDREN (MINORS) and PARENTAL PERMISSION  
6.1 Involvement of minors . Does the research include minors (children )? 
Minor or child  means someone who has not yet attained the legal age for consent for the research procedures, as 
described in the applicable laws of the jurisdiction in which the research will be conducted. This may or may not 
be the same as the definition used by fundin g agencies such as the National Institutes of Health.  
• In Washington State the generic age of consent is 18, meaning that anyone under the age of 18 is 
considered a child.  
• There are some procedures for which the age of consent is much lower in Washington State . 
• The generic age of consent may be different in other states, and in other countries.  
  No → If no, go to Section 8 . 
 X Yes → If yes, provide the age range of the minor subjects for this study and the legal age for consent in 
the study  population(s). If there is more than one answer, explain.      
  Phase 1: We will be using the entire data set of consumers for MHA and TS from 2018 until the 
final year of the project. While we expect most consumers will be aged 14 and older, we will 
include data from consumers aged 6 and over. All focus group particip ants will be aged 18 and 
over.   
 
Phase 2 MRTs: We will be using data from all naturalistic consumers of MHA and TS. While we 
expect most consumers will be aged 14 and over, we will include data from consumers of all ages.  
 
Phase 3 Study 1 SMART: We will be using data from all naturalistic consumers of MHA who 
engage with the site materials that are part of the study. While we expect most consumers will be 
aged 14 and over, we will include data from consumers of all ages.   
  
Don’t know  →This means is it not possible to know the age of the subjects. For example, this may be true 
for some research involving social media, the Internet, or a dataset that is obtained  from 
another researcher or from a government agency. Go to Section 8 .  
 
6.2 Parental permission . Parental permission  means actively obtaining the permission of the parents. This is not the 
same as “passive” or “opt out” permission where it is assumed that parents are allowing their children to 
participate because they have been provided with information about the res earch and have not objected or 
returned a form indicating they don’t wa nt their children to participate.  
a. Will parental permission be obtained for: 
  
All of the research procedures  → Go to question 6.2b.   
  
  
None  of the research procedures  → Use the table belo w to provide justification , and skip question 
6.2b.   X 
  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 43 of 70 
   
Some of the research procedures  → Use the table below to identify the procedures for which 
parental permission  will not be obtained .   
  
Be sure to consider all research procedures and plans, including screening, future contact, and sharing/banking of data and 
specimens for future work.  
Children  
Group1 Describe the procedures or 
data/specimen collection (if any) for 
which there will be NO parental 
permission2 Reason why parental 
permission  will not be 
obtained  Will parents be 
informed  about 
the research ?3 
   YES NO 
MHA and TS 
Consumers  All study procedures (children will not be 
included in focus groups)  Participants will be all 
consumers who 
naturalistically engaged with 
MHA and/or TS over the 
past 2 years (2018 -2020) and 
who naturalistically engage 
during the study. Both MHA 
and TS, as part of routine 
practice and as part of their 
terms and conditions, e xplain 
to consumers that their 
information may be used for 
research purposes and shared 
with researchers in academic 
settings to better understand 
mental illness and for quality 
improvement purposes.  
Because the purpose of this 
research is to better 
unders tand engagement in 
DMH tools, any interference 
from the study team would 
undermine our findings. 
Additionally, this study could 
not be done without a very 
large sample. Collecting 
formal consent from 
participants will prevent us 
from identifying a large 
sample and as has been 
found in previous studies of 
DMH, participants recruited 
explicitly for research engage 
differently than consumers 
who access DMH and are not 
participating in research.        
    X  
      
                        
      
      
                        
      
      
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 44 of 70 
                         
      
      
                        
      
      
                        
      
      
Table footnotes  
1. If the answer is the same for all children groups or all procedures : collapse the answer across the groups  and/or procedures . 
2. If identifiable information or biospecimens will be obtained without parent permission, any waiver granted by the IRB does not 
override parents’ refusal to provide broad consent (for example, through the Northwest Biotrust).  
3. Will parents be informed  about the research beforehand even though active permission  is not being obtained ? 
b. Indicate the  plan for obtaining parental permission . One or both boxes m ust be checked.  
  Both parents, unless one parent is deceased, unknown, incompetent, or not reasonably available; or when 
only one parent has legal responsibility for the care and custody of the child    
  
  
One parent, even if the other parent is alive, known, competent, reasonably available, and shares legal 
responsibility for the care and custody of the child.    
  
  This is all that is required for minimal risk research.  
 If both boxes  are checked , explain:  
       
6.3 Children who are wards. Will any of the children be wards of the State or any other agency, institution, or entity?  
 X No  
  Yes → If yes, an advocate may need to be  appointed for each child who is a ward. The advocate must be in 
addition to any other individual acting on behalf of the child as guardian or in loco parentis. The 
same individual can serve as advocate for all children w ho are wards.    
 Describe who will be the advocate(s). The description  must address the following points:  
• Background and experience  
• Willingness to act in the best interests of the child for the duration of the research  
• Independence of the research, research team, and any guardian organization  
       
 
 
7 ASSENT OF CHILDREN (MINORS)  
Go to Section 8  if your research does not involve children (minors).  
7.1 Assent of children (minors) . Though children do not have the legal capacity to “consent” to participate in 
research, they should be involved in the process if they are able to “assent” by having a study explained to them 
and/or by reading a simple form about the study, and then giving their verbal choice about wheth er they want to 
participate. They may also provide a written assent if they are older. See WORKSHEET Children  for circumstances 
in which a child’s assent may be unn ecessary or inappropriate.   
a. Will assent be obtained for: 
  
All research procedures and child groups  → Go to question 7.2. 
  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 45 of 70 
   
  
None  of the research procedures and child groups  → Use the table below to provide justification , 
then skip to question 7.6  X 
  
  
Some of your research procedures and child groups  → Use the table below to identify the 
procedures for which  assent  will not be 
obtain ed.    
  
Be sure to consider all research procedures and plans, including screening, future contact, and sharing/banking of data and 
specimens for future work.  
Children  Group1 Describe the procedures or 
data/specimen collection (if 
any) for which assent will NOT 
be obtained  Reason why assent will not  be obtain ed 
MHA and TS Consumers  All study procedures (children 
will not be included in focus 
groups)  Participants will be all consumers who 
naturalistically engaged with MHA and/or TS over 
the past 2 years (2018 -2020) and who 
naturalistically engage during the study. Both 
MHA and TS, as part of routine practice and as 
part of their terms and conditions, e xplain to 
consumers that their information may be used for 
research purposes and shared with researchers in 
academic settings to better understand mental 
illness and for quality improvement purposes.  
Because the purpose of this research is to better 
unders tand engagement in DMH tools, any 
interference from the study team would undermine 
our findings. Additionally, this study could not be 
done without a very large sample. Collecting 
formal assent  from participants will prevent us 
from identifying a large sam ple and as has been 
found in previous studies of DMH, participants 
recruited explicitly for research engage differently 
than consumers who access DMH and are not 
participating in research.  
                  
                  
                  
                  
Table footnotes  
1. If the answer is the same for all children groups or all procedures, collapse your answer across the groups  and/or procedures . 
7.2 Assent process. Describe how assent will be obtained , for each child group. If the research involves children of 
different ages, answer separately for each group. If the children are non -English speakers, include a description of 
how their comprehension of the information will be evaluated . 
       
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 46 of 70 
 7.3 Dissent or resistance. Describe how a child’s objection or resistance to participation (including non -verbal 
indications) will be identified during the research, and what the response will be .  
       
7.4 E -consent. Will any electronic processes (email, websites, electronic signatures, etc.) be used to present assent 
information to subjects/and or to obtain documentation (signatures) of assent? If yes, describe how this will be 
done . 
       
7.5 Documentation of assent.  Which of the following statements describes whether documentation of assent  will be 
obtained ? 
  
None of the research procedures and child groups  → Use the table below to provide justif ication, 
then go to question  7.5.b    
  
  
All of the research procedures and child groups  → Go to question 7.5.a, do not complete the 
table    
  
  
Some of the research procedures and/or child groups  → Complete the table below and then to go 
question 7.5.a   
  
Children  
Group1 Describe the procedures or data/specimen collection (if any) for which assent 
will NOT be documented  
            
            
            
            
            
Table footnotes  
1. If the answer is the same for all children groups or all procedures, collapse the answer across the groups  and/or procedures . 
 a. Describe how assent will be documented . If the children are functionally illiterate or are not fluent in English, 
include a description of the documentation process for them . 
        
 b. Upload all assent materials  (talking points, videos, forms, etc.) to Zipline . Assent materials are not required to 
provide all of the standard elements of adult consent; the information should be appropriate to the age, 
population, and research procedures.  The documents should be in Word, if possible.  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 47 of 70 
 7.6 Children who reach the legal age of consent during participation in longitudinal research .  
Children who were enrolled at a young age and continue for many years : It is best practice to re -obtain assent (or 
to obtain it for the first time, if it was not obtained  at the beginning of their participation).  
Children who reach the legal age of consent : Informed consent must be obtained from the now -adult subject for 
(1) any ongoing interactions or interventio ns with the subjects, or (2) the continued analysis of specimens or data 
for which the subject’s identify is readily identifiable to the researcher, unless the IRB waives this requirement.  
 a. Describe the plans (if any) to re -obtain assent from children.   
 N/A 
 b. Describe the plans (if any) to obtain consent for children who reach the legal age of consent.  
• If adult consent  will be obtained from them , describe what will happen regarding  now -adult subjects 
who cannot be contacted . 
• If consent will not obtained or will not be possible:  explain why.  
 N/A 
7.7 Other regulatory requirements . (This is for  information only; no answer or response is required.)  Researchers are 
responsible for determining whether their research conducted in schools, with student records, or over the 
Internet comply with permission, consent, and inspection requirements of the following federal regulations:  
• PPRA – Protection of Pup il Rights Amendment  
• FERPA – Family Education Rights and Privacy Act  
• COPPA – Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act  
 
 
8 CONSENT OF ADULTS  
Review the following definitions before answering the questions in this section.  
CONSENT  is the process  of informing potential subjects about the research and asking them 
whether they want to participate. It does not necessarily include  the signing of a 
consent form.  
CONSENT DOCUMENTATION  refers to how a subject’s decision to participate in the research is documented. 
This is typically obtained by having the subject sign a consent form.  
CONSENT FORM  is a document signed by subjects, by which they agree to participate in the 
research as des cribed in the consent form and in the consent process.  
ELEMENTS OF CONSENT  are specific information that is required to be provided to subjects.  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 48 of 70 
 CHARACTERISTICS OF CONSENT  are the qualities of the consent pro cess  as a whole. These are:  
• Consent must be legally effective.  
• The process minimizes the possibility of coercion or undue influence.  
• Subjects or their representatives must be given sufficient opportunity to 
discuss and consider participation.  
• The information provided must:  
o Begin with presentation of key information (for consent materials 
over 2,000 words)  
o Be what a reasonable person would want to have  
o Be organized and presented so as to facilitate understanding  
o Be provided in sufficient detail  
o Not ask or appear to ask  subjec ts to waive their rights  
PARENTAL PERMISSION  is the parent’s active permission for the child t o participate in the research. 
Parental permission is subject to the same requirements as consent, including 
written documentation of permission and required elements.  
SHORT FORM CONSENT  is an alternative way of obtaining written documentation of consent that is most 
commonly used  with individuals who are illiterate or whose language is one for 
which translated consent forms are not available.  
WAIVER OF CONSENT  means there is IRB approval for not obtaining consent or for not including some of 
the elements of consent in the consent  process.  
 
NOTE : If you plan to obtain identifiable information or identifiable biospecimens 
without consent, any waiver granted by the IRB does not override a subject’s 
refusal to provide broad consent (for example, the Northwest Biotrust).  
WAIVER OF DOCUMENTATION 
OF CONSENT  means that there is IRB approval for not obtaining written documentation of 
consent.  
8.1 Groups  Identify  the groups to which the answers in this section apply.  
 X Adult subjects  
  Parents who are providing permission for their children to participate in research  
 → If you selected PARENTS , the word “consent” below should also be interpreted as applying to parental 
permission and “subjects” should also be interpreted as applying to the parents.  
8.2 The consent process  and characteristics . This series of questions is about whether consent  will be obtained for all 
procedures except recruiting and screening  and, if yes, how.  
The issue of consent for recruiting and screening activities is addressed in question 4. 7. You do not need to repeat your answer 
to question 4.6.  
 a. Are there any procedures for which consent  will not be obtained ? 
  No  
 X Yes → If yes, use the table below to identify the procedures for which consent will not be obtained . “All” 
is an acceptable answer for some studies.    
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 49 of 70 
 Be sure to consider all research procedures and plans, including future contact, and sharing/banking of data and specimens for 
future work.  
Group1 Describe the procedures or 
data/specimen collection (if any) 
for which there will be NO consent 
process  Reason why consent  will not be 
obtain ed Will subjects  be 
provided with 
info about the 
research after 
they finish?  
   YES NO 
Phase 1: MHA 
and TS 
Consumers  All study procedures  (other than focus 
groups)  Participants will be all consumers who 
naturalistically engaged with MHA 
and/or TS over the past 2 years (2018 -
2020) and who naturalistically engage 
during the study. Both MHA and TS, as 
part of routine practice and as part of 
their terms and conditions, e xplain to 
consumers that their information may 
be used for research purposes and 
shared with researchers in academic 
settings to better understand mental 
illness and for quality improvement 
purposes.  Because the purpose of this 
research is to better unders tand 
engagement in DMH tools, any 
interference from the study team would 
undermine our findings. Additionally, 
this study could not be done without a 
very large sample. Collecting formal 
consent from participants will prevent 
us from identifying a large sa mple and 
as has been found in previous studies of 
DMH, participants recruited explicitly 
for research engage differently than 
consumers who access DMH and are 
not participating in research.        
    X  
      
Phase 2: MHA 
and TS 
Consumers  All study procedures (other than focus 
groups)  Participants will be all consumers who 
naturalistically engaged with MHA 
and/or TS over the past 2 years (2018 -
2020) and who naturalistically engage 
during the study. Both MHA and TS, as 
part of routine practice a nd as part of 
their terms and conditions, explain to 
consumers that their information may 
be used for research purposes and 
shared with researchers in academic 
settings to better understand mental 
illness and for quality improvement 
purposes. Because the p urpose of this 
research is to better understand 
engagement in DMH tools, any 
interference from the study team would       
    X  
      
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 50 of 70 
 undermine our findings. Additionally, 
this study could not be done without a 
very large sample. Collecting formal 
consent from participants will prevent 
us from identifying a large sample and 
as has been found in previous studies of 
DMH, participants recruited explicitly 
for research engage differently than 
consumers who access DMH and are 
not participating in research.  
Phase 3B: 
Study 1 
SMART       All study procedures (this does 
not include Study 2 procedures for 
Phase 3B  Participants will be those who 
naturalistically engage during the 
study. Both MHA and TS, as part of 
routine practice and as part of their 
terms and conditions, explain to 
consumers that their information may 
be used for research purposes and 
shared with researchers in academic 
settings to better understand mental 
illness and for quality improvement 
purposes. Bec ause the purpose of this 
research , among other aims,  is to better 
understand engagement in DMH tools, 
any interference from the study team 
would undermine our findings. 
Additionally, this study could not be 
done without a very large sample. 
Collecting form al consent from 
participants will prevent us from 
identifying a large sample and as has 
been found in previous studies of 
DMH, participants recruited explicitly 
for research engage differently than 
consumers who access DMH and are 
not participating in rese arch        
      
      
                        
      
      
                        
      
      
Table footnotes  
1. If the answer is the same for all groups , collaps e your answer across the groups and/or procedures.  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 51 of 70 
 b. Describe the consent process , if consent will be obtained  for any or all procedures, for any or all groups. 
Address groups and procedures separately if the consent processes are different.  
Be sure to include:  
• The location/setting where consent will be obtained  
• Who will obtain consent (refer to positions , roles, or titles, not names)  
• How subjects  will be provide d sufficient opportunity to discuss the study with the research team and consider 
participation  
 Phase 1 & Phase 2 FOCUS GROUP S ONLY: MHA and TS adult consumers will be invited to participate in 
focus groups by receiving messages via their preferred communication method on the platform on which they 
are active  (including but not limited to emails, pop -ups, messages from chat bot features, or messages in the 
participant’s inbox on th e system) . If consumers are interested in learning more, they can respond to the 
invitation by clicking on a link, which alerts study team members at MHA or TS.  
- Talkspace Focus Groups: A member of the study team will reach out to the consumer  via email  to provide 
more information, consent form , schedule activities, and provide information on engaging in the focus 
group (e.g. Zoom info). Verbal consent is collected at the beginning of each remote focus group. 
Participants will be given the option to consent  to having their focus group data linked to the platform 
usage data (e.g., engagement with the TS platform, number of texts sent). A study team member on the 
focus group Zoom call will send a private, direct message to each participant with the following ( this is 
also included in the consent form sent to participants via email):  
o “This is completely voluntary. You may continue to participate in this focus group whether you 
agree with this statement or not. Please respond YES or NO to the following statement : I give 
permission to the research team to link my responses in this focus group to data on my activity on 
the Talkspace platform.”  
- MHA Focus Groups: After viewing/receiving the invitation, consumers indicate their interest by clicking 
on the invitation and completing a brief survey. A member of the study team emails interested participants 
the consent form  and to provide information about the focus group, which is all done online including 
instruction, options for anonymity, and any recording that may happen. Verbal consent is collected at the 
beginning of each remote focus group.  
 
Phase 1 Talkspace Survey: After clicking on link in the invitation, potential respondents will review a brief 
statement that describes the survey, procedures, volun tariness, opportunity to ask questions, and compensation 
potential. This text has been uploaded to Zipline (“Talkspace_Nudge Survey_MHATS”). Respondents then 
indicate consent by clicking a box that specifically states they consent to the survey.  
 
Phase 3B  Study 2: After clicking on the study invitation, completing the initial screening questionnaire on 
REDCap and learning eligible status, informed consent will be obtained electronically via REDCap. 
Participants will review the consent and provide consent o nline. Participants are encouraged to contact the study 
team via email if parts of the informed consent form are unclear, or if additional information is desired. Consent 
will be documented in REDCap. Participants must select that they agree to participate  in the study at the end of 
the consent form in order to move forward with study procedures.  
 
c. Comprehension . Describe the methods that will be used to ensure or test the subjects ’ understanding of the 
information  during the consent process . 
 Phase 1 & Phase 2 FOCUS GROUPS ONLY: Potential participants will be given ample opportunity to ask 
questions of MHA and TS study staff.  
 
Phase 1 Talkspace Survey: Contact information for the study team at both TS and UW is p rovided.  
 
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 52 of 70 
 Phase 3B Study 2: Contact information for the study team at UW is provided , and participants are encouraged 
to contact the team with any questions.  
d. Influence . Does  the research involve any subject groups that might find it difficult to say “no” to participation  
because of the setting or their relationship with someone on the study team , even if they aren’t pressured  to 
participate ?   
Examples: Student participants bein g recruited into their teacher’s research; patients being recruited into their healthcare 
provider’s research, study team members who are participants; outpatients recruited from an outpatient surgery waiting 
room just prior to their surgery.  
 X No  
  Yes → If yes, describe what will be done to reduce any effect of the setting or relationship on the 
participation  decision.    
  Examples: a study coordinator will obtain consent instead of the subjects’ physician; the researcher will not 
know which subjects agreed to participate; subjects will have two days to decide after hearing about the 
study.  
       
e. Information provided is tailored to needs of subject population . Describe the basis for concluding that  the 
information that will be provided  to subjects (via written or oral methods ) is what a reasonable member of the 
subject population(s)  would want to know. If the research  consent materials contain a key information section, 
also describe the basis for concluding that the  informatio n presented in that section is t hat which is most likely  
to assist the selected subject population with making a decision. See GUIDA NCE Key I nformation for Consent 
Materials . 
 
For example : Consultation  with publications about research subjects’  preferences, disease -focused nonprofit groups, patient 
interest groups, or other researchers/study staff with experience with the specific population. It may also involve directly 
consulting selected members of the  study population.  
 Phase 1 & Phase 2 FOCUS GROUPS ONLY: Focus groups are routinely used by MHA and TS for marketing 
and QI purposes.  Members of the study team are experts in remote research with populations accessing digital 
mental health tools. Our study team has done previous work to determine the information that a user of digital 
mental health tools would want to know and what elem ents of remote study procedures are acceptable to remote 
study participants (Phase 1 of STUDY00004997 ; STUDY00004625 ; STUDY00001973 ; and 
STUDY00005434 ).  
 
Phase 1 Talkspace Survey: TS routinely completes surveys as part of market research and the UW study team 
frequently completes study research.  
 
Phase 3B Study 2: Both the UW and MHA study team s are frequently involved in study research.  
f. Ongoing proces s. For research that involves multiple or continued interaction with subjects over time, describe 
the opportunities (if any) that will be given to  subjects to ask questions or to change their minds about 
participating.  
 N/A  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 53 of 70 
 8.3 Electronic presentation of consent information. Will any part of the consent -related information be provided 
electronically for some or all of the subjects?  
This refers to the use of electronic systems and processes instead of (or in addition to) a paper consent form. For example, an 
emailed consent form, a passive or an interactive website, graphics, audio, video podcasts. See GUIDANCE Electronic Informed 
Consent  for information  about electronic consent requirements at UW . 
  No → If no, skip to question 8 .4 
 X Yes → If yes, answer questions a through e 
a. Describe the electronic consent  methodology and the information that will be provided . 
All informational materials must be made available to the IRB. Website content should be provided as a 
Word document. It is considered best practice to give subjects  information about multi -page/multi -screen 
information that will help them assess how long it will take them to complete the process. For example, 
telling them that it will take about 15 minutes, or that it involves reading six screens or pages.  
 Phase 1 & Phase 2 FOCUS GROUPS ONLY: MHA and TS consumers will receive information 
via the preferre d method of communication for the platform ( e.g., email, text, on -site message) . 
- Talkspace Focus Groups: A member of the study team will email the consumer to 
provide more information, provide the consent form , schedule activities, and provide 
information on engaging in the focus group ( e.g., Zoom info).  
- MHA Focus Groups: After viewing/receiving the invitation, consumers indicate their 
interest by clicking on the invitation and completing a brief survey. A member of the 
study team emails interested partici pants to send the consent form  and provide 
information about the focus group, which is all done online including instruction, options 
for anonymity, and any recording that may happen.  
 
Phase 1 Talkspace Survey: Potential respondents review consent information online. Email 
addresses for the TS and UW study team are provided . We expect the review of consent 
information should take 2 -4 minutes.  
 
Phase 3B Study 2 : Informed consent will be obtained electronically via REDCap. The participant 
will review the consent and provide consent online. Participants are encouraged to contact the 
study team  via email if parts of the informed consent form are unclear, or if additi onal 
information is desired. Consent will be documented in REDCAP.  Participants must select “I 
consent” at the end of the consent form in order to move forward with study procedures.  
 
b. Describe how the information can be navigated (if relevant). For ex ample, will the subject  be able to 
proceed forward or backward within the system, or to stop and continue at a later time?  
 Phase 1 & Phase 2 FOCUS GROUPS ONLY: Participants will retain the information they 
receive . Both TS and MHA consumers will receive consent information via email , and will be 
able to reference materials as desired.  
 
Phase 1 Talkspace Survey: Information is reviewed on a single screen. If a participant is unable 
to complete consent and wishes to return to it in the future, they would need to return to the 
invitation link and restart the process.  
 
Phase 3B Study 2:  Participants will be able to access the full consent document on the web page 
from REDCAP. Participants will also receive a copy of the consent form via email.  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 54 of 70 
 c. In a standard paper -based consent process, the subjects generally have the opportunity to go 
through the consent form with study staff and/or to ask study staff about any question they may 
have after reading the cons ent form. Describe  what  will be done , if anything, to facilitate the 
subject’s comprehension and opportunity to ask questions when consent information is 
presented electronically. Include a description of any provisions to help ensure privacy and 
confident iality during this process.  
Examples: hyperlinks, help text, telephone calls, text messages or other type of electronic messaging, video 
conference, live chat with remotely located study team members.  
 Phase 1 & Phase 2 FOCUS GROUPS ONLY: Participants will be able to respond to study staff 
via email. Prior to the focus groups starting, study staff will review focus group procedures and 
allow time for questions.  
 
Phase 1 Talkspace Survey: Email addresses for the TS and UW  study team are provided.  
 
Phase 3B Study 2:  Participants will have the ability to ask questions of the study staff during 
initial consent activities and  will have the ability to send questions to the study team via phone 
and/or email.  
d. What will happen if there are  individuals who wish to participate but who do not have access to 
the consent methodology being used, or who do not wish to use it? Are there alternative ways in 
which they can obtain the information, or will there be some assistance available? If this is  a 
clinical trial, these individuals cannot be excluded from the research  unless there is  a compelling 
rationale.  
 
For example, consider individuals who lack familiarity with electronic systems, have poor eyesight or 
impaired motor skills, or who do not ha ve easy email or internet access.  
 Phase 1  & Phase 2  FOCUS GROUPS ONLY: All potential participants will be MHA or TS 
consumers. All services provided by both MHA and TS are provided electronically/virtually. 
While in -person focus groups in the New York and Seattle areas may be a possibility, we 
anticipate t hese focus groups will be completed virtually due to COVID -19 and our participant 
population.  
 
Phase 1 Talkspace Survey: The survey is asking about engagement with TS, an online therapy 
service. If a participant does not have access to the internet, they would not engaged with TS and 
therefore would not be exposed to this survey.  
 
Phase 3B Study 2:  All potential participants will be MHA consumers , so they have some access 
to the internet  and must be willing to access the internet to engage in the study.  
e. How will additional information  be provided to subjects during the research , including any 
significant new findings (such as new risk information)  If this is not an issue, explain why.  
 Phase 1  & Phase 2  FOCUS GROUPS ONLY: N/A – we anticipate t hese will be a one -time 
engagement.   
 
Phase 1 Talkspace Survey: N/A  
 
Phase 3B Study 2: Email and/or SMS  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 55 of 70 
 8.4 Written documentation of consent. Which of the statements below describe whether documentation of consent 
will be obtained?  NOTE: This question does not apply to screening and recruiting procedures which have already 
been addressed in question 4.7 . 
Documentation of consent that is obtained electronically is not considered written consent unless it i s obtained by a method 
that allows verification of the individual’s signature. In other words, saying “yes” by email is rarely considered to be writ ten 
documentation of consent  
a. Is written documentation of consent being obtained for: 
  
None of the research procedures  → Use the table below to provide justification then g o to question 
8.5.   
  
  
All of the research procedures  → Do not complete the table; go to question 8.4.b.   
  
  
Some of the research procedures  → Use the table below to identify the procedures for which written 
documentation of consent  will not be obtained  from adult  
subjects.   X 
  
Adult 
subject 
group1 Describe the procedures or data/specimen collection (if any) for which 
there will be NO documentation of consent  Will they be 
provided  with a 
written 
statement 
describing the 
research 
(optional)?  
  YES NO 
Phase 1  & 2: 
Focus Group 
Participants  Phase 1  & Phase 2  Focus Groups        
 X     
      
Phase 1 
Talkspace 
Survey 
Respondents  Phase 1 Talkspace Survey        
    X  
      
     Phase 
3B MHA 
PHQ -9 
responders/en
gagers  Phase 3B Study 1 SMART       
 
    X 
      
                  
      
      
                  
      
      
Table footnotes  
1. If the answer is the same for all adult  groups or all procedures, collaps e the answer across the groups and/or procedures.  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 56 of 70 
 b. Electronic consent signature. For studies in which documentation of consent will be obtained: will subjects use 
an electronic method to provide their consent signature?  
• FDA-regulated studies must use a syst em that complies with the FDA’s “Part 11” requirements about electronic 
systems and records.  Note that the UW -IT supported DocuSign e -signature system does not meet this requirement . 
• Having subjects check a box at the beginning of an emailed or web -based q uestionnaire is not considered legally 
effective documentation of consent.  
 X No  
  Yes → If yes,  describe the methodology that will be used . 
See the GUIDANCE Electronic Informed Consent  for information about options (including the DocuSign 
system available through UW-IT) and requirements.  
       
b.1 Is this method legally valid in the jurisdiction where the research will occur?  
  No  
  Yes → If yes,  what is the source of information  about legal validity ? 
       
b.2 Will verific ation of the subject’s identity be obtained if the signature is not personally 
witnessed by a member of the study team? Note that this is required for FDA -regula ted 
studies.  
See the GUIDANCE Electronic Informed Consent  for information and examples  
  No →If no, provide the rationale  for why this is appropriate. Also, what would  
be the risks to the actual subject if somebody other than the intended  
signer provides the consent signature?  
       
  Yes →If yes,  how ? 
       
b.3 How will the requirement be met to provide a copy of the consent information (consent 
form) to individuals who provide an e -signature?  
The copy can be paper or electronic and may be provided on an electronic storage device or via 
email. If the electronic consent information uses hyperlinks or other websites or podcasts to convey 
information specifically related to the research, the inform ation in these hyperlinks should be 
included in the cop y provided to the subjects and the website must be maintained for the duration 
of the entire study.  
       
8.5 Non -English -speaking or -reading adult subjects . Will the research  enroll adult subjects who do not speak English 
or who lack fluency or literacy in English?  
  No  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 57 of 70 
  X Yes → If yes, describe the process that will be used  to ensure that the oral and written information 
provided to them during the consent process and throughout the study will be in a language readily 
understandable to them and (for written materials such as consent form s or questionnaires) at an 
appropriate reading/comprehension level.    
 Phase 1 Data Analysis  & Phase 2 MRTs  Activities: No consent procedures planned. Participants will 
be all consumers who naturalistically engaged with MHA and/or TS over the past 2 years (2018 -
2020) and who naturalistically engage during the study.  Participants will be English and/or Spanish 
speaking.  Both MHA and TS, as part of routine  practice and as part of their terms and conditions, 
explain to consumers that their information may be used for research purposes and shared with 
researchers in academic settings to better understand mental illness and for quality improvement 
purposes. These procedures are offered to consumers in their chosen language. Because the purpose 
of this research is to better understand engagement in DMH tools, any interference from the study 
team would undermine our findings. Additionally, this study could not be  done without a very large 
sample. Collecting formal consent from participants will prevent us from identifying a large sample 
and as has been found in previous studies of DMH, participants recruited explicitly for research 
engage differently than consumer s who access DMH and are not participating in research.  
 
Phase 1 & Phase 2 FOCUS GROUPS ONLY: Participants will be either English speaking only  
 
Phase 1 Talkspace Survey: Respondents will be English speaking only.  
 
Phase 3 Study 1:  No consent procedures  
 
Phase 3 Study 2:  Participants will be English speaking only.  
 a. Interpretation . Describe how interpretation will be provided,  and when. Also, describe the 
qualifications of the interpreter(s) – for example, background, experience, language proficiency 
in English and in the other language, certification, other credentials, familiarity with the research -
related vocabulary in Engli sh and the target language.  
 N/A 
 b. Translation s. Describe how translations will be obtained for  all study materials (not just consent 
forms) . Also, describe the method for ensuring  that the translations meet the UW IRB’s 
requirement that translated documents will be linguistically accurate, at an appropriate reading 
level for the participant population, and culturally sensitive for the locale in which they will be 
used.  
 N/A 
8.6 Barriers to written documentation of consent . There are many possible barriers to obtaining written 
documentation of consent. Consider, for example, individuals who are functionally illiterate; do not read English 
well; or have sensory or motor impairm ents that may impede the ability to read and sign a consent form.  
a. Describe the plans (if any) for obtaining written documentation of consent from potential subjects who may 
have difficulty with the standard documentation process (that is, reading and signing a consent form). Skip this 
question if written documentation of consent is not being obtained for any part of  the research.  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 58 of 70 
 Examples of solutions : Translated consent forms; use of the Short Form consent process; reading the form to the person  
before they sign it ; excluding individuals who cannot read an d understand the consent form.  
 N/A 
8.7 Deception . Will information  be deliberately withheld,  or will false information  be provided,  to any of the subjects? 
Note: “Blinding” subjects to their study group/condition/arm is not considered to be deception , but not telling them ahead of 
time that they will be subject to an intervention or about the purpose of the procedure(s) is deception . 
  No  
 X Yes → If yes, describe what information and why.  
  Example: It may be necessary to deceive subjects about the purpose of the study  (describe why) . 
      To properly execute the control condition for the study specifically while maintaining a 
uniform consent proces s across all conditions  so that the control condition and DIY tool without AI 
condition are not aware they are not receiving the DIY tool with AI which could influence their 
perception of their own intervention and their outcomes in turn , in the informed c onsent participants 
are not given a detailed description of the intervention  with which  they will be engaging . 
 
 In the consent form, prior to randomization, participants will not be given a full explanation about 
incentives for their participation, and this information is not given in detail because the incentive 
amounts  vary depending on what condition they are ra ndomized to and  knowing these details prior 
to randomization may influence their perception of a condition and engagement in the study 
depending on the condition to which they are randomly assigned.  
 
Participants in the DIY tool study will also be randomly  assigned to their condition prior to 
consenting , and not informed of this assignment until they have consented to participate in the study. 
Randomization takes place prior to consent to provide a smoother  and more consistent  participant 
experience  with le ss time delays  across all participants  and does not impact the participant’s 
eligibility nor their experience with the screening surveys prior to consent . This information must be 
withheld to prevent the potential differential enrollment of folks depending  on what condition to 
which they are randomly assigned. Knowing their assigned condition may influence their overall 
perception of the study and their likelihood of choosing to participate in the study . 
 a. Will subjects  be informed  beforehand that they will be unaware of or misled regarding the 
nature or purposes of the research ? (Note: this is not necessarily required.)  
 X No  
  Yes  
 b. Will subjects be debrief ed later? (Note: this is not necessarily required.)  
  No  
 X Yes → If yes, describe how  and when  this will occur . Upload any debriefing materials, 
including talking points or a script, to Zipline .   
      At the conclusion of the study  after their 8 week follow up assessment , 
participants will be referred to the DIY tool with AI that is available through the 
MHA website as a resource that they can use to  help with cognitive restructuring.  
 
Participants will be informed about the incentive payment structure for their 
specific condition in an email sent to them immediately (see ‘incentive language 
by condition post randomization’ document on Zipline.  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 59 of 70 
 8.8 Cognitively impaired adults, and other adults unable to consent . Will such individuals be included in the 
research?  
Examples: individuals with Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI) or dementia; individuals who are unconscious, or who are significantly 
intoxicated.  
 X No → If no, go to question  8.9. 
  Yes → If yes, answer the following questions.  
 a. Rationale . Provide the rationale for including this population.  
       
 b. Capacity for consent / decision making capacity . Describe the process that will be used  to 
determine whether a cognitively impaired  individual is capable of consent  decision making 
with respect to the research protocol and setting.  
        
 b.1. If there  will be repeated interactions with the impaired subjects over a time period when 
cognitive capacity could increase or diminish, also describe how (if at all) decision -
making capacity will be re -assessed and (if appropriate) consent obtained during that 
time.  
       
 c. Permission (surrogate consent) . If the research  will include adults who cannot consent for 
themselves, describe the process for obtaining permission (“surrogate consent”) from a legally 
authorized representative (LAR).   
 For research conducted in Washington State, see the GUIDANCE  Legally Authorized Representative  to 
learn which individuals meet the  state  definition of “legally authorized representative”.  
        
 d. Assent . Describe whether assent will be required of all, some, or none of the subjects. If some, 
indicate which subjects will be required to assent and which will not (and why not). Describe 
any process that will be used to obtain and document assent from the subjects.  
        
 e. Dissent or resistance . Describe how a subject’s objection or resistance to participation 
(including non -verbal) during the research  will be identified , and what will occur in response . 
        
8.9 Research use of human fetal tissue obtained from elective abortion. Federal and UW Policy specify some 
requirements for the consent process. If you are conducting this type of research, check the boxes to confirm 
these requirements will be followed.  
  Informed consent for the donation of fetal tissue for research use will be obtained by someone other than  
the person who obtained the informed consent for abortion.  
  Informed consent for the donation of fetal tissue for research use will be obtained after the informed  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 60 of 70 
 consent for abortion.  
  Participation in the research will not affect the method of abortion.  
  No enticements, benefits, or financial incentives will be used at any level of the process to incentivize  
abortion or the donation of human fetal tissue.  
  The informed consent form for the donation of fetal tissue for use in research will be signed by both the  
woman and the person who obtains the informed consent.  
8.10 Consent -related materials . Upload to Zipline  all consent scripts/talking points, consent forms, debriefing 
statements, Information Statements, Short Form consent forms, parental permission forms, and any other 
consent -related materials that will be used . Materials that will be used by a specific site  should be up loaded to 
that site’s Local Site Documents  page.  
• Translations must be submitted and approved before they can be used . However, we strongly encourage you to wait to 
provide them until the IRB has approve d the English versions.  
• Combination forms : It may be appropriate to combine parental permission with consent, if parents are subjects as well as 
providing permission for the participation of their children. Similarly, a consent form may be appropriately con sidered an 
assent form for older children.  
• For materials that cannot be uploaded : upload screenshots or written descriptions that are sufficient to enable the IRB to 
understand the types of data that will be collected and the nature of the experience for the participant. URLs (website 
addresses) may also  be provide d, or written descriptions  of websites . Examples of materials that usually cannot be 
dxuploaded: mobile apps; computer -administered test; licensed and restricted standardized tests.  
 
 
9 PRIVACY AND CONFIDENTIALITY  
9.1 Privacy protections.  Describe the steps that will be taken , if any, to address possible privacy concerns of subjects 
and potential subjects.  
Privacy refers to the sense of being in control of access that others have to ourselves. This can be an issue with respect to  
recruiting, consenting, sensitivity of the data being collected, and the method of data collection.  
Examples:  
• Many subjects will feel a violation of privacy if they receive a letter asking them to participate in a study because they 
have ____ medical condition, when their name, contact information, and medical condition were drawn from medical 
records without their consent.  Example:  the IRB expects that “cold call” recruitment letters will inform the subject 
about how their information was obtained.  
• Recruiting subjects immediately prior to a sensitive or invasive procedure  (e.g., in an outpatient surgery waiting 
room) will feel like an invasion of privacy to some individuals . 
• Asking subjects about sensitive topics (e.g. details about sexual behavior) may feel like an invasion of privacy to some 
individuals.  
 Phase 1  & Phas e 2 FOCUS GROUPS ONLY: Potential participants will receive an invitation from MHA or TS to 
participate in a focus group. Both MHA and TS consumers agree to these types of invitations as part of their 
terms and conditions.  The consent form will include info rmation about privacy protection for focus groups 
including that participants can participate without video turned on , using a blurred or image background,  and 
with a name other than their own. Facilitators of the focus group will share specific directions  on how to engage 
in these privacy measures as participants join the focus groups.   
 
Phase 1 Talkspace Survey: Potential participants receive an invitation from TS to participate in this survey. TS 
consumers have agree to these types of invitations as par t of their terms and conditions. The consent 
information includes information about how the survey information is not shared outside of the study team.  
 
Phase 3B Study 2: Potential participants are shown an invitation from MHA to participate in the study.  MHA 
consumers agree to these types of invitations as part of their terms and conditions. The consent form will 
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 61 of 70 
 include information about privacy protection measures in place for the study, including the deidentification of 
their information and how survey  info will be secure and not shared outside of the study team.  
9.2 Identification of individuals in publications and presentations . Will potentially identifiable information about 
subjects be used in publications and presentations, or is it possible that individual identities could be inferred from 
what is planned to be publish ed or present ed?  
 X No  
  Yes → If yes, will subject consent be obtained for this use?  
  Yes  
  No → If no, describe the steps that will be taken to protect subjects (or small groups of 
subjects) from being identifiable.     
       
9.3 State mandatory reporting. Each state has reporting laws that require some types of individuals to report some 
kinds of abuse, and medical conditions that are under public health surveillance. These include:  
• Child abuse  
• Abuse, abandonment, neglect, or financial exploitation of a vul nerable adult  
• Sexual assault  
• Serious physical assault  
• Medical conditions subject to mandatory reporting (notification) for public health surveillance  
 
Are you or a member of the research team  likely to learn of any of the above events or circumstances whil e 
conduc ting the research AND  feel obligated to report it to state authorities?  
 X No  
  Yes → If yes,  the UW IRB expects subjects to be informed of this possibility in the consent form or during 
the consent process, unless you provide a rationale for not doing so:    
         
9.4 Retention of identifiers  and data . Check the box below to indicate assurance that any identifiers (or links between 
identifiers and data/specimens)  and data  that are part of the research records will not be destroyed until after the 
end of the applicable records retention requirements (e.g. Washington State; funding agency or sponsor; Food 
and Drug Administration).  If it is important to say something about destruction of identifi ers (or links to identifiers) 
in the consent form, state something like “the link between your identifier and the research data will be destroyed 
after the records retention period required by state and/or federal law.”  
This question can be left blank for  conversion applications (existing paper applications that are being “converted” into a Zipline 
application.)  
 
See the “Research Data” sections of the following website for UW Records management for the Washington State research 
rectords retention schedules that apply in general to the UW  (not involving UW Medicine data) : 
http://f2.washington.edu/fm/recmgt/gs/research?title=R  
 
See the “Research Records and Data ” information in Section 8 of this document for the retention schedules for UW Medicine 
Records : https://www.uwmedicine.org/recordsmanagementuwm -records -retention -schedule.pdf  
 X Confirm  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 62 of 70 
 9.5 Certificates of Confidentiality . Will a federal Certificate of Confidentiality be obtained for the research data? 
NOTE: Answer “No”  if the study is funded by NIH or the CDC , because all NIH -funded  and CDC -funded  studies 
automatically have a Certificate.  
 X No  
  Yes  
9.6 Data and specimen security protections . Identify the data classifications and the security protections that will be 
provided  for all sites where data will be collected, transmitted, or stored , referring to the GUIDANCE Data and 
Security Protections  for the minimum requirements for e ach data classification level . It is not possible to  answer 
this question without reading this document. Data security protections should not conflict with records 
retention requirements.  
 a. Which level  of protections will be appl ied to the data and specimens? If more than one level  will be used , 
describe which level  will apply to which data and which specimens  and at which sites . 
  We will apply Level 5 protections to data sets that include any identifiable information (e.g., dates of serv ice).  
 
We will apply Level 1 protections to deidentified data sets.  
 
We will comply with all applicable requirements as outlined in our Data Security Protocol (uploaded to 
Zipline).  
 b. Use this space to provide additional information, details, or to describe protections that do not fit into one of 
the levels . If there are any protections within the level listed in 9.6.a which will not be followed , list those 
here , including identifying t he sites where this exception will apply . 
  Computer and storage servers are physically located in highly secure, locked, dedicated Allen School 
datacenter facilities with controlled access. They are accessible only to authorized Allen School technical 
staff.  All our machines that are used to proce ss the data are behind a NAT router and hence are not 
publicly available on the internet. Our networks are also monitored for suspicious traffic.  The data will be 
stored on a Linux filesystem and restricted with standard Unix file permissions, which will allow us to 
restrict the data access on a per user basis.   All user computer accounts are managed and authorized via a 
centralized Allen School identity management system, managed by Allen School technical staff.  Only PIs 
and researchers on the project w ill be given access to the files. This ensures that people have to get 1) 
access to the UW network, 2) access to a lab -computer behind a firewall and NAT router, 3) access to the 
dataset only accessible to project staff (several layers of protection). Data  will never be stored on private 
computers and laptops.  
 
Phase 2 Talkspace Focus Groups Screening Survey: The screening survey will be hosted on Talkspace’s 
Google Forms. Talkspace has a BAA with Google Workspace and this platform is HIPAA compliant. 
Deide ntified information will be shared with UW for reporting purposes through previously outlined 
methods used for other study procedures.  
 
Phase 3 MHA Study 2 DIY Tool Data: The Microsoft Azure platform hosts the DIY tool. This application is 
HIPAA compliant . For data that is entered by participants while using the tool, in -transit data is 
encrypted. A validated cryptographic module is used for the storage encryption for data at rest.  24-
hour threat management protects the infrastructure and platform against malware, distributed denial -of-service 
(DDoS), man -in-the-middle (MITM), and other threats . Deidentified information will be shared with UW for 
analysis through previously outlined methods used for other study procedures.  
 
 
 
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 63 of 70 
 10 RISK / BENEFIT ASSESSMENT  
10.1 Anticipated risks . Describe the reasonably foreseeable  risks  of harm, discomforts, and hazards to the subjects 
and others of the research procedures . For each harm , discomfort, or hazard:  
• Describe the magnitude, probability, duration, and/or reversibility of the harm, discomfort, or hazard, AND  
• Describe how the risks  will be reduced or managed . Do not describe data security protections here, these are 
already described in Question 9.6.  
• Consider possible physical, psychological, social, legal,  and economic harms , including  possible negative effects on  
financial standing, employability, insurability, educational advancement or reputation.  For example, a breach of 
confidentiality might have these effects.  
• Examples of “others”: embryo, fetus, or nursing child; family members; a specific group.  
• Do not include the risks of non -research procedures that are already being performed.  
• If the study design specifies that subjects will be assigned to a specific condition or intervention, then the condition or 
intervention is a research procedure - even if it is a standard of care.  
• Examples of mitigation strategies: inclusion/exclusion cri teria; applying appropriate data security measures to prevent 
unauthorized access to individually identifiable data; coding data; taking blood samples to monitor something that 
indicates drug toxicity.  
• As with all questions on this application, you may ref er to uploaded documents.  
 Phase 1 Data Analysis Activities  & Phase 2 MRTs : Participants will be all consumers who 
naturalistically engaged with MHA and/or TS over the past 2 years (2018 -2020) (Phase 1)  and who 
naturalistically engage during the study  (Phase 1 and 2) . We do not anticipate any risks as participants 
will be consuming services from MHA and TS as they typically would.  
 
Phase 1 & Phase 2 Focus Groups: Participants may experience fatigue during the focus groups. They 
will be able to take breaks and/or stop participating at any time. Video recording of participants may 
cause some stress for participants  and presents a risk of loss of confide ntiality . They will be informed  
prior to joining  that they can to turn off their video camera at any time. Video recordings  will be stored 
securely and only accessible to researchers . Data from focus groups will be coded and analyzed by study 
team members resulting in deidentified outputs.  
Phase 1 Talkspace Survey: Participants may experience fatigue while responding to the survey. They 
will be able to take breaks and/or stop participating at any time.  
 
Phase 3B Study 1 SMART : Participants may experience e motional distress and/or discomfort while 
engaging with survey questions or reading content on the MHA website. When scoring positively on 
questions regarding suicidality on the PHQ -9, MHA provides the following message  to users : If you 
need immediate help, you can reach the Suicide & Crisis Lifeline by calling or texting  988 or using the 
chat box at  988lifeline.org . You can also  text “MH A” to 741 -741 to reach the Crisis Text 
Line.  Warmlines  are an excellent place for non -crisis support.  There is also a ‘contact us’ feature on 
the MHA website that allows  users to contact organization staff with questions.  
 
 
Phase 3B Study 2: Some of the questions /prompts  asked during assessments  or when engaging with the 
DIY tool  might make participants feel uncomfortable  or upset ; however,  participants may choose not to 
answer any question at any time and still continue with the study. They are also informed during consent 
that if experiencing emotional distress and/or thoughts of self -harm or suicide, to text MHA to 741741 or 
call or text 988 to be connected to immediate help.  
 
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 64 of 70 
 Participants may experience fatigue while responding to the survey. They will be able to take breaks 
and/or stop participating at any time.  
 
If the participant endorses any suicidal ideation during the PHQ -9 administ ration in REDCap, they will 
see the following information on the screen in REDCap: “If you are ever experiencing thoughts that life 
is not worth living, self -harm, or suicide and need to speak with someone immediately, you can reach the 
Suicide & Crisis Li feline by calling or texting  988 or using the chat box at  988lifeline.org/chat . You can 
also text “MHA” to 741 -741 to reach the Crisis Text Line. ” 
 
10.2 Reproductive  risks . Are there any ris ks of the study procedures to me n and women (who are subjects, or partner 
of subjects) related to pregnancy, fertility, lactation or effects on a fetus or neonate?  
Example s: direct teratogenic effects; possible germline effects; effects on fertility; effects on a woman’s ability to continue a 
pregnancy; effects on future pregnancies.  
 X No → If no go to question 10.3  
  Yes → If yes,  answer the following questions:  
 a. Risks . Describe the magnitude, probability, duration and/or reversibility of the risks.  
         
 b. Steps to minimize risk . Describe the specific steps that will be taken  to minimize the 
magnitude, probability, or duration of these risks.  
Example s: inform the subjects about the risks and how to minimize them;  require a pregnancy test before 
and during the study; require subjects to use contraception; advise subjects about  banking of sperm and 
ova.  
 
If the use of contraception  will be required : describe the allowable methods and the time period when 
contraception must be used.  
         
 c. Pregnancy . Describe what will be done  if a subject (or a subject’s partner) becomes pregnant  
For example; will subject s be required  to immediately notify study staff , so that the study procedures  can be 
discontinue or modified , or for a discussion of  risks, and/or referrals or counseling?  
         
10.3 MRI risk management. Answer this question only if the subjects will receive MRI scans . A rare but serious adverse 
reaction called nephrogenic systemic fibrosis (NSF) has been observed in individuals with kidney disease who 
received gadolinium -based contrast agents (GBCAs) for the scans. Also, a few healthy individuals have a severe 
allergi c reaction to GBCAs.  
a. Describe how the renal function of subjects will be assessed prior to MRI scans and how that information will 
be used to exclude subjects at risk for NSF.  
 n/a 
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 65 of 70 
 b. Describe the protocol for handling a sever e allergic reaction to the GBCA or any other medical 
event/emergency during the MRI scan, including who will be responsible for which actions.   
 n/a 
10.4 Unforeseeable risks . Are there any research procedures that may have risks that are currently unforeseeable?  
Example: using a drug that hasn’t been used before in this subject population.  
 X No  
  Yes → If yes,  identify the procedures.  
         
10.5  Subjects who will be under regional or general anesthesiology . Will any research procedures occur while 
patients are under general or regional anesthesia, or during the 3 hours preceding general or regional anesthesia 
(supplied for non -research reasons)?  
 X No  
  Yes → If yes, check all the boxes that apply.  
    
Administration of any drug for research purposes      
    
  
Inserting an intra -venous (central or peripheral) or intra -arterial line for research purposes    
  
  Obtaining samples of blood, urine, bone marrow or cerebrospinal fluid for research 
purposes    
  
  Obtaining a research sample from tissue or organs that would not otherwise be removed 
during surgery    
  
  
Administration of a radio -isotope for research purposes**    
  
  
Implantation of an experimental device    
  
  
Other manipulations or procedures performed solely for research purposes (e.g., 
experimental liver dialysis, experimental brain stimulation)    
  
  If any of the boxe s are checked : 
Provide the name and institutional affiliation of a physician anesthesiologist who is a 
member of the research team or who will serve as a safety consultant about the interactions 
between the research procedures and the general or regional anesthesia of th e subject -
patients. If the procedures will be performed at a UW Medicine facility or affiliate, the 
anesthesiologist must be a UW faculty member, and  the Vice Chair of Clinical Research in 
the UW Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine must be cons ulted in advance for 
feasibility, safety and billing.  
        
  ** If the box about radio -isotopes  is checked : the study team is  responsible for informing in advance 
all appropriate clinical personnel (e.g., nurses, technicians, anesthesiologists, surgeons) about the 
administration and use of the radio -isotope, to ensure that any personal safety issues (e.g., 
pregnancy) can be appr opriately addressed. This is a condition of IRB approval.  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 66 of 70 
 10.6  Data and Safety Monitoring . A Data and Safety Monitoring Plan (DSMP) is required for clinical trials (as defined 
by NIH). If required for this research , or if there is a DSMP for the research regardless of whether it is required , 
upload the DSMP to Zipline . If it is embedded in another document being  uploading (for example, a Study 
Protocol ) use the text box below to name the document that has the DSMP.  Alternatively, provide a description 
of the DSMP in the text box below .  
 The DSMP has been uploaded to Zipline as “MHATS DSMP”  
10.7  Un-blinding . If this is a double -blind ed or single -blinded  study in which the participant and/or relevant study 
team members  do not k now the group to whic h the participant is assigned: describe the circumstances under 
which un -blinding would be necessary, and to whom the un -blinded information would be provided.  
 n/a 
10.8 Withdrawal of participants . If applicable, d escribe  the anticipated circumstances un der which participants will be 
withdrawn from the research without their consent. Also, describe any procedures for orderly withdrawal of a 
participant, regardless of the reason, including whether it will involve partial withdrawal from procedures and 
any intervention but continued data collection or long -term follow -up. 
 n/a 
10.9  Anticipated direct benefits to participants . If there are  any direct research -related benefits that some or all 
individual participants are likely to experience f rom taking part in the research, describe them below:  
Do not include benefits to society or others, and do not include subject payment (if any). Examples: medical benefits such as  
laboratory tests (if subjects receive the results); psychological resources made available to participants; training or educa tion 
that is provided.   
 n/a 
10.10 Return of individual research results.  
In this section , provide your plans for the return of individual results. An “individual research result” is any information 
collected, generated or discovered in the course of a research study that is linked to the identity of a research participant . 
These may be results  from screening procedures, results that are actively sought for purposes of the study, results that are 
discovered unintentionally, or after analysis of the collected data and/or results has been completed.  
 
 See the GUIDANCE Return of Individual Results  for information about results that should and should not be returned, validity 
of results, the Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendment (CLIA), consent req uirements and communicating results.  
 a. Is it anticipated  that the research will produce any individual research results that are clinically actionable?  
 “Clinically actionable” means that there are established therapeutic or preventive interventions or other available 
actions that have the potential to change the clinical course of the disease/condition, or lead to an improved health 
outcome.  
 
In general, e very effort should be made to offer results that are clinically actionable, valid and pose life -threatening or 
severe health consequences if not treated or addressed quickly. Other clinically actionable results should be offered if 
this can be ac complished without compromising the research.  
 X No  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 67 of 70 
   Yes → If yes, answer the following questions ( a.1-a.3). 
 a.1. Describe the clinically actionable results that are anticipated and explain which results, 
if any, could be urgent (i.e. because they pose life -threatening or severe health 
consequences if not treated or addressed quickly).  
 Examples  of urgent results include  very high calciu m levels, highly elevated liver function test results, 
positive results for reportable STDs . 
       
 a.2. Explain which of these results will be offered to subjects.  
       
 a.3. Explain which results will not be offered to subjects and provide the rationale for not 
offering these results.  
 Reasons not to offer the results might include:  
• There are serious questions regarding validity or reliability  
• Returning the results has the potential to cause bias  
• There are insufficient resources to communicate the results effectively and appropriately  
• Knowledge of the result could cause psychosocial harm to subjects  
       
 b. Is there a  plan for offering  subjects any results that are not clinically actionable?  
 Examples: non -actionable genetic results, clinical tests in the normal range, experimental and/or uncertain results.  
 X No  
  Yes → If yes, explain which results will be offered to subjects and provide the rationale for 
offering these results.   
       
 c. Describe the validity and reliability of any results that will be offered to subjects.  
 The IRB will consider evidence of validity such as studies demonstrating diagnostic, prognostic, or predictive value, 
use of confirmatory testing, and quality management systems.  
 n/a 
 d. Describe the process for communicating results to subjects and facilitating understanding of the results. In 
the description, include who will approach the participant with regard to the offer of results, who will 
communicate the result (if different), the  circumstances, timing, and communication methods that will be 
used.  
 n/a 
 e. Describe any plans to share results with family members (e.g. in the event a subject becomes 
incapacitated or deceased).  
 n/a 
 f. Check the box to indicate that any plans for return of individual research results  have been described  in 
the consent document. If there are no plans to provide results to participants, this should be stated in the 
consent form.  
 See the GUIDANCE Return of Individual Results  for information about consent requirements.  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 68 of 70 
   Confirmed   
10.11  Commercial products or patents . Is it possible that a commercial product or patent could result from this 
study?  
 X No  
  Yes → If yes,  describe whether subjects might receive any remuneration/compensation and, if yes, 
how the amount will be determined.   
         
 
 
11 ECONOMIC BURDEN TO PARTICIPANTS  
11.1 Financial responsibility for research -related injuries.  Answer this question only if the lead research er is not a 
UW student, staff member, or faculty member whose primary  paid appointment is at the UW.  
 
For each institution involved in conducting the research: Describe who will be financially responsible for 
research -related injuries experienced by subjects, and any limitations. Describe the process (if any) by which 
participants may obtain treatment/compensation.  
 n/a 
11.2 Costs to subjects . Describe any research -related costs for which subjects and/or their health insurance may be 
responsible ( examples might include:  CT scan required for research eligibility screening; co -pays; surgical costs 
when a subject is randomized to a specific procedu re; cost of a device ; travel and parking expenses that will not 
be reimbursed ). 
 Phase 1  & Phase 2 : MHA services are free. TS consumers pay for their services. Because this phase examines 
data from consumers who are naturalistically engaged in MHA and TS services, TS consumers will continue 
to pay for their services.  
11.3 Reimbursement for costs . Describe any costs to subjects  that will be reimbursed  (such as travel expenses) . 
 N/A  
 
 
12 RESOURCES  
12.1 Faculty Advisor . (For researchers who are students, fellows, or post -docs.) Provide the following information 
about the faculty advisor.  
• Advisor’s name  
• Your relationship with your advisor (for example: graduate advisor; course instructor)  
• Your plans for communication/cons ultation with your advisor about progress, problems, and changes.  
 N/A  
12.2 UW Principal Investigator Qualifications . Upload a current  or recent  Curriculum Vitae  (CV) , Biosketch  (as 
provided to federal funding agencies), or similar document to the Local Site Documents page in Zipline. The  
purpose of this is to  address the PI’s qualifications to conduct the proposed research (education, experience, 
training, certifications, etc.).  
For help with creating a CV, see  http://adai.uw.edu/grants/nsf_biosketch_template.pdf  and 
https://education.uwmedicine.org/student -affairs/career -advising/year -4/residency -applications/curriculum -vitae/   
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 69 of 70 
  X The CV will be uploaded.  
12.3 UW Study team qualifications . Describe the qualifications  and/or training for  each UW study team member to 
fulfill their role on the study and perform study procedures.  (You may be asked about non -UW study team 
members during the review; they should not be described here.) You may list these indivi duals by name, 
however if you list an individual by name, you will need to modify this application if that individual is replaced. 
Alternatively, you can describe study roles  and the  qualifications and training the PI or study leadership will 
require for any individual who might fill that role. The IRB will use this information to assess whether risks to 
subjects are minimized because study activities are being conducted by properly qualified and trained 
individuals.  
Describe: The role (or name of person),  the study activities they will perform, and the qualifications or 
training that are relevant to performing those study activities . 
 
 Examples:  
Research Study Coordinator:  Obtain consent, administer surveys, blood draw. Will have previous  experience 
coor dinating  clinical research and be a certified phlebotomist in WA.  
Undergraduate Research Assistant:  Obtain consent, perform all study procedures. Will have had coursework in 
research methods, complete an orientation to human subjects protections given by t he department, and will 
receive training from the PI  or the graduate student project lead on obtaining consent and debriefing subjects.  
Acupuncturist:  Perform acupuncture procedures and administer surveys. Must be licensed with WA State DoH 
and complete tr aining in administering research surveys given by the project director, an experienced survey 
researcher . 
Co-Investigator:  Supervise MRI and CT scan procedures and data interpretation, obtain consent. MD, specialty in 
interventional radiology and body imag ing. 5 -years clinical research experience.  
 
   
 Project Manager: 4+ years experience  in clinical research, remote clinical trials, and data acquisition; 
Responsible for coordinating all data collection activities, documenting study procedures, preparing 
study reports and ensuring regulatory requirements are met.  
Graduate Student: Conduct  data analyses and machine learning experiments on existing observational data of 
MHA and TS platforms  
Data Analyst: Assist PIs in setting up the data management platform, code book, monitoring data quality, 
communicating with MHA and TS regarding technica l issues, and generating reports on data quality  
Research Study Assistant: Provide operational support to all facets of the study  
12.4 Study team training and communication . Describe how it will be ensured that each study team member is 
adequately trained and informed about the research procedures and requirements (including any changes) as 
well as their research -related duties and functions.  
  There is no study team.  
   
 All study team members have completed CITI trainings. The study team will meet regularly (biweekly at 
project start up and monthly thereafter).  
 
 
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
06/26/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  02/13/2024  
Version 2.4 Version 1. 14 
  Page 70 of 70 
 13 OTHER APPROVALS, PERMISSIONS, and REGULATORY ISSUES  
13.1 Approvals and permissions.  Identify any other approvals or perm issions that will be obtained. For example: from 
a school, external site/organization, funding agency, employee uni on, UW Medicine clinical unit.  
Do not attach the approvals and permissions unless requested by the IRB. 
 N/A  
13.2 Financial Conflict of I nterest . Does any UW member of the team have ownership or other Significant Financial 
Interest (SFI) with this research as defined by UW policy GIM 10 ? 
 X No  
  Yes → If yes, has the Office of Research made a determination regarding this SFI as it pertains to the 
proposed research?    
  No → If no, contact the Office of Research (206.616.0804, research@uw.edu ) for  
guidance  on how to obtain the determination   
  Yes → If yes, upload the Conflict Management Plan for every UW team member who has 
a FCOI with respect to the research, to Zipline . If it is not yet available, use the text 
box to describe whether the Significant Financial Interest has been disclosed 
already to the UW Office of Research and include the FIDS Disclosure ID if 
available.   
       
 
 