 
 Double -Blind, Randomized, Two Period Crossover Comparison of the 
Cognitive and Behavioral Effects of Eslicarbazepine Acetate and 
Carbamazepine in Healthy Adults  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
Kimford Jay Meador , Principal Investigator  
Stanford University  
 
 
November  30, 2017  
 
 
 
 1 PROTOCOL FOR CLINICAL RESEARCH TRIAL  
 
TITLE:  Double -Blind, Randomized, Two Period Crossover Comparison of 
the Cognitive and Behavioral Effects of Eslicarbazepine  Acetate  
and Carbamazepine  in Healthy Adults  
 
BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF STUDY  
 This study is a doubl e-blind, randomized, two period crossover design.  The 
study consists of 6 visits over a 21 week period .  Fifty (50) normal healthy subjects will 
be treated with both Eslicarbazepine  acetate (ESL, 800 mg/day) and Carbamazepine  
(CBZ, 800mg/day)  for 6 weeks and 3 days each  (maintenance 4 weeks  and taper 3 
days ).  Each antiepileptic drug (AED) treatment period will be followed by a four day 
taper and washout period off AED for the remainder of the month.  Cognitive and 
behavioral function testing along with sa fety testing will be conducted at pretreatment 
baseline, the end of each randomization AED maintenance period, and after the final 
washout period.  
 
TIME PERIOD AND NUMBER OF SUBJECTS  
A. Anticipated Number of Subjects:  50 (to obtain 30 evaluable subjects)  
B. Anticipated Duration of Study:    1 Year  
   
DESCRIPTION OF MEDICATIONS  
Generic     Strength and   Therapeutic  
                Dosage Form   Classification  
 
ESL   400 mg/capsule   Anticonvulsant  
 
CBZ   200 mg/capsule   Anticonvulsant  
(immediate release)  
 
Draft prepared by:  
Kimford J. Meador, MD  
Professor , Department of Neurology & Neurological Sciences  
Stanford Comprehensive Epilepsy Center  
Stanford University School of Medicine  
300 Pasteur Drive (Room A343)  
Stanford, CA 94305 -5235  
Tel: 650:725 -6648    
Fax: 65 0:498 -6326  
kmeador@stanford.edu
 
 
2 TABLE OF CONTENTS  
                 Page  
I. BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE       3 
II. STUDY QUESTION          4 
III. STUDY OBJECTIVE         4 
IV. STUDY DESIGN          4 
V. STUDY POPULATION  
 A. Number and type of subjects       4 
 B. Inclusion Criteria         4 
 C. Exclusion Criteria         5 
VI. STUDY PROCEDURES  
 A. Overview: time and events        5 
 B. Blinding and controls        5 
 C. Dosage regimen         5 
 D. Enrollment goals         6 
 E. Visit-specific treat ment and evaluation sequence    6 
VII. NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL  TESTS       8 
 A. Outline          9 
 B. Description of Individual Tests        
VIII. STUDY MEDICATION  
 A. Description          13 
 B. Packaging and labeling        13 
 C. Shipment and st orage        13  
D. Maintenance of med ication dispensing records     14 
 E. Return of unused medication        14 
 F. Concomita nt medication and therapy      14 
VIII. CLINICAL AND LABORATORY MEASUREMENTS      
 A. Clinic al efficacy measurements       14 
 B. Clinical safety measurements       15 
 C. Adverse event procedures        15 
 D. Medicat ion compliance assessment      16 
 E. Subject discontinuation criteria       17 
IX. STATISTICAL EVALUATION  
 A. Sample size rationale        17 
 B. Methodology for statistical ana lysis     18 
 C. Interim analysis         19 
 D. Definition of evaluable subject (safety, efficacy)     19 
X. REFERENCES          19 
XI. APPENDICES           
 A.  Study Timetable         22 
 
 
3 I. BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE                                                                               
 The eff icacy of antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) in reducing seizures is similar for the most 
common type of seizures (i.e.,  focal  +/- secondary generalized).  Therefore, differential side 
effects play an important role in therapeutic decisions.  In this regard, differ ential cognitive 
effects of AEDs are of particular interest.  The older AEDs are known to produce untoward 
cognitive effects, which are clinically significant in some patients (Meador, 2001a).  The 
cognitive effects of carbamazepine , phenytoin, and valproa te are similar while the effects of 
phenobarbital are worse. Several of the newer AEDs are well tolerated and demonstrate 
fewer adverse cognitive effects compared to placebo  and to older AEDs  (Meador, 20 14a, 
2014b ). 
 
Eslicarbazepine acetate (ESL) is a new generation AED, which is chemically related to 
carbamazepine  and oxcarbazepine , but is structurally different at the 10,11 -position , which 
results in differences in metabolism . ESL is rapidly hydrolyzed to eslicarbazepine.  
Eslicarbazepine ’s main mechanism is blocka de of voltage -gated sodium chan nels, but it also 
affect s type T calcium channels  (Hebeisen et al., 2011;  Brady et al., 2011).  There have been 
3 phase III clinical trials: (Elger et al., 2009 ; Ben-Menachem et al., 2010 ; Sperling 2015) , all 
with sim ilar design in which ESL was titrated over 2 weeks and then administered for 12 
weeks at 400 mg  (not in one trial) , 800 mg and 1.200 mg once -daily. ESL demonstrated good 
efficacy in adjunctive therapy for partial seizures with and wit hout secondary general ization. 
However, ESL’s cognitive effects in relation to the  established AEDs are unknown.  
 
Only one study has formally assessed the cognitive effects of ESL (Milovan  et al, 
2010).  This investigation consisted of two single -blind parallel -group studies. I n the first study, 
a single dose of 900mg of either ESL or Oxcarbazepine. This was followed by one week of 
placebo, then one week of ESL 800mg daily or Oxcarbazepine 300mg bid, then one week of 
ESL 1200mg daily or Oxcarbazepine 600mg bid. Cognitive testing  was conducted pre and 3 
hours post the single dose and one hour post dose at the end of each week.  The total n = 56 
healthy subjects with ESL (n=26) and Oxcarbazepine (n=30). The overall treatment -emergent 
adverse effects (especially CNS related) were gre ater for Oxcarbazepine.  At the top doses, 
Oxcarbazepine had 83% of patients reporting adverse events compared to 30% for ESL; the 
CNS adverse reports  for asthenia, dizziness, somnolence and blurred vision were greater for 
Oxcarbazepine.  In contrast, differ ences between ESL and Oxcarbazepine on the cognitive 
measures were not significant. This disparity may be related to weaknesses in the study 
design. Weaknesses included small sample size, short duration of therapy, and lack of control 
for repeated testing (placebo tes ted only after the first week). The sample size was 56 (26 
ESL; 30 oxcarbazepine) which may be too small to detect differences in a parallel design 
study; the sample size was not determined by statistical considerations. In addition, primary 
comparisons were for each AED to the predose in the first single dose phase “or” to the 
placebo phase. Direct comparisons between AEDs were done as secondary analyses.  
Further , the testing was conducted one hour after the morning  dose of the two AEDs  (e.g., 
ESL 1200mg and  Oxcarbazepine 600mg) , even though ESL would be more likely to be given 
qHS in the real world. This biased against ESL. Thus, this investigation does not adequately 
assess the cognitive effects of ESL. 
 
The present study will investigate the cognitive and behavioral effects of ESL 
 
 
4 compared to Carbamazepine  in healthy subject s employing a double -blind, two -period, 
crossover design.  The design provides robust statistical strength and controls for selection 
bias created by individual variability  in cognitive performance. The use of healthy subjects will 
control  for the effect of changes in seizure frequency on cognitive function. In addition, 
examining AED cognitive effects in healthy subjects allows extrapolation of the results to other 
patient populations treated with AEDs (e.g., psychiatric and pain disorders).  
 
 
II. STUDY QUESTION  
 
 What are the cognitive and behavioral effects of ESL compared to Carbamazepine  in 
normal healthy adults?  
 
III. STUDY OBJECTIVE  
 
 The objective of this study is to determine whether there are any differences in the 
cognitive abilities and/or behavioral response of normal healthy volunteers after 6 weeks of 
treatment with ESL compared to Carbamazepine . 
 
IV. STUDY DESIGN  
 
 The study will employ a double -blind, randomiz ed, two period crossover design.  Every 
subject will receive each AED for 6  weeks  and 3 days , which includes a one -month 
maintenance period  and 3 day taper . Following neuropsychological assessment at the end of 
the maintenance phase,  AEDs will be tapered o ff over 3  days and then the subjects will 
remain off drug for the remainder of 4 weeks. A study physician will monitor each subject 
during AED treatment periods and will adjust AED dosages with the goal of reaching 
therapeutic doses of ESL (800mg/day) and Carbamazepine  (800mg/day ).  Subjects will 
undergo cognitive and behavioral testing at screening, prior to initiation of the first AED, at the 
end of each AED treatment, and at the end of each of the two washout periods.  Subjects and 
study personnel in dir ect contact with subjects will be blinded to AED treatment.  
 
 
V. STUDY POPULATION  
  
A. Number and type of subjects  
 
 Healthy males and females between the ages of 18 and 55 who do not require 
concomitant medications that affect study medications or cognitive and behavioral functions.  
Fifty subjects will be enrolled in the study in order to complete 30 subjects.  
 
B. Inclusion Criteria  
 
 1. Healthy adults between the ages of 18 and 55 years  
 
 2. Male or female (using approved birth control methods)  
 
 
5  
 3. Informe d consent obtained  
 
C. Exclusion Criteria  
   
1. Presence of clinically significant cardiovascular, endocrine, hematopoietic, hepatic, 
neurologic, psychiatric, or renal disease . 
 
2. Presence or history of drug or alcohol abuse . 
 
3. The use of concomitant medic ations , which are known to affect ESL or 
Carbamazepine  or the use of any concomitant medications that may alter cognitive 
function (see Section VII.E for a partial list) . 
 
4. Prior adverse reaction to or prior hypersensitivity to either study medication or  to 
related compounds . 
 
5. Prior participation in studies involving anticonvulsant medications.  
 
6. Subjects who have received any investigational drug within the previous thirty days . 
 
7. Subjects with IQ < 70 as determined by the Peabody Picture Vocabula ry Test . 
 
8. Presence of HLA B*1502 in subjects of Asian descent; this will be obtained at 
screening in subjects of Asian descent.  
 
 
VI. STUDY PROCEDURES  
 
A. Overview: time and events  
    
 The study will employ a double -blind, randomized, two -period crossover  design.  The 
study consists of 6 visits over a  21 week  time period.  Subjects will be screened and tested at 
baseline, and then randomly as signed to receive each AED for 6  weeks, which includ es a 
titration period and a one -month maintenance period. Each A ED treatment period will be 
followed by a 3 -day taper and a was hout period for the remainder of  4 weeks. (See Appendix 
A for a complete study timetable).  
 
B. Blinding and Controls  
 
 Subjects and study personnel will be blinded to drug randomization since all study 
drugs will be over -encap sulated in identical capsules.  
 
C. Dosage Regimen  
    
 During each AED phase, subjects will be titrated onto ESL (800mg/day) or 
 
 
6 Carbamazepine  (400mg bid ) and tapered off at end of 4 -week maintenance according to the 
following sc hedule  during each treatment arm : 
 
Week   ESL     Carbamazepine  
1  400 mg qAM  + placebo   200 mg bid  
2  400 mg qAM  + placebo   200 mg qAM & 400mg qHS  
3  800 mg qAM  + placebo   400 mg bid  
4  800 mg qAM  + placebo   400 mg bid  
5  800 mg qAM  + placebo   400 mg bid  
6  800 mg qAM  + placebo   400 mg bid   
3-day taper  400 mg qAM  + placebo   200 mg bid  
Stop 
  
The investigative team  will monitor each subject’s progress and safety during AED 
treatment periods with the goal of obtaining and maintaining ESL and Carbamazepine  at 
dosage of 800mg/day. Subjects will rem ain on each AED for a total of 6  weeks  (4 weeks 
maintenance),  and then will be tapered off over 3  days  followed by washout period for the 
remainder of 4 weeks.  T otal time on each drug will be 6 weeks plus 3  days.  ESL will be 
dose d qAM and Carbamazepine  will be dosed  BID. The plasma T max for plasma 
eslicarbazepine and carbamazepine will therefore approximately match the time of testing.  
Subjects will be t apered off AEDs over the first 3 days of each 4 -week washout peri od 
according to the following schedules:  
 
AED Dose DURING TRIAL   AED TAPER  
 
ESL = 800     400mg daily X3 days then stop  
Carbamazepine  = 800   200mg bid X3 days then stop   
 
 An appropriate number of placebo capsules will be added to all AED dosages so that 
subjects will always take the same number of capsules for each dose given BID during AED 
treatment periods.  Dosage times will be 8am and 8pm.   
 
D. Enrollment Goals  
 
 Previous studies i ndicate that an enrollment of 46  subjects will be required to obtain 30 
evaluable subjects.  See Statistical Section for power analysis.  
 
E. Visit-Specific Treatment and Evaluation Sequence  
   
 Subjects will be randomly assi gned to receive both AEDs, for 6  weeks each, in a 
random sequence of administration.  Each AED treatment  period will be followed by a 3 -day 
taper period and a 25 -day washout period.  
 
 At all visits, subjects will be advised on drug compliance and avoidance of medications 
which my adversely effect the results of cognitive function testing. Adverse events will be 
documented on the appropriate case report form.  Appointments will be made for follow up 
 
 
7 visits and care will be taken to schedule all cognitive and behavioral function testing for a 
given subject at the same time of the day . Testing will be in the appr oximately 2 hours post 
morning dose . The time of testing and time of last 2 doses will be recorded.    
 
 The timetable for th e study is listed in Appendix A .  This is a visit -by-visit description of 
the events scheduled for each visit.  
 
 Visit 1   Screening Visit ( -1 week prior to randomization)  
 
 Subjects will be screened to assure they meet all of the inclusion criteria and none of 
the exclusion criteria.  All eligible subjects will be required to give informed consent.  A 
complete history, physical examina tion, neurologic examination, laboratory screening 
including  urine pregnancy test (if woman of child bearing potential), HLA B*1502 testing for 
subjects of Asian descent, IQ screen with Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test, and full cognitive  
battery (see below ) will be obtained.  
 
 
 Visit 2   Randomization - Drug Period 1  (Study week 0)  
 
 At this visit all subjects who had successfully completed all screening tests and had no 
significant abnormalities on baseline laboratory, physical exam, neurologic exam, or IQ t esting 
will be randomized to study drug.  At this visit, neuropsychological testing will be conducted 
before the first dose of study drug is administered.  S ubject will be randomized, and s tudy 
drug will be dispensed.  
 
 Study weeks 2 - 6 
 
 During this peri od, subjects will titrate up during the 1st two weeks , and be maintained 
on 800mg /day of ESL or Carbamazepine  during weeks 3 -6. The subject’s doses will be 
titrated according to the schedule outlined below. Telephone contacts will be ma de at weeks 2 
and 4 to check on adverse events and to encourage compliance.  
 
 Visit 3  (Study week 6 ) 
 
 At this visit, p ill bottles will be checked, and pill counts conducted. Vital signs and a 
brief physical examination will be obtained.  In addition, antiepileptic drug bloo d levels , CBC 
and chemistries  will be obtained , and cognitive function and behavioral testing will be 
performed .  (Cognitive function and behavioral testing wil l be rescheduled if the subject s 
inadvertently used  alcohol, non -approved drugs 72 hours before testing.)  
 
 Study weeks 6 - 10  
 
 The subject will be tapered off drug over the first 3 days and then remain off drug for 
the next 25 days.  
 
Visit 4  (Study week 10) 
 
 
8  
 This visit ends the washout period and begins the baseline for Drug Period 2.  At this 
visit, vital signs and a brief physical examination will be obtained. S ubjects will undergo 
cognitive and behavioral  testing and then the alternate drug treatment  will be dispensed .  
Titration will be similar to the first titrations beginning at Visit 2.  I n addition, a pregnancy test 
will be obtained in women of child bearing potential.  
 
 Study weeks 10 - 14 
 
 During this period subjects will titrate up during weeks 10 -12, and be maintained on 
800mg/day of ESL or Carbamazepine during weeks 12 -16. Telephone contacts will be made 
at weeks 12 and 14 to check on adverse events and to encourage compliance.  
 
    
 Visits 5  (Study week 16 ) 
 
 At this visit, pill bottles will be checked, and pill counts conducted. Vital signs and a 
brief physical examination will be o btained.  In addition, antiepileptic drug blood levels, CBC 
and chemistries will be obtained, and cognitive function and behavioral testing will be 
performed.  (Cognitive function and behavioral testing will be rescheduled if the subjects  
inadvertently use d alcohol, non -approved drugs 72 hours before testing.)  
 
Study weeks 16 - 20  
 
 The subject will be tapered off drug over the first 3 days and then remain off drug for 
the next 25 days.  
  
 
Visit 6  (Study week 20)  
 
 This visit ends the washout period and b egins the baseline for Drug Period 2.  At this 
visit, vital signs and a brief physical examination will be obtained. Subjects will undergo 
cognitive and behavioral testing and then the alternate drug treatment will be dispensed.  
Titration will be similar to the first titrations beginning at Visit 2.  In addition, a pregnancy test 
will be obtained in women of child bearing potential.  
 
 
VII. NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL  TESTS  
 
A. Outline :  
Note that test will performed in the following order.  
 
Computerized Testing Bat tery (CNS Vitals system)  
 Verbal memory immediate assessment  
 Visual memory immediate assessment  
 Symbol digit coding assessment  
 
 
9 
 Shifting attention test  
 Dual task test  
 One- and two -back continuous performance test  
 Verbal memory delay assessment  
 Visual memory delay ass essment  
 
Non-computerized cognitive/behavioral testing  
 MCG paragraph memory -immediate recall assessment  
 Symbol digit modalities test  
 Stroop test  
 Profile of mood states (POMS) assessment  
 Columbia -Suicide Severity Rating Scale  
 MCG paragraph memor y-delay recall assessment  
 
B. Description of Individual Tests:  
 
1. Components for computerized cognitive assessments : 
The computerized cognitive assessments have been used in prior studies ( see reference 
section for CNS Vitals).  It consist s of verbal memor y immediate assessments, visual memory 
immediate assessments, symbol digit coding, shifting attention tasks, dual task tests, one - 
and two -back continuous performance tests, verbal memory delayed, and visual memory 
delayed. Detailed descriptions of each ar e below . 
 
1a. The order of computerized testing should be as follows:  
 Verbal memory immediate  
 Encoding -30 seconds  
 Immediate recognition -1 minute  
 Visual memory immediate  
 Encoding -30 seconds  
 Immediate recognition -1 minute  
 Symbol digit coding
  2 minutes  
 Shifting attention test  
 2 minutes  
 Dual task test  
 2 minutes  
 One- and two -back continuous performance test  
 5 minutes  
 Verbal memory delayed  
 1 minute  
 Visual memory delayed  
 1 minute  
 
These are actual test run times and do not includ e reading instructions or practice tests.  
 
1b. Verbal memory immediate assessment : 
Fifteen words are presented sequentially for 2 seconds each on the computer screen and 
subjects are instructed to remember the words. Following their presentation, the 15 ta rget 
words are presented, and the subject indicates if the word is new (not presented) or old (a 
member of the original presentation list). The duration of instructions and testing is 
approximately 3 minutes.  
Results are reported as follows:  
 
 
10 
 Correct hits (immediate)  
 Correct passes (immediate)  
 Total Correct hits + passes (immediate) – This is a primary measure for Z score.  
 
1c. Visual memory immediate assessment : 
Fifteen shapes are presented sequentially for 2 seconds each on the computer  screen, and  
subjects are instructed to remember the shapes. Following their presentation, the 15 target 
shapes are presented, and the subject indicates if the shape is new (not presented) or old (a 
member of the original presentation list). The duration o f instructions and testing is 
approximately 3 minutes.  
Results are reported as follows:  
 Correct hits (immediate)  
 Correct passes (immediate)  
 Total Correct hits + passes (immediate) – This is a primary measure for Z score.  
 
1d. Symbol digit coding : 
As a measure of processing efficiency, symbols are presented on the computer screen and 
the subject types in numbers that correspond to each symbol based upon a response key. 
The duration of instructions and testing is approximately 4 minutes.  
Results are reported as follows:  
 Correct responses  – This is a primary measure for Z score.  
 Errors  
 Correct responses  – Errors    – This is a primary measure for Z score.  
 
 
1e. Shifting attention test : 
As a measure of set shifting attention and executive function, the subject assesses a series of 
targets and rules and responds by pressing the appropria te shift key. The duration of 
instructions and testing is approximately 3 minutes.  
Results are reported as follows:  
 Correct responses  
 Errors  
 Correct responses  – Errors    – This is a primary measure for Z score.  
 
1f. Dual task test : 
This is a test th at measures multi -tasking. The subject traces the track of a target with a 
computer mouse while simultaneously monitoring and responding each time a number from a 
series of sequentially presented random numbers (ie, 1 to 99) is presented which corresponds 
to specific criteria (ie, between 45 and 55). The duration of instructions and testing is 
approximately 3 minutes. During the test portion, the level of difficulty increases by increasing 
the speed of the target movement. There are 8 levels of difficulty.  
Results are r eported for each of 8 levels (X 15 second  each)  of increasing difficulty as follows:  
 Percent of time cursor in box  
 Correct responses  
 Correct average reaction time  
 Commission errors  
 
 
11 
 Omission errors  
 
Summary across the 8 levels of diff iculty includes:  
 Total percent of time cursor in box  
 Average percent of cursor in box  
 Total correct responses  
 Average correct reaction time  
 Total commission errors  
 The primary measure for this test is a Z score averaging Z scores for (% time in  box) + 
(Correct RT) + ( # Correct – Errors).  
 
1g. One- and two -back continuous performance test : 
As a measure of working memory and sustained attention, subjects are presented a series of 
shapes of different colors in a sequence on the computer screen. Sub jects are required to 
press the spacebar upon seeing the target (eg, blue square), but only when a matching 
stimulus (eg, blue square) appears 1 position before (ie, one -back) or 2 positions before (ie, 
two-back). The duration of instructions and testing i s approximately 6 minutes. As an 
example, correct responses (yes/no) are given for the following sequence of stimuli:  
 Blue square=no  
 Red triangle=no  
 Blue square=yes  
 Blue triangle=no  
 
Results are reported as follows:  
 Correct responses  
 Average co rrect response time  
 Incorrect responses  
 Average incorrect response time  
 Omission errors  
 The primary measure for this test is a Z score averaging Z scores for (Correct RT) + ( # 
Correct – Errors).  
 
1h. Verbal memory delayed assessment : 
As a measure o f delayed memory, subjects are presented with 15 target words from the 
original list used to assess immediate verbal memory interspersed with 15 foils. The subject 
indicates if the word is new (not previously presented) or old (a member of the original 
presentation list). The duration of testing is approximately 1 minute.  
Results are reported as follows:  
 Correct hits (delayed)  
 Correct passes (delayed)  
 Total C orrect responses – This is a primary measure for Z score.  
 
1i. Visual memory delayed assessment : 
This is a measure of delayed memory in which the 15 target shapes from the original list  are 
presen ted interspersed with 15 foils. The subject indicates if the shape is new (not previously 
presented) or old (a member of the original presentation list). The duration of instructions and 
 
 
12 testing is approximately 1 minute.  
Results are reported as follows:  
 Correct hits (delayed)  
 Correct passes (delayed)  
 Total C orrect responses – This is a primary measure for Z score.  
 
2. Components for non -computerized cognitive and behavioral assessments : 
The non -computerized cognitive and behavioral battery performance  measures consist of 
MCG paragraph memory, symbol digit mod alities test, Stroop test, and POMS . A detailed 
description of each of these follows.  
 
2a. Peabody picture vocabulary test : 
At Screening, the PPVT (third edition) will be u sed to assess IQ at enrol lment. The PPVT is 
an individually -administered test of receptive vocabulary (of standard English) for children and 
adults from 2.5 through 90 years old. This test requires examinees to examine 4 black and 
white pictures and choose which best represents th e meaning of a stimulus word that is 
presented orally by the examiner ( Dunn and Dunn, 1997 ). 
This is screening measure and is not used in analyses.  
 
2b. MCG paragraph memory : 
A MCG paragraph memory test includes a matched set of short stories that were pre viously 
developed and have been shown to be sensitive to the side effects of anticonvulsants 
(Meador et al, 1993 ). On each test day, the subjects will be read 1 of the short stories. Free 
immediate and delayed (15 -minute) recall will be obtained.  
The prima ry measure for Z score is the % correct for delayed recall.  
 
2c. Symbol digit modalities test : 
The SDMT is a measure of cognitive processing involving coding which is sensitive to drug 
effects. This is a complex graphomotor transcription task that requires  the subject to 
transcribe symbols to numbers as quickly as possible employing a combination of direct visual 
identification and/or short -term memorization. Symbols with empty squares are presented, 
and the subject’s task is to fill in the corresponding nu mber as quickly as possible during a 90 -
second interval ( Smith, 1973 ). Results are scored based on number correct in 90 seconds , 
which is the primary measure for Z score . 
 
2d. Stroop test : 
The Stroop test is a measure of concentration effectiveness and res ponse inhibition. The test 
consists of 3 pages containing 100 items. One page contains the words “RED,” “GREEN,” 
and “BLUE” arranged randomly and printed in black ink. No word follows itself within a 
column. The second page contains “XXXX”s written in red,  green and blue ink. The final page 
consists of word names printed in non -congruent colors. The subject’s task for the first card is 
to read correctly as many of the word names as possible during a 45 -second interval. The 
second task is to read the colors of the printed “X”s as quickly as possible during an additional 
45-second interval. The final task measures an interference effect by requiring the subject to 
inhibit the natural tendency to read the word, and to instead name the color of ink, which is 
incongruent with the word name. This test results in 3 scores: word, color, and word/color 
 
 
13 contrast conditions ( Golden , 1978 ). 
The primary measure for Z score is the total # correct across all 3 conditions.  
 
2e. Profile of Mood States : 
The POMS is a checklist  of 65 adjectives describing mood states  (Lorr et al, 1971 . The 
subject rates the presence of each mood state in the past week on a 5 -point scale from “not at 
all” to “extremely.” The POMS is scored for 6 scales (fatigue, vigor, depression -dejection, 
anger -hostility, tension -anxiety, and confusion -bewilderment). All scales but the vigor scale 
are scored such that higher scores reflect greater mood disturbance; for the vigor scale, 
higher scores reflect less mood disturbance. The test is scored for each scal e as well as for a 
total mood disturbance score derived from summing all scales (with reversal of the negatively 
scored items on the vigor scale). The POMS has been shown to be sensitive to AEDs in prior 
studies (Meador et al, 2014a, 2014b ). 
The Total scor e for POMS is the primary measure for Z score for this measure.  
 
2f. Columbia -Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C -SSRS)  
Suicidality will be assessed by trained study personnel using the C -SSRS (Columbia 
University Medical Center, 2008). This scale will be use d for screening as well as to assess 
suicidal ideation and behavior that may occur during the study.   
This is a safety measure and is not used in the primary analysis.  
 
 
VIII.  STUDY MEDICATIONS  
 
A. Description  
 
 ESL 400mg, Carbamazepine  (immediate release ) 200mg , and placebos will be 
provided by Sunovion  or their designee. All AED doses and placebos will be 
overencapsulated in matched opaque capsules.   
 
B. Packaging and Labeling  
 
 Medication s will be provided by Sunovion  in capsule bulk containers.  Each w ill be 
labeled with the appropriate contents, ESL 400mg capsules, Carbamazepine  200mg 
(immediate release) capsules and matching placebo. All drug s will be identical capsules. 
Sunovion  will supply plastic containers with tid daily dose sections for each pat ient. The 
clinical research pharmacy will be responsible for dispensing and labeling study drug for the 
study subjects.  
 
C. Shipment and storage  
    
 Sunovion  or their designee will ship all drug supplies to the site.  A shipping invoice will 
be contained with each shipment and should be kept and matched against received drug.  All 
investigational drug will be stored and locked in the Clinical Research Pharmacy.  All unused 
drug supplies remaining at end of study will be destroyed by the site pharmacy perso nnel and 
written notification of the destruction will be sent to Sunovion .  Study drug should be stored in 
 
 
14 the drums it is shipped in, in a cool dry area until drug is dispensed to the study subjects.  
 
D. Maintenance of medication dispensing records  
 
 Each  clinical pharmacy site will provide medication dispensing instructions and forms 
for recording dispensing of study medications to the pharmacy study personnel.  These 
records should be kept current during the study and be available for inspection.  When 
medication is dispensed, the number of capsules of active and placebo are to be listed on the 
appropriate dispensing log.  Returned capsules at each visit will also be recorded.  
 
E. Return of unused medication  
    
 At each visit, subjects must return the me dication packets and all unused study 
medication to the investigator. The accountability for returning of medication is the 
responsibility of the investigator.  Unused study drug returned by subjects will be destroyed in 
accordance wit h remainder study dru g. 
 
F. Concomitant medication and therapy  
 
 Subjects will be instructed to limit alcohol consumption to no more than ½ ounce of 
absolute alcohol equivalents per day (approximately one 12 oz. beer, or 1 mixed drink) and no 
more than 3 ounces per week.  Subj ects will be instructed not to consume alcohol , caffeine,  or 
take any over -the-counter medications for at least 72 hours prior to cognitive and behavioral 
testing.  All concomitant medications will be recorded on the case report forms.  Any 
concomitant medi cations and other agents, which are known to affect Carbamazepine  or 
Eslicarbazepine  or have significant effects on cognition may not be taken during this trial. A 
partial list of examples include: anticholinergics, anticoagulants, antidepressants, 
antiepi leptics, antipsychotics, anxiolytics, central nervous system depressants, 
corticosteroids, doxycycline, erythromycin, H2 antagonists, lithium, methylphenidate, 
narcotics, quinidine, reserpine, theophylline, centrally active antihistamines , and grapefruit 
juice. Informed consent will emphasize that subjects should not consume grapefruit or its juice 
during the study.  
 
 
IX.  CLINICAL AND LABORATORY MEASUREMENTS  
 
A.  Clinical Measurements (Study weeks -1, 0, 6, 10 , 16, 20) 
 
 Neuropsychological testing will be completed at baseline (visits 1 & 2), at the 
completion of each AED treatment period (weeks 6 & 16) and at the completion of each 
washout period  (weeks 10 & 20) .  The neuropsychological test results from the first baseline 
testing (i.e., visit 1 at -2 week s) will not be included in the analyses. All subjects will have at 
least 7 hours of sleep on the evening before the day of cognitive testing. (Note. If the subject 
does not get the required hours of sleep or takes non -approved medication, caffeine, etc. , 
cognitive and behavioral testing will be rescheduled).  
 
 
 
15 For detailed information regarding all of the cognitive tests refer to Section VII . 
 
B. Clinical Safety Measurements  
    
 1. Physical Examinations (Study weeks -1, 0, 6, 10, 16 , & 20) 
     
 A complete phy sical and neurological examination will be performed during pre -
study screening ( visit 1; week -1) and at the completion of the study (visit 6; week 20) 
or study discontinuation. Brief physical examinations will be performed on visits 2, 3, 4, 
& 5 (weeks 0 , 6, 10, & 16). 
 
 A complete physical examination will consist of determinations of sitting blood 
pressure, weight, he art rate, assessment of physical condition (general appearance, 
skin and skin structure, HEENT, abdomen, cardiovascular, respiratory, 
musc uloskeletal, genitourinary and central nervous systems).  Brief physical 
examinations will consist of determinations of sitting blood pressure, weight, heart rate, 
and an assessment of physical condition, as required to determine change from the 
previous v isit, and an assessment of adverse effects focused on skin and neurological 
systems . 
 
 2. Laboratory assessments (Weeks -1, 6, 10 , 14, 18) 
     
  A. Blood and Urine Samples  
 
Blood work assessments will be obtained at visits  1, 6, 16, & 20 . 
 
The hematology parameters to be determined are: RBC count, hemoglobin, 
hematocrit, WBC count, platelet count, cell morphology and complete WBC 
differential count (neutrophils, bands, lymphocytes, monocytes, eosinophils and 
basophils).  
 
The chemistry parameters to be dete rmined are: SGOT, SGPT, alkaline 
phosphatase, albumin, total protein, total bilirubin, sodium, potassium, chloride, 
calcium, phosphorous, creatinine, blood urea nitrogen, uric acid and glucose.  
The total chem panel will be obtained at visits 1 & 6; just SG OT & SGPT will be 
obtained at visits 3 & 5.  
 
Urine Pregnancy tests will  be performed on women of child bearing potential at 
Weeks -1, 10 & 20 (visits 1, 4 & 6 ). 
 
In subjects of Asian descent, blood will be obtained to test for the HLA B*1502 
allele. If pres ent, subjects will not receive drug or continue in the study. Subjects 
lost for this reason will be replaced by new enrollees.  
 
Anticonvulsant blood levels will be collected at Weeks 6 and 16  (i.e., visits 3 & 
5).  Carbamazepine  levels are to be sent to th e hospital laboratory for immediate 
 
 
16 analysis.  The Eslicarbazepine  and Carbamazepine levels will be sent to an 
outside contract lab.  Results are to be reviewed and stored by the non -blinded 
investigator.  
 
C. Adverse Event Procedures  
 
 An ADVERSE EVENT (AE)  is a noxious and unintended event observed in, or reported 
by, a subject who is participating in (or has participated in) a clinical study and/or has received 
study medication.  The AE may be related temporarily either to immediate or long -term use of 
the d rug; the AE  may not necessarily  be caused by the drug. Overdose is regarded as an 
adverse event.  Any event meeting these criteria is to be considered an adverse event, 
regardless of whether or not it is considered drug related.  
 
 All adverse events should  be reported on the appropriate Case Report Form; details 
should include the type of event, date of onset, duration, intensity, causality relationship to the 
study drug(s), and outcome.  Wherever possible, a diagnosis  rather than symptom(s) should 
be repor ted. 
 
 “Serious” means an adverse experience that is fatal or life -threatening, is permanently 
disabling, requires or prolongs inpatient hospitalization, or is a congenital anomaly, cancer or 
overdose.  
 
 If any medically serious  adverse event occurs (SAE),  the study medication may be 
discontinued and the patient treated at the discretion of the physician investigator.  
 
 ANY MEDICALLY SERIOUS ADVERSE EVENT REQUIRES IMMEDIATE 
NOTIFICATION OF THE FDA BY THE INVESTIGATOR.  
  
 Any serious  adverse event that occur s up to two weeks following  study participation 
must also be reported.  
 
 Specific procedures for Double -Blind Studies  
 
 Site personnel not involved in direct care of study subjects will generate a 
randomization code.  In an acute medical emergency, the ran domization code may be broken 
if this is considered essential for subject management.  For this purpose the sealed 
randomization code will be provided to the investigator by the site pharmacy. If the code is 
broken, a record of the date, time and reason mu st be put into writing and sent to Sunovion .  
This letter will become part of the permanent study record.  
 
 All adverse events should be recorded on the appropriate Case Report Forms (CRF’s) 
including date of onset and cessation, intensity and relationship  to study drug.  The action 
taken and clinical outcome of the adverse event will also be recorded.   
 
 The investigator will report all serious  AE's to the FDA and to Sunovion  without delay.  
 
 
 
17  D. Medication Compliance Assessment  
   
 Compliance is to be jud ged by questioning the patient at the clinic visit and by the non -
blinded observer’s inspection of medication returned and recording missed doses on the 
appropriate CRF. Repeated noncompliance, or the missing of all scheduled doses of 
medication for three (3) consecutive days (72 -hour period) would be cause for removing the 
subject from the study.  Subjects should take all doses for 3 days before visits when cognitive 
function testing occurs.  
 
E. Subject Discontinuation Criteria  
 
1. Although they may withdr aw without prejudice at any time, every effort should 
be made to have subjects complete the study within the bounds of safety and 
provisions of informed consent.  
 
2. The investigator may discontinue the participation of any subject in this study if:  
    
a. Any clinically significant adverse experiences are observed.  
 
b. The subject is grossly noncompliant.  
 
c. The subject’s health would be jeopardized by continued participation.  
 
d. Consent is withdrawn.  Otherwise, subjects will be encouraged to complete th e 
study, although they may withdraw at any time without prejudice.  
 
3. If subject cannot tolerate the 8 00 mg/d ay dose of ESL or Carbamazepine , the 
dose may be reduced to 4 00 mg/day if the subject and physician deem 
appropriate. An attempt to increase the d ose a week later can be made. If they 
choose not to reduce the dose or if the sub ject cannot tolerate at least 4 00 
mg/day, then the subject will be discontinued.  
 
4. Subject replacement.  
 
 Subjects who are dropped from the study prior to completion of all cognitive 
testing will not be replaced.  
 
5. Follow -up of discontinued patients  
 
 Subjects who receive study drug and are discontinued from the study will have 
all safety assessments completed, including a complete physical examination 
and laboratory evalua tion including chemistry, hematology with differential, 
urinalysis and urine pregnancy test as required at study termination.  This 
testing should be done as soon as possible.  Medical follow -up of any severe 
adverse events or clinically significant abnorm al laboratory values will continue 
until the abnormality resolves, and adequate medical explanation is apparent.  
 
 
18 Such data will be provided to Sunovion . 
 
 
X. STATISTICAL EVALUATION  
 
A. Sample Size  
 
Estimations based on an overall composite score (sustaine d attention and memory 
[SAM] + neuropsychological) for carba mazepine -levetiracetam (Meador et al, 2007) would  
predict that with a sample size of 30 subjects in a 2 -period crossover study, the probability is 
90% that the study will detect a treatment differ ence at a 2 -sided 0.01 significance level, if the 
true difference between the treatments is 0.370 units. This is based on the assumption that 
the SD of the difference in the response variables is 0.490. Given an estimated dropout of 
30% to 40%, the planned  sample size needed to enroll is 40 to 45 subjects.  
The SDMT is a neuropsychological measure that has been sensitive to AED effects in 
multiple studies. Based on the SDMT for carbamazepine  vs. nondrug in the carba mazepine -
levetiracetam  study, a total of 31  subjects will need to complete the 2 -period crossover study. 
The probability is 90% that the study will detect a treatment difference at a 2 -sided 0.01 
significance level, if the true difference between the treatments is 3.800 units. This is based 
on the assumption that the standard deviation of the difference in the response variables is 
5.100. Given an estimated dropout of 30% to 40%, the study would need to enroll between 42 
and 47 subjects.  
Based on the above 2 scenarios, the planned sample size to enr oll in this study is 46 
subjects  to complete 30 . 
 
B. Methodology for statistical analysis  
 
 The parameters of interest are listed in Section VII. Descriptive statistics will be used to 
provide an overview of the primary, secondary, and other  variable resul ts. For categorical 
parameters, the number and percentage of subjects in each  category will be presented. The 
denominator for percentages will be based on the number of  subjects appropriate for the 
purpose of analysis. For continuous parameters, descriptiv e statistics  will include number of 
subjects, mean, standard deviation (SD), median, minimum, and  maximum.  Unless otherwise 
specified, b aseline neuropsychological data will be based on the Visit 2 assessments.  
 
The primary outcome (pharmacodynamic)  variabl e will be analyzed as the within 
subject difference between drugs in the  overall neuropsychological composite Z-score for 
CBZ vs . ESL comparing between end of  Maintenance Period scores for each drug 
(ie,Treatment  Period 1 to Treatment Period 2 ). The overal l composite Z-score will  be 
computed for each condition from  the individual cognitive test scores from the computerized 
tests and  non-computerized neuropsychological tests (including the behavioral 
questionnaires) after  transformation to Z -scores . The Z -score will be calculated using the 
values (mean and SD) from the average of the scores from the 3 nondrug conditions  
(Baseline, first Washout Period, and second Washout Period).  
 
The primary analysis will compare the composite Z score s for ESL to Carbamazepi ne 
 
 
19 for each subject at the end of the Treatment Maintenance Periods. Since the analysis is 
based on an overall composite score, no correction for multiple comparisons is necessary.  
The use of composit e Z-scores avoids Type II error.  
 
 Secondary analyses wi ll be conducted to compare the two AEDs states to the n on-drug 
average from Visits 2, 4 & 6 . The initial cognitive assessment (i.e., Visit #1) is given to reduce 
practice effects and will not be used in the statistical analyses.  Secondary analyses will als o 
be conducted comparing the 2 drug states to each other and the non -drug state for the 
individual neuropsychological variables.  
 
 Summary statistics will be calculated by treatm ent for each evaluation of anti epileptic 
blood levels  (ABLs).  Additional analy ses of data will be performed which take the ABLs into 
account.  Linear correlations of plasma concentrations and the overall  composite and 
individual score variables will be plotted with a fitted regression line  superimposed for each 
drug condition.  
 
 The incidences of all adverse events reported during the trial will be tabulated by 
treatment and study period.  The other safety variables, which include changes in 
hematology, clinical chemistry, and  urinalysis para meters, and vital sign s will be analyzed  
descriptively. The actual measurement and its change from Baseline will be presented by visit  
and period of collection. In addition, shift tables may be used to evaluate the number and  
percentage of subjects having a different post -Baseline status when compa red with their 
Baseline  status.  
   
C. Interim Analysis  
 
No interim analyses are planned.  
 
D. Definition of Evaluable Subjects  
  
 Any subject who ingested one or more doses of blinded study medication and provided 
follow -up information will be evaluable for  the analysis of the safety data. The primary analysis 
will include subjects who complete all visits for the primary variable in both periods and who 
did not have any important deviations, which may have an impact on cognitive function. 
Subjects who premat urely discontinue the study will be evaluated based on the data collected 
at each visit attended. Any subject who is evaluable for the safety analysis who also has 
baseline and end of drug period cognitive/behavioral data available for each of the two drug  
periods w ill be evaluable for the intent -to-treat analysis of the parameters of interest. Any 
subject evaluable for the intent -to-treat analysis will be evaluable for the per -protocol analysis 
of the parameters of interest provided that the subject was co mpliant with the protocol with 
regard to the study medication regimen, use of concomitant medications, sleep requirements 
prior to cognitive testing, alcohol consumption, caffeine consumption, and use of OTC 
medications prior to cognitive testing.  All data  will be used to their maximum possible extent, 
but without any imputations for missing data for any parameter.   
 
 
 
 
20 XI. REFERENCES : 
 
1. Background References.  
Ben-Menachem E , Gabb ai AA, Hufnagel A, Maia J , Almeida L, Soares -da-Silva P . 
Eslicarbazepine aceta te as adjunc -tive therapy in adult patients with partial epilepsy. E pilepsy 
Res 2010;89: 278-285. 
 
Brady K, Hebeisen S , Konrad D, Soares -da-Silva P . The  effects of eslicarbazepine, R -
licarbazepine, oxcarbazepine and  carbamazepine  on ion transmission Cav3.2 channels. 
Epilepsia  2011;52 (Suppl. 6): S260.  
 
Elger C, Halasz P, Maia J, Almeida  L, Soares -da-Silva P , BIA -2093-301 Investigators Study 
Group . Efficacy and safety of  eslicarbazepine acetate as adjunctive treatment in adults with  
refractory partial -onset se izures: a randomized, double -blind,  placebo -controlled, parallel -
group phase III study.  Epilepsia  2009; 50(3):454 -63. 
 
Gil-Nagel A , Elger C, Ben -Menachem E, Halász P, Lopes -Lima J, Gabbai AA, Nunes T, 
Falcão A, Almeida L, da -Silva PS. Efficacy and safety of eslicarbazepine  acetate as add -on 
treatment in patients with focal -onset seizures: integrated analysis of pooled data from 
double -blind phase III clinical studies.  Epilepsia  2013;54(1):98 -107. 
 
Hebeisen  S, Brady K , Konrad D, Soares -da-Silva P . Inhibitory effects of eslicarbazepine 
acetate and its metabolites  against neuronal voltage -gated sodium channel s. Epilepsia 
2011 ;52(Suppl. 6): S257 -S258.  
 
Hufnagel A, Ben -Menachem E , Gab bai AA, Falcão A, Almeida L , Soares -da-Silva P . Long -
term safety and efficacy of  eslicarbazepine acetate as adjunctive therapy in the treatment  of 
partial -onset seizures in adults with epilepsy: results of a1 -year open -label extens ion study. 
Epilepsy Res  2013;103 (2 -3):262—269. 
 
Meador KJ, Gevins A, Loring DW, McEvoy LK, Ray PG, Smith ME, et al. Neuropsychological  
and neurophysiologic effects of carbamazepine and levetiracetam. Neurology. 2007;69:2076 -
84. 
 
Meador KJ. Behavioral and cognitive effects of anti epileptic drugs. In: Chatterjee A, Coslett 
HB (eds). The Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience: Behavioral Neurology and Neuropsychology.  
New York: Oxford  University Press, 2014 a: 269 -283.  
 
Meador KJ.  Cognitive effects of epilepsy and its treatments. In: Wyll ie E, Cascino GD, Gidal 
BE, Goodkin HP (eds). Wyllie’s Treatment of Epilepsy: Principles & Practice, 6th Edition. 
Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2014 b.  
 
Milovan D , Almeida L , Romach MK , Nunes T , Rocha JF , Sokowloska M , Sellers EM , Soares -
da-Silva P . Effect of eslicarbazepine acetate and oxcarbazepine on cognition and 
psychomotor function in healthy volunteers. Epilepsy Behav  2010;18(4):366 -73. 
 
 
 
21 Sperling MR, Abou -Khalil B , Harvey J, Rogin JB, Biraben A, Galimberti CA, Kowacs PA, Hong 
SB, Cheng H, Blum D, Nunes T, Soares -da-Silva P; 304 Study Team. Eslicarbazepine 
acetate as adjunctive therapy in patients with uncontrolled partial -onset seizures: Results of a 
phase III, dou ble-blind, randomized, placebo -controlled trial. Epilepsia. 2015 Feb;56(2):244 -
53. 
 
2. References for Cognitive /Behavioral  Tests  
CNS Vitals:  see reference section #3 below.  
Columbia -Suicide Severity Rating Scale:  Columbia University Medical Center. Columbi a-
Suicide Severity Rating Scale, http://www.cssrs.columbia.edu/ , 2008.  
MCG Paragraphs: Meador KJ, Loring DW, Abney OL, et al.  Effects of Carbamazepine and 
phenytoin on EEG and memory in healthy adults.  Epilepsia  1993;34:153 -157. 
Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test (PPVT): Dunn, LM and Dunn, LM 1997. Peabody  Picture 
Vocabulary Test, 3d ed. Circle Pines, MN: American Guidance Service.  
Profile of Mood States: Lorr M, McNair DM, Droppleman LF. Manual: Profile of Moo d States. 
San Diego, CA: Educational and Industrial Testing Service, 1971.  
Symbol Digit Modalities:  Smith A. Symbol Digit Modalities Test. Manual. Los Angeles: 
Western Psychological Services, 1973.  
Stroop Test: Golden CJ. Stroop Color and Word Test. A Manu al for Clinical and 
Experimental Uses. Chicago: Stoelting, 1978.  
 
3. CNS Vitals References  
Meador K, Loring D, Boyd A, Byrnes W, Dilley D, Webster E, Borghs S, De Backer M, Story T, 
Peter Dedeken P. Randomized Crossover Study Comparing Neuropsychological E ffects of 
Lacosamide versus Carbamazepine Immediate Release in Healthy Subjects. AES Abstract 
2014 c (in press).  
Loring DW , Marino SE, Parfitt D, Finney GR, Meador KJ.  Acute lorazepam  effects on 
neurocognitive performance.  Epilepsy Behav. 2012 Nov;25(3):329 -33. 
 
Kane JM , Yang R, Youakim JM.  Adjunctive armodafinil  for negative symptoms in adults wit h 
schizophrenia: a double -blind, placebo -controlled study.  Schizophr Res. 2012 Mar;135(1 -
3):116 -22. 
 
Brooks BL , Sherman EM, Iverson GL.  Embedded validity indicators on CNS  vital signs in 
youth with neurological diagnoses.  Arch Clin Neuropsychol. 2014 Aug;29(5):422 -31. 
 
Iverson GL, Brooks BL , Ashton Rennison VL.  Minimal gender differences on the CNS vital 
signs computerized neurocognitive battery.  Appl Neuropsychol Adult. 2014;21(1):36 -42. 
 
Levy B . Autonomic nervous system  arousal and cognitive functioning in bipolar disorder.  
Bipolar Disord. 2013 Feb;15(1):70 -9. 
 
Olofsen E , Noppers I, Niesters M, Kharasch E, Aarts L, Sarton E, Dahan A.  Estimation of the 
 
 
22 contribution of norketamine to ketamine -induced acute pain relief and neurocognitive 
impairment in healthy volunteers.  Anesthesiology. 2012 Aug;117(2):353 -64. 
 
Iverson GL , Brooks BL, Langenecker SA, Young AH.  Identifying a cognitive  impairment 
subgroup in adults with mood disorders.  J Affect Disord. 2011 Aug;132(3):360 -7. 
 
Brooks BL , Sherman EM.  Computerized neuropsychological te sting to rapidly evaluate 
cognition  in pediatric  patients with neurologic disorders.  J Child Neurol. 2012 Aug;27(8):982 -
91. 
 
Crowgey T 1, Peters KB , Hornsby WE , Lane A , McSherry F , Herndon JE 2nd , West MJ , 
Williams CL , Jones LW . Relationship between exercise behavior, cardiorespiratory fitness, 
and cogniti ve function in early breast cancer patients treated with doxorubicin -containing 
chemotherapy: a pilot study.  Appl Physiol Nutr Metab.  2014 Jun;39(6):724 -9. 
 
Gualtieri CT , Johnson LG.  Reliability and validity of a computerized neurocognitive test 
battery, CNS Vital Signs.  Arch Clin Neuropsychol. 2006 Oct;21(7):623 -43. 
 
Gualtieri CT , Johnson LG.  Com parative neurocognitive effects of 5 psychotropic 
anticonvulsants and lithium.  MedGenMed. 2006 Aug 23;8(3):46.  
 
Mihalik JP , Lengas E, Register -Mihalik JK, Oyama S, Begalle RL, Guskiewicz KM.  The effects 
of sleep quality and sleep quantity on concussion  baseline assessment.  Clin J Sport Med. 
2013 Sep;23(5):343 -8. 
 
 
23 APPENDIX A - STUDY TIMETABLE  
PROCEDURE   SCREENING   FIRST    TAPER/   SECOND   TAPER/     FINAL  
      DRUG PERIOD  WASHO UT  DRUG PERIOD  WASHOUT     VISIT  
Week    -1   0  1 to 6*   7 to 10   11 to 16*   17 to 20   20  
  
Visit    1   2    3     4      5        6 
Informed consents  X 
Complete Physical  X                         X a  
& Neurol. Exam  
Brief Physical Exam         X     X     X         
CBC, Chem   X       X b          X b        X a 
 
Pregnancy Test  X c            X c             X a c 
HLA B*1250   Xd 
ABLs           X          X 
Cognitive &  
Behavioral Testing  X e   X    X     X     X        X 
Phone call        Xf Xf          Xf Xf  
 
Study Drug  
Dispensed      X         X      
* Calls are made at weeks 2, 4, 12 and 14 to check on AEs and to encourage compliance.  
a Done if patient discontinues early, or at last study visit  
bJust CBC, SGOT & SGPT on these dates.  
c Done only in wome n of child bearing potential  
d HLA B*1250 testing in subjects of Asian descent  
eScreening tests include  Peabody IQ at first visit only , then remainder of neuropsychological battery  (which is repeated each testing session)  
f  Research coordinator will call subjects on weeks 2, 4, 12 & 14 to check on side effects.  
 
 
24  