1 Genetic testing t o Understand an d Address Renal D isease Disparities 
acros s the U nited States (G UARDD -US) 
Principal I nvestigator: Carol R. Ho rowitz, MD, MPH 
Co-Investigator : Girish Nadkarni , MD 
Statistical Investigator: Hrishikesh Chakraborty, DrPH 
Clinicaltrial.gov
 #
: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED], [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Funded by: N ational H uman Genome R esearch Institute  
Version Number: v 6.0 
19 March 20 24 
 
2 
 PROTOCOL  VERSION  AND  AMENDMENT  TRACKING 
Version Number/ 
Affected Section(s)  Summary of Revisions Made  Version Date  
1/ Protocol Version 
and Amendment 
Tracking; Investigator 
Statement; Abbreviations; 
Protocol Synopsis; 
Sections 4,5,6,7, 8, 9, 
10 and Appendix B   • Protocol Version and Amendment 
Tracking – a dded A mendment 1 
change information 
• Investigator Statement  – updated  
protocol version date  
• Abbreviations – removed reference to 
PROMIS and PROPr  
• Protocol synopsis  – number of 
recruitment sites, inclusion criteria 
definition of CKD and exclusion criteria definition of terminal illness  
• Section 4 – Study Design  – explain 
randomization plan 
• Section 5 – i nclusion criteria to clarify 
CKD definition and exclusion definition 
of terminal illness  
• Section 6 – clarified information on 
EHR queries, provider consent, use of 
recruitment script as optional, changed 
will to may  and should, clarified 
consenting process and timeline for 
completing the baseline visit, and 
clarified compensation  
• Section 7 – clarified education 
materials and A POL1 results, clarified 
the recommendation for drug class, 
clarified baseline assessment 
completion , specimen collection 
guidelines, added secure email as 
method of return of results  
• Section 8 – added information on 
reportable events and removed 
meeting location  
• Section 9 – updated cost effective 
analysis plan 
• Section 10 – added pulse to data 
collection points  
• Section 15 – Appendix B  – clarified 
recommendation section for 
poor/normal/rapid metabolizers  05February2020  
2/ Protocol Version 
and Amendment 
Tracking; Investigator 
Statement; Protocol • Protocol Version and Amendment 
Tracking – a dded A mendment 2 
change information 22June2020  
 
3 
 Synopsis; Sections 
6,7, and 9    • Investigator Statement  – updated 
protocol version date  
• Protocol Synopsis – changed analysis  
method from Mann- Whitney to t -test 
under main study analyses  
• Section 6 – Recruitment and 
Enrollment Procedures – added that 
“the consenting process can be remote, 
via phone or electronically if approved by the reviewing IRB”.  
• Section 7 – Study Procedures – added 
that baseline survey and follow -up 
surveys may be administered ov er the 
phone.  
• Table 5 – changed “blood draw” to 
“sample collection”  
• Section 9 – changed “Mann- Whitney” to 
‘t-test” in Analysis of Primary Endpoint 
and Other Planned Analyses sections  
3/ Title Page; 
Protocol Version and Amendment Tracking; Investigator 
Statement; Protocol 
Synopsis; Sections 3, 
5,7, 8, 9, 10 and 11  • Title page updates  
• Protocol Version and Amendment 
Tracking – a dded Amendment 3  
change information 
• Investigator Statement – updated 
protocol version date  
• Protocol synopsis – added in- person as 
option for return of PGx results, added 
new exclusion criteria (LVAD), clarified 
population for primary endpoint 
analysis, updated duration of 
participation for EHR data retrieval   
• Sectio n 3 – Primary Endpoint – clarified 
population for primary endpoint 
analysis  
• Section 5 – Exclusion Criteria – added 
new exclusion criteria (LVAD)  
• Section 7 – Intervention/Treatment – 
clarified distribution methods for written 
test results and added in- perso n for 
verbal communication of test results  
• Section 7 – Assessments – updated 
criteria for which blood pressure 
reading would activate the elevated 
blood pressure protocol, clarified the 
thresholds for the elevated BP protocol, updated screen failure defini tion, 
updated the guidance for which EMR 27August2021  
 
4 
 BP values would qualify for inclusion in 
the study database  
• Section 7 – Data from EMR – revised 
the % of participants that would be 
included in the first data extract, 
updated the timing for the final EHR 
extract, updated description for how the 
EHR download and transfer process 
instructions would be distributed 
• Section 7 – Clinical Decision Support – 
updated the description for how the 
CDS ale rt details will be distributed  
• Section 8 – Safety Assessment - 
revised the % of participants that would 
be included in the first data extract, 
updated the timing for the final EHR 
extract, updated description for how the 
EHR download and transfer process 
instructions would be distributed and 
added virtual as a meeting format  
• Section 9 – Statistical Analysis Plan – 
updated language describing the 
planned interim analyses.  
• Section 10 – Data management – 
Updated language regarding 
verification of laboratory results , 
revised the % of participants that would 
be included in the firs t data extract, 
updated the timing for the final EHR 
extract, updated description for how the 
EHR download and transfer process 
instructions would be distributed 
• Section 11 – Updated language under 
the confidentiality and privacy section 
regarding participant name disclosure.  
 
4 Title Page; Protocol 
Version and 
Amendment 
Tracking; Investigator 
Statement; Protocol 
Synopsis; Sections 3, 
5,7, 8, 9, 10 and 11  • Title page and Investigator Statement  
• Protocol Version and Amendment 
Tracking – Changed “Approval date” to 
“Version Date” , added Amendment 3  
change information 
• Protocol Synopsis – updated number of 
participants under randomized 
population, a dded “~” to “6 months” for 
duration of participation and clarified 
inclusion criteria – changed “African 
American/Black” to “self -reported 
African ancestry”  10Jun2022  
 
5 
 • Section 4 – Study Design – added 
language regarding m anual blood 
pressure collection.  Updated numbers 
for randomized population, APOL1  
positive assumed percentage, numbers 
of population that would be in each arm 
for main study and PGx substudy. 
Changed power for PGx substudy from 80% to 90%.  
• Section 5 – Study Population – 
updated/clarified inclusion criteria – 
changed “African American/B lack” to 
“self-reported African ancestry”  
• Section 6 – Recruitment and 
Enrollment Procedures – added “Study 
staff may also ask current participants if 
they know anyone who would qualify for 
the study and provide them with study -
related contact information t o share 
with others.”  
• Section 6.3 Screening Procedures – 
added “Screening may also be 
performed in a location agreed upon 
between a potential participant and the research team.”  
• Section 6.4 Participant Consent 
Process – added “also” after “The 
consenting process can”.  
• Section 6.10 Compensation to 
Participants – changed “or” to “and/or” 
in sentence “Participants may be 
reimbursed for travel or parking 
expenses per institutional specific 
policies.”  
• Section 7 – Study Procedures - Section 
7.2 Baseline Assess ments – added 
“which may occur in a location agreed 
upon between potential participants 
and the research team,” after “At 
baseline”.   
• Section 7.2 Baseline Assessments – 
added “Manual blood pressures may be collected if necessary.”  
• Section 7.3 Follow -Up A ssessments – 
added “in a location agreed upon 
between the participant and the 
research team” after “Participants 
enrolled in the study will meet with 
Research Coordinators”.   
 
6 
 • Section 7.7 Data Collection from the 
Electronic Health Record – added “for 
Other  Planned Analyses including” 
after “variables needed”. Deleted “in 
the” before “Cost Effectiveness 
Analysis”.  
• Section 7.10 Schedule of Activities – 
updated Tables 6 and 7 to reflect 
change in 3M and 6M study visit 
windows from “+6 wks” to “+8 wks”.   
• Section 9 – Statistical Analysis Plan 
and Sample Size - Section 9.1 Sample 
Size Determination – updated numbers 
for randomized population, APOL1  
positive assumed percentage, numbers 
of population that would be in each arm 
for main study and PGx substudy. 
Updated Tables 8 and 9. Changed 
power for PGx substudy from 80% to 
90%.  
• Section 9.1 Sample Size Determination – added “Enrollment may end prior to 
the 6650 target if the study team notes that the necessary 931 APOL1  positive 
individuals have already been 
enrolled.”  
• Section 9.7 Interim Analyses – added 
language describing how additional 
interim analyses would be handled if 
requested by the DSMB.  
• Sections 6, 7 &10 – removed “to be” 
from “to be provided in the MOP”.  
5   Title Page; 
Protocol Version and Amendment 
Tracking; Investigator 
Statement; 
List of 
Tables; Protocol Synopsis; Sections  2, 
3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10 and 
11 • Title Page and Investigator Statement  
• Protocol Version and Amendment 
Tracking –  added Amendment 5 
change information  
• List of Tables  – removed Tables 8 & 9  
• Protocol Synopsis – c hanged 
“Appropriate” to “Documented” under 
objectives  and secondary endpoints; 
clarified PGx substudy participants by 
including information regarding 
participating sites; changed 
randomized population to 6,750; 
clarified inclusion criteria “allogenic” as added before bone marrow (previously approved on 04- Nov-
2022 in 
clarification memo #4) ; added “an 19Mar2024  
 
7 
 overall” under Statistical Analyses ; 
changed “All” to “Major” and removed 
“and secondary” u nder Substudy 
Analyses. 
• Section 2 – Introduction – changed “≤”  
to “<” and c hanged “appropriate” to 
“documented” for CKD diagnosis.  
• Section 3.2  – Secondary Endpoints – 
Changed “appropriate” to 
“documented” under secondary 
endpoints 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6.  
• Section 4 – Study Design – clarified 
PGx substudy population by including 
information regarding participating 
sites;  updated numbers for randomized 
population, APOL1  positive assumed 
percentage, and numbers of population 
that would be in each arm for main 
study and PGx substudy  and clarified 
rationale for updated target; added 
“approximately” before 90% power.  
• Section 5 – Study Population – clarified 
exclusion criteria by adding 
“allogeneic”. (previou sly approved on 
04-Nov-2022 in clarification memo #4)  
• Section 7.3 – Follow -Up Assessments 
– changed “6” to “8” consistent  with 
extended window approved in Jul 2022.  
• Section 7.7 – Data Collected from the 
Electronic Health Record – changed “in 
the 6 months”  to “up to 8 months”  
(previously approved on 14- Feb-2024 
in clarification memo #5)  
• Section 7.7 – Data Collected from the 
Electronic Health Record and Section 8 
– Safety Assessments and Monitoring – 
removed “two”, “one” and “another” 
from the EHR downloads sentence.  
(previously approved on 14- Feb-2024 
in clarification memo #5)  
• Section 9 – Statistical Analysis Plan 
and Sample Size – updated numbers 
for randomized population, APOL1  
positive assumed percentage, numbers 
of population that would be in each arm for main study and PGx substudy ; 
added additional information regarding 
continued enrollment until effect size is 
reached; removed sentences 
 
8 
 “Additional calculations using the same 
assumptions …and BP standard 
deviation” ; removed table 8; removed 
“interim analysis” from PGx substudy ; 
added “approximately” before 90% 
power  for PGx substudy; r emoved 
sentences “Additional calculations 
using the assumptions …major cardiac 
outcomes” ; removed table 9; clarified 
population for PGx substudy; added 
“overall” before two- sided for primary 
endpoint analysis ; changed 
“appropriate to “documented” for 
secondary endpoint analysis;  updated 
potential covariates by adding  “and 
baseline CKD” and remov ing “income, 
education, marital status, and 
insurance, and Cha rlson comorbidity 
index” ; updated “above  140 mm Hg” to 
“140 mm Hg or greater”; a dded 
“depending on the outcome of the main 
study” and removed “body mass index” 
from Cost-Effectiveness  section; 
removed “all” form pGx substudy 
analyses section; added “Impact  of 
Social Determinants of Health” under 
Other Planned Analyses; updated 
Interim Analyses section to describe a 
second interim analysis and impact on p-value.   
• Section 10 – Data Management  – 
Clarified definitions of baseline and 
follow -up SBPs; Updated CPT codes; 
added “OR the presence of urine 
microalbuminuria/proteinuria lab test 
order and/or result”; removed “AND 
order of urine 
microalbuminuria/proteinuria test at 6 
months” ; updated ICD -10 codes; 
removed “AND appropriate diagnosis at 
6 months (as described in 3b))  under 4 
and 6”; a dded “YN” under 2, 4 and 6; 
removed “OR having hypertension in 
the patient’s medical record problem list in the 24 months prior to baseline] and 
[having 2 lab results of eGFR <=60 
ml/min 3 months apart with at least one 
test in the 24 months prior to baseline 
OR order of urine 
microalbuminuria/proteinuria test with 
 
9 
 both eGFR and urine tests in the time 
period from 24 months prior to baseline 
to 6 months after baseline]”  from 3 and 
5; changed “appropriate” to 
“documented”  under 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6. 
• Section 11 – Ethical and Human 
Subjects Considerations  – c hanged 
“recruiters at each site” to “the study 
team”  and changed “and” to “or” in the 
phrase “de- identified and anonymized”.  
 
  
 
10 
  
INVESTIGATOR  STATEMENT  
 
 
 
 
By signing below, I agree to the conditions relating to this trial as set out in this protocol ( v6 dated 19Mar 2024). 
 
I agree to conduct this clinical trial according to Good Clinical Practice (ICH GCP) and US Regulatory 
Requirements.  
 
I fully understand that any changes instituted by me without previous discussion with the IGNITE Pragmatic Trials 
Network Coordinating Center or their designated representative constitute a violation of the protocol.   
 
I agree to adhere to the protocol in all circumstances other than where necessary to protect the well -being of the 
participant.  
 
 
 
Principal Investigator’s  
 
Name: ___________________________________  
 
 
Signature: __________________________     Date____________  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
11 
  
  
ABBREVIATIONS  
 
AA African Americans  
AE Adverse Event  
ACE Angiotensin -converting enzyme  
ARB Angiotensin receptor blocker  
APOL1  Apolipoprotein L1  
BP Blood pressure  
CC Coordinating center  
CKD  Chronic kidney disease  
CDS  Clinical decision support  
CE Cost-effectiveness  
CEA Cost-effectiveness analysis  
CIOMS  Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences  
CLIA  Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments  
CPT Current Procedural Terminology  
CRF Case Report Form  
DSMB  Data and safety monitoring board  
eGFR  Estimated  glomerular filtration rate  
EHR  Electronic Health Record  
ESRD  End stage renal disease  
GUARDD -US Genetic Testing to Understand and Address Renal Disease 
Disparities across the US  
HIPAA  Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996  
HTN Hypertension  
IGNITE PTN  Implementing Genomics in Practice Pragmatic Trials Network  
MOP  Manual of operations  
NHGRI  National Human Genome Research Institute  
PCT Pragmatic Clinical Trial  
PI Principal Investigator  
PGx Pharmacogenetic  
PPC Publications and Presentations Committee  
ROR  Return of results  
SAP Statistical analysis plan  
SBP Systolic blood pressure  
SOP  Standard operating procedure  
 
  
 
12 
  
LIST  OF FIGURES  
 
Figure 1.  GUARDD-US study design for sites participating in PGx.  .......................................................... 23 
Figure 2.  GUARDD-US study design for sites not participating in PGx.  .................................................... 24 
 
 
LIST  OF TABLES  
Table 1.  APOL1 Laboratory Report Language  ............................................................................................... 32 
Table 2.  Genes and gene variants to be tested in the PGx substudy.  ....................................................... 33 
Table 3.  PGx genotypes, phenotypes, and predicted genotype frequencies.  ........................................... 33 
Table 4.  PGx recommendationsa ...................................................................................................................... 34 
Table 5.  Schedule of participant activities up to randomization for sites.  .................................................. 38 
Table 6.  Schedule of activities following participant baseline visit for sites participating in the PGx 
substudy.  ............................................................................................................................................................... 39 
Table 7.  Schedule of activities following participant baseline visit for sites participating not in the PGx 
substudy.  ............................................................................................................................................................... 40 
Table 8.  ICD10 diagnosis codes and descriptions for diabetes  .................................................................. 56 
 
 
 
   
 
    
 
   
 
   
  
 
13 
 TABLE  OF CONTENTS 
1. PROTOCOL SYNOPSIS 16 
2. INTRODUCTION 20 
2.1 Background, Significance, and Rationale  20 
2.2 Aims and Objectives of the Study  21 
3. ENDPOINTS  22 
3.1 Primary Endpoint  22 
3.2 Secondary Endpoints  22 
3.3 Pharmacogenetic (PGx) Substudy Endpoints  22 
4. STUDY DESIGN  23 
4.1 Study Arms & Design  23 
4.2 Randomization  24 
4.3 Blinding  25 
4.4 Sample Size  25 
5. STUDY POPULATION  26 
5.1 Inclusion Criteria  26 
5.2 Exclusion Criteria  27 
6. RECRUITMENT AND ENROLLMENT PROCEDURES  28 
6.1 Provider Recruitment, Assent, and Consent  28 
6.2 Participant Recruitment Strategies  28 
6.3 Screening Procedures  28 
6.4 Participant Consent Process  29 
6.5 Participant Discontinuation/Withdrawal from the Study  29 
6.6 Lost to Follow -Up 29 
6.7 Risk  29 
6.8 Benefit  30 
6.9 Costs to the Participants  30 
6.10  Compensation to Participants  30 
7. STUDY PROCEDURES  31 
7.1 Interventions/Treatments  31 
7.2 Baseli ne Assessments  34 
7.3 Follow -Up Assessments  35 
7.4 Specimen Collection  35 
 
14 
 7.5 Specimen Transfer and Genetic Testing Procedures  36 
7.6 Return of Genetic Results  36 
7.7 Data Collection from the Electronic Health Record  36 
7.8 Clinical Decision Support System  37 
7.9 Provider Surveys  37 
7.10  Schedule of Activities  37 
8. SAFETY ASSESSMENT AND MONITORING  41 
8.1 Distress from Return of Results  41 
8.2 Events of Interest  41 
8.3 Safety Monitoring/Data and Safety Monitoring Board  41 
8.4 Early Termination and Participant Discontinuation  41 
9. STATISTICAL ANALYSIS PLAN AND SAMPLE SIZE  42 
9.1 Sample Size Determination  42 
9.2 General Statistical Methods  43 
9.3 Population for Analyses  43 
9.4 Analysis of the Primary Endpoint  43 
9.5 Analysis of the Secondary Endpoints  43 
9.6 Other Planned Analyses  43 
9.7 Interim Analyses  45 
9.8 Handling of Missing Data  46 
9.9 Multiplicity  46 
10. DATA MANAGEMENT  47 
10.1  Data Entry and Record Keeping  47 
10.2  Data Element Definitions  47 
10.3  Database Management and Quality Control of Data  49 
10.4  Study Close Out  49 
11. ETHICAL AND HUMAN SUBJECTS CONSIDERATIONS  50 
11.1  Institutional Review Board/Ethics Committee Review  50 
11.2  Use and Disclosure of Protected Health Information  50 
11.3  Confidentiality and Privacy  50 
11.4  Publication and Data Sharing Policies  50 
12. PROTOCOL DEVIATIONS  52 
13. CONFLICT OF INTEREST  53 
 
15 
 14. REFERENCES  54 
15. APPENDICES  56 
15.1  Appendix A. Diabetes Diagnosis Codes  56 
15.2  Appendix B. PGx Substudy Gene Description and Evidence  76 
 
  
 
16 
 1. PROTOCOL  SYNOPSIS  
Protocol Title  Genetic testing to Understand and Address Renal Disease Disparities across the 
United States (GUARDD -US) 
Product/Intervention Immediate versus delayed return of Apolipoprotein L1 ( APOL1 ) gene testing 
results to provider and participant.  
Objectives:  The primary aim is to determine the effect of participant and provider knowledge of 
a positive APOL1 status on change in systolic blood pressure (SBP) from baseline 
to 3 months after randomization. Secondary aims are to:  
1. Determine the effect of participant  and provider knowledge of a positive 
APOL1  status on the probability of documented chronic kidney disease 
(CKD) diagnosis.  
2. Determine the effect of participant and provider knowledge of a positive 
APOL1  status on the probability of receiving a urine test f or CKD.  
3. Explore cost effectiveness, mediators, moderators, psychobehavioral impact of results disclosure on participants, and effects of knowledge of 
APOL1  status on provider treatment recommendations.  
 
PGx Substudy:   
GUARDD- US will include a substudy  to determine the effect of knowledge of genetic 
test results that predict efficacy of various antihypertensive medications on change 
in SBP from baseline to 3 months in APOL1  negative individuals.  
Study Design Study Design:  
GUARDD- US is a prospective, mu lticenter, unblinded, two arm randomized 
pragmatic clinical trial. Participants will be randomized in a 1:1 ratio to immediate 
APOL1  gene testing and return of results (ROR) to participant and provider 
(Intervention arm) versus delayed APOL1  gene testing and ROR to participant and 
provider (Control arm). The main study will compare outcomes between APOL1  
positive participants in the Intervention arm (i.e., early knowledge of APOL1  status) 
to APOL1  positive participants in the Control arm (i.e., delayed knowledge of APOL1  
status). Participants that are APOL1  negative in the Intervention and Control groups 
will not be included in the main study analyses.    
 Pharmacogenetic (PGx) Substudy Design:  
GUARDD- US will also include a substudy that randomizes participa nts in the 
Intervention arm who are from the PGx substudy participating sites and who test 
negative for APOL1 to PGx Intervention (i.e., immediate PGx ROR) and PGx Control 
(i.e., delayed PGx ROR) in a 1:1 ratio. This substudy  will compare outcomes 
between participants in the PGx Control group and the PGx Intervention group.  
Rationale for Study 
Design  High-risk variants in the APOL1  gene explain approximately 70% of the excess 
prevalence of CKD in African Americans (AAs), conferring a 5 times higher risk for 
hypertensive CKD and a 10 times higher risk for ESRD. A recent pilot study (GUARDD), showed that returning APOL1  gene test results had a statistically 
significant improvement in SBP at 3 months when comparing APOL1  positives to 
APOL1  negatives who received their genetic testing results and when comparing 
APOL1  positives that received their results early to overall controls who did not 
receive their results until after the 3 month visit. GUARDD was not however powered to evaluate the effects of having and knowing a positive APOL1  status on 
outcomes for those with high risk of developing CKD (i.e., comparing outcomes for 
 
17 
 APOL1  positi ve patients who know their genetic risk to APOL1  positive patients 
who do not know their genetic risk). A broader trial is needed to better determine 
the importance of APOL1  gene testing for improving the testing, diagnosis, and 
treatment of individuals at  risk of CKD.  
 
PGx Substudy:  
New data show that genetic differences may cause patients to respond differently antihypertensive medication therapy, particularly in AAs. Pharmacogenomics may help guide initial or add- on antihypertensive therapy management. However, the 
impact of PGx testing on BP has not been studied in clinical trials among general or AA populations.  
 
Study Population  Randomized Population : 
Approximately 6, 750 participants of African ancestry age 18- 70 with hypertension 
that either: 1) do not have diabetes and do not have CKD, or 2) have CKD (with or 
without diabetes).  
 
Population for Main Study : 
Participants from Randomized Population (above) who test positive for APOL1  
 Population for PGx Substudy:  
Participants from Randomized Population (above) randomized to Intervention and who test negative for APOL1 . Only participants from PGx substudy participating 
sites are included in this population.  
Number of 
Recruitment Sites  ~46-60 
Duration of 
Participation  ~6 months for study visits, up to 12 months for EHR data retrieval  
Description of implementation of 
intervention (e.g., 
dose, schedule, etc.)  The primary intervention for GUARDD -US is the immediate return of APOL1  genetic 
testing results to participants and participant providers. Return of APOL1  genetic 
testing results to participants and providers will occur as described in Section 7.6. In addition to verbal ROR, participants will also receive lay explanations in writing and an educational booklet explaining their results and genetic risks. Providers will 
be notified of participant results via standard site- specific laboratory return of results 
methods and, where possible, a clinical decision support system (CDS) within the 
electronic health system as described in Section 7.8. Providers may also receive links for accessing provider and participant educational materials through the CDS 
or other means. Finally, all participants are given the option to discuss their results 
with a genetic counselor.  
 
The intervention for the PGx substudy is the immediate return of PGx testing results 
to participants via phone and/or in- person , return of results and alerts via standard 
site-specific laboratory return of results methods and a CDS within the electronic 
health system for providers, and educational materials for both patients and 
providers regarding the genes tested and phenotypes associated with the effi cacy 
of hypertension medications.  
Inclusion/Exclusion 
Criteria  Inclusion Criteria:  
● Self-reported African ancestry  
● English Speaking  
 
18 
 ● Age 18 -70 years  
● Have diagnosis of hypertension  
o Diagnosis of hypertension is defined by either:  
⮚ ICD10 diagnosis codes (i.e.,  I10; I11.x; I12.x; I13.x; I16.x) 
OR 
⮚ On active antihypertensive therapy for indication of 
hypertension OR  
⮚ Having systolic blood pressure of 140 mm Hg or greater in at least 2 of  the last 3 consecutive recorded values in the 
EHR OR 
⮚ Having hypertension in the patient’s medical record problem list 
● Have been seen at ≥1 time in past year at a participating primary care site  
● Either: 1) do not have diabetes and do not have CKD, or 2) have CKD; Participants with diabetes may be included as long as they also have C KD. 
o CKD is defined by:  
⮚ ICD10 codes (i.e., N18.x; E08.22; E09.22; E10.22; E11.22;  
E13.22 (exclude Z94.0; N18.6; Z99.2)) OR  
⮚ Microalbumin/proteinuria level >30 mg/g for 2 time periods ≥ 3 months. Values taken within 12 months of enrollment, unless 2 values are unavailable, then review within  24 
months of enrollment OR  
⮚ 15 ≤ eGFR ≤ 60 ml/min for 2 time periods ≥ 3 months  
o Diabetes is defined by:  
⮚ HbA1c ≥ 6.5 at least one time in the last year OR  
⮚ ICD10 diagnosis codes (see Appendix A) OR  
⮚ Having diabetes in the patient’s medical record problem list  
 
Exclusion Criteria  
● Have diabetes, but no CKD.  
● Are currently on dialysis (ICD 10 codes N18.6, Z99.2 and Z94.0)  
● Ha
ve ESRD (eGFR<15 ml/min)  
● Have a left ventricular assist device (LVAD)  
● Have a terminal illness  (specifically metastatic cancer, palliative care or 
hospice)  
● Have patient -reported known pregnancy at time of enrollment  
● Have had a liver, kidney, or allogeneic bone marrow transplant  
● Too cognitively impaired to provide informed consent and/or complete the study protocol  
● Institutionalized or too ill to participate (i.e. incarcerated, psychiatric or nursing home facility)  
● Plan to move out of the area within 6 months of enrollment  
● Not a current patient seeing a provider who cares for their hypertension 
(i.e., family medicine, internal medicine, nephrology, HIV provider, 
cardiology, hypertension specialists) at a participating s ite 
● Previously participated in the GUARDD pilot study OR have previously 
undergone APOL1  testing  
 
19 
 Primary Endpoint  Change in Systolic Blood Pressure (SBP) from baseline to 3 months  for APOL1  
positive participants.  
Secondary 
Endpoints  The secondary endpoints for the main study include:  
● Change in urine microalbuminuria/proteinuria orders from baseline to 6 
months (Y/N)  
● Documented order of microalbuminuria/proteinuria tests by 6 months (Y/N)  
● Change in documented diagnosis for stage 3 CKD and above from 
baseline to 6 months (Y/N) 
● Documented diagnosis of CKD stage 3 and above by 6 months (Y/N)  
● Change in documented diagnosis for any stage CKD from baseline to 6 
months (Y/N)  
● Documented diagnosis of all stages of CKD by 6 months (Y/N)   
 
The major endpoint  for the PGx substudy is the change in systolic blood pressure 
from baseline to the 3 month study visit .  
 
Statistical Analyses Main Study Analyses : 
● To determine the effect of participant and provider knowledge of a positive 
APOL1  status on SBP, we will compare the change in SBP from baseline 
to 3 months of the Intervention – APOL1  positive group to the change in 
SBP from baseline to 3 months of the Control - APOL1  positive group 
using a two sided t-test, as appropriate, with an overall  two-sided type I 
error of 0.05.  
● The effect of knowledge of a positive APOL1  status on all secondary 
endpoints will be compared between Intervention - APOL1  positives to 
Control - APOL1  positives with the proportion difference test.  
● Additional analyses will include analysis of time trends in SBP, subset 
analyses, and exploratory analyses of cost effec tiveness, mediators, 
moderators, psychobehavioral impact of results disclosure on participants, 
and effects of knowledge of APOL1  status on provider treatment 
recommendations.  
 
Substudy Analyses : 
● Major  primary endpoint analyses conducted for the APOL1  main study will 
be repeated for the PGx substudy focusing on differences in outcomes 
between APOL1  negative individuals with immediate PGx ROR (PGx 
Intervention) and APOL1  negative individuals with delayed PGx ROR (PGx 
Control).  
 
 
20 
 2. INTRODUCTION   
2.1 Background, Significance, and Rationale  
Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is associated with hypertension and diabetes and affects 26 million US adults.1 
African Americans (AA’s) have higher risk of end stage renal disease (ESRD) necessitating maintenance dialy sis 
or transplant than Whites.2 This disparity widens as kidney function declines. Additionally, AAs have the highest 
prevalence of hypertension (41% AA, 28% White) and the lowest rate of blood pressure (BP) control (43% AA 
versus 53% White).3 While improv ed BP control decreases CKD progression and reduces morbidity and mortality, 
BP control (defined as < 140/90 mm Hg4-7) is only achieved in 50% of participants.8  
 One in 7 AAs carry the Apolipoprotein L1 ( APOL1)  gene risk allele, but it is nearly absent in other populations. 
High-risk variants in the APOL1  explain approximately 70% of the excess prevalence of CKD in AAs, conferring 
a 5 times higher risk for hypertensive CKD and a 10 times higher risk for ESRD.
9 This risk is conferred by two 
variants (G1 and/or G2) in the last exon of APOL1 with the high- risk genotype being G1/G1; G2/G2 or G1/G2.10 
APOL1  does not significantly increase CKD risk in hypertensive people with diabetes and normal renal function, 
but in hypertensive people with prevalent CKD, APOL1  exacerbates worsening of kidney function and 
progression to ESRD regardless of diabetes diagnosis.11 Among adults with CKD, specific medications 
(angiotensin- converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs)) are recommended for 
participants of all ancestries, but 50% of participants do not receive these medications. Compounding this issue is the fact that providers do not include CKD on the problem list of 40% of participants with lab evidence of CKD,
12 
leading to widespread participant unawareness of CKD. Urine protein tests, essential for early diagnosis and prognosis of CKD, are missing in up to 30% of participants with CKD.
13  
 In Genetic Testing to Understand Renal Disease Disparities (GUARDD), investigators randomized participants 
to immediate (Intervention) versus delayed (Control) APOL1 testing. Results were returned to participants 
through culturally appropriate clinical coordinators trained by genetic counselors, and to providers through low -
intensity clinical decision support (CDS) (including best practice alerts (BPAs) with the test results and links to 
more provider information, participant education, and a generic message about the importance of blood pressure 
control). The study included a narrower phenotype of participants, excluding those with CKD or diabetes. 
GUARDD showed a statistically significant reduction in SBP at 3 months when comparing: 1) APOL1  positives 
and negatives in the Intervention group ( -6±18 mm Hg vs -3±18 mm Hg, p=0.008 cross -sectional at 3 months ), 
and 2) Intervention APOL1  positives versus overall Controls ( -6±18 mmHg vs -3±18 mmHg, p=0.04 cross -
sectional at 3 months).  GUARDD also showed a trend towards a higher proportion of participants receiving renal disease testing at 12 months, as captured through electronic health records, when comparing: 1) APOL1  positives 
and negatives in the Intervention group (29% vs 24%, p=0.10 cross -sectional at 12 months), and 2) Intervention 
APOL1  positives versus overall  Controls ( 29% vs 20%, p=0.01 cross -sectional 12 months ). Participants self -
reported making lifestyle changes and taking more blood pressure medicines in response to positive versus negative APOL1  results. In addition, over 95% of participants were satisfied with the type, timing, and amount of 
information they received. Although participants were offered the option to speak with or meet with a genetic counselor, none chose to do so. Using stakeholder -engaged processes, there was an 11% rate of refusal, 93%  
3-month retention rate, and 88% 12- month retention rate.  
 Several new developments highlight the importance of a broader pragmatic clinical trial (PCT). The GUARDD study was not powered to compare those with high risk genotypes ( APOL1  positives) in the Intervention group to 
APOL1  positives in the Control group. New evidence since the study’s inception also allows investigators to make 
CDS tools more robust, which may lead to greater action on the part of providers to improve hypertensi on 
management and renal disease screening. Finally, new data show that genetic differences affect the response to antihypertensive medication therapy, particularly in AAs. While pharmacogenetic (PGx) testing may help guide 
 
21 
 initial or add -on antihypertensive therapy management for patients with hypertension, the impact of PGx testing 
on BP has not been studied in clinical trials among general or AA populations.  
2.2 Aims and Objectives of the Study  
Because AAs are not routinely screened for  APOL1 , it is unknown whether participant or provider knowledge of 
genetic risk impacts participant care or outcomes.  Accordingly, the main objective of GUARDD -US is to 
determine the effect of participant and provider knowledge of a positive APOL1  status on BP, urine testing for 
CKD, and  documented  diagnosis of CKD .  
  
The primary aim is to determine the effect of participant and provider knowledge of a positive APOL1  status  and 
accompanying guideline based clinical decision support (CDS)  on blood pressure management  on change in 
systolic blood pressure (SBP) from baseline to 3 months after randomization among the APOL1 positive 
participants. Secondary aims are to:  
1. Determine the effect of participant and provider knowledge of a positive APOL1  status on the probability 
of documen ted CKD diagnosis.  
2. Determine the effect of participant and provider knowledge of a positive APOL1  status on the probability 
of receiving a urine microalbumin/creatinine testing and ACE-I/ARB  prescription based on results of the 
urine microalbumin level.  
3. Explore cost effectiveness, mediators, moderators, psychobehavioral impact of results disclosure on 
participants, and effects of participant and provider knowledge of  APOL1  status on provider treatment 
recommendations.  
 
In addition, GUARDD -US will include a substudy to determine the effect of knowledge of genetic test results that 
predict efficacy of various antihypertensive medications on change in SBP from baseline to 3 months in APOL1  
negative individuals.  
 
 
22 
 3. ENDPOINTS  
3.1 Primary Endpoint  
The primary endpoint is the change in systolic blood pressure from baseline to the 3 month study visit  in APOL1  
positive participants .  
3.2 Secondary Endpoints  
Secondary endpoints include:  
 
1. Change in urine microalbuminuria/proteinuria orders from baseline to 6 months (Y/N)  
2. Documented order of microalbuminuria/proteinuria tests by 6 months (Y/N)  
3. Change in documented diagnosis for stage 3 CKD and above from baseline to 6 months (Y/N)  
4. Documented diagnosis of CKD stage 3 and above by 6 months (Y/N)  
5. Change in documented diagnosis for any stage CKD from baseline to 6 months (Y/N)  
6. Documented diagnosis of all stages of CKD by 6 months (Y/N)   
 
Please see Section 10.2 for the derivations of these endpoints.  
3.3 Pharmacogenetic (PGx) Substudy Endpoints  
The major endpoint for the PGx substudy is the change in systolic blood pressure from baseline to the 3 month 
study visit .  
 
Additional exploratory endpoints and analyses for the PGx substudy will be described in a separate Statistical 
Analysis Plan (SAP).  
 
23 4. STUDY DESIGN
4.1 Study Arms & Design
This is a prospective, multicenter, unblinded, two arm, randomized pragmatic clinical trial (PCT) ( Figure  1). 
Participants will be recruited from several recruitment sites (hereafter referred to as site) and randomized in a 1:1 
ratio to immediate APOL1 gene testing and return of results (ROR) to participant and provider (Intervention arm) 
versus delayed APOL1 gene testing and ROR to participant and provider (Control arm). The main study will 
compare outcomes in a subset of the randomized population: APOL1 positive participants in the Intervention arm 
(i.e., early knowledge of APOL1 status) versus APOL1 positive participants in the Control arm (i.e., delayed 
knowledge of APOL1 status) (red outline in Figure 1 ). Participants that are APOL1 negative in the Intervention 
and Control groups will not be included in the main study analyses.   
Figure 1.GUARDD- US study design for sites participating in PGx.
The primary outcome of the main study is systolic blood pressure (SBP) at 3 months in Control -APOL1 positive and 
Intervention- APOL1 positive participants (red outline). The substudy outcome is SBP at 3 months in Intervention- APOL1

24 Negative PGX Control and PGx Intervention participants (orange outline). AA = African Americans. APOL1 = Apolipoprotein 
L1. HTN = hypertension. PGx = Pharmacogenetics. ROR = Return of Results.  
GUARDD- US will also include a substudy that randomizes participants in the Intervention arm who test negative 
for APOL1 to PGx Intervention (i.e., immediate PGx ROR) and PGx Control (i.e., delayed PGx ROR) in a 1:1 
ratio. Only participants from the PGx substudy participating sites are included in this substudy. This substudy will 
compare outcomes between participants in the PGx Control group and the PGx Intervention group (orange outline 
in Figure 1 ). 
The study design for sites that are not participating in the PGx substudy is summarized in Figure 2.
  Figure 2.GUARDD- US study design for sites not participating in PGx. 
The primary outcome of the main study is systolic blood pressure (SBP) at 3 months in Control -APOL1 positive and 
Intervention- APOL1 positive participants (red outline). AA = African Americans. APOL1 = Apolipoprotein L1. HTN = 
hypertension. ROR = Return of Results.  
4.2 Randomization
Eligible participants will be randomized in a 1:1 allocation to Intervention (i.e., immediate APOL1 gene testing 
and ROR to participant and provider) and Control arms (delayed APOL1 gene testing and ROR to participant and 
provider). Randomization will be stratified by clinical site with a random block size within site.   

 
25 
 Participants that are randomized to receive immediate APOL1  ROR will simultaneously be randomized to the 
PGx substudy intervention (i.e., immediate PGx gene testing and ROR to participant and provider) or the PGx 
control (delayed PGx gene testing and ROR to participant and provider) using a 1:1 allocation ratio. Participants 
from PGx substudy participating sites that test negative for APOL1  will proceed into the PGx substudy under their 
assigned PGx treatment arms, while participants from non- participating sites of the substudy and participants 
that test positive for APOL1  will be excluded from the substudy and receive delayed PGx gene testing and ROR.  
4.3 Blinding  
GUARDD- US randomization assignments will not be blinded to any participants, providers or study personnel 
because: 1) it is impossible to mask participants from the intervention testing and ROR, 2) research staff often 
receive questions from participants about the interpretation and risk associated with the participant’s genetic results during the administration of surveys, and 3) resource limitations make hiring additional blinded staff to 
measure blood pressure impractical. To minimize bias in the measurement of the primary outcome, 
randomization assignments will only be revealed after baseline survey responses and blood pressure readings have been collected, digital blood pressure devices (such as Professional Intellisense Blood Pressure Monitor OMRON- 907
14) will be used to measure blood pressure, and blood pressure will be measured as the mean of 
the second and third blood pressure readings for each participant at each visit.  Manual blood pressures may be 
collected if necessary.  
4.4 Sample Size  
Main Study:   GUARDD -U S will randomize approximately 6750 individuals with approximately 3375 individuals in 
the Control Arm and 3375 in the Intervention arm. Assuming a 14% prevalence of APOL1  positive individuals, a 
sample size of 6700 for the randomized population would result in 938 APOL1  positive individuals with at least 
469 in each arm for the main study population. This sample size will detect a 3.5 mm Hg difference in the change 
in SBP between baseline and 3 months between Intervention - APOL1  positive and Control - APOL1  positive 
groups with 80% power. Since APOL1 result data and SBP  change data could be missing for various reasons , 
an approximately  50 individuals will be randomized in addition to the 6700 sample size. Therefore, the total 
randomization target is approximately 6750.  Please see Section 9.1 for assumptions, clinical significance, and 
detailed power and sample size calculations.  
 PGx Substudy : Of 
 the approximately 6750 participants in the GUARDD -US study, approximatel y 4400 will also 
be at a site participat ing in the PGx substudy. A sample size of 4400 with a 14% prevalence of APOL1 positive 
individuals would result in 1892 participants for the PGx substudy (Intervention – APOL1  negative participants) 
with 946 particip ants in the PGx Control and PGx Intervention arms. This sample size will detect a 3.1 mm Hg 
difference in the change in SBP from baseline to 3 months between the PGx Intervention group and PGx Control group with approximately 90% power. Please see Section 9.1 Sample Size Determination for assumptions, 
clinical significance, and detailed power and sample size calculations.  
    
 
   
 
  
 
26 
 5. STUDY  POPULATION  
5.1 Inclusion Criteria  
● Self-reported African ancestry  
● English Speaking  
● Age 18- 70 years  
● Have diagnosis of hypertension  
o Diagnosis of hypertension is defined by either:  
⮚ ICD10 diagnosis codes (i.e., I10; I11.x; I12.x; I13.x; I16.x) OR  
⮚ On active antihypertensive therapy for indication of hypertension OR  
⮚ Having systolic blood pressure of 140 mm Hg or greater in at least 2 of  the last 3 
consecutive recorded values in the EHR OR  
⮚ Having hypertension in the patient’s medical record problem list  
● Have been seen at ≥1 time in past year at a participating primary care site  
● Either: 1) do not have diabetes  and do not have CKD, or 2) have CKD; Participants with diabetes may 
be included as long as they also have CKD.  
o CKD is defined by:  
⮚ A) ICD10 codes (i.e., N18.x; E08.22; E09.22; E10.22; E11.22;  E13.22 (exclude Z94.0; 
N18.6; Z99.2)) OR  
⮚ B) Microalbumin/proteinuria level >30 mg/g for 2 time periods ≥ 3 months. Values taken 
within 12 months of enrollment, unless 2 values are unavailable, then review within  24 
months of enrollment . 
1)      If there is only 1 proteinuria in E.H.R. (or if there are multiple and they are all within 3 months), any single proteinuria/microalbuminuria >30 mg/g would qualify  
2)      If there are two or more proteinuria measures in E.H.R. that are at least 3 months apart AND are >30 mg/g would qualify  
a.       Even if there are multiple  proteinuria measures in the E.H.R., and only two 
of them are >30 mg/g, but they are separated by at least 3 months  would qualify  
b.      If there is only 1 proteinuria measure >30 mg/g and there are 2 or more proteinuria measures separated by 3 months within the prior 12 months would not 
qualify 
3)      If there are not 2 proteinuria measures in 12 months, review within  24 months  of 
enrollment . 
OR  
⮚ C) 15 ≤ eGFR ≤ 60 ml/min for 2 time periods ≥ 3 months  
GFRs are taken within 12 months of enrollment, unless 2 values are unavailable, then review within  24 months.  
1)      If there is only 1 GFR in E.H.R. (or if there are multiple and are all within 3 months), 
any single GFR between 15- 60 would qualify  
2)      If there are two or more GFRs in E.H.R. that are at least 3 months apart AND are 
between 15- 60 would qualify  
a.       Even if there are multiple  GFRs in the E.H.R., and only two of them are 
between 15- 60, but they are separated by at least 3 months would qualify  
b.      If there is only 1 GFR between 15- 60 and there are 2 or more GFRs 
separated by 3 months within the prior 24 months would not qualify  
3)      If there are not 2 GFRs in 12 months, review within  24 months.  
o Diabetes is defined by:  
⮚ HbA1c ≥ 6.5 at least one time in the last year OR  
 
27 
 ⮚ ICD10 diagnosis codes (see Table 10, Appendix A) OR  
⮚ Having diabetes in the patient’s medical record problem list  
5.2 Exclusion Criteria  
● Have diabetes, but no CKD.  
● Are currently on dialysis (ICD 10 codes N18.6, Z99.2 and Z94.0)  
● Ha
ve ESRD (eGFR<15 ml/min)  
● Have a left ventricular assist device (LVAD)  
● Have a terminal illness  (specifically metastatic cancer, palliative care or hospice)  
● Have patient -reported known pregnancy at time of enrollment  
● Have had a liver, kidney, or allogeneic bone marrow transplant  
● Too cognitively impaired to provide informed consent and/or complete the study protocol  
● Institutionalized or too ill to participate (i.e. incarcerated, psychiatric or nursing home facility)  
● Plan to move out of the area within 6 months of enrollment  
● Not a current patient seeing a provider who cares for their hypertension (i.e., family medicine, internal 
medicine, nephrology, HIV provider, cardiology, hypertension specialists) at a participating site  
● Previously participated in the GUARDD pilot study OR have previously undergone APOL1  testing  
 
 
28 
 6. RECRUITMENT  AND  ENROLLMENT  PROCEDURES  
6.1 Provider Recruitment, Assent, and Consent  
Providers (including physicians, nurse practitioners, and provider assistants) that care for participants with 
hypertension (including, for example, general internists, family doctors/nurses, and nephrologists): 1) should be 
notified that their patients will be contacted to participate in the study, per site- specific institutional guidelines, and 
2) may be asked to participate in a baseline provider survey. Provider assent may be obtained as required per 
institutional guidelines. Site/clinical champions and GUARDD- US staff may present the study to providers at 
scheduled meetings and also in one- on-one encounters or email at various recruitment sites. Provider survey 
responses should be recorded in the study database. Study staff may send reminders to providers to increase 
survey completion rates.  
6.2 Participant Recruitment Strategies 
Electronic Health Record (EHR) Data Queries for Eligible Participants  
Sites may query EHRs to identify potentially eligible participants using the inclusion/exclusion criteria (see the 
manual of operations (MOP) for further details) .  
 
Participant Recruitment  
Participants may be approached for the study in various ways following local policies and procedures  including, 
for example, recruitment letters mailed directly to patients, clinic intercepts, study flyers, clinic referrals, or directly 
in clinic during a regularly scheduled clinic appointment.  Participant recruitment letters may be created according 
to site-specific institutional policies, including, for example, instructions for how to opt out of study participation.  
Research Coordinators can also approach potentially eligible patients at clinic appointments. Research Coordinators may also provide clinical staff with study referral cards with eligibility criteria and study contact information for patient referrals. Clinics may have posters, flyers, and advertisements on TV monitors in waiting 
rooms with a study description and Research Coordinator contact information. If a patient expresses interest in 
participating, Research Coordinators may  use a recruitment script (provided in the MOP) to do an initial screen 
for eligibility and then schedule the baseline visit in the future or that same day. Study sta ff may also ask current 
participants if they know anyone who would qualify for the study and provide them with study -related contact 
information to share with others .
 
 Stakeholder Group and Additional Recruitment Materials  
Diverse groups of stakeholders consisting of patient advocates, clinicians and community leaders will be engaged 
throughout the study process. These will include the Sinai Genomics Board, the Implementing Genomics in 
Practice Pragmatic Trials Network (IGNITE PTN) Patient, Provider, and Payer Advisory Board, and where available, stakeholders from sites. They may meet regularly to review all patient facing materials, including 
consent forms and patient recruitment and educational materials (recruitment letter s, scripts, flyers, posters, etc.), 
for clarity and content. They may also provide input on recruitment strategies, addressing study design and 
challenges.  
6.3 Screening Procedures  
Research Coordinators may use a recruitment script (provided in the MOP) during recruitment phone calls or 
clinic intercepts (described above) to inform the potential participant about the study and screen participants for eligibility using the study inclusion/exclusion criteria. If the participant is eligible and interested, a baseline visit should be scheduled in the future or that same day.  Screening may also be performed in a location agreed upon 
between a potential participant and the research team . 
 
29 
 6.4 Participant Consent Process  
If a participant is interested and eligible, Research Coordinators will review the consent document prior to 
enrolling the participant . Prospective research participants will have the opportunity to ask questions before 
providing written consent. Research Coordinators will provide the participant with a signed copy  or version of the 
consent document. An original signed consent form is maintained by the Research Coordinator to be filed per 
site policies. If the individual chooses not to sign the consent form, the Research Coordinator will inform him/her 
they are unable to participate in the study.  The consenting process can also be remote, via phone or electronically 
if approved by the reviewing IRB.  A participant can complete the baseline visit and be randomized into the study 
within 30 days of providing written consent. If randomization does not occur within 30 days then this participant would be considered a screen failure.   
 
Research participants will also be informed that they may be given the option to participate in other studies and 
provide additional biological specimens or data for those studies, which will require separate informed consent. They will also be provided the option to have their data collected as part of this study stored and shared for future related research, according to site- specific  institutional policies.  
 
6.5 Participant Discontinuation/Withdrawal from the Study  
Participants may stop participating or withdraw from the study at any point in time. All information and data 
collected from the participant up to that point can be used in the study. Withdrawal of consent to participate in the 
research study can be verbal or in writing, however, revocation of HIPAA authorization must be in writing. 
Research Coordinators should attempt to obtain a reason for withdrawal from the participant and record it in the 
study database.  
6.6 Lost to Follow -Up 
Losses to follow -up may be minimized and retention maximized through various mechanisms, including offering 
study visits during evening and weekend hours, collecting information for and contacting family members when participants cannot be reached, approaching research participants at clinic appointments, and completing surveys over-the-phone (although research participant should still attend study visits for blood pressure measurement). 
Certified letters may also be sent to those not reached by phone. Research Coordinators should confirm the best 
contact information for the participant at each study visit. Research Coordinators may also obtain permission to contact patients via text message or email and may send additional correspondence during the study. P articipants 
may be assigned to a specific Research Coordinator at the site in order to maintain continuity and build rapport.  
6.7 Risk  
This research presents minimal risks to participants. Possible risks are described below.  
 
Blood Pressure  
Participants may feel some arm pressure when the blood pressure cuff is briefly inflated.  
 
Blood Draw  
The risks of a blood draw include pain, bruising, and the slight possibility of infection at the location of needle 
insertion. Some participants may feel dizzy or may faint during or after a blood draw.  
 
Learning test results  
Results of blood, saliva, or buccal cell tests may show that a participant is at an increased risk of kidney disease. 
This knowledge may cause anxiety or psychological distress . Study staff should be trained to recognize anxiety 
and psychological stress and to attempt to relieve patient discomfort via discussion. All test results will be 
 
30 
 discussed with the participant at the time of ROR. If systolic blood pressure exceeds 190 mm Hg or diastolic 
exce eds 110 mm Hg during any study visit, the participant will be strongly advised to seek urgent and appropriate 
evaluation and care from a healthcare provider. The Research Coordinator may facilitate this by assisting the 
participant in contacting their primary care provider, urgent care, or clinic staff on site including the Principal 
Investigator (if study visit is taking place in a clinical setting).   
 
Delay in Learning Test Results  
There is a risk that some patients in the Control group will have a 6 month delay in learning positive genetic test 
results relative to those in the Intervention group. Earlier knowledge of positive APOL1  status could improve 
patient care and health outcomes. However, because APOL1  testing is not currently considered standard c are, 
the risks are low compared to patients receiving standard care.  
 
Genetic Discrimination 
While the Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act (GINA), generally makes it illegal for health insurance 
companies, group health plans, and most employers to discriminate against participants based on their genetic 
information, federal law does not protect patients against genetic discrimination by companies that sell life 
insurance, disability insurance, or long- term care insurance.  
6.8 Benef it 
Research participants may not directly benefit from taking part in this research.  However, some participants and 
their doctors may become aware of possible kidney disease earlier or which blood pressure medications are most 
efficacious. Providers may be able to make better decisions about the kind of treatment patients receive, thus providing some indirect benefit to participant health.  
6.9 Costs to the Participants  
Taking part in this research study may lead to minor added costs including, for example, transportation to attend 
study visits.  
6.10 Compensation to Participants  
Research participants will receive compensation throughout the course of the study for their time and effort. They 
will receive compensation for completion of each study visit – baseline, 3- month follow up, and 6- month follow 
up. Compensation may also be provided, on a pro- rated basis, for survey completion over the phone. Participants 
may be reimbursed for travel and/or parking expenses per institutional specific policies.  
  
 
 
31 
 7. STUDY  PROCEDURES  
This section provides an overview of the study procedures to be followed in GUARDD -US. Further details will be 
provided in a MOP. Sites will receive training on the protocol and MOP before beginning enrollment.  
7.1 Interventions/Treatments  
The intervention for  GUARDD- US is intended to reflect the practices and procedures that are likely to be 
implemented if APOL1  testing were to be integrated into standard clinical practice. It includes the following 
components for participants and providers:  
 
Participants  
● An educational booklet given to all participants at the baseline visit that includes information about high 
blood pressure, kidney disease, and APOL1  gene testing, and language recommending that participants 
speak with their provider if their BP is >130/80 mm Hg .  
● The results of participant blood pressure readings at each study visit including 
o the mean of the second and third blood pressure readings  
o an indication of whether the mean value is normal (<130/80 mm Hg), up to your provider  
(between 13 1/81 mm Hg and 140/90 mm Hg) or elevated (>140/90 mm Hg)  
o a recommendation to speak with a provider if the participant’s BP is above normal  
● The verbal return of APOL1  genetic testing results (i.e., APOL1  positive or negative)  and a verbal 
explanation of the meaning of the genetic testing results for risk of CKD and hypertension to participants  
following the schedule of activities and procedures for the participant’s APOL1 randomization 
assignment (see Section 7.10) . 
● A written  explanation of the clinical implications of the patient’s APOL1 genetic testing results given to 
participants at the time of ROR . 
● The same educational booklet will be given to participants as a reminder at the time of ROR .  
● The option for patients to speak  with a genetic counselor about their results .  
 
Providers  
● The electronic or written return of APOL1  genetic testing results (i.e., APOL1  positive or negative) to 
patient providers via standard site- specific laboratory return of results methods at approximately the 
same time or after participants have received their APOL1  genetic testing results . 
● Where possible, the electronic return of posit ive APOL1  gene testing results to providers via a CDS alert 
that includes the participant’s positive APOL1  status, the risks associated with the participant’s APOL1  
status, and treatment recommendations (including treatment for elevated BPs, ordering urine proteins 
tests, and ordering ACEs/ARBs) at approximately the same time or after participants have received their 
APOL1  genetic testing results (see Section 7.8 for details) . 
● Educational materials explaining APOL 1 gene testing and clinical implications may be given to providers 
at the same time or after they have received patient APOL1  genetic testing results . 
 During the baseline visit, all participants should receive an educational booklet with information about high blood 
pressure, kidney disease, and APOL1  gene testing. This document will be identical for all participants. 
Participants will be notified of their APOL1  randomization assignment after completing the baseline visit. At the 
end of each study visit  (i.e., baseline, 3 month, 6 month) , all participants will  also receive the results of their blood 
pressure readings  including the mean of the second and third blood pressure readings and an indication of 
whether this measurement is normal (<130/80 mm Hg), up to your provider  (between 131 /81 mm H g and 140/90 
mm Hg) or elevated  (>140/90 mm Hg).  Participants in the Control arm will receive their APOL1  genetic testing 
results and an explanation of the meaning of their genetic testing results for risk of CKD and hypertension by 
phone and/or in-person after their 6 month study visit, while participants in the Intervention arm will receive their 
APOL1  genetic testing results  and an explanation of the meaning of their genetic testing results  via phone and/or 
 
32 
 in-person as soon as their results are available after the baseline visit. All participants will be given the option to 
speak to a genetic counselor as soon as results are returned. In addition to verbal ROR, participants will also 
receive lay explanations of their test results in writing and the educational booklet at the time of ROR in case the 
education booklet given at baseline was misplaced. These documents will be sent via mail and/or secure email 
to participants after the study team has attempted to verbally notify the participant  of their test results. Written 
explanations of the test results and educational booklets will be identical for both Control and Intervention 
participants. In addition to study visits, participants may also have non- study related visits with their provider/s 
during the study. All participants may receive treatment recommendations or therapies for hypertension as part 
of these routine care visits.  
 
Providers may be notified of participant results via standard site- specific laboratory return of results methods and, 
where possible and for positive APOL1  results, a CDS alert within the electronic health system, as described in 
Section 7.8. Providers may also receive electronic links for accessing provider and participant educational materials through the CDS or other means. Providers of participants in the Intervention arm may receive notifications of the participants APOL1 gene status during the study (via CDS alert or standard site- specific 
laboratory return of results methods). Providers of participants in the Control arm may be notified of participant 
APOL1 gene status after the participant’s 6 month study visit. Details of the ROR are presented in Section 7.6 
and the schedule of activities is presented in Section 7.10. Table  1 describes the APOL1  variants and their 
predicted CKD risk.
9  
  Table 1. APOL1  Laboratory Report Language  
Gene  Result  Predicted Risk Status  
APOL1  *G2/*G2  Increased Risk of Chronic Kidney Disease 
Incidence and Progression  
*G1(GM) HET  Standard Risk of Chronic Kidney Disease 
Incidence and Progression  
 
 
The intervention for the PGx substudy  is also intended to reflect the practices and procedures that are likely to 
be implemented if PGx testing were to be integrated into standard clinical practice. It includes the following 
components for participants and providers:  
 
Participants  
● An educational booklet explaining PGx testing and clinical implications for hypertension medication 
management given to participants at the baseline visit . 
● The return of PGx genetic testing results to participants following the schedule of activities and 
procedures for the participant’s PGx randomization assignment . 
● A written explanation of clinical implications of the patient’s PGx genetic testing results including the genes tested and phenotypes associated with the efficacy of hypertension medications given to 
participants at the time of ROR .
 
● An educational booklet given to participants at the time of ROR .  
 
Providers  
● The return of PGx genetic testing results to patient providers via standard site- specific laboratory return 
of results methods at approximately the same time or after participants have received their PGx testing results.
 
 
33 
 ● Where possible, a CDS provider alert  for actionable phenotypes when a relevant medication is or may 
be ordered that  indicates the participant’s genetic results, the predicted phenotype (i.e., efficacy of 
various hypertension medications), and treatment recommendations  at approximately the same time or 
after participants have received their PGx testing results . 
 
Tables 2 and 3 describe the genes, variants, and phenotypes for the PGx substudy. The PGx sub- study will 
examine the efficacy of providing genetic information for two gene- drug pairs. The first gene- drug pair is YEATS4  
and thiazide diuretic efficacy, and focuses on first -line antihypertensive therapy in African Americans. The second 
gene- drug pair is NAT2 and hydralazine. Hydralazine is not first line therapy, but is used in the treatment of 
resistant hypertension. GUARDD -US will include patients with both hypertension and resistant hypertension. 
Neither gene- drug pair is presently recommended by CPIC, but both have significant evidence supporting their 
relationship in populations that include individuals of African ancestry which is summarized in Appendix B .  
 Table 4  describes the PGx recommendations to be given for actionable genotypes. Each recommendation will 
be provided in the laboratory return of results and via a CDS alert, where available, that will be activated when a 
provider prescribes a medication that is not recommended based on the participant’s genotype. Please see section 7.6 for more details. 
 
 
Table 2. Genes and gene variants to be tested in the PGx substudy.  
Gene  Variant  
NAT2  rs1801279, rs1801280, rs1799930, rs1799931  
YEATS4  rs7297610  
 
  
Table 3. PGx genotypes, phenotypes, and predicted genotype frequencies.  
Gene  Genotyping Result  Predicted Phenotype  Phenotype 
Frequency  
NAT2  1 or more copy of *4  Reduced Hydralazine Efficacy  0.50 
NAT2  2 copies of *5, *6, *7, *14b Increased Hydralazine Efficacy  0.50 
YEATS4  T/T or T/C  Reduced Thiazide Efficacy  0.51 
YEATS4  C/C Standard Thiazide Efficacy  0.49 
 
 
 
 
34 
  
Table 4. PGx recommendationsa 
Goal (Drug Class)  Gene  Genotype  Recommendation  
First Line Therapy  
(Thiazide diuretic)  YEATS4  C/C This individual is predicted to have standard thiazide 
efficacy. Consider use of a thiazide diuretic or calcium 
channel blocker as first line treatment of hypertension.  
First Line Therapy  
(Thiazide diuretic)  YEATS4  TT or TC  This individual is predicted to have reduced thiazide 
efficacy. Consider use of an alternate first line therapy 
such as a calcium channel blocker for treatment of hypertension.  
Resistant 
Hypertension  
(Hydralazine)  NAT2  *4/*X  This individua l is predicted to have reduced hydralazine 
efficacy and may require a 50- 100% higher starting dose 
or an alternate agent such as clonidine, spironolactone, 
or doxazosin for resistant hypertension.  
Resistant 
Hypertension  
(Hydralazine)  NAT2  2 non -*4 
alleles  This individual ’s NAT2 genetic test result is associated 
with increased hydralazine levels, which may lead to 
increased efficacy and/or adverse effects . 
aDetailed references and rationale are summarized in Appendix B   
7.2 Baseline Assessments  
At baseline, which may occur in a location agreed upon between potential participants and the research team,  
Research Coordinators will verify that the participant has given consent. If participant has not given consent, 
Research Coordinators will obtain consent and information for multiple methods of patient contact (including mailing address, all phone numbers, and next of kin contact information). Research Coordinators will administer 
a survey (approximately 30 minutes long) to obtain information regarding the demographics, comorbidities, 
psychosocial factors, and knowledge, attitudes and beliefs towards genomics, kidney disease and hypertension. Survey responses will be recorded by the Research Coordinator in the study database and may be administered 
over the phone . A paper version of the survey can be used during a study visit , with survey data entered into the 
study database at a later time. Blood pressure will be measured according to the GUARDD -US Blood Pressure 
Protocol (details provided in the MOP)  using a digital blood pressure monitor (such as Professional Intellisense 
Blood Pressure Monitor, OMRON -907
14). Manual blood pressures may be collected if necessary. Pulse 
measurement will also be recorded for each participant  and a blood, saliva, or buccal cell sample will be collected 
(as described in Section 7.4). After completion of the baseline visit, the Research Coordinator will randomize participants to immediate or delayed APOL1  genetic testing and give patients: 1) an educational booklet with 
information about high blood pressure, kidney disease, and APOL1  gene testing, 2) the results of participant 
blood pressure readings including the mean of the second and third blood pressure readings and an indication 
of whether this measurement is normal (<130/80 mm Hg), up to provider (between 131/81 mm Hg and 140/90 
mm Hg) or elevated (>140/90 mm Hg), and 3) the participant’s randomization assignment.   
 During the baseline visit, if the third (3
rd) of three (3) consecutively measured blood pressure readings is greater 
than or equal to 190 mmHg for SBP or greater than or equal to 110 mmHg for DBP , study staff must inform the 
participant that they have very high blood pressure and strongly advise that they get urgent and appropriate 
evaluation and care from a healthcare provider . Study staff must also inform study PIs  and follow the elevated 
blood pressure protocol outlined in the MOP . 
 
 
35 
 Genetic sample collection and blood pressure measurement should occur on the same day and randomization 
must occur within 72 hours of blood pressure collection.  
7.3 Follow -Up Assessments  
Participants enrolled in the study will meet with Research Coordinators in a location agreed upon between the 
participant and the research team for a baseline,  3 month, and 6 month study visit. Follow -up visits will be 
completed within 8 weeks after the projected follow -up date. At each follow -up visit, Research Coordinators will 
administer the study surveys to participants  and record their responses , measure and record the participant’s 
blood pressure according to GUARDD -US Blood Pressure Protocol (provided in the MOP)  and pulse 
measurement.  Participants will be compensated for each  study visit (see Section 6. 10). Whenever possible, 
participants will meet with the same Research Coordinator for follow -up visits to maintain continuity. Follow -up 
assessments at each visit will include only participant -reported surveys, blood pressure and pulse measurements. 
Follow -up surveys may also be administer ed over the phone. 
 If a study site has been unable to reach a participant for a follow up visit, a blood pressure measurement may be obtained from the EHR and recorded in the study database if it meets the following criteria: 1) the blood pressure 
was measured within the specified visit window for the missed projected visit date and 2) the visit was either a clinic visit or a hospital discharge.  Within the projected follow -up window , the blood pressure reading that was 
collected closest to the survey completion date will be used.   
 
During any follow -up visit, i f the third (3
rd) of three (3) consecutively measured blood pressure readings is  greater 
than or equ al to 190 mmHg for SBP or greater than or equal to 110 mmHg , study staff must inform the participant 
that they have very high blood pressure and strongly advise that they get urgent and appropriate evaluation and  
care from a healthcare provider . Study staff must also inform study PIs  and follow the elevated blood pressure 
protocol outlined in the MOP . 
 
7.4 Specimen Collection  
 
At the baseline visit, Research Coordinators will consent participants if not previously consented, administer the 
baseline survey, take 3 blood pressure readings, and, obtain a genetic sample via blood draw, saliva or buccal cell collection, whichever is most appropriate for the site and if possible, participant preferences .  
 
Blood Draw Protocol  
A phlebotomist or a coordinator trained in phlebotomy should collect 1 tube (approximately 1-2 teaspoons  or 5 
mLs) of blood via venipuncture from participants willing to give a blood sample.  Research Coordinators should 
follow the MOP for instructions regarding the collection, storage, and delivery of the genetic sample s to the  
designated laboratory.   
 
Saliva Protocol  
Alternatively, participants may provide a saliva sample in lieu of a blood sample. Research Coordinators should 
follow the MOP for instructions regarding the collection, storage, and delivery of the sample to the designated 
laboratory .  Patients giving a saliva sample should not eat, drink, smoke or chew gum for 30 minutes before 
sample collection. Previous studies have confirmed that saliva samples are a viable alternative as a source of DNA for genotyping procedures
15. 
 Buccal Cell Protocol  
Alternatively,  participants may provide a buccal cell sample in lieu of a blood or saliva sample. Sample collection 
swabs/brushes should be labeled by recruiters, and collection, storage, and delivery to the designated laboratory 
 
36 
 will follow the Buccal Cell Collection Protocol provided in the MOP. Participants providing a buccal cell sample 
should not eat, drink, smoke, or chew gum for 30 minutes before sample collection.  
7.5 Specimen Transfer and Genetic Testing Procedures  
All collected specimens should be clearly marked with the participant ID and all other required fields according to 
the instructions in the MOP, and delivered to a designated laboratory. Samples from Intervention arm participants will be processed by the laboratory as soon as possible using analytically validated APOL1  and PGx gene testing 
procedures. For Control arm samples, designated laboratories will either extract DNA as soon as possible after 
sample receipt, and store the DNA for later analysis or store the sample and extract DNA after the Control participant has completed the 6 month follow -up assessment. Control Arm DNA samples will be processed as 
soon as possible after the 6 month visit using analytically validated procedures. Genes to be tested for the PGx substudy along with genotyping results and predicted phenotypes are described in Section 7.1. Details of sample 
storage and transport will be presented in the MOP. All laboratories in GUARDD -US are Clinical Laboratory 
Improvement Amendments (CLIA) -certified for high complexity.  
7.6 Return of Genetic Results  
The designated laboratories will transfer participant genetic testing results to the IGNITE PTN Coordinating Center (CC) as soon as possible and follow standard site- specific procedures for return of results to providers. 
Genetic results will be imported into the study database and the site EHR, where available. The study database 
will notify study personnel  when a participant’s lab results are ready to be returned to the participant.  
 Participants will receive APOL1 and/or PGx results via phone and/or in- person. Research Coordinators should 
call participants at the appropriate time (see Figure 1  and Tables 5 -7), follow the ROR script (provided in the 
MOP), and end with a speak back in which participants will explain their results back in order to ensure 
comprehension. Research Coordinators should note the date, time, and completion status of all RORs in the 
study database. All participants will receive their genetic test results with lay explanations in writing and an educational booklet explaining their results and genetic risks via mail  and/or secure email . Research Coordinators 
will offer all participants the option to speak by phone or in person with a study genetic counselor about their results. If a participant wants to speak with a genetic counselor, the Research Coordinator should conta ct the 
genetic counselor for their site on behalf of the patient, and the genetic counselor should reach out to the patient 
for counseling.  
 Providers may be notified of participant results via standard site- specific laboratory return of results methods an d, 
where possible, a CDS within the electronic health system as described in Section 7.8. The genetic testing results should also be stored in the participant’s medical records.  
7.7 Data Collection from the Electronic Health Record  
Data from the local EHR will  be used to determine: 1) components of the secondary endpoints (i.e., presence of 
CKD diagnosis codes in the 24 months prior to baseline and up to 8 months after baseline, urine tests obtained 
in the 24 months prior to baseline and in the 6 months after baseline), 2) events of interest (see Section 8.2), and 3) variables needed for Other Planned Analyses including Cost Effectiveness Analysis (CEA) (se e Section 9.6). 
Sites will extract the relevant EHR data using prespecified algorithms developed centrally by the IGNITE PTN 
CC or using site- developed algorithms. If using the CC -developed algorithms, sites will modify the algorithm 
codes based on their own customized EHR system. Sites will be asked to conduct EHR data downloads  after at 
least 25% of the participants have completed their 6 month visit, and approximately 6-12 months after the last 
patient is randomized. EHR results will be sent to the IGNITE PTN CC via secure data transfer and formatted for data analyses. Details of the EHR download and transfer process will be provided separately to relevant site 
personnel . 
 
37 
 7.8 Clinical Decision Support System  
While participants will be notified of their APOL 1 and PGx test results via a phone call  and/or in- person, providers 
may be notified of participant results via standard site- specific laboratory return of results methods and, where 
possible, a CDS within the electronic health system. For APOL1  testing, sites should work with their institutional 
informational technology departments to set up provider CDS alerts for positive APOL1 results and for actionable 
PGx phenotypes when a relevant medication is ordered. APOL1  alerts should include the part icipant’s APOL1  
status, the risks associated with the participant’s APOL1  status, and treatment recommendations (including 
treatment for elevated BPs, ordering urine proteins tests, and ordering ACEs/ARBs), and additional educational 
materials  delivered via the site- specific CDS implementation method. For PGx testing, provider alerts should 
indicate the participant’s genetic results, the predicted phenotype (i.e., efficacy of various hypertension 
medications), and treatment recommendations.  
 Refl
ecting the pragmatic nature of the trial, the many involved research sites, and variations in local CDS policies, 
it is anticipated that there will be differences in CDS implementation details, but all sites will ensure that both participants and providers are alerted to APOL1 and PGx test results and associated significance. Details of the 
alerts will be provided separately to relevant site personnel . 
7.9 Provider Surveys  
Providers that agree to participate in the baseline survey should be given a written baseline survey to complete 
or instructions for completing the baseline survey online. 
 
7.10 Schedule of Activities  
Providers should be recruited and asked to complete the baseline survey as soon as possible after site activation. 
CDS alerts for providers should be activated as soon as lab results are entered into the electronic health record.  
 
Tables 5, 6, and 7 describe the participant schedule of events for GUARDD -US.  
 
   
 
38 
  
Table 5. Schedule of participant activities up to randomization for sites.  
Activities  Prior to 
baseline    Baseline visit  
Recruit participants  X   X  
Screen potential participants for interest/ 
eligibility  X   X 
Contact participant to schedule baseline visit  X   X  
Obtain consent  X OR X 
Obtain BP & pulse & return BP results to 
participant      X 
Distribute educational booklet/s to 
participant      X 
Administer baseline participant survey      X 
Perform sample collection      X 
Randomize to APOL1 treatment at end of 
baseline visit & notify patients of their 
randomization assignment      X 
   
 
39 
  
Table 6. Schedule of activities following participant baseline visit for sites participating in the PGx substudy.  
 
 After Baseline 
& before 3M 
visit3M visit
(+8 wks)6M visit
(+8 wks)After 6M 
visitAfter Baseline 
& before 3M 
visit3M visit
(+8 wks)6M visit
(+8 wks)After 6M 
visitAfter Baseline 
& before 3M 
visit3M visit
(+8 wks)6M visit
(+8 wks)After 6M 
visitAfter Baseline 
& before 3M 
visit3M visit
(+8 wks)6M visit
(+8 wks)After 6M 
visit
Participant surveys, BP & 
pulse measurements, & return of BP results to participant X X X X X X X X
APOL1  testing conducted at 
laboratoryX X X X
Return APOL1  test results 
to participant verbally and 
with written explanationX X X X
Give educational booklet for 
APOL1  results via mail or 
secure emailX X X X
PGx testing conducted at 
laboratoryX X X X
Return PGx Results verbally 
and with written explanationX X X X
Give educational booklet for 
PGx results via mail or secure email X X X XAPOL1  Negative
PGx Control GroupAPOL1  Negative
PGx Intervention GroupINTERVENTION GROUP
ActivitiesAPOL1  PositiveCONTROL GROUP
 
40 
  
Table 7. Schedule of activities following participant baseline visit for sites participating not in the PGx substudy.  
 
   After Baseline 
& before 3M 
visit3M visit
(+8 wks)6M visit
(+8 wks)After 6M 
visitAfter Baseline 
& before 3M 
visit3M visit
(+8 wks)6M visit
(+8 wks)After 6M 
visit
Participant surveys, BP and 
pulse measurements, & return 
of BP results to 
participantX X X X
APOL1  testing conducted at 
laborator
yX X
Return APOL1  test results 
to par
ticipant verbally and 
with written explanationX X
Give educational booklet for 
APOL1  results via mail or 
secur
e emailX XActivitiesCONTROL GROUP INTERVENTION GROUP
 
41 
 8. SAFETY  ASSESSMENT  AND  MONITORING  
 
GUARDD- US is an observational -type study that does not include a drug or device intervention. For this reason, 
no adverse events will be collected or recorded in the study database. Distress from return of results and events 
of interest will be monitored (as described in the next sections) and a Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) 
will provide trial oversight. Adverse events suspected to be related to study interventions should be reported to the reviewing IRB following local policies.  Reportable events including unanticipated study related deaths will be 
collected in the study database per IRB reporting policies.  
8.1 Distress from Return of Results  
Distress from return of results should be monitored at patient visits. If the participant seems overly distressed by 
the outcomes of the genetic test results, the Research Coordinator should: 
1. Offer the participant the opportunity to speak to the genetic counselor. If the genetic counselor is not 
immediately available, the Research Coordinator should help coordinate a phone call or meeting with the 
genetic counselor based on participant’s preference.  
2. Inform the Project Manager who should then:  
● Inform PIs  
● Document the event in the notes field of the participant’s study database record  
● Follow -up with participant  
8.2 Events of Interest  
EHR data will be reviewed to monitor emergency department visits and hospitalizations. Sites will be asked to conduct two EHR data downloads, one after at least 25% of the participants have completed their 6 month visit, 
and another approximately 6-12 months after the last patient is randomized. EHR results will be sent to the 
IGNITE PTN CC via secure data transfer and formatted for data analyses. Details of the EHR download and 
transfer process will be provided separately to relevant site personnel . 
8.3 Safety  Monitoring/Data and Safety Monitoring Board  
The DSMB, appointed by the NHGRI, will be responsible for providing recommendations regarding the conduct of the study and guidance to ensure the safety and well -being of participants. The DSMB will meet semi-
annually with one conference call and one in- person/virtual  meeting. A DSMB Charter will be developed 
detailing the procedures to be followed. A Data and Safety Monitoring Plan and a separate DSMB statistical analysis plan (SAP) will be developed in collaboration with the IGNITE PTN, IGNITE PTN CC, and NHGRI, and enacted by the DSMB.  
8.4 Early Termination and Participant Discontinuation  
Early termination considerations will generally apply only to emerging issues of major concern, or problems with trial co nduct that suggest the trial could not be completed successfully with a reliable conclusion in a feasible 
time frame.  
 The site investigator, sponsor or institution may stop involvement of any participant in this research study at any 
time without their consent. This may be because the research study is being stopped, the instructions of the study 
team have not been followed, the investigator believes it is in the participant’s best interest, or for any other reason. If specimens or data have been stored as  part of the research study, they too may be destroyed without 
participant consent.  
  
 
42 
 9. STATISTICAL  ANALYSIS  PLAN  AND  SAMPLE  SIZE  
9.1 Sample Size Determination  
Main Study  
In GUARDD, there was a 13% prevalence of APOL1  positive individuals among hypertension participants and a 
standard deviation of 18.1 mm Hg for SBP. A separate unpublished pilot study from Indiana University showed a 
20% prevalence of APOL1  positive individuals among participants with CKD and an estimated CKD prevalence 
of 50%. Finally, another study showed a 26% prevalence of APOL1 positive AAs with CKD9. As such, the initial 
sample size determination assumed a 17% prevalence of APOL1  positive individuals. However, observation of 
the prevalence of the APOL1  positive study participants during the course of the study led investigators and the 
DSMB to believe that this assumption was too high and the actual prevalence in the study population was 
between 14 and 15 percent. Assuming a conservative 14% prevalence of APOL1  positive individuals based on 
these studies, a sample size of approximately 6700 for the randomized population would result in approximately 
938 APOL1  positive individuals with at least 469 in each arm for the main study population examined here. U sing 
a two tailed t -test and assuming an overall  5% level of significance, 10% lost -to-follow up, two interim analys es, 
and a standard deviation of 18.1 mm of Hg, a sample size of 6700 for the randomized population and 
approximately 938 for the APOL1  posit ive individuals will detect a 3.5 mm Hg difference in the change in SBP 
from baseline to 3 months between Intervention - APOL1  positive and Control - APOL1  positive groups with at 
least 80% power. This sample size determination assumes 10% of the 938 APOL1  positive individuals could drop 
out of the study before 3 months  and therefore have incomplete data on SBP change from baseline to 3 months.  
APOL1 positive individuals with incomplete data on SBP change  from baseline to 3 months  cannot be included 
in the primary  endpoint analysis .  Therefore, the final analysis on the primary endpoint needs  at least 844 APOL1 
positive individuals who have complete data for SBP change from baseline to 3 months  to detect a 3.5 mm Hg 
difference between two treatment groups. Enrollment will continue until the 844 target  can be ensured.  Since  
APOL1 and SBP data could be missing for various reasons , approximately 50 additional participants will be 
randomized to help us to reach this 844 target . This ma kes the total randomization target to be approximately 
6750. Enrollment may end prior to the 6 750 target if the study team is certain  that the necessary 844 APOL1  
positive individuals  with complete SBP change data can be achieved . 
 
 
 PGx Substudy   
Of the approximately 6750 participants in the GUARDD -US study, approximately 4400 will also be at a site 
participat ing in the PGx substudy. A sample size of 4400 with a 14% prevalence of APOL1 positive individuals 
would result in 1892 participants for the PGx substudy (Intervention – APOL1  negative participants) with 946 
participants in the PGx Control and PGx Intervention arms. Using a two tailed t -test and assuming a 5% level of 
significance, 10% lost -to-follow up,  and a standard deviation of 20 mm Hg (obtained from an unpublished study 
from the University of Florida), a sample size of 4400 for the randomized population and 1892 for the PGx 
substudy will detect a 3.1 mm Hg difference in the change in SBP from baseline to 3 months between the PGx 
Intervention group and PGx Control group with approximately 90% power.  
  
 
43 
  
9.2 General Statistical Methods  
A detailed SAP will be developed and contained in a separate document. Prior to analysis, study population 
details including the number randomized, in each treatment arm, and lost to follow -up will be described. Baseline 
participant characteristics will be summarized as means, standard deviations, medians, and/or 25th, 75th 
percentiles for continuous variables, and as counts and percentages for categorical variables. Model assumptions 
will be examined prior to analysis and transformations implemented, if necessary, to more adequately meet the 
assumptions. Unless otherwise stated, hypotheses will be tested as two- sided with a significance level of 0.05.  
9.3 Population for Analyses  
Population for Main Study Objectives  
Participants from the Randomized Population who test positive for APOL1 . 
 
Population for PGx Substudy Objective  
Participants from the PGx substudy participating sites who are randomized to Intervention in the main study and test negative for APOL1  are included in the PGx  substudy population. Only p articipants who have non- missing 
PGx test results are included in the population for the primary and secondary analyses.   
9.4 Analysis of the Primary Endpoint  
To determine the effect of knowledge of a positive APOL1  status on SBP, we will compare the change in SBP 
from baseline to 3 months of the Intervention – APOL1  positive group to the change in SBP from baseline to 3 
months of the Control - APOL1  positive group using a two sided t-test with a n overall  two-sided type I error of 
0.05. Participants that are APOL1  negative in both the Intervention and Control groups will not be included. This 
primary analysis will be conducted according to the principle of intention- to-treat (ITT) with participants 
analyzed and endpoints attributed according to the treatment arm to which the participants were randomized, 
regardless of subsequent crossover or post -randomization medical care within the pre- specified subset of 
APOL1  positive participants.  
9.5 Analysis of the Secondary Endpoints  
The effect of knowledge of a positive APOL1  status on secondary endpoints [i.e., change in urine 
microalbuminuria/proteinuria orders from baseline to 6 months (Y/N), documented order of 
microalbuminuria/proteinuria tests by 6 months (Y/N), change in documented diagnosis for stage 3 CKD and 
above (Y/N) from baseline to 6 months, documented diagnosis of CKD stage 3 and above by 6 months (Y/N), 
change in documented diagnosis for any stage CKD from baseline to 6 months (Y/N), and documented  diagnosis 
of all stages of CKD by 6 months (Y/N) ] will be compared between Intervention - APOL1  positives and Control - 
APOL1  positives with the proportion difference test.  
9.6 Other  Planned Analyses 
Trends in SBP . In addi
 tion to the primary endpoint analysis described above, we will compare the time trends in 
SBP between Intervention – APOL1 positive individuals and Control – APOL1 positive individuals using a 
repeated measures mixed model. Since participants are randomized to Intervention and Control groups and not 
to the APOL1 positive subgroups within Intervention and Control groups, there could be important differences in 
baseline characteristics between the two groups. For this reason, we will conduct covariate- adjusted repeated 
measures mixed models that will account for differences in baseline characteristics that differ between the 
Intervention – APOL1  positive group and the Control – APOL1  positive group. Potential baseline co variates 
include baseline SBP, age, sex, and baseline CKD . We will select the appropriate covariance matrix (e.g., 
 
44 
 compound symmetry, autoregressive, unstructured, or other covariance structure) based on the data to account 
for repeated measures.  
 
CKD subs et. If the data provide evidence of an overall difference in the primary outcome (change in SBP from 
baseline to 3 months) between Intervention – APOL1  positive group and the Control – APOL1  positive groups, 
we will further examine whether the effect of knowledge of a positive APOL1  status on SBP differs among those 
with and without CKD. This subgroup analyses will involve testing for interactions between treatment arm and 
CKD using linear regression. Effect estimates will be carefully (conservatively) interpreted in conjunction with 
the formal interaction test. If the interaction is significant, we will test whether the time trends in effect of early versus delayed knowledge of a positive APOL1  status on SBP differs among Intervention – APOL1  positive 
group and the Control – APOL1  positive groups in those with CKD at baseline using a covariate- adjusted 
repeated measures mixed model. Potential covariates are the same as described above. We will select the appropriate covariance matrix (e.g., compound symmetry, autoregressive, unstructured, or other covariance structure) based on the data to account for repeated measures.  
 
Controlled versus Uncontrolled Blood Pressure Subset.  We w
 ill also examine whether the effect of knowledge 
of a positive APOL1  status on SBP differs among those whose blood pressure is well -controlled at baseline 
versus those whose blood pressure is not well -controlled at baseline. This subgroup analyses will involve 
testing for interactions between treatment arm and whether or not SBP is 140 mm Hg or great er at baseline 
using linear regression. Effect estimates will be carefully (conservatively) interpreted in conjunction with the 
formal interaction test. As an additional subgroup analysis, we will similarly examine the effect of  knowledge of 
a positive APOL1 status on SBP between those on treatment for hypertension versus those not on treatment in the subset of participants with SBP 140 mm Hg or great er. 
 Cost-Effectiveness (CE).  Co
 mplete details of the cost -effectiveness analysis (CEA) will be presented in a 
separate SAP  depending on the outcome of the main study . Briefly, two analyses will be conducted comparing 
economic  outcomes in Intervention – APOL1  positive and the Control – APOL1  positive groups. In the first, within -
trial cost analysis, 6 -month total healthcare cost will be estimated per participant using estimates of intervention 
costs (obtained from Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) physician fee schedule17), medication 
costs (obtained from participant survey, EHR costs per cost center and/or total costs, VAFFS drug prices18, 
National Average Drug Acquisition Cost (NADAC) drug prices19, Medicare drug prices20), and downstream health 
care costs of inpatient, outpatient, and emergency department use (from participant survey, EHR costs per cost center and/or total costs, Medicare outpatient prospective payment system (PPS) for healthcare common procedure coding system (HCPCS)
21, cost -to-charge- ratio (CCR) for estimating inpatient costs from charges22). 
The analyses will be adjusted for baseline 3-month total costs and utility scores by means of regression. The 
second, long- term CE analysis , will use a microsimulation model with five health states (Well, Cardiovascular 
Disease (CVD), ESRD, CVD plus ESRD, and Death) for predicting CE outcomes over a 5-year, 10- year and 
lifetime horizon following U.S. recommendations23. The microsimulation model’s predictions of CVD, ESRD and 
competing mortality rates will be informed by published epidemiological risk models and U.S. life tables. 
Specifically, we will use the Pooled Cohort Equations24 for modeling CVD and epidemiological studies for linking 
CKD stage to long- term ESRD risk with the following risk factors as input parameters: participant demographics 
(age,  gender, and race) obtained from participant surveys; 6- month systolic blood pressure measurements ; 6-
month smoking status and preventive medication use (BP med) obtained from participant surveys; and 6- month 
diabetes status , eGFR, urine albumin to creatinine ratio, and blood cholesterol parameters obtained from the 
EHR.  The estimated event rates of CVD, ESRD and competing mortality will be modified using expected rate 
ratios of blood pressure lowering therapy estimated from difference in 6- month change of systolic blood pressure 
from baseline. Rate ratios will be based on published meta- analyses of trials on blood pressure lowering 
medication.  The microsimulation model will be used to estimate cumulative costs and QALYs as a function of life 
expectancy and simulated CVD and ESRD events for each trial participant. Long- term utility and cost penalties 
 
45 
 conditioned on increasing age, CVD, and ESRD will be based on the literature. Details of the procedures for 
obtaining EHR data and estimates from the EHR will be provided in the MOP and SAP.  
 
PGx Substudy. Analyses for the PGx substudy will compare outcomes between APOL1  negat i ve individuals 
with imme diate PGx ROR (PGx Intervention) and APOL1  negative individuals with delayed PGx ROR (PGx 
Control). A two sided t-test with a two -sided type I error of 0.05 will be used to evaluate differences in the 
change in SBP from baseline to the 3 month study visit between PGx Intervention and PGx Control groups. To 
evaluate time trends in SBP, we will also conduct covariate- adjusted repeated measures mixed models that will 
account for differences in baseline characteristics that differ between the PGx Intervention group and the PGx 
Control group. Potential baseline covariates are as described above. We will select the appropriate covariance matrix (e.g., compound symmetry, autoregressive, unstructured, or other covariance structure) based on the 
data to account for r epeated measures. Additional exploratory endpoints and analyses for the PGx substudy 
will be described in a separate SAP.  
 
Detai
ls of these statistical analyses along with all other exploratory analyses (e.g., mediators, moderators and 
psychobehavioral impact of results disclosure on participant outcomes and provider treatment recommendations, and medication adherence) will be described in the study SAP.  
 
Long- Term Exploratory Outcomes:  
Research participants can consent for  long- term follow up of kidney function. We will use appropriate 
procedures (including secure linkage, honest broker procedures, etc.) to access several databases, including 
patient electronic medical records, or restricted databases such as USRDS (United States Renal Data System) and CMS  to track kidney function measurements, blood pressure, medication usage and health outcomes 
related to kidney disease up to 10 years from the date of enrollment, for patients who agree. We will then analyze these data as part of our exploratory outcomes and assess effect of interventions on long- term kidney 
outcomes.  
 
Impact of Social Determinants of Health:  
Data from participant surveys will be used to explore the impact of individual -level social determinants of health 
on primary, secondary, and exploratory study outcomes. Participant address will be used for linkage to publicly 
available data on community -level determinants of health (eg, Social CDC Vulnerability Index) . 
9.7 Interim Analyses 
  A single planned interim analysis was planned initially for this study . To account for repeated significance testing 
of the accumulating data, the group sequential method of Lan and DeMets will be used as a guide for interpreting 
this interim analysis.  Monitoring boundaries for the primary endpoint will be based on a two- sided symmetric 
Lan-DeMets spending function using O’Brien- Fleming type boundaries with an overall two- sided significance 
level of α=0.05. The O’Brien- Fleming approach requires large critical values early in the study but relaxes (i.e., 
decreases) the critical value as the trial progresses. The primary and interim analyses will compare S BP at 3 
months among APOL1 positive individuals in the Control arm to APOL1 positive individuals in the Intervention 
arm. Because APOL1  genotype (i.e., positive vs. negative) for participants in the Control arm is determined 
around the time of the 6 month study visit, only participants that have completed their 6 month study visit will be 
included in the interim analysis.  To account for the delays in receiving genetic testing results, the interim analysis 
will be targeted to occur when approximately 25% of the participants have completed their 6 month study visit. 
Using the O’Brien- Fleming type boundary at 25% information, if the analysis calculates a p- value that is less than 
0.00009, stopping the trial for efficacy or harm will be proposed.  In order to maintain the overall significance level 
of 0.05, the final analysis of the primary endpoint will be considered significant for p- values less than 0.049975. 
 
 
46 
 If the interim analysis does not propose stopping for efficacy (p- value < 0.00009 and the intervention has the 
larger reduction in SBP at 3 months), then the conditional power to detect a significant result at the end of the 
trial will be estimated. The conditional power will be presented to the DSMB to facilitate discussion of whether 
the trial should be stopped for futility.   
 
An additional interim analysis was performed per request by the DSMB in May, 2022.  In order to maintain the overall significance level of 0.05 after this second interim analysis, the definition of significant p- value for the final 
analysis is recalculated by continuing to use the Lan- DeMets function with O’ Brien-Fleming type boundaries 
appropriately for the approximate percent information at which the interim analysis occur red. Due to the 
occurrence of this second interim  analysis, the final analysis of the primary endpoint will be considered significant 
if p-value is less than 0.0492.  
9.8 Handling of Missing Data  
 For the primary and secondary statistical analyses described above, multiple imputation will be used for all missing values except those due to participant death. To ensure that the missing at random assumption for 
multiple imputation is valid, we will compare baseline SBP and other patient characteristics in those lost to follow up to participants retained on their  randomization assignment. We will also do sensitivity analyses where we 
compare results obtained with multiple imputation to those obtained without imputation. Missing values due to death will not be imputed and will therefore not be included in the analy ses.  
 For exploratory repeated measures analyses, missing data are easily handled in repeated measures mixed models, as long as the missing at random assumption is valid. However, the missing at random assumption cannot be tested.  Accordingly, for exploratory analyses using repeated measures mixed models, we will also 
conduct a sensitivity analysis where missing values are imputed using multiple imputation. The results with and 
without multiple imputation will be compared. More complete details of the handling of missing values under different circumstances will be described in the SAP.  
9.9 Multiplicity  
With the primary and various secondary endpoints that have been outlined, there is a multiplicity of analyses to be performed, which leads to an increased probability that at least one of the comparisons could be "significant" by chance. Adjusting for the effects of the repeated significance testing for the multiplicity of secondary endpoints would require that very small significance levels be used for every comparison. Therefore, rather than adjusting 
for multiple comparisons, statistical results (e.g., p values) will only be presented for the primary endpoint 
analysis. We will be conservative in the interpretation of secondary analyses and report only point estimates and 95% confidence intervals. We have also pre- specified the primary and secondary outcome variables to avoid 
over-interpretation of strictly exploratory comparisons.   
 
47 
 10. DATA  MANAGEMENT   
10.1 Data Entry and Record Keeping  
GUARDD- US will have 4 main data sources: data collected from participants (survey, blood pressure and pulse) 
and providers (survey), genetic testing results from designated laboratories, data from the EHR, and publicly 
available data for CEA analyses. Data from patients and providers should be entered directly into study database 
by trained and qualified personnel at each clinical site. Site staff will receive training on the use of the study database. After staff are trained, they will receive a unique user identification and password to access data entry 
forms for their site. Access codes should not be shared and are non- transferable.  
 
Laboratories will transfer genetic testing results to the IGNITE PTN CC and follow standard site- specific return of 
results procedures for providers. The genotype and result (i.e., positive versus negative) for each participant will 
then be automatically imported to the participant’s study database record from laboratory produced output files. 
The accuracy of the automatic import of laboratory results will be verified by comparing the results recorded in the study database to an external record of the result for a subset of the study participants . 
 
Sites will extract the relevant data from their EHR (see Section 7.7) and transfer those data to the IGNITE PTN 
CC following procedures that will be specified. Briefly, sites will be given a list of information to extract for their GUARDD- US participants, a common format that data should be converted to, and procedures for secure file 
transfer to the CC. Transfers of data will occur after at least 25% of the participants have completed their 6 month 
visit and 6-12 months after the last participant is random ized.  
 Data to be used for cost -effectiveness analyses (CEA) will be obtained via participant surveys administered at 
study visits, direct measurement at study visits (for blood pressure), via the EHR, and via publicly available data 
sources (CMS physician fee schedule
17, VAFFS drug prices18, NADAC drug prices19, Medicare drug prices20, 
PPS for HCPCS21, and CCR for estimating inpatient costs from charges22). Publicly available data sources can 
be downloaded  freely at the end of the study from corresponding online sources and stored on secure servers at 
the CC. Any specialized data collection procedures will be presented in the MOP. Details on the data to be used for CEA are presented in Section 9.6.  
10.2 Data Element Definitions  
Baseline SBP will be defined as th e mean of the 2
nd and 3rd measurements taken according to the GUARDD -US 
Blood Pressure Protocol provided in the MOP.   Similarly, follow -up SBP will be the average of the 2nd and 3rd 
SBP measures at the follow -up visit, or alternatively the SBP from the EHR entered into the study database by 
the site in accordance with the study manual of procedures (MOP).   
 
Secondary Endpoints will be defined as follows:  
 
1. Change in urine microalbuminuria/proteinuria orders from baseline to 6 months (Y/N)  
a. Order of urine microalbuminuria/proteinuria test at baseline is a binary variable (Y/N) where ‘Y’ is defined as the presence of urine proteinuria or urine microalbuminuria diagnostic code (i.e. 
82043/84156  (Current Procedural Terminology (CPT) codes) OR the presence of urine 
microalbuminuria/proteinuria lab test order and/or result
 in the participant’s EHR record at any 
point in the 12 months prior to baseline.  
b. Order of urine microalbuminuria/proteinuria test at 6 months is a binary variable (Y/N) where ‘Y’ is defined as the presence of urine proteinuria or urine microalbuminuria diagnostic code 
82043/84156  (CPT codes)  OR the presence of urine microalbuminuria/proteinuria lab test order 
and/or result  in the participant’s EHR record at any point from baseline to 6 months.  
 
48 
 c. Change in urine microalbuminuria/proteinuria orders is a binary variable (Y/N) where ‘Y’ is 
defined as no order of urine microalbuminuria/proteinuria test at baseline and having an order of urine microalbuminuria/proteinuria test at 6 months [No for 1a, Yes for 1b = NY].  
 
2. Documented order of microalbuminuria/proteinuria tests by 6 months is a binary variable (Y/N) where ‘Y’ 
is defined as the change in urine microalbuminuria/proteinuria orders (as described in 1c) OR (order of urine microalbuminuria/proteinuria test at baseline) [NY , YN or YY]  
 
3. Change in documented diagnosis for stage 3 CKD and above from baseline to 6 months (Y/N)  
a. Documented diagnosis at baseline is a binary variable (Y/N) where ‘Y’ is defined as [the 
presence of a CKD ICD10 diagnosis code s of N18.3 – N18.5 in the 24 months prior to baseline].  
b. Documented diagnosis at 6 months is a binary variable (Y/N) where ‘Y’ is defined as  [the 
presence of a CKD ICD10 diagnosis code s of N18.3 – N18.6 in the 6 months after baseline].  
c. Change in documented diagnosis for stage 3 CKD and above is a binary variable (Y/N) where ‘Y’ 
is defined as no documented  diagnosis at baseline and documented diagnosis at 6 months [No 
for 3a, Yes for 3b = NY] . 
 
4. Documented diagnosis of stage 3 and above CKD by 6 months is a binary variable (Y/N) where ‘Y’ is 
defined as (change in documented diagnosis for stage 3 CKD (as described in 3c)) OR ( documented 
diagnosis  at baseline (as described in 3a)) [NY , YN or YY] . 
 
5. Change in documented diagnosis for any stage CKD from baseline to 6 months (Y/N)  
a. Documented diagnosis at baseline is a binary variable (Y/N) where ‘Y’ is defined as [the 
presence of a CKD ICD10 diagnosis code (i.e., N18.x; E08.22; E09.22; E10.22; E11.22;  E13.22) 
in the 24 months prior to baseline].  
b. Documented diagnosis at 6 months is a binary variable (Y/N) where ‘Y’ is defined as [the 
presence of a CKD ICD10 diagnosis code (i.e., E18.x; E08.22; E09.22; E10.22; E11.22;  E13.22) 
in the 6 months after baseline].  
c. Change in documented diagnosis for any stage CKD is a binary variable defined as no 
documented diagnosis at baseline and documented  diagnosis at 6 months [No for 5a, Yes for 5b 
= NY] . 
 
6. Documented diagnosis of any stage CKD by 6 months is a binary variable (Y/N) where ‘Y’ is defined as 
(the change in documented diagnosis of any stage CKD (as described in 5c)) OR ( documented 
diagnosis at baseline (as described in 5a)) [NY , YN or YY] . 
 For CEA analyses, the following definitions for variables obtained from the EHR will be used:  
 
1. 6-month CKD stage will be defined with the follow categories using the most recent GFR measurement 
obtained between baseline and 6 months:  
a. Stage 1 with normal or high GFR (GFR > 90 mL/min)  
b. Stage 2 Mild CKD (GFR = 60- 89 mL/min)  
c. Stage 3A Moderate CKD (GFR =  45-59 mL/min)  
d. Stage 3B Moderate CKD (GFR = 30- 44 mL/min)  
e. Stage 4 Severe CKD (GFR = 15- 29 mL/min)  
f. Stage 5 End Stage CKD (GFR <15 mL/min)  
2. 6-month blood cholesterol:  The last observed blood cholesterol level observed prior to baseline.  
M
issing values will be imputed.  
 
49 
 10.3 Database Management and Quality Control of Data 
The IGNITE PTN CC will develop and manage the GUARDD -US study database and perform internal database 
quality -control checks. The CC will conduct data audits throughout the course of the trial. These audits are 
intended to identify data errors, protocol deviations, failure of standardization, missing data, or inconsistencies. 
Any out -of-range values and missing or inconsistent key variables are flagged and addressed/answered at the 
site in real tim e during the data entry process.  
 
All data will be transferred daily from the study database to SAS datasets and stored on the CC’s secure servers. 
The CC will periodically perform additional data quality checks in SAS. Clinical sites may also be given regular feedback directly to discuss issues identified by QC assessments.  
10.4 Study Close Out  
The end of the trial is defined as the end of participant follow -up in the trial. Upon completion of the study, the 
IGNITE PTN CC and/or their designee will notify the site of closeout. The CC and/or their designee will ensure that the Investigator’s regulatory files are up to date and complete, and that any outstanding issues from previous correspondences have been resolved. Other issues to be reviewed at the closeout include: discussing retention 
of study files, possibility of site audits, publication policy, and notifying the IRB of study closure.  
 
 
50 
 11. ETHICAL  AND  HUMAN  SUBJECTS  CONSIDERATIONS   
11.1 Institutional Review Board/Ethics Committee Review  
This study will be initiated only after all required documentation has been reviewed and approved by the central 
IRB according to national and international regulations. The investigator will provide the IGNITE PTN CC or 
their designee with the study approval documentation before the study may begin. The same is applicable for the implementation of changes introduced by amendments. Where applicable, the investigator must also provide to the IGNITE PTN CC and/or their designee the following documentation:  
1. A copy of IRB annual re- approval of the protocol per current Title 21 CFR 312.66 regulations and 1997 
International Conference on Harmonization guidelines.  
2. IRB approval of revisions to the informed consent documents. Administrative changes (such as a change  
in address or phone number) must be sent to IRBs/Ethics Committees but do not require their approval.  
3. The investigator must submit periodic status reports to their Executive Committee as required, as well as notification of completion of the study and a final report where applicable.  
4. The investigator will provide the IGNITE PTN CC or their designee with documentation of all approvals.  
11.2 Use and Disclosure of Protected Health Information  
For clinical trial sites located in the United States, an Authorization for the use and disclosure of PHI under the HIPAA Privacy Rule [45 CFR § 164.102 et seq ] will be obtained from every trial participant prior to, or at the time 
of, enrollment. The investigator is responsible for obtaining participants’ authorizations and signatures, and for explaining the elements of the HIPAA Authorization form. HIPAA Authorization may either be a separate form or 
included in the study ICF, dependent upon local requirements.  
11.3 Confidentiality and Privacy  
Participant confidentiality will  be maintained throughout the clinical study in a way that ensures the information 
can always be tracked back to the source data. For this purpose, a unique participant identification code (ID number) will be used that allows identification of all data reported for each participant. Participant information 
collected in this study and all records will be kept confidential.  
 
Clinical data will be entered into an internet data entry system provided by the CC. The data system includes 
password protection and internal quality checks, such as automatic range checks to identify data that appear 
inconsistent, incomplete, or inaccurate. All data collection and storage devices will be password protected with 
a strong password and all sensitive research information on portable devices will be encrypted. Access to 
identifiable data will be limited to the study team . If it is necessary to  use portable devices for initial collection of 
identifiers, the data files will be encrypted and the identifiers moved to a secure system as soon as possible.  
The portable device(s) will be locked in a secure location when it is not in use.  
 11.4 Pu 
blication  and Data Sharing Policies  
 The IGNITE PTN will have a Publications and Presentations Committee (PPC) with the primary responsibility for coordinating, monitoring, and reviewing all publications and presentations resulting from IGNITE PTN studies. In addition, the PPC will oversee the review, approval, and supervision of the secondary analyses and ancillary 
studies that are conducted within the Network. The goal of the PPC is to facilitate dissemination of the maximum amount of information from these studies in a scientifically sound and ethically responsible fashion in accordance with the unique nature of the IGNITE PTN mission. The IGNITE PTN CC will draft a PPC charter in collaboration with NHGRI, PPC, and the IGNITE PTN, which specifies the publication policies and procedures.  
 The sharing of datasets will be performed following standard operating procedures (SOPs) at the IGNITE PTN 
 
51 
 CC, requirements for NIH policy for data sharing, and guidelines for NIH Data Set Preparation. The de- identified 
or anonymi zed data and documentation in standardized formats may be made available in dbGaP, ClinVar or 
other NHGRI -approved cloud based platforms for sharing to the larger scientific community. Requested 
unrestricted data may be made available after database lock and after all planned primary and secondary 
analyses have been published to parties who sign a data sharing agreement, which stipulates that data must be: 1) used solely for research purposes, 2) properly acknowledged in resulting publications, 3) kept confidential and inaccessible to third parties, and 4) destroyed or returned after analyses are completed. Additionally, users must 
agree not to use data to identify individual participants.  
 
 
 
52 
 12. PROTOCOL  DEVIATIONS  
 
A protocol deviation is defined as an event where the Investigator or site personnel did not conduct the study 
according to the protocol or the Investigator Agreement. Investigators are required to obtain prior approval from 
the IGNITE PTN CC and the reviewing IRB before initiating deviations from the protocol, except where necessary to protect the life or physical well -being of a participant in an emergency. Such approval will be documented and 
maintained in study files. Prior approval is generally not expected in situations where unforeseen circums tances 
are beyond the Investigator’s control, (e.g., participant did not attend scheduled follow -up visit, blood sample lost 
by laboratory, etc.); however, the event is still considered a deviation. Deviations will be reported to the IGNITE PTN CC and/or t heir designee regardless of whether medically justifiable, or taken to protect the participant in an 
emergency. Investigators will maintain documentation of the dates and reasons for each deviation from the 
protocol in compliance with the International Conference on Harmonisation Good Clinical Practice guidelines.  
 
53 
 13. CONFLICT  OF INTEREST  
 
Institutions and investigators must report all present or potential financial conflicts of interest to the NIH, including 
any financial conflicts of interest identified in accordance with the 2011 42 CRF Part 50 Subpart F in the time and 
manner specified in the regulation. In addition, the DSMB membership is restricted to individuals free of significant 
or apparent conflicts of interest. The source of these conflicts may be financial, scientific or regulatory in nature. The IGNITE PTN CC will hold and update annually conflict -of-interest statements from each member. Any 
member who develops a potential conflict of interest during the course of the trial should inform other members of the DSMB. If the potential conflict of interest is determined to be substantial and relevant, the member should resign from the DSMB.  
 
 
 
54 
 14. REFERENCES  
 
1. Kazancioglu, R., Risk factors for chronic kidney disease: an update.  Kidney Int Suppl (2011), 2013. 3(4): 
p. 368-371. 
2. Crews, D.C., T. Pfaff, and N.R. Powe, Socioeconomic factors and racial disparities in kidney disease 
outcomes. Semin Nephrol, 2013. 33(5): p. 468-75. 
3. Ayanian, J.Z., B.E. Landon, J.P. Newhouse, and A.M . Zaslavsky, Racial and ethnic disparities among 
enrollees in Medicare Advantage plans.  N Engl J Med, 2014. 371(24): p. 2288-97. 
4. Gu, A., Y. Yue, R.P. Desai, and E. Argulian, Racial and Ethnic Differences in Antihypertensive Medication Use and Blood Pressure Control Among US Adults With Hypertension: The National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, 2003 to 2012. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes, 2017. 10(1). 
5. Judd, E. and D.A. Calhoun, Management of hypertension in CKD: beyond the guidelines. Adv Chronic 
Kidney Dis, 2015. 22(2): p. 116-22. 
6. Taler, S.J., R. Agarwal, G.L. Bakris, J.T. Flynn, P.M. Nilsson, M. Rahman, P.W. Sanders, S.C. Textor, M.R. Weir, and R.R. Townsend, KDOQI US commentary on the 2012 KDIGO clinical practice guideline for management of blood pressure in CKD. Am J Kidney Dis, 2013. 62(2): p. 201-13. 
7. Upadhyay, A., A. Earley, S.M. Haynes, and K. Uhlig, Systematic review: blood pressure target in chronic kidney disease and proteinuria as an effect modifier.  Ann Intern Med, 2011. 154(8): p. 541-8. 
8. Fryar, C.D., Y. Ostchega, C.M. Hales, G. Zhang, and D. Kruszon -Moran, Hypertension Prevalence and 
Control Among Adults: United States, 2015-2016. NCHS Data Brief, 2017(289): p. 1-8. 
9. Parsa, A., W.H. Kao, D. Xie, B.C. Astor, M. Li, C.Y. Hsu, H.I. Feldman, R.S. Parekh, J.W. Kusek, T.H. Greene, J.C. Fink, A.H. Anderson, M.J. Choi, J.T. Wright, Jr., J.P. Lash, B.I. Freedman, A. Ojo, C.A. Winkler, D.S. Raj, J.B. Kopp, J. He, N.G. Jensvold, K. Tao, M.S. Lipkowitz, and L.J. Appel, APOL1 risk varia nts, race, and progression of chronic kidney disease. N Engl J Med, 2013. 369(23): p. 2183-96. 
10. Genovese, G., D.J. Friedman, M.D. Ross, L. Lecordier, P. Uzureau, B.I. Freedman, D.W. Bowden, C.D. Langefeld, T.K. Oleksyk, A.L. Uscinski Knob, A.J. Bernhardy, P.J. Hicks, G.W. Nelson, B. Vanhollebeke, C.A. Winkler, J.B. Kopp, E. Pays, and M.R. Pollak, Association of trypanolytic ApoL1 variants with kidney disease in African Americans.  Science, 2010. 329(5993): p. 841-5. 
11. Foster, M.C., J. Coresh, M. Fornage, B.C. Astor, M. Grams, N. Franceschini, E. Boerwinkle, R.S. Parekh, and W.H. Kao, APOL1 variants associate with increased risk of CKD among African Americans.  J Am 
Soc Nephrol, 2013. 24(9): p. 1484-91. 
12. Kern, E.F., M. Maney, D.R. Miller, C.L. Tseng, A. Tiwari, M. Rajan, D. Aron, and L. Pogach, Failure of 
ICD-9-CM codes to identify patients with comorbid chronic kidney disease in diabetes.  Health Serv Res, 
2006. 41(2): p. 564-80. 
13. Nadkarni, G.N., O. Gottesman, J.G. Linneman, H. Chase, R.L. Berg, S. Farouk, R. Nadukuru, V. Lotay, S. Ellis, G. Hripcsak, P. Peissig, C. Weng, and E.P. Bottinger, Development and validation of an electronic phenotyping algorithm for chronic kidney disease. AMIA Annu Symp Proc, 2014. 2014 : p. 907-16. 
14. Omron Healthcare, I. Professional Intellisense Blood Pressure Monitor . 2019  [cited 2019; Available from: 
https://omronhealthcare.com/products/intellisense-professional- dig
 ital-blood-pressure-monitor-
hem907xl/ . 
15. Abraham, J.E., M.J. Maranian, I. Spiteri, R. Russell, S. Ingle, C. Luccarini, H.M. Earl, P.P. Pharoah, A.M. Dunning, and C. Caldas, Saliva samples are a viable alternative to blood samples as a source of DNA for high throughput genotyping. BMC Med Genomics, 2012. 5: p. 19. 
 
55 
 16. Ettehad, D., C.A. Emdin, A. Kiran, S.G. Anderson, T. Callender, J. Emberson, J. Chalmers, A. Rodgers, 
and K. Rahimi, Blood pressure lowering for prevention of cardiovascular disease and death: a systematic review and meta -analysis.  Lancet, 2016. 387 (10022): p. 957-967. 
17. U.S. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. Physician Fee Schedule. 2019; Available from: https://www.cms.gov/medicare/medicare-fee-for-service- payment/physicianfeesched/ . 
18. U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs. National Acquisition Center (CCST) Pharmaceutical Catalog Search. 2019; Available from: https://www.vendorportal.ecms.va.gov/NAC/Pharma/List. 
19. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. NADAC (National Average Drug Acquisition Cost). 2019; Available from: https://data.medicaid.gov/Drug- Pri
 cing-and- Payment/NADAC -National-Average -Drug -
Acquisition -Cost-/a4y5 -998d . 
20. U.S. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. The Official U.S. Goverment site for Medicare. 2019; Available from: https://www.medicare.gov/ . 
21. U.S. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. Hospital Outpatient PPS . 2019; Available from: 
https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Medicare- Fee-for-Service- Payment/HospitalOutpatientPPS/ . 
22. U.S. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. Cost Reports by Fiscal Year . 2014; Available from: 
https://www.cms.gov/Research -Stat istics -Data-and- Systems/Downloadable-Public-Use -Files/Cost -
Reports/Cost-Reports- by-Fiscal -Year.html . 
23. Sanders, G.D., P.J. Neumann, A. Basu, D.W. Brock, D. Feeny, M. Krahn, K.M. Kuntz, D.O. Meltzer, D.K. Owens, L.A. Prosser, J.A. Salomon, M.J. Sculpher, T.A. Trikalinos, L.B. Russell, J.E. Siegel, and T.G. 
Ganiats, Recommendations for Conduct, Methodological Practices, and Reporting of Cost -effectiveness 
Analyses: Second Panel on Cost -Effectiveness in Health and Medicine.  Jama, 2016. 316(10): p. 1093-103. 
24. Goff, D.C., Jr., D.M. Lloyd -Jones, G. Bennett, S. Coady, R.B. D'Agostino, R. Gibbons, P. Greenland, D.T. 
Lackland, D. Levy, C.J. O'Donnell, J.G. Robinson, J.S. Schwartz, S.T. Shero, S.C. Smith, Jr., P. Sorlie, N.J. Stone, P.W. Wilson, H.S. Jordan, L. Nevo, J. Wnek, J.L. Anderson, J.L. Halperin, N.M. Albert, B. 
Bozkurt, R.G. Brindis, L.H. Curtis, D. DeMets, J.S. Hochman, R.J. Kovacs, E.M. Ohman, S.J. Pressler, F.W. Sellke, W.K. Shen, S.C. Smith, Jr., and G.F. Tomaselli, 2013 ACC/AHA guideline on the assessment of cardiovascular risk: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines.  Circulation, 2014. 129(25 Suppl 2): p. S49-73. 
 
  
 
56 
 15. APPENDICES   
15.1 Appendix A. Diabetes Diagnosis Codes 
 
Table 8. ICD10 diagnosis codes and descriptions for diabetes  
ICD-10-CM DIABETES  
DIAGNOSIS CODES  DESCRIPTIONS  
E08.00  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with hyperosmolarity without 
nonketotic hyperglycemic -hyperosmolar coma (NKHHC)  
E08.01  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with hyperosmolarity with 
coma  
E08.10  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with ketoacidosis without coma  
E08.11  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with ketoacidosis with coma  
E08.21  Diabetes mell itus due to underlying condition with diabetic nephropathy  
E08.22  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with diabetic chronic kidney 
disease  
E08.29  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with other diabetic kidney 
complication  
E08.311  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with unspecified diabetic 
retinopathy with macular edema  
E08.3129  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with mild nonproliferative 
diabetic retinopathy with macular edema, unspecified eye  
E08.319  Diab etes mellitus due to underlying condition with unspecified diabetic 
retinopathy without macular edema  
E08.3211  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with mild nonproliferative 
diabetic retinopathy with macular edema, right eye  
E08.3212  Diabetes m ellitus due to underlying condition with mild nonproliferative 
diabetic retinopathy with macular edema, left eye  
E08.3213  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with mild nonproliferative 
diabetic retinopathy with macular edema, bilateral  
E08.3291  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with mild nonproliferative 
diabetic retinopathy without macular edema, right eye  
E08.3292  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with mild nonproliferative 
diabetic retinopathy without macular edema, l eft eye  
E08.3293  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with mild nonproliferative 
diabetic retinopathy without macular edema, bilateral  
E08.3311  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with moderate nonproliferative 
diabetic retinopathy wit h macular edema, right eye  
E08.3312  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with moderate nonproliferative 
diabetic retinopathy with macular edema, left eye  
 
57 
 E08.3313  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with moderate nonproliferative 
diabe tic retinopathy with macular edema, bilateral  
E08.3319  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with moderate nonproliferative 
diabetic retinopathy with macular edema, unspecified eye  
E08.3391  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with moderate nonproliferative 
diabetic retinopathy without macular edema, right eye  
E08.3392  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with moderate nonproliferative 
diabetic retinopathy without macular e dema, left eye  
E08.3393  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with moderate nonproliferative 
diabetic retinopathy without macular edema, bilateral  
E08.3399  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with moderate nonproliferative 
diabetic reti nopathy without macular edema, unspecified eye  
E08.3411  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with severe nonproliferative 
diabetic retinopathy with macular edema, right eye  
E08.3412  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with severe nonpr oliferative 
diabetic retinopathy with macular edema, left eye  
E08.3413  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with severe nonproliferative 
diabetic retinopathy with macular edema, bilateral  
E08.3419  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with severe nonproliferative 
diabetic retinopathy with macular edema, unspecified eye  
E08.3491  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with severe nonproliferative 
diabetic retinopathy without macular ed ema, right eye  
E08.3492  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with severe nonproliferative 
diabetic retinopathy without macular edema, left eye  
E08.3493  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with severe nonproliferative 
diabetic retinopat hy without macular edema, bilateral  
E08.3499  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with severe nonproliferative 
diabetic retinopathy without macular edema, unspecified eye  
E08.351  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with proliferative d iabetic 
retinopathy with macular edema  
E08.3511  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with proliferative diabetic 
retinopathy with macular edema, right eye  
E08.3512  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with proliferative diabetic 
retinop athy with macular edema, left eye  
E08.3513  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with proliferative diabetic 
retinopathy with macular edema, bilateral  
E08.3519  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with proliferative diabetic 
retinopathy with macular edema, unspecified eye  
E08.352  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with proliferative diabetic 
retinopathy with traction retinal detachment involving the macula  
E08.3521  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with proliferative diabetic 
retinopathy with traction retinal detachment involving the macula, right eye  
 
58 
 E08.3522  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with proliferative diabetic 
retinopathy with traction retinal detachment involving the macula, left eye 
E08.3523  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with proliferative diabetic 
retinopathy with traction retinal detachment involving the macula, bilateral  
E08.3529  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with proliferative diabetic 
retinop athy with traction retinal detachment involving the macula, 
unspecified eye  
E08.353  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with proliferative diabetic 
retinopathy with traction retinal detachment not involving the macula  
E08.3531  Diabetes mellitus  due to underlying condition with proliferative diabetic 
retinopathy with traction retinal detachment not involving the macula, right 
eye 
E08.3532  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with proliferative diabetic 
retinopathy with traction retinal detachment not involving the macula, left 
eye 
E08.3533  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with proliferative diabetic 
retinopathy with traction retinal detachment not involving the macula, 
bilateral  
E08.354  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with proliferative diabetic 
retinopathy with combined traction retinal detachment and rhegmatogenous 
retinal detachment  
E08.3541  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with proliferative diabetic 
retinopathy with combined traction retinal detachment and rhegmatogenous 
retinal detachment, right eye  
E08.3542  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with proliferative diabetic 
retinopathy with combined traction retinal detachment and rhegmatogenous 
retinal detachment, left eye  
E08.3543  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with proliferative diabetic 
retinopathy with combined traction retinal detachment and rhegmatogenous 
retinal detachment, bilateral  
E08.3549  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with proliferative dia betic 
retinopathy with combined traction retinal detachment and rhegmatogenous 
retinal detachment, unspecified eye  
E08.355  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with stable proliferative 
diabetic retinopathy  
E08.3551  Diabetes mellitus due to unde rlying condition with stable proliferative 
diabetic retinopathy, right eye  
E08.3552  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with stable proliferative 
diabetic retinopathy, left eye  
E08.3553  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with stable proliferative 
diabetic retinopathy, bilateral  
 
59 
 E08.3559  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with stable proliferative 
diabetic retinopathy, unspecified eye  
E08.359  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with proliferative diabetic 
retinopathy without macular edema  
E08.3591  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with proliferative diabetic 
retinopathy without macular edema, right eye  
E08.3592  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with proliferative diabetic 
retinopat hy without macular edema, left eye  
E08.3593  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with proliferative diabetic 
retinopathy without macular edema, bilateral  
E08.3599  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with proliferative diabetic 
retinopa thy without macular edema, unspecified eye  
E08.36  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with diabetic cataract  
E08.37  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with diabetic macular edema, 
resolved following treatment  
E08.37X1  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with diabetic macular edema, 
resolved following treatment, right eye  
E08.37X2  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with diabetic macular edema, 
resolved following treatment, left eye  
E08.37X3  Diabetes mellitu s due to underlying condition with diabetic macular edema, 
resolved following treatment, bilateral  
E08.37X9  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with diabetic macular edema, 
resolved following treatment, unspecified  
E08.39  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with other diabetic ophthalmic 
complication  
E08.3939  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with proliferative diabetic 
retinopathy with traction retinal detachment not involving the macula, 
unspecified eye  
E08.40  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with diabetic neuropathy, 
unspecified  
E08.41  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with diabetic mononeuropathy  
E08.42  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with diabetic polyneuropathy  
E08.43  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with diabetic autonomic 
(poly)neuropathy  
E08.44  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with diabetic amyotrophy  
E08.49  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with other diabetic 
neurological complication  
E08.51  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with diabetic peripheral 
angiopathy without gangrene  
E08.52  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with diabetic peripheral 
angiopathy with gangrene  
 
60 
 E08.59  Diabetes mellitus due to  underlying condition with other circulatory 
complications  
E08.610  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with diabetic arthropathy  
E08.618  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with other diabetic arthropathy  
E08.620  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with diabetic dermatitis  
E08.621  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with foot ulcer  
E08.622  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with other skin ulcer  
E08.628  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with other skin complications  
E08.630  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with periodontal disease  
E08.638  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with other oral complications  
E08.641  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with hypoglycemia with coma  
E08.649  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with hypoglycemia without 
coma  
E08.65  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with hyperglycemia  
E08.69  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with other specified  
complication  
E08.8  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with unspecified complication  
E08.9  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition without complications  
E09.00  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with hyperosmolarity without 
nonketotic hyperglycemic -hyperosmolar coma (NKHHC)  
E09.01  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with hyperosmolarity with coma  
E09.10  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with ketoacidosis without coma  
E09.11  Drug or chemical induced diabetes  mellitus with ketoacidosis with coma  
E09.21  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with diabetic nephropathy  
E09.22  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with diabetic chronic kidney 
disease  
E09.29  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus wi th other diabetic kidney 
complication  
E09.311  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with unspecified diabetic 
retinopathy with macular edema  
E09.319  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with unspecified diabetic 
retinopathy without macular edema  
E09.3211  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with mild nonproliferative 
diabetic retinopathy with macular edema, right eye  
E09.3212  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with mild nonproliferative 
diabetic retinopathy with macular edema , left eye  
E09.3213  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with mild nonproliferative 
diabetic retinopathy with macular edema, bilateral  
E09.3219  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with mild nonproliferative 
diabetic retinopathy with macular edema, unspecified eye  
E09.3291  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with mild nonproliferative 
diabetic retinopathy without macular edema, right eye  
 
61 
 E09.3292  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with mild nonproliferative  
diabetic retinopathy without macular edema, left eye  
E09.3293  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with mild nonproliferative 
diabetic retinopathy without macular edema, bilateral  
E09.3299  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with mild nonpr oliferative 
diabetic retinopathy without macular edema, unspecified eye  
E09.3311  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with moderate nonproliferative 
diabetic retinopathy with macular edema, right eye  
E09.3312  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with moderate nonproliferative 
diabetic retinopathy with macular edema, left eye  
E09.3313  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with moderate nonproliferative 
diabetic retinopathy with macular edema, bilater al 
E09.3319  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with moderate nonproliferative 
diabetic retinopathy with macular edema, unspecified eye  
E09.3391  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with moderate nonproliferative  
diabetic retinopathy without macular edema, right eye  
E09.3392  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with moderate nonproliferative 
diabetic retinopathy without macular edema, left eye  
E09.3393  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with modera te nonproliferative 
diabetic retinopathy without macular edema, bilateral  
E09.3399  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with moderate nonproliferative 
diabetic retinopathy without macular edema, unspecified eye  
E09.3411  Drug or chemical induced dia betes mellitus with severe nonproliferative 
diabetic retinopathy with macular edema, right eye  
E09.3412  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with severe nonproliferative 
diabetic retinopathy with macular edema, left eye  
E09.3413  Drug or chemical in duced diabetes mellitus with severe nonproliferative 
diabetic retinopathy with macular edema, bilateral  
E09.3419  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with severe nonproliferative 
diabetic retinopathy with macular edema, unspecified eye  
E09.3491  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with severe nonproliferative 
diabetic retinopathy without macular edema, right eye  
E09.3492  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with severe nonproliferative 
diabetic retinopathy without macular edema, left  eye 
E09.3493  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with severe nonproliferative 
diabetic retinopathy without macular edema, bilateral  
E09.3499  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with severe nonproliferative 
diabetic retinopathy without macu lar edema, unspecified eye  
E09.3511  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic 
retinopathy with macular edema, right eye  
E09.3512  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic 
retinopathy with macular edema, left eye  
 
62 
 E09.3513  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic 
retinopathy with macular edema, bilateral  
E09.3519  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic 
retinopathy with macular edema, unspecified eye  
E09.3521  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic 
retinopathy with traction retinal detachment involving the macula, right eye  
E09.3522  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic 
retinopathy with traction retinal detachment involving the macula, left eye  
E09.3523  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic 
retinopathy with traction retinal detachment involving the macula, bilateral  
E09.3529  Drug or chemi cal induced diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic 
retinopathy with traction retinal detachment involving the macula, 
unspecified eye  
E09.3531  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic 
retinopathy with traction retinal detachment not involving the macula, right 
eye 
E09.3532  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic 
retinopathy with traction retinal detachment not involving the macula, left 
eye 
E09.3533  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic 
retinopathy with traction retinal detachment not involving the macula, 
bilateral  
E09.3539  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic 
retinopathy with traction retinal detachment not involvin g the macula, 
unspecified eye  
E09.3541  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic 
retinopathy with combined traction retinal detachment and rhegmatogenous 
retinal detachment, right eye  
E09.3542  Drug or chemical induced diabete s mellitus with proliferative diabetic 
retinopathy with combined traction retinal detachment and rhegmatogenous 
retinal detachment, left eye  
E09.3543  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic 
retinopathy with combined traction  retinal detachment and rhegmatogenous 
retinal detachment, bilateral  
E09.3549  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic 
retinopathy with combined traction retinal detachment and rhegmatogenous 
retinal detachment, unspecified e ye 
E09.3551  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with stable proliferative diabetic 
retinopathy, right eye  
E09.3552  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with stable proliferative diabetic 
retinopathy, left eye  
 
63 
 E09.3553  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with stable proliferative diabetic 
retinopathy, bilateral  
E09.3559  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with stable proliferative diabetic 
retinopathy, unspecified eye  
E09.3591  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus wi th proliferative diabetic 
retinopathy without macular edema, right eye  
E09.3592  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic 
retinopathy without macular edema, left eye  
E09.3593  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic 
retinopathy without macular edema, bilateral  
E09.3599  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic 
retinopathy without macular edema, unspecified eye  
E09.36  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with diabetic cataract  
E09.37X1  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with diabetic macular edema, 
resolved following treatment, right eye  
E09.37X2  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with diabetic macular edema, 
resolved following treatment, left  eye 
E09.37X3  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with diabetic macular edema, 
resolved following treatment, bilateral  
E09.37X9  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with diabetic macular edema, 
resolved following treatment, unspecified eye  
E09.39  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with other diabetic ophthalmic 
complication  
E09.40  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with neurological complications 
with diabetic neuropathy, unspecified  
E09.41  Drug or chemical induced diabetes  mellitus with neurological complications 
with diabetic mononeuropathy  
E09.42  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with neurological complications 
with diabetic polyneuropathy  
E09.43  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with neurological comp lications 
with diabetic autonomic (poly)neuropathy  
E09.44  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with neurological complications 
with diabetic amyotrophy  
E09.49  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with neurological complications 
with other dia betic neurologic complication  
E09.51  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with diabetic peripheral 
angiopathy without gangrene  
E09.52  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with diabetic peripheral 
angiopathy with gangrene  
E09.59  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with other circulatory 
complications  
 
64 
 E09.610  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with diabetic neuropathic 
arthropathy  
E09.618  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with other diabetic arthropathy  
E09.620  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with diabetic dermatitis  
E09.621  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with foot ulcer  
E09.622  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with other skin ulcer  
E09.628  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with other skin complications  
E09.630  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with periodontal disease  
E09.638  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with other oral complications  
E09.641  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with h ypoglycemia with coma  
E09.649  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with hypoglycemia without coma  
E09.65  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with hyperglycemia  
E09.69  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with other specified complicat ion 
E09.8  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus with unspecified complications  
E09.9  Drug or chemical induced diabetes mellitus without complications  
E10.10  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with ketoacidosis without coma  
E10.11  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with ketoacidosis with coma  
E10.21  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with diabetic nephropathy  
E10.22  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with diabetic chronic kidney disease  
E10.29  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with other diabetic kidney complication  
E10.311  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with unspecified diabetic retinopathy with macular 
edema  
E10.319  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with unspecified diabetic retinopathy without 
macular edema  
E10.3211  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with mild nonproliferative  diabetic retinopathy with 
macular edema, right eye  
E10.3212  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with mild nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy with 
macular edema, left eye  
E10.3213  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with mild nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy with 
macu lar edema, bilateral  
E10.3219  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with mild nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy with 
macular edema, unspecified eye  
E10.3291  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with mild nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy 
without macular edema, right eye  
E10.3292  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with mild nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy 
without macular edema, left eye  
E10.3293  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with mild nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy 
without macular edema, bilateral  
E10.3299  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with mild nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy 
without macular edema, unspecified eye  
E10.3311  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with moderate nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy 
with macular edema, right eye  
 
65 
 E10.3312  Type 1 diabetes m ellitus with moderate nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy 
with macular edema, left eye  
E10.3313  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with moderate nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy 
with macular edema, bilateral  
E10.3319  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with moderate n onproliferative diabetic retinopathy 
with macular edema, unspecified eye  
E10.3391  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with moderate nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy 
without macular edema, right eye  
E10.3392  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with moderate nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy 
without macular edema, left eye  
E10.3393  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with moderate nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy 
without macular edema, bilateral  
E10.3399  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with moderate nonproliferative  diabetic retinopathy 
without macular edema, unspecified eye  
E10.3411  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with severe nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy 
with macular edema, right eye  
E10.3412  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with severe nonproliferative diabetic retinop athy 
with macular edema, left eye  
E10.3413  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with severe nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy 
with macular edema, bilateral  
E10.3419  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with severe nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy 
with macular edema, un specified eye  
E10.3491  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with severe nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy 
without macular edema, right eye  
E10.3492  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with severe nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy 
without macular edema, left eye  
E10.3493  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with severe nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy 
without macular edema, bilateral  
E10.3499  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with severe nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy 
without macular edema, unspecified eye  
E10.3511  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic retinopathy with macular 
edema, right eye  
E10.3512  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic retinopathy with macular 
edema, left eye  
E10.3513  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic  retinopathy with macular 
edema, bilateral  
E10.3519  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic retinopathy with macular 
edema, unspecified eye  
E10.3521  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic retinopathy with traction 
retinal detac hment involving the macula, right eye  
E10.3522  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic retinopathy with traction 
retinal detachment involving the macula, left eye  
 
66 
 E10.3523  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic retinopathy with  traction 
retinal detachment involving the macula, bilateral  
E10.3529  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic retinopathy with traction 
retinal detachment involving the macula, unspecified eye  
E10.3531  Type 1 diabetes melliuts with prolifera tive diabetic retinopathy with traction 
rentinal detachment not involving the macula, right eye  
E10.3532  Type 1 diabetes melliuts with proliferative diabetic retinopathy with traction 
rentinal detachment not involving the macula, left eye  
E10.3533  Type 1  diabetes melliuts with proliferative diabetic retinopathy with traction 
rentinal detachment not involving the macula, bilateral  
E10.3539  Type 1 diabetes melliuts with proliferative diabetic retinopathy with traction 
rentinal detachment not involving the macula, unspecified eye  
E10.3541  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic retinopathy with 
combined traction retinal detachment and rhegmatogenous retinal 
detachment, right eye  
E10.3542  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic retinopathy with 
combined traction retinal detachment and rhegmatogenous retinal 
detachment, left eye  
E10.3543  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic retinopathy with 
combined traction ret inal detachment and rhegmatogenous retinal 
detachment, bilateral  
E10.3549  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic retinopathy with 
combined traction retinal detachment and rhegmatogenous retinal 
detachment, unspecified eye  
E10.3551  Type 1 di abetes mellitus with stable proliferative diabetic retinopathy, right 
eye 
E10.3552  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with stable proliferative diabetic retinopathy, left 
eye 
E10.3553  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with stable proliferative diabetic retinopathy, 
bilateral  
E10.3559  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with stable proliferative diabetic retinopathy, 
unspecified eye  
E10.3591  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic retinopathy without 
macular edema, right eye  
E10.3592  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with  proliferative diabetic retinopathy without 
macular edema, left eye  
E10.3593  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic retinopathy without 
macular edema, bilateral  
E10.3599  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic retinopathy witho ut 
macular edema, unspecified eye  
E10.36  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with diabetic cataract  
 
67 
 E10.37X1  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with diabetic macular edema, resolved following 
treatment, right eye  
E10.37X2  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with diabetic macular edema, resolved following 
treatment, left eye  
E10.37X3  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with diabetic macular edema, resolved following 
treatment, bilateral  
E10.37X9  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with diabetic macular edema, resolved following 
treatment, unspecified eye 
E10.39  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with other diabetic ophthalmic complication  
E10.40  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with diabetic neuropathy, unspecified  
E10.41  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with diabetic mononeuropathy  
E10.42  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with diabetic polyneuropathy  
E10.43  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with diabetic autonomic (poly)neuropathy  
E10.44  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with diabetic amyotrophy  
E10.49  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with other diabetic neurological complication  
E10.51  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with diabetic peripheral angiopathy without 
gangrene  
E10.52  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with diabetic peripheral angiopathy with gangrene  
E10.59  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with other circulatory complications  
E10.610  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with diabetic neuropathic arthropathy  
E10.618  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with other diabetic arthropathy  
E10.620  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with diabetic dermatitis  
E10.621  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with foot ulcer  
E10.622  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with other skin ulcer  
E10.628  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with other skin complications  
E10.630  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with periodontal disease  
E10.638  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with other oral complications  
E10.641  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with hypoglyc emia with coma  
E10.649  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with hypoglycemia without coma  
E10.65  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with hyperglycemia  
E10.69  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with other specified complication  
E10.8  Type 1 diabetes mellitus with unspecified complications  
E10.9  Type 1 diabetes mellitus without complications  
E11.00  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with hyperosmolarity without nonketotic 
hyperglycemic -hyperosmolar coma (NKHHC)  
E11.01  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with hyperosmolarity with coma  
E11.10  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with ketoacidosis without coma  
E11.11  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with ketoacidosis with coma  
E11.21  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with diabetic nephropathy  
E11.22  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with diabetic chronic kidney disease  
E11.29  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with other diabetic kidney complication  
 
68 
 E11.311  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with unspecified diabetic retinopathy with macular 
edema  
E11.319  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with unspecified diabetic retinopathy without 
macular edema  
E11.3 211 Type 2 diabetes mellitus with mild nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy with 
macular edema, right eye  
E11.3212  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with mild nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy with 
macular edema, left eye  
E11.3213  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with mild nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy with 
macular edema, bilateral  
E11.3219  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with mild nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy with 
macular edema, unspecified eye  
E11.3291   Type 2 diabetes mellitu s with mild nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy 
without macular edema, right eye  
E11.3292   Type 2 diabetes mellitus with mild nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy 
without macular edema, left eye  
E11.3293   Type 2 diabetes mellitus with mild nonprolifer ative diabetic retinopathy 
without macular edema, bilateral  
E11.3299   Type 2 diabetes mellitus with mild nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy 
without macular edema, unspecified eye  
E11.3311  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with moderate nonproliferative  diabetic retinopathy 
with macular edema, right eye  
E11.3312  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with moderate nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy 
with macular edema, left eye  
E11.3313  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with moderate nonproliferative  diabetic retinopathy 
with macular edema, bilateral  
E11.3319  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with moderate nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy 
with macular edema, unspecified eye  
E11.3391  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with moderate nonproliferative diabetic retino pathy 
without macular edema, right eye  
E11.3392  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with moderate nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy 
without macular edema, left eye  
E11.3393  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with moderate nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy 
without mac ular edema, bilateral  
E11.3399  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with moderate nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy 
without macular edema, unspecified eye  
E11.3411  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with severe nonproliferative  diabetic retinopathy 
with macular edema, right eye  
E11.3412  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with severe nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy 
with macular edema, left eye  
E11.3413  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with severe nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy 
with macular edema, bilateral  
 
69 
 E11.3419  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with severe nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy 
with macular edema, unspecified eye  
E11.3491  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with severe nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy 
without macular edema, ri ght eye  
E11.3492  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with severe nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy 
without macular edema, left eye  
E11.3493  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with severe nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy 
without macular edema, bilateral  
E11.3499  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with severe nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy 
without macular edema, unspecified eye  
E11.3511  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic retinopathy with macular 
edema, right eye  
E11.3512  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic retinopathy with macular 
edema, left eye  
E11.3513  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic retinopathy with macular 
edema, bilateral  
E11.3519  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic retinopathy with macular  
edema, unspecified eye  
E11.3521  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic retinopathy with traction 
retinal detachment involving the macula, right eye  
E11.3522  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic retinopathy with traction 
retinal detachment involving the macula, left eye  
E11.3523  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic retinopathy with traction 
retinal detachment involving the macula, bilateral  
E11.3529  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic retino pathy with traction 
retinal detachment involving the macula, unspecified eye  
E11.3531  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic retinopathy with traction 
retinal detachment not involving the macula, right eye  
E11.3532  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic retinopathy with traction 
retinal detachment not involving the macula, left eye  
E11.3533  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic retinopathy with traction 
retinal detachment not involving the macula, bilateral  
E11.3539  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic retinopathy with traction 
retinal detachment not involving the macula, unspecified eye  
E11.3541  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic retinopathy with 
combined traction retinal detachment and rhegmatogenous retinal 
detachment, right eye  
E11.3542  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic retinopathy with 
combined traction retinal detachment and rhegmatogenous retinal 
detachment, left eye  
 
70 
 E11.3543  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic retinopathy with 
combined traction retinal detachment and rhegmatogenous retinal 
detachment, bilateral  
E11.3549  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic retinopathy with 
combined traction retinal detachment and rhegmatogenous retinal 
detachment, unspecified eye  
E11.3551  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with stable proliferative diabetic retinopathy, right 
eye 
E11.3552  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with stable proliferative diabetic retinopathy, left 
eye 
E11.3553  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with stable proliferative diabetic retinopathy, 
bilateral  
E11.3559  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with stable proliferative diabetic retinopathy, 
unspecified eye  
E11.3591  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic retinopathy without 
macular edema, right eye  
E11.3592  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic retinopathy without 
macular edema, left eye  
E11.3593  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic retinopathy without 
macular edema, bilateral  
E11.359 9 Type 2 diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic retinopathy without 
macular edema, unspecified eye  
E11.36  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with diabetic cataract  
E11.37X1  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with diabetic macular edema, resolved following 
treatment, right eye  
E11.37X2  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with diabetic macular edema, resolved following 
treatment, left eye  
E11.37X3  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with diabetic macular edema, resolved following 
treatment, bilateral  
E11.37X9  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with  diabetic macular edema, resolved following 
treatment, unspecified eye  
E11.39  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with other diabetic ophthalmic complication  
E11.40  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with diabetic neuropathy, unspecified  
E11.41  Type 2 diabetes mellitus wit h diabetic mononeuropathy  
E11.42  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with diabetic polyneuropathy  
E11.43  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with diabetic autonomic (poly)neuropathy   
E11.44  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with diabetic amyotrophy  
E11.49  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with other diabetic neurological complication  
E11.51  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with diabetic peripheral angiopathy without 
gangrene  
E11.52  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with diabetic peripheral angiopathy with gangrene  
E11.59  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with oth er circulatory complications  
 
71 
 E11.610  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with diabetic neuropathic arthropathy  
E11.618  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with other diabetic arthropathy  
E11.620  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with diabetic dermatitis  
E11.621  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with foot ulcer  
E11.622  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with other skin ulcer  
E11.628  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with other skin complications  
E11.630  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with periodontal disease  
E11.638  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with other oral co mplications  
E11.641  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with hypoglycemia with coma  
E11.649  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with hypoglycemia without coma  
E11.65  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with hyperglycemia  
E11.69  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with other specified complication  
E11.8  Type 2 diabetes mellitus with unspecified complications  
E11.9  Type 2 diabetes mellitus without complications  
E13.00  Other specified diabetes mellitus with hyperosmolarity without nonketotic 
hyperglycemic -hyperosmolar coma (NKHHC)  
E13.01  Other specified diabetes mellitus with hyperosmolarity with coma  
E13.10  Other specified diabetes mellitus with ketoacidosis without coma  
E13.11  Other specified diabetes mellitus with ketoacidosis with coma  
E13.21  Other specified diabetes mellitus  with diabetic nephropathy  
E13.22  Other specified diabetes mellitus with diabetic chronic kidney disease  
E13.29  Other specified diabetes mellitus with other diabetic kidney complication  
E13.311  Other specified diabetes mellitus with unspecified diabetic  retinopathy with 
macular edema  
E13.319  Other specified diabetes mellitus with unspecified diabetic retinopathy 
without macular edema  
E13.3211  Other specified diabetes mellitus with mild nonproliferative diabetic 
retinopathy with macular edema, right eye  
E13.3212  Other specified diabetes mellitus with mild nonproliferative diabetic 
retinopathy with macular edema, left eye  
E13.3213  Other specified diabetes mellitus with mild nonproliferative diabetic 
retinopathy with macular edema, bilateral  
E13.3219  Other specified diabetes mellitus with mild nonproliferative diabetic 
retinopathy with macular edema, unspecified eye  
E13.3291  Other specified diabetes mellitus with mild nonproliferative diabetic 
retinopathy without macular edema, right eye  
E13.3292  Other specified diabetes mellitus with mild nonproliferative diabetic 
retinopathy without macular edema, left eye  
E13.3293  Other specified diabetes mellitus with mild nonproliferative diabetic 
retinopathy without macular edema, bilateral  
E13.3299  Other specified diabetes mellitus with mild nonproliferative diabetic 
retinopathy without macular edema, unspecified eye  
 
72 
 E13.3311  Other specified diabetes mellitus with moderate nonproliferative diabetic 
retinopathy with macular edema, right eye  
E13.3312  Other specified diabetes mellitus with moderate nonproliferative diabetic 
retinopathy with macular edema, left eye  
E13.3313  Other specified diabetes mellitus with moderate nonproliferative diabetic 
retinopathy with macular edema, bilateral  
E13.3319  Other specified diabetes mellitus with moderate nonproliferative diabetic 
retinopathy with macular edema, unspecified eye  
E13.3391  Other specified diabetes mellitus with moderate nonproliferative diabetic 
retinopathy without macular edema, right eye  
E13. 3392  Other specified diabetes mellitus with moderate nonproliferative diabetic 
retinopathy without macular edema, left eye  
E13.3393  Other specified diabetes mellitus with moderate nonproliferative diabetic 
retinopathy without macular edema, bilateral  
E13.3399  Other specified diabetes mellitus with moderate nonproliferative diabetic 
retinopathy without macular edema, unspecified eye  
E13.3411  Other specified diabetes mellitus with severe nonproliferative diabetic 
retinopathy with macular edema, right eye  
E13.3412  Other specified diabetes mellitus with severe nonproliferative diabetic 
retinopathy with macular edema, left eye  
E13.3413  Other specified diabetes mellitus with severe nonproliferative diabetic 
retinopathy with macular edema, bilateral  
E13.3419  Other specified diabetes mellitus with severe nonproliferative diabetic 
retinopathy with macular edema, unspecified eye  
E13.3491  Other specified diabetes mellitus with severe nonproliferative diabetic 
retinopathy without macular edema, right eye  
E13.3492  Other specified diabetes mellitus with severe nonproliferative diabetic 
retinopathy without macular edema, left eye  
E13.3493  Other specified diabetes mellitus with severe nonproliferative diabetic 
retinopathy without macular edema, bilateral  
E13.3499  Other specified diabetes mellitus with severe nonproliferative diabetic 
retinopathy without macular edema, unspecified eye  
E13.3511  Other specified diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic retinopathy with 
macular edema, right eye  
E13.3512  Other specified diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic retinopathy with 
macular edema, left eye  
E13.3513  Other specified diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic retinopathy with 
macular edema, bilateral  
E13.3519  Other specified diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic retinopathy with 
macular edema, unspecified eye  
E13.3521  Other specified diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic retinopathy with 
traction retinal detachment involving the macula, right eye  
 
73 
 E13.3522  Other specified diabe tes mellitus with proliferative diabetic retinopathy with 
traction retinal detachment involving the macula, left eye  
E13.3523  Other specified diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic retinopathy with 
traction retinal detachment involving the macula, bilateral  
E13.3529  Other specified diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic retinopathy with 
traction retinal detachment involving the macula, unspecified eye  
E13.3531  Other specified diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic retinopathy with 
traction retinal detachment not involving the macula, right eye  
E13.3532  Other specified diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic retinopathy with 
traction retinal detachment not involving the macula, left eye  
E13.3533  Other specified diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic retinopathy with 
traction retinal detachment not involving the macula, bilateral  
E13.3539  Other specified diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic retinopathy with 
traction retinal detachment not involving the mac ula, unspecified eye  
E13.3541  Other specified diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic retinopathy with 
combined traction retinal detachment and rhegmatogenous retinal 
detachment, right eye  
E13.3542  Other specified diabetes mellitus with proliferati ve diabetic retinopathy with 
combined traction retinal detachment and rhegmatogenous retinal 
detachment, left eye  
E13.3543  Other specified diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic retinopathy with 
combined traction retinal detachment and rhegmatogenous retinal 
detachment, bilateral  
E13.3549  Other specified diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic retinopathy with 
combined traction retinal detachment and rhegmatogenous retinal 
detachment, unspecified eye  
E13.3551  Other specified diabetes mellitus with stable proliferative diabetic 
retinopathy, right eye  
E13.3552  Other specified diabetes mellitus with stable proliferative diabetic 
retinopathy, left eye  
E13.3553  Other specified diabetes mellitus with stable proliferative diabetic 
retinopat hy, bilateral  
E13.3559  Other specified diabetes mellitus with stable proliferative diabetic 
retinopathy, unspecified eye  
E13.3591  Other specified diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic retinopathy 
without macular edema, right eye  
E13.3592  Other s pecified diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic retinopathy 
without macular edema, left eye  
E13.3593  Other specified diabetes mellitus with proliferative diabetic retinopathy 
without macular edema, bilateral  
E13.3599  Other specified diabetes melli tus with proliferative diabetic retinopathy 
without macular edema, unspecified eye  
 
74 
 E13.36  Other specified diabetes mellitus with diabetic cataract  
E13.37X1  Other specified diabetes mellitus with diabetic macular edema, resolved 
following treatment, right  eye 
E13.37X2  Other specified diabetes mellitus with diabetic macular edema, resolved 
following treatment, left eye  
E13.37X3  Other specified diabetes mellitus with diabetic macular edema, resolved 
following treatment, bilateral  
E13.37X9  Other specified diabetes mellitus with diabetic macular edema, resolved 
following treatment, unspecified eye  
E13.39  Other specified diabetes mellitus with other diabetic ophthalmic complication  
E13.40  Other specified diabetes mellitus with diabetic neuropathy, unspecified  
E13.41  Other specified diabetes mellitus with diabetic mononeuropathy  
E13.42  Other specified diabetes mellitus with diabetic polyneuropathy  
E13.43  Other specified diabetes mellitus with diabetic autonomic (poly)neuropathy  
E13.44  Other specified diabetes mellitus with diabetic amyotrophy  
E13.49  Other specified diabetes mellitus with other diabetic neurological 
complication  
E13.51  Other specified diabetes mellitus with diabetic peripheral angiopathy without 
gangrene  
E13.52  Other specified diabetes mellitus with diabetic peripheral angiopathy with 
gangrene  
E13.59  Other specified diabetes mellitus with other circulatory complications  
E13.610  Other specified diabetes mellitus with diabetic neuropathic arthropathy  
E13.618  Other spe cified diabetes mellitus with other diabetic arthropathy  
E13.620  Other specified diabetes mellitus with diabetic dermatitis  
E13.621  Other specified diabetes mellitus with foot ulcer  
E13.622  Other specified diabetes mellitus with other skin ulcer  
E13.628  Other specified diabetes mellitus with other skin complications  
E13.630  Other specified diabetes mellitus with periodontal disease  
E13.638  Other specified diabetes mellitus with other oral complications  
E13.641  Other specified diabetes mellitus with hypoglycemia with coma  
E13.649  Other specified diabetes mellitus with hypoglycemia without coma  
E13.65  Other specified diabetes mellitus with hyperglycemia  
E13.69  Other specified diabetes mellitus with other specified complication  
E13.8  Other specified diabetes mellitus with unspecified complications  
E13.9  Other specified diabetes mellitus without complications  
E8.3299  Diabetes mellitus due to underlying condition with mild nonproliferative 
diabetic retinopathy without macular edema, unspecif ied eye  
O24.410  Gestational diabetes mellitus in pregnancy, diet controlled  
O24.414  Gestational diabetes mellitus in pregnancy, insulin controlled  
 
75 
 O24.415  Gestational diabetes mellitus in pregnancy controlled by oral hypoglycemic 
drugs  
O24.419  Gestational diabetes mellitus in pregnancy unspecified control  
O24.420  Gestational diabetes mellitus in childbirth, diet controlled  
O24.424  Gestational diabetes mellitus in childbirth, insulin controlled  
O24.425  Gestational diabetes mellitus in childbir th, controlled by oral hypoglycemic 
drugs  
O24.429  Gestational diabetes mellitus in childbirth, unspecified control  
O24.430  Gestational diabetes mellitus in the puerperium, diet controlled  
O24.434  Gestational diabetes mellitus in the puerperium, insulin controlled  
O24.435  Gestational diabetes mellitus in the puerperium, controlled by oral 
hypoglycemic drugs  
O24.439  Gestational diabetes mellitus in the puerperium, unspecified control  
 
15.2  
  
 
76 
 15.2  Appendix B. PGx Substudy Gene Description and Evidence  
 
Overview: The PGx sub- study will examine the efficacy of providing genetic information for two gene- drug 
pairs. The first gene- drug pair is YEATS4 and thiazide diuretic efficacy, impacting first -line 
antihypertensive therapy in African Americans. The second gene- drug pair is NAT2  and hydralazine. 
Hydralazine is not first line therapy, but is used in the treatment of resistant hypertension. GUARDD -US 
will include patients with both hypertension and resistant hypertension. Neither gene -drug pair is presently 
recommended by CPIC, but both have significant evidence supporting their relationship in populations 
that include individuals of African ancestry. Given that 83% of the GUARDD -US intervention arm will be 
APOL1  negative, the inclusion of a HTN PGx sub- study  is an economical means of testing a second 
hypothesis.  
Most individuals with hypertension require 2 or more agents to control blood pressure and those with resistant hypertension may require 4 or 5 agents. In contrast to other current PGx recommendations (e.g. 
antidepressants or opioids), antihypertensive agents are often not used in isolation. Thus, 
recommendations need to convey both dosing suggestions and/or relative efficacy to enable a provider 
to efficiently craft a regimen with fewer agents. This is  of even greater importance in individuals with 
resistant hypertension.  
  YEATS4 : 
Evidence: The first gene- drug pair is YEATS4 , predictive of thiazide efficacy in two independent cohorts. 
This gene- drug pair was associated with efficacy of thiazide diuretics (HCTZ) in the GERA and PEAR 
cohorts. It was discovered in a genome wide association of African American GERA patients (ST T urner) 
and later replicated in the PEAR cohort (JD Duarte). The SNP, rs7297610, is an expression quantitative locus of YEATS4 , as expression is associated with both genotype and thiazide therapy. Citations are 
provided below. Although both GERA and PEAR studied HCTZ, we have decided to relay 
recommendations as a class effect (including both HCTZ and chlorthalidone). The rationale for this 
decision include the following: 1) the mechanisms of action are the same, 2) GUARDD -US is a pragmatic 
trial and the inclusion of the class effect enhances future generalizability, and 3) GUARDD -US includes 
individuals with CKD in whom chlorthalidone will be preferentially used by practitioners. We recognize 
hydrochlorothiazide (6- 15 hours) and chlorthalidone (45- 60 hours) each have a very different half -life. 
Overall, we feel the advantages of studying both drugs outweigh the potential heterogeneity. Further, we also note that the YEATS4 SNP is an expression quantitative loci and is anticipated to have a greater 
pharmacodyna mic effect than pharmacokinetic effect.  
Effect size: The effect size of rs7297610 is large. The T allele confers reduced efficacy to thiazide 
diuretics, reducing change in SBP by 3.4 mmHg and change in DBP by 2.5 mmHg. Stated another way, individuals with a TC or TT genotype are expected to have a 9.6 mmHg reduction in SBP in response to 
HCTZ initiation. Individuals with a CC genotype are expected to have a 13.1 mmHg reduction in SBP in response to HCTZ initiation.  
Frequency: The minor allele frequency is ideal for testing effect size. The minor allele frequency of the T allele is ~0.3 with a dominant model for reduced efficacy. This means that approximately ½ of individuals 
(9% TT and 42% CT) would be expected to have reduced efficacy and ½ of individuals (49% CC) would 
 
77 
 be expected to have increased/standard efficacy. Thus, ~1 in 2 individuals would have an actionable 
genotype.  
Recommendation: First line antihypertensive therapy for African Americans presently consists of either a calcium channel blocker or thiazide diuretic. Our recommendation focusses on selection of first line therapy. The PEAR study included HCTZ and atenolol. Beta- blockers are no longer first line 
antihypertensive therapy. Thus, although HCTZ was not directly compared to a CCB in the study, we still 
have evidence that the T allele reduces thiazide efficacy. Thus, we are recommending thiazide or CCB 
use as the first drug in those with a CC genotype, but only a CCB as first -line in those with a T allele. This 
recommendation is pragmatic and straightforward for clinicians. The GUARDD -US trial will help us to test 
the efficacy of this recommendation.  
Our recommendation does not include specific dosing recommendations for thiazide diuretics, only 
relative efficacy recommendations. The rationale for this decision is that there is limited dynamic range of thiazide efficacy (essentially 12.5 mg or 25 mg dosing) and in practice, many clinicians will begin therapy at 25 mg daily. The GERA trial included only one dose, 25 mg. The PEAR trial included a titration protocol, 
so the observed effect is a mix of the 12.5 mg and 25 mg dose. Thus, there is insufficient data to conclude 
a dose- effect relationship.  
  
Goal (Drug Class)  Gene  Genotype  Recommendation  
First Line Therapy  
(Thiazide diuretic)  YEATS4  C/C This individual is predicted to have standard thiazide 
efficacy. Consider use of a thiazide diuretic or calcium 
channel blocker as first line treatment of hypertension.  
First Line Therapy  
(Thiazide diuretic)  YEATS4  TT or TC  This individual is predicted to have reduced thiazide 
efficacy. Consider use of an alternate first line therapy such 
as a calcium channel blocker for treatment of hypertension.  
Resistant Hypertension  
(Hydralazine)  NAT2  *4/*X  This individuals  is predicted to have reduced hydralazine 
efficacy and may require a higher starting dose or an 
alternate agent such as clonidine, spironolactone, or 
doxazosin for resistant hypertension.  
Resistant Hypertension  
(Hydralazine)  NAT2  2 non -*4 
alleles  This ind ividual is predicted to have increased efficacy of 
hydralazine.  
NAT2  Evidence:  
Evidence: The second gene- drug pair selected was NAT2  and hydralazine. Hydralazine is metabolized 
by NAT2 , so poor metabolizers have increased circulating concentrations of hydralazine. In this situation, 
poor metabolizers and slow acetylators terms are synonymous. This relationship was first reported nearly 
 
78 
 50 years ago. PharmGKB presently lists hydralzine- NAT2 as a level 3 recommendation, but there is only 
1 reference cited in PharmGKB. There is actually a preponderance of evidence (21 references) supporting 
the relationship between: 1) metabolizer status to hydralazine PK or blood pressure effect, 2) Metabolizer 
status to genotype, or 3) genotype directly to blood pressure effect. We also identified 3 negative studies, but in each there were limitations (underpowered or included multiple drugs which confounded the effect). Please see the references below. In  summary, the level of evidence for this drug- gene pair could 
potentially support a future CPIC recommendation. NAT2  metabolism is also listed in the FDA drug label 
for hydralazine. The evidence includes data in African ancestry populations and the stronge st effect is 
seen in slow acetylators/poor metabolizers. Based on evidence, it is possible that there is an intermediate phenotype, but the evidence is insufficient to distinguish blood pressure effects in rapid and intermediate 
acetylators.  
Effect size: T he effect size of the acetylator phenotype is large. Poor metabolizers may require a dose 
adjustment of 40% to >100% based on metabolizer status. There is a wide dose prescribing range for 
hydralazine from 10 mg BID to 100 mg TID.  
Frequency: The allele frequency is ideal for testing effect size. In the African American population, 35% are intermediate (1 non- *4 allele) and ~50% are slow acetylators (possessing 2 non -*4 alleles). Thus, ~1 
in 2 individuals would have an actionable genotype.  
Recommendation: Based on the multitude of studies, we are r elaying a climinical implication that poor 
metabolizers may have higher circulating concentrations with increased efficacy or risk for adverse effects. N ormal/rapid metabolizers may require a higher dose of hydralazine or an alternate agent as 
compared to poor metabolizers (slow acetylators)  to achieve equivalent blood pressure control . 
  
Thiazide and YEATS4  evidence 
1.       Shahin MH, Johnson JA. Mechanisms and pharmacogenetic signals underlying thiazide diuretics 
blood pressure response. Curr Opin Pharmacol. 2016 Apr;27:31- 7. PMID: 26874237 
2.       Duarte JD, Turner ST, Tran B, Chapman AB, Bailey KR, Gong Y, Gums JG, Langaee TY, 
Beitelshees AL, Cooper -Dehoff RM, Boerwinkle E, Johnson JA. Association of chromosome 12 locus with 
 
79 
 antihypertensive response to hydrochlorothiazide may involve differential YEATS4 expression. 
Pharmacogenomics J. 2013 Jun;13(3):257- 63. Feb 21. PMID: 22350108  
3.       Turner ST, Bailey KR, Fridley BL, Chapman AB, Schwartz GL, Chai HS, Sicotte H, Kocher JP, 
Rodin AS, Boerwinkle E. Genomic association analysis suggests chromosome 12 locus influencing 
antihypertensive response to thiazide diuretic. Hypertension. 2008 Aug;52(2):359- 65. PMID: 18591461  
  
Hydralazine and NAT2  evidence 
Evidence supporting the relationship of the NAT2  metabolic phenotype to hydralazine efficacy or PK  
1.    Jounela AJ, Pasanen M, Mattila MJ. Acetylator phenotype and the antihypertensive response to 
hydralazine. Acta Med Scand. 1975 Apr;197(4):303- 6. PMID: 1136859. 40% increased hydralazine dose 
needed in fast acetylators for same BP effect.  
2.       Timbrell JA , Harland SJ , Facchini V . Polymorphic acetylation of hydralazine.  Clin Pharmacol Ther.  
1980 Sep;28(3):350- 5. PMID: 7408395. Acetylation status relates to hydralazine metabolism.  
3.       Timbrell JA , Harland SJ. Identification and quantitation of hydrazine in the urine of patients treated 
with hydralazine.  Clin Pharmacol Ther.  1979 Jul;26(1):81- 8. PMID: 445966  
4.       Facchini V , Timbrell JA . Further evidence for an acetylator phenotype difference in the metabolism 
of hydralazine in man.  Br J Clin Pharmacol.  1981 Apr;11(4):345- 51. PMID: 7259927 
5.       Timbrell JA , Harland SJ,  Facchini V . Effect of dose on acetylator phenotype distribution of 
hydralazine.  Clin Pharmacol Ther.  1981 Mar;29(3):337- 43. PMID: 7471604  
6.       Rashid JR 1, Kofi-Tsepko,  Juma FD . Acetylation status using hydralazine in African hypertensives 
at Kenyatta National Hospital.  East Afr Med J.  1992 Jul;69(7):406- 8. PMID: 1396201. Acetylation 
phenotype in African patients determines urinary MTP/hydralazine appearance.  
7.       Shepherd AM , Ludden TM , McNay JL , Lin MS . Hydralazine kinetics after single and repeated oral 
doses.  Clin Pharmacol Ther.  1980 Dec;28(6):804- 11. PMID: 7438695  
8.    Graves DA 1, Muir KT , Richards W , Steiger BW , Chang I , Patel B . Hydralazine dose- response 
curve analysis.  J Pharmacokinet Biopharm.  1990 Aug;18(4):279- 91. PMID: 2231320  
9.    Rowell NP 1, Clark K . The effects of oral hydralazine on blood pressure, cardiac output and 
peripheral resistance with respect to dose, age and acetylator status.  Radiother Oncol.  1990 
Aug;18(4):293- 8. PMID: 2244017.  
10.   Ramsay LE , Silas JH , Ol lerenshaw JD , Tucker GT , Phillips FC , Freestone S . Should the acetylator 
phenotype be determined when prescribing hydralazine for hypertension? Eur J Clin Pharmacol.  
1984;26(1):39- 42. 
11.   Shepherd A , Lin MS , McNay J , Ludden T , M
usgrave G . Determinants of response to intravenous 
hydralazine in hypertension.  Clin Pharmacol Ther.  1981 Dec;30(6):773- 81. 
12.   Shepherd AM , McNay JL , Ludden TM , Lin MS , Musgrave GE . Plasma concentration and acetylator 
phenotype determine response to oral hydralazine.  Hypertension.  1981 Sep- Oct;3(5):580- 5. 
13.   Kalowski S 1, Hua AS , Whitworth JA , Kincaid -Smith P . Hydrallazine with beta- blocker and diuretic in 
the treatment of hypertension. A double- blind crossover study.  Med J Aust.  1979 Oct 20;2(8):439- 40. 
14.   Zacest R , Koch -Weser J . Relation of hydralazine plasma concentration to dosage and hypotensive 
action.  Clin Pharmacol Ther.  1972 May -Jun;13(3):420- 5. 
 
80 
   
 
Evidence supporting the relationship of NAT2  metabolic phenotype and genotype (could include other drugs as 
well) 
1.       Al-Ahmad MM 1, Amir N 1, Dhana sekaran S 1, John A 2, Abdulrazzaq YM 3, Ali BR 2, Bastaki S 1. 
Studies on N -Acetyltransferase (NAT2) Genotype Relationships in Emiratis: Confirmation of the Existence 
of Phenotype Variation among Slow Acetylators.  Ann Hum Genet.  2017 Sep;81(5):190- 196. PMID: 
28653770  
2.       Hein DW 1, Doll MA . Accuracy of various human NAT2 SNP genotyping panels to infer rapid, 
intermediate and slow acetylator phenotypes.  Pharmacogenomics.  2012 Jan;13(1):31- 41. doi: 
10.2217/pgs.11.122. Epub 2011 Nov 17. PMID: 22092036  
3.       S uarez -Kurtz G, Vargens DD, Sortica VA, Hutz MH. Accuracy of NAT2 SNP genotyping panels to 
infer acetylator phenotypes in African, Asian, Amerindian and admixed populations. Pharmacogenomics 
13(8), 851 –854 (2012). PMID: 22676187  
4.       Aklillu E 1, Carrillo JA 2, Makonnen E 3, Bertilsson L4, Djordjevic N 5. N-Acetyltransferase- 2 (NAT2) 
phenotype is influenced by genotype- environment interaction in Ethiopians.  Eur J Clin Pharmacol.  2018 
Jul;74(7):903- 911 PMID: 29589062  
5.       Others  
6.       Patin E 1, Barreiro LB , Sabeti PC , Austerlitz F , Luca F , Sajantila A , Behar DM , Semino O , 
Sakuntabhai A , Guiso N , Gicquel B , McElreavey K , Harding RM , Heyer E , Quintana- Murci L .  Deciphering 
the ancient and complex evolutionary history of human arylamine N -acetyltransferase genes.  Am J Hum 
Genet.  2006 Mar;78(3):423- 36. Epub 2006 Jan 13. PMID: 16416399  
 Evidence supporting the relationship of genotype to antihypertensive efficacy of hydralazine or metabolism.  
1.       Spinasse LB1, Santos AR, Suffys PN, Muxfeldt ES, Salles GF. PMID: 24444407. 
Pharmacogenomics. 2014 Feb;15(2):169- 78.  Different phenotypes of the NAT2 gene influences 
hydralazine antihypertensive response in patients with resistant hypertension. PMID: 24444407 Clinical 
Trial in Brazilian population assessing HTN response by NAT2 genotype  
2.    Garcés -Eisele SJ 1, Cedillo -Carvallo B , Reyes -Núñez V , Estrada- Marín L,  Vázquez -Pérez R , 
Juárez-C 
alderón M , Guzmán -García MO , Dueñas- González A , Ruiz-Argüelles A . Genetic selection of 
volunteers and concomitant dose adjustment leads to comparable hydralazine/valproate exposure.  J Clin 
 
81 
 Pharm Ther.  2014 Aug;39(4):368- 75. PMID: 24702251. Mexican PK study showing >100% dose increase 
required for same AUC.  
3.    Allen CE N -Acetyltransferase 2 Genotype- Dependent N -Acetylation of Hydralazine in Human 
Hepatocytes.  Drug Metab Dispos.  2017 Dec;45(12):1276- 1281. PMID: 29018032  
  
Other evidence/Gene summary:  
1.    McDonagh EM, Boukouvala S, Aklillu E, Hein DW, Altman RB, Klein TE. PharmGKB summary: 
very important pharmacogene information for N -acetyltransferase 2. Pharmacogenet Genomics. 2014 
Aug;24(8):409- 25. PMID: 24892773  
2.       BIDIL (hydralazine hydrochloride and isosorbide dinitrate) tablet, film coated. Arbor 
Pharmaceuticals, Inc; [Accessed 26th March 2013. .]. Drug label available from. http://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/lookup.cfm?setid=e1e63cd5- d1e4 -4af5- bad5- 1ad41ea46b00.  
3.       Hydralazine FDA drug label,  
https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/1996/008303s068lbl.pdf  
4.    Gonzalez -Fierro A, Vasquez -Bahena D, Taja- Chayeb L, Vidal S, Trejo- Becerril C, Pérez -
Cardenas E, de la Cruz -Hernández E, Chávez -Blanco A, Gutiérrez O, Rodriguez D, Fernandez Z, 
Duenas- González A. Pharmacokinetics of hydralazine, an antihypertensive and DNA -demethylating 
agent, using c ontrolled- release formulations designed for use in dosing schedules based on the acetylator 
phenotype. Int J Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2011 Aug; 49(8):519- 24. 
5.    Candelaria M, Gallardo- Rincón D, Arce C, Cetina L, Aguilar -Ponce JL, Arrieta O, González -Fierro 
A, Chávez -Blanco A, de la Cruz -Hernández E, Camargo MF, Trejo- Becerril C, Pérez -Cárdenas E, Pérez -
Plasencia C, Taja- Chayeb L, Wegman- Ostrosky T, Revilla- Vazquez A, Dueñas -González A. A phase II 
study of epigenetic therapy with hydralazine and magnesium val proate to overcome chemotherapy 
resistance in refractory solid tumors. Ann Oncol. 2007 Sep; 18(9):1529- 38. 
  
Negative studies of Hydralazine: 
6.       M J Vandenburg,  P Wright , J Holmes,  H J Rogers , and  R A Ahmad . The hypotensive response to 
hydralazine, in triple therapy, is not related to acetylator phenotype.  Br J Clin Pharmacol . 1982 May; 13(5): 
747–750. 
7.       Hunyor SN . Hydrallazine and beta- blockade in refractory hypertension with characterization of 
acetylator phenotype.  Aust N Z J Med.  1975 Dec;5(6):530- 6. 
8.       Ludden TM , Shepherd AM , McNay JL Jr , Lin MS . Effect of intravenous dose on hydralazine kinetics 
after administration.  Clin Pharmacol Ther.  1983 Aug;34(2):148- 52. 
 
 
 