Testing  the Efficacy  of FFC-AC-EIT in Patients  with Alzheimer’s  Disease  and 
Related  Dementias   
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Date:   1/20/2019  
 
  
Protocol  
 
Design : To achieve  our Aims  we will use a cluster  randomized  clinical  trial randomizing  
hospitals  to prevent  treatment  contamination  that might  occur  if we randomized  units  or patients  
within  units.   
 
Sample  and Setting:  Twelve  hospitals  (six in Maryland  and six in Pennsylvania)  will be 
randomized  to treatment  (FFC -AC-EIT) or Education -Only (EO)  using  permuted -block  
randomization  and 50 patients  per hospital  will be recruited  (total  600 participants).   The 
hypotheses  for Aim 1 efficacy  testing  include:  Patient  level: Hypothesis  1: At discharge,  
hospitalized  patients  with ADRD  on units  in which  FFC-AC-EIT is implemented  will increase  
time in physical  activity;  maintain  or improve  function;  perform  more  function  focused  care 
activities;  have  less incidence  and severity  of delirium;  have less evidence  of BPSD;  have  less 
pain;  have  fewer  falls; have  fewer  tethers;  and shorter  length  of stays  compared  to those  
exposed  to EO; Hypothesis  2:  Patients  on units  in which  FFC-AC-EIT is implemented  will 
maintain  or increase  time spent  in physical  activity;  maintain  or improve  function;  have  less 
incidence  and severity  of delirium;  have  less evidence  of BPSD;  have  less pain;  and have  
fewer  falls; fewer  emergency  room  visits;  fewer  unplanned  re-hospitalizations;  and fewer  new 
admissions  to long term care at 1, 6 and 12 months  post discharge  when  compared  to those  
exposed  to EO. 
Randomization  Plan:  The level of engagement  required  for the intervention  prevents  random  
assignment  at the patient  level as patients  could  become  aware  of differential  treatment  within  
the same  unit in the same  hospital  and there  is the risk of carry -over of treatment  by staff.   Thus,  
after hospitals  are recruited  they will be randomized  to cohort  (See  Study  Timeline)  and 
randomly  assigned  to treatment  so that the hospital  will receive  either  FFC-AC-EIT or EO. 
Random  assignment  will be completed  by the statistician  using  SAS proc plan which  allows  for 
simultaneous  randomization  on multiple  dimensions  (time  and hospitals).  In prior research  we 
noted  no differences  in implementation  of function  focused  care based  on facility  related  
factors111,137. We recognize , however,  that hospital  differences  may exist and will be controlled  
for in the analysis  (e.g.,bed  size, ownership) .  
 
Sample  Size:  Sample  size calculation  was based  on prior research  and our primary  focus  
which  is on physical  activity  and function12,14,15,33 ,106. For primary  patient  level outcomes,  
function  based  on the Barthel  Index  resulted  in a Cohen’s  d=.24, for physical  activity  the 
Cohen’s  d=.37, and for participation  in function  focused  care by patients  Cohen’s  d=.31.  The 
impact  on tethering,  a secondary  outcome,  was noted  to have  a Cohen’s  d= .61.  Given  a two-
tailed  alpha  of .05, an estimated  intra-class  correlation  coefficient  (ICC)  between  clusters  
(hospitals)  of .02, a correlation  coefficient  between  repeated  measures  of .60, and assuming  
even  dispersion  of means,  a total sample  of 360 patients  will provide  sufficient  power  (>.80)  to 
detect  a small  effect  size (d=.24)138 in primary  patient  level outcomes.   Our prior research  
showed  an attrition  rate of 5-40% over a 12- month  period.   Therefore,  we anticipate  that a total 
of 600 patients  from 12 hospitals  (50 patients  per hospital)  will be sufficient  to demonstrate  
outcomes.   With regard  to hospital  level outcomes,  our prior work  resulted  in effect  sizes  of 0.9 
for environment  and policy  changes15,33,106,139. With the proposed  sample  size of 12 hospitals  the 
statistical  power  for these  measures  will be adequate  (.90 for both outcomes  based  on our 
analysis  plan).    
 
Setting s: Hospitals  will be invited  to participate  if they:  (a) have  at least  one unit dedicated  to 
general  medical  patients;  (b) identify  two registered  nurses  (RN) to be champion s (one for day 
and one for evening  shifts) ; (c) enable staff to access  email  and websites  via a phone,  tablet  or 
computer ; and (d) do not have  a geriatric  program  (e.g.,  Acute  Care  for Elders,  Hospital  for 
Elder  Life Program/  HELP)  on the study  units . We will implement  FFC-AC-EIT in 6 hospitals  (on 
the medical  unit) and EO in 6 hospitals  (on the medical  unit) across  Maryland  and Pennsylvania.  
(See  support  letters  and Facilities  and Resources  section) .   
 
Patient  Participants : Patients  will be eligible  to participate  if they:  (a) are admitted  into the 
hospital  from any setting  during  the 12 month  implementation  period;  (b) are 65 years  of age or 
older;  (c) are admitted  onto a medical  unit for any medical  diagnosis;  and (d) screen  positive  for 
dementia  based  on two well-validated  scales:  a score  of ≤ 25 on the Montreal  Cognitive  
Assessment  (MoCA)  and a score  of >2 on the AD8 Dementia  Screening  Interview140-143; have  
mild to moderate  stage  dementia  based  a score  of 0.5 to 2.0 on the Clinical  Dementia  Rating  
Scale  (CDR)144; and lastly  to differentiate  between  dementia  and mild cognitive  impairment  
eligibility  is based  on evidence  of functional  impairment  with a score  of 9 or greater  on the 
Functional  Activities  Questionnaire  (FAQ)145.  The AD8,  CDR  and FAQ are all completed  by an 
informant  and all screening  measures  are reliable  and valid and accurately  differentiate  those  
with and without  dementia.  Patients  will be excluded  if they:  (1) are enrolled  in Hospice;  (2) have  
been  on the unit for greater  than 48 hours;  (3) do not have  a family  member/caregiver  that we 
can contact;  (4) anticipate  surgery;  or (5) have  a major  acute  psychiatric  disorder,  or significant  
neurological  condition  associated  with cogniti on other  than dementia . 
The intervention  activities  continue  for a 12 month  period  and we will recruit  patients  from 
the units  starting  at intervention  month  3 and following  completion  of steps  1 and 2 of FFC-AC-
EIT (following  evaluation  of the environment  and policies  and staff education)  and following  
education  in the EO settings.  In prior researc h we have  noted  changes  in staff behavior  
following  the first two months  of implementation  of function  focused  care approaches39,111,115,130 
therefore  we initiate  recruitment  following  this implementation  period.  We will obtain  information  
about  eligible  patients  from a designated  staff member  and will recruit  50 patients  over the 
remaining  10 months  of the 12 month  intervention.  We estimate  that approximately  7 to 8 
patients  per week  will be eligible  for the study.   Based  on our past recruitment  activity12,14 we will 
be able to enroll  1-2 patients  per week  which  will meet  our goal of approximately  5 patients  per 
month.   This will assure  that patient  recruitment  is spread  over the entire  intervention  period  and 
is similar  across  all settings.  Participants  will be evaluated  to determine  their ability  to self-
consent  using  the Evaluation  to Sign Consent  questionnaire146.   If they do not correctly  respond  
to all five questions,  verbal  or written  assent  will be obtained  and the Legally  Authorized  
Representative  will complete  the consent  process  (see Human  Subjects  section).   
 
The Implementation  of FFC-AC-EIT:  
 
FFC-AC-EIT is implemented  by a Research  Nurse  Facilitator  working  with the stakeholder  
team  and unit champions  for 10 hours  weekly  during  months  one and two and then for four 
hours  weekly  starting  in month  three  for a total of 12 months.  Timing  of the intervention  activities  
will be flexible  based  on the needs  of the unit (e.g.,  times  that work  best for champions  and 
Research  Nurse  Facilitator  to meet).   The first meeting  with the stakeholder  team  will be 1-2 
hours  and the remaining  meetin gs will be approximately  30 minutes  monthly  to update  the 
stakeholders  on progress  and any challenges  associated  with implementation  of FFC-AC-EIT 
(Table  1). The majority  of the time on the unit by the Research  Nurse  Facilitator  will be spent  
with the cham pions  helping  and assuring  that they are engaging  staff in function  focused  care 
activities  via the four steps  of FFC-AC-EIT (Table  1).  Once  hospitals  are randomized  we will set 
up a time to meet  with the identified  contact  to determine  the stakeholder  team members  and 
champions  and organize  the first stakeholder  team  meeting.   All FFC-AC-EIT related  activities  
will be coordinated  during  scheduled  working  hours  for the stakeholders.  The first meeting  will 
provide  an overview  of the implementation  of Steps  1 to 4 [(1) Environment  and Policy  
Assessments;  (2) Education;  (3) Establishing  Patient  Goals ; and (4) Mentoring  and Motivating  of 
Staff, Patients  and Families]  and will address  the unit challenges  to implementing  function  
focused  care using  a Brainstorming  approach  (Table  1). Brainstorming  involves  having  
stakeholders  identif y the challenges  to engaging  patients  with ADRD  in function  focused  care 
activities  during  their hospital  stay.  We then complete  Affinity  Diagramming  by cluster ing the 
ideas  identifi ed during  brainstorming  into themes.   Once  themes  are developed,  an 
Interrelationship  Diagraph147,148 will be made  to determine  which  of the identified  themes  is the 
best or strongest  driver.  Drivers  are established  by having  participants  consider  how each  
theme  is connected  to the other  themes.   For example,  does  staff knowledge  about  BPSD  
influence  function .  The theme  with the most  arrows  going  away  from it is referred  to as the 
"driver"  or root cause.   If there  are multiple  themes  with the same  number  of arrows  going  out of 
them,  they can be considered  as equally  important.  The best driver,  or the root cause,  is the 
theme  that is most  likely  to have  an impact  on why function  focused  care approaches  are not 
implemented  on the unit and will guide  the stakeholder  group  in goal identification.   
Table  1: Content  for First  FFC-AC-EIT Meeting  With  the Stakeholder  Team   
Introduction  and 
Overview  of FFC-
AC-EIT a. Overview  of project;  b. Roles  and responsibilities  of research  and stakeholder  teams;  c. 
Background  support  for FFC-AC-EIT: 1. Review  of current  care practices/philosophies  of 
care;  2. Task  and disease  focused  versus  patient  focused  care;  3. Optimizing  function  and 
physical  activity  in acute  care:   identification  of and solutions  to challenges  identified;  d. 
Evaluation  of the multilevel  context  that influences  implementation  of FFC-AC-EIT per unit, 
Brainstorming  Activity  to identify  unit drivers  and unit goals.  
Implementation  of 
Steps  1 and 2 in 
the four step 
process  
 a. Training  to complete  Step  1 Environment  and Policy  Assessments : Review  of the 
Environment  and Policy  Assessments  (Appendix  A): Assessments  are used  to identify  need  
for changes  in environment s and policies  to optimize  function  and safe physical  activity  of 
patients  with ADRD  (e.g.,  open  areas  for walking).  Introduce  as policy  the use of the Mobility  
Screen  and Nursing  Progressive  Mobility  Tool to guide  nurses  in setting  patient  goals ; b. 
Training  to complete  Step  2 Education : Review  educational  materials  for staff,  patients  as 
relevant,  and families,  which  have  been  developed  by the research  team12,15 and establish  a 
plan for staff education  sessions  that will assure  optimal  staff participation  (e.g.,  webinar,  
face to face).  Developed  education  materials  include  powerpoints  and printed  materials  for 
staff training,  patients  (as relevant)  and families/caregivers  about  optimizing  function  and 
physical  activity  during  hospital  and post hospital  periods.    
Implementation  of 
Steps  3 and 4 in 
the 4-step process   a. Training  to complete  Step  3 Establishing  Patient  Physical  Activity  Goals : 1. 
Demonstration  of use of the Mobility  Screen  and the Nursing  Progressive  Mobility  Tool149,150. 
These  tools  have  established  evidence  of reliability  and validity  and have  been  used  
previously  to establish  patient  goals149,150,151. 2.  Demonstrate  goal development  for patients  
using  the Mobility  Screen  and the Nursing  Progressive  Mobility  Tool and discuss  ways  for 
staff to help patients  achieve  goals  (e.g.,  provide  chairs  in the rooms;  age appropriate  
weights;  cueing;  use of recreation  activities  that encourage  physical  activity) ; b. Training  to 
complete  Step  4 Mentoring  and Motivating  Staff,  Patients,  and Families : 1. Review  self-
efficacy  techniques  (e.g.,  verbal  encouragement)  that are effective  for patients  with ADRD  
and staff; 2. Demonstrate  for champions  how to complete  the Nurse  Checklist  for Function  
Focused  Care  and direct  them  to complete  this with nurses  at 0-2, 4-6, and 10-12 months  
post implementation  of FFC-AC-EIT and provide  feedback  to the nurse  (e.g.,  positive  
reinforcement ; education);  review  plans  to view and use weekly  email  Tidbits  which  are 
innovative  ideas  emailed  about  ways  to engage  staff and patients  in function  focused  care 
activities,  ways  to prevent  and manage  delirium  and BPSD .  
Summary  of 
Training  Day  a. Discussion  of ways  the stakeholder  team  will work  with the champions  and Research  
Nurse  Facilitator  and establish  times  for monthly  meetings ; c. Opportunity  for questions;  d. 
Review  of timeline  of project.  
In the first two months  the Research  Nurse  Facilitator  complete s the environment  and policy  
assessments  with the champions  and implement s appropriate  changes  on the units  (e.g.,  
clearing  hallways  and making  them  pleasant  and safe,  assuring  that there  are places  to sit in 
the rooms ) and plans and provide s staff education  and makes  available  information  for patients  
and families/  caregivers.  The education  reviews  function  focused  care,  the benefits  of physical  
activity  for patients  with ADRD , ways  to evaluate,  prevent,  and manage  delirium  and BPSD,  
focuses  on elimination  of entrenched  and inaccurate  practices  such  as unnecessary  tethering  of 
patients  with pulse  oximetry97, completion  of the Mobility  Screen  and establishment  of patient  
physical  activity  goals  using  the Nursing  Progressive  Mobility  Tool,  and use of motivational  
techniques  to engage  patients  with ADRD  in physical  activity  during  all care interactions  without  
exacerbating  BPSD.  Ongoing  work  between  the champions  and the Research  Nurse  Facilitator  
focus es on motivating  staff and patients  to work  toward  achievement  of patient  goals and 
established  unit goals .   
The stakeholder  team will continue  to meet  with the Research  Nurse  Facilitator  monthly  
(approximately  30 minutes)  over the 12-month  intervention  period  to review  progress  and to 
help champions  overcome  any identified  multilevel  challenges  (Figure  1). We will keep  minutes  
of these  meetings  to describe  the implementation  process  on the unit in each  hospital . This 
cyclic  feedback  pattern  of review  of progress  and challenges  will help guide  staff intervention  
activities  to best respond  to contextual  changes  on the unit and in the hospital  over time.  In 
addition  to monthly  visits,  weekly  emails  containing  motivational  Tidbits  will be sent to all 
stakeholder  team members  within  the cohort . The Tidbits  include  such  things  as: updates  about  
benefits  of engaging  patients  with ADRD  in physical  activity  while  hospitalized;  information  to 
support  de-implementation  of entrenched  and inaccurate  practices(e.g.,  support  for removal  of 
tethers)97,98,152; symptom  management  (e.g.,  management  of pain and BPSD);  prevention  and 
identification  of delirium;  motivation  techniques  such  as using  patients’  prior work  life or leisure  
activities  to serve  as a source  of motivation  to engage  in physical  activities153; and motivational  
contests  for nurses  (e.g.,  reward  for the nurse  who provides  the most  innovative  approach  to 
engaging  a patient  in bathing,  dressing,  or ambulating).  To further  facilitate  implementation  we 
will give each  treatment  site: 1) a 100 dollar  gift certificate  from Nasco  (Nasco.com)  to buy 
supplies  for the unit to engage  patients  with ADRD  in physical  activities  (e.g.,  age-appropriate  
weights;  soft horseshoe  toss game ); 2) 1000  dollars  at the end of the study  for each  champion  
to attend  a conference  and submit  an abstract  focused  on optimizing  function  and physical  
activity  of hospitalized  older  adults  with ADRD.  
 
Education  Only (EO)  Control  Intervention:  Hospitals  randomized  to EO will be provided  with an 
in-service  for nursing  staff on function  focused  care in patients  with ADRD  by an EO Research  
Nurse  Facilitator  using  our developed  PowerPoint  presentations  in 30-minute  sessions  as is 
currently  done  in usual  practice .  We will provide  the education  in the preferred  format  (e.g.,  
face-to-face;  webinar).   No further  interaction  with the staff or the units  will occur.  We recognize  
that there  will be differences  in time exposure  to the Research  Nurse  Facilitators  but we are 
deliberately  testing  two different  approaches  to implementation  of function  focused  care on 
hospital  units  with older  adults  with ADRD  (FFC -AC-EIT versus  EO). Time/exposure  to the 
Research  Nurse  Facilitators  is part of the approach  and we will consider  exposure  time 
differences  between  the treatments.   
 
Hospital  descriptive  data: The following  data will be obtained  at baseline  to describe  the 
hospitals  and consider  confounders:  state;  bed size; ownership  status;  urban  or rural; MagnetTM 
Status ; teaching  status .   
Unit descriptive  data:  We will obtain  staff/patient  ratios and mix (registered , licensed  practical  
nurses , and nursing  assistants ) at baseline,  6, 12 and 18 months  and bed size.  
Patient  descriptive  data:   Data  will include  age, race,  sex, cognitive  status  based  on the 
MoCA140,141, marital  status,  education,  admission  diagnos is, admission  living  situation,  the 
Cumulative  Illness  Rating  Scale  (CIRS)154, medications,  length  of stay,  and discharge  location  
and living  location  at each  follow  up period.   
 
Measures  for Aim 1 (Appendix  A): Bolded  measures  are based  on subjective  data from 
informants  (nurse /family);  other  measures  are completed  by evaluators  based  on observation  or 
chart  abstracting.  Environment  and policy  assessments  are completed  by evaluators  who are 
blind  to randomization.  
 
Efficacy  Data  (see hypotheses  1-5 above) :  
 
For patients :  Barthel  Index  (BI)155 will be used  to evaluate  function.  The BI is a 10 item 
measure  of ability  to perform  activities  of daily living  (e.g.,  bathing,  dressing)  with evidence  of 
internal  consistency  (alpha  coefficients  .62-.80), inter-rater reliability  (r=.89)  and validity  based  
on correlations  with the Functional  Inventory  Measure  (r=.97)155.  Items  are weighted  to account  
for the amount  of assistance  required.   A total score  of 100 indicates  complete  independence.  
The Physical  Activity  Survey  33,156 is a subjective  measure  of time spent  in physical  activit ies 
over 24 hours based  on input  from an informant .  Activities  include  locomotion  (e.g.,  walking, 
wheelchair  mobility),  personal  care (e.g.,  bathing) , structured  exercise  (e.g.,  physical  and 
occupational  therapy) , recreational  activity  (music),  and repetitive  behavior  (moving  objects  
repeatedly) .  Prior  use of the measure  provided  evidence  of criterion -related  validity  (r=.55  -.60, 
p<.05)  and inter-rater reliability  (r=.82  -.94, p<.05)33,156. The MotionWatch  8 (only  obtained  
during  hospitalization)  is a compact,  lightweight,  wrist-worn  activity  monitoring  device  used  to 
document  physical  movement.  The MotionWatch  8 contains  a miniature  accelerometer  to allow  
measurement  and recording  of physical  movement  of the wrist which  provides  a close  
correlation  to whole  body  movement.  Reliability,  validity,  and cutpoints  for different  levels  of 
activity  have  been  established  for older  adults157.  We will place  the MotionWatch  8 on at 
baseline  and leave  this on till discharge  so that we can capture  baseline  activities  (the first 24 
hours  of measurement),  mean  daily activity  while  hospitalized  and discharge  activities  (the 24 
hours  prior to discha rge).  Specifically  we will collect  counts  of activity  and time spent  in 
sedentary,  moderate,  and vigorous  activity  during  these  time periods.   Patient Checklist for 
Function Focused Care (only completed during  hospitalization)  is a 19-item measure in which 
nurse -patient interactions are evaluated over a 30 minute period to determine if the patient 
performs function focused care (e.g., participates in bathing  at his or her highest level ).  Patients 
either do or do not perform the activity  (e.g., patient refuses to perform) .  If the item/activity is 
not observed it is marked as not observed.  Percentage scores are calculated based on function 
focused care performed/observed activities. Prior testing supported inter -rater reliability (r  =.92) 
and validity based on correlations with function (r  =.89)158. Delirium occurrence  will be based  on 
structured  interview s consisting  of questions  from the MoCA140,141 first to establish  if there  is 
evidence  of cognitive  impairment  and then the Confusion  Assessment  Method  (CAM)  to 
establish  if there  is delirium151. A review  of studies  testing  the psychometric  properties  of the 
CAM  noted  that in seven  high quality  studies  there  was an overall  sensitivity  of 94% (95%  
confidence  interval,  CI, 91–97%),  and specificity  of 89% (95%  CI, 85–94%)159 and evidence  of 
inter-rater reliability160. Delirium  severity  will be determined  based  on the Delirium  Rating  Scale  
which  is a 10 item scale  that is completed  by an informant161.  Prior  testing  supported  the validity  
of this measure  based  on differentiation  of delirium  among  different  groups  of patients  and 
reliability  based  on inter-rater reliability  (r=.97).  Scores  can range  from 0-26 with higher  scores  
indicative  of more  sever e delirium.  BPSD will be evaluated  using  the Brief  Neuropsychiatric  
Inventory  (NPI-Q)162 which  is a 12-item,  reliable  and valid informant -based  assessment  of 
neuropsychiatric  symptoms . Each  of the 12 NPI-Q domains  contains  a survey  question  that 
reflects  symptoms  of that domain  and if present  then severity  is rated  (symptoms  include  
resistance  to care,  apathy,  anxiety,  depression,  motor  disturbance , disinhibition,  agitation,  sleep  
issues,  hallucinations , and delusions) .  The informant  (nurse/caregiver)  providing  care to the 
patient  on the day of testing  will be asked  to respond  to the items  based  on the past 24 hours.   
Prior  testing  has established  evidence  of validity  of the measure  with a sensitivity  of 74% and 
specificity  of 80% and test retest  reliability  (r=.99)163. Pain will be evaluated  using  the Pain 
Assessment  in Advanced  Dementia  (PAINAD)164.  The PAINAD  includes  5 behaviors  that are 
commonly  noted  among  individuals  with pain.  Observations  will be done,  as recommended,  
during  periods  of activity  such  as transferring  or ambulating.  Scoring  ranges  from 0 to 2 for each  
specific  pain behavior.  A total score  of 1-3 is indicative  of mild pain, 4-6 is moderate  pain and 7-
10 is severe  pain.   Prior  testing  provided  evidence  of inter-rater-reliability  (kappa=.74)  and 
concurrent  validity  (p<.001)165. Tethering:  Tethering  of patients  will be based  on chart  review  of 
orders  for:  indwelling  urinary  catheters,  sequential  compression  devices,  continuous  
intravenous,  bed/chair  alarms,  cardiac  monitoring  and pulse  oximetry , physical  restraints,  
bedrest  orders  or negative  pressure  wound  therapy  devices.   The total number  of tethers  will be 
calculated.  Patient Falls  will be based  on chart  review  and documentation  of the falls that occur  
during  the acute  care stay.   Post hospitalization  falls will be based  on informant  recall  of number  
of falls during  the course  of the follow  up period  (discharge  to 1 month;  2-6 months ; and 7-12 
months  post discharge).  Emergency  room  visits,  unplanned  re-hospitalizations,  and new 
long  term  care admissions  will be based  on informant  recall  at follow  up (discharge  to 1 
month;  2-6 months;  and 7-12 months  post discharge) . 
For hospitals : Environment  Assessment  includes  18 items  that have  an impact  on engaging  
patients  in function  and physical  activity15,166. Examples  of items  include  evidence  of having  
clear  pathways;  pleasant  areas  to walk;  pleasant  destinations  to walk to; safe footwear;  
appropriate  height  of chairs  and beds  to facilitate  transfers.   Items  are scored  as present  or not 
present  and summed.  There  was prior evidence  of inter-rater reliability  (r=.89)  and validity  
based  on hypothesis  testing  and prior evidence  of change  in environments  following  exposure  
to FFC-AC15,33,166.  Policy  Assessment  includes  15 items  that reflect  policies  that support  
engaging  patients  in function  and physical  activity  and support  dementia  friendly  
environments15,33,166,167. Examples  of items  include  evidence  of policies  around  use of restraints , 
indwelling  urinary  catheters , and ambulation  on the unit.  Items  are scored  as present  or not 
present  and summed.  There  was prior evidence  of inter-rater reliability  (r=.84)  and validity  
based  on evidence  of improvement  in policies  to optimize  function  and physical  activity  following  
exposure  to FFC-AC15,33,166.   
 
Data  Analysis :  
 
Efficacy  (see hypotheses  1-3 above) :   
Descriptive  statistics  including  measures  of central  tendency,  dispersion  and appropriate  
visualization  approaches  (e.g.,  box plots  and spaghetti  plots)  will be performed  on each  
outcome  variable  for patients  and hospitals .  This will be done  to ascertain  distributional  
characteristics  and ensure  that the assumptions  (e.g.,  normality)  associated  with the planned  
statistical  procedures  are met. When  necessary,  transformations  will be performed.  All analyses  
will be done  using an intent -to-treat philosophy.   Baseline  characteristics  (both  patient  and 
setting  levels) will be compared  between  intervention  and control  groups  and the relevant  
variables  (e.g.,  age) that differ  by group  will be included  as covariates  in hypotheses  testing.  In 
particular , we will control  for the variables  that correlate  with function  and physical  activity  
including  sex, comorbidities  and cognitive  impairment.  Linear  mixed  models  (LMMs)170 for 
longitudinal  data (admission , discharge,  1, 6 and 12 months)  will be used  to assess  the 
intervention  effect  on continuous  outcomes  (e.g., physical  activity,  function,  and length  of stay) 
accounting  for clustering  of patients  that may occur  within  the same  hospital  and for correlations  
between  repeated  measurements  of each  patient .  Generalized  Linear  Mixed  Model  (GLMM)  
analyses  will be conducted  to assess  the effect  of the intervention  on count  outcomes  (e.g.,  
falls)  or binary  outcomes  (e.g.,  readmission  or not). The fixed  effects  included  in the models  will 
be treatment  group  (FFC-AC-EIT versus  EO), time (admission,  discharge,  1, 6, and 12 months  
post discharge  for patients  depending  on the time points  when  the effects  are evaluated) , group -
by-time interaction  term and the aforementioned  relevant  covariates , such  as age, sex, race,  
staffing,  hospital  size etc., identified  from the baseline  analyses  will be included  in the mixed  
model  to adjust  for their influences.  Random  effects  will include  hospitals  and patients . The 
hypothese s will be tested  by evaluating  the interaction  term for each  outcome  variable.   For 
each  hypothesis,  exploratory  analyses  will be performed  to assess  model  assumptions.   Post-
analysis  diagnostic  measures  (e.g.,  residuals)  will be explored  to assess  model  fit.  All tests  will 
use a 5% significance  level.   The use of LMM  will provide  flexibility  with regard  to assumptions  
related  to the covariance  structure  of the residuals  and the presence  of missing  data for the 
repeated  measures171.  As secondary  analyses,  we will also consider  three -way interactive  
effects  among  demographic  variables  of interest  (e.g.,  sex, age),  and treatment  condition,  and 
time to identify  moderators  of the treatment  effects.   All of the Research  Nurse  Facilitato rs are 
women  so we do not anticipate  an effect  of sex on outcomes.   Generalized  estimating  equation  
(GEE)  models  will be used  to compare  changes  in hospital  level measures  (i.e., environments,  
policies)  (Hypothesis  3) from baseline  to 6,12,  and 18 months  as GEE  is more  robust  than 
LMMs  when  the sample  size is relatively  small  (n=12)172. 
Missing  data.  In prior research  we had a 5-40% rate of attrition  at the patient  level and 0% at 
the hospital  level12,33.  If there  is significant  dropout,  we will identify  baseline  characteristics  that 
differ  between  persons  or hospitals  that drop out. Maximum  likelihood  methods  will be used  for 
primary  analyses,  which  address  non-informative  dropout  [missing  at random  (MAR) ]. If 
"informative"  dropout  is present , we will consider  sensitivity  analyses  that add these  relevant  
baseline  covariates  to make  the MAR  assumption  more  plausible173.  
 