PROTOCOL TITLE:  Exercise and markers of medial temporal health in youth at ultra high -
risk for psychosis, Phase 2   
 Page 1 of 58 Revis ed Template : October  19th, 2021  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Exercise and markers of medial temporal health in youth at ultra 
high -risk for psychosis, Phase 2   
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:  
Name  Vijay Anand Mittal  
Northwestern University  
Psychology, Swift Hall 102, 2029 Sheridan Road, Evanston, IL 60208  
Telephone Number  310-492-3303  
Email Address  vijay.mittal@northwestern.edu  
 
 
CO INVESTIGATOR  
Name Daniel M. Corcos  
Northwestern University Fe inberg School of Medicine  
Physical Therapy and Human Movement Sciences, 645 N Michigan Avenue, Suite 1100 
Chicago, IL 60611  
Telephone Number 312 -908 -8160  
Email Address Daniel.Corcos@northwestern.edu  
 
 
 
VERSION NUMBER:  
26 
 
VERSION DATE:  
12/13/2021  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Exercise and markers of medial temporal health in youth at ultra high -
risk for psychosis, Phase 2   
 Page 2 of 58 Revis ed Template : October  19th, 2021 Objectives  
Based off of the success of the feasibility study completed at our University of Colorado Boulder 
lab named “Exercise and markers of medial temporal health in youth at ultra high -risk for 
psychosis” (protocol #14 -0200), we have moved on to the second phase  of the study, which is 
named the R33 phase. The goals of this study are to continue to look at the effectiveness of a 
cardiovascular exercise in promoting brain health and improving related symptoms (e.g. hearing 
sounds that are not there, feeling emotion ally detached from self and others), cognitive 
difficulties (troubles with memory and learning), and every day social -occupation al functioning 
in youth at imminent risk for developing a psychotic disorder such as schizophrenia.  We call 
this population “Ul tra High Risk (UHR)” or “Prodromal”.  Usually these individuals have a 
cluster of symptoms called positive symptoms that characterize what the field calls “Thought 
Disorder.”  Please see below and under “Background and Significance” for further discussions  of 
UHR.  
 
“Ultra High -Risk” or “Prodromal” is the term that has been chosen by the field to describe 
individuals who may be experiencing symptoms that make them at risk for developing a 
psychotic illness such as schizophrenia, bipolar disorder with psychot ic features, clinical 
depression with psychotic features. Thought disorder is characterized by unusual thoughts, 
suspiciousness/paranoia, a sense of having special powers or unrealistic plans for the future, 
and/or unusual experiences with seeing or hearin gs things that are not there.  
 
We currently have been working with this population for four years in our “Frontal -Subcortical 
Development, Movement Abnormalities, and Risk for Psychosis” study as well as our phase one 
study mentioned above, protocol 14 -0200 at the University of Colorado Boulder before Professor 
Dr. Vijay Mittal became a new faculty member this year at Northwestern University . We will 
continue to use a measure called the Structured Interview for Prodromal Symptoms (SIPS), a 
widely used and well validated symptom measure, to see if a person is showing moderate 
attenuated positive symptoms  (indicated by a score of a 3, 4, or 5 on positive symptoms of this 
scale)  and a global decline in functioning which would make them UHR or prodromal.  
 
The s tudy follows adolescents and young adults who may have a thought disorder and who may 
be at risk for developing psychosis.  
 
Understanding how exercise may protect or improve the health of a brain area that is implicated 
as a major contributing factor to t he onset of psychosis may lead to a path -breaking new 
intervention that does not suffer from many of the side effects, costs, and other barriers that 
characterize treatments that are currently available for this group. Because a significant portion 
of high -risk youth go on to develop a psychotic disorder in a short period, intervening at this 
stage may help to improve the clinical course and ultimately prevent the onset of a devastating 
and prevalent mental illness.  
 
Specific Aim 1) If UHR subjects partici pating in the exercise condition show greater post -trial 
increases in medial temporal volume and improved cognitive, symptom and social/role 
functioning profiles when compared with the UHR waitlisted -controls.  We predict that the UHR 
exercise treatment gr oup will show a strong trend to suggest larger effects for increases in 
hippocampal and parahippocampal gyral volume, and improvements in cognitive, 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Exercise and markers of medial temporal health in youth at ultra high -
risk for psychosis, Phase 2   
 Page 3 of 58 Revis ed Template : October  19th, 2021 social/functional , and symptom profiles after the trial as compared to the UHR waitlist controls. 
Any natur alistic aerobic activity seen in the UHR waitlisted -controls will be monitored by testing 
for changes in aerobic fitness between the pre -post 12 -week assessments (although we do not 
anticipate a great deal of naturalistic aerobic activity in the UHR contro l group based on our pilot 
findings, any changes in fitness will be controlled for in the respective statistical analyses)  
 
Exploratory: Aim A) If the intervention has an influence on course of illness and conversion 
rates. An important ultimate considerat ion for UHR individuals relates to clinical outcome or 
conversion to formal psychotic disorders. Within -group analyses will focus on how varying 
degrees of aerobic fitness, brain, and cognitive changes post trial or wait -list predict s 12-month 
and 24 -month  symptoms levels and conversion status.  
 
Background  
Accumulating evidence from animal models (Wolf et al., 2011 ), healthy populations (Erickson et 
al., 2011 ), and schizophrenia studies (Farrow et al., 2005 ) suggests that regular exercise 
positively affects integral functions such as neurological maintenance and cognition.  Likewise, 
moderate to vigorous activity has been associated with improved quality of life and l ower 
symptom levels in patients with schizophrenia (Gorczynski & Faulkner, 2010 ).  Because 
voluntary e xercise has been found to stimulate adult medial temporal neurogenesis (Parker et al., 
2011 ), and the hippocampal and parahippocampal gyrus abnormalities  have been widely 
observed in structural, functional , and neurocognitive studies of schizophrenia (Wible et al., 
1995 , Walker et al., 2008 , Allen et al., 2011 ), aerobic physical activity may be an important 
treatment in schizophrenia . The period immediately preceding the onset of schizophrenia is a 
viable point for intervention, and a critical phase for elucidating the pathophysiology of the 
disorder.  However, the available interventions have not been definitely effective, and these 
treatments have been met with significant challenges including costs, poor compliance, attrition , 
and side effects.  A new series of cognitive remediation trials promoting neuroplasticity have 
shown a great deal of potential for targeting specific symptoms  and characteristics (Barlati et al., 
2012 ).  Despite the promise of exercise interventions in ani mal models as well as both healthy 
and clinical populations, to date there have been no trials in youth at ultra high -risk (UHR) for 
psychosis.  We propose an initial within -subject study to determine the effects of a 12 -week 
exercise trial, comparing two different levels of exercise intensity in targeting specific neural, 
cognitive, symptom , and social/role function outcomes in UHR youth.  
 
The Prodromal Period and Research Priorities  
The onset of psychosis is usually preceded by a prodromal phase characte rized by functional 
decline and subtle attenuated symptoms that include positive phenomena and a decline in socio -
occupational functioning (Haroun et al., 2006 , Cannon et al., 2008 ).  The prodromal period is of 
interest both as a window for investigating processes involved in disease onset, and also as a 
potential point of intervention and prevent ion (Haroun et al., 2006 , McGlashan et al., 2007 , 
Mittal et al., 2010b ).  More specifically, recent studies have suggested that adolescents with a 
prodromal syndrome (i.e., showing moderate attenuated positive symptoms accompanied by a 
global decline in functioning) (Miller et al., 1999 , Miller et al., 2002 , Miller et al., 2003b ) are at 
imminent risk for conversion to a psychotic disorder; although successful early identification and 
other factors relating to heterogeneous assessment/inclusi on criteria have yielded a global 
decrease in transition rates (Yung et al., 2007 ), a substantial proportion (anywhere from 10 -35%) 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Exercise and markers of medial temporal health in youth at ultra high -
risk for psychosis, Phase 2   
 Page 4 of 58 Revis ed Template : October  19th, 2021 will convert to a psychotic disorder within a two -year period (Yung et al., 2007 ; Cannon et al., 
2008 ).  This is promising from a research perspective as  prospective understanding of brain 
structure and function, in a period prior to when medications and neurotoxicity can confound 
research, is likely to significantly inform etiological conceptualizations of psychosis (Haroun et 
al., 2006 , McGlashan, 2006 ).  It is also significant from a clinical perspective as better 
understanding of the high -risk period will help to implement early intervention and guide 
treatment decisions with the potential to reduce the duration of untreated p sychosis (White et al., 
2006 ), ameliorate course of illness, and delay or potentially prevent onset of psychosis (McGorry 
et al., 2002 , McGlashan et al., 2003 , Woods et al., 2003 , Morrison et al., 2004 , Haroun et al., 
2006 ).  Because schizophrenia severely limits the most productive years of an individual's life , 
its costs to society are enormous (Wu et al., 2005 ), and this pro mise of early detection and 
intervention represents a major breakthrough.  
 
While existing cognitive -behavioral (Morrison et al., 2004 ), psychopharmacological (McGlashan 
et al., 2003 , McGlashan et al., 2007 ), and supplemental treatments (Amminger et al., 2010 ) have 
shown noteworthy effects, to date there have been no conclusive empirically supported 
interv entions for UHR youth (Corcoran et al., 2010 ).  Furthermore, there are significant 
treatment costs associated with psychotherapy, and serious adverse side effects accompanying 
pharmacological intervention s (e.g. weight gain, related diabetes) (Gerbino -Rosen et al., 2005 , 
Sporn et al., 2005 ).  There is a critical need for innovative new treatment options.  Recent 
cognitive remediation trials in psychosis have demonstrated benefits from neuroplasticity based 
interventions and that intensive trials engaging effortful activity a re feasible in UHR samples 
(Fisher et al., 2013 ).  Because of its known effects on neuroplasticity, an exercise -based 
intervention holds significant potential as UHR youth show a bnormalities in medial temporal 
structures as well as related cognitive impairments, symptoms and functional factors (Pantelis et 
al., 2007 , Mittal & Walker, 2009 , Walker et al., 2010 , Mittal & Walker, 2011b , Mittal et al., 
2013 ).  
 
Mechanisms of Cardiovascular Exercise on Medial Temporal Health  
Animal models hav e been instrumental in establishing the effects of 
aerobic activity on medial temporal health.  This body of literature 
has suggested that aerobic activity promotes hippocampal growth 
and related function through several processes including promoting 
neuro genesis (process by which neurons are generated from neural 
stem and progenitor cells) (Cotman & Berchtold, 2002 , Wolf et al., 
2011 ), cell proliferation (increase in the number of cells as a result 
of cell growth and cell division) (Koehl et al., 2008) and slowing 
apoptosis (programmed cell death) (Avula et al., 2001 , Phaneuf & 
Leeuwenburgh, 2001 ).  For example, in an animal study examining 
the effects of treadmill exercise on cell proliferation in the 
hippocampus (dentate gyrus), Sprague -Dawley rats were classified 
into controls, an easy exercise group, and a moderate exercise group 
(Kim et al., 2002 ).  Results s uggested a dose dependent response 
where easy and moderate exercise group rodents exhibited 
significant cell proliferation (increase in BrdU -positive cells) in the 
dentate gyrus compared to controls after 30 minutes of exercise a 
Figure 1. Photomicrographs of 5 -
bromo -2′-deoxyuridine (BrdU) -
positive c ells in the  hippocampus  
(dentate gyrus) . A and a, control 
group; B and b, easy exercise 
group; C and c, moderate 
exercise group. Black dots 
represent BrdU -positive cells. 
Scale bar in A, B, and C 
represents 100 μm. Scale bar in 
a, b, and c represents 12.5 μm.   
 

PROTOCOL TITLE:  Exercise and markers of medial temporal health in youth at ultra high -
risk for psychosis, Phase 2   
 Page 5 of 58 Revis ed Template : October  19th, 2021 day for one week (see Figu re 1).  Research also shows that exercise and fitness level can 
significantly alter blood oxygen level dependent (BOLD) activation in the parahippocampal 
gyrus (Janse Van Rensburg et al., 2009 , Holzschneider et al., 2012 ), a grey matter cortical region 
that encapsulates the hippocampus and  plays an integral role in memory coding and retrieval.  
Further, exercise -related brain plasticity has been shown in the increased temporal lobe 
connectivity between the bilateral parahippocampal gyrus and bilateral medial temporal gyrus in 
older adults (Voss et al., 2013 ).  With regard to the current proposal, its is important to note that 
several animal models have suggested that an aerobic exer cise program promotes neuroplastic 
changes in the hippocampal formation (e.g., significant increase of protein level in the 
hippocampal formation and PV -immunoreactive neurons in CA1 and CA2/CA3) during 
adolescent period (Gomes da Silva et al.,  2010 ).   
 
Accumulating evidence from a series of translational studies has indicated that the pattern of 
results seen in the animal research is also true for human populations. For example, a erobic 
exercise has been found to result in increased hippocampal blood volume in healthy individuals 
(Colcombe et al., 2004 ). There have also been several venues of researc h to suggest exercise 
counteracts declining medial temporal function in aging (Intlekofer & Cotman, 2012 ) and 
clinical populations such as those with Alzheimer’s disease (Yuede et al., 2009 , Erickson et al., 
2011 ).  To date, there have been a small number of studies showing positive effects from 
exercise that are also seen in schizophrenia patients.  For example, researchers observed 
naturalistic activity levels over a 20 -hour period (actigraphy) were posit ively associated with 
larger cortical volumes (Farrow et al., 2005 ).  In a landmark study, Pajonk and colleagues 
(Pajonk et al., 2010 ) found that after a br ief cardiovascular exercise trial (12 weeks) in patients 
diagnosed with schizophrenia, those in the exercise group showed a significant increase in 
hippocampal volume (12%) when compared to a control group of schizophrenia patients in a 
non-aerobic activit y (1%).  Further, the changes in volume were positively associated with 
improvement in aerobic fitness (measured by a change in maximum oxygen consumption) and 
improvement in verbal memory.  However, its important to note that while this work was 
instrumen tal in demonstrating trial -feasibility and a potentially effective treatment mechanism, 
the sample was small, analysis of structure involved a gross volume estimate (no consideration 
of shape), and the study included only a limited cognitive battery.  
 
Exercise and Cognitive Function  
There is good evidence to suggest that hippocampal neurogenesis is an important mechanism for 
learning and memory processes in healthy humans.  There have been several proposed 
mechanisms for explaining the relationship between  increased neurogenesis and improved 
cognition, including computational theories demonstrating that new neurons improve memory 
capacity (Becker, 2005 ), reduce interference between memories (Wiskott et al., 2006 ), and add 
information about time to memories (Aimone et al., 2006 ).  The act of learning itself is 
associated with elevated neuronal survival (Gould et al., 1999 ).  Exercise has been found to 
improve cognitive functioning by promoting synaptic plasticity through a series of mechanisms 
that contribute to neuroreorganization proce sses (allowing neurons and respective networks to 
change connections and behavior in response to new information, stimulation, development, 
damage and dysfunction).  For example, research has shown that capacity of synaptic plasticity 
(the ability of the c onnection between two neurons to change in strength in response to either use 
or disuse of transmission over synaptic pathways) (Hughes, 1958 ) is positively associated with 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Exercise and markers of medial temporal health in youth at ultra high -
risk for psychosis, Phase 2   
 Page 6 of 58 Revis ed Template : October  19th, 2021 aerob ic activity; rats given access to a running wheel (aerobic exercise) exhibit significantly 
more short -term potentiation and long -term potentiation (LTP) with theta -patterned conditioning 
stimulation in vivo than do age -matched litter mate controls (Farmer et al., 2004 ). This increase 
in LTP appears to reflect an alteration in th e induction threshold for synaptic plasticity that 
accompanies voluntary exercise (Farmer et al., 2004 ).  With particular relevance to the proposal, 
researchers have found that regular aerobic exercise (30 minutes of aerobic e xercise for regular 
sessions over 8 weeks) increases the number of hippocampal CA1, CA3, and dentate gyrus 
neurons and enhances spatial memory in adolescent rats (Uysal et al., 2005 ). 
 
In a recent comprehensive review of the literature, researchers concluded that although more 
high-quality trials are needed to assess the effects of different types and intensities of exercise on 
cognitive function, beneficial effects of various exe rcise programs have been observed in studies 
among subjects with and without cognitive decline (van Uffelen et al., 2008 ).  Studies have 
shown cognitive improvements in Alzheimer’s patients (Kramer et al., 2006 ) and after an 8 week 
exercise trial, stroke survivors (stationary bike, 3 times a week for 45 minute sessions) showed 
significant improvement in VO2max (i.e., a widely used and accurate index of aerobic fitness), 
and cognitive function (Quaney et al., 2009 ).  As noted, a trial in patients with schizophrenia 
found improvements in verbal learning (Pajonk et al., 2010 ), an important process that is also 
affected in UHR groups (Brewer et al., 2005 ).  Several of the ot her neurocognitive deficits 
present in UHR individuals have also been positively affected by exercise interventions in other 
populations.  A large randomized controlled study with 120 individuals showed that exercise 
training increases the size of the ante rior hippocampus and led to improvements in spatial 
memory in older adults (Erickson et al., 2011 ) and both this brain region an d memory domain are 
affected in the prodrome (Wood et al., 2003 , Pantelis et al., 2007 ).  This has been supported by 
the animal literature (rodent mode ls) (Vaynman et al., 2004 ) and observed in investigations of 
healthy young adults (Stroth et al., 2009 ).  Hippocampal -dependent cognitive functioning such as 
the acquisition of new episodic memory is mediated in part by synaptic plasticity (Neves et al., 
2008 ) and also found to be improved in exercise trials in humans (Bunce & Murden, 2006 ).  
Episodic memory deficits are also prominent in UHR youth (Valli et al., 2012 ).  The medial 
temporal memory system (including the hippocampus and parahippocampal gyrus) governs 
broader declarative memory functions including episodic memory as well as verbal learning 
(Squire, 1992 ); as noted a successful tri al in a small number of schizophrenia patients showed 
significant verbal learning improvement (Pajonk et al., 2010 ), and deficits in the verbal lea rning 
domain are both prominent in the prodrome (Fusar -Poli et al., 2012 ) and predictive of conversion 
(Walder et al., 2008 , Mittal et al., 2010c , Seidman et al., 201 0).  The cognit ive targets in this 
proposal are based on the domains that have reliably been shown to be improved with exercise 
intervention in human populations, known to recruit heavily on medial temporal structures, and 
shown to be affected in UHR youth (i.e., spatial  memory, episodic memory, verbal learning).  In 
addition, because of the central role medial temporal structures play in a wide range of high 
order cognitive functions (Voss et al., 2010 ), some research has shown exercise promotes 
improvements in domains such as executive function, although the specificity of this effect 
remains an empirical question.  
 
 
 
Exercise, Symptoms and Social/Role Functioning  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Exercise and markers of medial temporal health in youth at ultra high -
risk for psychosis, Phase 2   
 Page 7 of 58 Revis ed Template : October  19th, 2021 Sedentary behavior has been widely associated with obesity and health problems in adolescent 
populations (Rosenberger et al., in pre ss), and in addition to contributing to poor emotional well -
being and peer -support (Costigan et al., in press ), it may also exacerbate the health related side -
effects of pharmacological treatment (Maayan & Correll, 2010 ) and potentially lead to poorer 
compliance in UHR adolescents.  Further, the nature of the prodrome may contribute to 
sedentary activity as prototypic characteristic symptoms such as avolition aff ect motivation and 
positive symptoms such as paranoia may lead to avoidance of social/peer involved activities, 
leading these patients to become increasingly prone to inactivity.  In contrast, moderate to 
vigorous activity has been found to have ameliorati ve effects, such as reduced cardio metabolic 
risk factors, regardless of the amount of time spent engaging in sedentary activities (Ekelund et 
al., 2012 ).  More broadly, physical activity decreases the risk of numerous deleterious physical 
outcomes among adults (Penedo & Dahn, 2005)  and adolescents (Janssen & LeBlanc, 2010), and 
sedentary behavior has been identified as one of the leading preventable causes of death in the 
United States (Mokdad et al., 2004).  With regard to mental health, and consistent with studies in 
other populat ions (Dunn et al., 2001; Rangul et al., 2010), researchers have observed that 
exercise can improve symptoms of depression and social anhedonia in patients with 
schizophrenia (Gorczynski & Faulkner, 2010 ).  As noted, to date there have been no studies to 
determine how exercise may improve symptoms and social/role functioning in UHR youth.  
Because of studies  showing that an active lifestyle promotes higher quality of life, better mental 
health outcomes (Rangul et al., 2010), and lower rates of depression (Brunet et al., 2013) and 
anxiety (Hallal et al., 2006) in adolescents and young adults, we predict that t he exercise trial 
will improve social and role functioning (Aims 2). Further, based on the prominent role of the 
medial temporal lobe in etiological theories of schizophrenia (Walker & Diforio, 1997 , Lipska, 
2002 , Corcoran et al., 2003 ), and res earch noting significant relationships between the 
hippocampus and symptoms in psychosis (Benoit et al., 2012 ), we predict that aerobic exercise 
will also improve symptoms.  
 
Cortisol Sampling  
When accounting for the confluence of risk and disease progression in the prodromal period, a 
neural diathesis -stress model posits that one key pa thogenic mechanism involves the 
hypothalamic pituitary adrenal (HPA) axis, which can trigger a cascade of events that culminates 
in expression of dysfunctional neural circuits that subserve psychotic symptoms (E. Walker, 
Mittal, & Tessner, 2008 ). This notion draws primarily on the extant evidence concerning the 
effects of HPA axis secretogues, especially cortisol, on brain and behavior.  Specifically, patients 
at-risk for schizophrenia manifest elevated levels of cortisol, and there is a synergistic 
relationship between activation of dopaminergic circuits that have been implicated in psychosis 
(Czyrak, Mackowiak, Chocyk, Fijal, & Wedzony, 2003 ). It is also of note  that normative 
increases in the stress hormone cortisol, beginning at the onset of puberty, peak at the end of 
adolescence and this coincides precisely with the mean age of onset of psychotic disorders (E. 
Walker, et al., 2008 ). However, although studies have examined resting cortisol, little is know n 
about the effect of acute stress in the prodrome, or how this may constitute risk for a poorer 
course of illness over time (E. Walker, et al., 2008 ). 
 
 
 
 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Exercise and markers of medial temporal health in youth at ultra high -
risk for psychosis, Phase 2   
 Page 8 of 58 Revis ed Template : October  19th, 2021 Research Questions  
A neural diathesis -stress conceptualization is an established model used to understand 
pathogenic processes at play during the prodromal period and it predicts that an early 
vulnerability (the resulting confluence of genetic and/or 
early environmental fact ors) later interacts with 
neuromaturational processes and environmental stressors 
during adolescence, resulting in attenuated symptoms, 
cognitive and social/role dysfunction, and eventually 
psychosis (Walker & Diforio, 1997 ).  Within the context 
of the present study, w e propose to investigate the 
potential for an exercise intervention to promote medial 
temporal health in the high -risk period and subsequently 
influence a series of related symptoms and deficits (see 
Figure 2).  If an exercise intervention is effective in 
promoting medial temporal health and facilitating 
synaptic plasticity in UHR youth, this can serve to 
improve several key features and characteristics strongly 
affected by hippocampal and parahippocampal gyral function including cognitive function, 
symptom s, and social/role function.  To address the research questions posited in Aims 1 and 2, 
we propose to assess medial temporal integrity, cognitive function (with tests that weigh heavily 
on medial temporal function as well as a broader battery), social/rol e functioning, and symptoms 
both pre and post an exercise trial (with two intensity groupings) in a group of UHR youth  and a 
healthy controls (HC) group.  
 
Understanding the mechanisms and related effects of aerobic exercise in a developmentally 
sensitive p eriod, characterized by significant neural -reorganization, symptom escalation, and 
cognitive functional decline, is both innovative and incredibly important.  Further, examining the 
period immediately preceding  the onset of psychotic disorder, before the m edications and/or 
neurotoxicity can cloud our understanding (McGlashan, 2006 ), represents a necessary step in 
elucidate the etiology of psychotic disorders and increasing our ability to refine target 
interventions high -risk individuals. The proposed investigation holds promise for improving the 
understanding of aerobic activity based changes in medial temporal structures. A body of 
evidence suggests that aerobic exercise increases hippocampal volume in cl inical and healthy 
populations (Yuede et al., 2009 , Berle et al., 2010 , Pajonk et al., 2010 , Erickson et al., 2011 , 
Wolf et al., 2011 ).  Despite significant evidence to suggest medial temporal abnormalities in 
UHR youth (Fusar -Poli et al., 2007 , Fusar -Poli et al., 2011 , Mittal & Walker, 2011b ), and 
prominent models implicating the  hippocampus as an integral factor in the etiology of 
schizophrenia (Weinberger, 1995 , Lipska, 2002 , Corcoran et al.,  2003 , Walker et al., 2008 ), to 
date there have been no published studies that have examined an aerobic exercise mechanism in 
high-risk adolescents.  We propose to use the most promising and innovative aerobic fitness 
assessments, structural imaging methodologies (including size and shape ba sed approaches), and 
tailored neurocognitive tests to accomplish this goal.   
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Exercise Targets Key  Pathogenic Factors Driving the 
Progression to Psychosis  

PROTOCOL TITLE:  Exercise and markers of medial temporal health in youth at ultra high -
risk for psychosis, Phase 2   
 Page 9 of 58 Revis ed Template : October  19th, 2021 Preliminary Studies  
UHR Participants exhibit deficits in cognitive functioning and smaller medial temporal 
lobe volume  
A group of UHR (n = 29) and healthy control (n = 27) adolescents (mean = 18.09; SD =2.3) 
were administered a structural scan and a b rief cognitive battery.  Consistent with the 
broader literature, the ANCOVA analyses (controlling for age) 
indicated that UHR group showed poor performance across cognitive 
measures including verbal fluency F(1,50) = 2.25, p  .05, trail 
making, F(1,50) = 4.91, p  .01, and a trend for verbal learning, 
F(1,50) = 1.22, p = .14, when compared to healthy controls.  Analyses 
indicated that the UHR group showed significantly smaller right, 
F(1,51) = 10.17, p  .01, and left, F(1,51) = 4.44, p  .01, hippocampal 
volumes.  Likewise, the UHR group showed a non -significant trend 
towards smaller left, F(1,51) = .99, p = .18, and significantly smaller 
right, F(1,51) = 2.87, p  .05, parahippocampal gyral volumes (see 
Figure 3 ).  While these results serve to establish t hat cognitive and 
medial temporal lobe deficits are apparent in high -risk individuals, 
there has been little empirical work conducted to examine 
mechanisms that may contribute to these deficits, or interventions designed to target these 
specific domains.  As noted in the review above, a body of evidence suggests that moderate to 
vigorous aerobic activity promotes hippocampal cell growth and memory in healthy and 
clinical populations.  
Less activity is associated with smaller medial temporal volumes and cogn itive deficits  
In this pilot investigation 29 UHR and 27 matched control participants were assessed to 
determine the relationship between naturalistic activity level (i.e., everyday behavior in a 
natural context that is not manipulated by instruction or in tervention), medial temporal lobe 
structure (hippocampus and parahippocampal gyrus), and symptoms.  Participants were 
assessed with actigraphy for a 5 -day period (participants wore an actigraph wristwatch), 
magnetic resonance imaging, and structured interv iews.  We observed that UHR participants 
showed a greater percentage of time in sedentary behavior while healthy controls spent 
more time engaged in light, moderate and vigorous activity ( Figure 4 ).  In addition, the total 
level of movement activity was mo derately correlated with parahippocampal gyri bilaterally 
(right: r = .44, p  .01; left: r= .55, p  .01), a trend towards volume of the left hippocampus (r 
= .23, p = .09) and symptoms (r = -.35, p  .01).  The results suggest that more activity is 
linke d to larger volumes and lower symptom levels.  Furthermore, activity was associated 
with performance in verbal fluency r = .35, p  .01), trail making (r= .28, p  .05), and verbal 
learning (r= .25, p  .05). Taken together, these data indicate that more a ctivity is associated 
with improved cognition or conversely, lower activity is linked to a poorer cognitive 
performance on these measures. Finally, hippocampal volumes were bilaterally associated 
with performance on trail making (r= .27, p  .05) and a tre nd toward verbal fluency (r = .23, 
p = .08).   
Figure 3. The volumes of 
the hippocampus (red) 
and parahippocampal 
gyrus (green) were found 
to be smaller in the high -
risk group.  
 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Exercise and markers of medial temporal health in youth at ultra high -
risk for psychosis, Phase 2   
 Page 10 of 58 Revis ed Template : October  19th, 2021 I. While collectively, this pilot data is 
instrumental in suggesting that inactivity 
is associated with medial temporal 
health, symptoms, and cognition, it is not 
possible to determine any causality (for 
example, it is unclear if symptoms are 
driving inactivity, which in turn may be 
affecting the h ealth of the  
parahippocampal structure or if 
hippocampal deficits lead to lower 
levels of activity).  In  our Aims, we 
propose to determine the optimal 
exercise prescription that balances 
intensity and tolerability in UHR 
youth, and whether prescribed 
physical activity will lead to changes 
in medial temporal volume, cognitive 
function and symptoms/function.  A n experimental manipulation, focusing an aerobic fitness 
and tailoring level of activity to an individual’s initial level of cardiovascular fitness, will allow 
for stronger conclusions regarding the noted causality issue.  Taken together, the Aims for 
this phase hold important implications for etiological conceptions and the promise of 
exercise -based interventions for UHR youth.  
 
 
 
Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  
Participants will be recruited from community health care providers or self -referred by flyer s, 
electronic and paper advertisements. Participants will call in to the ADAPT lab  and a lab manager 
or trained graduate student will administer a phone screening. Based off of the phone screening, 
participants and the inclusion criteria, participants will be invited to participate in the study based 
off of “being a good fit” for the study.  A phone screening will also be done to determine if the 
participant is eligible for the MRI scanning portion of the study (i.e. inquiring about 
claustrophobia, metal in t heir body,  etc... ). If participants are found not to be eligible based off of 
the phone screening and inclusion criteria, then participants will be excluded.  
 
If the participant is younger than the age of 18, and thus not considered an adult yet, a parent 
must call on (and this is indicated on recruitment material). The same phone screening will be 
completed with  the parent and the questions will be about the ch ild. 
 
Inclusion criteria for UHR  participants are as follows: a) age 16 -24, b) no history of brain injury 
or neurological disease, c) no contraindications to exercise training (as assessed in the phone 
screening)  d.) do not meet for any MRI scanning exclus ion criteria as assessed via the phone 
screen . During the phone screening, we will assess to make sure there is not a history of 
cardiovascular or respiratory disease. During the exercise study, the participant’s heart rate and 
EKG will be monitored to ass ure that they are not experiencing an adverse cardiac event and to 
assure they are healthy enough to participate.  The phone screening will also assess to make sure 
the participant is not obese, pre -diabetic/diabetic, has high cholesterol, or has high bloo d 
 
Figure 4. Note: Activity represents the percentage of time spent in four 
levels of activity based on actigraphy counts per minute. * p ≤ .05; † 
Indicates a trend level difference p ≤ .15;  Error bars represent standard 
error. 
	 	 	*	
*	*	†		
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 
Sedenta ry Light Acti vity Moderate Acti vity Vigorous Activity Percetage	of	Time	Engaaged	in	a	Given	Activity	Ultra	 High-Risk	 Control	
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Exercise and markers of medial temporal health in youth at ultra high -
risk for psychosis, Phase 2   
 Page 11 of 58 Revis ed Template : October  19th, 2021 pressure, and does not have a diagnosis of current substance dependence (this will be determined 
in the phone screen). Participants will be asked if they ever had a history of substance 
dependence or if they currently are diagnosed with substance depende nce. Additionally, during 
the clinical evaluation, they will be asked if they have a current diagnosis of substance 
dependence and other related questions during the SCID) and d) no contraindications for being in 
an magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scanner . As noted above, for inclusion in the study, the at -
risk group, participants must meet criteria for a prodromal syndrome based upon the Structure 
Interview for Prodromal Syndromes (SIPS) interview. Inclusion criteria for the HC group is as 
follows: a) age  16-24, b) no diagnosable psychotic disorder, c) no history of substance use 
disorder within 6 months of the screening interview, d) no history of head injury, tic disorder, 
neurological disorder . Substance use will be assessed during the prescreener, and the participants 
who consent to the study will be asked to provide a urine sample for drug testing (see Procedures 
Involved).  Exclusions criteria for all subjects include: a) less than 16 or greater than 24 years of 
age, people who are claustrophobic (peo ple who have a fear of being in a closed space), b) have 
a history of significant head injury: This will be based off of the Childhood Brain Injury Scale to 
determine, if a head injury occurred, whether consciousness loss of consciousness.  If 
consciousnes s was lost between 2 -30 minutes, and/or post -traumatic amnesia/confusion <1 hour 
and/or other symptoms (cognitive or behavior changes) lasting 1 -24 hours, participants are not 
eligible to participate in the study (First, 2010), c) other neurological disord ers that could affect 
brain functioning such as Multiple Sclerosis, Stroke, Tumors, Epilepsy, Alzheimer’s disease, 
Parkinson’s disease, d) mental retardation, e) history of substance use disorder within 6 months 
of screening interview , f) have a psychotic disorder, taking antipsychotic medication, and/or 
have exhibited serious self -harm behaviors , g) pregnant females (see scanner protection 
description below), h) people who have contraindications to magnetic resonance (MR) scanning 
including intracranial, i ntraoribital , or intraspinal metal, pacemakers, cochlear implants or other 
non-MR-compatible devices, face or neck tattoos, and i) inability of the subject or their 
parent/guardian to understand the informed consent document  (see below) , j) inability of th e 
subject or parent/guardian to understand written or spoken English . For the at -risk group, 
participants meeting criteria for an Axis I psychotic disorder will be excluded (e.g., 
schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder, psychosis NOS, brief psychotic disorder, mood disorder 
with psychotic features). Medications are not a b asis for exclusion because of the sensitive nature 
of this research except for antipsychotics.  Similar studies have adopted a general policy 
allowing any outside treatment to remain because of ethical concerns that may arise.  During 
analyses, medications  (individuals taking antipsychotics will be excluded.  All other medications 
are accepted) will be treated as covariates such as antidepressants and stimulants. Although this 
may limit statistical power, the exploratory nature of this study allows for such .  In Dr. Mittal’s 
current protocol, only 8% of prodromal participants are using medications, such as 
antipsychotics.  Consistent with past exercise studies, all participants will be sedentary (i.e., no 
more than 60 minutes of maximal heart output per week  for at least the past six months).  This 
will not be the same as targeted treatment interventions at a high intensity and frequency of 2 -3 
times a week for 65% or 85% of VO2max for 60 -90 minutes.  Qualitative substance use will be 
evaluated by urine drug screening; urine drug screens which best document recent ingestion 
(which may have precipitated a worsening of symptoms ).  
 
For the scan portion of the study, in order to protect the health and safety of the participants, 
exclusion criteria for this study will include any contraindication to magnetic resonance scanning 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Exercise and markers of medial temporal health in youth at ultra high -
risk for psychosis, Phase 2   
 Page 12 of 58 Revis ed Template : October  19th, 2021 (e.g., metal in body, claustrophobia, pregnant). These exclusions are specific to MRI and are 
consistent with most studies involving MRI. Potential participants will be screened for the 
prese nce of any of these exclusion criteria prior to participating in this MRI study. Participants 
will be asked to complete the CTI required safety form prior to their scan.  
 
We will also exclude adults unable to consent, pregnant women (due to the scanning 
requirements), and prisoners because these populations are not relevant to our present research. 
We will be including individuals that are not yet adults (16 -18 years of age). Specific procedures 
for these populations are described throughout this protocol.  
 
Study Timelines  
Participants will be enrolled in the study for two years . We will be doing 12 and 24 month follow 
ups so we do not expect this study to be complete until July 2021.  We have made the 12 month 
follow up available to do on Zoom with an optio nal additional consent/assent form.  
 
Procedures Involved  
Overview  
Over a 2 -year period, we hope to recruit 36 UHR youth (to yield 30 because of an expected 20% 
attenuation: 15 in the exercise and 15 in the waitlisted -control). Participants will first atte nd a 
screening session that will be roughly 1.5 hours (please see Table 1 below) and if they meet 
criteria for UHR, they will be invited to join.  
 
Then, participants will return for a longer assessment that will examine diagnosis (Table 2), 
cognition (Tabl e 2), brain volume (Table 2), and cardiovascular fitness (Tabl e 3). This baseline 
assessment can be completed in one visit but also broken into several short vis its if the 
participant wishes. The screening, diagnosis , and cognitive assessment will take pla ce in the 
ADAPT lab at 1801 Maple Avenue in Evanston, IL and the cardio fitness will take place in the 
Northwestern University Department of Physical Therapy and Human Movement Science 
located at 645 N. Michigan Avenue, 10th floor, Chicago IL 60611. In the table , we have 
referred to this as “Downtown”  (this fitness portion takes 30 minutes pre and post exercise 
intervention and will be monitored by an  exercise physiologist ).   
 
After the baseline assessment, participants will be randomized into the followin g two conditions: 
exercise or waitlist control. The 15 UHR exercise group  participants  will be involved in a 3 -
month exercise treatment 2x a week at moderate -vigorous levels.  This will take place in the 
Evanston ADAPT  lab and will be monito red by an exerci se physiologist (Elizabeth Skender).  
For participants who are unable to come to Evanston twice a week, we will offer the downtown 
location as an alternative for one or both weekly exercise sessions.  
 
In total , this will result in 24 visits (each visit is 40 mintes ). After, the 12 weeks are completed, 
participants will come back and simply repeat the baseline visit again (with the exception of the 
screening) (note: this is termed the post -exercise follow -up visit).  This will be a total of 5 hours, 
and can be broken down into shorter visits based on the individual needs of a participant.   
 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Exercise and markers of medial temporal health in youth at ultra high -
risk for psychosis, Phase 2   
 Page 13 of 58 Revis ed Template : October  19th, 2021 Finally, after the post -exercise period, participants will be invited back  at 1 year and 2 years  later 
for a clinical assessment (this will include a 3 hour battery repeating the symptom and diagnostic 
measures that were noted at baseline).    
 
For the 15 -waitlist control participants, the procedures are the same however they will 
NOT be undergoing the exe rcise intervention. They will simply be asked to come back after 3 
months to do all post intervention assessments. These participants will also be invited back 12 
months and 24 months later for follow up.  The 12 month follow up interview will be optionally  
offered on Zoom secure video conferencing for CHR participants. The rationale is that the 
clinical group is the research priority during the remote work period before the return to 
Northwestern’s campus and the control group will be invited to follow up i nterviews normally in 
person at that time.  
 
 
The healthy control (HC) participants will only be invited to baseline, 12 -month, and 24 -month 
visits. We will not be inviting the HC group for the 3 -month follow up because we do not 
anticipate any diagnostic or brain structure changes in this population. All procedures will be the 
same except for the cognitive battery ( they will not complete MATRICS and RISE because these 
would not be a valid assessment of cognitive function in HC population ) and the exercise 
assessment (because we are not looking at a 3 -month change in HC group, they will not 
complete the VO2max). In addition, HC group will complete both fMRI tasks during the 
baseline visits.  
 
Below is a walk through of all visits:  
 
Table 1 : Screening Visit  
Visit (1 visit)  Time  Location  Time Point  
1. Screening  
1a. SIPS Positive  1.5 hours  ADAPT Lab  Screening  
 
Table 2: Pre -Intervention ( Both UHR  groups ) 
Visit (1 -3 visits)*  Time  Location  Time Point  
2. Clinical Assessment:  
2a. Cortisol Sampling -4 saliva 
samples  and a hair sample  
2b. Optional Blood Sampling  
and a Health Behaviors 
Questionnaire and a Symptom 
Checklist  
2c. Food and Activity Log  
2d. Child Hood Brain Injury 
Scale  
2e. Drug and Alcohol Use Scale  
2f. Hospitalizations  
2g. Psychosocial Therapy  
2h. Medication Log   
 
 
1.5 hours   
 
 
ADAPT Lab   
 
 
Pre-Intervention  
 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Exercise and markers of medial temporal health in youth at ultra high -
risk for psychosis, Phase 2   
 Page 14 of 58 Revis ed Template : October  19th, 2021 2i. Global Role/Social 
functioning  
2j. SIPS (negative, 
disorganized, general)  
2k. SCID  
2l. PINS  
2m. Exercise Survey  
2n.  Calgary Depression Scale  
2o. Beck Anxiety Scale  
2p. Beck Depression Inventory  
2q. 6 take home samples will be 
given   
2r. WRAT  
3. Cognitive Battery:  
3a. MATRICS  
3b. RISE Task  
3c. Urine Sample   
2 hour   
ADAPT Lab   
Pre-Intervention  
 
4. Scan  
4a. Structural Scan  
4b. fMRI Scan and MID task  1.5 hours CTI Pre-Intervention  
 
5. Initial Exercise Assessment  45 minutes  Downtown  Pre-Intervention  
 
 
Table 3: HC baseline visits  
Visit (1 -3 visits)*  Time  Location  Time Point  
2. Clinical Assessment:  
2a. Cortisol Sampling -4 saliva 
samples  and a hair sample  
2b. Optional Blood Sampling 
and a Health Behaviors 
Questionnaire and a Symptom 
Checklist  
2c. Food and Activity Log  
2d. Child Hood Brain Injury 
Scale  
2e. Drug and Alcohol Use Scale  
2f. Hospitalizations  
2g. Psychosocial Therapy  
2h. Medication Log  
2i. Global Role/Social 
functioning  
2j. SIPS (negative, 
disorganized, general)  
2k. SCID  
2l. PINS  
2m. Exercise Survey   
 
 
1.5 hours   
 
 
ADAPT Lab   
 
 
Baseline  
 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Exercise and markers of medial temporal health in youth at ultra high -
risk for psychosis, Phase 2   
 Page 15 of 58 Revis ed Template : October  19th, 2021 2n.  Calgary Depression Scale  
2o. Beck Anxiety Scale  
2p. Beck Depression Invent ory 
2q. 6 take home samples will be 
given   
2r. WRAT  
2s. Urine sample  
4. Scan  
4a. Structural Scan  
4b. fMRI Scan and MID task  
4c. SOT task  *2 hours or 2 
visits: 1.5 
hours and 30 
minutes  CTI Baseline  
 
 
*depending on participant needs and preferences  
 
Table 4: Exercise Intervention (ONLY FOR THE 15 UHR exercise group)  
Visit (24  visits)  Time  Location  Time Point  
6. Exercise Intervention 
(including the Orientation 
Tour and Affective 
Response Scales)  
 
PANAS and UFOV (will be 
given before and after 
exercise session 1, week 5 
sometime, week 9 
sometime, and week 12 
sometime)  
  
2x per week for 12 
weeks ( 40 minutes 
each session)   
Adapt Lab  
Or 
Downtown   
Intervention  
 
 
Table 5: Post Intervention ( Both  UHR groups ) 
Visit (1 -3 visits)*  Time  Location  Time Point  
7. Clinical Assessment:  
7a. Cortisol Sampling -4 saliva 
samples  and a hair sample  
7b. Optional Blood Sampling  
and a Health Behaviors 
Questionnaire and a Symptom 
Checklist  
7c. Food and Activity Log  
7d. Child Hood Brain Injury 
Scale  
7e. Drug and Alcohol Use 
Scale  
7f. Hospitalizations  
7g. Psychosocial Therapy   
 
 
 
 
1.5 
hours   
 
 
 
 
ADAPT Lab   
 
 
 
 
Post-Intervention  
 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Exercise and markers of medial temporal health in youth at ultra high -
risk for psychosis, Phase 2   
 Page 16 of 58 Revis ed Template : October  19th, 2021 7h. Medication Log  
7i. Global Role/Social 
Functioning  
7j. SIPS (negative, 
disorganized, general)  
7k. SCID  
2l. PINS  
7m. Exercise Survey  
7n.  Calgary Depression Scale  
7o. Beck Anxiety Scale  
7p. Beck Depression Inventory  
7q. 4 take home samples will 
be given  
7r. WRAT  
8. Cognitive Battery:  
8a. MATRICS  
8b. RISE Task  
8c. Urine Sample   
 
2 hour   
 
ADAPT Lab   
 
Post-Intervention  
 
9. Scan  
9a. Structural Scan  
9b. fMRI Scan and SOT  task 1.5 hour CTI Post-Intervention  
 
10. Post Exercise Assessment 
and Feedback Session  45 
minutes  Downtown  Post-Intervention  
 
*depending on participant needs and preferences  
 
 
Table 6: 12-month and 24 -month Visits ( All three groups)  
Visit (1 visit)  Time  Location  Time Point  
2. Clinical Assessment:  
2a. Cortisol Sampling -4 saliva 
samples  and a hair sample  
2b. Food and Activity Log  
2c. Child Hood Brain Injury 
Scale  
2d. Drug and Alcohol Use 
Scale  
2e. Hospitalizations  
2f. Psychosocial Therapy  
2g. Medication Log  
2h. Global Role/Social 
Functioning  
2i. SIPS (positive, negative, 
disorganized, general)  
2j. SCID  
2k. PINS  
2l. Exercise Survey   
 
 
 
3 hours   
 
 
 
ADAPT Lab   
Or  
Over the 
phone /Zoom   
 
 
 
12-month  
24-month  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Exercise and markers of medial temporal health in youth at ultra high -
risk for psychosis, Phase 2   
 Page 17 of 58 Revis ed Template : October  19th, 2021 2m.  Calgary Depression Scale  
2n. Beck Anxiety Scale  
2o.4 take home samples will 
be given  
 
 
NOTE: Visits can be completed in 1 -3 visits depending on what participants prefer.  
 
COVID -19 Symptom Checklist & Procedures  
If participating in person for any portion of the study, participants will be required to complete a 
COVID -19 pre -screening checklist within 24 hours before  the appointment. This checklist will 
be sent via email to the participant upon confirmation of thei r in-person appointment. The form 
is brief and does not ask for vaccination status. If the individual answers “Yes” to any of the 
screening questions, the study team will cancel the study visit. If the individual is experiencing 
any of the above symptoms, study team members will recommend that they contact a doctor to 
determine if seeking medical care or being tested for COVID -19 is necessary . The study team 
member coordinating the visit will attempt to reschedule the session for a date at least 14 days 
later. However, the potential participant must pass pre -screening before proceeding with the in -
person study visit.  COVID -19 prescreening checklists will be stored on Box SAFER, separate 
from study data.  
Participants will be asked to wear a mask for the durat ion of all study components in which the 
participant will be in the same room as research study team members. This is a requirement that 
will be included in the consent forms for all participants, and they will be informed that refusal to 
wear a mask or fa ilure to comply can result in being removed from the study before it is 
completed.  
 
 
Design of the Proposed Study  
 
 
1. Screening Visit  
Participants will first attend a screening session (roughly 1.5 hours) and if they meet UHR 
criteria discussed throughout the protocol and in consent forms, they will be invited to join the 
study (note: we propose to screen 54 people to identify the 36 eli gible UHR individuals). HC 
participants will be screened using the same measures to rule out UHR criteria. If potential HC 
participants present with the prodromal syndrome based on the SIPS scores, they will be 
informed that they cannot participate in the HC groups and provided with referrals to community 
mental health providers based on their specific needs. If they are still interested in participating 
in the study, they will be given an option to screen for the URH groups. At that point, we will 
follow t he protocol outlined for UHR groups.  
 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Exercise and markers of medial temporal health in youth at ultra high -
risk for psychosis, Phase 2   
 Page 18 of 58 Revis ed Template : October  19th, 2021 2. Clinical Assessment  
Background information will be obtained at the beginning of the clinical evaluation.  This will 
allow us to understand what the patient’s history is like in order to fully understand their curre nt 
experiences.  This background packet will include questions about brain injury from the 
Childhood Brain Injury Scale, drugs and alcohol from the Drug and Alcohol Scale, 
hospitalizations from the Hospitalizations Questionnaire, therapy from the Psychosoc ial Therapy 
Questionnaire and medications from the Medication Log.  This will be given at baseline, 12 
month, and 24 month visits.  
 
The Structured Interview for Prodromal Symptoms (SIPS) (Miller et al., 1999 ) will be 
administered to initially detect the presence of a prodromal syndrome at the screening interview 
(the presence of a prodromal syndrome is necessary for inclusion in the at -risk group), and then 
to formally assess attenuated negative and disorganized symptoms after inclusion in the study.  It 
will also be administered post -trial to track changes in clinical symptoms post intervention trial.  
The SIPS contains an instru ment, the Scale of Prodromal Symptoms (SOPS), which rates the 
severity of relevant dimensions including positive, negative , and disorganized symptoms along a 
7-point scale ranging from absent to severe and psychotic.  Prodromal or high -risk syndrome will 
defined by moderate levels of positive symptoms and/or a decline in global functioning 
accompanying the presence of schizotypal personality disorder and/or a family history of 
schizophrenia. The Structured Clinical Interview for DSM -IV (SCID -I) will be used  to determine 
the presence of Axis I psychotic disorders (for rule -out) and to classify diagnostic status for non -
psychotic axis -I disorders (First et al., 1995).  It will also be administered post -trial to determine 
any changes in clinical status.  Each o f the measures has been used with psychotic subjects and 
demonstrated reliability with adolescent populations (Martin et al., 2000 , Miller et al., 2003a , 
Mittal et al., 2008b , Howes et al., 2009 , Mittal et al., 2010c ).  Advanced doctoral students and 
clinical psychologists will cond uct the interviews.  As part of the ongoing ADAPT clinic, all 
interviewers in our program will participate in an in -depth training program regarding the 
administration and scoring of the SIPS and SCID and will be required to independently rate a 
minimum of  six SIPS and SCID training videos, followed by four live supervised assessments 
(by the PI Mittal).  Interviewers will be required to achieve sensitivity and specificity Kappas of 
at least .80 regarding SIPS and SCID symptoms, as well as 90 percent agreem ent on all 
diagnostic classifications across assessments. Following this stage, ADAPT examiners will 
continue the training, observing and providing ratings of live interviews with high -risk 
adolescents specifically. ADAPT raters have been observed while co nducting ratings on live 
interviews with high -risk adolescents; intraclass correlations (ICCS) over .80 for all symptom 
ratings and kappa of ≥ .80 for prodromal syndrome diagnoses will be met for each interviewer 
prior to participation in formal interviews . In addition, P rodromal Inventory of Negative 
Symptoms (PINS) will be administered to assess five dimensions of negative symptoms: 
avolition, asociality, anhedonia, transitionary distress, and blunted affect/alogia. The interview is 
comprised if 23 items and includes probes for the interviewer which assess areas of functioning 
reflected by these domenstions. Each item is rated on a scale from 0 (absent) to 6 (extremely 
severe).  
 
Role and social functioning will be assessed with the Global Functioning Scal e: Role (GFS -R) 
(Niendam et al., 2006 ), and the Global Functioning Scale: Social (GFS -S) (Auther et al., 2006 ), 
which provide ratings on two separate 10 -point Likert scales.  On the GFS -R, a score of 10 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Exercise and markers of medial temporal health in youth at ultra high -
risk for psychosis, Phase 2   
 Page 19 of 58 Revis ed Template : October  19th, 2021 indicates “Superior Role Functioning” (e.g., Independently maintains superior functioning in 
demanding roles), whereas a low score of 1 reflects “Extreme Role Dysfunction” (e.g., on 
disability, non -independent status).  A score of 10 on the GFS -S reflects “Superior 
Social/Interpersonal Functioning” (frequently seeks out others and has multiple satisf ying 
interpersonal relationships including close and casual friends), whereas the lowest score of 1 
indicates “Extreme Social Isolation” (no social or family member contact at all).  The scales 
were designed for adolescents and have been found valid and re liable in assessing prodromal 
populations (Cornblatt et al., 2007 ) and our group is familiar in working with these measures 
(Mittal & Walker, 2011a , Pelletier et al., 2013 ).  
 
In addition, we may ask permission (participants to sign a release form) for us to speak to current 
therapists, psychiatrists, or other medi cal professionals involved in the mental health of 
participants. We ask to do this in order to fully understand the mental health history and 
background.  We can better rate various scales, measures, and interviews with this knowledge.  If 
participants cho ose not to give us permission to do so, they may still continue to participate in 
the study. This is considered additional material, but is not absolutely necessary.  Detailed 
information regarding thoughts and experiences will be obtained during the clinical interview. 
Although information from current providers may provide useful supplementary information, 
this is not a requirement given the detailed structure of the  interview. This has been the common 
and successful  approach in our studies at the University of Colorado Boulder, and we will be 
extending this practice.  
 
We will also ask participants to complete an exercise survey. This survey is a short self -report 
questionnaire designed to capture exercise and activity practices of adolescents and young adults. 
The Exercise Survey was designed by and Deighton and Addington (2013) specifically for 
examining exercise in UHR samples, and uses items applicable to the adol escent and young adult 
age range from widely employed measures of exercise and recreation practices such as the 
International Physical Activity Questionnaire: Short, The World Health Organization (WHO) 
Quality of Life -BREF, Motivations for Physical Activit ies Measure -Revised, and the Physical 
Self Description Questionnaire. The survey is brief but highly informative (asking about the 
frequency, intensity, and duration of recent exercise activity; See Appendix 2) and will be 
administered pre and post exercis e intervention, as well as during the yearly longitudinal follow -
up time points.   
 
We will also assess symptoms of depression and anxiety using the self report measure s named 
the Beck Anxiety Scale (Beck et al., 1998) , Beck Depression Inve ntory (Beck et al., 1998),  and 
the Calgary Depressi on Scale developed by Addington, Addington,  and Schissel 1990, which is 
completed by the assessor based on interview. The scales will help supplement the questions 
given on the SCID noted above. This will be completed at pre and post exercise intervention , and 
12 and 24 month visits.  
 
We will ask participants to complete  a puberty scale asking them to rate puberty milestones on a 
4 point likert scale (not yet started, barely started, seems complete) or “I don’t know”.  
 
Further, participants will  be given  a sheet with words listed on it ranging from simple to difficult. 
They will be asked to read the words and the assessor will keep track of incorrectly pronounced 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Exercise and markers of medial temporal health in youth at ultra high -
risk for psychosis, Phase 2   
 Page 20 of 58 Revis ed Template : October  19th, 2021 words. This assessment called the Wide Range Achievement Test (WRAT)  has been used in 
order t o obtain a quick measure of general intelligence. Typically, general intelligence tests take 
several hours, and this is a quick and easy way to get this information . 
 
Cortisol  
Four saliva samples for cortisol assay will be collected in the ADAPT clinic at  the pre and post 
exercise intervention, and at 12 -month and 24 -month assessment points.  If participants  choose to 
do the 12 and/or 24 month follow up over the phone, saliva sample tubes will be mailed to them  
to complete during the phone interview. A pre -labelled/prepaid package will be included for 
them  to mail the completed samples back to ADAPT. Samples collected in the clinic will be 
collected at hourly intervals  during the first morning of the initial and follow -up assessments 
while the diagnostic interviews and self -report measures are administered. Collection will begin 
around 9:30am, and subsequent samples will be obtained at hourly intervals, approximately 
10:30, 11:30 and 12:30. A timer -alarm will be used to signal collection times. Participants will 
provide each sample in a plastic specimen tube prelabeled with participant’s ID and sample 
number. Collection time is recorded on the label. Samples will be imme diately stored at -20C in 
lab freezers, and kept frozen until assay. Because diet and activity affect cortisol, subjects will be 
given explicit instructions and provided a log to detail these activities.  On the evening before 
saliva sampling, they will be  asked to avoid alcohol and caffeine after 6:00 PM. On the morning 
of the assessment, they will refrain from exercise, caffeinated beverages, and consume only 
grains (e.g., toast, cereal, pastry), milk, juice or water.  They will also avoid over -the-counte r 
medications and physical exercise. Food, liquid , and medication consumption the previous 
evening and morning will be recorded (please see Food and Activity Log attached).  For salivary 
cortisol assay, the Salimetrics (Salimetrics, LLC, College Park, Pa) High Sensitivity Salivary 
Cortisol Enzyme Immunoassay Kit will be used. This assay captures the full range of salivary 
cortisol levels (0.003 to 3.0μg/dL) requiring only 25 uL of saliva per test. A built -in pH indicator 
detects acidic or basic samples.  
 
In addition to collecting salivary cortisol during pre and post exercise intervention, 12 -month, 
and 24 -month assessments, the participants will be asked to take home four plastic specimen 
tubes pre and post exercise intervention, 12 -month and 24 -month asse ssments. They will be 
given these tubes at the end of the clinical assessment (Please refer to tables 2, 4, and 5). These 
samples will be used to measure the Cortisol Awakening Response (CAR). The CAR is a new 
area of research that provides a good measure of HPA integrity (Wilhelm, Born, Kudielka, 
Schlotz, & Wüst, 2007 ). The participant will be instructed to give a saliva sample on any day 
prior to coming back for their next visit. Instructions on when to provide the samples will be 
given (see attached document, “Cortisol Sample Instructi ons”).  There is a section in the Sleep 
and Activity log for the participant to record the time and day that these samples are given as 
well as serve as a reminder to provide the samples. The participant is instructed to provide the 
samples immediately aft er waking, 30 minutes after awakening, 45 minutes after awakening, and 
immediately before going to sleep . The tubes will be labeled with their participant ID followed 
by a 01, 02, 03, 04 to denote the succession of samples.  The participant will be instruc ted to 
bring the samples back to the ADAPT office. Upon return to ADAPT, specimens will be stored 
in a freezer until ready for assay along with the other samples taken during the assessment. 
Please note that we do not request participants to store cortisol  samples in a freezer when they 
take them home.  If participants  choose to do the 12 and/or 24 month follow up over the phone, 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Exercise and markers of medial temporal health in youth at ultra high -
risk for psychosis, Phase 2   
 Page 21 of 58 Revis ed Template : October  19th, 2021 the take home saliva sample tubes will be mailed to participants to complete after the phone 
interview at the times noted above. A  pre-labelled/prepaid package will be included for them to 
mail the completed samples back to ADAPT.  
 
In addition to saliva samples, participants will be asked to provide a hair sample for cortisol 
analysis. The assessor or lab manager will collect a hair sample from the participant. They will 
cut a small strand of hair from the crown of the participant’s head. They will also be asked the 
following questions:  
1) How frequently do you wash your hair? (times/week)  
2) Do you use a conditioner? (yes/no)  
3) Do you b leach your hair?  (yes/no)  
4) Have you recently had a perm? (yes/no)  
5) Do you use hair straighteners? (yes/no)  
The strand of hair will be taped to a piece of foil and placed in a confidential, locked, cabinet.  
 
Blood Draw, RNA Extraction and BDNF  and Inflammation  Analysis :  
 
Before the blood draw, participants will be asked to complete a questionnaire asking about health 
behaviors (alcohol consumption, smoking, medication use, recreational activities, and 
reproductive health for female participants), a  questionnaire about symptoms (e.g ., headache, 
dizziness, chest pain), and questions about chronic illnesses and respiratory illnesses in the last 
two weeks. These questions are crucial for 1) data analysis because the blood sample can be 
affected by the h ealth behaviors outlined above and 2) determining whether blood can be drawn 
on the scheduled day. If the participant had a respiratory illness (e.g., cold, flu) in the last two 
weeks, the blood draw will be rescheduled because the cell count would likely be impacted by 
the illness.  
In addition, if the participant agrees to the blood draw, the trained phlebotomist will take 
participants’ body measurements: weight, height, waist, and hip.  These measures need to be 
factored in during the data analysis becaus e they are related to inflammatory markers. Research 
suggests that BMI, waist circumference, and waist to hip ration are all associated with IL-6, 
TNF - α and CRP (O’Connor et al., 2009). During that procedure, the phlebotomist will ensure 
the participants’  privacy is protected  by minimizing physical contact (having the participant hold 
the measurement tape during hip and waist measurement, keeping appropriate distance) and 
talking the participants though the steps. The participants will also be informed the y may tell the 
phlebotomist if they are uncomfortable with the procedure and that they can stop at any point 
without penalty.  
 
Blood sampling will be optional, and the participant’s decision no t to consent to the blood draw 
will not affect participation i n any of the ot her procedures. For those participants who consent to 
the blood draw, l ess than 30 mL of blood will be taken via antecubital blood  draw by a trained 
phlebotomist.  Collected into  2 PAXGene tubes, stored (frozen at -80 degree Celcius) and 
shipped to  Drs. Hutchison and Bryan at the University of Colorado Boulder.   There, blood will 
be collected into a 4 mL Vacutainer tube containing EDTA. A cell counter (Beckman Coulter 5 -
part Hematology Analyzer) will be used to quantify the presence of dif ferent cell populations in 
whole blood, to determine whether gene expression values differ depending on blood cell 
composition. The mRNA will be extracted from blood samples using the Qiagen RNAeasy kit 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Exercise and markers of medial temporal health in youth at ultra high -
risk for psychosis, Phase 2   
 Page 22 of 58 Revis ed Template : October  19th, 2021 and BDNF mRNA will be assayed using real time PCR and  a commercially available assay from 
Applied Biosystems.EndFragment . Blood samples will be collected pre and post exercise 
intervention  for the UHR Exercise group and pre and post waiting period for the UHR waitlist 
control.  
A sample of venous blood will be taken  at the same time  into a Vacutainer Serum Separation 
Tube (BD Biosciences), which is then centrifuged at 1200 rpm for 10 minutes (in the ADAPT 
lab Centrifuge). Samples will then be  aliquoted into microfuge tubes  and frozen at -80 degree 
Celsius unt il processing. These analyses will focus on inflammatory marker s associated with 
exercising . Another sample  will be processed at Dr. Gregory Miller and Dr. Edith Chen’s lab 
located at the same location as the ADAPT lab. Only trained and authorized lab memb ers will be 
responsible for transporting the blood specimens for processing. During this process, blood will 
be collected into a 4 mL Vacutainer tube containing EDTA. A cell counter (Beckman Coulter 5 -
part Hematology Analyzer) will be used to quantify the presence of different cell populations in 
whole blood, to determine whether gene expression values differ depending on blood cell 
composition.  
The total amount of blood drawn at each time point is less than 30mL between 4 tubes.  
 
Urine samples:  
We will a sk participants to urinate in an icup. Icup is a brand of drug testing cups. If the results 
(which show up immediately) indicate that the participant is under the influence, they will be 
asked to reschedule their visit when they are not under the influence . With this information, we 
will include an appropriate referral.   
 
Audio and/or Video Recordings  
We will videotape the clinical interviews portion of the study. On the consent form, we included 
information about the video taping process, and whether or no t participants agree to this.  
Participants will be informed that this is for educational purposes and this allows us to make sure 
we are doing everything correctly. Participants will be also informed that videotapes may be 
used for coding various portions  of the study such as examining emotions . Additionally, this will 
allow us to have accurate consultation from the consultants involved.  If participants decide not 
to be videotaped, they still may participate in the study.  
Video tapes will be deleted upon participants’ request, although the participant will not be 
permitted to review the tape before doing so. Videotapes will be retained for research and/or 
training purposes for 30 years after which time they will be destroyed unless participant provide 
written permission for their continued use. In the future, the videotapes may be used for coding 
various components of the study (if consent is obtained).  
 
Participants who do not consent to be videotaped will not be videotaped. Participants who 
consent to be videotaped and then withdraw from the study or are ineligible will have their 
videotapes erased/deleted.  
 
3. Cognitive Battery  
The battery is designed to assess spatial memory, verbal learning, and episodic memory as well 
as broad cognitive function. This will include the Measurement and Treatment Research to 
Improve Cognition in Schizophrenia (MATRICS) Consensus Cognitive Battery (Green & 
Nuechterlein, 2004 ) which provides scores for domains of processing speed, attention/vigilance, 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Exercise and markers of medial temporal health in youth at ultra high -
risk for psychosis, Phase 2   
 Page 23 of 58 Revis ed Template : October  19th, 2021 working memory, verbal learning, visual learning, problem solving, social cognition and an 
overall composite score.   The MATRICS includes the Brief Assessment of Cognition in 
Schizophrenia (BACS), Symbol -Coding ( Timed paper -and-pencil test in which respondent uses 
a key to write digits that correspond to nonsense symbols ), Category Fluency: Animal Naming 
(Oral test in which respondent names as many animals as she/he can in 1 minute ), Trail Making 
Test: Part A ( Timed paper -and-pencil test in which respondent draws a line to connect 
consecutively numbered circles placed irregularly on a sheet of paper ), Continuous Perform ance 
Test—Identical Pairs (CPT -IP) (Computer -administered measure of sustained attention in which 
respondent presses a response button to consecutive matching numbers ), Wechsler Memory 
Scale® —3rd Ed. (WMS® -III): Spatial Span ( Using a board on which 10 cube s are irregularly 
spaced, respondent taps cubes in same (or reverse) sequence as test administrator ), Letter -
Number Span ( Orally administered test in which respondent mentally reorders strings of number 
and letters and repeats them to administrator ), Hopki ns Verbal Learning Test —Revised™ 
(HVLT -R™) ( Orally administered test in which a list of 1 words from three taxonomic 
categories is presented and the respondent is asked to recall as many as possible after each of 
three learning trials ), Brief Visuospatial Memory Test —Revised (BVMT -R™) ( A test that 
involves reproducing six geometric figures from memory ), Neuropsychological Assessment 
Battery® (NAB®): Mazes ( Seven timed paper -and-pencil mazes of increasing difficulty that 
measure foresight and planning ), and the Mayer -Salovey -Caruso Emotional Intelligence Test 
(MSCEIT™): Managing Emotions ( Paper -and-pencil multiple -choice test that assesses how 
people manage their emotions ).  This collective battery has been specifically designed, and 
validated for administrat ion to psychosis spectrum individuals and is designed to take 60 -90 
minutes to complete.  
 
Episodic memory is a critical cognitive process affected in the psychosis spectrum (Eastvold et 
al., 2007 ), and tied with aerobic fitnes s in other populations (Bunce & Murden, 2006 ).  Many of 
the common paradigms used to assess relat ional encoding and retrieval allow for the nature of 
the encoding strategy to be up to the participant, leaving open the possibility that poor task 
performance simply reflects a failure to apply relational processing, rather than a fundamental 
deficit in t he ability  to engage in such processing. In addition to the MATRICS consensus battery 
participants will also be administered the behavioral version of the Relational and Item Specific 
Encoding and Retrieval (RISE) task, which has been determined to gauge h ippocampal mediated 
episodic memory function while explicitly controlling whether participants engage in item -
specific or relational memory processing (Ragland et al., 2012 ). The task is part of the final 
selection of CNTRICS initiative, and demonstrates excellent test -characteristics (Gold et al., 
2012 ).  Stimuli consist of visual object representations of word stimuli (selected from a 
standardized corpus of photographic ima ges; http://cvcl.mit.edu/MM/ ). The RISE assessment 
includes several components and is administered with E -Prime® (version 2.0).  For the Item -
Specific encoding component, a total of 36 stimuli are presented for two seconds eac h, with a 
one second inter -stimulus -interval (ISI), and subjects make a two -button “yes/no” response to 
indicate whether the objects are “living” (this level -of-processing manipulation controls for 
potential group differ ences in strategy generation). For t he Relational Encoding component 18 
pairs of visual objects are presented for 4 seconds each, with one second ISI and subjects make a 
two-button “yes/no” response to indicate whether one item co uld fit inside the other item. After 
the encoding conditions, two ret rieval tasks are administered. For the Item Recognition 
component, all 72 objects studied during the encoding trials (36 item -specific and 36 relational 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Exercise and markers of medial temporal health in youth at ultra high -
risk for psychosis, Phase 2   
 Page 24 of 58 Revis ed Template : October  19th, 2021 targets) are randomly intermixed and presented with 72 new unstudied foils, and participants 
indicate whether each test item was “old” (left hand response) or “new” (right hand response) 
and rate their confidence using one of three buttons (i.e., 3 = high, 2 = medium, 1 = low).  
Finally, the Associative Recognition component includes the 18 original objects pairs studied 
during the relational encoding, which are then randomly intermixed and presented with 18 
rearranged object pairs consisting of items presented during different encoding trials an n ot 
originally paired together. Subjects make a two -button “yes/no” response to indicate whether 
items in each pair had been presented “together.” To prevent additional encoding of the 
relational object pairs the item recognition task precedes th e associated recognition task. The 
familiarity and recollection p erformance as well as hit rates and false alarm rates following 
encoding reflect the cognitive and neural mechanism underlying rela tional encoding and 
retrieval. The complete procedure, including practice, encoding, and retrieval required 20 
minutes to com plete.  In addition to being highly innovative and amendable to administration in 
psychosis spectrum populations (the task uses visual objects rather than words to improve patient 
understanding of encoding instructions; because individuals with psychosis h ave prominent task -
switching difficulties, encoding conditions are alternated in a pseudo -random block design rather 
than in the fully randomized design; participants are presented with 3 second instruction screens 
to remind them of the encoding condition between blocks), the task specifically targets an NIMH 
prioritized construct as well (http://www.nimh.nih.gov/research -funding/rdoc/rdoc -
constructs.shtml#active_maint enance). Psychology Masters and Ph.D. level students will 
administer the entire batt ery un der the supervision of Dr. Mittal . Taken together, this battery was 
kept brief to limit any potential participant strain over the multiple testing periods.  
 
We will also be measuring acute stress.  We will do this using the t he Positive and Negative 
Affect Scale (PANAS), which is a paper and pencil 20 -item self -report questionnaire 
administered to the patients to assess their current mood state (Watson  et al., 1988). The 
questionnaire takes approximately  five minutes and will be  repeated once monthly before and 
after exercise for the duration of the study. Additionally, we will use the Useful Field of View 
(UFOV), which is a computerized measure of selective attention and visual processing speed. 
Subjects will be asked to identif y a central stimulus, as well as locate a peripheral target among 
distractors on the computer. Testing will last approximately five  minutes and will be repeated 
once monthly  before and after exercise  for the duration of the study. Specifically, they will b oth 
be given before and after exercise session 1, week 5 sometime, week 9 sometime, and week 12 
sometime)  
 
4. Exercise Intervention  
VO 2max Graded Treadmill Test: Participants will b e asked to meet in downtown Chicago at the 
Northwestern University, Departm ent of Physical Therapy and Human Movement Science, 645 
N. Michigan Ave. 10th Floor, 60611  for the initial exercise assessment pre a nd post exercise 
intervention. Prior to the initial exercise assessment, participants will be given information 
verbally on how to prepare for this test over the phone or during the ir last visit at ADAPT. We 
will inform participants to wear exercise clothes (comfortable clothing, tennis shoes, sports bra 
for women), bring water and water will also be provided if necessary, eat only very light meals 
before coming in for the assessments , and refrain from ingestion of caffeinated substances for at 
least 2 hours prior to the session   
 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Exercise and markers of medial temporal health in youth at ultra high -
risk for psychosis, Phase 2   
 Page 25 of 58 Revis ed Template : October  19th, 2021 Once at the VO 2max center,  a trained exercise physiologist  (Elizabeth Skender)  will con duct the 
maximal exercise test.  First, a  resting 12 -lead ECG will be recorded in the recumbent and upright 
positions immediately prior to the exercise test, as well as during the test. If the findings on the 
resting ECG do not contraindicate exercise, the exercise tes t will be performed.   Contraindicators 
include the following: (a) ST -segment depression of more than 0.2 mV that is either horizontal, 
downsloping, or slowly upsloping (less than 1 mV/sec) and lasts for 0.08 sec, or ST -segment 
elevation greater than 0.1 mV; (b) chest pain or discomfort; (c) serious arrhythmias, including 
multifocal PVCs, ventricular tachycardia, frequent (>10/min) PVCs or couplets, or sustained 
atrial tachyarrhythmias;  (d) A -V block or other conduction defects; (e) a fall of systolic blo od 
pressure of 10 mmHg or greater from the peak level with increasing exercise intensity; (f) 
diastolic blood pressure above 110 mmHg or systolic above 220 mmHg; (g) dizziness; (h) ataxic 
gait; and (i) pallor or cyanosis.  Elizabeth Skender , who is The Amer ican College of Sports 
Medicine certified exercise physiologis t and has a successful completion of an American Heart 
Association -sponsored course in advanced cardiac life support , is qualified to conduct and 
monitor the ECG procedure. In addition, she has knowledge of appropriate indications and 
contraindications for exercise testing, competence in cardiopulmonary resuscitation , knowledge 
of cardiac arrhythmia and the ability to recognize and treat various arrhythmias, and knowledge 
of endpoints of exercise  testing and indications to terminate exercise testing.  As a part of her 
ACSM certification, she also qualified to take blood pressure and measure rating s of perceived 
exertion  (RPE).   
  
Maximal aerobic power (VO2max) will be measured by indirect calorime try (TruMax 2400, 
ParvoMedics, Sandy, UT) during the GXT. A warm -up period on the treadmill will be used to 
identify the walking speed that generates a HR that is 65 -70% of the age - predicted HRmax . The 
speed of the treadmill will remain the same throughou t the test but the incline of the treadmill 
belt will increase 2% every 2 min (or 2.5% for speeds 6 mph or greater). The ECG will 
continuously monitor the subject’s HR throughout the entire VO2 max test. Blood pressure will 
be taken every minute of the tes t, and the subject’s RPE will be recorded at each minute.  The 
treadmill speed is determined using participant ’s heart rate and RPE and can vary greatly 
between subjects (1.5 -10+ mph). Because all participants will be sedentary, a speed that elicits 
70% of age-predicted max heart rate and an RPE rating of around 13 (“somewhat hard”) will be 
used to begin the te st. Staying within these parameters generally yields an 8 -12 min test; the 
recommended target for VO 2max testing (Hollenberg et al., 1998 ). The determination of when a 
participant has reached VO 2max is not without controversy,  (Magnan, 2013 ) and will ultimately 
be up to the participant, who chooses whe n they can no longer continue. This study will 
determine a valid VO 2max using both the primary criterion of having achieved a plateau in VO 2 as 
well as secondary criteria outlined by Pimentel and colleagues  (Pimentel et al., 2003 ) including 
respiratory exchange ratio (RER)max≥1.1, RPEmax≥18, and age pr edicted heart rate max 
±10bpm. VO 2max will be used as a baseline measure of cardiovascular fitness and will serve as 
the basis for exercise prescriptions. There is ample evidence in the literature that VO 2max is an 
appropriate measure for youth in this age range (Pheiffer et al., 2008). Additional measures of 
cardiovascular fit ness obtained in the course of the assessment include ventilatory threshold (VT) 
(Ekkekakis et al., 2008 ) and VO 2 peak (Cooper et al. , 1984 ), both of which are related but 
distinct measures of cardiovascular fitness and have been used successfully in studies of 
adolescents and young adults . These variables will then serve as  objective outcome measures to 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Exercise and markers of medial temporal health in youth at ultra high -
risk for psychosis, Phase 2   
 Page 26 of 58 Revis ed Template : October  19th, 2021 determine whether participation in one of the aerobic exercise (moderate versus vigorous 
intensity) led to an increase in cardiovascular fitness.  
 
Exercise Intervention at Northwestern University in Evanston, IL  
 
Orientation Tour  
During the orientation tour, we will show participants the facility, share their exercise 
prescriptions with them, and work with them and their famil ies to organize transportation for the 
sessions. We will also provide participants with mo re information about the incentives for 
participation and discuss factors relating to how to best keep them motivated. This will also be a 
great time for participants to meet the exercise staff (including an expert exercise physiologist) 
that will work wit h them to help meet aerobic fitness goals. This portion of the study will be 
apart from the  exercise intervention.  During the orientation tour, they will receive incentive 
flyers, exercise is fun flyer, and payment information forms (please see supporting documents).  
 
The exercise intervention will be tailored to each person’s current exercise fitness level. We will 
use 8 0% of VO 2max and ask participants to exercise 2 times a week. The first 10 minutes of the 
visit will include warming up. Next, participant s will be asked to run for 30 minutes. Every 10 
minutes they will be asked to run at a slightly higher intensity (a faster jog) for 3 1 -minute 
intervals to get to 95% of VO 2max . The purpose of adding brief sessions of high intensity 
interval training (HIIT ) to participants’ exercise prescription is to increase rates of their fitness 
improvement. Recent studies suggest that HIIT is associated with higher improvements in 
adolescent and young adult aerobic fitness than more traditional continuous endurance tra ining 
(Buchan, et al., 2012, Costigan et al., 2015, Logan et al., 2014, Matsuo, et al., 2014). Risks 
associated with brief spouts of HIIT are no greater than risks associated with aerobic exercise 
described in the Risks to subject portion of the protocol. In addition, individuals that are enrolled 
in the study will be asked not to partake in any physical activity outside  of the exercise 
intervention. Based on our pilot data, which suggest that prodromal participants do not engage in 
physical activity but in stead have more sedentary lifestyles, we do not think that excess physical 
activity will be a concern. Later in a different phase (which will be included in a separate 
application), the controls will be assessed for fitness before and after the exercise in tervention 
and any increases in fitness will be conside red outside physical activity. Increases in fitness will 
be treated as covariates.   
 
Most (if not all) exercise sessions will be monitored by the exercise physiologist. In an event the 
exercise physiologist is not available for the scheduled session , the research coordinator may step 
in to monitor the session to ensure participants are staying on the 2 session per week schedule. 
According to ACSM Guidelines for Exercise Testing and Presc ription, 9th edition , “The 
health/fitness and clinical exercise professional may determine the level of supervision that is 
optimal for an individual by evaluating information derived from the pre -exercise evaluation as 
indicated by the individual’s exerci se goals and health status” (the VO2 max test in our case). 
“Supervision by an experienced exercise leader can enhance adherence to exercise and may 
improve safety for individuals with chronic disease and health cond itions”. We are recruiting 
only low risk participants who do not  have chronic diseases or health conditions that wo uld put 
them at high risk for a  detrimental event during exercise . Therefore , the supervision is not 
necessary (i.e., healthy adolescents and  young adults could to the prescribed exercise regimen on 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Exercise and markers of medial temporal health in youth at ultra high -
risk for psychosis, Phase 2   
 Page 27 of 58 Revis ed Template : October  19th, 2021 their own) , and we monitor sessions to improve adherence , administer questionnaires, and to add 
a level of safety. However, we will be adding precautionary steps to ensure safety. B ased off the 
VO2 max test and first few weeks of exercise sessions, the exercise physiologist will determine 
the level of supervision that is optimal for the individual. If for any reason the subject is severely 
deconditioned, or the exercise physiologist believes that the y need an exercise professional’s 
supervision , they will only be supervised by an exercise physiologist. However, if based on the 
VO2 max test and the subject’s fitness level, the exercise ph ysiologist determines that the 
research coordinator  is an adequat e level of supervision during certain exercise sessions, then 
that may be an option.  Furthermore, we monitor heart rate and the perceived exertion every 5 
minutes throughout the sessions.  
 
Exercise Prescriptions. The initial exercise in tensity will be 55%  of VO 2max. This is the baseline 
fitness threshold for the study to see what their baseline fitness level is prior to intervention. 
Then, the intensity will be gradually increased to peak intensity over the first 3 weeks. The initial 
exercise duration will  be 15 minutes, and duration will be gradually increased to 30 minutes over 
the first 3 weeks. Intensity will be constantly monitored during exercise u sing heart rate (HR) 
monitors. Once at full training intensity, the goal will be to maintain HR withi n ±5% of the target 
intensity. The primary mode of exercise will be treadmill walking/running or elliptical . Adding 
variety will keep participants engaged and interested, allowing us to better test feasibility of this 
study.  
 
Feedback Session. At the end of th e post exercise visits, participants will receive a feedback 
session with members that worked with them. This is an opportunity for participants to ask 
questions and receive appropriate recommendations and referrals , if needed. A feedback session  
is a grea t way to check in and get information regarding the participation. Additionally, it's a 
good way to wrap up the time in the lab and to remind the participant they will be asked to come 
in 12 and 24 months later.  Addit ionally , participants will be given a t ake home packet consisting 
of a reminder of their next appointment and flyers. The first flyer will remind them about the 
opportunity to win incentives . The second flyer will be some information regarding the benefits 
of exercise, and other educational points. This allows participants to learn more about exercise 
throughout the process. Please see attached documents for more details.  
 
Affective Response Scales (Hardy and Rejeski, 1989; Svebak and Murgatroyd, 1985; Borg, 
1998): To check in wit h participants as they are exercising, we will be asking them questions 
about how they feel, how aroused they are, their thoughts, perceived exertion, and motivation. 
This will allow us to see how participants are able to handle the exercise intervention 
(contributing to the feasibility aims of the study).  
 
5. Imaging Assessment and Analysis  
PI Dr. Mittal and an experienced postdoctoral research assistant (PRA) will be responsible for 
preparing, analyzi ng, and interpreting the data. The entire imaging prot ocol including localizing 
images, gradient echo field mapping, arterial spin labeling scan, and BOLD weighted resting 
state scan takes  approximately  30 minutes. Prior to scanning at each time point, each participant 
will be evaluated with a comprehensive s creener detailed in the “Safety” section.   
 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Exercise and markers of medial temporal health in youth at ultra high -
risk for psychosis, Phase 2   
 Page 28 of 58 Revis ed Template : October  19th, 2021 fMRI Monetary Incentive Delay (MID) Task. During the same session of the structural MRI 
scan, the participants will be asked to complete the MID task while undergoing an fMRI. They 
will complete 2 MID runs each lasting 9 minutes. On each trial, a cue will indicate whether 
participants can win money, lose money, or neither win nor lose money (neutral). Next 
they are instructed to press a response -box button as quickly as possible following the 
target stimulus. Fin ally, feedback will indicate whether participants won or lost that trial 
and whether or not they won/lost money for their response. Outcome probabilities are 
fixed by an adaptive algorithm by applying a sliding threshold that changes how quickly 
participan ts need to respond to receive win feedback. The algorithm tracks participants’ 
response times and adjusts the response time window to keep the task difficulty consistent 
(at approximately 66% success rate). This means that if the participant is below 66%, the 
target duration is lengthened, and if the participant is above 66%, the target duration is 
shortened. There will be 150 trials and the total task takes about 20 minutes to finish.  In 
win trials, participants win 20 cents, and in lose trials, they lose 20 cents. Participants can 
earn an average of $20 during this task ($0 lowest and $30 highest amount) which will be 
added to the total payment for this session. The participants will be made aware that the 
difficulty of the task is changing depending on th eir performance and that they are most 
likely to earn $20 during the task. This taks will be completed only at the baseline (pre -
intervention).  
fMRI Self Ordered Working memory task (SOT). Participants will complete a Self Ordered 
Working memory class in the scanner. Eight line drawings of difficult -to-verbalize objects will 
be presented, and participants will be instructed to select each object once, in any order. After 
each object is selected, all objects will be pseudorandomly rearranged on the screen. Participants 
will then select an object not already selected so that at each step there is one more previously 
selected object to remember. A perceptual and motor control task will be used following 
identical procedures except that one object will be marke d with an asterisk, and participants will 
be instructed to select the marked object, as a control condition. Participants will be paid $0.25 
per correct response for both tasks. The primary measure of performance will be working 
memory capacity. Participan ts are able to earn between $0.25 (one trial correct) and $36 (144 
trials correct)  for an average of approximately $20 . This task will only be completed at the 3 
month follow up (post -intervention).  
 
MRI Post Processing  
PI Dr. Mittal holds significant expe rience in utilizing structural imaging to understand grey 
matter changes both in early psychosis and neurodegenerative disease and will be responsible for 
preparing the images for analysis (registration and delineation) and analyzing the data and 
interpret ing results. Medial temporal structures (hippocampus and parahippocampal gyrus) will 
be delineated automatically on MRI using the FMRIB’s Integrated Registration and 
Segmentation Tool (FIRST) algorithm within the FMRIB’s Software Library (FSL) image -
proces sing suite (Patenaude, 2007 ). Researchers have found close correspondences between 
FIRST and manually derived volume values (de Jong et al., 2008 ).  Dr. Mittal has also utilized 
this program in other recent studies of high -risk patients (e.g., Mittal et al., 2010a ). To employ 
FIRST, each subject’s whole -brain IR -FSPGR will be converted from DICOM to Analyze 
format and croppe d below the head.  The resulting volume will be resliced to an axial -oblique 
orientation aligned with the AC -PC plane. It will then be transformed into MNI152 space before 
being loaded into FIRST.  FIRST was developed by the FMRIB Centre in the Department o f 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Exercise and markers of medial temporal health in youth at ultra high -
risk for psychosis, Phase 2   
 Page 29 of 58 Revis ed Template : October  19th, 2021 Clinical Neurology at Oxford and represents a cutting -edge addition to the widely used FSL 
medical image -processing package, incorporating several major advances in brain voluming of 
the last decade.  Briefly, the individual subject’s brain MRI is compar ed to a large database of 
standard bra ins maintained by Harvard/MGH. These brains have been carefully parcellated into 
numerous volumes -of-interest (VOIs), each representing a different brain anatomic structure, by 
hand.  A surface mesh is then applied to each candidate VOI in the subject’s brain, (i.e., the 
actual surface is approximated by a very complicated contiguous net of a large number of tiny 
polygons (e.g., triangles) each with vertices (mesh points) and an interior area (facet)). The shape 
formed by the points mesh is then described quantitatively as a 3D distribution in space, 
composed of varying amounts of a set of stan dard deformable distributions. The T1 MRI 
intensity at each facet of the mesh surface is normalized to correct for instrumental a nd other 
inter-subject differences in intensity. A separate 3D distribution is then derived for the intensity.  
A “training set” of standard VOIs is extracted from the database.  Iterative curve fitting is then 
applied until a linear combination of the sta ndard VOIs is found that best reproduces the shape 
and intensity distr ibutions of the subject’s VOI. That yields the final volume.  FIRST also returns 
values for each participant’s total intracranial volume (TICV; the sum of whole -brain grey matter 
plus wh ite matter plus cerebrospinal fluid) and each structure is then divided by the TICV to 
control for whole brain volume. To confirm volumes derived using FIRST, results for each 
subject will be also che cked by visual inspection by Dr . Mittal an experienced P RA. Secondly, 
the structures will be evaluated with vertex analyses (assessing changes in shape post trial on a 
per-vertex basis), which will also be carried out utilizing FIRST (first_utils). Shape/appearance 
models used in FIRST are constructed from manu ally segmented images provided by the Center 
for Morphometric Analysis (CMA, MGH, Boston). This approach is different from using a 
whole -structure summary measure like volume, as it allows visualization of the region of the 
shape that is changing as well a s the type of shape change (changes in shape will be examin ed 
with exploratory analyses). Figure 5 illustrates a shape -based analysis of the hippocampus.  
Taken together, these analytic strategies will provide highly detailed information regarding 
longitud inal changes in the hippocampal structure.  
 
Data Analyses and Specific Hypotheses  
Preliminary analyses will be conducted to verify that demographics for the groups are 
adequately matched. If significant differences are found, these will be taken into 
consid eration in subsequent analyses.  Further, based on our previous studies indicating that 
target variables are normally distributed, we propose a parametric approach to data 
analysis; if any violations to parametric statistics are detected, we will empl oy corrections 
and/or non -parametric equivalent tests.  To control for development related changes in 
brain maturation between the ranges of subjects, each series of analyses will treat age as a 
covariate. With the exception of needing to control for any c hanges in aerobic fitness do to 
exercise activity from outside the trial (in the waitlist control) this will be the only covariate 
used in analyses .  For ROI based analyses, significance testing and adjustment for multiple 
comparisons will be calculated vi a modified Bonferroni correction.  Only participants with no 
history or current treatment with antipsychotics will be included in the study.  If participants 
begin treatment with neuroleptics during the 3 -month trial period, they will be permitted to 
compl ete the trial, but excluded from the study. Our aim is  If UHR subjects participating in 
the exercise condition show greater post -trial increases in medial temporal volume 
and improved cognitive, symptom and social/role functioning profiles when 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Exercise and markers of medial temporal health in youth at ultra high -
risk for psychosis, Phase 2   
 Page 30 of 58 Revis ed Template : October  19th, 2021 compared wi th the UHR waitlisted -controls.   We predict that the UHR exercise treatment 
group will show a strong trend to suggest larger effects for increases in hippocampal and 
parahippocampal gyral volume, and improvements in cognitive, social/functional and 
symptom  profiles after the trial as compared to the UHR waitlist controls. Any naturalistic 
aerobic activity seen in the UHR Waitlisted -Controls will be monitored by testing for changes 
in aerobic fitness between the pre -post 12 -week assessments (although we do n ot anticipate 
a great deal of naturalistic aerobic activity in the UHR control group based on our pilot 
findings, any changes in fitness will be controlled for in the respective statistical analyses) .  
Any participants in the UHR exercise group that are na turalistically being treated with 
psychotherapy will be matched with a wait -list control participant treated with a comparable 
modality.   All intervention analyses in the R33 phase will be conducted utilizing random 
coefficient regression that controls for  variability in response across participants as well as 
the within -subjects nature of the fitness assessment data and cognitive assessment data.  
This flexible mixed models statistical approach (Cohen  et al. , 2003 ) allows for the inclusion of 
the age covariate, as well as the utilization of sophisticated approaches to the treatment of 
missing data (full information maximum likelihood (FIML) estimation) (Schafer & Graham, 
2002 ).  There are several important reasons for including a controlled trial phase.  First, a 
pilot controlled trial will provide opportunity to de velop consistent practices to enhance data 
integrity and the protection of human subjects (e.g., informed consent procedures, data 
collection tools, regulatory reporting procedures, procedures for adverse event reporting).  
Second, it will be important to determine that any effects seen across the UHR -exercise group 
are due to the proposed intervention and not simply reflecting learning effects (for the 
cognitive measures) or developmental changes. Finally, the process of conducting a small 
clinical trial, before disseminating the findings or planning a larger multisite controlled trial 
will invariably provide a number of valuable insights and unforeseen factors.  This study will 
be instrumental in evaluating the feasibility of recruitment, retention, assess ment and 
implementation of a novel intervention in a fully powered trial.  
 
Exploratory: Aim A) If the intervention has an influence on course of illness and 
conversion rates.  An important ultimate consideration for UHR individuals relates to clinical 
outcome or conversion to formal psychotic disorders. Within -group analyses will focus on 
how varying degrees of aerobic fitness, brain, and cognitive changes post trial or wait -list 
predict 12 -month and 24 -month symptoms levels and conversion status.  In addition, it will 
be possible to compare the conversion incidence with that reported from extant well -
powered studies.  Finally, because there will be a small group of wait -list par ticipants 
followed up (from years 3 and 4), it will be possible to run exploratory analyses to compare 
groups in course and outcome over time (note: those control UHR youth who elect to accept 
the offer to participate in the free exercise program following  the wait -list period will be 
excluded from these analyses). Although the sample size prohibits any strong conclusions 
with regard to conversion (based on the current literature only 10 -15% are likely to convert 
to psychosis), this approach will allow for us to track longitudinal changes symptoms, and 
social/role function and the data will be useful in determining the ultimate effects of the 
intervention on long -term clinical course and conversion.   
 
Timeline, Sample Size, and Power Analysis:  
Over the cou rse of two years collecting data, 30 UHR participants (15 UHR -exercise, 15 UHR 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Exercise and markers of medial temporal health in youth at ultra high -
risk for psychosis, Phase 2   
 Page 31 of 58 Revis ed Template : October  19th, 2021 waitlisted -control) and 15 controls will participate in the study.  Based on pilot data and 
observations for similar trials in other clinical populations, it is estimated that t here will be a 
20% attrition rate among the participants.  To allow for a sufficient sample size to complete 
the Aims we propose to overall -sample at this rate a total of 36 subjects will be recruited for 
the R33 trial (an extra 3 in each group).   
Although the funding mechanism does not explicitly require a sample size sufficient to 
yield high - statistical power (PAR -11-177- “Pilot studies are not expected to be sufficiently 
powered to test efficacy, and inferential statistical test are not expected  at this phase of 
development” ), we projected the proposed numbers for each phase to provide a power level 
that is sufficient for detecting larger significant effects.  Following Cohen’s (1988) standard 
guidelines for power calculation (Cohen, 1988 ) and utilizing G*Power 3.0.3 (Faul  et al. , 
2007 ), we confirmed power estimates for each phase of the trial.  In the R33 phase we 
benefit significantly from the strength of the repeated measures design.  For the two -tailed 
multivariate tests comparing the two groups (UHR exercise, UHR waitlist -control) o n target 
variables, with 15 participants per group and two measurement occasions, we should have 
observed power of .75 with =. 05 and for the detection of a moderate effect size ( f = .25).  
Our observed power for the detection of a large effect ( f = .40) should be well over .99.   Thus, 
while significant effects are not central to the aims of the investigation, there is still power to 
detect larger effects in both phases.  
 
The scanning portion of the study will take place at the Center for Translational I maging 
(CTI) located at 737 N. Michigan Avenue, Suite 1600 Chicago IL 60611. The MRI device for 
these scans is FDA approved for research with human subjects and has all the safety 
inherent in a clinical MRI scanner.  The radio frequency fields conform to g uidelines 
determined by the FDA and the FDA has designated MRI scanners to be a non -significant 
risk device. MR techniques non -invasively produce images and measurements from tissues 
in the intact, living human. The facility houses Tim Trio 3.0 Tesla Sieme ns Medical 
Solutions scanners.  
 
About the Subjects  
The participants in the proposed study will consist of 30 UHR youth (15 in the exercise and 
15 in the waitlisted -control)  and 15 HC .  All participants (age 16 to 24) will be recruited into 
the study over a 5-year period through the established Adolescent Development and 
Preventive Treatment (ADAPT) program directed by Co -P.I. Mittal.  Potential UHR subjects 
undergo a telephone screen and those who screen positive will be invited to an in -person 
eligibility  and consent evaluation.  Those screened participants who meet criteria for a 
prodromal syndrome based on the SIPS (Miller  et al. , 2003a ) will be invited to participate in 
the study (help -seeking ind ividuals who do not meet criteria will be referred to appropriate 
community resources).  This upper limit of 24 years was chosen as this age falls within the 
range for mean age of conversion to psychosis yet is still characterized by significant changes 
in neural organization (maximizing the potential for the trial to influence brain morphology) 
(Sowell et al., 1999). With regard to physical activity status, consistent with previous exercise 
studies, all participants will be sedentary.  HC participants will be self -referred (responding to 
flyers and ads).  
 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Exercise and markers of medial temporal health in youth at ultra high -
risk for psychosis, Phase 2   
 Page 32 of 58 Revis ed Template : October  19th, 2021 For the scan portion of th e study, in order to protect the health and safety of the 
participants, exclusion criteria for this study will include any contraindication to magnetic 
resonance scanning (e.g., m etal in body, claustrophobia, pregnant). These exclusions are 
specific to MRI and are consistent with most studies involving MRI. Potential participants 
will be screened for the presence of any of these exclusion criteria prior to participating in 
this MRI  study.  
 
Financial Compensation  
Participants will be given $45.00 for 1.5 hour  screening to decide whether they are a good fit for 
the study.  If found to be a good fit, participants will be given an additional $ 30 per hour for up 
to 3-hours of clinical assessments.  UHR p articipants will be given $ 45 for a 1.5-hour cognitive 
batter y.  For the scan, UHR subjects will be given $ 45 for 1.5 hours  and HC participants $60 for 
the 2 hour scan.  For the fitness assessments, UHR subjects will be given $ 20.00.  For the 
exercise intervention trial, subjects who are exercising will be given $ 20.00 per 40 minutes  of 
their time. Participants who consent to the blood draw will be receive $25 for each of the draws. 
Subjects will be asked to complete the clinical assessments, cognitive testing, and scan post 
exercise intervention, and they will receiv e the same reimbursement.  Additionally, they will 
receive this reimbursement at 12 -month, and 24 -month time points. Other compensations 
include: 1 .) To improve compliance, the exercise group will be enrolled in a rewards system. For 
each completed exercis e session, they will receive a ticket for the total of 24 tickets. For the first 
8 tickets, each participant in the exercise group will get a $50 gift card . For the next 8, they will 
get $100 gift card (Northwestern’s PNC Stored Value Card which will be ex plained to 
participants). For the last 8 tickets, they will get an iPad mini.  2.) Snacks will be available at any 
of the visits and any costs relating to parking will be reimbursed. $15 will be used to purchase 
snacks for participants. $10 dollars will be  available to supplement travel/gas costs for the 
Pre/Post Exercise Assessment time points as well as both the 12 and 24 -month follow -ups ($40 
total for participation in the duration of the study).  If participants would like to complete the 12 
and/or 24 m onth follow -up clinical assessments  over the phone, they will be emailed a virtual 
Northwestern Stored Gift Card after completing the interview.  Transportation/snack total costs 
will be $55. As noted earlier, we will also arrange for a free pick up and dro p off service for each 
of the exercise sessions if requested.   
 
Withdrawal of Subjects*  
If a subject chooses to stop participating for any reason, his or her participation in the study will 
be terminated. Though highly unlikely, the circumstances under which a participant would be 
withdrawn without her consent include: (1) obviously not following study instructions or (2) 
behaving in a way that is verbally or physically abusive towards research staff. Those who 
experience early withdr awal will receive prorated payment based on the number of sessions they 
completed  
Risks to Subjects*  
Risks associated with breach of confidentiality: There is a potential risk that confidential health 
information collected during the course of the study ma y be disclosed to others.  
 
Risks associated with stigma: There is a potential risk that participants will be subjected to 
stigma and undue anxiety from identification as “at risk” of a serious mental disorder.  
 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Exercise and markers of medial temporal health in youth at ultra high -
risk for psychosis, Phase 2   
 Page 33 of 58 Revis ed Template : October  19th, 2021 Risks associated with being distressed: Ther e is a potential risk that the participants may find the 
study questions and procedures tedious, or that they may be distressed by the discussion of 
personal issues.  
 
Risks associated with the MRI Procedures:  
1. The magnetic field of the MR environment ha s the potential to cause burns or bodily injury if 
ferrous metal objects are implanted in the body, or if personal articles containing ferrous material 
are brought into the environment.  
2. The risk of MRI to pregnant women and fetuses is currently unknown.    
3. The MRI may cause discomfort due to scanner noise.  
4. There may be some discomfort from lying still and in one position for a long time  
5. Peripheral nerve stimulation (PNS/tingling). At sufficient exposure levels, peripheral nerve 
stimulation is perceptible as “tingling” or “tapping” sensations. PNS symptoms will usually 
subside shortly after the scan is completed.  
6. Participants may feel nervousness or feelings of claustrophobia.  
7. There is a risk that the image will reveal an ob servation concerning an individual research 
participant that has potential clinical importance but is beyond the aims of this protocol. In the 
event of the confirmation of a significant anomaly in a participant’s brain image, this information 
will likely b e distressing to the participant.  
8. In rare cases , MRI can result in  burning or tingling sensation, skin irritation,  or swelling at the 
tattooed areas wi thout lasting effects or complications (MRI safety.com, 2016 ; FDA, 2015 ). One 
study retrospectively examining reports from 108 individuals with tattoos who have undergone 
an MRI scan  found no complications (Nouredinne, et al., 2015). In a nother study , only two out 
of 135 participants (1.5%) reported slight tingling or burning sensation (Toppe, et al., 2002 ). The 
authors also reported that an estimate of less than 10% of individuals wh o have undergone an 
MRI scan have  reported transient symptoms (swelling, heating or burning sensation, or skin 
irritation).  In one case study that reported an athlete experienc ing skin reddening and mild 
swelling at the tattooed areas after an MRI reported that the symptoms were resolved within 12 
hours with no permanent effects (Ross & Matava, 2011).  These risks may higher if the tattoo is 
directly in the exposure volume of the transmit coil ; therefore, we will exclude participants who 
have face or neck tattoos.  
 
Risks Associated with the treadmill /elliptical  tests:  During treadmill /elliptical  tests, the 
American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association (2002) note that about 4 in 10,000 
people will experience chest pains or a heart attack during the maximal exercise test and about 1 
in 10,000 people may actually die from cardiovascular related problems during a maximal 
exercise test. Experiencing syncope during a ma ximal exercise test is more common, occurring 
in about 1 in 100 people. In addition, the treadmill test can cause dry mouth, fatigue and minor 
muscle and joint discomfort, as well as possible soreness or injury.   
 
Risks associated with the aerobic exercis e and/or stretching and toning interventions . Participants 
will be informed that any time they are physically active (in this case, during the supervised 
physical activity sessions) there is always a risk for muscle soreness and discomfort both during 
and after exercise activities.  
 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Exercise and markers of medial temporal health in youth at ultra high -
risk for psychosis, Phase 2   
 Page 34 of 58 Revis ed Template : October  19th, 2021 Risk associated with blood draws: pain, a bruise at the point where blood is taken, redness and 
swelling of the vein and infection, and a rare risk of fainting.  
 
Since we will be evaluating and monitoring subjects for the prese nce and the development of a 
psychiatric disorder, we have instituted procedures for the management of anticipated clinical 
issues . 
 
Management of Risks:  
Limits to confidentiality will be detailed on the consent/assent forms and will be discussed 
explicitl y in the initial interview.  Specifically, subjects will be informed that they will not be 
asked specifically about any illegal activities, but if they should discuss such activities, the 
information could be requested by authorities such as the police or court system. In addition, 
they will be told that there are limits to confidentiality, including our requirement to report 
information about: child abuse or neglect, a crime that the subject plans to commit, or harm that 
may come to the subject or others. With respect to child abuse or neglect, research staff will 
comply with state laws and complete a child abuse report with the state Department of Child 
Protective Services. If there is risk of harming self or others, research staff will take necessary 
actions, including notifying significant others who may assist in the protection of the subject’s 
safety or notifying others who might be affected, such as intended victims, or notifying the 
police.  
 
Risks of stigma and undue anxiety from identification as “at  risk” of a serious mental disorder 
will be minimized in the following ways:  
a. Information regarding possible outcomes and causes will be routinely provided. Subjects will 
be informed about possible outcomes, including remission, persistent symptoms, or w orsening of 
symptoms. They will be informed that causes of symptoms include a normal adolescent or early 
adult maturation, a reaction to a life stressor, a symptom of drug use, symptoms of a metabolic 
disorder, the symptoms of a mood disorder or anxiety di sorder, or the early warning signs of 
affective disorder or schizophrenia.  
b. Study participants who are judged to be in need of psychiatric or psychological 
evaluation/treatment, and are not currently receiving treatment, will be referred as clinically 
indicated.  
c. In addition, to minimize risk of undue anxiety related to uncertainty of diagnosis at screening 
we will also conduct a careful systematic diagnostic interview (the Structured Clinical Interview 
for DSM IV, SCID) and cognitive evaluation to de termine whether there is an active diagnosable 
condition.  
 
The risk that the subjects may find the study questions and procedures tedious, or that they may 
be distressed by the discussion of personal issues will be minimized by having a study staff 
person  monitor the subject’s experiences during the study procedures, and by having a study 
clinician familiar with the participant available to assist the subject if she or he becomes 
distressed by study procedures. In addition, participants will be told that t hey may decline to 
answer any questions or discuss any issue if they do not want to or if they find it distressing. 
Efforts will be made to make the study assessment procedures and exercise intervention as 
pleasant as possible for the subject, and to detec t and address any problems with evaluation 
procedures.  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Exercise and markers of medial temporal health in youth at ultra high -
risk for psychosis, Phase 2   
 Page 35 of 58 Revis ed Template : October  19th, 2021  
This protocol will be performed using an MR scanner employing pulse sequences and hardware 
that have been approved by the FDA for human clinical use. There is no known radiological risk 
of MRI scanni ng. Participants will be carefully screened to exclude those who may have metal in 
or on their bodies that cannot be removed (e g., bullets, metal filings, body piercings, etc.). MR 
Facility rules strictly forbid staff from entering the magnet room carryin g metal objects. The risk 
of claustrophobia is minimized by screening subjects for self -reported claustrophobia and 
making sure the subject is lying comfortably with head and neck supported and providing ear 
protection with headphones, a mirror to see out,  a button to signal distress, and an intercom.  
Scan time will be kept to a minimum. Although there are no know risks to unborn fetuses, 
pregnant individuals are not permitted in the scanner. We will follow CTI’s protocol for ruling 
out pregnancy: safety s creening (please see supporting documents) is administered right before 
the scan even if the participants filled the form out beforehand. The form  include s “are you 
pregnant?” question , and the scanning technician will not scan anyone who know or think the y 
may be pregnant. Participants  will also be reminded that they can discontinue participation in the 
study at any time and need not divulge to the researchers the reason for their discontinuation 
(i.e., if they determine they are pregnant, they need not di sclose that information). Scan time will 
be kept to a minimum and will not exceed the noted time allotment. All participants will be 
screened for tattoos.  Participants will be made aware of minimal risks associated with tattoos in 
MRI scanners and asked to inform the MR technician if they start feeling any sensation at the 
tattooed area. If they report any sensation , the tech will stop the scan immediately to avoid 
potential skin irritation and burning and tingling sensat ion at the tattoo ed site.  With regard to 
PNS, participants are given a squeeze ball to use in case of an emergency. They are informed 
that if they experience PNS related sensations or are otherwise uncomfortable, they can alert the 
MRI technologist via the  squeeze ball and the technologist will stop the scan immediately.  
 
These risks associated with blood draws are minimal, and are reduced in this study because 
trained personnel who have extensive venipuncture experience, and are trained in aseptic 
technique, will implement the blood drawing procedures in a clean room .  
 
Steps to ensure safety with regard to the potential risk from study participation have been noted 
below. The sample size does not allow for adequate power to make specific estimates with 
regard to how the frequency of any adverse events from the exercise trial would carry over into a 
larger trial (Leon et al., 2010). In addition it should be noted that previous studies of aerobic 
exercise interventions including Dr. Mittal’s hav e shown minimal adverse events.  
 
A number of steps have been taken to safeguard privacy and confidential ity across the st udy. All 
study staff will be required to sign statements indicating that they understand confidentiality and 
agree to protect against risk of confidentiality. During phone screening, participants will be 
asked at the start of the phone call if they are abl e to speak privately, and if not, will be offered 
an opportunity to reschedule the phone call. Project staff will use private offices and a private 
voicemail has been established specifically for screening (and recruitment) of clinical studies 
such as this  one. Only project staff will have access to the voicemail code to access messages. In 
the Zoom version of the 12 month follow up interview, IRB approved study staff conducting the 
assessment will store the video locally on encrypted, locked hard drive. For Zoom follow ups, 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Exercise and markers of medial temporal health in youth at ultra high -
risk for psychosis, Phase 2   
 Page 36 of 58 Revis ed Template : October  19th, 2021 staff will ask the participant ahead of time to secure a private, quiet place where they can talk 
about their thoughts, feelings, and experiences without violating privacy.  
 
With regard to the minimization of risks specific to exercise t raining, all participants will be 
phone screened for contraindications related to physical activity generally and to the maximal 
exercise test in particular.  In terms of the risks related to the maximal exercise treadmill test, the 
primary protective meas ure taken to assure the physical safety of pa rticipants is the test location .  
The American College of Sports Medicine certified exercise physiologist, Elizabeth Skender  will 
be present for all of the maximal exercise tests. Elizabeth Skender’s  ACMSM certification 
number is 1043289. In addition, she is and Advanced Cardiovascular Life Support (ACLS) 
provider (please see her certifications under supporting documents). If any exercise physiology  
or research personnel have any concerns about the pa rticipant’s health or safety during the 
maximal exercise treadmill test, the session will be terminated immediately.  The following 
specific protective measures will be taken for all participants: (1) Participants will be asked 
during the initial phone scr een if they have any history of cardiovascular or respiratory disease so 
as to decrease the risk of a participant experiencing cardiac problems during physical activity.  
(2) During the phone screen, participants will be asked prior to the maximal exercise  test to 
assure that they have no undiagnosed medical contraindications that would make it dangerous for 
them to participate in either the maximal exercise treadmill test or the aerobic activity 
interventions.  (3) During the maximal exercise test, the par ticipant’s heart rate and EKG will be 
monitored to assure that they are not experiencing an adverse cardiac event and to assure that 
they are healthy enough to safely participate in a moderate to vigorous intensity aerobic ex ercise 
program after the test. (4) Automated external  defibrillator (AED) is available on site, and the 
exercise psychologist is trained on ACLS.  No medical personnel presence is necessary during the 
VO 2max test.  
 
With regard to risks related to exercise during the supervised exercise s essions, all participants 
participating in the exercise interventions will receive individual instruction regarding safe 
exercise practices by our exercise physiologist.  The structure of the aerobic exercise 
intervention, which is quite standard in exerci se training interventions to improve cardiovascular 
fitness, is designed so that participants gradually work up to their training level of intensity.  
Further, exercise prescriptions are tailored to each participant’s current level of cardiovascular 
fitnes s.  Because participants begin slowly and move gradually up to the recommended level of 
exercise, and exercise takes place under close supervision of trained exercise physiology and 
exercise research personnel, the potential for injury during exercise shou ld be minimized for this 
study.  
 
Only low risk participants will complete the exercise study. The young adult and adolescent 
populations are at low risk for heart attack or exercise related injuries, and as noted throughout 
the protocol, the pre -screening  questionnaire includes questions which exclude individuals who 
may be at a higher risk from the study. Participants will receive instructions that they should: 1) 
wear appropriate exercise clothes and shoes for testing; 2) be well nourished and hydrated p rior 
to testing; 3) avoid alcohol, caffeine and tobacco within 3 hours of testing; 4) be rested and avoid 
significant exertion or exercise the day of testing; and 5) report any medication use to the testing 
staff prior to testing. Participants will warm up  prior to testing and cool down after testing. 
Standard emergency procedures will be followed in the event of an emergency. Masks and 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Exercise and markers of medial temporal health in youth at ultra high -
risk for psychosis, Phase 2   
 Page 37 of 58 Revis ed Template : October  19th, 2021 mouthpieces are disinfected between participants. Participants will be monitored at all times 
during the VO2max test by at  least one technician or team member who is knowledgeable and 
trained in two specific areas: 1) administration of graded exercise tests, including ability to 
conduct pre -test health screenings, and knowledge and recognition of signs and symptoms of 
cardiov ascular disease; 2) procedures for conducting metabolic measures. In addition, the 
exercise physiologist will monitor all exercise visits, and as noted, she has all the necessary 
training to provide life support in a case of an emergency.  Moreover, the  automated external 
defibrillator (AED) is available on site, and campus police, who are located two floors below are 
lab, can be reached in a case of an emergency . Test termination criteria include any of the 
following: subject requests to stop, physical or v erbal manifestations of fatigue, failure of test 
equipment.  
 
Procedures for the management of anticipated clinical issues include the following:  
 a. As noted a legal guardian of the participant (for minors) or the participant (for adults cases), 
will be sc reened over the telephone.  Individuals will also be notified in advance beginning 
screening of the limits to confidentiality. During the phone screening process, a number of steps 
will be put into place to protect against clinical risk.  If a caller expre sses non -emergent mental 
health needs, research staff will provide this person with the phone number of the behavioral 
health clinic and instruct her to call to set up an appointment.  If over the course of the phone 
interview the caller becomes emotionall y distressed, is not making clear sense, sounds 
intoxicated or impaired, or expresses thoughts of suicide or homicide, the interviewer will use a 
second phone line to have the study investigator join them, without losing verbal contact with the 
participant .  At that point the study investigator will guide the interview to ascertain the acuity 
and/or potential for harm. The study investigator will first determine if the caller is alone or has 
access to another person capable of transportation.  If the study investigator determines that the 
individual is in need of emergent care, the options for such care will be discussed with the caller 
and may include – referral to the closest emergency room, notification of emergency services for 
transportation to ER, emer gent appointment (that day).  If the subject declines such a referral, the 
emergency services will be notified of the clinical concern for safety.  b. If at the initial in -person 
screening visit the subject that is found to have a medical condition that ma y have caused the 
prodromal symptoms, they will be excluded from further participation. If either an exclusionary 
medical condition or an incidental medical condition is suspected, the participant will be advised 
to consult with their physician or referred . If a psychiatric disorder is found to be present at 
baseline, or is found to develop during the course of the study participants will be advised to 
consult with their mental health care provider or referred. These participants will continue to be 
followe d in the study, with information on treatment recorded in the database. Minor subjects 
and their parents or guardians will be informed that we will be doing urine drug screens as part 
of the routine study evaluations. We will explicitly inform parents and potential minor subjects, 
in the written informed consent document and orally, that we will not inform the parent of the 
results of the drug test, because revealing this information could affect the willingness of the 
minor subject to participate in the st udy or answer truthfully. We will tell both the minor subject 
and the parent or guardian our clinical policy regarding confidentiality, as follows: If a minor 
subject is found to have a positive drug screen, the PI will discuss the risks of drug use with t he 
subject, and encourage the minor subject to discuss their use of drugs with their parent or 
guardian. If the subject is found to have a substance use disorder, we will discuss the need for 
treatment with the subject, and encourage the subject to allow u s to speak with their parent or 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Exercise and markers of medial temporal health in youth at ultra high -
risk for psychosis, Phase 2   
 Page 38 of 58 Revis ed Template : October  19th, 2021 guardian about our concerns.  The University’s IRB has approved this procedure and it has been 
affective in our ongoing studies of UHR individuals. Participating minors will be informed that 
their parent s will be notified in  the event that they are engaging in or plan to engage in behavior 
(i.e., suicidal attempt) that is dangerous to themselves or others. e. To summarize, our procedures 
will follow routine clinical research procedures to reduce risk to participants, and foll ow all State 
regulations regarding treatment of minors and informing parents and guardians.  A single 
clinician attempts to engage the minor in a therapeutic relationship, and maintains confidentiality 
unless there is a specific, immediate safety risk (e.g ., suicidal ideation).   
 
Drug testing  
Participants will be informed “ You will be asked questions about  illegal activities that 
he/she/you may h ave been involved in. Although it is not likely, it is possible that their/your 
answers could be requested by t he police or the courts and used against them. ” Otherwise, results 
of drug tests will remain confidential.  
 
Thoughts of Suicide  
We will carefully monitor suicidality throughout the study, and the investigators and the clinical 
services are well equipped to  handle psychiatric emergencies.  Specifically, all research 
assistants are provided ongoing education and supervision with respect to the identification of 
potential clinical problems.  In addition, all are educated to have a very low threshold for 
obtain ing consultation. In addition, Dr. Mittal will carry a mobile phone listed with all study staff 
to be available 24/7.  We will have available 24/7 on call and emergency services. Additionally, 
Dr. Molly Lubin  will be available for clinical guidance and consultation. Potential suicidality 
will be queried for all subjects within the context of the noted clinical interviews and patients 
will be carefully observed when partic ipating in the exercise trial. If suici dality is present, gold 
standard procedures will be implemented (i.e., determining if a plan or means are available, 
contracting for safety, informing parent/guardian of risk (in the case of minors), ensuring 
removal of any potential means or in severe cas es encouraging self -hospitalization/requirin g 
involuntary hospitalization. In the case of minors for voluntary or involuntary hospitalization, 
participants will be escorted to the Evanston  Hospital . For Zoom follow up, the assessor will 
collect current loc ation and phone number to protect against risk during remote assessment. The 
current location and phone number information will be discarded as soon as the interview is 
completed. This information will be necessary in the situation that gold standard proce dures need 
to be implemented  remotely.  
 
 
Training of Staff  
All research staff will be trained in the regulations governing the conduct of human subjects 
research, as well as HIPAA regulations. All investigators and consultants have passed the IRB 
examinat ion, which requires knowledge of basic ethical principles and federal regulations 
concerning human subjects research. Investigators will assure that all research assistants 
complete the same training.   
 
All clinical evaluators will receive intensive training prior to conducting phone screens or 
assessments with study participants. In addition to training on the specific measures, training will 
include education about orientation to the assessment process,  possible risks to participants, and 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Exercise and markers of medial temporal health in youth at ultra high -
risk for psychosis, Phase 2   
 Page 39 of 58 Revis ed Template : October  19th, 2021 an extensive 2 -month training period for phone screens and assessments (observing live 
interviews with trained raters) observed by investigators. As reviewed above, we plan to hold 
weekly meetings involving related proj ect faculty and staff to review assessments and cases and 
discuss any clinical issues (note: the exercise physiologist, who will be aware of which 
participants are in the treatment groups, will not participate in these me etings to maintain 
blindness). Sepa rate weekly meetings will be held with the exercise physiologist to track 
progress, discuss motivation and attenuation or participants, and address any clinical/safety 
issues.  
 
Protection against Risk associated with the Ultra High -Risk Waitlisted -Control  Group 
Assignment  
We have taken careful steps to minimize potential risks associated with assignment to the control 
group. Because of the critical period associated with the prodrome, all UHR participants will be 
encouraged to maintain any concomitant trea tments already in place or referred to appropriate 
treatment providers in the community if they are not already receiving any treatment (Note: this 
is standard procedure in all current treatment and naturalistic investigations of UHR youth). As 
noted, indi viduals with a history or current treatment with antipsychotics will not participate in 
the study and those naturalistically treated with psychotherapy will be balanced between the two 
groups. Concerns regarding the withholding of an active intervention ar e mitigated by the 
treatment development nature of this project and our lack of knowledge at this point regarding 
the efficacy of the exercise -intervention approach. However, while the proposed exercise trial 
has not been proved to be efficacious, particip ants and parents will likely wish to participate in 
anything that is potentially helpful during this critical risk period. To address this concern, we 
will offer the UHR waitlisted -controls the option to also receive 12 -weeks of exercise 
immediately follow ing the waitlist period  (that is immediately following the post interviews. 
Participants are also invited to engage in the exercise portion at any point after these post 
interviews even before or after the 12 and 24 month visits) . Although there will be no  research 
questions tied to this option (there will be no additional assessments or time -compensation given 
post-waitlist period) the participants will have the chance to participate in supervised aerobic 
exercise. This will allow for the UHR controls to b enefit from any potential positive effects 
associated with an aerobic intervention. As noted, should any individuals elect to take this 
option, they will be excluded from longitudinal follow - up analyses examining the effects or 
exercise/waitlist on clinic al course/conversion outcome.  
 
Potential Benefits to Subjects  
Anticipated benefit to subjects and/or society is a greater understanding of the factors that 
influence risk of development of a psychotic illness. In addition, participants may benefit directly  
from the exercise intervention.  
 
Consistent with the ethical obligation to the participants, we will provide information about 
community treatment resources for those who are deemed in need, but are not currently receiving 
clinical care.  At the initial assessment and post -intervention assessment the participant will be 
asked to provide information on treatment history. For minors, parents will also be asked to 
provide this information. The following data will be collected; previous and current treatment 
counselors or mental health providers, psychotropic medications prescribed, current medication, 
and diagnoses.  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Exercise and markers of medial temporal health in youth at ultra high -
risk for psychosis, Phase 2   
 Page 40 of 58 Revis ed Template : October  19th, 2021  
Assessment results from each participant will be discussed in a weekly research meeting with 
Graduate Research Assistants and Drs. Mittal and Lubin.  In cases where the results suggest the 
need for further treatment and the participant is not currently under the care of a mental health 
professional, the participant (parent for minors) will be provided with a list of mental health care 
professiona ls in the area who have the necessary expertise. Any participant found to be suffering 
from an Axis I psychotic disorder at the initial assessment will not be included in the study and 
as noted, referred to appropria te treatment in the community. It should  be noted that prospective 
participants and parents who contact our center usually have serious concerns about thei r or their 
child’s adjustment. The findings from previous research in this population suggest that these 
concerns are often warranted.  Speci fically, research has shown that treatment for psychosis 
generally leads to a good outcome when the treatment is initiated “at onset” – meaning as soon 
as frankly psychotic symptoms are detected in the context of regular monitoring visits.  
Generally it is  possible to treat such patients as outpatients without loss of days of work or 
school, without disruption of ongoing social networks, and without the development of 
potentially stigmatizing events such as frankly abnormal behavior or hospitalization (Haroun et 
al., 2006 ; Corcoran et al., 2010 ). In line with the proposed protocol, treatment guidelines for the 
prodrome are just beginning to emerge and currently recommend that the patient be carefully 
monitored, but that antipsychotic or other medication treatment not be initiated, as there are n o 
data regarding the risk -benefit ratio, and the risks of antipsychotic treatment in particular may be 
substantial in this population (McGlashan et al., 2007 ).  Thus this proposal is consistent with 
current clinical practice guidelines. While data from ongoing prodromal studies are now 
emergin g to address this issue, further research is needed before practice guidelines for treatment 
of the prodrome will be established.  It is unlikely that empirical data will be available for expert 
consensus panels to address the issue of treatment of the pro drome before this project is 
completed.  Furthermore, we anticipate that the results of this study would contribute to such 
guidelines by informing the discussion of characterizing high -risk individuals where a targeted 
intervention would be of highest val ue. 
 
Importance of the Knowledge To Be Gained  
The results of this study will increase ability to understand etiological factors in high -risk 
individuals prior to the onset of schizophrenia or other psychotic disorders. In addition, we will 
be testing the f easibility of a potentially helpful exercise intervention.  Improved comprehension 
of this group will facilitate future preventative research. Intervention in early psychosis is of 
tremendous potential public health importance and thus the risk involved in  this observational 
study are relatively small in proportion to potential impact on treatment of psychosis.   
 
Additionally, all participants will have the opportunity to examine their own exercise behavior in 
the context of completing the measures. Furthe r, participants will learn about their maximal 
oxygen consumption, a measure of their aerobic exercise capacity and current level of aerobic 
fitness. Participants will have their cognitive functioning assessed by experts both in terms of 
brain physiology a nd cognitive tests. For the older adults in this study, both interventions 
(aerobic and strengthening and toning) are designed to increase health. Thus, regardless of which 
condition participants are randomized to be in, participants will gain information about their 
health and engage in healthy behaviors by completing the requirements of the study. The 
minimal costs associated with participation in this research seem reasonable in relation to both 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Exercise and markers of medial temporal health in youth at ultra high -
risk for psychosis, Phase 2   
 Page 41 of 58 Revis ed Template : October  19th, 2021 individual benefits to the participants as well as the anti cipated potential of the findings to 
increase the body of knowledge about the mediators and moderators of exercise behavior change.  
 
Vulnerable Populations  
This research program will be treating and studying persons who are at risk for developing 
schizophr enia or a related psychiatric disorder. However, it is not possible to study psychiatric 
disorders without studying individuals who have the psychiatric disorder being investigated.  
Additionally, based on our aim to study the prodromal period of psychotic  illness, we will focus 
on adolescent and young adult subjects.  Given that the risks involved in the measures of this 
program are minimal, and that the data derived are anticipated to be extremely useful for 
improving our understanding of the disorder and  develop a potentially important treatment, we 
believe that the involvement of these UHR patients is justifiable.  
 
Sources of Materials  
Sources of material will come primarily from the participant, in the form of the results of 
questionnaires, clinical int erviews, neurocognitive battery, and neuroimaging.  For minors, a 
parent/legal guardian will provide information. Biological specimens will be collected at 
screening (urine) to help determine recent substance use. Written and oral consent will be 
obtained from participants, or their legal guardian for minor participants . Assent will be obtained 
from minors.  These measures are described in greater detail in the body of the proposal. All 
materials are obtained for research purposes.  Procedures for maintaining confidentiality, 
including linkage to participants and access to identifiers are described below under “Minimizing 
Risks to Confidentiality.”  
 
Provisions for Data and Safety Monitoring of Participants  
As noted, there will be weekly meetings wit h the clinical and exercise staff (separately) to 
discuss case progress and any potential clinical issues, or complications relating to exercise (e.g., 
sore muscles, aching joints, trouble breathing, dizziness). The PI -s will be responsible for 
monitoring and reporting any clinical or exercise related adverse events.  
 
Data Safety Monitoring Plans  
Symptoms and diagnosis will be evaluated as part of the study during the visit (and throughout 
the visit this information will be collected), and in the event of any concerning symptoms or 
diagnostic status, an ADAPT assessor will contact the family (if the patient is younger than 18), 
the patient (if the patient is older than 18), and the outside treatment team for the respective 
individual. The trained a ssessor will carefully review each case and discuss details with the PI. 
Data will be reviewed after each visit.  If a patient reports suicidal ideation at any time during a 
research assessment, referrals, and if needed, appropriate recommendations of inpat ient care to 
insure the safety of the subject will be made. If the subject is a minor, the participant’s legal 
guardians will be informed, and a safety plan will be established. If inpatient care is needed 
immediately, 911 will be called , and the assessor will wait with the participant until someone 
takes them  to the  Northwestern Hospital . All ADAPT personnel are trained in assessing for 
suicidality and are required to consult with a licensed treatment provider on staff to ensure 
adequate assessment. Additi onally, if inpatient care is not warranted, ADAPT staff are trained to 
make “contract agreements” with participants for their safety and follow -up with the participant 
to continue to assess for safety.  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Exercise and markers of medial temporal health in youth at ultra high -
risk for psychosis, Phase 2   
 Page 42 of 58 Revis ed Template : October  19th, 2021  
Suicidal Thoughts  
We will carefully monitor suicidali ty throughout the study, and the investigators and the clinical 
services are well equipped to h andle psychiatric emergencies.  Specifically, all research team  
provides ongoing education and supervision with respect to the identification o f potential clinica l 
problems.  In addition, all are educated to have a very low threshold for obtaining consultation. In 
addition, Dr. Mittal will carry a cell phone listed with all stu dy staff to be available 24/7.  We will 
have available 24/7 o n call and emergency services.  Potential suicidality will be queried for all 
subjects within the context of the noted clinical interviews. Specifically,  the BDI -II will be 
scored before the participant leaves the laboratory.  If participants endorse current suicidal 
ideation on  item 9 of the BDI -II, a clinical psychology graduate student will complete a suicide 
assessment.   The BDI will be scored directly after the assessment, while the participant is in the 
room. Scoring item 9 on the BDI takes no time at all – about 30 seconds  in which the assessor 
looks at what number was circled (2=”I would like to kill myself” in which case the assessor will 
know to move forward accordingly). The assessor will let the participant know they are just 
reviewing everything briefly while they loo k over the BDI and other notes if needed (just in case 
the assessor needs additional information). Upon completion of this assessment, student 
clinicians will collaborate with the PI Mittal (a licensed clinical psychologist) to decide on a plan 
of action b efore allowing the participant to leave the laboratory.   If suicidality is present, gold 
standard procedures will be implemented (i.e., determining if a plan or means are available, 
contracting for safety, informing /guardian of risk (in the case of minors ), ensuring removal of 
any potential means or in severe cases encouraging self -hospitalization/requiring involuntary 
hospitalization. The student co -investigator  (Tina Gupta) has been trained on conducting suicide 
assessments. If the student judges a parti cipant’s suicidality to be mild or moderate, and 
determines that the participant is not in imminent danger, then the student clinician will provide 
the participant with information to local low -cost/sliding scale treatment providers.  In cases of 
high-risk (i.e., a specific plan, a means to achieve the plan, no -one else in the residence to 
monitor the individual or provide a safety network) voluntary or involuntary hospitalization will 
be directed to the Northwestern Hospital , which has a world -class adult p sychiatric unit. Acute 
suicidality has been rare in our ongoing studies with this population (although SPD and FEP 
individual commonly show depressive symptomatology including symptoms of suicidality), but 
these noted procedures and precautions ha ve proved  effective in our ongoing work with 
psychosis samples.   This plan can also be done remotely during the Zoom follow up assessment 
as referrals will be available electronically for those who are not in imminent danger. For high -
risk cases, the participant’s current location is collected immediately before the remote interview 
by the interviewer, and the nearest appropriate medical center will be substituted for 
Northwestern Hospital.  
 
Confidentiality and Data Management  
Strict standards of confidentiality are  maintained. All paper records (consent forms and SIPS) 
containing identifying information (including the subject contact list) and all subject videotapes 
will be stored in a locked file in a locked office in ADAPT program at Northwestern. All data is 
given a deidentified ID code. All electronic databases will have deidentifying information and be 
password protected/encrypted.  Deidentified data may be shared with other researchers to 
advance science, as specified by  the updated Northwestern IRB consent for m template . Subjects 
will remain anonymous in all datasets and subsequent publications. Unless Northwestern IRB 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Exercise and markers of medial temporal health in youth at ultra high -
risk for psychosis, Phase 2   
 Page 43 of 58 Revis ed Template : October  19th, 2021 approval is sought and obtained to extend the period of data st orage, data will be stored for 30  
years after study completion and then destroyed . Videotapes will be stored for 30  years after 
which point they will be destroyed unless individual approval is sought to continue their storage 
and use for teaching and research purposes.  
 
Confidentiality will be maintained by assigning each patient a st udy number, and coding all 
data collected with that number. Identifying information will not be stored on computer 
databases, and will not be stored with the study subject number. All computer databases 
are password protected, and hard copies of all data a nd records will be stored in locked 
filing cabinets. All study personnel will be certified to conduct research with human 
subjects, and will be aware of the importance of maintaining strict confidentiality.   
 
Cortisol samples will be labeled marked by the appropriate subject ID number and 1, 2, 3, 4 
(e.g. 5555 -1, 5555 -2, 5555 -3, 5555 -4). The take home samples will be labeled with the 
subject ID number followed by a 01, 02, 03, 04, 05, 06 (e.g. 5555 -01, 02, 03, 04, 05, 06).  
II.  
Strict standards of confidentiality are maintained.  MRI data will be electronically stored 
and analyzed using ID codes. If the data are published subjects will remain anonymous in 
all publications.  Data will be stored indefinitely and will  not be shared with other 
investigators without explicit permission from the Northwestern  IRB. All imaging data and 
behavioral data will be uploaded to the Northwestern University Research Image 
Processing System (NURIPS), an online collaborative research environment for securely 
storing, managing, analyzing and sharing de -identified medical imaging, associated data 
(e.g. behavioral), and results from advanced customizable processing pipelines. NURIPS is 
supported by both NUIT and FSM -IT and takes advantage  of the NU high performance 
computing cluster, Quest. NURIPS is a secure environment that supports the latest NU 
policy and procedures for encryption of data during transit and rest, provides granular 
project level access controls with varying permissions based on user groups, and allows 
non -NU collaborators access once they obtain an affiliate NetId. All data are backed up and 
have restore points that go back for 30 days. Users have access to common data analysis 
pipelines and the opportunity to create and  share their own pipelines.  
 
 
All instances of shared data within this protocol will be specifically approved by the IRB, 
and will be noted in the consent/assent forms, including how and what information will be 
shared. Subjects decide if they would like t o share their data with other investigators. Every 
consent form has check boxes included to allow for this.  
 
Basic identifying information (name, address, phone number/email address) is collected 
from every research participant for the purpose of research  logistics (schedule visits, etc.) 
and mailing of the radiological review letter, as appropriate.  
 
Provisions to Protect the Privacy Interests of Subjects  
Prescreens: In accordance with Northwestern IRB’s guidelines for pre -screening potential 
participant s only first names or initials will be collected to identify the potential participant 
during this phone screen (prescreen). In order to protect participant confidentiality, the 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Exercise and markers of medial temporal health in youth at ultra high -
risk for psychosis, Phase 2   
 Page 44 of 58 Revis ed Template : October  19th, 2021 first five pages of the phone screen form will be shredded immediately after t he phone 
screen (pre -screen) is complete. Only the information relevant to contacting the participant 
on the last page of the phone screen will remain. This contact information will be important 
for the study team to retain so that we will be able to conta ct participants concerning their 
study appointments. Participant contact information will be stored in a separate research 
folder, apart from all other study documents. This folder will be stored in a locked filing 
cabinet in the ADAPT lab . Upon study clos ure, all contact information sheets will be 
shredded. At the end of the phone screen session, eligible individuals will be provided with 
a detailed description of the study. These eligible individuals will be made aware of the 
required laboratory sessions,  supervised exercise sessions, physiological measures, 
psychological measures, and potential risks involved with participation. Eligible individuals 
who verbally indicate their willingness to participate in the research will be sched uled for a 
baseline app ointment . Upon scheduling a baseline appointment, potential participants will 
be provided, via e -mail attachment or hard copy mail (depending upon their preference), a 
letter that will include the time and date of their appointment, as well as information 
detailing the American College of Sports Medicine (ACSM) 9th edition guidelines for 
participating in a maximal exercise test. Once potential participants arrive for their 
baseline appointment, they will hear a presentation about the research program and wi ll 
have the opportunity to ask any questions they have about participating. Once all of their 
questions have been answered, potential participants will be asked to carefully read an 
informed consent document. The informed consent form will reiterate the ex perimental 
procedures, monetary compensation, risks and benefits, of all data obtained, and the 
voluntary nature of all components of the study. If participants agree with all of the 
information in the consent form, they will be instructed to sign their na me on the space 
provided indicating they consent to participate in the research.  
 
For 12 and/or 24 month follow -up clinical assessments  that take place over the phone, the 
assessor doing the assessment  will talk to the participant in a private room at the 1801 Maple 
Avenue ADAPT lab location to ensure privacy during the phone call.  
 
Setting  
As noted above, participants will call in for a phone screening. If they are found to be a good fit 
for the study, the will be asked to come into the lab located at 1801 Maple Avenue, suite 3120 
Evanston, IL 60201.  The VO2max test will be taken place North western University, Department 
of Physical Therapy and Human Movement Science, 645 N. Michigan Ave. 10th Floor, Chicago 
IL 60611. The MRI scan will be taken place at CTI located at 737 N. Michigan Ave, Suite 1600 
Chicago IL 60611.  
 
Resources Available  
All individuals that will have direct contact with participants that are minors are trained and 
skilled in administering the primary interview named the SIPS. PI’s and Co -PI’s have had 
several years of experience working with UHR youth and dealing with variou s situations. After 
each case, the assessor will discuss the details of the case with the PI of the study, an expert in 
working with UHR participants. Reliability checks of the SIPS interview will occur often in 
order to make sure assessors are adhering to  interview standards.  
 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Exercise and markers of medial temporal health in youth at ultra high -
risk for psychosis, Phase 2   
 Page 45 of 58 Revis ed Template : October  19th, 2021 Our research lab is completely private. Food, snacks, water, and magazines are available to 
participants in order to create a comfortable environment. If participants would like  further 
resources , they will be referred to other heal th care providers that may be a good fit for them.  
 
All new assessors upon the approval of the study will be given a copy of the protocol to review 
and study. They will have a meeting with the PI to discuss details such as study procedures, and 
confidentia lity to ensure they understand their role and the study protocol. Additionally, they will 
have CITI training complete in order to begin working with participants.  
 
Recruitment Methods  
We will be using ads on Craigslist and job search engines , flyers , and brochures  for recruitment. 
We will utilize flyers in Spanish for referrals but are recruiting only English speakers (e.g., a 
Spanish speaking individual who may want to refer an English speaking family member or 
friend). If a participant who is not a m inor with a Spanish speaking family member or a friend 
wishes for that individual to accompany them, we have a fluent Spanish speaker  (Teresa Vargas 
who is native Spanish speaker)  on the research team who can translate pertinent aspects of the 
study  (e.g.,  time commitment, type of tasks administered) and answer questions . If the 
participant agrees, she can also inform them about participant’s progress and referral sources. 
We also aim to recruit via social media networks (e.g., Facebook) by posting ads in s ocial media 
groups (please see a script in supporting documents) , electronic dissemination of ads via email, 
Pandora Radio ads, Psychology Department’s paid research registry, and ADAPT’s website (the 
website will include the note we are recruiting for the  study and a webpage where participants 
can express interest in participating by responding to a Qualtircs survey asking them to respond 
if they are 16 -24 and to provide contact information for a study team member to contact them).  
 
Phone Screening:  
A leg al guardian of the participant (for minors) or the participant (for adults cases), will be 
screened over the telephone by an experienced staff member about, 1) the presence of prodromal 
symptoms in the past month; 2) past treatment for a psychiatric disord er; 3) presence of an 
exclusionary neurological medical condition; and 4) age. Patients who are likely to meet study 
inclusion criteria based on the results of the screen will be invited to the research center for 
consent procedures and the screening evalu ation. Those persons who do not meet criteria for a 
prodromal syndrome (e.g., having minor symptoms, or meeting criteria for a psychotic disorder) 
will be referred to appropriate treat ment sources in the community. Minor subjects that self refer 
or are ref erred from a health -care provider will be required to bring a parent or guardian with 
them to the initial consenting visit. On initial  in person  screening the purpose of the study will be 
explained. Individuals who are interested in participating in the st udy will receive more detailed 
information, both orally and with a written informed consent. Children under the age of 18 will 
provide written assent, and written parental consent will be obtained for their participation.  
 
Consent Process  
A legal guardian of the participant (for participants under age 18) or the participating probands 
will be screened over the telephone for, 1) the presence of prodromal symptoms in the past month; 
2) past treatment for a psychiatric disorder; 3) presence of  an exclusionary neurological medical 
condition; and 4) age. Patients who are likely to meet study inclusion criteria based on the results 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Exercise and markers of medial temporal health in youth at ultra high -
risk for psychosis, Phase 2   
 Page 46 of 58 Revis ed Template : October  19th, 2021 of the screen will be invited to the ADAPT lab for consent the study. Minor subjects that self refer 
will be required  to bring a parent or guardian with them to the visit.  
During the consent process, the purpose of the study will be explained. Individuals who are 
interested in participating in the study will receive more detailed information, both orally and with 
a writ ten informed consent. Children under the age of 18 will provide written assent , and one 
parent that is competent, reasonably available, and shares legal responsibility for the care and 
custody of the child will provide written permission for their child to  participate . If the potential 
participant is an adult, they will read over the consent form and sign when they are ready. Consent 
procedures will not be rushed. We expect participant to complete consent after about 30 minutes, 
however we will let particip ants know that they are welcome to take their time. Additionally, 
participants will be reminded that the study is completely voluntary, and they are welcome to 
withdraw from the study at any point. Participants will also be informed that being videotaped i s 
completely voluntary as well.  
 
Online Consent /Assent . For the optional online 12 month follow up offered to CHR participants, 
we will use Qualtrics to obtain the electronic signature of the adult (for those 18 years of age or 
older) or the electronic signature of the parent/legal guardian and of the minor (for those less 
than 18 years of age). An IRB approved study staff member will assess for attention and 
comprehension of the document over the phone or on Zoom, based on participant prefere nce. We 
will coordinate the online consent/assent over email by scheduling a time to talk and by sending 
a Qualtrics link with a password to their consent/assent form. For minors, we will require the 
parent/legal guardian be present for the whole meeting t o assess both people’s comprehension of 
the document before the e -signature is acquired by both minor and parent/legal guardian.  
 
 
Consent forms will be written in language that is comprehensible to individuals that have at 
minimum an eighth grade educatio n. The consent form will contain information about the nature 
of the study. In providing participants with information about the research, there are two chief 
considerations; 1) to minimize psychological discomfort and potentially damaging negative 
expecta tions, and 2) to provide information that is based on the best currently available scientific 
data. The PI of this project, and Co -I’s have considerable experience with strategies for informing 
potential participants about the purpose of the research and f or minimizing distress and anxiety. 
We explain that some individuals experience changes in their perceptions, thinking, emotions, or 
behavior. While some are not bothered by these changes, others may find them distressing because 
they interfere with their ability to function. We then explain the possible reasons for such changes, 
including that they may be part of normal adolescent/young adult development, a reaction to a life 
stressor, symptoms of drug use, symptoms of a metabolic disorder, symptoms of a m ood disorder 
or anxiety disorder, or the early warning signs of bipolar disorder or schizophrenia. We then 
discuss the possible course of the “changes”, including that symptoms/signs often go away, remain 
stable, or worsen, particularly if they are the ear ly signs of a disorder.  
 
In order to minimize subject discomfort and attrition, it will be important to reduce the burden of 
participation in the study. As described in the protocol, the full assessment will take about 2 hours. 
Within the constraints of t he research design, efforts will be made to accommodate participants’ 
schedules and, when indicated, to avoid fatigue (e.g. breaks).  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Exercise and markers of medial temporal health in youth at ultra high -
risk for psychosis, Phase 2   
 Page 47 of 58 Revis ed Template : October  19th, 2021 It is relevant to note that potential prodromal participants are usually experiencing subjective 
distress and are therefore  motivated to take part in the clinical research assessment. Similarly, their 
family members typically encourage them to participate and are readily engaged in the assessment 
process.  
 
Additionally, in the consent forms, we have used the term “thought diso rder” to minimize 
stigmas that may be associated with using the phrase “at risk for psychosis,” and to avoid distress 
that can accompany the phrase as well. “Thought disorder” and “prodromal symptoms” are 
interchangeable  
 
In order to minimize subject disco mfort and attrition, it will be important to reduce the burden of 
participation in the study. As described in the proposal, the full initial assessment will take about 
6.5 hours total: 3 hours for screening visit/clinical interview, 2 hours for the cogniti ve 
assessment, 30 minutes for imaging and 30 minutes for the aerobic fitness evaluation.  The post 
exercise trial will take 5 hours (the 1.5 hour baseline screening which involves providing study 
information, signing consents, getting background informatio n, and diagnosing a prodromal 
syndrome will not be included, but participants will be administered the entire SIPS and SCID 
post intervention to track changes in symptoms and clinical status).  Based on our experience in 
working with UHR adolescents and yo ung adults, this time -requirement will be entirely feasible. 
Within the constraints of the research design, efforts will be made to accommodate participants’ 
schedules and, when indicated, to avoid fatigue. As noted, our group has significant experience 
in working with this population, and has perfected a number of effective strategies to ease burden 
and strain on participants and their families (e.g., schedule breaks, snacks, reimbursement of 
travel/lunch/parking costs).  The exercise trial will require 30  minutes of cardiovascular exercise . 
The exercise prescription will be tailored to the current fitness level of the participant, and the 
same research personnel will supervise the participants at each session to increase comfort. 
Finally, upon sche duling t heir fitness assessment, participants will be provided a letter that will 
include the time and date of their appointment, as well as information detailing the American 
College of Sports Medicine (ACSM) 9th edition guidelines for participating in a maximal 
exercise test. Once potential participants arrive for their appointment, they will hear a description 
of the fitness assessment, and will have the opportunity to ask any questions they have about 
participating their participation .  
 
It is relevant to note that UHR participants are usually experiencing subjective distress and are 
therefore motivated to take part in the clinical research assessment. Similarly, their family 
members typically encourage them to participate and are readily engaged in the assessme nt 
process.  
 
Process to Document Consent  
 
For all subjects, written informed consent will be obtained using consent forms that are approved 
by the Northwestern University  Institutional Review Board (IRB) after the p rocedures are fully 
explained. For the Zoom follow up, if the participant chooses to complete the follow up 
interview online, the consent form will be e -signed on Qualtrics during a phone call or Zoom call 
with an IRB approved staff member. The vast majority of the patients potentially eligible for this 
program will have the capacity to consent, as this program involves outpatients who are active 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Exercise and markers of medial temporal health in youth at ultra high -
risk for psychosis, Phase 2   
 Page 48 of 58 Revis ed Template : October  19th, 2021 participants in th eir own health care decisions. We will use the fo llowing procedures with 
potential participants to ensure comprehension of the information provided in the informed  
consent forms. A staff member will help each subject read the consent form and discu ss the 
content point -by-point. Potential participants wil l be asked to paraphrase each section to insure 
comprehension of the content.  Indicators that a participant cannot currently comprehend 
meaningfully the content of the consent form will include: (1) the potential participant has severe 
formal thought diso rder that does not allow him or her to ask understandable questions about the 
program or to paraphrase the basic points in the consent form; (2) the potential participant is 
unable to maintain attention to the description of the consent form long enough to  perceive the 
individual basic points in the consent from; (3) the potential participant cannot ask questions or 
respond sufficiently to indicate agreement due to symptoms like catatonia; and (4) the potential 
participant expresses delusions related to the  program that distort significantly his or her basic 
understanding of the nature of the research. On the other hand, some of the indicators that the 
potential participant can, at the time of approach, provide meaningful consent to participate will 
include:  (1) ability to pay attention well enough to read the form or have it read and described to 
them; (2) ability to paraphrase the basic points in the consent form; and (3) ability to ask 
reasonable questions about the research and associated treatment condit ions. For patient 
participants, comprehension of the informed consent form will be evaluated by administering an 
IRB-approved questionnaire about the  content of the consent forms. Participants who are unable 
to demonstrate comprehension of the informed con sent on the basis of this evaluation will not be 
enrolled.  All participants are informed that they can request breaks as needed, or withdraw from 
the study at any time.  
 
Signed consent forms will be stored in a locked filing cabinet in the PI’s laboratory , (the ADAPT 
Lab). Zoom online consent forms will be stored on Qualtrics, only available to IRB approved 
study staff. All data from questionnaires will be stored on password protected computers and on 
the PI’s password protected server, both of which are o nly accessible to research staff.  To 
further ensure participants’ confidentiality, all participant data (non -contact information) will be 
identified with a uniq ue research subject identifier.  The study team will generate a single master 
list linking numbe rs to names and other contact information for the purpose of scheduling and 
completing follow -up assessments. Zoom interview video recordings will be saved locally on 
encrypted hard drives in lockboxes. Only ADAPT research assistants who have received IRB 
approval to work on this project will have access to this master link file and only for the purpose 
of scheduling follow -up appointments or assessments. This master list as well as all identifying 
contact information will be destroyed at the conclusion of the final round of data collection. At 
that point, all data files will be identifiable only by each participant’s unique number. After the 
destruction of identifying information, it will be virtually impossible to link a participant’s 
identity with any of the data she provided during her enrollment in the study.  
 
If the content of the consent forms change, currently enrolled participants will be informed with 
a document outlining the changes since they initially signed the consent form for the study. 
Partic ipants will be taken through the changes in person  with a lab manager  at their next visit to 
the lab using the document outlining consent changes.  
 
 
VI.     References  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Exercise and markers of medial temporal health in youth at ultra high -
risk for psychosis, Phase 2   
 Page 49 of 58 Revis ed Template : October  19th, 2021  
ACSM American fitness index ranks 50 largest metro areas on health and community fitness (2011).  Last 
Accessed 5/20/2013 from, http://www.acsm.org/about -acsm/media -room/acsm -in-the-
news/2011/08/01/acsm -american -fitness -index -ranks -50-largest -metro -areas -on-health -and-
community -fitness   
Addington, D., Addington, J., Schissel, B. (1990). A depression rating scale for schizophrenics. 
Schizophrenia Research 3; 247 -251.  
America’s 15 most active cities (2011).  Time Magazine.  Accessed 5/27/201 3 from 
http://healthland.time.com/2011/02/18/americas -15-most -active -
cities/photo/denver/  
Aimone JB, Wiles JGage FH (2006). Potential role for adult neurogenesis in the encoding of 
time in new memories. Nat Neurosci  9, 723 -7. 
Allen P, Sea l ML, Valli I, Fusar -Poli P, Perlini C, Day F, Wood SJ, Williams SCMcguire PK 
(2011). Altered prefrontal and hippocampal function during verbal encoding and 
recognition in people with prodromal symptoms of psychosis. Schizophrenia Bulletin  
37, 746 -56. 
Ammi nger GP, Schafer MR, Papageorgiou K, Klier CM, Cotton SM, Harrigan SM, Mackinnon A, 
Mcgorry PDBerger GE (2010). Long -chain omega -3 fatty acids for indicated 
prevention of psychotic disorders: a randomized, placebo -controlled trial. Archives of 
General Psyc hiatry  67, 146 -54. 
Auther AM, Smith CWCornblatt B (2006). Global Functioning: Social Scale (GF: Social), New 
York, Zucker -Hillside Hospital.  
Avula CP, Muthukumar AR, Zaman K, Mccarter RFernandes G (2001). Inhibitory effects of 
voluntary wheel exercise on a poptosis in splenic lymphocyte subsets of C57BL/6 
mice. J Appl Physiol  91, 2546 -52. 
Barlati S, De Peri L, Deste G, Fusar -Poli PVita A (2012). Cognitive remediation in the early 
course of schizophrenia: a critical review. Curr Pharm Des  18, 534 -41. 
Beck, A.  T., Epstein, N., Brown, G., & Steer, R. A. (1988). An inventory for measuring clinical 
anxiety: psychometric properties. J Consult Clin Psychol, 56 (6), 893 -897.  
Becker S (2005). A computational principle for hippocampal learning and neurogenesis. 
Hippocampus  15, 722 -38. 
Benoit A, Bodnar M, Malla AK, Joober RLepage M (2012). The structural neural substrates of 
persistent negative symptoms in first -episode of non -affective psychosis: a voxel -
based morphometry study. Front Psychiatry  3, 42.  
Berle JO, Hauge ER, Oedegaard KJ, Holsten FFasmer OB (2010). Actigraphic registration of 
motor activity reveals a more structured behavioural pattern in schizophrenia than in 
major  depression. BMC Res Notes  3, 149.  
Borg, G. (1998). Borg’s perceived exertion and pain scales. Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics.  
Brewer WJ, Francey SM, Wood SJ, Jackson HJ, Pantelis C, Phillips LJ, Yung AR, Anderson 
VAMcgorry PD 2005. Memory impairments ident ified in people at ultra -high risk for 
psychosis who later develop first -episode psychosis. American Journal of Psychiatry.  
Buchan DS, Young JD, Simpson A D (2012). The effects of a novel high  intensity exercise 
intervention on established markers of cardio vascular  disease and health in Scottish 
adolescent youth. J Public  Health Res.  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Exercise and markers of medial temporal health in youth at ultra high -
risk for psychosis, Phase 2   
 Page 50 of 58 Revis ed Template : October  19th, 2021 Bunce DMurden F (2006). Age, aerobic fitness, executive function, and episodic memory. 
European journal of Cognitive Psychology  18, 221 -233.  
Cannon TD, Cadenhead K, Cornblatt B,  Woods SW, Addington J, Walker E, Seidman LJ, Perkins 
D, Tsuang M, Mcglashan THeinssen R (2008). Prediction of psychosis in youth at high 
clinical risk: a multisite longitudinal study in North America. Archives of General 
Psychiatry  65, 28 -37. 
Cohen J (198 8). Statistical power analyses for the behavioral sciences, Hillsdale, NJ, Lawrence 
Erlbaum.  
Cohen J, Cohen P, West SAiken L (2003). Applied multiple regression/correlational analysis for 
the behavioral sciences, Hillsdale, NJ, Erlbaum.  
Cohen RA, Moser DJ, Clark MM, Aloia MS, Cargill BR, Stefanik S, Albrecht A, Tilkemeier 
PForman DE (1999). Neurocognitive functioning and improvement in quality of life 
following participation in cardiac rehabilitation. Am J Cardiol  83, 1374 -8. 
Colcombe SJ, Kramer AF, Erickson KI, Scalf P, Mcauley E, Cohen NJ, Webb A, Jerome GJ, 
Marquez DXElavsky S (2004). Cardiovascular fitness, cortical plasticity, and aging. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A  101, 3316 -21. 
Cooper DM, Weiler -Ravell D, Whipp BJWasserman K  (1984). Aerobic parameters of exercise 
as a function of body size during growth in children. J Appl Physiol  56, 628 -34. 
Corcoran C, Walker E, Huot R, Mittal VA, Tessner K, Kestler LMalaspina D (2003). The stress 
cascade and schizophrenia: etiology and ons et. Schizophrenia Bulletin  29, 671 -92. 
PMID: 14989406  
Corcoran CM, First MBCornblatt B (2010). The psychosis risk syndrome and its proposed 
inclusion in the DSM -V: A risk -benefit analysis. Schizophrenia Research  120, 16 -22. 
Cornblatt B, Green M, Walker EFM ittal VA 2008. Schizophrenia:  Etiology and 
Neurocognition. In: MILLON, T., BLANEY, P. H. & DAVIS, R. D. (eds.) Oxford Textbook of 
Psychopathology. 2 ed. New York: Oxford University Press.  
Cornblatt BA, Auther AM, Niendam T, Smith CW, Zinberg J, Bearden CE Cannon TD (2007). 
Preliminary findings for two new measures of social and role functioning in the 
prodromal phase of schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Bulletin  33, 688 -702.  
Costigan SA, Barnett L, Plotnikoff RCLubans DR (in press). The Health Indicators Associa ted 
With Screen -Based Sedentary Behavior Among Adolescent Girls: A Systematic 
Review. Journal of Adolescscent Health . 
Costigan SA, Eather A, Plotnikoff RC, Taaffe DR, Lubans DR (2015). High -Intensity Interval 
Training for Improving Health -Related Fitness i n Adolescents: a Systemic Review and 
Meta -Analysis. British Journal of Sports Medicine Online 0, 1-9. 
Cotman CWBerchtold NC (2002). Exercise: a behavioral intervention to enhance brain health 
and plasticity. Trends Neurosci  25, 295 -301.  
Czyrak, A., Mackowi ak, M., Chocyk, A., Fijal, K., & Wedzony, K. (2003). Role of 
glucocorticoids in the regulation of dopaminergic neurotransmission. Pol J 
Pharmacol, 55 (5), 667 -674.  
Deighton, S., & Addington, J. (2013). Exercise practices in individuals at clinical high risk of 
developing psychosis. Early intervention in psychiatry . 
De Jong LW, Van Der Hiele K, Veer IM, Houwing JJ, Westendorp RG, Bollen EL, De Bruin PW, 
Middelkoop HA,  Van Buchem MAVan Der Grond J (2008). Strongly reduced volumes 
of putamen and thalamus in Alzheimer's disease: an MRI study. Brain  131, 3277 -85. 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Exercise and markers of medial temporal health in youth at ultra high -
risk for psychosis, Phase 2   
 Page 51 of 58 Revis ed Template : October  19th, 2021 Dickey CC, Mccarley RWShenton ME (2002). The brain in schizotypal personality disorder: a 
review of structural MRI and CT findings. Harv Rev Psychiatry  10, 1 -15. 
Dickey CC, Mccarley RW, Voglmaier MM, Niznikiewicz MA, Seidman LJ, Hirayasu Y, Fischer I, 
Teh EK, Van Rhoads R, Jakab M, Kikinis R, Jolesz FAShenton ME (1999). Schizotypal 
personality disorder and MRI abno rmalities of temporal lobe gray matter. Biological 
Psychiatry  45, 1393 -402.  
Eastvold AD, Heaton RKCadenhead KS 2007. Neurocognitive deficits in the (putative) 
prodrome and first episode of psychosis. Schizophrenia Research.  
Ekelund U, Luan J, Sherar LB, Es liger DW, Griew P, Cooper AInternational Children's 
Accelerometry Database C (2012). Moderate to vigorous physical activity and 
sedentary time and cardiometabolic risk factors in children and adolescents. Journal 
of the American Medical Association  307, 70 4-12. 
Ekkekakis P, Lind E, Hall EEPetruzzello SJ (2008). Do regression -based computer algorithms 
for determining the ventilatory threshold agree? J Sports Sci  26, 967 -76. 
Ekkekakis P, Parfitt GPetruzzello SJ (2011). The pleasure and displeasure people feel  when 
they exercise at different intensities: decennial update and progress towards a 
tripartite rationale for exercise intensity prescription. Sports medicine  41, 641 -71. 
Erickson KI, Voss MW, Prakash RS, Basak C, Szabo A, Chaddock L, Kim JS, Heo S, Alves  H, 
White SM, Wojcicki TR, Mailey E, Vieira VJ, Martin SA, Pence BD, Woods JA, Mcauley 
EKramer AF (2011). Exercise training increases size of hippocampus and improves 
memory. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A  108, 3017 -22. 
Etnier JL, Whitwer SS, Landers DM, Petruzz ello SJSalazar W (1996). Changes in 
electroencephalographic activity associated with learning a novel motor task. Res Q 
Exerc Sport  67, 272 -9. 
Farmer J, Zhao X, Van Praag H, Wodtke K, Gage FHChristie BR (2004). Effects of voluntary 
exercise on synaptic pla sticity and gene expression in the dentate gyrus of adult male 
Sprague -Dawley rats in vivo. Neuroscience  124, 71 -9. 
Farrow TF, Hunter MD, Wilkinson ID, Green RDSpence SA (2005). Structural brain correlates 
of unconstrained motor activity in people with schizophrenia. Br J Psychiatry  187, 
481-2. 
FDA (2015). Tattoos and Permanent Makeup: Fact Sheet. 
http://www.fda.gov/Cosmetics/ProductsIngredients/Products/ucm108530.htm  
Faul F, Erdfelder E, Lang AGBuchner A (2007). G*Power 3: a flexible statistical power 
analysis program for the social, behavioral,  and biomedical sciences. Behav Res 
Methods  39, 175 -91. 
Fisher M, Holland C, Merzenich MMVinogradov S (2009). Using neuroplasticity -based 
auditory training to improve verbal memory in schizophrenia. American Journal of 
Psychiatry  166, 805 -11. 
Fisher M, Loe wy R, Hardy K, Schlosser DVinogradov S (2013). Cognitive Interventions 
Targeting Brain Plasticity in the Prodromal and Early Phases of Schizophrenia. Annual 
Review of  Clinical Psycholology . 
Fusar -Poli P, Borgwardt S, Crescini A, Deste G, Kempton MJ, Lawri e S, Guire PMSacchetti E 
(2011). Neuroanatomy of vulnerability to psychosis: A voxel -based meta -analysis. 
Neuroscience and biobehavioral reviews  35, 1175 -1185.  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Exercise and markers of medial temporal health in youth at ultra high -
risk for psychosis, Phase 2   
 Page 52 of 58 Revis ed Template : October  19th, 2021 Fusar -Poli P, Deste G, Smieskova R, Barlati S, Yung AR, Howes O, Stieglitz RD, Vita A, Mcguire 
PBorgwardt S (2012). Cognitive functioning in prodromal psychosis: a meta -analysis. 
Archives of General Psychiatry  69, 562 -71. 
Fusar -Poli P, Perez J, Broome M, Borgwardt S, Placentino A, Caverzasi E, Cortesi M, Veggiotti 
P, Politi P, Barale FMcguire P (2007 ). Neurofunctional correlates of vulnerability to 
psychosis: a systematic review and meta -analysis. Neuroscience and biobehavioral 
reviews  31, 465 -84. 
Gallup Poll (2013). Boulder remains least obese U.S. Metro area. Last Accessed 5/24/2013 
from http://www. gallup.com/poll/161717/boulder -remains -least -obese -metro -
area.aspx.  
Gerbino -Rosen G, Roofeh D, Tompkins DA, Feryo D, Nusser L, Kranzler H, Napolitano B, 
Frederickson A, Henderson I, Rhinewine JKumra S (2005). Hematological adverse 
events in clozapine -treat ed children and adolescents. Journal of the American 
Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry  44, 1024 -31. 
Gold JM, Barch DM, Carter CS, Dakin S, Luck SJ, Macdonald AW, 3rd, Ragland JD, Ranganath C, 
Kovacs I, Silverstein SMStrauss M (2012). Clinical, fun ctional, and intertask 
correlations of measures developed by the Cognitive Neuroscience Test Reliability 
and Clinical Applications for Schizophrenia Consortium. Schizophrenia Bulletin  38, 
144-52. 
Gomes Da Silva S, Dona F, Da Silva Fernandes MJ, Scorza FA, Cavalheiro EAArida RM (2010). 
Physical exercise during the adolescent period of life increases hippocampal 
parvalbumin expression. Brain Dev  32, 137 -42. 
Gorczynski PFaulkner G (2010). Exercise therapy for schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Bulletin  
36, 665 -6. 
Gormley SE, Swain DP, High R, Spina RJ, Dowling EA, Kotipalli USGandrakota R (2008). Effect 
of intensity of aerobic training on VO2max. Med Sci Sports Exerc  40, 1336 -43. 
Gould E, Beylin A, Tanapat P, Reeves AShors TJ (1999). Learning enhances adult 
neurogene sis in the hippocampal formation. Nat Neurosci  2, 260 -5. 
Green MFNuechterlein KH (2004). The MATRICS initiative: developing a consensus cognitive 
battery for clinical trials. Schizophrenia Research  72, 1 -3. 
Hardy, C. J., & Rejeski, W. J. (1989). Not what, but how one feels: The measurement of affect 
during exercise. Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology, 11, 304 -317.  
Haroun N, Dunn L, Haroun ACadenhead KS (2006). Risk and protection in prodromal 
schizophrenia: ethical implications for clinical prac tice and future research. 
Schizophrenia Bulletin  32, 166 -78. 
Hickson RC, Foster C, Pollock ML, Galassi TMRich S (1985). Reduced training intensities and 
loss of aerobic power, endurance, and cardiac growth. J Appl Physiol  58, 492 -9. 
Hillman CH, Erickson KI Kramer AF (2008). Be smart, exercise your heart: exercise effects on 
brain and cognition. Nature reviews. Neuroscience  9, 58 -65. 
Hollenberg M, Ngo LH, Turner DTager IB (1998). Treadmill Exercise Testing in an 
Epidemiologic Study of Elderly Subjects. J Gero ntol A Biol Sci Med Sci  53, B259 -B267.  
Holzschneider K, Wolbers T, Roder BHotting K (2012). Cardiovascular fitness modulates 
brain activation associated with spatial learning. Neuroimage  59, 3003 -14. 
Howes OD, Montgomery AJ, Asselin MC, Murray RM, Valli I,  Tabraham P, Bramon -Bosch E, 
Valmaggia L, Johns L, Broome M, Mcguire PKGrasby PM (2009). Elevated striatal 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Exercise and markers of medial temporal health in youth at ultra high -
risk for psychosis, Phase 2   
 Page 53 of 58 Revis ed Template : October  19th, 2021 dopamine function linked to prodromal signs of schizophrenia. Archives of General 
Psychiatry  66, 13 -20. 
Hughes JR (1958). Post -tetanic potentiation. Physiol Rev  38, 91 -113.  
Intlekofer KACotman CW (2012). Exercise counteracts declining hippocampal function in 
aging and Alzheimer's disease. Neurobiol Dis . 
Janse Van Rensburg K, Taylor A, Hodgson TBenattayallah A (2009). Acute exercise modulates 
cigarette cravings and brain activation in response to smoking -related images: an 
fMRI study. Psychopharmacology  203, 589 -98. 
Kim SH, Kim HB, Jang MH, Lim BV, Kim YJ,  Kim YP, Kim SS, Kim EHKim CJ (2002). Treadmill 
exercise increases cell proliferation without altering of apoptosis in dentate gyrus of 
Sprague -Dawley rats. Life Science  71, 1331 -40. 
Kramer AF, Erickson KIColcombe SJ (2006). Exercise, cognition, and the ag ing brain. J Appl 
Physiol  101, 1237 -42. 
Lipska BK (2002). Neonatal disconnection of the rat hippocampus: a neurodevelopmental 
model of schizophrenia. Dialogues Clin Neurosci  4, 361 -7. 
Logan GRM, Harris N, Duncan S, Schofield G (2014). A Review of Adolescen t High -Intensity 
Interval Training. Sports Med 44, 1071 -1085 . 
Maayan LCorrell CU (2010). Management of antipsychotic -related weight gain. Expert Rev 
Neurother  10, 1175 -200.  
Magnan RE, Kwan, B.M., Ciccolo, J., Gurney, B., & Bryan, A.D. (2013). Aerobic capacity testing 
with inactive individuals: The role of subjective experience. J Phys Act Health  10, 271 -
279. PMID 22398432  
Martin C, Pollock N, Bukstein OLynch K (2000). Inter -rater reliability of the SCID alcohol and 
substance use disorders section among adolescents. Drug Alcohol Dependence  59, 
173-176.  
Matsuo T, Saotome K, Seino S, Eto M, Shimojo N, Matsushita A, Iemitsu M, Ohshima H, Tanak 
K, Mukai C (2014). Low -Volume, High -Intensity, Aerobic Interval Exercise for 
Sedentary Adults: VO2Max, Cardiac Mass and Heart Rate Recovery. Eur J Appl Physiol 
114 (9), 1963 -72. 
Mcglashan TH (2006). Is active psychosis neurotoxic? Schizophrenia Bulletin  32, 609 -13. 
Mcglashan TH, Addington J, Cannon T, Heinimaa M, Mcgorry P, O'brien M, Penn D, Perkins D, 
Salokangas RK, Walsh B, Woods SWYung A (2007). Recruitment and treatment 
practices for help -seeking "prodromal" patients. Schizophrenia Bulletin  33, 715 -26. 
Mcglashan TH, Zipursky RB, Perkins D , Addington J, Miller TJ, Woods SW, Hawkins KA, 
Hoffman R, Lindborg S, Tohen MBreier A (2003). The PRIME North America 
randomized double -blind clinical trial of olanzapine versus placebo in patients at risk 
of being prodromally symptomatic for psychosis. I . Study rationale and design. 
Schizophrenia Research  61, 7 -18. 
Mcgorry PD, Yung AR, Phillips LJ, Yuen HP, Francey S, Cosgrave EM, Germano D, Bravin J, 
Mcdonald T, Blair A, Adlard SJackson H (2002). Randomized controlled trial of 
interventions designed to r educe the risk of progression to first -episode psychosis in 
a clinical sample with subthreshold symptoms. Archives of General Psychiatry  59, 921 -
8. 
Miller TJ, Mcglashan TH, Rosen JL, Cadenhead K, Cannon T, Ventura J, Mcfarlane W, Perkins 
DO, Pearlson GDWoo ds SW (2003a). Prodromal assessment with the structured 
interview for prodromal syndromes and the scale of prodromal symptoms: predictive 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Exercise and markers of medial temporal health in youth at ultra high -
risk for psychosis, Phase 2   
 Page 54 of 58 Revis ed Template : October  19th, 2021 validity, interrater reliability, and training to reliability. Schizophrenia Bulletin  29, 
703-15. 
Miller TJ, Mcglashan  TH, Rosen JL, Somjee L, Markovich PJ, Stein KWoods SW (2002). 
Prospective diagnosis of the initial prodrome for schizophrenia based on the 
Structured Interview for Prodromal Syndromes: preliminary evidence of interrater 
reliability and predictive validity . American Journal of Psychiatry  159, 863 -5. 
Miller TJ, Mcglashan TH, Woods SW, Stein K, Driesen N, Corcoran CM, Hoffman RDavidson L 
(1999). Symptom assessment in schizophrenic prodromal states. Psychiatr Q  70, 273 -
87. 
Miller TJ, Zipursky RB, Perkins D, Ad dington J, Woods SW, Hawkins KA, Hoffman R, Preda A, 
Epstein I, Addington D, Lindborg S, Marquez E, Tohen M, Breier AMcglashan TH 
(2003b). The PRIME North America randomized double -blind clinical trial of 
olanzapine versus placebo in patients at risk of be ing prodromally symptomatic for 
psychosis. II. Baseline characteristics of the "prodromal" sample. Schizophrenia 
Research  61, 19 -30. 
Mittal VA, Daley M, O'niell J, Bearden CECannon T (2010a). Striatal volumes and dyskinetic 
movements in youth at high -risk for psychosis. Schizophrenia Research  123, 68 -70. 
PMCID: PMC2939316  
Mittal VA, Karlsgodt KH, Zinberg J, Cannon TBearden CE (2010b).  Identification and 
Treatment of a Pineal Gland Tumor in an Adolescent with Prodromal Psychotic 
Symptoms. American Journal o f Psychiatry  167, 1033 -1037. PMID: 20826854  
Mittal VA, Neumann C, Saczawa MWalker EF (2008a). Longitudinal progression of movement 
abnormalities in relation to psychotic symptoms in adolescents at high risk of 
schizophrenia. Archives of General Psychiatry  65, 165 -71. PMID: 18250254  
Mittal VA, Orr JM, Pelletier A, Dean DJ, Smith ALunsford -Avery J (2013). Hypothalamic -
pituitary -adrenal axis dysfunction in non -clinical psychosis. Psychiatry Research . 
PMID 23332683  
Mittal VA, Saczawa ME, Walker E, Willhite RWalder D (2008b). Prenatal exposure to viral 
infection and conversion among adolescents at high -risk for psychotic disorders. 
Schizophrenia Research  99, 375 -6. PMCID: PMC2323607  
Mittal VA, Tessner KD, Trottman HD,  Esterberg M, Dhrub SH, Simeonova DI, Mcmillan AL, 
Murphy E, Saczawa MEWalker EF (2007). Movement abnormalities and the 
progression of prodromal symptomatology in adolescents at risk for psychotic 
disorders. Journal of Abnormal Psychology  116, 260 -7. PMID:  17516759  
Mittal VAWalker EF (2007). Movement abnormalities predict conversion to Axis I psychosis 
among prodromal adolescents. Journal of Abnormal Psychology  116, 796 -803. PMID: 
18020725  
Mittal VAWalker EF (2009). Movement abnormalities: a putative biomar ker of risk for 
Psychosis, New York, Springer.  
Mittal VAWalker EF (2011a). Abnormal movements and the longitudinal course of role and 
social functioning in adolescents at high -risk for psychosis. Schizophrenia Research . 
PMID: 21636252  
Mittal VAWalker EF (2011b). Minor physical anomalies and vulnerability in prodromal 
youth. Schizophrenia Research  129, 116 -21. PMCID: PMC3110506  
Mittal VA, Walker EF, Bearden CE, Walder D, Trottman H, Daley M, Simone ACannon TD 
(2010c). Markers of Basal Ga nglia Dysfunction and Conversion to Psychosis: 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Exercise and markers of medial temporal health in youth at ultra high -
risk for psychosis, Phase 2   
 Page 55 of 58 Revis ed Template : October  19th, 2021 Neurocognitive Deficits and Dyskinesias in the Prodromal Period. Biological 
Psychiatry  68, 93 -99. PMCID: PMC2891189  
Mokdad, AH, Marks JS, Stroup DF, Gerberding JL (2004). Acutal causes of death in the United 
States, 2000. JAMA  10;291 1238 -1245.  
Morrison A, French P, L W, Sw L, A K, J G, S PRp B (2004). Cognitive therapy for the 
prevention of psychosis in people at ultra -high risk: Randomised controlled trial Br J 
Psychiatry  185, 291 -197.  
MRI Safety.com (2016). Safety Information Article. 
http://www.mrisafety.com/SafetyInfov.asp?SafetyInfoID=228  
Neves G, Cooke SFBliss TV (2008). Synaptic plasticity, memory and the hippocampus: a 
neural network approach to causality. Nature reviews. Neuroscience  9, 65 -75. 
Niendam TA, Bearden CE, Johnson JK, Mckinley M, Loewy R, O'brien M, Nuechterlein KH, 
Green MFCannon TD (2006). Neurocognitive performance and functional disability in 
the psychosis prodrome. Schizophrenia Research  84, 100 -11. 
Noureddine Y, et al. Experience with m agnetic resonance imaging of human subjects with 
passive implants and tattoos at 7 T: A retrospective study. MAGMA 2015  
O'Connor MF et al. (2009). To assess, to control, to exclude: Effects of biobehavioral factors on 
circulating inflammatory markers. Brain Behav Immun  
Pajonk FG, Wobrock T, Gruber O, Scherk H, Berner D, Kaizl I, Kierer A, Muller S, Oest M, 
Meyer T, Backens M, Schneider -Axmann T, Thornton AE, Honer WGFalkai P (2010). 
Hippocampal plasticity in response to exercise in schizophrenia. Archi ves of General 
Psychiatry  67, 133 -43. 
Pantelis C, Velakoulis D, Mcgorry PD, Wood SJ, Suckling J, Phillips LJ, Yung AR, Bullmore ET, 
Brewer W, Soulsby B, Desmond PMcguire PK (2003). Neuroanatomical abnormalities 
before and after onset of psychosis: a cross -sectional and longitudinal MRI 
comparison. Lancet  361, 281 -8. 
Pantelis C, Velakoulis D, Wood SJ, Yucel M, Yung AR, Phillips LJ, Sun DQMcgorry PD (2007). 
Neuroimaging and emerging psychotic disorders: the Melbourne ultra -high risk 
studies. International Rev iew of  Psychiatry  19, 371 -81. 
Parker BA, Thompson PD, Jordan KC, Grimaldi AS, Assaf M, Jagannathan KPearlson GD 
(2011). Effect of exercise training on hippocampal volume in humans: a pilot study. 
Res Q Exerc Sport  82, 585 -91. 
Patenaude B (2007). FMRIB Tec hnical Report TR07BP1, London, Oxford.  
Pelletier AL, Dean DJ, Lunsford -Avery JR, Smith AK, Orr JM, Gupta T, Millman ZBMittal VA 
(2013). Emotion recognition and social/role dysfunction in non -clinical psychosis. 
Schizophrenia Research  143, 70 -3. PMID: 23182 437 
Phaneuf SLeeuwenburgh C (2001). Apoptosis and exercise. Med Sci Sports Exerc  33, 393 -6. 
Pimentel AE, Gentile CL, Tanaka H, Seals DRGates PE (2003). Greater rate of decline in 
maximal aerobic capacity with age in endurance -trained than in sedentary men.  J Appl 
Physiol  94, 2406 -2413.  
Quaney BM, Boyd LA, Mcdowd JM, Zahner LH, He J, Mayo MSMacko RF (2009). Aerobic 
exercise improves cognition and motor function poststroke. Neurorehabil Neural 
Repair  23, 879 -85. 
Ragland JD, Ranganath C, Barch DM, Gold JM, Hal ey B, Macdonald AW, 3rd, Silverstein SM, 
Strauss ME, Yonelinas APCarter CS (2012). Relational and Item -Specific Encoding 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Exercise and markers of medial temporal health in youth at ultra high -
risk for psychosis, Phase 2   
 Page 56 of 58 Revis ed Template : October  19th, 2021 (RISE): task development and psychometric characteristics. Schizophrenia Bulletin  38, 
114-24. 
Rijcken CA, Monster TB, Brouwers JRDe Jon g-Van Den Berg LT (2003). Chlorpromazine 
equivalents versus defined daily doses: how to compare antipsychotic drug doses? J 
Clin Psychopharmacol  23, 657 -9. 
Rognmo O, Hetland E, Helgerud J, Hoff JSlordahl SA (2004). High intensity aerobic interval 
exercise is superior to moderate intensity exercise for increasing aerobic capacity in 
patients with coronary artery disease. Eur J Cardiovasc Prev Rehabil  11, 216 -22. 
Ross JR, Matava MJ. Tattoo -induced skin "burn" during magnetic resonance imaging in a 
professiona l football player: A case report. Sports Health 2011;3:431 -4. 
Rosenberger ME, Haskell WL, Albinali F, Mota S, Nawyn JIntille S (in press). Estimating 
Activity and Sedentary Behavior from an Accelerometer on the Hip or Wrist. Med Sci 
Sports Exerc . 
Schafer JLGraham JW (2002). Missing data: our view of the state of the art. Psychol Methods  7, 
147-77. 
Schneider MCooper DM (2011). Enjoyment of exercise moderates the impact of a school -
based physical activity intervention. Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act  8, 64 . 
Schneider M, Dunn ACooper D (2009). Affect, exercise, and physical activity among healthy 
adolescents. J Sport Exerc Psychol  31, 706 -23. 
Seidman LJ, Giuliano AJ, Meyer EC, Addington J, Cadenhead KS, Cannon TD, Mcglashan TH, 
Perkins DO, Tsuang MT, Walker EF, Woods SW, Bearden CE, Christensen BK, Hawkins 
K, Heaton R, Keefe RSE, Heinssen R, Cornblatt BAGroup NaPLSN (2010). 
Neuropsychology of t he prodrome to psychosis in the NAPLS consortium: 
relationship to family history and conversion to psychosis. Archives of General 
Psychiatry  67, 578 -88. 
Sporn A, Greenstein D, Gogtay N, Sailer F, Hommer DW, Rawlings R, Nicolson R, Egan MF, 
Lenane M, Gochma n P, Weinberger DRRapoport JL (2005). Childhood -onset 
schizophrenia: smooth pursuit eye -tracking dysfunction in family members. 
Schizophrenia Research  73, 243 -52. 
Squire LR (1992). Memory and the hippocampus: a synthesis from findings with rats, 
monkeys, a nd humans. Psychological Review  99, 195 -231.  
Stroth S, Hille K, Spitzer MReinhardt R (2009). Aerobic endurance exercise benefits memory 
and affect in young adults. Neuropsychol Rehabil  19, 223 -43. 
Svebak, S., & Murgatroyd, S. (1985). Metamotivational domin ance: A multimethod 
validation of reversal theory constructs. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 48(1), 107 -116.  
Tope WD, Shellock FG. Magnetic resonance imaging and permanent cosmetics (tattoos): Survey 
of complications and adverse events. J Ma gn Reson Imag 2002;15:180 -184. 
United States Census Bureau. (2008). 2006 -2008 American Community Survey 3 -Year 
Estimates.   Retrieved 8/10, 2010, from 
http://factfi nder.census.gov/servlet/ACSSAFFFacts?_event=ChangeGeoContext&geo_id
=16000US0820000&_geoContext=&_street=&_county=Denver&_cityTown=Denver&_
state=&_zip=&_lang=en&_sse=on&ActiveGeoDiv=&_useEV=&pctxt=fph&pgsl=010&
_submenuId=factsheet_1&ds_name=ACS_2007_3YR_SAF F&_ci_nbr=null&qr_name=n
ull&reg=null%3Anull&_keyword=&_industry=  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Exercise and markers of medial temporal health in youth at ultra high -
risk for psychosis, Phase 2   
 Page 57 of 58 Revis ed Template : October  19th, 2021 United States Census -Bureau. (2009). Annual County Resident Population Estimates by 
Age, Sex, Race, and Hispanic Origin: April 1, 2000 to July 1, 2009. 2009 Population 
Estimates . 
Uysal N, Tugyan K, Kayatekin BM, Acikgoz O, Bagriyanik HA, Gonenc S, Ozdemir D, Aksu I, 
Topcu ASemin I (2005). The effects of regular aerobic exercise in adolescent period 
on hippocampal neuron density, apoptosis and spatial memory. Neurosci Lett  383, 
241-5. 
Valli I, Tognin S, Fusar -Poli PMechelli A (2012). Episodic memory dysfunct ion in individuals 
at high -risk of psychosis: a systematic review of neuropsychological and 
neurofunctional studies. Curr Pharm Des  18, 443 -58. 
Van Uffelen JG, Chin APMJ, Hopman -Rock MVan Mechelen W (2008). The effects of exercise 
on cognition in older adu lts with and without cognitive decline: a systematic review. 
Clin J Sport Med  18, 486 -500.  
Vaynman S, Ying ZGomez -Pinilla F (2004). Hippocampal BDNF mediates the efficacy of 
exercise on synaptic plasticity and cognition. The European journal of neuroscienc e 20, 
2580 -90. 
Voss MW, Erickson KI, Prakash RS, Chaddock L, Kim JS, Alves H, Szabo A, Phillips SM, 
Wojcicki TR, Mailey EL, Olson EA, Gothe N, Vieira -Potter VJ, Martin SA, Pence BD, Cook 
MD, Woods JA, Mcauley EKramer AF (2013). Neurobiological markers of e xercise -
related brain plasticity in older adults. Brain Behav Immun  28, 90 -9. 
Voss MW, Prakash RS, Erickson KI, Basak C, Chaddock L, Kim JS, Alves H, Heo S, Szabo AN, 
White SM, Wojcicki TR, Mailey EL, Gothe N, Olson EA, Mcauley EKramer AF (2010). 
Plasticit y of brain networks in a randomized intervention trial of exercise training in 
older adults. Front Aging Neurosci  2. 
Walder DJ, Mittal VA, Trotman HD, Mcmillan ALWalker EF (2008). Neurocognition and 
conversion to psychosis in adolescents at high -risk. Schi zophrenia Research  101, 161 -
8. PMID: 18280704  
WalkerDiforio D (1997). Schizophrenia: a neural diathesis -stress model. Psychological Review  
104, 667 -85. 
Walker E, Mittal VA, Tessner K (2008). Stress and the hypothalamic pituitary adrenal axis in 
the develop mental course of schizophrenia. Annual Review of  Clinical Psycholology  4, 
189-216. PMID: 18370616  
Walker EF, Brennan PA, Esterberg M, Brasfield J, Pearce BCompton MT (2010). Longitudinal 
changes in cortisol secretion and conversion to psychosis in at -risk youth. Journal of 
Abnormal Psychology  119, 401 -8. 
Watson, D., Clark, L. A., & Tellegan, A. (1988). Development and validation of brief 
measures of positive and negative affect:  
The PANAS scales. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 54(6), 1063 –1070.  
Weinberger DR (1995). From neuropathology to neurodevelopment. Lancet  346, 552 -7. 
Wilhelm, I., J. Born, et al. (2007). Is the cortisol awakening rise a response to awakening? 
Psychoneuroendocrinology . 32: 358 -366 
White T, Anjum ASchulz SC (2006). The schizophrenia prodrome. American Journal of 
Psychiatry  163, 376 -80. 
Wible CG, Shenton ME, Hokama H, Kikinis R, Jolesz FA, Metcalf DMccarley RW (1995). 
Prefrontal cortex and schizophrenia. A quantitative magnetic resona nce imaging 
study. Archives of General Psychiatry  52, 279 -88. 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Exercise and markers of medial temporal health in youth at ultra high -
risk for psychosis, Phase 2   
 Page 58 of 58 Revis ed Template : October  19th, 2021 Wiskott L, Rasch MJKempermann G (2006). A functional hypothesis for adult hippocampal 
neurogenesis: avoidance of catastrophic interference in the dentate gyrus. 
Hippocampus  16, 329 -43. 
Wisloff U , Stoylen A, Loennechen JP, Bruvold M, Rognmo O, Haram PM, Tjonna AE, Helgerud J, 
Slordahl SA, Lee SJ, Videm V, Bye A, Smith GL, Najjar SM, Ellingsen OSkjaerpe T 
(2007). Superior cardiovascular effect of aerobic interval training versus moderate 
continuous  training in heart failure patients: a randomized study. Circulation  115, 
3086 -94. 
Wolf SA, Melnik AKempermann G (2011). Physical exercise increases adult neurogenesis and 
telomerase activity, and improves behavioral deficits in a mouse model of 
schizophre nia. Brain Behav Immun  25, 971 -80. 
Wood SJ, Pantelis C, Proffitt T, Phillips LJ, Stuart GW, Buchanan JA, Mahony K, Brewer W, 
Smith DJMcgorry PD (2003). Spatial working memory ability is a marker of risk -for-
psychosis. Psychological Medicine  33, 1239 -47. 
Woods SW, Breier A, Zipursky RB, Perkins DO, Addington J, Miller TJ, Hawkins KA, Marquez 
E, Lindborg SR, Tohen MMcglashan TH (2003). Randomized trial of olanzapine versus 
placebo in the symptomatic acute treatment of the schizophrenic prodrome. 
Biological Ps ychiatry  54, 453 -64. 
Wu EQ, Birnbaum HG, Shi L, Ball DE, Kessler RC, Moulis MAggarwal J (2005). The economic 
burden of schizophrenia in the United States in 2002. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry  66, 
1122 -9. 
Yuede CM, Zimmerman SD, Dong H, Kling MJ, Bero AW,  Holtzman DM, Timson BFCsernansky 
JG (2009). Effects of voluntary and forced exercise on plaque deposition, hippocampal 
volume, and behavior in the Tg2576 mouse model of Alzheimer's disease. Neurobiol 
Dis 35, 426 -32. 
Yung AR, Yuen HP, Berger G, Francey S, Hung TC, Nelson B, Phillips LMcgorry P (2007). 
Declining transition rate in ultra high risk (prodromal) services: dilution or reduction 
of risk? Schizophrenia Bulletin  33, 673 -81. 
Zito JM, Safer DJ, Dosreis S, Gardner  JF, Magder L, Soeken K, Boles M, Lynch FRiddle MA 
(2003). Psychotropic practice patterns for youth: a 10 -year perspective. Archive of 
Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine  157, 17 -25. 
 
 
 