Protocol Version 3 /5/2018  
Page 1 of 13 TMW -Newborn Implementation 
 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  TMW -Newborn Implementation  
 
PI: Dana Suskind, M.D.  
 
FUNDING: External funding from Hemera F oundation  
 
SPONSER: Private Industry  
 
TYPE OF RESEARCH:  Randomized implementation trial   
 INTERVENTION: Experimental Technique t o Change Knowledge and Beliefs  
 
PROTOCOL VERSION DATE: 3 /5/2018
  
Protocol Version 3 /5/2018  
Page 2 of 13 Thirty Million Words Initiative  Newborn Implementation Trial  
Protocol Narrative  
 
The Thirty Million Words Initiative Newborn Intervention (TMW -Newborn) is a public health 
effort aimed at increas ing awareness about the importance of a child’s  early language 
environment in his or her first years of life. This one -time educational intervention will be 
impacting maternal awareness and knowledge about the importance of children’s early language environment , between ages 0 and 3. We envision the in tervention to be carried out in 
the immediate postpartum period  because we seek to provide language  enriching tools  parents 
can use with their babies  from the start.  The educational intervention will be delivered in 
conjunction with the Universal Newborn H earing Screening (UNHS)
 in partnering hospitals , an 
existing public health infrastructure and a routine part of postpartum care . 
 
Background  
The Newborn Initiative is both an extension and a focused adapt ation  of the larger Thirty 
Million Words  initiative. TMW -Newborn is grounded in three main bodies of literature and 
avenues of research. The first is research on early childhood language acquisition, child development, and child behavior. The foundation of our evidence -based research derives from 
the differences found in children’s language environments, which largely depend on socio -
economic status (Hart and Risley 1995). Second is research on maternal health education and health literacy, specifically on prenatal, perinatal and post -natal educa tion. Third is research 
and data on the Universal Newborn Hearing Screening (UNHS), which occurs during post -
partum care. The UNHS i s a critical point in time to both deliver the TMW message and to  
increase follow up for those newborns  not passing the initial screening by focusing on the 
importance of a child’s early language  environment  and the impact of hearing loss  on cognitive 
development . 
Our effort therefore lies in bringing these three main bodies of research together to craft a public health intervention, which relies on existing initiatives while adding an important educational component . TMW -Newborn not only aims to impact parents’ beliefs about how 
crucial their role is in creating a stimulating and enriching language environment for their baby, but also seeks to improve rates of re -screening  (loss to follow -up) for the  universal  newborn 
hearing screening. By emphasizing  the importance  of talk (and hearing) for cognitive and 
language development, we seek to encourage families to follow up after the screening if their newborn does not pass.  
Importance of Language A cquisition on Cognitive Development : 
A child’s early language exposure is increasingly acknowledged as pivotal in language 
development and, more importantly, in ultimate educational and intellectual achievement (Bruner, 1981; Chapman, 2000; Gallaway & Richards, 1994; Hart & Risley, 1995; Hutt enlocher, 
Haight, Bryk, Selzer, & Lyons,1991; Rowe, 2008). Hart and Risley’s landmark study demonstrated the tremendous impact of a child’s early language milieu on future learning, revealing a significant correlation between the number of words a child is  exposed to between 
ages 0 -3 and his/her ultimate IQ and academic success (Hart & Risley, 1992; 1995). Their 
Protocol Version 3 /5/2018  
Page 3 of 13 findings were both significant and alarming, demonstrating the critical and time -sensitive role 
that early language exposure plays in a child’s lif e. 
The tragedy for children born into poverty is the overwhelming inequity in their early language 
experience. Hart and Risley’s study revealed a steep socioeconomic gradient in early exposure 
to words/language. At the end of their third year, children fro m high  socioeconomic status (SES) 
families heard approximately forty -five million  words; children from economically impoverished 
backgrounds heard only approximately thirteen million . Hart and Risley found that “with few 
exceptions, the more parents talked  to their children, the faster children’s vocabularies were 
growing and the higher their children’s IQ test scores at age three and later.” Their follow -up 
with these children at 9 -10 years of age confirmed that preschool/school interventions came 
too late  to alter these trajectories; the reverberations of early linguistic shortfall were likely to 
follow these children throughout their lives.   
But the tragedy for these children is not unalterable. It is neither genetics nor a lack of potential 
that lies at  the heart of this inequity; it is parental knowledge. In 2008, Rowe demonstrated that 
that the relationship between socioeconomic status and parental communication ability is 
mediated by parental knowledge (Rowe 2008). Other studies have corroborated this , showing 
that the effect of socioeconomic status on a child’s vocabulary was primarily dictated by 
maternal speech (Hoff 2003). Encouragingly, studies have also demonstrated that a well-
planned , parent -directed language intervention  in low -income populations may have a positive 
effect with parents increasing their use of facilitative language with their children (Oneil -Pirozzi, 
2009).  
Universal Newborn Hearing Screening and Early Hearing Detection and Intervention:  
Since 2000, the number of infants  screened for hearing loss at birth has dramatically increased. 
According to 2011 data (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2013), 97.9 % of all babies in the United States receive the Universal Newborn Hearing Screening. However, 1. 8 % of 
newborns  (59,161) do not pass the screening, 35.3%  (20,857)  of which are not rescreened, 
failing to receive the next step of treatment. The CDC groups these failed re -screenings into  two 
categories: “Loss to Follow -Up (LFU)” and “Loss  to Documentation (LTD)” . For infants who did 
not p ass the newborn hearing screening, LFU  refers to a failure to receive the next step of 
treatment, be it rescreening or comprehensive audiologic evaluation. Families are contacted 
but do not follow up, or cannot  be contacted. LTD  refers  to failure to report the results from 
hearing screening, rescreening, diagnostic services, and/or treatment services which are needed for comprehensive surveillance and monitoring by E arly Hearing Detection and 
Intervention (EDHI)  and the medical home.  
In Illinois, all birthing hospitals perform the newborn hearing screening, and 99.4% (156,376  in 
2011) of newborns are screened for hearing loss (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
2013). According to 2011 data however, of the  2,714 infants not passing the tes t, 64% (1,736) 
are LFU or LTD . This is nearly double the national average. The high incidence of newborns not 
returning for a complete audiologic screening is worrying and constitutes a concern for newborn developmental health. An infant  who does not pass his/her newborn hearing 
Protocol Version 3 /5/2018  
Page 4 of 13 screening has a potential developmental emergency  because of the tremendous impact 
language has on the developing brain.  
A Participatory Model of Educational I ntervention:  
The educational intervention is currently  being designed and planned with iterative 
participation and feedback from the audience we seek to have an impact on. Exploratory and 
formative qualitative research inf orms the intervention, drawing insights from pregnant 
mothers, mothers in immediate post -partum, parents, and healthcare providers. Our 
intervention is currently being developed with focus groups and individual interviews with mothers and parents, consultation with medical professionals (RNs, OB GYNs, Pediatricians), and visits to community health centers and birthing hospitals in Pensacola, FL  to understand 
the feasibility of implementation of the intervention around the time of the  newborn hearing  
screening.  
The TMW -Newborn translates the TMW message into a shorter -format one -time educational 
intervention that can be delivered to new parents in the hospital as part of routine postpartum 
care. As a large -scale public health approach, it has the potential for a significant impact on SES-
disparities in language development. While the e arlier TMW intervention was developed for 
toddlers, the TMW -Newborn  intervention will be tailored for parent s of newborns . It will 
include messages and  strategies specifically for children from birth to one year of age with a 
focus on preverbal communicati on and mother -child attachment. It will also include video 
modeling  of parents utilizing both spoken and sign language. Given the novelty of this 
intervention, it will be important to evaluate its acceptability and feasibility with low -SES 
families and objectively examine evidence of its efficacy.  The TMW NI video will be available in  
both  English and Spanish .   
The significance of the Newborn Intervention  as a Public Health Initiative  
The Thirty Million Words Initiative Newborn Intervention is a public health effort to raise 
awareness about the critical importance of early childhood language development. It will occur 
at the beginning of a baby’s life and during a special time for his or her parents, right after 
delivery.  TMW -Newborn is situated  at the intersection of multiple public health initiatives:  the 
Universal Newborn Hearing Screening and Early Hearing Detection and Intervention are crucial 
public health interventions to timely screen and detect hearing loss.  For the intervention, 
TMW -Newborn will be integrated as part of routine postpartum care in the hospital stay. In the 
future, we envision having key information about child language development as part of the discharge packet every mo ther  receives after birth. We also seek to have key information of 
language development milestones in newborns be part of prenatal classes and be included in prenatal educational material.   
Previous Research  
We conducted two randomized controlled trials to evaluate the feasibility and efficacy of TMW -
Newborn in two large Chicago birthing hospitals.  Over 600 English - and Spanish -speaking 
participants were randomly assigned to receive the TMW -Newborn video or a  control group 
educational video about Sudden Infant Death Syndrome (SIDS).  
Protocol Version 3 /5/2018  
Page 5 of 13  
Results showed a significant increase in knowledge survey scores between pre - and post-
intervention for participants in the TMW -Newborn treatment group. There was no significant 
increase in the control group’s average scores. The increase for treatment participants remained significant 4 to 6 weeks after the intervention.  
 In addition to the Knowledge Survey, participants were asked a few questions concerning the UNHS and the video. We found that nearly 92% percent of all participants in the study stated 
that they understood what the UNHS hearing results meant for them and their infant after 
watching the video. Furthermore, in response to the questions about the video, 99% of part icipants found the information in the video helpful.  98% of them reported learning 
something new from the video and expressed willingness to recommend the video to a friend.  97% of all participants planned to try out strategies from the video at home and 87% of them 
agreed that it was convenient to view the video during the UNHS.  
 
In summary, mothers of newborns who receive the TMW -Newborn educational intervention 
show increased knowledge and demonstrate an improved understanding of the critical importance of their newborn’s early language environment for cognitive development and 
school readiness (Suskind  et al. , 2017).  
 
Purpose  
The purpose of the proposed research is to perform testing o f the Thirty Million Words 
Initiative Newborn Intervention (TMW -Newborn)  with the primary goal of evaluating various 
implementation methods.  
 
We hypothesize that the TMW -Newborn intervention will:  
1.  Significantly impact parent k nowledge regarding the importance of UNHS follow -up  
2. Significantly impact parent knowledge of child development 
 
Additionally, we hypothesize that:  
3. The 7-minute version of the video with  questions interspersed will most significantly 
improve parent knowledge of child development 
4. There will be no significant difference s in effectiveness  of the Spanish and English 
versions of the TMW -Newborn i ntervention  
 The hypothese s rely on the existing research data supporting the idea that parental 
understanding and beliefs will alter parental behavior, and  consequently , that increased 
parental linguistic input will impact their child’s cognitive development.   
 
Protocol  
We propose to perform a randomized implementation trial to evaluate  the efficacy of  various 
implementation methods  of the  TMW -Newborn educational intervention . The study will be 
Protocol Version 3 /5/2018  
Page 6 of 13 conducted in temporal proximity to  the administration of the universal newborn hearing 
screen .  
 
After routine delivery,  postpartum  mothers  are admitted to the mother -baby unit for 48 -72 
hours.  At Sacred Heart Hospital, study participation will be offered to every postpartum mother 
prior to discharge by a hearing screening technician , registered nurse, or registered hospital 
volunteer during the patient’ s hospital stay . Study participation will be offered to every mother 
whose child is receiving the hearing screening  at the University of Chicago Medicine  and Baptist 
Hospital- Pensacola . At the University of Chicago Medicine , study participation will be offered by  
a research assistant or hearing screening techni cian. At the Baptist Hospital -Pensacola, study 
participation will be offered by a nurse . The technician , nurse , or registered volunteer  will give 
each mother a n electronic  tablet with  the HIPAA Compliant TMW -Newborn Tech Platform that 
houses the TMW -Newborn intervention.  
 The patient experience through the TMW -Newborn intervention within the TMW Tech Platform 
is as follows:  
• Participant selects  language (English or Spanish) for viewing videos and completing 
surveys;   
• Participant views Welcome and  Consent Video, in which Dr. Suskind (in English) or 
another health professional (in Spanish) introduce the study, explain participation, outline risks;   
• Participants who agree to participate will then be randomized into one of four 
conditions:  
o Long  TMW -Newborn intervention video without questions interspersed,  
o Long  TMW -Newborn intervention video with questions interspersed,  
o Short  TMW -Newborn intervention video without questions interspersed, or  
o Short  TMW -Newborn intervention video with questions intersper sed.  
 
• Participant completes pre -intervention surveys: Baby SPEAK and non-identifying 
demographics  items . These survey s take approximately 10 minutes to complete .  
• Participant views TMW -Newborn intervention video, according to her randomized 
assignment out lined above.  
• Participant completes post- intervention surveys: Baby SPEAK , UNHS, and  fidelity of 
implementation.  
 
The hearing screener , nurse , or volunteer will be notified via the TMW Tech Platform to pick up 
the tablet from the participant  upon intervention completion or whenever the participant opts 
out.  
No identifying information is collected within the TMW -Newborn web platform, and the 
hearing screening technicians will not be able to see or access any of the participants’ 
responses.  
Protocol Version 3 /5/2018  
Page 7 of 13 This study protocol will only be used at Sacred Heart Hospital , University of Chicago Medical 
Center , and Baptist Hospital- Pensacola.  
 
Randomization  
The hearing screener, nurse , or volunteer will drop off tablets with participants, and only after 
the participants  agree to participate by completing the tablet based consent will they be 
assigned to one of the four treatment conditions . The TMW -Newborn Web Platform will house 
the randomization tool that will randomize each participant into one of four treatment groups:  
1. Long  TMW -Newborn intervention video without questions interspersed,  
2. Long  TMW -Newborn intervention video with questions interspersed,  
3. Short  TMW -Newborn intervention video without questions interspersed , or 
4. Short  TMW -Newborn intervention v ideo with questions interspersed.  
 
There is equal likelihood of each randomization condition occurring.  
 
Participants  
Participants will include a goal of 10,000 new  mother s at Sacred Heart Hospital, University of 
Chicago Medical Center, and Baptist Hospital -Pensacola.  2,500 will be randomized into each of 
the four implementation conditions  outlined above.  
 
Exclusion criteria  
Individuals that do not have a live  birth at Sacred Heart Hospital, University of Chicago Medical 
Center , or Baptist Hospital -Pensacola or do not receive the UNHS at  one of these  location s will 
not be eligible for this study.  
 
Payment   
Participants will not be  compensated.  
 
Risks and B enefits  
Risks are minimal as testing only involves answering a questionnaire  and providing 
demographic information.  The data will be stored in password -protected computers and stored 
in locked file cabinets. Benefits include increased knowledge of  the importance of early 
childhood  language and cognitive  development, and increased understanding of the Universal 
Newborn Hearing Screening and the importance of prompt follow -up after failed hearing 
screens .  
 
Analysis  
Paired t-tests will be used  to analyze total  survey scores before and after intervention. ANOVA s 
will be used to evaluate differences in outcomes based on SES and other variables  in various 
experimental groups.   
 
 
Consent  
Protocol Version 3 /5/2018  
Page 8 of 13 Prior to enrollment, all participants will view a video of the PI, Dr. Dana Suskind  (in English) , or 
another healthcare professional (in Spanish),  explaining the study, what is involved, and its 
risks . Written text of this consent message appears below this video.  After watching the video 
and reviewing the consent text, mothers who want to participate may select the “I Agree” 
button, and will be randomized into the study. Those who  do not wish to participate  may select 
the “I Do Not Agree” button and return the tablet to the hearing screening technician. We request that a traditional written informed consent be waived, as collecting patient signature s 
would require us to collect identifying information in an otherwise de -identified study.  
No identifying information is collected in this study. All information collected is de -identified, 
and will be stor ed under a coded numerical variable name  that is not linked to any identifying 
information .   
 Hearing screening techs, research assistants, and nurses who implement the study are trained 
to address patient questions as outlined in the Quick Guide.  Patien ts with questions not 
immediately resolved per the Quick Guide guidelines will be referred to the TMW study team.  
 
Confidentiality  
The raw data will only be made available to the PI and study personnel listed on the protocol. 
Survey participants ’ will be stored under  numerical codes and will not contain any identifying 
information . The d ata will be carefully monitore d to protect patient privacy.  
 
Recruitment  
The hearing screening tech, research assistant , or nurse  will offer participation  to all 
eligible subjects  on the maternity ward. All mothers on the maternity ward or  present  in 
the NICU at Sacred Heart Hospital, University of Chicago Medical Center, or Baptist 
Hospital- Pensacola  during the study protocol will be eligble to participate . 
There will be no use of advertisements or additional materials for recruitment purposes. The hearing screening tech or research assistant will offer study participation to  
mothers in their rooms  at the start of the newborn’s hearing screening.   The Welcome 
and Consent Video in the TMW Tech Platform will describe the study  in detail.  
 
  
Protocol Version 3 /5/2018  
Page 9 of 13 References  
 
Early childhood language acquisition, child language development , and child behavior : 
American Academy of Pediatrics, Committee on Public Education, (2001). Children, adolescents, 
and television. Pediatrics, 107 (2), 423 –426.  
Bialystok, E., Majumder, S., Martin, M. M., (2003). Developing phonological awareness: Is there a bilingual advantag e? Applied Psycholinguistics, 24(1), 27 -44. 
Bloom, L. (1993). The transition from infancy to language. New York: Cambridge University Press.  
Bloom, L. (1998). Language acquisition in its developmental context. In D. Kuhn & R. S. Siegler (Ed.), W. Damon (Se ries Ed.), Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 2. Cognition, perception, and 
language, (5th ed., pp. 309 –370). New York: Wiley.  
Broaders , S. C. Cook , S. W. Mitchell , Z. Goldin -Meadow , S. (2007). Making children gesture 
brings out implicit knowledge and leads to learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General , 136 (4), 539 -550.  
Carpenter, M., Nagell, K., & Tomasello, M. (1998). Social cognition, joint attention and communicative competence from 9 to 15 months of age. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development , 63(4, Serial No. 255).   
Cooper, R. P., Abraham, J., Berman, S., & Staska, M. (1997). The development of infants' 
preference for  motherese. Infant Behavior & Development , Vol 20(4), 477 -488.  
Dieterich, S.E., Assel, M. A., Swank , P., Smith, K. E., & Landry, S. H. (2006) The impact of early 
maternal verbal scaffolding and child language abilities on later decoding and reading comprehension skills. Journal of School Psychology , 43, 481 -494.  
Duncan, G. J., Dowsett, C. J., Claessens,  A., Magnuson, K., Huston, A. C., Klebanov, P., et al. 
(2007). School readiness and later achievement. Developmental Psychology, 43, 1428 –1446.  
Fernald, A. (1985). Four- month -old infants prefer to listen to motherese. Infant Behavior and 
Development , 8, 18 1-195.  
Funk, J. B., Brouwer, J., Curtiss, K., & McBroom, E., (2009). Parents of preschoolers: expert 
media recommendations and ratings  knowledge, media- effects beliefs, and monitoring 
practices.  Pediatrics, 123, 981 -988.  
Genesee, F., Boivin, I., Nicoladis,  E., (1996). Talking  with  strangers: A  study  of bilingual   
children's  communicative  competence. Applied Psycholinguistics. 17(4), 427- 442.  
Protocol Version 3 /5/2018  
Page 10 of 13 Hart, B., & Risley, T. (1995). Meaningful differences in the everyday experience of young 
American children. Baltimore, MD: Paul H. Brookes Publishing Co.  
Huttenlocher, J., Vasilyeva, M., Cymerman, E., & Levine, S. (2002). Language input and child 
syntax. Cognitive psychology , 45(3), 337 –74.  
Huttenlocher, J., Waterfall, H., Vasilyeva, M., Vevea, J., & Hedges, L. V. (201 0). Sources of 
variability in children’s language growth. Cognitive Psycholog y, 61, 343 –365.  
Iverson, J. M., & Goldin -Meadow, S. (2005). Gesture paves the way for language development. 
Psychological Science , 16, 368 –371.  
Kcrmar, M., Grela, B., & Lin, K. (2 007). Can toddlers learn vocabulary from television? An 
experimental approach. Media Psychology , 10:41 –63.  
Kirkorian, H. L., Pempek, T. A., Murphy, L. A., Schmidt, M. E., & Anderson, D. R. (2009). The 
impact of background television on parent -child interaction. Child Development , 80(5), 1350-
1359.  
Lonigan, C. J., & Whitehurst, G. J. (1998). Relative efficacy of  parent and teacher involvement in 
a shared -reading intervention for preschool children from low -income backgrounds. Early 
Childhood Research Quarterly, 13(2), 263 –290.  
Masur, E.F., Flynn, V., Eichorst, D., (2005). Maternal responsive and  directive  behavio urs and 
utterances as predictors of children's lexical development. Journal of Child Language , 32(1), 63 -
91. 
Moore, C., & Dunham, P. (1995). Joint attention: Its origins and role in development. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.  
Pan , B.A. Rowe, M. Spier, E. Tamis -Lemo nda, C. (2004). Measuring productive vocabulary of 
toddlers in low -income families: Concurrent and predictive. Journal of Child Language, 31, 587 -
608.  
Phillips, M. (2011). Parenting, time use, and disparities in academic outcomes. In G. Duncan & 
R. Murnane  (Eds.), Whither opportunity: rising inequality schools, and children’s life chances 
(pp. 207 –228). New York, NY: Russell Sage.  
Rowe, M. L. (2012). A longitudinal investigation of the role of quantity and quality of child-directed speech in vocabulary deve lopment. Child Development, 83(5), 1762 -1774.  
Rowe, M. L., & Goldin -Meadow, S. (2009a). Early gesture selectively predicts later language 
learning . Developmental Science , 12, 182 187.  
Rowe, M. L., & Goldin -Meadow, S. (2009b). Differences in early gesture e xplain SES disparities 
in child vocabulary size at school entry. Science , 323, 951– 953.  
Schmidt, M. E., Rich, M., Rifas -Shiman, S. L., Oken, E., & Taveras, E. M. (2009). 
Protocol Version 3 /5/2018  
Page 11 of 13 Television  viewing in infancy and child cognition at 3 years of age in a US cohort. Pe diatrics , 
123(3), e370 -e375.  
Setliff, A. E., & Courage, M. L., (2011). Background  television  and infants’ allocation of their 
attention during toy play. Infancy , Vol 16(6), Nov -Dec 2011, 611 -639.  
Senechal, M., & LeFevre, J. (2002). Parental involvement in the development of children’s 
reading skill: a five -year longitudinal study. Child Development , 73(2), 445 -460.  
Snow, C. E. (1972). Mothers’ speech to children learning language. Child Development , 43, 549 –
565.  
Snow, C. E., Burns, S., & Griffin, P. (1998).  Preventing reading difficulties in young children. 
Washington, DC: National Academy Press.  
Schoon, I., Parsons, S., Rush, R., & Law, J. (2010). Children's language ability and psychosocial 
development: a 29 -year a follow -up study. Pediatrics , 126, e73- e80. 
Suskind, D. L., Leung, C. Y. Y., Webber, R. J., Hundertmark, A. C., Leffel, K. R., Suskind, E., & 
Grobman, W. A. (2017). The Newborn initiative parent education curriculum: A randomized 
controlled trial. Manuscript in preparation.  
Tamis -LeMonda , C. S. Bornstein , M. H. Baumwell , L. (2001). Maternal responsiveness and 
children's achievement of language milestones. Child Development 72, 748 -67. 
Wasik, B. A., & Bond, M. A. (2001). Beyond the pages of a book: Interactive book reading and 
language developme nt in preschool classrooms. Journal of Educational Psychology , 93(2), 243–
250.  
Whitehurst, G. J., Falco, F. L., Lonigan, C. J., Fischel, J. E., DeBaryshe, B. D., Valdez -Menchaca, M. 
C., et al. (1988). Accelerating language development through picture book reading. 
Developmental Psychology, 24, 552 –559.  
Health Education, M aternal Health Literacy and P ostpartum Learning Needs  
Beger, D., & Loveland Cook, C. A. (1998). Postpartum Teaching Priorities: The Viewpoints of 
Nurses and Mothers. Journal of Obstetric, G ynecologic, & Neonatal Nursing, 27(2), 161 –168.  
Bernaix, L. W., Beaman, M. L., Schmidt, C. A., Harris, J. K., & Miller, L. M. (2010). Success of an 
Educational Intervention on Maternal/Newborn Nurses’ Breastfeeding Knowledge and 
Attitudes. Journal of Obst etric, Gynecologic, & Neonatal Nursing, 39(6), 658 –666.  
 
Bernstein, H. H., Rieber, S., Stoltz, R. A., Shapiro, D. E., & Connors, K. M. (2004). Assessing the 
learning needs of maternal and child health professionals to teach health promotion. Maternal 
and child health journal , 8(2), 87 –93. 
 
Protocol Version 3 /5/2018  
Page 12 of 13 Bowman, K. G. (2005). Postpartum Learning Needs. Journal of Obstetric, Gynecologic, & 
Neonatal Nursing, 34(4), 438– 443.  
 
Buchko, B. L., Gutshall, C. H., & Jordan, E. T. (2012). Improving quality and efficiency of 
postpartum hospital education. The Journal of perinatal education, 21(4), 238– 247.  
 
Bull, M., & Lawrence, D. (1985). Mothers’Use of Knowledge During the First Postpartum Weeks. 
Journal of Obstetric, Gynecologic, & Neona tal Nursing, 14(4), 315 –320.  
 
Cheng, C. -Y., Fowles, E. R., & Walker, L. O. (2006). Postpartum Maternal Health Care in the 
United States: A Critical Review. The Journal of Perinatal Education, 15(3), 34 –42.  
 
Davis, J. H., Brucker, M. C., & Macmullen, N. J. (1988). A study of mothers’ postpartum teaching 
priorities. Maternal -child nursing journal , 17(1), 41 –50. 
 
Evans, S., & Jeffrey, J. (1995). Maternal Learning Needs During Labor and Delivery. Journal of 
Obstetric, Gynecologic, & Neonatal Nursing, 24(3), 2 35–240.  
 
Fowles, E., Cheng, H. -R., & Mills, S. (2012). Postpartum Health Promotion Interventions: A 
Systematic Review. Nursing Research July/August 2012 , 61(4), 269 –282.  
 
McKellar, L. V., Pincombe, J., & Henderson, A. M. (2002). Congratulations you’re a mother: a 
strategy for enhancing postnatal education for first- time mothers investigated through an 
action research cycle. Australian journal of midwifery: professional journal of the Australian 
College of Midwives Incorporated, 15(3), 24 –31. 
 
Sword, W., &  Watt, S. (2005). Learning Needs of Postpartum Women: Does Socioeconomic 
Status Matter? Birth, 32(2), 86– 92.  
Universal Newborn Hearing Screening  
Alam, S., Gaffney, M., & Eichwald, J. (2013). Improved Newborn Hearing Screening Follow -up 
Results in More Infants Identified. Journal of public health management and practice: JPHMP .  
 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2013, April). 2011 CDC EHDI Hearing Screening 
Summary. Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/hearingloss/ehdi -data2011.html  
 
Protocol Version 3 /5/2018  
Page 13 of 13 Crocket t, R., Wright, A. J., Uus, K., Bamford, J., & Marteau, T. M. (2006). Maternal anxiety 
following newborn hearing screening: the moderating role of knowledge. Journal of medical 
screening, 13(1), 20 –25.  
 
Deem, K. C., Diaz -Ordaz, E. A., & Shiner, B. (2012). Identifying Quality Improvement 
Opportunities in a Universal Newborn Hearing Screening Program. Pediatrics , 129(1), e157–
e164.  
 
Ferro, L. M., Tanner, G., Erler, S. F., Erickson, K., & Dhar, S. (2007). C omparison of universal 
newborn hearing screening programs in Illinois hospitals. International Journal of Pediatric 
Otorhinolaryngology , 71(2), 217 –230.  
 
Gaffney, M., Green, D. R., & Gaffney, C. (2010). Newborn Hearing Screening and Follow -up: Are 
Childre n Receiving Recommended Services? Public Health Reports , 125(2), 199 –207.  
 
Holte, L., Walker, E., Oleson, J., Spratford, M., Moeller, M. P., Roush, P., Tomblin, J. B. (2012). 
Factors influencing follow -up to newborn hearing screening for infants who are ha rd of hearing. 
American Journal Of Audiology , 21(2), 163 –174.  
 
Yoshinaga -Itano, C. (2004). Levels of evidence: universal newborn hearing screening (UNHS) 
and early hearing detection and intervention systems (EHDI). Journal of communication 
disorders , 37(5 ), 451– 465.  
 
Research Methodology : 
 Winickoff , J.P et al.  (2010)  Using the Postpartum Hospital Stay to Address Mothers’ and Fathers’ 
Smoking: The NEWS Study.  Pediatrics : (125) 518- 525.  