2230 .00A  
Page 1 of 16 FRED HUTCHINSON CANCER RESEARCH CENTER  
UNIVERSITY OF WASHINGTON SCHOOL OF MEDICINE,  
DEPARTMENT OF MEDICINE, DIVISION OF ONCOLOGY  
SEATTLE CHILDREN’S  
 
Consent to Participate in a Research Study called:  
A Phase I/II Study Evaluating the Safety and Efficacy of Adding a Single Prophylactic 
Donor Lymphocyte Infusion (DLI) of Natural Killer Cells Early After Nonmyeloablative, 
HLA-Haploidentical Hematopoietic Cell Transplantation  – A Multi Center Trial  
 
 
Note: If you are a parent or guardian of a patient younger than 18 years old and have been asked 
to sign this form, the 'you' in this document refers to the patient.  
 
Investigators (doctors in charge of this study):    
    
Brenda Sandmaier, M.D.,  Member, FHCRC, Professor of Medicine, UW  
Shelly Heimfeld, PhD   Member, FHCRC  
Effie Petersdorf, MD  Member, FHCRC,  Professor of Medicine, UW  
Ann Woolfrey, M.D.  Member, FHCRC, Professor of Pediatrics, UW  
Michael Linenberger M.D.  Associate Member, FHCRC, Professor of Medicine, UW  
Mohamed Sorror, M.D.,  MSc Associate  Member, FHCRC, Associate  Professor of Medicine, UW  
David Maloney, MD, PhD  Member, FHCRC, Professor of Medicine, UW  
Rainer Storb, M.D.  Member/Program Head, Transplantation Biology, FHCRC, 
Professor of Medicine, UW  
 
 
Statistician: Barry Storer, PhD, Member, FHCRC  
 
Additional Performance Sites  Investigators  Emergency Phone Numbers  
Medical College Wisconsin - 
Children’s Hospital of Wisconsin  Monica Thakar, MD  (414) 456 -7546     
Medical College of Wisconsin – 
Froedert Hospital  Parameswaran Hari, 
MD (414)  805-4600  
 
 
Research Nurse:  Michelle Bouvier, RN  (206) 667 -6993, pager (206) 995 -7658  
       
Emergency 24 Hour Phone :  
FHCRC:      Phone:  (206) 598 -8902    FAX:  (206) 598 -4034  
Seattle Children’s:   Phone:   (206) 987 -2000*  FAX:  (206) 987 -2764  
 
*Ask Seattle  Children’s Operator for “Transplant Provider On -Call” 
 
 
The purpose of this informed consent form is to let you know about a clinical trial (a type of 
research study). This form  tells you about the purpose, risks and benefits, and describes what is 
involv ed in the study. It also tells you what other choices you have.  
Up to 40 people  will be in the phase I and phase II portions of the study.  Your study doctor will 
explain the clinical trial to you. Clinical trials include only people who choose to take part. Please 
take your time to make your decision about taking part. You may discuss your decision with 
your friends and family. You can also discuss it with your health care team. If you have any 
questions, you can ask your study doctor for further information. There is no guarantee that this 
procedure will be successful.  
2230 .00A   
Page 2 of 16  Even if you join this study, you may stop at any time.  There is no penalt y for stopping.  If you 
decide not to be part of this study, you will continue receiving medical care.  If you would like to 
be part of this study , we will ask you to sign this form.  You will get a copy to keep.  
Why is this study being done?  
Sometimes it is difficult to find a “matched donor” in the family (related donor) or in the Bone 
Marrow Registry (unrelated donor).  When this happens, we may choose a donor who is only 
partially matched to you.  This can sometimes cause problems, such as graft rejection (when 
the body rejects the new cells), graft -versus -host disease (GVHD) (when the new cells attack 
the body), or even death.  Therefore, there is a great need to develop safer and more effective 
protocols when using mismatched donors.  
 
To address these pro blems , we will test a nonmyeloablative  transplant from a  haploidentical  
donor.  
 Unlike a standard transplant, a  nonmyeloablative transplant  uses milder or lower 
doses of drugs or radiation to leave some of the immune system intact. Drugs help 
your body acce pt the new donor cells.  
 A haploidentical donor  is related to the patient, but has a different tissue type.   This 
tissue type is matched by at least 50% to the patient.  A haploidentical transplant  is 
considered an “alternative” transplant to traditional me thods.  
 
As compared to conventional transplants with matched related and unrelated donors, 
haploidentical  transplants have been associated with a higher risk of:  
 GVHD  
 Infections.  
 Relapse after transplant.  
 Rejection of the new bone marrow.  
 
This trial is asking whether the addition of extra cells from the same haploidentical donor one 
week after transplant can help prevent these problems.  These cells are known as natural killer 
cells or NK cells .  The addition of NK cells is considered inves tigational therapy . 
 NK cells  are a type of white blood cell.  
 They have been shown to fight infections and fight cancer cells.  
 They have been shown to help new bone marrow stem cells engraft.  
 
When we do the transplant followed by an infusion of donor NK ce lls, we will want to find out:  
 Are adding NK cells  after non-myeloablative, haploidentical  transplant safe?  
 Will these NK cells  reduce the rates of relapse and graft rejection?  
 Will these NK cells  help fight infections after transplant?  
2230 .00A   
Page 3 of 16   
Hospitalization  
Pediatric patients  (those under 18 years of age)  may require hospitalization for this treatment. 
All of the research studies will be done in the hospital.  You will be discharged to the outpatient 
department when the inpatient doctor decides you are ready. Y ou may need hospitalization at 
other times if you get sick. 
Adult patients  (those 18 years of age and older)  the treatment, including infusion of donor bone 
marrow cells and NK cells, can be done as an outpatient.  You may get hospitalized at other 
times if you get  sick. 
Procedures  that will be done as part of the transplantation  
Conditioning:  
You will get  drugs  and radiation  to suppress the immune system and destroy the abnormal 
marrow , so the donor’s healthy cells can grow and produce new blood cells.  This is called 
“conditioning.”  You will get these drugs through the central venous catheter:  
 Cyclophosphamide : 2 doses total, on days −6 and −5.   
 Fludarabine : 1 dose per day for 5 days (day −6 through day −2.).  
 Total Body Irradiation : The day before the tr ansplant, you will get 1 dose of radiation.  
(If the patient is too young to be still, anesthesia will be provided. ) 
You will also get medications to help prevent nausea and vomiting.  
Bone marrow transplant:  
The donor’s bone marrow stem cells will be given through the central venous catheter, similar to 
a blood transfusion.  From these stem cells will grow the components found in blood: red blood 
cells that carry oxygen, white blood cells that fight infections, and platelets that make clots.  
Post-transplant i mmunosuppression : 
Starting on day 3 after the transplant, we will give you strong immune suppressing drugs. The 
purpose of these drugs is to allow the new bone marrow cells to be accepted and to try to 
reduce the risk of GVHD.  
The drugs are:  
 Cyclophosphamide: One dose on day 3 after transplant through the central venous 
catheter . 
 Mesna:  4 doses with each dose (1 just before the cyclophosphamide and 3 just 
after). Mesna is not chemotherapy . It is a medicine that helps protect your bladder 
from the side effects of high-dose cyclophosphamide.  
 Tacrolimus  twice a day beginning on day 4 until 84 days after the transplant , first by 
central venous catheter, then by mouth.  The dose will then be gradually reduced 
over a period of 13 more weeks, until d ay 180.  
 Mycophenolate mofetil (or MMF) : Three times a day beginning on day 4 until day 40, 
first by central venous catheter, then by mouth.  The dose will then be gradu ally 
reduced over a period of 6 more weeks, until day 84 .  
If you develop GVHD or we th ink your body may reject the donor cells , you may need to t ake 
the drugs for a longer time or we may need to add other drugs.  
2230 .00A   
Page 4 of 16  Post-transplant bone marrow recovery  
Starting on day 4 after transplant, we will start granulocyte colony stimulating factor (GCSF ) to 
help the new white blood cells grow.  This will be given either as an injection under the skin, or 
through an IV or central venous catheter.  GCSF  will continue until enough  new white blood cells 
grow . 
 
Post-transplant donor NK cell infusion  
The same haploidentical family member who gave you cells for your bone marrow transplant will 
also give you cells for your NK cell infusion.  One week after transplant, you will receive the NK 
cells as a single infusion through your central venous catheter.  
 
 You wi ll also have blood tests at least three times a week to check kidney function 
and blood cell counts early after the transplant  
 Other blood tests routinely done includ e liver function and electrolytes (blood salts).  
 In addition, a bone marrow biopsy will  be needed  at various time points. The bone 
marrow and blood samples will be evaluated for the presence of donor cells to 
determine how well you have accepted the new stem cells.  
 You will undergo scheduled screening tests to make sure that your cancer has not  
come back.  This screening is specific for your type of cancer.  Your doctor can 
provide more details regarding your screening tests.  
Here is the schedule of conditioning and post -transplant procedures:  
 
 Days before transplant  
  −6 −5 −4 −3 −2 −1 
Conditioning        
Cyclophosphamide  ● ●     
       
Fludarabine  ● ● ● ● ●  
TBI      ● 
 Days after transplant  
+3 +4 +7 +40 +84 +180 
Post -Transplantation        
Cyclophosphamide  ●      
Mesna   ●      
MMF   Start   Taper*  Stop*   
Tacrolimus   Start    Taper*  Stop*  
G-CSF**    Start      
Donor NK Cell Infusion    ●    
* We will reduce the dose around this time, depending  on your GVHD status . 
** Continues  until enough  new white blood cells grow.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2230 .00A   
Page 5 of 16  Blood and Bone Marrow Tests for Research  
 
 
 
We will use your blood and tissue samples for research to study your immune system recovery.  
This may involve sending your research samples to outside research labs . Samples will be 
stored indefinitely.  
 
If we want to use your tissue in the future for a purpose not described in this consent, we must 
first send  a request to the Institutional Review Board (IRB) for review and approval for all 
proposed new research.  
How long will I be in the study?  
Your treatment at the SCCA  will last about 3 ½ months, but could be longer. You may be asked 
to return for follow up a t 6 months and every year thereafter, to help manage some of the 
complications of the transplant.  
We would like to keep track of your medical condition for the rest of your life , to understand the 
long-term effects of the transplant. But y ou may be taken o ff the study  and followed less often  if: 
 The study treatment does not work for your disease;  
 You develop a serious side effect that you cannot tolerate or that cannot be 
controlled with other medications;  
 Your health gets worse;  
 You are unable to meet the requirements of the study (for example, you cannot take 
the medicine as prescribed or you refuse follow -up); 
 You start other treatments for your disease;  
 Other treatments for your disease become available;  
 By your request.  
What are the side effects (risks) ? 
Transplant  
We expect that the transplant itself will have relatively minor side effects (like a blood 
transfusion). However, after the transplant you will be at very high risk for complications, 
including death. The side effects of transplant are related  to the chemotherapy, radiation 
therapy, and immunosuppression that you will be receiving.  You may need red blood cell and 
platelet transfusions and antibiotic therapy.  
 Sample  Sample Size  Timing  
Bone marrow 
aspiration  Up to 2 ml (about ½ 
teaspoon)  
 
 Before transplant, We will try to collect  this sample 
at the same time as your regularly scheduled doctor 
visits.  
Blood  Up to 45 ml (about 3 
tablespoons)  Before and after  transplant, and after you return 
home at approximately Day  +7, +14,  +28, +56, +84,  
and one year  . We will try to collect  these samples 
at the same time as your regularly scheduled doctor 
visits.  
2230 .00A   
Page 6 of 16  Side effects that we know about now are described in the table. Side effects are categorized 
into either:  
 Likely side effects:  Side effects that may occur in 10% or more of patients (this means 
that 10 or more patients out of 100 might get this). Certain side -effects in this category 
could occur in virtually all patients.  
 Less likely s ide effects:  Side effects that may occur in 3 -9% of patients (this means 
that 3 to 9 patients out of 100 might get this).  
 Rare side effects:  Side effects that do not occur very often, but may occur in less than 
3% of patients (this means that 1 or 2 patien ts out of 100 might get this).    
 
With any drug or combination of drugs, there may be complications or side effects that we do 
not know about.  
Likely Side Effects  Less Likely Side Effects  Rare Side Effects  
Graft -versus -host disease  Allergic reaction with infusion of 
marrow and/or NK cells (including 
itching, hives, flushing, 
hypersensitivity, shortness of 
breath, wheezing, chest tightness, 
skin rashes, fever, chills, muscle 
stiffening, severe breathing 
problems)  Sores in mouth and/or 
throat  
Nausea  Jaundice (yellowish discoloration of 
sclera)  Hair loss  
Vomiting  Rejection/graft failure  Skin or nail discoloration  
Diarrhea  Fluid retention (bloating or swelling)  Nail changes  
Loss of appetite  Weakness  Painful burning on the skin 
of the hands and feet  
Fever  Fatigue  Irregular menses or 
stopping of menses  
Lowered white blood cell 
counts (may lead to 
infection)  Seizure  Infertility (inability to have 
children) in women or 
Sterility for men  
Lowered platelet counts 
(may lead to bleeding)  Tremor  Failure of heart function  
Lowered red blood cell 
counts (may lead to 
anemia, fatigue, shortness 
of breath)  Muscle or joint pain  Failure of liver function  
Infection  Red Blood Cell Destruction  Failure of brain function  
Time away from work   Impairment or failure of 
kidney function  
  Failure of lung function  
  Bleeding or dysfunction of 
the central nervous system  
 
  
2230 .00A   
Page 7 of 16  NK Cell Infusion  
We expect that the NK cell infusion itself will have relatively minor side effe cts.  Potential side 
effects are listed in the table and  all are considered rare (less than 3% of patients, or 1 -2 out of 
100 patients or less).  There may be complications or side effects that we do not know about.  
 
Graft -versus -host disease  
Nausea  
Vomiting  
Infection  
Prolonged neutropenia (low white count)  Diarrhea  
Possible allergic reaction (including itching, hives, 
flushing [red face], shortness of breath, wheezing, 
chest tightness, skin rash, fever, chills, stiff muscles, or 
trouble breathing)  
Marrow suppression  
 
There is a very small risk (less than 1%, or 1 out of 200 patients or less) of developing 
antibodies against proteins that are leftover on the NK cells.  This leftover protein is needed to 
select the NK cells from the donor’s blood and is a critical part of the NK cell collection process.  
 
Side ef fects may occur at the time of transplant or after . They  may require hospitalization , 
medication , or therap y. Risks and side effects vary from person to person. Your doctor may be 
able to change or give medications to make  some of the side effects less bot hersome . 
Side effects such as GVHD and infections can be very serious, long lasting, and/or life 
threatening. Please talk with your study doctor about these side effects. If you want to read 
more about the side effects from study drugs, please ask your doc tor or pharmacist for more 
information.  
In addition to the above risks, there is the risk of organ failure, including heart, kidney, lung, 
brain, liver or other body parts. This risk is increased in those patients who have pre -existing 
damage to any organ system. Although the aim of this study is to reduce the risks of having 
bone marrow transplants, the side effects of treatment could be severe and include a risk 
of death . 
There is a risk that y our disease will come back , even if the transplant works at fi rst. Also, the  
transplant may be less successful at treating your disease th an a standard stem cell transplant  
from a matched related donor,  and the rate of disease recurrence may be higher.  
Rejection of donor cells : There is a risk that you will reject th e donor blood stem cells and that 
the donor cells will not be detected after transplant. Transplants from haploidentical  donors are 
at a higher risk of rejection.  If this occurs, we expect your own blood counts to recover.   When 
this happens, you are also at higher risk of relapse if you have a history of leukemia.  Rarely, 
rejection may occur without recovery of cells. This type of rejection can be fatal . It can only be 
treated by a second stem cell transplant.  
2230 .00A   
Page 8 of 16   
Cyclophosphamide  is a type of chemotherapy u sed in stem cell transplants to try and reduce  
the risk of rejection and/or GVHD.  
 
Likely  side effects  Less likely  Rare 
Low white blood cell 
count  
Low red blood cell count  
Diarrhea  
Vomiting  
Liver damage  
Lower sperm production 
in men  
Hair loss  
Nausea  
Loss of appetite  
Missing or stopping 
menstrual cycle in 
women  Sores in mouth or on lips  
Blood in urine  
Fatigue  
Lower platelet count (mild) with 
increased risk of bleeding  
Darkening of nail beds  
Fetal damage (if pregnancy occurs 
while taking cyclophosphamid e) 
Secondary cancers  
Infertility  Lung scarring (fibrosis)  with 
cough and shortness of 
breath  
Heart failure (with high 
doses ) 
Decrease in sodium level in 
the blood with high doses  
 
Cyclophosphamide can cause bleeding in your bladder. Getting more fluid through a vein or 
your catheter and drinking extra liquids may prevent this. If the bleeding becomes severe , the 
bladder may need to be washed out with a salt -water solution , using a  bladder catheter (thin 
plastic tube).  
DO NOT take any aspirin or nonsteroid anti -inflammatory medications (e.g., Ibuprofen, Motrin, 
Advil). Report easy bruising or bleeding such as a nose bleed, bleeding of gums when you 
brush your teeth or have black/blood y stools.   
Mesna  is used to prevent bleeding from the bladder, a possible side effect of 
cyclophosphamide.  It is not chemotherapy.  
 
Likely side effects  Less likely  
Nausea  
Vomiting  
Diarrhea  
 Abdominal pain  
Altered taste  
Rash  
Hives  
Headache  
Joint or limb pain 
Low blood pressure  
Fatigue  
 
2230 .00A   
Page 9 of 16  Fludarabine  is a chemotherapy used to try and reduce the risk of rejection.  
 
Likely  side effects  Less 
likely  Rare 
Low white blood cell count with an increased risk of 
infection (from bacteria, fungi or viruses)  
Low platelet count with an increased risk of bleeding  
Anemia  Nausea  
Diarrhea  
Fatigue  Vomiting  
Trouble seeing or problems 
with your eyes  
Numbness or tingling in your 
fingers or toes  
Confusion or coma  
Pneumonia  
Secondary cancers  
 
Total body irradiation (TBI)  is “full body” radiation used to help weaken or destroy your abnormal 
bone marrow cells.  The dose used in this protocol will be much lower than that used in standard 
transplant protocols. TBI may destroy normal bone marrow cells.  
 
Likely side effects  Less likely  
Nausea  
Fatigue  Temporary hair loss  
Vomiting  
Diarrhea  
Painful swelling of the parotid gland (a gland 
under the chin) for a few days  
Cataracts (an opacity or whitening of the lens) 
in the eye  
Secondary cancers  
Sterility  
Major genetic damage to child ren conceived 
after transplant  
Damage to the lungs  
 
 
Patients receiving radiation have a risk of developing a secondary cancer later in life.  You will 
also be receiving diagnostic exams (CT scans, chest x -rays, bone scan, etc ) to help follow your 
progress. These exams will result in a radiation dose to you, but these doses are very small in 
comparison to the therapy dose you will receive. They are not expected to increase your health 
risk. 
TBI may also cause damage to the lining of the mouth, called “mucositis” that requires 
pain medication and temporary administration of fluids and nutrition by vein.  TBI may 
cause diarrhea that lasts for a few days.  In addition TBI can cause damage to the  lungs 
and often causes the formation of cataracts many years after its administration.     
  
2230 .00A   
Page 10 of 16  Tacrolimus  is a drug used to treat GVHD. During treatment, we will monitor the levels of 
tacrolimus  in your blood, to see if we need to adjust the dose.  
 
Likely s ide effects  Less likely  Rare  
High blood pressure 
(hypertension)  
Shaking of hands (tremor)  
Changes in liver or kidney 
function  
Altered levels of 
magnesium, calcium, 
potassium, and sugars in 
the blood  Headache  
Pain in the hands or 
feet. 
Increases in 
cholest erol and 
triglyceride levels  
Nausea/vomiting  
Changes in how clearly 
one can think  
Trouble sleeping  Patients have had seizures, but it is 
unclear whether tacrolimus, other 
drugs, or a combination of drugs were 
responsible.  
Renal failure from damage to the blood 
vessel walls and destruction of red 
blood cells by a condition called 
hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS)  
 
 
Mycophenolate Mofetil (MMF)  is a drug used for suppressing the immune system. It is 
reasonably well tolerated by  patients who have had nonmyeloablative transplants. There are a 
small number of patients who have received solid organ transplants and had reversible fall in 
their red cell or white cell count while receiving MMF. Additionally, cases of Pure Red Cell 
Aplasia (PRCA) have been re ported in some patients receiving MMF. PRCA is a condition in 
which the bone marrow stops producing red blood cells . In some instances, PRCA can be 
reversed by reducing or stopping M MF. Your blood counts will be monitored closely and if 
significant decreas e is noted, dose adjustments or stopping your MMF may be indicated.  
 
Cases of progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML) have occurred in some patients 
receiving MMF. PML is a rare disorder that affects the central nervous system, and is most often 
found in patients with suppressed immune systems. It occurs when the polyomavirus (or JC 
virus) is activated, and can cause neurologic symptoms including weakness on one side of the 
body, lack of emotion, confusion, cognitive difficulties, and loss of coord ination. It can cause 
permanent disability and is sometimes fatal. You should notify your doctor immediately if you 
develop any of the above symptoms.  
 
MMF has caused birth defects in humans. The United States Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA) requires th at women who take part in this study must use two forms of contraception if 
they are fertile and not abstinent.  
 
FOR WOMEN WHO COULD BECOME PREGNANT: Birth defects could occur if you take MMF 
while you are pregnant. As discussed above, you must use 2 effec tive forms of contraception if 
you are fertile and sexually active. You should talk to your doctor to find out which methods of 
birth control would be most effective for you. You must notify your doctor and the coordinating 
center for the study immediately  if you become pregnant while you are taking MMF. You should 
not breast feed while you are taking MMF.  
Likely side effects  Less likely  Rare  
Nausea  
Birth defects  Vomiting  
Diarrhea and abdominal discomfort  
Lower red blood cell count that is reversible  
Lower white blood cell count with increased risk of 
infection  Stomach bleeding  
Blood in stools  
Secondary cancers  
2230 .00A   
Page 11 of 16   
Granulocyte Colony Stimulating Factor  (known as GCSF, Neupogen, or growth factor)  is a drug 
used to help increase your white blood cell count after transplant.  
 
 
 
Graft -versus -host-disease (GVHD)  is a known complication of bone marrow transplantation. It 
has occurred in 50 - 70% of patients on similar studies . When you receive stem cells from a 
donor with a different tissue type than yours, the risk of GVHD is highe r.  However, we are 
hoping to reduce this complication to less than 30% by using cyclophosphamide on day +3 after 
transplant.  
GVHD can occur early after the transplant (called acute GVHD) or late after transplant (called 
chronic GVHD). In GVHD, donor cells  react against cells of your body. GVHD may cause skin 
damage (rash, discoloration, and tightness); gastrointestinal damage (nausea, vomiting, and 
diarrhea); liver damage (abnormal liver function tests and jaundice); lung damage, dry mouth or 
sores of the mouth, dry eyes, weight loss, and hair loss. GVHD may be mild or severe. It may 
require prolonged treatment (sometimes for years) with immune suppressing drugs to reduce 
inflammation. Severe GVHD and complications of its treatment can result in death.  
Side effects of GVHD include:  
 
Acute  Chronic  
Skin rash  
Lack of appetite, stomach cramps, diarrhea or “full” feeling 
in stomach  
Intestinal bleeding  
Problems of the liver  
Problems of the stomach  
Nausea  
Vomiting  
Death  Eye problems  
Skin problems  
Liver problems  
Problems of the mouth, lips, and 
throat  
Lung problems  
And all the risks listed under 
“Acute”  
Early (acute) or late (chronic) GVHD may become so bad that it results in death. GVHD is 
treated with drugs that weaken the immune system. This makes you more likely to get 
infections.  
A very effective drug for treating GVHD is prednisone, which is a type of steroid. However, 
prednisone is often required at high doses for 9 months to several years. Depending on the 
dose and duration of treatment, side effects ma y include weight gain, depression or psychosis 
(mood swings), cataracts, diabetes, muscle loss, bone loss or fractures, avascular necrosis 
(break down) of hip or other joints that may require joint replacement, high blood pressure and 
others.  
Reproductive risks 
Risk to the Unborn:  You should not become pregnant or father a child while on this study. The 
treatments in this study have NOT been proven to be safe at any stage of pregnancy. 
Therefore, if you are pregnant or nursing, you are not eligible for thi s study. Women who have 
the potential of becoming pregnant or men who have the potential of fathering a child must use 
two forms of effective birth control or abstinence for one year after transplant. If you are still on Likely side effects  Less likely  
Muscle aches or pain  
Bone pain  
Itching  
Skin rash  
Headache  Blood vessel inflammation (vasculitis)  
Ruptured spleen  
2230 .00A   
Page 12 of 16  MMF for more than one year after tr ansplant, you must continue using two forms of birth control 
until you have been off MMF for at least 2 months.  Effective birth control would be defined as 
the following: 1) refraining from all acts of vaginal intercourse (ABSTINENCE); 2) consistent use 
of birth control pills; 3) injectable birth control methods (Depo -Provera); 4) tubal sterilization or 
male partner who has undergone a vasectomy; 5) placement of an IUD (intrauterine device); 
and, 6) use, with every act of intercourse, of a diaphragm with c ontraceptive jelly and/or 
condoms with contraceptive foam.  
Sterility and Future Childbearing Potential for Men and Women:  Chemotherapy and/or 
irradiation may affect fertility. In males who have reached puberty and have received 300 cGy  
radiation, most men will have return of  sperm counts  by 30 months.  But some men will not 
recover sperm counts, and sterility can still occur. Female patients may find that their menstrual 
cycle becomes irregular or stops permanently. However, this DOES N OT MEAN THAT YOU 
CANNOT BECOME PREGNANT OR FATHER A CHILD, and you must use some effective 
method of birth control for at least one year after the transplant. Damage to reproductive tissue 
may result in birth defects or permanent inability to have a child or become pregnant. You 
should discuss these risks and options in detail with your doctor before entering this study.  
Cyclophosphamide can sometimes make it harder to have a baby (infertility). The doses in this 
study are much lower than in a standard tran splant, so your risk of infertility is also lower.  Since 
you will be receiving a combination of both radiation and cyclophosphamide, the risk of infertility 
or sterility may be higher than receiving each alone.   
If you are a male and have reached puberty , you can talk to your doctor about ways of storing 
sperm. If you are a woman and have reached puberty, egg storage is much more difficult. Talk 
to your doctor if you are interested in learning more about this.  
Other risks  
If you have severe side effects,  which can include low blood counts, infections, bleeding, and 
failure of the donor stem cells to grow, you may need red blood cell and platelet transfusions. 
Red blood cell and platelet transfusions have a very small risk of transmitting serious infection s. 
You may need antibiotics or other medications to treat the side effects.  
There is a risk that you might develop a fatal lymphoma, called Post -Transplant 
Lymphoproliferative Disease (PTLD). The risk of PTLD is small; it has occurred in 5% of 
patients who  were given standard (high -dose) transplant regimens. All these patients had either 
a diagnosed immune deficiency before the transplant, or severe GVHD after transplant that 
required intensive immune suppressive therapy. If you have either of these risk fa ctors you may 
be at risk for development of PTLD.  
Are there benefits to taking part in this study?  
There may or may not be direct medical benefits to patients in this study.  We hope that this 
treatment will result in a cure of your bone marrow failure or l eukemia and help your immune 
system function better after transplant . Some patients may not directly benefit, but may be 
encouraged by knowing that being in this study may help future patients with the same disease.  
What other treatment options are there?  
Instead of being in this study, you can decide to have:  
 Treatments that help with the symptoms of your disease. These may include 
antibiotics, blood transfusions, enzyme replacement, special diets, as well as other 
standard medical treatments.  
 Treatments that are considered experimental. For example, some patients may be 
eligible for  gene therapy  or other experimental forms of stem cell transplant.  
2230 .00A   
Page 13 of 16   A conventional stem cell transplant, which uses higher doses of chemotherapy and 
radiation therapy . 
 Waiting for a bone marrow donor who has a better tissue match to you . 
 No treatment.  
 Comfort care . 
Before you agree to th is study, please talk with your doctor about these and other options that 
may become available.  
Will my medical information be kept private?  
The individuals responsible for this study will try to keep your personal information as private as 
possible and ensure that it is disclosed only in accordance with state and federal law and the 
terms of this consent. However, it is not possible to guarantee  absolute privacy. In addition to 
disclosures in accordance with state and federal law, the organizations that are listed below 
may inspect or copy your research records for quality assurance and data analysis. Your 
research records will identify you by  a unique patient number (UPN) that may be linked to your 
name and will include things such as your medical record, medical history, results of your blood 
tests and exams, reports from your treatment, and reports of your office visits.  For any 
published repo rts, a different coding system not linked  to your name  will be used.  
Who has access to my research record information?  
You will receive some services, tests, or procedures at University of Washington clinical facilities 
(“UW Medicine”) and/or at the Seattl e Cancer Care Alliance (“SCCA”) as part of this study. This 
means that information about this study will become part of your medical record.   If you do not 
already have a UW Medicine or SCCA medical record for clinical purposes, one will be created for 
you. Basic information such as the name and number of the study, the study sponsor, the names 
and contact information of the study staff will be included in your medical record.    
 
Research procedures and test results may also be put in your medical record.   This will include 
things such as your medical history, results of your blood tests and exams, reports from your surgery 
and treatment, reports of your office visits.  
 
If you have already given or in the future decide to give permission to any person or g roup (such as 
an insurance company or employer) to have access to your medical record, the information about 
this study and your participation in it will be included.  This  could affect your ability to get life 
insurance or a new job.   
 
It is important fo r you to consider the possible risks of including study information in your medical 
record before you sign this consent form.  
 
We will try to keep your personal information as private as we can.  We cannot guarantee absolute 
privacy.  Your personal information may be disclosed if required by law.  Some people may see or 
copy your medical records. They would do this as part of thei r research, to make sure this study is 
being done correctly and safely, or to evaluate the results. Organizations that may inspect and/or 
copy your research records for quality assurance and data analysis include the groups listed below.   
 Researchers invo lved with this study  
 Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center (FHCRC), University of Washington (UW), 
Seattle Children’s,  and Seattle Cancer Care Alliance (SCCA)  
 Medical College of Wisconsin  
 US Food and Drug Administration (FDA), National Institutes of Healt h (NIH), and Office 
for Human Research Protections (OHRP)  
2230 .00A   
Page 14 of 16   Institutional Review Boards (IRB) (groups who review the study to protect your rights as 
a research participant)  
 Miltenyi Biotec  
What are the costs of taking part in this study?  
Miltenyi Biotec will  cover the cost of the reagents used to select the NK cells from your donor’s 
cells collected post transplant on day 7. Research funding will provide the remainder of the 
laboratory costs of the NK cell selection.  You or your insurance company will pay  the rest of the   
medical expenses relating to, or arising from, this study.   If you are injured or become ill from 
taking part in this study, emergency medical treatment is available but will be provided at the 
usual charge. No funds have been set aside to p ay you in the event of injury. You or your 
insurance company will be charged for continuing medical care and/or hospitalization.  
Taking part in this study may lead to added costs for you or for your insurance company due to 
the frequency of blood tests required. If you have any questions concerning your costs, financial 
responsibilities, and or medical insurance coverage for this activity, please ask your physi cian or 
contact the SCCA Patient Financial Services Department at (206) 288 -1113.  
Will I be paid to take part in this research study?  
You will not be paid for taking part in this study.  
Do I have to be part of the study?  
Joining this study is up to you. Y ou are free to say yes or no, or to drop out after joining.  
However, stopping  treatment during conditioning or after the transplant could have very serious 
health consequences, even death. Stopping  MMF and tacrolimus  after the transplant could lead 
to reje ction of the donor stem cells , or to life-threatening GVHD. If you are thinking about 
dropping out of this study, please tell your doctor and the study doctor . 
What are my rights as a study participant?  
 You do not have to join this study. You are free to s ay yes or no. Your regular 
medical care will not change.  
 If you join this study, you do not have to stay in it. You may stop at any time (even 
before you start). There is no penalty for stopping. Your regular medical care will not 
change.  
 If you get sick o r hurt in this study, you do not lose any of your legal rights to seek 
payment by signing this form.  
 During the study, we may learn new information you need to know. For example, 
some information may affect your health or well -being. Other information may make 
you change your mind about being in this study. If we learn these kinds of 
information, we will tell you.  
2230 .00A   
Page 15 of 16  For more information  
If you have questions or concerns about this study, you may talk to your doctor anytime. Other 
people you can talk to are l isted below.  
 
For Questions About  Please Contact  
This study and what it involves  Your doctor (attending physician) or one of the investigators 
listed at the beginning of the consent  
Your rights as a participant in a 
research study  Karen Hansen, in the Institutional Review Office, FHCRC at 
206-667-4867  
Your bills and health insurance 
coverage  Seattle Cancer Care Alliance, Patient Financial Services at 
206-288-1113  
Research use of your blood or 
tissue sample, or research files  Clinical Research Division, Data Management Office, 
FHCRC/Clinical Research Division at 206 -667-4728  
Research related injury  Your physician or one of the investigators listed at the 
beginning of this consent  
Emergency care  Emergency (24 hour) phone : UWMC(206) 598 -8902; Seattle 
Children’s (206) 987 -2032  
Medical records?  Contact the Seattle Cancer Care Alliance's Director of    
Health Information Management at 206 -288-2174.  
2230 .00A   
Page 16 of 16  Signature  
Before you sign this consent form, make sure of the following:  
 You have read this consent  form, or someone has read it to you.  
 This study has been explained to you.  
 You had the chance to ask as many questions as you wanted.  
 You understand you can ask more questions anytime.  
 You understand you (or your insurer) will have to pay the costs of bei ng in this study, 
including treatment for side effects.  
 You understand your medical records will be available to the doctors, staff, and other 
groups working on this study.  
 You agree to join this study.  
Participant (age 14+) / date  
 
 
Parent or legal guardi an (for participants 
under 18 years) / date  
  
Other parent or legal guardian (if 
reasonably available) / date  
 
Medical Staff Person’s Statement  
I have discussed the above research study, including the study procedures and possible 
alternatives and risks, with the person signing above. I encouraged questions and have 
answered them to the best of my ability. A copy of the signed consent form will be given to the 
participant.  
  
     
Medical Staff Person’s Signature     Date  
 
  
Printed Name and Title of Medical  Staff Person   
 
              
Signature of Any Additional Staff Person Present During Consent Process  (if present)  
 
 
2230 .00A – Current version:  04/14/2016  
Previous version:  12/09/2014  
Copies:  Patient, Medical Records, Research File  
 
 
Signed Consent MUST  be sent to Data Management – 
LF-229FHCRC, 1100 Fairview Avenue North, Seattle, WA  98109 -1024  
 