CLINICAL PROTOCOL  SYNOPSIS  
 
CP13- 001 
12 August 2015                                                                                              Page 1 of 6                                                        CONFIDENTIAL 
The information contained in this document is proprietary to Sequent Medical , Inc. a nd may not be used, disclosed, or copied without written p ermission of Sequent Medical, Inc.    
  
 
 
   
Protocol Synopsis C P13-001 
The WEB® Intrasaccular Therapy Study  
(WEB- IT) 
   
Study Sponsor  
Sequent Medical, Inc.  
11 A Columbia  
Aliso Viejo, CA 92656 
USA 
 
  
 
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT  
This document contains information that is confidential and proprietary to Sequent Medical, Inc. (Sequent).  This 
information is being provided to you solely for the purpose of evaluating or conducting a clinical study for Sequent. 
You may disclose the contents of this document only to study  personnel under your supervision who need to know the 
contents for this purpose and to your Institutional Review Board (IRB) or Ethics Committee (EC) otherwise; the 
contents of this document may not be disclosed without the prior authorization from Sequent. The foregoing sha ll not 
apply to disclosure required by governmental regulations or laws.  Any supplemental information that may be added to this document also is confidential and proprietary to Sequent and must be kept in confidence in the same manner as 
the contents of t his document.
CLINICAL PROTOCOL  SYNOPSIS  
 
CP13- 001  
12 August 2015                                                                                                       Page 2 of 6                                                        CONFIDENTIAL 
The information contained in this document is proprietary to Sequent Medical , Inc. a nd may not be used, disclosed, or copied without written p ermission of Sequent Medical, Inc.    
 
 
 
  
The WEB® Intrasaccular Therapy Study  (WEB -IT) 
1 Study Summary  
 
Protocol:  CP13 -001 Rev.3.1 
Study Name:  The WEB® Intrasaccular Therapy Study  (WEB -IT) 
Study Purpose:  To demonstrate  the safety and eff ectiveness  of the WEB  Aneurysm  
Embolization System for the treatment of intracranial wide -neck bifurcation 
aneurysms  
Study Device:  The WEB Aneurysm Embolization System  
Study Design:  Prospective, single -arm, multicenter , international interventional  cohort  
Sample Size  Up to 1 50 treated subjects  
Study 
Population:  Adults (18 -75 years of age) with  intracranial wide -neck  aneurysms located at 
arterial bifurcations (see eligibility criteria)    
Study Duration:  Each subject will participate for at least 5 years.  Total study  duration will be 
approximately 6 years.  
Primary 
Endpoints:  The study’s primary effectiveness endpoint  is the proportion of subjects 
with complete aneurysm occlusion without retreatment, recu rrent 
subarachnoid hemorrhage, without significant parent artery stenosis (>50% 
stenosis) at one year after treatment.  A subject will be considered an 
effectiveness success upon meeting all of the above criteria.  
 
The study’s primary safety endpoint  is the proportion of subjects with death 
of any nonaccidental cause or any major stroke ( defined as an ischemic or 
hemorrhagic  stroke resulting in an increase of 4 points or more on the 
National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale) within the first 30 days after 
treatment or major ipsilateral stroke or death due to neurologic cause from day 
31 to the 1 year after treatment.  A subj ect will be considered a safety failure 
upon meeting any of the above criteria. All safety events  will be adjudicated 
by an independent clinical events adjudicator.  
   
The study will be interpreted as a success if both of the primary effectiveness 
and prim ary safety endpoint s are met.   
 
CLINICAL PROTOCOL  SYNOPSIS  
 
CP13- 001  
12 August 2015                                                                                                       Page 3 of 6                                                        CONFIDENTIAL 
The information contained in this document is proprietary to Sequent Medical , Inc. a nd may not be used, disclosed, or copied without written p ermission of Sequent Medical, Inc.    
 
 
 
 Secondary 
Endpoint:  The study’s secondary endpoint is the proportion of subjects with 
angiographic aneurysmal recurrence defined as aneurysm growth or 
recanalization at one year after treatment.   
Other 
Endpoints:  Secondary analyses include:  
• Technical  success  
•  IA occlusion status at other time points (6 mo, 2, 5 yrs)  
• Change in mRS (for unruptured subjects only)  
• % Aneurysm occlusion 
• Proportion of IAs with each occlusion category at all angiographic 
follow -up time points.  
• Durability of occlusion – defined as “Sam e”, “Better”, “Worse” when 
comparing the 1 year angiographic result with the 6 month 
angiographic result  
Inclusion 
Criteria  1. Patient must be 18 -75 years of age at the time of screening.  
2. Patient must have a single ruptured or unruptured IA requiring 
treatme nt.  If the subject has an additional IA requiring treatment, the 
additional IA must not require treatment within 60 days of the index procedure.  
 
Definition: For the purposes of this study a ruptured IA  patient is defined as 
a patient with computed tomography (CT), magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI), or lumbar puncture (LP) evidence of subarachnoid hemorrhage 
attributed to the index aneurysm within the last 60 days. 
3. The index IA to be treated must have the following characteristics:  
a. Saccular i n shape  
b. Located in basilar apex (BA), middle cerebral artery (MCA) 
bifurcation, internal carotid artery terminus (ICAt), anterior 
communicating artery complex (ACom)  
c. Dome -to-Neck (DN) ratio ≥1   
d. Diameter of the IA  is appropriate for treatment with the WEB  
Aneurysm Embolization System per device Instructions for Use  
e. Wide -neck IA with neck size ≥ 4mm  or D ome-to-Neck (DN)  < 2 ; 
 
4. Patient  has an IA  that is appropriate for treatment with WEB without 
the use of additional implanted devices;  
5. If the IA previously ruptured, patient  must be neurologically stable 
with Hunt & Hess Score of I or II.  
6. Patient must be able to comply with all aspects of the screening, 
evaluation, treatment, and the postprocedure follow -up schedule.  
Patient must sign and date an IRB/EC -approved written informed 
consent prior to initiation of any study procedures .  
7. Patient must sign and date an IRB/EC -approved written informed 
consent prior to initiation of any study procedures . 
CLINICAL PROTOCOL  SYNOPSIS  
 
CP13- 001  
12 August 2015                                                                                                       Page 4 of 6                                                        CONFIDENTIAL 
The information contained in this document is proprietary to Sequent Medical , Inc. a nd may not be used, disclosed, or copied without written p ermission of Sequent Medical, Inc.    
 
 
 
 Exclusion 
Criteria  1. Patient has an IA with characteristics unsuitable for endovascular 
treatment;  
2. Microcatheter could not reach patient ’s index aneurysm to allow 
necessary access to treat with study device.  
3. Patient has vessel characteristics, tortuosity or morphology which 
could preclude safe access and support during treatment with 
study device;  
4. Patient has vascular disease or other vascular anomaly so as to preclude the necessary access to the aneur ysm for use of the study 
device.  
5. Patient has clinical, angiographic or CT evidence of vasospasm, 
vasculitis, or intracranial tumor (except small meningioma) or any 
other intracranial vascular malformations on presentation;  
6. Patient has conditions placing them at high risk for ischemic stroke  or has exhibited ischemic symptoms such as transient ischemic attacks, 
minor strokes, or stroke -in-evolution within the prior 6 0 days;  
7. Patient has any circulatory, neurovascular, cardiovascular , or 
neurologic  conditions  that have resulted in unstable neurological 
symptoms  
8. Patient has mRS ≥ 2 prior to presentation or rupture ( as applicable);  
9. Patient has had  an SAH from a non index  IA or any other intracranial 
hemorrhage within 90 days ; 
10. Patient has physical, neurologic or psychiatric conditions which 
preclude his/her ability to comply with all aspects of the screening, 
evaluation, treatment, and the post procedure follow -up schedule;  
11. Patient’s index IA was previously treated;  
12. Patient is taking  anticoagulants or has a known blood dyscrasia, 
coagulopathy, or hemoglobinopathy;  
13. Patient is pregnant;  
14. Patient has known hypersensitivity, which cannot be medically 
treated, to any component of the study device, procedural materials, or 
medications commonly used during the procedure;  
15. Patient is concurrently involved in another investigational study or  a 
postmarket study that could affect the safety and effectiveness of IA 
treatment with the study device or with the study’s follow -up 
schedule;  
16. Patient has an acute life-threatening illness other than the neurological 
disease to be treated in this trial;  
17. Patient has a life expectancy of less than 5 years due to other illness or 
condition (in additi on to an intracranial aneurysm).  
 
Study 
Procedures : Subjects will be  screened for study  eligibility after giving informed 
consent.  T he WEB  emboli zation p rocedure will be  performed in the  digital 
angiographic suite  using standard angiographic techniqu es. 
Schedule of 
Examinations:   Screening (Day -30 to Day 0)  
 Procedure  
CLINICAL PROTOCOL  SYNOPSIS  
 
CP13- 001  
12 August 2015                                                                                                       Page 5 of 6                                                        CONFIDENTIAL 
The information contained in this document is proprietary to Sequent Medical , Inc. a nd may not be used, disclosed, or copied without written p ermission of Sequent Medical, Inc.    
 
 
 
   Discharge  
 30-day follow -up (mRS per office or telephone update)  
 Six month follow -up (office visit and angiographic follow -up) 
 One year follow -up (office visit and angiographic follow -up) 
 Two year and four year follow -up (office visit per standard of care or 
telephone update)  
 Three year and five year follow -up (office visit and imaging follow -up per 
standard of care)  
Figure 1. Diagram of Study Flow . 
 
 
  

CLINICAL PROTOCOL  SYNOPSIS  
 
CP13- 001  
12 August 2015                                                                                                       Page 6 of 6                                                        CONFIDENTIAL 
The information contained in this document is proprietary to Sequent Medical , Inc. a nd may not be used, disclosed, or copied without written p ermission of Sequent Medical, Inc.    
 
 
 
  
 
Table 1. Schedule of Assessments . 
Parameter  
Screening  
Procedure  
Discharge  
30-Day Follow -Up  
6-Month Follow -Up 
1-Year Follow -Up 
2- and 4 -Year Follow -
Up 
3- and 5 -year Follow -
Up 
Health history  X        
Physical examination  X X X  X X  X 
Neurological examination  X    X X  X 
Site and subject  information  X        
Aneurysm information  (size, location, etc.)  X X       
Rupture status  X        
Hunt and Hess Grade  (ruptured aneurysms only)  X        
Microcatheter(s) used   X       
Ancillary devices used (eg, stent, balloon used)   X       
Medications used  X X X  X X  X 
Size and lot number of WEB  device(s) used   X       
WEB procedure fluoroscopy time   X       
Total procedure fluoroscopy time   X       
3D angiograph ic imaging  X X   X X Optional  X* 
Additional imaging per standard of care        X X 
Occlusion assessment s (Core Lab)    X  X X Optional  X* 
Modified Rankin Scale score X  X X X X   
NIHSS score  X As required  
QOL Assessment (EQ -5D)     X    
Additional scales as appropriate   X   X X Optional  Optional  
Technical  events   X       
Adverse events   X X X X X X X 
Retreatments /Additional Procedures     X X X X X 
Rebleed ( if ruptured)/New bleed    X X X X X X 
Comments  X X X X X X X X 
*  Per local S tandard of Care         
      