TITLE: A Randomized  Double-­­blin ded Comparison  of 24 -­­hour i nterval-
­­Mifepristo ne and Buccal  Misoprostol versus  Mifepristone  and  Vaginal  
Misoprostol for Cervical Preparation i n Second -­­Trim ester Surgi cal Abortio n  
 
PI: Frances Casey, MD, MPH  
 
NCT 03134183   
 
Unique Protocol ID: HM20005740  
 
Document Approval Date: April 15, 2015  
 
Document Type: Protocol and SAP  
  
 
A Randomized  Double-­­blin ded Comparison  of 24 -­­hour i nterval-­­Mifepristo ne and 
Buccal  Misoprostol versus  Mifepristone  and  Vaginal  Misoprostol for Cervical 
Preparation i n Second -­­Trim ester Surgi cal Abortio n  
  
Principal Inve stigator :  
Frances Casey , MD, MP H, Virginia Commo nwealth Universi ty Medic al Center  
  
Co -­­Inve stigator s:  
Randi F alls, MD , Vir ginia League of Planned Par enthood   
  
1. Abs tract   
Patient  preference  for medications  in place  of osmotic  dilators  as cervical  preparation  is 
well known.  Twent y-­­four to 48 hour s following  mifepristone,  vaginal  and buccal 
misoprostol  have  demonstrated  equal  efficacy  in second -­­trimes ter medical  abortion  but 
have not been compa red as cervical  preparat ion for second -­­trimes ter surgical ab ortion.  
  
This  study  will randomize  participants  undergoing  a second -­­trimes ter surgical  abortion 
between  16 0/7 -­­20 6/7 weeks  gestation  to 200mg  mifepristone  followed  20 -­­24 hours  later 
with  400mcg  vaginal  misoprostol  and buccal plac ebo versus  400mcg  buccal  miso prostol and 
vaginal plac ebo 1-­­2 hours  prior  to the procedur e. Primary  outcome  is intraoperative 
procedure  time  as measured  by time  of first  instrument  in the uterus  (dilator  if further 
dilation  is required  or forceps  if no further  dilation  required)  to last instrument  out of the 
uterus .  The study  uses  a supe riorit y desig n an d is po wered to detect a 4-­­minute differe nce  
in proced ure time from a ba seline of 10±5 minutes with 90%  power and two-­­taile d alpha  
of 0.05  requiring  33 participants in each arm. To account for  10%  dropout  or 
disqualification,  72 participants  will be recruited.  Secondary  outcomes  include  cervical 
dilation  assesse d with largest  Pratt  dilator  initially  accepted  without  resistance,  patient 
report  of pain  (as measured  on an 11 -­­point VAS  scale),  side effects, acceptability, and 
recommendation  to friends  (as measured  on a 5-­­point Likert  scale),  and provider 
estimation  of blood  loss,  complications,  ease  of dilation  (as measured  on an 11 -­­point VAS 
scale),  acceptability,  and recommendatio n to other  patients  (as measured  on a 5-­­point 
Likert  scale).   
  
 
    
Mifepristone and Misopros tol for Surg ical Abor tion Cerv ical Prepara tion Case y 
2  
  
 
2. Specific  Aims  
This  study  aims  to compare  mifepristone  and buccal  misoprostol  to mifepristone  and 
vaginal  misoprostol  for cervical  preparation  for second  trimester  D&E.  We hypothesize 
that giving  oral  mifepristone  20 -­­24 hours  and vaginal  misoprostol  1-­­2 hours  prior  to D&E 
will provide  better  cervical  dilation  than  mifepristone  20 -­­24 hours  and buccal  misoprostol  
1-­­2 hours  prior  to D&E.  The primary  outcome  of the study  will be length of  procedure  as 
measured  by first  instrument  in the uterus  (dilator  if further  dilation  is required  or force ps if 
no further  dilation  required)  to last instrument  out of the uterus.  Secondary  outcomes will 
include  cervical  dilation  achieved  as measured  by the largest  size Pratt dilator  accepted 
without  resistance  prior  to the  start  of the procedure,  total dilation  required,  blood  loss, 
pain,  complications,  provider  assessment  of difficulty,  and provider  and patient  acceptance 
and recommendation  for other  patients.  
 
3. Previous  research  
The addition  of mifepristone,  a progesterone  antagonist,  to a misoprostol  regimen  has been 
shown  to significantly  decrease  the medic ation-­­to-­­abortion interval  in secon d-­­trimes ter 
induction  terminations.1 Vaginal  administration  has demonstrated  improved  dilation  as 
compared  to buccal  administration  but it  is known  that  patients  prefer  buccal 
administration.2  A comparison  of mifepristone  and vaginal  versus  mifepristone  and buccal 
misoprostol  has not been  studied  prior  to seco nd-­­trimes ter surgical  abortion.  
 
A Cochrane  review  (2010)  of cervical  preparation  for second -­­trimes ter D&E  did not 
recommend  mifepristone  and misoprostol  for cervical  priming  due to high  rates  of pre-­­ 
procedural  expulsions.  3 However,  the primary  basis  for this conclusion  is the trial  by 
Carbonell  et al. in  which  the 48 -­­hour interval  between  the medications  accounts  for the 
high  out -­­of-­­facility expulsion  risk.4  A retrospective  cohort  of over  200  women  betw een 14 
and 19  6/7 weeks  gestation  showed  no difference  in difficulty  of cervical  dilation  for 
patients receiv ing mifepristone  24 -­­48 hours  misoprostol  as compared  to osmotic  dilators 
prior  to surgical  abortion.  Two  out of  facility  expulsions  occurred  in the mife pristone-­­ 
misoprostol  arms  but the  timing  of medication  to expulsion  interval  is not reported.5 
 
More  recent  studies  have  limited  the timing  of mifepristone  to 24 hours  or less prior  to 
procedure.  Mifepristone  only  has been  shown  to provide  adeq uate  cervical  dilation  as 
compared  to osmotic  dilators  to 16 weeks  gestation  with noninferiority  design  to detect  a 
3-­­minute difference  in procedure  time.6  A 24 -­­hour interval  between  200mg  mifepristone 
and 400mcg  buccal  misoprostol  has been  shown  as non-­­inferior  to osmotic  dilators  for 
total  procedure  time  for 15 -­­18 week surgical  abortions .7 Mifepristone  and one -­­set of 
osmotic  dilators  was  found  to be non -­­inferior  for total  procedure  time  as compared  to two 
sets  of osmotic  dilators  for surgical  abortion  19 -­­23 6/7 weeks  gestation.8 
 
The addition  of mifepristone  has benefit  as a cervical  priming  agent  as an adjunct  or 
alternative  to osmotic  dilators  for surgical  abortion,  but it  is not known  whether  the 
addition  of vaginal  versus  buccal  misopros tol changes  cervical  dilation  and thus  procedure 
time  outcomes.  
 
4. Rationale  
Mifepristone and Misopros tol for Surg ical Abor tion Cerv ical Prepara tion Case y 
3  
  
 
Second -­­trimes ter dilation  and evacuation  (D&E)  procedures  at 14  weeks  or greater  require 
cervical  preparation.  9 Osmotic  dilators  have  traditionally  been  used  for cervical  dilation  
but it  is known that patients  prefer  medication  to dilators.10    Misoprostol  alone  can be used  
for early  second  trimester  dilation  but is  associated  with  increased  requirement  for 
dilation.11  Adding  mifepristone  to buccal  misoprostol  was  found  to be non-­­inferior  to 
osmotic  dilators  for procedure  time  for 15 -­­18 weeks  gestation.7  Mifepristone  alone  was 
found  to provide  adequate  cervical  preparation  up to  16 weeks  gestation .6  Vaginal 
misoprostol  is associated  with  fewer  gastrointestinal  side  effects  as compared  to buccal 
administration  and is  associa ted with  a shorter  induction  to delivery  interva l.12  This  study 
aims  to evaluate  mifepristone  and buccal  versus  mifepristone  and vaginal  misoprostol 
(with  an interval  of at least  20 hours  between  the medications)  for gestational  ages  16 0/7 
to 20 6/7.  This  study  will contribute  to the literature  evaluating  medication  only  cervical 
preparation  prior  to second -­­trimes ter procedures.  
 
5. Research  design  and  General  Methodological  Approach  
We have  chosen  a randomized  controlled  trial  to ensure  that  neither  patient  nor provider  
will be biased  by medication  choice.  Seventy -­­two English  or Spanis h-­­speaking women 
greater  than 18  years  of age and at 16  0/7 -­­20 6/7 weeks  gestation  will be  enrolled  with 36 
women  in each  arm.  
 
Comput er-­­generated randomization  will be utilized  to assign  treatment  arms  and the 
vaginal  misoprostol  and buccal  placebo  and buccal  misoprostol  and vaginal  misoprostol 
will be  prepared  according  to randomization  scheme  by the research  pharmacy  in opaque-­­ 
sealed  envelopes  as to blind  participants  and provider s. 
 
One  arm  will receive  mifepristone  200mg  orally  20 -­­24 hours  prior  and misoprostol  
400mcg  (two  200mcg  tablets)  vaginally  1-­­2 hours  prior  and placebo (two  lactose  tablets 
designed  to appear  similar  to misoprostol)  buccally  1-­­2 hours  prior  to D&E.  The second arm 
will receive  mifepristone  200mg  orally  20 -­­24 hours  prior  and misoprostol  400mc g (two 
200mcg  tablets)  buccally  and placebo  (two  lactose  tablets  designed  to appear  similar to  
misoprostol)  vaginally  1-­­2 hours  prior  to surgical  abortion.  The patients  will place the 
tablets in  the pre -­­opera tive area  from  pre-­­marked envelopes.  The patient will be  instructed 
to take  the medication  in the envelope  marked  buccally  (misoprostol  400  mcg  or placebo) to 
be placed  in the cheek  pouch  for 30 minutes  and then  remaining  swallowed  and the 
envelope  marked  vaginally  (misoprostol  400mcg  or placebo)  to be placed  vaginally  as far 
as the patient can insert  with  her finger.  The patient will be  witnessed  taking the  buccal 
medication  but the  patient  will be given  privacy  for vaginal  administration.  The time  will 
be recorded  in the patient's  chart.  Prior  to the  procedure,  patient  assessment  of 
medications  will be obtained  as detailed  in 5.5. 
 
At 1-­­2 hours  after  misoprostol  and placebo  administration,  the participant  will be brought 
into  a procedure  room  for a dilation  and evacuation  (D&E).  Prior  to the D&E,  an assessment 
of cervical  dilation  will be made  as assessed  by largest  size Pratt  dilator  accepted  without 
resistance  starting  with 39-­­French . Only the  attending  will assess  cervical  dilation  but 
procedures  will be performed  by the attending  and reside nts-­­in-­­training.  Type  of provider 
will be recorded.  
Mifepristone and Misopros tol for Surg ical Abor tion Cerv ical Prepara tion Case y 
4  
  
 
 
 
Five  time  estimates  will be recorded:  1) time  interval  between  mifepristone  and 
misoprostol/placebo  placement,  2) time  interval  between  misoprostol  insertion  and 
assessment  of cervical  dilation  3) total  procedure  time  (speculum  in to speculum  out),  4) 
intraoperative  procedure  time  designated  as start  of additio nal dilation  (if required)  or 
start  of uterine  instrumentation  (if further  dilation  not required)  to time  of last instrument 
removed  from  uterus.  Following  the procedure,  provider  assessment  will be obtained  as 
detailed  in section  5.5. 
 
5.1 Criteria  for s election  of subjects  
The trial  will be  conducted  at Virginia  Commonwealth  University  Medical  Center  (VCUHS)  
and Virginia  League  of Planned  Parenthood  (VLPP)  over  the course  of approximately 
fourteen  months.  The study  will enroll  healthy  women,  over  18 years of age,  eligible  for 
non -­­urgent D&E  at 16  0/7 weeks to 20  6/7 weeks  gestation,  confirmed  by sonogram. 
Patients  presenting  to either  office  in consultation  for a D&E  will be  recruited  for 
participation.  Exclusion  criteria  will include:  emergent  need  for D&E,  intrauterine 
infection,  fetal  demise,  molar  pregnancy,  multiple  pregnancy,  uterine  anomaly  or 
significant  distortion  of the uterus  with  fibroids,  intolerance,  allergy  or contraindication  to 
mifepristone  or misoprostol.  
 
5.2 Subject  recruitment  and  allocation  
Both VCUHS  and VLPP  serve  representative  samples  of Richmond,  Virginia.  Second 
trimester  services  at VLPP  started  in 03/2014.  
 
After  the patient  has completed  the counseling  process  and decided  to proceed  with  an 
induced  abortion,  she will be  approached  by either  a co -­­invest igator or research  staff 
member  and asked  to participate  in the study.  A detailed  explanation  of the study  will be 
provided  and informed  consent  obtained  in English  or Spanish,  according  to patient 
preference.  A copy  of the informed  consent  will be given  to the patient.  Eligibility for  the 
study  will be confirmed.  
 
The VCU  Investigational  Research  pharmacy  will prepare  the allocation  sequence  for 
preparation  of allocation envelopes.  Subjects will be allocated in  blocks  of 4-­­6.  A 
researcher  not involved  in subject  recruitment  and without  participant  contact  will 
prepare sequentially  numbered  opaque  envelopes  with  the assigned,  blinded  pills  for 
vaginal  or buccal  administration  (misoprostol  or placebo)  enclosed.  The envel ope will not 
contain  information  that  would  reveal  the group  assignment.  The envelope  will not be 
assigned  to a participant  until  eligibility  is confirmed.  The envelope  will not be  opened 
until  just prior  buccal  and vaginal  placement.  The allocation  number  will be recorded 
twice  in the participant’s  char t. The envelope  will be  attached  to the  chart.  The envelope 
will only  have  the allocation  number  on the outside  and the blinded  pills  inside.  
 
 
 
5.3 Description  of the  drugs  and  devices  to be studied  
Mifepristone and Misopros tol for Surg ical Abor tion Cerv ical Prepara tion Case y 
5  
  
 
Mifepristone  is a progesterone  receptor  antagonist.  The brand  name  Mifeprex  is 
manufactured  for Danco  Laboratories,  LLC with  address:  640  5th Avenue  Floor  13 
New  York,  NY 10019.  The dose  of mifepristone  to be utilized  in this study  is 200  mg. 
 
Misoprostol  is a synthetic  prostaglandin  E1 analogue.  Generic  misoprostol  is 
manufactured  by Taj Pharmaceuticals  Ltd. with  address  as follows:  Plot  No. 32/2B,  Village 
Tondali,  Taluka -­­Khalapur, Dist.  Raigarh,  Maha rashtr a-­­410  203  India  (US FDA  approved 
manufacturer).  Brand  name  misoprostol,  Cytotec,  is manufactured  by Pfizer,  Inc. with 
address:  235  East 42nd  Street  New  York,  NY 10017 -­­5703.   The dose  of misoprostol  to be 
utilized  in this study  is 400  mcg.  
 
Both  misoprostol  and placebo  pills will either  be encapsulated  or will be supplied  in a 
troche.  This  is to be determined.  They  will be created  by the  VCU  investig ational  research 
pharmacy:  VCU  research  pharmacy:  410  North  12th  Street,  P.O. Box 980581,  Richmond, 
Virginia  23298 -­­0581  
 
 
 
5.4 Admission  procedure  
Recruitment  will begin  July 2015  and extend  for approximately  fourteen-­­months, 
ending  once  enrollment  is complete.  Patients  presenting  to VCUHS  or VLPP  will be 
enrol led, as described  in 5.2. Following  enrollment,  the patient  will comple te an admission 
form  including  baseline  demographics  and reproductive  history.  
 
After  ensuring  the patient  meets  eligibility  criteria,  has signed  consents  and 
following  the preoperative  assessment,  a research  staff  member  will give  the patient 
mifepristone  200mg  to take  orally  in the staff  member's  presence  and the time  will be 
recorded  in the patient's  chart.  The following  day,  a research  assistant  will dispense  two 
numbered  (one  vaginal  and one buccal)  envelopes  as described  in 5.2 upon arrival  to VCU 
Medical  Center  for the procedur e. Prior  to dispensing  the envelope,  the research  staff 
member  will examine  the allocation  numbers  as recorded  in the patient's  chart  to ensure  a 
match.  
 
5.5 Patient  and  Provider  Assessment  
The patient  will complete  the survey  immediately  prior  to the procedure  to provide  an 
accurate  assessment  of medication  acceptability  and side  effects  prior  to anesthesia.  The 
patient  survey  will assess  pain  (as measured  using  an 11 -­­point visual  analog scale)  and 
acceptability  of treat ment  with  respect  to ease  of use,  side  effects,  and recommendation  to 
others  (as measured  using  a 5-­­point Likert  scale).  
 
The provider  will complete  the assessment  immediately  following  the procedure.  The 
provider  assessment  elicits  estimated  blood  loss,  complications,  ease  of cervical  dilation 
(with  responses  rated  on an 11 -­­point visual analog  scale),  procedure  difficulty, 
recommendation  for same  patient  and recommendation  for other  patients (as  measured 
using  a 5-­­point Likert  scale).  
 
5.6 Criteria  for discontinuation  
Mifepristone and Misopros tol for Surg ical Abor tion Cerv ical Prepara tion Case y 
6  
  
 
Any  participants  who  meet  any one of the following  criteria  at any  point  after  enrollment 
will be discontinued  from  the study:  
• Urgent  need  for a D&E  
• Decision  not to  proceed  with  the D&E  
• Decision  to stop  participat ion in the study  
 
5.7 Data  management  
Data  will be entered  by the research  coordinator  and stored  on a computer  at each  center 
accessible  only  to the primary  and co -­­invest igators and research  coordinator  via password 
protection.  
 
5.9 Data  analysis  
STATA  statistical  software  (StataCorp  LP, College  Station,  TX, www.stata.com ) will be used 
to analyze  the baseline  characteristics  of the populations  based  on the study  questionnaires 
completed  by participants  prior  to their  procedure.  Primary  and secondary  outcomes  will 
be recorded  as described  above  in 5.4. Both  primary  and secondary  outcomes  will be 
analyzed  using  t-­­tests or  appropriate  non-­­parametric comparison  tests  as appropriate.  The 
perception  assessments  (VAS)  will be  assessed  using non -­­parametric analysis.  The 
primary  analysis  will be based  on intention  to treat.  
 
5.10 Number  of subjects  and  statistical  power  
Sample  size  is based  on prior  studies  assuming  that  longer  procedure  times  reflect  a need  
for further  dilation  and manipulation.  Procedure  time  is defined  in this study  as first 
instrument  passing  into  the uterus  until  last instrument  out of the uterus.  Previous  studies 
have  defined  a 3-­­minute for 14 -­­16 week gestations  or 5-­­minute change  for 19 -­­24 week 
gestations as  clinically  signifi cant.6  For this study  evaluating  16 -­­   20 6/7 week gestations, 
we chose  4-­­minute difference  as clinically  significant.  Using  a superiority  design,  in order to 
detect  a 4-­­minute change  in procedure  time  from  a baseline  of 10 minutes  with a standard  
deviation  (SD)  5 minutes),  with  a tw o-­­taile d alpha of  0.05  and power  of 90%,  33 women  
will be needed  in each  arm.  We plan to recruit  72 participants due  to post-­­ enrollment  
exclusion.  
 
5.11 Study  limitations  
While  there  are many  possible  regimens  of mifepristone  and misoprostol,  which  could  be 
compared,  we have  tried  to select  the most  reasonable  and practical  regimen  for use in our 
setting.  Additional  studies  may  be needed  in the future  to compare  other  regimens.  
As this study  will recruit  patients  from  VCU  Medical  Center  and Virginia  League  of Planned 
Parenthood,  the study  may  be generalizable  only  to patients  of similar  characteristics. 
However,  since  the biologic  response  to mifepristone  and misoprostol  is not known  to vary 
significantly,  the resu lts should  be widely  generalizable.  Loss  of blinding  is a concern.  
Steps have  been taken to ensure  internal  validity in  that both  participants  and practitioners 
will be blinded  to allocation  of treatment  versus  placebo.  We will ask both  providers  and 
part icipants  which  group  they  believe  the participant  was  in to determine  if group 
assignment  was  detectable.  
Mifepristone and Misopros tol for Surg ical Abor tion Cerv ical Prepara tion Case y 
7  
  
 
Limitations  of this study  will include  potential  extension  of time  for recruitment  and a 
relatively  small  sample  size.  
 
6. Links  with  other  projects  
There  is a multicenter  trial  comparing  the addition  of mifepristone  versus  misoprostol  to 
osmotic  dilators  versus  dilators  alone.  
 
7. Expected  outcomes  of the  study  and  dissemination  of findings  
If 20 -­­24 hour  mifepristone  and 2-­­4 hour  misoprostol  produces  better  cervical  dilation  than 
misoprostol  only  for second  trimester  D&E's,  this regimen  could  increase  the medication 
only  options  for surgical  procedures.  We plan on  publishing the  study  in a reproductive 
health  journal and  giving  oral presentations  of results.  
 
8. Budget  justification  
 
8.1. Personnel  
Principal  investigator:  Frances  Casey  will assist  in subject  recruitment,  obtaining consent, 
data  analysis,  dissemination  of findings,  and performing  procedures  related  to data 
acquisitio n. The following physicians  will also  assist  in subject  recruitment  and obtaining 
consent:  Randi  Falls.  The research  coordinator  will be  a paid position.  He/she  will assist  in 
subject  recruitment,  obtaining  consent,  treatment  allocation  and concealment.  We 
anticipate  supplementing  an existing  research  coordinator  for approximately  $5,755  with  
34.3%  fringe.  Please  see attached  budget  document  for further  details.  
 
8.2. Equipment  
We anticipate  utilizing  the ultrasound  machine  and computers  currently  available  at the  
study  sites.  
 
8.3. Materials  and  Supplies  
These  include  the cost  of the medication  and placebo,  concealment  for misoprostol  and 
placebo,  envelopes.  The total is  $7,161  
 
8.4. Participant  Incentives  
Each  participant  will receive  a $10  Target  gift card as reimbursement  for time  after  
completion  of the study,  approximately  $720.  
 
8.5. Travel  
No travel  reimbursement  required.  
 
9. Timeline  
Recruitment  will begin  July 2015  and extend  for approximately  9-­­months or once 
enrollment  is complete.  As recruit ment  will occur  on patient's  initial  consultation  for 
procedure  and allocation  and assessment  will occur  on the day of procedure,  data  
collection  will be complete  the day of the patient's  procedure.  Data  analysis  will follow  and 
will complete  prior  to the writing  of the final  report-­­please see timeline  attached.  
Mifepristone and Misopros tol for Surg ical Abor tion Cerv ical Prepara tion Case y 
8  
  
 
10. References  
 
1. Wildschut  H, Both  MI, Medema  S, Thomee  E, Wildhagen  MF, Kapp N.  Medical 
methods  for mid -­­trimes ter termi nation of pregnan cy. Cochrane D atabas e Syst Rev.  
2011(1):CD005216.  
2. Borgatta  L, Kapp N.  Clinical  guidelines.  Labor  induction  abortion  in the second 
trimester.  Contraception.  Jul 2011;84(1): 4-­­18. 
3. Newmann  SJ, Dalve -­­Endres  A, Diedrich  JT, Steinauer  JE, Meckstroth  K, Drey  EA. 
Cervical  preparation  for second  trimester  dilation  and evacuation.  Cochrane 
Database  of Systematic  Reviews.  2010(8). 
http://www.mrw.interscience.wiley.com/cochrane/clsysrev/articles /CD007310/fr  
ame.html . 
4. Carbonell  JL, Gallego  FG, Llorente  MP, et al. Vaginal  vs. sublingual  misoprostol  with  
mifepristone  for cervical  priming  in seco nd-­­trimes ter abortion  by dilation  and 
evacuation:  a randomized  clinical  trial.  Contraception.  2007;75(3):23 0-­­237.  
5. Searle  L, Tait  J, Langdana  F, Maharaj  D. Efficacy  of mifepristone  for cervical  priming  
for second -­­trimes ter surgical  termination  of pregnancy.  Int. J. Gynaecol.  Obstet.  Jan 
2014;124(1):3 8-­­41. 
6. Borgatta  L, Roncari  D, Sonalkar  S, et  al. Mifepristone  vs. osmotic  dilator  insertion  for 
cervical  preparation  prior  to surgical abortion  at 14 -­­16 weeks:  a randomized  trial.  
Contraception.  Nov  2012;86(5):56 7-­­571.  
7. L. Borgatta  SS, J.  McClusky,  D. Kattan, A. Paris,  R. Petricone,  M. Fi nesseth.  
Mifepristone  and misoprostol  versus  osmotic  dilator  use prior  to surgical  abortion 
at 15 –18 weeks:  a noninferiori ty study.  Contraception.  2014;90(3):307.  
8. Shaw  KA, Shaw  JG, Hugin  M, Velasquez  G, Hopkins  FW,  Blumenthal  PD. Adjunct 
mifepristone  for cervical  preparation  prior  to dilation  and evacuation:  a randomized 
trial.  Contraception.  Apr 2015;91(4):313 -­­319.  
9. Creinin  MD,  Schreiber  CA, Bednarek  P, Lintu  H, Wagner  M-­­S, Meyn  LA. Mifepristone 
and Misoprostol  Administered  Simultaneously  Versus  24 Hours  Apart  for Abortion: 
A Randomized  Controlled  Trial.  Obstet  Gynecol.  April  1, 2007  2007;109(4):885 -­­894.  
10. Goldberg  AB, Drey  EA, Whitaker  AK, Kang MS, Meckstroth  KR, Darney  PD. 
Misoprostol  compared  with  laminaria  before  early  seco nd-­­trimes ter surgical  
abortion:  a randomized  trial.  Obstet  Gynecol.  Aug 2005;106(2):234 -­­241.  
11. Bartz  D, Maurer  R, Allen  RH, Fortin  J, Kuang B, Goldberg  AB. Buccal  misoprostol  
compared  with  synthetic  osmotic  cervical  dilator  before  surgical  abortion:  a 
randomized  controlled  trial.  Obstet  Gynecol.  Jul 2013;122(1):5 7-­­63. 
12. Ellis  SC, Kapp N,  Vragpvoc  O, Borgata  L. Randomized  trial  of buccal  versus  vaginal  
misoprostol  for induction  of second  trimester  abortion.  Contraception.  May  
2010;81(5):44 1-­­445.  