 
Title 
Toric Contact Lens Digital Performance and 
Comfort Study 
 
 
NCT number   
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Document date  
Protocol  and Consent : 18 Aug 20 21  
 
FULL PROTOCOL TITLE:  Toric Contact Lens Digital Performance and Comfort Study
Page 1 of 15                                         Ver Aug 2021PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:
Kathryn Richdale,  OD, PhD
Associate Professor
University of Houston College of OptometryRichdale@central.uh.edu
713-743-1974
MOD00003743
UH IRB Approved
FULL PROTOCOL TITLE:  Toric Contact Lens Digital Performance and Comfort Study
Page 2 of 15                                         Ver Aug 2021Table of Contents
1.0 Objectives .............................................................................................................................3
2.0 Background...........................................................................................................................3
3.0 Inclusion and  Exclusion  Criteria ..........................................................................................4
4.0 Vulnerable Populations.........................................................................................................55.0 Number of Subjects ..............................................................................................................5
6.0 Recruitment  Methods............................................................................................................6
7.0 Multi-Site Research  Communication ...................................................................................6
8.0 Study Timelines ....................................................................................................................6
9.0 Study Endpoints....................................................................................................................710.0 Procedures Involved .............................................................................................................7
11.0 Setting .................................................................................................................................10
12.0 Drugs or Devices ................................................................................................................10
13.0 Risks  to Subjects .................................................................................................................10
14.0 Potential Benefits  to Subjects .............................................................................................11
15.0 Provisions to  Monitor Data  to Ensure the  Safety  of Subjects ............................................11
16.0 Withdrawal  of Subjects .......................................................................................................12
17.0 Costs/Payments  to Subjects ................................................................................................12
18.0 Compensation  for Research-Related  Injury........................................................................12
19.0 Confidentiality ....................................................................................................................12
20.0 Provisions to  Protect the Privacy  Interests  of Subjects ......................................................13
21.0 Informed Consent Process ..................................................................................................13
22.0 Process to  Document Consent in  Writing ...........................................................................13
23.0 HIPAA ................................................................................................................................1324.0 FERPA ................................................................................................................................14
25.0 Data Management ...............................................................................................................14
26.0 Specimen  Use and  Banking ................................................................................................14
27.0 Community-Based  Participatory  Research .........................................................................14
28.0 Sharing of Results  with  Subjects ........................................................................................14
29.0 Resources ............................................................................................................................15
30.0 Additional Approvals..........................................................................................................15
MOD00003743
UH IRB Approved
FULL PROTOCOL TITLE:  Toric Contact Lens Digital Performance and Comfort Study
Page 3 of 15                                         Ver Aug 20211.0 Objectives
1.1 This study seeks  to quantify the  near  visual performance and  subjective visual 
acceptance of toric contact lenses  as compared  to spherical lenses  in an astigmatic cohort 
of patients.  We also  aim to explore associations  between  tear LTB4  concentration,  eye 
comfort, visual performance, and  subjective  visual quality  after  6-8 hours (full day  of 
wear)  toric  and spherical  contact lens  wear.
1.2 Primary  Hypotheses: Subjects  will have better  near  visual acuity  and near  
visual performance with  toric,  as opposed to  spherical,  contact lens  correction.  As 
such, the following hypotheses will be tested:
H01: There is  no statistically  significant difference in  near  visual acuity  or near  
vision performance between  contact lenses  corrections
Ha1: There is  a statistically  significant difference in  visual acuity  or vision 
performance between  contact lenses  corrections
2.0 Background
2.1 Americans  spend over 10 hours a day  consuming media on smartphones, 
digital tablets  and home computers.1 The visual demands  of this  type of work 
require the use of sustained  clear  near  and intermediate vision. Previous work in  
our labs  has shown small but measurable improvements  in visual acuity  for toric  
lenses2 as compared  to spherical correction.  Unfortunately, standard in  office high 
contrast,  high luminance testing  is often  not helpful in  demonstrating  potential 
improvement  in real-world tasks  afforded by toric  lenses.
2.2 Dynamic visual acuity  has been  used in  sports vision assessment and  training  in 
the past,  but little is  published on the  topic.  It is more robust than  traditional visual acuity  
measures  in being  a detection  rather  than  recognition  task,  is always  of equal difficulty,  
there is  limited  time for observer adjustments  such as  blinking/squinting, and  a staircase 
procedure ensures a definitive  endpoint. Wolffsohn’s lab  has recently  developed  an iPad-
based  application  to assess dynamic  visual acuity  (see Appendix A).
Woods et al3 began  exploring patients’  preferences  conducting real-world tasks  such as  
the ability  to locate a web  page,  read  a newspaper or use a computer.  They  showed that 
while the difference in  standard acuity  testing  was small,  patients  reported significant  
subjective improvements  in driving, watching  a television,  and using a desktop computer,  
among  others.3 Wolffsohn and  colleagues  recently  developed  iPad  based  applications  that 
can quantify reading  performance on digital  devices  while the user performs reading  
tasks  (see also  Appendix B ).4 The user’s face  is analyzed  in real-time by the front facing  
camera to  allow  working distance  and blinks to  be tracked.  Swipes, changes  in 
magnification  and the time to  complete the task  are also  assessed. This  group also  
developed  a Near  Activity  Visual Questionnaire (NAVQ) (Appendix C) to  quantify 
subjective near  visual function.5 
MOD00003743
UH IRB Approved
FULL PROTOCOL TITLE:  Toric Contact Lens Digital Performance and Comfort Study
Page 4 of 15                                         Ver Aug 2021The Richdale lab  recently  utilized  these applications  to assess near  visual performance 
with spherical  vs. toric soft contact lenses  and found that toric  correction  improved near  
high-and low-contrast visual acuity  by 0.5 to  1 full line,  and enabled  individuals  to read  
one line smaller  text on the iPad  (STUDY00000682). The majority  of subjects  preferred 
the toric correction,  though this  was based  on visual performance alone,  and not ocular  
comfort.6 
2.3 Contact  lens discomfort can  affect  wearing  time and  potentially  lead  to dropout, 
particularly  in the first year  of wear.6,7 According to  the Tear  Film Ocular  Surface 
(TFOS) Contact Lens  Discomfort report, lens  design, material and  the interaction  
between  the contact lens  and ocular  surface are  potential factors  associated  with  contact  
lens discomfort.7 Toric lenses  have been  reported to  be less  comfortable than  spherical  
lenses; however previous studies  mainly  explored older  lens materials  and designs.7 
Additionally,  it is thought that contact lens  discomfort may  be more related  to subjective 
visual quality  (Questions 3a and  3b in  Contact Lens  Dry Eye  Questionaire-8 ) (Appendix 
D).8 However, the effect of modern toric  and spherical daily  disposable soft contact  
lenses  on the association  between  contact lens  discomfort, subjective visual quality  and 
visual function has  not been  investigated.  Symptomatic lens  wearers  usually  report 
discomfort prior to  reducing lens  wear  time.9 Recently,  it has  been  shown that contact 
lens discomfort was  related  to upregulation of tear  eicosanoid  biomarkers. Masoudi et al  
found a higher tear  concentration  of Leukotriene B4  (LTB4)  at the end  of the day  in 
symptomatic soft contact lens  wearers  compared  to asymptomatic contact lens  wearers.9
The purpose of this  study is  to quantify digital visual performance and  subjective  visual 
acceptance and  its association  with  ocular  comfort and  subjective visual quality,  during 
toric contact lens  wear  as compared  to spherical lens  wear  in low to moderate astigmatic 
patients  after  a full day  of contact lens  wear.  We also  aim to explore the association  
between  tear LTB4  concentration,  eye comfort, visual performance, and  subjective visual 
quality  after  6-8 hours (full day) of toric  and spherical contact lens  wear.
3.0 Inclusion and Exclusion  Criteria
3.1 ALL SUBJECTS  must be/have:
Able to  speak  and read  English  at a high school level / have at least  a high 
school diploma  or equivalent (by self-report)18 to  39 years  of age 
(inclusive)
Plano  to -6.00 D vertex  corrected  sphere power and -0.75 to -1.50 vertexed  
cylinder  power in  each  eye
Bes t corrected  acuity  of 20/25 or better  in each  eye
Self-report of at  least 4 hrs/day using digital devices
Willing  not to wear  their habitual contact lenses  or use artificial  tears  or other  
solutions for at least 24 hours
No history of ocular  pathology or surgery
No active ocular  infection  or clinically  significant ocular  inflammation
Current/established  full time (>6 days per week,  >8 hours per day) soft contact 
lens wearer
MOD00003743
UH IRB Approved
FULL PROTOCOL TITLE:  Toric Contact Lens Digital Performance and Comfort Study
Page 5 of 15                                         Ver Aug 2021Asymptomatic soft contact lens  wearer  (CLDEQ-8 score <12  at baseline)
No significant binocular  vision abnormality  (i.e., tropia,  convergence or 
accommodative insufficiency)
No gas  permeable lens  wear  for at least 3 months
Not an  optometrist 
Not pregnant/lactating  (by self-report)
Willing  to wear  lenses  at least  8 hours each  day during the study period
3.2 Potential subjects  will be initially  screened  for study eligibility  by phone/in 
person discussion and  through collection  of baseline  data at visit 1. 
3.3 Vulnerable Populations
The following vulnerable populations will be excluded  from the study:
1. Adults unable to  consent
2. Individuals who are  not yet adults  (infants, children,  teenagers  under age 18)
3. Prisoners 
4.Pregnant/lactating  women  (by self-report) will not be enrolled  as hormone 
changes  can affect the ocular  surface and  comfort with  contact lenses
5. Students for whom the  principal  investigator  has direct access  to/influence on 
grades will only be consented  and examined  by other  investigators.
4.0 Vulnerable Populations
Students for whom one of the principal investigators  has direct  access  to/influence  
on grades would be consented  and seen  by another  investigator  for all visits.  The 
following vulnerable populations will  be excluded  from the  study:
1. Pregnant women  
2.Neonates  of uncertain  viability  or non-viable neonates  
3. Prisoners 4.Children  
5.Cognitively  impaired  adults
5.0 Number of Subjects
5.1 The proposed single-site study will be conducted  at the University of Houston 
College of Optometry. Up to  30 subjects  will be screened  for study inclusion, with  the 
goal of completing  24 subjects.  
Source data will be collected  on paper  case report forms and  then  double entered  
electronically  into a database by trained  personnel prior to  locking  the dataset for 
analysis.
5.2 In this  within-subject crossover design, a paired  T-test  will be used to  compare 
visual acuity  performance, contact  lens discomfort, subjective visual quality  and LTB4  
concentration  following toric lens  wear  to spherical contact lens  wear.   We will use a 
two-sided independent T-test to  ensure there are  no carry  over or period effects  in our 
cross-over design, although it is  not anticipated.  As a secondary outcome,  subjects  will 
be asked  their  preference of contact lenses  in a two-alternative forced choice format.  
MOD00003743
UH IRB Approved
FULL PROTOCOL TITLE:  Toric Contact Lens Digital Performance and Comfort Study
Page 6 of 15                                         Ver Aug 2021One-sample binomial tests  will be used to  test the hypothesis that the probability  of 
preference to  toric lens  and spherical lenses  are equally  likely.  Linear  mixed  model  or 
generalized  linear  model,  as appropriate, will be carried  out to  examine the associations  
between  eye comfort, visual performance, subjective  visual quality  and LTB4  
concentration  during toric and  spherical contact lens  wear.    
We aim to  test the hypothesis that H_0: ∆=0  v.H_1: ∆≠0  using a two-sided test with  
significance level α=0.05, where ∆ is  the underlying benefit for treatment contact lenses  
versus spherical contact  lenses  in this cross-over design.  Our previous work found that 
toric correction  improved visual acuity  compared  to spherical correction  by 6 and  11 
letters  for high and  low contrast logMAR, respectively  (P <0.001).10 To demonstrate  an 
improvement of this  amount or more it will require at least 24 and  15 subjects  with  a 
P=0.05 and  80% power. The dynamic  visual acuity  test is  novel and  has not been  used 
previously to  allow  sample size estimates.  A total of 30 subjects  will be enrolled  to 
allow  for up to  20% dropout/screen-failure/missing data and  have 24 subjects  complete.  
We will randomize an  equal number of subjects  to each  group (i.e., group  A receives  
tr
eatment 1 in  period 1 and  treatment 2 in  period 2; group B receives  treatment 2 in  
period 1 and  treatment 1 in  period 2).  
6.0 Recruitment  Methods
6.1 Potential subjects  will be recruited  from the  patients  and staff  of the University 
Eye Institute/University  of Houston College of Optometry, as  well  as the surrounding 
community  via verbal communication,  print media (e.g. study fliers,), telephone and  
electronic media (e.g. email or posting of study flyer). 
6.2 Potential subjects  will be screened  via phone call.
6.3 Verbal communication,  print media (e.g. study flyer), telephone and  electronic  
media (e.g. flyer  sent by email,  or posted to  social  media)  will be used. (Flyer and  phone 
script are included  in this application)
7.0 Multi-Site Research  Communication 
N/A
8.0 Study Timelines
8.1 The total  duration of an  individual subject's  participation  in the study will 
be less  than  1 month. The study will consist of 5 visits.  Visit 1 will be a baseline  
evaluation,  pre-fitting  assessment,  randomization,  and contact  lens fitting.  
Visits  2 and  4 will be contact lens  follow-ups. Visits  3 and  5 are outcome  visits  
and will be performed after  6-8 hours of contact lens  wear  to provide consistent 
duration of lens  wear  between  subjects  and lens types. The 6-8 hours of wearing  
time
 also allows  a better  understanding of end  of day  visual performance and  the 
changes  in LTB4 . Expected  visit timing  is summarized  in the table  below:
Anticipated  Visit Timing  and Duration
MOD00003743
UH IRB Approved
FULL PROTOCOL TITLE:  Toric Contact Lens Digital Performance and Comfort Study
Page 7 of 15                                         Ver Aug 2021Study Window Study Visit Duration
Day 1 Visit 1: Baseline,  randomization,  contact  lens 
fitting,  tear collection140 minutes
Day 3 ± 1 Visit 2: Contact lens  follow-up 30-50 minutes
Day 10 ± 2 Visit 3: Outcome  lens #1, subjective and  
objective visual assessments  and tear collection,  
re-fit to  lens #295 minutes
Day 13 ± 2 Visit 4: Contact lens  follow-up 30-50 minutes
Day 20 ± 2 Visit 5: Outcome  lens #2, subjective and  
objective visual assessments  and tear 
collection  and tear collection75 minutes
The anticipated  duration to  enroll and  complete  all study subjects  is approximately  9-12 
months. The  estimated  date  for the investigators  to complete analyses  for this  study is  
Fall/Winter  2021.
9.0 Study Endpoints
9.1 The primary  study endpoints will compare  toric to  spherical lenses  for:
Near  visual acuity
The secondary study endpoints will compare  toric to  spherical lenses  for:
Other  near  visual performance outcomes
oReading  speed, reading  sentences  acuity,  digital device  interaction,  
dynamic visual acuity
Subjective eye comfort and  visual acceptance during contact lens  wear
oAssociation  between  subjective comfort surveys and  tear TLB4  
concentration  
9.2 This is a minimal risk study so safety  endpoints are not required
10.0 Procedures  Involved
10.1 The study is  a clinical trial and  will be registered  on ClinicalTrials.gov  prior to  
subject enrollment.  
10.2 Patients  will be seen  for 5 visits  over a period of approximately  1 month. Visit l 
will determine  subject  eligibility  for the study. Visits  2 and  4 are contact lens  follow-up 
visits.  Visits  3 and  5 are  study outcome  visits.  Tests  of visual performance at a near  
reading  distance  will be evaluated  with  an iPad  application  developed  by Prof. James  
Wolffsohn. These applications  are designed for research  purposes only and  are not 
commercially  available.  The applications  can measure reading  speed  and provide 
information  on how a subject interacts  with  the electronic device  (e.g. blink  rate,  working 
distance from the device,  scrolling  and zooming  on the  page,  etc.).   
10.3 Subjects  will be randomized  to start with  either  toric lenses  or spherical correction  
(FDA approved lenses  will be utilized).
Overview of Visit Procedures (Assessments)
MOD00003743
UH IRB Approved
FULL PROTOCOL TITLE:  Toric Contact Lens Digital Performance and Comfort Study
Page 8 of 15                                         Ver Aug 2021A masked  examiner  will perform all  outcome measures.
Visit  2
day 
3±1Visit  3 – day 
10±2Visit  4
day 13±1Visit  5
day 20±2Visit  1
Baseline 
and Fit  
Lens  1Follow-
up 
Lens  1Outcomes
Lens  1Fit
Lens  2Follow-
up 
Lens  2Outcomes 
Lens  2
Informed consent X
Ocular/medical/contact 
lens historyX
Ocular  symptoms 
(CLDEQ-8)8 X X X
Auto-refraction and  
keratometry  X
Slit lamp  exam with  
NaFl staining  X
Manifest refraction X
Accommodation  and 
phoriaX
Near  logMAR HCHL 
& LCHL acuity  OU X X X
NAVQ survey5 X X X
Radner  reading  
sentences,  dynamic  
acuity  measurement 
and functional vision 
test with  iPad4X X X
Tear collection  X X X
Study lens  order 
randomizationX
Insertion of CL and  
settling  (15 min)X X
Clinical CL vision and  
fit assessment,  over-
refraction,  and power 
adjustment if  indicatedX X X X
Removal of study lens  
and slit lamp  exam 
with NaFl stainingX X X X
MOD00003743
UH IRB Approved
FULL PROTOCOL TITLE:  Toric Contact Lens Digital Performance and Comfort Study
Page 9 of 15                                         Ver Aug 2021Layman’s Description  of Procedures
Patient demographics The subjects  will be asked  questions about their  age,  sex, race 
and ethnicity.
History The subjects  will be asked  questions about their  systemic and  eye 
health  and surgical history and  medications.  The subjects  will be 
asked  questions about how they  use their  current contact lenses,  
such as  their  current contact lens  brand and  wear  time,  as 
performed during a normal eye  exam.
Questionnaires Asks the subject  about his/her  vision and  comfort during contact 
lens wear
Visual acuity  Measurements  of how well subjects  can detect letters  or symbols 
at a given  distance
Auto-
refraction/keratometryA machine will  shine light into  a subject's  eye and  will estimate 
their prescription and  curvature of the eye without making  
contact with  the eye.
Slit Lamp  Exam A specialized  microscope is  used to  shine light on the eye and  to 
examine the health  of the front of the eye,  including  conjunctival 
and limbal redness using Cornea and  Contact Len  Research  Unit 
(CCLRU)  grading scale.  Sodium fluorescein  (NaFl) and  
lissamine green  are  temporary  dyes that  are used in  routine 
contact lens  exams  to evaluate the health  of the front surface of 
the eye using modified  Oxford Scale.
Tear collection Tears  will be collected  from both eyes  using glass  microcapillary  
tubes  (BLAU_BRAND, Intramark, Werthein,  Germany) and  
pooled together  in a low  adhesion Eppendorf tube.  The collected  
tears  will be kept on ice and  transferred to  a -80°C freezer  within  
half an hour and  stored until batch  analysis  using Leukotriene B4  
ELISA  kits (dilution  factor  1:10, Assay Designs, Ann Arbor, 
MI).9
Refraction The subject’s  prescription is  determined  by placing  different 
power lenses  in front of the subject’s  eye,  and modified  according  
to the subject’s  responses. 
Contact Lens  Fitting A contact lens  is placed  on the eye  and the fit is  assessed (how 
much  is moves, where it sits  on the eye,  etc.).  This  is done using 
a slit  lamp  biomicroscope. 
Contact Lens  Over-
Refraction  and Power 
AdjustmentLenses  will be placed  in front of the subject’s  eye while wearing  
the study contact lenses  to determine if  the prescription needs  to 
be changed  according  to the subject’s  responses. The contact lens  
power will be adjusted  if needed  based  on standard clinical fitting  
guidelines.
Radner  Reading,  
functional vision 
tests,  and dynamic  
acuity  measurementAn iPad  application  will be used to  assess reading  performance 
(speed, accuracy,  etc.).  The dynamic  acuity  measurement 
(detection  rather  than  a recognition  task)  involves a Landolt C 
surrounded by crowding bars presented  for a limited  duration 
MOD00003743
UH IRB Approved
FULL PROTOCOL TITLE:  Toric Contact Lens Digital Performance and Comfort Study
Page 10 of 15                                         Ver Aug 202111.0 Setting
11.1 All study visits  will be conducted  at the University of Houston College of 
Optometry  in the Richdale lab  
12.0 Drugs or Devices
12.1 No investigational drugs or devices  will be used in  this study. The contact lenses  
used in  the study are  commercially  available,  FDA approved contact lenses  that will be 
worn on a daily  wear,  daily  disposable basis. An assistant will mask  (over-label) contact 
lenses  so that  the subject and  outcome  examiner  remain  masked.  The primary  examiner  
will follow the  manufacturer's fitting  guide to  determine the initial lens  powers. Lens  
powers will be modified,  as needed  for best vision, according  to the manufactures  fitting  
guide. 
The ophthalmic dyes used in  the trial  to evaluate  the health  of the front surface (sodium 
fluorescein  and lissamine green) are a commercially  available ocular  diagnostic agents  
commonly  used in  routine clinical  assessment of ocular  health  in optometry. 
Study Contact Lenses  
(Alcon)Starting Sphere Power Starting Cyl Power
Precision1 for 
AstigmatismVertexed  manifest 
refraction  Per the fitting  guide
Precision1 SphereVertexed  spherical-
equivalent of manifest 
refractionN/A
13.0 Risks to Subjects
13.1 The risks to  the subjects  in the trial are the same risks found in  standard clinical  
practice and  patients  wearing  contact lenses  outside of a controlled  trial.  During study 
procedures, there is  the risk of mild  discomfort due to  light being  shined on the eye,  
through the use of topical ophthalmic diagnostic agents,  or insertion  of contact lenses.  
The usual risks which  exist during the performance of tear  collection  may  include minor  
eye discomfort, irritation,  and temporary  redness of the eyes.  The discomfort is  usually  
self-limiting  and can be resolved with  the use of over the counter  artificial tears.  A break  
will be given  if the subjects  experience any  discomfort or irritation  during tear  collection.
Contact lenses  will be fit as  part of this  study. The  US Food and  Drug Administration  
consider daily  wear  contact lenses  Class  II medical  devices.  While  most individuals  wear  (300ms) and  the observer identifies  which  of the 4 possible 
directions  it is orientated  on a response keypad. An incorrect 
response leads  to an increase  in presentation  size and correct 
response a decrease,  with  the endpoint being  when there have 
been  3 reversals  in the staircase procedure.
MOD00003743
UH IRB Approved
FULL PROTOCOL TITLE:  Toric Contact Lens Digital Performance and Comfort Study
Page 11 of 15                                         Ver Aug 2021contact lenses  without problems, there are some risks associated  with  wearing  contact 
lenses.  Ulcerative keratitis  (infection  of the clear  front part of the eye),  is the most severe 
risk and  can lead  to loss of vision. Ulcerative keratitis  is estimated  to happen to  about 1-2 
out of 10,000 people who use daily  wear,  daily  disposable contact lenses.  The risk for 
ulcerative keratitis  in this study is  no different than  the risk found with  contact lens  fitting  
in standard clinical practice.  The risk of ulcerative keratitis  may  be reduced  by educating  
subjects  to carefully  following the study doctor’s directions  for lens  care,   including  
throwing out contact lenses  each  night, never  sleeping  or napping in  contact lenses,  and 
never  exposing the contact lenses  to water.  These  study instructions are the  same as  those 
provided to  subjects  in clinical practice
In addition  to ulcerative keratitis,  the following problems may  occur  when wearing  
contact lenses:
Other, less  serious, infections  or inflammation  of the  eye(s)
Burning, stinging, itching,  dryness or general irritation  of the eye(s)
Corneal neovascularization  (small  blood vessels  growing into  the cornea)  
Excessive  watering,  unusual eye  secretions,  or redness of the eye
Reduced  or blurred vision (compared  to glasses)
Seeing  rainbows or halos  around bright lights  (compared  to glasses)
Many of the potential problems associated  with  contact lens  wear  are self-limiting  and 
can be resolved with  discontinuation  of lens  wear.  These problems can  be minimized  or 
avoided  with  proper contact lens  fitting  and follow-up. Subjects  in the study will be 
examined  within  a week  after  initial contact lens  fitting,  which  is a typical follow-up 
schedule seen  in clinical  practice for contact  lenses  worn in  a daily  wear  modality.
Subject safety  will be monitored  in the trial through slit lamp  evaluation  of the ocular  
surface. Subjects  will be educated  to potential  risk with  contact lens  wear  and instructed  
to discontinue contact lens  wear  and contact the study investigators  immediately  if they  
experience any  eye discomfort, excessive tearing,  vision changes, redness of the eye,  or 
other  problems
14.0 Potential Benefits  to Subjects
14.1 While there are  few direct benefits  to the study subjects,  subjects  will be 
unmasked (told  what each  of their  study lenses  were)  at the end  of the  study. Through 
this they  may  learn  more about their  vision and  visual performance with  different types  of 
contact lenses.  
15.0 Provisions to Monitor Data to Ensure the Safety of Subjects
N/A
16.0 Withdrawal of Subjects
MOD00003743
UH IRB Approved
FULL PROTOCOL TITLE:  Toric Contact Lens Digital Performance and Comfort Study
Page 12 of 15                                         Ver Aug 202116.1 Subjects  may  withdraw consent to  participate  in the study at any  time.  
16.2 Subjects  may  be withdrawn from the  trial by the study investigators  if they  
fail to  return for study visits  or follow study instructions, have unacceptable 
vision or fit with  the contact lenses,  are unable to  complete  the study outcomes,  
become pregnant during the trial,  or have a study-related  adverse event that  
warrants study withdrawal.  
17.0 Costs/Payments to Subjects
17.1 There are no expected  additional costs  to subjects  that participate in  the study. 
There is  no cost to  subjects  for contact  lens fitting  in this study. 
17.2 Subjects  will be provided with  daily  disposable contact lenses  for the duration of 
the study at no charge.  Subjects  parking at each  study visit will be validated  (if 
necessary). Subjects  will be compensated  $50 for completion  of each  study visit (a total 
of up to  $250 for 5 visits).  Subjects  will be compensated  with  an Amazon  gift card  after  
completion  of the last study visit or exit from the study (if  early  exit).  
18.0 Compensation for Research-Related Injury
18.1 The risks to  subjects  from participation  in the study are minimal.  The clinical  
procedures used in  the study are  commonly  used clinical procedure in  optometry  and 
opht
halmology. In the  rare case that a subject is  injured  as part of their  participation  in 
the study, the  subject  will be responsible for any  associated  medical bills.  
19.0 Confidentiality
19.1 Subjects  will be assigned a unique subject ID. Subjects  IDs are  two digits  and 
should start at  01 and  continue in  the order of enrollment.  
19.2 Any source documents  with  patient identifiable information  will be kept only at 
the local site  (informed consent form, linking  log). Individual documents  will be kept in  a 
locked  room in  the Richdale  lab. 
19.3 No one outside of the research  team will have access  to the subject identifiers.  
19.4 A key  to the study code will be maintained  for 3 years  at the  time of study 
completion  (i.e. Last Subject,  Last  Visit).
19.5 No audio  or video  will be saved  in this study. The video  recorded during the 
digital performance testing  is only used to  verify blinks and  test distance/alignment and  
will be deleted  once testing  is verified.  Only the numerical data will be saved. 
20.0 Provisions to Protect  the Privacy  Interests of Subjects
MOD00003743
UH IRB Approved
FULL PROTOCOL TITLE:  Toric Contact Lens Digital Performance and Comfort Study
Page 13 of 15                                         Ver Aug 202120.1 Those who are potentially  eligible  and interested  in the study will be referred to  a 
study team  member  who will discuss the study with  them.  This  discussion will take place 
in a quiet,  private area and  as much  time as  necessary  will be spent discussing the details  
of the study. 
21.0 Informed Consent Process
21.1 This trial will follow the  University of Houston Division of Research  SOP: 
Informed Consent Process for Research  (HRP-090). The participant will be provided an  
opportunity to  read  the informed consent and  to have any  questions answered before 
agreeing  to participate.  Prior to  any testing,  the investigator  or study coordinator will 
obtain  written  informed consent from all participants.  The consent form will be signed 
and dated  by both the participant and  a member  of the study personnel who has  been  
approved to  obtain  consent. The  participant will receive a copy of the signed consent 
documents  and the originals  will be filed  in the subject binder on site in  a secure location.  
21.2 Potential individuals  who cannot understand English, or who are unable to  
consent, will  not be included  in this study.
22.0 Process  to Document Consent in  Writing
22.1 The clinical trial will follow the  University of Houston Division of Research  
st
andard operating  procedure regarding written  documentation  of informed consent 
(SOP: Written  Documentation  of Consent (HRP-091)). The consent form will be signed 
and dated  by both the participant and  a member  of the study personnel who has  been  
approved to  obtain  consent. The  participant will receive a copy of the signed consent 
documents  and the originals  will be filed  in the subject binder on site in  a secure location.  
22.2 Template  Consent Document HRP-502c will be used for consented  adults
22.3 A copy of the  informed consent document is  included  in the study related  
documents. 
23.0 HIPAA
23.1 We will be collecting  demographic information  and general medical and  eye 
health  information. Since protected  health  information  (PHI) will be collected,  the Health  
Insurance Portability  and Accountability  Act (HIPAA) authorization  form will be 
included  as part of the  Informed Consent process.  
23.2 The link  to PHI will be destroyed upon completion  of the study and  final 
analysis/report. PHI will not be reused or disclosed  to any other  person or entity,  except 
as required by law,  for authorized  oversight of the research  study, or for other  research  
for which  the use or disclosure of protected  health  information  for which  an authorization  
or opportunity to  agree or object is  not required by 45 CFR 164.512.  
MOD00003743
UH IRB Approved
FULL PROTOCOL TITLE:  Toric Contact Lens Digital Performance and Comfort Study
Page 14 of 15                                         Ver Aug 202124.0 FERPA
N/A
25.0 Data Management
25.1 Any source documents  with  patient identifiable information  will be kept only at 
the local site  (informed consent form, linking  log). Individual documents  will be kept in  a 
locked  room in  the Richdale  lab. Paper  source documents  (i.e. case  report forms) will 
only be associated  with  a subject  ID number and  will not contain  direct  subject  
identifiers.  Data will be entered  in Excel  for analysis  and no patient identifiers  will be 
entered  in the data analysis  spreadsheets.
25.2 Data Entry  will be conducted  by study team  members  and data will be doubled 
checked  for any  errors.
25.3 Electronic data will only be stored in  a limited  access  shared folder on the college 
directory.
25.4 Copy of the data will be stored on campus  for 3 years  following completion  of 
the research.25.5 Only study team members  will have access  to the study data.  
25.6 Data can  only be accessed  remotely  via the secure UH VPN system.
26.0 Specimen  Use and Banking
26.1 Tear samples  will be stored at College  of Optometry, JDA building until  batch  
analysis.26.2 The samples  will be stored until analysis.
26.3 Only the investigators  in this study will have access  to the specimens.
26.4 The investigators  in this study will be responsible for the transportation of the 
s 
pecimens  from Health  1 to JDA building in  College of Optometry.
26.5 The samples  will be transported in  a tripled  sealed  container  on ice.
26.6 Tear samples  will be stored in  the lab  until analyses.
26.7 There will not be enough specimens  to save or store for future use.
27.0 Community-Based Participatory  Research
N/A
28.0 Sharing of Results with Subjects
28.1 Subjects  will be unmasked at the end  of the study and  informed of their  contact 
lens parameters.  The subject  may  choose to  share this  information  with  their  eye doctor 
to inform future contact  lens fitting  needs. 
29.0 Resources  
MOD00003743
UH IRB Approved
FULL PROTOCOL TITLE:  Toric Contact Lens Digital Performance and Comfort Study
Page 15 of 15                                         Ver Aug 202129.1 Thestudy team completed all necessary ethics training requirements. The PI
(Kathryn Richdale, OD, PhD) has nearly two decades ofexperience conducting clinical
care and research and will oversee allstudy personnel.
29.2 With  an abundance of contact lens  wearers  in the surrounding community,  
and based  on our recruitment  with  previous contact  lens studies  we believe that  we 
should be able to  complete enrollment  within  6-9 months. 
30.0 Additional Approvals
N/A
REFERENCES
1. Howard J. Americans  Devote More Than  10 Hours a Day  to Screen  Time,  and Growing. 
In: Health  C, ed.; 2016.
2. Richdale K, Berntsen  DA, Mack  CJ, et al.  Visual Acuity  with  Spherical and  Toric Soft 
Contact Lenses  in Low- to  Moderate-Astigmatic Eyes.  Optometry  and vision science : 
official publication  of the American  Academy  of Optometry  2007;84:969-75.
3. Woods J, Woods CA,  Fonn D. Early  Symptomatic Presbyopes--What Correction  
Modality  Works Best? Eye  & contact lens  2009;35:221-6.
4. Kingsnorth A, Wolffsohn JS. Mobile App Reading  Speed  Test.  The British  journal of 
ophthalmology 2015;99:536-9.
5. Buckhurst PJ, Wolffsohn JS, Gupta N, et al.  Development of a Questionnaire to  Assess 
the Relative Subjective Benefits  of Presbyopia Correction.  Journal of cataract  and 
refractive surgery 2012;38:74-9.
6 Richdale K, Sinnott LT,  Skadahl E et al.  Frequency of and  factors  associated  with  contact 
lens dissatisfaction  and discontinuation. Cornea 2007; 26: 168-174.
7. Jones L,  Brennan  NA, Gonzalez-Meijome J et al.  The TFOS International Workshop on 
Contact Lens  Discomfort: report of the contact lens  materials,  design, and  care 
subcommittee.  Invest Ophthalmol Vis  Sci 2013; 54: TFOS37-70.
8Chalmers  RL, Begley  CG,  Moody K et  al. Contact Lens  Dry Eye Questionnaire-8 
(CLDEQ-8) and  opinion of contact lens  performance. Optom Vis  Sci 2012; 89: 1435-
1442.
9. Masoudi S, Stapleton  FJ, Willcox  MD. Contact Lens-Induced Discomfort and  Protein  
Changes  in Tears.  Optom Vis  Sci. 2016; 93: 955-962.
10. Logan, AK; Datta,  A, Skidmore K; Tomiyama  E; Hu C,  Chandler  M, Procopio B,  
Bhadane M, Benoit J, Ritchey  E, Wolffsohn, JS, Richdale K. Randomized  Clinical Trial 
of Near  Visual Performance with  Digital Devices  Using Spherical and  Toric  Contact  
Lenses,  Optom Vis  Sci 2020; 97: 518-525
MOD00003743
UH IRB Approved
Consent  to Take Part in a Human Research Study
Page 1 of 9Title of research study: Toric  Contact Lens  Digital Performance and Comfort Study
Investigator: Kathryn Richdale OD PhD
Key Information:  
You are being  asked  to participate in  a research  study to  help  us evaluate the vision and  performance of 
different types  of contact  lenses  when used with  digital devices.  In addition,  we will be evaluating  the 
composition  of the  tears  on the front of your eye  after  wearing  the different types  of lenses.  You may  
be eligible to  be in  the study because  you have a certain  amount of astigmatism  (due to  the curvature of 
the front of your eye).  
We will be testing  different types  of soft contact lenses  to see how they  perform when using digital 
devices.  As such, you may  get slightly  different vision with  each  set of contact lenses.  At the end  of the 
study, the study doctors will explain  the differences  in the contact lenses  to you. 
Taking  part in  this study is  entirely  voluntary, meaning  that you may  or may  not choose to  participate.  
To decide whether  or not you want to  be part of this  research,  the risks and  possible benefits  of the 
study are described  in this form so you can  make  an informed decision.  This  process is  known as  
informed consent. This  consent form describes  the purpose, procedures, possible benefits  and risks of 
the study. This  form also  explains  how your medical information  will be used and  who may  see it.  You 
may have a copy of this  form to  take home to  review  and ask advice from others. 
What  should I know about  a research study?
Someone will explain  this research  study to  you.
Whether  or not you take part is  up to  you.
You can  choose not to  take part.
You can  agree to  take part and  later  change your mind.
Your decision  will not be held  against you.
You can  ask all the questions you want before you decide,  and can ask questions at any  time 
during the study.
We invite you to  take part in  a research  study about testing  different types  of soft contact lenses  to see 
how they  perform when using digital devices  because you meet the following criteria
Able to  read  and understand the study informed consent
18 to  39 years  of age (inclusive)
Pl to -6.00 D vertex  corrected  sphere power and -0.75 to -1.50 vertexed  cy linder  power 
in each  eye
Best corrected  acuity  of 20/25 or better  in each  eye
Self-report of at  least 4 hrs/day using digital devices
MOD00003743
UH IRB Approved
Consent  to Take Part in a Human Research Study
Page 2 of 9
Study version Aug 2021
Version: Jan19Willing  not to wear  their habitual  contact  lenses  or use artificial tears  or other  solutions 
for at least 24 hours
No history of ocular  pathology or surgery
No active ocular  infection  or clinically  significant ocular  inflammation
Current/established  full time (>6 days per week,  >8 hours per day) soft contact lens 
wearer
Asymptomatic soft contact lens  wearer  (CLDEQ-8 score <12  at baseline)
No significant binocular  vision abnormality
No gas  permeable lens  wear  for at least 3 months
Not an  optometrist 
Not pregnant/lactating  (by self-report)
Willing  to wear  lenses  at least  8 hours each  day during the study period
This research  is being  funded by Alcon  Laboratories.
In general,  your participation  in the research  involves 5 visits  over a period of one month.Visit 1 will 
last about 2 hours and  is a baseline screening  for eligibility  and includes  tests  to determine  which  
contact lens  powers you will wear  during the study. We will also  obtain  a sample  of your tears.  You 
will be randomized  (like flipping a coin)  to which  lens design you wear  first. All  subjects  will wear  
two different designs of contact lenses  – each  for about 1 week.  Visit  2 will take less  than  1 hour and  
should be done within  2-4 days from Visit 1. At Visit 2 we will check  to make  sure you are  doing well 
with your contact lenses  and make  changes  to the power, if  needed,  to give you your best vision. Visit 
3 will take less  than  1.5 hours and  should be done about 8-12 days after  Visit 1. At Visit 3 we will 
assess your vision and  performance with  the contact lenses,  obtain  a tear  sample,  and then  fit you with  
the other  contact  lens design. Visit  4 is the same as  Visit 2 but with  the second design of contact lenses  
(also  less than  1 hour visit).  At visit  5 we will assess your vision and  performance with  the second 
contact lens  design and  take  a third  and final  tear sample (less  than  1 hour).
See the tables  below  for a detailed  breakdown of the procedures and  estimated  study visit timing.
Visit  1 – You can  come to this visit  wearing  your glasses or your current  contact lenses
Procedure Description Duration
Informed Consent Review  risks, benefits,  and purpose of study 20 min
Demographics & Medical 
HistoryCollect info on medical history, current medications,  
contact lens  information  and demographics5 min
Visual Acuity Measure your vision with  your current prescription 5 min
Auto-refraction and auto-
keratometryA machine will  be used to  estimate your prescription 
and the shape of your eye5 min
Questionnaires Answer questions about your vision with  the contact  
lenses10 min
Radner Reading Test,  
dynamic acuity, and 
Functional Vision testing Measure how quickly  and easily  you are  able  to read  
on an  iPad15 min
MOD00003743
UH IRB Approved
Consent  to Take Part in a Human Research Study
Page 3 of 9
Study version Aug 2021
Version: Jan19with iPad
Refraction Determine your prescription 10 min
Accommodation, 
Binocular Vision Measure how well you focus your eyes  and use them 
together  as a team.  10 min
Slit Lamp Exam A microscope will  be used to  make sure the front 
surface of your eyes  are healthy  and able  to wear  
contact lenses5 min
Tear Collection A small tube will be used to  collect  a small amount of 
your tears.  5-10 min
Study Contact Lens  Order 
RandomizationYou will be randomized  (like a flip  of a coin)  to which  
lens design you wear  first. All subjects  will wear  both 
lens designs if  they  complete the study.5 min
Contact Lens  Fitting  & 
Over-RefractionMake sure the first contact lenses  fit your eyes  well 
and the prescription works well20 min
Total Estimated Duration: 2 hours
Visit  2 – You should come to this visit  wearing  your study contact lenses  for at least  2 hours
Procedure Description Duration
Visual Acuity Measure vision with  your contact lenses  using a 
standard eye chart for regular  eye examinations5min
Contact Lens  Assessment 
& Over-RefractionMake sure the contact  lenses  still fit your eyes  well  
and the prescription works well after  you adapted  to 
them for a few  days
If the vision can  be improved, new  lenses  will be put 
on the eye(s) and  allowed  to settle,  and the vision will 
be checked  again.
If the fit or vision are  not acceptable you will be exited  
from the study.20-40 min
Slit Lamp Exam A microscope will  be used to  make sure the front 
surface of your eyes  are healthy  and able  to continue 
wearing  contact lenses5min
Total Estimated Duration: 0.5to 1 hr
Visit  3 - You should come to this visit  wearing  your study contact lenses  for at least  2 hours
Procedure Description Duration
MOD00003743
UH IRB Approved
Consent  to Take Part in a Human Research Study
Page 4 of 9
Study version Aug 2021
Version: Jan19Visual Acuity Measure vision with  your contact lenses  5min
Questionnaires Answer questions about your vision with  the contact  
lenses10min
Radner Reading Test,  
dynamic acuity, and 
Functional Vision testing with iPadMeasure how quickly  and easily  you are  able  to read  
on an  iPad20min
Slit Lamp Exam A microscope will  be used to  make sure the front 
surface of your eyes  are healthy  and able  to continue 
wearing  contact lenses5min
Tear Collection A small tube will be used to  collect  a small amount of 
your tears.5-10 min
Contact Lens  Fitting  & 
Over-RefractionMake sure the second contact lens  design fits  your 
eyes well  and the prescription works well
If the fit or vision are  not acceptable you will be exited  
from the study.20min
Total Estimated Duration: 1 hour
Visit  4 – You should come to this visit  wearing  your study contact lenses  for at least  2 hours
Procedure Description Duration
Visual Acuity Measure vision with  your contact lenses  using a 
standard eye chart for regular  eye examinations5min
Contact Lens  Assessment 
& Over-RefractionMake sure the contact  lenses  still fit your eyes  well  
and the prescription works well after  you adapted  to 
them for a few  days
If the vision can  be improved, new  lenses  will be put 
on the eye(s) and  allowed  to settle,  and the vision will 
be checked  again.
If the fit or vision are  not acceptable you will be exited  
from the study.20-40 min
Slit Lamp Exam A microscope will  be used to  make sure the front 
surface of your eyes  are healthy  and able  to continue 
wearing  contact lenses5min
Total Estimated Duration: 0.5to 1 hr
MOD00003743
UH IRB Approved
Consent  to Take Part in a Human Research Study
Page 5 of 9
Study version Aug 2021
Version: Jan19Visit  5 - You should come to this visit  wearing  your study contact lenses  for at least  2 hours
You should bring  your glasses or contact lenses  to wear home from the study.
Procedure Description Duration
Visual Acuity Measure vision with  your contact lenses  using a 
standard eye chart for regular  eye examinations5min
Questionnaire Answer questions about your vision with  the contact  
lenses10min
Radner Reading Test,  
dynamic acuity, and 
Functional Vision testing with iPadMeasure how quickly  and easily  you are  able  to read  
on an  iPad20min
Slit Lamp Exam A microscope will  be used to  make sure the front 
surface of your eyes  are healthy  and able  to continue 
wearing  contact lenses5min
Tear Collection A small tube will be used to  collect  a small amount of 
your tears.5-10 min
Total Estimated Duration: 0.5to 1 
hour
The primary  risk to  you during study procedures, there may  be minor  eye irritation,  allergic  reactions  
(to the anesthetic drop), and  redness of the eyes  due to  the use of sodium fluorescein, or collection  of 
tears.  The discomfort is  self-limiting  and can be resolved with  the use of over the counter  artificial 
tears.  
There are no direct benefits  for the  participants.  You will  receive compensation  for your time to  
participate.
Detailed Information:
The following is  more detailed  information  about this  study, in  addition  to the information  listed  
above. 
Why  is this research being done?
The purpose of this  research  is to better  understand how different types  of contact lens  corrections  may  
affect your tears,  eye comfort, and  visual performance, like the ability  to read  on digital devices.  
How long will the research last?
We expect that you will be in  this research  study for about one month. 
How many people  will be studied? 
We expect to  start about 30 people in  the study. We expect 24 people to  complete the study.
MOD00003743
UH IRB Approved
Consent  to Take Part in a Human Research Study
Page 6 of 9
Study version Aug 2021
Version: Jan19What  happens  if I say yes, I want  to be  in this research?
All of the  tests  done during the study are  described  above. All  of the contact lenses  used in  the study 
are FDA approved. The eye examination  and contact lens  fitting  are the same as  what is  done in  
standard clinical care.  The questionnaires and  special vision and  reading  testing  are done for research  
purposes to  get a better  idea of how subjects  are performing with  the contact lenses.  
An iPad  app will be used to  measure your reading  performance. This  iPad  App uses the front camera to  
track  your blinks and  eye movements,  as well as  to make sure that you are properly lined  up with  the 
device.  The video/images  will be deleted  after  they  are checked  for accuracy  at the  end of each  study 
visit.
This research  study will be conducted  at Richdale  Lab by trained  study personnel. Optometrists  (eye 
doctors) will  fit the  contact lenses  and conduct the  eye examination  portion. A research  assistant may  
help with  the questionnaire and  visual performance testing.
The contact  lens design you wear  first will be chosen by chance,  like flipping a coin.  You will have 
equal chance of starting  with  either  lens design treatment.  Neither  you nor the study doctor evaluating  
your performance will know which  lens design you are using. 
Audio, video  or photograph will be not be taken  during the  study.
What  are my responsibilities  if I take part in this research?
If you agree  to be a part of this research,  you will be responsible for wearing  the assigned contact 
lenses  at least 8 hours a day  on the  days during the study. You will  also need  to adhere to  the dates  and 
times  for study visits  and wear  the assigned contact lenses  for at least six  hours before coming  to the 
outcome visits  (Visits  3 and  5). 
What  happens  if I do not want  to be in this research?
You can  choose not to  take part in  the research,  and it will not be held  against you. Choosing not to  
take part will  involve no penalty  or loss of benefit  to which  you are otherwise entitled.
If you are a student, a decision  to take  part or not, or to  withdraw from the research  will have no effect 
on your grades and/or standing with  the University of Houston.  If you are receiving  clinical care,  a 
decision  to take  part or not, or withdraw from the research,  will have no effect on what would be 
offered to  you as  part of routine care.  If you are an  employee of the  University of Houston, a decision  
to take part or not, or to  withdraw from the research  will have no effect  on your employment  with  the 
University of Houston
If you chose not to  be in  this study, you can  ask your eye doctor if  you can  be fitted  for contact lenses.  
What  happens  if I say yes, but  I change  my mind  later?
You can  leave  the research  at any  time it will not be held  against  you.
If you decide to  leave the research,  you will not be compensated  for study visits  after  you exit  the study 
and the data collected  up to  the point of study exit may  still be used. If you decide  to leave  the study, 
contact a study investigator.  The study investigator  will want to  talk to you or see you to  make sure 
that you are okay and  your eyes  are still  healthy.  
MOD00003743
UH IRB Approved
Consent  to Take Part in a Human Research Study
Page 7 of 9
Study version Aug 2021
Version: Jan19If you stop being  in the research,  already  collected  data may  not be removed  from the study database.  
You will be asked  whether  the investigator  can collect data  from your routine medical care.  If you 
agree,  this data  will be handled  the same as  research  data.  
Is there any  way  being in this study  could be bad for me?
The risks to  subjects  from participation  in the study are minimal.  The procedures in  the study (slit lamp  
exam,  contact lens  fitting,  etc.)  are commonly  used clinical procedures in  optometry  and 
ophthalmology. 
The usual risks which  exist during the performance of tear  collection  may  include minor  eye 
discomfort, irritation,  and temporary  redness of the  eyes.  The discomfort is  usually  self-limiting  and 
can be resolved with  the use of over the counter  artificial tears.  A break  will be given  if you experience 
any discomfort or irritation  during tear  collection.
Commercially  available (FDA approved) contact lenses  will be fit as  part of this  study. While most 
individuals  wear  contact  lenses  without problems, there are  some risks associated  with  wearing  contact 
lenses.  Ulcerative keratitis  (infection  of the clear  front part of the eye),  is the most severe risk and  can 
lead to loss of vision. Ulcerative keratitis  is estimated  to happen to  about 1-2 out of 10,000 people who 
use daily  wear  daily  disposable contact  lenses.  The risk in  this study is  no different than  the risk if  your 
eye care provider fit you in  contact  lenses.  The risk of ulcerative keratitis  may  be reduced  by carefully  
following the  study doctor’s directions  for lens  care  including  throwing out your contact lenses  each  
night, never  sleeping  or napping in  contact lenses,  and never  exposing your contact lenses  to water.
The following problems may  also occur  when wearing  contact lenses:
Other, less  serious, infections  or inflammation  of the  eye(s)
Burning, stinging, itching,  dryness or general irritation  of the eye(s)
Corneal neovascularization  (small  blood vessels  growing into  the cornea)  
Excessive  watering,  unusual eye  secretions  (such as mucus), or redness of the eye(s)
Reduced  or blurred vision (compared  to glasses)
Seeing  rainbows or halos  around bright lights  (compared  to glasses)
In the event you experience signs or symptoms associated  with  one of the problems listed  
above, you should immediately  contact the lab  at 713-743-7908 (during regular  business hours) 
or the study Principal Investigator, Dr. Kathryn Richdale,  at 917-755-4548 (outside business 
hours).
Will I receive anything for being  in this study?
If you are eligible for the study and  complete all 5 study visits  you will receive a $250 Amazon  gift 
card ($50/visit for 5 visits)  and parking validation  at any  study visit(s) for the patient parking lot.  If 
you attend  the first visit  but are  not eligible  (screen  fail),  you will receive a $50 Amazon  gift card  for 
Visit 1. If you are  exited  from the study at a later  visit (due to  problems with  the fit or vision of the 
contact lenses,  or not attending  the study visits  as assigned), you will only be paid  for the study visits  
that you completed  on time.  You will be paid  when you complete  or otherwise exit the study. 
MOD00003743
UH IRB Approved
Consent  to Take Part in a Human Research Study
Page 8 of 9
Study version Aug 2021
Version: Jan19Will being  in this study  help me in any way?
 We cannot promise any  benefits  to you or others from your taking  part in  this research.  Subjects  will 
be unmasked (told  what each  of their  study lenses  were)  at the end  of the study. Through this  they  may  
learn  more about their  vision and  visual performance with different types  of contact lenses.  
Participation  in the study may  also improve the  fitting  of toric contact  lenses  for future patients.  
What  happens  to the  information  collected for the research?
Efforts will  be made to  limit the use and  disclosure of your personal information, including  research  
study and  medical records, to  people who have a need  to review  this information. Each  subject’s  name  
will be paired  with  a code number, which  will appear  on all  written  study materials.  The list pairing  the 
subject’s  name to  the assigned code number will be kept separate from these materials.  We cannot 
promise complete secrecy.  Organizations  that may  inspect and  copy your information  include the IRB 
and other  representatives  of this  organization,  as well as  collaborating  institutions  and federal  agencies  
that oversee human  subjects  research.  The sponsor of the research  (Alcon) may  also review  research  
records upon request.  This  research  uses or discloses  Protected  Health  Information as  defined  by the 
Health  Insurance Portability  and Accountability  Act (HIPAA), and  you will be asked  to sign an  
additional document to  authorize the use of this  information. 
Your information  and/or biological  samples  that are collected  as part of this  research  will not be used 
or distributed  for future research  studies, even  if all of your identifiers  are removed.
We may  publish the results  of this  research.  However, unless otherwise detailed  in this document,  we 
will keep  your name and  other  identifying  information  confidential.  
Can I be removed from the  research without  my OK?
The person in  charge of the research  study or the sponsor can  remove you from the research  study 
without your approval. Possible reasons for removal  include if  you do not attend  the study visits  or the  
do not have acceptable vision or fit  with  the contact lenses.  
We will tell you about any  new  information  that may  affect  your health,  welfare,  or choice to  stay in 
the research.
What  else do I need to know?
If you need  medical care because of taking  part in  this research  study, contact the investigator  and 
medical care will be made available.  Generally,  this care will be billed  to you, your insurance, or other  
third  party. The University of Houston has  no program to  pay for medical care for research-related  
injury. 
Most tests  done on samples  in research  studies  are only for research  and have no clear  meaning  for 
health  care.  If the  research  with  your identifiable information  or samples  gives  results  that do have 
meaning  for your health,  the researchers  will not contact you to  let you know what they  have found. 
Who can I talk to?
If you have questions, concerns, or complaints,  or think  the research  has hurt you, you can  email  Dr. 
Richdale (Richdale@uh.edu )  or call  and ask to speak  to one of them  (713-743-2849).
MOD00003743
UH IRB Approved
Consent  to Take Part in a Human Research Study
Page 9 of 9
Study version Aug 2021
Version: Jan19This research  has been  reviewed  and approved by the  University of Houston Institutional Review  
Board  (IRB). You may  also talk to them at (713) 743-9204 or cphs@central.uh.edu if:
Your questions, concerns, or complaints  are not being  answered by the research  team.
You cannot reach  the research  team.
You want to  talk to someone besides  the research  team.
You have questions about your rights as  a research  subject.
You want to  get information  or provide input about this  research.
A description  of this  clinical trial  will be available on http://www.ClinicalTrials.gov,  as required by 
U.S. Law.  This  website will not include information  that can  identify  you. At most,  the Web  site will 
include a summary  of the  results. You can  search  this website at any  time.
May we  contact you regarding future research opportunities?
In the future, our research  team may  be interested  in contacting  you for other  research  studies  we 
undertake, or to  conduct a follow-up study to  this one. There is  never  any obligation  to take part in  
additional research.  Do we have permission to  contact you to  provide additional information?
Yes
No
Signature Block  for Capable Adult
Your signature documents  your consent to  take  part in  this research.
Signature of subject Date
Printed  name  of subject
Signature of person obtaining  consent Date
Printed  name of person obtaining  consent
MOD00003743
UH IRB Approved