Protocol 2015.03  Version Date: 07/7/16
1IRB #15452
Revised:
Oregon  Health  & Science  University
RESEARCH PROTOCOL
Protocol Title: Testing and Tuning a Multiparameter Exercise Detection Algorithm
Principal Investigator: Joseph El Youssef  MD elyoussj@ohsu.edu 
Sponsor: National Institute of  Diabetes and Digestive and  Kidney Diseases
BACKGROUND
The risk of hypoglycemia in individuals with type 1 diabetes (T1D) increases considerably  
during exercise. Increased  glucose utilization during exercise as well  as promotion  of insulin 
sensitivity, both during and after  exercise,  have been shown to  occur  with  prolonged  periods  of 
increased insulin  sensitivity  even after a single bout of intense physical activity. As a  result,  
many patients with T1D experience fear of and reluctance to  pursue physical activity, in order  to 
avoid the discomforting symptoms associated  with hypoglycemia.
The artificial  pancreas, a  device used  for automatic delivery of insulin and  glucagon 
subcutaneously to subjects  with T1D, is paving the way to  revolutionize the management of this  
disease. Already, the  benefit of improved  glycemic  control compared to current open-loop pump 
therapy has  been  demonstrated in several trials.  We have shown that  our artificial pancreas (AP) 
algorithm dual hormone system effectively manages  blood glucose in  a clinic setting and  our 
group specifically has shown  great  progress  using  glucagon to reduce hypoglycemic  episodes  
outside of  exercise 1-3. Our  most recent inpatient study, as yet unpublished, shows  that adjusting 
insulin and glucagon delivery during closed  loop treatment, after announcing exercise, 
effectively reduces mean time below a glucose  level  of 70 mg/dl when compared to  closed  loop  
control without  adjustments. We utilized initial  open-loop  data from this study to help devise 
dosing changes for the AP algorithm 4.
In order  to prepare for a future  home  study,  the ability  to detect, grade, and classify physical 
activity so  as to appropriately adjust system parameters is vital in helping to prevent exercise-
induced hypoglycemia in the home  setting. Currently, our closed-loop system transmits heart rate 
and accelerometry  outputs  from  a Zephyrlife BioPatch  monitoring device to a  Nexus 5 smart 
phone master controller  via Bluetooth.  The algorithm then converts  the heart rate  and 
accelerometry data into  modified estimated energy  expenditure - accounting for age,  weight, 
height, sex,  resting and sitting heart  rates - to determine if exercise  is present.  However, further 
data collection is needed  to hone  the specificity and sensitivity of the detection algorithm to 
account for a wide  variety of subject  characteristics and  activities.
This study  is designed to collect 3-axis accelerometry data  and heart rate data  during a variety of 
different home  activities, as well  as during formal exercise in  both  healthy subjects and subjects 
with type 1 diabetes and optionally VO 2 data from a portable VO 2 mask.   The data collected will 
be used to further enhance our algorithm that, in future closed-loop studies, will detect  exercise 
Protocol 2015.03  Version Date: 07/7/16
2and automatically  trigger algorithmic adjustments to reduce exercise-related  hypoglycemia  
during and  after  exercise in individuals with T1D.
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES
Primary Objective: To  obtain  accelerometer,  heart rate, and optionally  VO 2 data from subjects 
with and without T1D  during  various  home related activities and formal exercise for the purpose 
of training an  exercise  detection algorithm.
Secondary Objective: To obtain  data  from insulin pumps and glucose sensors from subjects 
with T1D during open-loop  therapy  while  exercising  to further define changes  in glucose level  
while performing home activities and formal exercise.
HYPOTHESIS
We hypothesize that  an exercise detection algorithm that utilizes accelerometer and heart rate  
data along with  patient parameters, such as age, sex, weight, height, sitting and resting heart rate,  
can accurately and  reliably estimate  energy expenditure. We also hypothesize that certain home 
exercises may  be of sufficient  intensity to trigger  a fall in glucose  levels,  which would require 
dose adjustment during closed-loop treatment of  T1D  in order to  prevent hypoglycemia.
ENDPOINTS:
Primary Endpoints: The primary endpoints are accelerometer and heart rate  data from both 
healthy subjects  and subjects with T1D and  healthy  subjects during  home activities and a  
structured exercise period.
Secondary Endpoints: Secondary endpoints include glucose data from  Dexcom  continuous 
glucose monitoring (CGM) systems and  insulin  pumps  attached  to subjects with T1D  during  
home activities and formal  exercise.
STUDY TYPE:  Pilot  study for data  collection.
STUDY POPULATION
The study population will include healthy  adults and  adults  with T1D who  have  been using an 
insulin pump for  at least  6 months, ages 21 – 45 years of age.  Older  subjects are  excluded due to  
higher risk of unrecognized coronary artery  disease.  Younger subjects are excluded  as it is 
appropriate to assess safety first in the adult  population and the current AP system has not  been 
tested in  the younger population. Use of an  insulin pump is required so as to obtain  accurate 
insulin dosing information on subjects with T1D.
Type 1  Diabetic Subject  Criteria
Inclusion criteria:
Subjects meeting all  of the following criteria  will be considered for enrollment  into the study:
a.Male or female subjects 21 to 45 years of age with a  diagnosis  of T1D for at least 6 
months on an insulin pump.
b.Physically active on a regular basis, i.e.  at least 3 days of scheduled physical activity per 
week and willing  to perform approximately 60 minutes of exercise (as determined by the 
investigator after  reviewing the  subjects activity level).
Protocol 2015.03  Version Date: 07/7/16
3c.Willingness to follow  all study  procedures.
d.Willingness to sign informed  consent  and HIPAA documents.
Exclusion criteria:
Subjects presenting with any of the following will not  be considered for  enrollment in the study:
a.Pregnancy  or Lactation:
i. For women of  childbearing potential,  there is a requirement for a  negative urine 
pregnancy test.
b.Any cardiovascular disease,  defined as a  clinically significant  EKG abnormality at the 
time of  screening or any history of: stroke, heart failure, myocardial infarction,  angina 
pectoris, or  coronary arterial bypass graft or angioplasty. Diagnosis of 2nd or 3rd degree  
heart block or any  non-physiological arrhythmia  judged by the investigator to  be 
exclusionary.
c.Renal  insufficiency (GFR <  60 ml/min, using the MDRD  equation as report by the 
OHSU laboratory).
d.Hematocrit  of less than or equal  to 34%.
e.History of severe  hypoglycemia during the  past 12  months  prior  to screening visit or 
hypoglycemia unawareness as judged  by the investigator. 
f.Adrenal insufficiency.
g.Any active infection.
h.Known or suspected abuse of alcohol,  narcotics, or illicit  drugs (except marijuana  use). 
i.Seizure disorder.
j.Active foot ulceration.
k.Severe peripheral arterial  disease  characterized  by ischemic rest pain or severe 
claudication.
l.Major surgical operation  within 30 days prior  to screening.
m.Use of an investigational drug within 30 days prior to screening.
n.Chronic usage of  any immunosuppressive medication (such as cyclosporine, 
azathioprine, sirolimus, or tacrolimus).
o.Bleeding disorder,  treatment with warfarin, or  platelet count below 50,000.
p.Current administration of oral or parenteral corticosteroids.
q.Any life threatening  disease, including malignant  neoplasms  and medical  history of 
malignant neoplasms  within  the past 5 years prior  to screening (except basal and 
squamous cell skin cancer). 
r.Any concurrent illness, other  than diabetes, that is not  controlled by a  stable therapeutic 
regimen.
s.Beta blockers or non-dihydropyridine  calcium  channel blockers.
t.A positive response to any of the questions from the Physical Activity Readiness Questionnaire, see  Appendix A.
u.Any chest discomfort with physical activity, including pain or pressure, or other  types  of 
discomfort. 
v.Any clinically  significant disease or disorder  which in  the opinion of the Investigator may 
jeopardize the subject’s safety  or compliance  with the protocol.
Healthy Subject Criteria
Inclusion Criteria:
Protocol 2015.03  Version Date: 07/7/16
4a.Male or female subjects 21 to 45 years of age.
b.Physically active on a regular basis, i.e.  at least 3 days of scheduled physical activity per 
week and willing  to perform approximately 60 minutes of exercise (as determined by the 
investigator after  reviewing the  subjects activity level).
c.Willingness to follow  all study  procedures.
d.Willingness to sign informed  consent  and HIPAA documents.
Exclusion criteria:
a.Pregnancy  or Lactation:
a.For women of  childbearing potential, there is a requirement for a negative urine 
pregnancy test.
b.Any history or evidence  of renal  insufficiency,  adrenal insufficiency, liver disease or 
anemia. 
c.A history of cerebrovascular disease  or coronary artery disease  (or angina) regardless  of 
the time since occurrence.
d.Congestive heart  failure, New York Heart Association (NYHA) any  class.
e.Diagnosis of 1st, 2nd or 3rd degree  heart  block  or any arrhythmia judged by the 
investigator to be  exclusionary.
f.Any condition which,  in the opinion of the investigator, makes it difficult to engage in 
vigorous physical  activity. 
g.Any active infection.
h.Severe peripheral arterial  disease  characterized  by ischemic rest pain or severe 
claudication.
i.Active alcohol abuse, substance abuse, or severe  mental illness (as judged by the 
principal investigator).
j.Active malignancy, except basal cell or squamous cell skin cancers.
k.Major surgical operation  within 30 days prior  to screening.
l.Seizure disorder.
m.Bleeding disorder,  or treatment with warfarin.
n.Use of an investigational drug within 30 days prior to screening.
o.A positive response to any of the questions from the Physical Activity Readiness Questionnaire.
p.Any chest discomfort with physical activity, including pain, pressure or other  types  of 
discomfort.
q.Any reason the principal investigator deems exclusionary.
STUDY RECRUITMENT
Subjects will be  recruited from OHSU clinics, from flyers to be posted in approved places at 
OHSU, or from the  OHSU Subject Recruitment website. Records from OHSU Harold  Schnitzer  
Diabetes Clinic  patients may be  screened to find potential TID subjects.  Subjects will also  be 
recruited from a list of subjects who participated in past OHSU studies,  past studies  involving 
Drs. Castle or El Youssef,  from the OHSU diabetes research registry and www.clinicaltrials.gov. 
Up to 60 subjects may  be screened in this study with up to 40 subjects enrolled into the study at  
OHSU, split 60-80% healthy subjects  and 20-40% subjects with T1D.
Protocol 2015.03  Version Date: 07/7/16
5Non-English speaking T1D subjects will not be recruited since this  protocol will require use of a  
device and mobile software (Dexcom G4, Dexcom Share or Dexcom G5  Mobile) that  does not  
have non-English versions available  yet for  users.
Withdrawal Criteria
The subject  may withdraw at will at any time or at  the discretion of the Investigator.
A subject  must  be withdrawn if the following applies:
1.Hypoglycemia, in T1D subjects, during the treatment period  posing a  safety problem as 
judged by the  investigator.
2.Hyperglycemia, in T1D subjects, during the treatment period  posing  a safety problem as 
judged by the  investigator.
3.Protocol deviation having influence on efficacy or safety data as judged by the Investigator.
4.Substantial and  repeated non-compliance  with trial procedures.
5.Pregnancy.
6.Intention of becoming pregnant.
OVERALL STUDY  DESIGN
The aim of  the study is  to determine if accelerometer, heart rate,  and VO 2 data can be utilized to 
enhance our  exercise detection algorithm for  use in our  closed-loop system.  The VO 2 mask  may  
be worn by subjects  during a single exercise  visit  to determine the  actual  energy  expenditure of 
each activity using metabolic equivalents (METs).  Each subject may wear one  or more 
monitoring devices  which will be transmitting heart rate and  accelerometer  data  to a master  
controller, such as a  Nexus  5 smart  phone.  The master controller may be running an algorithm  to 
detect and grade exercise, and will be  collecting  data  for offline  analysis and algorithm tuning. 
This device will  not be connected to a  glucose  sensor, a pump  delivering insulin or a pump 
delivering glucagon for the purpose of managing  blood sugar in  subjects  with T1D.
STUDY DETAILS
Visit 1: Screening
Screening will  take place at OHSU’s Harold Schnitzer Diabetes Health Center clinic Prior to any 
procedures, the  consent/authorization form  will be reviewed and signed,  with  a copy of the 
consent/authorization form given to the subject.  The original will be kept for the source 
document. This visit  will take  approximately  1.5 hours for healthy subjects.
In all  subjects, study personnel will review medical  history and medications, and fill  out the 
Physical Activity  Readiness Questionnaire  (Appendix A); height, weight, pulse, blood pressure,  
and a resting EKG will be obtained;  a study investigator will perform a physical  examination, 
excluding breast and  pelvic exams; and females of child-bearing potential will take a  urine  
pregnancy test, which must be negative to participate. A study investigator  will assess 
inclusion/exclusion criteria and review the subject’s  medical record for clarification as needed.  
Subjects may  be asked to be fitted  with a portable VO 2 mask and  will wear the mask for 
approximately 1 hour to obtain accurate baseline  data. Subjects will be asked to  abstain from  
food, caffeine and alcohol for approximately  3-4 hours prior to screening to ensure accurate VO 2 
baseline data. A three  digit subject ID number  will be assigned to each subject. The TID subjects 
Protocol 2015.03  Version Date: 07/7/16
6and the healthy subjects will be randomized  separately to ensure  that there are equal numbers 
within each arm of the study, as follows:
 
1)Aerobic exercise at  OCTRI followed  by activities of daily living and resistance exercise  
at the POC lab,  or
2)Activities  of daily  living  and resistance exercise at the POC lab followed by aerobic 
exercise at OCTRI
This randomization is  intended to help address  if glucose changes  in subjects with  T1D are 
affected by either the  order of structured exercise  and activities of daily  living  (ADLs) or aerobic 
vs. resistance  exercises.
T1D Subject Screening Specifics : This screening  will take approximately 2 hours. At the 
beginning of  screening, after consent has been  signed, subjects with T1D will be  asked to test 
their blood  sugar using their own meter  and strips. Venous blood  samples will be taken for 
complete blood  count, and complete metabolic panel  (including creatinine, liver panel,  and 
electrolytes) labs. If subjects have  had the aforementioned  labs performed within the 3 months  
prior to the intended date of Visit  2 and  we can access  the results, venous blood  samples will not 
be taken. These  subjects  will be fitted with a Dexcom G4,Share, or Dexcom G5  Mobile glucose 
sensor and short device training  will be performed  at the screening. The subjects that require 
blood tests will be asked to return for an  approximately 15-30 minutes  sensor  training and 
insertion visit if their lab  results determine that they  pass screening. 
Visit 2: Exercise Study  
For all  subjects,  the exercise visit will occur within  12 weeks of  screening. For T1D subjects, the 
exercise visit will occur no less than 24 hours and no more than  5 days from  the time of  sensor  
insertion. 
Subjects with T1D will always  be asked to check their capillary blood  glucose (CBG) before  
driving to the  clinic and to bring a snack  in the car in case hypoglycemia  does occur (in  which 
case, subjects must  park and treat the hypoglycemia).
This visit will  take approximately  4 hours and take place  at the OCTRI Clinical research unit as 
well as the  Biomedical Engineering Point of Care  (BME  POC) Lab. A study technician and 
Protocol 2015.03  Version Date: 07/7/16
7investigator will always be present  in the room throughout the study for safety purposes. On  the 
day of the study, subjects  will be instructed  to have  breakfast at 6 am. 
Subjects will be  instructed to arrive at OCTRI or BME  POC  lab around  8 am depending on their 
randomization group. Subjects  with T1D will measure their capillary  blood  glucose (CBG)  with  
their own glucose meter at  the beginning of the visit. Subjects with T1D will continue their 
normal basal  insulin  delivery using their own pump and will be allowed to adjust insulin delivery 
during the structured exercise  period as they normally would at home. All  subjects will be  fitted 
with a device to record  accelerometer and heart rate  data, and may be  fitted with the portable 
VO 2 mask.
During the aerobic exercise  period  and resistance exercise period, there will be defined  rules for 
stopping, including:
1)If the subject feels unwell,
2)If a subject with T1D develops hypoglycemic  symptoms, such as excessive sweating, 
shaking/tremors, palpitations, feelings of dread or panic,  light-headedness,  nausea, 
difficulty concentrating or the like,
3)If the subject develops chest  pain/pressure,
4)If the subject develops undue  shortness of breath,
5)If the maximum  heart  rate (defined as 220 – the  subject’s age) is reached or exceeded,
6)For patient preference.
The study technician  and physician will accompany the subject up and  down the tram between 
the two portions of  the visit (from  OCTRI to CHH or CHH to  OCTRI).
Aerobic Exercise: During the aerobic exercise  event,  all subjects will perform exercise on a 
treadmill or  cycle ergometer in three 15 minute periods each with  at least 10 minutes  of rest 
between each exercise period. Exercise intensity will vary between periods  to achieve different 
energy expenditures,  which may be determined  based  on VO2 measurements.  Subjects with T1D 
will do a CBG prior to exercise and will not start exercising if glucose is <70 mg/dl; they will be given 15-20 grams  of carbohydrates  for CBG  values  of <70 mg/dL  and CBG retested  in 15 
minutes. A code cart  is on site at OCTRI and  a code team is available by page at  all times. After  
completion of the exercise, T1D subjects  will complete another CBG sample and  have it 
reviewed by an  investigator. These subjects will be provided with  a snack after testing  if 
necessary to avoid  post-testing hypoglycemia. 
ADL and Resistance Exercise: T1D subjects will complete a CBG prior to  starting  this exercise  
period if ADL and resistance  exercise  is their first exercise of Visit  2. If the T1D subject has just 
come from aerobic exercise, they will not need  to complete  a CBG  prior  to starting  this period. 
Activities simulating  normal household activities will be completed in  the Point of Care Lab.  
These activities may  include:
1)sitting on a chair or  lying on a bed,
2)washing dishes or  folding laundry,
3)sweeping the  floor or vacuuming,
4)organizing a room or adjusting furniture in a room,
Protocol 2015.03  Version Date: 07/7/16
85)scrubbing  the carpet or the walls and/or
6)going up and down  flights  of stairs.
Each activity will be  performed between 5-15 minutes. After  the ADL are complete,  subjects 
will perform  resistance exercises such  as straight-leg raises or wall sits for approximately 20 
minutes. All items necessary  for performing  these  activities are  provided in the POC lab, and 
subject safety throughout all activities  will be ensured by coordinator observation. A  CBG  will 
be completed at the  end of this exercise portion if the  subject has already  completed  aerobic  
exercise. If the subject  has yet to complete  the aerobic portion of the visit, they will not  take a 
CBG measurement at  this time  and will instead complete one just prior to starting  aerobic 
exercise.
After the study is completed, the subject  will have all  devices removed.   Subjects with  T1D will 
have a CBG sample taken and reviewed  by an investigator. If necessary, oral carbohydrates will 
be given for values below  70 mg/dl, and  an insulin bolus will be given if deemed appropriate by 
the study investigator for values above  250 mg/dl. Study staff  will download the data from the 
subject’s personal insulin  pump.
Visit 3: Study  Follow-up
The study follow-up visit  will be conducted  by phone call  to the subject at the phone number 
obtained during screening, to determine the general post-discharge status of the subject.   The  
subject will be contacted 48 hours (+/- 24 hours) after the exercise portion of the study takes place.
CONFIDENTIALITY AND  PROTECTION OF HUMAN SUBJECTS
Risks and Benefits:
Risks: The risks of the protocol  procedures are considered  minor.  It should be noted that  a fully 
trained physician will be in constant  attendance  on the research  ward. The likelihood of 
significant harm is  quite low. Risks of exercise  include falls, sprains, bruises, very low risk of 
bone fractures and head trauma.
In subjects with T1D, there is a small risk of sensor  fracture, and in  such a case, a piece of the  
sensor could be  left in the tissue after sensor  removal. For  this reason, the study investigator will 
inspect each removed  sensor  for the possibility of breakage or fracture. Any  evidence of sensor 
breakage will  be recorded and reported to FDA and the sensor company.
Benefits: The subject may  not directly  benefit from being in this study;  however, their  
participation may help to  advance automated insulin and glucagon delivery technology.
Monitoring Entity:
This investigation  will be monitored by the principal  investigator Joseph El Youssef, MD.  Dr.  El 
Youssef has  no commercial interest in any  of the companies which  manufacture any of the 
devices used  in this  study. 
Data Collection :
Protocol 2015.03  Version Date: 07/7/16
9Subject privacy will be protected by using a  three  digit identifying number to code  study 
documents. Study staff will record  data  required by the protocol onto  the Case Report Forms 
(CRF). Case report forms (CRF) for  this study  will be entered  into REDCAP, a clinical research 
electronic data repository housed at Oregon  Health  Science University and administered by the 
Oregon Clinical  and Translation Research Institute (OCTRI).  Investigators and research 
coordinator will  verify that the  procedures are conducted according  to the approved protocol. All 
paper source  documents will be kept in a locked  cabinet for a minimum of  five years. Original,  
completed CRF’s will be  kept with the PI in a designated repository. All data from  CRF’s will 
subsequently be  entered into the authorized electronic REDCAP database
Recording of Data:
Investigators and staff  will record data  collected  during the clinical trial on the CRF’s. Case 
report forms  (CRF) for  this study  will be  entered  into REDCAP, a clinical research electronic 
data repository housed at  Oregon Health Science University and  administered  by the Oregon 
Clinical and Translation Research Institute (OCTRI). The REDCAP CRFs will include:
1.Screening  form
2.Exercise Study form
3.Phone Update Form
4.Adverse Event form
5.Serious Adverse Event form
6.Concomitant  Medications
The Principal Investigator  may authorize other personnel to  make entries  in the CRF.
Data Analysis:
All data will be  actively  streamed to the master controller on the Nexus 5 phone  and will be  
analyzed online  with a currently described exercise detection  algorithm  5. The  algorithm  results 
will be compared  to data from the  VO2 mask in order to  assess the sensitivity and  specificity  of 
the algorithm, and may also be used  to improve upon the parameters of the  algorithm.  
Additionally, glucose data from CGM devices will be  analyzed  for the rate of change of glucose 
(in mg/dl/min) during exercise events in order  to help quantify this for different activities. Model  
analysis with a  published non-linear model  of glucose regulation  6 will help  track  glucose  
changes with respect to insulin delivered and activity  level.
Monitoring Procedures:
This protocol  is written  in accordance with the principles established by the  18th  World Medical  
Assembly General Assembly (Helsinki,  1964) and amendments and  clarifications adopted by the 
29th (Tokyo, 1975),  35th (Venice, 1983), 41st (Hong Kong,  1989), 48th (Somerset West, South 
Africa, 1996), 52nd (Edinburgh, 2000), 53rd (Washington, 2002), 55th  (Tokyo, 2004), and 59th  
(Seoul, 2008)  General  Assemblies.   The investigator  will ensure that the study described in this  
protocol is  conducted in full conformance with those principles, the protocol, current FDA  
regulations, ICH Good Clinical Practices (GCP)  guidelines, Good  Laboratory Practices (GLP) 
guidelines, local ethical  and regulatory requirements, including the Federal Food, Drug and 
Cosmetic Act, U.S. applicable Code of Federal Regulations  (title 21), any IEC  requirements 
relative to clinical studies. 
Protocol 2015.03  Version Date: 07/7/16
10Should a conflict arise, the investigator  will follow whichever law or guideline affords the 
greater protection to the  individual subject. The investigator will also ensure thorough familiarity  
with the appropriate  use and potential risks  of use of all study devices as described in this  
protocol, prior to the initiation of the study.
Unanticipated problems  will be detected  by reviewing  descriptions  of known or foreseeable  
adverse events and risks in the IRB-approved research protocol and the current IRB approved consent form,  any underlying disease  or conditions of the subject experiencing the adverse  event, 
a careful assessment of whether the adverse event is related or possibly related to  the subject’s 
participation in  the study. Triggers for reporting  unanticipated problems are  seizure, 
hospitalization, death or any other  occurrence considered serious by the PI.
Any adverse event and/or  unanticipated problem (UP)  will be reported to  the investigator 
monitor immediately  by one of the investigators.  One  of the investigators will always be  on-site 
during the studies  and will write up a description of the adverse event/unanticipated problem.  
Deaths and potentially life-threatening events will be  reported to the IRB within seven calendar 
days after the  PI learns of the event. All other UPs must be reported to the IRB within fifteen 
calendar days.  The  report will be submitted to the IRB by the principal investigator or study 
coordinator. All  summary of all UP's and adverse  events will be submitted with the continuing 
review. 
Confidentiality Procedures :
To protect  confidentiality, standard  institutional practices will be followed as described in  the 
OHSU Information  Security and Research  Data Resource Guide 
(http://ozone.ohsu.edu/cc/sec/isg/res_sec.pdf) to maintain the confidentiality and security  of data 
collected in this study.  Study staff will be trained  with regard to  these procedures. Upon 
enrollment, subjects will be assigned with a  three-digit code that will be used instead  of their 
name, medical record  number or other personally identifying information.  The key associating 
the code and the  subject’s  personal identifying information will be restricted to  the PI  and study 
staff. The key will be  kept  secure on a restricted OHSU  network  drive  in a limited access  folder.   
Electronic files  for data analysis will contain  only the subject code.  Access to data/specimens is 
restricted to study personnel and requires OHSU  ID/password authentication. Paper files will be 
stored in locked  filing  cabinets  in restricted  access offices at OHSU.  Electronic  data  is stored on 
restricted drives on the OHSU network  or stored on encrypted computers as well as on the web-
accessible REDCap database housed on an OHSU secure server. User  passwords  will be  changed  
every 3  months and a firewall will be enabled at all times.  After  the study,  source documents 
will be maintained at the  participating clinical  center  (or offsite record storage facilities) 2 years 
after a marketing application is approved  for our group's artificial pancreas/decision  support 
device since  the data from this study will be included  in future software revisions or  
discontinuance of pursuit of marketing approval.   At the end of the study, an  electronic  copy  of 
the database  will be provided  on a CD for  long-term storage under lock.
Protocol 2015.03  Version Date: 07/7/16
11APPENDIX A

Protocol 2015.03  Version Date: 07/7/16
12REFERENCES 
1. Castle JR, Engle JM, El Youssef J, et al.  Novel use of glucagon in  a closed-loop system  for 
prevention of  hypoglycemia  in type  1 diabetes . Diabetes Care. 2010;33(6):1282-1287. doi: 
10.2337/dc09-2254; 10.2337/dc09-2254. 
2. Jacobs PG, El Youssef  J, Castle J, et  al. Automated control of an adaptive  bihormonal,  dual-
sensor artificial  pancreas and evaluation during inpatient studies. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng. 
2014;61(10):2569-2581. doi: 10.1109/TBME.2014.2323248 [doi]. 
3. Jacobs PG, El Youssef  J, Castle JR, et al.  Development of a  fully automated  closed loop  
artificial pancreas control  system with dual  pump  delivery  of insulin and  glucagon. Conf Proc 
IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc . 2011;2011:397-400. doi: 10.1109/IEMBS.2011.6090127; 
10.1109/IEMBS.2011.6090127. 
4. Jacobs PG, Resalat N, El Youssef J, et al. Incorporating an Exercise Detection,  Grading, and 
Hormone Dosing Algorithm  Into the  Artificial  Pancreas Using  Accelerometry  and Heart Rate. J 
Diabetes Sci  Technol. 2015;9(6):1175-1184.  doi: 10.1177/1932296815609371 [doi]. 
5. Zakeri I, Adolph AL, Puyau MR, Vohra FA, Butte NF. Application of cross-sectional time 
series modeling for the prediction of energy expenditure  from heart rate and  accelerometry. J 
Appl Physiol  (1985) . 2008;104(6):1665-1673. doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.01163.2007 [doi]. 
6. Hovorka R, Canonico  V, Chassin LJ, et al. Nonlinear model predictive control  of glucose  
concentration in subjects with type 1 diabetes. Physiol  Meas . 2004;25(4):905-920. 
Protocol 2015.03  Version Date: 07/7/16
13