 
  Page 1 of 12 
  
  
SedL ine EEG-Guided Depth of Anesthesia: Effect of Anesthetic Dosage  
    
 
 
 
Dr. Timothy Webb 
Asst. Prof., Dept. of Anesthesiology,  
Indiana University School of Medicine  
Fesler  Hall Room 204 
Indianapolis, Indiana 46202  
 
 
 
Dr. John Wolfe  
Asst. Prof., Dept. of Anesthesiology,  
Indiana University School of Medicine  
Fesler Hall Room 204  
Indianapolis, Indiana 46202  
 
V1.1- 28.2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  Page 2 of 12 
 Table of Contents:  
 
Study Schema  
1.0 Background  & Rationale  
2.0 Objective(s)  
2.1 Primary Objective  
2.2 Secondary Objective  
2.3 Tertiary/Exploratory/Correlative Objectives  
3.0 Outcome Measures  
3.1 Primary Outcome Measures  
3.2 Secondary Outcome Measures  
3.3 Tertiary/ Exploratory/ Correlative Outcome Measures  
4.0 Eligibility Criteria  
4.1 Inclusion Criteria  
4.2 Exclusion Criteria  
5.0 Study Design  
6.0 Enrollment/Randomization  
7.0 Study Procedures  
8.0 Study Calendar  
9.0 Reportable Events  
10.0 Data Safety Monitoring  
11.0 Study Withdrawal/Discontinuation  
12.0 Statistical Considerations  
13.0 Data Management  
14.0 Privacy/Confidentiality Issues  
15.0 Follow -up and Record Retention  
16.0 References  
17.0 Appendix  
 
  
 
  Page 3 of 12 
 1.0 Background  & Rationale  
 
 
Electroencephalogy (EEG) was first described in 1875 in dogs and apes.1 The 
technology was shortly after applied to humans and within 10 years the changes to the EEG tracing was studied when certain sedatives drugs were administered.
1   
Over the last several decades EEG based monitors have been developed with the 
hopes of aid ing anesthesiologists at evaluating the “depth” of a patient’s 
anesthetic while under general anesthesia.  Currently, typical anesthesia practice is to measure and adjust depth of a general anesthetic based on the medications 
administered and hemodynamic parameters of the patient, potentially exposing 
high risk patients to un- needed excessive depths of anesthesia  which can 
potentially result in adverse post- operative outcomes .
2,3  
 
The use of intraoperative EEG monitoring to guide the depth of an anesthetic  
seems to have the potential to reduce the total dose of anesthetic required.  Use of the EEG based monitor called the Bispectral Index Monitor (BIS Monitor) in an 
older study was shown to reduce sedative use and total cost in ICU patients who 
were receivi ng intravenous infusions of sedatives and neuromuscular blockers.
4  
And recently, the BIS monitor was used in a large randomized control study in 
order to investigate whether providing an anesthetic guided by an EEG based 
monitoring device in individuals a t high risk for postoperative delirium would 
significantly reduce postoperative delirium.  While the primary results reported a negative results , the study did have other interesting findings –  most notably a 
significant reduction in the dosage of volatile  anesthetic (the primary anesthetic 
agent used in general anesthetic procedures).  Furthermore, the study showed using a protocolized adjustment in anesthetic depth using an EEG based 
monitoring system for guidance in human subjects resulted in no signific ant 
change in adverse outcomes in a large trial of patients in this population
5 
 
The Masimo Sedline Brain Function Monitor (SedLine), is an EEG based 
monitoring device that is approved by the Food and Drug Administration for 
monitoring of brain function under anesthesia.  This new generation device 
provides processed EEG information (as the BIS monitor does) as well as raw EEG 
waveforms and a Density Spectral Array (DSA) display –  providing information of 
the power of the EEG signal over a spectrum of frequencies.  This additional 
 
  Page 4 of 12 
 information allows the anesthesiologist to evaluate the depth and 
appropriateness of the anesthetic in detail.6  
 We hypothesize that the use of a Sed line processed EEG monitor (using a 
protocolized adjustment in anesthetic depth u sing this EEG monitoring device) 
will allow anesthesiologists to reduce the doses of anesthetic drugs during general anesthesia in patients 65 or older  (resulting in less exposure of anesthetic 
medications to a high -risk patient population as well as a potential reduction in 
cost).   In addition, an added benefit of safely reducing the amount of volatile 
anesthetic used in everyday anesthesia practice may prove to also be helpful to 
environment and cut down o n their contribution to ozone layer depletion.
7   
 We plan to investigate this hypothesis in a study in which we will randomize 
patients to either anesthetic drug doses guided by Sed line processed EEG 
characteristics or standard anesthesia care.  We plan to evaluate the hypothesis 
that SedLine monitori ng reduces anesthetic drug doses.   
 Of note, we have recently completed a pilot study with  a similar study design and 
have confirmed we have the capabilities and resources to conduct this study.  
  
2.0 Objective(s)  
2.1 Primary Objective  
The primary objective of this study will be to determine whether an 
anesthetic guided by the Sedl ine EEG based monitor will reduce the total 
dosage of anesthetic under general anesthetics  in this population (patients 
65 or older ).   
 
 
3.0 Outcome Measures /Endpoints  
3.1 Primary Outcome Measures  
The primary outcome measured will be the total average percent of volatile anesthetic (sevoflurane) utilized while subjects are under anesthesia  
(maintenance phase).  The time considered “maintenance phase” under general anesthesia will be measured starting 5 minutes after the induction 
agents are administered and measurements will stop following 
 
  Page 5 of 12 
 administration of neuromuscular blocker reversal drugs.  Data will be 
collected from computerized anesthetic records.   
 
 
3.2 Secondary Outcome Measures  
The secondary outcomes measured will be the total dosage of hypnotic 
agents administered while in the maintenance phase of anesthesia.  These 
agents include : midazolam, lorazepam, diazepam, fentanyl, sufentanil, 
ketamine, propofol, morphine, and hydromorphone. Additional secondary 
outcomes measured will include episodes of hypotension (this will be 
defined as an episode of mean arterial pressure of <6 5 mmHg), total 
dosage  of vasopressors (such as phenylephrine, ephedrine, vasopressin, or 
norepinephrine), and the occurrence of  EEG isoelctricity, or burst 
suppression .  Sed Line images will be recorded for both groups  in order to 
compare rates and duration of burst suppression events.   Of note, if the 
patient has a functioning arterial line in place, we will use measurements from this in preference to a non- invasive blood pressure cuff). 
 
4.0 Eligibility  Criteria  
4.1 Inclusion Criteria  
• Patients undergoing a scheduled surgery (laparotomy, 
hepatobiliary surgery , gynecologic surgery, and/or urologic surgery 
procedures) at Indiana University Health University Hospital  that is 
expected to have at least a 3 day post -operative hospital stay . 
• ASA class 1, 2, 3, or 4.  
• Age 65 years or older.  
• Male or Female  
• Surgical procedure requiring g eneral anesthesia.  
 
4.2 Exclusion Criteria  
• Any previous diagnosis of dementia  or other cognitive 
impairment . 
• Any patient undergoing emergency surgery. 
• Any patient undergoing surgery who is currently an inpatient.  
• Patient refusal to participate in study.  
 
  Page 6 of 12 
 • Any patient undergoing surgery that  would prevent placement of 
the Sedline monitor leads (for example –  surgery on the patient’s 
forehead/scalp). 
• Any physical, ment al, or medical conditions which,  in the opinion 
of the investigators, m ay confound the ability to assess the patient for 
delirium in the post -operative period.  
 
 
5.0 Study Design  
 
- Prior to study commencement, select anesthesiologists from the Indiana 
University Health University Hospital Anesthesia Group will be trained on 
usage and interpretation of the Sedline.   Training for this group of providers 
will include a PowerPoint presentation recording presented by Dr. Wolfe to 
aid in interpretation of the Sedline data.  Representatives from the study 
will also be available as needed to answer questions as they arise.   They will 
also be given certain guidelines for anesthetic administration based on the 
processed EEG findings.  These will include the following:   
o Usage of sevoflurane as the primary anesthetic agent  
o Reducing sevoflurane dosage if the EEG indicates signs of burst 
suppression (excessive anesthetic depth), if the PSI on the Sedline reads less than 25, or if  hypotension is occurring and the anesthesia 
provider believes that depth of anesthesia may be a contributing  
factor.  
o Increasing sevoflurane  dosage  if the EEG pattern is not consistent 
with general anesthesia  (not enough depth of anesthetic).    
- We anticipate 5 -10 anesthesiologists being included in this group.  Given 
that this group of anesthesiologists will be assigned to both groups (study 
and control), the size of the groups, and the instructions regarding the 
maintenance phase of anesthesia, diazepam, and dexmedetomidine  we 
anticipate the difference in practice patterns between providers will not 
affect the data.  We will discourage the use of nitrous oxide as well as IV 
anesthetics including midazolam.    In the control group, the 
anesthesiologist will be asked to provide the anesthetic as he or she would 
under normal care with the exception of avoidance of nitrous oxide and IV 
anesthetics during the maintenance phase of anesthesia.   We anticipate 
 
  Page 7 of 12 
 that the surgical procedures included in this study will be similar enough 
that the type of surgical procedure will not affect anesthetic dosing. 
 
We will identify subjects who meet inclusion/exclusion criteria on the day 
of surgery.   Following explanation of the study and completion of informed 
consent, the patient will be randomized into 1 of 2 groups –  study group or 
control group.   We  plan to use block r andomization to keep the groups 
relatively balanced throughout enrollment . The patient will  then be taken 
to the operating room in normal fashion.  Prior to the induction of 
anesthesia, the Sedline monitor will be placed on the patient’s head to 
ensure the  monitor is working properly.  For those in the study group, the 
monitor will be in full view of the anesthesiologist administering the 
anesthetic.  For those in the control group, an apparatus will be placed over 
the monitor will not be in view of the ane sthesiologist. The monitor will still 
be processing and recording EEGs for both groups . The patient will then be 
placed under anesthesia and surgery will commence.  While  under 
anesthesia, images of the display screen of the Sedline will be collected for 
later evaluation.  Once the surgery is complete, the patient will have the 
monitor removed and image capture of the display will be stopped prior to exiting the operating room.  
 
Following finalization of the anesthetic record by the staff anesthesiologist, the primary and secondary outcomes will be collected by investigators.  The 
images of the Sedline EEG monitor will also be reviewed by investigators to ensure  that appropriate depth of anesthetic was utilized throughout the 
maintenance phase of anesthesia in the study group.   Blinding of the study 
investigators will not be possible due to the manner in which images of the 
Sedline readings are collected  (it will  be readily apparent on the images 
whether the SedLine data was readily available or concealed from the 
anesthesia team) .  
 
 
 
 
  Page 8 of 12 
 Prior to  
Enrollment  
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
    
 
     
  
6.0 Enrollment/Randomization  
The surgical schedule will be assessed daily to identify patients scheduled for 
surgery who may be eligible to participate in this study .  A member of the 
research team, either principal investigator, co -investigator, or study coordinator 
will approach the potential subject the day of their scheduled procedure.  They will conduct the visit in a private area such as a patient’s  room, secluded hospital 
room, or an area free from the general public.  All study procedures will be reviewed, questions answered,  and the subject will be given ample time to 
discuss and determine if they will sign the consent to participate in the study.   
 We plan to e nroll  110 subjects in this study .  Patients will be randomized to either 
the control or the study group.  
 
 
7.0 Study Procedures  
As noted above, following enrollment on the day of surgery, the Sedline device 
will be placed on the patient just prior to the induction of anesthesia.  A nesthesia Data Analysis, Statistical Analysis  Total N: 110  Obtain informed consent. Screen potential participants by inclusion 
and exclusion criteria.  Obtain history.  Document.  
Study Group  
N = 55  Control Group  
N = 55  Randomize  
1:1 
Sedline placement in the operating room  
 
Data Collection from Anesthesia Records  
 
Review of Sedline Readings  
 
 
  Page 9 of 12 
 will then be induced,  and surgery will proceed as usual.  Images will be captured 
of the dis play of the Sedline moni tor while  under anesthesia during the surgical 
procedure using a recording device.  The study group will have the Sedline 
readings visible to the anesthesiologist in the room and will use the Sedline to 
guide anesthe tic depth.  The control group will have the monitor out of view and 
not visible to the anesthesiologist, but the images of the Sedline monitor will be 
recorded.     
 
Once the procedure is complete, the Sedline monitor will be removed from the 
patient and the collectio n of images will be stopped prior to the patient exiting 
the operating room.  
Following the finalization of the anesthetic records, the desired data will be 
collected from the anesthetic record .  The images of the Sedline readings will also 
be reviewed by investigators to confirm an appropriate depth of anesthetic was 
achieved in the study group.  
 8.0 Study Calendar  
We will begin to enroll patients once we receive approval for study 
commencement from the IRB  and following selection/training of the 
anesthesiolog y study team.  We plan to enroll 110 patients total.  Following data 
collection of the last patient the study will be closed.  
 
9.0 Reportable Events  
Patients will be monitored by the primary team during the postoperative period, 
and any adverse events or unanticipated problem will be reported to the 
anesthesia service and research team. All unanticipated problems will be reported 
to the IRB committee using the prompt reporting form. 
 
10.0 Data Safety Monitoring  
In order to protect the privacy of our patients, any data which has identifiable patient data attached to it will be stored in the RED cap system.  Of note, the 
images obtained from the Sedline monitor display will not contain ANY identifiable patient data (these images will be stored on a research computer).  
  
 
 
  Page 10 of 12 
 11.0 Study Withdrawal/Discontinuation  
The patient can withdraw from the study at any time by contacting the research 
team or the anesthesia service.  
 
 
12.0 Statistical Considerations  
 
Primary outcome: total average percent of volatile anesthetic (sevoflurane) 
utilized while subjects are under anesthesia . 
 
Secondary outcomes: total dosage of hypnotic and opioid agents administered 
while in the maintenance phase of anesthesia.  These agents include midazolam, 
lorazepam, diazepam, fentanyl, sufentanil, ketamine, propofol, morphine,  and 
hydromorphone during the maintenance phase of anesthesia. Additional 
secondary outcomes measured will include episodes of hypotension, episodes of 
burst suppression,  and total dosa ge of vasopressors and hypnotic agents . 
 
Statistical analysis will be performed using a standard statistical program (SAS or 
Stata). All data will be summarized (either means and standard deviations or 
medians and quartiles for continuous variables; freque ncies and percentages for 
categorical variables) by treatment group. Demographic data will be compared between the two groups using t -test or Wilcoxon rank sum test as appropriate for 
continuous variables, and chi -square tests or Fisher's exact test for ca tegorical 
variables as appropriate. The primary outcome, total average percent of volatile 
anesthetic (sevoflurane) utilized along  with secondary outcomes of total dosage 
of hypnotic agents administered, will be compared between the two groups using t-test or Wilcoxon rank sum test as appropriate. To account for the possible 
effects of covariates age, sex, and BMI and anesthesiologist,  a mixed model with a 
random effect for anesthesiologists will be employed.  Here we could treat surgery 
type and duration as  fixed effects if needed. The secondary outcome of episodes 
of hypotension which will be compared using chi -square tests or Fisher's exact 
test for the occurrence of hypotension. Distributions of the continuous variables 
will be examined, and a transformat ion of the data (e.g. natural logarithm) or 
nonparametric tests will be used as necessary. A 5% significance level will be used 
for all comparisons. 
 
 
  Page 11 of 12 
 From a similar study using an outcome (minimum alveolar concentration or MAC) 
comparable to ours we were able to estimate a coefficient of variation for total 
average percent of volatile anesthetic to be 0.15.4  Working with a feasible sample 
size of 44 per group and using a power of 90%, 5% significance level, and 
employing a two -sided test, the study will be able to detect a reduction of 10% in 
for total average percent of volatile anesthetic between the two groups.  
Assuming a dropout rate of up to 20%, we will enroll up to 55 patients per group 
for this study. Here we used a “Tests for the Ratio of Two Means” using sample 
size software PASS 2019.  
 
 
13.0 Statistical Data Management  
 
 
Primary data will be collected via review of electronic medical records, anesthesia 
records, and screenshot images of the SedLine EEG monitor and will be stored 
electronically in REDCap.   The storage location will be backed up 
automatically.   Quality assur ance steps will include, built -in range checks and 
testing of the database by the study team prior to moving to production 
mode.   The following quality control methods will be used:   1) single data entry 
with random checks of accuracy; and 2) extraction and cleaning of data that will 
be used for analysis every  6 months . 
 
14.0 Privacy/Confidentiality Issues  
Any private data or potentially identifiable patient data will be stored in the 
REDcap system.   
 
 
15.0 Follow -up and Record Retention  
The study will start upon approval of the IRB  and following selection/training of 
the anesthesiology study team  and the study will stop following completion of 
data collection from the 110th subject.  We anticipate that this should not take 
longer than 24 months. 
 
  
 
 
  Page 12 of 12 
 16.0 References  
1. Hajat Z, Ahmad N, Andrzejowski J.  The role and limitations of EEG -based 
depth of anaesthesia monitoring in theatres and intensive care.  
Anaesthesia 2017; 72 (Suppl. 1):  38- 47. 
 
2. MacKenzie KK, Britt- Spells AM, Sands LP, Leung JM.  Processed 
Electroencepha logram Monitoring and Postoperative Delirium:  A Systemt 
Review and Meta -Analysis.   nesthesiology , 129(3), 417 –427.  
 
3. Purdon PL, Sampson A, Pavone KJ, Brown EN.  Clinical 
Electroencephalography for Anesthesiologists.  Anesthesiology.  2015; 
123(4):  937- 960.  
 
 
4. Kaplan LJ, Bailey H.  Bispectral index (BIS) monitoring of ICU patients on 
continuous infusion of sedatives and paralytics reduces sedative drug 
utilization and cost.  
 
5. Wildes TS, Mickel  AM et al.  Effect of Electroencephalography -Guided 
Anesthetic Administration on Postoperative Delirium Among Older Adults 
Undergoing Major Surgery:  The ENGAES Randomized Clinical Trial.  JAMA.  2019 5;321(5):  473- 483.   
 
 
6. Masimo.  Sedline Sedation Monit or.  Operator’s Manual.      
 
7. Ishizawa Y.  General Anesthetic Gases and the Global Environment.  
Anesthesia & Analgesia.  2011;  112(1) 213 -217).  