 
June 2nd, 2022  
 
Clinicaltrials.gov  
 To Whom It May Concern,  
Please see attached, the following document:  
 
Official Title :  Protocol  
Study ID:   INN-005 
Dated:   21Jul2017 
 
NCT No.   [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
Thank you , 
 
 
Haydee Frost  
Clinical Research Associate  
InnFocus, Inc. a Santen Company  

                                                          Page  1 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
   
A Randomized Study Comparing t he Safety and Efficacy of the 
InnFocus MicroShunt® Glaucoma Drainage System  
to Standard Trabecule ctomy In Subjects 
with Primary Open Angle Glaucoma 
 
Protocol INN-005 
 
July 21, 2017 
 
Sponsor: InnFocus, Inc. 
12415 S.W. 136 Av enue, Unit #3 
Miami, FL 33186 
Tel: 305-378-2651 
Fax: 305-378-2652 
 
Medical Monitor: Paul F. Palmberg, M.D., Ph.D 
Bascom Palmer Eye Institute 
900 N.W., 17th Street 
Miami, FL 33136 
Tel: 305-781-2561 
Email: mitodoc @aol.com
Sponsor Contact:  Jeannie Cecka 
Regulatory Consultant to 
InnFocus, Inc. 
12415 S.W. 136 Av enue, Unit #3 
Tel: 510.685.6004 
Email: jmcecka@comcast.net 
 

                                                          Page  2 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
 InnFocus, Inc. 
 
Protocol I NN-005 
 
A Randomized Study Comparing t he Safety and Efficacy of the 
InnFocus MicroShunt® Glaucoma Drainage System  
to Standard Trabeculectomy In Subjects  
with Primary Open Angle Glaucoma 
 
 
Study Synopsis 
 
Study Objective:   The study objective is to assess the safety and e ffectiveness  of the InnFocus 
MicroShunt when used to lower intra ocular pressure (IOP) in sub jects with primary open angle 
glaucoma where the IOP is not c ontrolled when using maximum tol erated glaucoma 
medications.  Study Design:   This is a prospective, randomi zed, controlled, single-masked,  multicenter trial.  
Two study groups will be included in the study.  The treatment group consists of subjects who 
receive the InnFocus MicroS hunt with Mitomycin C (MMC).   The c ontrol group consists of 
subjects who receive trabeculectomy with MMC.     The study will consist of two phases.  In the initial phase (Ph ase I), 102 subjects (68 treatments 
and 34 controls, 2:1 randomization ratio) were randomized.  Aft er 75 initial-phase subjects 
(about 50 treatments and 25 controls ) completed the 3-month fol low-up examination, all data 
was submitted to the FDA to reque st approval for expansion (Pha se II) to the full study 
population of an additional 412 randomized subjects (appr oximately 309 treatments and 103 
controls, 3:1 randomization ratio ).  Subsequently an expansion of Phase II was granted for 
another 102 patients with the sam e randomization schedule (3:1)  for a total of 514 Phase II 
patients. Phase I patients will be  analyzed as a feasibility co hort separately from Phase II. 
   A total of 514 subjects will be randomized in Phase II at 3:1 ratio. with a d rop-out rate of 6% per 
year, approximately 480 randomized subjects in Phase  II (360 treatments and 120 contro ls) are 
expected to have the 12-month examination and 448 randomized subjects (336 treatments and 
112 controls) are exp ected to have the 24-month follow-up examination. 
 The randomization will be stratif ied by investigational site an d within-site by len s status with a 
target of at least 60 randomized ph akic eyes in the treatment g roup and 20 randomized phakic 
eyes in the control group at 24 months.   
 Study Parameters:   The study population will consist of subjects diagnosed with open angle 
glaucoma with IOPs that are not  controlled on maximum tolerated  glaucoma medications.    All 
subjects will have medicate d IOPs of ≥ 15 mmHg and ≤ 40 mmHg.   
                                                          Page  3 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
  
Subject Population:  For Phase II, each investigati onal site will be asked to enrol l at least 23 
subjects in the study.  Additionally, no study investigator wil l exceed 25% of the total number of 
randomized investigational device or control subjects. For stud y sites with more than one 
investigator, the total rando mization will not exceed 33% of th e total number of randomized 
investigational device or contro l subjects.  Each investigator should enroll at least 10 
investigational devi ce subjects and each site will be asked to enroll approximately 23 subjects.   
 
Effectiveness Outcomes:   
The primary effectiveness outco me is the proportion of eyes wit h ≥ 20% decrease in mean 
diurnal intraocular pressure from screening t o 12 months post-o perative examination.  
 The proportion of eyes with ≥ 20% decrease in mean diurnal intr aocular pressure from screening 
to 24 months follow-up will also be  compared between treatment group and control group. 
   The secondary effectiveness outco me is the mean diurnal IOP cha nge from screening to 12 
months follow-up. 
 The mean diurnal IOP change fro m screening to 24 months post-op erative examination will also 
be compared between the treat ment group and control group. 
  
Analyses of outcomes will consid er subjects that fall into a fa ilure category.  Failure is defined as 
a patient with one or mor e of the following: 
1. No light perception vision conf irmed on two consecutive visits 
2. IOP persistently belo w 6mmHg (defined as an intraocular pressur e below 6mm that is 
present on two consecutive follow- up visits after the three mon th visit)  
3. Requiring a reoperation in the  study eye in an operating room c onsisting of: 
a. Trabeculectomy 
b. Placement of a drainage device 
c. Bleb revision (other than needling) 
d. Explantation or re positioning of the InnFocus MicroShunt 
e. Iridectomy 
f. Resuturing of the  scleral flap  
4. Glaucoma laser procedure (e.g., t rabeculoplasty, iridotomy) 
5. Other glaucoma sur gery to reduce IOP 
6.   Missing 24-month diurnal IOP  due to discontinuation from t he study prior to the 24-month 
visit 
7.   Post-operative introduction o f an oral carbonic anhydrase inhibitor 
 
The procedures shown below will  be reported as complications bu t are not failures: 
1. Needling of the bleb with or w ithout the use of an injected antifibrotic 
2. Laser removal of blockage at t he tip of the InnFocus MicroSh unt or at the AC entry 
point for a trabeculectomy 
3. Use of a viscoelastic to limit aqueous flow  
 
                                                          Page  4 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
 The following procedures will not be considered as failures or complications but will be 
documented: 
1. Eye massage 2. Laser suture lysis in a trabeculectomy 
. Inclusion Criteria  
 
All criteria apply to the st udy eye unless otherwise noted: 
 1) Male or female patient, age  40 to 85 years, inclusive 
2) Early to severe primary open angl e glaucoma where the mean diur nal intraocular pressure is 
not controlled on maximum tolerate d medical therapy with intrao cular pressure ≥ 15 mm Hg 
and ≤ 40 mm Hg while on gl aucoma medications.   
Maximum tolerated medical t herapy is defined as:  
a. Three or more classes of topical  glaucoma medications (prostagl andin analog, beta–
adrenergic antagonist, carbonic a nhydrase inhibitor, alpha-adre nergic agonist, 
parasympathomimetic).  Combinat ion glaucoma medications that co nsist of two or more 
glaucoma drugs will have each gl aucoma drug component counted a s a separate drug.  
b. fewer than three classes presen tly in use if a subject’s intole rance to specific glaucoma 
medications and ineffective m edications are included. 
3) Primary open angle glauco ma diagnosis based on: 
a.   visual field mean devi ation of -3dB or worse and 
b.   glaucomatous optic nerve da mage as evidenced by any of the  following optic disc or 
retinal nerve fiber layer struct ural abnormalities documented o n slit lamp stereo 
biomicroscopy or in stereo disc photos: 
 Diffuse thinning, focal narro wing, or notching of the optic dis c rim, especially at 
the inferior or superior poles 
 Localized abnormalities of the pe ripapillary retinal nerve fibe r layer, especially at 
the inferior or superior poles 
 Optic disc neural rim asymmetry of the two eyes consistent with  loss of neural 
tissue 
 Disc rim or peripapillary retin al nerve fiber layer hemorrhages . 
4)     Prior ab interno conjunctiva l-sparing glaucoma procedure s were conducted more than 6 
months prior to enrollment (e .g., iStent, Trabectome, gonioscop y-assisted transluminal 
trabeculectomy [GATT]). 
5) Patient must have signed a nd dated the Informed Consent form . 
6) Patient is willing to attend f ollow-up visits for two years postoperatively. 
  
                                                          Page  5 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
 Exclusion Criteria 
All criteria apply to the st udy eye unless otherwise noted   
1) Patient unwilling or unable to give informed consent, unwilling  to accept randomization, or 
unable to return for schedule d protocol visits through 2 years.  
2) Patient < 40 years or >85 years of age. 
3) Patient is pregnant or nursing or  unable to use ap propriate bir th control. 
4) Vision level of no light perception. 
5) Active iris neovascularization, a ctive proliferative retinopath y or other ophthalmic disease 
that could confound study results. 
6) Iridocorneal endothelial syndrome. 
7) Epithelial or fibrous downgrowth. 
8) Secondary glaucoma such as post- trauma, pseudoexfoliation or pi gment dispersion. 
9) Chronic ocular inflammatory disease. 
10) Subject already enrolled in thi s or another study (only one eye  can participate in this study) 
or completed their participat ion in another study within 30 cal endar days of the screening 
exam. 
11)  Aphakia. 
12) Vitreous in the anterior chamber.  13) A history of corneal surgery  (including Lasik or PRK), corn eal opacities or 
disease/pathology if acc urate IOP measurem ent may be affected. (Active cornea l infection or 
Fuchs dystrophy are examples.)  
14) Severe anterior or pos terior blepharitis. 
15) Unwilling to discontinue contact lens use after surgery for the  duration of the study. 
16) Previous incisional ophthalmic s urgery involving the conjunctiv a.   
17) Prior clear corneal cataract, ang le or trabecular meshwork surg ery conducted within the past 
6 months (e.g., iStent, Trabectom e, gonioscopy-assisted translu minal trabeculotomy)  
18) Presence of an anterior chamber IOL (ACIOL). 
19) Prior laser peripheral iridotom y conducted withi n three months of enrollment. 
20) Need for glaucoma surgery c ombined with other ocular proced ures or anticipated need for 
additional ocular surgery duri ng the investigational period. 
21) Fellow eye with poorer than 20 /80 best-corrected visual acu ity (BCVA) or points in both 
hemifields within 5 degrees of fixation with sensitivity less t han <0 dB. 
22) Known allergy or other contraindication to mitomycin C (MMC ) drug. 
23) Angle closure glaucoma or narro w anatomical chamber angle a s identified by gonioscopy 
and classified as Sh affer Grade 0 or 1. 
24) Endothelial cell dens ity at screening for the central readi ng of the following values:                                
Phakic Pseudophakic
Age 40-45<  2200   cells/mm2 Age 40-45  < 1980  cells/mm2 
Age 46-55  < 2000   cells/mm2 Age 46-55  < 1800   cells/mm2 
Age 56-65  < 1800   cells/mm2 Age 56-65  < 1620   cells/mm2 
Age over 65  < 1600   cells/mm2 Age over 65  < 1440   cells/mm2 
 
                                                          Page  6 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
 25) Any condition that prevents the investigational device impl antation or trabeculectomy in the 
superior region of the study eye  (e.g., peripheral anterior syn echiae, scleral staphyloma or 
conjunctival scarring). 
26) Diagnosed degenerative visual di sorders not associated with  existing glaucoma condition 
(e.g., advanced dry or wet macular degeneration or  other retina l disorders, cen tral retinal 
artery or vein occlusion) or chor oidopathy (e.g., choroidal det achment, effusion, choroiditis, 
or neovascularization). 
27) Central corneal thickness th at is less than 450 microns or greater than 620 microns. 
28) Previous cyclodest ructive procedure  
29) Prior retinal laser proce dure conducted for any purpose oth er than treatment of  retinal tear or 
hole. 
30) Conditions associated with ele vated episcleral venous press ure such as active thyroid 
orbitopathy, cavernous sinus fis tula, Sturge-Weber syndrome, or bital tumors, orbital 
congestive disease. 
31) Clinically significant seque lae from trauma  (e.g., chemical  burns, blunt trauma, etc.) 
32) Ocular pathology or medical condition for which, in the inv estigator's judgment, the 
following factors would either pl ace the subject at increased r isk of complications or 
contraindicate device implantati on or interfere with compliance  to elements of the study 
protocol (e.g., ophthalmic exa minations, follow-up visits), 
a. inability to reliably complete visual field testing over the co urse of the study, 
b. uncontrolled systemic disease (e .g. diabetes, hypertension) tha t could compromise their 
participation in the study. 
c. Disorders that pose a fall risk, a s well as comp romise ability to take a visual field exam 
and take glaucoma medications  (e.g., Parkinson's disease), 
d.   inability to discontinue use of blood thinners.  e.   immunodeficiency concerns. f.   known corticosteroid responders  whose pressure increases w ould not allow them to 
withstand the postop cor ticosteroid regimen. 
33) Intraocular silicone oil. 34) Ocular steroid use in the pl anned study eye or systemic ste roid use anytim e within three 
months of the procedure. (This w ould not include  the use of inh aled or dermatologic 
steroids.) 
35) Completion of chemotherapy w ithin six months of the screeni ng visit. 
36) Use of oral hypotens ive glaucoma medications for treatment of fellow eye. 
37) A requirement of general anesthesia for the procedure.
 
38) ALT/SLT within 90 days of enrollment.  
 
  
                                                          Page  7 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
                                   Study Visits and Parameters f or Study Eyes 
 
 
1 Diurnal  IOP 
 Examination Schedule: 
1. Screening Evaluation   6.  3 Months      
2. Operative Procedure    7.  6 Months    
3. 1   Day     8.  12 Months    
4. 1   Week     9.   18 Months  
5. 4 Weeks     10. 24 Months 
      
Activities 
Screening  
Op Follow-up Evaluation 
  1 D 1W 4W 3 M 6 M 12M 18M 24M
Informed Consen t X    
Randomization  X   
Ocular Medical Histor y X  X   
Ocular Medication Assessmen t X  X X X X XX X  X  X
Histor y/Demo graphics X   
Manifest Refraction X X X X X X X
BCVA (Snellen) or Pinhole VA  X X   
BCVA (ETDRS) X X X X X X X
Visual Fiel d X  X XX   X
Slit Lamp Exam X X X X X X X X X
Lens Status for Phakic E yes X X X X X X
IOP X1 XXX X X X1 X  X1
Pach ymetry X  X   X
Endothelial Cell Densit y X  X X X   X
Gonioscop y X       
Dilated Fundus Exa m X    
   Vertical C/D Ratio X X X XX   X
   Optic Disc Photo  X X X X X  X
Diplopia  X  XX X   X
Motilit y X   XX X   X
Pregnanc y Test (as applicable) X   
Surgical Procedure  X   
Observations Recorde d X  X X X X X X X  X  X
Adverse Event Assessmen t  X X X X X X X X X
Ocular QOL Questionnaire  X X X X X X X X
General Health Questionnaire X X X X X X X
                                                          Page  8 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
 The fellow eye will be managed according to the items listed an d data will be gathered on 
the case report forms.  
              Activities Conducted on Fellow Eye During Clinical  Study Activities 
Screening 
 Follow-up Evaluation 
  1 D 1W 4W 3 M 6 M 12M 18M 24M
Ophthalmolo gy Exam X   
Ocular Medical Histor y X   
Ocular Medication 
Assessmen t X X X X X X X X X 
Histor y/Demo graphics X  
Visual Fiel d X  X   X
Dilated Fundus Exa m X  XX   X
   Vertical C/D Ratio X XX   X
   Optic Disc Photo X XX   X
Slit Lamp Exam X XX  X  X
Manifest Refraction X X X X X X X
Visual Acuity (Snellen or 
Pinhole)  X  X        
BCVA (ETDRS) X X X X X X X
IOP X X X X X X X X X
Pach ymetry X  X   X
Endothelial Cell Densit y X  X X   X
Motility X      X  X 
Observations Recorde d X X X X X X X X X
Adverse Event Assessmen t  X X XXX X  X  X
                                                          Page  9 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
  
 ScreeningSubject signs
Informed Consent and is 
enrolled in study
End of Study FormSubject does not
meet screening criteria
Out of Study
Subject Meets Screening 
Criteria
Subject is Randomized on 
Day of Surgery 
Surgery
Follow up 1d, 7d, 4W
Follow up 3, 6, 18 mo
Follow up 12, 24 moSubject Terminates
Study Early
Unscheduled 
Visit Form
Adverse 
Event 
FormUADE 
FormIf UADE 
or SAEAdditional
Follow up
If Adverse
Event
Reoperation 
FormIf Re-op
                                                          Page  10 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
 LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 
AE Adverse Event 
ALT 
BCVA CFR Argon Laser Trabeculoplasty 
Best Corrected Visual Acuity Code of Federal Regulations 
CRF Case Report Form 
DSMB Data Safety Monitoring Board 
FE 
GCP Fellow Eye 
Good Clinical Practice 
HIPAA Health Insurance Portability  and Accountability Act of 1996 
HVF 
ICF Humphrey Visual Field 
Informed Consent Form 
ICH International Conference on Harmonisation 
IEC Independent Ethics Committee 
IOP 
IRB Intraocular Pressure 
Institutional Review Board 
LASIK 
MMC 
MR 
NRS OD OS OU 
PI 
POAG SE Laser in situ keratomileusis 
Mitomycin 
Manifest Refraction 
Numeric Rating Scale Oculus Dextrus (Right Eye) Oculus Sinister (Left Eye) Oculus Uterque (Both Eyes) 
Principal Investigator 
Primary Open Angle Glaucoma Study Eye 
SLE 
SLT TA UADE 
VA 
VF YAG Slit-lamp Examination 
Selective Laser Trabeculoplasty Tonometry by applanation Unanticipated adverse device effect 
Visual Acuity 
Visual Field Yttrium-aluminum-g arnet laser used i n posterior capsule 
opacity; also refe rred to as a neodymium (Nd): YAG laser 
 
                                                          Page  11 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
  
                                     InnFocus Study INN-005 
                               Table of Contents                         Page 
                            
1.0    Study Objective         1 2  
2.0    Study Design         1 2  
3.0    Rationale for the Study        1 2  
4.0    Potential Risks and Benefits       1 4  
5.0    Device Description        1 6  
6.0    Primary Effectiv eness Outcome       1 7  
7.0    Secondary Effectiveness Outcome      1 8  
8.0    Safety Outcome                                                                                                    18 
9.  0  Protocol Parameters        1 8  
 9.1  Study Centers                                      18 
 9.2   Study Population Characteristics                                                          18 
 9.3   Study Entry Procedures                                                                       22 
  9.3.1  Informed Consent       2 2  
 9.3.2  Screening Evaluation      2 3  
 9.3.3  Surgery and Subject Randomization    2 4  
 9.3.4  Evaluation Methods                   25  9.4   Study Procedures                                                                                    31 
 9.4.1  Training        3 1  
 9.4.2  Material and Equipment      3 1  
 9.4.3  InnFocus MicroShunt Surgical Procedure    3 1  
 9.4.4  Trabeculectomy with MMC  Surgical Procedure   33 
 9.4.5  Post Operative Instructions                          3 5  
 9.5   Follow-up                                                                                              39 
 9.6   Withdrawal Criteria                                                                              41 
 9.7   Lost to Follow-up Subjects                                                                         41 
 9.8   Device Return                                                                                       41 
 9.9   Protocol Modifications and Deviations                                                41 
10.0  Data Handling and Recordkeeping                 42 
11.0  Assessment of Safety                                                                                            44 
12.0  Monitoring Plan                    47 
13.0  Statistical Plan                              48 
14.0  Medical Monitor                                                                                                   48 
15.0  Data Safety Monitoring Board                                                                             48 
16.0  Compliance with Protocol                   48 
17.0  References                                                                                                            49  
18.0  Supplementary Infor mation – Definitions     5 0            
Attachment 1- Background on POAG , Management, and Rationale for  the Study   
Attachment 2 - Prior Pre-cli nical and Clinical Testing                                                 
                                                          Page  12 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
       
1.0 Study Objective  
The study objective is to assess the safety and effectiveness o f the InnFocus MicroShunt 
when used to lower intraocular p ressure (IOP) in subjects with primary open angle 
glaucoma where the IOP is not c ontrolled when using maximum tol erated glaucoma 
medications.  
2.0 Study Design 
This is a prospective, randomize d, controlled, sin gle-masked, m ulticenter trial.  Two study 
groups will be included in the study.  The treatment group cons ists of subjects who receive 
the InnFocus MicroShunt with M itomycin C (MMC).   The control g roup consists of 
subjects who receive trabeculectomy with MMC.     The study will consist of two phases.  In the initial phase (Ph ase I), 102 subjects (68 
treatments and 34 controls, 2:1 ra ndomization ratio) were rando mized.  After 75 initial-
phase subjects (about 50 treatme nts and 25 controls ) completed the 3-month follow-up 
examination, all data was submi tted to FDA to request approval for expansion (Phase II) to 
the full study populatio n of an additional 412 randomized subjects (about 309 treatments 
and 103 controls, 3:1 randomizati on ratio).  Subsequently an ex pansion of Phase II was 
granted for another 102 patients with the same randomization sc hedule (3:1) for a total of 
514 Phase II patients. Phase I patients will be analyzed as a f easibility cohort separately 
from Phase II.   A total of 514 subjects will be randomized in Phase II at 3:1 ratio with a dr op-out rate of 
6% per year, about 480 randomized subjects (360 tre atments and 120 controls) are 
expected to have the 12-month examination and 448 randomized subjects (336 treatments 
and 112 controls) are expected to have the 24-month follow-up examination.. 
 If a 40% screening failure is c onsidered, at least 170 subjects  should be enrolled for Phase I 
and 687 subjects should be enrolle d for Phase II.  Therefore, t otal of at least 857 subjects 
will be enrolled for this st udy in order to have at least 514 s ubjects be randomized and at 
least 416 randomized subjects reach the 24-month visit. 
 The randomization will be stratif ied by investigational site an d within-site by lens type, 
with a target of at least 60 r andomized phakic eyes in the trea tment group and 20 
randomized phakic eyes in the c ontrol group at 24 months.  Each  investigator is requested 
to conduct at least 10 InnFocus Mi croShunt procedures and each site will be requested to 
enroll approximately 23 subjects. 
 
  
3.0 Rationale for the Study   
 Trabeculectomy with MMC is one of the established treatment met hods and for many years 
has been the gold standard treatme nt for individuals with glauc oma who are uncontrolled 
                                                          Page  13 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
 on maximum tolerated glaucoma medications, and is generally con sidered the first 
incisional surgery choice.  The l atest poll of U.S. glaucoma sp ecialists done in 2008 9 
indicates that 84% of primary tra beculectomies use MMC and 90% of combined 
phacoemulsification/tr abeculectomy procedures use MMC.  The eff ectiveness and safety 
have been documented in numerous s tudies.  Data from a recent p ilot studies are indicative 
that safety and effectiveness comp arable to or better than trab eculectomy with MMC can 
be obtained with the use of  the InnFocus MicroShunt.   
 This prospective, randomized, controlled, open-label, multi-cen ter trial directly comparing 
trabeculectomy with MMC to the I nnFocus MicroShunt has been des igned to establish the 
comparable safety and effectiven ess of the InnFocus MicroShunt and trabeculectomy with 
MMC.  Trabeculectomy with and wit hout MMC has been used previou sly as the literature 
control to prove comparability t o another glaucoma drainage dev ice that was granted FDA 
premarket approval (P MA), i.e., the Aquaflow
TM Collagen Glaucoma Drainage Device by 
Staar Surgical.  By using a randomiz ed active control in the In nFocus MicroShunt study, a 
better comparison tha n literature controls can be made because there will be clearly defined 
and comparable subject populations  in the two arm s of the study . 
 The MMC concentration of 0.2mg /mL and 2 minutes of exposure wer e selected based on 
the recent NDA approval of the  Mobius Therapeutics Mitosol
TM Mitomycin C kit for use as 
an adjuvant to glaucoma filteri ng surgery.  This is the only ap proved source of MMC for 
this purpose.  Prior pilot studi es conducted on the InnFocus Mi croShunt used 0.4mg/mL 
and 3 minutes of application and th ere were no safety issues re lated to the concentration or 
application time of the MMC.  Review of the  literature shows th e MMC has been used over 
a wide range of MMC concentratio ns and application times from 0 .1-0.5mg/mL and 1-5 
minutes application ti mes.  Results of the  various studies have  shown no clear advantage of 
0.4mg/mL versus 0.2mg/mL; therefor e, it is appropriate for this  study to utilize the only 
approved source of MMC for the s pecific purpose of providing an  adjuvant to glaucoma 
filtering surgery.  The allowance of at least 6 mont hs from the time of IOL placeme nt for the pseudophakic 
subjects in the study was to assu re that most of the healing fr om the surgery had occurred 
and there would be no residual in flammation or rapid endothelia l cell configuration 
changes.   Investigational site s for the clinical s tudy have been selected  to assure that an appropriate 
balance of gender, minority, a nd age are obtained during the st udy.  Many of the sites are in 
metropolitan settings, which ass ist greatly in providing this b alance.  Also, the sites are 
distributed across the countr y to minimize any geographic diffe rences.  The inclusion and 
exclusion criteria of the study w ill inherently result in the m ajority of subject s in the 60-80 
years of age range where the m ost subjects on max imum tolerated  glaucoma medications 
would be expected to be.  Base d on not allowing any subject les s than 40 years of age in 
the study, there is no t expected to be a significant effect on enrollment of women in the 
study because of the one exclusion “subject is pregnant or nurs ing or unable to use 
appropriate birth control”.  
                                                          Page  14 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
 4.0  Potential Risks and Benefits 
 
InnFocus has reviewed the potenti al risks and benefits associat ed with the InnFocus 
MicroShunt Glaucoma Drainage Sys tem.  The risks have been evalu ated and design and 
procedure recommendations impleme nted to mitigate these risks w here applicable. 
 The following potential risks  have been identified: 
a. The cornea or iris could be dama ged during the implantation pro cedure or post 
implantation.  Based on prior c linical data, no cornea or iris damage has been observed 
although occasionally the device ha s made direct contact with t he iris.  Additionally, 
surgeons are instructed on the  proper inserti on method.  This p otential contact risk 
with the iris or cornea is simi lar to presently commercialized aqueous shunts (Ahmed, 
Baerveldt, Molteno) as they requi re placement of the proximal e nd of the tube in the 
same location as the InnFocus MicroShunt. 
b. The device may not be inserted comp letely into the anterior cha mber.  If this occurs, 
the device may be relocated to a different access tract or anot her device may be 
implanted.  In either case, this would result in an overall lon ger procedure.  There has 
only been one case with the presen t device in which a second in sertion location 
adjacent to the original location was required with the same de vice with a 
corresponding longer procedure tim e.  No other complications we re observed. 
c. Tube obstruction is a risk with t he InnFocus MicroShunt surgery . The device could 
clog if it remains in c ontact with the iris with resultant low flow and increased IOP.  
Although contact with the iris ha s been observed with the prese nt device, flow has 
been maintained.  If the tip does become clogged, the physician  can use a standard 
laser to remove the i ris material from th e tip of the device.  Also, fibrin that develops 
during surgery can occlude the  device.  There has been one tran sient tube obstruction 
from fibrin in a combined InnFocus  MicroShunt implantation and cataract surgery in 
an ongoing study that was resolve d with a flush of the AC end o f the tube during the 
initial surgery.  This risk of cl ogging is also present with th e proximal end of 
commercial aqueous shunts, whic h can contact the iris, or corne a and lasers are 
routinely used to clear deb ris from the proximal end. 
d. The bleb that is typically cre ated by the aqueous flow into the  Tenon/subconjunctival 
pocket may develop excessive s carring (bleb encapsulation or al so called “Tenon’s 
cyst”) which can res ult in lower aqueous  flow through the bleb and increased IOP.  
The implantation procedure has be en refined to pr ovide for a la
rge pocket that is 
resistant to fibrosis and scar ring.  One bleb encapsulation was  observed in prior 
InnFocus MicroShunt studies and w as successfully needled.  A si milar risk of scarring 
is observed with trabeculectomy. 
e. Choroidal effusion may occur a nd lead to an observable choroida l detachment.  This 
has been observed in 2 prior InnF ocus MicroShunt cases during c ombined surgery 
with cataract removal and resol ved with the use of cycloplegics .  There was no 
incidence of suprachoroidal he morrhage in studies to date but t his should be 
considered a risk of this surger y, as it is with trabeculectomy . 
f. Flat or shallow chambers may occu r as the result of low pressur e in the anterior 
chamber.  Two cases of shallow ch ambers were observed in studie s to date and 
resolved spontaneously with no obs ervable damage to the cornea or iris. 
                                                          Page  15 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
 g. Wound leaks may occur shortly after  surgery and may be related to the suturing of the 
conjunctiva to the limbus.  One short-term wound leak was obser ved but resolved 
spontaneously within the first  three weeks after surgery.  No l ong-term wound leaks 
have been observed in existi ng studies of this device. 
h. No blebitis has been observed in clinical studies to date but i s a risk whenever a bleb is 
developed as a result of the surgery. 
i. No endophthalmitis has been observed but it is a ris k of this type of surgery, esp ecially 
in the event that blebitis develops.  
j. Hyphema  has been observed in several cas es but not at a level of 10% or  more of the 
anterior chamber and typically r esolves within one week of surg ery. 
k. Aqueous misdirection is a potenti al risk of filtering surgery b ut has not been observed 
in existing studies  of the device.  
l. Decompression retinopathy has  not been observed but remains a r isk with this type of 
surgery. 
m. Persistent hypotony is defined as a n intraocular pressure below  6mmHg that is present 
on two consecutive follow-ups aft er three months.  This can lea d to hypotony 
maculopathy. No persistent hypot ony or hypotony maculopathy hav e been observed in 
studies to date. 
n. Corneal decompensation from MMC exposure could occur if MMC rea ched the 
corneal endothelium as has been r eported in an an imal model in the literature and is 
another risk. Avoiding contact of MMC with the cornea endotheli um by rinsing MMC 
out of the subconjunctival pocket  prior to entry of the needle into the AC should assure 
no entry of MMC and therefore no effect on the endothelium.  Co rneal 
decompensation has not been obser ved in InnFocus MicroShunt cli nical studies to 
date. 
o. A thin-walled avascular bleb ma y be associated with low IOP.  T his has not been 
observed in the prior InnFocus MicroShunt studies. 
p. Tube erosion over time resulti ng in a break in the conjunctival  barrier and potential 
infection is a risk in the InnF ocus MicroShunt arm of the study .  There have been no 
tube erosions in the ongoing studi es of the InnFocus MicroShunt . 
q. Chronic or recurrent iritis is a risk associated with filtering  surgery.  No chronic or 
recurrent iritis has been obser ved in the ongoing InnFocus Micr oShunt clinical studies. 
r. Migration of device ou t of anterior chamber.  There have been n o clinical cases of 
InnFocus MicroShunt migration out o f the anterior chamber, but there has been one 
case where the surgeon inadvertently moved the InnFocus MicroSh unt out of the 
anterior chamber during conjuncti val closure at time of the ori ginal procedure. 
 
The following potential benefits  have been ident ified (please n ote we do not necessarily 
intend to seek specific claims f or all these potential benefits ): 
a. The surgical procedure does not r equire extensive cutting into the sclera, as does the 
trabeculectomy in the creati on of a sclera flap and in punching  an internal ostium, and 
where if the cut is too deep, the re is a risk of hemorrhage and  loss of the eye.  In this 
regard, the InnFocus Mic roShunt is less invasive. 
b. The aqueous outflow through the Inn Focus MicroShunt is controll ed by the diameter 
and length of the InnFocus Mic roShunt tube and does not rely on  subjective tensioning 
of sutures as does trabeculectomy. 
                                                          Page  16 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
 c. If the implanted device is effect ive and reduces intraocular pr essure, the subject may 
reduce or eliminate glaucoma med ication therapy .  Reduction of glaucoma medication 
is desirable as more than half of the patients on glaucoma medi cations do not comply 
with their regimens and vision l oss continues.  If the implante d device is effective and 
reduces intraocular pressure, the  subject may not require addit ional glaucoma surgery 
and further vision loss may be avoided. 
d. Based on the minimally invasive p rocedure and the characteristi cs of the device, there 
may be fewer complications.  His torical clinical data suggests that the short term 
control of IOP with the InnFocus MicroShunt may be better than trabeculectomy with 
MMC with less inflammation and bleb scarring and less hypotony and associated 
concerns. 
 
5.0  Device Description 
 
This study evaluates the InnFocus MicroShunt Glaucoma Drainage System, which includes 
the InnFocus MicroShunt device  and associated components.  Ther e is only one device 
model in the clinical study.  The InnFocus MicroShunt can be st ored at room temperature.  
Brief descriptions of each are presented below: 
 
5.1 InnFocus MicroShunt device 
The lumen of the device as shown below is approximately 70 micr ons in diameter with an 
outer diameter of 350 microns and a length of approximately 8.5 mm.  It is designed to 
allow aqueous flow from the ante rior chamber to a bleb (blister -like formation below the 
conjunctiva/Tenons).    
InnFocus MicroShunt 
(All dimensions in mm) 
                                              
 
It is packaged in a thermoform tray that is enclosed in a seale d Tyvek pouch. 
 5.2   Double Step Incision Knife 
This disposable stainless steel knife has a 1.0mm wide cutting edge and a separate 0.5mm 
wide cutting edge at the distal  end of the knife.  This double cutting edge allows a track to 

                                                          Page  17 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
 be completed through the sclera in to the anterior chamber while  simultaneously creating a 
1mm wide scleral pocket for the fin to be located.  5.3   3mm Scleral Marker 
This disposable component is mad e from stainless steel.  The ge ntian violet from the 
marker pen is transferred to the  tips of the marker during surg ery.  The marker is lined up 
with the limbus and a point on the sclera 3mm from the limbus i s marked with the marker.  
The marker is packaged in the I nnFocus MicroShunt thermoform tr ay and enclosed in a 
sealed Tyvek pouch. 
 
5.4   Marker Pen 
The disposable marker pen contai ns gentian violet to be used wi th the 3mm marker to 
identify the point of entry for  the knife.  It is provided in a  separate sealed and sterilized 
package in the InnFocus MicroShunt System Box.  5.5 23 Gauge Thin Wall Cannula 
This stainless steel cannula can be attached to a syringe fille d with balanced sterile saline 
(BSS) and placed over the distal end of the InnFocus MicroShunt  to flush saline through 
the lumen of the device and aid i n initiating flow of aqueous.  The cannula is supplied in a 
separate sterile package in t he InnFocus MicroShunt kit.   
 5.6  Outer Packaging   
The ethylene oxide sterilized I nnFocus MicroShunt and 3mm marke r are packaged in a unit 
box with the other purchased and s eparately packag ed sterilized  components for shipment 
to the clinical site. 
 
6.0  Primary Effectiveness Outcome 
 
The primary effectiveness outco me is the proportion of eyes wit h ≥ 20% decrease in mean 
diurnal intraocular pressure from screening to 12 months follow -up.  
 The proportion of eyes with ≥ 20% decrease in mean diurnal intr aocular pressure from screening 
to 24 months follow-up will also be  compared between treatment group and control group. 
 Analyses of outcomes will consid er subjects that fall into a fa ilure category.  Failure is defined as 
a patient with one or mor e of the following: 
1.  No light perception vision con firmed on two consecutive vis its 
2.  IOP persistently below 6mmHg ( defined as an intraocular pre ssure below 6mm that is 
present on two consecutive follow- up visits after the three mon th visit)  
3.  Requiring a reoperation in t he study eye in an operating ro om consisting of: 
a. Trabeculectomy 
b. Placement of a drainage device 
c. Bleb revision (other than needling) 
d. Explantation or re positioning of the InnFocus MicroShunt 
e. Iridectomy 
f. Resuturing of the  scleral flap  
                                                          Page  18 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
 4.  Glaucoma laser procedure (e .g., trabeculoplas ty, iridotomy)  
5.  Other glaucoma surgery to reduce IOP 6.  Missing 24-month diurnal IOP  due to discontinuation from th e study prior to the 24-month 
visit 
7.  Post-operative introduction of an oral carbonic anhydrase i nhibitor. 
 
The procedures shown below will  be reported as complications bu t are not failures: 
1. Needling of the bleb with or w ithout the use of an injected antifibrotic 
2. Laser removal of blockage at t he tip of the InnFocus MicroSh unt or at the AC entry 
point for a trabeculectomy 
3. Use of a viscoelastic to limit aqueous flow  
 
The following procedures will not be considered as failures or complications but will be 
documented: 
1. Eye massage 2. Laser suture lysis in a trabeculectomy  
7.0  Secondary Effectiveness Outcome 
 
The secondary effectiveness outco me is mean diurnal IOP change from screening to 12 months 
follow-up post-operative examination.   The mean diurnal IOP change fro m screening to 24 months post-op erative examination will also 
be compared between the treat ment group and control group. 
 
8.0  Safety Outcome 
 
Safety will be evaluated at one  year follow-up as a comparison of all adverse events between the 
investigational device and control groups and will also be comp ared at 2 years follow-up. 
     
9.0  Protocol Parameters 
 
9.1  Number of Study Centers A total of 30 centers will be r ecruited to participate in the s tudy to assure enrollment in a 
reasonable timeframe.  Thirteen cen ters are identified for the Phase I activities and will 
continue into Phase II as part  of the total of 30 centers.  A m aximum of 6 centers of the 
thirty are planned to be outsi de of the United States. 
 
9.2  Study Population Characteristics All of the following ophthalmic c riteria apply to the study eye  unless otherwise noted.  The 
study population will consist of  subjects diagnosed with open a ngle glaucoma. Subjects 
will be currently tak ing ocular hypotensive medications and hav e IOPs that are not 
controlled.  Pseudophakic particip ants must have at least 180 d ays between cataract surgery 
and study enrollment. All subjects  must have IOPs that are not controlled on maximum 
                                                          Page  19 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
 tolerated glaucoma medications.  The term “maximum tolerate d glaucoma medications” is 
defined for this study as three or more classes of topical glau coma medications 
(prostaglandin analog, beta bloc ker, carbonic anhydrase inhibit or, alpha agonist, miotic).   
If a subject is intolerant to specific glaucoma medications or the medications are 
ineffective, “maximum tolerate d glaucoma medications” may be fe wer than three classes 
presently in use. In cases where  one or more of the classes of glaucoma medications have 
been used unsuccessfully because of ineffectiveness or allergic  reaction or intolerable side 
effects, this will  be noted on the Screening form.  Combination  glaucoma medications that 
consist of two or more glaucoma drugs will have each glaucoma d rug component counted 
as a separate drug. 
 
The rationale for adopting these c riteria is derived from the o bserved outcomes in the 
Advanced Glaucoma Intervention Study (AGIS)1-3, the Early Manifest Glaucoma 
Treatment study (EMGT) 4-5 and the Collaborative Initia l Glaucoma Treatment Study 
(CIGTS)6-8.   These studies taken together have shown that most eyes with  primary open-
angle glaucoma will progress to  a clinically significant degree  without treatment, that 
visual field progression in glauco matous eyes is intraocular pr essure dependent, and that 
visual field loss can be stabili zed in a large majority of eyes  with optimal pressure 
reduction, which is best obtaine d with pressures in the low-nor mal range (11-13 mm Hg) 
for eyes with advanced damage , and no higher tha n the mid-norma l (14-17 mm Hg) range 
for eyes with mild-moderate dama ge. All subjects will have medi cated IOPs of > 15mmHg 
and < 40mmHg at time of screeni ng.  In addition, all subjects w ill be in compliance with 
the inclusion and exclusion criteria presented below. 
 9.2.1  Inclusion Criteria  (All cr iteria apply to the study eye ) 
9.2.1.1  Male or female patient, a ge 40 to 85 years, inclusive 
9.2.1.2 Patient has early to sever e primary open a ngle glaucoma  where the mean 
diurnal intraocular pressure is  not controlled on maximum toler ated 
medical therapy with the intraoc ular pressure ≥ 15 mm Hg and ≤ 40 
mm Hg while on glaucoma medications.   
 Maximum tolerated medical t herapy is defined as:  
9.2.1.2.1  Three or more classes of topi cal glaucoma medications 
(prostaglandin analog, beta–ad renergic antagonist, carbonic 
anhydrase inhibitor, alp ha-adrenergic agonist, 
parasympathomimetic).  Combin ation glaucoma medications 
that consist of two or more glaucoma drugs will have each glaucoma drug component counted as a separate drug.  
9.2.1.2.2 Fewer than three classes pr esently in use if a subjec t’s 
intolerance to specific glauco ma medications and ineffective 
medications are included. 
9.2.1.3 Primary open angle glauco ma diagnosis based on: 
9.2.1.3.1  visual field mean devi ation of -3dB or worse and 
9.2.1.3.2  glaucomatous optic nerve damage as evidenced by any of the 
following optic disc or retinal ne rve fiber laye r structural 
abnormalities documented on slit lamp stereo biomicrosopy or 
in stereo disc photos: 
                                                          Page  20 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
  Diffuse thinning, focal narro wing, or notching of the optic 
disc rim, especially at the inferior or superior poles 
 Diffuse or localized a bnormalities of the pe ripapillary retinal  
nerve fiber layer, especially at the inferior or s uperior poles  
 Optic disc neural rim asymmetry of the two eyes consistent 
with loss of neural tissue 
 Disc rim or peripapillary r etinal nerve fiber layer 
hemorrhages 
9.2.1.4   Prior ab interno conjunctiva l-sparing glaucoma proced ures were 
conducted more than 6 months prio r to enrollment (e.g., iStent,  
Trabectome, gonioscopy-assisted t ransluminal trabeculectomy [GA TT]). 
9.2.1.5   Patient must have signed a nd dated the Informed Conse nt form. 
9.2.1.6   Patient is willing to att end follow-up visits for two  years postoperative.  
 
9.2.2  Exclusion Criteria (All crit eria apply to the study eye unless otherwise noted) 
9.2.2.1  Patient unwilling or unable t o give informed consent, unwilling to accept 
randomization, or unable to return for scheduled protocol visit s through 2 
years. 
9.2.2.2  Patient < 40 yr or >85 years of age. 
 9.2.2.3  Patient is pregnant or nur sing or unable to use appro priate birth control.  
9.2.2.4  Vision level of no light perception. 
9.2.2.5  Active iris neovascularizatio n or active proliferative  retinopathy or other 
ophthalmic disease that c ould confound study results. 
9.2.2.6  Iridocorneal endothelial syndrome. 
 9.2.2.7  Epithelial or fibrous downgrowth.  9.2.2.8  Secondary glaucoma such as post-trauma, pseudoexfolia tion or pigment  
dispersion. 
 9.2.2.9  Chronic ocular inf lammatory disease. 
9.2.2.10 Subject already enrolled i n another study (only one ey e can participate) 
or completed their participat ion in another study within 30 cal endar 
days of the screening exam.  
9.2.2.11 Aphakia. 
 9.2.2.12 Vitreous in anterior chamber for which a vitrectomy i s anticipated. 
 9.2.2.13 A history of corneal surge ry (including Lasik or PRK) , corneal opacities 
or disease/pathology if accurate  IOP measurement may be affecte d. 
(Active corneal infec tion or Fuch’s dystrophy are examples.) 
 9.2.2.14 Severe anterior or  posterior blepharitis. 
 9.2.2.15 Unwilling to discontinue contact lens use after surge ry for the duration of 
the study. 
9.2.2.16 Previous incisional ophthal mic surgery involving the c onjunctiva  
9.2.2.17 Prior clear corneal cataract , angle or trabecular mesh work surgery 
conducted within the past 6 months  (e.g., iStent, Trabectome, 
gonioscopy-assisted translu minal trabeculotomy)  
9.2.2.18 Presence of an anterior chamber IOL (ACIOL). 9.2.2.19 Prior laser peripheral ir idotomy conducted within 3 mo nths of 
enrollment.  
                                                          Page  21 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
 9.2.2.20 Need for glaucoma surgery c ombined with other ocular p rocedures or 
anticipated need for additional ocular surgery during the inves tigational 
period. 
9.2.2.21 Fellow eye with poorer than 20/80 best-corrected visua l acuity (BCVA) 
or points in both hemifields with in 5 degrees of fixation with sensitivity 
<0 dB. 
9.2.2.22 Known allergy or other cont raindication to use of mito mycin C (MMC) 
drug. 
9.2.2.23 Angle closure or narrow an gle as identified by goniosc opy and classified 
as Shaffer Grade 0 or 1. 
9.2.2.24 Endothelial cell density for  the central reading at sc reening of the 
following values: 
Phakic Pseudophakic 
Age 40-45<  2200   cells/mm2 Age 40-45  < 1980  cells/mm2 
Age 46-55  < 2000   cells/mm2 Age 46-55  < 1800   cells/mm2 
Age 56-65  < 1800   cells/mm2 Age 56-65  < 1620   cells/mm2 
Age over 65  < 1600   cells/mm2 Age over 65  < 1440   cells/mm2 
 
9.2.2.25 Any condition that prevents t he investigational device  implantation or 
trabeculectomy in the superior region of the study eye (e.g., p eripheral 
anterior synechiae, scleral sta phyloma or conjunctival scarring ). 
9.2.2.26 Diagnosed degenerative visu al disorders not associated  with existing 
glaucoma condition (e.g., advan ced dry macular degeneration or other 
retinal disorders, central or br anch retinal artery or vein occ lusion) or 
choroidopathy (e.g., choroidal de tachment, effusion, choroiditi s, or 
neovascularization). 
9.2.2.27 Central corneal thickness that is less than 450 micron s or greater than 
620 microns. 
9.2.2.28 Previous cyclodestru ctive procedure  
9.2.2.29 Prior retinal laser proce dure conducted for any purpos e other than 
treatment of retinal tear or hole. 
9.2.2.30 Conditions associated with elevated episcleral venous pressure such as 
active thyroid orbitopathy, caver nous sinus fistula, Sturge-Web er 
syndrome, orbital tumors, or bital congestive disease. 
9.2.2.31 Clinically significant seque lae from trau ma (e.g., che mical burns, blunt 
trauma, etc.) 
9.2.2.32 Ocular pathology or medic al condition for which, in th e investigator's 
judgment, the following would be e ither at risk or contraindica te device 
implantation or comp liance to elements of  the study protocol (e .g., 
ophthalmic examinations, follow-up visits), a. inability to reliably complete visual field testing over the  course of 
the study, 
b. uncontrolled systemic disease (e.g. diabetes, hypertension) that could 
compromise their partic ipation in the study. 
                                                          Page  22 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
 c. Disorders that pose a fall ri sk, as well as compromise abili ty to take 
a visual field exam and take  glaucoma medications, (e.g., 
Parkinson's disease) 
d. inability to discontinue use of blood thinners  e. immunodeficiency concerns. f. known corticosteroid responders  whose pressure increases wou ld not 
allow them to withstand the pos top corticosteroid regimen. 
9.2.2.33 Intraocular silicone oil. 9.2.2.34 Ocular steroid use in the  planned study eye or systemi c steroid use 
anytime within three months of t he procedure. (This would not i nclude 
the use of inhaled or der matologic steroids.) 
9.2.2.35 Completion of chemotherapy w ithin six months of the sc reening visit. 
9.2.2.36 Use of oral hypotensive medi cations for treatment of f ellow eye.  
9.2.2.37 A requirement of general an esthesia for the procedure.  
9.2.2.38 ALT/SLT within 90 days of enrollment.  
9.3  Study Entry Procedures 
 
9.3.1  Informed Consent The InnFocus and IRB approved informed consent form (ICF) will be presented and 
explained to each prospective s ubject by the investigator or a trained clinical 
professional before study-speci fic tests have been performed.  The investigator or a 
trained clinical professional wil l explain the elements of the informed consent form, 
including the risks or discomfort s, the fact that he or she wil l be randomized and 
therefore may or ma y or may not receive a  device and he or she will not know their 
randomization treatment until the 2 year visit is completed.   
 Once the subject has been informe d of all aspects of the study,  the potential subject 
will be given the opportunity to ask questions, and allowed tim e to consider the 
information provided. The subject’s willingness and ability to meet follow-up 
requirements will be determine d. The subject will be given a ch oice to voluntarily 
confirm his or her pa rticipation in the study as documented by completion of the 
Informed Consent.  After signi ng and dating the Informed Consen t, the HIPAA 
(Health Insurance Portability a nd Accountability Act) authoriza tion, and other 
applicable local documentation (e.g., California Bill of Rights ), the subject can then 
proceed with the screening evalu ation.  The subject has the rig ht to withdraw from the 
study at any time without conseque nces, as indicated in the Inf ormed Consent 
document.  Subjects are enrolled upon signi ng the informed consent documen t even if they 
subsequently fail to meet the eligibility criteria. Subjects wi ll be added to the 
enrollment log, and assigned a subject number.   The principal investigator(s) mu st retain the original, signed and dated Informed 
Consent Form.  A copy of the si gned and dated Informed Consent Form must be 
given to the subject. Note: Subjects will remained masked throughout the two year 
                                                          Page  23 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
 follow-up period to the treatment they will received, this will  be explained to the 
subject prior to their signing t he informed consent document.  
 9.3.2  Screening Evaluation  After obtaining an understanding o f the purpose of this study, then reviewing and 
signing the informed consent fo rm, all potential subjects will undergo a series of 
standard clinical tests to deter mine their eligibility for the study.  
 Subjects who do not meet the screen ing exam eligibility criteri a will be exited from 
the study.  An ocular and non-ocular  medication or supplements (including vitamins) 
assessment will be perfo rmed at screening vi sit and collected o n CRF for the duration 
of the study. Subjects who are int olerant to maximum tolerated medications should 
have history glaucoma medications recorded on CRF.  The screening examination will cons ist of the activities includ ed in Table 1. The 
study eye and fellow eye of eac h subject will undergo the tests  as indicated in Table 
1.                      Table 1.  Activities Conducted During Scree ning Evaluation 
Activity Study eye 
Screening 
Evaluation Fellow Eye 
Screening 
Evaluation 
Informed Consent X X 
Demo graphics X X 
Ocular Medical Histor y X X  
Systemic Disease Histor y X X  
Ocular Medication Assessment X X 
Ophthalmolo gy Exam X X 
BCVA (ETDRS) X X 
Lens Evaluation (LOCS III) X  
Diurnal Medicated IOP X  
Medicated IOP (durin g first IOP for stud yeye) X 
Gonioscop y X  
Optic Nerve Head Ima ging X X  
Vertical C/D Ratio X X 
Pach ymetry  X X 
Diplopia Evaluatio n X  
Motilit y Evaluatio n X  
Visual Field (onl y if < 3 mo. is not available) X X 
Pregnancy Test (as applicable) X  
Endothelial Cell Density X X 
Ocular QOL Questionnaire X  
General Health Questionnaire X  
 
                                                          Page  24 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
  
If both eyes meet the applicable  inclusion and exclusion criter ia, the eye that has the 
greater visual field defe ct will be in the study. If the mean deviations are within 1dB of 
each other, then the eye with the w orse BCVA (or PAM result in phakic eyes in which 
the visual acuity is not 20/25 or better) will be selected. 
 
The other eye will be exclude d based on the first eye already b eing included in the 
study.   Note: If a subject does not m eet the eligibility c riteria, he/she may  be re-screened 
after 30 calendar days. Subject s hould be exited from the study  and pertinent clinical 
data to the screening exam will be recorded on the appropriate CRFs. If the subject is 
screened the second time, another subject identif ication number  will be assigned.  
 During the screening process, the surgeon will prospectively de cide at what 
postoperative interventional IOP he/she will want to reinitiate  glaucoma medication 
or physically intervene.  In thi s manner, the decision will be set before randomization, 
such that there will be no bias  on the group to which the subje ct is randomized. 
 
 Default interventional IOP: IOP  ˃ 21 mm Hg (or ˃ the preoperati ve medicated 
IOP if that was lower than 21mm Hg) is the default IOP for rein itiating 
glaucoma medication or physically intervening.  
 
 Alternate interventional IOP:  IOP chosen by the surgeon above w hich he/she 
will reinitiate glaucoma medication or physically intervene.  
 (If the alternate interventional IOP was chosen and the post-pr ocedure IOP exceeds 
the surgeon’s choice, the subjec t will be asked to come back fo r a second visit within 
1 week to confirm the IOP before r einitiating glaucoma medicati on or physically 
intervening. If the IOP also ex ceeds the default interventional  IOP, such that safety is 
a concern, a second visit is not  required before taking any act ion.)  
 9.3.3  Surgery and Subject Randomization 
On the day of the surgery, the s ubject is randomized to partici pate in the Treatment or 
Control groups using a pseudo-ra ndom number generator with subj ects enrolled 
according to a predetermined lis t.  Each investigational site w ill be provided 
envelopes with randomization assi gnments.  The Treatment group will receive the 
InnFocus MicroShunt with MMC.  The Control group will receive t rabeculectomy 
with MMC.  Note: The subject will not be informed of what procedure he/she will 
receive. Neither the investigat or nor the investigational staff  will reveal the treatment 
assignment to the study subject f or the duration of their parti cipation in the clinical 
study  9.3.4  Evaluation Methods The following background informa tion is provided to assist with  appropriate 
screening and follow-up for al l subjects in this study: 
 
                                                          Page  25 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
 a.  Measurement of intraocular pressure 
Each time IOP is measured, the  physician or technician is to ut ilize a Goldmann 
tonometer; however, the indivi dual operating the tonometer shou ld not view the dial 
during the measurement and anothe r individual who is masked to the treatment 
should read the measurement and th en record the measurement to minimize observer 
bias.  At each visit, IOP will be measured prior to gonioscopy or dilation of the pupil.  
 
Each time IOP is measured, two m easurements should be taken and  the mean 
recorded on the case report form  unless they differ by more tha n 2mmHg in which 
case a third measurem ent is taken and the  median value is recor ded.  All 
measurements must be recorde d within the source documents. 
 In order to determine the mean di urnal intraocular pressure (IO P) measurements at 
screening, 12 months and 24 months , values should be taken at 9 :00AM + 1.5 hours, 
12:00PM + 1 hour, and 4:00PM + 2 hour s. The three IOP measureme nts should then 
be averaged to determine the mean diurnal IOP. 
 
Standard postoperative IOP measur ements (i.e., taken at Day 1, Week 1, Week 4, 
Months 3, 6 and 18), only 1 set of pre ssure measurements will b e needed.  Every 
attempt should be made to have t hese values taken at the same t ime interval for each 
visit.  b. Visual Field Examination Visual fields must be automated  threshold visual fields, 24-2 H umphrey Stimulus III.  
The SITA Standard must be use d for the visual field conducted a t the pre-operative 
evaluation and all subse quent evaluations, 
 Visual fields must be reliabl e at screening for eligibility, de fined as ≤ 33% false 
positives, false negatives, and fixation losses.  (These are th e acceptance criteria used 
in the previous OHTS study.)  A vi sual field done within 90 day s prior to the subject 
informed consent date and in accordance with the 24-2 SITA Stan dard requirements 
can be used for the screening eva luation.  For visual fields th at do not meet the 
reliability standards, the test should be repeated within two w eeks. 
 Visual fields are to be perfo rmed with a non-dilated pupil unle ss, in the opinion of the 
investigator, the pupil is so miotic that dilation is required (e.g., < 3mm).  If dilation 
was performed at screening, it s hould be performe d at all subse quent visual field 
examinations.  However, dilati on should not be performed before  the IOP 
measurement on the a ppropriate visits. 
 
 Visual field interpretation w ill be documented on the Screenin g form and one of the 
choices in the following categories will be marked (Mills GSS c riteria were referenced 
to obtain these choices): 
  
 
                                                          Page  26 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
 Mean Deviation 
Early defect outside of inclu sion range = MD of  > -2.99 dB 
Early defect within inclusion r ange = MD of -3.00 dB to - 6.00 dB  
Moderate defect = MD of -6.01 to -12.00 dB  
Advanced defect = MD of -12.01 dB to -20.0 dB Severe defect = MD of ≤ -20.01 dB  
Central Defects <0 dB within 5 ⁰ of fixation  
None 
1 in one hemifield only 2 in one hemifield only 1 in both hemifields 2 in one hemifield and 1 in t he other hemifield 
2 in one hemifield and 2 in t he other hemifield 
 c.  Pachymetry Pachymetry is performed to dete rmine central corneal thickness at screening, Months 
12 and 24. For each evaluation, three measurements are taken ut ilizing an electronic 
pachymeter and annually thereafte r. The measurements and the me an value will be 
recorded in the source documents.   Follow-up measurements conducte d at the 12 and 24 month visits should be 
performed using the same instrume nt that acquired the screening  data if at all 
possible.  These measurements should be performed on the study eye.  
 d.  Distance Visual Acuity   During the screening visit, Best Corrected Visual Acuity (BCVA)  should be 
measured (BCVA must be 25 or mor e letters equivalent to 20/80 o r better in the 
fellow eye) using Early Treatme nt of Diabetic Retinopathy Study  (ETDRS) charts at 
4 meters (13 feet and 1.5 inche s, or 157.5 inches) in both eyes  and reported in 
LogMAR units.  At all subsequent  follow-up visits from 1 month and longer where 
BCVA measurements are required, LogMAR measurement (utilizing E TDRS) should 
be documented.  MR must be performe d prior to BCVA using the ET DRS charts and 
will be performed at all visits  except Operative, Day 1, and We ek 1 visits. The 
Snellen or Pinhole visual acuit y is used for the 1 day and 1 we ek post-op values.   
 Visual acuity testing should prec ede slit lamp examination, int raocular pressure 
measurement, the ad ministration of topical  anesthetic agents, o r any examination 
requiring contact with t he anterior segment . 
 The visual acuity chart  must be retro-illum inated (“back-lit”).   The standard chart 
requires a distance from subjec t to chart of 4 meters.  Ideally , the subject should be 
seated.  Sites are directed to r efer to the instructions on the  commercial ETDRS charts 
and the Visual Acuity Testing Manual.  
                                                          Page  27 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
 The subject should attempt to r ead each letter, line by line, l eft to right, beginning 
with line 1 at the top of the c hart (20/200 line).  The subject s should be told that the 
chart has letters only, no numbe rs.  If the subject reads a num ber, he or she should be 
reminded that the chart contains  no numbers, and the examiner s hould then request a 
letter in lieu of the number.  T he subjects should be asked to read slowly, about one 
letter per second, so as to achie ve the best identification of each letter.  He/she is not 
to proceed to the next letter unt il he/she has given a definite  response. 
 In order to provide standardize d and well-controlled assessment  of visual acuity 
during the study, all visual acuit y assessments for a subject m ust be performed 
consistently (e.g., the same li ghting conditions, viewing dista nce, etc.) during the 
entire study.  The following steps will be used for LogMAR scoring: 1.  The examiner records each let ter identified correctly by ci rcling the corresponding 
letter on the Distance Visual A cuity Worksheet to be provided t o the 
investigational sites.   
2.  Letters read incorrectly or not  read at all are not marked on the form.   
3.  Each letter read correc tly is scored as one point.   
4.  The total score for each eye  is recorded on the worksheet a fter testing is 
completed. 
          
e.  Dilated fundus examination A mydriatic should be used to dila te the pupil so that an exami nation of the fundus can 
be conducted with an indirect opht halmoscope and slit lamp biom icroscopy (with 
contact lens, Hruby lens or  60-, 66-, 78-, or 90 diopter lens).   The appearance of the 
optic disc, macula, vessels and pe riphery should be evaluated i n support of a glaucoma 
indication as defined in the i nclusion criteria and reported on  the Screening form.  A 
measurement of the vertical cup -to-disc ratio should be made an d reported.  All 
methods used to assess nerve abno rmalities at screening must al so be used at all 
required postoperative exams.    The optic disc photos should be pe rformed using HRT, OCT, GDx o r other method 
(such as stereo disc photography w ith either true stereo or sid eways displacement of the 
camera). Note: Assessment of nerv e abnormalities conducted < 6 months of screening 
visit can be used as part of the subject’s evaluation for inclu sion in (or exclusion from) 
the study.  The examination will be conducted a t the prescribed intervals i n the activit y list and 
may be used for further investig ation at other follow-up period s in cases of hypotony to 
assure there are no choroidal effu sions, choroidal detachments or related concerns.
 
 
                                                          Page  28 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
 f.  Endothelial Cell Density  
Each subject must have a screeni ng density of the central endot helium in accordance 
with the clinical study inclusion criteria to participate in th e study.  Endothelial cell 
densities are to be taken befor e gonioscopic test ing is complet ed. 
 A Konan specular microscope is t o be used for measurement of en dothelial cell density 
at screening and at the defined f ollow-up periods.  All reading s will be conducted by 
the Corneal Image Analysis Read ing Center (CIARC) located at th e Department of 
Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences , Case Western Reserve Univers ity School of 
Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio. 
 
Cornea Image Analysis Reading Cen ter (CIARC) will certify techn icians and approve 
specular microscopes for study pa rticipation.   Only instrument s confirmed as 
calibrated by CIARC may be used.  Only technicians certified by  CIARC may conduct 
study imaging.  Calibration of the s pecular microscope at each investigational site must 
be confirmed by the CIARC prior to conducting the first reading s.  CIARC will provide 
sites a detailed site manual.  All technicians at CIARC conducti ng endothelial cell reading wi ll be masked to 
the treatment group.  Investigational site technicians will be masked to the treatmen t 
group for imaging as well.  
For each subject, central images of the study eye will be colle cted at screening, 3 
months, 6 months, 12 months and 24 m onths follow-ups.  Fellow e ye central images 
will be collected at screening, 3, 12 and 24 months. 
 
General instructions are as follows: 
1.  Place chin forward on chin rest unt il it touches the chin stop .  Ask the subject to 
close teeth together and relax their head, which depresses the chin rest. 
2. Forehead should touch forehea d bar.  Lower table enough for pat ient to lean in 
comfortably. 
3. The axis of head should be perpen dicular to the forehead bar. 
4. Ask the patient to focus on t he green indicator light. 
5. Ensure the patient’s pupil is w ithin the target circle on the m onitor in upper right of 
screen. 
6. Once adjusted, tell the patient you are going to record and let  them know they can 
blink until told to hold the eye open. 
7. Press the record button. 
8. Allow patient to blink until ju st before the “rec” sign in uppe r left of monitor starts 
flashing.  This can be predicted because the beam begins to mov e toward dead 
center. 
9.
 Tell patient to open wide and hold a s soon as “rec” starts flas hing. 
 
                                                          Page  29 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
 Notes:   
a. Use saline drops to moisten the  eye if it is dry, photograph is  black or photograph 
resembles the moon’s surface. 
b. If a shadow prevents analysis, s traighten the head left or righ t to center in 
camera.  Auto may need to be turne d off and camera adjusted man ually + 5 
increments to start to phot ograph in Manual Mode. 
c. If patient’s eyelid interferes with photograph, hold the lid fo r patient while 
keeping the forehead against the  forehead bar, or lightly tape the eyelid up still 
allowing the patient to be able to blink. 
d. IOLs can reflect multiple beams  of light into the camera interf ering with the 
photograph.  If so, have patient l ook slightly off (right/left/ up/down) from 
indicator light until w hite reflections coa lesce into one or tw o reflection spots 
and then take picture. 
 
g.   Slit Lamp Examination The study eye should include a mea surement of aqueous cell and flare using the 
following grading system and then reported. 
 
For anterior chamber cells, in a  field size of 1x1-mm slit beam , the following grades are 
standardized as follows: 0 (<  1 cell), 0.5+ (1-5 cells), 1+ (6- 15 cells), 2+ (16-25 cells), 
3+ (26-50 cells), and 4+ (>50 c ells). The presence of hypopyon is recorded separately.  
The grading for anterior chamber  flare is standardized as follo ws: 0 (none), 1+ (faint), 
2+ (moderate, iris and lens deta ils clear), 3+ (marked, iris an d lens details hazy), and 4+ 
(intense, fibrin or plastic aqueous).  
The presence of corneal edema, pup illary irregularities, iris a trophy and pigment 
dispersion should also be evaluated and noted. 
For patients with a phakic study e ye, the lens should be evalua ted for presence of 
cataract.  A LOCS III classification system is used and the out come reported on the 
form.  For anterior subcapsula r cataracts, the LOCS III posteri or subcapsular grading 
system is used to approximate the  characteristics of the catara ct and the number value 
reported.  If no cataract is pres ent, grade as a 0.0 in the res pective categories.  Use the 
visual LOCS III scale for gradi ng each of the categories, i.e.,  nuclear (color and 
opalescence), cortical, posterior  subcapsular and anterior subc apsular. 
h.  Gonioscopy 
Gonioscopy will be conducted as part of the screening process t o verify that the subject  
has an open angle and to identif y any anterior synechiae as wel l as determine if there is 
any pigment dispersion.  A Zeiss , Sussman or similar lens shoul d be used and 
gonioscopy conducted in a dark roo m with a narrow, short slit b eam that does not pass 
through the pupil and without a f ixation light being used.  The  Shaffer method will be 
used as follows: grade 4, wide  open (35º-45º): grade 3, moderat ely open (25º-34º); 
grade 2, moderately narrow (20º);  grade 1, very narrow (10º); g rade 0, closed (0º).  The 
grade number will be reported for  each quadrant of the eye in t he appropriate location 
on the form.  
                                                          Page  30 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
 Gonioscopy may also be used post-su rgery with a trabeculectomy if an elevated IOP is 
observed to determine if the scler ostomy is filling with iris o r fibrin before adding 
glaucoma medications.   i.  Ocular Hypotensive Medications Each ocular hypotensive medication will be recorded on the case  report form.  If 
subjects are taking combination m edications such as Cosopt® thi s is to be counted as 
two medications even th ough this is only in 1 bottle. 
 j.  Pregnancy Testing, Nursing and Contraceptives Women of childbearing potential a re excluded from  participation  if they are currently 
pregnant, have a positive urine  pregnancy test at screening, or  intend to become 
pregnant during the study period ; are breast-feeding; or are no t in agreement to use 
adequate birth control methods  to prevent pregnancy throughout the study ((hormonal – 
oral, implanted, transdermal, or injected contraceptives)(mecha nical – spermicide in 
conjunction with a barrier suc h as a condom or diaphragm or IUD )).  All women are 
considered to be of childbeari ng potential unles s one or more o f the following criteria 
are met: • Postmenopausal for at least 1 year • Surgically sterile  For non-sexually active females , abstinence may be regarded as an adequate method of 
birth control; however if the pati ent becomes sexually active d uring the study, she must 
agree to use adequate birth cont rol methods as define above pri or to sexual activity and 
for the remainder of the study. 
 
Females of childbearing potenti al will be instructed to immedia tely inform the 
investigator if they become  pregnant during the study.  Should this occur, the 
investigator must immedi ately contact the sponsor. 
 k.  Ocular Quality of Life (QOL) Questionnaire  A patient questionnaire is bei ng used in this st udy to evaluate  visual function and local 
eye effects related to the surge ries.  The questionnaire has be en derived from the 
Collaborative Initial Glauco ma Treatment Study {CIGTS} ( Ophthalmology 
1999;106:653–662) and identified in a draft manu script (yet to be published) as 
potentially useful for QOL eva luation based on the CIGTS histor y. The questionnaire 
was provided to InnFocus by one of t he authors of the manuscrip t. 
 The questionnaire contains 2 s ubgroups, consisting of 18 separa te items: 11 on Visual 
Function and 7 on the Local Eye, tha t have been extracted from the 43 question QOL 
questionnaire used in CIGTS. T he visual function subscale (11 i tems) includes 
symptoms and health problems de emed by clinical center ophthalm ologists to be 
related to glaucoma as a disease process independent from any t reatments or side 
effects: difficulties going fro m light to dark, blurred vision,  difficulty seeing in dark 
places, difficulty with near vision, trouble seeing when steppi ng down, problems with 
distance vision, dimming of visi on, problems with depth percept ion, visual distortion, 
                                                          Page  31 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
 difficulty with bright lights  or sunlight, and trouble with col or vision. The local eye 
subscale (7 items) includes suc h problems as eye irritation and  burning, excessive 
tearing, and red eyes.  
 
After enrollment during screeni ng, the patient will be initiall y interviewed using the 
questionnaire.  The statements t o be used are at the beginning of the questionnaire and 
should be followed closely to assu re consistency of response.  Document the patient 
responses directly on the questionnaire.  The interviewing process will be c onducted again at several int ervals in accordance 
with the testing schedule.  l. General Health Quest ionnaire (EQ-5D-5L) 
A second questionnaire will also be used to document the genera l health of the subject 
before and after surgery.  Thi s questionnaire, in association w ith the questionnaire in 
item k above will be used to compa re the overall health status of the subject as a result 
of the surgery.  Both questionnaires will also be used as part of a health economics 
comparison of the InnFocus Micro Shunt surgery and trabeculectom y.  This 
questionnaire was selected base d on the well-doc umented history  of its use and the 
relative ease of questionnaire c ompletion.  The subject complet es this questionnaire 
without the assistance of an interviewer ini tially after enroll ment and during the 
screening process.  The subject a gain completes the questionnai re at the defined follow-
up points in the test schedule.  
The EQ-5D-5L consists of a cover page and 2 pages to complete –  the EQ-5D-5L 
descriptive system (page 2) and t he EQ Visual Analogue scale (E Q VAS) (page 3).  
The descriptive system compris es 5 dimensions (m obility, self c are, usual activities, 
pain/discomfort, anx iety/depression). Eac h dimension has 5 leve ls: no problems, slight 
problems, moderate problems, sev ere problems, and extreme probl ems. The patient is 
asked to indicate his/her hea lth state by ticking (or placing a  cross) in the box against 
the most appropriate stateme nt in each of the 5 dimensions.  
 
9.4    Study Procedures 
 
9.4.1  Training Before any site may begin actual  device implantation, all inves tigators will participate 
in an InnFocus investigator tra ining session.  Investigators wi ll gain familiarity with the 
InnFocus MicroShunt through the us e of animal or human cadaver eyes.  Further 
training will be provided to the s tudy coordinators at each sit e by an InnFocus trained 
designee.   9.4.2  Material and Equipment A listing of general equipment a nd materials required at the in vestigational site for the 
preoperative, operative, and postope rative steps of the investi gational study is provided 
below.  
                                                          Page  32 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
 1. InnFocus MicroShunt Gla ucoma Drainage System 
2. Goldmann Applanation Tonometer 
3. Humphrey Visual Field Analyzer  
4. Goniolens (Zeiss, Sussman or s imilar, not Goldmann to screen fo r angle closure) 
5. Ultrasound Pachymeter 
6. Slit lamp and fundus contact lens, Hruby lens or 90 diopter len s 
7. Indirect ophthalmoscope 
8. ETDRS Visual Acuity System/Snellen Visual Acuity System 
9. Specular Microscope (Konan XL) 
10. Fully equipped surgical suite e quipped with opera ting microscop e 
11. Video equipment in operating room 
12. Fundus camera 
13. Mobius Therapeutics Mitosol MMC Kit 
14. Light Meter 
 
The Goldmann tonometer should be calibrated at each investigati onal site in accordance 
with the manufacturer ’s instructions.  Each site is also to fol low their own standard 
procedures for equipment main tenance and calibration by outside  vendors.  Calibration 
values should be recorded and the documents maintained accordin gly. 
 
9.4.3  InnFocus MicroShunt Surgical Procedure Mark the location of the implan t on the study eye sketch in the  source documents.  The 
following provides an overview of t he surgical procedure for im plantation of the 
InnFocus MicroShunt.  If possibl e, each surgical procedure shou ld be videotaped. 
 
A.  Anesthesia 
The type of anesthesia will be at the surgeon’s discretion exce pt general anesthesia 
is excluded and the type will be documented on the Operative fo rm. 
 
B.  Preparation of InnFocus MicroShunt 
Carefully examine the package c ontaining the InnFocus MicroShun t for signs of 
damage that could compromise sterility.  If da maged, discard th e device.   
Remove InnFocus MicroShunt fro m sterile packaging onto sterile field.  No more 
than 2 devices should be opened for each case.  Wet the InnFocu s MicroShunt using 
a solution of Balanced Salt Solution (BSS).   Note:  No cutting or modificatio n of the InnFocus MicroShunt is  allowed. 
 
C.  Preparation of Mitomycin C 
 Follow the instructions for use  of the Mobius Therapeutics Mit osol Kit.   
Prepare a syringe or line that can flush copious amounts of BSS  (>20ml). (Training 
on the Mitosol kit will be provide d prior to study initiation).  
 
D.  Corneal Traction a nd Conjunctival Flap 
Perform corneal traction with 7- 0 Vicryl suture at surgeon’s di scretion. 
                                                          Page  33 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
 In the planned surgical area, di ssect a fornix-based subconjunc tival//subTenon 
pouch over a circumference of 90o-120o at least 8mm deep. 
 
E.  Application of MMC 
Apply the MMC in accordance with the Mobius Therapeutics Mitoso l Kit 
instructions for use.  Use  only 4 half-moon sponges in the kit to prepare with MMC 
and place under the subconjunctival/subTenon’s flap.  Rinse wit h generous amounts 
of BSS (>20mL).  Note:  Assure that the conjunctival wound edge does not come 
into contact with antimetabolite. 
 
F.  Preparation of Anterior Chamber Entrance Site 
Mark a point 3mm from the limbus, utilizing 3mm scleral marker and marker pen. 
At the marked point, use a 1mm  double step knife in one motion to create both a 
scleral track into the anterior chamber (AC)  so as to enter the angle just above the iris 
plane and a shallow scleral pocket at the  mark just big enough to tuck the fin portion 
of the InnFocus MicroShunt.  
G.  Insertion of InnFocus Micro Shunt into Anterior Chamber 
Gently insert the InnFocus Mic roShunt tube with the bevel facin g toward the cornea 
through sclera track using forcep s and holding close to the tra ck entrance while 
keeping the fin face parallel t o the scleral surface and tuck t he fin into the scleral 
pocket.  If there is resistance to the placement of the InnFocu s MicroShunt after 
multiple attempts to position i t, use a 25G blunt tip cannula t o re-enter the sclera 
track and assure it is open. Then attempt placement of the InnF ocus MicroShunt 
again. 
 
  
If the InnFocus MicroShunt is da maged during the procedure, use  a new InnFocus 
MicroShunt and repeat the inserti on step using the same tract.   If not accessible, 
another track can be made. After  successful insertion of the In nFocus MicroShunt, 
check that the InnFocus Micro Shunt tube position in the AC is n ot in contact with 
the cornea or iris and that the re is flow of aqueous.  If flow is not visible, place the 
23G cannula over the distal end of InnFocus MicroShunt up to th e fin while 
applying slight pressure and injec t BSS to prime the tube.  Con firm flow, tuck the 
distal end of the InnFocus Micro Shunt tube under the subconjunc tival/Tenon’s flap 
on scleral surface making sur e it is not caught in Tenons.  
 
H.  Conjunctival Closure 
Reposition the Tenon’s and conjunc tiva to the limbus and suture  using  sutures with 
a long history of successful use by gl aucoma specialists (i.e.,  nylon, vicryl).   A 
moistened fluorescein strip is  used to check for a conjunctival  leak, which may be 
closed with additional sutures. 
 Verify the presence of the proxi mal end of the InnFocus MicroSh unt in the anterior 
chamber.   
                                                          Page  34 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
 Pull corneal traction sutur e out if it was used.  
 Apply antibiotic and steroidal medication post-op per clinical protocol requirements. 
 
After use, dispose of product a nd packaging in accordance with hospital, 
administrative, and/or l ocal government policy. 
 
Follow the Mobius Therapeutics Mi tosol Kit instructions for use  for proper disposal 
of the MMC and kit components. 
 
Warnings and Precautions: 
- For one-time use only.  Do not  reuse or re-sterilize. 
- Long term effects of MMC with the  use of this device have not b een 
evaluated.  Necessary precautions on the use of MMC are highly recommended. 
- All types of Viscoelastics have  not been tested with this devic e.  However, in 
an emergency when all other ther apies have failed, the use of h ydroxyl 
methyl-cellulose (HPMC) may be  an option. Use of HPMC should be  a last 
resort to correct a flat chambe r with the InnFocus MicroShunt a nd may risk 
loss of flow through the device fo r one or more weeks after use  necessitating 
close or more frequent observation of IOP. 
- Should the InnFocus MicroShunt a ppear deformed, folded and/or d istorted, do 
not use.  Avoid use of toothed for ceps to handle device. McPher son type 
forceps are recommended.  
- Do not use knife if it has been h it against or in contact with other parts than 
the eyeball. Such knife may be  damaged and lose sharpness. 
- Do not resterili ze the device. 
 
9.4.4  Trabeculectomy with MMC Surgical Procedure 
 
1. Investigators should use the fo llowing procedure for conducting  the trabeculectomy 
procedure with the use of MMC: An esthesia type is at the surgeo n’s discretion 
except general anesthesia is excluded. 
 
2. Conjunctival flap – the trabecul ectomy is performed in a superi or quadrant.  A 
fornix-based conjunctival flap i s used.  A corneal traction sut ure or superior rectus 
traction suture may be used to r otate the globe inferiorly and improve exposure. 
 
3. Mitomycin C applica tion –The MMC is prepared and used in accord ance with the 
Mobius Therapeutics Mitosol Kit instructions for use, again usi ng 4 half-moon 
sponges for delivery of the MMC under the subconjunctival flap.   The mitomycin 
may be applied before or after t he scleral fla p creation depend ent on the 
investigator’s standard practi ce (Training on the Mitosol Kit w ill be conducted prior 
to study initiation). 
 
4. Scleral flap – A corneal-based s cleral flap is dissected approx imately one-half 
scleral thickness.  The shape a nd size of the scleral flap is d etermined by the 
                                                          Page  35 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
 surgeon in keeping with his or he r usual practice and should be  kept consistent 
throughout the study. 
 
5. Paracentesis tract – A peripheral clear cornea paracentesis tra ct is made. 
 
6. Excision of Limbal tis sue – A block of limba l tissue is excised  from underneath the 
trabeculectomy flap using a shar p blade and Vannas scissors or a Kelly punch.  The 
amount of limbal tissue excised is at the surgeon’s discretion.  
 
7. Peripheral iridectomy – A periphe ral iridectomy is performed un less a specific 
rationale is provided as to why it is not required.  The sclero stomy opening is 
inspected for entrapped iris ti ssue, and a cellulose sponge is used to test for the 
presence of vitreous.  Vitreous p resenting to the surgical woun d is excised.  The 
method used to remove the  vitreous present at the surgical site  is at the surgeon’s 
discretion.  Document any presen ce of vitreous observed. 
 
8. Scleral flap closure – The scler al flap is reapproximated to th e scleral bed with 
interrupted or releasable 10-0 nyl on suture.  The number and te nsion of the scleral 
flap sutures is determined by t he surgeon.  Following injection  of balanced salt 
solution into the anterior cham ber through the paracentesis tra ct, the anterior 
chamber should remain formed w ith a visible leak present around  the scleral flap at 
equilibrium. 
 
9. Conjunctival flap closure – The t ype of suture material and nee dle used for the 
conjunctival flap closure is of  the surgeon’s choice.  Either a  double layered closure 
(conjunctiva and Tenon’s closed sep arately) or single layered c losure (conjunctiva 
and Tenon’s together) may be performed. 
 
10. Reformation of the Anterior Ch amber and Bleb Elevation – Balanc ed salt solution 
is injected through the paracentesi s tract to deepen the anteri or chamber and elevate 
the bleb.  A moistened fluoresce in strip is used to check for a  conjunctival leak or 
leakage from the paracentesis tract, which may be closed with a dditional sutures. 
 
11. Intraoperative medications – The  use of intraoperative medicati ons is at the 
surgeon’s discretion.  
 
9.4.5  Post-operative Instructions 
A.  Following surgery, the subjects will be instructed to adher e to the following 
antibiotic/anti-inflammatory r egiment and the frequency will be  documented on the 
Concomitant Medication form: 
 Topical polymyxin B sulfate and trime thoprim ophthalmic solution 
combination (e.g., Polytrim) antibiotic or fourth genera tion fluoroquinolone 
(e.g., gatifloxacin [Zymar], or moxa floxacin [Vigamox], for one  week 
postoperatively by instilling one drop in the opera ted eye four (4) times per 
day distributed during the waking hours. All subjects at a given investigational 
site must use the same antibio tic regimen unless contraindicate d by allergy.  
 Anti-inflammatory med ication (prednisolone  acetate 1% ophthalmi c 
suspension): 
                                                          Page  36 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
 o Weeks 1-4: at least four ( 4) times per day for  the first 4 weeks. .   
o Weeks 5-8: two (2) times per day for the next 4 weeks  
o Weeks 9-12: one time per day for the next 4 weeks.   
NOTE:  
1. Anti-inflammatory med ications may be increased to ≥ 4 times a d ay for the first 
month. If frequency i s increased during the  first month, consid eration should be 
given to the appropriate taperi ng schedule at follow-up visits.   
2. In the event of an adverse ev ent during post-ope rative medicati on regimen, 
consideration should be given to the appropriate tapering sched ule.  
At the 3 months follow-up, the inve stigator will determine if f urther treatment is 
needed.  Alternate antibiotic and anti-inflammatory medication regimens are 
allowed when the patient does not  respond well to the initial r egimen.   Cycloplegics 
may also be used for patients as  needed during th e initial heal ing phase or in phakic 
eyes. 
 
B.  At follow-up visits, there ar e some fairly routine practice s that are done by the 
investigator to assure a diffu se bleb and lower IOP.   These ar e not considered as 
adverse events in the study.   They are as follows: 
1.  Eye massage done by the investig ator will be documented on the follow-up 
form.  Eye massage should only be done by investigators and not by 
subjects. 
 
2.  Laser suture lysis is commonly u sed to lyse one or more sutures  in the first 
week or later after sur gery to bring the IOP down.  Tensioning of the sutures 
used to close the scleral flap may set the pressure higher than  desired, but tight 
suturing is done purposely in many cases to limit acute hypoton y.   The suture 
lysis is also documente d on the follow-up form. 
 
3. Depending on the surgeon’s meth od of tightening the scleral flap during 
trabeculectomy procedures, the s urgeon may choose to temporaril y use 
glaucoma medications rather tha n lyse a suture too early and ca use hypotony.  
Therefore, the use of temporary g laucoma medications for post t rabeculectomy 
subjects will be allowed and w ill be documented on the appropri ate case report 
form as needed.  The use of a top ical CAI or alpha-2 adrenergic  agonist is 
typically used for this purpose  because of the short washout pe riods (5 days for 
CAI and 14 days for alpha-2 adren ergic agonist), and if any oth er glaucoma 
medication is used, a rationale  should be provide d on the follo w-up form.  
   C.  Interventional techniques ar e employed if the IOP increases  to the default 
interventional IOP value of gr eater than 21mmHg or greater than  the pre-surgery 
medicated IOP if lower t han 21mmHg for any subject.    
 
As described in the Screening sec tion earlier in the protocol, the investigator may 
have established an alternate int erventional IOP for the subjec t on the screening 
                                                          Page  37 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
 form prior to randomization, and in this case, the investigator  will use this value 
as the maximum value before  considering intervention.   
 All investigators will intervene in a consistent manner per the  pre-established 
interventional IOP point for eac h subject in the treatment and control groups and 
only when necessary to control IOP.  (If the alternate interven tional IOP was 
chosen and the post-procedure IOP exceeds the surgeon’s choice,  the subject will 
be asked to come back for a sec ond visit within 1 week to confi rm the IOP before 
reinitiating glaucoma medica tion or physically intervening. If the IOP also 
exceeds the default interventional IOP, such that safety is a c oncern, a second 
visit is not required befor e taking any action.)  
 
 
There may be cases where the inv estigator needs to bring the IO P down when the 
subject has not exceeded the int erventional IOP.  In these case s, the Medical 
Monitor will consult with t he physician to understand the ratio nale for the 
intervention and it will be doc umented by the inv estigator on t he source 
document.  For the interventi on, the reason for the decision wi ll be noted on the 
case report form as one or more of the following:  IOP> default  interventional 
IOP or alternate interventiona l IOP, visual field change, optic  nerve change or 
temporary glaucoma med use pendin g suture lysis.   A field for “Other” will be 
used to document any other rea son for the intervention. 
 
 
      Physical intervention should be  considered prior to emplo ying glaucoma 
medications to bring the IOP down.  The reasons for the IOP increase are multiple 
but there are two commonly obser ved methods for reducing the IO P:  
1)     “Needling the bleb” to overcome part ial or complete closure of the 
subconjunctival pocket.  In these  cases, The InnFocus MicroShun t or 
trabeculectomy path to the anter ior chamber is open and can all ow flow, but 
the lack of an adequate subconj unctival drainage field is  preventing this.  To 
improve the flow, a needle is in serted into the sub-Tenons/conj unctival area, 
any fibrous attachment separate d, and the pocket re-established  (this is not a 
failure criterion but is docume nted as a complication on the Ad verse Event 
form).    
a. Needling with an injected antifib rotic may be preferred.  Both MMC 
and 5FU are used to accomplish th is.  If either antifibrotic is  injected 
subconjunctivally, the type of a ntifibrotic, dos age, and method  of 
introduction by the investigator s hould remain consistent with both 
arms of the study.  Dosages of MMC and 5FU vary by investigator  and 
are in the 10-100 microgram range  for MMC and 5-10 milligram ra nge 
for 5FU.  The dosage may be deliv ered as a mixture with an 
anesthetic, e.g., Lidocaine.  The  total dosage volume is in the  0.1-
0.3ml range.  The name of the an tifibrotic, injection volume, d osage 
and mixed anesthetic or other agents are documented in the 
concomitant medications log and ne edling with an antifibrotic i s 
indicated on the adve rse event form. 
 
                                                          Page  38 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
 2)  Laser removal of blockage at the tip of the InnFocus MicroS hunt or at the AC 
entry point for a trabeculectom y is another possibility and is documented as a 
complication on the Adverse Event form. 
                       
D. Glaucoma medications are add ed if common physical interventi onal techniques 
have been employed, but do not decreas e the IOP below the targe t IOP for any 
subject, or if physical intervent ion is not attempted at all to  reduce the IOP.    
  
E.  If glaucoma medications nee d to be re-introduced, glaucoma medications to 
which the subject is naïve s hould be deferred until after previ ously used 
medications have been introdu ced.   Barring interfering factors  regarding the 
method of re-introduction of glau coma medications post-surgery,  the 
recommended sequence is to first  add a beta blocker, then a pro staglandin, and 
either an alpha adrenergic a gonist or a carbonic anhydrase inhi bitor as a third 
medication.  As routine practi ce, medications should be added o ne at a time and 
the IOP lowering effect determined  before introducing the next medication.  
Based on the IOP level, the phys ician should decide on which me dications, 
dosage and order of re-introduc tion to choose.   The rationale for the re-
introduction or disc ontinuation should be doc umented in the fol low-up form field 
identified as “Investigator rati onale for medicat ion re-introdu ction or 
discontinuation” and the Medical  Monitor will discuss the ratio nale with the 
investigator as needed t o assure consistency.  
 
 Based on the sequence of drug re-introduction, there should not  be a case 
where an oral carbonic anhydrase inhibitor will be required, bu t if it is, it 
will be counted as a failure.    It is unlikely that any subject will be on oral 
carbonic anhydrase inhibitors at th e effectivenes s determinatio n, since they would 
be the last drug added.  
 
Medications which have been re- started by the investigator may be discontinued 
if the investigator’s j udgment is that the target intraocular p ressure has been 
reached and the continued use of some or all of the therapy may  not be required.  
Discontinuation of medications a fter re-introduc tion is recomme nded to be in the 
reverse order of re-introducti on.  The rationale for discontinu ation will also be 
documented on the follow-up form by the investigator and the Me dical Monitor 
will follow up with the investigator as needed to assure consis tency within the 
study parameters.  For medication di scontinuation, the reason f or the decision will 
be noted on the case report form as IOP controlled or allergy t o medication.  A 
field for “Other” will be use d to document any other reason for  glaucoma 
medication discontinuation.  
F. Another potential r eason for intervention is an IOP below 6m mHg (hypotony).  
Interventions such as those indicated below should only be cons idered if the 
hypotony has caused or is likely to cause sequelae such as a fl at chamber. No 
intervention is indicated when t he vision is unchanged from scr eening, there is no 
persistent choroidal detachment, the anterior chamber is not fl at with lens corneal 
                                                          Page  39 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
 touch, or the patient is asymptom atic.  No inter vention should be undertaken for 
hypotony which is not causing, or t hreatening to cause, a reduc tion in vision, as 
the intervention might cause pro cedure failure.  These interven tions should be 
documented as adverse events .  Otherwise, the hypotony should b e monitored 
with additional follow-ups as necessary.   
 
1) Too loose or not enough sutures ca n result in hypotony that may  be treated by 
adding more sutures in a separat e surgical intervention (this a ction will be 
considered a failure).  
 
2)   Introduction of visco elastic into the anterior chamber for  the purpose of 
slowing aqueous flow and eli minating hypotony that is causing a  reduction of 
best corrected visual acuity (tw o or more lines) or causing the  presence of 
persistent choroidal detachment  (3 or more months  if peripheral , up to one 
month if kissing), or causing hypot ony maculopathy (also docume nted as a 
complication on the Adve rse Event form.) 
 G.
  A secondary procedure that is pe rformed including a trabeculect omy, 
repositioning of a InnFocus Mic roShunt, Tenon’s resection, glau coma laser, 
glaucoma drainage device or other incisional treatment to estab lish a new aqueous 
flow path from the anterior cha mber in order to maintain accept able IOPs will be 
considered a failure of the original procedure. 
 H.  If the InnFocus MicroShunt is repositioned, removed and/or replaced with 
another type of device based on t he device performance, the con junctiva should 
be cut at the limbus in a similar manner to the original proced ure.  The device 
should be exposed and the repos itioning or removal conducted.  If the device is 
removed, verify that there is  no aqueous leakage from the track .  If there is, use a 
Vicryl suture to seal the tr ack.  The limbus should then be res utured in a similar 
manner as the original surger y.  The removed InnFocus MicroShun t should be 
returned to InnFocus, Inc. for a nalysis in accordance with the explanted device 
procedure. 
  If the InnFocus MicroShunt is removed, another InnFocus MicroS hunt should not 
be implanted in the same subjec t.  Use an alternate procedure. 
 
If repositioning, removal, repla cement or removal with another glaucoma 
procedure occurs, the event wil l result in the subject being fo llowed according to 
standard of care until the adverse event resolves and the follo w-up visits over the 
two years period under the protocol  schedule will be part of th e safety analyses.  
Any extra visits to evaluate the  patient due to the secondary p rocedure will be 
considered “Unscheduled Visits” if  performed outside of the sta ndard visit 
windows in the protocol and the Uns cheduled Visit form will be used to 
document the visit.  
I.  For any surgery or interventi ons not directly related to th e subject’s glaucoma that 
occur during the study, e.g., catar act surgery, the standard of  care for the 
particular type of interventi on will be followed until the subj ect has recovered.  
                                                          Page  40 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
 Unless a post-surgery vi sit coincides with t he standard protoco l follow-up visit, 
the visits will be handled as “Uns cheduled Visits” and the Unsc heduled Visit 
form will be used to doc ument the visit. 
 
9.5  Follow-up All subjects will participate i n defined follow-up visits throu ghout two years.  A follow-up 
case report form shall be complet ed from source data gathered a t the time the subject is 
examined.  Unscheduled or interim  visits should also be recorde d using the appropriate 
forms.  Table 5 provides an overvie w of all activities to be co nducted during the clinical 
study.  Table 5a indicates the tes ting that should be conducted  on the fellow eye during the 
study.  All attempts should be mad e to conduct each follow-up e valuation within the 
specified time intervals show n in Table 6.  Evaluations conduct ed outside the prescribed 
time period will be considered pr otocol deviations.  Visits con ducted outside scheduled 
timeframes will be considered an additional visit and must be d ocumented using the 
Unscheduled Visit form. 
 
Table 5.  Study Visits and Parameters for Study Eyes  
 
    1Diurnal IOP 
Activities 
Screening  
Op Follow-up Evaluation 
  1 D 1W 4W 3 M 6 M 12M 18M 24M
Informed Consen t X    
Randomization  X   
Ocular Medical Histor y X  X   
Ocular Medication Assessmen t X  X X X X X XX  X  X
Histor y/Demo graphics X   
Manifest Refraction X X X X X X X
BCVA (Snellen) or Pinhole VA  X X   
BCVA (ETDRS) X X X X X X X
Visual Fiel d X   XX   X
Slit Lamp Exam X X X X X X X X X
Lens Status for Phakic E yes X X X X X X
IOP X1 XXX X X X1 X  X1
Pach ymetry X  X   X
Endothelial Cell Densit y X  X X X   X
Gonioscop y X       
Dilated Fundus Exa m X    
   Vertical C/D Ratio X X X XX   X
   Optic Disc Photo  X X X X X  X
Diplopia  X  XX X   X
Motilit y X   XX X   X
Pregnanc y Test (as applicable) X   
Surgical Procedure  X   
Observations Recorde d X  X X X X X X X  X  X
Adverse Event Assessmen t  X X X X X X X X X
Ocular QOL Questionnaire  X X X X X X X X
General Health Questionnaire X X X X X X X
                                                          Page  41 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
 Testing of the fellow eye will be conducted as per the table be low and data will be gathered on 
the case report forms.  
           Table 5a.  Activities Conducted on Fellow Eye During Clinical Study 
 
    
 Follow-up Examination Schedule 
 
Table 6.  Examination Schedule 
Activity Acceptable Time Interval in Days 
Post Sur gery Evaluations
1 Da y  1 
7 Da ys  5-9 
4 Weeks  21-35 
3 Months 70-98 
6 Months 168-196 
12 Months 330-420 
18 Months 510-600 
24 Months 690-780 
 
  
Activities 
Screening 
 Follow-up Evaluation 
 1 D 1W 4W 3 M 6 M 12M 18M 24M
Ophthalmolo gy Exam X   
Ocular Medical Histor y X   
Ocular Medication 
Assessmen t X X X X X X X X X 
Histor y/Demo graphics X   
Visual Fiel d X X   X
Dilated Fundus Exa m X XX   X
   Vertical C/D Ratio X XX   X
   Optic Disc Photo  X XX   X
Slit Lamp Exam X XX  X  X
Manifest Refraction X X X X X X X
Visual Acuity (Snellen or 
Pinhole)  X  X        
BCVA (ETDRS) X X X X X X X
IOP X X X X X X X X X
Pach ymetry X X   X
Endothelial Cell Densit y X X X   X
Motility X      X  X 
Observations Recorde d X X X X X X X  X  X
Adverse Event Assessmen t X X X X X X X X
                                                          Page  42 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
 9.6  Withdrawal Criteria 
All subjects have the right t o withdraw at any point during the  treatment without prejudice.  
The investigator can discontinue  any subject at any time if con tinued participation in the 
study would result in harm to the s ubject.  All efforts should be made by the investigator to 
retain the patient in the st udy.  If a subject withdraws premat urely from the study, a 
genuine effort must be made to de termine the reason(s) the subj ect discontinued the study.  
The reason must be recorded in the subject’s file and on the En d of Study Form. The site 
will then notify InnFocus, Inc.  9.7  Lost-to-Follow-up Subjects Subjects who do not show up for a f ollow-up must be contacted t o attempt to have them 
come for the follow-up.  For t hose subjects who cannot be reach ed, at least 3 phone call 
attempts should be made and doc umented.  If still no response, a registered letter shall be 
sent to the address on file for the subject in an attempt to ma ke contact.  If there is still no 
response, the subject will be c onsidered lost-to-follow-up unle ss there is a further 
communication by the subject.  9.8  Device Return If an InnFocus device needs to be  returned, the Device Return F orm must be completed and 
returned with the product as ins tructed by the Device Return Pr ocedure (located in the 
Regulatory Binder).  Prior to exp lantation or re turn, please co ntact InnFocus as soon as 
possible. Reasons for return c ould include any of the following : 
1. Device has exceeded the labeled expiration date. 
2. Implant was not present or damaged in packaging. 
3. Implant was damaged or contamin ated before or during surgical p rocedure. 
4. Implant could not be inserted dur ing surgical procedure. 
5. Flow was never observed prior t o closing the flap (implying an obstruction in the 
device) 
6. Implant was removed during post-op erative/secondary surgical in tervention. 
7. Unused inventory upon completion o f the study or site exiting f rom the study. 
  For any device to be returned t hat has been exposed to blood o r tissue, a special package 
will be provided by InnFocus, Inc . for return of the device. 
 
9.9   Protocol Modifications and Deviations 
Protocol modifications may occur during the study.   Each will be approved by the 
sponsor before implementation. E ach will undergo Institutional Review Board (IRB) 
review and approval as necessary.  Any deviations from this protocol  intended to protect the life or physical well-being of a 
subject in an emergency are to b e reported to InnFocus, Inc. as  well as the IRB as soon as 
possible, and no later than 5 worki ng days after the emergency occurred. 
 
All protocol deviations will be documented using Protocol Devia tion form. 
 
 
                                                          Page  43 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
 10.0  Data Handling and Recordkeeping 
 
10.1  Subject Identification The subjects will be identifie d by a five digit subject number composed of a one-digit study 
identification number, a two dig it center ident ification number  followed by a two digit 
sequential subject number.  The s ubject identification will be assigned when ICF is 
obtained.  The initials for each sub ject will also be included on CRFs.  In this way, 
information contained in the st udy records will b e kept as conf idential as possible. 
 
10.2   Subject Accountability All subjects randomized in this clinical investigation shall be  monitored for the duration of 
the investigation. The  clinical investigation shall be consider ed completed when all 
subjects that have been enrolle d in the investigation, includin g subjects whose device was 
removed or replaced, have reached the final reporting period.   
 10.3   Confidentiality All medical records associated with the clinical investigation will be made available for 
review by InnFocus personnel, its  contract research organizatio n (CRO) and 
governmental/regulatory agencies  involved.  The results of the study may be published in 
the future for scientific a nd marketing purposes, but the ident ity (name) of each subject will 
not be revealed.  All records will be stored in a secure area a t the investigator’s facility, the 
CRO, and at InnFocus, Inc.  10.4    Source Data and Electronic Case Report Forms 
  All sites will be given instr uctions by a trained InnFocus de signee on source data 
completion at site initiation visi t and/or interim monitoring v isits.  
 Source data forms are to be mai ntained at the site in the subje ct records.  All entries must 
be made in black or blue ink a nd changes must be made by strike -through only with date 
and initials or signature.  All s ource documents must be comple ted and signed by the 
authorized study personnel (e.g., study coordinator).    No cor rection fluid or correction 
tape is to be used on the source  documents. The source document  will be used by the 
Sponsor to verify data submitted on the CRFs. 
 The source data will be entered i nto a validated e lectronic Cas e Report Form system at 
each site by trained study personnel in accordance with 21CFR P art 11 requirements.  The 
following forms will be utilized  to collect source data during this clinical investigation 
 Source Data Forms 
Screening  Operative  1 Day  7 Day  1M  3M 6M 
                                                          Page  44 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
 12M 
18M 24M Unscheduled Visit Adverse Event/ Unanticipated Adverse Device Effect (UADE) Protocol Deviation  Re-operation  End of Study Form Glaucoma Medication Concomitant Medication Ocular QOL Questionnaire EQ-5D-5L Health Questionnaire  10.5  Device Accountability With each shipment of  investigational devi ces, InnFocus will in clude a Packing List that 
will give the amount shipped and t he lot numbers. This packing list must be reconciled by 
the investigational site with t he contents of the shipment and then complete the Inventory 
Logs for the InnFocus MicroShunt  and the Mobius Mitosol (these logs are contained within 
the regulatory binder at the s ite).  All investigational produc ts (IMS) at the site must be 
stored in a secured/locked area .  The InnFocus MicroShunt and M obius Mitosol Kits may 
be stored at room temperature. D evice reconcilia tion activities  will also be conducted 
periodically in conjunction wit h site monitoring visits. 
 The investigator must maintai n accurate records of the receipt of all devices shipped by 
InnFocus, including the date and lot numbers received with the use of the device inventory 
tracking log. The use of devices  will also be recorded.  An ext ra label provided with the 
device may be placed in the patient records.  Any unused invent ory will be returned to the 
Sponsor upon completion of a given procedure, expiration, or Sp onsor’s request. 
 10.6  Record Retention Clinical sites are to retain a ny and all clinical trial materia l (documentation, photographs, 
etc.) for a period of two years from the date the marketing app lication is approved or two 
years after the investigati on has been discontinued and the FDA  notified, or as directed by 
their institutional document rete ntion requirements, whichever is the longest.  After that 
time, the items may be returned  to InnFocus for archiving.  Unu sed medical devices are to 
be returned to the sponsor at th e conclusion of the enrollment period. 
 10.7  Database Management The database will be designed t o be compliant with 21 CFR Part 11 and relevant guidance 
documents.  The electronic data base will be developed and maint ained by an independent 
Contract Research Organizati on, Promedica International. 
 The database will incorporate time-stamped audit trails, protec tion of human subjects, 
restricted access, and data secur ity at the component level.  E ach database module, 
including each individual CRF, will be validated by conducting a series of standard tests 
that demonstrate usability and cor rectness of the database syst em.  The database will be 
                                                          Page  45 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
 maintained on an ongoing basis and will be routinely backed up with both onsite and offsite 
storage.   
11.0  Assessment of Safety 
 
11.1  Adverse Events Adverse Events are defined below .  Adverse events that occur in  the study eye during the 
trial as well as other non-ocula r events whether they are consi dered to be device related or 
not must be documented in the s ubject’s records.   Date of the e vent, its severity, treatment 
(if any) and the assessed relati onship of the event to the stud y device will be recorded on 
the Adverse Event Form.  Conditi ons which exist at the time the  subject is enrolled do not 
need to be recorded on the Adverse Event Form as adverse events  unless they increase in 
severity during the study.  Anticipated Adverse Events 
Anticipated adverse events incl ude those that might reasonably be expected to occur in this 
study because they are associate d with glaucoma, glaucoma surge ry, and/or prior cataract 
surgical procedures.    Specific examples of anticipate d adverse events include hypoton y, increased intraocular 
pressure requiring medical or  surgical intervention and decreas e of BCVA. Increased 
intraocular pressure will be considered an adverse event if a s ubject has an IOP higher than 
the preoperative medicated scree ning pressure or 21mmHg, whiche ver is lower.  At this 
IOP level, the investigator will intervene either physically or  with the addition of glaucoma 
medication.  There may also be cas es where intervention for inc reased IOP is done at a 
lower IOP level than stated a bove because of oth er patient-rela ted factors; these will also 
be adverse events. BCVA decreas es of 2 lines or more should not  be reported as adverse 
events until two consecutive standard visits after the 3-month follow-up visits unless 
surgical or medical interventi on is required.  (Note:  a loss o f BCVA in conjunction with 
posterior capsular opacificati on, followed by Nd:YAG capsulotom y and improvement of 
BCVA, is not considered an adverse event.)  
 Intraoperative adverse events: 
  Hyphema (>10% of anterior chamber) 
  Choroidal effusion/detachment 
 Choroidal hemorrhage  
  Corneal abrasion during surgery 
 Failure to implant the device  
  Tube touching iris  
  Tube touching cornea 
  Iris abrasion during surgery 
 Globe perforation during the imp lantation or anesthesia 
 Flat anterior chamber  
 Needle damaged corneal endothelium 
 
                                                          Page  46 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
 Post-operative adverse events: 
 Anesthesia-related complications  
 Anterior chamber puncture 
 Aqueous humor misdirecti on (malignant  glaucoma) 
 Blebitis 
 Bleb leak based on Seidel positive test 
 Choroidal effusion/detachment  
 Choroidal hemorrhage  
 Chronic pain 
 Clinically signifi cant corneal damage 
 Clinically significant iris damage 
 Conjunctival dehiscence 
 Conjunctival dissection 
 Corneal edema 
 Diplopia 
 Encapsulated bleb causing increased IOP 
 Endophthalmitis 
 Erosion of the device th rough the conjunctiva  
 Flat anterior chamber 
 Hypotony (IOP<6mmHg at any time) 
 Hypotony maculopathy 
 Implant migration  
 Inadequate pain control following surgery 
 Increased IOP requiring Needling 
 Increased IOP requiring Needli ng with 5FU/MMC post-surgical inj ection of bleb area. 
 Increased IOP requiring addi tion of glaucoma medications 
 Increased IOP requiring treatme nt with oral or i ntravenous medi cations 
 Prolonged inflammation resulting fr om surgery defined as requir ing anti-inflammatory 
medication with dura tion and dosage in excess of protocol post- op instructions 
 Loss of 2 lines or more of BCVA  on 2 consecutive standard follo w-ups 90 days or more 
 after implantation  (Note: a loss of BCVA in conjunc tion with posterior capsule opa cification, followed by  
Nd:YAG capsulotomy and improveme nt of BCVA, is not considered a n adverse event) 
 Loss of light perception 
 Macular edema  
 Posterior capsule opacification 
 Proptosis 
 Pupillary block 
 Re-suture scleral flap 
 Retinal complication (dialysis,  flap tears, detachment, decompr ession or proliferative 
retinopathy) 
 Shallow anterior chamber 
 Subconjunctival bleeding or hyphema  at any time (i ncluding micr ohyphema)  
 
                                                          Page  47 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
  Event requiring unplanned surgical intervention for reason othe r than glaucoma  
  Tube obstruction, partial or com plete, regardless of how long the obstruction is present  
 Tube touching iris  
 Tube touching cornea 
 Vitreous hemorrhage 
 Leakage of wound site based on Seidel test 
 Suture abscess or other local infection 
 Significant increase in IOP vs . screening ≥10 mmHg occurring at  any visit  
 Strabismus 
 Event requiring unplanned glaucoma -related ocular surgical inte rvention 
 Device malfunction 
 Increase in C/D ratio of ≥0.3 units on slit lamp biomicroscopic  examination 
 Confirmed worsening in the visu al field of mean deviation (MD) of ≥2.5 dB compared to 
the MD used to determine subjec t eligibility (confirmed on at l east 2 out of 3 visual field 
tests performed after 3 months post procedure) 
 Laser removal of blockage at t he tip of MicroShunt or at the AC  entry point for 
trabeculectomy 
 Use of a viscoelastic to limit aqueous flow  
 Other  – complete AE description  
 
Sight-Threatening Adverse Events 
 Sight-threatening AEs include d but are not limited to events s uch as endophthalmitis and 
corneal decompensation, globe pe rforation during the implantati on or anesthesia, severe 
retinal detachment, severe choroi dal hemorrhage, severe choroid al detachment and aqueous 
misdirection.  Sight-threatening AEs will be reported to InnFocus and to the i nvestigator’s IRB as soon as 
possible, but no later than 10 wor king days after the investiga tor first learns of the event.  
Subjects who are terminated fro m the study due to the adverse e xperiences will be followed 
until their medical outcome is de termined; written reports will  be provided to the sponsor 
by the investigator.  Unanticipated Adverse Device Effect 
Unanticipated adverse device effe ct (UADE) is defined as any se rious adverse effect on the 
health or safety or any life-thr eatening problem or death cause d by, or associated with, a 
device, if that effect, problem , or death was not previously id entified in nature, severity, or 
degree of incidence in the inves tigational plan or application (including a supplementary 
plan or application), or any other  unanticipated serious proble m associated with a device 
that relates to the rights, saf ety, or welfare of subjects.  Da te of event, its severity, treatment 
if any, and the assessed relations hip of the eve nt to the study  device will be recorded on the 
AE form.  11.2  Reporting Adverse Events and Unanticipated Adverse Device  Effects 
All unanticipated adverse device effects (UADE) will be reporte d to the study sponsor, 
InnFocus, Inc., (Fax   305-378-2652)  or by e-mail and to the re viewing IRB as soon as 
possible but no later than 10 wor king days after the investigat or first learns of  the event.  A 
                                                          Page  48 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
 UADE should be documented as an adve rse event using the Adverse  Event form and then 
also documented on the UADE form .   All adverse events should b e documented by 
completing the Adverse Event fo rm and, if applicable, a specifi c IRB AE form. 
 Identification and collection of a dverse event in formation will  be the joint responsibility of 
the study sponsor, the CRO, and t he study investigators.  The s ponsor, the investigator, and 
the CRO will all follow the Decl aration of Helsinki in order to  ensure the safety of all 
subjects.  The sponsor will conduct an evalu ation of unanticipated adverse  device effects.  If the 
sponsor determines that an unantic ipated adverse device effect presents an unreasonable 
risk to subjects, parts of the  investigation presenting risks w ill be terminated.  Termination 
will occur not later than 5 working days after the sponsor make s such a determination and 
not later than 15 working days after  the sponsor first received  notice of the effect. 
 11.3  Type and Duration of Follow- up after Adverse Events 
The investigator is responsibl e for recommend ing the type and d uration of follow-up for 
each subject who experiences an adver se event.  All events must  be followed until 
complete resolution, resolution with sequel ae, or the subject e xits from the study.  All 
details must be documented on the Adverse Event Form.  If a subject in either study arm  requires an additional glaucom a surgery, the subject shall 
continue to be seen for the re quired follow-up visits so that s afety and effectiveness can 
continue to be monitored. 
 
12.0  Monitoring Plan 
 
InnFocus or its designee(s) will monitor the study in a manner consistent with applicable 
health authority regulations a nd the clinical research standard s adopted by InnFocus.  Study 
monitoring will involve the following elements:  12.1 InnFocus or its designee(s) wi ll meet with investigators p rior to the initiation of the 
study in order to review the ade quacy of the subject population , facilities, and equipment 
with respect to the needs of t he study, and to familiarize the investigator with the study 
protocol and Good Clin ical Practices 
 12.2 InnFocus or its designee(s) m ay meet with the investigator (s) at the time the site 
begins to enroll in or der to ensure that subjects are being pro perly selected and that study 
data are being correctly recorded.  12.3 InnFocus or its designee(s) wi ll visit the c linical site a t any time during the study to 
review and/or collect the Case Report Forms. 
 
12.4 Interim monitoring visits a nd telephone consultation will occur as necessary during 
the course of the study to ensur e the proper progress and docum entation of the study 
findings. 
                                                          Page  49 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
  
12.5 A close-out monitoring visit will be conducted at the comp letion of the study or study 
termination. 
 
13.0  Statistical Plan 
 
 The statistical analysis plan ha s been detailed in a separate document. 
 
14.0  Medical Monitor 
 
An independent Medical Monitor will be used in the study.  The Medical Monitor will 
not be an investigator in the st udy.  The Medical Monitor will be a certified 
ophthalmologist with a glaucoma specialization.  The Medical Mo nitor will review 
adverse events and determine if  the appropriate action have or are being taken.  In cases 
where there was an IOP increase and intervention or glaucoma me dication was initiated 
or in cases where medication was  discontinued, th e Monitor will  assure that the actions of 
the investigator met the intent of the protocol and were approp riate for the specific 
subject involved.    
15.0   Data Safety Monitoring Board 
 
A clinical trial DSMB will be us ed for this clinical study with  pertinent expertise and will 
review on a regular basis accumulating data from this clinical study. The DSMB will 
advise the sponsor regarding the  continuing safety of trial sub jects and those yet to be 
recruited to the trial, as we ll as the continuing validity and scientific merit of the trial. 
 The DSMB will review the Phase  I study results and provide thei r recommendations 
directly to FDA for continuing t he study into Phase II.  The Ph ase I interim report will be 
provided to them in a masked fas hion for review.   Only in the e vent of unexpected safety 
findings will the data be unmasked for further study. 
 DSMB meetings will be scheduled to review the status of the stu dy.  After review of the 
first 75 subjects at 3 months foll ow-up in the Phase I study, D SMB meetings will be 
scheduled at least every six mont hs to review interim results i ncluding 1 year Phase II 
results.  All data reviews by the DSMB will be masked to the tr eatment group. 
 A charter and operational procedures will be established for th e DSMB.  The DSMB will 
consist of at least three memb ers and will be  established by th e sponsor.  No DSMB 
member will have a conflict of i nterest in maintaining objectiv ity in study evaluation.
 
 
16.0  Compliance with Protocol 
 
An investigator shall conduct this investigation in accordance with the signed agreement 
with the sponsor, the investiga tional plan, the IDE regulation and other applicable FDA 
regulations, and any conditions of approval imposed by an IRB o r FDA. 
                                                          Page  50 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
  
    
17.0  References 
 
1. The Advanced Glaucoma Interven tion Study Investigators: The Adv anced Glaucoma 
Intervention Study (AGIS): 1. S tudy design and methods, and bas eline characteristics of 
study patients. Controlled Clinic al Trials 1994;15:299-325. 
2. The AGIS Investigators.  The Adva nced Glaucoma Intervention Stu dy (AGIS) 14.  
Distinguishing progression of glauco ma from visual field fluctu ations.  Ophthalmology 
2004;  111:2109-2116.  
3. The AGIS Investigators.  The Adva nced Glaucoma Intervention Stu dy (AGIS) 7.  The 
relationship between c ontrol of intr aocular pressure and visual  field deterioration. Am J 
Ophthalmol 2000;130:429-440.  
4. Heijl A, Leske MC, Bengtsson B, Hyman L, Bengstsson B, Hussein M; Reduction of 
intraocular pressure and glauco ma progression: results from the  Early Manifest 
Glaucoma Trial.  Arch Ophthalmology. 2002;120:1268-1279.  
5. Heijl A, Bengtsson B, Hyman L, Leske MC; Early Manifest Trial G roup.  Natural 
history of open-angle glau coma.  Ophthalmology 2009;116:):2271- 2276. 
6. Lichter PR, Musch DC, Gillespie BW, Guire KE, Janz NK, Wren PA,  Mills RP; CIGTS 
Study Group.  Interim clin ical outcomes in the Collaborative In itial Glaucoma 
Treatment Study comparing initial treatment randomized to medic ations or surgery.  
Ophthalmology 2001;108:1943-1953. 
7. Musch DC, Gillespie BW, Lichter P R, Niziol LM, Janz NK; CIGTS S tudy Investigators. 
Visual field progression in the C ollaborative Initial Glaucoma Treatment Study.  The 
impact of treatment and other ba seline factors.  Ophthalmol: 20 09;116:200-7.  
8. Musch DC, Niziol LM, Gillespie BW.  A critical evaluation of th e evidence for visual 
field improvement in the CIG TS.  ARVO 2012 Abstracts #4479, p-2 83.  (The paper in 
preparation will include Palmberg P who suggested the analysis. ) 
9   Desai, Practice Preferences for  Glaucoma Surgery: A Survey o f the American Glaucoma 
Society in 2008, Ophthalmic Sur g Lasers Imaging 2011;42:202-208  
10  Wilkins, Intraoperative Mitomy cin C for glaucoma surgery (Rev iew), Cochrane 
Collaboration, Wiley and Sons, 2010 
11   Alwrity, Primary low-risk trabecu lectomy augmented with low-dos e mitomycin-C, Eur J 
Ophthalmol 2009; 19:971-6 
12    Maris, Comparison of T rabeculectomy With E x-PRESS Miniature Gl aucoma Device 
Implanted Under Scleral Flap, J Glaucoma 2007;16:14–19 
13  Johnson, CA. Keltner JL, Cello  KE,  Edwards M, Kass MA, Gordon MO, Budenz DL, 
Gaasterland DE, Werner E, and the  Ocular Hypertension Study Gro up, Baseline Visual 
Field Characteristics in the Ocu lar Hypertension Treatment Stud y, Ophthalmology 
2002;109:432–437   
                                                          Page  51 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
  
18.0  Supplementary Informati on – Ophthalmic Definitions 
 
Anterior Chamber:  The fluid f illed space filled with aqueous f luid between the iris and back 
surface of the cornea.  Aqueous Flare:  A clinical sign o ccurring when there is increas ed protein content at the aqueous.  
It occurs when there is increase d protein content in the aqueou s fluid indicating a breakdown of 
the blood/aqueous barrier.  Aqueous Humor:  Clear, watery f luid that fills the space betwee n the back corneal surface and 
the front vitreous surface, bath ing the lens.  Produced by cili ary processes: nouris hes the cornea, 
iris, and lens and maintai ns the ocular pressure. 
 Best Corrected Visual Acuity  (BCVA):  Measur ement of vision obt ained with the best possible 
lens correction.  Choroid:  The layer of major blood vessels (vascular layer) of the eye, which lies between the 
retina and sclera and provides nour ishment to the outer layers of the retina. 
 Ciliary Body:  The circumferential  tissue inside the eye compos ed of ciliary muscle and ciliary 
processes that produc e aqueous fluid.   
 Ciliary Processes:  The innermos t, epithelial portion of the ci liary body that secretes aqueous 
fluid and serves as attachment s ite of suspensory ligaments of the lens (zonules). 
 Collagen:  Protein fibrils withi n the corneal tissue that help sustain its shape. 
 Conjunctivitis:  An inf lammation of the conjunctiva (mucus memb ranes that cover the white 
portion of the eye and inner surfaces of the eyelids).  Charact erized by discharge, grittiness, 
redness and swelling.  Contagious , usually viral in origin. 
 Cornea:  The outer, transparent, front segment of the cornea of ten having specific signs and 
symptoms with a known cause.  Corneal Ulcer:  Area of epithelial tissue loss from the corneal  surface: associated with 
inflammatory cells in the corn ea and anterior chamber and usual ly caused by bacterial, fungal or 
viral infection.  Cystic Bleb – thin, avascular b lister under the conjunctiva 
 Encapsulated Bleb - dome-shaped, elevated, tense, thick-walled,  demarcated area centered over 
the trabeculectomy or othe r subconjunctival wound site 
 Epithelium:  Tissue covering the outer surfaces of the cornea, conjunctiva, and eyelid surfaces. 
 
                                                          Page  52 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
 Filtering Bleb:  A surgical proc edure causing a bubble-like bli ster of the conjunc tiva overlying a 
tunnel that leads to inside of t he eye: formed by a surgical dr ainage procedure.  The most 
common form of filtering sur gery is trabeculectomy. 
 Glaucoma:  Damage to the optic n erve and to retinal nerve fiber  diagnosed by excavation of the 
optic nerve head and documented b y typical visual field defects .  A common cause of 
preventable vision loss. Elevated intraocular pressure is the o nly modifiable r isk factor. 
 Goldmann Applanation Tonometer:   Instrument device that measure s intraocular pressure and 
usually attaches to a slit lamp.  Gonioprism:  A special type of cont act lens with prism that per mits examination of the periphery 
of the anterior chamber or  the peripheral retina. 
 Intraocular Pressure (IOP):  Pre ssure of the fluid inside the e ye, which varies among individuals. 
 Iritis:  An inflammation of the colored part  of the eye (iris) that can cause pain, tearing, blurred 
vision, a small pupil and a red, c ongested eye, which is sensit ive to light. 
 Keratitis:  Corneal i nflammation, characterized by the loss of luster and transparency, and 
cellular infiltration.  Lens:  The natural crystalline lens of the eye: transparent, bi oconvex intraocular tissue that helps 
bring rays of light to focus on t he retina.  Suspended by fine ligaments (zonules) attached 
between the ciliary processes.   
 
Limbus:  The transitional zone , about 1-2 millimeters wide, whe re the cornea joins the sclera and 
the bulbar conjunctiva att aches to the eyeball. 
 Low Vision:  Visual loss, which cannot be corrected with eyewea r or contact lenses and 
interferes with daily living activities.  
 Lumen:  The space within the inside of any tubular structure, e .g., the inside walls of the arteries 
ore veins or tubular  medical device. 
 Open-angle glaucoma (OAG):  Gla ucoma not associated with mechan ical coverage of the 
trabecular meshwork by iris.  Optic cup:  The white depressi on in the center of the optic dis c; usually occupies about one-third 
or less of the total  disc diameter.   
 Optic Disc/Optic Nerve Head:  The  exit site of the retinal nerv e fibers from the eye. 
 Persistent Hypotony - intraocular  pressure below  6mm that is pr esent on two consecutive follow-
ups after three months post-surgery.  
                                                          Page  53 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
 Posterior Chamber:  The space be tween the back of the iris and the front face of the vitreous; 
filled with aqueous fluid.  Pupil:  The variable-size, circu lar opening in th e center of th e iris; regulating the amount of light 
that enters the eye.  Retina:  The part of the eye, that converts images (from the ey e’s optical system)  into electrical 
impulses sent along the optic ne rve for transmission back to th e brain.  It consists of many named 
layers that include cones, rods, bi polar cells, amacrine cells,  ganglion cells, horizontal cells, 
Mueller cells, and all interconnecting nerve fibers.  Schlemm’s Canal:  The circular channel deep in the corneo-scler a junction (limbus); collecting 
aqueous fluid from the anterior  chamber of the eye and deliveri ng it through a series of veins into 
the blood stream.  Passageway in w hich aqueous fluid leaves the  eye. 
 Sclera:  The opaque, fibrous, pr otective outer layer of the eye ; contains collagen and elastic 
fibers.  This is directly conti nuous with the cornea (interiorl y) and with the sheath covering the 
optic nerve (posteriorly).   Stroma (Iris):  The primary substa nce of the iris and contains pigment cells tha t determine eye 
color, and two non-striated muscl es: the ring-shaped sphincter and the radially-fibered dilator. 
 Tonometry:  The procedure that m easures intraocular pressure in  the eye.  The various types of 
devices measure the pressure by i ndenting the cornea and are as  follows:  applanation, 
indentation, pneumotonometer , and pneumatic tonometer. 
 
Trabecular Meshwork:  The mesh-li ke structure inside the eye br idging the anterior chamber 
angle between the cornea and the s clera. The trabecular meshwor k, associated 
glycosaminoglucans, and the endot helium of Schlemms canal compr ise the outflow resistance 
for aqueous leaving the anterior  chamber and entering into the canal of Schlemm. 
 Trabeculectomy:  Type of filteri ng procedure used in the treatm ent of glaucoma.  Involves the 
formation of an opening or hole unde r the conjunctiva and scler al flap into the a nterior chamber, 
such that aqueous humor is drained onto the outer surface of th e sclera.  
 Uvea, Uveal Tract:  The pigmente d layers of the eye (iris, cili ary body and choroid) that contain 
the majority of the blood vessel supply.  Visual Acuity (VA):  The measurem ent of the eye’s ability to di stinguish objects, details and 
shapes.  This is assessed by the s mallest identifiable letters that can be discerned at a specified 
distance (usually 20 feet or 14 inches).  Visual Field:  The vertical a nd horizontal extent of visual per ception of specific targets, 
measured in degrees in eac h direction fro m fixation.  
 
                                                          Page  54 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
 Vitrectomy:  Surgical  procedure for the removal of vitreous flu id, blood, or membranes from the 
vitreous cavity in th e posterior of the eye, usually performed by entering through the pars plana 
with a needle-like ro tary cutter that has  fluid injection and s uction capabilities. 
 Vitreous:  The transparent, color less gelatinous mass of fine c ollagen fibrils and hyaluronic acid 
filling the rear two-thirds of t he interior of the eyeball, bet ween the lens and the retina. 
 Zonules:  Radially arranged fiber s that suspend the lens from t he ciliary body and hold it in 
position. 
 
                                                          Page  55 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
 APPENDIX 1 
1.0 Background on POAG, Management, and Rationale for the 
Study  
 
1.1 Background on Primary Open Angle Glaucoma 
 The following summary in this section has been excerpted from t he American Academy of 
Ophthalmology Preferred Practice Patterns for Primary Open Angl e Glaucoma, October, 
2010.  Additional information and specific literature reference s can be obtained by going to 
the following website: http://one.aao.org/ce/practice guidelines/ppp_content.aspx?cid=9 3019a87-4649-4130-8f94-
b6a9b19144d2  
EPIDEMIOLOGY 
Primary open-angle glaucoma is a significant pub lic health prob lem. It is estimated that 45 
million people in the world have  open-angle glaucoma (OAG).  Gl aucoma (both open-
angle and angle-closure) is the  second leading cause of blindne ss worldwide, with 
approximately 8.4 million people b lind from glaucoma.  Overall in 2004, the prevalence of 
POAG for adults 40 and older in the  United States was estimated  to be about 2%.  Open-
angle glaucoma affects an estim ated 2.2 million people in the U nited States, and that 
number is likely to increase to 3.3 million in 2020 as the popu lation ages. However, large 
differences exist in the preva lence of glaucoma among different  ethnic groups. Overall, 
there appears to be a threefol d higher prevalence of OAG in Afr ican Americans relative to 
non-Hispanic Whites in the Unite d States.  It is also the leadi ng cause of blindness in 
African Americans. Further, the  prevalence of OAG is even highe r in Afro-Caribbeans 
relative to African Americans. R ecent evidence on Hispanics/Lat inos suggests that they 
have high prevalence rates of OAG that are comparable to Africa n Americans.  There are 
no data on the prevalence of OAG in A sians in the United States . 
RISK FACTORS 
The findings of epide miological investigations and clinical tri als provide a framework for 
assessing the risk factors asso ciated with POAG. The important risk factors associated with 
POAG are as follows: 
 Intraocular pressure level 
 Older age 
 Family histor y of glaucoma 
 African ancestry or Lati no/Hispanic ethnicity 
 Thinner central cornea 
 Low ocular perfusion pressures 
 Type 2 diabetes mellitus 
 Myopia 
 Genetic mutations  
                                                          Page  56 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
 Intraocular Pressure  
Several population-based studies h ave demonstrated that the pre valence of POAG increases 
as the level of IOP increases .  These studies provide strong ev idence that IOP plays an 
important role in the neuropat hy of POAG. Furthermore, studies have demonstrated that 
reduction in the level of IOP le ssens the risk of visual field progression in OAG.  In 
addition, treated eyes that have a  greater IOP fluctuation may be at increased risk of 
progression, although this has not  been shown consistently.  
In spite of the relationship be tween the level of IOP and POAG,  there is great inter-
individual variation in the sus ceptibility of the optic nerve t o IOP-related damage. 
Population-based studies indica te that a variable proportion of  patients with IOP greater 
than 21 mmHg (Northern Italy [13%] , Los Angeles [18%], Arizona [20%], Blue Mountains 
[25%], Melbourne [39%], Baltimo re [45%], Rotterd am [61%], Barba dos [71%]) have 
glaucomatous optic nerve damage .  This suggests that an IOP lev el of greater than 21 
mmHg is an arbitrarily defined  level and highlights the poor va lue of utilizing a specific 
IOP cutoff as a measure for screening and diagnosing POAG. 
Age 
Older age is another important r isk factor for the presence of POAG.   A number of 
epidemiological studies demonstrate that the prevalence of glau coma increases 
dramatically with age , particularly among i ndividuals of Latino /Hispanic and African 
descent (see Table 1, Figures  1 and 4). African Americans 73 to  74 years old and 75 and 
older had a prevalence of 5.7%  and 23.2%, respectively. Similar ly, the prevalence of OAG 
was 3.4% for white individua ls 73 and 74 years old and 9.4% for  those 75 and older.  
Family History 
Family history is a risk factor f or glaucoma. In the Rotterdam Eye Study, where all siblings 
of glaucoma cases and controls  were examined, the odds of havin g POAG was 9.2-fold 
higher for individuals who have a  first-degree relative (siblin g or parent) with medically 
confirmed POAG.  Other studies i n which family members were not  physically examined 
depend on patient reports of the sta tus of family members, and these are known to be 
subject to several biases. None theless, they support the concep t that first degree relatives of 
those with OAG are at greater ris k. For example, in the Baltimo re Eye Survey and the Los 
Angeles Latino Eye Study (LALES) , for individuals with POAG the  odds were twice as 
high (1.92 and 2.85, respectively) of reporting a first-degree relative (parent, child, or 
sibling) with glaucoma compa red with individuals who did not ha ve glaucoma. However, 
the odds increased to over three times as high if they reported  that they had a sibling with 
glaucoma (LALES 3.47, Baltimore 3. 7). Interestingly, the odds r ose to fivefold higher if 
there were two or more siblin gs who were reported to have a his tory of glaucoma. 
Race or Ethnicity 
For POAG, ethnicity is an impor tant risk factor. The prevalence  of POAG is higher in 
individuals of West African, Afro-Caribbea n, or Latino/Hispanic  origin than of other 
groups. The prevalence is three times higher in African America ns and Hispanics of 
Mexican ancestry compared with no n-Hispanic Whites. Blindness f rom glaucoma is at 
least six times more prevalent i n African Americans than in Cau casian Americans.  
                                                          Page  57 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
 Central Corneal Thickness  
Because applanation tonometry measurements are derived from res istance to corneal 
indentation and corneal stiffness , differences in central corne al thickness (CCT) may 
introduce artifacts in IOP measur ement. The mean CCT in healthy  human eyes varies by 
race/ethnicity. The average CCT  measured ultrasonically in Cauc asian Americans is 556 
μm, in Latinos it is 546 μm and i n African Americans it is 534 μm. If IOP is 
underestimated in those with thi nner CCT, the relationship betw een IOP level and OAG 
damage may be underestimated, sinc e the IOP is actually higher than measured. 
Conversely, if IOP is overestima ted in those with a non-edemato us thicker CCT, the 
relationship between IOP level  and OAG damage may be overestima ted, since the IOP is 
actually lower than measured. A lthough several tables and figur es have been published, no 
standard nomogram correcting appl anation IOP measurements for C CT has yet been fully 
validated.  
A thinner central cornea has b een reported as an independent ri sk factor (independent of 
IOP) associated with POAG, though not  in all studies. In LALES,  the risk of having OAG 
was higher in persons with thinn er CCT compared with those with  normal or thicker CCT 
even after adjusting the IOP.  S tudies show that differences in  corneal biomechanics across 
individuals may have a greater i mpact on IOP measurement errors  than CCT.  
Low Ocular Perfusion Pressure  
Ocular perfusion pressure is th e difference between blood press ure (at systole or diastole) 
and the IOP. It has been hypothesi zed that low oc ular perfusion  pressures lead to alterations 
in blood flow at the optic nerve  head and contribute to progres sive glaucomatous optic 
nerve damage. Population-based stu dies in African Americans, Hi spanics, and non-
Hispanic Whites have provided evi dence that low diastolic perfu sion pressure (<50 mmHg) 
is associated with a higher prev alence of POAG.  In addition, i n the Early Manifest 
Glaucoma Treatment Study, low s ystolic perfusion pressure (≤125  mmHg) was associated 
with a higher risk of glaucoma  progression (relative risk of 1. 42) over an 8-year period.  
Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus 
While there are some conflic ting data on the association betwee n type 2 diabetes mellitus 
(type 2 DM) and POAG, there is in creasing evidence from populat ion-based studies 
suggesting that type 2 DM is an i mportant risk factor for POAG.   Population-based 
assessments of Hispanics (in L os Angeles, California), non-Hisp anic Whites (in Beaver 
Dam, Wisconsin and Blue Mountai ns, Australia), and a large coho rt enrolled in the Nurses 
Health Study have shown that pers ons with type 2 DM are more li kely (40% higher odds in 
Hispanics, twofold higher odds in n on-Hispanic Whites) to have POAG. Further, in the 
LALES, longer duration of type 2 D M was associated with a highe r risk of having POAG. 
One explanation for this observa tion is that microvascular chan ges in the optic nerve may 
contribute to the greater sus ceptibility of optic nerve damage in persons with type 2 DM.  
Myopia 
Large cross-sectional epidemiol ogic studies in Afro-Caribbeans,  Hispanics, non-Hispanic 
Whites, Chinese, Asian Indians, a nd Japanese suggest that perso ns with myopia have a 
higher prevalence of OAG than thos e without myopia. More recent ly, data from the 
                                                          Page  58 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
 LALES have provided evidence of a n independent relationship bet ween longer axial length 
(axial myopia) and a higher pr evalence of OAG.  The underlying hypothesis is that 
individuals with axial myopia ha ve weaker scleral support at th e optic nerve, and this 
contributes to a greater suscep tibility of the optic nerve to g laucomatous damage. 
Genetic Factors  
The first gene to be linked t o POAG was the myocilin gene ( MYOC)  on chromosome 1 .  In 
one study, 3% to 4% of cases w ith POAG were found to have mutat ions in the myocilin 
gene.  Several chromosomal regi ons have now been linked to POAG  and additional genes 
identified.  However, a major ity of the cases with POAG do not have an identified genetic 
abnormality, suggesting that glau comatous optic nerve damage ma y be multifactorial in its 
development, with different genes modifying the impact of vario us factors such as age, 
IOP, and blood flow. 
Other Factors 
In addition, migraine headache a nd peripheral vasospasm have be en identified as risk 
factors for glaucomatous optic  nerve damage.  The association b etween POAG and factors 
such as concurrent cardiovascul ar disease and systemic hyperten sion has not been 
demonstrated consistently.  
1.2. Management of Primary Open Angle Glaucoma 
 
Goals  
The goals of managing patients w ith POAG are to achieve the fol lowing: 
 Controlled IOP in the target range 
 Stable optic nerve/retinal ne rve fiber layer status 
 Stable visual fields 
 
Because elevated IOP is a treata ble cause of POAG damage, one c an expect to reduce the 
risk of disease progression in ma ny patients by lowering the IO P by means of medication, 
laser therapy, or incisional glau coma surgery. Results from ran domized controlled trials 
and other studies reinforce this  expectation and provide eviden ce that the more the IOP is 
lowered, the more likely is it t o slow the rate of progression of POAG. 
  Management is a challenge for  the patient and the doctor, beca use POAG is a chronic, 
often asymptomatic, condition that  may require frequent use of multiple and expensive 
medications
181 that may cause side effects or m ay require laser or incisional  surgery. The 
effects of treatment, the patient's quality of life, and the pa tient's life expectancy are 
important to consider when choos ing therapy. The diagnosis, sev erity of the disease, 
prognosis and management plan, a nd likelihood of long-term ther apy should be discussed 
with the patient.  Subs tantial field loss i n glaucoma is associ ated with a decrease in quality 
of life measures.  Target Intraocular Pressure for Patients with POAG  
The goal of glaucoma treatment is to maintain the IOP in a rang e at which a patient is 
likely to remain stable or at which worsening of glaucoma will be slow enough that the risk 
                                                          Page  59 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
 of additional intervention is  not justified.  The estimated upp er limit of this range is 
considered the "target pressure."  The initial target pressure i s an estimate and a means 
toward the ultimate goal of prot ecting the patient's vision. Th e target pressure should be 
individualized and may need adjus tment during the course of the  disease. 
  When initiating therapy, the ophtha lmologist assumes that the m easured pretreatment 
pressure range contributed to opt ic nerve damage and is likely to cause additional damage 
in the future. Lowering the pr etreatment IOP by 25% or more has  been shown to inhibit 
progression of POAG.  It is reasona ble to select an initial tar get pressure at least 25% lower 
than pretreatment levels. Choosi ng an even lower target IOP can  be justified i f there is 
more severe optic nerv e damage, if the dama ge is progressing ra pidly, or if other risk 
factors such as family histor y, age, or disc hemorrhages are pr esent  
 Choosing a less aggressive targe t IOP may be reasonable if the risks of aggressive 
treatment outweigh the benefits (e.g., if a patient does not to lerate medical therapy well and 
surgical intervention would be di fficult or if the patient's li fe expectancy is short). In a 
study of newly diagnosed patients w ith moderate to advanced gla ucoma, a subset of 
patients randomized to initial  lowering of IOP by surgery did b etter than those assigned to 
medical treatment over an 8-y ear period, and this could be due to the lower mean post-
treatment IOP in the surgery group.   The adequacy and validity of the  target pressure are periodica lly reassessed by comparing 
optic nerve status (by optic disc  appearance, quan titative asse ssments of the disc and nerve 
fiber layer, and visual field tes ts) with previous examinations . If progressi on occurs at the 
target pressure, undetected IOP f luctuations and adherence to t herapy can be re-evaluated 
before adjusting the target IOP . However, target pressure is an  estimate, and all treatment 
decisions must be individualize d according to the needs of the patient. 
 Therapeutic Choices  
The IOP can be lowered by medical  treatment, laser therapy, or incisional glaucoma 
surgery (alone or in combination) . The choice of initial therap y depends on numerous 
considerations, and discussion of t reatment with the patient sh ould include the relative risks 
and benefits of the three options.  Medical treatment  
Unless contraindicated, medical therapy is presently the most c ommon initial intervention 
to lower IOP. There are many drugs  available for initial therap y, and medication choice 
may be influenced by potential co st, side effects, and dosing s chedules Patient adherence to 
therapy is enhanced by using eyedr ops with the fewest side effe cts as infrequently as 
necessary to achieve the target IOP. If target IOP is not achie ved by one medication, then 
additional separate medications , combination therapies, or swit ching of treatments may be 
considered to reach the target IOP.   Prostaglandin analogs and beta-b lockers are the most frequently  used initial eye drops for 
lowering IOP in patients with glau coma. Prostaglandin analogs a re the most effective drugs 
at lowering IOP and can be consider ed as initial medical therap y unless other 
                                                          Page  60 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
 considerations such as cost, sid e effects, intolerance, or pati ent refusal preclude this. Other 
agents in addition to prostagla ndin analogs and beta-blockers i nclude alpha2 adrenergic 
agonists, parasympathomimetics, a nd topical and oral carbonic a nhydrase inhibitors. 
 The ophthalmologist should consid er the balance between side ef fects and effectiveness in 
choosing a regimen of maximal effe ctiveness and to lerance to ac hieve the desired IOP 
reduction for each patient. Frequent dosing and side effects (s uch as depression, exercise 
intolerance, and impotence with t opical beta-blockers) may affe ct adherence to therapy. 
 Adequate treatment of glaucoma re quires a high level of adheren ce to therapy. Frequently 
this is not achieved; studies i ndicate relatively poor adherenc e to therapy.  Even with 
instruction, free medication, on ce-daily administration, use of  a dosing aid, and electronic 
monitoring of adherence, nearl y 45% of patients in one study to ok fewer than 75% of their 
prescribed doses.  Instilling eyedr ops correctly is difficult f or patients, and their ability to 
do so may worsen as glaucoma prog resses. Repeated instruction a nd counseling in proper 
techniques for using medication a s well as a clearly written me dication regimen and 
follow-up telephone calls may imp rove adherence to therapy.  
 Laser trabeculoplasty  
Laser trabeculoplasty can be cons idered as initial therapy in s elected patients or an 
alternative for patients who cannot or will not use medications  reliably due to cost, memory 
problems, difficulty with instil lation, or intol erance to the m edication. Laser 
trabeculoplasty lowers IOP by improving aqueous outflow and can  be performed using 
argon, diode, and frequency-doubled YAG lasers.  
Argon and diode laser trabeculoplasty  
Studies using continuous-wave arg on laser with a wavelength spe ctrum that peaks at 488 
nm (argon laser trabeculoplasty  [ALT]) found that treatment inc reases aqueous outflow and 
provides a clinically signifi cant reduction of IOP in more than  75% of initial treatments of 
previously unoperated eyes.  Since these initial s tudies, more compact solid-state diode 
lasers have mostly replaced the o riginal argon laser with equal  IOP lowering efficacy. 
For patients initially treated w ith ALT, the amount of medical treatment required for 
glaucoma control is reduced.  Res ults from long-term studies of  patients receiving 
maximum medical therapy who subse quently had laser and incision al surgery indicate that 
30% to more than 50% of eyes requi re additional surgical treatm ent within 5 years after 
ALT.  For eyes that have failed t o maintain a previously adequa te response, repeat ALT has 
a low long-term rate of succe ss, with failure occurring in near ly 90% of these eyes by 2 
years. After previous applicati ons to the full circumference of  the anterior chamber angle, 
repeat ALT has a lower success ra te than initial therapy in eye s that have not had a 
reduction in IOP for at least a ye ar following the first laser surgery. Compared with initial 
laser trabeculoplast y, there is an increased risk of problems a nd complications such as IOP 
spikes after repeat laser trabeculoplasty.  Selective laser trabeculoplasty  
The introduction of se lective laser trabecu loplasty (SLT) is mo st likely responsible for the 
increase in use of laser trab eculoplasty in 2001 after a previo us decline. Selective laser 
                                                          Page  61 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
 trabeculoplasty uses a Q-sw itched, frequency doubled, 532 nm Nd :YAG laser that delivers 
less energy and is purported t o be selectively absorbed by pigm ented cells in the trabecular 
meshwork. These attributes appe ar purportedly to produce less t hermal damage to the 
trabecular meshwork compared wit h ALT.  However, several prospe ctive and retrospective 
studies indicate that SLT app ears comparable  to but not better than ALT in lowering IOP. 
Selective laser trabeculoplasty  also appears to be comparable i n efficacy to medical therapy 
with prostaglandin analogs, a lthough in one prospective study, SLT was only comparable 
to latanoprost when 360 degrees of the trabecular meshwork was treated.  In this study, 
latanoprost had a better IOP-l owering effect c ompared with 90 a nd 180 degrees of 
treatment.  It has been claimed that SLT ha s greater success than ALT with repeated treatments, but no 
controlled, randomized clinical t rial has shown that this is tr ue. Only one study with a 
significant sample size has studi ed the results of SLT repeated  after prior SLT treatment. 
This was a retrospective st udy of repeat 360 degree SLT after p rior successful 360-degree 
SLT.  In the postoperative peri od, repeat SLT treatment lowered  IOP, but the effect was 
less than that with initial SLT treatment at 1 to 3 months and 5 to 8 months. These results 
suggest that repeat SLT may be l ess efficacious compared with p rimary treatment, but 
further studies are needed to c larify this issue. The safety pr ofile of SLT appears to be 
good, with mild anterior chamber in flammation after treatment a nd less ocular discomfort 
compared with ALT. Intraocular pr essure spikes have been noted after SLT in 4.5% to 27% 
of eyes in various studies.  Incisional glaucoma surgery Trabeculectomy  
Filtering surgery is effective i n lowering IOP; it is generally  indicated when medicine or 
laser therapy is insu fficient to control disease and can be con sidered in selected cases as 
initial therapy.   Filtering surgery provides an alternative path for the escape o f aqueous humor, and it often 
reduces IOP and the need for medic al treatment. Estimates of su ccess rates over time range 
from 31% to 56% in diff erent populations. The  failure rate of f iltering surgery, without the 
use of adjunctive antifibrotic m edications, alone  or combined w ith medical therapy in a 
previously unoperated eye in the A dvanced Glaucoma Intervention  Study reached 
approximately 30% in African Ame rican patients and 20% in Cauca sian American patients 
over a 10-year period. While long-te rm control is often achieve d, many patients may 
require further therapy or a reope ration, which carries a highe r failure rate. Furthermore, 
filtering surgery increases the  likelihood that phakic eyes may  undergo cataract surgery. In 
eyes that have undergone previous  cataract surge ry involving th e conjunctiva, the success 
rate of initial glaucoma  surgery is reduced.  
 
Antifibrotic agents may be use d intraoperatively and postoperat ively to reduce the 
subconjunctival scarring after f iltration surgery that can resu lt in failure of the operation. 
The use of intraoperative mitomyc in-C reduces the risk of surgi cal failure both in eyes at 
high risk of surgical failure a nd in eyes that have not undergo ne previous surgery. Some 
studies have demonstrated a bene fit of intraoperative 5-fluorou racil and others have not. 
                                                          Page  62 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
 The use of postoperative injec tions of 5-fluorouracil also redu ces the likelihood of surgical 
failure in both high-risk eyes a nd eyes that have not undergone  previous surgery. 
 The use of an antifibrotic agent carries with it an increased l ikelihood of bleb-related 
complications such as hypot ony, hypotony maculopathy, late-onse t bleb leak, and late-
onset infection that must be weighe d against the benefits when deciding whether or not to 
use these agents. These compli cations may be e ven more common i n primary filtering 
surgery of phakic patients.   Aqueous shunts  
All commercialized aqueous s hunts (also known as tube shunts, g laucoma drainage 
devices, and setons) consist of  a tube that diverts aqueous hum or to an end plate located in 
the equatorial region of the eye . The primary resistance to flo w through these devices 
occurs across the fibrous capsu le that develops around the end plate. Aqueous shunts differ 
in their design with respect to th e size, shape, and material f rom which the end plate is 
made. They may be further subdi vided into valved and non-valved  shunts, depending on 
whether or not a valve mechanism is present to limit flow throu gh the shunt if the IOP 
becomes too low. Examples of non -valved implants are the Baerve ldt glaucoma implant 
(Abbott Medical Optics, Santa A na, CA) and the Molteno implant (Molteno Ophthalmic 
Ltd., Dunedin, New Zealand). Example s of the valved implants ar e the Ahmed glaucoma 
valve (New World Medical, Inc ., Rancho Cucamonga, CA) and the K rupin implant (Eagle 
Vision, Inc., Memphis, TN).  Aqueous shunts have traditionally been used to manage medically  uncontrolled glaucoma 
when trabeculectomy has failed to control IOP or is deemed unli kely to succeed. This 
includes eyes with neovascular g laucoma, uveitic glaucoma, exte nsive conjunctival 
scarring from previous ocular surgery or cicatrizing diseases o f the conjunctiva, and 
congenital glaucoma in which angl e surgery has failed. However,  the indications for using 
aqueous shunts have been broadeni ng, and these devices are bein g increasingly utilized in 
the surgical management of glaucoma. Medicare data show a stead y rise in the number of 
shunts placed from 1995 to 2004, wh ile there has been a concurr ent decline in the number 
of trabeculectomies performed.  R ecent surveys of  the American Glaucoma Society 
membership have also demonstrated  a progressive increase in the  number of surgeons 
using tube shunts.   A systematic review concluded t hat aqueous shunts are comparabl e with trabeculectomy 
for IOP control and duration of be nefit, that larger end-plate surface area provides better 
IOP control, and that there a ppears to be no advantage to the u se of antifibrotic agents or 
systemic corticosteroids as a djuncts to aqueous shunt procedure s. The need for comparative 
studies and long-term follow-up was  identified by the authors. 
 Several studies have compared aqueous shunts with trabeculectom y. A retrospective study 
evaluating surgical results in m atched patient groups reported 
similar IOP reduction with 
the single-plate Mo lteno implant and trabec ulectomy with 5-fluo rouracil. However, another 
retrospective case-control st udy observed a higher 5-year succe ss rate after trabeculectomy 
with mitomycin-C than with Ahm ed glaucoma valve implantation. A  randomized clinical 
                                                          Page  63 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
 trial in Sri Lanka comparing the  Ahmed implant and trabeculecto my in patients with 
primary open-angle and angle-closure glaucoma found comparable IOP reduction and 
success rates with a mean follo w-up of 31 months. The Tube Vers us Trabeculectomy 
(TVT) Study is a multic enter, prospective, r andomized clinical trial that compared the 
safety and efficacy of tube-shunt  surgery using the 350-mm2 Bae rveldt glaucoma implant 
and trabeculectomy with mitomycin-C in patients with previous c ataract extraction and/or 
failed trabeculectomy. Tube-shunt  surgery had a higher success rate than trabeculectomy 
(85% vs. 69%) after 3 years of f ollow-up as defined by loss of vision, and/or IOP less than 
or equal to 5 mmHg or g reater than or equa l to 21 mmHg. Both su rgical procedures were 
associated with similar IOP r eduction and use of supplemental m edical therapy at 3 years.  
Postoperative complications occurr ed more frequently after trab eculectomy compared with 
tube-shunt surgery, but the rate of  serious complications assoc iated with vision loss and/or 
reoperation to manage the compli cation was similar with both pr ocedures. 
 Aqueous shunts are associated w ith intraoperative and postopera tive complications that are 
similar to those that occur with trabeculectomy. In addition, t hey have unique 
complications related to impla ntation of a foreign body. Erosio n of the tube may occur 
through the conjunctiva, and this typically develops a few mill imeters behind the limbus 
following anterior chamber ins ertion. Diplopia may result from extraocular muscle fibrosis 
or a mass effect of the bleb ove rlying the end plate. Tube-corn ea touch can lead to 
progressive endothelial cell loss and persistent corneal edema.  The risk of postoperative 
infection appears to be less wit h aqueous shunts than after tra beculectomy with an 
antifibrotic agent.  Other glaucoma surgeries  
Nonpenetrating glaucoma surgery i s an alternative to trabeculec tomy. The precise role of 
nonpenetrating surgery in the sur gical management of glaucoma r emains to be determined. 
The two main types of nonpenetra ting glaucoma surgery are visco canalostomy and 
nonpenetrating deep sclerectomy. T he rationale for nonpenetrati ng glaucoma surgery is that 
by avoiding a continuous passagewa y from the anterior chamber t o the subconjunctival 
space, the incidence of complicat ions such as bleb-related prob lems and hypotony can be 
reduced. The nonpenetrating procedur es have a higher degree of surgical difficulty 
compared with trabeculectomy and require special instrumentatio n. Randomized clinical 
trials comparing viscocanalostomy  with trabeculectomy generally  suggest greater IOP 
reduction with trabeculectomy, but more complications with visc ocanalostomy.  
One randomized clinical trial f ound that trabeculectomy was mor e effective than 
nonpenetrating deep sclerectomy a t lowering IOP, and several ot hers found that the two 
surgeries were e qually effective. 
  Other glaucoma surgica l procedures currently in use are canalop lasty with a tensioning 
suture (Prolene [Ethicon Inc., S omerville, NJ]), ab interno tra beculotomy using the 
Trabectome (NeoMedix, Tustin, CA) , trabecular meshwork bypass s tent (i-Stent, Glaukos 
Corp., Laguna Hills, CA) and the Ex-PRESS mini glaucoma shunt ( Alcon Laboratories, 
Inc., Ft. Worth, TX).  
                                                          Page  64 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
 Cyclodestructive surgery  
Cyclodestructive procedures red uce the rate of aqueous producti on. There are several ways 
to reduce ciliary body function, suc h as cyclocryo therapy, tran sscleral and noncontact 
Nd:YAG laser, and transscleral and noncontact endodiode laser c yclophotocoagulation. 
 Cyclodestructive procedures have traditionally been used for re fractory glaucomas, and 
success rates have been reporte d in the range of 34% to 94%. Th ey have been associated 
with a subsequent decrease of vi sual acuity and, rarely, cases of sympathetic ophthalmia.  
Disadvantages of cyclodestructiv e procedures include postoperat ive inflammation, IOP 
spike, and the frequen t need for repeat tr eatment weeks or mont hs later.  Compared with 
cyclocryotherapy, laser cyclophot ocoagulation causes less posto perative pain and 
inflammation. Therefore, cyclocr yotherapy is now rarely used. L aser cyclodestructive 
procedures have advantages over filtration surgery that include  technical ease and reduced 
postoperative care.  In 2005, 47% of all Medicare cyclo photocoagulation procedures w ere performed 
endoscopically; in 2006, 58%; a nd in 2007, 65%. Endoscopic cycl ophotocoagulation (ECP) 
consists of a solid-state 810-nm  laser, a video camera, aiming beam, and a xenon light 
source housed together in a fiber optic cable that can be introd uced inside the eye for direct 
visualization and treatment of t he ciliary processes. Theoretic ally, this allows better 
titration of laser treatment. The  efficacy of ECP appears to be  good, with IOP reduction 
reported in the range of 34% to 57% .  It appears that treating 270 to 360 degrees of the 
ciliary body is necessary to achieve significant IOP lowering.  Fibrin exudates, hyphema, 
cystoid macular edema, visi on loss, hypotony, choroidal detachm ent, and phthisis have 
been noted after ECP in eyes w ith advanced glaucoma, but more r ecent studies involving 
eyes with less advanced glaucom atous damage seem to report fewe r of these complications. 
                                                          Page  65 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
 APPENDIX 2 
2.0 Prior Pre-clinical and Clinical Testing  
 
2.1  Pre-clinical Studies The studies were designed and implemented by InnFocus or indepe ndent contractors to 
ensure that all reasonable con cerns regarding human implantatio n were mitigated.  These 
tests evaluated not only the basi c safety of the device and the  feasibility of performing the 
surgery with the associated surgi cal instruments, but also the fit and expected performance 
to assure the highest likelihood of success in reducing intraoc ular pressure in glaucomatous 
eyes.  
 
2.1.1 Physical Stability 
 
  Accelerated Hydrolysis Testing  
The testing was conducted on three  lots of InnFocus MicroShunt facsimiles.   
The test was conducted for a 5 year  equivalent timeframe at two  temperatures, 
85±2°C and 100±2°C, for 20 and 57 days, respectively.  No signi ficant weight 
loss was observed.  The bond stren gth of the tube to the fins o f the device did not 
change from the hydrolysis.   Aft er incubation, each recovered sample group was 
evaluated for changes in appear ance relative to un-aged samples . SEM at 500x 
magnification and optical microsc opy at magnifications of 20x a nd 30x were 
both applied and no significant chan ges were detected with eith er imaging 
method.  No significant analytes w ere detected in the hydrolysa tes from either 
incubation. These methods consiste ntly demonstrated the chemica l hydrolytic 
stability of the poly(styrene-b-is obutylene-b-styrene) thermopl astic hydrophobic 
elastomer (SIBS) from which the device is made.  
2.1.2 Pressure/Flow Characteristics 
Studies were conducted to verif y that the 70 micron internal di ameter and 8.5mm 
length of the InnFocus MicroShunt  tube provide adequate aqueous  flow to 
reduce intraocular pressure.  The  study of three lots of steril ized InnFocus 
MicroShunts demonstrated that th e internal diameter and length will provide at 
least 2 microliters/minute of flow at 6mmHg pressure.  
2.1.3 Structural Integrity  
The fins on the InnFocus MicroS hunt are heat fused to the tube.   Testing was 
conducted on three lots pre and post sterilization to verify th e fusion was 
adequate. All bonds met the speci fication of >50gra ms or >0.5Ne wtons.  An 
overall average increase i n bond strength of 11.2% was observed  after 
sterilization. 
 2.1.4 Chemical Testing  
                                                          Page  66 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
 Exhaustive Extraction of InnFocus  MicroShunt in Isopropyl Alcoh ol  
InnFocus MicroShunt facsimiles were exhaustively extracted in i sopropyl 
alcohol,  a strong but non-dissolving solvent f or the SIBS thermoplastic material.  
The test facsimiles, over three lots tested, displayed an avera ge weight loss of 
approximately 0.2%.  The overall sensitivity level of the chrom atographic and 
spectroscopic methods applied in this study was approximately 1  ppm or less for 
relevant compounds used in the ma nufacture of the device.  The study provides 
documented evidence at baseline levels showing only dimethylsil oxanes which 
are related to the packaging m aterials, and 2-phenylphenol and benzophenone at 
trace levels. None of these was  considered to be significant an d do not impact the 
biocompatibility of the device .  No other compounds were detect ed.  There were 
no significant differences in the  extractable fractions of the three different lots 
tested.  Leachable Testing 
This study quantified and ident ified the aqueous and lipophilic  leachable 
fractions for the InnFocus Micro Shunt.  Samples were incubated at a temperature 
of 35+2oC for 72+2h in both aqueous and li pophilic solvents. Extraction s in 
these two solvents cover the po ssible polarity ran ge that the i mplant could be 
exposed to in the intraocular e nvironment. HPLC-grade isopropyl  alcohol (IPA) 
was used as the lipophilic solvent  and HPLC-grade water was use d as the 
aqueous solvent.  The leachates  from test and c ontrol extractio ns were analyzed 
spectroscopically using UV/VIS sp ectrophotometry and chromatogr aphically 
using HPLC/PDA (photodiode array UV detection), GC/FID (flame i onization 
detection), and GC/MS techniques.  
 
Low molecular weight siloxanes , ethylene glycol, benzophenone, 2-
phenylphenol, and a low molecular weight alkyl polyol were dete cted in the 
lipophilic leachates at very low c oncentrations. These are rela ted to the 
packaging materials and the ste rilization process.  Glycerin, w hich is applied to 
the device to improve handling, was in the leachate at a concen tration of 0.5-0.6 
weight%.  Only the water-solub le compounds, glycerin, ethylene glycol, and the 
alkyl polyol, were detected in t he aqueous leachates.  None of these was 
considered to be significant a nd do not impact the biocompatibi lity of the device. 
 Insoluble Inorganics Analysis of InnFocus MicroShunt product 
Because the processes used to manufacture the InnFocus MicroShu nt involve 
contact with metallic equipmen t, three lots of the sterilized I nnFocus MicroShunt 
were sent for inductive couple d plasma/mass spectrophotometry a nalysis for 
metallic content.  The  data indicated that there is a low level  of metallic 
contaminants from the manufactu ring processes.  None of the lev els of the 
contaminants is near or above a ny known toxic levels for the pa rticular 
inorganics observed.  Additionally, the biocompatibility tests separately 
conducted by InnFocus used samples  that had been prepared with the same 
equipment.  Those samples passe d all of the biocompatibility te sts as will be 
discussed later in this document.  
                                                          Page  67 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
  
2.1.5 Dimensional and Surface Quality 
Pre and post sterilization dime nsional and visual testing was c onducted on three 
separate manufacturing lots of I nnFocus MicroShunts.  The testi ng included 
length, outside diameter, inside diameter, and surface characte ristics.  All 
InnFocus MicroShunts met the sp ecifications pre and post steril ization. 
Insignificant shrinkage of post st erilization samples was obser ved.  
 2.1.6 Evaluation of the Effect of Vis coelastics in Anterior Cha mber 
Studies were conducted with impla nted InnFocus MicroShunts in r abbits to 
determine if viscoelastics will flow through the lumen.  One He alon version and 
methyl cellulose were the onl y types studied.  The studies dete rmined that it 
requires over one week for these v iscoelastics to degrade adequ ately so that flow 
is initiated.  Based on this data , warnings were included in th e study protocol 
regarding the use of  viscoelastics. 
 
2.1.7 Aging and Transport testing 
Transport Testing 
 Standard packaged InnFocus MicroShunt units were sent to a con tract lab for 
transport testing to assure the re is no damage to the product o r packaging during 
shipment.  The packaged units met  the test requirements.   
 
Accelerated Aging Study 
Units were aged at 60oC for 11.1 weeks to simulate  3 years of real time aging 
and subsequent testing confirmed t hat the product met specifica tions supporting 
a 3 year expiration date.   
 
2.1.8 EO Sterilization residuals 
Testing of sterilized InnFocus MicroShunts was conducted to ass ure ethylene 
oxide residuals met specificat ions.  The devices passed the tes t requirements. 
 
2.1.9  Pyrogen Testing 
Testing of sterilized InnFocus MicroShunts was conducted to ass ure that levels of 
pyrogenic material were below acceptable levels.  All the devic es passed the test 
requirements.    
2.1.10  Biocompatibility (ISO 10993) 
Biocompatibility tests were conduc ted on SIBS polymer samples t hat had been 
processed through simulated InnF ocus MicroShunt manufacturing s teps.  The 
SIBS used for the testing included an additive to aid in manufa cturing processing. 
After EtO sterilizati on, the samples were s ent to an outside la boratory for a series 
of ISO 10993 GLP biocompatibility  studies as shown below.  The processed and 
2x EtO sterilized samples pa ssed all of these tests.   
 1.   Cytotoxicity – IS O Elution Method 
2.   In Vitro Inhibition of Cell Growth – L-929 Mouse Fibroblas t 
                                                          Page  68 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
 3.   ASTM Hemolysis 
4.   ASTM Partial Thromboplastin Time 5.   ISO Maximization Sensitization Study – Saline 6.   ISO Maximization Sensiti zation Study – Sesame Oil  
7.   ISO Muscle Implantation Study – 2 weeks 8.   Genotoxicity – Bacterial Reve rse Mutation Study – DMSO Ext ract 
9.   Genotoxicity – Bacterial Reve rse Mutation Study – Saline E xtract 
10. USP Pyrogen Study – Material Mediated 11. USP and ISO Systemic Toxicity Study – Saline 12. USP and ISO Systemic Toxicity Study – Sesame Oil 13. ISO Intracutaneous Study – Saline 14. ISO Intracutaneous Study - Sesame Oil  
2.1.11 Animal and clinical studies  on prior InnFocus MicroShunt  prototypes 
 A series of chronic ocular impla ntation rabbit studies were con ducted to evaluate 
the safety of InnFocus glaucoma d rainage device prototypes.  Th ese studies were 
conducted on various internal diam eter and external diameter tu bes.  In some 
prototypes, a tab lo cated on one side of the tube was present.  In one study, a 
small SIBS plate was attached t o the distal end of the device.  
 The chronic ocular implantation studies c onsisted of device imp lantation and 
follow-ups at 1 and 7 days, 4 weeks, and 3 and 6 months during which the 
rabbits were examined by slit lam p for healing characteristics and IOP was 
measured.  At the end of each s tudy, histology was conducted on  explanted 
devices and surrounding tissue to e valuate the healing response .   In all of these 
studies, the prototypes  demonstrated excelle nt biocompatibility .   
 Clinical feasibility studies w ere conducted in France and Domin ican Republic.  
Each of these studies had one y ear follow-up.  Based on the out come of these 
studies on prior prototypes which i dentified speci fic safety an d functional 
improvements as well as provi ding confirmation of many design c omponents, 
the final InnFocus MicroShunt G laucoma Drainage System design w as 
established and additional clini cal studies initiated that are described below.   
 
2.1.12  Ongoing InnFocus MicroSh unt Clinical Studies 
    Dominican Republic S tudy (Protocol INN-003) 
The first study which utilizes t he present design of the InnFoc us MicroShunt 
(formerly called the MIDI Arro w) study was initiated in Santo D omingo, 
Dominican Republic in 2010.  Twenty- three (23) subjects were en rolled.  The 
patients averaged 59.8+15.3 year s of age, IOP of 24.0+5.4 mmHg and 2.2+0.9 
glaucoma meds at baseline.  The subjects had no prior incisiona l glaucoma 
surgery and 1 of 23 had prior glauco ma laser surgery.  A total of 14 InnFocus 
MicroShunt only cases and 9 combi ned InnFocus MicroShunt and ca taract 
surgery cases were performed. The study will continue through 3  years of 
                                                          Page  69 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
 follow-up for each sub ject.  As of Decem ber 2012, 2 year data a re available for 
15 subjects with 1 year data availa ble for all other subjects.  This study used the 
present version of the device exce pt that the length was trimme d to 8-9mm at 
time of implantation versus the pr e-cut length of 8.5mm planned  for the U.S. 
study.    The data from the InnFocus M icroShunt study provided below are based on 15 
subjects at 24 months follow- up, 7 subjects at 12 months follow -up and one lost 
to follow-up after 12 months follow-up.  The definition of succ ess in the study 
was based on >20% drop in IOP a nd IOP < 21mmHg with or without glaucoma 
medication usage.  At 12 months follow-up, the success rate was  100% with an 
average IOP decrease of 55.4%.  T he mean IOP for the InnFocus M icroShunt 
only cases at 12 months was 11.3 ± 2.9 mmHg, and 9.7 ± 2.4 mmHg  for the 
combined InnFocus MicroShunt and cataract cases.  Glaucoma meds  usage for 
the total group at 12 months was an average of 0.3 meds/patient  with only 3 
patients requiring any glaucoma m edications. At two years, the success rate was 
87% with an average IOP drop of 49 .1%.  The mean IOP at 2 years  was 12.2 ± 
3.9 mmHg for the InnFocus Micro Shunt only cases (9) and 12.1 ± 4.4 mmHg for 
the combined group (6).  Glaucoma meds usage for the total grou p at 24 months 
was an average of 0.5 meds/pa tient with only 3 patients on any glaucoma 
medications.  Of the three fail ures at 24 months, 2 failures we re due the subjects 
only having an IOP decrease of 19 % and 1%.  The third failure w as due to 
increased IOP, which resulted i n the need for another glaucoma surgery. 
 
Complications of specific intere st in the study are summarized below and a table 
presenting all complications  is on the following page. 
 Intra-operative adverse events :  There was one intra-operative adverse event that 
occurred when the tip of the InnF ocus MicroShunt tube in the an terior chamber was 
observed to have blood and fibrin on it.  A paracentesis was ma de and the tip was flushed 
with balanced sterile saline to s uccessfully clear the tip of b lood.  A bleb was not present 
at 1 and 7 days post-surgery, but the  bleb was present from 21 days post-surgery forward. 
 
Post-operative Adverse Events:  There were a total of 58 m ostly mild, post-operative 
ocular adverse events to date i n the study.  The most common ev ent was transient acute 
hypotony where all cases cleared up spontaneously without inter vention.  Hypotony was 
defined as <6mmHg in the study.  T he historical data from the l iterature has used either 
<6mmHg or <5mmHg as a li mit. Also the historical data is variab le on when to start 
reporting hypotony, i.e., at Da y 1, Day 7 or later.  Because of  these reporting differences 
and the fact that any associat ed adverse events from hypotony t end to increase as the 
pressure moves downward from <6 mmHg, special mention is given t o the data as to the 
extent of lower pressure. 
                                                          Page  70 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
  
Hypotony Resolution   No. of Subjects 
Transient Hypotony                  
< 7 Days
                                 < 90 Days                                < 180 Days 4 (17% 
5 (22%) 
1 (4%)
Chronic H ypoton y > 180 Da ys0
 
Hypotony resolved in 4 subjects  by day 7, in 5 subjects by day 90 and in 1 subject by day 
180.  When patients with IOP values  at exactly 5 or with hypoto ny at 1 day postop only 
are excluded, there were onl y 3 cases or 13% transient hypotony .  All the patients with 
transient hypotony < 5 mmHg (excl uding Day 1) were combined MID I Arrow procedures 
with cataract surgery.    No chronic hypotony, defined as tw o consecutive visits after 90  days follow-up with IOP 
< 6 mmHg has been observed to date.   Shallow or flat anterior c hambers were observed 
in 13% (3/23) subjects with all  cases resolved within 14 days w ith no associated adverse 
events.  The tube in contact with  the iris was observed in 13% (3/23) of the cases, but has 
not led to any occlusion of the t ube or other adverse event.   
 In the combined surgery group, the re were 2 choroidal effusions , 4 cases of acute corneal 
edema, 2 cases of posterior capsu le opacification, 2 cases of D escemet striae, 1 case of 
fibrin strands, 2 cases of poste rior synechiae, 1 case of vitre ous hemorrhage and 2 cases 
of IOL pupillary capture.  All ar e likely related to the catara ct surgery or the added IOP 
drop from the cataract surgery.  A ll of these resolved spontane ously or were treated 
successfully.   There were two cases of eleva ted IOP that required physical int ervention.  In one 
combined surgery case with eleva ted IOP, the anterior chamber w as “burped” with the 
use of a 27G needle on Day 1 post surgery to alleviate the high  pressure.  The pressure 
immediately dropped below 5 mmHg and was back above 6 mmHg on D ay 7.  The 
pressure increase at Day 1 w as thought to be due to fibrin in t he anterior chamber from 
the cataract surgery that may have  blocked the InnFocus MicroSh unt tube temporarily 
until the fibrin resorbed.  The second elevated IOP case result ed in needling of a cystic 
bleb at the slit lamp on Day 90, whe rein the pressure returned to the prior reduced level. 
Both of these adverse events are  considered seve re and are deno ted with an “S” in Table 
6.  There were 3 cases of increased I OP that were treated with glau coma medication. 
  
One exposed Tenon’s capsule was observed at Day 1 post surgery in a patient with thin 
conjunctiva and was resolved by D ay 21 without intervention.  A  second potential 
exposed Tenon’s capsule was re ported in a subject approximately  9 months post-surgery 
with no Seidel positive.  The subj ect was prescr ibed lubricant drops, and intact 
                                                          Page  71 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
 conjunctiva was clearly observe d over the Tenon’s capsule withi n the next 3 months with 
no other issues or a ction taken. 
 There was one bleb leak not rel ated to the device that resolved  within 2 weeks.   
 Additional visual field loss  of >2.5dB in mean deviation (MD) w as classified as an 
adverse event and was based on t he latest follow-up of subjects  with measurable visual 
fields.  At 12 months for 6 patie nts, 0 of the 6 had additional  VF loss of >2.5dB.  At the 
latest follow-up of 24 months f or 10 patients, 2 of 10 had addi tional VF loss of >2.5dB. 
 One patient with a baseline MD of -19.2dB had additional loss o f 12.2dB at 2 years 
follow-up with no bleb and an IOP of 19mmHg.  Based on the exca vation of the optic 
nerve (C:D=0.9) and the continui ng excellent visual acuity of 2 0/20, the subject was 
scheduled for surgery to minimize further optic nerve damage an d was put on 3 glaucoma 
medications until surgery.  The contralateral eye had been on 3  glaucoma medications for 
12 months.  The second patient with a base line of -25.0dB had additional lo ss of 7.1dB at 2 years 
follow-up.  The subject had a n IOP of 11.5mmHg with a bleb pres ent and visual acuity of 
20/25.  The contralateral eye ha d been on 3 glaucoma medication s for 2 years.  No further 
action was indicated.  
                                                          Page  72 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
  Adverse Events in Do minican Republic Study 
Non-Ocular Adverse Events Number of events  
Angina pectoralis 1
 
Adverse events in study eye MIDI Arrow 
Only Surgery 
 
 
N=14 Combined 
Cataract and 
MIDI Arrow 
Surgery 
N=9 Overall% of 
Eyes 
 
N=23 
Corneal edem a 0 4 4 17.4
BCVA loss of at least 2 lin es at or after the three 
month visit 1 0 1 4.3 
Tube in contact with iris 3 0 3 13.0
Transient H ypoton y resolved b y D7 3 1 4 17.4
Transient H ypoton y resolved b y D90 4 1 5 21.7
Transient H ypoton y resolved b y D180 0 1 1 4.3
Chronic h ypoton y >180 Da ys 0 0 0 0.0
Shallow or flat AC 1 2 3 13.0
Posterior capsule opacificatio n 0 2 2 8.7
Hyphema 1 1 2 8.7
Elevated IOP requirin g needlin g of bleb or AC 1 1 2 8.7
Descemet striae 0 2 2 8.7
Tube obstruction b y iris, blood, fibrin, etc. 1 0 1 4.3
Elevated IOP requiring t reatment with glaucoma 
medicatio n 3 0 3 13.0 
Vitreous hemorrha ge 0 1 1 4.3
Dry eye 1 0 1 4.3
Flat bleb 1 1 2 8.7
Tearin g 1 0 1 4.3
Exposed Tenon’s capsule 2 0 2 8.7
Cystic bleb 2 0 2 8.7
Bleb lea k 1 0 1 4.3
Pain 2 1 3 13.0
Fibrin stran d 0 1 1 4.3
Choroidal effusion or detachment 0 2 2 8.7
Posterior s ynechiae 0 2 2 8.7
IOL pupillar y capture 0 2 2 8.7
Endophthalmitis 0 0 0 0.0
New cataract or pro gression 0 0 0 0.0
Aller gic con junctivitis 1 0 1 4.3
Corrective Sur gery 1 0 1 4.3
Visual field loss > 2.5dB at 1 yr 0 0 0 NA1
Visual field loss > 2.5dB at 2 yr 2 0 2 NA1
Totals 32 27 59  
 1Not all subjects had visual fields that could be measured
                                                          Page  73 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
 Clinical Study of InnFocus MicroShunt in Bordeaux, France  
 
INN-004 Clinical Study of the Saf ety and Performance of the Mia mi InnFocus 
Drainage Implant (MIDI Arrow) t o Relieve Glaucoma Symptoms   
 (REP-INF-0152-00 is in Volume 8; Briefcase summaries are in REP -INF-0153-00)  
 
An additional clinical trial of t he InnFocus MicroShunt implant  is being conducted in 
Bordeaux, France under the directio n of Professor Isabelle Riss .  The subjects for the 
study are inadequately controlle d on maximum tole rated medical therapy with intraocular 
pressures >18mmHg to < 40mmHg.  The subjects had no prior incis ional ophthalmic 
surgery other than uncomplicated  cataract surgery.  There are 3 7 eyes in the study of a 
total of 20 males and 16 females ; one patient had both eyes tre ated with the InnFocus 
MicroShunt.  As shown in the s econd table below, 32 of 37 eyes had prior non-incisional 
glaucoma procedures.  The study i s planned for two years of fol low-up.  To date, a total 
of 41 eyes of 36 subjects have rec eived InnFocus MicroShunt dev ices (Four of these 
InnFocus MicroShunts were impla nted outside of the study protoc ol in fellow eyes of 
subjects in the study for whic h the surgeon believed the InnFoc us MicroShunt to be the 
best choice).  The data below  summarizes the 37 eyes of 36 subj ects that are in the 
clinical study.  The exceptions t o this are the adverse event s ummary and tables that 
include all 41 eyes implanted.  A  total of 19 eyes are phakic a nd 18 eyes in the study are 
pseudophakic.  The mean age of the  subjects is 62.6 years (SD 1 3.0).  All patients are 
Caucasian.        
Table 1: Demographics and Baseline Characteristics  for INN-004 Population 
Number of EyesOverall
37
Age (Years) 
Mean 62.6
Std. Dev. 13.0
Minimum 38
Maximum 86
Race 
Caucasian 36
Status of Test Eye 
Phakic 19
Pseudophakic 18
Base line IOP 
Mean 22.8
Std. Dev. 4.3
Minimum 18
Maximum 35
Visual Acuity in Test Eye 
Mean 7.3
Min, Max 1-10
Glaucoma Diagnosis  
POAG 23
Number of Glaucoma Meds 
Mean 3.4
                                                          Page  74 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
 Std. Dev 1.2
Min, Max 1 - 6
Systemic Diseases 
Hypertension 10
Diabetes 0
Hypertension and Diabetes 1
HTN + Othe r 3
Othe r 13
 
 
                  Prior Non-Incisional Glaucoma Procedures 
Procedure Number of Eyes 
Selective laser trabeculoplast y (SLT) 15 
Laser peripheral iridotom y (LPI) 6 
SLT and LPI 7 
SLT and unspecified no n-incisional procedure (NIP) 2 
SLT, LPI and NIP 1 
NIP 1 
Total 32 
 
Follow-ups are shown below:  
Length of Follow-up No. of Eyes 
1 Yea r 12
9 Months 9
6 Months 10
<  6 Months 6
 
For eyes with baseline IOP >18 to < 21 mmHg, success is defined  as an IOP reduction of 
20% or greater with no reoperation f or glaucoma or loss of ligh t perception vision. For 
eyes with baseline IOP >21 mmHG , success is defined as IOP<21 m mHg and IOP 
reduction from baseline of 20% or  greater with no reoperation f or glaucoma or loss of 
light perception vision.    For the 12 eyes that have reached 12 months follow-up, the surg ical success rate is 75%. 
 The baseline medicated IOP for  the 37 eyes is 22.8+4.3mmHg.  Th e mean decreases in 
IOP are shown below at 6 and 12 months follow-up. 
 
Measurement 
Timepoint N IOP 
Mean SD % Decrease 
Baseline 37 22.8 4.3 NA 
6 Months 31 15.3 3.4 33 
12 Months 12 15.5 5.2 32 
 
                                                          Page  75 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
  
As shown below, the glaucoma med ication reduction from an avera ge of 3.4 meds per 
patient is 82% for those subjec ts at 12 months follow-up and 79 % overall. 
       Glaucoma Medication Usage 
 
        
 Adverse events related to the t reated eye in the study as well as those outside the study 
are summarized below for the 41 eyes: 
 
There was one case of correctiv e surgery due to the InnFocus Mi croShunt being 
dislodged during closure of the  conjunctiva without being notic ed by the surgeon.  Upon 
observing an IOP of 26mmHg, the n ext day the surgeon observed t hat the tip of the 
device was not in the anterior ch amber.  Review of the video sh owed that the device was 
dislodged by the forceps as the c onjunctiva was pulled forward to suture.  Because of the 
presence of blood, the surgeon di d not observe this.  One week after the original 
procedure, a new procedure was successfully performed to place the same device back 
into the anterior chamber w ith flow observed through the device  prior to conjunctival 
closure.  The patient responded w ell initially and at 12 months  follow-up, the IOP was 
19mmHg with one glauco ma medication. 
 Hypotony was observed infrequently with a total of 3 eyes with transient hypotony for an 
overall rate of 7.3%, and all we re resolved by the 3 week follo w-up. 
 Increased IOP was observed in a total of 17 eyes with 12 of the se having one or more 
needling procedures with glaucoma  medication and the remaining 5 eyes having 
glaucoma medications only.  N eedling was conducted in all cases  except one with the use 
of MMC; the one exception was with  the use of Healaflow (viscoe lastic).  Three eyes had 
over 3 needlings performed (7, 4, 4);  the IOP in two of these e yes was brought back into 
control with IOPs at one year  of 7mmHg and 13mmHg and the third  remained high at 
one year with an IOP of 27mmHg.  Keratitis was observed in 6 eyes and a corneal ulcer in 1 patie nt with resolution in all 7 
patients. Five of the corneal e dema cases and the corneal ulcer  were resolved by the 3 
months follow-up, and one corneal e dema case was resolved by th e 6 months follow-up.   
 Hyphema was observed in 10 eyes a nd resolved within the first w eek after surgery.  In 
one eye, the anterior chamber was flushed to remove the blood.  N No. Eyes on 
Meds Avg. 
Meds/Eye % Reduction 
All Eyes Post 
Surgery 37 11 0.7 79 
Subjects at 12 
months follow-up 12 5 0.7 82 
                                                          Page  76 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
  
Conjunctival bleeding was noted i n 3 eyes.  In one of these eye s, the bleeding was 
considered significant and it  occurred approximately 2 weeks af ter surgery.  It was 
resolved the same day and was a ttributed to the procedure and n ot the device. 
 There were transient irritati on issues in 5 patients, which res olved. 
 There were 5 cases of posterior  capsule opacification in the st udy eye of pseudophakic 
patients not believed to be relat ed to the InnFocus MicroShunt that were treated with 
YAG laser and resolved.  Other notable events included a t emporary loss of 2 lines of vi sual acuity in 1 patient 
which resolved by 12 months, and a bleb leak caused by cutting a suture within a week of 
surgery to eliminate irritation that was quickly resolved.  There were 7 non-ocular adverse ev ents that are listed in the s econd table below. 
                                                          Page  77 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
                              Adverse Events for Study Eye in Protocol INN-004 
(Includes 4 eyes implante d outside of study protocol)  
Anticipated adverse event in test eye IMS Only 
Surgery 
 
N=38 Combined 
Cataract and 
IMS Surgery 
N=3 Overall % of 
Eyes 
(n=41) 
Keratitis (Corneal edema) 5 1 6 14.6
Corneal ulce r 1 0 1  2 . 4
BCVA loss of at least 2 lines at or after the three month visit 1 
(temporary) 0 1 2.4 
Tube in contact with iris 0 0 0 0
Transient Hypotony (< 7 Days) 1 0 1 2.4
Transient Hypotony (7-180 Days) 2 0 2 4.9
Chronic hypotony (Post 180 Days) 0 0 0 0.0
Shallow or flat AC 1 0 1 2.4
Posterior capsule opacification 5 0 5 12.2
Hyphema 9 1 10 24.4
Intraoperative AC washout of blood 1 0 1 2.4
Elevated IOP requiring needling of bleb 
with with MMC or Healaflow 32 
(11 eyes)1 
(1 eye)33 
(12 eyes) 29.3 
Descemet striae 0 0 0 0.0
Tube obstruction by iris, blood, fibrin, 
etc. 0 0 0 0.0 
Elevated IOP requiring treatment with 
glaucoma medication only 5 
(5 eyes)0 5 
(5 eyes) 12.2 
Elevated IOP (Other) 2 0 2 4.9
Vitreous hemorrhage 0 0 0 0.0
Dry eye 0 0 0 0.0
Flat bleb 1 0 1 2.4
Tearing  0 0 0 0.0
Exposed Tenon’s capsule 0 0 0 0.0
Resuturing of conjunctiva 2 0 2 4.9
Cystic bleb 0 0 0 0.0
Bleb leak 1 0 1 2.4
Irritation 4 1 5 12.2
Conjunctival bleeding 3 0 3 7.3
Dislocation of Device During Procedure 1 0 1 2.4
Fibrin strand 0 0 0 0.0
Choroidal effusion or detachment 1 0 1 2.4
Posterior synechiae 0 0 0 0.0
IOL pupillary capture 0 0 0 0.0
Endophthalmitis 0 0 0 0.0
New cataract or progression 0 0 0 0.0
Corrective Surgery 1 0 1 2.4
Conjunctivitis 1 0 1 2.4
Sinusitis 1 0 1 2.4
Age-related Macular Degeneration 1 0 1 2.4
Totals 82 4 86  
                                                          Page  78 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
 Non-Ocular Adverse Events in  Protocol INN-004  
 
Adverse Event Number % of 
Subjects 
N=37 
Abnormal Hemogram during follow-up of Hyperlymphocytosis1 2.7 
Pneumopathy 1 2.7  
Psychiatric internment 1 2.7  
Emergency cardiac operation 1 2.7  
Blood pressure increase during surgery 1 2.7  
Hospitalization for alcoholic withdrawal 1 2.7  
Headache 1 2.7  
Total 7  
 
 Effectiveness Comparison to His torical Trabeculectomy/Glaucoma Drainage Device 
Studies 
 
Literature evaluation was use d to study the historical data on glaucoma drainage devices and 
trabeculectomy with or without t he use of MMC.  The data collec ted from these analyses were 
used to compare the performance a nd safety versus the InnFocus MicroShunt in the most recent 
clinical studies in the Domini can Republic (DR) and Bordeaux, a nd is presented in the tables 
below.  Based on the data from th e 23 eyes in the Dominican Rep ublic study and 37 eyes in the 
Bordeaux study, the performance of the InnFocus MicroShunt is c omparable to or exceeds the 
expected success rate at one year  for trabeculectomy with MMC a nd drainage devices. This is 
evidenced by the mean IOP, the us e of glaucoma medications, and  the InnFocus MicroShunt 
effectiveness at 12 months follow- up as compared to the success  rates at one year shown below 
for trabeculectomy with or wit hout MMC and glaucoma drainage de vices. 
 Further comparison of the InnFoc us MicroShunt 2-year data can b e made to the trabeculectomy 
data by adjusting the one-year trabeculectomy success rates dow nward by 10%, which is 
generally considered the rate o f failure of trab eculectomy per year.  The InnFocus MicroShunt 
results continue to compare fa vorably at the 2- year timeframe w ith each of the historical 
trabeculectomy groups at 12 months  follow-up in the table that follows. 
                                                          Page  79 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
 Effectiveness Comparison of One Year Follow-up Data Summaries 
 from Literature Search of  Trab eculectomies at One Year Follow -up  
with InnFocus MicroShunt Data at 12 months follow-up  
Effectiveness 
Parameter Type of 
Value Traba 
(Cochrane data 
@12mo follow-up) Trab w/MMCa 
(Cochrane Data 
@12mo follow-up) 
Trab w/MMC 
(12mo follow-up in 
historical studies 
from REP-INF-0117-00 ) 
Table 4  IMS at 12 
months 
(n=23) 
DR 
 IMS at 12 
months 
(n=12) 
Bordeaux  
 Highb 
Risk Primaryc High 
Risk Primary 
Surgical 
Success  
(% of N) Mean 49.5 72.0 84.4 92.2 78.6 100 75
Range 26-71 29-78 71-90 86-100 64-89   
IOP  
 Mean 20.7 17.4 13.8 12.0 13.0 10.7 15.5
Range 18.6-
23.9 16.4-
18.412.5-
14.611.1-
12.89.9-16.0   
Reduction 
in IOP (%)  Mean 40.7 35.3 59.5 55.4 51.2 55.6 30
Range 40-42 28-42 55-64 50-61 28-63 
Glaucoma 
Meds 
Reduction 
(%) Mean N R NR 85.8 91 79
Range NR NR 48-96   
                     aThe values in this column do not include any combined glaucoma and cataract surgery. 
bHigh risk = previous glaucoma drainage surgery or previous surg ery involving anything more than 
trivial conjunctival incision, i ncluding cataract surgery; pati ents with one or more of 
the following forms of glaucoma : glaucoma secondary to intraocu lar inflammation, 
congenital glaucoma and neovascular glaucoma.  
   cPrimary =  people who have recei ved no previous s urgical interv ention. This group may include people who have  
                     had previous medical therapy, laser proced ures or both. 
 
                                                          Page  80 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
     Effectiveness Comparison of One Year Follow-up Data Summaries from Literature   
              Search of Various Aqueous Shunt Studies with InnFocus MicroShun t Data  
                                                    at 12 month s follow-up  
Effectiveness 
parameter Type of 
Value Aqueous 
shunts 
w/reservoir Optonol 
Ex-Press 
Shunt Staar 
Aquaflow IMS 
DR IMS 
Bordeaux
IOP at one year (mmHg)  Mean 15.7 12.7 13.4 10.7 15.3 
Range 12.1-18.9 11.8-13.5 10.4-16.5   
Surgical success 
(with or without glaucoma meds) 
(% of N )                Mean 78.8 91.3 65.3 100 75 
Range 53.7-100 85.6-96.9 44-75   
Glaucoma meds  
per patient                Mean 0.9 0.6 0.4 0.3 0.7 
 
  
                      Extrapolated Surgical Success of Trabecul ectomy at 2 years Follow-up  
                                              vs. 2 year InnFoc us MicroShunt Data 
 
Effectiveness 
Parameter Type 
of 
Value Traba 
(Cochrane data) Trab w/MMCa 
(Cochrane Data) Trab 
w/MMC 
(12mo follow-
up in historical 
studies from 
REP-INF-0117-00 ) 
Table 4  IMS at 24 
months 
(n=23) DR  
 Highb 
Risk Primaryc High 
Risk Primary 
Surgical 
Success  
(% of N) Mean 39.5 62.0 74.4 82.2 68.6 87 
                     aThe values in this column do not include any combined glaucoma and cataract surgery. 
bHigh risk = previous glaucoma drainage surgery or previous surg ery involving anything more
trivial conjunctival incision, i ncluding cataract surgery; pati ents with one or 
more of the following forms of glaucoma: glaucoma secondary to intraocular 
inflammation, congenital glaucoma and neovascular glaucoma.   
   cPrimary =  people who have recei ved no previous s urgical interv ention. This group may include people who have  
                     had previous medical therapy, laser proced ures or both. 
 
 
                                                          Page  81 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
  
Safety Comparisons to Historic Trabeculectomy and Glaucoma Drai nage Device Studies 
 
A similar analysis of trabecu lectomy with or without MMC and gl aucoma drainage devices 
historic studies was done for saf ety as compared to the InnFocu s MicroShunt in the Dominican 
Republic and Bordeaux studies, a nd the two tables below show th e complications breakdown.  
The analysis is based on the data  from the 23 eyes in the Domin ican Republic study and the 
41eyes in the Bordeaux study.  The  analysis includes adverse ev ents through the latest follow-up 
including two-year follow-up on 15 e yes in the Dominican Republ ic and 12 eyes in the Bordeaux 
study.    The rate of cataract developmen t or progression was noticeably less in InnFocus MicroShunt 
treated eyes with 0% of eyes at  one year follo w-up versus trabe culectomy with MMC meta 
analysis means of 15.6% and 20.1% and aqueous shunt means rangi ng from 2.5-11.9%. 
 Visual acuity decreases were le ss in the InnFocus MicroShunt gr oups with 2.4% and 4.3% versus 
a mean of 14.6% in the one trab eculectomy with MMC meta analysi s that reported the decreases.  
The InnFocus MicroShunt groups wer e also less than the reported  aqueous shunt visual acuity 
decreases ranging from 10.8-21.8%.  Acute hypotony and related adverse ev ents were simi lar for the trabeculectomy and InnFocus 
MicroShunt groups, with no chroni c hypotony in the InnFocus Mic roShunt groups. 
 Corneal edema was greater in both I nnFocus MicroShunt studies w ith 17.4% and 14.6% as 
compared to the glaucoma draina ge device studies mean values of  7.3% and 3.6%.  There was no 
meta analysis data available f or trabeculectomy with or without  MMC.  The corneal edema value 
of 17.4% was in the Dominican R epublic study and was observed o nly in combined InnFocus 
MicroShunt and cataract cases where  corneal edema is expected.  One of the six cases observed 
in the Bordeaux study was also a  combined surgery case.  Four o f these cases resolved within the 
first 3 months with the final  one by the six months follow-up. 
   There were no other notable diffe rences in the co mparisons betw een the two procedures. 
 Based on this analysis of the relat ive safety of the InnFocus M icroShunt as compared to 
commercialized glaucoma drainage  devices and trabeculectomy wit h MMC, the InnFocus 
MicroShunt has comparable or bette r safety characteristics.  
                                                          Page  82 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
                                      Safety Comparison of InnFocus MicroShunt to  
                                              Historic Trabeculectomy Studies 
  
 
                       Complications (% of Patient Population)
Complication Type of 
Value Traba 
(Cochrane data 
@12mo follow-
up)Trab w/MMCa 
(Cochrane Data 
@12mo follow-up) Trab 
w/MMC  
(12mo follow-
up in historical 
studies from 
REP-INF-0117-00 
Table 5 ) InnFocus 
MicroShunt 
Combined High 
Risk and 
Primary Combined High 
Risk and 
Primary 23 eyes 
DR 41 eyes 
BORD 
Wound leak Mean 1.0 1.2 5.6 5.0 2.4
Range 0.0-12.5 0.0-19.5 1.9-11.0  
Chronic 
Hypotony Mean 
2.9b 
0.0-10.0 3.7b 
0.0-10.0 8.3 0.0 0.0
Range 0-24.3  
Acute Hypotony Mean 13.3 13.0c7.3
Range 0-47.9  
Shallow or flat 
AC Mean 9.3 7.6 6.2 8.7 2.4
Range 0.0-26.7 0.0-35.7 0.2-18.1  
Endophthalmitis Mean 0.0 0.0 1.5 0.0 0.0
Range 0.0-0.0 0.0-0.0 0.3-3.0  
Suprachoroidal 
Hemorrhage Mean 0.0 0.0 3.0 0.0 0.0
Range 0.0-0.0 0.0-0.0 3.0-3.0  
Cataract Surgery Mean 6.9 15.6 20.1 0.0 0.0
Range 0.0-18.2 0.0-26.0 1.0-40.2  
Blebitis Mean N R NR 3.5 0.0 0.0
Range N R NR 1.1-10.8  
        Hyphema Mean N R NR 7.8 8.7 24.4
Range NR NR 0.0-24.6   
Bleb Leak Mean N R NR 9.1 4.3 2.4
Range N R NR 1.9-27.0  
Choroidal 
Effusion 
or Detachment Mean N R NR 10.4 8.7 2.4
Range NR NR 0.8-28.0   
Encapsulated 
Bleb Mean N R NR 10.3 8.7 0.0
Range N R NR 1.2-37.0  
 
                                                          Page  83 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
 Complications (% of Patient Population)  (continued) 
Complication Type of 
Value Traba 
(Cochrane data 
@12mo follow-
up)Trab w/MMCa 
(Cochrane Data 
@12mo follow-up) Trab 
w/MMC  
(12mo follow-
up in historical 
studies from 
REP-INF-0117-00 
Table 5 ) InnFocus 
MicroShunt 
Combined 
High Risk and 
Primary Combined High 
Risk and 
Primary 23 eyes 
DR 41 eyes 
BORD 
Tenon’s Cyst Mean N R NR 50.4 0.0 0.0
Range N R NR 40.9-62.8 
Visual Acuity 
Decreased Mean N R NR 14.6 4.3e2.4f
Range N R NR 6.0-28.6 
aThe values in this column do not include any combined glaucoma and cataract surgery. 
bThese values were not defined as  acute or chroni c hypotony in t he individual studies and therefore have been 
grouped. 
cThis value excludes patients with  IOP values at e xactly 5 or hy potony at 1 day postop only.  
dDefined as > 2 lines of vision loss 
eOccurred in 1 patient and consider ed unreliable because of pati ent mental state 
fOne temporary VA decr ease was observed but was not present at 1 2 months follow-up 
NR = Not reported in study 
 
          
                     Complications Comparison of InnFocus MicroShunt Data 
                         to Historic Aqueous Shunt Studies  
                          Complications (% of patient populatio n) 
Complication Type of 
Value Aqueous 
shunts with 
reservoir Optonol 
Ex-Press 
Shunt Staar 
Aquaflow InnFocus MicroShunt 
23 eyes 
DR 41 eyes 
BORD 
Acute hypotony Mean 5.3 9.8 
8.9b 
0-32b 13.0a 7.3
  
Range 2-18.8 4-15.6
Chronic hypotony 
 Mean 8.4 2 0.0 0.0 
Range 1-23 0-4   
Shallow or Flat AC 
 Mean 9.9 3.0 3.8 8.7 2.4 
Range 3-20 2-4.1 0-18   
Hyphema Mean 9.5 6.7 5.9 8.7 24.4 
Range 0.8-20 2.8-11.5 0-10.3   
Erosions Mean 6.4 0.0 0 0.0 0.0 
Range 2-12 0-0 0-0   
Goniopuncture Mean 0 0 38.5 0.0 0.0 
Range 0-0 0-0 21-50   
MMC injections Mean N R NR 23.7 4.3 26.8 
Range N R NR 20-31   
 
                                                          Page  84 of 84                         INN-005 Rev.  072117 
                                 Complications (% of patient pop ulation) 
          (continued) 
Complication Type of 
Value  Aqueous 
shunts 
with 
reservoir Optonol 
Ex-Press
Shunt Staar 
Aquaflow InnFocus 
MicroShunt 
23 eyes 
DR 41 eyes 
BORD 
Strabismus and 
diplopia Mean 3.0 NR NR 0.0 2.4 
Range 0.0-5.0 N R NR   
Choroidal detachment             (effusion) Mean 17.5 4 3.2 8.7 2.4 
Range 3.8-52.0 0.0-8.0 0.0-5.0   
Suprachoroidal 
hemorrhage Mean 3.3 N R NR 0.0 0.0
Range 0.8-7.0 M R NR  
Retinal detachment Mean 3.2 N R NR 0.0 0.0
Range 1-6.4 N R NR  
Corneal edema or 
decomposition Mean 7.3 N R 3.6 17.4d 14.6
Range 0.0-27.0 N R 3.6-3.6  
Cataract formation or 
progression Mean 2.5 N R 11.9 0.0 0.0 
Range 2.5-2.5 N R 0.0-31.0   
Bleb problems (leaks, 
Tenon’s cyst, blebitis) Mean 3.6 5.6 23.2 8.7 2.4
Range 1.0-8.2 5.2-6.0 7.7-40.0  
Endophthalmitis Mean 3.3 2.0 0.0c0.0 0.0
Range 1.6-5.0 2.0-2.0 0.0-0.0c 
Visual acuity decreasee Mean 21.8 N R 10.8c4.3f 2.4g
Range 0.0-33.0 N R 10.8-10.8c 
aThis value excludes patients with  IOP values at e xactly 5 or hy potony at 1 day postop only.   
bNo differentiation between acute and chronic.  
cOnly the PMA study of the Aquaflow included data in these areas . 
dCorneal edema observed was the result of cataract surgery done at the same time; no decomposition was 
observed. 
eDefined as > 2 lines of vision loss 
fOccurred in 1 patient and consider ed unreliable because of pati ent mental state 
gTemporary decrease in VA but re solved by 1 year follow-up 
 
 
                   Overall Summary of Ongoing InnF ocus MicroShunt Clinical Studies  
 
InnFocus has studied the implant ation results of the present de vice design of the InnFocus 
Glaucoma Drainage System in th e ongoing studies summarized abov e.  The summary of the 
preliminary findings is as follows:  
 No biocompatibility issues have  been observed with the device. 
 
 In all cases, the InnFocus Mic roShunt was successfully placed t hrough the needle tract without 
damage to the device.  
 