 
 1 
 Orlistat for the Treatment of Type I Hyperlipoproteinemia 
 
 
 
 
Primary Investigator: Abhimanyu Garg, M.D. 
Sub-Investigator: Nivedita Patni, M.D. Funding Sponsor: Local funds, Sout hwestern Medical Foundation 
Version: 2 Date: June18, 2018 IRB number – STU 012013-042       
 
 
 
     
 
    
 
     
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
 2 
Introduction and Purpose: 
Patients with Type I Hyperlipoproteinemia (T1HLP) have a rare f orm of hypertriglyceridemia 
marked by significant chylomicronemia and recurrent episodes of acute pancreatitis. T1HLP is 
caused by a deficiency of lipoprotein lipase or one of its cofactors. Many patients are a challenge to treat, as the only effective therapy available is an extremely low fat diet. This diet is exceedingly difficult to follow, and despite adherence, many patients still  have chylomicronemia and develop 
acute pancreatitis.  
 
Specific Aim: To determine the efficacy of a gastric and pancre atic lipase inhibitor, Orlistat, in 
reducing serum triglyceride levels in patients with T1HLP.  Hypothesis: Inhibiting dietary fat absorption using a lipase inhibitor will lower serum triglyceride 
concentrations in patients with T1HLP.   
 We expect that Orlistat will markedly reduce serum triglycerides in patients with T1HLP by inducing partial fat malabsorption, and we expect that this can  be done safely with minimal side 
effects. 
  
Rationale: As there are no therapeutic options in patients with  T1HLP, the results of this study 
may help in designing a therapeutic approach to extreme hypertr iglyceridemia in these patients.   
 Primary Endpoint: Fasting serum triglyceride levels  
Secondary Endpoints: 
1. Serum chylomicron-TG lev els (Fasting and postprandial) 
2. Postprandial serum TG levels during meal tolerance test 
3. 72 hour fecal fat 4. Fat soluble vitamin levels 
 Primary Safety Endpoints:  
1. Fat soluble vitamin deficiencies due to fat malabsorption 2. Gastrointestinal side effects (oily stools, anal leakage, diarrhea, flatus with discharge) 
 The side effects experienced with Orlistat use are mainly gastrointestinal due to fat malabsorption. 
We intend to reduce these side effects by limiting fat intake i n the diet. Additionally, we will provide 
patients with a multivitamin to take daily in order to reduce r isk of vitamin deficiencies.  
 
The benefit of taking Orlistat is a reduction in serum triglyce ride levels, and thus, a reduction in 
the risk of acute pancreatitis. There is significant morbidity and mortality associated with acute 
pancreatitis, and so we believe a reduction in this risk offers  a greater benefit than mild 
gastrointestinal side effects.   
Background: 
Type I hyperlipoproteinemia (T1HLP) is a rare, autosomal recess ive condition characterized by 
recurrent episodes of acute pancreatitis due to extreme hypertr iglyceridemia as a result of 
accumulation of chylomicrons (1-2).  In most of the patients, T 1HLP is due to lipoprotein lipase 
(LPL) or apolipoprotein CII (APOC2) deficiency, however, recent ly mutations in lipase maturation 
factor 1 (LMF1), apolipoprotein A-5 (APOA5), and glycosyl-phosp hatidylinositol anchored high 
density lipoprotein binding protein 1 (GPIHBP1) have been reported (3-4). In some patients, the 
 
 3genetic basis of T1HLP remains unknown. Patients present with eruptive or tuberous xanthomas, 
pancreatitis, lipemia retinalis, and hepatosplenomegaly.  Most importantly, acute pancreatitis is 
often a cause for significant morbidity and even mortality in t hese patients. Treatment of these 
patients poses a significant challenge, as the current medicati ons for hypertriglyceridemia such 
as fibrates, niacin, and omega-3 fatty acids are ineffective (1 -2).  Some investigators have tried 
invasive procedures such as plasmapheresis to lower triglycerid es (TG), however this is a 
temporary measure (5). Others are exploring gene therapy using intramuscular injection of AAV1-
Lipoprotein lipaseS447X in patients with LPL deficiency. Although this initially lowers triglycerides, 
the effect is transient as patients develop antibodies to the capsid proteins (6).  The only effective therapy is a very low fat diet (<20% of tota l energy).  Since the basic defect in 
T1HLP is the reduced clearance of chylomicrons due to impaired lipolysis of triglycerides, reduction in dietary fat by reducing chylomicron formation can lower serum triglycerides.  
However, some patients continue to have severe triglyceridemia and acute pancreatitis despite 
following a low fat diet (1).  
 
There have been no formal clinical trials conducted in patients with T1HLP so far and most of the evidence about efficacy or lack of efficacy of medications or d ietary intervention is anecdotal. We 
wish to investigate whether an inhibitor of intestinal lipase ( Orlistat) will reduce serum triglyceride 
concentrations in patients with T1HLP. Orlistat is an inhibitor of gastric and pancreatic lipases and can reduce dietary fat absorption by 30% (7). Thus, Orlistat ma y reduce serum TG levels in 
patients with T1HLP by decreasing the substrate available for c hylomicron formation. 
  
 
 
 
     
Concise Summary of Project: Fig. 1.  The process of dietary  lipid digestion and 
absorption . A, The digestion of dietary lipids begins with 
partial digestion by gastric li pase, forming large fat globules  
with a triacylglycerol (TAG) core surrounded by phospholipids 
(PL), free cholesterol (CL), fa tty acids (FA), and ionizing 
proteins. In intestine, fat globul es are mixed with bile salts 
(BS) and pancreatic lipases. Monoacylglycerol (MAG), lysophosphatidic acid (LPA), diacylglycerol (DAG), and FA 
that are released from lipid and PL hydrolysis join bile salts,  
CL, and fat-soluble vitamins to form mixed micelles for dietary  
fat absorption at the brush border of the enterocytes. B, After 
entering the enterocyte, MAG, LPA, and CL are reacylated. MAG is sequentially acylated by MGAT and DGAT enzymes 
to form TAG. LPA is acylated by LPA acyltransferase 
(LPAAT) to phosphatidic acid (PA) followed by dephosphorylation by PA phosphorylase (PAP) to yield DAG. 
Dietary cholesterol (CL) is acyl ated by acyl-CoA:cholesterol 
acyltransferase (ACAT) to cholesteryl esters (CE). Facilitated 
by microsomal triglyceride transfer protein (MTP), TAG joins 
CE and apolipoprotein B-48 (A poB48) to form chylomicrons 
that are secreted in the lymph for delivery to circulation. 
Modified from Shi and Cheng (8). The step that is inhibited by 
Orlistat (an intestinal lipase inhibitor) is shown
 
 
Orlistat 

 
 4A two-treatment condition, four-period, two-sequence cross-over study design will be employed. 
Since T1HLP is a very rare disease, the study design will allow  for patients to act as their own 
controls, and thus increase the power of the study. This will b e an open-label trial.  
 
Baseline period:    
The baseline period will include a 4-week run-in period during which time dietary counseling will 
be performed. To be included in the study, subjects must have a  fasting TG > 1000 mg/dL at the 
end of the baseline period (complete inclusion/exclusion criteria are listed below). All patients will 
be evaluated at the Clinical Research Unit (CRU) at UTSW for th ree days  at the end of the 
baseline period. During this time, we will instruct them to consume a  diet containing 15% of total 
energy from fat, 70% from carbohydrate and 15% from protein. Th e same diet will be used during 
subsequent evaluations at CRU. This is to ensure that serum lipid evaluation is made when patients are taking a low fat diet to avoid confounding effects  of variability in dietary fat content.  
The subjects will also be asked to complete a 3-day food recall before admission to the CTRC to assess energy intake as well as dietary composition.  All patients will then be asked to follow a low fat diet (< 20% energy from fat) for the remainder of the s tudy period.  The diet counseling 
will be done by a trained research fellow or CTRC dietician imm ediately after the baseline period 
and at the beginning each new treatment period and at 2 wk dura tion for the remainder of the 
study. The counseling will be done in person at baseline and at  subsequent follow up visits and 
by phone in the intervening intervals.   Fasting blood samples will be obtained for serum lipid profile,  chylomicron-TG, serum chemistry, 
and aminotransaminases for the course of three days. Blood will  also be drawn once for 
determination of fat soluble vitamin levels (A, D, E, and K).  Patients will collect 72 hour stool for 
determination of fecal fat.  On the last day of the baseline pe riod, a meal tolerance test will be 
performed.   
Study phase:  
The patients will then be randomized to receive 3 months of Orl istat or control condition with no 
drug, then will crossover to the opposite condition as shown in Figure 2. This will be repeated 
for a total of 12 months or four periods of study.. Orlistat is  approved by the FDA at the higher 
dose of 120 mg three times a day for children over the age of 1 2 years. There are limited data 
regarding dosing of Orlistat for children, especially normal-weight children. One study used Orlistat for the treatment of Crigler-Najjar, which included ch ildren over the age of 7. The 
smallest child weighed 29 kg. In this study, the authors used a dose of 66 mg/m
2 body surface 
area three times daily, which is roughly equal to the amount fo r an adult per square meter body 
surface area (Hafkamp et al. Pediatric Research 2007;62(6):725-730). We are unable to precisely dose Orlistat since we will be using 60 mg capsules ( Alli).  Therefore, for our study, we 
will use a graded system for dosing based on the weight of the child (Table 1).  
 
Table 1: Dosing of Orlistat by weight in pediatric subjects: 
Breakfast Lunch Dinner 
>50 kg or adult >18 yrs 120 mg 120 mg 120 mg 
40-49.9 kg 60 mg 120 mg 120 mg 
30-39.9 kg 60 mg 60 mg 120 mg 
20-29.9 kg 60 mg 60 mg 60 mg 
 
 Orlistat has a short half-life of 1 to 2 hours, so no carry-ove r effects should be observed. Subjects 
will have their triglycerides m easured monthly. All laboratory studies enlisted during the baseline 
 
 5period (vitamin levels, liver f unction tests, complete blood count, and 72-hour fecal fat, etc.) will 
be repeated during the four study periods at CRU (see figure 2) . The patients will also take a daily 
multivitamin supplement containing vitamin A 3,500 IU (71% as retinol and 29% as β-carotene), 
vitamin D 400 IU (as cholecalciferol), vitamin E 30 IU (as dl-α -tocopheryl acetate) and vitamin K 
25 μg (as phytonadione).  Patients will be instructed to take v itamins at least 2 hours apart from 
Orlistat dosing.         
 
  Figure 2: Study Flow Diagram  
 
  Orlistat is a gastric and pancreatic lipase inhibitor that is a pproved by the FDA for weight loss. It 
is available over-the-counter as 60 mg tablets under the trade name Alli, and available by prescription as 120 mg capsules under the trade name Xenical. A t a dose of 120 mg three times 
daily, Orlistat reduces dietary fat absorption by 30% (7). Seve ral studies in the past ten years 
have shown a beneficial effect of Orlistat on postprandial lipids in healthy volunteers and in patients with diabetes (9-12). In a 52-week study involving obe se type 2 diabetic men, Orlistat 

 
 6120 mg three times daily reduced triglycerides and apolipoprote in B levels significantly (9). The 
FDA approved dose for obese children 12-18 years is the same as  that for adults, i.e., 120 mg 
three times a day.  
 Most of the patients with T1HLP present with recurrent abdomina l pain and even acute 
pancreatitis (a potentially life threatening complication) along with extreme hypertriglyceridemia during childhood. Since there is no established therapy for T1H LP, these children are at high risk 
of acute pancreatitis. Therefore, we have included children in this study. We will carefully monitor 
each child during participation in the study for any possible s ide effects. Since variability in 
glycemic control could be a confounding factor and patients wit h poorly controlled diabetes 
mellitus can develop secondary hypertriglyceridemia, we have ex cluded patients with diabetes 
from the study.   
Orlistat is currently approved for the treatment of obese children age 12 and older. Our study may 
incorporate younger children since there is currently no therap y available for these patients. A 
Swedish study was done to evaluate the safety of Orlistat in obese children ages 7-12. This study found no serious adverse effects (including liver toxicity and vitamin deficiencies). Most subjects 
did experience oily stools and diarrhea on at least one occasio n, but this occurred after ingestion 
of a high fat meal, and was not severe enough to cause discontinuation of the study. No negative effect on psychological or physical well-being was detected, and no effect on linear growth was identified. The adult dose of Orlistat (120 mg three times a day) was used in this study (13). For this reason, we will use the adult dose, except for small children weighing less than 30 kg. In these children, a dose of 60 mg three times a day will be used.  If the adult dose is not tolerated 
in children weighing > 30 kg, it will be reduced to 60 mg three  times a day. 
 Fasting serum TG is chosen as the primary end point variable as  this determination is made 
during clinical follow up of patients with T1HLP. Since Orlistat is expected to affect chylomicron formation, fasting and postprandial levels of chylomicron TG and serum TG are included as secondary endpoint variables. We will also capture any episodes  of acute pancreatitis and include 
them as a secondary endpoint variable. Tertiary end point varia bles include fat soluble vitamin 
levels to assess the potential effects of Orlistat on fat soluble vitamin absorption and fecal fat excretion to assess the potency of these drugs in blocking diet ary fat absorption.   
 The majority of Orlistat’s mechanism of action is believed to b e exerted in the gastrointestinal 
tract. Pharmacokinetic studies have shown that Orlistat is infr equently detected in plasma in 
subjects taking Orlistat, and when it is detected, very low levels are found (14-15).  For this study, a maximum of 12 patients will be enrolled. The subjects will serve as their own controls during their period off of the medication. Conditions which would result in the subject 
exiting the study prior to the expected completion date include  safety concerns, intolerable side 
effects, and subject withdrawal of consent.   
Study Procedures: 
Serum lipoproteins: Serum cholesterol, TG and high density lipo protein cholesterol will be 
measured by Quest Diagnostics. Ser um chylomicron TG will be mea sured according to the Lipid 
Research Clinics method after ultracentrifugation (16) using enzymatic kits.   
 Postprandial TG and chylomicron remnant clearance during meal t olerance test:  On the last day 
of evaluation, after obtaining a fasting blood sample, a breakf ast meal with a fixed dietary 
composition (600 kcal with 15% fat, 70% carbohydrate and 15% pr otein) will be given with 50,000 
 
 7IU of vitamin A (Aquasol).  A low fat meal will be prepared usi ng natural food items and is chosen 
to avoid exacerbation of hypertriglyceridemia and chylomicronem ia in these susceptible patients 
with T1HLP. Blood samples will be drawn at hourly intervals for 4 hours after the meal for 
determination of plasma triglyceride and retinyl palmitate concentrations.  .   Plasma retinyl palmitate concentration will be determined as described previously (17). Briefly, neutral lipids will be extracted from plasma using methanol and hexane.  All tubes used in the extraction will be covered with aluminum foil to protect re tinyl esters from light.  Plasma (500 
µL) and retinyl undecanoate as internal standard (300 ng in 100  µL of ethanol) will be added 
dropwise to 5 mL methanol.  After vortexing, 5 mL hexane will b e added and the mixture will be 
vortexed again for 30 s.  The samples will be allowed to stand for phase separation, and after removal of the upper phase, the lower phase will be washed with  5 mL hexane.  The hexane 
phase will be then dried under nitrogen and the residue will be  resuspended in 50 µL benzene.   
 Retinyl palmitate concentrations in the lipid extracts will be measured using reverse phase 
high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) using a Waters Mo del 6000A chromatograph 
(Waters Associates, Milford, MA) and a 3 µM Ultrasphere ODS col umn 4.6 X 75 mm (Alltech 
Associates, Deerfield, IL).  Column effluent will be monitored at 326 nm and chromatograms will 
be recorded on a Beckman 3390A integrator (Beckman Instruments, Palo Alto, CA) using an 
attenuation setting of three.  Peaks will be quantitated by the area ratio method.  Plasma 
triglyceride and retinyl palmitate data obtained during the ora l fat tolerance test will be analyzed 
by calculating incremental ar ea under the curves (normalized to the baseline value) using the 
trapezoidal rule.   
  Serum chemistry, complete blood counts and urinalysis: Complete  blood counts will include 
hemoglobin, hematocrit, MCV, MCH, MCHC, WBC count, RBC count, P latelet count and 
differential WBC count. Serum chemistry will include SMA-22 pan el with electrolytes (Na, K, Cl, 
carbon dioxide, urea nitrogen, creatinine, Ca, Mg, Phosphate), liver function tests (alanine 
aminotransferase, aspartate aminotransferase, Bilirubin, alkali ne phosphatase, gamma glutamyl 
transferase), glucose, hemoglobin A1c, creatine phosphokinase, total protein, albumin, globulin, 
uric acid and lactate dehydrogenase. Urinalysis will include co lor, appearance, specific gravity, 
pH, glucose, bilirubin, ketones, occult blood, protein, nitrite , leukocyte esterase, WBC, RBC, 
squamous epithelial cells, bacteria and hyaline cast. These tes ts will be done as indicated in the 
flow diagram. Serum TSH and fr ee T4 will be measured during eac h CRU visit for those patients 
who are taking thyroid hormone.  
 
72 Hour Fecal Fat:  Stool will be collected for 72 hours during each study period. The 
measurement will be performed by Quest Diagnostics. Oral carmin e will be used as a marker to 
ensure 72 hour collection of the stools.  
 Fat soluble vitamin levels:  Serum retinol, α-tocopherol, 25-OH Vitamin D and vitamin K will be 
measured once at baseline and during each study period. The measurements will be performed by Quest Diagnostics.   Three-Day Food Record:  Dietary intake will be assessed by 3-da y food record (two weekdays 
and one weekend day), a valid and reliable method. The records will be taken at baseline and at 
two week intervals.  The participants will be instructed on how  to record in detail all the food and 
drink consumed in the 3-day food record book provided.  The booklet will be available in English and Spanish.  Any questionable input or incomplete food entries  recorded will be promptly 
addressed when the subjects return their food records.  The foo d records will be analyzed for 
nutrient content using the University of Minnesota Nutrient Dat a System (NDS) for research.   
 
 
 8Gastrointestinal Symptoms Questionnaire: All patients will comp lete a gastrointestinal symptoms 
questionnaire (see appendix 1) during visit to the CRU (18). Th is questionnaire includes questions 
about diarrhea and steatorrhea, the expected side effects of Orlistat.  
 Subjects will be evaluated every month. They will be evaluated at CRU for evaluation at the 
beginning of the study, and every 3 months thereafter until the  end of the study. Each evaluation 
will be 3 days long. In addition, subjects will be seen in the CRU at the 1- and 2-month marks of 
each study period. This evaluation will last 3-4 hours and will  not require an overnight stay. If 
patient is unable to come to CRU, they will send blood sample f or lipid analysis.The study diagram 
above describes the timing of the procedures in more detail.   Subjects will not be responsible for any research-related costs  during this study. 
 
 
Sub-Study Procedures: 
No sub-studies will be involved in this study. 
  Criteria for Inclusion of Subjects: 
1. Type I hyperlipoproteinemia 2. Fasting serum triglyceride levels of greater than 1000 mg/dL 3. Age >  8 years 
  Criteria for Exclusion of Subjects: 
1. Secondary hypertriglyceridemias due to diabetes, renal disea se, hypothyroidism, 
alcoholism and drug therapy such as estrogens and estrogen analogues, steroids, HIV-protease inhibitors, retinoic acid derivatives and interferons 
2. Pregnant or lactating women 
3. Significant liver disease (elevated transaminases > 2 times upper limit of normal)  
Alcohol abuse (> 7 drinks or 84 g per week for women and > 14 d rinks or 168 g per week 
for men) 
4. Severe anemia (hematocrit < 24%) 
5. Drug use (cocaine, marijuana, LSD, etc.) 6. Major surgery in the past three months 
7. Congestive heart failure  
8. Serum creatinine greater than 2.5 mg/dL 9. Cancer within the past five years 10. Gastrointestinal surgery in the past  11. Current therapy with anti-coagulants, digoxin, and anti-arr hythmics 
12. Current therapy with cyclosporine 13. Chronic malabsorption syndromes 14. Cholestasis 15. Acute illnesses such as acute pancreatitis in the last 8 we eks 
  Sources of Research Material: 
Research material obtained in this study will consist of questionnaires, blood and stool specimens, 
physical examination, and 3-day food records obtained from the subjects according to the 
protocol. These will be obtained directly from subjects. Subjec ts will be asked to provide urine 
 
 9and stool, and blood will be collected via venipuncture. New clinical data will be generated from 
these specimens. The specimens will be collected and analyzed s olely for research purposes. 
  
Recruitment Methods and Consenting Process: 
Investigators will conduct chart review on Children’s EPIC and Parkland EPIC to search for 
patients with above mentioned inclusion and exclusion criteria.  The study subjects will be 
recruited from Children’s Medical Center (now called Children’s  health), the lipid clinics at the 
Parkland Memorial Hospital, Veterans Affairs North Texas Health  Care System, and UT 
Southwestern Aston Ambulatory Center.  In the past, patients ha ve been referred to the P.I. for 
diagnosis, clinical evaluation and management of T1HLP. These p atients may be recruited for 
the study as well. Patients will be recruited and consented by the investigators. Investigators will 
obtain informed consent after explaining the study and the subjects having read or been read the consent form. For Spanish-speaking subjects, a consent form wil l be provided in Spanish. For 
other Non-English speaking subjects, an interpreter will be use d via phone or in person. All 
information collected will be confidential and kept in a locked  room. The subjects will be informed 
that participation is voluntary and will not affect their medic al care or their relationship with the 
physician and institution. Minors may be included in this study , and consent for participation will 
be obtained from the subject’s parent or guardian. Consent will  be obtained prior to any study 
procedures being performed. A copy of the consent form will be given to the subjects and the 
original consent will be maintained in the subject’s research r ecords, which will be maintained in 
the CRU.   
   Potential Risks: 
All subjects will undergo a history and physical examination. S ubjects will be asked to collect stool 
and urine samples, for which there is minimal risk of psycholog ical or physical discomfort. They 
will be asked to undergo blood drawing, for which there is an unlikely risk for bruising and infection.  
Phlebotomy volumes for pediatric subjects will be adjusted base d on the child’s weight using the 
National Institutes of Health Guidelines for Blood Drawn for Research Purposes in the Clinical Center 2003.    The potential risks of Orlistat include gastrointestinal side e ffects such as: diarrhea, oily stools, 
flatulence with discharge, and anal leakage (9, 19-20). These r isks occur commonly but are 
significantly reduced by adherence to a low fat diet. The major risks for Orlistat are: drug-drug 
interactions and the reduction of cyclosporine and thyroid horm one levels in subjects taking 
thyroid supplementation (21), and fat soluble vitamin deficienc ies due to malabsorption (9, 19-
22). We will provide vitamin supplementation daily during the s tudy and monitor the fat soluble 
vitamin levels periodically. Vitamins will be taken 2 hours apart from Orlistat dosing. For patients 
taking thyroid supplementation, thyroid hormone levels will be checked during each CRU visit and 
medication adjusted as needed. Patients will be instructed to t ake levothyroxine 4 hours apart 
from Orlistat dosing. Patients  taking cyclosporine are excluded  from the study.  
 Currently the standard care for patients with T1HLP is a very l ow fat diet. This therapy is ineffective 
and difficult to follow. The risks of Orlistat are mild when compared to the reduction in risk of pancreatitis that may be obtained from this medication. No plac ebo will be used in this study. 
  
Subject Safety and Data Monitoring: 
Potential risks will be minimized by utilizing study codes to i dentify subjects. The physical risks 
will be minimized by the inclusion and exclusion criteria and a  complete physical examination 
 
 10prior to initiating study procedures with careful monitoring throughout. Additionally, pregnant or 
lactating women are excluded from the study. Subjects will have  close monitoring of their liver 
enzymes. In the event of adverse effects or events, the study subjects will be referred to an appropriate physician for treatment.  A pregnancy test will be performed on all female patients of 
reproductive age at each CRU visit (every 3 months). Study subj ects who become pregnant 
during the course of the study will be discontinued from the tr ial.  Blood tests including 
chemistry, lipids and liver enzymes will be obtained periodically to ensure safety of the subjects. All subjects with a BMI <24 who lose >5% body weight from baseline will be required to undergo 
dietary counseling from a dietician or trained research fellow. If weight continues to decrease 
over the next month, subjects will be discontinued from the stu dy. 
   
We propose the creation of an internal Data and Safety Monitoring Committee composed of 
experts in statistics and lipid metabolism.  Identified for the  necessary expertise are individuals 
who are not associated with this trial and not collaborators of the principal investigator. 1. Song Zhang, PhD, Assistant Professor, Department of Clinical Science s.  2.  Scott Grundy, M.D., Ph.D. 
Professor of Internal Medicine 3.  Perrin White, M.D., Professor of Pediatrics 4.  Fredrick Dunn, 
M.D., Associate Professor of Internal Medicine. 
   The Committee will be asked to:  a) Review the research protocol, informed consent documents and the plans for data and safety monitoring. b) Evaluate the p rogress of the study including 
periodic assessments of data quality and timeliness, recruitmen t, retention, and risk versus 
benefit.  c) Report on the safety and scientific progress of th e trial.  d) Make recommendations to 
the PI, and if needed to the IRB, CTRC and FDA concerning conti nuation, termination or 
modifications of the trial based on the observed beneficial or adverse effects of the interventions 
under study.  e) Conduct or review the interim analysis with re gards to safety in accordance with 
stopping rules, which should be defined in advance of the data analysis. f) Ensure data integrity. g) Ensure the confidentiality of the data and results of monito ring.  h) Maintain study integrity by 
commenting on any problems with study conduct, enrollment, stat istics or data collection. 
       The PI will hold the primary oversight responsibility for this trial and as such he will be responsible 
for surveying the medical literature for scientific or therapeu tic developments that may impact the 
safety of participants or the ethics of the study.  He will ins ure that: subjects are fully informed of 
the study requirements throughout the trial, insure that study subjects receive a study calendar 
upon enrollment, are updated on any new information relevant to  their continued participation or 
change in the risk versus benefit ratio of the interventions.  The PI will be responsible for reporting 
adverse events to the IRB, CTRC and FDA in accordance with IRB policies and time frames.  The 
PI is responsible for submitting continuing review reports to the IRB, and FDA.    
 
Procedures to Maintain Confidentiality: 
Study codes will be used to identify subjects to maintain confi dentiality. All files will be kept locked, 
and all information on computers will be password protected.  A ccess to research data is restricted 
to key personnel directly involved with the study who have been  trained in the protection of human 
subjects and signed statements assuring their compliance with University policies protecting the privacy of research subjects. We do not intend to apply for a Certificate of Confidentiality from the 
NIH.   
Potential Benefits: 
 
 11The potential benefit of Orlistat therapy is an improvement in serum triglycerides, serum 
chylomicron-TG levels, and postprandial serum triglyceride leve ls.   
 
If this therapy is effective, it will result in a reduction of the severe hypertriglyceridemia that is 
associated with T1HLP and ultimately decrease the incidence of acute pancreatitis. The knowledge to be gained by this study will have important implications in our understanding of how to effectively treat this rare condition.  
 
Biostatistics: 
Design. Due to the rare disease status of Type I Hyperlipoproteinemia, which will limit 
enrollment, we will implement a dual sequence, four-period crossover design to study the 
Orlistat and control treatment phases.  For a small sample size , this design allows us to better 
estimate treatment and carryover effects that can be aliased in  a two period design.  
 The sample size will be determined by the number of subjects wi th Type I Hyperlipoproteinemia 
meeting the inclusion criteria. Approximately 6-12 patients are  expected to be enrolled.  
Therefore no formal power calculations are performed. 
 
Statistical analysis. Each treatment condition will be summariz ed with descriptive statistics, 
graphics for each subject, and adverse events will be carefully tabulated.  The treatment effect (Orlistat versus control) will be estimated from repeated measu res mixed model and 
summarized with the model’s least squares means estimate and co rresponding 95% confidence 
interval. 
   
 
 12Literature Cited 
 1. Brunzell JD, Deeb SS  2006 Familial Lipoprotein Lipase Deficiency, Apo C-II Deficiency, 
and Hepatic Lipase Deficiency. In: Valle D, Beaudet AL, Vogelst ein B, Kinzler KW, 
Antonarakis SE, Ballabio A eds. Online Metabolic and Molecular Bases of Inherited 
Disease: McGraw-Hill; 1-60 
2. Durrington P  2003 Dyslipidaemia. Lancet 362:717-731 
3. Beigneux AP, Franssen R, Bensadoun A, Gin P, Melford K, Peter J , Walzem RL, 
Weinstein MM, Davies BS, Kuivenhoven JA, Kastelein JJ, Fong LG,  Dallinga-Thie 
GM, Young SG  2009 Chylomicronemia With a Mutant GPIHBP1 (Q115P) That Cannot  
Bind Lipoprotein Lipase. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 29(6):956-62 
4. Peterfy M, Ben-Zeev O, Mao HZ, Weissglas-Volkov D, Aouizerat BE , Pullinger CR, 
Frost PH, Kane JP, Malloy MJ, Reue K, Pajukanta P, Doolittle MH  2007 Mutations in 
LMF1 cause combined lipase deficiency and severe hypertriglycer idemia. Nat Genet 
39:1483-1487 
5. Piolot A, Nadler F, Cavallero E, Coquard JL, Jacotot B  1996 Prevention of recurrent 
acute pancreatitis in patients wi th severe hypertriglyceridemia: value of regular 
plasmapheresis. Pancreas 13:96-99 
6. Stroes ES, Nierman MC, Meulenberg JJ, Franssen R, Twisk J, Henn y CP, Maas MM, 
Zwinderman AH, Ross C, Aronica E, High KA, Levi MM, Hayden MR, Kastelein JJ, 
Kuivenhoven JA  2008 Intramuscular administration of AAV1-lipoprotein lipase S 447X 
lowers triglycerides in lipoprotein lipase-deficient patients. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 
28:2303-2304 
7. Lucas KH, Kaplan-Machlis B 2001 Orlistat--a novel weight loss therapy. Ann Pharmacother 35:314-328 
8. Shi Y, Cheng D  2009 Beyond Triglyceride Synthesis: The Dynamic Functional Rol es of 
MGAT and DGAT Enzymes in Energy Metabolism. Am J Physiol Endocr inol Metab 
297:E10-E18 
9. Hollander PA, Elbein SC, Hirsch IB, Kelley D, McGill J, Taylor T, Weiss SR, Crockett 
SE, Kaplan RA, Comstock J, Lucas CP, Lodewick PA, Canovatchel W, Chung J, Hauptman J 1998 Role of orlistat in the treatment of obese patients with type 2 diabetes. 
A 1-year randomized double-blind study. Diabetes Care 21:1288-1 294 
10. Reitsma JB, Castro Cabezas M, de Bruin TW, Erkelens DW  1994 Relationship between 
improved postprandial lipemia and low-density lipoprotein metab olism during treatment 
with tetrahydrolipstatin, a pancreatic lipase inhibitor. Metabo lism 43:293-298 
11. Suter PM, Marmier G, Veya-Linder C, Hanseler E, Lentz J, Vetter  W, Otvos J  2005 
Effect of orlistat on postprandial lipemia, NMR lipoprotein sub class profiles and particle 
size. Atherosclerosis 180:127-135 
12. Tan KC, Tso AW, Tam SC, Pang RW, Lam KS  2002 Acute effect of orlistat on post-
prandial lipaemia and free fatty acids in overweight patients w ith Type 2 diabetes mellitus. 
Diabet Med 19:944-948 
13. Norgren S, Danielsson P, Jurold R, Lötborn M, Marcus C  2003 Orlistat treatment in 
obese prepubertal children: a pilot study. Acta Pædiatr 92:666- 670 
14. Heck AM, Yanovski JA, Calis KA  2000 Orlistat, a New Lipase Inhibitor for the 
Management of Obesity. Pharmacotherapy 20(3):270-279 
15. Lucas 
KH, Kaplan-Machlis B 2001 Orlistat – A Novel Weight Loss Therapy. Ann 
Pharmacother 35:314-28 
16. 1984 Lipid and Lipoprotein Analysis. In: Manual of Laborato ry Operations. In: NIH ed. 
DHEW NIH publication. Washington D.C: Lipid research clinic pro gram 
 
 1317. Blades B, Garg A  1995 Mechanisms of increase in plasma triacylglycerol concentr ations 
as a result of high carbohydrate intakes in patients with non-i nsulin-dependent diabetes 
mellitus. Am J Clin Nutr 62:996-1002 
18. Bovenschen HJ, Janssen MJ, van Oijen MG, Laheij RJ, van Rossum LG, Jansen JB  
2006 Evaluation of a gastrointestinal symptoms questionnaire. Dig Dis Sci 51:1509-1515 
19. Sjostrom L, Rissanen A, Andersen T, Boldrin M, Golay A, Koppesc haar HP, Krempf 
M 1998 Randomised placebo-controlled trial of orlistat for weigh t loss and prevention of 
weight regain in obese patients. European Multicentre Orlistat Study Group. Lancet 
352:167-172 
20. Davidson MH, Hauptman J, DiGirolamo M, Foreyt JP, Halsted CH, Heber D, 
Heimburger DC, Lucas CP, Robbins DC, Chung J, Heymsfield SB 1999 Weight control and risk factor reduction in obese subjects treated for 2 years with orlistat: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 281:235-242 
21. 2008 Xenical (Orlistat) prescribing information. In: Pharma ceuticals R ed. Roche 
Laboratories. Nutley, New Jersey 
22. Hill JO, Hauptman J, Anderson JW, Fujioka K, O'Neil PM, Smith D K, Zavoral JH, 
Aronne LJ  1999 Orlistat, a lipase inhibitor, for weight maintenance after conventional 
dieting: a 1-y study. Am J Clin Nutr 69:1108-1116 
  
 
 1 4 A p p e n di x 1: GI S y m pt o m s Q u e sti o n n air e. 
  
G a str oi nt e sti n al S y m pt o m s Q u e sti o n n air e 
 
N a m e: _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _   D at e: _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ Vi sit: _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 
 
          N o S y m pt o m s ( 0)    S e v er e S y m pt o m s ( 5)  
S y m pt o m    0  1  2  3  4  5 
 
1.  A b d o mi n al p ai n s           
 
2.  H e art b ur n             
 
3.  A ci d r e g ur git ati o n            
 
4.  S u c ki n g s e n s ati o n s          
i n t h e di a p hr a g m ar e a  
 
5.  N a u s e a a n d v o miti n g         
 
6.  R u m bli n g of st o m a c h         
 
7.  A b d o mi n al di st e n si o n         
 
8.  B el c hi n g             
 
9. I n cr e a s e d g a s            
 
1 0.  D e cr e a s e d p a s s a g e          
 of st o ol s 
 
1 1.  I n cr e a s e d p a s s a g e          
 of st o ol s 
 
1 2.  L o o s e st o ol s           
 
1 3.  H ar d st o ol s           
 
1 4.  Ur g e nt n e e d f or           
 b o w el m o v e m e nt 
 
1 5.  F e eli n g of i n c o m pl et e          
 e v a c u ati o n 
 
1 6.  Oil y st o ol s           
 
1 7.  St o ol l e a k a g e           