 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PROTOCOL OUTLINE AND GUIDELINES  
Identifiers: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] Unique Protocol ID: 5130196  
Brief Title: Oral Steroids in Chronic Rhinosinusitis Without Nasal Polyps  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Investigators must submit well -organized, detailed information about the  study, demonstrating  
sound research design that minimizes risks to the subject. PI should assure that the content  
outlined below is addressed and may exercise some discretion as to how the information is  
organized. The quality and content of the protocol should demonstrate that scientific and merit  
review of the study has occurred at the departmental level prior to submission to the IRB.  
1. PROTOCOL INFORMATION  
Title: Efficacy of broad spectrum antibiotics combined with oral steroids versus  
antibiotics alo ne in the treatment of chronic rhinosinusitis (CRS) in adults without  
nasal polyposis (CRSsNP)  
Funding Source: None.  
Phase of Study: Phase 4  
Version Date of Protocol: 12/3/2020  
2. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR’S INFORMATION  
Kristin Seiberling, MD. Loma Linda Univer sity Department of Otolaryngology Head  
and Neck Surgery, 11234 Anderson Street, Loma Linda CA 92354. Ext 2260, fax  
44819  
3. STUDY PERSONNEL  
Kristin Seiberling, MD – PI 
Christopher Church, MD – Co-investigator  
Christopher Vuong, MD – Resident investigator  
4. STUDY INFORMATION  
Location(s) of Research Activity: Loma Linda Sinus and Allergy Center  
Expected Start/Stop Dates of Research: Start upon IRB approval, will plan to  
conduct study and collect data over 12 months  
Special Time Sensitivities: None  
Type of Re search: Interventional  
5. INCLUSION / EXCLUSION CRITERIA  
Inclusion Criteria:  
1. They have three -months of persistent symptoms meeting criteria for chronic rhinosinusits  
as defined by the Taskforce on Rhinosinusitis.  
2. They have a CT -scan in our clinic or have a viewable recent (< 3weeks prior to clinic  
visit) CT -scan with a Lund Mckay score of 6 or greater. A Lund Mckay score of 6 or  
greater is felt to be indicative of at least moderate CRS.  
2 
3. They do not have nasal polyps on initial clinic nasal endoscopy  
4. They are willing to participate in a clinical study  
5. They are between the ages of 18 to 80.  
Exclusion Criteria:  
1. They have a condition in which the use of systemic corticosteroids is contraindicated  
such as diabetes will be excluded.  
2. Th ey are unable to or unwilling to take the prescribed antibiotics or steroids will  
excluded.  
3. They have been treated with a > 3 week course of antibiotics and/or systemic steroids  
will also be excluded.  
4. They have variants of chronic sinusitis known to be refractory to medical therapy such as  
Wegener's granulomatosis, primary ciliary dyskinesia or sarcoidosis.  
5. They have sinusitis secondary to prior surgery, a dental procedure or anatomical  
variants.  
6. They have nasal polyps on physical exam.  
7. They are pregnant. Subjects who are possibly pregnant will be excluded based on history.  
Pregnancy testing is not standard of care for diagnostic imaging.  
8. They have a Lund -Mckay score on CT scan of < 6  
9. They are < 18 or > 80 years old  
6. SUBJECT RECRUITMEN T & SCREENING  
Number of Subjects : ~40  
Subject Age Range: ≥18 years of age, ≤80 years of age  
Subject Gender: Both  
Racial/Ethnic Distribution : Any  
Target Study Population : Patients without nasal polyps who suffer from chronic  
rhinosinusitis.  
English/Non -English Speaking Subject Info : Translators will be provided for non - 
English speaking patients  
Certified Translated Consent Form Use : None  
Recruitment Material Type Info : All patients who present to Loma Linda Sinus and  
Allergy center meeting i nclusion criteria will be asked to participate  
Vulnerable Subject Info : N/A  
Recruitment Method Info: Patients without nasal polyps as documented by  
endoscopy and who are not currently taking antibiotics or nasal/oral corticosteroids  
will be prospectively r ecruited. This will be a randomized blinded study. Patients  
will be randomized into three groups - Group 1 will received oral antibiotics (Bactrim  
or Augmentin) nasal steroid sprays (fluticasone) along with nasal saline irrigation ,  
Group 2 will receive ora l antibiotics, steroid nasal spray and in addition oral steroids  
(prednisone) at a tapered dosage for 6 days, and Group 3 will receive oral  
antibiotics, steroid nasal spray and in addition oral steroids at a tapered dosage for  
20 days. The investigator wil l be blinded as to which group the subjects are placed.  
Description of consent precautions regarding subject rights and welfare: Informed  
consent will be obtained from all patients after they have been given the opportunity  
to have their questions answered . 
Pregnancy Status Info: Pregnant patients will not be included in study  
3 
7. INFORMED CONSENT PROCESS  
Specific description of informed consent process: Informed consent will be obtained  
from all participating subjects prior to enrollment in the study. (Se e attached  
informed consent form) The risks, benefits and alternatives will be discussed with  
potential subjects by clinic investigators listed above (Drs. Seiberling, Church and  
Vuong) at time of appointment at Loma Linda Sinus and Allergy center. Patient  
information will be kept private and there will be time for decision -making/discussion  
prior to enrollment in the study. Patient who are able to verbalize/demonstrate their  
understanding and are able to give informed consent will be considered. Subjects w ill 
be identified by state ID or Driver’s license and will be randomized into one of two  
study groups by flip of a coin.  
Coding system: diagnosis and office visits will be coded in the standard fashion.  
Privacy of Medical and Research Records information/medical records: Patient  
information and study data will be kept as hard copy by PI in locked desk/room and  
some study data will be kept on encrypted/protected flash drive by PI.  
Medical Release forms, HIPAA compliance/authorization form: See attached form  
8. STUDY DESIGN  
a. Background or rationale for this study: Chronic sinus infections (chronic  
sinusitis or CRS) are common conditions that affect millions of Americans. This  
disea se can be divided into two main patient groups: Patients with chronic  
rhinosinusitis without nasal polyps (CRSsNP) and those with nasal polyps  
(CRSwNP). We will be focusing on the non -polyp group. While this is a common  
disorder, medical treatments for thi s condition vary considerably and little is  
known how and why different treatments work in some individuals and not in  
others. Topical nasal steroids and oral antibiotics are the mainstay and  
standard of care for both CRSsNP and CRSwNP. Oral steroids are c ommonly  
given for both of these sinusitis variants, however their role in non -polyp CRS  
patients is less well delineated. The purpose of this research study is to better  
understand whether orally administered steroids results in superior results  
when compa red with nasally sprayed steroids in this population. The  
investigators will compare patients with chronic sinusitis who are treated with  
antibiotics, topical nasal sprayed steroid therapy, and compare them to chronic  
sinusitis patients who receive antibio tics and nasally sprayed steroid therapy  
along with a short course or long course of oral steroids. The goal is to  
determine if oral steroids have a role in CRSsNP, and if so, the most effective  
dosage.  
b. Objectives. To compare the effectiveness of topica l nasal steroid sprays, oral  
antibiotics and saline nasal irrigations versus topical nasal steroids, oral  
antibiotics, saline nasal irrigation + oral corticosteroids (prednisone) in CRS  
patients without nasal polyps.  
c. Procedures involved (Research Interventions). Chronological order of all  
research interventions, distinguishing standard of care vs. research  
intervention : 
4 
1. At the time of enrollment nasal endoscopy will be performed to confirm that the  
patient does not have evidence of nasal polyp s. Office -based sinus CT scan will  
also be completed on initial visit. Lund -McKay score at initiation of treatment  
will be one a determinate of study eligibility. (Lund -McKay staging system is  
currently the most widely accepted system to radiographically  characterize and  
diagnose CRS. A score of 6 or greater indicates significant sinus disease and  
meets inclusion criteria for study. See below table 1 for Lund -McKay staging  
system.) Note: Endoscopy and CT of paranasal sinuses are the standard of care  
for e valuation of patients with symptoms of CRS and will be offered to all patients  
presenting with these symptoms regardless of study enrollment status.  
2. Subjects will be asked to fill out a SNOT 22 survey before the start of therapy.  
(SNOT 20 form attached) . 
3. Nasal endoscopy score will also be obtained during initial visit. (Nasal endoscopy  
scoring form attached). This exam is part of the standard of care.  
4. Subjects will be randomized into 3 groups via an electronic random generator  
(see below)  
1. Group 1: Treated with oral antibiotics, nasal steroid spray and saline  
rinses for 3 weeks (standard of care)  
2. Group 2: Treated with above + Prednisone 6 day tapered dosage  
(standard of care)  
3. Group 3: Group 2: Treated with above + Prednisone 20 day tapered  
dosage (standard of care)  
4. Random generator:  
5 
5. Patients will return to office at 4 weeks (following 3 weeks of oral antibiotics,  
nasal steroid spray, nasal saline irrigation + prednisone for patients in Groups 2  
and 3), At that time, patients will be asked to fill out SNOT 22 survey, nasal  
endoscopy and CT scan to assess response to treatment. (standard of care).  
6. At the 4 week follow up, patients will be asked to fill out SNOT 22 survey, and  
undergo nasal endoscop y. (standard of care).  
d. Alternative procedures, if any, that are not included in the study but might be  
advantageous to the subject - None  
e. If any deception is required for validity of this study, explain why this is  
necessary and how subject(s) will b e debriefed. - None  
f. Concise review of literature that supports the rationale, objectives, and  
methodology of the proposed study.  
1. Chronic sinus infections (chronic sinusitis or CRS) are common  
conditions  that affect millions of Americans. This disease can be divided  
into two main patient groups: Patients with chronic rhinosinusitis without  
nasal polyps (CRSsNP) and those with nasal polyps (CRSwNP). We will  
be focusing on the non -polyp group. While this is  a common disorder,  
medical treatments for this condition vary considerably and little is known  
how and why different treatments work in some individuals and not in  
others. Topical nasal steroids and oral antibiotics are the mainstay and  
standard of care f or both CRSsNP and CRSwNP. Oral steroids are  
commonly given for both of these sinusitis variants, however their role in  
non-polyp CRS patients is less well delineated. The purpose of this  
research study is to better understand whether orally administered  
steroids results in superior results when compared with nasally sprayed  
steroids in this population, and if so, at which dosage. The investigators  
will compare patients with chronic sinusitis who are treated with  
antibiotics, topical nasal sprayed steroid t herapy, and compare them to  
chronic sinusitis patients who receive antibiotics and nasally sprayed  
steroid therapy along with oral steroids. The goal is to determine if oral  
steroids have a role in CRSsNP. (See below for literature review.)  
6 
g. If an Investigational New Drug (IND) is involved, provide the following  
information: (1) name of drug, (2) source of drug, (3) dosage and schedule of  
administration, (4) status with Food and Drug Administration and IND#, (5)  
review of animal studies and previous  human studies, (6) reported side effects.  
– Not applicable to this study  
h. For an approved drug used in an experiment, provide similar information:  
1. Fluticasone propionate nasal spray 400mcg qday given as 2 sprays (50mcg  
propionate per spray) to each n ostril twice a day daily. Common side effects  
include: Headache. Back pain, minor nosebleed, menstrual cycle disturbance,  
sinus pain, cough, sore throat, sore or white patches inside or around nose  
1. Augmentin (amoxicillin/clavulanate 875/125mg) PO BID fo r 3 weeks.  
Common side effects: Diarrhea, nausea, rash, urticarial, pruritis, epigastric  
discomfort, vomiting, glossitis, stomatitis, candidiasis, LFT elevation  
2. If allergic to Augmentin: Bactrim DS  
(Trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole160/800mg) PO BID for 3 w eeks. Common  
side effects: Nausea/vomiting, rash, diarrhea, dizziness, utricaria, headache,  
lethargy  
3. Prednisone 6 day taper given as 30mg PO QD for 2 days, 20mg PO QD for 2  
days, 10mg PO QD for 2 days, then stop. Common side effects: Fluid retention,  
increased sweating, headache, insomnia, nervousness, mood swings, edema,  
muscle weakness, BP elevation, facial erythema, menstrual irregularities,  
hypokalemia, intraocular pressure increase, shortness of breath, weight gain.  
4. Prednisone 20 day taper given as 40mg PO QD for 5 days, 30mg PO QD for 5  
days, 20mg PO QD for 5 days, 10mg PO QD for 5 days, then stop. Common side  
effects: Fluid retention, increased sweating, headache, insomnia, nervousness,  
mood  swings, edema, muscle weakness, BP elevation, facial erythema, menstrual  
irregularities, hypokalemia, intraocular pressure increase, shortness of breath,  
weight gain.  
5. Nasal saline ad lib  
g. If an Investigational Device (ID) is involved, provide the fol lowing  
information: (1) name of device, (2) manufacturer, (3) status with Food and  
Drug Administration and ID#, (4) review of animal studies and previous  
human studies, (5) reported adverse effects. – Not applicable  
9. DATA COLLECTION  
As above. The data wh ich will be collected is clinic nasal endoscopy score, visual  
analogue score (VAS), SNOT 20 score and initial CT of paranasal sinuses with Lund 7 
McKay score. Response to treatment as recorded by subjective scoring systems above  
will be recorded in hard cop y and be kept by PI in secure, locked drawer.  
10. LABELING & STORAGE OF DATA & SPECIMENS  
Description of consent document storage/time/destroyed/disposed, research records  
and data storage/time/destroyed/disposed, hard copies vs. electronic, research  
specim ens storage/time/destroyed/disposed and any special storage conditions  
11. DATA ANALYSIS  
Data will be compiled and statistical analysis will be made using PRISM software  
12. RISK AND INJURY  
This study poses minimal risk  
13. BENEFIT(S)  
This study will demonstrate whether or not oral steroids in addition to antibiotics and  
topical nasal steroids are efficacious in the treatment of CRSsNP.  
14. COMPENSATION  
None  
15. CONFIDENTIALITY  
All patient information and data will be kept confidential  
16. LITERATURE R EVIEW  
a. Hissaria P, Smith W, Wormald PJ, Taylor J, Vadas M, Gillis D, Kette F. Short  
course of systemic corticosteroids in sinonasal polyposis: a double -blind,  
randomized, placebo -controlled trial with evaluation of outcome measures. J  
Allergy Clin Immunol. 2006 Jul;118(1):128 -33. Epub 2006 May 19.  
b. Hopkins C, Browne JP, Slack R, Lund V, Brown P. The Lund -Mackay staging  
system for chronic rhinosinusitis: how is it used and what does it predict?  
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2007 Oct;137(4):555 -61. 
c. Hopkins C, Gillett S, Slack R, Lund VJ, Browne JP. Psychometric validity of the  
22-item Sinonasal Outcome Test. Clin Otolaryngol. 2009 Oct;34(5):447 -54. 
d. Parikh A, Scadding GK, Darby Y, Baker RC. Topical corticosteroids in chronic  
rhinosinusitis: a rand omized, double -blind, placebo -controlled trial using  
fluticasone propionate aqueous nasal spray. Rhinology. 2001 Jun;39(2):75 -9. 
e. Stankiewicz JA, Chow JM. Cost analysis in the diagnosis of chronic  
rhinosinusitis. Am J Rhinol. 2003 May -Jun;17(3):139 -42. 
f. Wallwork B, Coman W, Mackay -Sim A, Greiff L, Cervin A. A double -blind,  
randomized, placebo -controlled trial of macrolide in the treatment of chronic  
rhinosinusitis. Laryngoscope. 2006 Feb;116(2):189 -93 