 
 
	
	
Metoclopramide for Post-Traumatic Headache 
A Pilot Study 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
NCT#: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
Protocol ID: 2017-7511 
Version Date: 02/16/2017 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
Benjamin W. Friedman, MD 
Professor and vice-chair fo r clinical investigation 
Department of Emergency Medicine 
Montefiore Medical Center Albert Einstein College of Medicine 
 
Metoclopramide	for	PTH.	Pilot	protocol.	Version	02162017	 2A pilot study of IV metoclopramide for acute post-traumatic headache  
 
Nearly 1.5 million patients present to US emergency departments  EDs annually following 
head trauma.(1) Headache is a frequent symptom of victims of tr auma and may take the 
form of either migraine or tensi on-type headache. (2) For most patients, post-traumatic 
headaches will resolve after several months, though up to ¼ wil l develop a persistent 
headache syndrome.(2) Post-traumatic headaches are believed to respond to the same parenteral medications as primary headaches, but this hypothesi s has never been tested 
experimentally. We propose a seri es of clinical investigations examining the role of IV 
metoclopramide for acute post-traumatic headache. Our hypothesi s is that 
metoclopramide will improve headache pain more than placebo one  hour, 48 hours and 
one week after medication admin istration. As a precursor to a d efinitive study, we intend 
to perform an open-label pilot study to determine the feasibili ty of this line of 
investigation.   It is not yet underst ood why anti-dopaminergic medications are effective treatment for 
acute headache, but there is a substantial evid ence base suppor ting efficacy of this class 
of medication for headache, regar dless of whether the headache is migraine,(3) or 
tension-type(4) headache. Als o, when used for headache, this me dication is generally 
well-tolerated; serious adverse  events have not been reported in this population. Given 
this track record of successful  use in primary headache disorders, we believe this 
medication is appropriate for us e in this initial study of pare nteral treatment for post-
traumatic headache.  
Methods 
Overview. This will be a non-randomized, open-label study of IV  metoclopramide for 
acute post-traumatic headache. Pat ients will be enrolled during  a visit to one of two 
Montefiore EDs and followed by telephone 48 hours and 7 days af ter the ED visit.  
 
Population of interest: Include d patients will be adults who meet International 
Classification of Headache Disord ers criteria f or acute post-tr aumatic headache. These 
are as follows: -Traumatic injury to the head has occurred - Headache has developed withi n 7 days of injury to the head 
-Headache is not better accounted for by another diagnosis (eg, previous history of migraine or tension-type headache)  The headache must be rated as moderate or severe in intensity a t the time of initial 
evaluation. The plan of the atte nding emergency physician must include treatment with 
parenteral metoclopramide. Patie nts will be excluded if more th an ten days have elapsed 
since the head trauma, if the  headache has already been treated with an anti-dopaminergic 
medication, or for medication con tra-indications including pheo chromocytoma, seizure 
disorder, Parkinson’s disease, use of MAO inhibitors, and use of anti-rejection transplant medications. Patients will  be excluded for pregnancy. 
 Study setting: This study will be conducted in the Moses and Ei nstein EDs 
Metoclopramide	for	PTH.	Pilot	protocol.	Version	02162017	 3 
Investigational medications: Metoclopramide 20mg IV drip over 1 5 minutes + 
diphenhydramine 25mg IV drip ove r 15 minutes. Diphenhydramine i s co-administered to 
prevent subjective restlessness.(5)   
Measures 
Numerical Rating Scale for pai n. This is a 0 to 10 verbal ratin g scale on which 0 signifies 
no pain and 10 signifies the w orst pain imaginable.  
International Headache Society pain scale. Headache is described as severe, moderate, 
mild, or none Satisfaction scale. Patients ar e asked if they would want to re ceive the same medication 
during a subsequent visit to the ED for post-traumatic headache Overall sense of wellbeing. Patie nts are asked to report their overall health since before 
their injury as better, same, or worse The Sport Concussion Assessment Tool (SCAT) Post Concussion Sym ptom Scale 
(PCSS). On this validated instrument, patients rate 25 symptoms  on a 0 to 6 scale. 
(Appendix)  
Primary outcome  
Headache relief for 48 hours—Achieving a headache intensity of mild or none in the ED 
without use of rescue medication and maintaining t hat level for 48 hours. 
 
Other outcomes   
1) Use of additional medication in the ED for headache 
2) Use of additional medication in the ED for associated sympto ms 
3) Achieving headache freedom in the ED without use of additional medication for headache 4) Satisfaction with the medi cation, measured at the 48 hour fo llow-up phone call 
5) Number of days with headache  during the week after ED discharge 
6) Return visits to the ED over the week after discharge 
7) SCAT PCSS at 48 hours and 7 days  
Details of protocol   
Patients who present to either of  the study EDs with an acute h eadache will be referred by 
the attending emergency physicia n to the research staff for enrollment. Eligibility will be 
ascertained by researc h associates and verifi ed by the site inv estigator. Capacity to 
consent to participate in th is study will be assessed by the attending emergency physician 
and specifically documented. The research associate will perfor m a baseline pain 
assessment. The ED nurse will the n administer the research medi cation as described 
above. The research associates wil l return every 30 minutes to perform an assessment of 
headache, associated features, a nd adverse events. The use of rescue medications to treat 
persistent pain will also be recorded. Prior to discharge, rese arch associates will ascertain 
key socio-demographics and pertin ent features of the headache h istory.  Contact 
information will be verified by calling the number given at the  time of acquisition in the 
ED. A specific time to perform the first follow-up phone call will be scheduled.  
 
Metoclopramide	for	PTH.	Pilot	protocol.	Version	02162017	 4Follow-up phone calls will be performed 48 hours and 7 days aft er ED discharge. At the 
first call, the next follow-up phone  call will be scheduled. Attempts to complete the 
follow-up calls successfully wil l be made every eight hours unt il deemed futile. At this 
point, questionnaires will be sent  by express courier, and failing this, the investigator will 
perform a home visit.  
  At the 48-hour phone call, the focus will be assessments of pa in and associated 
symptoms, adverse events, satisf action with the medication rece ived, and use of rescue 
medication. The focus of the seven day phone call will be total  number of days with 
headache and associated symptoms since ED discharge, the need f or repeat ED visits, 
healthcare providers visited, days of work missed, and adverse medication effects.  
 
Baseline co-variates 
1. Severity of initial trauma, as measured by presence and dura tion of loss of 
consciousness and amnesia (missing time) 
2. Anxiety, as measured by a nxiety scale (GAD-7) 
3. Concern about cause of headache (Four item Likert: I probably didn’t need to see a doctor but I wanted to be sure;  I’m not sure if I did or didn’t  need to see a doctor; I 
probably needed to see a doctor; I  definitely need ed to see a doctor)  
4 Personal and family primary headache history 5. Patient’s assessment of liability (no one’s fault, patient’s fault, someone else’s fault)  Sample size: We intend to enr oll up to 20 patients. We will rev iew data after each group 
of five patients to determine wh ether there is compelling data to proceed with a definitive 
study.  
 
Analysis   
The primary purpose of this study is to determine whether there is a compelling rationale 
to proceed with a definitive study. We will analyze the data af ter each group of five 
patients have been enrolled. If  0 of the initial five patients achieve the primary outcome, 
we will halt this line of inves tigation. After 10 patients have  been enrolled, we will use 
the threshold of 40% response (48 hour sustained relief) to det ermine whether or not to 
proceed with the definitive st udy. We intend to continue enrollment until 10 patients have 
provided complete outcome data  (may require up to 20 patients).  We also intend to 
continue enrollment beyond 10 patients in this pilot study if study instruments require refinement or if there is discr epancy between primary and secon dary outcomes. 
 
Data collection and processing  
Data acquisition will be performed using REDCap (Research Electronic Data Capture), a 
secure, web-based application de signed specifically to support data capture for research 
studies. The REDCap project  (http://project-redcap.org/ ) is an international project, with 
more than 70 institutional part ners from CTSA and GCRC funded institutions. Paper 
consent documents will be maintained in locked research cabinets. 
  
 
Metoclopramide	for	PTH.	Pilot	protocol.	Version	02162017	 5Consent   
Informed consent will be obtaine d when patients present to the ED.  As part of our 
consent process, we will offer to help patients call a family m ember or friend and discuss 
the study with them if they wish.  We will also have the patien t’s attending physician 
confirm that the patient has th e capacity to consent to partici pate in the study at the time 
they are asked to provide consent. 
 
Risks/Benefits 
Anti-dopaminergics such as metocl opramide can cause extra-pyramidal side effects 
including tardive dyskinesia. Irre versible extra-pyramidal symp toms have never been 
reported after one intravenous dose  of metoclopramide. The inve stigational medication 
can also cause a variety of nuisance side effects including diz ziness, drowsiness, and 
palpitations. As with any clinical  study, there is a risk that the patient’s personal 
identifiers and private health data may be seen by non-study pe rsonnel. It is clear that a 
great many patients continue to su ffer from headache after ED discharge. This protocol is 
specifically designed to inform the ED-based treatment of acute  post-traumatic headache. 
 
Data Storage & Confidentiality 
Data will be stored and maintained securely in REDCap. Data ana lysis initially de-
identifies patients, and is done only on password-protected computers behind an 
institutional firewall, protect ed with professionally maintaine d anti-viral software. 
Consent documents will be maintained in locked research cabinet s in inaccessible areas. 
Only study personnel will have access to the data and consent d ocuments. 
   
Metoclopramide	for	PTH.	Pilot	protocol.	Version	02162017	 6References 
1.	 Blyth	BJ,	Bazarian	JJ .	Traumatic	alterations	in	consciousness:	traumatic	brain	
injury.	Emergency	medicine	cli nics	of	North	America.	2010;28(3):571‐94.	
2.	 Seifert	TD,	Evans	RW .	Posttraumatic	headache:	a	review.	Current	pain	and	
headache	reports.	2010;14(4):292‐8.	
3.	 Orr	SL,	Friedman	BW,	Christie	S,	Minen	MT,	Bamford	C,	Kelley 	NE,	et	al. 	
Management	of	Adults	With	Acute	Migraine	in	the	Emergency	Depar tment:	
The	American	Headache	Society	Ev idence	Assessment	of	Parenteral 	
Pharmacotherapies.	Head ache.	2016;56(6):911‐40.	
4.	 Weinman	D,	Nicastro	O,	Akala	O,	Friedman	BW. 	Parenteral	treatment	of	
episodic	tension‐type	headache:	a	systematic	review.	Headache.	
2014;54(2):260‐8.	
5.	 Friedman	BW,	Bender	B,	Davitt	M,	Solorzano	C,	Paternoster	J,	Esses	D,	et	al. 	A	
randomized	trial	of	diphenhydramine	as	prophylaxis	against	
metoclopramide‐induced	akathisia	in	nauseated	emergency	departm ent	
patients.	Annals	of	emergency	medicine.	2009;53(3):379‐85.	
 
  
Metoclopramide	for	PTH.	Pilot	protocol.	Version	02162017	 7Post Concussion Symptom Scale  
 
0=none, 6= severe  
Headache 0 1 2 3 4 5 6  
“Pressure in head” 0 1 2 3 4 5 6  Neck Pain 0 1 2 3 4 5 6  
Balance problems or dizzy 0 1 2 3 4 5 6  
Nausea or vomiting 0 1 2 3 4 5 6  Vision problems 0 1 2 3 4 5 6  
Hearing problems / ringing 0 1 2 3 4 5 6  
“Don’t feel right” 0 1 2 3 4 5 6  
Feeling “dinged” or “dazed” 0 1 2 3 4 5 6  Confusion 0 1 2 3 4 5 6  Feeling slowed down 0 1 2 3 4 5 6  
Feeling like "in a fog" 0 1 2 3 4 5 6  
Drowsiness 0 1 2 3 4 5 6  Fatigue or low energy 0 1 2 3 4 5 6  
More emotional than usual 0 1 2 3 4 5 6  
Irritability 0 1 2 3 4 5 6  Difficulty concentrating 0 1 2 3 4 5 6  
Difficulty remembering 0 1 2 3 4 5 6  
 (follow up symptoms only)  
Sadness 0 1 2 3 4 5 6  
Nervous or Anxious 0 1 2 3 4 5 6  Trouble falling asleep 0 1 2 3 4 5 6  
Sleeping more than usual 0 1 2 3 4 5 6  
Sensitivity to light 0 1 2 3 4 5 6  Sensitivity to noise 0 1 2 3 4 5 6  
Other: _______________ 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 
 