 
Page 1 of 14 
This document contains confidential information.  
 Clinical Outcomes with MPKs vs. Powered Prosthetic Knees by K4 -level 
Transfemoral Amputees  
Investigators  Shane Wurdeman , PhD  
Hanger Institute for Clinical Research and Education  
10910 Domain Drive, Suite 300  
Austin, TX 78758  
(402) -290-8051  
 
Jennifer Johansson, M S 
Liberating Technologies , Inc.  
325 Hopping Brook Road , Suite A  
Holliston, MA 01746  
(774)-233-0874   
 
Funding Source  Department of Defense  
IRB Protocol #  20216190  
NCT#  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Version  V2.3 
IRB Approv al Date  August 28, 2022  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Page 2 of 14 
This document contains confidential information.  
 1. Background and Introduction  
Transfemoral amputation (TFA) results in significant changes in body structures which impact function, including 
bipedal activities essential in community living. Mechanical knees and microprocessor -controlled prosthetic 
knees (MPKs), such as those shown i n Figure 1 below, are the current standards of care and can replace some of 
the lost function due to TFA, but not all. This is evidenced by the fact that individuals with TFA have been shown 
to have increased metabolic energy expenditure [1, 2] , decreased walking speed [3, 4] , increased frequency and 
fear of falls and stumbles [5, 6] , decreased balance [7, 8] , reduced 
activity levels [9, 10] , and increased difficulty navigating slopes 
[11], stairs [12], and uneven terrain [13]. In addition, persons with 
TFA are at much greater risk of developing long -term secondary 
health problems, such as osteoarthritis, osteoporosis, higher rates 
of hip replacement surgeries, residual limb discomfort, low back 
pain, weight gain, and cardiovas cular disease [14, 15] . These 
increased risks have been associated with the abnormal 
biomechanical effects of utilizing passive prostheses, which are 
unable to restore the concentric power at the knee and ankle joints 
needed for typical biological gait [16].  
Powered prosthetic knees have the potential to restore lost knee 
power. There is currently one commercially -available powered 
prosthetic knee (Össur’s Power Knee ™ (PK), Iceland; Figure 1D) with others  under development. Like 
traditional MPKs, powered knees detect the person’s activity, but unlike MPKs, powered knees are able to provide 
power at the appropriate time to assist the user in a number of ambulatory tasks. For example, powered knees can 
actively lift the foot during swing flexion to increase ground clearance independent of the walking speed or type 
of activity. Possibly most advantageous, powered knee extensio n assists when standing up from a chair and 
walking up slopes, as well as allow ing for step -over-step stair ascent. These advantages intend to reduce the 
burden to the non -amputated contralateral limb .  
Studies have been conducted to validate the claims that active knee flexion and extension assist the user to achieve 
more symmetric and biomimetic mechanics, with the goal of ultimately reducing overuse injuries and wear and 
tear on the intact limb. These studies examined level walking [16, 17, 18], sit-to-stand and stand -to-sit activities 
[19-22], walking up and down slopes [23], and walking up and down stairs [23]. Benefits were shown in areas 
such as energy expenditure during level walking [16] and ramp ascent [23], improved biomechanics and 
symmetry during sit -to-stand [20, 21], stairs and ramps [23], and level walking [17, 18], as well as perceived 
exertion during long -distance ambulation [18]. However much of this work was performed in a laboratory setting 
making translation of these findings to community use unclear. Similarly, the limited testing that has been 
performed in a community environment has been on Medicare Functional Classification Level 3 (i.e., K3) 
individuals [24] who entered the study as non -MPK users, with only three patients completing the full protocol.  
There is a lack of testing outside the laboratory on active individuals with TFA and therefore, community testing 
of individuals with TFA classified as K2, K3 or K4 ambulators is needed to  guide  clinical decision making and 
improve clinical outcomes.  
   
Figure 1 | Examples of commercially -available 
prosthetic knees: (A) Otto Bock C -leg, (B) Össur 
Mauch®, (C) Össur Rheo®, (D) Össur Power 
Knee™.   
 

 
Page 3 of 14 
This document contains confidential information.  
 2. Study Rationale  
This study will focus on investigating the tradeoffs between powered knee s and traditional MPKs to identify the 
prosthetic knee that is best suited for users during different tasks. We will assess measured, observed, and self -
reported outcomes achieved through real -world use of the se prosthetic knees.  
 
The results of this study will (1) provide initial evidence  to guide clinical  prescription and use of powered knee 
technologies for K2, K3 or K4-level individuals with sound scientific data, (2) provide pilot data for a larger 
clinical trial to further inform the evidence -based prescription of powered knee technologies across multiple  K-
levels, and (3) obtain  data that can be disseminated to other researchers and inform the design of future powered 
prosthetic knees by understanding the needs of users and identifying the features and functions that are most 
valuable  to these patient population s, as well as evaluating the capabilities and limitations of current devices .  
 
3. Outcomes  
To achieve our goals, we will explore the following specific aims:  
Specific Aim 1 : To evaluate the longitudinal mobility  of individuals with TFA with each prosthetic knee 
by monitoring activity parameters and assessing performance on functional measures and activities 
representative of community participation.  
Specific Aim 2 : To evaluate the longitudinal safety  of individuals with TFA with the use of each prosthetic 
knee by monitoring measures of balance  confidence , exertion, and fatigue, as well as the number of falls .  
Specific Aim 3:  To evaluate the longitudinal well-being  of individuals with TFA with the use of each 
prosthetic knee by soliciting feedback on self -reported measures of health -related quality of life.   
Figure 2 | Study outcome measures  
 
Page 4 of 14 
This document contains confidential information.  
 To address our specific aims, we will administer a suite of physical and self -report measures to assess functional 
and perceived differences between the knee conditions, similar to what was performed by Hafner, et. al. [24] 
(Figure 2). We recognize that we have a large number of assessments; however, as a pilot study, we will seek to 
capture as much information as possible from a small number of individuals to ensure that the follow -on, larger 
full-scale clinical trial  will focus on the most relevant measures.  
 
4. Study Design  
We plan to perform a pilot longitudinal randomized crossover study to compare the effects of power at the knee 
in individuals with unilateral transfemoral amputation ( Figure 3). The two interventions, or conditions, to be 
tested are: (A) a powered prosthetic knee and (B) a n MPK . For this study we will recruit individuals who are 
currently MPK users; therefore, for the MPK condition, they will wear their usual prosthesis  (e.g. Otto Bock C -
leg, Össur Rheo, etc) as they represent the current standard of care. This will be recorded as a potential confounder 
in post -hoc analysis. For the powered knee condition, e ach subject  will be provided with the Össur Power Knee , 
which is the only powered knee that is commercially available  at this time .  
The order these conditions are tested in will be randomized across subjects. Block randomization using a 
previously developed custom software based on random number generation will be used to equally distribute the 
subjects into the 2 possible intervention orders ( AB or BA ). For each condition, the subject will be trained on and 
acclimated to the device during the first month of th e take -home period,  and then will continue to wear it at home 
after training  for a total of three months per condition . There ma y be seasonal effects due to the timing of when 
the various test conditions are administered, however, we plan to offset these effects with condition 
randomization, multiple site testing, and staggered start times.  
 
Testing will consist of  test sessions,  training sessions, at-home wear of the device, and functional and self -report 
assessment at the end of each intervention condition ( Figure 3). If the subject’s current foot is not compatible  
with the Power Knee, they will be provided with a commercially available prosthetic foot for the study . In this 
case, the subject  will be given an initial acclimation period of 1 month on the new foot before starting 
interventional testing.    
Figure 3 | Study Design - Longitudinal Randomized Crossover Study  
 

 
Page 5 of 14 
This document contains confidential information.  
 After receiving IRB and HRPO ( US Army Human Research Protection Office) approval, subjects will be recruited 
and screened for eligibility. If they are eligible and decide to participate, they will be scheduled for their first site 
visit. They will either be consented over the phone before their first site visit or at the first site visit (‘ 1’ in Figure 
3). If over the phone, study staff will use the telephone script to confirm eligibility and guide the subject through 
consent form details.  Subjects  will be provided the informed consent form to read through  entirely before signing, 
and are encouraged to ask questions at any time .  
Prior to each condition, each subject  will be fit and aligned on the knee by a trained certified prosthetist. An  
activity monitor (such as the GeneActiv ™) will be worn by the subject . As we have done in prior studies, we will 
use the  activity monitor  to track the number of steps the subjects take in each condition.  Each subject will wear 
the same foot  for all study periods  for comparability between the two knee conditions.  
The subject will wear the knee being tested at home for three months . During the first month of each condition, 
subjects will be given time to acclimate to the knee being tested . Subjects will participate in at least two, but up 
to eight, 1  hour training sessions . At a minimum, each subject will receive one training session to learn how to 
properly use each device for a variety of daily activities and a second session to demonstrate retention of the 
learned skills. The subject will continue training until they show retention of the understanding and/or proficiency 
of the device functions or until they have received eight training sessions, whichever comes first. After 8 training 
sessions, they will have completed all of the available  training and will therefore continue with the study at their 
current proficiency level. For the powered knee condition, we will work with trained and experienced clinicians, 
consulting prosthetic knee manufacturers as needed, to develop the training protocol  and determine proficiency .  
Subjects will be asked to continue to wear the  knee full time  for the remainder of the three month take -home 
period . Through Hanger’s current patient care system, we will have the ability to push out a digital to the patient’s 
phone  asking them whether they have experienced a recent fall. I f they respond positively that they had a fall, 
follow up questions can be asked to get more specific details  about the fall . After three  months of at -home wear , 
the subject will return for the second test visit. During that visit, functional tests and self -report surveys  will be 
administered . At the completion of the second test visit (Period 1) , the subject will then be fit and aligned on the 
prosthetic knee condition  for Period 2 . The training, at home wear, and in -clinic  assessments will be repeated for 
the next knee condition.  The overall study plan and schedule is summarized in Table 1 below.  
  
 
Page 6 of 14 
This document contains confidential information.  
  
Table 1 | Subject study schedule  
 Sequence  Duration  Description  
⓪ 
Period #0  1 month  If the subject’s current foot is not compatible  with the Power Knee, they will 
be provided a foot for the study . They will be given an acclimation period 
of 1 month on the provided  study  foot. 
◆ Test Session #1  2 hours  The subject  will be fit with a prosthetic knee configuration and an activity 
logger. They  will conduct standardized functional tests and assessments.  
① 
| Period #1  3 months  First three -month period of the study. Three months of using the prosthetic 
knee at home.  
◇ 
Training 
Sessions  1 hour /each  One-hour sessions will be scheduled during the first month of the take -home 
period for training on walking with a prosthetic knee configuration. Two to 
eight sessions will be required.  At the first and  last training session s, 
standardized functional tests and assessments will be conducted.  
◆ Test Session #2  4 hours  The subject  will conduct standardized functional tests and assessments on 
the first knee configuration. They  will then be fit with their second prosthetic 
knee configuration and an activity logger .  
② 
| Period #2  3 months  Second three -month period of the study. Three months of using the 
prosthetic knee at home.  
◇ 
Training 
Sessions  1 hour /each  One-hour sessions will be scheduled during the first month of the take -home 
period for training on walking with a prosthetic knee configuration. Two to 
eight sessions will be required.  At the the first and  last training session s, 
standardized functional tests and assessments will be conducted.  
◆ Test Session #3  2 hours  The subject  will conduct standardized functional tests and assessment . This 
is the final study event. Any study device or equipment will be returned, and 
their prosthesis reconfigured to its original state.  
 
5. Study Population  
The proposed work will include recruiting persons with transfemoral  amputation  for take -home testing of two 
prosthetic knees  in a randomized crossover design. A statistical power analysis revealed that 12 subjects would 
be required to achieve the desired statistical power to determine whether individuals are more active when wearing 
a powered knee than a traditional MPK prosthesis as measured by the daily number of steps taken . This power 
analysis aligns with the recommendation of Moore, et al. [35] to include 12 subjects  to estimate average values 
and variances of our specific outcome variables in our target population. We recognize that this pilot study may 
not demonstrate definitive evidence for a treatment effect of the intervention. However, it provides the means to 
gather the data and experience necessary to  optimize value and practicality for a subsequent  clinical trial.  
Therefore, based on the above, this study will require data from 12 individuals with transfemoral limb absence  
who use an MPK . However, we will target recruitment of 15 individuals for participation, to allow for  up to 20% 
dropout .  
While the recruitment of anything above a modest number of people  with a limb absence  can be challenging, the 
multiple locations of Hanger Clinics will help mitigate this risk and increase our pool of potential subjects from 
multiple geographic areas. Dr. Shane Wurdeman has been able to preemptively identify the locations within 
Hanger’s network of approximate ly 800 prosthetic clinics nationwide to focus recruitment at those sites with a 
 
Page 7 of 14 
This document contains confidential information.  
 large population of transfemoral, K4 , K3 and K2  prosthesis users. If recruitment challenges are encountered, he 
will onboard additional clinical sites as needed to mitigate recruitment issues .  
 
6. Participant Eligibility  
Up to 15 people will be recruited for testing. Individuals who meet the following inclusion criteria  will be included 
in the study :  
▪ Are at least 18 years old  
▪ Unilateral transfemoral prosthesis user  (limb absence  between the knee and hip)  
▪ Current user of a microprocessor -controlled knee (MPK)  
▪ Have adequate clearance between distal end and ground for necessary knee and foot components  
▪ Medicare Functional Classification Level (K -Level): 2, 3, or 4 
▪ Socket -Comfort Score: 6 or above to ensure adequate socket fit  
▪ Six months or more experience on a prosthesis  
▪ Body weight between 50kg and 116kg (110lbs - 256lbs)  
Exclusion criteria are:   
▪ Present injuries to residual limb or contralateral leg  affecting functional ability  
▪ Socket issues/changes in the last 6 weeks  
▪ Users with bone -anchored implants  
Subjects can be excluded at the discretion of the investigator for other unforeseen disqualifying criteria (such as 
specific cognitive issues, etc.) . Subjects in this study will not be discriminated by sex /gender  or race /ethnicity .  
Using a knee that the subject is unfamiliar with may increase the risk of falling. Therefore, pregnant women 
should not participate in the study and will be screened by self -disclosure.  
 
7. Study Methodology  
Timeline:  Subject participation in this study will span six months with two, 3-month at -home study periods . 
Subjects will be asked to attend 2  to 8 training visits, conduct normal activity  at home , document their falls , and 
complete a series of functional tests and self -report surveys  upon their return to the clinic . Site visits will take 
approximately 2  to 4 hours. Additional site visits may be scheduled if issues arise (issues with alignment , time 
constraints, etc. ). 
If the subject’s current foot is not compatible with the Power Knee, they will be provided a standard foot for the 
study and given an initial acclimation period of 1 month before site visit 1. In this case, subjects will be consented 
before (over the phone) or during their initial visit in which the prosthetist will align them on the foot provided 
for this study. Subjects are free to terminate a session and their participation in this study whenever they wish. 
The specific study events are detailed below.  
 
Site Visit <1>  
 
Page 8 of 14 
This document contains confidential information.  
 If the subject has not  yet been consented , they will begin the process of informed consent where all of the details 
of the res earch study will be explained  at this start of this visit . Subjects  are allowed to take the consent form 
home with them  and show it to friends, family, and their physician in order to make an informed  decision to 
participate in the study. Once consented , demographic information , including height, weight, and type of 
prosthetic foot and socket suspension, will be collected  from the subject . 
The subject will  then be fit  and aligned  with the first prosthetic knee  by a certified prosthetist . An activity monitor  
will be worn by the subject  to monitor daily step count.   
This visit will take up to 2 hours.  
 
Period 1: At-Home Participation Months 1 -3 
During the first month of the take -home period, subjects will be trained on the knee they are wearing and allowed 
time to acclimate to it  at home . At a minimum, each subject will receive one training session to learn how to 
properly use each device for a variety of daily activities and a second training session to demonstrate retention of 
the learned skills. At the beginning of the first training session, standardized functional tests and assessments will 
be conducted . 
Subjects will be asked to complete a series of functional tests and self -report surveys  to assess their mobility, 
safety, and well -being. The measures that we may use are:  
Specific Aim 1 - Mobility  
For aim 1, we  plan to administer outcome measures such as: step count,  the Six Minute Walk Test (6MWT) [25], 
Stair Assessment Index (SAI) [26]; Ramp Assessment Index (RAI) [26]; TUG [27]; Patient Reported Outcomes 
Measures Information System (PROMIS) Physical Function ( -PF) short form [24]; and the Prosthetic Limb Users 
Survey of Mobility (PLUS -M) [28].  
Specific Aim 2 - Safety  
For aim 2, we  plan to administer outcome measures such as: the Activities -Specific Balance Confidence (ABC) 
scale [29], the Borg Rating of Perceived Exertion Scale (RPE) [30], heart rate (to calculate the Physiological Cost 
Index (PCI) [36] , the PROMIS - Fatigue (PROMIS -FAT) short form [29], and number and details of self -reported 
falls.  
Specific Aim 3 – Wellbeing  
For aim 3, we  plan to administer outcome measures such as:  PROMIS -29 short form [31], the Oswestry Disability 
Index (ODI) [32], Prosthesis Evaluation Questionnaire -Well Being (PEQ -Well Being) [33], and the PROMIS -
Ability to Participate in Social Roles and Activities (PROMIS -APSRA) short form [34]. 
After completing these measures, the subject  will complete their initial training session for the first knee condition.  
 
The subject will continue training until they show retention of the understanding and/or proficiency of the knee  
functions or until they have received eight training sessions, whichever comes first . At the end of the last training 
session, standardized functional tests and assessments will be conducted  (such as those described in training 
session  1). Then d uring the following two months, the subject will be asked to continue using the knee full-time.  
 
Page 9 of 14 
This document contains confidential information.  
 Study staff may call or email the subject periodically to check -in and answer any questions they may have. A 
digital fall questionnaire will be delivered at most weekly  through a HIPAA secure system to the patient’s phone. 
If they respond positively that they had a fall, follow up questions can be asked to get more specific details. The 
subject may be asked to provide additional notes periodically to document their problems, experiences, and 
feedback.  
This portion of the study will be three  month s long.   
 
Site Visit <2>  
After three months of at -home wear, the subject will return for the second test visit . Subjects will be asked to 
complete a series of functional tests and self -report surveys  on the first knee configuration.  
Once the subjects have completed the functional  tests and assessments , the activity monitor will be removed,  and 
the knees will be swapped . The subject will be fit  and aligned  with the second prosthetic knee by a certified 
prosthetist . The activity monitor will then be placed back on the subject for condition 2 . 
This visit will take approximately  4 hours.  
 
Period 2: At -Home Participation Months 4 -6 
This period is the same as Period 1, except subjects will be testing and training on the second prosthetic knee .  
This portion of the study will be three months long.  
 
Site Visit < 3> 
At the end of Period 2, subjects will return to the clinic . They will be asked to complete a series of functional  tests 
and self -report surveys  on the second knee configuration. After completing these measures , the activity monitor 
will be removed,  and t he subject will be set back up on their usual prosthetic knee  and foot  by a certified 
prosthetist . At this time, the subject has completed the study.  
This visit will take approximately 2 hours.  
 
8. Study Conduct  
Subjects will be screened and consented for eligibility criteria. If they decide to participate, they will be set up 
with the first prosthetic knee  being tested . The study will consist of two, three  month  periods where  subjects  will 
be trained on the knees,  use the prosthetic knee s at home s and document  any falls and feedback on the knees . At 
the beginning and end of each knee condition, as well as at their final training session, subjects  will complete a 
series of functional tests and self -report surveys . 
Subjects may withdraw at any time by simply telling the investigators they wish to stop their participation.  
If a subject withdraws from the study, the data that were collected from them can still be used, and the withdrawn 
subjects may be replaced with a new subject. Deviations from the protocol that increase risks for subject s will be 
reported to WCG  and HRPO for approval prior to being implemented.  
 
Page 10 of 14 
This document contains confidential information.  
 Subjects will be compensated for the Site Visit milestones described in Section 7: Study Methodology . They 
will receive $50 for Site Visit 1, $100 for Site Visit 2, and $150 for Site Visit 3, for a total of $300 for completing  
all visits. Subjects will also receive $50 for completing 2 months, $100 for completing 4 months, and $125 for 
completing 6 months  of the study , for a total of $275 for finishing the take -home portion of the study. Upon  
completion of the  study  and return of study materials , subjects  will receive  an additional $200. The total 
anticipated payment  for this study  is $775 per subject.  
 
9. Study Treatment  
The Ӧssur Power Knee  is currently the only commercially -available powered prosthetic knee. The intervention  
being tested in this study is the newest  version of this product , Ӧssur Power Knee III ™ (Figure 4). 
The Power Knee III contain s design improvements to optimize features such as the control strategy, weight, and 
battery life. According to the Power Knee’s instructions for use, the device is comprised of a proximal pyramid 
adapter, motor, power button and status indicator, battery, charging port, battery indicator, battery button, and 
distal pyramid connector .  
A second intervention, the subject’s usual MPK, will also be tested as a baseline measure. All MPKs used for this 
condition (i.e ., Otto Bock C -leg, Össur Rheo, Freedom Innovations Plié, and Blatchford Orion) are commercially 
available. This configuration will be the same knee system the subject usually uses and will be tested for the 
purpose of comparing outcomes between their existi ng knee and the provided powered knee device.  
Subjects  will be instructed upon the device design and features and allowed time to practice operating the device 
using conventional strategies for powered knee prostheses. Fittings and trainings will be conducted with a certified 
prosthetist  and/or physical therapist .  
 
Figure 4 | Rendering of the Ӧssur Power Knee III
  
 
Page 11 of 14 
This document contains confidential information.  
 10. Evaluation of Adverse Events  
The main risk of the devices, inherent to all lower  limb prostheses, is injury from tripping, falling, or losing 
balance. Changing from the user’s usual MPK to the Power Knee and back may increase the risk of falls. The 
user may also experience fatigue during in -clinic testing. To mitigate the risk of trip ping, falling,  or losing balance, 
a certified prosthetist will fit the subject with all prosthetic components. Users will be provided with instructions, 
training, and acclimation periods for each knee configuration. Safety methods  (such as h andrails,  parallel bars,  
spotters, gait belt s, overhead harnessing , etc.)  will be avai lable during in -clinic testing to mitigate fall or trip 
hazards . Training will be conducted in a clinic  setting before subjects are sent home with any new devices.  If the 
user feels as though the prosthetic knee  is giving them trouble at home, they may schedule a visit with the ir 
prosthetist to fix any issues, or configure them back on their usual knee  if the problem persists. To mitigate any 
fatigue during in -clinic  training and  testing, r ests and break periods will be allowed and encouraged at the 
subject’s discretion to ensure they are comfortable while training and performing tests with the study knees . 
All unanticipated problems involving risk to subjects or others, serious adverse events related to participation in 
the study and subject deaths related to participation in the study will be promptly reported to the WCG  IRB and 
HRPO . A written description of the adverse event will be stored in the study file maintained by the Principal 
Investigator  (PI). Also, the protocol will be reviewed in light of the adverse event to determine if modifications 
need to be made to prevent the event from occurring again. Major modifications to the research protocol and any 
modifications that could potentially increase risk to human subjects must be submitted to the WCG IRB  and 
HRPO  for approval prior to implementation.  
 
11. Ethical Considerations  
Individuals receiving the power ed knee will get to experience an extended at -home trial period. Beyond this, t he 
powered prosthetic knee device provides  no further known direct benefit to the subjects . Their participation in 
this study will expand the knowledge of the prosthetic community by further understanding how users benefit 
from each of the prosthetic knees being tested . This research will in turn help physicians and prosthetists make 
more informed decisions when determining which devices are best fo r their patients.  
The protocol, consent form, and recruitment flyer will require IRB review and approval. The principal 
investigator s will be in continuous communication with WCG IRB  HRPO . Subjects’ participation is voluntary,  
and they may withdraw from participation in the study at any time by simply saying  that they wish to stop. The 
investigators may choose to terminate a subject’s participation if he or she experiences discomfort or injury . In 
addition, subjects  will be given any new information which is discovered during the course of the study which 
may influence subjects’  willingness to continue the study.  If they desire to do so, subjects’ will also have the 
option to discuss any concerns regarding the study activities o r the investigators with an impartial staff member 
of the IRB, whose duty it is to hear and review such concerns and provide advice or take  any other appropriate 
actions.  
The investigators will ensure the anonymity of all subjects  in this study. After completing the consenting process, 
subjects will be assigned a  unique  alpha -numeric  identification number. The number will be used on all test data 
associated with the subject. No personal identifiers will be associated with the data collected from the subjects 
during the study . The PI will have a master document linking the subject name with ID number, and it will be 
stored on a password protected computer, with only the PI and approved study staff  having access to the master 
 
Page 12 of 14 
This document contains confidential information.  
 list. Only the de -identified data will be shared with Liberating Technologies, Inc.  using subject and condition 
number  for data analysis . Data will be  stored in a secure manner depending on the media: either a password 
protected  computer with access limited to the co -investigator s, or in a locked filing cabinet in the investigator’s 
office. A copy of the test data will also be retained by the PI in the program folder, also stored in a secured manner.  
As with anything, there is the potential  of a data breach , however t he described steps taken to keep subject 
information secure will minimize this risk.  
 
12. Study Monitoring and Oversight  
Liberating Technologies, Inc. , as the clinical trial sponsor, plans to meet all requirements outlined in US federal 
regulations and International Council for Harmonisation (ICH) E6 for monitoring to ensure that site investigators 
comply with the protocol, all regulations,  and Good Clinical Practice (GCP). The PI will  ensure the rights and 
well-being of human subjects are protected, all data reported is accurate and complete, and that the conduct of the 
trial is in compliance with the approved protocol, GCP,  and other regulations.  
De-identified data, photos, and videos will be kept indefinitely to show in scientific presentations and 
publications. Photos will not contain any identifying information about the subject. Photos will not include the 
subject’s face or any identifying marks such as tattoos. If identifying photos happen to be received from a subject, 
they will be de -identified by either cropping or blurrin g using photo -editing software.  
Additionally, representatives of the United States Army Medical Research Acquisition Activity  (USAMRAA)  
are eligible to review research records as a function of their responsibility to protect subjects in research.  
 
13. Investigational Product Management  
All devices being tested are commercially available  prosthetic knees .  
 
14. Data Analysis  
The data collected in the  in-clinic  and take -home portions of this study will include number of steps  and number 
of self-reported falls, and a series of standard outcomes measures, including:  6MWT, SAI, RAI, TUG , PROMIS -
PF short form, PLUS -M, ABC, RPE, PROMIS -Fat, PROMIS -29, ODI, PEQ -Well Being, and PROMIS -APSRA 
short form .  
The primary statistical analysis will be led by Dr. Newton and will employ  a line ar mixed model. It will not 
include carryover effects as the training and acclimation period in the first month of each condition will constitute 
the washout period for the prior knee. Additional predictors will include a fixed effect for gender and MPK as 
well as a random effect for test clinic to account for potential differences between sites .  
15. References  
1. Waters, R.L., et al., Energy cost of walking of amputees: the influence of level of amputation. J Bone Joint 
Surg Am, 1976. 58(1): p. 42 -6. 
2. Traugh, G.H., P.J. Corcoran, and R.L. Reyes, Energy expenditure of ambulation in patients with above -knee 
amputations. Arch Phys Med Rehabil, 1975. 56(2): p. 67 -71. 
 
Page 13 of 14 
This document contains confidential information.  
 3. Jaegers, S.M., J.H. Arendzen, and H.J. de Jongh, Prosthetic gait of unilateral transfemoral amputees: a 
kinematic study. Arch Phys Med Rehabil, 1995. 76(8): p. 736 -43. 
4. Boonstra, A.M., et al., The gait of unilateral transfemoral amputees. Scand J Rehabil Med, 1994. 26(4): p. 
217-23. 
5. Miller, W.C., et al., The influence of falling, fear of falling, and balance confidence on prosthetic mobility 
and social activity among individuals with a lower extremity amputation. Arch Phys Med Rehabil, 2001. 
82(9): p. 1238 -44. 
6. Miller, W.C., M. Speechley, and B. Deathe, The prevalence and risk factors of falling and fear of falling 
among lower extremity amputees. Arch Phys Med Rehabil, 2001. 82(8): p. 1031 -7. 
7. Buckley, J.G., D. O'Driscoll, and S.J. Bennett, Postural sway and active balance performance in highly active 
lower -limb amputees. Am J Phys Med Rehabil, 2002. 81(1): p. 13 -20. 
8. Miller, W.C. and A.B. Deathe, A prospective study examining balance confidence among individuals with 
lower limb amputation. Disabil Rehabil, 2004. 26(14 -15): p. 875 -81. 
9. Halsne, E.G., M.G. Waddingham, and B.J. Hafner, Long -term activity in and among persons with 
transfemoral amputation. J Rehabil Res Dev, 2013. 50(4): p. 515 -30. 
10. Stepien, J.M., et al., Activity levels among lower -limb amputees: self -report versus step activity monitor. 
Arch Phys Med Rehabil, 2007. 88(7): p. 896 -900. 
11. Vrieling, A.H., et al., Uphill and downhill walking in unilateral lower limb amputees. Gait Posture, 2008. 
28(2): p. 235 -42. 
12. Ramstrand, N. and K.A. Nilsson, A comparison of foot placement strategies of transtibial amputees and able -
bodied subjects during stair ambulation. Prosthet Orthot Int, 2009. 33(4): p. 348 -55. 
13. Vrieling, A.H., et al., Obstacle crossing in lower limb amputees. Gait Posture, 2007. 26(4): p. 587 -94. 
14. Naschitz, J.E. and R. Lenger, Why traumatic leg amputees are at increased risk for cardiovascular diseases. 
QJM, 2008. 101(4): p. 251 -9. 
15. Kulkarni, J., et al., Chronic low back pain in traumatic lower limb amputees. Clin Rehabil, 2005. 19(1): p. 81 -
6. 
16. Jayaraman, C., et al., Impact of Powered Knee -Ankle Prosthesis on Low Back Muscle Mechanics in 
Transfemoral Amputees: A Case Series. Front Neurosci, 2018. 12: p. 134.  
17. Creylman, V., et al., Assessment of transfemoral amputees using a passive microprocessor -controlled knee 
versus an active powered microprocessor -controlled knee for level walking. Biomed Eng Online, 2016. 
15(Suppl 3): p. 142.  
18. Pasquina, P., et al., Case Series of Wounded Warriors Receiving Initial Fit PowerKnee Prosthesis. Journal of 
Prosthetics and Orthotics, 2017. 29(2): p. 88 -96. 
19. Simon, A.M., et al., Improved Weight -Bearing Symmetry for Transfemoral Amputees During Standing Up 
and Sitting Down With a Powered Knee -Ankle Prosthesis. Arch Phys Med Rehabil, 2016. 97(7): p. 1100 -6. 
20. Wolf, E.J., et al., Comparison of the Power Knee and C -Leg during step -up and sit -to-stand tasks. Gait 
Posture, 2013. 38(3): p. 397 -402. 
21. Highsmith, M.J., et al., Kinetic asymmetry in transfemoral amputees while performing sit to stand and stand 
to sit movements. Gait Posture, 2011. 34(1): p. 86 -91. 
22. Quinonez, E., R.S. Gailey, and K. Lechler. Biomechanics of sit -to-stand and stand -to-sit movements in 
unilateral transfemoral amputees using powered and non -powered prosthetic knees. in OTWorld Congress. 
2014. Leipzig, Germany.  
23. Wolf, E.J., et al., Assessment of transfemoral amputees using C -Leg and Power Knee for ascending and 
descending inclines and steps. J Rehabil Res Dev, 2012. 49(6): p. 831 -42. 
24. Hafner, B.J. and R.L. Askew, Physical performance and self -report outcomes associated with use of passive, 
adaptive, and active prosthetic knees in persons with unilateral, transfemoral amputation: Randomized 
crossover trial. J Rehabil Res Dev, 2015. 52(6) : p. 677 -700. 
 
Page 14 of 14 
This document contains confidential information.  
 25. Cox, P.D., et al., Impact of Course Configuration on 6 -Minute Walk Test Performance of People with Lower 
Extremity Amputations. Physiother Can, 2017. 69(3): p. 197 -203. 
26. Highsmith, M.J., et al., Psychometric Evaluation of the Hill Assessment Index (Hai) and Stair Assessment 
Index (Sai) in High -Functioning Transfemoral Amputees. Technol Innov, 2016. 18(2 -3): p. 193 -201. 
27. Podsiadlo D (1991) Richardson S The Timed “Up & Go”: a test of basic functional mobility for frail elderly 
person. J Am Geriatr Soc 39(2):142 –148 
28. Hafner, B.J., et al., Construct Validity of the Prosthetic Limb Users Survey of Mobility (PLUS -M) in Adults 
With Lower Limb Amputation. Arch Phys Med Rehabil, 2017. 98(2): p. 277 -285. 
29. Miller, W.C., A.B. Deathe, and M. Speechley, Psychometric properties of the Activities -specific Balance 
Confidence Scale among individuals with a lower -limb amputation. Arch Phys Med Rehabil, 2003. 84(5): p. 
656-61. 
30. Borg, G.A., Psychophysical bases of perceived exertion. Med Sci Sports Exerc, 1982. 14(5): p. 377 -81. 
31. Amtmann, D., et al., Health -related profiles of people with lower limb loss. Arch Phys Med Rehabil, 2015. 
96(8): p. 1474 -83. 
32. Fairbank, J.C. and P.B. Pynsent, The Oswestry Disability Index. Spine (Phila Pa 1976), 2000. 25(22): p. 2940 -
52; discussion 2952.  
33. Legro, M.W., et al., Prosthesis evaluation questionnaire for persons with lower limb amputations: assessing 
prosthesis -related quality of life. Arch Phys Med Rehabil, 1998. 79(8): p. 931 -8. 
34. Hahn, E.A., et al., New English and Spanish social health measures will facilitate evaluating health 
determinants. Health Psychol, 2014. 33(5): p. 490 -9. 
35. Moore, C.G., et al., Recommendations for planning pilot studies in clinical and translational research. Clin 
Transl Sci, 2011. 4(5): p. 332 -7. 
36. MacGregor J. The objective measurement of physical performance with long term ambulatory physiological 
surveillance equipment (LAPSE). In: Stott FD, Raftery EB, Goulding L, editors. Proceedings of 3rd 
International Symposium on Ambulatory Monitoring; 1979;  London, UK. Academic Press; pp. 29 –39. 
 