SI Screws - Protocol v 4 (2022.08.19 )  Page 1 of 24    
 
 
 
University of Maryland, Shock Trauma Center  
Department of Orthopaedics  
 
 
 
The Effects of SI Screw Removal on Patient -Reported Pain and Functional Outcomes After Open or 
Closed Reduction and Internal Fixation of Pelvic Fractures  
 
 
 
IRB Number: HP-000638 38 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Principal Investigator: Marcus Sciadini, MD  
 
Safety Monitor: Andrew Pollak, MD  
 
Version 4 
 
August  19, 2022 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SI Screws - Protocol v 4 (2022.08.19 )  Page 2 of 24     
 
SI Screws - Protocol v 4 (2022.08.19 )  Page 3 of 24   TABLE OF CONTENTS   
 
 
Protocol Summary …………………………………………………………………………  3 
Key Roles …….……………………………………………………………………………  4 
Background Information ………………… ………………………………………………..  4 
Rationale …………………………………………………………………………………..  5 
Potential Risks ………………………………………………………………………….....  5 
Potential Benefits ………………………………………………………………………….  6 
Primary Outcome ………………………………………………………………………….  6 
Secon dary Outcomes …………………………………………… …………………………  6 
Exploratory Outcomes …………………………………………………………………….  6 
Description of the Study Design ………………………………………………………… .. 6 
Primary Endpoint ………………………………………………………………………….  7 
Secondary Endpoints ………………………………………………………………………  8 
Study Population …………………………………………… ……………………………..  10 
Co-Enrollment Guidelines …………………………………………………………………  11 
Recruitment ………………………………………………………………………………..  11 
Study Treatments ………………………………………………………………………….  11 
Clinical Evaluation ………………………………………………………………………..  12 
Participant Interviews …………………………… ………………………………………..  13 
Study Schedule ……………………………………………………………………………  13 
Assessment of Safety ……………………………………………………………………..  15 
Data Analysis ……………………………………………………………………………..  16 
Randomization ……………………………………………………………………………  17 
Data Ma nagement ………………………………………………………… ……………...  17 
Missing Data ……………………………………………………………………………...  18 
Research Ethics Approval ………………………………………………………………...  18 
Informed Consent …………………………………………………………………………  19 
Vulnerable Populations …………………………………………………………………...  20 
Participant Confidentiality ………………… ……………………………………………..  20 
Study Discontinuation …………………………………………………………………….  21 
Reports ……………………………………………………………………………………  21 
Study Records Retention ………………………………………………………………….  21 
Supporting Literature ……………………………………………………………………..  21 
APPENDIX A : Study Contacts R oster …..……………………………………………….  23 
APPENDIX B : Data Collection Schedule  …………………………………………… .…. 23 
 
SI Screws - Protocol v 4 (2022.08.19 )  Page 4 of 24   PROTOCOL SUMMARY  
 
Title  The Ef fect of SI Screw Removal on Patient -Reported Pain and 
Functional Outcomes After Open or Closed Reduc tion and Internal 
Fixation of Pelvic Fractures  
Short Title  SI Screws  
Type of Study  Observational outcomes study  and p rospec tive randomized control trial 
(if applicable based on participant pain at 6 -month follow -up) 
Primary Objective  To determine if rem oving SI Screws 6 – 9 months post SI screw 
stabilization surgery in pelvic fractures decreases patient report ed pain at 
12 months post SI screw stabilizatio n surgery  compared to the SI screws 
remaining in place  
Secondary Objective  To explore associations between treatment and:  
1. Patient reported pain up to 24 months  post SI screw stabilization 
surgery  
2. Narcotic use up to 24 months post SI screw stabilization s urgery  
3. Work productivity & activity impairment up to 24 months  post SI 
screw stabilization surgery  
4. Health related quality of life up to 24 months post SI screw 
stabilization surgery  
5. Pelvic specific functional outcome up to 24 months post SI screw 
stabiliza tion surgery  
6. Surgical -related complications  
Sample Size  We w ill recruit a sample size of 450 observ ational patients, of which, 
approximately 150 (75 per arm) will be enrolled in the randomized arm 
of the study with a  12 month  follow -up for the primary out come  
Diagnosis and Main 
Inclusion Criteria  Pelvic fracture requiring SI screw placement in patients  between the ages 
of 18 and 80 years of age, inclusive  
Length of Follow -up  24 months  
 
Study duration:  We will recruit for  two and a half years .  Patients  will be followed for 24 months .  We 
estimate 6 years total.  
 
Primary outcome m easure: Patient -repor ted p ain as measured by using the  arithmetic mean of the four pain 
severity items on the patient -reported Brief Pain Inventory assessment (BPI) 12 months  following  the patient’s 
injury.  
   
Secondary outcome m easures: . Pelvic function  will be measured using  the Majeed Pelvic Score.   
 
Statistical analysi s: We are interested in estimating the causal effect of removal versus non -removal of SI 
screws in pelvic fracture patients requiring the use of SI screws for stabilization. For all our analyses, we will 
repor t estimates of the causal effects, standard err ors, and confidence intervals.  We will also report the results 
of tests of null hypothesis of no causal effect.   
 
KEY ROLES  
 
Safety  Monitor - Dr. Andrew Pollak will be responsible for overseeing patient safe ty for the study.  Dr. Pollak 
will review the enrollment numbers , adverse events,  and medical compliance annually for the duration of the 
study.  
SI Screws - Protocol v 4 (2022.08.19 )  Page 5 of 24    
Principle & Sub -Investigator s- Dr. Marcus Sciadini  (PI) and the sub -investigators  will be responsible for  
deve loping a detailed study protocol, providing ov ersight on study progress and act to correct deficiencies in the 
conduct of the study.  The PI  and sub -investigators  will also draft the main publications related to the study , and 
assist with patient consent . 
 
Research Coordinator - Haley Demyanovich , research specialist s, are responsible for maintaining all study 
documentation, developing and maintaining the master IRB application and consent, circulating any changes to 
study documents including protocols, case  report forms, and IRB materi als to the research team members , 
providing daily oversight and management of study implementation, performing data quality contro l and 
analysis of study results , and conduct ing monthly reports for the study . 
 
Research Team Mem bers- The research team members ar e responsible for the conduct of the clinical study 
including patient enrollment, performing study procedures, data collection and conducting study follow -up 
visits.  
 
 
BACKGROUND INFORMATION  
 
Chronic pain following surgica l stabilization of a pelvic fractu re is very prominent and can have a major effect 
on a patient's quality of life. Persistent pain after  radiographic evidence of fracture union commonly leads to 
implant removal. But, the routine removal of orthopaedic fixa tion devices after fracture healin g remains an  
issue of debate. Many surgeons remember patients whose intractable, hardly explainable local symptoms and 
complaints resolved quickly after the procedure. However,  implant removal requires a second surgical 
procedure in scarred tissue, poses a  risk for nerve damage, infection and re -fractures, and is not a guarantee of 
pain relief.  
 
Rates of implant removal vary based on anatomic location and implant selection. Many studies have introduced 
and assessed the outc omes of hardware removal in the  ankle, tibia and femur. But, there is currently no 
controlled trial that assesses the benefits and harms of SI screw removal in pelvic fracture patients.  
 
RATIONALE  
 
Reports in literature are not consistent concerning the in cidence of painful hardware and th e outcome and pain 
relief after hardware removal. There is conflicting  evidence that removing hardware decreases acute pain in 
ankle, tibia, and femur fractures but there is a need to explore the effect of SI screw removal  in pelvic fracture  
patients. We p ropose to observe patients requiring SI screw stabilization surgery for 24 months.  At 6 months 
post SI screw stabilization surgery, if the patient reports any pain associated with his/her pelvic injury, they will 
be asked  to enroll in the randomized arm o f the study that allows us to prospectively randomize patients to 
removal versus non -removal of SI  screws and track which group has less pain and need for narcotic pain 
medications.  
 
 
POTENTIAL RISKS  
 
While the intake ques tionnaire and information gathered  is of a sensitive nature (pain, narcotic use and medical 
history) and it might cause the patient some discomfort to answer truthfully, all information will be kept 
confidential and no identifiers will be used in publicati on. 
 
While every attempt will be m ade to keep all information confidential and the master link between the patient 
study number and personal identifiers will be destroyed at the completion of the study, there remains a risk of 
SI Screws - Protocol v 4 (2022.08.19 )  Page 6 of 24   the potential for the loss/br each of confidentiality. This risk  will be minimized by storing all paper 
questionnaires in a secure, locked location and all electronic data will be password protected.  
 
If the patient enrolled in the randomized arm of the study and is randomized to the s crew removal treatment, 
he/she wil l be exposed to all of the risks associated with surgery under a general anesthetic including but not  
limited to: prolonged intubation, heart attack, stroke and death. These risks are extremely rare and will be 
explained b y the anesthesia team, and a separ ate anesthesia  consent will be obtained. The risks of the surgical 
procedure are rare but include: infection, wound break down, re -fracture, and neurologic injury. A separate 
surgical  consent will be provided to go into mo re detail of the risks of the proc edure.  
 
There may be risks in this study which are not yet known.  
 
 
POTENTIAL BENEFITS  
 
While there are no direct benefits to patients participating in the study  (except for those that may accrue from 
closer clinical obser vation as a study patient) , partic ipation may help d etermine the best treatment for pelvic 
fractures requiring SI screw stabilization in the future .  This study also provides a potential benefit of decreased 
pelvic pain levels.  
 
 
 
 
PRIMARY OBJECTIVE  
 
To co mpare 12 month  assessments of pati ent reported pain of participants undergoing SI screw removal  versus 
non-removal  treatment following a pelvic fracture  requiring SI screw stabilization . We hypothesize that there 
will be a decrease in the Visual Analog Sca le (VAS) pain scores in the SI scr ew removal  group as compared to 
the non -removal  group at the patient’s 12 month follow -up and beyond.   
 
 
SECONDARY  OBJECTIVE S 
 
To compare assessments of narcotic use up to 24 months  post SI screw stabilization surgery  of participants 
undergoing SI screw re moval  versus non -removal  treatment following a pelvic fracture  requiring SI screw 
stabilization .  We hypothesize that there will be a decrease in the narcotic requirements in the SI screw removal  
group as compared to the n on-removal  group throughout the 24 month  follow up  and beyond . 
 
 
EXPLORATORY OBJECTIVES  
 
To explore assoc iations between treatment and:  
1. Work productivity and activity impairment up to 24 months  post SI screw stabilization surgery  
2. Health related quality of  life up to 24 months  post SI scre w stabilization surgery  
3. Pelvic specific functional outcome up to 24 months  post SI screw stabilization surgery  
4. Surgical -related complications . 
  
 
DESCRIPTION OF THE STUDY DESIGN  
 
The SI Screw  study is an  observational stud y in which patients will be asked to enroll during a clinical 
SI Screws - Protocol v 4 (2022.08.19 )  Page 7 of 24   appointment  following a pelvic fracture requiring SI screw stabilization surgery . At 6 months post SI screw 
stabilization surgery, if the patient reports any pain associated with his/her pelvic injury, they will be 
approached at  that time to consent  in the randomized arm of the study that allows us to prospectively randomize 
patients to removal versus non -removal of SI  screws . If the patient does not agree to randomization, the patient  
will conti nue to be tracked in the observati onal arm of the study and will choose SI screw removal or non -screw 
removal treatment for themselves based on personal preference and discussion with his/her surgeon.  
 
A total of 450 patients will be enrolled  in the obser vational arm of the study.  Of the  450 observational arm 
patients, approximately 150 (75 per arm) will be enrolled in the randomized arm of the study . All patients will 
be recruited from University of Maryland, Shock Trauma Center.  
 
A schematic representat ion of participant enrollment can be found in the figure below.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
At time of enrollment , participants will be asked to provide basic demographic information, health status and 
function prior to injury. Study injury characteristics will  be obtained from the surgeon and the participant’s 
medical record.  
 
Participants will be prospectively followed at 6 months , 9 months , 12 months,  18 months, and 24 months  post 
SI screw stabilization surgery . All follow -ups will occur in person at the hosp ital clinic follow -ups or over the  
phone and will consist of both a clinical examination (when applicable) and interview . 
 
 
PRIMARY ENDPOINT  
 
The primary endpoint is  patient reported pain severity  as measured by the Brief Pain Inventory assessment 
(BPI). The BPI is a 15 -item questionnaire that assesses the severity of pain, the impact of pain on daily function, 
the location of pain, pain medications and the amount of pain relief. There is no scoring algorithm but the 
arithmetic mean of the four severity ite ms can be used as a measure of pai n severity and the arithmetic mean of 
the seven interference items can be used as a measure of pain interference. This assessment has been chosen 
because it is a short, reliable, patient reported assessment of pain that ha s been specifically designed for a nd 
validated in patients with pain from acute conditions such as postoperative pain.  
 Figure: Participant Enrollment  Eligible  pelvic fractures  
(n=1 50) 
 
Non -Removal at 24 months  
post injury  Screw Removal Treatment  
(n=75) Non -Removal Treatment  
(n=75 ) 
 “Late” Screw Removal 
treatment (by 24 months 
post injury)  
SI Screws - Protocol v 4 (2022.08.19 )  Page 8 of 24    
SECONDARY ENDPOINTS  
 
The secondary endpoints include:   
1. Patient reported pelvic function .  This will be measured using the Majeed Pelvi c Score.   The Majeed 
Pelvic Score uses five criteria chosen for functional assessment after major pelvic fractures: pain, 
standing, sitting, sexual intercourse and performance at work. Each of these clinical parameters is 
scored, the total being a maximum of 100 points for patients who were working before the injury and 80 
points for those who were not. The five section s of the assessment are scored as shown in Table I and 
discussed below . 
Pain . Pain is an important sequel of major pelvic injury, and is giv en a score of 30 points, allocated 
according to the six grades listed in Table I. Standing . Weight -bearing in the er ect position is given 36  
points, in three main categories (aids, gait and walking ability), each of which has six grades. Sitting . 
Sitting i s an important function in relation to the pelvis, but less so than gait or walking ability. A total 
score of 10 poi nts is given in four grades. Sexual intercourse . For both men and women, four points are 
allocated for comfort during sexual intercourse. Th is does not take account of neurological or 
psychological impotence and is recorded in four grades. If, for any reas on, sexual intercourse has not 
been attempted, a score of four points is given. Work . Work performance is allocated 20 points in five 
grades , ranging from no regular work to return to the same job as before injury with no loss of 
performance. A patient who  was not working at the time of his injury is not scored; his overall 
assessment is then out of 80 points.  
 
 
The accumulative grading syst em is shown in Table II. This gives a breakdown into excellent, good, fair 
and poor for both working and non -working  patients.  
 
SI Screws - Protocol v 4 (2022.08.19 )  Page 9 of 24   
 
2. Surgical -related complications  will be determined by patient medical record review and surgeon recall 
following follow -up clin ic appointments.  
 
 
STUDY POPULATION  
 
The study population will be patients aged 18 -80 with a pelvic fracture that re quired SI screw stabilization . 
 
Inclusion Criteria:  
1. The patient is  between 18 and 80 years of age, inclusive.  
2. The patient has a pelvic fract ure that required SI screw stabilization.  
3. The patient has reached skeletal maturity.  
4. The patient’s pelvic fracture i s a result of trauma (includes polytraumatized patients).  
5. The patient is English -speaking.  
6. The patient’s surgeon agrees to randomization  (the patient is amendable to either SI screw removal or 
non-screw removal treatment) . 
7. The patient’s pelvic fracture was  initially treated at Shock Trauma.  
8. The patient is currently experiencing pain associated with his/her pelvic fracture.  
9. The p atient  is able to be randomized between 2 and 8 months post SI screw stabilization surgery at an 
orthopaedic follow -up appointment.  
 
Exclusion Criteria:  
Patients who satisfy any of the following exclusion criteria will be inelig ible for enrollment in the study : 
1. The patie nt is non -ambulatory due to an associated spinal cord injury.  
2. The patient was non -ambulatory pre -injury.  
3. The patient  is currently pregnant.  
4. The patient is enrolled in another study that does not allow co -enrollment.  
5. The patient is likely to have severe pro blems maintaining follow up.  
 
 
CO-ENROLLMENT GUIDELINES  
 
If allowed by the local IRB , participants  in the SI Screws  study may be co-enrolled in other research studies 
based on the following guidelines:  
A. Regardless of whether the participant is enrolled in t he randomization arm or the observational arm, the 
participant may be co -enrolled in any other observational study.  
B. If the participant is enrolled in the randomization arm, he or she may only be co -enrolled in up to two 
additional randomized control trials  prior to the completion of the intervention.  
C. If the participant is enrolled in the randomization arm, he or she may  co-enrolled in any other 
randomized control trial aft er the intervention is complete.  
SI Screws - Protocol v 4 (2022.08.19 )  Page 10 of 24   D. If the participant is enrolled in the observational a rm, he or she may be co -enrolled in any other 
randomized control trial at any time.  
  
 
RECRUITMENT  
 
Approximately 150 participant s will be enrolled in the study . Patients  will be recruited during a standard of care 
clinic follow -up appointment between 2 an d 8 months post SI screw stabilization surgery . Consenting 
procedures are described in detail in the Study Schedule and Informed Consent Sections of this protocol.  
 
 
STUDY TREATMENTS  
 
Both treatment options used in the study are within accepted practice an d standard of care at this institution.  
The same resources (pain management, social work, physical therapy, etc.) w ill be available to study patients as 
to all trauma patients.  
 
SI Screw Removal  Treatment  Group  
Patients enrolled in the SI screw removal  treatment group will be scheduled to undergo screw removal surgery 
between 5 – 9 months post initial SI screw stabiliz ation. If additional surgery is required or other complications 
arise, this will be recorded within the study follow -up forms.  
 
Non-SI Screw  Removal  Treatment Group  
Patients enrolled in the non -SI screw removal  treatment group will not undergo screw remova l surgery.  If 
complications arise and/or surgery  is required, crossover will be allowed and recorded within study follow -up 
forms.  
 
 
CLINICA L EVALUATION  
 
A summary of the clinical evaluations is outlined below and can also be found in Appendix B .  
 
Medical  Record Review  
At time of consent , information about the participant  (medical history , height and weight , etc. ) and the 
participant ’s injuri es and hospital stay will be collected, including mechanism  of injury, date and time of injury , 
presence of and seve rity of other orthopaedic and non -orthopaedic injuries, procedures done in the hospital,  and 
SI screw surgery characteristics .  
   
Assessmen t of Study Injuries   
The following information will be obtained via medical record review and surgeon recall at the  time of 
enrollment : 
• Type of pelvic fracture  
• Side of pelvic fracture  
• SI joint displacement at time of SI screw stabilization surgery  
 
Assess ment of S I Screw S tabilization Surgery  
The following information will be obtained  via medical record review and surg eon recall at the time of 
enrollment : 
• Type of fracture reduction  
• SI screw placement characteristics  
SI Screws - Protocol v 4 (2022.08.19 )  Page 11 of 24   • Type of fracture fixation (if applicable ) 
• Acetabular fracture characteristics (if applicable)  
 
Assessments a t 6 months, 9 months, 12 months, 18 months, and 24 months Post SI Screw Stabilization 
Surgery  
• Complications since last follow -up (type, severity, treatment)  
• Assessment of fracture  healing  
• Weight  bearing status  and ambulation  
• Use of a mbulatory devices  
• Pain assessment  
• Narcotic use assessment  
 
X-rays 
AP a nd lateral x -rays at admission, post SI screw stabilization surgery , and at the 6 month, 9 month, 12 month, 
18 month, and 24 month fo llow-ups will  be obtained.  These x -rays are obtained per standard of care .  
 
 
PARTICIPANT INTERVIEWS  
 
A summary of the par ticipant interviews performed are outlined below and can also be found in Appendix D .  
 
Enrollment  Intervie w 
At the time enrollment , partici pants will be asked about the  following:  
• Age, gender, r ace and ethnicity,  and education  
• Smoking history  
• Previous in juries (specifically pelvis or back)  
• Pain medication usage prior to pelvis  injury  
• Work and health status prior to pelvis injury   
• General and pelvic function prior to  pelvis  injury  
.  
Follow -up Interviews  
At 6 months, 9 months, 12 months, 18 months, and 24 months p ost SI screw stabilization s urgery , participant s 
will be asked  about  the following :  
• Any re -hospitalization or out patient  surgery si nce the last visit for any reason related to  
his/her pelvic  injury  
• Rehabilitation received  
• Pain medication usage  
• Work Status – Work Productivity and Activity Impairment  
• Pain – Brief Pain Inventory  
• Health Status – VR-12 
• Pelvic Function – Majeed Pelvic Score  
 
 
STUDY SCHEDULE  
 
Screening  and Consent  
All patients between the ages of 18 and 80 (inclusive) with pelvic fracture  that required SI screw stabilization 
surgery  will be screened for eligibility by the research coordinator  or research team members  in close  
coordination with the surgeon investigators. Screening will typically occur at the time of SI screw stabilization 
surgery and patients will be tracked until valid enrollment period opens (2 to 8 months post SI screw 
SI Screws - Protocol v 4 (2022.08.19 )  Page 12 of 24   stabilization surgery ). An eligibility checklist form  will be completed on every potentially eligible participant  
and entered onto the electronic data capture system . The treating surgeon  will be available via pager to answer 
questions regarding study eligibility. When the treating surgeon is not available, th e study PI will be available to 
page . Contact information for the PI and alternate contact is availa ble in  Appendix A. In  most cases, questions 
should be resolved at this level.  
 
Once eligibility has been confirmed, the informed consent pro cess will be completed by the research 
coordinator  or research team member  and attending surgeon.  Patients  will be approached  about potential 
participation in the study at a standard of care clinic follow -up appointment between 2 and 8 months post SI 
screw stabilization surgery following determination of eligibility.  
   
Enrollment  
Once consented into the study, baselin e data regarding participant  characteristics, injury characteristics, fracture 
classification and medical history/ co-morbidities will be col lected . Characteristics about the hospital course and 
treatment received will also be collected. A  brief interview will be conducted with the participant . All data will 
be recorded on the paper Case Report Form (CRF)  and entered into the electronic data capture system.  
 
Follow -up 
Participant s will return for follow -up visits at 6 months, 9 months, 12 months, 18 months, and 24 m onths p ost 
SI screw stabilization s urgery . Participant s will undergo a clinical evaluation by the treating surgeon and be 
interviewe d by the r esearch coordinator  or research team member . These visits tend to mirror clinic visits per 
standard of car e, however there may be some circumstances where patients are unwilling to return to the c linic. 
In these situations the research c oordinato r or research team member  may obtain as much visit data as possible 
by phone and/or medical record review to prevent  loss of important study information. All data will be recorded 
on the paper Case Report Form (CRF)  and entered into the electronic data capture system.  
 
Retention  
Every effort will be made to retain participant s in the study.  We will keep participants e ngaged through use of 
study updates during non -study clinic appointments, and reminder calls/letters for upcoming appointment visit 
window t imeframes.  
 
Visit Windows  
Each visit will have an interval of time surrounding the ideal date for the visit during w hich the visit may be 
completed and the data included in the trial database . This interval is approximately 2 weeks before or after t he 
ideal date for a visit . Study data will still to be collected even if the visit falls out of the ideal window of time.  
 
 
ASSESSMENT OF SAFETY  
 
The study will monitor all complications and report adverse events to ensure participant  safety. All local IRB 
requir ements for reporting adverse even ts will be  met.   
 
The safety  monitor ( SM) is responsible for providing medical gui dance and overseeing participant  safety for the 
study. The SM participates in determining the course of action necessary to meet safety goal s and objectives.   
This is achieved through the review of complications related or possibly related to study treatme nt, Serious 
Adverse Event (SAE) reports; resolving safety issues; and interacting with the Principal and Sub -Investigators 
at each site.  
 
SI Screws - Protocol v 4 (2022.08.19 )  Page 13 of 24   Reportable New Information  (RNI)  
The following information must be reported to the IRB within FIVE (5) business days o f the investigator 
becoming aware of the information (please note that a separate RNI must be completed and submitted for each 
problem/event /report):  
• Information that indicates a new or increased risk.  For example:  
­ New information (e.g., an interim analys is, safety monitoring report, publication in the literature, 
sponsor report, or investigator finding) indicates an increase in the frequency  or magnitude of a 
previously known risk, or uncovers a new risk  
­ An investigator brochure, package insert, or device  labeling is revised to indicate an increase in 
the frequency or magnitude of a previously known risk, or describe a new risk  
­ Withdrawal, re striction, or modification of a marketed approval of a drug, device, or biologic 
used in the research protocol  
­ Proto col violation that harmed subjects or others or that indicates subjects or others might be at 
increased risk of harm  
­ Complaint of a subject that indicates subjects or others might be at increased risk of harm or at 
risk of a new harm  
­ Any changes significan tly affecting the conduct of the research  
• Any harm experienced by a subject or other individual which in the opinion of the local investigat or is 
unexpected and at least probably related to the Human Research procedures and suggests that the 
research place s subjects or others at a greater risk of harm than was previously known or recognized  
­ A harm is “unexpected” when its specificity or severi ty are inconsistent with risk information 
previously reviewed and approved by the IRB in terms of nature, severity, frequency, and 
characteristics of the study population  
­ A harm is “at least probably related to the Human Research procedures” if in the opin ion of the 
local investigator, the research procedures more likely than not caused the harm (greater than 
50% probab ility)  
• Non-compliance with the federal regulations governing human research or with the requirements or 
determinations of the IRB, or an all egation of such non -compliance  
• Failure to follow the protocol due to the action or inaction of the investigator or r esearch staff  
• Breach of confidentiality  
• Change to the protocol taken without prior IRB review to eliminate an apparent immediate hazard to a  
subject  
• Incarceration of a subject in a study not approved by the IRB to involve prisoners  
• Complaint of a subject t hat cannot be resolved by the research team  
• Premature suspension or termination of the research by the sponsor or the investigator  
• Unanticip ated adverse device effect (any serious adverse effect on health or safety or any life -
threatening problem or death caused incidence in the investigational plan or application – including a 
supplementary plan or application – or any other unanticipated ser ious problem associated with a device 
that relates to the rights, safety, or welfare of subjects)  
• Audit, inspection,  or inquiry by a federal agency  
• Written reports of study monitors  
 
Serious Adverse Event  (SAE)  
Serious Adverse Events may be discovered duri ng regularly scheduled visits or though unscheduled participant 
contacts between visits.  SAEs will be managed accor ding to the medical judgment of the treating physician and 
source documentation will be maintained (e.g. laboratory and/or radiology reports , clinical notes, discharge 
summaries). The following are the categories considered for a serious adverse event and must be reported to the 
IRB during the continuing review process:  
• Serious, unexpected, not related  
SI Screws - Protocol v 4 (2022.08.19 )  Page 14 of 24   ­ Is unexpected, in terms of nature, sever ity, or frequency, given the research procedures that are 
described in the protocol and informed consent document an d the characteristics of the 
participant s eligible for the study  
­ e.g. Death not due to study participation  
• Serious, expected, related  
­ Is rel ated or possibly related to treatment/procedures under study; possibly related means there is 
a reasonable possibili ty that the incident, experience, or outcome may have been caused by the 
study procedures or treatments  
• Serious, expected, not related  
 
Study patients who experience an SAE will be followed until resolution of the event and a final report will be 
submitted  to the safety  monitor  and IRB . Please note that SAE’s and RNI’s may overlap and a single event may 
be classified under both conditions.  
 
 
DATA ANALYSIS  
 
We are interested in estimating the causal effect of removal versus non -removal of SI screws in pelvic  fracture 
patients requiring the use of SI screws for stabilization. Our primary hypothesis is that the SI screw removal  
group will have low er VAS pain scores compared to the non -SI screw removal  group during their outpatient 
follow -up period . For all our analyses, we will report estimates of the causal effects, standard errors, and 
confidence intervals.  We will also report the results of tes ts of null hypothesis of no causal effect.   
 
 
RANDOMIZATION  
 
Eligible patients will be randomized in equal proporti ons to one of the two treatment groups: 1) SI screw 
removal , 2) non-SI screw removal .  Allocation will be concealed using a centralized 24 -hour computerized 
randomization system , www.randomize.net , that will allow I nternet based allocation.  The treatment allocation 
will be stratified on the following prognostic factors to ensure balance between the int ervention groups: 1)  
patient SI joint displacement at the time of injury . 
 
 
DATA MANAGEMENT  
 
Data will be collected in real time by the study investigator s, research coordinator, or research team member s, 
directly on paper Administrative Forms (AFs) or Cas e Report Forms (CRFs) which will serve as source 
documents for the study. The study personnel  will obtain the inform ation necessary to complete the case report 
forms (CRFs) from several sources including but not limited to, the patient's medical record, cl inical evaluations 
and patient interviews. These forms will NOT contain the patient’s name, SSN, or hospital medical  record 
number; they will be identified only by a unique patient -specific study number. All data requested on the AF or 
CRF must be complete d. Source documents will be signed by the study team member that has reviewed the AF 
or CRF . An electronic data capt ure system, REDCap, will be used to  store data electronically after paper AF 
and CRF collection . On the monthly basis , the research coordina tor will make a visual check of the data and 
will query all missing data, implausible data, and inconsistencies.  
 
The REDCap data entry screens will be similar to the paper AFs and CRFs.  Data integrity will be enhanced by 
using the electronic data capture  system through a variety of mechanisms for checking data at the time of entry 
including referential data rules, val id values, range checks, and consistency checks against data already stored in 
the database.  Clinical site personnel will be able to view a nd modify data for participants recruited from their 
clinical site only.  Each time data is submitted or modified, i t will be validated by the research coordinator . 
SI Screws - Protocol v 4 (2022.08.19 )  Page 15 of 24    
All AFs and CRFs must be kept secure in locked cabinets or other enclosures that are acces sible only to study 
personnel.  All electronic data must be password -protected and accessibl e only to study personne l.  Study 
personnel  will be responsible for backing up all electronically submitted data.   Hard copy documents containing 
subject data and p atient identifiers (and contact information) will be stored in secure document containers (file 
cabinets, lockers, d rawers, etc.) in accordance with standard document management practices. Paper forms and 
the files containing personally identifiable data a t each site will be destroyed within 5 years of study 
completion.  
 
Quality control quality assurance procedures will  be in place for the duration of the study. Ongoing data edits 
and internal audits will be performed to ensure collection of quality data. T he continuous and timely flow of 
data from the  AFs and CRFs to the REDCap electronic data capture system  is an essen tial prerequisite for 
maintaining data quality.  
 
Monthly performance r eports will be completed by the  research coordinator summarizing amon g other things:  
recruitment, status of follow up, data completion, and timelines of data entry.  
 
 
MISSING DATA  
 
As with most prospective studies, missing data will be unavoidable , even with excellent follow up. Since the 
informative nature of missing data  cannot be verified from the observed data, we will adopt a sensitivity 
analysis framework for reporting results. We  will analyze data under a variety of modeling assumptions 
regarding how strongly the missingness mechanism is related to outcomes.  Regardi ng study  conduct, we will : 
1. Limit participant burden and inconvenience in data collection  
2. Select high quality researc h team members  
3. Monitor and report missing data rates during the study  
4. Emphasize the importance of full participation in the study  during the  consent process  
5. Collect information on the reasons for missing data  
6. Actively engage participants in the study and e ducate them about the  importance of their engagement  
7. Collect surrogate information on parti cipants who miss clinic visits  
8. Hold regular meeti ngs to discuss strategies for enrollment and engagement of participation  
 
While these efforts will help to minimize missing data, we recognize that missing data is inevitable.  
 
 
RESEARCH ETHICS APPROVAL  
 
This protocol, DSMB plan, consent form s, the AFs, a nd the CRFs have been reviewed and approved by 
University of Maryland Ins titutional Review Board (IRB).  
  
 
INFORMED CONSENT  
 
Both a R andomized Control Trial (RCT)  consent and Observational (OBS) consent has been prepared for the 
study and is attached in Ap pendix C. The consent form describe s the purpose of the study, the procedures to be 
followed, and the risks and  bene fits of participation. Copies of the signed consent forms will be given to the 
patient, and this fact will be docu mented in the patient’s re cord.  
 
Eligible patients will be approached for their consent to participate.  Informed consent will be obtained pri or to 
treatment  group assignment . 
SI Screws - Protocol v 4 (2022.08.19 )  Page 16 of 24    
To encourage a high level of participation from eligible patients , the attending surgeon will be involved  in the 
consent conversation. The conversation will be initiated by the research  coordinator  or research team member  
and the surgeon together.  Patients  will be informed of  the risks and benefits of participation and what will be 
expected of them if they c hoose to participate. Consent will be obtained in accordance with principles of GCP 
and ICH guidelines . 
 
The study s hould be presented as a randomized control trial upon initial consent conversation.  If the patient 
declines to participate after full under standing of the trial, only then should the observational arm be presented.  
 
VULNERABLE POPULATIONS  
 
The study will not include children , pregnant women,  or prisoners . 
 
PARTICIPANT CONFIDENTIALITY  
 
It is the investigator’s responsibility to conduct the pro tocol under the current version of Declaration of 
Helsinki, ICH Guidelines, Good Clinical Practice, and rules of loc al IRBs. The investigator must ensure that the 
patient’s anonymity be maintained.  
 
Participants will be identified only by an identification  code but not by their name, SSN, or hospital medical 
record number. The research c oordinator  will maintain a separa te confidential enrollment log which matches 
identifying codes with patient names and addresses available only to research  staff.  
 
All study  forms, reports, and other records that are part of the study data collection materials will be identified 
by coded number to maintain pat ient confidentiality. All paper  records will be kept in locked file cabinets. All 
electronic records of study data wil l be identified by coded number. Clinical information will not be released 
without written permission of the patient , except as neces sary for monitoring by the IRB or Safety Monitor . 
Consent procedures and forms, and the communication, transmission and sto rage of patient data will comply 
with the IRB and requirements for compliance with t he Health Insurance Portabil ity and Accountability Act 
(HIPA A). 
 
 
STUDY DISCONTINUATION  
 
Participants will be informed that they may discontinue the study at any time, for any reason. They will be 
assured that the medical care which they receive at the participating facility will not be affected should they 
elect to discontinue participation in the study.  
 
 
REPORTS  
 
The research coordinator  will report  queries on the monthly  basis  to ensure quality data collection and address 
missing data or visits at regular intervals.  
 
 
STUDY RECORDS RE TENTION  
 
Study records will be maintained in accordance with current ICH guidelines.  Data will be maintained for five 
years following the en d of research -related activities.  At the end of this period, paper forms will be shredded 
and the file containing p ersonally identifiable data will be permanently del eted from local site computers.  
SI Screws - Protocol v 4 (2022.08.19 )  Page 17 of 24    
 
SUPPORTING LITERATURE  
 
Keating JF, Orfaly R, O’Brien PJ . Knee pain after tibial nailing. J Orthop Trauma 11: 10 -13, 1997.  
Pot JH, van Wensen RJA, Olsman JG. Hardware relat ed pain and hardware removal after open reduction and 
internal fixation of ankle fractures. The Foot and Ankle Online Journal 4(5):1, 2011.  
 
Jacobsen S, Honnens de Lichtenberg M, Jensen CM, Torholm C. Removal of internal fixation – the effect on 
patients’ complaints: a study of 66 cases of removal of internal fixation after malleolar fractures. Foot Ankle Int 
15: 170 -171, 1994.  
 
Brown OL, Dirs chl D, Rand Obremskey WT. Incidence of hardware -related pain and its effect on functional 
outcomes after open reduct ion and internal fixation of ankle fractures. J Orhtop Trauma 15: 271 -274, 2001.  
 
Dodenhoff RM, Dainton JN, Hutchins PM. Proximal thigh pain  after femoral nailing: causes and treatment. J 
Bone Joint Surg Br 79: 738 -741, 1997.  
 
Court -Brown CM, Gustilo R, Sh aw AD. Knee pain after intramedullary tibial nailing: it’s incidence, etiology, 
and outcome. J Orthop Trauma 11: 103 -105, 1997.  
 
Busam ML, E sther RJ, Obremskey WT. Hardware removal: indications and expectations. J of American 
Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeon s 14(2): 113 -120, 2006.  
 
Gerbershagen HJ, Dagtekin O, Isenberg J, Marten N, Ozgur E, Krep H, et al. Chronic pain and disability after 
pelvic  and acetabular fractures – assessment with the mainz pain staging system. J Trauma 69(1): 128 -136, 
2010.  
 
Mehoff CS , Thomsen CH, Rasmussen LS, Nielsen PR. High incidence of chronic pain following surgery for 
pelvic fracture. Clin J Pain 22(2): 167 -172, 20 06. 
 
Pohlemann T, Tscherne H, Baumgartel F, Egbers HJ, Euler E, Maurer F, et al. Pelvic fractures: epidemiology, 
therapy and long -term outcome. Overview of the multicenter study of the Pelvis Study Group. Unfallchirurg 
99(3): 160 -167, 1996.  
 
Weiss RJ, Mont gomery SM, Stiller CO, Wick MC, Jansson KA. Long -term follow -up of opioid use in patients 
with acetabulare fractures . Injury Extra 43: 49 -53, 2012.  
 
Hanson B, van der Werken C, Stengel D. Surgeons’ beliefs and perceptions about removal of orthopaedic 
impla nts. BMC Musculoskeletal Disorders 9: 73, 2008.  
 
Toms AD, Morgan -Jones RL, Spencer -Jones R. Intramedullary femoral n ailing: removing the nail improves 
subjective outcome. Int J Care Injured 33: 247 -249, 2002.  
 
Williams AA, Witten DM, Duester R, Chou LB. Th e benefits of implant removal from the foot and ankle. J 
Bone Joint Surg Am 94 (14): 1316 -1320, 2012.  
SI Screws - Protocol v 4 (2022.08.19 )  Page 18 of 24   APPENDIX A: S TUDY CONTACT ROSTER  
 
Principal Investigator  
Robert Sciadini , MD  
Phone: (410) 328 -5435  
E mail: msciadini@umoa.umm.edu  
   
   
Safety  Monitor  
Andrew Pollak , MD  
Phone: ( 410) 328-1421  
Email: apollak@umoa.umn.edu  
   
 
Research Coordinator s 
Haley Demyanovich  
Phone: (410) 706 -3935  
Email: hdemyanovich@som.umaryland.edu  
 
 
APPENDIX B : DATA COLLECTION SCHEDULE   
 
Assessment  Enroll -
ment  6 
month  9 
month  12 
month  18 
month  24 
month  
Stratification Level (AF03)        
SI joint displacement (at time of injury)  X      
Patient  Intake (CRF01)        
Demographics (age, gender, race/ethnicity, 
education)  X      
Smoking History  X      
Previous Injuries  X      
Pre-injury Pain Medication Usage  X      
Pre-injury Work Status (WPAI:SHP)  X      
Pre-Injury Health Status (VR -12) X      
Pre-Injury Pelvic Function (Majeed Pelvic)  X      
Index Hospitalization - Clinical Intake (CRF02)        
Date/Time & Mechanism of Injury  X      
Height & Weight  X      
Medical History  X      
Narcotic Use  X      
SI Screw Surgery Characterist ics X      
Classification of All Injuries  X      
Study Injury Characteristics  X      
Patient Follow -Up (CRF03 & CRF04)        
Brief Pain Inventory (BPI)   X X X X X 
Re-hospitalizations or Surgeries   X X X X X 
Physical Therapy Tracking   X X X X X 
Post-Injury Pa in Medication Usage   X X X X X 
Post-Injury Work Status (WPAI: SHP)   X X X X X 
Post-Injury Health Status (VR -12)  X X X X X 
SI Screws - Protocol v 4 (2022.08.19 )  Page 19 of 24   Assessment  Enroll -
ment  6 
month  9 
month  12 
month  18 
month  24 
month  
Post-Injury Pelvic Function (Majeed Pelvic)   X X X X X 
Clinical Follow -Up (CRF05, CRF06, & CRF07)        
Ambulation & We ight Bear ing Status   X X X X X 
Pain Medication Usage   X X X X X 
Fracture Healing Status   X X X X X 
Complications (type, severity, treatment)   X X X X X 
Treatment SI Screw Removal Surgical 
Characteristics (if applicable)    X    
Crossover SI Screw Remov al Surgic al 
Characteristics (if applicable)    X X X X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 