Irene Gabashvili, [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Study Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan  
 
 
Title: Microbial Basis of Systemic Malodor and 
"People Allergic To Me" Condition  (PATM)  
 
Study Registry ID: [REMOVED]  
 
Date : March 6, 2018  
 
 
Information provided by (Responsible Party): Irene Gabashvili, 
PhD, Principal Investigator  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Irene Gabashvili, [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Abstract  
Summary  
The proposed study will identify microbial communities associated with  flare ups and remission s of 
MEBO ( systemic malodor  of metabolic origin)  or PATM  (“People allergic to me”) conditions .  
Background  
Human odor -prints, mostly owing to  the microbiome, have proven their value as  biomarkers of health 
and environmental exposures.  
In recent years, microb ial networks  responsible for localized malodors (e.g. , halitosis [1,2], groin area, 
foot and axillary  odor  [3,4]) have been mapped by using next generation sequencing approaches.  
Intestinal microbes responsible for psychologically debilitating systemic malodor  (whole -body and 
extraoral halitosis) , however, remain to be  identified. Even a relatively straightforward disorder of 
choline metabolism  trimethylaminuria (TMAU) is thought to exhibit complex host -gene microbiome 
interactions  [5] and  has not been sufficiently studied.  
Mapping gut microbiome is needed to understand human metabolic disfunction, make proper dietary 
recommendations and develop targeted treatments such as microbial therapies [6 -8]. Our preliminary 
analysis of culture -, PCR - and 16S -RNA -based data found sever al Operational Taxonomic Units (OTUs)  
potentially linked to  systemic malodor. Proposed controlled pilot study  will provide a more 
comprehensive evaluation and, combined with our prior data [ 9-12], will help to develop new therapies 
and treatments.  
Aims  
1. Use a longitudinal approach to determine if any characteristics of the microbiota are associated with 
episodes of metabolic malodor . 
2. Examine the relationship between fecal microbiome composition, diet, and inflammatory/metabolic 
disease markers . 
The hyp othesis of this study is that , in spite of genetic heterogeneity, the pathology involves common 
patterns in the gut microbiome.  
 
Research Proposal  
As randomized control trial  (RCT) methodology is rarely used in community settings and is  problematic  
when applied to supportive care in idiopathic malodor  (smaller sample, unethical to randomize) , 
proposed  study is non-randomized .  
To capture gut microbiota  dynamics in idiopathic malodo r, we will ask participants to continue their 
usual diet  and collect a stool sample at the first opportunity after experiencing a flare -up (if condition is 
in active state) or a usual flare -up-free-day (if in remission) .  At the same time, su bjects will be asked to 
submit observations of daily living,  describ ing diet, quality of life, activities, stress and other 
environmental exposures  (MEBO/PATM Life Quality Test  and free-text notes) . 
Irene Gabashvili, [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
We define a f lareup as  an episode of strong unpleasant odor emanating from the individual that can be 
detected at a social distance (4 feet or farther ). In case of PATM (“People Allergic to Me” condition), the 
odor is  less tangible  but emanations cause cons tant allergy -like reactions from other people at social 
distances.  
The first test will be followed by behavioral intervention for 8 weeks including personalized nutrition 
advice and education on stress management techniques.  
Subjects will be asked to submit their second sample as soon as there is a ( possibly  temporary) 
improvement in their symptoms.  Participants in remission or regression may choose to loosen their 
dietary restrictions  to observe a minor flare -up and submit a sample  at that time . If more kits are 
available, they will continue submitting more samples to be tter capture their p hysiological and 
psychosocial changes . 
Microbiome  data will be analyzed with software tools such as BCL2FASTQ, VSEARCH, Python libraries, 
diet analysis software [13], algorithms developed for analysis of noisy data [ 14-17], networks and  
metabolic pathways [18 ,19].  
Application and the Protocol Narrative with all applicable attachments was submitted to MEBO 
Research Institutional Review Board (IRB) on March 6, 2018 and approved on May 11, 2018.  Protocol 
Number: 201805110018MEBO  
 
Study De sign and Timeline  
 
Study Type: Interventional (supportive intervention)  
Actual Enrollment: 125 participants  that volunteered to donate microbiome samples , including 112 
participants interested in  intervention, including  receiving gut microbiome collection kits . 
Allocation: Non -Randomized  
Intervention Model: Sequential  
Masking: None (Open Label)  
Primary Purpose: Supportive Care ; Prevention  and Disease management  
Official Title: Dynamics of the Gut Microbiota in Idiopathi c Malodor Production . 
Actual Study Start Date: June 16, 2018  
Actual Primary Completion Date: June  16, 2019  
Actual Study Completion Date: February  10, 2020 
 
Irene Gabashvili, [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Statistical Bas is for sample size   
No formal sample size calculation was performed. Previous studie s of body odor found significant 
differences in axillar microbiomes of relatively small numbers of volunteers (50 times more bacteria in 
groups of 11 vs 13 Caucasians detectably different in axillary odor [20]). Simple estimates for a Wilcoxon 
test yield ed similar sample sizes. Determining the minimum number of participants needed for 
microbiome trials is a largely unresolved subject because of excessive number of zeroes, over -
dispersion, compositionality, intrinsically microbial correlations, and va riable sequencing depths [21 ]. 
Kelly et al [2 2] found that for NOVA -type analyses five subjects per group in microbiome studies allows 
90% power to detect a ω2 ( adjusted coefficient of determination ) of 0.05; 10 subjects per group allows 
90% power to d etect an ω2 of 0.02; and 20 subjects per group allows 90% power to detect an ω2 of 
0.008. Omega -squared provides a less biased measure of effect size for ANOVA -type analyses by 
accounting for the mean -squared error.   
Obviously, larger sample numbers allow for higher accuracy. Our study is the largest ever remote trial on 
microbial basis of long -standing idiopathic malodor  and PATM . 
 
Recruitment  
Patients will be recruited from  previous studies and non -interventional surveys. In addition, the study 
will be advertised on blogs, social media patient support groups and on Clinicaltrials.gov.  
All participants are given links to the Quality of Life questionnaire and informed consent  
(https://aurametrix.com/Studies/mebo -microbiome.html ) prior to the beginning of the study and at 
each time point of sampling that will either be filled in by themselves or by a study coordinator via an 
online interview. Clinical data is collected by the s tudy team from previously submitted health records 
and via a questionnaire. For stool sampling the participants will receive collection kits. Participants will 
collect gut microbiome samples  using the kit instructions  and mail  it in the provided return env elope.   
Inclusion Criteria:  
• Idiopathic malodor or PATM symptoms experienced over a period of several months or years  
• Able to read and understand the study information  
• Willing and able to comply with questionnaires, nutritional recommendations, and other st udy 
procedures  
Exclusion Criteria:  
 
• Consistent inability/unwillingness to communicate symptoms and health -related concerns  
• Consistent inability /unwillingness  to distinguish physical symptoms from pure emotional 
reactions  
• Lack of motivation to start feeling  better  
Principal Investigator  of this study , study coordinator and behavioral psychologist  providing supportive 
care  operate as a ‘virtual site’ as they did not physically work in the same location.  
 
Irene Gabashvili, [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Withdrawal of Subjects  
Subjects can leave the study at  any time for any reason if they wish to do so without any consequences.  
 
Self-Report Measures  
Enrollment interview remotely administered by the study coordinator  is asking about participants’ 
name, address  for shipping test kits , age, sex, medical histor y, copies of relevant test results and 
diagnoses (TMAU urine test, genetic tests, halitosis, IBS, bromhidrosis, foot odor, vaginosis, 
gastroenterological tests, blood work, dermatological and dental evaluations, urological or 
endocrinologic disorders, etc. ), detailed descriptions of odor conditions, ability to smell/detect malodor 
by themself, availability of a trusted buddy who could give them  feedback about their  odor  or allergic 
reactions from others. Enrollees are informed that their  personal information will be kept under strict 
privacy and confidentiality. Study coordinator will assign each human subject a de -identified unique 
identifier code. This ID  will be used by subjects to submit their online survey responses and kit IDs that 
will be linked to medical histories. Research personnel will work with de -identified information.  
Quality of Life (QoL) will be measured by the 24 -item survey  in addition to  questions about IDs and 
informed consent checkbox. Quality of life assessment questionnaire  is designed on the basis of the 
Halitosis Associated Life -quality Test (HALT) [23], WHOQOL -100 and Dermatology Life Quality Index 
(DLQI) [24] questionnaires. Most questions were devised with a Likert scale of 0 -5 where a higher s core 
indicated a higher quality of life. Scores for five negatively framed questions are transformed to 
positively framed questions. MEBO test provides a total QOL score (minimum score of 20 and maximum 
score of 150) and is focusing on four aspects of QOL:  physical health, psychological health, social support 
and environment.   
Our estimated time for completion is 2-5minutes, not counting the last  (optional)  multi-line free text 
question . This information is  provided  at the start of the questionnaire.  
Electronic informed consent (eIC) contains all elements of informed consent required by HHS and/or 
FDA regulations (45 CFR 46.116 and 21 CFR 50.25).  
 
Statistic al analysi s 
 
Study coord inator will assign each human subject a de -identified unique identifier code . It will be  used 
by subjects to submit their online survey responses and kit IDs that will be linked to  medical histories.  
Outcomes from questionnaires, tests and assays will be summarized for each group at different  time 
points.  The groups will be determined based on questionnaires and will include control group 
(individuals that never belonged to MEBO or PATM groups  or are symptom -free relatives of study 
patients ), subjects in remission, regression and active patients with symptoms of different severity. In 
addition  
Irene Gabashvili, [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
The data will then be examined for errors (e.g., out of range values), consistency , missing and spurious 
valu es. Missing data will not be imputed unless specifically note d. Any apparently spurious data will be 
verified. Non verified data will be excluded from summaries or analyses.  
The first step in the data analysis will be an inspection for outliers and normal ity violations. Initial data 
exploration will be undertaken using inspection of frequency distributions and plots (i.e., graphical 
methods such as histograms and box plots), estimation of z -scores, estimation of skewness and kurtosis, 
and test for normalit y (i.e., analytic methods). If necessary, data will be transformed and centered for 
minimizing problems.  
Descriptive statistics will be calculated and compared across all groups. I nter -group differences will be 
computed using statistical tests.  
If the ass umptions of the t -test cannot be met, yet the observations are independent, the Mann –
Whitney test will be used for two group comparisons, if the data are at least ordinal in nature. Wilcoxon 
matched pairs test will be used for samples of the same subjects before and after improvement of 
symptoms.  
Statistical analyses will be separately defined for each endpoint. There will be no adjustment of p -values 
for multiplicity unless specifically noted. P -values generated for this study are not intended to be 
concl usive, but provided for guidance only.  
The composition of the microbiome will be measured in terms of both the number of unique types of 
microorganisms  (i.e., α -diversity) and the microbial composition . We will calculate "phylogenetic 
entropy" to represen t alpha diversity [2 5].  
Microbiota composition will be evaluated in different ways. As microbiota data contain many variables, 
a first approach is to reduce the number of variables. Another approach will be longitudinal analyses  
with  subjects act ing as their own control. This will minimize the impact of confounding . We will also use 
other approach es for evaluation such as  unsupervised clustering of microbiota profiles. Resulting 
clusters will be analyzed for over - or underrepresentati on of different groups , again using the Mann -
Whitney U test or the Student  t test where appropriate.  
Supervised machine learning methods will include regression and classification with different classifiers.   
Predictive performance of the model will be as sessed by receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves . 
Using the  above -mentioned  approaches, we can evaluate our data and decide which parameters can be 
used to create a model that can predict MEBO/PATM phenotype.  
 
Potential pitfalls and proposed resol utions:  
It is currently thought that 16S ribosomal RNA gene sequence analysis could not adequately uncover the 
potential TMA -producing potential  and might not be suitable for systemic malodor research . However, if 
we don’t find significant statistical differences, we plan to apply resolution -enhancing methods similar 
to those developed by Nobel prize winner Joachim Frank for reconstruction  of images from extremely 
noisy projections . We will also apply novel netwo rk analysis approaches.  We are interested in functional 
profiling of gut microbes and identifying most prevalent metabolic pathways, as this will help to 
elucidate host physiological functions, in particular the underlying enzymatic deficiency.  
Irene Gabashvili, [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
The princip al disadvantage of nonrandomized design is the potential for bias from confounding. The 
direction of this bias is unpredictable from study to study. For example, we may have a larger number of 
“sicker” patients in the intervention, thus biasing the trial a gainst the intervention. Thus , we will 
evaluate our results in a larger context, and internal and external validity will be assessed through the 
replication of results in a variety of settings.  
In the future, w e’d like to see analysis extending beyond 16S RNA profiling because of the following:  
A large subset of MEBO patients is convinced they are suffering from Candida overgrowth, as is often 
reinforced by naturopathic doctors. Some patients have had yeast  infections of the mouth, scalp, skin, 
nails and ge nitals. There is also anecdotal evidence that anti -candida diet  and antifungals may help to 
get rid of the odor. There were cases of Blastocystis  spp. and Giardia  infections.  Archaea  was shown to 
facilitate TMA reduction.  In addition, almost half of MEBO patients have various skin conditions in 
which bacterial viruses (bacteriophages) are thought to play an important role.  
 
References  
 
1. Ren W, Xun Z, Wang Z, Zhang Q, Liu X, Zheng H, Zhang Q, Zhang Y, Zhang L, Wu C, Zheng S. Tongue 
coating and the salivary microbial communities vary in children with halitosis. Scientific reports. 2016 
Apr 15;6:24481.  
2. Seerangaiyan K, van Winkelhoff AJ , Harmsen HJ, Rossen JW, Winkel EG. The tongue microbiome in 
healthy subjects and patients with intra -oral halitosis. Journal of breath research. 2017 Sep 
6;11(3):036010.  
3. Troccaz M, Gaïa N, Beccucci S, Schrenzel J, Cayeux I, Starkenmann C, Lazarevic V. Mapping axillary 
microbiota responsible for body odours using a culture -independent approach. Microbiome. 2015 
Dec;3(1):3.  
4. Callewaert C. The science of body odor: characterization and management of the axillary microbiome 
(Doctoral dissertation, Ghent U niversity).  2015.  
5. Rath S, Heidrich B, Pieper DH, Vital M. Uncovering the trimethylamine -producing bacteria of the 
human gut microbiota. Microbiome. 2017 Dec;5(1):54.  
6. Sulakvelidze A, Alavidze Z, Morris JG. Bacteriophage therapy. Antimicrobial agents and che motherapy. 
2001 Mar 1;45(3):649 -59. 
7. Gabashvili IS, Khan SA, Hayes SJ, Serwer P.  Polymorphism of bacteriophage T7. Journal of Molecular 
Biology. 273: 658 -67. PMID 9356254 DOI: 10.1006/jmbi.1997.1353  
8. Gabashvili IS, Gregory ST, Valle M, Grassucci R, Wo rbs M, Wahl MC, Dahlberg AE, Frank J. The 
polypeptide tunnel system in the ribosome and its gating in erythromycin resistance mutants of L4 and 
L22. Molecular cell. 2001 Jul 1;8(1):181 -8. 
9. Gabashvili IS. Community -led research discovers links between elu sive symptoms and clinical tests. 
bioRxiv. 2017 Jan 1:139014.  
Irene Gabashvili, [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
10. ClinicalTrials.gov [Internet]. Bethesda (MD): National Library of Medicine (US). Identifier 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] , Exploratory Study of Relationships Between Malodor and Urine Metabolomics  
11. ClinicalTrials.gov [Internet]. Bethesda (MD): National Library of Medicine (US). Identifier 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] , Evaluation of Potential Screening Tools for Metabolic Body Odor and Halitosis  
12. ClinicalTrials.gov [Internet]. Bethesda (MD): National Library of Me dicine (US). Identifier 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] , Exploratory Study of Volatile Organic Compounds in Alveolar Breath (VOCs)  
13. Gabashvili IS. Why Red Beans and Rice Are Good ... But Not with Coffee 2012, Forbes  
14. Gabashvili IS, Sokolowski BH, Morton CC, Giersch AB. Ion channel gene expression in the inner ear. 
Journal of the Association for Research in Otolaryngology. 2007 Sep 1;8(3):305 -28. 
15. Gabashvili IS, Whirl -Carrillo M, Bada M, Banatao  DR, Altman RB. Ribosomal dynamics inferred from 
variations in experimental measurements. R NA. 2003 Nov 1;9(11):1301 -7. 
16. Gabashvili IS, Grosberg AY. Dynamics of double stranded DNA reptation from bacteriophage. Journal 
of Biomolecular Structure and Dyna mics. 1992 Apr 1;9(5):911 -20. 
17. Gabashvili IS, Agrawal RK, Spahn CM, Grassucci RA, Svergun DI, Frank J, Penczek P. Solution structure 
of the E. coli 70S ribosome at 11.5 Å resolution. Cell. 2000 Mar 3;100(5):537 -49. 
18. Krämer A, Green J, Pollard Jr J, T ugendreich S. Causal analysis approaches in ingenuity pathway 
analysis. Bioinformatics. 2013 Dec 13;30(4):523 -30. 
19. Krämer A, Shah S, Rebres RA, Tang S, Richards DR. Leveraging network analytics to infer patient 
syndrome and identify causal genes in rare  disease cases. BMC genomics. 2017 Aug;18(5):551.  
20. Troccaz M, Gaïa N, Beccucci S, Schrenzel J, Cayeux I, Starkenmann C, Lazarevic V. Mapping axillary 
microbiota responsible for body odours using a culture -independent approach. Microbiome. 2015 Dec 
1;3(1 ):3. 
21. Casals -Pascual C, González A, Vázquez -Baeza  Y, Song SJ, Jiang L, Knight R. Microbial Diversity in 
Clinical Microbiome Studies: Sample Size and Statistical Power Considerations. Gastroenterology. 2020 
May 1;158(6):1524 -8. 
22. Kelly BJ, Gross R, Bittinger K, Sherrill -Mix S, Lewis JD, Collman RG, Bushman FD, Li H. Power and 
sample -size estimation for microbiome studies using pairwise distances and PERMANOVA. 
Bioinformati cs. 2015 Aug 1;31(15):2461 -8.  (micropower.R : 
https://github.com/brendankelly/micropower ) 
23. Kizhner V, Xu D, Krespi YP. A new tool measuring oral malodor quality of life. European archives of 
oto-rhino -laryngology. 2011 Aug 1;268(8):1227 -32. 
24.  Finlay AY, Khan G. Dermatology Life Quality Index (DLQI) —a simple practical measure for routine 
clinical use. Clinical and experimental dermatolog y. 1994 May;19(3):210 -6. 
25. McCoy CO, Matsen IV FA. Abundance -weighted phylogenetic diversity measures distinguish 
microbial community states and are robust to sampling depth. PeerJ. 2013 Sep 12;1:e157.   