Comparative Effectiveness of Zolpidem /Trazodone  and Cognitive Behavioral 
Therapy for Insomnia in Rural Adults (COZI)  
  
Study Protocol  
2023.04.20  
 
Funder :  Patient -Centered Outcomes Research Institute (PCORI)  
1828 L St NW, Washington, DC 20036  
Contract Number: CER -2018C2 -13262  
 
Principal Investigators:  
Katie L. Stone, PhD: California Pacific Medical Center Research Institute  
Daniel J. Buysse, MD: University of Pittsburgh  
 
 
PROJECT SUMMARY  
 
COZI is a randomized, 3 -arm, parallel -group, multi -site comparative effectiveness trial of three 
treatment strategies for chronic insomnia. Participants are adults living in rural communities , recruited 
from their primary care  provider’s practice .  Participants will be randomized to o ne of 3 treatment arms  
to compare effectiveness and safety : 1) medication ( zolpidem  or trazodone) ; 2) CBT -I (Cognitive -
Behavioral Therapy for Insomnia) using the online SHUTi  (Sleep Healthy Using the Internet ) program ; or 
3) combination treatment with medi cation  + CBT-I . Outcomes will be assessed immediately post -
treatment (9 weeks), and at 6 and 12 -month fol low-up. 
 
COZI will recruit and study 1200  patients across 8 hub sites  (150 per site ), each of which will collaborate 
with affiliated primary care prac tices.  Recruitment methods may vary by  hub and practice , according to 
site-specific resources.  Recruitment methods will include traditional methods (posters, brochures, etc.) 
as well as electronic health record (EHR) -based recruitment  where supported ; all participants must be 
referred by a primary care practitioner . Referrals will be transmitted to the research team  at the 
affiliated hub , who will complete telephone or online screening and voluntary informed consent. Eligible 
patients will complete baseline evaluations online, then be randomized to one of three interventions: 
Medication , Medication  + CBT-I , or CBT-I , in a 1:1:1 ratio. Pre-treatment baseline and follow -up 
research assessments and other research procedures will be completed on line in the participant’s home.  
For participants randomized to a medication  arm, the medication will be prescribed and monitored by 
their primary care provider , following published treatment guideline, as would be done in “usual 
practice.”  Participants ra ndomized to CBT-I  will be instructed on how to complete the online self -guided  
CBT-I  intervention. All participants will complete follow -up assessments at 9 weeks, 6, and 12 months .  
 
  
PROJECT MANAGEMENT  
 
 
 
COZI is guided by a Steering Committee , with input from PCORI, the DSMB, and the Research Cores and 
Centers . The Steering Committee comprises the Dual PIs, Core Directors, two patient -stakeholder 
representatives, and two clinical hub site PIs.  
 
The project team is led by Dual PI s Stone (Contact PI) and Buysse.  Research Cores and Centers include 
the Data  Coordin ating Center  at CPMC (Stone) ; the Clinical  Coordinating Center  (CCC) at Pitt (Buysse) ; 
the Digital Therapeutics Core  at University of Virginia (Ritterband); and the Patient -Stakeholder 
Engagement Core  (PSEC) at the University of Arizona (Parthasarathy) . The PSEC comprises a Study 
Advisory Committee  (SAC) and the Recruitment and Retention Center  (RRC) at the University of Illinois 
Chicago (Krishnan , Musick, Sculley ). The eight clinical hub sites are each led by a PI with expertise in 
insomnia clinical  trials, and a Co‐I from primary care practice.  Two site leads serve on the Steering 
Committee to provide input into site -level operations and recruitment/retention plans.   
 
Overview of Leadership an d Organizational Structure  
The Steering Committee (SC) is the main decision‐making body of the study. It includes members of 
the EC, 8 site leads,  and the study statistician. The SC convene s monthly via teleconference to review 
progress on major milestones,  guide decision‐making for execution by the EC, and approve the 
protocol (initially, and subsequent modifications). In  addition, the SC will meet once per year in 
person (or virtual dependi ng on status of pandemic) in tandem with SAC meetings in Chicago, Illinois 
or Tucson, Arizona.  

The Executive  Committee  (EC) is responsible  for executing  the decisions  made  by the Study  Advisory  
Committee  (SAC),  and communicating  with  outside  entities  including  the Data  and Safety  Monitoring  
Board  (DSMB)  and PCORI.  The EC includes  the Lead  PIs (Stone  and Buysse),  the Lead  Patients  
(Brothman, Rockwell),  Patient  Advocacy  Lead  (Flygare),  each  of the core/sub‐core  leads  and Co‐Is  
(Parthasarathy,  Krishnan,  Erwin  and Ritterband),  the primary  care  Co‐I (Massart)  and the Data 
Coordinating Center  Project  Director. The EC will meet  weekly -biweekly  in Year 1 to review  progress  
towards  milestones,  review  preliminary  data,  troubleshoot  challenges,  and coordinate  operations.  
Thereafter  (Years  2‐4) the EC will continue  to meet  twice  per month.  We will increase  the frequency  
of meetings  as needed.  
Study  Advisory  Committee  (SAC).  The SAC is the main  source  of study  input  from  8 key stakeholder  
groups:  patients,  patient  advocacy,  providers,  purchasers,  payors,  product  makers,  policymakers  and 
investigator/  scientists.  The SAC will communicate  with  the EC on issues  pertaining  to study  design  
and feasibility,  recruitment  methods  and procedures,  finalization  of study  outcomes,  procedures  for 
study  implementation,  monitoring  study  progress,  and dissemination  of findings  to communities  of 
interest.  The SAC will meet  two times  per year,  once  via teleconference,  and once  in person.   
Hub Advisory Committee  (HAC) . The HAC will convene biweekly in Year 1 and biweekly -monthly in 
Years 2 -4. The HAC is led by the RRC PIs . Its mission is to develop, modify, and disseminate best 
practices for recruitment and retention of primary care practices and study participants.  The HAC 
serves as a vehicle for hub sites to share best practices and seek input on recruitment challenges.  
In‐Person Project Meetings . We held a kick‐off meeting in year 1 that  convened  the Steering  
Committee  and Study  Advisory  Committee.  At the end of year  4, we will reconvene  this group  for a 
dissemination  meetin g to discuss  preliminary  study  findings  and decide  on plans  for publication  and 
other  dissemination  strategies  such  as press  releases  and media.  
 
Katie  L. Stone,  PhD  (Prime  PI, Director  of the Data  Coordinating  Center  [DCC])    
Daniel  J. Buysse,  MD (Dual  PI, Director  of the Clinical  Coordinating  Center  [CCC])   
Sairam  Parthasarathy,  MD (Co‐I,  Director  of the Patient  and Stakeholder  Engagement  Core[PSEC]),    
Lee Ritterband,  PhD  (Co‐I,  Director  of the Digital Therapeutics Core )   
Jerry  A. Krishnan,  MD,  PhD (Co‐I,  Director  of the Recruitment  and Retention  Center  [RRC],  a component  
of the PSEC)    
Arthur  Brothman,  PhD  (patient  investigator  and consultant  to the PSEC)    
Heather Rockwell,  MPW  (patient member of SAC and SC )   
Julie  Flygare,  JD (patient  advocate  and member  of the PSEC)    
Eric Vittinghoff,  PhD  (Statistician),  is Professor  of Biostatistics  at UCSF  
Mylynda  Massart,  MD,  PhD (Co‐I  at Pitt/UPMC)  is a practicing  family  physician    
 
Enrollment  site Principal  Investigator  
University  of Pittsburgh / UPMC  
Center for Sleep and Circadian S cience  
3811 O’Hara Street, E -1123 
Pittsburgh, PA  15213  Daniel  J. Buysse,  MD 
buyssedj@upmc.edu  
 
Penn  State  University, Hershey  
Penn State College of Medicine  
Psychiatry, Sleep Research & Treatment Center  
500 University Dr. H073  C5644A  Julio  Fernandez‐Mendoza,  PhD 
jfernandezmendoza@pennstatehealth.psu.edu  
 
Hershey, PA 17033  
Oregon  Health  and Science  University  
Mark O Hatfield  Research Center   
3250 SW Sam Jackson  Park Road  
Portland, OR  97239  Asha  Singh,  MD 
singas@ohsu.edu  
 
 
Banner  Healthcare System  
1501 N Campbell Ave., AHSC Rm 2342D  
Tucson, AZ 85724  Sairam  Parthasarathy,  MD 
sparthasarathy@deptofmed.arizona.edu  
University  of Virginia  
PO Box 800546  
Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine  
Charlottesville, Virginia 22908  Eric Davis,  MD 
emd9b@hscmail.mcc.virginia.edu  
University  of Alabama  Birmingham  
UAB Center for Psychiatric Medical  
1713 6TH Ave South  
Birmingham, AL, 35294  S. Justin  Thomas,  PhD 
sjthoma@uabmc.edu  
Mizzou Sleep Research Lab  
University of Missouri, Dept. of Psychiatry  
909 Hitt Street, #C100  
Columbia, MO  65201  Richelle Koopman, MD  
koopmanr@health.missouri.edu  
 
RATIONALE AND BACKGROUND INFORMATION  
Insomnia  is a prevalent  health  condition  with  important  consequences.  By its very  definition,  chronic  
insomnia  disorder  (CID)  is a patient‐centered  problem:  Dissatisfaction  with  the quality  or quantity  of 
nighttime  sleep,  marked  by difficulty  falling  asleep,  maintaining  sleep,  or early  awakening.  Additional  
criteria  include  distress  or impaired  function,  adequate  sleep  opportunity,  frequency  >3 nights/week,  
and duration  >3 months.  The prevalence  of insomnia symptoms  in adults  is ~20‐30% , and the prevalence  
of CID ~5‐10% . Symptoms  persist  for >3 years  in 40%  of patients.  Insomnia  occurs  in 10‐26%  of primary  
care  patients . It is comorbid  with,  and associated  with  increased  risk for, depression,  obesity,  
hypertension,  falls,  cognitive  decline  and mortality.  Chronic  insomnia  leads  to reduced  quality  of life, lost 
work  productivity  through  both  presenteeism  and absenteeism , and increased  health  care  costs.  
Insomnia  disproportionally  affects  the elderly , wome n, socio‐economically  disadvantaged,  and 
racial/ethnic  minorities.  Despite  its prevalence  and serious  consequences,  individuals  with  insomnia  
often  feel isolated  and misunderstood  by family  members,  co‐workers,  and providers.  Patients  are 
specifically  dissatisfied  with  health  care  professionals’  lack of treatment  knowledge  beyond  “sleep  
hygiene”  and medications.  CID is a common  and consequential  health  condition,  but patients’  distress  
and treatment  needs  are poorly  addressed.  
FDA‐approved  medications  include  benzodiazepines  (e.g.,  temazepam,  triazolam),  
benzodiazepine  receptor  agonists  (BzRA,  e.g.,  zolpidem,  eszopiclone)  orexin  receptor  
antagonists  (e.g.,  suvorexant),  melatonin  receptor  agonists  (e.g.,  ramelteon),  and doxepin.  Data  
from  the National  Health  and Nutrition  Epidemiological  Survey  1999‐2010  showed  that 19.2%  of 
adults  took  at least  one sleep  aid in the prior  month.  Zolpidem  is the most  commonly  prescribed  
FDA-approved drug  for insomnia,  accounting  for 62%  of the 18.5  million  prescriptions  for 
hypnotics  in 2011.  Prescriptions  for BzRAs  have  increased  since  2004,  driven  by long‐term  
prescriptions  in primary  care,  and underscoring  the need  for long‐term  studies  of their  benefits  
and harms.  The efficacy  of hypnotic  medications  is supported  almost  exclusively  by industry‐
sponsored  studies,  most  of which  compare  a single  medication  to placebo,  and none  of which  
have  compared  zolpidem  to CBT‐I.  Although  individual  studies  for specific  hypnotics  have  large  
sample  sizes,  the number  of trials  per agent  is small,  the magnitude  of effects  modest,  the 
outcomes  focused  on sleep measured using polysomnography  rather  than  patient‐reported  
outcomes  (PROs),  and the duration  of treatment  short  (4‐12  weeks).  Meta‐analyses  support  the 
short‐term  efficacy  of benzodiazepines  and BzRA.  A recent  Clinical  Practice  Guideline  found  
weak  evidence  for the use of FDA‐approved  hypnotics,  and weak  evidence  against  other  agents,  
including  trazodone,  diphenhydramine,  and melatonin.  In particular,  zolpidem  is efficacious  for 
self‐report  and objective  measures,  in both  adults  and older  adults.  One longer‐term  study  has 
demonstrated  the efficacy  of nightly  zolpidem  over  6 months.  This evidence  supports  our choice  
of zolpidem  as one of the medication  treatment s. Nevertheless , data from a survey of providers we 
collected suggest that many providers are reluctant to prescribe zolpidem because of its DEA Schedule 
IV designation, the risk for physiological dependence, the risk for other side effects such as complex 
sleep -related behaviors, and concerns about co -prescription with other controlled drugs. Trazodone  is a 
sedating drug that is FDA -approved for treatment of depression, but is increasingly used at low doses 
off-label for the treatment of insomnia.   Our survey results sug gest that many providers perceive it to be 
safer and less likely to produce physiological dependence or other side effects than zolpidem. Moreover, 
a recently published article in JAMA (on which Dual PI Buysse was an author) utilized an analysis of IBM 
Marketscan Research Databases to examine prescribing trends for zolpidem and low -dose trazodone 
(typical doses prescribed for insomnia) in the United St ates over the period 2011 through 2018. 
Prescriptions for trazodone increased significantly and prescriptions for zolpidem decreased significantly 
over this time interval. In particular, the percentage of adults prescribed trazodone (< 150mg/day) 
increased  from 1.25% to 1.82%, whereas the percentage prescribed zolpidem decreased from 4.56% to 
2.50%. Similar trends were observed for patients with listed insomnia diagnoses. Of note, while 
zolpidem remains somewhat more commonly prescribed than trazodone, the gap is clearly closing .  
Despite being used commonly for the treatment of chronic insomnia, there is limited evidence 
of the effectiveness of trazodone for this purpose . The only randomized, placebo -controlled trial in 
adults with primary insomnia compared  1-week and 2 -week changes in self -reported sleep latency and 
duration, and sleep quality among 278 patients randomized to zolpidem (10mg), trazodone (50mg) or 
placebo. At the two -week follow -up, neither medication performed significantly better than contr ols for 
sleep quality; inspection of the data suggest stable effects of the two active medications, and increasing 
effect of placebo over this interval. A 2018 meta -analysis identified 7 randomized placebo -controlled 
trials of trazodone for treatment of in somnia with a total sample size of 4295. Overall findings of the 
meta -analysis indicated no improvements in sleep efficiency, sleep latency, or sleep duration, but 
patients randomized to trazodone did perceive significantly better subjective sleep quality based on 3 of 
the studies that collected this outcome (standard mean difference= -0.41; 95% confidence interval -0.82 
- -0.0; p=.05). Of note, only one of these 3 studies with sleep quality outcomes was conducted in adults 
with primary insomnia, and this s tudy found no significant effects.  
Thus, data supporting the efficacy and safety of trazodone for insomnia is much more limited 
than is the case for zolpidem . There has never been a large, placebo -controlled trial to assess the 
efficacy and safety of traz odone for chronic insomnia. Extensive discussion of these two medication 
options within the COZI Steering, Executive and Hub Advisory Committees leaves us in equipoise 
about which would be the better medication option for a comparative effectiveness trial with CBT -I, 
which professional organizations recommend as the first line treatment for insomnia. This state of 
equipoise had led us to a stakeholder -guided modification to the COZI study: using patient -provider 
medication choice of zolpidem or trazodone fo r patients in the two medication conditions.  
 
CBT‐I  is a multicomponent  therapy  including  education,  stimulus  control  instruction,  sleep  restriction,  and 
cognitive  restructuring.  CBT‐I  is typically  administered  over  6‐8 individual  sessions  by a therapist,  with  
self‐monitoring  and behavioral/cognitive  homework  between  sessions.  Meta‐analyses  and standards  of 
practice  papers  support  the efficacy  of CBT‐I  vs. active  and inactive  comparators.  Although  most  trials  
have  included  small  numbers  of participants,  effects  on self‐report  measures  are robust,  with  smaller  
improvements  on actigraphy  and polysomnography.  Efficacy  is maintained  over  6‐12  months.  CBT‐I  is 
also efficacious  among  individuals  with  comorbid  conditions . CBT‐I  dissemination  is limited  by the 
number  of therapists  and inconsistent  insurance  coverage.  Consequently,  CBT‐I  has been  adapted  to 
include  briefer  treatments  and self‐guided  Internet  versions,  including  Sleep  Healthy  Using  the Internet  
(SHUTi)  and Sleepio.  Internet  CBT‐I  has broad  accessibility,  consistent  treatment  fidelity,  comparable  
efficacy  to standard  CBT‐I,  and sustained  effects  over  1 year.  SHUTi  is supported  by multiple  RCTs,  with  
robust  data  for acceptance,  efficacy,  and adherence . This evidence  supports  our choice  of CBT-I (SHUTi ) as 
the treatment  comparator.  
Critical  evidence  gaps  remain . The extant  intervention  evidence  fails to address  the most  important  
questions  to patients  and clinicians:  Which  treatment  is best  in terms  of benefits  and harms?  Is combined  
treatment  better  than  medication  or CBT‐I  alone?  Which  treatment  is best  for me?  Published  clinical  
guidelines  for the treatment  of CID support  CBT‐I,  hypnotics,  or combination  treatment,  but they  also call 
for long‐term  studies  comparing  effectiveness,  adherence,  and harms  of these  efficacious  treatments . 
Our study  directly  addresses  these  critical  evidence  gaps.  
Previous  studies  comparing  medication,  CBT‐I,  and combination  treatment  have  included  small  samples  
(<80)  of highly‐  selected  participants  at single  research  sites,  inadequately  powered  for examining  
differences  in treatment  response .  No “real‐world”  pragmatic  clinical  effectiveness  trials  have  been  
conducted.  Previous  studies  suggest  faster response  to medications,  but better  short  and long‐term  (12‐
24 months)  outcomes  with  CBT‐I.  The evidence  base  on combination  treatment  is even  more  limited,  but 
suggests  more  enduring  effects  than  medication  alone,  better  response  and remission  rates  with  initial  
combined  treatment(78),  and lower  zolpidem  use. While  instructive,  these  studies  offer  no definitive  
conclusions  regarding  comparative  effectiveness  of treatments  for CID. 
Patient  preferences  favor  behavioral  over  pharmacologic  treatments  on the basis  of acceptability,  
expectation  of overall  benefits,  effects  on daytime  function,  and side effects.  However,  the treatments  
are expected  to be equally  efficacious,  and treatment  acceptability  does  not correlate  with  outcomes.  
Obstacles  to CBT‐I  include  limited  awareness  among  providers,  few service  providers,  and higher  initial  
cost due to a lack of insurance  coverage(81).  Primary  care  providers  believe  their  patients  rely too heavily  
on medications,  but lack resources  to direct  patients  to CBT‐I.  Our own  preliminary  data  (see below)  
further  highlight  the equipoise  experienced  by patients  and providers.  In their  own  ways,  patients  and 
providers  identify  the same  knowledge  gaps  revealed  by currently‐available  evidence.  
These  evidence  gaps  are uniquely  relevant  to rural  healthcare  settings.  There  is no single  definition  for 
“rural”. One example is  the US Department  of Agriculture, which  bases  its definition  on county‐level  
data.  “Nonmetro”  counties  include  some  combination  of open  countryside,  rural  towns  (<2500  people)  
and urban  areas  with  <50,000  people . We propose a composite scale for degree of rurality, based on 
individual scores using five established definitions (for furthe r details see Study Design, Section  4 below). 
Limited  rural  access  to medical  care  across  four  dimensions —people,  place,  providers,  and payment —is 
well‐documented , and access  to specialists  is even  more  limited . The disproportionate  impact  of 
substance  use in rural  populations,  particularly  opiates,  raises  additional  concerns  regarding  treatment  
with  other  controlled  drugs,  such  as zolpidem.  On the other  hand,  the generally  wide  safety  profile  and 
straightforward  prescribing  guidelines  for zolpidem  make  it potentially  attractive  for rural  settings.  
Although  more  rural  than  urban  Americans  lack access  to in‐home  broadband  internet  (39%  vs. 4%),  a 
similar  proportion  use the Internet  (69%  vs. 75%),  and overall  Internet  use is increasing  at the same  rate,  
making  Internet  CBT‐I  feasible.  Our study  addresses  specific  needs  and knowledge  gaps  in rural  settings.  
We can examine  HTE with  an adequately‐powered  comparative  effectiveness  study.  Previous  studies  
suggest  that characteristics  such  as sex, marital  status,  education,  and occupation  are generally  not 
related  to CBT‐I  outcomes,  but these  studies  have  not been  powered  to detect  such  differences.  Greater  
pre‐treatment  severity  and older  age are associated  with  larger  changes  in quantitative  sleep  
characteristics,  but smaller  changes  in categorical  outcomes,  whereas  concurrent  sleep  medication  does  
not appear  to affect  CBT‐I  outcomes . Short  objective  sleep  duration  and medical/psychiatric  
comorbidities  are associated  with  smaller  treatment  effects.  Most  medication  trials  select  insomnia  
patients  on the basis  of specific  symptoms  that match  the medication’s  pharmacokinetics.  
However,  multiple  sleep  symptoms  are the most  common  phenotype,  and symptoms  change  over  time.  
Thus,  we do not know  if specific  insomnia  symptoms  affect  HTE.  Our study  will address  which  treatment  is 
most  effective  for which  patient.  
DECISIONAL  DILEMMA : Patients,  clinicians,  and other  stakeholders  are concerned  about  the health  
consequences  of inadequate  sleep,  but they  face a quandary  in choosing  a treatment  for CID. Whereas  
CBT‐I  is recommended  by current  guidelines  and often  preferred  by patients,  many  providers  do not 
know  how  to access  it. BzRA  are more  familiar  to patients  and providers,  but can have  significant  side 
effects.  Existing  evidence  does  not provide  adequate  guidance  for choosing  between  these  efficacious  
treatments.  A long‐term,  real‐world  comparative  effectiveness  study  will provide  evidence  about  the 
relative  benefits  and harms  of CBT‐I,  BzRAs,  and combination  treatment,  and about  who  benefits  most  
from  which  treatment —evidence  that will help  providers  and patients  make  informed  and individualized  
treatment  choices.  
 
SPECIFIC AIMS  
To address current evidence gaps we aim to test the following  specific aims:  
Specific  Aim 1A: To compare  the effectiveness  of medication preference (zolpidem or trazodone),  
Internet  cognitive  behavioral  therapy  for insomnia  (CBT‐I),  and combination  treatment  (medication 
preference  + CBT‐I)  for insomnia  symptoms  over  12 months . Hypothesis  1a: Internet  CBT‐I  alone  and 
combination  treatment  will be superior  to medication preference  alone  in improving  insomnia  symptoms  
over  12 months.   Hypothesis  1b: Individuals  receiving  combination  treatment  will use less medication  at 
12 months  compared  to individuals  receiving  medication  alone.   
 1B: To compare the effects of treatment group assignment  on insomnia symptoms,  stratified by 
medication preference. Those randomized to the medication alone and combination treatment 
arms will be prescribed the preferred medication. These subgroups will be compared to those in the 
CBT-I alone arm whose provider indicated preference for that medication prior to randomization.  
 1C: Compare the effects of prescribed zolpidem versus  trazodone  on insomnia symptoms , within 
the medication and combination treatment arms of the study.   
Specific  Aim 2A: To compare  the effectiveness  of medication preference,  Internet  CBT‐I,  and 
combination  treatment  for key patient‐  centered  outcomes  (PCOs),  including  health‐related  quality  of 
life, mood,  cognition,  fatigue,  pain  and other  health  outcomes  (based  on self‐report)  over  12 months.  
Hypothesis  2: CBT‐I  alone  will be superior  to both  combination  treatment  and medication  alone  for 
improving  PCOs  over  12 months.  
 2B: To compare the effects of treatment group assignment  on PCOs,  stratified by medication 
preference. Those randomized to the medication alone and combination treatment arms will be 
prescribed the preferred medication. These subgroups will be compared to those in the CBT -I alone 
arm whose provider indicated preference for that medication prior to randomization.  
 2C: Compare the effects of prescribed zolpidem versus  trazodone  on PCOs , within the medication 
and combination treatment arms of the study.    
 
Specific  Aim 3A: To compare  the adverse  effects  of medication prefer ence,  CBT‐I,  and combination  
treatment.  Hypothesis  3: Adverse  effects  (e.g.,  falls)  will be greater  in the medication  and combination  
treatment  groups  vs. CBT‐I  alone.  
3B: To compare the effects of treatment group assignment  on adverse events,  stratified by 
medication preference. Those randomized to the medication alone and combination treatment 
arms will be prescribed the preferred medication. These subgroups will be compared to those in the 
CBT-I alone arm whose provider in dicated preference for that medication prior to randomization.  
 3C: Compare the effects of prescribed zolpidem versus  trazodone  on adverse events , within the 
medication and combination treatment arms of the study.  
 
Specific  Aim 4: To conduct  an exploratory  analysis  that  will assess  the potential  for heterogeneity  of 
treatment  effects  with  medication preference,  CBT‐I,  and combination  treatment.  We will assess  
whether  treatment  response  varies  by degree of rurality,  as well as  sociodemographic  (age,  sex, race,  
socio‐economic  status),  health‐related  (insurance,  comorbidities)  and sleep‐related  factors  (short  sleep,  
insomnia  treatment  preferences).  
 
COZI  will address  important  knowledge  gaps  related  to the treatment  of a highly  prevalent  chronic  
condition  with  significant  impact  on PCOs.  Our findings  will lead  to answers  for patients,  providers  and 
other  stakeholders  addressing  insomnia,  improved  health  and function  for millions  of Americans,  and 
sustainable  changes  in how  insomnia  is treated.  
COZI  will address  important  knowledge  gaps  related  to the treatment  of a highly  prevalent  chronic  
condition  with  significant  impact  on PCOs.  Our findings  will lead  to answers  for patients,  providers  and 
other  stakeholders  addressing  insomnia,  improved  health  and function  for millions  of Americans,  and 
sustainable  changes  in how  insomnia  is treated.  
 
STUDY DESIGN  
COZI  is a 3‐arm,  randomized  comparative  effectiveness  study.  Masking  is not possible  given  two very  
different  treatment  types.  1200  participants  (400  per arm)  will be randomized  to 1) medication ( zolpidem  
or trazodone) ; 2) SHUT);  or 3) combination  treatment  (medication  +CBT-I). Sleep  and other  PCOs,  will be 
assessed  via Internet  questionnaires  at post  treatment  (9 weeks),  6 and 12 months.  Self‐reported  
medication  use and adverse  events  will be assessed  at all scheduled  follow‐ups  as well as at  some 
additional time points  (See assessment grid ). 
 
 
 
METHODOLOGY  
 
Study Population and Recruitment  
 
Recruitment  will occur  in primary  care practices  in 8 large  healthcare  systems,  each  of which  has 
significant  coverage  of patients  in rural  locations.  The sites represent a diverse sample based on 
geography,  socioeconomic  status  and race/  ethnicity. Study  eligibility  criteria  were  designed  to be 
inclusive,  to maximize  the generalizability  of study  findings, and to ensure patient safety (see 
inclusion/exclusion criteria).  
 
The development of recruitment methods involves collaboration between the RRC, hub research sites, 
and practices, and will be responsive to ongoing experience. Recruitment  efforts  will be aided by 
educational programs for physicians and clinic staff prior to study start -up, and by the development of 
branded recruitment materials in clinics (e.g., cards, brochures, posters). To facilitate a productive 
working relationship between the  sites and practices around recruitment, we will engage in regular 
communication with the use of newsletters, relevant insomnia literature, and CME programs.   
 
We will  enroll patients with CID according to International  Classification of Sleep Disorders (ICSD -3) 
terminology, or Insomnia Disorder in Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM -5) terminology. We will 
confirm “caseness” using the Insomnia Severity Index (ISI) a nd a CID diagnostic checklist, administered 
during online screening.  An ISI threshold of >10  has the optimal sensitivity and specificity for identifying 
insomnia “cases” in the general population (86.1% sensitivity and 87.7% specificity and thus constitut es 
our inclusion criteria.  
 
To protect the safety of potential patients in COZI,  Primary Care Providers ( PCPs ) who have a potentially 
eligible patient with CID will review the medical history and medication list to determine whether there 
are any obvious c ontributors that require further treatment or would increase risk of participation. Such 
conditions include depression and anxiety, and other sleep disorders, particularly sleep apnea and 
restless legs syndrome (RLS). We will also use the STOP -BANG questio nnaire to assess risk of obstructive 
sleep apnea during the baseline visit, and return results to PCPs and patients. Specifically, we will 
identify whether patients are in the “green (0 -2 points ),” “yellow  (3-4 points) ,” or “red  (5-8 points) ” 
zones  for STOP -BANG scores, and provide appropriate recommendations for evaluation and treatment 
to PCPs for each level. We will not exclude any potential participant solely on the basis of STOP -BANG 
scores. When neck circumference (the “N” in STOP -BANG) are un available for participants, we will use 
modified (STOP -BA[N]G)scores.  We will exclude patients who are older than 80 years, in order to 
minimize incidents of adverse cognitive events and falls. PCPs may order appropriate tests, such as 
home or laboratory s leep apnea testing, and change or add treatments for comorbid conditions.  When 
patients present with clinically significant symptoms of other comorbid conditions (e.g., depression, 
anxiety, sleep apnea ) the research team will provide results to the PCP so that they may  plan for  
appropriate follow -up. 
   
The RRC will assist in the implantation of ongoing participant retention strategies (see Table 1.).  
Table  1. Participant  Retention  Strategies  
Strategy  Details  
Minimize  
participant burden  The online  platform  centralizes  all interactions  with COZI  into a single  point  of contact and includes 
mobile  notifications  and individualized  task lists to facilitate participant reporting  
Provide  desired  
benefits  For patients  who  join the trial  in hopes  of receiving CBT‐I  but are randomized  into the  medication   
only arm,  we will  offer  a year  of free CBT‐I starting  after  the 12‐month  data  collection  period  
 
COZI will employ a variety of options for recruitment. This flexibility will allow clinics to use methods that 
fit best into their current workflow while minimizing burden for both clinic staff/physicians and patients.  
These methods include (but are not necessarily  limited to) : 
 
• EHR searches to identify potential study pa tients, followed by an invitation letter from the 
patient’s PCP  
• Self-referral by the patient via their PCP  (e.g., in response to posters or brochures)  
• Identification of potentially eligible patients  by the PCP  at the time of visit  
• Review of medical records for scheduled patients to identify potential participants  
 
After identifying a potentially eligible patient , the PCP will provide the patient  with instructions for 
contacting the local hub research team  by telephone or e -mail . In some instances, PCPs may also refer 
assenting patients to COZI hub research staff verbally or electronically (telephone or secure email) . If the 
referral includes an e mail address, hub research staff will send participants an introductory email 
directing them to the study website for additional information and online screening. Alternatively, study 
staff may contact participants by telephone to complete initial screenin g. 
 
Finally, at hub sites with the capacity to do so, we will program alerts in the EHR, designed to trigger for 
patients who meet inclusion/exclusion criteria. Upon obtaining the patients' initial assent, physicians will 
refer eligible patients to the stu dy by making the appropriate selection  in the EHR . PCPs may also refer 
appropriate patients who do not trigger an alert (e.g., a patient with new -onset insomnia) by placing a 
consult, order, or message to COZI in the EHR .  In either scenario, the patient's  information will be 
electronically transmitted to the study team for further assessment.      
 
Regardless of the referral route, potentially eligible patients will meet the inclusion/exclusion criteria 
listed below.  
 
Screening Procedures  
 
Initial screening in conducted to ensure that every participant meets the following Inclusion/Exclusion 
criteria:  
 
Inclusion Criteria:  
• Age 18 -80 
• Meets DSM -5/ICSD -3 criteria for chronic insomnia disorder  
• Insomnia Severity Index score > 10  
• Regular internet  and computer access  
• Non -metropolitan/rural residence  (Rurality Score > 3) 
 Build in  self‐ 
learning  COZI  will support  provide feedback to participants and PCPs on selected research assessments (ones 
that do not threaten the validity of testing study aims).  Participants will also be a key audience  for 
dissemination  of study findings.  
Build pride  in 
joining  Study  participants  often  express pride  in joining  in an important national  study that  will potentially  
help  others. Regular  newsletters  and study  updates  will be delivered  through  the RICE  app.  
Express  
appreciation  Participants  feel bonded  to a study  if they  sense  appreciation and a relationship. We will  nurture  
relationships  with  texts  and email  follow‐up  reminders;  ‘thank  yous’  for data  surveys;  and quarterly  
newsletters . 
Exclusion Criteria:  
• Use of prescription hypnotic medication >2 times in the past week. Patients currently taking OTC 
medications (e.g., diphenhydramine, doxylamine) and naturopathic sleep aids (melatonin, 
valerian, chamomile, etc.) are permitted, at the discretion of the pres cribing physician.   
• Current cognitive or cognitive behavioral treatment for insomnia.  
• Psychotic disorder  
• Bipolar disorder  
• Current substance use disorder  
• Severe pulmonary disease that raises concerns rega rding respiratory depression with sedative -
hypnotic agents, as judged by the COZI Investigators.  
• Cognitive impairment or dementia  
• History of spontaneous or hypnotic -induced complex sleep behavior  
• Delayed sleep phase disorder (DSPD)  
• Shift work that includes working the night shift (between the hours of 12:00 a.m. - 6:00 a.m.)  
• History of fall resulting in a fracture or other injury, in the past 12 months .  Curr ently pregnant, 
planning to become pregnant, or breastfeeding  
• Other severe or uncontrolled mental or physical disorders that would make participation 
difficult or unsafe  
• Current use of opiate medication  
 
Inclusion /exclusion  criteria will be communicated to PCPs and provided in research recruitment 
materials (cards, flyers, etc.). We will verify inclusion/exclusion criteria during the online or telephone 
screening visit. We will confirm the presence of CID using a diagnostic checklist,  and insomnia severity 
using the Insomnia Severity  Index  (ISI) during screening.  An ISI threshold of >10 has the optimal 
sensitivity and specificity for identifying insomnia “cases” in the general population. Exclusion criteria 
are also addressed in the o nline/phone screen:  hypnotic use; psychotic disorder; bipolar disorder; 
current substance use disorder; COPD or other severe pulmonary disease; cognitive impairment; history 
of complex sleep behavior; history of fracture or injurious fall within past 12 m onths; and current 
pregnancy, planning to become pregnant or breastfeeding.  
Rurality of practices and participants will be determined by the COZI Rurality Score.  The COZI 
Rurality Score was created by reviewing the existing national definitions of rural ity and integrating 
those that do not overlap into a combined score. The COZI Rurality score includes % rural 
population, rural urban commuting area ( RUCA ) and urban influence code ( UIC) scores, Centers for 
Medicaid and Medicare Services ( CMS ), and frontier and remote area  (FAR) scores. (CMS scores in 
turn reflect Census Bureau -defined non -urbanized areas and health professional shortage area  
(HPSA ) or medic ally underserved area/population  MUA/P eligibility.) Utilization of the COZI Rurality 
Score allows for characterization of rurality across a continuum. Scores range from 0 (not at all 
rural) to 40 (highly rural); a score >3 is required for clinic/ patient participation.  
 
The initial screening involves self -report information regarding demographics and general health 
information. Participant assent for screening will be obtained, per a written screening script. Screening 
may be conducted either online or by telephone ; prospective participants may select their preferred 
method. For increased security, the online screening will be done using the  Research Infrastructure 
Containing E -interventions (RICE) system  developed at the University of Virginia under the  leadership of 
Lee Ritterband, PhD, Digital Therapeutics Core Director.  
 
For screenings conducted by telephone, the screener will begin with a brief description of the research 
study, interventions, and assessment procedures. If the patient expresses inter est and gives verbal 
assent, staff will ask screening questions to determine eligibility. Staff will enter patient responses 
directly into the data base via web interface. If the patient is eligible to proceed and expresses interest, 
the screener will sche dule a time for the patient to review the study consent form with the study 
coordinator . In states where required by law  (Pennsylvania) , a physician or licensed nurse practitioner 
will participate in the informed consent process .  
Online web -based screenin g includes the same sequence of events except that the participant reads the 
material and selects their answer(s) Participants will be informed following the online screen if they are 
not eligible to proceed in the study. Eligible participants will be inst ructed to contact study staff to 
schedule their consent call.  Study staff will also monitor online screening completions and will reach out 
to eligible participants to ensure that all eligible participants have the opportunity to schedule the 
consent call . If eligibility is questionable (as determined by decision rules to responses) participants will 
be notified that a staff member will call them to discuss the next step. During this call, clarification will 
be sought to determine eligibility.  
 
Voluntary I nformed Consent  
 
After screening, hub research staff will send eligible participants an email including a study summary , 
consent form,  and the URL for the study website . The website will also include the study summary and 
consent form. Participants will be encouraged to review both documents prior to the consent visit. 
During the consent visit, which will take place via telephone call or videoconference, the patient will  
have the opportunity to ask questions and request clarifications. After a discussion of study procedures, 
risks, benefits, and responsibilities, interested participants will electronically sign the consent form. 
Upon signing the consent, the participant w ill receive a signed, pdf copy of their consent  via e -mail .   
 
After  informed consent has been obtained, the EHR will be used to verify the absence of exclusionary 
factors (i.e. fall risk, etc.).  For those participants whose EHR is  not accessible , hub res earch staff will 
contact the PCP to clarif y any outstanding questions related to safety, eligibility and participation.    
 
Baseline  
 
Participants who are eligible after the initial telephone/online screening and consent visit will complete 
a set of self-report assessments via web interface  (see Table below ). Except as otherwise indicated, the 
same assessments will be used at the 9 -week,  6-month , and 12 -month evaluations. These assessments 
will allow us to address each of the specific aims of the study. We estimate the total time for completion 
of self -report assessments  is 20 -90 minutes  (allowing 2.5 – 8 questions completed per minute) . 
 
Randomization  
 
Following completion of the baseline assessment, eligible patients will be randomized to one of three 
interventions: Medication , Medication  + CBT-I , or CBT-I, in a 1:1:1 ratio.  The randomization will be 
stratified by enrollment hub and medication preference. The DCC will oversee randomization 
procedures.  In brief, the study statistician at the DCC will provide each enrollment hub with a REDCap 
randomization form that will allow t he study coordinator to perform randomization by enrollment hub, 
and stratified by medication preference (using  a protected listing of  random  treatment assignment . 
These  listings will be generated using a Stata program that generates r andomly permuted bloc ks of size 
3 and 6, stratified by enrollment hub  and medication preference . 
 
Intervention  
 
Medication  
 
  Medication will be prescribed by the participant’s primary care provider (PCP) or, in the event that the 
patient does not have a PCP, by a COZI study physician. Following randomization to either of the two 
medication arms (i.e., medication alone or medicat ion + CBT -I), the participant and prescribing provider 
(PCP or COZI physician) will be notified by the study team. The patient’s prescribing provider (PCP or 
COZI physician) will then prescribe zolpidem or trazodone and monitor treatment throughout the one ‐
year follow ‐up period as per usual care in this pragmatic trial .  There is no difference in risk depending on 
whether the PCP or COZI physician prescribes.  Providers will use their discretion in prescribing, guided by 
their patient’s progress and standard clinical guidelines.  For zolpidem, this will include a  starting  dosage  
of 5 mg, with an increase to  10 mg, if needed  and based on response , for patients  <65 years old.  
Trazodone, when prescribed for insomnia, is usually administered in doses of 25 – 100 mg, which is below the 
therapeutic range for depression treatment. In the COZI study, we will recommend a starting dos e of 25 mg, 
with dose adjustments to a maximum of 100 mg at the discretion of the provider based on patient response . A 
standard  order  set will be provided  to physicians,  as well as a  brief  set of written  instructions , with  tips 
for optimal  use of the medication  (e.g.,  when  the medication  should  be taken,  frequency,  dosage,  etc.).  
This information will also be covered in the CME program provided prior to the start of recruitment. 
Frequency  of medication  use will be tracked  as an outcome  over  the one‐year  follow‐up  period,  based  
on self‐report  ascertained  at regularly  scheduled  follow‐ups.  Note  that,  in contrast  to medications  for 
other  health  conditions,  intermittent  use several  times  per week,  rather  than  every  night,  is often  
recommended  for hypnotics  (including  zolpidem)  in order  to reduce  dependence  and tolerance.  
Intermittent  dosing  is efficacious  for zolpidem   and conforms  to actual  patterns  of medication  use. The 
effectiveness of intermittent dosing for trazodone is not well documented.  Therefore,  traditional  measures  of 
“adherence,”  based  on the assumption  of daily  medication  use, are not necessarily  appropriate  for 
medication  in COZI , and might better be termed “pattern of use.”   
COZI Study Assessments  
 
Category  Instrument  Primary/ 
Secondary / 
Descriptive,  
Aim #1 Survey Total 
Score (18 
max)  # Items  Assessment Points  
Screen  Base  1, 9 Mos  9 Wks, 6 Mos, 
12 Mos  
Demographics  Demographics Questionnaire D N/A  14  X   
Degree of Rurality  COZI Rurality Score  D N/A  1 X    
Insomnia  Insomnia Severity Index ( ISI) P1 18 7 X X  X 
Insomnia  DSM -5/ICSD -3 Insomnia Diagnosis  S1 N/A  7 X   X 
Insomnia  Insomnia treatments  D N/A  3  X  X 
Sleep  SASS -Y (retrospective diary analogue)  S1; D4 N/A  16  X  X 
Sleep  Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI)  S1 13 18  X  X 
Sleep  Epworth Sleepiness Scale (ESS)  S1 13 8  X  X 
Sleep apnea  STOP BANG2 D N/A  9  X   
Circadian 
rhythms  Munich Chronotype Questionnaire 
(MCTQ)3 S1, D 10 63  X  X 
Sleep Moderators - 
Mediators  Dysfunctional Beliefs and Attitudes 
about Sleep  S4 12 104  X  X 
Moderators - 
Mediators  Treatment Credibility/ Expectancy  S4 11 5  X   
Moderators - 
Mediators  Client Satisfaction Questionnaire  S4 N/A  8  X  X 
Mental Health: 
Depression  PHQ -8 S2 11 8  X  X 
Mental Health: 
Anxiety  GAD -7 S2 12 7  X  X 
Cognitive Health: 
Cognitive function  PROMIS Cognitive Function 2.0 8a  S2 16 8  X  X 
Health: Fatigue  PROMIS Fatigue SF  S2 8 6  X  X 
Health: Pain  PROMIS Pain Intensity SF 3a  S2 7 3  X  X 
Health: Pain  PROMIS Pain Intensity SF 6a  S2 7 6  X  X 
Health: Nocturia  Nocturia questionnaire  S2 N/A  3  X  X 
Health: General  Medications, tobacco, alcohol, 
caffeine5 D 14 10 
(estimated)   X X X 
Health: General  Medical History Checklist  D 14 25  X   
Health: COVID 
related  COVID questionnaire  D, S4  N/A  10  X  X? 
Health: Quality of 
life Medical Outcome Survey SF -12 S2 10 12  X  X 
Health: Quality of 
life PROMIS Global health  S2 10 10  X  X 
Adverse effects  Insomnia Treatment Side Effects  S3 15 3   X X 
Adverse effects  Falls  S3 10 10  X X X 
Process measures  Exit interview if withdrawn  D 15  1   X X 
Global severity  Patient Global Impressions Severity  S1 13 1  X  X 
Global 
improvement  Patient Global Impressions 
Improvement  S1 13 1    X 
Total questions 
per assessment     228  7 223  24 175  
Completion time, 
minutes6     1-3 27-87 3-8 22-70 
Primary 
Outcomes     106      
Secondary 
Outcomes     78     
Sample 
descriptives     44     
Primary + 
Descriptive     150   146   122  
Completion time, 
minutes6      19-59  16-50 
1P = Primary Outcome. S = Secondary Outcome. D = Sample descriptive  and/or HTE factor . Numbers indicate Specific Aim #.  
2May need to exclude N = Neck Circumference  
3SASS -Y and MCTQ instruments contain mostly overlapping questions. 6 = number of questions unique to MCTQ  
4DBAS has short forms with either 10 or 16 items  
5No set number of ite ms; counted as 5 items for TOTAL number of items  
6Estimated time for completion based on 2.5 – 8 questions/minute  
 
 
  
CBT-I (via SHUTi program) I ntervention  
 
SHUTi is a self -guided, automated, interactive, and tailored web -based program modeled on the primary 
componen ts of CBT -I: sleep restriction, stimulus control, cognitive restructuring, sleep hygiene, and 
relapse prevention. Intervention content is metered out over time through 6 “Cores.” Users obtain 
access to a new Core based on a time and event -based schedule (e.g., 7 days after completion of 
previous Core). This schedule is consistent with recommendations from the American Academy of Sleep 
Medicine deemi ng 6 –8 sessions an “adequate treatment exposure.” SHUTi uses online sleep diaries to 
track progress and to tailor treatment (e.g., assign a “sleep restriction” window). Each Core acts as an 
online analog for the weekly sessions of traditional CBT -I, and fo llows the same structure: 1) Core 
objectives (what will be learned and why it is important), 2) Review of previous week’s homework and 
sleep diary data, 3) New intervention material, 4) Assignment of homework (treatment strategies for the 
coming week), and  5) Summary of the Core’s main points. Intervention content is enhanced through 
interactive features including personalized goal -setting, graphical feedback based on participant -specific 
symptoms, animations/ illustrations, quizzes to test user knowledge, patient vignettes, and video -based 
expert explanation. Automated emails encourage program adherence. After completing the post -
assessment battery and sleep diaries, individuals will have continued access to the online program for 1 
year. Data will be colle cted through the 6 cores/diaries only.  
 
CBT-I + Medication  
 
Participants in the combined CBT-I + medication  arm will complete procedures for each of the respective 
arms as described above.  
 
Adverse Events Reporting  
Patients in the medication  conditions will receive printed material describing pharmacotherapy treatment, 
including instructions to discontinue use if serious side effects or other concerns arise.  Adverse  events  will be 
monitored  in two ways : 
• Spontaneous  Reporting : Participants  and PCPs will be encouraged  to report  any side effects  or 
adverse  events  during  the intervention.  The randomization  assignment  e‐mail  will encourage  
participants  to contact  their physician and the study  team  if they  experience  any AEs during  the 
course  of their  intervention. Patients and physicians will be instructed on how to spontaneously 
report adverse events on -line or by telephone, 24 hours per day, 7 days per week, for the 
duration of the study. Serious adverse events will be followed up by telephone contact from the 
site coordinator within 24 hours, including assessments with the instruments describe d in the 
following paragraph. The intervention  section  of the study  website  will also include  instructions  
for reporting  AEs.  
o If a participant spontaneously indicates suicidal ideation during any contact with the 
study team , we will initiate a Suicide Risk Management Protocol (SRMP).  This protocol 
includes procedures adapted from those previously utilized in online treatment studies 
of depression, including the PCORI funded Optimum study.  The SRMP begins with an 
interview o f the participant by the site Project Coordinator, following an online 
structured interview format. The online interview automatically generates a risk rating.  
These ratings are tied to specific recommended actions, ranging from the provision of 
informati on to contacting emergency authorities for a safety check.  Each study site will 
generate a list of local mental health resources for the counties serving each primary 
care practice, in the event that such resources are needed.  
• Questionnaire‐Based  Reportin g: Side effects  will be monitored  with  the Insomnia  Side  Effects  
and Insomnia  Side  Effects/Falls  questionnaires,  administered  at each  assessment  battery.  
Patients will complete adverse effect checklists at 1 month, 9-week, 6 -month, and 12 -month follow -up 
evaluations. The checklist  is adapted for insomnia treatment from the Frequency/Intensity/Burden 
(FIBSER) instrument . Scores >3 on any item will be report ed to patients’ physicians, and will be followed 
up with a telephone evaluation by study staff, at which point the Adverse Events checklist  will be 
completed by the site coordinator to determine severity and assessment of causality. Results of this 
evalua tion will be reported to the patient’s physician, the Study Advisory Committee (SAC) and Data 
Safety Monitoring Board.  
 
 
FOLLOW -UP 
 
Participants in each of the three intervention conditions will complete follow -up assessments at 9 
weeks, 6, and 12 months following the start of the intervention. These assessments will be conducted by 
Internet -based questionnaires.  Refer to the Table above for specific assessments.  
  
In addition to these time points, participants will be asked about falls and other adverse events at 1 
month, 9 weeks , 6 months, 9 months , and 12 months following the start of intervention.  The falls and 
adverse event questionnaires are estimated to take about 1 -3 minutes.  
 
Participants will be contacted by secure e -mail via University of  Virginia’s "Secure" email setting in order 
to prompt them to complete their follow -up assessments.  
 
If we are unable to reach the participant by secure e -mail, we will attempt to contact him/her by 
telephone and/or email to encourage them to complete them . 
 
 
DATA MANAGEMENT AND STUDY COORDINATION  
 
Data Management  and Study Coordination . The Data  Coordinating Center (DCC) at the SFCC  (CPMC ) has 
provided  data  management  and study coordination services  to large -scale multi -center studies  for decades.  
Their  services  typically include  provision of a standard  Research  Data  System  for data  collection,  editing,  
querying  and cleaning  and a study  web  site to facilitate  data  management  and administration.  The DCC 
also distributes and maintains the numbered memo system to archive all study -wide communication . While  the 
COZI  trial will utilize  RICE  (hosted by the University of Virginia) as the data collection platform , the data 
managers and statisticians at the DCC will be responsible for final data c leaning and we will utilize  DCC 
servers  for long‐term  storage  of all data  files and access  to network  services  and SAS statistical  software.  
DCC data managers will access and download data directly from the RICE platform using a secure 
connection. The DCC will oversee the DSMB and will perform the interim and final statistical analyses to 
address the specific aims of the COZI study. Finally, th e DCC will track and manage all study publications 
and ancillary studies and ensure adherence to established publications and ancillary study guidelines.  
 
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS PLAN  
 
1. Outcomes  
 
Definition of Insomnia Severity Index outcomes.  Insomnia  Severity  Index  (ISI): The ISI is a 7‐item  patient -
reported outcome  that is well‐validated  as an insomnia  outcome  measure.  The ISI has acceptable  
internal  consistency  (Cronbach’s  ɑ=.76‐.78);  excellent  face  and content  validity;  correlates  with  sleep  
diaries,  polysomnography,  and interviews;  and has 86.1%  sensitivity  and 87.7%  specificity  for detecting  
insomnia  cases  in the community.  The ISI takes  <5 minutes  to complete,  making  it useful  for clinical  
settings,  and has been  validated  in Spanish.  Scores  range  from  0 to 28, with  the following  interpretations:  
0‐7 (no clinically  significant  insomnia),  8‐14  (subthreshold  insomnia),  15‐21  (clinical  insomnia,  moderate  
severity),  and 22‐28  (clinical  insomnia,  severe).  The primary  endpoint  will be change  in ISI score  from  
baseline  to 12 months.  Secondary  outcomes  will be treatment  response,  using  the established  definition  
of ≥ 6 point  reduction  in ISI score  from  baseline  to follow‐up,  and remission  of insomnia,  defined  as ISI <8 
at follow -up. 
 
Definition of other  patient‐ centered  outcomes . The COZI Assessments T able  summarizes  other  key 
patient -centered outcomes (PCOs)  to be used  in secondary  analyses  (classified as “S2” under variable 
type/aim) . We will assess  the comparative  effectiveness  of therapy  on PCOs  that have  not been  
extensively  studied  in prior  insomnia  studies.  Our outcomes  were  informed  by patient  survey  results .  
 
Safety outcomes.  Safety outcomes, including self -reported falls and other insomnia treatment side effects, are 
indicated in the COZI Assessments Table under the variable type/aim category “S3”.  
 
2. Data Analysis  
 
Assessment of balance between treatment arms . To assess balance of the treatment and control 
samples, we will compare participant characteristics by treatment arm, overall and stratified by 
recruitment hub.  These checks will use linear, logistic, and other generalized linear models as 
appropriate to  the distribution of each of the baseline covariates.  Baseline variables to be considered 
will include  participant age, gender, race, body mass index, education, lifestyle factors, medical history, 
and degree of rurality.    
 
Primary Analysis . Our causal m odel posits that the 3 treatments will have differential effects on 
insomnia severity, measured by ISI, and on other PCOs.  Primary analyses will be conducted by 
treatment assignment, without regard to treatment adherence; sensitivity analyses with multipl e 
imputation of missing outcomes are described below. The primary analysis will estimate between‐group 
differences using linear mixed models (LMMs) for repeated ISI scores at 9 -wks, 6 -mos, and 12 -mos, 
adjusting for baseline score, with normalizing transfor mation as needed. The primary analysis will model 
treatment differences as constant across outcome visits. Within‐site and within‐participant correlation 
will be accounted for using nested random effects. This approach makes efficient use of partial data f or 
participants with incomplete follow‐up data. LMMs will also be used for continuous secondary PCO 
outcomes, after normalization if needed Adverse events will be compared using generalized linear 
mixed models (GLMMs) or exact methods, depending on frequen cy; a negative binomial GLMM will be 
used for falls.  
 
Sensitivity Analyses . Extensive baseline data will be collected on baseline factors known to affect sleep 
quality, which will be reported by treatment assignment. In addition, sensitivity analyses will be 
conducted adjusting for any imbalanced baseline factors that can be shown to affect outcomes. 
Additional sensitivity analyses will check for variation in between‐group differences across the three 
follow‐up visits.  
 
Heterogeneity of Treatm ent Effects . Powerful significant effect modifiers may help identify subgroups in 
which one treatment is clearly preferable or contraindicated. For example, although many patients with 
CID will have had exposure to hypnotic s and other insomnia  medications,  we do anticipate that some 
will be naïve to medication treatment. We can ascertain prior medication treatment by self -report and 
EHR review. We expect nearly all patients will be naïve to structured behavioral treatment. We can 
address prior treatment exp erience in subgroup analyses as part of the broader heterogeneity of 
treatment effect analyses. To assess HTE, we will add interactions between treatment group and the 
hypothesized effect modifier to LMMs for the primary analysis. Within‐subgroup treatment  effects will 
only be reported if the test for effect modification is statistically significant at P<0.05; all pre‐specified 
subgroup analyses will be reported. In exploratory analysis, we will use the Least Absolute Shrinkage and 
Selection Operator (LASSO ) to develop a multivariate model predicting differential treatment response.  
Finally, we will assess between‐site differences in treatment effects.  
 
Treatment Effects among candidates for Zolpidem or Trazodone.  The methods proposed for the primary 
analys es will also be implemented within the two subgroups of participants identified by their provider 
as candidates for zolpidem or trazodone before randomization. This preference will be a stratification 
factor  in the randomization, thereby ensuring balance i n medication preference across all treatment 
arms of the study. Using this strategy, zolpidem/trazodone users in the medication only and combined 
treatment groups can be compared to those in the CBT -I arm with the same medication preference, 
which avoids c onfounding of the primary between -group comparisons.  Likewise, overall between -arm 
comparisons will be unconfounded by this factor for the same reasons. Nevertheless, we will include an 
indicator for trazodone/zolpidem preference in models that test overa ll between -group comparisons, to 
account for the stratification of the randomization.  
 
Head -to-head comparisons of Zolpidem vs Trazodone . We will also compare the associations of zolpidem 
vs trazodone (in the medication alone and combined therapy arms) with study outcomes using LMMs 
and GLMMs as appropriate. For these head -to-head comparisons of zolpidem to trazodone, which will 
be confound ed by indication, we will develop propensity scores using multivariate logistic models with 
provider preference for zolpidem as the outcome, and predictors including factors that we hypothesize 
influence medication preference, informed by the literature an d our own provider surveys. These will 
include patient factors such as age and gender, health status (e.g. frailty) and comorbidities, history of 
substance abuse or concurrent opioid use, and depression. Other factors that drive medication 
preference may o ccur at the provider or practice level. Such factors, e.g., concern that zolpidem is a 
controlled substance, will be considered for inclusion as nested random effects in the propensity score 
model.  We will be careful to accommodate non -linearities and bet ween -factor interactions in 
developing the propensity score model.  Because propensity score model development will be 
conducted without regard to ISI, inflation of type -I error by model selection is not a concern.  In 
addition, we will consider inclusion of nested random effects for center and provider in the logistic 
propensity score model, which has been shown to reduce bias in some circumstances.  Propensity scores 
will then be estimated by the fitted probability of the observed provider choice, based on  the final 
model.  After checking for the overlap of the propensity score distributions between the zolpidem and 
trazodone groups, we will incorporate the propensity scores in outcome models comparing ISI scores  as 
inverse probability weights.   
 
Missing Da ta. Although extensive efforts will be made to maximize retention and minimize missing data, 
some missing data is inevitable. We will record and report reasons for dropout and missing data. The 
proposed LMMs will provide consistent estimates as long as the  data are covariate‐dependent missing 
at random (CD‐MAR), the model includes the covariates justifying CD‐MAR, and both its fixed and 
random components are correctly specified. Using sensitivity analyses, we will multiply impute missing 
outcomes, first und er the standard CD‐ MAR assumption, and then under plausible missing‐not‐at‐
random scenarios —for example, under the hypothesis that   ISI scores are systematically lower than 
expected under CD‐MAR after dropout in the CBT‐I arm. Multiply imputed data will be analyzed using 
standard methods that account for uncertainty due to missingness.  
 
Multiple comparisons . For the primary outcome, ISI scores, hypothesis testing for between‐arm 
treatment   differences will be conducted using the Hochberg procedure, a more powerful alternative to 
Bonferroni correction, to achieve a familywise error rate (FWER) of 5%. The Hochb erg procedure will 
also be used for the additional secondary outcomes. Because power in the HTE analyses will be 
relatively limited, as shown below, a false discovery rate (FDR) of 20% will be targeted. To preserve 
power, no corrections will be made for mu ltiplicity in comparing adverse event rates.  
 
3. Frequency of  Analysis  and Stopping Rules  
A statistical analyst at the DCC will analyze the primary and secondary outcomes after all participants 
have completed the 12 -month follow -up and the final dataset is c leaned and released for analysis. 
Interim reports including  limited analyses will be prepared for presentation to the DSMB  during bi -
annual meetings  over the course of data collection . Interim reports will be derived from the database as 
it exists on pre -specified dates, and full copies of the database at the time of each interim analysis will 
be archived. These  reports will generally include progress in recruitment and participant status, 
descriptives  and safety outcomes  (overall, by  recruitment hu b, and b y masked treatment assignment ). 
All tables shown by masked treatment assignment will be shared with the DSMB during the closed 
session of each meeting.  
 
We will not apply any stopping rules for effectiveness , but may implement stopping rules for safety if 
suggested by the DSMB.  
 
4. Adherence .  
Conceptually, adherence to behavioral and pharmacologic interventions is quite different: We aim for 
patients to follow behavioral recommendations every day, whereas optimal adherence to hypnotic 
medication  (for efficacy and safety) may involve less‐than‐nightly use. Adherence to CBT-I  will be 
measured using automatically collected records of access to the system (e.g., core completions, diaries). 
Adherence to medication  will be assessed using retrospective sel f‐ report of frequency of use. In both 
cases, these data may not reflect true adherence. We will use GLMMs to identify independent baseline 
correlates of adherence within each arm. We will also assess the association of adherence with ISI and 
other PROs wi thin each arm. Because no common, valid adherence measure is available for all 3 
treatment arms, correlates of adherence may differ. We will therefore exercise caution in interpreting 
mediation of treatment assignment by adherence and will not estimate bet ween‐group differences in 
treatment efficacy by adherence.  
 
5. Blinding  
The patient and treating physician will be notified of the treatment assignment following randomization 
and completion of the baseline questionnaire. Blinding of patients , treating physicians and COZI project staff 
who will be interacting with patients or working with data is not possible  given  two very  different  treatment  
types . However, the COZI study principal investigators (Drs. Stone an d Buysse) will be blinded to any  study 
results until after all data collection is complete and a final dataset is ready for analysis.  
 
6. Sample Size and Power  (Minimum Detectable Effects [MDEs])  
Assuming 25% attrition by 12 months, and within‐subject correlations between follow‐up ISI scores of 
0.67 and between baseline and follow‐up scores of 0.4 [L. Ritterband, personal communication], 400 
patients per group will provide 80% power in 2‐sided tests to detect standardized between‐group 
differences of . 20 standard deviations (SDs) in the  primary outcome. These estimates are obtained using 
a conservative type‐I error rate of 0.05/3, as would obtain under the Hochberg procedure if only one of 
the three pairwise null hypotheses can be rejected , and would shrink if > 1 can be rejected . Based on 
results of EHR queries of COZI practices, we expect approximately 25% of COZI patients will be referred by 
practitioners who indicated preference for zolpidem, whereas 75% may favor trazodone. These proportions would 
be expected yield 100 zolpidem users  and 300 trazodone users in the medication alone and combined arms of the 
study, and similar numbers of patients in the CBT -I only arm whose provider indicated preference for zolpidem or 
trazodone, respectively. However, we have calculated power for a wide r possible range of preference proportions 
(50, 75, and 90% trazodone preference; and corresponding proportions of 50, 25 and 10% zolpidem preference). 
MDE estimates for subgroup comparisons (Aims 1B and 1C) across this range of scenarios based on the prim ary 
outcome (change in ISI) are shown in Table 9 .  
 
Table 9. MDEs (SD units) for Subgroup Comparisons involving Trazodone vs Zolpidem  
Trazodone Preference, % (N per group)  50 (200)  75 (300)  90 (360)  
Zolpidem Preference, % (N per group)  50 (200)  25 (100)  10 (40)  
Aim 1B MDEs: Trazodone to CBT -I* 0.28 0.23 0.21 
Aim 1B MDEs: Zolpidem to CBT -I* 0.28 0.40 0.63 
Aim 1C MDEs: Trazodone to Zolpidem**  0.26 0.30 0.43 
*Comparison to CBT -I group in the corresponding medication preference stratum  
**Comparison of prescribed medications within the medication alone arm, or combined therapy arm, after penalization for the 
adjustment for propensity score  
 
MDEs for  overall between‐group  differences  in other  PCOs  will be 0.16 SDs before penalization for multiple 
comparisons, and 0.20 -0.21  SDs,  using  a conservative  type‐I  error  rate of .05/9  (Aim 2A) .  MDEs for Aim 2B 
will range from 0.21 to 0.63 SDs, depending on the proportions in the strata indicating preference for 
trazodone and zolpidem. For head -to-head comparisons of zolpidem 
to trazodone in the medication or combined therapy arms (Aim 2C), 
MDEs will be 0.26 -0.43 SDs, again depending on stratum sizes.  As 
noted above, epidemiologic evidence suggests that use of 
zolpid em and other hypnotics may have negative impacts on 
some PCOs such as cognition, as well as safety outcomes such as 
falls. In contrast, trazodone may have less harmful effects, or 
even beneficial effects for some outcomes such as cognition. 
Finally, f or HTE analyse s (Aim 4) , MDEs for effect  modification  are 
shown  in Table  10.  
 
We will ensure that there is sufficient balance by medication preference (trazodone vs zolpidem) across 
all study arms through stratified randomization. In order to ensure that we will have at least 10% of 
study participants randomized in the zolpidem pref erence stratum, we will specify a priori  time -points 
during the study timeline to assess and report  distribution of medication preference  to our DSMB; we 
will make adjustments to our recruitment plans as needed by extending enrollment or targeting 
practice s that prefer a particular medication.   
 
 
DISSEMINATION OF RESULTS AND PUBLICATION POLICY  Table 10. Minimum De tectable Effect 
Modification (SDs)  
ICC of 
Outcome  Proportion in Subgroup 
(%) 
30 40 50 
0.1 0.32  0.30  0.29  
0.5 0.35  0.33  0.32  
0.7 0.32  0.30  0.29  
0.9 0.21  0.20  0.19  
 
Results will be posted on clinicaltrials.gov.  
 
We will disseminate  our findings  to multiple  stakeholder  constituencies  using  methods  tailored  to each.  
We will work  with  our SAC and PSEC  to develop  strategies  for dissemination  to patient  constituencies . 
Strategies  will include  publications  in print  and electronic  media,  web  content,  and podcasts.  
Dissemination  to patients  will also benefit  from  our partnerships  with  multiple  patient  advocacy  
groups , most  notably  Project  Sleep  and American  Alliance  for Healthy  Sleep.  We have  previously  
partnered  with  these  groups  on a PCORI‐funded  engagement  award  and have  published  with  them.  The 
investigators  have  a strong  history  of dissemination  to scientific  constituencies  via peer‐reviewed  
publications,  conference  presentations,  and invited  talks.  The investigators  serve  as Deputy,  Associate,  
and Editorial  Board  members  on all of the major  sleep‐focused  journal,  as outlined  in investigator  
biosketches.  Similar  strategies  can be used  to disseminate  information  to providers,  health  care  
systems,  payors,  and product  manufacturers.  The investigators  will publish  and present  not only  in 
sleep  specialty  venues,  but also in primary  care  and health  care‐focused  journals  and meetings.  
Publications  and study  reports  will also include  detailed  information  regarding  study  premise,  design,  
implementation,  measures,  and findings.  These  details  will permit  reviewers,  readers,  and stakeholders  
to assess  the study’s  internal  and external  validity  (IR5).  As leaders  in the field  of sleep  medicine,  the 
study  investigators  are in frequent  contact  with  professional  sleep  medicine  organizations  such  as the 
AASM,  SRS, SRN,  and SBSM,  and serve  in multiple  volunteer  roles.  For example,  Drs. Parthasarathy  and 
Buysse  presented  a session  on PCOR  for the trainee  program  at the SLEEP  2018  meeting;  Dr. Buysse  and 
other  investigators  and consultants  have  served  on numerous  AASM  consensus  conference  and 
guideline  panels.  Each  of these  organizations  will disseminate  study  findings  via existing  communication  
tools.  There  is significant  potential  for the study  findings  to be implemented  in clinical  practice  and 
improve  delivery  of care.  We will de‐brief  patients  and clinicians  regarding  their  treatment  experiences  
in COZI,  and use their  feedback  to develop  a treatment  manual  for deploying  zolpidem  and/or  CBT‐I  in 
clinical  practice.  Our patient‐  stakeholder  panel  includes  payors,  purchasers,  product  manufacturers,  
and policymakers.  Our professional  sleep  medicine  organization  partners  advocate  for legislation  and 
regulations  that promote  patient  access  to high  quality  sleep  care  which  end‐users  and decision‐makers  
will use to make  policy  and treatment  decisions.  
 
We will adhere  with  all policies  pertaining  to PCORI‐funded  research  in order  to make  the results  
available  to study  participants.  We will make  results  available  to study  participants  through  multiple  
mechanisms:  (A) Our co‐investigator  and stakeholder,  Ms. Flygare  of Project  Sleep,  will encourage  
enrollment  of study  participants  in Project  Sleep  social  media  accounts  in Twitter  and Facebook.  Upon  
study  completion,  we will post  study  results  on these  outlets  and disseminate  the study  findings  to the 
participants  and wider  membership  of Project  Sleep.  (B) Study  participants  will have  the opportunity  to 
meet  with  study  staff  face‐to‐face  for a debriefing  at the end of their  participation  of their  individual  
results  that can be shared  without  compromising  the integrity  of the study.  (C) We will populate  a study  
website  with  peer‐reviewed  manuscripts  from  the study.  Lay narratives  and abstracts  will also be posted  
on this website.  
 
 
DURATION OF THE PROJECT  
 
COZI will be 4 -years in duration.  This includes start -up preparations, 2 years of recruitment, follow -up 
assessments and study close -out.  
COZI Study Abbreviations  
 
BzRA   Benzodiazepine receptor agonists  
CBSA   Core Based statistical area  
CBT-I  Cognitive behavioral treatment of insomnia  
CCC  Clinical Coordinating Center  
CD-MAR  Covariate‐dependent missing at random  
CID  Chronic insomnia disorder  
COZI   Comparative Effectiveness of Zolpidem and Cognitive Behavioral Therapy for Insomnia  
in Rural Adults  
 
CMS   Centers for Medicaid and Medicare Services  
CPMC   California Pacific Medical Center  
DCC  Data Coordinating Center  
DSMB   Data Safety Monitoring Board  
EC  Executive Committee  
EHR  Electronic health record  
FAR  Frontier and remote area  
FDR  False discovery rate  
FWER   Familywise error rate    
GLMM   Generalized linear mixed model  
HAC   Hub Advisory Committee  
HPSA   Health professional shortage area  
HTE  Heterogeneity of treatment effect  
LMM  Linear mixed model  
MSA   Metropolitan statistical area  
MUA   Medically underserved area  
MUAP   Medically underserved area and population  
MUP   Medically underserved population  
OMB   Office of Management and Budget  
PCO   Patient centered outcome  
PCP  Primary care practitioner (prescribing provider)  
PCORI   Patient -Centered Outcomes Research Institute  
PI  Principal Investigator  
PSEC   Patient Stakeholder Engagement Core  
RRC  Recruitment and Retention Center  
RUCA   Rural urban commuting area  
RUCC   Rural urban continuum code  
SAC  Study Advisory Committee  
SC  Steering Committee  
SD  Standard deviation  
SHUTi   Sleep Healthy Using the Internet  
UCSF   University of California, San Francisco  
UIC  Urban influence code  
UPMC   University of Pittsburgh Medical Center  
 
 