      Feasibility and Preliminary Effects of using a Music-based, Rhythm-modulating Wearable Sensor System in the Community in Persons With Parkinson Disease  Study Protocol  Study ID: [REMOVED]  Date of Document: April 29, 2023  
1 
Version:  November, 2017   
 
 
BU Charles River IRB  
Application Form (Full Board and Expedited Review)  
 
SECTION A:  PROTOCOL AND CONTACT INFORMATION  
Protocol Number  (To be 
assigned by IRB Office) :  
Protocol Title:    Feasibility and preliminary effects of using  a music -based, 
rhythm -modulating wearable sensor system  in the community  in 
persons with Parkinson disease  
Principal Investigator  
(Name, degrees, licenses, 
etc.): 
☐ Mr. 
☐ Ms. Terry Ellis  PhD, PT  
             Department /School : Department of Physical Therapy & Athletic Training; College of 
Health & Rehabilitation Sciences: Sargent College  
BU Mailing Address:  635 Commonwealth Ave, Boston, MA 02215  
             Email:  tellis@bu.edu  
             Telephone:  617-353-7571  
Additional Contact Person:  Jenna Zajac  PT, DPT,  Research Physical Therapist  
              Email:  zajacj@bu.edu  
              Telephone:  617-419-0704  
☒ YES  
(REQUIRED)  I confirm that I qualify to serve as the Principal Investigator of this study 
and am in compliance with the following policies:  
• http://www.bu.edu/researchsupport/compliance/human -subjects/   
 
SECTION B:  FUNDING  
 
Provide information regarding ALL  funding sources in this section.  This includes ANY  
EXISTING FUNDING, PENDING FUN DING, OR FUNDING THA T HAS BEEN 
APPLIED FOR TO SUPPO RT THIS RESEARCH .   
Please check  all that apply : 
 ☒ This research is funded  
 
Have you received Just In Time (JIT) Notification?   ☐ Yes           ☐ No 
 
☐ Funding has been requested  
Have you received Just In Time (JIT) Notification?   ☐ Yes           ☒ No IRB Office use only  
Date submitted________  
 
FB_____   Exp. ____  
 
2 
Version:  November, 2017   
NOTE:  Once the funding has been awarded, submit an amendment to t he IRB 
to add the funding source  
☐ Research is not funded  
 
If the research is funded or funding has been requested,  it is REQUIRED that you  
complete the box below.  The Sponsor Award # must be included in the box below.  If you 
don’t have an award #, please state that in the box below.  If you have multiple funding 
sources, add additional box es as necessary.  
 
Sponsor Name   MedRhythms , Inc.  
Title of 
Grant/Proposal   Feasibility and preliminary effects of using  a music -based, 
rhythm -modulating wearable sensor system in the community  
in persons with Parkinson disease  
Sponsor Award # 
(REQUIRED) * 
*If Award # is 
pending, put 
pending.  Once 
the funding has 
been awarded, 
submit an 
amendment to 
the IRB to add 
the funding 
source   Pending  
   
YES  NO   
☒ ☐  Is Boston University the Prime Awardee of the grant?  
☐ ☒  Is Boston University receiving  a sub -award?  
Name of Prime Recipient:  
 
*NOTE:  Provide a copy of the grant a pplication, funding proposal, scope of work , or sub -award 
agreement .  The University is required to verify that all funding proposals and grants have been 
reviewed by the IRB before funds are awarded.  
 
If this research study is for your dissertation, provide a copy of your prospectus (if available).  
 
 
 
 
3 
Version:  November, 2017  SECTION C:  CONFLICT OF INTEREST  
☒ YES  
(REQUIRED)  I confirm that  ALL  those responsible for the design, conduct, or reporting  
of the proposed program, including at minimum, all Senior/key personnel 
in the grant application, have completed the financial interest disclosure 
forms , submitted them to the COI office, and completed  training as 
dictated at:  http://www.bu.edu/researchsupport/compliance/conflicts -of-
interest/ ,  and as provided  under  the Boston University Investigator 
Conflicts of Interest Policy for Research .     
 
NOTE:  You must attach a copy of the PI’s COI submission 
confirmation email.  COI submission confirmation emails for all 
other study staff should be maintained at the research site.     
Of the financial interest disclosure forms submitted,  did you check “yes” to any of the 
questions on either the FIND1 or NONFIND1 form?  
      ☐ Yes*           ☒  No 
 
 
 
*If  you checked  “yes” to any of the questions on either the FIND1 or NONFIND1 form,  the 
IRB Director will contact the COI office to obtain the disclosure information . 
 
SECTION D:  TYPE OF REVIEW  
 
For Guidance regarding Type of Review please refer to the following website: 
http://www.bu.edu/researchsupport/compliance/human -subjects/submitting -an-irb-protocol/   
 
I. FULL BOARD  ☒  
Please refer to the IRB website for Full Board submission deadlines and meeting dates:  
http://www.bu.edu/researchsupport/compliance/human -subjects/dates -and-timing -of-the-irb-
committee/   
II. EXPEDITED   ☐  
In order to qualify for e xpedited review, the study must be no more than minimal risk * AND  
must fall into one of the categories below.  Check all that apply:  
 
1. ☐ Clinical studies of drugs and med ical device s only when  an investigational new drug 
application (IND)  or  investigational device exemption application (IDE) is not required  
 
2. ☐ Collection of blood samples by finger stick, heel stick, ear stick, or venipuncture as 
follows:  
a. From healthy, nonpregnant adults who weigh at least 110 pounds. For these 
subjects, the  amounts drawn may not exceed 550 ml in an 8 week period and 
collection may not occur more frequently than 2 times per week; or  
4 
Version:  November, 2017  b. From other adults and children, considering the age, weight, and health of the 
subjects, the collection procedure, the amount of  blood to be collected, and the 
frequency with which it will be collected. For these subjects, the amount drawn 
may not exceed the lesser of 50 ml or 3 ml per kg in an 8 week period and 
collection may not occur more frequently than 2 times per week.  
 
3. ☐ Prospective collection of biological specimens for research purposes by noninvasive 
means.   Examples include hair and nail clippings, saliva or cheek swabs, sweat, etc.  
 
4. ☐  Collection  of data through noninvasive procedures (not involving general anesthe sia 
or sedation) routinely employed in clinical practice, excluding procedures involving x -
rays or microwaves. Where medical devices are employed, they must be 
cleared/approved for marketing.  
 
Examples:  
1. Physical sensors that are applied either to the sur face of the body or at a distance 
and do not involve input of significant amounts of energy into the subject or an 
invasion of the subject’s privacy  
2. Weighing or testing sensory acuity  
3. Magnetic resonance imaging  
4. Electrocardiography, electroencephalograph y, thermography, detection of 
naturally occurring radioactivity, electroretinography, ultrasound, diagnostic 
infrared imaging, doppler blood flow, and echocardiography  
5. Moderate exercise, muscular strength testing, body composition assessment, and 
flexibil ity testing where appropriate given the age, weight, and health of the 
individual  
 
5. ☐ Research involving materials (data, documents, records, or specimens) that have been 
collected, or will be collected solely for nonresearch purposes (such as medical tre atment 
or diagnosis)  
 
6. ☐  Collection of data from voice, video, digital, or image recordings made for research 
purposes.  
 
7. ☐ Research on individual or group characteristics or behavior (including, but not limited 
to, research on perception, cognition, motivation, identity, language, communication, 
cultural beliefs or practices, and social behavior) or research employing survey, 
interview, oral history, focus group, program evaluation, human factors evaluation, or 
quality assurance methodologies.  
 
Note:  The IRB will make the final determination on the Type of Review  
*Minimal risk  means  that the probability and magnitude of harm or discomfort anticipated in 
the research are not greater in and of themselves than those ordinarily encountered in daily life or 
during the performance of routine physical or psychological examinations or tests.  
5 
Version:  November, 2017  SECTION E:  STUDY STAFF AND HUMAN SUBJECTS TRAINING  
 
List ALL  current members of the research team in the table below.  Add more rows as 
necessary.  
STUDENT RESEARCH :   
The Faculty Advisor must be listed as a co -investigator in this section  and must complete 
the Human Subjects training requirements.   Faculty Advisors are responsible for reviewing  
the IRB application, agree ing to serve as the Co -PI for th is study with the student and are  
responsible for the ethical conduct of this student’s human subjects research.  Faculty 
Advisors must sign this App lication prior to it being submitted to the IRB.  
 
BU CHARLES RIVER CAMPUS  (CRC)  INVESTIGATORS/STUDY STAFF  
Note: Boston University Medical Campus (BUMC) investigators/study staff should be listed in 
the NON -BU INVESTIGATOR/STUDY STAFF section  
Name, Degree, & 
Department/ School  Study Role (e.g. co -
investigator, research 
coordinator, research 
assistant, project 
manager, lab 
manager)  Human Subjects Training * 
Terry Ellis,  PhD, PT  
Department of Physical Therapy and 
Athletic Training, College of Health 
& Rehabilitation Science: Sargent 
College, Boston University  Principal Investigator  ☒ CITI  
☐ Other**: HIPAA training completed 
09-02-2015 
Most Recent Date Completed:  
07-19-2019  
Louis Awad, PT, DPT, PhD  
Department of Physical Therapy and 
Athletic Training, College of Health 
& Rehabilitation Science: Sargent 
College, Boston University  Co-Investigator  ☒ CITI  
Most Recent Date Completed:  
01-02-2017 
Lillian  Ribeirinha -Braga     
Neur omotor Recovery Laboratory     Research Assistant    ☒ CITI    
Most Recent Date Completed:  
07-08-2019   
Jenna Zajac , PT, DPT  
Center for Neurorehabilitation  
Boston University  
  Research  Physical 
Therapist    
 ☒ CITI   
☐ Other**:   
Most Recent Date Completed:    
07-26-2019  
Steven Zachariadis  
Student, Boston University  Research Assistant  ☒ CITI   
☐ Other**:   
Most Recent Date Completed:    
08-07-2020  
6 
Version:  November, 2017  Aaron Gu  
DPT Student, Boston University  Research Assistant  ☒ CITI   
☐ Other**:   
Most Recent Date Completed:    
08-07-2020  
 
*For more information regarding the Human Subjects Training Policy, refer to the ‘Training’ 
section of the Policies & Guidance section IRB website: 
http://www.bu.edu/researchsupport/training -how-to/human -subjects -training/ .   This site  includes 
a Study Personnel Training List.  You can search this list by name to obtain the completion and 
expiration dates of training for investigators and study staff.  
**If the investigator/study staff did not complete CITI, you must submit a copy o f his/her 
training certificate.  
NON -BU INVESTIGATORS/STUDY STAFF*     ☒ N/A 
Note:  BUMC and BMC staff are considered to be non -BU staff and should be listed in this 
section.     Add more rows as necessary.   All the columns in the box below must be 
completed.  In addition, you must complete the box that follows with a description of the 
activities for each staff member.    
 
Name, Degree, & Affiliate  
Institution  Study Role  Staff Information  Will IRB Approval be Obtained 
from Affiliate?  
  1. Will this staff 
interact with subjects?  
☐ Yes          ☐ No 
 
2.Will this staff have 
access to identifiable 
information?  
☐ Yes          ☐ No 
 
3.Is the work that the 
staff will complete 
related to his/her role 
or coursework at 
his/her affiliate 
institution.?  
☐ Yes          ☐ No 
 ☐ Yes:  Provide copy of IRB 
approval letter when available:  
☐ No (provide reason):  ______  
7 
Version:  November, 2017    1. Will this staff 
interact with subjects?  
☐ Yes          ☐ No 
 
2.Will this staff have 
access to identifiable 
information?  
☐ Yes          ☐ No 
 
3.Is the work that the 
staff will complete 
related to his/her role 
or coursework at 
his/her affiliate 
institution.?  
☐ Yes          ☐ No 
 ☐ Yes:  Prov ide copy of IRB 
approval letter when available:  
☐ No (provide reason) :  ______  
 
*If IRB approval will be obtained from the affiliate site, only list the lead investigator from the 
affiliate on this form.  
The box below must be completed.  Include a summary for each staff listed in the above 
box.  If any of the investigators listed on this form are not affiliated with BU, provide a summary 
of the study activities  that he/she will conduct.  If IRB approval is not being obtained at the 
affiliate institution, provide an explanation.   NOTE:  Non -BU staff may be required to 
complete an Individual Investigator Agreement (IIA).  The IRB will notify you if this form 
is required.  
  
8 
Version:  November, 2017  REQUIRE D GOOD CLINICAL PRACTICE TRAINING FOR NIH -
FUNDED CLINICAL TRIALS  
 
YES * NO NIH -FUNDED  CLINICAL TRIALS  
☐         
☒   Is your study NIH -Funded AND meet the definition of a clinical trial as defined 
below:   
Clinical Trial :  A research study in which one or more human subjects are 
prospectively assigned to one or more interventions (which may include 
placebo or other control) to evaluate the effects of those intervention on health -
related bi omedical or behavioral outcomes .  This definition encompasses phase 
1 trials of FDA -regulated drug and biological products, small feasibility studies 
of FDA -regulated device products, and studies of any intervention not regulated 
by the FDA, e.g. behavioral interventions.  
Of note, this require ment for GCP training applies to both biomedical and 
behavioral clinical trials funded by the NIH.  
 On January 1 , 2017, a new policy of the National Institutes of Health ( NIH) 
goes into effect that requires  all NIH -funded investigators and staff who are 
involved in the conduct, oversight, or management of clinical trials to be trained 
in Good Clinical Practice (GCP).  
The policy applies to all active grants and contracts, no  matter what point they 
are in the life cycle of the trial.    
Currently, there is a GCP course available in our CITI training program 
(https://www.citiprogram.org/ ).  This current course does have a focus on FDA -
regulated research.  Please note that online social -behavioral GCP courses are 
unde r development and we expect to have a social -behavioral focused GCP 
course available in the near future.   
If this study meets the definition, all staff must complete GCP training.  
For more information on this policy please refer to:  
• NIH definition of a Cl inical Trial: 
http://osp.od.nih.gov/sites/default/files/NIH%20Definition%20of%20Cli
nical%20Trial%2010 -23-2014 -UPDATED_0.pdf  
• Policy  on Good Clinical Practice Training for NIH Awardees Involved 
in NIH -funded Clinical Trials:  
https://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/notice -files/NOT -OD-16-148.html  
• Frequently Asked Questions:  
http://osp.od.nih.gov/sites/default/files/FAQs_on_NIH_GCP_Policy.pdf  
9 
Version:  November, 2017  SECTION F :  LOCATION OF THE RESEARCH  
 
YES * NO  
☐ ☒ Will this research take place at sites/locations other than Boston University?  
Note:  If the resea rch will take place at Boston University, state the location 
(Center for Neurorehabilitation, Sargent College (6th floor, room 610) ): 
 
*If YES , please complete the box es below  
 
NOTE:  You are responsible for obtaining permission/letters of support for research conducted 
off-site.  This may include locations such as schools, workplaces, community organizations, etc.  
You must submit the letters/documenta tion of support with this application . 
 
Institution Name and 
Address  (if known)  Describe Involvement 
(recruiting, consenting, data 
analysis, etc.) of the site .  If the 
site or the site staff is not 
involved (engaged)1 in research 
procedures, state NONE.  IRB/Ethics Approva l/Site 
Permissi on Attached?  If 
no2, explain the plan to 
obtain this approval .  If the 
site is not engaged in the 
research, you do not need to 
complete the box.  
   
   
1Guidance on Engagement of Institutions in Human Subjects Research: 
http://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/regulations -and-policy/guidance/guidance -on-engagement -of-
institutions/index.html  
 
 
2If IRB approval will not be  obtained at the site, describe the IRB oversight arrangements  here:  
 
 
 
 
YES * NO  
☐ ☒ 
N/A Is the off -site location requesting that the Boston University IRB review the 
protocol in place of local IRB review?  
*If YES , complete the Single IRB Review Form “Boston University is 
Institution A”: http://www.bu.edu/researchsupport/compliance/human -
subjects/ .  
 
 
 
 
10 
Version:  November, 2017  YES * NO  
☐  ☐ 
N/A Is the BU PI the lead investigator OR is BU the lead site for this research?  
Note:  This box only needs to be completed if the off -site location is 
engaged in the research.  
*If YES , provide the following information  in this box :  
• The plan for collection and management of data from all the sites  
• The plan for reporting and evaluating:  
o Unanticipated problems  
o Serious and/or continuing non -compliance  
o Suspensions and terminations of research  
o Interim results  
o Protocol modifications  
• The name of the Principal Investigator  from each site  
• If IRB approval will be obtained at the site, c onfirm ation  that you have a copy  (or will 
obtain a copy)  of the IRB approval letters and the IRB-approved protocols from each 
site  
• If IRB approval will be obtain ed at the site, con firmation that the site IRB has a federal  
wide assurance (FWA)  
 
YES * NO  
☐ ☒  Will this research be conducted outside of the United States?*  
 
*If YES , complete the International Research Form at 
http://www.bu.edu/researchsupport/compliance/human -subjects/  
 
SECTION G:  STUDY SUMMARY  
 
Summarize the study in lay language (do not copy from the grant/scope of work/proposal, 
etc.).  This summary should include the research design, purpose, objectives, research 
question, hypothesis, and any relevant background information.    
 
Note:  Do not include a list of citations in this section.  Please limit this section to no more 
than 300 w ords.  
Parkinson disease (PD) is a chronic progressive health condition affecting older adults. Of 
particular concern is walking decline, which is a marker of  emerging disability.  Pathophysiologic 
changes in the basal ganglia result in a high expenditure of cognitive resources for once automatic 
movements, such as walking . Auditory cueing has been shown to  compensate for impairments in 
the basal ganglia by harnessing the human capacity for rhythm perception through a mechanism 
called entrainment.  Entrainme nt refers  to the activation of motor -related centers of the brain in 
response to an external rhythmic stimulus. Direct sensorimotor connections between the auditory 
and motor system demonstrate the capacity for the auditory system to drive motor movement 
patterns.  Music -based auditory cueing has demonstrated immediate and potent effects on walking, 
as reflected clinically by improvements in speed, stride length, and step frequency. Improvements 
11 
Version:  November, 2017  observed in the quality and  thus,  quantity , of walking make a m usic-based device  a promising 
rehabilitation adjunct for persons with PD .  
 
Study Objectives:  The purpose of this study is to evaluate the effects of  music , tailored to the 
participant’s cadence , on adherence, quality of life, gait speed , function al mobility , and walking 
activity  in individuals with Parkinson disease when used in the home  and community  
environment.  
 
Primary and Secondary Endpoints : 
Primary Study Endpoints:  
• Observed adherence to therapy schedule (feasibility)  
• Mobility impact as assessed by PDQ -39 mobility dimension  
Secondary Study Endpoints:  
• Change in gait speed at baseline as compared to end of study participation (or earlier if the 
participant withdraws) as determined by the 10MWT  
• Overall quality of life impact as assessed by P DQ-39 
• Improvements in function al mobility  as measured by the Five Times Sit to Stand test  
• Change in amount (steps/day) and intensity (mod erate  intensity minutes; >100 steps/min) 
of walking activity as measured by the StepWatch Activity Monitor (SAM)  
 
 
SECTION H :  RESEARCH METHODS AND ACTIVITIES (Check all that 
apply)  
 
☐  Collection  of audio, video, digital, or image recordings  
☐ Biological samples → Complete Biological Samples  Form : 
http://www.bu.edu/researchsupport/compliance/human -subjects/  
Examples:  blood, hair, cheek swab, urine, tears, saliva, etc.  
☐ Collection of data that may be sensitive and if disclosed could put subjects at risk f or 
legal or social harms.  
Examples:  Illegal behaviors , HIV status, psychiatric illness, information re lated to 
sexual behaviors, etc.  
☐ Coordinating Center/Lead Site  
☐ Deception  
☒  Devices  → Complete Devices Form : 
http://www.bu.edu/researchsupport/compliance/human -subjects/  
 
☐ Drugs → Complete Drugs Form: 
http://www.bu.edu/researchsupport/compliance/human -subjects/  
 
☐ Ethnographic:  
12 
Version:  November, 2017  The study of people in their own environment through the use of methods such as 
participant observation and face -to-face interviewing  
☐ Focus Groups  
☐ Genetics Testing → Complete Genetics Form: 
http://www.bu.edu/researchsupport/compliance/human -subjects/  
☐ MRI  
☐ Placebo  
☐ Pregnancy Testing  
☐  Randomization  
☐ Surveys, interviews, questionnaires  
☐ Secondary Data Analysis  
☒ Other (please describe):  Clinical assessments that occur as part of standard clinical 
practice will be administered (e.g., cognition, walking ). 
 
SECTION I :  SUBJECT POPULATION  
 
Number of Subjects to be Enrolled:  
 
If you have sub -groups or mor e than one arm, please 
separate out these enrollment numbers.  
 
Note:  Please account for subjects who may drop out or 
be withdrawn from the study.  Any subject who signs a 
consent form is considered to be enrolled re gardless of 
whether they complete any study procedures  • Up to 20 individuals with 
Parkinson Disease will be 
included in this protocol  
 
 
Check all categories that apply to your target population:  
 
☒ Adults  
 
☐ Children (< 18 years of age)  
☐ Cognitively -Impaired Adults  
13 
Version:  November, 2017  ☐ Non-English Speaking  
☐ Prisoners  
☐ BU Employees  
☐ BU Students  
☐ Wards of the state  
☐ Other (please describe):  
 
If Categories other than ‘Adult’ are checked, describe the additional safeguards that 
have been put in place to protect that subject population .  For Cognitively -Impaired 
Subjects, provide the rationale for including this population in this research study.  
N/A; Persons with PD with significant cognitive impairment will be excluded from the study. 
Persons with PD with any mild cognitive impairments are capable of providing consent.  
 
Eligibility Criteria  
Inclusion Criteria:  Based on our experience conducting exercise trials in PD, the following 
criteria have been established to ensure participants can safely engage in a home/community 
walking program.  
 
1. Diagnosis of idiopathic, typical Parkinson disease provided by a physician per participant 
report.  
2. Modified Hoehn and Yahr stages 1-3 per physical exam by a licensed physical therapist.  
3. Able to walk independently without physical assistance or an assistive device . 
4. Willing and able to provide informed consent.  
5. Provide HIPAA Authorization to allow communication wi th the primary healthcare 
provider for communication (as needed) during the study period . 
 
Exclusion Criteria:  Exclusion criteria are the specific criteria which would disqualify an 
individual from participating in the study not simply the opposite of the  inclusion criteria.  
 
1. < 18 years of age;  
2. diagnosis of a typical P arkinsonism;  
3. Modified Hoehn & Yahr stages 4 -5; 
4. moderately or significantly disturbing freezing episodes  during daily walking ;  
4.1 moderate freezing episodes = freezing episodes that disrupt continuous walking  
4.2 significant freezing episodes = freezing episodes that prevent continuous walking  
5. cognitive impairment  (i.e., MoCA score <2 4); 
6. unable to walk at a comfortable speed of 0.4 m/s (i.e., 10 -meter walk test (10MWT));  
7. unable to walk independently (i.e., requires physical assistance or assistive device);  
14 
Version:  November, 2017  8. unable to independently use the music -based device following training;  
9. significant hearing impairment  (unable to hear the music on the device ); 
10. currently participating i n physical therapy ; 
11. self-reported cardiac problems that interfere with the ability to safely exercise (e.g., 
congestive heart failure, uncontrolled  cardiac arrhythmias, chest pain ; resting tachycardia 
(>100 beats/min)  or uncontrolled BP (resting systolic BP >1 60 mmHg or diastolic BP 
>100 mmHg))  as measured by the physical therapist;  
12. orthopedic problems in the lower extremities or spine that may limit walking distance 
(e.g., severe arthritis, spinal stenosis, or significan t pain) ; 
13. any other medical conditions that would preclude successful participation, as determined 
by a physical therapist  
 
If participants meet one or more of the exclusion criteria, they will be informed that they are not 
eligible to participate in this s tudy. Participants will not be informed which categories were not 
met (i.e., cognitive impairment), simply that they did not meet the collective criteria.   
 
SECTION J:  RECRUITMENT  
 
Provide a summary of the recruitment process, including who will recruit, when and 
where recruitment will occur, and how subjects will be identified  
 
Note:  Submit any recruitment materials such as advertisements, brochures, flyers, 
letters/e -mails, scripts, etc.   Please submit these materials as separate documents in 
either Word or PDF format.  
Twenty persons with Parkinson disease will be recruited to participate in this study.  
 
At BU, recruitment will occur primarily through the PD and Movement Disorders Center at the 
School of Medicine/Boston Medical Center and the Center for Neurorehabilitation (CNR) 
serving more than 2000 people with PD. Recruitment will occur in the following  ways: 1) 
potential participants from the CNR  patient registr y are contacted by study personnel; 2) 
potential participants are informed of the study by their neurologist or physical therapist and 
provide their contact information to a member of the researc h team  who initiates contact; 3) 
IRB-approved flyers are distributed to PD support groups throughout MA;  4) IRB -approved 
flyers are distributed to physicians and physical therapists in the community; 5) IRB -approved 
recruitment materials are included in th e American Parkinson Disease Information and Referral 
Center newsletter in MA sent out regularly (via US mail or e -mail) to the Parkinson’s 
community (5000 -9500 contacts); 6) study information will be posted on Clinical Trials.gov 
and Fox Trial Finder, online services ; 7) IRB -approved recruitment materials are posted on the 
CNR website; 9) IRB -approved recruitment materials are posted on the APDA’s Facebook 
page , newsletter  and other relevant social media sites  (see Appendix IV: Recruitment Flyer; see 
Appendix V: Recruitment Posting Information ). 
 
SECTION K :  CONSENT AND ASSENT  
 
NOTE:   Please refer to the consent and assent form templates on the IRB website when creating 
your consent/assent documents.  The templates include the required elements of consent and will 
15 
Version:  November, 2017  help to ensure that your consent/assent form meets the requiremen ts of the federal regulations 
and the BU CRC IRB.  The consent templates can be located at:  
http://www.bu.edu/researchsupport/compliance/human -subjects/ . 
 
Note:  STUDENT RESEARCH ERS must: 1) indicate in the consent form/information 
sheet/script that he/she is a student and 2) list the Faculty Advisor as a contact in the 
form/sheet/script.  
 
Provide a summary of the consent process, including who will consent, and when and 
where con sent will occur .  The summary should include, as appropriate, any waiting 
period between informing the prospective part icipant and obtaining consent, that the 
prospective participant or the legally authorized representative has sufficient 
opportunity to consider whether to participate , and steps taken to minimize coercion or 
undue influence . 
 
Note:  Submit copies of all consent forms and scripts .   Please submit these materials as 
separate documents in Word format.  
Potential participants will be screened  via phone to determine initial eligibility for the study (see 
Appendix I : Phone Screen ). This screen will  take approximately ten minutes and will  be 
conducted by one of the trained personnel on the research team . The potential participant will 
be asked questions to ascertain whether they meet the study’s initial inclusion/exclusion criteria. 
If the participant meets the study criteria and remains interested in participating, they will be 
scheduled for an in -person  screening / baseline assessment visit to confirm eligibility  and 
perform baseline clinical outcome measures . Testing will take place at the Center for 
Neurorehabilitation  located at 635 Commonwealth Avenue (6th floor) , Boston, MA 02215 . 
 
At the in -person screening, a trained study personnel (listed in section E) will begin the face -to-
face interview by explaining the study in detail and reviewing the informed consent document  
(see Appendix II: Informed Consent)  with each potential study pa rticipant. The potential 
participant will be informed that participation in the study is entirely voluntary and will have no 
effect on any present or future medical or rehabilitation care. The potential participant will be 
encouraged to ask questions about  the study to ensure complete understanding of all study 
elements. Potential participants will be provided with as much time as they request to review 
the informed consent and ask questions. All questions will be answered thoroughly by the 
trained study pe rsonnel. Only when the study participant has provided full written informed 
consent  will the trained study personnel proceed to the in -person screening and subsequent study 
procedures.   
 
Indicate the consent and/or assent process and document(s) to be used in this study.  Check 
all that apply  
 
Consent:  Adults ( >18 years of age)                                       N/A ☐ 
 
One of the following MUST apply  
☒ Consent Form /Information Sheet  
 
16 
Version:  November, 2017   
☐ Verbal Consent (Script)  
 
Note:  If written consent will not be obtained, complete the ‘Waiver of Written 
Documentation Consent’ box (Box 1) located further down in this section  
☐ Consent will not be obtained  
 
Note:  If consent will not be obtained, complete the ‘Waiver or Alteration of 
Consent’ box (Box 2) l ocated further down in this section  
 
 
 
Assent of Children ( < 18 years of age)                                      N/A ☒ 
 
One of the following MUST apply  
☐ Assent Form OR Parent Consent Form /Information Sheet  (older children may sign the 
parent consent form along with their parents as long as the consent form is written at 
the grade level of the subjects)  
 
 
☐ Verbal Assent (Script)  
☐ Assent will not be obtained  
 
If assent will not be obtained, one of the following conditions must exist:    
 
1. ☐ The capability of some or all of the children is so limited that they cannot 
reasonably be consulted  
 
2. ☐ The children are  too young to provide assent  
 
3. ☐ The i ntervention or procedure involved in the research holds out the prospect of 
direct benefit to the health or well -being of the children and is available only in the 
context of the research   
 
4. ☐ The research meets the same conditions as those for waiver or alteration of 
informed consent in research involving adults, as specified in the regulations at 45 
CFR 46.116(d) *.   (Complete the ‘Waiver or Alteration of Consent ’ box (Box 2) 
located further down in this section)  
 
*45 CFR 46.116(d): 
http://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/humansubjects/guidance/45cfr46.html  
 
 
Guidance on age requirements for obtaining assent:  
17 
Version:  November, 2017  • Parental Permission for minors under 6 years of age  
• Verbal assent f or minors 6 -11 years of age  
• Written assent from minors ages 12 -17 (unless verbal consent is approved for the 
parents/adult subjects  
 
Parental Permission                                                                     N/A ☒ 
 
One of the following MUST apply  
☐ Parental Consent Form  
 
 
☐ Parental Verbal Consent (Script)  
 
Note:  If written consent will not be obtained, complete the ‘Waiver of Written 
Documentation of Consent’ box (Box 1) located further down in this section  
☐ Parental permission will not be obtained  
 
If parental permission will not be obtained, one of the following conditions must 
exist:  
 
1. ☐ The research protocol is designed to study conditions in children or a subj ect 
population for which parental or guardian permission is not a reasonable 
requirement to protect the subjects (for example, neglected or abused children).  
 
2. ☐ The research meets the same conditions as those for waiver or alteration of 
informed consent in research involving adults, as specified in the regulations at 
45 CFR 46.116(d) *.  (Complete the ‘Waiver or Alteration of Consent ’ box 
(Box 2) located further down in this section)  
 
 
*45 CFR 46.116(d): 
http://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/humansubjects/guidance/45cfr46.html  
 
 
Consent:  Cognitively Impaired Adults ( >18 years of age)                  N/A ☒ 
 
Describe the process  for the consent and/or assent process for enrolling cognitively 
impaired adult subjects including how capacity to consent is determined  and if there is 
continual assessment  of capacity  
 
Assent will be obtained from:  
☐ All Subjects  
☐ Some Subjects, specify : 
☐ No Subjects  
 
18 
Version:  November, 2017  ☐ Consent will be obtained from the subject’s Legally Authorized Representative 
(REQUIRED)  
 
CONSENT OF NON -ENGLI SH SPEAKING SUBJECTS                             N/A ☒                              
 
Describe the process  for obtaining consent from non -English speaking subjects .  List the 
individual who will serve as the interpreter  and his/her qualifications.  
 
NOTE:  A copy of the translated consent along with the Attestation Form for Translation 
of Consent must be submit ted.  The Attestation Form can be located at: 
http://www.bu.edu/researchsupport/compliance/human -subjects/ . 
 
 
 
 
BOX 1 —WAIVER OF WRITTEN DOCUMENTATION OF CONSENT  
 
WAIVER OF WRITTEN DO CUMENTATION OF CONSE NT   N/A ☒                         
    
Either Criteria 1 or 2 must be met in order to qualify                   Yes No 
 
 
 
 ☐ Criteria 1  
The research i s NOT FDA Regulated  
 ☐ ☐ 
The only record linking the subject and the research would be the consent 
document  ☐ ☐ 
The principal risk would be potential harm resulting from a breach of 
confidentiality  ☐ ☐ 
Each subject will be asked whether the subject wants documentation linking 
the subject to the research and the subject’s wishes will govern  ☐ ☐ 
A written statement/information sheet will be provided to subjects.  If NO, 
provide rationale for not providing this information  ☐ ☐ 
 
 ☐ Criteria 2  
The research i s NOT FDA Regulated  ☐ ☐ 
The research presents no more than minimal risk of harm to subjects  ☐ ☐ 
The research involves no procedures for which written consent is normally 
required outside of the research context  ☐ ☐ 
A written statement/information sheet will be provided to subjects.  If NO, 
provide rationale for not providing this information  ☐ ☐ 
 
BOX 2 —WAIVE OR ALTERATION OF CONSENT  
 
19 
Version:  November, 2017  WAIVER OR ALTERATION  OF CONSENT                     N/A ☒                              
 
All of the criteria below must be met in order to qualify  Yes No 
 
 
The research is NOT  FDA Regulated  ☐ ☐ 
The research involves no more than minimal risk to the subjects  ☐ ☐ 
The waiver or alteration will not adversely affect the rights and welfare of the 
subjects  
 ☐ ☐ 
The research could not practicably be carried out without the waiver or 
alteration  ☐ ☐ 
Whenever appropriate, the subjects will be provided with additional pertinent 
information after participation.  If NO, provide rationale for  not providing this 
information:  ☐ ☐ 
Provide the justification/rationale for why this study meets the above cri teria for waiving 
or altering consent (REQUIRED):  
 
 
SECTION L :  STUDY PROCEDURES  
 
In the box below provide a detailed description of the study  procedures to be performed  
(preferably in sequential order).  Be sure to specify which procedures are for research 
purposes versus which procedures are part of standard of care , if applicable .    Be sure to 
include the following information:  
 
• Methods of data collection  
• Details reg arding research activities/ procedures/interventions  
• Number, frequency, duration and types of subject contacts (visits, phone calls, 
internet surveys, mailings, etc.)  
• Time required from each subject  
• Use of equipment (eye -tracker, treadmill, sensors, etc.) .  Provide a  brief  description 
of equipment that will be used in the study. * 
  
*Not e:  The IRB may request more information about  the equipment (including equipment 
manuals) and/or request that you submit Appendix C: Device Form.  
 
Submit copies of all surveys, interview questions, assessments, screening scripts, etc. that 
will be used during the conduct of this study .  Please submit these materials as separate 
documents in either Word or PDF format.  
 
Note:  If subjects will have sta ndard of care procedures in addition to research procedures, 
clearly state which procedures are standard of care and which are for research purposes 
only.  
Study Design:  
The proposed study is a pilot investigation in which the study evaluations will take place at the 
Center of Neurorehabilitation (CNR) at Sargent College, Boston University . Twenty persons  with 
20 
Version:  November, 2017  Parkinson disease will be enrolled  to determine the effects of a community walking  program  with 
a music -based device  on adherence, quality of life, walking speed and walking activity.  The 
walking program will be carried out independently by participants in their home/community 
environment . Noninvasive functional assessments  common ly administered in clinical practice 
(described below) will be used to measure the variables of interest.   
 
Study Procedures  
 
Preliminary Phone Screen (approximately 10 minutes):   
A phone screen will be conducted to make a preliminary determination if potential participants  
meet the initial inclusion / exclusion criteria prior to scheduling a  more in -depth,  in-person 
screening assessment . During the phone screen  (see Appendix I : Phone Screen ), potential 
participants will be asked their age (exclude if <18 years  of age ), if they are currently 
participating in physical therapy (exclude if yes), and if a medical doctor diagnosed them with 
Parkinson disease (exclude if no ). Potential p articipants will be asked about their  ability to walk 
independently without physical assistance or an assistive device (exclude if no)  and whether 
they experience freezing episodes during daily walking (exclude if moderately or significantly 
disturbing  – see operational definition under exclusion criteria ). Lastly, a brief medical history  
from the participant will be reviewed to determine the following:   
• Those with a history of cardiac problems that interfere with the ability to safely exercise 
(e.g., congestive heart failure, uncontrolled  cardiac arrhythmias, chest pain ) will be 
excluded.  
• Those with orthopedic conditions in the lower extremities or spine that may limit 
walking distance (e.g., severe arthritis, spinal stenosis, significant pain) will be excluded.  
• Those with a ny other medical conditions  that would preclude successful particip ation, as 
determined by a physical therapist, will be excluded.  
 
Data on the screening form will be entered into REDCap to allow investigators to monitor the 
number of persons screened and pass/failure rate.  
 
Potential p articipants who are deemed eligibl e based on the preliminary phone screen will be 
scheduled for an in -person screening and baseline assessment visit  at Boston University . 
 
In-Person Screening & Baseline Assessment Visit (approximately 2 hours) :  
The in -person screening and baseline assessment visit will take place at the Center for 
Neurorehabilitation at Boston University. All participants will be guided through the informed 
consent process  upon arrival  (see Appendix II : Informed Consent ; see sect ion K) . After 
consenting, participants will be asked to sign a HIPAA Authorization  to Disclose Protected 
Health Information for Research Purposes (see Appendix I II: HIPAA Authorization ). This will 
allow our team to communicate directly with the participant ’s healthcare provider during the 
study if needed .  
 
In-Person Screening : After consenting, potential participants will be screened in -person to 
determine if they meet all study inclusion/exclusion criteria. The elements included  in the 
screening process are part of routine physical therapy evaluation.  
 
21 
Version:  November, 2017  A physical exam will be conducted to assess cognitive status, Parkinson’s symptoms and 
walking capacity .  
• A diagnosis of Parkinson disease  will be confirmed  per participant report .  
• The Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) will be administered by a licensed physical 
therapist (exclude MoCA score <24)  (see Appendix VI: Screening Tools ). The MoCA is 
a rapid screen of cognitive abilities to detect mild cognitive dysfunction. Participants are 
tested on 16 items that cover multiple cognitive domains. The score ranges from 0 -30, 
with higher scores indicating less cognitive impairment.  
• Diseas e severity will be assessed by a licensed physical therapist using  the Modified 
Hoehn & Yahr Scale  (only H&Y 1 -3 will be included)  (see Appendix VI: Screening 
Tools) . The Modified H&Y Scale includes additional criteria to rate Parkinson disease 
symptoms on  a scale from 1 to 5. Higher scores indicate increased disease progression.  
• The 10 -meter walk test (10MWT ) will be administered by a licensed physical therapist 
(comfortable walking speed <0.4 m/s excluded based on the average of 2 trials at 
comfortable wa lking speed ) (see Appendix VI: Screening Tools ). The 10MWT is an 
assessment of gait speed over a short distance (2 meters ramp up, 6 meters walking, 2 
meters ramp down). The aforementioned distances will be pre -measured for accuracy 
and only the middle 6 meters will be timed. Participants will be asked to walk at a 
comfortable pace for 2 trials and a fast pace for 2 trials . The physical therapist 
conducting the test will be guarding the participant as necessary to optimize safety . 
• Walking capacity  will be measured via the six -minute walk test (6MWT ) (see Appendix  
VI: Screening Tools ). The 6MWT assesses how far a person can walk over a 6 -minute 
period. The test will be performed along a pre -measured (30 -meter), level, obstacle -free 
hallway. Particip ants will be instructed to walk as far as possible in 6 -minutes. The 
physical therapist conducting the test will be guarding the participant as necessary to 
optimize safety . Physiological measurements (e.g., heart rate, blood pressure) will be 
taken prior to initiation of the walking test to determine whether the participant is safe to 
participate in the walking program . The participant will be excluded based on the 
following : resting heart rate >100 beats/min; resting systolic BP >160 mmHg, resting 
diastol ic BP >100 mmHg . The same physiological measurements will be taken upon 
completion of the walking test to assess hemodynamic response to exercise.  
• Based on clinical expertise and judgement, the physical therapist conducting the in -
person screening will det ermine if a participant requires additional guarding and/or 
assistance during walking activities  (i.e., occasional hand contact to maintain balance or 
dynamic stability and/or an assistive device) . If guarding is needed, the participant will 
be excluded.  
 
Baseline Assessment: Participants who are deemed eligible through the in -person screen will 
continue on to complete the remainder of the baseline assessment measures, including:  
• Demographic  questionnaire  consisting of age, gender, education level, living s ituation, 
employment, ethnicity, race, and PD -specific questions (see Appendix VII: Outcome 
Measures).  This form will be completed interview -style by the physical therapist.  
• Medication form pertaining to PD and non -PD medications (see Appendix VII: Outcom e 
Measures) . Participants will be asked during the phone screen to bring their medication 
list to this first evaluation visit. The physical therapist will transcribe the medications 
22 
Version:  November, 2017  onto the designated form. Medication lists that contain identifiable infor mation will be 
given back to the participant and not be kept by the research team . 
• Motor & Functional  Measures:  
o Motor symptoms will be assessed using the Movement Disorder Society Unified 
Parkinson Disease Rating Scale (MDS -UPDRS) -III (see Appendix VII: Outcome 
Measures) . The MDS UPDRS is the most widely used clinical rating scale for 
Parkinson disease. Part III is a motor examination (33 scores summed from 18 
questions) conducted by the rater. Total scores can range from 0 to 141, with 
higher scores indi cating worse disease severity.  
o Functional Mobility  will be measured via the Five Times Sit to Stand (5xSTS)  
(see Appendix VII: Outcome Measures ). The 5xSTS objectively assesses the time 
it takes to complete 5 sit -to-stands and is a method to observe movem ent 
strategies or compensations. The test will be performed in a standard chair with 
participants instructed to stand up and sit down 5 times as quickly as possible. 
The physical therapist conducting the test will be guarding the participant as 
necessary t o optimize safety . 
• Self-report/Interview Measures : 
o Section I and II of the M ovement Disorder Society  Unified Parkinson Disease 
Rating Scale ( MDS -UPDRS) will be utilized to assess non -motor and motor 
signs. Section IA  includes 6 items related to non -motor e xperiences such as 
cognition, mood, and motivation which are assessed by the examiner  (see 
Appendix  VII: Outcome Measures ). Section IB  consists of 7 items related to non -
motor aspects of experiences of daily living such as sleep and fatigue which are 
filled out by the participant (with or without the help of a caregiver), but 
independent of the examiner  (see Appendix  VII: Outcome Measures ). Section II 
is a self -administered questionnaire consisting of 13 items related to motor 
aspects of experiences of  daily living  (see Appendix  VII: Outcome Measures ).  
o Health -related quality of life will be measured by the Parkinson’s Disease 
Questionnaire – 39 (PDQ -39)(see Appendix VII: Outcome Measures ). The PDQ -
39 is a self -report questionnaire that assesses quality  of life over the past month 
across 8 different dimensions. Items are scored based on a 5 -point ordinal system 
with lower scores reflecting better quality of life.  
• Walking Activity:  Walking activity will be measured over a 4-day period prior to 
initiating  the intervention  and continuously measured for an additional 4 days upon 
intervention initiation  (total of 8 days of data) . The purpose of this sequence is to be able 
detect changes in walking activity that may occur with initiation of a structured walkin g 
program. For example, once the walking program is initiated, do participants appear to 
increase their walking activity  compared to baseline (before initiating the walking 
program) ? Is the increase in walking activity isolated to during the individual ses sions, or 
is there an overall increase noted throughout the day? Walking activity will be measured 
using the StepWatch 4 Activity Monitor (SAM ; Orthocare Innovations, Mountlake 
Terrace, Washington). The SAM is a self -contained, maintenance -free device that  
combines acceleration, position and timing information to count complete gait cycles 
(strides) of the user; it is the size of a pager, weighs 38g, and will be attached with self -
adhesive straps above the lateral malleolus (where the shin meets the foot) of the 
participants’ less impaired lower extremity. Participants will be instructed to wear the 
23 
Version:  November, 2017  SAM for 8 consecutive days during all waking hours, expect  when bathing, showering, 
or swimming.  The physical therapist will fill out the SAM researcher form to 
appropriately document the SAM calibration process for each participant ( see Appendix 
VII: Outcome Measures). Participants will be given instructions on how to don/doff the 
device and will be provided with a form  to record times the SAM is removed over the 8-
day period  (see Appendix VII: Outcome Measures ). The SAM requires no maintenance 
by the user besides remembering to keep it on. The physical therapist will provide 
strategies to help the participant remember t o put the SAM back on if they do take it off 
at any time (e.g., if the SAM is taken off at night, place it on a nightstand next to the bed 
so it is seen in the morning). Using  the manufacturer’s software, the SAM will be 
calibrated by a physical therapist to each participant’s gait pattern based on height, 
typical walking speed, and leg motion. The validity and reliability of the SAM for 
capturing stride counts has been demonstrated in persons with various neurological 
disorders including PD (Shepard 1999, Coleman 1999, Macko 2002, Salarian  2004, 
Gaines 2005, Manns 2009, Speelman 2011). Collected data will be downloaded to a 
computerized tablet, with which manufacturer’s software will convert stride counts to 
step counts and calculate daily step count value s. No identifiable information is collected 
by the SAM. Participants will return the SAM to study personnel via a pre -labeled, 
addressed envelope to mail following the 8-day monitoring period . Participants will be 
contacted via phone within 24 -48 hours fol lowing th e evaluation session to ensure that 
they are comfortable with the device and to address any questions or concerns.  
 
Training Procedures / Instruction to Participants:  
• Music -Based Device Training: During the 2 hour evaluation visit , a physical therapist 
will train the participant on how to use the music -based device and independently 
conduct the remote walking program . To ensure that the participant is able to hear the 
music, the physical therapist will have the participant put on the headphones  while music 
is played . The participant will then practice donning/doffing, setting up, and using the 
device (i.e., walk for 5 minutes) to demonstrate comprehension  and independent use . A 
team member will provide the participant with the nece ssary equipmen t (i.e., 
smartphone, shoe sensors, headphones, study diary). The physical therapist will discuss 
the space  and location in which the participant plans to conduct the walking program , 
and review space adequacy and safety considerations.  A safe environment will be 
considered to be the following: indoor spaces – level surfaces, obstacle -free, no slippery 
surfaces, no unsecure area rugs; outdoor spaces – avoid  auto or bike traffic, obstructive 
tree roots, divots in the asphalt and concrete.  These environments could include, but are 
not limited to: home, apartment building hallway, neighborhood sidewalks, local track  or 
park, office environments, and community/recreation centers . Ideally the space is at least  
50 feet in length that meet the a bove indoor and outdoor space criteria. This will decrease 
the amount of pivot turns thereby optimizing the amount of continuous walking.   
The purpose  of the music -based device is to help participants entrain to a musical beat to 
improve  the quality of th eir walking. The device monitors a participant’s cadence using 
the sensor placed on the shoe. The music al tempo is matched to the baseline walking 
cadence of the participant. As the quality of a participant’s walking improves and the 
participant accurately  “entrain s” to the tempo of the music, the tempo will adapt and 
increase cadence by 5%. For example, if the participant starts off walking 100 
24 
Version:  November, 2017  steps/minute, once considered entrained, the tempo will increase to 105 steps/minute. 
This increase is very small  and will most likely not be noticed by the participant.  If the 
participant is unable to increase their cadence to match this tempo, the tempo is reduced 
back to baseline. The algorithm used to set the tempo is dynamic and adjusts to the 
cadence of the par ticipant. If a participant feels that they cannot keep up with the faster 
cadence, they can continue walking at their comfortable pace. Participant s will also be  
instructed to stop the intervention if they feel uncomfortable or anxious at any time . 
Followi ng this training, it is expected that participants will be able to independently set -
up (including donning/doffing the device), perform and conclude a walking session 
independently . Participants  will have access to Instructions for Use (IFU) that will deta il 
all procedures required for proper operation of the system. However, participants will be 
encouraged to contact the research team if they have any additional questions, issues or 
concerns. Participants will be excluded from the study if unable to demonstrate how to 
use the device independently as determined by the physical therapist . Please note, 
participants will be provided with a pre -established username and password. No 
personally identi fiable information will be recorded or stored in the device application.  
 
Remote Walking Program  Description  (10 hours total over four weeks + concurrent use of SAM 
device over 4 walking days)  
Overview:  Following enrollment, participants will wear the SAM  for a 4 -day period prior to 
initiating the intervention (to collect baseline walking activity ). After approximately 4 days, 
participants will initiate the walking program while continuing to wear the SAM for the first 4 
days of the walking program . As the sensor for the music -based device is hooked onto the shoe 
and the SAM is worn on the lower leg (just above the ankle), both can be worn simultaneously on 
the same side of the body without interfering with a participant’s walking and/or increasing th e 
risk for trips/falls. Participants will be instructed  to complete five  home -based walking  sessions 
per week ( approximately 30-40 minutes in duration)  for four weeks. Participants will be able to 
carry out  their five (5) sessions a week on any days of the  week according to their needs . 
Participant engagement in the walking program  will be monitored remotely by the study team  at 
the end of each week via a phone call.  This phone call will last approximately 5 -10 minutes 
(depending on whether the participant has questions/concerns and/or any medical/technical 
issues). During the evaluation visit, the research team will ask you at which time each week you 
would like to have this check -in call.  If participants are unable to carry out the walking program 
5-days per week , a study staff  member will discuss the barriers to implementation (by phone) and 
suggest ways to optimize adherence to the program (e.g., setting a schedule). A study staff member 
will also inquire about adverse events during the weekly phone call  and ensure that the participant 
is comfortable with the walking program . 
 
Description of Walking  Session s: Using the music -based device , participants will conduct the 
walking sessions at their self -selected pace in a home/community environment that limits the 
amount of stops and/or pivot turns in order to optimize continuous walking . For the purposes of 
this study, home /community  environment is considered any environment outside a professional 
healthcare facility. This includes but is not limited to the home, apartment building, independent 
living retirement homes, outdoor environments (tracks, parks, sidewalks), office environmen ts 
and community/recreation centers. Participants will be asked to record in a study diary their 
schedule (dates and times) of walking , location, record of any falls they experience  and any 
25 
Version:  November, 2017  comments/issues they experience while using the device  (see Append ix VII: Outcome Measures ). 
The entire session will take approximately 30-40 minutes , including  5-10 minutes to allow for a 
warm -up and cool -down  period . The goal is for 30 minutes of continuous walking with music to 
be completed, however, rest periods are allowed as needed. The participant will be reminded that 
it is ok if they are not able to achieve 30 minutes of walking. Each  individual walking  session 
should be completed in one bout (i.e., should not be split up t hroughout the day). Participants will 
be instructed to terminate any walking session in the event of technical or medical issue s to allow 
for adequate resolution . Participants will be informed of the potential risk of falls that can occur 
as part of the wa lking program  in the community . Determination of a safe environment (as 
described in the Music -Based  Device  Training section  above ) will be discussed with the 
participant to mitigate external risk factors that could lead to a fall. Participants will be instructed 
to reach out to their healthcare provider if experiencing dizziness, chest pain, or other serious 
symptoms and will be asked to notify the study team following the episode . If participants 
experience a fall while using the d evice, they are advised to seek medical attention and record the 
incident in their study diary. In addition, participants will be asked to contact the research team 
following the event to determine whether it is safe for them to continue.  
 
Participants wi ll be contacted by a member of the study team week ly to see if they have any 
questions or concerns with the walking program . However, participants will be encouraged to 
reach out to the research team at any point if they do not feel comfortable using the d evice.  
 
Post-Intervention Assessment Visit (approximately 1 hour):  
The post -intervention assessment visit will be scheduled within  approximately 7 days of 
completion  of the walking program  and take place at the Center for Neurorehabilitation at 
Boston University . This visit will entail the same battery of assessments performed at baseline 
including: 10MWT, 6MWT, MDS -UPDRS I/II/III, 5xSTS, and PDQ -39. In addition, post -
intervention self -report questionnaires will be completed regarding the usability of the music -
based device (Usability Scale), perceptions of change in walking abilities (Global Rating of 
Change Scale), and overall experience with the device (Post -training Questions)(Appendix V II: 
Outcome Measures). The music -based device  and study diary will be returned to study personnel 
at this visit.  The study team then will send back the music -based device to MedRhythms to be 
cleared of the data.  Participants will be given the SAM again to wear for 4-days following the 
post-intervention visit.  Following the 4 -day monitoring period, participants will return the SAM 
to study personnel via mail using a pre -labeled, stamped addressed envelope . Participants who 
withdraw or are withdrawn prior to completing their last walking session may be asked to 
complete closing visit activities, if feasible.  
 
Circumstances under which participants will be withdrawn without their consent:  
• If a change in medical/functional status occurs  that makes a participant ineligible for the 
study , the participant will be withdrawn.  
• If a participant is unable to follow verbal instructions  to ensure their safety during the 
study, he/she may be withdrawn from the study.  
 
26 
Version:  November, 2017  SECTION M :  RISKS  
 
Describe any expected risks to subjects.  Consider physical, psychological, social, political, 
legal, economic, or other risks that are related to the study .   
There are no identifiable social, political, legal, or economic risks associated with the study. There 
are s ome potential physical and psychological risks to participating in this study. The potential 
risks to participants include the following: (a) musculoskeletal injuries and/or cardiopulmonary 
complications, (b) injury or falls during assessments of physical function, (c) falls during the 
walking  program  in the community, (d) fatigue, ( e) loss of confidentiality.  
 
 
 
Describe the plan to minimize risks.  Include in the description the availability of any 
medical or psychological resources .  
The PI and co -investigators have extensive experience with clinical research involving individuals 
with Parkinson disease . Many of the investigators are licensed physical therapists and most study 
personnel and students have training in CPR and first aid. The risks of participating in this trial 
are minimal because the walking program  is conducted at low to moderate intensity, which has 
been found to be sa fe in other studies of people with PD.  In addition, a physical therapist will be 
instructing the parti cipant on the use of the music -based device and be available via phone to 
answer any questions concerning set -up, use, and/or technological difficulties throughout the 
study. Furthermore, as the music -based device is dynamic in nature, the musical tempo will be 
adapted to the participant’s specific needs and walking cadence.  
 
The following procedures will be implemented to minimize risk:  
• Musculoskeletal injuries and cardiopulmonary complications are minimized as persons 
with pre -existing orthopedic and cardiac conditions that may interfere with and/or 
compromise participant safety are excluded from the study. In addition, the musical 
tempo produced by the device is gradually progressed and accommodate s to the 
participant’s walking cadence, tailoring individually to each participant. This allows 
each person to acclimate gradually to the increased cadence thereby reducing the risk 
of musculoskeletal and cardiopulmonary complications.  During the remote wa lking 
program,  vitals  will not be monitored, but  vital signs will be examined during walking 
as part of the screening to ensure appropriate hemodynamic responses to walking.  
Participants will be instructed to reach out to their healthcare provider if they  are 
experiencing any dizziness, chest pain, or other serious symptoms.   
• Falling during in -person assessments is minimized as licensed physical therapists are 
conducting all assessments and are well -trained in safe guarding procedures and 
implementation of  all assessment procedures.  During community walking, falls are 
minimized as the physical therapist provides instruction on safe walking in the 
community (e.g., safe location, level surfaces, proper shoe s). Prior studies that have 
been done in persons with  mild to moderate PD ( Modified Hoehn & Yahr 1 -3) that 
participated in community walking programs found that increased physical activity 
levels did not result in an increase in falls  (Penko et al., 2019; Shen et al., 2015) . If 
participants experience a fall  while using the device, they are advised to seek medical 
attention and record the incident in their study diary. In addition, participants will be 
27 
Version:  November, 2017  asked to contact the research team following the event to determine whether it is safe 
for them to continue.   
• Participants with freezing of gait that moderately or significantly impacts daily walking 
are excluded to minimize the risk of falling.  
• Fatigue will be minimized due to the gradual progression of the musical tempo 
delivered by the device based on each in dividual participant.  This increase is minimal 
(5%) and will most likely not be detected by the participant.  In addition, participants 
walk to a self -selected pace and are allowed to rest during the approximately 30-40 
minute walking session . Participants will be educated o n the potential for the device to 
increase in speed beyond their usual pace . The participant will be instructed to reduce 
their speed or stop the walking session  if they feel uncomfortable or anxious.  
• Loss of confidentiality is unlikely a s data with ID numbers only will be entered, 
password protected, into the REDCap database. All forms completed in -person on 
paper will be de -identified (ID number only) and kept in a locked filing cabinet in a 
locked office. A master list that links partic ipant information with ID number will be 
kept in a password protected file in the REDCap database. Access to the REDCap 
database will be restricted to the PI and selected study staff only.  
 
 
 
 
SECTION N :  BENEFITS  
 
Describe the potential benefits to subjects related to the study.  State if there are no direct 
benefits . 
 
NOTE:  Compensation and/or course credit are not considered benefits.  
This study will provide multiple , structured walking sessions  using a music -based device . This 
walking program will provide participants with an opportunity to practice walking  while 
entraining to the beat of the music.   Participants may or may not experience improvements in the 
quality and quantity of walking as a result of the program.     
 
 
Describe the potentia l benefits to society and/or others related to the study  
 
This project will facilitate the development and clinical translation of targeted interventions that 
can improve the quality and quantity of walking in persons with PD through specific action on 
the impairments most likely to be limiting mobility .  In addition, the study will contribute to  the 
application  of new technology  that extend s the abilities of clinicians.  
 
 
 
 
SECTION O :  COSTS/PAYMENTS  
 
YES * NO  
28 
Version:  November, 2017  ☒ ☐ Are there any costs to subjects as a result of participating in this study?  
*If YES, provide a description of the costs:  Participants will be responsible for 
transportation costs; however, parking costs will be covered by the study.  
☒ ☐ Will subjects be compensated for participating in the study?  Compensation 
may include cash, checks, gift cards, lotteries, course credit, etc.  
*If YES, provide a description of the compensation:  
$50 amazon gift cards will be given to participants at the in -person 
screening/baseline assessment visit and at the post -intervention visit  ($100 
total)   
NOTE:  Payments should be prorated to compensate subjects for time and 
procedures completed  
☐ ☒ Will identifiable information be sent  to Central University departments 
(Accounts Payable, Post Aw ard Financial Operations, etc.) for payment 
purposes ? 
*If YES, this information must  be disclosed in the consent form.  
 
 
SECTION P :  CONFIDENTIALITY OF DATA  
Describe how data will be stored (e.g. paper, electronic database, etc.)  
 
Data Management:  Step Activity Monitor (SAM) data is coded (de -identified) and will be 
downloaded to a BU personal protected computer for data reduction and analysis using the 
manufacturer’s software. Other data from outcome measures will be collected on paper versions 
(coded, de -identified) and entered into REDCap  ®  - a cross -platform, secure and accessible data 
collection application that allo ws for multiple concurrent users to enter data directly into pre -
specified fields. The REDCap database will be housed at Boston U niversity. Our team has 
experience using REDCap in other trials.  
 
Each participant will be provided with a n ID from the research team at Boston University that will 
be used to begin each walking session  with the MedRhythms’ music -based device . The device 
collects walking session data and uploads it to the secured cloud -based drive, with the data 
attached to this ID. A master list of participants connecting them to an ID will be stored on the 
REDCap database housed at Boston University and only select study  personnel will have access. 
The MedRhythms company will not have access to this master list linking ID to participant. The 
data collected by the device are not study outcome data, but are device performance data. From 
this performance data, MedRhythms can  extract secondary outcomes data for the research team at 
Boston University (e.g., entrainment data).  
29 
Version:  November, 2017   
 
Per Boston University (BU) Record Retention Policy, records concerning human subjects must 
be retained for 7 years.  Please refer to the policy at: http://www.bu.edu/policies/finance/record -
retention/ .  As the investigator, you must also adhere to all applicable requirements as defined by 
regulatory agencies (e.g. FDA, etc.) or Sponsor s. 
YES * NO  
☒ ☐ Will you collect identifiable information? (e.g. names, social security 
numbers, addresses, telephone numbers, etc.)  
*If YES, complete the box below  
Describe the coding system * that will be used to protect the information including who 
will have access to the code    
*Coding system:  Coding systems are used to: 1) protect the confidentiality of the 
research data and 2) allow the investigator to link subjects to their responses.    Each 
subject is assigned a unique study ID at the beginning of the study.  A separate document 
(key) should be maintained that links the names of the subjects to the study ID numbers.  
To ensure confidentiality of all data collected, each subject will be  assigned a unique 
alphanumeric code  determined by the PI, Terry Ellis . Only the PI and designated research 
personnel associated with the project will have access to the master -code with the 
corresponding identifiers. The master -code will be housed on a pa ssword protected file within 
the REDCap database, requiring a two -factor authentication to login.  
YES * NO  
☐  ☒  Will you share data with others outside of the study?  
*If YES, complete the box below  
Describe how data will be transferred and how confidentiality will be maintained (e.g. 
identifying information will not be sent outside, etc.)  
 
 
Describe how you will maintain the confidentiality of the data (e.g. locked cabinet, 
password -protected files, encryption, etc.)  
 
Note: Confidentiality refers to the researcher’s agreement wit h the participant about how 
the subject ’s identifiable private information will be handled, managed, and disseminated  
 
For further assistance and/or access to resources regarding information security, please 
refer to  the BU Information Security website: http://www.bu.edu/tech/security/   
 
30 
Version:  November, 2017  Only data that is de -identified will be entered on paper forms. Paper forms will be stored behind 
2 locks. The de -identified data will be entered and stored in the REDCap database housed at 
Boston University. Two -factor authentication is required to login.  A master code will contain a 
link to identifiable information. The master code will be housed in a file within the REDCap 
database with access restricted to essential study staff who will login using a 2 -factor 
authentication process. The PI will approve any access to the master code. Data collected through 
the MedRhythms music -based devi ce will be uploaded to a secure cloud -based drive owned by 
MedRhythms. A de -identified ID will be given to each participant to begin walking sessions with 
the device. A ma ster list linking the unique ID to the participant will be stored in the REDCap 
database housed at Boston University  with only essential study staff having access. The 
MedRhythms company will not have access to this master list.  
 
SECTIO N Q:  CERTIFICATE O F CONFIDENTIALITY  
Complete this box if the study is UNFUNDED or  FUNDED by any entity (e.g 
department, foundation, NSF, or other federal agencies) other than the NIH  
 
On Oct ober 1, 2017 the NIH updated it s policy for issuing Certificates of Confidentiality.  
The updated policy is located at:  https://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/notice -files/NOT -
OD-17-109.html  
 
Additional in formation regarding the policy can be found on the NIH FAQ’s website at:  
https://humansubjects.nih.gov/coc/faqs .  Note:  Sections C and D describe the process for 
obtaining a Certificate for  studies not funded by NIH  
 
 
YES  NO  
☐ ☒ Will you obtain a Certificate of Confidentiality?  
The NIH has updated the required consent form language.  The language is at 
the following website:  https://humansubjects.nih.gov/coc/suggested -consent -
language .  Note:   A consent form with the applicable language must be 
included with this submission.  
 
Certificates of Confidentia lity are issued by the National Institutes of Health 
(NIH) .   A Certificate of Confidentiality (Certificate) protects the privacy of 
research participants enrolled in biomedical, behavioral, clinical or other 
research. With limited exceptions, researchers may not disclose names or any 
information, documents or biospecimens containing identifiable, sensitive 
information. The Certificate prohibits disclosure in response to legal demands, 
such as a subpoena .  
 
31 
Version:  November, 2017   
 
Complete this box if the study is FUNDED by the  NIH  
 
On Oct ober 1, 2017 the NIH updated it s policy for issuing Certificates of Confidentiality.  
The updated policy is located at:  https://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/not ice-files/NOT -
OD-17-109.html  
 
Note:  Under the new policy, the investigator will not need to apply for a Certificate.  All 
eligible research studies that are funded by NIH are automatically issued a certificate 
under the NIH Policy on Certificates of Confidentiality  
 
Additional information regarding the policy can be found on the NIH FAQ’s website at:  
https://humansubjects.nih.gov/coc/faqs  
 
YES  NO  
☐ ☐ 
N/A Does this study qualify for a Certificate of Confidentiality under the NIH 
Policy or Issuing Certificates of Confidentiality?  
To determine if this study (which is conducted or supported by NIH) qualifies 
for a Certificate of Confidentiality, please answer the following question:  
• Is the  activity biomedical, behavioral, clinical, or other research?  
☐ YES  
☐ NO 
If the answer to the above question is “NO”, then this study will not be  issued 
a Certificate of Confidentiality  by the NIH .  If th e answer is “YES”, please 
consider  the question s below:  
▪ Does the research involve Human Subjects as defined by 45 CFR 46?  
▪ Are you collecting or using biospecimens that are identifiable to an 
individual as part of the research?  
▪ If collecting or using biospecimens as part of the research, is there a 
smal l risk that some combination of the biospecimen, a request for the 
biospecimen, and other available data sources could be used to deduce 
the identity of an individual?  
▪ Does the research involve the generation of individual level, human 
genomic data?  
If the answer to any one of the four questions  above  is “YES”, then this NIH 
policy will apply and will be considered to have a Certificate of 
Confidentiality  by the NIH . 
32 
Version:  November, 2017  If this study is covered under this policy, the consent form must include 
language about th e protections and exceptions allowed with the Certificate.  
The NIH has updated the required consent form language.  The language is at 
the following website:  https://humansubjects.nih.gov/coc/suggested -consent -
language .  Note:   A consent form with the applicable language must be 
included with this submission.  
Certificates of Confidentiality are issued by the Natio nal Institutes of Health 
(NIH).  A Certificate of Confidentiality (Certificate) protects the privacy of 
research participants enrolled in biomedical, behavioral, clinical or other 
research. With limited exceptions, researchers may not disclose names or any 
information, documents or biospecimens contain ing identifiable, sensitive 
information. The Certificate prohibits disclosure in response to legal demands, 
such as a subpoena  
 
 
SECTION  R:  PRIVACY  
 
Describe how you will protect the privacy of subjects.  Include the following information: 
location of data storage, who will have access to study information, and location of study 
visits  
 
Note:  Privacy can be defined in terms of having control over the extent, timing, and 
circumstances of sharing oneself (physically, behaviorally, or intellectually) with  others  
Privacy of subjects will be protected by conducting all in -person interactions and assessments  in 
a semi -private or private space within the Center for Neurorehabilitation and sixth floor hallway 
of Sargent College , Boston University . While outside these spaces, no personally identifiable 
information will be discussed. All study personnel have completed training and undergo regular 
re-training to ensure their understanding of the steps taken to maintain confidentiality of data 
and privacy of subjects.   
Only the study PI’s and necessary research personnel will have access to identifiable research 
data. The master -code will be housed at site specific secure data storage sites (Sharepoint at 
Boston University) with 2 factor authentication require d for access. Access will be limited to 
specific personnel, approved by the PI’s at each site. Only data that is de -identified will be 
entered on paper forms and into the REDCap database. Paper forms with linked name and ID 
will be stored behind 2 locks.    
The PI and all study personnel (listed in section E) will have access to all coded data on paper 
forms and data housed in the REDCap database.    
33 
Version:  November, 2017  No identifiable or coded data will be shared with non -study personnel including students, 
professional colleag ues, outside institutions or study sponsors. No identifiable data will be used 
in scholarly presentations, in future research projects and in publications.    
We will store study information for future research related to Parkinson disease. We will store 
only a limited data set which will include the data collected and dates collected. No identifiable 
information will be used for future research ( see Appendix III: HIPAA Authorization ).  
 
SECTION  S:  MONITORING STUDY DATA  
 
How will data be monitored ?: 
 
Note:  The Data and Safety Monitoring Plan should be tailored to the natu re, size, and 
complexity of the research protocol, the expected risks of the research, and the t ype of 
subject population being studied   
 
☒ Principal Investigator  
☐ Monitor/Monitoring Group  
☐ Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB)  
Note:  The DSMB Charter must be submitted with this Application  
For more information regarding a DSMB, please refer to the following website: 
http://www.nidcr.nih.gov/Research/ToolsforResearchers/Toolkit/DSMBGuidelines.htm   
 
Describe the  plan for monitoring study data.  This should include a description of how data 
will be  collected and analyzed  as the project progresses to assure the appropriateness of 
the research, its design, and subject protections . 
Data will be collected and de -identified (using participant ID number only). This de -identified 
data will be processed and analyzed by the PI and research team ( Section E).  
 
Research staff will inquire about adverse events during a weekly phone call. Occurrences of 
adverse events will be described and recorded and any medical attention sought will be 
documented. If a deviation in data collection/usage, adverse or unanticipated event involving risks 
to participants or others, or a breach in confidential ity is suspected or found, the study will be 
halted until a resolution is determined in accordance with the IRB.  The following definitions will 
be applied to the present study to monitor adverse events:  
 
Adverse Event : Any untoward or unfavorable physical or psychological occurrence in a 
participant, including any abnormal sign ( e.g., abnormal physical exam or laboratory finding), 
symptom, or disease tem porally associated with participation in the research, whether o r not 
considered related to participation  in the research. The PI will be notified when any adverse event 
is identified  and will report this to the IRB.  
34 
Version:  November, 2017  Serious Adverse Event : Any adverse event that:  
i. results in death  
ii. is life -threatening (places the participant  at immediate risk of death)  
iii. results in hospitalization  
iv. results in a persistent or significant disability/incapacity  
v. results in a congenital anomaly/birth defect  
vi. may jeopardize the participan t’s health and may require medical or surgical intervention to 
prevent one of the other outcomes liste d in this definition.  
 
Unexpected Adverse Event: Any adverse event occurring in one or more participants, the nature, 
severity, or frequency of which is not consistent with either:  
i. the known or foreseeable risk of adverse events associated with the procedures involved in 
the research that are described in (a) the protocol -related documents, such as the IRB -
approved protocol, any applicable investigator brochure, and the current IRB -approved 
informed consent document, and (b) other relevant sources of  information, such as product 
labeling and package inserts or  the expected natural progression of any underlying disease, 
disorder, or condition of the subject(s) experiencing the adverse event and the subject’s 
predisposing risk factor profile for the adv erse event.  
 
 
SECTION  T:  HEALTH INSURANCE PORTABILITY AND 
ACCOUNTABILITY ACT (HIPAA)  
 
YES * NO  
X       Is this research being conducted in a covered entity?  
The following components have been determined to be covered entities on the 
Boston University Charles River Campus:  
• Sargent College Rehabilitation Services  
o Physical Therapy Center at the Ryan Center for Sports 
Medicine and Rehabilitation  
o Sargent Choice Nutrition Center  
• The Danielsen Institute  
• Boston University Health Plan  
 *If YES, conta ct the IRB office for assistance.  
 
 
SECTION  U:  FAMILY EDUCATIONAL R IGHTS AND PRIVACY AC T 
(FERPA) : FERPA is the federal law that protects the privacy of student education record s.  
Research funded by the Department of Education or research conducted in educational 
35 
Version:  November, 2017  institutions that receive funds from the Department of Education (for research or other purposes) 
must comply with FERPA . 
 
YES * NO  
☐ ☒ Does this study involve collection of information from student 
school/university records?  
*If YES, refer to the  following website s for guidance  on FERPA : 
• http://www.bu.edu/researchsupport/compliance/human -subjects/  
• http://www.bu.edu/reg/general -information/ferpa/  
• http://www2.ed.gov/policy/gen/guid/fpco/ferpa/index.html  
 
If FERPA appl ies, you must complete the box below:  
In accordance with FERPA, written consent must be obtained to access student records.  The 
consent must:  
• Specify th e records that may be disclosed  
• State the purpose of the disclosure  
• Identify the person or class of parties to whom the disclosure can be made  
 
☐ YES  
(REQUIRED)  I confirm that I will comply with the FERPA policy that is in place at the 
educational institution where I am conducting my research.  This 
includes, if applicable, the requirements for written agreement when 
requesting a waiver of consent for personally identifiable information.   If 
an agreement is required, this agreement must be submitted to the 
IRB.  
 
SECTION  V:  PROTECTION OF PUPIL RIGHTS AMENDMENT (PP RA): 
PPRA is a federal law that affords certain rights to parents of minor students with regard to 
surveys that ask questions of a personal nature.   Research funded by the Department of 
Education or research conducted in educational institutions that receive funds (for research or 
other purposes) from the Department of Education must comply with the PPRA.  
 
YES * NO  
☐ ☒ Does PPRA apply to this study?   
*If YES, refer to the  following websites for guidance:   
• http://www2.ed.gov/policy/gen/guid/fpco/ppra/index.html  
• http://www.bu.edu/researchsupport/compliance/human -subjects/  
36 
Version:  November, 2017  If PPRA  applies, you must complete the box below:  
In accordance with PPRA, written parental consent must be obtained  prior to subjects 
participation in the study.   
 
☐ YES  
(REQUIRED)  I confirm that I will comply with the PPRA  policy that is in place at the 
educational institution where I am conducting my research.   
 
SECTION  W:  CLINICAL TRIALS REGI STRATION:  
The Food Drug and Administration Amendments Act (known as FDAAA 801) requires that 
“applicable clinical trials” be registered and have results reported on clinicaltrials.gov. The 
Responsible Party for a clinical trial must register the trial and submit res ults information.   In 
addition, the International Committee of Medical Journal Editors (ICJME) and the National 
Institutes of Health (NIH) also have requirements for registration.  Please see box below to 
determine if your study requires registration in ac cordance with either FDAAA 801, ICJME , or 
NIH. 
 
YES  NO FDAAA 801 Requirements  
☐  ☒ Does your study meet the definition of an applicable clinical trial and require 
registration AND  results submission in accordance with FDAAA 801?  
Applicable Clinical Trials include the following:  
• Trials of drugs and biologics: Controlled clinical investigations, other 
than phase 1 clinical investigations, of drugs or biological products 
subject to Food and Drug Administration (FDA) regulation  
• Trials of devices  (see note) : 1) Controlled trials with health outcomes 
of devices subject to FDA regulation, other than small feasibility 
studies, and 2) pediatric postmarket surveillance  required by FDA  
The Responsible Party is defined as:  
• The sponsor of the clinical trial or  
• The principal investigator (PI) of such cli nical trial if so designated by 
a sponsor, grantee, contractor, or awardee, so long as the PI is 
responsible for conducting the trial, has access to and control over the 
data from the clinical trial, has the right to publish the results of the 
trial, and h as the ability to meet all of FDAAA's requirements for the 
submissio n of clinical trial information  
Refer to the following website  for guidance:   
37 
Version:  November, 2017  • FDAA 801 Requirements: https://clinicaltrials .gov/ct2/manage -
recs/fdaaa  
Note:  If your study meets the requirement for registration and 
reporting, you must submit the National Clinical Trial (NCT) Identifier # 
to the IRB prior to IRB approval.  
NCT #:__________________  
 
 
YES  NO ICMJE Requirements  
☒ ☐ Does your study meet the definition of a clinical trial and require registration 
in accordance with ICMJE?  
ICMJE definition of clinical trial :  Any research study that prospectively 
assigns human participants or groups of humans to one or more health -related 
interventions to evaluate t he effects on health outcomes. Health -related 
interventions include any intervention used to modify a biomedical or health -
related outcome (for example, drugs, surgical procedures, devices, behavioral 
treatments, d ietary interventions, and process -of-care changes). Health 
outcomes include any biomedical or health -related measures obtained in 
patients or participants, including pharmacokinetic measures and adverse 
events. Purely observational studies (those in which the assignment of the 
medical intervention is not at the discretion of the investigator) will not 
require registration.  
Refer to the following websites for guidance:   
• ICMJE Clinical Trials Registration: http://www.icmje.org/about -
icmje/faqs/clinical -trials -registration/  
Note:  If your study meets the requirement for registration, you must 
submit the National Clinical Trial (NCT) Identifier # to the IRB prior to 
IRB approval.  
NCT #:__ pending ________________  
***this is a small feasibility study of a new gait training approach. Moreover, 
outcomes assessed are the transient, single -session effects of this training 
approach.  
YES  NO NIH Requirements  
38 
Version:  November, 2017  ☐ ☒ Does your study meet the definition of an applicable clinical trial and require 
registration AND  results submission in accordance with NIH?  
As of January 18, 2017, NIH is requiring that clinical trials be registered at 
ClinicalTrials.gov.   Confirm whether  this study meets the registration 
requirements for clinical trial registration in accordance with the definition of 
a clinical trial as defined by NIH.   See definition below.  
Clinical Trial :  A research study in which one or more human subjects are 
prospectively assigned to one or more interventions (which may include 
placebo or other control) to evaluate the effects of those intervention on 
health -related biomedical or behavioral outcomes”.   This definition 
encompasses phase 1 trials of FDA -regulate d drug and biological products, 
small feasibility studies of FDA -regulated device products, and studies of any 
intervention not regulated by the FDA, e.g. behavioral interventions.  
Of note, this requirement for registering and results reporting includes cl inical 
trials beyond those already required by the FDA.  The requirements are 
expanded to include to Phase I drug studies and NIH -funded clinical trials of 
social -behavioral interventions.   
For more information on this policy please refer to:   
• NIH Policy on the Dissemination of NIH -Funded Clinical Trial 
Information:  https://s3.amazonaws.com/public -
inspection.federalregister.gov/2016 -22379.pdf  
• Checklist :  https://prsinfo.clinicaltrials.gov/ACT_Checklist.pdf  
• NIH Definition of Clinical Trial:  
http://osp.od.nih.gov/sites/default/files/NIH%20Definition%20of%20
Clinical%20Trial%2010 -23-2014 -UPDATED_0.pdf  
 
Note:  If your study meets the requirement for registration and 
reporting, you must submit the National Clinical Tr ial (NCT) Identifier # 
to the IRB prior to IRB approval.  
NCT #:__________________  
 
 
Certification / Signatures  
 
 
• By submitting this protocol I attest to the fact that all research activities to be implemented 
related to human subjects have been completely  and accurately described herein.  
 
39 
Version:  November, 2017  • I agree to conduct the describe research in an ethical manner.  
 
• I agree to comply with all institutional policies and procedures related to human subjects 
research and will not begin any human subjects research activitie s until I have obtained full 
approval from the IRB.  
 
• I agree to conduct the research as described in this protocol and not to make any changes 
(except to eliminate immediate harm to subjects) without first obtaining approval for the 
changes from the IRB.  
 
• I agree to immediately report any unanticipated problems involving risks to subjects or 
others, any subject complaints, and any incidents of non -compliance with the requirements of 
this protocol as soon as I become aware of them.  
 
• I agree to comply with any relevant HIPAA and FERPA regulations if applicable .  
 
• I verify that all those responsible for the design, conduct, or reporting of the proposed 
program, including at minimum, all Senior/key personnel in the grant application, have 
completed the financial interest disclosure forms  and completed training as dictated at 
http://www.bu.edu/orc/coi/forms/ , and returned the forms to   the Office for Research 
Compliance COI Unit .  NOTE: If anyone checked “yes” to any of the questions on either 
the FIND1 or NONFIND1 form, the IRB Director will contact the COI office to obtain 
the disclosure information.  
 
PI printed name:      Terry Ellis, PhD, PT  
 
 
PI Signature :        Date:  04-05-2021 
 
Submission  
This form can be completed, signed, scanned and submitted to the IRB at irb@bu.edu .   Faxed 
documents and handwritten materials are not accepted.   Be sure to include all relevant 
attachments.   
 
FACULTY Research:  
 
The Dep artment Chair signature is required: This application must be signed by the 
Department Chair for all faculty researchers.  If the PI is the Department Chair then signature by 
the appropriate Dean is required. Department Chair signature is not required for student research.  
By signing this form you are indicating that you have reviewed the application, the 
faculty/staff person listed as PI on this protocol is a member of your department, that 
he/she is qualified to serve as the PI for this study , he/she has the adequate resources, and 
the research utilizes acceptab le practice for the discipline.  
 

40 
Version:  November, 2017  Department Chair (print name):    Gael Orsmond      
       
       
              
Signature :         
  
 
Date:     4-11-2021      
 
 
STUDENT Research  
 
Student research: Student research must be signed by the faculty advisor AND the designated 
School IRB pre -reviewer (if applicable) PRIOR TO submission to the IRB.  Students should 
check with their School to determine if School IRB pre -review is required.  Students must submit 
a copy of their dissertation with the IRB Application   
 
By signing this form you are indicating that you have reviewed the application, that you 
agree to serve as the Co -PI for this study with the student and that you will be responsi ble 
for the ethical conduct of this stud ent’s human subjects research.   
 
Faculty Advisor (print name) :         
 
 
Signature :         
 
 
Date :        
 
 
 
 
IRB School Reviewer, if applicable (print name) :        
 
 
Signature :         
 
 
Date :         
