MEMORIAL  SLOAN -KETTERING  CANCER  CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#:  13-244 A(9) 
Amended:  29-SEP-2016  
Page  1 of 51  
  
A Phase II Study of Regorafenib in Patients with Progressive,  
Recurrent/Metastatic Adenoid Cystic Carcinoma  
PROTOCOL  FACE  PAGE  FOR 
MSKCC  THERAPEUTIC/DIAGNOSTIC  PROTOCOL  
 
 
Principal  Investigator/Department:  Alan L. Ho MD, PhD Medicine  
Co-Principal 
Investigator(s)/Department : David  G. Pfister  MD Medicine  
Investigator(s)/Department:  Eric Sherman,  MD 
Shrujal Baxi, MD  
Sofia Haque, MD 
Vaios  Hatzoglou,  MD 
John Lyo, MD  
Camelia Sima, MD 
Nora Katabi, MD 
Mario  Lacouture,  MD 
Jahan Aghalar, MD 
Arlyn Apollo, MD 
Karen Cadoo, MD 
Philip  Caron,  MD, PhD 
Jasmeet  Chadha  Singh,  MD 
Chau Dang, MD  
Avni Desai, MD 
Pamela  Drullinsky,  MD 
Zoe Goldberg, MD 
Diana Lake, MD  
Stuart Lichtman, MD 
Kenneth Ng, MD 
Marina Shcherba, DO 
Sarah Schweber, MD 
Steven  Sugarman,  MD 
Elizabeth Won, MD 
Han Xiao, MD  Medicine 
Medicine  
Radiology 
Radiology 
Radiology  
Epidemiology/Biostatistics 
Pathology  
Medicine  
 
Medicine 
Medicine 
Medicine 
Medicine 
Medicine 
Medicine 
Medicine 
Medicine 
Medicine 
Medicine 
Medicine 
Medicine 
Medicine 
Medicine 
Medicine 
Medicine 
Medicine  
Consenting  Professional(s)/Department:  Eric Sherman,  MD 
David Pfister, MD 
Alan Ho, MD, PhD 
Shrujal Baxi, MD  
Jahan  Aghalar,  MD 
Arlyn Apollo, MD 
Karen Cadoo, MD  
Philip  Caron,  MD, PhD Medicine 
Medicine 
Medicine 
Medicine  
Medicine 
Medicine 
Medicine  
Medicine  
MEMORIAL  SLOAN -KETTERING  CANCER  CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#:  13-244 A(9) 
Amended:  29-SEP-2016  
Page  2 of 51  
  Jasmeet  Chadha  Singh,  MD 
Chau Dang, MD  
Avni Desai, MD 
Pamela  Drullinsky,  MD 
Zoe Goldberg, MD 
Diana Lake, MD  
Stuart Lichtman, MD 
Kenneth Ng, MD 
Marina Shcherba, DO 
Sarah Schweber, MD 
Steven  Sugarman,  MD 
Elizabeth Won, MD 
Han Xiao, MD  Medicine 
Medicine 
Medicine 
Medicine 
Medicine 
Medicine 
Medicine 
Medicine 
Medicine 
Medicine 
Medicine 
Medicine 
Medicine  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Please  Note: A  Consenting  Professional  must  have  completed  the mandatory  Human 
Subjects Education and Certification Program . 
 
 
 
OneMSK  Sites  
Manhattan,  NY 
Basking  Ridge,  NJ 
Rockville  Centre,  NY 
Commack,  NY 
Westchester,  NY 
MEMORIAL  SLOAN -KETTERING  CANCER  CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#:  13-244 A(9) 
Amended:  29-SEP-2016  
Page  3 of 51  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center 
1275 York Avenue  
New York,  New York 10065  
MEMORIAL  SLOAN -KETTERING  CANCER  CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#:  13-244 A(9) 
Amended:  29-SEP-2016  
Page  4 of 51  
 Table  of Contents  
1.0 PROTOCOL  SUMMARY  AND/OR  SCHEMA  ................................ ................................ ..... 5 
2.0 OBJECTIVES  AND  SCIENTIFIC  AIMS  ................................ ................................ ..............  5 
3.0 BACKGROUND  AND  RATIONALE  ................................ ................................ ...................  5 
4.0 OVERVIEW  OF STUDY  DESIGN/INTERVENTION  ................................ ..........................  11 
4.1 Design  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........................  11 
4.2 Intervention  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................  11 
5.0 THERAPEUTIC/DIAGNOSTIC  AGENTS ................................ ................................ ..........  11 
6.0 CRITERIA  FOR  SUBJECT  ELIGIBILITY  ................................ ................................ ..........  11 
6.1 Subject  Inclusion  Criteria  ................................ ................................ ...............................  12 
6.2 Subject  Exclusion  Criteria  ................................ ................................ ..............................  13 
7.0 RECRUITMENT  PLAN  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 15 
8.0 PRETREATMENT  EVALUATION  ................................ ................................ ....................  15 
9.0 TREATMENT/INTERVENTION  PLAN  ................................ ................................ ..............  16 
10.0 EVALUATION  DURING  TREATMENT/INTERVENTION  ................................ ..................  23 
11.0 TOXICITIES/SIDE  EFFECTS  ................................ ................................ ...........................  25 
12.0 CRITERIA  FOR  THERAPEUTIC  RESPONSE/OUTCOME  ASSESSMENT  ......................  32 
13.0 CRITERIA  FOR  REMOVAL  FROM  STUDY  ................................ ................................ ...... 38 
14.0 BIOSTATISTICS  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............  38 
15.0 RESEARCH  PARTICIPANT  REGISTRATION  AND  RANDOMIZATION  PROCEDURES  
39 
15.1 Research  Participant  Registration  ................................ ................................ .................  39 
15.2 Randomization  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............  40 
16.0 DATA  MANAGEMENT  ISSUES  ................................ ................................ .......................  40 
16.1 Quality  Assurance  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........  40 
16.2 Data  and Safety  Monitoring  ................................ ................................ ...........................  40 
17.0 PROTECTION  OF HUMAN  SUBJECTS  ................................ ................................ ...........  42 
17.1 Privacy  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........................  42 
17.2 Serious  Adverse  Event  (SAE)  Reporting  ................................ ................................ ....... 43 
17.2.1   44 
18.0 INFORMED  CONSENT  PROCEDURES ................................ ................................ ...........  45 
19.0 REFERENCES  ................................ ................................ ................................ .................  46 
20.0 APPENDICES  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................  49 
MEMORIAL  SLOAN -KETTERING  CANCER  CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#:  13-244 A(9) 
Amended:  29-SEP-2016  
Page  5 of 51  
 1.0 PROTOCOL  SUMMARY  AND/OR  SCHEMA  
This is a single -arm phase II study evaluating the clinical efficacy of regorafenib in the 
treatment of patients with progressive, recurrent/metastatic adenoid cystic carcinoma 
(ACC).  Any number  of prior  therapies  for recurrent/metastatic  ACC is  allowed.  There  are 
two primary endpoints for the study: 1) proportion of patients alive at 6 months without 
disease  progression  by RECIST v1.1  criteria  (6-month  PFS),  and 2) best overall  response 
rate (BOR  = CR+PR)  documented  by RECIST  v1.1 criteria.  The secondary  endpoints  are 
the safety and tolerability of regorafenib.  An exploratory endpoint is analyzing tumor 
tissues for biomarkers that correlate to regorafenib clinical efficacy.  Patients enrolled in 
the study will be treated with regorafenib 160 mg orally daily for 3 weeks in a 4 week 
cycle.  Dose reductions and delays can be implemented according to criteria outlined in 
Section 11. RECIST v1.1 tumor assessments will be made at baseline (CT or MRI) and 
then approximately every 2 cycles (or every 8 weeks (+/ - 1 week)).  After 10 months, 
imaging will be done approximately every 3 cycles (or every 12 weeks (+/ - 1 week)).  
Patients  may remain  on study  until progression  of disease  or unacceptable  toxicity.  Other 
reasons patients could potentially come off study include patient non -compliance, patient 
withdrawal  of consent,  or physician’s  clinical  judgment  that removal  of the patient  from the 
study is in his/her best interest.  
2.0 OBJECTIVES  AND  SCIENTIFIC AIMS  
Primary  Objectives  
1) To determine  the proportion  of patients  alive at 6 months  without  disease  progression 
by RECIST v1.1 criteria of patients with progressive, recurrent/metastatic ACC treated 
with regorafenib.  
2) To determine  the best overall  response  rate documented  by RECIST  v1.1 criteria  of 
patients with progressive, recurrent/metastatic ACC treated with regorafenib.  
Secondary  Objective  
To determine  the safety/tolerability  of regorafenib.  
Exploratory  Objective  
To perform  tumor  tissues  analyses  for putative  biomarkers  and explore  their association 
with regorafenib clinical efficacy.  
3.0 BACKGROUND  AND  RATIONALE  
Recurrent/metastatic  (R/M)  ACC  
Adenoid  cystic  carcinomas  (ACCs)  are malignant  neoplasms  composed  of epithelial  and 
myoepithelial cells that commonly arise from both minor and major salivary glands.  
Rarely, ACC may also originate at other sites, such as the trachea, lung, and breast.  
While localized disease is potentially curable, nearly 40% of patients develop distant 
metastasis despite aggressive surgery and radiation with disease -free intervals ranging 
from 1 month to 19 years1,2. Metastatic disease is incurable and can be either indolent 
(10%  of patients  with distant  metastases  survive  more  than 10 years)  or alternatively  more 
aggressive  (54%  of patients  with distant  metastases  survive  less than 3 years)2. There  are 
no effective therapies and the development of new treatments is urgently needed.  
MEMORIAL  SLOAN -KETTERING  CANCER  CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#:  13-244 A(9) 
Amended:  29-SEP-2016  
Page  6 of 51  
 Systemic  therapies  tested  in R/M ACC  to date possess  limited  effectiveness  
We conducted  an exhaustive  review  of all chemotherapy  studies  conducted  between  1966 
and 2009 for R/M ACC which included 34 clinical trials that involved less than 500 
patients3. Most were small, single institution  studies of variable methodological  quality.  In 
this literature, only 18 objective major responses out of 141 patients (13%) treated with 
single agent cytotoxic chemotherapy were reported.  Mitoxantrone as a single agent was 
studied in the most number of patients in clinical trials of variable quality; the pooled 
response rate (an imperfect estimate of true activity) from these studies was around 
10%4,5. Ultimately, the true response rate of cytotoxic chemotherapy can only be 
concluded to be modest; the actual rate of response is difficult to ascertain across several 
different trials of variable quality.  Insufficient data exists to suggest that combination 
chemotherapy improves response rates or clinical benefit over single agent treatment.  
Given the limited efficacy of cytotoxic drugs, several targeted therapies have also been 
tested.  With up to 90% of ACC  tumors  possessing  high c-kit expression  and case  reports 
of responses to imatinib, six studies have been reported for imatinib in ACC with 
disappointingly only 2 objective responses in 71 evaluable patients6-11. Studies with 
gefitinib, cetuximab, lapatinib, and bortezomib all have failed to yield any objective 
responses3. 
The oncogenic  transcription  factor  c-myb is overexpressed  in ACC  
In 2009,  Persson  et. al. confirmed  the existence  of a t(6;9)(q22 -23;p23 -24) translocation  in 
ACC tumors of the breast and head/neck12 (Figure 1A).  This cytogenetic alteration 
creates a gene fusion of the c -myb and NFIB transcription factors.  The translocation was 
identified in all 11 tumors analyzed.  The MYB -NFIB fusion characterized in that 
publication predominantly involved a breakpoint between intron 14 of MYB and intron 8 of 
NFIB . Minimally, this resulted in the loss of the last 38 amino acids on the c -myb protein 
and the addition of the last 5 amino acids of the NFIB protein to the C -terminal end of the 
truncated c -myb gene (Figure 1).  This results in the loss of several microRNA binding 
sites in the 3’ UTR (“untranslated region”) of the MYB gene, leading to upregulated levels 
of c-myb expression in ACC tumors relative to non -ACC tumors at both the mRNA 
transcript and protein level12,13. c-myb overexpression presumably enhances 
transcriptional activity of c -myb, leading to the overexpression of 14 MYB target genes, 
including vascular endothelial factor A (VEGFA), KIT , fibroblast growth factor -2 (FGF2), 
and BCL212, all of which have been previously  proposed to  be potentially critical  genes  for 
therapeutic targeting in ACC.  
MEMORIAL  SLOAN -KETTERING  CANCER  CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#:  13-244 A(9) 
Amended:  29-SEP-2016  
Page  7 of 51  
  
 
 
 
Mitani  et. al. recently  published  a comparative  analysis  of 123  salivary  gland  cancers  (72 
primary ACC tumors, 17 ACCs metastatic to the lung and lymph nodes, and 34 salivary 
tumors of other non -ACC histologies) and 5 normal salivary gland tissue samples13. 
These authors observed that the MYB -NFIB fusion gene was present in 27.7% of primary 
ACCs,  35.2%  of metastatic  ACCs,  and none  of the non-ACC  salivary  cancer  histologies  or 
normal salivary tissues.  As expected, elevated MYB expression was detected in 85% of 
fusion  positive  tumors  at about  100-fold higher  levels  than non-ACC  tumors.  Interestingly, 
70% of fusion negative tumors also demonstrated elevated c -myb expression at an 
approximately  40-fold higher level over non -ACC tumors and  just 2 -fold lower than fusion - 
positive  ACCs,  suggesting  alternate  mechanisms  of c-myb overexpression  and supporting 
the hypothesis that c -myb plays a central role in the pathogenesis of this disease.  
c-myb is a bona fide oncogene.  It was first discovered as the  transforming gene co -opted 
by the Avian myeloblastosis virus (AMV) and later the MYB gene locus was identified as a 
common integration site for several avian and murine retroviruses leading to the 
development of leukemia14. It was recently reported that the MYB gene locus is involved 
with chromosomal  translocations and  genomic  duplications associated  with a new  subtype 
of human  T-cell acute  leukemia14,15. MYB  overexpression  has also been  described  in solid 
tumors.  In colon cancer, MYB overexpression has been reported in >80% of cases14 and 
when found expressed with Bcl -xl correlates with poor prognosis16. MYB overexpression 
has also been implicated in the pathogenesis of breast, melanoma, pancreatic, and 
esophageal cancers14. 
Results from two whole exome and genome sequencing projects in ACC have recently 
been reported17,18. These analyses revealed a relatively “quiet” genome with a low 
somatic mutation rate (0.31 non -silent events per megabase17) and wide mutational 
diversity.  These studies verified the importance of MYB in ACC biology with one study 
confirming 57% of tumors possessed the MYB -NFIB translocation and an additional 8% 
had alterations resulting in MYB pathway dysregulation17. Mutations in chromatin - 
remodeling  genes  were  also a prominent  feature  in the genetic  landscape  of ACCs  (35%17 
and 50%18 rates of mutation in the two studies).  Alterations in several other biologic 
pathways were found to occur at lower frequencies.  
Targeting  c-myb activity  in ACC  
Figure  1. Schematic  of the t(6;9)  translocation. DBD , DNA  Binding  Domain;  TAD, Transactivation  Domain;  NRD , Negative 
Regulatory  Domain;  miR, microRNA.  Adapted  from Persson  et. al. “Recurrent  fusion  of MYB  and NFIB  transcription  factor 
genes in carcinomas of the breast and head and neck”. PNAS, 2008.  
MEMORIAL  SLOAN -KETTERING  CANCER  CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#:  13-244 A(9) 
Amended:  29-SEP-2016  
Page  8 of 51  
 Devising strategies to directly block the function of a non -kinase transcription factor is a 
challenge.  One approach  is to inhibit  the activity  of critical  c-myb target  genes  responsible 
for promoting oncogenesis.  An analysis of 7 fusion positive ACC tumors confirmed that 
MYB overexpression indeed correlates to upregulation of 14 MYB transcriptional target 
genes, including the regorafenib -relevant targets VEGFA ( ligand that induces 
angiogenesis by engaging VEGF receptors (VEGFRs)), FGF2 (ligand that activates a 
subset of FGF receptors (FGFRs)),  and the receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) KIT (c-kit)12. 
Regorafenib -relevant  pathways  and targets  in ACC  
Beyond  c-myb mediated  activation,  several  lines of evidence  suggest  that VEGFR,  c-kit, 
and FGFR pathways are potentially critical to ACC biology.  
VEGF  pathway : High levels  of VEGF  ligand  have  been  detected  in salivary  malignancies 
in general,  and ACC  specifically,  correlating  to more  advanced  clinicopathologic  features 
(including stage, recurrence, and metastases) in several studies19-21. Multivariate 
analyses have also shown that high VEGF expression in ACC tumors is an  independent 
prognostic factor for surviva l21. These data suggest that the VEGF pathway may be 
critical for ACC pathogenesis and/or progression for tumors that overexpress VEGF 
ligand.  
c-kit: c-kit is highly expressed in >90% of ACCs22-26. A 2004 case report described 
impressive clinical responses in two patients with c -kit positive ACC treated with 600 mg 
daily of imatinib mesylate, a small molecule inhibitor of c -kit and platelet derived growth 
factor receptor (PDGFR)27. While subsequent imatinib studies failed to show significant 
clinical activity 6-11, one requiring “strong” c -kit expression and progressive disease at 
study  entry  reported  two responses  out of 15  evaluable  patients11. A recent  phase  II study 
of dasatinib also  failed to produce  RECIST responses in ACC patients,  though  52% of the 
patients with progressive disease at study  entry did have stable disease  on drug28. These 
data indicate that c -kit targeting only has modest efficacy at best, and leaves open the 
possibility that combining c -kit inhibition with other ACC -relevant kinase targets may 
produce greater efficacy.  
FGF pathway : There is now emerging evidence that the FGF pathway is activated in 
adenoid cystic carcinomas.  Immunohistochemistry revealed that FGF1, FGF2, and 
FGFR1 are expressed in ACCs, while normal salivary tissues are completely negative or 
only weakly positive for these proteins29. The recent characterization of the genetic 
landscape of ACCs revealed mutations in FGF16 ligand, FGFR2, and FGFR417,18 as well 
as a tandem  duplication  within  FGFR2  discovered  in one tumor17. Interestingly,  transgenic 
mice overexpressing FGF8b develop salivary cancers, and injection of FGF ligand in a 
9,10-dimethyl -1,2-benzanthracene (DMBA) carcinogenesis mouse model for salivary 
malignancies increased the incidence of salivary cancer formation.  Such data suggests 
that the FGF pathway is activated in ACC and may contribute to salivary cancer 
oncogenesis.  
Preliminary  clinical  efficacy  data for multi -kinase  inhibitors  in ACC  
Evidence  for both MYB -dependent  and -independent  mechanisms  of VEGFR/c -kit/FGFR 
activation in ACC biology has raised interest in evaluating multikinase inhibitors against  
MEMORIAL  SLOAN -KETTERING  CANCER  CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#:  13-244 A(9) 
Amended:  29-SEP-2016  
Page  9 of 51  
 these targets in ACC patients.  Preliminarily, studies have suggested clinical activity with 
these  agents.  The first study  conducted  was a phase  II trial of sunitinib  (VEGFR,  PDGFR, 
KIT inhibitor) in patients with progressive, recurrent/metastatic ACC30. While no 
responses were observed, 8 out of the enrolled 14 patients had stable disease for 6 
months or more, potentially meaningful given that progressive disease was required for 
enrollmen t30. Results from a sorafenib31 (VEGFR, PDGFR inhibitor) and a dovitinib32 
(VEGFR, PDGFR, FGFR1 -3, KIT inhibitor) phase II ACC trial were reported in abstract 
form at the 2013 ASCO Annual meeting.  Both agents elicited an approximately 11% 
response rate.  An axitinib (VEGFR, PDGFR, c -kit inhibitor) phase II study also recently 
completed enrollment at MSKCC.  The data has not yet been presented, but the study 
was a 2 -stage design that met the clinical efficacy rule required for progressing to the 
second stage.  These preliminary data suggest that combined VEGFR, PDGFR, c -kit 
inhibition plus or minus FGFR targeting translates to some clinical efficacy in ACC.  
Regorafenib  
Regorafenib has potent preclinical antitumor activity and long -lasting anti -angiogenic 
activity  as measured  by dynamic  contrast  enhanced  (DCE) – magnetic  resonance  imaging 
(MRI)33. 
Regorafenib is a small molecule inhibitor of multiple membrane -bound and intracellular 
kinases involved in normal cellular functions and in pathologic processes such as 
oncogenesis, tumor angiogenesis, and  maintenance of the  tumor microenvironment.  In in 
vitro biochemical  or cellular  assays,  regorafenib  or its major  human  active  metabolites  M-2 
and M -5 inhibited the activity of RET, VEGFR1, VEGFR2, VEGFR3, KIT, PDGFR -alpha, 
PDGFR -beta, FGFR, TIE2, DDR2, Trk2A, Eph2A, RAF -1, BRAF, BRAFV600E, SAPK2,  
PTK5,  and Ab1 at concentrations  of regorafenib  that have  been  achieved  clinically.  In in 
vivo models,  regorafenib  demonstrated  anti-angiogenic  activity  in a rat tumor  model,  and 
inhibition of tumor growth as well as anti -metastatic activity in several mouse xenograft 
models.  
Preclinical  data with regorafenib  
In vivo , regorafenib exhibited anti -angiogenic and anti -proliferative effects in human colon 
and breast xenografts as demonstrated by a reduction in microvessel area, reduced Ki -67 
staining, and reduced pERK1/2 staining in tissue sections from tumor xenografts, and 
dose -dependent inhibition of growth in multiple xenograft models (breast, colon, renal, 
NSCLC, melanoma, pancreatic, thyroid, ovarian)33. Immunohistochemical ex -vivo studies 
with a phospho –specific  monoclonal  anti-ERK 1 / 2 antibody  demonstrated  inhibition  of the 
MAPK  pathway  five days  after treatment  with regorafenib  in 2 of 3 tumor  models  examined 
(MDA -MB 231 and BxPC -3), but not in NSCLC (H460).  
In addition, all tested human tumor xenografts (MDA -MB-231, H460, BxPC -3 and Colo - 
205) demonstrated  a significant  reduction  in new blood  vessels  by histomorphometry  as 
detected in tumor samples using a murine CD31 antibody33. These data suggest that 
regorafenib can target the tumor cell MAPK pathway (tumor cell survival) and tumor 
vasculature in some but not all tumors.  
MEMORIAL  SLOAN -KETTERING  CANCER  CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#:  13-244 A(9) 
Amended:  29-SEP-2016  
Page  10 of 51  
 Clinical  experience  with regorafenib  
Two phase III global randomized studies have evaluated the efficacy of regorafenib. The 
CORRECT  (Patients  with metastatic  colorectal  cancer  treated  with regorafenib  or placebo 
after failure of standard therapy) trial is an international, multicenter, randomized, double - 
blind, placebo -controlled study that enrolled 760 patients with mCRC whose disease has 
progressed after approved standard therapies34. Metastatic colorectal cancer patients 
were randomized to regorafenib plus best supportive care (BSC) or placebo plus BSC. 
Treatment  cycles consisted of 160  mg of  regorafenib (or  matching placebo) once  daily for 
three weeks on / one week off plus BSC. The primary endpoint of this trial was overall 
survival. Secondary endpoints included progression -free survival, objective tumor 
response rate and disease control rate. The safety and tolerability of the two treatment 
groups were also compared.  
At a preplanned second interim analysis, there was a statistically significant survival 
benefit for regorafenib. The estimated hazard ratio for overall survival was 0.773 (95% 
confidence interval [CI], 0.635 to 0.941; 1 -sided p = .0051). Patients treated with 
regorafenib had a median overall survival of 6.4 months, compared with 5.0 months for 
placebo — a 29% increase in survival. In addition to improved overall survival, 
progression -free survival  was superior;  median  progression -free survival  was 1.9 months 
(95%  CI, 1.88 to 2.17)  for regorafenib  and 1.7 months  (95%  CI, 1.68  to 1.74)  for placebo. 
The estimated hazard ratio for progression -free survival was 0.493 (95% CI, 0.418 to 
0.581; 1 -sided p< .000001). There was a substantial difference in disease control rate in 
the regorafenib and placebo groups (44% vs. 15%; p<.000001).  Regorafenib 
demonstrated comparable efficacy benefits across patient subgroups analyzed including 
age, number of mets, number of lines of prior therapy, and kras status.  
The most  frequent  grade  3+ adverse  events  in the regorafenib  group  were  hand –foot skin 
reaction (17%), fatigue (15%), diarrhea (8%), hyperbilirubinemia (8%), and hypertension 
(7%).  The efficacy and safety from the CORRECT study supported FDA approval in 
September 2012.  
The efficacy and safety of regorafenib were examined in the Phase III GRID trial in 
patients with gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) who had exhausted all other 
treatment options35. The study involved 199 patients with metastatic and/or unresectable 
GIST  that had become  resistant  to imatinib  and sunitinib.  Patients  were  randomized  2:1 to 
regorafenib (160 mg orally once daily on a 3 weeks on/1 week off cycle) or placebo, plus 
best supportive care.  
The results showed that treatment with regorafenib led to a statistically significant 3.9 - 
month improvement in progression -free survival (PFS), compared with placebo (4.8 
months vs. 0.9 months; hazard ratio [HR] = 0.27;  p <.0001). Overall survival was 
statistically similar between groups as expected due to a trial design that allowed 
crossover to regorafenib for disease progression (85% for placebo and 31% regorafenib 
randomized patients).  The median survival period without tumor  growth among patients 
on regorafenib was 4.8 months while for the control group on placebo it was less than a 
month. The overall disease control rate combining partial responses with durable stable 
disease  for at least  12 weeks  was 53% with regorafenib  compared  with 9% in the control  
MEMORIAL  SLOAN -KETTERING  CANCER  CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#:  13-244 A(9) 
Amended:  29-SEP-2016  
Page  11 of 51  
 group.  The most  common  grade  ≥3 adverse  events  associated  with regorafenib  were 
hand -foot skin reaction (56.1%), hypertension (48.5%), and diarrhea (40.9%).  The 
efficacy and safety of the GRID study data supported FDA approval February 2013.  
4.0 OVERVIEW  OF STUDY  DESIGN/INTERVENTION  
4.1 Design  
This is a single -arm phase II study of patients with progressive, recurrent/metastatic 
adenoid cystic carcinoma (R/M ACC) treated with regorafenib.  There are two primary 
objectives for the study: 1) to determine the proportion of patients alive at 6 months 
without  disease  progression  by RECIST  v1.1 criteria (6 -month  PFS),  and 2) to determine 
the best overall response rate (BOR = CR+PR) documented by RECIST v1.1 criteria.  
Thirty -eight  patients  will be enrolled  in the study. If at  least  21 patients  are alive and free of 
progression at 6 -month, or if at least 5 patients have a response at any time while being 
enrolled in the study, the regimen will be considered worthy of further investigation.  
Regorafenib  safety  and tolerability  will be assessed  utilizing Common  Terminology  Criteria 
for Adverse Events version 4.0 (CTCAE 4.0) as a secondary endpoint.  An exploratory 
objective is to analyze tumor tissue in order to identify potential biomarkers that correlate 
to regorafenib clinical efficacy.  
4.2 Intervention  
All eligible patients will receive a starting regorafenib dose of 120  mg daily  taken orally  for 
3 weeks in a 4 -week cycle.  Patients for whom regorafenib dose reduction was not 
performed or required may have their treatment dose increased to the FDA -approved 
dose  of 160  mg daily orally  for 3 weeks  in a 4-week  cycle  in cycle  #2 or beyond  (this is not 
mandatory).  RECIST v1.1 tumor assessments will be made at baseline (CT or MRI) and 
then approximately every 2 cycles (or every 8 weeks (+/ - 1 week)).  After 10 months, 
imaging will be done every 3 cycles (or every 12 weeks (+/ - 1 week)).  Patients may 
remain on study until progression of disease or unacceptable toxicity  
5.0 THERAPEUTIC/DIAGNOSTIC  AGENTS  
Regorafenib (Bayer) or its major human active metabolites M -2 and M -5 inhibits the  
activity of RET, VEGFR1, VEGFR2, VEGFR3, KIT, PDGFR -alpha, PDGFR -beta, FGFR1, 
FGFR2,  TIE2,  DDR2,  Trk2A,  Eph2A,  RAF-1, BRAF,  BRAFV600E,  SAPK2,  PTK5,  and Ab1 
at concentrations  of regorafenib  that have  been  achieved  clinically.  
Regorafenib  tablets  will be packaged  in high density  polyethylene  bottles  with a white  child 
resistant closure and induction seal.  Each bottle includes 30 tablets and a 3 -gram 
desiccant.  The bottles will have a label affixed containing study identification, product 
identification, and quantity of tablets.  Once the drug has been received it must be kept in 
a secure, dry  location.  Study  drug must be  stored  in its original  bottle  at a temperature  not 
above 25°C (77°F).  The study drug must be exclusively used for the investigation 
specified in this protocol and it will only be accessible to authorized staff.  
6.0 CRITERIA  FOR  SUBJECT  ELIGIBILITY  
MEMORIAL  SLOAN -KETTERING  CANCER  CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#:  13-244 A(9) 
Amended:  29-SEP-2016  
Page  12 of 51  
 6.1 Subject  Inclusion  Criteria  
• Patients  must  have  pathologically  or cytologically  confirmed  adenoid  cystic  carcinoma. 
Cancers arising from non -salivary gland primary sites are allowed.  
• Patients  must  have  recurrent  and/or  metastatic  disease  not amenable  to potentially 
curative surgery or radiotherapy.  
• At least  2 weeks  must  have  elapsed  since  the end of prior  systemic  treatment  (4 weeks  for 
bevacizumab - containing  regimens) or radiotherapy  with resolution  of all treatment -related 
toxicity  to NCI CTCAE Version 4.0 grade ≤1 (or tolerable grade 2) or back to baseline 
(except for alopecia, lymphopenia, or hypothyroidism).  Any number of prior therapies for 
recurrent/metastatic ACC are allowed.  
• Patients  must  have  RECIST  v1.1 measurable  disease,  defined  as at least  one lesion  that 
can be accurately measured in at least one dimension (longest diameter to be recorded 
for non -nodal lesions and short axis for nodal lesions) as >20 mm with conventional 
techniques or as >10 mm with spiral CT scan.  
• Patients  must have  documentation  of a new or progressive  lesion  on a radiologic  imaging 
study performed within 6 months prior to study enrollment  (progression of disease over 
any interval  is allowed)  and/or  new/worsening  disease  related  symptoms  within  6 months 
prior to study enrollment.  Note: This assessment will be performed by the treating 
investigator.  Evidence of progression by RECIST criteria is not required.  
• Patients must have archival tissue from the primary tumor or metastases available for 
correlative studies. Either a paraffin block or twenty unstained slides are acceptable.  If 
twenty  slides  are not available,  a lesser  amount  may be acceptable  after discussion  with 
the Principal Investigator, Dr. Alan L. Ho.  
• Patients  must agree  to undergo  biopsy  of a malignant lesion.  Biopsies  do not need  to be 
done if either the investigator or person performing the biopsy judges that no tumor is 
accessible  for biopsy  or that biopsy  poses  too great of a  risk to  the patient.  Patients  may 
also be exempt if frozen tumor tissue has been collected within 12 months of study 
enrollment that the Principal Investigator deems is appropriate/sufficient for analysis on 
this protocol.  
• Age ≥ 18 years.  
• ECOG  performance  status  <2 (Karnofsky  >60%,  see Appendix  A). 
• Life expectancy  of at least  12 weeks  (3 months)  as determined  by the investigator.  
• Subjects must be able to understand and be willing to sign the written informed consent 
form.  A signed  informed  consent  form must be  appropriately  obtained  prior to the conduct 
of any trial -specific procedure.  
• Adequate  bone  marrow,  liver and renal  function  as assessed  by the following  laboratory 
requirements:  
MEMORIAL  SLOAN -KETTERING  CANCER  CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#:  13-244 A(9) 
Amended:  29-SEP-2016  
Page  13 of 51  
 o Total  bilirubin  ≤ 1.5 x the upper  limits  of normal  (ULN)  
o Alanine  aminotransferase  (ALT)  and aspartate  amino -transferase  (AST)  ≤ 2.5 x 
ULN (≤ 5 x ULN for subjects with liver involvement of their cancer)  
o Alkaline  phosphatase  limit ≤ 2.5 x ULN (≤ 5 x ULN for subjects  with liver 
involvement of their cancer)  
o Lipase  ≤ 1.5 x the ULN 
o Amylase  ≤ 1.5  x the ULN 
o Serum  creatinine  ≤ 1.5 x the ULN or calculated  creatinine  clearance  >60 ml/min  
o Platelet count > 100,000 /mm3, hemoglobin (Hb) > 9 g/dL, absolute neutrophil 
count  (ANC)  >1500/mm3.  Blood  transfusion  to meet  the inclusion  criteria  will not 
be allowed.  
• Women of childbearing potential must have a negative serum pregnancy test performed 
within 2 weeks prior to the start of study drug.  Post-menopausal women (defined as no 
menses  for at least 1  year)  and surgically  sterilized  women  are not required  to undergo  a 
pregnancy test.  
• Subjects (men and women) of childbearing potential must agree to use adequate 
contraception  beginning  at the signing of  the consent  form until  at least  3 months  after the 
last dose of study drug.  The definition of adequate contraception will be based on the 
judgment of the principal investigator or a designated associate.  
• Subject  must  be able to swallow  and retain  oral medication.  
6.2 Subject  Exclusion  Criteria  
• Concurrent anti -cancer therapy (chemotherapy, definitive radiation therapy, surgery, 
immunotherapy, biologic therapy, or tumor embolization) other than study treatment. 
Concurrent  therapy  with bisphosphonates  or denosumab  for bone  metastases  is allowed. 
Palliative radiation to non -target lesions is also allowed.  
• Prior  use of regorafenib.  
• Uncontrolled  hypertension  (systolic  pressure  >140  mm Hg or diastolic  pressure  > 90 mm 
Hg [NCI-CTCAE  v4.0]  on repeated  measurement)  despite  optimal  medical  management.  
• Concurrent use of another investigational drug or device therapy (i.e., outside of study 
treatment)  during,  or within  4 weeks  of trial entry  (signing  of the informed  consent  form).  
• Concurrent use of strong  CYP3A4 inhibitors (e.g. clarithromycin, grapefruit juice, 
itraconazole,  ketoconazole,  nefazodone,  posaconazole,  telithromycin,  and voriconazole). 
or strong  CYP3A4  inducers  (e.g. rifampin,  phenytoin,  carbamazepine,  phenobarbital,  and 
St. John’s Wort).  
• Use of any herbal  remedy  (e.g. St. John’s  wort [Hypericum  perforatum])  
MEMORIAL  SLOAN -KETTERING  CANCER  CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#:  13-244 A(9) 
Amended:  29-SEP-2016  
Page  14 of 51  
 • Major  surgical  procedure,  open  biopsy,  or significant  traumatic  injury  within  28 days  before 
start of study medication.  
• Active  or clinically  significant  cardiac  disease  including:  
o Congestive  heart  failure  – New York Heart  Association  (NYHA)  > Class  II. 
o Active  coronary  artery  disease  that is not medically  treated.  
o Cardiac  arrhythmias  requiring  anti-arrhythmic  therapy  other  than beta blockers  or 
digoxin.  
o Unstable  angina  (anginal  symptoms  at rest),  new-onset  angina  within  3 months 
before randomization, or myocardial infarction within 6 months before 
randomization.  
• Therapeutic  anticoagulation  with Vitamin -K antagonists  (e.g.,  warfarin)  is not allowed  if the 
medication dose and/or INR/PTT are not considered stable by the treating physician.  If 
the dose and/or INR/PTT are stable, therapeutic anticoagulation with Vitamin -K 
antagonists is allowed with close monitoring.  Anticoagulation with heparin or heparinoids 
is allowed.  
• Evidence  or history  of bleeding  diathesis  or coagulopathy.  
• Any hemorrhage  or bleeding event  ≥ NCI CTCAE  Grade  3 within  4 weeks  prior to start of 
study medication.  
• Subjects  with thrombotic,  embolic,  venous,  or arterial  events,  such  as cerebrovascular 
accident (including transient ischemic attacks) deep vein thrombosis or pulmonary 
embolism within 6 months of start of study treatment.  
• Subjects with a past or current diagnosis of another malignancy that will interfere with 
conduct  of the trial. Patients  with past or current  cancer diagnoses  other  than ACC  are 
allowed to enroll if the investigator believes it will not interfere with trial conduct.  
• Patients  with phaeochromocytoma.  
• Known  history  of human  immunodeficiency  virus  (HIV)  infection  or current  chronic  or 
active hepatitis B or C infection requiring treatment with antiviral therapy.  
• Active  infection  that would  impair  the ability  of the patient  to receive  study  treatment.  
• Symptomatic  metastatic  brain  or leptomeningeal  tumors  (asymptomatic  or treated 
metastatic brain and leptomeningeal tumors are allowed).  
• Presence  of a non-healing  wound  or non-healing  ulcer  that is not tumor  related.  
• Renal  failure  requiring  hemo -or peritoneal  dialysis.  
• Patients  with seizure  disorder  requiring  medication.  
MEMORIAL  SLOAN -KETTERING  CANCER  CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#:  13-244 A(9) 
Amended:  29-SEP-2016  
Page  15 of 51  
 • Interstitial  lung disease  with ongoing  signs  and symptoms  at the time of informed  consent.  
• History  of organ  allograft  (including  corneal  transplant).  
• Known  or suspected  allergy  or hypersensitivity  to any of the study  drugs,  study  drug 
classes, or excipients of the formulations given during the course of this trial.  
• Any malabsorption  condition.  
• Women  who are pregnant  or breast -feeding.  
• Any condition  which,  in the investigator’s  opinion,  makes  the subject  unsuitable  for trial 
participation.  
• Substance  abuse,  medical,  psychological  or social  conditions  that may interfere  with the 
subject’s participation in the study or evaluation of the study results.  
7.0 RECRUITMENT  PLAN  
Potential research subjects will be identified by a member of the patient’s treatment team, 
the protocol  investigator,  or research  team.  Patient  recruitment  most  likely  will occur  in the 
medical oncology clinics of the Head and Neck Disease management team. If the 
investigator is a member of the treatment team, s/he will screen their patient’s medical 
records for suitable research study participants and discuss the study and their potential 
for enrolling in the research study. Potential subjects contacted by their treating physician 
will be referred  to the investigator/research  staff of  the study.  Investigators  will discuss  the 
study and review/sign the informed consent documents with the patient.  
During  the initial  conversation  between  the investigator/research  staff and the patient,  the 
patient may be asked to provide certain health information that is necessary to the 
recruitment and enrollment process. The investigator/research staff may also review 
portions of their medical records in order to further assess eligibility. They will use the 
information provided by the patient and/or medical record to confirm that the patient is 
eligible  and to contact  the patient  regarding  study  enrollment.  If the patient  turns  out to be 
ineligible  for the research  study,  the research  staff will destroy  all information  collected  on 
the patient during the initial conversation and medical records review.  
8.0 PRETREATMENT  EVALUATION  
Within  30 days  of starting  treatment,  the following  tests  need  to be done : 
• History  and Physical  Examination  
• Vital signs,  including  weight  
• Performance  Status  (ECOG  or Karnofsky  Performance  Status)  
• Electrocardiogram  (ECG)  
• Radiology  studies  (CT or MRI)  for disease  assessment.  
MEMORIAL  SLOAN -KETTERING  CANCER  CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#:  13-244 A(9) 
Amended:  29-SEP-2016  
Page  16 of 51  
 • Record  of concomitant  medications  
• Signed  Informed  Consent  Form  
• Request for  archival  tumor  tissue  (if tissue  is not already  available  at MSKCC;  receipt  of 
tissue is not required for study enrollment or initiation.)  
• Research tumor biopsy (this can be performed any time prior to start of study drug): 
Patients may be exempt from biopsy if either the investigator or person performing the 
biopsy judges that no tumor is accessible for biopsy or that biopsy poses too great of a 
risk to the patient.  Patients may also be exempt if frozen tumor tissue has been 
collected within 12 months of study enrollment that the Principal Investigator deems is 
appropriate/sufficient for analysis on this protocol.  For those undergoing research 
biopsy on protocol, radiologic guidance (CT, MRI or ultrasound guided) approaches and 
obtaining multiple cores to ensure sufficient biopsy material (at least 3 cores preferred) 
are allowed as long as it is considered  reasonably safe for the patient.  Tissue will be 
flash frozen in liquid nitrogen as directed by the Principal Investigator (the biopsy 
sample(s)  will be placed  into a cryovial, which  will be submerged  in a liquid  nitrogen  bath 
until the tissue is frozen.)  Some tissue may be prepared by fixation according to 
institutional guidelines as directed by the Principal Investigator.  
• Research  blood  draw  (this can be performed  any time prior to start of  study drug): 
approximately 10 mL of blood, preferably in a lavender top tube (with EDTA).  
Within  14 days  of starting  treatment,  the following  tests  need  to be done : 
• Complete  Blood  Count  (including  platelets)  
• Comprehensive Panel, including liver function tests (Albumin, alkaline phosphatase, 
total bilirubin,  bicarbonate,  BUN,  calcium,  chloride,  creatinine,  glucose,  potassium,  total 
protein, SGOT[AST], SGPT[ALT], sodium), LDH, phosphorus  
• Coagulation studies consist of the prothrombin time (PT), partial thromboplastin time 
(PTT), and international normalized ratio (INR).  These are only required for patients on 
anti-coagulation medications (heparin, low -molecular weight heparin, or coumadin). 
These  do not need  to be checked  for patients not on these  anti-coagulation  medications.  
• Lipase  
• Serum  pregnancy  test in women  of child-bearing  potential.  
9.0 TREATMENT/ INTERVENTION  PLAN  
9.1 Administration  
Regorafenib 120 mg daily taken orally will be administered for 3 weeks on /1 week off. 
One cycle is 28 days.  Three 40 -mg regorafenib tables should be taken in the morning 
with approximately  8 fluid ounces  (240 mL) of water  after a low-fat (<30%  fat) breakfast. 
Some examples of low fat breakfasts are:  
MEMORIAL  SLOAN -KETTERING  CANCER  CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#:  13-244 A(9) 
Amended:  29-SEP-2016  
Page  17 of 51  
 • Two slices  of white  toast  with 1 tablespoon  of low-fat margarine  and 1 tablespoon 
of jelly  and 8 ounces  (240 mL) of skim  milk (approximately  319 calories and  8.2 g 
of fat).  
• One cup of cereal (i.e. Special K), 8 ounces (240 mL) of skim milk, one piece of 
toast  with jam (no butter  or marmalade),  apple  juice,  and one cup of coffee  or tea 
(2 g fat, 17 g protein, 93 g of carbohydrate, 520 calories.  
Patients  for whom  regorafenib  dose  reduction  was not performed  or required  may have 
their treatment dose increased to the FDA -approved dose of 160 mg daily orally for 3 
weeks in a 4 -week cycle in cycle #2 or beyond (this is not mandatory).  
If doses are missed or vomited, this must be indicated in the patient’s pill diary.  Missed 
doses not directed by  the investigator(s) that constitute < 20% of the mandated doses  for 
a given  cycle will  not be considered  (a) protocol  violation(s).  Missed  or skipped  doses  will 
not be made up (i.e., the week/day count on therapy will continue regardless of whether 
doses have been missed or skipped).  Study treatment will be administered in cycles of 4 
weeks in duration. Patients will bring their pill diaries for review at their clinic visits but it 
will not be considered a protocol violation if the patient forgets the diary.  
Patients  will receive  a sufficient  supply  of study  drug to last until their next scheduled 
appointment.  
9.2 Concomitant  Medications  and Therapies  
All medication that is considered necessary for the subject’s welfare, and which is not 
expected to interfere with the evaluation of the study treatment, may be given at the 
discretion of the investigator.  All medications (including contrast media) taken within 2 
weeks  prior to the start of  the study  and during  the study  must  be recorded  in the subject’s 
source documentation.  Specific caution should be taken when considering or 
administering a concomitant medication that is metabolized by the cytochrome enzymes 
CYP2C8, CYP2B6 and CYP2C9.  Such concomitant medication should be avoided on 
protocol, if possible.  
Co-administration of a strong CYP3A4 inducer (rifampin) with a single 160 mg dose of 
Stivarga  decreased  the mean  exposure  of regorafenib,  increased  the mean  exposure  of 
the active  metabolite  M-5, and resulted  in no change  in the mean  exposure  of the active 
metabolite M -2. Avoid concomitant use of Stivarga with strong CYP3A4 inducers (e.g. 
rifampin, phenytoin, carbamazepine, phenobarbital, and St. John’s Wort)  
Co administration of a strong CYP3A4 inhibitor (ketoconazole) with a single 160mg dose 
of Stivarga increased the mean exposure of regorafenib and decreased the mean 
exposure of the active metabolites M -2 and M -5. Avoid concomitant use of Stivarga with 
strong inhibitors of CYP3A4 activity (e.g. clarithromycin, grapefruit juice, itraconazole, 
ketoconazole, nefazodone, posaconazole, telithromycin, and voriconazole).  Please refer 
to http://medicine.iupui.edu/flockhart/  for additional  information  regarding  drug interactions 
with cytochrome P450 isoenzymes.  
Permitted  concomitant  therapy  includes:  
MEMORIAL  SLOAN -KETTERING  CANCER  CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#:  13-244 A(9) 
Amended:  29-SEP-2016  
Page  18 of 51  
 • Standard  therapies  for concurrent  medical  conditions.  
• Supportive  care for any underlying  illness.  
• Palliative  radiation  therapy  is allowed  if the target  lesion(s)  are not included  within  the 
radiation field and no more than 10% of the bone marrow is irradiated.  
• Granulocyte  colony -stimulating  factor  (G-CSF)  and other  hematopoietic  growth  factors 
may be used in the management of acute toxicity, such as febrile neutropenia, when 
clinically indicated or at the investigator’s discretion. However, they may not be 
substituted for a required dose reduction.  Subjects are permitted to take chronic 
erythropoietin.  
• Treatment with nonconventional therapies (such as acupuncture), and vitamin/mineral 
supplements  are permitted  provided  that they do not interfere  with the study  endpoints, 
in the opinion of the investigator.  
• Bisphosphonates  or denosumab.  
• Subjects  who are therapeutically  treated  with an agent  such  as warfarin  or heparin  will 
be allowed to participate provided that their medication dose and INR/PTT are 
considered stable by the treating physician.  
9.3 Schedule  of Events  (for ALL  patients  initiating  treatment)  
9.3.1  Patients will initiate treatment with regorafenib on Week 1, Day 1.  The required 
laboratory tests (detailed in Section 10 ) can be performed up to 7 days prior to 
initiation of treatment.  It is unnecessary to repeat these laboratory tests if the 
screening  assessments  of the same  tests  were  performed  within  7 days  prior to first 
dose of therapy.  All other Week 1 evaluations (detailed in Section 10 ) may be 
performed up to 3 days prior to initiation of study treatment.  
9.3.2  The onset of regorafenib -induced hypertension often occurs  during the  first cycle of 
treatment for most patients who develop hypertension.  During the first 6 weeks of 
treatment, it is strongly recommended that patients have their blood pressures 
checked even in weeks that they are not evaluated at MSKCC.  There are no 
restrictions on how the blood pressure is to be obtained during those weeks, and 
can include monitoring on home blood pressure equipment, at other physician 
offices, at MSKCC, or at commercial outlets.  Blood pressure values may be 
recorded in the pill diaries that will be reviewed at each MSKCC clinic visit or 
verbally reported to the study team.  If the systolic blood pressure is >150 mm Hg 
and/or  the diastolic blood pressure is > 90 mm Hg and/or  symptoms develop that 
are perceived to be related to elevated blood pressure (for example headaches or 
visual disturbance), patients will be instructed by study staff to contact their study 
physician immediately for guidance.  A re-check of the blood pressure can be 
requested at the study physician’s discretion to determine the accurate value of the 
patient’s blood pressure before protocol -dictated action(s) is/are taken in response 
to a reported  blood  pressure  value  (this applies  both to recommended  and protocol - 
mandated blood pressures taken at MSKCC or outside of MSKCC).  The study  
MEMORIAL  SLOAN -KETTERING  CANCER  CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#:  13-244 A(9) 
Amended:  29-SEP-2016  
Page  19 of 51  
 physician  may at his/her  discretion  determine  which  external  values  likely  reflect  the 
true blood pressure to guide clinical decision -making.  
9.3.3  Patients  for whom  regorafenib  dose  reduction  was not performed  or required  may 
have their treatment dose increased to the FDA -approved dose of 160 mg daily 
orally  for 3 weeks in  a 4-week cycle  in cycle  #2 or beyond  (this is not mandatory).  
9.3.4  Patients will be required to complete a pill diary concerning their use of regorafenib 
every 28 days.  If a patient misses a dose of regorafenib for personal reasons (i.e. 
forgetting  to take medication,  nausea,  etc.),  the missed  dose  should  be documented 
on the patient’s pill diary (Appendix B).  Missed doses not directed by the 
investigator(s) that constitute < 20% of the mandated doses for a given cycle will  
not be considered (a) protocol violation(s).  Doses held at the discretion of the 
physician are never protocol violations.  Missed or skipped doses will not be made 
up (i.e., the week/day count on therapy will continue regardless of whether doses 
have been missed or skipped).  
9.3.5  Evaluations  during  treatment  will be performed  according  to the schedule  detailed  in 
Section  10. Guidelines  for dose  reductions  are provided  in Section  11. 
9.3.6  Tumor  measurements  with CT and/or  MRI will be performed  as outlined  in Section 
10. 
9.3.7  Treatment may be discontinued at any time for progression of disease, 
unacceptable  toxicity,  patient  withdrawal  of consent,  patient  non-compliance,  or 
investigator judgment.  
9.4 Correlative  Studies  
Exploratory  Objective:  To perform  tumor  tissues  analyses  for biomarkers  that correlate  to 
regorafenib clinical efficacy . 
9.4.1  Background Studies/Preliminary Data : We hypothesize that ACC responses to 
regorafenib will be linked to baseline activation of the vascular endothelial growth 
factor (VEGF), platelet -derived growth factor (PDGF), fibroblast growth factor 
receptor (FGF), and/or c -kit (CD117) pathways via overexpression of the oncogenic 
transcription  factor  c-myb and/or  other  mechanisms  outlined  in Section  3.0. In order 
to evaluate this hypothesis, the studies described below will be performed upon  
both archival and research biopsy tissues, depending on the availability of funding. 
Included amongst these studies are exploratory approaches that may also suggest 
myb-independent mechanisms that may mediate drug susceptibility or resistance.  
9.4.2  Study  Plan for fixed  tissue : Studies  evaluating  c-myb protein  expression,  t(6;9) 
translocation  status,  the VEGF/PDGF/FGF/KIT  pathways, and  other  potentially 
relevant genes/proteins will be conducted in fixed tissues.  
Expression of VEGF/PDGF/FGF/KIT pathway proteins will be evaluated by 
immunohistochemistry  (IHC).  c-myb expression  will also be evaluated  by IHC. The 
presence or absence of the t(6;9) translocation will be assessed by fluorescent in - 
situ hybridization (FISH).  These studies will be performed upon collected archival  
MEMORIAL  SLOAN -KETTERING  CANCER  CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#:  13-244 A(9) 
Amended:  29-SEP-2016  
Page  20 of 51  
 samples and/or the  fixed portions of the research biopsies obtained on this study, 
depending on the availability of tissue.  Evaluation of the t(6;9) fusion breakpoint 
may also be pursued  with RT-PCR  cDNA  amplification  and sequencing if  feasible, 
though the need for high yield and quality RNA to perform this analysis may 
necessitate using frozen tissues obtained from the research biopsies.  
We anticipate that all 38 patients will have archival tissue available for these 
analyses.  We will explore  correlations  between  the tumor  IHC status  of the target 
proteins listed above, as well as presence of the t(6;9) translocation, with clinical 
benefit from regorafenib.  Please see Section14.0 for biostatistical considerations 
for these studies.  
9.4.3  Study Plan for research biopsy tissues : (to be performed in MSKCC Core facilities 
and Dr. Timothy Chan’s laboratory (MSKCC HOPP) The research biopsy samples 
will be divided for fixation and flash freezing at the discretion of the Principal 
Investigator.  A member of the research team will be present at the biopsy 
procedure and transport the tissues to the MSKCC Tumor Procurement Service for 
accessioning.  The tissues will then be transported by the research team to Dr. 
Chan’s Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program (HOPP) laboratory in the 
Zuckerman  Research  Center  for analysis  and storage.  These  samples  will be used 
to evaluate the genomic and transcriptomic landscape of the tumors with the 
exploratory goal of evaluating myb -dependent and/or -independent markers of 
regorafenib susceptibility and resistance.  
DNA and RNA will be extracted from frozen samples and/or paraffin tissue. The 
research  peripheral  blood  sample  collected  on the study  will be used as  a control, 
matched normal sample (microdissection of normal tissue in the tumor samples 
may also be used for this purpose).  
DNA will be submitted for whole exome or whole genome sequencing (in 
collaboration with Dr. Timothy Chan’s group).  It is possible that at the time these 
studies  are to be conducted  a customized -panel  of ACC  specific  alterations  that can 
be analyzed in a highly sensitive array based approach from fixed tissues will be 
available.  In that scenario, fixed tissue from the collected archival tissue or the 
research biopsies will be used for this genomic analysis, preserving the frozen 
tissue for other assays.  Hence, the specific assay that will be employed to analyze 
for genomic alterations will be dependent upon the technology available at the time 
of analysis. Comparisons of DNA between tumor and normal tissue (from the 
research blood draw) will be performed as appropriate, thus generating germline 
sequence data.  There is no intention to analyze the germline data beyond utilizing 
it as a normal control for the tumor tissue analysis, and generally germline data will 
not be communicated to the patient.  
The following procedure will be followed by MSKCC investigators for the unique 
situation  in which  a potentially  actionable  incidental  finding  has been  discovered  in 
the course of research conducted on samples collected under this protocol:  
MEMORIAL  SLOAN -KETTERING  CANCER  CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#:  13-244 A(9) 
Amended:  29-SEP-2016  
Page  21 of 51  
 In the event an investigator's research identifies a finding that he or she believes 
should be communicated to the subject (and/or family designee), the investigator 
shall communicate this to the OCR -IRB. The finding will be reviewed by a group 
convened by the IRB  to determine whether the incidental finding should be 
discussed with the  subject. In  the event that  group convened by  the IRB determines 
that the finding should  be discussed  with the subject,  and the subject  has consented 
to be re -contacted, then the treating/consenting physician shall be contacted by the 
OCR -IRB representative and asked to refer the subject to the Clinical Genetics 
Service for further discussion of the research finding. After appropriate counseling 
and consent, the Clinical Genetics Service will request permission to confirm the 
result in a New York DOH -approved laboratory prior to communication of the 
specific result. If the patient is not available (e.g. deceased), then the surrogate 
designated on the consent will be contacted and the above will occur.  
We hypothesize that the transcription factor c -myb is a central driver of ACC 
oncogenesis, presumably through activation of an oncogenic transcriptional 
program.  Several c -myb target genes have been  previously identified, but a c -myb 
transcriptional signature in ACC has yet to be defined.  Extracted RNA will be 
analyzed  with gene  expression  arrays  on the Affymetrix  GeneChip  system,  or some 
other equivalent technology that may be available at the time of analysis.  
Frozen tissues from the research biopsy may be evaluated for relevant protein 
targets  by Western  blot or other  proteomic  assays  that may be available  at time of 
analysis.  
Assuming that only approximately 10% of patients do not qualify for the research 
biopsy,  we anticipate  obtaining  biopsies  on 34 patients.  Please  Section  14.0 for the 
biostatistical considerations for these studies.  
9.4.4  Study Plan for research biopsy tissues : (to be performed in MSKCC Core facilities 
or Champions Oncology Inc.)  Emerging evidence suggests that mouse patient 
derived xenografts (PDXs) models can be faithful representations of in situ human 
cancer biology, and be used to predict clinical drug efficacy in patients.  ACC PDX 
models have been created by other groups, and represent the only experimental 
model system in which new therapeutic approaches and ACC biology can be 
explored  pre-clinically.  Patients  who will undergo  a research  biopsy  on this protocol 
and have sufficient tissue to create PDX models may be selected to have a portion 
of their biopsy submitted for this purpose.  These patients will be approached to 
sign consent for IRB protocol #06 -107, “Storage and Research Use of Human 
Biospecimens” and the models will be created as outlined in IRB protocol #14 - 
091(PI: Dr. Elise DeStanchina) , “Establishment and Characterization of Unique 
Mouse Models Using Patient -Derived Xenografts”.  These models will be 
established by the MSKCC Antitumor Assessment Core Facility, our institutional 
core facility responsible for establishing and testing xenograft mouse models. 
Alternatively, through a collaboration established with Champions Oncology, Inc., 
patient’s tumors may be collected and sent to Champions for model creation and 
conduct of experiments.  Those models will be provided back to Memorial Sloan 
Kettering Cancer Center for research purposes.  
MEMORIAL  SLOAN -KETTERING  CANCER  CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#:  13-244 A(9) 
Amended:  29-SEP-2016  
Page  22 of 51  
 Portions  of the research  biopsy  may also be used  to establish  cell line or spheroid in 
vitro models in Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center.  Such efforts will help 
develop new laboratory systems to help interrogate ACC biology and develop novel 
therapeutic approaches that build upon findings from this clinical/correlative study.  
MEMORIAL  SLOAN -KETTERING  CANCER  CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#:  13-244 A(9) 
Amended:  29-SEP-2016  
Page  23 of 51  
 10.0 EVALUATION  DURING  TREATMENT/INTERVENTION  
Study  Calendar  
Regorafenib  taken orally  will be administered  for 3 weeks on  /1 week off.  One cycle is 28 
days. The  evaluations/tests  scheduled  for Cycles  1 through  3+ may be performed  up to 3 
days  prior to the start of  the week designated  in the table  below  if not otherwise specified. 
After Cycle 12 and beyond, MD visits and labs are required every odd cycles, and labs 
only during even cycles.  
 
 Pre- 
Studya C1 
Wk 
1 C1 
Wk 
2 C1 
Wk 
3 C1 
Wk 
4 C2 
Wk 
1 C2 
Wk 
2 C2 
Wk 
3 C2 
Wk 
4 C3+ 
Wk1 C12+  
Even 
Wk 1 C13+  
Odd 
Wk 1  
Off Studyg 
Regorafenibb  X X X  Xb X X  X X X  
Informed  consent  X             
Medical  history  X             
Concurrent  meds  X X X X 
Physical  exam  X Xd X X  X  X  Xf  Xf X 
Vital signs  X Xd X X  X  X  Xf  Xf X 
Blood pressure 
monitoring  (on non- 
clinic weeks)j      
X   
X       
Weight  X Xd X X  X  X  Xf  Xf X 
Performance  status  X Xd X X  X  X  Xf  Xf X 
CBC  w/diff,  plts X Xe  X  X  X  Xf Xf Xf X 
Comprehensive  panelc X Xe  X  X  X  Xf Xf Xf X 
Lipase,  Amlyase  blood 
test X             
Coagulation  studiesl X X  X  X  X  Xf Xf Xf  
ECG X             
Beta-HCG  (serum)  Xk             
Request  for archival 
tumor tissue  X             
Research  tumor 
biopsyh X             
Research  blood  draw X             
Adverse  event 
evaluation   X Xm X 
 
 
 
 
Tumor  measurementsi  
 
 
 
X CT and/or MRI will be performed every 8 weeks (+/ - 1 week) ( or 
approximately every 2 cycles).  After 10 months, scans will be 
performed every 12 weeks (+/ - 1 week)( or approximately every 3 
cycles).  Documentation  (radiologic)  must  be provided  for patients 
removed from study for progressive disease.  Objective 
responses should be confirmed with a second assessment 
performed at least 4 weeks later. Every effort should be made 
to have tumor measurements performed 6 months (+/ - 1 
week)  after  the start  of treatment,  if possible,  for assessment  
of the primary  endpoint.   
 a: See Section  8.0 for the timing  of these  tests/evaluations  prior to the start of therapy. 
b: Patients will  start the study  taking regorafenib 120  mg orally  daily for 3 weeks  in a 4 
week cycle . Patients for whom regorafenib dose reduction was not performed or  
required  may have  their treatment  dose  increased  to the FDA-approved  dose  of 160 
mg daily orally for 3 weeks in a 4 -week cycle in cycle #2 or beyond (this is not 
mandatory). If a patient misses a dose of regorafenib for personal reasons (i.e. 
forgetting  to take medication,  nausea,  etc.),  the missed  dose  should  be documented 
on the patient’s pill diary (Appendix B).  Missed doses not directed by the 
investigator(s) that constitute < 20% of the mandated doses for a given cycle will  
not be considered (a) protocol violation(s).  Doses held at the discretion of the  
physician  are never  protocol  violations.  Missed  or skipped  doses  will not be made 
up (i.e., the week/day count on therapy will continue regardless of whether doses  
MEMORIAL  SLOAN -KETTERING  CANCER  CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#:  13-244 A(9) 
Amended:  29-SEP-2016  
Page  24 of 51  
 have  been  missed  or skipped).  
c: Albumin, alkaline phosphatase, total bilirubin, bicarbonate, BUN, calcium, chloride, 
creatinine,  glucose,  LDH,  phosphorus,  potassium,  total protein,  SGOT  [AST],  SGPT 
[ALT], sodium.  
d: These  Week 1  evaluations  may be performed  up to 3 days prior  to the start of 
treatment.  
e: These  Week 1  laboratory  tests  may be done  up to 7 days  prior to starting  treatment.  
It is unnecessary  to repeat  these  laboratory  tests  if the screening  assessments  of 
the same tests were performed within 7 days prior to the first dose of therapy.  
f:  After  the completion  of Cycle  2, the CBC,  serum  chemistry  blood  tests,  coagulation 
studies (if required), physical examinations, vitals signs, performance status, and 
weight will be done once every cycle, preferably on week 1 of every cycle.  If the 
patient cannot be seen on week 1, these evaluations may be completed up to 1 
week prior or during another week within the cycle at the discretion of the treating 
physician.  
g: Off-study  evaluation  will be performed  within  30 days  of the patient’s  last dose  of 
regorafenib.  
h: Patients may  be exempt from biopsy  if either  the investigator or  person performing 
the biopsy judges that no tumor is accessible for biopsy or that biopsy poses too 
great of a risk to the patient.  Patients may also be exempt if frozen tumor tissue 
has been collected within 12 months of study enrollment that the Principal 
Investigator deems is appropriate/sufficient for analysis on this protocol.  For those 
undergoing research biopsy on protocol, radiologic guidance (CT, MRI or 
ultrasound guided) approaches and obtaining multiple cores to ensure sufficient 
biopsy material (at least 3 cores preferred) are allowed as long as it is considered 
reasonably safe for the patient.  Tissue will be flash frozen in liquid nitrogen as 
directed by the Principal Investigator (the biopsy sample(s) will be placed into a 
cryovial,  which  will be submerged  in a liquid  nitrogen  bath until the tissue  is frozen.) 
Some tissue may be prepared by fixation according to institutional guidelines if 
directed by the Principal Investigator.  
i:  The treating physician  may reschedule radiology  scans  due to treatment delays at 
his or her discretion.  If the patient has CT and/or MRI scans completed early for 
any reason (i.e. suspicion of disease progression), the next set of scans may be 
ordered  in 8 weeks  (+/- 1 week)  from that assessment  (or in 12 weeks  (+/- 1 week) 
for patients who are on treatment for  more than 10 months).  Every  effort should 
be made  to have  tumor measurements  performed 6  months (+/ - 1 week)  after 
the start of treatment, if possible, for assessment of the primary endpoint.  
j: The onset of regorafenib -induced hypertension often occurs during the first cycle of 
treatment for most patients who develop hypertension.  During the first 6 weeks of 
treatment, it is strongly recommended that patients have their blood pressures 
checked even in weeks that they are not evaluated at MSKCC.  There are no 
restrictions on how the blood pressure is to be obtained during those weeks, and 
can include monitoring on home blood pressure equipment, at other physician 
offices, at MSKCC, or at commercial outlets.  Blood pressure values may be 
recorded in the pill diaries that will be reviewed at each MSKCC clinic visit or or 
verbally reported to the study team.  If the systolic blood pressure is >150 mm Hg 
and/or  the diastolic blood pressure is >90 mm Hg and/or  symptoms develop that  
are perceived to be related to elevated blood pressure (for example headaches or 
visual disturbance), patients will be instructed by study staff to contact their study 
physician immediately for guidance.  A re-check of the blood pressure can be 
requested at the study physician’s discretion to determine the accurate value of the 
patient’s blood pressure before protocol -dictated action(s) is/are taken in response 
to a reported  blood  pressure  value  (this applies  both to recommended  and protocol - 
mandated blood pressures taken at MSKCC or outside of MSKCC).  The study 
physician  may at his/her  discretion  determine  which  external  values  likely reflect  the 
true blood pressure to guide clinical decision -making.  
k. Serum  pregnancy  test is required  within  14 days  of drug treatment  for all women  of 
child-bearing potential.  
l. Coagulation  studies  consist  of the prothrombin  time (PT),  partial  thromboplastin  time 
(PTT), and international normalized ratio (INR).  These are only required as 
indicated  on the calendar  for patients  on anti-coagulation  medications  (heparin,  low- 
molecular weight heparin, or coumadin). These do not need to be checked for 
patients not on these anti -coagulation medications.  
m. During  even  cycles  after cycle  12, adverse  event  will be conducted  by phone 
assessment.  
MEMORIAL  SLOAN -KETTERING  CANCER  CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#:  13-244 A(9) 
Amended:  29-SEP-2016  
Page  25 of 51  
  
11.0 TOXICITIES/SIDE  EFFECTS  
The starting dose  of regorafenib  is 120 mg once  daily.  Study  medication  will be administered  on 
a 3 weeks  on/1 week off  schedule  (3 weeks  out of  every  4). Patients  for whom  regorafenib  dose 
reduction was not performed or required may have their treatment dose increased to the FDA - 
approved  dose  of 160  mg daily orally  for 3 weeks  in a 4-week cycle  in cycle  #2 or beyond  (this is 
not mandatory).  
Doses will be delayed or reduced for clinically significant hematologic and non -hematologic 
toxicities that are related to protocol therapy according to the guidelines described in sections 
below.  Dose  modifications  will follow  predefined  dose  levels.  Dose  adjustments  for hematologic 
toxicity are based on the blood counts obtained in preparation for the day of treatment. \ 
For patients who must undergo a procedure or surgery while on study that requires wound 
healing or  involves  risk for significant  bleeding,  regorafenib should  be held 2 weeks  prior to the 
scheduled  surgery/procedure.  The decision  to resume  reografenib  after the surgery/procedure 
should be based on clinical judgement of adequate wound healing  
11.1 General  Considerations  for Managing  Regorafenib -related  Adverse  Events  
This section  contains  general  recommendations  for the management  of adverse  events.  Patients 
developing a regorafenib -related CTCAE Grade 1 or 2 adverse events may have their dose 
continued at the same dose level.  
Notes: The recommendations for the management of adverse events in this section are to serve 
as general guidelines; dose reductions or delays for any event of any CTCAE grade may always 
be considered for safety reasons at the discretion of the treating investigator.  If a subject 
experiences more than one toxicity, dose reduction should be according to the toxicity with the 
highest  grade.  In the case  of two  or more  toxicities  of the  same  grade,  the investigator  may dose 
reduce according to that deemed most causally related to study treatment.  
 
 
 
The modifications  of regorafenib  will follow  the following  predefined  dose  levels:  
Dose level +1  
(standard  starting  dose)  160 mg po qd Four 40-mg tablets  of regorafenib  
Dose  level 0 120 mg po qd Three  40-mg tablets  of regorafenib  
Dose  level - 1 80 mg po qd Two 40-mg tablets  of regorafenib  
MEMORIAL  SLOAN -KETTERING  CANCER  CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#:  13-244 A(9) 
Amended:  29-SEP-2016  
Page  26 of 51  
  
 
 
Recommended  dose  modification  for toxicities  except  hand -foot-skin reaction,  hypertension,  and ALT/AST/bilirubin  for 
adverse  events  related  to regorafenib  
NCI-CTCAE  
v4.0a Dose Interruptionb Dose  
Modificationb Dose  for Subsequent  Cycles  
Grade  0-2 Treat  on time No change  No change  
Grade  3 Delay  until ≤ Grade  2c Reduce  by 1 dose  level If dose  was reduced  and toxicity  remains  < Grade 
2, dose re -escalation can be considered at the 
discretion  of the treating  investigator.  If dose  is re- 
escalated  and toxicity  (≥ Grade  3) recurs,  institute 
permanent dose reduction.  
Grade  4 Delay  until ≤ Grade  2c Reduce  by 1 dose  level. 
Permanent 
discontinuation  
can be considered  at 
treating  investigator’s 
discretion.   
a. NCI-CTCAE  = National  Cancer  Institute  - Common  Terminology  Criteria  for Adverse  Events,  version  4.0 
 
b. Dose modification  or interruption  is not required  for alopecia,  non-refractory  hypersensitivity  and asymptomatic  laboratory 
abnormalities.  Dose modification or interruption is not required for nausea, vomiting and diarrhea if optimal supportive 
management has not been instituted.  
 
c. If no recovery  after a 4 week  delay,  treatment  should  be permanently  discontinued  unless  subject  is deriving  clinical  benefit.  
MEMORIAL  SLOAN -KETTERING  CANCER  CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#:  13-244 A(9) 
Amended:  29-SEP-2016  
Page  27 of 51  
 11.2 Hand -foot skin reaction  related  to regorafenib  
 
Grading  for Hand -Foot -Skin -Reaction  
 Grade  1 Grade  2 Grade  3 
NCI-CTCAE  v4.0 
Palmar -plantar 
erythrodysesthesia 
syndromea Minimal  skin changes  or 
dermatitis  
(e.g.,  erythema,  edema, 
or hyperkeratosis) 
without pain  Skin changes  
(e.g.,  peeling,  blisters 
bleeding, edema, or 
hyperkeratosis) with 
pain Severe  skin changes 
(e.g., peeling, 
blisters, bleeding, 
edema, or  
hyperkeratosis)  with 
pain 
Further  description/ 
examples of skin 
changes  Numbness,  dysesthesia  
/ paresthesia tingling, 
painless swelling, or 
erythema  of the hands 
and/or feet  Painful  erythema  and 
swelling  of the hands 
and/or feet  Moist  desquamation, 
ulceration,  blistering, 
or severe  pain of the 
hands and/or feet  
Effect  on activities  Does  not disrupt  normal 
activities  Limiting  instrumental 
activities of daily life 
(e.g., preparing 
meals, shopping for 
groceries  or clothes, 
using  the telephone, 
managing money)  Limiting self -care 
activities  of daily life 
(e.g., bathing, 
dressing and 
undressing,  feeding 
self, using  the toilet,  
taking  medications) 
and not bedridden  
a. Palmer -planter  erythrodysesthesia  syndrome  is a disorder  characterized  by redness,  marked 
discomfort, swelling, and tingling in the palms of hands or the soles of the feet.  
At first occurrence of HFSR, independent of grade, prompt institution of supportive measures  
such  as topical  emollients,  low potency  steroids,  or urea-containing  creams  should  be considered.  
Recommended  (not mandated)  prevention/management  strategies  for skin toxicities  consistent 
with HFSR are summarized below:  
Control  of calluses  
Before  initiating  treatment  with regorafenib:  
• Check  condition  of hands  and feet. 
• Suggest  a manicure/pedicure,  when  indicated.  
• Recommend  pumice  stone  use for callus  or ‘rough  spot’  removal. 
During regorafenib treatment:  
• Avoid  pressure  points.  
• Avoid  items  that rub, pinch  or create  friction. 
Use of creams  
• Non-urea based  creams  may be applied  liberally.  
• Keratolytic  creams  (e.g. urea-based  creams,  salicylic  acid 6%) may be used  sparingly  and 
only to affected (hyperkeratotic) areas.  
• Alpha  hydroxyl  acids  (AHA)  based  creams  may be applied  liberally  2 times  a day. 
Approximately 5% to 8% provides gentle chemical exfoliation.  
• Topical  analgesics  (e.g. lidocaine  2%) are to be considered  for pain control.  
• Topical  corticosteroids  like clobetasol  0.05% can  be considered  for subjects  with Grade  2 
or 3 HFSR.  Use of any grade of HFSR is allowed.  
Tender  areas  should  be protected  as follows:  
MEMORIAL  SLOAN -KETTERING  CANCER  CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#:  13-244 A(9) 
Amended:  29-SEP-2016  
Page  28 of 51  
 • Use socks/gloves  to cover  moisturizing  creams  
• Wear  well-padded  footwear  
• Use insole  cushions  or inserts  (e.g. silicon,  gel) 
• Foot soaks  with tepid  water  and Epson  salts 
MEMORIAL  SLOAN -KETTERING  CANCER  CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#:  13-244 A(9) 
Amended:  29-SEP-2016  
Page  29 of 51  
  
Recommended  dose  modification  for hand -foot-skin reaction  related  to regorafenib  
Grade  of event  
(NCI-CTCAE  v4.0)  Occurrence  Suggested  Dose  Modification  
Grade  1 Any Maintain  dose  level and immediately  institute  supportive 
measures for symptomatic relief.  
Grade 2 
(intolerable)  1st occurrence  Therapy may be interrupted and restarted at the same 
dose  once  toxicity  resolves  to Grade  0-1. Alternatively, 
regorafenib may be decreased by one dose level.  
Supportive  measures should  be instituted  immediately. 
If no improvement,  interrupt  therapy  for a minimum  of 7 
days,  until toxicity  resolves  to Grade  0-1.b, c 
No improvement 
within 7 days or 
2nd occurrence  Interrupt therapy until toxicity resolves to Grade 0 -1.c 
When  resuming  treatment,  treat at reduced  dose  level.b 
3rd occurrence  Interrupt therapy until toxicity resolves to Grade 0 -1.c 
When  resuming  treatment,  decrease  dose  by one dose 
level.b, d 
4th occurrence  Discontinue  therapy.  
Grade  3 1st occurrence  Institute supportive measures immediately. Interrupt 
therapy  for a minimum  of 7 days  until toxicity  resolves  
to Grade  0-1.c When  resuming  treatment,  decrease 
dose by one dose level.b, d 
2nd occurrence  Institute supportive measures immediately. Interrupt 
therapy  for a minimum of  7 days  until toxicity  resolves  
to Grade  0-1.c When  resuming  treatment,  decrease 
dose by one additional dose level.b, d 
3rd occurrence  Discontinue  treatment  permanently.  
a. More  conservative  management  is allowed  if judged  medically  appropriate  by the investigator.  
b. If toxicity  returns  to Grade  0-1 after dose  reduction,  dose  re-escalation  is permitted  at the discretion  of 
the investigator if subject has completed one cycle at reduced dose without recurrence of event.  
c. If there  is no recovery  after a 4-week delay,  treatment  with regorafenib  will be discontinued 
permanently.  
d. Subjects  requiring  > 2 dose  reductions  should  go off protocol  therapy.  
e. The maximum  daily dose  is 160 mg. 
 
11.3 Hypertension  related  to regorafenib  
Hypertension is a known AE associated with regorafenib treatment.  The management of 
hypertension,  including  the choice  of antihypertensive  medication,  will be performed  according  to 
local standards and to the usual practice of the investigator.  Every effort should be made to 
control blood pressure by medical means other than study drug dose modification.  
MEMORIAL  SLOAN -KETTERING  CANCER  CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#:  13-244 A(9) 
Amended:  29-SEP-2016  
Page  30 of 51  
 Management  of Treatment -Emergent  Hypertension  related  to regorafenib  
Grade 
(CTCAE  v4.0)  Antihypertensive  Therapy  Regorafenib  Dosing  
1 
Prehypertension  (systolic 
BP 120 - 139 mmHg or  
diastolic  BP 80 - 89 
mmHg)   
 
None   
• Continue  regorafenib  
• Consider  increasing  blood  pressure 
(BP) monitoring  
2 
Systolic BP 140 - 159 
mmHg  or diastolic  BP 90 - 
99 mmHg,  
OR 
 
Symptomatic  increase  by 
> 20 mmHg  (diastolic)  if 
previously  within  normal 
limits   
 
• Treat  with the aim to achieve 
diastolic BP ≤ 90 mm Hg:  
• If BP previously  within  normal 
limits, start anti -hypertensive 
monotherapy  
• If patient  already  on anti- 
hypertensive  medication, 
titrate up the dose.   
 
• Continue  regorafenib  
 
• If symptomatic, hold regorafenib until 
symptoms  resolve  AND  diastolic  BP ≤ 
90 mm Hga. When regorafenib is 
restarted, continue at the same dose 
level.  
3 
Systolic  BP ≥ 160 mmHg 
or diastolic BP ≥ 100 
mmHg   
Treat  with the aim to achieve 
diastolic BP ≤ 90 mm Hg: 
Start anti -hypertensive 
medication  
AND/OR  
Increase current anti - 
hypertensive  medication  
AND/OR  
Add additional anti - 
hypertensive  medications.  • Hold regorafenib  until diastolic  BP ≤ 
90 mm Hg, and if symptomatic,  until 
symptoms resolve.a 
• When regorafenib is restarted, 
continue  at the same  dose  level.  
• If BP is not controlled  with the addition 
of new or more intensive therapy, 
reduce by 1 dose level.b 
• If Grade  3 hypertension  recurs  despite 
dose reduction and antihypertensive 
therapy, reduce another dose level.c 
4 
Life-threatening 
consequences (eg, 
malignant  hypertension, 
transient or permanent 
neurologic deficit, 
hypertensive crisis)   
 
 
Per institutional  guidelines   
 
 
Discontinue  therapy  
a. Patients  requiring  a delay  of >4 weeks  should  go off protocol  therapy  
b. If BP remains  controlled  for at least  one cycle,  dose  re-escalation  permitted  per investigator’s 
discretion.  
c. Patients  requiring  >2 dose  reductions  should  go off protocol  therapy.  
MEMORIAL  SLOAN -KETTERING  CANCER  CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#:  13-244 A(9) 
Amended:  29-SEP-2016  
Page  31 of 51  
 11.4 Liver  function  abnormalities  related  to regorafenib  
For patients with observed worsening of serum liver tests considered  related  to regorafenib (i.e. 
where  no alternative  cause  is evident,  such  as post-hepatic  cholestasis  or disease  progression), 
the dose modification and monitoring advice in Table 6 -5 should be followed.  
Regorafenib  is a UGT1A1  inhibitor.  Mild,  indirect  (unconjugated)  hyperbilirubinemia  may occur  in 
patients with Gilbert’s syndrome.  
 
Dose  modifications/interruption  for ALT and/or  AST and/or  bilirubin  increases  related  to 
regorafenib  
Observed  elevationsa 1st Occurrence  Restart  Re-occurrence  
Baseline  G0 to G1 
or 
baseline  G1 to G2 Treat on time and 
check AST, ALT and 
bilirubin  2x/week  for 2 
weeks followed by 
weekly assessments 
for at least 4 weeksc.  Continue with 
therapy with 
monitoring  at the 
investigator’s 
discretion.  
Baseline  G0 to G2 Delay  until < G1 and 
check AST, ALT, 
bilirubin 2x/week.  Reduce 1 dose level and 
check  AST,  ALT,  bilirubin 
weekly for at least 4 
weeks.a, c Discontinue  
Baseline  any grade  to 
G3 Delay until < G1 if 
baseline was G0 OR 
until G1 if baseline 
was G1 OR until G2 if 
baseline was G2.  
Check  AST,  ALT, 
bilirubin  2x/week.  
If ALT or AST > 8 x 
ULN with a 
concomitant rise in 
bilirubin (of any 
degree)  compared  to 
previous bilirubin 
values, consider 
permanent 
discontinuation  at the 
first occurrence.  Reduce 1 dose level and 
check  AST,  ALT,  bilirubin 
weekly assessments for 
at least 4 weeks.a, c Discontinue  
a: Severity  Grade  per NCI-CTCAE  v 4.0. 
b: If ALT, AST, and bilirubin remain stable for two full cycles, dose re -escalation may be 
considered  at the discretion  of the investigator.  After  re-escalation,  check  ALT,  AST,  and 
bilirubin 2x/week for 2 weeks, then 1x/week for 4 weeks.  
“G”, abbreviation  for “CTCAE  v4.0 Grade”.  
c: This schedule  of AST,  ALT,  and bilirubin  monitoring  need  not be repeated  for a given  
MEMORIAL  SLOAN -KETTERING  CANCER  CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#:  13-244 A(9) 
Amended:  29-SEP-2016  
Page  32 of 51  
  
12.0 CRITERIA  FOR  THERAPEUTIC  RESPONSE/OUTCOME  ASSESSMENT  
Please  refer to Section  10 regarding  the timing  of tumor  measurement  assessments.  
 
Documentation (radiologic) must be provided for patients removed from study for 
progressive disease (not necessary if removed based on criteria for clinical progression). 
Objective  responses  should  be confirmed  with a second  assessment performed  at least  4 
weeks later.  
Response and progression will be evaluated in this study using the new international 
criteria proposed by the revised Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) 
guideline  (version  1.1) [Eur J Ca 45:228 -247, 2009].  Changes  in the largest  diameter  (uni 
dimensional measurement) of the tumor lesions and the shortest diameter in the case of 
malignant lymph nodes are used in the RECIST criteria.  
12.1 Definitions  
Evaluable  for toxicity . All patients  will be evaluable  for toxicity  from the time of their 
first treatment with regorafenib.  
Evaluable for objective response.  Only those patients who have measurable 
disease  present  at baseline  and have  received  at least  one dose  of therapy  will be 
considered evaluable for response.  These patients will have their response 
classified according to the definitions stated below.  (Note:  Patients who exhibit 
objective disease progression prior to the end of cycle 1 will also be considered 
evaluable.)  
Evaluable Non -Target Disease Response . Patients who have lesions present at 
baseline that are  evaluable but do  not meet the  definitions of measurable  disease, 
have received at least one cycle of therapy, and have had their disease re - 
evaluated will be considered evaluable for non -target disease.  The response 
assessment  is based  on the presence,  absence,  or unequivocal  progression  of the 
lesions.  
12.2 Disease  Parameters  
Measurable disease . Measurable lesions are defined as those that can be 
accurately  measured  in at least  one dimension  (longest  diameter  to be recorded) 
as >20 mm by chest  x-ray, as >10 mm with CT scan, or >10 mm with calipers by 
clinical exam.  All tumor measurements must be recorded in millimeters  (or 
decimal fractions of centimeters).  
Note:  Tumor lesions that are situated in a previously irradiated area are not 
considered  measurable  unless  there  has been  demonstrated  progression  in the 
lesion.  
Malignant lymph nodes.  To be considered pathologically enlarged and 
measurable,  a lymph  node  must  be >15 mm in short  axis when  assessed  by CT 
dose  level if already  completed  once.  
MEMORIAL  SLOAN -KETTERING  CANCER  CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#:  13-244 A(9) 
Amended:  29-SEP-2016  
Page  33 of 51  
 scan  (CT scan  slice thickness  recommended  to be no greater  than 5 mm).  At 
baseline and in follow -up, only the short axis will be measured and followed.  
Non-measurable disease . All other lesions (or sites of disease), including small 
lesions (longest diameter <10 mm or pathological lymph nodes with ≥10 to <15  
mm short axis), are considered non -measurable disease.  Bone lesions, 
leptomeningeal disease, ascites, pleural/pericardial effusions, lymphangitis 
cutis/pulmonitis,  inflammatory  breast  disease,  and abdominal  masses  (not followed 
by CT or MRI), are considered as non -measurable.  
Note:  Cystic  lesions  that meet  the criteria  for radiographically  defined  simple  cysts 
should not be considered as malignant lesions (neither measurable nor non - 
measurable) since they are, by definition, simple cysts.  
‘Cystic lesions’ thought to represent cystic metastases can be considered as 
measurable lesions, if they meet the definition of measurability described above. 
However,  if non-cystic  lesions  are present  in the same  patient,  these  are preferred 
for selection as target lesions.  
Target lesions.  All measurable lesions up to a maximum of 2 lesions per organ 
and 5 lesions in  total,  representative  of all  involved  organs, should  be identified  as 
target  lesions and recorded  and measured  at baseline.  Target  lesions should  be 
selected on the basis of their size (lesions with the longest diameter), be 
representative of all involved organs, but in addition should be those that lend 
themselves to reproducible repeated measurements.  It may be the case that, on 
occasion, the largest lesion does not lend itself to reproducible measurement in 
which circumstance the next largest lesion which can be measured reproducibly 
should be selected.  A sum of the diameters (longest for non -nodal lesions, short 
axis for nodal lesions) for all target lesions will be calculated and reported as the 
baseline sum diameters.  If lymph nodes are to be included in the sum, then only 
the short axis is added into the sum.  The baseline sum diameters will be used as 
reference  to further  characterize  any objective  tumor  regression  in the measurable 
dimension of the disease.  
Non-target  lesions . All other  lesions  (or sites of disease)  including  any measurable 
lesions over and above the 5 target lesions should be identified as non-target 
lesions and should also be recorded at baseline.  Measurements of these lesions 
are not required, but the presence, absence, or in rare cases unequivocal 
progression of each should be noted throughout follow -up. 
12.3 Methods  for Evaluation  of Measurable  Disease  
All measurements  should  be taken  and recorded  in metric  notation  using  a ruler or 
calipers.  All baseline evaluations should be performed as closely as possible to 
the beginning of treatment and never more than 4 weeks before the beginning of 
the treatment.  
The same method of assessment and the same technique should be used to 
characterize  each  identified  and reported  lesion  at baseline  and during  follow -up. 
MEMORIAL  SLOAN -KETTERING  CANCER  CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#:  13-244 A(9) 
Amended:  29-SEP-2016  
Page  34 of 51  
 Imaging -based evaluation is preferred to evaluation by clinical examination unless 
the lesion(s)  being  followed  cannot  be imaged  but are assessable  by clinical  exam.  
Clinical  lesions:  Clinical  lesions  will only be considered  measurable  when  they are 
superficial  (e.g.,  skin nodules  and palpable  lymph  nodes)  and 10 mm diameter  as 
assessed using calipers (e.g., skin nodules).  In the case of skin lesions, 
documentation by color photography, including a ruler to estimate the size of the 
lesion, is recommended.  
 
Chest  x-ray: Lesions  on chest  x-ray are acceptable  as measurable  lesions  when 
they are clearly defined and surrounded by aerated lung.  However, CT is 
preferable.  
 
Conventional CT and MRI  This guideline has defined measurability of lesions on 
CT scan based on the assumption that CT slice thickness is 5 mm or less.  If CT 
scans  have  slice thickness  greater  than 5 mm, the minimum  size for a measurable 
lesion should be twice the slice thickness.  MRI is also acceptable in certain 
situations (e.g. for body scans).  
 
Use of MRI remains a complex issue.  MRI has excellent contrast, spatial, and 
temporal resolution; however, there are many image acquisition variables involved 
in MRI, which greatly impact image quality, lesion conspicuity, and measurement. 
Furthermore, the availability of MRI is variable globally.  As with CT, if an MRI is 
performed, the technical specifications of the scanning sequences used should be 
optimized for the evaluation of the type and site of disease.  Furthermore, as with 
CT, the modality used at follow -up should be the same as was used at baseline 
and the lesions should be measured/assessed on the same pulse sequence.  It is 
beyond the scope of the RECIST guidelines to prescribe specific MRI pulse 
sequence parameters for all scanners, body parts, and diseases.  Ideally, the  
same  type of scanner  should  be used  and the image  acquisition  protocol  should  be 
followed as closely as possible to prior scans.  Body scans should be performed 
with breath -hold scanning techniques, if possible.  
 
Ultrasound  Ultrasound is not useful in assessment of lesion size and should not  
be used as a method of measurement.  Ultrasound examinations cannot be 
reproduced in their entirety for independent review at a later date and, because 
they are operator  dependent,  it cannot  be guaranteed  that the same  technique  and 
measurements will be taken from one assessment to the next.  If new lesions are 
identified by ultrasound in the course of the study, confirmation by CT or MRI is 
advised.  If there is concern about radiation exposure at CT, MRI may be used 
instead of CT in selected instances.  
 
Endoscopy,  Laparoscopy  The utilization  of these  techniques  for objective  tumor 
evaluation is not advised.  However, such techniques may be useful to confirm 
complete pathological response when biopsies are obtained or to determine 
relapse in trials where recurrence following complete response (CR) or surgical 
resection is an endpoint.  
MEMORIAL  SLOAN -KETTERING  CANCER  CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#:  13-244 A(9) 
Amended:  29-SEP-2016  
Page  35 of 51  
 Tumor markers  Tumor markers alone cannot be used to assess response.  If 
markers  are initially  above  the upper  normal  limit, they must  normalize  for a patient 
to be considered in complete clinical response.  Specific guidelines for both CA - 
125 response (in recurrent ovarian cancer) and PSA response (in recurrent 
prostate cancer) have been published [ JNCI 96:487 -488, 2004; J Clin Oncol 17, 
3461 -3467, 1999; J Clin Oncol 26:1148 -1159, 2008].  In addition, the Gynecologic 
Cancer Intergroup has developed CA -125 progression criteria which are to be 
integrated with objective tumor assessment for use in first -line trials in ovarian 
cancer [ JNCI 92:1534 -1535, 2000].  
 
Cytology, Histology  These techniques can be used to differentiate between partial 
responses (PR) and complete responses (CR) in rare cases (e.g., residual lesions 
in tumor  types,  such  as germ  cell tumors,  where  known  residual  benign  tumors  can 
remain).  
 
The cytological  confirmation  of the neoplastic  origin  of any effusion  that appears  or 
worsens during treatment when the measurable tumor has met criteria for 
response or stable disease is mandatory to differentiate between response or 
stable disease (an effusion may be a side effect of the treatment) and progressive 
disease.  
 
12.4 Response  Criteria  
12.4.1  Evaluation  of Target  Lesions  
Complete  Response  (CR): Disappearance  of all target  lesions.  Any 
pathological  lymph  nodes  (whether  target  or non- 
target) must have reduction in short axis to <10 
mm. 
Partial  Response  (PR): At least  a 30% decrease  in the sum of the 
diameters  of target  lesions,  taking  as reference 
the baseline sum diameters.  
Progressive  Disease  (PD): At least  a 20% increase  in the sum of the 
diameters of target lesions, taking as reference 
the smallest sum on study (this includes the 
baseline sum if that is the smallest on study).  In 
addition to the relative increase of 20%, the sum 
must  also demonstrate  an absolute  increase  of at 
least 5 mm.  (Note:  the appearance of one or 
more new lesions is also considered 
progressions).  
Stable  Disease  (SD): Neither  sufficient  shrinkage  to qualify  for PR nor 
sufficient increase to qualify for PD, taking as 
reference  the smallest  sum diameters  while  on 
study.  
MEMORIAL  SLOAN -KETTERING  CANCER  CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#:  13-244 A(9) 
Amended:  29-SEP-2016  
Page  36 of 51  
 12.4.2  Evaluation  of Non-Target  Lesions  
Complete  Response  (CR): Disappearance  of all non-target  lesions  and 
normalization of tumor marker level.  All lymph 
nodes  must  be non-pathological  in size (<10 mm 
short axis). Note:  If tumor markers are initially 
above the upper normal limit, they must 
normalize for a patient to be considered in 
complete clinical response.  
Non-CR/Non -PD: Persistence  of one or more  non-target  lesion(s)  
and/or  maintenance  of tumor  marker  level above 
the normal limits.  
Progressive  Disease  (PD):  Appearance  of one or more  new lesions  and/or  
unequivocal progression of existing non -target 
lesions.  Unequivocal progression should not 
normally trump target lesion status.  It must be 
representative  of overall  disease  status  change, 
not a single lesion increase.  
Although a clear progression of “non -target” lesions only is exceptional, the 
opinion  of the treating  physician  should  prevail  in such  circumstances,  and the 
progression status should be confirmed at a later time by  the review panel (or 
Principal Investigator).  
12.4.3  Evaluation  of Best Overall  Response  
The best overall response is the best response recorded from the start of the 
treatment until disease progression/recurrence (taking as reference for 
progressive  disease  the smallest  measurements  recorded  since  the treatment 
started).  The patient's best response assignment will depend on the 
achievement of both measurement and confirmation criteria.  
For Patients  with Measurable  Disease  (i.e., Target  Disease)  
 
Target 
Lesions  Non-Target 
Lesions  New 
Lesions  Overall 
Response  Best  Overall  Response 
when Confirmation is  
Required*  
CR CR No CR >4 wks. Confirmation**  
CR Non- 
CR/Non -PD No PR 
>4 wks. Confirmation**  
CR Not 
evaluated  No PR 
PR Non- 
CR/Non - 
PD/not 
evaluated  No PR 
SD Non- 
CR/Non - 
PD/not  
evaluated  No SD Documented  at least 
once >4 wks. from 
baseline**  
MEMORIAL  SLOAN -KETTERING  CANCER  CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#:  13-244 A(9) 
Amended:  29-SEP-2016  
Page  37 of 51  
 PD Any Yes or 
No PD 
no prior SD, PR or CR 
Any PD***  Yes or 
No PD 
Any Any Yes PD 
*  See RECIST  1.1 manuscript  for further  details  on what  is evidence  of a new 
lesion.  
** Only for non-randomized  trials  with response  as primary  endpoint.  
*** In exceptional  circumstances,  unequivocal  progression  in non-target  lesions 
may be accepted as disease progression.  
 
Note: Patients with a global deterioration of health status requiring 
discontinuation  of treatment  without  objective  evidence  of disease 
progression at that time should be reported as “ symptomatic  
deterioration.”  Every  effort  should  be made  to document  the objective 
progression even after discontinuation of treatment.  
 
For Patients  with Non-Measurable  Disease  (i.e., Non-Target  Disease)  
 
Non-Target  Lesions  New Lesions  Overall  Response  
CR No CR 
Non-CR/non -PD No Non-CR/non -PD* 
Not all evaluated  No not evaluated  
Unequivocal  PD Yes or No PD 
Any Yes PD 
* ‘Non-CR/non -PD’ is preferred over ‘stable disease’ for non -target disease since 
SD is increasingly  used  as an endpoint  for assessment  of efficacy  in some  trials  so 
to assign this category when no lesions can be measured is not advised  
 
12.4.4  Duration  of Response  
Duration of overall response : The duration of overall response is measured from 
the time measurement criteria are met for CR or PR (whichever is first recorded) 
until the first date that recurrent or progressive disease is objectively documented 
(taking  as reference  for progressive  disease  the smallest  measurements  recorded 
since the treatment started).  
The duration  of overall  CR is measured  from the time measurement  criteria  are 
first met for CR until the first date that progressive disease is objectively 
documented.  
Duration of stable disease : Stable disease is measured from the start of the 
treatment  until the criteria  for progression  are met, taking  as reference  the smallest 
measurements recorded since the treatment started, including the baseline 
measurements.  
MEMORIAL  SLOAN -KETTERING  CANCER  CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#:  13-244 A(9) 
Amended:  29-SEP-2016  
Page  38 of 51  
 12.4.5  6-month  Progression -Free Survival  
Proportion  of patients  alive and free of progression  at 6 months.  
 
 
13.0 CRITERIA  FOR  REMOVAL  FROM  STUDY  
• Disease  progression  on treatment  with regorafenib  
• Patients  may be removed  from the study  for protocol  non-compliance.  
• If at any time the patient  develops  unacceptable toxicity  he/she  will be removed  from 
study.  
• Participants  can be removed  from the study  at any time if the  study  doctor  feels  that it is in 
their best interest to do so.  
• Patients  may withdraw  consent  from the study  at any time.  
14.0 BIOSTATISTICS  
Two co-primary  objectives  will be evaluated:  best overall  response  rate (BOR;  CR+PR  by 
RECIST v1.1  observed  at any  time between  start of treatment and  patient’s  removal  from 
the study) and 6 -month PFS (proportion of patients alive and progression -free at 6 
months).  If either one of these objectives is met, the treatment would be considered 
worthy of further investigation.  
Our recent literature review of all systemic chemotherapy studies reported for R/M ACC 
patients from 1966 to 2009 revealed that these were generally small studies of variable, 
poor methodological quality from which definitive conclusions regarding the efficacy of 
chemotherapy  are difficult  to establish3. Objective  responses  with cytotoxic  chemotherapy 
were infrequent, and in 10 studies evaluating different targeted agents (imatinib, gefitinib, 
cetuximab, lapatinib, bortezomib) involving 157 ACC patients, only 2 objective responses 
were reported (in response to high dose imatinib).  Notably, there is no data addressing 
potential  efficacy  of systemic  therapy  beyond  the first line  setting  in R/M ACC3. Therefore, 
we will adopt a null hypothesis of BOR of 5% and an expected BOR of 20% as the 
alternative hypothesis. In order to demonstrate that the BOR in the studied population is  
>5% with a one-sided  type I error  of 5%  and power  of 90%,  at least  5 responses  need  to 
be observed among 38 patients enrolled.  
Among all published phase II single -agent trials performed in recurrent/metastatic ACC, 
we identified six studies involving 106 patients that reported a 6 -month progression -free 
survival (PFS) with single -agent therapy (imatinib7, cetuximab36, gemcitabine37, 
paclitaxel38, lapatinib39, and sunitinib30). The mean 6 -month PFS from these studies was 
40.1%.  Three  of these studies did not require evidence of radiographic or  clinical disease 
progression  for study entry7,36,38 ; of the remaining three studies, two required evidence of 
RECIST progression or clinical deterioration within 6 months30,39 and the other study 
required symptomatic and/or progressive disease by  undefined criteria37. Based on  these 
studies,  we will adopt a  null hypothesis  for 6-month  PFS of 40% and an expected  6-month 
PFS of 65% as the alternative hypothesis. In order demonstrate that 6 -month PFS in the  
MEMORIAL  SLOAN -KETTERING  CANCER  CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#:  13-244 A(9) 
Amended:  29-SEP-2016  
Page  39 of 51  
 studied  population  is > 40% with a one-sided  type I error  of 5% and power  of 90%,  at least 
21 of the  38 patients  enrolled need to  be alive and  free of progression at  the 6 -month  time 
point (exact binomial design).  
Assuming  that 6-month  PFS and BOR  are independent,  the overall  type 1 error  is <0.1. 
The type 1 error decreases very slightly if PFS and BOR are positively correlated.  
Patients who receive at least one dose of medication will be included in the evaluation of 
the primary objectives. Patients who do not have a recorded CR or PR and are removed 
from the study  without  a final radiologic  evaluation  will be classified  as non-responders  for 
BOR evaluation. If patients discontinue the study  before  the 6-mo PFS  evaluation without 
evidence of progression, every effort will be made to bring them in for a 6 -mo radiologic 
evaluation. If this is not possible, the patients will be classified as progressors for the 
purpose of the 6 -month PFS evaluation.  
The secondary  endpoint  is the evaluation  of safety/tolerability  of regorafenib.  
Safety will be assessed in terms of AEs, laboratory data and vital sign data, which will be 
collected for all patients.  Appropriate summaries of these data will be presented. AE will 
be listed individually per patient according to CTCAE version 4.0, and the number of 
patients  experiencing  each  AE will be summarized.  The safety  population  will comprise  all 
patients who receive at least one dose of study treatment.  
Due to the limited sample size, the analyses investigating the association between 
correlative markers and response to therapy will be exploratory. Levels of c -kit, VEGF, 
VEGFR, PDGF, PDGFR, in archival tumor tissue will be quantified by 
immunohistochemistry  (IHC)  and their association  with objective  response  to regorafenib 
will be investigated using the non -parametric Wilcoxon rank -sum test.  Similarly, 
association between c -myb (strong staining, 2+ vs other) or t(6;9) translocation and 
response will be tested using Fisher’s exact test.  
We will investigate, in an exploratory fashion, whether gene alterations that we detect are 
associated with response. Further, we will use linear models  for microarray  data (LIMMA), 
which performs moderated t -tests by discounting changes in low expressing genes with 
low variance, to identify genes who are differentially expressed between responders and 
non-responders.  Multiplicity  correction  will be undertaken  by controlling  the false  discovery 
rate. 
We anticipate  an accrual  rate of approximately  2-3 patients/month;  therefore  we expect 
accrual to be completed within 15 months.  
15.0 RESEARCH  PARTICIPANT  REGISTRATION  AND  RANDOMIZATION  PROCEDURES  
15.1 Research  Participant  Registration  
Confirm  eligibility  as defined  in the section  entitled  Criteria  for Patient/Subject  Eligibility.  
Obtain  informed  consent,  by following  procedures  defined in  section  entitled  Informed 
Consent Procedures.  
MEMORIAL  SLOAN -KETTERING  CANCER  CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#:  13-244 A(9) 
Amended:  29-SEP-2016  
Page  40 of 51  
 During  the registration  process  registering  individuals  will be required  to complete  a 
protocol specific Eligibility Checklist.  
All participants must be registered through the Protocol Participant Registration (PPR) 
Office at Memorial Sloan -Kettering Cancer Center. PPR is available Monday through 
Friday from 8:30am – 5:30pm at 646 -735-8000. Registrations must be submitted via the 
PPR Electronic Registration System ( http://ppr/ ). The completed signature page of the 
written  consent/RA  or verbal  script/RA,  a completed  Eligibility  Checklist  and other  relevant 
documents must be uploaded via the PPR Electronic Registration System.  
15.2 Randomization  
Not applicable  
16.0 DATA  MANAGEMENT  ISSUES  
A Research Study Assistant (RSA) will be assigned to the study. The responsibilities of 
the RSA include  project  compliance,  data collection,  abstraction  and entry,  data reporting, 
regulatory  monitoring,  problem  resolution  and prioritization,  and coordinating  the activities 
of the protocol study team.  
 
The data collected for this study will be entered into the secure Clinical Research 
Database  (CRDB).  Source  documentation  will be available  to support  the computerized 
patient record.  
 
Whole exome or genome sequencing data will be deidentified; samples will be labelled 
with patient  study  IDs to preserve  links to clinical  data.  The deidentified  genomic  data will 
be stored to a protected server that is specifically set aside for clinical trial data.  
 
 
16.1 Quality  Assurance  
Weekly registration reports will be generated to monitor patient accruals and 
completeness of registration data. Routine data  quality reports will be generated to 
assess  missing  data and inconsistencies.  Accrual  rates  and extent  and accuracy  of 
evaluations and follow -up will be monitored periodically throughout the study  
period and potential problems will be brought to the attention of the study team for 
discussion and action.  
16.2 Data  and Safety  Monitoring  
The Data and Safety Monitoring (DSM) Plans at Memorial Sloan -Kettering Cancer Center 
were  approved  by the National  Cancer  Institute  in September  2001.  The plans  address  the 
new policies set forth by the NCI in the document entitled “Policy of the National Cancer 
Institute for Data and Safety Monitoring of Clinical Trials” which can be found at: 
http://www.cancer.gov/clinicaltrials/conducting/dsm -guidelines/page1 .. The DSM Plans at 
MSKCC were established and are monitored by the Office of Clinical Research. The 
MSKCC Data and Safety Monitoring Plans can be found on the MSKCC Intranet at: 
http://smskpsps9/dept/ocr/OCR%20Website%20Documents/Clinical%20Research%20Qu  
ality%20Assurance%20(CRQA)/MSKCC%20Data%20and%20Safety%20Monitoring%20P  
lan.pdf  
MEMORIAL  SLOAN -KETTERING  CANCER  CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#:  13-244 A(9) 
Amended:  29-SEP-2016  
Page  41 of 51  
 There are several different mechanisms by which clinical trials are monitored for data, 
safety and quality. There are institutional processes in place for quality assurance (e.g., 
protocol monitoring, compliance and data verification audits, therapeutic response, and 
staff education on clinical research QA) and departmental procedures for quality control, 
plus there  are two institutional  committees  that are responsible  for monitoring  the activities 
of our clinical trials programs. The committees: Data and Safety Monitoring Committee 
(DSMC) for Phase I and II clinical trials, and the Data and Safety Monitoring Board 
(DSMB) for Phase III clinical trials, report to the Center’s Research Council and 
Institutional Review Board.  
 
During the protocol development and review process, each protocol is assessed for the 
level of risk and degree of monitoring required. Every type of protocol (e.g., NIH 
sponsored,  in house  sponsored,  industrial  sponsored,  NCI cooperative  group,  etc.) will be 
addressed and the monitoring procedures will be established at the time of protocol 
activation.  
MEMORIAL  SLOAN -KETTERING  CANCER  CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#:  13-244 A(9) 
Amended:  29-SEP-2016  
Page  42 of 51  
  
17.0 PROTECTION  OF HUMAN  SUBJECTS  
Inclusion  of Children  in Research  
 
This protocol/project does not include children because the number of children is limited and 
because  the majority  is already  accessed  by a nationwide  pediatric  cancer  research network. 
This statement is  based  on exclusion 4b of the  NIH Policy  and Guidelines on the  Inclusion of 
Children as Participants in Research Involving Human Subjects.  
 
Risks,  Benefits,  Toxicities/side  effects  
 
Potential  risks to human  subjects include  drug related  toxicity, placement  of IV catheters, 
phlebotomy, and possible psychological discomfort from the stresses associated with 
obtaining  imaging  studies  (e.g.,  CT scan,  PET scan).  All efforts  will be made  to avoid  any 
complication by completely reviewing patients’ symptoms, providing appropriate 
management, and monitoring blood tests.  
If an adverse  medical  event  occurs,  the patient  will first contact the  primary  oncologist  or the 
Principal Investigator. At nights and on weekends, there is an oncology physician on call at 
all times. Patients may either call or come directly to the urgent care center at Memorial 
Hospital (or to their local emergency room) to be seen. Patients suffering serious adverse 
reactions must be carefully followed and all follow -up information also recorded.  
Alternatives/options  
 
Participation  in this trial is voluntary.  Depending  on the specific  details  of the situation, patient 
options without being in a study might include:  
 
• Other  palliative  chemotherapy  off study.  
• Participation  in a different  clinical  trial 
• Best supportive care 
Financial  Costs/Burdens  
The patient will be responsible for all costs related to treatment and complications of 
treatment.  Costs  to the patient  (third  party  insurer)  will include  hospitalizations,  routine  blood 
tests and diagnostic studies, office visits, baseline EKG, and doctor’s fees. Patients will not 
be charged the cost of analysis for the research correlates.  The patient also will not be 
charged  for the subsequent  research  analysis of these specimens.  Regorafenib is provided 
by Bayer and therefore is not billable to research participants.  
17.1 Privacy  
MSKCC’s Privacy Office may allow the use and disclosure of protected health information 
pursuant  to a completed  and signed  Research  Authorization  form.  The use and disclosure  of 
protected health information will be limited to the individuals described in the Research 
Authorization form. A Research Authorization form must be completed by the Principal 
Investigator and approved by the IRB and Privacy Board (IRB/PB).  
It is also stated in  the consent and  Research Authorization that research  data (e.g. genomic 
sequence)  may be placed  into databases  monitored  by the National  Institutes  of Health,  and 
MEMORIAL  SLOAN -KETTERING  CANCER  CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#:  13-244 A(9) 
Amended:  29-SEP-2016  
Page  43 of 51  
 may be made accessible to investigators approved by the U.S. government. It is difficult to 
identify  genotype/phenotype  specifics  since  multiple  diseases  are studied  under  the auspices 
of this protocol and therefore, the requirements for submission of genotype/phenotype data 
into the NIH GWAS Repository (or any other public database) will be followed as per the 
MSKCC IRB GWAS SOP -503. 
17.2 Serious  Adverse  Event  (SAE)  Reporting  
An adverse  event  is considered  serious  if it results  in ANY of the following  outcomes:  
• Death  
• A life-threatening  adverse  event  
• An adverse  event  that results  in inpatient  hospitalization  or prolongation  of existing 
hospitalization  
• A persistent  or significant  incapacity  or substantial  disruption  of the ability  to conduct 
normal life functions  
• A congenital  anomaly/birth  defect  
• Important Medical Events (IME) that may not result in death, be life threatening, or 
require  hospitalization  may be considered  serious  when,  based  upon  medical  judgment, 
they may jeopardize the patient or subject and may require medical or surgical 
intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed in this definition  
Note : Hospital  admission  for a planned  procedure/disease  treatment  is not considered  an 
SAE.  
 
SAE reporting is required as soon as the participant signs consent.  SAE reporting is 
required  for 30-days  after the participant’s  last investigational  treatment  or intervention.  Any 
events that occur after the 30 -day period and that are at least possibly related to protocol 
treatment must be reported.  
 
If an SAE requires submission to the IRB office per IRB SOP RR -408 ‘Reporting of Serious 
Adverse  Events’, the  SAE report must  be sent to the IRB within  5 calendar  days  of the  event. 
The IRB requires a Clinical Research Database (CRDB) SAE report be submitted 
electronically to the SAE Office as follows:  
For IND/IDE trials: Reports that include a Grade 5 SAE should be sent to 
saegrade5@mskcc.org . All other  reports  should  be sent to saemskind@mskcc.org . 
 
For all other trials: Reports that include a Grade 5 SAE should be sent to 
saegrade5@mskcc.org . All other  reports  should  be sent to sae@mskcc.org . 
The report  should  contain  the following  information: 
Fields populated from CRDB:  
• Subject’s  initials  
• Medical  record  number  
• Disease/histology  (if applicable)  
• Protocol  number  and title 
MEMORIAL  SLOAN -KETTERING  CANCER  CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#:  13-244 A(9) 
Amended:  29-SEP-2016  
Page  44 of 51  
 Data  needing  to be entered:  
• The date the adverse  event  occurred  
• The adverse  event  
• The grade  of the event  
• Relationship  of the adverse  event  to the treatment  (drug,  device,  or intervention)  
• If the AE was expected  
• The severity  of the  AE 
• The intervention  
• Detailed  text that includes  the following  
o A explanation  of how  the AE was handled  
o A description  of the subject’s  condition  
o Indication  if the subject  remains  on the study  
• If an amendment  will need  to be made  to the protocol  and/or  consent  form 
• If the SAE is an Unanticipated  Problem  
The PI’s signature  and the date it was signed  are required  on the completed  report.  
 
 
17.2.1  SAE reporting  for the Drug  Supplier  
An SAE is classified  as any untoward  medical  occurrence  that, at any dose,  meets  any of the 
following criteria (a – f): 
a. Results  in death.  
b. Is life-threatening.  
The term ‘life-threatening’  in the definition  refers  to an event  in which  the patient  was at 
risk of death at the time of the event, it does not refer to an event which hypothetically 
might have caused death if it were more severe.  
c. Requires  inpatient  hospitalization  or prolongation  of existing  hospitalization.  
A hospitalization  or prolongation  of hospitalization  will not be regarded  as an SAE if at 
least one of the following exceptions is met:  
- The admission  results  in a hospital  stay of less than 12 hours.  
- The admission  is pre-planned.  (i.e. elective  or scheduled  surgery  arranged  prior to the 
start of the study)  
- The admission  is not associated  with an AE. (e.g. social  hospitalization  for purposes  of 
respite care).  
However,  it should  be noted  that invasive  treatment  during  any hospitalization  may fulfill the 
criterion of ‘medically important’ and as such may be reportable as an SAE dependent on 
clinical judgment.  In addition, where local regulatory authorities specifically require a more 
stringent definition, the local regulation takes precedence.  
MEMORIAL  SLOAN -KETTERING  CANCER  CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#:  13-244 A(9) 
Amended:  29-SEP-2016  
Page  45 of 51  
 d. Results  in persistent  or significant  disability  / incapacity.  Disability  means  a substantial 
disruption  of a person’s  ability  to conduct  normal  life’s functions.  
e. Is a congenital  anomaly  / birth defect.  
f. Is another  medically  important  serious  event  as judged  by the investigator.  
Each serious adverse event must be followed up until resolution or stabilization, by 
submission of updated reports to the designated person. An isolated laboratory abnormality 
that is assigned  grade  4, according  to CTC definition, is  not reportable  as an SAE; unless  the 
investigator assesses that the event meets standard ICH criteria for an SAE.  CTC grade 4 
baseline laboratory abnormalities that are part of the disease profile should not be reported 
as an SAE, specifically when they are allowed or not excluded by the protocol 
inclusion/exclusion criteria.  
When  required,  and according  to local law and regulations,  serious  adverse  events  must  be 
reported to the Ethics Committee and Regulatory Authorities.  
All serious  adverse  events  should  be reported  to Bayer  within  24 hours.  In the event of such 
an event, the investigator should refer to the Pharmacovigilance section of the contract for 
reporting procedures.  
The Investigator  may report  serious  adverse  drug  reactions  (SADRs)  using:  
A MedWatch  form available  at http://www.fda.gov/medwatch/  
All reports shall be sent electronically to:  
Electronic  Mailbox:  DrugSafety.GPV.US@bayer.com  
Facsimile:  (973)  709-2185  
Address:  Global  Pharmacovigilance  - USA 
Mail only:  Bayer  HealthCare  Pharmaceuticals  Inc. 
P.O. Box 1000  
Montville,  NJ 07045 -1000  
Address:  340 Changebridge  Road  
FDX or UPS only Pine Brook,  NJ 07058  
 
Reports  for all Bayer  products  can also be phoned  in via our Clinical  Communications 
Dept:  
 
Phone:  1-888-842-2937  
 
 
18.0 INFORMED  CONSENT  PROCEDURES  
Before protocol -specified procedures are carried out, consenting professionals will explain 
full details of the protocol and study procedures as well as the risks involved to participants 
prior to their inclusion in the study. Participants will also be informed that they are free to 
withdraw  from the study  at any time.  All participants  must sign  an IRB/PB -approved  consent  
MEMORIAL  SLOAN -KETTERING  CANCER  CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#:  13-244 A(9) 
Amended:  29-SEP-2016  
Page  46 of 51  
 form indicating their consent to participate. This consent form meets the requirements of the 
Code  of Federal  Regulations  and the Institutional  Review  Board/Privacy  Board  of this Center. 
The consent form will include the following:  
1. The nature  and objectives,  potential  risks and benefits  of the intended  study.  
2. The length  of study  and the likely  follow -up required.  
3. Alternatives to the proposed study. (This will include available standard and 
investigational  therapies.  In addition,  patients  will be offered  an option  of supportive 
care for therapeutic studies.)  
4. The name  of the investigator(s)  responsible  for the protocol.  
5. The right of the  participant  to accept  or refuse  study  interventions/interactions  and to 
withdraw from participation at any time.  
Before  any protocol -specific  procedures  can be carried  out, the consenting  professional  will 
fully explain the aspects of patient privacy concerning research specific information.  In 
addition to signing the IRB Informed Consent, all patients must agree to the Research 
Authorization component of the informed consent form.  
Each  participant  and consenting  professional  will sign the consent  form.  The participant  must 
receive a copy of the signed informed consent form.  
 
19.0 REFERENCES  
1. Fordice  J, Kershaw  C, El-Naggar  A, Goepfert  H: Adenoid  cystic  carcinoma  of the head  and 
neck: predictors of morbidity and mortality. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 125:149 -52, 1999  
2. Spiro  RH: Distant  metastasis  in adenoid  cystic  carcinoma  of salivary  origin.  Am J Surg 
174:495 -8, 1997  
3. Laurie  SA, Ho  AL, Fury MG, Sherman  E, Pfister  DG: Systemic  therapy  in the management  of 
metastatic or locally recurrent adenoid cystic carcinoma of the salivary glands: a systematic review. 
Lancet Oncol, 2010  
4. Mattox DE, Von Hoff DD, Balcerzak SP: Southwest Oncology Group study of mitoxantrone 
for treatment  of patients  with advanced  adenoid  cystic  carcinoma  of the head  and neck.  Invest  New 
Drugs 8:105 -7, 1990  
5. Verweij J, de Mulder PH, de Graeff A, Vermorken JB, Wildiers J, Kerger J, Schornagel J, 
Cognetti  F, Kirkpatrick  A, Sahmoud  T, Lefebvre  JL: Phase  II study  on mitoxantrone  in adenoid  cystic 
carcinomas of the head and neck. EORTC Head and Neck Cancer Cooperative Group. Ann Oncol 
7:867 -9, 1996  
6. Slevin NJ, Mais KL, Bruce I: Imatinib with cisplatin in recurrent and/or metastatic 
adenoidcystic carcinoma -preliminary results of a phase II study of 18 patients with response 
assessed  by morphological  and functional  imaging.  Eur J Cancer  Supplements  3:292 -293, 2005  
7. Hotte  SJ, Winquist  EW, Lamont  E, MacKenzie M, Vokes  E, Chen  EX, Brown  S, Pond  GR, 
Murgo A, Siu LL: Imatinib mesylate in patients with adenoid cystic cancers of the salivary glands 
expressing  c-kit: a Princess  Margaret  Hospital  phase  II consortium  study.  J Clin Oncol  23:585 -90, 
2005  
MEMORIAL  SLOAN -KETTERING  CANCER  CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#:  13-244 A(9) 
Amended:  29-SEP-2016  
Page  47 of 51  
 8. Pfeffer MR, Talmi Y, Catane R, Symon Z, Yosepovitch A, Levitt M: A phase II study of 
Imatinib  for advanced  adenoid  cystic  carcinoma  of head  and neck  salivary  glands.  Oral Oncol  43:33 - 
6, 2007  
9. Ochel  HJ, Gademann  G, Rocken  C, Wordehoff  H: Effects  of imatinib  mesylate  on adenoid 
cystic carcinomas. Anticancer Res 25:3659 -64, 2005  
10. Lin CH, Yen RF, Jeng YM, Tzen CY, Hsu C, Hong RL: Unexpected rapid progression of 
metastatic  adenoid  cystic  carcinoma  during  treatment  with imatinib  mesylate.  Head  Neck  27:1022 -7, 
2005  
11. Guigay  JM, Bidault  F, Temam  S, Janot  F, Raymond  E, Faivre  S: Antitumor  activity  of imatinib 
in progressive, highly expressing KIT adenoid cystic carcinoma of the salivary glands: a phase II 
study. Journal of Clinical Oncology 25:6086, 2007  
12. Persson M, Andren Y, Mark J, Horlings HM, Persson F, Stenman G: Recurrent fusion of 
MYB  and NFIB  transcription  factor  genes  in carcinomas  of the breast and  head  and neck.  Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U S A 106:18740 -4, 2009  
13. Mitani  Y, Li J, Rao PH, Zhao  YJ, Bell D, Lippman  SM, Weber  RS, Caulin  C, El-Naggar  AK: 
Comprehensive analysis of the MYB -NFIB gene fusion in salivary adenoid cystic carcinoma: 
Incidence, variability, and clinicopathologic significance. Clin Cancer Res 16:4722 -31, 2010  
14. Ramsay  RG, Gonda  TJ: MYB  function  in normal  and cancer  cells.  Nat Rev Cancer  8:523 -34, 
2008  
15. Clappier E, Cuccuini W, Kalota A, Crinquette A, Cayuela JM, Dik WA, Langerak AW, 
Montpellier B, Nadel B, Walrafen P, Delattre O, Aurias A, Leblanc T, Dombret H, Gewirtz AM, 
Baruchel A, Sigaux F, Soulier J: The C -MYB locus is involved in chromosomal translocation and 
genomic  duplications  in human  T-cell acute  leukemia  (T-ALL),  the translocation  defining a  new T- 
ALL subtype in very young children. Blood 110:1251 -61, 2007  
16. Biroccio  A, Benassi  B, D'Agnano  I, D'Angelo  C, Buglioni  S, Mottolese  M, Ricciotti  A, Citro  G, 
Cosimelli M, Ramsay RG, Calabretta B, Zupi G: c -Myb and Bcl -x overexpression predicts poor 
prognosis in colorectal cancer: clinical and experimental findings. Am J Pathol 158:1289 -99, 2001  
17. Ho AS, Kannan  K, Roy  DM, Morris LG,  Ganly  I, Katabi N, Ramaswami D,  Walsh  LA, Eng S, 
Huse  JT, Zhang  J, Dolgalev  I, Huberman  K, Heguy  A, Viale  A, Drobnjak M, Leversha  MA, Rice  CE, 
Singh  B, Iyer NG, Leemans  CR, Bloemena  E, Ferris  RL, Seethala  RR, Gross  BE, Liang  Y, Sinha  R, 
Peng L, Raphael BJ, Turcan S, Gong Y, Schultz N, Kim S, Chiosea S, Shah JP, Sander C, Lee  W, 
Chan TA: The mutational landscape of adenoid cystic carcinoma. Nat Genet 45:791 -8, 2013  
18. Stephens PJ, Davies HR, Mitani Y, Van Loo P, Shlien A, Tarpey PS, Papaemmanuil E, 
Cheverton A, Bignell GR, Butler AP, Gamble J, Gamble S, Hardy C, Hinton J, Jia M, Jayakumar A, 
Jones  D, Latimer  C, McLaren  S, McBride  DJ, Menzies  A, Mudie  L, Maddison  M, Raine  K, Nik-Zainal 
S, O'Meara S, Teague JW, Varela I, Wedge DC, Whitmore I, Lippman SM, McDermott U, Stratton 
MR, Campbell PJ, El -Naggar AK, Futreal PA: Whole exome sequencing of adenoid cystic 
carcinoma. J Clin Invest 123:2965 -8, 2013  
19. Doi R, Kuratate I, Okamoto E, Ryoke K, Ito H: Expression of p53 oncoprotein increases 
intratumoral  microvessel  formation  in human  salivary  gland  carcinomas.  J Oral Pathol  Med 28:259 - 
63, 1999  
MEMORIAL  SLOAN -KETTERING  CANCER  CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#:  13-244 A(9) 
Amended:  29-SEP-2016  
Page  48 of 51  
 20. Lim JJ, Kang  S, Lee MR, Pai HK, Yoon  HJ, Lee JI, Hong  SP, Lim CY: Expression  of vascular 
endothelial growth factor in salivary gland carcinomas and its relation to p53, Ki -67 and prognosis.  J 
Oral Pathol Med 32:552 -61, 2003  
21. Zhang J, Peng B, Chen X: Expressions of nuclear factor kappaB, inducible nitric oxide 
synthase,  and vascular  endothelial  growth  factor  in adenoid  cystic  carcinoma  of salivary  glands: 
correlations with the angiogenesis and clinical outcome. Clin Cancer Res 11:7334 -43, 2005  
22. Locati  LD, Quattrone  P, Tamborini  E, Agus  V, Petrelli  F, Bareggi  C, Pilotti  S, Licitra  L, Gianni 
L: Investigation of molecular targets for therapy in salivary gland carcinoma. Eur J Cancer 
Supplements 37 (suppl 6):S103 -104, 2001  
23. Jeng  Y-M, Lin C-Y, Hsu H-C: Expression  of the c-kit protein  is associated  with certain 
subtypes of salivary gland carcinoma. Cancer Lett 154:107 -111, 2000  
24. Holst  VA, Marshall  CE, Moskaluk  CA, Frierson  HF: KIT protein  expression  and analysis  of c- 
kit gene mutation in adenoid cystic carcinoma. Mod Pathol 12:956 -960, 1999  
25. Penner  CR, Folpe  AL, Budnick  SD: C-kit expression  distinguishes  salivary  gland  adenoid 
cystic carcinoma  from polymorphous low -grade adenocarcinoma. Mod Pathol 15:687 -691, 2002  
26. Edwards  PC, Bhuiya  T, Kelsch  RD: C-kit expression  in the salivary  gland  neoplasms  adenoid 
cystic  carcinoma,  polymorphous  low-grade  adenocarcinoma,  and monomorphic  adenoma.  Oral Surg 
Oral Med Oral Pathol 95:586 -593, 2003  
27. Alcedo JC, Fabrega JM, Arosemena JR, Urrutia A: Imatinib mesylate as treatment for 
adenoid  cystic  carcinoma  of the salivary  glands:  report  of two successfully  treated  cases.  Head  Neck 
26:829 -31, 2004  
28. Wong SJ, Cohen EW, Karrison T, Hayes DN, Kies M, Cullen KJ, Tanvetyanon T, Argiris A, 
Takebe N, Lim D, Saba NF, Worden FP, Gilbert J, Lenz JF, Razak RA, Roberts JD, Vokes EE: A 
phase II study of dasatanib (BMS 354825) in recurrent or metastatic ckit -expressing adenoid cystic 
(ACC)  and non-ACC  malignant  salivary  glands  tumors  (MSGT).  . J Clin Oncol  31 suppl;  abstr  6022, 
2013  
29. Myoken  Y, Myoken  Y, Okamoto  T, Sato JD, Kan M, McKeehan  WL, Nakahara  M, Takada  K: 
Immunohistochemical study of overexpression of fibroblast growth factor -1 (FGF -1), FGF -2, and 
FGF receptor -1 in human malignant salivary gland tumours. J Pathol 178:429 -36, 1996  
30. Chau NG, Hotte SJ, Chen EX, Chin SF,  Turner  S, Wang L, Siu LL:  A phase II study  of 
sunitinib  in recurrent  and/or  metastatic  adenoid  cystic  carcinoma  (ACC)  of the salivary  glands: 
current  progress  and challenges  in evaluating  molecularly  targeted  agents  in ACC.  Ann Oncol 
23:1562 -70, 2012  
31. Locati LD, Bossi P, Civelli EM, Perrone F, Bergamini C, Cortelazzi B, Quattrone P, Imbimbo 
M, Mirabile A, Granata R, Resteghini C, Mariani L, Tosarello D, Cassani C, Alfonso M, Saibene G, 
Pilotti  S, Licitra  L: Sorafenib  in recurrent  and/or  metastatic  salivary  gland  carcinomas  (RMSGCs):  An 
investigator -initiated phase II trial ([STUDY_ID_REMOVED]). . J Clin Oncol 31 suppl; abstr 6020, 2013  
32. Dilon  PM, Moskaluk  CA, Fracasso  PM, Petroni  GR, Thomas  CY: Phase  II study  of dovitinib 
(TKI258)  in patients  with progressive  metastatic  adenoid  cystic carcinoma.  . J Clin  Oncol  31 suppl; 
abstr 6021, 2013  
MEMORIAL  SLOAN -KETTERING  CANCER  CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#:  13-244 A(9) 
Amended:  29-SEP-2016  
Page  49 of 51  
 33. Wilhelm SM, Dumas J, Adnane L, Lynch M, Carter CA, Schutz G, Thierauch KH, Zopf D: 
Regorafenib  (BAY  73-4506):  a new oral multikinase  inhibitor  of angiogenic,  stromal  and oncogenic 
receptor tyrosine kinases with potent preclinical antitumor activity. Int J Cancer 129:245 -55, 2011  
34. Grothey  A, Van Cutsem  E, Sobrero  A, Siena  S, Falcone  A, Ychou  M, Humblet  Y, Bouche  O, 
Mineur L, Barone C, Adenis A, Tabernero  J, Yoshino T, Lenz  HJ, Goldberg RM, Sargent DJ, Cihon 
F, Cupit L, Wagner A, Laurent D, Group CS: Regorafenib monotherapy for previously treated 
metastatic colorectal cancer (CORRECT): an international, multicentre, randomised, placebo - 
controlled, phase 3 trial. Lancet 381:303 -12, 2013  
35. Demetri  GD, Reichardt P, Kang YK, Blay JY, Rutkowski P, Gelderblom H,  Hohenberger P, 
Leahy  M, von Mehren  M, Joensuu  H, Badalamenti  G, Blackstein  M, Le Cesne  A, Schoffski  P, Maki 
RG, Bauer S, Nguyen BB, Xu J, Nishida T, Chung J, Kappeler C, Kuss I, Laurent D, Casali PG, 
investigators Gs: Efficacy and safety of regorafenib for advanced gastrointestinal stromal tumours 
after failure of imatinib and sunitinib (GRID): an international, multicentre, randomised, placebo - 
controlled, phase 3 trial. Lancet 381:295 -302, 2013  
36. Locati  LD, Bossi  P, Perrone  F, Potepan  P, Crippa  F, Mariani  L, Casieri  P, Orsenigo  M, Losa 
M, Bergamini C, Liberatoscioli C, Quattrone P, Calderone RG, Rinaldi G, Pilotti S, Licitra L: 
Cetuximab in recurrent and/or metastatic salivary gland carcinomas: A phase II study. Oral Oncol 
45:574 -8, 2009  
37. van Herpen  CM, Locati  LD, Buter  J, Thomas  J, Bogaerts  J, Lacombe  D, de Mulder  P, Awada 
A, Licitra L, Bernier J, Vermorken JB: Phase II study on gemcitabine in recurrent and/or metastatic 
adenoid cystic carcinoma of the head and neck (EORTC 24982). Eur J Cancer 44:2542 -5, 2008  
38. Gilbert  J, Li Y, Pinto  HA, Jennings  T, Kies MS, Silverman  P, Forastiere  AA: Phase  II trial of 
taxol in salivary gland malignancies (E1394): a trial of the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group. 
Head Neck 28:197 -204, 2006  
39. Agulnik M, Cohen EW, Cohen RB, Chen EX, Vokes EE, Hotte SJ, Winquist E, Laurie S, 
Hayes DN, Dancey JE, Brown S, Pond GR, Lorimer I, Daneshmand M, Ho J, Tsao MS, Siu LL: 
Phase  II study  of lapatinib  in recurrent  or metastatic  epidermal  growth  factor  receptor  and/or  erbB2 
expressing adenoid cystic carcinoma and non adenoid cystic carcinoma malignant tumors of the 
salivary glands. J Clin Oncol 25:3978 -84, 2007  
 
 
20.0 APPENDICES  
MEMORIAL  SLOAN -KETTERING  CANCER  CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#:  13-244 A(9) 
Amended:  29-SEP-2016  
Page  50 of 51  
 APPENDIX  A: PERFORMANCE  STATUS  CRITERIA  
 
 
ECOG  Performance  Status  Scale   
Karnofsky  Performance  Scale  
Grade  Descriptions  Percent  Description  
 
 
0  
Normal  activity.  Fully  active,  able 
to carry on all pre -disease 
performance without restriction.  100 Normal,  no complaints,  no evidence 
of disease.  
90 Able to carry  on normal  activity; 
minor signs or symptoms of 
disease.  
 
 
1 Symptoms, but ambulatory. 
Restricted  in physically  strenuous 
activity, but ambulatory and able 
to carry out work of a light or 
sedentary nature (e.g., light 
housework, office work).  80 Normal  activity  with effort;  some 
signs or symptoms of disease.  
70 Cares for self, unable to carry on 
normal  activity  or to do active  work.  
 
 
2 In bed <50% of the time. 
Ambulatory and capable of all 
self-care, but unable to carry out 
any work  activities.  Up and about 
more than 50% of waking hours.  60 Requires  occasional  assistance,  but 
is able to care for most of his/her 
needs.  
50 Requires  considerable  assistance 
and frequent medical care.  
 
3 In bed >50%  of the time.  Capable 
of only limited self -care, confined 
to bed or chair more than 50% of 
waking hours.  40 Disabled,  requires  special  care and 
assistance.  
30 Severely  disabled,  hospitalization 
indicated.  Death not imminent.  
 
4 100% bedridden.  Completely 
disabled.  Cannot carry on any 
self-care.  Totally  confined  to bed 
or chair.  20 Very sick, hospitalization  indicated. 
Death not imminent.  
10 Moribund,  fatal processes 
progressing rapidly.  
5 Dead.  0 Dead.  
MEMORIAL  SLOAN -KETTERING  CANCER  CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#:  13-244 A(9) 
Amended:  29-SEP-2016  
Page  51 of 51  
 APPENDIX  B: Pill Diary  