PROTOCOL TITLE: Metaplasticity in the human motor  cortex: validation  of an 
experimental design and comparison of motor outcome measure sensitivity to  change
Page  1 of 33 Version Date: December 16, 2016INSTRUCTIONS:
Use “TEMPLATE  PROTOCOL (HRP-503)” to prepare a 
document with  the information from following sections. 
Depending on the nature of what you are doing, some sections may not be applicable  to your research.  If so mark as “NA” and briefly 
explain why it doesn’t apply. For example, research involving a retrospective chart review may have many sections with NA.  
If there is  another protocol  document  (e.g.,  from  a study  sponsor),  
please include that protocol document  with your submission  in 
addition to this  form.  If  content  requested in this protocol template 
is already  addressed  in the  other protocol document, please 
indicate the location by page and paragraph number  rather than 
repeating the  information  here.
If this research is  HHS-supported (e.g.,  NIH funded) and UNM  
HSC is  the prime awardee or serving  as the IRB of record for the 
prime awardee,  include a copy of the  grant  application and sample 
consent (if applicable).
All checklists referenced in this protocol can  be found in  Click  
under the  “IRB” tab, in the “IRB  Library”.
When you  write a protocol,  keep an electronic copy. You  will need 
to modify this copy when making changes.
As you are writing the  protocol,  remove all instructions in italics 
so that  they are  not contained in the final version of your protocol.
PROTOCOL TITLE: Metaplasticity in the human motor  cortex: validation  of an 
experimental design and comparison of motor outcome measure sensitivity to  change
Page  2 of 33 Version Date: December 16, 2016PROTOCOL TITLE:
Metaplasticity in the human  motor cortex: validation of an experimental design  
and comparison of motor outcome  measure  sensitivity to change
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:
Sarah Pirio  Richardson, MD
Neurology
Davin Quinn,  MD
Psychiatry
VERSION NUMBER:
V2
DATE:
12/16/2016
REGULATORY FRAMEWORK:
Please indicate all  that apply:
DOD (Department of Defense)
DOE (Department of  Energy)
DOJ (Department of Justice)
ED (Department of  Education)
EPA (Environmental  Protection  Agency)
FDA (Food  and Drug Administration)
HHS (Department  of Health and Human Services)
VA
Other:      
Is this a clinical trial  under  ICH-GCP  E6?    Yes    No
If yes, please confirm that the research team is familiar with  and agrees  to comply  
with the investigator  requirements cited in  ICH-GCP E6.    Yes    No 
ICH-GCP E6 can be  accessed by copying and  pasting this URL into your 
browser: http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/Guidances/ucm073122.pdf
PROTOCOL TITLE: Metaplasticity in the human motor  cortex: validation  of an 
experimental design and comparison of motor outcome measure sensitivity to  change
Page  3 of 33 Version Date: December 16, 2016Table of Contents
1.Objectives ..................................................................................................................... 4
2.Background .................................................................................................................. 4
3.Study Design ................................................................................................................ 5
4.Inclusion and  Exclusion Criteria .................................................................................. 5
5.Number of Subjects ...................................................................................................... 6
6.Study Timelines ............................................................................................................ 6
7.Study Endpoints ........................................................................................................... 6
8.Research Setting ........................................................................................................... 7
9.Resources Available ..................................................................................................... 7
10. Prior Approvals ......................................................................................................... 7
11. Multi-Site Research .................................................................................................. 8
12. Study Procedures ...................................................................................................... 8
13. Data Analysis ............................................................................................................ 8
14. Provisions to Monitor  the Data  to Ensure the Safety of Subjects ............................. 9
15. Withdrawal  of Subjects ............................................................................................. 9
16. Data Management/Confidentiality ............................................................................ 9
17. Data and Specimen Banking ................................................................................... 11
18. Risks to Subjects ..................................................................................................... 11
19. Potential Benefits  to Subjects ................................................................................. 11
20. Recruitment  Methods .............................................................................................. 12
21. Provisions to Protect the Privacy Interests of Subjects .......................................... 12
22. Economic Burden to Subjects ................................................................................. 12
23. Compensation ......................................................................................................... 13
24. Compensation for Research-Related  Injury ............................................................ 13
25. Consent Process ...................................................................................................... 14
26. Documentation of  Consent ..................................................................................... 16
27. Study Test Results/Incidental  Findings .................................................................. 17
28. Sharing Study Progress or Results with Subjects ................................................... 18
29. Inclusion of  Vulnerable Populations ...................................................................... 18
30. Community-Based Participatory Research ............................................................. 19
31. Research Involving American Indian/Native  Populations ..................................... 19
32. Transnational Research ........................................................................................... 19
33. Drugs or Devices .................................................................................................... 19
Checklist Section ............................................................................................................... 20
PROTOCOL TITLE: Metaplasticity in the human motor  cortex: validation  of an 
experimental design and comparison of motor outcome measure sensitivity to  change
Page  4 of 33 Version Date: December 16, 20161.Objectives
1.1.The overall  objective is to validate the methodology of a metaplasticity  
experimental design by assessing change  in motor  excitability after 
administration of priming transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) 
followed by repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation  (rTMS) in healthy 
human participants. Our primary objective is to compare pre- and post-measures 
of cortical excitability before priming tDCS (anodal, cathodal or sham)  [M1], 
directly after priming tDCS [M2], directly  after inhibitory rTMS [M3], and 10 
minutes after inhibitory rTMS  [M4]. Our secondary objective is to evaluate the 
sensitivity of motor excitability  outcome measures response  to the noninvasive  
neurostimulation (e.g. rTMS and tDCS). Our future  direction is to apply this 
validated protocol in patient  populations  to better understand how disease states 
affect metaplasticity.
1.2.Aim 1: To compare pre- and post- measures of cortical  excitability after 
inhibitory and excitatory priming of the motor cortex. Hypothesis 1: We expect 
priming tDCS to affect the response  to rTMS, namely we expect “inhibitory” 
cathodal tDCS to cause  a reversal  of the normal inhibitory effect  of 1Hz rTMS.  
Hypothesis 2: We expect “excitatory”  anodal tDCS  to have no effect  on the 
normal inhibitory effect  of 1Hz rTMS. Hypothesis 3: We expect sham tDCS to 
have no effect  on the normal  inhibitory effect of 1Hz rTMS.
Exploratory Aim 2: To evaluate the sensitivity  of motor  outcome measures to 
changes in cortical plasticity. Hypothesis 1: We expect different  measures of 
motor cortex excitability to be more sensitive  than others  at detecting changes  in 
cortical excitability. We will be comparing in an exploratory but systematic 
fashion various  measures of motor cortex excitability  (e.g. peak-to-peak 
amplitude change in motor evoked potential (MEP), the integrated area of the 
MEP (root mean square), the cortical silent period (CSP)), and behavioral  
measures (reaction  time).
2.Background
2.1.rTMS  and tDCS are relatively new modalities that have shown promise  in the 
evaluation and treatment in a variety  of neurologic and psychiatric disorders as 
well as understanding normal brain processes  in the healthy human  brain.   One 
specific area of interest  has been the concept  of metaplasticity in the motor  
cortex in healthy brains and how this is modified in the disease state. 
Metaplasticity refers to changes  in synaptic  efficacy such as long-term 
potentiation (LTP) and long-term depression (LTD), which can be influenced by 
prior neuronal  activity. In humans, we can study these LTP-like and LTD-like  
changes using non-invasive  neurostimulation (e.g. tDCS and rTMS). 
2.2.Previous studies (Siebner  et al. 2004) have  shown that preconditioning with 
anodal (“excitatory”)  tDCS followed by inhibitory rTMS led to a period in which 
corticospinal excitability  was reduced below baseline. Conversely, 
preconditioning with cathodal tDCS followed by 1Hz rTMS caused a resulting 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Metaplasticity in the human motor  cortex: validation  of an 
experimental design and comparison of motor outcome measure sensitivity to  change
Page  5 of 33 Version Date: December 16, 2016period of corticospinal  excitability that was increased above  baseline.  This will 
be a proof of principle  trial to validate  the methodology of this protocol. 
2.3.rTMS  is a relatively  new therapeutic  modality  that shows great promise in the 
treatment and evaluation  of a variety  of conditions and is already FDA-approved  
for the treatment of depression.  However, various  target stimulation parameters  
and protocols make comparison  across research groups  difficult, leading to a 
knowledge gap. Validating  a systematic  methodological approach in healthy 
people will allow comparison  to previous work as well as establishing  a baseline 
for moving forward to compare  metaplasticity  in brain disease  states.
3.Study Design
3.1.This will be a randomized,  sham-controlled,  double blinded crossover trial in a 
healthy population.
Figure 1: Subjects  will enter the randomization at green diamond. Example shown for a subject 
following the red line through 3 interventions and another example shown in the blue line 
receiving a different order of interventions. They will be randomized to a three-visit crossover  
with a week separation between each visit. There will be four measures taken each  visit (M1-M4), 
which will be approximately 10 minutes apart. Measures taken at each  time point include: 
physiological measures (e.g. MEP), behavioral outcomes (e.g. reaction time) and exploratory 
outcomes. Study is completed at the end of visit 3 (red octagon). C tDCS=cathodal tDCS; A 
tDCS=anodal tDCS.
3.2.Participants will be blinded to treatment group. A team  investigator,  off-line,  will 
conduct the raw data analysis (e.g. MEP amplitude and CSP) and will be 
different than the investigator  applying the noninvasive neurostimulation to the 

PROTOCOL TITLE: Metaplasticity in the human motor  cortex: validation  of an 
experimental design and comparison of motor outcome measure sensitivity to  change
Page  6 of 33 Version Date: December 16, 2016treatment group. This additional blinding of the data analysis  will help to 
provide another protection against bias.
4.Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria
4.1.Individuals will be screened for eligibility by a study team member. The study 
team member  will ask the potential participant a series of questions  to determine 
whether or not they meet the inclusion/exclusion  criteria.
4.2.Inclusion Criteria:
a)Participant must  be at least 18 years  of age (all genders, races, and 
ethnicities)
b)Participant must have no  current psychiatric or neurologic issues
c)Participant must not have any conditions listed in the exclusion 
criteria
d)Participant must be  fluent in  English
Exclusion Criteria:
a)History of major psychiatric illness
b)Actively using a neuropsychoactive  medication
c)Legal or  mental incompetency
d)Substance use disorder, abuse or dependence, with active use within  
the last 3 months
e)Significant medical or neurological illness
f)Prior  neurosurgical procedure
g)History of seizure
h)History of ECT  or TMS treatment  within the past three  months
i)Presence of a pacemaker,  implanted medical pump or device, metal 
plate, or metal object in skull or eye (including shunts, dental  
implants, facial tattoos with metallic ink)
j)Pregnant women
4.3.This study will not include any participants from any special  populations (adults 
unable to consent, children, pregnant women, or prisoners).
4.4.This study will exclude pregnant women and children (due to safety and potential  
risk), prisoners  and those who cannot  competently provide their own consent 
(due to these groups  being special populations) and will also exclude  those  who 
do not fluently  speak or understand English (as our consent will be in English 
and study team members are fluent in English).
PROTOCOL TITLE: Metaplasticity in the human motor  cortex: validation  of an 
experimental design and comparison of motor outcome measure sensitivity to  change
Page  7 of 33 Version Date: December 16, 20165.Number of  Subjects
5.1.This is  not a multisite study and will only recruit subjects at  this site.
5.2.We will aim to recruit 16 subjects for this study.
5.3.Sixteen  subjects will be enrolled for this study according to the MANOVA model 
(anodal, cathodal, and sham) and a specified number  of variables (time points—
M1-M4) at the significance  level of α=0.05 and 80% power to correspond  to the 
very large effect size. We have based the calculation on the very large effect size 
as seen in Quartarone et al., 2005. The desired sample size was found to be 16 
patients per treatment arm. We will fulfill this sample size requirement  with a 
crossover design as all 16 subjects will participate in each treatment arm. We 
would request a recruitment ceiling of 20 subjects to account for subject dropout 
and if a subject were to meet exclusion  criteria after signing the  consent.
6.Study Timelines
6.1.Study  subjects  will participate in three visits total. Each visit will consist of a 
visit length of 1 to 1 ½ hours in duration. The visits will be approximately one 
week apart. There  will be no scheduled follow-up after the third subject  visit.  We 
anticipate that it will take 8 months to enroll all subjects. We expect to complete  
enrollment of all subjects  and completion  of experiments  in 1 year. We expect 
data analysis and publication  to occur  within  2 years  of study  commencement.
7.Study Endpoints
7.1.The primary endpoint  will be change  in motor evoked potential (MEP) amplitude 
over the first dorsal  interosseous (FDI) muscle  of the dominant (right) hand pre- 
and post-intervention (tDCS  and rTMS—time points M1-M3) as well as 10 
minutes post intervention (time  point M4). The secondary endpoint will be the 
comparison in an exploratory but systematic  fashion various measures of motor  
cortex excitability (e.g. peak-to-peak  amplitude change in motor evoked potential 
(MEP), the integrated area of the MEP (root mean square), the cortical  silent  
period (CSP)), and behavioral measures (reaction time).
7.2.We will collect data on the safety of rTMS in this patient population  including 
expected side effects: headache (expected 17% with transient headache that 
responds to simple analgesic) and nonspecific  feelings of discomfort. We will 
collect data on rare but serious adverse events such as seizures  (reported at 
1.4%). No seizures have been  reported in the literature on rTMS in the dystonia 
population thus far  (Lefaucheur  et al., 2014).
8.Research Setting
8.1.The study visits will all take place  in the Noninvasive Neurostimulation  Lab 
located on the 2nd floor of the Clinical and Translational Science Center (CTSC).
8.2.Potential subjects will be recruited  and identified through the healthy participant 
registry through the CTSC  as well as fliers placed  throughout  the Health 
Sciences Center and Main Campus.
PROTOCOL TITLE: Metaplasticity in the human motor  cortex: validation  of an 
experimental design and comparison of motor outcome measure sensitivity to  change
Page  8 of 33 Version Date: December 16, 20168.3.Research procedures will be  performed in the Noninvasive Neurostimulation Lab  
located on the 2nd floor of the CTSC.  Analysis will be performed between the 
offices of Dr. Pirio Richardson, Dr. Quinn, and the CTSC Biostatistics core.
8.4.N/A
8.5.N/A
9.Resources  Available
9.1.PI: Dr. Sarah Pirio Richardson will be responsible  for supervising and 
coordinating all aspects of the research. She is well prepared and qualified for 
this role. Her training includes a fellowship  at the National Institute of 
Neurological Disorders  and Stroke  in the Human Motor  Control Section with Dr. 
Mark Hallett, which  provided her with experience  and expertise to undertake 
clinical research with noninvasive neurostimulation. She has completed the NIH 
Clinic Center Research Curriculum Certificate with Commendation. 
Additionally, she has published multiple studies using  rTMS in healthy subjects 
and various movement disorders. She is well prepared to conduct  research in the 
population. Dr. Pirio Richardson recently completed a KL2 scholar position 
through the CTSC providing formal mentorship  and training in clinical  and 
translational research.
Co-PI: Dr. Davin Quinn is an Associate  Professor  in Psychiatry. As a junior  PI 
in the UNM Center  for Brain  Recovery and Repair, Dr. Quinn’s  goal is to 
establish an independent  NIH-funded  research  program in neurorehabilitative 
and neurostimulatory therapies for affective,  behavioral, and cognitive  sequelae 
of traumatic  brain injury (TBI).   The current  proposal  will study  the 
administration of high-definition transcranial direct current  stimulation  and 
transcranial magnetic stimulation to temporarily modulate the homeostatic 
plasticity of the brain  in healthy subjects, bringing together several of his 
academic interests  in one scientific endeavor.  Dr. Quinn has made the treatment 
of TBI the focus of his clinical work for the past several years, achieving board-
certification in neuropsychiatry and behavioral neurology in 2012, and 
establishing a neuropsychiatry clinic in the UNM Clinical Neurosciences Center 
in 2013 to better serve the undertreated population of TBI patients in New 
Mexico. Dr. Quinn  joined the UNM Electroconvulsive Therapy (ECT) Service  in 
2012 after becoming certified in ECT. He has published  several  articles  on the 
efficacy and safety of various neurostimulation modalities.
Co-I: Dr. Andrew  Archer is a third-year  Psychiatry resident interested in 
pursuing an academic career and is interested  in noninvasive neurostimulation. 
He has participated in several research  studies within the Psychiatry  department. 
He has completed the required trainings  to be able to conduct clinical  research 
responsibly.
Research Coordinator: Ms. Ashley Wegele  is a research coordinator  in the 
Department of Neurology (supervised by Dr. Pirio Richardson). She has 
completed all required training  for clinical research and regulation.  She will 
manage all regulatory correspondence  with the IRB and the funding agency such 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Metaplasticity in the human motor  cortex: validation  of an 
experimental design and comparison of motor outcome measure sensitivity to  change
Page  9 of 33 Version Date: December 16, 2016as progress reports and adverse event reporting.  She will obtain subject consent 
and HIPAA authorization.  She will schedule and facilitate all subject 
interactions, as well as collect and manage research data.
9.2.Drs. Pirio Richardson and Quinn will be responsible for any  medical decision-
making and ordering  and evaluation  of necessary diagnostics and therapeutics.
9.3.Other resources available
This study requires  a small number of healthy  participants. Given the registry  
maintained by the CTSC along with the number of healthy people who 
frequent the UNM campus and may see our flier, we believe it will be feasible 
to recruit our sample.
Our study team  will devote ample time to the all phases  of this research 
project. Time necessary  may fluctuate depending on how many participants 
are interested at a particular time. Our team comprises of several individuals 
with the training  and expertise necessary  to devote  the time needed  until the 
project is  completed.
Laboratory  space and equipment: Dr. Pirio Richardson’s, Noninvasive  
Neurostimulation Laboratory at UNM (476 nsf), is housed  at the University  of 
New Mexico Clinical and Translational  Science Center (CTSC)  on the second 
floor of the building. On this floor, a main reception  area and front desk 
check-in for study appointments. The lab contains all equipment  necessary to 
conduct noninvasive transcranial magnetic  stimulation (TMS)  studies. Both a 
Magstim 2002 (plus the Bistim2 unit) (Magstim Co., Whitland, Dyfed, UK) and 
a Magstim Rapid2 (Magstim Co., Whitland, Dyfed, UK) are used in the 
laboratory. The coil inventory  includes a Magstim double 70mm coil, 
Magstim custom double 35mm coils, and Magstim double 70mm cooled coil 
system and a Magstim double 70mm sham coil system (1st generation),  
(Magstim Co., Whitland, Dyfed,  UK). For this project, a set of real vs. sham 
Magstim (2nd generation) air-cooled  coils are requested to match the same set 
of coils in use at all other  sites. The TMS units are connected to a commercial  
electromyography machine (Nicolet Viking) through a data acquisition device 
(Micro 1401, Cambridge Electronic  Devices,  Cambridge, UK).  The data are 
collected and analyzed through Signal software (Cambridge  Electronic  
Devices, Cambridge, UK). The lab is also equipped with custom hardware, 
including a flexible overhead coil holders and optional chin-rest and neck 
brace for stabilizing  the subject's head during experiments and chair with arm 
and leg rests.
A NeuroConn MR transcranial electrical stimulator belonging  to the Clinical  
Core will be used.  This is a CE-certified medical device for conducting  non-
invasive transcranial  direct  current  stimulation  (tDCS), alternating (tACS) or 
random noise (tRNS)  current  stimulation  on subjects. Transcranial 
stimulation using  weak electric currents over a period of several minutes is 
demonstrated to modify neuronal excitability and circuit function and can 
serve to promote  brain recovery  and repair. 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Metaplasticity in the human motor  cortex: validation  of an 
experimental design and comparison of motor outcome measure sensitivity to  change
Page  10 of 33 Version Date: December 16, 2016Although risk for seizure is minimal, in the event this occurs the PI (Dr. Pirio 
Richardson) will be on hand to administer immediate first aid and the hospital 
code team would  be activated. 
All members  of our small study team are involved in the development of this 
protocol. Upon approval, we will meet regularly to ensure that our research 
protocol is being appropriately implemented.  Furthermore, there will be at 
least two members of the research  team available  for participant visits, 
ensuring accountability and  safety procedures are being met.
The signed CTSC  resources attachment will be uploaded on the CTSC  
Submission page in Click.
10.Prior Approvals
10.1. N/A
10.2. Attached to submission
10.3. N/A
10.4. N/A
11.Multi-Site Research
11.1. N/A
11.2. N/A
11.3. N/A
12.Study Procedures  
12.1. Visit 1:After informed consent, subjects will be seated in a comfortable chair.  
Surface EMG leads will be applied to clean and prepped  skin over the right  
hand over the first dorsal  interosseous muscle (FDI). The motor hotspot for FDI 
will be identified with TMS  on the contralateral hemisphere.  Resting motor  
threshold and active motor threshold will  be determined.
M1 (pre-tDCS measurement): neurophysiological outcome 
assessment (MEP, CSP) and behavioral outcome (reaction time task)
Priming Intervention 10 min tDCS (cathodal,  anodal or  sham)
M2 (pre-tDCS measurement): neurophysiological outcome 
assessment (MEP, CSP) and behavioral outcome (reaction time task)
Inhibitory Intervention 15 min rTMS over the dominant  primary 
motor cortex at 1Hz
M3 (post-rTMS  measurement): neurophysiological outcome 
assessment (MEP, CSP) and behavioral outcome (reaction time task)
M4 (10 minutes post-rTMS measurement):  neurophysiological 
outcome assessment  (MEP,  CSP) and behavioral  outcome (reaction 
time task)
PROTOCOL TITLE: Metaplasticity in the human motor  cortex: validation  of an 
experimental design and comparison of motor outcome measure sensitivity to  change
Page  11 of 33 Version Date: December 16, 2016Visit 2:
M1 (pre-tDCS measurement): neurophysiological outcome 
assessment (MEP, CSP) and behavioral outcome (reaction time task)
Priming Intervention 10 min  tDCS (cathodal,  anodal or  sham)
M2 (pre-tDCS measurement): neurophysiological outcome 
assessment (MEP, CSP) and behavioral outcome (reaction time task)
Inhibitory Intervention 15 min rTMS over the dominant  primary 
motor cortex at 1Hz
M3 (post-rTMS  measurement): neurophysiological outcome 
assessment (MEP, CSP) and behavioral outcome (reaction time task)
M4 (10 minutes post-rTMS measurement):  neurophysiological 
outcome assessment  (MEP,  CSP) and behavioral  outcome (reaction 
time task)
Visit 3:
M1 (pre-tDCS measurement): neurophysiological outcome 
assessment (MEP, CSP) and behavioral outcome (reaction time task)
Priming Intervention  10 min priming tDCS (cathodal, anodal or 
sham)
M2 (pre-tDCS measurement): neurophysiological outcome 
assessment (MEP, CSP) and behavioral outcome (reaction time task)
Inhibitory Intervention 15 min rTMS over the dominant  primary 
motor cortex at 1Hz
M3 (post-rTMS  measurement): neurophysiological outcome 
assessment (MEP, CSP) and behavioral outcome (reaction time task)
M4 (10 minutes post-rTMS measurement):  neurophysiological 
outcome assessment  (MEP,  CSP) and behavioral  outcome (reaction 
time task)
13.Data Analysis
13.1. Aim 1: To compare pre- and post- measures of cortical  excitability after 
inhibitory and excitatory priming of the motor cortex.  Hypothesis  1: We expect  
priming tDCS to affect the response to rTMS, namely we expect “inhibitory”  
cathodal tDCS to cause a reversal  of the normal inhibitory effect of 1Hz rTMS.  
Hypothesis 2: We expect “excitatory”  anodal tDCS to have no effect on the 
normal inhibitory  effect of 1Hz rTMS.  Hypothesis 3: We expect sham tDCS to 
have no effect  on the normal  inhibitory effect  of 1Hz rTMS. We will use a 
MANOVA model (anodal, cathodal,  and sham) and a specified  number of 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Metaplasticity in the human motor  cortex: validation  of an 
experimental design and comparison of motor outcome measure sensitivity to  change
Page  12 of 33 Version Date: December 16, 2016variables (time points— M1-M4).  MANOVA assumes normality of the residuals 
and equality  of variance across groups.  In the case of violation  of these 
assumptions, we will explore data transformations, including  logarithmic,  
power, and inverse-normal transformations, to identify an analytic scale under 
which modeling assumptions are met. Should transformations not be adequate, 
we will employ non-parametric methods instead.
Exploratory Aim 2: To evaluate the sensitivity  of motor  outcome measures to 
changes in cortical plasticity. Hypothesis 1: We expect different  measures of 
motor cortex excitability to be more sensitive  than others  at detecting changes  in 
cortical excitability. We will be comparing in an exploratory but systematic 
fashion various  measures of motor cortex excitability  (e.g. peak-to-peak 
amplitude change in motor evoked  potential  (MEP) and the integrated area of 
the MEP (root mean square)) with the cortical silent period  (CSP)  and 
behavioral measures (reaction time). We will perform both a linear regression as 
well as a Principal  Components Analysis (PCA)  to identify which cortical 
excitability factors are most sensitive  to change due to noninvasive 
neurostimulation.
13.2. Power analysis: Sixteen subjects will be enrolled for this study  according  to the 
MANOVA model (anodal, cathodal,  and sham) and a specified  number of 
variables (time points—M1-M4) at the significance level  of α=0.05 and 80% 
power to correspond to the very large  effect size. We have based the calculation 
on the very large effect  size as seen in Quartarone et al., 2005. The desired  
sample size was found to be 16 patients per treatment arm. We will fulfill  this 
sample size requirement through a crossover trial as all 16 subjects will 
participate in each treatment  arm. We would  request a recruitment ceiling of 20 
subjects to account  for subject dropout and if a subject were to meet  exclusion 
criteria after signing  the consent.
14.Provisions to Monitor the  Data to Ensure the  Safety  of Subjects
14.1. The PIs will consist  of the medical  monitoring team  for this study due to its 
minimal risk status.
14.2. We will collect data on the safety  of rTMS including expected side effects:  
headache (expected  17% with transient  headache that responds to simple 
analgesic) and nonspecific  feelings of discomfort.  We will collect data on rare 
but serious  adverse  events  such as seizures (reported  at 1.4%). 
14.3. The safety data will be reviewed on an ongoing basis during enrollment  and 
conduct of the study.
14.4. We plan to follow the most recent safety  recommendations from expert 
consensus panels  on rTMS.
14.5. We have  no planned  formal analysis of the  safety data.
14.6. N/A
14.7. We will follow  all local and national regulations  regarding the reporting of 
adverse events and serious adverse events.
PROTOCOL TITLE: Metaplasticity in the human motor  cortex: validation  of an 
experimental design and comparison of motor outcome measure sensitivity to  change
Page  13 of 33 Version Date: December 16, 201615.Withdrawal of Subjects
15.1. The PI may remove a subject  from the study at any time if he/she believes that 
continuing in not in his/her best medical interests,  or if he/she  is unable  to 
comply with  the requirements of the study.
15.2. N/A
15.3. N/A
15.4. If a subject withdraws  from the study, they will be asked if they would  like to 
allow us to keep data that has already  been collected. If they do not wish for 
this to happen,  we will get rid of any CRFs by secured  document-shredding 
methods and remove  all data on that participant from our secured database.
15.5. The participant will need to speak  with either the PI or research coordinator to 
verify they do not want to continue participating. There will be nothing in the 
consent to  limit  a participant  from voluntary  withdrawal.
16.Data Management/Confidentiality
16.1. Information and clinical data collected as part of this study  will be labeled  with 
the subject’s initials and study number, which will be in a locked file cabinet in 
the PI’s office that can  be locked  as well.
16.2. This research does not require direct  identifiers such as name or address to be 
used.
16.3. This research does not require the access,  use, or disclosure  of Protected 
Health Information.
16.4. This research will ask about substance abuse as it is an exclusion criterion  for 
this project, but we will not maintain any data or information  with details  about 
potential abuse.
16.5. We will not use  a Certificate of Confidentiality to protect data. 
16.6. Data (without identifiers) will be entered into a computer  database  and/or 
locked file cabinet in the PI’s office. All computers  with data will be password  
protected and databases  will have  no linking identifiers to the participant. All 
study team members have  completed HIPAA  training.
16.7. PI will be on-site at each  study visit to ensure quality control standards are 
being met.
16.8. N/A
16.9. N/A
16.10. N/A 
16.11. N/A
17.Data and Specimen Banking
17.1. N/A
PROTOCOL TITLE: Metaplasticity in the human motor  cortex: validation  of an 
experimental design and comparison of motor outcome measure sensitivity to  change
Page  14 of 33 Version Date: December 16, 201617.2. N/A
18.Risks to Subjects
18.1. TMS: TMS is a safe procedure  that has been  used on many people  to study  the 
brain. Most people  do not find the stimulation painful,  but occasionally strong 
contractions of scalp  muscles can cause some discomfort of headache.   
Headaches usually go away promptly with nonprescription medication.  The 
noise of the TMS magnet may affect  hearing, so participant  will be fitted with 
earplugs. Magnetic  stimulation will not be performed in people  who have 
pacemakers, implanted pumps  or stimulators, or who have metal objects inside 
the eye or skull. The risk of inducing  a seizure with single, or paired-pulse,  TMS  
is considered very low. Seizures from single/paired-pulse TMS have only been 
reported in subjects  with medically-intractable  epilepsy very rarely  (0.0-3%). 
Safety studies using TMS  in patients with neurological disorders have 
demonstrated no permanence.
tDCS: At the beginning of tDCS most people  feel a tingling sensation that is 
present for a short period of time. Also, most people feel a warming sensation 
on the scalp that disappears  after awhile. tDCS is known to be a safe procedure 
for several  hundred patients at UNM, but in a few cases (1%)  subjects have 
reported minor skin burns at the electrode spot. For example, a few subjects 
who had recently  shaved  their heads  have reported transient redness and 
irritation at the stimulating electrode  site. Prior to stimulation, your scalp will 
be checked for any redness or recent shaving of the head. If any of these are 
seen, we will pause or stop your participation in the study.  You will be 
encouraged at the beginning of and throughout the tDCS procedure  to report 
any pain or problems  at the electrode sites that you may encounter throughout  
the procedure. Any problems,  orevidence  of redness or pain of the scalp, will 
result in the immediate stopping of stimulation. As with any contact between 
persons and electrical apparatuses, there is a slight possibility of electrical 
shock. To our knowledge, no studies have  reported any electrical shock 
resulting from tDCS,  and we do not expect this event  to occur in our 
experiment. tDCS uses rubber electrode holders. If you think  you may be 
sensitive or allergic to rubber or latex,  please tell us before the start of the 
experiment. A few people in other studies have  experienced drowsiness, 
excitement, or dizziness  after  tDCS.
Risks of Research: A potential loss of confidentiality, which could result in 
stress, emotional distress,  inconvenience, and possibly  loss of privacy.
18.2. N/A
18.3. As risk to fetus  by TMS is not known, we will not include pregnant women in 
this study.  We will administer  a pregnancy  test to any women of childbearing 
potential at each visit and with confirmation that the test is negative before 
study procedures ensue.
18.4. N/A
PROTOCOL TITLE: Metaplasticity in the human motor  cortex: validation  of an 
experimental design and comparison of motor outcome measure sensitivity to  change
Page  15 of 33 Version Date: December 16, 201618.5. As noted, women  of childbearing potential will be tested for pregnancy prior  to 
treatment. Participants  with a pre-existing seizure disorder, or who meet 
criteria that may increase likelihood of seizure  will be excluded from  the study.  
Our study team will take all necessary  measures  to minimize  the risk of loss of 
confidentiality by  following all procedures noted in this protocol. 
19.Potential Benefits to Subjects
19.1. There is potential  societal benefit  in understanding  the brain mechanisms 
underlying metaplasticity and has implications in  both health and disease.
19.2. There is no direct benefit  to subjects for participating  in this  study.
20.Recruitment Methods
20.1. Participants will be recruited beginning upon IRB approval for this project.  We 
will utilize both fliers posted around the North and Main campus  of UNM as 
well as the  healthy participant registry at the CTSC. 
20.2. We will not reviewing any participant medical  charts.
20.3. We will utilize a flier that describes the purpose and scope  of this study, it will 
list an email  and phone contact for interested subjects to get in touch with us.
21.Provisions to Protect the Privacy  Interests of Subjects
21.1. Subjects  will be completing  the study visit, including  consent and giving any 
necessary information in our secured  noninvasive  neurostimulation lab. The 
nature of the information they may need to provide  includes basic 
demographics and health history.  We will inform  the subject that only members 
of the  study team may access  any of their information and data.
21.2. Any recruitment phone calls will be taken on a landline  in the research  
coordinator’s lab space. The consent and data collection  process will be done  
in a lab that has a closed door and will not be access by anyone outside of the 
study team.  Once data is collected we will follow  all procedures  described in 
the protocol, which will be explained to the participant  as well, and will include 
password-protected databases  and locked file cabinets in private offices. 
22.Economic  Burden to Subjects
22.1. N/A
Responsible  Party
Research ProceduresNumber of 
Samples/ProceduresStudy 3rd Party  Payer 
or Participant
rTMS 3
tDCS 3
Pregnancy test 1
          
          
          
          
          
Standard of Care ProceduresNumber of Responsible  Party
PROTOCOL TITLE: Metaplasticity in the human motor  cortex: validation  of an 
experimental design and comparison of motor outcome measure sensitivity to  change
Page  16 of 33 Version Date: December 16, 2016Samples/Procedures Study 3rd Party  Payer 
or Participant
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
22.2. N/A
22.3. N/A
22.4. We will explain to the participant, and also note in the consent form, that if an 
adverse event  occurs  the participant will be able to receive treatment here at 
UNMH but that it will be at the expense of the participant and that we are not 
liable for any costs incurred.
22.5. N/A
23.Compensation
23.1. In return for a subject’s time and inconvenience  due to participating in clinical 
research, he/she will be compensated a total  of $70 for the whole study  in the 
form of  a merchandise cards.  
They will receive  $20 for each of the first 2 study visits (subtotal $40). They will 
receive $30 for the  last study visit (subtotal $30 plus first 2 visit subtotal =  
$70).
This amount is appropriate  for the  time and inconvenience of the proposed 
research and would not  be construed as coercive  nor would the small increase 
for the last visit unduly induce subjects to remain in the study when  they 
otherwise would have withdrawn.
24.Compensation for Research-Related  Injury
24.1. N/A
24.2. We will explain to the participant, and also note in the consent form, that if an 
adverse event  occurs  the participant will be able to receive treatment here at 
UNMH but that it will be at the expense of the participant and that we are not 
liable for any costs incurred.
25.Consent Process
25.1. We will be obtaining  informed consent  from each subject prior  to study 
participation. The consent form will discuss the purpose and scope of the study,  
the procedures that will be performed, and the risks/benefits associated with the 
study. We will give the subject a copy of the signed consent form.  We will allow 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Metaplasticity in the human motor  cortex: validation  of an 
experimental design and comparison of motor outcome measure sensitivity to  change
Page  17 of 33 Version Date: December 16, 2016plenty of time for the subject to make  a decision and ask any questions they may 
have before consent, as  well as throughout the study.
25.1.1. The PIs, Co-I and research  coordinator will be responsible  for obtaining 
consent and they have completed the requisite training.
25.1.2. The consent process will take place  in our noninvasive neurostimulation  
lab in the CTSC, which  is a private and secure location.
25.1.3. This study does not offer any significant  benefit to the subject, and they 
will not be compensated at an amount that may be perceived as coercive.  
We will be sure to inform the subject that the study is entirely  voluntary, 
and will not way inhibit any current or future care they receive from us 
here at UNM. 
25.1.4. If the subject is interested, we will e-mail them a copy of the consent prior  
to their participation so that they have time to fully review. Regardless, we 
will take our time walking them through the consent and allow as much 
time as is needed for questions. We will also let them know  that they are 
welcome to  take the consent  home to discuss with friends or family.
25.1.5. We will encourage  the subject  to ask questions throughout the study, and 
will check  in to ensure  they are comfortable  and feel safe. If subject seems 
uncertain or hesitant, we will remind them that they are welcome to stop 
participation at any  time with  no consequences.
25.1.6. We will allow for a question and answer period to enhance  understanding.
25.1.7. We will not ask the participant to teach  back  specifically, unless they have 
questions that lead us to believe they do not fully understand, or seem 
hesitant or uncertain.
Subjects not fluent in English
25.1.8. N/A
25.1.9. N/A
25.1.10. N/A
Cognitively Impaired  Adults/Adults Unable to Consent/Use of a Legally 
Authorized Representative
25.1.11. N/A
25.1.12. N/A
25.1.13. N/A
25.1.14. N/A
25.1.15. N/A
25.1.16. N/A
25.1.17. N/A
PROTOCOL TITLE: Metaplasticity in the human motor  cortex: validation  of an 
experimental design and comparison of motor outcome measure sensitivity to  change
Page  18 of 33 Version Date: December 16, 201625.1.18. N/A
25.1.19. N/A
25.1.20. N/A
Subjects who are not  yet adults  (infants,  children, teenagers)
25.1.21. N/A
25.1.22. N/A 
25.1.23. N/A
25.1.24. N/A
25.1.25. N/A
25.1.26. N/A
25.1.27. N/A
Waiver or  Alteration of Consent  Process  (consent will not be obtained, required 
element of consent  will not be included, or one or more required elements of 
consent will  be altered) 
N/A
26.Documentation of  Consent
26.1. We do plan to use a consent  form to document  informed  consent. It is attached  
to the new  study  application.
26.2. N/A
26.3. N/A 
27.Study Test Results/Incidental Findings
27.1. Individual Results:  We do not intend to share study  test or procedure results 
with study  participants with the exception of the results  of the pregnancy  test. 
This result will  be communicated in person as well as through mail  notification.
27.2. Incidental Findings: We do not anticipate that the research  may result  in 
incidental findings.
28.Sharing  Study Progress or Results  with  Subjects
28.1. We do not intend  to provide subjects with a summary  of the trial progress while 
the study  remains  underway.
28.2. We do not intend  to provide  subjects with a summary of the study  results after 
the study  is complete. We do intend  to disseminate the results through peer-
reviewed publication and presentation at national meetings.
29.Inclusion of Vulnerable Populations
29.1. N/A
PROTOCOL TITLE: Metaplasticity in the human motor  cortex: validation  of an 
experimental design and comparison of motor outcome measure sensitivity to  change
Page  19 of 33 Version Date: December 16, 201630.Community-Based Participatory Research
30.1 N/A
31.Research Involving American Indian/Native Populations
31.1 N/A
32.Transnational Research
32.1. N/A 
32.2. N/A
32.3. N/A
32.4. N/A
32.5. N/A
32.6.  N/A 
33.Drugs or  Devices
33.1. This study utilizes a Magstim Rapid2 rTMS  device  (The Magstim Company 
Limited, Spring Gardens, Whitland, Carmarthenshire, SA34 0HR, UK).  This 
device is FDA approved for the treatment of treatment-resistant depression and 
has been approved  for treatment of Migraine.  The UNM HRRC  has previously  
determined that TMS devices  are not significant risk and has also been 
determined by the sponsor-investigator  (Sarah Pirio Richardson,  MD) to be a 
Non-Significant Risk device.  The device  is already housed at UNM in the 
Noninvasive Neurostimulation Lab, and access  will be limited to the PI who is 
fellowship trained in operating these devices and to study  personnel  who she 
trains to use these  devices safely. 
The TDCS device utilized in this study is determined to be a Non-Significant 
Risk device  by the sponsor-investigator (Davin  Quinn, MD) for the following 
reasons:
1)    It is not intended as an  implant
2)    It does not present a potential  for serious risk to the health, safety,  or 
welfare of the subjects
3)    It is not proposed to be for a use in supporting or sustaining  human life
4)    It is not for a use of substantial importance in diagnosing,  curing, 
mitigating, or treating disease, or preventing  impairment of  human health
According to the FDA, serious adverse events are those in which the outcome is 
death, life-threatening, hospitalization, disability/permanent damage,  
congenital anomaly,  requiring intervention to prevent permanent impairment,  
or other serious events such as refractory seizures, cardiorespiratory arrest,  or 
anaphylactic reaction.  No serious adverse events attributable to TDCS have  
been reported in the more than 10,000 subjects investigated  in the 
contemporary TDCS literature since 1998.  This literature includes  studies  in 
patients with severe  brain injury, stroke,  epilepsy, and neurodegenerative 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Metaplasticity in the human motor  cortex: validation  of an 
experimental design and comparison of motor outcome measure sensitivity to  change
Page  20 of 33 Version Date: December 16, 2016disorders, none of whom have  been  reported to experience serious  adverse  
events.  Specifically, there  have been no reports or evidence presented  of 
damage to the brain, seizures, or cardiorespiratory  arrest.  Animal studies  of 
charge densities  necessary to induce  brain damage in rats were  found  to be 100 
times higher than the charge density  used in TDCS trials with standard  
parameters (< 2.5 mA, no more than 2 sessions  daily, < 60 min per session, use 
of electrodes that minimize skin burns) as determined by world-wide expert 
consensus.  The commonly reported  side effects  of TDCS are itching, burning, 
tingling, headache, and discomfort (10-40%),  all of which are mild and 
transient.  As this trial will be operating within  standard parameters as defined  
above, we  believe our use of TDCS in subjects represent a Non-Significant Risk.
33.2. N/A
33.3. N/A
33.4. The “Device Checklist” in the Checklist  Section of this template has been 
completed.
PROTOCOL TITLE: Metaplasticity in the human motor  cortex: validation  of an experimental 
design and comparison of motor outcome  measure sensitivity to  change
Page  21 of 33 Version Date: December 16, 2016Checklist Section
This section contains checklists to provide information  on a variety of  topics that  require special  
determinations by the IRB.  Please complete all checklists relevant to  your research.
I.Waivers or  Alterations of Consent, Assent, and HIPAA  Authorization
A.Partial Waiver of Consent for Screening/Recruitment
Complete this checklist  if you are requesting a partial waiver  of consent so  that you  
can review private information to identify  potential  subjects  and/or determine 
eligibility prior to approaching potential subjects  for consent or parental permission.
1.Describe the data source  that you need to review (e.g., medical records):
     
2.Describe the purpose for the review (e.g., screening):
     
3.Describe who  will conducting the reviews  (e.g., investigators, research staff):
     
4.Do all persons who will be  conducting the reviews already have permitted 
access to the data source?
 Yes
 No. Explain:      
5.Verify that each of the  following  are true or provide an  alternate justification 
for the underlined regulatory criteria:
a)The activity involves no more than  minimal risk to  the subjects  
because the records  review itself is non-invasive and the results  of the 
records review will not be  used for any purposes other than those 
described above.
 True
 Other  justification:       
b)The waiver or alteration  will not adversely  affect the rights and  
welfare of  the subjects because eligible subjects will be approached for 
consent to  participate  in the research and are free to decline.  Further, 
the information  accessed during the  records  review will not be 
disclosed to anyone without a legitimate purpose (e.g., verification of eligibility).
 True
PROTOCOL TITLE: Metaplasticity in the human motor  cortex: validation  of an experimental 
design and comparison of motor outcome  measure sensitivity to  change
Page  22 of 33 Version Date: December 16, 2016 Other  justification:       
c)The research could  not practicably  be carried out without  the waiver  or 
alteration because there is no other  reasonably efficient and effective 
way to identify who to approach for possible participation in the research.  
 True
 Other  justification:       
d)Whenever  appropriate, potentially eligible subjects will be presented 
with information about  the research and asked to consider 
participation.  (Regulatory criteria: Whenever appropriate,  the 
subjects will be  provided  with additional pertinent  information  after 
participation.)
 True
 Other  justification:       
Partial Waiver of HIPAA Authorization for  Screening/Recruitment
Complete the following  additional  questions/attestations  if the records  you will 
review to identify potential subjects and/or determine eligibility include Protected Health Information (PHI).
6.Will you be recording  any PHI when conducting the records review to identify 
potential subjects  and/or determine eligibility?
 Yes. Describe:      
 No
7.If you answered “Yes”  to question 6 above, please describe when you will 
destroy identifiers (must be the earliest opportunity consistent with the conduct of  the research)  or provide  justification  for why they must  be 
retained:
     
8.The PHI  accessed or recorded for identification/screening purposes will not be 
reused or  disclosed to (shared with) any other person or entity, except as 
required by law,  for authorized oversight of  the research study, or for other 
research for which the  use or disclosure  of the  PHI would  be permitted  under  
the Privacy  Rule.
 True
 False
PROTOCOL TITLE: Metaplasticity in the human motor  cortex: validation  of an experimental 
design and comparison of motor outcome  measure sensitivity to  change
Page  23 of 33 Version Date: December 16, 2016B.Waiver of Documentation  of Consent
Complete this checklist  if you intend to obtain consent verbally but will  not be 
obtaining signatures from  subjects on a consent form to  document consent.   Waivers  
of documentation of consent are commonly  requested when  using scripts, information 
sheets, or  email or survey introductions to present the elements of  consent  instead of  
using a  traditional consent form.
1.Are you requesting a waiver of documentation of consent for some or all subjects?
 All
 Some. Explain:      
2.Provide justification for one of the following:
a)That the only record linking the subject and  the research would be the 
consent document and the principal risk would be potential harm resulting from a  breach of confidentiality.  Each  subject will be  asked 
whether the subject  wants  documentation linking the  subject  with the 
research, and the subject's wishes will govern.
     
b)That the research  presents no more than minimal risk of harm to 
subjects and involves no procedures  for which  written consent is 
normally required  outside of  the research context.
     
3.Do you intend to provide subjects with a written statement regarding the research in lieu of a  traditional consent form?
 Yes. Please attach a  copy to your submission  in Click.
 No
C.Alteration of Consent
Complete this checklist  if you intend to obtain consent but  will be eliminating or 
altering one or more  of the required elements of  consent. Alterations of consent  are 
commonly requested for research involving deception or for minimal  risk research 
when an abbreviated consent is desired and one  or more of  the required element are 
not relevant to the research.
Note: FDA-regulated  research is not eligible  for an alteration of consent.
1.Which element(s) of consent do you wish to eliminate and why?
     
PROTOCOL TITLE: Metaplasticity in the human motor  cortex: validation  of an experimental 
design and comparison of motor outcome  measure sensitivity to  change
Page  24 of 33 Version Date: December 16, 20162.Which element(s) of consent do you wish to alter and why?
     
3.Provide justification for each of the following  regulatory criteria:
a)The research involves no more  than minimal risk to  the subjects:
     
b)The waiver or alteration  will not adversely  affect the rights and  
welfare of  the subjects:
     
c)The research could  not practicably  be carried out without  the waiver  or 
alteration:
     
d)Whenever  appropriate, the subjects  will be provided with  additional 
pertinent information after  participation:
     
D.Full Waiver  of Consent/Parental Permission
Complete this checklist  if you are requesting a full waiver of consent for all subjects 
or certain  subject groups  (e.g., retrospective cohort).  Full waivers of consent are 
commonly requested when the research does not include any  opportunity for 
interaction with subjects  (e.g., chart review).
Note: FDA-regulated  research is not eligible  for a full waiver of consent using these 
criteria.  If you believe  that your FDA-regulated research may  be eligible for  a waiver 
under another mechanism, such as planned emergency  research, contact the HRPO 
for assistance in determining  what  information to provide to the HRRC.
1.Are you requesting a waiver for some or all  subjects?
 All
 Some. Explain:      
2.Provide justification for each of the following  regulatory criteria:
a)The research involves no more  than minimal risk to  the subjects:
     
b)The waiver or alteration  will not adversely  affect the rights and  
welfare of  the subjects:
     
PROTOCOL TITLE: Metaplasticity in the human motor  cortex: validation  of an experimental 
design and comparison of motor outcome  measure sensitivity to  change
Page  25 of 33 Version Date: December 16, 2016c)The research could  not practicably  be carried out without  the waiver  or 
alteration:
     
d)Whenever  appropriate, the subjects  will be provided with  additional 
pertinent information after  participation:
     
E.Full Waiver  of Consent/Parental Permission (Public  Benefit  or Service  
Programs)
Complete this checklist  if you are requesting a full waiver of consent for all subjects 
or certain  subject groups  (e.g., retrospective cohort) and the research  involves the 
evaluation of a public  benefit or service program.  
1.Are you requesting a waiver for some or all  subjects?
 All
 Some. Explain:      
2.Provide justification for each of the following  regulatory criteria:
a)The research or demonstration  project  is to be conducted by or subject 
to the approval of state or local  government officials and is designed to  
study, evaluate,  or otherwise examine: (i) public benefit or service 
programs; (ii)  procedures for obtaining  benefits or services under those 
programs; (iii)  possible changes in or alternatives  to those  programs or 
procedures; or (iv) possible changes  in methods  or levels of payment 
for benefits or services  under  those programs:
     
b)The research could  not practicably  be carried out without  the waiver  or 
alteration.
     
F.Full Waiver  of HIPAA Authorization
Complete this checklist  if you are requesting a full waiver of the requirement to 
obtain HIPAA authorization for all subjects or certain subject groups (e.g.,  
retrospective cohort).   Full waivers of HIPAA  authorization are  commonly  requested  
when the  research does not include  any opportunity for interaction  with subjects 
(e.g., chart review).
1.Are you requesting a waiver of authorization for  some or all subjects?
 All
 Some. Explain:      
PROTOCOL TITLE: Metaplasticity in the human motor  cortex: validation  of an experimental 
design and comparison of motor outcome  measure sensitivity to  change
Page  26 of 33 Version Date: December 16, 20162.Describe your plan  to protect health information  identifiers from improper use 
and disclosure:
     
3.Describe your plan  to destroy identifiers at the earliest opportunity consistent 
with conduct of the research (absent a health or research justification for retaining them or a legal requirement to do so):
     
4.Describe why  the research could not practicably  be conducted  without the 
waiver or  alteration:
     
5.The PHI  accessed or recorded for identification/screening purposes will not be 
reused or  disclosed to (shared with) any other person or entity, except as 
required by law,  for authorized oversight of  the research study, or for other 
research for which the  use or disclosure  of the  PHI would  be permitted  under  
the Privacy  Rule.
 True
 False
G.Other Waiver Types
If you are seeking another  waiver  type  (e.g., Planned  Emergency Research,  Waiver of  
Parental Permission to Protect  Child  Participants,  Enforcement Discretion for In 
Vitro Diagnostics, etc. contact the HRPO office  for assistance in  determining what  
information to submit  for the HRRC’s consideration.
II.Vulnerable Populations
A.Adults with Cognitive Impairments
Complete this checklist  if the subject population will include adults with cognitive 
impairments.  
This checklist does not need to be completed if the research doesn’t  involve 
interactions or interventions  with  subjects  and will  be conducted  under a waiver of  
consent.
1.Describe why  the objectives of the  study  cannot be met  without inclusion of 
adults with cognitive impairments.
     
2.Describe how  capacity to consent  will be evaluated.
PROTOCOL TITLE: Metaplasticity in the human motor  cortex: validation  of an experimental 
design and comparison of motor outcome  measure sensitivity to  change
Page  27 of 33 Version Date: December 16, 2016     
3.If subjects may regain capacity to consent,  or if  subjects  may have  fluctuating 
capacity to consent, describe your plans to evaluate capacity to  consent 
throughout the  research and to obtain consent  to continue participation if  
capacity is  regained.
     
4.Describe your plans, if any, to provide information about the research to  
subjects and the  steps you will take  to assess understanding.
     
5.Describe your plans to obtain assent, including whether assent will be obtained from  none, some, or all subjects.
     
6.Describe why  risks  to subjects are reasonable  in relation to  anticipated 
benefits to the  subjects.
     
7.If this study involves a  health  or behavioral intervention, describe why the 
relation of  the anticipated benefit to the risk of the research is at least as 
favorable to the  subjects as that presented  by alternative procedures.
     
8.Describe your plans for monitoring the well-being of subjects including any plans to withdraw subjects from the research if they appear to be unduly  
distressed.
     
B.Children
Complete this checklist  if the subject population will include children.
1.Select the  category of research that you believe this research  falls within and  
provide justification for any associated criteria.  If there are different assessments for different groups of children or arms (e.g.,  placebo  vs. drug), 
include a memo to provide an  assessment for each group.  
 Research not involving greater  than minimal risk. (Minimal  risk means  
that the probability and magnitude of harm or discomfort  anticipated 
in the research  are not greater in and of themselves than  those  
ordinarily encountered in  daily  life or during  the performance of  
routine physical  or psychological examinations or tests.)
PROTOCOL TITLE: Metaplasticity in the human motor  cortex: validation  of an experimental 
design and comparison of motor outcome  measure sensitivity to  change
Page  28 of 33 Version Date: December 16, 2016 Research involving greater than minimal risk but presenting the 
prospect of  direct benefit to the individual subjects.
Provide justification for each of the following  criteria:
(1)The risk is  justified  by the  anticipated benefit  to the subjects:
     
(2)The relation of the  anticipated benefit to the  risk is at least as 
favorable to the  subjects as that presented  by available 
alternative approaches:
     
 Research involving greater than minimal risk and no prospect of direct 
benefit to individual subjects, but likely to yield generalizable knowledge about the subject's disorder or condition.
Provide justification for each of the following  criteria:
(1)The risk represents  a minor increase  over minimal risk:
     
(2)The intervention or procedure presents  experiences to  subjects  
that are reasonably commensurate with those inherent in  their  
actual or expected medical, dental, psychological,  social, or 
educational situations:
     
(3)The intervention or procedure is likely to yield generalizable knowledge about the subjects' disorder or condition which is of vital importance for the understanding or amelioration  of the 
subjects' disorder or condition
     
C.Pregnant  Women  and Fetuses
Complete this checklist  if the subject population will include pregnant women and 
fetuses.
This checklist does not need to be completed if the research is both minimal risk and 
is not conducted, funded, or otherwise subject to regulation by DHHS,  DOD, EPA,  or 
VA.
Provide justification for each of the following:
1.Where  scientifically  appropriate,  preclinical  studies,  including  studies  on 
pregnant  animals,  and clinical  studies,  including  studies  on non-pregnant  
women,  have been conducted  and provide  data for assessing  potential  risks to 
pregnant  women  and fetuses.
PROTOCOL TITLE: Metaplasticity in the human motor  cortex: validation  of an experimental 
design and comparison of motor outcome  measure sensitivity to  change
Page  29 of 33 Version Date: December 16, 2016     
2.The risk to the  fetus is  caused solely by interventions or  procedures  that hold 
out the prospect  of direct  benefit  for the  woman or the fetus; or, if there is no 
such prospect of  benefit, the risk to the fetus is not greater than minimal and 
the purpose of the research is  the development  of important  biomedical 
knowledge which cannot be obtained  by any other  means.
     
3.Any risk is the least possible  for achieving  the objectives of the research.
     
D.Neonates  of Uncertain Viability or Nonviable Neonates
Complete this checklist  if the subject population will include neonates of  uncertain 
viability.
Provide justification for each of the following:
1.Where scientifically appropriate,  preclinical  and clinical studies have  been 
conducted and provide data for assessing potential risks to neonates.
     
2.Each  individual providing consent  is fully informed regarding  the reasonably 
foreseeable impact of the research  on the  neonate.
     
3.Individuals engaged  in the  research  will have no part in  determining the 
viability of  a neonate.
     
4.The research holds out the prospect  of enhancing the probability of survival of 
the neonate to the point of viability, and  any risk is  the least  possible for 
achieving that objective, or, the purpose of the research is the development of  
important biomedical knowledge which cannot be obtained by other means and there will be no added risk to the neonate resulting from the research
     
E.Nonviable  Neonates
Complete this checklist  if the subject population will include nonviable neonates.
Provide justification for each of the following:
1.Where scientifically appropriate,  preclinical  and clinical studies have  been 
conducted and provide data for assessing potential risks to neonates.
PROTOCOL TITLE: Metaplasticity in the human motor  cortex: validation  of an experimental 
design and comparison of motor outcome  measure sensitivity to  change
Page  30 of 33 Version Date: December 16, 2016     
2.Each  individual providing consent  is fully informed regarding  the reasonably 
foreseeable impact of the research  on the  neonate.
     
3.Individuals engaged  in the  research  will have no part in  determining the 
viability of  a neonate.
     
4.The purpose  of the research is the development of  important biomedical 
knowledge that  cannot be obtained  by other means.
     
Verify each of the following:
5.Vital functions of the neonate will not be artificially maintained
 True
 False
6.The research will not terminate the  heartbeat or respiration of  the neonate
 True
 False
7.There will be  no added risk to the neonate resulting from  the research
 True
 False
F.Biomedical and Behavioral  Research  Involving Prisoners
Complete this checklist  if the subject population will include prisoners.
Note: Minimal  risk for  research  involving prisoners is the probability and magnitude 
of physical or psychological  harm that is normally encountered in the daily lives,  or 
in the routine  medical, dental, or psychological  examination  of healthy persons.
1.Select and  justify which allowable category of research involving prisoners 
this research  falls within:
 Study of the possible causes,  effects, and processes of incarceration, and of 
criminal behavior, provided  that the study presents no more than minimal 
risk and no more than inconvenience  to the subjects
     
PROTOCOL TITLE: Metaplasticity in the human motor  cortex: validation  of an experimental 
design and comparison of motor outcome  measure sensitivity to  change
Page  31 of 33 Version Date: December 16, 2016 Study of prisons as institutional  structures  or of prisoners as incarcerated 
persons, provided  that the study presents no more  than  minimal  risk and  
no more than  inconvenience to the  subjects
     
 Research on conditions particularly  affecting  prisoners as a  class (for 
example, vaccine  trials  and other research on hepatitis which  is much 
more prevalent  in prisons than  elsewhere; and  research on social and  
psychological problems such as alcoholism, drug  addiction, and  sexual 
assaults)
     
 Research on practices, both  innovative and accepted,  which  have the  intent 
and reasonable probability of improving the  health or well-being of the  
subject
     
 Epidemiologic  studies  in which the  sole purpose is to describe  the 
prevalence or incidence of a disease  by identifying all cases or to  study 
potential risk factor  associations for a  disease, the research  presents  no 
more than  Minimal Risk and  no more than inconvenience  to the subjects, 
and Prisoners  are not a particular  focus of the research.
     
2.Provide justification for each of the following  regulatory criteria:
a)Any possible advantages  accruing  to the prisoner  through  his or her 
participation in  the research, when compared  to the general living 
conditions, medical care, quality of  food, amenities  and opportunity 
for earnings in the prison, are not of such a magnitude that his or her ability to weigh the  risks of  the research against the value  of such 
advantages in the  limited  choice  environment  of the prison is impaired
     
b)The risks  involved  in the research  are commensurate with  risks that 
would be accepted by nonprisoner volunteers
     
c)Procedures  for the selection of subjects within the prison are  fair to all 
prisoners and  immune  from arbitrary intervention by prison authorities 
or prisoners. Unless justification is provided,  control subjects must  be 
selected randomly from the group of  available prisoners who meet the 
characteristics needed  for that particular  research project
     
PROTOCOL TITLE: Metaplasticity in the human motor  cortex: validation  of an experimental 
design and comparison of motor outcome  measure sensitivity to  change
Page  32 of 33 Version Date: December 16, 2016d)The information is  presented in language which is understandable  to 
the subject population
     
e)Adequate assurance  exists  that parole boards will not take into account 
a prisoner's participation in the research in making decisions regarding parole, and each prisoner is clearly  informed in advance that 
participation in  the research will have no effect  on his  or her  parole
     
f)When appropriate, adequate provision  has been  made for follow up 
examination or care  after research participation, taking into account 
the varying  lengths of  individual prisoners'  sentences, and for 
informing participants of this fact
     
III.Medical Devices
Complete this checklist  if the research evaluates  the safety or  effectiveness  of a medical device.  
If more than one medical device  is being  evaluated,  provide the requested  information for each.
A.Device Name:  Magstim Rapid2 rTMS device
B.Manufacturer:  The Magstim Company Limited, Spring Gardens, Whitland,  
Carmarthenshire, SA34 0HR, UK
C.Does  the research involve a  Significant Risk Device under an  IDE?
 Yes. Include  documentation of the  FDA  approval of the IDE with your submission.  
Acceptable methods  of documentation include:  (1) FDA  letter noting IDE number 
and approval status; (2)  Industry  sponsor letter noting IDE number and FDA 
approval status; or (3)  FDA-approved  industry sponsor  protocol with  IDE  number  
noted 
 No
D.Is the research IDE-exempt?
 Yes. Include  a FDA  letter with your submission noting the determination that  the 
research is IDE-exempt or a letter from the sponsor (or sponsor-investigator) justifying why they believe the research is IDE-exempt*.  
 No
E.Does  the research involve a  Non-Significant  Risk (NSR) Device?
PROTOCOL TITLE: Metaplasticity in the human motor  cortex: validation  of an experimental 
design and comparison of motor outcome  measure sensitivity to  change
Page  33 of 33 Version Date: December 16, 2016 Yes. Include  a FDA  letter with your submission noting the determination that  the 
research is NSR or  a letter from the  sponsor (or sponsor-investigator) justifying  why  
they believe the research is NSR**.  
 No
F.Device Name:  MR transcranial electrical stimulator 
G.Manufacturer:  NeuroConn
H.Does  the research involve a  Significant Risk Device under an  IDE?
 Yes. Include  documentation of the  FDA  approval of the IDE with your submission.  
Acceptable methods  of documentation include:  (1) FDA  letter noting IDE number 
and approval status; (2)  Industry  sponsor letter noting IDE number and FDA 
approval status; or (3)  FDA-approved  industry sponsor  protocol with  IDE  number  
noted 
 No
I.Is the research IDE-exempt?
 Yes. Include  a FDA  letter with your submission noting the determination that  the 
research is IDE-exempt or a letter from the sponsor (or sponsor-investigator) justifying why they believe the research is IDE-exempt*.  
 No
J.Does  the research involve a  Non-Significant  Risk (NSR) Device?
 Yes. Include  a FDA  letter with your submission noting the determination that  the 
research is NSR or  a letter from the  sponsor (or sponsor-investigator) justifying  why  
they believe the research is NSR**.  
 No
* This FDA guidance includes a description for when a device study is exempt from the IDE requirements:  
http://www.fda.gov/downloads/RegulatoryInformation/Guidances/UCM127067.pdf 
**This FDA guidance includes information  on how to  differentiate between Significant  
Risk and Non-Significant Risk device studies: http://www.fda.gov/downloads/RegulatoryInformation/Guidances/UCM126418.pdf 