 
1 
 Platelet Inhibition with CANgrelor and Crushed TICagrelor in STEMI Patients 
Undergoing Primary Percutaneous Coronary Intervention:  
The CANTIC Study  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Protocol version 2, approved 07/20/2018  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dominick J Angiolillo, MD, PhD, FACC, FESC, FSCAI  
Director of Cardiovascular Research  
Professor of Medicine  
Division of Cardiology  
University of Florida College of Medicine - Jacksonville  
655 West 8th Street  
Jacksonville, FL – 32209  
Tel: 904 -2443933, Fax: 904 -2443102  
dominick.angiolillo@jax.ufl.edu  
 
2 
 Background and Significance:  
Dual antiplatelet therapy consisting of aspirin and an ADP  P2Y 12 receptor antagonist  is 
the cornerstone of treatment for the prevention of thrombotic events in patients with acute 
coronary syndrome (ACS) , including patients with ST -segment  elevation myocardial infarction 
(STEMI) undergoing primary percutaneous coronary intervention (PPCI)  [1-3]. The new -
generation P2Y 12 receptor inhibitors prasugrel and t icagrelor  are associated with more prompt 
and potent platelet inhibition , and better clinical outcomes than clopidogrel in ACS patients [4]. 
Therefore, prasugrel and ticagrelor are conside red the first choice in this setting [ 1-4]. However, 
in STEMI patients undergoing PPCI there is  a delayed onset of action  of oral P2Y 12 receptor 
inhibitors , including prasugrel and ticagrelor,  which require  more than 2 hours to exert their full 
antiplatelet effect s, and thus exposing these high -risk patients to an increased risk of early 
thrombotic complications [ 5-8]. The mechanism of this delayed onset of antiplatelet effect is 
likely multifactorial due to the presence in the setting of S TEMI of specific conditions that 
translate into delayed drug absorption  which in turn affect the pharmacoki netic (PK) and 
pharmacodynamic (PD) profiles of oral P2Y 12 receptor inhibitors [5-8]. Crushing prasugrel and 
ticagrelor  improves their PK and PD profiles as it favors drug  absorption and onset of antiplatelet 
effect s and because of this, it is commonly used in STEMI patients undergoing PPCI [9,10]. 
However, despite the use of crushed tablets, up to one-third  of patients may still have high on -
treatment platelet reactivity (HPR) within the first 2 hours after  loading dose (LD)  administration 
of these oral agents  [9,10]. These findings support the need for intravenous agents with more 
rapid platelet inhibiting effects.  
Cangrel or is a potent intravenous P2Y 12 receptor inhibitor with rapid onset and offset of 
action associated with a greater reduction in ischemic events, including stent thrombosis, 
 
3 
 compared with clopidogrel in P2Y 12 receptor naïve patients undergoing PCI (includi ng stable 
coronary artery disease, non -STE-ACS and STEMI) [4,11,12 ]. To date most studies have 
explored cangrelor in the setting of PCI subjects treated with clopidogrel and t he clinical profile 
of cangrelor among patients treated with  prasugrel or ticagrelor is currently unknown. This is 
noteworthy because ACS patients, in particular STEMI undergoing PPCI, are commonly treated 
with either prasugrel or ticagrelor. Moreover, cangrelor is also more likely to be used in these 
higher risk settings. PD in vestigations conducted in vitro  or ex vivo  in stable patients have shown 
cangrelor to be associated with enhanced platelet inhibition compared  with that induced by 
prasugrel and ticagrelor  [13-15]. However, the PD effect s of cangrelor in STEMI patients 
undergoing PPCI treated with a newer generation P2Y 12 receptor inhibitor and how this 
compares with a crushed formulation of the oral drug is unexplored. Because of a potential for 
drug-drug interactions with thienopyridines , drug regulating authorities only recommend that 
ticagrelor, and not prasugrel, be administered concomitantly with cangrelor [ 16-18]. 
Accordingly, ticagrelor is being chosen to test our study hypothesis in this investigation and will 
be administered as a crushed formulation as this has shown to be associated with fastest onset of 
effects of an oral formulation agent.  
 
Study Aim  
The aim of  this prospective randomized study is to investigate the PD effects of cangrelor 
in STEMI patients undergoing PPCI treated with  crushed ticagrelor.  
 
 
 
 
4 
 Research plan  
Research Design  
The proposed investigation is a prospective, randomized, double -blind, parallel design 
PD study. This study will be performed at the University of Florida Health Jacksonville - 
Division of  Cardiology. Patients will be recruited and consented at the Emergency Department or 
Catheterization Laboratory of our Institution. Patients will be screened by cardiology research 
staff, who will verify that all candidates meet inclusion criteria. After p roviding written informed 
consent, STEMI patients undergoing PPCI will be eligible for randomization. After diagnostic 
angiography and prior to commencement of the PCI procedure, patients will be randomly 
assigned 1:1 to receive either cangrelor (30 μg/kg bolus followed by 4 μg/kg/min infusion) or 
matching placebo (normal saline bolus and infusion). The bolus will be administered at the same 
time of a 180mg crushed ticagrelor LD and infusion will be continued for 2 h. The  180-mg LD 
of ticagrelor  will consist in  2 ticagrelor 90 -mg tablets that will be crushed using a commercially 
available syringe crusher. After, 5 rotations of the crushing mechanism, 25mL water will be 
aspirated into the syringe and mixed by shaking for 30 seconds. This suspensio n will be 
dispensed into a 165mL dosing cup.  The syringe crusher will be rinsed using additional 25 mL 
water, which will be added to the dosing cup for a total of 50mL suspension administered orally 
to patient. Patients will be administered the ticagrelor  LD in the cardiac catheterization 
laboratory after diagnostic angiography and before starting  PPCI (before passing the wire 
through the target lesion) .  
All patients will be treated as per local standard of care, which includes 325 mg aspirin 
LD and 4000 IU of unfractioned heparin at time of presentation. The choice of intravenous 
anticoagulant during PPCI (heparin or bivalirudin) will be at discretion of the physician 
 
5 
 performing PPCI.  After PCI, all patients will receive aspi rin 81 mg/d indefinitely  and ticagrelor 
90 mg bid for at least 12 months . The PCI procedure will be performed as per local practice 
standards, including the route of access (femoral vs. radial), use of aspirations device, and stent 
type. Patients receiving glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibi tors before the primary end point time point 
will be excluded due to their interference with the VerifyNow assay.  
PD assessment will be performed at the following 8 time points: baseline (before LD 
administration), 5 minutes, 30 minutes, 1 hour, and 2 hour s after bolus , at the end of PCI (when 
the guide catheter was removed at procedure completion) , and 1 hour and 2 hours after stopping 
the infusion.  A flow diagram of the study is presented below.  
 
Study Population  
Inclusion criteria:  
 Patients with STEMI undergoing primary PPCI  
 Age > 18 years old  
 
Exclusion criteria:   
 Inability to provide written informed consent  
 Known h istory of prior intracranial bleeding  

 
6 
  On treatment with a P2Y 12 receptor antagonist (ticlopidine, clopidogrel,  prasugrel, 
ticagrelor) in the prior 10 days  
 Known allergies to aspirin, ticagrelor or cangrelor  
 On treatment with oral anticoagulant  
 Treatment with glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors before the primary end point time point  
 Fibrinolytics within 24 hours  
 Active bleeding  
 High risk of b leeding  
 Known platelet count <80x106/mL 
 Known hemoglobin <10 g/dL  
 Intubated patients  (prior to randomization)  
 Known creatinine clearance <30 mL/minute or on hemodialysis.  
 Known severe hepatic dysfunction  
 Patients with sick sinus syndrome (SSS) or high degr ee AV block without pacemaker 
protection  
 Current treatment with drugs interfering with CYP3A4 metabolism (to avoid interaction 
with ticagrelor): Ketoconazole, itraconazole, voriconazole, clarithromycin, nefazodone, 
ritonavir, saquinavir, nelfinavir, indina vir, atazanavir, and telithromizycin.  
 Pregnant or lactating females.  
 
Blood sampling and Laboratory assessments  
Blood samples (10 mL) will be drawn through the arterial access sheet used for the PCI 
procedure for time points (until the end of PCI) while patient are in the cath lab; post -cath lab 
samples will be drawn th rough venous sampling. Samples will be collecte d in anticoagulated and 
serum tubes at each study time point for all PD assessments. The first 2 -4 mL of blood will be 
discarded to avoid spontaneous platelet activation.  
 
 
 
7 
 Laboratory assessments will include 2 PD assays : 
1. VerifyNow PRU  assay  
2. VASP -PRI assay  
 
Description of laboratory assays  
1) VerifyNow PRU : The VerifyNow System is a turbidimetric based optical detection system 
which measures platelet induced aggregation as an increase in light transmittance (Accumetrics, 
San Diego, CA) and will be utilized according to manufacturer’s instructions, as previously 
described [ 5]. The assay is based on microbead agglutination and uses specific reagents for the 
pathways of interest. The VerifyNow PRU  assay, by combining ADP+PGE1, measures changes 
in platelet function specific to P2Y 12 receptor inhibitors . The assay is based upon the ability of 
activated platelets to bind fibrinogen. Fibrinogen -coated microparticles aggregate in proportion 
to the number of GP IIb/IIIa receptors expressed. Microbead aggregation is more rapid and 
reproducible if platelets are activated; therefore the reagents are incorporated into the assay 
channel to induce platelet activation without fibrin formation. Light transmittance increases as 
activated platelets bind and aggregate fibrinogen -coated beads. The instrument measures this 
change in optical signal and reports results in P2Y 12 Reaction Units (PRU).  
2) Whole blood vasodilator -stimulated phosphoprotein (VASP):   VASP phospho rylation (VASP -
PRI) is a marker of P2Y 12 receptor reactivity, which is the target for ticagrelor. VASP will be 
assessed according to standard protocol using labeled monoclonal antibodies by flow cytometry 
with the Platelet VASP -FCM kit (Biocytex Inc., Mars eille, France) as previously described [ 5]. 
PGE1 increases VASP -P levels by stimulation of adenylate cyclase. Binding of ADP to P2Y 12 
leads to Gi -coupled inhibition of adenylate cyclase. Therefore, the addition of ADP to PGE1 -
 
8 
 stimulated platelets reduces PGE1 -induced VASP -P levels. If P2Y 12 receptors are successfully 
inhibited by ticagrelor  or cangrelor , addition of ADP will not reduce the PGE1 -stimulated 
VASP -P levels. The platelet reactivity ratio (PRI) will be calculated after measuring VASP -P 
levels af ter stimulation with PGE1 (MFI PGE1) and also PGE1 + ADP (MFI PGE1 + ADP). The 
P2Y 12 reactivity ratio = ([MFI PGE1] – [MFI PGE1 + ADP]/[MFI PGE1]) x 100%.  
 
Primary and secondary objectives  
The primary end point of our study is the comparison in platelet re activity measured by 
VerifyNow PRU between crushed ticagrelor LD plus cangrelor infusion and crushed ticagrelor 
LD (plus placebo infusion) at 30 min  after the LD and cangrelor (or placebo) bolus. We 
hypothesize that adding cangrelor will significantly redu ce PRU in patients with STEMI 
undergoing PPCI. Secondary objectives will include: 1) the comparison in PRU between 
cangrelor and placebo at the other time points; 2) the comparison in PRI at all time points; 3) the 
comparison in rates of HPR between cangre lor and placebo at all time points.  According to 
consensus definition, HPR will be defined as PRU>208 or PRI >50% [ 19]. 
 
Sample Size Computation, Power Analysis  and Statistical Analysis  
Assuming a common standard deviation of 70 PRU, a sample size of 20 patients per 
group will allow to detect a 70 PRU difference between groups (~160 PRU with ticagrelor vs 
~90 PRU with ticagrelor plus cangrelor) with 85% power and a two -sided α = 0.05. Con sidering 
the 2 arms and a possible ~25% rate of invalid results due to hemolysis, technical problems, or 
drop-out, we plan to randomize up to 50 patients, in order to have complete data for the primary 
 
9 
 end point analysis. Our sample size is based on data d erived from previously published studies 
[10,20,21]. 
The PD population will include all patients with PD data and without a major protocol 
deviation thought to affect significantly the PD of ticagrelor or cangrelor. The PD population 
will be used for analy sis of all primary and secondary PD variables. Erroneously treated patients 
(e.g., those randomized to one treatment but actually given the other) will be accounted for based 
on the actual treatment received.  
Categorical variables will be expressed as freq uencies and percentages. Continuous 
variables will be presented as mean ± SD  or median [IQR] . Continuous variables will be 
analyzed for normal distribution with the Kolmogorov -Smirnov test. Comparisons between 
categorical variables will be performed  using two -tailed Fisher’s exact test or the Pearson's chi -
square test. Student´s t test, Mann -Whitney U -test and Wilcoxon test will be used to compare 
continuous variables when appropriate.  An analysis of covariance will be used to evaluate the 
primary en d point and all between -group comparisons in platelet reactivity. A mixed linear 
model will be used to evaluate the overall difference between groups over time and within -group 
comparisons. A p value <0.05 will be considered statistically significant  for superiority analyses . 
Statistical analysis will be performed using a SPSSv22.0 software (SPSS Inc. Chicago, IL).  
 
Publication Strategy/Additional Information   
Subjects will be identified  with a number and data collection sheets will all be stored in a 
locked area. Data will be kept for 6 years after enrollment ends to comply with HIPAA 
regulations. Patients will receive a handout with the names and telephone numbers of the doctors 
involve d in the study. Study subjects will be identified first (months 1 -12): we expect to 
 
10 
 randomize  4-5 subjects monthly and complete enrollment in 12 months (total: 50 subjects 
randomized ). Months 13-14 will be implied  for statistical analysis and manuscript preparation. 
Results will be presented at the first available major cardiovascular meeting (e.g. AHA, ACC, 
ESC), and final manuscript will be submitted to publication to one of major cardiovascular 
journals (e.g. JA CC, Circulation, European Heart Journal).  
 
Possible Discomforts and Risk  
In clinical trials, the most com mon clinical side effect  of cangrelor was bleeding. 
Severe/moderate bleeding occurred in 0.8% of patients receiving cangrelor, as compared to 0.6% 
of those receiving placebo. Other side effects include dyspnea (1.3%), worsening renal function 
(3.2% of patients with severe renal impairment) , and hypersensitivity (0.05%)  [11,12] .  
All clinical events described above, if they were to occur, as well as deat h, myocardial 
infarction, stroke, and  urgent revascularization proce dure with PCI or coronary artery bypass 
grafting will be recorded. Bleeding data will be collected using BARC  definitions [ 22]. Clinical 
events will be evaluated by a local committee, comp rised of 2 faculty members (2 cardiologists), 
not directly involved in the research. In the event of a report of a serious adverse event the local 
committee will meet and antiplatelet treatment management will be managed according to 
physician recommendati on. 
 
Definition of Adverse Events  
An adverse event is any unintended or undesirable experience that occurs during the 
course of the clinical investigation whether or not it is considered to be therapy related.  This 
includes any newly occurring event or pr evious condition that has increased in severity or 
 
11 
 frequency since the initiation of study treatment.  Adverse events will be followed until 
resolution while the patient remains on -study.  Once the patient is removed from study, events 
thought to be relate d to the study therapy will be followed until resolution or until the patient 
starts a new treatment regimen.  
Serious Adverse Events (SAE): An adverse event occurring while on study and considered 
related (reasonable possibility that the study treatment ca used the adverse experience) to the 
study treatment that results in any of the following outcomes:  
- Death  
- A life -threatening adverse experience.  
- A persistent or significant disability, incapacity, or is a congenital anomaly, or birth defect.  
- Require s inpatient hospitalization, or prolongation of existing hospitalization.  
The definition of serious adverse event also includes ‘important medical event’.  Medical and 
scientific judgment should be exercised in deciding whether expedited reporting is appro priate in 
other situations, such as important medical events that may not be immediately life -threatening 
or result in death or hospitalization but may jeopardize the patient and/or may require medical or 
surgical intervention to prevent one of the other o utcomes listed in the definition above.  These 
should also usually be considered serious.  Examples of such events are intensive treatment in an 
emergency room or at home for allergic bronchospasm; blood dyscrasias or convulsions that do 
not result in hosp italization; or development of drug dependency or drug abuse.  
 
Conflict of Interest  
Dr. Angiolillo is a consultant for Chiesi, the maker of cangrelor, and Astra Zeneca, the maker of 
ticagrelor.  
 
12 
 References  
1. O'Gara PT, Kushner FG, Ascheim  DD, et al. 2013 ACCF/AHA Guideline for the 
Management of ST -Elevation Myocardial Infarction: A Report of the American College of 
Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. J 
Am Coll Cardiol. 2013; 61:e78 -e140.  
2. Amst erdam EA, Wenger NK, Brindis RG, et al. 2014 AHA/ACC Guideline for the 
Management of Patients With Non -ST-Elevation Acute Coronary Syndromes: A Report of 
the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice 
Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014 Sep 18. pii: S0735 -1097(14)06279 -2. doi: 
10.1016/j.jacc.2014.09.017.  
3. Levine GN, Bates ER, Blankenship JC, et al. 2011 ACCF/AHA/SCAI Guideline for 
Percutaneous Coronary Intervention. A report of the American College of Cardiology 
Foundati on/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines and the Society 
for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions.  J Am Coll Cardiol. 2011; 58:e44 -122. 
4. Franchi F, Angiolillo DJ. Novel antiplatelet agents in acute coronary syndrome. Nat Rev 
Cardiol. 2015 Jan;12(1):30 -47. 
5. Franchi F, Rollini F, Cho JR, et al. Impact of Escalating Loading Dose Regimens of 
Ticagrelor in Patients With  ST-Segment Elevation Myocardial Infarction Undergoing 
Primary Percutaneous Coronary Intervention: Results of a Prospective Randomized 
Pharmacokinetic and Pharmacodynamic Investigation. JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 
2015;8:1457 -67. 
6. Alexopoulos D, Xanthopoulou I,  Gkizas V, et al. Randomized assessment of ticagrelor 
versus prasugrel antiplatelet effects in patients with ST -segment -elevation myocardial 
infarction. Circ Cardiovasc Interv. 2012; 5:797 -804. 
7. Parodi G, Valenti R, Bellandi B, et al. Comparison of Prasugrel and Ticagrelor Loading 
Doses in ST -Segment Elevation Myocardial Infarction Patients: RAPID (Rapid Activity of 
Platelet Inhibitor Drugs) Primary PCI Study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013; 61:1601 -6. 
8. Rollini F, Franchi F. The Conundrum of Platelet P2Y 12 Inhibition in ST -Segment Elevation 
Myocardial Infarction. Circ J. 2016;80:2429 -2431.  
 
13 
 9. Rollini F, Franchi F, Hu J, et al. Crushed Prasugrel Tablets in Patients With STEMI 
Undergoing Primary Percutaneous Coronary Intervention: The CRUSH Study. J Am Coll 
Cardio l. 2016;67:1994 -2004.  
10. Parodi G, Xanthopoulou I, Bellandi B, et al. Ticagrelor crushed tablets administration in 
STEMI patients: the MOJITO study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2015;65:511 -2. 
11. Bhatt DL, Stone GW, Mahaffey KW, et al. Effect of platelet inhibition with c angrelor during 
PCI on ischemic events. N Engl J Med. 2013;368:1303 -13. 
12. Steg PG, Bhatt DL, Hamm CW, et al. Effect of cangrelor on periprocedural outcomes in 
percutaneous coronary interventions: a pooled analysis of patient -level data. Lancet. 
2013;382:1981 -92. 
13. Rollini F, Franchi F, Tello -Montoliu A, et al. Pharmacodynamic effects of cangrelor on 
platelet P2Y12 receptor -mediated signaling in prasugrel -treated patients. JACC Cardiovasc 
Interv. 2014;7:426 -34. 
14. Schneider DJ, Agarwal Z, Seecheran N, et al. Pharma codynamic effects during the transition 
between cangrelor and ticagrelor. JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 2014;7:435 -42. 
15. Schneider DJ, Seecheran N, Raza SS, et al. Pharmacodynamic effects during the transition 
between cangrelor and prasugrel. Coron Artery Dis. 201 5;26:42 -8. 
16. Rollini F, Franchi F, Angiolillo DJ. Switching P2Y12 -receptor inhibitors in patients with 
coronary artery disease. Nat Rev Cardiol. 2016;13:11 -27. 
17. Cangrelor United States full prescribing information [online], 
http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugs atfda_docs/label/2015/204958lbl.pdf  (Accessed 
December 2016).  
18. Cangrelor EMA prescribing information [online], 
www.ema.europa.eu/docs/en_GB/document_library/EPAR_ -
_Product_Information/human/003773/WC500188098.pdf (Accessed December 2016).  
19. Tantry US, Bonell o L, Aradi D, et al. Consensus and update on the definition of on -treatment 
platelet reactivity to adenosine diphosphate associated with ischemia and bleeding. J Am 
Coll Cardiol. 2013;62:2261 -73. 
20. Angiolillo DJ, Schneider DJ, Bhatt DL, et al. Pharmacodynami c effects of cangrelor and 
clopidogrel: the platelet function substudy from the cangrelor versus standard therapy to 
 
14 
 achieve optimal management of platelet inhibition (CHAMPION) trials. J Thromb 
Thrombolysis. 2012;34:44 -55. 
21. Mohammad MA, Andell P, Koul S, e t al. Cangrelor in combination with ticagrelor provides 
consistent and potent P2Y12 -inhibition during and after primary percutaneous coronary 
intervention in real -world patients with ST -segment -elevation myocardial infarction. 
Platelets. 2016 Nov 25:1 -3. [Epub ahead of print]  
22. Mehran R, Rao SV, Bhatt DL, et al. Standardized bleeding definitions for cardiovascular 
clinical trials: a consensus report from the Bleeding Academic Research Consortium. 
Circulation. 2011;123:2736 -47. 