 
 
UCSD Human Research Protections Program  
New Biomedical Application  
RESEARCH PLAN  
Instructions for completing the Research Plan are available on the HRPP website.  
The headings on this set of instructions correspond to the headings of the Research Plan.  
General Instructions: Enter a response for all topic headings.  
Enter “Not Applicable” rather than leaving an item blank if the item does not apply to this project.  
Version date: 09/09 /2015 
1. PROJECT TITLE  
Monoamine Contributions to Neurocircuitry in Eating Disorders  
 
2. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR   
P.I.: Walter H. Kaye, M.D.; UCSD Department of Psychiatry  
P.I.: Ursula Bailer, M.D.; UCSD Department of Psychiatry  
 
3. FACILITIES  
UCSD NeuroPET  Center  
UCSD Eating Disorder Center  
UCSD Center for Functional MRI  
UCSD Clinical and Translational Research Institute  (CTRI)  
University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Department of Radiology, PET facility  
 
4. ESTIMATED DURATION OF THE STUDY  
5 years  
5. LAY LANGUAGE SUMMARY OR SYNOPSIS (no more than one paragraph)  
Evidence suggests that the regulation of the neurotransmitters serotonin  and dopamine  is altered in the brain of 
people with anorexia nervosa  (AN) and bulimia nervosa (BN). This study will use br ain imaging technologies 
to measure several neurotransmitters (serotonin and dopamine) that contribute to our abilities to respond to 
reward or inhibit our impulses, and which are known to be altered in the brain of people with anorexia nervosa 
(AN) and bulimia nervosa (BN).  Because palatable food stimulates dopamine secretion, we propose  to use a 
challenge with brain imaging that will stimulate dopamine release which we hypothesize will generate anxiety 
rather than pleasure in AN, and will help explain wh y AN restrict eating in order to reduce anxiety. This 
application will help to understand the unique and puzzling symptoms of eating disorders and contribute to 
finding better methods for identifying effective treatments for these often relapsing and somet imes chronic 
disorders.  
6. SPECIFIC AIMS  
How are individuals with restricting -type AN able to starve themselves and become emaciated while most 
people have difficulty losing a few pounds? Furthermore, why do individuals with BN tend to periodically 
overe at? Considerable data support our overarching hypothesis: Serotonin ( 5-HT) and dopamine ( DA) 
functional activity, through actions on reward and inhibitory neural pathways, contribute to disturbed appetitive behaviors and extremes of self -control in AN and BN. In order to avoid the confounding effects of malnutrition 
and weight loss (and because our data suggest that recovered ( REC ) individuals have persistent trait- related 
alterations of DA and 5- HT function,
11, 12, 14, 60 we will study, over the  course of 5 years, 25 REC AN, 25 REC 
AN-BN, 25 REC BN, and 25 age and body mass index (BMI) matched healthy control women ( CW) who are 
18 to 45 years old. We will use PET imaging with specific radioligands for the DA D2/D3 receptors 
([11C]raclopride) and 5 -HTT ([11C]DASB).  
  It is well known that 5 -HT functional activity inhibits feeding.
23, 110 Considerable data90 suggest that AN and 
BN have different disturbances of 5- HT neural circuitry, which contributes to both re stricted eating and 
overeating. In AIM 1 , our data14, 138 support the prediction that REC AN will have elevated, and REC BN will  
have diminished 5- HTT binding [ e.g., [11C]DASB binding potential (BP Nondisplaceable tissue uptake (ND) )] in midbrain 
and striatal regions) contributing to inhibition of appetite and other rewards in AN, and decreased self -
regulatory control in BN. We predict REC AN -BN will have 5 -HTT binding values that fal l in-between REC 
AN and REC BN.  
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 2  
DA circuits play a key role in optimal response to stimuli. Our data support the possibility that AN and BN may 
have similar dysregulation of anterior ventral striatum (AVS) system function, making them vulnerable to 
dysfunctional modulation of the rewarding aspects of appetitive behaviors (a nd modulation of emotionality).  
In Aim 2A , we propose to use  PET and [11C]raclopride binding to confirm several hypotheses generated by our 
preliminary data regarding striatal DA D2/D3 receptors9, 60. First, that REC AN, and perhaps REC BN, have 
elevated anterior ventral striatum (AVS) [11C]raclopride (DA D2/D3  receptor) BP ND compared to CW. Second, 
that dorsal caudate (DC) [11C]raclopride BP ND in REC e ating disorders (ED s) is associated with baseline harm 
avoidance (HA), a measure of inhibition and anxiety.  
In AIM 2B , we will assess endogenous striatal DA release in order to better understand altered striatal 
[11C]raclopride binding, and (in AIM 2C ) to replicate and extend pilot data10 that show that endogenous DA 
release in the dorsal caudate ( DC) provoke s inhibitory and anxiety symptoms in AN and BN. In brief, because 
[11C]rac lopride binding is influenced by endogenous DA, elevated [11C]raclopride binding could indicate either 
an elevation of the density and/or affinity of the DA D2/D3 receptors or a reduction of intrasynaptic DA 
concentrations. It has been shown in non -human primate studies that the decrease in the BP ND of benzamide 
radiotracers such as [11C]raclopride following amphetamine (AMPH) -induced DA release is a reliable measure 
of endogenous DA transmission29, 108 in striatal subdivisions (limbic, associative and sensorimotor striatum).121, 
122 AMPH administration results in an increase in extracellular DA and a consequent reduction in 
[11C]raclopride binding. The change (Δ) in BP ND (the difference between the [11C]raclopride BP ND at baseline 
and post -AMPH treatment normalized to the baseline BP ND and expressed as a percentage) provides a non-
invasive measure of changes in DA concentration in the human brain. We will use the PET/double 
[11C]raclopride/AMPH paradigm described above to assess striatal endogenous DA release. Several recent, 
small scale studies using this technology10, 31 and a previous study96 of cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) homovanillic 
acid (HVA), a DA metabolite, support the likelihood that REC AN and BN have alterations of endogenous 
striatal DA releas e. In AIM 2B we will assess endogenous DA release to help interpret alterations in DA 
functional activity as well as D2/D3 receptors in limbic, associative, and sensorimotor striatal regions.  As 
summarized in Table 1  we predict that endogenous DA release w ill be selectively diminished in limbic striatal 
regions in REC AN and in associative and sensorimotor regions in REC BN. These data argue that AN have 
diminished ability to direct “motivated” responses whereas BN may have hypoactive dorsal associative 
inhibitory pathways. Several lines of evidence support our hypothes is that alterations of food -induced DA 
secretion, perhaps acting on DA D2 receptors, contribute to pathologic eating. In AIM 2C  we seek to replicate 
and extend findings that AN have a paradoxi cal response to palatable foods because endogenous DA release in 
the DC is anxiogenic in AN . This anxiogenic effect is  compensated  for by restricted eating to avoid anxiety. 
We will also test the hypothesis that a measure of altered inhibition in AN is ass ociated with DC DA D2 
binding.  
 Behavioral disorders may be caused by complex disturbances in neural pathways. The relationship between altered 5 -HT and DA 
function (and effects on ventral limbic and dorsal cognitive circuits) may modulate pathological feeding behavior in AN and BN. In brief, 5- HT and DA systems are thought to interact (with 5 -
HT being aversive/inhibitory, and DA m odulating 
reward/motivation) to regulate appetitive processes.
42, 45 Our data9 
showed positive correlations between striatal [11C]McN5652 BP ND and [11C]raclopride BP ND in REC AN, R EC 
AN-BN, and REC BN. Interactions between [11C]McN5652 BP ND and [11C]raclopride BP ND significantly 
predicted harm avoidance (HA), a measure of inhibition and anxiety, in REC ED.  We hypothesize that binding of these ligands may reflect complex 5 -HT – DA n eurotransmission interaction processes. In AIM 3  we seek to 
replicate these findings and determine whether a similar relationship occurs in CW.  
   Limbic  
DA Balance  Associative 
DA 
AN ↓ < N 
AN-BN ↓ Dysregulated  ↓ 
BN N > ↓ 
Table 1  Model of striatal DA functional activity and 
the balance of limbic versus associative DA striatal 
circuitry  
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 3 In AIM 4  we will explore how [11C]DASB)BP ND and [11C]raclopride BP ND are associated with neural circuits 
that modulate appetitive behaviors. We will co- register, in the same REC ED and CW, the PET findings in 
AIMS 1 to 3 with an fMRI study (UCSD IRB project No. 080019; 2 R01 MH0042984- 17A1; W. Kaye PI) that 
examines neural substrates underlying appetitive, as wel l as reward and cognitive dysregulation. The anterior 
insula (AI) and striatum integrate the sensory/hedonic aspects of taste, interoceptive awareness, and 
reward/motivation. Importantly, fMRI studies show that REC AN have diminished181 and REC BN have 
exaggerated blood oxygen- level dependent (BOLD) response of this circuitry in response to tas tes of sucrose.134 
We hypothesize that restricted eating and weight loss occur in AN because feeding elicits little  reward or 
motivation (due to excessive 5- HT inhibition), whereas the opposite may be true for BN. We predict that REC 
AN-BN may fall in -between REC AN and REC BN. Our pilot data show that fMRI AI BOLD response to 
tastes of sucrose was negatively correlated with anterior striatal [11C]raclopride BP ND in REC AN. This 
supports the speculation that those with the most diminished AI response to sucrose may have the lowest 
striatal DA concentrations and, thus, reduced appetitive motivation to approach food. In s ummary, AIM 4 will 
explore links between striatal [11C]DASB)BP ND and [11C]raclopride BP ND, and neural processes related to 
appetitive function, reward, inhibition, and self -control. In AIM 5  (exploratory) we will genotype the 5- HTT, 
DA D2/D3 receptors, and other relevant genes to explore their relationship with brain imaging.  
In summary, this application seeks to understand how [11C]DASB)BP ND and [11C]raclopride BP ND  are related 
to traits that are shared by, or divide EDs into subtypes. Our overarching goal is to characterize neural 
processes in ED, and their relationship to behavior. Current treatments for AN and BN are of limited efficacy. In AIM  6 we seek to extend prior animal and patient population work by directly measuring the relationship 
between s pontaneous blink rate and endogenous striatal DA  binding. By obtaining average spontaneous blink 
rates at baseline and during peak AMPH effects, this will be the first direct comparison between experimentally manipulated stria tal DA  binding and average bli nk rates in human subjects.
  
 
7. BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE  
Background:  
AN and BN are disorders of unknown etiology that tend to have their onset during adolescence in women.1 
Although psychosocial factors are hypothesized to cause AN and BN, recent studies show that genetic 
heritability accounts for approximately 50 to 80% of the risk and creates neurobiological vulnerabilities.21, 32, 89, 
101, 155, 166 It is important to note that considerable evidence has suggested that childhood temperament and 
personality traits can create a vulne rability for developing AN and BN during adolescence. Recent studies2, 112, 
156 describe negative emotionality, HA, perfectionism, inhibition, drive for thinness, altered interoceptive 
awareness, and obsessive- compulsive personality traits as childhood risk  factors that precede the onset of an 
ED, persi st after recovery, and are elevated in unaffected family members.33 
Two types of consumatory behavior are seen in AN and BN . Restricting -type anorexics (“AN” in this 
application) lose weight purely by restricted dieting and have no history of binge eating or purging. Individuals with BN (“BN” in this application) do not become emaciated and are able to maintain an average body weight (ABW) above 85%. BN individuals alternate restricting with episodic binge eating and/or purging. The third category are individuals who have bot h AN and BN (“AN -BN” in this application). It has been argued that AN 
and BN share some common risk and liability factors because these disorders are often cross -
transmitted in 
families and share many behavioral traits.101, 113, 160, 186 Both AN and BN individuals commonly have a 
seemingly relentless drive to restrain food intake, an extreme fear of weight gain, and a distorted view of their body shape as well as anxiety, obsessionality, and depression. In terms of differences, pure AN tend to be over -
controlled, whereas BN and AN -BN tend to have poor impulse control, greater novelty seeking,
112, 159, 179 and 
high rates of drug and substance abuse.79  
Neural circuitry of ED:  Imaging technology has supported the emerging ability to characterize the neural 
circuitry of neuropsychiatric disorder s.74 A key element of our research90 has been to test hypotheses regarding 
the neural processes that contribute to shared and independent behavioral traits in AN and BN. Work by 
Phillips et al137 describes how dysfunction of limbic and cognitive neural networks may occur in a range of 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 4 psychiatric disorders. Specifically, a ventral limbic neural circuit, which includes the amygdala, anterior insula 
(AI), AVS, and ventral regions of the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) and the prefrontal cortex (PFC), is 
necessary for identifying rewarding an d emotionally significant stimuli and for generating affective responses 
to these stimuli. A dorsal executive function neural circuit, which includes the hippocampus, dorsal regions of 
the caudate, dorsolateral PFC (DLPFC), parietal cortex, and other regio ns, is thought to modulate selective  
attention, planning, and effortful regulation of affective states. We hypothesize that AN and BN individuals 
have an imbalance within and/or between ventral limbic and dorsal cognitive circuits. Imaging studies from 
several groups169, 180, 182 show that ill and REC AN an d BN have altered activity of ventral limbic circuits that 
play a role in emotionality and reward. Thus, AN and BN may share an inability to precisely identify and/or modulate emotionality and reward in response to salient stimuli. Poor context separation 
may make them 
vulnerable to respond inappropriately  to the rewarding aspects of appetitive stimuli. In contrast, fMRI studies 
consistently show that ill and REC AN have increased activity in cognitive neural circuits,180, 196 whereas ill and 
REC BN have diminished or impaired activity in these regions;120, 145, 182 consistent with enhanced higher -order 
inhibitory function in AN and reduced inhibition in BN . We hypothesize that AN are able to inhibit appetite 
and have extraordinary self -control because they have exaggerated dorsal cognitive circuit function, whereas 
BN individuals are vulnerable to overeating when hungry because they have less ability to sel f-regulate and 
control their impulses.   
Distinguishing Shared and Independent Traits in AN and BN:  One goal of this application is to determine how 
monoamine and neural circuitry contribute to aspects of behavior and may be associated with diagnostic 
categ ory (e.g., AN vs. BN), perhaps related to impulse control, or aspects that may cut across diagnostic 
boundaries, such as HA. We will study subjects recruited and assessed by  UCSD IRB project No. 080019;  2 
R01 MH0042984- 17A1. These  subjects will have a comp rehensive battery of behavioral and cognitive 
assessments. Still, we want to note that this application will focus on the role of HA, a multifaceted 
temperament trait39 that contains elements of anxiety, inhibition, and inflexibility; reflecting the concept of 
‘behavioral inhibition’. The reason is that our PET imaging studies show striking and consistent correlations 
between the BP of both 5- HT 1A and 5- HT 2A, DA D2/D3 receptors, and HA. HA is positively associated with 
increased 5 -HT 1A BP in REC AN,12 decreased 5 -HT 2A BP in REC AN -BN,11, normal 5- HT 2A BP in ILL 
AN/AN- BN13 and increased DA D2/D3 BP in REC AN/AN- BN.60 In addition to being a premorbid childhood 
predisposing factor,2, 112, 156 elevated HA is common in all ill ED subtypes (for revie w see Cassin36) and 
elevated HA persists  after recovery from AN and BN.179 This application seeks to understand the 5- HT, DA, 
and neural circuitry mechanisms contributing to elevated HA in ED subjects. Our data suggest HA is a t rait that 
cuts across diagnostic boundaries (i.e., it is common to AN, AN -BN, and BN). However, it is possible that HA 
may be associated with extremes of impulse self -control.  
Distinguishing State and Trait in AN and BN: When malnourished and emaciated, i ndividuals with AN and BN 
have alterations of brain and peripheral organ function that are arguably more severe than in any other 
psychiatric disorder .50, 87 As a result,  neurobiological studies during acute illness are confounded by effects of 
malnutrition. Determining whether such symptoms are a consequence or a potential cause of pathological 
feeding behavior or malnutrition is a major methodological problem in the field. Considerable evidence 
suggests that childhood temperament and personality traits can create a vulnerability for developing AN and 
BN during adolescence, however, premorbid neurobiological studies in children are not pra ctical. The strategy 
used in this application is to identify neurobiological vulnerabilities that are independent of the confounding effects of malnutrition by studying women who are REC  from AN and BN.
179 Even if persistent physiological 
disturbances in REC EDs are “scars” they are still likely to help understand the processes contributing to these disorders.  
Altered 5-HT function in EDs : It is well known that 5 -HT alterations occur in peo ple who are ill with AN and 
BN and persist after recovery.30, 88, 185, 192 How 5 -HT function contributes to symptoms in AN and BN is not 
well understood. It is important to note that REC AN and BN have different patterns of 5- HT disturbances (see 
review by Kaye et al.88). For example, different degrees of elevated CSF concentrations of 5- HIAA,94, 95 
reduced 5 -HT2A receptor binding,11, 64, 97 increased 5 -HT1A receptor binding12 and altered behavioral 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 5 responses to 5 -HT challenges.63, 99, 149, 188 5-HT function is known to be inhibitory of appetite and plays a role in 
anxious and obsessive behaviors, as well as in depression.23, 40, 78, 110, 117, 119, 151 There is an extensive literature 
associating 5 -HT system activity with fundamental aspects of behavioral inhibition,71 e.g., reduced CSF 5-
HIAA levels are associated with increased impulsivity and aggression in humans and non- human primates, 
whereas increased CSF 5 -HIAA levels are related to behavioral inhibition.52, 147, 190 It is important to note that 
both AN and BN tend to restrict their eating and lose normal meal patterns.129 We hypothesize that AN can 
maintain this inhibition continuously, whereas AN -BN and BN have periodic disinhibition and loss of self -
control, resulting in overconsumption of food. Several studies14, 138 have shown  that REC AN and REC BN 
have differences in 5- HTT function that, in turn, might contribute to extremes of impulse c ontrol or inhibition 
of feeding behaviors. Other evidence of differences in 5- HTT function is that AN have a poor response to 
SSRIs6, 34, 53 and other “antidepressant” medication, while these drugs have greater efficacy in BN.  
Altered DA function in EDs:  Genetic, pharmacologic, and physiological data20, 66, 88, 96, 109 suggest that ill and 
REC AN have altered striatal DA function. It remains uncertain whether BN have trait -related DA disturbances 
because fewer DA studies have been done.19, 82, 93 In terms of PET studies, our group found that REC AN and 
AN-BN had inc reased [11C]raclopride BPND in the AVS.9, 60 Moreover, [11C]raclopride BPND in the DC was 
associated with HA in REC AN/AN- BN. DA disturbances in EDs may contribute to an altered modulation of 
appetitive behaviors, symptoms of anhedonia, dysphoric mood, and increased motor activity.75, 178 Animal 
studies indicate that DA in the striatum plays a key role in the optimal response to reward stimuli.47, 131, 146 To 
further understand striatal DA pathways and the relationship to reward, our group performed a fMRI study 
using a monetary choice task known t o activate the striatum. Importantly, both REC AN180 and REC BN182 
failed to have a differential AVS response to positive and negative monetary feedback compared to CW. As 
noted above, AN and BN may share an inability to precisely identify and/or modulate emotionality and reward in response to salient stimuli.  
 
Exploration of group differences for endogenous DA release in striatal  regions of interest ( ROIs )  
Limbic striatal: Some, but not all, data show that mixed groups of REC AN and AN -BN have elevated 
baseline AVS [11C]raclopride BP ND compared to CW.9, 10, 60 While pilot data10 in a mixed group of REC AN 
and AN -BN s howed a non- significant reduction of endogenous DA release in the AVS, an earlier study from 
our group showed that only the REC AN (pure restricting -type) had significant reduction of the DA metabolite 
HVA in CSF compared to CW. In Parkinson’s disease ther e is diminished CSF HVA and extracellular DA.38, 84 
We seek to determine whether pure R EC AN (never had BN) have reduced endogenous DA AVS release when 
compared to CW. Because endogenous DA displaces raclopride at the D2 receptor, elevated DA D2 receptor binding is consistent with diminished DA release. Altered AVS DA function in  
“pure” rest ricting -type AN 
group is likely given that this subtype has substantial anhedonia and reduced consummatory drive and other evidence of dysregulated AVS function.
62, 180, 181 
    With regards to predictions of AMPH induced DA release in REC BN and AN -BN, there are limited 
background data. The pilot data from  our group showed a non- significant baseline [11C]raclopride BP ND 
increase in the AVS in REC BN ,9 but a very large standard deviation (SD). Moreover, REC BN and AN -BN 
have normal CSF HVA levels96, and ill BN have normal limbic DA release.31 Together these data suggest that 
we will find normal limbic striatal DA release in REC BN. However, most studies to date have investigated 
mixed groups of AN and AN -BN, or BN a nd AN -BN. One advantage of the current study is that we are 
recruiting substantial numbers of “pure” subtypes. For example, the AN have never had BN symptoms. Second, data about DA release are critical for understanding DA’s relationship to anxiety and inhibition (AIM 2C) and to building a model (see below) regarding limbic and associative DA balance for the 3 subgroups.   
    Associative striatal DA predictions : In terms of the DC, the data reviewed above found no difference  
between REC AN/AN -BN and CW for baseline or  Δ BPND values. We expect to find normal  DC baseline 
[11C]raclopride  and Δ BP ND in “pure” REC AN.  There are limited data regarding DA function in BN. Broft 31 
reported a trend toward decreased mean baseline D2/D3 receptor BP ND in the posterior putamen and caudate in 
ill BN, and a significantly reduced/blunted DA release after the methylphenidate challenge in the anterior and 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 6 
 
Figure 1 : Predicted relationship between SSRT and 
baseline [11C]racloprideBP ND. Gray shade, range of 
individual responses; • , mean CW values; Ο, mean 
AN values at baseline;  , predicted change when 
post -AMPH SSRT is compared with baseline 
[11C]racloprideBP ND.  posterior putamen. Extrapolating the Bro ft31 findings from the ill BN to REC BN may be confounded by state 
related factors, such as relationship to binge frequency or the effects of malnutrition, as we ll as mixed 
diagnostic groups (some of the ILL BN had a history of AN). Still, there are reasons to think (see below) that 
REC BN will have diminished baseline [11C]raclopride and DA release in the associative and sensorimotor  
striatum, whether it is a tra it or a “scar”.8, 73 
    Modeling DA process in AN and BN : AN and BN tend to have opposite extremes of self -control and 
inhibition. For example, recent meta -analyses35, 68 show increased rates of drug and alcohol abuse in BN and 
decreased rates in AN. In a recent review we propose91 that such inhibitory extremes make BN vulnerable to 
and AN “protected” from using drugs and alcohol and other consum atory (food) behaviors. There have been 
relatively consistent findings (reviewed in176, 177) of reduced PET [11C]raclopride BP ND in the striatum, 
including the ventral striatum, in those with substance abuse and alcohol use disorders. Reduced/blunted striatal DA release in individuals who abuse coc
aine and alcohol has been exhibited in a smaller number of PET 
studies in human and primate models.73, 122, 123, 174 Whether  BN and substance abuse share DA D2 receptor 
related vulnerabilities  and whether  opposite findings contribute to protective  factors in AN remains to be 
determined.   
    AIM 2B will contribute to building our model of striatal DA functional activity in AN and BN. Studies of food tastes and negative and positive feedback consistently show altered ventral limbic circuitry in AN and BN 
(see review by Kaye
91). In addition, fMRI studies tend to show that AN and BN have altered activity of dorsal 
executive/cognitiv e circuitry, which is consistent with the possibility that AN have enhanced higher -order 
inhibitory function and BN have reduced inhibition. Our overarching goal is to explore the balance between neural processes that modulate reward and inhibition. Do AN 
have “normal” DA “tone” in cognitive 
association networks in the dorsal neurocircuit (e.g. DLPFC -to dorsal striatum), which direct motivated actions, 
but impaired ability of the ventral striatal pathways that direct more ‘automatic’ or intuitive motivated 
responses? In BN, is there hypoactivity of dorsal cognitive association pathways that is insufficient in inhibiting 
“normal” hedonic/incentive motivation impulses in “reward” neural circuits? Alternatively, though not 
supported by these data, is it possibl e that AN have adequate ventral limbic- striatal circuitry , but this ventral 
circuitry is  strongly inhibited by “hyperactive” inputs from cognitive domains such as the DLPFC and the 
parietal cortex ? Conversely, BN may have exaggerated hedonic/incentive moti vation impulses in “reward” 
neural circuits that overwhelm normal cognitive inhibition. Predictions about AN -BN are particularly 
handicapped by lack of data. It may be that they have impairments of both limbic and associated circuits 
leading to a particula rly dysregulated balance between reward and inhibition, or that they have exaggerated 
defects of associative circuits.   
 Relationship of endogenous DA release to anxiety and/or
 
inhibition in AN and BN:  
Background : Considerable literature (see 36) shows that HA, a 
multifaceted temperament trait39 that contains elements of anxiety, 
inhibition, and inflexibility, is elevated in individuals who are ill with AN and BN and persists after recovery.
179 As noted above, 
DC [11C]raclopride BP ND  is positively correlated with HA .9, 60 
Importantly, increased DA D2 -like receptor functional activity is 
associated with inhibition in healthy humans.72 Moreover, rats 
characterized as risk averse148 show greater D2 mRNA expression 
in the DC. In Aim 2C, we seek to explore how DA signaling in associative /executive cortical striatal circuitry may be related to inhibition and/or adverse consequences in AN and BN.  
    Anxiety : The major goal in Aim 2c is to replicate and extend 
our finding that self -reports of HA are associated with baseline D2 
binding in the DC in AN and BN, and self -reports of anxiety are 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 7 associated with endogenous DA release in the DC in AN. Our pilot data in REC AN10 show AMPH stimulated 
anxiety and this was positively associated with the magnitude of DA release in the DC. This is different from 
studies in controls, who tend to become euphoric after AMPH in association with AVS stimulant- induced 
striatal DA release.49, 107, 121, 175 Most people find eating to be a pleasant and rewarding experience. But for AN, 
eating stimulates dysphoric mood, while there is an anxiety -reducing character to dietary restraint and reduced 
caloric intake.61, 86, 153, 157, 173 Ingestion of palatable food is associated with striatal endogenous DA  release.8, 17 
We hypothesize that food- induced release of DA activates DC D2 receptors resulting in anxiety in AN (and not 
AVS related reward and motivat ion as in healthy controls). As a result, AN individuals pursue starvation 
because food refusal may be a way of diminishing DA release and concomitant anxiety. In fact, AN individuals 
have decreased CSF HVA, the major metabolite of DA,92, 96 supporting this hypothesis. Predicting response in 
REC BN and AN- BN is more speculative.  We may find a heterogenous response to AMPH in REC BN and 
AN-BN. In those who have high HA traits, we expect to find that AMPH administration makes them more 
anxious, and that anxiety will be associated with increased endogenous DA in associative and sensorimotor striatal regions. There may als o be a group that becomes euphoric on AMPH. 
Broft31 reported evidence of an 
association between striatal DA response and ratings of “energetic” in ill BN but the se were said to be driven 
by a small number of data points. This group, which may be at higher risk for substance abuse, may have 
diminished endogenous DA in associative regions, or enhanced AVS DA release associated with pleasure.   
  Inhibition : Clinically, it is well known that AN have exaggerated self -control and are anhedonic so they are 
able to sustain self -denial of food as well as most comforts and pleasures in life.60 For example, AN have an 
enhanced ability to delay reward (i.e., show less reduction in the value of  a monetary reward over time) 
compared to healthy volunteers.154 This enhanced cognitive control and ability to delay reward may help to 
maintain persistent food res triction. We will build on a recent study72 in healthy controls that showed that 
striatal (particularly in dorsal regions) DA D2/D3 receptor availability was negatively correlated with speed of response inhibition [stop signal react ion time (SSRT)] and positively correlated with inhibition -related fMRI 
activation in frontostriatal neural circuitry. Thus 
people with faster stopping speed had more D2 receptor 
binding in the caudate and putamen. The stop signal task (SST) requires peopl e to stop an already initiated 
response5 and calculates the speed of stopping (SSRT). There are relatively little response inhibition data (with 
SST or any other task) in AN, but a recent study in AN found that they had longer SSRT.69 Our data9, 60 show 
that AN have normal DC D2 binding. However, as noted above, there is evidence that ill92 and recovered AN96 
have reduced endogenous DA. Because AN may have less  DA activating  the DA D2 receptors, this may 
explain why their average inhibition ability is impaired . We will administer the SST after s ubjects complete the 
baseline [11C]raclopride PET study. We predict ( Figure 1 ) that both AN and CW will show a negative 
relationship between SSRT and DC D2 binding, but that such a relationship in AN will be shifted to the left due to reduced DA activation  of the D2 receptor. While slower inhibition in AN may seem counter -intuitive, this 
finding may be consistent with studies that show they have impaired abilities to change mental set.
144 
   We will repeat the SST after administration of AMPH. Studies tend to show46, 111, 142 that AMPH improves 
inhibition in healthy people without changing “ going”  speed. That is consistent with the idea that AMPH 
induced release of endogenous DA increases activation of D2 receptors and thus underlies inhibition -related 
caudate activity.72 We expect to find that AMPH shifts healthy controls to the right ( Figure 1 ). An abnormal 
shift to the right in AN would suggest aberrant function of DA/D2 -related processes . It is possible that higher 
anxiety in AN179 contributes to the slower stopping speed. While low threat puts people in a state of arousal 
where they can stop things more quickly, high threat association appears to make them slower .136 We will 
stratify our AN population into high and low state anxiety groups to better understand the relationship between anxiety and response inhibition ability in this group, and how that relates to the AMPH cha llenge and a putative 
marker of endogenous DA. Overall, too few data exist to be certain that the SST is an adequate reflection of 
inhibitory control ability in AN (especially in a way  that relates to self -control).  I
ndividuals with BN and AN -
BN have a puz zling group of symptoms in that they alternate between being overly inhibited and overly 
disinhibited: eating behaviors tend to alternate between restriction and overeating with a loss of normal meal 
patterns.189 This study  will provide the opportunity to better understand relationships between [11C]raclopride 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 8 BPND  or DA release and measures of inhibition and anxiety in BN and AN -BN.  
 
Significance:  The understanding of the pathophysiology of EDs has tended to lag behind ot her major 
psychiatric disorders. Improvement in the understanding and treatment of EDs are of immense clinical and 
public health importance133 as these are oft en chronic, relapsing illnesses77, 100, 102 with subst antial and costly 
medical morbidity,124 and a high mortality.161 AN and BN have puzzling symptoms that are unique to the 
disorder s: extremes of eating (restricting, bingeing/purging), relentless drive to lose weight, body image 
distortions, denial of illness, etc. We have little understanding of how such symptoms are encoded in the brain. 
These symptoms appear to be unique to humans. Since animal models have not been developed displaying 
these puzzling sym ptoms, studies in humans are essential. The  overarching goal of this, and related 
applications, is to use imaging to understand the neural circuitry of AN and BN and how symptoms are 
encoded in these circuits.  
 Importantly, for AN, there is no proven treat ment that reverses symptoms
133 or FDA approved medication.7, 34, 
83 While those with BN may respond better to treatment, many continue to be symptomatic or relapse.184 
Despite the evidence of 5 -HT and DA disturbances in ED, there is little evidence t hat selective 5 -HT reuptake 
inhibitors (SSRIs)6, 34, 53 or the neuroleptics pimozide and sulpiride170, 171 stimulate weight gain or reduce core 
symptoms in ill AN. Moreover, it remains controversial as to whether SSRIs reduce relapse after weight gain.98, 
158, 183 Still, preliminary data suggest that atypicals, such as olanzapine,15, 22, 24, 26, 28, 48, 51, 76, 81, 105, 118, 127, 130, 140, 
187 quetiapine,27, 126, 139 risperidone,58, 132 and aripiprazole168 may be useful in reducing anxiety and promoting 
weight gain in ill AN. Many of the psychoactive medications  that are approved for use in humans act on 5- HT 
and DA pathways. Thus , a better understanding of how 5- HT and DA contribute to symptoms in ED may help 
us advance beyond the trial and error system and develop new methods for identifying effective medications and psychological treatments.  
 
Relationship between spontaneous blink rate and striatal dopamine  
The hypothesized relationship between spontaneous eye blink rate and striatal DA  has been around for the last 
several decades. Experimental evidence support ing this hypothesis exists almost exlusively in animal 
research85, 165 and in patient populations85 despite being used as an established measure during tasks25. Using 
pharmacological85, 103 and neurotoxic165 manipulations of the DA  system in monkeys, a strong case has been 
made f or the role of striatal DA  in moderating spontaneous bl ink rates with striatal DA  levels being positively 
correlated with spontaneous blink rates. This link has been made usi ng direct, and indirect DA  agonists in 
Cynomolgus monkeys103, and was further refined by isolating the caudate as a p otential key source of this link 
using the dopaminergic neurotoxin MPTP in monkeys ( cercopithecus aethiops sabaeus). By using the well  
established dopaminergic abnormalities in schizophrenia and Parkinson’s Disease85, research in these patient 
populations ha ve indicated that these DA  abnormalities seem to be inducing the expected changes based on 
each disease’s dopamine profile consistent with the animal literature. This  work seeks to extend past patient and 
animal research by being the first to directly compare and experimentally manipulate the relationship between striatal dopamine binding and spontaneous blink rate.
  
 
8. PROGRESS REPORT  
To date a total of 47  particip ants have been enrolled into the study. We have succ essfully completed a total of 46  [11C]DA SB 
(in 18 CW, 11 REC AN, 10  REC AN -BN, 7 REC BN)  and a total 47  [11C]raclopride scans (in 19 CW, 11 REC AN, 10 REC 
AN-BN, 7  REC BN) .  
 
9. RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHO DS 
Screening and Assessments Prior to Imaging  Studies :  
Once the written consent has been ob tained, subjects will complete  screening interviews (for Axis I and II 
diagnoses, including ED subtype diagnosis), a physical examination (15 -20 min), and laborato ry tests, e.g., EKG, 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 9 VS, hemoglobin, hematocrit, total leukocyte with differential, plasma electrolytes, liver and thyroid function (T3, 
T4 and TSH levels), urinanalysis, toxicology  and confirmation of toxicology results  (if required) , cortisol levels, 
estradiol levels  and pregnancy test prior to entering the study as previously described.12, 179 The measures used in 
this study include the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM -IV Axis I Disorders (SCID -I) to assess the lifetime 
prevalence of Axis I psychiatric disorders, a modified version of Module H of SCID -I to assess lifetime diagnoses 
of EDs and subtypes a nd the Yale -Brown Obsessive Compulsive Scale for the assessment of OCD symptoms. 
Subjects will self -report ED symptoms, depression, anxiety, impulsivity, perfectionism, and temperament.16, 18, 41, 
67, 70, 152, 162 To reduce confounding influences, we will exclude ED subjects who, in the past 3 months, have been 
on psychoactive medication or met  criteria for substance abuse/dependence, major depression, or an 
incapacitating anxiety disorder.  
 
Subjects will also complete behavior self -ratings including assessments of personality, mood, depression, 
anxiety, impulsivity and other behaviors relevant  to eating disorders (See Table 2 for complete listing). These 
assessments will be sent to their home prior to scheduling them for an interview. The dominant hand will be 
assessed by the Edinburgh Inventory for analysis of handedness.  
 
Table  2: Interviews  and self -assessments  
Name  Abbreviation  Area assessed   Minutes  
Interviews:   
Mini -International Neuropsychiatric Interview  M.I.N.I. Plus  Axis I diagnoses  60 
Module H of SCID I, Modified  Module H  ED diagnoses  30 
Yale -Brown Obsessive Compulsive Scale  Y-BOCS  OCD  30 
Yale -Brown -Cornell Eating Disorder Scale  YBC  ED symptoms  15 
Set-shifting  SS Inflexibility   5 
Self-Assessments :    
Beck Depression Inventory  BDI Depression  10 
Spielberger State -Trait Anxiety Scale -Version Y  STAI -Y State and trait anxiety  10 
Eating Disorders Inventory -2 EDI-2 Core ED symptoms  15 
Multi -dimensional Perfectionism Scale  MPS  Perfectionism  10 
Barrett Impulsivity Scale  BIS Impulse control  10 
Temperament and Character Inventory  TCI Personality and 
temperament  30 
Sensation S eeking Scale  SSS Sensation Seeking  15 
 
Study -Day Session Procedures : Each study will be done during the early follicular phase (days 1 to 10) of the 
subject’s menstrual cycle. Subjects will arrive the day before the study and stay overnight at the Clinica l and 
Translational Research Institute (CTRI) at UCSD. On the day of the study, they will be awakened at 6:00 A.M. 
by the research staff. After a light breakfast, they will be transported by taxi to the Keck Center for Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging  on the UCSD campus at 7:00 A.M. After the acquisition of the structural MRI, 
which will be completed in about 30 minutes, the subjects will be transported again by taxi to the UCSD 
NeuroPET Center. The subjects will be informed of all of the procedures th at will be performed and the 
information that will be obtained. The subject confirmation will be made via the signed copy of the written 
informed consent and then an intravenous catheter will be placed in either the left or right antecubital vein. 
After in sertion of an intravenous catheter in a forearm vein, and a 20 minute transmission scan, a PET scan will 
be acquired following a slow bolus administration (over 20 sec) of 15 mCi of high -specific activity [11C]DASB. 
Emission data will be collected in 3D mo de for 100 minutes using a standard PET protocol as previously 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 10 described.65 At the completion  of the scan, the IV lines will be removed. An EKG, vital signs, mental status and 
physical exam will be performed and evaluated by the study physician prior to the subject’s discharge from the 
PET suite.  
    On the following day, the second day of the study, they will be awakened at 7:00 A.M. by the research staff. After a light breakfast, they will be transported again by taxi to the UCSD NeuroPET Center. After insertion of another intravenous catheter and following another transmission scan, the first PE
T scan will be acquired 
following a slow IV bolus administration (over 20 sec) of 10 mCi of high- specific activity [11C]raclopride. 
Emission data will be collected in 3D mode for 60 minutes using a standard PET protocol as previously 
described.60 The participant will then b e able to rest outside the scanner and will receive a physical exam, 
mental status exam, EKG, and vital signs measurement. The IV will stay in place. Thirty minutes following the 
first scan with [11C]raclopride, the participant will receive 0.5 mg x kg -1 of oral AMPH. Blood pressure and 
heart rate will be recorded every two minutes for the first 15 minutes, every five minutes for the next 30 
minutes, and then every 15 minutes (up to at least 180 min) . The post -AMPH [11C]raclopride scan will be 
performed 3 hours after the administration of AMPH. Assessment of behavioral responses will be conducted 
before and after PET scans. The participants will complete a symptom -rating visual analog scale (VAS) pre -
baseline PET, pre -AMPH, and then at 30 minute intervals a questionnaire assessing several states: “happy,” 
“anxious,” “energetic,” “restless.”163 To assess study participants’ mood states and fluctuations, we will utilize , 
at the same intervals , the short version of Profile of Mood States (POMS -B).125 The POMS is a useful measure 
of mood states and their fluctuations  and is  appropriate for both research and therapy. It is a factor -analytically 
derived self -report inventory that measures six identifiable mood or affective states: tension -anxiety;  
depression- dejection; anger -hostility; vigor -activity; fatigue -inertia; and confusion- bewilderment. For  more 
than 30 years, the POMS assessment has provided a valid and reliable measure of affective mood states. The 
short version, POMS Brief, developed in  1989, has a total of 30- items with five on each of the six POMS 
factors. Like the longer version, the POMS -B has excellent internal consistency. Items are rated on a 5 -point 
scale (not at all, a little, moderately, quite a bit, extremely) and they only ta ke five minutes to compete. The 
items are easy for patients to understand, allowing them to quickly and accurately complete the assessment. The basic stop signal task
115 will be done after the 1st [11C]raclopride (at b aseline) and then shortly after  the 2nd 
[11C]raclopride (post -AMPH) scan. The study will be completed by approximately late afternoon. At the 
completion of the second scan, the IV lines will be removed. An EKG, v ital signs, mental status and physical 
exam will be performed and evaluated by the study physician prior to the subject’s discharge from the PET 
suite. The subject will be served a cafeteria- style assortment  of lunch foods  following the [11C]DASB scan on 
Day 1 and the post -AMPH [11C]raclopride scan on Day 2. The uneaten food will be weighed after completion 
of the meal and the total calories consumed will be recorded.   
 
MRI Protocol:  All participants will undergo an MRI procedure for anatomical localization  of ROIs. Only one 
MRI will be done per participant. A single MRI study will be performed at the UCSD Keck Center for 
Functional MRI using a GE Excite HDx 3.0 Tesla scanner as described in our parent grant. The registered MRI will be used as an individuali zed anatomic map for the selection of ROIs used in the analysis of the PET data 
(see section Neuroimage Analysis ). 
 
Radiochemistry of [11C]raclopride and [11C]DASB:  
[11C]raclopride will be prepared at the UCSD Center For Molecular Imaging, PET Radiochemist ry 
Laboratory. Radioactive [11C]CO2 will be produced by the 14N(p, α)11C nuclear reaction at the CTI RDS 111 
cyclotron operated by PETNET. The [11C]CO2 will be converted into [11C]CH3I in GE Tracerlab FX MeI box 
sequentially swept into a silver triflate oven to produce [11C]methyl triflate. O -desmethylraclop ride 
tetrabutylammonium precursor that is reacted using the HPLC loop injection port procedure. Then, the contents 
of the loop will be quantitatively injected into a semi preparative liquid chromatography column. The 
[11C]raclopride fraction will be isolated, passed through a 0.22 µm sterile Millex -GV membrane filter, and 
collected in a 30 mL sterile vial already containing 15 mL of 0.9% sterile saline. Quality Assurance will be 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 11 performed as recommended by the FDA. For [11C]raclopride the radiochemical yiel d is 30 -40% at the end of 
synthesis. The total synthesis time will be 40± 5 min. The specific activity at the end of the analysis is 1500 
Ci/mmol to 4000 Ci/mmol. The studies are carried out under IND 74,250.  
[11C]DASB  will be prepared at the UCSD Center F or Molecular Imaging, PET Radiochemistry Laboratory. 
Radioactive [11C]CO2 will be produced by the 14N(p, α)11C nuclear reaction at the CTI RDS 111 cyclotron 
operated by PETNET. The [11C]CO2 will be converted into [11C]CH3I desmethyl -DASB precursor that is 
reacted using the loop injection port procedure. Then, the contents of the HPLC loop will be quantitatively 
injected into a semi preparative liquid chromatography column. The product will be transferred into a flask 
containing a multiple volume (10x with respect to the product peak volume) of HPLC water. After that the 
aqueous solutionis pushed through a solid phase extraction cartridge containing C -18 (usually WATERS 
SepPak light C -18 cartridge). The product is retarded on the C -18 cartridge. The cartridge is washed with 10 ml 
sterile water followed by product extraction w ith 1 ml USP EtOH transferred into a sterile product vial already 
containing 19 ml isotonic saline using a 22 μm sterile Millex -FG membrane filter. Quality Assurance will be 
performed as recommended by the FDA. The total synthesis time will be 50± 5 min. T he average specific 
activity at the end of the analysis has averaged 1000 to 5000 Ci/mmol. The studies are carried out under IND 
74, 254 for [11C]DASB.  
 
Dextroamphetamine sulfate (oral)  is the dextro isomer of the compound d,l -AMPH sulphate. It is an FDA 
approved drug available for the treatment of narcolepsy and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (maximum 
approved total daily dose of 5- 60 mg). It is manufactured and marketed under the commercial name Dexedrine 
by GlaxoSmithKline pharmaceuticals. As d exedrine is available as an orange, triangular, scored tablet in 5 mg, 
10 mg and 15 mg strengths, it will be dispensed by the pharmacy as nearly as it can be approximated to 0.5 
mg/kg (in 2.5 mg increments). For example a subject who weighs 50 kg or 54 kg will receive 25 mg of AMPH, while a subject who weighs 55 kg will receive 27.5 mg of AMPH. 
The use of AMPH in this study will be in an 
off-label manner. The pharmacokinetics and behavioral effects of oral dextroamphetamine peaks at 3h.104 
Several other groups have successfully used oral AMPH in the dose range of 0.43- 0.5 mg/kg in PET imaging 
studies.10, 143, 191, 193, 194  
 
PET scan protocol:  The PET imaging will be done at the UCSD NeuroPET Center using a HR+ PET s canner 
under the supervision of Drs. Hoh and Buchsbaum. An intravenous catheter will be placed in a forearm vein for 
radiopharmaceutical infusion (this protocol will not involve arterial catheterization) and collection of blood 
samples. The subject’s head will be positioned and immobilized using a vacuum bead padding to decrease head movement during  the scan. A 20 minute transmission scan, using rotating rods of Ge -68/Ga -
68, will be 
obtained for attenuation correction of the emission scan(s). On the first day of the study, after the transmission scan, a PET scan will be acquired following a slow bolus administration (over 20 sec) of 15 mCi of high-specific activity [
11C]DASB. Emission data will be collected in 3D mode for 100 minutes using a standard PET 
protocol as previously described.65 At the completion of the sca n, the IV line will be removed. On the next day, 
following another transmission scan, the first PET scan will be acquired follo wing a slow IV bolus 
administration (over 20 sec) of 10 mCi of high -specific activity [11C]raclopride. Emission data will be collected 
in 3D mode for 60 minutes using a standard PET protocol as previously described.60 Blood pressure and heart 
rate will be recorded every two  minutes for the first 15 minutes, every five minutes for the next 30 minutes, and 
then every 15 minutes until the subject is placed in the PET scanner (up to at least 180 min). The second 
[11C]raclopride scan will be done 3 hours post AMPH and will requir e a second  PET transmission scan. During 
the waiting period (post AMPH), the participant will be asked to perform a few structured tasks and rating 
scales such as the Visual Analog Scale (VAS) and Profile of Mood Scale (POMS)125 to contrast with baseline. 
Approximately 5 mL of venous blood will be drawn at 0 and 30 min relative to the second [11C]raclopride scan 
to measure plasma AMPH levels. Following each PET scan, an EKG, vital signs, mental status and physical 
exam will be performed and evaluated by the study physician  prior to the participant’s discharge from the 
UCSD PET center and the IV line will be removed.  
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 12  
Stop Signal Task:  The basic stop signal task115 will be done after the 1st [11C]raclopride (at b aseline) and then 
shortly after the 2nd [11C]raclopride (post -AMPH) scan. The test -retest reliability of the task is high.150 The task 
has been implemented in Matlab and Psychtoolbox 3,4 and can be run in 15 minutes, including practice. SSRT, 
the main dependent measur e, will be computed using an approach that is optimal for treating between- group 
differences.172 
 
Neuroimage Analysis  
    MRI -Based Region of Interest (ROI) Definition for analysis of PET Data . PET and MRI image sets are 
aligned using PET/MRI fusion software (IDL, ITT Visual Information Solutions). ROIs are defined on MRI 
images across all MRI slices passing through those structures using an ROI drawing tool (imagetool) by trained tracers (blind to the diagnosis) with established reliability.  For the [
11C]raclopride and [11C]DASB studies ROIs 
will include the three functional sub -division s (limbic, associative and motor) of the striatum as outlined by 
Martinez et al.121. The l imbic striatum comprises the AVS; the associative striatum comprises the pre -
commisural DC, precommisural dorsal putamen and postcommisural DC; the motor striatum comprises the post 
commisural dorsal putamen. For the [11C]DASB studies, as outlined by Frankle et al.,65 The subcortical regions 
include thalamus, insula, midbrain, medial temporal lobe  (a spatially weighted average of 5 limbic structures, 
the uncus, amygdala, entorhinal cortex, parahippocampal gyrus, and hippocampus). T he neocortical ROIs are 
as follows: DLPFC, medial PFC, OFC, ACC, temporal and occipital cortex. The cerebellum will be used as 
reference region for both studies. A different set of ROIs are routinely utilized for fMRI studies. As a result, we 
will define a second ROI set that will be applied to the PET BP ND maps and enable us to perform the integrative 
analyses to relate t he PET and fMRI data in exploratory AIM 4.  
    Anatomically constrained functional regions of interest for fMRI analyses. One of our co- investigators, Dr. 
Anders Dale, in collaboration with his colleagues, has developed methods for reconstructing the corti cal sheet 
based upon routine 3D T1- weighted MRI volumes.43, 44, 54, 55 FreeSurfer not only allows for the accurate 
measurement of cortical thickness, it also provides a method for parcellation of the cortical surface, where each location on the surface is ass igned a neuroanatomical label based upon probabilistic information estimated from 
a manually labeled training set.
56 The ROIs that will also be used for fMRI analysis include: bilateral caudate, 
ventral striatum, medial PFC, ACC, DLPFC, medial OFC, inferior frontal gyrus, inferior parietal cortex, and 
AI.  
    Analysis of PET Data:  The “PET” ROIs will be applied to the dynamic [11C]raclopride and [11C]DASB 
images to obtain decay -corrected, time -radioa ctivity curves using a calibrated phantom standard to convert 
tomographic counts to µCi/ml for each time point. Analysis of the PET data for both [11C]raclopride and 
[11C]DASB  will be performed using both the simplified reference tissue106 and graphical reference tissue116 
methods with the cerebellum as reference region for non -displaceable uptake. Both of these reference tissue 
methods have been shown to be appropriate models for quantifying [11C]raclopride49, 60 and [11C]DASB  
binding in humans65, 164 without an arterial input function. The outcome measure derived from these analyses is 
BPND. BP ND (unitless) is equal of f NDBavail/KD where B avail is the concentration of receptors available for 
radioligand binding in vivo  (not bound to endogenous li gand), K D is inversely related to the in vivo  affinity of 
radioligand for receptor binding and f ND is the fraction of radiotracer freely dissolved in tissue water (i.e. free 
fraction) in the non- displaceable compartment.80 We will also generate parametric BP ND maps that will be 
spatially normalized to the MR data set and the “fMRI” ROIs will then be applied to sample the normalized 
PET BP ND maps.  
    FC analysis across regions. We will explore functional inter -relationships in AI, OFC, striatum, and ventral  
and dorsal putamen by combining information from both fMRI and PET data. Initial analyses will assess for 
outliers and distributions of fMRI and PET data times series to ensure modeling assumptions are met. Outliers 
will be Winsorized; non- normality will be handled via appropriate transformations. Missing data will be 
multiply imputed.114 FC of activation in these regions in response to sucrose stimulus will be assessed on an 
individual subject -level basis via partial cross -spectrum of BOLD activation time series.197 The partial cross 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 13 spectrum will be used to estimate the normalized partial mutual information, an overall measure of the linear 
and nonlinear FC between pairs of regions controlling for activations in the  remaining regions. The stimulus 
waveform will also be entered as a separate time series in this model to control for non -stationarity in activation 
of regional BOLD time series due to stimulus. The resulting FC estimates will then be entered into a random  
effects model with clustering of responses by subject; subject -level PET 5 -HT/DA function in these same 
regions will be entered along with group membership (REC AN, REC AN -BN, REC BN, and CW). This 
random effects model will be used to test for whether any  group differences in FC in this network are (partially) 
explained by subject differences in 5 -HT and/or DA function. The methods implemented in the FC toolbox in 
MATLAB (Version 7.6)197 will be adapted to perform these analyses.  
    Exploratory analyses of PET and fMRI data relationships. Relationships between the PET BP ND and Δ in 
BPND values and the fMRI results will be explored with supplemental statistical analyses, performed acr oss 
subjects. First, task -specific BOLD fMRI activation will be related to a specific PET BP ND value following the 
methods of Fisher et al. (2009).57 A partial least squares (PLS) multivariate analysis will be applied to relate 
regional results and/or voxel level contrast maps.37, 141, 195 PLS is a non- parametric dimension reduction method 
that will utilize 2 blocks of manife st variables (X and Y) that can be statistical contrasts, covariates or 
neuroimaging data. The inter -block covariance matrix R YX between X and Y is determined and primary 
outcomes are scores  that represent the elements of block -X and block- Y that are most correlated. PLS can be 
applied to relate fMRI single -subject ROI results to PET BP ND maps or relate a difference map for a fMRI 
BOLD contrast to a difference map for a PET BP ND contrast between groups.  
 
Genetic Analyses:  
A one -time 20cc sample will be collected on the first scanning day only from consenting participants for the 
purpose of extracting DNA to determine whether polymorphisms of physiological systems that are known to 
influence 5 -HT and DA function contribute to binding on the PET/radioligand s tudies with women who have 
an eating disorder history. All samples collected will be identified without personal identifiers, but coded, and 
known only by Dr. Kaye's research team. Genetic samples will be used for eating disorder research, obesity or relat
ed disorders. Should a participant withdraw her consent from this genetic testing, the samples will be 
immediately destroyed. Otherwise, frozen samples will be kept under locked conditions at UCSD in the Eating Disorders Center for Treatment and Research  f
or an indefinite time where they will be submitted for analysis 
with DNA and lymphocyte extraction. A specific consent for this blood draw will be signed at the time of study consenting if the participant is interested in participating. Blood samples for g
enetic analysis will be stored in 
freezers at the Eating Disorders Center for Treatment and Research  under supervision of Dr. Kaye. Dr. Kaye 
will be responsible for determining how DNA will be used. The specimens collected and the DNA that they 
contain may  also be used in additional research to be conducted by the University of California personnel 
collaborating in this research. In addition to Dr. Kaye, subjects DNA may also be studied by other future 
collaborators that are unknown at this time to learn mo re about eating disorders, obesity and other related 
disorders. No more than a total of 105 cc of blood will be drawn for both studies together; this amount is 
approximately 20- 25% of a regular blood donation. 
 
Power and Statistical Analysis Plan: 
Aim 1 : In AIM 1 we will use PET and [11C]DASB BPND to determine whether there is a continuum of 5- HTT 
binding associated with diagnosis. We hypothesize that REC AN will show increased and REC BN decreased [
11C]DASB BPND in midbrain and striatal regions. REC AN -BN will have [11C]DASB BPNDs between those 
of REC AN and REC BN and will probably not differ from CW. These hypotheses will be tested by an 
unpaired t -test with diagnosis as factor and [11C]DASB BPND as dependent variable. We will use Troendle's 
(1995) method to adjust for multiple comparisons .167 Our preliminary study14 found [11C]McN5652 BPNDs of 
1.169 (CW), 1.316 (AN), 1.027 (BN), and 1.168 (AN -BN) in the dorsal raphe, with a SD of 0.348 or less in 
each group. [11C]McN5652 is an older radioligand and, based on additional pilot data, we expect to see 
[11C]DASB BPNDs that are roughly 2.17 -times higher than [11C]McN5652 BPNDs in the midbrain,  with only a 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 14 slight increase in within -group SDs (less than 0.382 for [11C]DASB BPND). With 25 subjects per group, a 
(Welch -Satterthwaite) t- test will have power in excess of 80% to see a difference between the REC AN and 
CW (based on a mean difference of 0.319 and a within- group SD of 0.382) and REC BN and CW (based on a 
mean difference of 0.308 and a within- group SD of 0.382) at the 0.05 level (two- sided). We expect the 
[11C]DASB BPND for REC AN- BN to be between that of REC AN and REC BN and (essentially)  the same as 
CW. 
 
Aim 2 A will compare REC AN, REC AN -BN and REC BN to CW to test the hypothesis that REC AN and 
REC BN have increased AVS [11C]raclopride BPND compared to CW, and to further explore [11C]raclopride 
BPND in REC AN- BN. We will assess [11C]rac lopride BPND in ventral and dorsal putamen, ventral and DC 
and consider the influences of age, weight, and other relevant variables. These hypotheses will be tested by an 
unpaired t -test, with diagnosis as factor and [11C]raclopride BPND as dependent varia ble. We will use 
Troendle's (1995) method to adjust for multiple comparisons.167 Based on our pilot data we expect to see 
[11C]raclopride BPND of roughly 2.120 (CW), 2.404 (REC AN), 2.299 (REC BN), and 2.147 (REC AN -BN) in 
the AVS , with SDs of roughly 0.359 in each group. With 25 subjects per group, a (Welch -Satterthwaite) t- test 
will have power in excess of 90% to detect differences in [11C]raclopride BPND between each of the ED 
groups and CW at the 0.05 level (two- sided). We will  also regress log [11C]raclopride BPND on group (REC 
AN, REC AN- BN, and REC BN, with CW as the reference group), controlling for age, height, and weight. To 
the extent that these additional covariates are associated with log [11C]raclopride BPND, this will  reduce the 
standard error associated with each of the group effects leading to improved power.  
 
In Aim 2B  ee hypothesize DA release (as reflected by AVS Δ  BPND) will be diminished in REC AN patients 
when compared to CW. This hypothesis will be tes ted usin g linear regression, with diagnostic group as factor 
and log AVS BP ND as dependent variable, controlling for age, height, and weight. For Aim 2B, we propose a 
regression model of the form: [log(post -AMPH BP ND) = a + b * log(baseline BP ND) + c * group + err or and 
hypothesize that the group differences (c) will be statistically significantly different from 0. Indeed, based on 
our preliminary data, we expect a pre -post difference in log -binding -potential [log(BP ND)] in the AVS of 0.132 
in the REC AN group and 0.101 in the CW with SDs of 0.048, corresponding to a group difference of c = 
0.031, with a pre -post correlation of 0.90. Assuming this, with 20 subjects per group, we will have 51% power 
at the 0.05 level (two- sided). This is improved by controlling for a ge, height, and weight. Indeed, controlling 
for these produces a smaller error SD of 0.034, with the same coefficient estimates as above. In this case, we 
will have power in excess of 0.80 for group differences at the 0.05 level (two- sided). Preliminary da ta from 
Broft et al .31 suggest the differences between ILL BN and CW in Δlog(BP ND) are even larger post -pre 
methy lphenidate administration. Indeed, they saw chan ges on the order of 2.69 on the log scale for ILL BN and 
3.17 for CW in the putamen with SD below 2.53. This corresponds to a group difference of 0.471 and, 
assuming similar pre -post correlations and effects of age, height, and weight, we should have power  greater 
than 0.80 to see group differences at the 0.05 level (two- sided) in this case as well.   
 
Aim 2C  Relationships between [11C]raclopride Δ BPND and behavioral characteristics (from assessments and 
VAS scales) and plasma AMPH levels of subjects will be analyzed with Pearson Product -Moment correlation 
coefficient. For example, we will compare the Fisher’s z -transformed correlations between be havioral measures 
of euphoria and anxiety with [11C]raclopride Δ BPND in REC AN, REC AN -BN and REC BN vs. CW using a t -
test. Based on our pilot data in REC AN, we expect correlations between euphoria and [11C]raclopride Δ BPND 
in the AVS to be larger (in m agnitude) than - 0.69 in CW and 0.21 in REC AN subjects. Assuming a difference 
in Fisher's z -transformed correlations of 1.06 (or larger), we will have power 0.91 to see a group difference at 
the 0.05 level (two- sided), with 20 subjects per group. (Note tha t the z -transformed value of 0.69 is - 0.85, and 
the z -transformed value of 0.21 is 0.21, giving a difference of 0.21 - (-0.85)  = 1.06). Similarly, we will correlate 
DA release with self -ratings of anxiety, euphoria, self -control, and labile mood in striata l regions in order to 
assess behavioral response, as well as SSRT and post -study food consumption. We will use continuous 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 15 measures of impulse control and inhibition including the SSS,198 BIS-11,16 EDI-2-subscale impulse 
regulation,70novelty seeking and HA from the TCI41 and the basic stop signal task.115 It is not certain what to 
expect from the REC BN and REC AN -BN subjects, but we will look for differences in correlations in the same 
way. Assuming these differences are larger than 0.909, we will have power in excess of 0.80 to see group 
differences at the 0.05 level (two- sided). We will explore the effects of age, height, and weight on DA release 
using partial correlations, after controlling for these variables.  
 
Spontaneous Eye Blink Rate:  Collec ting of eye blink rate data will be done two times during the study, shortly 
before the 1st [11C]raclopride scan (baseline), and shortly before the 2nd [11C]raclopride (post -AMPH) scan. 
Spontaneous eye blink rate will be measured by having participants sit  in front of a computer screen that is 
equipped with a video recording device. Participants will be told to look at the fixation cross in the center of the 
screen for a duration of five minutes with the explanation that we are interested in recording aspec ts of facial 
movements. Participants will not be told that blink rates are the object of the fixation to ensure that blink rates 
truly are spontaneous and are not being intentionally manipulated by the participant. Data will subsequently be 
scored by avera ging across each five minute span to obtain a blink per minute rate, similar to prior work using 
this methodology .85 
10. HUMAN SUBJECTS  
Subject Population : We seek to recruit 30 REC AN, 30 REC AN -BN, 30 REC BN, and 30  CW, between ages 
18 to 45 for the PE T imaging studies. It is our experience from previous studies that it will be necessary to 
enroll an additional 20% of subjects due to drug failure, non- completion of PET studies, etc. Thus, we e xpect to 
comp lete PET studies in a total of 100  subjects (25 REC AN, 25 REC AN -BN, 25 REC BN, and 25 CW).   
    Only right -handed subjects will be included as screened by the Edinburgh Handedness Inventory.135 The 
rationale for  including only female subjects is that AN, AN -BN and BN among males is relatively rare (less 
than 10% in our experience). Furthermore, because some males with AN, AN -BN or BN have many atypical 
features, they should be subjects of a different study. All s ubjects will be matched by age, IQ, income, 
race/ethnicity, and will be non -smokers. REC AN, REC AN -BN, REC BN, and CW will be matched by BMI. 
Subjects will be recruited locally and nationally to reflect the racial/ethnic composition of the United States, 
which encompasses a wide range of ethnically diverse individuals (i.e., 65.6% White persons, not Hispanic, 
15.4% Hispanic or Latino origin, 0.2% Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander, 4.5% Asian persons, 1.0% 
American Indian and Alaska Native persons,  12.8% Black persons, 79.8% White persons 
(http://quickfacts.census.gov/qfd/states/00000.html ). While every effort will be made to recruit participants in 
respective proportion to these de mographics, it has been our experience that patients with AN, AN -BN and BN 
tend to be predominantly white. Subjects fulfilling all the inclusion, but none of the exclusion criteria, will be 
admitted to the study. No exclusion criteria shall be based on rac e or ethnicity.  
 
Inclusion Criteria for REC AN, REC AN -BN and REC BN Women : REC AN, AN- BN and BN subjects must 
have, at some point in their life, met a DSM -IV diagnosis of AN and/or BN. The onset of their illness must 
have been at least 4 years prior to pa rticipating in this study. Due to the high rate of conversion from AN to BN 
within 3 years of onset, this time requirement will ensure that they did not convert from one diagnostic subtype 
to another. Thus, diagnostically “pure” groups may be obtained. REC  AN women must have met DSM –IV 
criteria for AN, restricting type, with an ABW below 85% for height.128 They must never have engaged in 
binge eating (as defined in DSM –IV) or purging behaviors (e.g., vomiting, laxative or diuretic abuse, enemas, 
etc.). REC AN -BN subjects must, at some point in their life, have been below 85% ABW and have had 
binging/purging behaviors during a period of low weight. REC BN must have met a lifetime DSM –IV 
diagnosis of BN with no history of AN. They must have engaged in b inge eating (as defined in DSM –IV) 
followed by vomiting at least once a day for 3 days of the week over at least a 3 -month period. All subjects 
must be right -handed.  
    ED groups must have been REC for 12 months or more prior to entering the study. Status  of recovery will be 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 16 defined as follows: a) No bingeing, purging, restrictive eating or other ED related behaviors in the preceding 12 
months; b) Maintained a stable weight (± 3.0 kg) between 90% and 120% ABW128 for at least 12 months; c) 
Regular me nstrual cycles for the preceding 12 months; d) Have values within the normal range for beta –
hydroxy –buteric –acid (BHBA), glucose, and insulin during the evaluation phase. Subjects will be studied 
during the first 10 days of the menstrual cycle (early folli cular phase).  
 
Exclusion Criteria for REC AN, REC AN -BN and REC BN Women : a) Met diagnosis of alcohol or drug abuse 
or dependence in the 3 months prior to the study. Alcohol or substance use within 30 days prior to PET studies 
as determined by self -report,  clinical or psychiatric interviews, or urine toxicology screen; b) Current diagnosis 
of an Axis I major affective or anxiety disorder or suicidal thoughts, or presence of other psychopathology that 
might interfere with ability to participate in the study,  (e.g., requiring inpatient hospitalization or medication); 
c) Organic brain syndromes, dementia, psychotic disorders, or mental retardation; d) Neurological or medical 
disorders such as seizure disorder, renal disease including pyelonephritis and chronic cystitis, impaired renal 
function including hyponatremia (less than 135 meq/l), hypokalemia, raised BUN (more than 15 mg/dl), raised 
creatinine (more than 1.5 mg/dl), diabetes, thyroid disease including hyperthyroidism and hypothyroidism, 
EKG indicative of  electrolyte imbalance; e) BN subjects whose primary or only purging methods were the use 
of laxatives, diuretics or means other than vomiting; f) Use of psychoactive medication in the 3 months prior to 
the study; g) Pregnancy, lactation  or lack of effecti ve birth control during the 15 days before the scans. A 
pregnancy test will be conducted within 24 hours of the study; h) Tobacco use in the 3 months prior to the PET 
studies. 
 
Criteria for CW : Healthy CW must not have any stigmata suggestive of an ED. The y must have maintained an 
ABW between 90% and 120% since menarche. Their lab tests, medical and psychiatric histories, and physical 
and neurological examinations should indicate no current or past psychiatric (definitive Axis I disorder), 
medical or neurol ogical illness. We recognize that these criteria will create a selection of healthier than average 
control subjects. However, it was deemed more important to avoid the potentially confounding effects of 
psychiatric symptomatology in the control group with regard to the biological measures for the current study. 
All pregnant and la ctating women will be excluded.  
 
11. RECRUITMENT  
This is a five -year study in which we will recruit equal numbers of subjects each year. It is our experience from 
previous studie s that it will be necessary to enroll an additional 20% of subjects due to drug failure, non-
completion of PET studies, etc. Thus, we expect to enter 30 subject s to complete cells of 25 radioligand/PET 
studies per subject group. Overall, we will enter 120 subjects into this study in 5 years or 24 subjects per year.  
   Since at least 50 to 70% of individuals who have anorexia or bulimia eventually recover, we are confident 
that our recruitment goal can  be achieved over the proposed 5- year period. All CW will be recruited from the 
greater San Diego region to minimize travel cost. However, based on our experience, approximately 75% of our 
REC subjects will come from outside southern California.  
    We will continue to employ recruitment strategies that were ef fective in our previous studies. These include:  
a) mailings to former patients of UCSD and the University of Pittsburgh ED treatment programs and other 
nationally recognized ED treatment programs directed by colleagues; b)  mailings of IRB approved flyers t o 
clinicians and treatment centers specialized in EDs, and to university health and counseling centers; c) placing 
advertisements and study announcements in ED related publications, press releases and conferences (e.g., 
NEDA, AED and EDRS); d) placing stud y advertisements on websites such as EDReferral and NEDA. We will 
also utilize the UCSD research websites which make available to professionals and the lay public alike our 
research publications and current findings ; e) We may also contact participants who  have been in our previous 
studies and who appear to be appropriate potential participants for this current study, provided they have given 
written permission to recontact them. There will be no cold -calling to any potential participant.  
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 17  
Subjects will con tact our staff by either phone or email at which time we will ask initial screening questions 
which do not contain any identifiable information: age, weight, height, use of medications, handedness and 
presence of metal in the body. Our procedure is to esta blish if prospective study participants meet minimal 
criteria as described before proceeding to explain the protocol and obtain address to send out consent form and 
self-report questionnaires. If subjects are disqualified at this time their information wil l be destroyed. If 
preliminary requirements are met, this information is destroyed (page 1 of brief screening tool) and we would 
then proceed to obtain mailing information. This information is the same as would be asked if the subject was 
being set up for a clinical appointment. The only information retained will be name and address, and phone 
number. The protocol will then be explained to the subject and we will then mail a consent form and self -
assessment questionnaires to the subject. If a subject declin es to participate or does not meet the minimal 
required inclusion criteria as per brief screening tool, the information obtained will be destroyed. This 
information will also be destroyed after receiving a signed consent form back from a subject or in the case of no 
response after sending the consent information to a subject.  
Recruitment will be accomplished by posting IRB approved flyers, website ads, craigslist, The San Diego 
Reader and ads in local and regional publications. Potential subjects can respo nd to these advertisements by 
phone or in writing. Many potential participants will live outside the immediate San Diego area; these potential 
research subjects would probably be unwilling to participate if they were required to come to UCSD to sign a 
written consent and undergo the initial screening. Also, because many subjects are excluded before completing 
the entire initial screening, requiring a trip to UCSD for a preliminary screening would be very time and cost 
intensive and therefore delay the compl etion of the study. Therefore, these subjects approaching us about 
participating in research will undergo a brief interview or telephone screening conducted by our research staff . 
This screening is designed to give a preliminary indication of whether or not the subject will be appropriate for 
this research study based upon current age, height, weight, and if the subject is currently on any medications. 
The preliminary screening tool is enclosed. It contains no name or identifier, (page 1). The only informat ion 
retained will be name and address, (page 2). Written consents will then be obtained from the participant before any information is obtained for the in-
depth screening process. If potential subjects appear to meet inclusion 
criteria (age, weight, height , and absence of medications) the research program will be explained to the 
subjects. All information is confidential and would not affect an individual’s employability or reputation. 
 
12. INFORMED CONSENT  
Once a potential study participant expresses int erest in our study and meets preliminary eligibility requirements, 
as determined by the brief phone screen, a written consent form will be sent to the subject either electronically or via mail. Consenting procedures will be HIPAA compliant. Upon receipt of  
written consent, recruitment 
contact will further explain by phone the details of the consent. The subject recruiter will present to study 
participants the objectives, procedures and a clear statement explaining risks and benefits involved in the study. Questions will be asked and elicited in order to ascertain that participants comprehend the study procedures as 
well as potential risks involved, prior to consenting to the study. All study related questions from study 
participants that a research staff is unable to address will be referred to one of the principal investigator, Drs. Kaye and Bailer , or other co -
investigators. Once a participant signed the consent form, the participant is 
considered enrolled in the study.  
 Participants will sign a separate co nsent form if they are interested in the future genetic study. The same 
consenting procedure described above will be followed.  
 
13. ALTERNATIVES TO STUDY PARTICIPATION  
This is not a therapeutic study, and there are no alternatives.  
 
14. POTENTIAL RISKS  
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 18 Risks of Psychological and Cognitive Assessments . The main risks are that clinical interviews, cognitive 
testing and self -report questionnaires are time consuming. Material elicited during interviews may be upsetting 
to some study participants. Others may  find cognitive tasks to be challenging or frustrating. These assessments, 
however, rarely pose psychological risks for study participants. It is our experience that REC ED subjects and 
CW will be willing to cooperate with such studies. These studies have not been psychologically traumatic to 
REC ED patients in the past. It should be noted that REC ED subjects are often motivated by altruistic feelings 
and are usually cooperative with studies that serve to develop a better understanding of EDs. We do not fe el 
that these studies pose any significant psychological risk for the patients.  
 
Risks of Venipuncture and Blood Sampling . There is minor discomfort and potentially significant 
psychological distress associated with venipuncture, if the procedure is not we ll-handled. There is a rare risk 
associated with the chance of infection or light -headedness or fainting due to blood withdrawal (less than 1 out 
of 100 people) and a more common risk (10 to 25 out of 100 people) of slight pain, bruising, bleeding or 
soren ess associated with taking blood from a vein.  
 
Risks of Catheterization.  Insertion of a catheter for intravenous injection of the PET radiopharmaceutical is 
rarely associated with the chance of infection (less than 1 out of 100 people), but more commonly a ssociated 
with slight pain or bruising at the puncture site (10 -25 out of 100 people).  
 
Risks of MRI.  According to the FDA, there is currently no evidence that MRI with approved scanners of up to 
4 Tesla signal strength are associated with adverse effects.  However, there are three major sources of potential 
risks. First, the subject may experience discomfort being in the confined and sometimes noisy environment of 
the scanner. Second, the strong magnetic field will affect electronic, magnetic and metal devi ces that subjects 
may carry with them or that have been implanted in the their bodies. Third, if unprotected, hearing loss can 
occur with prolonged exposure to the noise generated during MRI imaging. In addition, subjects may 
temporarily experience dizzine ss and/or nausea if the individual moves rapidly through the magnetic field. 
There is also the potential for RF -induced local heating and for mild electric stimulation due to induced currents 
from rapidly switching gradients.  
 
Risks of administering tracer dose of [11C]DASB and [11C]raclopride. Mass doses of radiotracers used in 
these studies are negligible. For these compounds, with affinities in the pico-  to nano- molar range, the receptor 
occupancy is negligible, and we have not observed any pharmacologic al effects. However, as with any drug, the 
possibility of idiosyncratic reaction exists as discussed in the consent forms. 
 
Risk of administering oral AMPH.  The major somatic side effects of AMPH administration are 
cardiovascular (hypertension, palpitations, tachycardia, bradycardia, orthostasis , syncope ). General effects such 
as sweating, feeling warm or cold, chest tightness, nausea, diarrhea, vomiting, muscle and abdominal cramping, 
blurred vision, and headaches, have been reported. There is a rare risk of permanent neurologic damage and 
death as a result of cardiac arrest or stroke. One of the largest cohort (n=81 schizophrenic and n=7 control 
subjects) of published safety data for 0.5 mg/kg oral AMPH is a report by Angrsit et al.3 In this report, the 
greatest changes from baseline were observed over the first hour, and absolute readings peaked at the second 
hour, at which point mean BP indices in subjects who received AMPH were 31 mm Hg greater for SBP 
(systolic blood pressure), 11 mm Hg for DBP (diastolic blood pressure), and 18 mm Hg for MAP (mean arterial pressure). They also observed a m ild but significant increase in heart rate (+ 10 beats per minute from baseline) 
after 3 hours in the healthy controls but not in subjects with schizophrenia. Several other groups have 
successfully used oral AMPH in the dose range of 0.43- 0.5 mg/Kg in PET imaging studies, but they have not 
reported any adverse effects that required medical intervention.49, 143, 193, 194 In addition, we have not 
experienced any adverse effects in our pilot study.10 
 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 19 Risks of Radiation Exposure:   Participation in the PET imaging procedures involves exposure to small 
amounts of radiation. The EDE per single injection is 0.39 rems for [11C]DASB and 0.25 rems for 
[11C]raclopride.  If the participants undergoes the maximum of 3 PET transmission scans, two [11C]raclopride 
scans (10 mCi) and one [11C]DASB scan (15 mCi) , the combined Effective Dose Equivalent (EDE)  radiation 
exposure will be equivalent to a whole body dose of 1.23 rem  (12.3mSv)  (24.64% of the annual whole body 
radiation exposure (5 rems) permitted to radiation workers by federal guidelines). This amount is approximately 
7 times more than they would receive from the average person’s annual background radiation exposure, which 
is approximately 160 mrem (1.6 mSv). This radiation dose is not expected to produce any harmful effects, 
although there is no known minimum level of radiation exposure considered to be totally free of the risk of causing genetic defects or cancer. Th
e risk associated with the amount of radiation exposure participants 
received in this study is considered low and comparable to everyday risks and similar to that from many 
commonly performed diagnostic Nuclear Medicine Procedures. If participants are espe cially concerned with 
radiation exposure or have had a lot of x -rays already, we advise that they should discuss their concern with 
their doctor.  
 
No PET studies will be performed on nursing, pregnant, or potentially pregnant women, as confirmed by serum p
regnancy testing and a urine test. Adverse effects of the radiopharmaceuticals in the study have not been 
reported. However, the possibility exists for a rare reaction to any of the substances or procedures to which the subject is exposed. Insertion of cat
heters for intravenous injection of the PET radiopharmaceutical may be 
associated with slight pain or bruising at the puncture site.  
 
Risk of Breach of Confidentiality. Breaches in confidentiality could impact future insurability, employability, 
or reprodu ction plans, or have a negative impact on family relationships, and/or result in pat ernity suits or 
stigmatization.  
 
Risk of Alcohol Exposure : The production of the [11C]raclopride compound contains up to 10% alcohol. This 
would amount to a total injected alcohol amount of 2mL of ethanol. Two mL distributed over 5000 mL whole 
blood or 2500 mL plasma would represent 2/5000 = 0.4 x 10- 3 (Blood alcohol Concentration BAC 0.0004) or 
2/2500 = 0.8 x 10- 3 (BAC 0.0008) as maximum amount.  
 
Risks of psychological ass essments : The main risks are that clinical interviews, cognitive testing and self -
report questionnaires are time consuming. Material elicited during interviews may be upsetting to some study 
participants. Others may find cognitive tasks to be challenging o r frustrating. These assessments, however, 
rarely pose psychological risks for study participants. 
 
MRI:  The subject may experience discomfort being in the confined environment of the scanner.  
 
Exposure to a high magnetic field. The only known hazard assoc iated with exposure to a static high magnetic 
field is that the magnet exerts a strong force on ferromagnetic objects. For this reason, ferromagnetic objects are 
excluded from the vicinity of the magnet so that they will not become projectiles. In addition , each subject 
undergoes a standard screening procedure to determine whether they have any implanted materials that may 
pose a risk. If there is any doubt about the nature of any implanted material, the subject will not be scanned. 
Conventional MRI uses 1.5 Tesla (T) magnets. At the Keck Center for Functional MRI, the research systems 
for human use have field strengths of 3T. Imaging at these field strengths is not considered a significant risk 
according to FDA guidelines. 
 
Heating from radiofrequency (RF) pulses.  The RF pulses that are used for creating the MR signal deposit 
some energy in the body in the form of heat, but no ionizing radiation is used with MRI. For the same pulse 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 20 sequence, the RF power deposited is higher at higher magnetic field strengths . However, the pulse sequences 
we will use at 3T has relatively low power depositions. In the future pulse sequences with higher RF power 
depositions may be developed, but we will insure that the power deposited is always below the FDA guidelines.  
 
Periphe ral nerve stimulation from rapidly switched magnetic fields (dB/dt).  Magnetic field gradients are 
switched on and off during imaging to encode the spatial distribution of the MR signal. Gradient switching rate 
depends on the gradient coil used, but does not depend on field strength. For this reason, the gradient switching 
rates will be similar to those for the 1.5 T scanners we have used in the past, and these rates will not exceed 
FDA recommendations. The FDA guideline states that a significant risk is inv olved only when “dB/dt sufficient 
to produce severe discomfort or painful stimulation” is used. All of the MRI studies performed in the past at 3T 
systems at UCSD are well below this threshold.  
 
Acoustic noise.  Acoustic noise is always an unwanted side ef fect of MR imaging. As currents are pulsed 
through the gradient coils within the magnetic field, the system acts like a loudspeaker, making a repetitive 
tapping sound. At the higher field strengths (3T) the acoustic noise is increased. In all our studies s ubjects will 
wear ear plugs to reduce the noise to a comfortable, safe level. The FDA guideline for a significant risk due to 
acoustic noise is “peak acoustic noise over 140 dB”, and we will insure that the acoustic levels remain well 
below this value. 
 
Acquisition of Eye Blink Rate.  The main risks associated with acquisition of eye blink data are associated 
with time consumption. Participants may become bored or irritated having to sit still and hold a fixation on a 
computer screen for 5 minutes. However, acquisition of this data should cause minimal risk to the research 
participant.  
 
15. RISK MANAGEMENT PROCEDURES AND ADEQUACY OF RESOURCES  
It is our experience that ED subjects and CW will be willing to cooperate with such studies. These studies have 
not been psychologically traumatic to ED patients in the past. It should be noted that ED subjects are often 
motivated by altruistic feelings and are usually cooperative with studies that serve to develop a better 
understanding understanding of EDs. We do not  feel that these studies pose any significant psychological risk 
for the patients.  
 
Risks of Psychological and Cognitive Assessments . While most study participants will find the clinical 
interviewing process to be a positive experience, some may become anx ious or tearful because of the personal 
nature of the questions. Clinical interviewers will exercise caution and sensitivity and terminate the interview as 
necessary in order to protect the emotional well -being of the study participant. Similarly, study pa rticipants who 
experience frustration during cognitive assessments will be reassured that they are there to do their best and that 
it does not matter how well they score. They will be encouraged to continue but allowed to stop if continued 
distress is expe rienced.  If the subject does not want to talk about any of her feelings during the study, she does 
not have to so, and she can tell the interviewer she does not want to talk about her feelings.  
 
Risks of Venipuncture and Blood Sampling . We have a firm poli cy to only attempt venipuncture a maximum 
of twice on one occasion. In addition, we allow adequate time for the procedure, as necessitated by the 
individual subject. Very rarely will a subject be so anxious about venipuncture that these studies are not 
feasible.  The taking of a blood sample may cause some discomfort. The CTRI nurse and the study staff will 
monitor the subjects’ condition closely to minimize any discomfort.  
 
MRI Related Risks . Typically, 3 Tesla scanners have been measured to produce noise b etween 122- 131 db.59 
The potential risk of hearing loss associated with the noise generated during MRI is eli minated by using ear 
plugs (rated to reduce noise by 32 dB) and through the use of headphones (rated to reduce noise 30 dB). 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 21 Subjects will be strongly encouraged to move slowly when entering or exiting the magnetic field. The scanner 
bed has been designed to slowly move the subject so as to minimize the possibility of vertigo. RF -induced local 
heating is unlikely due to the software requirement that subject’s weight is accurately recorded and used in 
determining the appropriate changes in gradients. Subject s are warned of the possibility of mild electric 
stimulation and are monitored throughout the session. Exclusions will be made for the following: cardiac 
pacemaker, metal fragments in eyes/skin/body (shrapnel), history of being a metal worker/welder, histo ry of 
eye surgery/eyes washed out because of metal, aortic aneurysm clips, prosthesis, by -pass surgery/coronary 
artery clips, hearing aid, heart valve replacement, subjects with an IUD (birth control device), a shunt 
(ventricular or spinal), electrodes, me tal plates/pins/screws/wires, or neuro/bio -stimulators (TENS unit), vision 
problems uncorrectable with lenses, claustrophobia, inability to lie still on one’s back for approximately 30 
minutes, prior neurosurgery, older tattoos with metal dyes, unwillingne ss to remove nose, ear, tongue or face 
jewelry, braces or permanent dental retainers, and women with a positive pregnancy test or currently lactating.  
    In addition, computers and the interfacing devices will be checked regularly for proper and safe oper ation. 
Similarly, study participants will be asked questions pertaining to fear of closed spaces during the screening 
stage. However, should the participant become claustrophobic during the study or for any reason be unable to 
endure remaining in the scann er, the study will be terminated and the participant will be removed from the 
scanner. In addition, a pregnancy test will be performed within 24 hours of the study. No studies will be 
performed on pregnant or potentially pregnant women. If there is a possi bility of metal being present in the 
participant’s body, the participant will be asked to undergo an x -ray study to rule out the presence of metal. The 
participant will be required to sign an additional consent form to undergo the x -ray study.  
 
In order to  minimize the risk of fear of closed spaces while in the MR scanner, patients will be extensively 
interviewed and informed about the nature of the task. If, at any point in during the scanning, the subject 
expresses increasing discomfort, the PI will immed iately intervene and terminate the scanning procedure  
 
Exposure to high magnetic fields:  All subjects will be screened twice before they will be allowed to enter the 
MRI facilities. Any non -removable magnetic material will automatically exclude subjects. A ll staff is regularly 
trained in MRI safety procedures by the PI.  
 
Heating from radiofrequency (RF) pulses : The MRI pulse sequences that will be used are discussed prior to 
usage by the MR physicists and the director of the Center for Magnetic Resonance Im aging (CMR) with respect 
to potential heating effects. The physicists at the CMR regularly test pulse sequences on phantom objects for 
heating effects.  
 
Acoustic noise: Subjects will be instructed to wear earplugs or headsets that reduce the noise by about  20-40 
dB. Subjects will be instructed to indicate if the noise is a source of physical or psychological discomfort. If 
this were to occur the experiment will be terminated immediately.  
 
PET and  Radiation related issues  The use of [11C] radioligands in thi s research proposal is considered to be 
generally safe and effective as approved by the University of California, San Diego Radioactive Drug Research 
Committee in accordance with Food and Drug Association regulation 21 CFR 361.1. No PET studies will be 
performed on pregnant or potentially pregnant women, as confirmed by pregnancy testing performed within 24 
hours prior to each PET scanning session. The total Occupational Dose Limit / EDE for adults, as regulated by 
the US Nuclear Regulatory Commission is 5.0 rem per year. Thus, for the three  studies the EDE is about 
24.64 % of the radiation dose (5 rem) permitted on an annual basis to radiation workers by federal regulations 
(21 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 361.1. If an X -ray study is required to rule out the presence of metallic 
fragments, the maximum radiation dose to the involved body area will be 0.3 rems (a unit of radiation dosage), 
with minimum exposure of the other areas of the body. In order to restrict the yearly cumulative exposure to 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 22 radiation  as outlined in FDA 21.361.1, all subjects exposed to radiation in the work place are excluded, as well 
as subjects exposed to nuclear medicine procedures during the previous year, including research protocols. In 
case of idiosyncratic reactions to the rad iotracers, a physician is present at each experiment and will be 
available at all times during the study and an emergency cart will be in close proximity.  
 
Risk of Alcohol Exposure : The radiotracer that is injected will contain a very small amount of alcoh ol that is 
1/1000 of what is allowed for driving a car in most states. This amount is minimal (Blood alcohol 
Concentration BAC 0.0004). The common legal limit for driving is a BAC of 0.8. In most cases the injected 
dose will be below. We do not expect that  the subject will even recognize any effects from this amount of 
alcohol; however, we discourage subjects with a history of alcohol dependence from participating in order to 
avoid the risk of relapse.  
 
Participant Monitoring on AMPH : Subjects with a histor y of hypertension or any heart disease will be 
excluded. Only subjects who are normotensive ( 100/70> BP<120/80) and have a HR above 55 bpm at 
screening , on the day of study before the 1st [11C]raclopride scan, as well as when measured 15 minutes after 
the 1 st [11C]raclopride scan when subject will lay supine for 5 minutes in a quiet room and have BP and HR 
measured, and then stand for 1 minute when HR and BP will be repeated, will receive amphetamine. As 
amphetamine cross -reacts with street drugs such as cocaine, a rapid drug screen will be performed on the day of 
the scan. The dextroamphetamine will be administered to the subject by a physician familiar with the protocol 
(study physician, Dr. Ursula Bailer). A study physician will be available to monitor the  subject until discharge. 
In order to monitor possible side effects of amphetamine including cardiovascular (hypertension, palpitations, 
tachycardia, bradycardia, orthostasis , syncope ) as well as general effects such as sweating, feeling warm or 
cold, ches t tightness, nausea, diarrhea,  vomiting  muscle and abdominal cramping, blurred vision and headaches, 
blood pressure and heart rate will be recorded every two minutes for the first 15 minutes after amphetamine 
administration, then every five minutes for 30 minutes, then every 15 minutes thereafter (up to at least 180 min) and then hourly until discharge. In addition, a participant will be asked to fill out an adverse event questionnaire after amphetamine ingestion in the following intervals: 10 min, 20 min, 30 min, 45 min, 60 min, 90 min, 120 min, 150 min and 180 min. If the patient has a SBP>190 or DBP>130 for greater than 5 minutes after ingestion of AMPH, then treatment with oral labetalol (200 -400 mg) will be initiated. Sublingual nitroglycerin (150- 600 
mcg) will be administered if the patient complains of chest pain. All changes from a laying to a sitting, laying 
to a standing, or sitting to a standing position of the participants will be assisted by the staff on site. Participants 
will be requested to dr ink at least 1.5 liter of water between standardized breakfast and end of the 2nd scan. If 
the patient has psychomotor activation or behavioral symptoms suggestive of a hypomanic state, they will be treated with oral lorazepam 2 mg. If symptoms of nausea, 
diarrhea, muscle and abdominal cramping, or 
headaches occur and are persisting and becoming intolerable for the participant, we will provide respective 
medication (including antiemetic medication, spasmolytics and pain medication) based on the individual 
clinical severity and assessed by the PI and study physician, Dr. Ursula Bailer. All these medications will be 
stored at the UCSD NeuroPET center for emergency management. Following emergency treatment with these 
medications, the appropriate routine medical  care will be initiated and provided. If any of the above side effects 
persist for more than 1 hour, despite the respective medication administered as outlined below, or intensify, the participant will be sent to the nearest Emergency Department. After a s
yncopal event the participant will be 
sent to the nearest Emergency Department immediately. Following the scans, the subject will receive: a) 
physical exam; b) vital signs measurement; c) mental status exam and d) EKG  
  Transfer Criteria : The subject will be transferred from the UCSD PET center to the UCSD Eating Disorder 
Treatment and Research Center once they meet the following criteria upon evaluation by a study physician: a blood pressure of less than 150/90 mm Hg; a heart rate of less than 110 BPM; no behavioral abnormalities.  
   Discharge Criteria:  After a minimum of 6 hours of observation following drug ingestion, the subject will be 
medically discharged from the UCSD Eating Disorder Treatment and Research Center  only if they meet the 
following crite ria upon evaluation by a study physician: a) a blood pressure (BP) of less than 20 mm Hg above 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 23 their baseline reading for systolic and diastolic BP or less than 150/90 (whichever reading is lower); b) a heart 
rate of less than 20 BPM above their baseline or 100 (whichever reading is lower); c) no reported subjective 
effects from the AMPH; d) no adverse events to the AMPH; e) a normal physical exam; f) a normal mental 
status exam. Most of the REC AN and BN will travel to San Diego for this study. We will establish a policy that 
they are required to stay the night after the study and will be discharged to travel home the next day. For the 
subjects that live in San Diego, we will ask a relative to drive them home after being discharged from the study.  
 
Confidentiality. To minimize possible risk of breach of confidentiality, each study participant will be assigned, 
upon entry into the study, a numeric code which will be used as the identifier for subsequent research related 
activities. All information collected, including self -report questionnaires, psychological assessments, and 
imaging data are identified solely by these numbers without any personal identifiers. Only strictly anonymous 
data will be entered into the database and used for statistical analysis. Acc ess to the numbering system will be 
limited to the principal investigators, Drs. Bailer and Kaye, and their research staff involved in the study. 
Research files will be kept in locked quarters and made available only to qualified personnel for research 
purposes. No verbal or written information concerning a subject will be released to anyone without expressed 
written consent by the subject.  
If blood samples are obtained for genetic sampling, all samples will be labeled by code numbers only and 
identifiable only by the PIs of this protocol, as knowledge of genetic research data could potentially impact 
future insurability, employability, or reproduction plans; or have a negative impact on family relationships; and/or result in shame or embarrassment. 
 
Others.  Unanticipated findings of potential medical significance uncovered during the course of the study, 
including a positive pregnancy test or an abnormal MRI, will be reported to the PIs. The study participant will 
be informed of the test result and then refe rred to her physician. If the participant does not have a regular 
physician, an appropriate referral will be made.  If the participant does not have a regular physician, an 
appropriate referral will be made. In the unlikely event that a subject is injured d uring the study, she will 
receive care from the University of California as needed to treat the injury.  
 
 
16. PRIVACY AND CONFIDENTIALITY CONSIDERATIONS INCLUDING DATA ACCESS AND MANAGEMENT  
To minimize possible risk of breach of confidentiality, each stu dy participant will be assigned, upon entry into the 
study, a numeric code which will be used as the identifier for subsequent research related activities. All 
information collected, including self -report questionnaires, psychological assessments and imagi ng data are 
identified solely by these numbers without any personal identifiers. Only strictly anonymous data will be entered into the database and used for statistical analysis. Access to the numbering system will be limited to the principal investigator, Drs. Kaye and Bailer, and the research staff involved in the study. Research files will be kept in 
locked quarters and made available only to qualified personnel for research purposes. No verbal or written information concerning a subject will be released  to anyone without expressed written consent by the subject.  
A data and safety monitoring plan will be implemented with close supervision by the principal investigators over all research -related activities. Drs. Bailer and Kaye will meet weekly with their research staff to review 
recruitment issues, data collection and entry and assess the adequacy of procedures to ensure subject privacy and confidentiality. More specifically, the data safety and monitoring plan will involve 1) evaluation of the progress of  the research study, e.g., assessing data quality and timeliness of participant recruitment, accrual and 
retention; 2) review of the outcome and adverse event data to determine whether there is any change to the anticipated benefit -to-risk ratio of study p articipation and determination of whether the study should continue 
as originally designed, be changed or terminated; 3) assessment of external factors or relevant information that may have an impact on the ethics of the research or safety of study partici pants; and 4) review of study 
procedures designed to protect the privacy of the research subjects and the confidentiality of their research data. 
In addition, we will use a Data Safety Monitoring Board consisting entirely of personnel not associated with t he 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 24 study, provided by the UCSD’s CTRI. In the event of an adverse event, our research staff will immediately 
communicate with Drs. Bailer and Kaye, as well as the IRB, in compliance with IRB policy for reporting 
adverse events. All fatal or immediately lif e-threatening events as well as unanticipated problems (UPRs) will 
be reported in writing to the IRB as soon as possible and no later than 10 working days after discovery and in compliance with UCSD Human Research Protection Program Institutional Review Bo ard Standard Operating 
Policies and Procedures (Section 3.13). The IRB will determine appropriate actions for mitigating unexpected problems. UPRs involving risks to human subjects or others will be promptly reported to OHRP, FDA, and the appropriate Unive rsity officials. In addition, adverse events will be reported annually as a part of the 
Continuing Review in compliance with UCSD Human Research Protection Program Institutional Review Board Standard Operating Policies and Procedures (Section 3.11). If, during the course of the study, changes or modifications to the study protocol become necessary to ensure continued confidentiality measures, or to ensure the level of risk associated with this study, the IRB will be notified immediately.  
 
17. POTENTIAL BEN EFITS  
Subjects participating in this study will benefit from the screening procedures that include a careful 
examination of the patient's psychiatric condition. Subjects will be paid for their participation since subjects will not accrue any other direct benefit for their participation in this study. Both experimental and control subjects will receive remuneration for their participation in these studies. Many subjects work or attend school, so that participation in this study will mean that they will have  to take time off from these responsibilities. This 
payment is to serve as an incentive for subject participation and to reimburse travel, lost wages, and expenses (e.g., parking). Although the individual subjects may not receive any benefit beyond financi al remuneration, the 
data generated by this project could significantly enhance our knowledge about the risk factors for EDs, and pave the way for new clinical treatments for these disorders. Study participants may also gain satisfaction from the knowledge  that they are contributing to a better understanding of brain function and potentially to the 
etiology of a psychiatric illness. There is little in the way of proven treatments for ED, particularly AN. Consequently, this is a costly and often chronic disorder for many. A better understanding of the pathophysiology of AN and BN is likely to lead to better therapies.  
 
18. RISK/BENEFIT RATIO  
The information gathered in this study will contribute to understanding 5 -HT and DA neuronal circuit function 
in REC ED subjects. This will help identify disease specific disturbances and hopefully lead to identify more 
effective pharmacologic treatment for EDs. In addition this study seeks to determine correlations of behavioral 
state and trait variables with 5 -HTT and DA receptor activity. This will be helpful for both the study of ED 
pathology as well as the study of normal behavior -biology interrelationships. Eating disorders such as anorexia 
and bulimia nervosa are often chronic with high morbidity and mortality, and individuals and families incur 
enormous health care expenses. We strongly believe that the potential benefits of understanding of the 
pathology of E D outweigh the potential risks. 
 
19. EXPENSE TO PARTICIPANT  
There will be no fees or charges to the subje ct for any of the medical procedures or for the PET or MRI or 
evaluations required for the study, questionnaires or assessments.  
 
20. COMPENSATION FOR PARTICIPATION  
Subjects will be compensated $375.00 for participation in each of the [11C]DASB PET scan and the 1st 
[11C]raclopride scan, for a total of $1250.00 if they completed also the 2nd [11C]raclopride scan after ingestion 
of amphetamine . Consented participants who do not meet all criteria will be paid $10 for completing just the 
written assessments, and $25.00 for completing the preliminary subjective assessments and physician 
interview. If a participant is ruled ineligible after completing the entire screening process with interviews, 
assessments, physical, labs and EKG, they will be compensated $50. 00 for their time.  
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 25 21. PRIVILEGES/CERTIFICATIONS/LICENSES AND RESEARCH TEAM RESPONSIBILITIES  
Walter H. Kaye, M. D., Professor of Psychiatry, is Director of the Eating Disorders Program at University of 
California, San Diego. These studies are a continuat ion of research protocols devised and carried out by Dr. Kaye 
on eating disorder patients since 1978.  Dr. Kaye has published more than 300 papers on eating disorders and is 
board certified in psychiatry and board eligible in neurology.  
 Ursula F. Bailer,  M.D., Assistant Clinical Professor, Department of Psychiatry, University of California San 
Diego, and Associate Professor of Psychiatry at the Medical University of Vienna, Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, and Director of the Outpatient Clinic for Eating Disorders and Eating Disorder Research Program at the Medical University of Vienna, Austria. Dr. Bailer has extensive experience in PET analysis and modeling, including the aforementioned radiologands since almost ten years. Furthermore, Dr. Bai ler has over 14 years of 
extensive experience in diagnosis, treatment and research of eating disorders in adolescents and adults. She is author on more than 50 scientific peer reviewed publications and 10 books /book chapters.  
 Julie Price, Ph.D. is a Prof essor of Radiology, Director, PET Pharmacokinetic Modeling, at the Athinoula A. 
Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging at Massachusetts General Hospital  and Member of the Faculty of 
Radiology, Harvard Medical School . Dr. Price has extensive experience in integrated approaches to the 
analyses of multiple intra -subject neuroimaging measures (e.g. blood flow, neuroreceptor binding) in studies of 
medical illness, neuropsychiatric disorders, and aging. She is an expert in PET modeling procedures for several radiotracers. Dr. Price has collaborated with Drs. Bailer and Kaye on PET studies in anorexia and bulimia nervosa at the University of Pittsburgh, and closely worked with Dr. Bailer on data analysis and interpretation of data for several PET projects. Dr. Price will provide expertise with regard to PET modeling, data analysis and interpretation.  
Brian Lopresti, MSNE, is Instructor of Radiology .   Mr. L opresti is a nuclear engineer with more than 20 years 
of experience spanning PET radiopharmaceutical discovery and development, medical physics, nuclear instrumentation and radiation detection methods, tracer kinetic analyses, and quantitative PET data ana lysis.  
Mr. Lopresti’s research efforts have focused on the development and analysis of PET radiotracers and methods for assessing neurodegenerative disease pathology, neuroinflammation, and neurotransmitter dysfunction in human subjects, having authored or co -authored more than 60 publications in this area.  Since 2003, Mr. 
Lopresti has been responsible for directing preclinical PET research efforts at the University of Pittsburgh PET Facility, for which the use of non- human primate models of CNS diseases is an emphasis.  More recently. Mr. 
Lopresti was been appointed as Head of  PET Methodology and Data Analysis.   In this role, Mr. Lopresti has oversight of all data analysis activities relating to PET image data collected at the University of Pittsburgh P ET 
Facility.    
 
Monte S. Buchsbaum, M.D., Distinguished Professor of Psychiatry and Radiology in March 2009. He heads the UCSD NeuroPET Center and leads an effort in developing an expanded research effort with positron emission tomography. Since 1980, the  primary focus of Dr. Buchsbaum's research has been brain imaging, combining 
positron emission tomography, computerized EEG and evoked potential brain mapping, and later magnetic resonance imaging and diffusion tensor imaging. While in the Intramural Resea rch Program at the National 
Institute of Mental Health, Dr. Buchsbaum published some of the first PET studies in psychiatry. In 1982, Dr. Buchsbaum left the NIMH to head the Brain Imaging Center at the University of California, Irvine (UCI) and carried out  studies on the prefrontal cortex in schizophrenia using FDG -PET and EEG. In 1992, Dr. Buchsbaum 
moved to New York to head the Neuroscience PET laboratory, focusing on pharmacological response and PET -
FDG. In 1998 he published the first report on diffusion tensor imaging in schizophrenia, extending his work on 
potential deficits in the prefrontal cortex in schizophrenia. He is Editor of Psychiatry Research and Co -Editor of 
Psychiatry Research: Neuroimaging. He has published over 485 research reports in scie
ntific journals, the 
majority on positron emission tomography. He is included in the Institute of Scientific Information data base as 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 26 one of the most highly -cited scientists (ISIHighlyCited.com).  
 
Carl Hoh, M.D. Associate Professor of Radiology, Division C hief of Nuclear Medicine at the University of 
California, San Diego. The quantitative PET research protocols have been a performed by Dr. Hoh since his training in Nuclear Medicine & PET at UCLA from 1989. Dr. Hoh has multiple publications on quantitative PET imaging.  
 Kishore Kumar Kotta, Ph.D., Staff Research Associate IV. Department of Radiology, UCSD Center for Molecular Imaging, University of California, San Diego, Ca  
Kishore K. Kotta obtained his Ph.D., in Synthetic Organic Chemistry from Department of Chemistry, University of Akron, OH and has more than 15 years of research experience in the areas of Synthetic Organic Chemistry, Medicinal Chemistry, Drug Delivery, and Radio Chemistry. His contributions to the field of chemistry resulted in many public ations in various international journals as well as scientific meetings.  He has 
been working in Radiochemistry lab at University of California, San Diego since 2010 developing new PET radiopharmaceuticals for clinical studies.   
 
22. BIBLIOGRAPHY  
 
1 American Psychiatric Association (1994). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders , 4 
edn. American Psychiatric Association: Washington D.C. 
 2 Anderluh MB, Tchanturia K, Rabe -Hesketh S, Treasure J (2003). Childhood obsessive -compulsive 
personality traits in adult women with eating disorders: defining a broader eating disorder phenotype. The American journal of psychiatry  160:  242- 247. 
 3 Angrist B, Sanfilipo M, Wolkin A (2001). Cardiovascular effects of 0.5 milligrams per kilog ram oral d -
amphetamine and possible attenuation by haloperidol. Clinical neuropharmacology  24: 139- 144. 
 4 Aron A, Poldrack R (2006). Cortical and subcortical contributions to Stop signal response inhibition: role of the subthalamic nucleus. The Journal of  neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for 
Neuroscience 26:  2424- 2433. 
 5 Aron A (2011). From reactive to proactive and selective control: developing a richer model for stopping inappropriate responses. Biol Psych  69: e55-e68. 
 6 Attia E, Haiman C, Walsh BT, Flater SR (1998). Does fluoxetine augment the inpatient treatment of anorexia nervosa? Am J Psychiatry 155:  548- 551. 
 7 Attia E, Wolk S, Cooper T, Glasofer D, Walsh B (2005). Plasma tryptophan during weight restoration in patients with anor exia nervosa. Biol Psychiatry  57: 674- 678. 
 8 Avena N, Bocarsly M (2012). Dysregulation of brain reward systems in eating disorders: Neurochemical information from animal models of binge eating, bulimia nervosa, and anorexia nervosa. Neuropharmacology  63: 87-96. 
 
9 Bailer U, Frank G, Price J, Meltzer C, Becker C, Mathis C  et al  (2012). Interaction between serotonin 
transporter and dopamine D2/D3 receptor radioligand measures is associated with harm avoidant 
symptoms in anorexia and bulimia nervosa. Psych Re s Neuroimaging  211: 160-168. 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 27  
10 Bailer U, Narendran R, Frankle W, Himes M, Duvvuri V, Mathis C  et al  (2012). Amphetamine induced 
dopamine release increases anxiety in individuals recovered from anorexia nervosa. Int J Eat Disord 45:  
263-271. 
 
11 Bailer UF , Price JC, Meltzer CC, Mathis CA, Frank GK, Weissfeld L  et al (2004). Altered 5 -HT 2A 
receptor binding after recovery from bulimia -type anorexia nervosa: relationships to harm avoidance 
and drive for thinness. Neuropsychopharmacology  29: 1143- 1155.  
 12 Bailer UF, Frank GK, Henry SE, Price JC, Meltzer CC, Weissfeld L  et al (2005). Altered brain 
serotonin 5- HT
1A receptor binding after recovery from anorexia nervosa measured by positron emission 
tomography and [11C]WAY100635. Archives of general psychiatry 62:  1032- 1041. 
 13 Bailer UF, Frank G, Henry S, Price J, Meltzer C, Mathis C  et al  (2007). Exaggerated 5- HT
1A but normal 
5-HT 2A receptor activity in individuals ill with anorexia nervosa. Biological Psychiatry  61: 1090- 1099. 
 14 Bailer UF, Frank G, Henry S, P rice J, Meltzer CC, Becker C  et al  (2007). Serotonin transporter binding 
after recovery from eating disorders. Psychopharmacology  195:  315- 324. 
 15 Barbarich N, McConaha C, Gaskill J, LaVia M, Frank GK, Brooks S  et al  (2004). An open trial of 
olanzapine in anorexia nervosa. J Clin Psychiatry  65: 1480- 1482.  
 16 Barrett ES (1983). The biological basis of impulsiveness: the significance of timing and rhythm. Personality & Individual Differences  4: 387-391. 
 17 Bassareo V, Di Chiara G (1999). Differential responsiveness of dopamine transmission to food- stimuli 
in nucleus accumbens shell/core compartments. Neuroscience 89:  637- 641. 
 18 Beck AT, Ward M, Mendelson M, Mock J, Erbaugh J (1961). An Inventory for measuring depression. Archives of general psychiatry  4: 561- 571. 
 19 Bello N, Coughlin J, Redgrave G, Moran T, Guarda A (2010). Oral sensory and cephalic hormonal responses to fat and non- fat liquids in bulimia nervosa. Physiol Behav  99: 611-617. 
 20 Bergen A, Yeager M, Welch R, Haque K, Ganjei JK, Mazzanti C  et al (2005). Association of multiple 
DRD2 polymorphisms with anorexia nervosa. Neuropsychopharmacology  30: 1703- 1710.  
 21 Berrettini W (2000). Genetics of psychiatric disease. Annual review of nutrition 51:  465- 479. 
 22 Bissada H, Tasca G, Barber A, Bradwejn J (2008). Olanzapine in the treatment of low body weight and obsessive thinking in women with anorexia nervosa: A randomized, double -blind, placebo -controlled 
trial. Am J Psych  165:  1281- 1288. 
 23 Blundell JE (1984). Serotonin and appetite. Neuropharmac ology  23: 1537- 1551. 
 24 Boachie A, Goldfield G, Spettigue W (2003). Olanzapine use as an adjunctive treatment for hospitalized children with anorexia nervosa: case reports. Int J Eat Disord 33:  98-103. 
 
25 Bochove M, Haegen LN, W, Verguts T (2013). Blinki ng predicts enhanced cognitive control. Cogn 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 28 Affect Behav Neurosci  13: 346-354. 
 
26 Bosanac P, Burrows G, Norman T (2003). Olanzapine in anorexia nervosa. Aust N Z J Med  37: 494. 
 27 Bosanac P, Kurlender S, Norman T, Hallasm K, Wesnes K, Manktelow T  et al  (2007). An open -label 
study of quetiapine in anorexia nervosa. Hum Psychopharmacol  22: 223- 230. 
 28 Brambilla F, Garcia CF, S, Daga GF, A, Santonastaso P, Ramaciotti C, Bondi E  et al  (2007). 
Olanzapine therapy in anorexia nervosa: psychobiological effects.  International clinical 
psychopharmacology  22: 197- 204. 
 29 Breier A, Su TP, Saunders R, Carson RE, Kolachana BS, de Bartolomeis A  et al  (1997). Schizophrenia 
is associated with elevated amphetamine- induced synaptic dopamine concentrations: evidence from a  
novel positron emission tomography method. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America  94: 2569- 2574.  
 30 Brewerton TD, Jimerson DC (1996). Studies of serotonin function in anorexia nervosa. Psychiatry Res  
62: 31-42. 
 
31 Broft A, Shingleton R, Kaufman J, Liu F, Kumar D, Slifstein M  et al  (2012). Striatal dopamine in 
bulimia nervosa: A pet imaging study. Int J Eat Disord 45:  648- 656. 
 
32 Bulik C, Sullivan PF, Tozzi F, Furberg H, Lichtenstein P, Pedersen NL (2006). Prevale nce, heritability 
and prospective risk factors for anorexia nervosa. Archives of general psychiatry  63: 305- 312. 
 
33 Bulik C, Hebebrand J, Keski -Rahkonen A, Klump K, Reichborn- Kjennerud KS, Mazzeo S  et al  (2007). 
Genetic epidemiology, endophenotypes, and e ating disorder classification. Int J Eat Disord S52- S60. 
 
34 Bulik CM, Berkman ND, Brownley KA, Sedway JA, Lohr KN (2007). Anorexia nervosa treatment: a 
systematic review of randomized controlled trials. Int J Eat Disord 40:  310- 320. 
 
35 Calero -Elvira A, K rug I, Davis K, Lopez C, Fernandez -Aranda F, Treasure J (2009). Meta -analysis on 
drugs in people with eating disorders. Eur Eat Disord Rev  17: 243- 259. 
 36 Cassin S, von Ranson K (2005). Personality and eating disorders: a decade in review. Clinical Psycho logy Review  25: 895- 916. 
 37 Chen K, Reiman R, Caselli R, Bandy D, Ayutyanonta N, Alexander G (2009). Linking functional and structural brain images with multivariate network analyses: A novel application of the partial least square method. Neuroimage  47: 602- 610. 
 38 Cheng F, Kuo J, Chia L, Dryhurst G (1996). Elevated 5- S-cysteinyldopamine/homovanillic acid ratio 
and reduced homovanillic acid in cerebrospinal fluid: possible markers for and potential insights into the pathoetiology of Parkinson's disease Journal of neural transmission 103:  433- 446. 
 39 Cloninger C, Przybeck T, Svrakic D, Wetzel R (1994). The Temperament and Character Inventory (TCI): A guide to its development and use: St. Louis pp 19- 28. 
 
40 Cloninger CR (1987). A systematic method for cli nical description and classification of personality 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 29 variants. A proposal. Archives of general psychiatry  44: 573-588. 
 
41 Cloninger CR, Svrakic DM, Przybeck TR (1993). A psychobiological model of temperament and character. Archives of general psychiatry  50: 975- 990. 
 42 Cools R, Roberts A, Robbins T (2008). Serotoninergic regulation of emotional and behavioural control processes. Trends in Cognitive Sciences  12: 31-40. 
 43 Dale A, Sereno M (1993). Improved localization of cortical activity by combining EEG and MEG with MRI cortical surface reconstruction: A linear approach. Journal of cognitive neuroscience  5: 162- 176. 
 44 Dale A, Fischl B, Sereno M (1999). Cortical surface -based analysis. I. Segmentation and surface 
reconstruction. Neuroimage  9: 179- 194. 
 45 Daw ND, Kakade S, Dayan P (2002). Opponent interactions between serotonin and dopamine. Neural networks : the official journal of the International Neural Network Society  15: 603- 616. 
 46 De Wit H, Enggasser J, Richards J (2002). Acute administration of d- amphetamine decreases 
impulsivity in healthy volunteers. Neuropsychopharmacology : official publication of the American 
College of Neuropsychopharmacology  27: 813- 825. 
 
47 Delgado M, Nystrom L, Fissel C, Noll D, Fiez J (2000). Tracking the hemodynamic re sponses to 
reward and punishment in the striatum. J Neurophysiol  84: 3072- 3077.  
 
48 Dennis K, Le Grange D, Bremer J (2006). Olanzapine use in adolescent anorexia nervosa. Eating and 
weight disorders : EWD  11: e53-56. 
 
49 Drevets W, Gautier C, Price J, Kupf er D, Kinahan P, Grace A  et al  (2001). Amphetamine -induced 
dopamine release in human ventral striatum correlates with euphoria. Biological Psychiatry  49: 81-96. 
 50 Ellison AR, Fong J (1998). Neuroimaging in Eating Disorders. In: Hoek HW, Treasure JL, Katz man 
MA (eds). Neurobiology in the treatment of eating disorders . John Wiley & Sons LTd.: Chichester. pp 
255-269. 
 51 Ercan E, Copkunol H, Cykoethlu S, Varan A (2003). Olanzapine treatment of an adolescent girl with anorexia nervosa. Hum Psychopharmacol  18: 401-403. 
 52 Fairbanks L, Melega W, Jorgensen M, Kaplan J, McGuire M (2001). Social impulsivity inversely associated with CSF 5 -HIAA and fluoxetine exposure in vervet monkeys. Journal of 
Neuropschopharmacology  24: 370- 378. 
 53 Ferguson CP, La Via MC, Cros san PJ, Kaye WH (1999). Are serotonin selective reuptake inhibitors 
effective in underweight anorexia nervosa? Int J Eat Disord 25:  11-17. 
 54 Fischl B, Sereno M, Dale A (1999). Cortical surface -based analysis. II: Inflation, flattening, and a 
surface -based coordinate system. Neuroimage  9: 195- 207. 
 
55 Fischl B, Dale A (2000). Measuring the thickness of the human cerebral cortex from magnetic 
resonance images. Proc Natl Acad Sci  97: 11050 -11055.  
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 30  
56 Fischl B, van der Kouwe A, Destrieux C, Halgren E, Segonne  F, Salat D  et al (2004). Automatically 
parcellating the human cerebral cortex. Cereb Cortex 14:  11-22. 
 
57 Fisher P, Price J, Coleman R, Ziolko S, Becker C, Moses -Kolko E  et al  (2009). Medial prefrontal cortex 
5-HT2A density is correlated with amygdala reactivity, response habituation and functional coupling. 
Cereb Cortex 19:  2499- 2507. 
 58 Fisman S, Steele M, Short J, Byrne T, Short J, Lavalle C (1996). Case study: anorexia nervosa and autistic disorder in an adolescent girl. Journal of the American Acade my of Child and Adolescent 
Psychiatry 35:  937- 940. 
 59 Foster J, Hall D, Summerfield A, Palmer A, Bowtell R (2000). Sound- level measurements and 
calculations of safe noise dosage during EPI at 3 T. J Magn Res Imaging 12:  157- 163. 
 60 Frank G, Bailer UF, He nry S, Drevets W, Meltzer CC, Price JC  et al  (2005). Increased dopamine 
D2/D3 receptor binding after recovery from anorexia nervosa measured by positron emission 
tomography and [
11C]raclopride. Biological Psychiatry  58: 908- 912. 
 
61 Frank G, Kaye W (2012). Current status of functional imaging in eating disorders. Int J Eat Disord 45: 
723-736. 
 62 Frank G, Reynolds J, Shott M, Jappe L, Yang T, Tregellas J  et al  (2012). Anorexia nervosa and obesity 
are associated with opposite brain reward response. Neuropsyc hopharmacology : official publication of 
the American College of Neuropsychopharmacology  37: 2031- 2046.  
 63 Frank GK, Kaye WH, Weltzin TE, Perel J, Moss H, McConaha C  et al  (2001). Altered response to 
meta -chlorophenylpiperazine in anorexia nervosa: suppor t for a persistent alteration of serotonin activity 
after short -term weight restoration. The International journal of eating disorders  30: 57-68. 
 64 Frank GK, Kaye WH, Meltzer CC, Price JC, Greer P, McConaha C  et al  (2002). Reduced 5 -HT2A 
receptor binding  after recovery from anorexia nervosa. Biological Psychiatry  52: 896- 906. 
 65 Frankle W, Slifstein M, Gunn R, Huang Y, Hwang D, Darr E  et al  (2006). Estimation of serotonin 
transporter parameters with 11C -DASB in healthy humans: reproducibility and compari son of methods. 
Journal of nuclear medicine : official publication, Society of Nuclear Medicine  47: 815- 826. 
 66 Friederich HC, Kumari V, Uher R, Riga M, Schmidt U, Campbell IC  et al  (2006). Differential 
motivational responses to food and pleasurable cues in anorexia and bulimia nervosa: a startle reflex paradigm. Psychological Medicine  36: 1327 -1335.  
 67 Frost RO, Marten P, Lahart C, Rosenblate R (1990). The dimensions of perfectionism. Cognitive Therapy & Research  14: 449-468. 
 68 Gadalla T, Piran N (2007 ). Co -occurrence of eating disorders and alcohol use disorders in women: a 
meta analysis. Arch Womens Ment Health 10:  133-140. 
 
69 Galimberti E, Martoni R, Cavallini M, Erzegovesi S, Bellodi L (2011). Motor inhibition and cognitive 
flexibility in eating di sorder subtypes.  In Press. Progress in Neuro -Psychopharmacology & Biological  
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 31 Psychiatry Res . 
 
70 Garner DM (1991). The Eating Disorders Inventory -2 Manual. Odessa, Florida: Psychological 
Assessment Resources Psychological Assessment Resources : Odessa FL.  
 71 Geyer MA (1996). Serotonergic functions in arousal and motor activity. Behavioural Brain Research 73: 31. 
 72 Ghahremani D, Lee B, Robertson C, tabibnia G, Morgan A, De Shelter N  et al (2012). Striatal 
Dopamine D2/D3 Receptors Mediate Response Inhibiti on and Related Activity in Frontostriatal Neural 
Circuitry in Humans. The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience  
32: 7316- 7324. 
 
73 Groman S, Lee B, Seu E, James A, Feiler K, Mandelkern M (2012). Dysregulation of D ₂-mediated 
dopamine transmission in monkeys after chronic escalating methamphetamine exposure. The Journal of 
neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience  32: 5843 -5852. 
 74 Haber S, Knutson B (2010). The reward circuit: Linking primat e anatomy and human imaging. 
Neuropsychopharmacology : official publication of the American College of 
Neuropsychopharmacology  35: 4-26. 
 
75 Halford J, Cooper G, Dovey T (2004). The pharmacology of human appetite expression. Current drug 
targets  5: 221- 240. 
 
76 Hansen L (1999). Olanzapine in the treatment of anorexia nervosa. The British journal of psychiatry : the journal of mental science  175:  592.  
 
77 Herzog DB, Keller MB, Lavori PW, Kenny GM, Sacks NR (1992). The prevalence of personality 
disorders in 210 women with eating disorders. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry  53: 147- 152. 
 
78 Higley JD, Linnoila M (1997). Low central nervous system serotonergic activity is traitlike and 
correlates with impulsive behavior.  A nonhuman primate model investigating gene tic and 
environmental influences on neurotransmission. Annals of the New York Academy of Science  836:  39-
56. 
 
79 Hudson J, Hiripi E, Pope H, Kessler R (2007). The prevalence and correlates of eating disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication. Biol Psych  61: 348- 358. 
 80 Innis R, Cunningham V, Delforge J, Fujita M, Gjedde A, Gunn R  et al  (2007). Consensus nomenclature 
for in vivo imaging of reversibly binding radioligands. Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism  
27: 1533- 1539. 
 81 Jensen VS, Mejlhede A (2000). Anorexia nervosa: treatment with olanzapine. The British journal of psychiatry : the journal of mental science  177:  87. 
 82 Jimerson DC, Lesem MD, Kaye WH, Brewerton TD (1992). Low serotonin and dopamine metabolite concentrations in cerebrospinal fluid from bulimic patients with frequent binge episodes. Archives of general psychiatry  49: 132- 138. 
 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 32 83 Jimerson DC, Wolfe BE, Brotman AW, Metzger ED (1996). Medications in the treatment of eating 
disorders. The Psychiatric clinics of North  America  19: 739- 754. 
 
84 Kaasinen V, Nurmi E, Bergman J, Eskola J, Solin O, Sonninen P  et al  (2001). Personality traits and 
brain dopaminergic function in Parkinson's disease. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science USA 98: 13272- 13277. 
 85 Karson C (1983). Spontaneous eye blink rates and dopaminergic systems. Brain : a journal of 
neurology  106:  643- 653. 
 86 Kaye W, Strober M, Klump KL (2003). Neurobiology of eating disorders. In: Martin A, Scahill L, Charney DS, Leckman JF (eds). Pediatric Psychoph armacology, Principles & Practice . Oxford 
University Press: New York. pp 224- 237. 
 87 Kaye W, Wagner A, Frank G, UF B (2006). Review of brain imaging in anorexia and bulimia nervosa. In: Mitchell J, Wonderlich S, Steiger H, deZwaan M (eds). AED Annual Revi ew of Eating Disorders, 
Part 2 . Radcliffe Publishing Ltd: Abingdon UK. pp 113- 130. 
 88 Kaye W (2008). Neurobiology of anorexia and bulimia nervosa. Physiology & behavior  94: 121- 135. 
 89 Kaye W, Strober M, Jimerson D (2008). The neurobiology of eating disorders. In: Charney D, Nestler E (eds). The Neurobiology of Mental Illness (3rd edition) . Oxford Press: New York.  
 90 Kaye W, Fudge J, Paulus M (2009). New insight into symptoms and neurocircuit function of anorexia nervosa. Nat Rev Neurosci  10: 573- 584. 
 91 Kaye W, Wierenga C, Bailer U, Simmons A, Wagner A, Bischoff -Grethe A (2013). Does a shared 
neurobiology for foods and drugs of abuse contribute to extremes of food ingestion in anorexia and bulimia nervosa? Biological Psychiatry  73: 836- 842. 
 92 Kaye WH,  Ebert MH, Raleigh M, Lake R (1984). Abnormalities in CNS monoamine metabolism in 
anorexia nervosa. Archives of general psychiatry  41: 350- 355. 
 93 Kaye WH, Ballenger JC, Lydiard RB, Stuart GW, Laraia MT, O'Neil P  et al  (1990). CSF monoamine 
levels in norm al-weight bulimia: evidence for abnormal noradrenergic activity. The American journal of 
psychiatry  147:  225- 229. 
 94 Kaye WH, Gwirtsman HE, George DT, Ebert MH (1991). Altered serotonin activity in anorexia nervosa after long -term weight restoration. Does  elevated cerebrospinal fluid 5 -hydroxyindoleacetic acid level 
correlate with rigid and obsessive behavior? Archives of general psychiatry  48: 556- 562. 
 95 Kaye WH, Greeno CG, Moss H, Fernstrom J, Fernstrom M, Lilenfeld LR  et al (1998). Alterations in 
serotonin activity and psychiatric symptomatology after recovery from bulimia nervosa. Archives of 
general psychiatry  55: 927- 935. 
 96 Kaye WH, Frank GK, McConaha C (1999). Altered dopamine activity after recovery from restricting -
type anorexia nervosa. Neuropsychopharmacology  21: 503- 506. 
 
97 Kaye WH, Frank GK, Meltzer CC, Price JC, McConaha CW, Crossan PJ  et al (2001). Altered serotonin 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 33 2A receptor activity in women who have recovered from bulimia nervosa. The American journal of 
psychiatry  158:  1152- 1155. 
 
98 Kaye WH, Nagata T, Weltzin TE, Hsu LK, Sokol MS, McConaha C  et al  (2001). Double -blind placebo-
controlled administration of fluoxetine in restricting - and restricting -purging -type anorexia nervosa. Biol 
Psychiatry 49:  644- 652. 
 99 Kaye WH, Barbarich NC, Putnam K, Gendall KA, Fernstrom J, Fernstrom M  et al  (2003). Anxiolytic 
effects of acute tryptophan depletion in anorexia nervosa. The International journal of eating disorders  
33: 257- 267. 
 100 Keel PK, Mitchell JE, Miller KB, Davis TL, Crow SJ (1999). Long -term outcome of bulimia nervosa. 
Archives of general psychiatry  56: 63-69. 
 101 Kendler KS, MacLean C, Neale M, Kessler R, Heath A, Eaves L (1991). The genetic epidemiology of bulimia nervosa. Am J Psychiatry 148:  1627- 1637.  
 102 Klein D, Walsh B (2003) . Eating disorders. Int Rev Psychiatry 15:  205-216. 
 103 Kleven M, Koek W (1996). Differential effects of direct and indirect dopamine agonists on eye blink rate in cynomolgus monkeys. The Journal of pharmacology and experimental therapeutics  279:  1211-
1219. 
 104 Kupietz SB, B, Angrist B, Windsberg B (1985). Psychostimulant plasma concentration and learning performance. J Clin Psychopharmacol  5: 293- 295. 
 105 La Via MC, Gray N, Kaye WH (2000). Case reports of olanzapine treatment of anorexia nervosa. Int J 
Eat Disord 27:  363- 366. 
 106 Lammertsma AA, Hume SP (1996). Simplified reference tissue model for PET receptor studies. Neuroimage  4: 153- 158. 
 107 Laruelle M, Abi -Dargham A, Van Dyck C, Rosenblatt W, Zea -Ponce Y, Zoghbi S  et al  (1995). SPECT 
imaging of striatal dopamine release after amphetamine challenge. Journal of nuclear medicine : official 
publication, Society of Nuclear Medicine  36: 1182- 1190. 
 108 Laruelle M, Iyer R, Al -Tikriti M, Zea -Ponce Y, Malison R, Zoghbi S (1997). Microdialysis and SPECT 
meas urements of amphetamine -induced dopamine release in nonhuman primates. Synapse  25: 1-14. 
 109 Lawrence A (2003). Impaired visual discrimination learning in anorexia nervosa. Appetite  20: 85-89. 
 110 Leibowitz SF, Shor -Posner G (1986). Brain serotonin and e ating behavior. Appetite  7: 1-14. 
 111 Li C, Morgan P, Matuskey D, Abdelghany O, Luo X, Chang JR, BJ  et al  (2010). Biological markers of 
the effects of intravenous methylphenidate on improving inhibitory control in cocaine -dependent 
patients. PNAS  107:  14455- 14459. 
 
112 Lilenfeld L, Wonderlich S, Riso LP, Crosby R, Mitchell J (2006). Eating disorders and personality: a 
methodological and empirical review. Clinical Psychology Review  26: 299-320. 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 34  
113 Lilenfeld LR, Kaye WH, Greeno CG, Merikangas KR, Plotnicov K, Pollice C  et al  (1998). A controlled 
family study of anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa: psychiatric disorders in first -degree relatives and 
effects of proband comorbidity. Archives of general psychiatry 55:  603- 610. 
 
114 Little R, Rubin D (1987). St atistical analysis with missing data. New York, John Wiley . 
 115 Logan G, Cowan W (1984). On the ability to inhibit thought and action: A theory of an act of control. Psychological Review  91: 295- 327. 
 116 Logan J, Fowler J, Volkow N, Wang G, Ding Y, Alexoff D (1996). Distribution volume ratios without blood sampling from grahical analysis of PET data. Journal of cerebral blood flow and metabolism : official journal of the International Society of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism  16: 834- 840. 
 117 Lucki I  (1998). The spectrum of behaviors influenced by serotonin. Biological Psychiatry  44: 151- 162. 
 118 Malina A, Gaskill J, McConaha C, Frank GK, LaVia M, Scholar L  et al  (2003). Olanzapine treatment of 
anorexia nervosa: a restrospective study. Int J Eat Disord  33: 234- 237. 
 
119 Mann JJ (1999). Role of the serotonergic system in the pathogenesis of major depression and suicidal 
behavior. Neuropsychopharmacology  21: 99S-105S. 
 
120 Marsh R, Steinglass J, Gerber A, Graziano O'Leary K, Wang Z, Murphy D  et al (2009). Deficient 
activity in the neural systems that mediate self -regulatory control in bulimia nervosa. Archives of 
general psychiatry  66: 51-63. 
 
121 Martinez D, Slifstein M, Broft A, Mawlawi O, Hwang D, Huang Y  et al  (2003). Imaging human 
mesolimbic dopamin e transmission with positron emission tomography.  Part II: amphetamine -induced 
dopamine release in the functional subdivisions of the striatum. Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow and 
Metabolism  23: 285- 300. 
 
122 Martinez D, Gil R, Slifstein M, Hwang D, Huang Y, Perez A  et al  (2005). Alcohol dependence is 
associated with blunted dopamine transmission in the ventral striatum. Biol Psychiatry  58: 779- 786. 
 123 Martinez D, Narendran R, Foltin R, Slifstein M, Hwang D, Broft A (2007). Amphetamine -induced 
dopamine re lease: markedly blunted in cocaine dependence and predictive of the choice to self -
administer cocaine. Am J Psychiatry 164:  622- 629. 
 124 McKenzie JM, Joyce PR (1992). Hospitalization for anorexia nervosa. Int J Eat Disord 11:  235- 241. 
 125 McNair D, Lorr M, Droppleman L (2005). Profile of Mood States (POMS) Manual . Multi -Health 
Systems, Inc.: Canada.  
 126 Mehler -Wex C, romanos M, Kirchheiner J, Schulze U (2008). Atypical antipsychotics in severe 
anorexia nervosa in children and adolescents -review and case reports. Eur Eat Disord Rev  16: 100- 108. 
 
127 Mehler C, Wewetzer C, Schulze U, Warnke A, Theisen F, Dittmann RW (2001). Olanzapine in children and adolescents with chronic anorexia nervosa. A study of five cases. Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry  10: 
151-157. 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 35  
128 Metropolitan Life Insurance Company (1959). New weight standards for men and women. Stat Bull 
Metrop Insur Co. pp 1- 11. 
 129 Mitchell J, Crow S, Peterson CW, S, Crosby R (1998). Feeding laboratory studies in patients with eating disorders: A review. In t J Eat Disord  24: 115- 124. 
 130 Mondraty N, Birmingham C, Touyz SW, Sundakov V, Chapman L, Beaumont P (2005). Randomized controlled trial of olanzapine in the treatment of cognitions in anorexia nervosa. Australas Psychiatry  
13: 72-75. 
 131 Montague R, Hy man S, Cohen J (2004). Computational roles for dopamine in behavioural control. 
Nature  431:  760- 767. 
 132 Newman -Toker J (2000). Risperidone in anorexia nervosa. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry  39: 
941-942. 
 133 NICE (2004). Core interventions in the tr eatment and management of anorexia nervosa, bulimia 
nervosa and related eating disorders (Clinical Guideline 9)  http://www.nice.org.uk
. National 
Collaborating Centre for Medical Health: London.  
 134 Oberndorfer T, F rank G, Fudge J, Simmons A, Paulus M, Wagner A  et al (2013). Altered insula 
response to sweet taste processing after recovery from anorexia and bulimia nervosa. Am J Psychiatry 170: 1143- 1151. 
 135 Oldfield R (1971). The assessment and analysis of handedne ss: the Edinburgh inventory. 
Neuropsychologia 9:  97-113. 
 136 Pessoa L, Padmala S, Kenzer A, Bauer A (2012). Interactions between cognition and emotion during response inhibition. Emotion 12:  192- 197. 
 137 Phillips M, Drevets WR, SL, Lane R (2003). Neurobi ology of emotion perception I: The neural basis of 
normal emotion perception Biol Psych  54: 504- 514. 
 138 Pichika R, Buschsbaum M, Bailer U, Hoh C, DeCastro A, Buschsbaum B  et al  (2011). Serotonin 
transporter binding after recovery from bulimia nervosa. In t J Eat Disord  45: 345- 352. 
 139 Powers P, Bannon Y, Eubanks R, McCormick T (2007). Quetiapine in anorexia nervosa patients: an open label outpatient pilot study. Int J Eat Disord 40: 21-26. 
 140 Powers PS, Santana CA, Bannon YS (2002). Olanzapine in the t reatment of anorexia nervosa: an open 
label trial. The International journal of eating disorders  32: 146- 154. 
 141 Price C, Ziolko S, Klunk W, Mathis C, Lopresti B, Bi W (2006). Multivariate analysis of PIB PET imaging studies. Neuroimage  31(S2):  T34.  
 
142 Ramaekers J, Kuypers K (2006). Acute effects of 3,4- methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA) on 
behavioral measures of impulsivity: alone and in combination with alcohol. Neuropsychopharmacology 
: official publication of the American College of Neuropsychopha rmacology  31: 1048 -1055.  
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 36  
143 Riccardi P, Li E, Ansari M, Zald D, Park S, Dawant B  et al  (2005). Amphetamine -induced displacement 
of [(18)F] fallypride in striatum and extrastriatal regions in humans. Neuropsychopharmacology . 
 
144 Roberts M, Tchanturia K, Stahl D, Southgate L, Treasure J (2007). A systematic review and meta -
analysis of set -shifting ability in eating disorders. Psychol Med  37: 1075- 1084. 
 145 Schienle A, Schafer A, Hermann A, Vaitl D (2008). Binge -eating disorder: Reward sensitivity and brai n 
action to images of food. Biol Psych  65: 654- 661. 
 146 Schultz W (2004). Neural coding of basic reward terms of animal learning theory, game theory, microeconomics and behavioural ecology. Science 14:  139- 147. 
 147 Schweighofer N, Tanaka S, Doya K (2007) . Serotonin and the evaluation of future rewards: theory, 
experiments, and possible neural mechanisms. Annals of the New York Academy of Science 1104:  289-
300. 
 148 Simon N, Montgomery K, Beas B, Mitchell M, LaSarge C, Mendez I  et al (2011). Dopaminergic 
modulation of risky decision- making. The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society 
for Neuroscience 31:  17460- 17470. 
 149 Smith KA, Morris JS, Friston KJ, Cowen PJ, Dolan RJ (1999). Brain mechanisms associated with 
depressive relapse and  associated cognitive impairment following acute tryptophan depletion. British 
Journal of Psychiatry  174:  525- 529. 
 150 Soreni N, Crosbie J, Ickowicz A, Schachar R (2009). Stop signal and Conners' continuous performance 
tasks: test --retest reliability of two inhibition measures in ADHD children. J Atten Disord  13: 137- 143. 
 151 Soubrie P (1986). Reconciling the role of central serotonin neurons in human and animal behavior. 
Behavioral and Brain Sciences  9: 319-335. 
 
152 Spielberger C, Gorsuch R, Lushene R ( 1970). STAI Manual for the State Trait Anxiety Inventory . 
Consulting Psychologists Press: Palo Alto, CA.  
 153 Steinglass J, Sysko R, Mayer L, Berner L, Schebendach J, Wang Y  et al  (2010). Pre -meal anxiety and 
food intake in anorexia nervosa. Appetite  55: 214- 218. 
 154 Steinglass J, Albano A, Simpson H, Carpenter K, Schebendach J, Attia E (2012). Fear of food as a treatment target: Exposure and response prevention for anorexia nervosa in an open series. Int J Eat Disord  45: 615- 621. 
 155 Steinglass JE, Walsh  T (2004). Psychopharmacology of anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, and binge 
eating disorder. In: Brewerton TD (ed). Clinical Handbook of  Eating Disorders: An Integrated Approach. Marcel Dekker: New York. pp 489 -508. 
 156 Stice E (2002). Risk and maintenance factors for eating pathology: a meta -analytic review. 
Pychopharmacology Bulletin 128:  825- 848. 
 
157 Strober M (1995). Family -genetic perspectives on anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa. In: Brownell 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 37 K, Fairburn C (eds). Eating Disorders and Obesity -A Comprehensive Handbook . The Guilford Press: 
New York. pp 212 -218. 
 
158 Strober M, Freeman R, DeAntonio M, Lampert C, Diamond J (1997). Does adjunctive fluoxetine influence the post -hospital course of restrictor -type anorexia nervosa? A 24 -month prospective, 
longitudinal followup and comparison with historical controls. Psychopharmacology bulletin 33:  425-
431. 
 159 Strober M, Freeman R, Morrell W (1997). The long -term course of severe anorexia nervosa in 
adolescents: survival analysis of recovery, relapse, and outcome predictors over 10-  15 years in a 
prospective study. Int J Eat Disord 22:  339- 360. 
 160 Strober M, Freeman R, Lampert C, Diamond J, Kaye W (2000). Controlled family study of anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa: evidence of shared liability and transmission of partial syndromes. Am J Psychiatry 157:  393- 401. 
 161 Sullivan PF (1995). Mortality in anorexia nervosa. Am J Psychiatry 152:  1073- 1074. 
 162 Svrakic DM, Whitehead C, Przybeck TR, Cloninger CR (1993). Differential diagnosis of personality disorders by the seven -factor model of temperament and character. Archives of general psychiatry  50: 
991-999. 
 163 Swerdlow N, Eastvold A, Karban B, Ploum Y, Stephany N, Geyer M  et al  (2002). Dopamine agonist 
effects on startle and sensorimotor gating in n ormal male subjects: time course studies. Psychopharm 
(Berl) 161:  189- 201. 
 164 Talbot P, Frankle W, Hwang DH, Y, Suckow R, Slifstein M, Abi -Dargham A  et al  (2005). Effects of 
reduced endogenous 5 -HT on the in vivo binding of the serotonin transporter radi oligand 11C -DASB in 
healthy humans. Synapse  55: 164- 175. 
 165 Taylor J, Elsworth J, Lawrence M, Sladek J, Roth R, Redmond D (1999). Spontaneous blink rates correlate with dopamine levels in the caudate nucleus of MPTP -treated monkeys. Experimental 
Neurology  158:  214- 220. 
 166 Treasure J, Campbell I (1994). The case for biology in the aetiology of anorexia nervosa. Psychol Med  
24: 3-8. 
 167 Troendle J (1995). A stepwise resampling method of multiple hypothesis testing. Journal of the American Statistical Ass ociation 90:  370- 378. 
 168 Trunko M, Schwartz T, Duvvuri V, Kaye W (2011). Aripiprazole in anorexia nervosa and low -weight 
bulimia nervosa: CASE REPORTS  Epub ahead of print. Int J Eat Disord 44:  269- 275. 
 169 Uher R, Murphy T, Brammer M, Dalgleish T, Phil lips M, Ng V  et al  (2004). Medial prefrontal cortex 
activity associated with symptom provocation in eating disorders. Am J Psychiatry 161:  1238- 1246.  
 
170 Vandereycken W, Pierloot R (1982). Pimozide combined with behavior therapy in the short -term 
treatmen t of anorexia nervosa. A double -blind placebo- controlled cross -over study. Acta psychiatrica 
Scandinavica  66: 445-450. 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 38  
171 Vandereycken W (1984). Neuroleptics in the short -term treatment of anorexia nervosa. A double - blind 
placebo -controlled study with s ulpiride. The British journal of psychiatry : the journal of mental science  
144: 288- 292. 
 
172 Verbreggen F, Chambers C, Logan G (2013). Fictitious inhibitory differences: How skewness and slowing distort the estimation of stopping latencies. Psychological  Science 24: 352- 362. 
 173 Vitousek K, Manke F (1994). Personality variables and disorders in anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa. J Abnorm Psychol  103:  137- 147. 
 174 Volkow N, Wang G, Fowler J, Logan J, Gatley J, Hitzemann R (1997). Decreased striatal dopaminergic responsiveness in detoxified cocaine -dependent subjects. Nature  386:  830- 833. 
 175 Volkow N, Wang G, Fowler J, Logan J, Gatley S, Wong C  et al  (1999). Reinforcing effects of 
psychostimulants in humans are associated with increases in brain dopam ine and occupancy of D(2) 
receptors. J Pharmacol Exp Ther  291:  409- 415. 
 176 Volkow N, Fowler J, Wang G, Baler R, Telang F (2009). Imaging dopamine's role in drug abuse and 
addiction. Neuropharmacology  56, Suppl 1:  3-8. 
 
177 Volkow N, Wang G, Fowler J, Tom asi A (2012). Addiction circuitry in the human brain. Ann Rev 
Pharmacol Toxicol  52: 321- 336. 
 
178 Volkow ND, Wang G, Fowler J, Logan j, Jayne M, Franceschi D  et al (2002). "Nonhedonic" food 
motivation in humans involves dopamine in the dorsal striatum and methylephenidate amplifies this 
effect. Synapse  44: 175- 180. 
 179 Wagner A, Barbarich N, Frank G, Bailer U, Weissfeld L, Henry S  et al (2006). Personality traits after 
recovery from eating disorders:  Do subtypes differ? The International journal of eating disorders  39: 
276-284. 
 
180 Wagner A, Aizenstein H, Venkatraman M, Fudge J, May J, Mazurkewicz L  et al  (2007). Altered reward 
processing in women recovered from anorexia nervosa. Am J Psychiatry 164:  1842- 1849.  
 
181 Wagner A, Aizenstein H, Frank GK, Figur ski J, May JC, Putnam K  et al  (2008). Altered insula 
response to a taste stimulus in individuals recovered from restricting- type anorexia nervosa. 
Neuropsychopharmacology  33: 513- 523. 
 182 Wagner A, Aizeinstein H, Venkatraman V, Bischoff -Grethe A, Fudge J,  May J  et al  (2010). Altered 
striatal response to reward in bulimia nervosa after recovery. Int J Eat Disord 43:  289- 294. 
 183 Walsh B, Kaplan A, Attia E, Olmsted M, Parides M, Carter J  et al  (2006). Fluoxetine After Weight 
Restoration in Anorexia Nervosa:  A Randomized Controlled Trial. JAMA : the journal of the American 
Medical Association 295:  2605- 2612.  
 184 Walsh BT (1991). Psychopharmacologic treatment of bulimia nervosa. J Clin Psychiatry 52 Suppl:  34-
38. 
 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 39 185 Walsh BT, Devlin MJ (1998). Eating diso rders: progress and problems. Science  280: 1387 -1390.  
 
186 Walters EE, Kendler KS (1995). Anorexia nervosa and anorexic -like syndromes in a population- based 
female twin sample. The American journal of psychiatry  152:  64-71. 
 187 Wang T, Chou Y, Shiah I (2006). Combined treatment of olanzapine and mirtazapine in anorexia nervosa associated with major depression. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry  30: 306- 309. 
 188 Ward A, Brown N, Lightman S, Campbell IC, Treasure J (1998). Neuroendocrine, appetitive and behavioural responses to d- fenfluramine in women recovered from anorexia nervosa. British Journal of 
Psychiatry 172:  351- 358. 
 189 Weltzin TE, Hsu LK, Pollice C, Kaye WH (1991). Feeding patterns in bulimia nervosa. Biol Psych  30: 
1093- 1110. 
 190 Wester gaard G, Suomi S, Chavanne T, Houser L, Hurley A, Cleveland A  et al  (2003). Physiological 
correlates of aggression and impulsivity in free -ranging female primates. Neuropsychopharmacology  
28: 1045- 1055. 
 
191 Willeit M, Ginovart N, Graff A, Rusjan P, Vitcu I, Houle S  et al  (2008). First human evidence of d-
amphetamine induced displacement of a D2/3 agonist radioligand: A [11C] -(+)-PHNO positron 
emission tomography study. Neuropsychopharmacology : official publication of the American College 
of Neuropsychopharmacology  33: 279- 289. 
 
192 Wolfe BE, Metzger ED, Jimerson DC (1997). Research update on serotonin function in bulimia nervosa 
and anorexia nervosa. Psychopharmacology bulletin 33:  345- 354. 
 
193 Wolkin A, Angrist B, Wolf AP, Brodie J, Wolkin B, Jaeger J  et al (1987). Effects of amphetamine on 
local cerebral metabolism in normal and schizophrenic subjects as determined by positron emission 
tomography. Psychopharmacology  92: 241- 246. 
 
194 Wolkin A, Sanfilipo M, Angrist B, Duncan E, Wieland S, Wolf A  et al  (1994). Acute d- amphetamine 
challenge in schozophrenia: effects on cerebral glucose utilization and clinical symptomatology. 
Psychol Med  35: 649- 657. 
 
195 Xu L, Mazumdar S, Price J (2007). Coviariate adjustment in parietal least squares for the extraction of the spatial -temporal pattern from positron emission tomogrpahy data. Stat Methodology  4: 44-63. 
 196 Zastrow A, Kaiser SS, C, Walthe S, Herzog W, Tchanturia K, Belger A  et al  (2009). Neural correlates 
of impaired cognitive -behavioral flexibility in anorexia nervosa. Am J Psychiatry  166:  608- 616. 
 197 Zhou D, Thompson W, Siegle G (2009). MATLAB toolbox for functional connectivity. Neuroimage  
47: 1590- 1607. 
 198 Zuckerman M (1978). Dimensions of sensation seeking. J Consult Clin Psychol  46: 139- 149. 
 
 
23. FUNDING SUPPORT FOR THIS STUDY  
Funded by the National Institute of Mental Health (1R01MH092793 -01A1 ;3R01MH092793 -03S1 ) going 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 40 through UCSD as an existing grant. Dates of Support: 04/01/2011 – 02/29/2016 Fiscal Contact: Ashley Harlow  
 
24. BIOLOGICAL MATERI ALS TRANSFER AGREEMENT  
Biological Materials will be kept under locked conditions at UCSD Eating Disorder Treatment and Research 
Center with Dr. Kaye for an indefinite time where they will be submitted for analysis with DNA and 
lymphocyte extraction. No bi ological materials transfer agreement is necessary.  
 
25. INVESTIGATIONAL DRUG FACT SHEET AND IND/IDE HOLDER  
Not Applicable  
 
 
26. IMPACT ON STAFF  
Nursing staff will be utilized in accordance with CTRI policies.  
 
27. CONFLICT OF INTEREST  
Not Applicable   
 
28. SUPPLEMENTAL INSTRUCTIONS FOR CANCER -RELATED STUDIES  
Not Applicable  
 
29. OTHER APPROVALS/REGULATED MATERIALS  
Not applicable  
 
30. PROCEDURES FOR SURROGATE CONSENT AND/OR DECISIONAL CAPACITY ASSESSMENT  
Not Applicable  
 
 
 
Version date: May 11, 2011  
 
 
 
 
 