Supplementary Appendix  
Study Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan  
Trial:  Antibiotic Choice On ReNal outcomes (ACORN) trial  
Manuscript:  Effect of Cefepime versus Piperacillin -tazobactam in Adults Hospitalized with 
Acute Infection: A Randomized Clinical Trial  
ClinicalTrials.gov:  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Authors:  Edward T. Qian; Jonathan D. Casey; Adam Wright; Li Wang; Matthew S. Shotwell; 
Justin K. Siemann; Mary Lynn Dear; Joanna L. Stollings; Brad D. Lloyd; Tanya 
Marvi; Kevin P . Seitz; George E. Nelson; Patty W. Wright; E dward D. Siew; Bradley 
M. Dennis; Jesse O. Wrenn; Jonathan W. Andereck; Jin H. Han; Wesley H. Self; 
Matthew W. Semler; Todd W. Rice  for the Vanderbilt Center for Learning 
Healthcare and the Pragmatic Critical Care Research Group  
This Supplementary Appendi x contains the following items:  
 1) Initial Protocol [dated 10/19/2021]  
2) Final Protocol [dated 7/27/202 2] 
3) Summary of changes to Study Protocol  
4) Original Statistical Analysis Plan [ submitted  7/27/2022 ] 
5) Final Statistical Analysis Plan [ published  BMJ Open  3/10/2023]  
6) Summary of changes to the Statistical Analysis Plan  
 
1 
 Effect of Antibiotic  Choice  On ReNal Outcomes  (ACORN)  
 
Study Principal Investigators:   
Edward Qian, MD, Fellow, Department of Medicine , Division of Allergy, Pulmonary, and Critical Care 
Medicine  
 
Co-investigators  
 
Todd Rice, MD, MSc, Associate Professor, Department of Medicine , Division of Allergy, Pulmonary, 
and Critical Care Medicine ; Director, Medical ICU; Director, Vanderbilt Human Research Protections 
Program  
 
Matthew Semler, MD, MS c, Assistant Professor, Department of Medicine , Division of  Allergy, 
Pulmonary, and Critical Care Medicine  
 
Jonathan Casey, MD, MS c, Assistant Professor, Department of Medicine , Division of Allergy, 
Pulmonary, and Critical Care Medicine  
 
Christopher Lindsell, PhD, Professor, Department of Biostatistics  
 
Wes Self, MD , MPH, Associate Professor, Department of Emergency Medicine  
 
Edward Siew, MD, MSc, Associate Professor,  Department of Medicine, Division of Nephrology and 
Hypertension   
 
George Nelson, MD, MPH, Assistant Professor, Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious 
Diseases ; Director , Antimicrobial Stewardship  Program ; Associate Hospital Epidemiologist  
 
Joanna Stollings, PharmD, FCCP, FCCM, BCPS, BCCCP, Department of Pharmacy Services  
 
Li Wang, MS, Department of Biostatistics  
 
 
 
 
Submission Date: 10/19/2021  
 
 
 
 
  
Study Protocol  
Full Study Title: Effe ct of Antibiotic Choice On ReNal Outcomes (ACORN)  
Primary Investigator: Edward Qian, MD  
 
Study Schema  
1.0 Study Summary  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ . 4 
2.0 Background  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .......  5 
2.1 Anti -Pseudomonal Cephalosporins as Part of an Empiric Broad Spectrum Regimen  .......................  6 
2.2 Anti -Pseudomonal Penicillins as Part of an Empiric Broad Spectrum Regimen  ..............................  6 
2.3 Acute Kidney Injury during Critical Illness  ................................ ................................ ....................  6 
2.4 Prior Evidence of the Effect of Antibiotic Choice on Acute Kidney Injury  ................................ ..... 6 
2.5 Rationale for a Trial of Anti -Pseudomonal Cephalosporins vs Anti -Pseudomonal Penicillins  .........  7 
3.0 Rationale, Aims, and Hypotheses  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......  7 
4.0 Study Description  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............................  7 
5.0 Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............  8 
5.1 Inclusion Criteria:  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................  8 
5.2 Exclusion Criteria:  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........................  8 
6.0 Enrollment/Randomization  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................  8 
6.1 Study Sites:  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 8 
6.2 Study Population: ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........................  8 
6.3 Enrollment:  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 8 
6.4 Consent:  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 10 
6.5 Randomization:  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................  10 
7.0 Study Procedures  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............................  10 
7.1 Electronic Healt h Record (EHR) Based Screening for Eligible Patients  ................................ ........  11 
7.2 Antibiotic Ordering after Randomizatio n................................ ................................ ......................  11 
7.3 EHR -Based Tool to Capture Data on Antibiotic Modification and Adverse Events  .......................  11 
7.4 Duration of the Intervention  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........  12 
7. 5 Blinding:  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 12 
8.0 Data Collection:  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............................  12 
8.1 In -Hospital Outcomes:  ................................ ................................ ................................ .................  12 
8.2 Baseline data:  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............................  13 
8.3 Data from enrollment to hospital discharge:  ................................ ................................ .................  13 
8.4 Outcome Data:  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............................  14 
9.0 Risks and Benefits  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........................  14 
Study Protocol  
Full Study Title: Effe ct of Antibiotic Choice On ReNal Outcomes (ACORN)  
Primary Investigator: Edward Qian, MD  
10.0 Statistical Considerations  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............  15 
11.0 Reporting of Adverse Events or Unanticipated Problems  ................................ ................................  17 
12.0 Privacy/Confidentiality Issues  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  20 
13.0 Follow -up and Record Retention  ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 20 
14.0 Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) ................................ ................................ ...................  20 
15.0 References  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 21 
 
 
  
Study Protocol  
Full Study Title: Effe ct of Antibiotic Choice On ReNal Outcomes (ACORN)  
Primary Investigator: Edward Qian, MD  
 
1.0 Study Summary  
Title:  Effect of Antibiotic Choice On ReNal Outcomes (ACORN)  
Background : Sepsis is one of the most common causes of acute  illness and death in the United States . 
Early, e mpiric broad -spectrum antibiotics are a mainstay of sepsis treatment . Two classes of antibiotic s 
with activity against Pseudomonas , anti -pseudomonal cephalosporins and anti -pseudomonal penicillins,  
are commonly used for acutely ill adults with sepsis in current practice. Recent observational studies, 
however, have raised concern that anti-pseudomonal penicillin s may cause  renal toxicity. Anti-
pseudomonal cephalosporins, by comparison, ma y be associated with a risk of neurotoxicity.  Rigorous , 
prospective d ata regarding the comparative effectiveness and toxicity of these two classes of medications 
among acutely ill patients are lacking. We propose a randomized trial comparing the impact of  anti-
pseudomonal cephalosporins  and anti-pseudomonal penicillins  on renal outcomes of  acutely ill patients.  
Primary Aim:  
- To compare the effect  of anti-pseudomonal cephalosporin s versus  anti-pseudomonal penicillins on the 
incidence of acute kidney  injury among  acutely ill patients  
Primary Hypothesis:  
- Among acutely  ill patients with sepsis, use of anti-pseudomonal cephalosporins  will decrease the 
incidence of acute kidney  injury  (AKI) , compared to anti-pseudomonal penicillins . 
Inclusion Criteria:  
1. Age ≥ 18 years old  
2. Located in a participating emergency department or  medical  intensive care  unit  
3. Less than 12 hours  from presentation to study hospital  
4. Treating clinician initiat ing an order for  an anti-pseudomonal cephalosporin or anti-pseudomonal 
penicillin   
Exclusion Criteria:  
1. Known receipt of > 1 dose of an anti-pseudomonal cephalosporin or anti-pseudomonal penicillin  
during the last 7 days  
2. Current d ocumented allergy to cephalosporins or penicillin  
3. Known to be a prisoner  
4. Treating clinicians feel that either an anti-pseudomonal cephalosporin or anti-pseudomonal penicillin  
is required or contraindicated for  the optimal treatment of the patient , including for more directed 
antibiotic therapy against known prior resistant infections or suspected sepsis with an associated 
central nervous system infection   
Consent:  
- Given that both anti-pseudomonal cephalosporins and anti-pseudomonal penicillins  are routinely used 
in usual care , the lack of established risk or benefit with either treatment group , the impracticability of 
obtaining informed consent prior to initiating antibiotics for acutely ill patient s, a waiver of informed 
consent will be reques ted. 
Randomization : 
- Using a  best-practices advisor embedded within the electronic health record, patients meeting all 
inclusion criteria and no exclusion criteria will be randomized in a 1 :1 ratio to receive an anti -
pseudomonal cephalosporin ( treating clinicians’ choice of cefepime or ceftazidime ) or anti-
pseudomonal penicillin . 
Study Interventions:  
Study Protocol  
Full Study Title: Effe ct of Antibiotic Choice On ReNal Outcomes (ACORN)  
Primary Investigator: Edward Qian, MD  
- Anti-pseudomonal cephalosporin  group : patients assigned  to the anti -pseudomonal cephalosporin 
group will receive the treating clinicians’ choice of  either cefepime  or ceftazidime .   
- Anti-pseudomonal penicillin  group : patients assigned  to the anti-pseudomonal penicillin  group will 
receive piperacillin -tazobactam  or ticarcillin -clavulanate .  
- For patients in both groups, treating clinicians will determine the dose and duration of the assigned 
antibiotic class.  An EHR -based advisor will alert treating clinicians of group assignment and collect 
data regarding any adverse events and the reason fo r modification or discontinuation of antibiotics  in 
the 7 days after randomization  
Primary Efficacy Outcome:  
- The primary outcome will be the highest stage of acute kidney injury (AKI) between enrollment and 
14 days after enrollment .  Stage of AKI will be defined by Kidney Disease: Improving Global 
Outcomes (KDIGO) AKI creatinine criteria .  Death will be classified as worse than the highest stage 
of AKI .  The outcome will be defined using the following 5 -value ordinal scale ranging from the 
lowest value (0 = alive without having experienced AKI) to the highest value (4 = died).  
o 0 = No AKI  
o 1 = Stage 1 AKI  (Creatinine increase by 1.5 -1.9 times baseline OR increase by >= 0.3  
mg/dL ) 
o 2 = Stage 2 AKI  (Creatinine increase by 2.0 -2.9 times baseline)  
o 3 = Stage 3 AKI  (Creatinine increase by >= 3.0 times baseline OR increase to >= 4.0 mg/dL 
OR New RRT)  
o 4 = Death  
 
Exploratory Outcome s: 
- Exploratory Renal Outcomes : acute kidney injury of stage 2 or higher as defined in the KDIGO 
criteria for creatinine level, new receipt of renal -replacement therapy, days alive and free of renal -
replacement therapy during the 28 days after enrollment, the highest creatinine level during the 28 
days after enrollment , the change from baseline to the highest creatinine level, the final creatinine 
level , and dialysis depende nce at hospital discharge . 
- Exploratory N eurologic Outcomes: Glasgow Coma Scale  score during the 14 days after enroll ment , 
neurologic component of SOFA score , Coma and Delirium Free Days in 14 days  after enrollment  
- Exploratory Clinical Outcomes: ICU -free days, ventilator -free days, vasopressor -free days , 
interaction between patients admitted to the ICU vs ward  
 
Sample Size  Considerations:  
- Using data obtained from 820 patients during the creation and testing of the enrollment advisor , we 
measured the distribution of outcomes expected among patients in the anti -pseudomonal penicillin 
group.  W e calculated that enro lling 2,050 patients would provide 80% power  at an alpha of 0.05 to 
detect an odds ratio for highest stage of AKI of 0.65. 
 
2.0 Background  
Sepsis is  a common condition  associated with high mortality an d morbidity1. Antibiotics are a n integral 
component of the management of patients with sepsis2. Each hour delay in antibiotic  administration  in 
sepsis is associated with an increas e in mortality3. Clinical guidelines recommend early  management  
bundles , including early broad -spectrum antibiotics,  for patients with presumed sepsis  in the emergency 
department  and intensive care unit2,4. Since the specific organism caus ing an infection is rarely known at 
Study Protocol  
Full Study Title: Effe ct of Antibiotic Choice On ReNal Outcomes (ACORN)  
Primary Investigator: Edward Qian, MD  
clinical presentation, empiric broad -spectrum antibiotics are commonly prescribed5. For patients at risk 
for resistant organisms, the most common regimens include vancomycin (to cover gram -positive 
organisms including methicillin -resistant Staphylococcus  aureus) and an anti-pseudomonal cephalosporin 
or anti-pseudomonal penicillin  (to cover gram -negative organisms includ ing Pseudomonas ).  
 
2.1 Anti -Pseudomonal Cephalosporins  as Part of an Empiric Broad Spectrum Regimen  
Cephalosporins are beta-lactam antibiotic s that act by inhibiting the synthesis of the peptidoglycan layer 
of bacterial cell walls. They are commonly used for a variety of infections including empiric broad 
spectrum coverage for sepsis, suspected nosocomial infections, and meningitis.   Several ceph alosporins 
have anti-pseudomonal activity , includ ing cefepime, a fourth -generation  cephalosporin, and ceftazidime, 
a third -generation cephalosporin.  Anti-pseudomonal cephalosporins have replaced anti -pseudomonal 
penicillins as the preferred agent for empi ric antibiotic regimens based on observational evidence that 
anti-cephalosporins are associated with a lower incidence of AKI6.  However, others have argued against 
this approach given the lack of randomized trials comparing the relative efficacy and safety of the two 
agents as well as observational data suggesting th at cephalosporins may be associated with neuro -
toxicity7–9. 
 
2.2 Anti-Pseudomonal Penicillins  as Part of an Empiric Broad Spectrum Regimen  
Penicillins are also  beta-lactam anti-biotics with similar mechanism s of action  to cephalosporins . Anti-
pseudomonal penicillins, such as piperacillin , ureidopenicillin, and ticarci llin are typically  administered 
with a beta-lactamase inhibitor such as tazobactam or clavul anate . In the United States the most 
commonly used anti -pseudom onal penicillins are piperacillin -tazobactam and ticarcillin -clavulanate. 
Anti-pseudomonal penicillins are the preferred agents for empiric broad spectrum coverage at many 
centers, and p iperacillin -tazobactam, specifically, has the added benefit of treating  anaerobic organisms.   
Conversely, penicillins do not cover meningitis due to poor central nervous system penetration.   
 
2.3 Acute Kidney Injury during Critical Illness  
Acute Kidney In jury (AKI) i s a common complication of ICU admission. AKI is associated with a six to 
eight fold increase in mortality in ICU populations , 10,11 is therefore a common target of critical care trials . 
There are many potential contributors to AKI in critical illness including isotonic fluids12, IV contrast 
administration, medication toxicities13, and acute illnesses like sepsis.  Sepsis is the most common cause 
of AKI and accounts for 40 -50% of AKI in the intensive care unit (ICU)14,15. As the primary treatment for 
the underlying cause of sepsis, antibiotics are a critical treatment for acutely  ill patients, but antibiotics 
may cause renal injury, and renally -cleared antibiotics may reach supratherapeutic levels in the setting of 
AKI.  
 
2.4 Prior Evidence of the Effect of Antibiotic Choice on Acute Kidney Injury  
Vancomycin has long been associat ed with AKI16,17. Recently, a number of retrospective observational 
analyses have examined a potential association between the concurrent administration of vancomycin and 
piperacillin -tazobactam and the development of AKI, compared with vancomycin alone18–21. These data, 
however, are likely to be confounded by indication bias and studies ev aluating whether piperacillin -
tazobactam causes more AKI than other anti -pseudomonal antibiotics  have been inconclusive .18,22 –30.  
Studies that limited their analyses to the first 72 hours of treatment (when antibiotic choices are empiric 
and not yet tailored based on micro biologic data), have not shown any  association between piperacillin -
tazobactam and kidney injury31.   
Study Protocol  
Full Study Title: Effe ct of Antibiotic Choice On ReNal Outcomes (ACORN)  
Primary Investigator: Edward Qian, MD  
 
Based on this preliminary, observational data, however, some institutions  have elected to change their 
preferred broad spectrum anti biotic regimens from one including  an anti-pseudomonal  to one including an 
anti-pseudomonal cephalosporins.   
 
2.5 Rationale for a Trial of Anti -Pseudomonal Cephalosporins vs Anti-Pseudomonal 
Penicillins  
Tens of thousands of patients each year receive either anti -pseudomonal cephalosporins and penicillins , 
but no randomized trial s have ever compared their  relative effectiveness or safety.  Each class of 
medications has been hypothesized to have toxicities that may be relevant for acutely  ill patients. Because 
the relationship between antibiotic choice ( anti-pseudomonal cephalosporins  or anti-pseudomonal 
penicillins ) and clinically relevant outcomes, such as AKI, are unknown, clinical trial data is urgently 
needed.  Rigorous high -quality evidence that anti -pseudomonal cephalosporins, compared to anti -
pseudomonal penicillins, decreases, increases or has no impact on the risk of AKI would have the 
potential to change the care received by thousands of acutely ill adults each year.  
 
To address this knowledge gap, we will conduct a prospective, randomized trial of acutely ill adults  
undergoing initiation of empiric antibiotics in the ED or ICU, comparing anti -pseudomonal 
cephalosporins vs anti-pseudomonal  penicillins  with regard to renal outcomes.   
3.0 Rationale, Aims , and Hypotheses  
In order t o determine the effect  of an  anti-pseudomonal cephalosporin , compared to an anti -pseudomonal 
penicillin , on the incidence of acute kidney injury among acutely ill patients, a randomized trial is needed.  
Study Aims:  
- Primary:  
o To compare the effect of anti-pseudomonal cephalosporin s versus anti-pseudomonal 
penicillins  on the incidence of acute kidney injury among a cutely ill patients  
- Secondary:  
o To compare the effect of anti-pseudomonal cephalosporins vs anti-pseudomonal penicillins  
on in -hospital mortality, ICU length of stay, and ventilator days  
Study Hypotheses  
- Primary  Hypothesis : 
o The use of anti -pseudomonal cephalosporins, compared to the use of anti-pseudomonal 
penicillins , will decrease the incidence of acute  kidney injury  among acutely  ill adults   
 
4.0 Study Description  
In order to address the aims outlined above, we propose a randomized  trial evaluating the impact of anti-
pseudomonal cephalosporins  versus anti -pseudomonal penicillins in the treatment of sepsis in acutely  ill 
adults . Patients admitted to a study unit who are deemed by their clinical team to require empiric broad 
spectrum antibiotics and fulfill inclusion criteria without meeting exclusion criteria will be enrolled and 
randomly assigned to an anti-pseudomonal cephalosporin  vs an anti -pseudomonal penicillin .  
Randomization, group assignment and delivery o f the intervention will occur within the electronic health 
record (details in section 7). All other decisions regarding treatment will remain at the discretion of the 
Study Protocol  
Full Study Title: Effe ct of Antibiotic Choice On ReNal Outcomes (ACORN)  
Primary Investigator: Edward Qian, MD  
treating provider.  Data will be collected prospectively from the medical record to determine the effect of 
the assigned interventions on procedural, physiologic, and clinical outcomes.  
 
5.0 Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
 
5.1 Inclusion Criteria:  
1. Age ≥ 18 years old  
2. Located in a participating emergency department or medical intensive care unit  
3. Less than 12 hours from presentation to study hospital  
4. Treating clinician initiating an order for an anti -pseudomonal cephalosporin or anti-pseudomonal 
penicillin   
5.2 Exclusion Criteria:  
1. Known receipt of > 1 dose of an anti -pseudomonal cephalosporin or anti -pseudomonal penicillin 
during the last 7 days  
2. Current documented allergy to cephalosporins or penicillin  
3. Known to be a prisoner  
4. Treating clinicians feel that eithe r an anti -pseudomonal cephalosporin or anti -pseudomonal penicillin 
is required or contraindicated for the optimal treatment of the patient, including for more directed 
antibiotic therapy against known prior resistant infections or suspected sepsis with an associated 
central nervous system infection   
6.0 Enrollment/Randomization  
6.1 Study Site s: 
Emergency Department  and Medical Intensive Care Unit  at Vanderbilt University Medical Center  
 
6.2 Study Population:   
All adults with sepsis located in a participating unit for whom the treating clinician orders either  an anti-
pseudomonal cephalosporins or anti-pseudomonal penicillin within 12 hours  of hospital presentation  
unless determined to meet an exclusion criteria. All eligible patients will be included and there will be no 
selection based on  gender, race, weight or other clinical factors.  
 
6.3 Enrollment:  
At the time that  a treating clinician in a participating emergency department or medical intensive care unit 
initiates an o rder for  an anti -pseudomonal cephalosporin or anti-pseudomonal penicillin  for a patient who 
meets all inclusion criteria, an advisor within the electronic health record (details in section 7) will prompt 
treating clinicians to record whether the patient me ets any exclusion criteria.  Patients not meeting any 
exclusion criteria will be enrolled and randomized .  For patients who are determined to be ineligible , the 
advisor will track the number and reasons for exclusion.  The time of randomization will be def ined as 
“time zero” on “study day 0.”  
 
Study Protocol  
Full Study Title: Effe ct of Antibiotic Choice On ReNal Outcomes (ACORN)  
Primary Investigator: Edward Qian, MD  
 
  
Figure 6: Enrollment Schema  – When a treating clinician orders an anti -pseudomonal 
cephalosporin or anti-pseudomonal penicillin , tools within the electronic health record (details in 
section 7) will evaluate if the patient meets inclusion criteria ( order placed within 12 hours  of 
hospital presentation , age ≥ 18, and located in a participating unit ), and the presence of 
documented allergy to penicillin or cephalosporins (an exclusion criteria).  If the patient has not 
been previously enrolled  in the trial during the index hospitalization, appears to meet all inclusion  
criteria , does not have a  documented a llergy to penicillin or cephalosporins , an ordering advisor 
will prompt the clinician to determine whether the patient meets any exclusion criteria. If the 

Study Protocol  
Full Study Title: Effe ct of Antibiotic Choice On ReNal Outcomes (ACORN)  
Primary Investigator: Edward Qian, MD  
treating clinician confirms that the patient does meet an exclusion criterion, the patient will be 
enrolled and randomized.  The ordering advisor will track all exclusions.  
 
6.4 Consent:  
Anti-pseudomonal cephalosporin s and anti-pseudomonal penicillins  are routinely used in the care of 
acutely ill patients with sepsis in the emergency department and intensive care units at Vanderbilt 
University Medical Center.  Currently, choice of empiric gram -negative coverage is based primarily on 
provider preference as there are no large randomized trials  or evidence -based guideline s to support the 
choice of one empiric anti -pseudomonal therapy for sepsis over another.  The concept of a randomized 
trial comparing anti -pseudomonal cephalosporin s versus anti-pseudomonal penicillins  has been discussed 
with the leader s of emergency department and intensive care units and representation from the infectious 
disease s and nephrology  program s who agree that clinical equipoise exist s regarding the choice of empiric 
anti-pseudomonal therapy for acutely ill adults with sepsis . 
 
Because the interventions studied (1) are used as a part of routine care, (2) are interventions the patient 
would be exposed to even if not participating in the study, (3) have no prior high-quality data to suggest 
the superiority of one approach over the oth er, and (4) are equivalent options from the perspective of the 
treating provider  (otherwise the patient is excluded) , we feel the study presents minimal risk . 
 
In addition to the minimal risk posed by the study, obtaining informed consent prior to particip ation 
would not be feasible or practicable.  Sepsis is a medical emergency.  E ach hour of delay in the initiation 
of antibiotics  for acutely  ill patients with  sepsis increase s mortality  by about  7%.  For patients presenting 
with sepsis to the participating units, the average time between initiation of an order for an anti -
pseudomonal antibiotic and its administration to the patient is 28 minutes.  Obtaining prospective written 
informed consent during this interval is impracticable and risks del aying antibiotic administration.  
Moreover , acutely ill patients  with sepsis  are commonly delirious or unconscious , and a legally authorized 
representative (LAR) is not consistently  present at the time of initiation of antibiotics.   Because the trial 
deter mines choice of the initial anti -pseudomonal antibiotic, but defers decisions regarding subsequent 
doses of antibiotics (e.g., duration of therapy, escalation, de -escalation) to treating clinicians, the primary 
study procedure will be completed within 1 ho ur of meeting eligibility criteria.  
  
Because the study presents minimal risk, would not adversely affect the welfare or privacy rights of the 
participant, and consent would be impracticable, we will request a waiver of informed consent.  
 
6.5 Randomization :  
A series of study group assignments will be generated by computerized randomization in a 1:1 ratio of 
intervention to control .  Study group assignment will remain concealed to study personnel and treatment 
team until after the study team has confirmed that the patient does not meet any exclusion criteria and the 
patient has been enrolled.   Following randomization , treating clinici ans will be notified via the ordering 
advisor.  
 
7.0 Study Procedures  
 
Study Protocol  
Full Study Title: Effe ct of Antibiotic Choice On ReNal Outcomes (ACORN)  
Primary Investigator: Edward Qian, MD  
7.1 E lectronic Health Record (EHR)  Based Screening for Eligible Patients  
For the duration of the study, when a provider initiates an order for the administration of an intravenous 
anti-pseudomonal cephalosporin  or anti-pseudomonal penicillin , a software application in  the EHR will 
assess if the patient is eligible for the study. The application will assess that the patient meets all the 
inclusion criteria (located in study unit, age ≥ 18, in the hospital  for less than 12 hours , and has not been 
previously enrolled during the  hospitalization)  and none of the exclusion criteria  (current documented 
allergy to cephalosporin  or penicillin class a ntibiotics , more than one prior administration of study 
antibiotic s during the last 7 days ). If the above criteria are met, an order advisor  (Figure 7) will : 1) Inform 
the provider of the study, 2) solicit the presence of contraindications to either study drug, 3) (if patient 
meets all eligibility criteria)  enroll and randomize the patient.  If there are contraindications which were 
not established electronica lly, the advisor will ask the provider to select the reason.  
 
 
Figure 7: Order advisor informing providers of the study and soliciting other exclusion criteria  
 
7.2 Antibiotic Ordering after Randomization  
Once the participant is enrolled and randomized, the ordering advisor will guide the provide r to the order 
one of the assigned study antibiotic s. Dose, frequency, and duration  will be at the discretion of treating 
clinicians  and not affected by the advisor.  
 
7.3 EHR -Based Tool to Capture Data on Antibiotic Modification and Adverse Events   
In the 7 days after enrollment, if a clinician attempts the discontinue the study -related antibiotic order , an 
EHR-based advisor will remind  the clinician of the treatment arm  and if the treating clinician chooses to 
discontinue the antibiotic from the assigned group,  the clinician  will be asked for the rationale:  
- Antibiotic tailoring (escalation or de -escalation) based on microbiologic data  
- Undocumented or newly apparent allergy  to either penicillin s or cephalosporins  

Study Protocol  
Full Study Title: Effe ct of Antibiotic Choice On ReNal Outcomes (ACORN)  
Primary Investigator: Edward Qian, MD  
- Treating clinicians feel that either anti -pseudomonal cephalosporins or anti-pseudomonal penicillins 
are superior in the optimal treatment of the patient (provide reason why)  
- Other (provide r input rationale ) 
- Antibiotic induced adverse event  
 
Data provided by the treating clinicians will be used for prospective safety monitoring and adverse event 
reporting.  
 
7.4 Duration of the Intervention  
Patients will be allocated to the anti -pseudomonal ce phalosporin or anti -pseudomonal penicillin groups 
which will determine their initial antibiotic choice only. All further antibiotic decision s including , but not 
limited to,  duration  of antibiotics , changing based on new clinical or microbiological data , and switching 
between classes of anti -pseudomonal antibiotics will be left to the discretion of the treating team.  
 
As described above, a n EHR -based advisor will alert treating clinicians to group assignment and collect 
data for monit or for adverse events occurring in the seven days after randomization .  The advisor will not 
impede the ability to change classes of antibiotic and will be used primarily for safety monitoring .  
 
7. 5 Blinding:  
It would be impractical to pursue blinding f or the study. The medicines involved in this study are given at 
different doses with varying volumes of IV infusion . They are also given on different schedules varying 
as widely as 4 times a day to once daily. Furthermore , these dosing variations are impacted by renal 
function . Given the nature of the study intervention, patients, clinicians, and investigators will not be 
blinded to group assignment.   
 
8.0 Data Collection:  
 
8.1 In-Hospital Outcomes:  
Primary Efficacy Outcome: Acute Kidney Injury  Score  between randomization and day 14 . The acute 
kidney injury score is an ordinal outcome containing the stages of AKI as defined by KDIGO  creatinine 
criteria , new renal replacement therapy (RRT),  and death:  
 
0 = No AKI  
1 = Stage 1 AKI (Creatinine increase by 1.5 -1.9 times baseline OR increase by >= 0.3  mg/dL ) 
2 = Stage 2 AKI (Creatinine increase by 2.0 -2.9 times baseline)  
3 = Stage 3 AKI (Creatinine increase by >= 3.0 times baseline OR increase to >= 4.0 mg/dL  OR 
New RRT ) 
4 = Death  
 
Death is defined as in -hospital mortality  from any cause prior to hospital discharge, censored at 14 days. 
New RRT is defined as receipt of RRT at any point between ICU admission and hospital discharge, 
censored at 14 days.  Baseline creatinine level will be determined by using a previously described 
hierarchical approach in which creatinine values obtained d uring the year before hospitalization are given 
priority over in -hospital measurements obtained before antibiotic administration . When no pre -enrollment 
Study Protocol  
Full Study Title: Effe ct of Antibiotic Choice On ReNal Outcomes (ACORN)  
Primary Investigator: Edward Qian, MD  
measurements are available , the baseline creatinine level is estimated with a previously described thre e-
variable formula32,33. It is important to note that those patients with End -Stage Renal Disease (ESRD) 
would only be eligible to meet the “Death” component of the primary outcome.  
 
Justification for the Primary Efficacy Outcome  
This outcome is 1) validated for electronic assess ment, 2) uses outcome  thresholds for  renal dysfunction  
defined by international nephrology organizations, 3) incorporat es patient -centered outcomes (new RRT 
and death) that would be missed by a purely laboratory -based outcome , and 4) uses a hierarchal approach 
to analysis that counts rare but important patient -centered outcomes (new RRT, death) as worse than 
purely laboratory -based measures (stage 2 AKI) .  
 
Exploratory  Outcomes :  
- Exploratory Renal Outcomes: acute kidney injury of stage 2 or h igher as defined in the KDIGO 
criteria for creatinine level  within 14 days , acute kidney injury of stage 2 or higher as defined in the 
KDIGO criteria for creatinine level within 28 days, new receipt of renal -replacement therapy  at 28 
days, new receipt of r enal-replacement therapy at 14 days,  days alive and free of renal -replacement 
therapy during the 28 days after enrollment,  days alive and free of renal -replacement therapy during 
the 14 days after enrollment , the highest creatinine level during the 28 days  after enrollment, the 
change from baseline to the highest creatinine level, and the final creatinine level before hospital 
discharge.  
- Exploratory Neurologic Outcomes: Glasgow Coma Scale  (GCS) score during the 28 days after 
enrollment, neurologic component of SOFA score , Coma and Delirium Free Days in 28 days after 
enrollment  
- Exploratory Clinical Outcomes: ICU -free days, ventilator -free days, vasopressor -free days , 28-day 
mortality , 14-day mortality , interaction between outcomes of patients admitte d to the ICU vs wards  
 
8.2 Baseline  data:  
Age, gender, height, weight, body mass index, race, APACHE II score, active medical problems at the 
time of admission, active comorbidities, comorbidities  and medications  known to increase risk of kidney 
or neurologic injury at enrollment  (receipt of IV contrast in the previous  24 hours, receipt of ACE 
inhibitor or Angiotensin Receptor Blocker in the previous 24 hours ), mean arterial pressure and 
vasopressor use prior to antibiotic receipt, analgesia and sedation use prior to antibiotic receipt  (propofol, 
dexme detomidine, fentan yl, hydromorphone, ketamine) , pH, PaO2, PaCO2, respiratory rate, heart rate, 
oxygen saturation, temperature, lactic acid, elements of a basic metabolic panel (Na, K, Cl, HCO3, BUN, 
Creatinine, Glucose), magnesium, elements of a complete blood count (white blood cell count, 
hemoglobin, hematocrit, platelets), Confusion Assessment Method – ICU ( CAM -ICU), Richmond 
Agitation Sedation Score ( RASS ), mechanical ventilation status and variables related to ventilation 
(FiO2, PEEP, respiratory rate, tidal volume), on  renal replacement therapy prior to receipt o f antibiotics , 
admission to ICU vs ward  
 
 
8.3 Data from enrollment to hospital discharge :  
Mean arterial pressure and vasopressor use, pH, PaO2, PaCO2, respiratory rate, heart rate, oxygen 
saturation, temperature, lactic acid, elements of a basic metabolic panel (Na, K, Cl, HCO3, BUN, 
Creatinine, Glucose), magnesium, elements of a complete blood  count (white blood cell count, 
Study Protocol  
Full Study Title: Effe ct of Antibiotic Choice On ReNal Outcomes (ACORN)  
Primary Investigator: Edward Qian, MD  
hemoglobin, hematocrit, platelets), all microbiologic culture data (blood, urine, respiratory, wound, 
surgical , aspirate, body fluid), CAM -ICU, RASS, mechanical ventilation status and variables related to 
ventilation (FiO2, PEEP, respiratory rate, tidal volume), new -start renal replacement therapy , medications 
known to increase risk of kidney injury (receipt of IV contrast ACE inhibitor or Angiotensin Receptor 
Blocker , NSAIDs, trimethoprim -sulfameth oxazole , acyclovir, amphote ricin B , diuretics ), medications 
known to increase risk of neurologic injury  (metronidazole, benzodiazepine s, barbiturates , opiate pain 
medicines, typical and atypical anti -psychotics , propofol, dexmedetomidine , ketamine, corticosteroids ), 
days spent in ICU, days spent in the hospital , date of intubation and extubation, date of death  
 
8.4 Outcome Data:  
Primary Outcome: All creatinine values from presentation  to day 14, creatinine values prior to 
hospitalization, and date s and time s of the following event s, if applicable : presentation to the hospital, 
receipt of new renal replacement therapy, admission to the hospital, discharge from the hospital, death  
 
Exploratory Renal Outcomes : All creatinine values  from presentation to hospital discharge , creatinine 
values prior to hospitalization,  and the dates and times of the following events, if applicable: presentation 
to the hospital, receipt of new renal replacement therapy, admission to the hospital, discharge from the 
hospital, death  
 
Exploratory N eurologic Outcomes: All RASS values /dates/times  from presentation to day 28, all CAM -
ICU values /dates/time  from presentation to day 28, all GCS values /dates/times  from presentation to day 
28 
 
Exploratory Clinical Outcomes: Date and time of the following events, if applicable: presentation to the 
hospital, admission to the hospital, admission to the ICU, transfer from the ICU, discharge from the 
hospital, receipt of mechanical ventilation, discontinuation of mechanical ventil ation, receipt of 
vasopressors, discontinuation of vasopressors, death  
 
9.0 Risks and Benefits  
In patients for whom the treating team has decided empiric broad spectrum antibiotics are required for the 
treatment of sepsis, there are currently no establishe d risks or benefits to using  anti-pseudomonal 
cephalosporins or anti-pseudomonal penicillins  as empiric gram negative coverage .  At this time, there is 
no reason to believe that participation in this study would expose patients to greater medical risks or 
benefits than those experienced by acutel y ill patients requiring antibiotics as a part of routine care.  The 
greater benefit of the study would be to society in the form of improved understanding of safe and 
effective empiric antibiotic selection for acutel y ill patients  with sepsis . 
 
A potential risk to patients participating in this study involves the collection of protected h ealth 
information (PHI).  In order to limit the associated risks, the minimum amount of PHI necessary for study 
conduct will be collected.  After collection, the data will be stored in a secure online database (REDCap) 
only accessible by the investigators.   After publication, a de -identified database will be generated to 
protect participant privacy.  
 
Study Protocol  
Full Study Title: Effe ct of Antibiotic Choice On ReNal Outcomes (ACORN)  
Primary Investigator: Edward Qian, MD  
10.0 Statistical Considerations  
 
Sample size considerations  
Using data captured during the development and testing of the enrollment advisor (trial intervention) from 
820 patients who would have been eligible for ACORN , we estimated the distribution of the primary 
outcome in the anti -pseudomonal penicillin group.  A total of 61.2% of patients did not experience AKI 
or death, 4.9% had Stage I AKI, 4. 3% had Stage II AKI, 8. 0% had Stage III AKI or new RRT, and 2 1.5% 
died within 30 days of ICU admission. We calculated that obtaining 80% power at an alpha of 0.05 to 
detect an odds ratio of 0.65 for patients assigned to anti -pseudomonal cephalosporins would require a 
sample size of 2010. Assuming missing data for 40 patients, or < 5%, we plan to enroll 2050 patients.  
 
Sample size re -estimation  
At the planned interim analysis after 10 25 patients, or roughly half of the intended enrollment, the DSMB 
will evaluate the distribution of the primary outcome in the anti -pseudomonal penicillin group. If required 
by the observed distribution of the primary outcome in the anti -pseudomonal penici llin group, the DSMB 
may recommend that the investigators increase the total sample size of the trial to maintain 80% power 
and an alpha of 0.05 to detect an odds ratio of 0.65.  
 
Statistical Analysis : 
Analysis principles  
- Primary analysis will be conducted on an intention -to-treat basis (patients with protocol violations are 
analyzed per the assigned treatment arm).  
- All hypothesis tests will be two sided, with an α of 0.05 unless otherwise specified.  
- All analyses will be unadjusted unless otherwise specified . 
- Pre-specified analyses of heterogeny of treatment effect based on baseline variables will be performed 
irrespective of treatment efficacy.  
 
Trial profile :  
We will present a Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials diagram to detail the movement of pat ients 
through the study. This diagram will include total number of patients meeting inclusion criteria, number 
excluded and reason for exclusion, number enrolled and randomized in the study, number followed, and 
number analyzed.  
 
Baseline Characteristics :  
To assess randomization success, we will summarize in Table 1 the distribution of baseline variables 
across the study arms. Categorical variables will be reported as frequencies and percentages and 
continuous variables as either means with SDs or medians with interquartile ranges. Variables reported 
will include Demographics (age, gender, race, BMI, co -morbidities); Indication for antibiotics; Severity 
of Illness (APACHE II score); Acute Kidney Injury at enrollment; Delirium at enrollment  
 
Primary Efficacy  Outcome Analysis : 
We will compare the primary outcome, the AKI ordinal outcome, between patients randomized to the 
anti-pseudomonal cephalosporins versus anti -pseudomonal penicillins groups. It is important to note that 
those patients with End -Stage Renal  Disease (ESRD) would only be eligible to meet the “Death” 
component of the primary outcome.  
Study Protocol  
Full Study Title: Effe ct of Antibiotic Choice On ReNal Outcomes (ACORN)  
Primary Investigator: Edward Qian, MD  
 
The main analysis will be an intention -to-treat comparison of the primary outcome between the anti -
pseudomonal cephalosporin and anti -pseudomonal penicillin group s. To do this, we will use an 
unadjusted, proportional odds model with group assignment (anti -pseudomonal cephalosporin, anti -
pseudomonal penicillin) as the independent variable.  For the purposes of declaring a statistically 
significant difference between  groups in the primary endpoint, we will consider a two -sided P value of 
0.05 as significant.  
 
Secondary Analyses of the Primary Outcome  
To account for potential confounders, we will develop an adjusted proportional odds regression model 
with the AKI ordinal outcome score (primary outcome) as the dependent variable and independent 
covariate of groups assignment, and relevant confounders (age, baseline creatinine, gender, mechanical 
ventilation at enrollment, receipt of inotropes at enrollment, AKI at e nrollment, presence of CKD, 
admission location).  
 
Secondary Analyses : 
Analysis of Secondary and Exploratory Outcomes  
We will conduct an intention -to-treat comparison of all secondary and exploratory outcomes between 
patients randomized to anti -pseudomonal cephalosporins and patients randomized to anti -pseudomonal 
penicillins. Continuous outcomes will be compared with the Mann -Whitney U test and categorical 
variables with the chi -square test or Fischer’s exact test, as appropriate.  
 
Heterogeny of Treatment E ffect 
We will examine the effect of group assignment on the primary outcome relative to a set of pre -specified 
baseline variables.  These variables will be prespecified as part of a formal statistical analysis plan 
completed and made public prior to the co mpletion of enrollment.  A formal test of interaction will be 
used to evaluate for effect modification.  
 
Presentation of Statistics  
Continuous variables will be described as mean and standard deviation or median and interquartile range 
or bootstrapped 95% confidence intervals as appropriate.  Categorical variables will be given as number 
and percentage.  All between -group comparisons with continuous variables will be performed using 
Mann -Whitney U tests; categorical variables will be compared with chi -squar e testing or Fisher’s exact 
test as appropriate.  
 
Interim Analysis  
We will plan for the DSMB to conduct a single interim analysis for efficacy and safety at the anticipated 
halfway point of the trial, after enrollment of 1025 patients.  The stopping bounda ry for efficacy will be 
met if the P value for the difference between groups in the primary outcome is 0.001 or less.  Use of the 
conservative Haybittle -Peto boundary (P < 0.001) will allow the final analysis to be performed using an 
unchanged level of sig nificance (P = 0.05).  Given the minimal risk nature of the study and current use of 
both interventions as a part of usual care, there will be no stopping boundary for futility.  At the interim 
analysis, the DSMB will also monitor the distribution of the A KI ordinal outcome within the anti -
pseudomonal penicillin group and may propose to increase the planned sample size to maintain the pre -
planned power to detect an odds ratio of 0.65.  
 
Study Protocol  
Full Study Title: Effe ct of Antibiotic Choice On ReNal Outcomes (ACORN)  
Primary Investigator: Edward Qian, MD  
11.0 Reporting of Adverse Events or Unanticipated Problem s 
Assuring patient safety is an essential component of this protocol. All medications used in this trial are 
approved by the Food and Drug Administration and used in clinical practice with an established safety 
profile. This protocol further ensures safety o f its participants through:  
a) Exclusion criteria designed to prevent enrollment of patients likely to experience adverse events  
from the study antibiotics ; 
b) Systematic collection of safety outcomes relevant to the use of anti -pseudomonal cephalosporins 
and an ti-pseudomonal penicillins in this setting;  
c) Structured monitoring , assessment, recording, and reporting of adverse events.  
 
11.1 Adverse  Event Definitions  
Adverse Event – An adverse event will be defined as any untoward or unfavorable medical 
occurrence in a human subject temporally associated with the subject’s participation in the research, 
whether or not considered related to the subject’s participation in the research.  Any adverse event 
occurring during the research will be classified acco rding to the following characteristics:  
 
● Seriousness – An adverse event will be considered “serious” if it:  
o Results in death;  
o Is life -threatening (defined as placing the patient at immediate risk of death);  
o Results in inpatient hospitalization or prolongat ion of existing hospitalization;  
o Results in a persistent or significant disability or incapacity;  
o Results in a congenital anomaly or birth defect; or  
o Based upon appropriate medical judgment, may jeopardize the patient’s health and may 
require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the other outcomes listed in this 
definition.  
 
● Unexpectedness – An adverse event will be considered “unexpected” if the nature, severity, or 
frequency is neither consistent with:  
o The known or foreseeable risk of adve rse events associated with the procedures involved 
in the research that are described in the protocol -related documents, such as the IRB -
approved research protocol; nor  
o The expected natural progression of any underlying disease, disorder, or condition of t he 
subject experiencing the adverse event and the subject’s predisposing risk factor profile 
for the adverse event.  
 
● Relatedness – The strength of the relationship of an adverse event to a study intervention or 
study procedure will be defined as follows:  
o Definitely Related : The adverse event follows (1) a reasonable, temporal sequence from a 
study procedure AND (2) cannot be explained by the known characteristics of the 
patient’s clinical state or other therapies AND (3) evaluation of the patient’s clinica l state 
indicates to the investigator that the experience is definitely related to study procedures.  
o Probably or Possibly Related : The adverse event meets some but not all of the above 
criteria for “Definitely Related”.  
Study Protocol  
Full Study Title: Effe ct of Antibiotic Choice On ReNal Outcomes (ACORN)  
Primary Investigator: Edward Qian, MD  
o Probably Not Related : The adverse e vent occurred while the patient was on the study but 
can reasonably be explained by the known characteristics of the patient’s clinical state or 
other therapies.  
o Definitely Not Related : The adverse event is definitely produced by the patient’s clinical 
state or by other modes of therapy administered to the patient.  
o Uncertain Relationship : The adverse event does not fit in any of the above categories.  
 
11.2 Monitoring for Adverse Events  
The time interval during which patients will be monitored for the occu rrence of adverse events begins at 
randomization and ends at the first of hospital discharge or 28 days.  Adverse events occurring before 
randomization or after hospital discharge or 28 days will not be collected. In this trial, enrollment, 
randomization, intervention delivery, monitoring for safety and adverse events and outcome assessment 
will all take place within the electronic health record.  As described an EHR -based advisor will 
continuously monitor for discontinuation of study drug and require that clinicians identify reason for 
discontinuation.  Every time a study drug is discontinued, investigators will be notified in real -time 
using an automated lists within the EHR.  Investigators will investigate and adjudicate potential adverse  
as close as feasible to 24 hours after initial report by treating clinicians.  Investigators will assess any 
potential adverse events for whether the adverse event meets the criteria for recording and reporting 
outlined below.  
 
11.3 Recording and Reporting  Adverse Events  
The following types of adverse events will be recorded and reported:  
● Adverse events that are Serious  and Definitely Related, Probably or Possibly Related, or of 
Uncertain Relationship . 
● Adverse events that are Unexpected  and Definitely Relat ed, Probably or Possibly Related, or of 
Uncertain Relationship . 
 
Adverse events that do not meet the above criteria will not be recorded or reported.  Adverse events that 
the investigator assesses to meet the above criteria for recording and reporting will  be entered into the 
adverse event electronic case report form in the trial database.  The investigator will record a 
preliminary assessment of each characteristic for the adverse event, including seriousness, 
unexpectedness, and relatedness.  For any adve rse event that is serious AND unexpected , and 
definitely related, probably or possibly related, or of uncertain relationship, the investigator will report 
the adverse event  to the principal investigator  within 24 hours  of the investigator becoming aware of 
the adverse event.  For any other adverse event requiring recording and reporting, the investigator will 
report the adverse event  to the principal investigator  within 72 hours  of the investigator becoming 
aware of the  adverse event.  The principal investigator will make the final determination regarding each 
characteristic for the adverse event, including seriousness, expectedness, and relatedness.   
 
For adverse events that meet the above criteria for recording and re porting, the coordinating center will 
notify the DSMB, the IRB, and the sponsor in accordance with the following reporting plan:  
Characteristics of the Adverse Event  Reporting Period  
Study Protocol  
Full Study Title: Effe ct of Antibiotic Choice On ReNal Outcomes (ACORN)  
Primary Investigator: Edward Qian, MD  
Fatal or life -threatening (and therefore serious), 
unexpected, and definitely related, probably or 
possibility related, or of uncertain relationship.  Report to the DSMB, IRB, and sponsor 
within 7 days after notification of the 
event.  
Serious but non -fatal and non -life-threatening, 
unexpected, and definite ly related, probably or 
possibly related, or of uncertain relationship.  Report to DSMB, IRB, and sponsor within 
15 days of notification of the event.  
All other adverse events meeting criteria for 
recording and reporting.  Report to DSMB in regularly schedu led 
DSMB safety reports.  
The investigator will distribute the written summary of the DSMB’s periodic review of reported adverse 
events to the IRB in accordance with NIH guidelines: ( http://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/notice -
files/not99 -107.html ). 
 
11.4 Clinical Outcomes that may be Exempt from Adverse Event Recording and Reporting  
In this study of critically ill patients at high risk for death and other adverse outcomes due to their 
underlying critical illness, clinical outcomes, including death and organ dysfunction, will be 
systematically collected and anal yzed for all patients. The primary, secondary, and exploratory 
outcomes will be recorded and reported as clinical outcomes and not as adverse events unless treating 
clinicians or site investigators believe the event is Definitely Related  or Probably or Pos sibly Related  to 
the study intervention or study procedures.  This approach – considering death and organ dysfunction as 
clinical outcomes rather than adverse events and systemically collecting these clinical outcomes for 
analysis – is common in ICU trials . This approach ensures comprehensive data on death and organ 
dysfunction for all patients, rather than relying on sporadic adverse event reporting to identify these 
important events.  The following events are examples of study -specific clinical outcomes t hat would not 
be recorded and reported as adverse events unless treating clinicians or site investigators believe the 
event was Definitely Related  or Probably or Possibly Related  to the study intervention or study 
procedures:  
● Death (all deaths occurring pr ior to hospital discharge or 28 days will be recorded);  
● Organ dysfunction  
o Circulatory failure, including hypotension, cardiac arrest or shock with or without 
receipt of vasopressors;  
o Acute renal failure  
o Delirium or coma  
● Duration of mechanical ventilation;  
● Duration of ICU admission;  
● Duration of hospitalization  
 
Note: A study -specific clinical outcome may also qualify as a reportable adverse event.  For example, 
anaphylaxis that the investigator considers Definitely Related to an anti -pseudomonal penicillin  would 
be both recorded as a study -specific clinical outcome and reported as a Serious and Definitely Related 
Adverse Event.  
  
11.5 Unanticipated Problems involving Risks to Subjects or Others  
Investigators must also report to the principal investigator  Unanticipated Problems Involving Risks to 
Subjects or Others (“Unanticipated Problems”), regardless of severity, associated with study procedures 
Study Protocol  
Full Study Title: Effe ct of Antibiotic Choice On ReNal Outcomes (ACORN)  
Primary Investigator: Edward Qian, MD  
within 24 hours  of the investigator becoming aware of the Unanticipated Problem. An Unanticipated 
Problem is defined as any incident, experience, or outcome that meets all of the following criteria:  
● Unexpected (in terms of nature, severity, or frequency) given (a) the r esearch procedures that 
are described in the protocol -related documents, such as the IRB -approved research protocol; 
and (b) the characteristics of the subject population being studied; AND  
● Definitely Related or Probably or Possibly Related to participatio n in the research (as defined 
above in the section on characteristics of adverse events); AND  
● Suggests that the research places subjects or others at a greater risk of harm (including 
physical, psychological, economic, or social harm) than was previously known or recognized.  
Upon becoming aware of any event that may represent an Unanticipated Problem, the investigator will 
assess whether the event represents an Unanticipated Problem by applying the criteria described above.  
If the investigator determines  that the event represents an Unanticipated Problem, the investigator will 
record the Unanticipated Problem in the Unanticipated Problem electronic case report form in the trial 
database.  The investigators will obtain information about the Unanticipated P roblem  and report the 
Unanticipated Problem to the DSMB, IRB, and sponsor within 15 days of becoming aware of the 
Unanticipated Problem.  
 
12.0 Privacy/Confidentiality Issues  
At no time during the course of this study, its analysis, or its publication will patient identities be revealed 
in any manner. The minimum necessary data containing patient or provider identities will be collected. As 
quickly as feasible, all data collected will be uploaded into a password -protected computerized database 
maintained wit hin a secure, web -based application for building and managing online databases 
(REDCap), or stored on secure servers with user -level access control. All patients will be assigned a 
unique study number for use in the computerized database. At the time of pu blication all identifiers will 
be removed.  
 
13.0 Follow -up and Record Retention  
Patients will be followed after enrollment for 28 days or until hospital discharge, whichever occurs first.  
Data collected from the medical record will be entered into the sec ure online database REDCap. All data 
will be maintained in the secure online database REDCap until the time of study publication.  At the time 
of publication, a de -identified version of the database will be generated.  
14.0 Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB)  
The principal role of the DSMB is to assure the safety of patients in the trial. They will regularly monitor 
data from this trial, review and assess the performance of its operations, and make recommendations to 
the steering committee and sponsor wi th respect to:  
- Participant safety and risk/benefit ratio of study procedures and interventions  
- Protocol amendments (with specific attention to study population, intervention, and study procedures)  
- Adherence to the protocol requirements  
- Completeness, quali ty, and planned analysis of data  
- Ancillary study burden on participants and main study  
- Possible early termination of the trial because of new external information, early attainment of study 
objectives, safety concerns, or inadequate performance  
Study Protocol  
Full Study Title: Effe ct of Antibiotic Choice On ReNal Outcomes (ACORN)  
Primary Investigator: Edward Qian, MD  
The DSMB will consist of members with expertise in critical care  medicine , infectious disease, 
biostatistics, and clinical trials. Appointment of all members is contingent upon the absence of any 
conflicts of interest. All the members of the DSMB are voting members. The Principal Investigator and 
unblinded study biostatistician will be responsible for the preparation of all DSMB and adverse event 
reports. The DSMB will develop a charter and review the protocol and patient notification forms during 
its first m eeting. Subsequent DSMB meetings will be scheduled in accordance with the DSMB Charter 
with the assistance of the Principal Investigator. The DSMB will have the ability to recommend that the 
trial end, be modified, or continued unchanged.  
15.0 References  
 
1.  Cecconi M, Evans L, Levy M, Rhodes A. Sepsis and septic shock. Lancet Lond Engl . 
2018;392(10141):75 -87. doi:10.1016/S0140 -6736(18)30696 -2 
2.  Rhodes A, Evans LE, Al hazzani W, et al. Surviving Sepsis Campaign: International Guidelines for 
Management of Sepsis and Septic Shock: 2016. Intensive Care Med . 2017;43(3):304 -377. 
doi:10.1007/s00134 -017-4683 -6 
3.  Liu VX, Fielding -Singh V, Greene JD, et al. The Timing of Early  Antibiotics and Hospital Mortality 
in Sepsis. Am J Respir Crit Care Med . 2017;196(7):856 -863. doi:10.1164/rccm.201609 -1848OC  
4.  Damiani E, Donati A, Serafini G, et al. Effect of performance improvement programs on compliance 
with sepsis bundles and morta lity: a systematic review and meta -analysis of observational studies. 
PloS One . 2015;10(5):e0125827. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0125827  
5.  Angrill N, Gallego M, Font J, et al. Determinants of empirical antipseudomonal antibiotic 
prescription for adults with  pneumonia in the emergency department. BMC Pulm Med . 2020;20. 
doi:10.1186/s12890 -020-1115 -0 
6.  Blevins AM, Lashinsky JN, McCammon C, Kollef M, Micek S, Juang P. Incidence of Acute Kidney 
Injury in Critically Ill Patients Receiving Vancomycin with Concomi tant Piperacillin -Tazobactam, 
Cefepime, or Meropenem. Antimicrob Agents Chemother . 2019;63(5). doi:10.1128/AAC.02658 -18 
7.  Abanades S, Nolla J, Rodríguez -Campello A, Pedro C, Valls A, Farré M. Reversible coma secondary 
to cefepime neurotoxicity. Ann Pharm acother . 2004;38(4):606 -608. doi:10.1345/aph.1D322  
8.  Balderia PG, Chandorkar A, Kim Y, Patnaik S, Sloan J, Newman GC. Dosing Cefepime for Renal 
Function Does Not Completely Prevent Neurotoxicity in a Patient With Kidney Transplant. J Patient 
Saf. 2018;14 (2):e33 -e34. doi:10.1097/PTS.0000000000000225  
9.  Drago L, De Vecchi E. The safety of cefepime in the treatment of infection. Expert Opin Drug Saf . 
2008;7(4):377 -387. doi:10.1517/14740338.7.4.377  
10.  Thakar CV, Christianson A, Freyberg R, Almenoff P, Rend er ML. Incidence and outcomes of acute 
kidney injury in intensive care units: a Veterans Administration study. Crit Care Med . 
2009;37(9):2552 -2558. doi:10.1097/CCM.0b013e3181a5906f  
11.  Uchino S, Kellum JA, Bellomo R, et al. Acute renal failure in critical ly ill patients: a multinational, 
multicenter study. JAMA . 2005;294(7):813 -818. doi:10.1001/jama.294.7.813  
Study Protocol  
Full Study Title: Effe ct of Antibiotic Choice On ReNal Outcomes (ACORN)  
Primary Investigator: Edward Qian, MD  
12.  Semler MW, Self WH, Wanderer JP, et al. Balanced Crystalloids versus Saline in Critically Ill 
Adults. N Engl J Med . 2018;378(9):829 -839. doi:10. 1056/NEJMoa1711584  
13.  Vandenberghe W, Hoste E. Contrast -associated acute kidney injury: does it really exist, and if so, 
what to do about it? F1000Research . 2019;8. doi:10.12688/f1000research.16347.1  
14.  Hoste EAJ, Bagshaw SM, Bellomo R, et al. Epidemio logy of acute kidney injury in critically ill 
patients: the multinational AKI -EPI study. Intensive Care Med . 2015;41(8):1411 -1423. 
doi:10.1007/s00134 -015-3934 -7 
15.  Gómez H, Kellum JA. Sepsis -induced acute kidney injury. Curr Opin Crit Care . 2016;22(6):54 6-
553. doi:10.1097/MCC.0000000000000356  
16.  Arnaud FC de S, Libório AB. Attributable nephrotoxicity of vancomycin in critically ill patients: a 
marginal structural model study. J Antimicrob Chemother . 2020;75(4):1031 -1037. 
doi:10.1093/jac/dkz520  
17.  Filippone EJ, Kraft WK, Farber JL. The Nephrotoxicity of Vancomycin. Clin Pharmacol Ther . 
2017;102(3):459 -469. doi:10.1002/cpt.726  
18.  Bellos I, Karageorgiou V, Pergialiotis V, Perrea DN. Acute kidney injury following the concurrent 
administration of antipseu domonal β -lactams and vancomycin: a network meta -analysis. Clin 
Microbiol Infect Off Publ Eur Soc Clin Microbiol Infect Dis . 2020;26(6):696 -705. 
doi:10.1016/j.cmi.2020.03.019  
19.  Rutter WC, Burgess DR, Talbert JC, Burgess DS. Acute kidney injury in patien ts treated with 
vancomycin and piperacillin -tazobactam: A retrospective cohort analysis. J Hosp Med . 
2017;12(2):77 -82. doi:10.12788/jhm.2684  
20.  Long B, April MD. Are Patients Receiving the Combination of Vancomycin and Piperacillin -
Tazobactam at Higher R isk for Acute Renal Injury? Ann Emerg Med . 2018;72(4):467 -469. 
doi:10.1016/j.annemergmed.2018.06.004  
21.  Carreno J, Smiraglia T, Hunter C, Tobin E, Lomaestro B. Comparative incidence and excess risk of 
acute kidney injury in hospitalised patients receivin g vancomycin and piperacillin/tazobactam in 
combination or as monotherapy. Int J Antimicrob Agents . 2018;52(5):643 -650. 
doi:10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2018.08.001  
22.  Downes KJ, Cowden C, Laskin BL, et al. Association of Acute Kidney Injury With Concomitant 
Vancomycin and Piperacillin/Tazobactam Treatment Among Hospitalized Children. JAMA Pediatr . 
2017;171(12):e173219. doi:10.1001/jamapediatrics.2017.3219  
23.  Buhlinger KM, Fuller KA, Faircloth CB, Wallace JR. Effect of concomitant vancomycin and 
piperacillin -tazobactam on frequency of acute kidney injury in pediatric patients. Am J Health -Syst 
Pharm AJHP Off J Am Soc Health -Syst Pharm . 2019;76(16):1204 -1210. doi:10.1093/ajhp/zxz125  
24.  O’Callaghan K, Hay K, Lavana J, McNamara JF. Acute kidney injury with combination vancomycin 
and piperacillin -tazobactam therapy in the ICU: A retrospective cohort study. Int J Antimicrob 
Agents . Published online May 12, 2020:106010. doi:10.1016/j.ijantimi cag.2020.106010  
Study Protocol  
Full Study Title: Effe ct of Antibiotic Choice On ReNal Outcomes (ACORN)  
Primary Investigator: Edward Qian, MD  
25.  Hammond DA, Smith MN, Painter JT, Meena NK, Lusardi K. Comparative Incidence of Acute 
Kidney Injury in Critically Ill Patients Receiving Vancomycin with Concomitant Piperacillin -
Tazobactam or Cefepime: A Retrospective Cohort Study. Pharmacotherapy . 2016;36(5):463 -471. 
doi:10.1002/phar.1738  
26.  Kang S, Park J, Yu YM, Park MS, Han E, Chang MJ. Comparison of acute kidney injury and clinical 
prognosis of vancomycin monotherapy and combination therapy with beta -lactams in the intensive 
care unit. PloS One . 2019;14(6):e0217908. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0217908  
27.  Buckley MS, Hartsock NC, Berry AJ, et al. Comparison of acute kidney injury risk associated with 
vancomycin and concomitant piperacillin/tazobactam or cefepime in the intensive care unit. J Crit 
Care . 2018;48:32 -38. doi:10.1016/j.jcrc.2018.08.007  
28.  Hamm ond DA, Smith MN, Li C, Hayes SM, Lusardi K, Bookstaver PB. Systematic Review and 
Meta -Analysis of Acute Kidney Injury Associated with Concomitant Vancomycin and 
Piperacillin/tazobactam. Clin Infect Dis Off Publ Infect Dis Soc Am . 2017;64(5):666 -674. 
doi:1 0.1093/cid/ciw811  
29.  Molina KC, Barletta JF, Hall ST, Yazdani C, Huang V. The Risk of Acute Kidney Injury in Critically 
Ill Patients Receiving Concomitant Vancomycin With Piperacillin -Tazobactam or Cefepime. J 
Intensive Care Med . Published online Februar y 10, 2019:885066619828290. 
doi:10.1177/0885066619828290  
30.  Luther MK, Timbrook TT, Caffrey AR, Dosa D, Lodise TP, LaPlante KL. Vancomycin Plus 
Piperacillin -Tazobactam and Acute Kidney Injury in Adults: A Systematic Review and Meta -
Analysis. Crit Care Me d. 2018;46(1):12 -20. doi:10.1097/CCM.0000000000002769  
31.  Schreier DJ, Kashani KB, Sakhuja A, et al. Incidence of Acute Kidney Injury Among Critically Ill 
Patients With Brief Empiric Use of Antipseudomonal β -Lactams With Vancomycin. Clin Infect Dis 
Off Pu bl Infect Dis Soc Am . 2019;68(9):1456 -1462. doi:10.1093/cid/ciy724  
32.  Závada J, Hoste E, Cartin -Ceba R, et al. A comparison of three methods to estimate baseline 
creatinine for RIFLE classification. Nephrol Dial Transplant . 2010;25(12):3911 -3918. 
doi:10. 1093/ndt/gfp766  
33.  Semler MW, Rice TW, Shaw AD, et al. Identification of Major Adverse Kidney Events Within the 
Electronic Health Record. J Med Syst . 2016;40(7):167. doi:10.1007/s10916 -016-0528 -z 
 
1 
 Effect of Antibiotic  Choice  On ReNal Outcomes  (ACORN)  
 
Study Principal Investigators:   
Edward Qian, MD, Fellow, Department of Medicine , Division of Allergy, Pulmonary, and Critical Care 
Medicine  
 
Co-investigators  
 
Todd Rice, MD, MSc, Associate Professor, Department of Medicine , Division of Allergy, Pulmonary, 
and Critical Care Medicine ; Director, Medical ICU; Director, Vanderbilt Human Research Protections 
Program  
 
Matthew Semler, MD, MS c, Assistant Professor, Department of Medicine , Division of  Allergy, 
Pulmonary, and Critical Care Medicine  
 
Jonathan Casey, MD, MS c, Assistant Professor, Department of Medicine , Division of Allergy, 
Pulmonary, and Critical Care Medicine  
 
Christopher Lindsell, PhD, Professor, Department of Biostatistics  
 
Wes Self, MD , MPH, Associate Professor, Department of Emergency Medicine  
 
Edward Siew, MD, MSc, Associate Professor,  Department of Medicine, Division of Nephrology and 
Hypertension   
 
George Nelson, MD, MPH, Assistant Professor, Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious 
Diseases ; Director , Antimicrobial Stewardship  Program ; Associate Hospital Epidemiologist  
 
Joanna Stollings, PharmD, FCCP, FCCM, BCPS, BCCCP, Department of Pharmacy Services  
 
Li Wang, MS, Department of Biostatistics  
 
 
 
Date: 7/27/202 2 
 
  
Study Protocol  
Full Study Title: Effe ct of Antibiotic Choice On ReNal Outcomes (ACORN)  
Primary Investigator: Edward Qian, MD  
 
Study Schema  
1.0 Study Summary  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........................  3 
2.0 Background  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .......  5 
2.1 Anti -Pseudomonal Cephalosporins as Part of an Empiric Broad Spectrum Regimen  .......................  5 
2.2 Anti -Pseudomonal Penicillins as Part of an Empiric Broad Spectrum Regimen  ..............................  6 
2.3 Acute Kidney Injury during Critical Illness  ................................ ................................ ....................  6 
2.4 Prior Evidenc e of the Effect of Antibiotic Choice on Acute Kidney Injury  ................................ ..... 6 
2.5 Rationale for a Trial of Anti -Pseudomonal Cephalosporins vs Anti -Pseudomonal Penicillins  .........  6 
3.0 Rationale, Aims, and Hypotheses  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......  7 
4.0 Study Description  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............................  7 
5.0 Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............  7 
5.1 Inclusion Criteria:  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................  7 
5.2 Exclusion Criteria:  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........................  8 
6.0 Enrollment/Randomization  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................  8 
6.1 Study Sites:  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 8 
6.2 Study Population: ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........................  8 
6.3 Enrollment:  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 8 
6.4 Consent:  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 10 
6.5 Randomization:  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................  10 
7.0 Study Procedures  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............................  10 
7.1 Electronic Health Record (EHR) Based Screening for Eligible Patients  ................................ ........  11 
7.2 Antibiotic Ordering after Randomization ................................ ................................ ......................  11 
7.3 EHR -Based Tool to Capture Data on Antibiotic Modification and Adverse Events  .......................  11 
7.4 Duration of the Intervention  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........  12 
7. 5 Blinding:  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 12 
8.0 Data Collection : ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............................  12 
8.1 In -Hospital Outcomes:  ................................ ................................ ................................ .................  12 
8.2 Baseline data:  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............................  14 
8.3 Data from enrollment to hospital discharge:  ................................ ................................ .................  14 
8.4 Outcome Data:  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............................  14 
9.0 Risks and Benefits  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........................  14 
Study Protocol  
Full Study Title: Effe ct of Antibiotic Choice On ReNal Outcomes (ACORN)  
Primary Investigator: Edward Qian, MD  
10.0 Statistical Considerations  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............  15 
11.0 Reporting of Adverse Events or Unanticipated Problems  ................................ ................................  17 
11.1 Adverse  Event Definitions  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........  17 
11.2 Monitoring for Adverse Events  ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 18 
11.3 Recording and Reporting Adverse Events  ................................ ................................ ...................  18 
11.4 Clinical Outcomes that may be Exempt from Adverse Event Recording and Reporting  ...............  19 
11.5 Unanticipated Problems involving Risks to Subjects or Others  ................................ ....................  20 
12.0 Privacy/Confidentiality Issues  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  20 
13.0 Follow -up and Record Retention  ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 21 
14.0 Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) ................................ ................................ ...................  21 
15.0 References  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 21 
 
 
1.0 Study Summary  
Title:  Effect of Antibiotic Choice On ReNal Outcomes (ACORN)  
Background : Sepsis is one of the most common causes of acute  illness and death in the United States . 
Early, e mpiric broad -spectrum antibiotics are a mainstay of sepsis treatment . Two classes of antibiotic s 
with activity against Pseudomonas , anti -pseudomonal cephalosporins and anti -pseudomonal penicillins,  
are commonly used for acutely ill adults with sepsis in current practice. Recent observational studies, 
however, have raised concern that anti-pseudomonal penicillin s may cause  renal toxicity. Anti-
pseudomon al cephalosporins, by comparison, may be associated with a risk of neurotoxicity.  Rigorous , 
prospective d ata regarding the comparative effectiveness and toxicity of these two classes of medications 
among acutely ill patients are lacking. We propose a rand omized trial comparing the impact of anti-
pseudomonal cephalosporins  and anti-pseudomonal penicillins  on renal outcomes of  acutely ill patients.  
Primary Aim:  
- To compare the effect  of anti-pseudomonal cephalosporin s versus  anti-pseudomonal penicillins on the 
incidence of acute kidney  injury among  acutely ill patients  
Primary Hypothesis:  
- Among acutely  ill patients with sepsis, use of anti-pseudomonal cephalosporins  will decrease the 
incidence of acute kidney  injury  (AKI) , com pared to anti-pseudomonal penicillins . 
Inclusion Criteria:  
1. Age ≥ 18 years old  
2. Located in a participating emergency department or  medical  intensive care  unit  
3. Less than 12 hours  from presentation to study hospital  
4. Treating clinician initiat ing an order for  an anti-pseudomonal cephalosporin or anti-pseudomonal 
penicillin   
Exclusion Criteria:  
1. Known receipt of > 1 dose of an anti-pseudomonal cephalosporin or anti-pseudomonal penicillin  
during the last 7 days  
2. Current d ocumented allergy to cephalosporins or penicillin  
Study Protocol  
Full Study Title: Effe ct of Antibiotic Choice On ReNal Outcomes (ACORN)  
Primary Investigator: Edward Qian, MD  
3. Known to be a prisoner  
4. Treating clinicians feel that either an anti-pseudomonal cephalosporin or anti-pseudomonal penicillin  
is required or contraindicated for  the optimal treatment of the patient , including for more directed 
antibiotic therapy against known prior resistant infections or suspected sepsis with an associated 
central nervous system infection   
Consent:  
- Given that both anti-pseudomonal cephalosporins and anti-pseudomonal penicillins  are routinely used 
in usual care , the lack of established risk or benefit with either treatment group , the impracticability of 
obtaining informed consent prior to initiating antibiotics for acutely ill patient s, a waiver of informed 
consent will be reques ted. 
Randomization : 
- Using a  best-practices advisor embedded within the electronic health record, patients meeting all 
inclusion criteria and no exclusion criteria will be randomized in a 1 :1 ratio to receive an anti -
pseudomonal cephalosporin ( treating clinicians’ choice of cefepime or ceftazidime ) or anti-
pseudomonal penicillin . 
Study Interventions:  
- Anti-pseudomonal cephalosporin  group : patients assigned  to the anti -pseudomonal cephalosporin 
group will receive the treating clinicians’ choice of either cefepime  or ceftazidime .   
- Anti-pseudomonal penicillin  group : patients assigned  to the anti-pseudomonal penicillin  group will 
receive piperacillin -tazobacta m or ticarcillin -clavulanate .  
- For patients in both groups, treating clinicians will determine the dose and duration of the assigned 
antibiotic class.  An EHR -based advisor will alert treating clinicians of group assignment and collect 
data regarding any adverse events and the reason fo r modification or discontinuation of antibiotics  in 
the 7 days after randomization  
Primary Efficacy Outcome:  
- The primary outcome will be the highest stage of acute kidney injury (AKI) between enrollment and 
14 days after enrollment .  Stage of AKI will be defined by Kidney Disease: Improving Global 
Outcomes (KDIGO) AKI creatinine criteria .  Death will be classified as worse than the highest stage 
of AKI .  The outcome will be defined using the following 5 -value ordinal scale ranging f rom the 
lowest value (0 = alive without having experienced AKI) to the highest value (4 = died).  
o 0 = No AKI  
o 1 = Stage 1 AKI  (Creatinine increase by 1.5 -1.9 times baseline OR increase by >= 0.3  
mg/dL ) 
o 2 = Stage 2 AKI  (Creatinine increase by 2.0 -2.9 times ba seline)  
o 3 = Stage 3 AKI  (Creatinine increase by >= 3.0 times baseline OR increase to >= 4.0 mg/dL 
OR New RRT)  
o 4 = Death  
Secondary Outcomes:  
- Secondary Renal Outcome : Major Adverse Kidney Events within 14 days (MAKE14): Composite 
outcome of death within 14 days, new renal replacement therapy within 14 days, or stage 2 or higher 
AKI at day 14.  
- Secondary Neurologic Outcome :  The number of days alive and free of coma and delirium in the 14 
days after enrollment (Delirium  and Coma -Free Days to day 14).  
 
Exploratory Outcome s: 
Study Protocol  
Full Study Title: Effe ct of Antibiotic Choice On ReNal Outcomes (ACORN)  
Primary Investigator: Edward Qian, MD  
- Exploratory Renal Outcomes : Major Adverse Kidney Events within 28 days (MAKE28),  highest 
stage of AKI or death between randomization and day 7,  stage 2  or higher acute kidney injury as 
defined in the KDIGO criteria for creatinine level  within 14 and 28 days after enrollment , new receipt 
of renal -replacement therapy  within 14 and  28 days  after enrollment , days alive and free of renal -
replacement therapy during the 14 and 28 days after enrollment, the highest creatinine level within 28 
days after enrollment , the change from pre-illness creatinine to the highest creatinine level  with 28 
days after enrollment , the final creatinine level  before hospital discharge at 28 days , and ongoing 
receipt of renal replacement therapy at hospital discharge  or 28 days, nephrology consultation . 
- Exploratory N eurologic Outcomes: Worst Glasgow Coma Scale  score during the  7, 14, and 28  days 
after enrollment , Delirium and Coma Free Days in 28 days after enrollment  
- Exploratory Clinical Outcomes: ICU -free days, hospital -free days, ventilator -free days, vasopressor -
free days , 28-day mortality, 14 -day mortality, disposition  of patient s admitted from the ED (ward vs 
ICU), escalation of antibiotics defined by subsequent receipt of meropenem, meropenem -
vaborbactam, imipenem, imipenem -relebactam, cefiderocol, ceftazidime -avibactam, ceftolozane -
tazobactam, tigecycline, amikacin, tobramycin,  gentamicin  
 
Sample Size  Considerations:  
- Our original sample size was calculated from 820 patients during the creation and testing of the 
enrollment advisor , where we measured the distribution of outcomes expected among patients in the 
anti-pseudomonal penicillin group.  W e calculated that enrolling 2,050 patients would provide 80% 
power  at an alpha of 0.05 to detect an odds ratio for highest stage of AKI of 0.65. 
 
Near the midpoint of the trial, we determined that about 75% of our patie nts received concurrent 
vancomycin, a key  subgroup of interest. We increased the sample size to 2,500 patients to estimate 
the enrollment of the original sample size (2,050) in the subgroup of patients receiving concurrent 
vancomycin.  
 
2.0 Background  
Sepsis is  a common condition  associated with high mortality an d morbidity1. Antibiotics are a n integral 
component of the management of patients with sepsis2. Each hour delay in antibiotic  administration  in 
sepsis  is associated with an increas e in mortality3. Clinical guidelines rec ommend early  management  
bundles , including early broad -spectrum antibiotics,  for patients with presumed sepsis  in the emergency 
department  and intensive care unit2,4. Since the specific organism caus ing an infection is rarely known at 
clinical presentation, empiric broad -spectrum antibiotics are commonly prescribed5. For patients at risk 
for resistant organisms, the most common regimens include vancomycin (to cover gram -positive 
organisms including methicillin -resistant Staphylococcus  aureus) and an anti-pseudomonal cephalosporin 
or anti-pseudomonal penicillin  (to cover gram -negative organisms includ ing Pseudomonas ).  
 
2.1 Anti -Pseudomonal Cephalosporins  as Part of an Empiric Broad Spectrum Regimen  
Cephalosporins are beta-lactam antibiotic s that act by inhibiting the synthesis of the peptidoglycan layer 
of bacterial cell walls. They are commonly used for a variety of infections including empiric broad 
spectrum coverage for sepsis, suspected nosocomial infections, and meningitis.   Several ceph alosporins 
have anti-pseudomonal activity , includ ing cefepime, a fourth -generation  cephalosporin, and ceftazidime, 
a third -generation cephalosporin.  Anti-pseudomonal cephalosporins have replaced anti -pseudomonal 
Study Protocol  
Full Study Title: Effe ct of Antibiotic Choice On ReNal Outcomes (ACORN)  
Primary Investigator: Edward Qian, MD  
penicillins as the preferred agent for empi ric antibiotic regimens based on observational evidence that 
anti-cephalosporins are associated with a lower incidence of AKI6.  However, others have argued against 
this approach given the lack of randomized trials comparing the relative efficacy and safety of the two 
agents as well as observational data suggesting th at cephalosporins may be associated with neuro -
toxicity7–9. 
 
2.2 Anti-Pseudomonal Penicillins  as Part of an Empiric Broad Spectrum Regimen  
Penicillins are also  beta-lactam anti-biotics with similar mechanism s of action  to cephalosporins . Anti-
pseudomonal penicillins, such as piperacillin , ureidopenicillin, and ticarci llin are typically  administered 
with a beta-lactamase inhibitor such as tazobactam or clavul anate . In the United States the most 
commonly used anti -pseudom onal penicillins are piperacillin -tazobactam and ticarcillin -clavulanate. 
Anti-pseudomonal penicillins are the preferred agents for empiric broad spectrum coverage at many 
centers, and p iperacillin -tazobactam, specifically, has the added benefit of treating  anaerobic organisms.   
Conversely, penicillins do not cover meningitis due to poor central nervous system penetration.   
 
2.3 Acute Kidney Injury during Critical Illness  
Acute Kidney In jury (AKI) i s a common complication of ICU admission. AKI is associated with a six to 
eight fold increase in mortality in ICU populations , 10,11 is therefore a common target of critical care trials . 
There are many potential contributors to AKI in critical illness including isotonic fluids12, IV contrast 
administration, medication toxicities13, and acute illnesses like sepsis.  Sepsis is the most common cause 
of AKI and accounts for 40 -50% of AKI in the intensive care unit (ICU)14,15. As the primary treatment for 
the underlying cause of sepsis, antibiotics are a critical treatment for acutely  ill patients, but antibiotics 
may cause renal injury, and renally -cleared antibiotics may reach supratherapeutic levels in the setting of 
AKI.  
 
2.4 Prior Evidence of the Effect of Antibiotic Choice on Acute Kidney Injury  
Vancomycin has long been associat ed with AKI16,17. Recently, a number of retrospective observational 
analyses have examined a potential association between the concurrent administration of vancomycin and 
piperacillin -tazobactam and the development of AKI, compared with vancomycin alone18–21. These data, 
however, are likely to be confounded by indication bias and studies ev aluating whether piperacillin -
tazobactam causes more AKI than other anti -pseudomonal antibiotics  have been inconclusive .18,22 –30.  
Studies that limited their analyses to the first 72 hours of treatment (when antibiotic choices are empiric 
and not yet tailored based on micro biologic data), have not shown any  association between piperacillin -
tazobactam and kidney injury31.   
 
Based on this preliminary, observational data, however, some institutions  have elected to change their 
preferred broad spectrum anti biotic regimens from one including  an anti-pseudomonal  to one including an 
anti-pseudomonal cephalosporins.   
 
2.5 Rationale for a Trial of Anti -Pseudomonal Cephalosporins vs Anti-Pseudomonal 
Penicillins  
Tens of thousands of patients each year receive either anti -pseudomonal cephalosporins and penicillins , 
but no randomized trial s have ever compared their  relative effectiveness or safety.  Each class of 
medications has been hypothesized to have toxicities that may be relevant for acutely  ill patients. Because 
the relationship between antibiotic choice ( anti-pseudomonal cephalosporins  or anti-pseudomonal 
Study Protocol  
Full Study Title: Effe ct of Antibiotic Choice On ReNal Outcomes (ACORN)  
Primary Investigator: Edward Qian, MD  
penicillins ) and clinically relevant outcomes, such as AKI, are unknown, clinical trial data is urgently 
needed.  Rigorous high -quality evidence that anti -pseudomonal cephalosporins, compared to anti -
pseudomonal penicillins, decreases, increases or has no impact on the risk of AKI would have the 
potential to change the care received by thousands of acutely ill adults each year.  
 
To address this knowledge gap, we will conduct a prospective, randomized trial of acutely ill adults  
undergoing initiation of empiric antibiotics in the ED or ICU, comparing anti -pseudomonal 
cephalosporins vs anti-pseudomonal  penicillins  with regard to renal outcomes.   
3.0 Rationale, Aims , and Hypotheses  
In order t o determine the effect  of an  anti-pseudomonal cephalosporin , compared to an anti -pseudomonal 
penicillin , on the incidence of acute kidney injury among acutely ill patients, a randomized trial is needed.  
Study Aims:  
- Primary:  
o To compare the effect of anti-pseudomonal cephalosporin s versus anti-pseudomonal 
penicillins  on the incidence of acute kidney injury among a cutely ill patients  
- Secondary:  
o To compare the effect of anti-pseudomonal cephalosporins vs anti-pseudomonal penicillins  
on in -hospital mortality, ICU length of stay, and ventilator days  
Study Hypotheses  
- Primary  Hypothesis : 
o The use of anti -pseudomonal cephalosporins, compared to the use of anti-pseudomonal 
penicillins , will decrease the incidence of acute  kidney injury  among acutely  ill adults   
 
4.0 Study Description  
In order to address the aims outlined above, we propose a randomized  trial evaluating the impact of anti-
pseudomonal cephalosporins  versus anti -pseudomonal penicillins in the treatment of sepsis in acutely  ill 
adults . Patients admitted to a study unit who are deemed by their clinical team to require empiric broad 
spectrum antibiotics and fulfill inclusion criteria without meeting exclusion criteria will be enrolled and 
randomly assigned to an anti-pseudomonal cephalosporin  vs an anti -pseudomonal penicillin .  
Randomization, group assignment and delivery o f the intervention will occur within the electronic health 
record (details in section 7). All other decisions regarding treatment will remain at the discretion of the 
treating provider.  Data will be collected prospectively from the medical record to determine the effect of 
the assigned interventions on procedural, physiologic, and clinical outcomes.  
 
5.0 Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
 
5.1 Inclusion Criteria:  
1. Age ≥ 18 years old  
2. Located in a participating emergency department or medical intensive care unit  
3. Less than 12 hours from presentation to study hospital  
4. Treating clinician initiating an order for an anti -pseudomonal cephalosporin or anti-pseudomonal 
penicillin   
Study Protocol  
Full Study Title: Effe ct of Antibiotic Choice On ReNal Outcomes (ACORN)  
Primary Investigator: Edward Qian, MD  
5.2 Exclusio n Criteria:  
1. Known receipt of > 1 dose of an anti -pseudomonal cephalosporin or anti -pseudomonal penicillin 
during the last 7 days  
2. Current documented allergy to cephalosporins or penicillin  
3. Known to be a prisoner  
4. Treating clinicians feel that either an anti -pseudomonal cephalosporin or anti -pseudomonal penicillin 
is required or contraindicated for the optimal treatment of the patient, including for more directed 
antibiotic therapy against known prior resistant infections or suspected sepsis with an associated  
central nervous system infection   
6.0 Enrollment/Randomization  
6.1 Study Site s: 
Emergency Department  and Medical Intensive Care Unit  at Vanderbilt University Medical Center  
 
6.2 Study Population:   
All adults with sepsis located in a participating unit for whom the treating clinician orders either  an anti-
pseudomonal cephalosporins or anti-pseudomonal penicillin within 12 hours  of hospital presentation  
unless determined to meet an exclusion criteria. All eligible patients will be included and there will be no 
selection based on  gender, race, weight or other clinical factors.  
 
6.3 Enrollment:  
At the time that  a treating clinician in a participating emergency department or medical intensive care unit 
initiates an o rder for  an anti -pseudomonal cephalosporin or anti-pseudomonal penicillin  for a patient who 
meets all inclusion criteria, an advisor within the electronic health record (details in section 7) will prompt 
treating clinicians to record whether the patient me ets any exclusion criteria.  Patients not meeting any 
exclusion criteria will be enrolled and randomized .  For patients who are determined to be ineligible , the 
advisor will track the number and reasons for exclusion.  The time of randomization will be def ined as 
“time zero” on “study day 0.”  
 
Study Protocol  
Full Study Title: Effe ct of Antibiotic Choice On ReNal Outcomes (ACORN)  
Primary Investigator: Edward Qian, MD  
 
  
Figure 6: Enrollment Schema  – When a treating clinician orders an anti -pseudomonal 
cephalosporin or anti-pseudomonal penicillin , tools within the electronic health record (details in 
section 7) will evaluate if the patient meets inclusion criteria ( order placed within 12 hours  of 
hospital presentation , age ≥ 18, and located in a participating unit ), and the presence of 
documented allergy to penicillin or cephalosporins (an exclusion criteria).  If the patient has not 
been previously enrolled  in the trial during the index hospitalization, appears to meet all inclusion  
criteria , does not have a  documented a llergy to penicillin or cephalosporins , an ordering advisor 
will prompt the clinician to determine whether the patient meets any exclusion criteria. If the 

Study Protocol  
Full Study Title: Effe ct of Antibiotic Choice On ReNal Outcomes (ACORN)  
Primary Investigator: Edward Qian, MD  
treating clinician confirms that the patient does meet an exclusion criterion, the patient will be 
enrolled and randomized.  The ordering advisor will track all exclusions.  
 
6.4 Consent:  
Anti-pseudomonal cephalosporin s and anti-pseudomonal penicillins  are routinely used in the care of 
acutely ill patients with sepsis in the emergency department and intensive care units at Vanderbilt 
University Medical Center.  Currently, choice of empiric gram -negative coverage is based primarily on 
provider preference as there are no large randomized trials  or evidence -based guideline s to support the 
choice of one empiric anti -pseudomonal therapy for sepsis over another.  The concept of a randomized 
trial comparing anti -pseudomonal cephalosporin s versus anti-pseudomonal penicillins  has been discussed 
with the leader s of emergency department and intensive care units and representation from the infectious 
disease s and nephrology  program s who agree that clinical equipoise exist s regarding the choice of empiric 
anti-pseudomonal therapy for acutely ill adults with sepsis . 
 
Because the interventions studied (1) are used as a part of routine care, (2) are interventions the patient 
would be exposed to even if not participating in the study, (3) have no prior high-quality data to suggest 
the superiority of one approach over the oth er, and (4) are equivalent options from the perspective of the 
treating provider  (otherwise the patient is excluded) , we feel the study presents minimal risk . 
 
In addition to the minimal risk posed by the study, obtaining informed consent prior to particip ation 
would not be feasible or practicable.  Sepsis is a medical emergency.  E ach hour of delay in the initiation 
of antibiotics  for acutely  ill patients with  sepsis increase s mortality  by about  7%.  For patients presenting 
with sepsis to the participating units, the average time between initiation of an order for an anti -
pseudomonal antibiotic and its administration to the patient is 28 minutes.  Obtaining prospective written 
informed consent during this interval is impracticable and risks del aying antibiotic administration.  
Moreover , acutely ill patients  with sepsis  are commonly delirious or unconscious , and a legally authorized 
representative (LAR) is not consistently  present at the time of initiation of antibiotics.   Because the trial 
deter mines choice of the initial anti -pseudomonal antibiotic, but defers decisions regarding subsequent 
doses of antibiotics (e.g., duration of therapy, escalation, de -escalation) to treating clinicians, the primary 
study procedure will be completed within 1 ho ur of meeting eligibility criteria.  
  
Because the study presents minimal risk, would not adversely affect the welfare or privacy rights of the 
participant, and consent would be impracticable, we will request a waiver of informed consent.  
 
6.5 Randomization :  
A series of study group assignments will be generated by computerized randomization in a 1:1 ratio of 
intervention to control .  Study group assignment will remain concealed to study personnel and treatment 
team until after the study team has confirmed that the patient does not meet any exclusion criteria and the 
patient has been enrolled.   Following randomization , treating clinici ans will be notified via the ordering 
advisor.  
 
7.0 Study Procedures  
 
Study Protocol  
Full Study Title: Effe ct of Antibiotic Choice On ReNal Outcomes (ACORN)  
Primary Investigator: Edward Qian, MD  
7.1 E lectronic Health Record (EHR)  Based Screening for Eligible Patients  
For the duration of the study, when a provider initiates an order for the administration of an intravenous 
anti-pseudomonal cephalosporin  or anti-pseudomonal penicillin , a software application in  the EHR will 
assess if the patient is eligible for the study. The application will assess that the patient meets all the 
inclusion criteria (located in study unit, age ≥ 18, in the hospital  for less than 12 hours , and has not been 
previously enrolled during the  hospitalization)  and none of the exclusion criteria  (current documented 
allergy to cephalosporin  or penicillin class a ntibiotics , more than one prior administration of study 
antibiotic s during the last 7 days ). If the above criteria are met, an order advisor  (Figure 7) will : 1) Inform 
the provider of the study, 2) solicit the presence of contraindications to either study drug, 3) (if patient 
meets all eligibility criteria)  enroll and randomize the patient.  If there are contraindications which were 
not established electronica lly, the advisor will ask the provider to select the reason.  
 
 
Figure 7: Order advisor informing providers of the study and soliciting other exclusion criteria  
 
7.2 Antibiotic Ordering after Randomization  
Once the participant is enrolled and randomized, the ordering advisor will guide the provide r to the order 
one of the assigned study antibiotic s. Dose, frequency, and duration  will be at the discretion of treating 
clinicians  and not affected by the advisor.  
 
7.3 EHR -Based Tool to Capture Data  on Antibiotic Modification and Adverse Events   
In the 7 days after enrollment, if a clinician attempts the discontinue the study -related antibiotic order , an 
EHR-based advisor will remind  the clinician of the treatment arm  and if the treating clinician chooses to 
discontinue the antibiotic from the assigned group,  the clinician  will be asked for the rationale:  
- Antibiotic tailoring (escalation or de -escalation) based on microbiologic data  
- Undocumented or newly apparent allergy  to either penicillin s or cephalosporins  

Study Protocol  
Full Study Title: Effe ct of Antibiotic Choice On ReNal Outcomes (ACORN)  
Primary Investigator: Edward Qian, MD  
- Treating clinicians feel that either anti -pseudomonal cephalosporins or anti-pseudomonal penicillins 
are superior in the optimal treatment of the patient (provide reason why)  
- Other (provide r input rationale ) 
- Antibiotic induced adverse event  
 
Data provided by the treating clinicians will be used for prospective safety monitoring and adverse event 
reporting.  
 
7.4 Duration of the Intervention  
Patients will be allocated to the anti -pseudomonal cephalosporin or ant i-pseudomonal penicillin groups 
which will determine their initial antibiotic choice only. All further antibiotic decision s including , but not 
limited to,  duration  of antibiotics , changing based on new clinical or microbiological data , and switching 
between classes of anti -pseudomonal antibiotics will be left to the discretion of the treating team.  
 
As described above, a n EHR -based advisor will alert treating clinicians to group assignment and collect 
data for monitor for adverse events occu rring in the seven days after randomization .  The advisor will not 
impede the ability to change classes of antibiotic and will be used primarily for safety monitoring .  
 
7. 5 Blinding:  
It would be impractical to pursue blinding for the study. The medicine s involved in this study are given at 
different doses with varying volumes of IV infusion . They are also given on different schedules varying 
as widely as 4 times a day to once daily. Furthermore , these dosing variations are impacted by renal 
function . Given the nature of the study intervention, patients, clinicians, and investigators will not be 
blinded to group assignment.   
 
8.0 Data Collection:  
 
8.1 In-Hospital Outcomes:  
Primary Efficacy Outcome: Acute Kidney Injury  Score  between randomization and day 14 . The acute 
kidney injury score is an ordinal outcome containing the stages of AKI as defined by KDIGO  creatinine 
criteria , new renal replacement therapy (RRT),  and death:  
 
0 = No AKI  
1 = Stage 1 AKI (Creatinine increase by 1.5 -1.9 times baseline OR increase by >= 0.3  mg/dL ) 
2 = Stage 2 AKI (Creatinine increase by 2.0 -2.9 times baseline)  
3 = Stage 3 AKI (Creatinine increase by >= 3.0 times baseline OR increase to >= 4.0 mg/dL  OR 
New RRT ) 
4 = Death  
 
“Baseline” creatinine values are defined as the lowest prior creatinine values from three different 
timepoints: the pre -illness creatinine value, the peri -enrollment creatinine value, and the lowest prior on-
study creatinine value . Death is defined as in -hospital mortality  from any cause prior to hospital 
discharge, censored at 14 days. New RRT is defined as receipt of RRT at any point between ICU 
admission and hospital discharge, censored at 14 days.   
Study Protocol  
Full Study Title: Effe ct of Antibiotic Choice On ReNal Outcomes (ACORN)  
Primary Investigator: Edward Qian, MD  
 
Pre-illness  creatinine level will be determined by using a previously described hierarchical approach in 
which creatinine values obtained during the year before hospitalization are given priority over in -hospital 
measurements obtained before antibiotic administration . When no pre -enrollment measurements are 
available , the pre-illness creatinine level is estimated with a previously described three -variable 
formula32,33. It is important to n ote that those patients with End -Stage Renal Disease (ESRD) would only 
be eligible to meet the “Death” component of the primary outcome.  
Patients’ peri -enrollment creatinine will be defined hierarchically using the creatinine value closest to 
enrollment in : (first) the 24 hours prior to enrollment, if available, and (second) the six hours after 
enrollment (if no value is available prior to enrollment).  Prevalent AKI, or AKI that is present on 
admission and unrelated to the study intervention, will be defin ed by comparing the peri -enrollment 
creatinine to the pre -illness creatinine.  
On-study creatinine will be defined as any creatinine value occurring after both the time of enrollment 
and the time of the peri -enrollment creatinine value. On -study creatinine  values will be used to identify 
incident AKI and calculate the stage of AKI for the primary outcome.   
 
Justification for the Primary Efficacy Outcome  
This outcome is 1) validated for electronic assessment, 2) uses outcome  thresholds for  renal dysfunction  
defined by international nephrology organizations, 3) incorporat es patient -centered outcomes (new RRT 
and death) that would be missed by a purely laboratory -based outcome , and 4) uses a hierarchal approach 
to analysis that counts rare bu t important patient -centered outcomes (new RRT, death) as worse than 
purely laboratory -based measures (stage 2 AKI) .  
 
Secondary Outcomes:  
- Secondary Renal Outcome : Major Adverse Kidney Events within  14 days (MAKE14): Composite 
outcome of death  within 14 days , new renal replacement therapy  within 14 days , or stage 2 or higher 
AKI at day 14 . 
- Secondary Neurologic Outcome :  The number of days alive and free of coma and delirium in the 14 
days after enrollment ( Delirium  and Coma -Free Days to day 14).  
 
Exploratory  Outcomes :  
- Exploratory Renal Outcomes: Major Adverse Kidney Events within 28 days (MAKE28), highest 
stage of AKI or death between randomization and day 7, stage 2 or higher acute kidney injur y as 
defined in the KDIGO criteria for creatinine level  within 14 and 28 days after enrollment , new receipt 
of renal -replacement therapy  within 14 and 28 days after enrollment,  days alive and free of renal -
replacement therapy during the 14 and 28 days afte r enrollment, the highest creatinine level within 28 
days after enrollment, the change from pre-illness creatinine to the highest creatinine level  with 28 
days after enrollment , the final creatinine level  before hospital discharge at 28 days, and ongoing 
receipt of renal replacement therapy at hospital discharge or 28 days, nephrology consultation . 
- Exploratory Neurologic Outcomes: Worst Glasgow Coma Scale  score during the  7, 14, and 28  days 
after enrollment, Delirium and Coma Free Days in 28 days after enrollment  
- Exploratory Clinical Outcomes: ICU -free days, hospital -free days, ventilator -free days, vasopressor -
free days, 28-day mortality, 14 -day mortality, disposition of patients admitted from the ED (ward vs 
ICU), e scalation of antibiotics defined by subsequent receipt of meropenem, meropenem -
Study Protocol  
Full Study Title: Effe ct of Antibiotic Choice On ReNal Outcomes (ACORN)  
Primary Investigator: Edward Qian, MD  
vaborbactam, imipenem, imipenem -relebactam, cefiderocol, ceftazidime -avibactam, ceftolozane -
tazobactam, tigecycline, amikacin, tobramycin, gentamicin  
 
8.2 Baseline  data:  
Age, sex, height, weight, body mass index, race, SOFA  score, active medical problems at the time of 
admission, active comorbidities, comorbidities  and medications  known to increase risk of kidney or 
neurologic injury at enrollment, mean arterial pressure and vasopressor use prior to antibiotic receipt, 
analgesia and sedation use prior to antibiotic receipt,  presence of sepsis  define by Sepsis -3 criteria , 
transplant recipient status, presumed source of infection, on renal replacement therapy prior to receipt o f 
antibiotics , admission to ICU vs ward  
 
 
8.3 Data from enrollment to hospital discharge :  
Mean arterial pressure and vasopressor use, pH, PaO2, PaCO2, respiratory rate, heart rate, oxygen 
saturation, temperature, lact ic acid, elements of a basic metabolic panel, magnesium, elements of a 
complete blood count, all microbiologic culture data , CAM -ICU, RASS,  GCS  mechanical ventilation 
status and variables related to ventilation, nephrology consultation, new-start renal replacement therapy , 
indications for new renal replacement therap y among patients who received new renal replacement 
therapy,  medications known to increase risk of kidney injury , medications known to increase risk of 
neurologic injury , days spent in ICU, days spent in the hospital , date of intubation and extubation, date of 
death  
 
8.4 Outcome Data:  
Primary Outcome: All creatinine values from presentation  to day 14, creatinine values prior to 
hospitalization, and date s and time s of the following events , if applicable : presentation to the hospital, 
receipt of new renal replacement therapy, admission to the hospital, discharge from the hospital, death  
 
Exploratory Renal Outcomes : All creatinine values  from presentation to hospital discharge , creatinine 
values prior to hospitalization,  and the dates and times of the following events, if applicable: presentation 
to the hospital, receipt of new renal replacement therapy, admission to the hospital, discharge from the 
hospital, death , nephrology consultation  
 
Exploratory Neurologic Outcomes: All RASS values /dates/times  from presentation to day 28, all CAM -
ICU values /dates/time  from presentation to day 28, all GCS values /dates/times  from presentation to day 
28 
 
Exploratory Clinical Outcomes: Date and time of the following events, if applicable: presentation to the 
hospital, admission to the hospital, admission to the ICU, transfer from the ICU, discharge from the 
hospital, receipt of mechanical ventilation, disco ntinuation of mechanical ventilation, receipt of 
vasopressors, discontinuation of vasopressors, death , antibiotic receipt  
 
9.0 Risks and Benefits  
In patients for whom the treating team has decided empiric broad spectrum antibiotics are required for the 
treatment of sepsis, there are currently no established risks or benefits to using  anti-pseudomonal 
Study Protocol  
Full Study Title: Effe ct of Antibiotic Choice On ReNal Outcomes (ACORN)  
Primary Investigator: Edward Qian, MD  
cephalosporins or anti-pseudomonal penicillins  as empiric gram negative coverage .  At this time, there is 
no reason to believe that participation in this study would expose patients to greater medical risks or 
benefits than those experienced by acutel y ill patients requiring antibiotics as a part of rout ine care.  The 
greater benefit of the study would be to society in the form of improved understanding of safe and 
effective empiric antibiotic selection for acutel y ill patients  with sepsis . 
 
A potential risk to patients participating in this study involve s the collection of protected health 
information (PHI).  In order to limit the associated risks, the minimum amount of PHI necessary for study 
conduct will be collected.  After collection, the data will be stored in a secure online database (REDCap) 
only a ccessible by the investigators.  After publication, a de -identified database will be generated to 
protect participant privacy.  
 
10.0 Statistical Considerations  
 
Sample size considerations  
Using data captured during the development and testing of the enrollment advisor (trial intervention) from 
820 patients who would have been eligible for ACORN , we estimated the distribution of the primary 
outcome in the anti -pseudomonal penicillin group.  A total of 61.2% of patients did not experience AKI 
or death, 4.9% had Stage I AKI, 4. 3% had Stage II AKI, 8. 0% had Stage III AKI or new RRT, and 2 1.5% 
died within 30 days of ICU admission. We calculated that obtaining 80% power at an alpha of 0.05 to 
detect an odds ratio of 0.65 for patients assigned to anti -pseudomonal cephalosporins would require a 
sample size of 2010. Assuming missing data for 40 patients, or < 5%, we plan ned to enroll 2050 patients.  
 
Sample size re -estimation  
At the planned interim analysis after  1025 patients, or roughly half of the intended enrollment, the DSMB 
will evaluate the distribution of the primary outcome in the anti -pseudomonal penicillin group. If required 
by the observed distribution of the primary outcome in the anti -pseudomonal pen icillin group, the DSMB 
may recommend that the investigators increase the total sample size of the trial to maintain 80% power 
and an alpha of 0.05 to detect an odds ratio of 0.65.  
 
Near the midpoint of the trial, we determined that about 75% of the total population received concurrent 
vancomycin, a n important subgroup  of interest. We increased the sample size from the original 2,050 
patients to 2,500 patients to estimate the original sample size in the subgroup of the receipt of concurrent 
vancomycin. Give n our faster than expected enrollment, the trial is estimated to complete at the originally 
proposed endpoint. This would provide 92% power to detect and OR of 0.75 at an alpha of 0.05 in the 
primary analysis cohort. This was presented to the DSMB at the i nterim analysis who agreed with the 
sample size increase.  
 
Statistical Analysis : 
Analysis principles  
- Primary analysis will be conducted on an intention -to-treat basis (patients with protocol violations are 
analyzed per the assigned treatment arm).  
- All hypothesis tests will be two sided, with an α of 0.05 unless otherwise specified.  
- All analyses will be unadjusted unless otherwise specified.  
Study Protocol  
Full Study Title: Effe ct of Antibiotic Choice On ReNal Outcomes (ACORN)  
Primary Investigator: Edward Qian, MD  
- Pre-specified analyses of heterogeny of treatment effect based on baseline variables will be performed 
irrespectiv e of treatment efficacy.  
 
Trial profile :  
We will present a Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials diagram to detail the movement of patients 
through the study. This diagram will include total number of patients meeting inclusion criteria, number 
exclu ded and reason for exclusion, number enrolled and randomized in the study, number followed, and 
number analyzed.  
 
Baseline Characteristics :  
To assess randomization success, we will summarize in Table 1 the distribution of baseline variables 
across the stu dy arms. Categorical variables will be reported as frequencies and percentages and 
continuous variables as either means with SDs or medians with interquartile ranges. Variables reported 
will include Demographics (age, gender, race, BMI, co -morbidities); In dication for antibiotics; Severity 
of Illness (APACHE II score); Acute Kidney Injury at enrollment; Delirium at enrollment  
 
Primary Efficacy Outcome Analysis : 
We will compare the primary outcome, the AKI ordinal outcome, between patients randomized to the 
anti-pseudomonal cephalosporins versus anti -pseudomonal penicillins groups. It is important to note that 
those patients with End -Stage Renal Disease (ESRD) would only be eligible to meet the “Death” 
component of the primary outcome.  
 
The main analysis will  be an intention -to-treat comparison of the primary outcome between the anti -
pseudomonal cephalosporin and anti -pseudomonal penicillin groups  who received at least one dose of a 
study drug . To do this, we will use an unadjusted, proportional odds model wit h group assignment (anti -
pseudomonal cephalosporin, anti -pseudomonal penicillin) as the independent variable.  For the purposes 
of declaring a statistically significant difference between groups in the primary endpoint, we will consider 
a two -sided P value  of 0.05 as significant.  
 
Secondary Analyses of the Primary Outcome  
To account for potential confounders, we will develop an adjusted proportional odds regression model 
with the AKI ordinal outcome score (primary outcome) as the dependent variable and inde pendent 
covariate of groups assignment, and relevant confounders (age, peri-enrollment creatinine, sex, 
mechanical ventilation prior to  enrollment, receipt of inotropes prior to  enrollment, receipt of RRT prior 
to enrollment, SOFA score, presumed source of  infection , enrollment location).  
 
Secondary Analyses : 
Analysis of Secondary and Exploratory Outcomes  
We will conduct an intention -to-treat comparison of all secondary and exploratory outcomes between 
patients randomized to anti -pseudomonal cephalosporins and patients randomized to anti -pseudomonal 
penicillins. Continuous outcomes will be compared with the Mann -Whitney U test and categorical 
variables with the chi -square test or Fischer’s exact test, as appropriate.  
 
Heterogeny of Treatment Effect  
We will examine the effect of group assignment on the primary outcome relative to a set of pre -specified 
baseline variables.  These variables will be prespecified as part of a formal statistical analysis plan 
Study Protocol  
Full Study Title: Effe ct of Antibiotic Choice On ReNal Outcomes (ACORN)  
Primary Investigator: Edward Qian, MD  
completed and made public prior to the completi on of enrollment.  A formal test of interaction will be 
used to evaluate for effect modification.  
 
Presentation of Statistics  
Continuous variables will be described as mean and standard deviation or median and interquartile range 
or bootstrapped 95% confid ence intervals as appropriate.  Categorical variables will be given as number 
and percentage.  All between -group comparisons with continuous variables will be performed using 
Mann -Whitney U tests; categorical variables will be compared with chi -square test ing or Fisher’s exact 
test as appropriate.  
 
Interim Analysis  
We will plan for the DSMB to conduct a single interim analysis for efficacy and safety at the anticipated 
halfway point of the trial, after enrollment of 1025 patients.  The stopping boundary for  efficacy will be 
met if the P value for the difference between groups in the primary outcome is 0.001 or less.  Use of the 
conservative Haybittle -Peto boundary (P < 0.001) will allow the final analysis to be performed using an 
unchanged level of significa nce (P = 0.05).  Given the minimal risk nature of the study and current use of 
both interventions as a part of usual care, there will be no stopping boundary for futility.  At the interim 
analysis, the DSMB will also monitor the distribution of the AKI ord inal outcome within the anti -
pseudomonal penicillin group and may propose to increase the planned sample size to maintain the pre -
planned power to detect an odds ratio of 0.65.  
 
11.0 Reporting of Adverse Events or Unanticipated Problem s 
Assuring patient safety is an essential component of this protocol. All medications used in this trial are 
approved by the Food and Drug Administration and used in clinical practice with an established safety 
profile. This protocol further ensures safety of its par ticipants through:  
a) Exclusion criteria designed to prevent enrollment of patients likely to experience adverse events  
from the study antibiotics ; 
b) Systematic collection of safety outcomes relevant to the use of anti -pseudomonal cephalosporins 
and anti -pseudo monal penicillins in this setting;  
c) Structured monitoring , assessment, recording, and reporting of adverse events.  
 
11.1 Adverse  Event Definitions  
Adverse Event – An adverse event will be defined as any untoward or unfavorable medical 
occurrence in a human subject temporally associated with the subject’s participation in the research, 
whether or not considered related to the subject’s participation in the research.  Any adverse event 
occurring during the research will be classified according to the following  characteristics:  
 
● Seriousness – An adverse event will be considered “serious” if it:  
o Results in death;  
o Is life -threatening (defined as placing the patient at immediate risk of death);  
o Results in inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization;  
o Results in a persistent or significant disability or incapacity;  
o Results in a congenital anomaly or birth defect; or  
Study Protocol  
Full Study Title: Effe ct of Antibiotic Choice On ReNal Outcomes (ACORN)  
Primary Investigator: Edward Qian, MD  
o Based upon appropriate medical judgment, may jeopardize  the patient’s health and may 
require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the other outcomes listed in this 
definition.  
 
● Unexpectedness – An adverse event will be considered “unexpected” if the nature, severity, or 
frequency is neither consi stent with:  
o The known or foreseeable risk of adverse events associated with the procedures involved 
in the research that are described in the protocol -related documents, such as the IRB -
approved research protocol; nor  
o The expected natural progression of an y underlying disease, disorder, or condition of the 
subject experiencing the adverse event and the subject’s predisposing risk factor profile 
for the adverse event.  
 
● Relatedness – The strength of the relationship of an adverse event to a study intervention  or 
study procedure will be defined as follows:  
o Definitely Related : The adverse event follows (1) a reasonable, temporal sequence from a 
study procedure AND (2) cannot be explained by the known characteristics of the 
patient’s clinical state or other ther apies AND (3) evaluation of the patient’s clinical state 
indicates to the investigator that the experience is definitely related to study procedures.  
o Probably or Possibly Related : The adverse event meets some but not all of the above 
criteria for “Definit ely Related”.  
o Probably Not Related : The adverse event occurred while the patient was on the study but 
can reasonably be explained by the known characteristics of the patient’s clinical state or 
other therapies.  
o Definitely Not Related : The adverse event is  definitely produced by the patient’s clinical 
state or by other modes of therapy administered to the patient.  
o Uncertain Relationship : The adverse event does not fit in any of the above categories.  
 
11.2 Monitoring for Adverse Events  
The time interval dur ing which patients will be monitored for the occurrence of adverse events begins at 
randomization and ends at the first of hospital discharge or 28 days.  Adverse events occurring before 
randomization or after hospital discharge or 28 days will not be coll ected. In this trial, enrollment, 
randomization, intervention delivery, monitoring for safety and adverse events and outcome assessment 
will all take place within the electronic health record.  As described an EHR -based advisor will 
continuously monitor fo r discontinuation of study drug and require that clinicians identify reason for 
discontinuation.  Every time a study drug is discontinued, investigators will be notified in real -time 
using an automated lists within the EHR.  Investigators will investigate and adjudicate potential adverse  
as close as feasible to 24 hours after initial report by treating clinicians.  Investigators will assess any 
potential adverse events for whether the adverse event meets the criteria for recording and reporting 
outlined be low. 
 
11.3 Recording and Reporting Adverse Events  
The following types of adverse events will be recorded and reported:  
● Adverse events that are Serious  and Definitely Related, Probably or Possibly Related, or of 
Uncertain Relationship . 
Study Protocol  
Full Study Title: Effe ct of Antibiotic Choice On ReNal Outcomes (ACORN)  
Primary Investigator: Edward Qian, MD  
● Adverse events that are Unexpected  and Definitely Related, Probably or Possibly Related, or of 
Uncertain Relationship . 
 
Adverse events that do not meet the above criteria will not be recorded or reported.  Adverse events that 
the investigator assesses to m eet the above criteria for recording and reporting will be entered into the 
adverse event electronic case report form in the trial database.  The investigator will record a 
preliminary assessment of each characteristic for the adverse event, including seri ousness, 
unexpectedness, and relatedness.  For any adverse event that is serious AND unexpected , and 
definitely related, probably or possibly related, or of uncertain relationship, the investigator will report 
the adverse event  to the principal investigato r within 24 hours  of the investigator becoming aware of 
the adverse event.  For any other adverse event requiring recording and reporting, the investigator will 
report the adverse event  to the principal investigator  within 72 hours  of the investigator becoming 
aware of the adverse event.  The principal investigator will make the final determination regarding each 
characteristic for the adverse event, including seriousness, expectedness, and relatedness.   
 
For adverse events that me et the above criteria for recording and reporting, the coordinating center will 
notify the DSMB, the IRB, and the sponsor in accordance with the following reporting plan:  
Characteristics of the Adverse Event  Reporting Period  
Fatal or life -threatening (and  therefore serious), 
unexpected, and definitely related, probably or 
possibility related, or of uncertain relationship.  Report to the DSMB, IRB, and sponsor 
within 7 days after notification of the 
event.  
Serious but non -fatal and non-life-threatening, 
unexpected, and definitely related, probably or 
possibly related, or of uncertain relationship.  Report to DSMB, IRB, and sponsor within 
15 days of notification of the event.  
All other adverse events meeting criteria for 
recording and  reporting.  Report to DSMB in regularly scheduled 
DSMB safety reports.  
The investigator will distribute the written summary of the DSMB’s periodic review of reported adverse 
events to the IRB in accordance with NIH guidelines: ( http://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/notice -
files/not99 -107.html ). 
 
11.4 Clinical Outcomes that may be Exempt from Adverse Event Recording and Reporting  
In this study of critically ill patients at high risk for death and other adverse outcomes due to their 
underlying critical illness, clinical outcomes, including death and organ dysfunction, will be 
systematically collected and anal yzed for all patients. The primary, secondary, and exploratory 
outcomes will be recorded and reported as clinical outcomes and not as adverse events unless treating 
clinicians or site investigators believe the event is Definitely Related  or Probably or Pos sibly Related  to 
the study intervention or study procedures.  This approach – considering death and organ dysfunction as 
clinical outcomes rather than adverse events and systemically collecting these clinical outcomes for 
analysis – is common in ICU trials . This approach ensures comprehensive data on death and organ 
dysfunction for all patients, rather than relying on sporadic adverse event reporting to identify these 
important events.  The following events are examples of study -specific clinical outcomes t hat would not 
be recorded and reported as adverse events unless treating clinicians or site investigators believe the 
event was Definitely Related  or Probably or Possibly Related  to the study intervention or study 
procedures:  
Study Protocol  
Full Study Title: Effe ct of Antibiotic Choice On ReNal Outcomes (ACORN)  
Primary Investigator: Edward Qian, MD  
● Death (all deaths occurring pr ior to hospital discharge or 28 days will be recorded);  
● Organ dysfunction  
o Circulatory failure, including hypotension, cardiac arrest or shock with or without 
receipt of vasopressors;  
o Acute renal failure  
o Delirium or coma  
● Duration of mechanical ventilation;  
● Duration of ICU admission;  
● Duration of hospitalization  
 
Note: A study -specific clinical outcome may also qualify as a reportable adverse event.  For example, 
anaphylaxis that the investigator considers Definitely Related to an anti -pseudomonal penicillin  would 
be both recorded as a study -specific clinical outcome and reported as a Serious and Definitely Related 
Adverse Event.  
  
11.5 Unanticipated Problems involving Risks to Subjects or Others  
Investigators must also report to the principal investigator  Unanticipated Problems Involving Risks to 
Subjects or Others (“Unanticipated Problems”), regardless of severity, associated with study procedures 
within 24 hours  of the investigator becoming aware of the Unanticipated Problem. An Unanticipated 
Problem is defined as any incident, experience, or outcome that meets all of the following criteria:  
● Unexpected (in terms of nature, severity, or frequency) given (a) the r esearch procedures that 
are described in the protocol -related documents, such as the IRB -approved research protocol; 
and (b) the characteristics of the subject population being studied; AND  
● Definitely Related or Probably or Possibly Related to participatio n in the research (as defined 
above in the section on characteristics of adverse events); AND  
● Suggests that the research places subjects or others at a greater risk of harm (including 
physical, psychological, economic, or social harm) than was previously known or recognized.  
Upon becoming aware of any event that may represent an Unanticipated Problem, the investigator will 
assess whether the event represents an Unanticipated Problem by applying the criteria described above.  
If the investigator determines  that the event represents an Unanticipated Problem, the investigator will 
record the Unanticipated Problem in the Unanticipated Problem electronic case report form in the trial 
database.  The investigators will obtain information about the Unanticipated P roblem  and report the 
Unanticipated Problem to the DSMB, IRB, and sponsor within 15 days of becoming aware of the 
Unanticipated Problem.  
 
12.0 Privacy/Confidentiality Issues  
At no time during the course of this study, its analysis, or its publication will patient identities be revealed 
in any manner. The minimum necessary data containing patient or provider identities will be collected. As 
quickly as feasible, all data collected will be uploaded into a password -protected computerized database 
maintained wit hin a secure, web -based application for building and managing online databases 
(REDCap), or stored on secure servers with user -level access control. All patients will be assigned a 
unique study number for use in the computerized database. At the time of pu blication all identifiers will 
be removed.  
 
Study Protocol  
Full Study Title: Effe ct of Antibiotic Choice On ReNal Outcomes (ACORN)  
Primary Investigator: Edward Qian, MD  
13.0 Follow -up and Record Retention  
Patients will be followed after enrollment for 28 days or until hospital discharge, whichever occurs first.  
Data collected from the medical record will be entered into the sec ure online database REDCap. All data 
will be maintained in the secure online database REDCap until the time of study publication.  At the time 
of publication, a de -identified version of the database will be generated.  
14.0 Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB)  
The principal role of the DSMB is to assure the safety of patients in the trial. They will regularly monitor 
data from this trial, review and assess the performance of its operations, and make recommendations to 
the steering committee and sponsor wi th respect to:  
- Participant safety and risk/benefit ratio of study procedures and interventions  
- Protocol amendments (with specific attention to study population, intervention, and study procedures)  
- Adherence to the protocol requirements  
- Completeness, quali ty, and planned analysis of data  
- Ancillary study burden on participants and main study  
- Possible early termination of the trial because of new external information, early attainment of study 
objectives, safety concerns, or inadequate performance  
The DSMB will consist of members with expertise in critical care  medicine , infectious disease, 
biostatistics, and clinical trials. Appointment of all members is contingent upon the absence of any 
conflicts of interest. All the members of the DSMB are voting members. The Principal Investigator and 
unblinded study biostatistician will be responsible for the preparation of all DSMB and adverse event 
reports. The DSMB will develop a charter and review the protocol and patient notification forms during 
its first m eeting. Subsequent DSMB meetings will be scheduled in accordance with the DSMB Charter 
with the assistance of the Principal Investigator. The DSMB will have the ability to recommend that the 
trial end, be modified, or continued unchanged.  
15.0 References  
 
1.  Cecconi M, Evans L, Levy M, Rhodes A. Sepsis and septic shock. Lancet Lond Engl . 
2018;392(10141):75 -87. doi:10.1016/S0140 -6736(18)30696 -2 
2.  Rhodes A, Evans LE, Al hazzani W, et al. Surviving Sepsis Campaign: International Guidelines for 
Management of Sepsis and Septic Shock: 2016. Intensive Care Med . 2017;43(3):304 -377. 
doi:10.1007/s00134 -017-4683 -6 
3.  Liu VX, Fielding -Singh V, Greene JD, et al. The Timing of Early  Antibiotics and Hospital Mortality 
in Sepsis. Am J Respir Crit Care Med . 2017;196(7):856 -863. doi:10.1164/rccm.201609 -1848OC  
4.  Damiani E, Donati A, Serafini G, et al. Effect of performance improvement programs on compliance 
with sepsis bundles and morta lity: a systematic review and meta -analysis of observational studies. 
PloS One . 2015;10(5):e0125827. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0125827  
5.  Angrill N, Gallego M, Font J, et al. Determinants of empirical antipseudomonal antibiotic 
prescription for adults with  pneumonia in the emergency department. BMC Pulm Med . 2020;20. 
doi:10.1186/s12890 -020-1115 -0 
Study Protocol  
Full Study Title: Effe ct of Antibiotic Choice On ReNal Outcomes (ACORN)  
Primary Investigator: Edward Qian, MD  
6.  Blevins AM, Lashinsky JN, McCammon C, Kollef M, Micek S, Juang P. Incidence of Acute Kidney 
Injury in Critically Ill Patients Receiving Vancomycin with Concomi tant Piperacillin -Tazobactam, 
Cefepime, or Meropenem. Antimicrob Agents Chemother . 2019;63(5). doi:10.1128/AAC.02658 -18 
7.  Abanades S, Nolla J, Rodríguez -Campello A, Pedro C, Valls A, Farré M. Reversible coma secondary 
to cefepime neurotoxicity. Ann Pharm acother . 2004;38(4):606 -608. doi:10.1345/aph.1D322  
8.  Balderia PG, Chandorkar A, Kim Y, Patnaik S, Sloan J, Newman GC. Dosing Cefepime for Renal 
Function Does Not Completely Prevent Neurotoxicity in a Patient With Kidney Transplant. J Patient 
Saf. 2018;14 (2):e33 -e34. doi:10.1097/PTS.0000000000000225  
9.  Drago L, De Vecchi E. The safety of cefepime in the treatment of infection. Expert Opin Drug Saf . 
2008;7(4):377 -387. doi:10.1517/14740338.7.4.377  
10.  Thakar CV, Christianson A, Freyberg R, Almenoff P, Rend er ML. Incidence and outcomes of acute 
kidney injury in intensive care units: a Veterans Administration study. Crit Care Med . 
2009;37(9):2552 -2558. doi:10.1097/CCM.0b013e3181a5906f  
11.  Uchino S, Kellum JA, Bellomo R, et al. Acute renal failure in critical ly ill patients: a multinational, 
multicenter study. JAMA . 2005;294(7):813 -818. doi:10.1001/jama.294.7.813  
12.  Semler MW, Self WH, Wanderer JP, et al. Balanced Crystalloids versus Saline in Critically Ill 
Adults. N Engl J Med . 2018;378(9):829 -839. doi:10. 1056/NEJMoa1711584  
13.  Vandenberghe W, Hoste E. Contrast -associated acute kidney injury: does it really exist, and if so, 
what to do about it? F1000Research . 2019;8. doi:10.12688/f1000research.16347.1  
14.  Hoste EAJ, Bagshaw SM, Bellomo R, et al. Epidemio logy of acute kidney injury in critically ill 
patients: the multinational AKI -EPI study. Intensive Care Med . 2015;41(8):1411 -1423. 
doi:10.1007/s00134 -015-3934 -7 
15.  Gómez H, Kellum JA. Sepsis -induced acute kidney injury. Curr Opin Crit Care . 2016;22(6):54 6-
553. doi:10.1097/MCC.0000000000000356  
16.  Arnaud FC de S, Libório AB. Attributable nephrotoxicity of vancomycin in critically ill patients: a 
marginal structural model study. J Antimicrob Chemother . 2020;75(4):1031 -1037. 
doi:10.1093/jac/dkz520  
17.  Filippone EJ, Kraft WK, Farber JL. The Nephrotoxicity of Vancomycin. Clin Pharmacol Ther . 
2017;102(3):459 -469. doi:10.1002/cpt.726  
18.  Bellos I, Karageorgiou V, Pergialiotis V, Perrea DN. Acute kidney injury following the concurrent 
administration of antipseu domonal β -lactams and vancomycin: a network meta -analysis. Clin 
Microbiol Infect Off Publ Eur Soc Clin Microbiol Infect Dis . 2020;26(6):696 -705. 
doi:10.1016/j.cmi.2020.03.019  
19.  Rutter WC, Burgess DR, Talbert JC, Burgess DS. Acute kidney injury in patien ts treated with 
vancomycin and piperacillin -tazobactam: A retrospective cohort analysis. J Hosp Med . 
2017;12(2):77 -82. doi:10.12788/jhm.2684  
Study Protocol  
Full Study Title: Effe ct of Antibiotic Choice On ReNal Outcomes (ACORN)  
Primary Investigator: Edward Qian, MD  
20.  Long B, April MD. Are Patients Receiving the Combination of Vancomycin and Piperacillin -
Tazobactam at Higher R isk for Acute Renal Injury? Ann Emerg Med . 2018;72(4):467 -469. 
doi:10.1016/j.annemergmed.2018.06.004  
21.  Carreno J, Smiraglia T, Hunter C, Tobin E, Lomaestro B. Comparative incidence and excess risk of 
acute kidney injury in hospitalised patients receivin g vancomycin and piperacillin/tazobactam in 
combination or as monotherapy. Int J Antimicrob Agents . 2018;52(5):643 -650. 
doi:10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2018.08.001  
22.  Downes KJ, Cowden C, Laskin BL, et al. Association of Acute Kidney Injury With Concomitant 
Vancomycin and Piperacillin/Tazobactam Treatment Among Hospitalized Children. JAMA Pediatr . 
2017;171(12):e173219. doi:10.1001/jamapediatrics.2017.3219  
23.  Buhlinger KM, Fuller KA, Faircloth CB, Wallace JR. Effect of concomitant vancomycin and 
piperacillin -tazobactam on frequency of acute kidney injury in pediatric patients. Am J Health -Syst 
Pharm AJHP Off J Am Soc Health -Syst Pharm . 2019;76(16):1204 -1210. doi:10.1093/ajhp/zxz125  
24.  O’Callaghan K, Hay K, Lavana J, McNamara JF. Acute kidney injury with combination vancomycin 
and piperacillin -tazobactam therapy in the ICU: A retrospective cohort study. Int J Antimicrob 
Agents . Published online May 12, 2020:106010. doi:10.1016/j.ijantimi cag.2020.106010  
25.  Hammond DA, Smith MN, Painter JT, Meena NK, Lusardi K. Comparative Incidence of Acute 
Kidney Injury in Critically Ill Patients Receiving Vancomycin with Concomitant Piperacillin -
Tazobactam or Cefepime: A Retrospective Cohort Study. Pharmacotherapy . 2016;36(5):463 -471. 
doi:10.1002/phar.1738  
26.  Kang S, Park J, Yu YM, Park MS, Han E, Chang MJ. Comparison of acute kidney injury and clinical 
prognosis of vancomycin monotherapy and combination therapy with beta -lactams in the intensive 
care unit. PloS One . 2019;14(6):e0217908. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0217908  
27.  Buckley MS, Hartsock NC, Berry AJ, et al. Comparison of acute kidney injury risk associated with 
vancomycin and concomitant piperacillin/tazobactam or cefepime in the intensive care unit. J Crit 
Care . 2018;48:32 -38. doi:10.1016/j.jcrc.2018.08.007  
28.  Hamm ond DA, Smith MN, Li C, Hayes SM, Lusardi K, Bookstaver PB. Systematic Review and 
Meta -Analysis of Acute Kidney Injury Associated with Concomitant Vancomycin and 
Piperacillin/tazobactam. Clin Infect Dis Off Publ Infect Dis Soc Am . 2017;64(5):666 -674. 
doi:1 0.1093/cid/ciw811  
29.  Molina KC, Barletta JF, Hall ST, Yazdani C, Huang V. The Risk of Acute Kidney Injury in Critically 
Ill Patients Receiving Concomitant Vancomycin With Piperacillin -Tazobactam or Cefepime. J 
Intensive Care Med . Published online Februar y 10, 2019:885066619828290. 
doi:10.1177/0885066619828290  
30.  Luther MK, Timbrook TT, Caffrey AR, Dosa D, Lodise TP, LaPlante KL. Vancomycin Plus 
Piperacillin -Tazobactam and Acute Kidney Injury in Adults: A Systematic Review and Meta -
Analysis. Crit Care Me d. 2018;46(1):12 -20. doi:10.1097/CCM.0000000000002769  
Study Protocol  
Full Study Title: Effe ct of Antibiotic Choice On ReNal Outcomes (ACORN)  
Primary Investigator: Edward Qian, MD  
31.  Schreier DJ, Kashani KB, Sakhuja A, et al. Incidence of Acute Kidney Injury Among Critically Ill 
Patients With Brief Empiric Use of Antipseudomonal β -Lactams With Vancomycin. Clin Infect Dis 
Off Pu bl Infect Dis Soc Am . 2019;68(9):1456 -1462. doi:10.1093/cid/ciy724  
32.  Závada J, Hoste E, Cartin -Ceba R, et al. A comparison of three methods to estimate baseline 
creatinine for RIFLE classification. Nephrol Dial Transplant . 2010;25(12):3911 -3918. 
doi:10. 1093/ndt/gfp766  
33.  Semler MW, Rice TW, Shaw AD, et al. Identification of Major Adverse Kidney Events Within the 
Electronic Health Record. J Med Syst . 2016;40(7):167. doi:10.1007/s10916 -016-0528 -z 
 
Antibiotic Choice On ReNal outcomes (ACORN) trial  
Study Protocol Revision Sequence  
10/19/2021  Original Protocol, version 1.0  
11/10/2021  First patient enrolled  
2/11/2021  Amendment to Study Protocol, version 1.1  
 
Exploratory outcomes were updated to match clinicaltrials.gov  (with addition of 
disposition from the Emergency Department ). 
 
Secondary outcome definitions were revised for clarity  and internal inconsistencies 
in outcomes were resolved.  
 
7/27/2022  Amendment to Study Protocol, version 1.2  
 
Sample size was increased to 2,500 at the time of the interim analysis to ensure 
sufficient patients in the subgroup receiving vancomycin at baseline . 
 
Protocol r evision also included changes to match the pre-specified statistical 
analysis plan:  
1. Approach to calculation of baseline creatinine was clarified.  
2. Clarified outcome windows for existing exploratory outcomes.  
3. Inclusion of additional exploratory outcome s: 
a. 7- day and 28 -day renal and neurologic outcomes  
b. Escalation of antibiotics  
c. Hospital -free days  
d. Nephrology consultation  
4. Changed the covariables included in the adjusted  analysis of the primary 
outcome (a secondary analysis) to include enrollment SOFA score, 
presumed source of infection, and receipt of kidney replacement therapy 
at enrollment.  
5. Clarified the definition of the primary analytic population  
10/7/2022  Enrollment complete  
 
 1 Protocol and  statistical analysis plan  for the Antibiotic Choice On ReNal 
outcomes (ACORN) randomized clinical trial  
 
Edward T. Qian, MD1; Jonathan D. Casey, MD, MSc1; Adam Wright, PhD2; Li Wang, 
MS3; Justin K. Siemann, PhD4; Mary Lynn Dear, PhD4; Joanna  L. Stollings, PharmD5; 
Brad L loyd, BS6; Kevin  P. Seitz, MD , MSc1; George Nelson, MD, MPH7; Patty Wright, 
MD7; Edward D. Siew, MD, MSc8; Brad Dennis, MD9; Jesse O. Wrenn, MD, PhD6; 
Jonathan W. Andere ck MD, MBA6; Wesley H. Self, MD, MPH6; Matthew W. Semler, 
MD, MSc1*; Todd W. Rice, MD, MSc1* for the Vanderbilt Learning Healthcare System 
Platform Investigators#. 
 
* These authors contributed equally.  
# A complete list of the members of the Vanderbilt Learning Healthcare System Platform 
Investigators is provided in the Supplement  
 
Affiliations : 
1 Vanderbilt University Medical Center , Department of Medicine, Division of Allergy, 
Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine;  
2 Vanderbilt University Medical Center , Department of Bioinformatics  
3 Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Department of Biostatistics  
4 Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Vanderbilt Institute for Clinical and Translational 
Research  
5 Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Department o f Pharmaceutical Services  
6 Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Department of Emergency Medicine.  
7 Vanderbilt University Medical Center , Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious 
Disease  
8 Vanderbilt University Medical Center , Department of Medicine, Division of Nephrology 
and Hypertension  
9 Vanderbilt University Medical Center , Department of Surgery  
 
 
Corresponding Author:  
Edward T. Qian , MD  
 
Email : 
edward.t.qian@vumc.org  
 
Address : 
T-1218 MCN  
1161 21st Ave S.  
Nashville, TN  37232 -2650  
 
 
 2 Telep hone : 
301-219-2350  
 
Key words for indexing:  Antibacterial Agents, Sepsis, Acute Kidney Injury, Delirium  
 
Subject Descriptor Number: 4.4 Clinical Trials in Critical Care Medicine  
Manuscript Word Count (body only): 4038/4000  
Date : 7/26/2022  
Version: 1  
  
 3 Abstract:  
Introduction : Antibiotics are time -critical in the management of sepsis. When infectious 
organism s are unknown, patients are treated with  empiric antibiotics to include 
coverage for  gram -negative organisms , such as  anti-pseudomonal cephalosporins and 
penicillins . However, i n observational studies some anti -pseudomonal cephalosporins 
(e.g. cefepime) is asso ciated with neurologic dysfunction while the most common  anti-
pseudomonal penicillin ( piperacillin -tazobactam ) is associated with acute kidney injury. 
No randomized control trials have compared these regimens. This manuscript describes 
the protocol and analysis plan for a trial designed to compare  the effects of  anti-
pseudomonal cephalosporins and anti -pseudomonal penicillins  among acutely ill 
patients receiving empiric antibiotic s.  
 
Methods and Analysis:  
The Antibiotic Choice On ReNal outcomes (ACORN) trial is a prospective, single -center, 
non-blinded randomized trial being conducted at Vanderbilt University Medical Center . 
The trial will enroll 2,500 acutely ill adults receiving gram -negative coverage for 
treatment of infection . Eligible p atients are randomized 1:1 to  receive cefepime or 
piperacillin -tazobactam  upon first order entry of a broad -spectrum  antibiotic covering 
gram -negative organisms . The primary outcome is the highest stage of acute kidney 
injury and death occurring between enrollment and 14 days after enrollment. This will be 
compared between patients randomized to cefepime and randomized to piperacillin -
tazobactam using an unadjusted proportional odds regr ession model . The secondary 
outcome s are Major Adverse Kidney Events through day 14  and number of days alive 
and free of delirium  and coma  in 14 days after enrollment . Enrollment began on 
November 10 , 2021 and is expected to be completed in December 2022. 
 
Ethics and Dissemination:  
The trial was approved by the Vanderbilt University Medical Center  institutional review 
board  with a waiver of informed consent . Results will be submitted in a peer -reviewed 
journal and presented at scientific conferences.  
 
 4 Trial Registration:  
This trial was registered with ClinicalTrials.gov ( [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] ) on October 26, 20 21, 
prior to enrollment of the first patient on November 10 , 2021. 
  
 5 Strengths and Limitations:  
 
● This ongoing pragmatic trial will compare  the effects of cefepime  vs piperacillin -
tazobactam  on acute kidney injury  and death among  acutely ill adults receiving 
gram -negative antibiotic therapy in the Emergency Department or Intensive Care 
Unit.  
● Strengths: Broad eligibility criteria,  inclusion of a range of indications for antibiotic 
therapy, and use of the electronic health record to screen for eligible patients  and 
facilitate delivery of the assigned intervention will increase the external validity of 
the findings  
● Limitations: After concealed randomization, p atients, clinicians, and investigators  
are unblinded to study group assignment.  Because urine output is not 
systematically available across all care , the outcome of AKI is based on 
creatinine measurements . 
  
 6 Introduction:  
 Antib iotics are necessary for management of patients with sepsis1 but can cause 
unintended adve rse effects on organ function2. Since specific organism s causing 
infection is often un known, empiric broad -spectrum antibiotics are commonly 
prescribed . For patients at risk for resistant organisms, common regimens include  gram -
positive coverage ( i.e. vancomycin) and gram -negative coverage with an anti -
pseudomonal cephalosporin or penicillin , predominantly  cefepime or piperacillin -
tazobactam1. 
 Because the medications are considered to have comparable anti -pseudomonal 
activity, discussion surrounding choice has focused on adverse effects.  Some 
observational studies have reported an association between receipt of piperacillin -
tazobactam and acute kidney injury  (AKI)3,4, particularly among patients receiving 
vancomycin5–7.  Other studies have shown no relationship between piperacillin -
tazobactam and AKI8,9. AKI is common during hospital ization10, and t here are many 
potential contributors including isotonic fluids11,12, med ication s, and acute illnesses like 
sepsis13,14.  
Similarly, a n association betwee n cephalosporins  and neurotoxicity  manifesting 
as delirium and coma  has been observed .15–17  Delirium , acute brain dysfunction 
characterized by fluctuations in mental status , inattention, altered consciousness, and 
disorganized thinking ,18 is also a common complication of hospital ization . In Intensive 
Care Unit ( ICU) population s, delirium is predictive of mortality, prolonged length of stay, 
and long -term cognitive impairment19,20. The incidence of cephalosporin -induced 
neurotoxicity is unknown but has been reported to  increase in-hospital mortality21.  
A randomized controlled trial would overcome limitations of observational data, 
but none are known to exist22.  Rigorous , high-quality evidence assessing risk of AKI 
and neurotoxicity after exposure to anti-pseudomonal antibiotics would have potential to 
change care received by thousands of acutely ill adults annually . To address the lack of 
available evidence, w e are conduct ing a prospective, ran domized trial comparing anti-
pseudomonal cephalosporins and anti-pseudomonal penicillins among acutely ill adults 
in the Emergency Department ( ED) or ICU.  
 
 7 Methods and Analysis : 
This manuscript was written in accordance with Standard Protocol Items: 
Recommendations for Interventional Trials (SPIRIT) guidelines ( Table  1, Supplement 
1)23. The Learning Healthcare System (LHS) Platform at Vanderbilt University Medical 
Center conducts research studies using a unique model that leverages pragmatic, 
randomized, controlled clinical trials embedded within usual care24. The LHS Platform is 
composed of stakeholders from across the enterprise and supports projects in both the 
pediatric and adult inpa tient and outpatient settings  (Supplement 2) . LHS Platform 
studies focus on comparative effectiveness, implementation science, and programmatic 
evaluation approaches25,26. 
 
Study Design  
The Antibiotic Choice On ReNal outcomes (ACORN) trial  is a pragmatic, single -
center, unblinded, parallel -group, randomized trial comparing anti-pseudomonal 
cephalosporins to anti -pseudomonal penicillins among acutely ill adults receiving gram -
negative antibiotics in the ED  and ICU. At this center, the predominant anti -
pseudomonal cephalosporin is cefepime and  the predominant anti -pseudomonal 
penicillin is piperacillin -tazobactam. The primary outcome is highest stage of AKI or 
death in 14 days . The trial protocol was approved by the institutional review board at 
Vanderbilt University Medical Center  and register ed prior to initiation of enrollment 
([STUDY_ID_REMOVED] ). An independent data and safety monitoring board (DSMB) monitor s 
the progress and safety of the trial.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8  
 STUDY PERIOD  
 Eligibility  
Screen  Randomization  
& 
Allocation  Post -allocation  Final Outcome  
Assessment  
TIMEPOINT  Order entry for 
CEF or PTZ  EHR enrollment 
advisor  7 days after 
enrollment  14 days after 
enrollment  Discharge or 28 days 
after enrollment  
ENROLLMENT:   X    
EHR -based  inclusion 
criteria screening  X     
Manual s creening for 
exclusion criteria by 
treating clinicians  X     
Allocation   X    
INTERVENTIONS:    
Cefepime   X X   
Piperacillin -
tazobactam   X X   
ASSESSMENTS:    
Baseline variables  X X    
Adverse events   X X X  
X 
Primary  and 
secondary outcome   X X X  
Exploratory  
outcomes    X X X 
 
Table  1. Standard Protocol Items: Recommendations for Interventional Trials (SPIRIT) 
checklist. Enrollment, interventions, and assessments. CEF, Cefepime; PTZ, 
piperacillin -tazobactam; EHR, Electronic health record;  
 
 
 
 9 Study Population  
Inclusion criteria : 
1. Age ≥ 18 years old  
2. Located in a participating ED or ICU 
3. Less than 12 hours between presentation to study hospital  
4. Treating clinician initiating an order for  an anti -pseudomonal cephalosporin or 
anti-pseudomonal penicillin  
 
Exclusion criteria:  
1. Known receipt of > 1 dose of an anti -pseudomonal cephalosporin or anti -
pseudomonal penicillin during the last 7 days  
2. Current documented allergy to cephalosporins or penicillin  
3. Known to be a prisoner  
4. Treating clinicians feel that either an anti -pseudomonal cephal osporin or anti -
pseudomonal penicillin is required or contraindicated for the optimal treatment of 
the patient , including for more directed antibiotic therapy against known prior 
resistant infections or suspected sepsis with an associated central nervous 
system infection  
 
Screening and Enrollment  
When a treating clinician in a participating ED or ICU initiates an order for 
cefepime  or piperacillin -tazobactam for a patient who meets all inclusion criteria, a 
clinical decision support (CDS) tool  will 1) inform the provider of the study, 2) query the 
provider regarding  the presence of any exclusion criteria , and if none are present , 3) 
enroll and randomize the patient. For patients who meet an exclusion criterion, the 
reason is recorded  (Fig. 1).  
 
Analysis  population  
The primary goal is the exploration of uncommon safety effects, there fore t he 
population for primary analysis will include all patients who were randomized and 
received  at least one dose of either study drug in the 168 hours ( 7 days ) after 
 10 randomization. A sensitivity analys is will include all patients randomized, including those 
who never received either  cefepime or  piperacillin/tazobactam.  
 
Randomization and Treatment Allocation  
Study group assignments are generated by computerized randomization in a 1:1 
ratio of intervention to control.  Study group assignment will remain concealed until the 
team has confirmed the patient does not meet any exclusion criteria and the patient has 
been enrolled. The CDS tool w ill advise the clinician of group assignment following  
randomization . 
 
Study Interventions  
For patients assigned to cefepime, the CDS tool  will guide providers to 
intravenous cefepime. For patients assigned to piperacillin -tazobactam,  the CDS tool 
will gui de providers to intravenous piperacillin -tazobactam. The CDS tool will display a 
standardized table of dose by glomerular filtration rate , but decisions regarding d ose, 
frequency, and duration will be the treating clinician ’s discretion .  
In the 168 hours ( 7 days ) following enrollment, a ny new order for cefepime or 
piperacillin -tazobactam will open a CDS tool, which display s group assignment  and 
allow s clinician s to (re)order the assigned antibiotic or provide a reason for order ing the 
non-assigned an tibiotic. Similarly, if the assigned antibiotic  is discontinued , the CDS tool  
will solicit a rationale  for discontinuation , including  antibiotic tailoring , newly apparent 
allergy to either cephalosporins  or penicillins , or clinician preference.   
The CDS tool influences only the choice of the initial anti -pseudomonal antibiotic.  
Treating clinicians determine concurrent administration of other antibiotics (e.g., 
vancomycin, metronidazole), duration of therapy, escalation, de -escalation, approach to 
source c ontrol, and use of culture and laboratory data to modify antibiotic therapy.  
 
Data Collection  
 Trial personnel will monitor for adverse events daily and will record  the following 
data elements at the time of enrollment by manual review of the health record  
(Supplement 3 and 4) : 
 11 - Presence of s epsis , defined by Sepsis -3 criteria27 
- Transplant recipient status  
- Receipt of renal rep lacement therapy (RRT)  prior to enrollment  
- Presumed source of infection organized into groups based on previously 
published data28 
 
All other data will be obtained using electronic exports from the health record. The 
following variables are collected:  
1. Collected at baseline : Age, sex, height, weight, body mass index, race, 
Sequential Organ Failure Assessment ( SOFA ) score, active medical problems at 
the time of admission, active comorbidities, comorbidities and medications known 
to increase risk of kidney or neurologic injury at enroll ment, mean arterial 
pressure and vasopressor use prior to antibiotic receipt, analgesia and sedation 
use prior to antibiotic receipt, admission to ICU vs ward  
2. Collected from randomization to hospital discharge: Mean arterial pressure and 
vasopressor use, p H, PaO2, PaCO2, respiratory rate, heart rate, oxygen 
saturation, temperature, lactic acid, elements of a basic metabolic panel, 
magnesium, elements of a complete blood count, antibiotic receipt, all 
microbiologic culture data, Confusion Assessment Method f or the ICU ( CAM -
ICU), Richmond Agitation Sedation Score ( RASS ), Glasgow Coma Scale ( GCS ), 
mechanical ventilation status and variables related to ventilation, nephrology 
consultation, receipt of new RRT, indications for new RRT among patients who 
received new RRT , medications known to increase risk of kidney injury, 
medications known to increase risk of neurologic injury, admitting team, date of 
admission, days spent in the ICU, days spent in the hospital, date of intubation (s) 
and extubation (s), date of discharge,  and date of death . 
 
Primary Outcome  
The primary outcome will be a combination of  the highest stage of AKI and death 
between randomization and day 14.  The stage s of AKI are defined using creatinine 
 12 measurements and the  “Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes ( KDIGO )”29 
criteria .  The score will range from 0 (best value) to 4 (worst value):  
0 = No AKI  
1 = Stage 1 AKI (Creatinine increase d by 1.5 -1.9 times bas eline OR increase by 
>= 0.3 mg/dL)  
2 = Stage 2 AKI (Creatinine increase d by 2.0 -2.9 times baseline)  
3 = Stage 3 AKI (Creatinine increase d by >= 3.0 times baseline OR increase to 
>= 4.0 mg/dL OR New RRT)  
4 = Death  
 
“Baseline ” creatinine values are defined as the lowest  prior creatinine values 
from three different timepoints : the pre -illness creatinine value, the peri -enrollment 
creatinine value, and the lowest prior on -study creatinine value as defined below.  Death 
is defined a s mortality from any cause occurring prior to  or on  the end of study day 14, 
censored at  hospital discharge.  RRT is defined as receipt of RRT at any point between 
randomization and the end of study day 14, censored at hospital discharge. Patients 
who are receiving RRT prior to enro llment can only experience values of 0 (patient did 
not die) or 4 (patient die d) because they are ineligible to experience changes in 
creatinine or new receipt of RRT that define levels 1  through 3 .  
Patients’ pre -illness creatinine will be defined as t he lowest serum creatinine 
between 12 months  and 24 h ours prior to enrollment . For patients for whom a value i s 
unavailable, a pre -illness creatinine value will be estimated using a previously -described 
three -variable formula  [creatinine = 0.74 − 0.2 (if female) + 0.08 (if African American) + 
0.003 × age (in  years)]30. There are no validated estimations of creatinine without race 
but we will evaluate the effect of social constructs by fitting models both with and 
without race in a sensitivity analysis.  
Patients’ p eri-enrollment creatinine will be defined hierarchically using the 
creatinine value closest to enrollment in : (first) the 24 hours prior to enrollment, if 
available, and (second ) the six hours after enrollment (if no value is available prior to 
enrollment) .  Prevalent AKI, or AKI that is present on admission and unrelated to the 
 13 study intervention, will be defined by compar ing the peri -enrollment creatinine to the 
pre-illness creatinine .  
On-study creatinine will be defined as any creatinine value occurring after both 
the time of enrollment and the time of the peri -enrollment creatinine value . On-study 
creatinine values will be used to identify  incident AKI  and calculate the stage of AKI for 
the primary outcome.    
The primary outcome will be calculated as follows:  
• Patients who survive without new RRT and do not experience an on -study 
creatinin e value that is at least 0.3 mg/dL higher than the peri -enrollment 
value or any preceding on -study value,  and whose on -study creatin ine is 
never more  than 1.5 times the peri-enrollment value or any preceding on -
study value, will be considered not to have experienced incident AKI and 
will receive a value of 0  for the primary outcome.  
• Among patients who survive and experience AKI (have  on-study 
creatinine value that is at 1.5 times or at least 0.3 mg/dL higher than the 
peri-enrollment value or any prece ding on -study value ), the score for the 
primary outcome will be determined by the stage of AKI  and classified as 
follows : 
a. A value of 1 if the highest on -study creatinine  after qualifying for 
AKI is less than 2.0 times the lowest of the pre -illness creatini ne 
value, the peri -enrollment creatinine value, and the lowest prior on -
study creatinine value  (baseline  creatinine ); 
b. A value of 2  if the highest on -study creatinine after qualifying for 
AKI is at least 2.0 times and less than 3 .0 times the lowest of the 
pre-illness creatinine value, the peri -enrollment creatinine value, 
and the lowest prior on -study creatinine value  (baseline creatinine ); 
and 
c. A value of 3  if the highest on -study creatinine after qualifying for 
AKI is at least 3.0 times the lowest of the pre -illness creatinine 
value, the peri -enrollment creatinine value, and the lowest prior on -
 14 study creatinine value  (baseline creatinine ), with a maximum 
creatinine above 4 mg/d L, or receive new RRT  
• Patients who die will receive a value of 4  
 
The mechanisms and extent of AKI with antibiotic exposure are not well understood .  
The primary outcome window of  14 days was chosen as it was felt to capture the period 
most likely to be affected by controlling antibiotics choice for 168 ho urs (7 days).  
 
Secondary Outcomes  
We have prespecified two secondary outcomes. Major Adverse Kidney Events 
within  14 days (MAKE14) , is the c omposite outcome of death within 14 days, new RRT 
within 14 days, or stage 2 or higher AKI at day 14 , according to KDIGO creatinine 
criteria . The second  is number of days alive and free of delirium and coma  in the 14 
days after enrollment (Delirium  and Coma -Free Days to day 14).  Delirium is defined as 
a positive assessment on the CAM -ICU31 and c oma is defined as a RASS  of -4 or -532 
at any point during that study day . 
 
Exploratory Outcomes  
- Exploratory Renal Outcomes  
o Major Adverse Kidney Events within  28 days (MAKE28)  
o Highest stage of AKI or death  between randomization and day 7 
o Stage 2 or higher AKI  as defined in the KDIGO criteria for creatinine level 
within 14 days  and 28 days  after enrollment  
o New receipt of RRT within 14 days and 28 days  after enrollment  
o Days alive and free of RRT during 14 days  and 28 days after enrollment  
o Highest creatinine level within 28 days after enrollment  
o Change from pre-illness creatinine  to the highest creatinine level  within 28 
days after enrollment  
o Final creatinine level before hospital discharge  at 28 days  
o Ongoing receipt of RRT at hospital discharge  or 28 days  
o Nephrology consultation  
 15 - Exploratory Neurologic Outcomes  
o Worst GCS  score during the 7 days,  14 days , and 28 days after 
enrollment  
o Delirium  and Coma -Free Days in the 28 days after enrollment  
- Exploratory Clinical Outcomes  
o ICU-free, Hospital -free, Ventilator -free, and Vasopressor -free days  in the 
28 days after enrollment  
o 14-day mortality  
o 28-day mortality  
o Disposition of patients admitted from the ED (ward vs ICU)  
o Escalation of antibiotics defined  by subsequent receipt of meropenem,  
meropenem -vaborbactam,  imipenem, imipen em-relebactam, cefiderocol, 
ceftazidime -avibactam, ceftolozane -tazobactam,  tigecycline, amikacin, 
tobramycin, gentam icin. 
Definition of Supportive Therapy -Free days is available in  Supplement section 5.  
 
DSMB  and Interim Analysis  
A DSMB composed of experts in critical care medicine, infectious disease, and 
biostatistics has overseen the design of the trial and is monitoring its conduct  
(Supplement 6). The DSMB conduct ed a single interim analysis , prepared by the study 
biostatistician, at the anticipated halfway point of the trial after enrollment of 1025 
patients . The meeting was held on July 14, 2022 , and the DSMB recommended 
continuing the trial to completion without a lteration .  The stopping boundary for efficacy 
was prespecified as  p-value for the difference between groups in the primary outcome 
of 0.001 or less.  Given current use of both interventions as a part of usual care, there 
was no stopping boundary for futility.  Use of a conservative Haybittle -Peto boundary  for 
efficacy  will allow the final analysis to be performed using an unchanged level of 
significance (P = 0.05).  The DSMB retains the authority to recommend stopping the trial 
at any point, request additional data or interim analyses, or request modifications of 
study protocol to protect patient safety.  
 
 16 Sample Size Estimation  
As specified in the initial  trial protocol, at the time of the single, planned interim 
analysis the DSMB oversaw a re -estimation of the planned sample size.  Because [1] 
concurrent receipt  of vancomycin has been hypothesized to be in the proposed 
mechanistic pathway between receipt  of an anti -pseudomonal penicillin and AKI and [2] 
approximately 75% of patients in the trial concurrently receive vancomycin, the sample 
size was increased by 25 % from 2,0 50 to 2,500  patients . The increase in sample size 
ensure s the number of patients receiving concurrent vancomycin will be approximately 
2,050, consistent with the original sample size estimation.  Assuming a two -sided alpha 
of 0.05 and a distribut ion of the primary outcome with approximately 70% of patients 
experiencing no AKI, 10% of patients experiencing stage I AKI, 7% of patients 
experiencing stage II AKI, 7% of patients experiencing stage III AKI, and 6% of patients 
experiencing death, we calc ulated that enrollment of a total of 2,500 patients would 
provide 92% statistical power to detect an odds ratio of 0.75 in the primary analysis.  
 
Statistical Analysis Principles  
Analyses will be conducted following reproducible research principles using R (R 
Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria)33. Continuous variables will be 
reported as mean ± SD or median and IQR; categorical varia bles will be reported as 
frequencies and proportions. As a randomized controlled trial, there will be no 
comparison of baseline characteristics. A two -sided p -value of < 0.05 will be used to 
indicate statistical significance; with just one primary outcome,  no adjustment for 
multiplicity will be made. Two secondary outcomes are specified, one safety outcome 
for each treatment regimen . Since hypothesized safety concerns are independent, we 
will not adjust our secondary outcomes for multiplicity. For all other  outcomes, emphasis 
will be placed on magnitude of differences between groups rather than statistical 
significance.  
 
Main Analysis of the Primary Outcome  
The main  analysis will be an unadjusted, intention -to-treat comparison of the 
primary outcome between patients randomized to receive anti-pseudomonal 
 17 cephalosporins versus  anti-pseudomonal penicillins who received at least one dose of a 
study drug using a proportional odds regression model . The unadjusted common odds 
ratio (cOR) with confidence int ervals will be the primary treatment effect.  If departures 
from the proportionality assumption are observed, then a partially proportional odds 
model will be constructed . 
 
Secondary Analyses of the Primary Outcome  
Multivariable modeling to account for covariates  
To account for participants ’ baseline status , we will include covariates in the 
proportional odds regression model . The following prespecified baseline covariates  will 
be considered : age; sex; peri-enrollment  creatinine ; receipt of RRT prior to enrollment; 
receipt of vasopressors; receipt of mechanical ventilation; SOFA score; presumed 
source of infection; enrollment location (ED vs ICU) .  Source of infection will be 
categorized as:  lung, intra -abdominal (perforated viscus, ischemic bowel, 
cholecystitis/cholangitis, peritonitis/abscess/small bowel obstruction, Clostridium difficile  
colitis, spontaneous bacterial peritonitis, pancreatitis, enterocolitis/diverticulitis, other 
intra-abdominal infections), urinary (pyelonephritis, obstructive urinary tract infection), 
skin and soft tissue (cellulitis/abscess/necrotizing fasciitis/decubitus ulcer, surgical site 
infection), other (bone/joint , primary blood stream infection, intravascular ca theter, 
disseminated infection, central nervous system infection, endocarditis, other), and 
unknown.  
 
Effect Modification  
We will test the interaction between the treatment effect of  anti-pseudomonal 
cephalosporins vs anti-pseudomonal penicillins and baseline variables expected to 
modify effects  of treatments on the outcome s. The effect modifiers will be tested one by 
one by including both the main effect and the interaction term in the adjusted model . 
Because this stud y is not formally designed or powered to test for interaction, a less 
conservative two-sided p value for the interaction term will be used, with values less 
than 0.10 considered suggestive of potential interaction and values less than 0.05 
considered concl usive evidence . The following variables will be consid ered: 
 18 1. Location at randomization  (ED vs ICU)  
2. Presence of sepsis  (meeting Sepsis -3 criteria) at randomization  
3. Receipt of vancomycin (defined as an order for vancomycin in the 12 hours 
before or 6 hours after randomization)  
4. Source of infection  
5. AKI at randomization  
6. CKD at randomization  
7. Neutropenia at randomization  
8. Admitting team (medicine vs surgical)  
 
Sensitivity Analyses of the Primary Outcome  
To assess robustness of findings, the main analysis of the primary outcome will 
be repeated in several alternative  population s. First, we will include all  patients who 
were identified by the CDS tool  as meeting eligibility criteria , regardless of receipt of any 
doses of anti-pseudomonal cephalosporins or anti -pseudomonal pen icillins . Second , 
many patients are initiated on antibiotics in the acute setting , which are stopped as a 
more likely cause for their illness becomes known  (e.g. pulmonary embolism) . We will 
repeat the main analysis restricted to the subset o f patients that received more than  2 
days (48 hours) of anti-pseudomonal therapy . Third, because race is a social construct , 
we will repeat the main analysis with those whose pre-illness creatinine was estimated 
by an equation without race as a factor.  Fourth, to avoid uncertainty around the 
calculations of pre-illness creatinine, we will repeat the main analysis excluding patients 
with calculated pre-illness creatinine values . Because group assignment might influence 
recovery from prevalent AKI in a way that could affect calculations of the primary 
outcome, we will recalculate the primary outcome as a repeated measure assessed 
daily from randomization to day 14 using only the pre -illness creatinine as the baseline 
creatinine.  
 
Analysis of the Secondary Outcomes  
Analysis of secondary outcomes will follow a similar framework to the primary 
analysis, with a systematic assessment of unadjusted mode ls, adjusted models using 
 19 the same set of covariates. The secondary outcome of MAKE14 will be compared 
between groups using  a logistic regression model . Delirium  and coma -free days to  day 
14 will be compared between groups using a proportional odds regression model , and 
will include the additional covariate of coma on enrollment  for the adjusted model . 
Delirium and coma free days to day 14 wil l be assessed for effect modification using the 
same approach as the primary outcome replacing receipt of vancomycin  with baseline 
coma .  
 
Analyses of Exploratory Outcomes  
Exploratory outcomes will proceed using unadjusted analyses only, with 
presentation o f effect sizes and confidence intervals as well as p -values.  Continuous 
outcomes will be compared with the Mann -Whitney U test and  difference in medians 
reported. For categorical variables , groups will be compared  with the chi -square test or 
Fischer’s exac t test as appropriate  and results will be expressed as a difference in 
proportions or odds ratios, each with 95% confidence intervals .  
 
Handling of Missing Data  
In the case that a patient is enrolled, never receives RRT, and is discharged alive 
without ha ving a creatinine value measured following enrollment, the patient will be 
assumed to have no AKI. When data are missing for secondary or exploratory 
outcomes, complete -case analysis, excluding cases where data for the analyzed 
outcome are missing , will be performed . There will be no imputation of missing data for 
these outcomes . In adjusted analyses, missing data for covariates will be imputed using 
multiple imputations.  
 
Trial status  
The ACORN  trial is currently enrolling and started enrollment on  November  10, 
2021 . 
 
 
 
 20 Ethics and Dissemination  
Waiver of Informed Consent  
Acutely ill patients for whom the provider is ordering broad -spectrum antibiotics in 
the ED or ICU are at significant risk for morbidity and mortality from their underlying 
illness. Most patients receiving empiric gram -negative antibiotics in routine clinical care 
receive either anti-pseudomonal cephalosporins or anti -pseudomonal penici llins. Any 
benefits or risks of these two approaches are experienced by patients receiving gram 
negative antibiotics in clinical care, outside the context of research. As a requirement for 
enrollment in the ACORN trial, the patient’s treating clinician mus t have made the 
decision to order  either anti-pseudomonal cephalosporins or anti -pseudomonal 
penicillins as part of routine clinical care and affirmed  that either would be a safe  and 
reasonable  approach for the patient (otherwise the patient is excluded). Therefore, 
making the decision between the two approaches randomly through  study group 
assignment rather than by a provider who thinks either approach is safe  and reasonable  
for the patient was proposed  to pose no more than minimal incremental  risk. 
Obtaining informed consent for participation in the study would be impracticable. 
Receipt of antibiotics in sepsis  is time sensitive . Each hour delay in antibiotics in 
patients with sepsis is associated with an increase in mortalit y34. Attempting to o btain 
prospective written informed consent from patients presenting to the ED or ICU during 
the interval  between the placement of an order for empiric antibiotics  and their 
administration  risks delaying antibiotic delivery .  Moreover, acutely ill patients with 
sepsis are commonly delirious or unconscious, and a legally authorized representative 
is not consistently present at the t ime of initiation of antibiotics.  Because the trial 
determines only the choice of the initial anti -pseudomonal antibiotic and defers 
decisions regarding subsequent doses of antibiotics (e.g., duration of therapy, 
escalation, de -escalation) to treating clinicians, enrollment, tr ial group assignment, and 
the primary study procedure (administration of the assigned antibiotic) common ly occur s 
within 1 hour of meeting eligibility criteria.   
Because the study was expected to pose minimal risk and prospective informed 
consent was considered  to be impracticable, a waiver of informed consent was 
requested and granted from the Vanderbilt Un iversity Medical Center IRB.   
 21 Protocol Changes  
ClinicalTrials.Gov will be updated with any amendments to the protocol as per 
SPIRIT guidelines  (Supplement 7).  
 
Dissemination Plan  
Trial results will be submitted to a peer -reviewed journal for consideration of 
publication and will be presented at one or more scientific conferences.  Data will be 
made available following publication (Supplement 8).  
 
Conclusion  
To allow for a clearer and more objective interpretation of trial results, this 
descript ion delineates the ACORN trial methods and analysis prior to the conclusion of 
enrollment.  
  
 22 Contributors : All study authors approved the final version of this manuscript. Study 
concept and design: E.T.Q., J.D.C., A.W., L.W., J.L.S., G.N., P.W., E.D.S., J.O.W., 
J.W.A., W.H.S., M.W.S., T.W.R. ; Acquisition of data: E.T.Q., B.L., K.P.S. ; Drafting of the 
manuscript: E.T.Q ., J.D.C., M.W.S., T.W.R. ; Critical revision of the manuscript for 
important intellectual content:  E.T.Q., J.D.C., A.W., L.W., J.K.S., M.L.D, J.L.S., B.L., 
K.P.S., G.N., P.W., E.D.S., B.D., J.O.W., J.W.A., W.H.S., M.W.S., T.W.R. ; Study 
supervision: M.W.S., T.W.R.   
 
Funding:   The project described was supported by the VICTR Learning Healthcare 
System Platform under CTSA award No. UL1 TR002243 from the National Center for 
Advancing Translational Sciences. It contents are solely the responsibility of the authors 
and do not necess arily represent official views of the National Center for Advancing 
Translational Sciences or the National Institutes of Health. E.T.Q. was supported by the 
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute award No. T32HL087738.  J.D.C. was 
supported in part by th e NHLBI ( K23HL153584 ). M.W.S. was supported in part by the 
NHLBI ( K23HL143053 ). E.D.S. was supported by the Vanderbilt O’Brien Kidney Center 
P30-DK114809 for service provided through the Clinical and Translational Research 
Core. The funding institutions had no role in (1) conception, design, or conduct of the 
study, (2) collection, manageme nt, analysis, interpretation, or presentation of the data, 
or (3) preparation, review, or approval of the manuscript.   
 
Competing  Interest s and Financial Disclosures :  None  
 
Patient and Public Involvement : Patients or the public were not involved in the 
design, or conduct, or reporting, or dissemination plans of our research  
 
 
  
 23 Figure 1. Electronic health record -based  enrollment advisor  
 
  
 24 References  
1. Rhodes A, Evans LE, Alhazzani W, et al. Surviving Sepsis Campaign: 
International Guidelines for Management of Sepsis and Septic Shock: 2016. Intensive 
Care Med . 2017;43(3):304 -377. doi:10.1007/s00134 -017-4683 -6 
2. Wright J, Paauw DS. Complications of Antibiotic Therapy. Med Clin North Am . 
2013;97(4):667 -679. doi:10.1016/j.mcna.2013.02.006  
3. Lee JD, Heintz BH, Mosher HJ, Livorsi DJ, Egge JA, Lund BC. Risk of Acute 
Kidney Injury a nd Clostridioides difficile Infection With Piperacillin/Tazobactam, 
Cefepime, and Meropenem With or Without Vancomycin. Clin Infect Dis Off Publ Infect 
Dis Soc Am . 2021;73(7):e1579 -e1586. doi:10.1093/cid/ciaa1902  
4. Kadomura S, Takekuma Y, Sato Y, et al. H igher incidence of acute kidney injury 
in patients treated with piperacillin/tazobactam than in patients treated with cefepime: a 
single -center retrospective cohort study. J Pharm Health Care Sci . 2019;5:13. 
doi:10.1186/s40780 -019-0142 -6 
5. Blevins AM, Las hinsky JN, McCammon C, Kollef M, Micek S, Juang P. Incidence 
of Acute Kidney Injury in Critically Ill Patients Receiving Vancomycin with Concomitant 
Piperacillin -Tazobactam, Cefepime, or Meropenem. Antimicrob Agents Chemother . 
2019;63(5). doi:10.1128/AAC.0 2658 -18 
6. O’Callaghan K, Hay K, Lavana J, McNamara JF. Acute kidney injury with 
combination vancomycin and piperacillin -tazobactam therapy in the ICU: A retrospective 
cohort study. Int J Antimicrob Agents . Published online May 12, 2020:106010. 
doi:10.1016 /j.ijantimicag.2020.106010  
7. Arnaud FC de S, Libório AB. Attributable nephrotoxicity of vancomycin in critically 
ill patients: a marginal structural model study. J Antimicrob Chemother . 
2020;75(4):1031 -1037. doi:10.1093/jac/dkz520  
8. Buckley MS, Hartsock NC, Berry AJ, et al. Comparison of acute kidney injury risk 
associated with vancomycin and concomitant piperacillin/tazobactam or cefepime in the 
intensive care unit. J Crit Care . 2018;48:32 -38. doi:10.1016/j.jcrc.2018.08.007  
9. Schreier DJ, Kashani KB, Sa khuja A, et al. Incidence of Acute Kidney Injury 
Among Critically Ill Patients With Brief Empiric Use of Antipseudomonal β -Lactams With 
Vancomycin. Clin Infect Dis Off Publ Infect Dis Soc Am . 2019;68(9):1456 -1462. 
doi:10.1093/cid/ciy724  
10. Wang HE, Muntner P, Chertow GM, Warnock DG. Acute kidney injury and 
mortality in hospitalized patients. Am J Nephrol . 2012;35(4):349 -355. 
doi:10.1159/000337487  
11. Semler MW, Self WH, Wanderer JP, et al. Balanced Crystalloids versus Saline in 
Critically Il l Adults. N Engl J Med . 2018;378(9):829 -839. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1711584  
12. Self WH, Semler MW, Wanderer JP, et al. Balanced Crystalloids versus Saline in 
Noncritically Ill Adults. N Engl J Med . 2018;378(9):819 -828. 
doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1711586  
13. Gómez H, Ke llum JA. Sepsis -induced acute kidney injury. Curr Opin Crit Care . 
2016;22(6):546 -553. doi:10.1097/MCC.0000000000000356  
14. Hoste EAJ, Bagshaw SM, Bellomo R, et al. Epidemiology of acute kidney injury 
in critically ill patients: the multinational AKI -EPI st udy. Intensive Care Med . 
2015;41(8):1411 -1423. doi:10.1007/s00134 -015-3934 -7 
 25 15. Abanades S, Nolla J, Rodríguez -Campello A, Pedro C, Valls A, Farré M. 
Reversible coma secondary to cefepime neurotoxicity. Ann Pharmacother . 
2004;38(4):606 -608. doi:10.1345/ap h.1D322  
16. Balderia PG, Chandorkar A, Kim Y, Patnaik S, Sloan J, Newman GC. Dosing 
Cefepime for Renal Function Does Not Completely Prevent Neurotoxicity in a Patient 
With Kidney Transplant. J Patient Saf . 2018;14(2):e33 -e34. 
doi:10.1097/PTS.00000000000002 25 
17. Drago L, De Vecchi E. The safety of cefepime in the treatment of infection. 
Expert Opin Drug Saf . 2008;7(4):377 -387. doi:10.1517/14740338.7.4.377  
18. Patel MB, Bednarik J, Lee P, et al. Delirium Monitoring in Neurocritically Ill 
Patients: A Systemat ic Review. Crit Care Med . 2018;46(11):1832 -1841. 
doi:10.1097/CCM.0000000000003349  
19. Pandharipande PP, Girard TD, Jackson JC, et al. Long -term cognitive 
impairment after critical illness. N Engl J Med . 2013;369(14):1306 -1316. 
doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1301372  
20. Girard TD, Jackson JC, Pandharipande PP, et al. Delirium as a predictor of long -
term cognitive impairment in survivors of critical illness. Crit Care Med . 
2010;38(7):1513 -1520. doi:10.1097/CCM.0b013e3181e47be1  
21. Boschung -Pasquier L, Atkinson A, Kastner LK, et al. Cefepime neurotoxicity: 
thresholds and risk factors. A retrospective cohort study. Clin Microbiol Infect Off Publ 
Eur Soc Clin Microbiol Infect Dis . 2020;26(3):333 -339. doi:10.1016/j.cmi.2019.06.028  
22. Rhee C, Dantes R, Epstein L, et al. Incide nce and Trends of Sepsis in US 
Hospitals Using Clinical vs Claims Data, 2009 -2014. JAMA . 2017;318(13):1241 -1249. 
doi:10.1001/jama.2017.13836  
23. Chan AW, Tetzlaff JM, Gøtzsche PC, et al. SPIRIT 2013 explanation and 
elaboration: guidance for protocols of cl inical trials. BMJ. 2013;346:e7586. 
doi:10.1136/bmj.e7586  
24. Lindsell CJ, Gatto CL, Dear ML, et al. Learning From What We Do, and Doing 
What We Learn: A Learning Health Care System in Action. Acad Med J Assoc Am Med 
Coll. 2021;96(9):1291 -1299. doi:10.1097 /ACM.0000000000004021  
25. Qian ET, Gatto CL, Amusina O, et al. Assessment of Awake Prone Positioning in 
Hospitalized Adults With COVID -19: A Nonrandomized Controlled Trial. JAMA Intern 
Med. 2022;182(6):612 -621. doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2022.1070  
26. Hasse lblad M, Morrison J, Kleinpell R, et al. Promoting patient and nurse safety: 
testing a behavioural health intervention in a learning healthcare system: results of the 
DEMEANOR pragmatic, cluster, cross -over trial. BMJ Open Qual . 2022;11(1):e001315. 
doi:10. 1136/bmjoq -2020 -001315  
27. Singer M, Deutschman CS, Seymour CW, et al. The Third International 
Consensus Definitions for Sepsis and Septic Shock (Sepsis -3). JAMA . 
2016;315(8):801 -810. doi:10.1001/jama.2016.0287  
28. Leligdowicz A, Dodek PM, Norena M, et al.  Association between source of 
infection and hospital mortality in patients who have septic shock. Am J Respir Crit Care 
Med. 2014;189(10):1204 -1213. doi:10.1164/rccm.201310 -1875OC  
29. Kidney Disease Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) Acute Kidney Injury Wo rk 
Group. KDIGO clinical practice guideline for acute kidney injury. Kidney Int Suppl . 
2012;2(1):1 -138. doi:10.1038/kisup.2012.1  
 26 30. Závada J, Hoste E, Cartin -Ceba R, et al. A comparison of three methods to 
estimate baseline creatinine for RIFLE classifica tion. Nephrol Dial Transplant . 
2010;25(12):3911 -3918. doi:10.1093/ndt/gfp766  
31. Ely EW, Inouye SK, Bernard GR, et al. Delirium in Mechanically Ventilated 
Patients: Validity and Reliability of the Confusion Assessment Method for the Intensive 
Care Unit (CAM -ICU). JAMA . 2001;286(21):2703. doi:10.1001/jama.286.21.2703  
32. Sessler CN, Gos nell MS, Grap MJ, et al. The Richmond Agitation –Sedation 
Scale. Am J Respir Crit Care Med . 2002;166(10):1338 -1344. doi:10.1164/rccm.2107138  
33. RStudio Team. RStudio: Integrated Development for R. http://www.rstudio.com/  
34. Liu VX, Fielding -Singh V, Green e JD, et al. The Timing of Early Antibiotics and 
Hospital Mortality in Sepsis. Am J Respir Crit Care Med . 2017;196(7):856 -863. 
doi:10.1164/rccm.201609 -1848OC  
 
1
Qian ET, et al. BMJ Open 2023;13:e066995. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2022-066995Open access  
Protocol and statistical analysis plan for 
the Antibiotic Choice On ReNal outcomes (ACORN) randomised clinical
 trial
Edward Tang Qian     ,1 Jonathan D Casey,1 Adam Wright,2 Li Wang,3 
Justin Siemann,4 Mary Lynn Dear,4 Joanna Stollings,5 Bradley Daniel Lloyd,6 
Kevin Seitz,1 George Nelson,7 Patty Wright,7 Edward D Siew,8 Bradley Dennis,9 
Jesse Wrenn,6 Jonathan Andereck,6 Wesley H Self,6 Matthew W Semler     ,1 
Todd W Rice,1 Vanderbilt Learning Healthcare System Platform Investigators
To cite: Qian ET, Casey JD, 
Wright A, et al.  Protocol and statistical analysis plan for the Antibiotic Choice On ReNal outcomes (ACORN) randomised clinical trial. BMJ Open 2023;13:e066995. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2022-066995
 ►Prepublication history and 
additional supplemental material for this paper are available online. To view these files, please visit the journal online (http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/
 
bmjopen-2022-066995).
MWS and TWR contributed 
equally.
Received 27 July 2022
Accepted 02 March 2023
For numbered affiliations see end of article.
Correspondence to
Dr Edward Tang Qian;  
 edward.  t. qian@  vumc.  orgProtocol
© Author(s) (or their 
employer(s)) 2023. Re-  use 
permitted under CC BY-  NC. No 
commercial re-  use. See rights 
and permissions. Published by BMJ.
ABSTRACT
Introduction  Antibiotics are time-  critical in the 
management of sepsis. 
When infectious organisms 
are unknown, patients are treated with empiric 
antibiotics to include coverage for gram-  negative 
organisms, such as antipseudomonal cephalosporins
 
and penicillins. However, in observational studies, some antipseudomonal cephalosporins (eg, cefepime) are associated with neurologic dysfunction while the most common antipseudomonal penicillin (piperacillin–tazobactam) is associated with acute kidney injury (AKI). No randomised control trials have compared these regimens. This manuscript describes the protocol and analysis plan for a trial designed to compare the effects of antipseudomonal cephalosporins and antipseudomonal penicillins among acutely ill patients receiving empiric antibiotics.Methods and analysis
 The Antibiotic Choice On 
ReNal outcomes trial is a prospective, single-  centre, 
non-  blinded randomised trial being conducted 
at V
anderbilt University Medical Center. The trial 
will enrol 2500 acutely ill adults receiving gram-  
negative coverage for treatment of infection.
 Eligible 
patients are randomised 1:1 to receive cefepime or piperacillin–tazobactam on first order entry of a broad-
 spectrum antibiotic covering gram-  negative 
organisms. 
The primary outcome is the highest stage 
of AKI and death occurring between enrolment and 14 days after enrolment. This will be compared between patients randomised to cefepime and randomised to piperacillin–tazobactam using an unadjusted proportional odds regression model. The secondary outcomes are major adverse kidney events through day 14 and number of days alive and free of delirium and coma in 14 days after enrolment. Enrolment began on 10 November 2021 and is expected to be completed in December 2022.Ethics and dissemination
 The trial was approved by 
the V
anderbilt University Medical Center institutional 
review board (IRB#210591) with a waiver of informed consent. Results will be submitted to a peer-
 reviewed 
journal and presented at scientific conferences.Trial registration number
 [STUDY_ID_REMOVED].INTRODUCTION
Antibiotics are necessary for the management of patients with sepsis,
1 but can cause unin-
tended adverse effects on organ function.2 
Since specific organisms causing infection are often unknown, empiric broad-
 spectrum 
antibiotics are commonly prescribed. For patients at risk for resistant 
organisms, 
common regimens include gram-  positive 
coverage (ie, vancomycin) and gram-  negative 
coverage with an antipseudomonal cephalo-sporin or penicillin, predominantly cefepime or piperacillin–tazobactam.
1
No prospective randomised trials have 
compared the efficacy of cefepime versus piperacillin–tazobactam head to head. When administered empirically in clinical prac-tice, both antibiotics are commonly consid-ered to have comparable activity against gram-
 negative organisms, including Pseudo-
monas, although 
cefepime does not cover 
anaerobic organisms and piperacillin–tazo-bactam does. Whether coverage of anaerobic STRENGTHS AND LIMITATIONS OF THIS STUDY
 ⇒This ongoing pragmatic trial will compare the ef-
fects of cefepime versus piperacillin–tazobactam on acute kidney injury (AKI) and death among acutely ill adults receiving gram-
 negative antibiotic thera
py 
in the emergency department or intensive care unit.
 ⇒Strengths: Broad eligibility criteria, inclusion of a range of indications for antibiotic therapy and use of the electronic health record to screen for eligible patients and facilitate delivery of the assigned in-tervention will increase the external validity of the findings.
 ⇒Limitations: After concealed randomisation, pa-tients, clinicians and investigators are unblinded to study group assignment. Because urine output is not systematically available across all care, the out-come of AKI is based on creatinine measurements. on July 6, 2023 by guest. Protected by copyright. http://bmjopen.bmj.com/ BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2022-066995 on 10 March 2023. Downloaded from 
2
Qian ET, et al. BMJ Open 2023;13:e066995. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2022-066995Open access  
organisms in acutely ill patients is associated with higher3 
mortality, lower4–7 mortality or no difference in mortality 
is uncertain.
In the absence of evidence that efficacy differs between 
cefepime and piperacillin–tazobactam, discussion 
surrounding the choice between the two has focused on adverse effects. Some observational studies have reported an association between receipt of piperacillin–tazobactam and acute kidney injury (AKI),
8 9 particularly among 
patients receiving vancomycin.10–12 Other studies have 
shown no relationship between piperacillin–tazobactam and AKI.
13 14 Adverse kidney events are common during 
hospitalisation,15 and there are many potential contribu-
tors including isotonic fluids,16 17 medications and acute 
illnesses such as sepsis.18 19
Similarly, an association between cephalosporins and 
neurotoxicity manifesting as delirium and coma has been observed.
20–22 Delirium, acute brain dysfunction char -
acterised by fluctuations in mental status, inattention, altered consciousness and disorganised thinking,
23 is also 
a common complication of hospitalisation. In intensive care unit (ICU) populations, delirium is predictive of mortality, prolonged length of stay and long-
 term cogni -
tive impairment.24 25 The incidence of cephalosporin-  
induced neurotoxicity is unknown but has been reported to increase in-
 hospital mortality.26
A randomised controlled trial would overcome limita-
tions of observational data, but none is known to exist.27 
Rigorous, high-  quality evidence assessing the risk of AKI 
and neurotoxicity after exposure to antipseudomonal antibiotics would have the potential to change care received by thousands of acutely ill adults annually. To address the lack of available evidence, we are conducting a prospective, randomised trial comparing antipseudo-monal cephalosporins and antipseudomonal penicillins among acutely ill adults in the emergency department (ED) or ICU.
METHODS AND ANAL
YSIS
This manuscript was written in accordance with Stan-
dard Protocol Items: Recommendations for Inter -
ventional Trials (SPIRIT) guidelines (table  1, online 
supplemental file 1).28 The Learning Healthcare System 
(LHS) Platform at Vanderbilt University Medical Center conducts research studies using a unique model that leverages pragmatic, randomised, controlled clinical trials embedded within usual care.
29 The LHS Platform is 
composed of stakeholders from across the enterprise and supports projects in both the paediatric and adult inpa-tient and outpatient settings (online supplemental file 2). LHS Platform studies focus on comparative effectiveness, implementation science and programmatic evaluation approaches.
30 31
Study designThe Antibiotic Choice On ReNal outcomes (ACORN) trial is a pragmatic, single-
 centre, unblinded, parallel-  
group, randomised trial comparing antipseudomonal cephalosporins to antipseudomonal penicillins among acutely ill adults receiving gram-
 negative antibiotics in the 
ED and ICU. At this centre, the predominant antipseudo-monal cephalosporin is 
cefepime and the predominant 
antipseudomonal penicillin is piperacillin–tazobactam. The primary outcome is the highest stage of AKI or death in 14 days. The trial protocol was approved by 
Table 1  Standard Protocol Items: Recommendations for Interventional Trials checklist
Study period
Eligibility
screenRandomisationand allocation Post allocationFinal outcomeassessment
Timepoint Order entry for CEF or PTZEHR enrolment advisor7 days after enrolment14 days after enrolmentDischarge or 28 days after enrolment
Enrolment: X
EHR-
 based inclusion criteria screening X
Manual screening for exclusion criteria by tr
eating cliniciansX
Allocation X
Interventions:
Cefepime X X
Piperacillin–tazobactam X X
Assessments:Baseline variables X X
Adverse events X X X X
Primary and secondary outcomes X X X
Exploratory outcomes X X X
Enrolment, interventions and assessments.
CEF , cefepime; EHR, electronic health record; PTZ, piperacillin–tazobactam. on July 6, 2023 by guest. Protected by copyright. http://bmjopen.bmj.com/ BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2022-066995 on 10 March 2023. Downloaded from 
3
Qian ET, et al. BMJ Open 2023;13:e066995. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2022-066995Open access
the institutional review board at Vanderbilt University 
Medical Center and registered prior to initiation of enrol-ment ([STUDY_ID_REMOVED]). An independent data and safety monitoring board (DSMB) monitors the progress and safety of the trial.
Patient and public involvement
Patients or the public were not involved in the design, or conduct, or reporting, or dissemination plans of our research. Patient and community representatives partici-pated in the steering committee for the LHS in which the trial was conducted.
Study population
Inclusion criteria1.
 Age≥18 years old.
2. Located in a participating ED or ICU.
3. Less than 12 hours between presentation to study hos-pital.
4.
 Treating clinician initiating an order for an antipseudo-monal cephalosporin or antipseudomonal penicillin.
Exclusion criteria1.
 Known receipt of >1  dose of an antipseudomonal ceph-
alosporin or antipseudomonal penicillin during the last 7 days.
2.
 Current documented allergy to 
cephalosporins or pen-
icillin.
3. Known to be a prisoner.
4. Treating clinicians feel that either an antipseudomon-al cephalosporin or antipseudomonal penicillin is re-quired 
or contraindicated for the optimal treatment 
of the patient, including for more directed antibiotic therapy against known prior resistant infections or sus-
pected sepsis with an associated central nervous system infection.
Screening and enrolmentWhen a treating clinician in a participating ED or ICU initiates an order for cefepime or piperacillin–tazo-bactam for a patient who meets all inclusion criteria, a clinical decision support (CDS) tool will (1) inform the provider of the study, (2) query the provider regarding the presence of any exclusion criteria, and if none is present, (3) enrol and randomise the patient. For patients who meet an exclusion criterion, the reason is recorded (figure
 1).
Analysis populationThe primary goal is the exploration of uncommon safety 
effects, therefore the population for primar
y analysis will 
include all patients who were randomised and received at least one dose of either study drug in the 168 hours (7 days) after randomisation. A sensitivity analysis will include all patients randomised, including those who never received either cefepime or piperacillin/tazobactam.
Randomisation and treatment allocation
Study group assignments are generated by computerised randomisation in a 1:1 ratio of intervention to control. Study group assignment will remain concealed until the team has confirmed the patient does not meet any exclusion criteria and the patient has been enrolled. The CDS tool will advise the clinician of group assignment following randomisation.
Figure 1  Electronic health record-  based enrolment advisor. ACORN, Antibiotic Choice On ReNal outcomes. D5W - Dextrose 
5% in W
ater; IVPB - Intravenous Piggyback; PCN - penicillin on July 6, 2023 by guest. Protected by copyright. http://bmjopen.bmj.com/ BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2022-066995 on 10 March 2023. Downloaded from 
4
Qian ET, et al. BMJ Open 2023;13:e066995. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2022-066995Open access  
Study interventions
For patients assigned to cefepime, the CDS tool will guide providers to intravenous cefepime. For patients assigned to piperacillin–tazobactam, the CDS tool will guide providers to intravenous piperacillin–tazobactam. The CDS tool will display a standardised table of dose by glomerular filtration rate, but decisions regarding dose, frequency and duration will be the treating clinician’s discretion.
In the 168 hours (7
 days) following enrolment, any 
new 
order for cefepime or piperacillin–tazobactam will open a CDS tool, which displays group assignment and allows clinicians to (re)order the assigned antibiotic or provide a reason for ordering the non-
 assigned antibiotic. Simi-
larly, if the assigned antibiotic is discontinued, the CDS tool will 
solicit a rationale for discontinuation, including 
antibiotic tailoring, newly apparent allergy to either ceph-alosporins or penicillins, or clinician preference.
The CDS tool influences only the choice of the initial 
antipseudomonal antibiotic. Treating clinicians to deter -
mine concurrent administration of other antibiotics (eg, vancomycin, metronidazole), duration of therapy, escala-tion, de-
 escalation, approach to source control and use of 
culture and laboratory data to modify antibiotic therapy.
Data collection
Trial personnel will monitor for adverse events daily and will record the following 
data elements at the time of 
enrolment by manual review of the health record (online supplemental files 3 and 4):
 ►Presence of sepsis, defined by Sepsis-  3 criteria.32
 ►Transplant recipient status.
 ►Receipt of renal replacement therapy (RRT) prior to enrolment.
 ►Presumed source of infection organised into groups based on previously published data.
33
All other data will be obtained using electronic exports 
from the health record. The following variables are collected:1.
 Collected at baseline: age, sex, height, weight, body mass index, race, Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) Score, active medical problems at the time of admission, active comorbidities, comorbidities and medications known to increase risk of kidney or neuro-logic injury at enrolment, mean arterial pressure and vasopressor 
use prior to antibiotic receipt, analgesia 
and sedation use prior to antibiotic receipt, admission to ICU versus ward.
2.
 Collected from randomisation to hospital discharge: mean arterial pressure and vasopressor use, pH, PaO
2, 
PaCO2, respiratory rate, heart rate, oxygen saturation, 
temperature, lactic acid, elements of a basic metabol-ic panel, magnesium, elements of a complete blood count, antibiotic receipt, all microbiologic culture data, Clostridium difficile testing results, Confusion Assessment Method for the ICU (CAM-
 ICU), Richmond Agitation 
Sedation Score (RASS), Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS), mechanical ventilation status and 
variables related to ventilation, nephrology consultation, receipt of new 
RRT, indications for new RRT among patients who re-ceived new RRT, medications known to increase risk of kidney injury, medications known to increase risk of neurologic injury, admitting team, date of admission, days spent in the ICU, days spent in the hospital, date of intubation(s) and extubation(s), date of discharge and date of death.
Primary outcomeThe primary outcome will be a combination of the highest stage of AKI and death between randomisation and day 14. The stages of AKI are defined using creati-nine measurements and the ‘Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO)’
34 criteria. The score will 
range from 0 (best value) to 4 (worst value):
0=No AKI.1=Stage 1 AKI (creatinine increased by 1.5–1.9 times 
baseline or increase by ≥0.3
 mg/dL).
2=Stage 2 AKI (creatinine increased by 2.0–2.9 times 
baseline).
3=Stage 3 AKI (creatinine increased by ≥3.0 times base
-
line or increase to ≥4.0  mg/dL or new RRT).
4=Death.‘Baseline’ creatinine values are defined as the lowest 
prior creatinine values from three different timepoints: the preillness creatinine 
value, the perienrolment creati-
nine value and the lowest prior on-  study creatinine value 
as defined below. 
Death is defined as mortality from any 
cause occurring prior to or on the end of study day 14, censored at hospital discharge. RRT is defined as receipt of RRT at any point between randomisation and the end of study day 14, censored at hospital discharge. Patients who are receiving RRT prior to enrolment can only expe-rience values of 0 (patient did not die) or 4 (patient died) because they are ineligible to experience changes in creatinine or new receipt of RRT that define levels 1 through 3.
Patients’ preillness creatinine will be defined as the 
lowest serum creatinine between 12 months and 24 hours prior to enrolment. For patients for whom a value is unavailable, a preillness creatinine value will be estimated using a previously described three-
 variable formula 
(creatinine=0.74–0.2 (if female)+0.08 (if African Ameri-can)+0.003×age (in years)).
35 There are no validated esti-
mations of creatinine without race but we will evaluate the effect of social constructs by fitting models both with and without race in a sensitivity analysis.
Patients’ perienrolment creatinine will be defined hier -
archically using the creatinine value closest to enrolment in: (first) the 24 hours prior to enrolment, if available, and (second) the 6
 hours after enrolment (if 
no value is 
available prior to enrolment). The prevalent AKI, or AKI that is present on admission and unrelated to the study intervention, will be defined by comparing the perienrol-ment creatinine to the preillness creatinine.
On-
 study creatinine will be defined as any creatinine 
value occurring after both the time of enrolment and  on July 6, 2023 by guest. Protected by copyright. http://bmjopen.bmj.com/ BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2022-066995 on 10 March 2023. Downloaded from 
5
Qian ET, et al. BMJ Open 2023;13:e066995. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2022-066995Open access
the time of the perienrolment creatinine value. On-  study 
creatinine values will be used to identify incident AKI and 
calculate the stage of AKI for the primary outcome.
The primary outcome will be calculated as follows:
 ►Patients who survive without new RRT and do not experience an on-
 study creatinine value that is at 
least 0.3  mg/dL higher than the perienrolment value 
or any preceding on-  study value, and whose on-  study 
creatinine is never more than 1.5 times the perienrol-ment value or any preceding on-
 study value, will be 
considered not to have experienced incident AKI and will receive a value of 0 for the primary outcome.
 ►Among patients who survive and experience AKI (have on-
 study creatinine value that is at 1.5 times 
or at least 0.3  mg/dL higher than the perienrolment 
value or any preceding on-  study value), the score for 
the primary outcome will be determined by the stage of AKI and classified as follows:a.
 A value of 1 if the highest on-  study creatinine after 
qualifying for AKI is less than 2 times the lowest of the preillness creatinine value, the perienrolment creatinine value and the lowest prior on-
 study 
creatinine value (baseline creatinine).
b. A value of 2 if the highest on-  study creatinine 
after qualifying for AKI is at least 2 times and less than 3 times the lowest of the preillness creatinine value, the perienrolment creatinine 
value and the 
lowest prior on-  study creatinine value (baseline 
creatinine).
c. A value of 3 if the highest on-  study creatinine after 
qualifying for AKI is at least 3 times the lowest of the preillness creatinine value, the perienrolment creatinine value and the lowest prior on-
 study 
creatinine value (baseline creatinine), with a maximum creatinine above 4 mg/dL, or receive new RRT.
 ►Patients who die will receive a value of 4.
The mechanisms and extent of AKI with antibiotic 
exposure are not well understood. The primary outcome window of 14 days was chosen as it was felt to capture the period most likely to be affected by controlling antibiotics choice for 168 hours (7 days).
Secondary outcomes
We have prespecified two secondary outcomes. Major adverse kidney events within 14 days (MAKE14) is the composite outcome of death within 14 days, new RRT within 14 days or stage 2 or higher AKI at day 14, according to KDIGO creatinine criteria. The second is number of days alive and free of delirium and coma in the 14 days after enrolment (delirium and coma-
 free days 
to day 14). Delirium is defined as a positive assessment on the CAM-
 ICU36 and coma is defined as an RASS of −4 or 
−537 at any point during that study day.
Exploratory outcomes
 ►Exploratory renal outcomes. –Major adverse kidney events within 28 days 
(MAKE28).
 –Highest stage of AKI or death between randomisa-tion and day 7.
 –Stage 2 or higher AKI as defined in the KDIGO cri-teria for creatinine level within 14 days and 28 days after enrolment.
 –New receipt of RRT within 14 days and 28 days after enrolment.
 –Days alive and free of RRT during 14 days and 28 days after enrolment.
 –Highest creatinine level within 28 days after enrolment.
 –Change from preillness creatinine to the highest creatinine level within 28 days after enrolment.
 –Final creatinine level before hospital discharge at 28 days.
 –Ongoing receipt of RRT at hospital discharge or 28 days.
 –Nephrology consultation.
 ►Exploratory neurologic outcomes.
 –Worst GCS Score during the 7, 14 and 28 days after enrolment.
 –Delirium and coma-  free days in the 28 days after 
enrolment.
 ►Exploratory clinical outcomes.
 –ICU-  free, hospital-  free, ventilator-  free and 
vasopressor-  free days in the 28 days after enrolment.
 –14- day mortality.
 –28- day mortality.
 –Disposition of patients admitted from the ED (ward vs ICU).
 –Escalation of antibiotics defined by subsequent re-ceipt of meropenem, meropenem–vaborbactam, imipenem, imipenem–relebactam, cefiderocol, ceftazidime–avibactam, ceftolozane–tazobactam, tigecycline, amikacin, tobramycin, gentamicin.
Definition of supportive therapy-
 free days is available in 
online supplemental section 5.
DSMB and interim analysis
A DSMB composed of experts in critical care medicine, infectious disease and biostatistics has overseen the design of the trial and is monitoring its conduct (online supplemental file 6). The DSMB conducted a single interim analysis, prepared by the study biostatistician, at the anticipated halfway point of the trial after enrol-ment of 1025 patients. The meeting was held on 14 July 2022, and the DSMB 
recommended continuing the trial 
to completion without alteration. The stopping boundary for efficacy was prespecified as p value for the difference between groups in the primary outcome of 0.001 or less. Given current use of both interventions as a part of usual care, there was no stopping boundary for futility. The use of a conservative Haybittle-
 Peto boundary for effi-
cacy will allow the final analysis to be performed using an unchanged level of significance (p=0.05). The DSMB retains the authority to recommend stopping the trial at  on July 6, 2023 by guest. Protected by copyright. http://bmjopen.bmj.com/ BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2022-066995 on 10 March 2023. Downloaded from 
6
Qian ET, et al. BMJ Open 2023;13:e066995. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2022-066995Open access  
any point, request additional data or interim analyses, 
or request modifications of the study protocol to protect patient safety.
Sample size estimation
As specified in the initial trial protocol, at the time of the single, planned interim analysis the DSMB oversaw a re-
 es-
timation of the planned sample size. Because (1) concur -
rent receipt of vancomycin has been hypothesised to be in the proposed mechanistic pathway between receipt of an antipseudomonal penicillin and AKI and (2) approx-imately 75% of patients in the trial concurrently receive vancomycin, the sample size was increased by 25% from 2050 to 2500 patients. The increase in sample size ensures the 
number of patients receiving concurrent vancomycin 
will be approximately 2050, consistent with the orig-inal sample size estimation. Assuming a two-
 sided alpha 
of 0.05 and a distribution of the primary outcome with approximately 70% of patients experiencing no AKI, 10% of patients experiencing stage 1 AKI, 7% of patients expe-riencing stage 2 AKI, 7% of patients experiencing stage 3 AKI and 6% of patients experiencing death, we calcu-lated 
that enrolment of a total of 2500 patients would 
provide 92% statistical power to detect an OR of 0.75 in the primary analysis.
Statistical analysis principles
Analyses will be conducted following reproducible research principles using R (R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria).
38 Continuous variables will 
be reported as mean±SD  or median and IQR; categorical 
variables will be reported as frequencies and proportions. As a randomised controlled trial, there will be no compar -
ison of baseline characteristics. A two-
 sided p value of 
<0.05  will be used to indicate statistical significance; with 
just one primary outcome, no adjustment for multiplicity will be made. Two secondary outcomes are specified, one safety outcome for each treatment regimen. Since hypothesised 
safety concerns are independent, we will 
not adjust our secondary outcomes for multiplicity. For all other outcomes, emphasis will be placed on the magni-tude of differences between groups rather than statistical significance.
Main analysis of the primary outcome
The main analysis will be an unadjusted, intention-
 to- treat 
comparison of the primar
y outcome between patients 
randomised to receive antipseudomonal cephalosporins versus antipseudomonal penicillins who received at least one dose of a study drug using a proportional odds regres-sion model. The unadjusted common OR with CIs will be the primary treatment effect. If departures from the proportionality assumption are observed, then a partially proportional odds model will be constructed.
Secondary analyses of the primary outcome
Multivariable modelling to account for covariatesTo account for participants’ baseline status, we will include covariates in the proportional odds regression model. The following prespecified baseline covariates 
will be considered: age; sex; perienrolment creatinine; receipt of RRT prior to enrolment; receipt of vasopres-sors; receipt of mechanical ventilation; SOFA Score; presumed source of infection; enrolment location (ED vs ICU). Source of infection will be categorised as: lung, intra-
 abdominal (perforated viscus, ischaemic bowel, 
cholecystitis/cholangitis, peritonitis/abscess/small bowel obstruction, Clostridium dif
ficile colitis, spontaneous bacte-
rial peritonitis, pancreatitis, enterocolitis/diverticulitis, other intra-
 abdominal infections), urinary (pyelone-
phritis, obstructive urinary tract infection), skin and soft tissue (cellulitis/abscess/necrotizing 
fasciitis/decubitus 
ulcer, surgical site infection), other (bone/joint, primary blood stream infection, intravascular catheter, dissemi-nated infection, central nervous system infection, endo-carditis, other) and unknown.
Effect modification
We will test the interaction between the treatment effect of antipseudomonal cephalosporins versus antipseu-domonal penicillins and baseline variables expected to modify the effects of treatments on the outcomes. The effect modifiers will be tested one by one by including both the main effect and the interaction term in the adjusted model. Because this study is not formally designed or powered to test for interaction, a less conservative two-
 
sided p value for the interaction term will be used, with values less than 0.10 considered suggestive of potential interaction and values less than 0.05 considered conclu-sive evidence. The following variables will be considered:1.
 Location at randomisation (ED vs ICU).
2. Presence of sepsis (meeting Sepsis-  3 criteria) at rando-
misation.
3. Receipt of vancomycin (defined as an order for vanco-mycin in the 12 hours before or 6
 hours after rando-
misation).
4. Source of infection.
5. AKI at randomisation.
6. CKD at randomisation.
7. Neutropenia at randomisation.
8. Admitting team (medicine vs surgical).
Sensitivity analyses of the primary outcomeTo assess robustness of 
findings, the main analysis of the 
primary outcome will be repeated in several alternative popu-lations. First, we will include all patients who were identified by the CDS tool as meeting eligibility criteria, regardless of receipt of any doses of antipseudomonal cephalosporins or antipseudomonal penicillins. Second, many patients are initi-ated on antibiotics in the acute setting, which are stopped as a more likely cause for their illness becomes known (eg, pulmo-nary embolism). We will repeat the main analysis restricted to the subset of patients that received more than 2
 days (48 
hours) of antipseudomonal 
therapy. Third, because race is 
a social construct, we will repeat the main analysis with those whose preillness creatinine was estimated by an equation without race as a factor. Fourth, to avoid uncertainty around  on July 6, 2023 by guest. Protected by copyright. http://bmjopen.bmj.com/ BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2022-066995 on 10 March 2023. Downloaded from 
7
Qian ET, et al. BMJ Open 2023;13:e066995. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2022-066995Open access
the calculations of preillness creatinine, we will repeat the 
main analysis excluding patients with calculated preillness creatinine values. Because group assignment might influ-ence recovery from prevalent AKI in a way that could affect calculations of the primary outcome, we will recalculate the primary outcome as a repeated measure assessed daily from randomisation to day 14 using only the preillness creatinine as the baseline creatinine.
Analysis of the secondary outcomes
Analysis of secondary outcomes will follow a similar frame-work to the primary analysis, with a systematic assessment of unadjusted models, adjusted models using the same set of covariates. The secondary outcome of MAKE14 will be compared between groups using a logistic regression model. Delirium and coma-
 free days to day 14 will be compared 
between groups using a proportional odds regression model, and will include the additional covariate of coma on enrol-ment for the adjusted model. Delirium and coma free days
 
to day 14 will be assessed for effect modification using the same approach as the primary outcome replacing receipt of vancomycin with baseline coma.
Analyses of exploratory outcomes
Exploratory outcomes will proceed using unadjusted analyses only, with presentation of effect sizes and CIs as well as p values. Continuous outcomes will be compared with the Mann-
 Whitney U test and the difference in 
medians reported. For categorical 
variables, groups will 
be compared with the χ2 test or Fischer’s exact test as 
appropriate and results will be expressed as a difference in proportions or ORs, each with 95% CIs.
Handling of missing data
In the case that a patient is enrolled, never receives RRT and is discharged alive without having a creatinine value measured following enrolment, the patient will be assumed to have no AKI. When data are missing for secondary or exploratory outcomes, complete-
 case anal-
ysis, excluding cases where data for the analysed outcome are missing, will be performed. There will be no impu-tation of missing 
data for these outcomes. In adjusted 
analyses, missing data for covariates will be imputed using multiple imputations.
Trial status
The ACORN trial is currently enrolling and started enrol-ment on 10 November 2021.
Ethics and dissemination
Waiver of informed consentAcutely ill patients for whom the provider is ordering broad-
 spectrum antibiotics in the ED or ICU are at 
significant risk for morbidity and mortality from their underlying illness. Most patients receiving empiric gram-
 negative antibiotics in routine clinical care receive 
either antipseudomonal cephalosporins or antipseu-domonal penicillins. Any benefits or risks of these two approaches are experienced by patients receiving gram-
 negative antibiotics in clinical care, outside the 
context of research. As a requirement for enrolment in the ACORN trial, the patient’s treating clinician must have made the decision to order 
either antipseudomonal 
cephalosporins or antipseudomonal penicillins as part of routine clinical care and affirmed that either would be a safe and reasonable approach for the patient (otherwise the patient is excluded). Therefore, making the decision between the two approaches randomly through study group assignment rather than by a provider who thinks either approach is safe and reasonable for the patient was proposed to pose no more than minimal incremental risk.
Obtaining informed consent for participation in the study 
would be impracticable. Receipt of antibiotics in sepsis is time sensitive. Each hour delay in antibiotics in patients with sepsis is associated with an increase in mortality.
39 Attempting to 
obtain prospective written informed consent from patients presenting to the ED or ICU during the interval between the placement of an order for empiric antibiotics and their administration risks delaying antibiotic delivery. Moreover, acutely ill patients with sepsis are commonly delirious or unconscious, and a legally authorised representative is not consistently present at the time of initiation of antibiotics. Because the trial determines only the choice of the initial antipseudomonal antibiotic and defers decisions regarding subsequent doses of antibiotics (eg, duration of therapy, esca-lation, de-
 escalation) to treating clinicians, enrolment, trial 
group assignment and the primary study procedure (admin-istration 
of the assigned antibiotic) commonly occurs within 
1 hour of meeting eligibility criteria.
Because the study was expected to pose minimal risk and 
prospective informed consent was considered to be imprac-ticable, a waiver of informed consent was requested and granted from the Vanderbilt University Medical Center IRB.
Protocol changes
ClinicalTrials.Gov will be updated with any amendments to the protocol as per SPIRIT guidelines (online supplemental file 7).
Dissemination plan
Trial results will be submitted to a peer-
 reviewed journal for 
consideration of publication and will be presented at one or more scientific conferences. Data will be made available following publication (online supplemental file 8).
CONCLUSION
T
o allow for a clearer and more objective interpretation 
of trial results, this description delineates the ACORN trial methods and analysis prior to the conclusion of enrolment.
Author affiliations
1Division of Allergy, Pulmonary, and Critical Care Medicine, Vanderbilt University 
Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee, USA
2Department of Biomedical Informatics, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, 
Nashville, Tennessee, USA
3Department of Biostatistics, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, 
Tennessee, USA on July 6, 2023 by guest. Protected by copyright. http://bmjopen.bmj.com/ BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2022-066995 on 10 March 2023. Downloaded from 
8
Qian ET, et al. BMJ Open 2023;13:e066995. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2022-066995Open access  
4Vanderbilt Institute for Clinical and Translational Research, Vanderbilt University 
Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee, USA
5Department of Pharmaceutical Services, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, 
Nashville, Tennessee, USA
6Department of Emergency Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, 
Nashville, Tennessee, USA
7Division of Infectious Disease, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, 
Tennessee, USA
8Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, 
Nashville, Tennessee, USA
9Department of Surgery, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee, 
USA
Twitter Edward Tang Qian @edqain, Bradley Daniel Lloyd @BradLloydVFL and 
Bradley Dennis @TraumaDawg
Collaborators  A complete list of the members of the Vanderbilt Learning 
Healthcare System Platform Investiga
tors is provided in the online supplemental 
file 1.Contributors
 All study authors approved the final version of this manuscript. Stud
y 
concept and design: ETQ, JDC, AW, LW, JStollings, GN, PW, EDS, JW, JA, WHS, MWS 
and TWR. Acquisition of data: ETQ, BDL and KS. Drafting of the manuscript: ETQ, JDC, MWS and TWR. Critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content: ETQ, JDC, AW, LW, JSiemann, MLD, JStollings, BDL, KS, GN, PW, EDS, BD, JW, JA, WHS, MWS and TWR. Study supervision: MWS and TWR.
Funding
 The project described was supported by the VICTR Learning Healthcare 
System Platform under CTSA, a
ward No. UL1 TR002243, from the National Center 
for Advancing Translational Sciences. It contents are solely the responsibility of 
the authors and do not necessarily represent the official views of the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences or the National Institutes of Health. ETQ was supported by the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, award No. T32HL087738. JDC was supported in part by the NHLBI (K23HL153584). MWS was supported in part by the NHLBI (K23HL143053). EDS was supported by the Vanderbilt O’Brien Kidney Center P30-
 DK114809 for service provided through the 
Clinical and Transla
tional Research Core. The funding institutions had no role in (1) 
conception, design, or conduct of the study, (2) collection, management, analysis, interpretation, or presentation of the data or (3) preparation, review or approval of the manuscript.
Competing interests
 None declared.
Patient and public involvement  Patients and/or the public were not involved in 
the design, or conduct,
 or reporting, or dissemination plans of this research.
Patient consent for publication  Not applicable.
Provenance and peer review  Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
Supplemental material  This content has been supplied by the author(s). It has 
not been vetted by BMJ Publishing Group Limited (BMJ) and may not have been 
peer-  reviewed. Any opinions or recommenda
tions discussed are solely those 
of the author(s) and are not endorsed by BMJ. BMJ disclaims all liability and responsibility arising from any reliance placed on the content. Where the content includes any translated material, BMJ does not warrant the accuracy and reliability of the translations (including but not limited to local regulations, clinical guidelines, terminology, drug names and drug dosages), and is not responsible for any error and/or omissions arising from translation and adaptation or otherwise.
Open access
 This is an open access article distributed in accordance with the 
Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY
- NC 4.0) license, which 
permits others to distribute, remix, ada
pt, build upon this work non-  commercially, 
and license their derivative works on different terms,
 provided the original work is 
properly cited, appropriate credit is given, any changes made indicated, and the use 
is non-  commercial. See: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/.
ORCID iDsEdward Tang Qian http://orcid.org/0000-0002-1092-3533
Ma
tthew W Semler http://orcid.org/0000-0002-7664-8263
REFERENCES
 1 Rhodes A, Evans LE, Alhazzani W, et al. Surviving sepsis campaign: 
inter
national guidelines for management of sepsis and septic shock: 
2016. Intensive Care Med 2017;43:304–77.  2 Wright J, Paauw DS. Complications of antibiotic therapy. Med Clin North Am
 2013;97:667–79. 
 3 Chanderraj R, Baker JM, Kay SG, et al. In critically ill patients, anti-  
anaerobic antibiotics increase risk of adverse clinical outcomes. Eur Respir J
 2023;61:2200910. 
 4 Finfer S, Micallef S, Hammond N, et al. Balanced multielectrolyte solution versus saline in critically ill adults. 
N Engl J Med 
2022;386:815–26. 
 5 Kim PW, Wu Y , Cooper C, 
et al. Meta-  Analysis of a possible signal 
of increased mortality associated with cefepime use. Clin Infect Dis 2010;51:381–9. 
 6 Yahav D, Paul M, Fraser A, et al. Ef
ficacy and safety of cefepime: 
a systematic review and meta-  analysis. Lancet Infect Dis 
2007;7:338–48. 
 7 Ross RC, Rosen AN, Tran KK, et al. A comparison between cefepime and piperacillin-
 tazobactam in the management of septic shock. 
Cureus 2021;13:e18742. 
 8 Lee JD, Heintz BH, Mosher HJ, et al. Risk of acute kidney injury and clostridioides difficile infection with piperacillin/tazobactam, cefepime, and mer
openem with or without vancomycin. Clin Infect 
Dis 2021;73:e1579–86. 
 9 Kadomura S, Takekuma Y , Sato Y , 
et al. Higher incidence of acute 
kidney injury in patients treated with piperacillin/tazobactam than in patients treated with cefepime: a single-
 center retrospective cohort 
study. 
J Pharm Health Care Sci 2019;5:13. 
 10 Blevins AM, Lashinsky JN, McCammon C, et al. Incidence of acute kidney injury in critically ill patients receiving vancomycin with concomitant piperacillin-
 tazobactam, cefepime, or meropenem. 
Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2019;63:e02658-  18. 
 11 O’Callaghan K, Hay K, Lavana J, et al. Acute kidney injury with combination vancomycin and piperacillin-
 tazobactam therapy 
in the ICU: a retrospective cohort study. 
Int J Antimicrob Agents 
2020;56:106010. 
 12 Arnaud FC de S, Libório AB. Attributable nephrotoxicity of vancomycin in critically ill patients: a marginal structural model study
. 
J Antimicrob Chemother 2020;75:1031–7. 
 13 Buckley MS, Hartsock NC, Berry AJ, et al. Comparison of acute kidney injury risk associated with vancomycin and concomitant piperacillin/tazobactam or cefepime in the intensive care unit. 
J Crit 
Care 2018;48:32–8. 
 14 Schreier DJ, Kashani KB, Sakhuja A, et al. Incidence of acute kidney injury among critically ill patients with brief empiric use of antipseudomonal 
β-lactams with vancomycin. Clin Infect Dis 
2019;68:1456–62. 
 15 Wang HE, Muntner P , Chertow GM, et al
. Acute kidney injury and 
mortality in hospitalized patients. Am J Nephrol 2012;35:349–55. 
 16 Semler MW, Self WH, Wanderer JP
, et al. Balanced crystalloids 
versus saline in critically ill adults. N Engl J Med 2018;378:829–39. 
 17 Self WH, Semler MW, Wanderer JP
, et al. Balanced crystalloids 
versus saline in noncritically ill adults. N Engl J Med 2018;378:819–28. 
 18 Gómez H, Kellum JA. Sepsis-  induced acute kidney injury. Curr Opin 
Crit Care
 2016;22:546–53. 
 19 Hoste EAJ, Bagshaw SM, Bellomo R, et al. Epidemiology of acute kidney injury in critically ill patients: the multinational AKI-
 EPI study. 
Intensive Care Med 2015;41:1411–23. 
 20 Abanades S, Nolla J, Rodríguez-  Campello A, et al. Reversible 
coma secondary to cefepime neurotoxicity
. Ann Pharmacother 
2004;38:606–8. 
 21 Balderia PG, Chandorkar A, Kim Y , et al. Dosing cefepime for r
enal 
function does not completely prevent neurotoxicity in a patient with kidney transplant. J Patient Saf 2018;14:e33–4. 
 22 Drago L, De Vecchi E. The safety of cefepime in the treatment of infection. Expert Opin Drug Saf
 2008;7:377–87. 
 23 Patel MB, Bednarik J, Lee P , et al. Delirium monitoring in neur
ocritically ill patients: a systematic review. Crit Care Med 
2018;46:1832–41. 
 24 Pandharipande PP , Girard TD, Jackson JC, et al
. Long-  
Term cognitive impairment after critical illness. N Engl J Med 2013;369:1306–16. 
 25 Girard TD, Jackson JC, Pandharipande PP , et al
. Delirium as a 
predictor of long-  term cognitive impairment in survivors of critical 
illness. Crit Care Med 2010;38:1513–20. 
 26 Boschung-  Pasquier L, Atkinson A, Kastner LK, et al. Cefepime 
neurotoxicity: thr
esholds and risk factors. A retrospective cohort 
study. Clin Microbiol Infect 2020;26:333–9. 
 27 Rhee C, Dantes R, Epstein L, et al. Incidence and trends of sepsis in US hospitals using clinical vs claims data, 2009-
 2014. JAMA 
2017;318:1241–9.  on July 6, 2023 by guest. Protected by copyright. http://bmjopen.bmj.com/ BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2022-066995 on 10 March 2023. Downloaded from 
9
Qian ET, et al. BMJ Open 2023;13:e066995. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2022-066995Open access
 28 Chan A-  W, Tetzlaff JM, Gøtzsche PC, et al. Spirit 2013 explanation 
and elaboration: guidance for protocols of clinical trials. BMJ 
2013;346:e7586. 
 29 Lindsell CJ, Gatto CL, Dear ML, et al. Learning fr
om what we do, 
and doing what we learn: a learning health care system in action. Academic Medicine 2021;96:1291–9. 
 30 Qian ET, Gatto CL, Amusina O, et al. Assessment of awake pr
one 
positioning in hospitalized adults with COVID-  19: a nonrandomized 
controlled trial. JAMA Intern Med
 2022;182:612–21. 
 31 Hasselblad M, Morrison J, Kleinpell R, et al. Promoting patient and nurse safety: testing a behavioural health intervention in a lear
ning 
healthcare system: results of the DEMEANOR pragmatic, cluster, cross-
 over trial. BMJ Open Qual 2022;11:e001315. 
 32 Singer M, Deutschman CS, Seymour CW, et al. The thir
d 
International consensus definitions for sepsis and septic shock (sepsis-
 3). JAMA 2016;315:801–10. 
 33 Leligdowicz A, Dodek PM, Norena M, et al. Association between 
sour
ce of infection and hospital mortality in patients who have septic 
shock. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2014;189:1204–13.  34 Kidney disease improving global outcomes (KDIGO) acute kidney 
injury work group. KDIGO clinical practice guideline for acute kidney injury. 
Kidney Int Suppl 2012;2. 
 35 Závada J, Hoste E, Cartin-  Ceba R, et al. A comparison of three 
methods to estimate baseline cr
eatinine for rifle classification. 
Nephrol Dial Transplant 2010;25:3911–8. 
 36 Ely EW, Inouye SK, Bernard GR, 
et al. Delirium in mechanically 
ventilated patients: validity and reliability of the confusion assessment method for the intensive care unit (CAM-
 ICU). JAMA 
2001;286:2703–10. 
 37 Sessler CN, Gosnell MS, Grap MJ, et al. The Richmond agitation–sedation scale. Am J Respir Crit Car
e Med 2002;166:1338–44. 
 38 Team Rs. RStudio: integrated development for R [RStudio]. Boston, MA: Inc. n.d. Available: www.rstudio.com/
 39 Liu VX, Fielding-  Singh V, Greene JD, et al
. The timing of early 
antibiotics and hospital mortality in sepsis. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2017;196:856–63.  on July 6, 2023 by guest. Protected by copyright. http://bmjopen.bmj.com/ BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2022-066995 on 10 March 2023. Downloaded from 
Antibiotic Choice On ReNal outcomes (ACORN) trial  
Statistical  Analysis Plan Revision Sequence  
7/27/2022  Original Statistical Analysis Plan complete and submitted for review at BMJ Open  
10/7/202 2 Enrollment Complete  
3/10/2023  Statistical Analysis Plan Published in BMJ Open  
 
Qian ET, Casey JD, Wright A, et al. Protocol and statistical analysis plan for the 
Antibiotic Choice On ReNal outcomes (ACORN) randomised clinical trial. BMJ Open. 
2023;13(3):e066995. Published 2023 Mar 10. doi:10.1136/bmjopen -2022 -066995  
 
 
* No changes occurred to the Statistical Analysis Plan from initial submission to publication  