SOCIAL PROTOCOL (HRP-580) PROTOCOL TITLE: MBI Interven;on with war-aﬀected families VERSION DATE:  3/2/2022 v6 ANCILLARY REVIEWS Which ancillary reviews do I need and when do I need them? Refer to HRP-309 for more informa;on about these ancillary reviews.Select yes or noDoes your study…If yes…Impact on IRB Review☐ Yes ☒ No Include GilleUe resources, staﬀ or loca;onsGille+e Scien/ﬁc review and Gille+e Research Administra/on approval is required.  Contact: research@gille+echildrens.com  Required prior to IRB submission☐ Yes ☒ NoInvolve Epic, or Fairview pa;ents, staﬀ, loca;ons, or resources?The Fairview ancillary review will be assigned to your study by IRB staﬀ Contact: ancillaryreview@Fairview.orgApproval must be received prior to IRB commiEee/ designated review.   Consider seeking approval prior to IRB submission.☐ Yes ☒ NoInclude evalua;on of drugs, devices, biologics, tobacco, or dietary supplements or data subject to FDA inspec;on?STOP – Complete the Medical Template Protocol (HRP-590) The regulatory ancillary review will be assigned to your study by IRB staﬀ Contact: medreg@umn.edu  See h+ps://policy.umn.edu/research/indide ☐ Yes ☒ NoRequire Scien;ﬁc Review? Not sure? See guidance on next page. ONLY REQURED BIOMEDICAL RESEARCH REVIEWED BY FULL COMMITTEE  ☐ Yes ☒ NoRelate to cancer pa;ents, cancer treatments, cancer screening/preven;on, or tobacco?Complete the CPRC applica/on process.  Contact: ccprc@umn.edu ☐ Yes ☒ NoInclude the use of radia;on? (x-ray imaging, radiopharmaceu;cals, external beam or brachytherapy)Complete the AURPC Human Use Applica/on and follow instruc/ons on the form for submission to the AURPC commi+ee. Contact: barmstro@umn.edu Approval from these commiEees must be received prior to IRB approval;  Page  of  Template Revised On: 09/01/2019145
SOCIAL PROTOCOL (HRP-580) PROTOCOL TITLE: MBI Interven;on with war-aﬀected families VERSION DATE:  3/2/2022 v6 ☐ Yes ☒ NoUse the Center for Magne;c Resonance Research (CMRR) as a study loca;on?Complete the CMRR pre-IRB ancillary review  Contact: ande2445@umn.edu IRB approval;  These groups each have their own applicaMon process. ☐ Yes ☒ NoInclude the use of recombinant or synthe;c nucleic acids, toxins, or infec;ous agents?STOP – Complete the Medical Template Protocol (HRP-590)☐ Yes ☒ NoInclude the use of human fetal ;ssue, human embryos, or embryonic stem cells?STOP – Complete the Medical Template Protocol (HRP-590)☒ Yes ☐ NoInclude PHI or are you reques;ng a HIPAA waiver?If yes, HIPCO will conduct a review of this protocol. Contact: privacy@umn.edu ☐ Yes ☒ NoUse data from the Informa;on Exchange (IE)?The Informa/on Exchange ancillary review will be assigned to your study by IRB staﬀ Contact: ics@umn.edu Approval must be received prior to IRB approval. These groups do not have a separate applicaMon process but addiMonal informaMon from the study team may be required. ☐ Yes ☒ NoUse the Biorepository and Laboratory Services to collect ;ssue for research?STOP – Complete the Medical Template Protocol (HRP-590)  The BLS ancillary review will be assigned to your study by IRB staﬀ. Contact: cdriba@umn.edu ☐ Yes ☒ NoHave a PI or study team member with a conﬂict of interest?The CoI ancillary review will be assigned to your study by IRB staﬀ Contact: becca002@umn.edu ☐ Yes ☒ NoNeed to be registered on clinicaltrials.gov?If you select “No” in ETHOS, the clinicaltrials.gov ancillary review will be assigned to your study by IRB staﬀ Contact: kmmccorm@umn.edu ☒ Yes ☐ NoRequire registra;on in OnCore?If you select “No” or “I Don’t Know” in ETHOS, the OnCore ancillary review will be assigned to your study by IRB staﬀ Contact: oncore@umn.edu Does not aﬀect IRB approval. Page  of  Template Revised On: 09/01/2019245
SOCIAL PROTOCOL (HRP-580) PROTOCOL TITLE: MBI Interven;on with war-aﬀected families VERSION DATE:  3/2/2022 v6 PROTOCOL COVER PAGE Protocol TitleMBI Interven;on with war-aﬀected familiesPrincipal InvesMgator/Faculty AdvisorName: Sarah HoﬀmanDepartment: School of NursingTelephone Number: 512-470-7128Email Address: hoﬀ0742@umn.eduStudent InvesMgatorN/AScienMﬁc AssessmentClinical and Transla;onal Science Ins;tute (CTSI) pilot funding awardsVersion Number/Date:Version 3/2/2022
Page  of  Template Revised On: 09/01/2019345
SOCIAL PROTOCOL (HRP-580) PROTOCOL TITLE: MBI Interven;on with war-aﬀected families VERSION DATE:  3/2/2022 v6 REVISION HISTORY Revision #Version DateSummary of ChangesConsent Change?18/2/2021# of sessions to 14Yes29/10/2021Update: no changes to youth curriculumNo39/28/2021Oﬀering Zoom plahorm as an op;on in Phase 2 implementa;on. Adding video recording to the previously iden;ﬁed audio recording. Updated recruitment script to match modiﬁca;on #1.No410/04/2021Expanding Karen recruitment source to targeted community partner referralNo52/9/2022Returning to group format for youth interven;on and adding post program interview ques;onsYes63/2/2022Included safety plan for if member of group experiences distressNo
Page  of  Template Revised On: 09/01/2019445
SOCIAL PROTOCOL (HRP-580) PROTOCOL TITLE: MBI Interven;on with war-aﬀected families VERSION DATE:  3/2/2022 v6 Table of Contents 1.0 Objec;ves 7 2.0 Background 7 3.0 Study Endpoints/Events/Outcomes 10 4.0 Study Interven;on(s)/Interac;on(s) 10 5.0 Procedures Involved 12 6.0 Data Banking 15 7.0 Sharing of Results with Par;cipants 16 8.0 Study Dura;on 16 9.0 Study Popula;on 16 11.0 Number of Par;cipants 21 12.0 Recruitment Methods 21 13.0 Withdrawal of Par;cipants 22 14.0 Risks to Par;cipants 23 15.0 Incomplete Disclosure or Decep;on 24 16.0 Poten;al Beneﬁts to Par;cipants 24 17.0 Sta;s;cal Considera;ons 24 18.0 Health Informa;on and Privacy Compliance 25 19.0 Conﬁden;ality 28 20.0 Provisions to Monitor the Data to Ensure the Safety of Par;cipants 29 21.0 Compensa;on for Research-Related Injury 30 22.0 Consent Process 30 23.0 Selng 33 24.0 Mul;-Site Research 33 25.0 Coordina;ng Center Research 33 26.0 Resources Available 34 27.0 References 35 Page  of  Template Revised On: 09/01/2019545
SOCIAL PROTOCOL (HRP-580) PROTOCOL TITLE: MBI Interven;on with war-aﬀected families VERSION DATE:  3/2/2022 v6 ABBREVIATIONS/DEFINITIONS ●Strengths and Diﬃcul/es Ques/onnaire (SDQ I/S) ●Cogni/ve and Aﬀec/ve Mindfulness Scale-Revised (CAMS-R) ●Karen Mental Health Screener – Brief (KMHS-B) ●Emo/on Regula/on Skills Ques/onnaire (ERSQ) ●Family Adaptability and Cohesion Scale IV (FACES) ●Cohen-Hoberman Inventory of Physical Symptoms (CHIPS) ●Post Trauma/c Stress Disorder (PTSD) ●Community Based Par/cipatory Research (CBPR) ●FMBI (Family Mindfulness Based Interven/on) ●CHWI (Community Health Worker Interven/onists) 
Page  of  Template Revised On: 09/01/2019645
SOCIAL PROTOCOL (HRP-580) PROTOCOL TITLE: MBI Interven;on with war-aﬀected families VERSION DATE:  3/2/2022 v6 1.ObjecMves Purpose: Our study has two central research ques;ons: 1) Is implemen;ng a family mindfulness-based interven;on with war-aﬀected immigrant families through community based par;cipatory research methods feasible?; and 2) Does the interven;on demonstrate preliminary improvements in the social and behavioral health of war-aﬀected caregivers and youth by addressing paUerns of behavior that poten;ate intergenera;onal trauma? Our objec;ve in the proposed study is to use Community Based Par;cipatory Research strategies to test the feasibility and acceptability of a mindfulness-based interven;on for Karen refugee families living post-reseUlement in the United States. A key focus in this phase of the pilot will be interven;on adapta;on and establishing ﬁdelity monitoring and quality improvement procedures through which the PI and community health worker interven;onists are trained and evaluated in the delivery of the interven;on. In future phases of the research where were are able to expand the sample size, we will submit a modiﬁca;on to reﬂect protocol updates. 2.Background 2.1 Signiﬁcance of Research Ques;on/Purpose: Intergenera;onal trauma is a major public health problem impac;ng war aﬀected families. Our speciﬁc research contribu;on will test the feasibility of a 7-week family mindfulness-based interven;on addressing key mechanisms central to the health of war-aﬀected families. The signiﬁcance of our contribu;on is ;ed to the conceptual understanding that caregivers uniquely inﬂuence the ways in which their children process trauma, experience stressful events, and thrive socially, behaviorally and physically. The responses of youth, in turn, aﬀect the wellbeing of their parents. Lep unaddressed, intergenera;onal trauma will con;nue to nega;vely impact the health and life course of immigrant youth and families. Collec;vely, this contributes to: higher burden of unaddressed mental and physical health disturbances in caregivers and youth; disrup;ons in family systems and community structures that nega;vely impact educa;onal achievement and other indicators of youth adjustment; and increased exposure to familial and community violence. If a mindfulness-based interven;on delivered directly to war-aﬀected families in their homes can demonstrate improvements in the behavioral and social health eﬀects of war trauma experienced by caregivers and their youth, then this study has the poten;al to oﬀer a novel, eﬀec;ve approach to disrup;ng the genera;onal impacts of war on war-aﬀected families. We will engage mothers, fathers, and youth to address intergenera;onal trauma fully. We will establish plans for collabora;ve dissemina;on with WellShare Interna;onal in phase I of the CTRS pilot award, including academic dissemina;on (presenta;on and publica;on) as well as dissemina;on of results among key stakeholders and community members. 2.Preliminary Data:  IRB Study #609S95262: Paren;ng adolescent refugees post-reseUlement in Minnesota: A pilot interven;on targe;ng Karen family cohesion (2016-2018) The purpose of the study was to assess the feasibility and acceptability of engaging Karen refugee mothers and fathers together in a seven-week culturally oriented paren;ng Page  of  Template Revised On: 09/01/2019745
SOCIAL PROTOCOL (HRP-580) PROTOCOL TITLE: MBI Interven;on with war-aﬀected families VERSION DATE:  3/2/2022 v6 curriculum. The group paren;ng interven;on aimed to promote family cohesion and communica;on through parent educa;on and skill building to address adolescent behavior and promote adolescent sense of belonging and posi;ve iden;ty. The sample included 30-40 Karen single parents or parent dyads with youth between the ages of 14 and 21. We conducted interviews with 10 adolescent-aged youth of par;cipants to elicit perspec;ves on parent involvement in the program. Overall the project demonstrated that Karen mothers and fathers could be successfully engaged in a group paren;ng interven;on. There was strong support for the program from caregivers and youth. Limita;ons of the interven;on included a focus on func;onal skill building. We have since recognized through our research that the inclusion of emo;on regula;on and mindfulness elements will address addi;onal factors in families that impact family func;oning and youth adjustment. Though evidence-based and implemented with a diverse sample, we feel there are stronger programs that integrate elements of mindfulness. Barriers to par;cipa;on included schedules and transporta;on. Thus we determined home based delivery is more likely to be successful in retaining par;cipants. Intergenera;onal Trauma CE Studio (2019) Facilitated through the University of Minnesota CTSI, a Community Engagement (CE) Studio is a structured guidance session that enables community experts to provide feedback on a par;cular health research topic. The ini;a;ve gives Minnesotans a meaningful way to contribute to research, while arming inves;gators with powerful insights that can inform their study. The study team held a CE studio that engaged 11 community experts with varying backgrounds, roles, and perspec;ves on refugee and migrant families and intergenera;onal trauma. Family based and paren;ng approaches were discussed, as was the important role of emo;on regula;on and mindfulness in family communica;on and problem solving.  3. From the CE Studio, the Community Leadership Board (CLB) was formed (2019-2020). The CLB was comprised of members from prominent refugee serving organiza;ons who were themselves Karen and provided support to the Karen refugee community in their professional roles. The CLB met monthly through the study team’s preliminary intergenera;onal project and discussed aspects of the proposed interven;on, including the integra;on of emo;on regula;on into paren;ng-focused programs, as well as the inclusion of adolescent youth. We plan to reconvene the CLB, and plan that the group will play a pivotal role in guiding the interven;on adapta;on and implementa;on. 4. The IRB was reviewed and discussed in a CRSC Feasibility Review. The purpose of the review is to provide an objec;ve review of study readiness by a panel of experts. Experienced research professionals from 7 research func;ons (see below) reviewed a complete protocol and assisted Dr. Hoﬀman in connec;ng with resources.   •Biosta;s;cal Design and Analysis Center (BDAC) •Research Prep Group (RPG) •CTSI Regulatory Specialists Page  of  Template Revised On: 09/01/2019845
SOCIAL PROTOCOL (HRP-580) PROTOCOL TITLE: MBI Interven;on with war-aﬀected families VERSION DATE:  3/2/2022 v6 •Community Engagement to Advance Research and Community Health (CEARCH) •Best Prac;ces Integrated Informa;cs Core (BPIC) •CTSI Regulatory Manager | Clinical Research Monitor Group •Clinical Research Liaison | Recruitment Reviewers provided detailed feedback, recommenda;ons and speciﬁc language from the panel of experts; developed a list of ac;on items for PI to complete, and provided follow up recommenda;on on next steps. Through our preliminary research (UMN IRB STUDY00005512; STUDY00000729; STUDY00006402), we established the founda;on for a novel approach to recovery from torture and war that will be used in the proposed feasibility pilot research plan. Preliminary data for this proposal is drawn from our previous community-engaged explanatory mixed methods research collected with maternal caregivers (N=96), and subsequently with paternal caregivers (N=48) and youth (N=72). Data collected from par;cipants included self-perceived mental health status28, family func;oning (FACES IV)29, youth adjustment (SDQ)30, and physical health variables. Analyses have been completed with the sample of 96 Karen refugee maternal caregivers from Burma living in the United States with caregiving responsibility for youth between the ages of 11 and 23. Maternal caregivers self-reported primary torture (26%), secondary torture (26%), or war trauma exposure (48%).23 We iden;ﬁed sta;s;cally signiﬁcant and posi;ve associa;ons between maternal exposure to torture/trauma, maternal mental health distress, maternal physical health, and youth adjustment. We iden;ﬁed complex interac;ons as to how these domains inﬂuenced each other in this context through extensive qualita;ve data collected via interviews with par;cipants. Preliminary results of a mul;ple linear regression model to predict overall youth adjustment (total scores on SDQ) reported by maternal caregivers indicated that self-reported age, gender, maternal mental health and maternal torture status signiﬁcantly predicted nega;ve adjustment in youth under 18 years, F(2, 166)= 6.111, p <.001, R2 =.128. Similar ﬁndings were shown for youth over 18 years, F(4, 102)= 3.876, p=.006, R2 =.132. SDQ subscales of Hyperac;vity, Prosocial and Emo;onal were signiﬁcantly predicted by child gender: maternal caregivers reported greater hyperac;vity behaviors for male youth; greater prosocial behaviors and emo;onal symptoms for female youth. In a bivariate linear regression model maternal torture exposure predicted higher emo;onal scores (more distress) in female youth (manuscript in review).22 Further analysis suggested the rela;onship between torture and war trauma experiences and youth adjustment was completely mediated by maternal mental health distress. Moderated media;on analysis demonstrated that physical health problems was found to moderate the degree to which maternal mental health distress mediated the rela;onship between torture and war trauma experiences and youth adjustment. A stronger impact of maternal mental health distress on associa;ons between torture experiences and youth adjustment was observed in maternal caregivers who reported greater physical health Page  of  Template Revised On: 09/01/2019945
SOCIAL PROTOCOL (HRP-580) PROTOCOL TITLE: MBI Interven;on with war-aﬀected families VERSION DATE:  3/2/2022 v6 problems (i.e. pain, hypertension, gastrointes;nal disturbances). Recently, we have begun to examine the direct and indirect eﬀects of torture and war trauma experiences, family func;oning, mental health distress, physical health problems, youth gender and youth trauma exposure on youth adjustment in the integrated dataset including maternal and paternal caregivers, and youth. Preliminary path analysis suggested parent torture and family func;oning type have sta;s;cally signiﬁcant direct eﬀects on youth adjustment. Parent torture was found to have an indirect eﬀect on youth adjustment through the mental health and physical health problems of parents, and the gender and trauma exposure of youth. Family func;oning type demonstrated an indirect eﬀect on youth adjustment through youth gender, youth trauma exposure, parent physical health problems and parent mental health.  Thus, our preliminary ﬁndings have enhanced a mechanis;c understanding that emo;onal and physiologic regula;on are key targets for recovery from intergenera;onal eﬀects of trauma. Our proposed research will directly address the intersec;on of mental and physiological health problems, youth adjustment, and family func;oning in trauma recovery.22 2.3 Exis;ng Literature: The UN es;mates that 68.5 million people are forcibly displaced from their communi;es of origin because of fear of violence or persecu;on; 16.2 million people were newly displaced last year alone1. War trauma2 is a silent, global epidemic. Its impacts are pernicious and far-reaching. Almost universally, civilian survivors of conﬂict are exposed to individual and/or collec;ve war traumas. The direct exposure to psychological trauma or torture3 leads to well-documented individual health consequences. Less well characterized are the inclusive eﬀects of war trauma including sequalae impac;ng families and communi;es. Intergenera;onal trauma is deﬁned as the passage of trauma-related dysfunc;on experienced by one genera;on onto members of future genera;ons who were not themselves exposed to the original trauma.4 It is a phenomenon documented among groups that have experienced collec;ve trauma and systema;c oppression, most notably, survivors of the Holocaust and First Na;ons/Na;ve American communi;es.5,6 An emerging body of evidence highlights the signiﬁcance of intergenera;onal trauma among war-aﬀected families.7-15 In our proposed work, we will address the intergenera;onal transmission of emo;onal and behavioral disrup;ons due to parental trauma in war-aﬀected families. We propose a mindfulness-based interven;on (MBI) to target key underlying mechanisms iden;ﬁed in preliminary research. These include physical/soma;c and psychological trauma related symptoms, and key constructs of family func;oning, all germane to healthy youth development and family systems in war-aﬀected youth and families. Our study will be the ﬁrst to provide feasibility data for a family MBI to address paUerns of behavior that poten;ate intergenera;onal trauma in war-aﬀected youth and families. Youth adjustment in the context of forced displacement, migraMon, and intergeneraMonal trauma We deﬁne youth adjustment as the social, behavioral, cogni;ve, and rela;onal characteris;cs of a young person in a war-aﬀected family that inﬂuence adapta;on and Page  of  Template Revised On: 09/01/20191045
SOCIAL PROTOCOL (HRP-580) PROTOCOL TITLE: MBI Interven;on with war-aﬀected families VERSION DATE:  3/2/2022 v6 integra;on during post-migra;on or reseUlement. Observa;onal intergenera;onal trauma studies describe that child aUachment and psychosocial adjustment can be nega;vely aﬀected by parental trauma history. Symptoms of depression and anxiety are reported at higher levels among children with trauma;zed parents8, although factors such as family func;oning and resilience strategies can inﬂuence these associa;ons or func;on as protec;ve factors.9 For children whose parents have experienced torture, the eﬀects can be par;cularly striking. Having a parent who experienced torture contributes to a higher likelihood of children’s nega;ve mental health outcomes.8,10 Family narra;ves about trauma sequalae can also be important. For example, contradic;ons between what children of survivors are told and what they observe contribute to uncertainty and instability.11 Children from families aﬀected by war and forced migra;on encounter a unique set of circumstances as they nego;ate reseUlement and integra;on. The capacity and resilience with which war-aﬀected youth nego;ate these circumstances is inﬂuenced by the strength of their familial and social networks. For example, among this group, familial factors such as intergenera;onal conﬂict or separa;on may protect or perpetuate trauma.12-17 Intergenera;onal conﬂict is a highly relevant factor in the development of dual mental health and substance use disorders and overall adjustment among refugee youth.18 Addi;onally, war-aﬀected youth are considered par;cularly vulnerable to gang recruitment.19 Poor familial dynamics are predic;ve of involvement in criminal and gang ac;vity.20 Gang-involved migrant youth had either experienced pre-migra;on trauma themselves or been impacted by their parents’ pre-migra;on experiences. Family violence, disintegra;on of rela;onships, and forms of absent, permissive or hos;le paren;ng are risk factors for gang involvement.21 There is a dearth of research focused on refugee adolescent adjustment and health. The proposed work will move the ﬁeld forward by developing and tes;ng an interven;on to address adolescent refugee adjustment. 3.Study Endpoints/Events/Outcomes 3.1 Primary Endpoint/Event/Outcome: Results will demonstrate the feasibility of community based par;cipatory research strategies, recruitment, reten;on, ﬁdelity, data collec;on procedures, and the acceptability and adaptability of the interven;on. We are establishing training procedures where the PI and the community health interven;onists will be trained and evaluated in the delivery of the interven;on. Addi;onally we are merging two evidence based interven;ons, both of which will be adapted contextually to the context of a home-based interven;on for war-aﬀected families with adolescent youth.  Hypothesis 1a: The CBPR design u;lizing CHWI will demonstrate high interven;on impact measured by interven;on ﬁdelity, rates of comple;on of study milestones, and high par;cipant and CHWI sa;sfac;on. Hypothesis 1b: Recruitment and reten;on will be robust. The study team will meet recruitment targets and 85% of families will complete FMBI sessions and structured assessments within 3 months of enrollment. Page  of  Template Revised On: 09/01/20191145
SOCIAL PROTOCOL (HRP-580) PROTOCOL TITLE: MBI Interven;on with war-aﬀected families VERSION DATE:  3/2/2022 v6 Hypothesis 1c: Acceptability and sustainability will be demonstrated through qualita;ve reports of engagement, safety of the interven;on, readiness to adopt, uptake, and perceived cultural congruence. 3.2.Secondary Endpoint(s)/Event(s)/Outcome(s): Though purposely not powered to infer a causal rela;onship, we will examine trends in outcomes related to physical complaints and mindfulness related processes in youth and parents. These outcomes include: youth adjustment; mindfulness; emo;on regula;on; family func;oning and physiological regula;on.  Hypothesis: FMBI will demonstrate preliminary improvements in outcomes listed above. 4.Study IntervenMon(s)/InteracMon(s) 1.Descrip;on: The Family Mindfulness Based interven;on will consist of two evidence based interven;ons, adapted contextually to the circumstances of war-aﬀected families in reseUlement, and integrated. The ﬁrst interven;on is the Aper Deployment Adap;ve Paren;ng Tools (ADAPT) interven;on. This is a 14 session group-based mindful paren;ng interven;on originally developed to increase emo;on regula;on among military caregivers with young children and improve youth adjustment.33-36  Parents will be invited to par;cipate in individual interviews post-program. The second interven;on is Learning To BREATHE, a 6 session group-based interven;on targe;ng adolescent mindfulness.37-41 The adapted and merged interven;on will be delivered to individual families (home-based) in twice weekly sessions over a 7-week period by two community health worker interven;onists. Learning to Breathe was determined during pilot tes;ng to be more eﬀec;ve in the group format and the study team will return to the original delivery format of 6 group sessions. In addi;on to interven;on sessions, there will be an enrollment visit, where consent and pre-interven;on assessments are completed. Post-assessments and focus groups will be conducted immediately post-interven;on. The administra;ve and 7-week interven;on period will cover topics as described in the following table. Table 1. Schedule of visits including elements of the family mindfulness based intervenMonWeekCaregiver (reﬂects adapted ADAPT interven;on)Youth (reﬂects adapted Learning to BREATHE interven;on)Pre-Interven;on (120 minutes)Enrollment and Consent Demographics Pre-assessments (listed table 2: caregiver, family, all)Enrollment and Assent Demographics Pre-assessments (listed table 2: youth, family, all)Page  of  Template Revised On: 09/01/20191245
SOCIAL PROTOCOL (HRP-580) PROTOCOL TITLE: MBI Interven;on with war-aﬀected families VERSION DATE:  3/2/2022 v6 
5.Procedures Involved 5.1.Study Design:  We will test the feasibility of the family mindfulness-based interven;on with a reseUled popula;on of war-aﬀected families through a nonrandomized par;al cluster feasibility trial with embedded qualita;ve procedures. This will occur in 2 phases: 1 (60 minutes)Building Blocks of Resistance Give Eﬀec;ve Direc;ons Body Check in and prac;ce2 (60 minutes)Teach New Behavior Recognizing emo;ons Reﬂec;on Check in and prac;ce3 (60 minutes)Responding to Emo;ons Selng Limits Emo;ons Check in and prac;ce4 (60 minutes)Following Through Communicate with Children AUen;on Check in and prac;ce5 (60 minutes)Solving Problems Managing Conﬂict Tenderness Check in and prac;ce6 (60 minutes)Monitor children’s ac;vi;es Responding to Children’s Emo;onsHealth Mind Habits Check in and prac;ce7 (60 minutes)Building Skills: Linking home and school Balancing work and playPost-Interven;on (120 minutes)Post interven;on assessmentsPost interven;on assessmentsOp;onal focus groups by role (60-90 minutes): Separate maternal, paternal, and youth focus groups
Page  of  Template Revised On: 09/01/20191345
SOCIAL PROTOCOL (HRP-580) PROTOCOL TITLE: MBI Interven;on with war-aﬀected families VERSION DATE:  3/2/2022 v6 Phase 1: Interven;on adapta;on and Community Health Worker Interven;onist (CHWI) training through the delivery of the interven;on to Community Leadership Board (CLB) members and adolescent focus group Phase 2: Preliminary feasibility tes;ng of the FMBI with members of the Karen community 5.2.Study Procedures:  Phase 1: Community Leadership Board The CLB will be made up of 4-7 Karen professionals represen;ng prominent local organiza;ons suppor;ng Karen refugees in reseUlement. Representa;ves will have lived cultural and historical exper;se as well as professional exper;se suppor;ng the reseUled community from mental health and social services perspec;ves. The exper;se of the board ensures culturally centered prepara;ons for interven;on dissemina;on. The CLB will take an ac;ve role in the adapta;on of the interven;on. At the end of Phase 1 the board will determine the frequency of mee;ngs through Phase 2. CHWI Training •Watch 25 hour ADAPT training video •50 hours of training with cer;ﬁed ADAPT facilitator for training, role play, and feedback •ADAPT facilitator will provide 80 hours coaching based on based on recorded sessions •15 hours training with cer;ﬁed Learning to Breathe facilitator AdaptaMon/CHWI coaching •In Phase 1 the CLB will meet twice per week for 6 weeks. At each mee;ng the CHWI will present an interven;on module to the CLB via Zoom. This will be recorded and later watched by the interven;on facilitator to provide coaching to the CHWI. Members of the CLB will be aware of and agree to the session recording. •Zoom sessions will include a brief group debrief following session (ques;ons below) •Adapta;ons to interven;on content will be made based on this work and summarized and submiUed as modiﬁca;on to the IRB.  •Final CLB mee;ng where present summary of ﬁnal program is presented and discussed. •In phase 2, interven;on sessions with families will be audio/video recorded for the purposes of coaching and ﬁdelity monitoring. Videos will be stored in UMN Box and transcribed. The focus of the recording is the interven;onist, not the research par;cipant. CLB debrieﬁng quesMons (aper each session and ﬁnal related to overall program): What did you like about this session? What did you not like about this session? What are some ways we improve the session? Was there anything missing from the session? Page  of  Template Revised On: 09/01/20191445
SOCIAL PROTOCOL (HRP-580) PROTOCOL TITLE: MBI Interven;on with war-aﬀected families VERSION DATE:  3/2/2022 v6 Are there ways we should change the session to beUer meet the needs of Karen parents? What will barriers be to par;cipa;on? What can the study team do to facilitate par;cipa;on? Youth Focus Group CHWI from WellShare Interna;onal will lead the recruitment of adolescent youth from the exis;ng cohort of families. We will also reach out to organiza;onal partners for recruitment support. If this is conﬁrmed, we will submit recruitment materials to the IRB as a modiﬁca;on. We will conduct up to two focus groups via Zoom with 5-6 youth par;cipants in each group. Consent/assent procedures are described further. Following assent, the CHWI will provide a descrip;on of the interven;on including the focus of each of the 6 sessions, and the types of ac;vi;es that will be part of the session. The CHWI will then ask par;cipants to discuss the following: Focus Group QuesMons: Would consider par;cipa;ng in this program? Why or why not? How do you think this interven;on could be helpful to you? What would kinds of things would you want to see included in the program? What do you not want to see included in the program? What would barriers to par;cipa;ng in the program be/what would prevent you from par;cipa;ng? What could the project team to help make it possible for you to par;cipate in the program? What do you think about ;mes during the program where you and your parents are learning together? 9/10/21 This update is relevant to youth participation in STUDY 00011195. We are not making any adaptations to the Learning to Breathe curriculum, and/or procedures proposed in the original protocol.   Six community health workers engaged in the migrant/refugee youth programming at WellShare International participated in the full Learning to Breathe intervention training with a goal of evaluating the acceptability of the intervention. It was highly endorsed and there were no recommended adaptations to the curriculum. We are still considering group-based versus individual delivery format, and will conduct a youth focus group following implementation to further exlore this. We will keep the proposed individual format as is through the fall pilot. This modification was based on the PIs conversation with the IRB committee and I am submitting this modification to confirm the activities has been completed. Page  of  Template Revised On: 09/01/20191545
SOCIAL PROTOCOL (HRP-580) PROTOCOL TITLE: MBI Interven;on with war-aﬀected families VERSION DATE:  3/2/2022 v6 Phase 2: Phase 2 procedures are designed to test the feasibility of the of the family mindfulness based interven;on and the preliminary impact of the program on key outcomes derived through early project phases. Speciﬁcally in this phase of the research our feasibility focus is the CBPR approach and interven;on delivery by community health worker interven;onists. Two Karen interven;onists (who are both members of the Karen community, employed as community health workers at WellShare Interna;onal) will lead the recruitment and enrollment of 10-12 families. Community health worker interven;onists will be listed as study staﬀ on the IRB submission. The 9-week study period will include: 7-week home-based interven;on delivery (60 minutes per biweekly session) and 2 weeks of pre/post assessments (120 minutes each). Youth will par;cipate in a group delivery format. The format will be in person groups consis;ng of 5-10 group members. The loca;on of the group will be the Knyaw Bap;st Church. Masks will be required and social distancing will be promoted. Groups will only consist of youth taking part in the interven;on. Parents will have the op;on of transpor;ng children, or transporta;on by the church van will be arranged as an alterna;ve. Youth will be instructed that all content of the interven;on sessions is to remain conﬁden;al. Youth will be reminded at the start of each session that the iden;;es of their fellow par;cipants and informa;on shared are conﬁden;al, and they should only share what they would be comfortable with others knowing since there is no guarantee that this informa;on will stay within the group. An op;onal later 60-90 minute focus group will be oﬀered 1-month post-interven;on for youth. Parents will be invited to par;cipate in individual interviews. Cost of transporta;on and childcare will be supported for focus group par;cipants and each par;cipant will receive a $15 gip card for par;cipa;on. Ques;ons will target success and challenges par;cipants have had implemen;ng the skills taught in the interven;on, as well as general percep;ons of the interven;on 1-month aper the program end. Coordinators will have par;cipated in the reﬁnement and implementa/on of the interven;on in Aim 1. Study coordinators and local interven;onists will be trained interven;on facilitators based at the University of Minnesota. Fidelity observa;ons will be made weekly by study team members/trainers. As part of feasibility tes;ng we will monitor par;cipant adherence to the study protocol and the challenges that prevent families’ full par;cipa;on in aUending interven;ons sessions. Study visits that take place +/- 2 days of target visit date will be considered ‘on ;me’. Visit outside of this ;meframe will be considered delayed. If a family member misses a scheduled visit, it will be documented as “missed”. Ac;vi;es of phase 2 are con;ngent on the comple;on of phase 1 and IRB approval of all modiﬁca;ons to the interven;on and/or proposed study protocol. Regarding in person versus remote interac;ons, we are developing two models, depending on the circumstances of Covid-19 in the Summer-Fall 2021 (intensive data collec;on phase). We plan to follow all Federal/CDC guidelines as appropriate. We an;cipate a hybrid implementa;on in that we will have families that prefer the telehealth op;on and familes that prefer in person. Page  of  Template Revised On: 09/01/20191645
SOCIAL PROTOCOL (HRP-580) PROTOCOL TITLE: MBI Interven;on with war-aﬀected families VERSION DATE:  3/2/2022 v6 •Model A - WellShare CHWs are currently conduc;ng telehealth visits by phone or video. If the circumstances surrounding Covid-19 persist into the summer-fall 2021 we will conduct all study procedures through remote technology. •Model B – If the circumstances allow, we will plan for data collec;on and interven;on sessions to be conducted in person, outdoors.  We are planning for study personnel and par;cipant PPE should this be necessary. The School of Nursing Oﬃce for Nursing Research and Scholarship will provide PPE funds if necessary. 5.2.1.The project is a pilot study and therefore all ac;vi;es are occurring for research purposes. 5.2.2.Pre and post assessments are listed in Table 2. These will be wriUen assessments and will be available in English and Karen languages. In the case that a par;cipant is not able to read or prefers to have the ques;ons aloud, the community health worker interven;onist will be delivered verbally. Table 2. Aim 2 assessmentsInstrumentOutcome CharacterisMcsItem samplePsychometricsCitaMonYouth (youth complete)Strengths and Diﬃcul/es Ques/onnaire (SDQ I/S)Youth adjustment A 25-item youth behavioral screening ques;onnaire Oien complains of headaches, stomach-aches or sickness.α = 0.82  (total diﬃcul;es)Goodman et al., 199828Cogni/ve and Aﬀec/ve Mindfulness Scale-Revised (CAMS-R)Mindfulness A 12-item assessment of mindfulness as a single construct It is easy for me to concentrate on what I am doing.α = 0.74-0.77Feldman et al., 200729
Page  of  Template Revised On: 09/01/20191745
SOCIAL PROTOCOL (HRP-580) PROTOCOL TITLE: MBI Interven;on with war-aﬀected families VERSION DATE:  3/2/2022 v6 UCLA Brief Screen for Child/Adolescent Trauma and PTSDYouth trauma history, PTSD screeningA 11-item (+2 open ended) evalua;on of trauma history and PTSD symptoms for iden;fying at-risk casesI have trouble concentra/ng or paying a+en/on.  α > .93 Rolon-Arroyo et al., 2020Emo/on Regula/on Skills Ques/onnaire (ERSQ)Emo;on regula;onA 27-item assessment of emo;on regula;on skills described in the ART83 modelMy physical sensa/ons were a good indica/on of how I was feeling.α = .96 Grant et al. 201830Caregiver (caregivers complete)Karen Mental Health Screener – Brief (KMHS-B)Parent mental health distress5-item measure developed to screen for mental distress associated with MDD and PTSD In the past month, have you been unable to concentrate, remember things, or make decisions?α = 0.83Brink et al., 201527
Cogni/ve and Aﬀec/ve Mindfulness Scale-Revised (CAMS-R)Mindfulness A 12-item assessment of mindfulness as a single construct It is easy for me to concentrate on what I am doing.α = 0.74-0.77Feldman et al., 200729Emo/on Regula/on Skills Ques/onnaire (ERSQ)Emo;on regula;onA 27-item assessment of emo;on regula;on skills described in the ART83 modelMy physical sensa/ons were a good indica/on of how I was feeling.α = .96 Grant et al. 201830Family FuncMoning (all complete)Page  of  Template Revised On: 09/01/20191845
SOCIAL PROTOCOL (HRP-580) PROTOCOL TITLE: MBI Interven;on with war-aﬀected families VERSION DATE:  3/2/2022 v6 
5.3.Follow-Up: Currently we plan to collect pre/post interven;on and focus group data only. If addi;onal funds are obtained will add a 6 month follow up assessment. If this is the case, we will submit an addendum to this protocol. Parents who complete the ADAPT interven;on will be invited to conduct a 1:1 in depth interview about their experiences in the program. This will occur in the home and an incen;ve of $10 will be provided. 5.4.Individually Iden;ﬁable Health Informa;on: This study will include individually iden;ﬁable health informa;on but will not include data from medical records. See sec;on 18.0. Par;cipants will be asked to sign a combined ICF/HIPAA form before comple;ng any study procedures.  6.Data Banking 6.1.Storage and Access: De-iden;ﬁed data collected from the pre- and post- assessment measures in this study may be used in collated fashion for future peer-reviewed publica;ons or other scien;ﬁc communica;ons.  6.2.Data: For subject screening we will be using a phone script. We will include an eligible/not eligible ﬁeld in the RedCAP databased to document eligibility for each par;cipant. Demographic data and pre/post will be collected during the enrollment visit via pen/paper. Demographic informa;on and responses to pre/post instruments will be entered into a par;cipant study record in RedCAP . Par;cipant IDs will be assigned to par;cipants and linked to iden;fying informa;on in a spreadsheet housed in the UMN Box plahorm. Study records including hard copies of assessments will be destroyed three years aper the close of the study. Community Family Adaptability and Cohesion Scale IV (FACES)Family func;oningA 42-item assessment of cohesion & ﬂexibilityFamily members are suppor/ve of each other during diﬃcult /mes.Alpha reliability range subscales:  α = .77-.89Olson, 201127Physiological RegulaMon (all complete)Cohen-Hoberman Inventory of Physical Symptoms (CHIPS)Physical health status A 39-item assessment of perceived burden from physical symptomsHow much were you bothered by: Back pain Cons/pa/on Dizzinessα = .88Cohen & Hoberman, 198331
Page  of  Template Revised On: 09/01/20191945
SOCIAL PROTOCOL (HRP-580) PROTOCOL TITLE: MBI Interven;on with war-aﬀected families VERSION DATE:  3/2/2022 v6 health workers will not be collec;ng data during the interven;on delivery. The PI or designated member of the study team will record study visits in an excel document housed in UMN Box. Interven;on session visits will be tape (audio) and video recorded to evaluate interven;on ﬁdelity (i.e. focus of the recording is the delivery of the interven;on by the Community Health Worker Interven;onists). Por;ons of these recordings will be transcribed for coaching purposes. For Zoom sessions, Zoom’s closed cap;oning will be used for transcrip;on because we do not an;cipate encountering during interven;on sessions. We will seek a BAA excep;on for the HCC account. All transcrip;ons will be de-iden;ﬁed. Because the recordings will also be used in coaching sessions with an interven;on facilitator involved in training the community health worker interven;onists, they will not be immediately destroyed. Recordings will be destroyed along with hard copy study records within three years of the close of the study. Recordings will be downloaded as soon as possible following the study interac;on and then deleted from the recording device. Recording devices will be in the possession of the study team member un;l the recording is deleted. All recordings will be stored in UMN Box. 6.3.Release/Sharing: Individual data will not be released. Community Health Worker Interven;onists will par;cipate in the analysis and interpreta;on of data. Aggregate ﬁndings will be disseminated to the community in partnership with WellShare Interna;onal (community partner).  7.Sharing of Results with ParMcipants 7.1.Individual data will not be shared among par;cipants. Aggregate ﬁndings will be disseminated to the community in partnership with WellShare Interna;onal (community partner).  8.Study DuraMon 8.1.Describe: 8.1.1.The dura;on an;cipated for adolescents par;cipa;ng in Phase 1 focus group is 1 hour. The dura;on an;cipated for an individual par;cipant’s par;cipa;on in the Phase 2 ac;vi;es of the study is approximately 20 hours over 8 weeks including interven;on and administra;ve visits.  8.1.2.The dura;on an;cipated to enroll Phase 1 study par;cipants is 1 week. Dura;on an;cipated to enroll all Phase 2 study par;cipants is 3 months 8.1.3.The dura;on an;cipated to complete all study procedures and data analysis is 12 months 9.Study PopulaMon 9.1 Inclusion Criteria:  Adult inclusion criteria:  a) Above the age of 18 Page  of  Template Revised On: 09/01/20192045
SOCIAL PROTOCOL (HRP-580) PROTOCOL TITLE: MBI Interven;on with war-aﬀected families VERSION DATE:  3/2/2022 v6 b) Karen refugees reseUled to the United States greater than one year prior to enrollment c) Caregiving responsibility for at least one child between the ages of 11 and 18 d) Reported primary or secondary torture or war trauma exposure, based on assessments conducted during UMN IRB STUDY00000729 e) Par;cipa;on in UMN IRB STUDY00000729 and having agreed to be contacted for future research Youth inclusion criteria: a) Ages 11 to 18 b) Living in the home with the primary caregivers c) Considered a dependent of the primary caregivers (s;ll in high school or transi;oning from school to work force, not married and/or raising their own children – will take individual youth circumstances into considera;on individually to make a determina;on of dependence)  9.2 Exclusion Criteria Exclusion criteria (applies to both adult and youth par;cipants): a) Self-reported or study team observed severe or unstable mental or physical illness such as: acute psychosis, presence or risk of safety concerns, and/or a physical disability or illness, which prevents the poten;al par;cipant from engaging in the study ac;vi;es. Youth will be excluded if screening is posi;ve for PTSD. Caregivers will not be excluded if mental health screening is posi;ve for PTSD/severe depression. b) Nonbiological caregiving rela;onships with child c) If one member of the family declines to par;cipate in the ini;al enrollment, the family will be excluded. If the randomly selected index youth declines to par;cipate, we will open enrollment to other youth in the family that meet the inclusion criteria. 9.3 Screening: Karen families will be recruited from an exis;ng cohort of 96 Karen families that par;cipated in preliminary observa;onal studies and gave consent to be contacted for poten;al involvement in future phases of the research (UMN IRB STUDY00005512 and STUDY00000729). Par;cipa;on in previous study phases will not impact the proposed trial. Two Karen community health worker interven;onists will be prepared to assist poten;al and assigned par;cipants in all aspects of the study—from recruitment and consent processes, to interven;on delivery, data collec;on, and ﬁnal evalua;on interviews.  In phase 1 our recruitment target is up to 12 adolescent youth age 11-18 to par;cipate in 5-6 member focus groups, each group mee;ng up to 3 ;mes. One parent will give verbal consent over the phone. Youth assent will be conﬁrmed at the beginning of the focus group session. Focus group sessions will take place over Zoom and will be facilitated by the CHWI with the PI present. Zoom sessions will be audio only recorded and any Karen language discussion will be transcribed by CHWI. All transcrip;ons will be de-iden;ﬁed.  Page  of  Template Revised On: 09/01/20192145
SOCIAL PROTOCOL (HRP-580) PROTOCOL TITLE: MBI Interven;on with war-aﬀected families VERSION DATE:  3/2/2022 v6 In phase 2 our recruitment target is N=10-12 families, inclusive of the maternal caregiver, paternal caregiver (when present), and one randomly selected index youth per family age 11-18. At the ini;al contact with poten;al par;cipants (phone call), the community health worker/Karen interven;onist will explain study procedures such as voluntary par;cipa;on and what par;cipa;on in the interven;on entails. Poten;al par;cipants will be oﬀered the opportunity to ask ques;ons about study procedures. A second, in person encounter will be scheduled if the poten;al par;cipant expresses interest in study par;cipa;on. At a second encounter (face to face in par;cipant homes or preferred alterna;ve loca;on or via Zoom if remote is preferred) con;nued interest in par;cipa;on will be assessed. Parents and youth will be screened for eligibility, and informed consent and assent will be obtained. Baseline data collec;on will be obtained at this second encounter. Interven;on sessions will begin within one month of enrollment. 10.Vulnerable PopulaMons 10.1.Vulnerable Popula;ons:  Popula;on / GroupIden;fy whether any of the following popula;ons will be targeted, included (not necessarily targeted) or excluded from par;cipa;on in the study. ChildrenTargeted Popula;onPregnant women/fetuses/neonatesIncluded/Allowed to Par;cipatePrisonersExcluded from Par;cipa;onAdults lacking capacity to consent and/or adults with diminished capacity to consent, including, but not limited to, those with acute medical condi;ons, psychiatric disorders, neurologic disorders, developmental disorders, and behavioral disordersExcluded from Par;cipa;on
Non-English speakersIncluded/Allowed to Par;cipateThose unable to read (illiterate)Included/Allowed to Par;cipateEmployees of the researcherExcluded from Par;cipa;onStudents of the researcherExcluded from Par;cipa;onPage  of  Template Revised On: 09/01/20192245
SOCIAL PROTOCOL (HRP-580) PROTOCOL TITLE: MBI Interven;on with war-aﬀected families VERSION DATE:  3/2/2022 v6 
10.2 Addi;onal Safeguards:  The study team will base a trauma informed approach on SAMHSA’s 6 KEY PRINCIPLES OF A TRAUMA-INFORMED APPROACH: 1.Safety  2.Trustworthiness and Transparency  3.Peer Support  4.Collabora;on and Mutuality  5.Empowerment, Voice and Choice  Undervalued or disenfranchised social groupTargeted Popula;onAc;ve members of the military (service members), DoD personnel (including civilian employees)Included/Allowed to Par;cipateIndividual or group that is approached for par;cipa;on in research during a stressful situa;on such as emergency room selng, childbirth (labor), etc.Excluded from Par;cipa;onIndividual or group that is disadvantaged in the distribu;on of social goods and services such as income, housing, or healthcare.Targeted Popula;onIndividual or group with a serious health condi;on for which there are no sa;sfactory standard treatments.Included/Allowed to Par;cipateIndividual or group with a fear of nega;ve consequences for not par;cipa;ng in the research (e.g. ins;tu;onaliza;on, deporta;on, disclosure of s;gma;zing behavior).Included/Allowed to Par;cipateAny other circumstance/dynamic that could increase vulnerability to coercion or exploita;on that might inﬂuence consent to research or decision to con;nue in research.Included/Allowed to Par;cipate
Page  of  Template Revised On: 09/01/20192345
SOCIAL PROTOCOL (HRP-580) PROTOCOL TITLE: MBI Interven;on with war-aﬀected families VERSION DATE:  3/2/2022 v6 6.Cultural, Historical, and Gender Issues  The framework will be implemented through a number of strategies, including but not limited to: Karen community health worker interven;onist model, stakeholder-led interven;on development/adapta;on, home-based interven;on delivery, par;cipant led consent and assent discussions, family involvement, and community advisory board input/oversight. Illiterate: Pa;ents who are illiterate may not be known, research staﬀ will not be asking a direct ques;on about literacy to poten;al par;cipants. However, if it's made known to us that the pa;ent is illiterate we will take extra care to go through the consent form and read it to the poten;al par;cipant. Vulnerability for this group will not be increased by par;cipa;ng in this study. Undervalued and Disadvantaged: Disadvantaged and disadvantaged people may not be known, research staﬀ will not be asking a direct ques;on about socioeconomic status to poten;al par;cipants. Vulnerability for this group will not be increased by par;cipa;ng in this study. Fear of Nega;ve consequences: Individuals with a fear of nega;ve consequences for not par;cipa;ng in the research (e.g. ins;tu;onaliza;on, deporta;on, disclosure of s;gma;zing behavior) are not targeted but may be enrolled. All par;cipants will be fully informed that the study is completely voluntary and that they may withdraw par;cipa;on at any ;me. They will also be reminded that their rela;onship with their provider or the UMN will not be aﬀected by their decision whether or not to par;cipate in this study. 10.1.1.Pregnant Women The inclusion of pregnant women will be incidental. This study does not include an interven;on, biologic or other greater than minimal risk procedure. No inducements, monetary or otherwise, will be oﬀered to terminate a pregnancy. Individuals engaged in the research will have no part in any decisions as to the ;ming, method, or procedures used to terminate a pregnancy. Individuals engaged in the research will have no part in determining the viability of a neonate. All par;cipants will be provided   assurance of conﬁden;ality, the freedom to decline to par;cipate and the right to withdraw at any ;me without penalty. All par;cipants will be reassured that their decision to par;cipate or not patriciate in this study will have no eﬀect on their current prenatal care. 10.1.2.NA 10.1.3.NA 10.1.4.Youth ages 11-18 will be recruited to par;cipate in an adolescent mindfulness curriculum.  Page  of  Template Revised On: 09/01/20192445
SOCIAL PROTOCOL (HRP-580) PROTOCOL TITLE: MBI Interven;on with war-aﬀected families VERSION DATE:  3/2/2022 v6 Children are the targeted popula;on for this study because the study aims could not be assessed without children. Study procedures have been minimized to exclude all unnecessary procedures that would not contribute to the scien;ﬁc objec;ve. The inves;gators believe that the risks to par;cipants are no greater than minimal in rela;on to the importance of the knowledge that may be expected to result. Permission by one or more parents or guardians and assent (when appropriate) by the child will be solicited. All par;cipants will be provided assurance of conﬁden;ality, the freedom to decline to par;cipate and the right to withdraw at any ;me without penalty. 10.1.5.NA 10.1.6.Refugees inherently experience inequity of wealth and access. A majority of Karen refugees reseUled in Minnesota are Karen-speaking only. Civilian survivors of conﬂict, almost universally, experience individual and/or collec;ve war traumas. Psychological trauma and torture experienced by war-aﬀected individuals is strongly associated with signiﬁcant and long-term individual mental and physical health eﬀects. It has more recently been observed that the eﬀects of a trauma experienced by a parent nega;vely inﬂuence the health of the family system and healthy youth development. Trauma treatment oﬀers important and eﬀec;ve elements in recovery in war-aﬀected individuals, but these programs remain predominantly centered on individual recovery. The intergenera;onal impact of trauma is overlooked, thus deepening health dispari;es experienced by an already vulnerable popula;on. With growing knowledge of the connec;on between mind, body and trauma, par;cularly informed by the emerging disciplines of neuroscience, developmental psychopathology, and interpersonal neurobiology, we understand that trauma experiences are felt, stored, and expressed by the body. This proposal integrates perspec;ves and methods from these and other disciplines to introduce, through mindfulness, a community-based interven;on that promotes posi;ve emo;onal and behavioral development of war-aﬀected youth and family systems.  10.1.7.See above for descrip;on of popula;on and alignment with aims. 10.1.8.See above descrip;on of risk. 11.Number of ParMcipants 11.1.Number of Par;cipants to be Consented in phase 1: 10-12 youth; in phase 2: Es;mated 50 or less (maternal, paternal, youth) 12.Recruitment Methods 12.1.Recruitment Process:  Page  of  Template Revised On: 09/01/20192545
SOCIAL PROTOCOL (HRP-580) PROTOCOL TITLE: MBI Interven;on with war-aﬀected families VERSION DATE:  3/2/2022 v6 For youth par;cipa;ng in phase 1 focus groups, we recruit from the exis;ng cohort. We will also reach out to organiza;onal partners for recruitment support. If this is conﬁrmed, we will submit recruitment materials to the IRB as a modiﬁca;on.  (See above also, sec;on 8.3). In phase 2 Karen families will be recruited from an exis;ng cohort of 96 Karen families that par;cipated in preliminary observa;onal studies and gave consent to be contacted for poten;al involvement in future phases of the research (UMN IRB STUDY00005512 and STUDY00000729). Par;cipa;on in previous study phases will not impact the proposed trial. Poten;al Karen par;cipants will also be recruited through iden;cal methods by targeted recruitment based on family engagement with community partner (WellShare Interna;onal) programming, e.g. involvement in Karen youth programming, tobacco cessa;on programming, or via referral through established partnerships to WellShare paren;ng support programming. Two Karen community health worker interven;onists will be prepared to assist poten;al and assigned par;cipants in all aspects of the study—from recruitment and consent processes, to interven;on delivery, data collec;on, and ﬁnal evalua;on interviews. Our recruitment target in phase 2 is N=10-12 families, inclusive of the maternal caregiver, paternal caregiver (when present), and one randomly selected index youth per family age 11-18. At the ini;al contact with poten;al par;cipants (phone call), the community health worker/Karen interven;onist will explain study procedures such as voluntary par;cipa;on and what par;cipa;on in the interven;on entails. The eligibility of the selected youth will also be conﬁrmed in this ini;al contact.  Based on past studies this ini;al point of contact will likely be the maternal caregiver. Poten;al par;cipants will be oﬀered the opportunity to ask ques;ons about study procedures. A second, in person encounter will be scheduled if the poten;al par;cipant expresses interest in study par;cipa;on. At a second encounter (face to face in par;cipant homes or preferred alterna;ve loca;on) con;nued interest in par;cipa;on will be assessed. Parents and youth will be met with individually, in private, and screened for eligibility, and informed consent and assent will be obtained. Youth can determine whether a parent remains present for study procedures. Baseline data collec;on will be obtained at this second encounter. Interven;on sessions will begin within one month of enrollment. Par;cipants will be given a copy of their signed and dated consent/assent forms. 12.2.Source of Par;cipants: An exis;ng cohort. 12.3.Iden;ﬁca;on of Poten;al Par;cipants:  Par;cipants will be iden;ﬁed and recruited from an exis;ng cohort or through CHWI iden;ﬁed poten;al par;cipants based on family engagement with community partner (WellShare Interna;onal) programming, e.g. involvement in Karen youth programming, tobacco cessa;on programming, or via referral through established partnerships to WellShare paren;ng support programming. 12.3.1.Page  of  Template Revised On: 09/01/20192645
SOCIAL PROTOCOL (HRP-580) PROTOCOL TITLE: MBI Interven;on with war-aﬀected families VERSION DATE:  3/2/2022 v6 NA 12.3.2.WellShare Community Health Worker Interven;onists (Karen) 12.3.3.No medical records will be accessed. 12.4.Recruitment Materials:  Phone recruitment phone script submiUed with ETHOS materials. 12.5.Payment:  In phase 1 youth will be compensated $20 per focus group session aUended. In phase 2 individuals will be compensated $10 each at each study visit (2 data collec;on visits + 12 study visits over 6 weeks), totaling $140 per individual/$420 per family if full par;cipa;on. Focus group par;cipants will individually receive $15 per session. Transporta;on and childcare will be provided for focus group aUendance. These amounts are based on community norms and the recommenda;on of WellShare Interna;onal. 12.5.1.See above, par;cipants will receive visa gip card incen;ves.  12.5.2.In phase 1 youth could receive up to $60 if they par;cipate in the maximum of 3 focus group sessions. In phase 2 families may receive up to $420. Individuals may receive up to $140. Individuals may receive an addi;onal $15 for focus group par;cipa;on.  12.5.3.Visa gip card incen;ves will be given at each study encounter. Payments will not be prorated. 12.5.4.Par;cipants will receive gip cards.  12.5.5.NA 12.5.6.No, Greenphire ClinCard will not be used. 13.Withdrawal of ParMcipants 13.1.Withdrawal Circumstances:  Page  of  Template Revised On: 09/01/20192745
SOCIAL PROTOCOL (HRP-580) PROTOCOL TITLE: MBI Interven;on with war-aﬀected families VERSION DATE:  3/2/2022 v6 We do not an;cipate circumstances under which this would occur. Par;cipants are free to withdraw at any;me during the study. 13.2.Withdrawal Procedures:  If a par;cipant wishes to withdraw or we determine that the par;cipant should withdraw, we will terminate data collec;on and discuss with the par;cipant the reasons for withdraw. All data collected up to that point will be used in analysis unless the par;cipant wishes for their data not to be used. The date and reason for par;cipant discon;nua;on or withdrawal from the study will be recorded on the par;cipant’s Case Report Form (CRF). 13.3.Termina;on Procedures: If a par;cipant withdraws from the study, the study team will request permission to use data collected up to the withdrawal point. 14.Risks to ParMcipants 14.1.Foreseeable Risks:  Interven;on response: Understood risks involved in par;cipa;on in mindfulness-based interven;ons are minimal, par;cularly when developed and delivered through a trauma informed approach.  Instruments and Ques;onnaires: It is possible that structured and or qualita;ve assessments could bring up painful memories and/or par;cipants could experience distress or psychological discomfort. This did not occur in the earlier phases of the project, where more sensi;ve ques;ons were asked of par;cipants in order to establish a mechanism of ac;on from which to target interven;on. Therefore, we consider the likelihood of occurrence of this degree of risk to be low. We will have a trained clinician available for consulta;on during and aper each interven;on session to guard against this concern. Nega;ve reac;ons requiring a clinician’s interven;on, if any, will be an important indicator for reﬁnements to the interven;on. If follow up services are required, par;cipants who experience distress will be referred for same day services through the Wilder Founda;on or Ramsey County Urgent Care for Adult/Child Mental Health. Both organiza;ons have Karen linguis;c and cultural resources available. At the beginning of each interven;on session, the facilitator will ask par;cipants to disclose if they experience any nega;ve feelings during the session. If this becomes the case, the par;cipant will be asked if he/she wants to stop par;cipa;on in the session. In the case of youth par;cipants, the interviewer will inform the parent/guardian. If a par;cipant reports signiﬁcant distress, or otherwise emergent issue, data collec;on will Page  of  Template Revised On: 09/01/20192845
SOCIAL PROTOCOL (HRP-580) PROTOCOL TITLE: MBI Interven;on with war-aﬀected families VERSION DATE:  3/2/2022 v6 stop. The PI will be immediately contacted to discuss the situa;on. A safety plan will be developed with the study coordinator, one or both of the mental health resources iden;ﬁed above, and consulta;on with the mentor team and community partner organiza;ons.  Distress may present in a variety of ways. If distress occurs, the community health worker interven;onist will remain with the par;cipant/family. The PI will always be available for consulta;on during study visits. Once the CHWI has reached the PI, a safety plan will be developed. In urgent or emergent circumstances, the Ramsey County Urgent Care for Adult/Child Mental Health will be consulted. The CHWI and/or PI and/or capable caregiver will stay with the par;cipant to ensure safety un;l a safety plan is established and an appropriate crisis interven;on handoﬀ is established. The threshold for interven;on or withdrawal will be determined by the par;cipant, the community health worker interven;onist, and the PI and will be based on the unique circumstances of the encounter. Referrals will be made upon request, and rou;nely in the event that a caregiver scores 4 or above on the Karen mental health screening tool or youth score 21 or higher on the DSM-5 PTSD diagnos;c screener (if not already receiving services). Rou;ne referrals will not automa;cally exclude a par;cipant from par;cipa;ng or con;nuing in the research. A support study team member/co-facilitator (Marry Htoo) will be present for each group session. The lead facilitator (Hsa Moo) will instruct youth to let the co-facilitator know if they become distressed. If this is the case the co-facilitator will locate a private space for her and the par;cipant to address the response. The primary facilitator can then con;nue with the rest of the session. The PI will be immediately contacted by the co-facilitator to discuss the situa;on and develop a safety plan. The co-facilitator is Karen speaking and will also call to inform the parent/guardian. If a par;cipant experiences signiﬁcant distress the co-facilitator and PI will follow the steps outlined above. The co-facilitator will also have primary responsibility for monitoring for signs of distress during the group and invi;ng youth who show signs of distress to check in individually.  Risk of loss of conﬁden;ality is unlikely, but could possibly occur as PHI is u;lized as part of this study. The risk would be minimized by protec;ons such as de-iden;ﬁca;on of par;cipants via use of a study iden;ﬁer, locked/secured/limited access to PH, and electronic data securely stored and password protected. 14.2.Reproduc;on Risks:  NA 14.3.Risks to Others:  NA 15.Incomplete Disclosure or DecepMon Page  of  Template Revised On: 09/01/20192945
SOCIAL PROTOCOL (HRP-580) PROTOCOL TITLE: MBI Interven;on with war-aﬀected families VERSION DATE:  3/2/2022 v6 15.1.Incomplete Disclosure or Decep;on:  15.1.1.NA 15.1.2.NA 15.1.3.NA 16.PotenMal Beneﬁts to ParMcipants 16.1.Poten;al Beneﬁts:   Individuals/families who par;cipate in the interven;on may learn new individual coping and mindfulness skills as well as family communica;on, conﬂict resolu;on, and problem-solving tools. Long term impact includes the development of a family mindfulness-based interven;on that may be adapted across diverse cultural and migrant groups and is eﬀec;ve in regula;ng the eﬀects of trauma through behavioral and environmental mechanisms. 17.StaMsMcal ConsideraMons 17.1.Data Analysis Plan:  Paired t tests will be used to examine intra-individual changes between baseline and post-group scores. Cohen’s d eﬀect sizes quan;fy the magnitude of poten;al changes detected in outcomes, .2 is small, .5 is medium and .8 or higher is large.75 Within families, we will ﬁrst evaluate congruence between the maternal-child dyad interven;on response because we an;cipate these data are more likely to have completeness. Within families, congruence in maternal and paternal caregiver interven;on response will be evaluated. If there are diﬀerences between mothers and fathers, we will conduct a cluster analysis. Missing data will be handled through data imputa;on. Qualita;ve approaches will assess the feasibility of local interven;onists and CBPR strategies. Interviews and focus group transcripts will be analyzed through content analysis and cross-case comparisons. Open coding will ini;ate the development of labels and concepts. Through paUern coding we will create categories of codes. Axial coding will allow for a considera;on of rela;onships between categories. During data reduc;on analy;c documenta;on will facilitate the arrangement of data into conceptual clusters.76 17.2.Power Analysis: The proposed pilot is underpowered. A power analysis for the primary outcome youth adjustment for paired t tests between pre and post interven;on outcome measures was performed a priori in nQuery Advanced to determine the adequate sample size with an alpha of 0.05, a Page  of  Template Revised On: 09/01/20193045
SOCIAL PROTOCOL (HRP-580) PROTOCOL TITLE: MBI Interven;on with war-aﬀected families VERSION DATE:  3/2/2022 v6 power of .80 and an eﬀect size =.45 (small to moderate). The power analysis determined a total sample size of 41 (without aUri;on), to detect a diﬀerence in outcomes. 17.3.Sta;s;cal Analysis: See above. 17.4.Data Integrity:  Data will be entered by a member of the study team and accuracy of data entry veriﬁed by a second team member. We will implement a team approach to analysis, meaning that community health worker interven;onists and members of the study team including the PI will jointly analyze and interpret results.  18.Health InformaMon and Privacy Compliance Select which of the following is applicable to your research: ☐ My research does not require access to individual health informa;on and therefore assert HIPAA does not apply.   ☒ I am reques;ng that all research par;cipants sign a HIPCO approved HIPAA Disclosure Authoriza;on to par;cipate in the research (either the standalone form or the combined consent and HIPAA Authoriza;on). ☐ I am reques;ng the IRB to approve a Waiver or an altera;on of research par;cipant authoriza;on to par;cipate in the research. Appropriate Use for Research:  ☐ An external IRB (e.g. Advarra) is reviewing and we are reques;ng use of the authoriza;on language embedded in the template consent form in lieu of the U of M stand-alone HIPAA Authoriza;on.  Note: External IRB must be serving as the privacy board for this op;on. 18.1.Iden;fy the source of Private Health Informa;on you will be using for your research (Check all that apply)   ☐ I will use the Informa;cs Consul;ng Services (ICS) available through CTSI (also referred to as the University's Informa;on Exchange (IE) or data shelter) to pull records for me ☒ I will collect informa;on directly from research par;cipants. ☐ I will use University services to access and retrieve records from the Bone Marrow Transplant (BMPT) database, also known as the HSCT (Hematopoie;c Stem Cell Transplant) database. ☐ I will pull records directly from EPIC. Page  of  Template Revised On: 09/01/20193145
SOCIAL PROTOCOL (HRP-580) PROTOCOL TITLE: MBI Interven;on with war-aﬀected families VERSION DATE:  3/2/2022 v6 ☐ I will retrieve record directly from axiUm / MiPACS ☐ I will receive data from the Center for Medicare/Medicaid Services  ☐ I will receive a limited data set from another ins;tu;on  ☐ Other.  Describe:  18.2.Explain how you will ensure that only records of pa;ents who have agreed to have their informa;on used for research will be reviewed. All data collected will be self report. 18.3.Approximate number of records required for review: NA. All data collected will be self report. 18.4.Please describe how you will communicate with research par;cipants during the course of this research.  Check all applicable boxes ☐ This research involves record review only. There will be no communica;on with research par;cipants. ☐ Communica;on with research par;cipants will take place in the course of treatment, through MyChart, or other similar forms of communica;on used with pa;ents receiving treatment.  ☒ Communica;on with research par;cipants will take place outside of treatment selngs. If this box is selected, please describe the type of communica;on and how it will be received by par;cipants.  Ini;al recruitment, scheduling and interven;on visit reminders will occur through telephone communica;on. Main study interac;ons and data collec;on will be in person.  18.5.Access to par;cipants NA 18.6.Loca;on(s) of storage, sharing and analysis of research data, including any links to research data (check all that apply).   ☐ In the data shelter of the Informa;on Exchange (IE)   ☐ Store ☐ Analyze ☐ Share ☐ In the Bone Marrow Transplant (BMT) database, also known as the HSCT (Hematopoie;c Stem Cell Transplant) Database   ☐ Store ☐ Analyze ☐ Share ☒ In REDCap (recap.ahc.umn.edu)  Page  of  Template Revised On: 09/01/20193245
SOCIAL PROTOCOL (HRP-580) PROTOCOL TITLE: MBI Interven;on with war-aﬀected families VERSION DATE:  3/2/2022 v6  ☒ Store ☒ Analyze ☐ Share ☐ In Qualtrics (qualtrics.umn.edu)  ☐ Store ☐ Analyze ☐ Share ☐ In OnCore (oncore.umn.edu)   ☐ Store ☐ Analyze ☐ Share ☒ In the University’s Box Secure Storage (box.umn.edu)  ☒ Store ☒ Analyze ☒ Share ☐ In an AHC-IS supported server. Provide folder path, loca;on of server and IT Support Contact:  ☐ Store ☐ Analyze ☐ Share ☒ In an AHC-IS supported desktop or laptop.  Provide UMN device numbers of all devices: PI device # 20201033  ☒ Store ☐ Analyze ☐ Share ☐ Other. Indicate if data will be collected, downloaded, accessed, shared or stored using a server, desktop, laptop, external drive or mobile device (including a tablet computer such as an iPad or a smarhorm (iPhone or Android devices) that you have not already iden;ﬁed in the preceding ques;ons ☐I will use a server not previously listed to collect/download research data ☐I will use a desktop or laptop not previously listed ☐I will use an external hard drive or USB drive (“ﬂash” or “thumb” drives) not previously listed  ☐I will use a mobile device such as an tablet or smartphone not previously listed 18.7.Consultants. Vendors. Third Par;es. NA. No data sharing agreement is needed. 18.8.Links to iden;ﬁable data: De-iden;ﬁed data (immediately deiden;ﬁed) will be stored in a secure, UMN administered RedCAP database. Study documents that include iden;fying informa;on will be stored in private, password protected, encrypted project folders hosted by the UMN server in the UMN Page  of  Template Revised On: 09/01/20193345
SOCIAL PROTOCOL (HRP-580) PROTOCOL TITLE: MBI Interven;on with war-aﬀected families VERSION DATE:  3/2/2022 v6 Box domain. Contact informa;on for par;cipants who agree to future contact and par;cipa;on will be stored in UMN Box folders. There will be a single document linking iden;fying informa;on with study IDs stored in the UMN Box folder. Deiden;ﬁed informa;on will be released to WellShare Interna;onal Community Health Worker Interven;onists, as they will par;cipate in data analysis and interpreta;on. No other informa;on will be released any addi;onal par;es without the wriUen consent of the study par;cipant. 18.9.Sharing of Data with Research Team Members.  Data will be shared via UMN Box and REdCAP . 18.10.Storage and Disposal of Paper Documents:  All paper documents will be locked in a secure ﬁle cabinet in a locked research oﬃce and kept for at least 3 years aper study comple;on.  19.ConﬁdenMality 19.1.Data Security: Conﬁden;ality will be maintained by iden;fying each subject on research records with only a study number. Therefore, no hard copy forms will contain iden;ﬁable par;cipant data. Data will be stored in a secure, University of Minnesota administered, RedCAP database. Electronic study documents that include iden;fying informa;on will be stored in private, password protected, encrypted project folders hosted by the University of Minnesota server in the University of Minnesota Box domain. Examples of this type of document are ﬁles that contain par;cipant name and contact informa;on, or records that link the par;cipant ID to the par;cipant name. To minimize the likelihood of a breach of privacy or conﬁden;ality, only deiden;ﬁed informa;on will be released to WellShare Interna;onal Community Health Worker Interven;onists, as they will par;cipate in data analysis and interpreta;on. No other informa;on will be released any addi;onal par;es without the wriUen consent of the study par;cipant. All study team members will be required to complete the CITI course in the Protec;on of Human Research Subjects. Data will be collected with youth and the maternal and paternal par;cipants separately to ensure privacy unless an otherwise preference is indicated.  To help protect the privacy of par;cipants, the Na;onal Ins;tutes of Health has granted a Cer;ﬁcate of Conﬁden;ality for this study. The researchers can use this Cer;ﬁcate legally to refuse to disclose informa;on that may iden;fy the par;cipant in any federal, state, or local civil, criminal, administra;ve, legisla;ve, or other proceedings, for example, if there is a court Page  of  Template Revised On: 09/01/20193445
SOCIAL PROTOCOL (HRP-580) PROTOCOL TITLE: MBI Interven;on with war-aﬀected families VERSION DATE:  3/2/2022 v6 subpoena. The researchers will use the Cer;ﬁcate to resist any demands for informa;on that would iden;fy the par;cipants, except as explained below. The Cer;ﬁcate does not prevent a researcher from repor;ng informa;on learned in research when required by other state or federal laws, such as mandatory reports to local health authori;es for abuse or neglect of children/vulnerable adults, or informa;on to the Food and Drug Administra;on (FDA) when required in an FDA audit.  However, the Cer;ﬁcate limits the researcher from disclosing such informa;on in follow up civil, criminal, legisla;ve or administra;ve legal proceedings if the informa;on was created or compiled for purposes of the research.   The Cer;ﬁcate of Conﬁden;ality does not prevent the par;cipant or a member of their family from voluntarily releasing informa;on about themselves or their involvement in this research. If an insurer, medical care provider, or other person obtains their wriUen consent to receive research informa;on, then the researchers will not use the Cer;ﬁcate to withhold that informa;on.   20.Provisions to Monitor the Data to Ensure the Safety of ParMcipants There is a poten;al risk for psychological or social discomfort when comple;ng surveys and aUending group interven;on mee;ngs. This risk is considered minimal; the alterna;ve is to not answer the ques;ons or to not par;cipate in the group conversa;ons that elicit discomfort. 20.1.Data Integrity Monitoring.  20.1.1.Considering the study ra;onale, popula;on, procedures and the risk: beneﬁt proﬁle, the overall risk level for par;cipa;on in this study is classiﬁed as minimal. The Data Safety Monitoring Plan (DSMP) for this pilot award will focus on close monitoring by the principal inves;gator (PI) in conjunc;on with project advisors, who will be available to review and recommend appropriate ac;on regarding individual reports of serious adverse events, adverse events, and other safety issues. The Community Advisory Board and community-based organiza;onal partners will also serve as resources if incidental ﬁndings emerge. The PI will have the primary responsibility to monitor this study.  20.1.2.NA 20.1.3.Principal Inves;gator (PI). Dr. Sarah Hoﬀman, will have the primary responsibility to monitor this study. The PI will review data on such aspects as par;cipant enrollment, study procedures, forms comple;on, data quality, losses to follow-up, and other measures of adherence to the protocol.  20.1.4.See above.  20.1.5.Page  of  Template Revised On: 09/01/20193545
SOCIAL PROTOCOL (HRP-580) PROTOCOL TITLE: MBI Interven;on with war-aﬀected families VERSION DATE:  3/2/2022 v6 The study team does not plan to implement a data safety monitoring board or an independent safety monitor at this ;me due to: 1) an;cipated low risk of harm to par;cipants; 2) clinical trial designa;on (Phase 1); and 3) the mentor team involvement in suppor;ng the candidate (PI) to protect the safety of research par;cipants and the validity and integrity of study data. 20.1.6.NA 20.2.Data Safety Monitoring.  20.2.1.Considering the study ra;onale, popula;on, procedures, and the risk: beneﬁt proﬁle, the overall risk level for par;cipa;on in this study is minimal. The DSMP for this pilot award will focus on close monitoring by the PI in conjunc;on with project advisors, who will be available to review and recommend appropriate ac;on regarding individual reports of serious adverse events, adverse events, and other safety issues. The community advisory board and community organiza;onal partners will also serve as resources if incidental ﬁndings emerge. The PI will review all possible and real events, and seek recommenda;ons from the study team in real ;me regarding all adverse events. The PI will be responsible for submilng necessary reports concerning adverse events to the University of Minnesota IRB within the required repor;ng ;meframes. 20.2.2.Reports of par;cipant distress. 20.2.3.At study visits and via telephone calls with par;cipants.  20.2.4.Data collected pre/post interven;on. Safety data monitoring beings with pre-interven;on data collec;on.  20.2.5.NA 20.2.6.The study PI. 20.2.7.The PI will rou;nely review study ac;vi;es and data collec;on weekly.  20.2.8.Qualita;ve self report. Sta;s;cal tests not applicable.  Page  of  Template Revised On: 09/01/20193645
SOCIAL PROTOCOL (HRP-580) PROTOCOL TITLE: MBI Interven;on with war-aﬀected families VERSION DATE:  3/2/2022 v6 20.2.9.Depending on context surrounding data collec;on, a covid-19 posi;ve test of a par;cipant and or study team member would temporarily suspend research procedures. 21.CompensaMon for Research-Related Injury 21.1.Compensa;on for Research-Related Injury:  NA 21.2.Contract Language:  NA 22.Consent Process 22.1.Consent Process (when consent will be obtained):  Consent in phase 1 will take place via phone. Consent in phase 2 will take place in person, in par;cipant homes. 22.1.1.Par;cipants will be contacted by telephone ini;ally. If they are interested in possible enrollment, a visit will be scheduled in the par;cipants home to more fully explain study procedures, conduct consent, and enrollment. The period between the ini;ally phone call and obtaining consent will vary based on when the community health worker interven;onist and the family are able to ﬁnd a mutual ;me in their schedules.   22.1.2.In phase 1 the parents of poten;al youth focus group parents of poten;al par;cipants will be contacted by phone. The focus group will be explained in detail to the parent. Verbal consent for par;cipa;on will be requested from one caregiver. The Community Health Worker interven;onist will then contact the par;cipant to assess willingness to par;cipate. The assent form will be read to the youth over the phone. If the par;cipant agrees, the Community Health Worker interven;onist will invite the youth to the focus group. Assent will be reiterated with the group at the start of the focus group. In phase 2 poten;al par;cipants will be contacted by phone by a Karen community health worker interven;onist. A brief descrip;on of the project will be provided over the phone. If members of the family express interest, an in-person mee;ng will be scheduled in the poten;al par;cipant’s home or a preferred alterna;ve loca;on. During the in-person mee;ng, par;cipants who conﬁrm interest in study Page  of  Template Revised On: 09/01/20193745
SOCIAL PROTOCOL (HRP-580) PROTOCOL TITLE: MBI Interven;on with war-aﬀected families VERSION DATE:  3/2/2022 v6 par;cipa;on and who are qualiﬁed to par;cipate will be given a detailed descrip;on of the study ac;vi;es. Caregivers and youth will be given a copy of the informed consent/assent forms printed in English and Karen language where study requirements, procedures, and risks and beneﬁts are detailed. Explana;ons will be given (or in some cases the form may be read aloud) in the preferred language of prospec;ve par;cipants. Informed consent will be obtained by the delegate of the PI who is also approved by the IRB to obtain informed consent and youth assent on the project. The informed consent form will be signed in the presence of another person and par;cipants will be given the opportunity to ask ques;ons about the procedures outlined in the informed consent form. A copy of the IRB-approved informed consent document and HIPAA agreement will be given to the par;cipant in their preferred language. Adult par;cipants will consent for themselves, as well as grant permission for youth under 18 to be involved in the project. We will request one signed parental permission and one verbal parental permission for all two parent households. The same protocol was followed with Karen study par;cipants in earlier study phases and aligned with Karen norms and values. Typically, it was the mother who provided wriUen permission. Following the consent process with adult (parent) par;cipants, details of the study will be provided to youth in a similar manner (read or verbal) and in their preferred language, English, Karen, or a hybrid. Youth will have an opportunity to ask ques;ons and discuss par;cipa;on with their families prior to assen;ng. Youth assent will take place in the presence of the signing maternal/paternal par;cipant in the study. In the circumstance that a parent consents to par;cipate, but the youth does not assent, the family will be considered ineligible for par;cipa;on. Ongoing consent to par;cipa;on will occur at the start of each interven;on session.  Par;cipants will be given a copy of their signed and dated consent/assent forms. 22.2.Waiver or Altera;on of Consent Process (when consent will not be obtained, required informa;on will not be disclosed, or the research involves decep;on):  NA 22.3.Waiver of WriUen/Signed Documenta;on of Consent (when wriUen/signed consent will not be obtained):  NA 22.4.Non-English Speaking Par;cipants:  Karen ●All consent documents will be transcribed in the Karen language. Community health worker interven;onists are themselves Karen and will conduct interven;on sessions in the Karen language. Page  of  Template Revised On: 09/01/20193845
SOCIAL PROTOCOL (HRP-580) PROTOCOL TITLE: MBI Interven;on with war-aﬀected families VERSION DATE:  3/2/2022 v6 ●When the PI is present for study interac;ons, the community health worker interven;onists (who also func;on in their roles as expert interpreters) will interpret the interac;ons. Otherwise, the study will be conducted in the language of par;cipants and without interpreta;on. ●Enrollment of non-English speakers is expected.  22.5.Par;cipants Who Are Not Yet Adults (infants, children, teenagers under 18 years of age): 22.5.1.Adult study par;cipants will iden;fy their children 11-18 who are eligible and interested in study par;cipa;on.  22.5.1.1.22.5.1.2.NA 22.5.1.3.See above. Consent will be aUained from one parent verbally (phase 1); and both parents when available, one verbal and one signed (phase 2).  22.5.1.4.For single parent households where the other parent is living separately or out of state, we will obtain from consent only from the primary caregiver.  22.5.2.NA 22.5.3.All. 22.5.4.Youth assent will be documented in the study record. 22.6.Cogni;vely Impaired Adults, or adults with ﬂuctua;ng or diminished capacity to consent: NA 22.7.Adults Unable to Consent: NA 23.Seing 23.1.Research Sites: Par;cipants will be asked their preference of in person study visits or Zoom study visits. Due to the Covid pandemic, we are altering our ini;al plan for study interac;ons to be exclusively home-based. One CHWI will interact with par;cipants preferring an in person op;on in their homes as planned. The second CHWI will deliver the interven;on via Zoom sessions. The focus group will take place in a loca;on that is accessible and known to the community. We are planning for in person focus groups. Zoom sessions and in person sessions will be video and audio recorded for ﬁdelity monitoring and coaching purposes. Youth L2B interven;on sessions will be delivered in a group format at the Knyaw Bap;st Church.  23.1.1.Page  of  Template Revised On: 09/01/20193945
SOCIAL PROTOCOL (HRP-580) PROTOCOL TITLE: MBI Interven;on with war-aﬀected families VERSION DATE:  3/2/2022 v6 Par;cipants will be recruited from an exis;ng cohort that par;cipated in earlier phases of the study. All par;cipants gave permission to the study team to contact them with further opportuni;es to par;cipate in the project.  23.1.2.In par;cipant homes or via Zoom. Home-based services is a model of care familiar to the refugee community in Minnesota. WellShare Interna;onal (our community partner) provides home-based services rou;nely in their opera;ons. During the pandemic it was typical for organiza;ons to oﬀer tele-health appointments with clients. Community members are now more accustomed to this plahorm and may prefer this approach. Our ini;al phases of implementa;on with youth demonstrated that a group format would be more engaging, thus we are returning to the original model of interven;on delivery for the Learning to Breathe interven;on. 23.1.3.A community advisory board developed in early phases of the study will con;nue to provide input on the adapta;on of the interven;on and study procedures. The community advisory board is comprised of representa;ves from key community organiza;ons serving the refugee community in Minnesota.  23.1.4.23.1.4.1. NA 23.1.4.2.NA 23.2.Interna;onal Research: NA 23.3.Community Based Par;cipatory Research:  23.3.1.WellShare Interna;onal is a primary study partner and will be involved at all stages of the research.  23.3.2.Community Health Workers will compete CITI training. Ongoing and regular discussions about human protec;ons, privacy, conﬁden;ality, and autonomy will take place during weekly study team mee;ngs. Community health worker interven;onists will be listed as study team members on the IRB submission. 23.3.3.See suppor;ng documents in Ethos. 24.MulM-Site Research NA 25.CoordinaMng Center Research NA 26.Resources Available Page  of  Template Revised On: 09/01/20194045
SOCIAL PROTOCOL (HRP-580) PROTOCOL TITLE: MBI Interven;on with war-aﬀected families VERSION DATE:  3/2/2022 v6 26.1.Resources Available:  26.1.1.At this point we do not have a student inves;gator involved in the project. 26.1.2.Our sample is very small given that the focus of this phase of the feasibility trial is reﬁning the CBPR approach, interven;onist training, and ﬁdelity monitoring procedures. The ability to recruit the target sample size is feasible. We have access to 96 Karen families through an exis;ng cohort. We are targe;ng 10% of those families for the current study phase.  26.1.3.The PI will allocate at least 10 hours per week to the project. Community health worker interven;onist ;me will vary based on the phase of the study. Administra;ve support at WellShare Interna;onal has allocated 1-4 hours per month for oversight of ac;vi;es. 26.1.4.The University of Minnesota (UMN) has an outstanding research reputa;on and is ranked in the top 25 research ins;tu;ons in the United States by the Center for Measuring University Performance at Arizona State University. Both a state land-grant university and Minnesota’s only research university; it is one of the leading recipients of federal research awards in the U.S. In ﬁscal year 2017, the University received more than $744 million in grant and contract awards from federal, state, and private sources and ranked in the top 10 of all public and private research universi;es. The University conducts 98 percent of all sponsored academic research in Minnesota. The University is one of the most comprehensive universi;es in the United States with more than 370 ﬁelds of study and over 65,000 students. The Graduate School oﬀers more than 150 masters and doctoral degree programs covering virtually every area of academic inquiry. The wide breadth of program oﬀerings provides graduate students with mul;ple opportuni;es for interdisciplinary study.  The Academic Health Center (AHC) is home to six colleges and schools, and more than 90 centers, ins;tutes, and hospitals and clinics. About 70 percent of Minnesota’s health care providers train through the AHC, including doctors, nurses, den;sts, pharmacists, public health workers, and veterinarians. Innova;ons for pa;ent care happen because of inter-professional collabora;on across the health sciences.  The Clinical and TranslaMonal Science InsMtute (CTSI; UL1TR002494) is building an integrated network of research services and support at the University of Minnesota that provides comprehensive support for the en;re spectrum of clinical and transla;onal research through a single point of entry. High quality and cost-Page  of  Template Revised On: 09/01/20194145
SOCIAL PROTOCOL (HRP-580) PROTOCOL TITLE: MBI Interven;on with war-aﬀected families VERSION DATE:  3/2/2022 v6 eﬀec;ve research services include informa;cs tools, expert consulta;ons, biosta;s;cal support, regulatory support, and clinical research facili;es. CTSI’s Community Engagement to Advance Research and Community Health (CEARCH) oﬃce provides an infrastructure for community groups and University-based researchers to work together to address health issues in ways that are truly relevant to the community.  Established in 1909, the mission of the UMN School of Nursing is to generate knowledge and prepare nurse leaders who will create, lead, and par;cipate in holis;c eﬀorts to improve the health of all people within the context of their environments. The school has two loca;ons: one in the heart of the Twin Ci;es of Minneapolis and St. Paul, and the second in Rochester, home of the Mayo Clinic. Original scholarly inquiry is at the core of the rich synergy of research, educa;on and prac;ce at the School of Nursing. Opportuni;es for collabora;ve research abound with nursing colleagues, colleagues from other disciplines at the University of Minnesota’s renowned Academic Health Center (AHC), in other academic areas throughout the university, and with community partners in this progressive, health-oriented community. Focal areas of research in the School of Nursing include: Health Promo;on among Vulnerable Popula;ons; Preven;on and Management of Chronic Health Condi;ons; Symptom Management; Health/Nursing Informa;cs and Systems Improvement. In the School of Nursing, the Center for Child and Family Health Promo/on Research (CCFHPR) mission is to improve the health of infants, children, adolescents, parents, and families through the development and dissemina;on of evidence-based knowledge of eﬀec;ve interven;ons and best prac;ces in primary and secondary preven;on.  26.1.5.See descrip;on of resources described in Foreseeable Risks 13.2. We will ensure readily available resources in the case that par;cipants experience unan;cipated consequences of the research. 26.1.6.In this phase we are collabora;vely developing and reﬁning the study protocol and research procedures, WellShare interven;onists will be involved in the development of these process. The PI will have weekly mee;ngs with the interven;onists where we will discuss all aspects of research ac;vi;es.  27.References 1. United Na;ons High Commissioner for Refugees. (2018). Forced displacement at record 68.5 million. Retrieved from hUps://www.unhcr.org/en-us/news/stories/2018/6/5b222c494/forced-displacement-record-685-million.html  2. American Psychiatric Associa;on. (2000). Diagnos/c and sta/s/cal manual of mental disorders (4th ed., text rev.). Washington, DC: Author.  Page  of  Template Revised On: 09/01/20194245
SOCIAL PROTOCOL (HRP-580) PROTOCOL TITLE: MBI Interven;on with war-aﬀected families VERSION DATE:  3/2/2022 v6 3. United Na;ons General Assembly. (1984). Conven;on against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. Retrieved from hUp://www.un.org/documents/ga/res/39/a39r046.htm  4. Sangalang, C. C., & Vang, C. (2017). Intergenera;onal trauma in refugee families: A systema;c review. Journal of Immigrant and Minority Health, 19(3), 745-754. 5. Danieli, Y ., Norris, F. H., & Engdahl, B. (2016). Mul;genera;onal legacies of trauma: Modeling the what and how of transmission. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 86(6), 639-651. hUp://dx.doi.org/10.1037/ort0000145 6. O’Neill, L., Fraser, T., Kitchenham, A., & McDonald, V. (2018). Hidden burdens: A review of intergenera;onal, historical and complex trauma, implica;ons for indigenous families. Journal of Child & Adolescent Trauma, 11(2), 173-186. 7. Wieling, E. (2018). Family Interven;ons for Popula;ons Exposed to Trauma;c Stress Related to War and Violence. Journal of Marital and Family Therapy, 44(2), 189-192. 8. Daud, A., Skoglund, E., & Rydelius, P . A. (2005). Children in families of torture vic;ms: Transgenera;onal transmission of parents’ trauma;c experiences to their children. Int Journal of Social Welfare, 14(1), 23-32. 9. Dalgaard, N. T., Todd, B. K., Daniel, S. I., & Montgomery, E. (2016). The transmission of trauma in refugee families: Associa;ons between intra-family trauma communica;on style, children’s aUachment security and psychosocial adjustment. A+achment & Human Development, 18(1), 69-89. 10. Daud, A., af Klinteberg, B., & Rydelius, P . A. (2008). Resilience and vulnerability among refugee children of trauma;zed and non-trauma;zed parents. Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and Mental Health, 2(1), 7. 11. Montgomery, E. (2004). Tortured families: A coordinated management of meaning analysis. Family Process, 43(3), 349-371. 12. Sangalang, C. C., Jager, J., & Harachi, T. W. (2017). Eﬀects of maternal trauma;c distress on family func;oning and child mental health: An examina;on of Southeast Asian refugee families in the US. Social Science & Medicine, 184, 178-186. 13. Van Ee, E., Kleber, R. J., & Mooren, T. (2012). War trauma lingers on: Associa;ons between maternal posUrauma;c stress disorder, parent–child interac;on, and child development. Inf Ment Hlth, 33(5), 459-468. 14. Burchert, S., Stammel, N., & Knaevelsrud, C. (2017). Transgenera;onal trauma in a post-conﬂict selng: Eﬀects on oﬀspring PTSS/PTSD and oﬀspring vulnerability in Cambodian families. Psych Res, 254, 151-157. 15. East, P . L., Gahagan, S., & Al-Delaimy, W. K. (2018). The Impact of Refugee Mothers’ Trauma, PosUrauma;c Stress, and Depression on Their Children’s Adjustment. J of Imm and Min Hlth, 20(2), 271-282. 16. Posselt, M., Galletly, C., de Crespigny, C., & Procter, N. (2014). Mental health and drug and alcohol comorbidity in young people of refugee background: a review of the literature. Mental Health and Substance Use, 7(1), 19-30. Page  of  Template Revised On: 09/01/20194345
SOCIAL PROTOCOL (HRP-580) PROTOCOL TITLE: MBI Interven;on with war-aﬀected families VERSION DATE:  3/2/2022 v6 17. Sowey, H. (2005). Are refugees at increased risk of substance misuse. Sydney: Drug and Alcohol Mul;cultural Educa;on Centre. 18. Posselt, M., Procter, N., Galletly, C., & De Crespigny, C. (2015). Ae;ology of coexis;ng mental health and alcohol and other drug disorders: perspec;ves of refugee youth and service providers. Australian Psychologist, 50(2), 130-140. 19. Rossiter, M. J., & Rossiter, K. R. (2009). Diamonds in the rough: Bridging gaps in supports for at-risk immigrant and refugee youth. Journal of Interna/onal Migra/on and Integra/on, 10(4), 409. 20. Goodrum, N. M., Chan, W. Y ., & Latzman, R. D. (2015). Gang Involvement among Immigrant and Refugee Youth: A Developmental Ecological Systems Approach. Interna/onal Journal of Developmental Science, 9(3, 4), 125-134. 21. Van Ngo, H., Calhoun, A., Worthington, C., Pyrch, T., & Este, D. (2017). The unravelling of iden;;es and belonging: Criminal gang involvement of youth from immigrant families. Journal of Interna/onal Migra/on and Integra/on, 18(1), 63-84. 22. Hoﬀman, S. J., Vukovich, M. M., Gewirtz, A. M., Fulkerson, J. A., Robertson, C. R., & Gaugler, J. E. Mechanisms explaining the rela;onship between maternal torture exposure and youth adjustment in reseUled refugees: A pilot examina;on of genera;onal trauma through moderated media;on. Under review at Journal of Immigrant and Minority Health  23. Hoﬀman, S. J., Vukovich, M. M., Peden-McAlpine, C., Robertson, C. L., Wilk, K., & Gaugler, J. E. Physical narra;ves of trauma. Under review at Qualita/ve Health Research. 24. Lehrner, A., & Yehuda, R. (2018). Trauma across genera;ons and paths to adapta;on and resilience. Psychological Trauma: Theory, Research, Prac/ce, and Policy, 10(1), 22. 25. Yehuda, R., Halligan, S. L., & Grossman, R. (2001). Childhood trauma and risk for PTSD: rela;onship to intergenera;onal eﬀects of trauma, parental PTSD, and cor;sol excre;on. Development and psychopathology, 13(3), 733-753. 26. Brink, D. R., Shannon, P . J., & Vinson, G. A. (2015). Valida;on of a brief mental health screener for Karen refugees in primary care. Family prac/ce, 33(1), 107-111. 27. Olson, D. (2011). FACES IV and the circumplex model: Valida;on study. J Marr & Fam Ther, 37(1), 64-80. 28. Goodman R, Meltzer H, Bailey V (1998) The Strengths and Diﬃcul;es Ques;onnaire: A pilot study on the validity of the self-report version. European Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 7, 125-130. 29. Feldman, G., Hayes, A., Kumar, S., Greeson, J., & Laurenceau, J. P . (2007). Mindfulness and emo;on regula;on: The development and ini;al valida;on of the Cogni;ve and Aﬀec;ve Mindfulness Scale-Revised (CAMS-R). Journal of psychopathology and Behavioral Assessment, 29(3), 177. 30.. Grant, M., Salsman, N. L., & Berking, M. (2018). The assessment of successful emo;on regula;on skills use: Development and valida;on of an English version of the Emo;on Regula;on Skills Ques;onnaire. PloS one, 13(10), e0205095. Page  of  Template Revised On: 09/01/20194445
SOCIAL PROTOCOL (HRP-580) PROTOCOL TITLE: MBI Interven;on with war-aﬀected families VERSION DATE:  3/2/2022 v6 31. Cohen, S., & Hoberman, H. (1983). Posi;ve events and social supports as buﬀers of life change stress. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 13, 99-125.  Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 13, 99-125. 32. Gewirtz, A. H., Pinna, K. L., Hanson, S. K., & Brockberg, D. (2014). Promo;ng paren;ng to support reintegra;ng military families: Aper deployment, adap;ve paren;ng tools. Psychological services, 11(1), 31. 33. Gewirtz, A. H., DeGarmo, D. S., & Zamir, O. (2018). Aper deployment, adap;ve paren;ng tools: 1-year outcomes of an evidence-based paren;ng program for military families following deployment. Preven/on Science, 19(4), 589-599. 34. Gewirtz, A., & Davis, L. (2014). Paren;ng prac;ces and emo;on regula;on in Na;onal Guard and Reserve families: Early ﬁndings from the Aper Deployment Adap;ve Paren;ng Tools/ADAPT study. In Military deployment and its consequences for families (pp. 111-131). Springer, New York, NY . 35. Zhang, N., Zhang, J., & Gewirtz, A. H. (2019). Do less mindful mothers show beUer paren;ng via improvements in trait mindfulness following a military parent training program?. Fron/ers in Psychology, 10, 909. 36. Zhang, N., Rudi, J. H., Zamir, O., & Gewirtz, A. H. (2018). Parent engagement in online mindfulness exercises within a parent training program for post-deployed military families. Mindfulness, 9(3), 725-736. 37. Bluth, K., Campo, R. A., Pruteanu-Malinici, S., Reams, A., Mullarkey, M., & Broderick, P . C. (2016). A school-based mindfulness pilot study for ethnically diverse at-risk adolescents. Mindfulness, 7(1), 90-104. 38. Broderick, P . C., & Metz, S. (2009). Learning to BREATHE: A pilot trial of a mindfulness curriculum for adolescents. Advances in school mental health promo/on, 2(1), 35-46. 39. Metz, S. M., Frank, J. L., Reibel, D., Cantrell, T., Sanders, R., & Broderick, P . C. (2013). The eﬀec;veness of the learning to BREATHE program on adolescent emo;on regula;on. Research in Human Development, 10(3), 252-272. 40. Broderick, P . C., & Frank, J. L. (2014). Learning to BREATHE: An interven;on to foster mindfulness in adolescence. New direc/ons for youth development, 2014(142), 31-44. 41. Bluth, K., Campo, R. A., Pruteanu-Malinici, S., Reams, A., Mullarkey, M., & Broderick, P . C. (2016). A school-based mindfulness pilot study for ethnically diverse at-risk adolescents. Mindfulness, 7(1), 90-104.      
Page  of  Template Revised On: 09/01/20194545