 
  
  
Protocol Number:  Q170886  
Protocol Title:  Cognoa ASD Diagnosis Aid Validation Study  
 
 
Study ID: [REMOVED]  
 
Protocol Date:  Version 3.0, Dated February 3, 2020  
 
 
Cognoa, Inc.  
Protocol # Q170886  
“Cognoa ASD Diagnosis Aid Validation Study”  
 
Confidential and Proprietary                                                                                                                                                                               Page 1 of 46                                                                      
Version 3.0, 3FEB2020   
 
 
TITLE PAGE  
 
 
 
 
Protocol Number:  Q170886  
Protocol Title:  Cognoa ASD Diagnosis Aid Validation Study  
Sponsor:  
 Cognoa, Inc.  
2185 Park Blvd.  
Palo Alto, CA 94306  
Telephone: (408) 207 -6659  
Contact: Minda Seal  
Email: minda.seal@cognoa.com  
 
 
Version, Date:  Version 3.0, Dated February 3, 2020  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Statement of Compliance  
The study will be conducted in accordance with the design and specific provisions of this IRB approved protocol, the ethical principles that 
have their origin in the Declaration of Helsinki, U.S. FDA requirements, including Good Cl inical Practice (GCP), and all applicable local, state 
and federal regulations.  
 
 
 
NOTE:  The confidential information in the following document is provided to you as an Investigator, potential Investigator, or cons ultant for 
review by you, your staff, and  applicable Institutional Review Board. By accepting this document, you agree that the information contained 
herein will not be disclosed to others without written authorization from Cognoa, Inc. except to the extent necessary to obta in informed 
consent fr om those persons to whom the device will be administered.  
  
Cognoa, Inc.  
Protocol # Q170886  
“Cognoa ASD Diagnosis Aid Validation Study”  
 
Confidential and Proprietary                                                                                                                                                                               Page 2 of 46                                                                      
Version 3.0, 3FEB2020   
 
 
 
Protocol Signature Page – Principal Investigator  
 
 
 
 
Study Title:  Cognoa ASD Diagnosis Aid Validation Study   
 
 
Protocol Version 3.0, Dated February 3, 2020  
 
I have received and read the protocol dated February 3, 2020 and agree to adhere to the requirements. I am aware 
that my adherence to the above protocol is mandatory and that any changes in the protocol or informed consent 
form must first be approved by Co gnoa, Inc. and the Institutional Review Board, except those changes necessary to 
eliminate apparent immediate hazards to subjects. I will provide copies of this protocol and all pertinent information 
to the study personnel under my supervision.  I will disc uss this material with them and ensure they are fully 
informed regarding their role in the study. I will ensure that the study is conducted in compliance with the protocol, 
Good Clinical Practice (GCP), and all applicable regulatory requirements, and with the reviewing Institutional Review 
Board (IRB) requirements. I agree to commence this study only after documented IRB approval is obtained.  
 
 
Principal Investigator:    _____________________________  _________________________  
                              Signature      Date  
 
     _____________________________   
                              Printed Name   
 
 
 
 
  
Cognoa, Inc.  
Protocol # Q170886  
“Cognoa ASD Diagnosis Aid Validation Study”  
 
Confidential and Proprietary                                                                                                                                                                               Page 3 of 46                                                                      
Version 3.0, 3FEB2020  Table of Contents  
Abbreviations  5 
Glossary  6 
Protocol Summary  9 
1 BACKGROUND  INFORMATION  12 
2 STUDY  DEVICE  DESCRIPTION  14 
3 STUDY  OBJECTIVES  15 
4 STUDY ENDPOINTS  16 
4.1 Effectiveness endpoints  16 
4.2 Safety endpoints  16 
5 STUDY DURATION  16 
6 STUDY DESIGN AND PROCEDURES  16 
7 STUDY  POPULATION  19 
7.1 Study Subject Recruitment and Selection  19 
7.2 Inclusion Criteria  20 
7.3 Exclusion Criteria  20 
7.4 Subject Numb er 21 
7.5 Subject Discontinuation Criteria  21 
8 DATA  COLLECTION  AND  STORAGE  21 
9 ADVERSE  EVENTS  AND ADVERSE  DEVICE  EVENTS  22 
9.1 Definitions  22 
9.1.1  Adverse Event (AE)  22 
9.1.2  Serious Adverse Event (SAE)  22 
9.1.3  Anticipated Serious Adverse Device Effect (ASADE)  23 
9.1.4  Unanticipated Serious Adverse Device Effect (USADE)  23 
9.2 Recording AEs/ADEs and SAEs/SADEs  25 
9.3 Follow -up of Subjects after AEs  25 
10 POTENTIAL  RISKS  / BENEFITS  25 
10.1  Potential Risks  25 
10.2  Potential Benefits  25 
11 DATA  ANALYSIS  PLAN  26 
11.1  Sample Size  26 
11.2  Analysis Sets  26 
11.3  Statistical Analyses  26 
11.4  Safety Analyses  26 
 
 
Cognoa, Inc.  
Protocol # Q170886  
“Cognoa ASD Diagnosis Aid Validation Study”  
 
Confidential and Proprietary                                                                                                                                                                               Page 4 of 46                                                                      
Version 3.0, 3FEB2020   
12 STUDY  MANAGEMENT  AND  ADMINISTRATIVE  CONSIDERATIONS  26 
12.1  Investigator Selection  26 
12.2  Training and Monitoring  26 
12.3  Informed Consent  26 
12.4  Protocol Compliance  27 
12.5  Protocol Amendments  27 
12.6  Protocol Deviation  27 
12.7  Study Dis continuation  27 
12.8  Data Collection, Record Keeping and Storage  27 
12.9  Subject Confidentiality  27 
12.10 Financial Considerations  28 
REFERENCES  29 
APPENDIX - STANDARDIZED MEDICAL HISTORY AND PHYSICAL FORM  31 
 
 
  
Cognoa, Inc.  
Protocol # Q170886  
“Cognoa ASD Diagnosis Aid Validation Study”  
 
Confidential and Proprietary                                                                                                                                                                               Page 5 of 46                                                                      
Version 3.0, 3FEB2020  Abbreviations  
 
ADHD:   Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder  
ADI-R:  Autism Diagnostic Instrument Revised  
AE:  Adverse Event  
AGRE:   Autism Genetic Resource Exchange  
ASADE:   Anticipated Serious Adverse Device Effect  
ASD:   Autism Spectrum Disorder  
ASRS:   Autism Spectrum Rating Scales  
BRIEF:   Behavior Rating Inventory of Executive Functions  
CFR:   Code Federal Regulation  
CRF:   Case Report Form  
DSM -5:  Diagnostic and Statistical  Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition  
FDA:   Food and Drug Administration  
GCP:   Good Clinical Practice  
HCP:   Healthcare Provider  
HIPAA:   Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996  
ICH:  International Conference on Harmonization  
IRB:  Institutional Review Board  
JAMIA:   Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association  
M-CHAT -R: Modified Checklist for Autism in Toddlers -Revised  
NPV:   Negative Predictive Value  
PII:  Personally Identif iable  Information  
PPV:   Positive Predictive Value  
SAE:   Serious Adverse Event  
SRS:   Social Responsiveness Scale  
USADE:   Unanticipated Serious Adverse Device Effect  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cognoa, Inc.  
Protocol # Q170886  
“Cognoa ASD Diagnosis Aid Validation Study”  
 
Confidential and Proprietary                                                                                                                                                                               Page 6 of 46                                                                      
Version 3.0, 3FEB2020  Glossary  
 
Term  Definition  
 
Accuracy (error rate)  Rate of correct (incorrect) predictions made by the model over a  
data set. Accuracy is usually estimated by using an independent test set 
that was not used at any time during the learning process.  
 
 
 
 
 
ADI-R The Autism Diagnostic Interview -Revised (ADI -R) is a structured interview 
conducted by an experienced clinical interviewer questions a parent or 
caretaker who is familiar with the developmental history and current 
behavior of the individual being evaluated and uses standardized 
procedures to code the responses. The interview can be used to asse ss 
children and adults as long as their mental ages are two years or higher.  
Because the ADI –R is an interview rather than a test, and because it 
focuses on behaviors that are rare in non -affected individuals, it provides 
categorical results rather than sc ales or  norms.  
 
 
 
 
ADOS  The Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule (ADOS) is a semi - structured 
assessment of communication, social interaction, and play (or imaginative 
use of materials) for individuals suspected of having autism or other 
pervasive devel opmental disorders. Its goal is to provide standardized 
contexts in which to observe the social -communicative behaviors of 
individuals across the life span in order to aid in the diagnosis of autism 
and other pervasive developmental disorders. Administrati on and coding 
are highly standardized. Therefore, valid assessment requires training.  
 
Aid to Diagnosis  Output that provides a Healthcare Provider (HCP) information that  
drives a diagnosis. An Aid to Diagnosis is not a standalone diagnosis tool.  
 
Algorithm  A process or set of rules to be followed in calculations or other problem -
solving operations, especially by a computer. The Device has an 
underlying algorithm based on machine learning  
techniques that provides the output to the provider.  
ASD Autism Spectrum Disorder  
 
Caregiver  The caregiver is often the parent  of the child presenting ASD symptoms 
but may represent the legal guardian or adult in charge of the child ’s well -
being and healthcare  decisions.  
Clinical reference  
standard  Best available method for establishing a subject’s true status with  
respect to a target condition.  
(Machine learning) 
Classification  Process of predicting to which predefined category (or class/label) a new 
observation belongs, on the basis of a training set o f data  
containing observations whose category membership is known.  
Classifier  Algorithm that evaluates unlabeled data and classifies them.  
 
 
 
 
 
Cognoa, Inc.  
Protocol # Q170886  
“Cognoa ASD Diagnosis Aid Validation Study”  
 
Confidential and Proprietary                                                                                                                                                                               Page 7 of 46                                                                      
Version 3.0, 3FEB2020  Term  Definition  
 
Cognoa Research App  A smartphone -based app that describes the Cognoa device, provides 
guidance on and access to assessments and video software, and serves as 
a collection mechanism for assessments  and videos.  
Coverage  Proportion of a data set for which a classifier makes a prediction.  
Diagnostic Output  Output from the Cognoa Device that is used as part of an overall  
diagnosis decision.  
 
Dropout  After consenting to participation in trial (and therefore enrolling), a study 
subject  discontinues participation in the trial (e.g., due to lack of interest, 
medical condition, adverse event). Dropout may  simply be lost to follow 
up. 
 
DSM -5 Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition; a 
guide to clinicians for dia gnosis of neurobehavioral and  
psychiatric disorders.  
Endpoint  Key outcome measure in a clinical study.  
Feature  Individual measurable property or characteristic of an  observation.  
 
 
Futility  Situation in which proceeding further with a trial is not safe, feasible, or 
warranted from a statistical perspective. Studies can be stopped early due 
to unacceptable safety or risk/benefit profile, inability to recruit or 
perform study procedures, overwhelming  
early efficacy, or statistical impossibility of ach ieving endpoint(s).  
HCP Healthcare provider.  
IC / ICF  Informed consent / Informed consent form.  
IRB Institutional review board.  
Negative Predictive Value  Probability that a child identified by the device as Negative for ASD truly 
doesn’t have ASD  
NPV = (True Negative)/ (True Negative + False Negative)  
 
Positive Predictive Value  Probability that a child identified by the device as Positive for ASD truly 
has ASD  
PPV = (True Positive)/ (True Positive + False Positive)  
 
 
Prevalence  Number of cases in  a defined population at a single point in time, 
regardless of when they first developed the condition.  
 
Prevalence = (# of cases in sample with condition) / (total # of cases in 
sample)  
Screening tool  A tool used in assist in clinical triage.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cognoa, Inc.  
Protocol # Q170886  
“Cognoa ASD Diagnosis Aid Validation Study”  
 
Confidential and Proprietary                                                                                                                                                                               Page 8 of 46                                                                      
Version 3.0, 3FEB2020   
Term  Definition  
 
 
Sensitivity  Measure of the proportion of children truly having ASD who are correctly 
identified by the device as Positive for ASD (or True positive rate).  
 
Sensitivity = (True Positive)/ (True Positive + False Negative)  
 
 
Specificity  Measure of the proportion of children truly not having ASD who are 
correctly identified by the device as Negative for ASD (or True negative 
rate).  
 
Specificity = (True Negative)/ (True Negative + False Positive)  
Specialist Clinician  Board -certified child adolescent psychiatrists, child neurologists, 
developmental -behavioral pediatricians, or psychologists, and have at 
least five years of experience in diagnosing and treating individuals with 
ASD.  
Standalone/ primary 
diagnostic device  A device that outputs a primary diagnosis that is intended to be  
the sole source of input into clinical -decision making, absent any 
interaction with a clinician.  
 
Standard of care   
Current practice of care  
 
Video Analyst  A trained healthcare professional who reviews Module 2 (Video Analysis 
module) videos submitted by caregivers to provide  responses on the 
patient’s behaviors and actions.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cognoa, Inc.  
Protocol # Q170886  
“Cognoa ASD Diagnosis Aid Validation Study”  
 
Confidential and Proprietary                                                                                                                                                                               Page 9 of 46                                                                      
Version 3.0, 3FEB2020  Protocol Summary  
 
Title  Cognoa ASD Diagnosis Aid Validation Study  
Sponsor  Cognoa, Inc.  
Study Description  This study seeks to evaluate the ability of the fourth generation Cognoa 
ASD Diagnosis Aid (the “device”) to aid healthcare providers in 
diagnosing autism spectrum disorder (ASD).  Children age >18 to <72 
months for whom the caregiver or a healthcare provi der has concern  
regarding development al delay will be assessed with the device in a 
prospective, blinded, multi -site, active comparator, cohort study. The 
output of the device will be compared to a specialist clinician diagnosis 
based on DSM -5 criteria, validated with independent review by one or 
two central specialist clinicians.  
 
For enrollment into the study, informed consent will be obtained from 
the subject ’s legal guardian. The subject s’ caregivers will complete a 
caregiver assessment and upload two brief videos of the child for 
analysis p rior to their evaluation by a specialist clinician. All participants , 
subject s’ caregivers and HCPs , will be blinded to the results of the 
device. Furthermore, the caregivers, device video analysts, and HCPs 
providing inputs to the device algorithm will be  blinded to each other’s 
input . 
Objective  
 To assess the ability of the device to aid in the diagnosis of ASD by 
comparing its diagnostic output with the clinical reference standard, 
consisting of a diagnosis made by a specialist clinician, based on DSM -5 
criteria and validated by one or more reviewing specialist clinicians.  
Endpoints  Primary:  
● Achievement of a composite of positive predictive value (PPV) 
greater than 65% and negative predictive value (NPV) greater 
than 85% for the device in relation to the clinical reference 
standard in the overall study population.  
● Measurement of the proportion of children for whom the 
Device provides no result.    
 
Secondary:  
● Sensitivity of the device in relation to the clinical reference 
standard in the ov erall study population.  
● Specificity of the device in relation to the clinical reference 
standard in the overall study population.  
 
Safety Assessment  Adverse events (AEs) and serious adverse events (SAEs) will be  
collected and reported  
Cognoa, Inc.  
Protocol # Q170886  
“Cognoa ASD Diagnosis Aid Validation Study”  
 
Confidential and Proprietary                                                                                                                                                                               Page 10 of 46                                                                      
Version 3.0, 3FEB2020  Study Design  This is a multi -site, prospective, blinded, active comparator cohort study  
Exempt Device Study  This study is exempt from the requirements of the IDE regulations (21 
CFR 812.2 (c)), with the exception of 21 CFR 812.119 Disqualification of a 
Clinical Investigator.  
 
In accordance with 21 CFR 809.10(c), the device labeling shall include 
the following statement: "For Investigational Use Only. The performance 
characteristics of this product have not been established."  
Number of Sites  The study wi ll be conducted at up to 30 clinical sites within the United 
States.  
Principal Investigator  To be determined  
Study Sample Size  Up to 7 25 subject s 
Subject Population  Female and male subjects between the ages of ≥ 18 months of age and < 
72 months of age  from a general population for whom a caregiver or 
healthcare provider has a concern about developmental delay.  
Inclusion/Exclusion 
Criteria  Inclusion Criteria:  
● Caregiver must be able to read, understand and sign the 
Informed Consent Form (ICF).  
● Caregiver or  HCP concern for developmental delay.  
● Female or Male, >18 to <72 months of age.  
● Functional English capability in the home environment.  
● Caregiver s must have smartphone capabilities for downloading 
the Cognoa Research App (Cognoa supports iOS 10.0 and up, 
Android 6.0 and up).  
● Participants must be willing to be videotaped as part of the 
diagnostic assessment by the specialist clinician .  
 
Exclusion Criteria:  
● Subjects with a prior diagnosis of ASD rendered by a healthcare 
professional.  
● Subjects with suspected auditory or visual hallucinations or with 
prior diagnosis of childhood onset schizophrenia.  
● Subjects with deafness or blindness.  
● Subjects with known physical impairments affecting their ability 
to use their hands.  
● Subjects with major dysmorphic features or prenatal exposure 
to teratogens (such as fetal alcohol syndrome).  
● Subjects with history, suspicion, or diagnosis of g enetic 
conditions (such as Rett’s Syndrome or Fragile X)  
● Subjects with microcephaly.  
● Subjects with history or prior diagnosis of epilepsy or seizures.  
● Subjects with a history of neglect.  
Cognoa, Inc.  
Protocol # Q170886  
“Cognoa ASD Diagnosis Aid Validation Study”  
 
Confidential and Proprietary                                                                                                                                                                               Page 11 of 46                                                                      
Version 3.0, 3FEB2020  ● Subjects with a history of brain malformation , injury or insult 
requi ring interventions such as surgery or chronic medication.  
● Subjects whose age on the date of enrollment is outside the 
target age range.  
● Subjects or caregivers who have been previously enrolled in any 
Cognoa clinical study or survey.  
● Subjects whose medical records had been included in any 
internal Cognoa training or validation sets.  
Planned Schedule  First subject enrolled:  August 2019  
Study Duration  10 Months  
Duration of Subject 
Participation  The duration of each individual subject ’s involvement in the study will 
be approximately 6 weeks.  
Investigational and 
Control Diagnoses  Investigational: Cognoa device diagnostic output.  
Comparator: Specialist clinician diagnosis of ASD, validated by one or 
more central reviewing specialist clinicians.  
Randomization  None. All subject s will be scheduled to undergo both investigational and 
comparator diagnosis for ASD.  
  
Cognoa, Inc.  
Protocol # Q170886  
“Cognoa ASD Diagnosis Aid Validation Study”  
 
Confidential and Proprietary                                                                                                                                                                               Page 12 of 46                                                                      
Version 3.0, 3FEB2020   
1 BACKGROUND  INFORMATION  
Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is a neurode velopmental disorder that affects communication and behavior.  
 
According to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM -5), a guide created by 
the American Psychiatric Association and used by health care professionals to diagnose mental disorders, ASD 
primarily consists of persistent deficits in social communication and social interaction as well as the presence of 
restricted, repetitive patterns of behaviors, interests, and/or activities that can persist throughout life.  
 
ASD is said to be a “developmental disorder” because symptoms generally appear in the first two years of life and 
is known as a “spectrum” because there is a wide variation in the type and severity of symptoms people 
experience.  
 
Symptoms  can include poor eye contact, difficulty reading social cues, failure to develop peer relationships, lack of 
social or emotional reciprocity, delayed speech development, difficulty sustaining conversations, lack of make -
believe play, repetitive motor mann erisms, rigid adherence to routines, restricted interests and hyper - and/or 
hypo sensitivity to sensory input. ASD can have a significant impact on a child’s day -to-day functioning including 
but not limited to impairments in communicating and getting needs  met as well as difficulties with activities of 
daily living such as eating, dressing, playing, and sleeping.  
 
Reported prevalence rates have been rising steadily since the 1960s and Autism Spectrum Disorders have risen to 
the top of childhood disorders wi th a prevalence rate of 1 in 59 children (Baio, Wiggins, Christensen et al., 2018). 
Multiple environmental, biologic, and genetic factors contribute to the development of ASD (Landrigan, 2010; 
Hallmayer, Cleveland, Torres, et al., 2011; Gaugler, Klei, Sand ers, et al., 2014; Pinto, Pagnamenta, Klei, et al., 
2010). Also, ASD is reported to occur in all racial, ethnic, and socioeconomic groups, and is approximately 4 times 
as prevalent in boys than girls.  
 
As recognized by the Center for Disease Control ( CDC ), diagnosing ASD can be difficult, since there is no medical 
test, like a blood test, to diagnose the disorder. Healthcare professionals typically diagnose ASD by observing how 
the child talks and acts in comparison to other children of the same age and b y asking questions to caregivers. 
They use the standardized diagnostic criteria for ASD provided in the American Psychiatric Association’s Diagnostic 
and Statistical Manual, Fifth Edition (DSM -5) and focus on the assessment of a behavioral phenotype, inclu ding 
deficits in social communication, social interactions, and restricted or repetitive behaviors while also considering 
the developmental history as well as the alternate developmental diagnosis that would explain the symptoms.
 
The American Academy of P ediatrics recommends children be screened specifically for Autism at 18 and 24 
months, or whenever caregivers express concern. The standard practice for screening is the Modified Checklist for 
Autism in Toddlers -Revised (M -CHAT -R). Many studies show, howev er, that primary HCPs are not screening 
children for ASD per these recommendations due to lack of confidence in the tools and/or lack of time to properly 
Cognoa, Inc.  
Protocol # Q170886  
“Cognoa ASD Diagnosis Aid Validation Study”  
 
Confidential and Proprietary                                                                                                                                                                               Page 13 of 46                                                                      
Version 3.0, 3FEB2020  review results with caregivers (Carbone et. al, 2016). If a primary care provider does suspect a devel opmental 
delay such as ASD, children are often put on watchful waiting until the clinician can be more certain of a problem. 
Moreover, in cases in which a referral for an assessment by a specialist is eventually provided, families may wait 
as long as 18 mo nths between initial screening by their primary HCP and final diagnosis by the specialist, or even 
longer if the family is part of a minority population or lower socioeconomic group (Begeer, Bouk, Boussaid, 
Terwogt, & Koot, 2009). On average, the overall d elay between first concerns arising in caregivers and an ASD 
diagnosis is approximately 3 years (Zuckerman, Lindly, & Sinche, 2015).  
 
This delay in obtaining a diagnosis directly translates into delays in initiating early behavioral intervention. Such 
early intervention in ASD has been shown to have significant positive impact on a child’s development, especially 
when delivered before 36 months (Warren et al., 2011).  
 
Although families report concerns to their child’s physician as early as 1 year of age, the average age of diagnosis 
in the United States is 4.4 years old and an estimated 27% of children with ASD still remain undiagnosed at 8 years 
of age. At later stages  in development, many of the early intervention opportunities have passed. Delayed 
therapies are much less effective, and the delay can impact child learning and development creating lifelong 
disability, not to mention the related increased economic costs on caregivers and society (Dawson et al, 2009; 
Cidav, et al., 2017). Thus, there is a critical need to provide primary HCPs not only with tools to screen and triage 
children for ASD, but also tools that can provide them with higher levels of diagnostic cer tainty than are currently 
available in the primary care setting, thus enabling them to render a diagnosis without referral to a specialist.  
 
Currently there are no FDA cleared or approved medical devices intended to aid in the diagnosis of ASD. 
Behavioral instruments with the highest diagnostic validity, such as the Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule 
(ADOS) (Lord et al., 2000) and the Autism Diagnostic Instrument Revised (ADI -R) (Lord, Rutter, & Couteur, 1994) 
are typically delivered in a secondary care  setting and can take several hours to administer by a trained specialist. 
The geographic and logistical hurdles in finding a healthcare professional trained to administer these instruments, 
the long duration of the standard exams, as well as the need for administration in a clinical facility, contribute to 
delays in diagnosis and an imbalance in coverage of the population needing attention (Shattuck PT, Durkin M, et 
al. 2009).  
 
Rural communities face even more significant challenges regarding th e availability of diagnostic specialists and 
geographic distance and transportation challenges, which results in delayed diagnosis of ASD, and consequently 
lower outcomes for children in these communities (Antezana, Scarpa, Valdespino, Albright, & Richey, 2017).
 
To address these challenges, Dr. Dennis Wall (scientific founder of Cognoa), then at the Center for Bioinformatics 
at Harvard Medical School, used machine learning techniques to create a 7 - question classifier, which stems from 
machine learning res earch on answers to elements in the ADI -R, an interviewer -based examination administered 
by a trained clinician to a parent or care provider about autism symptoms, which can take between 2 and 5 hours 
to complete. Dr. Wall’s Lab used data from Autism Speak s’ Autism Genetic Resource Exchange (AGRE) to create 
the classifier and then used this same database, in addition to two independent sources (a collection of 1654 
Cognoa, Inc.  
Protocol # Q170886  
“Cognoa ASD Diagnosis Aid Validation Study”  
 
Confidential and Proprietary                                                                                                                                                                               Page 14 of 46                                                                      
Version 3.0, 3FEB2020  autistic individuals from the Simons Foundation and a collection of 322 autistic individuals from the Boston Autism 
Consortium), to show a high level of statistical accuracy in correctly classifying children with ASD. The classifier 
was 92% accurate in identifying those who do not have ASD (Wall, Dally, Luyster, Jung, & DeLuca, 2012).  
 
Dr. Wall an d his colleagues continued to apply the techniques of machine learning to each of the observational 
modules of the ADOS. The ADOS is a semi -structured observational tool administered by a trained clinician that is 
focused on first -hand observations of the child. The ADOS module that is administered is determined by the 
child’s level of language (i.e. nonverbal, single words, phrased speech, fluent speech). By generating classifiers for 
each of the modules separately, Dr. Wall was able to adjust the risk gen erator to accommodate children across 
the developmental spectrum. He was able to again validate his findings in independent samples and showed a 
high degree of sensitivity and specificity in these archival datasets (Duda, Kosmicki, & Wall, 2014; Kosmicki, 
Sochat, Duda, & Wall, 2015).  
 
Building on the work of Dr. Dennis Wall, Cognoa has further developed the algorithm/software to render a risk 
assessment for Autism. Cognoa’s first -generation algorithm, developed in 2015 for screening purposes, showed 
better accuracy across a broader age range than other screening tools in a clinical study published in Autism 
Research (Kanne, Carpenter, & Warren, 2018) . Cognoa has continued to advance the development of its machine 
learning platform as the basis for a reliable  diagnostic device to improve the timeliness of autism diagnosis within 
the critical early childhood years (Abbas H., Garberson F., Glover E., Wall D. 2018).  
   
 
2 STUDY  DEVICE  DESCRIPTION  
 
The Study Device (“Device”) is intended to aid healthcare provider s in diagnosing Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) 
for children ≥ 18 months of age and < 72 months of age who are at risk for developmental delays based on a 
parental or healthcare provider concern.  
 
The device is not intended for use as a stand -alone diagnostic device. It is intended to be used in conjunction with 
the clinical presentation of the patient.  
 
The Device comprises of the following:  
● A caregiver facing mobile application (Cognoa Research App)  
● A Video Analyst Portal  
● Healthcare Provider Assessment  
● Underlying machine learning algorithm that drives the Device outputs (“Algorithm”)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cognoa, Inc.  
Protocol # Q170886  
“Cognoa ASD Diagnosis Aid Validation Study”  
 
Confidential and Proprietary                                                                                                                                                                               Page 15 of 46                                                                      
Version 3.0, 3FEB2020  The Algorithm operates on information and data from three modules, that serve as data input.  
 
Device Module  Module Description  Delivery System  
Module 1 - Caregiver Assessment  Answers to questions on key 
developmental behaviors (by age 
group), provided by the child’s 
caregiver.  Caregiver responses will be 
submitted via Cognoa Research 
App 
Module 2 - Patient Video Analysis  Information provided by trained 
video analyst who reviewed videos 
of the child’s natural play, 
communication, and social 
behavior at home, provided by the 
child’s caregiver.  Caregiver will submit videos via 
Cognoa Research  App 
 
Video analysts will access, review, 
and provide information via Video 
Analyst Portal  
Module 3 - Healthcare Provider 
Assessment  Answers to questions on key 
developmental behaviors (by age 
group), provided by the child’s 
healthcare provider.  Healthcar e provider responses will 
be captured on a form via pen and 
paper.  
 
Study Staff data entry personnel 
will enter information from form 
into a study database.   
 
The device evaluates the data inputs based on key developmental behaviors that are most indicative of autism 
and provides the following outputs -- Positive for Autism Spectrum Disorder (Positive ASD) or Negative for Autism 
Spectrum Disorder (Negative ASD).  The device output will be recorded by Sponsor in a dedicated study data 
repository. It  will not be shared with the referring HCP, caregivers, or specialist clinicians performing diagnosis and 
review.  
 
3 STUDY  OBJECTIVES  
This study seeks to evaluate the ability of the device to aid in the diagnosis of ASD by comparing its diagnostic 
output w ith the clinical reference standard, consisting of a diagnosis made by a specialist clinician, based on   
DSM -5 criteria and validated by one or more reviewing specialist clinicians.  
 
This is a multi -site, prospective, blinded, active comparator, cohort st udy in up to 7 25 subjects, ages ≥ 18 months of 
age and < 72 months of age.  
 
  
Cognoa, Inc.  
Protocol # Q170886  
“Cognoa ASD Diagnosis Aid Validation Study”  
 
Confidential and Proprietary                                                                                                                                                                               Page 16 of 46                                                                      
Version 3.0, 3FEB2020   
4 STUDY ENDPOINTS  
4.1 Effectiveness endpoints  
 
The primary endpoints of this study are:  
(1) to achieve a composite of positive predictive value (PPV) greater than 65% and negative predictive value (NPV) 
greater than 85% for the device in relation to the clinical reference standard in the overall study population, and  
(2) measurement of the proportion of all children for whom the Device provides no result.  
 
The secondary end points are:  
(1) sensitivity of the device in relation to the clinical reference standard in the overall study population and  
(2) specificity of the device in relation to the clinical reference standard in the overall study population.  
   
4.2 Safety endpoi nts  
Adverse events (AEs) and serious adverse events (SAEs) will be collected and reported from enrollment (informed 
consent signature) through completion of the reference diagnosis clinic visit.  
 
5 STUDY DURATION  
The study is expected to last 6 months. Su bjects’ participation in the study is expected to last 6 weeks.  
 
6 STUDY DESIGN AND PROCEDURES  
Primary healthcare providers who identify children at risk for developmental delay or learn of caregiver concern 
about developmental delay will inform caregivers about the clinical study. Caregivers may have access to a 
research coordinator, study website,  or app (Cognoa Research app) to learn more about the study, provide 
consent, determine whether their child qualifies, and answer questions to test their comprehension of the study.  
 
All subject s will undergo investigational (Cognoa assessment) and comparator diagnostic assessments for ASD 
using DSM -5 criteria and validating central review.  Caregivers will be instructed to download the Cognoa 
Research app on their smartphone, set the username and password, complete a caregiver assessment about the 
child’s behavior and development, and record two brief videos of their child. Caregivers will be given guidance on 
how to record videos. Both the assessment and the videos will be submitted via the Cognoa Research app. Cognoa 
video analysts will analyze the  videos. The primary healthcare provider (HCP) will also answer an assessment 
about the child’s behavior and development. The caregivers, video analysts, and HCPs providing inputs to the 
device algorithm will be blinded to each other’s input.  
 
Once the car egiver assessment, primary HCP assessment, and scored videos have been submitted, the device will 
generate a diagnostic output. The device output will be recorded by the Sponsor in a dedicated study data 
repository. The device inputs and the device output will not be shared with the referring HCP, caregivers, or 
Cognoa, Inc.  
Protocol # Q170886  
“Cognoa ASD Diagnosis Aid Validation Study”  
 
Confidential and Proprietary                                                                                                                                                                               Page 17 of 46                                                                      
Version 3.0, 3FEB2020  specialist clinicians performing diagnosis and review.  
 
After the caregiver assessment has been completed and scorable videos submitted, the caregiver will be 
contacted by a research coordinator to schedule an appointment for a diagnostic evaluation by a specialist 
clinician. The specialist clinician will meet with the child and caregiver(s), conduct an assessment (which will be 
captured on video), and make a diagnosis of positive for ASD or negative  for ASD based on DSM -5 criteria. The 
outcome of the diagnostic encounter may not be “uncertain” or “unknown at this time”.  The diagnosing clinician 
will also complete a standardized medical history and physical form (See Appendix), which may be completed  
during the diagnosing clinician visit.  The standardized form and video will be sent to the Cognoa study monitor.  
 
Determination of clinical diagnosis for study analysis purposes ( clinical reference standard ) will consist of a 
specialist clinician diagnos is by DSM -5 criteria, validated with independent review by one or two central specialist 
clinicians. After the diagnosing clinician has completed the patient assessment, the patient case is reviewed by 
one reviewing specialist clinician (who is provided wi th the standardized medical history and physical form, and a 
video of the diagnostic encounter). The diagnosing clinician will be instructed to not state any diagnostic 
conclusion, decision on any particular component of DSM -5 criteria, or diagnostic obser vation during the video of 
the assessment. If the assessment of the reviewing specialist clinician agrees with that of the diagnosing clinician, 
the diagnosis is considered validated and no further validation is conducted.   If the reviewing specialist cli nician 
disagrees with the diagnosing clinician, then the case is referred to a second reviewing specialist clinician.  The 
study monitor will track reviewing clinicians' assessment results , maintaining blinding to all parties . The diagnosis 
for study analy sis purposes is taken as the majority assessment of the three specialists (one diagnosing specialist 
and two reviewing specialists).  
 
Subject s Identification and Recruitment  
If the primary HCP has identified a child at risk for development al delay or learn s of caregiver concern about 
developmental delay the primary HCP or a member of his or her clinical team will inform caregivers about the 
study. Caregivers will be provided with material(s) describing the study and how to learn more and enroll. 
Caregivers may be enrolled in the study by Study Staff, if available at the site, via a website, or the Cognoa 
Research app.  If caregivers have questions, they can direct them to their primary HCP or his/her staff assisting in 
the study. They can also contact the Sp onsor’s representative for the study. If the caregivers wish to pursue 
enrollment for their child, they will answer questions to determine if the inclusion/exclusion criteria are met.  This 
will determine eligibility of the child for the study.  
 
Process of  Consent  
The caregivers of the child will be given access to the consent form. The objective of the informed consent form is 
to ensure that they understand the purpose of the study, the risks and benefits of participating and the voluntary 
nature of their participation. If they have questions, they may reach out to their primary HCP, other research staff 
at the site, or the Sponsor’s study coordinator. A child will not be enrolled in the study if his/her caregivers do not 
sign the consent. Child assent is n ot needed as the child involved will be less than 6 years old. Study subject s can 
end their participation in the study at any time.  
Cognoa, Inc.  
Protocol # Q170886  
“Cognoa ASD Diagnosis Aid Validation Study”  
 
Confidential and Proprietary                                                                                                                                                                               Page 18 of 46                                                                      
Version 3.0, 3FEB2020   
Randomization  
No randomization is necessary. This is a cohort single -arm study, with all subject s scheduled to undergo both 
investigational (Cognoa assessment) and diagnostic assessment for ASD using DSM -5 criteria and validated by one 
or two reviewing specialist clinicians.  
 
Study Flow  
Caregivers of subject s who have enrolled in the study will be instr ucted to download the Cognoa Research app, if 
they have not already done so, onto their smartphone, set a username and password, complete the caregiver 
assessment, and record two brief videos of their child for the video analysis portion of the assessment.  Both the 
caregiver assessment and videos will be submitted via the Cognoa Research App.  
 
The videos will be uploaded securely to a HIPAA secure server. Each submission will be scored by analysts who 
evaluate behaviors observed by answering a series of mul tiple -choice questions evaluating phenotypic features of 
ASD (e.g., on -verbal and verbal communication; social interaction; unusual sensory interests/reactions; 
stereotyped or repetitive motor movements, use of objects, or speech) on the combinative videos .  
 
The videos analysts scoring the videos submitted for study purposes will have at least a Master’s Degree from  
professional backgrounds including psychology, occupational therapy, physical therapy, speech -language 
pathology, special education, or a related field with specific training in autism diagnosis and/or treatment. They 
will also have at least 5 years of pr ofessional and/or clinical experience working with children with ASD. They will 
be trained, qualified to score the videos and their performance will be monitored according to Cognoa’s 
procedures.  
 
The video analysts will not have access to the caregiver as sessment or the primary HCP assessment. If the videos 
are not scorable (e.g., if one or more videos are unhelpful for any reason such as: poor lighting, poor video or 
audio quality, bad vantage point, child not present or identifiable within a group, insuf ficient interaction with the 
child), the caregiver will be asked to submit additional videos. Caregivers will be allowed a maximum of 60 days 
from submitting the caregiver assessment  (Module 1) to complete video upload or provide scoreable videos.  
Caregivers will be given guidance points on how to record videos.  
 
Either during the primary care appointment when the patient was informed about the study or in a timely manner 
after the appointment, the primary care physician will answer the primary HCP  assessment about the child’s 
behavior and development. The clinician will only answer the assessment if the caregiver provides an initial 
consent.  If the caregiver chooses not to participate in the study, the primary HCP assessment will be securely 
destr oyed. The HCP will not have access to the responses in the caregiver assessment  (Module 1) , the patient 
videos, or the video ’s analysis (Module 2) . 
 
Once the caregiver assessment, primary HCP assessment, and scored videos have been submitted, the device wi ll 
generate a diagnostic output. The device output will be recorded by Sponsor in a dedicated study data repository. 
Cognoa, Inc.  
Protocol # Q170886  
“Cognoa ASD Diagnosis Aid Validation Study”  
 
Confidential and Proprietary                                                                                                                                                                               Page 19 of 46                                                                      
Version 3.0, 3FEB2020  It will not be shared with the referring HCP, caregivers, or specialist clinicians performing diagnosis and review.  
 
After the c aregiver assessment has been completed and scorable videos submitted, the caregiver will be 
contacted by a research coordinator to schedule an appointment for a diagnostic evaluation by a specialist 
clinician.  The subject s will be randomized to one of the  specialist clinicians in the study at their respective  site.  
The specialist clinician will meet with the child and caregiver(s), fill out a standardized form for medical history and 
physical information (and may ask caregivers to fill out parts of this f orm during the visit) (See Appendix ), conduct 
an assessment, and make a diagnosis for ASD. He/she will utilize clinical observation, clinician interview and exam, 
medical record review, and assessment instruments as he or she deems necessary to arrive at a  diagnosis based 
on DSM -5 criteria, positive for ASD or negative for ASD. The diagnosing specialist clinician will be provided with a 
standardized protocol to use for a portion of the recorded diagnostic encounter  (this video is a unique video 
unrelated to  the videos uploaded by the caregiver  in the App  (Module 2) ).  This recorded interaction includes 
standard approaches to eliciting behavior (e.g., asking child to blow bubbles or speak on toy phone). The 
diagnosing clinician will be instructed to not state  any diagnostic conclusion, decision on any particular component 
of DSM -5 criteria, or diagnostic observation during the video of the assessment. 
 
Any further diagnostic testing deemed necessary by the clinician will be included as part of the study recor ds. 
Diagnosis of ASD alone or ASD plus co -morbid condition(s) would both constitute a positive for ASD clinical 
evaluation. If the clinician determines that the patient is negative for ASD and is able to arrive at a diagnosis other 
than ASD or determine th at the patient is neurotypical, that data will also be captured.   
 
The completion of diagnostic assessment by the diagnosing specialist clinician will indicate the conclusion of the 
subject ’s involvement in the study.  
 
Determination of clinical diagnosis for study analysis purposes (clinical reference standard) will follow a staged 
sequential review, in which a specialist clinician diagnosis by DSM -5 criteria will be validated with independent 
review by one or two central reviewing specialist clinicians. T he purpose of this approach is to mitigate against any 
excessive variability in the clinical diagnostic process. Specialist clinicians will be board -certified child adolescent 
psychiatrists, child neurologists, developmental -behavioral pediatricians, or ps ychologists, and will have at least 
five years of experience diagnosing autism spectrum disorder.     
 
For clinical care purposes, at the end of subject participation in the study, any findings  will be shared with the 
caregiver by the study site.  
 
7 STUDY  POPULATION  
 
7.1 Study Subject Recruitment and Selection  
This study will enroll  up to 7 25 male or female subjects, between the ages of ≥ 18 months of age and < 72 months 
of age from multiple recruitment sites.  
Cognoa, Inc.  
Protocol # Q170886  
“Cognoa ASD Diagnosis Aid Validation Study”  
 
Confidential and Proprietary                                                                                                                                                                               Page 20 of 46                                                                      
Version 3.0, 3FEB2020   
Subjects may also be recruited from the Investigator’s existing patient database or from patients who present 
themselves to the study site requesting evaluation .  
 
Only subjects who meet all eligibility criteria and who provide informed consent will be enrolled into the study.  
 
Each subject will be evaluated by the primary HCP to assess his/her suitability for entry into the study according to 
the following inclusion and exclusion criteria.  
  
7.2 Inclusion Criteria  
To be included in the study, subjects m ust meet all of the following Inclusion Criteria:  
● Caregiver  must be able to read, understand and sign the Informed Consent Form (ICF).  
● Caregiver or HCP concern for developmental delay.  
● Female or Male, >18 to <72 months  of age.  
● Functional English capability in the home environment.  
● Caregiver  must have smartphone capabilities for downloading the Cognoa Research App (Cognoa supports 
iOS 10.0 and up, Android 6.0 and up).  
● Participants  must be willing to be videotaped during  the diagnostic assessment by  the specialist clinicia n.  
 
7.3 Exclusion Criteria  
Subjects will be excluded from the study if they meet any of the following Exclusion Criteria:  
● Subjects with a prior diagnosis of ASD rendered by a healthcare professional.  
● Subjects with suspected auditory or visual hallucinations or with prior diagnosis of childhood onset 
schizophrenia.  
● Subjects with deafness or blindness.  
● Subjects with known physical impairments affecting their ability to use their hands.  
● Subjects with major dysmorphic features or prenatal exposure to teratogens (such as fetal alcohol 
syndrome).  
● Subjects with history, suspicion, or diagnosis of genetic conditions (such as Rett’s Syndrome or Fragile X)  
● Subjects with microcephaly.  
● Subjects with history or prior diagnosis of epilepsy or seizures.  
● Subjects with a history of neglect.  
● Subjects with a history of brain malformation , injury or insult requiring interventions such as surgery or 
chronic medication.  
● Subjects whose age on the date of enrollment is outside th e target age range.  
● Subjects or caregivers who have been previously enrolled in any Cognoa clinical study or survey.  
● Subjects whose medical records had been included in any internal Cognoa training or validation sets.  
Cognoa, Inc.  
Protocol # Q170886  
“Cognoa ASD Diagnosis Aid Validation Study”  
 
Confidential and Proprietary                                                                                                                                                                               Page 21 of 46                                                                      
Version 3.0, 3FEB2020   
7.4 Subject Number  
If a caregiver com pletes the Informed Consent Form, meets the study eligibility criteria and is willing to 
participate, the subject will be assigned a study subject identification number.  
 
This subject identification number will have no relation to Personally Identifiable Information (PII , defined as any 
data that could potentially identify a specific individual ), such as date of birth, initials, medical record number, etc.  
All data transmitted and used for analysis will be identified by ID number and not subject identifyi ng information.  
 
7.5 Subject Discontinuation Criteria  
If possible, every subject should remain in the study until completion of the required follow -up period. However, 
participation in this study is completely voluntary and a subject can choose to withdra w from the study at any 
time.  Decision to withdraw will not affect or prejudice the subject’s continued medical care in any way. In those 
instances, the investigator will attempt to obtain a final clinical assessment and an adverse device effect 
evaluatio n for the subject prior to this withdrawal. A subject will be considered lost to follow -up only after three 
unsuccessful, documented attempts to contact the subject have been made.   
 
In addition, a subject can be discontinued for any of the following reas ons: the Principal Investigator decides that 
continuing in the study would not be in the subject’s best interest, a subject is noncompliant with the protocol, a 
subject has a serious reaction to the treatment, a subject develops any of the exclusion criter ia during the study 
period or the study is stopped by the study sponsor.  
 
 
8 DATA  COLLECTION  AND  STORAGE  
To maintain confidentiality, subject s will be assigned a unique subject ID number (see section 7.4 subject number), 
which will be used on all case report forms and linked to the Informed Consent Forms for audit and verification 
purposes.  All data transmitted and used for analysis will be id entified by ID number rather than subject -
identifying information.  
 
Authorized representatives of institutions participating in the study, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), the 
Sponsor, and the reviewing IRB and other groups or organizations that hav e a role in this study will have access to 
and may view a subject ’s study information. They will be subject to regulations protecting patient confidentiality 
(e.g., HIPAA).  
 
Data collection will be completed using electronic and/or paper report forms provi ded by the Sponsor, and data 
will be recorded into the Sponsor dedicated study data repository.  
 
 
 
Cognoa, Inc.  
Protocol # Q170886  
“Cognoa ASD Diagnosis Aid Validation Study”  
 
Confidential and Proprietary                                                                                                                                                                               Page 22 of 46                                                                      
Version 3.0, 3FEB2020   
Data repository will include:  
● Demographic information (child age, child biological sex, child race, child ethnicity, caregiver level of 
education)  
● Device In puts 
o Caregiver assessment  
o Video analysis  
o Primary HCP assessment  
● Device Output
● Diagnostic assessment for ASD according to DSM -5 diagnostic criteria, by the diagnosing specialist clinician  
● Medical, Developmental history and Physical  
● Diagnostic review outcome of reviewing specialist clinicians  
 
The data will be stored securely on an Amazon S3 cloud server with secured access and SSL encryption. Any data 
collected on paper will be kept in a secure and locked location at the primary HCP’s or specialist clinician’s office 
and periodically transferred to a central research coordinator at each site, before being recorded in an electronic 
format by the study staff and stored on a HIPAA -secure serv er. 
 
All data will be retained for at least 7 years from the completion of the Study. Data collected on paper may be 
retained solely in electronic format.  
 
9 ADVERSE  EVENTS  AND ADVERSE  DEVICE  EVENTS  
9.1 Definitions  
9.1.1  Adverse Event (AE)  
An adverse even t (AE) is defined as any untoward medical occurrence, unintended disease or injury, or untoward 
clinical signs (including abnormal laboratory findings) in subjects, device users or other persons, whether or not it 
is related to the investigational medical device.  Expected Adverse Device Events (ADEs) may be previously 
identified in nature, incidence, severity or outcome in the study protocol, informed consent document, device 
operator manual, other risk analysis documentation or regulatory application.  
 
9.1.2 Serious Adverse Event (SAE)  
A serious adverse event (SAE) is any adverse event, whether related to the use of an investigational device or 
clinical study device, that:  
 
● led to a death;  
● led to a serious deterioration in the health of the subject that:  
o resulted in a life -threatening illness or injury;  
o resulted in a permanent impairment of a body structure or body function;  
o required in -patient hospitalization or prolongation of existing ho spitalization;  
Cognoa, Inc.  
Protocol # Q170886  
“Cognoa ASD Diagnosis Aid Validation Study”  
 
Confidential and Proprietary                                                                                                                                                                               Page 23 of 46                                                                      
Version 3.0, 3FEB2020  o resulted in medical or surgical intervention to prevent permanent impairment to a body structure or a 
body function;  
● led to fetal distress, fetal death or a congenital abnormality or birth defect.  
 
9.1.3  Anticipated Serious Adverse Device Effect (ASADE)  
An anticipated serious adverse device effect (ASADE) is  any SAE on health or safety or any life -threatening 
problem or death caused by, or associated with the device, if that effect, problem, or death was previously 
identified  in nature, severity, or degree of incidence in the investigational plan, informed con sent, operator 
manual, other risk analysis documentation or regulatory application; or any other serious problem associated with 
a device that relates to the rights, safety, or welfare of subjects.  
 
9.1.4  Unanticipated Serious Adverse Device Effect (USADE ) 
An unanticipated serious adverse device effect (USADE) is any SAE on health or safety or any life -threatening 
problem or death caused by, or associated with the device, if that effect, problem, or death was not previously 
identified  in nature, severity, or degree of incidence in the investigational plan, informed consent, operator 
manual, other risk analysis documentation, or regulatory application; or any other unanticipated serious problem 
associated with a device that relates to the rights, safety, or welfare of subjects.  
 
In subjects, the ADEs/SADEs include the effects related to the investigational medical device (clinical study device), 
or the procedures involved. For device users or other persons (other clinical staff in the treatment room) 
ADE/SAD E is restricted to the effects related to investigational medical devices. ADEs/SADEs may include the 
effects (1) resulting from insufficient or inadequate instructions for use, deployment, installation, or operation, or 
any malfunction of the investigatio nal medical device; or (2) resulting from user error or from intentional misuse 
of the investigational medical device.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cognoa, Inc.  
Protocol # Q170886  
“Cognoa ASD Diagnosis Aid Validation Study”  
 
Confidential and Proprietary                                                                                                                                                                               Page 24 of 46                                                                      
Version 3.0, 3FEB2020   
 
 
Figure 1. Flowchart for classification of adverse device events  
 
 
 
                                                 
                                          
 
  
  
 
 
 
  Adverse Event Occurrence                           
(i.e., Untoward Medical Occurrence)  
 
 Is it device or 
procedure 
related?  
 Adverse Event (AE) or Serious 
Adverse Event (SAE) depending on 
criteria  
- Report on Visit CRF  
 
 NO 
YES  
NO Does it meet 
seriousness 
criteria?  Adverse Device Event (ADE)  
- Report on Visit CRF  
 
 
  
YES  
Anticipated Serious Adverse Device Effect (ASADE)  
- Reported on Cognoa SADE Form  
- Report on ADE CRF  
 Serious Adverse Device 
Effect (SADE)  
 
Unanticipated Serious Adverse Device Effect 
(USADE/UADE)  
- Reported on Cognoa SADE Form  
- Reported on ADE CRF 
- Examples: seizure, event leading to death  
 
 YES  NO  Is it anticipated?  YES  
 
Cognoa, Inc.  
Protocol # Q170886  
“Cognoa ASD Diagnosis Aid Validation Study”  
 
Confidential and Proprietary                                                                                                                                                                               Page 25 of 46                                                                      
Version 3.0, 3FEB2020  9.2 Recording AEs/ADEs and SAEs/SADEs  
All AEs/SAEs or ADEs/SADEs will be: (1) evaluated and must be recorded in the subject’s study case report forms 
(CRFs); (2) monitored and tracked from the time of the first treatment.  
At each contact with the subject, the investigator must seek informatio n on AEs/ADEs/SADEs by specific 
questioning and, as appropriate, by examination. AEs/ADEs/SADEs may be observed by the investigator and/or 
clinical research staff, elicited from the subject and/or family member or volunteered by the subject. All observed 
and volunteered adverse signs and symptoms, anticipated or unanticipated, regardless of severity or frequency, 
will be recorded in the case histories (medical chart and CRFs). Included in the description should be the nature of 
the sign or symptom, the date  of onset, date of resolution (duration), the severity, anticipated or unanticipated, 
the relationship to study treatment or other therapy, the action taken (if any), and the outcome.   
All SAEs/SADEs, anticipated or unanticipated, must be reported to Cogn oa immediately but not later than 5 
working days.  The SADE must be recorded in: (1) the CRF and (2) a written report must be submitted to Cognoa 
within five (5) working days after the investigator first learns of the event and is to include a full descrip tion of the 
event and sequelae, in the format detailed by the Cognoa Serious Adverse Event Form.  
 
9.3 Follow -up of Subjects after AEs  
All reported AEs/ADEs/SAEs/SADEs should be followed until resolution or until the subject’s participation in the 
study end s.  Resolutions of AEs/ADEs/SAEs/SADEs are to be documented on the appropriate CRFs.  All ADEs that 
result in permanent discontinuation from this clinical trial, whether serious or not, should also be reported on the 
subject Non -Completion of Study Form.  
 
10 POTENTIAL  RISKS  / BENEFITS  
10.1  Potential Risks  
Risks related to the study are expected to be minimal.  
 
There are no physical risks of participating in the study. However, one risk could be psychological. Caregiver s may 
feel some discomfort in answering questions about their child’s behavior. Children might also feel some 
discomfort being filmed for the vide o analysis.  
 
Another potential risk is the possible release of sensitive medical, behavioral, or educational information. To 
mitigate the risk of releasing sensitive personal information, we adhere to confidentiality protocols to protect the 
privacy of pe rsonal information. When data is published, it is always anonymous and in a manner so that specific 
families or subject s cannot  be identified.  
 
10.2  Potential Benefits  
The subjects may or may not benefit from the study.  
Potential benefit is to identify subjects  with ASD, thus enabling earlier therapy, which is known to positively 
impact long -term outcomes. All subjects  in the study will receive an appointment with a specialist clinician, which 
is likely to occur in an expedited manner relative to their r eferral path were they not participa ting in the clinical 
study.  
Cognoa, Inc.  
Protocol # Q170886  
“Cognoa ASD Diagnosis Aid Validation Study”  
 
Confidential and Proprietary                                                                                                                                                                               Page 26 of 46                                                                      
Version 3.0, 3FEB2020  11 DATA  ANALYSIS  PLAN  
11.1  Sample Size  
This is a multi -site, prospective, blinded, active comparator study with up to 7 25 subjects who have been deemed 
appropriate for evaluation of the devic e.   
11.2  Analysis Sets  
The analysis set will include all enrolled subjects who complete assessment.  
11.3  Statistical Analyses  
Statistical analyses will be conducted per Statistical Analysis Plan version 1.4. 6. 
11.4  Safety Analyses  
Device -related and procedure -related adverse effects (AEs) will be tabulated and analyzed.  
12 STUDY  MANAGEMENT  AND  ADMINISTRATIVE  CONSIDERATIONS   
12.1  Investigator Selection  
The Investigator(s) will be invited to participate in the study based on his or h er medical specialty and experience 
conducting clinical research studies. Access to potential study subjects and the Investigator’s sincere interest in 
this study along with expressed willingness to cooperate with the study process and requirements are als o 
considered.  
12.2  Training and Monitoring  
The investigators and site research staff will be trained on the study procedures.  
 
Investigator will allow sponsor representatives to periodically review the study documentation.  Monitoring of the 
site will occur to evaluate the progress of the study, verify the accuracy and completeness of CRFs, assure that all 
protocol requirements, applicable FDA regulations and the investigator’s obligations are being fulfilled and resolve 
any inconsistencies in the study  records.  
12.3  Informed Consent  
The investigator is responsible for ensuring that informed consent, using an Institutional Review Board (IRB) 
approved informed consent document, is obtained f or each subject before the performance of any protocol 
procedures , including administration of the study device. The informed consent document must comply with all 
essential elements as defined in 21 CFR 50.25 “Elements of Informed Consent” and must contain a statement that 
consent is freely given, the study involves re search, the subject is aware of the risks and benefits of entering the 
study, and that the subject is free to withdraw from the study at any time.  An evaluation of each candidate will be 
conducted by the investigator. Upon determining a subject’s eligibil ity status, the subject will be offered the 
opportunity to participate in the study.  
 
The investigator or the investigator’s designee will inform all subjects regarding the purpose of the study and 
expected duration, as well as the potential risks and ben efits that may result from participation. The subjects shall 
be informed by the investigator or investigator’s designee that they are free to refuse participation in this clinical 
study. If they elect to participate, it will be made clear that they may wit hdraw from the study at any time without 
prejudicing further care.  
Cognoa, Inc.  
Protocol # Q170886  
“Cognoa ASD Diagnosis Aid Validation Study”  
 
Confidential and Proprietary                                                                                                                                                                               Page 27 of 46                                                                      
Version 3.0, 3FEB2020   
The acquisition of informed consent will be documented in the subject’s medical records, as required by 21 CFR 
812.140.  
12.4  Protocol Compliance  
The principal investigator must comply wi th all terms of the protocol.  
12.5  Protocol Amendments  
Neither the principal investigator nor the sponsor will modify or alter this protocol without first obtaining the 
concurrence of the other party (with the exception of amendments which involves mitigat ing a medical 
emergency or immediate health risk to the subject). The party initiating an amendment must confirm it clearly in 
writing and it must be signed and dated by the sponsor and the principal investigator. IRB approval must be 
obtained before imple mentation of an amendment.  
12.6  Protocol Deviation  
Significant protocol deviations must be reported to the IRB according to their policies.  
12.7  Study Discontinuation  
Cognoa, Inc. (the sponsor) has the right to terminate this study at any time.  Reasons for terminating the study 
may include, but are not limited to, the following: incidence or severity of adverse events in this or other studies 
indicates a potential health hazard to subjects; subject enrollment is unsatisfactory; number of protocol  deviations 
is unacceptable; data recording is inaccurate or incomplete; or questionable study site compliance with ICH -E6, 
Good Clinical Practice.   
12.8  Data Collection, Record Keeping and Storage  
The principal investigator is responsible for assuring tha t all study records including case report forms (CRFs), 
informed consent forms, device accountability records, source documents (e.g., notes, medical records etc.) and 
other study records are complete, accurate and recorded in a timely manner. All study da ta will be captured on 
the CRFs.  All data entries on the CRFs will be recorded completely, promptly, and legibly using blue or black 
indelible ink pen and accuracy will be ensured. The corrections on CRFs will be made only by the designated study 
staff. T o make a correction to an entry, the data will be crossed through with a single line (the original entry 
should be visible) and then will be initialed and dated by the person making the correction.  
 
The study records will be maintained in a secure locatio n throughout the duration of the study.  Upon study 
completion or termination, records will be kept at a secure location until at least 2 years after the last approval of 
a marketing application and until there are no pending or contemplated marketing appl ications or at least 2 years 
have elapsed since the formal discontinuation of clinical development of the investigational product.  
12.9  Subject Confidentiality  
This study preserves the confidentiality of all subjects under the Health Insurance Portability  and Accountability 
Act of 1996 (HIPAA) Privacy Rule. The following safeguards will be in place to protect the privacy of the individuals 
who are the subjects of the health information to be used in the research and the confidentiality of that 
information:    
 
The subjects will be informed by the investigator or the investigator’s designee that their medical records will be 
kept as confidential as possible but may be subject to review by: (1) Cognoa, or its representative; (2) reviewing 
Cognoa, Inc.  
Protocol # Q170886  
“Cognoa ASD Diagnosis Aid Validation Study”  
 
Confidential and Proprietary                                                                                                                                                                               Page 28 of 46                                                                      
Version 3.0, 3FEB2020  IRB; and/or (3) by ap propriate regulatory bodies (e.g. the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA), Department of 
Health and Human Services (DHHS) agencies).  
 
Only pieces of personal information required for purposes of the study will be collected. The personal information 
will be collected and used to ensure subject eligibility for study participation, to conduct the study and to assess 
the results of the study as required and permitted by law. Subjects have the right to see and copy any of the 
information gathered about them a nd request changes if the information is not correct, until it is no longer kept 
by the investigator. Permission to use or disclose personal information, except for that has been collected and 
relied on may be cancelled by the subject by written notice. If  the subject is withdrawn from the study, the 
information collected to that time may still be used to preserve the scientific integrity of the study. There is no 
expiration date to this authorization.  
 
Subjects’ identities will be kept confidential. Subjects will be assigned a unique study code that will not reveal the 
subjects’ identity, and this code will be used on all study documents.  
12.10 Financial Considerations  
 
Subject  Compensation:  
The subjec t’s caregiver will be compensated for their participation, which is defined as completion of caregiver 
assessment, brief videos, and specialist clinician evaluation.  
 
Costs to the Subject : 
The specialist clinician evaluation is part of standard of care referral and should be covered by insurance. The 
costs not covered by subject’s insurance will be covered by the sponsor, up to $1,000.00. Please note that genetic 
testing and/or neuroimaging will not be covered by the sponsor.  
 
Clinician Compensation:  
Referring primary care physicians will be compensated per HCP assessment they complete.  
Specialist clinicians, who handle the primary diagnosis, will be compensated per patient visit.  
Reviewing specialist clinicians will be compensated per independent review of cases.  
  
Cognoa, Inc.  
Protocol # Q170886  
“Cognoa ASD Diagnosis Aid Validation Study”  
 
Confidential and Proprietary                                                                                                                                                                               Page 29 of 46                                                                      
Version 3.0, 3FEB2020   
REFERENCES  
Abbas H., Garberson F., Glover E., Wall D. (2018). Machine learning approach for early detection of autism by 
combining questionnaire and home video screening. Journal  of the American Medical Informatics Association , 
Volume 25, Issue 8, August 2018, Pages 1000 – 
1007, https://doi.org/10.1093/jamia/ocy039  
  
Antezana, L., Scarpa, A., Valdespino , A., Albright, J., & Richey, J. A. (2017). Rural Trends in Diagnosis and Services 
for Autism Spectrum Disorder. Frontiers in psychology, 8, 590. doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2017  
 
Baio J , Wiggins L , Christensen DL , et al. (2018). Prevalence of Autism Spectrum Disorder Among Children Aged 8 
Years - Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network, 11
Sites, United States, 2014. MMWR Surveill Summ.  2018 Apr 27;67(6):1 -23. doi: 10.15585/mmwr.ss6706a1.  
 
Begeer, S., Bouk, S. El, Boussaid, W.,  Terwogt, M. M., & Koot, H. M. (2009). Underdiagnosis and referral bias of 
autism in ethnic minorities. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders , 39(1), 142 –148. 
http://doi.org/10.1007/s10803 -008-0611 -5 
 
Carbone, P., Norlin, C., & Young, P. (2016). Improving early identification and ongoing care of children with Autism 
Spectrum Disorder. Pediatrics, 137(6) DOI : 10.1542/peds.2015 -1850  
 
CDC. (2014). Prevalence of Autism Spectrum Disorder Among C hildren Aged 8 Years — Autism and Developmental 
Disabilities Monitoring Network, 11 Sites, United States, 2010 . Retrieved from 
http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/pdf/ss/ss6302.pdf  
 
Cidav Z., PhD, Munson J.,  PhD, Estes A., PhD, Dawson G., PhD, Rogers S., PhD, & Mandell D., ScD. (2017). Cost 
Offset Associated With Early Start Denver Model for Children With Autism. Journal of the American Academy of 
Child & Adolescent Psychiatry,56(9), 777 -783. doi: 10.1016/j.j aac.2017.06.007  
 
Dawson G., Rogers S., Munson J., Smith M., Winter J., Greenson J., Donaldson A., & Varley, J., Randomized, 
Controlled Trial of an Intervention for Toddlers With Autism: The Early Start Denver Model, Pediatrics, 
2010;125;e17; originally pub lished online November 30, 2009; DOI: 10.1542/peds.2009 -0958  
 
Duda, M., Kosmicki, J. a, & Wall, D. P. (2014). Testing the accuracy of an observation -based classifier for rapid 
detection of autism risk. Translational Psychiatry , 4(8), e424. http://doi.org/10.1038/tp.2014.65  
 
Kosmicki, J. a, Sochat, V., Duda, M., & Wall, D. P. (2015). Searching for a minimal set of behaviors for autism 
detection through feature selection -based machi ne learning. Translational Psychiatry , 5(2), e514. 
http://doi.org/10.1038/tp.2015.
 
Lord, C., Risi, S., Lambrecht, L., Cook, E. H., Leventhal, B. L., DiLavore, P. C., … Rutter, M. (2000). Autism Diagnosti c 
Observation Schedule (ADOS) . Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders (Vol. 30). 
http://doi.org/10.1007/BF02211841.  
 
Lord, C., Rutter, M., & Couteur, A. L. (1994). Autism diagnostic interview -revised: A revised version of a diagnostic 
interview for caregivers of individuals with possible pervasive developmental disorders. Journal of Autism and 
Developmental Disorders , 24(5), 659 –685. http://doi.o rg/10.1007/BF02172145  
Cognoa, Inc.  
Protocol # Q170886  
“Cognoa ASD Diagnosis Aid Validation Study”  
 
Confidential and Proprietary                                                                                                                                                                               Page 30 of 46                                                                      
Version 3.0, 3FEB2020   
Shattuck PT, Durkin M, Maenner M, Newschaffer C, Mandell DS, Wiggins L et al . Timing of identification among 
children with an autism spectrum disorder: findings from a population - based surveillance study. J Am Acad Child 
Adolesc Psychiatry 2009; 48: 474 –483 
 
Snow, A. V, & Lecavalier, L. (2008). Sensitivity and specificity of the Modified Checklist for Autism in Toddlers and 
the Social Communication Questionnaire in preschoolers suspected of having pervasive developmental disorders. 
Autism : The International Journal of Research and Practice , 12(6), 627 –644. 
http://doi.org/10.1177/1362361308097116  
 
Wall, D. P., Dally, R., Luyster, R., Jung, J. Y., & DeLuca, T. F. (2012). Use of artificial intelligence to shorten the 
behavioral diagnosis of autism. PLoS O NE, 7(8). http://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0043855  
 
Warren, Z., McPheeters, M. L., Sathe, N., Foss -Feig, J. H., Glasser, A., & Veenstra - Vanderweele, J. (2011). A 
systematic review of early intensive intervention for autism spectrum disorders. Pediatrics , 127(5), e1303 –e1311. 
http://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2011 -0426  
 
Witwer, A. N., & Lecavalier, L. (2007). Autism screening tools: an evalua tion of the Social Communication 
Questionnaire and the Developmental Behaviour Checklist -Autism Screening Algorithm. Journal of Intellectual & 
Developmental Disability , 32(3), 179 –187. http://doi. org/10.1080/13668250701604776  
 
Zuckerman, K. E., Lindly, O. J., & Sinche, B. K. (2015). Parent al Concerns, Provider Response, and Timeliness of 
Autism Spectrum Disorder Diagnosis. The Journal of Pediatrics , 1–10. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpeds.2015.03.007  
 
  
Cognoa, Inc.  
Protocol # Q170886  
“Cognoa ASD Diagnosis Aid Validation Study”  
 
Confidential and Proprietary                                                                                                                                                                               Page 31 of 46                                                                      
Version 3.0, 3FEB2020   
APPENDIX - STANDARDIZED  MEDICAL  HISTORY AND PHYSICAL FORM  
 
 
HISTORY AND PHYSICAL INTAKE FORM                            
  
  
Subject ID  Date of Evaluation   Biological Sex  
☐Female    ☐Male  
Child’s Name (Last, First)  Date of Birth   Age (months)  
   
HISTORY OF PRESENTING ILLNESS:  
 
___________________________________________________________________________________ ___________________  
  
____________________________________________________________________________________ __________________  
  
___________________________________________________________________________________ ___________________  
  
___________________________________________________________________________________ ___________________  
 
_______________________________________________ ____________________________________ ___________________  
  
___________________________________________________________________________________ ___________________  
  
___________________________________________________________________________________ __________ _________  
  
___________________________________________________________________________________ ___________________  
 
______________________________________________________________________________________________________  
 
____________________________________ __________________________________________________________________  
  
______________________________________________________________________________________________________  
  
__________________________________________________________________________________ ____________________  
  
______________________________________________________________________________________________________  
Cognoa, Inc.  
Protocol # Q170886  
“Cognoa ASD Diagnosis Aid Validation Study”  
 
Confidential and Proprietary                                                                                                                                                                               Page 32 of 46                                                                      
Version 3.0, 3FEB2020   
 
  
Age caregiver first became concerned about patient’s development or behavior?  __________________________________  
  
Does the child have any of the following compared to other children his/her age  (Circle  all that apply) : 
 
 Impulsive/Overactive   Destructive   Unable to separate from parent  
 Short attention span/Distractible   Aggressive   Sad or Depressed  
 Daydream s  Wetting pants/bed   Suicidal thoughts  
 Classroom disruption   Bowel accidents   Eats or Mouths non -food items  
 Is easily overstimulated in play   Poor eye -contact   Psychiatric/emotional problems  
 Easily frustrated   Low self -esteem   Plays with toys abnormally  
 Doesn’t follow directions   Isolated/withdrawn   Sexualized behavior  
 Oppositional/Defiant   Excessive worry/fears   Obsessions or compulsions  
 Sensitive to noises/ lights/ textures   Need for sameness   Difficulty making or keeping friends  
 Self-injurious (head bangs, bites/hits self)  Requires a lot of parent al 
attention  Overreacts when faced with a  
problem  
 Rocking/spinning/hand flapping  More interested in things than in   
people  Does not show much emotion  
  
  
Other problems or comments regarding infancy or early childhood development?  
  
_________________________________________________________________________________________ __________  
  
_________________________________________________________________________________________ __________  
  
_________________________________________________________________________________________ __________  
  
_________________________________________________________________________________________ __________  
 
_____________________________________________________ ____________________________________ __________  
Cognoa, Inc.  
Protocol # Q170886  
“Cognoa ASD Diagnosis Aid Validation Study”  
 
Confidential and Proprietary                                                                                                                                                                               Page 33 of 46                                                                      
Version 3.0, 3FEB2020    
BIRTH HISTORY  
  
Is child adopted?    ◻ Yes  ◻ No      In foster care?  ◻ Yes  ◻ No   If Yes, from what age? ______  
Mother’s 
age during 
pregnancy  
  Father’s age 
during 
pregnancy  Prenatal care received?  
◻ Yes    ◻ No    Previous pregnancies? ◻ No 
◻ Yes:  If yes, number of pregnancies ____  
  Number of miscarriages (if any): _____  
Prescription medications used during pregnancy:  
  
Maternal use any of the following while pregnant:  
  
◻  Tobacco     ◻  Alcohol     ◻ Marijuana     ◻  Methamphetamines  ◻ Cocaine/Crack  ◻  Heroin     ◻  
Methadone  
  
◻  Other (specify): ________  
Were there any problems during pregnancy or delivery?   ◻ No    ◻ Yes  (details):  
  
  
  
Full term (40 wks)? ◻ Yes  ◻ No     Birth weight:         
_______  (lbs)  
Or 
_______(kg)  Birth Length:          
__________ (in)  
Or 
_________ (cm)  Birth Head Circ:            
__________ (in)  
Or 
_________ (cm)  
  If premature, how early?  ___________weeks  
  
If overdue, how late? ______________weeks  Method of Delivery:  
◻ Vaginal  
◻ C-section     
Did child need any special care after delivery?  ◻ No    ◻ Yes  (details):  
  
  
Health problems (feeding difficulties, poor weight gain, etc.) during infancy?  
◻ No  ◻ Yes (details):  
  
  
Maternal or Paternal Depression following the birth?  
◻ No  ◻ Yes (details):  
  
Cognoa, Inc.  
Protocol # Q170886  
“Cognoa ASD Diagnosis Aid Validation Study”  
 
Confidential and Proprietary                                                                                                                                                                               Page 34 of 46                                                                      
Version 3.0, 3FEB2020  Additional Birth History:  
 
DEVELOPMENTAL HISTORY:  
  
Age of first developmental concern:             months  
Please note the age at which your child first did each of the following (write N/A if he/she does not do this yet):  
Sat independently: _______                                    Walked 10 steps: _______  
Said first word (other than mama/dada): _______       Put two words together (e.g. “my ball”)_______  
Toilet trained: Bladder ________               Bowel ________   Fed self with utensils (fork, spoon) _______  
 
Provide an example of something your child might say:  
  
  
Provide an example of how your child lets caregiver  know what he/she needs?  
  
  
Caregiver  concern regarding child’s ability to think or that learning is delayed?  
◻ No      ◻ Yes, Please specify:  
  
  
How old does caregiver  think child seems to act? _________  
History of child gross motor delays (e.g. sitting, walking, skipping, riding a bicycle, etc.)?  
  
◻ No      ◻ Yes, Please specify:  
  
History of child  fine motor delays  (e.g. drawing, writing, cutting, eating with utensils)?  What any part of child’s small 
muscle development slow?  
  
◻ No      ◻ Yes, Please specify:  
  
Are child’s self -help skills (i.e. dressing, toileting, bathing, etc.) age -appropriate?  
  
◻ Yes ◻ No: Please explain:  
  
Cognoa, Inc.  
Protocol # Q170886  
“Cognoa ASD Diagnosis Aid Validation Study”  
 
Confidential and Proprietary                                                                                                                                                                               Page 35 of 46                                                                      
Version 3.0, 3FEB2020  Has child ever lost any previously acquired and well -established language, motor, self -help, or social skills?  
  
◻ No      ◻ Yes -  What age? ____ years.  Please describe:  
  
Any prior developmental evaluations through Early Intervention, Developmental Pediatrics, etc.:  
 
PAST MEDICAL HISTORY:  
 
Circle Any That Apply  
 
Chickenpox      Frequent ear infections     Problems with ears or hearing     Nasal allergies     Problems with eyes or visio n      
 
Asthma, bronchitis, bronchiolitis, or pneumonia     Any heart problem or heart murmur     Anemia or bleeding problem  
 
Blood transfusion     HIV     Organ transplant     Malignancy/bone marrow transplant     Chemotherapy  
 
Frequent abdominal pain     Constipation requiring doctor visits     Recurrent urinary tract infections and problems  
 
Congenital cataracts/ret inoblastoma     Metabolic/Genetic disorders     Cancer     Kidney disease or urologic malformations      
 
Sleep problems; snoring     Chronic or recurrent skin problems (eg, acne, eczema)     Frequent headaches  
 
Convulsions or seizures     Obesity     Diabetes     Thyroid or other endocrine problems     High blood pressure  
 
History of serious injuries/fractures/concussions      Dental decay  
  
Hospitalizations/ Major Illnesses /Surgeries:  
  
  
  
  
  
 
                                                                                     
 
 
SOCIAL HISTORY  
  
Cognoa, Inc.  
Protocol # Q170886  
“Cognoa ASD Diagnosis Aid Validation Study”  
 
Confidential and Proprietary                                                                                                                                                                               Page 36 of 46                                                                      
Version 3.0, 3FEB2020  Early Intervention Services:  ◻  No Services  ◻  Current Services (Please specify in hr/week or hr/ month):  
  
Does the child currently attend daycare?   ◻ No     ◻ Yes (Please explain):  
  
 
Current Grade in School (if applicable):  Type of Class (mainstream or special education services):  
  
  
Concerns (if any) child’s current teacher has?  
  
  
Any evaluations child has received through school district (SST, Speech Evaluation, Psychoeducational evaluation, etc.):  
  
  
Has child ever had an Individual Education Plan (IEP or IFSP)?  ◻ No  ◻ Yes. If yes, reason:  
  
  
Services child CURRENTLY RECEIVES  at school and how often ( i.e., Resource support or specialized instruction, aide, speech 
therapy, occupational therapy, adaptive PE, social skills group, positive behavioral support plan, etc. ). 
  
  
  
  
 
  
Any other services child has RECEIVED IN THE PAST  through school.  
  
  
  
   
Please describe any major family stressors at the present time, if any?  
  
  
Please note if there is a history of any of the following (check all that apply):  
Cognoa, Inc.  
Protocol # Q170886  
“Cognoa ASD Diagnosis Aid Validation Study”  
 
Confidential and Proprietary                                                                                                                                                                               Page 37 of 46                                                                      
Version 3.0, 3FEB2020  ❒ Marital discord/separation/divorce  ❒  Parent deployed overseas/out of 
town for work extensively  ❒ Financial problems  
❒ Custody disputes  ❒  Parent legal problems  ❒ Parent  job loss  
❒ Birth/Adoption of another child  ❒  Parent alcohol/ drug use  ❒ Witness physical violence  
❒ Severe sibling/ illness or death  ❒ Living away from parent  ❒ Witness sexual abuse  
❒ Parent emotionally/mentally ill  ❒ Other significant trauma/negative 
event    
  
If yes to any of the above, provide circumstances:  
______________________________________________________________________________________________________  
  
______________________________________________________________________________________________________  
  
_______________________________ _______________________________________________________________________  
  
______________________________________________________________________________________________________  
  
Cognoa, Inc.  
Protocol # Q170886  
“Cognoa ASD Diagnosis Aid Validation Study”  
 
Confidential and Proprietary                                                                                                                                                                               Page 38 of 46                                                                      
Version 3.0, 3FEB2020  REVIEW OF SYMPTOMS  
  
Concern  Never  Currently  In the past  
Fatigue        
Sleep problems (falling asleep, staying asleep, snoring, 
difficulty breathing at night, etc.)        
Genetic disorder        
Head injury/brain problem (hydrocephalus, brain bleed)        
Seizures         
Headaches        
Tics, tremors, or unusual movements        
Eye or vision problem        
Ear or hearing problem        
Dental or tooth problem        
Nose and Throat problems        
Heart problem        
Heart rhythm problems        
Cognoa, Inc.  
Protocol # Q170886  
“Cognoa ASD Diagnosis Aid Validation Study”  
 
Confidential and Proprietary                                                                                                                                                                               Page 39 of 46                                                                      
Version 3.0, 3FEB2020  Concern  Never  Currently  In the past  
Breathing/lung problem, asthma        
GI problem: vomiting/reflux/stomach pain        
Diarrhea (loose, watery stools)        
Constipation (hard, painful stools)        
Feeding problem or use of a feeding tube        
Limited diet (picky eater):        
Kidney/bladder/genital problems        
Bone, joint, or muscle problems        
Anemia or other blood problems        
Skin conditions or birthmarks        
Endocrine or hormone problems        
Growth problems (short stature, overweight/underweight, 
etc.)        
Allergies        
Health concern not listed above        
Cognoa, Inc.  
Protocol # Q170886  
“Cognoa ASD Diagnosis Aid Validation Study”  
 
Confidential and Proprietary                                                                                                                                                                               Page 40 of 46                                                                      
Version 3.0, 3FEB2020  Child uses any adaptive equipment (circle)?  
  
 Glasses         Hearing aids      Walker     Wheelchair     Communication device  
  
  Other:  
  
  
  
Cognoa, Inc.  
Protocol # Q170886  
“Cognoa ASD Diagnosis Aid Validation Study”  
 
Confidential and Proprietary                                                                                                                                                                               Page 41 of 46                                                                      
Version 3.0, 3FEB2020  BIOLOGICAL FAMILY HISTORY  
Please note who, if any, of the child’s biological relatives have had these conditions (“blood related” family members only;        
i.e. biological parents, siblings, aunts, uncles, grandparents)  
  
 Conditions:  Relative(s) with the condition  
(if 2d degree relation, specify maternal or paternal)  
 Autism Spectrum Disorder    
 ADHD    
 Learning disabilities or intellectual disability    
 School failure (please explain)    
 Developmental delays (speech delay, delayed walking, etc.)    
 Schizophrenia or psychosis    
 Depression    
 Bipolar Disorder    
 Anxiety or OCD    
 Tics or Tourette’s Disorder    
 Seizures    
Genetic disorder (Down Syndrome, Fragile X Syndrome, 
Tuberous Sclerosis Complex,, Neurofibromatosis, etc.)    
 Substance abuse (alcohol, drugs, etc.)    
 Other /Additional Details  (Please Specify)  
    
  
  
Cognoa, Inc.  
Protocol # Q170886  
“Cognoa ASD Diagnosis Aid Validation Study”  
 
Confidential and Proprietary                                                                                                                                                                               Page 42 of 46                                                                      
Version 3.0, 3FEB2020  Current medication(s) that child takes:  
  
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
ALLERGIES:  
❒ Not Known Medication Allergies  
  
  
IMAGING, LABORATORY, AND NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL TESTING  
(attach reports if available, excluding/redacting assessment portion)  
Test  Yes Don’t Know  If Yes, Abnormal?  
Array CGH (microarray) or Karyotype    Details:  
Fragile X    Details:  
Testing for Rett Syndrome (MECP2)    Details:  
Whole Genome/ Exome    Details:  
MRI of the brain    Details:  
EEG (electroencephalogram)    Details:  
Sleep Study    Details:  
Audiology (Hearing) Testing    Details:  
Cognoa, Inc.  
Protocol # Q170886  
“Cognoa ASD Diagnosis Aid Validation Study”  
 
Confidential and Proprietary                                                                                                                                                                               Page 43 of 46                                                                      
Version 3.0, 3FEB2020  Neuropsychological Testing    Details:  
Other:    Details:  
  
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION  
  
Height: ________________cm    Weight: _______________kg    Head Circumference: _______________cm  
(attach growth charts if available)  
  
CATEGORY  STATUS  IF ABNORMAL, DESCRIBE BELOW  
Vital Signs  ☐Normal  
☐Abnormal  
☐Not Examined    
General Appearance  ☐Normal  
☐Abnormal  
☐Not Examined    
HEENT  ☐Normal  
☐Abnormal  
☐Not Examined    
Respiratory  ☐Normal  
☐Abnormal  
☐Not Examined    
Cardiovascular  ☐Normal  
☐Abnormal  
☐Not Examined  
   
Cognoa, Inc.  
Protocol # Q170886  
“Cognoa ASD Diagnosis Aid Validation Study”  
 
Confidential and Proprietary                                                                                                                                                                               Page 44 of 46                                                                      
Version 3.0, 3FEB2020  CATEGORY  STATUS  IF ABNORMAL, DESCRIBE BELOW  
Abdomen  ☐Normal  
☐Abnormal  
☐Not Examined    
Genitourinary  ☐Normal  
☐Abnormal  
☐Not Examined    
Musculoskeletal  ☐Normal  
☐Abnormal  
☐Not Examined    
Lymph Nodes  ☐Normal  
☐Abnormal  
☐Not Examined    
  
Skin ☐Normal  
☐Abnormal  
☐Not Examined    
Cognoa, Inc.  
Protocol # Q170886  
“Cognoa ASD Diagnosis Aid Validation Study”  
 
Confidential and Proprietary                                                                                                                                                                               Page 45 of 46                                                                      
Version 3.0, 3FEB2020  Neuropsychiatric:  
- Mental Status  ☐Normal  
☐Abnormal  
☐Not Examined  Appearance/Behavior (e.g. level of motor activity, eye contact):  
  
  
  
Apparent reaction to situation/reactivity level to sensory stimuli:  
  
  
  
  
Speech/Language:  
  
Vocalization/speech production  
  
  
  
Affect (range of expressed emotions)  
  
  
  
Thought Processes:  
  
  
  
Thought Content:  
  
  
  
Cognition:  
  
  
  
Neurological:  
- Cranial Nerves  ☐Normal  
☐Abnormal  
☐Not Examined    
Neurological:  
- Tone, Motor & 
Coordination  ☐Normal  
☐Abnormal  
☐Not Examined  Check if any abnormal movements noted:  
☐ Tics       ☐ Chorea     ☐ Stereotypy  
  
Cognoa, Inc.  
Protocol # Q170886  
“Cognoa ASD Diagnosis Aid Validation Study”  
 
Confidential and Proprietary                                                                                                                                                                               Page 46 of 46                                                                      
Version 3.0, 3FEB2020  Neurological:  
- Reflexes  ☐Normal  
☐Abnormal  
☐Not Examined    
Neurological:  
- Sensory  ☐Normal  
☐Abnormal  
☐Not Examined    
  
 