 1  
 
Official Title:  Improving Care Coordination for Adolescents and Young Adults With Cancer: Implementing a Bridge 
Between Needs and Services  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
IRB-Approved Date:  2/9/2021  
 2 PStudy Title : Improving care coordination for adolescents and young adults with can cer: implementing a bridge between 
needs an d services  
 
Principal Investigator : Sarah Birken, PhD  
Co-investigator(s) :  
Emily Haines, PhD , Wake Forest School of Medicine  
Laur en Lux, MSW , LCSW , Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Cen ter  
 
Sponsor or funding source: Depart mental  
 
Background , Rationale  and Context  
In the United States, m any of the nearly 9 0,000 adolescents and young adults (AYAs) diagnosed with 
cancer each year do no t receive services to address the full scope of needs they experience during and after cancer  
treatment.1-6 AYAs’ unmet needs result in negative outcomes, includ ing distress,3,4 poor health -relate d quality of 
life,7 and high physical symptom burden.2 The National Cancer Instit ute8 and Centers for Medicare and Medicaid 
Services9 increasingly  advocate for the use of patient -reported outcome measures (PROMs) in practice to better 
address the needs of cancer patients. However, PROM s are unlikely to address patient needs if pa tients an d 
providers find them difficult to use,  or if the y are not lin ked to available services and resources that will address 
identified needs. Indeed, such limitations have stymied the implementation of PROM s in routine cancer care10-13 
and their effect on d ownstream patient outco mes (e.g., improved symptom burden, quality of life, experience of 
care).14-16  
To facil itate a s ystematic and patient -centered approach to delivering services and resources to address 
the unmet needs of adolescents and young adults (AYAs) with cancer , we developed in preliminary studies the 
AYA  Needs As sessment & Service Bridge ( AYA NA-SB). AYA NA -SB includes (1) a holisti c PROM assessing 
AYAs’ physical, psychosocial and practical needs and (2) a collection of referral pathways  for connecting AYAs 
to services and resources based on the needs the y report (see Appendix A ).17 To optimize AYA NA -SB’s  
usability  (i.e., ease of use)  and u sefulness (i.e., link to services) , promote cancer programs’ receptivity to AYA 
NA-SB implementation , and anticipate implementation strategi es needed to facilitate AYA NA -SB’s successfu l 
impleme ntation and sustainment , we conducted u sability testing, an et hnographic user and contextual analysis, 
and iterative prototyping workshops with a multidisciplinary design team.   
Our development process culminated in an intervention with high usabi lity and usefulness, characteristics 
we expect t o promote AYA NA -SB’s s uccessful implementation and achievement of desired outcomes; however, 
AYA NA -SB’s implementation and efficacy remain untested.  Thus, throug h this study , we will evaluate AYA 
NA-SB’s  implementat ion and establish proof -of-concept . To avoid creating a  tool t hat is only applicable to its 
high-resource testing environment, I will also plan for AYA NA -SB’s potential  scale -up across diverse health 
systems serving AYAs with cancer . 
 
Objective s 
Aim 1. Assess the implementation of AYA NA -SB. I will pilot AYA NA-SB in the North Carolina 
Cancer Hospital  (NCCH) , with a primary focus on implementation outcomes.  
Aim 2.  Establish proof -of-concept  for AYA NA -SB. I will use pilot data to generate prelimi nary evid ence 
on the extent to which AYA NA -SB a ddresses AYA s’ repo rted needs.  
Aim 3. Plan for  AYA NA -SB’s scalability and sustainability in diverse health systems.  I will conduct 
annual 60 -minute semi -structur ed qualitative interview s with AYA providers and progr am leaders from 
approximately 8 health systems  to proacti vely address challenges and prepare for future AYA NA-SB scale -up 
and sustainability.  
 
Methods and Measures  
 
Design  
• Aim 1 /2: Single-arm feasibili ty pilot   
• Aim 3:  qualita tive interviews  
 
Setting  
 3 Aim 1/2: I will pilot AYA NA-SB in the North Carolina Cancer  Hospital (NCCH ). NCCH is a public, National 
Cancer Institute -designated Comprehensive Cancer Center located in central North Carolina, in a rela tively 
metropolitan area. At NCCH, around 450 individu als ages 15 -30 are diagnosed each year.  About one third o f 
these patients a re treated in pediatric oncology and the remainder in adult oncology. NCCH’s AYA program was 
established in 2015 with funding f rom a local nonprofit organization, the BeLou d Sophie Foundation. This 
funding was initi ally allocated towards hiring one fulltim e employee (a social worker/program director) to 
provide AYA -specific care at NCCH. Since 2015, the program has evolved, hiring  new AYA -specific staff 
members (e.g., nurse practitio ner, fertil ity counsel or) and expanding  program activities and reach.  
 
Aim 3: I will conduct interviews w ith providers and program leaders from AYA programs around the country.  
 
Subjects selection crit eria 
• Inclusio n Criteria  
Aim 1 /2: AYAs with ca ncer ages 18 through 39 currently in treatment  at NCCH  
Aim 3:  AYA providers and program lea ders from around the co untry  
• Exclusion Criteria  
No exclusion criteria  
• Sample Size  
• Aim 1 /2 
o N=25-50 AYAs  
o N=25/arm  has bee n proposed as  the minimum th reshold of sample  size for  aims related to 
instrumentation.18 Give n that this is a single -arm pilot study, we have determined that a 
sample size between 25 and 50 is appropriat e.  
• Aim 3 
o N=8 AYA providers/ pro gram lead ers. Interviewees will be purposefully sampled such that 
they represent a range of health systems. As su ch, a sample size of 8 is expected to y ield 
adequate data to meet the objectives of A im 3.  
Interv ention s and  Interactions  
 
Intervention  (Aims 1, 2) 
The intervention, AYA NA -SB, includes thre e components: (1) a needs assessment, (2)  a map of referral 
pathways, and (3) implementation guidance (Appendix A) .  
Needs assessment.  The needs assessment portion  of AYA NA-SB is a 57 -item PROM which include s 
nine do mains: (1) information, (2) cancer care  team, (3) physical health, (4) emotional  health, (5) sexual and  
reproductive health, (6) health behaviors and wellness, (7) work and education, (8) peer support a nd 
progr amm ing, and (9) finances and everyday  needs.  
Referral pathways.  Each domain of the n eeds assessment triggers a specif ic referral pathway. For 
example, nee ds reported in the ‘sexual and reproductive heal th’ domain trigger a referral to a fertil ity counselor or 
specia list while needs reported in the ‘w ork and education’ domain trigger a soc ial worker visit. NCCH will tailo r 
the map of referral pathways to the ir institution prior to the onset of data collec tion such that AYAs’ needs are 
triaged to  the appropriate partie s at their institution.  
Implementa tion guidance. Based on data collected during AYA NA -SB development, we compiled a 
list of potential implemen tation barriers and implementation strategies hy pothesized to mitigate them. 
Participatin g NC CH providers will b e given this information to inform their own deployment of strategies. To 
enhance the real -world applicabil ity of findings, the implementation s trategies will not be explicitly prescribed to 
NCCH, but the strategies they use will be carefully documented to  contextualize findings.  
 
Instrume nts & p rocedure  (Aims 1,2)  
Provider tra ining. Six weeks prior to the onset of data collection, participating  NCCH providers will 
participate in a 3 -hour grou p training to familiarize them with the i ntervention and pilot p rotocol. In addition to 
the impleme ntation leader, additional relevant pro viders identified by the implementat ion leader will participate in 
this training.  
During the first hour of the traini ng, I will provide an overview of AYA NA -SB a nd its development as 
well as a detailed summary of th e pilot protocol. During the second hou r of the training, we will collabora tively 
identify appropriate refer ral pathway providers for each needs assessment d omain, explicitly outlining the 
 4 processes  needed to initiate the se referral pathways. During the th ird hour, we will brainstorm potential 
implementation strategies that might  be deployed to facilitate AYA NA -SB implementation.  
Needs assessment  administ ration. The needs assessment portion of AYA NA-SB will be administe red 
to AYAs through a secure online  survey platform , RedCAP, and will take  approximately 1 5 minutes to complete. 
The s urvey link will be deliver ed to AYAs through a patient portal message from  the implementation leader . 
AYAs will rec eive a $15 incentive fo r completing the needs assessment .  
Referral pathway initiation . Within seven calendar days  of AYA NA-SB completion, the 
implementation leader  will review completed needs assessments  and, depe nding  on AYAs’ preferences indicated 
at the end of the needs ass essment, will  either (a) initiate a ppropriate referral pathways , or (b) pr ovide a list of 
recommended referrals to AYA s. For each needs assessme nt reviewed , they will document these actions on  a 
brief fidelity checklist  which timesta mps their completion of  these tasks , documents the referra l pathways 
selected, and gauges their c onfidence in selecting  appropriate referral pathways (Appendix B ). This process is 
expected to take less than 10 minut es/ needs assessment.  
Postintervention A YA s urvey. One month  following their completion of the nee ds assessment , I will 
engage  AYA  pilot participants  in an online  postintervention  survey (Appendix C ) assessi ng their perceptions of  
AYA NA-SB’s feasibility,  acceptability, and appropriateness . In add ition to items assessin g AYAs’ perspe ctives 
of the needs  assessment itself, this survey will so licit information about the follow -up care AYA s received in 
response t o needs they reported  in the needs assessment  and whether they felt their needs were met  (Aim 2). This 
survey will  administered through RedCAP and will take approximately 15 minutes to c omplete. AYAs will 
receive a second $ 15 incent ive for completing the p ostintervention survey.  
Postintervention provid er intervie w. I will conduct a semi -structu red interview with  the implementation 
leader and other participating providers from NCCH  after AYA NA -SB has been administered to a minimum o f 
n=15 AYAs. The purpose  of this 1-hour interview is to assess provider perceptions of the  feasibility, 
acceptabili ty, and appropriateness  of AYA NA -SB and to elicit infor mation about perceived implementatio n 
determinants and strategies deployed. Interview s will be recorded and t ranscribed for analysis. Appen dix D  
contains the  interview guide.  
 
Activity  Provider 
Traini ng Needs assessment 
administration  Referral pathway 
initiation  Postintervention 
AYA survey  Postintervention 
provider 
interview  
Time  0 +6 wee ks +7 weeks  +10 weeks  +10-15 weeks  
 
Instruments & p rocedure  (Aims 3) 
I will conduct annual semi -structured qualita tive interview s with AYA providers and program leaders f rom 
diverse health systems  to proactive ly address challenges and prep are for future AYA NA-SB scale -up and 
sustainability.  
An interview guide (Appen dix E) was developed using domains and constructs fr om the Dynamic 
Sustaina bility Framework, which conceptua lizes the dynamic relationship am ong in terventions, practice settings, 
and broader sy stems over time.19 During inter views, I will review pilot data with pr oviders and ask them to 
consider how AYA NA-SB’s implementation and ou tcomes might unfold similarly or differently  in their health 
systems given their practice c ontext (e.g., staffing,  informationa l systems, culture) and broader context (e.g., 
policy, regu lations, market forces).  
I will conduct i nterv iews via telephone  at a time of participants’ choosing. In terviews  will last 
approximately 60 minutes. They will be  recorded and transcrib ed for analysis.  
 
Outcome Measur e(s) 
 
Variable  Definition  Measure  Parti cipants  Data source  
Demographic/clinical vari ables (Aim 1 , Aim 2 )  
Demographics  Age; sex; race/ethnicity; health insurance status  AYAs  Needs assessment  
Clinic al 
variables  Cancer dia gnosi s; stage at diagnosis; time since diagnosis  AYAs  Needs Assessment  
Implementation measures (Aim 1)  
Feasibility  extent to which AYA NA -
SB can be successfully used Feasibility of Intervention Measure 
(FIM)20 AYAs  Postintervention 
AYA sur vey 
 5 in cancer programs  Providers  Postintervention 
provider interview  
Acceptability  perception of whether 
AYA -NA-SB is agree able, 
palatable, or satisfactory to 
users  Accept ability of Interven tion 
Measure (AIM)20 AYAs  Postintervention 
AYA survey  
Providers  Postintervention 
provide r interview  
Appropriateness  perception of AYA -NA-
SB’s fit, relevance,  or 
compatibili ty with the 
context in which it w ill be 
used Intervention Appropriateness 
Measure (IAM)20 AYAs  Postinterv ention 
AYA survey  
Providers  Postint ervention 
provider interviews  
Fidelity  the d egree to which AYA 
NA-SB is implemented as 
intended  Proportion of needs assessment 
reviewed by provider within one 
week and referral pathw ays 
initiated  Providers  Fidelity  checklist  
Implementation 
determinant s  Perceived barriers and 
facilit ators to AYA NS-SB 
implementation  Qualitative analysis of perceived 
determinants bas ed on CFIR 
constructs   Providers  Postinte rvention 
provider inter view  
Implementation 
strategies  Strategies deployed to 
facilitate AYA N A-SB 
implementation  Qualitative analysis of s trategies 
used and their  perceived level of 
influence  Providers  Postint ervention 
provider interview  
Service and p atient outcomes (Aim 2)   
AYA needs  Prevalence of needs by item; crosstab with demographic/clin ical 
variables(?)  AYAs  Needs asse ssment  
Prevalence of needs by follo w-up domain; crosstab with 
demographic/clinical variables(?)  
Services 
rendered   Distribu tion of referral pathwa ys initiated in response to AYAs’  
reported needs  Providers  Fidelity Chec klist 
Distribution of services and resources  rendered in response to  
needs reported by AYAs  AYAs  Postintervention 
AYA survey  
Care 
coordination  The delivery o f 
multidisciplinary ser vices to 
address needs reported b y 
AYAs  AYA’s receipt of services/ 
resou rces from across disciplines 
to address report ed needs within 
one mont h of needs assessment 
completion  AYAs  Postinter vention 
AYA survey  
Needs met  Extent to wh ich services 
and resour ces received met 
reported needs  AYAs’ perception of the degree to 
which  their needs were adequately 
addressed during the study period  AYAs  Postintervention 
AYA survey  
 
Analytical Plan  
Aim1. I will report descriptive  
 6  
 7 statistics on  demographic and clinic al variables. I will also calcula te descriptive  statistics on  all 
quanti tative  implementation outcomes.  Index scores w ill be generated for eac h measure by calculating an 
unweighted average o f items within each construct. Further, I w ill conduct bivariate a nalyses to assess whether 
impleme ntation outcom es vary by demographic an d clinical variables  to ensure that AYA NA -SB is feasible, 
acceptable,  and appropriate across patient characteristics.   
Qualitative interview  data will be analyz ed using template analy sis21 based on a priori theme s (i.e., 
Proctor’s model and CFIR constructs) bu t allowing for additional emergent themes.  A peer and I will 
independently abstract data from inter view transcriptions per Proctor outc omes and CFIR constructs and discuss 
discrepancie s until consensus is rea ched. When necessary, a third party will be pull ed in to resolve discrepant 
coding.  
Aim 2.  I will calculate descr iptive statistics on AYAs’ identi fied needs, reporting the prevalence of  
specific needs and needs within specific doma ins, as well as on servi ces received. I will also calculate descriptive 
statistics o n quantitative service and pati ent outcomes. I will co nduct bivariate analyses to asses s whether service 
and patient outcomes vary by demographic and clinical variables.  
Aim 3.  Interview data wil l be analyzed using template analysis21 of intervie w transcriptions based  on a 
priori themes (i.e., domains of the Dyna mic Sustainability Frame work ) but allowing for additional emergent 
theme s. A peer and I will independentl y abstract  data from interview tr anscriptions and discuss discrepa ncies until 
conse nsus is reached. When necessary, a third party will be pulled in to resolve discrepant codin g. 
 
Human Subjects Protection  
 
Subject Recruitme nt Methods  
 
Aim 1/2:  AYAs will be recruited  by the implementation leader  who, during routine encoun ters with AYAs , will 
provi de a brief de scription of the study objectives and a 1 -page  recruitment flyer  with additional details  
(Appendix F ). Additionally, they will receive a fact sheet containing all of the relevant information f rom the 
consent form  temp late ( Appendix G ). The implementation l eader will distribute the needs assessment link  to 
AYAs interested in participating  (via a secure patient portal messa ge), following up with non -responders using 
Dillman’s approach  for max imizing survey response rates  which includes initial contact, then f ollow -up with non -
responders at 1, 3, and 7 wee ks.22 
When re cruiting AYAs, implementatio n leaders will prioritize  achieving heterogenei ty in terms of cancer type, 
gender/sex, and race/ethnicity. The impleme ntation leader will not share the identi ty of AYAs interested in 
participating, even to members of the study team.   
 
Aim 3: Four intervie wees have already been identified: (1) Program Manager, Sta nford AYA C ancer Program , (2) 
AYA Nurse Navigator, Universi ty Hospitals , (3) Program Coordinator, Bon Se cours St. Francis Cancer Center , 
and (4) Patient Navigator, Fort Worth AYA Oncolog y Coalition . With expr essed support from Teen Cancer 
America, an advocacy group t hat consults with AYA programs around the countr y, I will i dentify  four additional 
key contac ts (i.e., AYA pro viders)  from diverse health systems . I will email these key conta cts informa tion about 
the study, following Dillman’s approach for maximizing resp onse rates which includes initial contact, then 
follow -up wi th non -responders at 1, 3, and 7 weeks.22  Key contacts will identify indivi duals wit hin their 
institution who are best e quipped to participate in these annual interviews.   
 
 Informed Consent  
 
Aim 1/2 : During recruitment, AYAs will  receive  from their provider a study fact sheet  with all relevant consent 
form information  (Appendix G ). This will give them time to revi ew and pr ocess this information prior  to 
receiving the online l ink to the first survey. Additionally, this will remove an y pressure they may feel to agree to 
participate as a result of their provider being present.  Informed  consent will then be  obtained  from AYAs o n the 
first page of the web -based nee ds assessment and  postintervention AYA survey  (see scree nshot, below) . This 
waiver of documentation of consent is appro priate b ecause (1) this research presents no more than minima l risk of 
harm to participants , and (2) this research involves no procedures for which writte n consent is normally requ ired 
outside the research context . Additionally, we believe that this 2 -stage consent process will alle viate any undue 
pressure that AYAs feel to pa rticipate . Finally, this 2 -stage consent process provides some measure of pr ivacy 
 8 protection to potential participants  becaus e, although  their provider will be aware of the identi ty of potential 
participants  during recruitment , this information will not be shared with the  study team .   
 
 
 
Aim 3: Prior to interviews , Aim 3 participants will receive a fact sheet containing consent information  (Appendix 
H). Verbal consent will be obtained at the beginning of telephone interviews  with providers . 
 
Confi dentiality a nd Privacy  
Confi dential ity will be prot ected by collecting only information needed to assess study outcomes, minimizing to the 
fullest ext ent possible  the co llection of any information that could directly  identify subjects, and maintaining  all study 
inform ation in a secur e manne r.  To help ensu re subject privacy and confidentiality, only a unique study identifier will 
appear on the data coll ection form.   Any c ollected p atient identifying information corres pond ing to the unique study 
identifier w ill be maint ained on a linka ge file , store separate ly from the data .  The linkage file  will be kept secure, 
with access limited to designated study pe rsonnel.  Subject-identifying information will be destroyed  one year after 
closure of the study  by permanen tly deletin g all files , leaving on ly an anonymous analytical data set. Data access will 
be lim ited to study st aff.  Dat a and records will be kept locked and secured, with any computer data password 
protected .  No re ference to any individual participant will appear in  reports, presen tations , or publication s that may 
arise from the study.  
 
Data and S afety Monitoring  
The prin cipal investigator will be res ponsible for  the overall monitoring of the data and safety of stud y participants .  
The principal investigator will be assisted by oth er membe rs of the study staff.  
 
Reporting of Unanticipated Problems,  Adverse Events or Deviat ions 
Any unanticipated problem s, serious a nd unexpected adverse events, deviations or protocol c hang es will be promptly 
reported  by the principal in vestigator or de signate d member of the research team  to the IRB and sponsor or 
appropriate g overnme nt agency  if appropriate.  
 
References  
 
1. Society AC. American Cancer Society Cancer Prevention and Early Detection Facts and Figures, Ta bles & 
Figures 2 020. 20 20. 
2. Keegan TH , Lichtensztajn DY, Kato I, et al. Unmet ado lescent and youn g adult cance r survivors information an d 
service ne eds: a population -based cancer registry study. Journal  of Cancer Survivorship. 2012;6(3):239 -250. 
3. Dyson  GJ, Thompson K,  Palmer  S, Thomas DM, S chofield P. The relationship between unmet n eeds and distres s 
amongst you ng people with cancer. Supportive Care  in Cancer. 2012;20(1):75 -85. 
4. Sawyer SM, McNeil R, McCa rthy M, et al. Unmet need for healthcare service s in adolescents  and yo ung adults 
with cancer and their parent carers. Supportive C are in Cancer. 2017;25(7):222 9-2239.  
 9 5. Zebrack BJ, Cor bett V, Embr y L, et al. Psychological distress and unsatisfied nee d for psychosocial support in 
adolescent and young a dult cancer pati ents du ring the first y ear following diagnosis. Psychooncology. 
2014;23(11):1267 -1275. 
6. Zebrac k BJ, Block R, Hayes -Latti n B, et al. Psychosocial service use and unmet need among recently  diagnosed 
adolescent and young adult cancer patient s. Cancer. 2013; 119(1): 201-214. 
7. Smit h A, Parsons H, Kent E, et al. Unmet Support  Service Needs a nd Health -Related Quality of Life among  
Adolescents  and Young Adults with Cancer: The AYA HOPE Study. Frontiers in Oncology. 2013;3(75).  
8. Institute NC. The Nation's Invest ment in  Cancer Research : A plan and budget proposal for Fiscal Year  2008.  
U.S. Depa rtment of Hea lth and Human Services: Na tional Insti tutes of Health;2008.  
9. Health UDo, Services H. Repor t to Congress: National strategy for quality improve ment in health c are. 
Washington, DC: US  Department of Health and Human Services. 2011. 
10. van Egdo m LS, Oemraws ingh A, Verweij LM, et al.  Implementin g Patient -Reported Outcome Measures in 
Clinical Breast  Cancer Care: A Systematic Review. Value in Health. 2019.  
11. Porter  I, Gon çalves -Bradley D , Ricci -Cabello I, et al. Framework and guid ance for impleme nting patient -reported 
outcomes in clin ical practic e: evidence, challenges and opportunities. Journal of comp arative effectiveness 
research. 2016;5(5):507 -519. 
12. Foster A,  Croot L, Brazier J, Ha rris J, O’Cathain A. The facilitators and ba rriers to implem enting patien t reported 
outcome measure s in organis ations delivering health related services: a systemati c review of reviews. Journal of 
patient -reported out comes. 2018;2(1) :46. 
13. Snyder CF, Aar onson NK, Choucair AK, et al. Implementing p atient -reported outcomes asse ssment in clinical 
practic e: a review of the options and considerations. Quality of Life Res earch. 2012;21(8):1305 -1314.  
14. Kotronoulas G, Kear ney N, Maguire R , et al . What is the va lue of the routine use of patient -reported o utcome 
measures toward improv ement of patient outcomes,  processes o f care, and health service outcomes in cancer 
care? A systematic review of controlled trials. Journal of c linical oncology . 2014; 32(14):1480 -1510 . 
15. Yang LY, Manhas DS, Howard AF, Olson R A. Patient -repor ted outcome u se in oncology: a systemat ic review of  
the impact on patient -clinician communication. Suppor tive Care in Cancer. 2018;26(1):41 -60. 
16. Greenhalg h J, Gooding K, Gibbons  E, et al. How d o patient reported outcome measures (PROMs) support 
clinicia n-patient communication and patient car e? A realist  synthesis. Journal of patient -reported outcomes. 
2018 ;2(1):42. 
17. Haines E, Dopp AR, Stover  A, Smitherma n A, Powell BJ, Birken SA. Improving ca re coordination for 
adolescents and young ad ults with cancer : building a bridge between needs and s ervices Heal th Policy & 
Management University of North Carolina at  Chapel Hill 2020  
18. Hertzog MA. Cons iderations in  determining sam ple siz e for pilot stud ies. Research in nursing & health. 
2008;31(2 ):180 -191. 
19. Chambers DA, Glasgow RE, Stange KC. The dynamic sust ainability framework: addressing the paradox of 
sustai nmen t amid ongoing change. Implementati on Science. 2013;8(1):117.  
20. Weine r BJ, Lewis CC, Stanick C, et al. Psychometric assessment of  three newly dev eloped implementation 
outcome measures.  Implementat ion Science. 2017;12(1):108.  
21. King N. Using templat es in the thematic analysis of text. Essential guide  to qualitative methods  in organization al 
research. 2004;2:256 -270. 
22. Dillman DA.  Mail and teleph one surveys: The total design method.  Vol 19: Wiley  New York; 1978.  
 
 10 Appendix  A: AYA NA -SB 
 
 
 
 
 
 11  
Need s Assessment  
1. INFORMATION  
 
I want more informatio n about:  Agree  Somewha t 
agree  
 I have 
enough 
information  
about this 
concern   Not sure  
1 My cancer  diagnosis       
2 The short -term side  effects of treatment      
3 The long -term side effects of treatme nt      
4 What will happen when treatment finishes      
5 My diseas e statu s        
6 My test results      
7 What to do if I have side effects from m y treatment       
8 How my genetics ma y or may not  have impacted my diagnosis and 
treatment      
 
2. CAN CER CARE TEAM  
 
I want my cancer treatment team to do  a better job of :  Agre e Somewhat 
agree  My cancer 
treatment 
team is doing 
this already  Not sure  
9 Respecting me as an individual, not jus t a cancer p atient     
10 Offering  to talk to me in private, with out my family or friends      
11 Explaining  what the y were  doing in a way I  can understand      
12 Encouraging  me to ask questions      
13 Engaging  me in decision -making about my treatment and respect ing my 
decisions      
14 Asking me  about my treatment conc erns      
 
3. PHYSICAL HEALTH  
 
I want more help  with : Agree  Som ewhat 
agree I have 
enough help  
with this 
concern  Not sure  
15 Managing pain      
16 Managing my medications      
17 Mana ging physica l side effects of treatment      
18 Managing feeling t ired/ fatigued      
 12 19 Managing loss of  walking abil ity      
 
4. EM OTIONAL  HEALTH  
 
I want more help with:  Agree   Somewhat 
agree  I have 
enough help  
with this 
concern  Not sure  
20 Feeling an xious or sca red     
21 Feeling depressed      
22 Having what I n eed to cope with my diagnosis      
23 Worrying abou t my cancer spre ading      
24 Worrying about my cancer returning or getting another type of cancer      
25 Worrying about how my family i s coping      
26 Coping with changes in my dating or romantic lif e     
27 Coping with changes in my relationships wi th my family mem bers     
28 Coping with changes in my relationships with friends      
29 Feeling independent      
30 Coping with changes  in my physi cal ability      
31 Coping with changes in my appeara nce     
32 Coping with not being able to do the sam e things as othe r peopl e my age      
33 Managing the emotional side effects of treatment      
34 Being able to make plans or think about the future      
 
5. SEXUAL & REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH  
 
I want more inf orma tion about:  Agree  Somewhat 
agree  I have 
enough 
information 
abou t this 
concern  Not sure  
35 My r isk of infertility and  my fertility preservation o ptions      
36 Treating  infertility an d other opti ons for having children in the future (i.e., 
sperm/egg  freezing, artificial insemination, in vitro fertili zation, surrogac y, 
adop tion, etc.)      
37 Sexuality and intimacy during cancer treatment      
38 Sexual side effects of my treatment (e. g., sexual d ysfunction)      
39 The effects of treatment on long -term hormone changes      
 
6. HEALTH BEHAVIORS & WEL LNESS  
 
I want mo re info rmation about:  Agree  Somewhat 
agree  I have 
enough Not sure  
 13 information  
about this 
concern  
40 Nutrition      
41 Exercise or p hysical activity      
42 Getting enough or better -quality sleep       
43 Smoking  or vaping during cancer t reatment      
44 Drug o r alcohol use during cancer treatment      
45 Spiritual  support or resource s      
46 Alternative therapies (herba l treatment,  acupuncture, massage therapy, 
meditation, etc.)      
 
7. WORK & EDUCATION  
 
I want more help with:  Agree  Somewhat 
agree  I have en ough 
help with this 
concern  Not sure  
47 Managing  my school life while going  through cancer treatment      
48 Manag ing my work life while going through cancer treatment      
 
8. PEER S UPPORT & PROGRAMMING  
 
I want more help with:  Agree Somewhat 
agre e I hav e enough 
help with this 
concern  Not sure  
49 Being able to spend time with p eople my own age      
50 Being able to  talk to peo ple my own age who have been through a similar 
cancer treatment experience      
51 Participating  in social  activities      
 
9. FINANCES & EVERYDAY NEEDS  
 
I want more help with:  Agree  Somewhat 
agree  I hav e enough 
help with this 
concern  Not sur e  
52 Payin g my bills      
53 Scholarship or loan repayment opti ons      
54 My health insurance (e.g., access/eligi bility, coverage , cost)      
55 Getting to and from my cancer care appointments      
56 Having chi ldcare during my cancer care appointmen ts      
57 Having stable housing      
 
 
 14 Please indicate anything  else you want help with, below:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Protocol vers ion: 
Template updated 9.24.14  15 Map of referral pathway s 

Protocol vers ion: 
Template updated 9.24.14  16 Implementation Guidance  
 
 
1 Consider a phased -in approach to implementation, fo r example, by implementing within one d isease group  and 
expand ing outwards  
2 Build buy -in by engaging in  implementation planning any provider groups who will interface with AYA NA -SB 
in practice  
3 Build buy -in among leadership, emphasizing the potential  benefits of A YA NA -SB for patient care , patient -
provider comm unication, provi der-provider communication,  and program development  
4 Provide education across disease groups and id entify champions within each disease group to facilitate referrals of 
AYAs t o AYA program  
5 Obtain a thorough und erstanding o f services and resources av ailable at your institution  prior to implementation, 
identifying gaps that may hinder follow -up on nee ds reported by AYAs on the needs assessment. For identified 
gaps, bolster ex isting service s or tailor the needs ass essment to a ddress the subset of needs that your institution has 
the capacity to address.  
6 Explicitly outline referral pathways for each f ollow-up domain, identifying primary contacts, current workflow, 
and best me thod of commun ication for service/resou rce provider s.  
7 Wher e possible, leve rage existing communication  and documentation channels in AYA NA -SB delivery. Modify 
communication and  documentation processes as needed to allow for, at a minimum, traceable doc umentation of 
follow -up on needs.  
8 Leverage staf f who are c urrently assessi ng and addressing the needs  of AYA patients at your institution and thus, 
have the necessary expertise  and time allocated towards these tasks.  
9 Identify approach for ensuring that services and resources are provid ed in a timel y manner on ce needs are 
identified.  
10 Use pilot tes ting to tailor AYA NA -SB to your institution, for example, to:  
• Make additio nal refinements to the needs assessment tool to tailor it to your institutio n  
• Determine f requency of needs assess ment administ ration that  makes sense in your institution ( e.g., 1 
month versus 3 months)  
• Map out changes needed to your institution’s EHR to facilitate systematic documentation  
Protocol vers ion: 
Template updated 9.24.14  17 Appendix B: Fidelity checklist  
 
 
 
 
Assessment ID  
(see top of assessment)   
_ _ _ _ _ _  
Assessment D ate  
(see timest amp at top of 
assessment)   
_ _ / _ _ / _ _ _ _  
Date I reviewed assessment  _ _ / _ _ / _ _ _ _  
Date i n which I initiated 
referral pathways   
_ _ / _ _ / _ _ _ _  
Referral pathwa ys initiated  
 Need #  Referral Pathway  
  
  
  
  
  
  
For needs ind icated by this 
AYA, I was c onfident about 
which referral pathways to 
initiate  Completely 
disagree  Disagree Neither agree 
nor disagree  Agree  Completely 
agree  
     
Protocol vers ion: 
Template updated 9.24.14  18 Append ix C: Postinte rvention AYA survey  
 
Acce ptability of Interventi on Measure (AIM)  
 Completely 
disagree  Disag ree Neither agree nor 
disagree  Agree  Completely agree  
1. The needs assessm ent meets my approval.       
2. The needs assessment  is appealing to me .      
3. I like the needs assess ment.       
4. I welcome the need s assessment.       
 
Intervention Appropriateness  Measure (IAM)  
 Completely 
disagree  Disagree  Neither agree 
nor disagree  Agree  Completely agree  
1. The needs assessment  seems fitting.       
2. The needs ass essment seem s suitable.       
3. The needs assessment seems a pplicable.       
4. The needs assessment  seems like a good match.       
 
Feasibility of Intervention Measure (FIM)  
 Completely 
disagree  Disag ree Neither ag ree 
nor disagree  Agree  Completely agr ee 
1. The needs assessment  seems implementable.       
2. The needs assessment  seems possible.       
3. The needs asses sment  seems doable.       
4. The needs assessment seems easy to use.       
 
Face  validity / content validi ty  
 Complet ely 
disagre e Disagree  Neith er agree 
nor disagree  Agree  Completely agree  
1. The needs assessment helped me to communicate my need s.       
2. The needs assessment was relevant to me.       
3. The needs assess ment included all needs t hat I was co ncerned 
about.       
 
Usability  
 Completely 
disagree  Disagree  Neither agree 
nor disagree  Agree  Completely agree  
Protocol vers ion: 
Template updated 9.24.14  19 1. I thin k that I would like to complete the needs assessment 
again.       
2. I found the nee ds assessment too complic ated.       
3. I think the needs assessment was easy to comp lete.      
4. I think I would need help to complete the needs assessm ent.       
5. I felt very confident completing the needs assessment.       
 
Usefulness  
 Completely 
disagree Disagre e Neither a gree 
nor disagre e Agree  Completely agree  
1. The needs assessment provided a helpful way for me to tell 
my doctors wha t I need.        
2. I did use or would use services and resources offe red to me 
by m y doctors based on the ne eds I checke d in the ne eds 
assessment.        
 
Care coordina tion/Needs met  
 Yes No 
1. I reported no needs on the needs assessment    
(skip to end)   
2. I received follow -up care for the needs I reported (e.g ., referrals, counseling, other service s or 
resourc es)     
(skip to end)  
 
3. Please indicate the type of 
follow -up care that you received. 
(check all that apply)     (1) communic ation from my primary oncology team  
(2) a phone call or visit from a social worker  
(3) a p hone call or visit from a  nurse navig ator 
(4) A referral to a s pecialist (e.g., fertility c ounselor, nutritionist, physical therapist, etc.)  
(5) educational materials  
(6) other  
 
 
 Completely 
disagree  Disagree  Neither agree 
nor disagree  Agre e Completely a gree 
4. The follow -up ca re I receive d addressed  my needs.         
 
Protocol vers ion: 
Template updated 9.24.14  20 Appendix D: Post intervention provider interview guide  
Introduction:   
Thank you for your in terest in this study . The aim of the  interview  is to help us understand your  experienc es implement ing 
the AYA Needs  Assessment and Ser vice Bridge  (NA-SB). During the interview, I wi ll ask questions about  NA-SB 
implementation including barriers you encounte red and strategies you used .  
 
Our discussion should last approximately one hour. All of y our responses will remain  confidentia l and will only be 
reported  in aggregate. You may choo se to stop the interview at any time, and there is no penalty to yo u or you r 
organization  for not completing the interview. Before we begin, we  would l ike to ask you r permission to audio rec ord our 
discussion for the purposes  of future analysis . Would it b e OK with you if I record this interview ? (If participant refuses 
to be aud io-recorded, the RA will take notes instead .) The interview will be transcri bed; however, your name or any 
personal  identifiers  will not b e associated wit h any of the notes. The aud io recordings will be deleted once the project is 
complete.   
 
Do you have a ny questions before we begin?  
Intervention Characteristics  
Evidence Strength  & Quality  
1. In a healthcare setting, inf luential sta keholders m ay include influ ential and we ll-respected c linicians, where as in 
an edu cation setting, this may include influential a nd well -respected teachers or educators.  
What do influential stakeholders th ink of the int ervention?  
o What do admini strative or other leade rs think of the intervention?  
Adaptability  
1. What kinds of changes or alte rations do you think you will need to make to the intervention so it will work 
effectively in your setting?  
o Do you think y ou will be abl e to make t hese changes? Why or why n ot? 
Complex ity 
1. How complica ted is the intervention?  
o Please consider the following a spects of the intervention: duration, scope, i ntricacy and number of steps 
involved and whether the intervention reflects a clear depart ure from pr evious practic es. 
Design Q uality & Pa ckaging  
1. What is your perception of the qual ity of the supporting materia ls, packaging, and bundling of the interventio n for 
implementation?  
o Why?  
Cost  
1. What costs will be incurred to implement the  intervention?  
Outer Setting  
Patient Ne eds & Resour ces 
1. How wel l do you think t he intervention will meet t he needs of the individuals s erved by your organization?  
o In what ways will the intervention meet their need s? E.g. improved access to services? Reduced  wait 
times? H elp with self -management?  Reduced tra vel time an d expense?  
2. How d o you think the individuals  served by your organization will respond to the intervention?  
3. What barrier s will the individuals served by  your organization face to participating in the interventi on? 
4. Have you heard storie s about the experiences  of participants  with the intervention?  
o Can you describe a specific stor y? 
Inner Setting  
Structural Characteristics  
1. How will the infrastructure of your organization (social architecture, age, ma turity, size, or physical layout) affec t 
the implem entation of  the interventio n? 
o How will the infrastruct ure facilitate/hinder impleme ntation of the intervention?  
o How will you wo rk around structural challenges?  
2. What kinds of infrastructure changes will be needed to acco mmodate the intervention?  
o Changes in scope of pr actice? Changes in formal policies? Changes  in information systems or el ectronic 
records systems? Other?  
o What kind of approvals will be needed? Who will need to be involved?  
Protocol vers ion: 
Template updated 9.24.14  21 o Can you describe the  process that will be needed to make th ese changes?  
Culture  
1. How do you think y our organization's culture (general beliefs, values, ass umptions that people embrace) will 
affect the implementation of the intervention?  
o Can you describe an example that highlig hts this?  
Impl ementation Climate  
1. This q uestion is l ikely to un cover topics to explore more within other s ub-constructs, but be attenti ve to other 
themes that may not be included in  your assessment.  
What is the general level of receptivity in your organizat ion to impleme nting the intervention?  
o Why? 
Compatib ility 
1. How w ell does the int ervention fit with your val ues and norms and the values and norms within the organization?  
o Values rela ting to interacting with individuals served by your organization, e.g. share d-decision mak ing 
vs. being more direct ive? 
o Values related to referring to out side vendor -based programs vs. providing services by in -house staff?  
2. How well does the inte rvention fi t with existing work processes and practices in your setting?  
o What are likel y issues or co mplications that may aris e? 
3. Can you d escribe how  the interventio n will be integrated into c urrent processes?  
o How will it  interact or conflict with current programs or  processes?  
Goals & Feedback  
1. This question can be framed in terms of the int ervention. For  example, in a healthcare  setting: Ho w does 
implementation of th e intervention align with o rganizational goals related t o preventing  
How does implementatio n of the in tervention align with other organizational goals?  
Readiness for Implementati on 
Leadership Engagement  
1. What level of involvement has leaders hip at your orga nization had so far with th e intervention?  
o Do they know about the intention to implement th e intervent ion? 
o Who are these leaders? How do attitudes of different leaders vary?  
o What  kind of suppo rt have they given you? C an you provi de specific  examples?  
2. What kind of support or actions can you expect from leaders i n your organization to help make im plementatio n 
successful?  
o Who are these leaders? How do attitudes of different leaders v ary? 
o Do they k now about the intention t o implement the interve ntion?  
o What kind  of support can you expect going forward? Can you provid e specific examples?  
o What types of barriers mi ght they create?  
Available Resources  
1. Do you expect to have sufficient resour ces to impleme nt and administer the int ervention?  
o [If Yes] Wha t resou rces are you counting on? Are there any other resources that you received, or would 
have liked to receive?  
o What  resources will be easy to procure?  
o [If no] What resources will not be avail able?  
2. How do y ou expect to procure nece ssary resour ces? 
o Who wi ll be i nvolved i n helping you get what is n eeded?  
o What challenges do you  expect to encounter?  
Characteristics of Indiv iduals  
Knowledge & Beliefs about the Intervention  
1. What do you know about the  intervention or its implementation?  
Self-efficacy  
1. How confide nt are you that you will be able to success fully implement the intervent ion? 
o What gives you that level of confidence ( or lack of confidence)?  
2. How confident do you think your colleagues feel abou t implementing  the intervention?  
o What g ives them th at level of  confidence (or lack of confidence)?  
Proces s 
Planning  
Protocol vers ion: 
Template updated 9.24.14  22 1. What have you done  (or what do you plan to do) to get a plan in place to implement the i ntervention?  
Engaging  
Opinion Leaders  
1. Who are the ke y influential individuals to get on boa rd with this  implementa tion?  
Key Stakeh olders  
1. Who are the key indi viduals to get on board with the intervention?  
o To encourage individuals to use the intervention? To  help with implementation?  
Intervention Participants  
1. How will you or your colleagues commun icate to the  individual s that are serve d by your organization abou t the 
intervention?  
o How will they participate in the intervention?  
o How will  they access the intervention?  
Reflecting & Evaluating  
1. What kind of informat ion do you pla n to collect as you imple ment the int ervention?  
o Which measures w ill you track? How will you  track them?  
o How wil l this in formation be used?  
2. How will you assess progres s towards implementation or intervention goals?  
o How will results of the eval uation be dist ributed to stakeholders?  
 
Protocol vers ion: 
Template updated 9.24.14  23 Appendix E : Aim 3 Int erview guide  
Introduction:   
Thank you for your interest in this study . The aim of the  interview  is to help us prepare  for the future scale -up and 
sustainability of the AYA Needs Assessment and Service Bridge  (NA-SB), and interventio n that we de veloped to assess 
and addre ss the needs of AYAs with c ancer . During the interview, I will ask questions about how NA -SB might be 
implemented and sustained  in your health system .   
 
Our discussion should la st approximate ly 30 minutes . Your respo nses will he lp us under stand how NA-SB components or 
its implement ation might need to be modified to address the needs of diverse health syst ems. All of your responses will 
remain confidential and will only be reporte d in aggregate . You may choose to stop the intervie w at any ti me, and there is  
no penalty to yo u or your organization  for not completing the interview. Before we begin, we  would li ke to ask your 
permission to audio record our discussion for the purposes  of future analys is. Would it be OK with y ou if I reco rd this 
interview ? (If part icipant refuses to be audio -recorded, the RA will take notes instead .) The interview will be transcrib ed; 
however, your name or any personal identifiers will not be associated wi th any of the notes. The audio recordin gs will be 
deleted once  the project is complete.   
 
Do you have any  questions before we begin?  
 
YEAR ONE : Explor ation  
[Summarize progress of NA-SB implementation and outcomes in the North Carolina Cancer Hospital  (NCCH ), as it 
relates to the Exploration sta ge.] 
I’d lik e to begin by discussing how AYAs ’ needs a re assessed and addressed at your in stitution .  
1. What happens when an AYA is d iagnosed a t your inst itution?  
 
Prompts:  How are new AYA patients identified? How are their needs id entified  and addressed?  Are any 
forma lized needs  assessments or other tools used?  Is a refe rral to a provider with AYA expertise automatically 
triggered?  
 
2. Considerin g what I’ve told you about NA-SB’s implementation and outcomes so far at NCC H,  
What are y our thoughts on the appro priateness (&acceptabil ity & feasibilit y) of NA-SB in the context of your 
health system ? How do you see this  as an opportunity? If not, what are the challenges in your health system that 
might influence the implementa tion of this i ntervention?  
 
YEAR TWO : Prepar ation  & Implementa tion 
[Summarize progress of NA-SB implement ation and outcomes at NCCH  to date, as it relates to the Preparation & 
Impl ementation stage.]  
I’d like to start by talking about the potential barriers /facilitators as you consider what  preparing for  the implement ation of 
NA-SB might involve in your health  system .  
1. What activities might be pursued in your health system in prepara tion to implement NA-SB?  
 
- Examples: Training, financing, hiring, reorgani zing, obtainin g other resources, de -implementing pr evious 
approaches  
- Other  prompts: whether these activ ities relate to different patient population  / care setting and delivery  / policy 
context  / external environment associated with their health system  
 
2. Are there parti cular barriers or facilit ators that y ou have in mind as you think through how you would pre pare to 
implement NA-SB?  
 
- Probe on why the participant s perceive them as  barriers or facilitators  
- Other prompts: patient population / care setting  and delivery / policy context / extern al environme nt  
- E.g., how d id your health system respond to chan ges (new practices or interventions) , if any ?  
 
Protocol vers ion: 
Template updated 9.24.14  24 3. As you consider the experie nce of NCCH  as I’ve described it, how do you think implementation might comp are 
in your he alth system ? 
 
Prompts: Previous exper ience of im plementing a new  practice/intervention into  the system?  
 
4. How would the  organization /health system  proceed if they were  to implement this new intervention ? 
 
Prompts: What are some next immediate steps?  How wou ld the organization deter mine who is in charge o f what  
task?  How  does this differ from NCCH ’s experience? How? Why?  
 
YEAR THREE : Sustain ment  
[Summarize progress of NA-SB implementation and outcomes at NCCH  to date, as it relates to the Sustai nment stage.]   
1. How would your health sy stem approac h sustainin g NA-SB? 
 
2. What d o you think the organizatio n could  do prior to imp lementation and/or during implementation to   make i t 
sustainable ? 
 
Prompts: When should the organization start thinking about sustainment?  What process do you think i s 
necessary?  What resou rces do you thin k are needed  to make this i ntervention sustainable ? 
 
Those are all of the questions that I had planned  for today. Is there anything else that you want to share regarding  the 
intervention  or its scalability ?  
 
Thank yo u so much  for your time !  
 
Protocol vers ion: 
Template updated 9.24.14  25 Appendix F:  Recruitment flyer  
 
 
 
 
 
 
AYA EXPERTISE  NEEDED  FOR RESEARCH STUDY!  
 
Improving Care Coordination for AYA s with Cancer : Implementing a Bridge Between Needs and Services  
 
What is the  study ? 
We dev eloped  a tool to help con nect adolesc ents and yo ung adults (AYAs ) with cancer to the servic es and resources they 
need. We need input from AYAs to make sure we create d a tool that works for you . 
  
What would you have to do ? 
If you agree to par ticipate in th is research effort : 
 
1. An A YA social wo rker will send you a MyChar t message with a link to a survey  that assesses your needs. The 
survey will take approximat ely 1 5 minu tes and you will receive a $15 Ama zon gift card for completing it.  
2. Based on  the needs you  report in the survey , an AYA social worker will  reach out to yo u about serv ices and 
resources that might help meet your needs.  
3. One month later, you will receive a l ink to a 2nd survey asking you about your experience with the first survey,  
and the follow -care you received. The s urvey will take approxi mately 1 5 minute s and you will receive a $1 5 
Ama zon gift card for completing it.  
 
If you choose to partic ipate, y ou ca n opt out of the study  at any time. Everything you say will be kept confiden tial; 
protecti ng your privacy is our priority ! 
 
How  do you sign up?  
Tell your AYA soci al wo rker (Lauren Lux or Catherine Swift) that you are interested in participating and th ey wi ll send 
you the survey link.  
 
Please do not hesitate to reach out to me wit h any question s or concerns you have!  
Emily Haines,  PhD  
ehaines@ wakehealth .edu 
(336) 906 -3395  
Wake Forest School of Medicine  
 
Protocol vers ion: 
Template updated 9.24.14  26 Social Sciences and Health Policy  Append ix G: Fact Sheet (AYAs)  
 
  
Improving care coordination for adolescents and young adults with ca ncer: 
implementing a brid ge between n eeds and se rvices  
Informed Consent Form to Participate  in Research  
Sarah Birken, PhD , Principal Investigator  
 
Summary  
You a re invited to participate in a research study. The purpose of this research is to test an intervention designed 
to identify your canc er needs and connect you with services that address t hose needs .  You are invited to be in 
this study because you are betwe en the ages of 1 8-39 and have been diagnosed with cancer . Your participation 
in this research will involve completing 2 online survey s over the course of 1 month; each should take about 15 
minutes to complete .  
 
Participation in this study will involve identifying your cancer needs so that your providers can connect you 
with services that might address them .  All research studies involv e some risks.  A risk to this study that you 
should b e aware of is potential distress related to answering questions about your cancer needs .  You may 
benefit  from participation in this study  through being connected to services that are aligned with your n eeds.   
 
Your participation in this study is voluntar y.  You do not have to participate in this study if you do not want to . 
You will not lose any services, benefits , or rights you would normally hav e if you choose not to participate .  
 
The remainder of th is form contains a more  complete description of this study. Please read this description 
carefully. You can ask any questio ns if you need help deciding  whether to join the study. The person in charge 
of this study is Sarah Birken , PhD . If you have question s, suggestions, or conc erns regarding this study or y ou 
want to withdraw from the study his/her contact informa tion is: sbirken@wakehealth .edu .  
If you have any questions, suggestions or concerns about your ri ghts as a volunteer in this research, contact the 
Institutional Review Board at 336 -716-4542 or the Research Subject Advocat e at Wake Forest at 336 -716-8372 . 
 
Introductio n 
You are invited to be in a research study.  Research studies are designed to gain sci entific knowledge that may 
help other people in the f uture. You are being asked to take p art in this study because you are an adolescent or 
young adult with cancer.  Your participation is voluntary. Please take your time in making your decision as to 
whethe r or not you wish to participate. Ask your study doct or or the study staff  to explain an y  words or 
information contained   in this informed consent document that yo u do not understand. You may also discuss the 
study with your friends and family.  
 
Protocol vers ion: 
Template updated 9.24.14  27 Why Is T his Study Being Done?  
The purpose of this research st udy is to get feedback from adolesce nts and young adults on a new intervention 
to assess and address their cance r nee ds.  
 
 
How Many People Will Take Part in the Study?  
25-50 people will take part in thi s study . 
 
What Is Involved in the Study?  
 
1. You will re ceive a link via a MyChart message t o complete an online survey (needs assessment). This needs 
assessment will ask yo u about your cancer needs and will take approximately 15 minutes to complete.  
2. Your so cial worker will review your needs assessm ent with yo u during your next visit and ask you  if you would 
like to be referred to services to address your needs.  
3. One month l ater, you will receive a link to complete a second, follow -up survey. This survey will  ask you about 
your experience completing the needs a ssessment and reviewing it with your  social worker and will take 
approximately 15 minutes to complete.  
 
How Long Will I Be in the Study?  
You will be in the study for about one month.  
 
You can stop part icipating at any time. If you decide to stop particip ating in the study we encourage you to talk 
to the investigators or study staff first to learn about any potential he alth or safety consequences.  
 
WHAT ARE THE RISKS OF THE STUDY ? 
The ri sk of harm or dis comfort that may happen as a result of taking part in  this research study is not expected  
to be more than in daily life or from routine physical or psychological examinat ions or tests.  You should 
discuss the risk of being in this study wi th the study staf f. 
 
There is a slight risk of a breach of confidentia lity.  We will do our best to protec t you r confidential 
information.  Efforts, such as coding research records, keepi ng research records secure and allowing only 
authorized people to hav e access to resea rch records, will be made to keep your information sa fe. 
 
Are There Benefits to Taking Pa rt in the Study?  
Your participation may result in you being more efficiently conn ected to services that address your needs.  We 
hope the information le arned from this s tudy will benefit other people in the future.  
 
What O ther Choices Are There?  
You do not h ave to be in this study to receive referrals to address your cancer needs . You sh ould talk to your 
social worker  about all the choices you have.  
Protocol vers ion: 
Template updated 9.24.14  28  
What Are the Costs?  
All study costs, related directly to the study, will be paid for by the study. Costs for your regular medical care, 
which are not related to this study, will be your own responsibility.  
 
WILL YOUR  RESEARCH RECORDS BE CONFIDENTIAL ? 
 
The results of this rese arch study may be presented at scientific or medical meetings or published in scientific 
journals.  Your identity and/or your personal health information will not be disc losed unless it is authori zed by 
you, required by law , or necessary to protect the saf ety of yourself or others.  T here is always some risk  that 
even de -identified information  might be re -identified.  
 
Participant information may be provided to Federal and  other regulatory agencies  as required.  The Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA), for e xample, may inspect research records and learn your i dentity if this study falls 
within i ts jurisdiction.  
 
 
Will You Be Paid for Participating?  
You will be paid $15 for each of two surveys  you com plete  (for a total of $30) .  
 
Who is Sponsoring this Study?  
This study is being sponsored by an institutional tra ining grant from the National Cancer  Institute . The sponsor 
is providing money or other support to Wake Forest Univer sity Health Sciences to help conduct this study. The 
researchers do not, however, hold  a direct financial interest in the sponsor or the pr oduct being studied.  
 
What About My Health Information?  
In this research study, any new information we collect from y ou about you r health or behaviors is considered 
Protected Health Information . The info rmation we will collect for this research study inclu des information 
about your physical,  psychosocial, and practical needs.  
 
We will make every effort to keep your Prot ected Health  Information private. We will store records of your 
Protected Health Infor mation in a cabinet in a locked office or on a passwo rd protected computer.  
 
Your person al health information and information that identifies you (“your health informati on”) may be given 
to others during and after the study. This is for reasons such as to  carry out the study, to determine the results of 
the study, to make sure the study is be ing done correctly, to provide required reports and to get approval for new 
produ cts.   
 
Some of the people, agencies and businesses that may receive and use your heal th information are the research 
sponsor; representati ves of the sponsor assisting with th e research; investigators at other sites who are assisting 
with the research; cen tral lab oratories, reading centers or analysis centers; the Institutional Review Board ; 
representatives of Wake Forest University Health Sc iences and North Carolina Baptist Ho spital; representatives 
from government agencies such as the Food and Drug Admini stration  (FDA)  or the Office of Human Research 
Protocol vers ion: 
Template updated 9.24.14  29 Protections (OHRP) , the Department of H ealth and Human Services (DHHS) and similar agencies in other 
countries.    
 
Some of these  people, agencies and businesses may further disclose your health information. If  disclos ed by 
them, your health information may no longer be covered by federal or sta te privacy regulations.  Your health 
information may be disclosed if required by law. You r health information may be used to create information 
that does not directly ide ntify yo u. This information may be used by other researchers. You will not be directly  
identified in any publication or presentation that m ay result from this study unless the re are photographs or 
recorded media which are identifiable.  
 
If required by law or court  order, we might also have to share your Protected Health Information with a j udge, 
law enforcement officer, government agencies, o r others. If your Protected Health I nformation is shared with 
any of these groups it m ay no longer be protected by fe deral or  state privacy rules . 
 
Any Protected Health Information collected from you in this study that is maintained in the research records  
will be kept for at least six years  after the study is finished. At that time any research information not already i n 
your m edical record will either be destro yed or it will be de -identified . You will n ot be able to obtain a copy of 
your Protected Health Information in the research records until all activities in the study are completely 
finished.  
 
You can tell Emily H aines  that you want to take away your permission to use and share your Protected Healt h 
Information at any time by sending a letter to this  address:  
 
Emily Haines  
377 McGowan Lane  
Chapel Hill, NC, 27516  
 
However, if you take away permission to use your Protected Health Information you will not be able to be in 
the study any longer. We will  stop collecting any more information about you, but any information we have 
already coll ected can still be used for the purposes of the research study.  
 
If you choose to participate in this study, your medical record at Wake Forest University Baptist Medi cal Center 
will indicate that you are enrolled in a c linical trial.  Information about th e research and any medications or 
devices you are being given as a participant may also be included in your medical record.  This part of the 
medical record will only be available to people who have authorized access to your medical record .  If you are 
not a patient at this Medical Center, a medical record will be created for you any way to ensure that this 
important information is available to doctors in case of an emer gency.  
 
A description of this clinical trial will be available on http://www.ClinicalTrials.gov , as required by U.S. Law.  
This website will not include information that can identify you.  At most, the website will include a summary of 
the results.  You can searc h this Web site at any time.  
 
What A re My Rights as a Research Study Participant?  
You may choose not to take part o r you may leave the study at any time. If you decide to stop participating in 
the study we encourage you to talk to t he investigators or stud y staff.  The investigators also hav e the right to 
stop your participation in the study at any time. This could be because  it is in your best medical interest or 
Protocol vers ion: 
Template updated 9.24.14  30 because the entire study has been stopped . Information about you may be removed from the study  data and 
could be used for future r esearch or shared with other researchers without additional consent from you.  
 
By continuing, I agree to take part in this study. I authorize the use and disclosure of  my health information as 
described in this consent a nd authorization form.  I have had a  chance to ask questions about being in this study 
and have those questions answe red.   By taking part in the study , I am not releasing or agreeing to release the 
investigator, the sponsor, the institution or its agents from liability for negligence.  
 
WHOM  DO I CALL IF I HA VE QUESTIONS OR PROBLEMS ? 
For questions about the study or in t he event of a  research -related injury, contact the study investigator, Name  at 
telepho ne number (also include after hours number) . 
 
The Ins titutional Review Board (IRB) is a g roup of people who review the research to protect your rights. If you 
have a ques tion about yo ur rights as a research participant, or you would like to discuss problem s or concerns, 
have questions or want to offer input,  or you want to obtain additional in formation, you should contact the 
Chairman of the IRB at (336) 716 -4542  or the Re search Subjec t Advocate at (336) 716 -8372 . 
 
Protocol vers ion: 
Template updated 9.24.14  31 Social Sciences and Health Policy  Appendix H: Fact Sheet (Providers, Aim 3 ) 
 
  
 
 
Improving care coordinatio n for adolescents and young adults with cancer: 
implementing a bridge between needs and services  
Informed Consent Form to Participate in Research  
Sarah Birken, PhD , Principal Investigator  
Emily Haines, PhD , Co-investigator  
 
Summary  
You are invited to part icipate in a research study. The purpose of this research is to seek feedback on an  
intervention designed to assess and address the needs  of adolescents and young adults (AYAs) with cancer: the 
AYA Needs Assessment & Service Bridge (NA -SB).  You are invite d to be in this study because you a provider 
serving AYAs with cancer . Your participation in this research will involve participating in a 60-minute 
telephon e interview.   
 
Participation in this study will asking you questions about how NA -SB might be impl emented at your 
institution .  All research studies involve some risks.  A risk to this study that you should be aware of is a slight 
risk of breach in confid entiality, although we will take measures to protect your privacy . You will not directly 
benefit fr om your participation in this study, but your feedback on NA -SB will help us to refine it so that it 
better addresses the needs of AYAs a nd cancer care provi ders.    
 
Your participation in this study is voluntary.  You do not have to participate in this st udy if you do not want to. 
You will not lose any services, benefits , or rights you would normally hav e if you choose not to participate .  
 
The remainder of t his form contains a more  complete description of this study. Please read this description 
carefully . You can ask any questions if you need help deciding  whether to join the study. The person in charge 
of this study is Sarah Birken, Ph D. If you have questions, suggestions, or concerns regarding this study or you 
want to withdraw from the study his/her co ntact information is: sbirken@wakehealth.edu .  
If you have any questions, suggestions or co ncerns about your rights as a volunteer in this research, contact the 
Institutional Review Board at 336 -716-4542 or the  Research Subject Advocat e at Wake Forest at 336 -716-8372 . 
 
Introduction  
You are invited to be in a research study.  Research studies are designed to gain scientific knowledge that may 
help other people in the future. You are being asked to take part in thi s study because you are an adolescent or 
young adult with cancer.  Your participation is voluntary. Please take your time in making your d ecision as to 
whether or not you wish to participate. Ask the study staff  to explain any  words or information contain ed  in 
Protocol vers ion: 
Template updated 9.24.14  32 this informed consent document that you do not understand. You may also discuss the study with your friends 
and family.  
 
Why Is Th is Study Being Done?  
The purpose of this research study is to get feedback from providers on a  new intervention to asse ss and address 
the needs of AYAs with cancer.  
 
 
How Many People Will Take Part in the Study?  
8 people will take part in this study . 
 
Wha t Is Involved in the Study?  
 
You will participate in a 60 -minute telephone interview. During this interview, we will as k you  questions about 
your thoughts on NA -SB and how it might be  implemented at you institut ion.  
 
As part of this research study, you w ill be audiotaped .  This is being for the purposes of transcription.  You 
understand that you may request the recording be stopped at any time during the course of the research 
study.  You can also withdraw your consent t o use and disclose the audiotape befo re it is used. You should  also 
understand that  you will not be able to inspect, review, or approve the audiotapes befor e they are used in this 
study.  
 
Please choose one of the following regarding the use and disclosure  of the audiotape used in this resear ch study:  
 
_____ I would like the audiotapes  of me to be destroyed once their use in this study is finished.  
 
____ The audiotapes of me can be kept for use in future studies provided they are kept secure and any future 
study will be reviewed by an IRB.    I understand that I will not be able to inspect, review or approve their future 
use. 
 
 
How Long Will I Be in the Study?  
You will be in the study for about one day  (i.e., the time it takes to participate in 60 -minute inte rview).   
 
You can stop participating at any time. If you decide to stop participating in the study  we encourage you to talk 
to the investigators or study st aff first to learn about any potential health or safety consequences.  
 
WHAT ARE THE RISKS OF THE STUDY ? 
The risk of harm or discomfort th at may happen as a result of taking part in this research stu dy is not expected 
to be more than in daily life or from r outine physical or psychological examinations or tests.  You should 
discuss the risk of being in this study with the study staff.  
 
Protocol vers ion: 
Template updated 9.24.14  33 There is a slight risk of a breach of confidentiality.  We will do our best to protect you r confidential 
information.  Effort s, such as coding research records, keeping research records secure and allowing only 
authorized people to have access to research record s, will be made to keep your information safe.  
 
Are There Benefits to Taking Part in the Study?  
There are no expected d irect benefits from taking part in the study.  
 
What Other Choices Are There?  
You do not have to be in this study to use NA -SB at your in stitution .  
 
What Are the Costs?  
All study costs, re lated directly to the study, will be paid for by the study. Costs f or your regular medical care, 
which are not related to this study, will be your own responsibility.  
 
WILL YOUR  RESEARCH RECORDS BE CONFID ENTIAL ? 
 
The results of this research study may be p resented at scientific or medical meetings or published in scientif ic 
journals.  Your identity and/or your personal health information will not be disclosed unless it is authorized by 
you, required by law , or necessary to protect the safety of yourself or others.  T here is always some risk that 
even de -identified informat ion might be re -identified.  
 
Interview recordings from this study will be stored securely and only shared among members of the study tea m. 
They will be stored for approximately 6 months to allow for transcription and then permanently deleted. Note 
that, d uring interviews, participants can choose to stop the recording at any time.  
 
Participant information may be provided to Federal and oth er regulatory agencies as required.  The Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA), for example, may inspect research records and learn your identity if this study falls 
within its jurisdiction.  
 
 
Will You Be Paid for Participating?  
You will not be paid for parti cipating.  
 
Who is Sponsoring this Study?  
This study is being sponsored by Wake Forest School of Medicine . The sponsor is providing money or other 
support to help conduct this study. The researchers do not, however, hold a direct financial interest in the 
spon sor or the product being studied.  
 
Protocol vers ion: 
Template updated 9.24.14  34 What About My Health Information?  
In this research study, any new information we  collect from you  about your health or behaviors is considered 
Protected Health Information . The information we will collect for this research study includes  information 
about your physical, psychosocial, and practical needs.  
 
We will make every effort to  keep your Protected Health Information private. We will store records of your 
Protected Health Information in a cabinet in a locked o ffice or on a password protected computer.  
 
Your personal health information and information that identifies you (“your h ealth information”) may be given 
to others during and after the study. This is for reasons such as to carry out the study, to determin e the results of 
the study, to make sure the study is being done correctly, to provide required reports and to get approva l for new 
products.   
 
Some of the people, agencies and businesses that may receive and use your health information are the research 
spon sor; representatives of the sponsor assisting with the research; investigators at other sites who are assisting 
with th e research; central laboratories, reading centers or analysis centers; the Institutional Review Board; 
representatives of Wa ke Forest Uni versity Health Sciences and North Carolina Baptist Hospital; representatives 
from government agencies such as the Food and Drug Administration (FDA)  or the Office of Human Research 
Protections (OHRP) , the Department of Health and Human Service s (DHHS) and similar agencies in other 
countries.    
 
Some of these people, agencies and businesses may further disclose your health information. If disclosed by 
them, your health information may no longer be covered by federal or state privacy regulations.   Your health  
information may be disclosed if required by law. Your health information may be used to create information 
that does n ot directly identify you. This information may be used by other researchers. You will not be directly 
identified in any publ ication or pr esentation that may result from this study unless there are photographs or 
recorded media which are identifiable.  
 
If required by law or court order, we might also have to share your Protected Health Information with a judge, 
law enforcement o fficer, gover nment agencies, or others. If your Protected Health Information is shared with 
any of these groups it m ay no longer be protected by federal or state privacy rules . 
 
Any Protected Health Information collected from you in this study that is main tained in the  research records 
will be kept for at least six years after the study is finished. At that time any research informatio n not already in 
your medical record will either be destro yed or it will be de -identified.  You will not be able to obtain a copy of 
your Protected Health Information in the research records until all activities in the study are completely 
finished.  
 
You c an tell Emily Haines  that you want to take away your permission to use and share your Protected Health 
Information at any ti me by sending  a letter to this address:  
 
Emily Haines  
377 McGowan Lane  
Chapel Hill, NC, 27516  
 
However, if you take away permission  to use your Protected Health Information you will not be able to be in 
the study any longer. We will stop collecting any mo re informatio n about you, but any information we have 
already collected can still be used for the purposes of the research study.  
Protocol vers ion: 
Template updated 9.24.14  35  
If you choose to participate in this study, your medical record at Wake Forest University Baptist Medical Center 
will indicat e that you ar e enrolled in a clinical trial.  Information about the research and any medications or 
devices you are being given as a  participant may also be included in your medical record.  This part of the 
medical record will only be available to people who have auth orized access to your medical record .  If you are 
not a patient at this Medical Center, a medical record will be create d for you anyway to ensure that this 
important information is available to doctors in case of an emergency.  
 
A description of this clinic al trial will be available on http://www.ClinicalTrials.gov , as required by U.S. Law.  
This website will not include information that can identify you.  At most, the website will include a summary of 
the result s.  You can search this Web site at any time.  
 
What Are My Rights as a Research Study Participant?  
You may choose not t o take part or you may leave the study at any time. If you decide to stop participating in 
the study we en courage you to talk to t he inve stigators or study staff.  The investigators also have the right to 
stop your participation in the study at any time. T his could be because  it is in your best medical interest or 
because the entire study has been stopped. Information about you may be remov ed from the study data and 
could be used for future research or shared with other researchers without additional consen t from you.  
 
By continuing, I agree to take part in this study. I authorize the use and disclosure of my h ealth information as 
described in this consent and authorization form.  I have had a chance to ask questions about being in this study 
and have those questions answered.   By taking part in the study , I am not releasing or agreeing to release the 
investiga tor, the sponsor, the instituti on or its agents from liability for negligence.  
 
WHOM DO I CALL IF I HA VE QUESTIONS OR PROBLEMS ? 
For questions about th e study or in the event of a research -related injury, contact the study investigator, Sarah 
Birken, PhD  at (919) 357 -2662  or after -hours at (336)906 -3395.  
. 
 
The Institutional Review Board (IRB) is a group of people who review the research to protect your  rights. If you 
have a question about your rights as a research participant, or you would like to discuss problems or concerns, 
have ques tions or want to offer input, or you want to obtain additional information, you should contact the 
Chairman of the IRB at (336) 716 -4542  or the Research Subject Advocate at (336) 716 -8372 . 
 
You will be given a copy of this co nsent form.  
 
 
 