 
 
 
 
Non-Damaging Photothermal Therapy of Non -exudative Age 
Related Macular Deg eneration  
Study Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 August 15, 20 18 
1 
 
Title:  
Non-Damaging Photothermal  Therapy of Non-exudative Age Related Macular 
Degeneration  
 
Introduction  
 
Age Related Macular Degeneration (AMD) is the leading cause of blindness 
and visual disability among patients exceeding 60 years of age in the western 
hemisphere. The clinical presentation of AMD ranges from soft drusen in 
patients with normal visua l acuit y to geographic atrophy or subfoveal 
choroidal neovascularization (CNVs), disciform scarring and eventually legal 
blindness.1  
 Approximately 10 to 15% of patients with AMD develop  severe visual 
loss due to geographic atrophy characterized by the atrophy of retinal pigment 
epithelium, choriocapillaris and outer retina or due to exudative AMD. 
Nonexudative AMD is responsible for about 25% of the severe visual loss and 
the remaining i s caused by neovascular AMD2. Fortunately, with the 
introduction of pharmacological anti-VEGF treatment s to neovascular AMD , 
exudative AMD can be effectively treated, thereby maintaining good visual 
acuity for extended period of time . However, there is sti ll no treatment for 
nonexudative AMD other than vitamin supplementation , and patients 
inevitably progress to ad vanced disease and associated visual loss.3 
 The cumulative incidence of new exudative or atrophic lesions in  
eyes initially free of advanced  AMD has been estimated as 8.6% at one year, 
16.4% at two years and 23.5% at three years .4 The five-year risk of CNV 
occurrence in the fellow eye of patients  who have already experienced CNV in 
the first eye, varies from  7% to 87%  depending on the coexiste nce of four 
main risk factors  (presence of five or more drusen, focal hyperpigmentation, 
one or  more large dr usen and systemic hypertension) . 
Owing to the risk of vision  loss associated with the presence of large 
volume of  drusen, retinal laser treatment was proposed to prevent 
progression to advanced  AMD. Several clinical trials have been conducted to 
test the effect of laser photocoagulation on reabsorption of  drusen  in the 
macula.5-12 Laser burns were applied  to the retina, either directly to the drusen 
or following predefined patterns. Argon, krypton,  dye or diode lasers have 
been used with varying levels of energy  (ranging  from sub-visible to faint or 
intense whitish retinal lesions).   The assumption was tha t phagocytic cells or 
macrophages clearing the laser -induced debris in the retina, RPE and choroid 
could  also reduce or eliminate the drusen . It was als o speculated that laser 
could trigger release of cytokines and growth factors from the RPE , which 
may ac t on drusen regress ion.  
A systematic review of  all clinical trials using laser treatment of drusen 
demonstrat ed that there was a significant reduction of drusen over time . 
However there was a lso found a slight  increase in the incidence of CNV and 
geographic atrophy , albeit not statistically significant  3. This increase could be 
related to the fact that conventional photocoagulation used in most of these 
trials  damaged the Bruch’s membrane,  consequently in ducing CNV. 
Therefore, a non -damaging laser treatment strategy might be able  to induce 
drusen regression without the known side effects of photocoagulation. This 
hypothesis is supported by the fact that  “subthreshold” laser treat ments of the  
drusen resulted in their reduction with much fewer side ef fects than with 
2 
 
conventional visible burns : 6 out of 63 eyes treated with visible burns 
developed CNV within 3 months of treatment, while no such CNV was 
reported for subthreshold treatment . Despite the drusen reduction, the 
treatment did not slow the prog ression to geographic atrophy or to CNV, 
compared to observation in this trial. This  might be due to very small number 
(a few tens) of laser spots  applied to the macula . Our approach might rectify 
this deficiency by applying higher density of the treatment : 500 non-damaging 
spots . 11-12 
Micropulse laser photocoagulation avoid s the excessive heat ing which  
causes visible burns, tissue necrosis, and related collateral effects13, while 
providing similar clinical benefits as  conventional laser coagulation .14 -19 
However, the lack of a reliable titration for every patient and absence of visible 
endpoint makes it difficult for the physician to (a) know which retinal areas 
have been treated and (b) to ensure the adequate amount of laser energy  in 
the treatment . In addition, the dense coverage of the retina with the sub -
visible laser exposures typically requires more than 500 spots in the macula, 
which is difficult to accomplish without pattern scanning laser. These issues 
prevented acceptance of this technology in clinical practice . 
We have developed the titration protocol for PASCAL laser , which 
ensures that pulse energy is within the range of clinic al efficacy, but does not 
exceed the tissue damage threshold 21 in every patient. This protocol, called 
EndPoint Management, has been recently tested in a clinical trial, which 
demonstrated its safety and efficacy in treatment of Central Serous 
Retinopathy22 using 30% energy settings. The trial demonstrated lack of  
tissue damage and excellent tissue response to the treatment, even after 
multiple retreatments. The average retreatment period in this trial was found 
to be 6 months.   
We propose to use the same  laser parameters for treatment of the 
macula in patients with early AMD to prevent drusen growth and 
advancement of the disease into geographic atrophy or neovascularization.  
 
AIMS OF THE STUDY  
 
1. To determine whether photothermal  therapy (PTT) of the macula with 
EpM® reduces the volume of drusen in the macula.  
2. To determine whether PTT decrease s the  incidence of advanced AMD 
(neovascular AMD or geographic atrophy).  
 
The primary efficacy outcome measure will be the reduction in drusen 
volume in the central 3mm circle over 12, 18, 24  months in subjects  treated 
with PTT , compared to observation alone .    
The secondary efficacy  outcome s after the month 12, 18, 24  of follow up will 
be: 
• Functional outcome :  
▪ Mean change in visual acuity in both groups . 
• Anatomical outcome:  
• Reduction of drusen growth ; 
• Prevention of  neovascular AMD ; 
• Prevention of geographic atrophy based on OCT and 
FAF.   
3 
 
• Safety Assessments . Safety of the treatment  will be assessed for 
ocular adverse event incidence (AEs) and serious AEs (SAEs), 
based on the reports of the patients  and examination during or 
between visits until  the month 24 of follow up.  After 24 months, 
subjects will then be followed for an additional 3 years for 
observation  
• Serious adverse events  (SAEs) will be monitored continuously.  
 
 
STUDY METHODS  
 
Design:  
 
• Prospective, Randomized Clinical Trial (RCT).  
• 24 months with an additional 3 year observation follow up period . 
Subjects will be seen once a year and undergo non -invasive testing.  
• Total patient recruitment 56 patients.   
• Number of arms: 2 arms.  
• Number of patients:  28 patients in each arm.  
 
Patient Recruitment  
 
1. Initial Assessment   
 
The study will e nroll 56 eyes in total. Patients will be initially assessed 
as part of their standard management and , if fulfilling all the inclusion criteria , 
will be referred to a Study Investigator.  
At the initial assessment, the investigator will confirm that the patient 
has satisfied the eligibility criteria stated in the Study Protocol (SPR) and the 
study will be discussed in full with the study participa nt (SP). If interested in 
participating, the SP will be given a written informed consent to take home for 
further consideration. The patient will have a minimum of 24 hours to decide 
whether or not to take part in the study .   All study procedures , will be  
explained to the SP by the investigator or staff member. The nature of the 
study  will be also explained to the SP together with hazards of the study 
procedures, including any possible adverse events. The  SP will be informed 
that he or she is free to termi nate participation in the study for any reason.   
Any patient unwilling to participate at this stage will be managed as 
part of the appropriate routine eye care pathway.  
The study patient will undergo the Examination Procedures at the 
Baseline visit. The d ata from these tests will be used for study data analysis.  
 
2. Examination Procedures at Baseline and Follow -up visits  
 
(1)  ETDRS best corrected visual acuity.   
(2) Slit lamp biomicroscopy : dilated fundus examination with 78D Volk lens, 
intraocular pressure by Goldmann applanation  tonometry . 
(3) Spectral domain OCT ( Cirrus SD-OCT ): Macular/macular cube/Volume 
scan & a verage central retina thickness and Drusen volume.  
(4) Fundus photography and autofluorescence . 
 
4 
 
The treatment will be randomis ed at this stage, and the SP will be 
allocated to arm A  (treat)  or arm B  (observe) . The 56 eyes will be randomly 
allocated to each of the two study arms, 28 in each arm. The SP will be given 
a trial number, and the treatment record will be coded.  For patients where 
both eyes meet eligibility criteria both eyes will be enrolled with the Right Eye 
randomly assigned to active treatment arm or sham arm, with the Left Eye 
assigned to the oppo site arm.  
 
3. Treatment Visit:  
 
The SP will undergo treatment within 14 days after the examinations are 
performed.  
 
Patient -eligibility  
 
Inclusion criteria:  
 
1. Older than 60  years of age.  
2. Male or female patients with nonexudative AMD with a drusen volume of of 
at least 0.03mm3 on OCT with in the central  3mm circle  centered  on the fovea .  
3. Adequate pupil dilatation and cl ear media to perform color , red-free 
imaging , fundus autofluorescence imaging , and OCT  imaging . 
4. Able to give an informed consent.  
 
Exclusion criteria:  
 
1. Presence of signs of advanced AMD, such as CNV, haemorrhages or 
macular atrophy  based on OCT and FAF .  
2. Previous macular laser treatment.  
3. Any previous ocular condition that may be associated with a risk of 
developing macular oedema.  
4. Vitreomacular traction determined clinically and /or by OCT, which  in the 
opinion of the investigator contributes to the macular oedema (associated 
or caus ing a detachment of the fovea).  
5. Presence of other macular disea se such as epiretinal membrane, macular 
telangiectasia.  
6. Ocular or periocular infections.  
7. Planned intra-ocular surgery within one year.  
8. Patient is unavailable for follow -up visits.  
 
Study Examination Procedure  
 
Baseline:  
 
1. Full patient history including age, gender, ethnic group, diabetes 
history, medical history, medication history, ocular history, driving 
history, smoking status.  
 
 
Baseline and Follow -up visits (see table):  
 
5 
 
1. ETDRS BCVA  
2. Slitlamp biomicroscopy:    
Dilated fundus examination with 78D Volk lens  
Intraocular pressure by Goldmann applanation  tonometry  
3. Spectral domain OCT  
4. Optical c oherence tomography  angiography if available on site.  
5. Fundus photography  and autofluorescence.  
 
 
Study Treatments Schedules:  
 
Laser:  
• Pupillary dilatation:  Will be achieved using Tropicamide  1% and 
Phenylephrine 2.5%.  One drop instilled every five minutes repeated 
three times.  
• Anaesthesia: Topical anaesthetic will be applied to the cornea, prior to 
the commencement of treatment.  
• Lens: Area centralis contact lens will be coupled to the cornea  with 1% 
methylcellulose or equivalent.  
• Laser system: Pascal® laser with 532 nm (green) or 577 nm (yellow)  
wavelength , with EndPoint Management Software ( EpM) at 30%, 200 
m spot diameter and 0.25 spot -width spacing. A grid -pattern 
treatment will be applie d to the area of retinal thickening as per OCT. 
The total number of spots should exceed 500, including the full macula 
grid + plus patterns of 2x2 inside the grid and patterns of 3x3 or 4x4 
outside the grid.  
 
Arm A:    
Patien ts will be treated initially  (Day 0)  and every 6 months during the follow 
up, if meet retreatment criteria .  
• Number of laser spots : >500. Customized grid pattern to cover area 
of drusen . 
• Spot size:   200m 
• Duration for titration:  15 or 20  ms 
• Exposure:                     Laser power will be titrated to produce a barely 
visible burn, considered a 100% at EpM ®. For the treatment, energy  is set 
at 30% to achieve non -damaging exposures.  
• Titration power range:  100 to 200 mW  
• Spot spacing:    0.25 spo t-width -apart.  
• Retreatment criteria:   
o Meet initial inclusion /exclusion  criteria  
o Does not exhibit  significant reduction in drusen volume  6 months 
after previous treatment . Significant is a 50% reduction in the cube 
root volume of drusen.  
 
Arm B:    
Patients will be treated with a sham laser (zero therapeutic power, only the 
aiming beam) and observed.  
 
PATIENT FOLLOW -UP: 
6 
 
All participants will receive treatment at the initial treatment day and will have 
follow -up visits at 1  month (optional) , 3, 6 , 9, 12, 18, 24  months.  
 
At the end of the 24 month period there will be an additional 3 year follow up. 
During the 3 year follow up, there would be no active component, the subjects 
will be seen once per year and undergo visual acuity testing and non-invasive 
retinal imaging to monitor for long term effects of treatment. This should not 
place a significant burden on the subjects since they are typically seen every 
6 to 12 months for routine follow -up. 
 
Best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) using ETDR S charts at a distance of 4 
meters, digital fundus photography, fundus autofluorescence , ocular 
coherence tomography (OCT) , ocular coherence tomography angiography 
(OCTA  when available on the site ) will be carried out at baseline and at each 
follow -up visit. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*OCTA will be done if available on site  
 
STUDY RANDOMI ZATION PROCEDURE  
 
The subjects will be allocated to each arm of the study with simple 
randomization  method using a computer -generated randomi zation list and 
sequentially  number, sealed, opaque envelopes (SNSOE).  
After a subject has signed informed consent, their name will be written 
on the selected envelope by the Clinical Trials Coordinator. The 56 eyes will TEST , treatment  Baseline  0 1 
optional  3 6 12 18 24 
Laser treatment   x   x x x x 
ETDRS visual 
acuity (BCVA)  x x x x x x x x 
Slitlam p x x x x x x x x 
OCT   X X X X X X X X 
OCTA * X X X X X X X X 
Digital Fundus 
Photography  X X X X X X X X 
Fundus 
autofluorescence  X X X X X X X X 
7 
 
be randomly allocated to one of the two arms.  The computer randomization  
will be done by the Clinical Tria ls Coordinator. The randomization  table will be 
given to an independent person, who will sequentially label 56 envelopes, and 
enclose the written treatment type within the envelope. The study arm will be 
coded numerically for each subject.  
 
METHOD OF STATI STICAL ANALYS IS 
 
The data will be analysed using analysis of covariance, adjusting for 
baseline and disease severity. Results will be presented as differences 
between the treatment arms with their associated 95% confidence intervals, 
and non - significant effects interpreted in the context of these and the limited 
power of the study.  
 
SAMPLE SIZE:  
 
We estimated our sample size based on previous comparable 
publications that included approximately 50 eyes on average.11-12 
 
EFFICACY MEASURES:  
 
Primary Outcome:  
• Reduction in drusen volume in arm A  compared to arm B. 
 
Secondary Outcomes:  
• Mean change in visual acuity (ETDRS letters)  
• Mean change in average central retinal thickness (ACRT) after 
12, 18, 24  months of follow up.  
• The proportion of patients with ACRT < 300 µm on Spectral 
domain OCT after 12 , 18, 24  months of follow up   
• Conversion into GA or CNV  
 
SAFETY MEASURES:  
 
• Monitoring of adverse events (AEs) and serious adverse effects 
(SAEs) (the incidence of ocular AEs and SAEs).  
• Assessment of the retinal autofluorescence to identify any laser 
burn.  
• Signs of any laser burn identified at RPE -photoreceptors layers 
on DRI -OCT.  
 
ADVERSE EFFECTS:  
 
• Any medical incidence in patients who received laser that could be 
associated with the tre atment delivered in the research study.  
• Any temporal or transitory adverse effect that has relationship to the 
study therapy.  
REPORTING ADVERSE EVENTS (AE)  AND SERIOUS ADVERSE EVENTS  
 
8 
 
• With any AE, we will treat the SP as appropriate to prevent further 
complications and to potentially resolve the event.  
• SAEs and AE will be reported immediately (when the subject is in the 
office, if possible or within 24 hours of learning of the event) to the 
principal investigator, study coordinator and sponsor. The SP subject 
will be referred for further medical treatment if required.  
• Follow -up reports on AEs should indicate whether the AE is presumed 
to be device -related, or a result of other factors, and should be 
recorded on the Adverse Events Report. The Adve rse Events Report 
should be completed each time the subject is seen during the 
management of the incident and at resolution of the incident.  
• All AEs occurring from the time of written informed consent throughout 
the course of the study (end of study is def ined as the end of the scan 
acquisition) will be recorded at the study site.    
• The AE  should be made to describe it in terms of a diagnosis.  If a 
clear diagnosis has been made, individual signs and symptoms will not 
be recorded unless they represent atyp ical or extreme manifestations 
of the diagnosis, in which case they should be reported as separate 
events.  If a clear diagnosis cannot be established, each sign and 
symptom must be recorded individually.  
 
All the adverse events shall be recorded in detail  as specified below:  
Name (Type)  The common name of the adverse event that appeared shall 
be written down.  
Date of onset  The first date that the physician in charge found the adverse 
event shall be written down.  
Causal 
relation  Write down probable causes, and classify the causal relation 
with the test device depending on the presence or absence of 
the causal relationship as defined below. The adverse events 
that are judged to have no relation with the test devises are 
classified as complica tions; all the others are classified as 
adverse device effects.  
Probably not 
related  The adverse event is definitely related to other 
than the test device. (Complication)  
Possibly 
related  The adverse event is possibly related to the 
test device; the causal relationship with the 
test devices is fully undeniable. (Adverse 
device effect)  
Probably 
related  The cause of the adverse event cannot be 
located. However, the adverse event is 
probably related to the test device. (Adverse 
device effect)  
Definitely 
related  The adverse event is definitely related to the 
test device. (Adverse device effect).  
Severity  The severity shall be classified into mild, moderate and severe 
based on the criteria:  
Mild The symptom is mild and expected to heal 
soon.  
9 
 
Moderate  The symptom is described as neither mild nor 
severe.  
Severe  The finding is serious and expected to 
interfere with the subject’s daily life depending 
on the subject’s physical predisposition or the 
circumstances under which the adverse event 
appeared.  
Symptom, 
progress and 
treatment  Necessity for treatment and progress from the detection of the 
adverse event and the determination of outcome shall be 
written down.  
Outcome  The classification into “healed”, “unchanged”, “aggravated”, or 
“death” and the outcome date shall be written down. If the 
subject died, statement of death shall be made.  
Views on the 
adverse 
event  Views on the adverse event by the physician in charge shall 
be written down. Omission is allowed if there are no special 
comments.  
  
POTENTIAL RISKS:  
 
• Complications of conventional laser therapy including marked vision 
loss, paracentral scotomas or accidental application of laser in the 
fovea. There is limited data regarding potential risks of photothermal  
therapy, however, due to its non -damaging nature, it is expected to be 
safer than conventional photocoagulation.  
 
STUDY PATIENT DISPOSITION  
 
Completed SP: A completed SP is one who has not been discontinued from 
the study and has completed all study rela ted procedures.  
 
Discontinued SP:  SP may be discontinued prior to their completion of the 
study due to:  
• subject request  
• adverse events  
• protocol violations  
• administrative reasons (e.g., inability to continue, lost 
to follow up)  
• termination of the study  
Note: In addition, any SP may be discontinued for any sound medical reason.  
Notification of a SP discontinuation and the reason for discontinuation will be 
clearly documented.  
 
STUDY TERMINATION  
 
The study may be stopped at any tim e by the investigator, the sponsor, and/or 
study monitor with appropriate notification.  
 
STUDY COMPLIANCE  
10 
 
An investigator should not deviate from the clinical protocol. Should a 
deviation occur the date of and reason for deviations will be documented by 
the monitor via the monitoring report and further detail may be requested from 
the investigator . Deviations will be reported to the sponsor  immediately.   
 
MONITORING AND QUALITY ASSURANCE   
 
Study Monitoring  
The designated  study monitor will review the protocol, regulatory 
obligations, and other material or equipment relevant to the conduct of the 
study prior to the start of the study with the principal investigator/co -
investigator(s) and pertinent study staff. Monitoring v isits will occur as 
necessary during the course of the investigation to verify:  
• The rights and well -being of subjects are protected.  
• The conduct of the investigation is in compliance with the currently approved 
protocol.  
• The integrity of the data.  
• Device accountability adequate study documentation.  
 
CONFIDENTIALITY  
Recording of Data   
SP data recorded during the study will be documented in the patient’s 
clinical file. In the data analysis the SP will only be identified by the subject 
number, and by their initials if also required. If, as an exception, it is 
necessary for safety or regulatory reasons to identify the SP, the sponsor or 
its representative, and the investigator are bound to keep this information 
confidential.  
All personal SP data collect ed and processed for the purposes of this 
study will be maintained by the investigator and his staff with adequate 
precautions as to ensure that the confidentiality of the data in accordance with 
local laws and regulations.  
 
PUBLICATION POLICY  
 
Authorship and manuscript composition will reflect cooperation among 
all parties involved in the study.  Authorship will be established before writing 
the manuscript.  
   
REFERENCES  
 
1. Gangnon RE, Lee KE, Klein BE, Iyengar SK, Sivakumaran  TA, Klein R. 
Severity of age -related macular degeneration in 1 eye and the 
incidence and progression of age -related macular degeneration in the 
fellow eye: the beaver dam eye study. JAMA Ophth almol. 2015 Feb 
1;133(2):125 -32 
2. Klein R, Klein BE, Jensen SC, M euer SM. The five -year incidence and 
progression of age -related maculopathy: the Beaver Dam Eye Study. 
Ophthalmology. 1997;104(1):7 -21. 
11 
 
3. Parodi MB, Virgili G, Evans JR. Laser treatment of drusen to prevent 
progression to advanced age -related macular degener ation. Cochrane 
Database Syst  Rev. 2009 Jul 8  
4. Holz FG, Wolfensberger TJ, Piquet B, Gross - Jendroska M, et al, 
Bilateral macular drusen in age -related macular degeneration. 
Prognosis and risk factors. Ophthalmology. 1994 Sep; 101(9): 1522 -8.  
5. CAPT, Complic ations of Age -Related Macular Degeneration 
Prevention Trial Research Group. Laser treatment in patients with 
bilateral large drusen: the complications of age -related macular 
degeneration prevention trial.  Ophthalmology 2006; 113(11):1974 –86. 
6. Figueroa M, Schocket LS, DuPont J, Metelitsina TI, Grunwald JE. 
Effect of laser treatment for dry age related macular degeneration on 
foveolar choroidal haemodynamics. British Journal of Ophthalmology 
2004; 88 (6):792 –5. 
7. Kaiser RS, Berger JW, Maguire MG, Ho  AC, Javornik NB. Choroidal 
Neovascularization Prevention Trial Study Group. Laser burn intensity 
and the risk for choroidal neovascularization in the CNVPT Fellow Eye 
Study. Archives of Ophthalmology 2001; 119(6):826 –32. 
8. Choroidal Neovascularization Preven tion Trial Research Group. Laser 
treatment in fellow eyes with large drusen: updated findings from a pilot 
randomized clinical trial.  Ophthalmology 2003; 110(5):971 –8. 
9. Owens SL, Bunce C, Brannon AJ, Wormald R, Bird AC. Drusen Laser 
Study Group. Prophylactic  laser treatment  appears to promote 
choroidal neovascularisation in high risk ARM: results of an interim 
analysis. Eye (London,  England) 2003; 17(5):623 –7. 
10.  Little HL, Showman J. A pilot randomized, controlled study on the 
effect of laser photocoagulation o f confluent soft macular drusen. 
American Academy of Ophthalmology  1995:120.  
11. Olk RJ, Friberg TR, Stickney KL, Akduman L, Wong KL, Chen MC, et 
al.Therapeutic benefits of infrared (810 -nm) diode laser macular grid 
photocoagulation in prophylactic treatment o f nonexudative age -related 
macular degeneration: two -year results of a randomized pilot 
study. Ophthalmology 1999; 106(11):2082 –90. 
12. Rodanant N, Friberg TR, Cheng L, Aurora A, Bartsch D, Toyoguchi M, 
et al.Predictors of drusen reduction after subthreshold inf rared (810 
nm) diode laser macular grid photocoagulation for nonexudative age -
related macular degeneration. American Journal of Ophthalmology 
2002; 134 (4):577 –85. 
13. Schatz H, Madeira D, McDonald HR, et al. Progressive enlargement of 
laser scars following gri d laser photocoagulation for diffuse diabetic 
macular edema. Arch Ophthalmol 1991;109:1549 –1551.  
14. Roider J. Laser treatment of retinal diseases by subthreshold laser 
effects. SeminOphthalmol 1999;14:19 –26. 
15. Maeshima K, Utsugi -Sutoh N, Otani  T, et al. Progressive enlargement 
of scattered photocoagulation scars in diabetic retinopathy. Retina 
2004; 24:507 511.  
16. Sivaprasad S, Sandhu R, Tandon A, et al. Subthreshold  micropulse 
diode laser photocoagulation for clinically significant diabetic macul ar 
oedema: a three -year follow up. Clin Exp Ophthalmol 2007; 35: 640 –
644. 
12 
 
17. Ohkoshi K, Yamaguchi T. Subthreshold micropulse diode laser 
photocoagulation for diabetic macular edema in Japanese patients. Am 
J Ophthalmol 2010; 149:133 –139. 
18.  Figueira J, Khan J, Nunes S, et al. Prospective randomized controlled 
trial comparing subthreshold micropulse diode laser photocoagulation 
and conventional green laser for clinically significant  diabetic macular 
oedema. Br J Ophthalmol  2009; 93:1341 –1344.  
19. Lavinsky D, Cardill o JA, Melo LAS, et al. Randomized Clinical Trial 
Evaluating mETDRS versus Normal or High -Density Micropulse 
Photocoagulation for Diabetic Macular Edema. Invest Ophthalmol Vis 
Sci 2011; 52:4314 -23. 
20. Muquit MM, Gray JC, Marcellino GR, Henson DB, Young LB, Pat ton N, 
Charles SJ, Turner GS, Stanga PE. Barely visible 10 -millisecond 
pascal laser photocoagulation for diabetic macular edema: 
observations of clinical effect and burn localization.  Am J Ophthalmol 
2010; 149: 979 -986 
21. D. Lavinsky, C. Sramek , J. Wang, P. Huie, R. Dalal, Y. Mandel, D. 
Palanker. Subvisible Retinal Laser Therapy: Titration Algorithm and 
Tissue Response. Retina 34 (1): 87 -97 (2014).  
22. . D. Lavinsky, D. Palanker Non-damaging Photothermal  Therapy of the 
Retina: Initial Clinical Experience with Chronic Central Serous 
Retinopathy, Retina, 2015  
 