Version  17 May 2019  
Revision  2.2 Efficiency -20161119  
Medacta  A multi -center, prospective, randomized study comparing 
surgical and economic parameters  of Total  Knee  Replacement 
performed with  single -use Efficiency  instruments  with  patient - 
specific technique (MyKnee®) versus traditional metal 
instruments with convent ional surgical technique.  
Study  Protocol  
Protocol #: 
Sponsor:  Efficiency -20161119 
Medacta USA, Inc. 
 

Version  17 May 2019  
Revision  2.2 Efficiency -20161119  
Medacta  1 INTRODUCTION  
1.1 Study  Rationale 
Total knee arthroplasties are a common procedure in the United States (US), designed to relieve pain 
and improve the quality of life in patients with advanced knee osteoarthritis. Age and obesity are major risk factors for osteoarthritis and as the US popu lation continues to age and body mass index (BMI)  
levels increase, the incidence of total knee arthroplasties will increase as well.
1 In 2013, total knee 
arthroplasties were occurring at a rate of greater than 500,000 procedures per year and are expected t o 
increase to 3.48 million by 2030.2 Costs for total knee arthroplasties currently exceed $11 billion in the 
US alone.1 
With the numbers of total knee arthroplasties continuing to increase, efforts are being made to cut procedural costs. One way this can be achieved is by decreasing operative times. The utilization of  
single -use instruments  can decrease  the time  spent  preparing for and cleaning  after  the surgery,  thereby 
decreasing patient turnover time. Single -use instruments are common in ophthalmology, cardiothoracic 
surgery and urologic surgery, but have yet to experience much of a crossover into lower extremity surgery, including total joint arthroplasty. Mont et al. studied 400 procedures using single -use 
instruments for total knee arthroplasty, concluding that single -use instruments showed promising 
benefits and after further study, could play a role in increasing operating room efficiency. 
2 Siegel et al. 
found that total operating room time during total knee arthroplasty was on average 30 minutes sh orter 
for single -use instruments and saved between $480 and $600 per case.  3 The same study also suggested 
that single -use instrumentation may also decrease the risk of infection. There is controversy regarding 
some manufacturers’ claims of improved clinical outcomes, surgical efficiency and decreased costs with patient -specific cutting blocks.
4 It is evident that not all patient- specific instruments from different 
manufacturers are equivalent, and each needs to be studied individually.  This study is being conducted 
to evaluate the total knee replacement instrument options for a single manufacturer.  
1.2 Study  Treatment  
The GMK single -use (Efficiency) instruments are made of medical- grade composite technopolymers that 
give high fatigue and abrasion resistance in addition to form versatility. The single -use instruments are 
shipped from the manufacturer in pre -sterilized packaging, eliminating the need to use the hospital 
Central- Sterile processing equipment.  The reproducible sterility may potentially reduce the infection 
risk. 
1 Losina E, et al. Cost-effectiveness of Total Knee Arthroplasty in the United States: Patient Risk and Hospital 
Volume. Arch Intern Med (2009); 169(2):1113-1122.  
2 Mont MA, et al. Single -Use Instruments, Cutting Blocks, and Trials Increase Efficiency in the Operating Room  
During Total Knee Arthroplasty: A Prospective Comparison of Navigated and Non-Navigated Cases. J Arthroplasty 
(2013); 28(7):1135-1140.  
3 Siegel Gw, et al . Cost A nalysis and Surgical Site Infection Rates in Total Knee Arthroplasty Comparing Traditional 
vs. Single -Use Instrumentation. J Arthroplasty (2015); 30: 2271-2274  
4 Lachiewicz, PF, Henderson, RA: Patient -specific Instruments for Total Knee Arthroplasty. J Am Acad Orthop Surg, 2013: 21:513- 
518.
Version  17 May 2019  
Revision  2.2 Efficiency -20161119  
Medacta  MyKnee® patient- specific cutting blocks allow the surgeon to realize his pre -operative 3D planning, 
based on CT or MRI images of the patient’s knee. The blocks are created based on the individual 
patient’s anatomy, his/her mechanical axis, and the surgeon’ s preferred reconstruction goals. The 
innovative concept combines the following features giving potential benefits to both the surgeon and 
the patient:  
•Accurate  bony  cuts and therefore  implant  positioning
•No intramedullary  canal violation
•Up to 60%  reduct ion of surgical steps  for bone  resection  and related  time
•Up to 66%  reduction  of time  and cost in washing,  assembling  and sterilization  procedures
•Interactive 3D web  planning
1.3 Study  Objectives  
The objectives  of this study  are to compare  economic  factors  and the rate of adverse  events  between  two 
types of instrumentation used for total knee replacement:  
•Single -use Efficiency  Instruments  with  Patient  Specific  Technique  (MyKnee®)
•Traditional  Metal  Instruments  with  Conventional  Surgical  Technique
The data obtained from this study could be useful for surgeons, facilities, and payors to help determine appropriate instrumentation in total knee arthroplasties.  
Primary  Objective : 
•To compare the time- saving parameters associated with the two procedures with respect to
parameters such as OR preparation time, intra- operative time (OR efficiency), OR clean -up time
and sterilization costs.
Secondary  Objectives: 
To compare  the following  surgical and clinical outcomes  between  the two study  groups  
•To compare correction of alignment after total knee replacement via long standing AP hip -knee- 
ankle x -rays.
•To compare  the accuracy  of tibial slope  angle  on a lateral knee  x-ray
•To compare  the number  of trays  sent  to sterilization
•To compare  the volume  of estimated  blood  loss during  the procedure
•To compare  the drop  in post -operative  (day  1) hemoglobin  and total  volume  of transfusions
(allogeneic and/or autologous)
•To compare  the occurrence  of adverse  events
•To compare  the waste  weight  at the end of each  surgery,  considering separately  those  recyclable
and those not recyclable.
•To compare  the rate of intraoperative  and post -operative  complications
•To compare the rate of successful use of MyKnee® cutting blocks (i.e. the incidence of surgicalcases  where  the surgeon  did not need  to abort  the use of MyKnee intra- operatively  and default  to
the use of standard cutting blocks.
Version  17 May 2019  
Revision  2.2 Efficiency -20161119  
Medacta  The cost- per-minute value based on hospital estimates will be used to calculate an overall cost -savings 
total. 
2 STUDY  DESIGN  
The study  is a multi -center,  prospective,  randomized  study  comparing  surgical and economic  parameters 
of Total Knee Replacement performed with single -use Efficiency instruments with patient -specific 
technique (MyKnee®) versus traditional metal instruments with conventional surgical technique. The 
objective is to evaluate the impact of single -use instrumentation versus traditional metal instruments in 
reducing overall surgical costs and improving mechanical axis alignment. The timing of routine surgical phases will be measured, including the pre -operative preparation time, intra- operative phase, O R clean - 
up time and sterilization phase in 300 adult patients undergoing total knee replacement. AP and lateral x-rays will be utilized to assess the implant’s mechanical axis alignment and tibial slope after discharge
to the completion of the 6 week visi t. Additionally, other parameters will be recorded including blood
loss, post -op day 1 hemoglobin drop, adverse events, number of trays sent to sterilization, and tot
al
w
aste weight at the end of each procedure, considering separately those recyclable and those not
recyclable.  To ensure that  the minimum of  300 patients  is met, 342 patients  will be randomized  into two
treatment cohorts in a 2:1 ratio.
G
roup A : Single -Use Efficiency Instruments with Patient Specific Technique (Efficiency/MyKnee ®) 
Patients randomized to Group A will undergo surgery utilizing single -use Efficiency Instruments with 
patient -specific technique (MyKnee® patient- matched cutting blocks)  
G
roup B: Traditional Metal Instruments with Conventional Surgical Technique (Conventional TKA) 
Patients randomized to Group B will undergo conventional surgical technique utilizing traditional metal 
instrumentation and traditional cutting blocks (Metal)  
Additional demographic information will be collected to describe the study population and to docu ment 
whether the two treatment groups are clinically comparable. Data collected will include: age, gender, 
BMI, race/ethnicity, smoking history, and employment status, in addition to pre -operative knee 
history/diagnosis and degree of pre -operative knee mal alignment and Kellgren- Lawrence grade.  
3 PATIENT RECRUITMENT  AND  SAMPLE  
SIZE 
The study participants will be recruited from the patients receiving care with one of the study investigators or their practice partners. Participating clinicians and their staff will be notified of this 
protocol and will be asked to refer patients undergo ing total knee arthroplasty.  
3
42 patients will be enrolled and randomized with 2:1 ratio, MyKnee/Efficiency (n = 228) : 
Conventional/Metal (n = 114).  
3.1 Inclusion/Exclusion  Criteria  
All inclusion and exclusion criteria will be reviewed by the investigator o r qualified designee to ensure 
that the subject qualifies for the study prior to enrollment and randomization. Subjects must meet all inclusion criteria and none of the exclusion criteria to be eligible for the study.  
Version  17 May 2019  
Revision  2.2 Efficiency -20161119  
Medacta  3.1.1 I 
nclusion  Criteria  
In order to be eligible for participation in this study, the patient must meet all of the following inclusion 
criteria:  
1)Age 18 to 75 years
2)BMI ≤ 40
3)Undergoing unilateral total  knee  arthroplasty  due to osteoarthritis  (primary  or post -traumatic  OA)
4)Able  and willing  to give consent  and to comply  with  study  requirements,  including follow  up visit
at 6 weeks
3.1.2 E 
xclusion  Criteria  
The subject must be excluded from participating in the study if the subject meets any of the following exclusion criteria:  
1)Pregnant  women  or those  seeking  to become  pregnant.  Pregnancy  test is administered  prior  to
surgery as part of routine care by the hospital / surgery center for all female patients o f
c
hildbearing potential
2)Is participating  in another  clinical study
3)Has inflammatory  arthritis
4)Has knee avascular necrosis
5)Has severe  deformity,  defined as greater than 15 degrees  varus  or valgus  relative  to the mechanic al
ax
is.
6)Has retained hardware in  the knee  that requires removal or interferes  with TKA  procedure
3.2 Study Procedures  
Patients who are undergoing a unilateral total knee arthroplasty and meet all of the inclusion/exclusion criteria will be approached to participate in the study. If consent is obtained the study coordinator will 
be notified. The coordinator will randomize the patients in a 2:1 ratio to one of the two treatment 
cohorts (i.e., total knee arthroplasty utilizing Efficiency instruments with patient specific technique (MyKnee®) or total knee arthroplasty with traditional metal instruments with conventional surgical technique respectively).  
Preoperatively, subjects randomized to Group A (Efficiency/MyKnee®) will undergo a pre -operative CT 
scan  or MRI as standard  of care.  The investigator  will perform  appropriate  pre-operative  planning  which 
enables the custom manufacturing of the MyKnee® cutt ing blocks that will be delivered to the surgical 
facility.  Subjects randomized to Group B (Conventional TKA) will undergo imaging required for 
preoperative planning as deemed standard of care by the investigator.  
At the next visit all subjects will under go the total knee arthroplasty procedure utilizing the assigned 
instrumentation. Timing of various operative and sterilization phases will be recorded. Following the procedure, the patient will undergo X -rays after discharge to the completion of the 6 week  visit to 
examine the alignment of the implant.  
Version  17 May 2019  
Revision  2.2 Efficiency -20161119  
Medacta  3.2.1 I 
nformed  Consent  
Individuals who agree to participate in this study will be asked to provide formal written informed 
consent.  A signed  copy  of the informed consent  form  will be given to the patient,  and the original will be 
maintained in the patient file.  
Consent must be documented by the subject’s dated signature or by the subject’s legally acceptable representative’s dated signature on a consent form along with the dated signature of the person conducting the consent discussion.  
The initial informed consent form, any subsequent revised written informed consent form and any 
written information provided to the subject must receive the IRB/EC’s approval/favorable opinion in 
advance of use . The subject or his/her legally acceptable representative should be informed in a timely 
manner if new information becomes available that may be relevant to the subject’s participation in the study. The communication of this information will be provided and documented via a revised consent form or addendum to the original consent form that captures the subject’s dated signature or by the subject’s legally acceptable representative’s dated signature.  
3.2.2 R 
andomization 
Patients will be randomized using a computer generated blocked randomization with 2:1 allocations to 
the single -use Efficiency instruments (and MyKnee) versus traditional metal instruments (conventional 
TKA) groups. The randomization will be performed sepa rately for each site.  
In case the investigator decides not to include the patient after randomization, this patient will be 
treated as withdrawn although a randomization has been performed. The reason for withdrawal must  
be documented in the patient file.  The used randomization number cannot be used again. For the next 
patient, the following randomization number will be used.  
3.2.3 P 
rotocol  Deviations  
Protocol deviations will be recorded and will capture the date of deviation, associated study visit, and  
type of deviation. Types of deviations are as follows:  
•Consent  procedures
•Inclusion/exclusion criteria
•Study  procedures
•Serious  adverse  event  / unanticipated  adverse  device  effect  (SAE/UADE)  reporting
•Randomization  procedures
•Visit  schedule  / window
•Other  (site  will be requested  to specify)
3.3 Evaluation Parameters  
Version  17 May 2019  
Revision  2.2 Efficiency -20161119  
Medacta  Time  of Operative  Phases  
The time  of the following  pre-operative, operative  and sterilization phases  will be recorded  (hh:mm:ss):  
1.Surgery  Room Preparation  and Clean -up Phase
a.Instrument  preparation  for surgery  from  stock  to Operative  Room  (OR)
b.Surgical  table  preparation
c.Instrument  collection  after surgery  for sterilization
2.Intra -operative  Phase
a.Patient  OR time
b.Skin-to-skin time
c.Femoral and tibial resection  times
d.Tourniquet  time
3.Sterilization Phase
a.Instrument  transportation  to the sterilization unit
b.Instrument  reception
c.Instrument  cleaning  before  sterilization
d.Instrument  decontamination before  sterilization
e.Instrument  sterilization
f.Instrument  collection  after sterilization
g.Instrument  transportation  to stock
A
dditional Operative Parameters  
1.Estimated  blood  loss (cc)
2.Drop  in post -operative  hemoglobin (measured  at Day 1 or discharge  if patient  does  not stay overnight)
3.Total  volume  of transfusions  (allogeneic  and/or  autologous)
4.Number  of trays  sent  to sterilization
5.Waste weight  at the end of each  surgery;  recyclable  and non- recyclable  (grams)
Radiographic Parameters  
Each subject will undergo the following radiographic assessments pre -operatively and at 6 weeks post - 
operatively.  
•Long  standing  (hip to ankle)  AP x-ray to assess the mechanical axis alignment
•Standard lateral x- ray to assess tibial posterior slope
S
ubjects  randomized  to Group A (Efficiency/MyKnee®)  will also undergo  a preoperative  CT or MRI. 
Accuracy  will be determined  by the difference  between  the final position  on the post -operative  x-rays and 
the surgeon’s  intended  position  (usually  0 degrees  of mechanical axis on AP, and recreation  of tibial slope 
on the lateral x -ray).  
Adverse  Events  
Version  17 May 2019  
Revision  2.2 Efficiency -20161119  
Medacta  All operative  and post -operative  adverse  events,  whether  voluntarily  reported  by the patient  or observed 
by the investigator,  will be recorded  in the patient’s  study  records.  
3.4 Study  Visits  
Each  subject  will attend  3 study  visits. Each  visit will have  specified  activities  as described below.  
Visit  1: Baseline  (-1 to -90 days  prior to surgery)  
The baseline visit will occur to screen subjects, confirm study eligibility, complete the informed consent 
process, and enroll and randomize the subject.  
• Informed  consent
• Randomize  patients  meeting  inclusion/exclusion criteria
• Collect  demographics  data,  pre-operative  knee  history/diagnosis  and employment  status
• Visual Analog  Scale  (VAS)  for knee  pain
• Long standing AP and lateral x- rays to assess pre-operative  mechanical axis alignment  and
posterior tibial slope.  X-rays obtained within 6 months  prior to surgery  are acceptable  for the
baseline  visit.  The investigator  may  repeat  x-rays if needed  for clinical or imaging  quality 
reasons.  
• Complete  CT scan  or MRI for pre-operative  planning  and selection  of cutting  blocks  (Group A Only)
Visits  2: Operative  (Day  0-Discharge)  
The following  activities  will be performed  at each  surgery  visit. 
• For all female  patients  of child  bearing  potential,  pregnancy  test will be administered  prior to
surgery as  part of routine  care  by the hospital  or surgery center.
• Surgery  using instrumentation  per randomization assignment
• Adverse  event  assessment
• Transfusion summary
• Bloodwork  for hemoglobin assessment  (measured  at Day 1 or discharge  if patient  does  not stay
overnight)
Visit  3: 6 Weeks  (± 3 weeks)  
The following  activities  will be performed  at the post -operative/discharge  visit.  
• Long  standing  AP x-ray to assess mechanical axis alignment
• Standard lateral x- ray to assess tibial slope
• Visual Analog  Scale  (VAS)  for knee  pain
• Adverse  event  assessment
Version  17 May 2019  
Revision  2.2 Efficiency -20161119  
Medacta  Activity  Baseline  Operative  6 Weeks(  ±3) 
Informed  Consent  X 
Baseline  Details  X 
-Medical  History X 
-Eligibility  Criteria X 
-Demographics X 
CT Scan  or MRI for Pre-Operative  Planning*  X* 
Randomization  X 
Visual  Analog  Scale  (VAS)  for knee  pain  X X 
Pregnancy  Test X 
Operative  Details  X 
-Timing  for Pre-Operative  Phase X 
- Timing  for Intra -Operative  Phase X 
-Timing  for Sterilization  Phase X 
-Other  Operative  Parameters
Adverse Events X 
X1 X1 
Long  Standing  and Lateral  Knee  X-Rays  X X 
1If applicable  
*Group  A (Efficiency/MyKnee®)  Only  
3.5 Case  Report  Forms  
Case  Report  Forms  (CRFs)  are to be completed  for all subjects.  
A
ll data is collected on study source documents and entered into the Case Report Forms by the Study 
Coordinator or delegated designee. All data will be reviewed for consistency and correctness with the 
protocol by the Investigator (or designee) and the Cli nical Research Associate (CRA). All discrepancies 
requiring verification via an examination of the source documents will be sent to the study site for resolution or resolved during monitoring visits. During monitoring visits, the CRA will review all data, evaluate for completeness and have  the site enter missing  information  and/or  resolve  errors.  All entries, 
corrections  and alterations  are to be made  by the responsible  Investigator or his/her  designee.  
3.6 Study  Documents  
The following  documents  will be required  by each  site prior to activation:  
•Signed protocol  signature  page
•Signed and dated written approval from the IRB of the protocol, informed consent form, andany applicable recruiting materials
•Signed investigator’s  agreement
•Financial disclosure  form
•Signed and dated  Delegation  of Authority  log
•Curriculum  Vitae  and medical licenses  of applicable  study  staff
4 STATISTICAL  ANALYSIS  PLAN  
The Sponsor will evaluate for non -inferiority based on economic factors and the rate of adverse events 
between the two groups. The Sponsor may conduct additional post -hoc analyses of the study data after 
study completion. These analyses may be done for the  purposes of publication or in conjunction with 
additional data that may be available to Sponsor from other sources.  
Version  17 May 2019  
Revision  2.2 Efficiency -20161119  
Medacta  4.1 Data  Analysis  
The objectives  of this study  are outlined in Section  1.3. For purposes  of this study,  economic  outcomes  of 
interest include the peri -operative time, intra- operative time (OR efficiency), and sterilization times as 
quantitative values. These outcomes will be subsequently used in comparative cost analyses. The 
secondary objectives are to assess the ac curacy of mechanical axis alignment and posterior tibial slope 
after total  knee  replacement,  additional operative  parameters,  and adverse  events.  
Descriptive statistics, specifically means will be used to summarize the peri- operative, intra- operative 
and sterilization time data.  
The primary objective will be met by comparing mean values of each of the time -saving  parameters.  The 
null hypotheses of no differences in mean values between re- usable and single -use devices will be  
tested  using separate  t-tests  for two independent  groups  for each  endpoint.   A p- value  of less than  
0.05 will be considered significant for each endpoint.  Endpoints with statistically significant differences 
are expected to contribute to expected cost differences to be determined in subsequent analyses.  
D
escriptive analyses as well as similar two -sample comparisons will be used to evaluate secondary 
measure s. 
4.2 Sample  Size Analysis  
S
ample size for this study was determined on the basis of device group differences observed in the  
Mont et al 2013 study for four (related) but important health care utilization  endpoints.  The table below 
summarizes the data in Table 2 of Mont et al, but also provides a summary of the comparisons between 
single -use and re -usable pooling over whether or not navigation was employed. These data were used  
to approximate the expected effect size (standardized mean difference) comparing between single- use 
vs re -useable instruments.  The sample sizes required for a two sample t -test to obtain 80%, 85%, and 
90% p ower as a function of the observed pooled effect sizes were determined.  The effect sizes were 
derived from the reported mean differences and p- values. The maximum sample size per group  
required to achieve at least 80% statistical power to reject the null hypothesis of equal group mean was determined across the four outcomes summarized in Table 2. For the 2:1 allocation between the single - 
use Efficiency instruments with MyKnee versus traditional metal instruments, this sample size was 
200:100 or total N=300. This value was increased by 14% to N=342 to account for uncertainty in the 
estimated  effect sizes, to account  and to allow  for additional analyses  of economic  outcomes.  Therefore, 
228 and 114 patients will be randomly allocated into single -use Efficiency instruments and traditional 
metal instruments arms respectively.  
Version  17 May 2019  
Revision  2.2 Efficiency -20161119  
Medacta  5 BENEFIT / RISK  PROFILE  
5.1 Potential  Benefits  
Results of this study will be helpful in evaluating the impact of single -use instrumentation versus 
traditional metal instruments on overall surgical cost reduction and improving mechanical axis  
alignment improvement when using patient -matched cutting bloc ks. The study will provide the initial 
data to understand the health economic impact of the Efficiency single -use instrumentation when using 
MyKnee® patient- matched cutting blocks.  
5.2 Possible  Risks  
It is not expected that the possible risks will increase wi th the instrumentation options. All risks are 
anticipated with total knee replacement surgery and surgery in general. The following risks and 
discomforts may occur and are considered anticipated in connection with total knee arthroplasty 
procedures at the time of the operation:  
•Complication  from  Anesthesia •Allergic  Reaction •Hemorrhage  (Bleeding)
•Immunologic  Response •Deep  Vein  Thrombosis •Pulmonary  Embolism
•Vascular Damage •Nerve Damage •Fat Emboli  Syndrome
The following risks and discomforts may occur with reusable or single -use instrumentation:  
•Instrument  Breakage
•Retention  of foreign  body•Instrument  Malfunction

Version  17 May 2019  
Revision  2.2 Efficiency -20161119  
Medacta  6 ADVERSE  EVENTS  
6.1 Adverse Event  Definition  
An adverse event (AE) is any symptom, sign, illness or experience that develops or worsens in severity 
during the course of the study. Intercurrent illnesses or injuries should be regarded as adverse events. For the purposes of this study, AE’s will include any complications that may be routinely observed with total knee arthroplasty, such as infection, prosthesis loosening, etc. AE’s will be noted within the research database whenever the Investigator is aware of them.  
Adverse event collection will begin from the time of first incision. All medical events and conditions that 
occur prior to this time point are to be captured as pre -existing conditions in the patient’s medical 
history. Adverse event collection will conclude at the completion of th e final follow -up visit.  
O
bserved  and reported  adverse  events  shall be recorded  in the patient’s  study  records  and on the Adverse 
Event Form within 48 hours of the site becoming aware of each event, and must include the following information at minimum:  
• Event  Description
• Date  of Onset
• Date  of Resolution
• Severity  (mild,  moderate,  severe)
• Seriousness
• Relationship  to surgery  (definitely,  probably,  possibly,  unlikely,  not related)
• Relationship  to instrumentation  (definite,  probable,  possible,  unlikely,  not related)
• Event  treatment  (e.g.,  none,  non-drug therapy,  medications,  surgery)
• Outcome
S
ignificant new information and updates will continue to be captured in the patient’s records as they 
become available. The investigator will follow each subject who experiences an AE until the event resolves or no further improvement is expected. If the AE has not resolved by the time of the subject’s 
completion, the AE will be listed as ongoing at the time of subject discontinuation.  
6.2 Assessment of Severity  
The severity  of the adverse  event  is classified as mild,  moderate  or severe.  
• Mild: Awareness of signs or symptoms, but easily tolerated and are of minor irritant type
causing no loss of time from normal activities.  Symptoms  do not require therapy or a  medical 
evaluation; signs and symptoms are transient.  
• M oderate: Events introduce a low level of inconvenience or concern to the participant
and may interfere with daily activities, but are usually improved by simple therapeuticmeasures; moderate experiences may cause some interference with functioning.
• S evere: Events interrupt the participant’s normal daily activities and generally require
systemic drug therapy or other treatment; they are usually incapacitating.
Version  17 May 2019  
Revision  2.2 Efficiency -20161119  
Medacta  6.3 Relationship to Surgery/Instrumentation  
The investigator will evaluate the relationship of the adverse e vent to the research intervention 
according to the following definitions. The term "treatment -related," as it pertains to adverse events, 
means that the event was or may have been attributable to the treatment, or that the treatment was or 
may have been a factor in an event, including those occurring as a result of malfunction, poor 
manufacture, inadequate labeling, or improper design.  
•Definitely
The adverse event is clearly related to the research intervention: the adverse event has a
temporal  relationship  to the administration  of the research  intervention,  follows  a known pattern
of response, or is otherwise logically related to the intervention, and no alternative cause ispresent.
•Probably
The adverse event is likely related  to the research  intervention: the adverse  event has  a tempor al
re
lationship to the administration of the research intervention, follows a known or suspected
pattern of response, or is otherwise logically related to the intervention, but an alternative causemay be present.
•Possibly
The adverse event  may  be related  to the research  intervention:  the adverse  event  has a tempor al
re
lationship to the administration of the research intervention, follows a suspected pattern of
response, or is otherwise logically related to the intervention, but an alternative cause is present.
•Unlikely
The adverse event is doubtfully related to the research intervention: the adverse event has atemporal or other relationship to the administration of the research intervention, but follows noknown or suspected pattern of response, and an alternative cause is present.
•Not Related
The adverse event is clearly NOT related to the research intervention: the adverse event has notemporal or other relationship to the administration of the research intervention, follows noknown or suspected pattern of response, and an alternative  cause is present.
6.4 Serious  Adverse Events  
A serious  adverse  event (SAE) is any adverse  event that:  
• Results  in death;
• I s life -threatening; the subject was at substantial risk of dying at the time of the adverse
event, or use or continued use of the device or other medical product might have resulted inthe death of the patient;
• Results  in hospitalization  (initial or prolo nged);
• R esults in disability or permanent damage; the event resulted in a substantial disruptionof the person’s ability to conduct normal life functions;
• Results  in a congenital  anomaly  or birth  defect;
Version  17 May 2019  
Revision  2.2 Efficiency -20161119  
Medacta  • R equires intervention to prevent permanent impairment or damage; medical or surgical
intervention was necessary to preclude permanent impairment of a body function, or
prevent permanent damage to a body structure.
• R esults in any other serious, important m edical events; the event does not fit the other
outcomes, but the event may jeopardize the patient and may require medical or surgical
intervention to prevent one of the other outcomes.
In case of Serious Adverse Events (SAE), the Investigator must notify  the Sponsor or its representative 
using the Adverse Event Form as soon as possible but at most within 24 hours of becoming aware of the 
event using the contact information below.  
Sponsor Contact: Mukesh Ahuja 
E-mail:  mahuja@medacta.us.com
Fax: (312) 546- 6881
The Investigator should provide additional information on the SAE by updating the information on the 
Adverse Event Form and CRF as updates become available. The Sponsor may also ask for additional 
clinical reports including redacted source documents to be provided by the Investigator to assist in the assessment of the event.  Significant new information and updates should continue to be submitted 
promptly to the Sponsor and entered on the Adverse Event CRF as they become available, and the Investigator should follow the SAE until it is resolved or no further improvement is expe cted.  
New  SAEs  will only  be documented  for each  patient  until  the last study -related  clinic  visit. 
6.5 Unanticipated Adverse Device  Effects  
An UADE is defined as any serious adverse effect on health or safety or any life -threatening problem or 
death caused by, or associated with, a device/product, if that effect, problem, or death was not previously identified in nature, severity, or degree of  incidence in the protocol or application, or any 
other unanticipated serious problem associated with a device/product that is related to the rights, safety, or welfare of subject. Adverse events that might reasonably occur because of placement or 
attempted placement of the product or during follow -up are identified through a risk assessment and 
summarized in the Instructions for Use.  
If Medacta  determines  that a UADE  presents  an unreasonable  risk to study  subjects, Medacta  will: 
• ter minate the investigation, or the parts of the investigation presenting that risk, within 5
working days after making the “unreasonable risk” determination, or within 15 working daysof receiving notice of the UADE
• immediately  investigate  and evaluate  the adverse  effect,
• re port the results of the investigation to all reviewing IRBs and to all participatinginvestigators within 10 working days after Medacta receiving notice of the UADE, and
• resume  the study,  if appropriate,  as specified  by the IRB.
Version  17 May 2019  
Revision  2.2 Efficiency -20161119  
Medacta  6.6 Adverse Event  Reporting  
Adverse events should be reported to the overseeing IRB per the board’s specified reporting 
requirements. The CRA or Sponsor’s representative will review each IRB’s reporting requirements with the site.  
7 ETHICAL  AND  LEGAL ASPECTS  
7.1 Institutional  Review  Boar d (IRB)  
This trial can only be undertaken after full approval has been obtained through the IRB or Ethics Committee (EC). The approval(s) must cover the protocol and addenda, if applicable, as well as the Informed Consent Form, product brochure and manufac turer information (if applicable).  
D
uring the trial the following  documents  will be sent  to the EC/IRB  for their  review:  
•Changes  to the product  brochure  and manufacturer information
•Reports  of all Adverse  Events  that are rated  serious,  unexpected  and associated  with  the
s
tudy product and meet IRB reporting requirements.
•All protocol  amendments  and revised  Informed  Consent  Forms  (if any).
For any protocol amendments that increase subject risk, the amendment and applicable Informed Consent Form revisions must promptly be submitted to the EC/IRB for review and approval prior to implementation of the change(s).  
R
eports on, and reviews of the trial and its progress will be submitted to the EC/IRB by the Investigator 
at intervals stipulated in their guidelines.  
A
t the end of the trial,  the Investigator  will notify  the EC/IRB  about  the trial completion.  
7.2 Good  Clinical  Practice  
This trial will be conducted in accordance with the current ICH -GCP-guidelines as specified for medical 
devices in ISO 14155.  
Good Clinical Practice (GCP) is an international ethical and scientific quality standard for designing, conducting, recording and reporting trials that involve the participation of human subjects. Compliance 
with this standard provides public assurance that the rights, safety and well- being of trial subjects are 
protected,  consistent  with  the principles  that have  their  origin  in the Declaration  of Helsinki,  and that the 
clinical trial data are credible.  
7.3 Informed  Consent  
Prior to entry in the study, the investigator must explain to potential subjects or their legal 
representatives the trial and the implications of participation. Subjects will be informed that their 
participation is voluntary and that they may withdraw cons ent to participate at any time. They will be 
informed that choosing not to participate will not impact on the care the subject will receive for the treatment of his/her  disease. Subjects  will be told that alternative  treatments  are available  if they  refuse  
to take  part and that such  refusal will not prejudice  future  treatment.  Finally,  they  will be told that 
Version  17 May 2019  
Revision  2.2 Efficiency -20161119  
Medacta  competent authorities may access their records and authorized Sponsor’s persons without violating the 
confidentiality of the subject, to the extent permitted by the applicable law(s) and/or regulations. By signing the Informed Consent Form (ICF) the subjec t or legally acceptable representative is authorizing 
such access.  
T
he subject will be given sufficient time to read the informed consent form and to ask additional 
questions. After this explanation and before entry to the trial, consent should be appropr iately recorded 
by means of the subject's dated signature. After having obtained the consent, a copy of the Informed 
Consent must be given to the subject.  
7.4 Confidentiality,  Compliance,  and Data  Management  
Provisions for maintaining and insuring (1) the confidentiality of data, subject records, and investigator 
information, (2) compliance with financial disclosure requirements, law, audit, debarment, (3) quality 
management system, (4) data management are set forth in the executed contract between Sponsor and  
participating clinical centers.  
A
ll HIPAA requirements for subject confidentiality will be maintained. All summary data shared beyond 
the Sponsor, Sponsor’s representatives and the patients’ clinical team will be de- identified. Such 
summary data will not  contain any of the identifiable protected health information (PHI) listed below: 
Data  that includes  any of the following  identifiers  are considered  identifiable  health  information:  
•Name
•Social Security  number
•Medical Record  Number
•Address  by Street Location
•Address  by Town/City/Zip  Code
•Date  of Birth
•Admission  or Discharge  Date
•Date  of Death
•Telephone  Number
•Fax Number
•Electronic  E-Mail Address
•Web  URLs
•Internet  Protocol  (IP) Address
•Health  Plan  Beneficiary  Number
•Account  Number
•Certificate/License  Number
•Vehicle  Identification  Number  and Serial Number,  including License  Plate  Number
•Medical  Device  Identifiers  and Serial Numbers
•Biometric  Identifiers  (finger  and voice  prints)
•Full Face  Photographic  Image
•Any Other  Identifier likely  to identify  the subject
Version  17 May 2019  
Revision  2.2 Efficiency -20161119  
Medacta  8 SUBJECT  DISCONTINUATION  / 
WITHDRAWAL  
Consent to participate in this study is completely voluntary. Consent may be withdrawn at any time, if 
desired by the study participant or the investigator may choose to discontinue the subject. Reasons for discontinuation of a patient from the clinical study may be (1) insufficient cooperation of the patient (non- compliance);  (2) technical or administrative  reasons  (e.g.,  change  of investigator  or move  of patient 
or cancelled/postponed surgery outside of window); or (3) death. To formally withdraw consent to participate in this study, the participant will need to notify their treating physician.  