APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 10/10/2018 VALID THROUGH 11/7/2019                                                                                                                                                                       HIC# 2000021868
                                                                                                                                                                                     
Page  1 of 28
                   
                                   
HRP-503B – BIOMEDICAL  RESEARCH  PROTOCOL  
(2016-1)
Protocol Title:  Title of Research Project: Pilot  study of galantamine  and CBT4CBT to reduce post-taper relapse for 
MAT
Principal Investigator: Kathleen M. Carroll, PhD
Version Date: 02/09/2018 Version 4
(If applicable ) Clinicaltrials.gov Registration  #: Click or tap here to enter text.
INSTRUCTIONS
This template is intended to help investigators prepare a protocol that includes  all of the necessary information 
needed by the IRB to determine whether a study  meets approval criteria.  Read  the following instructions 
before proceeding:
1.Use this protocol  template for a PI initiated study  that includes  direct interactions with research 
subjects. Additional templates for other types of research protocols are available in the system  Library.
2.If a section or question does not apply  to your research study,  type “Not Applicable” underneath.
3.Once completed, upload your protocol in the “Basic Information” screen in IRES IRB system. 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 10/10/2018 VALID THROUGH 11/7/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 10/10/2018 VALID THROUGH 11/7/2019                                                                                                                                                                       HIC# 2000021868
                                                                                                                                                                                     
Page  2 of 28SECTION  I: RESEARCH  PLAN
1.Statement  of Purpose:  State the scientific aim(s) of the study, or the hypotheses to be tested.  
We are proposing a  randomized pilot feasibility study to evaluate  the effects  of galantamine,  a 
reversible and  competitive  inhibitor of  acetylcholinesterase,  versus placebo, on preventing  relapse to  
opioid use following tapering  from methadone or buprenorphine maintenance (Medication Assisted  
Treatment, or MAT)  among adults with opioid use disorder, with additional behavioral therapy 
(web-based cognitive behavioral therapy)  provided  across all  conditions to  help individuals 
successfully transition  from MAT to a drug-free  state.   
We aim to evaluate the  feasibility and potential  efficacy of up to  16 mg/day galantamine treatment 
among 30 adults aged 18 or over who have recently chosen to be tapered off methadone or buprenorphine. Participants will be randomized to receive galantamine (extended release) or matched placebo to be initiated within a week  of initiating of a standard medically monitored 
buprenorphine or methadone taper and continue until  4 weeks after  the end  of the  taper  (length of 
taper is determined by the CMU physician; for most patients it occurs over 4-6 weeks; thus  we 
expect the duration  of treatment to be 8-10weeks for most participants).  Participants will then be  
followed for three months to evaluate the durability of treatment response.
This dose and  treatment  duration are similar to those used in our previous studies with substance 
using patients, including  those maintained  on methadone (1-4) .  Primary outcomes  will include: (1) 
successful completion of taper (2) opioid withdrawal symptoms, and (3) opioid use, assessed by self-report and urine samples  during and up to 3 months after  the end of opioid taper.  
Exploratory Aims: To explore the potential  mechanisms underlying  galantamine’s  effect  on the main 
study outcomes. These include measures of cognitive function and inflammation, which  will be 
measured at the  beginning of treatment, immediately after the taper ends, and at the end of treatment.  
2.Probable Duration  of Project: State the expected duration of the project,  including all follow-up and data 
analysis activities.  
Approximately 12 months
3.Background: Describe  the background information  that led to the plan for this project.  Provide  references to 
support the expectation of obtaining useful scientific data.
Improving outcomes  after  methadone or buprenorphine maintenance  for individuals with  opioid use  
disorder.
The efficacy  and public  health significance of treating opioid-dependent  via maintenance therapies  
(methadone or buprenorphine) is compelling.   Compared to  no medication or detoxification,  
maintenance therapies are associated with significantly less morbidity and  mortality (5,  6).  The 
appropriate focus of current public heath efforts  is on making  maintenance therapies  more widely 
available as a strategy to address current high rates  of opioid use and mortality in the US (7).   At the 
same time, there is no consensus on the length  of time most opioid-dependent individuals should be  
maintained on  either  methadone or buprenorphine (6).   Moreover, although not all individuals wish 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 10/10/2018 VALID THROUGH 11/7/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 10/10/2018 VALID THROUGH 11/7/2019                                                                                                                                                                       HIC# 2000021868
                                                                                                                                                                                     
Page  3 of 28to remain on buprenorphine or methadone indefinitely, rates of relapse among individuals seeking to taper off methadone  or buprenorphine are extremely high  (estimated at 80% or higher) (8-10)  and 
relapse carries significant risk over  overdose  and death (11-13).  Strategies for  increasing the 
likelihood of  successfully tapering individuals  from methadone/buprenorphine  maintenance to  
abstinence are clearly  needed.  
Multiple factors  likely contribute  to these  unacceptably high rates of relapse, including physical and 
psychological stress associated with reducing methadone/buprenorphine dose  over  time, adjusting to  
the lack of support/structure  and monitoring of the programs in  which MAT  is delivered,  and so on.  
Moreover, individuals  maintained on methadone typically have multiple problems with  cognitive  
function, including deficits in memory, attention,  and problem solving (14);  these are likely 
exacerbated with the  stress  of detoxification  and transitioning from  methadone maintenance 
programs.  We therefore  propose a randomized  pilot  feasibility study evaluating  a combined  
behavioral therapy/pharmacotherapy approach to help individuals successfully transition from MAT to a drug-free state.    
Rationale for  computerized CBT
To provide cognitive and behavioral  tools  for the transition to abstinence, we will provide 
computerized cognitive-behavioral  therapy,  starting about one  month before the taper ends and 
extending up to a  month after.  Cognitive-behavioral  therapy  consists  of multiple strategies aimed at 
helping individuals  achieve greater  control  over cravings and urges, and improve  decision making 
and problem-solving  skills.   CBT is one of the  most  widely studied and well-validated  treatments  
for the addictions and other  mental health disorders  (15, 16).  A particular advantage for this  study  is 
CBT’s focus  on strategies  to help individuals remain  abstinent; in  fact, in  its first application to 
substance use disorders it was called ‘relapse prevention’ therapy (17).  For  the proposed study, we 
will use a computerized version of CBT, called computer-based training in  CBT (CBT4CBT) 
developed at Yale and demonstrated  to be safe, effective and durable in  a range of substance-using 
populations (18-20), including methadone-maintained individuals (21) (17).   As CBT4CBT is computer-based and can be used at home on smartphones, laptops, and other devices, it appears well suited to individuals who are transitioning from regular clinic  visits  for methadone dosing and  
counseling.   
Acetylcholine (Ach) and opioid use disorder
Ach is one of the key neurotransmitters in the  central nervous system  (CNS) and  participates in 
multiple functions including sensory and motor processing, sleep, nociception,  mood,  stress 
response, attention, arousal,  memory,  motivation and reinforcement (22-24). The neural substrate of 
drug reinforcement is the mesolimbic dopamine (DA) transmission which projects  from the ventral  
tegmental area (VTA) to the nucleus  accumbens  (NAc). The mesolimbic DA is anatomically  and 
functionally linked to ACh. While VTA receives  ACh projections from the laterodorsal and 
pedunculopontine tegmental nuclei,  NAc has cholinergic interneurons that  are closely  linked to DA 
function. In the  reward circuit, especially in the NAc, DA and  ACh  have opposing effects. For  
example, ablation of  the cholinergic neurons in the NAc enhanced the rewarding  effects  of 
morphine, assessed by the conditioned place preference (CPP) and the negative reinforcement of morphine withdrawal in mice (25) . In contrast, increased ACh levels induced by treatment with  
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 10/10/2018 VALID THROUGH 11/7/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 10/10/2018 VALID THROUGH 11/7/2019                                                                                                                                                                       HIC# 2000021868
                                                                                                                                                                                     
Page  4 of 28inhibitor donepezil blocked  the CPP for morphine  (25) . In another study, galantamine, another 
cholinesterase inhibitor, attenuated the reinstatement of opioid-seeking behavior in  rats that were 
trained to self-administer heroin (26) . Following  its release from nerve endings,  ACh activates two 
types of receptors:  nicotinic and muscarinic acetyl cholinergic receptors, based  on their differential 
sensitivity to the exogenous  ligands, nicotine and muscarine, respectively. The observed effects of 
cholinesterase inhibitors on  morphine reinforcement seems to  be mediated  by the activation  of 
nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChR). In a recent study, treatment with  acetylcholinesterase 
inhibitor, rivastigmine or donepezil, blocked the acquisition and  expression of CPP for morphine 
(27). In addition,  cholinesterase inhibitors also blocked the reinstatement of CPP  for morphine  by a 
priming dose  of morphine.  Treatment  by a nAChR antagonist mecamylamine, reversed  the effects  of 
cholinesterase inhibitors, suggesting that these effects of cholinesterase inhibitors  are mediated  by 
the nAChRs (27). In  other  studies, cholinesterase  inhibitors enhanced the nociceptive effects of 
opioids in mice  (28) . Similar  findings were  observed  in uncontrolled human studies. In patients  who  
are receiving chronic  opioids,  addition of a cholinergic inhibitor medication enhanced opioid 
analgesia and reduced the  sedative effects of opioids (29-31). Together,  these findings  support the  
potential efficacy of  cholinesterase inhibitors for the treatment of opioid use disorder.  
Galantamine
In this study,  we will use galantamine,  a cholinesterase inhibitor to help individuals to taper off from 
opioid medications including methadone  or buprenorphine.  Cholinesterase inhibitors  are a group of 
medications that are marketed for the treatment  of Alzheimer’s disease. Following its  release  to the 
synaptic cleft, ACh is  hydrolyzed by acetylcholinesterase. This enzyme  is inhibited  by a group of 
medications called  acetylcholinesterase inhibitors. These medications increase synaptic  levels of 
ACh available at  both the nicotinic  and muscarinic type cholinergic receptors (32).  Many 
acetylcholinesterase inhibitors including tacrine,  rivastigmine, donepezil and  galantamine, are 
clinically used as cognitive enhancers  in the treatment of dementia.  Galantamine, similar to other  
cholinesterase inhibitors, increases the synaptic  concentrations of ACh.  As a unique feature, 
galantamine also directly stimulates the  nicotinic receptors: it is an  allosteric  modulator of the  7 and 
42 subtypes (33) . Because of its additional nAChR potentiating  effects, we  hypothesized that GAL  
could be more effective  than other cholinesterase inhibitors.  
For this study, study medication, galantamine  extended release  (ER) will be administered at an initial 
dose of 8 mg/day for 4 weeks, with the option of  going to 16 mg  during the final 4 weeks of 
treatment.  Capsules  will be prepared  by the APT Foundation pharmacist. Matching placebo 
capsules will also be prepared  for participants  randomized to the placebo arm.  
4.Research Plan: Summarize the study  design and research  procedures  using non-technical language that can 
be readily understood  by someone outside the discipline. Be sure to distinguish between standard of care vs. 
research procedures when applicable, and include any flowcharts of visits  specifying  their individual  times  and 
lengths.  Describe the setting in which the research will take place.
This is  a randomized  pilot study to examine the potential use of galantamine as an adjunct to the 
standard buprenorphine or methadone taper  in the  context of behavioral support. Early abstinence 
from opioids is associated  with high relapse rates  and there is a great need to develop interventions 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 10/10/2018 VALID THROUGH 11/7/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 10/10/2018 VALID THROUGH 11/7/2019                                                                                                                                                                       HIC# 2000021868
                                                                                                                                                                                     
Page  5 of 28that will prevent relapse to opioid use. Cumulating evidence suggest the cholinergic system  is a 
promising target for relapse prevention. 
  
In this randomized  pilot, 30 adults enrolled  in the methadone or buprenorphine maintenance 
programs at the APT Foundation and who have sought a  medically supervised, voluntary taper  from 
these medications will be offered participation in a double-blind, placebo controlled, randomized trial of galantamine as an  adjunct to standard  tapering procedures at this clinic along with  the 
combined approach utilizing concurrent  behavior  therapy.   Primary outcomes will be: (1) successful 
completion of taper (achieving  a methadone/buprenorphine  dose of  0), (2) opioid withdrawal 
symptoms, and (3)  opioid use, assessed  by self-report and urine samples during and  up to 3 months 
after the end of opioid taper.   We will also closely monitor  patient  comfort and safety (assessed by 
opioid withdrawal  symptoms, adverse  events, with measures of stress, sleep  and pain) as well  as 
cognitive function (assessed by the  CANTAB).      
PROCEDURES          
Initial Screening    
Participants will be  recruited from individuals stabilized  in the methadone maintenance program or 
buprenorphine maintenance programs  of the APT Foundation  who have recently chosen to  taper off 
MAT. They will be  identified by their  clinicians,  fliers, and  clinic postings.  Individuals who indicate 
they are interested  in hearing more  about the study will be offered  a meeting with  the Research 
Assistant.  At the first interview, the Research Assistant will provide a brief overview  of the protocol  
and obtain informed consent.  To enhance  the quality of informed consent procedures,  we will use a  
multiple choice test to assess prospective participants’ understanding of key aspects of the protocol (34), and provide ample time to review  questions and concerns to  assure  individuals’ understanding  
of the protocols and treatments offered.  After determination  of eligibility, the pretreatment 
assessments will be  completed by the Research  Assistant (see Assessment  Table below).  
Pretreatment evaluations and physical examination
Eligible individuals  will meet with the Research Assistant to  complete baseline interview  and self-
report scales (see Table below)  including the CANTAB  which is an optional assessment  for which  
participants will  be paid.  They  will also be examined by Dr. Shi to  assure they  are healthy, meet 
medical inclusion/exclusions, and are sufficiently  stable for tapering.  Routine  laboratory studies  will 
include CBC, BUN/creatinine, electrolytes, serum glucose, cortisol,  liver function tests,  and urine 
toxicology.   Following final confirmation of eligibility by Dr.  Shi, participants will be randomized 
to condition using a  computerized urn randomization  program (35) to  balance treatment conditions 
on key prognostic variables (buprenorphine  versus methadone; severity of substance use disorder, 
gender) and begin their  tapering.   
Treatment phase
Tapering typically takes 4 to  6 weeks and will follow standard clinical procedures  as established by 
Dr. Shi at  the Central Medical Unit (CMU) of  the APT Foundation over almost 30 years.   At the 
start of each participants’ taper, the participant will be offered  weekly  CBT4CBT  sessions, which 
they are free to complete on site at CMU or at home  (see CBT4CBT description, below).  These 
sessions will last about 35 minutes. CBT4CBT is intended to provide support during the taper and  
transition to abstinence.  
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 10/10/2018 VALID THROUGH 11/7/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 10/10/2018 VALID THROUGH 11/7/2019                                                                                                                                                                       HIC# 2000021868
                                                                                                                                                                                     
Page  6 of 28As the taper  begins, patients will initiate  the study medication (4-6 weeks  during  taper and 4 weeks 
after completion  of the taper).  The  medication  will be continued  after the taper ends, as we 
anticipate it may  be helpful in coping with protracted  withdrawal.  Participants will receive study 
medication at weekly research meetings.   These will take place at the Central  Medical Unit at  the 
same time as  weekly visits with Dr. Shi.  We anticipate these will last no longer than 10 minutes. 
Participants will be  dispensed up to 16 mg/day of galantamine or matched placebo at the CMU with  
weekly monitoring of symptoms, adverse  events,  and urine collection.  Medication increases will 
take place at the discretion  of Dr.  Shi, based  on lack  of adverse  reactions  to study medication.  
Medication compliance will be assessed  at every  visit.  Participants  will be free to use CBT4CBT as 
they wish through the  end of follow-up (3 months after completion of taper).   At the end  of the  
active treatment, an  endpoint interview  will be conducted.   Follow-up  assessments  will occur two 
weeks, one month  and three months  following the  end of the taper.
Treatment Conditions
     1.  Medications 
Galantamine 8mg or placebo will be  dispensed weekly with directions for  daily  dosing at the start of  
taper and continue 8-10 weeks, with the option to increase to 16mg at the end of Week 4.  Participants will receive  a weekly supply during weekly research assessment visits. Adverse  events will be  
monitored closely; urine and breath samples will be collected weekly during taper and  at each follow-up.  
In this study,  we will use galantamine  extended  release (ER). Galantamine ER is used once daily (36). 
The recommended initial dose is 8 mg/day and  the maintenance dose is 16-24 mg/day. With once daily  
dosing, steady-state plasma  levels are reached  within one week (36). Common adverse events (>5%) 
include weight  loss (5%  to 7%), diarrhea  (6% to 12%), loss of appetite  (7% to  9%),  nausea (13% to 
24%), vomiting (6%  to 13%, dizziness  (9%),  headache (8%). Other less common adverse  events  include 
bradyarrhythmia (2%), cardiac dysrhythmia (infrequent), heart failure (infrequent), esophageal  
perforation (rare), gastrointestinal hemorrhage, rectal hemorrhage (infrequent), thrombocytopenia (infrequent) and death (very rare).  When the taper begins, participants  will receive the first dose of the 
medication in  the CMU  clinic at the  time they come  in for their methadone/buprenorphine.   Participants Study design & Timeline
Week -0 Informed consent, baseline assessment, inclusion/exclusion criteria
Week 1 to week 4-6 Reduced methadone/buprenorphine dose per standard CMU procedure
Week 1 to week -4-6 Initiate CBT4CBT and  galantamine or placebo, continue tapering, weekly  
check-in
Week 4-6 Last dose methadone or  buprenorphine
Week 4-6 to Week  
8-10Continue CBT4CBT  and study medication, weekly check-in 
Week 8-10 Endpoint interview
Week 10-12 Two week  follow-up assessment
Week 12-14 One month follow-up assessment 
Week 20-24 Three month follow-up  assessment 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 10/10/2018 VALID THROUGH 11/7/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 10/10/2018 VALID THROUGH 11/7/2019                                                                                                                                                                       HIC# 2000021868
                                                                                                                                                                                     
Page  7 of 28will meet briefly with Dr. Shi and study staff weekly  during the first week  and weekly thereafter to 
ensure that they tolerate  the study  medication well.
Galantamine’s safety and  efficacy have  been  evaluated in different  patient populations including 
Alzheimer’s disease, mild cognitive impairment, Parkinson’s disease,  Attention Deficit Hyperactivity 
Disorder (ADHD), chronic  fatigue  syndrome, schizophrenia and alcohol dependence  (37-43).
In our most recently  completed randomized  clinical  trial evaluating  galantamine  versus placebo among 
120 methadone  maintained individuals with cocaine  use disorder,  galantamine was safe  and well 
tolerated by patients (3).   The most frequently reported adverse events were nausea/vomiting (reported at least once  by 21%  of participants), headache (17.7%),  loss of appetite (15.9%), fatigue  (15%), and 
diarrhea/constipation (13.3%), but there were no significant differences in frequency  of these symptoms 
by medication  condition (galantamine  versus  placebo).  Four participants  reported significant weight 
loss; all were  in the placebo condition (galantamine versus placebo, X2=3.54, p=.06).  Rates of serious 
adverse events occurred infrequently (8.3% of all  those  randomized,  n=10;  3 for medical  reasons, 6 for 
substance use hospitalization, and 1 for  psychiatric  reasons)  and did not differ by treatment  condition 
(galantamine versus placebo).  
To minimize the adverse effects of  galantamine in our study,  following  precautions will be taken:
1)Following  the manufacturer’s recommendations, the galantamine dose will be started  at 
8mg/day. Participants will be maintained on this  dose for 4 weeks  and if they tolerate the 8 mg 
dose, the  dose may be increased to a maximum of 16 mg/day.  Galantamine doses  over 16 
mg/day are associated  with more frequent adverse events and will not be used in this  study.
2)We chose methadone-  and buprenorphine-maintained patients voluntarily seeking to  taper off 
MAT as  our participant  population. Participants  will come to  the clinic to  attend weekly  research 
visits and obtain weekly supply of study medication.  This will allow close monitoring of 
compliance as well as any adverse  effects from galantamine treatment (44) . Participants  will be 
briefly evaluated before methadone/buprenorphine administration  by the clinic nurse. In 
addition, participants will see the  clinic nurse weekly  for a systematic evaluation of any adverse 
events.
3)Potential participants will be carefully screened to  rule out medical  conditions  that may increase 
the possibility of adverse events.  These  include asthma or chronic  obstructive  lung  disease, 
history or current  gastrointestinal ulcer, hepatic  or renal impairment and  cardiac  rhythm 
disturbances (44).  
4)Participants will be  warned and  closely monitored for concomitant use of drugs  that may cause 
drug interactions with galantamine.  These include:   a) drugs that  slow  heart rate (eg,  beta-
blockers), which may increase the risk of bradycardia and AV block, and b) NSAIDs; increased potential for developing  ulcers/active or occult gastrointestinal bleeding (44).
  
      2.  CBT  for CBT 
All participants  will also  be offered  CBT4CBT, which they can  access  onsite at CMU, or if they wish, at  
home on their own smartphone, laptop, or tablet.    Research staff  will provide  detailed instruction and 
support in the use  of the  computer and  the program, and be  available  to answer questions about the 
program.  Research staff will check  in weekly with study participants.   Time spent using  the program 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 10/10/2018 VALID THROUGH 11/7/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 10/10/2018 VALID THROUGH 11/7/2019                                                                                                                                                                       HIC# 2000021868
                                                                                                                                                                                     
Page  8 of 28will be tracked  by the computer  and can be entered into the data analyses as a possible  predictor  of 
outcome.  
The CBT4CBT program has been  evaluated  in multiple clinical trials  with  a range  of substance using 
samples (cocaine, opioid, alcohol,  marijuana  users) and has been shown to be effective, durable, and  
safe (18-21).  Furthermore, this  proposal  follows  ethical guidelines for  use of computerized behavioral 
therapies developed by Sampson and  Pyle (45), including (1) assurance of confidentiality, (2) 
determination of appropriateness of the specific form of therapy (in  this case, CBT, which has been 
shown to be effective across a  wide range of substance use disorders), (3)  adequate introduction  to the 
computer program to reduce  possible anxiety about use of the systems, (4) provision of follow-up 
consultation with  a clinician if needed,  (5) computer system uses  current information on the disorder,  
and (6) supervision of  the treatment process by a clinician.
The CBT4CBT program has the following features:
• Password protection.  Each patient  will access the program  through  an ID/password system  that 
protects confidentiality and is linked to an imbedded  database that tracks, for each patient, time logged 
onto the program,  modules accessed, progress  through  the program from  session  to session, completion 
of homework assignments, progress in treatment, and learning of CBT  principles through multiple 
choice tests after each  module.   
• User-friendliness. Given that many patients have minimal background  in the use  of personal 
computers, the  program  is user-friendly,  with extensive use of point-and-click features  (as opposed to 
typed-in responses) so  that no prior experience with computers or software is necessary.  Presentation of 
didactic material is done through graphics and cartoons, videotaped examples, and audio voice-overs, thus requiring very little reading of text.   When text  is used in presentation of material, audio  voice-
overs accompanies the text, as  many patients may become  impatient  or uncomfortable with  reading  
large amounts of  material.  CBT concepts are  presented in a simple,  straightforward  style without jargon 
and in a visual style that is engaging and  enjoyable  (e.g., modeled  on computer learning games).  
• Topics covered:   The  ‘CBT for CBT’ program will is modeled closely on a validated NIDA-
published CBT manual (46).  Seven core skill  modules  cover the following topics, which correspond to 
the major session topics in the manual:   
        o Understanding and changing  patterns  of drug use, 
        o Coping with craving,  
        o Substance refusal skills, 
        o Seemingly irrelevant decisions, 
        o Planning for  emergencies, and
        o Problem-solving skills.
        o HIV/STD risk reduction
•   Choice of topics:  Although all patients will be able to access all 7 key  CBT  topics (‘skill modules’), 
patients have the option of choosing the  order in which they access skill modules as well as items within 
modules as  often as  they wish.  Prior to log-off, patients are  reminded to  immediately report  any 
concerns or uncomfortable feelings associated with use of the program  to the research  assistant, their  
APT clinician, or Dr.  Carroll.
Assessments:   Assessments will include  measures of substance use, withdrawal symptoms  and severity, 
stress, cognitive function, sleep and pain.   
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 10/10/2018 VALID THROUGH 11/7/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 10/10/2018 VALID THROUGH 11/7/2019                                                                                                                                                                       HIC# 2000021868
                                                                                                                                                                                     
Page  9 of 28i.  Assessment of Outcome. 
The primary outcome will be  successful  transition to abstinence, defined as providing an opioid-
free urine  at the  one- and three-month follow-up. On-site  urine testing  system we use is the ToxCup  
Drug Screen  Cup    We will use a  5 panel  Screen Cup on-site ToxCup system for detection of cocaine,  
methamphetamine, THC, benzodiazepine,  and opioids  at each  assessment  visit.  Breathalyzer  samples 
will be collected  at each assessment to monitor alcohol use.   Individuals who  miss follow-ups or re-
initiate methadone  or buprenorphine will be considered  to be relapsed.  
The 11-item  Clinical Opioid Withdrawal Scale (COWS ) (47, 48), a  widely used  and validated  
rating scale, will be used at  each assessment visit during taper  to evaluate withdrawal  symptoms
 The Perceived Stress Scale (49)  is a brief,  widely used measure of perceived stress.
 The Sleep Problems  Questionnaire, a 4-item measure of insomnia during the past 1 month(50), 
will be used  to monitor sleep patterns   (51-53).
Pain will be assessed  at baseline, during taper, and at each follow-up using the Brief Pain 
Inventory-Short form (54)
Adverse events  will be monitored at  each visit through use of the SAFTEE (55), which has been 
used in a  large number of pharmacotherapy  trials (56, 57) .
Inflammatory markers. Opioid medications are  known to  enhance inflammatory markers and the 
serum level of these markers may potentially  predict  treatment  outcomes.  For this reason we will 
collect serum levels of pro-inflamatory  cytokines including Interleukin-1 beta (IL-1β),  Interleukin-2 
(IL-2), Interleukin-6 (IL-6), Interleukin-10 (IL-10), Interleukin 12 p70 (IL12p70), Interferon gamma (IFNg), Tumor Necrosis Factor alpha  (TNFα), Granulocyte-Macrophage Colony  Stimulating Factor 
(GM-CSF). Serum samples will be obtained  at baseline, and  at the end  of taper and at 4-week post 
taper.   The samples  will be assayed  using electrochemiluminescence multi-array technology (Meso 
Scale Discovery, Gaithersburg, MD).
CANTAB. (Optional) We will include tests from  the well-validated computerized CANTAB battery  
(58, 59)   selected specifically for their  likely sensitivity to effects of mifepristone and used in  similar 
ongoing trials with alcohol dependent  populations (60).  Paired Associate Learning  (PAL)  which 
assesses episodic memory and learning  of geometric patterns and spatial locations, Delayed Pattern 
Recognition Memory  (PRM), which  assesses short-term recognition  memory for geometric patterns, 
and Rapid  Visual  Information Processing (RVIP), a test  of visual sustained  attention with a small  
working memory component.
Instrument nameRater Screen 4-6 week 
taperEnd of 
taper4 weeks 
post taperFollow-up 
2 week  
1, 3 mo
Informed Consent Quiz P x
Baseline Demographics, including 
DSM-V screenerRA x
Inclusion/Exclusion  RA x
Follow-up contact & tracking sheet RA x x
BASIS RA x
Urine toxicology screen, breathalyzer RA x weekly x x x
Inflammatory markers MD x x x
COWS (withdrawal symptoms) MD x weekly x x
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 10/10/2018 VALID THROUGH 11/7/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 10/10/2018 VALID THROUGH 11/7/2019                                                                                                                                                                       HIC# 2000021868
                                                                                                                                                                                     
Page  10 of 28Substance Use Calendar (SUC) RA x weekly x x x
Perceived Stress Scale P x x x x
Sleep Problems Questionnaire P x x x x
CANTAB subtests (Optional) RA x x x
Brief Pain Inventory P x weekly x x x
Patient satisfaction P, PC x x
SAFTEE (adverse events) MD weekly x x x
SAE Reporting Form  (as needed) PC
5.Genetic Testing   N/A ☒
6.Subject Population: Provide a detailed  description  of the types of human  subjects  who will be recruited into 
this study.
Participants will be  30 opioid-dependent adults enrolled the methadone maintenance or 
buprenorphine programs  of the APT Foundation and who provide written  informed consent.  
Participants will be  recruited from those  enrolled in methadone or  buprenorphine treatment and  
stable for at least  one year and are voluntarily requesting taper.  In this and other community 
programs in which  we have worked,  we have recruited samples that are roughly 40% members of 
racial and ethnic minority groups.  We will not include individuals younger  than 18, as MAT 
program require patients to be 18 or  older.   Health  in our samples is generally good, but participants 
often experience a  variety of comorbidities  related to chronic substance use.
7.Subject classification:  Check off all classifications of subjects  that will be specifically recruited for enrollment in 
the research project. Will subjects  who may require additional  safeguards or other considerations be enrolled 
in the study? If so, identify the population of subjects requiring  special safeguards and provide a justification  
for their  involvement.
☐Children ☐ Healthy  ☐Fetal material, placenta, or dead fetus
☐Non-English Speaking ☐ Prisoners ☐Economically  disadvantaged  persons
☐Decisionally Impaired ☐ Employees ☐Pregnant women  and/or fetuses
☐Yale Students ☐ Females of childbearing potential
NOTE: Is this research  proposal  designed  to enroll children who are wards of the state  as potential subjects?
Yes ☐  No ☒ 
8.Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria: What  are the criteria  used to determine  subject  inclusion or exclusion?
Eligibility will be determined by the  project  physician, Dr. Shi, following screening/baseline 
assessment and physical exam.  
Individuals will be  included who:  
Are male and females, between the ages  of 18 and 65
Are enrolled in the  APT methadone or buprenorphine program, have been stabilized  for at least one  
year, and  who voluntarily wish to taper off MAT.   
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 10/10/2018 VALID THROUGH 11/7/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 10/10/2018 VALID THROUGH 11/7/2019                                                                                                                                                                       HIC# 2000021868
                                                                                                                                                                                     
Page  11 of 28For women of  child-bearing age, have  a negative serum pregnancy test at screening, agree to 
adequate contraception to prevent pregnancy, and  agree  to have  monthly  urine pregnancy tests at the 
clinic.   
Are fluent in English  and have  a 6th grade or higher reading level.
Can commit  to at  least 12 weeks of treatment  and are willing to be  randomized  to treatment
Individuals will be  excluded who:
Are undergoing administrative  (non-voluntary) tapering (e.g., example due  to non-
payment of program fees, program  rule infractions).
Meet DSM-V psychiatric classifications  for lifetime schizophrenia or  bipolar  disorder, 
or have  a depressive  or anxiety  disorder  with current use of a prescribed psychotropic 
medication that cannot be  discontinued;
Current DSM-V diagnosis of drug or  alcohol use disorder (other than opioids  or 
tobacco); 
Demonstrate significant medical conditions, including asthma or chronic obstructive lung disease, history or  current  gastrointestinal ulcer, hepatic or renal impairment and  
cardiac rhythm  disturbances or  any other medical conditions that the study physician  
deems contraindicated  for galantamine  treatment; 
Use of other medications including  a)  drugs that slow heart rate (e.g., beta-blockers),which may 
increase the risk of bradycardia and AV block and b) NSAIDs; increased  potential  for 
developing ulcers/active or occult  gastrointestinal bleeding (44) ; 
Have a screening liver function  test (AST or ALT) greater than 3 times normal; 
Known allergy or  adverse reaction to galantamine  
9.How will eligibility be determined,  and by whom?  Write here
Eligibility will be determined by the  project  physician, Dr. Shi, following screening/baseline 
assessment and physical exam
10.Risks: Describe the reasonably  foreseeable risks, including risks to subject  privacy, discomforts, or 
inconveniences associated with  subjects  participating in the research. 
a. Tapering
Standard methadone or  buprenorphine tapering  procedures well-established and in  place at  the Central 
Medical Unit.   Risks therefore are no different from standard procedures at this setting.
b.Computer-assisted training program
The ‘CBT4  CBT’  program will be delivered in addition to standard  tapering procedures at the clinic.  
The program is modeled  closely  on the CBT treatment manual that has been evaluated in several  
randomized clinical trials  (46) and which is widely accepted as an empirically  validated  treatment for 
substance dependence  (51).   We have  completed  several large trials  of the program  and have  found it 
safe and effective for this  population (18-21).  We  have not observed any adverse  effects related  to use 
of the program in over 300  outpatients  with substance use disorders.   
Thus, while we believe  adverse events, such as increases in  craving or suicidal ideation associated with 
the use of the computer program, are likely to be rare, we will nevertheless continue to  be vigilant in  
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 10/10/2018 VALID THROUGH 11/7/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 10/10/2018 VALID THROUGH 11/7/2019                                                                                                                                                                       HIC# 2000021868
                                                                                                                                                                                     
Page  12 of 28case of their  occurrence.  Thus, the research assistant will supervise the participants’ use and  
understanding of the program closely,  and Dr. Carroll will be  available  to monitor  patients’ reactions to  
the program and to answer any clinical issues.   A member  of the research staff will check-in  with  
participants on  a weekly basis.  In addition, participants will be  notified  at both  login and logoff  that any 
feelings or  thoughts that  concern them (such  as craving, anxiety, and particularly thoughts about 
harming themselves or others),  should be  discussed immediately with  their  counselor,  the Dr.  Carroll 
and Dr. Shi.  
Thus, psychological risks appear to be minimal and  not different  from those of equivalent non-study 
psychotherapeutic interventions.  For each treatment  condition, frequent monitoring (at least weekly) of 
the patient’s clinical status by research staff will insure identification and withdrawal from the study of 
participants who  show significant psychological  or symptomatic deterioration.  
c.Galantamine 
Galantamine is a  generally well-tolerated medication  and has a good safety profile in related populations  
at the same  doses as proposed here (e.g., chronic alcohol dependent  males  undergoing  alcohol 
detoxification).  The doses proposed here (initial dose of 8 mg  up to a maximum  of 16 mg/day) is lower 
than the typical maintenance dose of 16-24 mg/day.  Common  adverse  events (>5%)  include weight loss  
(5% to 7%), diarrhea (6%  to 12%),  loss of appetite  (7% to 9%), nausea (13% to 24%), vomiting (6% to 
13%, dizziness (9%), headache (8%). Other  less common adverse events include bradyarrhythmia (2%), 
cardiac dysrhythmia (infrequent),  heart failure (infrequent), esophageal  perforation (rare), 
gastrointestinal hemorrhage, rectal hemorrhage  (infrequent), thrombocytopenia (infrequent) and death 
(very rare). To minimize the risk of adverse events, participants will be closely  monitored  during  study 
participation with  daily  visits to the CMU during taper and weekly post-taper and  close monitoring  of 
adverse events by the program nurse  and physician as well as the research staff.
In previous clinical trials,  galantamine’s safety  and efficacy have been evaluated in  different patient 
populations including  Alzheimer’s disease,  mild cognitive impairment, Parkinson’s disease, Attention 
Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD),  chronic  fatigue  syndrome,  schizophrenia and alcohol 
dependence (37-43, 61-63).   A recent  meta-analysis  of 10 clinical  trials which included 6805 patients 
with Alzheimer’s disease or mild cognitive  impairment (41) . The adverse  events  reported include 
tremor; anorexia; vomiting; nausea;  weight  loss;  headache;  abdominal  pain; diarrhea; dizziness; and 
agitation. For the  8mg/day dose, none of the  adverse events was statistically significantly more frequent 
than placebo treatment.  At 16mg/day  dose, nausea,  vomiting  and diarrhea were statistically significantly 
more frequent than placebo. Similarly, at 24 mg /day dose nausea, vomiting, dizziness, weight loss,  
anorexia, tremor and headache were statistically  significant. This  analysis concluded that, galantamine 
was generally well-tolerated and the  frequency  of adverse events  seem to be dose-related (41).
Altogether, these studies support the safety  of galantamine in different  patient populations including 
those with alcoholism.  Adverse effects of  galantamine seem to  be dose-related,  with more frequent 
adverse effects over the  16 mg/day  dose.
                 d.  Urine and  breath specimen  collection
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 10/10/2018 VALID THROUGH 11/7/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 10/10/2018 VALID THROUGH 11/7/2019                                                                                                                                                                       HIC# 2000021868
                                                                                                                                                                                     
Page  13 of 28Urine and  breath specimens are  collected  primarily as safeguards to  participants and should add  no risks  
other than those normally associated with these procedures.
e. Blood  draws
Less than 50cc’s of blood will be drawn  for routine laboratory  evaluations  and for inflammatory markers 
and should add  no risks other than those normally associated with  these procedures.  
f.  Rating scales  and questionnaires.
These are all brief, non-invasive, should add  no risk, and  have  been used without difficulty or any  
adverse events in our  previous studies with this population.  Our  past experience with these measures  
indicates that they are acceptable to patients.  Careful efforts aimed at maintaining confidentiality have  
been effective  in previous  research, and only patients’ code numbers will be  recorded  on the forms 
themselves to protect confidentiality.
11.Minimizing Risks: Describe the manner in which the above-mentioned  risks  will be minimized.
The screening of  patients using the inclusion and  exclusion  criteria, medical  exam  and the urine 
toxicology screens are intended to identify participants  who are appropriate  for the study.  Conducting  
the study at a primary care center with on-site medical staff and frequent visits and monitoring by medical and research  staff will minimize  the risks of adverse events and assure that they are managed 
quickly if  they do occur.  Confidentiality in regards  to collected materials will be maintained via a  
numbered reference system maintained by the research assistant.  Participants’ names will appear only on a consent form and “key” form  kept by the research assistant.  Participants will be withdrawn from  
the treatment arm of the  study if they  show  severe  psychological or symptomatic deterioration if 
clinically necessary for ethical or safety purposes.  Participants withdrawn from a  study for these reasons  
or because they wish  to withdraw from a  study  will be offered treatment as usual  at the  clinic  or be 
referred to a higher level of care when  appropriate.   Private referral and/or hospitalization  may also  be 
offered according to the participants’ needs  and wishes. 
To minimize the risk adverse effects of  galantamine in our  study,  following  precautions will be taken:
1)Following  the manufacturer’s recommendations, the galantamine dose will be started  at 
8mg/day. Participants will be maintained on this  dose for 4 weeks  and if they tolerate the 8 mg 
dose, the  dose may be increased to a maximum of to16  mg/day. Galantamine doses over 16 
mg/day are associated  with more frequent adverse events and will not be used in this  study.
2)We chose methadone  and buprenorphine  maintained patients  voluntarily  seeking taper off MAT  
as our participant population.  Participants will come to the clinic to  attend weekly research  visits 
and obtain weekly supply of study medication. This will allow close monitoring of compliance as well as any adverse effects from  galantamine treatment (44). In addition,  participants will see 
the clinic nurse weekly for  a systematic evaluation of any adverse  events.
3)Potential participants will be carefully screened to  rule out medical  conditions  that may increase 
the possibility of adverse events.  These  include asthma or chronic  obstructive  lung  disease, 
history or current  gastrointestinal ulcer, hepatic  or renal impairment and  cardiac  rhythm 
disturbances (44).  
4)Participants will be  warned and  closely monitored for concomitant use of drugs  that may cause 
drug interactions with galantamine.  These include a) drugs that slow heart rate (eg, beta-
blockers), which may increase the risk of bradycardia and AV block and b) NSAIDs; increased potential for developing  ulcers/active or occult gastrointestinal bleeding (44).
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 10/10/2018 VALID THROUGH 11/7/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 10/10/2018 VALID THROUGH 11/7/2019                                                                                                                                                                       HIC# 2000021868
                                                                                                                                                                                     
Page  14 of 2812.Data and Safety Monitoring  Plan:  Include  an appropriate Data and Safety  Monitoring  Plan (DSMP) based  on 
the investigator’s risk assessment stated below. (Note: the HIC will make the final determination of the risk to 
subjects.)
a. What is the investigator’s assessment of the overall risk level for subjects  participating in this 
study?   Greater  than  minimal
b. If children are involved, what  is the investigator’s assessment of the overall risk level for the 
children participating  in this study? N/A
c. Include an appropriate Data and Safety Monitoring Plan. Examples of DSMPs are  
available here  http://your.yale.edu/policies-procedures/forms/420-fr-01-data-and-safety-
monitoring-plans-templates for
i.Minimal risk
ii.Greater than minimal
A Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) will monitor this  and all Center projects  because this  
population might be  considered vulnerable due to their substance  use.  The overall risks  are moderate 
and adverse effects of Galantamine include weight loss (5%  to 7%), diarrhea (6% to 12%), loss of 
appetite (7% to 9%),  nausea (13% to 24%), vomiting (6% to  13%, dizziness (9%), headache (8%). Other 
less common adverse  events include  bradyarrhythmia (2%),  cardiac dysrhythmia (infrequent),  heart 
failure (infrequent),  esophageal perforation  (rare), gastrointestinal hemorrhage, rectal hemorrhage 
(infrequent), thrombocytopenia (infrequent)  and death (very rare). These will be  monitored  and recorded 
by study  staff  and reported to the DSMB per  protocol. This  board, already in place for  Dr. Carroll and  
Sofuoglu’s other NIH-supported projects, is composed of Yale  investigators who are  independent of the 
trial and experienced in various aspects of the  conduct of clinical trials for the treatment of addictive 
disorders   We use a standard  DSMB  report form that is used in all  Center and Center-related trials  that 
summarizes on a quarterly  basis:
1.  Recruitment,  retention,  and follow-up rates for  the study and compares them to target  rates.
2.  Rates of data completeness and availability of primary outcome data
3.  Occurrence of AEs  and SAEs
4.  Report of study  progress  since the last report.   
5.  Rates of recruitment of women, minorities, and  children with  respect to  targeted rates.
Because the projected effect sizes  may not be large enough for detection during interim  analyses, we  are 
not proposing a preliminary analysis of accumulating  efficacy  and safety  data  by treatment  assignment.  
Instead, we propose to submit a quarterly report of  aggregate data  to the DSMB members that contains  
screening data, baseline demographics,  retention  data, serious adverse events data, as well as accrual 
status including projections, times to milestones, and any other data that will help in  the assessment of 
the clinical trial. Based  on this  report,  each DSMB member will complete a form making  one of two 
recommendations: 1) continue recruitment as  planned; or 2) schedule formal  DSMB  meeting  
immediately. If any DSMB member recommends a meeting, this will be scheduled within one  week, 
minutes will be  kept,  the report  will be  reviewed  with the PI,  and the committee  will vote on whether the 
study should: 1)  continue recruitment unchanged; 2) continue with a protocol  amendment; 3) stop 
recruiting pending further  investigation. If, after this meeting, any DSMB member votes to stop 
recruitment or requests a  protocol modification, the Yale IRB will be informed.
Participants who experience a  significant  psychiatric or  medical  problem requiring  an overnight 
hospitalization at an acute care facility will be considered to have experienced an SAE.  In general, most  
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 10/10/2018 VALID THROUGH 11/7/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 10/10/2018 VALID THROUGH 11/7/2019                                                                                                                                                                       HIC# 2000021868
                                                                                                                                                                                     
Page  15 of 28SAEs will result in inpatient  care  and thus in transfer from  the methadone/buprenorphine clinic. All  
SAEs will result in the completion of an SAE Form and a  verbal report within one hour to  the Principal 
Investigator (Dr. Carroll), the Co-Investigator (Dr.  Shi) and  the CMU Clinic Director  (Ms.  Henry).   
Within 24 hours, the  following additional individuals will be informed: 1) all co-investigators; 2) the 
DSMB.  All of these individuals will receive a copy of the SAE Form within one week at which  point a 
decision will be made whether to convene a meeting  of the DSMB.  Adverse events that are serious and 
unanticipated and  probably, possibly, or definitely related or adverse events occurring with greater 
frequency than anticipated  will be reported  to Yale  Human Investigation Committee within 48 hours  of 
discovery.
The procedures for  SAE reporting include  written documentation using the clinical notes  related  to the 
adverse event and specific forms detailing  the event  with a sign-off by all  appropriate  supervisory 
personnel. Communication of recommendations and  decisions from all  parties (DSMB, IRB, and APT 
Administration) are made back to the investigator  in a timely manner. We will report all protocol 
amendments or changes  in the informed  consent form  to NIDA  as well as any  temporary  or permanent 
suspension of patient accrual.
d. For multi-site studies for which  the Yale PI serves  as the lead investigator:   N/A
i.How will adverse events and unanticipated  problems involving  risks to subjects  or others be 
reported, reviewed and managed? Write here
ii.What provisions are in place for management of interim results?  Write here
iii. What will the multi-site process be for protocol modifications? Write  here
13.Statistical Considerations: Describe the statistical  analyses that support the study design. 
Write here
This is  a small randomized  pilot  trial to evaluate  the safety and feasibility of galantamine versus  placebo  
plus CBT4CBT to improve successful  transition  from  methadone or buprenorphine  maintenance  to 
abstinence.  The primary outcome  will be relapse to opioid  use within the follow-up  period.    While not  
powered to detect a  significant difference between treatment conditions  in the primary outcome, given  
estimates of relapse as high as 80% in this population, a  success rate of 40-50%  would warrant  further 
evaluation in a larger study.  
Because Dr. Carroll has a potential  conflict of interest in  this protocol, the following procedures will be  
followed per  the plan  approved and on file  with the Yale COI  committee  for Dr.  Carroll’s other  projects  
that involved CBT4CBT:  Dr. Carroll  is not directly involved with the consenting of participants, 
determination of eligibility of participants,  direct collection of study data;  furthermore,  and analysis of 
study data  are conducted by multiple staff, with study  condition not revealed until  analysis is complete.  
SECTION II: RESEARCH INVOLVING DRUGS , BIOLOGICS, RADIOTRACERS,  PLACEBOS AND DEVICES
If this section (or one of its parts, A or B) is not applicable,  check  off N/A and delete  the rest of the section.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 10/10/2018 VALID THROUGH 11/7/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 10/10/2018 VALID THROUGH 11/7/2019                                                                                                                                                                       HIC# 2000021868
                                                                                                                                                                                     
Page  16 of 28A.  RADIOTRACERS ☒N/A
1.Name of the radiotracer: Write here
2.Is the radiotracer FDA approved?     ☐YES ☐NO
If NO, an FDA issued IND is required for the investigational  use unless RDRC assumes  oversight.  
3. Check  one:    ☐IND#  applied for ☐RDRC oversight (RDRC approval will be required prior  to use)
B.  DRUGS/BIOLOGICS    ☐N/A
1.If an exemption from IND filing requirements is sought for a clinical investigation of a drug product that is 
lawfully marketed in the United States, review  the following categories  and complete the category  that 
applies (and delete  the inapplicable categories) :
1.The intention of the investigation is NOT to report  to the FDA as a well-controlled study in support  
of a new indication  for use or to be used to support any other  significant  change in the labeling for 
the drug.☒
2.The drug that is undergoing investigation is lawfully marketed  as a prescription drug product, and 
the intention of the investigation is NOT  to support  a significant change  in the advertising for the 
product.☒
3.The investigation does NOT involve  a route of administration  or dosage level or use in populations 
or other factor  that significantly increases the risks (or decreases  the acceptability of the risks) 
associated with the use of the drug product☒
4.The investigation will be conducted  in compliance with the requirements for institutional (HIC) 
review and with the requirements for informed consent of the FDA regulations (21 CFR Part 50 and 
21 CFR Part 56).☒
5.The investigation will be conducted  in compliance with the requirements regarding promotion and 
charging for investigational drugs.
2. Background Information: Provide  a description of previous  human use, known risks, and data addressing 
dosage(s), interval(s), route(s) of administration,  and any other factors that might influence risks. If this is the first 
time this drug is being  administered to humans, include relevant  data on animal models. 
Galantamine, a  reversible and competitive inhibitor of acetylcholinesterase,  elevates synaptic 
concentrations of acetylcholine which  leads to increased stimulation of both  nicotinic and muscarinic 
receptors. Galantamine also directly stimulates the nicotinic alpha7  and alpha4-beta2 receptors, as an 
allosteric positive modulator. This results in dopamine release in  the mesolimbic/mesocortical 
dopaminergic pathway22, providing an additional mechanism by which  galantamine may enhance 
cognitive function and reduce stimulant  use19, 21, 23.   
Few studies have evaluated galantamine,  either in terms of direct effects on substance use  or as a  
strategy to improve cognitive  impairment: Among 114 alcohol-dependent individuals, galantamine was  
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 10/10/2018 VALID THROUGH 11/7/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 10/10/2018 VALID THROUGH 11/7/2019                                                                                                                                                                       HIC# 2000021868
                                                                                                                                                                                     
Page  17 of 28associated with  significant reductions  in cigarette smoking  compared  with placebo24.  A trial evaluating 
effects of galantamine in 149 recently detoxified  alcohol-dependent  patients  reported no significant  
effects on relapse,  but some evidence  of reduced drinking among those who  relapsed25.  In a randomized 
placebo controlled  pilot study with 14 cocaine-dependent methadone-maintained individuals, 16 mg/day  
galantamine was associated with fewer  cocaine  positive urine specimens, (45% versus 95%, P =.15)  as 
well as a higher proportion of days  of abstinence from cocaine 80% versus 60%, P=.06) relative to 
placebo, with  participants  reporting moderate nausea and fatigue26.  Differential effects on cognitive 
functioning were not seen.  In  a 10-day  proof-of-concept  trial with  34 abstinent cocaine  users,  8/mg/day 
of galantamine was associated  with  significant improvement in the Rapid Visual  Information  Processing 
task (RVP) of the  CANTAB  (Cambridge Neurologic Test Battery) compared with placebo27.  These two 
pilot studies by our group suggested evaluation of galantamine on cocaine use and cognitive functioning was warranted in an a full  randomized clinical  trial.
2.Source:  Identify the source of the drug  or biologic  to be used. 
Purchase from Razadyne  ER, Ortho-McNeil Neurologics, 1125 Trenton Harbourton Road,  
Titusville, NJ 08560
a) Is the drug provided free of charge to subjects? ☒YES  ☐NO  
If yes, by whom?  Study
f.Storage, Preparation and Use:  Describe the method of storage, preparation, stability information, and for 
parenteral products, method  of sterilization and method  of testing sterility  and pyrogenicity.
 This is  a double-blind  study.  Medication will be packaged by the clinic pharmacy and  administered  
by the clinic nurses.  Only the clinic  pharmacist  will hold the key  and will be able  to break the blind 
if necessary.  All participants will be given  a wallet  card with  emergency numbers  in case of 
emergency or if the blind needs  to be broken.   
Check applicable Investigational Drug Service  utilized:
    ☐  YNHH  IDS                                                        ☐  CMHC Pharmacy                                           ☐ West  Haven VA
    ☐  PET Center                                                      ☐    None      
    ☒   Other: APT Foundation Pharmacy
Note: If the YNHH IDS (or comparable service  at CMHC  or WHVA) will not be utilized, explain in detail  how the PI 
will oversee these aspects of drug accountability, storage, and preparation.   
g.Use of Placebo:  ☐Not applicable to this research project
If use of a placebo  is planned, provide a justification  which addresses  the following:
a)Describe the safety and efficacy  of other available therapies. If there  are no other available therapies, state 
this. 
There are no approved  therapies to improve relapse after methadone/buprenorphine taper.   The computerized 
CBT program  will be  provided to all participants as  behavioral  support this exceeds current standard of care.
b)State the maximum total  length  of time a participant  may receive placebo while on the study.  
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 10/10/2018 VALID THROUGH 11/7/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 10/10/2018 VALID THROUGH 11/7/2019                                                                                                                                                                       HIC# 2000021868
                                                                                                                                                                                     
Page  18 of 2810 weeks
c)Address the greatest potential harm that may come  to a participant as a result  of receiving placebo. 
Relapse to drug use is extremely high in this population and no effective medications have  been identified. In 
the case  of relapse,  all participants can  be re-admitted to APT methadone or naltrexone programs or seek 
treatment elsewhere.
d)Describe the procedures  that are in place to safeguard participants receiving placebo. 
Regular monitoring by Dr. Shi and  study staff will alert staff  to patients  whose relapse risk is particularly 
high; they will be  referred as  indicated to a higher  level  of care.  The computerized  CBT  program  is also 
being offered to provided  additional  support to patients  and exceeds current standard of care.
h.Continuation of Drug Therapy After Study Closure   ☐Not applicable to this project
Are subjects  provided the opportunity to continue to receive the study drug(s) after the study has ended?
☐ Yes   If yes, describe the conditions under  which continued access to study  drug(s)  may  apply as well as 
conditions for termination of such access.  Write here
☒ NO   If no, explain  why this is acceptable. 
This is an initial pilot  study of galantamine for this  population.    If galantamine appears to have benefit  for this 
population, we will apply for funding  for a  larger randomized controlled trial.
 B.  DEVICES  ☒N/A
1. Are there any investigational devices used  or investigational procedures performed at Yale-New Haven 
Hospital (YNHH) (e.g.,  in the YNHH  Operating  Room or YNHH Heart and Vascular  Center)?   ☐Yes   ☒No    
SECTION III: RECRUITMENT/CONSENT AND ASSENT  PROCEDURES 
1.Targeted Enrollment:  Give the number of subjects:  
a.Targeted for enrollment at Yale for this protocol: 30
b.If this is a multi-site study, give the total number  of subjects targeted across all sites: N/A
2.Indicate recruitment methods below.  Attach  copies of any recruitment materials that will be used.
☒Flyers ☐ Internet/web postings ☐ Radio
☐ Posters ☐ Mass  email solicitation ☐ Telephone
☐ Letter ☐ Departmental/Center website ☐ Television
☐ Medical  record review* ☐ Departmental/Center research boards ☐ Newspaper
☐ Departmental/Center newsletters ☐ Web-based  clinical trial registries ☒ Clinicaltrails.gov 
☐ YCCI Recruitment database ☐ Social Media  (Twitter/Facebook): 
☐ Other:  
* Requests for medical  records should be made  through JDAT  as described  at 
http://medicine.yale.edu/ycci/oncore/availableservices/datarequests/datarequests.aspx
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 10/10/2018 VALID THROUGH 11/7/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 10/10/2018 VALID THROUGH 11/7/2019                                                                                                                                                                       HIC# 2000021868
                                                                                                                                                                                     
Page  19 of 283. Recruitment Procedures: 
a.Describe how potential subjects  will be identified.  Fliers in APT clinics, referrals from  APT clinicans
b.Describe how potential subjects  are contacted. Potential participants  will be asked  to contact Dr.  Shi or 
research staff.
c.Who is recruiting potential  subjects? Research staff, CMU staff.
4.Assessment of Current  Health Provider Relationship for HIPAA Consideration:
Does the Investigator or any member of the research team have a direct existing clinical relationship  with any 
potential subject? 
☐Yes, all subjects
☒Yes, some of the subjects; 
☐No
If yes, describe the nature of this relationship. 
Dr. Shi and Central  Medical Staff provide  physical examinations for  all patients entering buprenorphine or 
methadone at APT.   CMU  staff also typically supervise medical  care of APT patients undergoing taper.
5.Request for waiver  of HIPAA authorization: (When  requesting a waiver of HIPAA Authorization for either  the 
entire study, or for recruitment  purposes  only.  Note: if you are collecting PHI as part of a phone or email  
screen, you must  request  a HIPAA  waiver for recruitment purposes.)  N/A
Choose one: 
☐ For entire study 
☐ For recruitment/screening purposes  only
☐ For inclusion of non-English speaking subject if short form is being used  and there  is no translated  HIPAA 
research authorization form available on the University’s  HIPAA website at hipaa.yale.edu.
i.Describe why it would be impracticable to obtain the subject’s authorization for use/disclosure of this 
data: Write  here
ii.If requesting a waiver of signed authorization, describe why it would be impracticable to obtain the 
subject’s signed authorization for use/disclosure of this data:  Write here
The investigator assures that the protected health information for which  a Waiver of Authorization has been 
requested will not be reused or disclosed to any person  or entity other than those  listed in this application, except 
as required by law, for authorized oversight  of this research study, or as specifically approved for use in another 
study by an IRB.
Researchers are reminded that unauthorized disclosures of PHI to individuals outside of the Yale HIPAA-Covered 
entity must be accounted for in the “accounting  for disclosures log”, by subject name,  purpose,  date, recipients,  
and a description of information provided.  Logs are to be forwarded to the Deputy  HIPAA Privacy Officer.
6.Process of Consent/Assent: Describe the setting and conditions under which consent/assent will be obtained, 
including parental permission  or surrogate permission  and the steps taken to ensure  subjects’ independent 
decision-making. 
A trained  research staff  member at  the performance site will obtain written  informed consent prior to  
any study related  procedures.  The informed  consent  process will be  conducted  in a private, quiet 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 10/10/2018 VALID THROUGH 11/7/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 10/10/2018 VALID THROUGH 11/7/2019                                                                                                                                                                       HIC# 2000021868
                                                                                                                                                                                     
Page  20 of 28setting.  The staff member and the participant will discuss the basic components described in  the 
consent form.   These include: participation is voluntary and participants may withdraw without 
consequences to clinic services received,  purpose,  procedures, randomization, visit schedule, risks 
and benefits, potential  compensation,  alternatives  to study participation, and  confidentiality.  Study 
medical personnel will meet with potential  participants during  the consenting  process, before 
signatures, to  review the  medical content.  Potential  participants will be  provided an opportunity to  
ask questions and  time  to consider his/her decision  to participate.  A  comprehension  quiz will be 
given to ensure the participant has an  adequate  understanding of study.   A copy of the consent form 
will be given to the  participant.
7.Evaluation of Subject(s) Capacity to Provide  Informed Consent/Assent: Indicate how the personnel obtaining 
consent will assess the potential subject’s  ability  and capacity to consent to the research being proposed. 
We require participants to read and write,  and we will use a multiple-choice test after review of the 
consent form to determine that participants understand the key points of the  research.  The Project 
Coordinator reviews the test with the participant  and clarifies any question which was  incorrectly 
answered
8.Non-English  Speaking  Subjects:  Explain  provisions in place to ensure comprehension for research involving  
non-English speaking subjects.  If enrollment of these  subjects is anticipated, translated  copies of all consent 
materials must be submitted for approval prior to use. 
N/A
As a limited alternative to the above  requirement, will you use the short form* for consenting process  if you 
unexpectedly encounter a non-English speaking individual  interested in study  participation and the translation of 
the long  form is not possible prior  to intended enrollment?  YES ☐  NO ☐
Note* If more  than 2 study participants are enrolled using a short form translated  into the same language, then 
the full consent form should be translated into that language for use the next time a subject speaking  that 
language is to be enrolled.
Several translated short form templates  are available on the HRPP website (yale.edu/hrpp)  and translated HIPAA  
Research Authorization Forms are available on the HIPAA website (hipaa.yale.edu). If the translation  of the short 
form is not available on our website, then the translated  short form needs  to be submitted to the IRB office for 
approval via modification  prior to enrolling  the subject.   Please review the guidance and presentation on use of 
the short form available  on the HRPP website.
If using a short  form  without  a translated HIPAA Research  Authorization Form,  please request a HIPAA waiver in 
the section above. 
9. Consent  Waiver: In certain circumstances, the HIC may grant  a waiver of signed consent, or a full waiver 
of consent, depending on the study.  If you will request either a waiver of consent,  or a waiver of signed  consent 
for this study, complete  the appropriate section below.  
☒Not Requesting any consent waivers 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 10/10/2018 VALID THROUGH 11/7/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 10/10/2018 VALID THROUGH 11/7/2019                                                                                                                                                                       HIC# 2000021868
                                                                                                                                                                                     
Page  21 of 28SECTION  IV: PROTECTION OF RESEARCH  SUBJECTS
    Confidentiality & Security  of Data:
1.What protected health information (medical  information along  with the HIPAA identifiers) about subjects will 
be collected and used  for the research?    
Our study forms have been designed  to avoid collecting identifiable  information (e.g., no PHI is 
collected on CRFs).  We generally  collect only  names and protocol session dates.  The  latter  are 
changed to 'number  of sessions completed' if data sets are released to other  Yale investigators.   
As below, names appear only on the consent and HIPPA forms and the ‘key form’.
The health information collected  for this study are substance use  history, adverse reaction 
symptoms, current medications, previous hospitalizations and health related services used.
Research data are collected on CRFs, and  sent to data managers in our research  offices on a 
closed secure  network.  All computers used by research staff are password protected.   No 
identifying information  is on CRFs.
The screening  of patients using the inclusion and  exclusion  criteria, and the comprehensive 
evaluations will minimize the risk of including  subjects with  insignificant  substance use (or who 
are otherwise inappropriate  for the study).  
Confidentiality in regards to collected materials will  be maintained via a numbered reference  
system maintained  by the Project Director.   Participants' names will appear only on the  consent 
form, HIPPA authorization form, and  "key" form kept by the Project Director.  
Limits to confidentiality  include only disclosure  of acute suicidality, homicidality, or abuse of a 
minor, as  is standard in clinical  practice.
Data are stored at  our secure data management center; data sets do not  include  identifying  
information.  At the  conclusion of the study, all  locator data  are destroyed.  Source data  is 
generally destroyed  3 years after  completion  of the study at a  secure location (Iron Mountain) 
and destroyed by Iron Mountain or Shred-It.  
The funding agency, NIDA, may access the  data for routine audits.
All research  staff and  clinicians receive annual  Good Clinical Practice training  through  the Core.  
Our data collection and management procedures are fully compliant with HIPAA.
2.How will the research data be collected, recorded  and stored? See above
3.How will the digital  data be stored? ☐CD  ☐DVD  ☐Flash Drive  ☐Portable Hard  Drive   ☒Secured Server  
☐Laptop Computer  ☒Desktop Computer   ☐Other
4.What methods and procedures will be used to safeguard the confidentiality and security of  the identifiable 
study data and the storage media indicated  above during and after the subject’s participation in the study?
 See above
All portable devices  must contain encryption  software, per University Policy 5100.  If there  is a technical reason a 
device cannot  be encrypted  please submit an exception  request to the Information  Security,  Policy and Compliance 
Office by clicking on url http://its.yale.edu/egrc or email it.compliance@yale.edu
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 10/10/2018 VALID THROUGH 11/7/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 10/10/2018 VALID THROUGH 11/7/2019                                                                                                                                                                       HIC# 2000021868
                                                                                                                                                                                     
Page  22 of 285.What will be done with the data  when the research  is completed? Are there plans to destroy the identifiable 
data? If yes, describe how, by whom and when  identifiers  will be destroyed. If no, describe how  the data and/or 
identifiers will be secured. 
Data are stored at our secure data management center; data sets do not include identifying information.  
At the conclusion  of the study, all locator  data are destroyed.  Source data is generally destroyed  3 
years after completion of  the study  at a secure location and destroyed by Shred-It.
6.If appropriate, has a Certificate of Confidentiality  been obtained?
Per the Notice of Changes to NIH Policy for Issuing Certificates of Confidentiality (NOT-OD-17-109), 
effective October 1, 2017, this research is covered by a Certificate of Confidentiality.
SECTION V: POTENTIAL BENEFITS
Potential Benefits: Identify any benefits  that may be reasonably expected to result  from  the research, either  to 
the subject(s) or to society  at large. (Payment  of subjects is not considered a benefit in this context of the risk 
benefit assessment.) 
Benefits to subjects include significant  psychotherapeutic exploration  through the provision  of the 
computerized cognitive behavioral training  program.   The major potential benefit in this study is in  
reduced risk of relapse which may, in turn, foster  improvement in subjects legal, medical, interpersonal,  
psychological and occupational  functioning.
         SECTION  VI: RESEARCH  ALTERNATIVES AND ECONOMIC  CONSIDERATIONS
1.Alternatives: What other  alternatives are available to the study subjects outside  of the research? 
Individuals who do not wish to participate  or who are ineligible for the trial will be referred to 
standard treatment at the  APT Foundation methadone or buprenorphine program or other  appropriate 
programs in the  New Haven  area.
2.Payments for Participation (Economic Considerations): Describe any payments that will be made to subjects, 
the amount and schedule of payments,  and the conditions for receiving  this compensation.
All subjects will be  offered a material inducement for participation in  study evaluations including 
$25 for screening, $25 for the pretreatment assessment, these payments will be in  the form of a  gift 
card. Participants will be  offered the optional CANTAB assessment  at 3 separate timepoints  
(screening, end  of taper and 4 weeks post taper) for  which  they  will be  paid $20 at each  timepoint.  
However, they must complete the first timepoint (screening) to  be considered  to participate in the 
remaining 2.  Participants will be paid  $10 for each weekly research assessment visit completed and 
$10 each week for  urine toxicology screen during the 8–10 week  treatment  phase  of the study 
($20/week for 8 -10 weeks), $30 for end of taper interview, $35 for an endpoint  interview,  $40 for 2-
week follow-up, $45 for  one-month follow-up,  and $50 for  three-month follow-up,  these will be 
cash payments.  For a possible total of $470 - $510.  Payments to  the participants will be prorated for 
those who  withdraw  prematurely; that is, they will receive payment only for those  assessments they  
complete.  
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 10/10/2018 VALID THROUGH 11/7/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 10/10/2018 VALID THROUGH 11/7/2019                                                                                                                                                                       HIC# 2000021868
                                                                                                                                                                                     
Page  23 of 283.Costs  for Participation (Economic Considerations): Clearly  describe the subject’s costs  associated with 
participation in the research, and the interventions or procedures of the study that will be provided at no cost 
to subjects.  
Subjects will not be  charged for ancillary treatments (the CBT4CBT program) or evaluations they 
receive at the  clinic.  Subjects  will be charged for  treatment  as usual  at the clinic;  where  most  
patients receive treatment  with no-out of  pocket  expenses or on a sliding scale.  Study medication  
will be provided  at no cost to subjects.  
4.In Case of Injury: This section is required for any research involving more than  minimal risk, and for minimal 
risk research that presents  the potential for physical harm (e.g.,  research involving blood draws).
Should injuries occur, the participant would be assessed and referred appropriately by the staff of the Central Medical Unity of the APT Foundation.  The  participant’s insurance carrier  will be expected 
to pay the costs of medical care.   No additional  financial compensation for injury is available
a.Will medical  treatment  be available if research-related injury occurs? Yes
b.Where and from whom may treatment  be obtained? At the Central  Medical Unit of the APT 
Foundation
c.Are there any limits to the treatment  being  provided?  Limited  outpatient care only.
d.Who will pay for this treatment? Patient insurance
e.How will the medical treatment be accessed by subjects? CMU  referral
IMPORTANT REMINDERS
Will this study  have a billable service?  Yes ☐  No☒
A billable service is defined as any service  rendered  to a study subject that, if he/she was not on a study,  would 
normally generate a bill from  either Yale-New  Haven  Hospital or Yale Medical Group to the patient  or the patient’s 
insurer. The service may or may not be performed  by the research staff on your study, but may be provided by 
professionals within either Yale-New Haven Hospital or Yale Medical Group (examples include  x-rays, MRIs, CT 
scans, specimens sent to central labs,  or specimens sent to pathology). Notes: 1. There is no distinction  made  
whether the service is paid for by the subject or their insurance (Standard of Care)  or by the study’s  funding 
mechanism (Research Sponsored). 2. This generally includes new services  or orders placed in EPIC for research 
subjects. 
If answered, “yes”, this study will need to be set up in OnCore, Yale’s clinical research management  system, for 
Epic to appropriately route research  related  charges. Please contact oncore.support@yale.edu
Are there any procedures  involved in this protocol that will be performed at YNHH or one of its affiliated entities?  
Yes ☐  No ☒ 
If Yes, please answer questions a through c and note  instructions below.   
a. Does your  YNHH privilege delineation currently include the specific procedure that you will perform? Yes ☐  No  
☐
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 10/10/2018 VALID THROUGH 11/7/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 10/10/2018 VALID THROUGH 11/7/2019                                                                                                                                                                       HIC# 2000021868
                                                                                                                                                                                     
Page  24 of 28b. Will you be using any new equipment or equipment that you have not used in the past  for this procedure? Yes 
☐  No ☐
c. Will a novel approach using existing equipment be applied? Yes ☐  No ☐
 
If you answered “no”  to question 4a, or "yes" to question  4b or c, please contact the YNHH Department  of 
Physician Services (688-2615) for prior approval  before commencing with  your research protocol.
IMPORTANT REMINDER ABOUT RESEARCH AT YNHH  
Please note that if this protocol includes Yale-New Haven Hospital patients, including  patients  at the HRU, the 
Principal Investigator  and any co-investigators  who are physicians or mid-level  practitioners (includes PAs, APRNs, 
psychologists and speech pathologists)  who may have  direct patient  contact  with patients on YNHH premises 
must have medical staff appointment and appropriate clinical privileges at YNHH.  If you are uncertain whether 
the study personnel  meet the criteria, please telephone  the Physician  Services  Department at 203-688-2615. By 
submitting this protocol as a PI, you attest that you and any co-investigator  who may have patient contact has a 
medical staff  appointment  and appropriate clinical privileges at YNHH.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 10/10/2018 VALID THROUGH 11/7/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 10/10/2018 VALID THROUGH 11/7/2019                                                                                                                                                                       HIC# 2000021868
                                                                                                                                                                                     
Page  25 of 28Literature cited
1. SOFUOGLU M., W ATERS A. J., POLING J., CARROLL K.  M. Galantamine  improves sustained 
attention in chronic cocaine users, Experimental and  clinical  psychopharmacology 2011: 19: 11-
19.
2. SOFUOGLU M., CARROLL K. M. Effects of galantamine on cocaine use in  chronic  cocaine  users,  
The American journal on addictions / American Academy of Psychiatrists in Alcoholism  and 
Addictions 2011: 20: 302-303.
3. CARROLL K. M., DE VITO E. E., SHI J. M., NICH C., S OFUOGLU M. A randomized trial of 
galantamine and  computerized cognitive  behavioral  therapy for  methadone  maintained 
individuals with cocaine use disorder.,  Journal of Clinical Psychiatry  In press.
4. MANN K., ACKERMANN K., DIEHL  A., EBERT D., MUNDLE G.,  NAKOVICS H.  et al. Galantamine:  
A cholinergic  patch in the treatment of  alcoholism:  A randomized,  placebo-controlled trial, 
Psychopharmacology 2006: 184: 115-121.
5. MATTICK  R. P., BREEN C., KIMBER  J., DAVOLI M.  Buprenorphine maintenance  versus placebo or 
methadone maintenance for opioid dependence, The Cochrane  database  of systematic reviews 
2014: 2: CD002207.
6. SCHUCKIT  M. A. Treatment of Opioid-Use Disorders, The New England  journal of medicine 
2016: 375: 357-368.
7. JONES C.  M., CAMPOPIANO M., BALDWIN G., MCCANCE-KATZ E.  National  and State Treatment 
Need and Capacity for Opioid  Agonist Medication-Assisted Treatment, American journal of 
public health  2015: 105:  e55-63.
8. GOSSOP M., M ARSDEN  J., STEWART D., TREACY S. Outcomes after methadone maintenance and 
methadone reduction treatments: two-year follow-up results from  the National Treatment 
Outcome Research Study, Drug and alcohol  dependence 2001: 62: 255-264.
9. MAGURA S., ROSENBLUM A. Leaving  methadone treatment:  Lessons  learned, lessons forgotten,  
lessons ignored, Mount Sinai Journal of Medicine  2001:  68: 62-74.
10. KORNOR  H., W AAL H. From opioid maintenance to abstinence: a  literature  review, Drug and  
alcohol review 2005: 24: 267-274.
11. DEGENHARDT  L., BUCELLO C., MATHERS  B., BRIEGLEB C., A LI H., HICKMAN M. et al. Mortality 
among regular  or dependent users  of heroin and other opioids: a systematic review and meta-
analysis of  cohort studies, Addiction 2011: 106: 32-51.
12. BELL J., TRINH L.,  BUTLER B., RANDALL D., R UBIN G. Comparing retention in  treatment and 
mortality in people  after initial entry  to methadone and buprenorphine treatment, Addiction 
2009: 104: 1193-1200.
13. GIBSON A., DEGENHARDT L., MATTICK  R. P., ALI R., W HITE  J., O'BRIEN S. Exposure to  opioid 
maintenance treatment reduces long-term mortality, Addiction 2008: 103: 462-468.
14. BALDACCHINO  A., ARMANYOUS M., BALFOUR D. J.  K., H UMPHRIS G.,  MATTHEWS K.  
Neuropsychological functioning  and chronic methadone use:   A systematic review and meta-
analysis, Neuroscience and biobehavioral  reviews 2017: 73:  23-38.
15. TOLIN  D. F. Is cognitive-behavioral therapy more effective  than  other therapies?  A  meta-analytic  
review, Clinical psychology review 2010: 30: 710-720.
16. DUTRA L., S TATHOPOULOU G., BASDEN S. L., L EYRO T. M., P OWERS M. B., O TTO  M. W. A meta-
analytic review  of psychosocial interventions for  substance use disorders, Am J Psychiat 2008:  
165: 179-187.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 10/10/2018 VALID THROUGH 11/7/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 10/10/2018 VALID THROUGH 11/7/2019                                                                                                                                                                       HIC# 2000021868
                                                                                                                                                                                     
Page  26 of 2817. MARLATT  G. A., GORDON J. R. Relapse Prevention:  Maintenance Strategies in the Treatment of 
Addictive Behaviors New York: Guilford;  1985.
18. KILUK  B. D., DEVORE K. A., BUCK M. B., NICH C., FRANKFORTER  T. L., L APAGLIA  D. M. et  al. 
Randomized Trial of Computerized  Cognitive Behavioral Therapy for  Alcohol Use  Disorders: 
Efficacy as a Virtual  Stand-Alone and Treatment Add-On Compared with  Standard Outpatient 
Treatment, Alcoholism, clinical  and experimental research 2016: 40:  1991-2000.
19. CARROLL K. M., B ALL S. A., MARTINO S.,  NICH C., BABUSCIO T. A.,  ROUNSAVILLE B. J. 
Enduring effects of a computer-assisted training program  for cognitive behavioral therapy: a 6-
month follow-up of  CBT4CBT,  Drug and alcohol dependence 2009:  100: 178-181.
20. CARROLL K. M., B ALL S. A., MARTINO S.,  NICH C., BABUSCIO T. A.,  NURO K. F. et al. Computer-
assisted delivery of cognitive-behavioral therapy for addiction: a randomized trial of CBT4CBT, The American journal of  psychiatry  2008: 165: 881-888.
21. CARROLL K. M., KILUK B. D., NICH  C., GORDON M. A.,  PORTNOY G.  A., MARINO D. R. et al. 
Computer-assisted delivery  of cognitive-behavioral therapy: efficacy and durability of 
CBT4CBT among cocaine-dependent  individuals maintained on methadone,  The American  
journal of  psychiatry 2014: 171: 436-444.
22. LUCAS -MEUNIER E., FOSSIER P.,  BAUX G., AMAR M.  Cholinergic  modulation of the cortical 
neuronal network,  Pflugers Arch  2003: 446: 17-29.
23. PERRY E.,  WALKER M., GRACE J., PERRY  R. Acetylcholine in  mind: a neurotransmitter correlate 
of consciousness?, Trends  Neurosci  1999: 22: 273-280.
24. SMYTHIES  J. Section I.  The cholinergic system, Int Rev  Neurobiol 2005: 64:  1-122.
25. HIKIDA T., KITABATAKE Y., PASTAN I., NAKANISHI  S. Acetylcholine enhancement in the nucleus 
accumbens prevents addictive behaviors  of cocaine and morphine,  Proc Natl Acad Sci U S  A 
2003: 100: 6169-6173.
26. LIU H., LAI M., ZHOU X., ZHU  H., LIU  Y., S UN A.  et al. Galantamine attenuates the heroin seeking 
behaviors induced by cues  after prolonged withdrawal in rats, Neuropharmacology  2012:  62: 
2515-2521.
27. GAWEL K., LABUZ K.,  JENDA M., SILBERRING J., KOTLINSKA J. H. Influence  of cholinesterase 
inhibitors, donepezil  and rivastigmine on the  acquisition, expression, and  reinstatement of 
morphine-induced conditioned place preference in  rats, Behav Brain Res 2014:  268:  169-176.
28. KIMURA S.,  OHI  Y., HAJI  A. Effects  of cholinesterase inhibitors  and serotonin-1A receptor  
agonists on morphine-induced ventilatory  depression and antinociception in rats,  Eur J 
Pharmacol 2013: 703: 33-41.
29. BRUERA  E., STRASSER  F., SHEN L., PALMER J. L., W ILLEY  J., D RIVER L.  C. et al. The  effect  of 
donepezil on sedation and other  symptoms  in patients receiving  opioids for cancer pain: a  pilot  
study, J Pain Symptom  Manage  2003: 26: 1049-1054.
30. REISSIG  J. E., RYBARCZYK A. M. Pharmacologic treatment of opioid-induced sedation in  chronic 
pain, Ann Pharmacother 2005: 39: 727-731.
31. SLATKIN N. E., RHINER M., B OLTON  T. M. Donepezil in the treatment of  opioid-induced  sedation:  
report of  six cases, J Pain Symptom Manage  2001: 21: 425-438.
32. MANCUSO  C., SICILIANO  R., BARONE  E., BUTTERFIELD D.  A., PREZIOSI P. Pharmacologists  and 
Alzheimer disease  therapy: to  boldly go where no scientist has gone before, Expert  opinion on 
investigational drugs 2011: 20: 1243-1261.
33. SCHILSTROM B., IVANOV V. B., WIKER C., SVENSSON T.  H. Galantamine enhances dopaminergic 
neurotransmission in vivo  via allosteric  potentiation of nicotinic acetylcholine receptors,  
Neuropsychopharmacology 2007: 32: 43-53.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 10/10/2018 VALID THROUGH 11/7/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 10/10/2018 VALID THROUGH 11/7/2019                                                                                                                                                                       HIC# 2000021868
                                                                                                                                                                                     
Page  27 of 2834. ROUNSAVILLE D., HUNKELE K., EASTON C., AL. E . Making  consent more  informed: 
Preliminary results from  a multiple-choice  test among  probation-referred  marijuana  users 
entering a randomized clinical trial, JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN  ACADEMY OF 
PSYCHIATRY AND THE LAW 2008: 36: 354-359.
35. STOUT R. L., W IRTZ P. W., CARBONARI J. P., DEL BOCA  F. K. Ensuring balanced  distribution  of 
prognostic factors in treatment outcome  research, Journal  of studies on alcohol 1994: 
Supplement 12: 70-75.
36. ROBINSON D. M., PLOSKER  G. L. Galantamine extended release, CNS Drugs 2006: 20: 673-681; 
discussion 682-673.
37. AARSLAND  D., HUTCHINSON M., LARSEN J. P.  Cognitive, psychiatric, and  motor response to  
galantamine in Parkinson's disease  with dementia, International  journal  of geriatric psychiatry 
2003: 18: 937-941.
38. BIEDERMAN J., MICK E., FARAONE S.,  HAMMERNESS P., SURMAN C., HARPOLD T.  et al.  A double 
blind comparison of galantamine  hydrogen bromide and placebo in adults with attention-
deficit/hyperactivity disorder:   A pilot study, Journal of Clinical Pharmacology  2006:  26: 163-
166.
39. BLACKER C.  V., G REENWOOD D. T., WESNES K. A., W ILSON  R., W OODWARD C., HOWE I. et  al. 
Effect of galantamine hydrobromide in chronic  fatique syndrome:  A randomized  controlled  trial,  
JAMA : the journal of the  American Medical  Association 2004:  292: 1195-1204.
40. CAROFF S.  N., WALKER P., CAMPBELL  C., LORRY  A., P ETRO C. J., LYNCH K. G.  et al. Treatment 
of tardive  dyskinesia with galantamine:  A randomized controlled crossover trial, Journal of 
Clinical Psychiatry  2007:  68: 410-415.
41. LOY  C., S CHNEIDER  L. Galantamine  for Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment, The 
Cochrane database of systematic  reviews  2006: CD001747.
42. MANN K., ACKERMANN K., DIEHL  A., EBERT D., MUNDLE G.,  NAKOVICS H.  et al. Galantamine: a  
cholinergic patch  in the treatment of alcoholism:   A randomized, placebo-controlled trial, 
Psychopharmacology (Berl)  2006: 184: 115-121.
43. LEE S. W.,  LEE J. G.,  LEE B. J., KIM Y. H. A 12-week, double-blind  placebo-controlled trial of 
galantamine adjunctive treatment to conventional antipsychotics for the cognitive impairments in chronic schizophrenia, International  journal of Clinical Pharmacology  2007:  22: 63-68.
44. PDR. Physicians Desk Reference Montvale, NJ: Medical  Economics Data; 2007.
45. SAMPSON  J. P., P YLE K. R. Ethical issues involved with  the use of computer-assessed counseling, 
testing, and guidance systems, Personnel and Guidance Journal 1983:  61: 283-287.
46. CARROLL K. M. A Cognitive-Behavioral  Approach:  Treating Cocaine Addiction Rockville,  
Maryland: NIDA;  1998.
47. WESSON D. R., LING W. The  Clinical Opiate Withdrawal Scale (COWS),  Journal of psychoactive 
drugs 2003: 35: 253-259.
48. TOMPKINS  D. A., B IGELOW G. E., HARRISON J.  A., JOHNSON R. E., FUDALA P. J.,  STRAIN E.  C. 
Concurrent validation of the Clinical  Opiate Withdrawal Scale (COWS) and  single-item indices 
against the  Clinical Institute Narcotic  Assessment (CINA) opioid withdrawal instrument, Drug 
and alcohol dependence  2009:  105:  154-159.
49. COHEN S., L ICHTENSTEIN T., MERMELSTEIN R.  A global measure of perceived stress, Journal  of 
Health and Social Behavior  1983: 24: 385-396.
50. JENKINS C. D., S TANTON B. A., NIEMCRYK S.  J., ROSE  R. M.  A scale for the estimation of sleep  
problems in clinical research, Journal of Clinical Epidemiology 1988:  41: 313-321.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 10/10/2018 VALID THROUGH 11/7/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 10/10/2018 VALID THROUGH 11/7/2019                                                                                                                                                                       HIC# 2000021868
                                                                                                                                                                                     
Page  28 of 2851. KARAM-HAGE M., BROWER  K. J. Gabapentin treatment for insomnia  associated with  alcohol 
dependence, American Journal of  Psychiatry 2000: 157:  151.
52. KARAM-HAGE M., BROWER  K. J. An open pilot study of gabapentin versus trazodone  to treat 
insomnia in alcoholic outpatients, Psychiatry Clin Neurosci 2003:  57: 542-544.
53. JENKINS C. D., S TANTON B. A., NIEMCRYK S.  J., ROSE  R. M.  A scale for the estimation of sleep  
problems in clinical research, Journal of clinical epidemiology  1988:  41: 313-321.
54. KELLER  S., BANN C. M., DODD S.  L., SCHEIN J., M ENDOZA T.  R., CLEELAND C. S.  Validity of the 
brief pain inventory for use  in documenting  the outcomes  of patients  with  noncancer pain, The 
Clinical journal  of pain 2004: 20: 309-318.
55. LEVINE J., S CHOOLER N. SAFTEE:  A technique for the  systematic  assessment of side effects in 
clinical trials, Psychopharmacology bulletin 1986: 343-381.
56. COMBINE S TUDY  RESEARCH GROUP . Testing  combined  pharmacotherapies and  behavioral  
therapies in alcohol dependence:  Rationale  and methods, Alcoholism:  Clinical & Experimental  
Research 2003: 27: 1107-1122.
57. JACOBSON A. F., GOLDSTEIN B. J., DOMINGUEZ R. A., S TEINBROOK R. M. Interrater  agreement  
and intraclass reliability measures of SAFTEE in psychopharmacologic clinical trials, Psychopharmacology bulletin 1986: 22: 382-388.
58. ROBBINS T. W.,  JAMES M., OWEN A. M., SAHAKIAN B. J.,  LAWRENCE  A. D.,  MCINNES  L. et al. A 
study of performance on tests from the CANTAB battery  sensitive to frontal lobe dysfunction in  
a large sample  of normal volunteers: implications for theories of executive  functioning  and 
cognitive aging.  Cambridge Neuropsychological Test Automated  Battery, Journal of the 
International Neuropsychological Society : JINS 1998: 4: 474-490.
59. ROBBINS T. W.,  JAMES M., OWEN A. M., SAHAKIAN B. J.,  MCINNES  L., RABBITT P.  Cambridge 
Neuropsychological Test Automated  Battery (CANTAB):  a factor analytic  study  of a large 
sample of  normal elderly volunteers,  Dementia 1994: 5:  266-281.
60. DONOGHUE  K., ROSE A., COULTON S., MILWARD J.,  REED K., DRUMMOND C. et al. Double-blind, 
12 month follow-up, placebo-controlled trial  of mifepristone on cognition in  alcoholics: the 
MIFCOG trial  protocol,  BMC  Psychiatry 2016: 16:  40.
61. SCHUBERT  M. H., YOUNG K. A., HICKS P.  B. Galantamine improves cognition in schizophrenic  
patients stabilized  on risperidone, Biological psychiatry 2006: 60:  530-533.
62. DIEHL A., NAKOVICS H., B. C., SMOLKA M. N., BATRA A., MANN K.  Galantamine reduces 
smoking in alcohol-dependent patients:  A randomized, placebo  controlled  trial,  International 
Journal of  Clinical  Pharmacology & Therapeutics  2006:  44: 614-622.
63. JONES R.  W., S OININEN  H., HAGER  K., AARSLAND D.,  PASSMORE P., M URTHY A. et al. A 
multinational, randomized, 12-week  study comparing the effects of donepezil and galantamine in  
patients with mild to moderate  Alzheimer's disease, International journal of geriatric psychiatry 
2004: 19: 58-67.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 10/10/2018 VALID THROUGH 11/7/2019