Cover sheet  
 
Title of the project  
A validation study of the NightOwl PAT -based home sleep apnea test.  
 
Protocol identifier and date  
NOVS V1. 1 5th January  2020 (Redacted Version)  
 
Protocol amendments  
1 
 
Sponsor   
Ectosense NV  
Bosbessenlaan  19A, 3110 Rotselaar, Belgium  
 
Investigator  
Jagdeep Bijwadia M.D.  
 
Research site  
Plantation Laboratory West  
10059 NW 1st Court  
Plantation, FL  33324  
 
Plantation Laboratory East  
100 NW 82nd Avenue   
Suite 402  
Plantation, FL  33324  
 
Miami Lakes Laboratory  
7745 NW 146th Street  
Miami Lakes, FL  33016  
 
6274 Linton Blvd  
Suite 106  
Delray Beach, FL  33484  
 
Purpose and background  
 
Scientific objectives  
The objective of this study is to evaluate the performance of a miniaturized sleep apnea test, 
called Ni ghtOwl. The system consists of a sensor placed on the fingertip and a cloud -based 
analytics software. The sensor acquires accelerometer and photoplethysmographic data. The 
software derives actigraphy from the former, and blood oxygen saturation and periphe ral 
arterial tone (PAT), among other features, from the latter. In order to assess NightOwl's 
performance, we will compare the respiratory event index (REI), defined as the number of 
respiratory events per hour of sleep, derived by the NightOwl system, to the AHI obtained from 
manual analysis of the polysomnography (PSG), which is the gold standard for sleep apnea 
diagnosis. We will also compare the total sleep time (TST) derived by both systems. This study 
will be performed in a sleep lab environment.  
 
As of March 2017, the new clinical practice guideline for diagnostic testing for adult sleep 
apnea of the American Academy of Sleep Medicine (AASM) for the first time formulates a 
strong recommendation that both polysomnography (PSG) and home sleep apnea tes ting 
(HSAT) are appropriate diagnostic testing options for uncomplicated adult patients who are at 
increased risk of moderate to severe sleep apnea.1  
Collop et al.2 performed a comprehensive analysis of the evidence for HSAT devices to 
diagnose obstructiv e sleep apnea (OSA) in out -of-center settings. The authors concluded that 
testing devices that analyze changes in peripheral arterial tone (PAT) in combination with 
actigraphy and blood oxygen saturation (SpO2) are adequate to diagnose OSA in patient 
popul ations with a high pre -test probability.  
In this study, we wish to assess the performance of a system for the diagnosis of OSA that 
measures and analyzes the abovementioned parameters, called NightOwl. The system consists 
of a small sensor device which is  placed on the fingertip and a cloud -based analytics platform. 
An illustration of the NightOwl sensor can be found in Figure 1.  
 
 
Figure 1: A photograph of the NightOwl sensor positioned on the index finger (source: 
https://www.r esmed.com.au/sleep -apnea/sleep -study)  
 
It is designed to be self -applied and initiated by the patient by attaching the sensor to the 
fingertip by means of an adhesive patch.  
 
Justification for involving humans  
In order to investigate whether the NightOwl achieves adequate performance in deriving the 
REI, we need to apply it to subjects that are undergoing a simultaneous polysomnography study, 
which is the gold standard for sleep apnea diagnosis.   
 
Subjects  
 
Number of subject s 
100 
 
Gender of subjects  
No gender specific bias will be introduced in recruitment, such that the subject sample will 
approximate the gender distribution of subjects admitted to a sleep clinic for an overnight PSG. 
From previous clinical trials, we expect the gender distr ibution to be approximately 60% male 
and 40% female. We do not exclude pregnant women from participating in the study since we 

want to represent this population in our subject pool. As justified below, the NightOwl sensor 
poses negligible risk for the subj ect, pregnant or otherwise.  
 
Subjects age  
We aim to include subjects from the age of 13 and older. The American Academy of Sleep 
Medicine (AASM), which is the leading guideline body in sleep medicine, recommends using 
the adult criteria for the scoring of  respiratory events for young adolescents of at least 13 years 
of age. The AASM recognized that this recommendation would provide the underserved 
adolescent population greater access to sleep studies. Hence in order to represent the full age 
range of subje cts for which the adult scoring rules apply, and for which we want to validate our 
device, we aim to include subjects of 13 years of age and older.  
 
Racial and Ethnic Origin  
We aim to include sufficient enrollment of persons of diverse racial  and ethnic b ackgrounds . 
We will not stratify the subject population on a racial or ethnical basis but will a ssume that the 
subjects population without stratification will represent subjects of a diverse racial/ethnic 
background because of the  significant  subject pool size.  
 
Inclusion criteria  
Subjects with an indication for an in -lab polysomnography  
 
Exclusion criteria  
Intellectually disabled people  
People younger than 13 years of age.  
 
Vulnerable Subjects:   
Children aged 13 or older will not be excluded (rationale p rovided in the Subjects age  
paragraph ). Explicit consent of the parents will be required before inclusion.  
Pregnant wome n will not be excluded (rationale in the Gender of subjects  paragraph ).   
 
Methods and procedures  
 
Overview of study design and procedur es 
The study is open -blind and non -randomized.  
 
During the PSG night:  
• Eligible patients will be invited to participate in the study and will be presented with the 
ICF.  
• If the ICF is accepted, the patient will undergo the scheduled in -lab PSG, in which the 
NightOwl sensor will be included.  
During each study night, the following  flowchart will be followed:  
 
 Figure 2 - Flowchart of study. Experimental signifies procedures that are performed exclusively for 
research purposes.  
 
 
Frequency and duration  
We aim to include between 10 and 19 subjects every  study  night. Each patient has one night of 
recording.  
 
Precautions  
No procedures, situations, or materials are deemed hazardous; hence no specific precautions 
are to be exercised.  See NightOwl Product Risk Analysis (attached)  
 
Sample collection  
Data of the PSG  and NightOwl  will be collected throughout the entire duration o f the overnight 
PSG study.  
 
Detailed procedure for each study night  
For every patient scheduled for an overnight in -lab PSG, the clinical personnel in charge of 
administering the PSG will assess whether the patient is eligible for inclusion (does not viol ate 
the exclusion criteria) to the study (the patient passes the inclusion criteria since he/she has been 
scheduled for a PSG). Every eligible patient will be presented with the ICF. The patient can at 
all time ask for clarifications on the content of the ICF and will be provided with sufficient time 
to read the entire form. Upon signing of the ICF, the patient will be included in the study. For 
subjects  aged under 22, parental consent is required.  
For each subject included during a particular night, the a ge, gender, height, and weight will be 
collected. Additionally, we will ask the subject for a self -report of his/her race and ethnicity. 
The following options will be provided:  
 Patient selection (experimental)
Presentation of informed consent 
to targeted patients 
(experimental)
Application of PSG (standard of 
care) and NightOwl sensor 
(experimental)
Execution of scheduled PSG 
(standard of care) and activation 
of NightOwl sensor (experimental)
 
Table 1: Self -reported options for Ethnicity and Race  
 
The NightOwl  sensor will be attached to the middle finger of the hand on which the pulse 
oximeter of the PSG is applied by means of a disposable adhesive fingerwrap. The NightOwl 
sensor will be switched on and connected to a smartphone on which the NightOwl Companion 
App is installed. The NightOwl Companion App continuously acquires the raw sensor data 
from the NightOwl Sensor and stores this data on its internal memory. After starting the 
acquisition of the NightOwl sensor data via the NightOwl Companion App, the PSG recording 
can be started.  
 
When the personnel press the ‘Wake up’ button in the NightOwl Companion App at the end of 
the PSG study, the data will be uploaded to a secure cloud server in which the raw NightOwl 
Sensor data is stored and on which the NightOwl  Software, which analyses the data, is 
deployed .  
 
After pressing the ‘Wake up’ button in the NightOwl Companion App, the PSG equipment and 
NightOwl sensor will be detached from the subject . The NightOwl Sensor will be disinfected 
and cleaned. The followin g disinfectants can be used on the sensor:  
 
• Mikrozid  
• Clorox  
• Lysol  
• Cavicide  
• 70% Ethyl alcohol or isopropyl alcohol (IPA)  

 
 
 
Details of acquired dataset for each subject  
Throughout the study, the following data will be collected for each included subject:  
• Polysomnographic data (EDF format), by means of export from the sleep clinics’ PSG 
software   
• Respiratory events and sleep  stages annotated by the sleep technician (EDF, TXT, or CSV 
format), by means of export from the sleep clinics’ PSG software  
• NightOwl sen sor data, by means of export from the NightOw l database:  
o red and infrared PPG from finger (CSV)  
o accelerometry from finger (CSV)  
• Subject ’s age, gender, weight, height, self -reported ethnicity, and self -reported race  will 
be collected right before administering the PSG.  
 
Potential risks  
 
Risk Category  
The NightOwl sensor has been tested against IEC 60601 -1 (Medical Device Electrical Safety) 
and IEC 60601 -1-2 (Medical Device Electromagnetic Compatibility) standards . It is a low 
voltage device that contains an accelerometer and an optical sensor such as would be found in 
a traditional pulse oximeter. In the FDA guidance document “Pulse Oximeters - Premarket 
Notification Submissions [510(k)s]” it is stated that generally, FDA believes pulse oximeters 
addressed by this guidance document are non -significant risk devices.  
The Product Risk Analysis, conducted in accordance with ISO14971:2012; Application of Risk 
Mana gement to Medical Devices, is attached.  There are no residual risks that considered to be 
unacceptable.  
Hence, risk of the research is considered minimal . the probability and magnitude of harm or 
discomfort anticipated in the research are not greater than  those ordinarily encountered in daily 
life or during the performance of routine physical or psychological examinations or tests.  
 
Potential Risk and protection against such risk  
A non -serious risk for cytotoxicity or skin irritation caused by the sensor m aterial  being in 
continuous contact with the fingertip for the overnight recording  could be identified. However, 
this risk is deemed negligible since the sensor enclosure material passed ISO10993 -1 compliant 
tests for cytotoxicity and Direct Primary Skin I rritation.  
 
A risk for discomfort of the subject  caused by the tight application of the NightOwl sensor to 
the finger exists. In order to mitigate this risk, the subject will be explicitly encouraged to either 
contact the clinical personnel to reapply the  sensor more loosely or to detach the sensor from  
the finger.  
 
Potential Benefit  
There is no potential benefit for individual subjects  
 
Subject identification, recruitment, and consent/assent  
For every patient scheduled for an overnight in -lab PSG, the cl inical personnel in charge of 
administering the PSG will assess whether the patient is eligible for inclusion (does not violate 
the exclusion criteria) to the study (the patient passes the inclusion criteria since he/she has been 
scheduled for a PSG). Ever y eligible patient will be presented with the ICF. The patient can at 
all time ask for clarifications on the content of the ICF and will be provided with sufficient time 
to read the entire form. The protocol will be discussed with the subject, all question s will be 
answered. The subject will explicitly be asked if all content was clear.  
Upon signing of the ICF, the patient  will be included in the study. For patients aged under 22, 
parental consent is required and both parent and child will be asked if all content was clear. The 
consent forms will be stored. All ICFs will be entered into the IRB’s storage system in unlocked 
word form.  
 
The subject will incur no extra cost as a result of participating in the study.  
 
Compensation of subjects  
The subjects will receive no payment for participating in the study  
 
DATA AND CONFIDENTIALTIY  
 
HIPAA Compliance  
This study will be conducted in full accordance the HIPAA privacy rule. Any episodes of non -
compliance will be documented.   The investigators will p erform the study in accordance with 
this protocol  and will obtain consent (unless a HIPAA waiver of Consent is granted)  and will 
report unexpected problems in accordance with institutional regulatory committee. Collection 
of data will be accurate and will ensure the privacy, health, and welfare of research subjects 
during and after the study. The principal investigator overseeing the conduct of this study and 
the research personnel will comply with the applicable federal, state, and local regulations 
govern ing clinical research and the protection of human research subjects.   
 
Study analysis  
. 
Two main performance analyses will be performed:  
• The evaluation of the Pearson correlation between the REI and TST estimate obtained 
from the NightOwl  and the AHI and T ST determined from the PSG;  
• The evaluation of the agreement between patient categorization (into sleep apnea 
severity categories) obtained by the NightOwl  and those obtained by the manual 
analysis of the PSG.  
 
In order to establish an external benchmark to  which the NightOwl  and PSG analysis could be 
compared, the codified PSG data will be transferred to Younes Medical Technologies Ltd. 
(YMT), the corporation behind the Michele Sleep Scoring System (MSSS) developed by Dr. 
M. Younes. Malhotra et al.3 confirm ed that the MSSS, complemented with manual editing, 
standardizes PSG scoring results within and across sleep centers. Using such external 
benchmark, the impact of inter -scorer variability of current and future reports on NightOwl ’s 
performance metrics is reduced.  
Data Storage and Confidentiality  
The data will be stored in a cloud storage system (Google drive with activated Google Vault) 
protected by password, which is only known by the Principal Investigator and Sponsor. Google 
Vaul t is SSAE 16, SOC 2 audited, and ISO 27001 certified and was specifically designed for 
users to meet legal data retention requirements  
 
An audit trail of all changes made to data files can be reconstructed since each file addition and 
deletion is permanent ly logged. All data will be stored for at least 2 years after the completion 
of the study. All data belonging to the same subject will receive a unique patient code. This 
number will be composed of the center nr (1 to 4) followed by the enrolment nr of tha t subject 
(e.g. the third patient enrolled in center 1 will receive the nr 1 -3).  
For each center, a coding table will be maintained in paper format which maps the patient code 
to the patient’s name. This coding table is securely stored and locked away whe n not in use and 
is temporarily maintained to allow for association between the NightOwl Sensor data (which is 
always coded such that the patient’s name is never transferred to Ectosense NV) and PSG 
(which is coded upon upload to the cloud storage system ). As soon as all PSG  and data of all 
subjects has been exported, coded, and uploaded, the coding table will be perman ently 
destroyed by means of secure shredding in order to render the dataset stored on the cloud storage 
system anonymous.  
 
Only the anonymi zed data stored in the cloud storage system will be used for the analysis 
described above. Hence, none of the researchers performing the statistical analysis will have 
access to uncod ed data.  
 
Questionnaires and data collection sheets  
 
1. Ethnicity and race s elf-reporting questionnaire.  
a. This questionnaire will be coded, scanned and uploaded to the cloud storage 
system for each subject. After uploading the physical copy will be securely 
shredded.  
b. This questionnaire is proposed by the FDA guidance document for the 
Collection of Race and Ethnicity Data in Clinical Trials . 
 
Table 1: Ethnical and racial self -reporting questionnaire  
 
 
2. Subject additional information sheet  
a. This in formation sheet will be coded, scanned and uploaded to the cloud storage 
system for each subject. After uploading the physical copy will be securely 
shredded.  
 
Table 2: Subject additional information sheet  
 
References  
1.  Kapur VK, Auckley DH, Chowdhuri S, et al. Clinical Practice Guideline for Diagnostic 
Testing for Adult Obstructive Sleep Apnea: An American Academy of Sleep Medicine 
Clinical Practice Guideline. J Clin Sleep Med . 2017;1313(3):479 -504. 
doi:10.5664/jcsm.6506 . 
2. Collop NA, Anderson WM, Boehlecke B, et al. Clinical guidelines for the use of 
unattended portable monitors in the diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea in adult 
patients. Portable Monitoring Task Force of the American Academy of Sleep 

Medicine.  J Clin  Sleep Med. 2007;3(7):737 –747.  
3.  Malhotra A, Younes M, Kuna ST, et al. Performance of an automated 
polysomnography scoring system versus computer -assisted manual scoring. Sleep . 
2013;36(April 2013):573 -82. doi:10.5665/sleep.2548.  
 
 
 
 
 