Version                                                                                                 Page 1 of 14 
9-24-19  
 
 
  
 
  
Urine Trypsinogen 2 Dipstick for the  
 Early Detection of P ost-ERCP Pancreatitis 
  
 
Principal Investigator: Jeffrey Easler, MD  
 
 
Assistant Professor of Medicine  
IU School of Medicine  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
Version                                                                                                 Page 2 of 14 
9-24-19  
 
 
 
 
Table of Contents:  
Study Schema  
1.0 Back ground  
2.0 Rationale and Specific Aims  
3.0 Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
4.0 Enrollment/Randomization  
5.0 Study Procedures  
6.0 Reporting of Adverse Events or Unanticipated Problems involving Risk 
to Participants or Others  
7.0 Study Withdrawal/Discontinuation  
8.0 Statistical Considerat ions 
9.0 Privacy/Confidentiality Issues  
10.0  Follow -up and Record Retention  
 
 
Version                                                                                                 Page 3 of 14 
9-24-19 1.0 Background  
 
Post-endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) pancreatitis 
(PEP) is the most common, serious complication of ERCP and accounts for a 
significant proportion of morbidity, mortality, and health care expenditures accrued in the post procedure setting.
3-5 Large studies have shown that PEP 
occurs approximately 4- 10% procedures with a mortality rate up to 0.7%.6-8  
 ERCP is most often performed in the outpatient setting with the expectation for 
patients to be discharged home the same day of the procedure.  Patients are 
often observed for symptoms of complications after procedures. Data suggests prolonged observation (4- 6 hours) captures symptoms indicative of a 
complication in 80% of these patients and consequently prevents un- intended 
discharge with subsequent hospitalizations.
9 However, a standar dized 
observation protocol for this interval of time is not practical at ERCP centers. 
Given 11% of patients require admission after ERCP and fewer patients 
ultimately are verified as having complications; the majority of centers do not 
have a 4- 6 hour obs ervation protocol for post -ERCP care. Moreover, such a 
protocol for all ERCP outpatients would create unnecessary costs, strain on 
recovery room resources (staff, nursing and space), and significant 
inconvenience for patients.10 While several factors including peri -procedural pain, 
history of pancreatitis, and performance of sphincterotomy predict need for 
hospital admission after ERCP, no single clinical factor has proven accuracy. Complex models for predicting adm ission are cumbersome and struggle to 
achieve a AUC ROC beyond 0.90 for predicting need for admission, much less post ERCP pancreatitis.
11 However, while same -day discharge after ERCP is 
widely utilized and relatively safe, it has been associated with readmissions.9 We 
have reported rates of inadvertent discharge and readmission of outpatients with 
post ERCP pancreatitis to occur in up 25%. 12 A recent review of patients 
enrolled in a prospective study, at risk for post ERCP pancreat itis demonstrated 
that rate of inappropriate discharge may occur in over 50% of patients. This delay 
in recognition may be clinically important as this represents a missed opportunity 
for timely interventions. For instance,  early intravenous fluid hydratio n after the 
development of pancreatitis can reduce the morbidity and mortality at least 3-
fold.12,13 
 
By definition, a confirmatory diagnosis of post ERCP pancreatitis requires an assessment well after the ERCP procedure. Post ERCP pancreatitis is defined by the presence of two of three criteria: characteristic abdominal pain, elevation in serum lipase or amylase three times greater than the upper limit of normal assessed 24 hours following ERCP, and characteristic findings of acute pancreatitis on cross sectional imaging.
14.15 Consequently, PEP is confirmed for 
the majority of patients with PEP symptoms in the inpatient setting a day or more after the ERCP procedure. This delay in confirmation requires empiric admission and treatment for PEP for many patie nts that develop suspicious symptoms after. 
Early measurement of serum amylase and lipase levels have been studied; however offer limited accuracy and are by no means practical as a rapid, bedside 
Version                                                                                                 Page 4 of 14 
9-24-19 assessment is not possible given time need for serum collec tion, transport and 
processing.16-19 Also, elevated serum pancreatic enzymes are common in 
asymptomatic patients after ERCP ( up to 75% of patients) with confirmed clinical 
pancreatitis being much less common.20 Therefore, an early diagnostic tool is yet 
to be identified.   
 Trypsinogen is the main proteolytic proenzyme in pancreatic secretions. 
Activation of trypsinogen and other proenzymes is part of the initial pathobiology of acute pancreatitis. Trypsinogen- 2 is an isoenzyme  that peaks at 6 hours with a 
median level of 1790 ug/L in patients with pancreatitis, compared to 3.6ug/L in 
patients without.
21,22 The isoenzyme trypsinogen- 2 is both preferentially elevated 
in pancreatitis23 and poorly reabsorbed in the renal tubules24, making this a 
potentially useful early diagnostic mar ker for acute pancreatitis. In contrast, 
serum amylase peaks at 12 hours and lipase 24 hours after pancreatitis. While amylase and lipase are currently the established diagnostic tests for the diagnosis of PEP; the delay in physiologic peak is likely the r eason their utility as 
an early marker for PEP is limited. A urine trypsinogen- 2 dipstick (UTDT) is 
commercially available for purchase ($3.18/unit) with promising studies for accuracy of its cut point for pancreatitis. Trypsinogen- 2 urine testing for PEP 
potentially offers several advantages including an earlier peak concentration, ease of deployment (at the bedside), interpretation (positive/negative test strip) and a low cost.  
 Actim Pancreatitis (Medix Biochemica)  is a urine trypsinogen- 2 dipstick test 
(UTDT)  that uses trypsinogen- 2 as a biomarker for acute pancreatitis. At a 
cutpoint of 50 ug/L it has been assessed in 3 small prospective studies for the 
diagnosis of PEP.
1,25,26 Kemppainen et al.25 demonstrated an adequate 
sensitivity (81%) and specificity (97%) with the UTDT for diagnosing PEP at 6 hours after ERCP in 106 patients. Limit ations include the impracticality of a 6 
hour testing interval after ERCP and unclear inclusion/exclusion criteria. Sankaralingam et al.
26 demonstrated a very high sensitivity (100%) and 
specificity (96%) with the UTDT for diagnosing PEP at 4 hours after ERCP, but was limited by the small sample size of 29 patients. Tseng et al.
1 demonstrated a 
sensitivity of 85%, specificity of 97%, and a superior accuracy of 96% compared to serum amylase/lipase for the diagnosis of PEP at 3 hours after ERCP  in 150 
patients, but limitations include a high number (100) of excluded patients. A 
meta -analysis of these available studies calculated an overall sensitivity of 86%, 
specificity of 94% and area under the operator curve of 0.92. 
27 However , as 
mentioned above, the published studies suffer from variation in timing of UTDT, 
inclusion/exclusion criteria, and lack of rigorous study design with adequately powered sampled size. Consequently, further study is needed to assess its accuracy of UTDT in the post ERCP setting.  
 The primary study objective is to determine the test characteristics of UTDT for the diagnosis of PEP 2 hours post ERCP.   
 
Version                                                                                                 Page 5 of 14 
9-24-19  
2.0 Rationale and Specific Aims  
 
Post-endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) pancreatitis 
(PEP) is the most common, serious complication of ERCP. More than 500,000 
ERCP procedures are performed from which 25,000 cases of PEP occur in the 
U.S.A. annually. PEP account s for significant morbidity and health care 
expenditures . While symptoms of PEP ari se immediately after ERCP, they are 
non-specific. Consequently, unnecessary admissions of outpatients without PEP 
and inadvertent discharge of outpatients with PEP from ERCP recovery are common. An accurate, confirmatory test for diagnosis of PEP immediately after ERCP is lacking. Urine Trypisinogen- 2 Dipstick test (UTDT)  is a simple, 
inexpensive test with promising preliminary data for accuracy for immediate diagnosis of PEP. Prior studies of ITDT test characteristics lack rigorous scientific 
design.  
 Proposed Study and Methods:  
We will enroll 1825 ERCP outpatients at our institution in a prospective cohort study. A pre- ERCP UTDT test and diagnostic UTDT 2 hours after the ERCP will 
be performed. Patients with a positive baseline UTDT will be followed clinic ally as 
part of this study without 2 hour testing. Care providers and study primary investigators will be blinded to the 2 hour UTDT results. Baseline, intra- procedure 
and recovery room clinical data will be recorded. Diagnosis of PEP will be made blinded to the UTDT result. Admission status for PEP will be assessed by review 
of records and phone/e- mail contact 5 days and 30 days after ERCP procedure. 
Sensitivity and specificity of 2 hour post ERCP UTDT for the diagnosis of PEP will be calculated.   
 
Aims:  1) To determine the test characteristics of UTDT for the diagnosis of PEP   
2 hours after completion of ERCP . 2) To identify and describe patients wit h 
baseline UTDT positivity, in whom this test offers limited utility.  
 
Specific Aims:  
 Primary Aim  
1.1 To deter mine the test characteristics (sensitivity and specificity) of the UTDT 
for the diagnosis of PEP:  
 
Hypotheses:  
1) UTDT is a  sensitive and specific test for the diagnosis of PEP  for patients 
undergoing ERCP.  
2) At a cutpoint for a negative test of <50ug/L, UTDT will be accurate at 2 hours post 
ERCP in patients whose baseline test is negative.  
    
Version                                                                                                 Page 6 of 14 
9-24-19 Secondary AIM:  
1.1 To identify and describe patients with baseline UTDT positivity.  
Hypothesis:  
1) A subgroup of  patients will demonstrate baseline positivity for UTDT. Ba sed on 
previous studies, the subgroup is likely to include patients with chronic 
inflammatory or obstructive conditions of the pancreatic duct (pancreatic ductal 
adenocarcinoma, obstructive chronic pancreatitis)1 This subgroup will represent a 
minority (<6%) of outpatients presenting for ERCP. 1 
 
 
3.0 Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 Inclusion Criteria  18 years of Age  
 
Undergoing Outpatient ERCP  
Exclusion Criteria  Unwilling ness or inability to consent for the study  
 
Acute pancreatitis on presentation or within 1 month  
 Recent ERCP (i.e. within 2 Weeks ) 
  
 
 Known s tage 3B or higher renal disease (GRF less than 45) 
and/or oliguria per Pre -_ERCP labs or outside hospital labs wi thin 
7 days prior to the 2- hour Post - ERCP urine collection procedure.  
 
History of renal transplant  
 
Consumed supplemental Biotin within 7 days prior to enrollment  
 
Total Pancreatectomy  
 MRCP with secretin within 48 hours prior to ERCP  
 
Inability to acces s the ampulla at ERCP attempt ( unable to attempt 
cannulation of the ampulla or minor papilla, e.g. gastric outlet obstruction)  
 
Unable to collect Baseline  or Post -ERCP  urine sample . 
Version                                                                                                 Page 7 of 14 
9-24-19  
 
 
4.0 Enrollment/Randomization  
Patients  will be recruited in the pre-procedure area prior to ERCP.   Only patients who 
would be offered ERCP as part of their previously outlined care plan will be 
included in this study. Patients will be screened according to inclusion/exclusion 
criteria described above.   
 
 
5.0 Study Procedur es 
 
Informed Consent :  Eligible patients  will sign an IRB -approved, written informed 
consent  to verify their willingness to participate in this study.  Informed consent 
will be obtained on the day of their scheduled ERCP . Consent for the study will 
be obtained by one of the participating endoscopists and/or a research assistant.  
Patients  will receive a copy of the signed and dated informed consent document. 
Original informed consent documents will be maintained on- file.  A note may be 
made in the subject’s  medical record regarding participation in the research 
study. Once consented and enrolled into the trial, patients  will be issued a unique 
identifier  for the purposes of data entry . 
 Pre-Procedure data and sample collection:   After obtaining informed cons ent,  
patients  will be asked health questions prior  to ERCP to assess and quantify 
current and prior alcohol use, current and prior tobacco use, quantification of narcotic use and quantification of non- steroidal anti -inflammatory drug (NSAID) 
use.  Narcoti c and NSAID use in the 7 days prior to ERCP will be recorded.  
Abdominal pain scores will be collected at baseline and post ERCP .  Subjects 
will be shown the study pain scale (appendix 1) and asked to pick a number on the scale to rate their  abdomial  pain at baseline and post ERCP.  Amount and 
type of IV fluids given Pre- ERCP may be collected.  Post- ERCP Pain scores will 
be attempted 2 -3 hours  Post –ERCP, but if necessary may be collected prior to 
the 2 hours Post – ERCP time point up to the time of patient discharge by the 
study research technician.    
  Data will be collected on the indication of ERCP, history of acute pancreatitis, 
recurrent acute pancreatitis, or chronic pancreatitis, history of pancreatic surgery, 
presence of peri -pancreatic fluid collecti on and prior sphincterotomy . Data will 
also be collected to note if subjects underwent an endoscopic ultrasound with fine needle aspirate during the same visit as  baseline ERCP. Prior imaging may 
be reviewed for the presence of pancreatic mass and/or pancr eatic duct 
obstruction.  
 Baseline tests may  be obtained prior to undergoing ERCP including serum 
pancreatic enzymes (amylase, lipase), serum liver enzymes, and coagulation profile,  as is the standard for our endoscopy unit.  Available o utpatient laboratory  
data with in 48-72 hours of ERCP will be reviewed.  If Pre - ERCP  baseline lab 
Version                                                                                                 Page 8 of 14 
9-24-19 results are not yet available at the time of the 2 hour  Post- ERCP urine test this 
will not be a criterion for exclusion from the study.   If the GFR is less than 45 
after the 2 hour Post ERCP urine collection has been completed, these patients 
will not be contacted for the 5 day and 30 day follow -up call and their data will not 
be included in the final analysis.      
 Patients with baseline, pre- procedure positivity for UTDT (> or = 50ug/L) will 
undergo all study procedures as outlined below with the exception of 2 hour UTDT level.  
 Patients who are unable to provide a urine sample at baseline or for Post- ERCP 
testing  will be considered a study screen failure. Subjects who provided a 
baseline urine sample will still be included in the final analysis of baseline UTDT 
level.  Subjects who are excluded due to the inability to access the ampulla at 
ERCP will also still be  Included in the final analysis of baseline UTDT level.  
  Intra -procedural Data Collection:  Patients will undergo ERCP as intended . All 
clinical decisions and endoscopic interventions prior to, during and after ERCP will be performed at the discretion of the treating physician. Data on all ERCP  
procedure findings  and in terventions including,  duration of procedure, placement 
of pancreatic or biliary duct stents, ERCP maneuvers deployed for cannulation 
(e.g. needle knife), findings associated with chronic pancreatit is (e.g  pancreatic 
duct stones ), pancreatic duct leak, per i-procedural NSAIDs administration and 
any immediate complications including perforation, bleeding, or hemodynamic 
instability will be recorded.  Amount  and type  of intraoperative IV fluids may be  
collected.  
  Immediate Postoperative Care, D ata and Sample  collection:  At our institution, 
patients  typically remain  in the recovery area for 2 -3 hours after completion of the 
ERCP.  This time interval in part is related to two -phase  recovery after general 
anesthesia, which is the standard sedation approach for ERC P outpatients.  
Patients  may remain for recovery after ERCP for two hours for a post procedure 
observation period and collection of UTDT result . During this time, urine sample 
collection  for UTDT testing will be attempted 2 -3 hours  Post –ERCP, but  if 
necessary  may be collected  prior to  the 2 hours Post – ERCP  time point  up to the 
time of  patient  discharge by the study research technician.  Patients, study 
investigators, ERCP care team, nursing staff  will be blinded to the results. The 
statistician will be blinded to the urine trypsinogen- 2 hour test during statistical 
analysis.  
 
 
   
Version                                                                                                 Page 9 of 14 
9-24-19  
The decision to admit/monitor the patient will be left to the discretion of the endoscopist  / ERCP care team and will occur blinded to the UTDT results . Data 
regarding symptoms (e.g. nausea/vomiting, abdominal pain scores),  anti –emetic 
use and narcotic s administered for pain symptoms, duration in recovery and 
decision to admit or discharge will be recorded.  Volume and type of IV fluids  
administered in recovery may also be collec ted. Patients will receive a risk 
assessment for post -ERCP pancreatitis . This will calculated and tracked for the 
purposes of this study.  
    Follow Up Data Collection: Patients who are hospitalized will have serum 
amylase and lipase drawn after the ERCP  procedure per standard clinical 
protocol  timelines . Patients who are discharged to home/other after ERCP will be 
contacted by telephone and/ or email 5 days  (+  4 days or – 2 days)  and 30 days   
( + or – 10 days) after the ERCP by a study team member  to deter mine whether 
PEP occurred and was managed outside of our institution.  Patients will be asked 
about ERCP procedure complications such as infection, bleeding, perforation and death.  This contact may be made by phone, email or text message. Subjects 
will be a sked for their preferred method of contact at study enrollment.   Records 
confirming post ERCP pancreatitis will be requested if the patient is admitted and/or initially  managed at an outside institution for PEP . Patients without 
hospitalization for symptom s attributable to post ERCP pancreatitis will be 
classified as not having developed PEP.  Records pertaining to any ERCP 
procedure complications will also be requested.  
 PEP will be defined by the primary ERCP team . The ERCP team will be blinded 
to the UTD T result  when determining PEP.  
 Clinical data regarding volume and type of IV fluids administered at 24, 48 hours 
of admission and severity of pancreatitis (based on Cotton criteria, Modified Marshall Score and graded presence of necrosis) will  be assessed  recorded  for 
all patients admitted with PEP . 
Version                                                                                                 Page 10 of 14 
9-24-19 Figure 2: Study Flow Diagram for Outpatient ERCP Subjects  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 ERCP as Planned,  
Prospective Follow Up: 
 Intra -procedure Data Collection  
Post procedure Data Collection  
Follow Up Phone/E- mail Contact  ERCP as Planned  
Absence of Exclusion Criteria  
Intra -procedure Data 
Collected  
 Baseline UTDT a nd Urine Sample  
No, D/C Home   
Admission per ERCP care team (blinded to UTDT result)?  2 Hr UTDT and Urine Sample  
Follow Up Procedures:  
1) Clinical Follow Up and Data collection for Hospital Course if Admitted  
2) Day 5 phone/email contact if outpatient  
3) Day 30 phone/email if outpatient  Patients Meets Inclusion Criteria  
Informed Consent,  
Pre-procedure Health Questions  
Baseline  
UTDT Positive  
UTDT Negative  
Yes  
Version                                                                                                 Page 11 of 14 
9-24-19 6.0 Reporting of Adverse Events or Unanticipated Problems involving Risk 
to Participants  or Others  
  
 An adverse event  will be considered a  complication that occurred due to the 
collection of urine for testing or administration of health questions. Associated 
adverse event s will be reported to the IRB per  the IRB reporting criteria.   
 
 
  Stud y Withdrawal/Discontinuation  
 
Patients  may withdraw from the study at any time upon their request. Data collected 
prior to their withdrawal may still be used in the final analysis.   
 
7.0 Statistical Considerations  
 
Descriptive statistics will be performed for all continuous variables (mean ± 
standard deviation for normally distributed variables and median ± interquartile range for non- normal variables) and categorical variables (count and proportion).  
Categorical outcomes will be analyzed using Χ
2 test or Fish er’s test for small 
samples.  Comparison of group outcomes will be analyzed using Student’s t test for normally distributed data and nonparametric Wilcoxon- Mann -Whitney test for 
data that violate the normality assumption. Univariate logistic regression analysis will be used to identify predictors of interest and multiple predictor analysis will estimate effects adjusted for covariates. 
 
Diagnostic test characteristics including sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive 
value, negative predictive value, and accuracy will be assessed for the UTDT in 
diagnosing PEP and for different severity levels of PEP. In addition, the UTDT will be assessed in predicting additional outcomes as outlined above.   Specific pre- procedure, intra- procedure, or post -procedure characteristics as 
noted above will be assessed in univariate and multivariable regression models to assess whether they contribute to the inaccurate diagnosis of PEP based on the UTDT. Similar multivariable regression analysis will be done to assess for additional risk factors of PEP.  
 A cost analysis will also be performed to determine the number of UTDT strips needed to prevent one inadvertent discharge of a patient with PEP.  
 
 
8.0 Privacy/Confidentiality Issues  
 
Each subject will be assigned a unique study number.  Study material will be kept 
on a limited number of password protected computer stations, and paper records 
will be kept in locked cabinets/offices in areas with limited public access.  Study material will be retained until seven years after study closure, at which point records will be destroyed, and hard drives containing study data will be erased.  
Version                                                                                                 Page 12 of 14 
9-24-19 9.0 Follow -up and Record Retention  
We anticipate a 30-month enrollment period to achieve our estimated sample 
size.  We expect a 30- 40 day period from the  onset of patient enrollment to 
completion of follow -up.  This does not include final statistical analysis and 
interpretation.  Data collected for research purposes will be retained for seven 
years after the study is closed.  At that time, all paper and el ectronic records 
pertaining to this study will be destroyed.  
  Literature Cited  
  
1. Tseng CW, Chen CC, Lin SZ, Chang FY, Lin HC, Lee SD. Rapid urinary trypsinogen -2 test 
strip in the diagnosis of pancreatitis after endoscopic retrograd e cholangiopancreatography. 
Pancreas 2011;40:1211 -4. 
2. Cotton PB, Lehman G, Vennes J, et al. Endoscopic sphincterotomy complications and 
their management: an attempt at consensus. Gastrointest Endosc 1991;37:383 -93. 
3. Fagenholz PJ, Fernandez- del Castillo  C, Harris NS, Pelletier AJ, Camargo CA, Jr. Direct 
medical costs of acute pancreatitis hospitalizations in the United States. Pancreas 2007;35:302 -
7. 
4. Freeman ML, Nelson DB, Sherman S, et al. Complications of endoscopic biliary 
sphincterotomy. N Engl J Med 1996;335:909 -18. 
5. Gottlieb K, Sherman S. ERCP and biliary endoscopic sphincterotomy -induced 
pancreatitis. Gastrointest Endosc Clin N Am 1998;8:87 -114.  
6. Andriulli A, Loperfido S, Napolitano G, et al. Incidence rates of post -ERCP complications: 
a sys tematic survey of prospective studies. Am J Gastroenterol 2007;102:1781 -8. 
7. Kochar B, Akshintala VS, Afghani E, et al. Incidence, severity, and mortality of post -ERCP 
pancreatitis: a systematic review by using randomized, controlled trials. Gastrointest Endosc 
2015;81:143 -9 e9.  
8. Masci E, Mariani A, Curioni S, Testoni PA. Risk factors for pancreatitis following 
endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography: a meta- analysis. Endoscopy 2003;35:830 -4. 
9. Freeman ML, Nelson DB, Sherman S, et al. Same -day di scharge after endoscopic biliary 
sphincterotomy: observations from a prospective multicenter complication study. The Multicenter Endoscopic Sphincterotomy (MESH) Study Group. Gastrointest Endosc 1999;49:580 -
6. 
10. Cote GA, Lynch S, Easler JJ, et al. Develo pment and Validation of a Prediction Model for 
Admission After Endoscopic Retrograde Cholangiopancreatography. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2015;13:2323- 32 e1- 9. 
11. Ho KY, Montes H, Sossenheimer MJ, et al. Features that may predict hospital admission 
follow ing outpatient therapeutic ERCP. Gastrointest Endosc 1999;49:587 -92. 
12. Sagi SV, Schmidt S, Fogel E, et al. Association of greater intravenous volume infusion 
with shorter hospitalization for patients with post -ERCP pancreatitis. J Gastroenterol Hepatol 
2014;29:1316 -20. 
13. Wall I, Badalov N, Baradarian R, Iswara K, Li JJ, Tenner S. Decreased mortality in acute 
pancreatitis related to early aggressive hydration. Pancreas 2011;40:547 -50. 
14. Banks PA, Bollen TL, Dervenis C, et al. Classification of acute pancreatitis --2012: revision 
of the Atlanta classification and definitions by international consensus. Gut 2013;62:102 -11. 
Version                                                                                                 Page 13 of 14 
9-24-19 15. Testoni PA, Bagnolo F. Pain at 24 hours associated with amylase levels greater than 5 
times the upper normal limit as the most reliable indicator of post -ERCP pancreatitis. 
Gastrointest Endosc 2001;53:33 -9. 
16. Gottlieb K, Sherman S, Pezzi J, Esber E, Lehman GA. Early recognition of post -ERCP 
pancreatitis by clinical assessment and serum pancreatic enzymes. Am J Gastroenterol 
1996;91: 1553- 7. 
17. Sutton VR, Hong MK, Thomas PR. Using the 4 -hour Post -ERCP amylase level to predict 
post -ERCP pancreatitis. JOP 2011;12:372 -6. 
18. Testoni PA, Bagnolo F, Caporuscio S, Lella F. Serum amylase measured four hours after 
endoscopic sphincterotomy is  a reliable predictor of postprocedure pancreatitis. Am J 
Gastroenterol 1999;94:1235 -41. 
19. Thomas PR, Sengupta S. Prediction of pancreatitis following endoscopic retrograde 
cholangiopancreatography by the 4 -h post procedure amylase level. J Gastroenterol Hepatol 
2001;16:923 -6. 
20. Pieper -Bigelow C, Strocchi A, Levitt MD. Where does serum amylase come from and 
where does it go? Gastroenterol Clin North Am 1990;19:793 -810.  
21. Rinderknecht H, Geokas M. Anionic and cationic trypsinogens (trypsins) in mammali an 
pancreas. Enzyme 1972;73:116 -30. 
22. Yadav D, Agarwal N, Pitchumoni CS. A critical evaluation of laboratory tests in acute 
pancreatitis. Am J Gastroenterol 2002;97:1309 -18. 
23. Itkonen O, Koivunen E, Hurme M, Alfthan H, Schroder T, Stenman UH. Time- reso lved 
immunofluorometric assays for trypsinogen -1 and 2 in serum reveal preferential elevation of 
trypsinogen -2 in pancreatitis. J Lab Clin Med 1990;115:712 -8. 
24. Kemppainen EA, Hedstrom JI, Puolakkainen PA, et al. Rapid measurement of urinary 
trypsinogen -2 as a screening test for acute pancreatitis. N Engl J Med 1997;336:1788 -93. 
25. Kemppainen E, Hedstrom J, Puolakkainen P, et al. Urinary trypsinogen -2 test strip in 
detecting ERCP -induced pancreatitis. Endoscopy 1997;29:247 -51. 
26. Sankaralingam S, Wesen C, Barawi M, Galera R, Lloyd L. Use of the urinary trypsinogen -2 
dip stick test in early diagnosis of pancreatitis after endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography. Surg Endosc 2007;21:1312 -5. 
27. Jin T, Huang W, Jiang K, et al. Urinary trypsinogen -2 for diagnosing acute pancreatitis: a 
meta -analysis. Hepatobiliary Pancreat Dis Int 2013;12:355 -62. 
28. Coelho -Prabhu N, Shah ND, Van Houten H, Kamath PS, Baron TH. Endoscopic retrograde 
cholangiopancreatography: utilisation and outcomes in a 10 -year populat ion-based cohort. BMJ 
Open 2013;3.  
29. Freeman ML, Guda NM. Prevention of post- ERCP pancreatitis: a comprehensive review. 
Gastrointest Endosc 2004;59:845 -64. 
 
         
Version                                                                                                 Page 14 of 14 
9-24-19 Appendix 1  
 
 
 
   Pain Scale  
 
 