Version 10-16-15 
 1  
 
 
NORTHSIDE HOSPITAL  
 
 
 
THE IMPACT OF HEMATOPOIETIC STEM CELL TRANSPLANTATION ON 
PRIMARY CAREGIVER LEVEL OF BURDEN AND DISTRESS  
 
 
 
 
Principal Investigators:  Dawn Speckhart, Ph D 
      
Associate Investigators:  H. Kent Holland, MD  
     Scott R. Solomon, MD  
     Asad Bashey, MD, PhD  
     Lawrence E. Morris, Jr, MD  
     Melhem Solh, MD  
                                                                         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Version 10-16-15 
 2  
TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 
 
SCHEMA……………………………………………………….  3 
 
1.0 OBJECTIVES………………………………………………….  4 
 
2.0 BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE………………………..  4 
 
3.0 DRUG INFORMATION………………………………………  5 
 
4.0 PAT IENT SELECTION………………………………………  5  
 
5.0 TREATMENT PLAN…………………………………………  6 
 
6.0 ADVERSE EVENT REPORTING…………... ………………  6 
 
7.0 RISKS A ND TOXICITIES……………………………………..  7 
 
8.0 STATIST ICAL CONSIDERATIONS…………………………  7 
 
9.0 REFERENCES… ……………………………………… ……….  7 
 
Appendices:   
 Appendix A: BSI -18 
Appendix B: BFI  
 Appendix C: BPI  
 Appendix D: Burden Interview  
 Appendix E: Demographic Form  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Version 10-16-15 
 3 Treatment Schema  
 
 
 

 
 
  
 Pre-BMT  Day 0  Day 71 Day 301 Day 3652 
Patient  BSI-18 
BFI 
BPI BSI-18 
BFI 
BPI BSI-18 
BFI 
BPI BSI-18 
BFI 
BPI BSI-18 
BFI 
BPI 
Caregiver  Demographics  
BSI-18 
BFI 
Burden Interview  BSI-18 
BFI 
Burden Interview  BSI-18 
BFI 
Burden Interview  BSI-18 
BFI 
Burden Interview  BSI-18 
BFI 
Burden Interview  
1  Assessment can be done +/ - 3 days  
2 Assessment can be done +/ - 7 days  
  
 
Version 10-16-15 
 4 1.0 OBJECTIVES  
 
Primary Objectives:  
 
1.1 To investigate the level of distress and feelings of burden in caregivers of HSCT patients.   
 
Secondary Objectives:  
 
1.2 To investigate the impact of patient distress, fatigue and pain on the level of caregive r 
distress and burden.   
 
1.3  To investigate the impact of caregiver distress and burden on overall patient survival and 
length of patient hospitalization.   
 
1.4 To identify common characteristics of caregivers who report significantly more  feeling s of 
burden  or distress.   
 
2.0 BACKGROUND  
 
Hematopo ietic stem cell transplant (HSCT) is an established  treatment for certain hematologic 
malignancies1. The process of undergoi ng HSCT is intense and time consuming.  Patients and 
their caregivers are required to commit to several months of treatment  and close follow -up.  At 
our institution, the Blood and Marrow Transplant Program at Northside Hospital, t he transplant  
process incl udes frequent, if not daily, visits to the clinic, and at times lengthy hospital stays for 
the patient.  Our program require s patients  to have a full -time caregiver to assist them with 
transportation, treatment compliance, nutritional intake and emotional support.  Patients are not 
allowed to be alone, go to public areas, or independently manage their medications.  Patients are 
most commonly  out of work for extended periods of time.  The need for a caregiver places an 
extra burden on the patient and their l oved ones, as caregivers are not able to work full time 
while caring for an HSCT patient.  Many studies have looked at the quality of life and various 
psychological symptoms in patients undergoing  HSCT.   Studies have analyzed the impact of 
HSCT on patient  health related quality of life (HRQOL) during and after HSCT.  However, l ittle 
is known about the impact of HSCT on spouses/partners or other primary caregivers.  
 
The process of serving as a caregiver for a loved one going through HSCT is rigorous  and 
stressful.  Much of the psychosocial support that exists in transplant centers focuse s on the 
patients with little support for the caregivers.  Friends and family also tend to place emphasis on 
the patient undergoing the treatment and give less attention to the patient’s caregiver.  Even with 
the presence of community support groups and education from the transplant programs, 
caregivers typically report experiencing high levels of distress.  Caregivers often express feeling 
the weight of the world on them, as  they are left to worry about everything outside of transplant 
(i.e. finances, child care) , in addition  to being  very concerned with the patient’s health .  They 
feel a sense of responsibility for the  patient improving medically.   
 
More recently, transplan t program s have begun to identify needs of HSCT caregivers.  
Researchers have begun to recognize caregivers as an important and often overlooked participant 
Version 10-16-15 
 5 in the HSCT process.  The current literature on HSCT caregivers suggests that caregivers for 
HSCT p atients do report feeling stressed , exhausted emotionally and physically,  and in need of 
support2, 3, 4.  One study identified high levels of stress and depression pre -transplant5.   A 2004 
study by Gaston -Johansson6 found that primary caregivers of patien ts with breast cancer 
scheduled for BMT experience fatigue, anxiety, burden of care, and low quality of life.   
 
Due to these previous findings, it was clear that level of burden, fatigue and distress were 
essential properties to be measured in HSCT caregi vers.  Each of these areas will be measured by 
a speci fic, psychometrically sound in strument.  The Burden Interview, The Brief Fatigue 
Inventory, The Brief Pain Inventory and the Brief Symptom Inventory -187, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 were 
selected due to th ere previous use in oncology settings.   
 
The purpose of this study is to examine the impact of HSCT on the caregiver’s level of burden, 
depression, anxiety, somatic symptoms, fatigue and overall distress.  It will also examine if 
caregiver burden leads to  an increase  in the patient’s hospital utilization and overall outcome.  In 
addition,  we hope to identify  these caregiver symptoms as they relate to the patient’s overall 
functioning.  Therefore, each patient will also complete self -report measures in orde r to assess if 
the patient’s level of distress impacts the caregivers’ functioning.  The patients will complete 
self-report measures assessing symptoms o f psychological distress, pain and fatigue and these 
scores will be matched to their particular caregiv er. 
  
3.0 D RUG  INFORMATION  
 
There are no drugs associated with this study.  
 
4.0 PATIENT SELECTION  
 
4.1 Patient  eligibility  
 
4.1.1 Any patient undergoing autologous or allogeneic  HSCT at The Blood and Marrow 
Transplant Program at Northside Hospital will be eligib le.   
4.1.2 Patients must have a single primary caregiver.   
4.1.3 Patient must be willing to  comply with all assessments as outlined in the protocol.   
4.1.4 Patient must be willing to  sign informed consent.  
 
4.2 Caregiver  eligibility  
       
4.2.1 Must be the primary caregiver f or an autologous or allogeneic HSCT patient at The 
Blood and Marrow Transplant Program at Northside Hospital.   
4.2.2 Caregiver must be willing to comply with all assessments as outlined in the protocol.   
4.2.3 Caregiver must be willing to sign consent.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
Version 10-16-15 
 6 5.0 TREATMENT  PLAN   
 
Pre-BMT  Patient Completes: BSI -18, BFI, BPI  
 Caregiver Completes: Demographic Form, BSI -18, BFI, Burden Interview  
 
 
 
Days 0, 7, 30 and 365  Patient Completes: BSI -18, BFI, BPI  
 Caregiver Completes: BSI -18, BFI, Burden Interview  
 
 Pre-BMT Day 0  Day 73 Day 303 Day 3654 
Demographics1 X      
BSI-18 X X X X X 
BFI X X X X X 
BPI2 X X X X X 
Burden Interview1 X  X  X  X  X  
1caregiver only  
2patient only  
3assessment to be done +/ - 3 days  
4assessment to be done +/ - 7 days  
 
 
6.0 A DVERSE  EVENT  REPORTING  
 
Adverse events are further defined as “Any untoward medical occurrence in a patient or clinical 
investigation subject administered a pharmaceutical product and which does not necessarily have 
to have a causal relationship with this treatment.” 15 
 
Patients will be monitored by the investigators and data maintained by the Clinical Research 
Program.   All Adverse Events will be graded with the Common Terminology Criteria for 
Adverse Events (CTCAE) Version 3.0.  
 
http://ctep.cancer.gov/protocolDevelopment/electronic_applications/docs/ctcaev3.pdf  
 
Due to the non -treatment nature of this protocol, there are not expected to be any adverse events. 
However, should a patient experience an adverse event that is specifically related to participation 
in this study, the following reporting criteria will apply.  Patients will be followed through Day 
365 for protocol -related adverse events.   
 
6.1 Procedure for reporting Serious and Unexpected Adverse Events  
 
Serious Adverse Events will be reported by telephone or email to the Institutional Review Board 
within 24 hours of notifi cation of event.  Written report will follow within 10 working days.   
Serious adverse events will be reported for a period of one (1) year post -transplant.   
 
6.2  Definition of Serious and Unexpected Adverse Events:  
Version 10-16-15 
 7  
Serious Adverse Events are defined as one of the following:  
a. Death  
b. Life-Threatening  
c. Hospitalization (initial or prolonged)  
d. Disability  
e. Congenital Anomaly  
f. Requires Intervention to Prevent Permanent Impairment or Damage  
 
Unexpected  is defined as:  
Not previously reported with the agents/devices  or procedures being undertaken.  Symptomatically 
and pathophysiologically related to known toxicity but differs because of greater severity than 
previously reported.  
 
7.0 RISKS and TOXICITIES  
 
7.1 There are no expected r isks associated with participation in this study.  However, there may 
be an indirect or direct increase in psychological distress related to the completion of the 
psychological measures.  Patients  and caregivers will be monitored per programmatic protocol 
for any increases in psychological distress and these symptoms will be managed according to 
programmatic standards.  All participants  will be asked to contact the principal investigator , who 
is a licensed psychologist, if they experience an increase in psychological distress.   
 
8.0 STATIST ICAL CONSIDERATIONS /DATA ANALYSIS  
 
8.1 We will plan to accrue 50 autologous and 50 allogeneic patient /caregiver dyad s. This number 
of patients will be sufficient to perform an initial analysis to examine levels of distress and 
associated outcome variables.  We expect that patients will be accrued over 1-2 years.  
 
8.2  Data analysis will be performed on the information gathered to evaluate the impact of HSCT 
on the caregiver’s level of burden, depression, anxiety, somatic symptoms, fatigue and overall 
distres s.  It will also examine if caregiver burden leads to an increase in the patient’s hospital 
utilization and overall outcome.  In addition, we hope to identify these caregiver symptoms as 
they relate to the patient’s overall functioning.  The analysis will include t -tests to look at 
correlations, as well as more complex statistical procedures (e.g., manova, and multiple 
regression analyses) to identify relationships between variables.   
 
9.0 REFERENCES  
 
1) Malden M. Thomas' Hematopoietic  Cell Transplantation. 3 rd ed. Blackwell Publishing; 
2004.  
2) Aslan O, Kav S, Meral C, Tekin F, Yesil H, Ozturk U, Bulut Z, Anaboifo A, Dover M, 
Yazar B. Ness of lay caregivers of bone marrow transplant patients in Turkey: a 
multicenter study.  Cancer Nursing, 29 (6): E1 -7, 2006.  
Version 10-16-15 
 8 3) Boyle D, Blodgett L, Gnesdiloff S, White J, Bamford AM, Sheridan M, Beverisge R. 
Caregiver quality of life after autologous bone marrow transplantation. Cancer Nursing, 
23 (3): 193 -203, 2000.  
4) Foxall MJ, Gaston -Johansson F. Burden and health outcomes of fami ly caregivers of 
hospitalized bone marrow transplant patients. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 24 (5): 915 -
23, 1996.  
5) Harris, Margaret. Uncertainty and caregiver burden in family caregivers of HSCT 
patients. Oral presentation at the Transplant Nursing Confere nce BMT Tandem Meetings, 
February, 2009.  
6) Gaston -Johansson F, Lachica EM, Fall -Dickson JM, Kennedy MJ. Psychological distress, 
fatigue, burden of care, and quality of life in primary caregivers of patients with breast 
cancer undergoing autologous bone marro w transplantation.  Oncology Nursing Forum, 
31 (6): 1161 -9, 2004.  
7) Zarit SH, Zarit JM. The memory and behavior problems checklist and the burden 
interview – Univeristy Park, PA: Penn State Gerontology Center, 1990 . 
8) Mendoza T, Wang XS, Cleeland CS, Morrisse y M, Johnson BA, Wendt JK, Huber SL. 
The rapid assessment of fatigue severity in cancer patients: use of the Brief Fatigue 
Inventory. Cancer 1999; 85: 1186 -96.  
9) Chang YJ, Lee JS, Lee CG, Lee WS, Lee KS, Bang SM, Wang XS, Mendoza TR, 
Cleeland CS, Yun YH. As sessment of clinical relevant fatigue level in cancer. Support 
Care Cancer  15(7): 891 -896, 2007.  
10) Cleeland CS, Ryan KM. Pain assessment: global use of the Brief Pain Inventory. Ann 
Acad Med Singapore  23(2): 129 -138, 1994.   
11) Cleeland CS. Measurement of pain b y subjective report. In: Chapman CR, Loeser JD, 
editors. Advances in Pain Research and Therapy, Volume 12: Issues in Pain 
Measurement . New York: Raven Press; 1989. p. 391 -403.  
12) Shi Q, Wang XS, Mendoza TR, Pandya KJ, Cleeland CS. Assessing persistent cancer  
pain: a comparison of current pain ratings and pain recalled from the past week. J Pain 
Symptom Manage , in press.   
13) Zabora, James; BrintzenhofeSzoc, Karlynn; Jacobsen, Paul; Curbow, Barbara; 
Piantadosi, Steven; Hooker, Craig; Owens, Albert; Derogatis, Leon ard (2001). A new 
psychosocial screening instrument for use with cancer patients. Psychosomatics: Journal 
of Consultation Liaison Psychiatry, 42(3) , 241 -246.  
14) Asner -Self, Kimberly K.; Schreiber, James B.; Marotta, Sylvia A. (2006). A cross -
cultural analysi s of the Brief Symptom Inventory -18. Cultural Diversity & Ethnic 
Minority Psychology, 12(2) , 367 -375.  
Version 10-16-15 
 9 15) Expert Working Group (Efficacy) of the International Conference on Harmonisation of 
Technical Requirements for Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH). 
(August 25, 2007).  “ Guideline for Industry – Clinical safety data management: 
definitions and standards for expedited reporting.”  (PDF). FDA Center for Drug 
Evaluation and Research.  
 
 
  
 