 
Physical Activity Pathway for Patients with Osteoarthritis in Primary Care  
 
 
 
NCT number  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Document Date  08/05/2021  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Physical Activity Pathway for Patients with Osteoarthritis in Primary Care  
 
Protocol Number: 20 -2134 
 
Study ID: [REMOVED] 
 
Principal Investigator: Kelli D. Allen, PhD  
 
Sponsor: University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill  
 
Grant Title: Physical Activity Pathway for Patients with Osteoarthritis in Primary Care  
 
 
Grant Number: 4R33AG056568- 03 
 
Funded by:  
National Institute on Aging of the National Institutes of Health  
 
Version Number: 4 .0 
 
5 August  2021  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
Physical Activity Pathway for Patients with Osteoarthritis in Primary Care   Version 4.0 
Protocol #20 -2134   5 August  2021  
ii 
Protocol v4.0 - 20210805  
Summary of Changes from Previous Version:  
 
Affected 
Section(s)  Summary of Revisions Made  Rationale  
Section 
10.1.10  Revised language  Correction needed previous 
language stated NIAMS and should 
state NIA  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Physical Activity Pathway for Patients with Osteoarthritis in Primary Care   Version 4.0 
Protocol #20 -2134   5 August  2021  
iii 
Protocol v4.0 - 20210805 Table of Contents  
 
 
STATEMENT OF COMPLIANCE.……………………………………………………….. …………..... 1 
INVESTIGATOR’S SIGNATURE………………………………………………………… ………..……2 
1  PROTOCOL SUMMARY …………………………………………………………………………... 3 
1.1 Synopsis ………………………………………………………………………………………3 
1.2 Schema………………………………………………………………………………………. 5 
1.3 Schedule of Activities ………………………………………………………………………..6 
2  INTRODUCTION… ............................................................................................................ 7 
 2.1 Study Rationale and Background…………………………………………………………. 7 
  2.1.1   Clinical Signficance  ................................................................................................... 8 
  2.1.2   Premise ……… ………………………………………………………………………………. 8 
  2.1.3   Prior Studies and Rationale for Development…………………………………………….9 
 2.2 Risk/Benefit Assessment …………………………………………………………………. .. 9 
  2.2.1   Known Potential Risks …………………………………………………………………… ....9 
  2.2.2  Known Potential Benefits …………………………………………………………………. 10 
  2.2.3  Assessment of Potential Risks and Benefits …………………………………………….10 
3 STUDY OBJECTIVES AND ENDPOINTS ......................................................................... 10 
4 STUDY DESIGN ………………………………………………………………………………… .. 12 
 4.1  Overall  Design ………………………………………………………………………………12 
 4.2  Scientific Rationale for Study Design  ....................................................................... 12 
 4.3   Justification for Intervention ..................................................................................... 12 
 4.4  End-of-Study Definition  ........................................................................................... 13 
5 STUDY POPULATION …………………………………………………………………………….1 3 
 5.1  Inclusion Criteria  ..................................................................................................... 13 
 5.2  Exclusion Criteria  .................................................................................................... 13 
 5.3  Lifestyle Considerations  .......................................................................................... 14 
 5.4  Screen Failures ……………………………………………………………………………..14 
 5.5  Strategies for Recruitment and Retention………………………………………………. 14 
6 S T UDY INTERVENTIONS 
 6.1  Study Intervention  Administration  ............................................................................ 15 
 6.2  Fidelity ..................................................................................................................... 18 
6.3  Measures to Minimize Bias: Randomizaiton and Blinding…………………………… ..18 
6.4  Study Intervention Adherence……………………………………………………………. 18 
6.5  Concomitant Therapy ………………………………………………………………………18  
7 STUDY INTERVENTION DISCONTINUATION AND  
 PARTICIPANT DISCONTINUATION/WITHDRAWAL ……………………………………… ... 18 
 7.1   Discontinuation of Study Intervention…………………………………………………… 18 
 7.2   Participant Discontinuation/Withdrawal from the Study ……………………………… . 18 
 7.3   Lost to Follow -up………………………………………………………………………… .. 19 
8 STUDY ASSESSMENTS AND PROCEDURES ……………………………………………… . 19 
 8.1  Endpoint and Other Non -Safety Assessments ………………………………………… 19 
 8.2  Safety Assessments ……………………………………………………………………… . 21 
 8.3  Adverse Events and Serious Adverse Events ………………………………………… . 21 
8.3.1  Definition of Adverse Events ……………………………………………………………. .21 
8.3.2  Definition of Serious Adverse Events ………………………………………………….. .. 21 
8.3.3  Classification of an Adverse Event ……………………………………………………. ... 21 
8.3.4  Time Period and Frequence for Event Assessment and Follow -up…………………..22 
Physical Activity Pathway for Patients with Osteoarthritis in Primary Care   Version 4.0 
Protocol #20 -2134   5 August  2021  
iv 
Protocol v4.0 - 20210805 8.3.5  Adverse Event Reporting ………………………………………………………………. ... 22 
8.3.6  Serious Adverse Event Reporting……………………………………………………… . 23 
8.3.7  Reporting Events to Participants ……………………………………………………….. . 23 
8.3.8  Events of Special Interest ……………………………………………………………….. . 23 
8.3.9  Reporting of Pregnancy ………………………………………………………………….. . 23 
 8.4   Unanticipated Problems ………………………………………………………………… ..23 
8.4.1  Definition of Unanticipated Problems …………………………………………………….23 
8.4.2  Unanticipated Problems Reporting……………………………………………………… 24 
8.4.3  Reporting Unanticipated Problems to Participants ……………………………………. 24 
9 STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS ...……………………………………………………….. .. .24 
9.1   Statistical Hypotheses …………………………………………………………………… . 24 
9.2   Sample Size Determination ……………………………………………………………… 25 
9.3  Populations for Analyses …………………………………………………………………. 25 
9.4  Statistical Analyses ……………………………………………………………………… .. 25 
10 SUPPORTING DOCUMENTATION AND OPERATIONAL CONSIDERATIONS  ............... 26 
 10.1 Regulatory, Ethical, and Study Oversight Considerations …………………………………. 26 
10.1.1  Informed Consent Process ……………………………………………………………….. 26 
10.1.2  Study Discontinuation and Closure……………………………………………………… 27 
10.1.3  Confidentiality and Privacy ………………………………………………………………. . 27 
10.1.4  Future Use of Stored Specimens and Data……………………………………………. 28 
10.1.5  Key Roles and Study Governance………………………………………………………. 29 
10.1.6  Safety Oversight …………………………………………………………………………… 29 
10.1.7  Clinical Monitoring ………………………………………………………………………… 29 
10.1.8  Quality Assurance and Quality Control………………………………………………….. 29 
10.1.9  Data Handling and Record Keeping…………………………………………………….. 30 
10.1.10 Protocol Deviations ………………………………………………………………………. 30 
10.1.11 Publication and Data Sharing Policy …………………………………………………… 30 
10.1.12 Conflict of Interest Policy ………………………………………………………………… 31 
 10.2 Additional Considerations ………………………………………………………………… 31 
 10.3 Abbreviations and Special Terms ……………………………………………………… .. 31 
 10.4 Protocol Amendment History…………………………………………………………….  . 33 
11  References ………………………………………………………………………………………34 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Physical Activity Pathway for Patients with Osteoarthritis in Primary Care   Version 4.0 
Protocol #20 -2134   5 August  2021  
1 
Protocol v4.0 - 20210805  
 
 
STATEMENT OF COMPLIANCE  
  
The trial will be carried out in accordance with International Council on Harmonisation Good Clinical Practice (ICH GCP) and the following:  
 
• United States (US) Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) applicable to clinical studies (45 CFR Part 46, 21 CFR Part 50, 21 CFR Part 56, 21 CFR Part 312, and/or 21 CFR Part 812).  
 
National Institutes of Health (NIH) -funded investigators and clinical trial site staff who are responsible for 
the conduct, management, or oversight of NIH -funded clinical trials  have completed Human Subjects 
Protection and ICH GCP Training.  
 
The protocol, informed consent form(s), recruitment materials, and all participant materials will be 
submitted to the Institutional Review Board (IRB) for review and approval. Approval of both the protocol 
and the consent form(s) must be obtained before any participant is consented. Any amendment to the protocol will require review and approval by the IRB before the changes are implemented to the study. All changes to the consent form(s) will be IRB approved; a determination will be made regarding whether 
a new consent needs to be obtained from participants who provided consent, using a previously approved 
consent form.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
               
Physical Activity Pathway for Patients with Osteoarthritis in Primary Care   Version 4.0 
Protocol #20 -2134   5 August  2021  
2 
Protocol v4.0 - 20210805  
 
INVESTIGATOR’S SIGNATURE  
 
The signature below constitutes the approval of this protocol and provides the necessary assurances that this 
study will be conducted according to all stipulations of the protocol, including all statements regarding 
confidentiality, and according to local legal and regulatory requirements and applicable US federal regulations 
and ICH guidelines.  
 
Principal Investigator or Clinical Site Investigator: 
 
 
Signed:   Date:   
 Name:   
 Title:   
 
 
 
Investigator Contact Information 
Affiliation: University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill  
Address: 3300 Thurston Bldg., CB #7280, Chapel Hill, NC  27599- 7280  
Telephone: 919- 966-0558 
Email: kdallen@med.unc.edu  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Physical Activity Pathway for Patients with Osteoarthritis in Primary Care   Version 4.0 
Protocol #20 -2134   5 August  2021  
3 
Protocol v4.0 - 20210805  
 
 
1 PROTOCOL SUMMARY  
  
1.1 SYNOPSIS 
 
 
Title:  Physical Activity Pathway for Patients with Osteoarthritis in Primary 
Care  
Grant Number:  4R33AG056568 -03 
Study Description:  The overall objective of this study is to conduct a randomized pilot 
trial of the Osteoarthritis Physical activity Care Pathway ( OA-PCP) 
among n=240 patients with knee and/or hip OA recruited from  UNC 
Health Care and affiliated clinics within the UNC Physicians 
Network , as well as Piedmont Health Services . Specific hypotheses 
are as follows:  
 
H1:   Participants in OA -PCP intervention will have greater 
improvement in objectively assessed  physical activity ( PA), 
measured at 6 and 12 months, compared to participants in an attention control group.  
 H2:   Participants in OA -PCP intervention will have greater 
improvement in self -reported physical function and pain, measured 
at 6 and 12 months, compared to participants in an attention control group.  
 
 
Objectives*: 
 Specific Aim 1:   Obtain data on the efficacy of the OA -PCP 
program . 
Specific Aim 2 : Refine the OA -PCP b ased on feedback from 
patients and clinic personnel in preparation for a larger, 
implementation -focused trial.  
Physical Activity Pathway for Patients with Osteoarthritis in Primary Care   Version 4.0 
Protocol #20 -2134   5 August  2021  
4 
Protocol v4.0 - 20210805 Endpoints*: Primary Endpoint:  
Objectively assessed PA , measured via accelerometer.  The 
primary metric of interest is minutes of moderate to vigorous 
physical activity (MVPA).  Other metrics will include light intensity 
PA, sedentary minutes and step counts.  These will be assessed at 
baseline and 6- month and 12- month follow -up time points.   
 
Secondary Endpoints:  Self -reported pain and function (Western 
Ontario and McMaster Universities Osteoarthritis Index; WOMAC).  
These will be assessed at baseline and 6- month and 12-month 
follow- up time points.   
 
Exploratory Endpoints:  Fatigue numeric rating scale, self -reported 
PA, self-reported sleep, Patient Global Impression of Change and 
pain medication usage. 
 
Feasibility  and acceptability  metrics include recruitment, retention, 
intervention delivery, and outcome assessment. Perceptions of acceptability will be obtained from patients using open- ended 
questions.  
  
Study Population:  N = 240 participants age ≥65  recruited from primary care clinics  
within UNC Health Care and affiliated clinics within the UNC Physicians Network, as well as Piedmont Health Services . We will 
enroll both males and females from any racial / ethnic  background.   
    
Phase* or Stage:  Based on the Obesity -Related Behavioral Intervention Trials 
(ORBIT) framework, this study is a Phase II b trial. 
  
Description of 
Sites/Facilities Enrolling Participants:  Patients are eligible of they have received care at any site within 
UNC Health Care or affiliated clinics within the UNC Physicians Network ,
 as well as Piedmont Health Services . 
 
 
Description of Study 
Intervention/Experimental Manipulation:  The OA-PCP will include four phases. Phase 1:  Physical Activity 
Screening: This component of the OA -PCP will be completed as 
part of  the enrollment process. Phase 2:  Brief PA Counseling:  This 
will be delivered  via phone by a PA Coach, who will be trained in 
relevant aspects of PA and motivational interviewing.  Phase 3:  
Linkage to PA Programs and Resources Phase ; 4:  PA Coaching 
Follow -Up. The PA coach  will call participants approximately 3, 6, 9 
and 12 months following the initial call, with periodic check -in emails 
in between calls . The coaching calls will focus on PA goal -setting, 
and participants will be provided with an activity tracker to facilitate PA self -monitoring.  
Study Duration*: 2-3 years   
Participant Duration:  12 months   
  
 
 
Physical Activity Pathway for Patients with Osteoarthritis in Primary Care   Version 4.0 
Protocol #20 -2134   5 August  2021  
5 
Protocol v4.0 - 20210805 1.2 SCHEMA 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 

Physical Activity Pathway for Patients with Osteoarthritis in Primary Care   Version 4.0 
Protocol #20 -2134   5 August  2021  
6 
Protocol v4.0 - 20210805 1.3 SCHEDULE OF ACTIVITIES 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 

Physical Activity Pathway for Patients with Osteoarthritis in Primary Care   Version 4.0 
Protocol #20 -2134   5 August  2021  
7 
Protocol v4.0 - 20210805 2 INTRODUCTION  
 
2.1 STUDY RATIONALE  AND BACKGROUND  
 
 2.1.1.  CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE   
Osteoarthritis (OA) is a Major Cause of Pain and Disability among Older Adults  
OA is one of the most prevalent chronic conditions in the U.S.  Lifetime risks of symptomatic knee and hip OA 
are 45% and 25%, respectively 1,2, and the prevalence of OA is expected to rise dramatically over the next 
several decades 3.  The incidence of OA begins to rise around age 50 years, and OA affects about 1/3 of 
adults age ≥65 years 4,5.  OA is associated with significant pain, functional limitations, and poorer health- related 
quality of life 6.  Among older adults, the risk of disability attributable to knee OA is as great as that due to 
cardiovascular disease and greater than any other medical condition 7.  In addition, studies show that arthritis 
is a significant barrier to engagement in physical activity (PA) among individuals who are overweight and those 
who have diabetes and cardiovascular disease 8-10; therefore addressing OA symptoms is also critical for 
management of common comorbid health conditions. 
Physical Activity is Essential for OA Management, But Most Patients are Inactive  
Guidelines consistently include PA as a core component of managing knee and hip OA 11-13, based on its 
strong evidence for effectiveness 14.  A meta -analysis of trials of PA for knee OA found that effect sizes for 
aerobic exercise were 0.52 and 0.46 for pain and disability, respectively; for strengthening exercises, effect 
sizes were 0.39 and 0.3215. These are moderate to large effect sizes and are comparable to those observed 
for pharmacological treatment of OA 16.  Among patients with hip OA, meta -analysis also showed that land-
based exercise substantially reduced pain and improved physical function – providing 28% and 24% 
improvement from baseline, respectively 17.  Despite strong evidence for PA in managing OA symptoms, it is 
substantially under -utilized 18,19.  For example, in a study of adults who had or were at risk for knee OA, only 
2% of African Americans and 13% of Caucasians were currently meeting PA recommendations 19. There is an 
urgent need to improve PA levels among older adults with OA, particularly to reduce risk for downstream 
functional limitations and disability.    
Primary Care is a Key But Under -U tilized Setting for Promoting PA  
The vast majority of patients with OA are seen in primary care, which therefore represents a key opportunity to 
integrate PA into a comprehensive OA management approach 20.  Yet evidence shows that we are failing to 
bring PA into the conversation about OA management 21.  For example, in one study less than half of inactive 
patients with arthritis (primarily OA) reported that a doctor had ever suggested PA as a strategy to help manage joint symptoms 
22, despite the fact that exercise is included as a first -line therapy in OA treatment 
guidelines 23.  This is in contrast to the overwhelming majority of patients who take pain medications to help 
manage OA symptoms 24. Other data show that only 1/3 of patients overall receive advice to increase PA from 
a primary care provider 25. There are a number of reasons that health care providers infrequently recommend 
or counsel patients about PA, including include lack of routine PA screening, lack of time within clinic visits, and lack of provider confidence in skills to deliver PA couns eling 
20.  These challenges are addressed in our 
proposed intervention approach.   
Evidence supports the effectiveness of PA interventions within primary care settings 20,26- 28.  However, we have 
failed to move this evidence toward implementation, as PA is still not incorporated into health care delivery models. The following are critical gaps that must be addressed in order to successfully integrate PA 
interventions into primary care, each of which will be addressed by this study:  
• Approach for Regular PA Screening:  Prior studies suggest that incorporation of routine PA screening into 
health care settings can facilitate clinician- patient conversations about PA 
29,30.  However, studies have not 
examined models that systematically follow up on PA screening with an intervention for those who are inactive.  
• Approach to Sustainable Intervention Delivery:  A key reason that PA interventions have not been 
integrated into clinical settings is the lack of feasible delivery models, both in terms of organization and financial support. This project will develop and test an intervention that can be delivered within the context of 
the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) Chronic Care Management (CCM) services,  as 
described below.  This provides a practical model for both reimbursement and intervention deliver y personnel.  
Physical Activity Pathway for Patients with Osteoarthritis in Primary Care   Version 4.0 
Protocol #20 -2134   5 August  2021  
8 
Protocol v4.0 - 20210805 • Implementation Science- Based Approach to Development :  Models for PA interventions in primary care 
must have input from key stakeholders throughout all phases of the development and testing processes  31. 
These stakeholders include patients and their supportive partners, primary care personnel, and representatives 
of clinical and community -based PA programs  
   2.1.2. PREMISE  
Developing an OA Physical activity Care Pathway (OA- P
 CP) for Primary Care Settings  
We initially developed the OA -PCP model based on: 1) key recommendations for PA interventions in primary 
care, 2) the “Let’s Get Moving” intervention, 3) the Socioecological Model of Health Behavior, and 4) CMS 
guideli nes for delivering CCM services:    
Key recommendations for PA interventions in primary care , based on prior studies, include: use of trained 
coaches  to deliver the PA intervention, engagement of patients as active participants who select goals and 
identify strategies to overcome barriers, inclusion of follow -up contacts and tailored feedback, and integration 
with community -based and other PA resources  20,27.  
The “Let’s Get Moving” intervention is a systematic approach to integrating PA into primary care that was  
implemented in United Kingdom general practices based on research evidence 32-34. This model involves four 
phases: 1.) Screening for physical inactivity in a primary care setting, 2.) Brief PA counseling intervention, 3.) 
Connection with community and other PA resources, 4.) Follow- up to assess progress and promote 
maintenance. The OA -PCP mirrors these four phases.   
The Social Ecological Model of Health Behavior  has been 
applied to many interventions and emphasizes the unique 
and complementary strengths of intervention components 
at different levels 35,36.  As shown in Figure 1, OA -PCP 
components address the individual  and interpersonal  
levels though PA counseling, the organizational  level via 
systematic PA screening and intervention initiation in 
primary care, and the community  level by linking patients 
with programs and resources.  The ultimate goal of this 
research is to provide a strong evidence base that will 
lead to public policy  level initiatives such as systematic, 
widespread roll- out and quality measures related to PA 
screening and intervention in health care systems.  
CCM services  were initiated by the CMS in 2015, and 
provision of these services has been growing under this 
model and reimbursement structure; CMS is actively 
promoting delivery of these services. Briefly, these 
services provide “at least 20 minutes of clinical staff time, 
directed by a physician or other qualified health care professional, per calendar month,” for patients with two or 
more chronic health conditions.  OA is one of the 
qualifying chronic conditions, and many conditions that 
commonly co-occur with OA also qualify (e.g. diabetes, 
depression, hypertension, cardiovascular disease). Therefore, a large proportion of patients with Medicare coverage who have OA are eligible for these services. PA counseling could be delivered as a component of 
CCM services, since these include addressing patients’ functional needs, referrals to other clinicians and 
community -based services, patient education, motivational counseling and self -management support.  
Embedding PA counseling within the context of CCM services is appealing because it integrates PA within the broader disease management process.  Importantly for the structure of the OA -PCP, CCM services do not 
need to be delivered by the billing practitioner; they may be delivered by other clinic staff under the direction of the billing practitioner. Some primary care clinics at our institution (University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill 

Physical Activity Pathway for Patients with Osteoarthritis in Primary Care   Version 4.0 
Protocol #20 -2134   5 August  2021  
9 
Protocol v4.0 - 20210805 (UNC)) are currently delivering these services using a model that involves “care assistants” (typically 
individuals with Bachelor Degree level of education in an appropriate field who are given training in CCM) who 
are supervised by billing practitioners. Also importantly for the OA -PCP, CCM services can be delivered via 
telephone, which is a typical delivery model at UNC. This project focus es on patients who are eligible for CMS 
CCM services, since this is a currently active reimbursement model and since many patients with OA are age 65 or older.   
 
 2.1.3. PRIOR STUDIES AND RATIONALE FOR DEVELOPMENT  
Overall Experience of the Research Team  
This project builds on the collective experience of our study team in OA management, PA interventions, and 
primary care -based studies.  Dr. Allen ’s has led 8 clinical trials of behavioral and health services interventions 
among individuals with OA 37-43.  Of high relevance to this project were two randomized clinical trials of patient 
and provider based interventions for managing OA in primary care 37,44. These studies directly interfaced with 
primary care clinics, showing the feasibility of this approach and our experience with these types of interventions. Dr. Callahan is an international leader in evidence -based PA programs for OA, particularly 
community -based and self -directed interventions.  She led the evaluation of the Arthritis Foundation Walk With 
Ease program and 5 other PA intervention trials 45-52.  She participated in development of the National Public 
Health Agenda for OA and directs the Osteoarthritis Action Alliance (OAAA), a coalition of more than 95 
organizations committed to increasing PA among individuals with OA 53. Dr. Golightly  is a physical therapist 
and epidemiologist with expertise in the clinical aspects of OA and PA intervention approaches for OA 54. She 
serves as the Grants Program Manager for the OAAA, partnering with communities and healthcare systems nationwide to implement evidence- based PA programs for people with OA.  Dr. Nelson  is a rheumatologist with 
expertise in OA diagnosis, clinical care and epidemiology.  She is also the medical advisor for the OAAA and leads an OAAA workgroup focused on health systems and OA management. Dr. Cleveland  is an 
epidemiologist and statistician with extensive expertise in conducting analyses related to OA and PA, as well as other outcomes. Dr. Powell is an implementation scientist who has expertise in understanding strategies to 
implement effective health services interventions 55-57.  Dr. Vu  is a qualitative methodologist who has 
contributed to many studies that conduct formative assessments of multi -level and health system based 
interventions 58-60.  Dr. Hales  is an expert in use of accelerometers to measure PA 61,62 and is currently 
collaborating with Dr. Callahan on a study of partner -focused PA among individuals with arthritis.   
This protocol covers study activities for Aim 3 of a 3- A im project.  In Aim 1 we developed OA -PCP based on 
input obtained during focus groups and interviews with patients with OA, spouses / support partners, clinic 
personnel and community organization representatives  63.    In Aim 2 we conducted a pilot trial to assess the 
feasibility and acceptability of OA- PCP among 60 participants with hip and / or knee OA.  Results supported 
the feasibility and acceptability of the program 64.   
 
2.2 RISK/BENEFIT ASSESSMENT  
 2.2.1  KNOWN POTENTIAL RISKS  
 
Emotional distress: it is unlikely that the types of questions participants will be asked in this study will result  
in emotional distress, but we understand tha t participants may be uncomfortable with answering questions  
about some aspect of their health or other things about them. To minimize this risk, we will let participants  
know they may choose not to answer any study questions and can still be involved in the study.  
 Breach of confidentiality: we will be collecting some elements of personal health information necessary for  
the study. To minimize breaches of confidentiality, all data will be stored on a secure UNC server and paper information will be stored in locked filing cabinets in the office of a study team member, and only approved 
study personnel will have access to those data.  
 
Physical Activity Pathway for Patients with Osteoarthritis in Primary Care   Version 4.0 
Protocol #20 -2134   5 August  2021  
10 
Protocol v4.0 - 20210805 Risks of Exercise: The physical activity coach will give participants  information on exercise programs 
appropriate for people with OA. This information follows guidelines recommended by physicians and 
researchers. However, exercise programs may be associated with risk of injury, muscle soreness, and joint 
pain. The risk of sudden death during physical activity is about 1 death per 656,000 hours of physical activity. In general, the risk of these events with moderate physical activity is very low.  
 
2.2.2  KNOWN POTENTIAL BENEFITS  
 Participants may experience improvements in pain, physical function or other symptoms related to OA, from participating in the OA -PCP program . It is possible that this study may not benefit participants directly, but 
participation in this study may lead to information that can benefit other patients with knee and hip OA, as well as their health care providers . 
 
 2.2.3 ASSESSMENT  OF POTENTIAL RISKS AND BENEFITS  
This is a minimal risk study with physical risks that are comparable to those that would be encountered with 
exercise programs in clinical or community settings.  Furthermore, we do not anticipate any significant 
psychological, social, financial, or legal risks to be associated with participation in this study.  Given the high 
and increasing rate of OA, the persistent deficits of physical inactivity, and the lack of a standard, evidence-
based approach to address these deficits in primary care  settings, we believe the value of the information to be 
gained outweighs the risks of participation in the study.  
 
3  STUDY OBJECTIVES AND ENDPOINTS  
 
OBJECTIVES  ENDPOINTS  JUSTIFICATION FOR ENDPOINTS  
Primary  
Obtain data on the 
efficacy of the OA -PCP 
program  on objectively 
assessed PA, measured via accelerometer.
 
H1  Participants in OA -PCP 
intervention will have greater improvement in 
objectively assessed PA, 
measured at 6 and 12 
months, compared to 
participants in an attention control group.  
  
MVPA (primary metric), light intensity activity, sedentary 
minutes, step counts and 
other PA metrics, assessed 
at baseline, 6 months and 12 
months.   
  
MVPA was chosen as the primary metric because it corresponds to Department of 
Health and Human Services (DHHS)  PA 
recommendations.  Other complementary PA metrics are also important for describing the 
overall activity patterns of participants.  The 12-month time point corresponds to the end 
of OA -PCP calls, and the 6- month time point 
will allow assessment of the time courses of 
changes in outcomes.    
Secondary  
Obtain data on the 
efficacy of the OA -PCP 
program with respect to improvement in self -
reported physical function and pain .  
H2  Participants in OA -PCP 
intervention will have Western Ontario and 
McMaster Universities 
Osteoarthritis Index 
(WOMAC) pain and function 
subscales, assessed at 
baseline, 6 months and 12 
months.   These secondary metrics will be assessed 
because they are key outcomes in OA and can be improved with regular PA. The 12 -
month time point corresponds to the end of OA-PCP calls, and the 6 -month time point will 
allow assessment of the time courses of changes in outcomes.    
Physical Activity Pathway for Patients with Osteoarthritis in Primary Care   Version 4.0 
Protocol #20 -2134   5 August  2021  
11 
Protocol v4.0 - 20210805 OBJECTIVES  ENDPOINTS  JUSTIFICATION FOR ENDPOINTS  
greater improvement in 
self-reported physical 
function and pain, 
measured at 6 and 12 
months, compared to 
participants in an attention 
control group.  
Tertiary / Exploratory  
Obtain data on the efficacy of the OA -PCP 
program with respect to 
the change in 
exploratory outcomes . 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
Assess the feasibility 
and acceptability of the OA-PCP program.  
  
Exploratory outcomes include self -reported fatigue 
(Stanford Numeric Rating 
Scale) , self-reported physical 
activity  (Modified version of 
the Community Health 
Activities Model Program for Seniors; CHAMPS), self -
reported sleep (PROMIS Sleep Disturbance) and pain 
medication usage assessed 
at baseline, 6 months and 12 months. Perceived Impact of 
COVID -19 and the Valuing 
Questionnaire assessed at 
baseline. Patient Global 
Impression of Change  
assessed at 6 months and 12 months.  
  
Feasibility and acceptability 
metrics include recruitment, 
retention, intervention delivery, and outcome 
assessment. Perceptions of 
acceptability will be obtained 
from patients and providers 
from each clinic using open-ended questions.  
  
Fatigue is an important patient -centered 
outcome for patients with OA, closely linked with pain.  Self -reported PA is a useful 
complement to accelerometer -based 
measurement, providing information on the 
contexts and types of activities in which 
participant s are engaging. Patient Global 
Impression of Change  scale evaluates 
participants’ perspectives on overall changes in their joint pain during the study period. 
Self-reported sleep assesses sleep- related 
impairment. Pain medication use evaluates 
common treat ment s for patients with OA .    
The 12- month time point corresponds to the 
end of OA -PCP calls, and the 6- month time 
point will allow assessment of the time 
courses of changes in outcomes.     
 
 
 
This information is important for planning for 
a future, larger implementation- focused trial 
and for refining the OA -PCP intervention as 
needed.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
4  STUDY DESIGN  
Physical Activity Pathway for Patients with Osteoarthritis in Primary Care   Version 4.0 
Protocol #20 -2134   5 August  2021  
12 
Protocol v4.0 - 20210805  
4.1  OVERALL DESIGN    
The aim of this study is to conduct a randomized pilot trial of the refined OA -PCP among n=240 
patients with knee and / or hip OA. Sub- aims and hypotheses are:  
1.  Obtain data on the efficacy of the OA -PCP.  
H1  Participants in OA -PCP intervention will have greater improvement in objectively assessed PA, 
measured at 6 and 12 months, compared to participants in an attention control group.  
H2  Participants in OA -PCP intervention will have greater improvement in self -reported physical function and 
pain, measured at 6 and 12 months, compared to participants in an attention control group.  
2.  Refine the OA -PCP based on feedback from patients, clinic personnel, and community representatives, in 
preparation for a larger, implementation- focused trial.  
 
This study will be a randomized trial with participants assigned 
equally to either the OA -PCP or an attention control group (Figure 
2).  To enhance generalizability, we will involve patients broadly 
from UNC Health Care and affiliated clinics within the UNC 
Physicians Network  as well as Piedmont Health Services . 
Randomization will be based on a computer generated sequence maintained by the project statistician in a database. Participants 
will be notified of their randomization assignment by the study coordinator, following completion of baseline assessments. Study patients will complete assessments at baseline, 6 months and 12 
months.  The 12- month time point corresponds to the end of OA -
PCP follow- up calls (described below), and the 6- month time 
point allows  assessment of the time course of changes.   
 
4.2   SCIENTIFIC RATIONALE FOR STUDY DESIGN  
 The use of an attention control group was selected to account for 
potential effects of intervention- related contacts (e.g., “attention”) 
that are not specific to the OA -PCP intervention c omponents 
(e.g., PA counseling, goal -setting, linkage to PA resources ).  
 4.3  JUSTIFICAT ION FOR INTERVENTION  
 The Scientific Premise and Prior Studies sections above describe the prior literature, recommendations and preliminary studies that 
have informed development and refinement of the OA -PCP 
components.  The number, frequency and types of contacts were selected based on feasibility to deliver within CMS CCM services.  
Content of each PA counseling contact is based on scientific evidence related to behavior change and successful strategies for 
increasing PA 
20,27,35,70.    
 
 
 
 
 4.4  END- OF-STUDY DEFINITION  
 

Physical Activity Pathway for Patients with Osteoarthritis in Primary Care   Version 4.0 
Protocol #20 -2134   5 August  2021  
13 
Protocol v4.0 - 20210805 A participant is considered to have completed the study if he or she has completed 12 -month follow -up 
assessment.  
 
5   STUDY POPULATION  
 
5.1  INCLUSION CRITERIA 
 
Participants need to be age 65 or older, and have, in addition to OA, one other chronic health condition that  
qualified under CCM guidelines, including: diabetes, depression, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, heart failure, 
atrial fibrillation, ischemic heart disease, stroke/TIA, peripheral vascular disease, COPD, bronchiectasis, 
asthma, rheumatoid arthritis, osteoarthritis, HIV/AIDS, chronic kidney disease, hepatitis (chronic &  viral B & C) 
and osteoporosis.  Other inclusion criteria are :  1) Self -reported current symptoms in a joint with OA, using the 
following validated item: “Do you have pain, aching or stiffness in your knees/hips on most days?” 71. Patients 
also had to self -report a pain score of ≥3 on a 0- 10 numeric scale (0=no pain, 10=extreme pain), which is an 
approach recommended by the Osteoarthritis Research Society International Clinical Trial Guidelines 72.  2) 
Self-reported physical activity <150 minutes per week, which aligns with public health recommendations.  We 
will use  the Physical Activity Vital Sign (PAVS) 29,73- 75, which includes the following two questions:  1. “On 
average, how many days a week do you engage in moderate to strenuous exercise (like a brisk walk)?” 2. “On 
average, how many minutes do you exercise at this level?”  The PAVS has been implemented in a large health 
care system, showing good face and dis criminant validity 29,30.  We also selected this physical activity 
screening approach because would be feasible to administer in primary care settings as part of implementing 
OA-PCP.  3) Willing to make a change in their PA over the next 3 months.  
 5.2  EXCLUSION CRITERIA 
 
Exclusion Criteria and Sources of Information  
Criterion  EMR  Phone Screening  
Pain in chest when performing 
physical activity   X 
Pain in chest when not performing 
physical activity   X 
Loss of balance because of dizziness 
or loss of consciousness   X 
Recommendation from doctor to only 
perform physical activity under 
medical supervision   X 
No documented diagnosis of knee or 
hip OA  X  
Dementia  X X 
Psychosis  X  X 
Active Substance abuse disorder  X X 
Total knee or hip replacement 
surgery, meniscus tear, ligament tear, 
or other significant lower extremity 
injury or surgery in the last 6 months  X X 
Severe hearing or visual impairment  X X 
Serious/terminal illness as indicated 
by referral to hospice or palliative care  X X 
Unstable angina  X X 
Hospitalization for cardiovascular 
event in last 6 months  X X 
History of ventricular tachycardia  X X 
Physical Activity Pathway for Patients with Osteoarthritis in Primary Care   Version 4.0 
Protocol #20 -2134   5 August  2021  
14 
Protocol v4.0 - 20210805 Unstable chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (2 hospitalizations 
within the previous 6 months and/or 
on oxygen)  X X 
Stroke with moderate to severe 
aphasia  X X 
Recent history (last 6 months) of 
three or more falls   X 
Planning total joint replacement in 
next 6 months   X 
Other health problem that would 
prohibit safe physical activity 
participation   X 
Current participation in other study 
related to knee or hip osteoarthritis or 
physical activity   X 
Unable to speak English  X X 
 
 
5.3  LIFESTYLE CONSIDERATIONS  
N/A 
 5.4  SCREEN FAILURES  
 Screen failures are defined as participants who consent to participate in this study but are not subsequently 
assigned to the study intervention or entered in the study. Individuals who do not meet the criteria for 
participation in this trial (screen failure) because of meeting one or more exclusion criteria (e.g., development 
of an exclusionary health condition) will not be rescreened.   
 
5.5.  STRATEGIES FOR RECRUITMENT AND RETENTION  
Potential participants will first be identified using the electronic medical record (EMR). Specifically, we will 
identify patients age 65 and older with diagnosis codes for knee or hip OA ( M17.0, M17.10, M17.11, M17.12, 
M17.2, M17.30, M17.31, M17.32, M17.4, M17.5, M17.9, M16.0, M16.10, M16.11, M16.12, M16.2, M16.30, M16.31, M16.32, M16.4, M16.50, M16.51, M16.52, M16.6, M16.7, M16.9, M19.90, M19.91, M19.92, M19.93 , 
M15.0 (primary, generalized OA )), a diagnosis code for at least one qualifying comorbid health  condition under 
CCM guidelines listed above, and no diagnosis codes for exclusionary health conditions. We will include 
patients who have been seen within UNC by a primary care provider during the past 2 years, including Internal 
Medicine, Family Medicine and Geriatrics clinics.  Primary care providers may, if they choose,  review lists of 
patients eligible based on the EMR and approve a final list of patients to contact, but this is not a requirement .  
These patients will be mailed an introductory letter  and then called by a study team to further assess eligibility.  
Patients who are eligible and interested in participating will complete a verbal consent process which will include verbal  HIPAA authorization.  Then participants will complete baseline assessments via telephone and 
be mailed an accelerometer for physical activity assessment.  Participants will be paid $25 for completing each 
phone- based assessment and $15 for returning the accelerometer at each time point.  Following return of the 
accelerometer at baseline, an unblinded study team member will call the participant to inform them of their 
randomization assignment.  Participants assigned to the OA -PCP group will then be mailed an Activity Tracker 
and instructions and asked to begin wearing it as soon as they receive it.  About a week after the Activity Tracker is mailed, an unblinded study team member will call the participant to answer any questions about 
device wear and setup.  We will aim for the participant to wear the Activity Tracker for at least 1 week prior to 
the first OA -PCP call, so that PA goals can be based on current activity patterns. Participants will also be 
notified that the PA Coach will be able to view their Activity Tracker data using Fitabase®.  
 
Physical Activity Pathway for Patients with Osteoarthritis in Primary Care   Version 4.0 
Protocol #20 -2134   5 August  2021  
15 
Protocol v4.0 - 20210805 Participants in both the intervention and control group will have regular contact with an interventionist 
throughout the study period. Based on our prior studies, we believe this will enhance retention. In addition, we 
believe that the lack of requirement for any in -person study visits will enhance both recruitment and retention.  
To facilitate completion of recruitment calls, as well as baseline and follow -up assessment calls, we will call 
participants on different times of day and different days, across multiple weeks.  We have used this strategy successfully in prior studies to reach participants at times convenient to them.  
6.0  STUDY INTERV ENTIONS  
6.1  STUDY INTERVENTION ADMINISTRATION  
 
OA-PCP Intervention   
As summarized in Figure 3 , the O A-PCP will include four phases, with a total intervention period of 12 months.  
Phase 1:  Physical Activity Screening 
This component of the OA- PCP will be completed as described above within  the recruitment and enrollment 
process.  Although it is framed within the recruitment process here, it has been designed to mirror a PA 
screening process that could occurred routinely in primary care.    
Phase 2:  Brief I nitial PA Counseling  
This will be delivered via phone by the PA Coach, who will be trained in relevant aspects of PA and 
motivational interviewing.  The content for the initial call is designed to be brief enough that it can be 
embedded within a routine CCM call; future calls are even shorter.  We have developed detailed sc ripts for all 
OA-PCP calls.  The following are key components of the f irst PA counseling call :  
1. Description of the Benefits and Appropriateness of PA for OA :  This content includes a brief summary of 
benefits of PA and basic information for safe, appropriate PA in the context of OA . With regard to aerobic 
activity, the PA Coach  will encourage participants that good long- term goals are  to do 150 minutes of moderate 
intensity activity per week  and or 7,500- 10,000 steps per day , per general public health recommendations  and 
recent research evidence 76,77. However, the Coach  will also stress the value and health benefits of interim 
goals when increasing amount of weekly aerobic activity.  In addition, goal -setting for aerobic activity will be 
framed around benchmarks of particular relevance for people with OA, as described below.  With respect to 
strengthening exercises, participants will be encouraged to perform these at least twice per week on non-consecutive days 
78.  Lower extremity strengthening exercises will be emphasized.  Participants will be 
encouraged to perform stretching exercises daily.  Instructions and example strengthening and stretching exercises are included in the Arthritis Foundation brochure described below.   

Physical Activity Pathway for Patients with Osteoarthritis in Primary Care   Version 4.0 
Protocol #20 -2134   5 August  2021  
16 
Protocol v4.0 - 20210805 2. PA Goal -Setting:  The Coach will work with participants to establish and document PA goals, with an initial 
focus on the next 2 weeks (before check -in call; Figure 3). Participants will be asked to focus their PA goals on 
either step counts  or activity minutes; monitoring for each of these will be facilitated by use of the Activity 
Trackers.   Recent research has identified important metrics for reducing risks of functional limitation and 
disability among individuals with OA.  In particular, thresholds of 60 weekly minutes of MVPA and 6,000 steps 
per day as important targets 79,80.  Participants will be asked to select one of these benchmarks as a minimum 
goal to work toward during the one- year time period of the intervention. If participants meet one of these goals, 
they will be encouraged to work toward broader public health goals of 150 minutes of MVPA per week or 
7,500- 10,000 steps per day 76,77.  Participants may also switch from step- focused goal to an activity minute-
focused goal as the OA -PCP calls progress.  As noted above, initial goals will be based on participants’ current 
PA data (e.g., at least 1 week of Activity Tracker wear).  The PA Coach  will inform participants that s/he will be 
able to monitor their PA (using Fitabase ®),  with their permission,  based on data from the Activity Tracker, and 
describe that this will enhance the “partnership” of this program, allowing the Coach  to observe specific PA 
patterns and potential opportunities to enhance activity during the day.  As part of the goal -setting process, t he 
Coach will talk with participants about potential barriers and use a problem -solving approach to address each 
one.  
3. Discussion of Preferences for PA and Identifying Appropriate PA Resources : The Coach will ask 
participants brief questions to understand types of PA they enjoy most and are likely to engage in. Based on this information, at the 2 -week call, the Coach  will recommend specific PA programs resources that can help 
them progress toward their PA The coach will also review  participants’  progress toward PA goals and set new 
goals.  If participants have encountered any barriers to PA since the first call, they will be addressed and other 
PA resources identified if needed.   
4. Follow -up emails:  The study team  will ask participants to opt -in (or opt -out) to receive follow -up emails at 1 -
month and 2 -month time points after the initial call.  The content of the emails will be based on individual PA 
goals set during previous check in calls.   
Phase 3:  Linkage to PA Programs and Resources  
There are a large number of OA -appropriate, evidence- based PA resources, and a collection of these 
resources has been developed (and is updated on an ongoing basis) by the OAAA at UNC; a key source for informing this collection is the CDC’s Compendium of Arthritis Appropriate Physical Activity and Self -
Management Education Interventions.  Table 1 shows representative examples of these resources, which 
include tools to facilitate individual PA, as well as group- based classes. With regard to the latter, we will 
perform an environmental scan for programs available within the communities surrounding study clinics; this 
will be facilitated by the OAAA, the Arthritis Foundation’s Online Resource Finder and the Evidence- Based 
Leadership Council. Based on our prior experience 
38, there are many free, appropriate PA programs available 
in communities, including walking groups and classes in senior centers.   
 
Local resource information will be used to tailor patient handouts.  Participants will be able to contact the PA 
Coach throughout the intervention period if they have questions about PA resources, or if they would like 
information on different resources.  We will document the frequency and nature of the contacts to inform and 
refine the intervention.  
 
Table 1.  Example OA -Appropriate PA Resources and Programs  
Self-Directed  
Walk With Ease 
(Self-Directed)  Resources to help people with arthritis learn to walk safely and regularly.  
Tools include a guidebook, walking diary, example exercises, interactive 
online resources (starting point test, motivational tools, activity log) and a 
mobile app. COST: Free  
Exercises for 
Chronic 
Conditions  Exercise CDs developed by Stanford University, appropriate for people 
with arthritis and other chronic health conditions. COST: $10  
Physical Activity Pathway for Patients with Osteoarthritis in Primary Care   Version 4.0 
Protocol #20 -2134   5 August  2021  
17 
Protocol v4.0 - 20210805  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
Phase 4:   
PA 
Counseling Follow -Up   
The PA Coach will call participants at three month intervals following the initial call (e.g., 3 -, 6-, 9- and 12 
months) , again using our developed phone scripts and tailored based on earlier calls.  These calls will focus on 
reviewing progress t oward PA goals, PA patterns observed in Fitabase ®, identifying additional PA resources if 
needed, and work ing with participants to set new PA goals  as they progress .  During the 3 -month call, the 
coach will briefly review instructions for strengthening and stretching exercises, to complement step or activity 
minute goals.  During the 6-month call, the PA Coach will provide tips for identifying setbacks in PA and work  
with participants to identify strategies for dealing with these. In between phone calls, the PA Coach will continue to send emails to participants on a monthly basis.  These will focus on encouragement toward PA goals, encouragements based on data in Fitabase®  and personalized tips based on these data.   
Motivational interviewing (MI) principles will be used throughout the PA coaching calls. MI is a key behavior 
change strategy that can elicit participants’ own motivations and / or ambivalence toward PA 
81-83.  This helps 
individuals to explore and resolve their own, sometimes conflicting attitudes toward changing PA behaviors, building autonomy and internal awareness that is essential for long- term behavior change. To support topics 
discussed during the phone calls, participants will be mailed and/ or emailed materials including: 1) handouts 
describing appropriate exercise for people with osteoarthritis,  tips on PA for people with arthritis (including pain 
management), instructions for different types of exercise (aerobic, strengthening, stretching), and example 
exercises. 2) A list of PA programs and resources adapted for their locality. 3) W orksheet s for documenting PA 
goals.   
 
Attention Control Intervention  
We chose this type of control group to account for the effect of general attention provided by the PA Coach.  
This group will receive an intervention in the same “dose” (e.g., number and duration of phone calls  and 
emails ) as the OA -PCP group, but the content will not be PA -specific. During the first call, the Coach  will 
discuss 2 topics, for which the amount of content parallels call #1 for the OA -PCP:  What is OA? OA Diagnosis  
and OA Risk Factors.  During the second call, the Coach will discuss the topic of Health Care Providers and 
Overview of OA Treatment Guidelines.  Call topics for 3, 6, 9 and 12- month follow -up calls will be: Pain 
Medications, Mechanical  Treatments (e.g., knee braces , footwear, joint protection) , Complimentary and 
Alternative Therapies  and discussion of OA and Mental Health, Sleep and Fatigue. Participants will be emailed 
or mailed (based on their preference) handouts with information on additional topics related to OA.  The study 
team will ask partic ipants to opt -in to receive follow- up monthly educational emails; if they prefer, they can 
receive this information via mail . 
 Arthritis 
Foundation 
Online PA Tools  Resources including arthritis -friendly exercise videos, workouts, tips for 
people with arthritis. COST:  Free  
Group -Based  
Arthritis 
Foundation 
Exercise 
Program  Community -based exercise program; trained instructors cover a variety of 
range- of-motion and endurance- building activities and health education 
topics.  COST: Free or low cost, varies by location  
Walk with Ease 
(Group-
Delivered)  Community -based walking program developed by the Arthritis Foundation 
with regular meetings, facilitated by trained leaders.  COST: Typically free  
Fit and Strong  Community -based PA and behavior change intervention offering 
stretching, balance, and aerobic exercises.  COST: Typically free at Senior 
Centers  
Tai Chi for 
Arthritis  Group classes available at many YMCAs and other community centers.  
COST: Varies from low cost to free  
Arthritis Foundation 
Aquatic Program  Group classes led by a trained instructor, including joint range of motion, 
breathing, and light aerobic activities. Many community aquatic centers have similar, appropriate programs for older adults.  COST: Varies based 
on location, some free  
Physical Activity Pathway for Patients with Osteoarthritis in Primary Care   Version 4.0 
Protocol #20 -2134   5 August  2021  
18 
Protocol v4.0 - 20210805  
 
6.2  FIDELITY  
PA Coach(es) will be trained by Dr. Allen  and will conduct mock sessions of all OA-PCP calls  prior to study 
initiation.  We plan to audio record calls for approximately  the first 10 participants and a random subset 
thereafter.  Dr. Allen and another investigator with experience in delivering behavioral PA interventions (Dr. 
Callahan or Dr. Golightly) will review audio recordings and provide feedback to the PA Coach .  A similar 
process will be used for the attention control calls, with a particular emphasis on ensuring that OA -PCP content 
is not included in these calls.    
 
6.3  MEASURES TO MINIMIZE BIAS: RANDOMIZATION AND BLINDING  
 
The randomization scheme will be generated by the study statistician and stored within the study database.  
The database will be configured so that blinded study personnel (e.g., those conducting follow -up 
assessments) will not have access to randomization information. The participants will not be notified of randomization assignment until all baseline assessments are complete.  In addition, an individual participant’s 
randomization assignment will not be known to any study personnel until baseline assessments are complete.  
Randomization will be stratified according by clinic site.  
 
6.4  STUDY INTERVENTION ADHERENCE   
 
The study database will be used to track participants’ completion of all assessment visits, as well as all 
intervention contacts . The coordinator  will also maintain close communication with PA coach(e s) regarding 
intervention delivery.  If participants miss intervention calls , an unblinded study team member may assist the 
PA coach in attem pting to reach the participant.  
 
6.5  CONCOMITANT THERAPY  
  Participants will be p ermitted to continue any other OA treatment during the course of the study.  
 7  STUDY INTERVENTION/ DISCONTINUATION AND PARTICIPANT 
DISCONTINUATION/WITHDRAWAL  
7.1  DISCONTINUATION OF STUDY INTERVENTION 
 
When a participant discontinues from  the OA-PCP or attention  control intervention but not the study, remaining 
study procedures (e.g., follow -up assessments) will be completed as indicated by the study protocol.   If a 
clinically sig nificant finding is identified after enrollment (e.g. health -related changes that may change the 
safety level of participating in an independent PA program), the investigator or qualified designee will 
determine if any change in participant management is needed. Any new clinically relevant finding will be 
reported as an adverse event (AE). The data to be collected at the time of study intervention discontinuation will include the reason(s) for discontinuing the participant from the intervention, and methods for determining the need to discontinue . 
 
7.2  PARTICIPANT DISCONTINUATION/WITHDRAWAL FROM THE STUDY   
 
Participants are free to withdraw from participation in the study at any time upon request.  
Physical Activity Pathway for Patients with Osteoarthritis in Primary Care   Version 4.0 
Protocol #20 -2134   5 August  2021  
19 
Protocol v4.0 - 20210805 An investigator may discontinue a participant from the study for the following reasons:  
 
• Lost-to-follow up; unable to contact subject  
• Any event or medical condition or situation occurs such that continued collection of follow- up study data 
would not be in the best interest of the participant or might require an additional treatment that would 
confound the interpretation of the study  
• The participant meets an exclusion criterion (either newly developed or not previously recognized) that precludes further study participation  
The reason for participant discontinuation or withdrawal from the study will be recorded in the study database.   
Participants who discontinue or are withdrawn will be replaced up to the point of randomization assignment being given to the participant.  Once participants are given their randomization assignment, they will be 
counted toward the total study sample size and not replaced.  
 
7.3  LOST TO FOLLOW -UP 
A participant will be considered lost to follow- up if he or she fails to retur n for the final, 12-month follow -up 
assessment.  If a participant misses intervention calls or follow- up assessments prior to the 12 -month time 
point and cannot be contacted during the time frame, the study team will still attempt to contact the participant 
for remaining calls  / assessments. The study team must attempt to contact a participant at least 3 times, on 
different days of the week, different times of day, and across at least 2 weeks, before they are considered to 
have missed a visit / assessment or be  lost to follow- up.  These contact attempts will be documented in the 
study database.  
 
8   STUDY ASSESSMENTS AND PROCEDURES  
 8.1  ENDPOINT AND OTHER NON- SAFETY ASSESSMENTS  
Measures will be collected at baseline, 6- months and 12- months  by a trained research assistant blinded to 
randomization assignment. O ther than the accelerometer, measures will be administered via phone.  
Participants will be paid $25 for completing each phone- based measure and $15 for returning the 
accelerometer device at each time point .   
Primary Efficacy Outcome:  Objectively Assessed Physical Activity.  
We selected this as the primary study outcome because PA is the target of the intervention, and objective 
assessment has advantages over self -report in terms of accuracy 
86. Our specific primary outcome of interest 
is minutes of moderate to vigorous intensity PA (MVPA) per week, since this corresponds to DHHS 
recommendations and is a known predictor of outcomes in patients with OA 78. We will also examine step 
counts, minutes of sedentary activity  and other complementary metrics, as these are also important for 
providing a broad picture of PA among participants  80,87.  Each participant will be asked to wear the Actigraph 
GT3X+ (Pensacola, FL), which allows for the collection and manipulation of raw actigraphy data to facilitate 
accurate assessment of PA 88.  Participants will be asked to wear the monitors during all waking hours  for 7 
days. Following previously established thresholds, outcomes will only be computed for participants who wear the accelerometer for 4+ days with 10+ hours of daytime wear. Monitors will be worn on the waist, using either 
an elastic belt or clip, over the right hip.  We may ask a subset of participants to wear a wrist -worn monitor in 
addition to the waist -worn monitor, in order to assess acceptability and compare values obtained f rom monitors 
worn at the two different sites.  Accelerometers will be mailed with instructions and a pre -stamped / addressed 
return envelope.  Several days after the accelerometer has been mailed, a study team member will call the 
participant to review instructions.  A phone number will be provided for problems or questions. A second call 
will be made toward the end of the 7 days to ask about wear and to remind participants to return the monitor. If 
participants have not worn the monitor enough, they will be asked to wear the monitor a few extra days.  Drs. 
Hales, Callahan and Allen have been involved with projects that have successfully mailed accelerometers to 
and / or from study participants with OA. There have been high rates of adherence (4+ days with 10+ hours of wear); 93% in one study of adults and partners with OA and 89% in another of 140 patients with OA, with 
Physical Activity Pathway for Patients with Osteoarthritis in Primary Care   Version 4.0 
Protocol #20 -2134   5 August  2021  
20 
Protocol v4.0 - 20210805 minimal loss of monitors (< 2%).  In Aim 2 of this project, valid accelerometer data were available for 57 
participants at baseline (95%) and 52 participants at follow -up (86%). U pon return, accelerometer data will be 
downloaded, compiled into 60s epochs, processed to identify wear, non -wear, and sleep periods using current 
algorithms 89,90, and summarized using cut -points developed by Troiano 89 and Mathews 91. These cut -points 
will allow us to calculate minutes of MVPA, as well as sedentary time and step counts.  
Secondary Efficacy Outcomes:  
Self-R eported Physical Function.  Physical function is a key outcome in OA and can be improved with regular 
PA 14,15.  We will assess physical function with the widely used Western Ontario and McMaster Universities 
Osteoarthritis Index (WOMAC) subscale 92,93; it includes 17 items, rated on a Likert scale of 0 (no difficulty) to 4 
(extreme difficulty), that assess difficulty with performing a range of daily activities commonly affected by lower 
extremity OA. The reliability and validity of the WOMAC total score and subscales have been confirmed 93.  In 
patients with hip or knee OA, Bellamy et al. reported internal consistency coefficients (Cronbach’s alpha) between 0.86 and 0.95 on WOMAC subscales.   
Pain (WOMAC) . We
  will assess self -reported pain using the WOMAC subscale 14,15; it includes 5 items, rated 
on a Likert scale of 0 (no pain) to 4 (extreme pain), that assess pain during a range of daily activities.  
Exploratory Outcomes:  
Stanford Numeric Rating Scale (NRS) for Fatigue: We will assess self -r eported fatigue using the Stanford NRS 
Scale for Fatigue; it includes 1 item, rated on a Likert scale of 0 (no fatigue) to 10 (severe fatigue), that 
assesses fatigue in the past 2 weeks.   
 
Self-r eported Physical Activity :  Modified version of the CHAMPS (Community Health Activities Model Program 
for Seniors) Physical Activity Measure 94.   This measure complements the accelerometer -based data by 
providing additional information on the contexts and types of activities in which participants are engaging. This 
modified version of the CHAMPS includes items tailored for this participant group.  For each item, participants 
first indicate whether they have done the activity for 10 or more minutes during the past week.  If they respond 
“yes,” they will be asked the number or days and minutes per week. This questionnaire will be supplemented with individual items to assess sitting behavior and sleep.   
 
Patient Global Impression of Change. W
 e will use this scale to evaluate participants’ perspectives on overall 
changes in their joint pain during the study period. This measure asks participants to describe their change in 
pain on a 7 -point rating scale with the following options: “very much improved,” “much improved,” “minimally 
improved,” “no change,” “minimally worse,” “much worse,” and “very much worse.” This scale has been widely 
used in clinical trials of chronic pain and is recommended by IMMPACT.  
 
Pain Medication Use.  P ain medications are a common treatment for patients with OA, and some patients seek 
to reduce their use; therefore we have included this as an exploratory  outcome.  We will assess pain 
medication use using methods we have used successfully in previous studies.  We will ask participants to bring 
to the telephone all medications (prescription and non- prescription) they are currently taking for their arthritis  
symptoms.  For each medication, the study team will record the medi cation name, medication class, frequency 
of taking the medication.  
 
PROMIS Sleep Disturbance – S hort Form 4a.  The PROMIS adult sleep related impairment item bank  
focuses on self -reported perceptions of sleep quality, sleep depth, and  restoration associated with sleep. It 
assesses sleep -related impairment over the past seven days. This scale includes 4 items, each measured on a 
5-point Likert scale.  
 
 
  
 
Physical Activity Pathway for Patients with Osteoarthritis in Primary Care   Version 4.0 
Protocol #20 -2134   5 August  2021  
21 
Protocol v4.0 - 20210805 Potential Mediators and Moderators of Intervention Effects: 
 We are interested in understanding the roles of various “active ingredients” of the OA -PCP (mediators), as 
well as potential patient characteristics that are associated with differential effectiveness (moderators).  With respect to mediators, we will assess number of OA -PCP calls completed, participants’ ratings of satisfaction 
and helpfulness of the calls (single item numeric rating scales of 0- 10), indicators of whether participants 
engaged with new group -based or self -directed PA resources during the study, and participants’ ratings of 
satisfaction and helpfulness of any new PA resources they have tried. These variables will be assessed at both 
6 and 12 months.  With respect to moderators, we are particularly interested in variables of age, gender and 
level of baseline PA, but we will also conduct additional exploratory analyses of heterogeneity of treatment 
effects, as described below.  
Participant Characteristics:   
We will collect the following information to characterize the study sample: age, race / ethnicity, gender, 
education, works status, marital status, body mass index, comorbid illnesses 
95, joints with arthritis symptoms  
and duration of knee / hip OA symptoms , as well as:  
 
Covid -19 I mpact Scale.  The scale was designed to rate the impact of the COVID- 19 pandemic, deferring to 
other well validated scales to assess general stress or symptoms developed in response to the pandemic. This scale includes 1 item with the following options: “Reduced my ability to get be physically active a lot”, 
““Reduced my ability to get be physically active a little”, “not affected my ability to be physically active” or 
improved my ability to be physically active”.  
 
Valuing Questionnaire.  T
 he Valuing Questionnaire assess the extent of personal values enactment during the 
past-week.  This questionnaire lists 10 life domains (e.g., family relations, physical well -being). Participants 
rate the importance of each domain and how consistently they have lived according to their values in that 
domain during the past week (on a scale of 0– 10).   
 Feasi
bility and Acceptability : 
The following metrics will inform feasibility : 
• Proportion of screened patients who meet the PA eligibility criterion (<150 min per week) 
• Proportion of screened patients who are eligible overall  
• Proportion of patients who consent to participate, along with refusal reasons for those who do not  
• Proportion of participants who complete each phase of the intervention and follow -up assessments  
We have developed open- ended questions to assess acceptability  of the intervention. Topics include 
acceptability of each intervention component, usefulness of options provided for PA programs / resources, and 
suggestions for increasing the patient- centeredness of the intervention.  
 
8.2  SAFETY ASSESSMENTS 
The study PA coach  will be trained to deliver the interventions in adherence to and within the scope of the 
intervention.  If  a study team member learns of a ny adverse events ( AEs) that occur in the course of  
participants’ home exercise, this  will be documented on the Adverse Events form, as described below.  
 8.3  ADVERSE EVENTS AND SERIOUS ADVERSE EVENTS  
 8.3.1 DEFINITION OF ADVERSE EVENTS 
This protocol uses the definition of adverse event from DHHS Office for Human Research Protections (OHRP): 
Any untoward or unfavorable medical occurrence in a human subject, including any abnormal sign (for 
example, abnormal physical exam or laboratory finding), symptom, or disease, temporally associated with the 
subject’s participation in the research, whether or not considered related to the subject’s participation in the 
research (modified from the definition of adverse events in the 1996 International Conference on Harmonization E -6 Guidelines for Good Clinical Practice).  
Physical Activity Pathway for Patients with Osteoarthritis in Primary Care   Version 4.0 
Protocol #20 -2134   5 August  2021  
22 
Protocol v4.0 - 20210805  
 8.3.2 DEFINITION OF SERIOUS ADVERSE EVENTS  
This protocol uses the definition of serious adverse event from DHHS OHRP:  any adverse event that results in 
death;  is life -threatening (places the subject at immediate risk of death from the event as it occurred);  results in 
inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization;  results in a persistent or significant 
disability/incapacity;  results in a congenital anomaly/birth defect; or  based upon appropriate medical judgment, 
may jeopardize the subject’s health and may require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the 
other outcomes listed in this definition (examples of such events include allergic bronchospasm requiring 
intensive treatment in the emergency room or at home, blood dyscrasias or convulsions that do not result in inpatient hospitalization, or the development of drug dependency or drug abuse).  
 
 8.3.3 CLASSIFICATION OF AN ADVERSE EVENT  
   8.3.3.1 SEVERITY OF EVENT  
All AEs will be assessed by the PI or co -investigators , if the PI is not available.  The following guidelines will be 
used to describe severi ty:  
 
• Mild – Events require minimal or no treatment and do not interfere with the participant’s daily activities.  
• Moderate – Events result in a low level of inconvenience or concern with the therapeutic measures. 
Moderate events may cause some interference with functioning.  
• Severe – Events interrupt a participant’s usual daily activity and may require systemic drug therapy or 
other treatment. Severe events are usually potentially life- threatening or incapacitating.  Of note, the 
term “severe” does not necessarily equate to “serious” .] 
   8.3.3.2 RELATIONSHIP TO STUDY INTERVENTION/EXPERIMENTAL MANIPULATION  
All AEs  will have their relationship to study procedures, including the intervention, assessed by  the PI or co -
investigators based on temporal relationship and his/her clinical judgment. The degree of certainty about 
causality will be graded using the categories below.  
 
• Related – The AE is known to occur with the study procedures, there is a reasonable possibility that 
the study procedures caused the AE, or there is a temporal relationship between the study procedures 
and the event. Reasonable possibility means that there is evidence to suggest a causal relationship 
between the study procedures and the AE.  
• Not Related – There is not a reasonable possibility that the study procedures caused the event, there 
is no temporal relationship between the study procedures and event onset, or an alternate etiology has 
been established.  
 
  8.3.3.3 EXPECTEDNESS 
The PI or Dr. Nelson or Dr. Golightly  (co-investigators on the study ) will be responsible for determining whether 
an AE is expected or unexpected. An AE will be considered unexpected if the nature, severity, or frequency of 
the event is not consistent with the risk information previously described for the study procedures.  
 
 8.3.4 TIME PERIOD AND FREQUENCY FOR EVENT ASSESSMENT AND FOLLOW -UP 
Physical Activity Pathway for Patients with Osteoarthritis in Primary Care   Version 4.0 
Protocol #20 -2134   5 August  2021  
23 
Protocol v4.0 - 20210805 The occurrence of an AE or serious adverse event ( SAE) may come to the attention of study team members 
during study visits.  All AEs, not otherwise precluded per the protocol, will be captured on the  Adverse Event 
Form.  Information to be collected includes event description, time of onset, PI or co -investigator ’s assessment 
of severity, relationship to study procedures (assessed only by those with the training and authority to make a 
diagnosis), and time of resolution/stabilization of the event. All AEs occurring while on study will be 
documented appropriately regardless of relationship. All AEs will be followed to adequate resolution. 
Any medical or psychiatric condition that is present at the time that the participant is screened will be considered as baseline and not reported as an AE. However, if the study participant’s condition deteriorates at 
any time during the study, it will be recorded as an AE.  
Changes in the severity of an AE will be documented to allow an assessment of the duration of the event at 
each level of severity to be performed. Documentation of onset and duration of each episode will be 
maintained for AEs characterized as intermittent.  
The Project Coordinator will record events with start dates occurring any time after informed consent is obtained until 7 (for non- serious AEs) or 30 days (for SAEs) after the last day of study participation.  
Participants are identified in the EMR as a study participant and for each AE/SAE occurrence, research team member s will receive  an alert through EMR. AEs or SAEs may also be reported to PA Coach  during the course 
of intervention visits.  Events will be followed for outcome information until resolution or stabilization.  
 
 8.3.5  ADVERSE EVENT REPORTING  
Once Dr. Allen (or a co- investigator) is contacted about the adverse event, she / he will make a determination 
about the reporting requirements in accordance with UNC IRB guidelines.   
The PI will report all adverse events to the  Safety Officer (SO) on a biannual basis, or as requested.  
Additionally, the PI or a co- investigator will report any AEs that suggest new or increased risk to participants or 
others within 7 calendar days of when the PI became aware of the information.  For AEs that are not related to 
participation in the researc h and do not suggest new or increased risks to the participant, these will be reported 
at continuing review.    
 
 8.3.6 SERIOUS ADVERSE EVENT REPORTING  
Once Dr. Allen (or a co- investigator) is contacted about a serious  adverse event, she / he will make a 
determination about the reporting requirements in accordance with UNC IRB guidelines.  This will include 
notification of the UNC IRB, as well as the SO , within 24- hours if a study -related death and within 48 hours if 
another SAE.  
 
 8.3.7 REPORTING EVENTS TO PARTICIPANTS 
N/A 
  8.3.8  EVENTS OF SPECIAL INTEREST  
N/A 
 
 8.3.9 REPORTING OF PREGNANCY   
N/A 
 
8.4. UNANTICIPATED PROBLEMS  
Physical Activity Pathway for Patients with Osteoarthritis in Primary Care   Version 4.0 
Protocol #20 -2134   5 August  2021  
24 
Protocol v4.0 - 20210805  
 8.4.1 DEFINITION OF UNANTICIPATED PROBLEMS  
 This protocol uses the definition of Unanticipated Problems as defined by the Office for Human Research 
Protections (OHRP). OHRP considers unanticipated problems involving risks to participants or others to 
include, in general, any incident, experience, or  outcome that meets all of the following criteria:  
 
(1) Unexpected (in terms of nature, severity, or frequency) given (a) the research procedures that are 
described in the IRB- approved research protocol and informed consent document; and (b) the 
characteristics of the participant population being studied;  
 
(2) Related or possibly related to participation in the research. Possibly related means there is a reasonable 
possibility that the incident, experience, or outcome may have been caused by the procedures involved in 
the research); and  
 
(3) Suggests that the research places participants or others at a greater risk of harm (including physical, 
psychological, economic, or social harm) than was previously known or recognized.  
 
OHRP recognizes that it may be difficult to determine whether a particular incident, experience, or outcome is 
unexpected and whether it is related or possibly related to participation in the research.  OHRP notes that an 
incident, experience, or outcome that meets the three criteria above generally will warrant consideration of substantive changes in the research protocol or informed consent process/document or other corrective 
actions in order to protect the safety, welfare, or rights of participants or o thers.   
The following corrective actions or substantive changes that could be considered in response to an unanticipated problem include:  
 
o Changes to the research protocol initiated by the investigator prior to obtaining IRB approval to eliminate apparent immediate hazards to subjects;  
o modification of inclusion or exclusion criteria to mitigate the newly identified risks;  
o implementation of additional procedures for monitoring subjects; suspension of enrollment of new 
subjects;  
o suspension of research procedures in currently enrolled subjects;  
o modification of informed consent documents to include a description of newly recognized risks;  
o provision of additional information about newly recognized risks to previously enrolled subjects.  
 
Only a small subset of adverse events occurring in human subjects participating in research will meet these 
three criteria for an unanticipated problem. Furthermore, there are other types of incidents, experiences, and 
outcomes that occur during the conduct of human subjects research that represent unanticipated problems but 
are not considered adverse events.  For example, some unanticipated problems involve social or economic 
harm instead of the physical or psychological harm associated with adverse events.  In other cases, 
unanticipated problems place subjects or others at increased risk of harm, but no harm occurs.   
 
Physical Activity Pathway for Patients with Osteoarthritis in Primary Care   Version 4.0 
Protocol #20 -2134   5 August  2021  
25 
Protocol v4.0 - 20210805  8.4.2 UNANTICIPATED PROBLEMS REPORTING  
All UPs will be reported to the NIA and the SO  within 48 hours of the PI becoming aware of the event.  
 
 8.4.3 REPORTING UNANTICIPATED PROBLEMS TO PARTICIPANTS  
Participants will be given any new information gained during the course of the study that might affect their 
willingness to continue participation in the study.   
  
9  STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS  
 
9.1  STATISTICAL HYPOTHESES  
The aim of this study is to conduct a randomized pilot trial of the refined OA -PCP among n=240 
patients with knee and / or hip OA. Sub- aims and hypotheses are:  
1.  Obtain data on the efficacy of the OA -PCP.  
H
1  Participants in OA -PCP intervention will have greater improvement in objectively assessed PA, 
measured at 6 and 12 months, compared to participants in an attention control group.  
H2  Participants in OA -PCP intervention will have greater improvement in self -reported physical function and 
pain, measured at 6 and 12 months, compared to participants in an attention control group.  
2.  Refine the OA -PCP based on feedback from patients, clinic personnel, and community representatives, in 
preparation for a larger, implementation- focused trial.  
 
 
9.2  SAMPLE SIZE DETERMINATION  
 We note that this study is an extended 
exploratory phase, in which we are interested in obtaining estimates of efficacy that will 
inform a larger trial that is adequately powered 
to detect clinically meaningful differences in 
MVPA. Our sample size was selected on the 
basis of feasibility for this exploratory study and involvement of a sufficient number participants 
to adequately assess intervention and study 
procedures. We provide here a description of 
expected statistical power for this sample size. 
Based on previous research on PA 
interventions for OA 
98,99, we expect an effect 
size of 0.3 -0.7, though have examined a range of possible values from 0.2 -0.8 (Table 2).  We also account for 
10% attrition, based on our prior work.  A sample size of 240 participants (120 per group) will provide 
approximately 80% power at 5% level of significance to detect a small- to-medium effect size of 0.38 or greater 
for the difference in minutes of MVPA between intervention and control groups, accounting for expected attrition.  
 
9.3  POPULATIONS FOR ANALYSES  
 The primary analyses will be conducted using an intent -to-treat approach.  Supportive exploratory analyses 
may be conducted to consider samples with greater completion of study intervention visits.  Since this is an exploratory trial, the nature of these supportive analyses will be based on observed patterns of intervention 
contacts .  
 Table 2. Sample  size needed based on effect size and study power  
  α=0.05  Power=80%  Power=85%  Power=90%  Power=95%  
Effect 
size Sample 
size Sample 
size Sample 
size Sample 
size 
0.20 787 900 1053  1301  
0.30 351 401 469 579 
0.40 198 226 265 327 
0.50 128 146 170 210 
0.60 90 102 120 148 
0.70 68 76 88 110 
0.80 52 60 68 84 
Physical Activity Pathway for Patients with Osteoarthritis in Primary Care   Version 4.0 
Protocol #20 -2134   5 August  2021  
26 
Protocol v4.0 - 20210805 9.4  STATISTICAL ANALYSES PLAN  
 
Preliminary analyses will include generating descriptive statistics for demographic variables, as well as 
baseline characteristics and follow -up measures.  This includes means and standard deviations for continuous 
variables, and frequencies and percentages for categorical variables.  Ranges will also be examined for 
outliers and to ensure data integrity. Demographics and baseline characteristics will also be described 
separately by randomized group.   
We hypothesize that participants receiving the OA -PCP will have greater improvement in MVPA compared with 
the attention control group at 6 and 12 months. To determine the effects of the intervention on MVPA, repeated 
measures will be analyzed using linear mixed effects models, with clinic included as a random effect, to 
estimate mean change and 95% confidence intervals in MVPA from baseline to 6- month and 12 -month time 
points. This model will account for intra -person clustering for the repeated measures, including a group x time 
effect. We will use the same modeling strategy for continuous secondary and exploratory outcomes.  An 
advantage of this modeling approach is that it uses all available data; participants are not dropped if they miss 
a time point. This approach will reduce the overall amount of missing data and could eliminate the need for 
imputation of missing repeated outcomes 100. However, if we find that missing data are related to measured 
patient factors (i.e., missing not at random [MNAR]), we will carry out sensitivity analyses by imputing missing 
values under the MNAR scenario and examining the results. The SAS procedure PROC MI has several 
options for using multiple imputation in sensitivity analyses based on pattern- mixture models for MNAR data, 
which  model the distribution of a response as the mixture of a distribution of the observed responses and a 
distribution of the mi ssing responses 101. Multiple imputation has the advantage of providing a framework for 
incorporating information from these variables, while preserving a parsimonious main treatment effect model 
102,103. Analyses will be conducted on an intent -to-treat basis and carried out using SAS 9.4 (SAS Institute Inc., 
Cary, NC). Tests will be two -sided and considered significant at the 0.05 level.  
Exploration of Mediators.  We are interested in understanding the degree to which various facets of the OA -
PCP contribute to improvements in PA and other outcomes. Because the mediating variables of interest (described above) pertain only to the OA -PCP group, our strategy will differ from a traditional mediation 
analysis approach in the context of a clinical trial.  Specifically, we will use linear regression models to assess associations between potential mediating variables and outcomes among individuals in the OA -PCP group. 
Each potential mediator will be assessed individually, then we will fit a multivariable model including all variables with bivariate associations of p≤0.1.  Analyses will be performed for both 6 and 12 month outcomes.  
Exploration of Moderators.  We will explore potential differential treatment effects based on participant 
characteristics, particularly gender, age and baseline PAVS score.  The latter is of interest to help inform the inclusion criterion for a larger trial; if individuals with higher baseline PA (though not meeting DHHS 
recommendations) make little additional improvement in PA, we may focus on individuals with lower PA levels 
at screening.  For assessment of differential treatment effects, we will conduct stratified analyses based on participant characteristics (e.g., men / women, age categories by decade, quartiles of baseline PAVS scores).  
We propose this strategy because the study is not powered to detect interactions between treatment group and 
particip ant characteristics. We will also use multivariable logistic regression 
104,105  and recursive partitioning 
(RP) 106,107 to explore multidimensional subgroups that exhibit heterogeneous treatment effects; these analyses 
will focus on our a priori characteristics of interest but also explore additional variables.  
 
10  SUPPORTING DOCUMENTATION AND OPERATIONAL CONSIDERATIONS  
 
10.1 REGULATORY, ETHICAL, AND STUDY OVERSIGHT CONSIDERATIONS  
 10.1.1 INFORMED CONSENT PROCESS  
 
Physical Activity Pathway for Patients with Osteoarthritis in Primary Care   Version 4.0 
Protocol #20 -2134   5 August  2021  
27 
Protocol v4.0 - 20210805 10.1.1.1 CONSENT AND OTHER INFORMATIONAL DOCUMENTS PROVIDED TO 
PARTICIPANTS  
Consent forms describing in detail the study intervention, study procedures, and risks will be given to the participant and written documentation of informed consent will be completed prior to starting the study intervention.  The following consent materials are submitted with this protocol: Adult Consent Form.  
 
10.1.1.2 CONSENT PROCEDURES AND DOCUMENTATION  
 
Once a potential participant meets the medical record and telephone screening criteria for eligibility, and is interested in participating , the study team member will begin the verbal consenting process by phone.  If the 
participant does not have time to complete the verbal consent, the study team member will arrange a date and time to call the participant back.  No other study activities will occur until this process is completed.    
 
We will use a UNC IRB approved consent form / script with included language that satisfies the HIPAA 
requirements and outlines the protection of health information utilized in the study.   
 
Verbal i nformed consent  and HIPAA authorization  will be obtained by a trained study team member.  The study 
team member will read the IRB approved verbal consent script and HIPAA authorization to the potential 
participant and provide an opportunity for him/her to ask any questions that they may have about the research 
study.  We anticipate this process to take approximately 20 minutes, but this time will not be limited should a 
participant have additional questions or concerns regarding the study.  During this phase of the consent 
process, it will be stressed that the participant is not obligated to participate in the study, that participation is completely voluntary, and that he/she may withdrawal from the study at any time without penalty.  Also, 
potential  risks from participating in the study will be outlined in the consent form, as are the measures taken to 
protect against study specific risks.  Once the information in the consent  form and HIPAA authorization is fully 
reviewed and understood by the individual, he/she will be asked to decide at that time if they would like to 
voluntarily participate in the research study.  If the individual does choose to participate in the study, the study team member will document in REDCap the date verbal  consent and the date HIPAA authorization is collected .  
No activities will commence until verbal consent and HIPAA authorization are collected.  Each enrolled 
participant will then be mailed a copy of the consent form  and HIPAA authorization to keep for their records.   
 
If after review  of the consent form, the potential participant is not sure they would like to participate in the study 
at this time, they may choose to consider the study further, and then contact the study team if they decide later that they would like to participate.  
 Participants will only be included if they have capacity to give legally effective consent. Additionally, this study 
will only recruit participants whom are English speakers.
   
 
 
10.1.2 STUDY DISCONTINUATION AND CLOSURE  
This study may be temporarily suspended or prematurely terminated if there is sufficient reasonable cause. 
Written notification, documenting the reason for study suspension or termination, will be provided by the 
suspending or terminating party to study participants, investigator, funding agency, and regulatory authorities. 
If the study is prematurely terminated or suspended, the PI will promptly inform study participants, the IRB, and 
sponsor/funding agency and will provide the reason(s) for the termination or suspension. Study participants will 
be contacted, as applicable, and be informed of changes to study visit schedule.  
 
Circumstances that may warrant termination or suspension include, but are not limited to:  
• Determination of unexpected, significant, or unacceptable risk to participants  
Physical Activity Pathway for Patients with Osteoarthritis in Primary Care   Version 4.0 
Protocol #20 -2134   5 August  2021  
28 
Protocol v4.0 - 20210805 • Demonstration of efficacy that would warrant stopping    
• Insufficient compliance to protocol requirements  
• Data that are not sufficiently complete and/or evaluable 
• Determination that the primary endpoint has been met 
• Determination of futility  
 
The study may resume once concerns about safety, protocol compliance, and data quality are addressed, and 
satisfy the funding agency, sponsor, IRB or other relevant regulatory or oversight bodies (OHRP, SO ). 
 
10.1.3 CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY  
 
Participant confidentiality and privacy is strictly held in trust by the participating investigators, their staff, the safety and oversight monitor(s), and the sponsor(s) and funding agency. This confidentiality is extended to the 
data being collected as part of this study. Data that could be used to identify a specific study participant will be 
held in strict confidence within the research team. No personally -identifiable information from the study will be 
released to any unauthorized third party without prior written approval of the sponsor/funding agency.  
 
All research activities will be conducted in as private a setting as possible.  
The study monitor, other authorized representatives of the sponsor or funding agency, representatives of the 
IRB, regulatory agencies or representatives from companies or organizations supplying the product, may 
inspect all documents and records required to be maintained by the investigator, including but not limited to, medical records (office, clinic, or hospital) and pharmacy records for the participants in this study.  
 
The study participant’s contact information will be securely stored on a secure study database  for internal use 
during the study. At the end of the study, all records will continue to be kept in a secure location for as long a 
period as dictated by the reviewing IRB, Institutional policies, or sponsor/funding agency requirements.  
 
Study participant research data, which is for purposes of statistical analysis and scientific reporting, will be 
stored on a secure UNC server. The study data entry and study management systems used by research staff 
will be secured and password protected. At the end of the study, all study databases will be de -identified and 
archived on a secure UNC server.  
 
Measures Taken to Ensure Confidentiality of Data Shared per the NIH Data Sharing Policies  
It is NIH policy that the results and accomplishments of the activities that it funds should be made available to 
the public (see https://grants.nih.gov/policy/sharing.htm ). The PI will ensure all mechanisms used to share data 
will include proper plans and safeguards for the protection of privacy, confidentiality, and security for data 
dissemination and reuse (e.g., all data will be thoroughly de- identified and will not be traceable to a specific 
study participant). Plans for archiving and long- term preservation of the data will be implemented, as 
appropriate.  
 
Ce
rtificate of Confidentiality  
To further protect the privacy of study participants, the Secretary, Health and Human Services (HHS), has 
issued a Certificate of Confidentiality (CoC) to all researchers engaged in biomedical, behavioral, clinical or other human subjects research funded wholly or in part by the federal government.   Recipients of NIH funding 
for human subjects research are required to protect identifiable research information from forced disclosure per 
Physical Activity Pathway for Patients with Osteoarthritis in Primary Care   Version 4.0 
Protocol #20 -2134   5 August  2021  
29 
Protocol v4.0 - 20210805 the terms of the NIH Policy (see https://humansubjects.nih.gov/coc/index ). As set forth in  45 CFR Part 
75.303(a)  and N IHGPS Chapter 8.3 , recipients conducting NIH -s upported research covered by this Policy are 
required to establish and maintain effective internal controls (e.g., policies and procedures) that provide 
reasonable assurance that the award is managed in compliance with Federal statutes, regulations, and the terms and conditions of award. It is the NIH policy that investigators and others who have access to research 
records will not disclose identifying information except when the participant consents or in certain instances 
when federal, state, or local law or regulation requires disclosure. NIH expects investigators to inform research 
participants of the protections and the limits to protections provided by a Certificate issued by this Policy.  
 
1
0.1.4 FUTURE USE OF STORED DATA 
 
Data collected for this study will be analyzed and stored on a secure UNC server. After the study is completed, 
the de -identified data will be made available to other researchers, available by request to the PI. Investigators 
requesting study data must adhere to regulatory requirements for data use (e.g., IRB approvals, data use 
agreements) . No biological samples are collected for this study. 
 
 
 
10.1.5 KEY ROLES AND STUDY GOVERNANCE  
Principal Investigator  Independent Safety Monitor  
Kelli D. Allen, PhD  David J. Berkoff, MD FAMSSM 
FAAEM  
University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill  University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill  
3300 Thurston Bldg, CB #7280  
Chapel Hill, NC  27599 -7280  3142 Bioinformatics Bldg  
Chapel Hill, NC 27599  
919-966-0558  919-966-7095  
kdallen@med.unc.edu  david_berkoff@med.unc.edu  
 
 
 10.1.6 SAFETY OVERSIGHT  
Safety oversight will be under the direction of the NIA appointed SO. The SO will be independent from the 
study conduct and free of conflict of interest. On a biannual basis, the PI will provide to the SO  a study 
summary, a report of all AEs, and any problems or issues that have been identified.   
 
10.1.7 CLINICAL MONITORING  
 
Since this is a single site study there will not be site visits conducted by the PI or co- investigators.  However, 
we will monitor the fidelity of intervention delivery as described above.   
 
 10.1.8 QUALITY ASSURANCE AND QUALITY CONTROL  
 Quality control (QC) procedures will be implemented as follows : 
 
Physical Activity Pathway for Patients with Osteoarthritis in Primary Care   Version 4.0 
Protocol #20 -2134   5 August  2021  
30 
Protocol v4.0 - 20210805 Informed consent ---  During the consenting process, the study team member will review the completed consent 
document to ensure the participant has signed and dated the consent form accurately prior to completing any 
other study activities.    
 
Source documents and the electronic data --- Data from study measures will be entered directly into the study 
database. If the study database is not accessible, data will be captured on a source document and will ultimately 
be entered into the study database. To ensure accuracy site staff will compare a representative sample of source 
data against the database.  Intervention Fidelity — Consistent delivery of the study interventions will  be monitored throughout the 
intervention phase of the study. Procedures for ensuring fidelity of intervention delivery are described in Section 6.2  
 
Protocol Deviations  – The study team will review protocol deviations on an ongoing basis and will implement 
corrective actions when the quantity or nature of deviations are deemed to be at a level of concern.  
 
Should independent monitoring become necessary, the PI will provide direct access to all trial related sites, 
source data/documents, and reports for the purpose of monitoring and auditing by the sponsor/funding agency, 
and inspection by local and regulatory authorities.  
 
  
 10.1.9 DATA HANDLING AND RECORD KEEPING  
 
 10.1.9.1 DATA COLLECTION AND MANAGEMENT RESPONSIBILITIES  
Study data will be stored on a secure UNC server in a folder accessible only to IRB- approved study team 
members. We will use REDCap to store all patient information and dispositions, responses to screening and 
outcome assessments. REDCap is a secure web application supported at UNC that can be used to build and 
manage case report forms, surveys, and other data capture mechanisms.   
 
 10.1.9.2 STUDY RECORDS RETENTION 
 
Research study records will be maintained for no less than 6 years following the completion of the study, after 
which time personal identifying information will be removed.  Research information in a subject’s medical 
record will be kept indefinitely. No records will be destroyed without the written consent of the sponsor/funding 
agenc y, if applicable. It is the responsibility of the sponsor/funding agency to inform the investigator when 
these documents no longer need to be retained.  
 
 10.1.10 PROTOCOL DEVIATIONS  
 This protocol defines a protocol deviation as any noncompliance with the clinical trial protocol,  
ICH GCP, or Manual of Procedures (MOP) requirements. The noncompliance may be either on the part of the 
participant, the investigator, or the study site staff. As a result of deviations, corrective actions will be 
developed by the site and implemented prom ptly.  
 
These practices are consistent with ICH GCP:  
• Section 4.5 Compliance with Protocol, subsections 4.5.1, 4.5.2, and 4.5.3  
• Section 5.1 Quality Assurance and Quality Control, subsection 5.1.1  
Physical Activity Pathway for Patients with Osteoarthritis in Primary Care   Version 4.0 
Protocol #20 -2134   5 August  2021  
31 
Protocol v4.0 - 20210805 • Section 5.20 Noncompliance, subsections 5.20.1, and 5.20.2.  
 
It will be the responsibility of the site investigator to use continuous vigilance to identify and report deviations 
that impact participant safety to the NIA and the SO  within 48 hours of the PI becoming aware of the event and 
to the UNC IRB within 7 business days of the time the PI becomes aware to the event, if the protocol deviation 
harmed participant(s) or others or placed participant(s) or others at increased risk of harm. Otherwise, protocol 
deviations/violations that occur but do not affect participant safety will be submitted with the routine safety 
reports as noted. Protocol deviations will be sent to the reviewing IRB per their policies. The site investigator 
will be responsible for knowing and adhering to the reviewing IRB requirements. Further d etails about the 
handling of protocol deviations will be included in the MOP.  
 
 10.1.11 PUBLICATION AND DATA SHARING POLICY  
This study will be conducted in accordance with the following publication and data sharing policies and 
regulations:  
 
- National Institutes of Health (NIH) Public Access Policy, which ensures that the public has access to the published results of NIH funded research. It requires scientists to submit final peer -reviewed journal 
manuscripts that arise from NIH funds to the digital archive PubMed Central upon acceptance for publication.  
 
This study will comply with the NIH Data Sharing Policy and Policy on the Dissemination of NIH -Funded 
Clinical Trial Information and the Clinical Trials Registration and Results Information Submission rule. As such, 
this trial will be registered at Clinica lTrials.gov, and results information from this trial will be submitted to 
ClinicalTrials.gov. In addition, every attempt will be made to publish results in peer -reviewed journals.  Data 
from this study may be requested from other researchers after the completion of the primary endpoint by 
contacting the study PI .  Considerations for ensuring confidentiality of these shared data are described in 
Section 10.1.3.  
 
 10.1.12 CONFLICT OF INTEREST POLICY  
 The independence of this study from any actual or perceived influence is critical. Therefore, any actual conflict 
of interest of persons who have a role in the design, conduct, analysis, publication, or any aspect of this trial 
will be disclosed and managed. Furthermore, persons who have a perceived conflict of interest will be required 
to have such conflicts managed in a way that is appropriate to their participation in the design and conduct of 
this trial. The study leadership in conjunction with the National Institute on Aging has established policies and 
procedures for all study group members to disclose all conflicts of interest and will establish a mechanism for 
the management of all reported dualities of interest. 
 
10.2 ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS  
N/A 
 
10.3  ABBREVIATIONS  
 
AE Adverse Event  
ATT Attention Control  
DHHS  Department of Health and Human Services  
CCM  Chronic Care Management  
CMS  Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services  
Physical Activity Pathway for Patients with Osteoarthritis in Primary Care   Version 4.0 
Protocol #20 -2134   5 August  2021  
32 
Protocol v4.0 - 20210805 CoC Certificate of Confidentiality  
CHAMPS  Community Health Activities Model Program 
for Seniors  
CFR Code of Federal Regulations  
EMR  Electronic Medical Record  
GCP  Good Clinical Practice  
HHS  Health and Human Services  
HIPAA  Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act of 1996  
ICH International Council on Harmonisation  
IRB Institutional Review Board  
MOP  Manual of Procedures  
MI  Motivational Interviewing  
MVPA  Moderate to Vigorous Intensity Physical 
Activity  
NIA National Institute on Aging  
NIH  National Institutes of Health  
OA Osteoarthritis  
OAAA  Osteoarthritis Action Alliance  
OARSI  Osteoarthritis Research Society International  
OA-PCP Osteoarthritis Physical activity Care Pathway  
OHRP  Office for Human Research Protections  
ORBIT  Obesity -Related Behavioral Intervention 
Trials  
PA Physical Activity  
PI Principal Investigator  
QC Quality Control  
SAE Serious Adverse Event  
SO Safety Officer  
NRS  Stanford Numeric Rating Scale  
UNC  University of North Carolina  
WOMAC  Western Ontario and McMaster Universities 
Osteoarthritis Index  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
Physical Activity Pathway for Patients with Osteoarthritis in Primary Care   Version 4.0 
Protocol #20 -2134   5 August  2021  
33 
Protocol v4.0 - 20210805  
10.4 PROTOCOL AMENDMENT HISTORY  
 
Version  Date  Description of Change  Brief Rationale  
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
  
Physical Activity Pathway for Patients with Osteoarthritis in Primary Care   Version 4.0 
Protocol #20 -2134   5 August  2021  
34 
Protocol v4.0 - 20210805  
 
REFERENCES  
 
1. Murphy L, Helmick CG, Schwartz T, et al. The lifetime risk of symptomatic hip osteoarthritis is one in 
four. Paper presented at: American College of Rheumatology Scientific Meeting; November, 2006, 
2006; Washington, DC.  
2. Murphy L, Schwartz TA, Helmick CG, et al. Lifetime risk of symptomatic knee osteoarthritis. Arthritis & Rheumatism. 2008;59(9):1207- 1213.  
3. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Projected state- specific increases in self -reported doctor -
diagnosed arthritis and arthritis -attributable activity limitations --United States, 2005 -2030. Morbidity and 
Mortality Weekly Report. 2007;56(17):423- 425. 
4. Neogi T, Zhang Y. Epidemiology of osteoarthritis. Rheum Dis Clin North Am. 2013;39(1):1- 19. 
5. Lawrence RC, Felson DT, Helmick CG, et al. Estimates of the prevalence of arthritis and other 
rheumatic conditions in the United States:  Part II. Arthritis & Rheumatism. 2008;58(1):26- 35. 
6. Dominick KL, Ahern FM, Gold CH, et al. Health -related quality of life among older adults with arthritis. 
Health and Quality of Life Outcomes. 2004;2(1):5.  
7. Guccione AA, Felson DT, Anderson JJ, et al. The effects of specific medical conditions on the 
functional limitations of elders in the Framingham Study. American Journal of Public Health. 
1997;84:351 -358. 
8. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Arthritis as a potential barrier to physical activity among 
adults with diabetes - United States, 2005 and 2007. MMWR - Morbidity & Mortality Weekly Report. 
2008;57(18):486 -489. 
9. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Arthritis as a potential barrier to physical activity among 
adults with heart disease - United States, 2005 and 2007. MMWR - Morbidity & Mortality Weekly 
Report. 2009;58:165 -169. 
10. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Arthritis as a potential barrier to physical activity among adults with obesity. MMWR - Morbidity & Mortality Weekly Report. 2011;60(19):614- 618. 
11. Hochberg MC, Altman RD, April KT, et al. American College of Rheumatology 2012 recommendations for the use of non -pharmacologic and pharmacologic therapies in osteoarthritis of the hand, hip and 
knee. Arthritis Care and Research. 2012;64(4):465- 474. 
12. Richmond J, Hunter DH, Irrgang JJ, et al. American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons Clinical Practice Guidline on the Treatment of Osteoarthritis (OA) of the Knee. Journal of Bone and Joint 
Surgery 2010;92:990- 993. 
13. Zhang W, Nuki G, Moskowitz RW, et al. OARSI recommendations for the management of hip and knee osteoarthritis Part III: changes in evidence following systematic cumulative update of research published through January 2009. Osteoarthritis & Cartilage. 2010;18(4):476- 499. 
14. Uthman OA, van der Windt DA, Jordan JL, et al. Exercise for lower limb osteoarthritis: systematic review incorporating trial sequential analysis and network meta- analysis. BMJ. 2013;347:f5555.  
15. Roddy E, Zhang W, Doherty M. Aerobic walking or strengthening exercise for osteoarthritis of the knee? A systematic review. Annals of the Rheumatic Diseases. 2005;64(4):544 -548. 
16. Rannou F, Poiraudeau S. Non- pharmacological approaches for the treatment of osteoarthritis. Best 
Pract Res Clin Rheumatol. 2010;24(1):93- 106. 
17. Fransen M, McConnell S, Hernandez -Molina G, et al. Exercise for osteoarthritis of the hip. The 
Cochrane database of systematic reviews. 2014(4):CD007912.  
18. Cisternas MG, Yelin E, Katz JN, et al. Ambulatory visit utilization in a national, population- based sample 
of adults with osteoarthritis. Arthritis Rheum. 2009;61(12):1694 -1703.  
19. Song J, Hochberg MC, Chang RW, et al. Racial and ethnic differences in physical activity guidelines attainment among people at high risk of or having knee osteoarthritis. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken). 
2013;65(2):195 -202. 
20. AuYoung M, Linke SE, Pagoto S, et al. Integrating Physical Activity in Primary Care Practice. Am J Med. 2016.  
Physical Activity Pathway for Patients with Osteoarthritis in Primary Care   Version 4.0 
Protocol #20 -2134   5 August  2021  
35 
Protocol v4.0 - 20210805 21. Hunter DJ, Neogi T, Hochberg MC. Quality of osteoarthritis management and the need for reform in the 
US. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken). 2011;63(1):31 -38. 
22. Do BT, Hootman JM, Helmick CG, et al. Monitoring healthy people 2010 arthritis management objectives: education and clinician counseling for weight loss and exercise. Annals of Family Medicine. 2011;9(2):136 -141. 
23. Nelson AE, Allen KD, Golightly YM, et al. A systematic review of recommendations and guidelines for the management of osteoarthritis: The Chronic Osteoarthritis Management Initiative of the U.S. Bone 
and Joint Initiative. Seminars in Arthritis & Rheumatism. 2014;434(6):701 -712. 
24. Allen KD, Bosworth HB, Chatterjee R, et al. Clinic variation in recruitment metrics, patient 
characteristics and treatment use in a randomized clinical trial of osteoarthritis management. BMC 
Musculoskelet Disord. 2014;15:413. 
25. Tulloch H, Fortier M, Hogg W. Physical activity counseling in primary care: who has and who should be counseling? Patient Educ Couns. 2006;64(1- 3):6-20. 
26. Heath GW, Parra DC, Sarmiento OL, et al. Evidence- based intervention in physical activity: lessons 
from around the world. Lancet. 2012;380(9838):272- 281. 
27. Estabrooks PA, Glasgow RE. Translating effective clinic -based physical activity interventions into 
practice. Am J Prev Med. 2006;31(4 Suppl):S45 -56. 
28. Orrow G, Kinmonth AL, Sanderson S, et al. Effectiveness of physical activity promotion based in 
primary care: systematic review and meta -analysis of randomised controlled trials. BMJ. 
2012;344:e1389.  
29. Coleman KJ, Ngor E, Reynolds K, et al. Initial validation of an exercise "vital sign" in electronic medical records. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2012;44(11):2071 -2076.  
30. Fitzgerald L, Ozemek C, Jarrett H, et al. Accelerometer Validation of Questionnaires Used in Clinical Settings to Assess MVPA. Medicine and science in sports and exercise. 2015;47(7):1538 -1542.  
31. Allen KD, Bierma -Zeinstra SM, Foster NE, et al. OARSI Clinical Trials Recommendations: Design and 
conduct of implementation trials of interventions for osteoarthritis. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 
2015;23(5):826 -838. 
32. Boehler CE, Milton KE, Bull FC, et al. The cost of changing physical activity behaviour: evidence from a "physical activity pathway" in the primary care setting. BMC Public Health. 2011;11:370.  
33. Bull FC, Milton KE. A process evaluation of a "physical activity pathway" in the primary care setting. BMC Public Health. 2010;10:463.  
34. Barrett EM, Hussey J, Darker CD. Feasibility of a physical activity pathway for Irish primary care 
physiotherapy services. Physiotherapy. 2016.  
35. Sallis JF, Cervero RB, Ascher W, et al. An ecological approach to creating active living communities. Annu Rev Public Health. 2006;27:297 -322. 
36. McLeroy KR, Bibeau D, Steckler A, et al. An ecological perspective on health promotion programs. 
Health Educ Q. 1988;15(4):351 -377. 
37. Allen KD, Yancy WS, Jr., Bosworth HB, et al. A Combined Patient and Provider Intervention for Management of Osteoarthritis in Veterans: A Randomized Clinical Trial. Ann Intern Med. 
2016;164(2):73 -83. 
38. Allen KD, Oddone EZ, Coffman CJ, et al. Patient, Provider, and Combined Interventions for Managing Osteoarthritis in Primary Care: A Cluster Randomized Trial. Ann Intern Med. 2017.  
39. Allen KD, Bongiorni D, Bosworth HB, et al. Group Versus Individual Physical Therapy for Veterans With 
Knee Osteoarthritis: Randomized Clinical Trial. Phys Ther. 2016;96(5):597- 608. 
40. Allen KD, Oddone EZ, Coffman CJ, et al. Telephone- based self -management of osteoarthritis: a 
randomized, controlled trial. Annals of Internal Medicine. 2010;153:570- 579. 
41. Allen KD, Sanders L, Olsen MK, et al. Effectiveness of internet and DVD decision aids for patients with hip and knee osteoarthritis. Osteoarthritis Research Society International Meeting; 2014; Paris, France.  
42. Schrubbe LA, Ravyts SG, Benas BC, et al. Pain coping skills training for African Americans with 
osteoarthritis (STAART): study protocol of a randomized controlled trial. BMC Musculoskelet Disord. 
2016;17(1):359.  
43. Williams QI, Gunn AH, Beaulieu JE, et al. Physical therapy vs. internet -based exercise training (PATH -
Physical Activity Pathway for Patients with Osteoarthritis in Primary Care   Version 4.0 
Protocol #20 -2134   5 August  2021  
36 
Protocol v4.0 - 20210805 IN) for patients with knee osteoarthritis: study protocol of a randomized controlled trial. BMC 
Musculoskelet Disord. 2015;16:264. 
44. Allen KD, Bosworth HB, Brock DS, et al. Patient and Provider Interventions for Managing Osteoarthritis in Primary Care: Protocols for Two Randomized Controlled Trials. BMC Musculoskelet Disord. 2012;13(1):60.  
45. Callahan LF, Rivadeneira A, Altpeter M, et al. Evaluation of the Arthritis Foundation's Camine Con Gusto Program for Hispanic Adults With Arthritis. Hisp Health Care Int. 2016;14(3):132 -140. 
46. Callahan LF, Cleveland RJ, Altpeter M, et al. Evaluation of Tai Chi Program Effectiveness for People with Arthritis in the Community: A Randomized Controlled Trial. J Aging Phys Act. 2016;24(1):101- 110. 
47. Callahan LF, Shreffler JH, Altpeter M, et al. Evaluation of group and self -directed formats of the Arthritis 
Foundation's Walk With Ease Program. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken). 2011;63(8):1098 -1107.  
48. Mielenz TJ, Kubiak -Rizzone KL, Alvarez KJ, et al. Association of self -efficacy and outcome 
expectations with physical activity in adults with arthritis. Arthritis. 2013;2013:621396. 
49. Nyrop KA, Callahan LF, Rini C, et al. Adaptation of an Evidence- Based Arthritis Program for Breast 
Cancer Survivors on Aromatase Inhibitor Therapy Who Experience Joint Pain. Prev Chronic Dis. 2015;12:E91.  
50. Nyrop KA, Charnock BL, Martin KR, et al. Effect of a six -week walking program on work place activity 
limitations among adults with arthritis. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken). 2011;63(12):1773- 1776.  
51. Wyatt B, Mingo CA, Waterman MB, et al. Impact of the Arthritis Foundation's Walk With Ease Program 
on arthritis symptoms in African Americans. Prev Chronic Dis. 2014;11:E199.  
52. Callahan LF, Cleveland RJ, Shreffler J, et al. Evaluation of active living every day in adults with arthritis. 
J Phys Act Health. 2014;11(2):285- 295. 
53. Lubar D, White PH, Callahan LF, et al. A National Public Health Agenda for Osteoarthritis 2010. Semin Arthritis Rheum. 2010;39(5):323- 326. 
54. Golightly YM, Allen KD, Caine DJ. A comprehensive review of the effectiveness of different exercise programs for patients with osteoarthritis. Phys Sportsmed. 2012;40(4):52 -65. 
55. Powell BJ, Beidas RS, Lewis CC, et al. Methods to Improve the Selection and Tailoring of 
Implementation Strategies. J Behav Health Serv Res. 2015.  
56. Powell BJ, Waltz TJ, Chinman MJ, et al. A refined compilation of implementation strategies: results from the Expert Recommendations for Implementing Change (ERIC) project. Implement Sci. 
2015;10:21.  
57. Waltz TJ, Powell BJ, Matthieu MM, et al. Use of concept mapping to characterize relationships among implementation strategies and assess their feasibility and importance: results from the Expert 
Recommendations for Implementing Change (ERIC) study. Implement Sci. 2015;10:109.  
58. Keyserling TC, Sheridan SL, Draeger LB, et al. A comparison of live counseling with a web- based 
lifestyle and medication intervention to reduce coronary heart disease risk: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Intern Med. 2014;174(7):1144- 1157.  
59. Pitts SB, Vu MB, Garcia BA, et al. A community assessment to inform a multilevel intervention to reduce cardiovascular disease risk and risk disparities in a rural community. Fam Community Health. 
2013;36(2):135 -146. 
60. Carter -Edwards L, Lowe- Wilson A, Mouw MS, et al. Community Member and Stakeholder Perspectives 
on a Healthy Environment Initiative in North Carolina. Prev Chronic Dis. 2015;12:E127.  
61. Evenson KR, Wen F, Hales D, et al. National youth sedentary behavior and physical activity daily 
patterns using latent class analysis applied to accelerometry. Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act. 2016;13:55.  
62. Hales D, Vaughn AE, Mazzucca S, et al. Development of HomeSTEAD's physical activity and screen time physical environment inventory. Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act. 2013;10:132.  
63. Griesemer I, Vu MB, Callahan LF, et al. Developing a primary care- focused intervention to engage 
patients with osteoarthritis in physical activity: a stakeholder engagement qualitative study. Health 
Promotion Practice. 2020 In Press.  
64. Allen K, Vu MB, Callahan LF, et al. Osteoarthritis physical activity care pathway (OA -PCP): results of a 
feasibility trial. BMC Musculoskelet Disord. 2020;21(1):308.  
65. Angst F, Aeschlimann A, Steiner W, et al. Responsiveness of the WOMAC Osteoarthritis Index as 
Physical Activity Pathway for Patients with Osteoarthritis in Primary Care   Version 4.0 
Protocol #20 -2134   5 August  2021  
37 
Protocol v4.0 - 20210805 compared with the SF -36 in patients with osteoarthritis of the legs undergoing a comprehensive 
rehabilitation program. Annals of the Rheumatic Diseases. 2001;60:834 -840. 
66. Goode AP, Hall KS, Batch BC, et al. The Impact of Interventions that Integrate Accelerometers on 
Physical Activity and Weight Loss: A Systematic Review. Ann Behav Med. 2017;51(1):79 -93. 
67. Schembre SM, Liao Y, Robertson MC, et al. Just -in-Time Feedback in Diet and Physical Activity 
Interventions: Systematic Review and Practical Design Framework. J Med Internet Res. 
2018;20(3):e106.  
68. Hodkinson A, Kontopantelis E, Adeniji C, et al. Accelerometer - and Pedometer -Based Physical Activity 
Interventions Among Adults With Cardiometabolic Conditions: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. JAMA Netw Open. 2019;2(10):e1912895.  
69. Davergne T, Pallot A, Dechartres A, et al. Use of Wearable Activity Trackers to Improve Physical Activity Behavior in Patients With Rheumatic and Musculoskeletal Diseases: A Systematic Review and 
Meta -Analysis. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken). 2019;71(6):758 -767. 
70. Buchan DS, Ollis S, Thomas NE, et al. Physical activity behaviour: an overview of current and emergent theoretical practices. J Obes. 2012;2012:546459. 
71. Nguyen US, Zhang Y, Zhu Y, et al. Increasing prevalence of knee pain and symptomatic knee 
osteoarthritis: survey and cohort data. Ann Intern Med. 2011;155(11):725 -732. 
72. McAlindon TE, Driban JB, Henrotin Y, et al. OARSI Clinical Trials Recommendations: Design, conduct, and reporting of clinical trials for knee osteoarthritis. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2015;23(5):747 -760. 
73. Grant RW, Schmittdiel JA, Neugebauer RS, et al. Exercise as a vital sign: a quasi -experimental 
analysis of a health system intervention to collect patient- reported exercise levels. Journal of general 
internal medicine. 2014;29(2):341- 348. 
74. Joseph RP, Keller C, Adams MA, et al. Validity of two brief physical activity questionnaires with accelerometers among African- American women. Primary health care research & development. 
2016;17(3):265 -276. 
75. Young DR, Coleman KJ, Ngor E, et al. Associations between physical activity and cardiometabolic risk factors assessed in a Southern California health care system, 2010- 2012. Preventing chronic disease. 
2014;11:E219.  
76. McAlindon TE, Bannuru RR, Sullivan MC, et al. OARSI guidelines for the non- surgical management of 
knee osteoarthritis. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2014;22(3):363 -388. 
77. Lee IM, Shiroma EJ, Kamada M, et al. Association of Step Volume and Intensity With All- Cause 
Mortality in Older Women. JAMA Intern Med. 2019.  
78. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2008 Physical Activity Guidelines for Americans. 
Washington, DC2008.  
79. Dunlop DD, Song J, Hootman JM, et al. One Hour a Week: Moving to Prevent Disability in Adults With Lower Extremity Joint Symptoms. Am J Prev Med. 2019;56(5):664 -672. 
80. White DK, Tudor -Locke C, Zhang Y, et al. Daily walking and the risk of incident functional limitation in 
knee osteoarthritis: an observational study. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken). 2014;66(9):1328 -1336.  
81. Miller WR, Rollnick S. Motivational Interviewing: Preparing People for Change.  2nd ed. New York: 
Guilford; 2002.  
82. O'Halloran PD, Blackstock F, Shields N, et al. Motivational interviewing to increase physical activity in 
people with chronic health conditions: a systematic review and meta -analysis. Clin Rehabil. 
2014;28(12):1159 -1171.  
83. Rubak S, Sandbaek A, Lauritzen T, et al. Motivational interviewing: a systematic review and meta-analysis. British Journal of General Practice. 2005;55:305 -312. 
84. Allen KD, Bongiorni D, Caves K, et al. STepped exercise program for patients with knee OsteoArthritis (STEP- KOA): protocol for a randomized controlled trial. BMC Musculoskelet Disord. 2019;20(1):254.  
85. Messier SP, Callahan LF, Beavers DP, et al. Weight -loss and exercise for communities with arthritis in 
North Carolina (we -can): design and rationale of a pragmatic, assessor- blinded, randomized controlled 
trial. BMC Musculoskelet Disord. 2017;18(1):91. 
86. Prince SA, Adamo KB, Hamel ME, et al. A comparison of direct versus self -report measures for 
assessing physical activity in adults: a systematic review. Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act. 2008;5:56.  
Physical Activity Pathway for Patients with Osteoarthritis in Primary Care   Version 4.0 
Protocol #20 -2134   5 August  2021  
38 
Protocol v4.0 - 20210805 87. Semanik PA, Lee J, Song J, et al. Accelerometer -monitored sedentary behavior and observed physical 
function loss. Am J Public Health. 2015;105(3):560- 566. 
88. Carr LJ, Mahar MT. Accuracy of intensity and inclinometer output of three activity monitors for 
identification of sedentary behavior and light -intensity activity. J Obes. 2012;2012:460271. 
89. Troiano RP, Berrigan D, Dodd KW, et al. Physical activity in the United States measured by 
accelerometer. Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise. 2008;40(181- 188).  
90. Choi L, Ward SC, Schnelle JF, et al. Assessment of wear/nonwear time classification algorithms for triaxial accelerometer. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2012;44(10):2009 -2016.  
91. Matthews CE. Calibration of accelerometer output for adults. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2005;37(11 
Suppl):S512- 522. 
92. Bellamy N. WOMAC: a 20 -year experiential review of a patient -centered self -reported health status 
questionnaire. The Journal of Rheumatology. 2002;29(12):2473 -2476.  
93. Bellamy N, Buchanan WW, Goldsmith CH, et al. Validation study of WOMAC:  A health status instrument for measuring clinically important patient relevant outcomes to antirheumatic drug therapy in 
patients with osteoarthritis of the hip or knee. The Journal of Rheumatology. 1988;15:1833 -1840.  
94. Stewart AL, Mills KM, King AC, et al. CHAMPS physical activity questionnaire for older adults: 
outcomes for interventions. Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise. 2001;33(7):1126- 1141.  
95. Sangha O, Stucki G, Liang MH, et al. The self -administered comorbidity questionnaire: a new method 
to assess comorbidity for clinical and health services research. Arthritis & Rheumatism. 
2003;49(2):156 -163. 
96. Lewis CC, Weiner BJ, Stanick C, et al. Advancing implementation science through measure 
development and evaluation: a study protocol. Implement Sci. 2015;10:102.  
97. Weiner BJ, Dorsey C, Stanick CF, et al. Psychometric assessment of three newly developed implemenation outcome measures. 9th Annual Conferene on the Science of Dissemination and 
Implementation; 2016; Washington, DC. 
98. Focht BC, Garver MJ, Devor ST, et al. Group -mediated physical activity promotion and mobility in 
sedentary patients with knee osteoarthritis: results from the IMPACT- pilot trial. J Rheumatol. 
2014;41(10):2068 -2077.  
99. Schlenk EA, Lias JL, Sereika SM, et al. Improving physical activity and function in overweight and obese older adults with osteoarthritis of the knee: a feasibility study. Rehabil Nurs. 2011;36(1):32 -42. 
100. Peters SA, Bots ML, den Ruijter HM, et al. Multiple imputation of missing repeated outcome 
measurements did not add to linear mixed- effects models. J Clin Epidemiol. 2012;65(6):686- 695. 
101. Little RJ, Wang Y. Pattern- mixture models for multivariate incomplete data with covariates. Biometrics. 
1996;52(1):98 -111. 
102. Collins LM, Schafer JL, Kam CM. A comparison of inclusive and restrictive strategies in modern missing data procedures. Psychol Methods. 2001;6(4):330 -351. 
103. Panel on Handling Missing Data in Clinical Trials - National Research Council. The Prevention and 
Treatment of Missing Data in Clinical Trials.  Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2010. 
104. Hayward RA, Krumholz HM, Zulman DM, et al. Optimizing statin treatment for primary prevention of 
coronary artery disease. Ann Intern Med. 2010;152(2):69- 77. 
105. Kent DM, Hayward RA, Griffith JL, et al. An independently derived and validated predictive model for selecting patients with myocardial infarction who are likely to benefit from tissue plasminogen activator 
compared with streptokinase. Am J Med. 2002;113(2):104- 111. 
106. Kiernan M, Kraemer HC, Winkleby MA, et al. Do logistic regression and signal detection identify 
different subgroups at risk? Implications for the design of tailored interventions. Psychol Methods. 
2001;6(1):35 -48. 
107. Owens EB, Hinshaw SP, Kraemer HC, et al. Which treatment for whom for ADHD? Moderators of treatment response in the MTA. J Consult Clin Psychol. 2003;71(3):540 -552. 
 