Cover Page [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] NICU Oxygen Control Study Protocol May 6, 2023 
MU	IRB	version:		3/26/2014		Page 1 of 9		Date:	__5/6/23				Version	Number:	__	8________________	Principal	Investigator:	__John	Pardalos	MD__________	Application	Number:	___2003117________	Application	Title:			NICU	Oxygen	Control	Study	Funding	source:		NIH		Protocol		1. Abstract	Babies	born	less	than	or	equal	to	30	weeks	gestational	age	or	have	a	birth	weight	less	than	or	equal	to	1500	grams	are	at	risk	for	developing	long-term	complications	(chronic	lung	disease,	retinopathy	of	prematurity,	brain	damage,	necrotizing	enterocolitis,	or	death)	if	they	receive	too	much	oxygen	or	not	enough	oxygen.		Therefor	all	infants	in	the	neonatal	intensive	care	unit	(NICU)	that	require	oxygen	are	placed	on	a	pulse	oximeter	that	continuously	measures	the	infant's	saturation	level.		Our	goal	is	to	keep	the	oxygen	saturation	level	in	this	group	of	infants	in	the	80’s	to	low	90’s	range	until	the	risk	of	retinopathy	of	prematurity	diminishes	and	then	it	is	increased	to	the	term	infant	parameters.	Preterm	infants	with	respiratory	distress	may	require	respiratory	support	from	a	variety	of	devices	ranging	from	a	variety	of	ventilators	to	a	variety	of	non-invasive	devices.		One	of	these	non-invasive	devices	is	called	a	high	flow	nasal	cannula.		This	device	provides	flow	of	air	to	the	infant	through	a	cannula	attached	to	the	infant's	nose.		Another	non-invasive	device	is	called	bubble	CPAP.		In	this	case	a	flexi-trunk	interface	is	attached	to	the	patient	using	nasal	prongs	alternated	with	a	mask	every	4	hours	to	prevent	skin	breakdown.		With	this	device,	the	flow	of	air	is	passed	through	a	column	of	water	which	provides	a	gentle	vibration	to	the	air	entering	the	baby’s	lungs	which	may	help	the	baby	breathe	easier.		With	either	device	the	air	is	warmed	and	humidified	to	be	gentler	to	the	infant's	lungs.		Both	devices	also	have	a	blender	attached	to	them	so	that	the	percent	oxygen	in	the	air	can	be	adjusted	from	21%	(or	room	air)	to	100%	oxygen	depending	on	the	needs	of	the	infant	to	keep	his/her	oxygen	saturation	level	in	the	desired	range.		Currently	adjustments	made	to	the	percent	oxygen	require	a	healthcare	provider	to	manually	turn	the	knob	on	the	blender	in	order	to	increase	or	decrease	the	percent	oxygen	being	delivered	to	the	infant	to	keep	the	infant's	oxygen	saturation	level	in	the	desired	range.			We	took	these	same	devices	and	attached	a	computer	that	can	receive	information	about	the	infant's	oxygen	saturation	level	from	the	pulse	oximeter	and	can	automatically	turn	the	knob	on	the	blender	in	order	to	adjust	the	oxygen	level	being	delivered	to	the	infant	to	keep	the	oxygen	saturation	level	in	the	desired	range.		The	computer	also	has	an	artificial	intelligence	algorithm	in	it,	and	it	will	learn	to	anticipate	the	patient's	oxygen	needs	the	longer	it	is	attached	to	a	patient.		For	safety	concerns,	the	device	also	has	a	switch	that	the	healthcare	provider	can	use	to	turn	the	device	to	manual	mode	should	the	computer	system	not	be	able	to	keep	up	with	the	infant's	condition.				With	this	study,	we	will	compare	how	well	the	computer	adjusts	the	oxygen	concentration	to	keep	the	baby's	oxygen	saturation	level	in	the	desired	range	compared	to	the	healthcare	providers	that	must	manually	adjust	the	knob	whenever	the	infant's	saturation	level	falls	out	of	range.		2. Objectives	The	primary	objective	to	this	study	is	to	determine	if	the	computer	can	automatically	keep	the	infant's	oxygen	saturation	level	in	the	desired	range	for	a	longer	period	of	time	compared	to	
MU	IRB	version:		3/26/2014		Page 2 of 9	the	healthcare	providers	that	must	manually	adjust	the	oxygen	concentration	whenever	the	infant's	oxygen	saturation	level	falls	out	of	range.				Other	objectives	of	this	study	are	clinical	validation	of	the	oxygen	control	device	and	algorithm	developed	by	the	researchers	at	the	University	of	Missouri	by	testing	the	transitions	from	automatic	to	manual	control	of	the	device;	demonstrate	the	dynamic	adaptability;	and	show	that	the	response	of	the	system	in	the	automatic	model	is	stable.	We	will	also	monitor	the	frequency	of	acute	events	(apnea,	bradycardia	and/or	desaturation	events)	to	see	if	the	frequency	of	these	events	will	decrease	when	the	oxygen	saturation	level	is	better	controlled.	3. Background	(N/A	please	see	abstract	section)		4. Study	Procedures	a. Whenever	an	infant	who	has	been	admitted	to	the	Neonatal	Intensive	Care	Unit	(NICU)	at	one	of	the	study	sites	is	placed	on	a	high	flow	nasal	cannula	or	bubble	CPAP	by	the	primary	healthcare	team,	the	study	personnel	will	determine	if	the	infant	meets	inclusion	criteria.	b. The	primary	healthcare	team	caring	for	the	infant	will	continue	to	adjust	the	flow	on	the	high	flow	nasal	cannula	or	the	PEEP	on	the	bubble	CPAP	per	the	patient's	needs.	c. The	primary	healthcare	team	will	determine	the	oxygen	saturation	parameters	for	the	patient.		The	study	team	will	adjust	the	computer	set	point	goal	for	the	oxygen	delivery	system	to	be	the	median	of	that	range.	d. If	the	patient	meets	criteria,	we	will	approach	the	parents	to	give	consent	to	enroll	the	infant	in	the	study.	e. Once	consent	is	obtained,	the	study	personnel	will	switch	the	infant	to	the	equivalent	study	device	for	up	to	6	days	but	the	infant's	interface	with	the	device	will	not	be	changed.		The	infant	will	be	kept	on	the	same	pulse	oximeter	as	well.		f. The	bedside	nurse	and	respiratory	therapist	will	be	educated	on	how	the	device	works	and	what	to	do	if	they	have	any	questions.		A	two-page	information	sheet	will	be	hanging	from	the	device,	so	they	have	a	reference	to	look	at.		This	information	sheet	includes	a	frequently	asked	questions	section.		It	also	reminds	them	to	call	the	study	team	for	any	questions.	g. The	bedside	nurse	will	be	asked	to	keep	a	log	of	events	that	may	be	contributing	to	potential	changes	in	oxygen	needs	or	desaturation	events	such	as	changing	diapers,	being	held,	feeding,	repositioning	the	infant,	IV	starts,	blood	draws,	blood	transfusions,	medications	administered,	etc.		In	addition,	acute	events	(apnea,	bradycardia,	desaturation)	and	their	resolution	will	be	documented	on	the	logs.		They	will	also	document	when	the	interface	on	the	device	is	switched	from	a	mask	to	prongs	or	vice	versa	or	the	settings	are	adjusted	by	the	primary	healthcare	team	(flow	rate	on	the	HFNC,	PEEP	on	the	bubble	CPAP).		They	will	also	document	anytime	they	had	to	switch	the	device	the	manual	mode	to	adjust	the	FiO2	faster	than	the	computer	was	doing	based	on	the	infant’s	needs.		They	will	then	document	when	they	switched	the	device	back	to	the	automatic	mode	to	finish	out	the	6-hour	period.	h. Study	personnel	will	collect	the	baby's	medical	history	and	mom's	prenatal	history.		The	baby’s	history	including	mom’s	prenatal	history	information	produced	by	this	study	will	be	stored	in	the	investigator’s	file	and	identified	by	a	code	number	only.	The	code	key	connecting	the	baby’s	name	to	specific	information	about	the	patient	will	be	kept	in	a	separate,	secure	location	in	the	investigator’s	office.	i. We will continuously download the vital signs and pulse oximeter data from the monitor system for up to 24 hours prior to the study as well as throughout the study to see how well the healthcare providers kept the baby in the desired range during that time period.  	
MU	IRB	version:		3/26/2014		Page 3 of 9	• Continuously	measure	SpO2	using	existing	sensors	in	the	NICU.		A	pulse	oximetry	unit	will	be	used	to	continuously	gather	SpO2	data	from	the	patients.	• Continuously	measure	heart	rate	using	existing	sensors	in	the	NICU.	A	cardiorespiratory	monitor	will	be	used	to	continuously	gather	heart	rate	data	from	the	patients.	• Continuously	measure	respiratory	rate	using	existing	sensors	in	the	NICU.	A	cardiorespiratory	monitor	will	be	used	to	continuously	gather	respiratory	rate	data	from	the	patients.	• Continuously	measure	FiO2	concentration.		The	computer	system	attached	to	the	research	device,	will	continuously	keep	track	of	the	infant’s	SpO2,	heart	rate,	respiratory	rate	and	FiO2	being	provided	to	the	patient.		This	data	will	be	downloaded	and	analyzed	by	the	study	personnel	once	the	device	is	removed	from	the	patient.	j. When	the	device	is	set	on	the	manual	mode,	the	healthcare	providers	will	be	responsible	for	adjusting	the	oxygen	concentration	to	keep	the	infant	in	the	desired	saturation	range	set	by	the	primary	healthcare	team.	k. When	the	device	is	set	in	the	automatic	mode,	the	computer	will	make	the	necessary	adjustments	to	the	oxygen	concentration	to	keep	the	infant	in	the	desired	saturation	range.		The	computer	will	strive	to	keep	the	oxygen	saturation	level	at	the	median	of	the	range	set	by	the	primary	healthcare	team.	l. The	infant	will	be	placed	in	one	of	these	modes	for	6	hours	and	then	switched	to	the	other	mode	for	the	next	6	hours.		Ideally	this	will	occur	every	6	hours	+/-	1	hour.	m. This	cycle	will	be	repeated	for	the	next	132	hours	(5.5	days)	except	at	48	and	at	96	hours	where	it	will	be	kept	on	the	same	mode	for	at	12-	hour	period	in	order	to	switch	the	time	of	day	the	infant	is	on	automatic	mode	so	it	not	always	the	same	time	of	day	for	the	full	6	days.			n. Infants	will	be	randomized	so	some	will	start	in	the	automatic	mode	(A)	while	others	start	in	the	manual	mode	(B).		Due	to	concern	that	the	time	of	day	may	play	a	role	in	the	variation	in	the	patient’s	oxygen	need	and/or	the	frequency	of	acute	events,	the	patients	will	be	randomly	assigned	to	one	of	two	tracks:	• ABAB/ABAB/BABA/BABA/ABAB/ABAB	• BABA/BABA/ABAB/ABAB/BABA/BABA	o. After	completion	of	the	6	days	(144	hours)	on	the	study	device,	the	infant	will	be	switched	back	to	the	regular	device	used	in	the	NICU.			p. While	the	infant	is	on	the	study	device	during	the	first	12	hours	of	the	study,	a	member	of	the	research	team	will	remain	at	the	infant's	bedside	to	make	sure	the	device	remains	operational,	but	they	will	not	be	allowed	to	adjust	the	oxygen	concentration.			The	bedside	nurse	will	be	able	to	switch	the	device	to	manual	mode	anytime	she/he	feels	the	oxygen	concentration	needs	to	be	adjusted	faster	than	the	computer	is	doing	in	the	automatic	mode.	q. The	study	will	be	stopped	earlier	if	the	primary	healthcare	team	feels:	• The	infant	requires	more	respiratory	support	than	can	be	provided	by	the	high	flow	nasal	cannula	or	bubble	CPAP	device.		• The	infant	no	longer	requires	respiratory	support	and	can	be	weaned	off	the	high	flow	nasal	cannula	or	bubble	CPAP	device.		5. Inclusion/Exclusion	Criteria	a. Inclusion	criteria:	infants	admitted	to	the	NICU	who	were	less	than	or	equal	to	30	weeks	gestational	age	or	less	than	or	equal	to1500	grams	at	birth	who	are	currently	on	
MU	IRB	version:		3/26/2014		Page 4 of 9	high	flow	nasal	cannula	or	bubble	CPAP	and	require	at	least	2	adjustments	to	the	FiO2	per	shift	and/or	have	at	least	2	desaturation	events	per	shift.	b. Exclusion	criteria:		infants	admitted	to	the	NICU	with	congenital	heart	disease.		Infants	who	are	set	on	a	minimum	FiO2	set	point	by	their	healthcare	provider,	will	also	be	excluded	from	this	study.			6. Drugs/	Substances/	Devices	The	high	flow	nasal	cannula	device	that	we	use	in	the	NICU	consists	of	a	oxygen	blender	that	is	mounted	on	an	IV	pole	and	a	Fisher	&	Paykel	Healthcare	humidifier	that	is	mounted	to	the	same	pole.		Medical	air	and	oxygen	are	introduced	in	the	back	of	the	blender	that	allows	the	oxygen	concentration	to	range	from	21%	(or	room	air)	to	100%	oxygen	by	simply	turning	the	knob	on	the	blender.		The	flowmeter	on	the	blender	is	used	to	adjust	the	flow	of	air	out	of	the	blender	(usually	1-6	lpm).		A	tube	connects	the	flowmeter	with	the	humidifier	where	the	air	is	heated	 and	 humidified.	 	 Another	 tube	 then	 connects	 the	 humidifier	 with	 the	 nasal	 cannula	which	is	placed	on	the	infant's	face.					The	 bubble	 CPAP	 device	 that	 we	 use	 in	 the	 NICU	 consists	 of	 an	oxygen	 blender	 that	 is	mounted	 on	 an	 IV	 pole,	 a	 Fisher	 &	 Paykel	 Healthcare	 humidifier	 and	 a	 Fischer	 &	 Paykel	Healthcare	bubble	CPAP	generator	that	are	mounted	to	the	same	pole.		Medical	air	and	oxygen	are	introduced	in	the	back	of	the	blender	that	allows	the	oxygen	concentration	to	range	from	21%	 (or	 room	 air)	 to	 100%	 oxygen	 by	 simply	 turning	 the	 knob	 on	 the	 blender.	 	 A	 tube	connects	the	flowmeter	with	the	humidifier	where	the	air	is	heated	and	humidified.		Another	tube	then	connects	the	humidifier	to	the	inspiratory	limb	of	the	flexi-trunk	which	is	placed	on	the	infant’s	face.		The	expiratory	limb	from	the	flexi-trunk	is	connected	to	the	bubble	CPAP	generator	which	is	set	to	the	desired	PEEP	(3-10	cm	of	H2O).			The	study	devices	are	exactly	the	same	set	ups	as	described	above	except	for	3	differences.		First,	 there	 is	 a	 computer	 attached	 to	 the	 IV	 pole	 that	 accepts	 input	 from	 a	 pulse	 oximeter.		The	 computer	 registers	 the	 saturation	 level	 and	 determines	 if	 the	 level	 is	 within	 the	prescribed	range.		Second,	there	is	an	attachment	between	the	computer	and	the	knob	on	the	blender.		If	the	oxygen	saturation	level	isn't	in	the	prescribed	range,	the	computer	can	turn	the	knob	 on	 the	 blender	 using	 this	 attachment	 to	 either	 increase	 or	 decrease	 the	 amount	 of	oxygen	being	delivered	to	the	patient	by	2%	every	10	seconds	as long as the oxygen saturation reading is considered reliable (the heart from the cardiac monitor and the pulse oximeter have to agree within 5 beats per min).	 	Third,	 the	 device	 has	 an	 alarm	 that	 will	 sound	 if	 the	 FiO2	 is	increased	or	decreased	by	more	than	10%	from	the	baseline	FiO2	requirement.		For	example,	if	the	infant’s	baseline	FiO2	needs	were	35%	and	the	FiO2	is	increased	to	45%	while	in	the	automatic	 mode,	 an	 alarm	 will	 sound	 so	 the	 nurse	 can	 evaluate	 why	 the	 infant	 is	 requiring	10%	more	oxygen	than	the	baseline.		The	nurse	can	evaluate	the	infant	to	see	if	the	oxygen	device	is	no	longer	in	the	infant’s	nose	and	reposition	it	or	notify	the	healthcare	providers	to	have	 them	 determine	 if	 the	 infant’s	 condition	 is	 deteriorating.	 	 If	 the	 infant	 truly	 needs	 the	extra	oxygen,	the	nurse	can	reset	the	baseline	oxygen	requirement	to	this	new	level	and	the	machine	will	not	alarm	again	until	the	oxygen	level	is	again	10%	out	of	range.		The	computer	also	 has	 a	 switch	 that	 turns	 it	 from	 automatic	 to	 manual	 mode.	 	 If	 the	 healthcare	 provider	needs	to	adjust	the	oxygen	concentration	faster	than	the	computer	is	making	a	change,	all	they	need	to	do	is	simply	switch	the	button	to	manual	and	they	can	adjust	the	knob	on	the	blender	to	whatever	concentration	they	want.		Name	of	Medical	Device:	Automatic	Oxygen	Control	System	Medical	Device	Description:	
MU	IRB	version:		3/26/2014		Page 5 of 9	The device receives signals with SpO2 information along with the heart rate and respiratory rate.  Using the measurements and a set-point, the device determines an FiO2 that is to be applied to a respiratory support system.  The device uses a motor to control a blend valve which manipulates the FiO2.  If the device makes inappropriate settings to the FiO2, risk is eliminated since all of the alarms will be in place (as in current practice) and manual control will always be available.    There will be a total of three replications of the Automatic	 Oxygen	 Control	 System devices at each site.  These three devices will be used under the supervision of a study engineer and/or healthcare provider.    There are no known difficulties in using the device.  The cost of the device is funded by the study.  Doctors, respiratory therapists, and nurses will be trained on how to use the device.  They will receive training on how to turn the device off and on, switch between automatic and manual modes, and adjust the FiO2 settings on the device.  This training will be conducted by the study personnel prior to placing the device on a patient. This training should take less than 5 minutes to complete.  A member of the study personnel will be present at the infant's bedside during the first 12 hours of the study period the infant is attached to the device and then 1 hour daily to make sure the device is functioning properly.  A member of the study team will also be on-call during the entire study period to answer questions about the device.  The study device will not be documented in the medical records.  The study PI and study engineers will be trained in Medical Device Reporting principles.   The study will only last 144 hours.  No follow up visits or tests are required.  This device is considered a non-significant risk device requiring no IDE. 		7. Study	Statistics	a. Primary	outcome	variable.	• Mean	elapsed	time	needed	to	re-	establish	SpO2	within	the	desired	range	after	an	alarm.	Does	the	computer	do	a	better	job	of	keeping	the	patient	in	the	desired	saturation	level	range	compared	to	the	current	manual	mode?		Does	the	patient	return	to	the	prescribed	saturation	level	range	quicker	in	the	automatic	mode	compared	to	the	manual	mode?	b. Secondary	outcome	variables.	• Proportion	of	time	SpO2	is	within	the	prescribed	range	computed	using	an	area-under-the-curve	approach.	Is	our	device	safe	to	use	on	neonates?		Is	the	transition	from	automatic	to	manual	mode	smooth?		Does	the	device	respond	appropriately	to	the	patient's	saturation	level?			• Does	the	frequency	of	acute	events	(apnea,	bradycardia	and/or	desaturation	events)	decrease	if	the	oxygen	saturation	level	is	kept	under	better	control?	
MU	IRB	version:		3/26/2014		Page 6 of 9	c. Our	goal	is	to	enroll	60	patients	into	the	study.		We	expect	to	consent	70	subjects	to	account	for	drop-out.	d. Our	pilot	study	of	6	patients	demonstrated	that	when	the	device	was	in	the	automatic	mode,	the	patient	spent	more	time	within	the	prescribed	oxygen	saturation	goals	and	that	it	took	less	time	for	them	to	return	to	the	prescribed	oxygen	saturation	range	whenever	they	were	outside	of	the	range.		Even	though	this	wasn’t	considered	statistically	significant,	we	felt	that	this	was	due	to	the	fact	the	infants	were	only	on	the	device	for	12	hours	(two	3-hour	periods	of	automatic	control	and	two	3-hour	periods	of	manual	control).		This	pilot	study	did	show	a	significant	decrease	in	the	number	of	bradycardia	events	while	the	infants	where	in	the	automatic	mode.		With	our	current	study,	the	patients	will	be	on	the	device	for	6	days	so	a	total	of	72	hours	of	automatic	control	and	72	hours	of	manual	control,	so	we	are	hoping	to	find	statistical	significance	in	all	our	study	metrics.			e. If	the	healthcare	team	determines	that	the	patient's	respiratory	distress	is	worsening	and	he/she	needs	more	support	than	can	be	provided	by	the	high	flow	nasal	cannula	or	bubble	CPAP,	the	study	will	be	terminated,	and	the	patient	will	be	placed	on	whatever	device	the	healthcare	team	chooses.		On	the	other	hand,	if	the	healthcare	team	determines	that	the	infant	is	doing	well	enough	that	they	no	longer	need	the	high	flow	nasal	cannula	or	bubble	CPAP,	we	will	stop	the	study	and	allow	the	infant	to	be	taken	off	the	respiratory	device.				8. Risks	a. The	study	high	flow	nasal	cannula	device	and	bubble	CPAP	device	are	the	same	exact	set	ups	we	currently	use	in	the	NICU	except	that	there	is	a	computer	attached	to	the	oxygen	blender	that	can	automatically	adjust	the	FiO2	being	delivered	to	the	patient.		A	member	of	the	research	team	will	be	at	the	baby's	bedside	to	make	sure	it	is	operating	properly	for	the	first	12	hours	and	then	daily	for	1	hour	to	make	sure	everything	is	functioning	appropriately.		They	will	also	be	available	by	phone	for	the	entire	time	the	infant	is	on	the	device.				The	bedside	nurse	and	respiratory	therapist	will	be	educated	on	how	the	device	works	and	what	to	do	if	they	have	any	questions.		A	two-page	information	sheet	will	be	hanging	from	the	device,	so	they	have	a	reference	to	look	at.		This	information	sheet	includes	a	frequently	asked	questions	section.		It	also	reminds	them	to	call	the	study	team	for	any	questions.		For	the	safety	of	every	patient	in	the	NICU,	we	have	several	redundant	systems	to	monitor	our	patients.		First	every	patient	in	the	NICU	is	continuously	monitored	for	their	heart	rate	and	respiratory	rate.		In	addition,	those	infants	requiring	respiratory	support	of	any	type	are	kept	on	a	pulse	oximeter	that	continuously	monitors	the	patient's	oxygen	saturation	levels.		If	these	vital	signs	fall	out	of	the	prescribed	range,	the	monitor	starts	to	alarm.		At	the	beginning	of	each	shift	the	nurses	make	sure	the	alarms	of	each	of	their	patients	ring	on	all	their	babies'	monitors	through	a	system	known	as	alarm	watch.		Additionally,	throughout	the	NICU,	monitors	are	present	so	healthcare	providers	can	monitor	these	vital	signs	in	key	locations	throughout	the	unit.		Furthermore,	the	heart	rate	and	respiratory	alarms	ring	directly	to	the	nurse's	special	secure	cellular	phone	used	in	the	hospital	that	also	functions	as	an	alarm	monitor	so	no	matter	where	the	nurse	may	be	located	in	the	NICU	she	can	hear	these	alarms.	To	protect	the	confidentially	of	the	patient’s	protected	health	information,	the	form	used	to	gather	the	information	from	the	medical	record	will	be	coded	so	the	infant's	name	and	medical	record	number	will	not	be	listed	on	the	sheet.		A	separate	sheet	indicating	
MU	IRB	version:		3/26/2014		Page 7 of 9	what	code	represents	the	patient's	name	and	medical	record	number	will	be	kept	in	a	secure	location	away	from	the	data	forms.		Once	completed,	the	data	forms	will	be	kept	in	Dr.	Pardalos'	office	at	the	MU	site	and	in	Dr.	Amjad’s	office	at	the	Florida	site.	b. There	is	no	financial	risk	to	the	participants.	c. The	data	safety	and	monitoring	plan	for	this	research	study	will	consist	of	a	local	data	monitoring	board	consisting	of	the	primary	investigator,	co-investigators,	and	research	study	team	members	who	will	be	responsible	for	monitoring	data,	recruitment,	and	subject	confidentiality.	The	principal	investigator	and	research	team	will	meet	to	review	the	data	at	completion	of	the	study	procedure.	Regular	meetings	will	occur	with	the	reporting	of	adverse	events	as	outlined	in	the	University	of	Missouri,	IRB	Reference	Manual,	and	appendix.	The	IRB	will	be	notified	at	the	time	of	renewal	of	the	frequency	of	monitoring,	cumulative	adverse	event	data,	summary	of	assessment	evaluating	the	safety	of	study	subjects,	summary	of	reviews	to	ensure	subject	participation	and	final	conclusions	regarding	changes	to	the	anticipated	benefit	to	risk	ratio	of	study	participation	and	final	recommendations	related	to	continuing,	changing,	or	terminating	the	study.			9. Benefits	Our	pilot	study	of	6	patients	demonstrated	that	when	the	device	was	in	the	automatic	mode,	the	patient	spent	more	time	within	the	prescribed	oxygen	saturation	goals	and	that	it	took	less	time	for	them	to	return	to	the	prescribed	oxygen	saturation	range	whenever	they	were	outside	of	the	range.		Even	though	this	wasn’t	considered	statistically	significant,	we	felt	that	this	was	due	to	the	fact	the	infants	were	only	on	the	device	for	12	hours	(two	3-hour	periods	of	automatic	control	and	two	3-hour	periods	of	manual	control).		This	pilot	study	did	show	a	significant	decrease	in	the	number	of	bradycardia	events	while	the	infants	where	in	the	automatic	mode.		With	our	current	study,	the	patients	will	be	on	the	device	for	6	days	so	a	total	of	72	hours	of	automatic	control	and	72	hours	of	manual	control,	so	we	are	hoping	to	find	statistical	significance	in	all	our	study	metrics.		In	the	future	once	this	device	receives	FDA	approval,	preterm	infants	can	be	kept	in	the	desired	saturation	range	for	longer	periods	of	time	and	help	minimize	long-term	complications	(chronic	lung	disease,	retinopathy	of	prematurity,	brain	damage,	necrotizing	enterocolitis	or	death).			Currently	healthcare	providers	care	for	2-3	patients	in	the	NICU.	To	prevent	alarm	fatigue	in	our	staff,	we	chose	a	wide	range	for	our	pulse	oximeter	alarms	parameters	to	minimize	the	frequency	of	alarms.		If	they	are	in	the	middle	of	caring	for	another	patient	and	another	patient's	saturations	are	only	slightly	out	of	range,	they	may	take	up	to	a	few	minutes	to	respond	especially	if	the	saturation	level	is	high.		This	computerized	system	will	be	able	to	respond	instantaneously	whereby	decreasing	the	risk	for	long-term	complications.		Currently	no	one	knows	for	sure	what	the	optimal	saturation	level	range	should	be	for	preterm	infants	to	prevent	these	long-term	complications.		Once	we	validate	this	device,	we	will	be	able	to	choose	more	narrow	saturation	levels	to	see	if	we	can	improve	the	outcomes	of	our	patients.			10. Payment	and	Remuneration	a. N/A		11. Costs	a. There	are	no	costs	to	the	patients	for	this	study.		The	grant	will	pay	for	the	tubing	needed	to	connect	the	high	flow	nasal	cannula	set-up	or	the	bubble	CPAP	set-up	to	the	study	device.		12. Multiple	Sites	
MU	IRB	version:		3/26/2014		Page 8 of 9	a. The	University	of	Missouri	Women’s	and	Children’s	Hospital	(Columbia,	Missouri)	is	the	lead	site.	b. All	required	approvals	will	be	in	place	at	each	site	prior	to	project	implementation.		The	study	will	utilize	a	single	IRB	(sIRB).		The	Studer	Family	Children’s	Hospital	at	Ascension	Health	(Ascension	Sacred	Heart	Pensacola)	(Pensacola,	Florida)	will	be	an	additional	site	for	the	study	and	will	rely	on	the	MU	IRB	for	review.		The	MU	IRB	will	be	responsible	for	the	oversite	of	the	relying	IRB.	c. Information	that	is	relevant	to	protection	of	human	subjects	obtained	from	multiple	sites	will	be	managed	as	follows.		Communications	between	sites	will	be	handled	using	regularly	scheduled	(weekly)	meetings	to	discuss	the	study.		Also,	any	issues	related	to	IRB	will	be	discussed	immediately	by	phone,	text,	and	email.	Each	site	has	a	clinical	PI	(Pardalos	in	Columbia,	Missouri	and	Amjad	in	Pensacola,	Florida)	working	at	that	location	full	time.	All	IRB	documents	(protocol,	consent	forms,	etc.)	will	be	stored	on	secure	cloud	storage	using	a	provider	under	contract	by	MU	(currently	box.com)	and	using	the	MU	IRB	web-based	IRB	system.		Further	the	clinical	PIs	(neonatologists)	at	both	sites	are	affiliated	with	the	University	of	Missouri	and	therefore	have	login	access	to	the	MU	IRB	web-based	tools	and	document	storage.			This	will	allow	instantaneous	access	of	IRB	documents	for	both	study	sites.	Participating	sites	will	be	responsible	for	meeting	other	regulatory	obligations,	such	as	obtaining	informed	consent,	overseeing	the	implementation	of	the	approved	protocol,	and	reporting	unanticipated	problems	and	study	progress	to	the	sIRB.	Participating	sites	will	communicate	relevant	information	necessary	for	the	sIRB	to	consider	local	context	issues	and	state/local	regulatory	requirements	during	its	deliberations.		Participating	sites	will	rely	on	the	sIRB	to	satisfy	the	regulatory	requirements	relevant	to	the	ethical	review.				13. Conflict	of	Interest	a. Conflict	of	Interest	Description:	Dr.	Amjad	and	Dr.	Fales	have	a	financial	interest	in	a	company	called	Intelligent	Respiratory	Devices,	LLC	(IRD).	Intelligent	Respiratory	Devices,	LLC	has	licensed	intellectual	property	(IP)	from	MU.	The	IP	relates	to	the	device	being	studied	in	the	IRB	protocol.	b. Conflict	of	Interest	Management:	• John	Pardalos,	MD	is	the	PI	over	the	multicenter	clinical	trial	in	addition	to	the	MU	study	site.		He	will	oversee	all	activity	relevant	to	the	IRB	protocol	including	data	safety	monitoring.		Dr.	Pardalos	has	no	conflict	of	interest	with	respect	to	the	clinical	trial.		• An	independent	statistician	will	be	utilized	for	data	analysis	including	for	interim	analysis	and	the	final	analysis	for	the	clinical	trial.		• Affiliation	with	the	company	Intelligent	Respiratory	Devices,	LLC	will	be	disclosed	in	all	publications	and	reports	of	study	data.		• Affiliation	with	the	company	Intelligent	Respiratory	Devices,	LLC	will	be	disclosed	in	the	consent	document	to	be	signed	by	a	parent	or	legal	guardian.		14. References			Martin,	R.		Oxygen	Monitoring	and	Therapy	in	the	Newborn.		UpToDate;	April	18,	2016.			A.	Faqeeh,	R.	Fales,	J.	Pardalos,	R.	Amjad,	I.	Zaniletti,	and	X.	Hou,	“Engineering	Evaluation	of	the	Performance	of	an	Automatic	Peripheral	Oxygen	Controller	Using	a	Neonatal	Respiratory	Model,”	ASME	Journal	of	Medical	Devices,	vol.	12,	no.	3,	pp.	031005,	Sep,	2018.		
MU	IRB	version:		3/26/2014		Page 9 of 9	Hou,	Xuefeng,	Akram	Faqeeh,	Tyler	Shinn,	and	Roger	Fales.	“Anti-Windup	and	Disturbance	Rejection	Controller	Design	of	an	Automated	Oxygen	Control	System	for	Premature	Infants”,	40th	International	Conference	of	the	IEEE	Engineering	in	Medicine	and	Biology	Society,	July	17-21,	2018.		Faqeeh,	Akram,	Xuefeng	Hou,	Isabella	Zaniletti,	John	Pardalos,	Ramak	Amjad,	and	Roger	Fales.	“Comparison	of	Automated	and	Manual	Peripheral	Oxygen	Saturation	Control	Applied	to	One	Human	Subject	at	a	High	Target	Range”,	40th	International	Conference	of	the	IEEE	Engineering	in	Medicine	and	Biology	Society,	July	17-21,	2018.		Hou,	Xuefeng,	akram	Faqeeh,	Ramak	Amjad,	John	Pardalos	and	Roger	Fales.		“Clinical	Evaluation	of	an	Automatic	Oxygen	Control	System	for	Premature	Infants	Receiving	High	Flow	Nasal	Cannula	for	Respiratory	Support:		A	Pilot	Study,”	Journal	of	Medical	Devices.	2022 Sep 1;16(3):031005. doi: 10.1115/1.4054250. Epub 2022 May 10. PMID: 35646226		