IRB Study Number: 20200793 
 Page 1 of 10  Revised: 4/25/22   
 
 
     
 
  
Implementation of onsite, rapid ART initiation among People Who Inject Drugs living with HIV at Syringe Services Program  
 Protocol Version 2  
Protocol Version Date 4/25/22  
eProst ID Number 20200793  
PI Hansel Tookes 
NCT Number [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
    
 
    
 
     
 
    
IRB Study Number: 20200793 
 Page 2 of 10  Revised: 4/25/22  1) Protocol Title : Implementation of onsite, rapid ART initiation among People W ho Inject 
Drugs (PWID) living with HIV at Syringe Services Program (SSP) 
 
2) Objectives* 
 
Aim 1:  To evaluate/assess the effectiveness and feasibility of same -day rapid initiation of 
ART for PWID living with HIV who utilize the SSP (SSP Rapid Initiation) .   
Aim 2: T o identify barriers to success of HIV care retention and treatment adherence among 
PWID preparing for entry into long-term HIV care.   
Aim 3 :  To compare adherence of patients in SSP Rapid Initiation after transition to a 
traditional healthcare clinic. 
 
3) Background* 
 
PWID experience extensive barriers to engagement in HIV care.  Challenges in linkage 
to care, retention in care, and viral suppression in PWID are well documented, with estimates that less than half of PWID living with HIV in the U.S. are virally 
suppressed
5,6. In the 2018 Miami outbreak investigation and public health response in 
PWID, we were able to support 100% of newly infected individuals in achieving viral suppression through a test -and-treat approach with intensive patient navigation and 
medication management; but faced challenges in initiating ART in previously diagnosed PWID, with only 53% achieving suppression. 
Reasons for this sub-optimal result could 
include  recognized barriers to HIV care and retention within the Miami community, including 
drug use, mental illness, stigma and transportation issues7,8. Although Miller et al.9 recently 
reported that intensive and flexible patient navigation with psychosocial counseling was central to increased initiation of ART and viral suppression, the literature on evidence-based approaches to initiation of ART and retention in care for PWID  is lacking.  
 Why Test and Treat?  Early HIV diagnosis and immediate ART initiation are essential to 
rapidly decrease viral load, reduce the impact of outbreaks, and improve quality of life among PWID
10,11,12. Established Test and Treat paradigms have shown decreased time to virologic 
suppression, the ultimate goal of controlling HIV transmission among PWID and their sexual partners
13. However, traditional healthcare systems may not be the ideal environment to 
initiate HIV care in PWID, a population so stigmatized by the healthcare system and society at-large that they often avoid care due to profound distrust and structural barriers. ART 
initiation at an SSP is potentially an ideal venue, bringing services to the patient and making healthcare easily accessible.  With SSPs  just beginning in Florida, an SSP Rapid Initiation 
approach developed at the Miami IDEA SSP will enable new programs to rapidly implement pathways to rapid ART initiation.   
 
 
4) Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria*  
1) Adult (age>18 years); 2) positive rapid HIV test; 3) ability to provide informed consent; 4) HIV RNA > 200 ; 5) creatinine clearance > 30 as measured by serum creatinine; 6) no 
allergy to bictegravir/emtricitabine/tenofovir alafenamide (BFTAF)  as indicated by 
patient history and self -reported allergies. Any other comorbidities that at the discretion 
of the investigator would prevent the participant from participating in the study . 
 
IRB Study Number: 20200793 
 Page 3 of 10  Revised: 4/25/22  5) Study Design 
 
We plan to utilize a hybrid quasi -experimental design to test the effectiveness and 
implementation outcomes of successful delivery of rapid ART initiation intervention in an SSP (Figure 1). In addition, we will use a multi-method approach, collecting both quantitative and qualitative data on patients (n=50) accepting the rapid ART initiation protocol at the SSP, patients 
declining to engage in the rapid ART initiation protocol, and patients after transition to a traditional Ryan White clinic. To assess the effectiveness of the SSP Rapid Initiation, we will 
compare the percentage of PWID virally suppressed at 6 months post baseline at the SSP 
compared to at 6 months post transition to UM/Jackson Adult Outpatient HIV Clinic. Since this proposed study is in its pilot phase, this study will not be exam ining differential effects in 
treatment groups in the study, but rather provide preliminary data to support a future randomized-controlled trial. Represented in the figure below, participants at the SSP will be tested for HIV 
using a rapid test, which when reactive will be confirmed using a second rapid HIV test from 
another manufacturer following a CDC -approved dual rapid HIV testing algorithm. If a patient 
tests positive, the patient will be offered immediate initiation onto ART at the SSP. Baseline labs (4
th Generation HIV test, HIV viral load, CD4, HIV genotype, CBC, CMP, 
Gonorrhea/Chlamydia, RPR, HCV Antibody, HCV RNA, HbsAg, HBsAb, HAV Total) will be 
obtained and sent to the Miami -Dade County Health Department. Patients will have up to 7 days 
post HIV-positive test to start on ART (per definition of rapid ART initiation). The community 
advisory board and peer navigators at the SSP will assist in the SSP Rapid Initiation protocol 
design, execution, and process improvement.  Peers will work between the SSP and the Ryan White clinics.  Our experience with the 2018 HIV cluster in PWID in Miami taught us that medication management (i.e., pill lockers at the SSP, third party pickup of ART at ADAP by SSP 
staff, weekly medication drops to participants unable to access medications at the fixed site) was 
highly effective at supporting adherence in PWID living with HIV.   Peer navigators will conduct outreach to SSP Rapid Initiation participants, monitor appointments, and provide transport to 
healthcare services. This intensive linkage and active follow-up delivered by peer PWID living with HIV is essential to delivery of care to this population.  Peers will be tasked with helping 
participants with eligibility (e.g., Ryan White, Medicaid) and ADAP enrollment when they 
transition to the transitional HIV clinic.  This grant will enable them to have ongoing support in 
clinic after transition to the traditional healthcare environment for l ong-term care.  
Patients who decline engagement in ART after one week will be asked to partake in 
semi -structured interviews. Patients who accept will be initiated onto ART at the SSP. A 
medication adherence plan will be developed for each patient by SSP staff to optimize  medication 
adherence. Quantitative and qualitative assessments exploring barriers and facilitators of HIV treatment adherence will be given at 1, 3, 6 and 12 months post treatment start date. In addition, HIV viral load will be measured at 1, 3, 6, 9 and 12 months post treatment start date to assess viral suppression.  
 
Figure 1 . Conceptual Framework of SSP Rapid Initiation Pilot Study  
IRB Study Number: 20200793 
 Page 4 of 10  Revised: 4/25/22   
 
Quantitative Assessments of those accepting rapid ART  
Baseline assessment of participants will include socio -demographics, drug and sexual risk 
behaviors, HIV knowledge, and SSP utilization. If re-engaging: date of HIV diagnosis, previous 
HIV clinic attendance, previous ART exposure, and reason(s) for discontinuing ART. Follow -up 
assessments will include a side effect inventory, mental health screening, timeline follow-back on ART adherence, timeline follow-back on drug use.  
Qualitative Assessment of those accepting rapid ART  
Qualitative assessments will include patient perspectives on HIV diagnosis and living with HIV, including both HIV and PWID stigma. The interviews will explore which symptoms are most important to the patient, their experience with ART in the past and expe rience on BFTAF in the 
current study, and facilitators and barriers to ART adherence in the past and in the current study.  These assessments will also include formative feedback on ART initiation at the SSP, medication 
management at the SSP, follow -up HIV  care at the SSP, and barriers and facilitators to transition 
to a more traditional HIV clinic for long -term care. Those who are eligible for the study will be 
consented and asked to participate in a 30 -minute interview conducted at the IDEA SSP for 
which they will receive $ 50 
Qualitative Assessment of those declining rapid ART  
In-depth interviews with PWID living with HIV who do not engage in treatment with 7 days of 
HIV test result will be conducted. We anticipate conducting 10 interviews, which is sufficient to achieve data saturation and will be conducted within 3 months post  HIV test result. Inclusion 
criteria are: 1) 18 years of age or older; 2) enrolled in the IDEA SSP; 3) HIV positive rapid test result; 4) English or Spanish speaking, 5) declined rapid ART initiation at the SSP. Those who are eligible for the study will be  consented and asked to participate in a 30 -minute interview 
conducted at the IDEA SSP for which they will receive $ 25.  
     These semi -structured interviews will explore: 1) the role of key personal and structural 
barriers to engagement in HIV care (e.g., transportation, poverty, and stigma); 2) perceived benefit of engaging in rapid initiation of HIV care on personal heal th outcomes (i.e., viral 

IRB Study Number:  20200793 
 Page 5 of 10  Revis ed: 4/25/22  suppression); 3) reasons for declining rapid ART initiation protocol (e.g., prior clinic experience, 
previous ART side effects), 4) recommendations for structuring the intervention to maximize 
participant engagement (e.g., physical location, hours of opera tion, duration, and frequency); 5) 
recommendations for intervention facilitator demographics and training; and 6) current 
knowledge, attitudes, and awareness regarding HIV treatment in PWID. All interviews will be 
audio-recorded and transcribed verbatim by an external transcription company.  
 
 
6) Arms and Interventions  
This single arm pilot study will assess the effectiveness of on site initiation of HIV care and 
followup at an SSP (fixed site or mobile exchange on outreach). The study is 1 year duration, and 
study visits are conduct ed at at 0, 1, 3, 6, 9 and 12 months  as outlined above. The intervention is 
delivery of HIV care outside of a traditional healthcare clinic. The medication offered will be 
BFTAF, 50/200/25mg tablet to be administered orally. The intervention will include wraparound 
support by the peer naviga tor. Study visits will be conducted either at the IDEA Exchange fixed 
location, or on the mobile unit in the community (e.g. homeless encampments). The fixed site and 
mobile unit are equipped with private rooms for medical encounters. Medical visit with a 
provider and phlebotomy will be provided on site.  
 7) Procedures Involved*  
  Screening  0 1 3 6 9 12 
Lab 
Assessments  HIV Rapid  HIV Ag/Ab Test  HIV RNA  HIV RNA  HIV RNA  HIV RNA  HIV RNA  
    HIV RNA  CD4 count  CD4 CD4     
    CD4 count  CBC CBC CBC     
    HIV genotype  CMP  CMP  CMP      
    CBC   GC/CT  GC/CT      
    CMP    RPR RPR     
    GC/CT           
    RPR           
    HCV Ab            
    HCV RNA            
    HBsAg            
    anti-HBs           
    Anti-HAV Total            
Assessments  Eligibility  Baseline    Quant/Qual  Quant/Qual    Quant/Qual  
 Participants at the SSP will be tested for HIV using a rapid test, which when reactive will be 
confirmed using a second rapid HIV test from another manufacturer following a CDC -
approved dual rapid HIV testing algorithm. Confirmatory testing no longer requires venipuncture. A 4
th generation test will be sent as indiated below. The initiation of care, 
however, will not be delayed. If a patient tests positive  on dual rapids , the patient will be 
offered immediate initiation onto ART at the SSP. If accepted, they  will provide informed 
consent.  They will have an immediate HIV care visit with a provider in person or via encrypted Zoom technology. A prescription for BFTAF will be written and filed  for the 
participant , and BFTAF will be provided on site. ART will be initiated immediately, and in 
the rare case that changes in dosing or ART based on lab values (e.g. creatinine) is needed, 
IRB Study Number: 20200793 
 Page 6 of 10  Revised: 4/25/22  they will made once lab results return. This is now standard of care nationwide for rapid 
initiation. The care visit will be documented in UChart. Baseline labs (4th Generation HIV 
test, HIV viral load, CD4, HIV genotype, CBC, CMP, Gonorrhea/Chlamydia, RPR, HCV Antibody, HCV RNA) will be obtained and sent to the Miami -Dade County Health 
Department. Patients will have up to 7 days post HIV-positive test to start on ART (per definition of rapid ART initiation).  
 Peer navigators will conduct outreach to SSP Rapid Initiation participants, monitor 
appointments, and provide transport to healthcare services. This intensive linkage and active 
follow -up delivered by peer PWID living with HIV is essential to delivery of care to this 
population.  A medication adherence plan will be developed for each patient by SSP staff to 
optimize medication adherence. Quantitative and qualitative assessments exploring barriers and facilitators of HIV treatment adherence will be given at 1, 3 and 6 months post tr eatment 
start date. In addition, HIV viral load will be measured at 1, 3, and 6 months post treatment start date to assess viral suppression . Peers will be tasked with helping participants with 
eligibility (e.g., Ryan White, Medicaid) and ADAP enrollment when they transition out of the trial to a traditional care environment . 
 
For each 30- minute interview conducted at the IDEA SSP , participants will receive $ 50. 
 
Qualitative Assessment of those declining rapid ART  
In-depth interviews with PWID living with HIV who do not engage in treatment with 7 days of HIV test result will be conducted. We anticipate conducting 10 interviews, which is sufficient to achieve data saturation and will be conducted within 3 months post HIV test 
result . Participants will be consented and asked to participate in a 30 -minute interview 
conducted at the IDEA SSP for which they will receive $25.  
 
 
8) Primary Endpoints  
 
Study Aim  Primary 
Outcome 
(Patient -Level)  Definition  Primary Outcome 
(Implementation)  Definition  
Aim 1  Viral Suppression  HIV viral load 
<200 copies/ml at 
6 months post baseline  Acceptability of Rapid 
Initiation of  ART  Number and 
percentage of PWID living with HIV that enter SSP 
Rapid Initiation   
Aim 2  Treatment 
Adherence  HIV Viral Load 
<200, pill counts, medication log, 
appointment 
attendance  
  Barriers to Adherence  Exploration of 
challenges to HIV treatment 
management at 
SSP 
Aim 3  Viral Suppression  HIV Viral Load 
<200, pill counts, medication log, appointment 
attendance  
 Feasibility of peer 
navigation  Exploration of 
challenges to HIV 
treatment management at 
traditional HIV 
clinic  
IRB Study Number: 20200793 
 Page 7 of 10  Revised: 4/25/22   
For this proposed study, we expect that ongoing, peer -driven patient navigation based at the 
SSP will result in patients’ remaining virally suppressed after transition to the UM/Jackson Adult Outpatient HIV Clinic. More importantly, based on the hybrid des ign, this study will 
lay the foundational groundwork to provide a proof of concept for HIV care at SSPs, including pertinent implementation information for future expansion sites in the state of Florida. We expect to uncover barriers and facilitators to im plementation of rapid ART 
initiation at an SSP, including patient-level perspectives on improving delivery of care 
developed in the SSP Rapid Initiation among PWID  Living with HIV protocol . 
 
Secondary outcomes: Time to viral suppression, or viral suppression at 1 month, will be assessed. Treatment adherence will be assessed both by follow-up viral load results (1, 3, 6, 9, 12 months) as well as by medication management measures (e.g., PWID accessing meds 
weekly, pill counting by SSP staff) and attendance at clinic visits. Successful transition to 
HIV care at a Ryan White clinic will also be assessed.  The clinic-based peer patient navigator will assist in transition of patients to long -term car e within six months of ART 
initiation. Ryan White clinic appointment attendance and successful re-enrollment in Ryan White/ADAP will be assessed.  
 
 
9) Data and Specimen Banking*  
 For clinical data, we will use the UHealth’s electronic health record, UChart, which is locked under dual authentication.  
 All data collected will be housed in the REDCap database system , which is locked under dual 
authentication by University of Miami Information Technology  and then extracted for 
analysis by the principal investigator.  Only study staff will have access to survey results.  
 
As for the in -depth interviews, sessions will be audio -recorded, transcribed by an external 
company, de -identified for analysis and stored on a password -protected computer in a secured 
office in the Don Soffer Clinical Research Center. Only study staff will have access to results.  
 
10) Data Management*  
 
Quantitative Data Analysis:  Quantitative data will be analyzed using descriptive statistics 
and frequencies to present pilot data on rapid ART initiation at an SSP. Data will be 
presented as frequency tables, and viral suppression will be reported as a percentage suppressed at each t ime-point (1, 3, 6, 9, 12 months). All quantitative data will be stored 
and managed in REDCap and all analyses will be performed using SAS statistical 
software (Version 9.4; SAS Institute, Cary, NC). Categorical data will be analyzed using 
frequency of res ponses and continuous variables will be analyzed using means and 
standard deviations.  
 
Qualitative Data Analysis : Qualitative data collected from the in -depth interviews will be 
analyzed using general inductive methodology31, which allows for themes to be 
developed from the raw data based on a study objective/research question. A data codebook will be generated in an iterative process during transcript reading by the study team. All qualitative data analysis will be conducted  using Dedoose (version 8.2.14, 
Sociocultural Research Consultants, Los Angeles, CA), a cross-platform software used for analyzing qualitative and mixed methods research.  
IRB Study Number:  20200793 
 Page 8 of 10  Revis ed: 4/25/22   
 
11) Risks to Subjects*  
 
Study procedures: there is risk of discomfort to phlebotomy, but no risk above routine HIV care  
 
Study Drug: Serious risks of taking BFTAF includes serious drug reactions such as lactic 
acidosis, hepatomegaly with steatosis, hepatotoxicity, hepatitis B virus exacerbation, pancreatitis, 
nephrotoxicity, ne utropenia, immune reconstitution syndrome, autoimmune disorders, suicidality, 
and angioedema. Common adverse reactions include diarrhea, headache, fatigue, 
hyperbilirubinemia, elevated CK, abnormal dreams, dizziness, insomnia, hypercholesterolemia, 
hyperam ylasemia, neutropenia, LFTs elevated, nausea/vomiting, depression, rash, dyspepsia, 
abdominal pain, asthenia, increased creatinine, bone density loss, arthralgia/myalgia, cough, 
paresthesia, peripheral neuropathy, palmar -plantar hyperpigmentation, hypertri glyceridemia, 
hematuria, hyperglycemia, glycosuria, rhinitis and flatulence.  
 
12) Adverse Events and Serious Adverse Events  
 
AEs will be any of the common adverse reactions defined above.  SAEs  will include any 
hospitalization or death or disability that occurs with participants in the trial.  AEs will be 
reported to the IRB in continuing reviews. SAEs will be reported to the IRB within 24 hours.  
 13) Potential Benefits to Subjects*  
 
The potential benefit to the PWID is that  they will be able to access rapid on-site  ART 
treatment initiation  with few barriers, improving their overall health in the short and long 
term.  
 
14) Vulnerable Populations*  
 
This study will exclude children because the provider is board certified in Internal Medicine 
and only sees adult patients. Children will be rapidly referred to University of Miami Department of Pediatrics Test and Treat program . 
 
15) Setting  
 
The IDEA Syringe Services Program of the University of Miami Miller School of Medicine 
is the study site.  
 16) Resources Available  
 
Dr. Hansel Tookes (Contact PI) is a board -certified internist and HIV physician with 
expertise in treating HIV among PWID. Dr. Tookes was the driving force behind the 
establishment of the IDEA SSP and serves as the PI of the UM Harm Reduction Research Grou p. Dr. Tookes has extensive knowledge regarding HIV prevention among PWID and has 
utilized community -based research approaches to improve health outcomes among this 
vulnerable population.  
 
Dr. David Serota (co -I) is a board -certified infectious disease specialist , internist and 
addiction medicine physician. He specializes in the treatment of severe infections in PWID. 
IRB Study Number:  20200793 
 Page 9 of 10  Revis ed: 4/25/22  He has extensive knowledge regarding HIV prevention in this high priority community, and a 
leader in harm reduction in our community.  
  Dr. David Forrest (co -I) is a medical anthropologist who brings expertise in advanced 
qualitative methods and research to inform HIV prevention among at -risk populations. Dr. 
Forrest is co -PI for the Miami -Dade site of the National HIV Behavioral Surveillance and has 
over 25 years of expertise conducting research among PWID.  
  
Dr. Tyler Bartholomew (co -I) has expertise conducting HIV and HCV implementation 
research among PWID, including the implementation and evaluation of HIV/HCV testing and 
linkage to care at the IDEA SSP.  
 
Dr. Katrina Ciraldo (co -I) is a board certified Family Medicine and Addiction Medicine 
specialist. She specializes in womens health with a focus on pregnant women with substance 
use disorders who are experiencing homelessness. Dr. Ciraldo has extensive kno wledge in 
addiction medicine and innovator in the harm reduction community.  
 
Dr. Teresa Chueng (co -I) is finishing her Infections Disease clinical fellowship at Jackson 
Memorial Hosptial and will start her appointment as Assistant Professor of Clinical Medicine 
in the Division of Infectious Diseases at the University of Miami Mill er School of Medicine 
in July 2022. Dr. Chueng provides expertise in clinicial infectious disease, including HIV, hepatitis C, and infections related to injection drug use.  
 
 
17) Prior Approvals  
 
Funding agency approval: none  
 
18) Recruitment Methods 
Recruitment will be through  the IDEA SSP participants with regular usage of SSP services 
(at least 1 visit per month ). All PWID with a negative rapid HIV screen will be offered 
participation in this study.  
 Local Number of Subjects  
We intend to recruit 50 PWID living with HIV and currently not engaged in ART treatment  
to assess the SSP Rapid  Initiation pilot program. Since this is a pilot, there were no statistical 
considerations made with determining sample size. We expect that 20% of those approached 
to participate will decline. Those who decline will be asked to participate in a brief qualitative 
assessment to explore patient -level factors for declining treatment (N=10).  
 19) Confidentiality  
The REDCap surveys will be anonymous and do not solicit protected health information or 
any identifying information. If results of this survey are reported to any agency, or in journa ls 
or at scientific meetings, data  will be de -identified and presented in aggre gate. In addition to 
the research staff, the following entities may review information collected as part of this 
survey activity:  1) Office of Human Research Protections (OHRP), 2) University of Miami 
Human Subjects Research Office, and 3) professionals who may be evaluating this survey 
activity  
 
IRB Study Number: 20200793 
 Page 10 of 10  Revised: 4/25/22  The in -depth interviews audios and transcripts will be stored in a password -protected file that 
will be stored on University of Miami secure network.  Audio will be deleted immediately 
after transcription.  
 
In order to secure the data, all staff will be trained on confidentiality via the CITI program including Human Subjects Research and Good Clinical Practice  
 
20) Provisions to Protect the Privacy Interests of Subjects   
All data will be stored on the PI ’s password protected computer and data will only be shared 
via secured access Sharepoint with other members of the research team. The computer is 
secured by UM IT, kept in a locked office in the Soffer Clinical Research Center. Qualitative 
data will be transcribed and stored on the PI ’s computer and shared only with the research 
team. Audio will be deleted immediately following transcription. Copies of the informed 
consent with patient signature will be stored in a locked filing cabinet within the PI’s keycard secured office.   
21) Consent Process  
Written  consent will be obtained at the IDEA SSP by study staff.  
 
(See attached consent documents for reference) 
 
22) Process to Document Consent in Writing 
Writtten  consent  (provided both in English and in Spanish)  will be obtained using e -consent 
in REDCap. REDCap  e-Consent Framework provides standardized tools to obtain consent 
and store consent documentation with a certification screen and a storage function which automatically generates a “hard -copy” PDF of the signed form.  