D15154   V.08.18.17 
 
 
 
 
Page 1 of 25 
  
 
 
D15154: Evaluation of Appeal and Impact of  E-Cigarettes   
Among Chronic Smokers with Smoking -related  Cancers  
Dartmouth -Hitchcock Medical Center  
 
Principal Investigator:  James D. Sargent,  MD 
Co-Investigators:   Konstantin Dragnev,  MD 
    Lionel Lewis, MA., MB BCh., MD., FRCP  (London)   
    Sarah Pratt,  PhD 
    Emily Scherer,  PhD  
    Alexander Fuld,  MD  
    Mary Brunette,  MD 
    Elizabeth Maislen, MD  
    John Seigne, MD  
    Nirav Kapadia, MD  
 
Address:  Norris Cotton Cancer Center  
Dartmouth -Hitchcock Medical Center  
Geisel School of Medicine at  Dartmouth   
One Medical Center  Dr. 
Lebanon, NH  03756  
 
Initial protocol version:   August 14,  2015  
Edited:    October 27,  2015  
    January 12,  2016  
    March 31,  2016  
    October 7, 2016  
November 4, 2016  
July 19, 2017  
August 1 8, 2017  
D15154   V.08.18.17 
 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 25 
  
 
 
Study Protocol Table of  Contents  
 
Abbreviations  3 
Abstract  4  
Specific Aims and Hypotheses  4  
Study Overview  5  
Study Design Considerations  5  
Study Design  14  
Participants  17 
Recruitment  17  
Study Timeline and Follow -up 18  
Outcomes Assessment  18  
Statistical Analysis  19 
Safety and Data Monitoring  22  
References  22 
D15154   V.08.18.17 
 
 
 
 
Page 3 of 25 
 ABBREVIATIONS  
1-HOP  1-hydroxy  napthaline  
AJCC  American Joint Committee on  Cancer  
BMI body mass  index  
CI confidence  interval  
CO carbon  monoxide  
CPSR  Clinical Pharmacology Shared Resource of  NCCC  
CTP Center for Tobacco Products at  FDA 
DHMC  Dartmouth -Hitchcock Medical  Center  
DNA deoxyribonucleic  acid 
DSMAC  Data Safety Monitoring and Accrual Committee of  NCCC  
ENDD  electronic nicotine delivery  device  
FDA Food and Drug Administration  (U.S.)  
FEV1  Forced Expiratory Volume in the first  second  
FVC forced vital  capacity  
g gram  
HPLC  high performance liquid  chromatography  
mg milligram  
mL milliliter  
NCCC  Norris Cotton Cancer  Center  
NF-kB nuclear factor -kappa  B 
Ng nanogram  
NNAL  4-(methylnitrosamino) -1-(3-pyridyl) -1-butanol  
NNK nicotine -derived nitrosamine  ketone  
NNN  N′-nitrosonornicotine  
pmol  picomoles  
ppm parts per  million  
SPLC  second primary lung  cancer  
TLFB  Timeline Follow -Back  Questionnaire  
TSNA  tobacco -specific  nitrosamine  
US United  States  
4 D15154   V.08.18.17 
 
 
 ABSTRACT  
Smoking causes many cancers but also affects survival and quality of life. Currently, the  
only option available to smokers who present with cancer is to quit, a notoriously  difficult  
undertaking. E-cigarettes represent a modified -risk tobacco product that could reduce  
toxicity  and improve medical outcomes. We test the appeal of e -cigarettes in cancer 
patients  that smoke, and the impact of their use on excretion of smoke -related toxic 
metabolites. T his pilot study tests the feasibility of a larger randomized trial to examine the 
effect of e -cigarette use,  on measures of smoke -related toxicity and medical  outcomes.  
We will test feasibility in 40 smokers with aerodigestive tract cancers or bladder cancer,  
recruited  over the course of nine months.  In this 12 week single -arm study, smokers will 
be recruited  from oncology and surgical clinics that treat these cancers, s upplied with a 
current generation  e- cigarette product and will return to clinic every 3 weeks for 
assessments on their e -cigarette  and cigarette use along with markers for toxicity from 
tobacco smoke  inhalation.  
The overarching aim of the study is to determine the appeal of e -cigarettes as measured 
by the degree to which smokers with cancer adopt their use over the 9 weeks they are 
supplied  with product. We will measure past use of e -cigarettes and cigarettes at baseline, 
3, 6, 9, and  12 weeks. We will also assess the effect of e -cigarette substitution on toxicity 
by measuring  expired carbon monoxide and urine NNAL, a carcinogenic metabolite of 
cigarette smoke.  This translational research involves a multi -disciplinary team of 
prevention scientists,  tobacco -use experts, statisticians, cancer clinicians, and 
psychiatrists and uses NCCC and White  River  Junction VAMC statistical and clinical trials  
resources.  
 
SPECIFIC AIMS AND  HYPOTHESES  
Aim 1: To evaluate the behavioral and psychological appeal of e-cigarettes among 40  
chronic  smokers with smoking -related  cancers.  
Hypothesis 1 (H1): Greater than 50% of study participants will report daily e -cigarette use  
at each assessment during the 9 weeks that e -cigs are provided, and mean satisfaction 
with e- cigarettes will be >4 on a 5 -point scale. In a parallel process growth model for e -
cigarette  and cigarette use, there will be a significant negative correlation of growth  slopes.  
Aim 2: To evaluate the effect of e -cigarettes on biological markers of combusted  tobacco  
toxicity.  
Hypothesis 2 (H2): After 9 weeks, mean expired breath CO 2 and urine NNAL will be  
reduced.  
 
Primary  outcomes:  
Appeal ( H1)—E-cigarette use and amount of e -cigarette product used per week, 
proportion  of participants that report e -cigarette use at each assessment, satisfaction 
scores for  e-cigarettes,  and whether they continue e -cigarette use at 12 weeks (3w after 
end of trial).  Correlation  between change in e -cigarette use and change in cigarette  use. 
5 D15154   V.08.18.17 
 
 
 Combustible Tobacco T oxicity ( H2)—Exhaled CO, urine NNAL and 1 -hydroxy napthaline  
(1- HOP). Because smokers are good at regulating nicotine intake, we expect no change 
in urine  cotinine over  time.  
 
STUDY  OVERVIEW  
This pilot study will test the appeal and toxicity of e-cigarettes as a substitute for  cigarettes  
among smokers with aerodigestive tract cancers or bladder cancer. Participants will 
receive  e- cigarettes for 9 weeks and be asked to substitute the e -cigarette product for 
their usual  combustible product. Primar y outcomes include e -cigarette appeal,  e-cigarette  
use/satisfaction  and combustible tobacco  toxicity.  
 
STUDY DESIGN  CONSIDERATIONS  
INTRODUCTION  
Smoking is responsible for $130 billion in direct healthcare expenditures and half a  million  
deaths every year in the United States, primarily from cancers, cardiovascular disease  and 
chronic lung disease. The most recent Surgeon General report added new causal  
associations  between active smoking and age -related macular degeneration, diabetes, 
colorectal  cance r, liver cancer, adverse health outcomes in cancer patients and survivors, 
tuberculosis,  erectile  dysfunction, orofacial clefts in infants, ectopic pregnancy, rheumatoid 
arthritis, inflammation,  and impaired immune function.4  Of all the preventable causes  of 
disease, smoking ranks by far  as the most important single modifiable risk factor because 
it remains a prevalent  behavior  (affecting about 20% of the population), because of its 
strong relation to many  disease  outcomes, and because of its lack of specificity: Smoking 
is linked with almost every  important  chronic  disease.  
 
SMOKING AS A CAUSE OF  CANCER  
Among all modifiable risk factors for cancer, cigarette smoking exerts the greatest single  
effect,  being responsible for about one -third of cancer dea ths.5 With respect to cancer,  
cigarettes  deliver dozens of toxins to the lung in the tar component of smoke, where they 
are absorbed  into the surrounding tissues and transmitted to other tissues through the 
blood stream. Figure  1 illustrates the known mechanisms that relate continued exposure to 
these toxins and the  onset  and development of cancers. Tobacco smoke contains more 
than 7,000 chemicals, and at  least  69 of these can cause cancer.6 These carcinogenic 
compounds deposit in the lung tissues  and act locally, and are transmitted through the 
circulatory system to tissues remote from the  lung.  
For example, N -nitrosodimethylamine, and 4 -aminobiphenyl are liver metabolites 
implicated  in the association between smoking and cancer of the liver.4 Other metabolites, 
e.g. urinary  4- (methylnitrosamino) -1-(3-pyridyl) -1-butanol (NNAL), N′ -nitrosonornicotine 
(NNN), and  their glucuronide metabolites of the tobacco -specific nitrosamine (TSNA),  
nicotine -derived  nitrosamine ketone (NNK), are subsequently co ncentrated in the kidney, 
leading to high  organ  exposure in those tissues and the  bladder.  
Some constituents (or metabolites) of tobacco smoke bind to cellular receptors and  
6 D15154   V.08.18.17 
 
 
 activate  protein kinases and growth receptors, which can induce inflammation,7  resulting  
in enhanced pneumocyte proliferation, activation of nuclear factor -kappa B (NF -kB), and  
tumor  promotion.8 These same mechanisms could affect tumor growth rates after 
diagnosis and risk  of secondary recurrence after successful trea tment of the primary  
tumor.  
 
 
 
The main addictive component in tobacco, nicotine, has little toxicity in cigarette  doses , 
especially to smokers, who are tolerant to its effects on the brain and other systems. 
Nicotine  is also available from various nicotine replacement products that have been found 
to reduce cigarette consumption when given to active  smokers.9 
Reviews of studies have found that  this approach does not reduce the chances that a 
smoker will quit smoking.10 Moreover,  smoker  titrate their nicotine intake when given 
multiple nicotine products, such that urine cotinine  levels  remain the same when smokers 
are given a nicotine replacement product.11 More  recent  unpublished data show that 
introduction of e -cigarettes in smokers doe s not result in rises  in saliva cotinine, but is 
associated with changes in cigarette  consumption.12 
 
SMOKING AMONG CANCER  PATIENTS  
Given the prominent role smoking plays in carcinogenesis, it is not surprising that smoking  
is more common in cancer patients than in the general population. In a cohort of 5185  
recently diagnosed cancer patients at Roswell Park Cancer Center,1  62% of all patients 
had  some involvement with tobacco during their lives: current smokers (18%), recent 
quitters (10%),  or former smokers (35%). Cancers with the highest rates of current 

7 D15154   V.08.18.17 
 
 
 smoking included head &  neck  (29%), bladder (27%) and lung (24%).13 Another study 
summarized cross -sectional and  longitudinal studies of smoking after cancer diagnosis 
among lung and head & neck  cancer  patients, and found an overall rate of 33%.14 
Summary of the longitudinal studies in this  review  found little evidence to support the 
notion that cancer patients who smoke tend to quit over  time.  There were few studies of 
level of addiction among ca ncer patients that some, but given their  life circumstances and 
the lack of evidence for quitting, it would be reasonable to conclude  that these individuals 
are heavily addicted smokers that would be expected to be relatively  refractory  to 
treatment and fo r whom alternatives to cessation should be  considered.  
 
OUTCOMES FOR SMOKING -RELATED CANCERS IN SMOKERS VS. FORMER  
SMOKERS   
EFFECT ON  MORTALITY  
In the Roswell Park study investigators assessed smoking status for 5185 cancer  patients  
enrolled into treatment programs between 1982 and 1998.1  Survival curves like the one  in 
Figure 2 compared survival by disease site for current vs former smokers/recent quitters.  
Not all the curves are as striking as this one, which shows overall survival for head & neck  
cancer,  but continued smoking was an important risk factor for many cancers and overall, 
with adjusted  hazard ratio for time to mortality being 1.29 (95% CI 1.17, 1.42) for current 
vs. former  smokers  and 1.18 (1.04, 1.33) for current vs. recent quitte rs after adjusting for 
grade and stage,  age, BMI, and several other risk factors. Given that many of the recent 
quitters would have  relapsed  (see below), the increased survival in recent quitters 
represents a possible harm  reduction influence  conferred  by decreased daily cigarette 
consumption.  Furthermore, a  systemati c review of observational studies examining the 
influence of smoking cessation after diagnosis  of early stage lung cancer suggested that 
the mortality benefit seen with smoking cessation  was due more to reduced cancer 
progression rather than fewer cardiorespiratory  deaths.15 
 
 
 
 
        
      
    1 
8 D15154   V.08.18.17 
 
 
 EFFECT ON RISK FOR SECOND PRIMARY  CANCER  
Other studies have looked specifically at how smoking status relates to the probability  of 
developing a second primary. A study of over 1484 patients with a primary non -small cell  
lung carcinoma (median follow -up 26 months) found that 66 developed a second  primary 
lung cancer  (SPLC).16 Among smokers the only variable associated with SPLC 
development was  smoking  pack -years (entered as a continuous variable), with hazard 
ratios indicating an 8% increase  in risk for SPLC development for each additional 10 pack -
years.  A much larger  prospective  study17 pooled data from five prospective cohorts, 
examining hazard of developing  second  primary cancers and compared never -smokers 
with former smokers <20 cigarettes per  day, former smoker > 20 cigarettes per day, 
current smoker < 20 cigarettes per day, and  curren t smoker ≥ 20 cigarettes per  day.  Table 
1, adapted from the study, shows hazard ratios  for second cancer development for lung, 
bladder, kidney, and head/neck  cancers.   Compared  to never smokers, higher levels  of 
former and current smoking showed substantially  greate r hazard of second primary 
cancers in all categories, with current smokers having higher  risk compared to former 
smokers.  Note the finding of a dose -response among smokers,  showing  consistently 
higher hazard ratios for those who smoked ≥ 20 cigarettes per day vs. those  who smoked 
less. This adds justification to the idea that e -cigarette substitution could  improve  cancer 
outcomes even if the smoker was not able to achieve complete subst itution of the  e- 
cigarette  product.  
 
 
 
ONLY A SMALL PROPORTION OF CANCER PATIENTS SUCCEED AT  
QUITTING  SMOKING  
The information from the Roswell Park study would suggest that approximately 30 -40% of 
smokers attempt  to quit at or around the time of their cancer diagnosis. A recent  
publication  from a large,  well-funded cessation service at Sloan -Kettering18  offering 
intensive  cessation  support, found that of over 4500 tobacco us er referrals, 3430 (75%) 
were unreachable  or refused cessation assistance. Of the over 1000 enrolled in the 
service, about 25% did  not complete the protocol, 25% either died or were lost to follow -
   e            
p             
    17 
               
  
9 D15154   V.08.18.17 
 
 
 up, and 43% reported no  tobacco  use at 6 months. In summary, the data from a large 
cessation service at a major cancer  center  suggest that these state -of-the art programs 
benefit only about 10% of smokers with  cancer.   This is, again, consistent with the findings 
above that suggest these individuals are  heavily addicted and relatively refractory to 
cessation treatment, leaving about 90 percent who  continue  to expose themselves to 
smoke -derived carcinogens during the course of their  therapy.  
The Sloan -Kettering program assessed e -cigarette use among patients trying to  quit 
smoking and found that as many as half of these patients were experimenting with  e-
cigarettes  during 2013, but that e -cigarette use did not affect successful quit rates. This is 
becoming  a common finding in population studies of e-cigarettes, in part because people 
receive  mixed  messages from  the public health community regarding whether these 
products represent  an appropriate substitute for smoking. In the present study, we will test 
the appeal and toxicity  of e-cigarettes in smo kers with  cancer.  
 
E-CIGARETTES  
WHAT ARE THEY AND HOW DO THEY  WORK  
Electronic cigarettes, also known as e -cigarettes, create an inhalable nicotine aerosol  by 
heating a liquid nicotine solution.  Unregulated in the US, e-cigarette sales have seen a  
rapid  rise unparalleled by any other non -combustible nicotine delivery system.19  The main  
components of the e -cigarette include a battery, a cartridge with nicotine dissolved in  
propylene  glycol or vegetable glycerol, and a heater that aerosolizes the nicotine —
propylene  glycol  solution. When the user puffs on the end of the device and creates a 
vacuum, the  battery  powers the heater and creates aerosol, which is drawn into the mouth 
piece and inhaled  (Figure  3). E -cigarettes come in many styles and are rapidly evolving. 
This was true for first gen  e-cigs. Later models have a button to push on the battery, which 
creates a bolus of vapor ready  for immediate inhal ation when the e -cig reaches the  mouth.  
 
10 D15154   V.08.18.17 
 
 
  
 
THEORETICAL CASE FOR E -CIGARETTE HARM REDUCTION IN SMOKERS  
WITH  CANCER  
TOXICOLOGY  
E-cigarettes are not currently regulated, and the Food and Drug Administration has 
required  no information from manufacturers on their ability to deliver nicotine and potential  
toxicity.  
However, compared to cigarettes, they should deliver comparatively fe wer toxic chemicals  
to the lung; available evidence strongly suggests this is true.  Compared to tobacco  
smoke,  studies have found e -cigarette smoke to be substantially lower in toxic content, 
cytotoxicity,  and adverse side effects.20   One laboratory study comparing the toxicity 
profile of  e-cigarette  aerosols and tobacco smoke found that known tobacco toxins in e -
cigarette aerosols were  100 to 1000 times lower than those found in tobacco smoke.21 
Another FDA study found  that carcinogenic to bacco specific nitrosamines in e -cigarette 
vapor was 8.2 ng/g, similar to the  level in nicotine patch users (8.0 ng/g) and much less 
than the level in Marlboro cigarette  smoke  (6260ng/g).22 Another study found that toxic 
metabolites of cigarette smoke were  greatly  reduced in the urine of e -cigarette users 
compared to  smokers.23 
Studies have also reported that e -cigarette use had no inflammatory effect on complete  
blood  count indices,24 nor did it cause significant reduction in lung function (3% reduction  
FEV1/FVC)  compared to cigarette smoke (7% reduction FEV1/FVC),25 and that e -
cigarette use had  no negative effects on myocardial function.26 Based on these and other 
studies, Public  Health  England has published a public statement that e -cigarettes  are 95% 
safer than  smoking.27 
Although e -cigarettes appear to have much lower toxic potential compared to cigarettes,  
             
 
11 D15154   V.08.18.17 
 
 
 and are being embraced by some public health programs, they are not free from toxicity.  
Because  of the lack of regulation of these products, we are now faced with an array of 
products, and  no standardization of nicotine concentration, flavoring, and contamina nt 
allowance.28 Lipoid  pneumonia has been reported in one e -cigarette user, probably as a 
result of flavoring oils or  oil contaminated glycerol.29 Use of high voltage batteries in 
refillable tank devices  converts  propylene glycol at very high temperatures to 
formaldehyde, but not to the levels found  in tobacco smoke.30   Data are starting to appear 
that suggest that some of the flavor  components  of e-cigarettes may affect lung epithelial 
cells and inflammation,31 and even nonflavored  vapor  affected macrophage -moderated 
inflammation in mice exposed to the vapor.32 Thus, the sum  of the limited data available 
so far suggests that, compared to cigarette smoke, e -cigarette  vapor  exposes users to 
much lower levels of toxins. While it remains unknown what t he impact  on health or 
oncological outcomes of e -cigarettes may be, the factors outlined above suggest  a clear 
theoretical safety advantage over continued use of combustible tobacco products  for 
patients with cancer. Given almost universal access to these products and the fact that  
cancer  patients are using them, we have an obligation to determine how they affect 
consumption  of combustible tobacco and whether their use affects intermediate medical 
outcomes. That is  the overarching purpose of the prese nt research.  
 
NICOTINE  DELIVERY  
Much of the nicotine from cigarettes is delivered to the brain by arterial circulation  within  
seconds of puffing on the cigarette.33 This is one of the reasons for high abuse liability  for 
cigarettes. Nicotine delivered from the oropharynx (e.g., when smokeless or nicotine gum  
is used) enters the venous blood and passes through the liver before going to the brain. 
This not only delays its delivery to the brain, but it lowers the dose because some of the 
nicotine  is changed to cotinine in the liver. For e -cigarette aerosols, about half the nicotine 
absorbed  is delivered through the alveoli, with the other half being delivered to the venous  
circulation  through absorption from the oropharynx and bronchial tree.34 Delivery of 
nicotine is improving  as e-cigarette manufacturers improve design. First generation e -
cigarette devices,  released  between 2008 and 2010, delivered nicotine primarily to the 
mouth and oropharynx and could  not product plasma nicotine concentrations equivalent to 
cigarettes (blue line in Figure 4  below).  
Nicotine absorption from new generation devices (produced after 2010, red line in Figure 
4) are able to equivalent levels of plasma nicotine, but only after 20 -30 minutes of puffing.2 
However,  nicotine delivery from e -cigarettes has been shown to improve with practice,35 
and more  recent  studies find that experienced users of some products can quickly deliver 
cigarette -like nicotine  doses.36 
 
12 D15154   V.08.18.17 
 
 
  
 
BEHAVIORAL  ADVANTAGES  
Despite some disadvantages of nicotine delivery compared to cigarettes, e -cigarettes  
represent  an improvement in nicotine delivery compared to available nicotine replacement 
products,  such  as nicotine gum or patch, products that were intentionally meant to be 
slowly absorbed.35  Part of the appeal of the e -cigarette is in how it mimics the behavioral 
process of smoking.  The importance of the behavior in maintaining the smoking habit was 
recognized over 30 years  ago by chief Philip Morris scientist William Dunn, who stated, 
“The smoking act has  many  dimensions. The motor aspects, drawing the smoke into the 
mouth, inhaling the smoke into  the lungs … taste and olfactory sensations are elicited, 
sensations are elicited when the smoke  is drawn down into the lungs, psychosocial 
symbolism is imparted to the person, and a  large  number of chemical compounds pass 
rapidly in to the bloodstream.”37 Nicotine  replacement  therapy emphasizes the effects of 
one of those compounds and largely ignores the  important  behavioral aspects of the  habit.   
The effect of the behavioral components of the e -cigarette  are apparent in a  study  of e-
cigarette use and cigarette craving.3   As illustrated in Figure 5  below,  e-cigarette use was 
associated with substantial reductions in cigarette craving, and  these  immediate 
reductions were independent of whether the device contained  nicotine.  
              
        
13 D15154   V.08.18.17 
 
 
  
 
a 
 
 
E-CIGARETTE REGULATION: IMPLICATIONS ON STUDY  DESIGN  
As detailed below, the specific aims of this project are to determine the appeal and  
toxicity  of e-cigarettes in current smokers with a smoking -related cancer. This is NOT a  
smoking  cessation study ; instead, it examines changes in intake for two tobacco products  
when  administered together. There is a regulatory basis for the decision to focus on 
appeal  and toxicity, and not smoking cessation. When e -cigarette devices first attempted 
to enter the  US market, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) blocked shipments on 
the basis that  e-cigarettes were unapproved drug delivery devices and must first pass 
through FDA’s New  Drug  Application process before they could be legally sold. E -
cigarette manufacturers sued,  arguing  that e -cigarettes contained nicotine derived from 
tobacco and were therefore a tobacco  product;  the US Court of Appeals (Washington DC) 
ruled in their favor; and  the FDA decided not to  seek  further review. The FDA then 
determined that they would “deem” e -cigarettes to be  covered  under the Family Smoking 
Prevention and Tobacco Control Act (deeming is in process at  this date). In the meantime, 
the FDA has determined  that any evaluation of the e -cigarette  product  for a therapeutic 
endpoint (such as treating nicotine addiction) requires an Investigational  New Drug 
Application (involving animal pharmacology and toxicity studies, manufacturing  information 
on the product,  etc.).   This regulation does not allow scientists not closely affiliated with an  
 
Figure 5. Craving to smoke a cigarette as a function of time and whether the 
smoker was inhaling a cigarette or an electronic nicotine delivery device (ENDD) 
with and without nicotine or a nicotine inhaler (one form of nicotine replacement 
therapy). Taken from Bullen, et al. 3  
14 D15154   V.08.18.17 
 
 
 e-cigarette company to study these products as therapeutic  devices.   Moreover,  e-
cigarette  companies have made it clear in US courts that they do not seek approval as  a 
drug delivery  device.  
The Center for Tobacco Products (CTP) at FDA is charged with regulating the  tobacco  
market under the Family Smoking Prevention and Tobacco Control Act, which charges the  
FDA,  among other things, “to promote cessation to reduce disease risk and the social  
costs  associated with tobacco -related diseases.”  CTP funds investigators to help the  
agency  compare tobacco products with respect to three issues of interest —their relative 
appeal,  toxicity,  and effect on health. This le aves scientists the option of studying the e -
cigarette as a  modified  risk tobacco product in smokers with respect to those three types 
of outcomes.  The  ultimate  goal is to reduce the harm caused by cigarettes and other 
combustible tobacco products  by subs tituting less toxic delivery devices for the primary 
drug, nicotine.  This pilot project  begins  this line of investigation with a short -term study of 
e-cigarette appeal and toxicity among  cancer  patients that  smoke.  
 
TRIAL  PROTOCOL  
STUDY  DESIGN  
We will enroll 40 chronic smokers  from the Norris Cotton Cancer Center and the White 
River Junction VAMC , approximately 15 of which will be accrued from the  White  River 
Junction VAMC .  Participants will be given  access to e -cigarettes for a 9 -week period.  
Consecutive  patients with stage I -IV aerodigestive tract cancers  or bladder cancer who 
are current daily  smokers  will be identified two ways:  
1) Clinic Recruitment  - Potential participants will be identified by the treating physician 
during routine clinic visits. Patients will be advised to quit smoking as per the 
standard  of care. Any patient wishing to quit smoking will be referred for smoking 
cessation  counselling  through the DHMC  program,  the White River Junction VAMC 
program , or their state help -line. Once eligibility is  confirmed  and informed consent 
is obtained and signed, patients will be enrolled in the  study.  
2) EMR Recruitment : In a recruitment strategy that parallels clinic recruitmen t, we will 
use the EMR to identify all potentially eligible smokers (with the diagnosis of 
aerodigestive tract cancers  or bladder cancer) that have been seen in the NCCC in 
the past 3 years.  EMR records will be searched by the D -HRDS Analytics Institute  
who will then forward a list of potential subjects to the project coordinator with their 
diagnos es and contact information , consistent with our partial HIPAA waiver.  The 
project coordinator will then send this list of potential subject s to their  providers to 
be approved to be contacted about the study.  Approved p otential subjects will then 
be contacted by mail through a letter from the ir NCCC oncology group.  The 
subjects will have an opportunity to opt out of receiving a phone call through a 
prepaid return mailer  or by calling a telephone number.  If we do not hear from 
them in 2 weeks, we will then attempt to call them.  We will attempt to call one time 
a week for 3 weeks.  If there is no answer we will leave a brief , generic message.   
The call  will assess their smoking status, and their willingness to quit.  Nonsmokers 
are not eligible.  If they smoke and are interested in quitting, they will be referred to 
their state quit line.  If they are not interested in quitting at this time, they will b e 
15 D15154   V.08.18.17 
 
 
 offered participation in the study, and we will confirm eligibility.   The mailing will 
include:  A letter from their oncology group at NCCC, the brochure for their state 
quit line, a handout about the study, and a paper to return to us in a postage -paid 
envelope.  If they return the paper to us requesting a referral to the quit line we will 
notify the D -H smoking cessation specialist.  He/She will then process the referral to 
the quit line in EDH.  The patient will then be contacted directly by the quit l ine.  We 
will also provide them with their state smoking cessation help -line numbers .  If they 
return the paper to us indicating they do not wish to quit and would like more 
information regarding the study, a coordinator  will contact them.  
Once enrolled, p articipants will receive the e -cigarette product described below, will be 
instructed on use  of the e -cigarette, and given a supply that is approximately equivalent to 
their current  nicotine  intake.  They will be told that e-cigarettes are theoretically safer than 
cigarettes, and that  this trial aims to test how appealing the product is for smokers not 
willing to quit consuming  nicotine.  
We have opted to use e -cigarette products produced by Halo, a US manufacturing  
company  that emphasizes the purity of its products and its approach to quality control in 
the manu facturing process. Patients will be given Halo Triton, which uses a leak -proof 
refillable  tank system that has had a recent technological update.  The patient will be 
shown how to fill  the tank and will be observed filling it.  Those not able to manage the 
tank refill will be given  Halo  G6 leak proof prefilled cartomizers (the part of the e -cigarette 
that contains the nicotine  solution  and the heating filament); these can be substituted for 
the tank on the Triton battery.  The starter kit that will be distributed to patients is 
illustrated in Figure  6. 
HALO manufactures its e -cigarette and the nicotine solutions in the United States.  The 
HALO solution e -cigarettes contain 0, 12, 18, 24, or 36 mg/ml nicotine. We have been  
advised  to begin our participants with 18mg/ml and move up or down based on patient 
preference.  E-cigarette liquid also comes in many flavors, and we have decided to allo w 
participants to  choose  from four options.  Halo has agreed to provide us with the names of 
their 4 highest  selling  liquids.  They have shared an ingredients list with the Drs. Sargent 
and Lewis for the  purposes  of adverse event monitoring and in the event that our IRB 
members request information  about  the ingredients.  
16 D15154   V.08.18.17 
 
 
 T 
 
 
Coordinators will assess participants at baseline and weeks 3, 6, 9, and 12.  Although  
most of our patients are expected to have completed their therapy, the schedule is 
designed  to integrate with return schedules for many chemotherapeutic regimens , if 
possible . We have considered  the concern that chemotherapy could affect cigarette 
consumption or excretion of  nicotine  metabolites. According to our clinicians, the current 
chemotherapy regimens for these cancers  are not associated with severe symptoms, such 
that patients rarely decrease their smoking  during  treatment. Nevertheless, we will assess 
the severity of 6 common chemotherapy side effects  at each visit so that may be entered 
as a covariate in our analytic models. Regarding  metabolites,  for nicotine, the major 
metabolite cotinine is formed via CYP2A6 and CYP2B6 metabolism,  and the traditional 
cytotoxic chem otherapeutic agents used in the cancer treatment are not known  to affect 
the activity of these CYP450 /UGT enzymes significantly. Additionally, cyclical  cytotoxic  
chemotherapy is not given every day throughout a cycle. The most well  characterized  
carcinogens of smoking so far are NNK (4 -(methylnitrosamino)1(3 -pyridyl) -1-butanone)  
and NNAL (4 -(methylnitrosamino)1(3 -pyridyl) -1-butanol). These carcinogens are also  
metabolized  by some of the same enzymes that metabolize nicotine including CYP2A6, 
UGT2B 10, UGT1A4  and CYP2A13, so these should not be affected by most 
chemotherapeutic  regimens.  
Coordinators will assess eligibility, collect specimens, administer CO 2 measurements  and 
administer the surveys during the basel ine and follow up  visits.  
 
 
        T   
17 D15154   V.08.18.17 
 
 
 PARTICIPANTS  
Inclusion  Criteria:  
1) Histological or cytological diagnosis of aerodigestive tract cancers  or bladder 
cancer within  the past 5 years (more than one tobacco -related malignancy is  
allowed)  
2) AJCC stages  I-IV 
3) Daily smoking (at least 10 cigarettes per day for 10 years) and breath CO 2 ≥8 ppm 
4) Does not wish to quit smoking now (anyone wishing to quit smoking will be referred  
for smoking cessation counselling through the WRJ VAMC or DHMC  program)  
5) May be receiving anti -cancer  agents  
6) Age 18 or  older  
7) Fluent in  English  
8) Patient must be capable and willing to provide informed written consent for  study  
participation  
9) Able to participate in study  visits  
 
Exclusion  Criteria:  
1) Cancer surgery planned in the next 9  weeks  
2) Treatment with radiation planned for the next 9  weeks  
3) Actively trying to quit smoking, or planning to in the next 30 days. (If a subject 
reports  that they plan to quit smoking in the next 30 days, we will call them after the 
30 days to see  if they are still trying to  quit.)  
4) Any use of e -cigarettes in the past 30  days  
5) Pregnant or trying to get  pregnant  
 
RECRUITMENT  
Potentially eligible patients will be identified by clinician -researcher collaborators and  
through  clinical trials nurses or clinical research coordinators, who monitor the cancer 
patient  population  for recruitment into clinical studies. Patients may be identified in 
multiple clinical  settings,  including outpatient clinics and the infusion suite. Once a 
potentially eligible patient is  identified,  a referral will be made to the site coordinator, who 
will meet with the patient,  confirm  eligibility , and obtain consent for the patient to 
participate in the study , and register the patient in the Velos e -Research database . (If a 
site coordinator is unab le to utilize Velos, that coordinator will submit participant data to 
another coordinator with access and it will be entered into the Velos e -Research 
database.)  The coordinator  will conduct baseline web assessments, provide e -cigarettes 
and instruction o n how to use  the product, and conduct all follow up  assessments.  
 
18 D15154   V.08.18.17 
 
 
 STUDY  TIMELINE  AND FOLLOW -UP 
The trial is designed to allow for patient visits  every 3 weeks for 12 weeks. The  
coordinator s will work with the participant and the participants’  medical  care teams to 
schedule and conduct the visits. We will contact enrolled subjects for follow -up at 6 and 12 
months after enrollment.  Each time, we will attempt to contact the subjects 3 times by 
phone over a period of 3 weeks.  During the call the subject will be asked if they are still 
using an e -cigarette, what brand they are using, what concentration of nicotine they use, 
how many times a day they use it , and how often they currently smoking any combustible 
tobacco products.  
Participants  will receive free e -cigarette products for the first 9 weeks of the trial and $20 
for each visit ($100  total).  Participants that travel more than 20 miles one-way for a study -
only visit (n o other appointments scheduled on the day of the ir study visit ) will be g iven a 
$10 gas card.  
 
Table  2. Timeline  for study  activities  and compensation     
Time  Baseline  3 weeks  6 weeks  9 weeks  12 weeks  
Activity  Consent; survey;  ecig 
instruction; urine;  CO Survey; ecig  refill;  
urine;  CO Survey; ecig  refill;  
CO Survey; 
qualitative  
interview; urine;  
CO Survey;  
CO 
Compensation  $20 $20 $20 $20 $20 
 
OUTCOMES  ASSESSMENT  
Each visit will include a checklist that assesses how the participant is using the e -
cigarettes  and what problems he/she may be encountering with the use of the e -cigarette 
device.  Adverse  events will be assessed with a checklist for commonly occurring side 
effects from  e-cigarettes  and nicotine products. The coordinator s will conduct and audio -
record a 10 -15 minute  qualitative interview at 9 weeks soliciting perceptions about e -
cigarettes to be transcribed  and analyzed for common themes that could be useful in 
developing the larger  intervention.  
Behavioral assessments: We will use a Timeline Follow -Back Questionnaire (TLFB)38,39  
to document use of c igarettes at baseline and cigarettes/e -cigarettes at baseline, 3, 6, 9, 
and 12 weeks. At follow up visits participants will be instructed to bring in all used and 
unused  e- cigarettes, in order to verify reports of e -cigarette use. We will evaluate appeal 
with attitudinal  ratings, on a 5 -point Likert -type scale, e -cigarette ease of use, satisfaction, 
and enjoyment,  and willingness to continue to purchase e -cigarettes in the future. All 
questionnaires are  being  programmed using a secure web -based system set up and 
maintained by the  Dartmouth  Bioinformatics group led by Kristen  Anton.  
Biomarkers of behavior: Cigarette smoking will also be measured with exhaled carbon  
dioxide.  We will assess expired breath CO 2 using Micro Smokerlyzer meters (Bedfont 
Scientific),  which  have already been purchased for a previous study. The protocol will 
follow  operating  instructions that come with the devices, and the devices will be calibrated 
weekly with  40PPM  CO 2/air mixture. E -cigarette smoking will be measured with  urine 
propylene glycol, the  main  constituent of e -cigarette aerosol. Some 40% of ingested 
19 D15154   V.08.18.17 
 
 
  
n propylene glycol is  excreted  unchanged in the  urine.  
The NCCC Clinical Pharmacology Shared Resource (CPSR) will conduct assays of urine  
for smoke -related carcinogens. Urine samples (at least 20 mL) will be collected at the 
study  defined  time points from study participants in standard urine containers. These will 
be delivered to  the NCCC CPSR, divided into 5 mL aliquots and stored at -20°C or b elow 
until analysis.  Urine  aliquots will be assayed in batches based on the published assays 
for urine nicotine, cotinine,  4- (methylnitrosamino) -1-(-3pyridyl) -1butanol (NNAL)40 and 1 -
hydroxy naphthalene  (1-HOP)41 concentrations. These assays can and will be 
established and validated in the NCCC  CPSR  using the LC -MS/MS and HPLC -
Fluorescence services available in the  CPSR.  
 
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS AND POWER  CONSIDERATIONS  
Qualitative Analysis  
A follow up interview will be conducted at week 9. The interview will  be transcribed and a 
thematic analysis will be conducted to evaluate common issues  encountered  by smokers 
with cancer patients who use e -cigarettes. Thematic analysis consists  of examination of 
text by identifying and grouping themes, follow ed by coding, classifying,  and developing 
categories. Transcripts are uploaded into a qualitative analytic software  program  and 
analyzed using Atlas.ti, a qualitative coding program. Co -investigator Sarah Pratt  has 
experience using similar qualitative meth ods to interview health professionals. She  will 
supervise the coders, staff at the Centers for Health and Aging at Dartmouth who have  
been  trained to perform similar analyses in other  studies.  
Substitution assessment: The proportion of participants who report use of e -cigarettes  
during  each follow -up visit during treatment will also be computed (along with a 95%  
confidence  interval).   This proportion is expected to be at least  0.5.  With 40 participants, 
width of a  95% confidence interva l around this proportion will be at most 0.32. The 
satisfaction with  e- cigarettes (averaged across 3 treatment assessments) will be 
summarized among  participants  using descriptive statistics and the amount of e -cigarette 
product returned at each  follow -up period will be summarized across the treatment  period.  
To explicitly test the substitution/replacement mechanism of e -cigarettes, we will perform  
an exploratory parallel process growth model fit within a structural equation modeling  
framework .42 In this model the trajectory over time of both frequency/quantity of cigarette 
use and frequency/quantity of e -cigarette use will be modeled assuming individual -level 
latent  intercept  and slope (i.e., latent growth curve model). A significant negative 
association between the  latent  slope of e -cigarettes and the latent slope of combustible 
cigarettes would be consistent with  the replacement/substitution hypothesis. The model 
provides an explicit statistical test of  the hypothesis that, as e -cigarette usage increases, 
combustible cigarette usage decreases.  Power  for this analysis is computed as that for an 
individual -level correlation coefficient assuming  40 participants. There will be at least 80% 
power to detect a correlation that is at least -0.4 between  these two  individual -level slopes. 
Figure  7 shows a diagram  of the parallel  process  growth  model.  
 
20 D15154   V.08.18.17 
 
 
  
 
Toxicity  Assessment:  Our measures  of toxicity, urine  NNAL,  1-HOP and CO 2 will be 
compared between  the baseline and  9-week  assessments via  paired t -test. For NNAL, 
assuming  a standard deviation  of change in  this measure of  3.8 pmol/mg creatinine  (as 
was seen in Joseph  et al. 2008), with  40 participants, this  test will have 80% power at the 
two-sided 0.05 significance level to detect a change from baseline  of 1.7 pmol/mg 
creatinine.  There is not enough information available on 1 -HOP to perform a  test of 
power, so analysis of this metabolite is considered exploratory. For expired CO, assuming  
a standard deviation of change in this measure of 17.0 ppm,43 with 40 participants, a 
paired  t-test comparing baseline to 9 -week will have 80% power at the two-sided 0.05 
significance level  to detect a change from baseline that is 7.7 ppm. Additionally, since CO 2 
will be measured  several  times throughout the treatment period, the trajectory of change 
over time in this measure will  be modeled via linear mixed effects models including 
random intercept and slope terms to  account  for repeated observations within individual. 
With repeated measurements of CO, the power  for the mixed model will be greater than 
that of the pair ed t-test of change from baseline to  detect  this change over  time.  
We will also evaluate toxicity by analyzing cotinine level to assure that the adverse effect  
of increased cotinine (resultant from increased e -cigarette usage without similar decrease  
in combustible cigarettes). To do this, we will compute the number of participants with an  
increase  in cotinine over the course of the study and consider this an adverse event. With 
40 participants,  confidence intervals around this adverse event percentage wi ll be at most 
0.32 percentage  points. The table below gives the probability of observing at least 1 
participant with an  increase  in cotinine given different true percentage of participants with 
this adverse event. For example,  if the population -wide true p ercentage of participants 
with cotinine increase is 0.5%, then  the probability of observing at least 1 of the 40 study 
participants with an increase is  0.18.  
             
    n      
  
21 D15154   V.08.18.17 
 
 
  
True percentage of participants with  
increase  cotinine  Probability of observing at least 1  adverse  
event (increase in  cotinine)  
0.5%  0.18 
1% 0.33 
2% 0.55 
5% 0.87 
10% 0.99 
 
 
ON-SITE  MONITORING  
Clinical research monitoring for regulatory compliance and data integrity will be  conducted  
according to the NCI -approved NCCC Data and Safety Monitoring Plan. Internal 
monitoring  is conducted by appropriately trained staff of the NCCC Office of Clinical 
Research  and Dartmouth -Hitchcock Medical Center Clinical Trials Office (CTO) and the 
White River  Junction  VA Medical Center who are not involved in the study. This 
monitoring will include  periodic  assessment of the regulatory compliance, data quality, and 
study integrity. Study records will  be reviewed and directly compared to source documents 
and the conduct of the study will  be discussed  with the investigator. Monitors may request 
access to all regulatory  documents,  source documents, CRFs, and other study 
documentation for on -site inspection. Direct  access  to these documents is guaranteed by 
the investigator, who must provide support at a ll times  for these  activities.  
Participation as an investigator in this study implies acceptance of potential inspection  by 
government regulatory authorities and applicable Dartmouth research compliance and  
quality  assurance offices. The investigator will permit study protocol related audits and 
inspections  by the Dartmouth CPHS, government regulatory bodies, and the Dartmouth 
compliance and  quality  assurance groups of all study related documents (e.g., source 
documents,  regulatory  documen ts, data collection instruments, study data.). The 
investigator will ensure the  capability  for inspections of applicable study -related facilities 
(e.g., diagnostic  laboratory).  
 
RECORD  RETENTION  
Following closure of the study, the investigator will maintain all site study records in a safe  
and secure location. The records are maintained to allow easy and timely retrieval when  
needed  (e.g., audit or inspection) and, whenever feasible, to allow any subsequent review 
of data  in conjunction with assessme nt of the facility, supporting systems, and staff. Upon 
completion  of study analysis, research information is stored in a password protected, 
secure research  server  behind the firewall at the WRJ VA indefinitely or at Dartmouth 
College Records  Management  off-site storage located at 6218 Etna Road, Hanover, NH. 
Documents are shredded on site  after 50 years of  storage.  
Electronic case report forms, participant, and study information will be kept in the  Velos  
eResearch password -protected database (or equivalent)  indefinitely.  
 
22 D15154   V.08.18.17 
 
 
 SAFETY AND DATA  MONITORING  
This study will be monitored by the Data Safety Monitoring and Accrual Committee 
(DSMAC)  of the Norris Cotton Cancer Center. The Committee meets quarterly to review 
accrual rates  and information for stu dies that have accrued participants. The Clinical 
Cancer Review  Committee  (CCRC) determines the frequency of DSMAC review.  The 
DSMAC has the authority  to suspend or to recommend termination to the CCRC of all 
research activities that fall within  its jurisdiction. In the event that a study is suspended or 
terminated, that information will  be forwarded to the CPHS (Dartmouth IRB)  office.  
 
References  
1. Warren GW, Kasza KA, Reid ME, Cummings KM, Marshall JR. Smoking at 
diagnosis and survival  in cancer patients. International Journal of Cancer.  
2013;132(2):401 ‐410. 
2. Farsalinos KE, Spyrou A, Tsimopoulou K, Stefopoulos C, Romagna G, Voudris V.  
Nicotine  absorption from electronic cigarette use: comparison between first and 
new‐generation  devices.  Scientific reports.  2014;4.  
3. Bullen  C, McRobbie  H, Thornley  S, Glover  M, Lin R, Laugesen  M. Effect  of an 
electronic  nicotine  delivery  device  (e cigarette)  on desire  to smoke  and withdrawal,  
user preferences  and nicotine  delivery: randomised cross ‐over trial. Tobacco 
control.  2010;19(2):98 ‐103. 
4. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. The Health Consequences of 
Smoking: 50  Years  of Progress. A Report of the Surgeon General. Atlanta GUSD. 
Centers for Disease Control  and Preventi on, National Center for Chronic Disease 
Prevention and Health Promotion, Office  on Smoking and Health,  2014.  
5. Jacobs EJ, Newton CC, Carter BD, et al. What proportion of cancer deaths in the  
contemporary  United States is attributable to cigarette smoking? Annals of 
epidemiology.  2014.  
6. (GA): U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,  
USDoHaHSHTSCDTBaBBfS ‐ADARotSGA.  Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention  and Health Promotion, 
Office on Smoking and Health,  2010.  
7. Shizu  M, Itoh Y, Sunahara  R, et al. Cigarette  smoke  condensate  upregulates  the 
gene  and protein  expression of proinflammatory cytokines in human fibroblast ‐like 
synoviocyte line. Journal  of Interferon & Cytokine Research.  2007;28(8):509 ‐522. 
8. Takahashi H, Ogata H, Nishigaki R, Broide DH, Karin M. Tobacco smoke promotes  
lung tumorigenesis by triggering IKKβ ‐and JNK1 ‐dependent inflammation. Cancer 
cell. 2010;17(1):89 ‐ 97. 
9. Hughes JR, Carpenter MJ. The feasibility of smoking reduction: an update.  
Addiction.  2005;100(8):1074 ‐1089.  
10. Hughes JR, Carpenter MJ. Does smoking reduction increase future cessation and  
decrease  disease risk? A qualitative review. Nicoti ne & Tobacco Research.  
23 D15154   V.08.18.17 
 
 
 2006;8(6):739 ‐749. 
11. Fagerström KO, Tejding R, Westin A, Lunell E. Aiding reduction of smoking with  
nicotine  replacement medications: hope for the recalcitrant smoker? Tobacco 
Control.  1997;6(4):311 ‐ 316. 
12. Goniewicz M. Saliva cotinine and nicotine levels among tobacco cigarette smokers,  
electronic  cigarette users, NRT users and dual users. SRNT Europe 16th Annual 
Conference; September  12, 2015, 2015; Maastricht, The  Netherlands.  
13. Morales NA, Romano MA, Cummings KM, et al. Accuracy of self ‐reported tobacco 
use in  newly  diagnosed cancer patients. Cancer Causes & Control.  
2013;24(6):1223 ‐1230.  
14. Burris  JL, Studts  JL, DeRosa  AP, Ostroff  JS. Systematic  Review  of Tobacco  Use 
after Lung  or Head/Neck Cancer Diagnosis: Results and Recommendations for 
Future Research.  Cancer  Epidemiology Biomarkers & Prevention. October 1, 2015  
2015;24(10):1450 ‐1461.  
15. Parsons A, Daley A, Begh R, Aveyard P. Influence of smoking cessation after 
diagnosis of  early  stage lung cancer on prognosis: systematic review of 
observational studies with  meta‐analysis.  Bmj. 2010;340.  
16. Boyle  JM, Tandberg  DJ, Chino  JP, D'Amico  TA, Ready  NE, Kelsey  CR. Smoking  
history  predicts  for increased risk of second primary lung cancer: a comprehensive 
analysis. Cancer. Feb 15 2015;121(4):598 ‐604. 
17. Shiels MS, Gibson T, Sampson J, et al. Cigarette smoking prior to first cancer and 
risk of  second  smoking‐associated cancers among survivors of bladder, kidney, 
head and neck, and stage I  lung cancers.  Journal  of clinical  oncology  : official  
journal  of the American  Society  of Clinical  Oncology.  Dec 10  2014;32(35):3989 ‐
3995.  
18. Borderud SP, Li Y, Burkhalter JE, Sheffer CE, Ostroff JS. Electronic cigarette use 
among  patients  with cancer: characteristics of electronic cigarette users and their 
smoking cessation  outcomes.  Cancer. Nov 15 2014;120(22):3527 ‐3535.  
19. Ayers  JW, Ribisl  KM, Brownstein  JS. Tracking  the rise in popularity  of electronic  
nicotine  delivery  systems (electronic cigarettes) using search query surveillance. 
American journal of  preventive  medicine. Apr 2011;40(4):448 ‐453. 
20. Harrell  PT, Simmons  VN, Correa  JB, Padhya  TA, Brandon  TH. Electronic  nicotine  
delivery  systems  ("e‐cigarettes"):  review  of safety  and smoking  cessation  efficacy.  
Otolaryngology ‐‐head  and neck  surgery : official journal of American Academy of 
Otolaryngology ‐Head and Neck Surgery.  Sep 2014;151(3):381 ‐393. 
21. Goniewicz  ML, Knysak  J, Gawron  M, et al. Levels  of selected  carcinogens  and 
toxicants  in vapour  from electronic cigarettes. Tobacco control.  2014;23(2):133 ‐
139. 
22. http://www.fda.gov/downloads/drugs/scienceresearch/ucm173250.pdf. , WBEoe‐ 
cFCfDEaRDoPAAo.  
23. Hecht SS, Carmella SG, Kotandeniya D, et al. Evaluation of toxicant and 
24 D15154   V.08.18.17 
 
 
 carcinogen  metabolites  in the urine of e ‐cigarette users versus cigarette smokers. 
Nicotine  & Tobacco  Research.  2014:ntu218.  
24. Flouris AD, Poulianiti KP, Chorti MS, et al. Acute effects of electronic and tobacco  
cigarette  smoking on complete blood count. Food and chemical toxicology.  
2012;50(10):3600 ‐3603.  
25. Flouris AD, Chorti MS, Poulianiti KP, et al. Acute impact of active and passive 
electronic  cigarette  smoking on serum cotinine and lung function. Inhalation 
toxicology.  2013;25(2):91 ‐101. 
26. Farsalinos KE, Tsiapras D, Kyrzopoulos S, Savvopoulou M, Voudris V. Acute 
effects of using  an electronic nicotine ‐delivery device (electronic cigarette) on 
myocardial function:  comparison  with the effects of regular cigarettes. BMC 
cardiovascular disorders.  2014;14(1):78.  
27. Public Health England. Underpinning evidence for the estimate that e ‐cigarette use 
is around  95% safer than smoking: authors' note.  2015.  
https:// www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/456704/
McN eill‐Hajek_report_authors_note_on_evidence_for_95_estimate.pdf . Accessed 
Septem ber 9, 2015.  
28. Cheng T. Chemical evaluation of electronic cigarettes. Tob Control. May 2014;23 
Suppl  2:ii11‐17. 
29. McCauley L, Markin C, Hosmer D. An unexpected consequence of electronic 
cigarette  use. CHEST Journal.  2012;141(4):1110 ‐1113.  
30. Jensen RP, Luo W, Pankow JF, Strongin RM, Peyton DH. Hidden Formaldehyde in  
E‐Cigarette  Aerosols. New England Journal of Medicine.  2015;372(4):392 ‐394. 
31. Lerner  CA, Sundar  IK, Yao H, et al. Vapors  Produced  by Electronic  Cigarettes  and 
E‐Juices  with Flavorings Induce Toxicity, Oxidative Stress, and Inflammatory 
Response in Lung Epithelial  Cells  and in Mouse Lung. PLoS One.  2015;10(2).  
32. Sussan  TE, Gajghate  S, Thimmulappa  RK, et al. Exposure  to electronic  cigarettes  
impairs  pulmonary anti ‐bacterial and anti ‐viral defenses in a mouse model. PLoS  
One.  2015;10(2):e0116861.  
33. Henningfield  JE, Keenan  RM. Nicotine  delivery  kinetics  and abuse  liability.  Journal  
of consulting  and clinical psychology.  1993;61(5):743.  
34. Zhang  Y, Sumner  W, Chen  D‐R. In vitro particle  size distributions  in electronic  and 
conventional  cigarette aerosols suggest comparable deposition patterns. Nicotine & 
tobacco  research.  2013;15(2):501 ‐508. 
35. Hajek P, Goniewicz ML, Phillips A, Myers Smith K, West O, McRobbie H. Nicotine 
intake  from electronic  cigarettes  on initial  use and after 4 weeks  of regular  use. 
Nicotine  & tobacco  research : official journal of the Society for Research on Nicotine 
and Tobacco. Feb 2015;17(2):175 ‐179. 
36. Talih S, Balhas Z, Eissenberg T, et al. Effects of user puff topography, device 
voltage, and  liquid  nicotine concentration on electronic cigarette nicotine yield: 
measurements and  model  predictions. Nicotine & tobacco research : official journal 
25 D15154   V.08.18.17 
 
 
 of the Society for Research on  Nicotine  and Tobacco. Feb 2015 ;17(2):150 ‐157. 
37. Dunn WL. Smoker Psychology Program Review. Philip  Morris;1977.  
38. Brown  RA, Burgess  ES, Sales  SD, Whiteley  JA, Evans  DM, Miller  IW. Reliability  
and validity  of a smoking timeline follow ‐back interview. Psychology of Addictive 
Behaviors.  1998;12(2):101.  
39. Sobell LC, Sobell MB. Timeline follow ‐back. Measuring alcohol consumption : 
Springer;  1992:41‐ 72. 
40. Kotandeniya D, Carmella SG, Ming X, Murphy SE, Hecht SS. Combined analysis of 
the tobacco  metabolites cotinine and 4 ‐(methylnitrosa mino)‐1‐(3‐pyridyl)‐1‐butanol 
in human  urine.  Analytical chemistry. Feb 3  2015;87(3):1514 ‐1517.  
41. Carmella SG, Le KA, Hecht SS. Improved method for determination of 1 ‐
hydroxypyrene in  human  urine.  Cancer  epidemiology,  biomarkers  & prevention  : a 
publication  of the American  Association  for Cancer Research, cosponsored by the 
American Society of Preventive Oncology.  Jul 2004;13(7):1261 ‐1264.  
42. Cheong J, Mackinnon DP, Khoo ST. Investigation of Mediational Processes Using 
Parallel  Process  Latent Growth Curve Modeling. Structural equation modeling : a 
multidisciplinary journal. Apr 1 2003;10(2):238.  
43. Joseph AM, Hecht SS, Murphy SE, et al. Smoking reduction fails to improve clinical 
and biological  markers of cardiac disease: a randomized controlled trial. Nicotine & 
tobacco research :  official  journal of the Society for Research on Nicotine and 
Tobacco. Mar 2008;10(3):471 ‐481. 