BRANY  Protocol   Protocol identifier: MCI IPT -A 
  Version date: 4/17/2019  
 
 1  
Engaging Black Youth in Depression and Suicide Prevention Treatment within  
Urban Schools: A Preliminary Study  
 
1 R34 MH119290 -01 
 
Version date 4/17/2019  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BRANY  Protocol   Protocol identifier: MCI IPT -A 
  Version date: 4/17/2019  
 
 2 Summary of the Research  
The overall goal of this study is to examine the effect iveness of the Making Connections 
Intervention, hereafter referred to as the MCI. Based on the Unified Theory of Behavior and 
Stages of Change Theory, the MCI is designed to facilitate adolescents' identification of 
perceptual and actual barriers that infl uence their mental health treatment acceptability (i.e. 
engagement, perceived relevance, and satisfaction), and equip them with the skills to overcome 
these barriers at the initiation and/or during the course of treatment. As a  test of the MCI, our 
target population was urban, Black adolescents screened for depression and referred for 
Interpersonal Psychotherapy for Depressed Adolescents, or IPT -A, for treatment. Prior research 
by the PI indicates that depressed, Black adolescents are likely to have untreat ed depression 
due to negative family influences, negative perceptions of services and providers, or self -stigma 
associated with experiencing depressive symptoms. This is of public health significance 
because: (1) this group uses less mental health services  than any other adolescent group, and 
non-financial factors (e.g. mental illness stigma, negative perception of providers/services) plays 
a significant role in their lower service use; (2) if/when they do enter treatment, low engagement 
and early terminati on typify their experiences; and (3) suicide, a byproduct of untreated 
depression, has increased among this group, narrowing the gap in suicide rates between White 
and Black adolescents. To date, limited work has been done to improve treatment acceptabilit y 
among urban, Black adolescents with depression, especially those in their middle -school age 
years. This study proposes a small -scale trial in New York City DOE school -based mental 
health clinics throughout the Bronx, where Black youth would be randomized  to receive the 
MCI+IPT -A or IPT -A alone.  
Project Information II  
Description of study procedures:  
a. The study will be conducted at six (6) New York City Department of Education (DOE) 
Middle and High School School -Based Mental Health Clinics.  
b. Participants wil l need to sign consent (caregivers) and assent (youth) forms. Following 
enrollment, youth and caregivers will be given a baseline assessment consisting of a 
series of questionnaires. Both youth and caregivers assigned to the MCI + IPT -A group 
will attend o ne or two MCI sessions lasting approximately 45 minutes. The youth 
participant s will continue to receive IPT -A for 12 sessions and will be given additional 
assessment questionnaires at weeks 4, 8, and 12. Youth in the IPT -A only group will 
begin IPT -A sess ions imme diately following enrollment and will follow the same 
assessment schedule. Assessments, screenings,  and MCI and IPT -A sessions will be 
conducted at the youth's school.  
c. The MCI coupled with the IPT -A will consist of 13 -15 intervention sessions. Th e IPT -A 
alone will consist of 12 -15 intervention  sessions. The MCI will occur with parents or legal 
guardians and students for one hour (60 -75 minutes) over 1 -2 sessions (Note: the 
screening and initial assessment will occur prior to the MCI session). The remaining 12 -
15 sessions will focus on the delivery of the evidence -based depression treatment, IPT -
A, which will occur in weekly 30 -45 minute individual therapy sessions (over 12 weeks, 
additional if a week is skipped) with the students and allowing possi ble concurrent 
sessions with the parent or legal guardian as needed. Thus, the intervention should last 
for approximately 3 -4 months.  
BRANY  Protocol   Protocol identifier: MCI IPT -A 
  Version date: 4/17/2019  
 
 3 d. A member of the research staff will conduct interviews and assessments. SMH clinicians 
will deliver the MCI and IPT -A interventions.  This study will feature a 2 -group 
randomized design. Eligible students will be randomized to receive the MCI and IPT -A 
enhanced intervention, or to receive IPT -A only. Astor Services for Children & Families is 
a community based, non -profit orga nization that provides children’s mental health 
services, child welfare services, and early childhood development programs. Astor 
serves children and families in the Bronx through school -based mental health clinics. 
These on -site mental health clinics, whi ch are all licensed mental health clinics in New 
York State, offer individual, group, and family treatment, as well as crisis intervention on 
school campuses. Six to eight clinicians employed by Astor will deliver both the MCI and 
IPT-A interventions, or t he IPT -A alone. Therefore, Astor Services for Children & 
Families will be responsible for administering individual psychotherapy at their 6 selected 
school -based sites in the Bronx, but will not be involved in the design, oversight and/or 
management of the  study.  
e. Screening  tools will be distributed  to students in a take -home packet , completed  along 
with a consent form , and collected by research staff  or SMH clinicians . Assessment 
questionnaires will be given by a member of the research staff and delivered t o the 
research  coordinator when completed.   
Incentives  
Incentives will be provided to both youth and caregiver participants in the form of gift cards. If 
participants withdraw prior to study completion, they may keep any gift cards they received but 
will n ot receive additional gift cards that would have been distributed at a later point in the study. 
Participating caregivers receive a $20 gift card at baseline, $15 gift card following the post -MCI 
assessment, and then a $15 gift card following the assessmen ts at week 4, week 8 and week 
12. Youth receive a $15 gift card at baseline, $10 gift card following the post -MCI assessment, 
$10 gift card following the week 4 assessment, $10 gift card following the week 8 assessment, 
and then a $10 gift card following t he week 12 assessment. The total gift card amount for 
caregivers completing the study is $80 in gift cards; the total for youth participants completing 
the study is $55 in gift cards.  
Participant Identification, Recruitment, & Selection  
We based our sample  projections on the demographic data from our partnering NYC DOE 
schools. The schools we are partnering with have approximately similar percentages of male 
and female students, of whom over 20% are African American. The students who attend these 
schools ar e generally from low -income families (live below the poverty line, receive Medicaid). 
We will enroll a total of 60 subject and randomly assign them to the MCI + IPT -A or IPT -A only 
in a 1:1 ratio. Based on screening rates in our previous R21, we anticipate  recruiting 60 
adolescents (10 per school -based site). In our R21 study, we were able to recruit 24 
adolescent/parent pairs from our partnering schools using similar screening processes.  
At each school, students with elevated depression will be identified through a school -wide 
screening process. We will work in concert with NYC DOE school mental health (SMH) staff to 
screen participants as per usual care procedures. We will identify participants through the 
following procedures. First, a screening (PHQ -9) and consent form (caregivers provide 
permission for their child to be seen in SMH services) are sent home with all students at the 
beginning of the academic year. We have requested (per IRB approval) to also send home a 
BRANY  Protocol   Protocol identifier: MCI IPT -A 
  Version date: 4/17/2019  
 
 4 permission to be contacted form, alon g with a letter describing our study. If caregivers agree to 
be contacted, the SMH staff will share with the research staff the contact information of students 
who scoring above the clinical cutoff of 1 1 (range 0 to 27). Astor Services for Children & 
Famil ies used the school -wide screening method with the Strengths and Difficulties 
Questionnaire in 2015 and had an approximately 50% return rate on the screenings/consent 
forms. Research staff will not receive names of students whose parents do not provide a 
permission to be contacted from. Of the received forms, the research staff will contact the family 
to set up a time to consent/assent for the study and screen the adolescent using our standard 
screening procedure, which is to administer the Center for Epide miologic Studies Depression 
Scale (CES -D). Second way we also will recruit participants is that using another standard of 
care in SMH service delivery, which is to recruit through the school -based clinics among those 
students presenting to services for men tal health needs. That is, SMH staff at the participating 
schools currently receive referrals from NYC DOE social workers, guidance counselors, 
administrators, teachers, other school -based providers, family members, and self -referrals. All 
referrals are sc reened using the PHQ -9. Upon receipt of referrals, the SMH staff person will 
share a brochure of the study and a letter to be shared with the family, along with a permission 
to be contacted form. Following assessment, Dr. Lindsey and Tracy  Grogan  will revi ew 
assessment, establish eligibility, and follow random assignment procedures. Randomization lists 
will be prepared by Dr. Jaccard who will have no contact with participants, clinicians, or study 
staff members. We will randomize within schools and provide clinicians information per each 
case about whether the participant will receive the MCI + IPT -A or IPT -A only. Clinicians will 
complete fidelity assessments, and we will randomly listen to audiotapes of sessions to 
document the extent of contamination or t he potential of it. We will also make sure to discuss 
instances of contamination (or the potential of it) during weekly supervision with the clinicians.   
Note: We will keep track of the % of families who return the permission to be contacted forms. 
Researc h staff will follow -up on all returned forms and schedule a time to consent/assent for the 
study and screen the adolescent using our standard screening procedure  
Participant Population  
Inclusion Criteria:   
1. Must identify as Black and/or African American  
2. Must be enrolled in grades 6 -12 (except 12th graders in their last semester)  
3. Must be able to speak English  
4. Must have received caregiver consent and have assented to participate  
5. Must m eet depression and global functioning levels indicated by a CES-D score ≥16, a 
Hamilton Rating Scale of Depression (HRSD) Score ≥ 10 , and  a Global Assessment 
Scale for Children (C -GAS) score ≤ 65 at baseline  
6. Students who are currently on a stable dose of anti -depressant medication, but still meet 
inclusion crit eria, can be enrolled in the study.  
Exclusion Criteria:  
1. Actively  suicidal with intent or plan  
BRANY  Protocol   Protocol identifier: MCI IPT -A 
  Version date: 4/17/2019  
 
 5 2. Intellectually  disabled  
3. Have  a life threatening medical illness  
4. Have  a current primary substance abuse diagnosis in the moderate to severe range, 
schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, any evidence of psychosis, a primary diagnosis of 
anorexia  
5. Currently  in active treatment for depression (excluding medication) at baseline 
assessment  
Note:  Adult caregivers included in the study must be the adolescent’s leg al guardian. 
Otherwise, exclusion criteria similar to what is applied to the adolescents will be applied to the 
legal guardians.  
Informed Consent  
All student participants will require parental consent and student assent to participate in the 
study. At eac h school, students will be recruited through a school -wide screening process. Prior 
to screening, the research team will hold an informational meeting for parents, adolescents, and 
teachers regarding adolescent depression, rationale for screening for eleva ted depression, and 
treatment options including the current study. Par ents will then be sent a PHQ -9 and a consent 
form for their child’s participation in the screening  (students will take home  in a packet)  as part 
of usual care procedures at the participa ting NYC DOE schools . Upon receipt of a willingness to 
be contacted form, the research team will contact families about their interest in participating in 
the study. Upon an expressed interested, a research team member will meet the family to 
explain the s tudy and cover the informed consent procedures (and child assent). The research 
team member will explain the study to the family, including the randomization procedure. They 
will understand that they are participating in a research study and that participa tion is voluntary. 
The consents also give information regarding what the study entails, incentives, and 
requirements of participants. Students and parents or legal guardians will also be given a copy 
of all consents/assents signed for their records and are  welcome to contact any member of the 
research staff or the school mental health clinicians regarding questions or concerns they may 
have. Participants may choose not to participate. Consents will be written at the 7th grade 
reading level for parents or le gal guardians and at the 5th grade level for student assents. The 
research team member will be sure that the participants understand all aspects of the consent 
process. Note: For those families who do not wish to participate in the study, usual care 
treatm ent will be offered.  With informed consent and child assent  obtained , the research team 
member will administer the CES -D screen. If the student scores above the clinical cutoff on the 
CES-D (i.e., 16 or higher), and the Hamilton (i.e., 10 or higher), and m eet other 
inclusion/exclusion criteria, the student will be enrolled. We anticipate these procedures will be 
completed at the participating schools.  
 
Participation Consideration  
Study participant s are  allowed to enroll or withdraw from the study at any ti me. The recruitment, 
active  treatment phases, and data collection will take place over 3 years . 
Privacy of Participants  
BRANY  Protocol   Protocol identifier: MCI IPT -A 
  Version date: 4/17/2019  
 
 6 Information will be obtained  in a school -based setting  during the normal school day . Loss of 
privacy and confidentiality are possible ri sks of participation i n the study. For example, there is 
potential for being stigmatized by peers for participating in a study  on depression, particularly if 
peers of the participant discover  this information.  For example, peers may not ice that a 
participa nt is absent from class or may pass them in a hallway while a participant is on his/her  
way to a private setting.  To protect pri vacy during the data collection phase, (1)  research staff 
will have  direct contact with the caregive r(s) of the participants dur ing afterschool hours; (2) any 
referees will be  informed that the names of part icipating students must be kept confidential; and 
(3) copies of study assessments are kept  in locked f iles at schools (not containing identifying 
information).  
Private Informat ion Sources  
Mental health assessments and audio taped sessions  
Regulatory Risk/Benefit Determination Applicable to Children  
Federal regulations (45 CFR 46, subpart D) define risk/benefit categories as they apply to 
children.  
(404) Minimal Risk research, w here the probability and magnitude of harm or discomfort 
anticipated in the research are not greater in and of themselves than those ordinarily 
encountered in daily life or during the performance of routine physical or psychological 
examinations or tests. For research with children, adequate provisions must also be 
made for soliciting the assent of the children and the permission of their parents or 
guardians, as set forth in 46.408.  
Participants are subject to minimal levels of risk - not greater than that  of a typical therapy 
session with a counselor.  
Data Confidentiality and Risks & Benefits  
During data collection, a  participant number will be  assigned to each participant and indicated 
on research forms, so that it is the only link on assessment instrumen ts. Access to consent 
forms, assent forms, demographic information, audio tapes, and assessment materials will be 
limited to the research staff at the NYU in  password -protected files; the school mental health 
clinicians have access to copies of student ass essments. The document containing students' 
ident ification  number assignment will be  sent to school mental health clinicians via NYU’s 
secure file transfer system. The document is password  protected, and the password is provided 
in a separate email. Only r esearch personnel listed in this application have access to the hard 
copies of a ny data.  
a. Research data and digital recordings of therapy sessions are stored on a password -protected 
network at the School of Social Work, which is on a secure server  in the school and  accessed 
only by investigators who are from NYU Silver School of Social Work. Data stored on the School 
of Social Work servers are prot ected by Windows New Technology File System (NTFS) Access 
Control Lists (ACL) tied to users Active Directory  domain accounts. Users  have access to a 
private folder accessible only to them and group folders  accessible by select groups of people. 
Logging will be established on group folders  and files to monitor a ccess to individual folders and 
files. Access will b e established and tracked by the user’s N ew York University  NetID. The only 
BRANY  Protocol   Protocol identifier: MCI IPT -A 
  Version date: 4/17/2019  
 
 7 account(s) on the system with access to all files is the main administrator account (which is not 
named administrator and has a 15 random character password, and the system interna l account 
for tape backup. The School’s main file server uses a Storage Area Network (SAN), which 
distri butes the data over multiple redundant hard drives for reliability. In addition, Shadow copie s 
are created at multiple times throughout the day and serv ers are backed up nightly to tape. 
Servers, network access devices and tape backups are housed in locked limited access rooms.  
b. Research data and digital recordings of therapy sessions are stored on  the password -
protected network at the School of Social Work. Only the PI, research coordinator, and research 
assistants will have access to the data and digital recordings. Co- Principal Investigator, Dr. 
Laura Mufson of Columbia University, will have access to de -identified data and de -identified 
digital reco rdings of therapy sessions to review for IPT -A fidelity. SMH clinicians have access to 
copies of assessments.  
c. Research data will be kept for 3  years post the conclusion of the study. At the 3 -year point, 
the data will be destroyed.  
d. Research data has been kept in locked cabinets  in the research coordinator's office at NYU . 
The office is locked by key whenever the  research coordinator is not in the office. When the  time 
arrives for the data to be destroyed, it will be done  so by shredding the documents.  
e. Additionally, we have also provided a data safety and monitoring plan.  
Risks of the Study  
Participants are subject to minimal levels of risk - not greater than that of a typical therapy 
session wi th a counselor. (Note: In instances where youth are on medications related t o their 
mental health symptoms, those youth will not be asked to stop taking medication. If appropriate, 
they will be referred for medical or psychiatric treatment.)  
During the assessment and/or t reatment sessions, students are  asked  questions that may 
cause some d iscomfort. Participants may experience  some anxiety and/ or increased sadness 
related to discussing personal information with the SMH clinician; however, stude nts are not 
pressured to respond to any questions that they did not want to answer. Additionally, t he SMH 
clinician as well as the PI are  available to provide debriefing opportunities and discuss any 
issues related to this study.  
Loss of privacy and co nfidentiality are possible risks of participation in th e study. For exam ple, 
there is a potential for being stigmatized by peers for participating in a study on depre ssion, 
particularly if peers of the participant discover this information. We will make  sure, to the extent 
possible, to protect the participation of students fro m other students. For exam ple: (1) only 
research staff will have direct contact with the caregiver(s) of the participants during afterschool 
hours; (2) referees will be  informed that the names o f participating students must be kept 
confidential; and (3) co pies of study  assessments are kept in locked files at schools and do  not 
contain identifying information. It is poss ible that participants may themselves inform  peers 
about participating in the study or receiving treatment.   
Due to working with students sh owing symptoms of depression, there w as a risk that their 
depression could worsen while engaging in mental health treatment. The PI and resea rch team 
will make every available effort to safely and sensitively handle significant worsening of 
BRANY  Protocol   Protocol identifier: MCI IPT -A 
  Version date: 4/17/2019  
 
 8 depress ive symp toms. For example, as a standard of practice in the IPT -A treatment,  SMH 
clinicians assess current symptom levels at the beginning of each session. F urther, SMH 
clinicians complete  the Chi ldren's Global Assessment Scale (C-GAS) to assess for global 
impairm ent associated with mood disorder. Ad ditionally, the Hamilton Rating Scale for 
Depression (HRSD) and Center for Epidemiological Studies -Depress ion Scale (CES -D) are 
administered at baseline, post -MCI session, and at weeks 4, 8 and 12. If at any time the 
symptoms, as indicated by the HRSD and CES -D, reach a clinically severe level (HRS D score 
of 28 or greater; CES -D score of 31 or greater), the P I and SMH clinicians immediate ask  follow -
up questions to determine whether the youth is expressing suicidal ideat ion; if suicidal ideatio n 
was indicated, the PI and SMH clinicians further assess  whether the youth has a plan, whether 
there is access and means to follow through with a plan, the level of suicidal intent and the 
presence of cur rent suicidal gestures. We also contact  the caregiver and provided information 
about emergency psychia tric services for determination of whether hospitalization is necessary. 
If there was a pattern of w orsening depressive symptoms or de-compensation in the absence of 
suicidal intent  during the course o f the study (as measured by the Clinical Global Impressions 
(CGI), which was given weekly by the SMH clinician and  indicated by a 6 or 7 on the CGI for 2 
consecutive weeks), the PI in consultat ion with the SMH clinicians will make a det ermination of 
whether the youth is : (1) appropriate for the study; or (2) in need of  more emergent psychiatric 
care such as hospitalization. Referral may have also be made back to a primary care physician 
or to community -based mental health services in ins tances where participants might worsen 
during the course  of the study. Again, gu idance on this determination is  informed on a session -
by-session basis (e.g. symptom query is a standard practice of the IPT -A treatment) and via the 
standardized assessments o f depression (e.g. HRSD and CES -D). If hospitalization was 
necessary, info rmation on psychiatric services (e.g. hospitalization) will be  provided to the 
caregiver.  
Benefits of the Study  
Participants experience minimal risks and receive high quality mental health services from 
master’s level SMH clinicians in an effort to help reduce presen ting issues. Participants may 
gain knowledge of the therapy process and learn problem solving skills to reduce hesitancy to 
engage  in treatment. Participants may experienc e a reduction in depression as an outcome of 
completing the full depression intervention.  
However, participants may not receive  any direct benefit from participating in the study.  
Results of this study will inform the preparation of a future federal grant application proposa l 
(e.g. NIH R01) to address the effectiveness of the intervention  approach outlined her e in a 
larger scale trial . In particular, a future randomized controlled trial will be conducted to further 
test or refine the MCI inter vention for SM H/community -based services. An intervention that will 
help reduce barriers to care  and impr ove engagement in therapy would benefit the community 
greatly, particularly for those groups who experien ce many challenges in obtaining mental 
health  services such as Black adolescents in an urban setting.  