HSR#17 -4351  [05.17.17][10.05.17][07.26.18][09.09.19][10.22.19][11.04.19][01.28.20]   
  
HSR #17 -4351:  Development of an Integrated Depression and Behavioral Risk Factor Reduction  
Intervention  for Secondary  Prevention  Following  Acute  Coronary  Syndrome  
 
Significance  
Acute Coronary Syndrome (ACS) and Behavioral Risk Factors  
More than 1 million Americans survive an Acute Coronary Syndrome (ACS; unstable angina, ST and  non-ST 
elevation myocardial infarction) each year. 1 ACS survivors are at risk for recurrent events and early  mortality. 
Thus, secondary prevention follow ing ACS is a major public health issue.  Modifiable behavioral risk factors (e.g., 
smoking, inactivity, poor diet) contribute significantly to  occurrence of ACS. 2,3 Thus it is not surprising that these 
behavioral risk factors frequently occur post -ACS. For  example, 31 -37% of ACS patients smoke cigarettes 45-47 
and without intensive treatment, most return to  smoking within a year following ACS. 48-50 An estimated 57% of 
post-ACS North American patients fail to meet  physical activity recommendations and 53% fail to meet dietary 
recommendations. 8 Further, there is clear  evidence that medications (e.g., statins, beta blockers, etc.) improve 
post-ACS survival. However, 40 -75% of  patients do not take medications as prescribed. 6,7 Improving  the 
behavioral risk factor profile of post -ACS patients is imperative. Modifiable behavioral risk factors predict 
morbidity/mortality post -ACS in an additive  manner; 3,8 thus interventions targeting only one risk factor may be 
inefficient.  
 
Depression Symp toms and ACS  
Twenty percent of ACS patients meet criteria for clinical depression immediately following ACS (3x the  point 
prevalence in the US population), and an additional 11% experience significant but subclinical depression  
symptoms. 9,10 Additional pat ients who are not depressed at the time of ACS develop depression in the  following 
weeks. 51,52 Clinical depression and sub -clinical depression symptoms at the time of ACS and  in the weeks 
following independently predict post -ACS morbidity and mortality. 10-12 The most recent  meta -analysis of this issue 
found that depression was associated with an increased risk of 2.3x for all -cause  mortality, 2.7x for cardiac 
mortality, and 1.6x for cardiac event reoccurrence over 2 year follow -up. 11 These  relationships are  only slightly 
attenuated when controlling for known cardiac risk factors. 10,11  
 
Interaction of Depressed Mood and Behavioral Risk Factors Post -ACS 
In the general population, depression is associated with a higher smoking rate, 53,54 lower levels of  physic al 
activity 55,56, poor diet 57 and obesity 58, and poor adherence to prescribed medications. 59,60 Further,  depression 
symptoms predict failure of interventions targeting behavioral risk factors. For example, depression  symptoms 
predict smoking cessation fail ure. 61,62 Likewise, depression predicts drop out, poor adherence, and  poor 
outcomes in interventions targeting physical activity, diet, and/or weight loss. 63-68 Specifically among post -ACS 
patients, those with depression smoke more, 13 exercise less, 14,15 eat a less healthy diet, 16 and adhere less well to 
prescribed medications. 14,15 Recent work has demonstrated that at  least part of the relationship between 
depressed mood and post -ACS morbidity/mortality is explained  by a poor profile of modifiable behavior al risk 
factors among those with depression, 14-17,69 -72 suggesting  that depressed mood contributes to morbidity/mortality 
both directly and indirectly through  interference with post -ACS improvement in behavioral risk. However, 
successful treatment of depression  alone does not have automatic serendipitous effects on behavioral risk 
factors. 18 Thus, an integrated treatment  targeting depression and multiple behavioral risk factors may have 
unique potential to reduce long -term mortality for those with post -ACS depression.  
 
Existing Treatments for both Mood and Behavioral Risk Reduction Post -ACS 
To our knowledge, only one treatment targeting depression and multiple behavioral risk factors post -ACS has 
been tested. This treatment (“MoodCare” 21,73) provided 10 phone counseling sessions utilizing  Cognitive Therapy 
and Motivational Interviewing. MoodCare targets several behavioral risk factors (e.g.,  physical activity, diet, sleep, 
alcohol consumption). This study demonstrated the feasibility of combin ing depression treatment and behavioral 
risk factor change post -ACS. They found evidence for the efficacy of  MoodCare on depression symptoms at end 
of treatment, but mixed results at 1 -year follow -up. They did not  report the effect of MoodCare on risk fact ors or 
on cardiac health. MoodCare has several weaknesses we  considered when deciding to develop a new treatment: 
1) Cognitive Therapy and Motivational Interviewing  both require substantial training and supervision to implement 
with fidelity, thus limiting  dissemination potential;  2) No data on behavioral risk factor changes were reported, 
HSR#17 -4351  [05.17.17][10.05.17][07.26.18][09.09.19][10.22.19][11.04.19][01.28.20]   
 thus we do not know if MoodCare had any effect  on these; and 3) MoodCare focuses on a broad array of 
behavioral risk factors, rather than focusing on those  that have spec ifically been implicated in explaining the 
relationship between depression and post -ACS mortality (tobacco use, physical activity, medication adherence, 
and diet have been implicated 14-17,69 -72). 
 
Behavioral Activation and Behavioral Risk Reduction  
Behavio ral Activation (BA) is a well -established counseling treatment for depression. 28 BA is easier to  train than 
other empirically -supported counseling treatments. 29,32,74 -76 BA can be effective in relatively few  sessions 77 and 
can be delivered with fidelity by  bachelor’s level providers. 33,78 BA aims to ameliorate  depression and decrease 
avoidance behaviors (which can include smoking, overeating, and inactivity) by reengaging  patients with healthy 
sources of positive reinforcement in their environment. This is accomplished  through individually -tailored 
“activation goals” that are collaboratively set and explicitly scheduled during  counseling sessions. Behavioral risk 
factor changes can be explicitly scheduled as activation goals.  The efficacy of BA was originall y established for 
the treatment of clinical depression in psychiatric  settings. 25,26 Importantly, BA now has support for the treatment 
of depression in a variety of medical  populations, including patients with cancer, 24 macular degeneration, 79 
stroke, 22 and obesity. 23 Research  suggests that BA counseling can facilitate behavioral risk factor change among 
those with depressed mood, 34-40 including pilot data from the PI’s K23 award (see preliminary studies below).  
To our knowledge, BA for depression has not b een tested as a stand -alone treatment in post -ACS patients. 
However, there is evidence to support its use in this population. First, the core target of BA, greater  engagement 
in pleasant/valued life activities, is independently associated with improved pos t-ACS mood  trajectories. 80-83 
Second, low levels of pleasant/valued life activities have been linked to higher levels of  established ACS risk 
factors, including inflammation and hypertension. 84-86 Finally, BA techniques have been  included as components 
of successful collaborative care interventions for post -ACS depression. 41-44 The proposed study will develop a 
treatment targeting secondary prevention post -ACS that integrates BA  based treatment for depression and 
modification of behavioral ris k factors post -ACS (Behavioral  Activation for Health and Depression; BA -HD). 
 
Approach  
Aim: Conduct  an open  trial (N=20)  of BA-HD to test the feasibility  and acceptability  of our  
procedures  and obtain  initial  indications  of efficacy.  
Inclusion criteria:  1) ACS diagnosis (diagnosis of unstable angina, ST and non -ST elevation myocardial  
infarction) documented in medical record in the preceding 2 -12 months, 2) Depression diagnosis listed on  
patient problem list in patient’s medical record, a clinic ally administered PHQ -9 score of 10 or greater in the  
past 12 months indicated in the patient’s medical record, or a Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression  
scale (CESD) score ≥10 (indicating “likely major depressive disorder”); CESD will be administer ed by phone  
during screening if there is no indication of depression or PHQ -9 score within 12 months in the patient medical  
record,  3) current  non-adherence  to ≥ 1 of four behavioral  risk factors  (see below),  4) willing  to make  
immediate changes to ≥ 1 rel evant behavioral risk factors , 5) age of 18 -75, 6) lives within 1.5 hours of  
Hennepin Healthcare, and 7) fluent in English.. Exclusion criteria : 1) Limited mental competency (as indicated  
in medical chart), 2) presence of current exacerbation of psychosis/serious mental illness or suicidality, 3) in  
hospice care, 4) currently attending regular counseling targeting depression or any health behavior change,  
and 5) currently attending a cardiac rehabilitation program (those excluded for being in reha bilitation will be re - 
contacted  after completion).  We will attempt  to obtain  a sample  of at least  45% women,  which  is representative  
of the gender  distribution  of discharged  ACS patients.1 
We will define non -adherence as follows: Tobacco non -adherence = u se of any tobacco product in the  
last week. Physical activity non -adherence = engagement in < 90 minutes of moderate or greater physical  
activity per week.104 Medication non -adherence =  non-adherence based on Heart and Soul study criteria i.e.,  
taking medi cation as prescribed 75% of the time or less, forgetting medications at least 1x/week, or skipping a  
medication  at least  1x/week.  Diet non-adherence =  following  a “healthful  eating  plan”  4 or fewer  days  per 
week, eating 5 or more servings of fruits and vegetables 4 or fewer days per week, or eating high fat foods 3 or  
more  days  per week.   
Recruitment : Participants will again be recruited through review of electronic medical records at  
Hennepin Healthcare. We will pull records of recent ACS hospital disch arges, screening for depression where  
available. The ACE team may identify names from EPIC to facilitate this. We will also review records of  
outpatient cardiology (clinic and cardiac rehab to identify potential patients, (a flyer will be provided to patie nts 
and providers. Flyer attached).  Opt out letters will be sent to all participants identified through chart review and  
HSR#17 -4351  [05.17.17][10.05.17][07.26.18][09.09.19][10.22.19][11.04.19][01.28.20]   
 a research assistant will call patients on this list to screen for eligibility using the above criteria. Those that  
qualify by phone sc reen will be invited to an in person meeting to provide informed consent and then complete  
a baseline  assessment.  If study  staff are unable to  reach  potentially qualifying  patients  by phone,  study  staff 
will work with care providers in clinic or cardiac rehab to introduce the study during a clinical visit, where  
research assistant will screen in person. The research assistant will then schedule the patient for a first session  
of BA -HD coaching at the Berman center, other Hennepin Healthcare facili ty, or in patient’s home when  
needed; (Note that “Home” can be a nursing home, assisted living, rehab center, or other institution.). We may  
recontact  patients  who have  completed primary  outcome  in other  Busch  Lab studies.  
Behavioral  Activation  for Health  and Depression  (BA-HD) 
Consistent with successful BA manuals, we plan to conduct up to 10 sessions of treatment over 12  
weeks (the recommendation will be to do at least 8 sessions; scheduling of sessions will be flexible and  
conform to patient preference).  The initial two sessions will be about 50 minutes long and later sessions will be  
20-30 minutes long. Sessions can be done on site or over the phone. The recommended treatment will have 2  
sessions in person followed by phone sessions. Home visits will be offered for sessions 1 -2 if a participant  
cannot travel to on -site sessions. Study treatment will be conducted by an exercise physiologist who is a  
cardiac rehabilitation provider, a HHRI employed licensed social worker, or a licensed clinical health  
psych ologist  with clinical  privileges  at Hennepin  Healthcare.  
BA has its underpinnings in the behavioral model of depression,75 which purports that depression  
results from reduced engagement in positively reinforcing activities. According to BA theory, depression and  
related problem behaviors can be reduced by reconnecting patients with healthy sources of positive  
reinforcement. The core components of all BA treatments are 1) Assessment of participant values , 2) self- 
monitoring of mood and behavior  betw een sessions, and 3) Between session goal setting . We will integrate  
behavioral  risk factor  improvement  into these  core components.  
Assessment of participant values  is accomplished through a structured values assessment. The results  
of this assessment will  be used to guide content of goals for increasing pleasant/valued activities in order to  
improve depression. Personal values will also be used to maintain motivation for behavioral risk factor  
changes. Patents will be asked to self-monitor mood and behavio r between sessions in order to gather  
idiographic data on the relationship between mood and daily activities. Participants will also monitor the  
behavioral risk factors currently being targeted (see below). This will allow for discussion of the relationshi p 
between mood and behavioral risk factors. Participants will be provided with standard BA self -monitoring  
forms, with added sections for tracking behavioral risk factors. Between session goal setting  is accomplished  
though collaboratively defined, between -session “activation goals” (i.e., explicitly scheduled between session  
activities). Goals are pleasurable and/or value driven, but specific content is individualized. Several aspects of  
BA facilitate the completion of activation goals. Specifically, goals  are collaboratively determined, set in  
manageable increments (to increase self -efficacy through early success), and reviewed in detail during  
subsequent sessions in order to identify and problem -solve any barriers encountered.75,107 In addition, all  
activation goals are explicitly written down (e.g., to -do list, daily planner) or otherwise scheduled (e.g., entered  
into cell phone calendar). With the participant’s permission, study staff will send an automated email or text  
message  between  sessions  to remind  the patient  to complete  their goals  (in our pilot RCT (see section  3.2) 
>80% of participants were willing and able to receive goal reminders by text or email). There is emerging  
evidence th at such text messages can improve post -ACS adherence.108 Texting and emailing are included in  
the informed consent document. Further, when obtaining contact information, we will confirm with patients what  
email  address  we can use  and what  phone  numbers  they give us permission to  text message  to. 
Behavioral risk factor change goals will be set alongside depression focused goals (see below) and the  
content of goals will be integrated to maximize both mood improvement and risk factor change. For example,  
for a participant trying to quit smoking, the interventionist will ensure that goals don’t involve increased contact  
with smoking triggers. Likewise, the interventionist will encourage pleasant/valued activity content that is  
consistent with risk factor targets (e.g., walking, cooking healthy a meal with spouse) and discourage content  
inconsistent  with risk  factor  goals  (e.g.,  outings  for ice  cream).  
Risk factors will be targeted sequentially . First, the  interventionist and participant will collabo ratively  
choose the first risk factor to target. This will primarily be based on what the participant is most motivated to  
change. If the participant is equally motivated to change two or more risk factors on which they are non - 
adherent, the priority orde r will be: 1) tobacco, 2) medication adherence, 3) physical activity, 4) diet. This  
priority order is based on strength of data implicating each as a mechanism of the depression to post -ACS 
mortality relationship. 14-17,76-79 Next, the interventionist will provide brief education regarding the importance of  
that risk factor post -ACS, the recommended level of that risk factor for secondary prevention, and how their  
HSR#17 -4351  [05.17.17][10.05.17][07.26.18][09.09.19][10.22.19][11.04.19][01.28.20]   
 current behavior compares to rec ommendations. This information will be based on the latest clinical  
guidelines.109-111 The interventionist  will then collaboratively  set an attainable  goal regarding  that risk factor  until 
the next session  and ask  the participant  to self-monitor  engagement  in the risk factor.  A second and/or third  
risk factor could be targeted later in treatment if the participant makes sufficient progress on the first. The  
detailed content of coaching for each of the behavioral risk factors has been developed by the investigative  
team  and is  informed  by clinical guidelines  and our Aim I qualitative  findings.  
We will provide relevant educational content to support health behavior change. Content will be  
produced by, or closely adapted from the American  Heart Association, and in -line with current guideline -based  
care (patients will receive a packet with this information).  The behavioral targets for improving health  
behavioral will be as follows: 1) For tobacco use, we will focus on quitting tobacco completely during the study  
period. We will allow goals to partially reduce tobacco use, but only in the context of “cutting down to quit” (i.e.,  
we will support tobacco reduction goals that are first steps towards a goal of quitting completely; we  will not  
support reduction itself as a long -term goal). 2) For physical activity, we will focus on increasing overall walking  
steps per  day. 3) For medication adherence,  we will focus  increasing  days  that participants  are adherent  to 
their currently presc ribed medications. We will encourage participants to resolve issues (e.g., cost, side effects)  
in discussions with their clinical providers. 4) For diet, we will focus on making small, concrete changes to diet,  
consistent with the “small changes approach”.  For example, we might set goals like, “eat one more fruit per  
day” or “limit fast food to 2x per week”. We will not focus on weight loss as a short term goal. As we have done  
in our previous studies (K23HL107391, AHA 12CRP9840018), we will also provide to ols to facilitate behavioral  
risk factor change that are cost effective and widely used in clinical care. Specifically, we will: 1) provide  
courses  of the nicotine  patch  and/or  lozenge  to tobacco  users  who are willing  to make  a quit  attempt  in the 
next 30 days when medically indicated. Nicotine replacement is medically indicated for the vast majority of  
smokers with few exceptions (e.g., pregnancy). If nicotine replacement is provided the dose will be determined  
in consultation  with study  team  (i.e., Dr. Busch: psychologist/tobacco  expert;  Dr. Ayenew: cardiologist;  Dr. 
Vickery: family physician). Non -daily tobacco users will only be offered the nicotine lozenge.The patient’s  
primary provider will be informed through EPIC messaging that nicotine repla cement was provided to the  
participant. The study MDs/PhD may talk to the participant to obtain more information in order to assess  
appropriateness of nicotine replacement. Participants will be encouraged to contact staff if they have any side  
effects  or concerns.  Providing  nicotine replacement  is important  because  recent  data indicate that smokers  
with depression symptoms experience more nicotine withdrawal post -ACS.112 2) Provide wearable  
accelerometers/pedometers to those attempting to increase physical activity. Accelerometers/pedometers will  
facilitate physical activity monitoring and goal setting. Physical activity promotion will focus on increasing step  
counts on accelerometers/pedometers by walking more. It is safe for the vast majority of p ost-ACS patients to  
start a walking program. If the interventionist has any concern regarding the safety of walking Dr. Ayenew and  
Dr. Vickery will be available for consultation. The participant may want to work on more intense exercise,  
especially later i n the treatment protocol. If this is the case the interventionist will discuss with the patient if they  
have been cleared by their medical team to engage in the desired activity. If there is any concern regarding  
clearance for exercise, the interventionist  may contact the patient’s providers and/or consult with Dr. Ayenew  
and Dr. Vickery. 3) Provide a variety of pill boxes with and without reminder alarms. We will also offer reminder  
devices that replace pill bottles if participants prefer. We will also enc ourage those targeting medication  
adherence to set a cell phone alarm for every daily dose. Interventionists will assist participants in setting these  
cell phone/pill box/pill bottle top alarms. 4) Provide those targeting diet change  with American Heart  
Association -supported cookbooks and/or simple measurement and healthy cooking tools to facilitate healthy  
cooking.  
BA-HD will have the following structure: Session 1  will be offered in our clinic or at home (based on  
participant need and preference). Session  1 will include the following: 1) review patient history, 2) review status  
of 4 health behavior targets, 3) discussion of rationale for BA -HD, 4) choice of initial behavioral risk factor  
target, 5) brief education and history regarding chosen health behavi or, 6) introduction of self -monitoring of  
mood and behaviors (including relevant health behaviors), 7) collaboration to set one activation goal to be  
completed before the next session, 8) problem -solving of barriers to completion of goals, and 9) offering an  
automated email or text message reminder of goals. Participants will be provided with a packet of educational  
materials to keep at session 1. If applicable, interventionist will engage providers and the study team (including  
study  cardiologist)  to assess  for safety  of physical  activity  or use of nicotine  replacement.  
Session 2  will be scheduled in person if possible. Session 2  will include the following: 1) follow -up on  
between session self -monitoring and any planned activities, 2) a structured values assessment107 and a  
HSR#17 -4351  [05.17.17][10.05.17][07.26.18][09.09.19][10.22.19][11.04.19][01.28.20]   
 discussion of how resulting values relate to risk behaviors (e.g., “How will continued smoking detract from  
grandparenting?”), 3) provision of tools to aid risk behavior change, 4) collaboration to set 1 -4 activation goals  
to wor k on before the next session, 5) problem -solving of barriers to completion of goals, and 6) offering an  
automated  email or  text message  reminder  of goals.  
Sessions 3 -10 will be conducted by phone and will follow the same basic format: 1) assess depressed  
mood, activity, and relevant behavioral risk factors between sessions, 2) review adherence to activation goals  
from the previous session; 3) choose 1 -4 activation goals t hat are pleasant and/or in line with the participant’s  
values and explicitly schedule these; 4) problem -solve barriers to completion of new goals, and 5) offer an  
automated  email  or text message  reminder  of goals. Starting in  session  4 the interventionist  and participant  will 
collaboratively discuss if the next relevant behavioral risk factor should be added to goals. During the final  
coaching call (session 10 if full protocol completed), rather than assigning new activation goals, the  
interventionist will guide the participant in completion of a written guide which provides a structure for  
continuing  to work  towards  goals  independently.  
Measurement  
Participants will complete self -report, interview, and anthropomorphic measures at enrollment and at  
end-of-treatment (i.e., following 12 weeks of BA -HD coaching). In addition, at end -of-treatment a 30 -45 minute  
qualitative interview will be conducted. Participants will be compensated $30 per assessment and an extra $20  
for completion  of the  qualitative  interview.  Thus, Aim II participants  could  receive  $80 total for assessments.  
Transportation  will also be provided  or reimbursed  as well. 
Variables assessed at baseline only: Socio -demographics , including age, gender, ethnicity,  
employment, and income will be collected. Medical history  will be assessed through self -report and chart  
review and will include ACS diagnosis and treatment, and a detailed history of cardiac disease, events, and  
procedures.  Co-Morbid conditions  will also be assessed.  
Outcomes: Accep tability  will be assessed only during the end -of-treatment assessment using the 8 - 
item Client Satisfaction Questionnaire.94 Feasibility  will be assessed by rate of recruitment/retention, session  
attendance,  and completion of  between session  goals.  Depression symptoms  will be assessed using the  
CESD and the 9 -item self -report Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ -9).97 Composite Behavioral risk factor  
adherence : The Medical Outcomes Study Patient Adherence Questionnaire106 has validated items measuring  
all four of the behavioral risk factors targeted (tobacco, physical activity, diet, medication adherence) and has  
been used  in large  studies  of post-ACS risk factor  change.113 Thus,  we will use the total score  of these  items  
as a composite outcome across th e 4 risk behaviors. We will calculate the total score for the 10 more general  
items related to cardiac health 135. We will also administer brief validated questions regarding time spent  
engaging in physical activity, medication adherence, and diet quality.  Change in tobacco use will also be  
measured continuously with cigarettes/other tobacco product use per day and dichotomously using 7 -day point  
prevalence abstinence (i.e., no use at all in past 7 days). A breath sample will be used to verify  
abstinence .117,118 Participants who report using smokeless tobacco products or e -cigarettes containing nicotine  
will be considered  tobacco  users.  Secondary  outcomes : We will  also include  establi shed  self-report  
measures of affect,119, health related quality of life121, exercise capacity,122 and hypothesized BA  
mediators.123,124 Weight/height, waist circumference, and resting systolic and diastolic blood pressure wil l be 
collected  using  standard  procedures.  
Analysis  
Qualitative  Data : We will again  analyze  recordings  of end-of-treatment  qualitative  interviews  using  the 
Framework Matrix Analysis procedures described for Aim I above. However, analysis of follow -up interviews  
will explicitly  focus  on acceptability  and suggestions  for improving BA -HD.  
Feasibility  and Acceptability  Data  will be examined descriptively. Client Satisfaction Questionnaire 
score, rates of recruitment/retention, session  attendance , and completion of between session goals will be 
compared to relevant previous trials. Clinical  outcome analyses  will focus on determining if BA -HD had 
clinically meaningful effects. For example, we will  examine within participant effect size and response rates 
(using standard cut offs) on the PHQ -9. We will  examine within participant change in our composite of 
behavioral risk factors in a similar manner. We will  analyze data  in an intent -to-treat manner.  
Design  Considerations  
Choice not to use car diac rehabilitation . Cardiac rehabilitation is the gold standard for targeting behavioral risk  
factors post -ACS and also improves depression symptoms. However, only a minority of ACS patients complete  
cardiac rehabilitation and those with depression are pa rticularly unlikely to attend or complete.123 Thus, if we  
conducted our treatment in a rehabilitation setting we would miss many of those with depression post -ACS.  
Choice to enroll participants 2 -12 months after ACS . We considered enrollment of patients wh ile in the hospital  
for ACS. We chose not to because: 1) there is a high rate of spontaneous recovery of hospital assessed  
HSR#17 -4351  [05.17.17][10.05.17][07.26.18][09.09.19][10.22.19][11.04.19][01.28.20]   
 depression in the first month post -ACS,124 2) there is a high rate of development of new depression symptoms  
in the initial months fo llowing ACS,9,51 3) depression assessed 3 months post -ACS has specifically been linked  
to poor adherence to behavioral risk factors,14 and 4) many patients will not be cleared to increase physica l 
activity  immediately post -ACS.  Choice to  complete  an open trial  rather  than an RCT. We considered  
conducting an RCT as part of the proposed R03. However, our primary purpose is to get as much patient  
feedback on the BA -HD manual as possible, making an open trail a better fit. Choice of a sequential  
intervention . We considered  targeting  depression  and all  relevant behavioral  risk factors  simultaneously.  
However, simultaneous targeting of multiple risk factors is cognitively demanding for the patient and associated  
with increased drop -out.125 Given that those with depression have concentration and memory deficits, and are  
already more likely to drop -out of risk factor reduction treatments, we chose to target risk factors sequentially.  
Choice to provide free behavior change aids . Those with depression struggle with motivation, concentration,  
memory, and self -regulation, thus we provide reminder and goal tracking aids (e.g., wearable accelerom eters,  
medication reminder alarms, diet measurement/tracking tools) to help address these deficits. We provide  
nicotine replacement treatment because smokers with depression symptoms experience more nicotine  
withdrawal  post-ACS.112 
  
HSR#17 -4351  [05.17.17][10.05.17][07.26.18][09.09.19][10.22.19][11.04.19][01.28.20]   
 PROTECTION  OF HUMAN SU BJECTS  
1. Risks  to Human  Subjects  
Note: The design of Aim II will be adjusted based on the results of Aim I. Thus, the protections below will be  
reviewed and updated  as needed  following  the design of  Aim II. 
 
1a. Human  Subjects  Involvement,  Characteristics,  and Design  
AIM II Inclusion criteria:  1) ACS diagnosis (diagnosis of unstable angina, ST and non -ST elevation  
myocardial infarction) documented in medical record in the preceding 2 -12 months, 2) Depression diagnosis  
listed on patient probl em list in patient’s medical record, a clinically administered PHQ -9 score of 10 or greater  
in the past 12 months indicated in the patient’s medical record, or a Center for Epidemiologic Studies  
Depression scale (CESD) score ≥10 (indicating “likely major d epressive disorder”); CESD will be administered  
by phone during screening if there is no indication of depression or PHQ -9 score within 12 months in the  
patient medical record,  3) current non -adherence to ≥ 1 of four behavioral risk factors (see below), 4)  willing to  
make immediate changes to ≥ 1 relevant behavioral risk factors, 5) age of 18 -75, 6) lives within 1.5 hours of  
Hennepin Healthcare, and 7) fluent in English.. Exclusion criteria : 1) Limited mental competency (as indicated  
in medical chart), 2) p resence of current exacerbation of psychosis/serious mental illness or suicidality, 3) in  
hospice care, 4) currently attending regular counseling targeting depression or any health behavior change,  
and 5) currently attending a cardiac rehabilitation program (those excluded for being in rehabilitation will be re - 
contacted  after completion).  We will attempt  to obtain  a sample  of at least  45% women,  which  is representative  
of the gender  distribution  of discharged  ACS patients.1 
We will de fine non -adherence as follows: Tobacco non -adherence = use of any tobacco product  in the 
last week. Physical activity non -adherence = engagement in < 90 minutes of moderate or greater  physical 
activity per week.104 Medication non -adherence =  non-adherence based on Heart and Soul study  criteria i.e., 
taking medication as prescribed 75% of the time or less, forgetting medications at least 1x/week, or  skipping a 
medication at least 1x/week. Diet non -adherence = following a “healthful eating plan” 4 or fewer  days per 
week, eating 5 or more servings of fruits and vegetables 4 or fewer days per week, or eating high fat  foods 3  or 
more  days  per week.  
We are recruiting ACS patients who are depressed and struggle with at least one behavioral risk factor  
post-ACS because this population will be the target of our intervention.  We require patient willingness to  
change at least one risk factor because the treatment is designed for patients with some motivation to change.  
We limited  enrollment  to ages  18-75 because  young  children and  geriatric  patients  may need  tailored  
interventions.  Fluency in English is required because (at this time) the BA -HD manual and forms are only in  
English and clinical supervisors are mono -lingual English speakers. Those with limited  mental competency, a  
severe mental illness that would interfere with participation, or suicidality are excluded because these groups  
likely require different counseling strategies and/or a higher level of counseling care than provided by the  
proposed inte rvention.  Our treatment manual was not designed for use in these populations. Those in hospice  
are excluded because the BA -HD manual does not address end of life issues. Those currently attending  
counseling  for depression  or health  behavior  change  are excluded  because  these  concurrent  treatments  would  
confound  primary  outcomes.  
For both Aims I and II , we will enroll individuals of all racial and ethnic backgrounds. We plan to enroll  
ratios of minority groups that are consistent with the population of Minneapolis, MN. According to latest United  
States Census data, the racial composition of individuals living in Minneapolis, MN is 63.8% White, 18.6%  
Black or African American, 5.6% Asian, 2.0% American Indian/Alaska Native, 0.0% Native Hawaiian/Other  
Pacific Islander,  and 4.4%  two or more  races.  The ethnic  composition  of individuals  living in  Minneapolis  MN is 
10.5% Hispanic/Latino and 86.0% Non -Hispanic/Latino. Thus, we expect that 36.2% of the sample will be  
members of a racial minority group, and 10.5% of the sample will be of Hispanic/Latino ethnicity. We expect to  
enroll a sample that is 45% women which is representative of the gender distribution of ACS patients .1,45 
Please  see the  Targeted/Planned Enrollment  Table  for a detailed distribution.  
Enrollment, Aim II : Participants will again be recruited through review of electronic medical records at  
Hennepin Healthcare. We will pull records of recent ACS hospital discharges that also have depression listed  
as a diagnosis. The Analytics Center of Excellence (ACE) team may identify names from EPIC to facilitate this.  
We will also review records of outpatient cardiology and ask outpatient cardiology providers to direct us to  
records of patients who might qualify. A research assistant will call patients to screen for eligibility using the  
above criteria. In addition, patients will be invited to call a research assistant themselves via use of a  
recruitment flyer will be provided to card iology patients and providers (See attached). This flyer will be given to  
providers  for distribution  to interested  patients and  posted  in clinic  waiting  rooms.  
Those who qualify by phone screen will be invited to an in person meeting to provide informed co nsent  
HSR#17 -4351  [05.17.17][10.05.17][07.26.18][09.09.19][10.22.19][11.04.19][01.28.20]   
 and then complete a baseline assessment. The research assistant will then schedule the patient for a first  
session of BA -HD coaching at the Berman center or other Hennepin Healthcare facility (or in patient’s home  
when  needed).  
Procedure, Aim II : Following informed consent, participants will complete self -report, interview, and  
anthropomorphic measures at enrollment and at end -of-treatment (i.e., following 12 weeks of BA -HD 
coaching). In addition, at end -of-treatment a 30 minute qualitative interview will be conducted. Qualitative  
questions will focus on the participants experience throughout the study (e.g., How was the screening  
process? How was the consent and enrollment process? What did you like and dislike about the coaching  
program?, etc). Data will also be pulled from the medical chart. Participants will be compensated $30 per  
assessment and an extra $20 for completion of the qualitative interview. Thus, participants completing could  
receive  $80 total for assessment completion.  Transportation  will also be provided  or reimbursed  as well. 
Consistent with successful BA manuals and our Aim 1 qualitative data, we plan to conduct a 10 session  
treatment  over 12 weeks (weekly  for the first 8 sessions  and bi-weekly  for the final  two). The initial  two 
sessions will be about 50 minutes long and later sessions will be 20 -30 minutes long. We plan a treatment that  
is primarily  over the phone,  but allowing for  the 1st and 2nd sessions  in person  and in home  if needed  per 
patient preferences. Dr. Busch, a Hennepin Healthcare employed exercise physiologist, and/or an HHRI  
employed  social worker  will conduct  all treatment  in the  proposed study.  
 
1b. Sources  of Materials  
All data collection  will follow  IRB and HIPAA  guidelines.  Data  will be collected  directly  from participants  and from 
medical records. Data will include participant responses to interviews and self -report questionnaires  (including 
screening questions), expired air samples  (aim II for those focused on tobacco cessation only, i.e.,  carbon 
monoxide  testing), physical measurements  (aim II only, e.g., blood pressure, height, weight), and data pulled from 
medical charts . Coaching sessions (aim II only) and qualitative interviews (aim I only) will also be  audio  recorded  
(explicit  permission  to do  so will be obtained).  
As participants will be recruited via chart review (medical records will be screened in order to identify  
patients  who may meet  inclusion  criteria), we  will apply  for a Protected  Health  Information  (PHI)  waiver  from 
our IRB. All data will be treated  as confidential  and will never  be stored  or reported  in association  with identifying  
information. Participant responses to interviews and self -report questionnaires and information obtained from  
medical charts will be entered directly into a secure electronic database. Only the PI, Co -Is, and study staff that  
have completed training in the ethical conduct of research will obtain or have access to identifiable information.  
All data will be de -identified and filed according to participant ID num bers in secure storage. Any forms with  
identifying information (e.g., signed informed consent forms) will be stored separately. Only de -identified data  
will be published.  
 
1c. Potential  Risks  
Nicotine replacement side effects (Aim II only) : All subjects in  Aim II who are tobacco users, ready to  
quit in 30 days, and cleared for use by the study team will be offered a free course of nicotine patches and/or  
the nicotine lozenge. Nicotine replacement treatment has been in clinical use for 20 years. It is availa ble over  
the counter and has been judged to be generally safe and efficacious with very few contraindications. Nicotine  
replacement has been found to be medically safe for use with cardiac patients,126 including specifically among  
ACS patients .127,128 Nicotine replacement is medically indicated for the vast majority of smokers with few  
exceptions (e.g., pregnancy). However, there are some reports indicating that nicotine replacement use poses  
risk to some subgroups of ACS patients in some situations129. Thus, if nicotine replacement is provided, the  
dose  will be determined  in consultation  with study  team  (i.e., Dr.  Busch:  psychologist/tobacco  expert;  Dr. 
Ayenew: cardiologist; Dr. Vickery:  family physician). The patient’s primary provider will be informed through  
EPIC messaging that nicotine replacement was provided to the participant. The study MDs/PhD may talk to the  
patient to obtain more information in order to assess appropriateness of  nicotine replacement. Initial dosing will  
follow FDA instructions/clinical guidelines, but lower doses may be provided if recommended by Drs. Busch,  
Ayenew, or Vickery. Staff will be trained to explain the purpose of nicotine replacement, use, and side ef fects.  
Common side effects of the patch include local skin irritation at the site of the patch and disturbed or vivid  
dreams.  Common  side effects of  the nicotine  lozenge  include  mouth  problems,  indigestion, and  sore throat.  
Less common reactions to both the patch and lozenge includes allergic reactions. If the dose of nicotine  
replacement is too large or if the participant continues to smoke at a high level while using the nicotine  
replacement, they may experience symptoms of nicotine overuse including nausea, irregular heartbeat or  
palpitation, and dizziness. The risk of using nicotine replacement in the current study is judged to be very  
minor.  
Nicotine Withdrawal Symptoms After Quitting (Aim II only):  There is a strong likelihood that most s tudy 
HSR#17 -4351  [05.17.17][10.05.17][07.26.18][09.09.19][10.22.19][11.04.19][01.28.20]   
 participants who quit smoking will experience some nicotine withdrawal symptoms, including anxiety,  
restlessness, anger, irritability, sadness, problems concentrating, appetite change and weight gain, insomnia,  
and decreased  heart  rate. Generally,  these reactions are  temporary  and pose  no serious health  risks.  
Injury from increasing physical activity (Aim II only) : It is possible that physical activity post -ACS could  
trigger a recurrent cardiac event or cause other injury. The risk of injury from incre asing physical activity in the  
current study is judged to be very minor, given that we will focus on increasing walking (rather than more  
intense  exercise).  
Confidentiality or loss of privacy . We will collect potentially sensitive information about partici pants; if  
released inappropriately, participants may experience embarrassment or distress. The seriousness of the  
consequences would depend on the nature of the information revealed and to whom the information was  
revealed. Given the numerous steps we take  to protect participant confidentiality, we think the risk of a breach  
of confidentiality  is low. 
Discomfort or distress when completing assessment and treatment procedures . Some participants may  
feel uncomfortable  or distressed  answering  personal  or private  questions  during  assessment or  treatment.  
Some participants may also feel uncomfortable or distressed due to the collection of physical measures (e.g.,  
weight).  In our previous  studies,  when  individuals  did report  discomfort  in these  situations,  it was mild.  
Worsening of depression and emergent suicidality . The post -ACS period can be a high stress time.  
Although not likely resulting from trial participation, it is likely that a minority of participants will experience  
worsening  of depression  or episodes  of suicidality  during  this study.  
HSR#17 -4351  [05.17.17][10.05.17][07.26.18][09.09.19][10.22.19][11.04.19][01.28.20]   
  
2. Adequacy of Protection Against Risk  
2a. Recruitment  and Informed Consent  
Participants  who appear  to meet  inclusion/exclusion  criteria,  based  on review  of their electronic  medical  
records, will be called by study staff. At first contact, all participants will first be given a brief verbal overview of  
the study. If participants agree to be screened and pass the  screening questions based on inclusion/exclusion  
criteria they will be invited to participate. Written informed consent (including a description of the nature,  
purpose, risks, and benefits of the study) will be obtained from participants before initiating assessment. The  
voluntary nature of the study and the participant’s right to withdrawal at any time will be stressed during the  
consent process; this information will be provided to participants in written form at the time of consent. As part  
of the consent process for Aim II, we will also ask five questions about the study. The staff member will clarify  
any misunderstandings that emerge during this process. Those who answer fewer than four questions correctly  
(after two tries) will be considered  to lack the capacity to consent to the research. Research assistants and  
study  interventionists  will obtain consent.  
 
2b. Protections  Against  Risk  
Minimization of nicotine replacement side effects : Nicotine replacement is generally safe for patients  
with stable cardiac disease126 and with post -ACS patients .132,133 However, there are some reports indicating  
that nicotine replacement use poses risk to some subgroups of ACS patients in some situati ons129. Thus, we  
will minimize the occurrence of any serious medical side effects by having the study provider team (i.e.,  
Dr. Busch: psychologist/tobacco expert; Dr. Ayenew: cardiologist; Dr. Vickery: family physician) review if the  
patient is appropriate  for nicotine replacement and if so what the dose should be. Initial dosing will follow FDA  
instructions  and clinical  guidelines, but  lower doses  may be provided  if recommended  by the study  team.  
Participants will agree to consult with their outpatient medical providers regarding the safety of using nicotine  
replacement if their medical status changes after nicotine replacement is initially provided. Further, staff will be  
trained to explain the purpose of nicotine replacement, procedure for u se, and side effects, as well as how to  
use nicotine  replacement in a  manner  that minimizes  risk. 
To minimize skin reactions related to the nicotine patch, participants will be instructed to move the site  
of patch placement each day and to not repeat site use for at least one week. Smokers will be instructed to  
remove the patch before bed if it significantly interferes with sleep. To minimize lozenge side effects,  
participants  will be instructed  in proper  use in detail (i.e.,  do not chew  the lozenge).  
Nicot ine replacement  dose  may be adjusted  downward  if there  is significant nausea  or other  reactions.  
Participants with severe side effects will be asked to discontinue nicotine replacement use and discuss with  
study  team  and/or  their providers before continuing.  
Only participants  who are ready  to quit within  30 days  will be provided  with nicotine  replacement.  
Participants will be allowed to use the nicotine lozenge to reduce smoking in preparation for a quit day (i.e.,  
consistent  with a “cut  down to  quit” approach.  
Minimization of nicotine withdrawal symptoms after quitting : Participants who decide to use the nicotine  
replacement will be told that it will reduce but not entirely eliminate  withdrawal symptoms. Participants will be  
instructed to call their outpatient physician in the case of severe withdrawal reactions. Withdrawal symptoms  
typically  abate within  1 to 2 weeks  of quitting and  are not  medically  dangerous.  
Minimization of potent ial for injury from increasing physical activity . BA-HD focuses on increasing self - 
paced walking (i.e., goals well be stated in steps per day on wearable accelerometers/pedometers), which is  
safe for the vast majority of patients who are ≥3 months post -ACS. If the interventionist has any concern  
regarding the safety of walking Dr. Ayenew and Dr. Vickery will be available for consultation. The patient may  
want to work on more intense exercise, especially later in the treatment protocol. If this is the case the 
interventionist will discuss with the patient if they have been cleared by their medical team to engage in the  
desired activity. If there is any concern regarding clearance for exercise, the interventionist may contact the  
patient’s providers  and/or  consult  with Dr. Ayenew  and Dr.  Vickery.  
Minimization of loss of confidentiality/privacy : All data and records will be safeguarded according to the  
strict privacy/confidentiality policies of Hennepin Healthcare Research Institute’s Institutional Review Board  
(IRB). Confidentiality will be maintained by numerically coding all data, disguising identifying information, and  
keeping data in secure electronic locations or locked in file drawers. All electronic data will be numerically  
coded and stored on a password  protected computer in a secure research space. All paper forms will be stored  
in locked file cabinets in a locked room. Names of participants will be stored separately. Participant information  
will be accessible  only to research  staff,  who are pledged  to confidentiality  and complete  training  in the ethical  
HSR#17 -4351  [05.17.17][10.05.17][07.26.18][09.09.19][10.22.19][11.04.19][01.28.20]   
  
conduct of research (i.e., both HIPAA and CITI trainings). Dr. Busch will also personally train staff on  
maintenance  of participant  confidentiality.  Identifying  information  will not be reported  in any publication.  
Minimization of discomfort or distress when completing assessment and treatment procedures : We will  
take three  specific  steps  to reduce  the possibility  of discomfort  or distress:  
Study will be clearly explained . A detailed explanation of the study, including what study participation  
would involve, the nature of the questions participants will be asked to answer, the nature of measurements,  
and the right to withdrawal from the study at any time without penalty, will be provided to the participants, both  
verbally and in writing (through the informed consent form). Participants will be encouraged to ask questions  
about the study. Individuals who are uncomfortable answering these types of questions, assessments, or  
interventions likely will not choose to participate. Those who choose to participate but are very uncomfortable  
with the questions, assessments or interventions will likely refuse these assessments or choose to withdrawal  
from the study.  
Private setting . To help ensure clients’ comfort, they will answer survey questions and complete  
physical  measurements  in a private  setting.  Thus,  they should  not be concerned  that another  individual  would  
be able to  observe these  assessments.  
Staff Training . All staff intera cting with participants will be trained by Dr. Busch to ask questions and  
complete  assessments  in a sensitive  manner  and be supportive  to any participant  experiencing discomfort  or 
distress.  
Minimization of risk from worsening of depression and emergent suicidality . There is no evidence  
indicating that participation in this trial will worsen depression or cause suicidality. However, given that  
post-ACS period can be a high stress time, it is likely that a minority of participants will experience worsening  
of depression during this study. A smaller minority may experience episodes of suicidality. Thus, we will  
monitor  and respond  to these issues  in an ethically  sensitive manner.  
For aim II, we are only enrolling participants  who are not currently  in counseling  for depression.  
Participants taking an anti -depressant medication at baseline and during the study will be allowed to  
participate. For ethical reasons, once enrolled we will not restrict anti -depressant medication treatment seeking  
in any way  during the study (i.e., we will not ask participants to refrain from starting antidepressant medication  
during  the study).  We will  carefully  track  antidepressant  medication seeking  outside  of the study  and will 
control  for outside treatment  in analyses  as appropriate.  
All participants will be assessed for depression using the PHQ -9 at all assessments. If a participant  
continues to report significant depression (i.e., PHQ -9 ≥10) at the end -of-treatment assessment, staff will 1)  
encourage the parti cipant to discuss these symptoms with his or her medical providers and 2) provide a list of  
community  psychiatric  treatment  referrals.  
If a participant reports active suicidality (i.e., any recent suicidal attempts, suicidal gestures, or self - 
injurious behavior; any current plan or intent to engage in suicidal or self -injurious behavior) to any study staff  
at any time point, the participant will be assessed by Dr. Busch (a licensed clinical psychologist). Dr. Busch will  
assess the participant a nd respond in an appropriate and ethical manner according to the standards of care for  
suicide  prevention  (e.g.,  referral  to immediate  emergency  psychiatric  care if danger  to self is imminent).  
3. Potential  Benefits  of the Proposed  Research  
Potential benefits  for Aim II participants include free treatment with the potential to increase the  
likelihood of behavioral risk factor reduction, which could in turn extend their lives. Aim II participants will also  
receive free depression coaching, which can improve the ir quality of life. By participating in the research, all  
participants  (both  Aims  I and II) will also benefit  from knowing  they may ultimately  be helping  others  as they will 
have helped us develop and test an intervention. The costs of participating in the research will be minimized  
through our extensive efforts to maintain confidentiality, reduce discomfort or distress, and minimize medical  
complications. Overall, it is expected that the potential benefits to participants in the propose d study will  
outweigh  potential risks.  
4. Importance  of the Knowledge  to be Gained  
The results of the proposed study will further our knowledge regarding 1) the relationship between  
behavioral risk factors and mood in post -ACS patients and 2) the utility of integrating Behavioral Activation  
based depression treatment with behavioral risk factor reduction for cardiac patients. This knowledge could  
lead to a reduction in post -ACS mortality rates. As discussed above, we expect that these benefits will  
outweigh  potential risks  to participants.  
5. Data  and Safety  Monitoring  Plan  
HSR#17 -4351  [05.17.17][10.05.17][07.26.18][09.09.19][10.22.19][11.04.19][01.28.20]   
  
We expect the proposed trial to be considered minimal risk by Hennepin Healthcare Research  
Institute’s IRB. Given that the proposed Aim II research is a single site t rial and our expectation of a minimal  
risk designation, the proposed trial does not meet NIH criteria requiring establishment of a formal Data and  
Safety Monitoring Board. However, we have a detailed data and safety monitoring plan for aim II to ensure the  
safety of all participants and the validity and integrity of the data. (Note: If our Institutional Review Board or the  
study sponsor unexpectedly decides that the proposed study includes more than minimal risk to participants,  
we will convene a Data and Safety Monitoring Board before recruitment begins.) The Data and Safety  
Monitoring  plan is  provided in  a separate attachment.  
6. ClinicalTrials.gov  Requirements  
The proposed  clinical  trial will be registered  at www.clinicaltrials.gov.  
HSR#17 -4351  [05.17.17][10.05.17][07.26.18][09.09.19][10.22.19][11.04.19][01.28.20]   
  
Amendment  2: H3 Study  Issued  Cell Phone  Protocol  
If at time of recruitment or any time during treatment/follow -up study staff determine that the participant does  
not have access to or has lost access to regular phone access, the participant may be offered use of a H3 
provided cell phone. Participants who are issued a study phone will complete the H3 Study Issued Cell Phone  
Agreement form. Patient will be instructed to return the H3 provided phone to staff  upon completion of the 12w  
outcomes visit or at any time if it is determined that the participant no longer qualifies for the study or is not  
adhering to the guidelines outlined in the H3 Study Issued Cell Phone Agreement. Upon return of the device,  
participants  will qualify  for a $20 stipend.  
 
See Appendix  A: Study  Issued  Cell Phone  Agreement.  
HSR#17 -4351  [05.17.17][10.05.17][07.26.18][09.09.19][10.22.19][11.04.19][01.28.20]   
  
References  
 
1. Go AS, Mozaffarian D, Roger VL, et al. Heart disease  and stroke statistics --2014 update: a report  
from  the American  Heart  Association.  Circulation. Jan 21 2014;129(3):e28 -e292.  
2. Lichtenstein AH, Appel LJ, Brands M, et al. Diet and lifestyle recommendations revision 2006: a  
scientific statement from the Ameri can Heart Association Nutrition Committee. Circulation. Jul 4  
2006;114(1):82 -96. 
3. Jensen MK, Chiuve SE, Rimm EB, et al. Obesity, behavioral lifestyle factors, and risk of acute  
coronary  events. Circulation. Jun 17 2008;117(24):3062 -3069.  
4. Mohiuddin SM, Mooss  AN, Hunter CB, Grollmes TL, Cloutier DA, Hilleman DE. Intensive  
smoking cessation intervention reduces mortality in high -risk smokers with cardiovascular  
disease.  Chest. Feb 2007;131(2):446 -452. 
5. Eisenberg MJ, Grandi SM, Gervais A, et al. Bupropion for smo king cessation in patients  
hospitalized with acute myocardial infarction: a randomized, placebo -controlled trial. Journal of  
the American College  of Cardiology. Feb 5 2013;61(5):524 -532. 
6. Desai  NR, Choudhry  NK. Impediments  to adherence  to post myocardial  infarction  medications.  
Curr  Cardiol  Rep. Jan 2013;15(1):322.  
7. Cheng K, Ingram N, Keenan J, Choudhury RP. Evidence of poor adherence to secondary  
prevention after acute coronary syndromes: possible remedies through the application of new  
technologies.  Open Heart. 2015;2(1):e000166.  
8. Chow CK, Jolly S, Rao -Melacini P, Fox KA, Anand SS, Yusuf S. Association of diet, exercise, and  
smoking modification with risk of early cardiovascular events after acute coronary syndromes.  
Circulation.  Feb 16 2 010;121(6):750 -758. 
9. Thombs BD, Bass EB, Ford DE, et al. Prevalence of depression in survivors of acute myocardial  
infarction.  J Gen Intern  Med. Jan 2006;21(1):30 -38. 
10. Lichtman JH, Froelicher ES, Blumenthal JA, et al. Depression as a risk factor for poor pro gnosis  
among patients with acute coronary syndrome: systematic review and recommendations: a  
scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation. Mar 25 2014;129(12):1350 - 
1369.  
11. Meijer A, Conradi HJ, Bos EH, Thombs BD, van Melle JP, de Jo nge P. Prognostic association of  
depression following myocardial infarction with mortality and cardiovascular events: a meta - 
analysis  of 25  years  of research.  General  hospital  psychiatry.  May -Jun 2011;33(3):203 -216. 
12. van Melle JP, de Jonge P, Spijkerman TA , et al. Prognostic association of depression following  
myocardial  infarction  with  mortality  and cardiovascular  events:  a meta -analysis.  Psychosom  Med.  
Nov-Dec 2004;66(6):814 -822. 
13. Doyle  F, Rohde  D, Rutkowska  A, Morgan  K, Cousins  G, McGee  H. Systematic  review  and meta - 
analysis of the impact of depression on subsequent smoking cessation in patients with coronary  
heart  disease:  1990 to  2013. Psychosom  Med. Jan 2014;76(1):44 -57. 
14. Kronish IM, Rieckmann  N, Halm EA, et al. Persistent depression affects adherence to secondary  
prevention behaviors after acute coronary syndromes. J Gen Intern Med. Nov 2006;21(11):1178 - 
1183.  
15. Ye S, Muntner P, Shimbo D, et al. Behavioral mechanisms, elevated depressive symptom s, and the  
risk for myocardial infarction or death in individuals with coronary heart disease: the REGARDS  
(Reason for Geographic and Racial Differences in Stroke) study. Journal of the American College  
of Cardiology. Feb 12 2013;61(6):622 -630. 
16. Chrysohoou C, Liontou C, Aggelopoulos P, et al. Mediterranean diet mediates the adverse effect  
of depressive  symptomatology  on short -term  outcome  in elderly  survivors  from  an acute  coronary  
event.  Cardiol Res Pract. 2011;2011:429487.  
HSR#17 -4351  [05.17.17][10.05.17][07.26.18][09.09.19][10.22.19][11.04.19][01.28.20]   
  
17. Brummett BH, Babyak MA, Siegler IC, Mark DB, Williams RB, Barefoot JC. Effect of smoking  
and sedentary behavior on the association between depressive symptoms and mortality from  
coronary  heart  disease.  The American  journal of  cardiology.  Sep 1  2003;92(5):529 -532. 
18. Kroni sh IM, Rieckmann N, Burg MM, Edmondson D, Schwartz JE, Davidson KW. The effect of  
enhanced depression care on adherence to risk -reducing behaviors after acute coronary  
syndromes:  findings  from  the COPES  trial. Am Heart  J. Oct 2012;164(4):524 -529. 
19. Berkman L F, Blumenthal J, Burg M, et al. Effects of treating depression and low perceived social  
support  on clinical  events  after  myocardial  infarction:  the Enhancing  Recovery  in Coronary  Heart  
Disease Patients  (ENRICHD)  Randomized  Trial.  JAMA.  Jun 18 2003 ;289(23):3106 -3116.  
20. O'Neil A, Hawkes AL, Atherton JJ, et al. Telephone -delivered health coaching improves anxiety  
outcomes after myocardial infarction: the 'ProActive Heart' trial. Eur J Prev Cardiol. Jan 
2014;21(1):30 -38. 
21. O'Neil A, Taylor B, Hare DL, et a l. Long -term efficacy of a tele -health intervention for acute  
coronary syndrome patients with depression: 12 -month results of the MoodCare randomized  
controlled  trial. Eur J Prev  Cardiol. Sep 2015;22(9):1111 -1120.  
22. Mitchell PH, Veith  RC, Becker KJ, et al. Brief psychosocial -behavioral intervention with  
antidepressant reduces poststroke depression significantly more than usual care with  
antidepressant: living well with stroke: randomized, controlled trial. Stroke; a journal of cerebral  
circulation.  Sep 2009;40(9):3073 -3078.  
23. Pagoto S, Schneider KL, Whited MC, et al. Randomized controlled trial of behavioral treatment  
for comorbid obesity and depression in women: the Be Active Trial. Int J Obes (Lond). Nov 
2013;37(11):1427 -1434.  
24. Hopko DR,  Armento ME, Robertson SM, et al. Brief behavioral activation and problem -solving  
therapy for depressed breast cancer patients: randomized trial. Journal of consulting and clinical  
psychology.  Dec 2011;79(6):834 -849. 
25. Dimidjian  S, Barrera M, Jr., Martell C, Munoz RF, Lewinsohn PM. The origins and current  
status  of behavioral  activation  treatments  for depression.  Annu  Rev Clin Psychol.  2011;7:1 -38. 
26. Dimidjian S, Hollon  SD, Dobson KS, et al. Randomized trial of behavioral activation, cognitive  
therapy, and antidepressant medication in the acute treatment of adults with major depression. J 
Consult  Clin Psychol. Aug 2006;74(4):658 -670. 
27. Ekers D, Richards D, Gilbody S. A met a-analysis of randomized trials of behavioural treatment of  
depression.  Psychological medicine. May 2008;38(5):611 -623. 
28. Ekers  D, Webster  L, Van Straten  A, Cuijpers P,  Richards  D, Gilbody  S. Behavioural  activation  
for depression; an update of meta -analysis of effectiveness and sub group analysis. PloS one.  
2014;9(6):e100100.  
29. Alexopoulos GS, Raue PJ, Kiosses DN, Seirup JK, Banerjee S, Arean PA. Comparing engage with  
PST in late -life major depression: a preliminary report. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. May  
2015;23(5):506 -513. 
30. Ekers D, Dawson MS, Bailey E. Dissemination of behavioural activation for depression to mental  
health nurses: training evaluation and benchmarked clin ical outcomes. J Psychiatr Ment Health  
Nurs.  Mar 2013;20(2):186 -192. 
31. Ekers D, Richards D, McMillan D, Bland JM, Gilbody S. Behavioural activation delivered by the  
nonspecialist: Phase II randomised controlled trial. The British Journal of Psychiatry.  
2011; 198(1):66 -72. 
32. Hollon SD. Behavioral activation treatment for depression: A commentary. Clinical Psychology:  
Science  and Practice. 2001;8:271 -274. 
33. Chowdhary N, Anand A, Dimidjian S, et al. The Healthy Activity Program lay counsellor  
delivered  treatment  for severe  depression  in India:  systematic  development  and randomised  
evaluation.  Br J Psychiatry. Apr 2016;208(4):381 -388. 
HSR#17 -4351  [05.17.17][10.05.17][07.26.18][09.09.19][10.22.19][11.04.19][01.28.20]   
  
34. Daughters SB, Braun AR, Sargeant  MN, et al. Effectiveness of a brief behavioral treatment for  
inner -city illicit  drug  users  with elevated  depressive  symptoms:  the life enhancement  treatment  for 
substance  use (LETS Act!).  The Journal of  clinical psychiatry.  Jan 2008;69(1):122 -129. 
35. Daughters SB, Magidson JF, Schuster RM, Safren SA. ACT HEALTHY: A Combined Cognitive - 
Behavioral Depression and Medication Adherence Treatment for HIV -Infected Substance Users.  
Cogn  Behav  Pract. Aug 1 2010;17(3):309 -321. 
36. Mimiaga MJ, Rei sner SL, Pantalone DW, O'Cleirigh C, Mayer KH, Safren SA. A pilot trial of  
integrated behavioral activation and sexual risk reduction counseling for HIV -uninfected men  
who have sex with men abusing crystal methamphetamine. AIDS Patient Care STDS. Nov 
2012; 26(11):681 -693. 
37. Magidson JF, Gorka SM, MacPherson L, et al. Examining the effect of the Life Enhancement  
Treatment  for Substance  Use (LETS  ACT)  on residential  substance  abuse  treatment  retention.  
Addictive  behaviors. Jun 2011;36(6):615 -623. 
38. Pagoto SL, Schn eider K, Olendzki B, Spates CR, Ma Y. Initial investigation of behavioral  
activation  treatment  for comorbid  major  depressive  disorder  and obesity.  Psychotherapy:  Theory,  
Research,  Practice, Training. 2008;45(3):410 -415. 
39. MacPherson L, Tull MT, Matusiewicz AK, et al. Randomized controlled trial of behavioral  
activation smoking cessation treatment for smokers with elevated depressive symptoms. Journal of  
consulting  and clinical psychology.  Feb 2010;78(1):55 -61. 
40. Banducci AN, Lejuez CW, MacPherson L . Pilot of a Behavioral Activation -Enhanced Smoking  
Cessation Program for Substance Users With Elevated Depressive Symptoms in Residential  
Treatment.  Addictions newsletter. Summer  2013;2013:16 -20. 
41. Davidson KW, Rieckmann N, Clemow L, et al. Enhanced depress ion care for patients with acute  
coronary  syndrome  and persistent  depressive  symptoms:  coronary  psychosocial  evaluation  studies  
randomized  controlled trial.  Arch Intern  Med.  Apr 12 2010;170(7):600 -608. 
42. Davidson KW, Bigger JT, Burg MM, et al. Centralized, stepped, patient preference -based  
treatment for patients with post -acute coronary syndrome depression: CODIACS vanguard  
randomized  controlled  trial.  JAMA  internal  medicine.  Jun 10 2013;173(11):997 -1004.  
43. Huffman JC, Mastromauro  CA, Sowden GL, Wittmann C, Rodman R, Januzzi JL. A  
collaborative  care depression  management  program  for cardiac  inpatients:  depression  
characteristics  and in-hospital  outcomes.  Psychosomatics.  Jan-Feb 2011;52(1):26 -33. 
44. Huffman  JC, Mastromauro  CA, Sowden  G, Fricchione  GL, Healy  BC, Januzzi  JL. Impact  of a 
depression care management program for hospitalized cardiac patients. Circulation.  
Cardiovascular  quality  and outcomes. Mar  2011;4(2):198 -205. 
45. Khot UN, Khot MB, Bajzer  CT, et al. Prevalence of conventional risk factors in patients with  
coronary  heart  disease.  JAMA. Aug 20  2003;290(7):898 -904. 
46. Control CfD. Cigarette Smoking Among Adults - United States, 2006. Morbidity and Mortality  
Weekly  Report. 2007;56:1157 -1161.  
47. Shaho umian  TA, Phillips  BR, Backus  LI. Cigarette  Smoking,  Reduction  and Quit  Attempts:  
Prevalence  Among  Veterans  With  Coronary  Heart  Disease.  Prev  Chronic  Dis. 2016;13:E41.  
48. Rigotti  NA, Munafo  MR,  Stead  LF. Smoking  cessation  interventions  for hospitalized  smokers:  a 
systematic review. Archives  of internal  medicine. Oct 13 2008;168(18):1950 -1960.  
49. Dawood N, Vaccarino V, Reid KJ, Spertus JA, Hamid N, Parashar S. Predictors of smoking  
cessation after a myocardial infarction: the role of institutional smoking cessation programs in  
improving  success. Arch Intern  Med. Oct 13 2008;168(18):1961 -1967.  
50. Prugger C, Wellmann J, Heidrich J, et al. Readiness for smoking cessation in coronary heart  
disease patients across Europe: Results from the EURO ASPIRE III survey. Eur J Prev Cardiol.  
Dec 16 2014.  
HSR#17 -4351  [05.17.17][10.05.17][07.26.18][09.09.19][10.22.19][11.04.19][01.28.20]   
  
51. Parker GB, Hilton TM, Walsh WF, et al. Timing is everything: the onset of depression and acute  
coronary  syndrome  outcome.  Biological psychiatry. Oct 15 2008;64(8):660 -666. 
52. Zuidersma M, Thombs BD, de Jonge P. Onset and recurrence of depression as predictors of  
cardiovascular prognosis in depressed acute coronary syndrome patients: a systematic review.  
Psychother  Psychosom.  2011;80(4):227 -237. 
53. Anda RF, Williamson DF, Escobedo LG, Mast EE, Giovino GA, Remington PL. Depression and  
the dynamics  of smoking.  A national  perspective.  JAMA.  Sep 26 1990;264(12):1541 -1545.  
54. Wilhelm K, Mitchell P, Slade T, Brownhill S, Andrews G. Prevalence and correlates of DSM -IV 
major depression in an Australian national survey. Journal of affective disorders. Jul 
2003;75(2):155 -162. 
55. Sieverdes JC, Ray BM, Sui X, et al. Association between leisure time physical activity and  
depressive  symptoms  in men.  Medicine  and science  in sports  and exercise.  Feb 2012;44(2):260 -265. 
56. Farmer  M, Locke  B, Moscicki  E, Dannenberg  A, Larson  D, Radloff L.  Physical  activity  and 
depressive symptoms: the NHANES I Epidemiologic Follow -up Study. American Journal of  
Epidemiology.  1988;128(6):1340 -1351.  
57. Akbaraly  TN, Brunner  EJ, Ferrie  JE, Marmot  MG, Kivimaki  M, Singh -Manoux  A. Dietary  
pattern  and depressive  symptoms  in middle  age. Br J Psychiatry.  Nov 2009;195(5):408 -413. 
58. Luppino FS, de Wit LM, Bouvy PF, et al. Overweight, obesity, and depression: a systematic  
review  and meta -analysis  of longitudinal  studies.  Arch  Gen Psychiatry.  Mar  2010;67(3):220 -229. 
59. Grenard JL, Munjas BA, Adams JL,  et al. Depression and medication adherence in the treatment  
of chronic diseases in the United States: a meta -analysis. Journal of general internal medicine. Oct 
2011;26(10):1175 -1182.  
60. DiMatteo  MR, Lepper HS, Croghan TW. Depression is a risk factor for noncompliance with  
medical treatment: meta -analysis of the effects of anxiety and depression on patient adherence.  
Archives  of internal  medicine. Jul 24 2000;160(14):2101 -2107.  
61. Kahler CW, Brown RA, Ramsey SE, et al. Negative mood, depressive symptoms, and major  
depression after smoking cessation treatment in smokers with a history of major depressive  
disorder.  Journal of  abnormal  psychology. Nov 2002;111(4):670 -675. 
62. Niaura  R, Britt  DM,  Shad el WG,  Goldstein  M, Abrams  D, Brown  R. Symptoms  of depression  and 
survival experience among three samples of smokers trying to quit. Psychol Addict Behav. Mar 
2001;15(1):13 -17. 
63. Gonzalez  JS, Peyrot  M, McCarl  LA, et  al. Depression  and diabetes  treatment  nonadherence:  a 
meta -analysis.  Diabetes  care. Dec 2008;31(12):2398 -2403.  
64. Wing  RR, Phelan  S, Tate  D. The role of adherence  in mediating  the relationship  between  
depression  and health outcomes.  J Psychosom  Res. Oct 2002;53(4):877 -881. 
65. Mazzeschi C, Pazzagli C, Buratta L, et al. Mutual interactions between depression/quality of life  
and adherence to a multidisciplinary lifestyle intervention in obesity. The Journal of clinical  
endocrinology  and metabolism. Dec 2012;97(12):E2261 -2265.  
66. Krogh J, Videbech P, Thomsen C, Gluud C, Nordentoft M. DEMO -II trial. Aerobic exercise  
versus  stretching  exercise  in patients  with  major  depression -a randomised  clinical  trial.  PloS  one. 
2012;7(10):e48316.  
67. Busch AM, Scott -Sheldon LA, Pierce J, et al. Depre ssed mood predicts pulmonary rehabilitation  
completion  among women,  but not men. Respir  Med. Jul 2014;108(7):1007 -1013.  
68. Ellard DR, Thorogood M, Underwood M, Seale C, Taylor SJ. Whole home exercise intervention  
for depression in older care home residents (the OPERA study): a process evaluation. BMC  
medicine.  2014;12:1.  
69. Myers V, Gerber Y, Benyamini Y, Goldbourt U, Drory Y. Post -myocardial infarction depression:  
increased hospital admissions and reduced adoption of secondary prevention measures --a 
longitudinal  study. J Psychosom  Res. Jan 2012;72(1):5 -10. 
HSR#17 -4351  [05.17.17][10.05.17][07.26.18][09.09.19][10.22.19][11.04.19][01.28.20]   
  
70. Ziegelstein RC, Fauerbach JA, Stevens SS, Romanelli J, Richter DP, Bush DE. Patients with  
depression are less likely to follow recommendat ions to reduce cardiac risk during recovery from  
a myocardial infarction. Arch  Intern Med. Jun 26 2000;160(12):1818 -1823.  
71. McGee HM, Doyle F, Conroy RM, De La Harpe D, Shelley E. Impact of briefly -assessed  
depression on secondary prevention outcomes after a cute coronary syndrome: a one -year  
longitudinal  survey. BMC Health Serv  Res. 2006;6:9.  
72. Whooley MA, de Jonge P, Vittinghoff E, et al. Depressive symptoms, health behaviors, and risk of  
cardiovascular events in patients with coronary heart disease. JAMA. Nov 26 2008;300(20):2379 - 
2388.  
73. O'Neil A, Taylor B, Sanderson K, et al. Efficacy and feasibility of a tele -health intervention for  
acute coronary syndrome patients with depression: results of the "MoodCare" randomized  
controlled trial. Annals of beha vioral medicine : a publication of the Society of Behavioral Medicine.  
Oct 2014;48(2):163 -174. 
74. Hollon  SD. Do cognitive  change  strategies matter  in cognitive  therapy? .  Prevention  & Treatment.  
2000;3(Article  25). 
75. Kanter JW, Busch, A. M. & Rusch, L. C. Behav ioral Activation: Distinctive Features . London:  
Routledge  Press;  2009.  
76. Sturmey P. Behavioral activation is an evidence -based treatment for depression. Behavior  
modification.  Nov 2009;33(6):818 -829. 
77. Moore RC, Chattillion EA, Ceglowski  J, et al. A randomized clinical trial of Behavioral Activation  
(BA) therapy for improving psychological and physical health in dementia caregivers: results of  
the Pleasant  Events  Program  (PEP).  Behaviour  research  and therapy.  Oct 2013;51(10):623 -632. 
78. Eker s DM, Dawson MS, Bailey E. Dissemination of behavioural activation for depression to  
mental health nurses: training evaluation and benchmarked clinical outcomes. J Psychiatr Ment  
Health  Nurs. Mar  2013;20(2):186 -192. 
79. Rovner BW, Casten RJ, Hegel MT, et al. L ow vision depression prevention trial in age -related  
macular  degeneration:  a randomized  clinical  trial.  Ophthalmology.  Nov 2014;121(11):2204 -2211.  
80. Doyle F, McGee HM, Conroy RM, Delaney M. What predicts depression in cardiac patients:  
sociodemographic  factors,  disease  severity  or theoretical  vulnerabilities?  Psychol  Health.  May  
2011;26(5):619 -634. 
81. Rieckmann N, Burg MM, Gerin W, Chaplin WF, Clemow L, Davidson KW. Depression  
vulnerabilities  in patients  with  different  levels  of depressive  symptoms  after  acute  coronary  
syndromes.  Psychotherapy  and psychosomatics.  2006;75(6):353 -361. 
82. Denton EG, Rieckmann  N, Davidson KW, Chaplin WF. Psychosocial vulnerabilities to depression  
after acute coronary syndrome: the pivotal role of rumination in predicting and maintaining  
depression.  Front Psychol. 2012;3:288.  
83. Doyle F, McGee H, Delaney M, Motterlini N, Conroy R. Depressive vulnerabilities predict  
depression status and trajectories of depression over 1 year in persons with acute coronary  
syndrome.  General hospital  psychiatry. May -Jun 2011;33(3):224 -231. 
84. von Kanel  R, Mausbach  BT, Mills  PJ, et al. Longitudinal  relati onship  of low leisure  satisfaction  
but not depressive symptoms with systemic low -grade inflammation in dementia caregivers. J 
Gerontol  B Psychol Sci  Soc Sci. May  2014;69(3):397 -407. 
85. Mausbach BT, Chattillion E, Roepke  SK, et al. A longitudinal analysis of the relations among  
stress, depressive symptoms, leisure satisfaction, and endothelial function in caregivers. Health  
psychology : official journal of the Division of Health Psychology, American Psychological  
Associat ion. Jul 2012;31(4):433 -440. 
86. Chattillion EA, Ceglowski J, Roepke SK, et al. Pleasant events, activity restriction, and blood  
pressure in dementia caregivers. Health psychology :  official journal of the Division of Health  
Psychology,  American Psychological  Association. Jul 2013;32(7):793 -801. 
HSR#17 -4351  [05.17.17][10.05.17][07.26.18][09.09.19][10.22.19][11.04.19][01.28.20]   
  
87. Busch  AM,  Whited  MC,  Appelhans  BM, et al. Reliable  change  in depression  during  behavioral  
weight  loss treatment  among  women  with  major  depression.  Obesity. 2013;21(3):E211 -E218.  
88. Busch AM, Borrelli B, Leventhal AM. The Relationship between Smoking and Depression Post - 
Acute  Coronary Syndrome.  Curr Cardiovasc  Risk Rep. Feb 1 2012;5(6):510 -518. 
89. Busch AM, Fani Srour J, Arrigh i JA, Kahler CW, Borrelli B. Valued Life Activities, Smoking  
Cessation,  and Mood  in Post-Acute  Coronary  Syndrome Patients.  Int J Behav  Med.  Dec 4 2014.  
90. Busch AM, Scott -Sheldon LA, Pierce J, et al. Depressed mood predicts pulmonary rehabilitation  
completion  among women,  but not men. Respir  Med. Jul 2014;108(7):1007 -1013.  
91. Busch AM, Wagener TL, Gregor KL, Ring KT, Borrelli B. Utilizing reliable and clinically  
significant change criteria to assess for the development of depression durin g smoking cessation  
treatment: the importance of tracking idiographic change. Addictive behaviors. Dec 
2011;36(12):1228 -1232.  
92. Busch  AM,  Whited  MC,  Appelhans  BM, et al. Reliable  change  in depression  during  behavioral  
weight loss treatment among women with major depression. Obesity (Silver Spring). Mar  
2013;21(3):E211 -218. 
93. Kahler CW, Spillane NS, Busch AM, Leventhal AM. Time -varying smoking abstinence predicts  
lower depressive symptoms following smoking cessation treatm ent. Nicotine Tob Res. Feb 
2011;13(2):146 -150. 
94. Nguyen TD, Attkisson CC, Stegner BL. Assessment of patient satisfaction: development and  
refinement of a service evaluation questionnaire. Evaluation and program planning. 1983;6(3 - 
4):299 -313. 
95. Cox DR. Regression models  and life tables  (with  discussion).  Journal  of the Royal  Statistical  Society  
Series  B (Methodological). 1972;34:187 -220. 
96. Hosmer DW, Lemeshow S. Applied survival analysis . Wiley Series in Probability and Statistics.  
Hoboken,  NJ: John Wiley &  Sons;  1999.  
97. Kroenke  K, Spitzer  RL, Williams  JB. The PHQ -9: validity  of a brief  depression  severity measure.  
J Gen Intern  Med.  Sep 2001;16(9):606 -613. 
98. Rutledge  T, Redwine  LS, Linke  SE, Mills  PJ. A meta -analysis  of mental  health  treatments  and 
cardiac rehabilitation for improving clinical outcomes and depression among patients with  
coronary  heart  disease.  Psychosomatic  medicine. May 2013;75(4):335 -349. 
99. Katon WJ, Lin EH, Von Korff  M, et al. Collaborative care for patients with depression and  
chronic  illnesses.  The New England  journal  of medicine.  Dec 30 2010;363(27):2611 -2620.  
100. Redfern J, Briffa T, Ellis E, Freedman SB. Choice of secondary prevention improves risk factors  
after acut e coronary syndrome: 1 -year follow -up of the CHOICE (Choice of Health Options In  
prevention  of Cardiovascular  Events)  randomised  controlled  trial.  Heart.  Mar  2009;95(6):468 -475. 
101. Folstein MF, Folstein  SE, McHugh PR. "Mini -mental state". A practical method for grading the  
cognitive state of patients for the clinician. Journal of psychiatric research. Nov 1975;12(3):189 - 
198. 
102. Green  J, Thorogood  N. Qualitative  methods  for health  research : Sage;  2013.  
103. Baze ley P, Jackson  K, eds. Qualitative  data analysis  with NVivo : Sage  Publications  Limited;  2013.  
104. Pettee  Gabriel  K, McClain  JJ, Schmid  KK, Storti  KL, Ainsworth  BE. Reliability  and convergent  
validity of the past -week Modifiable Activity Questionnaire. Public health nutrition. Mar  
2011;14(3):435 -442. 
105. Morisky  DE, Green  LW,  Levine  DM.  Concurrent  and predictive  validity  of a self-reported  
measure  of medication  adherence. Medical  care. Jan 1986;24(1):67 -74. 
106. Hays RD, Kravitz RL, Mazel RM, et al. The impact of patient adherence on health outcomes for  
patients with chronic disease in the Medical Outcomes Study. Journal of behavioral medicine. Aug 
1994;17(4):347 -360. 
HSR#17 -4351  [05.17.17][10.05.17][07.26.18][09.09.19][10.22.19][11.04.19][01.28.20]   
  
107. Lejuez CW, Ho pko DR, Hopko SD. A brief behavioral activation treatment for depression.  
Treatment manual. Behavior  modification. Apr 2001;25(2):255 -286. 
108. Park LG, Howie -Esquivel J, Chung ML, Dracup K. A text messaging intervention to promote  
medication adherence for pati ents with coronary heart disease: a randomized controlled trial.  
Patient  Educ  Couns. Feb 2014;94(2):261 -268. 
109. Smith SC, Jr., Benjamin EJ, Bonow RO, et al. AHA/ACCF Secondary Prevention and Risk  
Reduction Therapy for Patients with Coronary and other Atherosclerotic Vascular Disease: 2011  
update: a guideline from the American Heart Association and American College of Cardiology  
Foundation.  Circulation. Nov 29 2011;124(22):2458 -2473.  
110. Eckel RH, Jakicic JM, Ard JD, et al. 2013 AHA/ACC guideline on lifesty le management to reduce  
cardiovascular risk: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association  
Task  Force  on Practice Guidelines.  Circulation.  Jun 24 2014;129(25  Suppl  2):S76 -99. 
111. O'Gara PT, Kushner FG, Ascheim DD, et al. 2013 ACCF/A HA guideline for the management of  
ST-elevation myocardial infarction: a report of the American College of Cardiology  
Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation. Jan 29  
2013;127(4):e362 -425. 
112. Thorndike  AN, Regan  S, McKool  K, et al. Depressive  symptoms  and smoking  cessation  after  
hospitalization  for cardiovascular  disease.  Arch  Intern  Med.  Jan 28 2008;168(2):186 -191. 
113. Ziegelstein RC, Fauerbach  JA, Stevens SS, Romanelli J, Richter DP, Bush DE. PAtients with  
depression are less likely to follow recommendations to reduce cardiac risk during recovery from  
a myocardial  infarction. Archives  of Internal  Medicine. 2000;160(12):1818 -1823.  
114. Hayden -Wade HA , Coleman KJ, Sallis JF, Armstrong C. Validation of the telephone and in - 
person interview versions of the 7 -day PAR. Medicine and science in sports and exercise. May  
2003;35(5):801 -809. 
115. Mason B, Ross L, Gill E, Healy H, Juffs P, Kark A. Development and va lidation of a dietary  
screening tool for high sodium consumption in Australian renal patients. J Ren Nutr. Mar  
2014;24(2):123 -134 e121 -123. 
116. Thompson FE, Midthune D, Subar AF, Kipnis V, Kahle LL, Schatzkin A. Development and  
evaluation of a short instrument to estimate usual dietary intake of percentage energy from fat. J 
Am Diet Assoc. May 2007;107(5):760 -767. 
117. Cropsey KL, Trent LR, Clark CB, Stevens EN, Lahti AC, Hendricks PS. How low should you go?  
Determining the optimal cu toff for exhaled carbon monoxide to confirm smoking abstinence when  
using cotinine as reference. Nicotine & tobacco research : official journal of the Society for Research  
on Nicotine  and Tobacco. Oct 2014;16(10):1348 -1355.  
118. Javors  MA,  Hatch  JP, Lamb  RJ. Cut-off levels  for breath  carbon  monoxide  as a marker  for 
cigarette  smoking. Addiction. Feb 2005;100(2):159 -167. 
119. Watson D, Clark LA, Tellegen A. Development and validation of brief measures of positive and  
negative affect: the PANAS scales. Journal of personality and social psychology. Jun 
1988;54(6):1063 -1070.  
120. Spertus  JA, Winder  JA, Dewhurst  TA, et al. Development  and evaluation  of the Seattle  Angina  
Questionnaire: a new functional status measure for corona ry artery disease. Journal of the  
American  College  of Cardiology. Feb 1995;25(2):333 -341. 
121.  SF-12v2™: How to Score Version 2 of the SF -12® Health Survey. Lincoln, RI: QualityMetric  
Incorporated;  2002.  
122. Hlatky  MA,  Boineau  RE, Higginbotham  MB, et al. A brief  self-administered  questionnaire  to 
determine functional capacity (the Duke Activity Status Index). The American journal of  
cardiology.  Sep 15 1989;64(10):651 -654. 
123. Menezes AR, Lavie CJ, Milani RV, Forman DE, King M, Williams MA. Cardiac rehabilitation  in 
the United States. Prog  Cardiovasc  Dis. Mar-Apr 2014;56(5):522 -529. 
HSR#17 -4351  [05.17.17][10.05.17][07.26.18][09.09.19][10.22.19][11.04.19][01.28.20]   
  
124. Hanssen TA, Nordrehaug JE, Eide GE, Bjelland I, Rokne B. Anxiety and depression after acute  
myocardial infarction: an 18 -month follow -up study with repeated measures and  comparison with  
a reference population. European journal of cardiovascular prevention and rehabilitation : official  
journal of the European Society of Cardiology, Working Groups on Epidemiology & Prevention and  
Cardiac  Rehabilitation and Exercise  Physiology. Dec 2009;16(6):651 -659. 
125. Spring B, King AC, Pagoto SL, Van Horn L, Fisher JD. Fostering multiple healthy lifestyle  
behaviors  for primary  prevention  of cancer.  Am Psychol.  Feb-Mar  2015;70(2):75 -90. 
126. Joseph AM, Norman SM, Ferry LH, et al. The safet y of transdermal nicotine as an aid to smoking  
cessation in patients with cardiac disease. The New England journal of medicine. Dec 12  
1996;335(24):1792 -1798.  
127. Meine  TJ, Patel  MR,  Washam  JB, Pappas  PA, Jollis  JG. Safety  and effectiveness  of transdermal  
nicotine patch in smokers admitted with acute coronary syndromes. The American journal of  
cardiology.  Apr 15 2005;95(8):976 -978. 
128. Woolf KJ, Zabad MN, Post JM, McNitt S, Williams GC, Bisognano JD. Effect of nicotine  
replacement therapy on cardiov ascular outcomes after acute coronary syndromes. The American  
journal  of cardiology. Oct 1 2012;110(7):968 -970. 
129. Paciullo  CA, Short MR, Steinke DT, Jennings HR. Impact of nicotine replacement therapy on  
postoperative mortality following coronary artery bypass graft surgery. Ann Pharmacother. Jul 
2009;43(7):1197 -1202.  
130. Cohen  S, Kamarck  T, Mermelstein  R. A global  measure  of perceived  stress.  J Health  Soc Behav.  
Dec 1983;24(4):385 -396. 
131. Kanter  JW, Mulick,  P. S.,  Busch,  A. M., Berlin,  K.S.,  & Martell,  C. R. The Behavioral  Activation  
for Depression scale (BADS): Psychometric properties and factor structure. Journal of  
Psychopathology  and Behavioral Assessment. 2007;29:191 -202. 
132. Kanter JW, Rusch, L. C., Busch, A. M., & Sedivy, S. K. .  Confirmatory factor analysis of the  
Behavioral Activation for Depression Scale (BADS) in a depressed sample. Journal of  
Psychopathology  and Behavioral Assessment. 2009;31:36 -42. 
133. Busch AM, Leavens EL, Wagener TL, Buckley ML, Tooley EM. Prevalence, Reasons for Use, and  
Risk Perception of Electronic Cigarettes Among Post -Acute Coronary Syndrome Smokers. J 
Cardiopulm  Rehabil Prev. Apr 26 2016.  
134. Busch AM, Ciccolo JT, Puspitasari AJ, Nosrat S, Whitworth JW, Stults -Kolehmainen MA.  
Preferences for exercise as a tre atment for depression. Mental Health and Physical Activity. In 
Press.  
135. Ziegelstein,  R. C., Fauerbach,  J. A., Stevens,  S. S., Romanelli,  J., Richter,  D. P., & Bush,  D. E. (2000).  
Patients with depression are less likely to follow recommendations to reduce cardiac risk during  
recovery  from  a myocardial infarction.  Archives of  Internal Medicine , 160(12), 1818 –1823.  