Version 1 .0 
01 Septemb er 2012  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Intensive Models of HCV Care for Injection Drug Users  
PREVAIL Study  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Version Number: 1.0  
 
01 September 20 12 
 
 
 
Study ID: [REMOVED]  
 
I
njection drug users (IDUs) constitute 60% of the approximately 5 million people in the U .S. infected  with 
hepatitis C virus (HCV). HCV is the leading cause of liver failure and transplantation in the U .S., and mortality  
and health care costs due to HCV ar e expected to increase over the next two decades . Successful HCV 
treatment  leading to sustained viral response (SVR)  is associated with decreased progression of liver disease 
and increased survival , but to date successful treatment of IDUs has been limited. 
Although past  HCV therapies have been relatively ineffective in genotype- 1 infected pat ients (the most 
common genotype in the U .S.), new er regimens are substantially improved. With the addition of direct -acting 
antiviral agents , HCV treatment  delivered w ithin large clinical trials leads to SVR or cure in  over 90%  of 
genotype- 1 infected patients , compared to 45% with previous regimens . However, SVR rates are as low as 
14% in real-world settings  (pegylated interferon and ribavirin) . Initial triple therapy H CV regimens  were 
associated with i ncreased dosing frequency (three times daily ), pill bur den (up to 20 pills daily), and side 
effects . Newer regimens such as fixed- dose ledipasvir and sofosbuvir are dosed once daily and have minimal 
side effects.   Nevertheless, IDUs may still have lower adherence and high rates of treatment discontinuation, 
and many of those who fail to attain an SVR will develop drug resistance.  
If HCV treatment continues to be delivered within current  models of care, m ost IDUs will not o nly fail 
treatment  and develop resistance, but may transmit drug resistant viruses to others, leading to new reservoir s 
of drug resistant virus. Though a growing number of studies now provide support for using interferon- based 
HCV treatment regimens in IDU s, none have determined the best  model for delivering treatment , and this  lack 
of data has contributed to physician reluctance to offer HCV treatment to IDUs. To reduce  HCV  prevalence, 
decrease HCV transmission leading to new infections, decrease mortality  and health- care costs, and eliminate 
disparities in HCV -related care, effective HCV treatment must be provided to IDUs . 
Treatment of IDUs is  complex  due to addiction, mental illness , poverty, homelessness, lack of positive 
social support, poor adherence-r elated skills, low motivation and knowledge,  and poor access to and trust in 
the health  care system . Although treatment for addiction and access to multidisciplinary teams likely play 
important roles in successfully  treating HCV -infected IDUs, it is unknow n which  specific psychosocial and/or  
structural interventions  are needed. Each patient’s course of HCV treatment may cost  over $90,000, but may 
not be cost -effective with our current model s of care. The life- and cost -saving benefits of new  HCV  treatments 
will not be realized unless we determine optimal models of care for the majority of HCV -infected patients . 
We have developed a multidisci plinary model of HCV care which integrates substance abuse treatment, 
on-site primary and psychiatr ic care,  and HCV -related care within opiate agonist treatment clinics . To maximize 
HCV treatment outcomes , we have also piloted two models of intensive care: directly observed therapy (DOT) , 
and concurrent group therapy  (CGT). In our  DOT model, one daily dose of oral medication is administered with 
methadone . Though we have shown that DOT is associated with increased adherence , we do not know how 
DOT will extend to new DAA therapy , or what impact DOT will have on resistance. In our  CGT  model,  groups 
initiate and complete HCV treatment in a once weekly treatment group which provides  powerful social support  
to mitigat e fears of side effects  and promote s efficien t education. While CGT  has also been associated with 
good pilot outcomes , we do not know whether either model  is better or more cost -effective than standard care. 
In the proposed study, 150 IDUs with chronic HCV  (genotype 1)  will be recruited from opiate agonist 
treatment clinics and randomized to one of three models of care: DOT; CGT ; or standard on- site care. We 
hypothesi ze that either intensive  model  will be superior to standard on- site care. One-hundred will initiate 
treatment with fixed- dose ledipasvir and sofosbuvir.  Our specific aims  are: 
1.To determine in a randomized trial whether e ither  of two in tensive on -site HCV treatment models
(DOT or concurrent group treatment)  provided at a methadone program is more efficacious t han
st
andard on -site treatment for enhancing adherence and virological outcomes, and decreasi ng
dr
ug resistance . We will co mpare the proportion of sub jects in each arm who:  a) adhere to antiviral
treatmen t; b) co mplete antiviral treatment; c) attain SVR (cure ); and d) develop drug resistance .
2.To determine the incidence and factors associated with the development of drug resistance in
IDUs initiating  HCV  treatment . In a pooled analysis of all subjects, we will determine what proporti on
o
f subjects develops  resistance, and examine associations between adherence and resistance.
3.To perform cost and cost -effectiveness analyses of each model of intensive on- site HCV care.
We will use empirical data to determine the total costs of providing intensive on- site or standard on- site
care. A computer simulation cost -effectiveness model combining  empirical and published data will be
us
ed to determine dollars per qualit y-adjusted life-year gained associated with intensive versus
standard care.
1  B. SIGNIF ICANCE 
B.1. HCV  epidemic  in IDUs.  HCV  prevalence in injection drug users  (IDUs)  ranges  from 70-90%,  and 
HCV  incidence ranges  from 10–26 per 100 person -years.1-4 IDUs  comprise 60% of all HCV -infected  persons  in 
the U.S.,  and genotype- 1 infectio ns are the most  prevalent  (74%).5 In the U.S., approximately  35,000  acute HCV  
infections  occur  each year,  and a 4-fold increase  in the number  of adults  with chronic  HCV  is projected from  
1990- 2015.6 HCV  causes  up to 15,000 deaths annually,  and is the leading cause of liver transplantation 
in the U.S.7-9 Until recently  (6/11),  HCV  treatm ent was effective  in less than 50% of patients  in registration 
trials ,10-12 and much less effective  (14%)  in real-world  urban populations .13 Treatment  effectiveness  among 
IDUs  is crucial  because IDUs  remain the leading risk group for HCV  infection.14 
B.2. Treatment  of chronic HCV.  Sustained viral response (SVR),  defined as the absence  of 
detectable  virus  24 weeks after completion of therapy,  reflects  eliminatio n of HCV  infection  because >95%  of 
patients  with such  respo nses  remain persisten tly free of detectable virus  up to 10 years  later.15,16 Combination 
pegylated interferon  (IFN)  and ribavirin  therapy  also reduc es progressi on of liver fibrosis,17-22 reduces  portal 
hypertension,23 prevents  development  of liver cancer ,24-26 improves  quality of life,27-29 and lengt hens  survival .30- 
32 Treatment  is complex,  however,  because treatment  limiting  side effec ts are extremely  commo n.10-12, 33-35 
These include flu-like syndromes,36 cytopenias10-12 which  may require reduction or discontinuat ion of 
medications  or the administration of growth factors,37, 38 and neuropsychiatric  side effects.39-45 Other  common 
side effec ts are anorexia,  nausea,  skin rash,  diarrhea, arthlagias,  headac hes, dizziness,  and impaired 
thought.10, 45 Support  for side effect  manageme nt is a crucial feature of HCV  care.  
B.3. Efficacy  of new HCV  regimen s for genot ype-1 infected patients.  Treatment  with IFN and 
ribavirin  has been associated with SVR rates  of 40-50% in treatment -naive  patients  with genotype 1. In the 
ADVANCE  trial, patient s who were  treated with IFN, ribavirin,  and telapr evir achieved an SVR of 75%, 
compared  to 44% in the IFN and ribavirin  arm.46 Rates  of SVR were  higher  in telapr evir-treated patients 
regardless  of stage  of liver disease,  race, or ethnicity.  However,  there  was a two-fold higher  incidence  of 
adverse effects,  including rash,  nausea,  and anemia,w ith telaprevir -based  regimens  compared to IFN and 
ribavirin.46-48 When patients disconti nue treatment  prior to 20 weeks,  the SVR rate is markedly  decreased - 
only 23%.47 Support  for keeping patients  on treatment  is also crucial  to maximize  rates  of SVR.   The FDA 
has recently approved treatment of genotype- 1 infected patients with 12 –  24 weeks of fixed- dose 
(ledipasvir  and sofosbuvir ), and this is associated with SVR rates of >95% (www.hcvguidelines.org).  
B.4. Is HCV  treatment  feasible  in IDUs?  Despite  the centr al role IDUs  occupy  in the HCV  epidemic, 
the 1997  NIH Consensus  Statement  on the Management  of Hepatitis  C, citing  concerns about  adherence and 
toxicity,  recommended not treating  patients  who were  using  illicit drugs unless  they had stopped  for at least  6 
months.49 After  advocacy  by Dr. Edlin  and colleagues ,50,51 the 2002 Consensus  Panel altered  this stance and 
affirmed that active  IDUs  can be successfully  treated for HCV.  The Panel  further  stated that active  drug use in 
and of itself is not a reason to exclude patients  from antiviral  therapy,  and that treatment  decisio ns for active 
IDUs  be made case -by-case.  52 Subsequently,  the 2004 AASLD  Guidelines  recognized that patients  with co- 
occurring  alcohol  or drug abuse or psychiatric  illness  may be effectively  treated for HCV  infectio n.53 
Nearly  10 years  later,  few data are available on optimal  methods  of treating IDUs.  Most  physici ans, 
reluctant  to engage  an already  challenging  patient group in a complex  and difficult  treatment  regimen,  continue 
to adhere  to old guideli nes.54-60 Consequently,  IDUs  are still rarely  offered  treatment  for HCV ,61, 62 and 
registration  trials of new triple  thera py regimens  still exclude active  drug users  and rarely enroll  patients  on 
opiate subs titution  treatments,  including methadone.  Although a large  proportion of IDUs  with HCV  is willing  to 
undergo treatment,  few actually  receive therapy .63-67 We expect that physician reluctance  to treat IDUs  and 
dispariti es in access  to HCV  care will increase markedly  with newer  HCV  regimens  that are associ ated with 
increased side effects,  higher  rates  of treatment  discontinu ation,  and, for the first time, with drug resistance .68 
A growing number  of new studies  provides  supp ort for IFN-based  HCV  therapy  in drug using  and 
methadone -maintained patients .69-85 Though on-site multidisciplinary  models  of care have demon strated  good 
outcomes  for IDUs,  optimal  models  of care must  be studied .84 By performing  a rando mized  trial of 2 models  of 
intensive on-site HCV  care - modified directly  observed  therapy  and concurrent  group therapy  - we will be able 
to evaluate whether  either  on-site model  is optimal for delivering  state  of the art therapy  to drug users.  
B.5. HCV  treatment  in minority  populations.  A dispropor tionately  high number  of African -American 
and Latino persons  in the U.S. are infected  with HCV,5, 86, 87 yet evidence suggests  that HCV  treatment  is more 
effective  in Whites  than in Latinos  or African  Americans .88-93 Prior  studies  of genotype- 1 infected patients treated  
with IFN and ribavirin  have  shown lower  rates  of SVR among  Latinos  comp ared to non-Latino whites (34%  v. 
49%),91 and among  African  Americans  compared  to non-Hispanic Whites  (19%  v. 52%) .92 In a recent 
effectiveness  study  from our liver clinic,  rates  of SVR for genotype- 1 infected patien ts were  even lower:  11% 
for Latinos,  14% for African  Americans,  and 25% for Whites .13 While  some rural programs  are reducing 
2  dispariti es in HCV  care between Latinos  and non-Latino Whites using telemedicine,94 active  drug users  have 
been excluded.95 Treatment  differences  among  Latinos,  African  Americans  and Whites are explained to a 
large extent  by differences  in DNA  sequences  near the interferon lambda 3 gene,  and the favorable IL28B  
genoty pe (C/C vs. C/T or T/T) is more  prevalent  in Whites  than in Latinos or African Americans .96, 97 Clinical 
trial data  suggest  that disparities  may be less pronou nced with telaprevir -based treatment:  the ADVANCE  trial 
demonstrated  SVR rates  of 62% in African  Americans  and 74% in Latinos.46 With fixed -dose ( ledipasvir and 
sofosbuvir ), there does not appear to be differences in rates of SVR based on race and ethinicty.  However, 
there may be differences seen in real -world studies. A dditional  intensive interventions  are neede d to optimize  
treatment  outcom es for Latino and African  American IDUs.  Because our substance  abuse treatment  program  
serves  predom inantly  Latinos  and African  Americans,  we have the opportunity  to test such  interventions.  
B.6. What  is known about adherence to HCV  treatment?  Strict  adhe rence  to IFN and ribavirin therapy  
is necessary  to optimize  SVR rates.  Studies  have shown that patients  who adhere to at least  80% of the 
intended treatment  schedule (taking  at least  80% of the total dose of both IFN and ribavirin  for at least  80% of 
the inten ded duration)  are more  likely  to achieve an SVR (44% v. 7%).98, 99 Among  patients  with genotype 1, 
greater  adherence has been associated  with SVR at 48 weeks.100 Some  studies  have suggested  that ribavirin 
exposure may be particularly  important  in determining  response to HCV  treatment,  supporting the concept  that 
adherence to daily oral medicat ions requires  unique interventions .101, 102 There are currently  little data descri bing 
associa tions between DAA adherence  and virological outcomes,  making  optimal  levels  of adherence  to DAA -
based regimens  unknown.  However,  because  of the risk of resistance  observed with protease inhibitor  
treatment  for HIV, optimal  adherence  may be as high as 90%.  Adherence support  is particularly important  for 
active  drug users,  because active  drug use has been associated  with nonadherence .103-111 
Electronic  monitors  measure adher ence most  accurately,  and have the advantage of continuously 
assessing  doses  taken  and temporal  regularity .112 Med-ic® electronic  monitors  are an innovative method of 
assessing  adherence  that uses  an electronic  monitoring system applied directly  to weekly  blister  packs .113 This 
system  allows  patients  to continue  to take medications  from blister  packs, which  are associ ated with improved 
adherence to complex  regimens.  In the propos ed trial, we will take advantage of this new technology  to 
monitor  adherence,  and we will also use self-report adherence  measures.  Self-reported adherence  to HCV  
treatment  has been  shown to be correlated with (though  higher than)  electronic  monitoring estimates .114 
B.7. Direct -acting  antiviral  HCV  agents and resistance.  Emergence of antiviral resistant  varia nts 
during  PI-based  therapy  has been observed during  all trials,  and is associated with both virological failure  and 
relapse.115 In clinical trials, resistance -associa ted mutations  were  seen  in 62% of patients  who failed  to achieve 
SVR.  However, only 5% of patients  in telaprevir  trials  had baseline  HCV  substitu tions/variants,  and these were 
not associa ted with SVR.115 Treatment -emergent  substitu tions have been demonstrated  to reduce  the anti- HCV 
activity  of NS3/4A  protease  inhibitors .116-118 Additional mutations have been seen in patients treated with fixed-
dose (ledipasvir and sofosbuvir). I n the proposed trial, we will assess development  of resistanc e, and determine  
the association  between adherence level and development  of resis tance.  
B.8. Cost  of HCV  treatment.  A 48-week  course of IFN, ribavirin,  and telaprevir,  including  the use of 
growth  factors  (and exclusive  of physician visits,  laboratory  tests,  or care for complications)  may be over 
$50,000.119,177-179 Cost of fixed- dose ( ledipasvir  and sofosbuvir ) may be over $90,000. A small  increment  in the 
overall  cost of treatment  that appreciably  increases  patients’ likelihood  of successfully  completing  the regimen  
could substantially  improve its cost-effectiveness.  To assess this,  we will estimate  the cost of each model  of on-
site care (mDOT,  CGT,  and stand ard care).  While intensive on- site interventions  such  as mDOT  and CGT  may 
require  additional  provider time,  we expect  the incremental cost  of this effort  will be relatively  small compared  to 
the current cost of treatment.  
B.9. Theoretical  frame works for the proposed trial.  
Information,  Motivation,  Behavior  (IMB)  model  of adherence.  The proposed mDOT  and CGT 
interventions  are guided  by Fisher’s  IMB model .120-122 The IMB model  asserts  that information,  motivation,  and 
behavioral  skills  are fundamental  determinants  of adherence .120 Accordi ng to the IMB model,  information and 
motivation work  through behavioral  skills  to effect adherence.  Behavioral  skills  are a critical prereq uisite of 
adherence,  and determine whether  even well-informed  and motivated individuals  are able to adhere.  The IMB 
model  further  specifi es that personal  and situati onal charact eristics,  such  as poor psychologic  health, 
substance  abuse,  unstable housing,  or inadequa te access to medical  care, may moderate  these relationshi ps 
and impact  adherence .120 In extreme  cases,  strong negative  effects  on adherence are expected,  and 
interventions  aimed at improving  information and motivation may not be effective  without  adjuvant  support.  
Both interventions  - mDOT  and CGT  - focus  on enhancing information,  motivation,  and behavioral 
skills,  and provide adjuvant  support  to lessen negative  impacts  of moderating  factors. The mDOT  strategy,  in 
which  adherence to HCV  treatment  is linked to an establishe d behavioral  skill, specifically  methadone clinic 
3  attendance,  addresses  adherence skills:  acquisit ion and administration  of HCV  medications;  incorporation  of 
HCV  treatment  into daily routines;  coping  with side effects  (through  side effect  assessment  and manageme nt 
protocols);  and acquis ition of social support.  While primarily  operating  on behavioral  skills,  the mDOT  
4  intervention also enhances  both information  and motivation (through  support from nurses  and other clinic  staff). 
Our proposed CGT  intervention addresses  information  (through education),  motivation (through  peer and 
providers  support),  and behavioral  skills  (by dispensing  medications  during group).  
 
 
ADHE RENCE 
INFOR MATION 
Regimen and dose 
Side effects  
Drug  interactions  
Treatm ent goals   
 
 
ADHE RENCE 
BEHAVIORAL SKILLS 
Acquire  and self- 
administer  medications 
Incorporate regimen into  
 
 
 
 
 
ADHE RENCE MODERATING FACTORS 
Psychological  distress 
Depression  symptoms 
Substance  use 
Hazardous  alcoh ol use 
 
 
HEALTH OUTCOMES 
 
ADHE RENCE 
MOTI VATION 
Personal  motivation 
Perceived support  for 
adherence from significant 
others  (including medical  
providers  and peers) daily life 
Minimize  side effects 
Acquire  social  support  for 
adherence 
Self reinforce adherence Medication adher ence  
Dieta ry adhe rence 
Treatm ent duration Ļ HCV  viral load 
SVR (cure)  
Ļ cirrhosis  and cancer  
Ļ mortality  
5   
Theory  of Fundamental  Cause and dispariti es in HCV  care. Disparities  related to HCV  care can be 
expected to increase with the introd uction  of more  efficacious  treatments, just as was observed with HIV. 
Initially,  HIV did not discriminate based on race,  ethnicit y, or socioeconomic  status  (SES),  but as effective 
treatments  became  available,  African  Americans,  Latinos,  and those  with low SES began to have poorer 
treatment  outcomes.  Link and Phelan proposed  that socio economic  status is a “fundamental  cause”  of 
mortality  disparities,  and that socio economic  disparities  endure despite  availability  of more  effective 
treatments.123 This is because SES embodies  an array  of resources  such  as money,  knowledge,  prestige, 
power,  and beneficial  social conne ctions,  all of which protect  health.  In the U.S., although  health care is 
fragmented for all people,  patients  with high SES are able to mobilize  resources  to minimize  the effect  of 
fragmented care on poor health.  Effective  models  of care which mobilize  resources  for low SES patients,  or for 
all patient s across  the SES spectrum  equally,  have  the greatest  potenti al to minimize  or eliminate  disparitie s.94 
Intensive models  of HCV  care which  mobilize  resources  normally  available to patien ts with high levels 
of SES (such  as knowledge,  social  networks,  prestige,  or power)  may decrease associations  between SES 
and HCV -related morbidity  and mortality. To optimize  HCV  prevention and control,  it is essen tial to eradicate 
racial  and ethnic dispar ities, as well as dispari ties based on SES and IDU-status  in HCV-related  healthcare. 
Our proposed models  may be an important  step towards  eliminating  disparities  in HCV care.  
B.10.  Generalizability  of mDOT  and CGT  approaches.  IDUs  are at the heart  of the HCV  epidemic, 
and the majority  of all cases in the U.S. and other  developed nations  are related to illicit drug use. There  are 
several  reasons  for initiating this research  in the methadone treatment  setting:  (1) drug users  must  attend their 
methadone program  frequently  because methadone take-home doses  are linked to absence of illicit drug use; 
(2) methadone treatment  is a congr egate setting  in which  patients  are already present  nearly  daily to receive 
methadone;  and (3) drug users  may have particular  difficulty adhering  with HCV  treatment,  in part because the 
side effec ts of IFN mimic the symptoms  of opiate  withdrawal.  If proven effective, our mDOT  model could be 
applied in other programs  that serve  the approximately  180,000 HCV -infected  methadone patien ts in the 
U.S.124-125 as well as in other  settin gs in which  drug users  are present  nearly daily (e.g. correctiona l facilities, 
homeless  shelters,  day treatment  programs,  and residential  substance  abuse  settin gs). DOT  can be extended 
in the community  through  nurses  and communi ty health workers .126-127 If proven effective,  our CGT  model could  
be applied  to many  diverse clinical settings in which  patients  are able to attend clinic  once weekly.  
C. INNOVATION  
•  First randomized  trial to test innovative intervention strate gies for providing  HCV -care to IDUs  in the U.S. 
•     Concurrent  group treatment  (CGT)  is an innov ative model  of care allowing  groups  of patients  to 
concurrently  initiate  HCV  treatment,  leading  to informed and activated patient  groups  with enhanced 
social support  and trust in the healthcare  team. 
•     Adherence monitoring  of blister  packs with Medi -ic® technology  allows  us to combi ne a state  of the 
art electronic  adherence  monitoring system  with weekly  blister  packs.  
•  First study  to provide data on factors  associ ated with resista nce to HCV  direct -acting  antiviral drugs  in 
IDUs,  and to define associations  between adherence and development  of resista nce. 
•  Innovative techniques  for modeling  cost,  including  quality adjustment  for treatment  failure  and 
development of  resistant -virus.128 
•     First study  to evaluate cost effectiv eness  of HCV  treatment  in a methadone clinic  in a randomized trial. 
D. APPROACH 
D.1. Prelim inary Studies 
D.1.1.  Overvi ew of the research team.  We have assembl ed a strong  team of investigators  with 
expertise conducting  research to improve  health outcomes  among  HCV -infected  and drug-using  populations.  
Dr. Litwin  has focused on defining optimal  mode ls of HCV  care for IDUs,  and is expert  in treating HCV  in IDUs,  
methadone -maintained patients,  and active  drug users.  Dr. Arnsten  is a nationally  recognized expert on 
adherence to antiviral  therapy  and treatment  of HIV and HCV  in substa nce users.  Dr. Edlin  is expert in 
epidemiologic  studi es of and interventions  for infectious  complications  of drug use, particularly  HCV.  Dr. 
Schackman is expert  in cost studies of models  of care for screening  and treatment  for diverse populations,  and 
has extensive experience conducti ng economic  analyses  in collaborati on with the NIDA  Clinical Trials  Network 
and the NIAID  AIDS  Clinical Trials  Group.  Dr. Linas  has expertise in modeling  the impact of care systems  on 
HCV - and HIV-related outcomes.  This team  has successfully  condu cted epidem iologic al, clinical,  behavioral,  
and cost studi es of HCV -infected  and drug-using  populations,  and together  has published over 300 peer-
reviewed papers.  
D.1.2.  Study  of HCV  treatment  in IDUs.  In 2001,  Dr. Litwin  collaborated on a multi- site study  of the 
6  
safety  and efficacy  of thrice-weekly  IFN and ribavirin  in IDUs.70 The model  of care included  multidiscip linary 
treatment  with on-site HCV care,  substance  abuse treatment,  and psychiatric  care.  Subjects  self-administered 
both medications,  and 28% achieved SVR.  We concluded that IDUs  can be safely  and effectively treated 
despite multiple barriers  to treatment.  However,  SVR was lower than would be expected in a large registration 
trial where projected SVR would be 51%,  given  the same  proportion of genotypes.10 
D.1.3.  Study  of HCV  treatment  in methadone  patients.  In 2003,  we adapted our on-site 
multidiscip linary  HCV  program  to include directl y-administered  weekly  IFN in addition to screeni ng, 
assessment  of treatment  eligibility,  psych iatric services,  and on-site antiviral therapy .79 Of 73 patients,  most 
were  Latino (67%)  or African -American  (12%),  nearly  half (49%)  had used  illicit substances  in the 6 months 
before initiating treatment,  32% were  HIV-infected,  and curre nt psychiatric  illness  was common  (67%). Most 
(86%)  completed 12 weeks  of HCV  treatment  and 45% achieved SVR,  including  40% of genotype- 1 patient s. 
Though  30% used  illicit drugs  during HCV  treatment,  there  was no association  between illicit drug use and 
virological outcomes.  These  resul ts demonstrate that IDUs  with complex  medical  and psychiatric  comorbiditi es 
can be effectively  treated  for HCV  with co-located on-site care. However,  it is unknown which  interventions 
(multidisciplinary  on-site care v. DOT  injectio ns) contributed to the observed outcomes .78-80 
D.1.4.  Pilot  RCT of directly obser ved HCV  treatment  in methadone  patients.  In 2008  we began  a 
pilot RCT (K23  DA022454,  PI: Litwin)  of modified  DOT  (mDOT)  which  extended our DOT  strategy  to the oral 
medication ribavirin.  We designed this trial to test the efficacy  of 2 versions  of mDOT.  Our primary  objective was 
to determine whether  enhanced DOT  with both IFN plus ribavirin  is more  efficacious  than standard DOT  with 
weekly  provider -administered IFN and self-administered  ribavirin  for improving  adherence.  We have completed 
enrollment  (n=80),  with 74 initiating  HCV  treatm ent. We observed significant  differences  in pill count adherence 
between the treatment  arms  (88%  in mDOT  arm vs. 77% in the treatment  as usual,  or TAU arm, p=0.02).129 In 
addition,  81% of mDOT  subjec ts achieved • 80% adherence v. 53% in the TAU arm (p=0.09).  Only 16% 
discontinued treatment,  and among  genotype- 1 infected  patients (n=22),  55% achieved SVR (half active  drug 
users) .129 Of the 1st 4 subjects  on telaprevir -based triple  therapy randomi zed to DOT,  pill count  adherence at 4 
weeks  was 98%,  and 3 of 4 had 4 week  VL<43 IU/ml,  with one subject  discontinui ng treatment.  
The above data demonstrate:  (1) our ability  to enroll and retain HCV -infected IDUs;  (2) efficacy  of 
enhanced mDOT  v. standard mDOT;  and (3) promising  early  outcomes  with telapr evir-based therapy. 
However,  because this pilot RCT was not powered to demonstrate  increased  SVR with mDOT  (and both arms 
included some degree of DOT),  we now propose a definitiv e study  to determine if DOT  is associated  with 
increased SVR for genotype- 1 patients,  and whether  DOT  is cost-effective.129 We will have sufficient  power  to 
answer  this question  as treatment  for genotype- 1 patients  is more  effective  (SVR=7 5%),46 we will include only 
genotype- 1 patients,  and all medic ations  will be self-administered in the proposed TAU arm. 
D.1.5.  Concurrent  Group  Treatment  (CGT).  In 2009,  we implemented  a group treatment  model  of HCV 
care.  To date,  39 patients  have initiated  CGT  (including  34 enrolled in the mDOT  study  desc ribed above).  Early 
treatment  outcomes  are promising,  with 89% of patient s completi ng at least  80% of planne d treatment  duration, 
and only 2 patients  discontinuing treatment  because of side effects. Of the first 20 patie nts who 
initiated  CGT, 80% achieved an end of treatment  response and 55% achieved SVR,  including 57% of those 
with genotype- 1 (half active  drug users).130 Eight  CGT  
patients  have initiated  telaprevir -based regimens,  7 of 8 had 
4 week  HCV  VL <43 IU, 5 out of 8 had undetect able VL, 
with one discon tinuing treatment.  These data demonstrate  
that CGT  is a promising model  of care for treati ng IDUs.  
However,  since  patients  were not  randomized,  it is possible 
that CGT patients  were  more motivated than others.  The 2 
x 2 figure  demonstrates  the effects  of each intervention 
(mDOT  and CGT),  as well as of their interacti on. When  
subjects  were  treated individually  with mDOT,  or when the subjects  were treated  with CGT  (without mDO T), 
adherence and virological  outcomes  were  better  than without  either intervention.  Howev er, the additive 
effects  of mDOT  and CGT appear  modest.  For this reaso n, as well as to increase  generalizabi lity, in the 
proposed study  we will evaluate 2 models  of intensive  care: mDOT  (both  IFN and oral medicati ons) and CGT  
(IFN direc tly-administered and oral meds  self-administered).  Both models  must  be rigorously  tested to 
determine whether  intensive  models  of care are superior  to stand ard on-site care for achieving  SVR.  
D.1.6.  RCT of direct ly observed HAART  in methadone patients.  We conducted an RCT of DOT  with 
HAART  in HIV-infected  drug users  in methadone  clinics.  Seventy -seven participant s were  randomized to a 24- 
week  DOT  intervention or treatment  as usual  (TAU), with 86% study  retention at 24 weeks.  Participants 
randomized to DOT  (v. TAU) had greater  adherence (mean adherence:  86% v. 56%,  p<0.0001)  and VL 
7  decreased  by 0.52 log10 copies/ml  in the DOT  group  while  it remained stable  in the TAU group (p<0.01).  More 
DOT  than TAU participants  had undetectable viral load (71%  vs. 44%,  p=0.03).  Active  drug use decreased 
adherence,  but the negative impact  of drug use on adherence  was eliminated by DOT. By 3 months after DOT  
ended,  differences  in both adherence and viral load between DOT  and TAU had extinguished.  These  data 
demonstrate  that DOT  is associ ated with improved HIV virological  outcomes among  methadone- maintained 
patients,  including  active  drug users,  and that it should be continued  long-term for durable effect. It is unknow n 
whether  virological outcomes will improve with HCV  DOT.131-134 
D.1.7.  Effect of adherence and DOT  on development  of resistance.  We explored the impact  of DOT 
on the development  of new antiretroviral  resist ance mutations  in subjects enrolled in the above RCT.  To 
determine if increases  in adherence associa ted with DOT  would affect  drug resista nce, we examined the 
developmen t of new resistance  mutations  among  21 partic ipants who had a detectable  HIV VL at both baseli ne 
and a seco nd time point.  Of these,  9 developed new drug resistance  mutations  not seen at baseline (3 in DOT 
and 6 in TAU,  p=0.27).  Overall,  5 TAU subjects  developed major  mutat ions correlating with their current 
antiretroviral  regimen,  while  no DOT  subjec ts developed such  mutations.  These  data demonstrate that improved 
HIV adherence associat ed with DOT  does  not lead to increased resista nce. In the proposed  study,  
we will investigate associations  between HCV  treatment  adherence and development  of drug resistance.135 
D.1.8.  Cost  pilot  data.  Drs. Schackman and Litwin  conduc ted a retros pective  chart  review  of costs  of 
HCV  treatment  for patients treated  in a methadone maintenance  progr am. Mean treatment  costs were  $40,600 
for patients  with SVR and $31,400  for patients  without  SVR.  Drs. Linas  and Schackman conduct ed a study  of 
health care services  utilization  by HCV -infected  patient s in the AIDS  Clinical Trials Group Longitudinal  Linked 
Randomized Trials  Cohort136 in which  they described the additional  use of hospital  and emergency  departmen t 
services  associated with HCV  infection in this cohort after adjusting  fro demographic  and clinical factors.  Dr. 
Schackman has also assessed the cost of HIV medication adherence  support interventions .137 
D.2. Overvi ew of study  approach.  In the proposed study,  150 HCV -monoinfected IDUs (genotype 1) 
eligible  for on-site HCV  treatment  will be recruited from opiate agonist  treatment  clinics  and randomized to one 
of 3 models  of care: modified  directly  observed treatment  (mDOT);  concurrent  group treatment  (CGT);  or 
standard  on-site treatment  which  represents  the treatment  as usual  arm (TAU).  We will compare the proporti on 
of patients  in each  arm who optimally  adhere (>80%), complete treatment,  achieve SVR,  and develop 
resistanc e. We hypothesize that both intensive  models  of care (mDOT  and CGT)  will be superior  to TAU.  
Participants  on 48 week regimens (e.g. telaprevir) will be followed  for 72 weeks  (up to 48 weeks  of HCV trea tment  + 
24 weeks  of follow -up), with visits  occurri ng every  4 weeks  for the first 24 weeks, followed by 
4 additional  visits  at 12 week  intervals.  Participants (n=100) on 12 –  24 weeks reg imens (fixed -dose ledipasvir and 
sofosbuvir ) will be followed up to 48 weeks (up to 24 weeks of HCV treatment + 24 weeks of follow -up) with visits 
occurring every 4 weeks for the first 12 weeks, week 24 (if necessary), end of treatment, and follow -up weeks (4, 12 and 
24).  Data  sources  will include blood tests  (HCV  viral load and resistance tests), urine toxicology  tests,  
questionn aires,  medical  records,  electronic  monitors  for assessing adherence,  and staff logs and direct  
observation (for cost-effectiveness  analysis).  In pooled analyses  of all subjects  (n=150),  we will determine 
associa tions between adherence and developm ent of resist ance. We will also  assess  cost and cost-
effective ness of all 3 models.  
8 
 Inclus ion Criter ia Exclusi on Criteria  
• HIV-negative 
• Willing  to recei ve HCV  treatment on-site 
• Initiating treat ment with fixed dose (sofosbuvir and ledipasvir)  
• Recei ving methadone in clinic at least once per week  
• Age 18 or older 
• Able to provide informed consent 
• English  or Spanish speaking  
• Pregna nt or breast-feeding 
 D.3. Setting:  Einstein and Montef iore Division  of Substance Abuse (DoSA).  DoSA  is a clinical, 
research,  and teaching division  of Einstein’s  Department  of Psychiatry  and Behavioral  Sciences.  DoSA  operates 
a comprehensive substance abuse treatment  program  providi ng pharmacotherapy  and related services to about 
4200 adults  (>18 years)  with current  narcotic  addicti on (typically  heroin).  The primary  focus is treatment  of opiate  
depe ndence with methadone,  and the average  methadone pick-up schedule is 5 times  per week.  At present,  
DoSA  operates  12 clinics  in 5 Bronx comm unities.  The treatment  paradigm  relies  on integrating  general and 
HCV - and HIV-related medical,  subs tance  abuse,  and mental  health services  under  
one roof. Multiple  RCTs  have been conducted  in DoSA.  Both recruitment  and resea rch visits  will occur  at 
DoSA.  With Dr. Litwin  (HCV  Medical  Director),  Dr. Arnsten  (DoSA  Research Director),  and Dr. Cohen (DoSA 
Medical  Director),  partic ipant recrui tment and private office  space for research visits  will be ensur ed. 
D.4. Partic ipants.  Most  DoSA  patients  are Hispanic (59%)  or black  (24%), male  (62%),  and live under 
the federal  poverty  line (81%).  Mean age is 47 years.  Approximately  65% (n=2730)  are HCV -infected,  and 
75% of those  have chronic  HCV  (n=2048);  70% have  genotype- 1 (n=1434),  and 80% of those  are HIV- 
negative (n=1147).  We anticipate 800 new admissions  over the 3-year recruitment  period,  representing 
another  216 HCV -monoinfected  genotype -1 patients.   
Table 1. Inclusion and E xclusion Cr iteria (also se e Human S ubject s) 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
D.5. Recruitment . Recruitment  (as with other  success ful studies  cond ucted in this setting )129,132,142 will 
be both active and passive;  for active  recruitment  DoSA  medical provider s will inform  genotype- 1 HCV -infected 
subjects  about the study and assist  with referral,  and for passive recrui tment  subjects  will self-refer. Self- 
referred  subjects will meet  with their provider  to determine whether  starti ng HCV  treatment  is appropriate.  
Determination of eligib ility. 
Initial screen ing visit and inform ed consent:  
• Obtain or al consent for  brief screen ing u sing Einste in Com mittee on C linical Investigati ons (IRB) screen ing cons ent template  
• Brief screen i n private r oom in methado ne clinic to determ ine eligibility 
• Discuss stu dy procedures, ri sks and  benefits  of study participation 
• Obtain written  cons ent for 1) clini cal trial  participat ion; 2) s tudy staff to use protected health informati on from methad one 
clinic records; 3) st udy staff to disclose protect ed health informat ion in event of psychiatric distress 
Methadone  clinic chart r eview: 
• Laboratory test  results: HCV Ab, HCV viral l oad, HIV  (within 1 year), HCV  genot ype/sub type, IL28B, A PRI and 
Fibro SURE (biomar ker tests  for liver fibro sis) 
• Methad one clinic attenda nce and dos e 
 
Second  screening  visit (medical   eligibility  determination  by Dr. Litwin): 
• Review of HCV-relat ed labs ( as above) a nd  fibroscan or liver bi opsy (if availa ble) 
• Review of HCV  Treatment  Evaluation Flow Sheet   to co nfirm no prev ious HCV treatment and planned on-site 
treatment regi men: fixed dose (sofosbuvir and ledipasvir)  
• Partici pants who meet all e ligibility criteria sche duled for a baseline vi sit 
• Randomi zation (stratified,  blocked) ge nerated by centrali zed computer program  
 
 
 
D.6. Partic ipant  tracking and retention.  We have extensive experience following  HCV - and HIV- 
infected  drug users  in studies.  In our ongoing  RCT of directly  observed HCV  treatm ent, 24 week  follow -up was 
92%.129 In our completed  RCT of directly  observed HAART,  24-week  follow -up was 86%.142 At enrollment  and 
subsequent  visits,  we will record:  1) participan ts’ address,  phone number,  and social security  number;  2) 
contact  inform ation  of family  or friends;  3) contact informati on of partici pants’  community -based organizat ions; 
4) contact  information  of case  managers;  and 5) locations  where particip ants “hang  out”. 
D.7. Randomization.  We will recruit  150 patients  (100 on fixed- dose sofosbuvir and ledipasvir) , with 
patien ts randomized to mDOT, CGT,  or TAU in a 1:1:1  ratio (50 subjec ts in each group) in variable block  
sizes of 3-6 via central,  computer -generated randomization.  Two special  randomization strategies 
(stratification  and blocking)  will be used to avert imbalances  in prognostic  factors,  and to ensure  comparison 
9 
 groups  of approximately  equal size. Because  of the  historical importance  of IL28B  genotype and stage of 
liver disease (cirrhosis  v. no cirrhosis)  in determining  virologic outco mes,46 we will stratify by these 2 factors.  
All subject s will have the IL28B  genetic  test performed  as per our standa rd clinical algorithm.  To determine 
presence of cirrhosis,  all subjects  will have 2 biomarker  tests  (APRI and  Fibrosure)  performed  at baseline,143-
144 per our standard  clinical algorithm  (Appendices  A and D). Liver biopsy  / Fibroscan  is not requi red but will 
be performed  if 1) biomarker  tests  are inconcl usive for determination  of cirrhosis as per the SAFE algorithm  
(<20%),145 2) to rule out co-occurring liver disease,  or 3) if the result  will influence the decision to initiate  
treatment.  Results  of liver biopsy  / Fibroscan  (if done) will be used for strati fication  instead of biomarker  
tests.  Since  IL28B  explains  much of the variabilit y in response between African  Americans  and non- African  
Americans ,96,146  and rates  of SVR with DAAs  may be equivalent  in Latinos  and non-Latino Whites ,46 we will 
not stratify by race or ethnicity,  but will adjust in the analyses  if necessary.  
D.8. Treatment  arms:  TAU,  mDOT,  and CGT.  All 3 models  of care include co-locat ed on-site care 
including  HCV care,  primary  care,  and substance  abuse treatment. Table 2 summarizes similarities  and 
differences  between the 3 models.  Subjects  randomized to TAU will receive all medications monthly  at the 
clinic  from the clinic  nurse,  packaged  in 7-day blister  packs  (oral medications)  
Table  2: Eleme nt IMB Model TAU mDOT CGT 
Co-located care Information 
Motivation X X X 
Enha nced social support by providers Motivation  Nurse  – individual Medical  provider - group 
DOT  Interfer on Behavioral Skills  Nurse  - individual Medical  provider - group 
DOT  telaprevir and ribavirin Behavioral Skills  DAA  1-6 doses /week 
  
DOT  snack (if telaprevir or RBV only)  Behavioral Skills  Nurse  - individual  Enha nced social support by patients  Motivation   Peers  – group 
Enha nced education  Information   Week ly educational sessions 
Enha nced side effect management Information 
Motivation  Nurse  - individual Week ly group treatm ent 
D.8.1.  Intensive treatment  intervention arms  (mDOT  and CGT)  
Modified  directly  observed treatment  (mDOT).  Since  DOT  of HCV  medications  will be linked  to 
methadone visits,  the number  of directly  observed oral doses  will vary based on the number  of days  the 
patients  attends the clinic  to receive directly  observed metha done (pick -up schedule).  This interv ention is 
considered modified DOT  (mDOT) since  only 1-6 out of up to 24  weekly  oral medication  doses  will be 
obser ved. Subjects  in the mDOT  arm will receive:  1) 1 to 6 directly  observed oral medication doses  per week  
at the same time as they receive methadone,  and 2) individually  packaged  take-home  doses  for self-
admini stration  on days not in the clinic.  In additi on, methadone clinic nurses  will: 3) notify clinicia ns when 
doses  are declin ed, 4) assess  for side effects using a standard  script; and 5) refer subjec ts to onsite  clinicia ns 
as necessary.  Since  some medica tions must  be taken with food,  subjects  will also be provided with a high-fat 
snack  (20 grams  of fat) when necessary . 
Concurrent  group treatment  (CGT).  We developed this model  by adapting models  linking  HCV  
support groups  with treatment70,77-78 and models of group  medical  visits across  many  chronic  conditions.180-
182 Weekly CGT  meetings  will have 6 components:  1) brief physical  exams;  2) psychosocial  support from 
peers  and providers;  3) education;  4) direct  administration  of pegylated interferon  medication in the group 
setting  (if applicable) ; 5) side effect  management;  and 6) closing  meditation  on positive  health.  Six to 12 
patients  will receive treatment concurrently.  Other  intervention elements  will be as follows.  
ORIENT ATION MEETING S. The orient ation will be the first oppo rtunity  for subjects  to meet as a group and 
interact  with each other  and the treatment  team  (phys ician and physician assist ant). Subjects  will introduce 
themselves  and share  concerns  about HCV.  The treatment  team  will present  an overview  of the HCV  
epide mic and its impact on drug users,  natural  history  of HCV,  and risks,  benefits,  and efficacy  of HCV  
treatment.  The group treatment  protocol  and schedule will be discussed,  and time allowed for questions  and 
discussion.  A second orientation will be scheduled the followin g week  to discuss medication side effects  and 
general strategies  for managing  them.  A group treatment  contract,  including  a confidentiality  agreement,  will 
be read aloud  by subjects  and signed.  At the third weekly  group,  all members  will initiate  treatment  
concurrently  and receive the first IFN injection  directly  administered in the group setting  (if applicable) . 
WEEKLY TREATMENT GROUP S. Each  group will last one hour.  Prior to the group, one clinician  will review 
labs and make decisions  regarding  ribavirin  dose  adjustments  (if applicable) and initiation  or adjus tment of 
growth  factors  (if applicable) to manage  adverse  effects  (cytopenias).  When  group members  arrive,  they will fill 
out weekly  side effect inventory  sheets.  During  the first 30 minutes,  2 providers  will conduct  brief individual  
10 
 visits  to check  vital signs and address  lab values,  adherence to medicati ons, and adverse  effects.  IFN 
injecti ons and growth  factors  as needed  will be adminis tered in the group setting if needed,  and the medical  
visit will be charted  using  a template.  In the second 30 minutes,  one provider  will condu ct a group discussion  
while  the second provider  completes individual  visits.  Facilitated group discussion will begin with an informal  
hand raising  survey  of how participants are  faring  in treatment  from “terrible”  to “no probl em”. The group will 
end with a 5-minute guided meditation exercise.  The total time demand  for the treatment  team  is 90 minutes.  
All subjects will receive metrocards  (2 ride  value of $5.00)  for each  of the first 12 weeks  as an incen tive for 
arriving  within  a 15 minute grace  period. At  the completion of treatment,  a ceremony  is held and certificates  of 
appreciation are given  out. 
FREQUENCY  OF CGT  CYCLE S. New cycles  begin at each of 3 sites 3 times  per year;  therefore there  is a 
new cycle  starting  nearly  every  mont h. To facilit ate rapid  entry into a group,  trial subjects may elect  to wait until 
a cycle  is starting at their “home”  clinic  site, or travel to a different  site. In addition,  they may join a group that is 
already  in its first mont h. (Appendix  C for group treatment  protocols)  
D.9. Specific study design considerations.  
D.9.2.  Why not include  an off-site treatment  by referral arm?  Our study  is urgently  needed because 
off-site referral is the current prevailing  model  of HCV  care,  and alternative approache s are neede d. Dr. Reinus 
has studied  outcomes  from Montefi ore’s liver clinic and found that only 15% were  eligible  for HCV  treatment, 
and SVR rates for geno type-1 were  14% (compared  to 40% in our on-site cohor ts).13 These suboptimal 
outcomes  on referral  from our methadone clinics  to our liver clinic  motivated us to develop our on-site 
treatment  program,  in collaboration with Dr. Reinus.  
D.9.3.  Why another  study of DOT  for HCV  treatment? To date,  no HCV  DOT  study has 
demonstrated  improved virological outcomes,  the most  important  clinical outcome.  Our currently  funded study 
has a heter ogeneous  population and was powered for adherence,  not virological outcomes.  This study 
demonstrates  that there  is increas ed adherence with DOT  and is the foundation for the proposed trial. 
D.9.4.  Why use weekly  blister  packs instead  of the standard  packaging? Weekly  pill boxes  and 
blister  packs  have been  shown to be associ ated with increased adherence and improved virological 
outco mes.147-149 The proposed design will maximize  adheren ce in the control arm and eliminate  the chance that 
suboptimal  packaging  could  be responsible for any effect  of the intensive interventions.  Since  any increase  in 
adherence from blister  packaging  will be observed in all three arms,  it will not contaminate intervention effects.  
D.9.6.  Future  developments in HCV  treatment . Study  participants  will receive state-of-the-art 
treatment  (IFN in combination with telaprevir  and ribavirin).  As additional  regimens  become available with either 
more  conv enient  dosing , fewer  side effects,  or increased efficacy,  partic ipants  in all 3 arms  will receive 
treatment  according  to best available practices.  On October 10, 2014, the FDA approved fixed- dose (ledipasvir and 
sofosbuvir).  Because rates of SVR are >95% in patients initiating treatment with fixed- dose (ledipasvir and sofosbuvir), all 
newly enrolled subjjects w ill initiate treatment with this regimen.  It is likely that our  intens ive models  of care will be 
generalizab le to IFN-sparing regimens  which  include only oral therapies.  We recognize that HCV  treatment  has 
been greatly simplified,  but issues  with adherence,  resistanc e, side effec ts, and cost will remain.  
D.10.  Data  sources and collection.  
D.10.1.  Overview . Sources of data will include: blood and urine tests,  participant  interviews,  medi cal 
charts,  staff activity and expense logs,  direct  observation of staff,  and electronic  adherence  monitors  (Table 3). 
D.10.2.  Research  visits.  Research visits  will occur at baseline, then every  4 weeks  during the first 12 
weeks of treatment, then at week 24 (if necessary),  a “Final Treatment Week visit” will be conducted after the last day 
of treatment, and then post -treatment visits after 4, 12, and 24 weeks , for a total of up to 9  research visits.  
Partic ipants  will receive  $25 for each  visit and an additional  $20 for visits  with blood draws.  
Baseline visit (Table 3).  At baseline we will assess: sociodemographic  and HCV  clinical factors, 
potential  mediating variables  based on the IMB model,  potential  moderators  (inclu ding psychiat ric status, 
substance  use, and unstable housi ng), and additional  psych osocial  factors hypothesized to predict  adher ence. 
The baseli ne visit will take approximately  3 hours.  Blood will be collected at the first visit and stored for 
  possible  HCV viral load and resista nce testing,  and for future  studies.  
Follow -up visits  (Table 3). Follow  up visits  will occur at weeks  4, 8, 12, and 24 (if necessary). 
Adherence to all medic ations  will be evaluated by elect ronic monitors  and self-repor t. Weeks  on treatment  will 
be determined by electronic  monitors  and chart  review.  HCV viral load,  virological endpoints,  and resistance 
results  will be obtained by chart  review  and blood draw,  if unavailable by chart  review.  IMB model  mediators 
will be assessed  at weeks 8 and 12. Potential  moderators  will be assessed  at each monthly  visit.  
 
11 
  
Table 3. Overview of Data Coll ection by Aims 
Aim & 
Hypothe sis Construct Measu re, source  Research visit (week) Sour ce 
Outcome  Measures 
Aim 1, H1 Adherence  Med-ic® and MEMS® Electronic  Monitors  4,8,12  Electronic  
Aim 1, H2 Completion  Medical  record  NA Chart  
Aim 1, H3 Viral load (SVR)  HCV  VL by Roche TaqMAN  assay 0,4,8,12,  24, FU 4, FU12, FU24 Chart,  Blood  
Aim 1/2, H4 Resistance  HCV  GenoSURE  NS3/4A , NS5A, NS5B (Monogra m) 4, 8, 12, 24, FU4, FU12, FU24  Chart,  Blood  
Aim 3 Cost HCV  treatment 
mDOT  and CGT interventions  
Non-HCV treatment health  services  NA 
NA 
12,24,FU4. FU12. FU24  Chart  
Logs,  Direct  
Observation  
Q 
Other covariate measures* 
All Demogr aphics  Age, race/ethnici ty, education,  income,  housing  0 Q 
All HCV -related  
clinical  information  HCV  VL, HIV, HCV geno type/su btype, IL28B, APRI 
and FibroS URE (biomarkers  of liver fibrosis)  0 Chart  
All Substance  use Addiction  severi ty Index-Lite (ASI-lite) (152,153)  
Alcohol  use (AUDIT)  (154) 
Urine  toxicolo gy EMIT  assay 0,4,8,12,  24, FU4, FU12, FU24  Q, Urine  
All Methadone  dose 
opiate withdrawal Methadone  dose; Subjective  and Objective  Opiate  
Withdr awal Scales  (SOWS  and OOW S) (155) 0,4,8,12, 24, FU4, FU12, FU24  Q 
All Neurop sychiatric  MINI  (138-140) 0 Q 
All Information  , 
motivation,  and 
behavioral  Skills  Health  Beliefs  Model  (161)  
HCV  Motivation (161) 
Adherence Self-Efficacy  (161) 0, 12 Q 
All Social  support  Medical  Outcomes  Scale (162)  0,4,8,12,24, FU4, FU12, FU24  Q 
All DAA levels GC-MS (if additio nal funding  obtained)  4 Blood  
All Depression,  
anxiet y, and 
hostility  Depressive  symptoms  (BDI-II) (156-157) 
Brief Symptom  Inventor y (BSI)  anxiety subscale (158) 
BSI hostility  subscale  (158- 160) 0,4,8,12,24, FU4, FU12, FU24  Q 
All Pychosocial  
factors  Stages  of readi ness for HCV  treatment  (183) 
Trust in physician  (184)  0 
0,4,8,12,24, FU4, FU12, FU24  Q 
All Quali ty of life HCV  QOL  and EQ-5D (163-166) 0,4,12,  24, FU4, FU12, FU24  Q 
All Med side- effects  Adult  ACTG  adherence instrum ent – revised  (167) 0,4,8,12, 24, FU4, FU12, FU24  Q 
All Adherence  
(self repor t) Adult  ACTG  adherence  instrum ent (167)  
Visual  Analogue Scale  (VAS)  (168) 
24 hour dietary recall instrument  0,4,8,12,24  Q 
Q=Q uestionnaire  *All measures  used  in Dr. Litwin’s  pilot K23 HCV DOT  study or Dr. Edlin’s  current  R01 study 
D. 10.3.  Definitions  of outcome measures.  
Med-ic® or MEMS®  missed  dose a dherence.   For DAA and ribavirin  (if applicable) , adherence will be 
calculated as  Med-ic blister  pack  dose openin gs divided by total number  of prescribe d doses  in time interval.  
For example,  Med-ic adher ence for one week  would be X/7Y, where X=number of Med-ic dose openi ngs 
recorded in one week  and Y=number  of doses  prescribed per day.  
HCV  treat ment  completion . Subjects  will be considered to have completed  treatment  if they have 
completed  at least  80% of the plann ed treatment  course (at least  10 weeks  of 12 week course, or at  least  20 
weeks  of 24 week course)  based on response guided therapy  approach.98,115 
Sustained viral response (SVR).  SVR is defined  as undetec table HCV  viral load 12 weeks  after 
treatment  completion or discontinu ation.  
Resistance.  Subjects  will be cons idered to have new drug resistance  if they have a telaprevir - associa ted 
mutation (any substituti ons at V36, T54, R155,  A156)  at any time point  during  the study, and the specific  
mutation did not exist at baseline.   Subjects  will be cons idered to have new drug resistance  if they have a 
ledipasvir - associa ted mutation  (K24R, M28T/V, Q30E/H/K/L/R , L31V/M/I, and Y93H/N) during  the study, and 
the specific  mutation did not exist at baseline.  Subjects  will be cons idered to have new drug resistance  if they 
have a sofosbuvir - associat ed mutation (S282T ) at any time point  during  the study, and the specific  mutation 
did not exist at baseline .                                                 
Cost.  Costs  of HCV  treatment  will be collected using the same  methods  as in the pilot analysis  (see 
Section D.1.8  above),  by conducting  chart  reviews  and assigning unit costs to all provider visits,  lab tests,  and 
medications  based on Medicare fee schedules.  The cost of the mDOT  intervention will be determined by 
conducting  observational  time studies  of the additional  medical  provider  and patient  time required  for mDOT, 
12 
 using  prevailing  nationa l wage  rates  to determine the cost of the time,  and applying  this cost to each  DOT 
interaction.  Patient  time costs  will be valued based on the minimum  wage, because most  patients  are likely to be  
unemployed.  The cost of the CGT  intervention will be similarly determined through observational  studi es, as 
well as staff member  time and activi ty logs,  and expense logs will be maintained for transportati on and other  
incidental  costs. Provider  time spent  on research  activities,  such as condu cting  resea rch visit assessments,  will 
be excluded.  We will also examine the cost of health care services received outside of the study  (emergency 
department  visits,  hospi talizatio ns, substance abuse treatment)  based on quarterly  patient  self-reports. 
D.10.4.  Data  Sources.  There will be 6 data sources.  Resul ts will not be provided to participant s’ 
medical  providers  unless  particip ants speci fically  request  (in writing)  that study  staff release this information.  
Medical  record.   HCV  viral load and resistance  assays  (if no SVR)  will be obtained when possibl e by 
chart  review.  HCV  viral load is measured by the Roche TaqMAN  assay  and HCV  resistance  is measured by 
the Monogram  HCV  GenoSURE  NS3/4A  assay,  which  is automatically  run on any HCV  viral load which  is 
•2000 IU/m l. Information on treatment  interrupti ons and discontinuation will be obtained from medical  records. 
Blood.  Three  tubes  of blood will be drawn  at weeks  0, and 4, and stored at Einstein’s Clinical Research 
Center  (CRC).  HCV  viral load and resistance  assays will be perfo rmed if not available by chart  review.  For 
subjec ts who fail to achieve SVR,  resistance  testing  will be performed  on post-treatment specim en. All  testing  
will be performed  at Montefiore’s  labor atories.   
Urine  toxicology.  Participants  will provide urine specimens  at each  resea rch visit, which will be tested 
for cocaine and opiates  (and pH to ensure  validit y) using  enzyme  multiplied  immunoa ssay techni que. 
Adherence by electronic  monitors  (Med -ic® and MEMS®)  and self-report. 
ADHERENCE TO  DAAs AND RIBAVIRIN will be measured in all three  arms by electronic  compli ance 
monitoring for blistered  medications  for the first 12 weeks of treatment  with an attached  Med-ic® device.  Med-
ic® is an innovative stick-on paper label  for medication blisters that provides  a disposable method to measure 
adherenc e.185 Med-ic® packages yield  99.6%  event  accuracy  (time  of dose removal  correctly  recorded within 
+2 minutes).  This technology  will allow  tracki ng of medication usage  from weekly  blister packs  prepared by our 
local pharmacist.  Blister  packs will  be pre-fitted with labels and electronic  tags,  which  can be recycled up to five 
times  to save  cost.  
In the TAU arm, subjec ts will receive monthly  packages  of 4 blister  packs, deliver ed at their methadone 
clinic by nurses.  Blister  packs will be returned  at research visits for downloading  adherence  data. In the CGT 
arm, subjec ts will receive weekly  blister  packs  at group meetings  and used  packs  will be collected at each 
group.  Unreturned  packs  will be returned at research visits.  
In the mDOT  arm, subjects  will take observed doses  from weekly  blister  packs,  but the packs  will be 
modified to contain only observed doses.  Indivi dual take-home doses will be taken in weekly blister packs given on 
Monday. Blister  packs will be collected weekly.  
SELF-REPO RT ADHEREN CE will be measured  using a modified  ACTG questionnaire,  adapted  for IFN, 
DAAs , and ribavirin,  as well as a single -item visual  analogue scale  (VAS) which  has been shown to 
correlate  well with both pill count s and virological outcomes  in HIV-infected  patients  taking HAAR T.167,168 
Adherence to dietary  recommendati ons will be conducted by 24 hour dietary recall.  Fat content  of each  meal 
will be deter mined with available software  (www .nutritionco .com).  
Participant  surveys.  At baseline and every  research visit, participants  will answer  surveys  using  Audio Computer -
Assisted  Self-Interview  (ACASI)  technology.  The ACASI  system displays  each  question on a computer  monitor  
while  playing  an audio recording of the question.  Participants  enter responses  directly  on the computer,  which  
may result in more  accurate reporting  of sensitive  behavior  than other survey  methods .170 
D.11.  Analytic plan.  First, the success  of randomization will be checked by compar ing the mDOT,  CGT  
and TAU groups  on key variables,  such  as age, gender,  ethnicity,  race,  HCV  viral load,  HCV  subtype (1a vs. 
1b), BMI, psychiatric  history, active  drug use, and social  supp ort.46 By design,  IL28B  and stage  of liver disease 
will be represented equa lly in each arm. Contin uous variables  will be compared between arms  using  the 
ANOVA or Kruskal -Wallis  test, and categorical  variables  will be compared  using  chi-square or Fisher’s  exact 
tests.  Varia bles that are not equally  distributed will be included in multivariate  models. In primary analysis,  we 
will use the intention- to-treat princip le, which  preserves  the advantages  of a randomized design.  
D.12.1.  Hypotheses for Aim 1. We hypothesize that in the intensive intervention arms,  compared  to 
the control  arm, rates  of adherence,  treatment  completion,  and SVR will be signif icantly higher,  and that rates 
of resista nce will be lower. We further  hypothesize that the proportion  of subjects  in the intensive  models  of 
care arms  who achieve an SVR will be equivalent  to that observed in large  registrat ion trials.  
13 
 D.12.2.  Analytic plan for Aim 1. Adherence to DAAs , ribavirin,  and IFN will be determined using 
electronic  monitors  and self report,  as describe d above.  Initially,  adherence  will be calculated  as a single 
outcome  for each  subject, evaluated  at the end of the study.  We will use Chi-square tests  or Fisher’s exact test 
to compare  the proporti on of subjec ts who achieve high adherence  rate (≥ 80%)  complete treatment,  achieve 
SVR,  and develop resistance in the three  arms  (mDOT,  CGT,  and TAU).  If the omnibus  equality  test of 
adherence across  the 3 groups  is rejected,  we will conduct  the following  2 specif ic post-hoc pairw ise tests  with 
a Bonferroni  adjusted  2-sided alpha = 0.025:  mDOT  vs. control,  and CGT  vs. control.  This strate gy will be 
applied to multivariable logistic  regressions  if any  potential  confounding variables  not equally  distributed 
between the study  arms  at baseline are identifi ed. 
For the analysis  of repeatedly  measured  adherence (using  6 post-baseline time points  and adher ence as  
a contin uous measure),  we will apply  mixed  effects  linear model  to test if the 3 groups  are significantly different.  
This model  accounts  for within-subject  longi tudinal  outcome correlation by taking  the subject -level intercept  as 
random.  The model  will include potential confo unding  variables.  If the omnibus  equality  test is rejected,  we will 
conduct  the 2 post-hoc pairwise  tests descri bed above.  Concerning  potential  clustering  effects in  the CGT  arm, 
we used pilot data (5 groups)  to examine  whether  clustering  influe nced adheren ce. Between cluster  variation 
was not significant,  as tested  by applicati on of a random  effects  repeated-measure ANOVA model.  Clustering  in 
the GCT  arm will be minimal,  and we will not adjust  for it in statistical or power analysis.  
We will also apply  mixed effects  logistic regression to test the signif icance of mDOT  and CGT  on 
repeatedly -measured undetectable HCV  VL throughout  the intervention period,  adjusting  for substance  use. 
Changes  in illicit drug use will be analyzed  using  urine toxico logy data from each  visit, counting the “person-  
month”  as a unit of analysis,  and analyzing  the proportion of person -months  that are positive  for use of illicit 
drugs  using  a chi-square analysis.  
As seconda ry analyses,  we will examine if mDOT  and CGT  effects,  v. TAU, will be mediated by IMB 
components.  We will assess IMB model mediators  of adhere nce at baseline,  and during the intervention,  and 
will analyze changes  in those variables  from the baseline to the intervention period.  The indirect  effects  of IMB 
mediators  will be tested  by assessi ng changes  in coeffic ients of the intervention effect  (mDOT  or CGT)  with and  
without  IMB compo nent(s)  in mixed  effects  models.  Confidence intervals  of the mediated effects  will be 
calculated by bootstrapping,  and mediation assumed if confidence intervals  do not include zero.  
D.12.3.  Hypotheses for Aim 2. We hypothesize that only a minority  (~20%)  of IDUs  will develop 
resistanc e, and that the relationship between adherence and resistance will be quadratic.  
D.12.4.  Analytic plan for Aim 2. The proportion of particip ants (n=150)  who develop resista nce will be 
determined with 95% confidence  interval  (CIs)  calculated using exact  binomial  metho ds. The proportion of 
participant s with resista nce will then be determined within  each of 4 groups determined by quartiles  of 
adherence measured  at the final time point  in the study.  We will apply  logistic  regression models  to estimate 
odds  ratios  for resistance  in each  quartile.  To examine whether  the relationship between adherence  and 
resistance is quadratic,  we will test a linearity  of trends  in odds ratios.  If this linear  trend is reject ed, we will 
identify  a quartile  group that is assoc iated with the highest  odds of resistance. Potent ial covariat es will be 
entered  in regression  models  if found by univariate analysis  to be associated (p<0.2)  with resist ance. 
D.12.5.  Hypotheses for Aim 3. We hypothesize that the total cost of delivering  the CGT  interv ention 
will be lower  than delivering  the mDOT  intervention,  and that the incremental  cost-effectiveness  ratios  for CGT 
v. TAU and mDOT  v. TAU will each be less than $100,000/QALY.  
D.12.6.  Cost  and Cost -effectiveness Analyses. To project  future  HCV  costs and life expectancy,  we 
will adapt  to the study  population a computer  simulation  model  of HCV  disease progression  that has been 
developed by Dr. Linas  based on published data using  empiric  calibration methods.171-172The model is curren tly 
being  upda ted with data on disease progression and resource utiliza tion from a racial ly diverse cohort  of over 
600 HCV -infected  individ uals cared  for at Boston Medical  Center,  an urban  public  hospital  system, including 
IDUs  in methadone treatment  and active  IDUs.173 The model  simulates  chronic  HCV  with fibrosis  progression 
through  3 stages  of liver fibrosis  including:  mild to moderate fibrosis,  cirrhosis,  and decompensated cirrhosis. 
At all stages,  HCV  infection is associated with increased resource utilization  and decreased  quali ty of life 
(QOL).136,186- 187  When  HCV  infection  reaches  the stage  of cirrhosis,  individuals  begin  to experience incre ased 
mortality  attributable to liver disease.188  With successful  HCV  therapy,  disease progr ession  halts,  and 
mortality,  resource utilization,  and quality  of life returns  to that of HCV  un-infected individuals.189 HCV -related  
QOL  is stratified  by fibrosis  stage, and costs of chronic  HCV  care (such  as hospit alizatio ns, ED visits,  and clinic 
visits)  are identified separately  for patients  with and without  cirrhosis  and stratified  by age and sex. 
14 
 We will use the model  to assess the cost-effec tiveness  of the 3 interventions:  TAU,  mDOT,  and CGT. 
Primary  outcomes  will be projected  life-expectancy,  quality-adjusted  life-expectancy  (QALYs),  lifetime  costs,  and 
incremental  cost-effectiveness  ratios  meas ured in $/QALY.  We will forecast  health and cost outcomes  of each 
intervention for a hypothetical  cohort  of HCV  patients  using baseli ne study  data on fibrosis,  age, sex, and 
alcohol  use, and study  outcome  data for each  intervention including  SVR,  resista nce, and retenti on in care.  We 
will explore the potential  impact  of resistance  mutations  by varying  the efficacy  of subsequent  HCV  retreatm ent 
for patients  with resista nce who choose to be retreated.  Lifetime  costs  will include the costs of the intervention 
received as well as projected future  costs  of HCV  care depen ding on treatment  effectiveness.  Incremental  cost 
effectiveness  ratios  will be calcul ated for TAU compared to no treatment  and for mDOT  and CGI compared  to 
the next most expensive intervention,  with costs and QALYs  discounted  at 3% annually  accordi ng to standa rd 
practice .173 The resulti ng ratios  will be compared  to a thres hold of $100 ,000 per QALY.174-175 To explore 
uncertainti es in our results, we will perform one and 2-way sensitivity  analyses  on key input  variables  (e.g. 
probability  of SVR and intervention cost)  and probabilis tic sensitivity  analyses  (PSAs)  using second  order  
Monte Carlo  simulation  on multiple  variables.176 For PSAs  we will perfo rm 1,000 simulations  of a cohort  of 
100,000 individuals.  The result  will be a distribu tion of 1,000 model -based  outcomes  with a median and inter- 
quartile  range that reflec ts underlying  uncertainty  in critical model  parameters.  
D.13  Power considerations Assuming  a conse rvative  attrition  rate of 20%,  50 subjects per arm will 
begin the study, but 40 subjects  per arm will complete it. For power  calculations  for repeatedly  measured  
continuous  or binary  adherence outcomes,  we will use the expected number  of observations  per subject.  The 
power  analysis  is condu cted based  on the omnibus  testing  of equality  across  the three groups.  It follows  that at 
least  one of the post-hoc pair-wise tests is powered to be rejected by this study  design. 
Adherence.  Based on our pilot data,  if we cons ervatively assume that 80% of subjects in both mDOT 
and CGT  arms  will achieve >80% adherence (v. 50% in the TAU arm),  we will have >87%  power  to find a 
statistically  significant  difference.  With the application of mixed -effects  logistic  regression to the repeatedly 
measured  binary  adherence outcome,  power  will be greater  than 87% no matter  how large  the within-subject 
outcome  correlation  or intraclass  correlation  (ICC).  
In our previous  DOT  study,  mean adherence  in the mDOT  group  was 87% (SD=12 %, n=21),  and mean 
adherence in the TAU group was 77% (SD=20 %, n=19)  which  translates  into a standardized effect size or 
Cohen’s  d = 0.6. Based on this effect  size, the power  of the mixed  effects  linear  model  for the repeatedly 
measured  continuous  adherence outcome  will be greater  than 90%, even if anticipa ted ICC is as high as 0.5. 
Treatment  completion.  Based on our pilot data,  if we assume treatment  completion rates  of 85% in 
CGT,  60% in mDOT,  and 50% in TAU,  we will have >80%  power  to detect  this difference.  
SVR.  We anticipate  that SVR rates  in the mDOT  and CGT  arms  will be 70%,  and <40% in the TAU 
arm.13,70,82  The statis tical power  will be >80%.  These  are conservative  estimates  of effect  sizes, as actual  effect 
sizes  will likely  be larger  because regimens  now contain telaprevir  which  is taken  3x daily.  Effects size for fixed -
dose (ledipasvir and sofosbuvir) is likely to be lower.  
Resistance.  We estimate  that 16% of intervention arm subjects  v. 30% of TAU subjects  will develop 
resistanc e. We are underpowered to detect  this difference,  and consid er this an exploratory  analysis.  
Effectiveness  of intensive  models  of care.  We will determine the proportion (and 95% CI) of subjects  in 
each of the intensive intervention arms  to achieve SVR,  and compare  to results  from large  registration  trials.  
D.14.  Limitations.  In addition to the considera tions noted  in Section D., our results  may not be generalizable to 
HCV -infected  drug users not enrolled  in methadone clinics. However,  we believe  that the intensive  models  we are 
testing,  if efficaci ous, can and should be adop ted in diverse settings  and populati ons.  