 Page 1 of 19                                                      14-151 SURGERY WITH OR WITHOUT STEROTACTIC BODY RADIOTHERAPY  
  
A Prospective Randomized Phase II Study of Surgery with or without Adjuvant 
Stereotactc Body Radiotherapy (SBRT) in Patients with Previously -Irradiated Head and 
Neck Cancer  
(Version Dated 2020 -04-29) 
 
Principal Investigator:    David A. Clump, MD, PhD  
     UPMC Cancer Center  
     Mary Hillman Jennings Radiation Oncology Center  
     MHJROC Posner Tower, 1st Floor  
     5230 Centre Avenue  
     Pittsburgh, PA  15232  
     clumpda2@upmc.edu   
     Ph: (412) 623 -6720  
     Fax: (412) 623 -4050  
 
Study Co -Investigators:    Radiation Oncology  
     Steven A. Burton, MD ( burtons@upmc.edu  ) 
     Robert L. Ferris, MD, PhD ( ferri@upmc.edu  ) 
     John Vargo, MD ( vargoja4@upmc.edu  ) 
 
     Hematology Oncology  
     James Paul Ohr, MD ( ohrj@upmc.edu  ) 
      
     Otolaryngology  
     Umamaheswar Duvvuri, MD ( duvvuriu@upmc.edu  ) 
     Jonas T. Johnson, MD ( johnsonjt@upmc.edu  ) 
     Seungwon W. Kim, MD ( kimsw2@upmc.edu  ) 
     Carl Snyderman, MD ( snydermanch@upmc.edu  ) 
 
Biostatistics  
              Hong Wang, PhD ( how8@pitt.edu  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Page 2 of 19                                                      14-151  
TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 
PROTOCOL SUMMARY ……………………………………………………………… ….… 3 
 
1.0  BACKGROUND ………………………….…………………………………...… ..…… 5 
 
2.0  OBJECTIVES ………………………………………………………………… ..……… 7 
 
3.0  INVESTIGATIONAL PLAN…………………………………………… .………… .... 8 
 
4.0  SUBJECT SELECTION AND ELIGIBILITY.………………………………… .…..1 1 
 
5.0  TREATMENT EVALUATION, ADMINISTRATION, AND MODIFICATION…1 3 
 
6.0  STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS………………………………………..……….1 4 
 
7.0  DATA SAFETY AND MONITORING………...……...……………….…..………… 16 
 
8.0      REFERENCES ………………………………………………………………………....17  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Page 3 of 19                                                      14-151  
 
PROTOCOL SUMMARY  
 
Title  
A Prospective Randomized Phase II Study of Surgery with or without Adjuvant 
Stereotactc  Body Radiotherapy (SBRT) in Patients with Previously -Irradiated Head and 
Neck Cancer  
 
Objectives  
The primary  objective of this study is to compare the 1 -year local control in patients with  
operable, recurrent previously -irradiated squamous cell head -and-neck cancers with or  
without adjuvant SBRT.   
 
The secondary  objectives of this study are:  
1. To determine the locoregional progression -free survival (PFS) distant PFS, overall PFS  
(local + regional + distant), and overall survival (OS).  
2. To evaluate the acute and late toxicities of adjuvant SBRT in the re -irradiation setting  
following salvage surgery.  
3. To determine prognostic factors that may predict the likelihood of local failure, regional  
failure, or OS in this cohort to guide future manage ment.  
4. To compare the impact of adjuvant SBRT versus a wait -and-see approach on patient  
reported quality of life (PR -QoL).  
5. To compare surgical versus SBRT -induced immunological serum markers in relation to 
local control.  
 
Patient population  
In order to be eligible for this study, patients must have a  pathologically proven recurrent or 
second -primary head -and-neck cancer with no evidence of distant matastases. Patients mut be at 
least 18 years of age and able to give informed consent. They must have a Karnof sky 
Performance Status ≥ 60. 
 
Number of patients  
42 
 
Study design and methodology  
This is a prospective , double -arm phase II study. The treatment schema detail is in Section 6.3.  
 
Treatment administered  
Patients will  or will not receive adjuvant Stereotac tic Body Radiotherapy  (SBRT)  at various 
levels depending upon tumor volume. Subsequent evaluations will measure the efficacy of the 
adjuvant SBRT.  
 
Efficacy data collected  
The following evaluations will be performed to assess the efficacy of preoperative stereotactic 
radiation therapy:  
 Page 4 of 19                                                      14-151 • Objective local control rate measuring tumor volume  
• Health Related Quality of Life assessment using the University of Washington Quality -
of-Life-Revised (UW -Qol-R) 
 
Safety data collected  
The following evaluation s will be conducted to assess the safety of radiosurgery:  
• Recording of all toxicity data per NCI CTCAE version 4.0  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Page 5 of 19                                                      14-151 1.0 BACKGROUND  
 
1.1 Salvage Surgery for Recurrent Head -and-Neck Cancers  
Recurrent and second -primary head -and-neck cancers (rHNC) in a previously -irradiated  
field represent a therapeutic challenge (1). Even with adjuvant therapy, rHNC occurs in  
≥20-30% of high -risk postoperative patients and ≥30% of patients treated with definitive  
chemorad iotherapy (2 -3). While there are no randomized data to test the benefits of  
salvage surgery after prior irradiation, for patients who can have surgical resection, based  
on available data, surgical resection represents the currently accepted standard of car e (4- 
5). However, even patients with resectable rHNC are at high -risk for subsequent failure  
(67% overall failure rates). In patients with close or positive surgical margins following  
salvage surgery, recurrence rates of nearly 100% have been reported (6) . To improve  
tumor control in this setting adjuvant re -irradiation techniques along with chemotherapy  
has been used with mixed but limited success (7 -10). 
 
1.2 Adjuvant Re -Irradiation  
The only phase III experience evaluating adjuvant therapy after surgical  salvage is from the  
Institute Gustave -Roussy (7). In this phase III study, 130 previously -irradiated rHNC  
patients were randomized following salvage surgery to chemotherapy + re -irradiation  
(CT/Re -RT) versus observation. Chemotherapy consisted of six cycl es of hydroxyurea and  
continuous infusion 5 -FU, while adjuvant re -irradiation was delivered to a total dose of 60  
Gy in a split -course fashion (the contemporaneous RTOG standard). Disease -free survival  
(DFS), but not overall survival (OS), was improved wit h the addition of adjuvant CT/Re -RT 
(the study was not powered for OS). However, this treatment was not without toxicity.  
Grade 3 or 4 mucositis was seen in 28% of patients and 39% of patients had grade 3 or 4  
late toxicity versus only 10% of patients in the observation arm. This is the only level I  
evidence for adjuvant therapy in re -irradiation setting. Thus the data supports the role of  
re-irradiation in improving local control albeit with the expense of significant toxicity.  
 
1.3 Stereotact ic Body Radiotherapy  
Stereotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT), is a treatment technique that incorporates advances in radiation 
planning and delivery to provide highly conformal doses of radiation with a  
steep -dose gradient to surrounding critical organs -at-risk. Since 2001, researchers at the  
University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute have been pioneers in the use of frameless  
extracranial SBRT for a variety of benign and malignant lesions. The advantages of SBRT in  
the setting of re -treatment of high -risk pat ients with head and neck carcinomas are a highly  
conformal treatment volume that affords a small number of fractions, decreased overall  
treatment time, and radiobiological advantages (where acute responding tissue is better  
spared with higher doses per fra ction/lower overall dose to) minimizing acute toxicity.  
 
1.4 Experiences with SBRT at the University of Pittsburgh  
Stereotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT) has emerged as a promising treatment option in  
patients with unresectable rHNC. Initial phase I dose-escalation study from the University  
of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute established the safety of SBRT up to 44 Gy in 5 fractions  
(11). Numerous subsequent international single -institution studies have confirmed the  
primary benefits of SBRT relative to co nventional re -irradiation ± chemotherapy for  
unresectable rHNC: decreased toxicity with comparable tumor control/survival (12 -17). 
 Page 6 of 19                                                      14-151 Further studies from the University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute have established a dose  
volume  response model and shown similar outcomes for non -squamous versus squamous  
histologies (18 -19). Moreover, longitudinal prospective evaluations of patient -reported  
quality of life (PR -QoL) have shown that improved tumor control associated with SBRT 
reirradiation  ameliorates d ecreased PR -QoL resulting from rSCCHN which transcended all  
measured domains in a validated PR -QoL assessment tool. This improvement was  
independent of age, use of cetuximab, tumor volume, and interval since prior irradiation  
(20). Finally, recent prospect ive data has suggested that the addition of cetuximab to SBRT  
may improve tumor control without significant increases in re -irradiation toxicity for  
unresectable rHNC (21 -22). While there is growing evidence for SBRT in unresectable rHNC,  
there is limited data in the adjuvant setting (23). We recently reported our experience using  
SBRT following salvage surgery for patients with compromised/positive surgical margins  
and extra -nodal extension at high -risk for recurrence (24). Based on these results, SBRT  
may improve tumor control relative to salvage surgery alone and reduce toxicity relative to  
conventional adjuvant radiotherapy ± chemotherapy in rHNC (see Table 1). We seek to  
confirm these retrospective observations with the prospective trial evaluating SBRT  to 
observation post -surgery.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Page 7 of 19                                                      14-151 2.0 OBJECTIVES  
 
 Primary  
 
2.1  To compare the 1 -year local control in patients with operable, recurrent previously -irradiated  
        squamous cell head -and-neck cancers with or without adjuvant SBRT.  
 
 Secondary  
 
2.2  To determine the locoregional progression -free survival (PFS) distant PFS, overall PFS  
        (local + regional + distant), and overall survival (OS).  
 
2.3  To evaluate the acute and late toxicities of adjuvant SBRT in the re -irradiation setting  
       following salvage surgery.  
 
2.4  To determine pro gnostic factors that may predict the likelihood of local failure, regional  
       failure, or OS in this cohort to guide future management.  
 
2.5  To compare the impact of adjuvant SBRT versus a wait -and-see approach on patient  
       reported quality of li fe (PR -QoL).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Page 8 of 19                                                      14-151 3.0 INVESTIGATIONAL PLAN  
 
3.1 Overall design and plan of the study  
Detailed visit -by-visit study procedures and a study flow chart are provided in Section 6.3.  Prior 
to enrollment, all subjects will be evaluated with medical records to confirm patient received 
diagnosis of recurrent or second -primary head -and-neck squamo us cell carcinomas. Additionally, 
these records will confirm the patient had had macroscopic complete (R0/R1) salvage surgery and 
previous radiation. Patients will receive a  Stereotactic Body Radiotherapy and then followed 
periodically for up until 2 years . 
 
3.2 Screening procedures  
• Medical history (including review of pathology and laboratory values) and physical 
examination  
• Pathologic confirmation of diagnosis and disease status/staging with biopsy to rule out 
metastatic disease (if necessary)  
• Baseline la boratory assessment, including CBC and blood chemistry  
• Urine or blood β -HCG within 14 days prior to study start for females who are not at least 
one year post -menopausal or who have not undergone a surgical sterilization procedure  
• CT or PET -CT of the neck and chest  
• Baseline Quality of Life Assessment  
 
3.3 Personnel performing the procedures  
All procedures will be performed by appropriate certified medical personnel, including, but not 
limited to physicians, nurses, technologists and research staff.  
 
3.4 Location and duration of procedures  
All study visits will take place on an outpatient basis in the UPMC Shadyside Radiation  
Oncology Department. However, it is possible that a subject may be an inpatient at the  
time of diagnosis.  All procedures will be performed by appropriate certified medical personnel.  
 
3.5 Timeline of study procedures  
Once eligible by screening and enrolled in study, patients will be randomized into one of two arms. 
One arm will receive SBRT treatment for 1 – 2 weeks. The second arm will receive no SBRT and 
will continue with standard of care treatment. Patients will be followed for 8 -12 weeks after 
treatment and every 3 -6 months for up to 24 additional months. Extended long -term follow -up will 
occur as clinica lly indicated until death.  
 
3.6 Research Activities  
 
3.6.1 Pretreatment Evaluation  
The following tests/procedures will be performed within 3 months prior to registration unless 
otherwise specified:  
• Medical history and physical examination  
• Pathologic confirmation of diagnosis and disease status/staging with biopsy to rule out 
metastatic disease if necessary  
• Baseline laboratory assessment, including CBC and blood chemistry  
 Page 9 of 19                                                      14-151 • Urine or blood β -HCG within 14 days prior to study start for females w ho are not at least 
one year post -menopausal or who have not undergone a surgical sterilization procedure  
• CT (computed tomography) scan or FDG -PET-CT (18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron 
emission tomography/computed tomography) of the neck and chest  
• Baseline Quality of Life Assessment (University of Washington – Quality of Life – 
Revised (UW -QoL-R) 
 
3.6.2 Randomization  
Once the participant is deemed eligible for the study based upon the screening procedures, the 
patient will be randomized. The randomi zation of subjects to one of the two treatment arms will 
be in a 1:1 ratio,  between the presence or absence of SBRT treatment.  The Hillman Cancer 
Center biostatics facility has a randomizer, an intranet application for randomly assigning 
patients to differ ent thresholds, which will be used for the randomization in the trial.  
 
3.6.3 Treatment  
Steriotactic Body Radiotherapy (SBRT) will be performed on 1 of the treatment arms. Group  
1 will receive SBRT for 1 -2 weeks.  
 
3.6.3.1 Tumor Volume  
Tumor volumes <25cc will receive 40Gy (5 fractions of 8Gy per fraction). Tumor volumes ≥25cc 
will receive 44 -50Gy (5 fractions of 8.8 – 10 Gy per fraction). Ideally, all tumor volumes ≥25cc 
will receive 50Gy over 5 fractions; however, at the discretion of the treating radiation oncologist 
based on tumor bed volume, prior radiation dose, and proximity to critical organs , the dose can be 
reduced to 44 Gy over 5 fractions.  
 
3.6.3.2 Randomized Arm  
Patients randomized to the adjuvant SBRT arm will receive 40 -50Gy in 5 fractions on non -
consecutive days in 1 -2 weeks  on an outpatient basis. SBRT should be completed at a minimum 
of 4-weeks following salvage surgery, with a maximum of 12 -weeks. CTV (clinical target volume) 
will represent the tumor bed/high -risk region as defined by head and neck surgeon and radiation 
oncologist. A maximum of 5mm expansion from CTV to PTV  (planning target volume) shall be 
applied  
 
 Treatment Volumes < 25cc will receive 40Gy (5 fractions of 8 Gy per fraction)  
 Treatment Volumes ≥ 25cc will receive 44 -50Gy over 5 fractions (5 fractions of 8.8Gy per  
    fraction). Ideally, all tumors volumes ≥ 25cc will receive 50Gy over  
5 fractions; however, at the discretion of the treating radiation  
oncologist based on tumor  volume, prior radiation dose and  
proximity to critical organs, the dose can be reduced to 44Gy over 5  
fractions as outlined in prior SBRT protocols.  
  
3.6.3.3 Specifications  
SBRT treatments are to be delineated using CT -based planning with custom thermo plastic  
mask for immobilization. SBRT is to be delivered using linear accelerators commissioned to  
deliver SBRT such as Cyberknife™ M6 (Accuracy, Inc., Sunnyvale, CA) Trilogy™ or  
TrueBeam™ STx (Varian Medical Systems Inc., Palo Alto, CA), with daily image guidance to  
 Page 10 of 19                                                      14-151 set-up verification and assessment of intra - and inter -fraction motion.  
 
3.6.4 Follow -up/Long -term follow -up/Extended long -term follow -up procedures  
Follow -up evaluations will be completed in patients in both arms (SBRT and wait -and see).  
They will be carefully followed every 3 -6 months for 24 months or until death. Evaluations  
will consist of the following:  
• Interim medical history and physical examination  
• Careful documentation of Toxicity According to National Cancer Institute Common 
Toxicity  Criteria Events Scale version 4.0  
• Follow -up Patient -Reported Quality of Life Assessment (PR -QoL)  
• FDG PET -CT at 8 -12 weeks post -treatment then every 12 weeks  
 
 
TABLE 1: Treatment Schema  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.6.5 Methods of Measurement  
The methods of measurement are as follows:  
 
CT, PET/CT, or MRI are the best currently available methods for measuring disease status.  
Lesions that can be accurately measured in at least one dimension ≥ 10mm (1.0 cm). If  
measurable disease is restricted to a solitary lesion, its neoplastic nature should be  
confirmed by cytology/histology.  
 
Clinically detected les ion will only be considered measurable when superficial (vis -à-vis skin  
nodules and palpable lymph nodes). Documentation should include color photography and  
ruler estimation of size.  
 
3.6.6 Evaluation of Disease Status and Survival  
Survival and time to pr ogression will be measured from the date of salvage surgery to date  
of death, appearance of new metastatic lesion, or objective tumor progression.  
 
 
 
 
 
  Pre-Study  During 8 -12 
weeks  Q 12 -24 weeks  SBRT Post for 
2-years  
History + 
Physical   
X  
X  
X  
X 
Imaging  X X X  
QoL 
Assessment   
X  
X  
X  Clinical Visit  
Assessment  
 Page 11 of 19                                                      14-151 4.0 SUBJECT SELECTION AND ELIGIBILITY  
 
4.1 Selection of subjects  
Forty -two ( 42) patients with recurrent or second -primary head -and-neck squamous cell 
carcinomas  within a previously -irradiated field with high -risk features (compromised/positive 
surgical  margins or extra -nodal extension) following macroscopic complete (R0/R1) salvage  
surgery  will be recruited for this randomized phase II study.  
 
4.2 Identification and initiation of contact with study participants  
Potential research subjects are first identified by their primary doctor/clinical team. The  
research project will be discuss ed by the caregiver with the patient. If interested, the  
patient will be informed at this time either to contact the research team to express his/her  
interest in participating. Other subjects are referred in specifically for possible participation  
in a stu dy which they or their physicians are aware of based on publications which list  
clinical trials at UPCI. "Cold -calling" will not be used to recruit subjects. Potential subjects  
will be approached by clinicians who are directly involved in their care. "Find er's fees" for  
referring a potential subject for participation in a research study are prohibited.  
 
Physicians and other health care professionals in the area are aware of active studies at  
UPMC Radiation Oncology Department by means of various publications including the World  
Wide Web. Such publication and Web listings are not advertisements for specific studies.  
Rather, they are public listings of trials available.  
 
Once a subject is identified as a potential participant in a research study as indicated above,  
he/she is screened for eligibility. No identifiable information (e.g. name, diagnosis,  
treatment, etc.) will be released until the subject has given written authorization. No  
research -related procedures (including review of the su bject's medical records) will be  
performed until the subject has provided written informed consent. The consent process will  
be carried out as a joint effort among the subject's physicians, the study coordinators, and  
a physician who is listed as an invest igator on the study.  
 
4.3 Inclusion criteria  
Each patient must meet all of the following inclusion criteria for study enrollment:  
• Age ≥18 with ability to provide written informed consent  
• Pathologically proven recurrent or second -primary head -and-neck cance r receiving prior  
radiotherapy with or without chemotherapy  
• Prior radiotherapy to a dose of ≥50Gy  
• No evidence of distant metastases  
• Macroscopic complete salvage surgery with curative intent (surgery was not performed  
only for biopsy or palliation). Final p athology and imaging must indicate a R0 or R1  
resection (no gross disease remaining).  
• High -risk pathologic features must be present: compromised/positive surgical margins  
(≤ 2mm) or extra -nodal extension (patient with other high -risk features gross perinueral  
invasion, bone invasion, angiolyphatic invasion, or a constellation of these factors may be  
eligible based on case -by-case basis at discretion of principal investigator).  
• Karnofsky Performance Status ≥60 (ECOG 0 -2) 
 Page 12 of 19                                                      14-151 • Any number or type of prior chemotherapy is allowed (patient may receive concurrent or  
adjuvant systemic therapy such as cetuximab at the discretion of the treating oncologic  
team).  
 
4.4 Exclusion criteria  
Patie nts meeting any of the following exclusion criteria are not eligible for enrollment:  
• Evidence of distant metastases on any staging or imaging modality  
• Women who are breast feeding, or have a positive pregnancy test (reproductive age  
should use effective bi rth control during study if randomized to SBRT treatment arm)  
• Any patient with gross residual disease following salvage surgery  
• Any co -morbidity or condition of sufficient severity to limit full compliance with the  
protocol per assessment by the principal investigator.  
 
4.4.1 Specific criteria to exclude pregnant females and feta/neonatal exposure  
 
For all females who are not at least one year post -menopausal or who have not undergone a  
surgical sterilization procedure, a urine pregnancy test will be done. If this is positive or  
questionable a serum pregnancy test will be done. The results of the pregnancy test must be  
negative in order for the patient to participate in this study.  
 
Women who are pregnant or breastfeeding are excluded from part icipation in this study. All  
females of childbearing potential must have a serum pregnancy test within 14 days of the  
radiation. The results of the pregnancy test must be negative for the patient to participate  
in this study.  
 
Subjects will be informed by the study staff that is extremely important that they not  
become pregnant or father a baby while participating in this study, and that avoiding sexual  
activity is the only certain method of preventing pregnancy. However, if a subject chooses  
to be sexually  active, he or she must agree to use an appropriate "double barrier" method  
of birth control starting from the subject's participation in the screening process to include a  
negative pregnancy test to continue as a study participant and continuing until two  weeks  
following the subject's participation in the study. The methods of birth control should  
include intrauterine device (IUD), contraceptive sponge and spermicide, in addition to male  
use of a condom, or the female should be using prescribed birth control implant. Subjects  
will be instructed to notify the study doctor of their birth control method prior to the start of  
the study, and also if they plan to change their birth control method.  
 
Subjects that choose to be sexually active must be made awar e that even with the use of  
birth control measures, pregnancy could still result. Subjects will be informed that if they  
become pregnant or impregnate a woman while taking part in this study, they must  
immediately notify one of the doctors listed on the co nsent form.  
 
The information listed above will be relayed to applicable subjects by the study staff. It will  
also be listed in the consent form, a copy of which will be provided to the patients for them  
to take home.  
 
 Page 13 of 19                                                      14-151 5.0 TREATMENT EVALUATION, ADMINISTRATI ON, AND MODIFICATION  
 
5.1 Primary outcome variables to be evaluated  
 
(1) Primary endpoint - local progression -free survival (LPFS), defined as the time from the  
date of randomization to the date of local progression or the date of death from any cause.  
Subjects who are alive and have not progressed will be censored at their last follow -up date.  
(2) Regional PFS, distant PFS, PFS (local + regional + distant): The definition of these  
endpoints is similar to LPFS.  
(3) Overall Survival: time from the date of randomization to the date of death due to any  
cause.  
(4) Acute and late toxicities of adjuvant SBRT. Acute toxicity is defined as toxicity occurring  
within 3 months of completion of SBRT. Late toxicity is defined as toxicity occurring later  
than 3 months after SBRT treatment.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Page 14 of 19                                                      14-151 6.0 STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS  
 
6.1 Study objectives and design  
The primary objective is to compare the 1 -year local control in patients with  
operable, recurrent previously -irradiated squamous cell head -and-neck cancers with or  
without adjuvant SBRT.  
 
Secondary objectives include  to determine the  locoregional progression -free survival (PFS) 
distant PFS, overall PFS (local + regional +  distant), and overall survival  (OS) ; to evaluate the  
acute and late toxicities of adjuvant  SBRT in the re -irradiation setting following salvage surgery ; 
to determine prognostic factors  that may predict the likelihood of local failure, regional failure, 
or OS in this cohort to guide  future management ; and to compare the impact of adjuvant SBRT 
versus a wait -and-see approach on patient reported quality of life (PR -QoL),  
 
This clinical trial is planned as a prospective, randomized, two -arm Phase II study.  
 
6.2 Sample size and accrual rate  
Forty (40) patients will be screened for each arm of the trial so that 21 subjects will be cleared to 
participate in research procedures in each arm of the trial.  
 
The following assumptions are used in determining the sample size for this study:  
Primary endpoint: local progression -free survival (LPFS)  
One-sided type I error rate: 0.10  
Statistical power: 90%  
One-year LPFS for surgery alone: 20%  
One-year LPFS for surgery + SBRT: 52%  
Randomization: 1:1  
2-year accrual period and one year follow -up following closure of accrual  
5% lost to follow -up in each arm  
 
To have 90% power to detect the above 32% difference in one -year LPFS, using a onesided  
log-rank test with a 0.1 level of significance, 21 patients are required in each arm.  
The randomizati on of subjects to one of the two treatment arms will be in a 1:1 ratio. The  
UPCI Biostatistics Facility has a randomizer, an intranet application for randomly assigning  
patients to different treatments, which will be used for the randomization in this tria l. 
 
6.3 Statistical approach and analysis  
 
(1) Efficacy Analysis Set: includes all enrolled and randomized patients. Subjects will be  
analyzed according to their randomized treatment group assignment.  
(2) Safety Analysis Set: The safety analysis will be performed according to the actual  
treatment received.  
 
 
 
 
 Page 15 of 19                                                      14-151 6.4 Analysis of primary and secondary endpoints  
 
Survival endpoints  will be estimated by the Kaplan -Meiermethod and the corresponding median 
survival times (with 95% confidence interval)  reported. The one -year LPFS will also be 
estimated along with its 95% confidence interval.  Survival will be compared between the two 
arms with the one -sided log -rank test. Effect of  treatment and other variables (e.g., baseline 
characteristics, biomarkers etc) on su rvival will  be explored with Cox regression models.  
 
For the quality of life (QoL) data analysis, each item of the UW -QoL-R will be individually  
assessed. The mean and standard deviation of the observed data will be summarized at  
each collection time and p lotted against time, from baseline through the end of patient  
follow -up. Generalized linear models (such as cumulative logit models) for repeated  
measures will be used to explore if there are significant changes in PR -QOL over time.  
 
Using NCI Common Termi nology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE v4.0), the number of  
patients experiencing adverse events over their course of treatment will be characterized by  
type of adverse event and grade, by the time of onset in relation to the first day of therapy,  
and w hether the event is clinically significant. Attribution of adverse events to treatment  
(unrelated, unlikely, possibly, probably, or definitely) will also be summarized for any serious  
adverse events (SAEs), CTCAE grade 3 or higher. The percentage of patien ts experiencing  
SAEs that are considered to be treatment -related (probable or definite) will be determined.  
The percentages of patients experiencing the acute/late toxicities associated with SBRT will  
also be estimated along with their exact 95% confidence intervals.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Page 16 of 19                                                      14-151 7.0 DATA SAFETY AND MONITORING  
 
7.1 Data monitoring plan  
All research -related procedures will be conducted by certified medical personnel. The study  
staff will monitor the subjects closely throughout the study for any adverse events, and  
subjects will be strongly encouraged to report all issues to the study staff. All supportive  
measures consistent with optimal patient care will be given throughout the study . 
 
All subject data will be collected by the University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute’s  
Department of Radiation Oncology’s Protocol Office. All data will be secured in a password  
protected file with observance of all applicable HIPAA regulation. A data safety monitoring  
board comprised of the PI, ph ysicians, residents, fellows, physics, statistician and research  
manager will meet monthly to evaluate toxicity for this trial. Subjects/adverse events will  
be discussed at these monthly disease center meetings. Unexpected serious adverse events  
will be re ported to the IRB and DSMC, and minutes of the monthly disease center meetings  
will be reviewed at the DSMC meetings.  
Reports will be submitted annually at the time of the yearly renewal.  
 
7.2 Adverse events  
All serious AE shall be reported meeting criteri a for reporting can be found on the University  
of Pittsburgh Institutional Review Board’s website at http://www.irb.pitt.edu. In the event  
of such adverse event, the investigator must report the event(s) via phone within 24 hours  
and a written report filed  within 24 hours to the Principal Investigator, or the University of  
Pittsburgh Cancer Institute’s Department of Radiation Oncology’s Protocol Office.  
All adverse events will be reported as per the University of Pittsburgh IRB web site at  
www.irb.pitt.edu  . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Page 17 of 19                                                      14-151 8.0  REFERENCES  
 
1. Patel PR, Slama JK.  Reirradiation for recurrent head and neck cancer.  Expert  Rev 
Anticancer Ther 2012;12:1177 -89. 
 
2. Bernier J, Domenge C, Ozsahin M, et al. Postoperative irradiation with or without 
concomitant chemotherapy for locally advanced head and neck cancer. N Engl J Med 
2004;350:1945 –1952.  
 
3. Brockstein B, Haraf DJ, Rademaker AW, et al. Patterns of failure, prognostic factors and 
survival in locoregio nally advanced head and neck cancer treated with concomitant 
chemoradiotherapy: A 9 -year, 337 -patient, multi -institutional experience. Ann Oncol  
2004;15:1179 –1186.  
 
4. McDonald MW, Lawson J, Garg MR, et al.  ACR appropriateness criteria of recurrent head 
and neck cancer after prior definitive radiation.  Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys  2011;80:1292 -
8.  
 
5. Goodwin WJ, Jr.  Salvage surgery for patients with recurrent squamous cell carcinoma of the 
upper aerodigestive tract: when do the ends justify the means?  Laryng oscope  2000;110:1 -
18. 
 
6. Zafereo ME, Hanasono MM, Rosenthal DI, et al.  The role of salvage surgery in patients 
with recurrent squamous cell carcinoma of the oropharynx.   Cancer  2009;115:5723 -33. 
 
7. Janot F, de Raucourt D, Benhamou E, et al. Randomized trial  of postoperative reirradiation 
combined with chemotherapy after salvage surgery compared with salvage surgery alone in 
head and neck carcinoma. J Clin Oncol  2008;26:5518 –5523 . 
 
8. Kasperts N, Slotman BJ, Leemans CR, et al. Results of postoperative reirradiat ion for 
recurrent or second primary head and neck carcinoma. Cancer  2006;106:1536 –1547.  
 
9. De Crevoisier R, Domenge C, Wibault P, et al. Full dose reirradiation combined with 
chemotherapy after salvage surgery in head and neck carcinoma . Cancer  2001;91:2071 –
2076.  
 
10.  Machtay M, Rosenthal DI, Chalian AA, et al.  Pilot study of postoperative reirradiation, 
chemotherapy, and amifostine after surgical salvage for recurrent head -and-neck cancer.  Int 
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2004;59:72 -77. 
 
11. Heron DE, Ferris RL, Kara mouzis M et al. Stereotactic body radiotherapy for recurrent 
squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck: results of a phase I dose -escalation trial. Int J 
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys  2009;75:1493 -500. 
 
 Page 18 of 19                                                      14-151 12. Rwigema JC, Heron DE, Ferris RL, et al. Fractionated ster eotactic body radiation therapy in 
the treatment of previously -irradiated recurrent head and neck carcinoma. Am J Clin Oncol  
2010;33:286 –293. 
 
13.  Siddiqui, F, Patel, M, Khan, M, et al. Stereotactic body radiation therapy for primary, 
recurrent, and metastati c tumors in the head -and-neck region. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys  
2009; 74:1047 -1053.  
 
14. Unger KR, Lominska CE, Deeken JF, et al. Fractionated Stereotactic Radiosurgery for 
Reirradiation of Head -and-Neck Cancer . Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys  2010;77:1411 -9. 
 
15. Kodani N, Yamzaki H, Tsubokura T, et al. Stereotactic body radiation therapy for head and 
neck tumor: disease control and morbidity outcomes. J Radiat Res  2011;52:24 –31. 
 
16.  Roh KW, Jang JS, Kim MS, et al.  Fractionated stereotactic radiothe rapy as reirradiation for 
locally recurrent head and neck cancer.   Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2009;74:1348 -55. 
 
17. Cengiz M, Ozyigit G, Yazici G, et al.  Salvage reirradiation with stereotactic body 
radiotherapy for locally recurrent head -and-neck tumors.  Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys  2011; 
81:104 -9. 
 
18.  Rwigema JC, Heron DE, Ferris RL, et al. The impact of tumor volume and radiotherapy 
dose on outcome in previously irradiated recurrent squamous cell carcinoma of the head and 
neck treated with stereotactic bo dy radiation therapy. Am J Clin Oncol  2011;34:372 -379. 
 
19.  Vargo JA, Wegner RE, Heron DE, et al.  Stereotactic body radiation therapy for locally 
recurrent, previously irradiated nonsquamous cell cancers of the head and neck.  Head Neck  
2012;34:1153 -61. 
 
20.  Vargo JA, Heron DE, Ferris RL, et al. Prospective evaluation of patient -reported quality -of-
life outcomes following SBRT± cetuximab for locally -recurrent, previously -irradiated head 
and neck cancer. Radiother Oncol  2012;104:91 -5. 
 
21. Heron DE, Ferris RL, Burton  S, et al. Interim results of phase II trial of concurrent cetuximab 
and stereotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT) for the recurrent squamous cell carcinomas of the 
head and neck (SCCHN). Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys  2010;78:S105.  
 
22. Comet B, Kramar A, Faivre -Peirret M, et al.  Salvage stereotactic reirradiation with or 
without cetuximab for locally recurrent head -and-neck cancer: a feasibility study.   Int J 
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys  2012;84:203 -9. 
 
23. Hasney CP, Swanton RG, Friedlander PL.  Cyberknife stereotactic radiosurgery for recurrent 
squamous cell carcinoma of the head ad neck following salvage surgery with close or 
positive margins.   Laryngoscope  2010;120:S152.  
 Page 19 of 19                                                      14-151 24.  Vargo JA, Kuicek GK, Ferris RL, et al.  Adjuvant stereotactic body radiotherapy ± 
cetuximab following salvage surgery in previously -irradiated head -and-neck cancer.   
Laryngoscope  2013 [Epub ahead of print].  
 
25. Jones AS, Hanafi ZB, Nadapalan  V, et al.  Do positive resection margins after ablative 
surgery for head and neck cancer adversely affect prognosis?  A study of 352 patients with 
recurrent carcinoma following radiotherapy treated by salvage surgery.  Br J Cancer  
1996;74:128 -132. 
 
26. Chopra  S, Gupta T, Agarwal JP, et al.  Re-irradiation in the management of isolated neck 
recurrences: current status and recommendations.  Radiother Oncol  2006;81:1 -8. 
 
27. Weymuller EA, Alsarraf R, Yueh B, Deleyiannis FW, Coltera  MD.  Analysis of the 
performance of the University of Washington Quality of Life instrument and its modification 
(UW -QOL -R).  Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg  2001;127:489 -93. 
 