1 
04/16/20  Grant Study Title: Trial of vitamin D supplementation and neuro muscular function in older adults  
Working Study Title: EVIDENCE - Exploring VItamin D’s Effects o n NeuromusCular Endpoints Study 
 
Principal Investigator, Co-investigator(s): Denise K. Houston (PI), Steve Kritchevsky, Osvaldo Delbono, 
Janet Tooze, Tony Marsh, Anthony M olina, Jamehl Demons, and Cla udia Campos 
 
Sponsor or funding source: NIH/NIA and The Office of Dietary Supplements  
 
Background, Rationale and Context 
The scientific community disagrees on the amount of vitamin D r equired for optimal health. In 2011, the 
Institute of Medicine (IOM) concluded that while scientific evi dence supports a role of vitamin D for bone 
health, compelling evidence was lacking for non-bone health out comes, primarily due to the paucity of 
randomized trials.1 The IOM also concluded that 25-hydroxyvitamin D (25[OH]D) conc entrations ≥20 ng/mL (50 
nmol/L) were sufficient for bone and overall health. However, m any vitamin D experts, citing a large volume of 
observational research, maintain that 25(OH)D concentrations ≥3 0 ng/mL (75 nmol/L) are beneficial for non-
bone health outcomes such as neuromuscular function.2-4 The resolution of this controversy is vital given that 
almost 20 million older adults have 25(OH)D concentrations betw een 20 and 30 ng/mL.5 If increasing 25(OH)D 
concentrations above 30 ng/mL is beneficial, it would have an e normous impact on improving the health of 
approximately one-half of the older U.S. adult population. To r esolve these controversies, randomized 
controlled trials are needed to both establish non-bone health benefits of remediating low 25(OH)D 
concentrations and determine whether increasing 25(OH)D concent rations from ≥20 to ≥30 ng/mL is beneficial. 
Growing evidence indicates tha t vitamin D’s effect on reducing falls is mediated by improvements in 
neuromuscular function.6-8 We and others have shown associations between 25(OH)D concentra tions and 
muscle strength and physical performance measures associated wi th fall risk (e.g., gait, balance) in 
observational studies.6,9-13 Yet trials of vitamin D supplementation on changes in muscle s trength and physical 
performance are equivocal,14 likely due to inadequate trial duration, small sample sizes, i nsufficient vitamin D 
dose, and sample heterogeneity. Moreover, vitamin D’s effects o n the mechanisms underlying neuromuscular 
function are not well understood. Determining whether increasin g 25(OH)D concentrations to ≥30 ng/mL will 
improve neuromuscular deficits that are risk factors for falls and elucidating the underlying physiological 
mechanisms linking vitamin D and neuromuscular function could c hange clinical practice by providing evidence 
to guide vitamin D supplementation recommendations for neuromus cular-related outcomes in older adults. 
Objectives 
To conduct a 12-month, double-blind randomized placebo controll ed trial in 136 older (65-89 yrs) men and 
women with initial 25(OH)D concentrations of 18-<30 ng/mL to de termine the effect of increasing 25(OH)D 
concentrations to ≥30 ng/mL through vitamin D 3 supplementation on 1) change in neuromuscular functions that 
are established risk-factors for falls in older adults; and 2) changes in the underlying physiological mechanisms 
over 4 months in a subset of 36 randomly selected participants.  Participants will be randomized to 2000 IU/d of 
vitamin D 3 (a dose expected to increase 25(OH)D concentrations by ~14 ng/ mL) or placebo. 
Hypothesis 1: Compared to participants randomized to placebo, p articipants randomized to vitamin D 3 will 
have increased lower extremity muscle power and strength, incre ased physical performance, decreased 
postural sway, and reduced rate of falls over 12 months. 
Hypothesis 2: Compared to participants randomized to placebo, p articipants randomized to vitamin D 3 will 
have increased type II muscle fibers, muscle fiber force, and m yofiber regeneration, and decreased muscle 
fiber denervation over 4 months.  
Lower extremity muscle strength and power, physical performance , and postural sway will be assessed at 
baseline, 4 months and 12 months  and falls assessed monthly. Mu scle biopsies of the vastus lateralis  will be 
taken at baseline and 4 months to assess muscle fiber type, con tractility, and denervation, and number and 
differentiation stage of satellite cells. The primary outcomes are change in lower extremity muscle power 
(Hypothesis 1) and change in percentage of type II (fast-twitch ) muscle fibers (Hypothesis 2). Secondary 
outcomes include change in lower extremity muscle strength, phy sical performance, and postural sway 
(Hypothesis 1) and muscle fiber contractility, muscle fiber den ervation, and number and differentiation of 
satellite cells (Hypothesis 2). Falls will also be assessed as an exploratory outcome (Hypothesis 1). 
  
2 
04/16/20  Methods and Measures 
Experimental Overview/Study Design 
 This study is a 12-month, double-blind randomized placebo cont rolled trial in 136 older (65-89 yrs) men 
and women with initial 25(OH)D concentrations of 18-<30 ng/mL t o determine the effect of increasing 25(OH)D 
concentrations to ≥30 ng/mL through vitamin D 3 supplementation on 1) change in neuromuscular functions that 
are established risk-factors for falls in older adults and 2) c hanges in the underlying physiological mechanisms 
over 4 months in a subset of 36 randomly selected participants.  Participants will be randomized to vitamin D 3 
(2000 IU/d) or matching placebo in a 1:1 ratio stratified by ge nder and race.  
Recruitment of study participants  We plan to recruit and randomize a total of 136 older men and women with baseline 25(OH)D 
concentrations of 18-<30 ng/mL to 2000 IU/d vitamin D
3 or matching placebo for 12 months in a 1:1 ratio 
stratified by gender and race. In addition, a subset of partici pants that are eligible to receive the muscle biopsy, 
i.e. those not taking anti-coagulants, will be randomly selecte d in a 1:1 ratio stratified by gender and race to be 
included in the 4 month muscle biopsy mechanistic substudy. We will stop recruitment into the muscle biopsy 
substudy when we can ensure that at least 32 participants will complete the pre- and post-muscle biopsy. Our 
power analyses show that 125 persons total (assuming 90% retent ion) will yield >80% power to detect 
between group differences of a 10% relative increase in lower e xtremity muscle power and 16 persons/group 
(assuming 32 completers) will yield >80% power to detect a 25% difference in the relative increase in type II 
muscle fibers between groups in the muscle biopsy substudy. We plan to recruit, screen, and enroll these 
individuals continuously at the rate of approximately 5-6/mo du ring years 1-4 of the study. We will target men 
and women aged 65 to 89 years who live in the surrounding area via media advertisements (newspaper), 
targeted mass mailings, the VITAL newsletter, and community out reach events. We will also target age-eligible 
patients being seen at the Downtown Health Plaza (DHP) via post ers, flyers, targeted mass mailing, and 
approaching age-eligible patients following their scheduled DHP  care provider visit to see if they would be 
interested in learning more about the study. 
Participant screening and randomization Telephone screening.  All prospective participants will initially be screened via tel ephone to determine general 
eligibility. They will be ask ed about their age, medical histor y, and current medications and dietary 
supplements. All participants mus t meet the inclusion/exclusion  criteria in Table 1 . These selection criteria will 
eliminate participants with conditions that may affect their ab ility to safely perform the neuromuscular function 
tests, consume vitamin D supplements, or undergo a muscle biops y. The telephone screen will be 
administered in person to interested DHP patients following the ir scheduled DHP care provider visit if time 
allows by the DHP recruitment coordinator; otherwise, it will b e administered over the phone. 
Table 1. Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria 
Inclusion Criteria  Exclusion Criteria
Age ≥65 to <90 years Serious o r uncontrolled chronic disease in cluding: insulin-dependent diabetes; cancer 
requiring treatment in past year , except non-melanoma skin canc ers; acute coronary event 
(within the last 6 months), uncontrolled angina, heart failure (stage 3-4), PAD, or stroke 
(within the last 6 months) ; uncontrolled hypertension  (BP>200/110 mmHg); chronic 
respiratory disease requiring the use of oxygen; uncontrolled e ndocrine/metabolic disease; 
neurological (e.g., Parkinson’s di sease) or hematological disea se; liver or renal dysfunction 
(eGFR <45 mL/min/1.73m2); and musculoskeletal impairments severe enough to preclude 
functional testing 
SPPB <10 if chair stand score is <3 
or <10 if chair stand score is a 4 Evidence of impaired cognitive function (MoCA <18) 
Initial serum 25(O H)D concentration 
of 18 to <30 ng/mL Taking prescription vitamin D 2  or taking >1000 IU/day of vitamin D 3 (from all sources); 
taking an oral corticoste riod (i.e., prednisone at  7.5mg/d for 3 mos or  equivalent); taking 
hormone replacement therapy 
Not dependent on a walker Inability or contraindications to con sume daily vitamin D suppl ements (e.g., hypercalcemia, 
sarcoidosis, history of kidney stones in last 5 years) 
Willing to provide informed consent 
and adhere to the protocol Knee or hip surgery within the la st 6 months or planned knee or  hip surgery within the next 
year 
Not involved in another behavioral, exercise, or investigational drug 
intervention study Unwillingness to undergo a muscle biopsy  
3 
04/16/20  Table 1. Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria 
Inclusion Criteria  Exclusion Criteria
Self- reported phys ical performance 
difficulty Weight loss of ≥5% or more in the past 3 months  
 BMI >40 kg/m2 
 Eye surgery (e.g., cataract sur gery) within th e past month or planned within the next month 
 If the PI feels the participan t is unlikely to  follow the prot ocol 
 
Screening, consent and randomization.  Individuals who pass the telephone screening will be scheduled for 
a screening visit (SV) in the Geriatric Research Clinic (GRC) i n the Sticht Center on Aging. Before any data 
collection, all participants will provide written informed cons ent and complete a HIPAA authorization form in 
accordance with the Wake Forest School of Medicine Institutiona l Review Board policies. DHP patients who 
pass the in-person telephone screen will be given the option of  completing a prescreen visit (PSV; informed 
consent, MoCA, SPPB, and weight and height for BMI; see below) with the DHP recruitment coordinator at the 
DHP after their scheduled DHP care provider visit if time allow s. If they are eligible following the prescreen 
visit, they will be scheduled for the full screening visit at t he GRC.  
Individuals who meet all eligibility criteria and provide infor med consent will be invited back for the first 
baseline visit 1 (BV1). At the end of BV1, participants will be  randomized to participate in the muscle biopsy 
substudy (those who are not on anti-coagulants) using a web-bas ed randomization scheme (developed by Dr. 
Tooze) with blocking by gender and race with a goal of achievin g n=32 pre- and post-muscle biopsy samples. 
At the end of baseline visit 2 (BV2), participants will be rand omized to one of the two study interventions 
(vitamin D 3 or placebo) using a web-based randomization scheme (developed by Dr. Tooze) with blocking by 
gender, race, and muscle biopsy subgroup. Block size and the ra ndomization sequences will be unknown to 
the research staff. Muscle biopsy and intervention assignment w ill be generated using a program that the study 
coordinator will access from her PC through the study website.   
Schedule and organization of assessment visits  All assessments will be conducted during 5-6 visits according to the timeline in Table 2 : 1 screening visit; 2 
baseline visits; 1 or 2 (participants undergoing a muscle biops y only) 4-month mid-intervention follow-up visits; 
and 1 12-month post-intervention follow-up visit. Assessments w ill take place in the Geriatric Clinical Research 
Unit, the Geriatric Research Clinic, or the Downtown Health Pla za (prescreen visit only).  
Table 2. Assessment timeline                                               Visit code SV BV1 BV2 On 
trial 4FV1 4FV2 12FV 
Activity/assessment                                                       Week number -3 -1 0 16 17 52 
Informed consent, review inclusio n/exclusion cr iteria, demograp hics, 
weight*, height*, BP and pulse, fasting scree ning blood draw (m etabolic 
blood panel and 25(OH)D), short physical performance battery 
(SPPB)*, cognitive screen (MoCA)*, medical history, 
medication/supplement review X    
  
 
Lower extremity muscle power, k nee extensor and flexor strength ,  
expanded SPPB, timed up and go, 20-m walk test (usual and fast) , 
postural sway, gait velocity, 4 stair climb, grip strength, CHA MPS 
Physical Activity Questionnaire , arthritis and joint pain quest ionnaire, 
review changes to medical history and medications/supplements  X    
X  
X 
Fasting blood draw (25(OH)D, 1 ,25(OH)D, storage), MAT-sf, sun 
exposure questionnaire, calcium and vitamin D diet questionnair e (done 
only at BV2) BP, height, weight, and a fasting metabolic panel will also be done at 4FV and 12FV 
Fasting 25(OH)D (LabCorp) will also be done at 4FV and 12FV  to 
determine response to vitamin D supplements    X   
X 
 X  
CES-D, DSST. The MoCA will al so be repeated at 12FV   X    X  
Muscle biopsy ( subsample only )   X    X   
Randomization   X     
Monthly supplement adherence and falls assessment calendars    X    
SV = screening visit; BV = baselin e visit; FV = follow-up visit ; * See PSV below.   
 The screening visit (SV) will be conducted in the morning foll owing an 8-hour fast for measurement of 
25(OH)D concentration and a metabolic panel for screening purpo ses. After vitals (blood pressure, pulse, 
4 
04/16/20  height and weight) are collected and the blood draw completed, participants will be given a snack and continue 
with the remainder of the visit. First, the short physical perf ormance battery (SPPB)15 will be administered and 
scored. If still eligible, participants will then undergo a cog nitive screen (assessed using the Montreal Cognitive 
Assessment, MoCA16) and a medical history and review of medications and dietary s upplements. A prescreen 
visit (PSV)* may be scheduled to ass ess eligibility on the SPPB  and the MoCA. If this occurs, the participant 
will sign consent at the PSV and then weight and height will be  obtained to calculate BMI and the SPPB and 
MoCA will be administered. If the participant qualifies, they w ill then be scheduled for the SV (and those 
measures would not be repeated again until follow up). The reas on for doing a prescreen visit is those two 
measures will often disqualify someone from the study so it gre atly improves our work flow and scheduling 
abilities to schedule this as a separate visit since the PSV ca n be done in the afternoon whereas the SV is a 
fasting visit and has to be done in the morning. Following the screening visit, the study coordinator will check 
the lab results to determine if the participant is still eligib le based on blood work (25(OH)D between 18 and <30 
ng/mL, liver and serum calcium within normal limits, and eGFR≥4 5). If the participant is eligible, they will be 
notified and scheduled for a baseline visit. If the participant  is not eligible, they will be notified and given a copy 
of their screening blood work (if it was completed).  At the first baseline visit 1 (BV1), lower extremity muscle po wer (Nottingham Power Rig) and strength 
(Biodex dynamometer), physical performance (the expanded SPPB, timed up and go (TUG), and 20-m walk 
speed), grip strength, postural sway (AMTI AccuSway force platf orm), timed stair climb, and gait velocity 
(GAITRite mat) will be measured. The CHAMPS Physical Activity Q uestionnaire for Older Adults,17 to estimate 
physical activity in a typical week over the past 4 weeks, and an arthritis and joint pain questionnaire will be 
administered. At the completion of BV1, the study coordinator w ill check to see if the participant has been 
selected to be in the muscle biopsy substudy and tell the parti cipant whether or not he/she was selected to be 
in the muscle biopsy substudy. Participants selected for the mu scle biopsy substudy will be given oral and 
written instructions to prepare for the muscle biopsy (not to t ake aspirin, ibuprofen, naproxen, or other 
medications that may affect bleeding, platelets, or bruising fo r 5 days before the procedure and to avoid 
strenuous physical activity for 36 hours before the procedure).  Participants will be scheduled for their BV2 visit 
approximately one week later.  
 Baseline visit 2 (BV2) will be conducted in the morning after an 8-hour fast in which participants will have 
blood drawn for analyses of serum 25(OH)D and 1,25(OH)D, plasma  PTH, bioenergetic profiling (muscle 
biopsy subsample only), and blood for storage. For participants  randomized to the muscle biopsy subsample, a 
muscle biopsy of the vastus lateralis  (quadriceps) will also be taken. After vitals are collected an d the blood 
draw (and muscle biopsy for those in the substudy) completed, p articipants will be given a snack. Participants 
in the muscle biopsy substudy will be given the option to conti nue with the BV2 visit following the muscle 
biopsy or to come back the following week to complete the BV2 q uestionnaires and be randomized in a 
separate visit. Then the Mobility Assessment Tool for Disabilit y – short form (MAT-sf) to assess difficulty 
performing daily tasks, Digit Symbol Substitution Test (DSST) t o assess attention and psychomotor speed, the 
Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale (CES-D) to me asure mood and depression, and a sun 
exposure questionnaire (a modified version of the NHANES Dermat ology Questionnaire) to estimate sun 
exposure and protection habits will be administered. At the con clusion of BV2, the study coordinator will check 
to see if the participant is randomized to receive either vitam in D 3 or placebo. The study coordinator will 
provide the participant with a 4-month supply of vitamin D 3 or placebo pills and monthly fall calendars to 
complete and provide oral and written instructions for taking t he study supplement and completing the monthly 
fall calendars. Participants in the muscle biopsy substudy who do not elect to return the following week to 
complete the BV2 visit will receive a phone call 2-4 days follo wing the procedure to check that they are not 
experiencing any adverse effects that may be related to the pro cedure (pain/soreness, signs of infection such 
as fever, excessive bleeding, or limitations in activity). The study physician (Dr. Demons) will be notified of any 
adverse effects related to the muscle biopsy procedure and any necessary action taken (e.g., follow-up visit 
scheduled with the study physician).  Monthly phone calls: Participants will be called once a month throughout the study to ensure they are 
taking and tolerating the supplements and completing the monthl y fall calendars. The study coordinator will ask 
about any falls or adverse events that may have occurred.   The first 4-month follow-up visit (4FV1) will occur during wee k 16 of the intervention. After an 8-hour 
overnight fast, participants will have their vitals taken and b lood drawn for analyses of serum 25(OH)D and 
1,25(OH)D, plasma PTH, metabolic panel, and storage followed by  a snack. Lower extremity muscle power 
and strength, physical performance, grip strength, postural swa y, stair climb, and gait velocity will be 
measured. The CHAMPS Physical A ctivity Questionnaire, MAT-sf, a rthritis and joint pain questionnaire, and 
sun exposure questionnaire will be administered. Any changes to  medical history and current medications and 
5 
04/16/20  dietary supplements will be reviewed. The first four months of fall calendars will be collected and reviewed. 
Participants will return the study supplement bottle with any r emaining pills and an 8-month supply of vitamin 
D3 or placebo pills will be provided to them to last through the end of the study. Instructions for taking the study 
supplement and completing the monthly fall calendars will be re viewed. Participants in the muscle biopsy 
substudy will be scheduled for their follow-up muscle biopsy an d given oral and written instructions to prepare 
for the procedure. Following the 4-month follow-up visit, the s tudy coordinator will check the lab results to 
determine if the 25(OH)D concentrations are at or above 30 ng/m L in participants randomized to receive 
vitamin D 3. Participants randomized to vitamin D 3 who have not achieved 25(OH)D concentrations ≥30 ng/mL 
at the 4-month follow-up visit will be instructed to take 2 pil ls/d (4000 IU) for the remainder of the study. The 
study coordinator will also check to ensure that serum calcium levels are ≤10.6 mg/dL. If a participant’s serum 
calcium is >10.6 mg/dL at 4FV1, the protocol to assess whether the participant is hypercalcemic outlined in the 
Human Subjects Protection section (p. 10) will be followed.  The second 4-month follow-up visit (4FV2) will occur 3-5 days after the 4FV1 visit in the morning for 
participants in the muscle biopsy substudy who had a viable mus cle biopsy sample at BV2 only. After an 8-
hour overnight fast, participants will undergo a muscle biopsy of the vastus lateralis  followed by a snack. 
Participants will receive a phone call 2-4 days following the p rocedure to check that they are not experiencing 
any adverse effects that may be related to the procedure. The s tudy physician (Dr. Demons) will be notified of 
any adverse effects related to the muscle biopsy procedure and any necessary action taken. 
 The 12-month follow-up visit (12FV) will occur during week 52 of the intervention. After an 8-hour overnight 
fast, participants will have their vitals taken and blood drawn  for analyses of serum 25(OH)D and 1,25(OH)D, 
plasma PTH, metabolic panel, and storage followed by a snack. L ower extremity muscle power and strength, 
physical performance, grip strength, postural sway, stair climb , and gait velocity will be measured. The 
CHAMPS Physical Activity Questionnaire, MAT-sf, arthritis and j oint pain questionnaire, DSST, CES-D, the 
MoCA, and sun exposure questionnaire will be administered. Medi cal history and current medications and 
dietary supplements will be reviewed. Monthly fall calendars wi ll be collected and reviewed. Participants will 
return the study supplement bottles with any remaining pills. P articipants will then be told of their randomization 
assignment. 
Muscle biopsies: Muscle will be obtained in a stratified sample  of participants from the vastus lateralis  
using the percutaneous needle biopsy technique.18 The vastus lateralis  is a good representative muscle for the 
in vitro  study of skeletal muscle in older persons.19 By conducting an average of 3-4 passes (some may require 
additional passes depending on body composition) from a single incision, tissue samples of an average of 
500mg (more or less depending on body composition) are obtained , which is sufficient for the mechanistic 
analyses proposed and any remaining tissue will be frozen and s tored for future use. Up to 40 participants may 
be approached for a baseline muscle biopsy to ensure that at le ast 32 participants complete the 4-month 
muscle biopsy and allow for biopsy samples that yield insuffici ent muscle for analyses. Once the specimen is 
obtained, visible blood and connective tissue is removed, and p ortions for specific assays are partitioned. A 
portion for histochemical analysis (≥20 mg) will be oriented su ch that the fibers run longitudinally, mounted in a 
histology tray in embedding medium (OCT compound, Miles Laborat ory, Naperville, IL), and frozen in 
isopentane cooled to its freezing point with liquid nitrogen. A nother portion to be used for RNA extraction (≥50 
mg) will be snap frozen in liquid nitrogen (within 30 seconds o f the biopsy) and stored at -80°C until analyses. 
A portion of muscle tissue will be homogenized for extraction o f mitochondria (≥50 mg). 
Vitamin D intervention 
Participants will be randomized to either 2000 IU/d of vitamin D3 or placebo for 12 months. The vitamin D 3 
supplements and matching placebo pills will be manufactured by Tishcon Corp (Salisbury, MD). The proposed 
dose is expected to increase 25(OH)D concentrations by ~14 ng/m L.20,21 Previous vitamin D supplement 
dosing studies have observed a plateau in the increase in 25(OH )D concentrations in 6 to 8 weeks.20,22,23 In a 
recent dose-response study, a vitamin D 3 dose of 1600 IU/d increased 25(OH)D concentrations from <20 
ng/mL to ≥30 ng/mL over 1 year in 97.5% of participants.24 However, we will measure serum 25(OH)D at the 4-
month visit and increase the vitamin D 3 dose to 4,000 IU/d in participants in the intervention group w ith 
25(OH)D concentrations <30 ng/mL (for every participant in the intervention group that has to increase their 
vitamin D 3 supplement dose to 2 pills/d after the 4-month follow-up visit , a random participant from the placebo 
group will also be instructed to take 2 placebo pills/d). Suppl ements will be dispensed at baseline and at the 4-
month visit. Participants will be instructed to maintain their regular dietary intake and typical physical activity 
level and instructed to refrain from starting any other dietary  supplements or changing the frequency/dose of 
any supplements they are current ly using during the study. A br own bag review will be done at each visit of all 
6 
04/16/20  dietary supplements participants are currently taking; and the brand and type, frequency, and dose of vitamin 
D and calcium will be recorded on the medication inventory. Sup plement adherence will be monitored monthly 
via phone calls and the remaining supplement pills counted at t he 4- and 12-month visits. Since the half-life of 
25(OH)D is ~2-3 weeks,27 occasional missed pills should have a minimal effect on 25(OH) D concentrations. 
The neuromuscular function assessments, mechanistic studies of the muscle biopsy sample, and assessments 
of 25(OH)D and 1,25(OH) 2D will be conducted by study staff and investigators blinded to  the vitamin D 
intervention assignment. 
Outcome measures  
All examiners are trained in the standardized conduct of all as sessments before data collection.  
Participants will be instructed to wear appropriate and comfort able clothing, and standardized written 
instructions will be provided prior to each study visit. Study outcomes (i.e., lower extremity muscle power and 
strength, expanded short physical performance battery, timed up  and go, 20-m walk, stair climbing, grip 
strength, postural sway, gait velocity, and the mechanistic stu dies described below for the muscle biopsy 
substudy) will be assessed by blinded staff. 
Lower extremity muscle power  will be measured using the No ttingham Power Rig, a safe, conve nient 
method for assessing power output from the lower limb which has  been used reliably in older adults.28 
Participants will sit in a chair and unilaterally depress a foot lever attached to a flywheel as hard and as fast as 
they can. Power output, derived from the acceleration of the flywheel from 5 trials on each leg at maximal 
effort, will be recorded in Watts. Participants that have had a  unilateral hip or knee replacement should not 
have that side tested. Participants who have had eye surgery (e .g., cataract surgery) within the past month 
should not be tested. For the primary analyses, the ratio of th e overall maximum leg power (right or left leg at 
baseline) to body weight in kg will be used and the maximum leg  power from the same leg used at 4- and 12-
month follow-up. For analyses correlating muscle composition an d physiology from the muscle biopsy 
substudy with leg power, the ratio of maximum leg power on the leg biopsied to body weight in kg will be used 
in analysis. 
 Lower extremity muscle strength  will be measured using an isoki netic dynamometer (Biodex) at o ne 
speed (60°/sec) with the participant sitting and the hips and k nee flexed at 90°. The dynamometer will be 
adjusted for each participant and all adjustments will be recor ded to duplicate the position for subsequent 
assessments. Start and stop angles will be set at 90° and 30°. Participants will be asked to extend the knee 
and push as hard as possible against the resistance pad. Streng th is expressed as peak torque in Newton-
meters (Nm). Two trials will be done consisting of 4 repetition s each. Participants who have a history of brain 
aneurysm, cerebral bleeding in the past 6 months, or blood pres sure >199/99 mmHg should not be tested. 
Participants that have had a unilateral knee replacement should  not have that side tested. Participants who 
have had eye surgery (e.g., cataract surgery) within the past m onth should not be tested. The maximum knee 
extensor strength of the 4 repetitions from trial 2 for the dom inant leg will be will be used in analyses unless 
unable to test the dominant leg (i.e., knee replacement) in whi ch case the non-dominant leg will be used; the 
maximum knee extensor strength from the same leg will be used a t 4- and 12-month follow-up. For analyses 
correlating muscle composition and physiology from the muscle b iopsy substudy with leg strength, the 
maximum leg strength on the leg biopsied will be used in analys is. 
Physical performance  will be assessed using the expanded Short Physical Performance  Battery (SPPB). 
The expanded SPPB consists of 5 repeated chair stands, standing  balance (semi- and full-tandem stands and 
a single leg stand for 30 seconds), a 4-m walk to assess usual gait speed, and a narrow 4-m walk test of 
balance (walking at usual pace within lines of tape spaced 20 c m apart).29 Scores for the traditional 0-12 point 
SPPB can also be obtained from thes e tests. We will also assess  physical performance using the Timed Up 
and Go (TUG). TUG measures the time a person takes to stand up from a standard chair, walk 3 m, turn, walk 
back to the chair, and sit down again.30 A practice trial is given, followed by a timed trial. Usual an d fast walking 
speed over 20 m will be assessed to determine the functional re serve that exists in walking speed and to 
provide a substantive challenge over the usual pace 6-m walk us ed in the expanded SPPB. Stair climbing time 
will be assessed by measuring the time to climb up 4 steps on a  4-step staircase (test will be performed 2 
times). The faster of the 2 trials will be used in analysis. 
 Grip strength  will be measured twice in each hand to the nearest 2 kg using an isometric Hydraulic Hand 
Dynamometer (Jamar, Bolingbrook, IL) and the mean value from th e stronger hand at baseline will be used in 
analysis and the mean value from the same hand used at 4- and 1 2-month follow-up. Participants will be 
excluded from performing the test if they report hand-pain or r ecent hand or wrist surgery.   
7 
04/16/20  Postural sway  during quiet stance will be assessed from Center-of-Pressure ( COP) trajectory data 
collected at 100 Hz using an Advanced Mechanical Technology Inc orporated (AMTI) AccuSway biomechanics 
force platform. Participants will be barefoot in an upright sta nce with arms relaxed comfortably at their sides, 
feet abducted 10 degrees, and heels separated medio-laterally b y 6 cm.31 COP data will be collected in a 
series of 10 30-sec trials standing on the force plate alone (c losed trials) followed by 5 30-sec trials standing on 
the force plate with a 3 inch Airex foam pad (foam trials) plac ed on top. Four posturographic parameters 
(maximum anteroposterior (AP) and mediolateral (ML) displacemen t, average sway velocity, and 95% 
confidence ellipse) calculated by the AMTI Balance Clinic softw are will be used to quantify postural sway and 
the average of the closed and foam trials used in analysis.31 Studies have linked indicators of ML stability32-36 
or AP stability37 to clinical measures of balance performance and/or fall risk.  
Gait velocity will be measured using a 4.88 m long instrumented carpet (GAITR ite, CIR Systems Inc., 
Clifton, NJ). The carpet is composed of 18,432 force sensing se nsors arranged in a 48 wide x 384 long grid. 
Data are sampled at either 60, 120, or 240 Hz. The GAITRite is interfaced with a laptop computer that runs 
software to calculate variables related to gait performance. Th e GAITRite system is a valid instrument for 
determining gait velocity and other spatiotemporal parameters. In the testing procedures, participants walk 
across the carpet, beginning 2 m in front of the carpet and wal king 2 m past the end of the carpet to allow for 
acceleration and deceleration. Participants make multiple passe s over the carpet at either the preferred (4 
trials) or fast (4 trials) velocity. At the preferred velocity,  participants are told to walk at “at a pace that feels 
comfortable to you (as if you were walking to the mailbox or wi ndow shopping at the mall).” At the fast velocity 
the instructions are to walk “a s quickly as you can without run ning.” The software calculates individual trial and 
average data on gait velocity and spatiotemporal gait character istics and these data can be exported for further 
analysis. Summary data on velocity (m/sec; averaged over the 4 usual and 4 fast trials) and the average of the 
left and right leg for double support (percent of cycle), singl e support (percent of cycle), stance (percent of 
cycle), swing (percent of cycle), stride length (cm), and base width (cm) for both the usual and fast trials will be 
used in analysis.  
Falls  will be defined as an event whereby an individual unexpectedly  comes to rest on the ground or 
another lower level. Participants will be provided monthly fall  calendars, considered the “gold standard”,38 and 
asked to mark any falls that occur on the calendar. Completion of monthly fall calendars will be monitored via 
monthly phone calls and collected at the 4- and 12-month visits . Total number of falls over the 12-month follow-
up will be used in analysis. 
Single fiber-type composition and fiber size  will be examined in muscle biopsies using the ATPase, pH 
9.4 and 4.6 technique, combined with laminin immunostaining in 10 µm muscle sections and the absolute and 
relative number of type I, IIA, IIX fiber subtypes and their cr oss-sectional area quantified. The relative number 
of fiber type and their cross-sectional area at baseline and 4- month follow-up will be used in analysis.   
Single type I and type II muscle fiber contraction force, short ening velocity, and power  will be 
examined in 10-15 fibers per muscle biopsy sample. For single m uscle fiber preparation, physiologic tests, and 
experimental procedures, we will follow described techniques.39,40 Briefly, a slack test will be used to determine 
the unloaded shortening velocity (V o). The force/velocity relationship will be determined by perfor ming a series 
of isotonic contractions of the muscle fiber.41 The muscle fiber will be placed in activating solution (pCa 4. 5) 
and, after it reaches peak force, subjected to three isotonic s teps varying from 3-80% of P o. After the final step, 
the fiber is rapidly (<1ms) slackened by 20% of its length. Thi s zeroes the force transducer, providing a 
baseline for force measurement. Shortening velocity and force w ill be assessed over the final half of each step, 
and force averaged over the last half of each step. Velocity wi ll be calculated as the slope of the position 
recorded over the same time period. A total of 5-6 isotonic con traction series will be performed, generating 15-
18 pairs of velocity and relative force measurements. Data will  be fit to the Hill equation using an iterative, 
nonlinear curve-fitting procedure to draw the force/power relat ionship. All forces will be normalized to the fiber’s 
cross sectional area. At the end of each functional experiment,  the single-fiber segment will be used to 
determine myosin heavy chain (MHC) composition using silver sta ining.41,42 Fibers will be excluded from 
analysis if force declines more than 10% or if fibers break or show partial myofibrillar tearing during the 
experimental protocol. Absolute fiber force (slk max mN), norma lized fiber force to cross-sectional area (slk pk 
kN/m2), unloaded shortening velocity (V o, FL/s), the velocity extrapolated to a force of zero (FV Vmax,  FL/s), 
power (uN*FL/s), and normalized power (W/liter) by fiber type ( I or II) at baseline and 4-month follow-up will be 
used in analysis. 
8 
04/16/20  Type I and type II denervated myofibers  will be identified using ATPase pH 9 plus NCAM 
immunostaining analysis. The whole muscle biopsy will be cryose ctioned and 10-12 slices will be mounted per 
slide. Alternate slides will be stained for NCAM and positive f ibers and their expression pattern (perimeter or 
whole cross section) will be reported as a percent of the total  number of fibers. Additionally, fiber grouping (the 
area occupied by at least two contiguous fibers expressing a pr edominantly similar myosin heavy chain isoform 
– type I or II, fully surrounded by fibers of the same predomin ant myosin heavy chain), a classical evidence of 
a neurogenic process, will be examined. NCAM+ number and densit y (NCAM+ number per cross sectional 
area) and fiber grouping (%) by fiber type (I or II) at baselin e and 4-month follow-up will be used in analysis. 
Regulation of Runx1 and its dependent genes will be assessed by RNA extraction using the TRIzol 
method (Invitrogen). Runx1 and its dependent genes will be meas ured by qRT-PCR and normalized to 
GAPDH expression. We will use the cycle threshold (CT), defined  as the number of cycles required for the 
fluorescent signal to cross the threshold, as the parameter to calculate 2-CT, which is needed to compare the 
gene expression in two different samples. Expression of Runx1, Chrn, Scn5a, Myh3, Myog, NCAM1 at 
baseline and 4-month follow-up will be used in analysis. 
Satellite cell differentiation will be assessed in serial muscle cross sections immunostained for 
Pax7/NCAM satellite cells (SCs). SC number and density (SC per cross sectional area) by fiber type (I or II) at 
baseline and 4-month follow-up will be used in analysis. 
Vitamin D Receptor (VDR) expression  will be measured by Western blots using the C20 antibody raise d 
against a peptide mapping at the C terminus of VDR and normaliz ed to actin used as a loading control. VDR 
concentration at baseline and 4-month follow-up will be used in  analysis. 
Exploratory outcomes (Wake Forest Pepper Center Pilot; Anthony Molina, PI) 
Respirometric profiling will be used to assess bioenergetic capacity, respiratory contr ol and electron 
transport chain function. This will be performed by examining t he oxygen consumption profile of blood cells and 
mitochondrial fractions extracted from muscle tissue. Specific outcomes of mitochondria function include 
respiratory control ratio (RCR), state 3 (maximal oxygen consum ption rate), and state 4o (oxygen consumption 
upon inhibition of ATP synthase).  
Respirometry of isolated mitochondria will be performed in orde r to examine intrinsic mitochondrial function 
(type 1). Purified mitochondria with intact electron transport chain activity will be obtained from muscle tissue. 5 
ug of mitochondria will be loaded into each well of V7 Seahorse  plates for analysis using an XF-24-3 system 
(Seahorse Bioscience, Billerica MA). Specific measures obtained  include: baseline respiration (state 2), 
maximal respiration (state 3), maximal uncoupled respiration (s tate 3u), and proton leak (state 4). 
Mitochondrial mass and biogenesis will be determined by western  blot analysis. Changes in mitochondrial 
mass will be assessed using VDAC/porin and COXIV expression. PG C1a, TFAM, SIRT1 and SIRT3, 
regulators of mitochondrial biogenesis, will also be measured o n the same immunoblot. All primary antibodies 
will be obtained from Abcam (Cambridge, MA). Quantification of each immunoreactive product will be 
performed by densitometry using Kodak (Rochester, NY) imaging s ystem.   
Blood-based bioenergetic profiling.  PBMC’s, monocytes, lymphocy tes, and platelets will be separated from 
whole blood and assessed for basal respiration, maximal respira tion, ATP linked respiration, spare respiratory 
capacity, proton leak, and non-mitochondrial respiration as des cribed above.  
Covariates 
Vitamin D status: Fasting blood samples will be collected in th e morning by trained and certified 
phlebotomists at baseline and 4-month and 12-month follow-up. B lood samples will be sent to LabCorp for 
assessment of serum 25(OH)D for screening purposes and at 4-mon th follow-up to assess 25(OH)D response 
to vitamin D supplementation and  for assessment of serum calciu m at each visit. After processing, 
approximately 4 ml of the blood from each visit will be aliquot ted and stored at -80ºC until it is shipped to the 
Clinical and Analytical Lab (CACL) at the Human Nutrition Resea rch Center on Aging at Tufts University where 
the samples will be stored at -80ºC until analysis. Serum total  (D 2 and D 3) 25(OH)D will be assessed in 
duplicate using LC/MS/MS  (Waters Acquity UPLC with TQD triple quadrupole mass spectromet er; CV: 6%) 
along with the 25(OH)D standard reference material (SRM 972) de veloped by the National Institute of 
Standards and Technology and the National Institutes of Health Office of Dietary Supplements for assay 
calibration.45 Serum 1,25(OH) 2D will also be assessed in duplicate using the 5500 QTRAP LC/MS /MS System 
(AB Sciex LLC) with Electrospray after immunoaffinity extractio n, 4-phenyl-1,2,4-triazole-3,5-dione (PTAD) 
9 
04/16/20  derivatization, and methylamine adduction (intra- and interassa y CVs of 5% and 8.5%, respectively). Repeat 
analyses will be conducted when duplicate samples differ by 10%  or more. Storage: Approximately 10 ml of 
blood (serum and plasma) from each visit will be stored at -80º C in the Pepper Tissue Repository (IRB# 1219) 
for storage. Any person wishing to use this blood will obtain I RB approval first.  
Season: The season in which the participant is screened for eli gibility will be obtained to examine if the 
season of enrollment affects the outcomes due to seasonal effec ts on endogenous vitamin D synthesis and 
25(OH)D concentrations.  
Supplement adherence: Although we will attempt to enhance adher ence by monthly calls to participants, 
there may be inter-individual variability in adherence to suppl ementation. At the 4 and 12-month study visits, 
participants will be asked to return any unused supplements for  a pill count to determine participant adherence. 
Our primary analyses will be an intent-to-treat analysis of the  effects of the vitamin D intervention, but 
secondary analyses will include adherence as a covariate. 
Calcium and vitamin D intake: Calcium and vitamin D intake from  diet and supplements will be assessed at 
baseline using a short calcium and vitamin D intake questionnai re.  
Cognitive function will be assessed during screening using the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA), 
participants must score ≥18 to be eligible. We will also assess  psychomotor speed, attention, and working 
memory using the Digit Symbol Substitution Test (DSST). Partici pants are given a series of numbered symbols 
and then asked to draw the appropriate symbols below a list of random numbers. The score is the number of 
correctly made matches in 2 minutes (120 seconds). The cognitiv e function tests will be audio recorded by the 
assessor using a hand held digital recorder. The recordings wil l be used to properly score the tests as well as 
be available for quality control testing. The recordings will b e deleted once the study is over and the data that 
was entered has been verified. 
Mood will be assessed using the 20-item Center for Epidemiologi c Studies Depression Scale (CES-D). 
Demographic characteristics including age, gender, race, educat ion level, and socio-economic status will 
be recorded and used as covariates if necessary.  
Body mass index (BMI) will be ca lculated from measured height a nd weight.  
Physical activity will be measured using the CHAMPS Physical Ac tivity Questionnaire for Older Adults17 at 
baseline, 4- and 12-month follow-up. In addition to being a str ong correlate of the neuromuscular function 
measures, more physically activ e participants will likely have increased sun exposure, and therefore, may have 
higher endogenous vitamin D production.  
Activities of daily living will be assessed using the Mobility Assessment Tool – Short Form (MAT-sf) at 
baseline, 4- and 12-month follow-up. This is a novel, computeri zed tool for self-assessment of functional 
performance designed to reduce bias from factors such as age, g ender and body image.  
Sun exposure will be assessed at baseline, 4- and 12-month foll ow-up using a modified version of the 
NHANES Dermatology Questionnaire that includes questions on sun  exposure and sun protection habits.  
Medical information regarding co-morbidities will be ascertaine d at the screening visit and reviewed at the 
4- and 12-month follow-up visits. Arthritis and joint pain will  be assessed by self-report on a questionnaire. We 
will record medication and supplement use at screening and 4- a nd 12-month follow-up. Participants will also 
be asked to bring in medications and dietary supplements for a "brown bag" review. The medication form will 
specifically ask about the use of vitamin D-containing suppleme nts, anti-inflammatory agents, protein 
supplements, and sex steroids or corticosteroids. 
Statistical Power  
We anticipate that, based on the vitamin D 3 supplement dose of 2000 IU/d, 25(OH)D concentrations will 
increase by an average of 14 ng/mL in the intervention group at  12-month follow-up. In preliminary data from 
17 older individuals with vitamin D concentrations between 20 a nd 40 ng/mL, we found that a 1 ng/mL 
difference in 25(OH)D concentration was associated with a 0.023 3 watts/kg of body weight difference in lower 
extremity muscle power for men and women combined. If this cros s-sectional relationship holds for the 
intervention study, we would expect approximately a 0.33 watts/ kg difference between the two groups at 
follow-up (0.0233 x 14 = 0.33). However, due to the uncertainty  of extending cross-sectional data to 
longitudinal follow-up and the potential for non-adherence, we have based the power on a difference in means 
10 
04/16/20  Table 3. Differences detected w ith 80% power for secondary outc omes  
Outcome measure SD* Detectable 
difference 
Short Physical Performance Battery score30 2.05 0.92 
Timed Up and Go, sec82 5.40 2.43 
20-m Gait Speed, m/sec31 0.15 0.07 
Lower extremity muscle strength, Nm31 21.0 9.5 
Postural Sway, mm122 
     Mediolateral (ML) displacement      Anteroposterior (AP) displacement  
2.7 3.9  
1.2 1.8 
*SD calculated assuming a correlation of 0.43 between baseline and follow-
up measures. of a 10% relative change between the two groups; a magnitude th at resulted in a clinically meaningful increase 
on the SPPB in a previous intervention trial.47 The mean (SD) of lower extremity muscle power was 1.74 
(0.382) watts/kg in our preliminary data; a 10% difference (0.1 74 watts/kg) corresponds to an effect size of 
0.45. A sample size of 125 participants randomized in a 1:1 rat io stratified by gender and race will have >80% 
power to detect this difference using analysis of covariance (A NCOVA), adjusting for the baseline measure, 
based on a baseline mean of 1.7 watts/kg (SD=0.444) and a corre lation between baseline and 12-month 
follow-up of 0.708 with a 0.05 two-sided significance level. Al lowing for a 10% dropout rate, we will inflate the 
sample size to 136. We will also have sufficient power to detec t a difference of 0.45 SD or greater in our 
secondary outcomes ( Table 3 ).  
For the muscle biopsy subsample, we 
have powered on a difference between the two groups of a relative increase in type II fibers of 25% or more. In our preliminary data in older adults with 25(OH)D concentrations <25 ng/mL treated with 2000 IU/d vitamin D
3 
plus 1200 mg/d calcium (n=4) or calcium only (n=2), a 1 ng/mL increase in 25(OH)D concentration was associated with a 2.35% relative increase in type II fibers over 4 months. Assuming that 25(OH)D concentrations will increase by an average of 14 ng/mL in the intervention group, we 
expect to see a relative increase in type II fibers of approxim ately 33%. To allow for the possibility that there 
may be some increase in the control group due to “drop in” by s tarting vitamin D supplements or changes in 
physical activity, a 25% differ ence between the two groups in t he relative increase in type II fibers was 
selected. Two previously published vitamin D supplementation st udies observed increases in type II fibers of 
31-34%
48 and 202%.49 Thus, the detectable 25% relative increase is in line with ind ependent observations. A 
sample size of 16 in each group will have 80% power to detect a  difference of 25% assuming that the common 
standard deviation is 23.7 (based on preliminary data of n=17 p articipants in a behavioral intervention with data 
on change in type II muscle fibers) using a two group t-test wi th a 0.05 two-sided significance level. Allowing 
for 10% drop out, we will inflate the sample size to 18 per gro up, for a total of 36 participants. However, up to 
40 participants may be approached for a baseline muscle biopsy to allow for biopsy samples that yield 
insufficient muscle for analyses. 
Statistical Analyses  We will examine the distributions of all continuous outcomes o f interest, and will transform them to 
approximate normality if the outcomes show a strong departure f rom normality as evidenced by examining Q-Q 
plots and performing the Shapiro-Wilk test. Outliers will be ex amined on the chosen scale (original or 
transformed) and may be set to missing if they are 3 or more in terquartile ranges above the 75
th percentile or 
below the 25th percentile. Plausible biologic values may be retained even if they are outliers. Implausible 
biologic values may be set to missing based on a review of heal th-related events (e.g., AEs related to pain, 
fractures, surgery) in the interval surrounding the collection of the measurements.  
 The primary outcome for this trial will be the 12-month measur e of muscle power. For the muscle biopsy 
substudy, the primary outcome will be the change in type II mus cle fibers over 4-months. Our primary statistical 
analyses will proceed on the “intent-to-treat” principle in whi ch data from all randomized participants are used 
to test the primary hypotheses that compared to placebo, vitami n D 3 supplementation will result in increases in 
lower extremity muscle power and strength, and improvements in physical performance (expanded SPPB, 
TUG, and 20-m walk speed) and bal ance. Even if participants wis h to discontinue the supplements, we will still 
attempt to follow them for outcomes in order to carry out inten t-to-treat analysis at 12 months. Characteristics 
of the participants missing the 12-month follow-up outcomes wil l be compared to participants without missing 
data using chi-square tests and t-tests to determine if there a re any differences with regard to intervention 
group, demographic characteristics, and baseline neuromuscular function outcomes. If a particular group 
exhibits markedly higher drop-out rates, we will attempt to ide ntify baseline covariates that predict attrition. If 
such covariates can be identified, the analyses of outcome meas ures may need to be stratified according to 
these comparisons to decrease bias. We will use a mixed model w ith an unstructured covariance matrix to 
model after-treatment neuromuscular function outcomes between t he two groups by time, with adjustment for 
11 
04/16/20  the baseline neuromuscular function measure, age, gender, and r ace, using data from baseline, 4, and 12 
months, and estimating the baseline to 12 month change using li near contrasts. In secondary analyses, we will 
fit linear contrasts to compare whether the change between the two groups at 4 months differs from the change 
at 12 months. These analyses will be adjusted for age, gender, race, and season, as we anticipate there will be 
an effect of season on the change from baseline and 12 months. If the analyses of the characteristics of those 
missing the 12-month outcome data indicate that the missing dat a are informative, we will also consider using 
the 4-month outcome data to impute the 12-month outcome, using the trajectory models to predict the 12-
month outcome. 
 We will examine factors that m ay influence the measured respon ses to the intervention. We anticipate that 
not all individuals will respond to the vitamin D 3 dose in a similar manner due to genetic differences50-52 as well 
as differences in BMI,53,54 health status, and adherence.3 First, individuals in the vitamin D intervention group 
who have low adherence (<80%) will be excluded from the analysi s. We will also investigate treatment effects 
by attained 25(OH)D concentrations including only those in the intervention group whose 12-month 25(OH)D 
concentrations are ≥30 ng/mL. We will also fit models that incl ude BMI, health status, and other variables to 
determine if they account for any of the variation in response to the intervention on changes in the outcomes. 
For our exploratory outcome of falls, we will use a generalized  estimating equation (GEE) approach to model 
repeated measures, assuming a Poisson distribution, to compare the rate of falls in each group with 
adjustment for age, gender, and race.55 Differences in, or reasons for, attrition rates between study groups may 
complicate the analysis of the primary outcomes. Therefore, the  attrition rates will also be compared and, if a 
particular group exhibits markedly higher drop-out rates, we wi ll attempt to identify baseline covariates that 
predict attrition. If such covariates can be identified, the an alyses of outcome measures may need to be 
stratified according to these comparisons to decrease bias.  
 For the muscle biopsy subsample (n=16 per group), primary anal yses will proceed on the “intent-to-treat” 
principle in which data from all randomized participants are us ed in analyses. All participants who complete the 
4-month muscle biopsy and on whom the muscle fiber testing can be completed will be included in the analytic 
sample. Even if participants wish to discontinue the supplement s, we will still attempt to follow them for 
outcomes in order to do the intention-to-treat analysis at 4 mo nths. Characteristics of the participants missing 
the 4-month follow-up outcomes will be compared to participants  without missing data using chi-square tests 
and t-tests to determine if there are any differences with rega rd to intervention group, demographic 
characteristics, baseline physical performance, and baseline mu scle fiber testing. Our primary statistical 
analyses will focus on testing the primary hypotheses that, com pared to placebo, vitamin D supplementation 
will result in changes in skeletal muscle composition and physi ology as quantified by: fiber-type composition 
and size; fiber force, shortening velocity, and power; NCAM+ my ofibers; Runx1, Chrn , Scn5a, Myh3, Myog, 
and NCAM1 expression; SC number; VDR expression; and bioenerget ic capacity. For our primary outcome of 
percent type II fibers we will use analysis of covariance (ANCO VA) to model differences in percent of type II 
fibers between the two groups, with adjustment for the baseline  measure, age, gender, and race. Analysis of 
other continuous measures will also use the ANCOVA model to com pare the groups adjusted for age, gender, 
and race. In secondary analyses, we will examine if the percent  of participants who have a relative increase in 
type II fibers of 25% or more from baseline differs by interven tion group using Fisher’s Exact Test, and in 
logistic regression models adjusted for age, gender, and race. Furthermore, we will explore if the relationship 
between vitamin D supplementation and neuromuscular function is  mediated by change in muscle composition 
and physiology by including the va riables described above as co variates in the ANCOVA model described 
above. If the relationship between vitamin D supplementation an d power decreases by 10% or more, it will be 
considered evidence of partial mediation. 
Human Subjects Protection 
Subject Recruitment Methods      We will recruit these individuals using community-based recruit ment strategies including newspaper ads 
and mass mailings. We will also advertise in the VITAL newslett er (BG99-559) and participate in community 
outreach events.  
Informed Consent 
 Written informed consent will be obtained from each subject. T he informed consent process will follow the 
procedures of the WFSM Institutional Review Board. The study in terviewers will explain the purpose, methods 
and extent of the study to prospective participants. The potent ial participant is asked to read the informed 
12 
04/16/20  consent form and ask questions. The form is written in simple e asy to understand language. We require study 
staff to review all of the key aspects of the study verbally wi th the potential participants. Staff is provided with a 
structured checklist for this purpose. Staff is then required t o question potential participants to ascertain 
whether s/he has understood the information. Potential particip ants who are illiterate or have impaired vision 
must have the consent read to them, followed by review of the c hecklist, opportunity for questions, and 
discussion. This process will take place in a quiet, private ro om. A copy of the signed and dated consent form 
will be given to participants, and the original document will b e placed in subjects’ individual study files, which 
will be stored in a secure location. In compliance with the Hea lth Insurance Portability and Accountability Act 
(HIPAA) and the Standards for Privacy of Individually Identifia ble Health Information of the Department of 
Health and Human Services, we will access personal health infor mation only after obtaining informed consent.  
Potential Risks 
1) Neuromuscular function.  There is a small risk of injury dur ing the muscle strength and power testing, 
stair climb, postural sway and gait velocity testing, and physi cal performance testing, such as muscle 
strains or pulls, falls, or joint injury. However, these tests have been performed in large study 
populations with no significant adverse events reported. Risks will be minimized by having experienced/ 
trained staff conducting these assessments. A warm-up and range  of motion practice will be conducted 
before maximal strength testing. In addition, if a participant reports pain, dizziness, lightheadedness or 
other medical problem during the  test, the test will be termina ted.   
2) Blood Draw. Participants may experience temporary pain, brui sing, bleeding and a small  
risk of infection or fainting or dizziness during the blood sam ple collection process. Only trained staff will 
be responsible for the collection of blood samples.  
3) Muscle biopsy. There may be some temporary discomfort and bl eeding from the muscle biopsy. 
However, there is typically no discomfort felt during the proce dure due to the use of lidocaine as a local 
anesthetic injected into the muscle. Temporary numbness of the skin near the sampling site can rarely 
occur. A small amount of bruising can also occur. There is a sl ight risk of bleeding into the tissue and 
infection, but this procedure is done under sterile conditions to protect against this. There is also a risk 
of a vaso-vagal response during or after this procedure, but th ere are trained medical personnel 
performing the procedure and a fully stocked crash cart is avai lable should it be needed. To date, Dr. 
Demons and Dr. Lyles have performed >600 muscle biopsies for ag ing-related research studies without 
a serious adverse event. 
4) The risks of the vitamin D supplement intervention are minim al, but may include hypervitaminosis D. 
Although the proposed vitamin D 3 dose of 2000 IU/d is below the upper limit set by the Institut e of 
Medicine (4000 IU/d), participants could exceed the upper limit  if they begin consuming other vitamin D-
containing supplements. Participants will be advised not to beg in any new dietary supplements during 
the trial and of the possible side effects of hypervitaminosis D (e.g., non-specific symptoms such as 
anorexia, weight loss, polyuria, and heart arrhythmias; as well  as increased serum calcium which can 
lead to vascular and tissue calcification including kidney ston es). Those with contraindications to 
vitamin D supplements will be ex cluded (e.g., kidney impairment  (eGFR <45 mL/min/1.73), 
hypercalcemia, sarcoidosis, and history of kidney stones). Seru m calcium will be assessed at screening 
and at 4- and 12-month follow-up. Participants with hypercalcem ia (serum calcium >10.6 mg/dL) at 
their 4-month visit will have a repeat serum calcium drawn with in 2 weeks, and, if confirmed, the study 
supplement will be discontinued; however, we will continue foll owing participants with confirmed 
hypercalcemia for outcomes.  
Confidentiality and Privacy 
 All data are obtained for research purposes only. Confidential ity of data is maintained by using research 
identification numbers which uniquely identify each individual.  Data will be used only in aggregate and no 
identifying characteristics of individuals will be published or  presented. The information collected has a low 
potential for abuse because the data do not address sensitive i ssues. Nevertheless, appropriate measures are 
taken to prevent unauthorized use of study information. Researc h records are kept in a locked room. Data 
access will be limited to study staff. Information linking IDs to individuals is kept on a secure, password-
protected server to which only authorized study personnel will have access. Data and records will be kept 
locked and secured, with any computer data password protected. A web-based data entry system will be 
13 
04/16/20  created for this study which will allow access only to study st aff (user id and password required to access). 
Blinded staff will not have access to blinded study information  on the web-based database. Computer files are 
stored on file servers, which are backed up each night and stor ed for easy retrieval in case of emergency.  
Files may not be obtained from the research unit by persons oth er than the research personnel, who are asked 
to sign a document agreeing to maintain the confidentiality of the information. No data files distributed for 
analysis will include personal information. No reference to any  individual participant will appear in reports, 
presentations, or publications that may arise from the study. A fter the study is completed, the data will be 
stored with other completed research studies in a locked secure  area.  
Data and Safety Monitoring 
 The principal investigator will be responsible for the overall  monitoring of the data and safety of study 
participants.  The principal investigator will be assisted by o ther members of the study staff. A Data Safety 
Monitoring Board (DSMB) has been established by the NIH, with r esponsibility to monitor all aspects of the 
study, including those that require access to any blinded data.  The operational plan and all members were 
approved by the NIH Program Scientist. The NIH-appointed DSMB r esponsibilities are to:  
– review the research protocol, informed consent documents and p lans for data safety and 
monitoring;  
– advise the NIA on the readiness of the study staff to initiate  recruitment; 
– evaluate the progress of the trial, including periodic assessm ents of data quality and timeliness, 
recruitment, accrual and retention, participant risk versus ben efit, performance of the trial sites, and 
other factors that can affect study outcome; 
– consider factors external to the study when relevant informati on becomes available, such as 
scientific or therapeutic developm ents that may have an impact on the safety of the participants or 
the ethics of the trial; 
– review study performance, make recommendations and assist in t he resolution of problems 
reported by the Principal Investigator; 
– protect the safety of the study participants; 
– report to NIA on the safety and  progress of the trial;  
– make recommendations to the NIA, the Principal Investigator, a nd, if required, to the Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) concerning continuation, termination or ot her modifications of the trial based 
on the observed beneficial or adverse effects of the treatment under study; 
– ensure the confidentiality of the study data and the results o f monitoring; and,  
– assist the NIA by commenting on any problems with study conduc t, enrollment, sample size and/or 
data collection. 
 The PI, co-investigators and the biostatistician will meet reg ularly to review study progress and to examine 
reports of adverse incidents as well as participant recruitment  and follow-up. All serious  adverse events will be 
reported to the Institutional Review Board (IRB) and if the eve nt occurred as a direct result of participation in this 
study, an amendment will be made to the consent form and the PI  will request new IRB approval. The PI and 
the Medical Director will meet quarterly, or as needed, to revi ew all reported events. 
 Adverse events include any event that occurs during the course  of the study that results in a participant 
suffering physical or mental injury, pain or suffering. Adverse  events can be major, such as a subject who 
suffers cardiac arrest during neuromuscular function testing, o r minor such as a subject pulling a muscle during 
neuromuscular function testing. This includes any events occurr ing while a subject is enrolled in the study, even 
if the event did not occur while s/he was actively participatin g in the activities called for in the research protocol. 
Deviations from the study’s protocol are also considered an adv erse, unexpected, or notable event and will be 
reported to the PI. 
Both major and minor events will be reported using the study’s Adverse, Unexpected, or Notable Event 
Reporting Form. Any major event, i .e., any serious injury or li fe-threatening event, will be reported immediately 
right after completing any and all actions that are necessary t o protect the subject’s health and safety. Minor 
events will be reported within seven days. A description of the  event, and the date and location of the event will 
be recorded on this form, which will be kept in the subject’s r esearch file. 
In addition, participant safety in all Wake Forest Pepper Cente r OAIC-supported studies is monitored by a 
Data and Safety Monitoring Committee (DSMC). It reviews study r ecruitment, drop-outs, protocol changes, 
14 
04/16/20  losses to follow-up, and adverse events every 6 months. The DSM C has authority to recommend changing or 
stopping the protocol. In the latter case, the PI will immediat ely act upon the recommendation according to 
institutional policy and in consultation with the Wake Forest P epper Center OAIC Executive Committee and the 
NIH-appointed DSMB committee.   
Reporting of Unanticipated Problems, Adverse Events or Protocol  Deviations 
Any unanticipated problems, serious and unexpected adverse even ts, deviations or protocol changes will 
be promptly reported by the principal investigator or designate d member of the research team to the IRB and 
sponsor or appropriate government agency if appropriate. 
Use of biological samples by other investigators 
Biological samples may be used by investigators other than the investigators of the current study. The use 
will be limited to non-commercial purposes. The names and other  personal identifiers of the study participants 
will not be sent to any recipients of the blood or muscle sampl es. 
Storage and disposal of biological material 
Blood and muscle samples will be stored at Wake Forest Baptist Medical Center for twenty years after the 
end of the trial at which time the samples will be destroyed. B iological specimens will be stored in locked –
70oC alarmed Revco freezers located in a locked room. The Wake For est Pepper Center Integrative Biology 
Core lab coordinator (Heather Gregory) and the Core Co-Leader ( Dr. Nicklas) have access to the keys of the 
freezers. All the specimens will have numerical study IDs with no personal identifiers of the participants. These 
are stored under the Pepper Center Tissue Repository (IRB#1219) . 
 
References 
 (1)  Institute of Medicine, Committee to Review Dietary Refere nce Intakes for Vitamin D and Calcium, Food 
and Nutrition Board. Dietary reference intakes for calcium and vitamin D . Washington, D.C.: The 
National Academies Press; 2011. 
 (2)  Bischoff-Ferrari HA, Giovannucci E, Willett WC, Dietrich T, Dawson-Hughes B. Estimation of optimal 
serum concentrations of 25-hydroxyvitamin D for multiple health  outcomes. Am J Clin Nutr  
2006;84(1):18-28. 
 (3)  Dawson-Hughes B, Mithal A, Bonjour JP, Boonen S, Burckhar dt P, Fuleihan GE, Josse RG, Lips P, 
Morales-Torres J, Yoshimura N. IOF position statement: vitamin D recommendations for older adults. 
Osteoporos Int  2010;21(7):1151-4. 
 (4)  Holick MF, Binkley NC, Bischoff-Ferrari HA, Gordon CM, Ha nley DA, Heaney RP, Murad MH, Weaver 
CM. Evaluation, treatment, and prevention of vitamin D deficien cy: an Endocrine Society clinical 
practice guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab  2011;96(7):1911-30. 
 (5)  Looker AC, Pfeiffer CM, Lacher DA, Schleicher RL, Piccian o MF, Yetley EA. Serum 25-hydroxyvitamin 
D status of the US population: 1988-1994 compared with 2000-200 4. Am J Clin Nutr  2008;88(6):1519-
27. 
 (6)  Dawson-Hughes B. Serum 25- hydroxyvitamin D and functional  outcomes in the elderly. Am J Clin Nutr  
2008;88(2):537S-40S. 
 (7)  Ceglia L. Vitamin D and skeletal muscle tissue and functi on. Mol Aspects Med  2008;29(6):407-14. 
 (8)  Annweiler C, Montero-Oda sso M, Schott AM, Berrut G, Fanti no B, Beauchet O. Fall prevention and 
vitamin D in the elderly: an overview of the key role of the no n-bone effects. J Neuroeng Rehabil  
2010;7:50. 
 (9)  Houston DK, Cesari M, Ferrucci L, Cherubini A, Maggio D, Bartali B, Johnson MA, Schwartz GG, 
Kritchevsky SB. Association between vitamin D status and physic al performance: the InCHIANTI study. 
J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci  2007;62(4):440-6. 
 (10)  Houston DK, Tooze JA, Davis CC, Chaves PH, Hirsch CH, Ro bbins JA, Arnold AM, Newman AB, 
Kritchevsky SB. Serum 25-hydro xyvitamin D and physical function  in older adults: the Cardiovascular 
Health Study All Stars. J Am Geriatr Soc  2011;59(10):1793-801. 
 (11)  Houston DK, Tooze JA, Hausman DB, Johnson MA, Nicklas BJ , Miller ME, Neiberg RH, Marsh AP, 
Newman AB, Blair SN, Kritchevsky SB. Change in 25-hydroxyvitami n D and physical performance in 
older adults. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci  2011;66(4):430-6. 
15 
04/16/20   (12)  Houston DK, Tooze JA, Neiberg RH et al. 25-Hydroxyvitami n D Status and Change in Physical 
Performance and Strength in Older Adults: the Health ABC Study.  Am J Epidemiol. In press 2012. 
 (13)  Bischoff-Ferrari HA, Dietrich T, Orav EJ, Hu FB, Zhang Y , Karlson EW, Dawson-Hughes B. Higher 25-
hydroxyvitamin D concentrations are associated with better lowe r-extremity function in both active and 
inactive persons aged > or =60 y. Am J Clin Nutr  2004;80(3):752-8. 
 (14)  Annweiler C, Schott AM, Berrut G, Fantino B, Beauchet O.  Vitamin D-related changes in physical 
performance: a systematic review. J Nutr Health Aging  2009;13(10):893-8. 
 (15)  Guralnik JM, Simonsick EM, Ferrucci L, Glynn RJ, Berkman  LF, Blazer DG, Scherr PA, Wallace RB. A 
short physical performance battery  assessing lower extremity fu nction: association with self-reported 
disability and prediction of mortality and nursing home admissi on. J Gerontol  1994;49(2):M85-M94. 
  (16)  Donoghue OA, Horgan NF, Savva GM, Cronin H, O'Regan C, Kenny RA. Association between  timed 
 up-and-go and memory, executive function, and processing speed . J Am Geriatr Soc . 2012 
 Sep;60(9):1681-6.  
 (17)  Stewart AL, Mills KM, Ki ng AC, Haskell WL, Gillis D, Rit ter PL. CHAMPS physical activity questionnaire 
for older adults: outcomes for interventions. Med Sci Sports Exerc  2001;33(7):1126-41. 
 (18)  O'Rourke KS, Ike RW. Muscle biopsy. Curr Opin Rheumatol  1995;7(6):462-8. 
 (19)  Trappe TA, Lindquist DM, Carrithers JA. Muscle-specific atrophy of the quadriceps femoris with aging. 
J Appl Physiol  2001;90(6):2070-4. 
 (20)  Heaney RP, Davies KM, C hen TC, Holick MF, Barger-Lux MJ.  Human serum 25-hydroxycholecalciferol 
response to extended oral dosing with cholecalciferol. Am J Clin Nutr  2003;77(1):204-10. 
 (21)  Heaney RP, Holick MF. Why the IOM recommendations for vi tamin D are deficient. J Bone Miner Res  
2011;26(3):455-7. 
 (22)  Viljakainen HT, Palssa A, Karkkainen M, Jakobsen J, Lamb erg-Allardt C. How much vitamin D3 do the 
elderly need? J Am Coll Nutr  2006;25(5):429-35. 
 (23)  Aloia JF, Patel M, Dimaano R, Li-Ng M, Talwar SA, Mikhai l M, Pollack S, Yeh JK. Vitamin D intake to 
attain a desired serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D concentration. Am J Clin Nutr  2008;87(6):1952-8. 
 (24)  Gallagher JC, Sai A, Templin T, Smith L. Dose response t o vitamin D supplementation in 
postmenopausal women: a randomized trial. Ann Intern Med  2012;156(6):425-37. 
 (25)  Latham NK, Anderson CS, Reid IR. Effects of vitamin D su pplementation on strength, physical 
performance, and falls in older persons: a systematic review. J Am Geriatr Soc  2003;51:1219-26. 
 (26)  Dirks-Naylor AJ, Lennon-Edwards S. The effects of vitami n D on skeletal muscle function and cellular 
signaling. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol  2011;125(3-5):159-68. 
 (27)  Holick MF. Vitamin D status: measurement, interpretation , and clinical application. Ann Epidemiol  
2009;19(2):73-8. 
 (28)  Bassey EJ, Short AH. A new method for measuring power ou tput in a single leg extension: feasibility, 
reliability and validity. Eur J Appl Physiol Occup Physiol  1990;60(5):385-90. 
 (29)  Simonsick EM, Newman AB, N evitt MC, Kritchevsky SB, Ferr ucci L, Guralnik JM, Harris T. Measuring 
higher level physical function in well-functioning older adults : expanding familiar approaches in the 
Health ABC study. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci  2001;56(10):M644-M649. 
 (30)  Podsiadlo D, Richardson S. The timed "Up & Go": a test o f basic functional mobility for frail elderly 
persons. J Am Geriatr Soc  1991;39(2):142-8. 
 (31)  Norris JA, Marsh AP, Smith IJ, Kohut RI, Miller ME. Abil ity of static and statistical mechanics 
posturographic measures to distinguish between age and fall ris k. J Biomech  2005;38(6):1263-72. 
 (32)  Brauer SG, Burns YR, Galley P. A prospective study of la boratory and clinical measures of postural 
stability to predict community-dwelling fallers. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci  2000;55(8):M469-M476. 
 (33)  Hahn ME, Chou LS. Can motion of individual body segments  identify dynamic instability in the elderly? 
Clin Biomech (Bristol , Avon )  2003;18(8):737-44. 
 (34)  Mak MK, Ng PL. Mediolateral sway in single-leg stance is  the best discriminator of balance 
performance for Tai-Chi practitioners. Arch Phys Med Rehabil  2003;84(5):683-6. 
 (35)  Maki BE, Holliday PJ, Topper AK. A prospective study of postural balance and risk of falling in an 
ambulatory and independent elderly population. J Gerontol  1994;49(2):M72-M84. 
 (36)  Mitchell SL, Collins JJ, De Luca CJ, Burrows A, Lipsitz LA. Open-loop and closed-loop postural control 
mechanisms in Parkinson's disease: increased mediolateral activ ity during quiet standing. Neurosci Lett  
1995;197(2):133-6. 
 (37)  Laughton CA, Slavin M, Katdare K, Nolan L, Bean JF, Kerr igan DC, Phillips E, Lipsitz LA, Collins JJ. 
Aging, muscle activity, and balance control: physiologic change s associated with balance impairment. 
Gait Posture  2003;18(2):101-8. 
16 
04/16/20   (38)  Hannan MT, Gagnon MM, Aneja J, Jones RN, Cupples LA, Lip sitz LA, Samelson EJ, Leveille SG, Kiel 
DP. Optimizing the tracking of falls in studies of older partic ipants: comparison of quarterly telephone 
recall with monthly falls calendars in the MOBILIZE Boston Stud y. Am J Epidemiol  2010;171(9):1031-6. 
 (39)  Trappe S, Williamson D, Godard M, Porter D, Rowden G, Co still D. Effect of resistance training on 
single muscle fiber contractile function in older men. J Appl Physiol  2000;89(1):143-52. 
 (40)  Godard MP, Gallagher PM, Raue U, Trappe SW. Alterations in single muscle fiber calcium sensitivity 
with resistance training in older women. Pflugers Arch  2002;444(3):419-25. 
 (41)  Widrick JJ, Trappe SW, Blaser CA, Costill DL, Fitts RH. Isometric force and maximal shortening 
velocity of single muscle fibers from elite master runners. Am J Physiol  1996;271(2 Pt 1):C666-C675. 
 (42)  Woledge RC, Curtin NA, Homsher E. Energetic aspects of m uscle contraction. Monogr Physiol Soc  
1985;41:1-357. 
 (45)  Phinney KW. Development of a standard reference material  for vitamin D in serum. Am J Clin Nutr  
2008;88(2):511S-2S. 
 (46)  Bellamy N, Buchanan WW, Goldsmith CH, Campbell J, Stitt LW. Validation study of WOMAC: a health 
status instrument for measuring clinically important patient re levant outcomes to antirheumatic drug 
therapy in patients with osteoarthritis of the hip or knee. J Rheumatol  1988;15(12):1833-40. 
 (47)  Bean JF, Kiely DK, LaRose S, Goldstein R, Frontera WR, L eveille SG. Are changes in leg power 
responsible for clinically meaningful improvements in mobility in older adults? J Am Geriatr Soc  
2010;58(12):2363-8. 
 (48)  Sorensen OH, Lund B, Saltin B, Lund B, Andersen RB, Hjor th L, Melsen F, Mosekilde L. Myopathy in 
bone loss of ageing: improvement by treatment with 1 alpha-hydr oxycholecalciferol and calcium. Clin 
Sci (Lond)  1979;56(2):157-61. 
 (49)  Sato Y, Iwamoto J, Kanoko T, Satoh K. Low-dose vitamin D  prevents muscular atrophy and reduces 
falls and hip fractures in women after stroke: a randomized con trolled trial. Cerebrovasc Dis  
2005;20(3):187-92. 
 (50)  Wang TJ, Zhang F, Richards  JB, Kestenbaum B, van Meurs J B, Berry D, Kiel DP, Streeten EA, 
Ohlsson C, Koller DL, Peltonen L, Cooper JD, O'Reilly PF, Houst on DK, Glazer NL, Vandenput L, 
Peacock M, Shi J, Rivadeneira F, M cCarthy MI, Anneli P, de B, I , Mangino M, Kato B, Smyth DJ, Booth 
SL, Jacques PF, Burke GL, Goodar zi M, Cheung CL, Wolf M, Rice K , Goltzman D, Hidiroglou N, 
Ladouceur M, Wareham NJ, Hocking LJ, Hart D, Arden NK, Cooper C , Malik S, Fraser WD, Hartikainen 
AL, Zhai G, Macdonald HM, Forouhi N G, Loos RJ, Reid DM, Hakim A , Dennison E, Liu Y, Power C, 
Stevens HE, Jaana L, Vasan RS, Soranzo N, Bojunga J, Psaty BM, Lorentzon M, Foroud T, Harris TB, 
Hofman A, Jansson JO, Cauley JA , Uitterlinden AG, Gibson Q, Jar velin MR, Karasik D, Siscovick DS, 
Econs MJ, Kritchevsky SB, Flo rez JC, Todd JA, Dupuis J, Hyppone n E, Spector TD. Common genetic 
determinants of vitamin D insufficiency: a genome-wide associat ion study. Lancet  2010;376(9736):180-
8. 
 (51)  Elnenaei MO, Chandra R, M angion T, Moniz C. Genomic and metabolomic patterns segregate with 
responses to calcium and vitamin D supplementation. Br J Nutr  2011;105(1):71-9. 
 (52)  Fu L, Yun F, Oczak M, Wong BY, Vieth R, Cole DE. Common genetic variants of the vitamin D binding 
protein (DBP) predict differences in response of serum 25-hydro xyvitamin D [25(OH)D] to vitamin D 
supplementation. Clin Biochem  2009;42(10-11):1174-7. 
 (53)  Wortsman J, Matsuoka LY, Chen TC, Lu Z, Holick MF. Decre ased bioavailability of vitamin D in obesity. 
Am J Clin Nutr  2000;72(3):690-3. 
 (54)  Blum M, Dallal GE, wson-Hughes B. Body size and serum 25  hydroxy vitamin D response to oral 
supplements in healthy older adults. J Am Coll Nutr  2008;27(2):274-9. 
 (55)  Diggle PJ, Heagerty P, Liang K-Y, Zeger SL. Analysis of longitudinal data . 2 ed. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press; 2002. 