 
 
 
 18 January  2018  
 
Thomas T. Henderson, MD  
Attn:  Valerie Gatavaski, COA  
Eye Clinic of Austin  
3410 Far West Boulevard, Suite 140  
Austin, TX 78731  
 
Re:   GUARDiON Health Sciences, Inc. , Protocol number 1   
 
Dear Dr. Henderson : 
 
The Protocol Version 2 dated 27 DEC 2017 , and revisions to the Informed Consent Document (ICD) 
were  approved using the expedited review procedure  on 17 January 2018 , as reflected on the attached 
document .   
 
Due to the nature of the modifica tions, the reviewer  has determined that reconsenting is require d. 
Investigators must consider enrollment  at their site  as of the approval date listed and ensure any 
participants enrolled are reconsented  at the next study visit .  
 
If you have questions , or if we can provide further assistance, please contact our office at (512)  380-1244 
or at salus@salusirb.com .   
 
Sincerely,  
 
Trina Anderson, CCRP, CIP  
Quality Systems Manager  
 
 
 
 
        
APPROVED BY SALUS IRB:  17 JANUARY  2018 
        
 
AN AGREEMENT TO BE IN A RESEARCH STUDY  
INFORMED CONSENT DOCUMENT  
 
Sponsor:   GUARDiON HEALTH SCIENCES, Inc.  
City and State:   San Diego, California  
 
Protocol Number and Title:  1, Version 2 : Controlled Study of the Effect of 
a      Medical     Food Containing All Three 
Carotenoids and  Essential Cofactors 
Compared to AREDS2 on  Early Macular 
Degeneration  
 
Study Doctor:   Thomas T. Henderson, MD  
 
Address of Study Site :  Eye Clinic of Austin  
    3410 Far West Blvd, Suite 140  
    Austin, TX 78731  
 
24-Hour Telephone Number:   512-427-1100 
 
INTRODUCTION  
You are being invited to take part in a medical research study. Before you decide to 
take part in this study, you should read this document. This document, called an 
informed consent documen t, explains the study. Please ask as many questions as 
needed so that you can decide if you want to be in the study.  
 
To be in this research study, you cannot already be in another medical research 
study.  
 
You must be honest and complete in providing your medical history. Giving false, 
incomplete, or misleading information about your medical history, including past and 
present drug use, could have very serious health consequences.  
 
The study doctor is being paid by the Sponsor to conduct this research study.  
 
PURPOSE OF THE STUDY   
The purpose of this study is to compare the effect of treatment with Lumega Z®, (a 
medical food containing lutein, zeaxanthin and meso -zeaxanthin, as well as other 
components) with treatment with AREDS2. AREDS 2 is a nutrient formula used for 
age-related vision loss that is available over the counter and marketed by Bausch & 
Lomb as PreserVision® AREDS 2.  Lumega Z is different than PreserVision AREDS 2 in 
that it is available only by prescription and contains additional vitami ns, antioxidants, 
and micronutrients.  
 
GUARDiON Health Sciences, Inc. : 1  Thomas T. Henderson, MD  
Informed Consent  Page 2 of 6  
        
APPROVED BY SALUS IRB:  17 JANUARY  2018 
        
 
Patients with early signs of age -related vision loss (defined for this study as  having 
yellow deposits  in the retina  and no or mild abnormality of dark adaptatio n) that 
take one of the two treatments (PreserVision AREDS 2 or Lumega Z) will be 
compared with those with normal dark adaptation  and with the other treatment 
group.  
 
WHAT WILL HAPPEN DURING THE STUDY  
Each potential patient will undergo a screening test called AdaptDx to identify 
patients with normal dark adaptation and those with abnormal adaptation. AdaptDx 
is a machine used to test dark adaptation that involves looking into a dark field and 
recognizi ng when a light appears.  All patients will receive the same exams at 
baseline, three months and six months (for details see listing below).  
 
Those who are confirmed as normal dark adaptation will receive no treatment 
because they do not need this treatme nt. Those who are confirmed with  a few 
drusen on Visucam photography and mild dark adaptation difficulty (less than or 
equal to 10 minutes on the AdaptDx) will receive one of two treatments below for 6 
months:  
 
x Lumega Z, a medical food, containing all 3 macular pigments, 10 mg lutein, 
15 mg meso -zeaxanthin, 3mg zeaxanthin as well as essential cofactors and 
other antioxidants  
x PreserVision AREDS 2 containing 10mg lutein, 2 mg zeaxanthin  
 
The treatment assigned to you will be assigned by chance . You have a 2 in 3 
chance of being assigned to Lumega Z or 1 in 3 chance to be assigned to 
PreserVision AREDS2.  If positive effects are noted it is possible that the study may 
be extended. The tasks below are part of standard diagnostic clinical eyecare 
practice.  
 
x Baseline, 3 month and 6 month examinations  
 
Medical History  
Best corrected visual acuity  
Best corrected contrast sensitivity (CSV -1000)  
Intraocular pressure, non dilated slit lamp exam  
Dark adaptation (AdaptDx, extended exam)  
Macular Pigment Optical Density (Mapcat SF) 
Macular Ocular Coherence Tomography (Cirrus OCT)  
Fundus Photography (Zeiss Procam)  
 
If the Sponsor determines there is a need to extend the study, you may be asked 
to attend extra visits, although this is not required.   
 
GUARDiON Health Sciences, Inc. : 1  Thomas T. Henderson, MD  
Informed Consent  Page 3 of 6  
        
APPROVED BY SALUS IRB:  17 JANUARY  2018 
        
 
LENGTH OF THE STUDY AND NUMBER OF PARTICIPANTS EXPECTED TO TAKE 
PART  
Approximately 90  participants, ages 60 through 80, are expected to be in this 
study. The study will last for six months. At any point during the study, you may 
choose to withdraw with absolutely no penalty or qu estions asked. Your withdrawal 
will not jeopardize your relationship with the study doctor or the study staff at his 
clinic.  
 
SIDE EFFECTS AND OTHER RISKS  
There are no known side effects for the nutrients to be taken for this study.  Lutein, 
zeaxanthin an d meso -zeaxanthin have been studied in several thousands of people 
at various doses with no reports of side effects.  Additionally, leutein, zeaxanthin and 
meso -zeaxanthin have no known drug interactions.  
 
You must be honest in reporting anything out of th e ordinary that you may 
experience during the study. There is a possibility that you may experience side 
effects from these nutrients.  
 
UNFORESEEABLE RISKS  
As noted above, there are no known risks associated with any of the procedures in 
the study. Howeve r, there is always a possibility that you may experience a side 
effect during the study. We ask that you please tell us if you believe this to be the 
case so that we can properly address the issue.  
 
POSSIBLE BENEFITS OF THE STUDY  
Lutein, zeaxanthin and meso -zeaxanthin could significantly reduce your risk for 
developing age -related macular degeneration or may delay, halt or even reverse 
the progression of the disease at its very earliest stages. You may also experience 
improvement in visual performance by  participating in this study. Even if the study 
does not benefit you, this study could benefit other patients in the future.  You will, 
receive a six months supply of lutein, zeaxanthin or lutein, zeaxanthin and meso -
zeaxanthin at no cost.  
 
PAYMENT FOR BEI NG IN THE STUDY  
You will not be paid for being in this study.   
 
ADDITIONAL COSTS  
You do not have to pay for  the specific study supplements.  If the examinations 
conducted during the study would be conducted as a part of the routine care for 
macular degeneration, they would be submitted to your insurance plan and you 
would be responsible as usual, for expenses under deductibles and copays.  
 
ALTERNATIVES TO PARTICIPATION  
There are other treatments available if you decide not to be in the study.  
   
GUARDiON Health Sciences, Inc. : 1  Thomas T. Henderson, MD  
Informed Consent  Page 4 of 6  
        
APPROVED BY SALUS IRB:  17 JANUARY  2018 
        
 
x You may choose to buy available supplements containing Lutein, 
zeaxanthin and meso -zeaxanthin.  
 
x You may choose not to take any supplements at all.  
 
RELEASE OF MEDICAL RECORDS AND PRIVACY  
Your study records  will be kept private. There may be times when the study doctor 
will not be able to guarantee privacy, such as when your study medical records are 
requested by a court of law or when shared with a firm in another country that does 
not have privacy regulations in place. Salus IRB and accrediting agencies may 
inspect and copy your records, which may have your name on them. Therefore, 
your total privacy cannot be guaranteed.  If information from this study is published 
or presented at scientific meetings, your name and other personal information will 
not be used . The following people will have access to your study records:  
 
x Study Doctor  
x Study Monitor or Auditor  
x Sponsor Company or Research Institution  
x Salus IRB 
x Other State or Federal Regulatory Agencies  
 
Salus IRB has approved this study and this informed consent document. Salus IRB is 
a committee  of scientific and non -scientific individuals  who review, require 
modifications to, and approve or disapprove research studies  by following the federal 
laws. This  group is also required by the federal regulations to provide  periodic review  
of ongoing research studies.  
 
IN CASE OF AN INJURY RELATED TO THIS RESEARCH STUDY  
You must tell your study doctor if you feel that you have been injured by taking 
part in this study. You can tell the study doctor in person or call the number listed 
on the first page of this consent document. You will be treated with the same care 
that any other patient would receive if they suspected a side effect from treatment. 
No form of comp ensation is offered for a research related injury.  
 
LEGAL RIGHTS  
You do not lose any legal rights by signing this consent document. The above 
statement, “In Case of an Injury Related to This Research Study,” does not stop you 
from seeking  legal help in cas e of negligence.  
 
NEW FINDINGS   
During the study, you will be told of any important new findings about the nutrients 
used in the study . You can then decide if you still want to be in the study.  
 
 
GUARDiON Health Sciences, Inc. : 1  Thomas T. Henderson, MD  
Informed Consent  Page 5 of 6  
        
APPROVED BY SALUS IRB:  17 JANUARY  2018 
        
 
WHOM TO CONTACT  
You may contact the study doctor or study sta ff at the phone number listed on the 
first page of this consent document:  
 
 • for answers to questions, concerns, or complaints about this research study ,  
 • to report a research related injury, or  
 • for information about study procedures.  
  
If you need medical attention please go to the nearest emergency room.  
 
You may contact Salus IRB if you:  
 
x would like to speak with someone unrelated to the research,  
x have questions, concerns,  or complaints regarding the research study, or  
x have questions about your rights as a research participant.  
 
Salus IRB  
 2111 West Braker Lane, Suite 400  
Austin, TX 78758  
Phone: 855-300-0815 between 8:00 AM and 5:00 PM Central Time  
Email: salus@salusirb.com  
 
If you would like additional information  about your rights, research in general, or 
IRBs, you may visit www.salus irb.com . 
 
LEAVING THE STUDY   
Taking part in this study is your choice. You may choose either to take part or not 
to take part in the study.  You have the right to leave this  study at any time. If you 
do not want to be in the study, there will be no penalty to you, and you will not lose 
any benefits to which you are otherwise entitled . 
 
If you wish to leave this study, please call the study doctor or study staff at the 
telepho ne number listed on the first page of this consent document to schedule study 
exit procedures.  
 
Your part in this study may be stopped at any time without you r permission . The 
following people can stop your participation and/or the study itself:  
 
 • Study Doctor  
•  Sponsor Company  
 • Salus IRB  
 • Regulatory Agencies  
  
If you do not follow the study procedures you may be taken out of the study.  
GUARDiON Health Sciences, Inc. : 1  Thomas T. Henderson, MD  
Informed Consent  Page 6 of 6  
        
APPROVED BY SALUS IRB:  17 JANUARY  2018 
        
 
 
If you withdraw from the study, no new data about you will be collected for study 
purposes. The study doctor will inform you whether he/she  intends to either: (1) 
retain and analyze already collected data relating to you up to the time of your 
withdrawal; or (2) honor your request that your data be destroyed or exclude d 
from any analysis.  
 
AGREEMENT TO BE IN THE S TUDY  
This consent document contains important information to help you decide if you want 
to be in this study. If you have any questions that are not answered in this consent 
document, please ask the person explaining this document or one of the study staff .   
 
By consenting to participate you agree that y ou have been given a copy of all pages 
of this consent document. You have had an opportunity to ask questions and 
received satisfactory answers to all your questions about this study. You understand 
that yo u are free to leave the study at any time without having to give a reason and 
without affecting your medical care . You understand that your study -related 
medical records may be reviewed by the company sponsoring the study and by 
government authorities.  
 
  
IF YOU DO NOT AGREE WITH THE STATEMENT A BOVE,  
YOU SHOULD NOT SIGN THIS INFORMED CONSEN T DOCUMENT.  
 
   
Printed Name of Participant  
 
    
Signature of Participant         Date 
 
  
Printed Name of Person Explaining Informed Consent Document  
 
    
Signature of Person Explaining Informed Consent Document          Date 
 
 
 
FOR Salus IRB USE ONLY  Initial draft  cas: 02Nov17  tla: 17Jan18   
 
                                       
 
 
 
 
                                CONTROLLED STUDY OF THE EFFECT OF A MEDICAL FOOD CONTAINING  
                                ALL THREE MACULAR CAROTENOIDS AND ESSENTIAL COFACTORS COMPARED  
                                TO AREDS2 ON EARLY  MACULAR DEGENERATION  
 
Sponsor:                GUARDiON HEALTH SCIENCES, Inc.  
                               15150 Avenue of Science, S uite 200  
                               San Diego, California 92128  
                               (800) 873 -5141  
                               Gordon Bethwaite  
                               Vice President, Sales and Marketing  
 
Investigator:        Thomas T. Henderson, MD  
                              3410 Far West Blvd. Suit e 140  
                              Austin, TX 78731  
                              (512) 427 -1100  
 
Study Product:   Lumega -Z Advanced Ocular Health Medical Food  
 
Protocol Number: 1 
                                  Version 2  
                                 27 DEC 2017  
       
 
 
 
  
                    Controlled Study of the Effect of a Medical Food  
Containing  All Three Macular Caro tenoids and Essential  Cofactors   
Compared to  AREDS2 o n Early  Macular Degeneration  
 
PURPOSE:  
This 6-month  randomized control study is undertaken to compare the effect of treatment with  
LumegaZ, a medical food containing lutein, zeaxanthin, and meso -zeaxanthin, as well as 
essential cofact ors, other antioxidants, and mitochondrial support, with  the effect of  treatment 
with AREDS2.  P atients with early  macular degeneration, defined as photographically  visible 
drusen  with or without abnormal dark adaptation  on the AdaptDx  will be randomized 2:1 and 
both groups will be compared to untreated patients with normal dark adaptation.  
 
BACKGROUND:  
Macular degeneration is the most common cause of blindness in people over the age of 60.  
The incidence of macular degeneration at all stages is 1 in 8 and is more common than diabetes 
and glaucoma at the same age.  
The dietary car otenoids lutein and zeaxanthin (derived primarily from  leafy green vegetables 
and other colored fruits  and vegetables)  as well as meso -zeaxanthin, a metabolite of lu tein, are 
stored in the macula  in all healthy retinas.  This area serves central vison, and is the specific 
area that is affected by macular degeneration.  The accumulation of these pigments results in a 
yellowish coloration  of the retina, the concent ration of which is called macular pigment density.  
A large multicenter trial called AREDS 2 (2013) showed that supplementing lutein and 
zeaxanthin  reduced progression of moderate to advanced AMD by 25%.  The CREST (2014) and 
MOST (2015) studies showed tha t supplementation of all 3 macular pigments resulted in 
normalization of the macular pigment profile and improvement in contrast sensitivity in early 
AMD.  All 3 macular carotenoids are recognized by the FDA as ‘generally regarded as safe 
(GRAS) for supple mentation in foods.  
Macular degeneration can be understood as a disease of excessive oxidation of the retinal 
tissue with genetic, age, dietary and light exposure  components leading to accumulation of 
oxidized cholesterol and polyunsaturated fatty acids  both on Bruch’s membrane and between 
Bruch’s membrane and the retinal pigment epithelium in a condition analogous to plaque 
buildup in arteries.  These deposits block transfer of waste out of the retina leading to more 
accumulation and block transfer of nutr ients into the retina.  In macular degeneration,  not 
enough Vitamin A  crosses Bruch’s membrane because of the build -up, causing a localized 
deficiency of Retinol in the parafoveal rods . This  causes  slower dark ada ptation after bleaching 
light, which is the  earliest symptom of macular degeneration: difficulty driving in darkness or 
adapting to dark cond itions  increasing with aging.  
Abnormal dark adaptation found by AdaptDX testing is the earliest clinical sign of macular 
degeneration. This has enabled diagn osis of subclinical macular degeneration with 90% positive 
and negative test reliability, 3-5 years before the first drusen is visible clinically.  Those patients 
who exhibit impaired dark adaptation, whether they are subclinical with no drusen or early wit h 
mild drusen, may benefit from nutritional and /or lifestyle changes which could significantly 
slow the progression of the disease.  This would result in maintenance of retinal health and 
visual performance.  
It is clear that early, effective  intervention in any disease process is the key to reducing 
morbidity.  Earlier diagnosis of macular degeneration is now possible with AdaptDX testing.  
Effective intervention involves reducing the photo -oxidative damage of the retina caused by the 
visual process in the retina, and potential clearing of the early stage blockage of bidirectional 
transport across Bruch’s membrane. Thirty percent of people over age 60 have abnormal dark 
adaptation.  Likewise, 30% of people have an abnormal spatia l profile of macular pigment 
indicating insufficient meso -zeaxanthin creation from lutein.  Supplementing meso -zeaxanthin  
as well as lutein and zeaxanthin can restore the macular pigment spatial profile and improve 
visual performance in early macular degen eration.  Ear ly results from an  as yet unpublished 
exploratory study in progress with such supplementation in subclinical AMD indicate 
improvement in MPOD and best  corrected contrast sensitivity in many patients by 6 months.  
A medical food is a special ca tegory of suppl ement approval by the FDA where physicians 
prescribe it for nutritional treatment of specific medical conditions.  The medical food to be 
used by patients in this study contains not only all the macular carotenoids  in micelle 
formulation for  improved absorption , but also significant cofactors, such a s vitamins,  minerals,  
ALA, astaxanthin, N -acetylcysteine,  carnosine and others.  A ll of these ingredients working 
together  should significantly improve the mitochondrial , antioxidant and anti -inflammatory 
functions of the retina.  This should allow  creation of less damage to critical elements of the 
retina and less toxic waste such as oxidized cholesterol and oxidized polyunsaturated fatty acids 
which are the major components of the sub -RPE and Bru ch’s membrane deposits.  This 
controlled study will attempt to show that using a medical food designed to optimize  retinal 
metabolism and antioxidant capacity will exert a positive effect in subclinical macular 
degeneration, which is greater than supplemen tation with AREDS2 and will also improve 
measured functions into the range of function i n untreated normal patients.  
 
STUDY:  
All study candidates are routine patients in a general ophthalmology practice. All patients who 
are interested will be offered the  opportunity to participate in this controlled study of the 
effect of a nutritional food on subclinical macular degeneration. Each patient will undergo a 
screening AdaptDx to sep arate patients with n ormal dark adaptation from those with abnormal 
dark adaptation. All patients will receive the same exams at baseline,  3 months and 6 months. 
For details, see the listing below . Those who are confirmed as normal with extended dark 
adaptation testing will receive no treatment precisely because they are define d as not having a 
problem needing this treatment.  Those who are confirmed with early macular degeneration by 
photographically visible drusen and have dark adaptation scores of less than 10 minutes  will 
receive treatment by ingesting a commercially availab le medical food, containing all 3 macular 
pigment as well as essential cofactors and other antioxidants, or AREDS2,randomized 2:1 for 6 
months.  If positive effects are noted, it is possible that the study might be extended. The tasks 
below are part of sta ndard diagnostic clinical eyecare practice.  
x Baseline, 3 month and 6 month examinations  
o History  
o Risk factors  
o Best corrected visual acuity  
o Best corrected contrast sensitivity  (CSV 1000)  
o Intraocular pressure, nondilated slit -lamp exam  
o Dark adaptation ( AdaptDX, extended exam)  
o Macular pigment optical density (MapcatSF)  
o Macular ocular coherence tomography (Z eiss Cirrus OCT ) 
o Fundus photography ( Zeiss VisuCam Pro)  
 
Because these patients will have additional problems found in routine clinical practice, oth er 
exams may occur for other problems and will not be considered part of the study data.  Should 
any adverse effects be noted thought to be from the study treatment, the patient will be 
examined to understand the effect and if it is felt to be not signific ant, the patient will be asked 
to continue in the study. In the highly unlikely event a serious adverse effect is noted the 
patient will be terminated from the study and appropriate treatment will be undertaken.  
 
DATA COLLECTION:  
The data will be maintaine d on standardized forms  and printable graphics, as well  as in the 
patient’s routine clinical file.  To protect identifiable information, files will be locked in a file 
cabinet, accessible only the PI and th e study coordinator. Data will be transcribed with out 
personally identifiable information into standard Excel files and analyzed as appropriate using 
standard statistical techniques.  
STUDY REQUIREMENTS:  
This study will be conducted  with the protocol, good clinical practices and applicable regulatory 
requirements. This is a no significant risk study, using commercially available supplements, 
Lumega -Z or AREDS 2, containing  2 or 3  of the three carotenoids that are FDA “generally  
recognized as safe” for food supplementation and are found in all healthy retinas. All 
examinations are noninvasive and are performed with FDA cleared, commercially available 
medical devices in routine clinical use.  
The study population consists of 90 ma le and female patients in a routine clinical practice age 
60 and over  who have early macular degeneration as defined as a few drusen vis ible on 
Visucam and have an AdaptDx score less t han or equal to 10 minutes . No vulnerable 
populations will be studied.  
The patient will be studied for improvements in ocu lar function . Primary endpoint s would be 
improvement in macular pigment optical density  long form, improvement in best corrected 
contrast sensitivity and improvement in best corrected vision. Secondary endpoints would be 
improvement of AdaptDx long f orm time  or a reduction in drusen.    
The study supplements for each  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
study subject will be kept in a locked cabinet until dispensed by study s taff not involved with 
testing to the subject.  
A protocol deviation log and an adverse effect log will be kept for each subject. Immediate 
attention will be paid to any serious adverse events, which by the nature of the study are 
completely unexpected. If  any injuries occur to subjects in the protocol , they are considered to 
be under treatment for early  AMD, (diagnosis AMD, ICD H35.3131 ) and will be dealt with as any 
other medical condition or complication of treatment.  
Data will be reviewed for safety and unexpected positive or negative effects after three and six 
month visit period are completed for all subjects.  
Data will be collected in the subjects routine electronic medical record and confirmed as  
complete on a ha rd copy visit log in a study folder for each subject.  Copies of each visit will be 
kept in the study folder. There will be a protocol deviation log, adverse events log and a study 
supplement log in each subjects folder.  
The information collected will be us ed in anonymous group data analysis to be prepared for 
submission for potential publication. The information will not be sold or  used in future 
research. The data can be verified through the audit trail in the subject’s individual electronic 
medical record  original source. No data will be stored on a portable device. The data will not be 
destroyed because it is part of medical record of care of AMD unspecified for an individual  and 
is subject to the laws of the state of Texas and the rules of the state med ical board.  
Statistical Analysis Plan   At the end of the trail period, data will be collected by the Principal Investigator and analyzed by professional optical engineers at Western University of Health Sciences, Pomona CA.  The data provided will only contain patient ID, age, and sex, without containing any identifying details about each participant. Data will be analyzed upon measurement quality, according to the respective manufacturer procedures, in each outcome measure. In the event which data is missing or incomplete, we will evaluate the appropriate measures to include the available information and consult with qualified professionals.  Preliminary and sub-analyses will be performed using the statistical programing software, SPSS Systems. The objective is to examine the distribution and potential relationships within data sets through standardized descriptive-numerical summaries. Statistical analysis strategies may include a mixed-design Analysis Of Variance (ANOVA) to examine the following outcome measures across the three time-points of data collection; including visual acuity, contrast sensitivity, dark adaptation recovery, and MPOD levels. A post hoc sub-analysis of paired sample t-test may be used (either Bonferroni correction or Tukey test) to evaluate the change in each outcome measure parameter, if needed, in respect to each treatment group. Additionally, each group-measurement may be separated and analyzed by eye; to evaluate inter-eye differences from each treatment. Results of the statistical analysis will be analyzed as group averages of each outcome measurement. 