2040 Function QUERI        PI Hastings        AMD 23  5.17.2023  Page 1 of 42 
 Optimizing Function and Independence Through iHI -FIVES  – Protocol  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
IRB Approval Date: July 6, 2023  
  
2040 Function QUERI        PI Hastings        AMD 23  5.17.2023  Page 2 of 42 
  
DVAHCS REQUIRED ELEMENTS AND PROTOCOL TEMPLATE  
 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Optimizing Function and Independence QUERI  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:  S. Nicole Hastings, MD, MHS (clinician)  
 
VERSION NUMBER AND DATE: AMD 23  5.17.2023  
 
SPONSOR/FUNDING SOURCE: VA QUERI   
 
BACKGROUND    
Clinical Framework and  Introduction of  Individual Projects     
Function QUERI will support implementation of 2 new clinical programs . These were selected on the basis of  
alignment with national VA strategic goals, those of our operational and clinical partners, and potential impact 
for Veterans. The underlying clinical framewo rk for our projects is the  International Classification of Function-
ing, Disability and Health  (ICF, Figure 1 ), a biopsy chosocial model of disability that conceptualizes  a person's 
level of functioning as a multidimensional and dynamic interaction between her or his  health conditions, environ-
mental factors, and personal factors. An individual’s functional status is dynamic, with stressors such as hospi-
talization or develo pment of a symptomatic chronic illness being important tipping points  into disability .1 Each 
clinical program directly addresses known stressors and/or contextual factors that influence functional ability and 
independence. STRIDE  is a supervised walking program for hospitalized older Veteran s. STRIDE focuses on 
maintain ing musculoskeletal strength and mobi lity (body function and structure) during hospitalization (environ-
mental  factors ), a highly vulnerable time for development of disability.2 HI- FIVES, is a multimodal, evidence -
based skills training program for caregivers of Veterans with cognitive and/or functional limitations  who have 
recently been referred to home and community -based services . HI-FIVES  promotes function and independence 
through caregiver skill training and support (per-
sonal  factors ). The ICF also provides guidance for 
selecting  relevant Veteran -centered outco mes 
(e.g. quality of life , days in the community ) and 
important patient -level covariates .  Details of the 
three clinical programs are provided in separate 
sections below, following our description of the 
implementation core.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Implementation Framework  and Strategies  
  Figure 1.  International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health 
(ICF)  

2040 Function QUERI        PI Hastings        AMD 23  5.17.2023  Page 3 of 42 
 Implementation Strateg ies. Guided by 
our implementation framework (Figure 
2), preliminary evaluation of barriers to 
implementation for each project and in-
put from clinical and operational part-
ners, we have selected Replicating Ef-
fective Programs (REP) as the over-
arching implementati on strategy for in-
corporating new clinical programs into 
routine practice.  Half of participating 
sites will receive  REP paired with CON-
NECT , a teamwork training  intervention  
that focuses on optimizing team readi-
ness and function.  
Replicating Effective Programs .  REP 
has been described both as an imple-
mentation framework12 and strategy.13 
Herein we refer to REP a s an implemen-
tation strategy because we will use it as 
an integrated bundle or package of dis-
crete , standardized activities selected to 
address identified barriers to implementation success .14 REP is appropriate for Function QUERI projects for 
three reasons.  First  and most importantly,  REP addresses the major barrier to adoption of new clinical programs 
for Veterans at risk for  functional decline identified by our partners in GEC: limited clinical resources. REP is 
designed to promote flexibility in the de livery  of clinical programs, and Function QUERI will use this to provide 
options for program designs that can be implemented using existing clinical resources.  Second, REP has been 
empirically tested and validated through randomized control led trials and shown to be  effective in promoting 
uptake and fidelity of clinical interventions in v arious healthcare organizations, including VA .12,13,15,16 Third, REP 
is pragmatic in its emphasis on creation of user -friendly clinical program implementation packages that can be 
used for large scale roll -outs with relatively low need for additional implementation resources  (distinct from clin-
ical resources) , an important consideration for any large organization such as VHA.  
REP Implementation Activities . REP is designed for roll -out of new programs through  four phases: pre -condition, 
pre-implementation, implementation, and maintenance.  Across these phases, REP is delivered through a com-
bination of standardized activities  as displayed in Figure 3 . Each Function QUERI project has initiated the REP 
pre-condit ion phase, by identifying needs and gaps in clinical care resulting in loss of function and independence 
and the clinical programs that will be used to fill these gaps . Pre -implementation phase activities that project 
teams have already begun include ident ifying barriers to implementation and clinical program delivery. Imple-
mentation phase activities will include drafting clinical program implementation packages, with input from stake-
holder groups. Packages include standardized program materials for clinica l staff to implement the program (e.g. 
training manuals, procedures, competencies, etc.) and guidance on core elements of the program and options 
for customization. Following clinical training, project teams provide technical assistance and support. The fi nal 
step in REP is refining  clinical program implementation packages in preparation for dissemination at additional 
sites (Section 2.6).  
REP has many advantages as an implementation strate gy; there are limitations to its use as well. An often 
noted barrier to adoption of new clinical programs is a focus on the clinical program content while ignoring the 
organizational learning context and processes needed to successfully implement change17 and REP offers no 
activities specifically designed to prepare clinical teams for program upt ake. Function QUERI addresses this 
challenge and potential limitation of REP by proposing to pair REP with CONNECT  to facilitate the readiness of 
teams to adopt new clinical programs.17,18   
CONNECT is a bundle of interaction -oriented activities designed to  supplement implementation efforts by 
promot ing team function and readiness for change, as a critical precondition of effective implement ation of  Func-
tion QUERI’s clinical programs.   CONNECT has been used successfully in other clinical settings17-19 and is as-
sociated with improvements in communicati on and participation in decision -making among clinical staff and in Figure 2.  Nested model of team function and performance in implementation  

2040 Function QUERI        PI Hastings        AMD 23  5.17.2023  Page 4 of 42 
 patient outcomes.18 CONNECT activities in clude group storytelling , role play to improve daily interaction s be-
tween providers, relationship  mapping of communication patterns , strategies for creative problem solving, and 
individual mentorship to sustain new interaction behaviors . 
 
Function QUERI  Clinical Program  1: Optimizing Function and Independence through STRIDE  
More than one -third of adults over the age of 70 are discharged from the hospital with a major new disability that 
was not present before the onset of acute illness.2 At least half  of the time the associated illness is not a disabling 
condition like hip fracture or stroke, but rather a medical condition such as pneumonia or heart failure . Moreover,  
one year following discharge, more  than half of older adults with hospital -associated disability do not recover to 
their pre -illness functional status , resulting in higher  rates of nursing home placement and death.20 A key con-
tributor to hospital -associated disability is immobility during hospitalization.21 While  fewer than 5% of patients 
have physician orders for bed rest , hospitalized older adults spend only 3% of their time standing or walking.22  
The hazards of immobility in the hospital have been recognized for more than 2 decades,23 but there ar e currently 
no VA -system wide approaches to address this important gap in clinical care .  
STRIDE  is a supervised inpatient walking program  developed by an interdisciplinary team of investigators, 
clinicians and administrators at the Durham VA and funded by the VHA Office of GEC. STRIDE  consists of a 
one-time gait and balance assessment conducted by a physical therapist , followed by daily supervised walks  by 
a recreation therapy assistant for the duration of the hospital stay. Program evaluation has demonstrated high 
satisfaction among Veteran participants and reduced need for post -acute institutional care.24 As a result, the 
Durham VAMC funded STRIDE as a permanent program that currently  serves over 6 50 Veterans  annually, and 
the VHA Office of GEC funded a dissemination grant to launch the program at another medical center . The 
STRIDE program has generated inquiries from many VA and non -VA healthcare systems interested in improving 
mobility among hospitalized patients; however an important challenge and consideration for provider organiza-
tions is the optimal method to disse minate and spread this promising clinical model into practice more widely 
and in a sustained way.  Our initial experience with STRIDE implementation suggests inter -professional relation-
ships and team dynamics are key determinant s to the success of a new hospital -based clinical program that 
requires collaborative processes involving multiple disciplines.  
 
Rationale  
Hospitalization is a highly vulnerabl e time for loss of function and independence .  An insidious and common 
complication associated with hospitalization  for older adults is loss of independence due to inability to perform 
self-care functions.25 This loss of independence often has serious implications, including  increased risk of long -
term care in a nursing home, repeat hospitalization, and death.1,2,26 Loss of independence often begins with 
weakness and deconditioning that accompany onset of the illness itself, which then leads to disability that fails 
to improve or worsens during hospitalization.20 Even in healthy older adults , bedrest  leads to significant loss of 
muscle mass (1 kg) and strength (16% decline at knee extensors ) within 7 -10 days.27 
Functional decline and loss of independence can be mitigated by inpatient walking programs . Increased  time 
spent  walking during hospitalization has been associated with reduced length of hospitalization, less need for 
institutional post-acute care , improved physical functioning at 30 days post -discharge , and reduced 2 -year mor-
tality.28,29 In a group -randomized randomized controlled trial ( RCT) conducted in 3 non -VA hospitals, a super-
vised walking program was found to reduce hospital length of stay (mean 5.8 days for program participants vs. 
6.9 days for usual care; p< 0.05).30  A systematic review of early physical rehabilitation programs for hospitalized 
older adults concluded they were safe and participants demonstrated improvements in physical functional status 
and reduced likelihood of discharge to a nursing home.31  
Clinical demonstration of STRIDE at Durham VA . STRIDE is a supervised walking program for older Veterans 
admitted to the hospital with medical illness , modeled on the aforementioned RCT .30 Daily supervised walking is 
the core element of the program. Patients are eligible for STRIDE if they are age 6 0 or older  and admitted to the 
General Medicine Service of the Durham VAMC . Veterans with admitting conditions that limit their ability to 
ambulate safely (e.g. new neurological deficit, unable to follow one -step commands) are excluded. Patients are 
referred to STRIDE by their treating physician. Next they are evaluated by a physical therapist who assesses 
their safety for walking and provides an assistive device (e.g. walker) if needed. After the physical ther apist 
evaluation, patients begin daily supervised walks that continue for the duration of the hospital stay  (goal 20 
minutes divided into 2 sessions) .30 Daily walks are supervised by a recreation therapy assistant that works with 
2040 Function QUERI        PI Hastings        AMD 23  5.17.2023  Page 5 of 42 
 each patient’s nurse t o determine the best timing for the walk  and follows established protocols for offering rest 
breaks as needed and monitoring vital signs.  
A significant proportion of STRIDE patients had functional  deficits at baseline; 50% used an assistive device 
for walking, and 45% reported at least 1 fall in the past 3 months.  STRIDE walks lasted 10 minutes on average , 
and 90% of patients reported feeling better after their walk. Overall 92% of STRIDE participants were discharged 
to home compared to 74% from a clinically similar group of patients receiving usual care ( p=0.007); the remainder 
went to skilled nursing or rehabilitation facilities.24 Based on the cumulative evidence , and positive staff and 
Veteran feedback on the program, Durham VAMC made STRIDE a permanent clinical service.  
Dissemination of STRIDE is a high priority for VHA program offices and clinical and executive leaders hip.  Two 
of Function QUERI’s national program office partners, VHA Office of GEC and Office of PM&R Services, share 
common goals that are directly address ed by this project: increasing independence and improving quality of life 
for Veterans, and promoting the Veteran’s ability to remain in the most independent and least restrictive living 
environment. Both offices strongly support STRIDE dissemination as di rectly responsive to these shared goals 
and strategic objectives.  
Barriers to STRIDE implementation that our implementation strategies will address . In preparation for the current 
study, we evaluated barriers to STRIDE implementation in Durham and the Baltimore VAMC, which developed 
a GEC -funded STRIDE program in FY15 . Key challenges identified by clinicians and program leaders included: 
1) differing availability of staff resources and 2) lack of communication and teamwork among front -line providers 
of multiple disciplines (e.g. physicians, nurses, physical therapists) around the issue of patient mobility. In 
Durham, clinical leaders assigned  recreation therapy assistants to supervise walks; however limited resources 
in Baltimore compelled their programs’ use of nurse aids to supervise walks.  Providers at both sites reported a 
lack of understanding of the roles of individual providers (i.e. w hose job it is to walk patients) was an impediment 
to promoting patient mobility. Moreover, poor communication produced a “silo effect” that prevented sharing 
relevant clinical information to other providers and, in extreme cases, resulted in conflicting i nstruction to patients 
about mobility. These experiences were a key factor in selecting REP as an implementation strategy, given its 
focus on tailoring clinical programs for local environments, and our interest in augmenting REP with CONNECT 
to improve tea m-based interaction strategies to promote optimal program effectiveness.  
 
Clinical Program Procedures   
 
STRIDE implementation will occur in  two stratified  blocks  (4 VAMCs  per block)  with two waves  per block  (2 
VAMCs per wave ), with each wave corresponding to a different  3 month implementation period for the interven-
tion rollout  (Figure 4).  The timeline for STRIDE will be approximately 18 months in which pre -implementation 
(control) and post -implementation (treatment) data will be collected. In this stratified design, each cluster ( VAMC ) 
provides  some  before  (control)  and after  (intervention)  observations , and every cluster ( VAMC ) switches from 
control to be exposed  based on their randomly assigned implementation start date  within their stratif ied block  
(step) during recruitment months of the study. Further, t ransition to intervention condition will oc cur at approxi-
mately 3-month intervals. The p re-implementation period will occur from time 0  (stratified block 1) or time 6 
(stratified block 2)  to the beginning of implementation at each VAMC.  
Randomization  procedure . For each 
stratified block, w e will have two random-
izations due to the stepped -wedge de-
sign and comparison of two implementa-
tion strategies. First , in each stratified 
block , the 4 VAMCs will be randomized 
to either wave 1 or wave 2, then within 
wave each VAMC  will be randomized to 
either REP alone or REP  + CONNECT . 
Within each block  and wave combina-
tion, one VAMC will use REP alone and 
the other will use REP + CONNECT for 
STRIDE implementation.  In each stratified block, the four VAMCs will be in the pre -implementation period during 
the first 3 -month recruitment window. There will be a 3 -month interval i mplementation period in each block where 
the intervention is rolled out.    Recruitment months  
Stratified 
Block  Wave  1-3 4-6 7-10 11-12 13-15 16-18 
1 1  1st     
1 2   2nd    
2 1    3rd   
2 2     4th  
 ◼pre-implementation ◼implementation      post-implemen-
tation ◼ administrative data collection only  
 Figure 4: Stepped wedge d esign for the 8 participating 
STRIDE VAMCs  (4 per stratified block, 2 per wave) , with a 3 -
month period to implement training for each site  
2040 Function QUERI        PI Hastings        AMD 23  5.17.2023  Page 6 of 42 
 STRIDE Participating sites.  We will recruit  sites in blocks of 4 based on our stratified design described above for  
a total of eight sites for participation. With assistance from our operational partners (Dr. Kenneth Shay from GEC 
and Dr. Joel Scholten from PM&R), we will recruit the sites on a volunteer basis to complete the cohort of eight.  
To ensure that sites are similar enough to compare between arms, sites are required to have a  minimum average  
daily census of 20 general medicine patients per day. We will conduct site visits at all participating sites prior to 
implementation to obtain additional important contextual information and base line data for analyses .  
Implementation activities . REP. Drafting the STRIDE intervention package will include identifying core elements 
of the program and those that can be modified to fit local conditions. The core program element is daily super-
vised walk ing; this will be critical for evaluati ng implementation fidelity to the program. The intervention package 
will provide options for sites to determine the type of provider who provides the supervision, using input from the 
team and other stakeholders. Based on our experience to date, we anticip ate that these options will include the 
following models:  dedicated rehabilitation assistants (physical therapy or recreation therapy) or nurse aids to 
supervise walks; nurses are trained on use of gait aids and dedicated equipment is made available on ea ch floor; 
volunteers complete competencies for gait training, with supervision from other clinical staff.   
CONNECT . For sites randomized to REP + CONNECT, CONNECT training will occur prior to orientation and 
clinical training for STRIDE . All staff with a relevant role in promoting (or hindering) mobility in the hospital setting 
will participate in CONNECT training. This will include nurses, physical therapists, therapy assistants, nursing 
aids and physicians. These will be the same at all sites, regardless  of how sites choose to tailor the program (i.e. 
who supervised walks). We anticipate that the CONNECT activities that will be most relevant to STRIDE include 
learning protocols that bring together interdisciplinary groups to discuss and role -play local in teraction strategies 
and problem -solving. In this way, all team members are empowered to recognize and share barriers to optimal 
program delivery and work together to find solutions.  
 
All activities related to implementation of STRIDE as described above are non -research operations activities, as 
defined in VHA Handbook 1058.05. These programs are designed to support VHA’s mission of delivering health 
care to the Nation’s Veterans.  
Please see letter from Richard M. Allman, MD, Chief Consultant, Geriatrics a nd Extended Care Service 
(10P4G) providing certification of non -research operations activities status  (Appendix A ). 
Upon further evaluation, it was determined that Function QUERI, STRIDE, and CONNECT were not designed 
with an explicit focus on racial health equity. In order to address this, a QUERI Advance Diversity in Implemen-
tation Leadership  (ADIL ) project will  quantify disparities in hospitalization outcomes and access to care among 
older adult Veterans in the STRIDE program trial and to integrate a health equity focus into the Function QUERI.  
Increasingly, evidence demonstrates racial and ethnic disparities in discharge and function post -hospitalization. 
It is un clear to what extent these disparities are due to unequal access to care or due to cumulative effects of 
structural racism and other social determinants of health. There is a critical need  to understand systemic inequi-
ties in access to and benefits from pr ograms that improve hospitalization outcomes and to design equity -driven 
implementation strategies for programs that could mitigate disparities.  
 
 
 
Function QUERI Project 2: Maximizing Veteran  Independence through Informal Caregiver Support  (iHI 
FIVES)   
Over 5 million Veterans receive informal care in their homes from family and friends. Whereas caregivers (CGs) 
allow Veterans to avoid or delay nursing home entry,35 caregiving comes at a cost to CGs through high rates of 
depression, and potentially to Veterans if CG depression/burden prevents Vete rans from receiving high quality 
informal care. CG training programs can enhance CG skill and reduce negative conse quences of caregiving  and 
thereby increase quality of care and optimize patient independence.36-41 However, CGs who care for Vete rans 
report unmet need for training.42   
Implementing h elping Invested Family Members Improve Veterans Experiences Study ( iHI-FIVES) is a clin-
ical program that has been adapted from the HI -FIVES randomized controlled trial to  be delivered in the field by 
existing clinical teams . iHI-FIVES will deliver a n evidence -based skills training program to CGs of Veterans who 
have recently been re ferred to Veteran -directed care or  home and community -based services ( home -based pri-
mary care , homemaker home hea lth aide ser vices, adult day health care, respite care) .  Topics address tools for 
2040 Function QUERI        PI Hastings        AMD 23  5.17.2023  Page 7 of 42 
 increasing Veteran function and independence, CG injury prevention and self -care, communication with provid-
ers, and navigating the VHA. iHI- FIVES aims to improve support to  CGs and patients through reductions in CG 
burden  and depressive symptoms , increases in caregiver satisfaction with VHA health care the patient receives,  
and increases in  the number of days that functionally and/or cognitively impaired Veterans spend safel y at home.   
The VA Caregiver Support Program (CSP) considers iHI-FIVES to be  a clinical program that has  strong  
potential to fill a  critical gap in VA CG training. To adapt iHI-FIVES for successful implementation, our partners 
and our team will directly address known capacity constraints to deliver iHI-FIVES.  Specifically, our implemen-
tation strategy will adapt iHI-FIVES for ease of delivery using stakeholder input (REP) , and half of the sites will 
also form and train cross -service teams and promote inter -service and inter -professional relationships (CON-
NECT). In close partnership with the VA CSP Office,  we will implement iHI-FIVES in eight VAMCs to compare 
the effectiveness o f implementation using REP alone versus REP + CONNECT and to examine the impact of 
iHI-FIVES on key patient and caregiver outcomes.  
Rationale . Although VHA has the most extensive system of home and community -based services of any health 
care system in the  U.S., the majority of patients who need help in the home receive it exclusively from family 
members or friends. These  CGs often lack the training and support needed to provide high quality care to Vet-
erans.  Despite significant expansion in front -line sta ff to meet the growing demand for CG services, with 224 
Caregiver Support Coordinators (CSCs) now working at 122 VAMCs nationally, critical gaps in CG training re-
main.42,43 
Prior CG support programs have overwhelmingly focused on psycho -educational support for CGs of de-
mentia patients. By contrast, the iHI-FIVES curriculum addresses caregiver  skills  needed to care for a heteroge-
neous patient population , and thus addresses the needs of a broader population of CGs in VHA. Importantly, the 
timing of iHI-FIVES  - after referral to home and community -based services  -  represents a ‘crisis point’ in a 
patient’s ability to remain independent. Thus, iHI-FIVES is designed for key tipping points into disability (Figure 
1): 1) to promote patie nts’ functional recovery through CG training ; and 2) to optimize patient functioning and 
independence at specific time  points when patients face longer episodes of disablement and are less likely to 
recover . 
Our implementation strategies address barriers to expanding CG training and support . Our overarching im-
plementation strategy REP is expected to address key factors leading to gaps in CG training: (1) low levels of 
awareness of the CSP and its mission among PACT and specialty providers: we will educate PACT and other 
providers about the CSP. (2) CG support  is often fragmented or duplicative because many services offer ad hoc 
training: we will train CSCs  and their partner  trainers  to reach across services to help deliver iHI-FIVES and 
streamline CG support efforts. (3) limited resources and support for CSCs to sufficiently provide direct support 
to CGs or increase their services for general CGs: sites will be able to select from curriculum delivery options as 
well as what additional resources to provide based on their perceived capacity .44 We will test the ability of the  
CONNECT implementation intervention to augment team formation and team processes across services (e.g. 
Social Work Service (SWS), PACT team members, Geriatrics) and thereby improve HI -FIVES implementation 
(Figure 2).   
2040 Function QUERI        PI Hastings        AMD 23  5.17.2023  Page 8 of 42 
 iHI-FIVES is a clinical intervention with 
strong potential for high impact in VA . iHI-
FIVES is a clinical program  that delivers ev-
idence -based skills training program to fam-
ily or friend CGs of Veteran s with cognitive 
and/or functional limitations  who have re-
cently been referred to  Veteran directed 
care,  home -based primary care, home-
maker home health aide services,  adult day 
health care,  or respite care  (see overview in 
Table 5).   
 
Clinical Program Procedures .  
Overview . Similar to Project 1, t his project is 
a hybrid type III  effectiveness -implementa-
tion design using a stepped -wedge design  
and mixed methods evaluation. We will test 
two implementation strategies, REP alone 
versus  REP+CONNECT for implementation 
of iHI-FIVES.45  The type III design was se-
lected for three reasons:  the implementation 
strateg y REP and implementation interven-
tion CONNECT have strong preliminary evidence ;24,44 iHI-FIVES shows promise in evaluations of ‘value’ to CGs  
through increasing caregiver perceived quality and satisfaction with VHA care the Veteran receives ; and the VA 
Caregiver Support Program views iHI-FIVES to hold grea t promise to fill critical gaps in training for CGs of cog-
nitively or functionally impaired Veterans. To improve  the evidence -base for iHI FIVES  across multiple sites, we 
will carefully track both patient -level clin ical effectiveness and site -level implementation  outcomes.  
 
The participants in the iHI -FIVES clinical program will be CGs of Veterans who had a recent referral (3 months 
or 6 months) to receive  Veteran directed care or  home and community -based services (home -based primary 
care, homemaker home health aide services, adult day health care, respite care) .  110 In addition, sites will use 
their discretion to recruit other caregivers who may benefit from their program, after receiving training in the REP 
process on the targeted caregivers of int erest (e.g., those CGs helping functionally or cognitively impaired Vet-
erans who are at high risk of nursing home entry).  
 
Implementation  activities . The pre -implementation activities as specified by REP will include preparing the pack-
age for training and delivery using a stakeholder panel. As a part of the stakeholder activities of REP, core 
elements and optional components of iHI-FIVES will be established for evaluating implementation fidelity to the 
program.  The core program element is group classes, wh ich  will not be optional given their critical role in 
reducing CG isolation; however, the stakeholder panel may opt to include phone training  sessions  (Table 5 
shows topics based on materials already developed for the RCT) . The intervention package will provide options 
for stakeholder panels to determine who will deliver the curriculum (trainers can teach alone or with other co -
teachers from their own or other service lines), as well as what additional local resources to provide in the training 
materials. During orientation and program training (delivered by Function QUERI at sites), CSCs will receive 
facilitation guides and instruction on curriculum deliv ery as well as options for  potential recruitment CG strategies 
and discuss how to work across services to form their own site -specific teams.  For example, other services that 
support caregivers may be included (e.g., PACT, Spinal Cord Injury service, Ger iatrics, traumatic brain injury 
(TBI) clinic, PTSD clinic, Occupational Therapy/Physical Therapy (OT/PT), and volunteers from VA Volunteer 
Services).  As a result, there will be variation among REP and REP + CONNECT sites in team composition and 
service re ach (e.g., across services or housed solely within the CSP).  We will evaluate team characteristics and 
their processes for both strategies. In summary, participating sites will have options for implementation through-
out the REP process, such as 1) whether  to offer optional phone training; 2) who will deliver the curriculum and Table 5. HI -FIVES Curriculum  
CORE: 4 IN-PERSON WEEKLY GROUP CLASSES  
Session 1: Introduction , frustrations and rewards  of CG   
Session 2: Clinical issues, increasing independence , prevent injury  
Session 3: Caring for the caregiver, communication, depression, burnout  
Session 4: Navigating the VHA , planning for future, services for  CGs 
OPTIONAL: 1 -3 PHONE TRAINING CALLS, caregivers choose topics , ac-
tion items  
Patient -oriented topics  
a. Disease information    d. Managing symptoms at home  
b. Safety issues such as falls   e. Planning for future (directives)  
c. Safe home environment, driving  f. Sleep hygiene for patient   
Caregiver -oriented topics  
a. Management of stress   d. Sleep hygiene for self  
b. Caring for self     e Coping with frustrations  
c. Asking  for help     f. Relaxation techniques  
 
OPTIONAL: 1 -2 BOOSTER CALLS, after group classes, general check -in 
and follow up on any action items  
 
 
2040 Function QUERI        PI Hastings        AMD 23  5.17.2023  Page 9 of 42 
 will they teach it alone or with other service lines; 3) how to recruit beyond the list of potential eligibles, and 4) 
how to form teams to deliver the clinical program.   
 CONNECT . For sites randomized to REP + CONNECT,  sites will receive explicit training and instruction  
prior to iHI -FIVES program delivery targeted to CSCs and other services about the benefits of interacting together 
to improve CG support . Currently there is sub-optimal information flow directly between providers (social work-
ers, CSCs, PACT nurses) that is then communicated back to patients and their CGs . We anticipate CONNECT 
to facilitate more direct information flow between the diverse providers that serve CG s and their Veterans  with 
cognitive and/or functional impairment , which will thereby improve the success of iHI-FIVES implementation. 
Because the  potential team members in iHI-FIVES (e.g. VAMC personnel who support caregivers) often work in 
different locations without regular opportunities for frequent communication, the Group and Individual Mapping 
components of CONNECT will likely be the focus of their team training  (Relationship Ma pping, Table 1).   Land-
scape site -visits and close coordination with the implementation core will be used for optimal adaptation of CON-
NECT for iHI-FIVES . 
 
All activities related to implementation of iHI-FIVES  as described above are non -research operations activities, 
as defined in VHA Handbook 1058.05. These programs are designed to support VHA’s mission of delivering 
health care to the Nation’s Veterans.  
Study timeline . In this stepped -wedge design , iHI -
FIVES implementation will occur in two stratified blocks 
(4 VAMCs per block) with two waves per block (2 
VAMCs per wave), with each wave corresponding to a 
different 6 month period to  begin offering the iHI -FIVES 
training to  CGs in each study site (Figure 5).  The time-
line for HI -FIVES will be 30 months in which pre -imple-
mentation (control) and post -implementation (treat-
ment) data will be collected. In this design, each cluster 
(VAMC) provides before (control) and after (inter ven-
tion) observations and every cluster (VAMC) switches from control to be exposed based on their randomly as-
signed post-implementation start date (step) during recruitment months of the study. T ransition to intervention 
condition will occur at 6 -month int ervals. The p re-observation period occurs from time 0 (stratified block 1) to the 
beginning of post-implementation at an individual VAMC. Each site will provide  at least two rounds  of iHI-FIVES 
training in each 6 -month period  (the basic iHI -FIVES training , e.g., core component, means that “one round” is 
defined as “4 weekly classes”) covering core sessions listed in Table 5. Ideally, each class in a round would be 
offered on consecutive weeks, but the sites will have discretion on scheduling around holiday s. The National 
Director of Caregiver Support felt that offering 2 rounds of iHI -FIVES in a 6 -month period (total of 8 hours in-
structional time, and additional recruiting and recording keeping time) is reasonable for CSC workload.   
 
2.5.3.c. Randomization  procedure . Similar to implementation Project 1, there will be two randomizations due to 
the stepped -wedge design and comparison of two implementation strategies. First,  in each stratified block, the 
4 VAMC s will be randomized to either  wave 1 or wave 2, t hen within wave  randomized to REP alone or REP  + 
CONNECT  for iHI -FIVES implementation.  In each stratified block, the 4 VAMCs will be in the pre -implementation 
period during the first 6 -month recruitment window. Within each block , sites will begin offering  iHI-FIVES training 
to CGs during the first post-implementation period  and will continue for the remaining post -implementation  6-
month intervals.  
Participating Sites . With our partners in the VA CSP, we will  recruit sites in blocks of 4 based on our stratified 
stepped wedge design  for a total of  8 volunteer VAMC sites for iHI-FIVES implementation (see letter of support 
from National Director Meg Kabat) . To ensure sites are similar enough to compare between a rms, sites are 
required to  implement at least two rounds  of iHI-FIVES training every six months. The full standard curriculum 
of HI -FIVES (e.g. if the sites choose all core and optional items to deliver) is 12 weeks in duration; delivering 
only the core c urriculum would take four weeks of group classes.  We anticipate some potential volunteer sites 
will be high functioning and primed for more successful implementation at baseline (i.e., based on their past 
performance in training and other performance metr ics).  Thus, we will work with our operational partners to 
review the volunteer pool to obtain diversity of sites based on a priori ease of implementing a new clinical program   Recruitment months  
Stratified 
Block Wave 1-6 7-12 13-18 19-24 25-30 
1 1         
1 2         
2 1          
2 2         
◼pre-implementation   ◼ post-implementation ◼ administrative data col-
lection only  
 
Figure 5: Stepped wedge design for the 8 participating VAMCs  
2040 Function QUERI        PI Hastings        AMD 23  5.17.2023  Page 10 of 42 
 (e.g. high performing , late adopter) .  We will explore with the implementation c ore the need to stratify by ‘baseline 
site performance’ . Eligible sites will need to have at least 50 recent referrals to  Veteran directed care,  home -
based primary care, homemaker home health aide services, adult day health care, or respite care in a 3 or 6-
month period to provide enough patient and caregiver volume to offer training (and for evaluation purposes).  We 
are designating 3 or 6 months because, although we prefer a shorter window of 3 months, feasibility of site 
volume may lead us to use a 6 -mont h period.  Thus, we will assess the referrals on each interested site to make 
sure there is sufficient volume. We will conduct site visits at all participating sites prior to implementation to obtain 
additional important contextual information and baseline data for analysis.  
 
Please see letter from Margaret Kabat, National Director, Caregiver Support Program (10P4C), providing 
certification of non -research operations activities status (Appendix B). 
 
STUDY DESIGN   
 
Overview . We will conduct a mixed methods evaluation  to address the aims  specified below for  the STRIDE 
and iHI -FIVES program s.  All evaluation  activities involving human subjects will be carried out by employees of 
the Durham VA. Only Durham VA employees will have access to and conduct analyses from collected data.  
Clinical site personnel who participate in STRIDE or iHI -FIVES will participate i n clinical program duties only; no 
employees of other VAMCs implementing STRIDE or iHI -FIVES will participate in research activities.  
 
STRIDE Aims  
Specific Aim 1 : To evaluate implementation  of STRIDE  at REP alone versus REP + CONNECT sites.  
Key questions:  Are implementation penetration and fidelity higher at REP + CONNECT sites? Do team 
processes improve more  at REP + CONNECT sites , compared to REP alone sites ? How do providers ex-
perience implementation at REP alone vs. REP + CONNECT sites?    
 
Specific Aim  2: To examine the impact  of STRIDE  on patient outcomes.  
Key questions: Do STRIDE  participants have fewer discharges to skilled nursing facilities  and shorter 
lengths of stay ? Do STRID E participants have better physical function and higher health -related quality of 
life at 30 days post -discharge? What is the value of STRIDE  from the Veteran’s perspective?  
 
Specific Aim 3 :  To determine the conditions  under which STRIDE implementation is  most successful.  
Key questions: Are higher implementation fidelity and penetration associated with better team processes, as 
measured by the Team Development Measure  (TDM©)?  If REP+CONNECT has better implementation fidelity 
and penetration, do team proc esses moderate or mediate this effect? What contextual factors are associated 
with higher implementation fidelity and penetration? What contextual elements do providers and leaders report 
to be vital contributors to implementation success?   
 
QUERI ADIL  Aims  
Specific Aim 1: Quantify disparities in hospitalization outcomes (length of stay and discharge to home) prior to 
STRIDE implementation among older adult Veterans based on social determinants of health (Black race, La-
tino/a ethnicity, history of housi ng insecurity, rurality, and neighborhood deprivation).  
 
Specific Aim 2a: Quantify disparities in access to STRIDE (proportion of eligible Veterans with any program 
activity and fidelity of program delivery) based on social determinants of health.  
 
Specific Aim 2b: Determine whether and to what extent social determinants of health are associated with dispar-
ities in STRIDE program effects on length of hospital stay and discharge to home.   
 
Specific Aim 3: Create the CONNECTED (CONNECT for Equity and D iversity) implementation package and 
equity -relevant implementation outcomes. We will use implementation mapping (a 5 -step process for develop-
ment of implementation strategies) to include an explicit health equity focus and representation from racially 
diverse Veterans, staff, and operations partners.  
 
2040 Function QUERI        PI Hastings        AMD 23  5.17.2023  Page 11 of 42 
  
iHI-FIVES Aims  
Specific Aim 1 : To evaluate implementation  of iHI-FIVES at REP alone versus REP + CONNECT sites.  
Key questions: Is implementation penetration and fidelity higher at REP + CONNECT sites? How d o provid-
ers experience implementation at REP alone vs. REP + CONNECT sites?   Do team processes improve 
more at REP + CONNECT sites?  
 
Specific Aim 2 : To examine the impact  of iHI-FIVES on key patient and caregiver outcomes.  
Key questions: Do iHI-FIVE S patients have more days in the community at six months? Do HI -FIVE care-
givers have higher satisfaction with VA care , lower depressive symptoms and lower burden ?  What is the 
value of iHI-FIVES from the Veteran and caregiver’s perspective?  
 
Specific Aim 3 :  To determine the conditions  under which iHI-FIVES implementation is most successful.  
Key questions: Are higher implementation fidelity and penetration associated with better team processes, 
as measured by the TDM®? If REP  + CONNECT has better implementation fidelity and penetration, do team 
processes moderate or mediate this effect? What contextual facto rs are associated with higher implemen-
tation fidelity and penetration? What contextual elements do providers and leaders report to be vital contrib-
utors to implementation success?  
 
Understanding the relationships  between uptake of new clinical programs  and teams’ contexts is critical to de-
signing, evaluating, and realizing the effectiveness of implementation efforts.  We will use mixed qualitative and 
quantitative methods to evaluate implementation processes , outcomes , and context . Evaluation will focus on 
evaluating implementation processes, program impact, and the conditions under which program implementation, 
regardless of implementation strategy, is most successful. An overview of mixed method designs that will be 
used to meet these aims in diverse clinical settings is described below.  
To evaluate implementation, we will use a quantitatively driven simultaneous design (QUAN + qual)  in which 
quantitative data constitute the core component and are collected in parallel with qualitative data.47,48 These two 
methods will be used to answer related questions, in that quantitative data will be used to evalu ate implementa-
tion effectiveness (i.e., outcomes of penetration and fidelity) and qualitative data to understand how implemen-
tation processes (including team processes) and environmental context relate to implementation outcomes. Data 
integration will invo lve embedding qualitative process data within the quantitative outcomes data (for example in 
a matrix format in which program sites are arranged from high to low penetration) to evaluate the relationship 
between implementation outcomes and process for both  implementation strategies (e.g. REP alone vs. REP + 
CONNECT).  
 
Pre-implementation landscape assessment at participating sites . Function QUERI  personnel will conduct site 
visits at all participating sites to conduct baseline assessments of clinical needs, clinical and administrative pro-
cesses, teams, and environmental context before clinical programs are formally introduced. During these visits,  
data will be drawn from multiple sources, including semi -structured interviews with service line administrators, 
clinical providers anticipated for program delivery, local policies and procedures  (e.g., directives, protocols),  sur-
veys to assess team devel opment and function for program delivery , and process mapping with key informants . 
Additional informants relevant to each program and site will be identified through snowball purposeful sampling.48 
Information within and between participating sites will be used to inform refinements to clinical program imple-
mentation packages and obtain baseline data for analyse s of context sensitivity.  
 
 Common Measures and Data Sources .  Guided by our nested model of team function and performance  in 
implementation  (Figure 2), the implementation core will utilize common measures and data sources to evaluate 
team processes and characteristics, program characteristics , environmental context, and implementation out-
comes; sample measures and associated data sources are displayed in Table 2.  
Team characteristics and processes . Features of team characteristics and proce sses will be assessed using the 
Team Development Measure (TDM©), a 31-item questionnaire, which characterizes the degree to which groups 
have the characteristics of highly effective teamwork in place.49,50 The TDM© is ideally suited for Function 
QUERI’s evaluation of team s for several reasons.  First, the instrument has been tested in a variety of healthcare 
settings (e.g., administrative, inpatient and outpatient) and maintains psychometric strength when applied to 
2040 Function QUERI        PI Hastings        AMD 23  5.17.2023  Page 12 of 42 
 group size ranging from 3 to 43 members.  Second, the TDM©’s validated instrument design measures team 
functioning from the perspective of individual members of teams, allowing for data collection and analysis at the 
individual and team -level.   
Although TDM© responses generate a summative score describing overa ll team development, items from 
the TDM© also cluster to reflect the four key dimensions of team function: communication, role clarity, cohesion, 
and goal and means clarity.49  This will enable the implementation core to 1) assess baseline and post -imple-
mentation changes in dimensions of team function, 2) identify variations in team strengths and weaknesses 
within and across clinical programs at participating sites, and 3) assess the dimensionality (e.g., one summat ive 
measure of team function or multiple measures of team function) and predictive power of team function on im-
plementation and program outcomes to inform future implementation efforts.   
The implementation core will examine other important features of tea ms, including size, composition and 
the degree to which team membership spans boundaries (e.g., clinical, professional, etc.)  by supplementing the 
TDM with additional survey items . For example, w e will also describe team communication channels (internal, 
external), decision -making, and establishment of routines (Table 2).   The team survey will take roughly 15 -20 
minutes to complete.  
Clinical program characteristics  include the components and processes that each site chooses for program de-
livery. Each site w ill be provided with clinical program implementation packages that outline both the core  and 
optional elements of each program. We will carefully track how each site decides to structure their program, and 
also asses s other important elements associated wi th delivering the program such as task complexity and un-
certainty , and dependence on other teams or clinical units within the organization . 
 
 
Provider data collection  
 
Pre-implementation provider interviews . 
For STRIDE, w e anticipate interviewing approximately 5-10 providers (clinicians and administrators) per ward at 
each site (n=8 sites) for a total of approximately 50 -100 subjects , or until we reach theoretical saturation . For iHI -
FIVES, w e anticipate interviewing appro ximately 5-10 providers ( CSCs, administrators , and staff from other ser-
vices that support caregivers ) at each site (n=8 sites) for a total of approximately 50-100 subjects , or until we 
reach theoretical saturation . Interviews will take place at participati ng sites or over the phone , 2-4 months prior 
to program  implementation . After obtaining verbal informed consent, interviews will be conducted over the phone 
or in person by Function QUERI staff. See Appendix for a copy of the provider interview guide.  We will seek a 
waiver of documentation of informed consent and HIPAA so that we may offer study participation to subjects 
over the phone. Subject eligibility criteria will include:  
• Willing and able to provide in formed consent  
• Knowledge of local context as described above  
 
Post-implementation provider interviews  
For STRIDE, a pproximately 3 -4 months after STRIDE implementation we will conduct interviews with approxi-
mately 5-10 providers per ward at each site (n=8 sites) for a total of approximately 50 -100 subjects , or until we 
reach thematic  saturation,  to understand their experience with the program. For iHI -FIVES, we will conduct ap-
proximately 5-10 providers ( CSCs, administrators , and staff from other services that support caregivers ) at each 
site (n=8 sites) for a total of approximately 50-100 subjects , or until we reach thematic saturation , to understand 
their experience working on caregiver support at their VAMC .  After obtaining verbal informed consent, interviews 
will be conducted over the phone or in person by Function QUERI staff. Subject eligibility criteria will include:  
• Willing and able to provide informed consent  
• Participation in STRIDE  or iHI -FIVES  program  
 
Enrollment Procedures .  We will obtain the appropriate collective bargaining unit (CBU) approvals before enrol-
ling providers and conducting interviews.  Once the VAMC has been confirmed to be a STRIDE or iHI -FIVES 
site, we will contact key informants for interviews. Using snowball sampling from these initial interviews, we will 
identify other involved individuals on the ward  to approach and offer participation  in an int erview .  The study 
team will initially contact the provider via email (Appen dix C  for STRIDE, Appendix  16 for iHI -FIVES ) and invite 
him/her to participate in the interview. When providers respond to the invitation email  and state that they want to 
2040 Function QUERI        PI Hastings        AMD 23  5.17.2023  Page 13 of 42 
 participate, study staff will send them information about the interview, including information about their rights as 
study part icipants from the verbal inf ormed consent script (Appendix D  for STRIDE, Appendix 13 for iHI -FIVES ). 
Telephone interviews and/or in -person interview s will then be scheduled. At the beginning of the conversation, 
the study interviewer will confirm that the participant received and read the information about the study and 
consent process. Then the study interviewer will reiterate key parts of the informed consent information that had 
been sent via email when the interview was sched uled (e.g. purpose of the st udy, the key informant’s rig hts as 
a study participant, the confidentiality of the interview ), ask if there are questions, and ask for verbal consent . 
The interviewer will ask permission to audio -record the interview. Interviewers will use th e script conta ined in the 
Appendix  to review participant rights and obtain verbal consent in cases where consent information was emailed 
prior to a scheduled phone interview.  
If providers cannot be reached via email, they may be called by study staff or study interview ers before being 
considered unreachable. If a provider is reached via phone, study staff will explain the study and invite that 
person to participate using the verbal informed consent script. If the person verbally consents, the interview can 
be conducted at that time or scheduled for another time. Study interviewers will keep a n electronic  verbal consent 
log. The telephone interviews will be audio -recorded using a secure system (Sparky) behind the VA firewall and 
transcribed using a secure VA transcription  service (Salt Lake City)  or by staff .   
  
Pre-implementation provider survey s 
For STRIDE, w e plan to survey  a maximum of 100 providers (e.g. physicians, nurses, physical therapists, etc.) 
in each ward at each site (n=8 sites) for a maximum total of 800 subjects . We will administer  the survey 2-4 
months prior to STRIDE implementation (see Appendix for full instrument) . For iHI -FIVES, we plan to survey a 
maximum of 10 -20 providers (e.g., social workers, CSCs, PACT nurses, etc.) at each site (n=8 sites)  for a max-
imum of 80 -160 subjects.  
 
After obtaining informed consent, s urveys will be administered in one of two ways: 1) email via link to secure 
Illume survey; or 2) in-person  on paper hardcopy of survey . Further details of enrollment pr ocedures are provided 
below. We will seek a waiver of documentation of informed consent and HIPAA so that we may offer study 
participation to subjects via email . Participation is voluntary. Subject eligibility criteria will include:  
• Willing and able to provide informed consent  
• Hospital staff member working in inpatient setting  
 
Post-implementation provider survey s 
Using the same procedures and eligibility criteria , as well as implementation records , we will also survey provid-
ers 3-4 months after STRIDE or iHI -FIVES implementation. We will attempt to survey all providers who partici-
pated in the pre -implementation survey as well as others who have joined the staff, were unavailable, or chose 
not to par ticipate in the first survey. Providers who participated in CONNECT training and those who participate 
directly in delivery of the clinical program will be asked additional questions about these experiences.  
 
Enrollment Procedures .  We will obtain the appropriate collective bargaining unit (CBU) approvals before enrol-
ling providers and collecting survey data.  Once the VAMC has been confirmed to be a STRIDE  or iH I-FIVES  
site, we will contact program leadership (e.g.  program champion) and/or the appropr iate service line leaders  to 
identify individuals to approach and offer participation.  The study team will initially contact th e provider via email 
(Appendix ) and invite him/her to participate in the survey. The email will include all elemen ts of informed  consent 
(Appendix ) and include a  VA-intranet -secured  link that the provider should use to begin the survey if they agree 
to participate. If the participant agrees to participate in the survey, they will be directed to click on a VA-intranet 
secured link to complete and submit the confidential survey to our VA -secure -networked server.   Two brief follow -
up email reminders may be sent as needed to encourage providers to complete the survey.   If there is no provider 
response and the subject has primary non -VA email, a message may be sent to that email asking the participant 
to respond to the link in their VA email.  
In the event that providers cannot be reached by  email  or do not complete the survey through email, personnel 
will be approached during the clinical program site visit by study staff and invited to participate and complete the 
survey in-person on paper.  If the providers agree, study staff will  provide  the informed consent script and if they 
2040 Function QUERI        PI Hastings        AMD 23  5.17.2023  Page 14 of 42 
 are willing to participate, they will be asked to complete a paper copy of the sur vey.  The completed survey will 
be scanned on an approved VA mobile scanner by study staff and transmitted securely to the Durham HSR&D 
secure network , restricted -access  Function QUERI s tudy folder.  In the event that the scanner is not available, 
the surveys  will be returned  to Durham VA HSR&D in a pre -addressed, business reply envelope.   Similar email 
procedures will be followed for the post -implementation survey.  In addition, particip ants who do not respond to 
the secure email link will be mailed a paper copy of the survey and consent with a pre -addressed, business reply 
envelope to return it .  In order to increase survey participation, we may offer ince ntives such as an entry into a 
raffle for small prizes.  
 
Rationa le for Enrollment We have opted to enroll providers primarily by email or in-person  for logistical reasons. 
An email or paper -based strategy greatly expands the reach of the evaluation by allowing enrollment from mul-
tiple VAMCs. We will track number of attempts to contact, and examine differences between providers who 
enrolled or refused and those we were unable to contact to in form future implementation efforts.   Tracking indi-
vidual responses will also allow the study team to examine within person differences in team characteristics, 
processes, and satisfaction that contribute to team performance and outcomes.  
 
PROGRAM -SPECIFIC METHODS : STRIDE  
 
Implementation Outcomes . Penetration  of STRIDE will be assessed by the percentage of eligible patients with 
any documented walking during hospitalization.  In a sub-sample of patients, we will assess total daily minutes 
of activity and dis tance walked (if any), and the percentage of eligible patients who report their providers wanted 
them to walk while they were in the hospital. Fidelity  will be assessed via the percentage of STRIDE participants 
with at least two documented supervised walk s, or one walk > 5 minutes per hospital business day  (excluding 
day of consult, admission days pre -consult, discharge day, weekend days and holidays) .  
 
These data will be obtained from patient survey, review of electronic medical records vi a VistaWeb  or Joint 
Legacy Viewer  JLV, and through a CDW datapull of health factor data.  
 
Patient Outcomes. Our primary patient -level outcome of interest is discharge from the hospital to a skilled 
nursing facility . This could be considered a service -level outcome as well given the important financial implica-
tions for VHA; however we feel it’s most relevant as a patient -centered outcome given the overwhelming data 
that patients prefer home to institutional care.   
Service Outcomes.  Primary service outcome is hospital length of stay  (LOS). Patients value shorter hospitali-
zations as well; however we include it here due to its implications for overall facility efficiency and performance 
reporting (e.g., SAIL measures).43   
 
These data will be obtained from VA administrative records (e.g. Corporat e Data Warehouse) , VA/CMS Repos-
itory Data , and confirmatory chart review through VistaWeb or JLV .  
 
Patient data collection  
Representative measures include the following instruments.  Physical function  will be assessed with subscales 
of the Function and Disability Instrument (LL -FDI). The Life Space Assessment  (LSQ) will assess the extent of 
mobility in the person’s environment.  The LSQ is a reliable measure and has construct and criterion validity in 
samples of older adults.   Health -related quality of life will be assessed via the ICE-CAP A and the Euroquol (EQ -
5D). The Euroquol has been widely used and well -validated, including for telephone administration. It features 
relevant questions on mobility and has been mapped to he alth utilities providing additional data for understanding 
the program’s overall value.52 The full patient  survey is shown in the Appendix . 
 
Key covariates . Patient -level covariates will be identified based on the ICF (Figure 1) and other factors known to 
assess functional outcomes and recovery after hospitalization,54 such as  age, living arrangements, social sup-
port, baseline health (e.g. functional status, chronic health conditions, use of sedative medications, nutritional 
status, depression), severity of acute illness, and delirium on admission. Site -level covariates will include facilit y 
size and complexity, staffing ratios (nursing and PT), average daily census, and academic affiliation.  Data 
sourc es will include CDW, Pharmacy Benefits Management (PBM), Inpatient Evaluation Center ( IPEC ), VHA 
2040 Function QUERI        PI Hastings        AMD 23  5.17.2023  Page 15 of 42 
 Support Services Center (VSSC), Strategic An alytics for Improvement and Learning ( SAIL ), Geriatrics and Ex-
tended Care Data Analysis Center (GECDAC)  and the medical record.  
 
Patient surveys  
We plan to survey approximately 30 patients  per 3 -month period (16 3 -month periods across 8 sites)  for an 
appro ximate total of 960 subjects  (150 subjects per VAMC in stratified block 1 and 90 subjects per VAMC in 
stratified block 2) . For all VAMCs , patients will not be surveyed if they  were admitted and discharged in the 3 -
month window of the implementation rollout . Surveys will be collected via telephone at 30 days following hospital 
discharge. We will seek a waiver of documentation of informed consent and HIPAA given that recruitment and 
data collection is entirely telephone based  and minimal risk . Participation is voluntary. Su bject eligibility criteria 
include s: 
• Able and willing to provide informed consent  (does not lack decision -making capacity)  
• Discharged from a participating hospital within the preceding 30 days  
• Age >= 60  
• Index admission for med ical illness  
• Community -dwelling (i.e. not in a nursing home  or institutional care ) prior to hospital visit  
• Ability to ambulate safely and independently  (does not need help walking across a small room)  
• Valid telephone number in the medical record  
• Admitted to a medical service and discharged from a medical service  
• Index h ospital stay was in a ward identified to participate in the STRIDE program  
 
Exclusion Criteria:  
• Patient deceased  
• Index hospital stay was < 2 business days  (48 hours), including any observation days  
• Currently hospitalized  
• Current high -risk suicide flag in medical record  
• Diagnosis of cognitive impairment or dementia  
• Difficulty with or u nable to communicate on the telephone, or no telephone access  
• Discharged to another hospital or acute care  setting  
• Transferred into index hospital from another hospital  
• Bedrest order that was not lifted for at least >2 days of the index hospitalization  
 
Patient Interviews  
We plan to interview approximately 5 -10 patients from each STRIDE site (n=8 sites) for a total of 40 -80 subjects. 
Interviews will be conducted approximately one week post -discharge  for patients participating in the STRIDE 
program . The interviews include 5 -10 questions  and are projected to take 10-20 minutes to administer.  The 
interviewer will ask permission to  audio -record the interview, invite the participan t to ask any questions and 
request verbal consent to proceed with the interview. The telephone interviews will be audio -recorded using a 
secure system (Sparky) behind the VA firewall and transcribed using a secure VA transcription service (Salt 
Lake City) or by study staff.  Data col lection and audio recording of interviews concluded on 1.22.20.  
The verbal informe d consent script (see Appendix ) will include language mentioning the potential interview and 
audio -recording and that patients have the option to decline the interview  and au dio-recording.   
 
Enrollment Procedures .  An automated  CDW datapull and/or  VistaWeb /Joint Legacy Viewer  as appropriate will 
first identify the patients who meet criteria for age, index admission  and discharge status.  Study staff will then 
conduct a brief medical record review to check for eligibility criteria that are not readily available in CDW (e.g. 
residential status).  During the medical record review study staff will determine if the patie nt has “decision -making 
capacity” by searching the medical record notes section using the key term “capacity”. The patient will be con-
sidered initially eligible if study staff finds that the patient has decision -making notated in the medical record. The 
patient will not be eligible if the term or similar term “lack of decision -making capacity” is found in the record. If 
term “capacity” is not found, study staff will assume decision -making capacity is intact. Of those eligible, we will 
2040 Function QUERI        PI Hastings        AMD 23  5.17.2023  Page 16 of 42 
 mail introductory recr uitment /opt-out letters signed by the PI (see Sample Letter; Appendix).  Patients will be 
provided a toll -free number to contact if they do not wish to be contacted further.  Starting about one week after 
mailing recruitment letters, a member of the study staff will call patients to ascertain eligibility and obtain informed 
consent from the Veteran participant. See Appendix  for the patient informed consent script and screening script.  
Because the screening and enrollment is entirely telephone based, we wil l seek a waiver of documentation of 
informed consent  and of HIPAA , as approved by the Durham VAMC IRB in our ongoing studies using similar 
recruitment methods.   
 
Rationale for Enrollment and Screening over the Telephone . We have opted not to enroll Vetera ns during a 
hospital admission or other in -person visit for logistical reasons. A telephone -based strategy makes the evalua-
tion possible  by allowing en rollment of  patients from multiple VAMCs  across the country . We will track number 
of attempts to contact,  and examine differences between patients who enrolled or refused and those we were 
unable to contact to inform future implementation efforts.  
 
PROGRAM -SPECIFIC METHODS: QUERI ADIL  
Aims 1 and 2: Data Source  
Aims 1 and 2 will utilize existing data from the  Function QUERI STRIDE implementation trial, which includes 
nearly 15,000 Veterans across 8 VA facilities who met inclusion criteria for the stepped -wedge trial. Sites were 
randomized to one of two implementation programs:  Replicating Effective Programs ( REP) or REP + CON-
NECT  (a supplement  to REP that consisted of  interaction -oriented staff training activities designed to promo te 
clinic team work  and readiness to implement new practices) . Veteran c riteria for STRIDE participation were as 
follows : ≥ 60 years of age , admi tted for medical illness, community -dwelling, ab le to follow one -step com-
mands , and able  to ambulate safely. Veteran -level data was collected pre - and post -implementation.  
Aim 1 Measures  
The goal of Aim 1 is to q uantify pre-implement ation disparities in hospitalization outcomes . Main outcomes in-
clude: length of hospital stay and  discharge from the hospital to a skilled nursing facility.  Key social determi-
nants of health include: CDW race and ethnicity data, positive EHR screen for hou sing and food insecurity 
within the past 5 years, census tract Rural -Urban Community Area (RUCA) code, and census tract Neighbor-
hood Deprivation Index (NDI). Housing insecurity, food insecurity, and NDI from approved CDW data sources 
have not previously be en analyzed as predictors of hospitalization outcomes for the parent project . Covariates 
will be similar to the parent project, and will include: (patient -level) age, baseline health, severity of acute ill-
ness, and delirium on admission ; and (site-level)  facility size /complexity, staffing ratios, average daily census, 
and academic affiliation.  Using race as a stand -in for systemic inequity may reify the myth of biological race 
and runs the risk of glossing over racism as a causal factor in ine quity. However, given the absence of existing 
measures of systemic racism, race and ethnicity variables will be included in analysis. To avoid using white-
ness as a norm, effects coding of race (i.e., quantifying the extent to which each racial group varies  from the 
grand mean) will be used. Additionally, a new algorithm for race/ethnicity coding in CDW will provide more pre-
cision in these measures.  
Aim 2 Measures  
The goal of Aim 2 is to q uantify disparities in access to STRIDE  and disparities in STRIDE pro gram effects . 
Access to STRIDE (2a) will be assessed by  the percentage of all eligible patients with documented walking 
during hospitalization , the percentage of STRIDE participants with documented supervised walk ing, and the 
percentage with ≥ 10 minutes o f daily walking.  STRIDE program effects (2b) will be measured by the difference 
in pre - and post -implementation patient -level length of hospital stay and discharge from the hospital to a skilled 
nursing facility . Key social determinants (2a and 2b) will be  identical to those of Aim 1.  
Aim 1 Analysis  
We hypothesize that social determinants of health (i.e., Black race, Latino/a ethnicity, history of housing inse-
curity, rurality, and neighborhood deprivation) will be significantly associated with hospitalizat ion outcomes. We 
will model patient -level outcomes of discharge and length of stay via generalized linear mixed models with a 
random intercept for cluster. Models will also account for multiple hospitalizations per patient. We will estimate 
the association  (e.g. odds ratio, incidence rate ratio) of the social determinant with the outcome and the associ-
ated 95% confidence intervals.  
2040 Function QUERI        PI Hastings        AMD 23  5.17.2023  Page 17 of 42 
 Aim 2 Analysis  
We hypothesize that social determinants of health will be associated with STRIDE access. The modeling ap-
proach f or Aims 2a/2b will be similar to Aim 1. In Aim 2b, 1) we will additionally account for within - and be-
tween -period effects, and 2) address heterogeneity in STRIDE program effects on patient -level outcomes at-
tributed to each social determinant through estima tion and testing of pre -specified interaction terms between 
social determinants and STRIDE indication. Models will adjust for REP vs. REP + CONNECT and patient char-
acteristics . 
Aim 1 and 2 Power Calculation  
With a cohort of nearly 15 ,000 patients, we are confident that we will be adequately powered to detect clinically 
meaningful differences in patient -level outcomes. Clinically meaningful differences will be pre -specified by 
study clinicians to minimize spurious findings . 
Aim 3: Overview  
We propose to use implementation mapping methodology to incorporate a greater focus on racial equity within 
the CONNECT implementation package . Implementation mapping includes a 5 -step process for strateg y de-
velopment.  CONNECT is an appropriate foundation for this work because it has been used successfully in mul-
tiple clinical settings  and has been associated with improvements in staff communication.   
Aim 3: Recruitment & Participants  
We will convene a Function QUERI Equity Working Group monthly for 6 month s to use implementation map-
ping to  develop/adapt  implementation strategies that focus on health equity for staff receiving the CONNECT 
implementation package . The working group will include the mentoring team, and will consist of 12 -15 end -
users ; it will also include  the Function QUERI leadership team  and experts on health equity . Dr. Wilson will fa-
cilitate the group.  End-user group members will include: Veterans over the age of 60, general medicine inpa-
tient services staff, Veteran caregivers, geriat ricians, and operations partners. Effort will be made to include 
end-users who are Black, Indigenous, or People of Color, while recognizing that it is not the default responsibil-
ity of those who experience oppression to address disparities.  
Aim 3: Procedur e 
We will present workgroup members with findings from Aims 1 and 2  (i.e., equity needs assessment ). At meet-
ing 2,  the group will identify matrices of change (e.g., reduce staff authority bias, reduce staff implicit racial 
bias, improve housing security) . Dr. Wilson and Function QUERI collaborators will then select implementation 
strategies based upon the matrices of change, the Expert Recommendations for Implementing Change (ERIC) 
taxonomy, and the Health Equity Implementation Framework. At meetings 3 thro ugh 6 , the working group will 
collaboratively  revise  and refine  the proposed implementation strategies.  
Aim 3 Deliverables  
Although final content of the CONNECTED  implementation package is dependent on the implementation map-
ping process, some potential st rategies might include: equity training for clinical teams, audit and feedback of 
equity metrics, and/or coalition building with local clinical/community partners. At the project’s conclusion, the 
team (led by Dr. Wilson)  will propose  a QUERI - or HSR&D -funded project to test CONNECTED.  
 
 
PROGRAM -SPECIFIC METHODS: iHI -FIVES  
 
Implementation Outcomes.  
 
Penetration  will be measured using caregiver -level and provider -level measures at each site. Caregiver -level. 
We will measure penetration of the program at each site by assessing the number of caregivers “reached” by 
iHI-FIVES in a 6 -month interval  out of the total n umber of caregivers “eligible” during the same interval . Provider -
level. Penetration at the provider -level will be measured  as the number of providers who refer caregivers to 
participate in iHI -FIVES in a 6 -month  interval  out of the total providers involve d in caregiver support. Site level. 
Penetration at the site -level will be measured as the number of caregivers registered into the Caregiver Applica-
tion Tracker (CAT) out of the number registered in the prior 6 -months.  
2040 Function QUERI        PI Hastings        AMD 23  5.17.2023  Page 18 of 42 
  
Fidelity  will be measured as follows : 1) the number of 6 -month intervals  in post -implementation in which a site 
delivered at least two rounds of iHI -FIVES trainings out of the total number of 6 -month intervals  in post -imple-
mentation; 2) the number of rounds of training in which the full iHI -FIVES core curriculum topics were covered 
out of the total number of rounds of training offered.  
 
These data will be obtained from review of electronic medical records via VistaWeb or Joint Legacy Viewer JLV, 
CDW data pull of health factor data, training r ecords and attendance logs for each site, POC -reported data on 
instructors involved, and caregiver participant interviews.  
 
Patient Outcome: Our primary individual -level outcome for iHI -FIVES is a patient -level outcome . Veteran  inde-
pendence  (i.e., days spent alive and at home over the 6 -month outcome period). This will be calculated as 180 
days after the data pull date for that specific 6 -month interval  minus the total number of days in an Emergency 
Department (ED) setting, an inpatient sett ing, or in a post -acute facility in the 6 months after the study 
start date (e.g. , 6 months post -data pull).    
 
Caregiver Outcomes: Function.  Our primary caregiver -level outcome of interest is function which includes 
depressive symptoms, as well as subjective burden  (or the level of stress felt by CGs), and global satisfac-
tion with VA health care quality measure as perceived by the caregiver.  Caregiver outcome data will be ob-
tained from surveys.  
Patient  data: Definition of the Primary Outcome  
To create the primary outcome, measures from administrative data and VA/CMS Repository data will be cre-
ated that include patient ED days, inpatient days, post -acute facility days, and residential nursing home stays.  
These are all defined below, along with contextual utilization variables.  We examine whether patients had a 
residential nursing home stay because we do not include those types of stays in our primary outcome and be-
cause patients who have transitioned to residential care of this type are no longer considered to be “independ-
ent” or living at home.  As such, any days occurring in a visit of these types, will be censored and not included 
in the analysis as a day not at home.  The outcome period is defined as from the mid -point of each 6 -month 
block forward 6 months (e.g., the last day of month 3 in a block).  
 
Emergency Department (ED) Days. We will count an emergency department encounter occurring on one day 
(two days, etc.) as one day (two days, etc.) not at home.  For any ED visit that results in an inpatient admission 
on the same day as the ED visit, we will count the first day as being an ED day.  Days thereafter that are spent 
in the inpatient setting , defined as there being  a record of a hospital admission within one day of their ED visit, 
will be counted under the inpatient variable, described below.      
 
Inpatient Days . We will use the admission date and the discharge date to calculate days spent in an inpatient 
stay.  Inpatient hospice  stays will be not included in the I npatient Days count.  Residential Psychiatric Inpatient 
Days will not be counted in the I npatient Days count.  See below for definitions of each of these.  We will cross 
reference  Inpatient Days  against ED Days and Post-Acute Facility  Days to prevent double counting.  
 
Post-acute Facility  days . We will also use admission and discharge dates to measure days in a post-acute fa-
cility setting . We will include Community Living Center, Community Nursing Home, and p rivate or Medicare 
nursing home (e.g. not reimbursed by the VA) days  directly following an inpatient stay .  Specifically, a post-
acute facility  stay is defined as nursing home stay of 100 days or fewer immediately following discharge from 
an inpatient stay ( on the same day or day before).  For community -dwelling patients, if a patient has a long -
stay nursing home stay following immediate discharge from the hospital, we will count the first 100 days as 
post-acute days and then thereafter the da ys will be censored.  For patients who are identified as living in a 
nursing home (e.g. they have a nursing home stay for at least 101 days), being discharged from the hospital 
into a nursing home upon immediate discharge from the hospital will not be coun ted as post -acute care.  This 
will be considered residential nursing home care and the days will not be included in the count of post -acute 
facility days.  Chart review will confirm identification of community residence or nursing home residence if 
deemed necessary.   We will cross reference against ED days and Inpatient Days to prevent double counting.  If 
2040 Function QUERI        PI Hastings        AMD 23  5.17.2023  Page 19 of 42 
 a patient begins at a facility stay as a post -acute facility episode as defined above, but does not leave the facil-
ity by day 100, that is considered a tr ansition to a ‘residential nursing home stay’. Thus, the first 100 days of 
that post -acute episode will be counted as “ 100 days” not at home but then thereafter the patient will be cen-
sored.  
 
Measures that will be created to help with censoring decisions:   
 
Residential Nursing Home Stays . A binary outcome of “ any residential  nursing home stay” , defined  as an episode 
of 101 or more days in a nursing home setting (CLC, CNH, VA and non -VA locations), will also be constructed 
and explored descriptive ly and as exploratory analysis.  An episode of 101 days or more in our preliminary 
analysis of local GeriPACT patients and 100 HI -FIVES patients, pooled and not by arm, indicates a permanent 
move to a nursing home .  We view this cut -off to help distinguish  between post -acute skilled facility care and 
longer term residential custodial care. For comparison, in Medicare in 2016, mean length of stay for post -acute 
care was 30 days [32] and 97% of discharges from Medicare post -acute care facilities (SNFs) occurred by 90 
days. Thus, it is likely that stays in a VA nursing home for less than 101 days can also be considered post -acute 
care and that days over this threshold will be considered residential .  Additionally, since  a “Residential Nursing 
Home Stay ” represents a more permanent transition from the home environment,  the patient will then be  cen-
sored  at the t ime of that transition  from the primary outcome. Specifically, days after the admission date for a 
stay which lasted longer than 100 days will be removed from the “denominator” of the outcome, such that those 
days do not count as either at home or not at h ome because this measure is no longer considered applicable 
after the transition.   In addition, for the rare cases in which patients living in a nursing home (e.g. they have a 
nursing home stay for at least 101 days) are then admitted and then discharged f rom the hospital back into a 
nursing home, these days following the discharge will also be counted as “residential nursing home days”. We 
will examine the binary outcome of any residential nursing home stay as  “the patient had a long stay n ursing 
home stay  ≥101 days in the 6 month outcome period across VA and VA -purchased stays ” versus no long -stay 
nursing home stay .[33] 
 
Finally, for descriptive purposes, the team will d efine other utilization types: a ny adult day health care use, any 
respite care, a nd any short -term nursing home  stays will also be described.  A  short -term custodial  nursing 
home stay, which is one that is 1) not within one day of an inpatient discharge and 2) less than or equal to 60 
days , is not counted as a day not at home and patients will not be censored.  Thi s will be examined in descrip-
tive analyses.  
 
Key covariates . Patient -level covariates will be identified based on the ICF (Figure 1) and other factors known to 
assess independence  including age, race, ethnicity, marital status, service connection, urban/rural status,  
NOSOS score from year prior to start date. Site-level covariates  to explore  will include  presence of a Geriatric 
Research Education and Clinical Center, rural status, and academic af filiation.  Data sources will include CDW, 
Inpatient Evaluation Center (IPEC), Strategic Analytics for Improvement and Learning (SAIL) , Geriatrics and 
Extended Care Data Analysis Center (GECDAC)  and the patient medical record.  
 
Sample of Patients . Administrative data and VA/CMS Repository data will be used to construct  the primary pa-
tient outcome.  Analysis will be performed on a sample of Veterans from a 3 or 6-month repeated automated 
CDW data pull and/or VistaWeb/Joint Legacy Viewer as appropriate. This data pull will occur at a uniform time 
period (e.g. , 2 weeks) of each 3 or 6-month interval for the duration of the 30 -month study.  
 
Patient  eligibility crit eria includes a consult or referral in the past 3 or 6-months from the date of the data pull to 
the following VA services:  
• H/HHA (homemaker home health aide services)  
• Home based primary care (HBPC)  
• Adult day health care  
• Respite care  
• Veteran directed care  
2040 Function QUERI        PI Hastings        AMD 23  5.17.2023  Page 20 of 42 
 and meet none of the exclusion criteria:  
• Consult or referral to hospice care.  
 
We anticipate that there will be between 15,000 -18,000  total Veteran patients meeting these criteria.  We will 
require sites have a minimum  of 50 recent referrals to HCBS  (recent is defined as within a 3 or 6 -month  interval ) 
to be an eligible site.   
 
Sample of C aregivers. Survey data  will be used to  construct secondary caregiver outcomes.  
 
Enrollment procedures. Of the Veteran patients identified from the repeated automated data pull described above 
to create the administrative primary outcome, we will mail introductory recruitment/opt -out letters signed by the 
PI (see Sample Letter for iHI -FIVES; Appendix). Patients will be pro vided a toll -free number to opt out. Starting 
about one week after mailing recruitment letters, a member of study staff will call patients and  describe that we 
would like to conduct a brief survey  with their family or friend  caregiver by phone. If they do not have a  caregiver, 
contact will cease. If they do, s tudy staff will ask the Veteran patient  for permission to contact the caregiver, and 
if allowed, will confirm contact information for the caregiver.  The patient’s interaction with the study team is lim ited 
to agreeing or declining to give the study team permission to contact their caregiver.  
See Appendix for the iHI -FIVES patient screening script.  
 
Because the Veteran patient contact screening is entirely telephone based  and minimal risk , we will seek a 
waiver of informed consent and of HIPAA, as approved by the Durham VAMC IRB in our ongoing studies using 
similar recruitment methods  (Appendix) .   
 
For eligible Veteran patients who gave permission to the study team to contact their  caregiver, a member of the 
study team will call the caregiver to describe the survey, answer questions, ascertain eligibility , and obtain in-
formed consent. It will be common based on our experience with the RCT of HI -FIVES for the caregiver to answer 
the V eteran’s phone. If this is the case, we will proceed to the caregiver informed consent and screening script 
(Appendix).   
 
For caregiver surveys, we will seek a waiver of documentation of informed consent and HIPAA given that re-
cruitment and data collection  is entirely telephone based and minimal risk  (Appendix) . Participation is volun-
tary. The caregiver survey exclusion criteria by phone screening include:  
• Unwilling to complete baseline survey and 3 -month follow -up survey  
• Not able to communicate via telepho ne 
• Of minority age  
• Caregiver is a professional without a pre -existing personal relationship with the Veteran and re-
ceives payment for caregiving services  
• Caregiver is a member of the Durham HSR&D Veteran and Family Input Initiative (VAFII), where 
members have advised and provided input towards the development of iHI -FIVES intervention 
materials (will apply to the Durham VAMC site only, study staff have a list of VAFII caregiver 
members).  
• Informs us Veteran is currently in hospital or institution  
• Informs us Veteran is  currently receiving hospice care  
 
The goal is to collect 120 surveys from caregivers in the pre -implementation period and 200 caregivers in the 
post-implementation period  (n=320) .  All caregivers will fill out a baseline survey  upon c onsent and 2-3 months 
later complete a follow -up survey. Both surveys take approximately 20 -30 minutes to complete.  The primary 
analysis approach for the caregiver outcomes (satisfaction with VA care, subjective burden, depressive symp-
toms), will be perfor med on t hese  320 caregivers.  
 
For an “as treated” analysis, there will be an additional pool of caregivers recruited into the study among those 
participating in the iHI-FIVES clinical program.  We expect that not every caregiver participating in the clinical 
program will consent to be a research subject, thus, with a conservative estimate of a 50% enrollment rate from 
the pool of participating caregivers (n=320), the minimum number of participating caregivers in the “as treated” 
2040 Function QUERI        PI Hastings        AMD 23  5.17.2023  Page 21 of 42 
 analysis is expected to be 100. Prior to the start of the first iHI-FIVES training , a member of the study team will 
call caregivers to ascertain eligibility and obtain  verbal  informed consent from the caregiver. Study team mem-
bers will describe that participation in the study is completely voluntary and will not impact the caregiver’s invita-
tion to attend the iHI -FIVES training. Caregivers will be provided a toll -free number to contact if they do not wish 
to be contacted further. See Appendix for the caregiver informed consent script and screening script.   
 
Ratio nale for Caregiver Enrollment and Screening over the Telephone . We have opted not to enroll caregivers 
of Veterans during the Veteran’s hospital admission or other in -person visit to their VAMC for logistical reasons. 
A telephone -based strategy makes the evaluation poss ible by allowing enrollment of caregivers from multiple 
VAMCs across the country. To inform future implementation efforts, w e will track number of attempts to contact 
and examine differences between caregivers who enrolled or refused and  those we were unable to contact.  
 
Caregiver Interviews .   
We will not be conducting qualitative interviews with caregivers in the pre -implementation period. In the post -
implementation period, we plan to interview by telephone approximately 5 -12 caregivers  who participated in iHI -
FIVES training and consented to be part of the study for a total of approximately 40 -96 subjects across 8 sites, 
or until we reach thematic saturation.  The interviews will take approximately 1 5-20 minutes to administer. The 
study t eam interviewer will ask permission to audio record the interview, and invite the caregiver to any questions 
and request verbal consent to proceed with the interview. The telephone interviews will be audio -recorded using 
a secure system (Sparky) behind the  VA firewall and transcribed using a secure VA transcription service (Salt 
Lake City) or by study staff. In addition, we plan to share site -level summaries of the qualitative interviews with 
individual sites for implementation and quality improvement purpo ses. 
 
For the caregiver qualitative interviews, we will seek a waiver of documentation of informed consent and HIPAA 
given that recruitment and data collection is entirely telephone based and minimal risk . Caregivers who are 
enrolled in the study will be m ailed a written statement regarding the research that contains key elements of the 
informed consent. The verbal informed consent script (see Appendix) will include language mentioning the po-
tential interview and audio -recording that caregivers have the opt ion to decline the interview and audio recording. 
Participation is voluntary. The caregiver  interview exclusion criteria  by phone screening  include :   
• Not able to communicate via telephone  
• Participated in less than  50% of the iHI -FIVES  group  training program sessions  
• Of minority age  
•  
• Caregiver is a member of the Durham HSR&D Veteran and Family Input Initiative (VAFII), 
where members have advised and provided input towards the development of iHI -FIVES inter-
vention materials (will apply to the Durham VAMC site only, study staff have a list of VAFII care-
giver members).  
 
Enrollment Procedures .  We will first identify the caregivers who have participated in the iHI -FIVES training 
program using an LSV report of iHI -FIVES caregiver attendance developed for sites. We will compare this list 
with caregivers identified for the study sample (see procedur es above). We will confirm eligibility via Vista-
Web/Joint Legacy Viewer review of the Veteran/caregiver records.   We will mail introductory recruitment/opt -
out letters signed by the PI (see Sample Letter; Appendix).  Caregivers will be provided a toll -free number to 
contact if they do not wish to be contacted further.  Starting about on e week after mailing recruitment letters, a 
member of the study staff will call caregivers to ascertain eligibility and obtain informed consent from the care-
giver. See Append ix for the caregiver informed consent script and screening script.  Because the screening 
and enrollment is entirely telephone based, we will seek a waiver of documentation of informed consent and of 
HIPAA, as approved by the Durham VAMC IRB in our ongoing  studies using similar recruitment methods.   
 
Rationale for Enrollment and Screening over the Telephone . We have opted not to enroll caregivers during an 
iHI-FIVES training session or other in -person visit for logistical reasons. A telephone -based strateg y makes the 
evaluation possible by allowing enrollment of caregivers from multiple VAMCs across the country. We will track 
number of attempts to contact, and examine differences between caregivers who enrolled or refused and those 
we were unable to contact  to inform future implementation efforts.  
2040 Function QUERI        PI Hastings        AMD 23  5.17.2023  Page 22 of 42 
  
 
RISK/BENEFIT ASSESSMENT  
Providers. There is no patient involvement in the provider survey or  interview process. The benefits of these 
interviews far outweigh any minimal risk that may be involved.  
Patients.  The evaluation is minimal risk and does not involve an intervention.  For the STRIDE program, w e will 
ensure that patients are willing and able to provid e informed consent and will not enroll patients who have evi-
dence of dementia, cognitive imp airment or lack of capacity.  For the iHI -FIVES program, there will be no survey 
questions or interviews asked of the patient.  
Caregivers. The evaluation is minimal risk and does not involve an intervention. For the iHI -FIVES program, we 
will ensure that ca regivers are willing and able to provide  verbal  informed consent and will not enroll caregivers 
if they are not able to provide informed consent and will not enroll caregivers if they are under 18 years of age 
or if their Veteran patient is in hospice or c urrently in the hospital or other institution.   
 
Protection of Data from Improper Use or Disclosure  
There is a slight risk of breach of privacy resulting from unauthorized use, loss, or disclosures of PHI.  However, 
if such an event occurs, the Durham loca l site PI and staff will follow the Durham VA Medical Center’s proce-
dures.  The lead principal investigator will work closely with the IRB, the ISO, and Privacy Officer if notification 
to individuals is necessary.  
 
Through their VA training, all staff are familiar with the Durham VA Medical Center’s procedure for reporting loss 
or theft of computer devices, unauthorized use, loss, or disclosures of PHI, or violations of information security 
requirements is to report the incident immediately (within 1 hour o f discovery) to the VA Police, the employee’s 
Supervisor, ISO, and Privacy Officer. Loss or theft of computer devices or PHI will also be reported to the Durham 
VA IRB as an adverse event.  
 
Data Management  
The Durham HSR&D COIN  adheres to VA policy and Du rham VAMC IRB requirements, but has also devel-
oped additional Standard Operating Procedures for data security which have been designed to ensure contin-
ued confidentiality, integrity, and availability of research data. These procedures, which protect both p aper and 
computer based records, have been used successfully in many studies, and will be followed for the proposed 
study.  
With respect to all data, these procedures mandate the following to ensure confidentiality and safe handling of 
all data: (1) Access  to all participant data and information will be restricted to authorized personnel; (2) Partici-
pants will not be identified by name in any reports or publications, nor will data be presented in such a way that 
the identity of individual participants can b e inferred; (3) Each participant will be assigned an anonymous study 
ID which will be used on all study forms; and (4) All study personnel will maintain certification with the Durham 
VAMC IRB that they have completed training in research ethics and confide ntiality.  
With respect to paper based records, these procedures mandate the following: (1) All study records that con-
tain participant information will be kept in secured locked areas when not in use; and (2) In addition, such ma-
terials, when in use, will be kept safe from public scrutiny. With respect to computer based records, the follow-
ing practices are followed: (1) All research data are stored on VA -administered servers which are physically 
secured in a Durham VAMC server room; (2) Individual computer accounts, password protected, are issued to 
staff members; and (3) Access to computer data is granted by OI&T personnel after confirming appropriate 
docume ntation through the IRB, per COIN  policies. Utilization data will be downloaded directly from nationa l 
files to the Durham HSR&D COIN  servers  or stored in the secure VINCI environment.  Of study personnel, only 
the study Statisticians and Eco nomist will have access to the utilization  data, which will not be moved from this 
secured environment.  
The key linking the study ID numbers to the patients’ identifying information will be stored in a password pro-
tected electronic database and maintained on a password protected VA server, with access only available to 
approved study staff and investigators.    
 
Additional Safeguards for Provider Interviews and Surveys . The information gained during the interviews and 
surveys will not be used to evaluate quality of care. Neither the provider’s supervisors nor the provider’s peers 
2040 Function QUERI        PI Hastings        AMD 23  5.17.2023  Page 23 of 42 
 or patients will have access t o the data. Data will remain confidential. No individually identifiable information will 
be published or disclosed, unless required by law.  
 
In order to protect participants’ privacy, we will avoid the use of names during the audiotaped interview.  To 
protect participants against risk after interview data have been collected, we will take a variety of measures to 
ensure confidentiality. In all records, participants will be assigned unique identifiers. The key linking unique iden-
tifiers to participants, the verbal consent log, as well as all interview recordings and transcripts will be stored 
electronically in a restricted -use folder on a VA server, and hard copies of any of these files will be stored in a 
locked file cabinet in the locked office of study per sonnel.  
 
We will guard against the individual identification of participants in transcripts and research reports by using 
study IDs and by not identifying specific research sites. These data will be accessible only to the PIs, study staff 
and the appropria te data management personnel in Durham.   We are outsourcing transcription of recorded in-
terviews to the VA  Salt Lake City’s Professional Transcription Service in order to ensure timely availability of 
qualitative data for the purposes of qualitative analys is. The audio recordings to be transcribed will be placed in 
a dedicated sub -folder of the study’s shared folder on the Durham HSR&D P Drive, and approved VASLC Tran-
scription staff will access files and complete tasks within this folder. No data will leave  the Durham VAMC.  
Electronic data will only be stored and accessed through secure VA servers and other VA information systems. 
Access to primary data will be restricted to those members of the research team with specific need to perform 
their duties. Data will not be removed from designated VA computer systems, except for archiving at study com-
pletion.  
 
 
DATA AND SAFETY MONITORING PLAN  
This study carries minimal risk of unexpected or adverse events. The patient and provider data will remain on 
secure VA ser vers. Any paper copies of data will always remain in locked cabinets. All aspects of this study are 
of minimal risk. Unexpected or adverse events are highly unlikely in this study. In the highly unlikely event that a 
study -related serious adverse event sho uld occur, it will be reported per Durham VA Medical Center IRB require-
ments. Any other adverse events, serious adverse events and protocol violations will be reported at Continuing 
Review per Durham IRB requirements.  
 
Analyses  
Aim 1: To evaluate implementation  of STRIDE  and iHI -FIVES  at REP alone versus REP + CONNECT 
sites.  
We hypothesize that sites randomized to REP  + CONNECT will have higher penetration  (for STRIDE that 
is the proportion  of eligible patients with ≥ 1 documente d walk during hospitalization , higher  total daily minutes 
of activity and distance walked , and higher proportion  of eligible patients who report their providers wanted them 
to walk while they were in the hospital ; and for iHI -FIVES that is the  proportion o f eligible caregivers reached by 
iHI-FIVES in a 6 -month interval a nd the proportion of providers involved in caregiver support who refer caregivers 
to participate in iHI -FIVES in a 6-month interval ) and fidelity  (higher proportion  of STRIDE participants with ≥ 
one document ed supervised walk, and with ≥ 10 minutes of daily walking ); for iHI -FIVES proportion of sites that 
delivered at least two rounds of iHI -FIVES trainings in a 6 -month interval  during post -implementation and the 
proportion of training rounds from the total number offered in which the full iHI -FIVES core curriculum topics 
were covered ). For A im 1, outcomes are defined in the post -implementation period only and the primary analyses 
will be for the outcomes in the first  post-implementation 3 -month period so that analysis will not be confounded 
with time since implementation.  For the dichotomous outcomes, we wil l use logistic regression model s55-57 where 
the main predictor of interest will be REP vs. REP + CONNECT adjusting for clustering of VAMC  with either a 
random effect or by conditioning. For continuous outcomes, we will use linear mixed regression models.58 Ad-
justments for patient characteristics and a random effect for hospital ward may also be added.  In hospitals that 
have multiple post -implementation 3 -month measurement times, we will examine how fidelity and penetration 
outcomes change over time using descriptive methods (e.g. plots, descriptive statistics, subgroups).  
In addition to testing the above quantitative hypot heses, we will use semi -structured interviews with provid-
ers to elicit their experience with implementation process and evaluation of outcomes. Specifically, we will ask 
providers questions about team processes, for example, How do team members communicate  with each other 
2040 Function QUERI        PI Hastings        AMD 23  5.17.2023  Page 24 of 42 
 and how are decisions collectively made? , as well as questions about effectiveness of implementation strategies. 
We will code interviews using both a priori  labels of team processes and implementation outcomes and data 
derived labels to re flect respondent description of implementation. We will aggregate this individual -level data 
into site -level case memos, structured according to interview questions and a priori  measures. We will then 
develop a matrix to compare reports of implementation p rocesses and outcomes between REP and REP + 
CONNECT sites. The rows of the matrix will reflect a priori  implementation measures and the columns will reflect 
whether responses are from REP or REP + CONNECT sites. Coded data within each matrix cell will refl ect 
description of the implementation process or outcome, coded with descriptive labels (e.g., regular, in -person 
meetings), and we will assign valence to indicate whether data indicate facilitators or barriers to implementation. 
At least two researchers w ill independently code transcripts and assign valence to data and then will meet to 
compare codes and resolve discrepancies.59  
Aim 2 a: To examine the impact  of STRIDE on patient outcomes.  
To address Aim 2, we will utilize quantitative and qualitative methods with simultaneous collection of and 
equal weight given to both data types (QUAN + QUAL) to evaluate impact of program on patient outcomes.48 
These two approaches will be used in a complementary way to answer related que stions, in this case how 
STRIDE impacts patients. We will merge the two analyses together to present an in -depth assessment of pro-
gram impact, both in terms of clinically relevant measures as well as from patient priorities, which may or may 
not match a priori clinical measures.  
Quantitative analyses for Aim 2 will be conduc ted at the level of the patient, utilizing all available data to 
evaluate STRIDE effectiveness on defined dichotomous, count and continuous outcomes. The overall antici-
pated sample size of eligible STRIDE patients during pre - and post -implementation periods is 2000. The antici-
pated maximum sample is 16,000. Only a subset of STRIDE eligible patients will receive survey  measures  in 
both the pre - and post -implementation periods. We will use random effect linear (continuous outcomes), negative 
binomial (count outcomes), or logistic (dichotomous outcomes) models appropriate for the stepped -wedge de-
sign which account for the correlation of patients within the same VAMC.34,60  For example with a continuous 
outcome, I VAMCs, T time points, N individuals per VAMC per time interval, the model is:  𝑌𝑖𝑗𝑘=𝜇+𝛼𝑖+𝛽𝑗+
𝑋𝑖𝑗𝜃+𝑒𝑖𝑗𝑘, where 𝛼𝑖 is the random effect for the ith VAMC, 𝛽𝑗 is a fixed effect that captures time trends, and 𝑋𝑖𝑗 
is an indicator of the intervention mode for the ith hospital at time j (=0 prior to intervention and =1 post interven-
tion), and θ is the measure of the  effect of the intervention.   Adjustments for patient characteristics and a random 
effect for hospital ward may also be added.   
Qualitative data will be collected via 30-45 minute semi -structured telephone interviews with a sample of 
patients  in STRIDE . Interviews will be audio recorded. We will ask patients  about whether they found STRIDE 
to be helpful for them and in what ways and if they have suggestions for improvement. We will analyze data 
using conventional content analysis, in which we will transcr ibe interviews and then code text with descriptive 
labels that are developed as we read through transcripts. Data will be coded by a team process as described in 
Aim 1.  Findings from Aims 1 and 2 will be supplemented  by budget impact analyses   
Aim 2 b: To examine the impact  of iHI -FIVES on key patient and caregiver outcomes.  
To address the impact of the iHI -FIVES program, we will use quantitative methods to examine the effect on 
patient outcomes. The overall anticipated number of eligible Veteran patie nts in the iHI -FIVES study will be 
15,000 -18,000  total patients . The analysis plan of our primary outcome is to examine days at home for the patient 
over a 6 -month interval  and will be defined as the total number of days not in the emergency department, nu rsing 
home, or inpatient ward. The start date for each patient, or the day of the automated data pull, will be “day 0” for 
all patients, and the maximum total possible number of days at home will be 180 for all patients. To make this 
outcome variable easie r to deal with analytically, our first step will be to calculate each patients' days not at home 
by subtracting their number of days at home from 180, converting the “stack” of days at 180 to a “stack” at zero.  
For days not at home outcome, we anticipate,  that it may have an excess of zeros and larger variance than what 
is to be expected from either a Poisson or Negative Binomial process. Common approaches for analyzing this 
type of data are the zero -inflated Poisson (ZIP) model and the zero -inflated negat ive binomial (ZINB) model116 
or two -part models.117,118 Consequently, we will explore the distribution that best f its this outcome: Poisson, Neg-
ative Binomial, ZIP, ZINB, or a semi -continuous distribution such as a two -part gamma.119 
To address if caregivers who participate in iHI -FIVES have higher satisfaction  with VA care, lower depres-
sive symptoms, and lower burden, analysis will be conducted at the level of the patient or caregiver utilizing all 
available data to evaluate iHI-FIVES effectiveness versus control condition on defined count and cont inuous 
outcom es. The overall anticipated sample size of eligible caregivers in the iHI -FIVES study will be 320.  We will 
2040 Function QUERI        PI Hastings        AMD 23  5.17.2023  Page 25 of 42 
 use random effect linear (continuous outcomes), negative binomial (count outcomes), or logistic (dichotomous 
outcomes) models appropriate for the ste pped -wedge design which account for the correlation of patients within 
the same VAMC.34,60  For example with a continuou s outcome, I VAMCs, T time points, N individuals per VAMC 
per time interval, the model is:  𝑌𝑖𝑗𝑘=𝜇+𝛼𝑖+𝛽𝑗+𝑋𝑖𝑗𝜃+𝑒𝑖𝑗𝑘, where 𝛼𝑖 is the random effect for the ith VAMC, 
𝛽𝑗 is a fixed effect that captures time trends, and 𝑋𝑖𝑗 is an indica tor of the intervention mode for the ith hospital 
at time j (=0 prior to intervention and =1 post intervention), and θ is the measure of the effect of the intervention.   
Adjustments for patient characteristics and a random effect for VAMC site  may also be added .  
Sensitivity analysis. In addition to the primary analysis of the primary and secondary outcomes described 
above, we will perform an “as treated” analysis focused on the outcomes of Veteran patients from caregivers in 
the post -implement ation period exclusively. This will show us whether there is benefit conferred upon those 
caregivers/Veterans in the iHI -FIVES program compared to similar caregivers/Veterans not in the program. The 
treated caregivers will be all caregivers who meaningfull y participated in the iHI -FIVES training (e.g., attended 
at least one class). The comparison caregivers will be selected from the full set of caregivers referred to iHI -
FIVES using n:1 matching on key baseline covariates of the patient and caregiver. The r ationale for matching 
on key Veteran baseline covariates is to ensure that we have similar Veteran acuity in both groups, because the 
training may be differentially effective for caregivers by level of Veteran disability. Candidate matching variables 
for the patient include:  
• Patient age bands  
• Patient Jen Frailty Index Score (0 -10) 
• Patient CAN scores (1 year inpatient use version)  
• Dementia status based on ICD9 codes in the past 6 months  
• Documentation of incontinence in the past 6 months  
 
Based on the sample  size, we may use only a subset of these matching variables, and use exact and distance -
match ed methods. Candidate matching variables for the caregiver will include: age, race, employment status, 
education, and caregiver relationship to the Veteran. We  will use the same analysis techniques for the “as 
treated” analysis as described above. Or we may simply use regression adjustment if sample size is too low, 
from the candidate set of covariates described here.  
To address the value of iHI -FIVES from t he careg iver’s perspective, qu alitative data will be collected via 15-
20-minute  semi -structured telephone interviews with a sample of caregivers who participate in iHI -FIVES. Inter-
views will be audio recorded. We will ask patients  about whether they found iHI-FIVE S to be helpful for them and 
in what ways and if they have suggestions for improvement. We will analyze data using conventional content 
analysis, in which we will transcribe interviews and then code text with descriptive labels that are developed as 
we rea d through transcripts. Data will be coded by a team process as described in Aim 1.  Findings from Aims 1 
and 2 will be supplemented  by budget impact analyses .  
Aim 3: To determine the conditions  under which STRIDE implementation is most successful.  
As described for A im 1, Aim 3 outcomes are defined in the first post -implementation 3 -month period so that 
analys es will not be confounded with time since implementation.  To examine the relationship between team 
function and dichotomous implementation outcomes, we will use logistic regression models57 where the main 
predictor s of interest will be th e baseline  TDM© score s (e.g., overall, and team dimensions such as cohesion and 
role clarity)  adjusting for clustering of VAMC with either a random effect or by conditioning.55,56 Other responses 
from the provider survey instrument may collectively  reflect other dimensions of team function.  Using exploratory 
factor and cluster analysis  methods , the implementa tion core will determine the appropriateness (i.e., with our 
operational partners) and reliability of constructing other composite measures of team function  that will be incor-
porated in quantitative analysis to examine teams’ mediating/moderating effects on implementation outcomes.   
For continuous outcomes, we will use linear mixed regression models.58 In VAMCs that have multiple post -
implementation 3 -month measurement times, we will examine how fidelity and penetration outcomes change 
over time by TDM© score team function  using descriptive methods (e.g. plots, descriptive statistics, subgroups). 
Adjustments for covariates  and a random effect for VAMC ward may also be added. If scores of team function 
are assoc iated with implementation outcomes, we will explore whether they differentially affect implementation 
outcomes by patient and facility characteristics. If we find in Aim 1  that the implementation strategy REP  + CON-
NECT improves implementation outcomes comp ared to REP alone, we will examine whether team function me-
diates or moderates this effect following methods of MacKinnon52 and Kraemer.61,62 These quantitative findings 
from Aim 3 will be complemented by additional analyses of context sensitivity  as described earlier . 
2040 Function QUERI        PI Hastings        AMD 23  5.17.2023  Page 26 of 42 
  
Sample size estimate . For STRIDE, s ample size calculations were conducted for patient -level analyses evaluat-
ing impact of STRIDE on discharge to skilled nursing facility. The sample size calculation was done based on a 
complete stepped -wedge design using Hussey and Hughes (2007) method.60 The sample  size is based on the 
following assumptions for the discharge to skilled nursing facility outcome : 1) base discharge rate to skilled 
nursing of approximately 20% ; 2) 10% drop in discharge rate after STRIDE , determined as a clinically significant 
gain in the outcome;  3) intracluster correlations (ICC) ranging from 0.02 to 0.6  for patients  within the same 
hospital ; 3) 8 hospital sites with 5 3 -month assessment periods ; and 4) alpha=0.05, power>80%.  A total sample 
of 2000 patients (~250 per hospital , 50 per 3 -month interval) will result in ≥80% power to detect a 10% reduction 
in discharges to skilled nursing facilities.  The anticipated maximum sample is 16,000. For iHI -FIVES, t he sample 
size calculation was done based on a complete stepped -wedge design using Hussey and Hughes (2007) 
method.60 The overall anticipated number of Veteran patients will be 15,000 -18,000  with a mini mum sample size 
of 400 subjects  (at least 50 per VAMC, 2 0 per 6 -month interval). The power calculation for this sample size is 
based on the following assumptions for days not at home : 1) 8 is the base line mean number of days not at home 
over 6 months ; 2) 2-day reduction in days not at home over 6 months ; 3) coe fficient of variation (CV) ranging 
from 0.3 to 0.5 for assessments on participants within the same VAMC ; 4) 8 VAMCs  with five  6-month assess-
ment intervals;  and 5) alpha=0.05, power>80%.  A minimum sample of 400 Veterans will result in at least 80% 
power to detect a mean reduction of 2 days not home assuming variance equal to the mean (Poisson distribu-
tion).  
 
Impact.  Prevention of hospitalization -associated disability is an urgent clinical priority for VHA and Vet erans. By 
implementing STRIDE in eight VAMCs, this project will fill this key gap in inpatient care for the more than 30,000 
Veterans hospitalized in these facilities annually. In addition to important positive effects on Veterans’ health and 
satisfaction we anticipate important budgetary impact through reduction in non -VA care costs for hospitalizations 
at non -VA facilities due to diversion status and reduced direct costs for post -acute institutional care. Finally, 
testing REP alone and REP + CONNECT will inform dissemination efforts. If the lower budget impact strategy 
of REP alone has the equivalent impact on individual outcomes, it may be preferred over REP + CONNECT.   
Implementation of iHI-FIVES is expected to increase quality  of care for vulnerable Veteran s by better supporting 
the caregivers who care for them. In turn, better supporting caregivers can avoid costly nursing home place-
ments. Importantly, the implementation of iHI -FIVES targets a prevalent, heterogeneous patient population at 
high risk of  nursing home entry —keeping these vulnerable patients independent meets the definition of patient -
centered care.121 Further, the focus on CONNECT and team -building aims to improve information flow about 
high-risk patients through the creation of new, cross -service teams. Increased information flow may enhance 
targeting of services t o patients at highest risk of negative outcomes. And yet, if REP has similar impact on 
individual outcomes, it provides a lower budget impact option to CONNECT and will inform dissemination efforts. 
The project may also create positive practice spillovers by increasing provider knowledge about VA Caregiver 
Support Program.  
The QUERI ADIL  project will maximize impact based on the QUERI ACTION Framework. Alignment : This pro-
ject aligns with both Veterans’ Health Administration’s priorities (i.e., “improve the uptake of strategies to address 
health disparities and Veteran social determinants of health”) and QUERI’s Strategic Plan (“integrating health 
equity as a core component to implementation science initiatives”). Informing the field : Findings will be dissem-
inated to local Veteran advisory groups, groups of under -represented Veteran groups, operations partners, na-
tional health services conferences, media outlets, and implementation science peer -reviewed scientific journals. 
Observing healthcare changes and gen erating new questions : This project is anticipated to lead to at least 
one new QUERI or HSR&D project application.  
Environmental context  is an important consideration in our evaluation.  Clinical  programs and their teams operate 
within the broader context o f local VAMCs that vary by facility complexity, organizational climate, presence of 
policies and practices to support innovative practices, and historical performance .  These factors may work indi-
vidually or in combination to support or challenge a team ’s ability to  accomplish intended goals.   
Implementation outcomes  are the intermediate result of deliberate action in implementing new practices/ser-
vices .44 They serve as indicators of implementation processes that are the precondition for attainment of i ntended 
clinical and system -level change (i.e., program outcomes such as reductions in admission to nursing homes ). 
2040 Function QUERI        PI Hastings        AMD 23  5.17.2023  Page 27 of 42 
 This distinction is important, as it provides more specificity of the mechanisms underlying implementation suc-
cesses or failures .44 Given the overall goals of Function QUERI and the goals of our operational partners, we 
will focus on 3 main  types of  implementation outcomes: penetration , fidelity , and cost (see bottom of Table 2) . 
 
Table 2.  Sample Measures from Nested Model of Team Function and Performance in Implementation  
 
 
 
 Measure  Definition  Data Sources  
Team Characteristics  
Team size  Number of members of team for clinical program delivery  Program design  
Semi -structured interview  
Team composition  Diversity of members within team to accomplish tasks (e.g., expertise and skill set)  Program design  
Semi -structured interview  
Role Clarity  Extent to which roles among team members are clearly defined and supersede individ-
ual members’ professional roles  TDM©  composite  
Cohesion  Commitment in working as a collective unit to accomplish the work of the team  TDM©  composite  
Team Processes  
Communication  Open communication and participation in handling conflict and solving problems as a 
collective unit  TDM©  composite  
Communication struc-
ture Standardization and centralization of conveying key information within team and exter-
nally to related clinical units  Semi -structured interview  
Goal and Means Clarity  Collective understanding of the work of the team and its goals, and agreement on how 
their goals are reached  TDM©  composite  
Decision -making  Manner in which information is exchanged and decisions are made within teams (e.g., 
member involvement, techniques of decision -making)  Semi -structured interview  
Task interdependence  Degree of dependen ce of tasks between members within a team  (team - and individual -
level measures)  Program design  
Semi -structured interview  
Satisfaction/experience  Employee satisfaction with the outcomes of the team’s work, to date.  TDM survey items #21, 23,  
Program/task characteristics  
Complexity  Degree to which tasks require diverse operations and skills  
Program design  
Semi -structured interview  Diversity  Number of different patient subpopulations served (e.g., clinical conditions)  
Uncertainty  Predictability in the work processes; presence of standardized processes and proto-
cols for different clinical scenarios  
Program interdepend-
ence  Degree of dependence of tasks on other clinical units or departments  
Task interdependence  Degree of depende nce of tasks between members within a team  
Environmental  context  
Facility complexity  Operational complexity of VAMC (e.g., patients served, case -mix, intensive care unit 
level, etc .) Administrative data  
Climate  Share perception on the degree to which clinical program is supported, rewarded, and 
expected within VAMC  Provider Survey  
Semi -structured interview  
Policies, practices, and 
procedures  Organizational effort to support innovative practices within VAMC (e. g., performance 
monitoring)  Provider/Admin Survey  
Semi -structured interview  
Historical performance  Prior organizational performance on related clinical metrics (e.g., adjusted length of 
hospital stay ) Provider Survey  
Semi -structured interview  
Administrati ve data  
Implementation outcomes  
Penetration  Integration of program within  VAMC’s relevant clinical units  
• Similar to “reach” (e.g. number of eligible persons who receive a service, divided 
by the total number of persons eligible for the service)  Chart review  
Patient/Provider Survey  
Administrative data  
Fidelity  Degree to which program is implemented as intended  
• Adherence to protocol (e.g., % patients who received core elements of program ) 
• Dose and quality of program delivered  
• Participant engagement  Chart review  
Semi -structured interviews  
Administrative data  
Cost Total implementation cost = ∑ program -related  + implementation strategy +  resource 
utilization costs    
 Project records , VHA salary 
data, managerial cost a ccount-
ing data 
 
Analyses of context sensitivity . Organization -specific contextual characteristics are likely to affect both imple-
mentation and program outcomes, thus we will perform analyses of context sensitivity for both of  Function 
QUERI’s multi -site implementation projects  (Project 1, STRIDE and Project 3, iHI FIVES) . We will examine con-
text via simultaneous collection of quantitative and qualitative data. We describe the qualitative methods for 
context analyses for both implementation projects here, as w e will use similar techniques.  Qualitative dat a will 
2040 Function QUERI        PI Hastings        AMD 23  5.17.2023  Page 28 of 42 
 be obtained through  semi -structured interviews with clinical program personnel and administrative leadership. 
These interviews will provide rich contextual data regarding clinical program implementation, team function, and 
organizational context tha t are otherwise unobservable in clinical or administration data.  For example, respond-
ents will be asked about the ir VAMC’s  organizational climate; the importance of the clinical program to their 
facility;  key conditions for successful implementation at th eir facility ; their perceptions of their team’s function and 
readiness for change; the impact of the clinical program on their workload; interactions with providers and pa-
tients; changes made to care delivery and content; barriers to implementation; satisf action with the process; and 
recommended changes to the clinical program.  Responses will be coded and analyzed at individual and team -
levels to develop facility -level summaries of contextual factors, indicating where there is divergence in responses 
at the  team or site -level.  From this coded data, we will identify and visually display emergent themes in a matrix, 
with columns reflecting implementation outcomes (i .e., fidelity and penetration) arranged from high to low, to 
illustrate  patterns in contextual factors according to implementation outcomes . 
Budget impact a nalyses  (BIA) . Utilizing a similar approach across projects, we  will perform BIA to frame afford-
ability  to the VHA.73 We will calculate the budget  impacts of the clinical programs and compare them to each 
program’s value.  Value will be defined in light of all of the evaluation evidence. For example, value may be 
framed as total budget impact per unit gain in patient function or as total budget impa ct compared to the clinical 
team’s narrative on how a program benefited patients. We will also consider framing budgetary impact against 
different domains, such as total costs by site or costs per Veteran participant.  The clinical program leads will 
work w ith the  implementation core to develop appropriate comparisons.    
For the BIA we will consider three cost categories: (1) program -related implementation costs; (2) implemen-
tation strategy costs; and (3) resource utilization costs. We will not consider the fixed labor costs of implementa-
tion planning (e.g. stakeholder com mittee time) because these are one -time costs that would not occur if the 
clinical programs were implemented nationally. First, for program -related costs , we will measure personnel 
time and labor costs associated with  preparing for and delivering the clini cal programs  using micro -costing . Clin-
ical program trainer time and clinical delivery team time  (including donated FTE ) will be  collected through per-
sonnel time logs and periodic time studies . Personnel time will be valued using VA Human Resources salary 
data. In addition to labor costs, we will consider program -related capital costs  such as purchased durable equip-
ment (e.g., walkers, measuring wheels, stop watches and portable pulse oximeters). Second, we will track im-
plementation strategy costs, which inc ludes  REP and CONNECT training time, training materials, and site -
visit travel. Travel costs will be measured using accepted per diem reimbursement, and the cost of personnel 
time will be measured as described above.  Third, for resource utilization costs  we will examine patient -level 
utilization pre -and post -clinical program by treatment and control subjects, to understand marginal costs/savings 
associated with the clinical programs.    
Depending on the evaluation results  of implementation Projects 1 and 2, the BIA will particularly focus on 
comparing total costs by the implementation method of REP vs. REP  + CONNECT.   Since CONNECT is ex-
pected to be more time-intensive and expensive than REP, it is critical to consider the relative gains (if any) to 
both team  function and patient outcomes from adding CONNECT training to REP. For these projects we will also 
consider variability in budgetary impact by site (e.g. costs may differ by low versus high penetration sites or by 
team composition ). Thus, we will examine costs by different measures of context at each site.  
Implementation Products and Dissemination . The development and evaluation of strategies to build and sup-
port team readiness for implementation  is a unique departure from currently funded QUERI pr ogram projects 
and this focus promises to make significant contributions to the field of implementation science. Mapping imple-
mentation techniques to team -based constructs will inform our development of a Team Building and Readiness 
Toolkit for Implementat ion that provide s guidance to practitioners on tailoring implementation strategies to care 
teams within local settings.  Also ultimately , discoveries from our implementation of clinical program s for vulner-
able Veterans at high risk for disability will be valuable to VHA for realizing  priority goals of improving patient 
access to care, supporting employee engagement, and creating a culture of high performance ; thus synthesis 
and dissemination of our findings in the manner most useful to VHA is a high program  priority . The Durham COIN 
has developed dissemination strategies based upon prior experience with conception, implementation, and re-
porting of innovations in VA healthcare delivery ; we will build on this collective experience  to inform strategies 
for Func tion QUERI dissemination activities . Stakeholders play a key role in maximizing Function QUERI ’s value 
and impact . Stakeholders will have direct involvement in and across projects , setting the stage for  rapid, wide-
spread acceptance and dissemination throughout VHA clinical practice.  In addition to traditional strategies for 
2040 Function QUERI        PI Hastings        AMD 23  5.17.2023  Page 29 of 42 
 disseminating findings, Function QUERI will provide two types of products based on pro ject activities and eval-
uations.  
Clinical Prog ram Implementation Packages . Clinical program packages will be developed and refined throughout 
the duration of each Function QUERI project.  Findings from our evaluations of the clinical impacts of STRIDE, 
Group PT for Knee OA, and iHI-FIVES programs’ pac kages will prompt further refinement at the conclusion of 
each project.  Packages will include information including: provider training manuals/materials, information 
sheets for referring providers to facilitate consults to the program, lessons learned, su ggested administrative 
strategies (e.g., scheduling), strategies to promote referrals and patient/caregiver adherence to program curric-
ula, forms/templates for documenting patient status and outcomes, recommended exercises/lecture materials, 
templates for clinical assessments, patient educational materials and instructions. In close collaboration with our 
national operational partners, polished Clinical Program Implementation Packages will be developed and dis-
seminated to guide program implementation effort s at other VA facilities.  
Team Building and Readiness Toolkit . Function QUERI will serve a unique opportunity to evaluate the value of 
CONNECT for enhancing implementation efforts. A shortcoming in the field of implementation science is that 
implementatio n strategies are often not specified with sufficient detail for others to replicate them in research or 
practice. We will translate implementation findings across the 3 projects to identify the contextual factors and 
components from CONNECT that improve te am function and optimize effectiveness of implementation of VA 
clinical programs. Applying the recommended guidelines for specifying discrete implementation techniques to 
this synthesis ,74 we will develop a Team Building and Readiness Toolkit to prepare teams for uptake of new 
clinical programs.  Function QUERI personnel with relevant experience in toolkit development (Mahanna, Sper-
ber, Wang)  will work closely with investigators to synthesize project findings  and develop format and content for 
the drafted toolkit.  Revisions and refinement of the toolkit will occur through two stages of review from our expert 
panels (Sections 2.7.2  and 2.7.3 ) to ensure the toolkit is readable, comprehensive, and meets the needs of  the 
intended audiences.   We will work closely with QUERI and our operational partners to ensure presentation and 
dissemination of the Team Building and Readiness Toolkit  to all relevant audiences in VA Central Office in the 
final year of Function QUERI. We will also present results at annual research and dissemination and implemen-
tation science meetings and selected online portals such as the VA QUERI webinar series, VA Pulse Implemen-
tation Research Group and the VHA CommSite.   Last, we will present our f indings in relevant publication venues.  
Management and Partnerships  
Key Personnel  
The Function QUERI team is comprised of a n interdisciplinary  group of investigators and clinicians with expertise 
in all aspects of the proposed project. Dr. Hastings, a geriatrician, is the Corresponding PI for Function QUERI . 
In her roles as Director of the Durham VAMC Geri atrics Clinic , lead er of GEC  and Office of Rural Health (ORH) -
funded T21 programs  and HSR&D funded clinical trials , she has substantial expertise in local and national geri-
atric clinical practice , evaluation of models of care, and partnered research . Dr. Hastings has extensive clinic al 
and research experience with Veterans with functional limitations. Dr. Hastings (Project 1), Dr. Allen (QI project 
and co -PI), and Dr. Van Houtven (Project 3 and co -PI) will lead Function QUERI’s three clinical program projects.  
Dr. Allen, health servic es researcher and exercise scientist, examines care delivery and outcome improvements 
for patients with OA and other musculoskeletal conditions.  Dr. Van Houtven, health economist, evaluates long -
term services and supports delivery, including interventions to support informal caregivers. Dr. Wang (Co -PI) will 
lead the Function QUERI implementation core. With expertise in organizational behavior, Dr. Wang assesses 
managerial and organizational influences on healthcare service provision, care coordination, and  patient out-
comes . The multiple PI plan provides more detail on the roles and responsibilities of the project leaders.  
 The Function QUERI team has substantial experience in the following critical areas  for our proposed program 
of work : 
• Implementation Science and Quality Management  Dr. Wang ; Dr. Jackson , epidemiologist and Director of 
Durham COIN Implementation Science Laboratory; Dr. Sperber , public health, health behavior,  and mixed 
qualitative and quantitative methods  and member of Durh am COIN Implementation Science Laboratory; Dr. 
Damush , health psychologist and PI of PRISM QUERI Program at Indianapolis COIN; Drs. Crevensten  and 
Price , hospitalists  and Co-Director s of Quality Management at San Francisco VAMC ; Dr. Colon -Emeric , co-
developer  of CONNECT  implementation  intervention . 
2040 Function QUERI        PI Hastings        AMD 23  5.17.2023  Page 30 of 42 
 • VA Operations and QUERI -Partnered Evaluation  Dr. Hastings , implementation of the STRIDE and 
EQUiPPED T21 QI demonstration projects, GEC  and ORH ; Dr. Wang , Office of Specialty Care Services, Di-
alysis Workgroup’s National Dialysis Pilot Study, and National VA Kidney Program ; Dr. Van Houtven , Director, 
partnered evaluation of the VA Caregiver Support Program, VA CSP ; Dr. Jackson , PI of VA Chaplain Mental 
Health Quality Improvement Project ; Drs. Jackson  and Sperber , VA Lung Cancer Screening Clinical Demon-
stration Project, VHA National Center for Health Promotion and Disease Prevention ; Drs. Sperber  and Oddone  
collaborated on the Telephone Li festyle Coaching (TLC) project funded by the VA National Center for Health 
Promotion (Dams chroder, PI).   
• Quantitative and Qualitative Methodology  Dr. Coffman , biostatistician and trials methodologist; Dr. Sperber , 
public health  and mixed qualitative and quantitative methods ; Dr. Van Houtven , economic evaluation, budget 
impact analysis ; Drs. Wang , Hastings , Allen , VHA administrative and utilization data.   
• Clinical and Function al Assessment  Dr. Hastings , mobility  measures, physical function ; Dr. Allen,  pain and 
physical function measures  (general and for OA) ; Dr. Oddone , primary care physician, interventionist and Di-
rector of Durham HSR&D COIN; Dr. Hoenig , geriatrician and rehabilitation researcher and Durham VAMC ; 
Chief of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation; Dr. Colon -Emeric , geriatrician  researcher  at Durham  VAMC . 
Together, the team has the necessary expertise, relevant experience, and analytic techniques required to suc-
cessfully accomplish the aims of Function QUERI.  
Collaboration with National Partners. This QUERI program will be conducted in concert with key support, 
feedback, and engagement with our VA operational partners (see Letters of Support).  These partnerships reflect 
more than four years of o ngoing collaboration with VA Operations, which has been instrumental in defining the 
gaps in clinical care and resultant clinical programs to address them:  STRIDE, Group PT  for Knee OA and iHI 
FIVES . Their continued engagement in the Function QUERI demonst rates interest and commitment to support 
their continued expansion across VAMCs nationwide.  
Office of Geriatrics and Extended Care (GEC)  funded development and dissemination of STRIDE, investing  
more than $350,000  to date in the program. STRIDE was developed with support from VHA Office of GEC , as 
part of its Transformation to the 21st Century Non -institutional Long Term Care (T21 NILTC) initiative.  As part of 
its evaluation of the NILTC program, GEC identified lim ited clinical resources and difficulty hiring new clinical 
staff as the major barrier s to implementation of new programs . Thus this partnership was very influential in 
Function QUERI’s choice of implementation strategies that focus on providing options for  tailoring clinical pro-
grams and providing options for using existing clinical resources. A major priority for GEC is disseminating pro-
grams that have been developed through the T21 NILTC initiative; thus the knowledge gained about implemen-
tation strategie s will be of immediate use and value to GEC. GEC will assist Function QUERI in recruiting sites 
for STRIDE participation, and also providing access to data through the GEC Data Analysis Center.  
VA Caregiver Support Program (CSP)  is committed to the implementation of iHI-FIVES and advising on all pro-
gram projects. This partnership is critical to perform the work, because Ms. Kabat will seek volunteer sites from 
the field, and will also provide data on caregivers enrolled in the CSP .  Importantly, t he CSP is dedicating tangible 
support of a 1.0 FTE Caregiver Support Coordinator  (Josh D’Adolf) for four years  to aid in Project 3 for training 
the team  to deliver HI -FIVES,  strategizing with site s on recruitment preferences,  and providing  ongoing phone 
and in -person support  (see letter of support  from Meg Kabat ). Findings from HI -FIVES in Project 3 are critical to 
CSP, as the Office consider s further expansion of HI-FIVES caregiver training programs and foci.  
Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation (PM&R) Services  are pro vided in a variety of settings including acute med-
ical, surgical, and psychiatric units, and community living centers (CLC) , with a goal of facilitating  Veteran s’ ability 
to remain in the most independent and least res trictive living environment through therapeutic interventions. 
PM&R operates from a physician directed, interdisciplinary team -based model of care designed to increase in-
dependence and improve quality of life for Veterans with disabilities , which is direct ly aligned with the goals and 
focus of Function QUERI . PM&R leadership will provide important clinical and operational input on STRIDE and 
Group PT  and will assist in recruiting sites for STRIDE .  
Office o f VA Voluntary Services (VAVS)  coordinates activiti es for more than 140,000  volunteers  who provide 
more than 11 million hours of service to America’s Veterans. Ms. Sabrina Clark, National Director, will serve on 
the Advisory Board for Function QUERI. She is actively working with Dr. Hastings and Ms. Ronni Miller, Director 
of Voluntary Services at the Durham VAMC to develop a volunteer -based walking program in Durham that will 
serve as a model for other facilities  that want to use volunteers.  
VA Mid -Atlantic Healthcare Network (VISN 6).  Network Direct or Mr. Hoffman has directed all medical centers in 
VISN 6 to develop a STRIDE program and has asked Dr. Hastings and the Function QUERI team to lead this 
2040 Function QUERI        PI Hastings        AMD 23  5.17.2023  Page 31 of 42 
 effort. Drs. Hastings, Wang, and Jackson have experience working with VISN 6 leadership and medical ce nters 
conduct ing quality improvement projects.  
With our Partners’ input, w e will seek commonality in the service delivery challenges  facing VA providers’ ability 
to serve vulnerable Veterans with impaired function and will work collaboratively to address t hese gaps. We will 
keep our national partners notified bi -annually regarding progress toward mutual implementation goals. We will 
also convene 3 in-person meetings in which national stakeholders and the QUERI program will share information 
to actively deve lop a short - and long -term vision of clinical and managerial processes  in VHA to restore and 
sustain patient function and independence.  
Program and Implementation Advisory Board. Function QUERI has formed an Advisory Board consisting of 
clinical and operational leaders from national partner program offices, experts in implementation science and 
Veterans. The Advisory Board will ensure that the proposed program activities are respon sive to clinical needs 
for rigorous information and that results are disseminated effectively and fully.  Specifically, t he Advisory Board 
will assist with oversight and decision -making about implementation strategy development, individual project  
design, e valuation, and dissemination of implementation activities across clinical programs. It will also keep the 
team abreast of anticipated changes at VA that might  influence implementation activities , provide input on the 
development of intervention packages for each clinical program, and advise on the Team Building and Readiness 
Toolkit  and other dissemination strategies most useful for VA policy and operations. Program investigators will 
convene with the Advisory Board in -person during the first year of the pr ogram, to kick -off implementation activ-
ities and evaluation plans.  We will then meet with the Advisor Board semi -annually, by telephone , for review 
and assessment of: research implementation and evaluation plans, interpretation of results, and materials p re-
pared for dissemination.    
The Function QUERI Advisory Board include s key members from each of our national partner program 
offices, as described above. These will include  Kenneth  Shay  (GEC ) Director of Geriatric Programs, Karen 
Massey (GEC)  Chief, GEC Strategic a nd Transformational Initiatives, Margaret  Kabat (CSP)  Director, C are-
giver Support Program Office, Joel Scholten (PM&R),  Director, Office of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation , 
and Sabrina Clark (VAVS),  Director, VA Voluntary Servic e. In addition, the Function QUERI will receive ongoing 
consultation and guidance from leading experts in various aspects of Implementation Science , includ ing: 
Laura Dams chroder, MS, MPH , a research scientist at the Ann Arbor VA and University of Michigan.   She led 
development of an implementation framework, the Consolidated Framework for Implementation Research , which 
is being used in studies around the world. She is currently and has been on several invited national expert panels 
related to implementation  and sustainability of evidence -based practices.  Other Advisory Board members are:  
Ruth Anderson , PhD, RN, FAAN , is Associate Dean for Research in the UNC School of Nursing . Together with 
Dr. Colon -Emeric (study Co -I) she developed and tested the CONNECT for Quality intervention to reduce falls 
in nursi ng homes (NIH/NINR; R01NR003178 ).   
Hector Rodriguez, PhD , Associate Professor in Health Policy and Management and Co -Director of the Center 
for Healthcare Organizational Innovation Research at the U niversity of California Berkeley School of Public 
Health , is a medical and organizational sociologist who conducts organizational and outcomes research on en-
hancing teamwork and team effectiveness to improve the quality of care for chronic illness in medic al groups, 
community health centers, and the VHA.   
Byron Powell, PhD , Assistant Professor in Health Policy and Management at the UNC  Gillings School of Public 
Health , is an implementation scientist who conducts research on the strategies and organizationa l factors that 
facilitate the implementation of evidence -based practices in community -based behavioral health and social ser-
vices.  
Morris Weinberger, PhD , Core Investigator with the Durham HSR&D COIN and Distinguished Professor in 
Health Policy and Manage ment at the UNC  GiIlings School of Public Health , is a health services researcher who 
develops and evaluates innovative strategies within health care systems to improve the process and outcomes 
of care for medically vulnerable patients, including Veterans.   
Bryan Weiner, PhD , Professor in Health Policy and Management at the UNC Gillings School of Public Health , 
is an organizational psychologist who conducts research on the adoption, implementation, and sustainability of 
innovations and evidence -based practices in health care organizations . Dr. Weiner is also the UNC Director of 
the Consortium for Implementation Science, fostering collaborations in research, practice, policy, and training to 
advance theory  (e.g., organizational readiness for change) , methods, and measures in dissemination and imple-
mentation research.  
2040 Function QUERI        PI Hastings        AMD 23  5.17.2023  Page 32 of 42 
 Veteran and Caregiver Engagement Panel .  In addition to our close partnerships with clinical and operations 
stakeholders, the Function QUERI will engage a group of Veterans an d caregivers throughout the projects.  Our 
COIN has recently begun a Veterans Engagement Panel (co -led by Dr. Allen), and we have developed specific 
processes for identifying and involving Veterans meaningfully in this panel.  The Function QUERI Panel will  be 
based on those processes, as well as the experiences of the project leads with other patient stakeholder groups. 
The panel will have representation from key groups relevant to each of the projects (e.g., older Veterans with 
recent hospitalization, Vete rans with knee OA, Veterans with recent referrals to home care services and their 
caregivers), as well as representation of women and minority Veterans.  We expect the full panel will include 
about ten individuals.  We will aim to convene the full panel tw ice annually (including one meeting during the first 
month of the funding period), and smaller panels will meet more frequently to advise on each specific project.  
The perspectives of this panel will be instrumental for bringing the Veteran and caregiver perspectives to all 
phases and aspects of the projects, including patient -centered outcomes (e.g., satisfaction measures), logistics 
of the clinical programs, and patient characteristics to include in analyses.   
Program Timeline and Metrics . We propose a 5 year program of work for Functi on QUERI. Specific project 
and implementation c ore activities are outlined below. Key metrics will include initiation of Implementation Project 
1 (STRIDE) and Local QI project 2 (Group PT for Knee OA) in Year 1, completion of a white paper on CONNECT 
and completion of Local QI project in Year 2, completion of implementation project 1 (STRIDE) in Year 4 and 
implementation project 3 ( iHI FIVES) in Year 5. In Year 5 we will also synthesize and dissemination findings via 
a Team Building and Readiness Toolkit.  
 YEAR 1  
Quarter  YEAR 2  
Quarter  YEAR 3  
Quarter  YEAR 4  
Quarter  YEAR 5  
Quarter  
 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 
Implementation Project 1: STRIDE   
Train staff, draft intervention package , landscape site visits                      
Baseline data collection                      
STRIDE implementation                      
Evaluation: surveys, interviews, and medical record review                      
Analyses, reports to partners, manuscripts                      
Local QI Project 2: Group PT for Knee OA   
Group PT for Knee OA implementation                      
Evaluation: surveys, interviews                      
Analyses, reports to partners, manuscripts                      
Implementation Project 3: HI FIVES   
Train staff, draft intervention package , landscape site visits                      
Baseline data collection                      
iHI FIVES implementation                      
Evaluation: surveys, interviews, and medical record review                      
Analyses, reports to partners, manuscripts                      
Impleme ntation Core   
Adapt CONNECT and prepare white paper                      
Implementation evaluation and analyses                      
Develop and disseminate Team Building and Readiness Toolkit                      
 
  
2040 Function QUERI        PI Hastings        AMD 23  5.17.2023  Page 33 of 42 
  
Privacy, Confidentiality, and Information Security  
1. Lists of Data Reviewed and/or Collected for Screening/Recruitment and Conduction of Study:  
 
The Personal Health Information that will be obtained, used, and/or shared for this study includes:   
Identifier (s) Source(s) of Health Information  
 Names   Medical history & physical exam information  
 All geog raphic subdivisions smaller than a 
State, including street address, city, county, pre-
cinct, and zip code.  Describe:  addresses to mail pa-
tient and caregiver opt-out letter s and written state-
ment regarding the research.  Zip code used to deter-
mine rural -urban community area (RUCA) code and 
census tract will be used to determine Neighborhood 
Deprivation Index (NDI).   Photographs, videotapes, audiotapes, or 
digital or other images  
 All elements of dates (except year) for dates di-
rectly related to an individual, including birth date, 
admission date, discharge date, visit or treatment 
dates, etc.; and all ages over 89,  Describe:  b irth 
date, admission and discharge dates,  referral dates,  ED 
visit dates, date of enrollment   Biologic specimens (e.g., blood, tissue, 
urine, saliva). Describe:  
 Telephone numbers   Progress notes  
 Fax numbers   Diagnostic / Laboratory test results  
 Electronic mail addresses  (to email providers 
study information and a survey link)   Operative reports  
 Social Security Numbers   Imag ing (x -ray, CT, MRI, etc.)  
 Medical record numbers   Discharge summaries  
 Health pl an beneficiary numbers   Survey / Questionnaire responses  
 Account numbers   Billing records  
 Certificate and/or license numbers   HIV testing or infection records  
 Vehicle identifiers and serial numbers, including 
license plate numbers   Sickle cell anemia information  
 Device identifiers and serial numbers   Alcoholism or alcohol use information  
 Web Universal Resource Locators (URLs)   Drug abuse information  
 Internet Protocol (IP) address numbers   Mental health (not psychotherapy) notes  
 Biometric identifiers, including finger & voice 
prints   Psychological test results  
 Full-face photographic images and any compa-
rable images   Genetic testing  
 Any other unique identifying number, linked 
study ID, characteristic, or code, describe:  Study 
ID numbers   Other, describe:        
 
All non -Veterans enrolled in this study will receive the VA Notice of Privacy Practices (NOPP) and are re-
quested to sign the acknowledgment form.  The signed acknowledgment form will be maintain ed with the re-
search records.    
 
2. Data and/or Specimen Acquisition:    
Data for this study will be collected through ( check all that apply ): 
  Prospective data and/or specimen collection obtained from participants.  Provide description of processes:   
2040 Function QUERI        PI Hastings        AMD 23  5.17.2023  Page 34 of 42 
 Please see p. 11-14 in the protocol for a description of the data collection process  for STRIDE. Please see p. 
11-12 and p. 15 -20 in the protocol for a description of the data collection process for iHI -FIVES.  
  Retrospective data collection and/or specimens obtained from medical chart review/data access.  Describe 
how data will be obtained (e.g., fileman, CDW, etc .):   
Please see protocol p. 12-14 for a description of CDW, VistaWeb and medical chart r eview data collection  for 
STRIDE and p. 15 -19 for iHI -FIVES. Utilization data will be downloaded directly from nation al files to the 
Durham HSR&D COIN  servers  or the secure VINCI environment . 
  Retrospective data collection and/or specimens obtained from an IRB -approved data and/or specimen re-
pository.  Indicate the repository source including name, VA location, and IRB number:       . 
Note:  for data and/or specimens obtained from a VA approved data repository, a Data Use Agreement (DUA) 
must be executed prior to obtaining data and/or specimens.  See VHA Handbook 1 200.12 for further infor-
mation.  
3. Level of Data:    
The following level(s) of data will be acquired/maintained for this study ( check all that apply ): 
  Identified (e.g., names, addres ses or other identifiers included)  
  Coded (direct and/or all identifiers removed, but study code/ID included)  
  De-Identified (all HIPAA 18 and study ID/code removed):  
  Verified Statistically  
 OR 
  Verified by Absence or Removal of HIPAA 18 and study ID  
  Limited Data Set  
  Other: Describe:        
 
4. Location of Data and/or Specimens, and Data Retention Plan:   
A. Data and/or Specimen Location:  OITDURSQLRESCH.VA.GOV  (SQL database server) , 
\\OITDURHSMSMB601.va.gov \Durham_HSRD_R  (shared document folder) , and vhadurhsrd-
sas1.v06 .med.va.gov (SAS server temporary storage).    
Data will be stored electronically  - See above.  Data that will be stored electronically include  - See protocol p. 
10-19. 
Paper records of data include participant study folders with records of enrollment dates, informed consent and 
any data collection instruments administered in paper form; will be stored in locked file cabinets (#129 6th 
floor) , Legacy Tower.  
  Data will also be placed at the VA Informatics and Computing Interface (VINCI; 
http://vaww.vinci.med.va.gov/vincicentral/VINCIWorkspace.aspx ). The VA Informatics and Computing Infra-
structure is a partnership between the VA Office of Information Technology and the Veterans’ Health Admin-
istration Off ice of Research and Development.  Researchers and operations staff can use VINCI to access 
data and statistical analysis tools in a virtual working environment through a certified VHA network computer 
using the VA Intranet or Virtual Private Network (VPN).   
B. Data Retention Plan  
2040 Function QUERI        PI Hastings        AMD 23  5.17.2023  Page 35 of 42 
  Research records will be maintained and destroyed according to the National Archives and Records Admin-
istration, Records Schedule Number:  DAA -0015 -2015 -0004.  Records destruction, when authorize d, will be 
accomplished using the then current requirements for the secure disposal of paper and electronic records.  
Currently, destruction of research records (see DAA -0015 -2015 -0004, section 7.6 “Research Investigator Files” 
for materials included in re search records) is scheduled for 6 years after the cut -off (the cut -off is the comple-
tion of the research project) and may be retained longer if required by other federal agencies.  Records will not 
be destroyed without pre -notification to the facility rec ords manager. .   
  Other data retention plan, describe:        
5. Data Access and Data Recipients  
All VA research personnel who have access to VHA records are instructed, in accordance with VA policy, on 
the requirements of Federal privacy and information laws and regulations, VA regulations and policies, and 
VHA policy. All study personnel who are VA employees working within the VA system have fulfilled all required 
HIPAA and other VA security and privacy policy training requirements and have agreed to follow guidelines 
pertaining to the protection of patient data. All research staff sign VA Rules of B ehavior, and all study staff are 
up-to-date with VHA Privacy Policy Training and the VA Office of Cyber and Information Security Awareness 
Training Course. The data security and privacy procedures summarized in that course include logging off or 
locking th e computer when walking away from it; no sharing of access codes, verify codes or passwords; not 
allowing anyone else to use the computer under one’s password; and disposing of sensitive information using 
VA-approved methods (e.g., shredder bins).  
Access t o study data will be removed for all study personnel when they are no longer part of the research 
team.  
 
6. Data and/or Specimen Transportation and/or Transmission for all data and/or specimens involved 
in the study:    
 
 
I.   Data and/or specimens will not be transported or transmitted outside of Durham VAMC environ-
ment.  
II.   Data and/or specimens will be transported BET WEEN sites that are under the auspices of the 
Durham VA Medical Center.   
a.  Local DVAMC memorandum “Authorization to Use, Process, Store, or Transmit VA Sensitive 
Information Outside VA Owned or Managed Facilities” has been pre -filled out for each study team 
member who may tran sport the data and/or specimens off -site.  This (these) forms are included 
with the IRB materials.   
b.   Containers (e.g., briefcase, bin) are labeled with the following notice (label plac ed on the out-
side of container):  
NOTICE!!!  
Access to these records is limited to: AUTHORIZED PERSONS ONLY.  
Information may not be disclosed from this file unless permitted by all applicable legal authorities, which 
may include the Privacy Act; 38 U.S.C. §§  5701, 5705, 7332; the Health Insurance Portability and Ac-
countability Act; and regulations implementing those provisions, at 38 C.F.R. §§ 1.460 – 1.599 and 45 
C.F.R. Parts 160 and 164. Anyone who discloses information in violation of the above provisions may 
subject to civil and criminal penalties.  
 
III.    Data and/or specimens will be transmitted to other VA sites  using the following method(s):  
2040 Function QUERI        PI Hastings        AMD 23  5.17.2023  Page 36 of 42 
 A. Data  
  Data are de -identified and thus will be sent via unencrypted e -mail or unencrypted disk (encryp-
tion is optional).  
  Data are coded or contain identifiers and thus will be sent securely from other VAs to the 
Durham VA using a VA -approved travel scanner , scanned as an image file on a QUERI staff mem-
ber’s VA-issued, FIPS 140 -2 encrypted laptop.  The file will be uploaded t o a HSR&D secure server 
when back in Durham. If the VA network is available at the participating VA  and QUERI staff lap-
tops can successfully access the network , the file will be uploaded while at the site .  If wi -fi is availa-
ble at the site or the hotel wh ere QUERI staff are staying, the file will be uploaded securely through 
VPN to the Durham VA HSR&D server . If the travel scanner and secure  transmission is not availa-
ble, the paper data  will be sealed in a in a VA business -reply envelope and sent to the Durham VA.  
  Other, describe:        
B. Specimens  
  Specimens are de -identified and thus will be sent via standard carrier (tracking is optional).  
  Specimens are coded or contain identifiers and thus wi ll be sent via VA -authorized carrier with 
tracking.   
  Other, describe:        
IV.   Data and/or specimens will be transported to non-VA/VHA sites (e.g., academic affiliates, laborato-
ries, etc.)  using the following method(s):  
A. Data  
  Data are de -identified and thus will be sent via unencrypted e -mail or unencrypted CD.  
  Data are coded or contain identifiers and thus will be sent via > using VA —approved carrier with 
tracking.   
  Data are coded or identified and will be uploaded to sponsor website using electronic case re-
port form (eCRF)  
 Other , describe:        
B. Specimens  
  Specimens are de -identified and thus will be sent via standard carrier (tracking is optional) or 
will be hand -delivered by research study personnel.  Specify method of delivery:        
  Specimens are coded and thus will be sent via VA -approved carrier with tracking or will be 
hand -delivered by res earch study personnel.  Specify method of delivery:        
 In accordance with the HIPAA and the Privacy Act, for any coded or identifiable data or specimens released 
from the Durham  VAMC (with the exception of Limited Data Sets), an Accounting of Disclosure (AOD) will be 
maintained (e.g., in a database or spreadsheet) that includes the participant’s name, date of the disclosure, 
description of the nature of the Individually Identifia ble Information (III) disclosed, purpose of each disclosure, 
and the name and address of the person/agency to whom the disclosure was made.  
7. Risk Mitigation Strategies:   
  Data are fully de -identified (stripped of HIPAA 18 and study ID/code) before being shared outside of 
Durham VAMC.  
2040 Function QUERI        PI Hastings        AMD 23  5.17.2023  Page 37 of 42 
   Specimens are fully de -identified (stripped of HIPAA 18 and study ID/code before being shared outside of 
Durham VAMC.  
  Direct identifiers will be maintained separately from data  and or specimens by using a code to “identify” 
subjects.   In a separate database (i.e., a “linking” or “cross -walk” database) this code will be linked to identify-
ing subject information.   
The subjects ’ right of privacy and the confidentiality of the protected health information will be guarded through 
strict controls and safeguards for access of the data to members of the research team.   All study data will be 
stored on VA servers maintained by OI&T sta ff to comply with VA information security requirements. This in-
cludes study tracking and Datstat Il lume survey databases on server OITDURSQLRESCH.VA.GOV , project 
shared document folder OITDURHSMSMB601.va.gov \Durham_HSRD_R   and vhadurhsrd-
sas1.v06.med.va.gov  (SAS server temporary storage). Access to database and file systems is granted to re-
search personnel via membership in Active Directory security groups created by OI&T and  limited to individu-
als on the IRB staff listing.  Members are removed from the secur ity group when they no longer require access 
to study data. Data that will be  temporarily  stored on a VA -issued  laptop will be stored in a FIPS -140-2 en-
crypted hard-drive.   Only VA approved staff will have access to the data file for data analysis.  The P I will have 
ultimate responsibility of access to the data. Furthermore, data will be kept in accordance with VA records con-
trol schedule.   
 
  Other, specify:        
8. Suspected Loss of VA Information:  
Should any incident such as theft or loss of data, unauthorized  access of sensitive data or non -compliance with 
security controls occur it will be immediately reported according to VA policy. All incidents regarding infor-
mation security/privacy incidents will be reported to the ISO and PO within 1 hour of acknowledgem ent of issue 
and done so using the VHADUR Research Events Report e -mail group ( VHADURResearchEven-
tReport@va.gov ). 
9. Reporting of Results:    
  Reporting of results, such as in scientific papers and presentations, will never identify individual subjects.  
Data will be presented in aggregate and individual -level data will not be publishe d. 
  Other results reporting plan, describe:       
10. Future Use of Data:  
 
  Data will be retained for future use.  This is described elsewhere in the protocol and is noted in the HIPAA 
authorization.  
   Future Use of data is optional (i.e., not required by the research subject).  
  Future Use of data is required for participation in the study.  
  No future use of data is currently planned.   
11. Use of Mail Merge Technology  N/A  
  Mail merge programs will be used to generate letters and/or address labels for mailings to potential or al-
ready enrolled research subjects.  The study team is aware that to reduce risk of mail m erge related privacy 
2040 Function QUERI        PI Hastings        AMD 23  5.17.2023  Page 38 of 42 
 incidents, use of mail merge programs requires a 25% accuracy check to verify that (potential) research sub-
ject name and mailing address are properly “matched”.  If discrepancies are found, a 100% accuracy check is 
required before lett ers may be mailed.   
 
 
References  
Provide references, if applicable.   
 
2040 Function QUERI        PI Hastings        AMD 23  5.17.2023  Page 39 of 42 
  
 
REFERENCES  
 
1. Gill TM, Allore HG, Gahbauer EA, Murphy TE. Change in disability after hospitalization or restricted activity 
in older persons. JAMA : the journal of the American Medical Association. Nov 3 2010;304(17):1919 -1928.  
2. Covinsky KE, Pierluissi E, Johnston CB.  Hospitalization -Associated Disability. JAMA : the journal of the 
American Medical Association. 2011;306(16):1782 -1794.  
3. CDC grand rounds: public health practices to include persons with disabilities. MMWR. Morbidity and 
mortality weekly report. Aug 30 2 013;62(34):697 -701. 
4. Roethlisberger FJD, W.J. Management and the worker.  Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press; 1939.  
5. Hasenfield Y. Human Service Organizations.  Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice -Hall; 1983.  
6. Porter LW, Lawler, E. E., III, & Hackman, J.R. Behavior in Organizations.  New Yourk: McGraw -Hill; 1975.  
7. Helfrich CD, Dolan ED, Fihn SD, et al. Association of medical home team -based care functions and 
perceived improvements in patient -centered care at V HA primary care clinics. Healthcare. Dec 
2014;2(4):238 -244. 
8. Lanham HJ, Leykum LK, Taylor BS, McCannon CJ, Lindberg C, Lester RT. How complexity science can 
inform scale -up and spread in health care: understanding the role of self -organization in variati on across 
local contexts. Social science & medicine. Sep 2013;93:194 -202. 
9. Plsek P, Greenhalgh, T. The Challenge of Complexity in Health Care. British Medical Journal. 15 
September 2001 2001;323:625 -628. 
10. Grol R, Wensing M. Effective implementation: A  model. In: Grol R, Wensing M, Eccles M, eds.  Improving 
patient care: The implementation of change in clinical practice. : Edinburgh: Elsevier; 2005:41 -57. 
11. Damschroder L AD, Keith R, Kirsh S, Alexander J, Lowery J. Fostering implementation of health ser vices 
research findings into practice: a consolidated work framework for advancing implementation science. 
Implement Science. 2009;4(50).  
12. Kilbourne AM, Neumann MS, Pincus HA, Bauer MS, Stall R. Implementing evidence -based interventions in 
health care: application of the replicating effective programs framework. Implementation science : IS. 
2007;2:42.  
13. Kilbourne AM, Abraham KM, Goodrich DE, et al. Cluster randomized adaptive implementation trial 
comparing a standard versus enhanced implementation inte rvention to improve uptake of an effective re -
engagement program for patients with serious mental illness. Implementation science : IS. 2013;8:136.  
14. Bauer MS, Damschroder L, Hagedorn H, Smith J, Kilbourne AM. An introduction to implementation science 
for the non -specialist. BMC psychology. 2015;3:32.  
15. Richardson JL, Milam J, McCutchan A, et al. Effect of brief safer -sex counseling by medical providers to 
HIV-1 seropositive patients: a multi -clinic assessment. Aids. May 21 2004;18(8):1179 -1186.  
16. Kelly JA, Somlai AM, DiFranceisco WJ, et al. Bridging th e gap between the science and service of HIV 
prevention: transferring effective research -based HIV prevention interventions to community AIDS service 
providers. American journal of public health. Jul 2000;90(7):1082 -1088.  
17. Anderson RA, Corazzini K, Port er K, Daily K, McDaniel RR, Jr., Colon -Emeric C. CONNECT for quality: 
protocol of a cluster randomized controlled trial to improve fall prevention in nursing homes. 
Implementation science : IS. 2012;7:11.  
18. Colon -Emeric CS, McConnell E, Pinheiro SO, et a l. CONNECT for better fall prevention in nursing homes: 
results from a pilot intervention study. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society. Dec 2013;61(12):2150 -
2159.  
19. Anderson RA, Toles MP, Corazzini K, McDaniel RR, Colon -Emeric C. Local interaction s trategies and 
capacity for better care in nursing homes: a multiple case study. BMC Health Serv Res. 2014;14:244.  
20. Boyd CM, Landefeld CS, Counsell SR, et al. Recovery of activities of daily living in older adults after 
hospitalization for acute medical illness. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society. Dec 2008;56(12):2171 -
2179.  
21. Zisberg A, Shadmi E, Sinoff G, Gur -Yaish N, Srulovici E, Admi H. Low mobility during hospitalization and 
functional decline in older adults. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society. Feb 2011;59(2):266 -273. 
 
2040 Function QUERI        PI Hastings        AMD 23  5.17.2023  Page 40 of 42 
 22. Brown CJ, Redden DT, Flood KL, Allman RM. The underrecognized epidemic of low mobility during 
hospitalization of older adults. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society. Sep 2009;57(9 ):1660 -1665.  
23. Murphy EA. A Key Step for Hospitalized Elders. Archives of internal medicine. 2011;171(3):268 -269. 
24. Hastings SN, Sloane R, Morey MC, Pavon JM, Hoenig H. Assisted early mobility for hospitalized older 
veterans: preliminary data from the STRIDE program. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society. Nov 
2014;62(11):2180 -2184.  
25. Ettinger WH. Can hospitalization -associated disability be prevented? JAMA : the journal of the American 
Medical Association. Oct 26 2011;306(16):1800 -1801.  
26. Hoyer  EH, Needham DM, Atanelov L, Knox B, Friedman M, Brotman DJ. Association of impaired functional 
status at hospital discharge and subsequent rehospitalization. Journal of hospital medicine : an official 
publication of the Society of Hospital Medicine. May 2 014;9(5):277 -282. 
27. Kortebein P, Symons TB, Ferrando A, et al. Functional impact of 10 days of bed rest in healthy older 
adults. The journals of gerontology. Series A, Biological sciences and medical sciences. Oct 
2008;63(10):1076 -1081.  
28. Ostir GV, Ber ges IM, Kuo YF, Goodwin JS, Fisher SR, Guralnik JM. Mobility activity and its value as a 
prognostic indicator of survival in hospitalized older adults. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society. Apr 
2013;61(4):551 -557. 
29. Fisher SR, Kuo YF, Graham JE, Ot tenbacher KJ, Ostir GV. Early ambulation and length of stay in older 
adults hospitalized for acute illness. Archives of internal medicine. Nov 22 2010;170(21):1942 -1943.  
30. Mundy LM. Early Mobilization of Patients Hospitalized With Community -Acquired Pneu monia. Chest. 
2003;124(3):883 -889. 
31. Kosse NM, Dutmer AL, Dasenbrock L, Bauer JM, Lamoth CJ. Effectiveness and feasibility of early physical 
rehabilitation programs for geriatric hospitalized patients: a systematic review. BMC geriatrics. 
2013;13:107.  
32. Kilbourne AM, Goodrich DE, Nord KM, et al. Long -Term Clinical Outcomes from a Randomized Controlled 
Trial of Two Implementation Strategies to Promote Collaborative Care Attendance in Community Practices. 
Administration and policy in mental health. Sep 20 15;42(5):642 -653. 
33. Curran GM, Bauer M, Mittman B, Pyne JM, Stetler C. Effectiveness -implementation hybrid designs: 
combining elements of clinical effectiveness and implementation research to enhance public health impact. 
Medical care. Mar 2012;50(3):217 -226. 
34. Hemming K, Lilford R, Girling AJ. Stepped -wedge cluster randomised controlled trials: a generic framework 
including parallel and multiple -level designs. Statistics in medicine. Jan 30 2015;34(2):181 -196. 
35. Van Houtven CH, Norton EC. Informal ca re and health care use of older adults. Journal of health 
economics. Nov 2004;23(6):1159 -1180.  
36. Wray LO, Shulan MD, Toseland RW, Freeman KE, Vasquez BE, Gao J. The effect of telephone support 
groups on costs of care for veterans with dementia. Gerontolo gist. Oct 2010;50(5):623 -631. 
37. Nichols LO, Martindale -Adams J, Burns R, Graney MJ, Zuber J. Translation of a dementia caregiver 
support program in a health care system --REACH VA. Arch Intern Med. Feb 28 2011;171(4):353 -359. 
38. Mittelman MS, Ferris SH, Shulman E, et al. A comprehensive support program: effect on depression in 
spouse -caregivers of AD patients. Gerontologist. Dec 1995;35(6):792 -802. 
39. Mittelman MS, Haley WE, Clay OJ, Roth DL. Improving caregiver well -being delays nursing home 
placement of patients with Alzheimer disease.  Neurology. Nov 14 2006;67(9):1592 -1599.  
40. Belle SH, Burgio L, Burns R, et al. Enhancing the quality of life of dementia caregivers from different ethnic 
or racial groups: a randomized, controlled trial. Annals of internal medicine. Nov 21 2006;145(10):7 27-738. 
41. Gitlin LN, Hauck WW, Winter L, Dennis MP, Schulz R. Effect of an in -home occupational and physical 
therapy intervention on reducing mortality in functionally vulnerable older people: preliminary findings. 
Journal of the American Geriatrics Soci ety. Jun 2006;54(6):950 -955. 
42. Van Houtven CH, Oddone EZ, Weinberger M. Informal and formal care infrastructure and perceived need 
for caregiver training for frail US veterans referred to home and community -based services. Chronic illness. 
Mar 2010;6(1):57 -66. 
43. Griffin JM, Friedemann -Sanchez G, Jensen AC, et al. The invisible side of war:  Families caring for US 
service members with Traumatic Brain Injuries and Polytrauma  Journal of Head Trauma Rehabilitation. 
Jan 2012;27(1):3 -13. 
 
2040 Function QUERI        PI Hastings        AMD 23  5.17.2023  Page 41 of 42 
 44. Proctor E, Silmere H, Raghavan R, et al. Outcomes  for implementation research: conceptual distinctions, 
measurement challenges, and research agenda. Administration and policy in mental health. Mar 
2011;38(2):65 -76. 
45. Van Houtven CH, Oddone EZ, Hastings SN, et al. Helping Invested Families Improve Veter ans’ 
Experiences (HI -FIVES) Study: Study Design and Methodology  Contemporary clinical trials. 2014;38:260 -
269. 
46. Toseland RW, Smith TL. The impact of a caregiver health education program on health care costs. 
Research on Social Work Practice. 2006;16(1) :9-19. 
47. Morse JM, Niehaus L. Mixed method design : principles and procedures.  Walnut Creek, Calif.: Left Coast 
Press; 2009.  
48. Palinkas L, Horwitz S, Green C, Wisdom J, Duan N, Hoagwood K. Purposeful sampling for qualitative data 
collection and analysi s in mixed method implementation research. Adm. Policy Ment. Health. 2013.  
49. Stock R, Mahoney E, Carney PA. Measuring team development in clinical care settings. Family medicine. 
Nov-Dec 2013;45(10):691 -700. 
50. Salem -Schatz S OD, Mittman  B. Guide to th e Team Development Measure.  Center for Implementation 
Practice and Research Support;2010.  
51. Sayers SP, Jette AM, Haley SM, Heeren TC, Guralnik JM, Fielding RA. Validation of the Late -Life Function 
and Disability Instrument. Journal of the American Geriat rics Society. Sep 2004;52(9):1554 -1559.  
52. Janssen MF, Pickard AS, Golicki D, et al. Measurement properties of the EQ -5D-5L compared to the EQ -
5D-3L across eight patient groups: a multi -country study. Quality of life research : an international journal of  
quality of life aspects of treatment, care and rehabilitation. Sep 2013;22(7):1717 -1727.  
53. VHA Office of Informatics & Analytics VHA. Strategic Analytics for Improvement and Learning SAIL Value 
Model Measure Definitions. October 2015; http://www.va.gov/QUALITYOFCARE/me asure -
up/SAIL_definitions.asp . Accessed December 23, 2015.  
54. Zisberg A, Shadmi E, Gur -Yaish N, Tonkikh O, Sinoff G. Hospital -associated functional decline: the role of 
hospitalization processes beyond individual risk f actors. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society. Jan 
2015;63(1):55 -62. 
55. Localio AR, Berlin JA, Ten Have TR, Kimmel SE. Adjustments for center in multicenter studies: an 
overview. Annals of internal medicine. Jul 17 2001;135(2):112 -123. 
56. Kahan BC. Accounting for centre -effects in multicentre trials with a binary outcome - when, why, and how? 
BMC medical research methodology. 2014;14:20.  
57. Hedeker R GR. Longitudinal Data Analysis.  Hoboken NJ: John Wiley & Sons; 2006.  
58. Verbeke G MG. Linear Mixed Models for Longitudinal Analysis.  New York: Springer -Verlag; 2000.  
59. Hill CE KS, Thompson BJ, Williams EN, Hess SA, Ladany N. Consensual qualitative research:  An update. 
Journal of Counseling Psychology. 2005;52(2):196 -205. 
60. Hussey MA, Hughes JP. Des ign and analysis of stepped wedge cluster randomized trials. Contemporary 
clinical trials. Feb 2007;28(2):182 -191. 
61. MacKinnon DP, Fairchild AJ, Fritz MS. Mediation analysis. Annual review of psychology. 2007;58:593 -614. 
62. Kraemer HC, Wilson GT, Fairbu rn CG, Agras WS. Mediators and moderators of treatment effects in 
randomized clinical trials. Archives of general psychiatry. Oct 2002;59(10):877 -883. 
63. Schulz R, O'Brien A, Czaja S, et al. Dementia caregiver intervention research: in search of clinical 
significance. Gerontologist. Oct 2002;42(5):589 -602. 
64. Zarit SH, Reever KE, Bach -Peterson J. Relatives of the impaired elderly: correlates of feelings of burden. 
The Gerontologist. Dec 1980;20(6):649 -655. 
65. Hargraves JL, Hays RD, Cleary PD. Psychometric properties of the Consumer Assessment of Health Plans 
Study (CAHPS) 2.0 adult core survey. Health services research. Dec 2003;38(6 Pt 1):1509 -1527.  
66. Morycz RK. Caregiving strain and the desire to institutio nalize family members with Alzheimer's disease. 
Possible predictors and model development. Research on aging. Sep 1985;7(3):329 -361. 
67. Preisser JS, Das K, Long DL, Divaris K. Marginalized zero -inflated negative binomial regression with 
application to den tal caries. Statistics in medicine. Nov 15 2015.  
68. Duan N MW, Morris CN, Newhouse JP. A comparison of alternative models for the demand for medical 
care. Journal of Business and Economic Statistics. 1983;1(2):115 -126. 
 
2040 Function QUERI        PI Hastings        AMD 23  5.17.2023  Page 42 of 42 
 69. Smith VA, Preisser JS, Neelon B, Maciejewski ML. A marginalized two -part model for semicontinuous data. 
Statistics in medicine. Dec 10 2014;33(28):4891 -4903.  
70. Liu L, Strawderman RL, Cowen ME, Shih YC. A flexible two -part random effects model for correla ted 
medical costs. Journal of health economics. Jan 2010;29(1):110 -123. 
71. Baio G, Copas A, Ambler G, Hargreaves J, Beard E, Omar RZ. Sample size calculation for a stepped 
wedge trial. Trials. 2015;16:354.  
72. PCORI. Annual Report. In: Institute P -COR, ed . Patient -Centered Outcomes Research Institute: Patient -
Centered Outcomes Research Institute; 2011.  
73. Sullivan SD, Mauskopf JA, Augustovski F, et al. Budget impact analysis -principles of good practice: report 
of the ISPOR 2012 Budget Impact Analysis Good  Practice II Task Force. Value in health : the journal of the 
International Society for Pharmacoeconomics and Outcomes Research. Jan-Feb 2014;17(1):5 -14. 
74. Proctor EK, Powell BJ, McMillen JC. Implementation strategies: recommendations for specifying and 
reporting. Implementation science : IS. 2013;8:139.  
 
 