HSP  
Vascular Spiro CKD Revised 3 21 2017   Page 1 of 21 
 Human Subjects Protocol (HSP)  
Form Version: October 15, 2008  
  
 You are applying for IRB review  of the research described in this form.  
 To avoid delay , respond to all items in order and include all required approvals and documents.  
 To complete the form , click the underlined areas and type or paste in your text; double -click 
checkboxes to check/uncheck. For more tips, see www.uab.edu/irb/forms . 
 Mail or deliver all materials to AB 470 , 701 20th Street South, Bir mingham, AL 35294 -0104.  
 
Indicate the type of review you are applying for:  
 Convened (Full) IRB or 
 Expedited —See the Expedited Category Review  Sheet , and indicate the 
category(ies) here: 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
 
 
1. IRB Protocol Title:   Vascular Effects of Mineralocorticoid Receptor Antagonism in Kidney 
Disease   
 
2. Investigator, Contacts, Supervisors  
a. Name of Principal Investigator:  Eric Judd   
 Degree(s)/Title:  MD/ Instructor  BlazerID : ejudd  
 Dept/Div:  Medicine/ Nephrolog y Mailing Address:  Paula , Rm 223   UAB ZIP:  0007  
 Phone:  975-9676 Fax: 975-8879 E-mail: ejudd @uab.edu   
b. Name of Contact Person : Felice Cook   Title:  Program Coordinator II  Phone:  4-1400 
E-mail: fycook@uab.edu      Fax: 4-1302  
Mailing Address (if different from that of PI, above):  CH19, Room 115  
INVESTIGATOR ASSURANCE STA TEMENT & SIGNATURE  
By my signature as Principal Investigator, I acknowledge my responsibilities for this Human 
Subjects Protocol, including:  
 Certifying that I and any Co -Investigators or Other Investigators comply with reporting 
requirements of the UAB Co nflict of Interest Review Board;  
 Certifying that the information, data, and/or specimens collected for the research will be 
used, disclosed and maintained in accordance with this protocol and UAB policies;   
 Following this protocol without modification un less (a) the IRB has approved changes prior 
to implementation or (b) it is necessary to eliminate an apparent, immediate hazard to a 
participant(s);  
 Verifying that all key personnel listed in the protocol and persons obtaining informed 
consent have comple ted initial IRB training and will complete continuing IRB training each 
year;  
 Verifying that all personnel are licensed/credentialed for the procedures they will be 
performing, if applicable;  
 Certifying that I and all key personnel have read the UAB Policy/Procedure to Ensure 
Prompt Reporting of Unanticipated Problems Involving Risks to Subjects or Others to the 
IRB, Institutional Officials , and Regulatory Agencies  and understand the procedures for 
reporting;  
 Applying for continuing review of the protocol at least annually unless directed by the IRB 
to apply more frequently;  
 Conducting the protocol as represented here and in compliance with IRB determinations 
and all applicable local, state, and fed eral law and regulations; providing the IRB with all 
information necessary to review the protocol; refraining from protocol activities until 
receipt of initial and continuing formal IRB approval.  
 
Signature of Investigator:         Date:    
HSP  
Vascular Spiro CKD Revised 3 21 2017   Page 2 of 21 c. List all sta ff who will be involved with the design, conduct, and reporting of the 
research, their degree(s) and job title, and any additional qualifications.  Include 
individuals who will be involved in the consent process. Repeat the table below for 
each individual.  
Note.  For studies involving investigational drugs, include all investigators who will 
be listed on FDA Form 1572 and attach a copy, if applicable. Send the IRB a copy 
of Form 1572 anytime you update the form with the FDA.  
 
Role:  Co- -OR- Other –AND/OR - Consent Process  
 Full Name:  Eric Judd  
Primary UAB Dept.:  
(Employer if not UAB)  Medicine  
Degree(s) / Job Title:  M.D./ Instructor  
Additional Qualifications 
pertinent to the study:        
 
Role:   
Co- -OR- Other –AND/OR - Consent Process  
 Full Name:  David A. Calhoun  
Primary UAB Dept.:  
(Employer if not UAB)  Medicine  
Degree(s) / Job Title:  M.D./Professor  
Additional Qualifications 
pertinent to the study:        
 
Role:   
Co- -OR- Other –AND/OR - Consent Process  
 Full Name:  Michael Allon  
Primary UAB Dept.:  
(Employer if not UAB)  Medicine  
Degree(s) / Job Title:  M.D./Pro fessor  
Additional Qualifications 
pertinent to the study:        
 
Role:   
Co- -OR- Other –AND/OR - Consent Process  
 Full Name:  Tanja Dudenbostel  
Primary UAB Dept.:  
(Employer if not UAB)  Med icine  
Degree(s) / Job Title:  M.D./Assistant Professor  
Additional Qualifications 
pertinent to the study:        
Additional Qualifications 
pertinent to the study:        
 
Role:   
Co- -OR- Other –AND/OR - Consent Process  
 Full Name:  Mohammed Siddiqui  
Primary UAB Dept.:  
(Employer if not UAB)  Medicine  
Degree(s) / Job Title:  M.D./Postdoctoral Fellow  
Additional Qualifications 
pertinent to the study:        
HSP  
Vascular Spiro CKD Revised 3 21 2017   Page 3 of 21  
Role:   
Co- -OR- Other –AND/OR - Consent Process  
 Full Name:  Gary Cutter  
Primary UAB Dept.:  
(Employer if not UAB)  Biostatistics  
Degree(s) / Job Title:  Ph.D./Professor  
Additional Qualifications 
pertinent to the study:        
 
Role:   
Co- -OR- Other –AND/OR - Consent Process  
 Full Name:  Rakesh Patel  
Primary UAB Dept.:  
(Employer if not UAB)  Molecular & Cellular Pathology  
Degree(s) / Job Title:  Ph.D./Professor  
Additio nal Qualifications 
pertinent to the study:        
 
 
Role:   
Co- -OR- Other –AND/OR - Consent Process  
 Full Name:  Salam Madi  
Primary UAB Dept.:  
(Employer if not UAB)  Medicine  
Degree(s) / Jo b Title:  MSc/Research Coordinator  
Additional Qualifications 
pertinent to the study:        
 
 
d. Is the principal investigator a student, fellow, or resident?  Yes No 
 If Yes , complete items below and obtain signature of faculty advisor or 
supervisor:  
Supervisor's Name:   
Degree(s) / Job Title:   
Additional Qualifications 
pertinent to the study:   
Telephone:   
E-Mail:   
Signature:   
 
e. Describe the principal investigator's activities related to this protocol and 
provisions made by the PI to devote sufficient time to conduct the protocol:  
 This clinical trial constitutes the primary project for D r. Judd ’s career development award, for 
which he will receive  80% dedicated research time for 5 years.  Dr. Judd  will oversee all aspects of 
the study including the consent process , vascular function testing, biochemical specimen collection 
and storage, study visit s, dispensing of study medication, data storage, and data analysis .    
 
f.  Is medical supervision required for this research?  Yes No 
 If Yes , who will provide the supervision?  
 PI will provide -OR- Name:       Telephone:  
 If other than PI, obtain signature of person providing medical supervision:  
Signature         
 
HSP  
Vascular Spiro CKD Revised 3 21 2017   Page 4 of 21 g. Describe the process that ensures that all persons assisting with the research are 
adequately informed about the protocol and their research -related duties and 
functions:  The co -investigators contributed to the design of the proposed protocol.  The  protocol 
roles of all study personnel will be reviewed prior to study init iation, annually and with any 
change(s) in protocol.  
 
3. Funding  
Is this study funded?  Yes No 
If No,  specify that costs of the study will be cover ed by funds from the UAB 
department or other source named:   
 
    
If Yes , attach one copy of completed application or request for funding sent to 
sponsor, and complete a -d.  
a. Title of Grant or Contract:   Vascular effects of mineralocoriticoid receptor ant agonism in 
kidney disease  
b. PI of Grant or Contract:  Eric Judd  
c. Office of Grants & Contracts Administration Link or Tracking Number:  Pending  
 (or enter "Pending" and provide upon receipt from OGCA ) 
d. Sponsor, Funding Route ( check and describe all that apply ): 
 Gov’t Agency or Agencies —Agency name(s):  National Institutes of Health  
 NIH Coop. Group Trial —Group name:       
 Private Nonprofit (e.g., Foundation) —Name:        
 Industry, investigator -initiated —Name:       Describe the funding 
arrangement:        
 Note.  Western IRB  reviews industry -sponsored protocols unless the 
investigator initiate d the research, or the study qualifies for expedited review 
or involves gene therapy.  
 UAB Departmental/Division Funds —Specify:  
 
4. Conflict of Interest —Human subjects research involving a disclosed financial 
interest is subject to IRB re view following review by the Conflict of Interest 
Review Board.  
The following definitions are used for Item #4:  
Immediate family  means spouse or a dependent of the employee. Dependent  is any 
person, regardless of his or her legal residence or domicile, wh o receives 50% or 
more of his or her support from the public official or public employee or his or her 
spouse or who resided with the public official or public employee for more than 180 
days during the reporting period.  
Financial Interest Related to the R esearch  means financial interest in the 
sponsor, product or service being tested, or competitor of the sponsor.  
For each investigator and staff member who are involved in the design, conduct and 
reporting of the research (2a. and c.) answer the questions b elow: (Repeat the 
section below for each individual)  
 
Name:  Eric Judd  
Do you or your immediate family have any of the following? (check all that apply)  
 An ownership interest, stock options, or other equity interest related 
to the research  of any value.   
HSP  
Vascular Spiro CKD Revised 3 21 2017   Page 5 of 21   Compensation related to the research unless it meets two tests:  
 Less than $10,000 in the past year when aggregated for the 
immediate family.  
 Amount will not be affected by the outcome of the research.   
 Proprietary interest related to the research including, but not limited 
to, a patent, trademark, copyright, or licensing agreement.   
 Board of executive relationship related to the research, regardless of 
compensation.   
 
Name : David A . Calhoun  
Do you or your immediate family have any of the following? (check all that apply)  
 An ownership interest, stock options, or other equity interest related 
to the research of any value.   
  Compensation related to the research unless it meets two tests:  
 Less than $10,000 in the past year when aggregated for the 
immediate family.  
 Amount will not be affected by the outcome of the research.   
 Proprietary interest related to the research including, bu t not limited 
to, a patent, trademark, copyright, or licensing agreement.   
 Board of executive relationship related to the research, regardless of 
compensation.   
 
Name:  Michael Allon  
Do you or your immediate family have any of the follo wing? (check all that apply)  
 An ownership interest, stock options, or other equity interest related 
to the research of any value.   
  Compensation related to the research unless it meets two tests:  
 Less than $10,000 in th e past year when aggregated for the 
immediate family.  
 Amount will not be affected by the outcome of the research.   
 Proprietary interest related to the research including, but not limited 
to, a patent, trademark, copyright, or licensing agreement.   
 Board of executive relationship related to the research, regardless of 
compensation.   
 
Name : Tanja Dudenbostel  
Do you or your immediate family have any of the following? (check all that apply)  
 An ownership  interest, stock options, or other equity interest related 
to the research of any value.   
  Compensation related to the research unless it meets two tests:  
 Less than $10,000 in the past year when aggregated for the 
immediate family.  
 Amoun t will not be affected by the outcome of the research.   
 Proprietary interest related to the research including, but not limited 
to, a patent, trademark, copyright, or licensing agreement.   
 Board of executive relation ship related to the research, regardless of 
compensation.   
 
 
HSP  
Vascular Spiro CKD Revised 3 21 2017   Page 6 of 21 Name : Salam Madi  
Do you or your immediate family have any of the following? (check all that apply)  
 An ownership interest, stock options, or other equity interest related 
to the  research of any value.   
  Compensation related to the research unless it meets two tests:  
 Less than $10,000 in the past year when aggregated for the 
immediate family.  
 Amount will not be affected by the outcome of the research.   
 Proprietary interest related to the research including, but not limited 
to, a patent, trademark, copyright, or licensing agreement.   
 Board of executive relationship related to the research, regardless of 
compensation.  
  
Name : Mohamme d Siddiqui  
Do you or your immediate family have any of the following? (check all that apply)  
 An ownership interest, stock options, or other equity interest related 
to the research of any value.   
  Compensation r elated to the research unless it meets two tests:  
 Less than $10,000 in the past year when aggregated for the 
immediate family.  
 Amount will not be affected by the outcome of the research.   
 Proprietary interest related to the research inc luding, but not limited 
to, a patent, trademark, copyright, or licensing agreement.   
 Board of executive relationship related to the research, regardless of 
compensation.  
  
Name : Gary Cutter  
Do you or your immediate family have any of t he following? (check all that apply)  
 An ownership interest, stock options, or other equity interest related 
to the research of any value.   
  Compensation related to the research unless it meets two tests:  
 Less than $10,0 00 in the past year when aggregated for the 
immediate family.  
 Amount will not be affected by the outcome of the research.   
 Proprietary interest related to the research including, but not limited 
to, a patent, trademark, copyright, or li censing agreement.   
 Board of executive relationship related to the research, regardless of 
compensation.  
  
Name : Rakesh Patel  
Do you or your immediate family have any of the following? (check all that apply)  
 An owners hip interest, stock options, or other equity interest related 
to the research of any value.   
  Compensation related to the research unless it meets two tests:  
 Less than $10,000 in the past year when aggregated for the 
immediate family.  
 Amount will not be affected by the outcome of the research.   
 Proprietary interest related to the research including, but not limited 
to, a patent, trademark, copyright, or licensing agreement.   
HSP  
Vascular Spiro CKD Revised 3 21 2017   Page 7 of 21  Board of executive relat ionship related to the research, regardless of 
compensation.   
 
 
If you checked  any of the above , a financial interest disclosure has to be submitted 
to or currently be on file with the CIRB. A completed CIRB Evalua tion has to be available 
before the IRB will conduct its review.  
 
5. Locations Involved  
a. Describe the facilities available for the conduct of the research. For research on 
UAB campus, include building names and room numbers:  115 Community Health 
Service s Building;  UAB Outreach Laboratory Services , O’Brien Center Bioanalytical Core  
 
 
b. Indicate all "performance sites" that will provide space, services, facilities, 
potential or actual participants, or other support for this protocol.  
 The Kirklin Clinic (TKC)  
 University of Alabama Hospital (UAHosp)  
 The Children's Hospital of Alabama (TCHA)  
 Callahan Eye Foundation Hospital (CEFH)  
 UAB Highlands  
 Jeffers on County Dept. of Health (JCDH)  
 Birmingham Veterans Affairs Medical Center (BVAMC)  
 General Clinical Research Center (GCRC) —inpatient  
 General Clinical Research Center (GCRC) —outpatient  
 General Clinical Research Center (GCRC) at The Kirklin Clinic (TKC)  
 Other (i.e., A ny performance site not listed above, including those covered by 
subcontracts related to this protocol) —Describe:  CHSB Room 115  
 
c. Is this study a clini cal trial requiring clinical services at one of the performance 
sites listed in Item b above?  Yes No 
If Yes , Fiscal Approval Process (FAP) -designated units complete a FAP submission 
and send to fap@uab.edu . For more on the UAB FAP, see www.uab.edu/ohr .  
 
d. Is this a field study?  Yes No 
If Yes , describe the community:       
 
e. Is the study to be undertaken within a school, business, or other institution that 
does not have an institutional review board?  Yes No 
If Yes , attach a statement of any contacts with and approvals from the 
appropriate institution officials.  
 Note.  Documentation of all such approvals must be received by the UAB OIRB 
before IRB approval will be issued.  
 
f. Has this protocol or project been reviewed by another IRB, similar review board, or 
departmental review comm ittee(s) that authorizes the use of its patient 
populations?  Yes No 
 If Yes , provide name of the review board(s):        and for each board listed,  
 enter either the date of latest approval(s) or “PENDING”:       or reasons not 
approved:      .  If this protocol is subsequently rejected or disapproved by 
another review board, the UAB IRB mu st be notified promptly.  
HSP  
Vascular Spiro CKD Revised 3 21 2017   Page 8 of 21  Attach copies of approvals/disapprovals.  
 
g. Will any of the participants be from the Birmingham Veterans Affairs Medical 
Center?  Yes No 
If Yes , attach VA IRB approval or notification from the VA  Research and 
Development Department that the study has been submitted to the VA IRB for 
review.  
 
h. Will the study be conducted at or recruit participants from the Jefferson County 
Department of Public Health (JCDH)?  Yes No 
If Yes , attach notification that the protocol has been approved by JCDH or the 
Alabama Department of Public Health IRB.  
 
6. Multi -Site Studies  
a. Is the investigator the lead investigator of a multi -site study?  Yes No 
b. Is UAB a coordinating site in a multi -site study?  Yes No 
c. If you answered Yes to a or b, describe the management of information obtained 
in multi -site research that might be relevant to the protection of participants . 
Include, at a minimum, the following items:  
o IRB approvals from other sites  
o Unanticipated problems involving risks to participants or others. (For 
example, if there is an unanticipated problem involving risks to participants 
or others, which site is resp onsible for reporting it?)  
o Interim results.  
o Protocol modifications.  
      
 
7. Drugs:  Will any drugs or supplements be used/studied in this protocol?  Yes No 
If Yes , attach the Drug Review Sheet .  
 
8. Devices: Will any devic es be studied in this protocol or used for a purpose other than 
for which they were approved by the FDA?   Yes No  
If Yes , attach the Device Review Sheet . 
 
9. Special Approvals  
a. Does this project involve the use of radioisotopes?  Yes No 
If Yes , attach documentation of approval from the Radiation Safety Division.  
 
b. Does this project include patients with contagious infec tions (e.g., mumps, 
measles, chickenpox, TB, meningitis)?  Yes No 
If Yes , attach documentation of approval from Chairman of the Infection Control 
Committee of the appropriate facilities.  
 
c. Does this project involve obtai ning remnant biopsy or surgical material from the 
Department of Pathology or any other source?  Yes No 
If Yes , attach documentation of approval from the entity or individual providing 
the materials (e.g., the UAB Division of Anatomic Pathology Release of Pathologic 
Materials ). 
 
d. Does this project require obtaining any remnant clinical laboratory specimens, 
body fluids, or microbiological isola tes from the Department of Pathology or any 
other source?  Yes No 
HSP  
Vascular Spiro CKD Revised 3 21 2017   Page 9 of 21 If Yes , attach documentation of approval from the entity or individual providing 
the materials (e.g., the UAB Division of Laboratory Medicine Release of Pathologic 
Materials ). 
 
e. Does this project use stored (existing) specimens from a repository?  Yes No 
If Yes , attach documentation of approv al for use of specimens, and describe how 
existing specimens are labeled:        
 
10. Use of Specimens  
Does this project involve collecting specimens from participants and storing them for 
future research?  Yes No 
If Yes , complete a -h. If no, skip to Item 11  
a. How will specimens be obtained, processed, distributed, and stored?  
Blood and urine from 3 study visits  will be labeled and stored in a Fisherbrand cryo/freezer 
box in a temperature controlled and monitored freezer  located in the Ziegler Research 
Building (Rm 510)  
 
b.  How will specimen s be labeled (e.g., unique identifier, medical record number, 
Social Security number, name, date of birth)?  
Specimens will be labeled by study name, participant study number, and date of collection.  
 
c.  How will clinical data associated with the specimen s be collected and stored?  
Clinical data associated with the specimens will be kept in the study database.  The database  
will be maintained on a computer with access restricted  by password protection  to study staff.  
A non -specific participant number  will be generated for each participant .  The list linking the  
participant  number s to the participant identifiers will kept in a secure location with password -
protection and only the PI and designated study personnel will have access to this list .  Data 
will be  stored with use of the participant numbers  without identifiable labels such as names, 
medical record number or social security number.  
 
d.  What participant -identifying information will be collected and linked to the 
specimens?  
Participant name and date of birth will be recorded in the list linking participant number to 
the participant identifiers.  
 
e.  What steps will be taken to maximize the confidentiality of linked identifiers?  
For example, procedures could include using a password -protected computer 
database to link identifiers, with limited personnel knowledgeable of the 
password, or coded identifiers released without the ability to link to clinical data 
(also called "stripped" or "anonymized" specimens).  
As described in part c, data collected throu ghout the study will be stored in  a database 
maintained on a computer with access restricted by password protection to study staff.  The 
specimens will be labeled with de -identified codes (participant number and date of collection).  
 
f.  Will specimens be shared with other investigators in the future?  Yes No  
If Yes , what identifiers, clinical information and demographic information will 
be shared; or will the specimens be stripped of identifiers (i.e., anonymized)? 
Also if yes , outline your procedure for assuring IRB approval for release and 
use prior to release of specimens.  
  Specimens that are provided to other investigators will remain stripped of identifiers.  
Participant demographics including age, gender, race, and  comorbidities will also be provided 
in a de -identified form using participant study number (e.g., CKD1501 ).   
HSP  
Vascular Spiro CKD Revised 3 21 2017   Page 10 of 21   Note.  Investigator s who receive and/or use these specimens must document 
approval from the appropriate IRB(s) before the specimens may be relea sed. 
 
g.  Will biological samples be stored for future use?  Yes No 
If Yes , indicate whether they will be used for the disease under study in this 
protocol or research on other diseases.  
Blood and urine samples will be sto red with the potential for future testing for the disease 
under this study protocol (e.g., vascular function in chronic kidney disease).   
 
h. Is genetic testing planned?  Yes No 
If Yes , describe the planned testing here an d see "DNA/Genetic Testing" in the 
Guidebook for consent requirements.  
Cells from the blood sample will be stored for the potential to test for specific 
genetic variations (i.e., polymorphisms that alter the response to 
spironolactone).  
 
 
11. Gene Therapy   
Does this project involve gene therapy or administering recombinant materials to 
humans?  Yes No 
 If Yes , submit the Gene Therapy Project Review Panel Report  –OR- If this is a 
vaccine trial that is exempt from the NIH Guidelines For Research Involving 
Recombinant DNA Molecules, submit the Protocol Oversight Review Form For Clinical 
Vaccine Trials . 
 
12.  HIPAA Privacy and Security  
 Will the PI or others obtain, review, or make other use of participants' "personal 
health information" (i.e., information, whether oral or recorded in any form or 
medium that (a) is created or received by a health care provid er and (b) relates to 
past, present, or future physical or mental health or condition of an individual; or 
provision of health care; or payment for provision of heath care)?  Yes No 
 
 If Yes , complete a -e as described.  
 a. Will the data/information be stored or managed electronically (on a computer)?  
  Yes No 
 
b. Is the principal investigator requesting that the UAB IRB waive patient HIPAA 
authorization from another institution or entity (e .g., insurance company, 
collaborating institution).  Yes No 
 If Yes , attach copy of privacy notices from institution/entity, and provide the 
name of institution/entity:        
 
c. Indicate which, if any, of the listed entities below would provide information or 
maintain health information collected for this protocol and/or where health 
information that been collected will be stored/maintained.  
 The Kirkl in Clinic  
 University of Alabama Hospital  
 The Children’s Hospital of Alabama  
 Callahan Eye Foundation Hospital  
 UAB Highlands  
 Jefferson County Department of Health  
 School of Dentistry  
HSP  
Vascular Spiro CKD Revised 3 21 2017   Page 11 of 21  School of Health Professions  
 School of Medicine  
 School of Nursing  
 School of Optometry  
 University of Alabama Health Services Foundati on 
 UAB Health Centers  
 Viva Health  
 Ophthalmology Services Foundation  
 Valley Foundation  
 Medical West - UAB Health System Affiliate  
 Health System Information Systems:  
 HealthQuest  
 Cerner Millennium (Lab, Radiology, UED, Surgery)  
 EMMI - Master Member Index  
 Horizon - IPV (IVR/CDA/CRIS)  
 CareFlow Net  
 Eclipsys (PIN)  
 IMPACT  
 None—If None, skip to Item 13.  
 
d.  Indicate which of the listed identifiers would be associated/linked with the 
protected health information (PHI) used for this protocol.   
  Names  
 Geographic subdivisions smaller than a State  
 Elements of dates (except year) related to an individual  
 Telephone numbers  
 Fax numbers  
 Email addresses  
 Social security n umbers  
 Medical record numbers  
 Health plan beneficiary numbers  
 Account numbers  
 Certificate/license numbers  
 Vehicle identifiers and serial numbers  
 Device identifiers and serial numbers  
 Biometric identifiers  
 Web universal resource locators (URLs)  
 Internet protocol address numbers  
 Full-face photographic images  
 Any o ther unique identifying number —Describe:        
 Note.  Codes are not identifying as long as the researcher cannot link the data 
to an individual  
 None—If None, skip to Item 13.  
 
e. Choose one plan to describe your use of the p ersonal health information:  
 The data collected meet the specifications for a “ limited data set ” 
—Attach Data Use A greement  or Business Associate Agreement  
 
 Research staff will obtain authorization from each patient to use the information  
HSP  
Vascular Spiro CKD Revised 3 21 2017   Page 12 of 21  —Attach Patient Authorization  form, complete except for patient name and IRB 
protocol number  
 
 PI requests Waiver of Patient Authorization to use the information  
 —Attach Waiver of Authorization a nd Informed Consent  form 
 
PROPOSED RESEARCH  
• The IRB will not accept grant applications and/or sponsor's protocols in lieu of the 
items as outlined below.  
• Do not separate responses from items. Instead, insert your response to each item 
below the item,  keeping the information in the order of this form.  
• Number each page of the Human Subjects Protocol (i.e., Page X of Y). 
 
13. Purpose —in nontechnical, lay language   
Summarize the purpose and objectives of this protocol, including any related 
projects, in  one short paragraph.  
Few therapies exist to prevent or slow the progression of chronic kidney disease, a disease with a 
large public health burden.  This project investigates the vasculature as a novel target for c hronic 
kidney disease treatment . 
 
14. Bac kground —in nontechnical, lay language  
Summarize in 2 -3 paragraphs past experimental and/or clinical findings leading to the 
formulation of this study. Include any relevant past or current research by the 
Principal Investigator. For drug and device studies summarize the previous results 
(i.e., Phase I/II or III studies).  
Chronic kidney disease, an inpairment  in kidney func tion beyond age -expected decline , is 
commonly attributed to kidney damage from diabetes mellitus and/or hypertension.  While the 
direct me chanism(s) of kidney injury resulting from these comorbidities has yet to be defined, it 
has been hypothesized that the vasculature is involved in kidney function .  This hypothesis is 
supported by the evidence that t he one proven therapy for chronic kidney  disease, namely 
angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEIs) or angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs), 
improve s vascular function.   
 In our study of patients with resistant hypertension, we have shown that vascular function 
improves with the use of sp ironolactone, a mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist.  Spironolactone 
has also been shown to reduce urinary protein loss in patients with chronic kidney disease.  
Therefore, it is reasonable to suppose that spironolactone can improve vascular function in 
patients with chronic kidney disease.  Currently spironolactone is used sparingly in early stages of 
chronic kidney disease and is avoided in late stages of chronic kidney disease due to the risk of 
raising serum potassium levels.  If spironolactone improv es vascular function in patients with 
moderate stages of chronic kidney disease , as it has been shown to do in patients with resistant 
hypertension , then defining this  mechanism would open new therapeutic avenues for patients with 
chronic kidney disease.   
  
 
15. Participants (Screening and Selection)  
a. How many participants are to be enrolled at UAB?  62  
If multi -center study, total number at all centers:       
 
b. Sex: 50% Male  
Race/Ethnicity: All races and ethnicities in the Birmingham area will be enrolled.  Enrollment is 
expected to be composed of  65% African American  (chronic kidney disease is more prevalent 
among African Americans ). 
HSP  
Vascular Spiro CKD Revised 3 21 2017   Page 13 of 21 Age: 19-65 years of age 
Health status:  Participants with a moderate stage of chronic kidney disease  
 
Note.  If data from prior studies indicate differences between the genders or among 
racial/ethnic groups in the proposed research or if there are no data to support or to 
negate such differences, Phase 3 clinical trials will be required to include sufficient 
and appropriate entry of gender and racial/ethnic subgroups so that trends detected 
in the affected subgroups can be analyzed. If ethnic, racial, and gender estimates are  
not included in the protocol, a clear rationale must be provided for exclusion of this 
information. If prior evidence indicates that the results will not show gender or racial 
differences, researchers are not required to use gender or race/ethnicity as se lection 
criteria for study participants. They are, however, encouraged to include these 
groups. See Section II. Policy of the NIH POLICY AND GUIDELINES ON THE 
INCLUSION OF WOMEN AND MINORITIES AS SUBJECTS IN CLINICAL RESEARCH – 
Amended, October, 2001 ) for further details.  
 
c. From what population(s) will the participants be derived?  
Participants will be primarily recruited from a database of former and active pa tients of the UAB 
Hypertension Clinic totaling over 1400 patients, over 200 of which have eGFRs < 60 
mL/min/1.73m2.  Additional recruitment will come from a database of patients seen in the CKD 
clinic at the Kirklin clinic and the  PI’s renal clinics both a t the Kirklin Clinic and at Cooper 
Green.     
 
Describe your ability to obtain access to the proposed population that will allow 
recruitment of the necessary number of participants:  
The PI has maintained a database of hypertension patients while working in  Dr. David Calhoun’s 
Hypertension Clinic at the Kirklin Clinic.  A letter signed by Dr. David Calhoun and Dr. Eric 
Judd will be mailed to potential participants identified in this database .  The PI will recruit 
directly from his clinics at the Kirklin Clin ic and at Cooper Green, where he is an attending in the 
renal clinic.   A letter signed by Dr. Eric Judd and Dana Rizk, the director of the CKD clinic at the 
Kirklin Clinic, will be mailed to potential participants identified in the CKD database.   
 
 
Describ e the inclusion/exclusion criteria:  
Table 1. Study inclusion and exclusion criteria  
Inclusion 
Criteria   Adults (19 -65 years of age)  
 CKD (eGFR 25-60 mL/min/1.73m2) with urine ACR > 30 mg/gCKD (eGFR > 60 
mL/min/1.73m2) with u rine ACR ≥ 30 0 mg/g  
Exclusion 
Criteria   Severe HTN (office BP ≥ 160/100 mm Hg)  
 Hypotension (office BP < 110/70 mm Hg)  
 Serum potassium > 5 mEq/L  
 History of arrhythmia, including atrial fibrillation  
 Pregnant or breast feeding woman  
 DM type 1  
 DM type 2 with hemoglobin A1C ≥ 6.5 %  
 Dementia or cognitive impairment prohibiting informed consent  
 History of ischemic stroke, unstable angina, or myocardial infarction within the 
past 6 months  
 Allergy or intolerance to spironolactone or amiloride  
 Use of an MR antagonis t or an epithelial sodium channel blocking medication 
within the last month  
HSP  
Vascular Spiro CKD Revised 3 21 2017   Page 14 of 21  Known primary aldosteronism or renal artery stenosis  
ACR = albumin -to-creatinine ratio, HTN = hypertension, BP = blood pressure, DM = diabetes 
mellitus, MR = mineralocorticoid rec eptor  
Patients with severe hypertension (office BP > 160/100 mm Hg) are excluded due to 1) the 
possibility of requiring blood pressure medication changes during the study period, 2) direct 
effects of blood pressure on vascular function testing, and 3) inc reased cardiovascular risk  leading 
to potential serious adverse event s.  Patients with hypotension (office BP < 110/70 mm Hg) were 
excluded due to an expected drop in blood pressure with administration of spironolactone and/or 
amiloride.  
 
d. If participant s will comprise more than one group or stratification, describe each 
group (e.g., treatment/intervention, placebo, controls, sham treatment) and 
provide the number of participants anticipated in each group.  
 This clinical trial follows a cross -over design.   All participants are scheduled to receive both study 
medications in series with randomization to the initiating therapy (See Figure 2).  
 
e. Indicate which, if any, of the special populations listed below will be involved in 
the protocol. Include the Spec ial Populations Review Form (SPRF) if indicated.  
 Pregnant Women: Attach SPRF—Pregnant Women, Fetuses, 
Neonates/Nonviable Neonates  
 Fetuses: Attach SPRF—Pregnant Women, Fetuses, Neonates/Nonviable 
Neonates  
 Neonates/Nonviable Neonates: SPRF—Pregnant Women, Fetuses, 
Neonates/Nonviable Neonates  
 Prisoners: Attach SPRF—Prisoners   
 Minors (<19 years old): Attach SPRF—Minors  
 Employees or students at institution where research conducted  
 Persons who are temporarily decisionally impaired   
 Persons who are permanently decisionally impaired (e.g., mentally retarded)   
  Non-English Speakers  
For each box checked, describe why the group is included and the additional 
protections provided to protect the rights and welfare of these participants who 
are vulnerable to coercion:       
 
f. List any persons other than those directly involved in the study who will be at risk. 
If none, enter "None": None  
 
g. Describe the process  (e.g., recruitment, chart review) that will be used to seek 
potential participants (e.g., individuals, re cords, specimens). Research recruitment 
by non -treating physicians/staff may require completion of Partial Waiver of 
HSP  
Vascular Spiro CKD Revised 3 21 2017   Page 15 of 21 Authorization for Recruitment/Screening. (See 
http://main.uab.edu/show.asp?durki=6 1981.) 
For patients identified as potential participants through the hypertension and CKD 
database s, study personnel will revie w the medical history including the medical record in order 
to identify exclusion criteria.  Eligible  participants who meet incl usion and exclusion criteria after 
this screening process will be mailed a letter co -signed by Drs. Judd and Calhoun for the HTN 
database and Drs. Judd and Rizk (Dr. Dana Rizk is the Director of the CKD clinic at the Kirklin 
Clinic) for the CKD database.  Potential participants will be contacted by phone to set up a 
screening visit where an investigator will review the risks and benefits  of participation in a formal 
consenting process.    
 Patients recruited from the PI’s Kirklin Clinic or Cooper Green clini c will have the study 
and its associated risks and benefits introduced by the PI during a regularly scheduled follow -up 
visit.  Patients interested in participating will have a screening visit scheduled whe re informed 
consent will occur.  
 Patients who are scheduled to see a  nephrologist at the Kirklin clinic will be prescreened 
using chart review in Impact to assess eligibility.  With approval from the patient’s nephrologist, 
patients who are eligible will be contacted either by phone or in person at their clinic visit .  If 
interested, potential participants will be scheduled for a screening visit where the informed 
consent process takes place.  As part of the consenting process participants are  presented with a 
copy of the informed consent and are  allowed a n unlimited  amount of time before deciding  to 
proceed with  the study.   
 In order to meet recruitment goals, the electronic health record system for University of 
Alabama Hospital and Kirklin Clinic will be screened using i2b2 in order to generate a list o f 
potential study candidates.  Once this list has been truncated further by chart review, the primary 
care doctor and/or primary nephrologist at UAB will be contacted to approve sending the patient 
a letter in the mail.  The recruitment letter is attached.  
 
h. If you will use recruitment materials (e.g., advertisements, flyers, letters) to reach 
potential participants, attach a copy of each item. If not, identify the source (e.g., 
databases) from which you will recruit participants.  Eligible participants i dentified in 
the hypertension  and CKD  database s will receive a letter alerting them to future contact by study 
personnel.   Other participants will be recruited directly from the PI (Dr. Eric Judd’s) Kirklin 
Clinic and Cooper Green clinic.   Flyers will be posted in designated areas at Cooper Green, UAB 
campus, and the Kirklin Clinic.     
 
i. Describe the procedures for screening potential participants.  
The m edical history will be reviewed with the potential participant in a standard of care clinic 
visit.  If the patien t agrees to participate, an investigator will review the consent form in person 
with the volunteer  during a screening visit .  For potential participants identified in the database s, 
their medical records will be obtained through Horizon  or Impa ct in order to identify exclusion 
criteria .  Review of medical records will be limited to study personnel (either the PI, sub -
investigator, or study coordinator).   
 
16. Protocol Procedures, Methods, and Duration of the Study —in nontechnical 
language  
a.  Describe the study methodology that will affect the participants —particularly in 
regard to any inconvenience, danger, or discomfort.  
Study participants with proteinuric, CKD will be randomly assigned in a double -masked fashion 
to spironolactone 25mg daily o r amiloride 5 mg daily for 6 weeks and then crossed over to the 
alternate study medication after a 1 mon th wash -out period (See Figure 1 ).  Vascular function will be 
assessed at baseline and the end of each 6 week treatment period by: 1) ultrasound guided flow-
mediated dilation (FMD) of the brachial artery, 2) impedence cardiography,  3) pulse -wave velocity, 4) 
HSP  
Vascular Spiro CKD Revised 3 21 2017   Page 16 of 21 24 hour ambulatory blood pressure monitoring, and 5 ) serum and urine biomarkers .  Participants 
will undergo a total of 7 visits over 16 -18 weeks; 3 o f the 7 visits will involve vascular function testing.   
Pulse -wave velocity is measured non -invasively with placement of a small sensor (tonometry 
probe) over the carotid and femoral arter y.  This procedure poses no discomfort and is usually done 
in about 15 minutes.  Impedence cardiography is  also noninvasive with minimal inconvenience to the 
participant.  It is  performed by placing small electrode pads on the chest wall and neck  and takes  
about 12 minutes.  FMD is measured by assessing the change in brach ial artery diameter by 
ultrasound.  A blood pressure cuff is placed below the elbow and inflated above systolic blood 
pressure for 5 minutes.  The cuff is then released and change in brachial artery is determi ned 
immediately afterwards for 2  minutes.  The entire procedure takes about 45 minutes.   Some back 
discomfort can occur with FMD testing as participants must lie flat for 30 minutes.  Hand and arm 
discomfort from cuff inflation is common yet resolves immediately after cuff deflation.  Collection of 
urine for 24 hours and wearing a blood pressure monitor for 24 hours can be disruptive to normal 
daily/nightly activities; however poses no danger or long-term  inconvenience.  
A study visit where vascular function testing is to be performed will begin at 0800 in the morning 
and start with a vital sign assessment including height, weight, body fat percent, and left arm 
automated BP measurement followed by confirmation of fasting status and a brief past medical 
history.  Each participant will then lie supine for 10 minutes in preparation for vascular function 
testing.  Following the pulse wave velocity, impedence cardiography, and FMD measurements, the 
participant will have his/her blood and urine collected for laboratory testing.  Laboratory testing will 
include ~20 mL of blood for plasma and serum testing.  Participants will return 24 hour urine 
samples and have a 24 hour ambulatory monitor placed .  This entire visit is expected to take 2 hours.   
Study visits where vascular function testing will not be performed  (e.g., screening visit, visit 2, visit 
4, and visit 5; see Table 2) should last 30 minutes and involve a medication assessment, vital sign 
check, and blood collection for serum potassium (~4 mL).  
All study med ication will be prepared by the UAB Research P harmacy in matching capsules.  .  
The order of medication dispensing will follow simple randomization using an a priori  randomization 
list prepared by the research pharmacy . 
 
 
 
b. What is the probable length of time required for  the entire study (i.e., recruitment 
through data analysis to study closure)?  
5 year s 
c. What is the total amount of time each participant will be involved?  
16 weeks  
 

HSP  
Vascular Spiro CKD Revised 3 21 2017   Page 17 of 21 d. If different phases are involved, what is the duration of each phase in which the 
participants will be involved? If no phases are involved, enter "not applicable."  
The cross -over design consists of two 6 week intervention periods separated by a one month 
washout period . 
 
e. List the procedures, the length of time each will take, and the freque ncy of 
repetition, and indicate whether each is done solely for research or would already 
be performed for treatment or diagnostic purposes (routine care) for the 
population. Insert additional table rows as needed.   
 
 
 
All procedure s will be for research purposes.  Study  visits 1, 3, and 6 will be approximately 120 
minutes in length .  Study visits 2, 4, and 5 will be appr oximately 30 minutes in length .    
 
f.  Will an interview script or questionnaire be used?  Yes No 
 If Yes , attach a copy.  
 
g. Will participants incur any costs as a result of their participation?  Yes No 
If Yes , describe the reason for and amount of each foreseeable cost.  
      
 
h.  Will participants be compensated?  Yes No 
If Yes , complete i -v:  
i. Type: (e.g., cash, check, gift card, merch andise): Check   
ii. Amount or Value: $100 for the study  visits 1, 3, and 6 and $ 50 for study visits 2, 4, 5, 
screening visit , and unscheduled visit(s).  
iii. Method (e.g., mail, at visit): Mail  
iv. Timing of Payments: (e.g., every visit, each month): After  the visit 
v. Maximum Amount of Payments per Participant: $500 (not including any unscheduled 
visits)  Table 2 . Combine d study procedure s chedule 
 Screen Visit  
Week -(1-2) Visit 1  
Week 0  Visit 2  
Week 2  Visit 3  
Week 6  Visit 4  
Week 10  Visit 5  
Week 12  Visit 6  
Week 16  
Informed consent  X       
Study medication pill count    X X  X X 
Con medication assessment   X  X X  X 
Dispense study medication   X   X   
Clinic vital signs  X X X X X X X 
FMD   X  X   X 
ACR  X X  X   X 
RFP  X   X   X 
24 hour ABPM   X  X   X 
Plasma aldosterone, PRA   X  X   X 
Blood & urine biomarkers*   X  X   X 
Serum potassium  via BMP    X  X X  
24hr urine collection   X  X   X 
Urine Pregnancy Test  X       
Con = concomitant, FMD = flow -mediated dilation, ACR = spot urinary albumin -to-creatinine ratio, RFP = renal function 
panel, PRA = plasma renin activity , BMP = basic metabolic panel , ABPM = ambulatory blood pressure monitor  
*Biomarkers include serum high -sensitivity C-reactive protein (hsCRP), serum pentraxin -3 (PTX -3), serum fetuin -A, 
serum uric acid, plasma asymmetric dimethylarginine (ADMA), serum soluable vascular cell adhesion molecule 
(sVCAM -1), homeostasis model assessmen t method of insulin resistance (HOMA -IR), plasma and urine F2 -
isoprostanes, and plasma endothelin . 
HSP  
Vascular Spiro CKD Revised 3 21 2017   Page 18 of 21  
17. Describe the potential benefits of the research.  
There is no anticipated direct benefit which the participants will obtain from participating in the 
protocol.  However, indirect benefits may include discovering that spironolactone or amiloride 
reduce s albuminuria and/or blood pressure.  In addition, participants who experience an 
improvement in endothelial function with spironolactone use would be expe cted to have a lower 
cardiovascular risk with continued use.  We feel the risks involved with participating in this study 
are reasonable in relation to the potential benefits.  
 
18. Risks  
a. List the known risks —physical, psychological, social, economic, a nd/or legal —that 
participants may encounter as a result of procedures required in this protocol. Do 
not list risks resulting from standard -of-care procedures. Note.  Risks included in 
this protocol document should be included in the written consent document .  
No undue hazards (physical, psychological, financial, legal, or other) are anticipated with vascular 
function testing  or blood and urine sampling. Participants may be exposed to several potential 
risks as itemized below:  
1. Hyperkalemia: Administration of both spironolactone and amiloride are associated with 
increases in serum potassium of approximately 0.4 mEq/L.  Serum levels of potassium will 
be monitored at each study visit.  Kayexalate and a low potassium diet will be administered 
for levels of serum p otassium > 5.5 meq/L followed by a repeat potassium level in 3 days.  
Participants will be withdrawn from the study with serum potassium levels > 6.0 meq/L.  In 
addition, participants will not be allowed to participate in the second treatment period with 
a serum potassium > 5.0 meq/L when checked at week 10.   
2. Fetal toxicity: Spironolactone is associated with fetal toxicity.  Pregnant women, as 
determined by a screening urine sample, are excluded from study participation.  Women of 
child bearing potential w ill be advised of the risk of fetal toxicity, and if a pregnancy occurs 
during the study the participant will be withdrawn and study medication stopped.  
3. Gynecomastia: Spironolactone is associated with breast growth in men.  This association 
occurs more fre quently with the long -term use of doses exceeding 50mg/day.  
4. Discomfort and risks (hematoma/skin infection) ass ociated venous blood collection  
5. Measurement of pulse wave velocity  and performing impedence cardiography  is non -
invasive and entails no risk. Howe ver, measurement of FMD requires that the subject be 
supine for 30 minutes, and i nflation of the blood pressure cuff for 5 minutes may cause 
discomfort.  
 
b. Estimate the frequency, severity, and reversibility of each risk listed.  
1. Hyperkalemia, defined as a serum potassium concentration > 5.5 mEq/L, is expected to 
occur in less than 5% of study participants.  Serum potassium levels will be monitored  
within 2 weeks of starting either spironolactone or amiloride in order to  prevent severe or 
prolonged hyperka lemia.  Rises in serum potassium levels discovered in the first 2 weeks of 
the intervention are expected to resolve within 1 -2 days of stopping the medication.  
2. Fetal toxi city is not expected to occur during the study.  Pregnant women, as determined by 
a scr eening urine sample, are excluded from study participation.  If a pregnancy occurs 
during the study , the participant will be withdrawn and study medication stopped.  
3. Discomfort and bruising is expected to occur in the majority of venous blood collection s.  
However these complications of blood collection are mild.  A skin infection due to blood 
collection is not expected to occur as standard collection techniques involving sterile 
materials and alcohol preparation will be employed.  
HSP  
Vascular Spiro CKD Revised 3 21 2017   Page 19 of 21 4. Back discomfort from lying supine for 30 minutes  for FMD measurement is expected to 
occur in less than 25% of study participants.  Lumbar support pillows are available if 
needed.  Hand and arm discomfort from blood pressure cuff inflation for 5 minutes 
commonly occurs with FMD measu rement, yet completely resolves with cuff deflation .  
 
c. Is this a therapeutic study or intervention?  Yes No 
 If Yes , complete the following items:  
i. Describe the standard of care in the setting where the research will be 
conducted:  The standard of care for non -diabetic patients with moderate (stage III) CKD is 
control of blood pressure and avoidance of nephrotoxic agents (e.g., nonsteroidal anti -
inflammatory  and illicit  drugs ).  Patients with severely, uncontrolled bloo d pressure (e.g., 
>160/100 mm Hg) will be excluded from participation.   
 
ii. Describe any other alternative treatments or interventions:  An angiotensin 
converting enzyme inhibitor (ACEI) or an angiotensin receptor blocker (ARB) is 
recommended for p atients who have CKD and moderate levels of albuminuria a nd/or 
uncontrolled hypertension.  Participation in this clinical trial will not interfere with this 
therapy.   
 
iii. Describe any withholding of, delay in, or washout period for standard of care or 
alternativ e treatment that participants may be currently using:  Patients taking 
spironolactone, amiloride, or triamterene at baseline will be offered to hold this medication for 
1 month prior to starting the study.  All participants will undergo a 1 month washout be tween 
the 2 intervention periods.  
 
 
d. Do you foresee that participants might need additional medical or psychological 
resources as a result of the research procedures/interventions?  Yes No 
If Yes , describe the provisions  that have been made to make these resources 
available.   
      
 
e. Do the benefits or knowledge to be gained outweigh the risks to participants?  
  Yes No 
If No,  provide justification for performing the research:       
 
19. Precautions/Minimization of Risks (If stu dy involves drugs or devices 
complete the Drug or Device Review Sheet and skip to question #20)  
a. Describe precautions that will be taken to avoid risks and the means for monitoring 
to detect risks.  
 
 
b. If hazards to an individual participant occur, des cribe (i) the criteria that will be 
used to decide whether that participant should be removed from the study; (ii) the 
procedure for removing such participants when necessary to protect their rights 
and welfare; and (iii) any special procedures, precaution s, or follow -up that will be 
used to ensure the safety of other currently enrolled participants.  
 
c. If hazards occur that might make the risks of participation outweigh the benefits 
for all participants, describe (i) the criteria that will be used to sto p or end the 
entire study and (ii) any special procedures, precautions, or follow -up that will be 
used to ensure the safety of currently enrolled participants.   
 
HSP  
Vascular Spiro CKD Revised 3 21 2017   Page 20 of 21  
 
 
20. Informed Consent  
a. Do you plan to obtain informed consent for this protocol?   Yes No 
If Yes,  complete the items below.  
If No,  complete and include the Waiver of Informed Consent  or Waiver of 
Authorization and Informed Consent , as applicable.  
 
b. Do you plan to document informed consent for this protocol?   Yes No 
If Yes,  complete the items below.  
If No,  complete the items below and include the Waiver of Informed Consent 
Documentation .  
 
c. How will consent be obtained? Informed c onsent will be obtained by the PI or designated 
study personnel after revi ewing the protocol, including risks, in person with the potential participant.   
Designated study personnel include Eric Judd  (PI), Cassidy Clevenger  (study coordinator) , 
Mohammed Siddiqui (sub -investigator) . 
 
d. Who will conduct the consent interview? PI or designated study personnel.  
 
e. Who are the persons who will provide consent or permission? Patients identified in a 
hypertension database from Dr. David Calhoun’s Hypertension Clinic  and a CKD database from 
Dr. Dana Rizk’s CKD Clinic at the Kirklin Clin ic, Dr. Eric Judd’s Kirklin Clinic, Dr. Eric Judd’s 
Cooper Green renal clinic , in the 12b2  database, or patients responding to posted flyers .   
 
f. What steps will be taken to minimize the possibility of coercion or undue influence? 
Potential participants will be informed that they are under no obligation to participate and it will 
in no way affect their routine care if they elect not to enroll.   
 
g. What language will the prospective participant or the legally authorized 
representative understand? English  
 
h. What language will be used to obtain consent ? English  
 
i. If any potential participants will be, or will have been, in a stressful, painful, or 
drugged condition before or during the consent process , describe the precautions 
proposed to overcome the e ffect of the condition on the consent process.  If not, 
enter "no such effect."  
No such effect.  
 
j. If any project -specific instruments will be used in the consenting process, such as 
flip charts or videos, describe the instrument(s) here, and provide a cop y of each. 
If not, enter "not used."  
Not used  
 
k. How long will participants have between the time they are told about the study 
and the time they must decide whether to enroll? If not 24 hours or more, 
describe the proposed time interval and why the 24 -hour minimum is neither 
feasible nor practical. Potential participants are given an indefinite amount of time to make a 
decision.  Some patients do enroll at the ir standard of care visit s, but this is in no way obligatory.  
 
21. Procedures to Protect Privacy  
 Describe the provisions included in the research to protect the privacy interests of 
participants (e.g., others will not overhear your conversation with potential 
participants, individuals will not be publicly identified or embarrassed).  
HSP  
Vascular Spiro CKD Revised 3 21 2017   Page 21 of 21 All discussions w ith potential participants will be done in clinic rooms with the door closed so 
others will not be able to overhear the conversation.  Potential participants will in no way be 
publicly identified or embarrassed.  
 
 
22. Procedures to Maintain Confidentiality  
a. Describe the manner and method for storing research data and maintaining 
confidentiality. If data will be stored electronically anywhere other than a server 
maintained centrally by UAB, identify the departmental and all computer systems 
used to store p rotocol -related data, and describe how access to that data will be 
limited to those with a need to know.  
The study database will be maintained on a computer with access restricted by password 
protection to study staff.  A non -specific participant number wi ll be generated for each participant  
(e.g., CKD1501 ).  The list linking the participant numbers to the participant identifiers will kept in 
a secure location with password -protection , and only the PI and designated study personnel will 
have access to this list.  Data will be stored with use of the participant numbers without 
identifiable labels such as names, medical record number or social security number .   
b. Will any information derived from this study be given to any person, including the 
subject, or a ny group, including coordinating centers and sponsors?  Yes No  
 If Yes , complete i -iii. 
 i. To whom will the information be given? UAB IRB  
 ii. What is the nature of the information? Summary data without individual person al 
identifiers  
 iii. How will the information be identified, coded, etc.? Information will only be 
presented as summarized data with out individualized information.  
 
23. Additional Information  
In the space below, provide any additional information that you believe may help 
the IRB review the proposed research, or enter "None."  
None  
 