Revised  4/27/2021  Page 1 of 7 STUDY TITLE: The Care After Life -threatening Medical Events (CALME) pilot study : An 
investigation of heart rate variability biofeedback training  
 
Principal Investigator:  Jeffrey Birk , PhD  (jlb2287)  
 
IRB #: AAAS 9001  
 
1. Study Purpose and Rationale  
 
Posttraumatic stress disorder ( PTSD ) is characterized in part by an imbalance of the autonomic nervous 
system, including diminished parasympathetic activity [1, 2]  and heightened sympathetic activity. [3] 
Diminished parasympathetic activity is indicated by low heart rate variability (H RV), which itself is a risk 
factor for worsened cardiovascular health. Patients with low HRV have more frequent ventricular 
arrhythmias, [4] develop atherosclerosis more rapidly, [5] show lower ejection fraction, [4] and have a three -fold 
increase in risk of cardiac mortality relative to people with higher HRV. [6]  
 
HRV biofeedback is a techniqu e that combines slow paced breathing with the use of accurate, moment -to-
moment physiological monitoring. [7] The goal is to make internal cardiac information available to people in 
order to help them learn how to increase the beat -to-beat va riability in their heart’s activity and thereby 
increase parasympathetic activity. Apart from active interventions such as exercise training that reliably 
increase HRV but that may be inappropriate for many cardiac patients, [8] HRV biofeedback is an  easy -to-
implement technique allows  people to monitor and then ultimately alter their parasympathetic activity.  
 
A growing body of research shows that HRV biofeedback training not only increases HRV but also reduces 
symptoms of stress and anxiety with a la rge standardized effect size in a meta -analysis of 24 studies. [9] The 
interven tion is believed to restore autonomic balance by increasing activity in the vagus nerve , which underlies 
activation of the parasympathetic branch of the autonomic nervous system . Pilot studies have revealed that 
HRV training specifically reduces PTSD sympt oms in traumatized people [10] and reduces anxiety in cardiac 
patients. [11] These intervention findings are in line with the reliable correlational finding that higher HRV has 
been associated with lower negative affect, even after controlling for respirati on rate, demographic 
characteristics, exercise, smoking, and medications that affect cardiac activity. [12] Critically , in a randomized 
controlled study, HRV biofeedback training using the same hardware and smartphone app as in the present 
study has been shown to lower resting heart rate by over 5 beats per minute  and increase HRV by over 
30% .[13] 
 
Research is needed to determine whether HRV training has beneficial consequences for mental and 
cardiovascular health in patients who have experienced serious cardiac events . Cardiac arrest  survivors , in 
parti cular,  may benefit from such an intervention because  many of them experience clinically significant  
psychological distress after the ir medical event .[14] An important research question for this population 
concerns  the best ways to maximize the efficacy of HRV training on fear outcomes. Th e currently predominant 
version of HRV training was developed two decades years ago by Paul Lehrer and colleagues. [7] It involves 
identifying for each individual the respiratory rate at which their variability in beat -to-beat heart rate (HR)  is 
maximized. For many people, this rate tends to be approximately 0.1 Hz (i.e., breaths per second), which 
amounts to 6 breaths/minute. Participants then practice breathing at this rate with the goal of improving their 
post -training resting state HRV. It  has been proposed that the training achieves its dampening effects on fear, 
stress, and anxiety by enhancing the baroreflex and increasing vagal afferent traffic to frontal cortical brain 
regions associated with affective regulation. [15] 
 
Distressed cardiac patients may be especially motivated to learn to influence their own heart activity in order to 
improve their own HRV, reduce their cardiovascular risk, and lessen their symptoms of psychological distress. 
Therefore , it may be wise to harness this motivation in the service of helping these patients deliberately  learn  
to alter their own autonomic activity rat her than simply breathing at a rate that automatically  improves HRV 
without any learning process. As noted by Robert Gatchel, biofeedback “is based on the fundamental learning 
principle that people learn to perform a particular response when they receive f eedback or information about 
the consequences of that response, and then make the appropriate compensatory behavior adjustments” (p. 
197).[16] By providing patients with an external (e.g., vi sual) form of feedback about their otherwise largely 
Revised  4/27/2021  Page 2 of 7 inaccessible autonomic physiology (i.e., vagus nerve activity), we will conduct a feasibility  study of HRV 
biofeedback training with the goal of increasing  HRV and reducing anxiety symptoms.  
 
The purpose  of this pilot study is to examine the feasibility of enrolling 10 participants and assessing their 
satisfaction with HRV biofeedback training . The data collected from participants as part of this feasibility pilot 
will influence the decision to submit an R01 grant in 2021 to conduct a large -scale randomized intervention 
using the methods in this pilot.  
 
2. Study Design  
 
We will recruit 10 participants who each recently survived a cardiac arrest and who are either 1) participating 
in a separate ongoing longitudinal study ( Cardiac Arrest Neuropsychological Outcomes Evaluation [CANOE ]; 
IRB Protocol #: AAAR8497 ) or 2) on a mailing list to receive information from the Sudden Cardiac Arrest 
Foundation (SCAF), a  community of cardiac arrest survivors , their families, and other advocates . They will 
complete a brief set of screening questions to determine eligibility. They will complete three  “Video Visits”  that 
will be conducted by study staff who will meet with the participant via the Zoom application associated with 
Columbia University Irving Medical Center , 1) an enrollment video visit  within 72 months since their cardiac 
arrest , 2) a baseline /pre -interv ention  video visit approximately a week after the enrollment video visit  (once 
participant confirms receiving study materials), and 3 ) a post -intervention video visit  3 weeks  after the pre -
intervention video visit . The first video visit will last approximately 45 minutes, the second video visit will last 
approximately 60 minutes and the third video visit will last approximately 30 minutes.  
 
Upon obtaining verbal consent, the first video visit includes  demographic and  partner/caregiver 
questionnaires, download of the smartphone app (Elite HRV), and selection of appropriate chest strap size for 
the heart rate monitor for the participant.  
 
The second video visit consists of attachment of the heart rate monitor (Polar H10) , setup of the smartphone 
app (Elite HRV), completion of questionnaires (cardiac -related interoceptive fear, trait anxiety, and trait 
negative affect ), a short baseline resting state breathing task, and a training in how to do the intervention u sing 
the heart rate monitor together with the smartphone app . Since the equipment is unobtrusive  and handled 
exclusively by the participant, this visit is easily conducted remotely . The hardware device (Polar H10 heart rate 
monitor) measure s HR and HRV , and the app (Elite HRV) receives data wirelessly via a Bluetooth  connection.  
During the second video visit , a heart rate monitor chest strap  will be attached around the torso along  the 
bottom of the rib c age of each participant to measure interbeat intervals in order to compute heart rate (HR) 
and heart rate variability (HRV). Participants will complete a paradigm in which they breathe at a set frequency 
(e.g., one breath lasting  10 seconds) while they wat ch their real -time heart rate  on a visual display  on the Elite 
HRV app . Participants will be told that the goal of the training is to increase the amount of variation  in their 
heart rate  between one heartbeat and the next heartbeat . Participants will have the advantage of seeing real -
time HR feedback as a means to guide their success at maximizing HRV with each breath as the training 
progresses over time.  Detailed procedures are provided to the IRB in separate documents entitled 
“CALME_HardwareAndAppInstruc tions_IPHONE.pptx ” and  
“CALME_HardwareAndAppInstructions_ Android .pptx .”  
 
The third video visit consists of attachment of the heart rate monitor (Polar H10), a short baseline resting state 
breathing task, and complet ion of the self-report measures of cardiac -related interoceptive fear, trait anxiety, 
and trait negative affect . Within -in person changes in these measures will be computed as a preliminary test of 
the intervention’s efficacy.  
 
Measures  
 
Cardiac -related interoceptive fear is measured with the four cardiac -related items from the Anxiety Sensitivity 
Index -3.[17] Trait anxiety is measured using the State -Trait Anxiety Inventory. [18] Cognitive and somatic 
facets of trait anxiety are measured with the State -Trait Inventory of Cognitive and Somatic Anxiety  
(STICSA ).[18] Facets of trait affect are measured with  the Positive and Negative Affect Schedule (PANAS) [19]. 
Those measures above are administered at both the pre - and post -training video visits . Additionally, at the 
post -training video visit only, participants  complete the following standalone self -report items : 1) “How 
Revised  4/27/2021  Page 3 of 7 pleasant did it feel to pay attention to your heart’s  activity during the training sessions at home?” (scale of 1, 
very unpleasant , to 5, very p leasant ); 2) “How successful were you in increasing the variability in your heart 
activity by the end of the training  sessions at home?” (scale of 1, not at all successful , to 5, very successful ). 
Also at the third video visit, i ntervention usability is measured with the Sy stem Usability Scale , [20]  and 
intervention acceptability, feasibility, and appropriateness are measured with the three validated four -item 
scales .[21] Additionally, we assess demograp hic information and partner and caregiver status.  
 
3. Study procedures  
 
Recruitment /First Video Visit ( 45 Minutes)  
 
For participants already enrolled in the CANOE Study : 
Participants already enrolled in the CANOE Study who have indicated they are willing to hear about additional 
research opportunities and who meet initial study criteria will be contacted by telephon e by the study team . 
Those who are interested in learning more about the study will undergo consent using a verbal information 
sheet for screening . Those who agree to be screened will answer a brief set of questions to determine study 
eligibility. Those who meet inclusion and exclusion criteria will be scheduled for the first Zoom Video Visit  
during which the informed consent process for participation in the overall study will take place. Those who 
provide verbal consent , answer baseline demographics and a brief partner/caregiver questionnaire, and 
successfully install the Elite HRV App on their smartphone  will continue with the second Video  Visit as 
outlined below  (once they confirm receiving the Polar H10 heart rate monitor in the mail). Participants will 
receive a PayCard in the mail following this visit onto which compensation will be loaded for this and future 
sessions.   
For non-CANOE cardiac arrest survivors who respond to our study flyer  online : 
Cardiac arrest survivors who view the CALME study flyer  online and who choose to view the online eligibility 
assessment that is included on the flyer  will be directed to a brief study description on a Columbia University 
Qualtrics website . Those who agree to be screened will answer a brief set of questions to determine study 
eligibility via this secure website. Those who meet inclusion and exclusion criteria will be asked at the 
conclusion of the survey to provide their contact information (first name, last name, email address, and phone 
number) for the study team to send them the study materials . Those who provide their contact information will 
be contacted by phone and if necessary, will be asked a brief set of questions to confirm study el igibility. Those 
who are verified to meet inclusion and exclusion criteria will be scheduled for the first Zoom Video Visit  during 
which the informed consent process for participation in the overall study will take place. Those who provide 
verbal consent, answer baseline demographics and a brief partner/caregiver questionnaire, and successfully 
install the Elite HRV App on their smartphone  will continue with the second Video Visit as outlined below  
(once they confirm receiving the Polar H10 heart rate monit or in the mail). Participants will receive a PayCard 
in the mail following this visit onto which compensation will be loaded for this and future sessions.  
 
2nd (Pre -Intervention) Video Visit (60 minutes)  
 
Members of the study team will  introduce participan ts to the heart rate monitor  they received by mail  and train 
them  in its proper application. Participants put on the heart rate monitor and wear it for the duration of the  
session. Participants are  also introduced to the Elite HRV app  (previously installed in the 1st Video Visit) . The 
experimenter s assist  participant s in the app setting  on their smartphone s and pair the heart rate monitor via 
Bluetooth  with the app . They complete the pre -intervention questionnaires to assess cardiac -related 
interoceptive fear , trait anxiety, and positive and negative trait affect. A two -minute  resting -state reading is 
recorded  using the “Elite HRV ” app while participant s sit in a comfortable, relaxed, and well -supported 
position with their feet flat on the floor . They then complete a single HRV biofeedback training session  (see 
details below). Participants are trained in how to export the data on the app to an email with the form of 
TheCALME Study+###@ gmail.com  where ###  is a study ID that pertains only to the participant in question  
and does not include any identifying information . HRV d ata are exported once via the app at the end of this 
session. Participants  are made aware that they will be compensated for this session on their P ayCard. 
 
HRV  Biofeedback Training ( 15 at-home sessions; 10 minutes each)  
 
Revised  4/27/2021  Page 4 of 7 Participants are asked to complete the HRV biofeedback training with the heart rate monitor and app once per 
day f or 10 minutes each time (at least 5 minutes) for at least 5 days each week. They are encouraged to practice 
the training before bedtime because it has been shown to improve HRV during sleep when practiced at that 
time. However, they are told that they can do the training at any time of day that works well for them.  
 
Participants begin each session by applying water to the electrode strip on the Polar H10 heart rate monitor, 
clipping the transmitter portion of the device to its strap, and then attaching the strap around their torso over 
the lower portion of their ribca ge. They sit in a comfortable, relaxed, and well supported position. They open 
the Elite HRV app on their smartphone (iPhone or Android) and verify that it has connected successfully to the 
heart rate monitor via Bluetooth. Participants select the “Open Re ading” option in the app . After a brief 
stabilization period of several seconds, the training task begins. Participants see the following on the screen: 1) 
a breathing pacing stimulus: a circle that continually expands for 5 seconds and then contracts for 5 seconds, 2) 
a numerical readout of current heart rate, 3) a numerical readout of their current heart rate variability, 4) a 
visual representation of their increasing and decreasing heart rate over the last minute, 5) a running tally of the 
time elapsed i n the training session. Participants are instructed to breathe in as the circle expands, and breathe 
out as the circle shrinks.  They are told to watch as a line shows their heart rate going up and down. 
Participants are instructed that their goal is to tr y to make large, slow changes in heart rate that follow the pace 
of their slow breathing instead of the smaller, faster changes in heart rate that occur when they are not doing 
the training exercise.  When the timer indicates that 10 minutes have passed (or  at least 5 minutes), then 
participants end the training session. Detailed instructions are provided to participants with these instructions, 
and all the steps are also covered with the experimenter s present during the second video visit . 
 
Participants are asked to select the option to export their data using the Elite HRV app  after each session . The 
transmitted data come to the specified email address (see above ) as a zipped directory. The name of that  zipped 
directory includes  only the par ticipant’s study ID and does not contain any identifiable information. The 
directory includes a separate text file for each recording session (i.e., each training session) with only the date 
and times of the recording in the file name. Each text file conta ins only a list of numeric values that represent 
the intervals elapsed in milliseconds between consecutive heartbeats during the recording.  
 
3rd (Post -Intervention) Video Visit ( 30 minutes)  
 
The post -training procedures are identical to the pre -training pr ocedures except for the following elements. 
First, participants do not need to re -download the Elite HRV app, and participants are not re-trained in the use 
of the heart rate monitor and app because  they are already  familiar with them . Second, the participants will not 
complete the HRV Biofeedback training task (they will only complete the resting state task). Third, the self-
report items  about participants’ perceptions of the intervention are administered only at the post -training visit. 
Fourth , the session concludes with a short debriefing in which participants have a chance to share any feedback 
about completing the intervention and about the study in general.  Fifth , participants will delete the study 
account in the Elite HRV App from their ph ones so that the study will not continue to receive their data 
following study completion.  
 
4. Compensation  
 
Participants receive a Bank of America  PayCard in the mail after successfully completing the i nitial/first video 
visit  (45 minutes) . Once they confirm receiving the PayCard  with study personnel , $30 will be uploaded to the 
card as compensation for the first video visit. Following successful completion of the second 60-minute pre -
intervention video visit, they will be compensated an addi tional $60 on th e PayCard, and following the third 
and final 30-minute post -intervention video visit they will be compensated an additional $60 on th e PayCard.  
Therefore, the total possible compensation for completing the study is $150. All compensation i s loaded onto 
one Bank of America PayCard registered specifically to the participant.     
 
In addition, participants will be permitted to keep the study -provided heart rate monitor (Polar H10) upon 
completion of the study, which has an estimated value of $ 70.00 when purchased as new.  
 
5. Eligibility  
 
Revised  4/27/2021  Page 5 of 7 For participants already enrolled in the CANOE Study : 
 
 Inclusion criteria  
 
(1) Age 18 years or older  
(2) Fluent in English  
(3) A diagnosis of cardiac arrest (CA)  
(4) Time elapsed since their CA is less than 72 months  
(5) Previously enrolled in the protocol titled “Cardiac Arrest Neuropsychological Outcomes 
Evaluation” (CANOE; IRB-AAAR8497 ) 
(6) Willing to be contacted about other studies (this applies to CANOE participants who 
agreed to be contacted about future research opportunities either during the initial 
consent process or during a follow -up visit or phone call   
(7) Elevated post -traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) symptom total scores on the 17 -item Post -
Traumatic Stress Disord er Checklist (PCL) of 30 or higher (i.e., greater than the median in a 
prior sample of cardiac arrest survivors)  or elevated PCL -5 scores of 30 or higher  or Acute Stress 
Disorder Scale ( ASDS ) scores of 34 or higher  
(8) Owns either an iPhone or Android smartphone in order to run the app involved in the 
intervention  
 
 Exclusion criteria  
 
(1) Breathing difficulty that does not allow participant to complete the intervention  
(2) Inability to comply with the protocol (either self -selected or indicated during screening that s/he 
could not complete all requested tasks). This includes, but is not limited to, patients with a level 
of cognitive impairment indicative of dementia and patients with current alcohol or substance 
abuse , patients with severe visual impairment, patients with severe auditory impairment, and 
patients with severe mental illness (e.g., schizophrenia).  
 
For non-CANOE cardiac arrest survivors who respond to our study  flyer  online : 
 
 Inclusion criteria  
 
(1) Age 18 years or older  
(2) Fluent in English  
(3) A self-reported diagnosis of cardiac arrest (CA)  
(4) Time elapsed since their CA is less than 72 months  
(5) Elevated PCL -5 scores of 30 or higher  
(6) Owns either an iPhone or Android smartphone in order to run the app involved in the 
intervention  
 
 Exclusion criteria  
 
(1) Breathing difficulty that does not allow participant to complete the intervention  
(2) Inability to comply with the protocol (either self -selected or indicated during screening that s/he 
could not complete all requested tasks). This includes, but is not limited to, patients with a level 
of cognitive impairment indicative of dementia , patients with current alcohol or substance 
problems , patients with severe visual impairment, patients with severe auditory impairment, 
and patients with severe mental illness (e.g., schizophrenia).  
 
6. Risks  
 
There are minimal risks involved with completing the HRV training and the question s about emotions  and 
state anxiety. The questions asked and the thoughts evoked during the course of this research study pose 
minimal risk of psychological discomfort, and some participants may wish to skip any question or 
Revised  4/27/2021  Page 6 of 7 questionnaire that they choose. Participants will b e made aware of these risks, and will be assured they can 
terminate their participation in the study at any time without penalty.   
 
The study staff  that will be conducting the video visits of the HRV pilot includes a trained psychologist and 
emotion scientist who  will be able to provide on -the-spot assistance or assist in referring participants  to a 
mental health professional, if they  experience any distressing thoughts or feelings during their  participation in 
this pilot study.  
 
Risk of Breach of Confidentiality:  A risk of taking part in this study includes the possibility of a loss of 
confidentiality.  The study team has outlined the plans to protect participant confidentiality in the Privacy and 
Data Security section of RASCAL.   
 
7. Benefits  
 
There is no direct benefit to participation .  Participants may begin to learn some stress reduction skills that 
could help them to relax or improve their HRV , which may be beneficial for mental or physical health . 
Additionally, the pilot study will contribut e to scientific  knowledge about stress, emotion, and HRV training.  
 
8. Alternatives  
 
The alternative is not to participate  in the study . 
 
9. Data and Safety Monitoring  
 
As this study presents minimal risk to participants, data and safety monitoring will be conducted by the study 
staff as directed by the principal investigator. Thus, there is no plan for a Data Safety and Monitoring Board 
(DSMB). Investigators and research  assistants will meet weekly to discuss any issues or concerns  with the 
study, in particular, whether there were any unexpected complaints about the study procedures or 
questionnaires, or whether there were any breaches in data confidentiality (which will be reported to the IRB as 
required by policy). If unexpected complaints about the procedures or questionnaires are generated, then the 
study may be stopped or altered prior to recruiting the full sample.    
Revised  4/27/2021  Page 7 of 7 References  
 
1. Alvares, G.A., et al., Autonomic nervous system dysfunction in psychiatric disorders and the impact of 
psychotropic medications: a systematic review and meta -analysis.  Journal of Psychiatry & Neuroscience, 2016.  
2. Nagpal, M., K. Gleichauf, and J. Ginsberg , Meta -analysis of heart rate variability as a psychophysiological 
indicator of posttraumatic stress disorder.  J Trauma Treat, 2013. 3(2167–1222): p. 1000182.  
3. Zoladz, P.R. and D.M. Diamond, Current status on behavioral and biological markers of PTSD: a search for clarity 
in a conflicting literature.  Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 2013. 37(5): p. 860 -895.  
4. Kleiger, R.E., P.K. Stein, and J.T. Bigger Jr, Heart rate variability: measurement and clinical utility.  Annals of 
Noninvasive Electrocardiolo gy, 2005. 10(1): p. 88 -101.  
5. Huikuri, H.V., et al., Heart rate variability and progression of coronary atherosclerosis.  Arteriosclerosis, 
thrombosis, and vascular biology, 1999. 19(8): p. 1979 -1985.  
6. La Rovere, M.T., et al., Baroreflex sensitivity and heart rate variability in the identification of patients at risk for 
life-threatening arrhythmias: Implications for clinical trials.  Circulation, 2001. 103(16): p. 2072 -2077.  
7. Lehrer, P.M., E. Vaschillo, and B. Vaschillo, Resonant frequency biofeedback t raining to increase cardiac 
variability: Rationale and manual for training.  Applied psychophysiology and biofeedback, 2000. 25(3): p. 177 -
191.  
8. Sandercock, G., P.D. Bromley, and D.A. Brodie, Effects of exercise on heart rate variability: Inferences from meta -
analysis.  Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise, 2005. 37(3): p. 433 -439.  
9. Goessl, V.C., J.E. Curtiss, and S.G. Hofmann, The effect of heart rate variability biofeedback training on stress and 
anxiety: a meta -analysis.  Psychological medicine, 2017. 47(15): p. 2578 -2586.  
10. Tan, G., et al., Heart rate variability (HRV) and posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD): a pilot study.  Applied 
psychophysiology and biofeedback, 2011. 36(1): p. 27 -35. 
11. Mikosch, P., et al., Effect iveness of respiratory‐sinus‐arrhythmia biofeedback on state‐anxiety in patients 
undergoing coronary angiography.  Journal of Advanced Nursing, 2010. 66(5): p. 1101 -1110.  
12. Sloan, R.P., et al., Vagally -mediated heart rate variability and indices of well -being: Results of a nationally 
representative study.  Health Psychology, 2017. 36(1): p. 73.  
13. Schumann, A., et al. The influence of an 8 -week biofeedback intervention on heart rate variability and functional 
brain connectivity . in Psychosomatic Medicine . 2019. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.  
14. Presciutti, A., et al., Posttraumatic stress and depressive symptoms characterize cardiac arrest survivors' 
perceived recovery at hospital discharge.  General Hospital Psychiatry, 2018. 53: p. 108–113.  
15. Lehrer, P. M. and R. Gevirtz, Heart rate variability biofeedback: how and why does it work?  Frontiers in 
psychology, 2014. 5: p. 756.  
16. Gatchel, R.J., Biofeedback , in Cambridge Handbook of Psychology, Health, and Medicine , A. Baum, et al., Editors. 
1997, Cambridge University Press.  
17. Taylor, S., et al., Robust dimensions of anxiety sensitivity: Development and initial validation of the Anxiety 
Sensitivity Index -3. Psychological Assessment, 2007. 19(2): p. 176 -188.  
18. Spielberger, C.D. and R.L. Gorsuch, Manual for  the state -trait anxiety inventory (form Y) . 1983: Consulting 
Psychologists Press, Incorporated.  
19. Watson, D., L.A. Clark, and A. Tellegen, Development and validation of brief measures of positive and negative 
affect: The PANAS scales.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1988. 54(6): p. 1063 -1070.  
20. Lewis, J.R. and J. Sauro. The factor structure of the system usability scale . in International Conference on Human 
Centered Design . 2009. Springer.  
21. Weiner, B.J., et al., Psyc hometric assessment of three newly developed implementation outcome measures.  
Implementation Science, 2017. 12(1): p. 108.  
 