Version # 3.18.21                                                   1 
  
 1/10 
Human Research Protection Office  
Box 8089  
(314)633 -7400  
Fax (314)367 -3041  
 
 
Title:   
Impact of Tourniquet Use on Functional Outcomes and Complications after TKA  
Principal Investigator:  
Robert L. Barrack, MD  
 
 
Co-Investigators:  
Ryan M. Nunley , MD  
Charles Lawrie, MD  
Marcie Hayes, PT, DPT, MSCI  
Richard Rames, MD  
 
OVERVIEW  
 
Background information : 
  
Functional recovery after total knee arthroplasty (TKA) has seen dramatic improvement over the 
past 20 years through advances in surgical technique, implant design, perioperative pain 
management strategies,  and physical therapy protocols. Tourniquet use during TKA, however, 
remains controversial due to conflicting reports in the literature on these benefits and risks of its 
use. Reported advantages of tourniquet use include improved visualization of the surg ical field and 
decreased intraoperative blood loss. (Austin, 2019) Reported disadvantages of tourniquet use 
include increased postoperative pain and slower functional recovery as a direct result of the 
pressure of the tourniquet on the thigh during the pro cedure. (Ejaz 2014, Harsten 2015)  
Traditionally with tourniquet use during TKA, the limb is exsanguinated and the tourniquet is raised 
to a fixed, pressure at the beginning of the case, typically 250mmHg to 350mmHg, and let down 
after closure. A novel tour niquet design that adjusts the tourniquet pressure in real -time based on 
intraoperative patient blood pressure measurements. This design may allow for the tourniquet to be 
inflated at a lower mean pressure while still maintaining efficacy.  
A prospective st udy comparing total blood loss, pain and functional recovery after TKA 
using this novel tourniquet design, design (Zimmer A.T.S.® 4000TS Automatic Tourniquet System, 
with disposable contour cuffs) and TKA without tourniquet  would further the current litera ture. Total 
blood loss will be calculated by previously validated methods. Pain and functional recovery will be 
closely monitored throughout the postoperative period using a patient wearable activity tracker 
(FitBit Inspire HR) and a smartphone -based patie nt engagement platform with integrated digital 

Version # 3.18.21                                                   2 
 surveys paired with smart -brace based home PT assessments (FocusMotion). Pain and functional 
recovery will be closely monitored throughout the postoperative period using a patient wearable 
activity tracker (Fit Bit Inspire HR) and a smartphone -based patient engagement platform with 
integrated digital surveys paired with smart -brace based home PT assessments (FocusMotion). 
Applying this technology to the proposed study can help identify problematic pain that is no t 
appreciable during admission; given the fact that markers of inflammation and myocyte damage 
increase over time until at least post -operative day 3, it is possible that TKAs performed under 
tourniquet may have pain and narcotic requirements not appreciat ed with short -stay admissions 
(Huang 2014). The proposed study will further the literature on pain and narcotic use in the early 
time period after TKA, and will help identify if tourniquet has an effect on these variables.  
Furthermore, s leep quality is a c omponent of functional recovery and is correlated with pain. Knee 
osteoarthritis affects general quality of life by increasing sleep disturbance and nighttime wakening, 
and this is correlated with the pre -operative radiographic severity of disease (Sasaki,  2014). Sleep 
quality is affected in the immediate post -operative period after TKA as well, but improves by 3 -6 
months post -operatively (Chen, 2016). The proposed study would be the largest prospective study 
investigating the effect of TKA on pain and slee p quality, as well as being the first to investigate 
tourniquet use as a factor affecting sleep quality and pain. The proposed study would be the first to 
collect both subjective and objective data on the subject, using validated survey measurements as 
well as the data collected by the Fitbit  Inspire HR device.  
Research objectives:   
The purpose of this study is to determine the effect of  novel pressure -regulating tourniquet 
use on pain, functional recovery, sleep and total blood loss following total knee ar throplasty.  
Specific Aim  1: Our primary aim is to determine the effect of tourniquet use on pain after TKA.  Pain 
levels and oral analgesic requirements will be assessed daily using the FocusMotion remote patient 
monitoring platform.  
Specific  Aim 2: Secondary  aim to determine the effect of tourniquet use on functional 
recovery after TKA. To do so, w e will using a combination of standardized clinical assessments 
performed by physical therapy preoperatively and at 3 months postoperatively, as well as 
assessments with patient reported outcome surveys and functional assessments at regular 
intervals using the FocusMotion remote patient monitoring and virtual physical therapy platform . 
Specific Aim 3 : The third aim is to investigate sleep quality in the post -operative period after TKA 
with and without tourniquet use. We will apply both subjective measurements using the Pittsburgh 
Sleep Quality Index (PSQI) as well as sleep quality data as collected by the Fitbit HR.  
Specific Aim 4:  The fourth aim is to determ ine the effect of tourniquet use on total calculated blood 
loss after total knee arthroplasty. Hemoglobin dilution will be utilized to determine calculated blood 
loss using a validated methodology.  
Version # 3.18.21                                                   3 
 Potential Contribution : This study would give us a bette r understanding  of the effect of a pressure 
auto-regulating tourniquet on pain, functional recovery sleep , and blood loss after total knee 
arthroplasty.  
METHODS  
Timeline:  3 years ( 2 year of prospective enrollment, 3 months  years  of follow -up for all partic ipants, 
approx.  9 months  of data analysis)  
 
Inclusion/Exclusion criteria : The Principal Investigator (PI) will independently review all cases to 
confirm  study eligibility for each patient. The following inclusion and exclusion criteria  will be used to 
determine patient eligibility . 
 
Inclusion criteria:  
1. Age 18 and up  
2. Primary unilateral TKA 
3. BMI<4 5 
4. Primary diagnosis of osteoarthritis  
5. Patient has a iOS or Android smartphone  capable of running FitBit and FocusMotion 
applications   
 
Exclusion criteria:  
1. Revision TKA  
2. Bilateral TKA   
3. Pregnancy  
4. Prisoners  
5. Pre-existing functionally -limiting neurologic disorder  
6. Narcotic dependence, defined as oxycodone/hydrocodone use >5days/week  
7. History of unprovoked VTE/PE  
8. Inability to complete baseline functional testing  
 
Recruitment : We will be recruiting patients from the clinical practice s of Dr. Ryan Nunley, Dr. Rob ert 
Barrack  and Dr. Charles Lawrie.   
 
Design : The proposed study is a prospective , single blinded, randomized clinical trial with 2 study 
groups  
 
 
For purposes of randomization, patients will be randomized into one of two groups tourniquet or no 
tourniquet,  stratified by surgeon ,using randomization sequences generated a priori using a 
computerized formal probability model with a block design and 1:1:1:1 allocation ratio.   Patients will 
Version # 3.18.21                                                   4 
 be blinded to study group membership. As a result of the blocking, the desired allocation ratio will be 
maintained at periodic intervals throughout the recruitment process.   The randomization 
sequences will be uploaded to REDCap so that allocations will be elicited using the REDCap 
randomization mo dule in the immediate pre -operative period to minimize loss to follow -up. 
  
Number of participant s:  
A pre -hoc power analysis for the primary outcome measure of VAS pain score was performed. A 
medium effect size of 0.5, power of 0. 8, and alpha error of 0 .05 were used for the analysis. With 
these assumptions, 1 28 patients were required to be enrolled in the study. With the dropout rate 
assumed to be 10%, 144 patients w ill be enrolled in the study.  
 
Data collection :  
Data collection will be done preoperativ ely, intraoperati vely, 4 weeks  post operatively , and at 12 
weeks  post operatively and at 1  year postoperatively. The data will be analyze d by site staff . All data 
to be collected can be found in tables 1 -8.  
 
All procedures will be performed by  three  surgeons  (R.B., R.N. , C.L) within a single institution at one 
site (Barnes Jewish West County  and Progress West Hospital ).  
All participants will undergo standard admission and pre -operative procedure for primary total knee 
arthroplasty  per institution pr otocol. Participants will be admitted to hospital on day of surgery for 
elective procedure. Spinal anaesthesia will be placed in pre -op holding area per regional 
anaesthesia team. Participants will be positioned in standard supine position . Per operative 
protocol each patient will undergo standard prep and drape. There will be  no application of 
tourniquet for those randomized to no -tourniquet arm. If tourniquet is to be used, it will be applied 
after induction and will be deflated after incision closure . Maximum tourniquet time will be 120 
mintues,  TKA implant choi ce will be made based on surgeon preference.  Transexamic acid will be 
given 1g IV prior to incision and 1g IV at end of case. The procedure for all participants will be via 
midvastus approach to the knee . At the end of the procedure, all patients will rece ive standard 
ipericapsular injection of 30mL 0. 25% Marcaine with epinephrine and 30mL toradol prior to closure.  
PT treatment and evaluation will take place on day of surgery post -operative day  one prior to 
discharge . All patients will be placed on Aspirin EC 325mg BID for VTE prophylaxis. Pain 
medications will be standardized during admission, and an uncontrolled pain protocol will be 
available for implementation at physician discretion; see Tables 1 and 2 ) The final set of standard 
blood labs will be drawn  at midnight. Discharge medications will be standard (Table 3). , Patients will 
be contacted at 1 week post -operatively to evaluate clinical progress, general concerns and 
compliance with study protocols , including use of the Fitbit  HR platform  and FocusMoti on platforms.  
Version # 3.18.21                                                   5 
 Participants will be scheduled for a standard clinical visit at 4 weeks.   
Participants will undergo final clinical  evaluation at 3 months post -operatively  with a PT visit and 
phone call from the research team  as well as a final questionnaire about their experience with the 
app and Fitbit and knee brace which will be completed by paper, phone, or electronically.  
Fitbit Activity Tracker and Focus Motion knee brace  apps  
During the pre -operative arthroplasty class, participants in the study will be set -up with a FitBit 
wrist-based activity  tracker  and FocusMotion knee brace  and the appropriate software. Participants 
will be instructed to use the device  in the 2 weeks prior to undergoing surgery, to gather baseline 
data on narcotic use, pain, use of assistive device and sleep quality. They will continue to use the 
devices for 3 months postoperatively(Table 7) .  
Subject Payment  
Honorarium of $100 provided at 3 months  following completion of 3 month evaluation. Participants  
will be gifted the Fitbit  Inspire  HR and the FocusMotion smart -brace and platform  and given an 
honorarium  of $50  for completion of the 1 year app based survey.  
 
 
Participants Lost to follow -up: Some participants will not return for follow -up at the required 
intervals.  A member of the research team shall contact non -respondent participants using phone 
calls, regular mail, e -mail, certified letters, or other means to urge participants to return f or clinic 
follow -up or ascertain if a participant has moved, died, or otherwise become lost to follow -up.  The 
following flow chart identifies the steps for attempts to locate lost participants.  These actions, 
along with any other options available to the  site, should be followed to exhaust all reasonable 
means in locating lost participants.  These actions should be documented in the participant’s 
records and may be performed concurrently or in parallel.  
 
Phone call to last known number  Contact  Follow -up with participant  
 
No Contact  
 
Phone call to other numbers (spouse, relative, etc.)  Contact  Follow -up with participant  
 
No Contact  
Note: There will be a minimum of 3 calls to different numbers  
 
Mail letter to last known patient add ress  Contact  Follow -up with participant  
 
No Contact  
 
Version # 3.18.21                                                   6 
 Mail letter to secondary addresses  Contact  Follow -up with participant  
 
No Contact  
 
Mail “certified” type of letter to last address and any secondary address  Contact  Follow -up 
with participant  
 
No Contact  
 
Social Security Death Index to determine if participant has died  Confirm death  
 
Not Confirmed  
 
End attempts.  
 
INFORMED CONSENT  
 
Enrollment and consent will begin in the clinics of Dr. Ryan Nu nley,  Dr. Robert Barrack  and Dr. 
Charles Lawrie , and will be the same for both study groups. The consent process will occur by one 
of the following means:  
 
1) The study coordinator will meet with each potentially eligible participant to review the study 
requirements (including additional screening for  eligibility) and answer any questions the patient 
may have.  
 
If the patient has any clinical questions that cannot be answered by the study coordinator they will 
be answered by the physician or the physician's nurse. The patient will have the opportunity  to 
review the consent form, discuss with family/friends, and do his/her own research on the subject if 
desired. Qualified patients who agree to participate in the study will be required to sign an Informed 
Consent Document. Valid enrollment is not granted  until after surgery, once it has been verified that 
the participant qualifies for total knee replacement.  
 
2) The consent discussion and review of the Informed Consent Document may occur over the 
phone. In this case, the study coordinator will call the p atient to present the study to the participant 
and gauge interest in participation. If the patient expresses interest in participation, the study 
coordinator will e -mail, mail or fax the Informed Consent Document to the participant. The patient 
will be giv en the opportunity to ask questions. If the patient has any research questions beyond the 
scope of the study coordinator, arrangements will be made for the participant to speak with the 
applicable member of the research team, including the PI. After review  of the Informed Consent 
Document, the participant will sign the applicable sections of the Informed Consent Document and 
email, mail or fax the consent for back to the study coordinator. The Informed Consent Document 
will be signed by the consenting study  coordinator upon receipt. Valid enrollment is not granted until 
Version # 3.18.21                                                   7 
 after surgery.    
 
PROCEDURES FOR MAINTA INING CONFIDENTIALITY  
 
Data Security : Hard copies of patient questionnaires and CRFs will be stored in individual patient 
binders. The binders will be kept in a locked filing cabinet in an office that has password protected 
access and is locked when not in use.   
 
Data collected on questionnaires and CRFs will be entered into electronic databases for analysis 
and tracking. These databases are on a secure server and can only be accessed by authorized 
research team members. There is no intention that the electronic records will be transported. We 
will not use laptops/jump drives/CD/DVDs to store, analyze, or input this data.  
 
For data collected by the Fitbit platform including health monitoring and app -generated data, 
pre-assigned study ID numbers and anonymous email addresses will be used for all 
patient -reported and patient -generated data collection and transmission . No ePHI is seen or 
handled by the smart phone application or its data collection platform. The electronic key will be 
available only to the study team, not the mobile he alth platform or app developers .   
 
 
De-identification of Data : All information will be coll ected by the research team in a confidential 
manner. PHI will be de -identified. All data will be entered into a master database that is password 
and security protected. Only members of the research team will be able to access information on 
study participa nts. Electronic  key linking participant to data will be kept on a secure d, 
password -protected network.  All electronic information will be encrypted and stored in a 
password -protected database.  All research files will be kept in a secure, locked location wh ich can 
only be accessed by the study team. Once all manuscript submission is complete, all study 
documents, including the master list, will be retained for seven years after close of the study . 
 
ASSESSMENT OF RISKS AND BENEFITS  
 
There is a slight risk that patients may feel a small amount of psychological discomfort answering 
the questionnaires.  
 
In addition there is the risk of breach of confidentiality.  
 
Benefits : Participants will receive no direct medical benefit from study participation. However, 
this prospective study is the first to investigate tourniquet use as a factor affecting sleep quality 
and pain by collecting both subjective and objective data on the su bject that is not be 
appreciable during admission. Furthermore, the study device design of adjusting tourniquet 
pressure in real -time based on intra -operative patient data measurements may allow for the 
tourniquet to be inflated at a lower mean pressure wh ile still maintaining efficacy.  
Version # 3.18.21                                                   8 
  
G1. Tables  
Table 1: Post -operative pain protocol  
Medication  Dose and Route  Timing  PRN  
Percocet 5mg/325mg  1-2 tablets PO  Q6 hours  Yes 
Toradol  30mg IV  Q6 hours  No 
Morphine  2-4 mg  IV Q4 hours  Yes 
*Toradol withhel d in patients with sulfa aller gy 
Table 2: Discharge medication protocol  
Medication  Dose and Route  Timing  Duration/ PRN  
Aspirin  325mg PO  BID  6 weeks  
Percocet 5mg/325mg  1-2 tablets PO  Q6 hours  PRN  
Celebrex*  200mg PO  BID 5 days  
Senna -docusate  8.6mg/50mg PO  BID PRN  
*Celebrex withheld  in patients with sulfa allergy  
Table 3: Pre -operative data within 4 weeks  of procedure  
Test Unit Collected by  
Knee circumference  cm PT measurement  
Passive Knee ROM  degrees  PT measurement  
Active Knee ROM  degrees  FocusMotion Brace  
Balance: tandem stance  scale  PT measurement  
Balance:Standing on one leg  Scale  PT measurement  
10m walk test for speed  Seconds  PT measurement  
6 minute walk test  Meters  PT measurement  
Timed up and go test  seconds  PT measurement  
   
5 times sit to stand  Seconds  PT measurement  
30 sec chair stand test  count  PT measurement  
Timed Stair climb  seconds  PTmeasurement  
Quadriceps strength  N PT measurement  
Hamstrings strength  N PT measurement  
Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index  scale  FocusMotion App Survey  
Oxford knee score  scale   FocusMotion App Survey  
FJS scale  FocusMotion App Survey  
Visual Analog Scale pain score thigh  scale  FocusMotion App Survey  
Visual Analog Scale pain score knee  scale  FocusMotion App Survey  
Version # 3.18.21                                                   9 
 Visual Analog Scale pain score leg/calf  scale  FocusMotion App Survey  
% normal knee  Scale  Focus Motion App Survey  
Use of assistive device  incidence  FocusMotion App Survey  
Narcotic requirement, daily  Daily MME/hr  FocusMotion App survey  
Sleep duration  min Fitbit  
Sleep quality  (REM sleep/non -REM sleep)  percentage  Fitbit  
Sleep disturbances  count  Fitbit  
Sleep efficiency(time asleep/time in bed)  percentage  Fitbit  
Charleston Comorbidity Index  Score EPIC CPAP documentation  
PROMIS  Score  WUPRO  
 
Table 4: Intra -operative data during procedure  
Test Unit Collected by  
Tourniquet time   Surgeon  
Tourniquet pressure   Surgeon  
Length of surgery   Surgeon  
  
Table 5: Post -operative data during hospital stay  
Test Unit Collected by  
Length of stay  Hours  Chart review  
Day of discharge  number  Chart review  
Total calculated blood loss  mL Chart review  
Occurrence of transfusion  incidence  Chart review  
   
   
VAS pain score (q8hr)  scale  Nursing  
Narcotic requirements, PACU to discharge  MME/hr  Chart review  
Perioperative complications  incidence  Chart review  
   
 
Table 6: Daily data points, from postop day 0 to 12 weeks postop  
Data  Unit Collected by  
VAS pain score  Scale  FocusMotion App Survey  
Total prescribed morphine equivalents  Pills/day  EPIC  
Narcotic requirement, daily  MME/hr  FocusMotion App Survey  
Sleep duration  Min Fitbit  
Sleep disturbances  Count  FItbit  
Version # 3.18.21                                                   10 
 Sleep efficiency (time asleep/time in bed)  percenta
ge Fitbit  
Sleep quality (REM sleep/non -REM sleep)  Percenta
ge Fitbit  
Step count  Count  Fitbit  
Use of assistive device  Incidence  FocusMotion App Survey  
Active Knee ROM  degrees  FocusMotion Brace  
Passive Knee ROM  degrees  FocusMotion Brace  
Compliance with home PT protocol  incidence  FocusMotion App  
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
 
Table 7: Post -operative data at 3 months following procedure  
Knee circumference  cm PT measurement  
Passive Knee ROM  degrees  PT measurement  
Active Knee ROM  degrees  FocusMotion Brace  
Balance: tandem stance  scale  PT measurement  
Balance: Standing on One Leg  scale  PT measurement  
10m walk test for speed  seconds  PT measurement  
6 minute walk test  meters  PT measurement  
Timed up and go test  seconds  PT measurement  
5 times sit to stand  seconds  PT measurement  
30 sec chair stand  count  PT measurement  
Timed stair climb  seconds  PT measurement  
Quadriceps strength  N PT measurement  
Hamstrings strength  N PT measurement  
PSQI  scale  FocusMotion App Survey  
Oxford Knee Score  scale  FocusMotion App Survey  
% normal knee  scale  FocusMotion App Survey  
 FJS scale  FocusMotion App Survey  
VAS pain score  scale  FocusMotion App Survey  
Use of assistive device  incidence  FocusMotion App Survey  
Version # 3.18.21                                                   11 
 Narcotic requirement  daily MME/hr  FocusMotion App Survey  
Sleep duration  min Fitbit  
Sleep disturbances  count  Fitbit  
Sleep efficiency (time asleep/time in 
bed)  percentage  Fitbit  
Sleep quality (REM sleep/non -REM 
sleep)  percentage  Fitbit  
PROMIS  score  WUPRO  
Wound complications  incidence  EPIC documentation  
DVT/PE  incidence  incidence  
Infection  incidence  EPIC documentation  
Return to OR  incidence  EPIC documentation  
Patient questionnaire about app and 
Fitbit/brace usage  questionnaire  Paper questionnaire  or 
through app  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES  
 
Dennis,  D. A. ;Kittelson, A. J. ;Yang, C. C. ;Miner, T. M. ;Kim, R. H. ;Stevens -Lapsley, J. E. Does 
Tourniquet Use in TKA Affect Recovery of Lower Extremity Strength and Function? A Randomized 
Trial. 2016. Clin Orthop Relat Res; 474(1); 69 -77 
Huang, Z. Y. ;Pei, F . X. ;Ma, J. ;Yang, J. ;Zhou, Z. K. ;Kang, P. D. ;Shen, B. Comparison of three 
different tourniquet application strategies for minimally invasive total knee arthroplasty: a 
prospective non -randomized clinical trial. 2014. Arch Orth op Trauma Surg; 134(4); 5 61-70.  
Kageyama, K. ;Nakajima, Y. ;Shibasaki, M. ;Hashimoto, S. ;Mizobe, T. Increased platelet, 
leukocyte, and endothelial cell activity are associated with increased coagulability in patients after 
total knee arthroplasty. 2007.   
Version # 3.18.21                                                   12 
 J Thromb Haemost; 5(4);  738-45 
Liu, D. ;Graham, D. ;Gillies, K. ;Gillies, R. M. Effects of tourniquet use on quadriceps function and 
pain in total knee arthroplasty. 2014. Knee  Surg Relat Res; 26(4); 207 -13. 
Nishiguchi, M. ;Takamura, N. ;Abe, Y. ;Kono, M. ;Shindo, H. ;Aoyagi, K.  Pilot study on the use of 
tourniquet: a risk factor for pulmonary thromboembolism after total knee arthroplasty? 2005. 
Thromb Res; 115(4); 271 -6.  
Sasaki, E., Tsuda, E., Yamamoto, Y., Maeda, S., Inoue, R., Chiba, D., Okubo, N., Takahashi, I., 
Nakaji, S., Ishibashi, Y. Nocturnal knee pain increases with the severity of knee osteoarthritis, 
disturbing patient sleep quality. 2014. Arthritis Care and Research, 66(7), 1027  
Shahi, A. ;Chen, A. F. ;Tan, T. L. ;Maltenfort, M. G. ;Kucukdurmaz, F. ;Parvizi, J. 2017.  The 
Incidence and Economic Burden of In -Hospital Venous Thromboembolism in the United States. 
2017. J Arthroplasty; 32(4); 1063 -6.  
Snyder, M. A. ;Sympson, A. N. ;Scheuerman, C. M. ;Gregg, J. L. ;Hussain, L. R. Efficacy in Deep 
Vein Th rombosis Prevention With Extended Mechanical Compression Device Therapy and 
Prophylactic Aspirin Following Total Knee Arthroplasty: A Randomized Control Trial. 2017. J 
Arthroplasty; 32(5); 1478 -82. 
Sun, Y. ;Chen, D. ;Xu, Z. ;Shi, D. ;Dai, J. ;Qin, J. ;Jian g, Q. Incidence of symptomatic and 
asymptomatic venous thromboembolism after elective knee arthroscopic surgery: a retrospective 
study with routinely applied venography. 2014. Arthroscopy; 30(7); 818 -22.  
Tai, T. W. ;Chang, C. W. ;Lai, K. A. ;Lin, C. J. ;Y ang, C. Y. Effects of tourniquet use on blood loss 
and soft -tissue damage in total knee arthroplasty: a randomized controlled trial. 2012. J Bone Joint 
Surg Am; 94(24); 2209 -15. 
Vanninen, R. ;Manninen, H. ;Soimakallio, S. ;Katila, T. ;Suomalainen, O. Asymp tomatic deep 
venous thrombosis in the calf: accuracy and limitations of ultrasonography as a screening test after 
total knee arthroplasty. 1993. Br J Radiol; 66(783); 199 -202. 
Gao FQ, Li ZJ, Zhang K, Sun W, Zhang H. Four methods for calculating blood -loss after total knee 
arthroplasty. Chin Med J (Engl). 2015 Nov 5;128(21):2856 -60. 
Meunier A, Petersson A, Good L, Berlin G. Validation of a haemoglobin dilution method for 
estimation of blood loss. Vox Sang. 2008 Aug;95(2):120 -4. Epub 2008 May 28.  
 
Ejaz A, Lau rsen AC, Kappel A, Laursen MB, Jakobsen T, Rasmussen S, Nielsen PT.  
Faster recovery without the use of a tourniquet in total knee arthroplasty. Acta  
Orthop. 2014 Aug;85(4):422 -6. doi: 10.3109/17453674.2014.931197. Epub 2014 Jun  
23. PubMed PMID: 24954487; P ubMed Central PMCID: PMC4105775.  
 
Goel R, Rondon AJ, Sydnor K, Blevins K, O'Malley M, Purtill JJ, Austin MS.  
Version # 3.18.21                                                   13 
 Tourniquet Use Does Not Affect Functional Outcomes or Pain After Total Knee  
Arthroplasty: A Prospective, Double -Blinded, Randomized Controlled Trial. J Bone  
Joint Surg Am. 2019 Oct 16;101(20):1821 -1828. doi: 10.2106/JBJS.19.00146. PubMed  
PMID: 31626006.  
 