IRB#:  2008540965  
 
Daily  Engagement  in Meaningful  Activities  Professional  (DEMA -Pro) intervention  for 
seniors with subjective cognitive decline and living at home  
 
Principal  Investigator:  Yvonne  Lu, PhD,  RN, FGSA,  FAAN 
Professor, Department of Science Nursing Care  
Indiana  University  School  of Nursing 
600 Barnhill Drive, NU W407 
Indianapolis, IN 46202  
 
 
Co-Investigators  
Susan  E. Hickman,  PhD,  
Professor,  Department  of Science  Nursing  Care 
Indiana University of School of Nursing  
 
Joan E. Haase, PhD, RN, FAAN 
Professor,  Department  of Science  Nursing  Care  
Indiana  University  of School  of Nursing  
 
Susan M.  Perkins, PhD 
Professor,  Biostatistics  of Department 
Indiana  University  School  of Medicine  
 
Pei-Shiun Chang, PhD, RN, MSN, ACNP -BC 
Assistant Professor,  Department  of Community  Health  System 
Indiana  University  School  of Nursing  
 
Jennifer  Ellis,  DPT,  PhD,  GCS  
Vice President  of Research  and Business  Development,  Gentiva  Health  Services, 
Inc., d/b/a Kindred at Home.  
 
 
Support  Provided  by: 
NIH, NIA, Protocol  Number:  AG0700265  
 
 
NCT#:  04796415  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Version  Date:  2023 09 12 Page 1 of 1 
A. SPECIFIC  AIMS  
Over 4.4 million Americans receive home health services after hospital or rehabilitation f acility 
discharge to improve function, foster independence, promote health -related quality of life and 
sense of well -being (QoL), and decrease unnecessary hospital or  nursing home stays. Among 
these patients, > 80%  are 65 years or older, most manage at least two chronic conditions, and 
nearly 70% report subjective cognitive decline (SCD).1-1 SCD is an early clinical sign of 
Alzheimer’s  disease  and related  dementia  (ADR D).2-4 SCD  is associated  with diminished  activity 
performance,5-7 poor QoL,8,9 and other adverse health outcomes (e.g., depressive  
symptoms).8,10 
Home health patients with SCD require more time, structure, and guidance to complete tas ks 
and adjust to new skills and environments. Without support, they often lose their sense of 
control,  have  fewer  personal  choices,11 and disengage  from meaningful  activities .12,13  Meaningful 
activities are self -identified activities based on the individual’s previous life experiences, sense 
of intentionality,  and goals  to remain  involved  in desired  activities  and personal  relationships.14,15  
In older adults, engagement in meaningful activities is associated with better physical and 
mental health, QoL, reduced risk of cognitive decline and mortality.14,16,17  Poor engagement in 
meaningful activities results in rapid patient decline18 that may otherwise be preventable. For 
those with SCD who are at risk of declining and progressing to preclinical ADRD,19 new care 
delivery  models  that promote  engagement  in meaningful  activities  to enhance  patient  outcomes 
are needed. Because informal caregivers are usually unprepared, lack confidence in their new 
caregiver role, and have difficulty providing support,1,20 it is vitally important to include these 
caregivers in new care delivery models.  
We propose  a new home  health  care delivery  model  in partnership  with Kindred  at Home  (KAH) 
Gentiva Health Services, a division of Humana that encompasses 400 sites across 40 states . 
Our proposed telephone -delivered care model, Daily Engagement in Meaningful Activitie s- 
Professional (DEMA -Pro) is a Positive Health intervention21 that is strengths -based, family - 
centered, and tailored to patient/caregiver goals and values.  DEMA -Pro addresses the core 
problem of diminished engagement in meaningful activities among SCD patients at home by: 1) 
coaching  patient -caregiver  dyads  to problem -solve;  2) teaching  the dyads  self-management  and 
communication skills; and 3) enhancing naturally occurring patient -caregiver interactions 
necessary to accomplish self -identified, mutually a greed upon goals. DEMA -Pro builds on five 
preliminary studies of  the DEMA intervention22-28 that demonstrated high  feasibility, acceptability, 
and positive preliminary effects on health outcomes (physical function, mood, and QoL).27,28  
DEMA -Pro will be refined for delivery by home health services staff to patients with SCD and 
their informal caregivers.  
The purpose of this R61/R33 grant proposal is to conduct a pragmatic cluster randomized 
controlled trial (RCT) of DEMA -Pro to improve outcomes in home health service patients with 
SCD. In the R61 phase, we will establish the organizational structure and  processes and pil ot 
test DEMA -Pro in 4 KAH home  health  service facilities. In  the R33 phase  we will conduct a  full 
pragmatic RCT in 40 KAH facilities to compare DEMA -Pro to usual care. In accordance with 
pragmatic trial principles, we will primarily use existing data sources including elect ronic 
Medicare OASIS (Outcome and Assessment Information Set) data to characterize t he cohort 
and measure outcomes . R61 and R33 Specific aims are: 
R61 Phase  (12 months)   
Aim 1 . Establish the organizational infrastructure and programmatic processes needed to 
conduct  a pragmatic  cluster -randomized  control  trial of the DEMA -Pro intervention  versus usual 
care.  A Steering  Committee  will lead the project  and coordinate  the activities  of 3 Work  Groups: 
Regulatory and Operations; DEMA -Pro Intervention Protocol; and Data Management and 
Analysis.  
Aim 2. Pilot test the DEMA -Pro training  protocol  in 4 KAH North  Region  locations  and refine  as 
indicated.  
39,40,46  
8,9,41 -43 R33 Phase  (48 months).  
Forty  KAH home  health  services  sites will be randomized  to DEMA -Pro or usual  care.  DEMA - 
Pro site home health services staff will be trained as DEMA -Pro coaches who will work with 
home health  service leaders  to: (1) consolidate home health  services DEMA -Pro procedur es; 
(2) train and educate  staff;  and (3) facilitate  DEMA -Pro coaching  with patients  and their family 
caregivers. The implementation period will be 18 months and all enrolled patients will be 
followed for 12 months.  
Aim 3. Compare  outcomes  of DEMA -Pro to Usual  Care  over 12 months.  
Hypotheses (H). Compared to usual care, DEMA -Pro patients will have: H 3.1(primary) higher 
physical  function; H  3.2 higher overall  quality  of life (i.e. Sense  of well -being)  (QoL);  H 3.3 lower 
depression, and, H 3.4. lower rates of transfers to nursing home per 1000 person days.  
Impact:  By valuing  and fostering  a positive  health  model  of care, an  efficacious  DEMA -Pro has 
potential to facilitate a paradigm shift in how elderly patients in the USA are cared for at home.  
B. SIGNIFICANCE:  R61/R33  
 
Cognitive decline is a significant burden for patients, family caregivers, healthcare 
providers,  and society.  Subjective  cognitive  decline  (SCD)  affects  significant  numbers  of older 
adults.1 Patients with SCD report reduced cognitive ability to function at expected levels,29- 
31 disengagement from meaningful activities,25,32 and diminished confidence in ability to manage 
daily challenges25,33,34  and other  chronic  illness  issues.35-38 Patient s with SCD  also experience  poor 
communication that contributes to decreased dyadic agreement regarding patient functional  
ability,33,39,40  poor quality of life (QoL), 
patient/caregiver  relationship  satisfaction.  anxiety,  depressive  symptoms,44,45  and poor 
Family  caregivers  (family  or friends;  henceforth  
referred to as “caregivers”) often feel unprepared and lack confidence to deal with their new 
caregiving duties and daily challenges.23,46 -49 With our aging population, our society faces 
increased numbers of people with SCD, high, complex demands on home health services,50,51  
and increased  burden  for millions  of older  persons,  their families,  healthcare  providers,  and the 
health care system.51-54 
 
SCD  provides  a critical  window  of time to provide  early  interventions  to slow  the onset of 
dementia and improve negative outcomes. SCD patients and their caregivers need early, 
supportive interventions from home health services staff to slow functional decline and i mprove 
health outcomes. While there are no proven cures or treatments for Alzheimer’s disease and 
related dementia (ADRD), there is strong evidence that combining four or five healthy lifes tyle 
behaviors (i.e., heathy diet, regular exercise, cognitive stimulation, non -smoking, social activity) 
decreases risk of AD, compared to having none or only one of the five behaviors.55,56  However, 
two of these behaviors, cognitive stimulation and exercise, are less likely to be meaningful 
enough be sustained by  older persons’ over time or foster engagement in additional activities.55- 
58 Very few interventions focus on SCD patients and their caregiver in home health s ervices 
settings.55,59  The Institute of Medicine recommended research on active engagement of both 
patients and their caregivers as a fundamental feature of successful interventions,60 but few 
dyadic  interventions  are developed,  tested,  or evaluated  in the home  health  setting.12 Tailored 
positive health interventions for SCD patients living at home are  sorely needed,61 and 
opportunities to intervene before progression to moderate/advanced dementia are few.  
 
Patient -driven  care and meaningful  activity  engagement  are critical  components  of home 
health services. Sustained engagement in meaningful activities is essential for patient 
QoL.15,62  Home health services should optimize the abilities of patients with SCD and QoL, 
through engagement in meaningful activity.63 Unfortunately, healthcare t eams often lack 
important information regarding patient goals, values, and preferences necessary to develop 
appropriate plans of care. Also, very few supportive care interventions focus on SCD pati ent- 
informal  caregiver  dyads  and none  promote  reengagement  in preferred  meaningful  activities  to 
maximize QoL, preserve activity performance, prolong independence, and delay 
institutionalization. Current SCD interventions are rarely tailored to patient pr eferences, do not 
involve caregivers,55,58 and are not easily integrated into the well -established, daily routines.  
Dyadic engagement in self -selected meaningful activities may be an efficient means to: 1) 
improve patient and caregiver confidence to manage patient’s daily challenges,15,64 2) promote 
long-term engagement in meaningful activities;14,18,65  3) foster feelings of pleasure, 
connectedness, identity,14,64  autonomy, and goal directedness;14,26 -28 and, 4) enhance patient 
activity  performance  over time14,15—all of which  are important  to maintain  patient  abilities.  Mutual 
engagement in daily meaningful activities can enhance the patient -caregiver  
relationships ,15,66  and enhance both patient and caregiver QoL.25 
 
The Daily Engagement in Meaningful Activities (DEMA ) intervent ion is a practical, 
promising solution to improve QoL for home health service patients with SCD and 
reduce caregiver burden. To ensure effective health promotion and quality engagement, 
DEMA fosters full patient engagement, with caregiver support, to ident ify meaningful activities, 
assess capacity, problem -solve barriers, and establish routines for engagement. Our previous 
studies  found  prevention  of patient  disengagement  requires  a structured,  goal-setting  approach 
to foster continued or renewed engagement  in diverse meaningful activities.26-28 DEMA’s highly 
person -centered approach to activity engagement begins with the patient identifying valued 
activities and addressing the individual's unique barriers to engagement. Meaningful activity 
engagement promotes patient and  caregiver life  satisfaction by  coaching  the dyad on  problem - 
solving, self -management, active listening, and communication skills, and by enhancing 
naturally occurring patient/caregiver interactions to accomplish self -identified and mutually 
agreed upon goals.26,27,49 
 
Regardless  of whether  patients  progress  to ADRD, remain  stable, or  improve,67 patients 
and caregivers  can benefit  from  DEMA -Pro. This R61 will lead to an R33 pragmatic  trial by: 
1) creating  the organizational  structure  in the R61 (pilot)  phase  to be used  in the R33 phase;  2) 
recruiting participants across 4 home health service locations; 3) adapting the DEMA training 
protocol in collaboration with the KAH professional team to create DEMA -Pro; and, 4) using 
blended learning modules (i.e. electronic and in -person delivery).  
 
IMPACT . SCD is a risk factor for developing Alzheimer disease (AD).68 Over five million 
Americans had dementia in 2019, with projections of 7.1 million by 2025.51 Innovative 
interventions  to address  the growing demands  for high quality care in  this popul ation, and  foster 
both health -related quality of life, quality of life as overall sense of well -being are needed. The 
interprofessional,  telephone  delivered  DEMA -Pro program,  aimed  to improve  quality  of care and 
patient health outcomes, offers an efficient, cost -efficient care model.  
 
C. INNOVATION:  R61/R33  
 
DEMA  is the first telephone -delivered intervention for patients with SCD and caregivers 
with demonstrated high feasibility, acceptability, and positive preliminary effects on 
health outcomes (physical function, mood, and QoL) .27,28  DEMA is primarily telephone 
delivered (1 in -person and 5 telephone session) and 5 preliminary studies demonstrated very 
high feasibility: 98% participant consent and 94%  completion,27 indicating unusually high patient 
and caregiver  acceptance,  minimal  burden,  and intervention  value,  compared  to other  studies  of 
older adults with cognitive impairment (completion rates 60 to 78%).69-72 DEMA participants 
reported high satisfaction with the intervener information provided over time. Group 
comparisons, DEMA mean scores were significantly higher for overall satisfacti on subscale:  
usefulness (p=.025) and ease of use (p=.038).28 Participant’s post intervention interviews 
support the helpfulness of DEMA (e.g., Patient: “(DEMA) let me know I’m not the only 
one…There  are things  that you  can do…to  resolve or make  them  not as big of a problem  … the 
daily logs showed I was doing much more than I believed .” Caregiver: “ A program like this is 
extremely important. If nobody pays any attention…there’s no improvement, there’s not hing.  
Most  helpful  [was]  understanding  the challenges  of memory  impairmen t, learning  and practicing 
a variety of coping skills, and realizing I need to reach out for help without guilt feeling ”.28 
 
The DEMA -Pro intervention will be the first to address the engagement constraints of 
older persons with SCD using a Positive Health approach to foster sustainable 
engagement  in meaningful  activities  that are  based  on the shared  values  and priorities  of 
both patients’ and caregivers’.  There is emerging evidence that regular, personalized, and 
self-identified engagement in any meaningful activities  can improve quality of life, depressive 
symptoms, anxiety, and dyad communication.14,15,65,73,74  The DEMA -Pro Program is: 1)  tailored to 
patients’ activity priorities and functional abilities; 2) flexible in activity sel ection (e.g. one long - 
term or several short -term activities); 3) collaborative between the patient and caregiver in 
developing and executing the personalized meaningful activity plan; and; 4) relevant and 
tailored to patient/caregiver’s priority needs for written information related  to the 6 priority topics 
identified and evaluated by focus groups.27,28,30,31 
 
DEMA -Pro will be  the first large -scale  pragmatic  RCT to evaluate  a telephone  intervention 
embedded in existing home health services teams’ care for patients with SCD and their 
family caregivers (Aims 1 -3). DEMA -Pro delivery within a pragmatic RCT increases likelihood 
of success and sustainability. Advantage s of this pragmatic trial approach include: 1) 
coordinated training; 2) DEMA -Pro delivery by dedicated KAH Call Center coaches in 
collaboration with home health services providers in the field; and, 3) flexible incorporation of 
DEMA -Pro into home health services policies and procedures. For example, KAH home health 
service teams will train the KAH Call Center care coordinators to deliver DEMA -Pro and create 
DEMA -Pro care plans to be implemented by clinical staff in the field with the aim to enhance 
patient and caregiver engagement in self -selected meaningful activities in home settings. The 
field staff will be meeting regularly to support the patients in reaching their goals based on the 
plan created by the coach in the call center.  DEMA -Pro will also be integrated into the home 
health services culture and existing administrative structures, which drives change in home 
health services settings. For example, the DEMA -Pro Coach will have accountability to their 
supervisors for their activities as part of their position. Internally generated benchmark ing will 
increase willingness to devote time and resources by elevating the profile of this importan t staff 
function.  
 
DEMA is efficiently delivered in home settings and DEMA -Pro will lever age DEMA’s 
lessons -learned through delivery as a demonstration project in one of the largest home 
health services companies in the USA (Aim 1). The DEMA -Pro Program capitalizes on our 
team’s  experiences  delivering a highly person -centered  approach  to activity engagement based 
on patient -identified valued activities and addressing the individual's unique barriers to 
engagement.  Meaningful  activity  engagement  fosters  better  patient  physical function  and quality 
of life (sense of well -being) by coaching dyad p roblem -solving, self -management, active 
listening, communication skills, and by enhancing the naturally occurring patient/caregiver  
interactions to accomplish self -identified and mutually agreed upon goals.26,27,49  Regardless of 
whether patients with SCD progress to AD, remain stable, or improve,67 patients and caregivers 
can benefit from DEMA -Pro. 
23-28 Our proposed study combines multiple sources of data to comprehensively evaluate 
quality  and effectiveness  of DEMA -Pro when  delivered  through  home  healthcare  services 
(Aim 3). Use of multiple existing databases to evaluate the quality of home health services for 
patients with SCD is extraordinarily difficult. Our use of combined data from the M edicare  
OASIS electronic health record and from KAH’s Ele ctronic DEMA -Pro care plan is innovative 
and will enable  us to meaningfully  evaluate  DEMA -Pro’s  influence  on home  healthcare  quality  of 
care.  
 
D. APPROACH:  R61/R33  
 
Following the instruction and requirements provided in RFA -18-585, this section includes 
descr iption  of: (1) preliminary  studies  relevant  to the R61/R33  phases;  (2) a conceptual  model;  
(3) detailed  methods  to assess R61 milestones  prior to R33 phase;  (4) R33  milestones; and,  (5) 
Potential problems and alternative solutions.  
 
D.1. Preliminary Studies. Our combined expertise is necessary for the success of this DEMA - 
Pro pragmatic pilot project. PI (Lu) has developed and led a DEMA program of research 
focused on positive health, strength -based and family -center interventions to improve the 
meaningful activities, physical function, and quality of life of older adults with cognitive 
impairment and their family caregivers in past 15 years. Dr. Hickman (Co -I) has significant 
experience with implementing and evaluating evidence -based interventions for older ad ults in 
real world clinical settings, including serving as an 8 -year Co -I on a Centers for Medicare and 
Medicaid Services funded demonstration project in which they are implementing systematic 
advance care planning in 19 nursing facilities. Dr Haase (Co -I) has extensive experience 
developing psychosocial behavioral interventions and evaluating them in multi -site randomized 
clinical trial. Dr. Ellis (Co -I), Vice -President, Research and Business Development, Kindred at 
Home, has extensive experiences coordinating and leading efforts to guide large -scale 
implementation of healthcare delivery innovation via translation of evidence to real -world 
application in large, complex and highly -matrixed healthcare delivery organizations for over 15 
years.  Dr. Perkins  (Co-I) is has extensive statistical  experience,  serving  as biostatistician  or Co- 
Investigator on 33 funded studies (including NIH). Dr. Jones (Consultant), has successful 
experiences with recruitment and stakeholder engagement in home healthcare setting and 
recently conducting improving care coordination between clinicians to optimize care transiti ons 
to home health care (AHRQ, K08HS024569).  
 
DEMA -Pro is adapted  from DEMA.  DEMA  was developed  using  NIH’s  Stage  Model  for 
Behavioral Intervention Development 95 across  five preliminary studies (T32NR007066,  
P30AG10133 -pilot study,  K01NR010854,  R21NR013755);  all five studies  were  consistently  
focused on patients’ and caregivers’ self -identified needs and experiences. The studies 
demonstrated DEMA’s high feasibility and acceptability in home settings. Compared to othe r 
studies of older adults with cognitive impairment in which completion rates ranged from 60% to 
78%,69-72 we had a 98% consent rate and a 94% completion rate, indicating unusually high 
acceptance, minimal burden, and high intervention value.27,28  This pilot offers the unique 
opportunities  to adapt  DEMA  to the home  health  service setting,  delivered  by centralized  health 
care professionals and with evaluation support.  
 
Indiana University & Kindred at Home, Gentiva Health Services academic/corporate 
research  partnership.  Kindred  at Home  (KAH)  is one of the largest  home  health  services in the 
United States (> 400 sites in 40 states).75 Dr. Lu (PI) and KAH Vice President Dr. Ellis have 
collaborated since 2015 on preliminary studies of DEMA, which yielded 2 publications,28,76  1 
manuscript in progress,  and 2 poster  presentations at  national an d international conferences.77,78 
In her role as Vice President of Research and Business Development, Dr. Ellis facilit ated a 
formal memorandum of understanding (MOU) between IU School of Nursing and KAH to 
collaborate  on research  and share  data (Data  Use Agreement  No.1153529).  This call for pilot 
proposals is timely, since Drs. Lu, Ellis, and the Chief Officers of KAH had alr eady started 
exploring adapting the DEMA program for use in the home health services settings —this 
funding mechanism provides the ideal opportunity to both adapt and rigo rously evaluate the 
implementation of DEMA for dissemination both within and potentially beyond KAH. (See 
attached of Letter of Support ). 
 
Team  experience  conducting  pragmatic  RCTs  with Alzheimer’s  patient,  caregivers,  and 
healthcare providers. As an MPI on a R21/R33 APPROACHES pragmatic clinical trial to 
implement an advance care planning intervention for persons with ADRD in nursing facilities 
(R21 AG057463; R33 AG057463), Dr. Hickman established the infrastructure to conduct a 
pragmatic RCT, developed a  training plan, collaborated with corporate partners to adapt 
intervention  protocols, and is using existing federally collected data  (Claims, MDS) along with 
electronic health record (EHR) data to evaluate target outcomes.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
D2. 
Conceptual Framework (see Figure 1.) A modified Donabedian79 approach to quality 
measurement  guides this study. The 4 elements of the model are: 1) context, 2) process, 3) 
systems of care, and  4) outcomes.  In this framework,  DEMA -Pro is a process  that is  influenced 
by context (e.g. patients/caregiver characteristics) and systems of care (e.g. the KAH home 
health services sites), to improve intermediate (e.g. meaningful activity engagement)  and 
longer -term outcomes (e.g. physical function, QoL, and reduced depression, hospitalization, 
emergency visit, and/or transfer to nursing home rates).  
 
D.3. APPROACH  R61 Pilot  Phase  
 
Activities  to Support  Aim 1: Establish  the organizational  infrastructure  and programmatic 
processes needed to conduct a pragmatic cluster -rando mized control trial of the DEMA - 
Pro intervention versus usual care.  
 
D.3.1. Establish Memorandum of Agreement. PI Lu and Dr. Ellis will work with the IU Office 
of Research  Administration  and KAH.  Electronic  copies  of the signed  MOU  will be securely  filed 
in the IUPUI research office and sent to the NIA Agency. In the R61 phase, patient recruitment  
and assessment will be done by Assessment Associates at 4 KAH sites; DEMA -Pro will be 
delivered by protocol -trained personnel at KAH’s Centralized Call Center and the resulting 
DEMA -Pro care plans will be implemented by site clinical staff.  
 
D.3.2.  Establish Organizational Structure. As PI, Dr. Lu will oversee all aspects of project 
development, implementation, and analysis including human resources, NIH/NIA Progra m 
Officer  communication,  and budgetary  decisions.  Figure  2 depicts  the organizational  structure 
for both the R61 and R33 phases.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Steering 
Committee . Responsibilities  are: 1) project  oversight,  including  collaboration  between  IU and 
KAH partners, coordinating workgroup tasks, and achieving project milestones, including 
primary  oversight  of the  pilot pragmatic phase,  and transition  to the R33  phase; 2)  monitoring 
KAH electronic and Medicare OASIS data to ensure quality of all DEMA -Pro outcome data.  
 
Regulatory and Operations Workgroup. Responsibilities are: 1) obtain a signed MOU from 
KAH, Gentiva  Health  Services for  the DEMA -Pro trial; 2)  follow  the signed  data use agreements 
from KAH  to ensure  access to electronic  health  record  OASIS  data80 and other  relevant  data;  3) 
oversee human subjects’ protection, obtaining Indiana University Institutional Review Boar d of 
Record (IRB of record) approval, and requesting an informed consent waiver for patients and 
caregivers; 4) coordinate data safety monitoring board (DSMB), convening meetings and 
supporting data safety and monitoring reporting.  
 
DEMA -Pro Intervention Protocol Workgroup . Responsibilities include adapting the DEMA 
protocol, training protocol and toolkits according to KAH’s blended learning modules for use as 
DEMA -Pro to be implemented  as a new KAH initiative.  In collaboration  with KAH Gentiva  Health 
Servcies, relevant corporate policies will be reviewed and potentially modified or created to 
support the roll -out of this new initiative. The Chief Officer (O’Sullivan) of KAH Home Health 
Services confirmed her willingness to make modifications to policies and procedures to  support 
DEMA -Pro. DEMA training and intervention protocols and toolkits will be revised as DEMA -Pro 
to assure the home health services call -center care coordinators delivering DEMA -Pro coach 
are able to follow the intervention pr otocol.  DEMA -Pro will be refined based on collaboration 
and consensus, national standards, and existing research evidence.  
 
Separate meetings will be conducted with each KAH site (n=4) recruiting participants and with  
home health services corporate leadership to discuss opportunities and potential barriers to 
implementing DEMA -Pro at the site. DEMA -Pro will be refined based on this feedback and 
further  reviewed  with representatives  from all  4 sites. Based  on feedback,  DEMA -Pro materials 
will be refined and finalized for KAH training and delivery.  
A minimum of three KAH call -center care coordinators will be designated DEMA -Pro coaches 
will receive in -depth training (approximately 8 hours) and hard -copies of the protocol, sample 
template workflows, educational  handouts (i.e. Self -Management Toolkits), and tips for 
navigating common barriers. Training will include specific information about the principles of 
problem -solving  for patients  with SCD  and their family  caregivers.  Core  expectations  for DEMA - 
Pro include education provided to KAH staff with dedicated time to coordinate and facilitate 
discussions with SCD patients and their caregivers. Based on our previous DEMA study 
personnel training, DEMA -Pro delivery to SCD patients and caregivers requires 60 minutes  for 
each  of the six weekly  calls. Dedicated  time and flexible  schedules are  important  for the DEMA - 

Pro coach  to facilitate  conversations  with SDC  patients  and their caregivers.  Consistent  with the 
principles of a pragmatic trial, instructions for the DEMA -Pro coach will be highly flexible.81 
 
Per standard operating procedures, a Clinical Assessment Associate at each KAH site wi ll 
collect and enter data into the electronic health record -OASIS. This Associate will receive one - 
hour of training  to ensure  data collection  fidelity at both  admission and discharge data collection 
times.  In addition, a  20 minutes  online  video  will be provided  to other home  health  services field- 
based staff to orient them to the goals and processes of DEMA -Pro and to support their use of 
the DEMA -Pro care plans with patients in the home setting. These KAH home health services 
field-based staff include registered nurses, physical therapists, occupational therapists, and 
social workers. The DEMA -PRO coach communicate with to the field -based staff through 
electronic DEMA -Pro care plan. Adaptations to the DEMA -Pro Self -Management Toolkit, 
workflows, and educational materials will be made following the pilot.  
 
Data Management and Analysis Workgroup . This group is responsible for obtaining and 
monitoring all KAH facility and patient data. Based on power calculations, we need 40 KAH 
home health services locations (20 intervention and 20 control sites, 25 patients/per sit e; a total 
of 1000 patients) for the R33 clinical trial phase. This workgroup is responsible for: 1) dat a 
mana gement required to link data sources in preparation for analysis and for the actual  
analysis; 2) data collection protocol and data transfer processes; and 3) the REDCap data 
management system for the QoL outcome. In Month 2, initial data collection protocol  and 
process for integrating KAH electronic data sources will be tested to determine if any data 
revisions are  necessary. To assess  completeness  and accuracy  of , an  electronic  health  record - 
OASIS dataset tool,80 will be compared to the KAH hospitalization rate, or/and transfer to  
nursing home rate to determine whether the process of merging was accurate . For example, 
validity  checks will be performed  to insure  all participant hospitalizations  and transfers  to nursing 
homes are captured. This also will provide an opportunity to pilot test data cleaning procedures 
and initial analytic cap abilities of the merged data set.  
 
Activities  to Support  Aim 2, Pilot  test the DEMA -Pro training  protocol  in 4 KAH  North 
Region sites and refine as indicated.  
 
D.3.3.1 Pilot Study Setting. KAH, Gentiva Health Services is a subsidiary of Humana and 
annually provides home health services to >500,000 patients at > than 400 United States sites 
in over 40 states.75 KAH employs  teams  of clinicians  who provide  in-home  visits  with the support 
of clinicians who provide support and monitoring by phone from the KAH -wide call -center. Call - 
center care coordinators will deliver DEMA -Pro intervention via telephone. The expected 
outcome of each  session is a DEMA -Pro plan/revised plan for engagement in meani ngful 
activity over the next week. The home health field -base staff will review the electronic weekly 
DEMA -Pro care plan with participants and support patient and caregiver engagement in 
meaningful activity according to latest plan. See Table 1 for R61 (pi lot) phase potential number 
of staff and admissions rates at potential sites.  
 
Table  1. R61 KAH  North  Region  Sites  and Numbers  of Site Staff  and Patient  Admissions 
in 2018  
Location  Number  of Staff*  2018  Patient  Admissions  
North  Region  Location  No. 1 20 659 
North  Region  Location  No. 2 20 554 
North  Region  Location  No. 3 38 900 
North  Region  Location  No. 4 18 347 
Total  96 Staff  2460  Patient  Admissions  
*Staff  includes  nurses,  physical therapists,  occupational  therapists,  and speech  therapists.  
D.3.3.2.  R61 Study  Population.  There  are two study  populations.  
1) KAH staff including  call-center  care coordinators,  clinical  assessment  associates,  field- 
based therapists, and clinical operational coordinator;  
2) Home health service patients  aged > 60 year s with SCD,  with an OASIS - Cognition 
Function Subscale Score of 1 or 2 (0 = alert/oriented, able to focus and shift attention, 
comprehends and recalls task directions independently; 1 = Requires prompting [cuing, 
repetition,  reminders)  only under  stressful  or unfamiliar  conditions;  2 = Requires  assistance  and 
some direction in specific situations [for example, on all tasks involving shifting of a ttention] or 
consistently requires low stimulus environment due to distractibility; 3 = Requires  conside rable 
assistance in routine  situations.  Is not alert and oriented  or is unable  to shift attention  and recall 
directions more than half the time; 4 = Totally dependent due to disturbances such as constant  
disorientation, coma, persistent vegetative state, o r delirium.  
 
D.3.3.3.  R61 Data  Elements.  
Data  elements  include  home  health  services characteristics  (size, rural/urban  location),  patient 
characteristics (demographics, cognitive status, and functional status), patient out comes, and 
feasibility of  DEMA -Pro training  and delivery. Consistent  with the principle  of pragmatic clinical 
trials,82,83  primarily existing data  will be used  to evaluate outcomes. See  Table 2  for Outcomes, 
Measures and Electronic Data Sources.  
 
The primary study outcome is physical function, assessed using existing OASIS Acti vity Daily 
Living and Instrumental Activity Daily Living (ADL/IADLs) subscales.80 Secondary outcomes are 
QoL, depression, the rates of hospitalization, emergency room admission, and transfers to a 
nursing  home.  We will use OASIS  to assess rates  of hospitalization,  emergency  room  visits, and 
transfer to nursing home.80 QoL (Sense of Well -being) will be measured with the NIH Toolbox - 
Psychological Well -being Short -From.84,85  Depression will be assessed using the OASIS -PHQ -2 
subscale. DEMA -Pro training acceptability, delivery confidence, and ability to meet goals will be 
assessed using of the existing KAH online learning management system and tools and will be 
analyzed by the D ata Management Workgroup.  
 
Table  2. R61 Data  Elements:  Patient,  Staff,  and Outcomes  
Patient  Data  Measure(s)  OASIS -Da Other 
Sources  
Demographics  Patient  Characteristics  M0010,  M0014,  M0020, 
M0030,  M0050,  M0066, 
M0069,  M0140,  M0100, 
M1000,  M1021;  M1023,  
M1028,  M1033,  M1100, 
M1200   
Cognitive  status  Cognitive  Function  M1700   
DEMA -Pro care plan DEMA -Pro Care  Plan and Daily 
Meaningful Activity Log   KAH - DEMA - 
Pro care 
plan b 
Staff  Data     
Staff Experiences  of DEMA - 
Pro training and delivery  Feasibility  and Acceptability  of DEMA - 
Pro training and delivery survey   KAH LMSc 
Outcomes  Data     
Physical Function, 
(Primary  Outcome)  Activities  of Daily  Living/Instructive 
Activities of Daily Living  M1800,  M1819,  M1820, 
MM1830, M1840, 
M1845,  M1850,  M1870,   
QoL (Sense  of Well- 
Being)  NIH ToolBox:  Psychosocial  Well-being - 
Short -Form   REDCap  
Depression  PHQ -2 M1730   
Hospitalization  Rate Frequency  of rehospitalization  rate M2410   
Number,  Types  of ER 
visits  Frequency  unplanned  urgent  care or 
hospital ER care  M2301,  M2041   
Nursing  Home  Transfers  Frequency  of transfers  to nursing  home 
care M2410   
aOASIS -D = Outcome  and Assessment Information  Set Data;  bKAH electronic  DEMA -Pro Care 
Plan; cKAH LMS = Kindred at Home Learning Management Systems.  
 
D.3.3.4.  R61 Data  Collection  Protocol.  Patient  data will be obtained  by a KAH Clinical 
Assessment  
Associate at start of care date, date of any re -admission, and discharge date, using existing 
KAH electronic  data sources  including  electronic  health  record -OASIS,  Electronic  DEMA -Pro 
Care Plan, learning management system (LMS) and REDCap.  
 
Staff data related to orientation,  training,  DEMA -Pro delivery  and data collection  will be obtained 
from DEMA -Pro coaches, Clinical Assessment Associates, and home health field -based  
staff.  The KAH call -center Care Coordinator will complete the Weekly Activity Engagement 
Form through the electronic KAH E DEMA -Pro care plan data are used by KAH to identify 
quality improvement opportunities, evaluate the quality of service provided and guide 
operational decisions. Items specific to DEMA -Pro outcome s (i.e., QoL) will be added to the 
KAH home health services REDCap system. KAH staff perception of feasibility of and 
satisfaction  with DEMA -Pro training  and delivery  survey  questions  will be added  to and entered 
into KAH LMS.  
 
To establish acceptability of the blended learning modules to train home health providers to 
deliver DEMA -Pro, the Intervention Protocol Workgroup will: 1) review corporate policies 
relevant  to DEMA -Pro implementation  at KAH;  2) adapt  the DEMA  intervention  protocol,  training 
protocol,  and Self-Management  Toolkit,  into blended  learning  modules  and training  materials;  3) 
develop the 15 -minute  orientation video for KAH home health services field -based staff in 
Month 4, at the KAH Education/Training Center in Atlanta, and 4) work with KAH clinical 
operational coordinators to ensure the training protocols are aligned with KAH policies.  
The Data Management and Analysis Workgroup will: 1) integrate the feasibility and satisfacti on 
survey questions of DEMA -Pro training and delivery into the KAH online system; 2) ensure the 
KAH trained staff (i.e. call -center care coordinators,  clinical assessment associates, home 
health service field -based staff) complete the feasibility DEMA -Pro training survey after training 
sessions and  the satisfaction survey  (within 48  hours of completing  training session) in the  KAH 
online system as following the KAH policies; 3) complete the survey data analysis; and 4) 
provide the results to the steering committee and the funding agency quarterly. PI Lu and the 
project  manager will  work  with the DEMA -Pro intervention  protocol  work  group  to train KAH staff 
using the modified training protocol, developed blended teaching modules, and training 
materials.  
 
To assess feasibility  of the DEMA  protocol  as delivered  by trained  call-center  care coordinators, 
PI Lu will work  with the Project  Manager  and the DEMA -Pro Intervention  Protocol  Workgroup  to 
ensure  trained  KAH call-center  care coordinators  can follow  the DEMA -Pro protocol  and deliver 
the sessions through telephone.  
To assess acceptability and quality of study data using  the electronic hea lth record - OASIS 
data collection tool,  KAH Electronic DEMA -Pro care plan, and other measures (e.g., QoL),  Dr 
Lu, the (TBD) Project Manager, and the Data Management and Analysis Workgroup will: 1) 
extract necessary home health services OASIS administrative  data, and generate preliminary 
statistics; 2) access the acceptability  and quality  of study  specific  data such as electronic  health 
record from the OASIS data set, the KAH electronic DEMA -Pro care plan, the REDCap Data 
(e.g. QoL), and KAH online learning management system (e.g. feasibility of DEMA -Pro training 
and delivery survey data).  
 
D.3.3.5.  R61 Intervention Monitoring data will be obtained and monitored within the DEMA - 
Pro REDCap and KAH electronic DEMA -Pro care plan data bases, as modified by the Steering 
Committee.  These modifications are necessary both to monitor the use of the intervention and 
to support  best clini cal practice.  A goal will be to minimize  the burden  on staff and  maximize  the 
integration of monitoring into existing clinical systems, consistent with the goals of  a pragmatic 
clinical trial. Specifically, the KAH electronic DEMA -Pro care plan will capture: 1) When a 
DEMA -Pro is held; 2) what is discussed (check box), 3) who are involved; 4) length of 
discussion, and 5) outcomes (e.g. code status documentation “Weekly Activity  
Engagement”).  The DEMA -Pro coach  will be given  an assignment  list of  5 home  health  patients 
with SCD with a total of 20 telephone session monthly approach; the project staff will wor k with 
the DEMA -Pro coach and the KAH Clinical Operations Coordinator to determine procedures for 
generating  this monthly  assignment  list. If a patien t or family  caregiver  is approached  by phone, 
but declines or does not engage (e.g., passive refusal) after three phone call attempts, the 
DEMA -Pro coach will document this outcome in the electronic DEMA -Pro care plan.  
 
D.3.3.6.  R61 Phase  Data  Analysis . Analytic  Plan. Aim 1 will not require  quantitative  analysis. 
The data collected for Aim 2 will be analyzed with descriptive methods. Item responses wil l be 
tabulated  and scale scores  for acceptability  and feasibility  summarized  by means  and standard 
deviations (or medians and 25th and 75th percentiles if the data is skewed). Acceptability, 
feasibility, and satisfaction data will be summarized separately for DEMA -Pro coaches, clinical 
assessment associates, and home health field -based staff. With respect to patient outcomes, 
our primary goals are to examine  the data collected from the EHR for quality and ensure it can 
be captured and merged efficiently and appropriately. We will also generate descriptive 
statistics for all patient outcomes collected through the EHR to help us to identify any  data 
issues, such as missing  data patterns,  that could  influence  the implementation  of the pragmatic 
RCT. Cronbach’s alpha will be calculated for multi -items scales.  
 
D.3.3.7.  R61Go/No -Go Criteria, Milestones and Timeline. The Go/No -Go Criteria are 
established per the RFA guidance to identify the milestones that must be achieved during the 
R61 phase to qualify for the transition from the R61 to the R33 phase . The R61 Go/No -Go 
criteria are: 1) Establish partnerships with the KAH home health services as demonst rated by 
executed memoranda of understanding and data use agreements; 2) Obtain access to 
necessary  administrative  data including  OASIS,  KAH electronic  DEMA -Pro care plan,  REDCap 
and KAH LMS; 3) Produce the DEMA -Pro protocol; and 4) Pilot test the DEMA -Pro Program 
and generate preliminary feasibility data. Milestones and the study timeline are in Table 3.  
 
Table  3. R61 (Pilot)  Milestones  and Timeline.  
Milestones  Months:  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 
Start -UP: hire staff,  obtain  IRB approvals;  establish  goal timelines  the 
Steering Committee and the three Workgroups              
Obtain  MOU  with the KAH,  and establish  DMSB              
Submit  data access  requests  to: HHS  for OASIS  database  and to KAH 
for access to DEMA -Pro care plan and LMS data bases              
Identify  pilot sites and DEMA  Program  interveners,  Review/adapt  HHS 
EHR policies and procedures.              
Refine  DEMA  in-person  training  delivery  to blended  learning 
models  for DEMA -Pro             
Pilot test DEMA -Pro training  and revise  as needed              
Access  and analyze  process  and outcome  data from OASIS  and KAH 
DEMA -Pro care plan and LMS databases              
Extract,  link and verify  accuracy  of data             
Assess  value  of and ease  of obtain  outcomes  measures  for use in R33             
Note:  IRB = Institutional Review Board; MOU = Memoranda of Understanding; HHS = Home Health 
Services; EHR= Electronic Health Record; DSMB = Data Safety and Monitoring Board; O ASIS = 
Outcome  and Assessment  Information  Set; LMS = Learning  Management  System;  DEMA -Pro = Daily 
Engagement Meaningful Activity Professional  