REVEALPLAQUE Study Protocol Version 1.0 August 12th, 2021 
CONFIDENTIAL Version 1.0  Page 1 of 17 
  
The REVEALPLAQUE  Study :  A pRospEctiVe, multic Enter study to AnaLyze PLAQUE  using  
CCTA  
 
 
  Study Objective Current clinically available methods to quantify coronary artery plaque 
noninvasively from CCTA data are largely manual and as a result, have 
limited utility, reproducibility, accuracy, and precision. An automated 
deep learning based artificial intelligence method for segmenting the 
vessel wall and atherosclerotic plaque from CCTA data has been 
developed . This study will evaluate the level of agreement between this 
noninvasive CCTA-based quantification and characterization of coronary 
atherosclerosis and invasive IVUS .       
 
Study Design Patients who have a stenosis in at least one major epicardial vessel 
confirmed by CCTA and who are scheduled to undergo clinically 
indicated IVUS-guided invasive evaluation and/or treatment will be 
eligible for enrollment. Enrolling sites will have FFR CT analysis 
incorporated when indicated into their standard evaluation of CCTA 
scans. Data collected will include  CCTA and FFR CT images, full 
angiographic images, IVUS images, and if obtained, any other imaging 
or physiologic data including OCT, FFR, any NHPR (e.g., dPR, RFR, iFR, 
etc.), and pre- and post-stent implantation invasive data. All non-invasive 
and invasive data collected will be obtained as clinical practice consistent 
with standard clinical care.  
 
Principal 
Investigator(s) Thomas Stuckey, MD 
Cone Health 
USA 
 
Jagat Narula, MD, PhD 
Mt. Sinai  
USA 
 
Gaku Nakazawa, MD, PhD 
Kindai University 
Japan  
 
Sponsor HeartFlow, Inc. 
1400 Seaport Blvd., Building B 
Redwood City, CA 94063 
 
Campbell Rogers, MD 
Chief Medical Officer 
 
 DocuSign Envelope ID: 79C9324E-EE95-458E-9DED-D4F328BC6960
REVEALPLAQUE Study Protocol Version 1.0 August 12th, 2021 
CONFIDENTIAL Version 1.0  Page 2 of 17 
 Protocol Signature Page 
 
I have read and understood the protocol and agree that it contains all the ethical , legal, and scientific 
information necessary to conduct this study. I will personally conduct the study as described. I will 
provide copies of the protocol to all assigned physicians, nurses, and other professional per sonnel who 
will be involved per the delegation of authority log, and I will be responsible for their compliance and 
adherence to the study protocol. I am aware that this protocol must be approved by the Institutional 
Review Board or Ethics Committee. I agree to adhere strictly to the attach ed protocol. I agree that 
clinical data entered on case report forms by me and my staff will be  supplied to HeartFlow and may be 
utilized by HeartFlow in various ways, such as for submission to governmental regulato ry authorities 
and/or in combination with clinical data gathered from other research sites, whenever applicab le. I 
agree to allow HeartFlow monitors and auditors and their designees full access t o all medical records at 
the research facility for subjects screened or randomized in the study. I agree to provide all subjects 
with informed consent forms and will ensure adequate informed consent is obtained,  as required by 
government regulations and International Conference on Harmonization guidelines. 
 
 
 
 
   Site Name            Site Number 
 
 
 
 
   Site Co- Principal Investigator (print name)  
 
  
   Site Co- Principal Investigator (signature)      Date 
 
 
 
 
   Site Co- Principal Investigator (print name)  
 
  
   Site Co- Principal Investigator (signature)      Date 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Protocol reviewed and approved by sponsor: 
 
 
 
   Campbell Rogers, MD; HeartFlow, Inc., CMO      Date 
 
  DocuSign Envelope ID: 79C9324E-EE95-458E-9DED-D4F328BC6960
8/12/2021 | 11:47 AM PDT

REVEALPLAQUE Study Protocol Version 1.0 August 12th, 2021 
CONFIDENTIAL Version 1.0  Page 3 of 17 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS  
STANDARD ABBREVIATIONS                                                                                                               6                     
STUDY SYNOPSIS 7 
I.   BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE 9  
II. STUDY OBJECTIVE 9 
III. STUDY ENDPOINTS 10 
III. A. Primary Endpoint 10 
IV. STUDY DESIGN 10 
IV. A.  Location and Number of Subjects 11 
IV. B.  Patient Population 11 
IV. C.   General Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria 11 
V. STUDY WORKFLOW 11 
V. A. Study/Site Selection 11 
V. B. Subject Selection 12 
V. C. Screening Period 12 
V. D. Enrollment 12 
V. E. Follow up 13 
VI. STUDY DURATION 13 
VI. A. Rules for Subject Withdrawal 13 
VI. B. Screen Failures 13 
VI. C. Rules for Terminating the Study 13 
VII. SAFETY ASSESSMENT 13 
VIII. RATIONALE AND ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS 14 
IX. STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS 14 
IX. A.  General Considerations 14 
IX. B.  Subject Characteristics 14 
IX. C.  Endpoint Analysis 14 
IX. D.  Sample Size 15 
IX. E. Analysis Populations 15 
X. DATA HANDLING AND QUALITY ASSURANCE 15 
X. A. Completing and Signing Case Report Forms 15 
X. B. Clinical Data Management 15 
X. C. Archiving of Data 15 
XI. SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES 16 DocuSign Envelope ID: 79C9324E-EE95-458E-9DED-D4F328BC6960
REVEALPLAQUE Study Protocol Version 1.0 August 12th, 2021 
CONFIDENTIAL Version 1.0  Page 4 of 17 
 XI. A. Institutional Review 16 
XI. B. Guidelines for Obtaining Subject Informed Consent 16 
XI. C. Site Initiation/Training 16 
XI. D. Study Monitoring and Audit 16 
XI. E.  Clinical Events Committee 16 
XI. F.  IVUS Core Lab 16 
XI. G.  HeartFlow Technology / Data Team 16 
XII. FINAL REPORT 16 
XIII. REFERENCES 17 
 
  DocuSign Envelope ID: 79C9324E-EE95-458E-9DED-D4F328BC6960
REVEALPLAQUE Study Protocol Version 1.0 August 12th, 2021 
CONFIDENTIAL Version 1.0  Page 5 of 17 
 STANDARD ABBREVIATIONS 
 
CAD  coronary artery disease 
CCTA coronary computed tomographic angiography 
dPR diastolic pressure ratio 
EDC  electronic data capture 
eCRF electronic case report form 
FFR fractional flow reserve 
FFR CT non-invasive technique using CCTA to determine FFR 
ICA invasive coronary angiography 
ICF informed consent form 
IFR instantaneous wave free ratio 
IVUS intravascular ultrasound   
LoA level of agreement 
MACE major adverse cardiovascular event 
MI myocardial infarction 
NHPR  non-hyperemic flow reserve 
NI non-invasive 
OCT optical coherence tomography 
PCI percutaneous coronary intervention 
RRF resting full cycle ratio 
 
  DocuSign Envelope ID: 79C9324E-EE95-458E-9DED-D4F328BC6960
REVEALPLAQUE Study Protocol Version 1.0 August 12th, 2021 
CONFIDENTIAL Version 1.0  Page 6 of 17 
 STUDY SYNOPSIS 
Protocol Title A pRospEctiVe, multic Enter study to AnaLyze PLAQUE  using  
CCTA  
Subjects and Study 
Centers Approximately 250 subjects across approximately 15 sites in the US and 
Japan. 
 
Planned Study Duration The duration of this study will be approximately 24 months: 
● 3 - 9 months for study start-up (Site qualification, IRB approval, 
and site initiation)  
● 12 months for enrollment  
● 3 months for query resolution and database lock  
 
Primary Study Objective This study will evaluate the level of agreement between noninvasive 
CCTA-based quantification and characterization of coronary 
atherosclerosis and invasive IVUS      . 
       
Secondary 
Study 
Objectives The secondary objectives of this study are to: 
      
1) Compare total plaque volumes per-patient and per lesion as well 
as comparing different plaque type volumes to the IVUS reference 
standard and assess reproducibility of quantitative plaque 
measurements compared to the reference standard .  
 
2) Perform exploratory analyses on plaque in previously stented 
vessels (protocol to allow up to 20% (50 patients) with one or two 
stented vessels vessels in this category . This can also include 
plaque proximal or distal to the stented vessel.  
 
Hypotheses The primary hypothesis of the study is that a deep-learning based 
automated method for segmenting coronary atherosclerotic plaques can 
quantify total plaque volume from CCTA with an acceptable level of 
agreement with IVUS measurements . The secondary hypothesis of the 
study is that CCTA- derived coronary models can accurately assess 
percent plaque burden as well as calcified, low attenuation, and fibrous 
plaque volumes with an acceptable level of agreement and repeatability 
compared to IVUS .        
 
Population Clinically stable patients with known CAD who have a CCTA showing 
stenosis in at least one major epicardial vessel of stentable/graftable 
diameter and in whom clinically-indicated IVUS is planned. 
 
Study Design and 
Methods This is a prospective, multi-center study. All patients who have a 
stenosis in at least one major epicardial vessel confirmed by CCTA, who 
have undergone FFR CT analysis, and who are scheduled to undergo 
clinically indicated IVUS-guided invasive evaluation and/or treatment will 
be eligible for enrollment. Enrolling sites will have FFR CT analysis 
incorporated when indicated into their standard evaluation of CCTA 
scans.   Data collected will include CCTA and FFR CT, full angiographic , 
and IVUS images, and if obtained, any other imaging or physiologic data 
including OCT, FFR, any NHPR (e.g., dPR, RFR, iFR, etc.), and pre- DocuSign Envelope ID: 79C9324E-EE95-458E-9DED-D4F328BC6960
REVEALPLAQUE Study Protocol Version 1.0 August 12th, 2021 
CONFIDENTIAL Version 1.0  Page 7 of 17 
 and post-stent implantation invasive data.   All non-invasive and invasive 
data collected will be obtained as clinical practice consistent with 
standard clinical care. 
 
All details about cardiovascular testing and treatment (planned and 
actual) will be recorded at baseline. There will be no study required v isits 
after the baseline invasive procedure .  
 
Primary Endpoint The primary endpoint is to assess the level of agreement between total 
plaque volume of a deep-learning based automated method for 
segmenting coronary atherosclerotic plaques, compared to IVUS, on a 
per-IVUS-pullback level .  
 
Secondary 
Endpoints Key secondary endpoints are: 
 
Per pullback:  
● Total plaque volume 
● Percent Plaque burden  
● Calcified plaque volume 
● Low attenuation plaque volume 
● Fibrous plaque volume 
● Segment involvement score (SIS) 
● Adverse plaque characteristics (APC) 
Per lesion:  
● Total plaque volume 
● Percent plaque burden  
● Calcified plaque volume 
● Low attenuation plaque volume 
● Fibrous plaque volume 
● Minimum lumen area (MLA) 
● Percentage area stenosis (%AS) 
● Positive remodeling index   
Per lesion/pullback: 
● Reproducibility of all metrics above when quantified from 
different CCTA series 
● Reproducibility of all metrics above when processing the same 
series twice (analyst and process variation) 
● Exploratory analysis of necrotic core volume 
 
 
 
Inclusion 
Criteria Inclusion criteria (all must be present): 
 
1. Age ≥18 years  
2. Clinically stable patient with known CAD  
3. CCTA showing stenosis in at least one major epicardial vessel of 
stentable/graftable diameter, in whom clinically indicated IVUS is 
planned within 45 days of the CCTA and FFR CT available  DocuSign Envelope ID: 79C9324E-EE95-458E-9DED-D4F328BC6960
REVEALPLAQUE Study Protocol Version 1.0 August 12th, 2021 
CONFIDENTIAL Version 1.0  Page 8 of 17 
 4. FFR CT successfully processed 
5. Willing to comply with all aspects of the protocol  
6. Agrees to be included in the study and able to provide written 
informed consent.  
 
 Exclusion criteria (all must be absent): 
 
1. CCTA showing no stenosis  
2. Uninterpretable CCTA by HeartFlow assessment, in which image 
quality prevents FFR CT from being processed.  
3. Acute chest pain 
4. CABG prior to CCTA acquisition 
5. Prior history of PCI for 3 or more vessels  
6. MI less than 30 days prior to CCTA or between CCTA and ICA. 
7. Suspicion of acute coronary syndrome (acute myocardial infarction or 
unstable angina) 
8. Known complex congenital heart disease 
9. Tachycardia or significant arrhythmia  
10. Subject requires an emergent procedure 
11. Evidence of ongoing or active clinical instability, including acute chest 
pain (sudden onset), cardiogenic shock, unstable blood pressure with 
systolic blood pressure <90 mmHg, and severe congestive heart failure 
(NYHA III or IV) or acute pulmonary edema 
12. Any active, serious, life-threatening disease with a life expectancy of 
less than 2 months 
13. Currently enrolled in another study utilizing FFR CT or in an 
investigational trial that involves a non-approved cardiac drug or device 
14. Persons under the protection of justice, guardianship, or curatorship 
 
Study Follow- Up There will be no study required visits after the baseline cath. 
 
Clinical 
Research 
Organization Peachtree BioResearch Solutions 
4985 Lower Roswell Road 
Marietta, GA 30068 
 
Sponsor HeartFlow, Inc. 
1400 B Seaport Blvd 
Redwood City, CA 94063 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DocuSign Envelope ID: 79C9324E-EE95-458E-9DED-D4F328BC6960
REVEALPLAQUE Study Protocol Version 1.0 August 12th, 2021 
CONFIDENTIAL Version 1.0  Page 9 of 17 
  
I.   BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE 
HeartFlow, Inc. (‘HeartFlow’) provides a non -invasive method to determine the hemodynamic significance 
of CAD (FFR CT) from subject specific CCTA data using computational fluid dynamics under rest and 
simulated maximal coronary hyperemic conditions (Taylor 2013). Results from four  prospective trials 
suggest that FFR CT accurately predicts the hemodynamic significance of coronary lesions when 
compared to invasively measured FFR (Koo 2011, Min 2012, Nørgaard 2014, Driessen 2 018). FFR CT is 
available in Japan, in many European countries (CE mark 2011), in Canada, and in the U.S. (De Novo 
510K clearance 2014).  
One of the next key areas of interest in non-invasive disease identification is con firming whether a deep-
learning based automated method for segmenting coronary atherosclerotic plaques can identify coro nary 
atherosclerotic plaque location, quantity, and type. Recent studies have shown the im portance of 
understanding plaque burden including non-calcified plaque and especially low att enuation plaque to 
better identify patients at risk of myocardial infarction (Thomsen 2016 ). A deep-learning based automated 
method for segmenting coronary atherosclerotic plaques which can quantify total plaque volume from 
CCTA has been designed and tested and now requires prospectively collected invasive imagi ng data to 
assess performance as compared to intravascular ultrasound imaging (IVUS), a gold st andard in plaque 
quantification (Voros 2011, Fischer 2013).  
In the REVEALPLAQUE study, all patients who have a stenosis confirmed by  CCTA, have had FFR CT 
completed, and are scheduled to undergo IVUS will be eligible for enrollment.  Enrolling sites will hav e 
FFR CT analysis incorporated when indicated into their standard evaluation of CCTA scans.  All sites will 
provide demographic and medical history of enrolled subjects, CCTA and FFR images,  full angiographic 
images, IVUS images, and if obtained, any other imaging or physiologic data including OCT, FFR CT, any 
NHPR (e.g., dPR, RFR, iFR, etc.), and pre- and post-stent implan tation invasive data. All non-invasive 
and invasive data collected will be obtained as clinical practice consistent with standard clini cal care. 
Data may be used to train deep learning artificial intelligence algorithms for  image segmentation and 
physiological modeling, to improve current and future products.    
 
II. STUDY OBJECTIVE 
Primary Objective:  
Current clinically available software packages to quantify coronary artery plaq ue noninvasively from 
CCTA data are largely manual and as a result, have limited reproducibility, accuracy, and precision. A n 
automated deep-learning based artificial intelligence method for segmenting the vessel w all and 
atherosclerotic plaque from CCTA data has been developed . This study will evaluate the level of 
agreement between noninvasive CCTA-based quantification and characterization of coronary 
atherosclerosis and invasive IVUS.  
 
Secondary Objectives: 
The secondary objectives of this study are to: 
1. Compare total plaque volumes per-patient and per lesion as well as comparin g different 
plaque type volumes to the IVUS reference standard and assess reproducibility of quantitative 
plaque measurements compared to the reference standard.  
2. Perform exploratory analyses on plaque in previously stented vessels (protocol to allow up to 
20% (50 patients) with one or two stented vessels in this category ). This can also include DocuSign Envelope ID: 79C9324E-EE95-458E-9DED-D4F328BC6960
REVEALPLAQUE Study Protocol Version 1.0 August 12th, 2021 
CONFIDENTIAL Version 1.0  Page 10 of 17 
 plaque proximal or distal to the stented vessel.  
 
III. STUDY ENDPOINTS  
III. A. Primary Endpoint 
The primary endpoint is to assess the level of agreement between total plaque volume of  a deep-
learning based automated method for segmenting coronary atherosclerotic plaques, compared to 
IVUS, on a per-IVUS-pullback level.  
 
III. B. Secondary Endpoints 
Key secondary endpoints are: 
Per pullback:  
● Total plaque volume 
● Percent plaque burden  
● Calcified plaque volume 
● Low attenuation plaque volume 
● Fibrous plaque volume 
● Segment involvement score (SIS) 
● Adverse plaque characteristics (APC) 
Per lesion:  
● Total plaque volume 
● Percent Plaque burden  
● Calcified plaque volume 
● Low attenuation plaque volume 
● Fibrous plaque volume 
● Minimum lumen area (MLA) 
● Percentage area stenosis (%AS) 
● Positive remodeling index   
Per lesion/pullback: 
● Reproducibility of all metrics above when quantified from different CCTA series 
● Reproducibility of all metrics above when processing the same series twice (analyst an d 
process variation) 
● Exploratory analysis of necrotic core volume 
 
IV. STUDY DESIGN  
The REVEALPLAQUE study is a prospective, multi-center study designed to evaluate a deep-learning 
based automated method for segmenting coronary atherosclerotic plaques. All patients who have a 
stenosis confirmed by CCTA and FFR CT available and who are scheduled to undergo IV US will be eligible 
for enrollment. Enrolling sites will have FFR CT analysis incorporated when indicated into their standard 
evaluation of CCTA scans. All sites will provide  CCTA and FFR CT images, full angiographic images, IVUS 
images, and if obtained, any other imaging or physiologic data including  OCT, FFR, any NHPR (e.g., 
dPR, RFR, iFR, etc.), and pre- and post-stent implantation invasive data.  All non-invasive and invasive 
data collected will be obtained as clinical practice consistent with standard clinical care. 
All details about cardiovascular testing and treatment (planned and actual) will be  recorded at baseline. DocuSign Envelope ID: 79C9324E-EE95-458E-9DED-D4F328BC6960
REVEALPLAQUE Study Protocol Version 1.0 August 12th, 2021 
CONFIDENTIAL Version 1.0  Page 11 of 17 
 IV. A. Location and Number of Subjects  
Approximately 250 subjects will be enrolled from approximately 15 experienced cli nical research sites in 
the US and Japan.  
IV. B. Patient Population 
Clinically stable patients with known CAD who have a CCTA showing sten osis in at least one major 
epicardial vessel of stentable/graftable diameter and FFR CT available, and in whom clinically indicated 
IVUS is planned within 45 days of CCTA will be prospectively enrolled.   
IV. C.  General Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  
Inclusion Criteria (all must be present):  
1. Age ≥18 years  
2. Clinically stable patient with known CAD  
3. CCTA showing stenosis in at least one major epicardial vessel of stentable/ graftable diameter, 
in whom clinically indicated IVUS is planned within 45 days of the CCTA  
4. CCTA meets eligibility criteria for FFR CT as defined in the IFU 
5. Willing to comply with all aspects of the protocol, including adherence to fol low up visits  
6. Agrees to be included in the study and able to provide written informed con sent  
Exclusion Criteria (all must be absent): 
1. CCTA showing no stenosis  
2. Uninterpretable CCTA by HeartFlow assessment, in which image quality prevents FFR CT from 
being processed.  
3. Acute chest pain 
4. CABG prior to CCTA acquisition 
5. Prior history of PCI for 3 or more vessels  
6. MI less than 30 days prior to CCTA or between CCTA and ICA. 
7. Suspicion of acute coronary syndrome (acute myocardial infarction or unstable angi na) 
8. Known complex congenital heart disease 
9. Tachycardia or significant arrhythmia  
10. Subject requires an emergent procedure 
11. Evidence of ongoing or active clinical instability, including acute chest pain (sud den onset), 
cardiogenic shock, unstable blood pressure with systolic blood pressure <90 mmHg, and severe 
congestive heart failure (NYHA III or IV) or acute pulmonary edema 
12. Any active, serious, life-threatening disease with a life expectancy of less than 2 mon ths 
13. Currently enrolled in another study utilizing FFR CT or in an investigational trial that involves a 
non-approved cardiac drug or device 
14. Persons under the protection of justice, guardianship, or curatorship 
 
V. STUDY WORKFLOW  
The workflow for the REVEALPLAQUE study is described in the following sections. 
V. A. Study/Site Selection 
HeartFlow will identify and qualify the clinical research sites for the REV EALPLAQUE study. Participating 
sites will be screened for: 
● CCTA acquisition practices conforming to SCCT guidelines  
● Invasive Coronary Angiography (ICA) and other invasive data collection following best prac tices 
● High quality IVUS data collection experience and ability to use automatic pullback f or IVUS DocuSign Envelope ID: 79C9324E-EE95-458E-9DED-D4F328BC6960
REVEALPLAQUE Study Protocol Version 1.0 August 12th, 2021 
CONFIDENTIAL Version 1.0  Page 12 of 17 
 ● Adequate resources and past clinical research experience  
V. B. Subject Selection 
Institutional Review Board (IRB) approval will be obtained at all participat ing sites prior to screening 
subjects. All subjects who meet all inclusion criteria and do not meet any excl usion criteria, and are 
able and willing to participate, are candidates for the REVEALPLAQUE study . All subjects providing 
written informed consent and meeting all selection criteria will be enrolled into the REVEALPLAQUE 
study.   
V. C. Screening Period 
1. All subjects must fulfill all study inclusion criteria and no study exclusion criteria. 
2. Each subject will undergo the following assessments to be documented in the approp riate 
electronic case report form (eCRF) upon enrollment:  
a. Collection of demographic information  
b. A summary of the subject’s relevant medical history and cardiovascular risk factors  
c. Information about the subject’s CCTA and FFR CT results 
d. Results and images from non-invasive/invasive tests performed during 90 day s prior to 
enrollment 
V. D. Enrollment 
All subjects must provide written informed consent prior to enrollment. A no tation will be made in the 
subject’s medical chart, if required by the institution, and in the study records that he/she is participating 
in the study, has had his/her questions answered, has read, signed, and dated the Inf ormed Consent 
Form (ICF), and been given a copy of the ICF.  
All subjects who meet eligibility requirements will be asked to par ticipate. Subjects will be considered 
enrolled in the study after the following criteria have been met:  
1. Informed consent form has been signed and subject has been provided a copy.  
2. All inclusion criteria and no exclusion criteria have been met.  
Subjects included in the study will have anatomic and physiological data obtained as standard clinical 
care during ICA recorded. A guide advising how to obtain IVUS measurements  will be provided to sites 
during site protocol training; in summary the below mentioned data will be collected. A maximum of 20% 
of enrolled subjects may have at least one vessel with prior stent implantation. 
ICA procedure: 
1. The subject’s vital signs (blood pressure and heart rate) will be recorded p rior to ICA 
procedure.   
2. Medications (adenosine and nitrates) taken within 24 hours of ICA will be recorded.   
3. Angiography is advised to be performed according to the study guides pr ovided during site 
protocol training.  
4. The data from IVUS (mandatory), FFR measurements (as deemed necessary), and OCT (as 
deemed necessary) by the physician will be collected. 
5. All angiographic images will be collected.  
6. IVUS data for non-targeted lesions that are standard clinical care will  be collected.  
7. Radiation exposure will be documented. 
8. Total procedural volume of iodinated contrast will be recorded 
9. Fluoroscopy duration will be documented. 
10. Diagnostic and therapeutic procedures and equipment used, including catheters, balloons, 
wires, and stents, and vessels treated will be documented. DocuSign Envelope ID: 79C9324E-EE95-458E-9DED-D4F328BC6960
REVEALPLAQUE Study Protocol Version 1.0 August 12th, 2021 
CONFIDENTIAL Version 1.0  Page 13 of 17 
 11. Procedural complications will be documented (e.g., dissection from catheter or wire, reac tion 
to medication, side branch occlusion, slow/no flow )       
 
 
 
 
V. E. Follow up 
No follow up with the subjects will be done as a part of this study. 
 
VI. STUDY DURATION 
The anticipated enrollment duration of the REVEALPLAQUE study wi ll be approximately 12 months. No 
subject follow up is planned for this study. 
VI. A. Rules for Subject Withdrawal 
Each subject is free to withdraw from the study at any time. No addi tional data will be collected after a 
subject informs the Investigator that they want to withdraw.  Wit hdrawn subjects will be considered screen 
failures if the collected data does not allow for adequate selection criteria assessment. 
VI. B. Screen Failures 
Subjects who sign consent will be deemed a screen failure if: 
● Automatic pullback for IVUS catheter was not used during the procedure 
● Prior to IVUS, the vessel was predilated (medications OK) 
     No data beyond reason for screen failure will be collected. 
VI. C. Rules for Terminating the Study 
There are no formal termination criteria for this study. The sponsor reserves the right to terminate the 
REVEALPLAQUE study at any time. Investigators have the responsibility to comply  with all applicable 
regulatory guidelines and regulations. Specific reasons which may cause the sponsor,  IRB, or local 
regulatory authorities to terminate a center include, but are not limited t o:  
1) Failure of the investigator to comply with investigator agreement, protocol, guideli nes, and/or 
regulations.  
2) Serious protocol violations. 
3) Submission of knowingly false information from the research facility to t he sponsor, clinical 
monitor, or other party involved in the study.  
 
VII. SAFETY ASSESSMENT 
Subjects will undergo a clinically indicated ICA and invasive physiological meas urements, which do not 
require additional radiation, extra contrast, or additional procedure time for  this study/protocol. All 
procedures performed will be per standard clinical care and with adherence to revascularization 
guidelines and data obtained will be documented. Therefore, there will be no additional clinical risks for 
subjects who participate. Procedural complications will be documented (i.e., di ssection from catheter or 
wire, reaction to medication). 
 DocuSign Envelope ID: 79C9324E-EE95-458E-9DED-D4F328BC6960
REVEALPLAQUE Study Protocol Version 1.0 August 12th, 2021 
CONFIDENTIAL Version 1.0  Page 14 of 17 
 VIII. RATIONALE AND ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS  
This prospective, multi-center study is being conducted to expand existing datasets to improve the 
performance of FFR CT and support development of future products. 
The potential risks to subjects participating in this study include potent ial breach of confidentiality. Data 
transmitted to HeartFlow will not contain any PHI identifiers and will be cod ed with a unique identifier for 
each subject.  All applicable study data will be transferred to HeartFlow and core laboratories in a secure 
manner and in accordance with all applicable regulations. 
Anticipated benefits  
There are no specific benefits to subjects participating in the study. There may be some benefit to other 
patients who undergo management in the future based on deep-learning based  automated methods for 
segmenting coronary atherosclerotic plaques. 
Anticipated risks  
The REVEALPLAQUE study is a prospective study which collects data from clinically i ndicated CCTA 
imaging and ICA procedures. These procedures will have been planned as part of routine clinical practice; 
therefore, no additional clinical risks are related to participating in the s tudy. Procedural complications 
will be documented that are related to IVUS or FFR (e.g.,. dissection from cathe ter or wire, reaction to 
medication). 
 
IX. STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS 
IX. A.  General Considerations 
Descriptive statistical methods will be used to summarize the data from this study , with confidence 
intervals and hypothesis testing performed for the primary and other selected efficacy endpoints. 
Unless stated otherwise, the term “descriptive statistics”  refers to number of events (n), mean, median, 
standard deviation (SD), standard error, minimum, maximum, and coefficient of  variation (CV) for 
continuous data and frequencies and percentages for categorical data.  
All data collected during the study will be included in data listings.  
Unless specified otherwise, all statistical testing will be two-sided and will be pe rformed using an overall 
significance (alpha) level of 0.05.  
All statistical analyses will be conducted with the SAS® System, version 9.1.3 or higher.  
A statistical analysis plan (SAP) will describe the methods of data collection, val idation, analysis, and 
reporting. The sections below provide a brief overview of statistical consideration  for the study. 
IX. B.  Subject Characteristics  
Subject accountability will be described, including number of subjects enrolled, number of subjects 
included in the analysis, and reasons for any subjects discontinued from the study or not i ncluded in the 
analysis. Demographic information will be summarized using descriptive statistics. Sex and  medical 
histories will be summarized by counts and percentages.   
IX. C.  Endpoint Analysis 
The primary endpoint is to assess the level of agreement between total plaque volume o f a deep-learning 
based automated method for segmenting coronary atherosclerotic plaques, compared to IVUS,  on a per-
IVUS-pullback level.  
Bland Altman plots will be constructed. If the deep -learning based automated method CCTA 
measurements fall with the limits of agreement (LoA) estimated from th e IVUS measurements, the DocuSign Envelope ID: 79C9324E-EE95-458E-9DED-D4F328BC6960
REVEALPLAQUE Study Protocol Version 1.0 August 12th, 2021 
CONFIDENTIAL Version 1.0  Page 15 of 17 
 measures will be assumed to agree. Additionally, Pearson’s correlation and paired t -test will be 
constructed to further describe the relationship between IVUS measurements and deep -learning based 
automated method for segmenting coronary atherosclerotic plaques from CCTA. 
All secondary endpoints which are continuous (e.g., per lesion total plaque volume, per l esion calcium 
volume, per lesion low attenuation volume, per lesion non-calcified plaque volume, segment 
involvement score) will be similarly compared using a Bland Altman plot, Pearson’s correlati on and 
paired t-tests. Reproducibility will be estimated with Intra Class correlation (IC C).  
IX. D.  Sample Size  
Approximately 250 subjects may be enrolled into this study. 
From published data (Conte 2019), the maximum allowable difference between the measuremen ts is 
36 mm3.  Assuming a standard deviation of 12 mm3, a sample size of 223 patients achieves 90% power 
to detect agreement when the mean is 8, confidence level of the (LoA) is 0.950 and the confidence 
level of the confidence intervals about the LoA is 0.950. 
IX. E. Analysis Populations  
All subjects who meet the study criteria, sign the written informed consen t, and are enrolled in th e study , 
and provide paired assessments of CCTA and IVUS measurements will be included i n the analysis set.  
 
X. DATA HANDLING AND QUALITY ASSURANCE  
X. A. Completing and Signing Case Report Forms  
This study will utilize eCRFs for the collection of all data. Data changes and corrections for any errors 
should be corrected within the eCRF. The audit trail will record all changes m ade, the date and time of 
the correction, the person making the change, and a reason for the ch ange. The appropriate electronic 
signature will be provided by the investigator as indicated. 
X. B. Clinical Data Management  
The sponsor or designee will be responsible for the processing and quality con trol of the data. The 
handling of data, including data quality control, will comply with all ap plicable regulatory guidelines.  
The training of clinical site personnel in eCRF completion will be the respo nsibility of the sponsor or 
designee. To ensure uniform data collection, Case Report Form Guidelines will be created to assist with 
eCRF completion. All site staff including investigators and research coordinators w ill undergo site 
initiation training to become thoroughly familiar with the protocol, case report f orms, and with methods of 
data verification. 
X. C. Archiving of Data  
All study data collected at the investigator site and sponsor site will be archived in accordance  with local 
guidelines and regulations.  
Clinical sites will be asked to retain the data for 5 years following com pletion of the study. If local country 
guidelines require longer data storage, data will be kept according t o that country’s guidelines.  
All data obtained through this protocol will be securely handled and stored by the research site and by 
Heartflow, Inc., its designee, and/or other research entities that are listed in this protocol. Trained 
investigational site staff will keep a record of what data is electronically t ransferred and to whom. All data 
that is transferred to HeartFlow will be anonymized. 
 DocuSign Envelope ID: 79C9324E-EE95-458E-9DED-D4F328BC6960
REVEALPLAQUE Study Protocol Version 1.0 August 12th, 2021 
CONFIDENTIAL Version 1.0  Page 16 of 17 
 XI. SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES  
XI. A. Institutional Review  
Before starting this study, the protocol approved by the sponsor will be submitted to the regulatory 
bodies/local health authorities, as required, in accordance with local regulation s and to the IRB. The study 
will not start before the IRB gives written approval or a favorable opinion in accor dance with all applicable 
regulatory bodies/local health authorities. 
No changes from the final approved protocol will be initiated without the I RB’s prior written ap proval or 
favorable opinion except when necessary to eliminate immediate hazards to the subjects or when the 
change involves only logistics or administration. The sponsor will authorize any protoco l amendments, if 
necessary. Significant protocol amendments should be submitted to the IRB without de lay.  
XI. B. Guidelines for Obtaining Subject Informed Consent  
Written informed consent approved by HeartFlow and the IRB will be obtai ned from each subject, or their 
legal guardian as required according to section V.B. Subject Selection.  
XI. C. Site Initiation/Training  
Prior to sites enrolling subjects, the sponsor or its designee will contact the investigator and research 
coordinator for the site initiation visit.  This visit will include the prot ocol review the data requirements for 
the study, including eCRF completion instructions, PI responsibilities, and to ensur e all other applicable 
regulatory documents and trainings are completed.  
XI. D. Study Monitoring and Audit  
Edit checks will be included in the study database to ensure that out of rang e values are checked prior 
to inclusion in the dataset. If unusual outliers are found in any of the individu al study populations, an audit 
plan may be developed at that time.  
XI. E.  Clinical Events Committee 
There will not be a Clinical Events Committee for this study. 
XI. F.  IVUS Core Lab 
There will be an IVUS core lab responsible for annotating the angio images, IVUS ima ges, and HeartFlow 
provided Paraview models according to predefined study workflows. These workflows wi ll be the joint 
responsibility of HeartFlow and the core lab and will be approved by both par ties prior to implementing 
any study case reviews. All imaging data and annotations will be housed in a centralized EDC database.  
XI. G.  HeartFlow Technology / Data Team  
The HeartFlow technology / data team will be responsible for exporting the coronary models for all 
enrolled subjects via Paraview and uploading them into the EDC system for the cor e lab.  
Following the core lab analysis and blinded to the core lab results, the technolog y/data team will have 
access to the x,y,z coordinates from the annotated Paraview models and will use tho se to determine 
the plaque volume from the deep -learning based automated method for segmenting coronary 
atherosclerotic plaques from CCTA. Further details will be included in the stud y manuals separate from 
the main protocol. 
 
XII. FINAL REPORT 
Following conclusion of the study, a final report from HeartFlow or it ’s designee and may be distributed 
to all investigators. This final report will include all enrolled, eligible subjec ts. DocuSign Envelope ID: 79C9324E-EE95-458E-9DED-D4F328BC6960
REVEALPLAQUE Study Protocol Version 1.0 August 12th, 2021 
CONFIDENTIAL Version 1.0  Page 17 of 17 
 XIII. REFERENCES  
 
Taylor CA et al. Computational fluid dynamics applied to cardiac CT for noninvasive qua ntification of 
fractional flow reserve. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2012.11.083  
 
Thomsen C et al. Characteristics of high-risk coronary plaques identified by computed tomographic 
angiography and associated prognosis: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Eur H eart J. 2016 
http://doi.org/doi: 10.1093/ehjci/jev325  
 
Veros S et al. Coronary Atherosclerosis Imaging by Coronary CT Angiography: Current  Status, 
Correlation with Intravascular Interrogation and Meta-Analysis J Am Coll Cardiol-C V Imaging 2011 
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcmg.2011.03.006  
 
Koo B et al. Diagnosis of Ischemia-Causing Coronary Stenoses by Noninva sive Fractional Flow 
Reserve Computed from Coronary Computed Tomographic Angiograms: Results From the P rospective 
Multicenter DISCOVER-FLOW (Diagnosis of Ischemia-Causing Stenoses Obtained Via No ninvasive 
Fractional Flow Reserve) Study. J Am Coll Cardiol 2011 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2011.06.066  
 
Min J et al. Diagnostic Accuracy of Fractional Flow Reserve From Anatomic CT Angiograp hy. JAMA 
2012 http://doi.org/10.1001/2012.jama.11274  
 
Norgaard BL et al. Diagnostic Performance of Noninvasive Fractional Flow Reserve Derived From  
Coronary Computed Tomography Angiography in Suspected Coronary Artery Disease The NXT  Trial 
(Analysis of Coronary Blood Flow. J Am Coll Cardiol 2014. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2013.11.043  
 
Conte E et al. Plaque quantification by coronary computed tomography angiograp hy using intravascular 
ultrasound as a reference standard: a comparison between standard and last generation computed 
tomography scanners. Eur Heart J 2019 https://doi.org/10.1093/ehjci/jez089  
 
Fischer C et al. Coronary CT angiography versus intravascular ultrasound for estimati on of coronary 
stenosis and atherosclerotic plaque burden: a meta-analysis. J Cardiovasc CT 2013 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcct.2013.08.006  
 
 
 
 DocuSign Envelope ID: 79C9324E-EE95-458E-9DED-D4F328BC6960