Protocol Page
Minocycline for reduction of radiation therapy treatment-related  symptom  burden in 
head and neck cancer:  a randomized  study.
2010-0096
Core  Protocol Information
Short Title HNC
Study Chair: Gary B. Gunn
Additional Contact:Angele K. Saleeba
Araceli G. Garcia-Gonzalez
Toni Williams
Additional Memo Recipients: Recipients List
OPR Recipients (for OPR use only)
Araceli G. Garcia-Gonzalez
Loretta A. Williams
OPR DSMB
PDOL OPR DMC Addl Cont
Study Staff Recipients
None
Department:Symptom Research
Phone:713-745-3470
Unit:1450
Study Manager: Araceli G. Garcia-Gonzalez
Full Title:  Minocycline for reduction of radiation therapy treatment-
related symptom burden  in head and neck cancer:  a 
randomized study.
Public Description: N/A
Protocol Type:Standard Protocol
Protocol Phase: Phase II
Version Status: Activated -- Closed to new patient entry as of 08/28/2019
Version: 15
Document Status:Saved as "Final"
Submitted by: Angele K. Saleeba--8/28/2019 8:51:48 AM
OPR Action: Accepted by:  Melinda  E. Gordon -- 8/28/2019 9:47:45 AM
Which Committee  will review this protocol?
 The Clinical Research  Committee - (CRC)
Protocol Body
1.0 Objectives
The primary objective of this protocol is to test the efficacy of minocycline  in reducing  multiple patient-reported symptoms in patients with oropharyngeal 
cancer, nasopharyngeal cancer,  or unknown  primary  cancer  of head and neck treated with definitive radiation therapy.
2.0 Rationale
The study aims to test a symptom-reduction strategy based on underlying symptom mechanisms  associated with cancer treatments. Using a blinded, 
randomized placebo-controlled trial, we will evaluate minocycline safety and ability to reduce the symptom burden of oropharyngeal cancer, 
nasopharyngeal cancer, or unknown primary cancer of head and neck  treated with radiation  therapy. The significance of this research is that it (a) 
evaluates a low-toxicity, low-cost symptom therapy, (b) evaluates a therapy which could reduce multiple  commonly reported symptoms in oropharyngeal 
cancer, nasopharyngeal cancer,  or unknown  primary  cancer  of head and neck, and (c) seeks  to establish simple medical symptom prevention  therapy for 
a disease site and treatment  for which the symptom burden is high and few medical  symptom prevention strategies exist.
The agent tested in this trial is minocycline.  The target of action for the proposed intervention is in reduction of proinflammatory cytokines, specifically 
IL-1, IL-6, and TNF-alpha, likely mediators  of multiple  symptom expression.  Minocycline also crosses the blood-brain barrier, possibly reducing 
inflammation in the central nervous system, potentially  reducing multiple symptom  expression at the brain level.
3.0 Background
Cancer was diagnosed  in more than 1.4 million people in the United States in 2007 alone — 34,360 with head  and neck cancer (HNC) (Jemal et al., 
2007).  Many of these patients received aggressive therapy and experienced  multiple symptoms that cause them significant distress and impair  function 
and rehabilitation. Whereas many of these symptoms are the result of disease, it is increasingly recognized that pain, fatigue, sleep disturbance,  cognitive 
dysfunction, and affective  symptoms can also be caused  by cancer treatment.  Treatment-related symptoms  can directly affect survival if they become so 
severe that patients  abandon  potentially  curative therapies (Borden & Parkinson, 1998; Jeremic et al., 2003). Moreover, treatment-related  symptoms  may 
persist for weeks, months, or years and may worsen, even if the cancer  improves.
There is growing  awareness that common biologic mechanisms may cause or contribute  to some  of these  clusters of symptoms at the same time 
(Barsevick et al., 2006;  Dodd et al., 2005; Wang et al., 2006). The theoretical underpinning for the proposed studies, based  on the animal model  of 
inflammation-induced sickness behavior, is that dysregulated  inflammation and its downstream toxic effects  represent a significant  biologic basis for 
subjectively reported clusters of symptoms (Cleeland et al., 2003; Lee et al., 2004). Based on this model, optimal  symptomatic control would attack  both 
underlying symptom mechanisms as well as the end effects of these mechanisms  with symptom-focused therapies.  
We have  reviewed the evidence  of the impact  of inflammation  on several cancer-related symptoms  (Lee et al., 2004). The insult of cancer treatment,  
including radiotherapy  and chemotherapy,  increases production of inflammatory  cytokines, especially interleukin  (IL)-6 and tumor necrosis  factor (TNF) 
variants (Linard et al., 2004; Linard et al., 2005).  Inflammatory reaction is a classic feature  of radiation  exposure, and animal models have shown  an 
increase in IL-6 several days  after such exposure (Van der Meeren et al., 2003). This increase in inflammation is a prime candidate for the mechanism 
behind increases  in treatment-related symptoms. It has been suggested that reduction of this treatment-induced  inflammatory response might significantly  
reduce the morbidity associated with radiotherapy (Garden,  2003).
3.1  Symptom Management
The control  or prevention  of cancer-related cytokine dysregulation presents  new opportunities for symptom reduction or prevention. Thus,  a goal of the 
proposed study is the development  of symptom-management strategy based on underlying symptom  mechanisms in combination  with empiric 
treatments. Inflammation can be modulated by a variety  of existing pharmaceutical  approaches. 
Better symptom  management,  in cancer as well as in other diseases, has been hampered  by the lack of a strong clinical-trial evidence base for guiding 
symptom management practice. Several  barriers have hindered the development of clinical trials in symptom management. First, the subjective  nature of 
symptoms has limited  innovative research  into the mechanisms  underlying these symptoms and the development of novel ways  of treating  or preventing  
them. Special difficulties include the poor fit of current disease models of research for implementing  this kind of health-related  investigation and lack of 
statistical models that integrate “rough”  self-report data and biologic data (Cleeland, 2001). However, patient-reported outcome  research has recently 
been promoted by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for more accurate  therapeutic agent evaluation,  and symptom reduction has been  
recognized as a primary clinical benefit for drug approval (FDA, 2006b).
Other barriers have  hindered  development of evidence-based  methods for controlling  treatment-related symptom  burden, despite the availability of more 
adequate symptom  measurement methods.  Many  of the agents that might be effective in the control  of treatment-related symptom burden are generic or 
off-patent drugs that will never  receive clinical research  support from the pharmaceutical industry  because  there is no financial  incentive to support clinical 
trials testing their effectiveness  for symptom control. 
Current practice utilizes randomized clinical trials to manage a single symptom with a single agent, for example, pain controlled with a single analgesic. 
When clinicians do treat multiple symptoms, they typically prescribe multiple agents based on anecdotal experience or the patient’s perceived needs, 
rather than on evidence-based  research (Foley et al., 2001).
3.2 Head and Neck Cancer Treatment Side-Effects
All cancer therapies, especially multimodality  and multiagent  treatment programs  are associated with a spectrum of early and late adverse effects.  
Because of the wide variety  of symptoms and their severity, toxicity data is a further challenge to evaluate. One recent analysis noted an almost 500% 
increase in the number of early toxicity events with chemoradiation as compared  with standard  postoperative radiotherapy for head and neck cancers  
(Trotti et al., 2007). Chemoradiotherapy for head  and neck cancers  has consistently shown to yield clinically  relevant improvement in locoregional  control 
and overall  survival, though at the cost of more severe early toxicity (Pignon et al., 2000). However, many patients  treated with radiation therapy alone  still 
report high symptom burden. Early  effects are typically  expressed during  or within  a few weeks after the end of therapy, typically  in proliferative tissues  
and organs such as the skin, the mucosal lining  of the GI tract and the hematopoietic system. The alterations in swallowing and nutritional intake may 
cause poor compliance  to therapy, may have long-term effects and even cause death  of the patient.   The burden of treatment- related adverse effects 
needs to be well documented and controlled  to improve  both physical and social functioning in these patients. Thus,  a goal of the proposed study is to 
develop symptom management strategy to improve patient outcomes  and also to improve  compliance to intensive  treatment regimen, in this case 
definitive radiation  therapy.
4.0 Background Drug Information
4.1  Minocycline hydrochloride (Minocin®, manufactured by Triaxc  Pharmaceuticals, LLC) is a semisynthetic antibiotic derived  from tetracycline. It has 
the unusual side effect of markedly  suppressing  proinflammatory cytokine release, the primary reason we will include it as an intervention in this study. 
Preclinical data suggests that minocycline reduces neural  inflammation and prevents apoptosis of neural cells.  Animal studies have demonstrated  that 
minocycline reduces the levels of the proinflammatory  cytokines IL-6, TNF-alpha,  IL-1b and interferon (IFN)-g (Ledeboer et al., 2005; Zanjani  et al., 2006). 
Minocycline’s anti-inflammatory  effect  prevents subacute pathological change  in lungs  due to inflammation produced by peripheral  lipopoly-saccharide 
administration in animals (Yamaki  et al., 1998). Minocycline was found  to decrease IL-6 and the acute-phase response protein C-reactive protein (CRP)  
levels in patients with rheumatoid arthritis (Kloppenburg et al., 1996).
Commonly associated side effects include light-headedness, vestibular symptoms, headache, and nausea (Gump et al., 1977), with no correlation  seen 
between serum concentration and toxicity (Kloppenburg et al., 1995).  Minocycline is now widely used in the management of dermatitis associated  with 
targeted therapy  in cancer.
4.2  Absolute Contraindications to study  symptom  intervention agent  Minocycline 
4.21  hypersensitivity  to any tetracyclines;
4.22  pregnancy
      4.23  hepatotoxicity (aspartate aminotransferase (AST) or alanine aminotransferase (ALT);  2 times the upper  limit of normal)
4.3Minocycline Common Adverse Reactions
4.31  Minocycline: Dizziness (9%) and vertigo.
4.4Minocycline Monitoring Parameters
4.41 Minocycline:  LFTs, BUN, Sr Cr, 
4.42 Signs of acute hepatitis:  rash, fever,  malaise,  abdominal pain, and vomiting
Evidence:  Hepatotoxicity (e.g., elevated  hepatic  enzymes,  hyperbilirubinemia, hepatic cholestasis, hepatic failure with some fatalities,  hepatitis  with 
autoimmune features, and jaundice)  has also been reported.  Abdominal complaints may suggest  hepatotoxicity; the incidence  of this effect is roughly 
4.7%.   Liver  toxicity is possible with excessive  accumulation of the drug, which can occur in patients with renal impairment receiving  even usual oral or 
parenteral doses.
4.44 Minocycline Drug Interactions
4.441 Minocycline
4.442 Calcium-, magnesium-,  or aluminum-containing antacids,  bile acid sequestrants, bismuth, oral contraceptives, iron, zinc, sodium  
bicarbonate, penicillins, quinapril may decrease absorption of minocycline:   Avoid  taking within  2 hours of using this medication.
4.443 Methoxyflurane anesthesia, when  concurrent  with minocycline, may cause fatal nephrotoxicity. 
4.444 Retinoic acid derivatives:  May increase  risk of pseudotumor  cerebri.
4.445 Warfarin: Hypoprothrombinemic response may be increased with tetracyclines; monitor  INR closely during initiation  or 
discontinuation
4.45 Storage Information
4.451  Store at 20°C to 25°C (68°F to 77°F)
*References for intervention agent:
1. MD Anderson Cancer Center  Formulary:  http://www.crlonline.com/crlsql/servlet/crlonline
2. Micromedex  – Healthcare Series:  http://www.thomsonhc.com/home/dispatch
3. Micromedex:   Minocycline Drugdex Drug  Evaluation and Armodafinil Drugdex  Drug Evaluation     and Turmeric Drug Evaluation  by Martindale.
4. Lexi-Comp:  Minocycline
5. Clinical Pharmacology:  Minocycline
5.0 Study  Design
Using a blinded, randomized placebo-controlled  trial, we will evaluate minocycline safety and ability to reduce the symptom burden of oropharyngeal  
cancer, nasopharyngeal cancer,  or unknown  primary  cancer  of head and neck treated with radiation therapy. This is especially important in trials where  
symptom reduction is the outcome and where  knowledge of the treatment arm might bias assessment staff or patient.  The compounding pharmacy will 
prepare the appropriate active  agent  and placebo  for each patient.
Design:  Phase II blinded, randomized placebo-controlled  trial
Symptom Intervention Agent: minocycline
Study Period:  15 weeks: intervention agent daily during radiation for 7 weeks (+/- 5 days) + additional  follow-up to first follow  up (4-8 weeks) for a total 
of 11-15 weeks. 
Primary Outcome Variable: 7-week (+/- 5 days) area under the curve (AUC)  for select MDASI-HNC symptoms namely fatigue, pain, sleep disturbance, 
difficulty swallowing  and lack of appetite.
Forty patients  will be randomized to either minocycline or placebo, twenty in each arm. AUC values for patients who drop out of the study after entering 
two weeks  of AUC data will be included by carrying  their last symptom data forward for the remaining  study period under the intent to treat rule (ITT).  The 
carry-forward method of handling  drop-outs  will be revisited upon completion of the study to determine  if adjustments to these values can be made using 
longitudinal regression models estimated from patients who completed the entire study. 
All Grade 3 and 4 toxicities  reported by patients in this trial will be evaluated by the principal investigator and treating physician, or other attending 
physician if PI is not available, to determine if the toxicities were  due to study medication.  We will use standard  3+3 criteria for determining  whether  
treatment exceeds either grade 3 or 4 toxicities for the first 6 patients  assigned to minocycline.  That is, if more  than 1 symptom intervention related 
toxicity (grade  3, 4) in the first 6 patients assigned  to minocycline is observed, the study will be terminated.  
A list of adverse events  known to be associated with primary treatment is listed in section 4.0 of the protocol.
The determination of whether a toxicity (grade 3, 4) was due to minocycline received by the patient  (rather than the primary radiation) will be performed by 
the principal  investigator in consultation with the treating physician. 
The interaction screening  will be the responsibility  of the research staff.  The Research staff will review any current or new medications started  with the 
patient prior to initiating treatment. During the trial, the research staff will capture all drug interactions causing an adverse event on the Adverse Event 
forms. We plan to document all medications  patients will be or have been using during  the trial.  Medication sheets  will be provided to both patients and 
treating physicians to inform them of the possibility  that the patients may be on this drug (see Appendices T and TT).  
Minocycline will begin at the start of radiation therapy and continue  daily through the final radiation treatment day.
6.0 Administration of Pharmacologic  Agent
As stated in section 5, preparation of symptom  intervention medication for each  patient will be done by the compounding pharmacy.  Patients will pick up 
the assigned study medications at one of the outpatient  pharmacy stations in M. D. Anderson.  At pickup patients will receive instruction in how to take 
study medications. 
The participants will take study medication twice  daily, starting on day one of radiation therapy.  The final day of study medication will be the 
final day of radiation therapy.  The participants will take study medications twice daily during entire course  of radiation therapy, including  weekend 
days. 
Patients will be asked  to bring their study medication container  to the clinic where study staff will perform a capsule count  each week during one of their 
radiation weekly appointments. Results of the capsule count  will be recorded on the Study  Medication Accountability form.
Unused drugs  will be returned to Investigational Pharmacy Services by the study staff, or destroyed in a red biohazard bag.  Once the capsule count is 
completed, the capsules can be placed into the M. D. Anderson biohazard waste system.
 The table below displays the symptom intervention agent and the dosing schedule  (Lexi-Comp). 
Symptom 
Intervention  Agent Dosage FormsInitial Dose  (starts on 
first day of radiation)Initial Dose (starts on 
first day of radiation)
Minocycline 100mg capsules 100mg  two times a day 
(200 mg)Matching placebo
7.0 Data Collection Tools
Patient Reported  Outcome  (PRO)  Measurements
7.11  Symptom Measurement  Symptom data will be collected using the MDASI-  HNC module of the M. D. Anderson Symptom Inventory (see Appendix  
C and Appendix P). MDASI-HNC  items namely fatigue, pain, sleep disturbance, difficulty  swallowing and lack of appetite  will be used to calculate  the 
symptom AUC. Prior studies (Rosenthal, et al, 2007,  2008) have indicated that a significant proportion of patients  reported  these symptoms to be 
moderate to severe. The MDASI-HNC will be collected face to face in the clinic, through  an interactive voice response  system, through a tablet PC, 
through phone calls by field coordinators, or by regular mail to measure symptom burden over time of the treatment and post treatment. 
7.12  Measure of Quality of Life  The EuroQol (EQ-5D) is a standardized instrument for use as a measure of health outcome.  (See Appendix 
D)  Applicable to a wide range of health conditions  and treatments, it provides a simple descriptive profile  and a single index value for health  status. EQ-
5D was originally  designed  to complement  other  instruments  but is now increasingly  used as a 'stand alone' measure. The EQ-5D descriptive system 
consists of five dimensions: mobility, self-care, usual  activities,  pain/discomfort, and anxiety/depression. Each dimension has three  levels, reflecting "no 
health problems," (level  1) "moderate health problems," (level  2) and "extreme health problems" (level 3).  A dimension for which there are no problems is 
said to be at level 1, while a dimension for which  there are extreme  problems is said to be at level 3. Each  unique health state described by the instrument 
has an associated 5-digit descriptor ranging from 11111 for perfect  health to 33333 for the worst possible state. The resulting  descriptive system defines 
243 health states. In addition, "unconscious" and "immediate death" are included in the EQ-5D valuation process but are not a part of the descriptive 
system. 
7.13  Measure of Global  Quality of Life  The Global Quality of Life (GQL)  is a single item asking patients  to rate their quality of life on a 0 to 10 scale 
over the past week. (See Appendix DD). 
7.14  Measure of Patient Satisfaction with Study Medication Scale   The Study  Medication Satisfaction Scale is a short, 7-item scale  that asks 
patients about  several areas  of satisfaction. (See Appendix E)  The scale includes questions about ease or difficulty of taking the medication in general 
and in its current  form, convenience  of taking the study medication as instructed, and patient confidence that the study medication is of benefit.  
7.15 a Tobacco History  Form  The Tobacco History Form is a short questionnaire that asks about smoking history. (See  Appendix  F).  
7.15 b Follow-Up Smoking  Assessment Form  The Follow-Up Smoking  Assessment  Form asks three questions about smoking  subsequent to the start 
of radiation therapy (See Appendix FF).  
7.16 Alcohol History  Form The Alcohol History Form  is a short questionnaire that asks about alcohol history  at baseline. (See Appendix G).
7.2 Case Report Forms (CRFs)
7.21 Demographic Form  This form includes  patient  birth date, gender, marital status,  race, ethnicity,  education, and employment status. (See Appendix 
H)  The Demographic Form will be completed  at baseline.
7.22  Charlson Comorbidity Index  The Charlson Comorbidity Index  yields  a comorbidity score, to control  for serious concurrent chronic  disease 
conditions (Charlson et al., 1994) (Appendix  I).
 
7.23  On-Study Form  The On-Study Form  contains data about  disease, previous  treatment, whether a patient is on concurrent protocols (See Appendix 
J). This form will be completed at baseline.
7.24  Clinical Monitoring Form  The Clinical Monitoring Form contains clinical data including Body Mass Index (BMI), blood pressure, performance 
status, symptom  treatment,  and CTC toxicity scores. (See Appendix K).
7.25  Medication Form  The Medication Form contains data about types of medications patients  have been prescribed.  Medication types include pain 
medications, antiemetics,  and psychotropics among others. There is also a general section for other types of medications patients may be taking. (See 
Appendix L).
7.26  Daily Tracking  of Study Medication Taken  by Participants  Patients will be given a diary and asked to record  their doses of study medication 
(see Appendix M).   Each page of the diary  contains space to document 7 days of study medication  consumption.   Patients will be asked to record  the 
number of study  capsules  they take at one time and also check  off the time slot when the capsules  are ingested.   
7.27  Study  Medication Accountability  Form  This form contains study medication data including  the number  of capsules dispensed to the patient  at 
the last visit to the outpatient  pharmacy, how many capsules were returned from the last visit, and the number of days the pills were taken.  (See Appendix  
N). 
7.28  Laboratory Data Form  The Laboratory Data Form contains data from blood  analysis  including C-Reactive Protein (CRP), serum  chemistry 
(albumin, calcium,  phosphorous, glucose,  BUN,  creatinine, total bilirubin, and total protein), electrolytes (sodium, potassium, chloride, carbon dioxide, 
magnesium), and complete  blood count (CBC).  (See  Appendix W). These values will be recorded  if they are available in the patient medical record  from 
a blood draw  performed  for clinical purposes. 
Note: Liver function tests are required at baseline.  If they were not performed within the past 3 months prior to starting treatment  with the symptom drug/  
placebo, they will be drawn for eligibility purposes.
 
7.29 Treatment Summary Form  The Treatment Summary Form  contains data about radiation  treatment received and induction chemotherapy.  (See  
Appendix O).
7.30 Final  Study Status Form  The Final Study Status  Form  contains data about patient disposition at the end of the study (i.e., completed study, 
withdrew, vital status) and tumor evaluation after treatment. (See Appendix OO).
7.31 CTC Toxicity  Form  The CTC Toxicity Score Form contains the maximum toxicity  score in the last seven days, or since  the last assessment.  (See 
Appendix X).
8.0 Patient Eligibility
Patient Eligibility
  8.11 Inclusion  Criteria
8.111  Patients  with a pathologically  proven  diagnosis of oropharyngeal  cancer , nasopharyngeal  cancer, or unknown primary  cancer of head and 
neck in MDACC receiving radiation  therapy with or without induction  chemotherapy. 
8.112  Patients  > 18 years old.
8.113 Patients  with the above cancers, T0, TX, T1 to T3, N any, M0 receiving IMRT (to unilateral or bilateral  neck), 64-72  Gy in 6-7 weeks  as 
definitive treatment.
8.114  Patients  must have normal renal  function test and no prior renal disease: The screening cut off for serum creatinine < upper limit of normal.  
8.115  Patients  must have normal hepatic function test and no prior liver disease:  The screening  results for total bilirubin must be < 1.5 times  the 
upper limit of normal. The screening results  for the following must be < 2 times the upper  limit of normal for patients  to be eligible: Alkaline phosphatase 
(ALP) and Alanine aminotransferase (ALT).  The screening results  for Aspartate aminotransferase  (AST) must  be < 2 times the upper limit of normal if 
available.
8.116 Patients  who speak English (due to the novel research and its complexity, we are only accruing English speaking patients to the protocol).
8.117 Patients  must be willing to discontinue taking dong quai and/or St John's wort.
8.118 Patients  must be willing and able to review, understand,  and provide  written consent.
  8.12  Exclusion  Criteria               
8.121 Patients  receiving concurrent chemotherapy or concurrent biologic  agent. 
8.122 Patients  who are taking medications or have conditions that potentially preclude  use of the study medication or intervention  as determined by 
the treating physician.
8.123 Patients  who are enrolled  in another symptom management  trial or receiving active treatment under  another clinical trial.
8.124 Bile duct obstruction or cholelithiasis.
8.125  History of clinically significant  cutaneous  drug reaction, or a history of clinically  significant  hypersensitivity reaction, including  multiple allergies  
or drug reaction.
8.126   Pre-existing  psychosis or bipolar disorder.
8.127  Hypersensitivity  to any tetracyclines.
8.128  Patients on anticoagulants  (ie warfarin/heparin).
     8.129 Patients with INR > 1.5.
8.130 Patients taking any tetracycline within the last 15 days.
8.131  Patients that are pregnant. 
8.132  Patients treated  with upfront radical  surgery at the primary site (other  than diagnostic  tonsillectomy or excision).
9.0 Patient Enrollment and Registration
Patient Enrollment
Patients will be screened for eligibility and recruited for enrollment in the outpatient  Head and Neck Cancer Clinic in Radiation Oncology  before their 
radiation therapy starts.   Enrollment will also take place in the outpatient radiation oncology  facilities at the MD Anderson regional care centers: Sugar 
Land, Katy, Bay Area, and the Woodlands.
Research staff will maintain a log of all patients screened, and the reasons that patients  do not enter the study will be documented.
Eligible patients who agree  to enroll in the study will provide written informed consent/authorization. 
Women of child-bearing  potential  who want to participate will be told that we will perform a mandatory pregnancy  screening test through  a urine  sample at 
baseline. Study staff will provide the pregnancy kits to these women and make sure the results are known and recorded in the follow-up  notes in Clinic 
Station before additional  study drug prescriptions  are filled by the Investigational Pharmacy. If the pregnancy test is positive the patient will not be 
prescribed the symptom  drug study.
At enrollment patients  will be informed  that they will receive a stipend in the total amount of $60 for participation in the pilot study.  The stipend will be 
distributed in $20 increments at three times during the study.  Stipends will be distributed to participants at weeks 1, 7 (+/- one week), and at the final 
study follow  up visit.
Enrolled patients will be registered into the Clinical Oncology Research System (CORe), the institutional  patient  data management system.
Patient Randomization  and Assignment to Treatment Arm 
The study  will accrue a total of 40 patients  with 20 patients each in the placebo and minocycline group. Prior to accruing  the first patient,  a 
randomization list will be generated by our biostatistician collaborator from the Department of Biostatistics for all 40 patients stating which  group  a 
patient was randomized. This list containing the accrual number  and treatment group  information  will be given to Investigational  Pharmacy.  A sealed 
backup list will be kept by the assigned  data analyst at the Department of Symptom Research. This list will only be opened in case unblinding is 
needed.
Recruitment efforts will be made such that patients with induction chemotherapy and/or unilateral neck radiation comprised at least 20% of 
the sample.
Once a patient is enrolled the study staff will contact  the Investigational Pharmacy  and let them  know of the patient's accrual  number and patient ID. 
Investigational Pharmacy retrieves the randomized treatment arm information  from the generated randomization  list.  Once a patient is randomized  to a 
treatment arm, Investigational Pharmacy will relay the information to the dispensing  Pharmacy.   The patient  visits  the most convenient outpatient 
pharmacy to pick up the study medication  assigned.  Patients will be randomized into one of the 2 possible arms.  (See Section 5.0 Study Design).
10.0 Assessment Schedule
Please see Appendix P for an expanded study assessment/evaluation schedule.
Data Confidentiality  Plan
All patient-reported outcome, laboratory and clinical data gathered in this protocol  will be stored in a password-protected database. All patient information  
will be handled using  anonymous  identifiers. Linkage to patient identity is only possible after accessing a password-protected database. Access  to the 
database is only available  to individuals  directly  involved  in the study. 
When all analysis has been completed and all study results have been reported, the electronic and paper  files will be stored  in a password-protected MD 
Anderson secure server.  This stored data may be made available to MD Anderson  research and clinical  faculty for research purposes, with appropriate 
validation and access controls, so it can facilitate research cross-fertilization and speed insight discovery. Patient data also will be stored and accessible  
in the MD Anderson Translational Research Accelerator database (TRA; PI: A. Futreal). 
11.0 Adverse  Event Reporting
11.1 Adverse Events (AE)  (See Appendix Q)
All patients  will be seen weekly during radiation therapy  in the radiation oncology clinics, allowing for close monitoring of potential adverse events by clinic 
and research  staff during treatment. 
During the 3 weeks post radiation, patients  will be monitored through weekly  phone calls by the research staff,  and then every other  week for another 3 
weeks. In addition,  patients will be given  a contact  phone number for treatment-related questions.
Toxicity and other  clinical  variables will be collected by research staff at weeks 1, 4, 7, and end of study. Treatment-related toxicities  (NCI Common 
Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events, version 4) will be monitored by both clinic and research staff at the patient’s  regular clinical appointments. (See  
Appendix R)
Grade 1 and Grade 2 AEs based on radiation  treatment and symptom treatment  that are expected or unrelated will not be reported.   AEs that are Grade 3 
and above that are definite, probable, or possible and related  will be reported.  AEs will be tabulated  and reported  as a summary on the continuing review 
report. All Grade 3 and 4 toxicities reported by patients in this trial will be evaluated by the principal  investigator and treating physician  to determine if the 
toxicities were due to study medication.  
11.2  Serious  Adverse  Events  (SAE)  (See Appendix  S)
A serious adverse event is any adverse drug experience occurring  at any dose that results in any of the following outcomes: 
Death
A life-threatening adverse drug experience – any adverse experience that places  the patient, in the view of the initial reporter, at immediate risk of 
death from the adverse  experience as it occurred.  It does not include an adverse experience that, had it occurred in a more  severe form, might have 
caused death.
Inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization
A persistent or significant disability/incapacity  – a substantial disruption of a person’s ability  to conduct normal  life functions.
A congenital anomaly/birth  defect.
Important medical  events  that may not result in death, be life-threatening, or require  hospitalization may be considered a serious  adverse drug experience 
when, based upon appropriate medical  judgment, they may jeopardize the patient or subject and may require medical or surgical intervention to prevent 
one of the outcomes listed in this definition. Examples  of such medical events  include allergic  bronchospasm requiring intensive treatment  in an 
emergency room or at home, blood dyscrasias  or convulsions that do not result in inpatient hospitalization, or the development of drug dependency or 
drug abuse (21 CFR 312.32).
Important medical events as defined  above, may also be considered serious  adverse  events.  Any important medical  event can and should 
be reported  as an SAE if deemed appropriate by the Principal Investigator or the Clinical  Research Support  Center.
All events occurring  during the conduct of a protocol  and meeting the definition of a SAE must be reported  to the IRB in accordance with the 
timeframes and procedures outlined in  “University  of Texas M. D. Anderson  Cancer  Center  Institutional Review Board Policy on Reporting Serious 
Adverse Events”.   Unless stated otherwise in the protocol, all SAEs, expected or unexpected, must be reported to the Clinical Research  Support Center,  
regardless of attribution (within 5 working  days of knowledge of the event).  
All life-threatening or fatal events, expected or unexpected,  and regardless of attribution  to the study drug, must have a written report submitted 
within 24 hours  (next  working day) of knowledge of the event to the Safety Project  Manager in the Clinical  Research  Support Center.
The MDACC  “Internal  SAE Report Form for Prompt Reporting” will be used for reporting  to the Clinical  Research Support Center. 
Serious adverse events will be captured from the time the patient signs  consent until  30 days after  the last dose of drug. Serious  adverse  
events must  be followed  until clinical recovery  is complete  and laboratory test have returned  to baseline,  progression of the event has 
stabilized, or there  has been acceptable resolution  of the event.
·Additionally, any serious adverse events that occur after the 30 day time period that are related to the study treatment  must be reported 
to the Clinical Research Support Center. This may include the development of a secondary malignancy.
It is the responsibility of the PI and the research team to ensure serious  adverse  events are reported according to the Code of Federal 
Regulations, Good Clinical Practices, the protocol guidelines,  the sponsor’s guidelines,  and Institutional Review Board policy.
12.0 Criteria for Removal from the Study
12.1 Patients  will be taken off study if these values are met or exceeded:
12.11  Alkaline  phosphatase (ALP) is >2 times the upper limit of normal  
12.12 Aspartate aminotransferase  (AST) or alanine aminotransferase (ALT) is >2 times the upper  limit of normal 
12.13 Total bilirubin > 1.5 times the upper limit of normal
12.14 Monitor for signs and symptoms of severe rash (CTC version 4  > grade 3), hypersensitivity, and if appear, need to stop drug immediately  
and discontinue study.
12.15 Pregnancy during the study period
12.16 INR > 1.5.  Treating physician notified so that medical management occurs.
13.0 Statistical Analysis Plan
13.1 Sample Size and Randomization
Forty patients will be randomized equally to the two treatment arms  - minocycline and placebo. With 20 patients per treatment arm, we will be able to 
detect a 0.70 SD effect size on the symptom AUC between the two treatments with 70% power  and one-sided 5% significance test. Because this is a 
pilot study with the intent of providing effect  size estimates to inform large clinical  trial in the future, we chose  a modest statistical  power.  
13.2 Analysis  Plan
Our emphasis  is to test the efficacy  of minocycline as a potential agent in reducing patient-reported  symptoms  in cancer patients receiving  radiation 
therapy. The proposed phase II clinical-trial for screening potentially effective symptom  intervention agent  will provide moderate  power in detecting 
modest intervention  effect.  If the treatment has a more pronounced effect, then it will be detected  with higher power.  
This study will allow us to obtain estimates of treatment effect and the variability of these estimates. Estimates of treatment effect will be obtained using 
standard linear regression techniques in which  AUC  values (lc(i)) are regressed  on indicator variables  that represent treatment received.   Estimates of 
treatment effect  and between subject variability  will then be used to design a more comprehensive  study in future clinical trials.     
Recruitment efforts will be made such that patients with induction chemotherapy and/or unilateral neck comprised at least 20% of the sample.  Indicator 
variables for the type of treatment (induction chemotherapy  vs. radiation  therapy alone) and location  (unilateral neck vs. bilateral  neck) will be created. In 
addition to the formal  evaluation of treatment  effects on the primary outcome, we will also examine the prognostic effects of the type of treatment,  
location, disease stage,  ECOG status,  age and gender in predicting the outcome variable.  Standard exploratory data analysis techniques  and descriptive 
statistics will be used.
We will test minocycline in its ability to reduce values of 5 symptoms.  Assuming  that patients accrue at the rate of 4 per month, we anticipate  that this pilot 
study will require approximately 14 months  to complete. 
We will need  at least 2 weeks  of treatment with the study drug/placebo for patients to be considered  as evaluable.  Any patient  who drops  out prior to this 
will be replaced. 
13.21  Primary Outcome Variable
The primary outcome variable will be the combined AUC  for selected symptoms. The value  of this variable for patient i is denoted lc(i) and is comprised  of 
the MDASI-HNC  scores for fatigue, pain,  sleep disturbance, difficulty swallowing and lack of appetite collected during  the 7 weeks of RadTx. 
Because lc(i) represent the average  of a large number of ordinal  variables, we assume by the central  limit theorem that its value can be considered to be 
approximately normally distributed. 
13.22  Secondary Outcome
In addition to obtaining estimate of treatment effect,  this protocol also aims to pilot the procedure used in calculating area under  the curve (AUC). 
Because future clinical trial requires frequent monitoring and updating of symptom  data collected using either   the interactive voice  response system  
or  paper  and pencil, the logistics developed here will be useful in ensuring an efficient data collection system.
We are also interested  in exploring predictors  of survival. Univariate Cox proportional hazards models  will be used to screen  for potential predictors 
(demographic and clinical  variables) of overall survival.  Predictors that are significant  with  p<.10  will be included  in the multivariate Cox proportional 
hazards models. Final  predictors will be selected  by stepwise regression, with an entry  level of 0.1 and a stay level of 0.05. Standard model fitting 
diagnostics will be performed. Finally,  Cox survival curves will be plotted.
13.23 Non-Compliance with Study Agent
Patients who do not comply with study agent  dosing requirements will remain  in the study under the intent  to treat rule.
14.0 References
Barsevick, A. M., Whitmer, K., Nail, L. M., Beck, S. L., & Dudley, W. N. (2006). Symptom cluster research: conceptual, design,  measurement, and 
analysis issues. J Pain Symptom Manage, 31(1), 85-95.
Becker, P. M., Schwartz, J. R., Feldman,  N. T., & Hughes,  R. J. (2004). Effect of modafinil on fatigue, mood, and health-related quality of life in patients  
with narcolepsy.  Psychopharmacology (Berl), 171(2), 133-139.
Bharti, A. C., Shishodia, S., Reuben, J. M., Weber, D., Alexanian, R., Raj-Vadhan, S. et al. (2004). Nuclear  factor-kappaB and STAT3  are constitutively 
active in CD138+ cells derived from multiple  myeloma patients, and suppression  of these  transcription factors  leads to apoptosis. Blood, 103(8), 3175-
3184.
Borden, E. C. & Parkinson, D. (1998). A perspective on the clinical  effectiveness and tolerance of interferon-alpha. Seminars in Oncology, 25(1 Suppl  1), 
3-8.
Carroll, J. K., Kohli, S., Mustian, K. M., Roscoe, J. A., & Morrow, G. R. (2007). Pharmacologic  treatment of cancer-related fatigue.  The Oncologist, 12 
Suppl 1, 43-51.
Chan, M. M., Fong, D., Soprano, K. J., Holmes, W. F., & Heverling, H. (2003). Inhibition  of growth and sensitization to cisplatin-mediated killing  of ovarian  
cancer cells by polyphenolic chemopreventive agents.  J Cell Physiol, 194(1), 63-70.
Charlson, M., Szatrowski, T. P., Peterson,  J., & Gold, J. (1994). Validation  of a combined comorbidity index. Journal of Clinical  Epidemiology, 47(11), 
1245-1251.
Cleeland, C. S. (2001).  Cross-cutting  research issues: a research agenda for reducing distress of patients  with cancer. In K.M.Foley & H. Gelband  (Eds.), 
Improving palliative care for cancer (pp. 233-276). Washington, D.C: National Academy Press.
Cleeland, C. S., Bennett,  G. J., Dantzer, R., Dougherty, P. M., Dunn, A. J., Meyers,  C. A. et al. (2003). Are the symptoms of cancer and cancer treatment  
due to a shared biologic  mechanism? A cytokine-immunologic model  of cancer symptoms. Cancer, 97(11), 2919-2925.
Clinical Pharmacology Textbook: Minocycline
Dodd, M. J., Cho, M. H., Cooper, B., Miaskowski, C., Lee, K. A., & Bank, K. (2005). Advancing our knowledge  of symptom clusters.  J Support Oncol, 3(6 
Suppl 4), 30-31.
EuroQol Group. EuroQol-A  new facility for the measurement of health-related quality of life. Health Policy. 1990;  16: 199-208.
Foley, K. M. & Gelband, H. (2001). Improving  Palliative Care for Cancer.  Washington, D.C: National Academy Press.
Food and Drug Administration  (2006a). Guidance for Industry and FDA Staff (draft): Guidance  for the Use of Bayesian Statistics  in Medical  Device  
Clinical Trials. Rockville MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Available at http://www.fda.gov/cdrh/osb/guidance/1601.pdf.
Food and Drug Administration  (Feb 2006b). Guidelines for Industry (draft). Patient-Reported  Outcome  Measures: Use in Medical Product Development to 
Support Labeling Claims.http://www.fda.gov/cder/guidance/5460dft.htm.
Garden, A. S. (2003). Mucositis:  current  management and investigations.  Semin Radiat  Oncol, 13(3),  267-273.
Gump, D. W., Ashikaga,  T., Fink, T. J., & Radin, A. M. (1977). Side effects  of minocycline: different  dosage  regimens. Antimicrobial  Agents and 
Chemotherapy, 12(5),  642-646.
Jemal, A., Siegel, R., Ward, E., Murray, T., Xu, J., & Thun, M. J. (2007). Cancer  statistics, 2007.  CA Cancer J Clin, 57(1), 43-66.
Jeremic, B., Shibamoto, Y., Milicic, B., Dagovic,  A., Nikolic, N., Aleksandrovic, J. et al. (2003). Impact  of treatment interruptions due to toxicity on outcome 
of patients with early  stage  (I/II) non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) treated with hyperfractionated radiation therapy alone. Lung Cancer, 40(3), 317-323.
Kent, S., Bluthe, R. M., Kelley, K. W., & Dantzer, R. (1992).  Sickness  behavior as a new target  for drug development. Trends in Pharmacological 
Sciences, 13(1), 24-28.
Kloppenburg, M., Dijkmans,  B. A., Verweij, C. L., & Breedveld, F. C. (1996). Inflammatory and immunological parameters of disease activity in rheumatoid 
arthritis patients treated with minocycline. Immunopharmacology, 31(2-3), 163-169.
Kloppenburg, M., Mattie, H., Douwes, N., Dijkmans, B. A., & Breedveld, F. C. (1995). Minocycline in the treatment  of rheumatoid arthritis: relationship of 
serum concentrations  to efficacy. Journal of Rheumatology, 22(4), 611-616.
Ledeboer, A., Sloane, E. M., Milligan, E. D., Frank, M. G., Mahony, J. H., Maier, S. F. et al. (2005). Minocycline attenuates mechanical allodynia  and 
proinflammatory cytokine  expression in rat models  of pain facilitation. Pain,  115(1-2), 71-83.
Lee, B. N., Dantzer,  R., Langley,  K. E., Bennett,  G. J., Dougherty, P. M., Dunn, A. J. et al. (2004). A cytokine-based  neuroimmunologic mechanism of 
cancer-related symptoms. Neuroimmunomodulation, 11(5), 279-292.
Lexi-Comp: Minocycline.  Retrieved July 21, 2008, from web site: http://www.lexi.com/
Lev-Ari S, Lichtenberg D, Arber N.(2008). Compositions for treatment of cancer and inflammation. Recent  Patents Anticancer Drug Discov.  2008  
Jan;3(1):55-62.
Linard, C., Marquette, C., Clarencon, D., Galonnier, M., Mathieu, J., Pennequin, A. et al. (2005). Acute ileal inflammatory cytokine response induced by 
irradiation is modulated by subdiaphragmatic  vagotomy. J Neuroimmunol, 168(1-2),  83-95.
Linard, C., Marquette, C., Mathieu, J., Pennequin, A., Clarencon, D., & Mathe, D. (2004).  Acute induction of inflammatory  cytokine expression after 
gamma-irradiation in the rat: effect of an NF-kappaB  inhibitor. Int J Radiat Oncol  Biol Phys, 58(2), 427-434.
MD Anderson Cancer Center Formulary.  Retrieved July 21, 2008, from web site: http://www.crlonline.com/crlsql/servlet/crlonline
McNair, D. M., Lorr, M., & Droppleman, L. F. (1992). EdITS Manual for the Profile of Mood States. San Diego CA: Educational and Industrial Testing  
Service.
Mendoza, T., Cleeland, C., Wang, S., Brown, T., Lin, E., Wolff, R. et al. (Dec 2002).  Differences in quality of life during chemoradiation for rectal and 
pancreatic cancers: Measureable impact of chemotherapy  on treatment-related toxicities [abstract]. Radiological Society of North America 88th Scientific 
Assembly and Annual Meeting, Chicago IL. 
Micromedex – Healthcare Series.  Retrieved July 21, 2008, from web site: http://www.thomsonhc.com/home/dispatch
Miller, A. H. (2003).  Cytokines  and sickness  behavior: implications for cancer care and control. Brain Behav Immun, 17 Suppl 1, S132-S134.
Morrow, G. R.,  Jean-Pierre, P.,  Roscoe, J. A.,  Heckler,  C. E., Schwartzenberger,  P. O.,  Giguere, J. K., Dakhil,  S. R.  A phase  III randomized, placebo-
controlled, double-blind trial of a eugeroic agent  in 642 cancer patients reporting fatigue during chemotherapy: A URCC CCOP Study.  J Clin Oncol 26: 
2008 (May  20 suppl; abstr 9512).
National Cancer Institute  (Feb 2007). University of Rochester Clinical Trial: Phase III 
Nutt, D. J., Demyttenaere, K., Janka, Z., Aarre, T., Bourin, M., Canonico, P. L. et al. (2006). The other face of depression, reduced positive affect:  the role 
of catecholamines  in causation  and cure.  J Psychopharmacol.
Pignon J.P., Bourhis  J., Domenge C., et al. (2000). Chemotherapy added to locoregional treatment for head and neck squamous cell carcinoma:  Three 
meta-analyses of updated  individual data- MACH-NC Collaborative Group. Meta-Analysis of Chemotherapy on Head  and Neck Cancer.  Lancet 355: 949-
955.
Radloff, L.S. (1977) 'The CES-D  scale: A self report depression scale for research  in the general population'.  Applied Psychological Measurement 1: 385-
401. 
Sloan, J. A., Loprinzi, C. L., Kuross, S. A., Miser, A. W., O'Fallon,  J. R., Mahoney, M. R. et al. (1998). Randomized comparison of four tools  measuring 
overall quality of life in patients with advanced cancer. Journal of Clinical Oncology, 16(11), 3662-3673.
Trotti A., Pajak  T.F., Gwede  C.K.,   Paulus R., Cooper J., Forastiere A., Ridge J.A., Bruner D.W., Garden A.S., Ang K.K., Curran W. (2007). TAME:  
Development of a new method for summarizing  adverse events of cancer  treatment by the Radiation Therapy Oncology Group. Lancet Oncology, 8, 613-
624.
Van der Meeren, A., Vandamme, M., Squiban, C., Gaugler,  M. H., & Mouthon, M. A. (2003). Inflammatory reaction  and changes in expression of 
coagulation proteins on lung endothelial  cells after total-body irradiation  in mice. Radiation Research,  160(6), 637-646.
Wang, X. S., Fairclough, D. L., Liao, Z., Komaki, R., Chang, J. Y., Mobley,  G. M. et al. (2006). Longitudinal  study of the relationship between  
chemoradiation therapy for non-small-cell lung cancer and patient symptoms. J Clin Oncol, 24(27), 4485-4491.
Yamaki, K., Yoshida, N., Kimura, T., Ohbayashi, H., & Takagi, K. (1998). Effects  of cytokines and minocycline on subacute lung injuries induced  by 
repeated injection of lipopolysaccharide.  Kansenshogaku Zasshi, 72(1),  75-82.
Zanjani, T. M., Sabetkasaei, M., Mosaffa, N., Manaheji, H., Labibi, F., & Farokhi, B. (2006). Suppression of interleukin-6 by minocycline in a rat model  of 
neuropathic pain. European Journal of Pharmacology,  538(1-3), 66-72.