Version 11 
February 22, 2018  Page 1 CLINICAL TRIAL PROTOCOL  
 
Title: A Phase 1b dose -finding study of DDFPe in acute ischemic stroke  
 
Protocol Number: NVX -208-AIS 
 
UAMS IRB Number: 205529  
 
Phase: 1b  
 
 
Study Principal Investigator:  William Culp, MD  
     University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences  
      
Co-Principal Investigator:   Sanjeeva Onteddu, MD  
     University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences  
 
Sub-Investigator:    Krishna NalleBalle, MD  
     University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences  
 
IND Sponsor:  
University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences (UAMS)  
4301 W. Markham Street  
Little Rock, AR 72205  
 
Clinical Site:  
University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences  
Little Rock, AR  
 
Medical Monitors:  
James D. Marsh, MD  
Professor and Chair  
Department of Internal Medicine  
University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences  
 
Manish Joshi, MD  
Associate Professor  
Department of Internal Medicine  
University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences  
 
Title: A phase 1b dose -finding study of DDFPe in acute ischemic stroke  
PIs: William C. Culp, MD & Sanjeeva Onteddu, MD  
Institution: UAMS  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version 11 
February 22, 2018  Page 2 Study Summary  
Title  A Phase 1b dose -finding study of DDFPe in Acute Ischemic Stroke  
Sponsor  University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences  
Protocol Number  NVX -208-AIS 
Phase  Phase 1b  
Methodology  Randomized, placebo controlled, blinded escalating dose design; 6:2 DDFPe to 
placebo at each dose level  
Rationale  To provide dosing guidelines for a Phase 2 study in patients who have an acute stroke  
Study Duration  Approximately 18 months  
Study Center(s)  University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR  
Primary Objective  To determine the maximum tolerated dose (MTD) of Dodecafluoropentane emulsion 
(DDFPe) in subjects with acute ischemic stroke (AIS)  
Secondary Objective  To determine the safety of DDFPe in subjects who have experienced an AIS event  
Number of Subjects  Up to 24 completed subjects  
Diagnosis and Main 
Eligibility Criteria  ➢ Inclusion: ages 18years old or older, male or female, AIS with NIH Stroke 
Scale between 2 and 20  
➢ Exclusion: Severe cerebral hemorrhage or severe hemorrhagic stroke, 
intracranial surgery or major head trauma within 3 months, > 12 hours since 
onset of stroke symptoms, clinically significant cardiac or pulmonary disease, 
current anticoagulant therapy (except low doses of aspirin or low molecular 
weigh t heparin), pregnancy or breastfeeding  
Study Product, Dose, 
Route, Regimen  Dodecafluoropentane emulsion (DDFPe)  
Dose Range: 0.05, 0.10, and 0.17 mL/kg (Maximum dose: 17 mL/dose)  
Route: Intravenous over 5 -10 minutes every 90 ± 10 minutes x 3 doses  
Placebo - Intralipid® 20% IV fat emulsion  
Dose: Sterile 1:101 dilution of Intralipid® in aqueous sodium chloride (0.9% w/v)  
Route: Intravenous  over 5 -10 minutes every 90 ± 10 minutes x 3 doses  
Duration of 
Administration  Approximately 3 -4 hours  
Reference Therapy  None  
Primary Outcome 
Measures  DLT (dose limiting adverse events) including clinically significant changes in vital 
signs, peripheral oxygen saturation (pulse oximetry), clinical symptoms, NIH Stroke 
Scale, laboratory values, and ECG measurements, Grade 3 or higher scores on 
selected CTCAE 4 measures  
  
Title: A phase 1b dose -finding study of DDFPe in acute ischemic stroke  
PIs: William C. Culp, MD & Sanjeeva Onteddu, MD  
Institution: UAMS  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version 11 
February 22, 2018  Page 3 ABBREVIATIONS  
AE  Adverse Event  
AIS  Acute ischemic stroke  
ALT   Alanine Aminotransferase  
ANOVA  Analysis of Variance  
aPTT   Activated Partial Thromboplastin Time  
AST   Aspartate Aminotransferase  
AUC   Area under the Concentration vs. Time Curve  
BP  Blood Pressure  
BUN   Blood Urea Nitrogen  
CL  Clearance  
Cmax   Maximum Concentration  
COPD   Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease  
CRF   Case Report Form  
CT  Computed (Computerized) Tomography  
CTCAE  Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events  
DDFP   Dodecafluoropentane  
DDFPe  Dodecafluoropentane emulsion  
DBP   Diastolic Blood Pressure  
DLT   Dose Limiting Toxicity  
DSM   Data Safety Monitor  
ECG   Electrocardiogram  
FDA   Food and Drug Administration  
HIPAA  Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act  
HR  Heart rate  
IEC  Independent Ethics Committee  
INR  International Normalized Ratio  
IRB  Institutional Review Board  
IV  Intravenous  
LAR   Legally Authorized Representative  
LFT  Liver Function Tests  
mmHg   Millimeters of Mercury  
mRS   modified Rankin Scale  
mSec   Millisecond  
MTD   Maximum Tolerated Dose  
N/A  Not Applicable  
ND  Not Done  
NIH  National Institutes of Health  
NIHSS   National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale  
NSAID  Non-Steroidal Anti -Inflammatory Drug  
NYHA   New York Heart Association  
OTs  Oxygen Transporters  
PHI  Personal Health Information  
PTB  PE-Telomer -B 
RR  Respiratory Rate  
Title: A phase 1b dose -finding study of DDFPe in acute ischemic stroke  
PIs: William C. Culp, MD & Sanjeeva Onteddu, MD  
Institution: UAMS  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version 11 
February 22, 2018  Page 4 SAE   Serious Adverse Event  
SBP  Systolic Blood Pressure  
SD  Standard Deviation  
Tmax   Time at Which the Maximum Concentration (Cmax) Occurs  
tPA  Tissue Plasminogen Activator  
Vd  Volume of Distribution  
UAMS   University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences  
UPIRTSO  Unanticipated Problem Involving Risk to Subjects or Others  
  
Title: A phase 1b dose -finding study of DDFPe in acute ischemic stroke  
PIs: William C. Culp, MD & Sanjeeva Onteddu, MD  
Institution: UAMS  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version 11 
February 22, 2018  Page 5 TABLE OF CONTENTS  
Study Summar y 2 
Abbreviations  3 
1.0 Background and Rationale  7 
1.1 Background  7 
1.2 Brief Description of the Investigational Product  8 
1.3 Preclinical Studies  8 
1.4 Clinical Trials  9 
1.5 Rationale for Conducting the Trial  9 
2.0 Objectives  10 
2.1 Primary Objective  10 
2.2 Secondary Objectives  10 
2.3 Exploratory Objective  10 
3.0 Study Design  10 
3.1 Study Design   10 
3.2 Study Schema  11 
4.0 Trial Registration  11 
5.0 Investigational Product  11 
5.1 Description of the Investigational Product  11 
5.2 Storage and Pr eparation of the Investigational Product  12 
5.3 Dose Escalation Plan/Dose Limiting Toxicity  13 
5.4 Dispensing of the Investigational Product  14 
5.5 Administration of the Investigational Product  15 
5.6 Prior and Concomitant Therapy  15 
5.7 Return and Destruction of the Investigational Product  15 
6.0 Study Subjects  16 
6.1 Study Population  16 
6.2 Inclusion Criteria  16 
6.3 Exclusion Criteria  16 
6.4 Withdrawal Criteria  17 
6.5 Replacement of Subjects  17 
7.0 Investigational Plan  17 
7.1 Usual Care Provided by Treating Physician  17 
7.2 Consent Process  18 
7.3 Verification of Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  18 
7.4 Randomization and Blinding  18 
7.5 Screening Study Procedures  19 
7.6 Day 1: Study Procedures  20 
7.7 Day 4: Study Procedures  21 
7.8 Day 7 (±1 day ) (or Hospital Discharge Day): Study Procedures  21 
Title: A phase 1b dose -finding study of DDFPe in acute ischemic stroke  
PIs: William C. Culp, MD & Sanjeeva Onteddu, MD  
Institution: UAMS  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version 11 
February 22, 2018  Page 6 7.9 Day 30 (±7 days): Study Procedures or Telephone Follow Up  22 
7.10 Day 90 (±14 days): Study Procedures or Telephone Follow Up  22 
8.0 Adverse Events  23 
8.1 Definitions  23 
8.2 Recording of Adverse Events  25 
8.3 Reporting Procedures for Adverse and Serious Adverse Events  25 
8.4 Data Safety and Monitoring Plan  25 
8.5 Medical Monitor  25 
8.6 Risks and Benefits  26 
8.7 Risk Mitigation  26 
9.0 Data Collection  26 
9.1 Data Collection and Storage  26 
9.2 Confidentiality  26 
9.3 Study Monitoring and Data Queries  27 
9.4 Source Documents  27 
9.5 Case Report Forms  27 
9.6 Study Auditing  27 
9.7 Record Retention  28 
10.0 Data Analysis Plan  28 
10.1 Sample Size  28 
10.2 Clinical Data  28 
10.3 Safety Data  28 
10.4 Exploratory Aim Analysis  29 
11.0 Ethical and Regulatory Requirements  29 
11.1 Trial Registration  29 
11.2 Informed Consent Procedures  29 
11.3 Institutional Review Board (IRB)/Independent Ethics Committee (IEC)  29 
11.4 Subject Confidentiality  29 
11.5 Protocol  Amendments  29 
11.6 Study Termination  30 
12.0 Publication Policy  30 
13.0 References  31 
Appendices:  33 
1. CTCAE 4 Selected Adverse Events  33 
2. DDFPe Dosing by Weight  34 
3. Modified Rankin Scale  40 
4. Schedule of Time and Events  41 
  
Title: A phase 1b dose -finding study of DDFPe in acute ischemic stroke  
PIs: William C. Culp, MD & Sanjeeva Onteddu, MD  
Institution: UAMS  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version 11 
February 22, 2018  Page 7 1.0 Background and Rationale  
1.1 Background  
Stroke is the fifth leading cause of death in the United States and is the 
leading cause of long term disability1,2. Distinct geographic disparities in 
stroke mortality, with highest rates in the southeast United States including 
Arkansas, are known as the “stroke belt.” There the average stroke mortality is 
≈20% to 40% higher than the rest of the nation3. Stroke is the leading cause of 
serious long -term disability3. Between 2012 and 2030, disability and medical 
costs related to str oke are projected to triple, from $71.6 billion to $184.1 
billion, with the majority of the projected increase in costs arising from those 
65 to 79 years of age4. 
 
There are two main forms of stroke, ischemic and hemorrhagic. An ischemic 
stroke occurs in 85% of cases and is caused by cerebral vessel occlusion, 
obstructing blood flow to a portion of the brain1. Currently, the only approved 
therapies for acute ischemic stroke are IV tissue plasminogen activator (tPA), 
a thrombolytic agent that clea rs the thrombus within the blood vessel, or intra -
arterial catheter thrombectomy. Despite the availability of therapy, it reaches 
only approximately 7% of ischemic stroke victims in the United St ates5. Delay 
beyond the effective time window for therapy is a common reason for failure. 
To reduce the devastating impact of stroke on individuals and society, we 
continue to seek ways to improve functional recovery and limit ischemic 
damage in stroke pat ients. The potential neuroprotective agent, 
dodecafluoropentane emulsion (DDFPe) has recently shown strong positive 
effects in pre -clinical animal models of acute ischemic stroke6-11. Other 
perfluorocarbons have been tested in humans as potential neuroprot ectants 
and blood substitutes12 yet none have been successful.  
 
DDFPe (2% w/vol) is a liquid perfluorocarbon nanodroplet which transports 
over 200 times as much oxygen per milligram of fluorocarbon as others tested 
as oxygen therapeutics13-15. It is active  at doses that have already been safely 
tested as bolus IV injections in humans as an ultrasound contrast agent by 
Sonus Pharmaceutical in over 2200 patients,16,17 and was approved by the 
European Medicines Agency as an ultrasound contrast agent. NuvOx Pha rma 
owns these data and the FDA has given NuvOx guidance that the prior human 
data from the ultrasound contrast development can be used in support of 
therapeutic development of DDFPe. NuvOx is currently conducting a Phase 
Ib/II trial of DDFPe as a radiatio n sensitizer to reverse tumor hypoxia in 
glioblastoma18 and is about to start a study in sickle cell disease for which an 
IND has been granted. NuvOx has received Orphan Drug Designations for 
both the glioblastoma and sickle cell disease applications.  
 
This fluorocarbon with its greater innate oxygen carrying capacity and smaller 
particle size that allows delivery to occluded and ischemic areas is a superior 
oxygen transporter (OT). DDFPe was shown to significantly improve 
Title: A phase 1b dose -finding study of DDFPe in acute ischemic stroke  
PIs: William C. Culp, MD & Sanjeeva Onteddu, MD  
Institution: UAMS  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version 11 
February 22, 2018  Page 8 functional recovery within two hou rs of dosing and full recovery by 3.5 hours 
in the rabbit stroke model6. A small dose of 0.1 ml/kg was effective in the 
animal model and may provide clinical neuroprotection during pre -hospital 
triage and diagnosis10. Recent DDFPe studies confirmed its str ong capability 
as a neuroprotectant, which  widened the therapeutic window to 9 hours in 
ischemic stroke rabbit models. In those studies >80% of infarct volume was 
protected to 24 hours with only 6 doses over the first 9 hours7. 
 
1.2 Brief Description of the Investigational Product  
DDFPe is an emulsion of 2% dodecafluoropentane in stabilizers (sucrose, PE -
Telomer B) and phosphate buffered saline (pH 7.0). Compared to higher 
molecular weight liquid fluorocarbons that have already been studied  
extensively as OTs, DDFPe carries far more oxygen per gram of fluorocarbon.  
 
Stoichiometrically, DDFP has 200 times the oxygen carrying capacity 
compared to human hemoglobin. Consequently, if it were administered 
intravenously (IV) and passed through the lungs of patients breathing high 
concentrations of oxygen, it would take up large amounts of oxygen and 
increase the oxygen concentration in blood in a dose -dependent way. 
Hypothetically, by shifting ischemic environments to normal tissue pO2 
environments patient recovery from stroke will be improved.  
 
1.3 Preclinical Studies  
Extensive work was done to evaluate the toxicity and PK/PD of DDFPe as an 
ultrasound contrast -imaging  agent. During development,  most work was done 
using "activated" dodeca fluoropentane emulsion (DDFPe) referred to as 
EchoGen® when it was studied as a contrast agent. EchoGen was 
administered as bolus IV injections. Activation was achieved by applying 
negative pressure (usually by suction in a syringe) which resulted in 2 mic ron 
sized microbubbles of gas in the circulation. The “activated” form of DDFPe 
has been shown to have more toxicity than "unactivated" compound (0.2 
micron vesicles of DDFP without microbubbles). Recently, in a single - dose 
rat study, the maximum tolerate d dose of "unactivated" DDFPe was 
determined to be 6 mL/kg, which converted to a human equivalent dose 
(HED) of approximately 1 mL/kg. At that dose in the rats, toxicity was 
observed to be impaired locomotion and blanching of the typical red color of 
the e yes and gums. No mortality was observed and all animals recovered 
within 4 hours.  
 
Studies have also been performed in non -human primates. Anaesthetized 
rhesus monkeys received 0.6 mL/kg of activated DDFPe IV every 30 minutes 
for 3 doses without adverse ef fects19. In addition, conscious cynomolgus 
monkeys showed no adverse reactions to 0.6 mL/kg of activated DDFPe given 
IV every 30 minutes for 3 doses and showed only minor transient changes in 
blood pressure and heart rate at up to 1.1 mL/kg19. 
Title: A phase 1b dose -finding study of DDFPe in acute ischemic stroke  
PIs: William C. Culp, MD & Sanjeeva Onteddu, MD  
Institution: UAMS  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version 11 
February 22, 2018  Page 9 Additional i nformation on the preclinical evaluation of DDFPe is presented in 
the Investigator’s Brochure.  
 
1.4 Clinical Trials  
Pharmacokinetic data collected during studies conducted by Sonus were 
analyzed by NuvOx16,17. The pharmacokinetics of DDFP in human subjects  
exhibits biphasic decline after an IV bolus dose; there is a rapid initial decline 
followed by a slow terminal elimination phase17. The terminal elimination 
phase (t 1/2) in humans ranges from 81 -99.5 min for doses of 0.15 -0.35 mL/kg. 
The values of half-life in dogs (30 -48 min) were shorter than humans. The 
half-life is the shortest in rats (0.7 -1.9 min). Efficacy was demonstrated in 
lower levels in animal stroke models and higher levels are not thought 
necessary in humans.  
 
DDFP is not metabolized i n humans. The major route of excretion of DDFP is 
through expired air. Almost one hundred percent of administered dose was 
recovered in the expired air as DDFP. The clearance of DDFP in humans is 
43.9-65.2 mL/min/kg.  
 
1.5 Rationale for Conducting the Trial  
A safe, reliable therapy deployed early in the care of acute stroke patients, 
either ischemic or hemorrhagic, that restored critical oxygen supply to brain 
could potentially attenuate ischemic tissue damage and could improve long -
term patient outcomes. Im mediate restoration of critical brain oxygenation to 
bridge the time to vascular reperfusion by other methods would be expected to 
decrease ischemic damage, improve immediate outcomes, decrease sequelae, 
and reduce long -term health care costs.  
 
DDFPe (2% w /vol dodecafluoropentane emulsion (NVX -208)) is a liquid 
fluorocarbon, which  transports over 200 times as much oxygen per milligram 
of fluorocarbon as liquid fluorocarbons that were previously tested 
extensively as oxygen therapeutics13-15. It can easily b e injected intravenously. 
Intravenous drug delivery in the first hour after the onset of the symptoms and 
signs of stroke has been proven practical in the FAST MAG clinical trial of 
acute strokes20. 
 
We hypothesize that administration of DDFPe  will provide critical tissue 
oxygenation in acute stroke patients to decrease stroke volumes and symptoms 
in these patients.  
 
The rationale for administering the doses evaluated is:  
1. The dose levels are within the  levels already tested in animals and 
humans6-11,16,17. Volunteers received two IV bolus doses of 0.35 mL/kg of 
activated DDFPe 24 hours apart and brain cancer patients received daily 
doses of 0.17 mL/kg of unactivated DDFPe19. 
Title: A phase 1b dose -finding study of DDFPe in acute ischemic stroke  
PIs: William C. Culp, MD & Sanjeeva Onteddu, MD  
Institution: UAMS  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version 11 
February 22, 2018  Page 10 2. Therapeutic reversal of tumo r hypoxia has already been observed in 
patients administered doses of 0.1 mL/kg and 0.17 mL/kg19,21. 
 
3. Therapeutic reduction in stroke damage has been observed at dose levels 
of 0.1 mL/kg in rabbits6-11. Since drug effects tend to correlate with body 
surfac e area/weight, one would predict that a dose of approximately 0.03 
mL/kg should be effective in humans compared to rabbits. Therefore, we 
do not believe that it is necessary to explore doses higher than 0.17 mL/kg.  
 
2.0 Objectives  
2.1 Primary Objective  
The primary objective of this study is to establish the Maximum Tolerated Dose 
(MTD) of DDFPe  given intravenously at intervals of 90 ± 10 minutes x 3 doses 
within 12 hours after subjects have had a documented Acute Ischemic Stroke (AIS).  
 
2.2 Secondary Object ive 
The secondary objective of this study is to assess the frequency and severity of 
adverse events following administration of DDFPe  to patients who have had an AIS.  
 
2.3 Exploratory Objective  
We will evaluate the feasibility of using the National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale 
(NIHSS) to assess the immediate response to intravenous DDFPe in patients with 
AIS. 
 
3.0 Study Design  
3.1 Study Design  
This study is a randomized, placebo controlled, blinded escalating dose study 
designed to determine the MTD and adverse events possibly related to intravenous 
administration of DDFPe . At each of three dose levels (0.05, 0.10, 0.17 mL/kg) six 
subjects will receive DDFPe and two will receive placebo.  
Title: A phase 1b dose -finding study of DDFPe in acute ischemic stroke  
PIs: William C. Culp, MD & Sanjeeva Onteddu, MD  
Institution: UAMS  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version 11 
February 22, 2018  Page 11 3.2 Study Schema  
The study flow is shown below in Figure 1:  
 
 
4.0 Trial Registration  
The trial will be registered in the ClinicalTrials.gov database prior to enrollment of the first 
subject. Updated information  will be included in the record every six (6) months or as 
necessary. Results will be included in the ClinicalTrials.gov database within one (1) year 
after the completion of the study.  
 
5.0 Investigational Product  
5.1 Description of the Investigational Pro duct 
DDFPe  (2% w/vol dodecafluoropentane emulsion (NVX -208)) is a liquid 
fluorocarbon, which  transports over 200 times as much oxygen per milligram of 
fluorocarbon as liquid fluorocarbons that were previously tested extensively as 
oxygen therapeutics. The active ingredient dodecafluoropentane (DDFP) is a liquid 
with a boiling point of 28 -30°C at atmospheric pressure. It is formulated as a 
nanodroplet dispersion of 2% (w/v) DDFP, stabilized by a 0.3% (w/v) 
fluorosurfactant, PEG Telomer B, in a continuous phase of 30% (w/v) sucrose.  
 

Title: A phase 1b dose -finding study of DDFPe in acute ischemic stroke  
PIs: William C. Culp, MD & Sanjeeva Onteddu, MD  
Institution: UAMS  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version 11 
February 22, 2018  Page 12 Clinical supplies for this study have been manufactured under asep tic conditions at 
NuvOx Pharma in Tucson, Arizona, USA. DDFPe  is produced as a stable emulsion, 
which is terminally filtered through 0.2 μm sterile filters, and aseptically sealed in 
vials containing 10 mL of DDFPe.  
 
The placebo will be a sterile 1:101 dil ution of Intralipid® 20% IV fat emulsion in 
aqueous sodium chloride (0.9% w/v) for injection prepared by pharmacy staff 
according to instructions in the Pharmacy Manual. Immediately prior to injection, the 
placebo will be aseptically compounded and placed  directly into the same dispensing 
syringes as those for dispensing used for the injection of DDFPe22, 23. The placebo 
will not be stored for any length of time.  
 
5.2 Storage and Preparation of the Investigational Product  
DDFPe will be shipped to the University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences (UAMS) 
Research Pharmacy prior to the start of the study along with instructions for handling, 
storage, dispensing and administration of DDFPe. All instructions are detailed in the 
Pharmacy Manual.  
 
Receipt of dr ug in proper condition will be recorded by the research pharmacist. 
Upon receipt, any drug that does not meet the conditions established in the Pharmacy 
Manual or arrives with vials that are broken or otherwise damaged will be reported to 
NuvOx and instruc tion will be sought as to whether the vials can be used or should be 
set aside for later return or destruction. The site will be will be responsible for its own 
drug accountability.  
 
DDFPe will be provided in 10 mL vials and stored upright at 2 -8ºC at ambi ent 
humidity in a monitored refrigerator prior to use. Once a subject has been identified, 
the drug may be removed from the refrigerator and stored at room temperature up to 6 
hours until administered. The study drug may not be frozen. All vials of DDFPe w ill 
be labelled for investigational use. The number of vials stored in each locked kit will 
be calculated to allow for administration of the maximum dose at each dosing level. 
Each kit will also have a table used to calculate the dose, drug dosing and 
accountability forms and will be labeled for investigational use only. Immediately 
prior to injection, DDFPe or placebo will be prepared as per instructions in the 
Pharmacy Manual by pharmacy staff. The syringes containing either DDFPe or 
placebo will be appro priately labeled for investigational use only and provided to the 
clinical team in a blinded manner.  
 
Once a kit has been opened, it should be returned to the pharmacy after use.  
  
Title: A phase 1b dose -finding study of DDFPe in acute ischemic stroke  
PIs: William C. Culp, MD & Sanjeeva Onteddu, MD  
Institution: UAMS  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version 11 
February 22, 2018  Page 13 5.3 Dose Escalation Plan  
5.3.1  Dose Escalation  
The plan for dose escalation  is shown in Table 5.1.  
Table 5.1: Dos e Escalation of DDFPe by Cohort  
Cohort  DDFPe Dose (mL/kg)  Maximum Dose (mL)  
1 0.05 (x 3 doses)  5 mL/dose x 3 doses  
2 0.10 (x 3 doses)  10 mL/dose x 3 doses  
3 0.17 (x 3 doses)  17 mL/dose x 3 doses  
* Subjects weighing more than 100kg will be included in the study. Doses will be limited 
to a maximum based on a weight of 100 kg for subjects weighing in excess of 100 kg.  
 
5.3.2  Dose Limiting Toxicity  
Dose limiting toxicity (DLT) will be defined by the following cr iteria:  
• Clinically significant changes in vital signs:  
o Heart rate ± 50% from baseline  
o Respiratory rate >30 /min  
o Systolic blood pressure < 90 mmHg or >220 mmHg  
o Diastolic blood pressure >110 mmHg  
• New (i.e. not seen at baseline) ECG changes consistent with:  
o Acute right ventricular dilation or strain  
o Incomplete or complete bundle branch block  
o Q waves in leads III and aVF  
o T-wave inversion and/or ST segment changes in the precordial leads  
o Any other clinically significant cardiac arrhythmia  
• Common Terminology Crit eria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) 4 Grade 3 
or higher cough, dyspnea, chest pain -cardiac or non -cardiac, chest wall 
pain or hypoxia (See Appendix 1  for specific criteria)  
• NIHSS: sudden worsening of 4 or more from the baseline (pre -DDFPe 
initiation)  
• The Medical Monitor will review all data collected at Post -Dose #3 
(approximately 4 -6 hours after the end of the Dose #3 infusion of 
DDFPe or placebo for each subject). Enrollment will be on hold until the 
Medical Monitor has reviewed the data and approves enrollment of an 
additional subject. The Medical Monitor may choose to temporarily halt 
the study if serious concerns arise regarding subject safety.  
 
5.3.3  Maximum Tolerated Dose  
 The algorithm for determining the MTD is as follows : 
• Up to six subjects and two controls will be enrolled at each dose level 
constituting each cohort. Subjects will be evaluated for four hours after 
receiving the last of the three doses and again at discharge from the 
hospital or one week later, whichever is soone r. 
• DLT is previously defined in Section 5.3.2 . 
• If no DLTs are observed in a patient at Post -Dose #3 of DDFPe or 
placebo the Medical Monitor may allow progression to the next patient.  
Title: A phase 1b dose -finding study of DDFPe in acute ischemic stroke  
PIs: William C. Culp, MD & Sanjeeva Onteddu, MD  
Institution: UAMS  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version 11 
February 22, 2018  Page 14 • After all 8 subjects have been enrolled in a cohort, the Medical Monitor 
will review the data. A decision as to whether the study may proceed to 
the next cohort will be made.  
• If a total of two or fewer subjects in an 8 subject cohort experience a 
DLT, escalation to the next cohort may proceed if approved by the 
Medical Monitor.  If three or more DLTs were observed, the Medical 
Monitor may consult with the Research Pharmacist to determine if the 
observed DLTs occurred in subjects who received DDFPe or placebo. If 
any of the DLTs were observed in the subjects receiving placebo, the  
Medical Monitor may allow the study to proceed as long as two or fewer 
subjects with DLTs received DDFPe.  
• If three or more subjects who received DDFPe in an 8 subject cohort 
experience a DLT, the MTD will be determined to have been exceeded 
and further en rollment in the cohort as well as dose escalation will stop. 
The dose administered to the previous cohort will be considered to be 
the MTD.  
• Subjects who withdraw from the study for reasons other than a DLT 
may be replaced.  
• The Medical Monitor will review a ll safety data for each patient and 
cohort and must grant approval before proceeding to the next patient 
and/or cohort.  
• Exploration of lower dose levels intermediate to a level previously 
shown to be well tolerated may be considered. In addition to reducin g 
the dose, this might include reducing the number of doses, increasing the 
time between doses, and/or altering the infusion time.  
• The dose exploration will be complete when either: (1) the MTD has 
been defined or (2) when no MTD has been reached but six s ubjects and 
two controls have been treated at the last cohort level approved by the 
Medical Monitor.  
 
5.4 Dispensing of the Investigational Product  
DDFPe will be stored as detailed in Section 5.2 . A written order signed by one of the 
principal investigator s must be obtained prior to dispensing.  
 
5.5 Administration of the Investigational Product  
For each cohort, the dose of DDFPe or placebo will be calculated based on body 
weight according to the table in Appendix 2 . Before administration, the drug will be 
prepared for injection per instructions in the Pharmacy Manual. DDFPe will be 
administered intravenously over 5 -10 minutes through an IV catheter placed in a 
peripheral vein or through a central venous catheter (Note: a central venous catheter 
will not be p laced solely for the study). The site of the intravenous catheter through 
which the study drug is administered will be recorded in the research record. Doses 
will be administered by slow IV push. After the first dose, subsequent doses will be 
administered 90 ± 10 minutes after the end of the previous infusion. Administration 
of all doses should occur with the syringe in the vertical position assuring that any 
Title: A phase 1b dose -finding study of DDFPe in acute ischemic stroke  
PIs: William C. Culp, MD & Sanjeeva Onteddu, MD  
Institution: UAMS  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version 11 
February 22, 2018  Page 15 product foaming in the syringe will float near the rubber seal of the syringe plunger 
(NOTE: THIS I S THE MOST CRITICAL SAFETY CONSIDERATION DURING 
INFUSION). The placebo will be placed in identical syringes and administered in the 
same way. The volume of drug product to be used from each syringe will be provided 
on the label from pharmacy. The start and  stop times for each infusion will be 
recorded on the source documents. The volume of the infusion will also be recorded.  
 
5.6 Prior and Concomitant Therapy  
5.6.1  Excluded Drug Therapy Prior to Enrollment  
Blood clot lysing agents normally used in patients with non -hemorrhagic 
stroke may be used as indicated for acute treatment of AIS. Acute or chronic 
dosing with the following medications precludes entry into the study:  
• Anticoagulants with the exception of low dose aspirin, prophylactic 
doses of lo w molecular weight heparin and warfarin  
• All non -prescription medications and herbal remedies must be reviewed 
and approved by the investigator . 
• NSAIDs are permissible.  
 
5.6.2  Prohibited Drug Therapy During and 24 Hours after the Administration of the 
Inves tigational Product  
The following drugs are not allowable within 24 hours after the last dose of 
DDFPe:  
• None  
 
5.6.3  Criteria for Stopping the Investigational Product  
The investigational agent will be discontinued in the event that:  
• Life-threatening disease progression occurs  
• Unacceptable adverse events  
• Subject wishes to withdraw from the study  
• Changes in the patient’s condition that, in the opinion of the investigator, 
present unacceptable risk to the subject  
 
5.7 Return and Destruct ion of the Investigational Product  
Any doses of DDFPe or placebo that are dispensed but not administered to an 
individual subject will be returned to the Pharmacy, documented in the drug 
accountability record, and handled as per Section 5.5 . Any DDFPe or p lacebo that 
remains at the end of the study will be entered into the drug accountability records 
and returned to NuvOx or destroyed  (21 CFR 312.62). Destruction will be witnessed 
and recorded appropriately.  
 
6.0 Study Subjects  
6.1 Study Population  
The stud y population will include any male or female patients, ages 18years old or 
older, who present to UAMS with evidence of an AIS. The potential subjects must 
have a CT scan demonstrating that there is no evidence of hemorrhage or major 
Title: A phase 1b dose -finding study of DDFPe in acute ischemic stroke  
PIs: William C. Culp, MD & Sanjeeva Onteddu, MD  
Institution: UAMS  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version 11 
February 22, 2018  Page 16 trauma. Potential subje cts must not have had recent (within 3 months) intracranial 
surgery. Subjects must meet all of the inclusion and exclusion criteria prior to 
enrollment. The patient or a legally authorized representative must be able and 
willing to provide informed consent . 
 
6.2 Inclusion Criteria  
6.2.1  Ages 18  years old or older  
6.2.2  Diagnosis of AIS  
6.2.3  Body weight ≥ 45 kg  
6.2.4  NIHSS between 2 and 20 inclusive.  
6.2.5  Patient or LAR must be willing and able to understand the study and provide 
written informed consent  
 
6.3 Exclusion Criteria  
6.3.1  Currently pregnant or breastfeeding  
6.3.2  History of significantly impaired renal or hepatic function  
6.3.3  Severe hemorrhage or severe hemorrhagic stroke on CT scan. Mild or 
moderate changes of Fisher Grade 1 or 2 sub arachnoid hemorrhage are 
allowed as are hemorrhagic transformation changes of Grade HI -1 and HI -
224,25. 
6.3.4  Prior stroke, intracranial surgery, or major head trauma within three (3) 
months prior to enrollment  
6.3.5  Pre-stroke mRS ≥ 2 (See Appendix 3 ) 
6.3.6 Myocardial infarction within six (6) months prior to enrollment  
6.3.7  Unstable angina, NYHA Class II or greater congestive heart failure  
6.3.8  Uncontrolled hypertension (SBP > 180 and/or DBP > 110 mmHg)  
6.3.9  Uncontrolled arrhythmia or history of clinic ally significant arrhythmia within 
the past six (6) months (except atrial fibrillation)  
6.3.10  Clinically significant COPD or other pulmonary condition that is not 
controlled by medication or requires oxygen frequently or continuously  
6.3.11  Pneumonia, bro nchitis, or other acute respiratory disease  
6.3.12  Current anticoagulant therapy except for antiplatelet therapy (aspirin, 
NSAIDs) and prophylactic doses of low molecular weight heparin to prevent 
deep vein thrombosis. Note: tPA administered as part of sub jects’ therapy for 
AIS is allowed. However, thrombolytic therapy is not a study requirement.  
6.3.13  History of allergic reaction attributed to compounds of similar chemical 
composition to DDFPe or soy or egg allergies (see Investigator’s Brochure).  
6.3.14  Subject has received any investigational drug within thirty (30) days prior to 
enrollment into the study  
6.3.15  Inability to comply with the study procedures  
6.3.16  History or evidence of any other clinically significant condition that, in the 
opinion of t he investigator, might pose a safety risk to subjects or interfere 
with study procedures, evaluation, or completion  
 
 
Title: A phase 1b dose -finding study of DDFPe in acute ischemic stroke  
PIs: William C. Culp, MD & Sanjeeva Onteddu, MD  
Institution: UAMS  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version 11 
February 22, 2018  Page 17 6.4 Withdrawal Criteria  
Subjects may choose to withdraw from the study at any time for any reason. 
Additionally, the investigator may choose to remove subjects from the study. Any 
subject withdrawing their consent to participate in the study or their authorization to 
use their pr otected health information will be withdrawn from the study.  
 
Subjects will be informed that the investigational product may be discontinued by the 
investigator even if the subject and/or the LAR wish to continue. This may occur for 
the following reasons:  
• Serious Adverse Event (SAE) believed to be related to investigational product  
• Intolerable side effects  
• Failure to complete required study procedures  
• Clinically significant laboratory or ECG abnormalities  
• Significant change in oxygenation as measured by pul se oximetry  
• Initiation of treatment with a prohibited drug during the intervention phase  
• Non-compliance with the treatment regimen  
Subjects may also be withdrawn for any reason if the investigator believes that it is in 
the best interest of the subject to discontinue the study.  
6.5 Replacement of Subjects  
Subjects who withdraw or are withdrawn from the study prior to the completion of 
the Day 7 visit may be replaced at the discretion of the investigator.  
 
7.0 Investigational Plan   
7.1 Usual Care Provided by Treating Physician  
Customary (routine) care for patients suffering a stroke will be offered as would be 
the case had the patient not enrolled in the trial. This may include  physiological 
monitoring, medical procedures, drug therapy (including t PA), respiratory support, 
and ancillary or accessory care. Routine care will be directed by the patient’s treating 
physician. If the treating physician believes that it is no longer in the best interest for 
the patient to continue in the study, he/she will  contact the investigator and 
immediately stop all study -related procedures.  
 
7.2 Consent Process  
Potential study subjects whose condition has rendered them unable to provide 
informed consent due to aphasia, confusion, impaired consciousness or other 
cogni tive impairments such as intellectual disability and dementia will require a 
legally authorized representative (LAR).  
 
Trained study personnel will review the IRB -approved study summary brochure with 
the subject/LAR and answer questions followed by reviewi ng the informed consent 
document with the subject and/or a LAR. The subject/LAR will be allowed to ask 
questions. If the subject/LAR agrees to participate, the consent will be signed and a 
copy will be provided to the subject. Once the consent process is c omplete, study 
Title: A phase 1b dose -finding study of DDFPe in acute ischemic stroke  
PIs: William C. Culp, MD & Sanjeeva Onteddu, MD  
Institution: UAMS  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version 11 
February 22, 2018  Page 18 personnel will document the process in a note to be placed in the study file along with 
the signed consent document.  
 
All screened and enrolled subjects will be recorded in the Screening and Enrollment 
Log at each participating institution. All enrolled subjects should be reported to Dr. 
Culp within 24 hours using the Study Participant Registration form. Dr. Culp will 
advise all PIs as to when it is acceptable to proceed with the next subject. All pre -
determined stopping points will be observ ed (i.e. after each subject in each cohort and 
at the end of each cohort prior to proceeding to the next highest dose).  
 
7.3 Verification of Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
After the consent process is complete, trained study personnel will review the 
Inclusi on and Exclusion criteria with the subject/LAR. The following options are then 
possible:  
• If the subject meets all criteria, they will be allowed to proceed with the study.  
• If the subject fails to meet criteria, no further study -related procedures will be 
conducted.  
• If the failure to meet criteria is minor, the investigator may choose to approach 
the Medical Monitor for a waiver. A waiver will be granted only if doing so will 
not place the subject at increased risk if allowed to participate in the study.  
 
Study personnel will document the review of Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria on the 
appropriate form and place the signed form in the study file. The investigator will be 
notified of the results of the review.  
 
7.4 Randomization and Blinding  
7.4.1  A randomization schedule will be created and maintained by the UAMS 
Research Pharmacy.  
7.4.2  Subjects who agree to participate in the study and meet inclusion and 
exclusion criteria will be assigned to the next available treatment. The UAMS 
Research Pharma cy will track enrollment and randomize blinded treatments 
for administration to properly enrolled research subjects.  
7.4.3  The UAMS Research Pharmacy will deliver the blinded investigational 
treatment to the study personnel who will administer the drug to the subject.  
 
7.5 Screening Study Procedures  
7.5.1  Screening and Enrollment Log  
All subjects who provide informed consent will be entered into the screening 
and enrollment log. Once screening is complete, the log will be updated to 
identify those subjects who pass screening and proceed into the dosing phase 
of the trial.  
 
7.5.2  Review of Head CT Exam  
The investigator will review the CT of the head with the treating physician (if 
not the investigator) or radiologist to assure that the subject meets the 
Title: A phase 1b dose -finding study of DDFPe in acute ischemic stroke  
PIs: William C. Culp, MD & Sanjeeva Onteddu, MD  
Institution: UAMS  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version 11 
February 22, 2018  Page 19 eligibility criteria. The CT must be negative for severe hemorrhage or sever 
hemorrhagic stroke. This will be documented in the study record.  
 
7.5.3  Medical History  
A brief medical history reviewing information pertinent to the study will be 
completed by the investigator. The medical history will be documented and 
signed by the investigator (physician).  
 
7.5.4  Physical Exam  
A brief, targeted physical exam will be completed by the investigator to 
document the subjects condition and assure that there are no obvi ous reasons 
that it would not be in the best interest of the subject to proceed with the 
study. Weight will be measured in light clothing without shoes and recorded 
in the study record. Physical findings will be documented and signed by the 
investigator (p hysician).  
 
7.5.5  Concomitant Medications  
All medications currently taken by subjects will be reviewed and documented 
on the appropriate form. The form will be included in the study file.  
 
7.5.6  Pregnancy Test  
A serum pregnancy test will be performed on al l women of child -bearing 
potential. Dosing with DDFPe will not begin before the test confirms that the 
women are not pregnant. If the test indicates that a woman is pregnant, she 
will be immediately dropped from the study.  
 
7.5.7  NIH Stroke Scale  
The NIHSS will be administered during Screening to assure that subjects 
score between 2 and 20, inclusive, to meet the study Inclusion criteria. Initial 
NIHSS scores from outside originating hospitals or facilities are acceptable 
only if performed by a certifi ed neurologist. The NIHSS will be repeated 
throughout the study as indicated in the Schedule of Time and Events 
(Appendix 4 ). The NIHSS may be found at:  
https://www.ninds.nih.gov/doctor s/NIH_Stroke_Scale.pdf  
 
7.5.8  ECG  
A 12 -lead ECG will be performed as part of the Screening process to assure 
that subjects with serious arrhythmias are appropriately excluded from the 
study. The ECG will be inspected by the treating physician and the 
inves tigator. If a serious rhythm disturbance is observed, a cardiologist may 
be consulted to confirm the findings. If confirmed by the cardiologist, the 
subject will be withdrawn from the study prior to administration of DDFPe. 
After the study is completed, al l ECGs will be reviewed by a board certified 
cardiologist to confirm that no new arrhythmias developed during the course 
of treatment.  
Title: A phase 1b dose -finding study of DDFPe in acute ischemic stroke  
PIs: William C. Culp, MD & Sanjeeva Onteddu, MD  
Institution: UAMS  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version 11 
February 22, 2018  Page 20 7.5.9  Laboratory Studies  
All subjects will have the following laboratory tests collected prior to 
receiving DDFPe:  
• Complete Blood Count  
• Electrolytes (Na, K, Cl,)  
• BUN  
• Creatinine  
• LFTs (AST, ALT, Total Bilirubin, Direct Bilirubin, Albumin)  
• Calcium  
• Glucose  
 
It is anticipated that many of these tests will be done as part of the subjects’ 
routine care. These tests will provi de baseline values prior to administration of 
DDFPe for later comparison with post -dosing test results. The results of these 
tests may or may not be available prior to dosing with DDFPe. None of the 
tests would exclude a subject from participating in the s tudy.  
 
7.6 Day 1: Study Procedures  
After documentation that the subject passed the screening procedures and meets all 
Inclusion and Exclusion criteria, study personnel will check to assure that a patent 
intravenous catheter is in place for infusion of the DDFPe. The catheter should be 
used solely for infusion of DDFPe and compatible intravenous fluids during the study 
intervention period (from the initiation of Dose #1 to after the Dose #3 infusion is 
complete).  
 
Dose #1:  DDFPe will be ordered from the phar macy and prepared as previously 
described. The time that the infusion begins will be recorded. The drug or placebo 
will be infused over 5 -10 minutes. At the end of the infusion, the time will again be 
recorded. Vital signs and pulse oximetry will be monito red. Measurements will be 
recorded every 15 minutes. The subject will be observed for any signs of adverse 
events for 90 minutes after the completion of the infusion.  
 
Dose # 2:  Any new concomitant medications will be recorded. The second dose of 
DDFPe or placebo will be administered as previously described over 5 -10 minutes. 
Times will be recorded at the beginning and end of the infusion as before. Vital signs 
and pulse oximetry will be monitored. Measurements will be recorded every 15 
minutes. The NIHSS w ill be repeated within 60 minutes after the end of the DDFPe 
infusion. The subject will be observed for any signs of adverse events for 90 minutes 
after the completion of the infusion.  
 
Dose #3:  Any new concomitant medications will be recorded. The third d ose of 
DDFPe or placebo will be administered as previously described over 5 -10 minutes. 
Times will be recorded at the beginning and end of the infusion as before. Vital signs 
and pulse oximetry will be monitored. Measurements will be recorded every 15 
minu tes. The NIHSS will be repeated within 60 minutes after the end of the DDFPe 
Title: A phase 1b dose -finding study of DDFPe in acute ischemic stroke  
PIs: William C. Culp, MD & Sanjeeva Onteddu, MD  
Institution: UAMS  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version 11 
February 22, 2018  Page 21 infusion. The subject will be observed for any signs of adverse events for 90 minutes 
after the completion of the infusion.  
 
Vitals should be taken at all scheduled time points (i .e. every 15 minutes); however, 
deviations from scheduled times will not be considered protocol deviations. The exact 
date and time of each measurement will be recorded on the CRF.  
 
Post-Dose #3: Approximately 4±1 hours after the end of Dose #3, the following 
observations will be made:  
• Concomitant medications administered after Dose #3  
• A brief physical examination  
• Vital signs (BP, HR, RR)  
• Pulse oximeter measurement  
• NIHSS  
• ECG  
• Laboratory testing  
 
Any AEs observed during the intervention period will be r ecorded, assessed, and 
followed to resolution.  
 
7.7 Day 4: Study Procedures  
All subjects will be contacted to assess AEs. If the subject is still hospitalized, any 
significant change in condition will be recorded as a possible AE and assessed by the 
invest igator. All AEs will be graded (mild, moderate, severe), assessed for relatedness 
(not related, possibly related, probably related, definitely related), and followed to 
resolution as described in Section 8.0 . 
 
In the event that the subject has been dischar ged from the hospital before Day 4, 
subjects or their LAR will be contacted by telephone. AEs will be assessed and 
followed as described above.  
 
7.8 Day 7±1 (or Hospital Discharge Day): Study Procedures  
The subject will be re -examined on the day of discharge or at one week (Day 7±1), 
whichever comes first. At this visit, the following procedures will be completed:  
• A brief interval medical history  
• A brief physical examination  
• Vital signs (BP, HR, RR)  
• Pulse oximeter measurement  
• NIHSS  
• ECG  
• Laboratory tes ting 
• Modified Rankin Scale  
 
 
Title: A phase 1b dose -finding study of DDFPe in acute ischemic stroke  
PIs: William C. Culp, MD & Sanjeeva Onteddu, MD  
Institution: UAMS  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version 11 
February 22, 2018  Page 22 Any AEs observed during the intervention period will be recorded, assessed, and 
followed to resolution.  
 
If subjects are discharged before Day 7, they will be contacted by telephone to assess 
possible AEs seven days after admin istration of the investigational product. If any 
possible AEs are identified, they will be assessed and followed as previously 
described.  
 
7.9 Day 30 (±7 days): Study Procedures or Telephone Follow Up  
This visit will occur as part of the routine, clinically indicated follow up. If no routine 
appointment is scheduled, the subject may be contacted by telephone to complete the 
study visit. At this visit, the following procedures will occur:  
• Interval medical history  
• A brief physical examination (omitte d for telephone follow up)  
• Vital signs (BP, HR, RR) (omitted for telephone follow up)  
• mRS  
• NIHSS (omitted for telephone follow up)  
• Adverse Events  
 
7.10 Day 90 (±14 days): Office Visit or Telephone Follow Up  
This visit will occur as part of the routine, clin ically indicated follow up. If no routine 
appointment is scheduled, the subject may be contacted by telephone to complete the 
study visit. The purpose of this visit is to assess longer term complications and 
functioning related to stroke. At this visit, th e following procedures will occur:  
• Interval medical history  
• mRS  
• Adverse Events  
 
The medical history will focus on additional cardiovascular events that may have 
occurred since the stroke, any changes in functioning at 90 days compared with pre-
stroke.  
 
8.0 Adverse Events  
8.1 Definitions  
Adverse Event  
An adverse event (AE) is any untoward medical occurrence that develops or worsens 
in severity during the course of the study, whether or not it has a causal relationship 
to the study treatment. Concurrent illnesses or injuries should be regarded as AEs. 
Abnormal results of diagnostic procedures are considered AEs if the abnormality:  
• results in study withdrawal  
• is associated with a serious adverse event  
• is associated with clinical signs  or symptoms  
• leads to additional treatment or to further diagnostic tests  
• is considered by the investigator to be of clinical significance  
Title: A phase 1b dose -finding study of DDFPe in acute ischemic stroke  
PIs: William C. Culp, MD & Sanjeeva Onteddu, MD  
Institution: UAMS  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version 11 
February 22, 2018  Page 23 Serious Adverse Event  
Adverse events are classified as serious or non -serious. A serious adverse event 
(SAE)  is any A E that is:  
• fatal 
• life-threatening  
• requires or prolongs hospital stay  
• results in persistent or significant disability or incapacity  
• a congenital anomaly or birth defect  
• an important medical event  
 
Important medical events are those that may not be immediately life threatening, but 
are clearly of major clinical significance. They may jeopardize the subject, and may 
require intervention to prevent one of the other serious outcomes noted above. For 
example, drug overdose or abuse, a seizure that did no t result in in -patient 
hospitalization or intensive treatment of bronchospasm in an emergency department 
would typically be considered serious.  
 
All adverse events that do not meet any of the criteria for serious should be regarded 
as non-serious adverse e vents . 
 
Adverse Event Reporting Period  
The study period during which adverse events must be reported is normally defined 
as the period from the initiation of any study procedures to the end of the study 
treatment follow -up. For this study, the study treatm ent follow -up is defined as within 
90 days following the last administration of study treatment.  
 
Preexisting Condition  
A preexisting condition is one that is present at the start of the study. A preexisting 
condition should be recorded as an adverse event  if the frequency, intensity, or the 
character of the condition worsens during the study period (e.g. if behavior worsens).  
 
General Physical Examination Findings  
At screening, any clinically significant abnormality should be recorded as a 
preexisting cond ition. At the end of the study, any new clinically significant 
findings/abnormalities that meet the definition of an adverse event must also be 
recorded and documented as an AE.  
 
Post-study Adverse Event  
All unresolved AEs should be followed by the investi gator until the events are 
resolved, until the events are otherwise stable or the subject is lost to follow -up. At 
the last scheduled visit, the investigator should instruct each subject to report any 
subsequent event(s) that the subject, or the subject’s personal physician, believes 
might reasonably be related to participation in this study.  
 
 
Title: A phase 1b dose -finding study of DDFPe in acute ischemic stroke  
PIs: William C. Culp, MD & Sanjeeva Onteddu, MD  
Institution: UAMS  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version 11 
February 22, 2018  Page 24 Abnormal Laboratory Values  
A clinical laboratory abnormality should be documented as an AE if  any one of the 
following  conditions is met:  
• The laboratory abnormality is not otherwise refuted by a repeat test to confirm 
the abnormality  
• The abnormality suggests a disease and/or organ toxicity  
• The abnormality is of a degree that requires active management; e.g. change of 
dose, discontinuation of the investigat ional product, more frequent follow -up 
assessments, further diagnostic investigation, etc.  
 
Hospitalization, Prolonged Hospitalization or Surgery  
Any AE that results in hospitalization or prolonged hospitalization should be 
documented and reported as a SAE  unless specifically instructed otherwise in this 
protocol. Any condition responsible for surgery should be documented as an AE if the 
condition meets the criteria for an AE.  Neither the condition, hospitalization, 
prolonged hospitalization, nor surgery ar e reported as an AE in the following 
circumstances:  
• Hospitalization or prolonged hospitalization for diagnostic or elective surgical 
procedures for a preexisting condition. Surgery should not be reported as an 
outcome of an AE if the purpose of the surgery  was elective or diagnostic and 
the outcome was uneventful.  
• Hospitalization or prolonged hospitalization required to allow efficacy 
measurement for the study.  
• Hospitalization or prolonged hospitalization for therapy of the target disease of 
the study, unle ss it is a worsening or increase in frequency of hospital 
admissions as judged by the clinical investigator.  
 
8.2 Recording of Adverse Events  
At each contact with the subject, the investigator must seek information on adverse 
events by specific questioning and, as appropriate, by examination. Information on all 
AEs should be recorded immediately in the source document, and also in the 
appropriate adverse event module of the case report form (CRF). All clearly related 
signs, symptoms, and abnormal  diagnostic procedures results should be recorded in 
the source document and grouped under one diagnosis when possible.  
 
All AEs occurring during the study period must be recorded. The clinical course of 
each event should be followed until resolution, stab ilization, or until it has been 
determined that the study treatment or participation is not the cause. Serious adverse 
events that are still ongoing at the end of the study period must be followed up to 
determine the final outcome.  
 
8.3 Reporting Procedure s for Adverse and Serious Adverse Events  
All adverse and SAEs will be reported in accordance with FDA and local IRB 
requirements. In addition, any SAE will be reported to NuvOx and the Sponsor by the 
Investigator within 24 hours after becoming apparent.  
Title: A phase 1b dose -finding study of DDFPe in acute ischemic stroke  
PIs: William C. Culp, MD & Sanjeeva Onteddu, MD  
Institution: UAMS  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version 11 
February 22, 2018  Page 25 All SAEs that meet the IRB’s UPIRTSO requirements must be submitted to the IRB 
within 10 working days. All other SAEs will be submitted to the IRB at continuing 
review. Copies of each report and documentation of IRB notification and receipt will 
be kept in t he Clinical Investigator’s binder.  
 
8.4 Data Safety and Monitoring Plan  
All safety data will be reviewed by the Medical Monitor after each patient and after 
the completion of each cohort. All moderate and severe safety signals that are 
unanticipated and pr obably or definitely related to the investigational product will be 
discussed with the Sponsor and NuVox prior to enrolling additional subjects. A Data 
Safety and Monitoring Board will not be appointed.  
 
8.5 Medical Monitor  
A Medical Monitor (MM) will be s elected. The MM will be a licensed physician who 
is familiar with cardiovascular disease and stroke. The MM will review the data 
collected after each patient and after each dose level and will provide an opinion to 
the investigator as to whether it is advi sable to proceed with dose escalation as 
described in Section 5.3.3 . As part of the review, the MM will review all AEs and 
assure that any SAEs have been reported appropriately.  
 
8.6 Risks and Benefits  
Risks may include pain from IV placement, hypotension,  reversible inflammatory 
changes in the lungs, nausea, vomiting, drowsiness, dizziness, fever, headache, 
reduced or elevated blood pressure, blanching of the gums, and allergy to soy or eggs. 
There may be unanticipated adverse events or outcomes. It is ant icipated that oxygen 
delivery to ischemic areas of the brain may improve thereby changing clinical signs. 
It is unclear as to whether this might result in reduced cerebral tissue loss or any 
improvement in outcome following stroke. There may be no benefit to subjects.  
 
8.7 Risk Mitigation  
All subjects will be observed in a unit accustomed to treating patients with stroke. 
Customary clinical care will be provided by the patient’s treating physician. No 
standard treatments will be withheld as a result of part icipation in the study.  
 
Adverse events will be actively sought through the study at multiple time points. All 
AEs will be recorded and evaluated for severity and relatedness and followed to 
resolution. A MM will be appointed to review safety issues as described in Section 
8.5. Repeated measurement of clinical, ECG, and laboratory data have been included 
to detect important safety signals. Careful assessment of all AEs, especially those that 
are probably or definitely related to the investigational product, will be conducted.  
 
9.0 Data Collection  
9.1 Data Collection and Storage  
All source data will be recorded on Case Report Forms (CRFs) as described in 
Sections 9.4 and 9.5. CRFs will be placed in the subjects’ study file and stored in a 
Title: A phase 1b dose -finding study of DDFPe in acute ischemic stroke  
PIs: William C. Culp, MD & Sanjeeva Onteddu, MD  
Institution: UAMS  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version 11 
February 22, 2018  Page 26 locked file cabinet or on password protected or encrypted electronic media. All data 
will be appropriately monitored by the sponsor to assure data quality and integrity. 
Electronic data capture will not be used in this study.  
 
9.2  Confidentiality  
Information about study subjects will be kept confide ntial and managed according to 
the requirements of the Health Information Portability and Accountability Act 
(HIPAA). Those regulations require a signed subject authorization informing the 
subject of the following:  
• The personal health information (PHI) to be collected from subjects in this 
study  
• Who will have access to that information and why  
• Who will use or disclose that information  
• To whom the data may be disclosed and the reasons for this disclosure  
• The rights of a research subject to revoke their autho rization for use of their PHI  
 
In the event that a subject revokes authorization to collect or use PHI, the 
investigator, by regulation, retains the ability to use all information collected prior to 
the revocation of subject authorization. For subjects tha t have revoked authorization 
to collect or use PHI, attempts should be made to obtain permission to collect at least 
vital status (i.e. that the subject is alive) at the end of their scheduled study period.  
 
9.3 Study Monitoring and Data Queries  
The investigator is required to permit the Sponsor to monitor the study data, including 
all communications with the IRB, the manufacturer, all source documents, CRFs, 
pharmacy records, and any other pertinent information. Monitoring visits will be 
scheduled at  a time that is convenient for both the monitor and the investigator. The 
monitor will provide a written report to the investigator within one month after the 
conclusion of the monitoring visit.  
 
9.4 Source Documents  
Source data is all information, origina l records of clinical findings, observations, or 
other activities in a clinical trial necessary for the reconstruction and evaluation of the 
trial. Source data are contained in source documents. Examples of these original 
documents, and data records includ e: hospital records, clinical and office charts, 
laboratory notes, memoranda, subjects’ diaries or evaluation checklists, pharmacy 
dispensing records, recorded data from automated instruments, copies or 
transcriptions certified after verification as being accurate and complete, photographic 
negatives, microfilm or magnetic media, x -rays, subject files, and records kept at the 
pharmacy, at the laboratories, and at medico -technical departments involved in the 
clinical trial.  
 
9.5 Case Report Forms  
The study C RF is the primary data collection instrument for the study. All data 
requested on the CRF must be recorded. All missing data must be explained. If a 
Title: A phase 1b dose -finding study of DDFPe in acute ischemic stroke  
PIs: William C. Culp, MD & Sanjeeva Onteddu, MD  
Institution: UAMS  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version 11 
February 22, 2018  Page 27 space on the CRF is left blank because the procedure was not done or the question 
was not asked, write “N/D ”. If the item is not applicable to the individual case, write 
“N/A”. All entries should be printed legibly in black ink. If any entry error has been 
made, to correct such an error, draw a single straight line through the incorrect entry 
and enter the corr ect data above it. All such changes must be initialed and dated. DO 
NOT ERASE OR WHITE OUT ERRORS. For clarification of illegible or uncertain 
entries, print the clarification above the item, then initial and date it.  
 
9.6 Study Auditing  
The investigator w ill permit study -related monitoring, audits, and inspections by the 
IRB, the study Sponsor, government regulatory bodies, and UAMS compliance 
groups of all study related documents (e.g. source documents, regulatory documents, 
pharmacy documents, data colle ction instruments, study data etc.). The investigator 
will ensure the capability for inspections of applicable study -related facilities (e.g. 
pharmacy, diagnostic laboratory, etc.).  
 
Participation as an investigator in this study implies acceptance of pote ntial 
inspection by government regulatory authorities and applicable compliance offices. 
FDA may choose to inspect the study records as indicated in 21 CFR 312.58.  
 
9.7 Record Retention  
It is the investigator’s responsibility to retain study essential documents for 2 years 
following the date a marketing application is approved for the drug for the indication 
for which it is being investigated (21 CFR 312.62). These documents should be 
retained for a longer period if required by an agreement wi th the funding entity or the 
supplier of the investigational agent. In such an instance, it is the responsibility of the 
funding entity or supplier of the investigational product to inform the 
investigator/institution as to when these documents no longer n eed to be retained.  
 
10.0 Data Analysis Plan  
10.1 Sample Size  
This is a Phase I study. No sample size estimates were done.  
 
10.2 Clinical Data  
Demographic data will be presented as the mean ± SD (range) for normally 
distributed data (median ± interquartile range for non -normal data).  
 
Clinical data includes  vital signs and pulse oximetry (pre - and post -intervention). Pre - 
and post -intervention data will be grouped and examined for differences using a two -
sided t -test or ANOVA, as appropriate. P re- and post - laboratory data will be 
compared in a similar manner. ECGs will be read by a board -certified cardiologist 
and clinically significant changes will be described.  
 
 
 
Title: A phase 1b dose -finding study of DDFPe in acute ischemic stroke  
PIs: William C. Culp, MD & Sanjeeva Onteddu, MD  
Institution: UAMS  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version 11 
February 22, 2018  Page 28 10.3 Safety Data  
All safety data will be reported. DLT will be examined and the MTD will be 
determined as previously described. All SAEs will be reported as required.  
 
10.4 Exploratory Aim Analysis  
There are a number of patient subgroups that could be of interest and might be 
expected to respond differently to DDFPe as evaluated b y NIHSS scores:  
a. In those early patients who get some successful therapy and get DDFPe early at 
less than 3 hours from LKWT, the values should drop with the DDFPe and stay 
down with reperfusion. Late DDFPe uncertain.  
b. In those that get Rx and it fails, score s may perhaps go down with early DDFPe 
and come back up when it wears off. With late DDFPe little change is expected.  
c. In those that do not get reperfusion therapy and do get DDFPe in the first 3 hours, 
scores should go down but come back up when it wears o ff. 
d. In those that do not get reperfusion therapy and get DDFPe late, scores should not 
change much  
e. In those that get placebo, should see little change, early or late, unless they have 
successful reperfusion therapy or spontaneous reperfusion.  
 
Fewer than 20% are likely to get IV tPA or IA reperfusion therapy of the total 24 
patients; the patient numbers in any of these groups will be quite small, obviating the 
ability to make formal statistical comparisons or to draw conclusions about the impact  
of DDFPe therapy on outcome. This is a Phase I safety trial, and not designed to test 
treatment outcomes. As an exploratory analysis, we will compare the patients without 
reperfusion therapy, IV or IA, who got early DDFPe under 3 hours from LKWT, to 
place bo patients of similar characteristics. Due to the small sample sizes and because 
each of the proposed doses were effective in animal studies, we will ignore dose in 
this comparison.  
 
We expect that the NIHSS values should drop with DDFPe but come back up  after 5 
or 6 hours and no change is expected in placebo. We will visually examine plots of 
the data for consistency with this hypothesis and if the sample sizes are sufficient, we 
will carry out nonparametric tests comparing the changes as exploratory ana lyses.  
 
Those patients receiving DDFPe between 3 and 6 hours from LKWT could be 
another group of great interest, and we will make similar exploratory comparisons of 
this group with the two just described.  
 
No claims of efficacy will be possible based on t hese limited data, but they may 
suggest directions for subsequent study.  
 
11.0 Ethical and Regulatory Requirements  
11.1 Trial Registration  
The trial will be registered on ClinicalTrials.gov as previously described in Section 4  
of the protocol.  
Title: A phase 1b dose -finding study of DDFPe in acute ischemic stroke  
PIs: William C. Culp, MD & Sanjeeva Onteddu, MD  
Institution: UAMS  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version 11 
February 22, 2018  Page 29 11.2 Informed Consent Procedures  
This study will be conducted in accordance with all applicable government 
regulations, research policies and procedures. This protocol and any amendments will 
be submitted and approved by the local IRB prior to conducting the st udy. 
 
The formal consent of each subject/LAR, using the IRB -approved consent form, will 
be obtained before the subject is enrolled into any study procedure. All 
subjects/LARs for this study will be provided a consent form describing this study 
and provided  sufficient information in language suitable for subjects/LARs to make 
an informed decision about their participation in this study. The person obtaining 
consent will thoroughly explain each element of the document and outline the risks 
and benefits, alter nate treatment(s), and requirements of the study. It is anticipated 
that, due to the nature of the condition under study, some subjects may be unable to 
provide informed consent. The investigators will follow local IRB policies for 
obtaining consent from c ognitively impaired subjects.  
 
No coercion or undue influence will be used in the consent process. The consent form 
must be signed by the subject/LAR and the individual obtaining the consent. A copy 
of the signed consent will be given to the subjects/LARs,  and the informed consent 
process will be documented in each subject’s research record.  
 
11.3 Institutional Review Board (IRB)/Independent Ethics Committee (IEC)  
This study is to be conducted according to applicable government regulations and 
Institutional research policies and procedures. The protocol, the consent document, 
and any amendments will be submitted to a properly constituted independent IRB, in 
agreemen t with local legal prescriptions, for formal approval of the study conduct. 
The decision of the local IRB concerning the conduct of the study will be made in 
writing to the investigator before commencement of this study.  
 
11.4 Subject Confidentiality  
Ever y effort will be made to assure that data collected from subjects remains 
confidential. Subjects will be identified by a code. The subject’s name and identifying 
information will be stored in a locked file in the office of the investigator or on a 
password  protected or an encrypted drive in the investigators’ personal possession. 
Data may be shared with NuvOx, the Sponsor (UAMS), the IRB, the FDA, and 
appropriate compliance and regulatory authorities.  
 
11.5 Protocol Amendments  
Any change to the research pro tocol or consent document must be submitted to and 
receive approval from the Sponsor, NuVox, and the IRB prior to implementation.  
11.6 Study Termination  
The study may be terminated at any time by the Sponsor or NuvOx. If the study is 
terminated, the FDA wi ll be notified.  
 
 
Title: A phase 1b dose -finding study of DDFPe in acute ischemic stroke  
PIs: William C. Culp, MD & Sanjeeva Onteddu, MD  
Institution: UAMS  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version 11 
February 22, 2018  Page 30 In the event that the study is terminated prior to completion, all investigational 
product will be returned to the pharmacy. The pharmacy will either return the unused 
product to NuvOx or proceed with destruction of the investigational ag ent per 21 
CFR 312.62.  
 
12.0 Publication Policy  
Any manuscripts reporting the results of this clinical trial must be provided to NuvOx by the 
Principal Investigator for advisory review and comment prior to submission for publication. 
NuvOx will have 30 day s from the date of receipt for review and will also have the right to 
request that publication be delayed for up to an additional 30 days in order to ensure that 
confidential and proprietary data, and intellectual property rights, are protected. Copies of 
meeting abstracts must be provided to NuvOx for courtesy review as soon as possible and at 
least three (3) days prior to submission. Press releases and other media presentations must 
also be forwarded to NuvOx prior to release.  
 
In any publication or prese ntation, individual subjects will not be identified by name or any 
other means. All data will be published in aggregate form.   
Title: A phase 1b dose -finding study of DDFPe in acute ischemic stroke  
PIs: William C. Culp, MD & Sanjeeva Onteddu, MD  
Institution: UAMS  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version 11 
February 22, 2018  Page 31 13.0 References  
1. Mozaffarian D , Benjamin EJ, Go AS, Arnett DK, Blaha MJ, Cushman M, Das SR, de 
Ferranti S, Després JP, Fullerton HJ, Howard VJ, Huffman MD, Isasi CR, Jiménez MC, 
Judd SE, Kissela BM, Lichtman JH, Lisabeth LD, Liu S, Mackey RH, Magid DJ, 
McGuire DK, Mohler ER 3rd, Moy CS , Muntner P, Mussolino ME, Nasir K, Neumar 
RW, Nichol G, Palaniappan L, Pandey DK, Reeves MJ, Rodriguez CJ, Rosamond W, 
Sorlie PD, Stein J, Towfighi A, Turan TN, Virani SS, Woo D, Yeh RW, Turner MB; 
American Heart Association Statistics Committee and Strok e Statistics Subcommittee. 
Heart Disease and Stroke Statistics —2015 Update. A Report From the American Heart 
Association. Circulation . 2016;133:e38 -e360. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000350. 
Epub 2015  Dec 16.  
2. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).  Prevalence and most common 
causes of disability among adults: United States, 2005. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep . 
2009;58:421 –426. 
3. Howard G, Anderson R, Johnson NJ, Sorlie P, Russell G, Howard VJ. Evaluation of 
social status as a contributing factor to the st roke belt region of the United States. 
Stroke . 1997;28:936 –940. 
4. Ovbiagele B, Goldstein LB, Higashida RT, Howard VJ, Johnston SC, Khavjou OA, 
Lackland DT, Lichtman JH, Mohl S, Sacco RL, Saver JL, Trogdon JG; on behalf of the 
American Heart Association Advoc acy Coordinating Committee and Stroke Council. 
Forecasting the future of stroke in the United States: a policy statement from the 
American Heart Association and American Stroke Association. Stroke . 2013;44:2361 –
2375.  
5. Schwamm LH , Ali SF, Reeves MJ, Smith EE , Saver JL, Messe S, Bhatt DL, Grau -
Sepulveda MV, Peterson ED, Fonarow GC. Temporal Trends in Patient Characteristics 
and Treatment With Intravenous Thrombolysis Among Acute Ischemic Stroke Patients 
at Get With the Guidelines –Stroke Hospitals. Circulation:  Cardiovascular Quality and 
Outcom es. 2013; 6: 543-549. 
6. Arthur MC, Brown A, Carlson K, Lowery J, Skinner RD, Culp WC. 
Dodecafluoropentane improves neurological function following anterior ischemic 
stroke. Molecular Neurobiology. June 2016; Accepted for publication.  
7. Culp WC, Brown AT, Lowery JD, Arthur MC, Roberson PK, Skinner RD. 
Dodecafluoropentane emulsion extends window for tPA therapy in a rabbit stroke 
model. Mol Neurobiol. 2015;52:979 -84. 
8. Fitzgerald RT, Ou X, Nix JS, Arthur MC, Brown AT, Skinner RD , Borrelli MJ, Culp 
WC. Dodecafluoropentane emulsion delays and reduces MRI markers of infarction in a 
rat stroke model. Magnetic Resonance Imaging. 2015; 33:236 -239. 
9. Brown AT, Arthur MC, Nix JS, Montgomery JA, Skinner RD, Roberson PK, Borrelli 
M, Culp WC.  Dodecafluoropentane emulsion (DDFPe) decreases stroke size and 
improves neurological scores in a permanent occlusion rat stroke model. The Open 
Neurology Journal. 2014; 8:27 -33. 
10. Woods SD, Skinner RD, Ricca AM, Brown AT, Lowery JD, Borrelli MJ, Lay JO, Cul p 
WC. Progress in dodecafluoropentane emulsion as a neuroprotective agent in a rabbit 
stroke model. Mol Neurobiol. 2013;48:363 -7. 
Title: A phase 1b dose -finding study of DDFPe in acute ischemic stroke  
PIs: William C. Culp, MD & Sanjeeva Onteddu, MD  
Institution: UAMS  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version 11 
February 22, 2018  Page 32 11. Culp WC, Woods SD, Skinner RD, Brown AT, Lowery JD, Johnson JLH, Unger EC, 
Hennings LJ, Borrelli MJ, Roberson PK. Dodecafluoro pentane emulsion decreases 
infarct volume in a rabbit ischemic stroke model. JVIR. 2012;23:116 -21. 
12. Spahn DR. Blood substitutes Artificial oxygen carriers: perfluorocarbon emulsions. Crit 
Care. 1999;3: R93 –R97.  
13. Johnson, J. L., Dolezal, M. C., Kerschen, A., Matsunaga, T. O., & Unger, E. C. In vitro 
comparison of dodecafluoropentane (DDFP), perfluorodecalin (PFD), and 
perfluoroctylbromide (PFOB) in the facilitation of oxygen exchange. Artificial Cells, 
Blood Substitutes and Biotechnology.2009;37:156 ‐162. 
14. Lowe KC. Fluorinated blood substitutes and oxygen carriers. Journal of Fluorine 
Chemistry. 2001;109:59 -65. 
15. Riess JG. Understanding the fundamentals of perfluorocarbons and perfluorocarbon 
emulsions relevant to in vivo oxygen delivery. Artificial Cells, Blo od Substitutes and 
Biotechnology. 2005;33:47 -63. 
16. Grayburn, Paul A., et al. "Phase III multicenter trial comparing the efficacy of 2% 
dodecafluoropentane emulsion (EchoGen) and sonicated 5% human albumin (Albunex) 
as ultrasound contrast agents in patients w ith suboptimal echocardiograms." Journal of 
the American College of Cardiology. 1998;32.1:230 -236. 
17. Correas, Jean -Michel, et al. "Human pharmacokinetics of a perfluorocarbon ultrasound 
contrast agent evaluated with gas chromatography." Ultrasound in medicin e & biology . 
2001 ;27.4: 565 -570. 
18. ClinicalTrials.gov [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
19. Investigators Brochure for NVX -508-SCD, v.5, 2016.  
20. Saver JL, Starkman S, Eckstein M, Stratton SJ, Pratt FD, Hamilton S, Conwit R, 
Liebeskind DS, Sung G, Kramer I, Moreau G, Goldweber R, Sanoss ian N, for the 
FAST -MAG Investigators and Coordinators. Prehospital use of magnesium sulfate as 
neuroprotection in acute stroke. NEJM. 2015; 372:528 -536. 
21. Investigators Brochure for NVX -208-AIS. 
22. Rogers Chris A, et al. Propofol cardioplegia: A single -center, placebo -controlled, 
randomized controlled trial. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg, 2015;150:1610 -9. 
23. Shah, Amit, et al. A blinded, randomized controlled trial to evaluate Ketamine/Propofol 
versus Ketamine alone for procedural sedation in children. An n Emerg Med. 
2011;57:425 -433. 
24. Trouillas P, von Krummer R. Classification and Pathogenisis of cerebral hemorrhages 
after thrombolysis in ischemic stroke. Stroke, 2006;37:556 -561. 
25. Fisher CM, Kistler JP, Davis JM. Relation of cerebral vasospasm to subarachnoi d 
hemorrhage visualized by computerized tomographic scanning. Neurosurgery, 
1980;6:1 -9. 
  
Title: A phase 1b dose -finding study of DDFPe in acute ischemic stroke  
PIs: William C. Culp, MD & Sanjeeva Onteddu, MD  
Institution: UAMS  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version 11 
February 22, 2018  Page 33 Appendices:  
Appendices 1 – 4 are attached below.  
 
Appendix 1:  CTCAE 4 Selected Adverse Events  
 
Respiratory, thoracic, and mediastinal disorders  
 Grade  
Adverse Event  1 2 3 4 5 
Cough  
Definition: A disorder characterized by 
sudden, often repetitive, spasmodic 
contraction of the thoracic cavity, 
resulting in violent release of air from 
the lungs and usually accompanied by a 
distinctive sound.  Mild symptoms; 
nonprescription  
intervention 
indicated  Moderate symptoms, 
medical intervention 
indicated; limiting 
instrumental ADL  Severe symptoms; 
limiting self care ADL    
Dyspnea  
Definition: A disorder characterized by 
an uncomfortable sensation of difficulty 
breathing.  Shortness of 
breath with  
moderate 
exertion  Shortness of breath 
with minimal 
exertion; limiting 
instrumental ADL  Shortness of breath at 
rest; limiting self care 
ADL  Life-threatening 
consequences; urgent 
intervention indicated  Death  
Chest Pain Cardiac  
Definition: A disorder characterized by 
substernal discomfort due to 
insufficient myocardial oxygenation.  Mild pain  Moderate pain; 
limiting  
instrumental ADL  Pain at rest; limiting 
self care ADL    
Chest Wall Pain  
Definition: A disorder characterized by 
marked discomfort sensation in the 
pleura.  Mild pain  Moderate pain; 
limiting  
instrumental ADL  Severe pain; limiting 
self care ADL    
Hypoxia  
Definition: A disorder characterized by 
a decrease in the level of oxygen in the 
body.   Decreased oxygen 
saturation with 
exercise (e.g., pulse 
oximeter <88%); 
intermittent  
supplemental oxygen  Decreased oxygen 
saturation at rest (e.g., 
pulse oximeter <88% 
or PaO2 <=55 mm Hg  Life-threatening airway  
compromise; urgent 
intervention indicated 
(e.g., tracheotomy or  
intubation)  Death  
  
Title: A phase 1b dose -finding study of DDFPe in acute ischemic stroke  
PIs: William C. Culp, MD & Sanjeeva Onteddu, MD  
Institution: UAMS  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version 11 
February 22, 2018  Page 34 Appendix 2: DDFPe Dosing by Weight  
 
 
 
  DDFPe dosage volume in cc for 0.05 mL/kg  based on patient body weight in kilograms (kg).  
Body 
Weight 
(kg) DDFPe  
Dose 
0.05mL/ kg 
(mL)  Number of 
DDFPe  
10mL Vials 
Required  Number 
of 10mL 
Syringes  Total Volume 
to be Prepared 
(mL)  Volume to be 
Administered 
from syringe 
(mL)  
45* 2.2 1 1 10 2.2 
46 2.3 1 1 10 2.3 
47 2.4 1 1 10 2.4 
48 2.4 1 1 10 2.4 
49 2.4 1 1 10 2.4 
50 2.5 1 1 10 2.5 
51 2.6 1 1 10 2.6 
52 2.6 1 1 10 2.6 
53 2.6 1 1 10 2.6 
54 2.7 1 1 10 2.7 
55 2.8 1 1 10 2.8 
56 2.8 1 1 10 2.8 
57 2.8 1 1 10 2.8 
58 2.9 1 1 10 2.9 
59 3.0 1 1 10 3.0 
60 3.0 1 1 10 3.0 
61 3.0 1 1 10 3.0 
62 3.1 1 1 10 3.1 
63 3.2 1 1 10 3.2 
64 3.2 1 1 10 3.2 
65 3.2 1 1 10 3.2 
66 3.3 1 1 10 3.3 
67 3.4 1 1 10 3.4 
68 3.4 1 1 10 3.4 
69 3.4 1 1 10 3.4 
70 3.5 1 1 10 3.5 
71 3.6 1 1 10 3.6 
72 3.6 1 1 10 3.6 
73 3.6 1 1 10 3.6 
74 3.7 1 1 10 3.7 
75 3.8 1 1 10 3.8 
76 3.8 1 1 10 3.8 
77 3.8 1 1 10 3.8 
78 3.9 1 1 10 3.9 
79 4.0 1 1 10 4.0 
80 4.0 1 1 10 4.0 
Title: A phase 1b dose -finding study of DDFPe in acute ischemic stroke  
PIs: William C. Culp, MD & Sanjeeva Onteddu, MD  
Institution: UAMS  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version 11 
February 22, 2018  Page 35   
Body 
Weight 
(kg) DDFPe  
Dose 
0.05mL/ kg 
(mL)  Number of 
DDFPe  
10mL Vials 
Required  Number 
of 10 mL 
Syringes  Total 
Volume to 
be Prepared 
(mL)  Volume to be 
Administered 
from syringe 
(mL)  
81 4.0 1 1 10 4.0 
82 4.1 1 1 10 4.1 
83 4.2 1 1 10 4.2 
84 4.2 1 1 10 4.2 
85 4.2 1 1 10 4.2 
86 4.3 1 1 10 4.3 
87 4.4 1 1 10 4.4 
88 4.4 1 1 10 4.4 
89 4.4 1 1 10 4.4 
90 4.5 1 1 10 4.5 
91 4.6 1 1 10 4.6 
92 4.6 1 1 10 4.6 
93 4.6 1 1 10 4.6 
94 4.7 1 1 10 4.7 
95 4.8 1 1 10 4.8 
96 4.8 1 1 10 4.8 
97 4.8 1 1 10 4.8 
98 4.9 1 1 10 4.9 
99 5.0 1 1 10 5.0 
100**  5.0 1 1 10 5.0 
Total DDFPe Dose = 0.05 mL/kg x weight in kg.  
*Minimum subject weight = 45 kg.  
**Maximum subject weight used for dose calculation = 100 kg. For subjects weighing more 
than 100 kg, dose will be calculated based on a weight of 100 kg.  
 
Title: A phase 1b dose -finding study of DDFPe in acute ischemic stroke  
PIs: William C. Culp, MD & Sanjeeva Onteddu, MD  
Institution: UAMS  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version 11 
February 22, 2018  Page 36 DDFPe dosage volume in cc for 0.10 mL/kg based on patient body weight in kilograms (kg).  
Body 
Weight 
(kg) DDFPe 
Dose 
0.10mL/kg  Number of 
DDFPe 
10mL 
Vials 
Required  Number of 
10mL 
Syringes to be 
Prepared  Total Volume 
to be 
Prepared 
(mL)  Volume to be 
Administered 
from 1st 
syringe (mL)  Volume to be 
Administered 
from 2nd 
Syringe (mL)  
45* 4.5 1 1 10 4.5 N/A 
46 4.6 1 1 10 4.6 N/A 
47 4.7 1 1 10 4.7 N/A 
48 4.8 1 1 10 4.8 N/A 
49 4.9 1 1 10 4.9 N/A 
50 5.0 1 1 10 5.0 N/A 
51 5.1 1 1 10 5.1 N/A 
52 5.2 1 1 10 5.2 N/A 
53 5.3 1 1 10 5.3 N/A 
54 5.4 1 1 10 5.4 N/A 
55 5.5 1 1 10 5.5 N/A 
56 5.6 1 1 10 5.6 N/A 
57 5.7 1 1 10 5.7 N/A 
58 5.8 1 1 10 5.8 N/A 
59 5.9 1 1 10 5.9 N/A 
60 6.0 1 1 10 6.0 N/A 
61 6.1 1 1 10 6.1 N/A 
62 6.2 1 1 10 6.2 N/A 
63 6.3 1 1 10 6.3 N/A 
64 6.4 1 1 10 6.4 N/A 
65 6.5 1 1 10 6.5 N/A 
66 6.6 1 1 10 6.6 N/A 
67 6.7 1 1 10 6.7 N/A 
68 6.8 1 1 10 6.8 N/A 
69 6.9 1 1 10 6.9 N/A 
70 7.0 1 1 10 7.0 N/A 
71 7.1 1 1 10 7.1 N/A 
72 7.2 1 1 10 7.2 N/A 
73 7.3 1 1 10 7.3 N/A 
74 7.4 1 1 10 7.4 N/A 
75 7.5 1 1 10 7.5 N/A 
76 7.6 1 1 10 7.6 N/A 
77 7.7 1 1 10 7.7 N/A 
78 7.8 1 1 10 7.8 N/A 
79 7.9 1 1 10 7.9 N/A 
80 8.0 2 2 20 4.0 4.0 
Title: A phase 1b dose -finding study of DDFPe in acute ischemic stroke  
PIs: William C. Culp, MD & Sanjeeva Onteddu, MD  
Institution: UAMS  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version 11 
February 22, 2018  Page 37   
Body 
Weight 
(kg) DDFPe 
Dose 
0.10mL/kg  Number of 
DDFPe 
10mL 
Vials 
Required  Number of 
10mL Syringes 
to be Prepared  Total 
Volume to 
be Prepared 
(mL)  Volume to be 
Administered 
from 1st 
syringe (mL)  Volume to be 
Administered 
from 2nd 
Syringe (mL)  
81 8.1 2 2 20 4.1 4.0 
82 8.2 2 2 20 4.2 4.0 
83 8.3 2 2 20 4.3 4.0 
84 8.4 2 2 20 4.4 4.0 
85 8.5 2 2 20 4.5 4.0 
86 8.6 2 2 20 4.6 4.0 
87 8.7 2 2 20 4.7 4.0 
88 8.8 2 2 20 4.8 4.0 
89 8.9 2 2 20 4.9 4.0 
90 9.0 2 2 20 5.0 4.0 
91 9.1 2 2 20 5.1 4.0 
92 9.2 2 2 20 5.2 4.0 
93 9.3 2 2 20 5.3 4.0 
94 9.4 2 2 20 5.4 4.0 
95 9.5 2 2 20 5.5 4.0 
96 9.6 2 2 20 5.6 4.0 
97 9.7 2 2 20 5.7 4.0 
98 9.8 2 2 20 5.8 4.0 
99 9.9 2 2 20 5.9 4.0 
100**  10.0 2 2 20 5.0 5.0 
Total DDFPe Dose = 0.10 mL/kg x weight in kg.  
*Minimum subject weight = 45 kg.  
**Maximum subject weight used for dose calculation = 100 kg. For subjects weighing more than 100 kg, 
dose will be calculated based on a weight of 100 kg.  
Title: A phase 1b dose -finding study of DDFPe in acute ischemic stroke  
PIs: William C. Culp, MD & Sanjeeva Onteddu, MD  
Institution: UAMS  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version 11 
February 22, 2018  Page 38   DDFPe dosage volume in cc for 0.17 mL/kg based on patient body weight in kilograms (kg).  
Body 
Weight 
(kg) DDFPe 
Dose 
0.17mL/k
g (mL)  Number 
of DDFPe 
10mL 
Vials 
Required  Number 
of 10mL 
Syringes  
 
 Total 
Volume to 
be 
Prepared 
(mL)  Volume to be 
Administered 
from 1st 
syringe (mL)  Volume to be 
Administered 
from 2nd 
syringe (mL)  Volume to be 
Administered 
from 3rd 
syringe (mL)  
45* 7.6 1 1 10 7.6 N/A N/A 
46 7.8 1 1 10 7.8 N/A N/A 
47 8.0 1 1 10 8.0 N/A N/A 
48 8.2 1 1 10 8.2 N/A N/A 
49 8.3 1 1 10 8.3 N/A N/A 
50 8.5 1 1 10 8.5 N/A N/A 
51 8.7 1 1 10 8.7 N/A N/A 
52 8.8 1 1 10 8.8 N/A N/A 
53 9.0 2 2 20 4.5 4.5 N/A 
54 9.2 2 2 20 4.6 4.6 N/A 
55 9.4 2 2 20 4.7 4.7 N/A 
56 9.5 2 2 20 4.8 4.7 N/A 
57 9.7 2 2 20 4.9 4.8 N/A 
58 9.9 2 2 20 5.0 4.9 N/A 
59 10.0 2 2 20 5.0 5.0 N/A 
60 10.2 2 2 20 5.1 5.1 N/A 
61 10.4 2 2 20 5.2 5.2 N/A 
62 10.5 2 2 20 5.3 5.2 N/A 
63 10.7 2 2 20 5.4 5.3 N/A 
64 10.9 2 2 20 5.5 5.4 N/A 
65 11.0 2 2 20 5.5 5.5 N/A 
66 11.2 2 2 20 5.6 5.6 N/A 
67 11.4 2 2 20 5.7 5.7 N/A 
68 11.6 2 2 20 5.8 5.8 N/A 
69 11.7 2 2 20 5.9 5.8 N/A 
70 11.9 2 2 20 6.0 5.9 N/A 
71 12.1 2 2 20 6.1 6.0 N/A 
72 12.2 2 2 20 6.1 6.1 N/A 
73 12.4 2 2 20 6.2 6.2 N/A 
74 12.6 2 2 20 6.3 6.3 N/A 
75 12.8 2 2 20 6.4 6.4 N/A 
76 12.9 2 2 20 6.5 6.4 N/A 
77 13.1 2 2 20 6.6 6.5 N/A 
78 13.3 2 2 20 6.7 6.6 N/A 
79 13.4 2 2 20 6.7 6.7 N/A 
80 13.6 2 2 20 6.8 6.8 N/A 
Title: A phase 1b dose -finding study of DDFPe in acute ischemic stroke  
PIs: William C. Culp, MD & Sanjeeva Onteddu, MD  
Institution: UAMS  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version 11 
February 22, 2018  Page 39   Body 
Weight 
(kg) DDFPe 
Dose 
0.17mL/
kg (mL)  Number 
of DDFPe 
10mL 
Vials 
Required  Number 
of 10mL 
Syringes  
 
 Total 
Volume to 
be 
Prepared 
(mL)  Volume to be 
Administered 
from 1st 
syringe (mL)  Volume to be 
Administered 
from 2nd 
syringe (mL)  Volume to be 
Administered 
from 3rd 
syringe (mL)  
81 13.8 2 2 20 6.9 6.9 N/A 
82 13.9 2 2 20 7.0 6.9 N/A 
83 14.1 2 2 20 7.1 7.0 N/A 
84 14.3 2 2 20 7.2 7.1 N/A 
85 14.4 2 2 20 7.2 7.2 N/A 
86 14.6 2 2 20 7.3 7.3 N/A 
87 14.8 2 2 20 7.4 7.4 N/A 
88 15.0 2 2 20 7.5 7.5 N/A 
89 15.1 2 2 20 7.6 7.5 N/A 
90 15.3 2 2 20 7.7 7.6 N/A 
91 15.5 2 2 20 7.8 7.7 N/A 
92 15.6 2 2 20 7.8 7.8 N/A 
93 15.8 2 2 20 7.9 7.9 N/A 
94 16.0 2 2 20 8.0 8.0 N/A 
95 16.2 3 3 30 6.0 6.0 4.2 
96 16.3 3 3 30 6.0 6.0 4.3 
97 16.5 3 3 30 6.0 6.0 4.5 
98 16.7 3 3 30 6.0 6.0 4.7 
99 16.8 3 3 30 6.0 6.0 4.8 
100**  17.0 3 3 30 6.0 6.0 5.0 
Total DDFPe Dose = 0.17 mL/kg x weight in kg.  
*Minimum subject weight = 45 kg.  
**Maximum subject weight used for dose calculation = 100 kg. For subjects weighing more than 100 kg, dose 
will be calculated based on a weight of 100 kg.  
Title: A phase 1b dose -finding study of DDFPe in acute ischemic stroke  
PIs: William C. Culp, MD & Sanjeeva Onteddu, MD  
Institution: UAMS  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version 11 
February 22, 2018  Page 40 Appendix 3 : Modified Rankin Scale  
 
Subject Name:  __________________________  
Rate Name:  __________________________  
Date:  ______________________ ____ 
 
Scale to be administered as part of the exclusion criteria and again at follow up (discharge and end of 
study)  
 
SCORE  DESCRIPTION  
0 No symptoms at all  
 
1 No significant disability despite symptoms; able to carry out all usual duties and 
activities  
 
2 Slight disability; unable to carry out all previous activities, but able to look after 
own affairs without assistance  
 
3 Moderate disability; requiring some help, but able to walk without assistance  
 
4 Moderately severe disability: unable to walk without assistance and unable to 
attend to own bodily needs without assistance  
 
5 Severe disability; bedridden, incontinent and requiring constant nursing attention  
 
6 Dead  
 
 
 
Score (0 -6): ______  
 
 
References  
Rankin J. Cerebral vascular accidents in patients over the age of 60. Scot Med J 1957;2:200 -215. 
 
Bonita R, Beaglehole R. Modification of Rankin Scale: Recovery of motor function after stroke. 
Stroke 1988;19(12):1497 -1500.  
 
  
Title: A phase 1b dose -finding study of DDFPe in acute ischemic stroke  
PIs: William C. Culp, MD & Sanjeeva Onteddu, MD  
Institution: UAMS  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version 11 
February 22, 2018  Page 41 Appendix 4: Schedule of Time and Events  
 Day 1  Day 4  Day 7±1 or 
Day of 
Discharge  Day 
30 ±7  Day 
90 ±14  
 
Study Procedures  Screening  
(Baseline)   
Dose #1a  
Dose #2a  
Dose #3a Post-
Dose #3b     
 
Informed Consent  X         
I/E Criteria  X         
Concomitant 
Meds  X X X X X     
Medical Historyc X      X X X 
Physical Examc X    X  X X  
Weight  X         
Vital Signsd X X X X X  X X  
Pulse Oximetrye X X X X X  X   
Modified Rankin 
Scale  X      X X X 
NIHSS  X  Xf Xf X  X X  
ECGg X    X  X   
Pregnancy Testh X         
Lab Studiesi X    X  X   
Administer 
DDFPej  X X X      
Adverse Events   X X X X X X X X 
 
 
a  Each dose of DDFPe or placebo is to be administered intravenously over 5 -10 minutes. Start and stop times 
will be recorded as will the volume infused.  
b  Post-dose #3 concludes approximately 4 -6 hours after the end of the Dose #3 infusion.  
c  Brief, targeted medical history and physical exam.  
d  Vital signs (blood pressure, heart rate, respiratory rate) will be done every 15 minutes through the end of 
Post-Dose #3 (approximately 4 -6 hours) and then consistent with standard procedures for the hospital unit. 
Temperature will be done every 1 -4 hours consis tent with the hospital unit standard procedures.  
e  Continuous or spot readings may be taken; if continuous readings are used, record the measurement every 
15 minutes.  
f  To be performed within 60 minutes following the dose.  
g  12-lead ECG to be examined a t the bedside by the study personnel and later reviewed by a board certified 
cardiologist.  
h  Serum pregnancy test will be done in pre -menopausal women.  
i  To include: CBC, electrolytes (Na, K, Cl,), BUN, creatinine, LFTs, calcium, albumin, glucose  
j  DDFP e or placebo to be administered over 5 -10 minutes intravenously through a peripheral or central IV. 
The interval between the end of one dose and the beginning of the next should be 90 ± 10 minutes.  