 
 
 
 
 
Phase II Study of Response Adapted Therapy Using Single Agent Lenalidomide in 
Older Adults with Newly Diagnosed, Standard Risk Multiple Myeloma  
 
NCT0 1054144  
Version 6 
April 15, 2016  
Page  1 of 86 Confidential  
Version 6 4/15/2016   
  
Myeloma Program  
 
 
 
 
SPONSOR: H. Lee Moffitt Canc er Center  
STUDY NUMBER: MCC 16018 
CELGENE TRACKING #: RV-MM- PI- 0454 
 
 
STUDY TITLE : Phase II Study of response adapted therapy using single agent  
lenalidom ide in older adults with newly diagnosed standard risk multiple myelom a. 
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Rachid Baz, MD 
STATISTI CIAN: Hui-Yi Lin, PhD 
 Zhenjun Ma, 
PhD 
 
SUPPORTER(S): Celgene Corporation 
 
CLINICAL FACILITY: H. Lee Moffitt Canc er Center and  Research Institute 
STUDY DR UGS: Lenalidomide (Revlimid®)  
Prednisone 
Dexamethasone (Decadron)  
PROTOCOL VERSION: Version 6 (April 15, 2016) 
 
IRB AP PROVAL DAT E: 12/08/2009 
 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  
 
This protocol is pr ovided to y ou as an Inves tigator, potent ial Inves tigator, or consu ltant for revi ew by you, your 
staff, and ethic s committee/institutional revie w board. The information contained in this document is regarded 
as confidenti al and, except to the extent necessar y to obtai n informed consent, m ay not be disclo sed to another 
party unless such di sclosure is required by law or reg ulations. Person s to whom the information is disclosed 
must be informe d that the informa tion is confidenti al and may not be further disclosed by them.  
Page  2 of 86 Confidential  
Version 6 4/15/2016   
  
PRINCIPAL INVE STI GATOR SIGNATUR E PAGE  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Principal Investigat or: 
 
 
 
Signature  of Investigator  
 
 
 
 
Rachid  Baz, MD 
 
 
 
 
By my signatu re, I agree to personally  supervise the conduct  of this stu 
conduct  in compliance  with the protocol,  infor med consent,  IRB/EC pr 
instructions  from Celgene  representatives,  the Decla ration  of Helsinki,  
Practices  guidelines,  and the applicable  parts  of the United  States  Code  
Regulations  or local  regulations  governing the conduct  of clinical  studi   
Date  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dy and to ensure its 
ocedu res, 
ICH Good  Clinical  
of Fede ral 
es. 
Page  3 of 86 Confidential  
Version 6 4/15/2016   
  
Table of Contents  
 
 
Page  
 
 
1 Protocol Synopsis .......................................................................................... 4  
2 Schedule of Study Assessments ................................................................... 8  
3 Glossar y of Abbreviations ................................ ............................................ 11 
4 Backgroun d and Rationale ........................................................................... 15 
5. Study Endpoints. .......................................................................................... 22 
6. Investigatio nal Plan ...................................................................................... 23 
7. Stud y population .......................................................................................... 26 
8. Treatments ................................................................................................ .. 30 
9. 
Safety assessments ..................................................................................... 48 
10. Protoco l Amendments/Deviations ................................................................  60 
11. Data Management ....................................................................................... 61 
12. Bio-statistical Consideration ......................................................................... 64 
13. Regulatory Considerations ........................................................................... 69 
14. Appendices ................................................................................................ .. 74 
1
5. References ................................................................................................ .. 85 
Page  4 of 86 Confidential  
Version 6 4/15/2016   
 1 Protocol Synopsis  
 
 
PROTOCOL  TITLE:  Phase  II  Study  of  response  adapted  therapy  using  single  agent 
lenalidomide in older adults with ne wly diagnosed  standard  risk multiple  myeloma.  
PROTOCOL NUMBER:  MCC16018  
IRB APPROVA L DAT E OF 
PROTOCOL:  12/08/2009  
STUDY DRUG(s):  Lenalido mide (Revli mid®)  
Prednisone  
Dexa methasone (Decadron)  
INDICAT ION: Newly  Diagnosed  (stan dard risk) Multiple Myel oma 
with Active  Disease  
STUD Y PHASE:  2 
STUD Y OBJECTIVE S: 
 
 
Primary:  
 
1-  To estimate the efficacy  of a response  adapted  approach  of treatment of older  adults  with 
standard  risk multiple  myeloma 
Secondary:  
 
 
1.  To evaluate  the efficacy  of single  agent  lenalido mide in patie nts with standard risk 
multiple  myeloma 
Page  5 of 86 Confidential  
Version 6 4/15/2016   
  
2. To evaluate  the safety  and efficacy  of the combination  of lenalido mide and predniso ne in 
 
non responders  to single  agent  lenalido mide 
 
3. To evaluate  markers  of lenalido mide induced  tumor immunity  in patients treated with 
single  agent  lenalido mide 
STUDY DESIGN:  
 
 
This is a multi-center,  single -arm, phase  2, open-label study of lenalido mide [Revlimid® (R)] 
based  therapy in older adults with standard  risk multiple myeloma. After enroll ment patients will 
receive  single  agent  lenalido mide. Responders  (minimal response  or better) after 2 cycles  will 
continue  present  therapy until disease progre ssion or intolerable  toxicity. Patients with stable  
disease  after 2 cycles  will recei ve prednisone  (100 mg orally  on days 1to 5 of each cycle s) in 
addition  to lenalido mide. Patie nts with evidence of diseas e progressio n after 2 cycle s of single  
agent  lenalido mide will receive low dose dexamethasone  (40 mg weekly)  in addition  to 
lenalido mide. Patients  not receiving  low dose dexa methasone  and with disease  progression  at 
any time during  the study will be eligible to receive  low dose dexa methasone  in combination  
with lenali domide. Patients  on lenalido mide and low dose dexa methasone  who experience  
disease  progression  at any time during  the study will be taken off study and treate d with 
alternative  therapies..  
STUD Y ENDPOINTS  
 
 
Primary:  
 
 
1- The 12-month progression  free survival  (PFS)  of older  adults  with mildly symptomatic 
multiple myeloma treated  on this  response ada pted approach  (i.e. time from  lenalid omide 
start to failure of lenali domide and low dose dexa methasone)  
Page  6 of 86 Confidential  
Version 6 4/15/2016   
  
Secondar y: 
 
 
1- The respon se rate of older  adults  with mildly symptomatic multiple  myelo ma to single  
agent  lenalido mide, lenalido mide prednisone  and lenalido mide low dose dexa methasone  
in patients  with suboptimal  responses  to lenalido mide monotherapy  
2- The toxicity profile of these lenalidomide based  combinations  
 
3- The progression  free survival  of patients  treated with single  agent lenalidomide 
 
4- The 1 year overall  survival (OS)  of older  adults with mildly  symptomatic multiple  
myelo ma treated  on this response  adapted  approach  
Exploratory  
 
 
1- Measure  a lenalidomide  induced  tumor specif ic immune response  and correlate  the tumor 
specific  immune  response  with corticosteroid  use, respons e to therap y and duration  of response  
2- To evaluate  the impact of lenalido mide mono-therapy  on expression  of tumor suppression 
genes  and cell cycle  regulators  
STUD Y DURATION : Patie nts will recei ve 
study  therapy  until evidence  of disease  
progression  on lenalido mide and low dose 
dexa methasone,  unaccepta ble toxicity  or 
withdrawal  of consent  TOTA L SAMPL E SIZE: approxi mately  30 
patie nts enrolled at Moffitt and 30 patients  
enrolled  in a parallel  identica l desig n study in 
multiple  sites in South  Korea.  
STUD Y  DRU G  SUPPLIES :  Lenalido mide capsules  will  be  supplied  by  Celgene  
Corporation  at no charge  through  the RevAssist®  progra m. 
Com mercial  supplies  of dexa methasone  (Decadro n®) and prednisone  tablets  will be utilized.  
Com mercial  supplies  of aspirin  will be utilized.  
Page  7 of 86 Confidential  
Version 6 4/15/2016   
  
DOSING REGIMENS:  
 
 
 Or al Lenalid omide (R) will be administered every 28 days as foll ows: 
 
 
 25 mg QD  PO daily on Days 1-21 followed by 7 days rest (10 mg dose will be used for 
pa
tients with a Creatinine clearance < 60 ml/min) 
 
 
 Or al Prednisone (100 mg) will be administered on days 1 to 5  of every 28 days cycle in 
patien ts receiving combination lenalidomide and prednisone (LP). 
 Or al  dexamethasone  (40  mg)  will  be  administered  once  a  week  in  patients  receiving  
lenalidomide and low  dose dexamethasone (Ld). 
All subjects will also receive concomitant aspi rin 81 mg PO daily. For patients who cannot  tolerate 
aspirin, low molecular weight hepar in or therapeutic doses of coumadin m ay be used in place of aspirin. 
 
Rationale for Amendment 6 
MCC16018 has enrolled 30 patients from 2/2010 to 6/2013. It has been closed to accrual since 
10/2013 given it met its accrual target. Currently, six patients only continue on treatment, for now 
2-4 years. We anticipate to final close the study as soon as a manuscript has been published.   
Of note, lenalidomide was approved by the FDA for newly diagnosed multiple myeloma patients in 
2/2015. MCC16018 involves lenalidomide based therapy for newly diagnosed multiple myeloma 
and is thus currently considered standard of care (although that use was considered investigational 
at the time of initiation and completion of accrual of the study). Accordingly, we propose to collect 
more limited data pertaining to the current treatment of study subject as of 2/2016 until the final 
closure of the trial. Specifically, we will only plan to capture only serious adverse events (SAE), 
response and follow up data. Patients will continue on treatment and undergo standard of care 
monitoring which is at the discretion of the treating physician.  
The changes made with this amendment will serve several purposes:  
1- De crease the burden on patients to comply with study requirement (for example, comply 
with study visit timeframe). 
2- Decrease the number of deviations due to non-compliance with study requirements (such as 
missed 24h urine protein electrophoresis, laboratory testing outside the window).  
3- Decrease the burden to the study team which would otherwise continue to collect additional 
data which will not aid in the overall interpretation of the study results (it is unlikely that a 
new toxicity to lenalidomide will be encountered in this study population that have been on 
this treatment for now 2-4 years on average)  
Page  8 of 86 Confidential  
Version 6 4/15/2016   
  
 
2 Schedule of Study Assessments  
 
 
 
 
Procedure   
Screening/  
Baseline  
(-28 Days)   
Cycle  
1 
Day 
1  
 
Cycle  
2 day 
28  
Every  
4 
Weeks 
(1st 6 
cycles)  Maintenance   
Addi tion of 
Prednisone  or 
Dexa methasone  2 months  after   
 
Off 
Stud y1 Every  3 
months 
except  
where the addition  of 
dexamethasone  
Indicated
15 
Infor med consent  X - - - - -  - 
Inclusion/exclusion  criteria  X - - - - -  - 
Complete  medical  histo ry X - - - - -  - 
Confirm  diagnosis  and 
stage/type  MM X - - - - -  - 
Perfor mance status (ECOG) X X - X  X  X 
Concu rrent therapy X X - X  X  X 
Safety  Asses sments:  
-  
X  
-  
X  
X12  
X   
X12 Adverse  event  query  
Conc omitant Medication  query X X - X - X X 
Vital  signs/  BSA  X X - X - X X 
12-lead ECG X - - - - - - 
Physical  examination X X - X - X X 
CBC  w/diff9 X X9 - X9 - X X 
Serum Chemistry2 X  - X - X X 
TSH, T3, T43 X - - X3 - - - 
Pregnancy  testing  and X4 X4 - X4 - X X4 
counselin g4 X - - X - X X 
Serum Free Light Chain  X13 - - - - - - 
Serum B12,  RBC  Folate,  
Effic acy measurements:  
X  
-  
-  
X X  
-  
X   
X -2-M 
Protein  electropho resis (serum X - - X - X X 
and urine) X - - X - X X 
Quantitative  immunoglobulins  X - - X - X X 
Immunofixation  studies  (serum X - - X5 - X X 
and urine) 
Skeletal  surve y X 
- - 
- X14 
- - 
X - 
- X 
X X 
X 
Dosing:   
X 
- 
-  
 
X10 
- 
X   
 
X10 
X 
X 
X  
 
- --  
- 
X 
X 
X 
X   
 
- 
X 
 
X Register  patient  into RevAssist®  
program 
Prescribe study  drug10 
Count  study  drug returns10 
Dispense  Diary  Cards 
Collect  Diary  Cards 
Correlative  testing 
Bone  marrow aspiration  for 
ancillary  studies  
Peripheral blood  collection  for 
ancillary  studies   
X  
 
 
X14  
X14 
 
X14    
X14 
 
X14  
 
 
X14  
Follo w-up: 
Survival      X     
X8 
 
Screening procedures must be done within 28 days of first cycle unless otherwise specified.  
Page  9 of 86 Confidential  
Version 6 4/15/2016   
  
Starting with Cycle 1, Day 1, and all tests mu st be done +/- 7 business days of the treatment 
visi
t day. However, pregnancy testing must be done strictly as sch eduled in footnote #4 
below and in sections 6.5.1 and 6.7 without an allowance of +/- 7 days.  
 
*
 An unschedu led visit can occur at any time dur ing the study. Source must be maintained for t hese unscheduled 
visits. The date for the visit and any data generated must be reco rded on the app ropriate CRF.  Source docum ents for 
these unscheduled visits must also be maintained. 
 
1 All s ubjects are to have t he designated tests perf ormed upon discon tinua tion of s tudy drug. 
 
 
2 Clini cal laboratory e xaminations i nclude: to tal prote in, albumi n, ca lcium, , glucos e, total bilirubi n, alkaline 
phosphatase, AST (SGOT), ALT (SGPT), sodium, potassium, chloride, carbon di oxide, blood urea nitroge n, 
creatinine, and LDH. 
 
3 Serum TSH, (Thy roid Stimula ting H ormone) , T3 and T4 levels every 3 m onths 
 
4 Pregnanc y testing for female s of child bearing po tentia l. A female of chil dbeari ng poten tia l (a woman of 
childbearing po tential i s a se xually mature woma n who: 1) has not u ndergone a hyst erectomy or bilateral 
oophorectomy or 2) who has not been postmenopausal for at least 24 co nsecutive m onths [i.e., who  has had menses 
at any time in the preced ing 24 consecu tive months]). Pregn ancy testing must be pe rformed 10 to 14 days an d again 
within 24 hour s prior to prescrib ing lenalidomide for Cycle 1. (prescriptions must be filled within 7 days). FCBP 
with regular  or n o menstruati on must have a p regnancy test weekly for t he first 4 weeks a nd the n e very 28 day s  
while on therapy (includ ing  breaks in therapy) ; at discon tinuation o f lenalidomide and  at Day 28 pos t the last dose of 
lenalido mide. Females with i rregular menstruation must ha ve a pregnanc y test weekl y for the first 4 weeks and then 
every 14 d ays while on thera py (includ ing breaks in therapy ), at discon tinuation  of lenalidomi de and at Day 1 4 and 
Day 28 post the last dose of lenalidomide. (see Append ix VI II: Risks of Fetal Exposure, Pregnancy Tes ting 
Gu
ideline s and Accep table Birth Control Meth ods). 
 
5 Skeletal survey is to be performed at baseline, up on addition of cortic ost eroids (pre dnisone and / or 
dexam ethasone) , disc ontinuation, and when cli nicall y indicated. 
Page  10 of 86 Confidential  
Version 6 4/15/2016   
  
6 Bone marrow biop sy is to be performed at base line, af ter 2 cycles of single agent lena lidomi de therapy, to confirm 
CR
, at t he time of addition of corticosteroi ds (pre dnisone a nd / or dexam ethasone), disc ontinuation, and when 
clin
ically indicate d. 
 
8 Survival fo llow-up to be comple ted every 3 months. 
 
 
9 CBC with diff. is required on Day 1Cycle 1 (unless baseli ne done  within 7 d ays of Day 1), then ev ery 2 weeks for 
the first 4 wee ks of therapy. After t he first 4 wee ks of therapy, if t he patie nt required a dose reduction of 
lenalido mide (Revlimid®) or t he addition of cyt okine supp ort due to neu tropenia en countered during t he previous 
cycle, CBC with diff. is required at least ev ery 2 wee ks during the next cycle, otherwise CBC with diff. is required 
at least every 4 weeks.   More frequen t CBCs may be obtained at the investi gator’s discretion. After 4/2016, 
laboratory testing is at the discretion of the treating physician and in accordance with lenalidomide package insert. 
CBC will not be collected for the purpose of the trial but could be ordered per standard practise 
10 Lenalidomide must be prescribed thro ugh and in compliance w ith Celgene ’s RevAssist® Program. Prescriptions  
must be filled within 7 days. Drug returned from the previous cycle will be counted, recorded in t he patien t’s CRF. 
Patients must be instructed to return all bottles (whether empty, partial or full) at each visit. Unused lenalidomide 
should be returne d to the patie nt for disp osition in accorda nce wit h the RevAssist® pro gram. After April 2016, 
diaries and pill counts will not be performed.  
11. During maintenance, patients will have laboratory testing per institutional standard of care approximately  
e v e r y  3  m o n t h s .   
12 After April 2016, only serious adverse events SAE will be collected. 
 
13 At the initiati on of study and yearly thereafter. 
 
14 Ancillary bone marr ow aspiration  will be obtained at b aseline and after 2 m onths of lenalidomi de monoth erapy. 
Ancillary peripheral bl ood samples will be obtained at baseline, after 2 m onths of lenalidomide monotherapy a nd 
after 2 month of addition of dexam ethasone .se e section 9.7.4 for details regarding ancillar y studies. 
15. Patients who complete the first 6 cycles of therapy, are on a stable dose of lenalidomide for more than 2 cycles and 
are responding to therapy are eligible for entering a maintenance schedule of visits where office visits will be every 3 
months and monitoring will be pre institutional standard of care Patient will continue to be followed for disease 
progression per standard clinical practice.  
Page  11 of 86 Confidential  
Version 6 4/15/2016   
  
 
3 Glossary of Abbreviations  
 
 
2-M Beta 2-microblogulin 
 
 
-hCG Beta - Human chorionic gonadotropin 
 
 
AE Adve
rse event 
 
 
ALT (SGPT) Alanine tran sam inase (serum glutamate pyruvic transaminase)  
AST (SGOT) Aspartate transaminase (serum glutam ic oxaloacetic transaminase)  
Bid Twice per day 
BM Bone marrow 
 
 
BMSC Bone marrow strom al cells 
 
 
BUN Blood urea nitrogen 
 
 
CBC Complete blood count 
 
 
C
FR Code of Federal Regulations 
 
 
CR Complete response 
 
 
CRF Case report form 
 
 
CTC Common  toxicity criteria 
 
 
DLT Dose- limiting toxicity 
 
 
DSMP Data Safety Monitoring Plan 
 
 
DVT  Deep vein thrombosis 
 
 
EC Ethics Committee 
Page  12 of 86 Confidential  
Version 6 4/15/2016   
  
ECG Elec trocardiogram 
 
 
ECH O Echocardiogram 
 
 
EGR 1 Early Growt h Response 1 
 
 
EGR2 Ea rly Growt h Response 2 
 
 
EGR 3 Early Growt h Response 3 
 
 
FDA Food and Drug Administration 
 
 
GCP Good clinical practice 
 
 
G-CSF Granulocyte colony stimulating factor 
 
 
GM-CSF Granulocyte macrophage colony stimulating factor  
IB Investigator’s Brochure 
ICH International Conference on Harmonization 
 
 
I
FN- Interferon-alpha 
 
 
IL Interleuk in 
 
 
IMiD Immunomodulatory drug 
 
 
I
MWG International Myeloma Working Group 
 
 
IND Investigational New Drug 
 
 
IRB Institutional Review Board 
 
 
IVP Intravenous push 
 
 
LDH Lactate dehydrogenase 
 
 
mAbs Monoclonal antibodies 
Version 6 4/15/2016  Page  13 of 86 Confidential   
  
MM Multip le myeloma 
 
 
MTD Maximum tolerated dose 
 
 
NC
I National Cancer Institute 
 
 
NK cells Natural Killer Cells 
 
 
P
BMC Peripheral blood mononuclear cells 
 
 
PD Progressive disease 
 
 
PCR Polymerase chain reaction 
 
 
P
DE-4 Phosphodiesterase 4 
 
 
PO Per orum – by mouth 
 
 
PR P
artial Response 
 
 
PS Performance status 
 
 
SAE Serious adverse event 
 
 
Q.D. Every day 
 
 
Q-PCR Quantitative Polymerase Chain Reaction  
SPARC Secreted Protein Acid ic and Rich in Cysteine  
SD Stable disease 
SWOG Southwest Oncology Group 
 
 
TCR T-cell receptor 
 
 
TGF Tumor growth factor beta 
 
 
TNF
 Tumor necrosis factor 
Version 6 4/15/2016  Page  14 of 86 Confidential   
  
TPP Therapeutics Product Programme 
 
 
TSH Thyroid-stimulating hormone 
 
 
ULN Upper limit of norm al 
 
 
VEG
F Vascular endothelial grow th factor 
 
 
WBC White blood cell 
 
 
WCBP Wome n  of child bearing potential  
 
 
WHO World Health Organization 
Version 6 4/15/2016  Page  15 of 86 Confidential   
  
 
4 Background and Rationale  
 
 
 
4.1. Multipl e Myeloma  
 
 
Multip le myeloma is a plasma cell neoplasm characte rized by an infiltrate of monoclonal  plasma  
cells in the bon e ma rrow which results in the production of a monoclonal protein . Multiple  
myeloma accounts for approximately 10% of hematologic malignancies and  about 1% of 
malignancies overall[1]. Approximately 19,000 patien ts will be diagnosed with multiple  
myeloma in 2007 in the United States and the m edian a ge at the time of diagnosis is 70 years  
(hence most patients with multiple myeloma are older than 65 years)[1].  Bone marrow 
involvement m ay result in cytopenias, painful skeletal lytic lesions and system ic sym pto ms 
(f
evers, sweats, anorexia and weight loss ); while  the paraprotein m ay cause renal dysfunction,  
neuronal damage, amyloid deposition, and  rarely hyperviscosity. The cornerstone of therapy of 
multiple myeloma has traditionally includ ed the use of corticosteroids (prednisone or 
dexamethasone). However, these agents have substantial toxicities e specially in the multiple  
myeloma patient population which  tends to be particularly vulnerable to those side effects  
(namely fluid retention, non neu tropenic infections and venous thromboembolic events). The  
past 5 years has witnessed the introduction of novel agents (lenalidomide, thalidomide and  
bortezomib) with considerable efficacy especially when combined with corticosteroids[2-4]. 
While these novel agen ts have considerably changed the outlook of multiple myeloma patients,  
the toxicity of therapy remains significant and attempts to reduce the toxicity of therapy by 
minimizing corticosteroid exposure remains a significant priority. 
Version 6 4/15/2016  Page  16 of 86 Confidential   
  
4.2. Lenal idomide  
 
 
 
4.2.1  Preclinica l evaluatio n of lenalidomide  
 
 
Lenalidomide is a proprietary IMiD® compound of Celgene Corporation, which markedly  
stimulate T-cell proliferation, as well as IL-2 and IFN-   production, but do  not inhibit  
phosphodiesterase 4 (PDE-4)[5]. Lenalidomide (Revlimid®) is 50 to 2000 times more potent  
than thalid omide in stimulating T-cell proliferatio n triggered via th e T-cell receptor (TCR), an d 
50 to 100  times more potent than thalidomide in augmenting IL-2 and IFN-   production. In 
a
ddition, Lenalidomide triggers dose-dependent decreased secretion of T NF-, IL- 1, and IL-6; 
and triggers increased secretio n of IL-10. The  IC50 of Lenalidomide for inhibiting L PS  induced  
TNF-secretion by PBMC is ~100 nM (25.9 ng/mL), whereas thalidomide has an IC50 of ~194 
µM 
(50.2 µ g/mL)[6]. Lenalidomide decreases bind ing  of MM cells to  bone marrow stro mal cells 
 
(BMSCs); inhibits the production in the BM milieu of cytokines (IL-6, VEGF, TNF- ) 
m
ediating growth and survival of MM cells; blocks angiogenesis; and stimulates host anti-M M 
NK cell immunity[7, 8]. These preclinical studies suggest that Lenalidomide m ay overcome drug 
resistanc e, even to th alidomide, in MM cells. 
 
4.2.2. Lenalidomide in relapsed refractory multiple myeloma  
 
 
The immunomodulator lenalidomide has considerable activity in multiple myelom a. Early phase  
I study of single agent lenalidomide in relaps ed refracto ry multiple myeloma have shown a  
response rate of approximately  30%[9 , 10].  This  single agen t activity  was confirm ed in a 
subsequent phase II study evaluatin g two different doses of lena lidomide (15 mg once daily or 
15 mg twice daily) for 21 of a 28 days cycle[9]. High dose dexamethasone (40 mg orally on days 
1-4, 9-12, and 17 -20) was added  after 2 or 4 cycles in the event of disease progression or stable 
Page  17 of 86 Confidential   
Version. 5.1 date 6/25/2014 
  
disease respectively. Of 83 evaluable patients, 5 had a com plete remission, 15 a partial  
remission, 14  had a minim al response, 39  had stable disease and the remainder had progressive  
disease. The rate of minim al response or be tter was 40%[9]. Dexamethasone w as added to 
lena
lidomide therapy in 30 non-responders, and resulted in a response in  10 patients (30 % added  
response rate)[9]. The combination of lenalidomide and  high dose dexamethasone was compared  
to high do se dexamethasone in two phase I II trials in relaps ed refractory multiple myeloma[11, 
12]. This combination result ed in an overall response ra te of approximately 60% and  a complete  
response rate o f 25% which was  statistically superior to high  dose dexamethasone[11, 12]. More 
importantly, the combination of lenalidomide and high dose dexamethasone resulted in an 
overall survival benefit compared  to high dose dexamethasone[11, 12]. These results hav e led to 
the approval of lenalidomide by the Food  and Drug Administration for the treatment of relapsed  
or refractory multiple myelom a. 
 
4.2.3 INDICATION S AND USAGE:  
 
 
Revlimid® (lenalidomide) is indicated for the treatment of patients with transfusion-dependent  
anem ia due to Low- or Intermediate-1 -risk myelodysplastic  syndrom es associated with a deletion  
5q cytogene tic abnormality with or without additional cy togenetic abnormalities. Revlimid® is 
also approved in combination with dexamethasone for the treatment of patien ts with multiple  
myeloma that have received at least one prior therapy. 
 
4.2.4 Adverse Events  
 
 
Most frequently reported adverse events reported during clinical studies with lenalidomide in 
oncologic and  non-oncologic  indications, regardl ess of presum ed relationship to study  
medication include: anemia, neutropenia, thrombocytopenia and pancytopenia, abdominal pain, 
Page  18 of 86 Confidential   
Version. 5.1 date 6/25/2014 
  
nausea, vomiting and diarrhea, dehydration, rash, itching, infections, sepsis, pneumonia, UTI, 
Uppe
r respiratory infection, atrial fibrillation, congestive heart failure, myocardial infarction,  
chest pain , weakness, hypotension,  hypercalcemia, hyperglycemia, back pain, bone pain,  
generalized pain, dizziness, mental status changes, syncope, renal  failure, dyspnea, pleural  
effusion, pulmonary embolism,  deep vein thrombosis, CVA, convulsions, dizziness, spinal cord  
compression, syncope, disease progression, death not specified and fractures. 
 
Com
plete and updated adverse events are  available in the  Investigational Drug Brochure and the  
IND Safety Letters. 
 
4
.2.5 Lenalidomide in new ly diagnosed multiple myeloma  
 
 
The phase II experience of lenalidomide and high dose dexamethasone in newly diagnosed  
multiple myeloma resulted in a response rate of 91% and generated interest in larger randomized  
studies evaluating this combination in this patient population[3]. The Eastern  Cooperative  
Oncology Group rand omiz ed patients with newly diagno sed multiple myeloma to lenalidomide  
and low dose dexamethasone or lenalidomide and high dose dexamethasone[13]. The patients  
who receiv ed high  dose dexamethasone in combination with lenalidomide had a superio r 
re
sponse rate after 4  cycles of therapy (82% compared to 70% with low  dose dexamethasone and  
lenalidomide, p<0.01), bu t had  an inferior 1 y ear overall survival rate (87% versus 96%, 
p<
0.001) and had a higher  induction  mortality (5% versus 0.5%,  p=0.006)[13]. In addition, the  
patien ts who received hi gh dose dexamethasone and  lenalid omide had a higher rate of toxicity in 
the form of venous thromboembolic events, infectious complications, and neutropenia[13]. Fro m 
these clinical observations, one can conclude th at a better tolerated less intensive therapy will  
result in better survival (long term) outcomes in older adults with multiple myelom a. 
Page  19 of 86 Confidential   
Version. 5.1 date 6/25/2014 
  
4.2.6 Rationale for the evaluation  of single agent lenalidomide in newly diagnosed 
mildly symptomatic multiple myeloma  
 
While corticosteroids have been shown to  resu lt in apoptosis and decreased proliferation of 
multiple myeloma cells, they have also been noted to inhi bit the stimulatory e ff ects of 
lenalidomide on T cell and NK cell[14]. Hence, a lenalidomide based therapeutic approach  
excluding corticosteroids wou ld take better advantage of the immunomodulatory effects of 
lena
lidomide. In addition, clini cal results corroborate such an approach: E4A03 study suggest 
that a lower dose of dexamethasone is associated with a superior survival outcome compared to 
higher dose of dexamethasone. These findings were more  striking in older adults who are more  
vulnerable to the toxicities of dexamethasone (great er than  65  years of age)[13]. Accordingly, we 
propose to evaluate single agent lenalidomide in patien ts with newly diagnosed multiple  
myeloma who are o nly mildly symptomatic from their disease but who fulf ill the requirement for 
active treatment initiation. This would be exp ected to result in better tolerance  to therapy, less 
tox
icity but more potential for eliciting the immuno m odulatory effects of lenalidomide. 
 
4.2.7 Measurin g lenalidomid e induce d humora l immun e response  
 
 
Immunomodulation is one of the proposed mechanisms of action of lenalidomide and  
thalidomide in multiple myelom a. Because mo st of the clinical evaluations of lenalidomide in 
multiple myeloma have included  concomitant corticostero id  use, firm evidence of 
im
munomodulation and a lenalidomide induced tumor specific immune response has not been  
demonstrated in vivo. Noonan  et al. have recen tly demonstrated enhanced hu moral response to 
pneu mococcal vaccination in multiple myeloma patien ts who received  lenalidomide prior to 
vaccination as compared to patien ts receiving vaccination prior to lenalid omide therapy[15]. This  
data suggests an enhanced humoral immune response during lenalidomide therapy. Accordingly, 
Page  20 of 86 Confidential  
Version.  5.1 date 6/25/2014  
  
  
we propose to evaluate the impa ct of lenalidomide monotherapy on the development of a  
humoral immune response directed to common tum or antigens. 
 
4.2.7.1          Serametrix® seru m profilin g assay  
 
 
The Serametrix serum profiling assay enables the multiplex detection of serum antibodies to key 
tumor antigens. The assay utilizes a proprietary prote in microarray th at contains protein antigens 
that are known to be immunogenic in cancer. The use of automated liquid handling equipment  
ensures high reproducibility, high throughput and low  sample  volumes. The assay has sufficient  
sensitivity and  dynam ic range to measure physiological levels of serum antibody and  is therefore  
an effective tool in the measurement of hu moral immune responses in cancer. 
The Serametrix protein microarray contains approximately 100 tum or an tigens. Each antigen is 
derived from sequence-verified full-length human clones. These are expressed in insect cells and  
the consequent eukaryotic glycosylation helps to ensure authentic ep itopes are maintained. The  
proteins were selected from published scientific literature  in consultation with leading academ ic 
tumor immunologists. The criteria for selection included demonstrable  immunogenicity,  
association with cancer and suitability for use as biomarker. 
 
 
 
4.2.8  Lenalidomid e induce d expressio n of tumor s uppresso r genes  
 
A number  of mechanisms of actions have been postulated to account for lenalidomide activity in 
multiple myeloma including direct tum or growth inh ibition, upregulation of tum or suppressor 
genes and immunomodulation. Lenalidomide has been shown to  induce the expression of various  
tumor suppressor gen es (EGR1, EGR2, EGR 3,  p15, p21, p27  and SPARC) in multiple myeloma  
cells lines[14, 16, 17]. These studies have not been replicated in  samples from patients and  
induction of these tumor suppressors could be an early predictor of response to lenalidomide. As 
Version.  5.1 date 6/25/2014  
 Page  21 of 86 Confidential   
  
such, we propose to evaluate the expression of the above tumor suppressor genes after treatment  
of patients with single agent lenalidomide and correlate the  induction of the  tumor suppressor 
g
enes to clinical responses. 
 
 
 
4.3.    Corticosteroids in induction therapy for multiple myeloma.  
 
The optim al dosage of corticosteroids in combination with lenalidomide in patients with newly  
diagnosed myeloma has not clearly been established. In older adults with multiple myeloma,  
several groups have attempted to investigate the optim al corticosteroid in induction therapy  
stemming from the lower tolerance to dexamethasone of older adults with multiple myelom a. 
One such  investigation  conducted by the  national cancer institute of Canada compared  induction  
therapy in older newly diagnosed multiple myeloma patients with melphalan and prednisone to 
therapy with melphalan and  dexamethasone[18]. They no ted a higher rate of grade 3 and 4 
infe
ctions in the dexamethasone arm without a response or survival benefit to that agent[18].  
Similar findings were reported by investigators of the Intergroupe Francais du  Myelome (IFM) 
who compared induction therapy with melphalan and prednisone com pared to dexamethasone  
based  therapy in older adults with multip le myeloma[19]. These results p rom pted us to evaluate  
prednisone as the corticosteroid partner of lenalidomide in  patients who do not achieve a  
response after 2  cycles of single agent lenalidomide and yet h ave not evidence of disease  
progression. This combination  was safely delivered as reported in two investigation s where  
lenalidomide and  alternate day prednisone were used as maintenance therapy in relapsed and  
newly diagnosed patients[20]. 
Version.  5.1 date 6/25/2014  
 Page  22 of 86 Confidential   
  
5. Study Endpoints  
 
 
Primary:  
 
1- The 12-month progression free survival (PFS) of older adults with mildly sym ptoma tic 
multiple myeloma treated on  this response adapted approach (i.e. time from start o f 
lenalidomide to failure of lenalidomide and low dose dexamethasone) 
Secondary : 
 
 
1- The  response rate of older adults with mildly symptomatic multiple myeloma to single  
agent lenalidomide, lenalidomide prednisone and lenalidomide low dose dexamethasone  
in patients w ith suboptimal responses to lenalidomide monotherapy 
2- The  toxicity prof ile of these lenalid omide based combinations 
 
3- The  progression free survival of patients treated with single agent lenalidomide 
 
4- The  1  year overall survival (OS) of older adults with mildly sym ptomatic multiple  
myeloma treated on this response adapted approach 
 
 
 
Exploratory  
 
1- Mea sure a lenalidomide induced tumor specific immune response and correlate the tu mor 
specific immune response with corticosteroid use, response to therapy and duration of response 
2- To  evaluate  the  impact  of  lenalido mide  mono-therapy  on  expression  of  tumor 
suppression genes and cell cycle regulators 
Version.  5.1 date 6/25/2014  
 Page  23 of 86 Confidential   
  
 
 
 
 
6. Investigational Plan  
 
 
 
6.1. Overall design  
 
 
This is a phase 2 trial evaluating a lenalidomide based response  adapted strategy in older adults  
with newly diagnosed multiple myelom a. Subjects will be started on single agent lenalidomide.  
In the ev ent of disease progression, low dose dexamethasone will be add ed (see diagram below).  
In the even t of stable disease after 2 cycles of therapy, the use of an alternate corticosteroid  
(prednisone) will be added to len alidomide therapy (see diagram below). In the event of a  
minimal response after 2  cycles of single agent lenalidomide therapy, such therapy will be  
continued until disea se progression (see diagram below). 
Version.  5.1 date 6/25/2014  
 Page  24 of 86 Confidential   
 
 
Newly diagnosed multiple  
myeloma 
Mildly symptomatic*  
 
 
 
 
 
Lenalidomide 25 mg PO 
days 1-21 of a 28 day cycle  
 
 
 
 
 
Response  
after 2 cycles  
MR± or better Stable  disease after  2 cycles Prog ressive disease within 2  
cycles  
 
 
 
 
 
Continue  present therapy as  
long as response main tained.  Addi tion of Prednisone 
100 mg PO on day s 1-5 A
ddition of 
Dexamethasone 40 mg PO 
days 1, 8, 15, 22 
 
 
 
 
Progress ive di sease:  add 
dexam etha sone 40 mg PO 
days 1, 8, 15, 22 of the 
cycle Respon se after 2 cyc les: 
continue abov e thera py Stable or progressive  
disease after 2 cycles:  
Discontin ue Predn isone 
Add Dexamethasone 40 mg  
PO days 1,8,15, 22 No p
rogres sion after 2 
cycles: 
Continue abov e t hera py Progress ive di sease:  off 
study 
 
 
 
Subject replacement and evaluable patients  
 
 
Subjects who discontinue study drug, other then for progression, prior to  com pleting one cycle of 
ther
apy will be replaced. 
 
6.2. Discussion of design  
 
 
Older adults or subjects not willing or eligible for post induction high dose therapy and stem cell  
transplantation will be offered participation in to this study. This  is in  line with findings from the  
ECOG E4A03  study which noted a decreased survival among patients receiving higher dose 
de
xamethasone compared to low  dose dexamethasone specifically in the subgroup of patients  
older than 65  years of age[13]. In addition, patients enrolled o n this response adapted clinical 
Version.  5.1 date 6/25/2014  
 Page  25 of 86 Confidential   
  
trial would be either not willing or ineligible to undergo immediate (post 4 cycles of induction)  
high dose therapy and stem cell transplantation. The rationale underlying this exclusion criterion  
related to the fact that patients wishing to undergo immediate (post induction) high dose therapy  
usually are treated with more aggressive front line regimens. 
Mildly symptomatic patients will be selected for participation in this study. The rationale for the 
selection of this population  lies in the fact that patients with aggressive disease at presentation  
(patients with significant sympto ms) are probably best treated with combination the rapy in order 
to achieve a higher likelihood of response (as evidenced by E4A03 where patients receiving  
higher dose dexamethasone in combination with lenalidomide had a higher response rate than  
patients receiving a lower dose of dexamethasone in combination with lena lidomide)[13] . 
E
mpirically, defining this patient population objectively can be difficult but we propose the  
following definition of mildly symptomatic d isease: goo d performance status (ECOG 0-1), 
absenc
e of severe cytopenias or renal failure, as well as low risk as def in ed by β2-microglobulin  
level and lack of adverse cytogenetic features[21]. 
In a
ddition, this study w ill evaluate the role of an alternative corticosteroid in com bination with  
lenalidomide. Prednisone is known to be a better tolerated corticosteroid than dexamethasone  
without a compromise in the efficacy. This was seen in a recent report of a clinical trial by the 
national cancer  institu te of Canad a study comparing melphal an prednisone to melphalan  
dexamethasone (grade 3 and 4 infections; 9 versus 15%, p=0.03)[18]. In addition, the  
intergroupe francais du myelome (IFM) had noted sim ilar finding in older adults with newly  
diagnosed myeloma randomized to melphalan prednisone or dexamethasone based  
induction[19]. Both trials did not note a superiority of dexamethasone based induction to the 
prednisone based induction. 
Version.  5.1 date 6/25/2014  
 Page  26 of 86 Confidential   
  
The primary endpoint of this study will be the progression free survival of patients treated with  
this response  adapted  approach.  This is  defined  as  the  time from enrollment to failure of 
lenalidomide and low dose dexamethasone. Outcom es of this cohort of patients treated with this  
response adapted approach would  be compared to patients treated with lenalidomide and low 
dose dexamethasone. If this response adapted approach results in similar or improved outcomes 
com
pared to therapy with lenalidomide and low dose dexamethasone, this approach would be  
favored since it likely result in less toxicity by using an overall lower dosage of corticosteroid. 
 
 
7. Study population  
 
 
Male and female subjects with doc umented newly diagnosed mu ltiple myeloma who meet all of 
the eligibility criteria in Section 7.1.1 below will be enrolled into the study. 
 
7.1. Inclus
ion an d exclusion criteria  
 
 
Subjects are to be assessed for suitability for entry into the study based on the following  
inclu sion and  exclusion criteria. 
 
7.1.1.  Inclusion criteria  
 
 
Subjects must  meet all of the following inclusion criteria to be eligible for enrollment into the  
study: 
1. Understand and voluntarily sign an inform ed consent form. 
 
2. Age  65 years or not eligible for high dose therapy and autologous stem cell transplant. 
 
3. Able  to adhere to the study visit schedule and other pro tocol requirements. 
Version.  5.1 date 6/25/2014  
 Page  27 of 86 Confidential   
  
4. Diagnosed with multiple myeloma and be considered to have active disease. Patients  
must not have received an active chemotherapy regim en or Dexamethasone. Patients ma y 
have received palliative radiotherapy at least 2 weeks prior to  the study start. 
5. Mea surab le myeloma paraprotein levels in serum (≥ 0.5 g/dL), urine (≥ 0. 2 g excreted in 
a 24-hour urine collection sam ple) or by serum free light chains (involved free light chain  
greater th an 100mg/L) 
6. Ea stern Coo perative Group (ECOG) Performance Status of 0 or 1. 
 
7. S erum bilir ubin levels 1.5 times the upper limit of the norm al range for the laboratory  
(ULN). 
8. S erum AST or serum ALT] levels 2 x UL N 
 
9. Must  have adequate bone marrow function: 
 
a. Absolute neutrophil count > 1,000 cells/mm3 (1.0 x 109/L). 
 
b. Platelets 100,00 0 /mm3. 
 
10.
 Hemoglobin > 8 g/dL 
 
 
11.
 Must have adequate renal function: Renal function assessed by calculated creatinine  
clearance as follows (see Appendix VI: Cockcroft-Gault estimation of CrCl): 
 
a. Calculated creatinine clearance ≥ 30m l/min by Cockcroft-Gault formula. See  
section below, “Prescribing Information”, regarding lenalidomide dose 
a
djustment for calculated creatinine clearance  30ml/min and < 60ml/min. 
12.
 Low risk myeloma is defined as the absence of the following adverse features[21] 
 
i. t(4;14) by FISH or metap hase cytogenetics 
 
ii. t(14,16) or t(14;20) by FISH or m etaphase cytogenetics 
 
iii. Deletion 17q13  by FISH 
 
iv. Deletion 13  by metaphase analysis 
 
v. Aneuploidy by metaphase analysis 
Version.  5.1 date 6/25/2014  
 Page  28 of 86 Confidential   
  
vi. Β2 microglobulin > 5.5 
 
 
13. Able to tolerate one of the  following thromboprophylactic strategies:  aspirin,  low 
molecular weight heparin or warfarin (coumadin). 
14.
 All study participan ts must be registered into the mandato ry RevAssist® program,  and be 
willing and  able to comply with the requirements of RevAssist®. 
15.
 Females of childbearing potential (FCBP)† must have a negative serum or urine  
pregnancy test with a sensitiv ity of at least 50 mIU/mL within 10 – 14 days and again  
within 24  hours p rior to prescribing lenalidomide for Cycle 1 (presc riptions must be filled  
within 7 d ays) and mu st eith er commit to continued abstinence from heterosexual  
intercourse or begin TWO acceptable methods of birth contro l, one highly effective  
method and one additional effective method AT THE  SAME TIME, at least 4  weeks 
before she starts taking lenalidomide. FCBP must also agree to ongoing pregnancy  
testing. Men mu st agree to use a latex condom during sexual contact with a female of 
child bea ring potential even if they have had a successful vasectomy.   See Appendix 
V
III:  Risks  of  Fetal  Exposure,  Pregnancy  Testing  Guidelines  and  Acceptable  Birth  
Control Methods. 
 
7.1.2. E xclusion criteria  
 
 
The presence of any of the following will exclude a subject from study enrollment: 
 
1. Ong oing severe infection requiring intravenous antibiotic treatment. 
 
2. L ife expectancy of less  than 3  months. 
 
 
 
† A female of ch ildbearing po tential i s a sexually m ature female who: 1) has not undergone a hyster ectomy 
or bilateral o ophorectomy; or 2) has n ot been naturally postmenopausal for at least 24 consecu tive m onths (i.e., ha s 
had m
enses at any time in the preceding 24 c onsecutive months ). 
Version.  5.1 date 6/25/2014  
 Page  29 of 86 Confidential   
  
3. Performance status of 2,  3 or 4 
 
4. P rior malignancy, except for adequately treated basal cell or squamous cell sk in can cer, 
in-situ cervical cancer, or other cancer from which the subject has been disease-free for at 
least 2 years.  
5. S olita ry bone or solita ry extramedullary plasmacytoma as the only evidence of plasma  
cell dyscrasia. 
6. Unc ontrolled medical problems such as diabetes mellitus, congestive heart failure,  
coronary artery disease, hypertension, unstable angina, arrhythmias), pulmonary, hepatic  
and renal diseases unless  renal insu fficiency is felt to be secondary to multiple myeloma. 
7. An y serious medical condition, laboratory abnormality, or psychiatr ic ill ness that would 
prevent the subject from  signing the inform ed consent form. 
8. P regnant or lactating females. 
 
9. An y condition, including the presence of laboratory abnormalities, which places the  
subject at unacceptable risk if he/she were to participate in the study or confounds the  
ability to interpret data from the study. 
 
10. Known hypersensitivity to tha lidomide. 
 
11. Use of any other experi mental  drug  or therapy within 28 days of baseline. 
 
12. The development of erythema nodosum if characterized by a desquamating rash while  
taking thalidomide or similar drugs. 
 
13. Any prior use of lenalidomide. 
 
14. Concurrent use of other anti-cancer agents or treatments. 
 
15. Known seropositive for or active viral infection with hum an immunodeficiency virus 
(HIV), hepatitis B virus  (HBV) or hepatitis C vir us (HCV). Patients  who are seropositive  
because of hepatitis B virus vaccine are eligible. 
Version.  5.1 date 6/25/2014  
 Page  30 of 86 Confidential   
  
8. Treatments  
 
 
 
8.1.1. In vestiga tional drug and reference therapy  
 
 
 
8.1.1.1. S
upplier(s)  
 
 
Celgene Corporation will supply Revlimid® (lenalidomide) to study participants at no charge  
through  the RevAssist®  program.  All physicians who prescribe lenalidomide for research  
subjec ts enrolled into th is trial and a ll research subjects enrolled into this trial must  be registered  
in and must  comply with all requirements of Celgene’s RevAssist® program. 
 
Commercial supplies of dexamethasone, prednisone, low molecular weight heparin, coumadin  
and aspir in will be u sed for this stud y. 
 
8.1.1.2. Lenalidomide Description  
 
 
REVLIMID® (lenalidomide), a thalidomide analogue, is an immuno modulatory agent with anti-  
angiogenic properties. The chemical name is 3-(4- amino-1-oxo 1,3-dihydro -2 H-isoindol-2-yl)  
piperidine-2,6 -dione and it has the following chemical structure: 
 
Che
mical Structure of Lenalidomide  
 
 
O
 O H 
N 
N O 
 
 
NH2 
 
 
3-(4- amino-1-oxo 1,3-dihydro-2H - isoindol-2- yl)  piperidine-2,6 -dione 
 
 
The empirical formula for lenalidomide is C13H13N3O3, and the gram molecular weight is 259.3. 
Version.  5.1 date 6/25/2014  
 Page 31 of 86 Confidential   
  
Lenalidomide is an off-white to pale-yellow solid powder. It is soluble in organic solvent/water  
mixtures, and  buffered aqueous solvents. Lenalidomide is more soluble in organic solvents and  
low pH solutions. Solubility was s ignificantly lower in less acidic buffers, ranging from about 
0.4 to 0.5  mg/m l. Lenalidomide has an asymmetric carbon atom and can exist as the optically  
active forms S(-) and R(+), and is  produced as a racem ic mixture with a net optical rotation of 
z
ero. 
 
Clinical pharmacology 
Mechanism of Action:  
The
 mechanism of action of lenalidomide rem ains to be fully charac terized. Lenalidomide  
possesses immunomodulatory and  antiangiogenic properties. Lenalidomide inhibited the  
secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines and increased the secretion of anti-inflammatory 
cytokines from peripheral blood mononuclear cells. Lenalidomide inhibited cell proliferation  
with varying e ffectiveness (IC50s) in some but not all cell lines. Of cell lines tested,  
lenalidomide was effective in inhibiting growth of Namalwa cells (a hum an B cell lymphoma  
cell line with a deletion of one chromosome 5) but was much less effective in inhibiting growth 
of KG-1 cells (hum an m yeloblastic cell line, also with a deletion of one chromosome 5) and  
other cell lines without chromosome 5 deletions. Lenalidomide inhibited the expression of 
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) but not COX-1 in vitro. 
 
Pharmacokinetics and Drug Metabolism: 
Absorption:  
Lenalidomide, in healthy volunteers, is rapidly absorbed  following oral administration with  
maximum plasm a concentrations occurring between 0.625 and  1.5 hours post-dose. 
Version.  5.1 date 6/25/2014  
 Page 32 of 86 Confidential   
  
Co-administration with food does not alter the extent of absorption (AUC) but does reduce the  
maximal plasma concentration (Cmax) by 36%. The pharmacokinetic disposition of 
lenalidomide is linear. Cm ax and AUC  increase proportionately with increases in dos e. Multip le 
dosing at the recommended dose-regimen  does not resu lt in drug accumulation. 
 
P
harmacokinetic analys es were perform ed on 15 multiple myeloma patients treated in the phase I 
studies. Absorption was found to be rapid on both Day 1 and Day 28 with time to maximum  
blood levels ranging from 0.7  to 2.0 hours at all dose levels (5mg, 10m g, 25mg, and 50mg).  No 
plasma accumulation was observed with multiple daily do sing. Plasma lenalidomide declin ed in 
a monophasic manner with elimination half- life ranging from 2.8  to 6.1 hours on  both Day 1 and  
28 at all 4  doses. Peak and overall plasma concentrations were dose proportional over the dosing  
range of 5mg to 50mg. Exposure (AUC) in multiple myeloma patients is 57% higher than in 
healthy male volunteers. 
 
Pharmacokinetic Para meters: 
Distribution:  
In vitro (14C)-lenalidomide binding to plasma proteins is approximately 30%. 
 
 
Metabolism and Excretion:  
 
 
The metabolic profile of lenalidomide in humans has not been studied. In healthy volunteers,  
approximately two-thirds of lenalidomide is eliminated  unchanged through urinary excretion.  
The process exceeds the glomerular filtration rate and  therefore is partially or entirely active.  
Half- life of elimination is approximately 3 hours. 
Version.  5.1 date 6/25/2014  
 Page 33 of 86 Confidential   
  
Dosage form  
 
 
Lenalidomide will be supplied as capsules for oral administration. Lenalidomide will be supplied  
as 5 mg and 25  mg capsules for oral administration. 
 
Prescribing Information  
 
 
Lenalidomide (Revlimid®) will be provided to research subjects for the duration of their  
participation in this trial  at no cha rge to them or their  insurance providers. Lenalidomide will be  
provided in accordan ce with the RevAssist® program of Celgene Corporation. Per standard  
RevAssist® requirements all physicians who prescribe lenalidomide for research subjects  
enrolled in to this trial, an d all research subjec ts enrolled into this trial, mu st be registered in and 
must comply with all requirements of the RevAssist® program.  Prescriptions mu st be filled  
within 7 days. Only enough lenalidomide for one cycle of therapy will be supplied to the 
p
atient each cycle . 
 
The planned dose of lenalidomide for investigation is 25  mg/day, orally on days 1  - 21 followed  
by 7 days rest (28 day cycle). Dosing will be b ased on CrCl: 
Lenalidomide will be given  at a dose of 25 mg once daily on  days 1 to 21, every 28 days for 
those
 patients with a subjects wi th a creatinine clearance of ≥ 60 mL/m in by Cockroft-Gault  
formula. 
Subjects with a crea tinine clearance of ≥ 30  mL/m in but < 60  mL/m in by Cockroft-Gault  
formula will begin lenalidomide at 10 mg once daily on days 1 to 21, every 28 days. 
The
 lenalidomide dose may be increased to dose 15 mg at the start of Cycle 3  if hematologic  
toxicities have not occurred. 
Version.  5.1 date 6/25/2014  
 Page 34 of 86 Confidential   
  
Dosing will be in the morning at approximately the sam e ti me each day.  Lenalidomide capsule s 
should be swallowed whole, and should not be broken, chewed or opened. 
 
If a dose of lenalidomide is missed, it should be taken  as soon as possible on the same day. If it 
is missed for the entire day, it should not be made up. 
 
Patients who tak e more than  the prescribed dose of lenalidomide should be instructed  to seek  
emergency medical care if needed and  contact study staff immediately. 
 
S
pecial Handling Inst ructions  
 
 
Fema les of childbearing potential should not hand le or administer lenalidomide unless they are  
wearing gloves. 
 
8.1.1.3. Study Drug Storage  
 
 
 
Lenalidomide  
 
 
Lenalidomide should be stored at room temperature away from direct sunlight and protected  
from excessive heat and cold. 
 
Dexamethasone and prednisone  
 
 
Dexamethason e should  be stored  at room temperature away from direct sunligh t and protected  
from excessive heat and cold. 
 
8.1.1.4. Record of administration  
 
 
Subjects will receive diary cards to record wh en medications are taken. Diary cards will be  
collected at the end of each cycle or every 3 cycles in maintenance. 
Version.  5.1 date 6/25/2014  
 Page 35 of 86 Confidential   
  
Accurate records will be kept in the source d ocuments of all drug administration (including 
prescribing and dosing). After April 2016, diary card will no longer be used 
 
Dexamethasone  
 
 
Commercial dexamethasone is available as 4 mg tablets for oral administration. 
 
 
Prednisone  
 
 
Commercial prednisone is availab le as 50 mg tables for oral administration 
 
 
Low Molecular Weight Heparin,  Coumadin or Aspirin:  
 
 
Commercial low  molecular weight heparin, coumadin or aspirin for oral administration will be  
utilized. 
 
8.1.2. T reatment assignments  
 
 
Subjects will be entered in to the study sequentially in the order they are registered. 
 
 
 
8.1.3. P rior/Concomitant therapy  
 
 
All medications (prescription and non-presc ription), treatments and  therapies taken from 28 days 
prior to the start of study drug, Lenalidomide, through to the last dose of study drug, mu st be 
record ed on the appropriate page of the data collection sys tem. Subjects will be supplied a diary 
to 
record their concomitant medications. After April 2016, diary card will no longer be used. 
 
8.1.3.1. Allo
wed concomitant therapy  
 
 
The
 use hematopoietic growth  factors for subjects in this study are permitted when  used to treat  
neutropenia and anemia. In addition, low dose prednisone (up to 10 mg/day) m ay be used for the  
treatment and  prevention of lenalido mide induced neutropenia. Therapies considered necessary 
Version.  5.1 date 6/25/2014  
 Page 36 of 86 Confidential   
  
for the subject’s  well being m ay be administered at the discretion of the Investigator. The se 
therapies may include bisphosphonates, palliative radiation therapy, antibiotics, analgesics,  
antihistamines, or other medications as well as transfusions of red blood cells, platelets, or fresh 
f
rozen pla sma given to assist in the management of complications associated with mu lti ple 
myelom a. Low dose corticosteroid therapy, (the equivalent up  to 10 mg a day of prednisone) for 
the treatment of the patient existing autoimmun e, rheu matologic  or inflammatory conditions is 
allowed. 
 
8.1.3.2. Prohibited concomitant therapy  
 
 
C
oncomitant use of other anti-myeloma therapy while  the subject is on study drug is prohibited.  
No new investigational therapies  shall be initiated while the subject is on study drug. 
 
8.1.4. T reatment compliance  
 
 
To monitor treatment compliance, reconciliation of Lenalidom ide  capsules will b e done at each 
study visit. Subject diaries will be provided to assist in the collection of dosin g information  
between study visits. After April 2016, diary card will no longer be used and reconciliation of 
lenalidomide capsule will not be performed.  
 
8.1.5. Dose  modification or interruption  
 
 
Subjects will be evaluated for adverse even ts at each visit using the National Cancer Institu te 
Common Toxicity Criteria (NCI CTCAE) version 4.0 to grade severity. All subjects who are  
discontinued due to an adverse event should be followed for as long as necessary to document  
the resolution or stab ili zation of the event. 
 
8.1.5.1. Dose Reduction Steps for Lenalidomide 
Version.  5.1 date 6/25/2014  
 Page 37 of 86 Confidential   
 Table 1: Lenalidomide dose leve ls 
Version.  5.1 date 6/25/2014  
 Page 38 of 86 Confidential   
  
Starting Dose  Dose level –1 Dose Level -2 Dose Level –3 Dose Level -4 
25 mg PO days  
 
1-21 of a 28  days 
cycle  15 mg PO days  
 
1-21 of a 28  days 
cycle  10 mg PO days  
 
1-21 of a 28  days 
cycles  5 mg PO days 1- 
 
21 of a 28  days 
cycles  Discontin ue 
 
 
Lenalidomide dose reductions will be done as per the instruction below and as illustrated in the 
following example. 
 
Example 1: A patient is being treated with lenalidomide 25mg daily on Days 1-21 every 28 days 
a
nd requir es a lenalidomide dose reduction per Table 1. The patient will start their n ext cycle of 
therapy with lenalidomide 15 mg daily on Days 1-21 every 28 days. 
 
L
enalidomide will alwa ys be dosed daily on Days 1-21 every 28 days. The minimum  
lenalidomide dose is 5 mg/day on days 1 –  21 every 28  days. If this dose is not tolerated,  
lenalidomide must  be discontinued. 
 
 
 
Table 2: Dose Modif ica tion Guidelines for Lenalidomide  
 
 
 
 
CTCA E CATEGORY  
 
ADVER SE EVENT  CTCAE  
 
GRADE  TREATMEN T ADJU STMENT  
 
Maintenance Phase  
Neutropenia  Grad e 3 with 
 
fever  
grade  4 Hold  lenalido mide for remainder  of cycle 
 
if the toxicity  occurs  in the latter  2 weeks 
of the cycle  and resume the next cycle  at 
the dose detailed  below.  Altern atively if 
the toxicity occurred  during  the first 2 
Version.  5.1 date 6/25/2014  
 Page 39 of 86 Confidential   
  
  weeks  of the cycle,  then hold lenalidomide 
 
until the toxicity improves  to ≤ grade  2 
and resume lenalido mide as detailed  
below.  
First occurrence:  when  resolved  to ≤ grade  
2 begin  next cycle  with one dose level  
reduction  of lenalido mide or continue  
same dose with cytokine  or low dose 
prednisone  support.  
Secon d occurrence : when resolve d to ≤ 
grade  2 begin  next cycle  with one level  
dose reduction  of lenalido mide or 
continue  same dose with cytokine  support 
if not already  implemented.  
Subsequent  dose reductions  of 
lenalido mide are permitted at the 
investigators  discretion.  
Thro mbocy topenia  Grade  4 Hold  lenalido mide for remainder  of cycle 
 
if the toxicity  occurs  in the latter  2 weeks 
of the cycle  and resume the next cycle  
with one dose level  reduction  in 
lenalido mide. Alter natively if the toxicity 
occurred  during  the first 2 weeks  of the 
Version.  5.1 date 6/25/2014  
 Page 40 of 86 Confidential   
  
  cycle,  then hold lenalidomide until the 
 
toxicity  improves  to ≤ grade 2 and resume 
lenalido mide with one dose level  
reductio n . . 
Cardiac  toxicity  Arrhyth mia > 
 
grade  2 Hold  lenali domide until resolved  to < 
 
grade  1. Resu me at one dose level  
reduction  of lenalido mide. 
Arrhyth mia > 
 
grade  3 Discontinue  protocol  therapy.  
Congestive  
 
heart  failure  > 
grade  2 Discontin ue lenalido mide at the 
 
investigators  discretion.  
Hyperthyroidis m/ 
 
Hypothyroidism  Any grade  Hold  lenalido mide and evaluate  patient.  
 
May resume therapy  at the same dose 
once  patient  is stable at investigators  
discretion.  
Version.  5.1 date 6/25/2014  
 Page 41 of 86 Confidential   
  
Non desqua mating  rash Grade  2 Hold  lenalido mide for remainder  of cycle 
 
if the toxicity  occurs  in the latter  2 weeks 
of the cycle  and resume the next cycle  
with one dose level  reduction  in 
lenalido mide if the toxicity resolv es to less 
than grade 2. Altern atively if the toxicity 
occurred  during  the first 2 weeks  of the 
cycle,  then hold lenalidomide until the 
toxicity  improves  to < grade  2 and resume 
lenalido mide with one dose level   
reductio n .. 
Grade  3 or 4 Discontin ue protoco l therapy.  
Desqua mating  rash or Erythe ma 
 
Multi forme Any grade  Discontinue  protocol  therapy.  
Version.  5.1 date 6/25/2014  
 Page 42 of 86 Confidential   
  
Aller gic reaction  or 
hypersensitivity  Grade  2 or 3 Hold  lenalido mide for remainder  of cycle 
 
if the toxicity  occurs  in the latter  2 weeks 
of the cycle  and resume the next cycle  
with one dose level  reduction  in 
lenalido mide if the toxicity improves  to 
less than grade 2. Alter natively if the 
toxicity  occurred  during  the first 2 weeks 
of the cycle,  then hold lenalido mide until 
the toxicity improves  to less than grade 2 
and resume lenalido mide with one dose 
level  reduction.  
Grade  4 Discontinue  lenalido mide 
Venous  thrombosis/e mbolism  ≥ Grade  3 Hold  (interrupt)  dose,  consider  therapeutic  
 
anticoagulation ; restart at investigator’s 
discretion  (maintain  dose level)  
Version.  5.1 date 6/25/2014  
 Page 43 of 86 Confidential   
  
Other  non-hematologic  toxicity  
 
except  those  events  specifically  
attributed  to dexa methasone  as 
outlined in table  4. Grade  3 / 4 Hold  lenalido mide for remainder  of cycle 
 
if the toxicity  occurs  in the latter  2 weeks 
of the cycle  and resume the next cycle  
with one dose level  reduction  in 
lenalido mide. Alter natively if the toxicity 
occurred  during  the first 2 weeks  of the 
cycle,  then hold lenalidomide until the 
toxicity  improves  to ≤ grade 2 and resume 
lenalido mide with one dose level  
reduction.  
 
 
 
8.1.5.2. Dose reduction steps for corticosteroids  
 
 
For patients assigned to receive corticosteroids as part of the trial therapy, dose reduction steps 
for prednisone and dexamethasone should follow the guidelines in the following tables. Table 2 
refers to dose leve ls for  the corticosteroids  used on this clinical trial: prednisone and  
dexamethasone. Table 3  suggests dose reduction schema dictated by specific adverse events. 
 
Table 3: Dose Reduction Steps for Dexamethasone and / or Prednisone  
 
 
Starting Dose  Dose level –1 Dose Level -2 Dose Level –3 
40 mg daily  on days 1 
 
– 4 every  28 days 20 mg daily  on days 1 
 
– 4 every  28 days 
 
 
 
 
Dose  level  -1a 10 mg daily  on days 1 
 
– 4 every  28 days Discontin ue 
Version.  5.1 date 6/25/2014  
 Page 44 of 86 Confidential   
  
 40 mg daily  on days 
 
1, 2, and 3 followed  
 
by 20 mg on day 4 
followed  by 12 mg on 
day 5 followed  by 8 
mg on day 6   
Prednisone  100 mg 
 
PO days 1-5 every  28 
days 50 mg PO  days 1 -5 of 
 
a 28 day cycle  25 mg PO  days 1 -5 of 
 
a 28 day cycle  Discontin ue 
Version.  5.1 date 6/25/2014  
 Page 45 of 86 Confidential   
  
 
 
Table 3: Dose Modification Guidelines for corticosteroids (Dexamethasone and / or 
P
rednisone)  
 
CTCAE  
 
CATEGORY 
ADVER SE 
EVENT  ADVER SE EVENT  TREATMEN T ADJU STMENT  
Gastroi ntestinal  Dyspeps ia, gastric  or duodenal  
 
ulcer,  gastritis  
Grade  1-2 Treat  with H2 blockers,  sucralfate,  or 
 
Omeprazol e. If symptoms persist  despite  
above  measures,  decrease  corticosteroid  
dose by 2 dose levels  permanently  
 > Grade  3 Hold  cortic osteroids until symptoms are 
 
adequately  controlled.  Reduce  by 2 dose 
levels  along  with concurrent  therapy  with 
H2 blockers,  sucralfate,  or omeprazole.  If 
symptoms persist  despite  above  measures,  
discontinue  corticosteroids  and do not 
resume. 
 Acute  pancreatitis  Discontinue  corticosteroids  and do not 
 
resume 
Cardiovasc ular Edema 
 
> Grade  3 Diuretics  as needed,  and decrease  
 
corticosteroids  dose by 1 dose level;  if 
edema persists  despite  above  measures  
Version.  5.1 date 6/25/2014  
 Page 46 of 86 Confidential   
  
  decrease  dose by 2 dose levels  from  the 
 
initial  dose; discontinue  corticosteroids  and 
do not resume if sympto ms persist  despite  
reduction.  
Neurology  Confusion  or Mood  alteration  
 
> Grade  2 (interfering  with 
function  
+/- interfering  with activities  of 
daily  
living) Hold  cortic osteroids until symptoms 
 
resolve  to < grade1.  Reduce  dose by 2 dose 
levels  from  current  dose.  
If symptoms persist  despite  above  
measures,  discontinue  corticosteroids  and 
do not resume. 
Musculoskeletal  Muscle  weakness  
 
> Grade  2 (symptomatic and 
interfering  with functi on +/- 
interfering  with activities  of 
daily  
living) Decrease  corticosteroids  dose by 1 dose 
 
level;  If weakness  persists  despite  above  
measures  decrease  dose by 2 dose levels  
from the initial  dose. Discontinue  
corticosteroids  and do not resume if 
symptoms persi st despite reduction. 
Metab olic Hyperglyc emia 
 
> Grade  3 or higher  Treat ment with insulin  or oral 
 
hypoglycemics  as needed.  If uncontrolled  
despite  above measures,  
decrease  dose by 1 dose level  decrements  
until levels are satisfactory 
Version.  5.1 date 6/25/2014  
 Page 47 of 86 Confidential   
  
8.1.6. In itiation of a new cycle of therapy  
 
 
A new course of treatment m ay begin on the scheduled Day 1 of a new cycle if: 
 
 
 Absolute neutrophil count > 500 cells/mm3 
 
 
 Thrombocytopenia ≤ grade 2  and there is no  bleeding; 
 
 
 Any therapy-related rash , allerg ic reaction/hypersensitivity, sinus bradycardia or other  
cardiac arrhythmia, or confusion/mood-alteration adverse event that m ay have occurred 
has resolved to ≤ Grade 1 severity 
 
 Any other therapy-related adverse event that m ay have occurred has resolved to ≤ Grade 
2 severity. 
If these conditions are not m et on Day 1 of a new cycle, evaluate the subject weekly through an 
exam and  relevant evaluations by the Investigator.  A new cycle  of lenalidomide treatment will 
not be initiated  until the toxicity has resolved as describ ed abo ve. If a new cycle is delayed for >  
4 weeks, the Princip al Investigator w ill be notified. The above criteria will not be used after April 
2016, a new cycle of therapy may be initiated per the treating physician discretion consistent 
with standard of care use of lenalidomide. 
 
8.1.7. Disco ntinuation from treatment  
 
 
The following events are considered sufficient reasons for discontinuing a subject from study  
drug: 
 
 Subject declines further study participation. 
 
 
 Adverse event(s) (AEs) that, in the judgment of the Investigator, m ay cause severe or 
permanent harm or which rule out continuation o f study drug. 
 
Version.  5.1 date 6/25/2014  
 Page 48 of 86 Confidential   
  Major violation of the study protocol. 
 
 
 Progression of disease/unsatisfactory therapeutic effect 
Version.  5.1 date 6/25/2014  
 Page 49 of 86 Confidential   
  
 Death 
 
 
 Pregnancy or a positive pregnancy test 
 
 
 Discontinuation of lenalidomide for any reason 
 
 
 Subject lost to follow-up 
 
 
 If for any other reason, must be specified in the data collection system. 
S
tudy Closure 
Reasons for discontinuation should be recorded in the data collection system and in the  
subject’s medical record s. 
 
8.2.     Visit schedule an d assessments  
 
 
The Investigator is responsible for keeping a record of all subjects who sign an Informe d 
Consent Form and are screened for entry into the study. For those subjects who fail screening  
the reason(s) for exclusion must be reco rded in the subject’s source documents. 
 
A schedule of the assessments can be found in Section 2, Sche dule of Study Asse ssments . All 
scheduled visits will have a ±7-day window unless otherwise stated. 
 
An unscheduled  visit can occur at any time during the  study. The  date for the visit and any data  
generated must be recorded on the data collection system. Sour ce documents for these  
unscheduled visits mu st also be maintained. 
 
All study participants must be registered into the mandatory RevAssist® program,  and be willing  
and able to comply with the requirements of RevAssist®. 
After April 2016 patients will be followed per standard of care at the discretion of the treating 
physician.
Version.  5.1 date 6/25/2014  
 Page 50 of 86 Confidential   
  
9. Safety assessments  
 
 
The following safety assessments will be done at baseline and at scheduled intervals throughout  
the duration of the study (see Section 2,  Schedule  of Study Assessments). Unless otherwise  
noted, all laboratory testing will be conducted in the local laboratory. After April 2016, safety 
assessments will not be mandated by the trial but rather will be at the discretion of the treating 
physician in accordance with standard of care management of multiple myeloma patients on 
lenalidomide. 
 
9.1. Physical examination  
 
 
Routine physical examination including vital signs (blood pressure, pulse, tem perature), height,  
and weight. Height is only collected  at the baseline physical examination. 
 
9.2. Clinical laboratory evaluations  
 
 
 
General Laboratory Testing  
 
 
Serum chemistries  
 
 
Total protein, albumin, calcium, phosphate, glucose, uric acid, total bilirubin, alk aline  
phosphatase,  AST (SGOT), ALT  (SGPT), sodiu m , potassium, chloride, carbon dioxide,  
blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, and  LDH. 
 
Hematology  
 
 
Red blood cell (RBC) count, hemoglobin, hematocrit, MCV, MCH, MCHC, white blood  
cell (WBC) count and differential, absolute n eutrophil count (ANC), and platelet count. 
 
Specific Laboratory Testing 
 
 
Version.  5.1 date 6/25/2014  
 Page 51 of 86 Confidential   
 Myeloma Specific  
 
 
SPEP, 24 hour UPEP, 2 microglobulin, serum and  urine immunofixation,  serum free  
light chain 
Page 52 of 86 Confidential  
Version.  5.1 date 6/25/2014  
  
  
Supportive  
 
 
Serum B12 , RBC Folate,  Ferritin, ESR 
 
 
Th
yroid-stimulating hormone, total triiodothyronine (T 3)  and total thyroxine (T 4). 
 
 
 
9.3. Pregnancy testing fo r FCBP -  -hCG  
 
 
Serum or urine pregnancy testing β-hCG with a sensitivity of at least 50 m IU/ mL is to be done  
on FCBP only per Appendix VIII. 
 
 
9.4. Electrocardiogram (ECG)  
 
 
12-lead electrocardiogram. 
 
 
 
9.5. Prior/
Conc omitant therapy 
 
 
All 
concomitant therapies (prescription and non-prescription) taken 28 days prior to the start of 
study drug, Lenalidomide, and during the course of the study (from start of study drug until the  
last dose of study drug) will be collected. All therapies taken while the subject is on study drug 
will be record ed in the subject’s da ta collection system. After April 2016, concomitant therapy 
will
 not be collected 
 
9.6. Advers e events  
 
 
 
All serious adverse events must be reported to Celgene Clinical Affairs within  24 hours of the 
investigational staff’s knowledge; this includes any even t that occurs during the  particip ation of 
the trial regardless of associated therapy, severit y or relationship 
 
9.6.1. S erious Adverse Event (SAE) Definition  
 
Page 53 of 86 Confidential  
Version.  5.1 date 6/25/2014  
  
  
A serious adverse event is one that at any dose (including overdose): 
Version.  5.1 date 6/25/2014  
 Page 54 of 86 Confidential   
  
<         Results in death 
 
 
<         Is life-threatening 1 
 
 
<         Requires inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization 
 
 
<
         Results in persi stent or significant disability or incapacity 2 
 
 
<
         Is a congenital anomaly or birth defect 
 
 
<         Is an important medical event 3 
 
 
<         Pregnancy 
 
1“
Life-threatening” m eans that the subject was at immediate risk of death at the time of the serious 
adverse event; it does n ot refer to a ser ious adverse eve nt that hy pothetically might have caused death if i t 
were more se vere. 
 
2“Persiste nt or significa nt disability or incapacity” m eans that there is a subs tantial disr uption of a pe rson’s 
abilit y to carry out norma l life functions. 
3Medical and scientific judgment sh ould be exe rcised in decid ing whether exped ited rep orting i s 
appropriate in situations where none of t he outcomes listed abo ve occurred.  Im portant medical events th at 
may not be immediately life-threat ening or result in death or hospitali zation but may jeopardize the patient 
or may requi re intervention to prevent one of the other outcom es listed in the defin ition above should also 
usually be considered ser ious. E xamples of such events include allergic b ronchospasm requiring intensive 
treatme nt in an emergency room or at home, blood dysc rasias or convulsions that do n ot result in inpatient 
hospitali zation, or the development of drug dependency or drug abuse. A new diagnosis of cancer during 
the course of a treatment should be considered as medically important. 
 
9.6.2. Adver se Event Reporting  
 
 
Lenalidomide was approved by the FDA for newly diagnosed multiple myeloma patients in 
2/2015. MCC16018 involves lenalidomide based therapy for newly diagnosed multiple myeloma 
and is thus currently considered standard of care (although that use was considered investigational 
Version.  5.1 date 6/25/2014  
 Page 55 of 86 Confidential   
 at the time of initiation and completion of accrual of the study). Moreover, the adverse event 
profile of lenalidomide is now well established. Finally, as of April 2016, all the current study 
patients have been on present therapy for a minimum of 2 years and a continued collection of all 
adverse events will not leads to a meaningful change in the adverse event profile of lenalidomide. 
Accordingly, as of April 2016, we will only collect serious adverse events (SAE) and will no 
longer collect other adverse events encountered after that time.  
 
9.6.3. P regnancies  
 
 
Pregnancy of a female subject or the female partner of a male subject occurring while the subject  
is on study drug or within 4  weeks after the subject’s last dose of study drug are considered  
expedited reportable events. If the  subject is on study dru g the study drug is to  be discontinued  
immediately and  the subject is to be instructed to return any  unused portion o f the study drug to 
the Investigator.  Within 24  hours of the investigator’s knowledge, all pregnancies must be  
reported to Celgene Corporation World Wide Safety Surveillance (WWDSS) by phone and  
facsimile. 
 
The Investigator will follow the pregnant female until completion of the pregnancy, and must  
notify Celgene Corporation Worldwide Drug Safety Surveillance (WWDSS) of the outcome as 
specified below. The Investigator will provide th is infor mation as a follow-up to the initial SAE. 
Version.  5.1 date 6/25/2014  
 Page 53 of 86 Confidential   
  
If the outcome of the pregnancy meets the criter ia for immediate classification as a SAE 
(i.e., spontaneous abortion [any congenital anomaly detected in an aborted fetus is to be 
doc
umented],  stillbirth, neonatal death, or congenital ano maly),  the Investigator should 
follow the procedures  for reporting SAEs (i.e., report the event to  Celgene  Corporation 
Worldwide Drug Safety  Surveillance (WWDSS) by facsim ile within 24 hours of the 
Investigator’s knowledge of the  event). 
Any suspected fetal exposure to lenalidomide mu st be reported to Celgene within 24 
hours of being made aware of the event. The pregnant female should be referred to an 
obstetrician/gynecologist experienced in reproductive toxicity for further evaluation and  
counseling. 
All neonatal deaths that occur within 30 days of birth should be reported, without 
regard to causality, as SAEs. In addition, any infant death after 30  days that  the 
investigator suspect is related to the in utero exposure to the  study drug should also be 
re
ported. 
 
In the case of a live “normal” birth, Celgene Corporation Worldwide Drug Safety 
S
urveillance  (WWDSS) should be advised as soon as the information is available. 
9.6.4. Ce lgene Drug Safety Contact 
Information:  
 
Celgene Corporation  
Worldwide Drug Safety Surveillance (WWDSS) 
 86 Morris Avenue 
S
umm it, NJ 07901 
Toll Free:      (800) 640-7854 
P
hone:           (908) 763-9667  
F
ax: (908) 673-9115  
E-mail: drugsaf ety@celgene.com  
 
 Confidential  Page 54 of 86   
 
 
9.7. Investigator Report ing Responsibilities  
 
 
The
 conduct of the study will comply with all FDA safety reporting requirements. Given  
that the FDA has granted an IND exemption for this study, an annual report is not  
required. 
 
 
All adverse experience reports must  include the patient number, age, sex, weight, severity  
of reaction (mild, moderate, severe), relationship to study drug (probably related,  
unknown relationship, definitely not related), date and time of adm inistration of test  
medications and all concomitant medications,  and  medical treatment provided. The  
investigator is responsible for evaluating all adverse events to determine whether criteria  
for “serious” and as defined  above are  presen t. The investigator is responsible for 
reporting adverse events to Celgene as described below. 
 
9.7.1.  Expedited reporting by investigator to Celgene  
 
 
Serious adverse events (SAE) are defined above. The investigator should inform Celgene  
of any SAE within 24 hours of being aware of the event. This mu st be documented on 
Celgene SAE form, an acceptab le institution SAE from or a FDA 3500 or MEDWATCH 
form. This form must be completed and supplied to Celgene within 24  hours of the 
investigator’s knowledge of the event..  The date o f awareness should  be noted on the  
report. The initial repor t must  be as complete as possible, including details of the current  
illness and (serious) adverse event, and  an assessment of the causal relationship betw een 
the event and  the investigational product(s ), if available.  In formation not available at the 
 
 
 
Version. 5.1 date 6/25/2014 
Page 55 of 86 Confidential  
Version.  6 date 4/15/2016  
  
  
time of the initial report (e.g., an  end date for  the adverse event or laboratory values  
received after th e report) must be documented on a follow-up  MEDWATCH. A final  
report to docu ment resolution of the SAE is required. The Celgene protocol number  
(RV- MM- PI-0454 ) should  be included on SAE  reports to Celgene. A copy of the fax  
transmission conf irm ation of the SAE report to Celgene should be attached to the S AE 
and retained with the patient record s. 
 
 
Moffitt Cancer Center will on ly be responsible to report to Celgene those events 
that occur at Moffitt.  
 
9.7.2. Re port of Adverse Events to the Institutional Review Board  
 
 
The princip al Investigator is requ ire d  to notify his/her Institutional Review Board (IRB) 
of
 a serious adverse event according to institu tional policy. 
 
9.7.3. Inve stiga t or Reporting to the FDA  
 
 
Adverse drug reactions that  are Serious, Unlisted/unexpected, and at least possibly 
associat
ed to the drug, and that have not previously been reported in the Investigators  
brochure, or reference safety information document should be reported promptly to the 
Food  and Drug Administration (FDA) in writing by each investigator/physician engaged 
Version.  6 date 4/15/2016  
 Page 56 of 86 Confidential   
  
in clinical research.   A clear description of the suspected react ion should be provided  
along with an assessment as to whether the event is drug or disease related. 
 
 
 
Adverse event updates/IND safety reports  
 
 
Celgene for lenalidomide shall no tify the Investigator v ia an IND Safety Report of the  
following in formation: 
 
 Any AE associated with the use of study drug in this study or in other studies that  
is both serious and unexpected. 
 
 An
y finding from tests in laboratory animals that suggests a significant risk for 
human subjects including reports of mutagenicity, teratogenicity, or 
c
arcinogenicity. 
 
The Investigator shall notify his/her IRB/EC promptly of these new serious and  
unexpected AE(s) or significant risks to subje cts. 
 
The Investigator mu st keep copies of a ll AE information, including correspondence with  
Celgene and  the IRB/EC, on  file (see Section 13.4 S tudy records requirements ). 
 
9.7.4. E fficacy a ssessments  
 
 
 
9.7.4.1. Myeloma paraprotein  
 
 
S
erum and urine protein electrophoresis, quantitative immunoglobulins, serum and urine  
immunofixation  studies (see Section 2,  Schedule of Study Assessments) . Response will  
be assessed using the Uniform response criter ia set forth by the In ternational myeloma  
working group (IMWG) (See Appendix II). Response will be assessed at least every 3 
months in the maintenance setting. 
Version.  6 date 4/15/2016  
 Page 56 of 86 Confidential   
 As of April 2016, given all patients are in maintenance, patients will be followed for follow up and 
survival. Response assessment is not mandated per the trial and per institutional standard of care and 
to occur at a minimum of every 3 months.  
Version.  6 date 4/15/2016  
 Page 57 of 86 Confidential   
  
9.7.4.2. Bone marrow aspiration/ biopsy  
 
 
At baseline, after 2 cycles of lenalidomide monotherapy, at the end of study, to confirm  
complete response, and as clinically indicated (see Section 2, Schedule of Study  
Assessments). 
 
9.7.4.3.
 Skeletal survey  
 
 
Radiographic assessment of the bones to be done at baseline, end  o f study, to confirm  
complete response, and as clinically indicated (see Section 2, Schedule of Study  
Assessments). 
 
9.7.5. C orrelative and tran slational studies 
 
 
All patients will be encouraged to participate in the correlative / translational studies  
outlin ed below.  However, patients will have th e option to decline such participa tion and 
still be eligible for inclusion in the study if they meet all other requirements and  
assessments. Correlatives / translational studies will involve addition al bone marrow 
aspiration speci men (optimally up  to 20 cc addition al aspiration ne eded ) and periph eral 
blood specimens. Bone marrow plasma cells from patients w ith multiple myeloma wi ll be 
isolated  with CD138 positive beads. RNA w ill be extracted and expression of tumor  
suppression genes will be assayed by real time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain  
reaction (RT-PCR)  at baseline and after 2 cycles of mono -therapy with lenalidomide. 
 
9.7.5.1. Effects of Lenalidomide Monotherapy on Tum or Suppressor Genes 
 
 
C
D138 positive plasma cell will be isolated from the bone marrow aspirate of 
pa
tients  at diagnosis and after 2  cycl es of lenalidomide using CD138 positive  
selection. RNA will be extracted. Quantitative P CR (Q-PCR) will be pe rform ed to 
Version.  6 date 4/15/2016  
 Page 58 of 86 Confidential   
  
assay the expression of the following target genes: EGR1, EGR2, EGR3, p15, 
p21, p27 and SPARC. These studies will be perform ed by the Moffitt Core Lab  
under th e direction of Christoph er Cubitt. We estimate 15 paired sam ples will be  
obtained to com pare the expression of the above mentioned genes pre and post 2 
c
ycles of lenalidomide monotherapy. 
 
9.7.5.2. Demonstration of Lenalidomide Induced Humoral Imm une Response 
 
 
Peripheral blood will be collected at the time of study start (C1D1), after 2 cycles  
of lenalid omide monthotherapy, at the time of addition of dexamethasone, and 2 
c
ycles after the addition of dexamethasone. Serum will be used for the detection  
of lenalidomide induced humoral immune response using the serametrix assay. 
S
amples will be stored  at -20ºC prior to assay in the lab of Dr. Javier Pinilla. 
 
9.7.5.3. Effects of lenalidomide monotherapy and in combination with corticosteroids  
on T cells subsets 
 
P
eripheral blood collected at the time of study start (C1D1), after 2 cycles of 
lena
lidomide monthotherapy, at the time of addition of dexamethasone, and  2 
cycles after the addition of dexamethasone will be used for the determination o f 
c
hanges in T cell subsets with lenalidomide monotherapy and after the addition of 
dexamethasone. The determination of T cell subset will be perform ed by flow 
cytometry. Samples will be collected, processed  (ficoll separation and slow freeze  
at -120ºC ) and stored  under the care of Dr. Javier Pinilla. A total of 5  green top  
tube per sample will be obtained. 
Version.  6 date 4/15/2016  
 Page 59 of 86 Confidential   
  
9.7.5.4. Effects of single agent lenalidomide on global  gene expression profile of 
malignant plasma cells. 
 
RNA extracted from CD138 positive cells isolated from the bone marrow aspirate  
of patients with myeloma at baseline and after 2 cycles of lena lidomide  
monotherapy will be subjected to affymatrix array for global gene expression  
profiling and changes in gene expression befo re and after treatment will be  
correlated. 
 
9.7.5.5. Significance of Notch signaling in myeloma 
 
 
RNA will be isolated form  CD138 positive cells and the expression of notch  
receptors, ligants and targets by Q-p CR will be compared among responder and  
non responders to lenalidomide. These experiments will be perform ed by Dr. 
Yulia Nefedova. 
 
9.7.5.6. Post Translational modification of protein drug targets in  myeloma using mass 
spectrometry 
 
Cell pe llets of comprised of CD138 positive cells will be used for proteom ic 
studies. Using quantitative mass spectrometry, prote in expression and  selected  
post-tran slational modification s will be monitored for apoptotic protei ns, nuclear  
factor kappa B survival signaling, and existing drug targets. The impact of 
e
xposure to lenalidomide on the malignant cell proteome wi ll thus be examined.  
These studies will be perform ed by Dr. John Koomen. 
 
9.7.5.7.
 Prioritization of sam ples for  correlative/translatio nal studies 
Version.  6 date 4/15/2016  
 Page 60 of 86 Confidential   
  
Recognizing that  not all patients will consent to the ancillary studies noted above and for 
som
e of the patients who do consent, the quantity of quality sam ple might not be  
sufficient for all experiments above, the following priority for sam ple usage for 
correlative studies is proposed (mainly applicable to bone marrow aspiration samples): 
 
1- induction  of tumor suppressor genes by lenalidomide 
 
 
2- P ost translational modification of protein drug targets in myeloma using mass 
spectrometry 
 
3- S ignificance of Notch signaling in myeloma 
 
 
4- Diff erential gene expression profile of malignant plasma cell treated in vivo  
with lenalidomide as monotherapy 
 
 
10. Protocol Amendments/Deviations  
 
 
 
10.1. Protocol amendments  
 
 
Any amendment to this protocol  must be agre ed to by the Principal Investigator and  
reviewed by Celgene. Amendments shou ld only be sub mitted to IRB/EC after  
consideration  of Celgene review. Written ve rifica tion of  IRB/EC approval will be  
obtained before any amendment is implemented. 
 
10.2. Protocol de viations  
 
 
When an emergency occurs that requires a deviation from  the protocol for a subj ect, a 
deviation will be made only for that subject. The physician in attendance in such an 
emergency will, if circumstances and time perm it, contact Principal Investigator (Rachid 
Version.  6 date 4/15/2016  
 Page 61 of 86 Confidential   
  
Baz, MD) prior to the deviation immediately by telephone. If time does not allow for 
this, the Investigator will notify Dr. Baz of the deviation as soon as possible in writing  
and by phone. 
 
Such contacts will be made as soon as possib le to determine whether or not the subject  
(for whom the deviation from protocol was effected) is to continue in the  study.  The  
subject’s  medical reco rds will completely describe the deviation from the protocol and  
state the reasons for such deviation and document the con tact or a ttempted contact with  
Dr. Baz.  In addition , the Investigator will notify the IRB/EC in  writing of such deviation  
from protocol. 
 
Non-emergency minor deviations from the protocol will be permitted only with prior  
agreement from the Principal Investigator. 
 
 
11. Data Management  
 
 
 
11.1. Study monitoring and auditing  
 
 
 
11.2. Scientific Review Committee (SRC)  
 
The
 Cancer Center maintains two full board Scientif ic Review Committees (SRC),  
meeting every other week (the first Wednesday and third Thursday of every month) as 
well as one Behavioral Ad-Hoc SRC. 
 
Each SRC  conducts a formal internal peer review o f all clinical protocols and  
general scientif ic oversi ght of interventional c linical research. Protoco ls are reviewed for 
scientific merit, adequate study design, safet y, availability of targeted study population,  
and feasibility of timely completion of all p roposed research projec ts to be conducted by 
Version.  6 date 4/15/2016  
 Page 62 of 86 Confidential   
  
its assigned programs at the Cancer Center. Each  SRC  is responsible for evaluating the  
risk/benefit assessment and corresponding data and safety monitoring plan as part of the  
scien tific review and approval process. The SRC will r efer any pot ential conf licts of 
interest identified in the proposed r esearch to the Conflict Committee. 
 
11.3. PI Responsibility  
 
 
The PI of each study is u ltimately responsible for every asp ect of the design, conduct and  
actions of a ll members of the re search team.  This includes the final analys is of the  
protocol. The PI is responsible for ensuring that: 
 
 All  protocols include a DSMP and procedur es for  its implementation commensurate  
with the risk  and complexity of the study. The DSMP must include a structured  
adverse event determination, monitoring and reporting system, including standardized  
forms and  procedures for referring and/or treating subjects experiencing adverse  
events. The plan mu st include data and safety-monitoring procedures for subjects  
enrolled who m ay be receiving a part of their protocol-required treatment at 
community sites. 
 
 In all cases, the PI of the study will have primary responsibility for ensuring that the  
protocol is conducted as approved by the SRC and  IRB. The PI will ensure that the  
monitoring plan is followed,  that all data required for oversight of monitoring are  
accurately reported to a DSMB and/or to the PMC and IRB as required, th at all 
adverse events are rep orted according to protocol guidelines, and that  any advers e 
actions reflecting p atient safety concerns are appropriately reported. 
 
  
Version.  6 date 4/15/2016  
 Page 63 of 86 Confidential   
  
11.4. The Protocol Monitoring Committee (PMC)   
 
The PMC monitors its assigned ongoing research protocols for: adverse event reporting,  
data and safety monitoring, and  internal audit findings. The  PMC,  upo n review of any  
agenda item, m ay approve the study for continuation, require revisions, suspend or close  
a protocol. 
 
Investigators of studies, which  are designated to be reviewed by the P MC for data and  
safety monitoring, shall provide a statistical report of the study’s progress and summary  
of adverse events and deviations based on the phase of the study and the associated risk 
of
 the study or more often if applicable. The external DSMB (if applicable) shall forward  
its report for high-risk  studies designated for external review at least annually o r more  
often if applicable. 
 
11.5. Research Compliance Division (RCD)  
 
 
RCD  
of the Corporate Compliance Office is the coordinating center for internal audits of 
clinical trials conducted at the Cancer Center. The audit procedure is a formal, 
comprehensive, source docu m ent review of all clinical trials. External audit reports that  
meet the criteria of the internal audit m ay be accepted in lieu of an internal audit. 
 
The (RCD) shall provide a repo rt to the PMC of internal audit findings for PMC action.  
A representative of the RCD will be present to discuss the audits with the PMC. For 
cause audits will be discu ssed during an executive session of the PMC. Only members 
(voting
 and ex- officio) may attend this session. 
 
  
Version.  6 date 4/15/2016  
 Page 64 of 86 Confidential   
 11.6. Investigator responsibilities  
 
 
Investigator responsibilities are set out in the ICH guideline for Good Clinical Practice  
and in the US Code of Federal Regulations. 
Investigators, or designee, must  enter study data onto a data collection system.  The  
Investigator will perm it study-related audits by Celgene or its representatives, IRB/EC  
review, and regulatory inspection(s) (e.g., FDA,  EMEA, and TPP), providing direct  
access to the facilities where the study took place, to sou rce documents, to the data  
collection system,  and to all other study documents. 
 
The Investigator, or a designated member of the Investigator’s  staff, must be available at 
some time during audits to review data and resolve any queries and to allow  direct access  
to the subject’s records (e.g., medical records, office charts, hospital charts, and study  
related charts) for source data verification. The data collection must be completed prior  
to any visits and be made available to the Celgene representatives so that the accuracy  
and completeness m ay be checked. 
 
This study m ay be subject to an independent audit at the investigational site, which will  
be conducted by Celgene’s Quality Assurance personnel or designee. Full consultation  
with appropriate personnel will be made prior to and during such an audit. The  
Investigator must be available during the audit. 
 
If the Investigator  is contacted by any regulatory authority regarding an audit for this  
study or any other study, the Investigator is to contact Celgene immediately. 
 
12. Bio-statistical Consideration  
 
This is a phase 2 trial evaluating a lenalidomide based response adapted strategy in 
older  adults with newly diagno sed mu ltiple myelom a. Descriptive statistics will be 
Version.  6 date 4/15/2016  
 Page 65 of 86 Confidential   
 used to summarize patients’ demographic and clinical characteristics collect ed at each 
visit.  Mean, standard deviation and  range will be calculated for con tinuous variables, 
and frequency and percenta ge will be generated for categorical variables. The 
distribution  (frequency and percentage) of patien ts treated with single agent 
lenalidomide,  lenalidomide + pred nisone, and lenalidomide+low  dose dexamethasone 
will be pres ented. 
 
12.1. Sample siz e: 
 
 
The primary endpoint is 12-month PFS for the overall response adaptive approach. Based on 
the E4A03 and SW OG 2032 studies, the 12-month PFS is approximately 70% for patients 
treated  with lenalidomide low dose dexamethasone. The s ample size determination is 
primarily based on the consideration of providing an estimate of the 12-month PFS with 
re
asonable precision. We  estimate the 12-month PFS in the response adapted approach is 
85%. W ith a sample  size of 60 evaluab le patients (30 from Moff itt and 30 from sites in South 
Korea), its 95% conf iden ce  interval is 73.4 -92.9%. 
 
12.2. Efficacy evaluation  
 
 
 
12.2.1
 Primary efficacy analysis  
 
 
Progression free survival (PFS) is defined as the time from start of lenalidomide  
monotherapy to  the first occurrence of disease progression or death on study from 
a
ny cause, whichever occurs earlier. All treated patients will be included in efficacy 
endpoint  analysis. Those patients who are treated on this trial but have not had  a 
relevant event at the time of last follow-up  will be included in the analyses of these 
endpoints as censored  observations. 
 
Version.  6 date 4/15/2016  
 Page 66 of 86 Confidential   
 The primary endpoint is the point estimate of the 12-month PFS rate for the overall  
response adaptive approach. Number and percentage of patients who survived greater or 
equal to 365 days without disease progress io n will be summarized. The  95 % confidence 
interval will be calculated using the exact binominal method. The PFS curves will be  
estimated by the Kaplan-Meier method. Median and its 95% confidence intervals will be  
estimated. 
 
12.2.2 Secondary efficacy analysis  
 
 
Response will be assessed using the Uni form response criteria s et forth by the  
International myeloma working group (IMWG)  (See  Appendix II). Frequencies and  
percentages will be used to summarize for all response categories. The response in this 
trial is defined  as complete remission (CR), stringent complete remission (SRC), very  
good  partial remission (VGPR)  and partial rem ission (PR). The response rate for patients  
treated with single agen t lenalidomide, lenalidom ide and prednisone and lenalidomide  
and low dose dexamethasone will be calculated as the percentage of responders, and the  
95% confidence interval will be calculated using the exact binominal  method. Logistic  
regression will be used to investigate relationships of the response rates with baseline and  
other relevant covariates, if appropriate. 
 
Overall survival (OS) is defined as the  time from  study entry to death of any  cause. The  
OS curves will be estimated by the Kaplan-Meier method. Median and its 95% 
confidence intervals will be es timated. The effect of baseline and other relevant  
covariates will be investigated with Cox regression models, when  appropriate.  
Confidence intervals for the survival probabilities at different points will be constructed  
as needed. T he PFS curve for the patients treated with sing le agent lenalidomide will also  
Version.  6 date 4/15/2016  
 Page 67 of 86 Confidential   
 be calculated using the Kaplan-Meier method. 
 
12.2.3 Safety analysis  
 
 
The following safety analyses will be perform ed using data from all subjects who receive  
any study drug. Adverse events will be classified  using the MedDRA classification  
syste m. The severity of the toxicities will be graded according to the NCI CTCAE v 4.0 
whe
never po ssible. 
 
In the by-subject analysis, a subject having the same event more th an once will be  
counted only once. Adverse even ts (AE) will be summarized by worst NCI CTCAE  
grade. The patient incidence of AEs will be summarized by system organ class, p ref erred  
term,  severity and  relationship to study drug. Adverse events leading to death  or to 
discontinuation from treatment, events classified as NCI CTCAE v  4.0 grade 3 or higher,  
study-drug-related events, and serious advers e  even ts will be  listed  separately.  
Laborato ry data will be graded according to NCI CTCAE v  4.0 severity grade. Cross 
tabula
tions will be provided to summarize frequencies of abnormalities. The physical  
examine results (such as blood pressure, pu lse, temperature) at each vis it will  be 
summarized using descriptive statistics. 
 
12.2.4 Evaluation of the group difference betw een participants from Moffitt and 
South Korea  
 
The
 study participan ts will be enrolled half f rom Moffitt and half from multiple sites in 
South Korea. The important demographic and clinical characters ass ociated with the  
endpoints were addressed in the inclusion and exclusion criteria so these two groups 
shoul
d be comparable at baseline. Although there are currently no reports suggestin g a 
difference tolerance or response in Korean patients to lenalidomide as compar ed to 
Version.  6 date 4/15/2016  
 Page 68 of 86 Confidential   
 European / North American patients, we will evaluate the ethnic e ffect for our study 
endpoints for conservative purpose. For survival endpoints (PFS and OS), the  log-rank  
test will be applied to evalua te the ethnic effect. For response rate and  adverse event  
proportion, the Fisher’s exact test will be applied for testing the ethnic effect. If there are  
no significant differences between  these two groups, we will provide the overall results 
using the combined data sources. If ethnic effects are observed for some endpoints,  
statistical models will be applied for adjusting the ethnic effect. Cox regression models  
and logis tic models will be applied for adjusting the ethnic e ff ect for the surviv al and  
binary endpoints, respectively. 
 
12.2.5 Analysis on exploratory aims  
 
 
The
 first exploratory aim is to measure a lenalidomide induced tumor specif ic immune  
response and correlate the tum or specific immune response with corticosteroid  use 
(addition of dexamethasone or prednisone), response to therapy and duration of response. 
Antibod
y titer, measurement of tumor specific immune response, will be obtained at 4 
diff
erent time points: at baseline, after 2 cycles of lenalidomide monthotherapy, at the 
time of addition of dexamethasone, and 2  cycles after the addition of dexamethasone. 
Descriptive statistics (mean, standard deviation, median, and inter-quartile rang e) will be 
used to describe antibody titer distributions for  the overall response adaptive approach  
and by treatment in different time points. For evaluating lenalidomide effect on immune  
response, the antibody titer change from baseline to after 2 cycles of lenalidomide  
monthothera py will be summarized using descriptive statistics. For evaluating 
c
orticosteroid effect on immune response, the antibody titer change from baseline to 
either time of addition of dexamethasone or 2  cycles after the addition of dexamethasone  
will be summarized. These lena lidomide and corticosteroid e ffect will be analyzed using  
Version.  6 date 4/15/2016  
 Page 69 of 86 Confidential   
 either the pair t-te st if the origin al or transform ed data are normally distributed, or the  
Wilcoxon sign  rank test whenever the normality assumption cannot be justified. The  
antibody titer change will also be compared between response to therapy (yes/no) using  
either the student’s t-test or Wilcoxon rank sum test. Duration of response is defined as 
the time from study start to the time of disease progression on lenalidomide and  
dexamethasone. Cox regression model will be applied to evaluate the association between  
antibody titer change and duration of response. 
The second exploratory aim is to evaluate the impact of lenalidomide mono-therapy on 
e
xpression of tumor suppression genes and cel l cycle regulators. The expressions of 
interest are in the following target genes: EGR1, EGR2, EGR3, p15, p21, p27 and  
SPARC. The 15  paired samples will be obtain ed pre and post 2  cycles of lenalidomide  
monotherapy. The gene expression  data will be pre-p rocessed using appropriate  
background correction, normalization, and transformation. The processed expression data  
will be u sed for further analyses. For each gene expression, the expression differences  
between pre and  post 2  cycles of lenalidomide monotherapy w ill  be described using  
descriptive statistics and the impact of lenalidomide mono-therapy will be evaluated   
using either the paired t-test or Wilcoxon sign rank test. 
 
 
13. Regulatory Considerations  
 
 
 
13.1. Institutional review board/ethics committee approval  
 
 
The
 protocol for this study has been designed in accordan ce with the general ethical  
principles ou tlined in the Declaration of Helsinki. The review of this protocol by the  
IRB/EC and the performance of all aspects of the study, including the methods used for 
Version.  6 date 4/15/2016  
 Page 70 of 86 Confidential   
 obtai ning in formed consent, must  also be in accordance with principles enunciated in the 
declaration, as well as ICH Guidelines, T itle 21 of the Code of Federal Regulations  
(CFR),  Part 5 0 Protection o f Human Subjects and  Part 56 Institutional Review Boards. 
 
The
 Investigator will be responsible for preparing documents for submission to the 
relevant IRB/EC and obtaining written approval for this study. The approval will be  
obtained prior to the initiation of the study. 
 
A copy of the IRB/EC approval for the protocol and the Inform ed Consent is to be 
provided to Celgene. The approval for both the protocol  and inform ed consent must  
specify the date of approval, protocol  numb er and version, or amend ment number. 
 
Any amendments to the protocol after receipt of IRB/EC approval mu st be subm itted by 
the Inves tigator for review to Celgene, and then to the IRB/EC for approval. The  
Investigator is also responsible for notifying the IRB/EC of any serious deviations from  
the protocol, or anything else that m ay involve added risk  to subjects. 
 
Any advertisements used to recruit subjects for the study must be reviewed and approved  
by the IRB/EC prior to use. 
 
13.2. Informed consent  
 
 
The Investigator must obtain inform ed consent of a subject or his/her designee prior to 
any study related procedures as per Good Clinical Practices (GCP) as set forth in the CFR 
and ICH guidelines. 
 
Doc
umentation that inform ed consent occurred prior to the subject’s entry into the study 
and the inform ed consent process should be recorded in  the subject’s source documents.  
The original consent form signed  and dated by the subject and by the person consenting 
Version.  6 date 4/15/2016  
 Page 71 of 86 Confidential   
 the subject prior to the subject’s entry in to the study, must be maintained in the 
Investigator’s study files. 
 
A sample  of the inform ed consent to be used in the study is to be forwarded to Celgene  
prior to submitting it to the IRB/EC for approval. 
 
13.3. Subject confidentiality  
 
 
C
elgene affirms the subject’s right to protection against invasion of privacy. In 
com
pliance with United States f ede ral regula tions, Celgene requires the Investigator  to 
perm it Celgene representatives and,  when necessa ry,  representatives of the FDA  or other  
regulatory authorities to review and/or copy any medical records relevant to the study in 
accordan ce with local laws.  
 
Should direct access to medical records require a waiver or authorization separate from  
the subject’s statement of inform ed consent, it is the responsibility of the Investigator to 
obtain such permission in writing from the appropriate individual. 
 
13.4. Study records requirements  
 
 
The Investigator must ensure that the records and documents pertaining to the conduct of 
the study and the  distribution o f the study drug, that is copies of data collection  and  
source docu ments (original docu ments, data, and records [e.g., hospital records; clinical  
and office charts; laboratory notes; memoranda; subject’s diaries or evaluation checklists;  
pharmacy dispensing records; recorded data from automated instruments; copies or 
transcrip tions certified after verification as being accurate copies; microfiches;  
photographic negatives, microfilm,  or magnetic media; x-rays; subject files; and records  
kept at the pharmacy, at the laboratories, and at medico-technical departments involved in 
Version.  6 date 4/15/2016  
 Page 72 of 86 Confidential   
 the clinical study; do cum ents regarding subject treatment and study drug accountability;  
origin al signed  inform ed consents, etc.]) be retained by the investigator for as long as 
needed to comply with national and international regulations (generally 2 years after  
discontinuing clinical development or after the last marketing approval). The  
Investigator agrees to adhere to the docu m ent/records retention procedures by signing the  
protocol. 
 
Premature discontinuation of  study  
 
 
 
13.4.1.
 Single center  
 
 
The responsible local clin ical Investigator as well as Celgene have the right to 
discontinue this study at any time for reasonab le medical or administrative reasons in any 
single center. Possible reasons for termination of the study could be but are not limited  
to: 
 
 Unsatisf actory enrollment with r espect to quantity or qua lity . 
 
 
 Inaccurate or incomplete data collection. 
 
 
 F
alsification of records. 
 
 
 Failure to adhere to the study protocol. 
 
 
 
13.4.2. Study as a whole  
 
 
Any possible premature discontinuation would have to be documented adequately with  
reasons bein g stated, and information would be issued according to local requirements  
after discussions and agreement between the PI ’s sponsor (s) and regulatory authorities at 
the institutions (e.g.,  IRB/EC, regulatory authorities, etc.). 
 
Version.  6 date 4/15/2016  
 Page 73 of 86 Confidential   
 14. Appendices  
 
 
 
Appendi x I: Classification of the plasma cell dyscrasias[22] & 
International Staging System (ISS)[23]  
 
 
 
MGUS   
 
Asymptomatic m ultiple 
myeloma   
 
Symptomatic multiple 
myeloma  
 
 
Serum  M protein  < 30g/L  & 
 
 
 
Clonal  bone  marrow 
plasmacytosis  <10%  
 
No other  B cell 
lymphoproliferative  disorder  
 
No related  organ  and tissue  
impairment  
 
Serum  M protein  ≥ 30g/L or 
 
 
 
Clonal  bone  marrow 
plasmacytosis  ≥ 10% 
 
No related  organ  and tissue  
impairment  
 
M protein  in the serum  or urine  
 
& 
 
 
 
Clonal  bone  marrow 
plasmacytosis  or plasmacyto ma 
 
Related  organ  and tissue  
impairment* 
 
*Related Organ Tissue Impairment 
 
 
• Hypercalcem ia 
 
 
• Renal dysfunction 
 
 
• Anemia: hemoglobin 2 g/dL below the lower limit  of norm al 
 
• Ly tic bone lesions (solitary plasmacytoma requires >30% PC) 
 
 
 
• Symptomatic hyperviscosity 
 
 
Version.  6 date 4/15/2016  
 Page 74 of 86 Confidential   
  
• A myloidosis (requires >30% PC) 
  
Version.  6 date 4/15/2016  
 Page 75 of 86 Confidential   
 •  
 
 
 
• R ecurrent bacterial infections (>2/year) 
 
 
 
 
 
International Staging System[23]:  
 
 
 
I  
β2m < 3.5 mg/dL  
 
 
 
Albu min≥3.5g/dL  
 
II  
5.5> β2m ≥ 3.5 mg/dL 
Or 
Albu min <3.5g/dL  and β2m < 3.5 mg/dL  
 
III  
β2m ≥ 5.5 mg/dL  
  
Version.  6 date 4/15/2016  
 Page 76 of 86 Confidential   
 Appendix II:  Uniform Response Criteria as defined by the International 
Myeloma Working Group[22]  
All relapse categories require two consecutive assessments made at anytime 
before  classification as relapse or disease progression and/or the institution of 
any
 new therapy. 
Measurab le disease is defined as: 
 
 
Complete  remission  • Negative  immunofixation  on the serum  and urine,  and 
• Disapppearance  of any soft tissue  plasmacytomas  , and 
• ≤5%  plasma cells in the bone  marrow  (confir mation  with repeat  bone  marrow 
is not needed)  
 
Stringent  Complete  
remission  • CR as defined  above,  and 
• Normal free light chain  (FLC)  ratio,  and 
• Absence  of clonal  cells in the bone  marrow  by immunohistoche mistry or 
immunofluorescence,  based  on a κ/λ ratio of > 4:1 or < 1:2 perfor med on a 
minimum of 100 plasma cells (confir mation  with repeat  bone  marrow  is not 
needed)  
 
Very  Good  Partial  
Remission  • Serum  and urine  M-protein  detectable  by immunofixation  but not on 
electrophoresis,  or 
• 90% or greater  reduction  in serum  M-protein plus urine M-protei n level of < 
100 mg per 24 hours  
 
Partial  Remission  • ≥50% reductio n of serum M-protei n and reduction  in 24-h urinary  M-protein  
by ≥90%,  or to <200 mg per 24 h 
• If the serum  and urine  M-protein  are unmeasurable*,  a ≥50% decrease  in the 
difference  between  involved  and uninvolved  FLC levels  is required  in place  of 
the M-protein  criteria  
• In addition  to the above listed criteria, if prese nt at baseline,  a ≥50% 
reduction  in the size of soft tissue  plasmacyto mas is also required 
Minimal remission  • 25-49% reductio n of serum M-protei n and reduction  in 24-h urinary  M-
protein  by ≥50% but  less than 90%  
• In addition  to the above listed criteria, if prese nt at baseline,  a ≥25% 
reduction  in the size of soft tissue  plasmacyto mas is also required 
 
Stable  Disease • Not meeting  criteria  for CR, VGPR, PR or progressive  disease  
Version.  6 date 4/15/2016  
 Page 77 of 86 Confidential   
  
Progres sive Disease  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
V. 3 12/06/2010 Increase  of ≥25%  from  baseline  in serum  M-component,  and the absolute  
increase  must be ≥0.5 g/dl. If the starting  M-component  is ≥5 g/dl, increases  
≥1 g/dl are sufficient  to defin e relapse.  
• Increase  of ≥25%  from  baseline  in urine  M-component,  and the absolute  
increase  must be ≥200  mg/24  hours  
• Only  in patients  witho ut measurable  serum  and urine  M-protein  levels:  
Increase  of ≥25%  from  baseline  in the difference  between  involved  and 
uninvolved  FLC levels,  and the absol ute difference  must be >10 mg/dl 
• Increase  of ≥25%  from  baseline  in bone  marrow  plasma cell percentage,  and 
the absolute % must be ≥10%  (relapse  from  CR has the 5% cutoff  versus  10% 
for other  categories  of relapse)  
• Definite  develop ment of new bone  lesions  or soft tissue  plasmacyto mas or 
definite  increase  in the size of existing  bone  lesions  or soft tissue  
plasmacyto mas 
• Development  of hypercalce mia (corr ected serum  calcium  >11.5  mg/dl or 
>2.65  mmol/l)  that can be attrib uted solely to the plasma cell proliferati ve 
disorder.  
 
 
- Serum M-protein ≥ 1 g/dl (≥ 10 gm /l) [10 g/l] 
 
- Urine M-protein ≥ 200 mg/24h 
 
Serum FLC assay: Involved FLC level ≥ 100 mg/dl (≥ 100 mg/l) provided serum FLC  
ratio is abnorm al 
 
  
Version.  6 date 4/15/2016  
 Page 78 of 86 Confidential   
 Appendi x III: ECO G Performance Status Scale  
 
 
 
SCORE   
DESCRIP TION 
 
0  
Fully  active,  able  to  carry  on  all  pre-disease  performance 
without  restriction.  
 
1  
Restricte d in physicall y strenuous  activity  but ambulatory  and 
able to  carry  out work  of a light or sedentar y nature , e.g., light 
housework,  office  work.  
 
2  
Ambulator y and capabl e of all self-care but unable to carry 
out any work  activities.  Up and about  more than 50% of 
wakin g hours.  
 
3  
Capable  of only limited self-care,  confined  to bed or chair  
more  than 50% of waking  hours.  
 
4  
Completely  disabled.  Cannot  carry on any self-care.  Totally  
confine d to bed or chair.  
 
5  
Dead.  
  
Version.  6 date 4/15/2016  
 Page 79 of 86 Confidential   
  
 
Appendi x IV: Risks of Fetal Exposure, Pregnancy Testing Guidelines and 
Acceptabl
e Birth Control Methods  
Risks Associated with Pregnancy  
The use of lenalidomide in pregnant females and nursing mothers has not been studied  
nor has the effect of the lenalidomide on  hum an eggs and sperm. Lenalidomide is 
structurally related to thalidomide. Thalidomide is a known hu man teratogenic active  
substance th at causes severe life-threatening birth defects. An embryofetal development  
study in animals indicates that  lenalidomide produced malformations in the offspring of 
female monkeys who received the drug during pregnancy. The teratogenic effect of 
lenali
domide in humans cannot be ruled out. Therefore, a risk minimization plan to 
prevent pregnancy must be observed.The risks to a fetus are not known. However, 
because lenalidomide is related to thalidomid e, and thalidomide is known to cause severe 
birth defects, the following requirements must be observed. 
All study participants must be registered in to the mandatory RevAssist® program, and be  
willing and  able to comply with th e requirements of RevAssist®. 
Criteria for females of childbearing potential (FCBP) 
 
This protocol defines a female of childbearing potential as a sexually mature female who: 
1) has not undergone a hysterectomy or bilateral oophorectomy or 2) has not been  
naturally postmenopausal for at least 24 consecutive months (i.e., has had menses at a ny 
time in the preceding 24  consecutive months). 
The investigator must  ensure that: 
 Femal es of childbearing potential comply with the  conditions for pregnancy risk 
minimization, including confirmation that she has an  adequate level of 
understanding 
 
 Females NOT  of childbearing potential acknowledge that she understands the  
hazards and  necessary precautions associated with the use of lenalidomide 
 
 Male  patients taking lenalidomide acknowledge that he understands that traces of 
lenali
domide have been found in semen, that he understands the potential  
teratogenic risk if engaged in sexual activity with a female of childbearing  
potential,  and that he understands the need for the use of a condom even if he has 
had a vasectom y, if engaged in sexual activity with a female of childbearing  
potential.  
Version.  6 date 4/15/2016  
 Page 80 of 86 Confidential   
  
Contraception  
 
Females of childbearing poten tial (FCBP) enrolled in this protocol  must agree to use two 
reliable forms o f contraception simultaneously or to practice complete abstinence from  
heterosexual intercourse during th e following time periods  related to this study: 1) for at 
least 28 days before starting lenalidomid e; 2) throughout the entire duration of 
lenalidomide treatment; 3) during dose interruptions; and 4) for at least 28 days after  
lenalidomide discontinuation. 
 
The two methods of reliable contraception must  include one highly effective metho d and 
one additional effective (barrier) method. FCBP must be refe rred to a qualified provider  
of contraceptive methods if needed. The  following are examples of highly effective and  
additional effective methods of contraception: 
 
o Hig hly effective methods: 
 
 Intrauterine device (IUD) 
 
 Hormonal (birth control pills, injections, implants) 
 
 Tubal ligation 
 
 Partner’s vasectomy 
 
o Additi onal effective methods: 
 
 Male condom 
 
 Diaphragm 
 
 Cervical Cap 
 
Because of the increas ed risk  of venous thromboembolism in patien ts with multiple  
myeloma taking lenalidomide and  dexamethasone,  combined oral contraceptive pills are  
not recommended. If a patient is currently using com b ined oral contraception the patient  
should switch to one o f the effective method  listed  above. The  risk of venous 
thro
mboembolism continues for 4−6 weeks after discontinuing com bined oral  
contraceptio n. The efficacy of contraceptive steroids m ay be reduced during co-treatment  
with dexamethasone. 
 
Implants and levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine systems are associated with an 
increased risk  of infection at the time of insertion and irregular vaginal bleeding.  
Prophylactic antibiotics should be considered particularly in patients with neutropenia. 
Version.  6 date 4/15/2016  
 Page 81 of 86 Confidential   
  
Pregnancy testing 
 
Medically supervised pregnancy tests with a minimu m sensitivity of 50  mIU/mL must be  
perform ed for females of childbearing potential, including fema les of childbearing  
potential who comm it to complete abstinence,  as outlin ed below.  
 
Before starting lenalidomide  
 
Female Patients:  
 
FCBP must have two negative pregnancy tests (sensitivity of  at least 50 mIU/mL) prior to  
prescribing lenalidomide. The first pregnancy test must be perform ed within 10-14 days 
pr
ior to prescribing lenalidomide and  the second pregnancy test mu st be performe d 
within 24 hours prior to  prescribing lenalidomide. The patient m ay not receive  
lenalidomide until the Investigator has verified that the results of these pregnancy tests  
are negative. 
 
Male Patients : 
 
Must agree to practice complete abstinence  or agree to use a condom during sexual  
contact with pregnant females or females of childbearing potential throughout the entire  
duration of lenalidomide treatment, during do se inte rruptions and for  at least 28 days 
following
 lenalidomide discontinuation, even if he has undergone a successful  
vasectom y. 
 
During study participation an d  for 28 days follo wing lenalidomide discontinua tion 
 
Female Patients:  
 
 F CBP with  regular or no menstrual cycles must agree to  have pregnancy tests  
weekly for the f irst 28 days of lenalidomide treatment, inc luding dose 
int
erruptions and then every 28 days throughout the  remaining duration of 
lena
lidomide treatment, including dose interrup tions, at lenalidomide  
discontinuation,  and at Day 28 following lenalidomide  discontinuation.  If 
menstrual cycles are irregular, the pregnancy testing mu st occur weekly for the 
first  28 days of lenalidomide treatment,  including dose interruptions, and then 
every  14 days throughout the rem aining duration  of  lenalidomide  treatment, 
including dose interruptions, at lenali domide  discontinuation, and at Day  14 and 
Da
y 28 following lenalidomide discontinuation. 
 At each visit, the Investigator must  confirm with the FCBP that she is continuing  
to use two  reliable methods of birth control at each visit during the time that birth  
control is required. 
 I f pregnancy or a positive pregnancy test does occur in a study patient,  
lenalidomide mu st be immediately discontinued. 
 
Version.  6 date 4/15/2016  
 Page 82 of 86 Confidential   
  Pregnancy testing and  counseling must be perform ed if a patient misses her period  
or if her pregnancy test or her menstrual bleeding is abnormal. Lenalidomide  
treatment must be temporarily discontinued during this evaluation. 
 
 Fem ales mu st agree to abstain from breastfeeding during stu dy participation and  
for at least 28 days after lenalidomide discontinuation. 
 
Male Patients:  
 
 Must practice complete abstinence or use a condom during sexual contact with  
pregnant females or females of childbearing potential throughout the entire  
duration of lenalidomide treatment, duri ng dose interruptions and  for at least 28 
days following lenalidomide discontinuation, even  if he has undergone a  
successful vasectom y. 
 
 If pregnancy or a positive pregnancy test does occur in the partner of a male study  
patient during study participation, the investigator must be notified immediately. 
 
Additional precautions 
 
 Patients should be instructed never to  give lenalidomide to another person. 
 
 F emale patients should not donate blood during therapy and for at least 28  days 
following discontinuation of lenalid omide.  
 
 Mal e patients should  not donate blood,  semen or sperm during therapy or for at 
least 28 days following discontinuation of lenalidomide. 
 
 Onl y enough lenalidomide for one cycle of therapy m ay be prescribed with each 
cycle  of therapy. 
 
  
Version.  6 date 4/15/2016  
 Page 83 of 86 Confidential   
  
 
Appendix V NCI CTC Versi on 4.0 
 
 
Toxicity will be scored using NCI  CTC Version 4.0 for toxicity and  adverse event  
reporting.  A copy o f the NCI CTC Version 4.0 can be downloaded from the CTEP  
homepage: (http://ctep.info.nih.gov ). All appropriate treatment areas have access to a 
copy of the CTC Version 
 
  
Version.  6 date 4/15/2016  
 Page 84 of 86 Confidential   
  
Appendix VI: Cockcroft-Gault estimation of CrCl:  
 
 
 
Cockcroft-Gault estimation of creatinine clearance (CrCl):  
(Cockcroft, 1976; Luke 1990) 
 
 
CrCl (mL/min) =  (140 –age) x (weight, kg) 
(Male
s) 72 x (serum creatinine, mg/dL) 
 
 
CrCl (mL/min) = (140 –age) x (weight, kg)_   x 0.85 
(Females) 72  x (serum creatinine, mg/dL) 
 
  
Version.  6 date 4/15/2016  
 Page 85 of 86 Confidential   
  
 
REFERENCES 
 
1. Jem al, A., et al., Cancer statistics, 2008. CA Cancer J Clin, 2008. 58(2): p. 71-96. 
 
2. R ajkumar, S.V., et al., Phase I II clinical trial of thalidomide plus dexamethasone 
c
ompared with dexamethasone alone in newly diagnosed multiple myeloma: a 
clinical trial coordinated by the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group. J Clin  
Oncol, 2006.  24(3): p. 431 -6. 
 
3. R ajkumar, S.V., et al., Combination therapy with lenalidomide plu s 
dexamethasone (Rev/Dex) for newly diagnosed myeloma. Blood, 2005. 106(13):  
p. 4050-3.  
 
4. San Miguel,  J.F., et al., Bortezomib plus melphalan and prednison e for initial 
treatment of multiple myeloma. N Engl J Med, 2008. 359(9): p. 906-17. 
 
5. C orral, L.G. and  G. Kaplan, Immunomodulation by thalidomide an d thalidomide 
analogues. Ann Rheum Dis, 1999. 58 Suppl 1: p. I107-13. 
 
6. Mul ler, G.W., et al., Amino-substituted thalidomide analogs: potent inhibitors of 
TN
F-alpha production. Bioorg Med Chem Lett, 1999. 9(11): p. 1625-30. 
 
7. Da vies, F.E., et al., Thalidomide and immunomodulatory derivatives augment 
natural killer cell cytotoxic ity in multiple myelom a. Blood, 2001. 98(1): p. 210-6. 
 
8. Gup ta, D., et al., Ad herence of multiple myeloma cells to bone marrow stromal 
c
ells   upregulates vascular endothelial growth factor secretion: therapeutic 
appli
cations. Leukemia, 2001. 15(12): p. 1950-61. 
 
9. R ichardson, P.G., et al., A randomized phase 2 study of lenalidomide therapy for 
patie
nts with relapsed or relapsed and refrac tor y multip le myeloma. B lood, 2006. 
 
10. R ichardson, P.G., et al., Immunomodulatory drug CC- 5013  overcomes drug 
resistance and is well tolerated in patients with relapsed multiple myeloma. 
Blood, 2002. 100(9): p. 3063-7. 
 
11. D imopoulos,  M., et al., L enalidomide  plus  Dexamethasone  for  Relapsed  or 
Refracto ry Multiple Myeloma 1056/NEJMoa070594 . N Eng l  J Med, 2007. 
357(2
1): p. 2123 -2132.  
 
 
12. W eber, D.M., et al., Lenalidomide plus Dexamethasone for Relapsed Multiple 
Myeloma  in North America  
 
13. .R ajkumar, S., et al., A Randomized Trial of Lenalidomide Plus High-Dose 
Dex
amethasone (RD) Versus Lenalidomide Plus Low-Dose Dexamethasone (Rd) 
in Newly Diagnosed Multip le Myeloma (E4A03): A Trial Coordinated by the 
Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group. Blood, 2007. 110(11): p. abstract 74. 
 
14. S chafer, P.H., et al., Opposing Effects of Dexamethasone on  Lenalidomide 
Activ ity in Multiple Myeloma: Additiv e/Synergistic Effec ts on Anti- Pro liferative  
Version.  6 date 4/15/2016  
 Page 86 of 86 Confidential   
  
Activity on  Myeloma Cells and Antagonistic Effects on Immune Function. ASH 
Annual
 Meeting Abstracts, 2008. 112(11): p. 2761-. 
 
15. Noona n,  K.A., et al., The Immunomodulatory Role of Lenalidomide  on 
Prevnar(R) Responses in Pa tients with Relapsed Multip le Myeloma: A 
Comprehensive Analysis of the Immune Response. ASH Annual Meeting  
Abstracts, 2008. 112(11): p.  2772-. 
 
16. Ga ndhi, A.t.K., et al., Stimulation of T Cells by Lenalidomide Involves Putativ e 
Lenalidomide Binding Proteins CD3-Epsilon-Associated Protein and GDP -  
Mannose Pyrophosphorylase a. ASH  Annual Meeting Abstracts, 2008. 112(11):  
p. 2606-.  
 
17. Z hang, L.-H., et al., Direct Inhibitory Effects of Lenalidomide on the  Proliferation 
and VEGF Production of Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma Cells Are Associated with 
Inc
reased SPARC Expression. ASH Annual Meeting Abstracts, 2008. 112(11): p. 
2612-. 
 
18. S hustik, C., et al., A randomised comparison of melphalan with prednisone or 
de
xamethasone as induction therapy and dexamethasone or observation as 
maintenanc
e therapy in multiple myeloma: NCIC CTG MY.7. Br J Haematol,  
2007. 136(2): p.  203-11. 
 
19. F acon, T., et al., Dexamethasone-based regimens versus melphalan-prednisone 
for
 elder ly multiple myeloma patients ineligib le for high-dose therap y. Blood,  
2006. 107(4): p.  1292 -8. 
 
20. B az, R., et al., Lenalidomide and pegylated liposomal doxorubicin-based 
c
hemotherapy for relapsed or refractory multiple myeloma: safety and efficacy. 
Ann 
Oncol, 2006. 17(12): p. 1766-71. 
 
21. S tewart, A.K., et al., A practical guide to defining h igh-risk myeloma for clinical 
tri
als, patient counseling and choice of therapy. L eukemia, 2007. 21(3): p. 529 - 
34. 
 
22. Dur ie, B.G., et al., International uniform respon se criteria for multip le myeloma.  
Leukemia, 2006. 20(9): p. 1467-73. 
 
23. Gr eipp, P.R., et al., International staging system for multiple myeloma. J  Clin  
Oncol, 2005.  23(15): p.  3412-20. 