(CCI) Committee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 1 of 8 
 
Study Description – Part B  
CCI Form:  9-2015 
 PI Revision Date:  2020 -03-03  
 
PART B  
STUDY DESCRIPTION  
 
TITLE OF PROTOCOL  EEG changes with meditation:  A proposal to analyze EEG changes 
with a simple , online, guided  meditative tool  
Principal Investigator  Balachundhar Subramaniam MD, MPH  
 
B1. PURPOSE OF PROTOCOL  
The purpose of this study is to assess : 
 
a) the qualitative EEG measures  associated with meditation   
b) the observed difference in EEG changes between novice and experienced meditators  
c) the observed difference in EEG changes between the start and end of 6 weeks  of daily med itation  
 
B2. SIGNIFICANCE AND BACKGROUND FOR THE STUDY  
 
Meditation refers to a category  of self -regulation practices which  focus on training attention and awareness in order 
to bring mental processes under greater voluntary control . Meditation , as therapy , has the potential to improve  
mental well -being and development in specific  capacities such as calm ness, clarity, and concentration.1 
Mindfulness is defined in psychological terms as being characterized by paying total attention to the present 
moment with a nonjudgmental awarene ss of inner and outer experiences .2  
 
Meditation and current literature:  
 
Studies have shown numerous benefits of meditation  techniques . For example, Goyal et al . reported  that meditation 
has a similar  effect on anxiety and depression as compared to medication without the side effects.3 Therefore,  it is 
essential  to assess the usefulness of incorporating meditati on as an adjunctive therapy in p erioperative patient care.   
 
In order to study the benefits and efficacy of meditation intervention, it is important to have an objective measure 
that assesses the quality 
of meditation. Ahani et al . 
reported  that EEG signa ls 
are sensitive to meditation 
using coherence and 
synchrony techniques as 
well as spectral analysis.4 
The overall effect of 
meditation is decreased 
electro -cortical arousal.5 
Meditators have shown to 
have higher alpha  and 
theta a ctivities in EEG s 
than non-meditators.6 
Focused -attention has 
shown to  produce  an 
increase of gamma 
activity in the brain. 7 
Studies have also shown 
that meditation produces 
different activities at  
different locations  such as  
increased alpha  activity  in 
frontal regions  8 and 
posterior regions .9  
 
 
EEG spectral analysis of alpha, beta, and theta waves during meditation. Credits :Ahani et al10 

(CCI) Committee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 2 of 8 
 
Study Description – Part B  
CCI Form:  9-2015 
 PI Revision Date:  2020 -03-03  
 
 
A meta -analysis conducted in 2014 showed the most consistently altered brain regions were the left rostrolateral 
prefrontal cortex, anterior/mid cingulate cortex, anterior 
insula, primary/secondary somatomotor cortices  inferior 
temporal gyrus, and hi ppocampus .11 Insula is consistentl y 
linked to interoception -awareness of the body’s internal and 
visceral states, including respiration, heart rate, emotional 
self-awareness, and potentially metacognitive 
awareness.12,13 Somatosensory areas are also  altered by 
meditation.  
 
Neuroimaging studies have shown that there is increased 
cortical thickening in the left prefrontal lobe cluster as well as 
increased volume of insula, right temporal, and right angular 
gyrus.14 Meditator s have also shown to have increased grey 
matter volume.   
 
Central box represents the value from the lower to upper 
quartile (25th to 75th percentile).  The middle line represents 
the median. The vertical line extends from the minimum to 
the maximum value.14 
 
Experienced and n ovice meditators:  
A recent study has  shown that after practicing 5 -60 hours of 
meditation, novice meditators experience structural 
differences in 7 grey matters and 5 white matter tract regions.15 
 
Number  Grey Matter areas  White matter area s 
1) Anterior cingulate cortices  Corpus callosum  
2) Posterior cingulate cortices  Superior longitudinal fasciculus  
3) Insular cortex  Sagital stratum  
4) Temporoparietal junction  Thalamic radiation  
5) Hippocampus  Corona radiata.  
6) Caudate nucleus   
7) Cerebellum   
 
A recently published study reports  that meditation  resulted in  effortless awareness in novice and experienced 
meditators  and meditation was associated with lower activity in Posterior Cingulate Cortices ( PCC).15 A recent study 
has shown that medit ation correlates with decr eased activity of default mode network16 as opposed to an increased 
activity of default mode network associated with mind  wandering and self -referential process es.17  
 
Network integration  
A recent study has also assessed the network integration in EEG due to meditation and has  found that meditation is 
associated with increased brain network integration.15 Such  studies demonstrate the  possibility of application of r eal 
time EEG to associate an objective measure of brain activity with subjective mind stat es related to meditation. EEG 
has an excellent temporal resolution  and is preferred over fMRI in this study since it is portable and less expensive.   
 
Meditation enco mpasses a family of complex practices that include yoga meditation, mindfulness meditation, 
mantra meditation, tai chi, etc.  However, the training requirements for these types of meditation are variable 
including training from a trained teacher . Isha Kriya  is a type of meditation that does not involve complicated 
trainings, rituals or mantras and can be performed anywhere at any time . Isha Kriya  is a meditation technique that 
regulates breathing and produces a positive  effect on  the mind an d body  as endorse d by millions of people 
worldwide .18 At this time, no studies have been done regarding the EEG changes in the brain during Isha Kriya.  
 
This study will investigate  if Isha Kriya produces EEG changes comparable to that of established literature and will 
look at the differences between the start and t he end of a 6 week  cycle . This study will also explore the difference in 
EEG changes between  experienced and novi ce meditator s. 

(CCI) Committee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 3 of 8 
 
Study Description – Part B  
CCI Form:  9-2015 
 PI Revision Date:  2020 -03-03  
 
B3. DESCRIPTION OF RESEARCH P ROTOCOL  
A. Study Design – Overview, Methods, Procedures  
 
Study design:  
This is a prospective trial en rolling healthy volunteer s, including novice meditators and experienced meditators.  
Subjects will undergo an EEG at baseline and again after 6 weeks.  During the 6 weeks, subject s will be asked to 
meditate twice a day, 12 minutes each time.  
 
Recruitment : 
Recruitment will occur via flyers posted at BIDMC and flyers emailed to mediation listservs.  
 
Study procedures : 
 
1) EEG 
Subjects will undergo an EEG at baseline and again after 6 weeks  (+/- 1 week).  During the EEGs, the subjects will 
be asked to meditate.   
 
The ENOBIO 32  EEG device i s an investigational device under US federal law which is a 24 -bit EEG data reader at 
the rate of 500 S/s which comes as a wearable wireless electrophysiology sensor system. It includes spectrogram 
and 3D visualization in real tim e of spectral features. It also collects triaxial acclereometer data. These data are 
stored in microSD offline in Holter mode.19 This EEG communica tes via wireless allowing the subjects to be in a 
comfortable position and also can reduce the effects of electrical interference. EEG measures brain waves by the 
following processes:  
 
Pre-processing Signal  
Down sampling will be done to eliminate interfere nce from unexpected signals.  
After down sampling, Band Pass Filter (BPF) will be used to filter the signals.  
 
Ensemble Average  
In this step, signal acquired from every selected channel would be averaged. There are fifteen signals 
from the instruction that  are averaged into one signal representing the instruction.  
 
Short Time Fourier Transform (STFT)  
STFT will be used to determine a dominant frequency from the signal of an ensemble average  
result when the event occurs . 
 
Event Related Desynchronization/Event  Related Synchronization   
ERD/ERS during event is calculated with the above data.  
 
2) Meditation  
 
Subjects will be introduced to Isha Kriya (IK) meditation.  IK is a meditation that can be learned quickly and requires 
approximately 12 minutes, twice a day o f practice.  This regimen was chosen because of its simplicity making it an 
excellent way to introduce meditation to beginners. IK does not incorporate a spiritual or religious focus.  Dr. 
Subramaniam, the principal investigator of the study, was trained to be an instructor by the Isha Institute of Inner 
Sciences, a nonprofit foundation located at McMinnville, Tennessee.   
 
At the time of enrollment, Dr. Subramaniam, or a trained research team member, will provide a brief introduction to 
IK meditation and revi ew a handout of the meditation instructions.  The subjects can utilize the online -guided 
meditation or follow the instructions on their own.  
 
Preparation : Sit in a cross -legged posture or sit in a chair, spine comfortably erect, hands upon 
thighs, palms fac ing up, face slightly upturned, eyes closed, keeping a mild focus 
between the eyebrows.  
Meditation : Slow inhaling and exhaling while mentally focusing on the words “ I am not the body” 
and “I am not even the mind” for 7 minutes; uttering a long “Ahh” sound seven 
times; sitting for 5 minutes with eyes closed.   
(CCI) Committee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 4 of 8 
 
Study Description – Part B  
CCI Form:  9-2015 
 PI Revision Date:  2020 -03-03  
 
 
Subjects will be asked to practice the meditation twice daily for 12 minutes each session, for approximately 6 
weeks.  They will be given a meditation diary to complete daily.  
 
 
 Baseline  After 6 weeks   
Group 1 - Novice meditators  Meditation with EEG monitoring  Meditation with EEG monitoring  
Group 2 - Experienced meditators  Meditation with EEG monitoring  Meditation with EEG monitoring  
 
 
Study Monitoring / Adverse Events:  
The study interventions are n on-invasive and minimal risk. Therefore, we will limit the scope of AE monitoring and 
reporting to the following:  
 
• All Serious Adverse Events believed to be related to the study procedures  
• Unexpected, non -serious Adverse Events believed to be related t o the study procedures  
 
 
B. Statistical Considerations  
a. Sample Size Justification :  In this pilot study , atleast 10 patients who complete both EEGs are required 
for analysis.  In order to achieve this target accrual of 10 patients and  also to account for po tential 
dropouts, a total of 15 volunteers will be recruited . 
  
b. Data Analysis:  Continuous data will be reported as means ± standard deviation or median (quartile 1, 
quartile 3) depending on distribution.  Normality will be assessed with the Shapiro -Wilk te st.  Categorical 
data will be reported as frequencies and proportions and assessed with a chi -square of Fisher’ s Exact t est 
as appropriate.  SAS 9.4 (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC) will be used for all analyses, with two -sided p -
values < 0.05 considered sta tistically significant.   
The primary aim of t he study is to study the effect of guided meditation on EEG. This will be a descriptive 
study noting  the EEG changes (alpha vs beta ), differences in the waveform signals between novices and 
experienced meditato rs, and at the beginning and the end of the 6-week  period.  Secondary analys is is 
being conducted with collaborators outside of BIDMC . Professor Contreras Vidal, Jose & his subordinate 
Sujatha Ravindran, Akshay from The University of Houston; will be assist ing in the analysis of the EEG 
data collected. They will be provided with limited de -identified dataset in accordance to the terms of 
specific Data Use Agreements.  No PHI will be shared between the institutions and all data will be 
completely de -identified  before secure transfer to the co -investigators.  
 
Primary endpoint : 
1) Examine the qualitative EEG measures associated with Isha Kriya meditation  
 Event related potential fields in EEG: a mplitude in fT and latency in ms  
 Oscillations: power spectral density a nd time -frequency oscillations in fT^2/Hz  
 
Secondary endpoint s:  
1) Investigate the difference in EEG changes between novice and experienced meditators  
2) Investigate the difference in EEG changes between the start and end of 6 weeks of daily meditation  
 
 
(CCI) Committee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 5 of 8 
 
Study Description – Part B  
CCI Form:  9-2015 
 PI Revision Date:  2020 -03-03  
 
C. Subject Selection  
 
This is a descriptive study of healthy volunteers , including novices  and expert meditators.  
 
Inclusion criteria : 
1) 18 years or older  
2) Novice or expert meditator  
 
Novice meditator : No meditation practice in the previous year and < 20 entire lifetime hours  
Expert meditator : Meditation  ≥ 30 min per day for at least 5 days per week over the past 1 year 
 
 
 
Exclusion criteria:  
1) History of any neurological condition (i.e. Parkinson’s disease, Alzheimer’s disease, Huntington’s disease,  
brain tumors, brain surgery, or multiple sclerosis)  
2) History of depression, currently being treated with antidepressants  
3) History of any psychiatric disorder, within last 5 years (i.e. anxiety, psychosis, posttraumatic stress disorder, 
attention defic it hyperactive disorder)  
4) Current use of cognition enhancing medications  
5) Active history (within the last 5 years) of alcohol or drug abuse (> 10 drinks per week)  
6) History (within the last 5 years) of stroke/aneurysm  
7) Recent history (< 3 months) of  seizures  
8) Non -English speaking  
 
Subject Protection  
Subjects will not be recruited on the basis of race, ethnicity, or gender. However, it is not clear whether the final 
study sample will contain a representative spread of the racial and gender makeup. T here is no reason to exclude 
pregnant women from this protocol.  
 
 
B4. POSSIBLE BENEFITS  
We do not anticipate any direct benefit to be gained by the individual subject.  Insights gained from this trial may 
allow us to better understand and interpret results  and potentially provide information about the association 
between meditation and structural and functional brain changes.  
(CCI) Committee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 6 of 8 
 
Study Description – Part B  
CCI Form:  9-2015 
 PI Revision Date:  2020 -03-03  
 
 
B5. POSSIBLE RISKS AND ANALYSIS OF RISK/BENEFIT RATIO  
Since this is a feasibility study on healthy individuals, and the interventio n is non -invasive EEG, the risks expected 
to be associated with this study are minimum.  
 
EEG : 
Noninvasive EEG monitoring is considered a safe procedure. It has no discomfort and produces no sensation. In 
addition, there is no risk of electric shock.  In rar e instances, EEG can precipitate seizures in individuals with a 
seizure disorder due to flashing of lights or deep breathing.20 EEG will be performed  by trained study staff.   
 
Meditation : 
The meditation intervention only involves  thought and  mindful br eathing.  We do not anticipate any physical risk . 
The meditation program has not been used in this arena prior to this study.  Therefore, there is no published 
information regarding psychological risk.  Additional counseling regarding any psychological or emo tional distress 
stemming from this will be provided by the principal investigator at the request of the subject or family.   
 
Risk of breach of confidentiality : As with any research study, there is a small risk associated with a breach of 
confidentiality.  All research staff for this trial has been extensively trained in how to handle confidential data and 
how to minimize the possibility of this risk.  Data will be completely de -identified and transferred i n a secure 
manner .   
 
Risk/Benefit Ratio : The meditati on intervention has no expected risks and the knowledge gained could provide 
information about the association between meditation and structural and functional brain changes.  Research team 
members will attempt to mitigate any of the possible risks describe d above.  
 
B6. RECRUITMENT AND CONSENT PROCEDURES  
 
Recruitment  
Subjects will be identified by the study team via response to study flyers seeking volunteers.  Flyers will be posted 
throughout the Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center.  Flyers  will also be se nt to meditation listservs such as Isha . 
 
When interested subjects contact the study team, the study will be discussed and the subject will undergo 
prescreening for eligibility via phone.  If the subject meets eligibility criteria, an appointment for the fi rst EEG will be 
scheduled.  
 
Consent  
When the subject arrives at BIDMC for the first EEG, th e study will be discussed and the consent form reviewed 
with a research team member. The subjects will have the opportunity to ask any and all questions, and are fre e to 
decline participation at any time. Written informed consent will be obtained prior to any research procedures.  A 
copy of the signed consent will be provided to the subject  and the original will be kept in the research files.  
 
The research team underg oes standardized, rigorous training regarding the informed consent process for 
research. Within the Center for Anesthesia Research Excellence (CARE) at BIDMC, this training is personally 
overseen by the Clinical Research Administrator and includes: didacti c sessions, mandated attendance at 
CCI/HSPO seminars related to the informed consent process, shadowing of informed consent in a variety of 
contexts, trainee -led informed consent conversations with the aid of consenting checklists and accompanied by 
senior  staff member and/or PI, robust feedback sessions, and clear communication when the team member is 
skilled enough to engage in informed consent discussions without direct supervision.   All CARE members, 
including non -physicians, undergo this training.  
 
Subject Protection  
This meditation regimen was chosen because it excels in simplicity and is a great way to introduce meditation to 
beginners.  It does not incorporate a spiritual or religious focus . Subjects who are unable to consent for themselves 
will be ex cluded from this study.  
 
 
(CCI) Committee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 7 of 8 
 
Study Description – Part B  
CCI Form:  9-2015 
 PI Revision Date:  2020 -03-03  
 
B7. STUDY LOCATION  
Privacy   
Study interactions and procedures  will take place in private clinical settings with curtains/doors closed so as to 
provide privacy and comfort. Every effort will be made to protect the privacy of the participant.  
 
Physical Setting  
Subjects will be enrolled at BIDMC.  Prescreening will occur via phone.  Consent and EEGs will be performed in 
either the Clinical Research Center (CRC) or Pre -admission Testing (PAT) clinic.  Electronic data will be 
maintained  on password -protected computers behind the institutional firewall. Paper records will be maintained 
in locked file cabinets and secure research offices.  
 
B8. DATA SECURITY  
All electronic data will be stored in REDCap and/or on password -protected servers behind the BIDMC firewall.  
Any data collected on paper will be stored in locked file cabinets or in secure offices.  Each subject will be 
assigned a study -specific ID number.  A crosswalk between the participants and their study IDs will be 
maintained on pas sword -protected computers by members of the research team.  Limited information will be 
retained on patients who are prescreened and do not qualify, or who are approached and declined, for the 
purposes of generating a CONSORT diagram.   
Any transfer of data to outside collaborators will be done by sending Limited Data Sets with date -shifting, using 
Secure File Transfer.  Data will be completely de -identified and transferred i n a secure manner . The de -
identified data will be loaded in memory drive and/or DVD an d send via trackable FedEx  or using a Secure File 
Transfer  online .  Recipients will work with the data on their secure institutional computers, behind a firewall. All 
data sharing will be done in accord ance  to the terms of BIDMC -issued Data Use Agreements.  
 
B9 Multi -Site Studies  
N/A – not a multi -site study  
 
Is the BIDMC the coordinating site ?     Yes   No  
Is the BIDMC PI the lead investigator of the multi -site study?     Yes   No  
 
B10 Dissemination of Research Results  
Participants will be thanked for their time throughout the study.  There is no plan to share the results at the 
conclusion of this trial.   
 
References:  
 
1. Walsh R, Shapiro SL. The meeting of meditative disciplines and Western psychology: a mutually enriching 
dialogue. Am Psychol  2006; 61(3):227 -39. 
2. Kabat -Zinn J. Wherever You Go, There You Are: Mindfulness Meditation In Everyday Life , 1994.  
3. Goyal M, Singh S, Sibinga EM, et al. Meditation programs for  psychological stress and well -being: a 
systematic review and meta -analysis. JAMA Intern Med  2014; 174(3):357 -68. 
4. Ahani A, Wahbeh H, Nezamfar H, et al. Quantitative change of EEG and respiration signals during 
mindfulness meditation. J Neuroeng Rehabil  2014;11:87. 
5. Delmonte MM. Electrocortical activity and related phenomena associated with meditation practice: a literature 
review. Int J Neurosci  1984; 24(3-4):217 -31. 
6. Fell J, Axmacher N, Haupt S. From alpha to gamma: electrophysiological correlates of meditation -related 
states of consciousness. Med Hypotheses  2010; 75(2):218 -24. 
7. Dunn AL, Marcus BH, Kampert JB, et al. Comparison of lifestyle and structured interventions to increase 
physical activity and cardiorespiratory fitness: a randomized trial. JAMA 1999; 281(4):327 -34. 
8. Takahashi T, Murata T, Hamada T, et al. Changes in EEG and autonomic nervous activity during meditation 
and their association with personality traits. Int J Psychophysiol  2005; 55(2):199 -207. 
9. Lagopoulos J, Xu J, Rasmussen I, et al. Increased theta and alpha EEG activity during nondirective 
meditation. J Altern Complement Med  2009; 15(11):1187 -92. 
10. Ahani A, Wahbeh H, Miller M, et al. Change in physiological signals during mindfulness meditation. Int IEEE 
EMBS Conf Neural Eng  2013:1738 -381. 
(CCI) Committee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 8 of 8 
 
Study Description – Part B  
CCI Form:  9-2015 
 PI Revision Date:  2020 -03-03  
 
11. Tang YY, Hölzel BK, Posner MI. The neuroscience of mindfulness meditation. Nat Rev Neurosci  
2015; 16(4):213 -25. 
12. Critchley HD, Wiens S, Rotshtein P, et al. Neural systems supporting interoceptive awareness. Nat Neurosci  
2004; 7(2):189 -95. 
13. Fleming SM, Dolan RJ. The neural basis of metacognitive ability. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci  
2012; 367(1594):1338 -49. 
14. Hernández SE, Suero J, Barros A, et al. Increased Grey Matter Associated with Long -Term Sahaja Yoga 
Meditation: A Voxel -Base d Morphometry Study. PLoS One  2016; 11(3):e0150757.  
15. van Lutterveld R, Houlihan SD, Pal P, et al. Source -space EEG neurofeedback links subjective experience 
with brain activity during effortless awareness meditation. Neuroimage  2017; 151:117-27. 
16. Brewe r JA, Worhunsky PD, Gray JR, et al. Meditation experience is associated with differences in default 
mode network activity and connectivity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A  2011; 108(50):20254 -9. 
17. Mason MF, Norton MI, Van Horn JD, et al. Wandering minds: the def ault network and stimulus -independent 
thought. Science  2007; 315(5810):393 -5. 
18. Isha Kriya. Secondary Isha Kriya. http://www.ishafoundation.org/Ishakriya . 
19. ENOBIO 32. Secondary ENOBIO 32. http://www.neuroelectrics.com/products/enobio/enobio -32/. 
20. Electroencephalogram (EEG). Secondary Electroencephalogram (EEG). 
http://www.hopkinsmedicine.org/healthlibrary/test_procedures/neurological/electroencephalogram_eeg_92,P
07655/ . 
 