COPILOT  Simulation Study Protocol   July 10 , 201 7 
 1  
Protocol  
 
Title:  Code Blue Outcomes & Process Improvement through Leadership 
Optimization using Teleintensivists -Simulation  (COPILOT -Simulation ) 
 
ClinicalTrials.gov  ID: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Study sites : Alta View Medical Center, American Fork Hospital, Heber Valley Medical Center, 
Intermountain Medical Center, LDS Hospital, McKay -Dee Hospital, Park City 
Medical Center, Riverton Hospital, The Orthopedic Specialty Hospital  
 
Principle i nvestigator:  Ithan Pe ltan, MD, MSc  
 
Sponsor:    Intermountain Research and Medical Foundation  
 
 
  
COPILOT  Simulation Study Protocol   July 10 , 201 7 
 2 PROTOCOL  
 
Code Blue Outcomes & Process Improvement through  
Leadership Optimization usin g Teleintensivists -Simulation  
(COPILOT -Simulation)  
 
Principle Investigator: Ithan Peltan, MD, MSc  
 
Purpose of the Study:  Our long -term goal is to improve patient outcomes after in -hospital cardiac arrest 
(IHCA) , an event often referred to as a “Code Blue.” The current project will evaluate the effect of 
telemedical consultation by an in tensiv e care physi cian to assist local IHCA teams.   
 
Research Questions:  Does  remote consultation by experienced intensivists “copilots” improve the 
quality of resuscitation delivered by IHCA teams ? 
 
Study summary: We will conduct a multicenter randomized trial using in -situ cardiac arrest simulations 
(“mock codes”) to test the eff ect of adding a telemedical intensivist “copilot” to IHCA teams on chest 
compression quality, ACLS protocol adherence, team function, and provider experience.  
 
Hypothesis:  Intensivist support of the IHCA team during mock codes improves chest compression qu ality.  
 
Background and Significance: Only 15 -30% of patients who suffer in -hospital cardiac arrest (IHCA) 
survive to hospital discharge.1,2 Factors associated with lower mortality and improved function include 
provision of high -quality, minimally -interrupted chest compressions, prompt administration of 
epinephrine, and swift defibrillation of eli gible arrhythmias.3-6 Unfortunately, resuscitation teams 
provide suboptimal care to 25 -40% of IHCA victims, with significant variation in IHCA outcomes and 
process adherence documented between hospitals.3,7 Resource limitations and less -experienced 
providers may exp lain lower IHCA at small hospitals and on nights and weekends.8,9 Although 
educational and technological interventions ma y improve patient outcomes, the gap between optimal 
and actual resuscitation practice remains large.1,10 Barriers to effective IHCA resuscitation countered by 
effective leadership include response teams’ ad hoc formation and variable structure and member 
expertise.11-13 Explicit leadership training improves process es of care and outcomes for IHCA 
resuscitation, but standard Advanced Cardiac Life Support (ACLS) training provides little instruction non -
technical skills critical for high -functioning IHCA teams.12,14,15 A dedicated, leadership -trained “copilot” 
on cardiac arrest resuscitation teams may improve IHCA outcomes by performing the same functions  — 
parallel analysis, situational awareness augmentation, action checking, protocol verification, and error 
correction — for the resuscitation team leader that an airplane copilot provides the pilot during an in -
flight emergency. Employing telemedical tech nology to involve the “copilot” physician will allow this role 
to be filled by an intensivist physician with particular expertise in care of critical illness and will provide 
long -term cost and resource efficiencies, particularly in smaller hospitals with fewer available physicians.  
 
Research subjects:  We will conduct mock codes at Intermountain Healthcare hospitals, specifically 
Intermountain Medical Center, LDS Hospital, Riverton Hospital, The Orthopedic Specialty Hospital, 
McKay -Dee Hospital, Park City Medical Center, and American Fork Hospital.  
 
• Local IHCA team: Int ermountain Healthcare employees, resident physicians, and affiliated care 
providers who are either designated members of each participating hospital’s IHCA response 
COPILOT  Simulation Study Protocol   July 10 , 201 7 
 3 teams or act as volun tary responders to announced mock codes will be eligible to participate. 
The number of on-site participants for each simulated IHCA event is expected to average 15-25.  
• Telemedical intensivist IHCA copilot: Board -certified  or board -eligible  critical care m edicine 
physicians on the staff of the Intermountain Healthcare Telecritical Care Center will act as IHCA 
team copilot. The total number of e xpected participants is up to 30.  
 
Recruitment:  
• Local IHCA team: IHCA team activation  will employ  the participatin g hospital’s standard  
mechanism. A sign posted  outside the room used for the mock code will indicate that a video -
recor ded simulation is taking place.  After completion of the simulation, participants will receive 
an information sheet about the study.  
• Telemedical intensivist IHCA copilot: Eligible telemedical intensivists will be invited to participate 
by email and in person.  
 
Methods/Procedures:   
• Study design: Randomized, multicenter, simulation -based clinical trial   
• Intervention : Standardized consultation to IHCA  team by  off-site intensivist  via two -way 
audiovisual link using a mobile telemedicine cart  
• Control: Display of silent, pre -recorded, non -interactive videotape of an ICU physician. The on -
site participants will be told that an intensive care physician is observing the mock code.  
• Rando mization: Each  event will be randomly assigned to intervention or control using block 
randomization by hospital.  
• Procedures:  
o All e vent will be randomly pre-assigned to intervention (participation via telemedicine 
link by a remote critical care physician) or control (prerecorded video of telemedicine 
physician displayed on mobile telemedicine cart).  
o A research coordinator will arrange a time for mock code with l ocal hospital clinical 
leadership and Code Blue leadership . The remainder of the IHCA team will n ot be 
informed that the announced event is a simulation prior to team activation.  
o The research coordinator and an experienced simulation technician will set up  
simulation equipment in an unused patient care room on the general medical or surgical 
ward at the hospital , including video recording device and mobile telemedicine cart.  
o Research coordinator will obtain final confirm ation  with the on duty clinical leadership 
that simulation will n ot interfere with patient care.  
o The hospital’s  on duty IHCA resuscitation team will then be activated via the hospital’s 
standard mechanism.  
o Upon arrival to the room, members of the designated IHCA team and other care 
providers will be informed via a posted sign that the event is a videorecorded resea rch 
simulation. They will then begin participate in the simulation  at their discretion . 
o We will adapt existing, tested cardiac arrest simulation scenarios for use in this study.  
While the provided case histories will describe patients of different ages, g enders, and 
presenting complaints, all scenarios will feature cardiac rhythms demanding 
substantively identical resuscitative actions  (Figure 1) .  
o The telemedical link (or a control video) will be activated by the research coordinator 
after the arrival of the team lead or after five minutes have elapsed , whichever occurs 
first. At this time, the coordinator will also provide simple, brief, and scripted “just -in-
COPILOT  Simulation Study Protocol   July 10 , 201 7 
 4 time” training to the mobile telemedicine cart and, for intervention events, the 
telemedical inte nsivist copilot.  
o For mock codes randomized to intervention, critical care  physicians with experience in 
telecritical care who consent to participate in this study will provide standardized 
consultation to the on -site team. 
These IHCA team “copilots” will 
advice and assistance to the on -
site team leader including help 
with ensuring high -quality, 
minimally -interrupted chest 
compressions and prompt 
defibrillation, assisting 
situational awareness, 
encouraging etiologic evaluation, 
and promoting leadership 
beha viors.  
o The event will be terminated when team performs an action that was pre -determined 
for the scenario to result in return of spontaneous circulation. The simulation will be 
terminated no later than 25 minutes after initiation i f team fails to perform this pre-
determined action . Most simulations are expected to last 10 -12 minutes.   
o After simulation termination, participants will complete a brief, anonymo us questionnaire.  
o Local code team leadership and/or the on -site code team leader will lead a debrief of 
the event. As needed, the research coordinator or simulation specialist will facilitate 
discussion of the simulation.  
o In progress mock code simulations  may be terminated by on -duty hospital clinical 
leadership or physician code team members if cli nical care of patients requires.  
• Mock codes terminated in progress due to competing clinical priorities prior to simulated return 
of spontaneous circulation wi ll be excluded from the final analysis. If this occurs, the simulation 
event may  be rescheduled at the same hospital for a later date, with the rescheduled mock code 
assigned to the same study arm as the aborted mock code.  
• If systematic problems interfering with study implementation, data collection, or interpretation 
are identified after study initiation , the study may be halted temporarily while the systematic 
issues are addressed. Affected events where data is invalid will be considered part o f a roll -in 
phase of the study and will be excluded from data analysis. For each assigned to roll -in event 
status , we will schedule a make-up event  at the affected  hospital . Make -up events will be 
assigned to the same study arm as the roll-in event being re placed  and will be interposed  
randomly with other events at the affected study site.  
• Data collection: A research coordinator will be present at all mock codes. Besides study 
implementation duties,  the coordinator will record team composition and function, processes of 
care, and leadership behaviors. Additional data will be obtained from (1) the simulator device, (2) 
the defibrillator device, (3) videotaped recording obtained via the mobile telemedicine carts, and 
(4) a brief questionnaire completed by IHCA team members upon completion of the mock code.  
• The primary outcome for the study will be the fraction of time between activation of the 
telemedicine cart and beginning of the pulse check following the subsequent second full cycle of 
CPR that the IHCA team does not deliver chest compressions ( “no-flow fraction”). Secondary 
outcomes are shown in Table 1.  
 On-site IHCA team members will complete a brief questionnaire (attached) to measure 
the subjective experience of individual and team f unction and — when applicable, 
Figure 1.  Unified structure for mock code scenarios. (ROSC: 
return of spontaneous circulation.)  
COPILOT  Simulation Study Protocol   July 10 , 201 7 
 5 opinions about the simulated mock code. Some on -site study participants will also 
complete a short -form version of the State -Trait Anxiety Index (STAI)16 validated for 
measurement of state anxiety (i.e. anxiety/stress at the time the questions are 
answered).17 Some participants may complete the survey online using REDCap, a secure 
web application for building and managing online surveys and databases.18 
o Off-site IHCA team copilots will complete a brief questionnaire (attached) . Most 
participants may complete the survey online using a version of this questionna ire 
implemented in REDCap.18 Opinions about the procedure will also be elicited through 
post -study qualitative interviews.  
 ACLS protocol adherence and violations using a checklist adapted from previously 
validated research tools.8,40  
o Leadership behaviors will be evaluated according to a previously published taxonomy.19  
o Overall function of the IHCA team will also be evaluated using a previously validated 
instrument.20,21 
• Number of simulation events and power analysis : Assuming a baseline no -flow percentage of 
0.285,10,22 a best -case no -flow fraction of 0.08 (protocol guidelines advise a single 10 second 
pause in chest compressions for a pulse and cardiac rhythm check every two minutes), and 
equipment malfunction or simulation termination precluding event analysis for 15% of mock 
codes, we will require 76 completed mock codes (38 in each arm) to achieve 80% power to 
detect a 31% relative decrease (9% absolute decrease) in the mean no -flow fraction.   
• Study duratio n: The 76 planned mock codes  will be divided between the 7 -8 participating 
insti tutions. We expect to complete 2 -6 simulations at eac h participating hospital every 2 
months. Accounting for scheduling conflicts and expected intermissions during implementation 
of a new electronic medical record at some study hospitals, we expect study c ompletion to 
require 18-24 months (and potentially up to 48 months) after simulations begin.  
 
Informed consent (“copilot” physicians) : Members of the research team will approach the eligible 
subjects by email (see attached) or in person  at their workplace. Interested subjects will be consented 
by research team member(s) according to the Intermountain Healthcare Informed Consent Policy.  
Table 1:  Descriptive & outcome measures for randomized trial of telemedical intensivist IHCA team copilot  
Variable  Data source  
Primary  Secondary  
Response team characteristics    
Response team structure  In-person observation  Video recording  
Past experience of code team members  Questionnaire   
   
Primary outcome    
Fraction of pulseless time with no chest compressions*  Simulator mannequin   
   
Secondary outcomes    
Time from onset of shockable rhythm to defibrillation  Simulator mannequin  Defibrillator  
Fraction of chest compressions in target depth range 23* Simulator mannequin  Defibrillator  
Fraction  of chest compressions with incomplete release*  Simulator mannequin  Defibrillator  
Fraction of 30s segments with 8 -12 breaths/minute23* Simulator mannequin  Defib rillator  
Fraction chest compressions at target rate (100 -120/minute)*  Simulator mannequin  Defibrillator  
Time to first dose of epinephrine  In-person observation  Video recording  
ACLS protocol adherence fraction (using validated instrument)
24 In-person observation  Video recording  
COPILOT  Simulation Study Protocol   July 10 , 201 7 
 6  
Data analysis:  
The primary analysis will include completed simulation where CPR quality data is complete and 
non-corruprted. Simulations for which equipment malfunction preclude  measurement of compression 
quality will be  excluded from analysis.  Simulation events where malfunction of audiovisual recording 
equipment or major deviations during simulatio n implementation  prevent accurate evaluation of 
resuscitation team performance and protocol will be excluded from analyses addressing these topics. 
Prematurely terminated simulation events and s imulation events classified as  run-in events  will be 
excluded from all analyses.  
Between -group comparisons for continuous variables will employ two -sided t -tests with 
unequal variance. Comparisons for binary or categorical variables will employ Fisher’s exact test or chi -
squared test as appropriate. Given clustering within simulations, between -group comparisons of of 
survey responses will employ multilevel logistic (for binary variables) or linear (for continuous variables) 
regression with a random effect for simulation event. Comparisons of Likert -style variables wil l use the 
rank -sum method described Datta/Satten.28 
 
Sample size/power analysis: Assuming a baseline no -flow percentage of 0.285, a best -case no -flow 
fraction of 0.08 (protocol guidelines advise a single 10 second pause in chest compressions for a pulse 
and cardiac rhythm check every two minutes), and equipm ent malfunction or simulation termination 
precluding event analysis for 15% of mock codes, we will require 76 mock codes (38 in each arm) to 
achieve 80% power to detect a 31% relative decrease (9% absolute decrease) in the mean no -flow 
fraction. We therefo re expect to enroll 1900 on -site IHCA team members as study subjects (although 
some participants may participate in >1 mock code).  
 
Waiver of Informed Consent  and HIPAA Authorization  (for on -site IHCA team members) : 
We are requesting a waiver of informed c onsent and HIPAA authorization for on-site IHCA team 
study  participants  of this study . Participation in this study is similar to standard training for IHCA team 
members and involves no more than minimal risk to the subject. Individuals will be notified by means of 
a prominently displayed poster(s) that a simulation -based research project with video recording is in 
progress. Such notification will address individuals reasonable expectation of privacy. We will not use 
video recordings for any purposes except research, and digital video recordings will be stored securely 
and then transferred to a secure, approved server of the Intermountain network. We will not 
systematically collect individually identifiable information. The research therefore involves no more  than 
minimal risk to the subjects; the only potential risk is a breach of confidentiality, and protections are in 
place to safeguard the data. Because risk is minimal, the waiver of consent and authorization will not 
adversely affect the rights or welfare of subjects.  ACLS protocol errors of commission, timing and omission
24 In-person observation  Video recording  
Team Emergency Assessment Measure (TEAM) score20 In-person observation  Video recording  
Number and types of input by telemedical intensivi st copilot  Video recording  In-person observation  
On-site provider experience during mock -code  Questionnaire   
On-site provider satisfaction with telemedical intensivist copilot  Questionnaire   
On-site provider short -form State -Trait Anxiety Inventory score 
16,17 Questionnaire   
Off-site copilot experience during mock code  Questionnaire  Qualitative interview  
Audiovisual connection or equipment problems (logistic or technical)  In-person observation  Questionnaire  
* Outcome measured over (1) primary analysis window  and from  (2) activation of telemedicine cart; (3) “Code Blue” 
activation; and (4) from arrival of first resuscitation team member until simulation termination  
COPILOT  Simulation Study Protocol   July 10 , 201 7 
 7 The research could not practicably be carried out without the waiver of consent and 
authorization. Most hospitals have dozens or even hundreds of staff eli gible to participate formally in 
IHCA responses. We would estimate that more than  2000 individuals are eligible for study participation. 
Team membership is also flexible, and the list of eligible IHCA team members for each hospital is 
expected to vary sign ificantly over the 24 months of this study  as staffing changes . Finally, f or hospitals 
announcing IHCA team activations via a public address system, additional ad hoc participation by other 
staff is to be expected. For all of these reasons, we are unable t o identify and consent in advance 
individuals who will participate in simulations. Moreover, including on IHCA simulation teams only those 
subjects for whom advance consent could be obtained would compromise the scientific validity of the 
study and preclud e useful conclusions, as a large proportion of the data would be eliminated if obtaining 
consent were a requirement. Informed consent would markedly increase the response burden for 
participants, thereby reducing response rates and compromising study valid ity.  
Similarly, o btaining consent after IHCA team activation  and individual’s arrival to the simulation 
site but prior to an individual beginning participation in the s imulation is also not feasible. T his would 
preclude the necessarily rapid formation of a IHCA response team and abolish the simulation’s fidelity to 
actual cardiac arrest event, introducing  significant bias into the results and compromising the scientific 
validity of the data obtained.  
On-site p articipants in code simulations will be provided an information sheet about study 
participation at the time the simulation concludes.  
Safeguards will be in place to protect subject identity. The data will be protected from improper 
use or disclosure.  The study data will be kept on encrypted, pa ssword -protected computers.  The data 
will only be accessible to members of the research team, and all members of the research team with 
access to identifiable data have completed Human Subjects Protections training and understand the 
importance of protecti ng subject privacy and confidentiality.  These computers are Intermountain 
Healthcare devices, which are routinely used for storage of patient data and research data including 
subject identifiers. No individual subject data will be presented in any presenta tion, publication,  or 
report related to this research. Data will be presented only in aggregate or as results of statistical 
analyses and will not include any individual -level data that could be traced to a particular subject.  
 
Risks:  Both the off -site co pilot and on -site study participants may find participation in simulated IHCA 
events stressful. This expected stress related to the simulation is similar to the stress participants would 
experience during performance of their routine job duties  or routine training related to these duties . 
On-site participants will have an opportunity to discuss their experience during the simulation during 
post -event debriefings.  
 
The only other risk involved with this study is a potential breach of confidentiality.  There is a minimal 
risk of a pri vacy and confidentiality breach. H owever, this risk is low given the secured databases and 
computers that will be employed for data storage.  
 
Benefits:  It is unlikely that there will be any direct benefit to  you as a result of participating in this study. 
Participation in simulated IHCA events may improve the skills used by both on -site IHCA team members 
and the telemedical copilot when managing actual patients suffering medical emergencies . Improved 
understa nding of cardiac arrest resuscitation could  improve outcomes for all patients suffering IHCA.  
 
Compensation:  
▪ On-site IHCA team member :  A small snack/drink or similar token of appreciation, valued at $1 -2 
each, will be available for members of on -site code team after simulation completes  
▪ Telemedical physician copilot: Fleece jacket, valued at approximately $ 35-50 
COPILOT  Simulation Study Protocol   July 10 , 201 7 
 8  
Data Collection:  A research coordinator will be present at all mock codes. Besides study implementation 
duties, the coordinator will record team composition and function, processes of care, and leadership 
behaviors. Additional data will be obtained from (1) the simulator d evice, (2) the defibrillator device, (3) 
review of video  recording  of simulation event , (4) a brief questionnaire completed by IHCA team 
members upon completion of the mock code, and (5) a brief questionnaire completed by the 
telemedical physician copilot.  
 
Data elements for collection  
• Telemedical critical  care physician (“copilot”)  
▪ Name  
▪ DOB  
▪ Email  
▪ Telephone  
▪ Race/ethnicity  
▪ Year completed medical school  
▪ Year completed post -graduate training  
▪ Date of first experience with telecritical care  
▪ Telecritical care shifts per year  
▪ Sex 
▪ Age 
▪ Credential type (MD vs DO)  
▪ Experience with in -person cardiac arrest events led  
▪ Date/time of each study simulation participation  
▪ Opinions about impact, utility, and feasibility of “copilot” interaction  (survey)  
▪ Opin ions about impact, utility, and feasibility of “copilot” interaction (post -participation 
qualitative interview)  
• On-site code team participants  
o Event ID  
o Profession  
o Specialty (if physician)  
o Role on IHCA  team  
o IHCA  team participation frequency  
o Experience participating in mock code  
o Opinions about code team function during mock code  
o Opinions about impact, utility, and feasibility of “copilot” interaction  
 Short form State -Trait Anxiety Inventory16,17 
• Simulation events  (see a lso Table 1)  
o Location  
o Date/time  of event  
o Participant numbers and professions  
o Simulation duration  
o Date/time of key  response parameters  (i.e. team leader arrival)  
o Date/time of key resuscitation events  
o CPR qualit y 
o Interventions by IHCA team  
o ACLS protocol adhe rence  
o ACLS protocol deviation  & errors  
COPILOT  Simulation Study Protocol   July 10 , 201 7 
 9 o Etiology identification  
o IHCA team function  
o Debriefing (Y/N) and themes  
o Telemedicine interface function  
o Leadership behaviors by IHCA team leader  
 
Privacy, Confidentiality and Data Management  
Names , date of birth, email addresses, and telephone numbers  of participating telemedicine 
critical care physicians will be maintained in a protected database on a protected computer and within 
the secure REDCap interface until completion  of data collection and a nalysis . Individual identifiers will 
subsequently be deleted . We will not collect any individual identifiers for on -site IHCA team members. 
Paper questionnaires will be maintained securely in a locked office. All electronic subject and simulation 
data, inc luding digital video recordings, will be kept in a protected database on a protected computer or 
server after transfer from collection devices. Video recordings will be viewed only be research staff and 
will be destroyed after completion of data collection  and analysis.  Information about physician and mid -
level  remuneration (name/remuneration value) will be p rovided to Intermountain compliance officials 
to comply with requirements for imposed by the federal Stark Law requiring tracking of  non-montary  
compensation given to clinicians.  
To comply with scientific journal data sharing requirements, deidentified and anonymized data 
from the proposed study may be shared with other researchers upon request. Deidentified and 
anonymized data may also be deposit ed to one or more research data repositories such as the Harvard 
Dataverse Network, the Dryad Digital Repository, or other data repository recommended by the specific 
journal in which study results are being published.  
 
Funding:  This study is funded by a g rant from the  Intermountain  Research and Medical Foundation.  
 
Appendix :  
• Post -simulation questionnaire for on -site IHCA team members  
• Post -simulation questionnaire for telecritical care physicians  
• State -Trait Anxiety inventory short form  
• Telemedical critical care physician recruitment emails  
• Informed consent for telemedical critical care physician  
• Poster for display outside simulation room  
• Information sheet for distribution to on -site IHCA team members after each simulation  
 
Bibliography  
1. Girotra S, Nallamothu BK, Spertus JA, Li Y, Krumholz HM, Chan PS, et al. Trends in survival after 
in-hospital cardiac arrest. New Engl J Med  2012;367:1912 –20.  
2. Ehlenbach WJ, Barnato AE, Curtis JR, Kreuter W, Koepsell TD, Deyo RA, et al. Epidemiologic study 
of in -hospital cardiopulmonary resuscitation in the elderly. New Engl J Med  2009;361:22 –31.  
3. Ornato JP, Peberdy MA, Reid RD, Feeser VR, Dhindsa HS, N RCPR Investigators. Impact of 
resuscitation system errors on survival from in -hospital cardiac arrest. Resuscitation  2012;83:63 –
9.  
4. McEvoy MD, Field LC, Moore HE, Smalley JC, Nietert PJ, Scarbrough SH. The effect of adherence 
to ACLS protocols on surviv al of event in the setting of in -hospital cardiac arrest. Resuscitation  
2014;85:82 –7.  
5. Donnino MW, Salciccioli JD, Howell MD, Cocchi MN, Giberson B, Berg K, et al. Time to 
COPILOT  Simulation Study Protocol   July 10 , 201 7 
 10 administration of epinephrine and outcome after in -hospital cardiac arrest with n on-shockable 
rhythms. BMJ  2014;348:g3028.  
6. Abella BS, Sandbo N, Vassilatos P, Alvarado JP, O'Hearn N, Wigder HN, et al. Chest compression 
rates during cardiopulmonary resuscitation are suboptimal: a prospective study during in -
hospital cardiac arrest. Circulation  2005;111:428 –34.  
7. Chan PS, Nichol G, Krumholz HM, Spertus JA, Nallamothu BK, American Heart Association 
National Registry of Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (NRCPR) Investigators. Hospital variation in 
time to defibrillation after in -hospital cardiac arrest. Arch Intern Med  2009;169:1265 –73.  
8. Peberdy MA, Ornato JP, Larkin GL, Braithwaite RS, Kashner TM, Carey SM, et al. Survival from in -
hospital cardiac arrest during nights and weekends. JAMA  2008;299:785 –92.  
9. Institute of Medicine Committee on the Treatment of Cardiac A rrest. Strategies to Improve 
Cardiac Arrest Survival: a Time to Act . Graham R, McCoy MA, Schultz AM, eds. Washington, D.C.: 
National Academies Press; 2015.  
10. Couper K, Kimani PK, Abella BS, Chilwan M, Cooke MW, Davies RP, et al. The system -wide effect 
of real -time audiovisual feedback and postevent debriefing for in -hospital cardiac arrest: the 
cardiopulmonary resuscitation quality improvement initiative. Crit Care Med  2015;43:2321 –31.  
11. Cooper S, Wakelam A. Leadership of resuscitation teams: “Lightho use Leadership.” Resuscitation  
1999;42:27 –45.  
12. Fernandez Castelao E, Russo SG, Cremer S, Strack M, Kaminski L, Eich C, et al. Positive impact of 
crisis resource management training on no -flow time and team member verbalisations during 
simulated cardiop ulmonary resuscitation: a randomised controlled trial. Resuscitation  
2011;82:1338 –43.  
13. Hoff WS, Reilly PM, Rotondo MF, DiGiacomo JC, Schwab CW. The importance of the command -
physician in trauma resuscitation. J Trauma  1997;43:772 –7.  
14. Hunziker S, Jo hansson AC, Tschan F, Semmer NK, Rock L, Howell MD, et al. Teamwork and 
leadership in cardiopulmonary resuscitation. J Am Coll Cardiol  2011;57:2381 –8.  
15. Hunziker S, Bühlmann C, Tschan F, Balestra G, Legeret C, Schumacher C, et al. Brief leadership 
instr uctions improve cardiopulmonary resuscitation in a high -fidelity simulation: a randomized 
controlled trial. Crit Care Med  2010;38:1086 –91.  
16. Spielberger CD, Gorsuch RL, Lushene R, Vagg PR, Jacobs GA. Manual for the State -Trait Anxiety 
Inventory . Palo Al to, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press; 1983.  
17. Marteau TM, Bekker H. The development of a six -item short -form of the state scale of the 
Spielberger State -Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI). Br J Clin Psychol  1992;31 ( Pt 3):301 –6.  
18. Harris PA, Taylor R,  Thielke R, Payne J, Gonzalez N, Conde JG. Research electronic data capture 
(REDCap) --a metadata -driven methodology and workflow process for providing translational 
research informatics support. J Biomed Inform  2009;42:377 –81.  
19. Fernandez Castelao E, Ru sso SG, Riethmüller M, Boos M. Effects of team coordination during 
cardiopulmonary resuscitation: a systematic review of the literature. J Crit Care  2013;28:504 –21.  
20. Cooper S, Cant R, Porter J, Sellick K, Somers G, Kinsman L, et al. Rating medical emer gency 
teamwork performance: development of the Team Emergency Assessment Measure (TEAM). 
Resuscitation  2010;81:446 –52.  
21. McKay A, Walker ST, Brett SJ, Vincent C, Sevdalis N. Team performance in resuscitation teams: 
comparison and critique of two recently developed scoring tools. Resuscitation  2012;83:1478 –83.  
22. Abella BS, Alvarado JP, Myklebust H, Edelson DP, Barry A, O'H earn N, et al. Quality of 
cardiopulmonary resuscitation during in -hospital cardiac arrest. JAMA  2005;293:305 –10.  
23. Link MS, Berkow LC, Kudenchuk PJ, Halperin HR, Hess EP, Moitra VK, et al. Adult Advanced 
Cardiovascular Life Support: 2015 American Heart Association Guidelines Update for 
Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation and Emergency Cardiovascular Care. Circulation  2015.:S444 –64.  
COPILOT  Simulation Study Protocol   July 10 , 201 7 
 11 24. McEvoy MD, Smalley JC, Nietert PJ, Field LC, Furse CM, Blenko JW, et al. Validation of a detailed 
scoring checklist for use d uring advanced cardiac life support certification. Simul Healthc  
2012;7:222 –35.  
 