Evaluating a Messaging Campaign in the United States  
 
Hypotheses and Analytic Plan  
 
 
NCT #[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Version Date: 9/25/2020  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hypotheses  
 
The overarching goal of this study is to evaluate the effectiveness of environmental and health 
messages in the “Meatless Monday” campaign in discouraging red meat consumption . We have 
the following prediction:  
 
Environmental and health messages about red meat will be more effective than control 
messages at discouraging participants from wanting to consume red meat  (measure d with 
perceived message effectiveness (PME)  scale) . Additionally, h ealth messages will be more 
effective than environmental messages at discouraging participants from wanting to consume 
red meat.  
 
We will also test the following predictions about our secondary outcomes: Environmental 
messages and health messages  (vs. control)  – and health messages (vs. environment ) – will 
lead to increase s in: reported attention, negative affect message reactions, cognitive 
elaboration, likelihood of discuss ing the message s with others , and intention to reduce red meat 
consumption in the next 30 days.   
 
Analyses  
 
We will use a two -sided critical alpha of 0.05 to conduct all statistical tests. All confidence 
intervals presented will be 95% and two -sided. For our main outcome, PME, we will take the 
average of the 4 items for each product type if alpha>.70.  We will use complete case analysis to 
handle any missing data.      
 
We will descriptively report unadjusted means and percentages for the primary and secondary 
outcomes. For significance testing of our hypotheses, we will run logistic regression  for 
dichotomous variables and linear regression for continuous variables.  We will use the margins 
command to examine all pairwise comparisons pe r the hypotheses above.  
 
Exploratory analys is will examine whether the frequency of consumption of red meat moderate s 
the effect of environmental or health messages  on PME . To test whether th is characteristic 
moderate s the effect of environmental  or health  messages  on PME , we will fit a linear  
regression  model , with trial arm, the moderator, and their interaction as predictors. W e will 
probe significant interactions by calculating the marginal effect of environmental and health 
messag es on the outcome  at different leve ls of the moderating variable.  We will use a joint 
chunk test to test for the statistical significance of the interaction term.  Moderation analyses will 
use a Bonferroni -corrected p-value.  
 
 