COVER PAGE  
Pre-op Cognitive Behavior Therapy to Decrease Chronic Post -Surgical Pain in TKA  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
November 2 3, 202 0 
 
 
1 
 PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR S: Martin D. Cheatle, PhD  & Peggy Compton, RN, PhD, FAAN  
 
PROTOCOL TITLE : Pre-op CBT to Reduce the Risk for Development of Chronic Post -surgical Pain in Patients undergoing 
Total Knee Arthroplasty   
 
INTRODUCTION AND PURPOSE :  
A signif icant number of patients develop chronic post -surgical pain following knee joint replacement surgery, and the risk 
factors for this problematic outcome have been identified.  Proposed is the development and preliminary efficacy testing of a  
novel computer -assisted cognitive behavioral intervention  integrating opioid taper  delivered in the four weeks prior to surgery 
to address these risk factors, w ith the expectation that both the severity of post -operative pain and the subsequent incidence 
of chro nic post -surgical pain will be reduced. In that chronic post -surgical pain  brings with it diminished functionality and 
quality of life, ongoing opioid use, and direct patient costs,  it is it is critical that interventions aimed at mitigating its 
developmen t are imp lemented and evaluated in the clinical setting .   
 
OBJECTIVES : 
In a sample of adult men and women with chronic pain, on opioid therapy and undergoing a planned TKA, the objectives  of 
this randomized clinical trial  are to:  
1. Add a motivational interviewing co mponent to a validated computer -assisted CBT int ervention for chronic pain 
(PAINTrainer) to encourage opioid tapering in the 4 weeks prior to surgery.  
2. Describe the efficacy of the 4 -week targeted pre -operative CBT intervention in 75 TKA patients to decrea se preoperative 
chronic pain severity, preoperat ive opioid consumption, and symptoms of depression, anxiety and pain catastrophizing 
prior to surgery  in comparison to 75 TKA patients randomized to treatment -as-usual .    
3. Describe the effects of a 4 -week tar geted pre -operative CBT intervention in 75 TKA p atients on 72hr post -operative pain 
severity, and 3 - and 6 -month rates of CPSP  in comparison to 75 TKA patients randomized to treatment -as-usual .    
 
BACKGROUND : 
Knee  Joint Replacement  and Chronic Post -surgic al Pain  
Total k nee arthroplasty (TKA) is among the most common surgical procedures performed in the US1,2, and as the population 
ages and face age -related joint deterioration, will only increase in frequency.3,4 Although in the majority of cases, patient -
centered outcomes (pain, function and quality of life) are improved following this procedure, a significant number  of patients 
develop chronic post -surgical pain (CPSP), which is often  rated as severe , and includ es treatment -resistant neuropathic 
component s.5 The International Association for the Study of Pain defines CPS P as pain that develops or increases in 
intensi ty after a surgical procedure, persists beyond the tissue healing process (> 3months), and is localized to the surgical 
field or innervation t erritory of nerve located in surgical field .24 Rates of CPSP are alarmingly high following TKA, with 
Petersen and colleagues  6,7 reporting  that between 44% to 53% patients develop CPSP ,15% to 19% of whom rate their pain  
as severe. Clearly, the development of CPSP following TKA is a significant adverse outcome, which brings with it decreased 
quality of life, diminished functionality, disability, and perhaps most concerning in the era of the opioid crisis, long-term opioid 
use.8,12 Further, CPSP is associate d with notable economic burden, with rec ent analysis suggesting almost $30,000 in annual 
adjusted  indirect costs to patients per year , an amount directly related to the severity of CPSP pain.13    
Preoperative Predictors of Chronic Post -surgical Pain  
The et iology of CPSP has been de scribed  as multifactorial,  and attributed to the inevitable nerve damage (both directly to 
nerve and to innervated tissues) and the concomitant release of inflammatory mediators which accompan y the surgical 
procedure. The no cicept ive “afferent barrage ” associated wit h the incision and tissue manipulation result in both central 
sensitization of nociceptive systems and centralization of pain in brain systems15,18,2 5, theorized to lay the foundation for pain 
chronification . However, n ot all patients undergoing surgery will develop CPSP ; predictors include factors in cognitive -
affective, sociodemographic, genetic, and environmental  domains.10,15 Most consistently identified as preoperative risk factors 
for the development of CPSP are , (1) the presence of pain in the body  part to be operated on or elsewhere9,14,16, (2) chronic 
opioid use10,11,15,18,2 6, and (3) symptoms of psychological distress including depression, anxiety, or pain catastrophizing .9,14,16 
In fact, predictive evaluation s show that the presence of preoperative pain increases the odds of developing 6 -month CPSP 
2.8 to 4.3 fold, and preoperative  distress increases the odds by 3.4 .16 Acknowledging the role preoperative opioid use plays 
in the development of CPSP, clinical expe rts are calling for preoperative opioid tapering as an approach to improve post -
operative pain outcomes.27 
 
 
2 
 In addition to these  preoperative risk factors, the severity of post -operative pain has been identified as an independent 
predictor of the developme nt of CPSP.9 Argument s have  been  made for each of the identified pr e-operative risk factors 
amplifying post -operative pain severity , in that pre -existing pain 
brings with it inflammatory and sensitization elements, and 
antecedent distress results in the pa tient less able to cope with 
discomfort. Perhaps most compelling is  the role long-term opioid 
use plays in post -operative pain severity; related to the putative 
effects of opioid -induced hyperalgesia  (OIH) ,28,29 the patient arrives 
to the surgical setting with opioid -derived increased sensitivity to 
pain, which becomes evident during the post -operative pain 
experience.  Figure 1 explicates the relationships among these risk 
factors and the development of CPSP.  
Cogn itive-Behavioral Therapy for Chronic Pain  
A mainstay of multi -modal treatment for chronic  pain is cognitive -
behavioral therapy  (CBT) . CBT  is a structured  psychosocial 
intervention that aims to change maladaptive thoughts , behaviors  
and beliefs about pain and disability, improve emotional responses 
to these, and cultivate  coping and adjustment strategi es to manage distress and discomfort.30,31 Multiple integrative and 
systematic reviews support the efficacy of CBT -based interventions to decrease chronic pain severity, improve physical 
function and de crease problematic thought patterns, including pain ca tastrophizing and fear avoidance beliefs.32,33,35 -38 More 
recently, the efficacy of CBT delivered in online  platforms has been established  and demonstrated to be  comparable to 
outcomes with in -person de livery32,34,40, greatly expanding the number of patients with chronic pain who benefit from th e 
intervention. Notably, across these reviews, the quality of studies has been graded as adequate33,36  to high ,37,38  with the low 
risk for bias across the majorit y of bias source s,34,35,38   and no evidence for publication bias when assessed .36,38 A particularly 
promising internet-based CBT pain program  for the population of inter est, PAINTrainer41, demonstrated improve d pain, 
function, coping and global health  in patients with chronic knee arthritic pain in comparison to an internet education control, 
with benefits persisting for up to 52 weeks .42,43   
Cognitive -Behavioral Therapy for the Preoperative Setting  
As described above, internet -based CBT has proved effectiv e for patients suffering lower joint chronic pain, however it has 
been primarily delivered in post -operative or primary care setting s, not preoperatively to improve surgical pain outcomes.  
Evidence from bariatric surgery populations suggest that benefits a ssociated with preoperative CBT include decreased 
problematic eating behaviors and affective distress following surgery  (pain outcomes  not examined ).44,45 Much of the work in 
preoperative interventions for TKA focus on physical rehabilitation,46 as opposed  to targeting chronic pain symptoms, opioid 
therapy and distress, which may explain  findings of only  slight and short -term improve ments  in early postoperat ive pain and 
function .47  Only two reports testing CBT -based interventions prior to TKA could be foun d in the literature  (one feasibility 
trial48 and one randomized clinical trial21), and both focused only on managing symptoms of distress (depression, anxiety, 
catastrophizing) ; neither considered the roles of preoperative pain, opioid consumption or post-operative pain severity in 
predicting longer term outcomes  (pain, long -term opioid use, functionality) . 
 
CHARACTERISTICS OF THE STUDY POPULATION : 
 
1. Target Po pulation and Accrual : 
A total of 150 male and female chronic  pain patients on opioid therapy seek ing total knee arthroscopy (TKA) at the Penn  
Presbyterian Medical Center  will be included in the s tudy sample , half of whom will be randomly assigned to receive the 
targeted computer -assisted CBT intervention  beginning 4 weeks prior to their planned TKA su rgery; as the control condition, 
the others will receive treatment -as-usual , consisting of a mandatory four -hour educational session . 
A power analysis was conducted for the post -operative pain outcomes ; being a novel intervention, opioid taper outcomes 
were not considered. Estimated group means, variances, and effect -size were d rawn  from the literature.41,42 The sample size 
estimate was derived for the primary outcome variable, chronic pain severity, using an expected baseline mean of 4.82 
(Effect size: 0.3 3). Based on estimates obtained, a sample size of 75 participants provides 80%  power to detect a pre -post 
improvement in pain severity (14.5%), depression (21.3%), anxiety (24.3%), and catastrophizing (29.5%), statistically 
significant at alpha of 0.05. Be ing a novel intervention, the analysis for  chronic p ost-surgical pain  will be considered 
explorator y and used to obtain effect size estimates. We anticipate a low attrition rate (10%)  and will over -recruit 16 additional 
participants (total 83 subjec ts per group ) to retain adequate power.  
 
 
2. Key Inclusion Criteria : Opioid 
Use Pain 
Distress  Post-op Pain 
Severity  Chronic 
post-surgical 
pain 
Pre-operative  Post-operative  
Figure 1. Predictive factors of CPSP following TKA  
 
 
3 
 1. Males and females, age > 21 years  
2. Chronic non -malignant pain of at least 3 months duration  
3. Morphine equivalent daily dose (MEDD) > 50 milligrams for at least 3 months  
4. Able to en roll at least 4 weeks prior to planned surgery  
5. Able to speak, read and comprehend in English at the 6th grade or higher proficiency  
Participants will be selected so as to represent the gender, ethnicity, and age of the patient population of 
individuals seeking TKA in grea ter Philadelphia area, thus the sample is expected to be 50% women, 55% white, 
35% African -American, 6 -8% Latino, and 2 -4% other or multiracial, and on average 67 years of age.  No 
restrictions on gender or ethnicity will be applied. Because total knee arthroplasty surgery is uncommon in 
children, individuals under the age of 21 will not be included in this proposed study.  
 
3.Key Exclusion Criteria : 
1. Pain of malignant origin  
2. Current or past history of opioid use disorder (including those on medication -assis ted therapy)  
3. Revision of TKA   
4. Comorbid CNS disease such as dementia, HIV, psychosis, poorly controlled bipolar disorder or any 
condit ion interfering with informed consent   
Pain of malignant  origin  is likely  to worsen with disease p rogression  over time , thus the efficacy of the intervention  
on pain outcomes would be limited.  Similarly, opioid use in patients  with opioid  use disorder is  motivated by 
factors  other than pain, thus opioid  use outcomes would be spurious if these patients  were included in the 
analysis. Finally, surgical outcomes for patients  undergoin g a revision of their TKA have poorer pain and 
functional  outcomes, in troducing known variance  to the efficacy of the intervention ; excluding them from the 
sample  preserves homogenei ty as required for a small  pilot study.   
 
4. Subject Recruitment and Screening : 
Participants will be recruited from those preparing to undergo total knee arthroplasty (TKA)  surgery  at the large 
and nationally -renowned Participants will be recruited from those treated at the  large and nationally -renowned 
Department of Orthopedic Surgery at the Penn Presbyterian Medical Center.  The Center performs approximately 
1100 major TKAs per year with an estimated 20 -30% of patients who have been taking opioids regularly for at 
least 3 months for the treatment of a chronic nonmalignant pain condition.  
The EHR of all patients scheduled for TKA at least 5 weeks in  the future will be examined to identify those 
meeting inclusion criteria. Eligibility will be reviewed by Co -I Elkassabany; tho se eligible will be contacted by the 
study coordinator to inform them about the study. Those who express interest will be schedu led for a screening 
visit during which informed consent will be obtained in a Center private room . 
If a patient assigned to standard treatment requests the enhanced treatment, he or she will  be removed from the 
study . 
5. Early Withdrawal of Subje cts: 
Subject s may be withdrawn from the study prior the expected completion of the projec t if there ar e concerns 
about  the safety of the subject, failure of subject to return for visits, failure to locate the subject and if subjects 
withdraw their consent.  Concerns a bout safety include feelings of extreme anxiety or depression  which will be 
evaluated by co -PI Cheatle.  
Subjects are also informed via the in formed consent  process that they are free to leave the study at any  time, and 
that w ithdrawal will not interfere with their  future care.   
 
6. Vulnerable Populations :  
Children, pregnant women, fetuses, neonates, or prisoners are not included in this research study.  
 
7. Populations vulnerable to  undue influence or coercion : 
The pop ulation fro m which the sam ple will be recruited  are not vulnerable to coercion or undue influe nce.  
 
 
 
4 
  
STUDY DESIGN : 
A randomized clinical trial is proposed to evaluate the efficacy of the novel computer -assisted preoperative 
CBT/opioid sparing  intervention to affect acute and chro nic post -operative pain outcomes. Specifically, 150 male 
and female patients meeting study inclusion criteria and preparing to undergo  TKA at the Penn Presbyterian 
Medical Center will be randomized to either r eceive the computer -assisted preoperative CBT i ntervention  (n=75) 
or treatment -as-usual  (control, n=75) . The effectiveness of the intervention to address the preoperative risk 
facto rs for CPSP will be evaluated by comparing pain severity, opioid use, symptoms of depression, anxiety  and 
pain catastrophi zing before and following the 4 -week pre-surgical period and compared with in and across 
subjects . Post-operative pain severity will be abstracted from the electronic health record (EHR)  and compared to 
post-operative pain severity ratings between the inter vention and control groups . Similarly, group differences will 
be inspected for rates of CPSP at 3 - and 6 -months following surgery . In addition, due to the novelty of the 
CBT/opioid sparing  intervention, brief (15 -20min) qualitative interviews will be condu cted with the participants  who 
received it  during the study visit immediately prior to surgery , to assess patient utilization , and satisfaction  with the 
program in general, and the opioid taper component specifically ; adherence is tracked by the PAINTraine r. 
Participants will be pr ompted to comment on the perceived ease of use, burden, helpfulness and quality of the 
CBT intervention.  
A randomized clinical trial was de signed beca use it  provides the highest level of evidence and lowest risk for bias. 
The meth ods employed are predominantly quantit ative, although a qualitative  survey approach is used to assess 
subject satisfaction with the interventio n. The project is designed, staffed and budgeted to be completed in 24 
months. In consultation with consultant s, Dr. Cheatle  will train the study coordinator coach on delivering the opioid 
taper  intervention during months 1 -3, during which time stu dy start -up activities will take place . Enrollment will 
begin month 3;  at a rate of 12-13 enrollments  per month , we antic ipate having enrolled 166 subjects  (n=150, 
assuming 10% attrition)  by study month 15, providing adequate time for 3 - and 6 -month follow up, and 
dissemination activities.  
The research will be conducted in the Department of Orthop aedic Surgery at Penn Presb yterian Medical Center , 
and data analysis will be pe rformed at the Biostatistics * Evaluation * Collaboration * Consultation * Analysis  
(BECCA ) lab at the U Penn School of Nursing . 
The duration of subject participation  is approximately  seve n (7) months beginning four (4) weeks prior to surgery 
and ending following the 6 -month data collection time point. The baseline study session will  last approximately 
30minutes for those in the con trol g roup and 60minutes for those in the experimental group . For those in the 
experimental group, subjects will spend approximately n ine (9) hours prior to surgery  receiving the intervention.  
For those in the cont rol group, subjects will spend approximately four (4) hours prior to surgery receiving  the 
standard educational  care.  Just prior to the surgery, subjects in b oth groups spend approximately 45minutes 
providing pre -operative d ata, and they will additionally spend one (1) hour providing da ta at the 3 - and 6-month 
follow up at 30minu tes each.   Thus, th e duration of partici pation for th ose in the experimental group is 
approximately 12 hours, and for those in the control group, approximately  7.5 hours.   
     
METHODS : 
 
1. Study Instruments : 
Preoperative chronic pain – The severity of p reoperative chronic pain will be evaluated  with the Brief Pain 
Inventory (BPI) ,52 along  two dimensions: intensity and interference. Pain intensity is rated on a 0 (no pain) to 10 
(worst pain imaginable ) scale as the wors t in the past 24 hours, least in the past 24 hours, average pain and 
current p ain. Pain interference is measured  in 7 areas: general activity, mood, walking ability, work, sleep, 
enjoyment of life and relationships  on a 0 (no interference) to 10 (interferes completely) scale . The composite 
mean of these scores are used as a pain int erference score.  BPI scores will be collected prior to the intervention 
and compared to those collected just prior to surgery  and at 3- and 6 -month  follow -up. 
Long -term opioid use  – Preoperative opioid use will be measured by converting to morphine equival ent daily dose 
(MEDD) prior to beginning the intervention , during the study visit just prior to surgery  and at the 3 and 6 months  
follow  up if the patients are still taking opioid s. At each timepoint, state prescription dr ug monitoring program will 
be quer ied as a check on self -reported opioid use.  
 
5 
 Pain catastrophizing  – Pain catastrophizing will be measure d by the Pain Catastrophizing Scale  (PCS) .53 The 
PCS is a 13 -item self-report scale, with each item rated on a 5 -point scale: 0 (Not at all) to 4 (all th e time). It is 
broken into three subscales  (magnification, rumination, and helplessness ); results from the initial development 
and validation studies indicate that the PCS is a reli able and valid measurement tool for catastrophizing  in clinical 
and non -clinical populations . PCS will be completed prior to and following completion of the intervention and at 
the 3 - and 6 -month follow ups to assess the durability of the intervention.  
Depression  and Anxiety  - To measure symptoms of depression and anxiety, the PROMIS® (Patient -Reported 
Outcomes Measurement Information System) person -centered measures will be utilized .54  Specifically, the 8 -item 
PROMIS depression and anxiety short forms will be compared prior to and following completion of the 
intervention ; to eva luate the stability of CBT skills, the PROMIS  will also be administered at 3 and 6 months.  
Potential confounders  – Pre-existi ng medical comorbidities or post -operative complications may affect surgical 
outcomes with respect to pain severity and resolution.   To account for the effects of these confounders, all 
medical comorbidities will be extracted from the EHR by the study coor dinator prior to surgery and recorded in the 
study database.  Also added to the study database will be any unanticipated adverse ev ents following surgery, 
and with medical comorbidities, considered as moderators of the effects of the intervention on the de velopment of 
CPSP.  
Post-operative pain intensity  – Severity of post -operative pain will be operationalized as  (1) responses on a v isual 
analogue pain scale (VAS) and (2) consumption of opioid analgesic medications  during the first 72 hours following 
surgery . The VAS ranges from 0 (no pain) to 10 (worst pain imaginable) , and pain scores are collected every 4 
hours  as part of routine p ractice . Pain ratings will be graphed over time and area under the curve calculated. 
Dose of opioid analgesi cs consumed during this period  (24hr increments and total) will be abstracted from the 
electronic health record and converted in to MEDD  for analysis . 
Chronic post -surgical pain  – To evaluate for the presence of CPSP , subjects will be asked at 3- and 6 -months if 
they have pain  in the surgical site  that develop ed or increase d in intensity following  the surgery  utilizing a 
checklist based upon the IASP d efinition of CPSP  (Appendi x). If they respond affirmatively, BPI pain scores will 
be collected to assess the intensity and interference associated with the CPSP.  In addition, subjects will be asked 
if they are continuing to u se opioids at these timepoints,  and if so, daily MEDD calculated for analysis.  
 
2. Group Modifications : 
The only group modification with respect to measures is that only those in the intervention group will participate in 
the survey  assessing  subject satisfaction  with the intervention.    
 
3. Method for Assigning Subjects to G roups : 
A randomiza tion s cheme will be generated by the study biostatistician and provided to the study coordinator who 
will assign consecutively enrolled subjects  to group.      
 
4. Administration of Surveys and/or Process :  
The data collection s chedule is described bel ow: 
 Baseline  
(T-4weeks)  Pre-operation  
(T0) Post-operation  
(T = 72hr)  Follow -up 
(T + 3 and 6 
months)  
Chronic Pain Intensity (BPI)  X X  X 
Opioid Use (MEDD)  X X  X 
PDMP review  X   X 
Pain Catastrophiz ing (PCS)  X X  X 
Depression & Anxiety symptoms 
(PROMIS)  X X  X 
CBT use, adherence, satisfactiona  X   
Post-operative Pain Severity (72hr VAS)    X  
Post-operative Pain Severity (72hr MEDD)    X  
Chronic post -surgical pain checklist     X 
a subjects  in treatment group only      
 
 
6 
  
5. Data Management : 
Collected data will be entered into the U Penn School of Nursing  REDCap (Research Electronic Data Capture) 
system  by trained CITI- and HIPAA -certified  research assi stants , which is a central and secure resourc e for data 
processing and management. As the front -end collection instrument is created, REDCap automatically creates a 
database designed to store the data that will be recorded from the research. The U Penn School of Nursing  has 
licensed its own version o f REDCap that is housed on password protected servers located within a data center 
inside the School of Nursing  firewall , and therefore are afforded the same network protections as other sensitive 
clinical systems. REDCap was developed specifically around HIPAA -Security guidelines with features such as 
data encryption and is recommended to Penn researchers by our Office of Human Research.    
Data quality will be monitored by random inspection of the completed datasets by the study coordinator  and any 
problem s detected will be discussed with the co-PIs. In addition , the PIs will carefully monitor the data accrual 
weekly.  Data will be entered on an ongoing basis under the direction of the study coordinator , and weekly reports 
detailing health events, study pro gress, and data accuracy and completeness will be generated for review by the  
PIs and c o-investigators . Quality assurance activities will be supervised by the study coordinator . Prior to 
analysis, m issing data or discrepancies will be corrected by the proj ect director based on source documents. The 
study’s statistician will analyze the data, using SAS for Windows Version 9.4 statistical softwar e. 
Data monitoring of all aspects of this study will proceed in an exacting manner and meet all IRB requirements. 
Data will be collected by trained research staff using standardized hardcopy and electronic forms an d will only be 
identified with a st udy ID .  Personal identifiers required for follow -up will be linked with the study ID and kept 
confidential by Drs. Cheatl e and Compton  in a secured cabinet . No presentation or publication of the results of 
this study will refer to the individual participants or present information that would identify any participant.  No data 
will be disclosed  to personnel not listed o n the s tudy protocol.  
 
6. Subject Follow -up: 
Using contact information obtained at the baseline visit, s ubjects will be contacted via telephone at 3- and 6-
months following surgery to determine if CPSP is present  utilizing a checklist based upon the IASP definiti on of 
CPSP  (Appendix) . If present , the BPI will be administered,  and any opioid use  recorded  and checked again st the 
PDMP . In addition, the PCS and PROMIS  measures will be collected to evaluate the durability of CBT training 
effects . The sample  does not in clude transient groups, minimizing potential attrition.  
 
STUDY PROCEDURES : 
 
1. Detailed Description : 
The study procedure s, including all the visits, contacts, and interactions  are described sequentially  below:  
Recruitment and Consent : The EHR of all patie nts scheduled for TKA at least 5 weeks in the future will be 
examined to identify those meeting inclusion criteria . Eligibility will be reviewed  by Co-I Elkassabany ; those 
eligible will be contacted by the study coordinator to inform them about the study.  Those who express interest will 
be scheduled for a screening visit during which informed consen t will be obtained in a Center private room .  
Baseline Study Session : Once informed consent is obtained, Baseline measures o n the severity of chronic pain, 
opioi d use, pain catastrophizing, and symptoms of depression and anxiety  and evidence of OUD  will be col lected 
at this time. The PDMP will be consulted to verify self -reported opioid use . In addition, the subjects randomized to 
the intervention group will be pr ovided access to the computer -assisted preoperative CBT intervention (described 
below) and trained on its use. It is anticipated this study session will last no  longer than 30minutes for those 
assigned to the control group, and 60 minutes  for those assigne d to the treatment group .  
Pre-operative CBT Intervention : In the current application we will be utilizing and building upon a well -vetted 
internet -based pain coping skill program (P AINTrainer ).41-43  The PAINTrainer includes 8 sessions, each of which 
takes 35-45 minutes to complete, and teaches an evidence -based pain coping skill. The program is led by a 
virtual coach and content is provided in audio to minimize reading and facilitate progr am completion for fatigued  
or low literacy patients; only key infor mation is highlighted with brief , large -font onscreen text. Illustrations, 
animations, interactive exercises, and tailored feedback are used to reinforce learning. The intervention can be 
delivered on a number of platforms (iPad, smart phone, PC, Mac) , and  four iPads with internet connec tivity will 
purchased to loan to  participants  who do not have a device on which to run the application.  Users  can close  a 
 
7 
 session before completing it and resume where they left off , and  access program resources to manage go als and 
reminders, log practices , review progress in easy -to-read graphs, read about others’ experiences using the skills, 
and share their own . In addition, they will have access to P AINTrainer for one-month  post operatively to reinforce 
the basic CBT principles ; the program also tracks participants’ use . Although it is recommended to complete one 
session per week, in this application patients will be asked to complete 2 sessions per week for four weeks; t he 
developers of the PAINTrainer ( consultants Keefe and Rini)  note that the  efficacy of flexible approaches, includ ing 
shortening of the delivery schedule.   
In addition to the PAINTrainer, we will integrate a motivational interviewing (MI) intervention  delivered by a trained 
“coach” across the sessions abou t (1) the benefits of opi oid tapering for post -operative pain control, (2) 
approaches for safely tapering, (3) identifying and managing withdrawal symptoms patients may experience. Co -
PI Cheatle will provide scripted language and train the study coordinato r to effectively deliver this education within 
the CBT context employing MI techniques, and monitor fidelity to the delivery at regular intervals over the course 
of the study.  The content and tapering guidelines will be based upon the US Department of Vete rans Affairs Pain 
Managem ent Opioid Taper Decision Tool55 which provides guidance on dose reduction schedules, over -the-
counter medications to treat mild withdrawal symptoms, and resources to manage discomfort or distress. Patients 
will not be expected to taper completely off opio ids during the intervention period, but up to 30% reduction in daily 
opioid dose is anticipated. For future  testing, th e MI intervention  will be integrated into the platform virtual coach, 
however it  is cost -prohibitive to do so in the current application.   
Treatment as usual:  Patients scheduled to undergo total joint arthroplasty at the study site are automatically 
enrolled in a mandatory 4 -hour education class delivered by a nurse educator or  physical therapist. Utilizing an in -
person Powerpoint presentation format, patients are informed about pre -habilitation exercises to do prior to 
surgery; what to expect the day of surgery; the multimodal analgesia protocol used in the perioperative period;  
options for anesthesia and analgesia;  and the expectation of physical therapy after surgery.  
Pre-operative study session : Immediately prior to the surgical procedure, patients in the experimental group  will 
meet with the study coordinator  and baseline assessments  will be repeat ed.  In additio n, the subject will be 
interview ed to gain understanding of their perceived ease, burden , satisfaction  and likability of the intervention .  It 
is anticipated that this study session will last no longer than 45 minutes. At the completion of t he session, use 
data from the computer -assisted CBT program  will be downloaded and recorded.  
Post-operative Pain : Post-operative pain intensity and opioid use  (converted to MEDD)  data will be extracted from 
the EHR  for the first 72 hours post -operatively . If the patient is discharged prior to 72 hours, he or she will be 
provided a pain diary to record daily pain ratings and opioid use.   
Chronic Post -surgical Pain : Subjects will be contacted via telephone at 3- and 6-months following surgery to 
determine if CPSP is presen t utilizing a checklist based upon the IASP definition of CPSP  (Appendix) . If present , 
the BPI will be administered,  and any opioid use  recorded  and checked again st the PDMP . In addition, the PCS 
and PROMIS  measures will be collected to evaluate the durabi lity of CBT training effects . 
 
2. Data C ollection : 
Data related to 72 -hour post -operative pain and opioid use outcomes will be extracted from the EHR and opioid 
use data will be validated from PDMP entries ; all other data will be so urced directly from the subject . These data 
are not existing at the ti me of submission of the IRB application. N o tissue specimens  will be collected or used in 
this study.  
 
3. Genetic Testing : 
Not ap plicab le. 
 
4. Use of Deception:  
Not applicable . 
 
5. Statistica l Analysis : 
Prelimi nary analysis of all outcome and baseline demographic variables will describe and test for differences in 
baseline measures between the groups. Adequacy of randomization will be evaluated by tests of differences 
between the intervention and usual care grou ps. These baseline comparisons will be based on t -tests or Wilcoxon 
rank sum t ests for continuous variables, depending on the symmetry of the distributions; on logistic regression for 
 
8 
 binary or ordinal variables; and on Poisson log -linear regression for co unt data. If imbalances are found at 
baseline, then the relevant variables wil l be treated as confounders in the post study analyses.  
For the second study ob jective, we expect that participants, who receive a MI intervention along with a validated 
computer -assisted CBT intervention for chronic pain (PAINTrainer) will demonstrate a significantly gr eater 
improvement in outcome variables from baseline vs those receiving usual care. The outcome variables will 
include change in the severity of pre -operative chro nic pain, opioid use, and psychological risk factors 
(depression, anxiety, catastrophizing) f or CPSP in the 4 weeks prior to surgery . Specifically, a mixed model 
analysis will be fit to the data using the Proc Mixed procedure in SAS.56,57 Residual modeling  will be performed to 
check for significant violations in the distribution and constant varia nce assumptions and determine if variance 
stabilizing or normalizing transformations should be applied. Furthermore, sensitivity analyses will be run 
considering d ichotomous versions of the outcome variables using multiple logistic regression.  
For the third study objective , we will describe the effects of the CBT intervention on 72hr post -operative pain 
severity, and 3 - and 6 -month rates of CPSP in comparison to pat ients who received treatment -as-usual . A mixed 
effects model will be fit with Treatment Group (intervention and u sual care) as a between subject factor and Time 
(72hr, month 3 and 6) as a categorical within -subjects factor. We will include as baseline cova riates any factors 
that differ significantly between the groups at baseline or show significant relationships wit h the outcome. 
Potential confounders (medical comorbidities, post -operative complications) will also be considered in the 
analysis .  
The result s from the mixed model analyses will be summarized by mean (SE) change from baseline for each 
group at each time point. The primary hypothesis will be evaluated at the alpha = 0.05 level and all 
contrasts/hypotheses will be considered exploratory and resul ts will be interpreted with caution at alpha equal to 
0.05 level. The primary goal will be to obtain reliable eff ect size estimates to inform larger studies. In that women 
are more likely to develop CPSP than men,8,16 sex as a biological variable  will cons idered  as a possible moderator 
in all analyses.  
 
RISK/BENEFIT ASSESSMENT : 
 
1. Risks :  
Opioid taper : As a part of the intervention  and with the guidance of their trained coach , one-half of the subjects 
will be encouraged to gradually taper their opioid use in the month prior to surgery.  It is possible that in doing 
so, s ubjects may experience the uncomfortable symptom s associated with opioid withdrawal. To avoid the 
emergence of these, subjects will be instructed to taper their dose gradually ( no more than 1 0%/week), and 
will be provided with information on how to self -manage these symptoms should they arise.  In addit ion, 
subjects will be instructed to contact  their coach should the symptoms become  severe, to receive guidance on 
how to  temporarily cease and then restart taper attempts.  In that subjects will have been regular users of 
opioids for at least three months prior to study enrollment, they will have developed a certain degree of 
physiologic tolerance, offering protection against any respiratory depr essant effects during a taper pause.   
Breach of Confidentiality : Participation in this study may constitute a social risk to the participant in that others 
may learn that he or she has chronic pain and is taking opioid medications .  Due to the sensitive n ature of this 
information, privacy and confidentiality will be str ictly maintained in all aspects of participation.  Consent and 
data collection sessions will take place in private rooms where strict privacy is enforced and all staff are 
HIPAA certified.  
Acute Anxiety or Depressive Symptoms : It is possible  that the opioi d taper for the intervention group, or the 
upcoming surgery for both groups may precipitate unanticipated symptoms of acute anxiety or depression.  As 
described below, co -PI Cheatle is a lic ensed clinical psychologist with over 40 years’ experience in trea ting 
patients with chronic pain, will be available to assess and intervene with patients who experience these 
distressing symptoms during the pre -operative period.  
 
2. Benefits : 
The potenti al benefit for both the participants and broader segments of society is to improve pain outcomes 
following a very common procedure, TKA, ideally decreasing t he severity of post -operative pain experienced and 
 
9 
 the development of CPSP.  Development of an effe ctive intervention to address the risk factors for poor pain 
outcomes following TKA can guide clinical practice based upon evidence.  
Participants will be informed that, other than any effect of the intervention  for the treatment group , no direct 
benefit i s expected to accrue to them from participation in the study.  
 
3. Subject Privacy:  
Consent and data collection sessions will take place in private rooms where strict privacy is enforced and all staff 
are HIPAA certified.  
 
4. Subject Confidentiality : 
All records will be kept strictly c onfidential.  No one except the researchers will know the subjects are in a research 
study.  Data forms for the collection of health and study data will be coded with each subject’s unique identification 
number.  No data form will identify the participants  by name.  Hardcopies of d ata forms will be kept in locked files with 
keys held only by the study investigator s.  All electronic data will be stored with the password and firewall protect ed 
REDCap data collection and managemen t system of the U Penn School of Nursing . No presentation or publication of 
the results of this study will refer to the individual participants or present information that would identify any 
participant. All persons working on the proposed work will have c ompleted HIPAA training and th e Collaborative 
Institutional Training Initiative  (CITI)  Basic Courses in the Protection of Human Research Subjects and Biomedical 
Focus Responsible Conduct o f Research (RCR) modules . 
 
How will confidentiality of data be maintained?  Check all that apply.  
 
XX Paper -based records will be kept in a s ecure location and only be accessible to personnel involved in 
the study.  
XX Com puter -based files will only be made  available to personnel involved in the study through the use of 
access privileges and passwords.  
XX Prior to a ccess to any study -related information, personnel will be required to sign statements agreeing 
to protect the security and confidentiality of ide ntifiable information.  
XX Whenever feasible, identifiers will be removed from study -related info rmation.  
 A Certificate of Confidentiality will be obtained, because the rese arch could place the subject at risk of 
criminal or civil liabili ty or cause damage to the subject’s financial standing, employability, or liability.  
 A waiver of documentation of consent is being requested, because the only link between t he subject 
and the study would be the consent document and the pr imary risk is a breach of confidentiality.  (This is 
not an option for FDA -regulated research.)  
 Precautions are in place to ensure the data is secure by using passwords and  encryption, because the 
research involves web -based surveys.   
 Audio and/or video recordings will be transcribed and then destroyed to elimina te audible identification 
of subjects.  
 Other (specify):     
 
5. Protected Health Information  
Five types of protected health information  will be collect ed, subject ’s name, telephone number, email a ddress , 
medical record number , and  date of birth .  The first  three are required to allow for the 3 - and 6 -month follow up , 
and the medical reco rd number will enable us to extract data on post -operative  pain and opioid use . Date of birth 
will be collected to verify  age. These data will not be shared with persons not involved in the study , all of whom 
have completed HIPAA training . 
 
6. Compensation :  
Subjects will receive no compensation for participating in the study.  
 
7. Data and Safety Monitoring : 
The Penn Center for Substance Abuse Treatment (CSA) has a standing data and safety monitoring board 
(DSMB) which  will be used for this study .  The purpose of the DSMB and consistent with NIH guidelines  is to 
 
10 
 assure that the safety of subjects is protected wh ile scientific goals are being met. Specifically, the CSA DSMB is 
charged with monitoring the safety of participants and the quality of data, as well as the appropriate termination of 
studies when significant benefits or risks have been uncovered or when i t appears that a clinical trial cannot be 
concluded su ccessfully.  
All board members meet NIH requirements regarding background and experience, and none will have ethical 
conflicts including financial interest related to study outcome. Individuals invited to serve on the board disclose 
any potential conflict s in writing. The board meets every six months (unless more frequent meetings are deemed 
necessary) and is chaired by James McKay Ph.D. a faculty member within the Department of Psychiatry at the 
Univers ity of Pennsylvania. Other members of the board inclu de Kevin Lynch, Ph.D. (senior statistician), David 
Metzger, Ph.D., Deborah Dunbar, MSN, CRNP who are faculty members or staff of the Perelman School of 
Medicine at Penn. Issues related to recruitment, sa fety and efficacy, whether the study questions are be ing 
answered, conflict of interest, confidentiality, and ongoing study review (including AEs, SAEs, and regulatory 
issues) are assessed.  
Following each DSMB meeting, the designated member standing in fo r the Chair will make recommendations to 
Drs. Cheatl e and Compton  and a final report (edited by all Board members not in conflict with this project) will be 
prepared and submitted to NINR, the Penn IRB, and the FDA (if required) according to each body’s re porting 
requirements.  In addition, a Data Safety Mon itoring Board report is issued to the NINR Project Officer with the 
annual progress report.  
The DSMB will meet to review s afety data every six months (unless more frequent  meetings are deemed 
necessary) .  At least two weeks prior to each meeting, the investigative team will submit to the DSMB a DSMB 
Report detailing screening activities; reasons for screening failures; subject enrollment (actual vs. expected); 
sociodemograp hic characteristics of enrolled s ubjects; and subject disposition (including reasons for attrition).  In 
addition, the number and nature (severity and relatedness to study procedures) of all adverse events will 
described.  Finally, a random or purposive sa mple (depending on DSMB request) of subject case report forms 
(CRFs) will be submitted with the DSMB Report, to enable assessment of compliance with IRB requirements, 
conformance with informed consent requirements, verification of source documents and inve stigator compliance.  
In the even t that a subject  scores high on the depression scale, a licensed clinic al psychologist (co -PI Cheatle) 
will be available to assess immediately any patient who exhibits  extreme anxiety, depress ion or suicidal ideation 
on routine screening  or during the preo perative period .  All research and clinical staff will call his cell phone when 
a patient with significant anxiety, depression or suicidal ideation is encountered.  All patients who acknowledg e 
extreme anxiety, depression or suicidal ideation and intent wi ll be contacted immediately by Dr. Cheatle  and an 
appropriate treatment plan will be enacted.  
 
8. Investigator’s Risk/Benefi t Assessment : 
Based on the characteristics of the risks associated with study partici pation, and efforts in place to minimize these 
risks, the risks to subjects are considered reasonable in relation to the anticipated benefits to research 
participants and others.  
 
INFORMED CONSENT : 
 
1. Consent Process : 
Informed consent will be obtained fro m patients  who e xpress interest participating i n the study by the trained 
study coordinator who has experience in ob taining co nsent f rom research subjects.  It will be ob tained  in a private 
office at t ime that is convenient  for the prospec tive subject.  Specifically, the study coordinator will read out loud in 
English the consent  form to the patient , stopping at regular intervals to assess the patient ’s level of unders tanding 
of the information in the consent form , clarifying  content, and answering questions . Patients will be told that they 
need not sign  the consent at this ti me, and that they may take it home to revi ew for as long as  they would  like 
prior to deciding to provide  informed consent. Patients will be assured  that if they choose not to participate, it will 
have no effect on the medical care th ey receive or any other  social retribution s. Any evidence of mental 
impairment  will be evaluated by the study coordinator via informal  assessment; if impairment is suspected, the 
consent process will be halted , and either co -PI Compton or C heatle will be c alled upon to further  evaluate.  
 
2. Waiver of Informed Consent : 
 
11 
 Not applicable.  
 
RESOURCES NECESSARY FOR HUMAN RESEARCH PROTECTION : 
 
The percent effort and qualifications of the members of the investi gative team are more than adequate to conduct 
the resear ch. Specifically, c o-principal investigator, Martin Cheatle, PhD Cheatle will contribute 1.44 calendar 
months effort for the duration  of the projec t and  take primary responsibility for the development and pilot testing of 
the cognitive behavioral therapy ( CBT) intervention, working closely with consultants  Keefe and Rini. He will be 
responsible for training  and monitoring  the study coordinator/ coach to effectively deliver the opioid tapering 
motivational interviewing (MI) component of the intervention and  monitoring the fidelity of this delivery. He will 
serve as the CBT expert during the efficacy testing of the intervention and  troubleshoot any issues that arise as 
participants undergo the 4 -week training.  In addition, he will take the lead in directing an d interpreting  the CBT 
feasibility and ef ficacy data in data analysis and dissemination activities and  play a primary role in writing reports 
of the findings and subsequent grant  applications .   
Co-principal investigator, Peggy Compton, RN, PhD, will contr ibute 1.44 calendar months effort to the project over 
the two -year project duration.  She will be responsible for obtaining IRB approval, directing development of the 
REDCap database, and overall coordination of the efficacy testing of the  intervention. Wo rking closely with Co -I 
Elkassabany, she will monitor subject recruitment and enrollment efforts and verify subject eligibility.  She will also 
oversee the day -to-day activities and performance of the Study Coordinator , and be responsible for monitor ing th e 
accuracy, quality and completeness of d ata collection, ensure protocol fidelity , and compliance with all regulatory 
and funding agencies. She will direct data analysis, and play a primary role in dissemination of findings and grant 
writing.  
The Co -inves tigator, Nabil  Elkassabany , MD  will contr ibute 0.6 calendar months during both years of the project .  
He will be responsible for working closely with Study Surgeons Lee and Nelson to identify and recruit potentially 
eligible patients for study enrollment.  He will work with the Study Coordinator to establish eligibility and obtain 
informed consent.  Importantly, he will serve as the primary liaison to the orthopedic surgeons and the surgery 
service to ensure effective collaboration as a means to achieve stu dy objectives. In addition, h e will assis t with 
data interpretation and the dissemination of findings. Dr. Elkassabany will  serve the primary  study clinician, 
managing any health -related issues experienced by study subjects during study participation.      
Statistician, Jesse Chittams, PhD, will c ontribute .45 calendar months  effort to the project during Year 2 only.  He 
will serve as the study statistician, working with the REDCap  derived database to the complete the analysis as 
outlined in the Research Pla n. Specifically, he will oversee data cleaning and variable construction, run interim 
analysis, and complete the descriptive and multivariate analysis required to meet the study specific aims.  As 
results become available, he will work closely with the  Co-PIs to refine the analytical plan as needed and 
contribute to the writing of dissemination materials.  
The Study Coordinator/Coach , TBH,  will devote 12 calendar months effort to t he study over both years of the 
project.  This individual will come to the pro ject with experience in coordinating human subject clinical research 
studies and be responsible for enrolling subjects, scheduling study visits, all aspects of data collection, e ntering 
study data into REDCap, and engaging in ongoing communication with IRB , study setting and U Penn School of 
Medicine and Nursing, Department of Anesthesiology and Department of Orthopaedic Surgery.  In addition, this 
individual will receive directed  training  and monitoring  from Co -PI Cheatle to oversee delivery of the CBT and  
opioid tapering MI intervention. In this role, this individual will serve as a “coach” to the subjects, contacting them 
on a weekly basis prior to surgery, educating  and motivat ing them to engage in preoperative opioid reduction . 
Participants will be recruited from the nationally renowned  Department of Orthop aedic Surgery at PPMC . Center 
surgeons perform approximately 1800 major TKAs  per year , an estimated 20-30% of whom  have been taking 
opioids for at least 3 months for the treatment of a chronic nonmalig nant pain  condition , resulting in a recruitment 
pool of 30 to 45 patients per month , providing  an adequate source of the necessary  12-13 enrollments  per month . 
In addition , the facilities and resources are adequate  to safely conduct the stu dy. Situated wit hin the Department 
of Psychiatry is the Center for Studies on Addiction (CSA), where Co-Principal Investigator  Cheatle  holds an 
appointment. A  primary mission of the CSA is to continue to advance the cutting edge of knowledge on the nature 
of addiction and  the best ways to treat this disorder . The CSA has, for the past 40 years, been an important 
 
12 
 national and international resource for addictions research . The PI (Cheatle) has conduct ed large -scale studies 
on pain and opioid use disorders and su icide and ha s an established relationship at the primary recruitment site.  
The CSA is housed  in 16,400 sq. ft. of space in a building near the  UPenn campus located adjacent to the 
primary recruitment site , PPMC .  Dr. Cheatle has a locked private office space ( 5th floor, 3535 Market St. , 
approximately 400 square feet). All faculty offices come equipped with locked filing cabinets, bookshelves, desk, 
minimum 4 GHz computer with HP printer, Windows XP service pack 3 operating system, Microsoft Office 
Professional (Word, E xcel, PowerPoint, Access), SPSS or SA S statistical analysis software, and e -mail and 
internet access. Copier, printer, fax and scanner facilities are available in the center .  In addition, the CSA has 
several meeting rooms with teleconferencing capabilitie s, 
Co-Principal Investigator Compton  and Biostatistician Chittams  benefit  from the extensive research resources at 
the University of Pennsylvania School of Nursing, which boasts the highest rate of NIH funding across nur sing 
schools in the country.  The Sc hool of Nursing has outstanding facilities and resources to accomplish its mission 
of excellence in research. Specifically, the Office of Nursing Research (ONR) support faculty  and students in 
applying for, obtaining, and managing funding for scientific re search projects. The ONR delivers a suite of 
services throughout the lifespan of a research grant - from conception to closeout. The ONR also provides highly -
skilled statistical support, hosts an expertly staffed state -of-the-art nursing research laborator y, conducts mock 
reviews, offers guidance with IRB protocol submission and regulatory compliance, and provides editing services 
for scientific and English conten t of proposals. The ONR also provides various learning opportunities for faculty, 
staff and stu dents through weekly colloquia and six face -to-face Responsible Conduct of Research seminars a 
year. Colloquia are presented by Penn Nursing faculty and guest le cturers from complementary disciplines to 
foster multidisciplinary research collaborations and initiatives.  
For implementation of the proposed project, School of Nursing facilities  include  adequate computer, statistical 
support , and office resources neces sary to undertake and complete the proposed research project successfully .  
Specifically, a  wide range of computing resources is available at the University of Pennsylvania . Support for these 
resources is divided among a num ber of organizations.  The broadest organization is led by the Vice Provost for 
Information Systems and Computing (ISC), which supports PennNet, the campus -wide network, providing both 
intra-campus communication, and access to the Internet.  ISC manages th e Data Warehouse, the University’s 
central repository for administrative data, and oversees the development and maintenance of most of the 
administrative systems at Penn. Administrative systems are those used by all centers and the 12 schools in 
support of  academic, business/financial, and research administration. ISC also provides a number of other 
campus -wide services, including  development of technology training programs, evaluation of universally -used 
software (e.g., email, anti -virus packages, communic ations software), and management of software site licenses.  
ISC provides leadership on a number of technology issues, such as security and privacy.  
Computing support is also available from the Office of Technology and Information Systems (OTIS) unit in th e 
School of Nursing.  OTIS supports a school -wide local area network, provides desktop support, offers routine 
training service s, maintains liaison with technology representatives in each department, and runs two computer 
laboratories.  The larger of these  laboratories, containing 21 personal computers, is available to all members of 
the School of Nursing.  The second laboratory, the Doctoral Computer Laboratory, is exclusively for the use of 
pre- and post -doctoral trainees.  This lab is equipped with 8 per sonal computers with software resources including 
SAS, SPSS, STATA, ATLAS.  
OTIS provides access for researchers to REDCap and t o store data on a secure research server, which is backed 
up nightly, with weekly backups stored off site.   The server is behind a firewall and is registered as a “Critical 
Host” by the University.   This means OTIS follows all University polices regarding critical hosts: firewalls, access 
controls, timely patch management and anti -viral scans and software updates, and an enterprise system 
monitoring solution (allowing us to detect and address intrusion attempts).   In the future, we will be enhancing the 
research server with the following: folder -based intrusion detection, encryption, and an off -site mirroring solution.  
With respect t o statistical support, the Office of Nursing Research (ONR) provides a team of highly skilled doctoral 
and master’s level stati sticians through the BECCA ( Biostatistics *  Evaluation *  Collaboration *  Consultation 
* Analysis) Lab, along with Penn Nursing re search assistants and biostatistics graduate interns, who work with 
investigators to design, implement, analyze, and diss eminat e their research. Collaboration with a fully -supported, 
skilled statistician typically yields clearly articulated results that me et grant reviewers’ expectations and peer -
review. Statistical collaboration provides support in the areas of sample size, power  analysis computation, data 
 
13 
 management, statistical analysis, and results presentation. Expert at identifying and addressing pote ntial issues, 
BECCA statisticians may suggest exploring alternatives such as more appropriate statistical designs, or perhaps 
modern modeling techniques. BECCA statisticians not only ensure statistical rigor and appropriateness, but also 
make sure that a s tudy design is practical, feasible, and scientifically justifiable.  The BECCA Lab is directed by 
and houses study biostatistici an, Jesse Chittams.   
Because the PAINTrainer intervention is web -based, and can be accessed from a computer, tablet or 
smartphone , dedicated university computer resources are not necessary for the proposed work; written into the 
budget is the purchase of f our(4) ipads with internet connectivity to provide subjects who do not have a suitable 
device.  
The School of Nursing is housed in Claire M. Fagin Hall, which was constructed in 1972 by funds from the Nurse 
Training Facilities Construction Grant Program of the Public Health Services, Department of Health and funds 
from the City of Philadelphia as a f acility for three hospital programs.  The co-PI applicant has her own locking 
office space (Claire Fagin Hall 204, approximately 170 square feet). All faculty of fices come equipped with locked 
filing cabinets, bookshelves, desk, minimum 4 GHz computer with  HP printer, Windows XP service pack 3 
operating system, Microsoft Office Professional (Word, Excel, PowerPoint, Access), SPSS or SAS statistical 
analysis softwa re, and e -mail and internet access. With the same resources, an adjacent cubicle space is 
dedic ated to the study research assistant. Copier, printer, fax and scanner facilities are available on each floor.  
Co-Investigator Elkassabany  holds an  appointment in the Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care at 
Penn Medicine . The Department  was founded over 50 years ago , and is enriched in a deep history of clinical care 
beginning with the first Department Chairman, Robert Dunning Dripps , who started the re sidency p rogram at 
UPenn  in 1943.  U Penn Department of Anesthesiology provides anesthesia care to those having  surgery, 
receiving trauma treatment, giving birth or undergoing major diagnostic procedures , offering comprehensive 
anesthesia care programs at HUP and PPMC (the proposed study site).  The faculty include pain management 
specialists who provide interdisciplinary treatment of chronic pain. The Department boasts the Penn Center for 
Anesthesia Research , which  emphasizes translational and interdiscipl inary science, both within the department 
and other departments and institutes in the schools of medicine, nursing, arts and sciences, engineering and 
veterinary medicine, on Penn's unified campus.  The resources listed below are fully available to Dr. Elka ssabany 
and the research team to conduct of the study proposed herein.   These resources, and the UPenn Anesthesia 
environment in general are considered state -of-the-art, in compliance with all Federal and State regulations, and 
will facilitate the timely c ompletion of these studies.  
Dr. Elkassabany  has private locking office in  the Perelman School of Medicine and shared office space in the 
primary recruitment site, PPMC.  At both facilities, his office space is equipped with locked filing cabinets, 
bookshelv es, desk, minimum 4 GHz computer with HP printer, Windows XP service pack 3 operating system, 
Microsoft Office Professional (Word, Excel, PowerPoint, Access), SPSS or SAS statistical analysis software, and 
e-mail and internet access. He enjoys full access to the centralized Department of Orthopaedic Surgery database 
through which patient randomization and data collection will be done.   
Study Surgeons Lee and Nelson practice  in the Department of Orthopaedics (Penn Orthopaedics)  which boast a 
talented and spe cialized interdisciplinary team of health care providers dedicates to  a whole -body approach to 
diagnosing and treating joint pain.  They complete thousands of joint procedures a year (approximately 1100 
primary TKAs and 500 TKA revisions), and provide servi ces in sports medicine, cartilage repair, neuro -
orthopedics, orthop aedic oncology, and traum a and fracture repair .  
The Department of Orthopaedics  provides the latest diagnostic techniques and the most advanced surgical and 
non-surgical options for a range  of disorders, injuries and pain found in joints, muscles or bones. Penn  
Orthopaedics  has 49 exam rooms, 4 Operating Rooms for Outpatient Procedures and 2 floors of Physical and 
Occupational Therapy at Penn Medicine University City. It brings together Penn  clinicians from numerous 
specialties, including orthopaedics, rheumatol ogy, physical medicine and rehabilitation, pain medicine and 
musculoskeletal radiology. This team -based model of care creates a seamless, integrated patient experience and 
the most eff icient process towards an accurate diagnosis and appropriate treatment p lan. Drs. Lee and Nelson 
each have their own 100 square feet offices with computers, printers, internet access and standard furniture.  
In addition to clinical space, to support researc h activities, the Departme nt of Orthopaedic Surgery  provides space 
and resources for Clinical Research staff ( up to 10 full time coordinators) associated with these studies. The 
 
14 
 space is loc ated in the department  where we have 600 square feet of dedicated space, eleven PCs and eleven 
desks as well as storage for research binders and other confidential information. Electronic research files are 
stored on UP enn Health System secured servers behind the UPenn Health S ystem  firewall and are additionally 
protecte d through the use of limited access folders on the servers. Clinical data is maintained in PennChart which 
is a Penn -specific image of EPIC Electronic Medical Records Software (Epic Systems Corporation, Madison, 
Wisconsin).  
The project is designed, staffed  and budgeted to be successfully completed in 24 months. In consultation with 
Drs. Keefe and Rini, Dr. Cheatle  will train the study coordinator coach on delivering the opioid taper  MI 
intervention during months 1 -3, during which time stu dy start -up activit ies will take place . Enrollment will begin 
month 3;  at a rate of 12-13 enrollments  per month , we anticipate having enrolled 166 subjects  (n=150, assuming 
10% attrition)  by study month 15, providing adequate time for 3 - and 6 -month follow up, and disseminat ion 
activities.  
 
REFERENCES  
1. http://aaos -annualmeeting -presskit.org/2018/research -news/sloan_tjr/  
2. https://www.nc bi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17403800  
3. Inacio MCS, Paxton EW, Graves SE, Namba RS, Nemes  S. Projected increase in total knee arthroplasty in 
the United States - an alternative projection model.O  steoarthritis Cartilage. 2017 Nov;25(11):1797 -1803. doi: 
10.1016/j.jo ca.2017.07.022. Epub 2017 Aug 8.  
4. Sloan M, Premkumar A, Sheth NP. Projected Volum e of Primary Total Joint Arthroplasty in the U.S., 2014 to 
2030.  J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2018 Sep 5;100(17):1455 -1460. doi: 10.2106/JBJS.17.01617.  
5. Lewis GN, Rice DA, McNair PJ, K luger M. Predictors of persistent pain after total knee arthroplasty: a 
systemat ic review and meta -analysis.  Br J Anaesth. 2015 Apr;114(4):551 -61. doi: 10.1093/bja/aeu441. Epub 
2014 Dec 26.  
6. Petersen, K.K., Simonsen, O., Laursen, M.B., Nielsen, T.A., Rasmus sen, S. & Arendt -Nielsen, L. (2015). 
Chronic postoperative pain after primary an d revision total knee arthroplasty. The Clinical Journal of Pain 
31(1), 1-6. doi: 10.1097/AJP.0000000000000146   
7. Petersen, K.K., Graven -Nielsen, T., Simonsen, O., Laursen, M.B., & Arendt -Nielsen, L. (2016).      
Postoperative pain mechanisms assessed by cuff  algometry are associated with chronic     postoperative pain 
relief after total knee replacement. Pain 157( 7), 1400 -1406. doi:      10.1097/j.pain.0000000000000531  
8. Schug  SA, Bruce J. Risk stratification for the development of chronic postsurgical  pain.  Pain Rep.  2017  Oct 
31;2(6):e627. doi: 10.1097/PR9.0000000000000627.  
9. Lavand’homme P. (2017). Transition from ac ute to ch ronic pain after surgery. Pain 158 (4), S50 -S54.  
10. Richebe P, Capdevila X, Rivat C. (2018).  Persistent Postsurgical pain: Pathophysiolog y and preventive 
pharmacologic considerations.  Anesthesiology 129 : 590 -607. 
11. Goesling  J, Moser SE, Zaidi B, Hass ett AL, H illiard P, Hallstrom B, Clauw DJ, Brummett CM. Trends and 
predictor s of opioid  use after total knee and total hip arthroplasty.  Pain.  2016  Jun;157(6):1259 -65. doi: 
10.1097/j.pain .00000000 00000516  
12. Westermann RW, Anthony CA, Bedard N, Glass N, Bollier M, Hettrich CM, Wolf BR. (2017). Opioid 
consumption after rotator cuff r epair.  Arthroscopy 33 (8): 1467 -1472.  
13. Parsons B, Schaefer C, Mann R, Sadosky A, Daniel S, Nalamachu S, Stacey BR , Nieshof f EC, Tuchman M, 
Anschel A. Economic and humanistic burden of post -trauma and post -surgical neuropathic pain among adults 
in the United  States. J Pain Res. 2013 Jun 17;6:459 -69. doi: 10.2147/JPR.S44939.  
14. Katz J, Seltzer Z.  Transition from acute to  chronic postsurgical  pain: risk factors and protective factors. Expert 
Rev Neurother  2009  May;9(5):723 -44. doi: 10.1586/e rn.09.20.  
15. Borsook D, Youssef AM, Simons L, Elman I, Eccleston C. When  pain gets stuck: the evolution 
of pain chronifica tion and treatment resistance.  Pain.  2018  Dec;159(12):2421 -2436. doi: 
10.1097/j.pain.0000000000001401.  
16. Althaus  A, Hinrichs -Rocker A, Chapman R, Arránz Becker O, Lefering R, Simanski C, W eber F, M oser KH, 
Joppich R, Trojan S, Gutzeit N, Neugebauer E. Development of a ris k index for the prediction of chronic post -
surgical  pain. Eur J  Pain. 2012  Jul;16(6):901 -10. doi: 10.1002/j.153 2-2149.2011.00090  
17. Buvanendran A, Della Valle CJ, Kroin JS, Shah M, Moric M, Tuman KJ, McCarthy RJ. Acute postoperative 
pain is an independent pr edictor of chronic postsurgical pain following total knee arthroplasty at 6 months: A 
 
15 
 prospective c ohort study.  Regional Anesthesia and Pain Medicine.  2019; 44:e100036. 
http://dx.doi.org /10.1136/rapm -2018 -100036 . 
18. Eisenach  JC, Brennan TJ. Pain after surgery.  Pain.  2018  Jun;159(6):1010 -1011. doi: 
10.1097/j.pain.0000000000001223.  
19. Raja SN, Jensen TS.  (2010).  Predicting po st-operative pain based on pre -operative pain perception:  Are we 
doing better than the weatherman?  Anesthesiolo gy 112 : 1311 -1312.  
20. McDonald S, Page MJ, Beringer K, Wasiak J, Sprowson A. Preoperative education for hip or knee 
replacement. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014 May 13;(5):CD003526. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD003526.pub3.  
21. Riddle DL, Keefe FJ, Ang D C, Slover J, Jensen MP, Bair MJ, Kroenke K, Perera RA, Reed SD, McKee D, 
Dumenci L. Pain Coping Skills Training for Patients Who Catastrophize About Pain Pri or to Knee Arthroplasty: 
A Multisite Randomized Clinical Trial. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2019 Feb 6;10 1(3):218 -227. doi: 
10.2106/JBJS.18.00621.  
22. Gibson E, Sabo MT. Can pain catastrophizing be changed in surgical patients? A scoping review. Can J Surg. 
2018 Oct  1;61(5):311 -318. doi: 10.1503/cjs.015417.  
23. Schug SA, Lavandʼhomme P, Barke A, Korwisi B, Rief W, Tr eede RD.  IAS P Taskforce for the Classification 
of Chronic Pain. The IASP classification of chronic pain for ICD -11: chronic postsurgical or posttraumatic pain. 
Pain. 2019 Jan;160(1):45 -52. doi: 10.10 97/j.pain.0000000000001413.  
24. Borsook  D, Kussman  BD, George E, Becerra LR, Burke DW. Surgically -induced neuropathic pain (SNPP): 
Understanding the perioperative process. Ann Surg. 2013; 257(3):403.412  
25. Suzan  E, Pud D, Eisenberg E.  A crucial administration tim ing separates between beneficial and 
counterproductive effects of opi oids on postoperative pain. Pain. 2018  Aug;159(8):1438 -1440. ;  
26. McAnally H. Rationale for and approach to preoperative opioid weaning: A preoperative optimizat ion protocol. 
Preoperative M ed. 2017; 6(19). Doi:10.1186/13741 -017-0079 -y. 
27. Glare P, Aubrey KR, My les PS. Transition from acute to chronic pain after surgery.  Lancet. 2019 Apr 
13;393(10180):1537 -1546. doi: 10.1016/S0140 -6736(19)30352 -6. 
28. Weber L, Yeomans DC,  Tzabazis A. Opioid -induced hyperalgesia in clinical anesthesia practice: what has 
remained from theoretical concepts and experimental studies?  Curr Opin Anaesthesiol. 2017 Aug;30(4):458 -
465. doi: 10.1097/ACO.0000000000000485.  
29. Beck JS . Cognitive behavior t herapy: Basics and beyond (2 nd ed.) . (2011)  New York, NY: The Guilford Press . 
30. Turk DC , Flor H. Etiological theories and treatments for chronic back pain. II. Psychological models and 
interventions. Pain, 1984. 19(3): p. 209 -33. 
31. Knoerl  R, Lavoie Smith EM, Weisberg J.  Chronic Pain and Cognitive Behavioral Therapy: An Integrative 
Review. West J Nurs Res.  2016 May;38(5):596 -628. doi: 10.1177/0193945915615869. Epub 2015 Nov 24.  
32. Baez S, Hoch MC, Hoch JM. Evaluation of Cognitive Behavioral In terventions and Psychoeducation 
Implemented by Reh abilitation Specialists to Treat Fear -Avoidance Beliefs in Patients w ith Low Back Pain: A 
Systematic Review.  Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2018 Nov;99(11):2287 -2298. doi: 10.1016/j.apmr.2017.11.003. 
Epub 2017 Dec 14. 
33. Monticone M, Ambrosini E, Cedraschi C, Rocca B , Fiorentini R, Restelli M, Gianola S, Ferrante S, Zanoli G, 
Moja L. Cognitive -behavioral Treatment for Subacute and Chronic Neck Pain: A Cochrane Review. Spine 
(Phila Pa 1976). 2015 Oct 1;40(19):1495 -504. doi: 10.1097/BRS.0000000000001052.  
34. Vugts MAP, Joos en MCW, van der Geer JE, Zedlitz AMEE, Vrijhoef HJM. The effectivenes s of various 
computer -based interventions for patients with chronic pain or functional somatic syndromes: A systematic 
review and meta -analysis.  PLoS One. 2018 May 16;13(5):e0196467. doi:  10.1371/journal.pone.0196467. 
eCollection 2018.  
35. Ehde DM, Dillworth T M, Turner JA. Cognitive -behavioral therapy for individuals with chronic pain: efficacy, 
innovations, and directions for research.  Am Psyc hol. 2014 Feb -Mar;69(2):153 -66. doi: 10.1037/a0035 747. 
36. Rini, C., et al., Automated Internet -based pain coping skills tr aining to manage osteoarthritis pain: a 
randomized controlled trial. Pain, 2015. 156(5): p. 837 -48. 
37. Bennell KL, Nelligan R, Dobson F, Rin i C, Keefe F, Kasza J, French S, Bryant C, Dalwood  A, Abbott JH, 
Hinman RS.  Effectiveness of an Internet -Delivered Exer cise and Pain -Coping Skills Training Intervention for 
Persons With Chronic Knee Pain: A Randomized Trial.  Ann Intern Med. 2017 Apr 4;166( 7):453 -462. doi: 
10.7326/M16 -1714. Epub 2017 Feb 2 1. 
38. Bennell KL, Nelligan RK, Rini C, Keefe FJ, Kasza J, French S, Forb es A, Dobson F, Abbott JH, Dalwood A, 
Harris A, Vicenzino B, Hodges PW, Hinman RS. Effects of internet -based pain coping skills training before 
 
16 
 home exercise for individuals with hip oste oarthritis (HOPE trial): a randomised controlled trial.  Pain. 2018 
Sep;159(9):1833 -1842. doi: 10.1097/j.pain.0000000000001281.  
39. Cassin SE, Sockalingam S, Du C, Wnuk S, Hawa R, Parikh SV. A pilot randomized c ontrolled trial of 
telephone -based cognitive behav ioural therapy for preoperative bariatric surgery patients.  Behav Res  Ther. 
2016 May;80:17 -22. doi: 10.1016/j.brat.2016.03.001. Epub 2016 Mar 10.  
40. Gade H, Friborg O, Rosenvinge JH, Småstuen MC, Hjelmesæth J.  The Impact of a Preoperative Cognitive 
Behavioura l Therapy (CBT) on Dysfunctional Eating Behaviours, Affective Symptom s and Body Weight 1 Year 
after Bariatric Surgery: A Randomised Controlled Trial.  Obes Surg. 2015 Nov;25(11):2112 -9. doi: 
10.1007/s11695 -015-1673 -z 
41. Lotzke H, Brisby H, Gutke A, Hägg O, Jak obsson M, Smeets R, Lundberg M . A Person -Centered 
Prehabilitation Pro gram Based on Cognitive -Behavioral Physical Therapy for Patients Scheduled for Lumbar 
Fusion Surgery - A Randomized Controlled Trial.  Phys Ther. 2019 Feb 21. pii: pzz020. doi: 
10.1093/ptj /pzz020.  
42. Wang L, Lee M, Zhang Z, Moodie J, Cheng D, Martin J. Does p reoperative rehabilitation for patients planning 
to undergo joint replacement surgery improve outcomes? A systematic review and meta -analysis of 
randomised controlled trials. BMJ Open. 20 16 Feb 2;6(2):e009857. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen -2015 -009857. 
Review . 
43. das Nair R, Mhizha -Murira JR, Anderson P, Carpenter H, Clarke S, Groves S, Leighton P, Scammell BE, 
Topcu G, Walsh DA, Lincoln NB. Home -based  pre-surgical psychological intervention for knee osteoarthritis 
(HAPPiKNEES): a feasibility randomized controlled tria l. Clin Rehabil. 2018 Jun;32(6):777 -789. doi: 
10.1177/0269215518755426. Epub 2018 Feb 9.  
44. Eccleston C, Fisher E, Thomas KH, Hearn L, Derry  S, Stannard C, Knaggs R, Moore RA. Interventions for the 
reduction of prescribed opioid use in chronic non -cancer pain . Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2017 Nov 
13;11:CD010323. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD010323.pub3.  
45. Jung HJ, Yu ES, Kim JH.Combined  Program of Cognitive -Behavioral Therapy for Insomnia and Medica tion 
Tapering in Cancer Patients: A Clinic -Based Pilot Study. Behav S leep Med. 2019 Apr 9:1 -10. doi: 
10.1080/15402002.2019.1597718.  
46. https://www.pbm.va.gov/AcademicDetailingService/Documents/P ain_Opioid_Taper_Tool_IB_10_939_P96820
.pdf 
47. Cleeland CS. Measurem ent of pain by subjective report. In: Chapman CR, Loeser JD, editors.  Issues in Pain 
Measurement. New York: Raven Press; pp. 391 -403, 1989 Advances in Pain Research and Therapy; Vol. 12.  
48. Sullivan MJ, Bishop SR, Pivik J.  The Pain Catastrophizing Scale: Deve lopment and Validation.  Psychological 
Assessment 1995; 7(4): 524 –532.  
49. http://www.healthmeasures.net/explore -measurement -systems/promis  
50. Littell RC, Milli GA, Stroup  WW, Wolfin ger RD.  SAS System for Mixed Models, Cary, NC:  SAS Institute Inc., 
1996, pp. 633. 
51. SAS Institute Inc. 2013. Base SAS® 9.4 Procedures Guide: Statistical Procedures, Second Edition. Cary, NC: 
SAS Institute Inc.  
52. Little RJA.  Modeling the drop -out mechanism in repeated -measures studies.  Journal of the American 
Statistical Associ ation. 1995;90:1112 -21. 
53. Allison PD . Missing Data. Sage University Papers Series on Quantitative Applications in the Socia l Sciences, 
2001 ; 07-136. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.  
 
 
 
17 
  
 
 
 
Appendix  
Chronic Post -Surgical Pain (CPSP) Checklist  
If Brief Pain Inventory indicates that patient still has pain:  
1. Did the pain develop or increase in intensity after the surgical 
procedure?  o YES      
o NO 
2. Is the pain in the same location/area as the surgical proc edure?  o YES  
o NO  
3. Is the pain distinct from other kinds of pain that w ere present prior to the 
surgery?  o YES  
o NO  
o NA  
4. Could your pain be described as burning, prickly, tingling, electric 
shocks and/or pins and needles?  o YES  
o NO  
5. Is the skin covering your painful area more sensitive to touch?  o YES  
o NO  
 
 
 
 