Title:  Mechanisms  of Fall Resistance  to Diverse  Slipping  Conditions 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
11 Mar 2021  
Study  Protocol  
For all gait collections, participants  will arrive at the Biomechanics Research Building on the University of 
Nebraska  at Omaha  campus.  All participants  will be consented  and screened  prior  to gait testing.  During  
the consent  process,  participants  will be asked  if they  can be contacted  again  for future  research  studies.  
During the screening, participants  will undergo a short medical history.  
Partic ipants  will be asked to put on  a form  fitting  suit for data collection. Body  weight, height and  
extremity anthropometry  will be collected  (length  of arm and leg segments).  Retroreflective  markers  will 
be placed on the legs, arms, torso and head to obtain whole -body kinematic data. A ceiling -mounted 
safety harness will also  be fitted to each participant . Prior to performing any  walking trials,  the 
participants  will be allowed to "sit" in the harness to experience how it feels when it catches them.  
 
 
Aim 1 Specific  Methods  
Young healthy participants  will undergo overground gait and stabilization movement analysis sessions 
that will  last approximately  210 minutes.  All participants  will be fitted  with  a form -fitting  singlet,  ceiling  
mounted safety harness, lab -provided shoes, and a full -body retroreflective marker set. A load cell 
placed in line with the safety harness will allow for the quantification of forces exerted on the harness at 
80 Hz. A 17 camera  3D motion  capture  system  will be used  to collect  kinematic  data  at 120 Hz 
throughout  each  trial. Data will be collected at a comfortable walking speed of 1.3 m/s53. Walking 
speed will be monitored using timing gait plates placed along the path. Participants will be coached to 
maintain prescribed walking speed. A repeated  measures design will have participants  slip both feet at  3 
different  times in  the gait cycle for each of 3 path curvatures for a total of 18 slip episodes. Slips will be 
delivered while walking along a straight path (infinite radius), or curved paths with radii of 2 or 1 meters. 
A path consisting of multiple turns will be marked on the floor of the lab, including turning radii of 2 and 
1 meters.  
Only right turns  will be  examined, as previous research has found no  difference between  the kinematics 
of left and right  turns.  Participants  will follow  the path  for a randomly  selected  amount  of time  between  
1 and 3 minutes. After this time has elapsed, the investigator will initiate a slip during a randomized turn 
on the path in early, middle, or late stance. Participants  will be given a seated rest period of 5 minutes  
between  each  trial.  
 
 
Aim 2 Specific  Methods  
Young  healthy  participants  will undergo  treadmill  gait and stabilization  movement  analysis  sessions  that 
will last approximately 270 minutes. All participants  will be fitted with a form -fitting singlet, a safety 
harness mounted  to the rigging  of the CAREN  system,  lab-provided  shoes,  and a full- body  retroreflective  
marker set.  A load  cell placed  in line with  the safety  harness  will allow  for the quantification  of forces  
exerted  on the harness at 80 Hz. Data  will be collected with the treadmill set at a comfortable walking 
speed of 1.3 m/s53. A repeated measures design will have participants  slip at 3 different times in the 
gait cycle for each of 5 different uphill/downhill slopes and at 3 times to both feet for 2 cross -slopes for 
a total of 27 slip  episodes  (3 phases  x 5 slopes  that foot doesn't  matter  + 3 phases  x 2 feet x 2 slopes  that 
foot  matters).  
Specifically,  slips  will be delivered  over  sloped  ground  surface  of no slope,  ±5.0  and ±10.0  degrees  slopes 
in the direction of walking, and 5.0 and 10.0 degrees perpendicular to the direction of walking.  
Sloped  surfaces  will be generated  with  the CAREN  system  treadmill,  which  is capable  of pitch  and roll 
±16 degrees.55Slip onset will be triggered by the experimenter in a randomized order at early, mid, or 
late stance. Participants  will walk on the prescribed slope and a slip will be triggered on after a randomly 
predetermined  amount  of time  between  1 and 3 minutes  at either  early,  middle,  or late stance.  
Participants will be given a seated rest period of 5 minutes between each  trial. To quantify the effects of 
the slip perturbation, whole body angular momentum, COM characteristics,  arm movements,  and slip 
characteristics  will be derived  from  the kinematic  data.  
 
 
Statistical  Analysis  Plan 
For each variable, investigators  will test for normality and employ the appropriate parametric or non -
parametric descriptive statistics. Histograms and plots for each variable will be made and examined. 
Statistical hypothesis  testing  will be done  using  custom  software  written  in R statistical  computing  
language  (R Core Team).  General  linear  mixed -effects  model  will be used  to determine  the effects  of 
diverse  slip conditions on reactive movements and slip severity measures for all aims. This mixed -effects 
model will be used to include participants  and order as random factors while testing for differences 
between conditions. For  example,  even  though  these  data  will have  repeated  measures  from  the same  
subject,  a linear  mixed effect model can resolve those non -independencies by including participants  as a 
random factor and  accounting  for changes  from  baseline  participant  variation.  Aim 1: independent  
variables  will be a) turn radius (4 levels: no turn, 2m, 1m, 1/2m), b) slip timing (3 levels: early,  mid, and 
late stance). Aim  2: independent variables will be a) slope (7 levels: no slope, ±5.3 degrees AP, ±10.6 
degrees AP, ±5.3 degrees ML, ±10.6 degrees ML).  