IRB Code Number:  
Version Date: 05/14/2013  1 of 3 
 
 
CONSENT FORM 
 
Use of a “flash-free” adhesive resin for orth odontic bracket bonding: a clinical study of 
bonding time, bond survival, an d adhesive remnant cleanup 
 
You are invited to participate in a research study, which compares a new “flash-free” adhesive with 
a conventional adhesive for orthodontic brack et bonding. You were selected as a possible 
participant because you are seeking orthodontic treatment at the University of Minnesota. We ask that you read this form and ask any questions you  may have before agreeing to be in the study. 
 This study is being conducted by Thorsten Grue nheid, DDS, Dr med dent, PhD and Brent Larson, 
DDS, MS, researchers at the University of Minn esota, Division of Orthodontics, Department of 
Developmental and Surgical Sciences.   Some of the materials used in the study, such as the brackets and adhesives, were donated by 3M 
Unitek, the manufacturer of these materials. Th e flash-free adhesive is  a light-cure orthodontic 
adhesive, which the Food and Drug Administrati on has approved to market for use in bonding 
appliances for orthodontic treatment.  
Study Purpose 
 
The purpose of this study is to compare the tim e required to bond brackets on upper teeth, success 
rate of these brackets, amount of adhesive re maining on the tooth surf ace once the brackets are 
removed, and time required for adhesive remnant cleanup between the new flash-free and the conventional adhesive. About 30 subjects will be involved in the study.  
Study Procedures 
 
If you agree to participat e in this study, we will ask you to have orthodontic brackets bonded to your 
upper teeth with the flash-free adhesive on one side  and the conventional adhe sive on the other side. 
This procedure will be timed as well as the time necessary to remove the adhesive from your teeth 
once the treatment is completed. Bonding ortho dontic brackets to your teeth is required for 
orthodontic treatment, regardless of your pa rticipation in this research study.  
 During treatment, you will be asked to be seen at standardized intervals of 4 weeks for adjustment 
of the orthodontic appliance. During these adjust ment visits, possible bond failure will be recorded. 
A time of 1–2 minutes is estimated to be required for recording of bond failure per adjustment visit. 
Regular adjustment of the orthodontic appliance at  4–6 weeks intervals is n ecessary to achieve an 
adequate orthodontic result regardless of your participation in this research study. Study 
participation does not involve withholding the st andard of care, which includes bonding orthodontic 
brackets to your teeth as outlined above.  
IRB Code Number:  
Version Date: 05/14/2013  2 of 3 
 Risks of Study Participation 
 
This study involves no greater than minimal risk as the new adhesive has been approved for 
marketing and is being used in accordance with  its approved labeling. Ho wever, risks cannot be 
completely eliminated. The risks associated with the new adhesive include a mild reaction of the 
gum tissue to monomers of the adhesive. However, this  risk is not directly a ssociated with the study 
and similar reactions may occur in response to any other orthodontic adhesive as well. 
 A risk associated with record keeping is breach of  confidentiality. All efforts will be made to keep 
your information private. Moreover, your name will be made anonymous and replaced with a 
unique identification number. All data will be re ported using this number and only the investigators 
will know which identification number corresponds to which individual.  
Benefits of Study  Participation 
 
If you decide to participate in this study, you will be treated with tooth-colored ceramic brackets 
without additional charge ($200 value). You will rece ive no other direct benefit for participating in 
this study. However, future orthodontic patients could benefit from the knowledge acquired as the 
results of this study may help de velop better orthodon tic materials. 
 
Alternatives to Study Participation 
 
If you choose not to participate, your  status to receive orthodontic treatment will not be affected.  
 
Study Costs/Compensation 
 
If you participate in this study, you will not incur any costs as a resu lt of study participation. Neither 
will you receive any monetary compensation or ot her type of compensation for your involvement. 
However, you will be reimbursed for parking expe nses up to $120 and will receive a $50 gift card 
upon completion of orthodontic treatment.   
Research Related Injury 
 
In the event that this research activity results in an injury, treatment will be available, including first 
aid, emergency treatment, and follow-up care as needed. Care for such injuries will be billed in the 
ordinary manner to you or your insurance company. If you think that you have suffered a research-
related injury, let the re searchers know right away. 
 
Confidentiality 
 
The records of this study will be kept private. A ny publications that may result from this study will 
not include any information that will make it possi ble to identify you as a subject. However, your 
record for the study may be reviewed by Univers ity departments with appropriate regulatory 
oversight. Study information will not be recorded in your or thodontic record.  
 
IRB Code Number:  
Version Date: 05/14/2013  3 of 3 
 Protected Health Information (PHI) 
 
Your PHI created or received for the purposes of th is study is protected unde r the federal regulation 
known as the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA). Refer to the 
attached HIPAA authorization for details concerning the use of this information.  
 
Voluntary Nature of the Study 
 
Participation in this study is vol untary. Your decision whether or not  to participate will not affect 
your current or future relations with the Univers ity. If you decide to participate, you are free to 
withdraw at any time without a ffecting those relationships.  
 
Contacts and Questions 
 
The researchers conducting this st udy are Thorsten Gruenheid, DDS , Dr med dent, PhD and Brent 
Larson, DDS, MS. You may ask any questions you have  now, or if you have questions later, you are 
encouraged to contact the researchers at 612-625 -5110. If you would like to talk to someone other 
than the researchers, you are encouraged to c ontact the Fairview Resear ch Helpline at telephone 
number 612-672-7692 or toll free at 866-508-6961. You may also contact th is office in writing or in 
person at Fairview Research Administrati on, 2433 Energy Park Drive, St. Paul, MN 55108. 
 You will be given a copy of this form to keep for your records. 
 
Statement of Consent 
 
I have read the above information. I have asked que stions and have received answers. I consent to 
participate in the study. 
  
             
Signature of patient/parent/guardian    Date 
 
             
Signature of researcher obtaining consent   Date 
IRB Code Number:  
Version Date: 05/14/2013 
 
ASSENT FORM 
 
Use of a “flash-free” adhesive resin for orth odontic bracket bonding: a clinical study of 
bonding time, bond survival, an d adhesive remnant cleanup 
 
We are asking you to participate in a study that will help us find out how  well a new “flash-free” 
adhesive for bonding braces to teeth compares to a conventional adhesive. An adhesive is basically 
the glue that holds the braces on your teeth.   We will record the time it takes to put braces on your upper teeth as well as the time it takes to 
remove the glue from them once the braces are removed. During your treatment, we will see you 
every 4 weeks to adjust your braces. At these visits, possible breakage of the braces will be 
recorded. We expect this to take  an extra 1–2 minutes per visit.  
 None of the activities involved in the study will hurt. It will just take some extra time at each visit as 
we need to collect some extra information.   We have also asked your parents for permission a nd we will show you the materials we will use in 
the study before we put the braces on. If you want, your parents can be in the room with you at all 
times. If there is anything you do not like during th e study, you can ask us to stop at any time. You 
can also ask us questions about the study at any time. If you think of any questions later, you may 
call us at 612-625-5110.  By signing below, you confirm that you have read this  form with us, we have explained your role in 
the study, and that you are willi ng to participate. Remember, be ing in this study is up to you. 
Nobody will be angry if you do not want to partic ipate or if you change your mind later. 
   
             
Signature of patient      Date 
 
             
Signature of researcher obtaining assent   Date 
Version 01/11/2012 1 of 1 
IRB Code Number:  HIPAA1 AUTHORIZATION TO USE AND DISCLOSE 
INDIVIDUAL HEALTH INFORMATION FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES 
 
1. Purpose. As a research participant, I authorize Thorst en Gruenheid, DDS, Dr med dent, PhD and the 
researcher’s staff to use and disclose my individual health information for the purpose of conducting the 
research project entitled “Use of a ‘flash-free’ adhesive  resin for orthodontic bracket bonding: a clinical 
study of bonding time, bond survival, and adhesive remnant cleanup.” 
 
2. Individual Health Information to be Used or Disclosed. My individual health information that may be 
used or disclosed to conduct this research includes in formation on survival of orthodontic brackets bonded to 
my teeth and the time needed for adhesive  remnant cleanup after bracket removal. 
 
3. Parties Who May Disclose My Individual Health Information. The researchers will not obtain 
individual health information from other healthcare pr oviders for the purposes of carrying out this research 
study.  
 
4. Parties Who May Receive or Use My Individual Health Information. The individual health 
information disclosed by me during the course of the research may be received and used by 3M Unitek for 
product development and improvement. 
 
5. Right to Refuse to Sign this Authorization. I do not have to sign this Authorization. If I decide not to 
sign, I may not be allowed to participate in this stud y. However, my decision not to sign this authorization 
will not affect any treatment, payment, or enrollmen t in health plans or eligibility for benefits. 
 
6. Right to Revoke. I can change my mind and withdraw this au thorization at any time by sending a written 
notice to Thorsten Gruenheid, DDS, Dr med dent, PhD, University of Minnesota, 515 Delaware Street S.E., 
Minneapolis, MN 55455 to inform the researcher of my  decision. If I withdraw this authorization, the 
researcher may only use and disclose the health informa tion already collected for this study. No further 
health information about me will be collected by or disclosed to the researcher for this study. 
 
7. Potential for Re-disclosure. Once my health information is disclosed under this authorization, there is a 
potential that it will be re-disclosed outside this study and no longer covered by this  authorization. However, 
the research team and the University’s Institutional Re view Board (the committee that reviews studies to be 
sure that the rights and safety of study participants ar e protected) are very careful to protect privacy and limit 
the disclosure of identifying information. There are othe r laws that may require individual health information 
to be disclosed for public purposes. Examples in clude potential disclosures if required for mandated 
reporting of abuse or neglect, judicial proceedings, h ealth oversight activities, a nd public health measures. 
 
This authorization does not have an expiration date. 
 
I am the research participant or personal representative au thorized to act on behalf of the participant. I have 
read this information, and I will receive a copy of this authorization form after it is signed. 
                
Signature  of research participant or person al representative   Date    
 
              
Printed name of research participant or description of personal   Date 
representative’s authority to act on behalf of the research participant 
 
 
1 HIPAA is the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996, a federa l law related to privacy  of health informatio n. 