Nitrous oxide as treatment for tinnitus – a pilot study  STUDY PROTOCOL  
NITROUS OXIDE AS 
TREATMENT FOR TINNIT US 
–A PILOT STUDY
Principal Investigator :  
Jay F. Piccirillo, MD, FACS, CPI  
Professor of Otolaryngology, Director of Clinical Outcomes Research  
Department of Otolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery  
Washington University School of Medicine  
Phone: 314 -362-8641 (off ice) 
Piccirilloj@ent.wustl.edu  
Sub-Investigators:  
Peter Nagele, MD, MSc  
Associate  Professor of Anesthesiology and Genetics  
Department of Anesthesiology  
Washington University School of Medicine  
Phone: 314 -362-5129  
nagelep@anest.wustl.edu  
Charles R. Conway, MD  
Department of Psychiatry, Professor of Psychiatry, Director of Treatment Resistant Depression 
and Neurostimulation Clinic  
Dorina Kallogjeri, MD, MPH , Biostatistician, Department of Otolaryngology - Head and Neck 
Surgery , Washington University School of Medicine  
Helena Hong, Medical Student (MD Candidate ), Washington  University School of Medicine  June 23, 2016
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
2 Nitrous oxide as treatment for tinnitus – a pilot study  Study  Title  Nitrous oxide as treatment for tinnitus – a pilot study  
 
Objective  This pilot study aims to determine if nitrous oxide (laughing gas ) is efficacious as treatment for 
subjective tinnitus . 
Study  Period  Planned enrollment duration: Approximately 6 months.  
Planned study duration: 1 year  
Number of 
Patients  40 
 
 
Study  Drug  Nitrous  oxide  (laughing  gas).  This is an FDA -approved  general  anesthetic  and sedative  agent  used in 
hospitals and dentist offices. The use of nitrous oxide to treat tinnitus is off -label and outside of the 
approved indication. Nitrous oxide will be administered under supervision of an attending -level 
anesthesiologist and using standard anesthesia equipment (mobile anesthesia machine, stan dard peri -
procedural monitoring, oxygen, rescue  equipment).  
 
 
Study  Design  Prospective, randomized, double -blinded, placebo -controlled cross -over trial. Subjects will first 
receive either up to 50% nitrous oxide/50% oxygen or “ placebo” (50% nitrogen [inert]/50% 
oxygen) in a 40-minute single session.  In the subsequent session, subjects will  receive  the other 
treatment intervention. The two sessions will be held 2 weeks apart and will be indistinguishable 
from each other in settin g, setup, and monitoring.  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Inclusion and 
Exclusion  Criteria  Inclusion Criteria  
a) Adult men and women 18 -65 years of  age 
b) Subjective, unilateral  or bilateral, non -pulsatile tinnitus  for at least 6 months duration  
c) Either “Bothered more than a little but not a lot ”, “Bothered a lot ”, or “Extremely bothered ” on 
the Global Bothersome scale  
d) Able to give informed consent  
e) Must be able to read, write, and understand English  
  Exclusion Criteria  
History  of: 
a) Bipolar  disorder  
b) Schizophrenia  
c) Schizoaffective  disorder  
d) Substance abuse or dependence (except for remote substance abuse or dependence with 
remission at least 1 year prior to the study and except for nicotine use  disorders)  
e) Acute  medical  illness  that may pose subject  at risk during  nitrous oxide  administration  
f) Active psychotic  symptoms  
g)  Patients with significant pulmonary disease and/or requiring supplemental  oxygen  
h) Contraindication against the use of nitrous  oxide:  
a. Pneumothorax  
b. Bowel  obstruction  
c. Middle ear  occlusion  
d. Elevated intracranial  pressure  
e. Chronic cobalamin and/or folate deficiency treated with folic acid or vitamin  B12 
f. Pregnant  patients  
g. Breastfeeding  women  
i) Previous  administration  of NMDA -receptor  antagonists  (e.g.,  ketamine)  within  the last 3 
months  
j) Tinnitus related to  cochlear implantation, retrocochlear lesion, Meniere ’s Disease, or other 
known anatomic lesions of the ear or temporal bone  
k) Tinnitus related to a Workman ’s Compensation claim or litigation -related event that is still 
pending.  
l) Any medical condition, which,  in the opinion of the PI, confounds study results or places the 
subject at greater risk  
 Primary  Outcome  
and Measurements  The difference in the difference in patient -reported tinnitus symptoms according to Tinnitus Functional 
Index (TFI)  between baseline and 1 week  after each intervention .  Secondary ou tcome measure will be 
the same calculation performed for  the Momentary Assessment of Tinnitus (MAT)  questionnaire.  
3 Nitrous oxide as treatment for tinnitus – a pilot study   
ABSTRACT  
Tinnitus, the perception of sound in the absence of external ac oustic stimulation, is a common 
yet poorly understood disease that currently lacks effective front -line treatment. Many therapies 
focus on mitigating the effects of tinnitus on patients’ quality of life, such as through habituation 
or masking with white no ise. However, the tinnitus research literature suggests that NMDA 
receptor antagonists may prove to be useful in reducing tinnitus itself. [6, 9, 11, 12 ] Nitrous oxide 
belongs to the class of NMDA receptor antagonists, and additionally is widely -used, non -
invasive, and has a proven safety profile. As such, nitrous oxide may be the drug of choice for 
testing  the efficacy of NMDA receptor antagonists on reducing subjective, bothersome tinnitus.  
 
We propose conducting a pilot randomized placebo -controlled, double -blind crossover study in 
which patients attend two sessions where they receive either 50% nitrous oxide in oxygen or 
50% nitrogen, 50% oxygen for a period of 40 minutes. Tinnitus will be ass essed  using the 
Tinnitus Functional Index (TFI) upon enroll ment, then reassessed 1 week following each 
intervention session. Secondarily, the Momentary Assessment of Tinnitus (MAT)  questionnaire 
will be administered at baseline before intervention, 1 hour after intervention, 1 day after 
intervention, and 1 week af ter intervention.  
 
1. SPECIFIC AIMS  
 
Aim 1.  To evaluate the efficacy of nitrous oxide as treatment for tinnitus  
 
 
2. BACKGROUND  
Subjective,  idiopathic, non -pulsatile tinnitus (“tinnitus”) is perception of sound without  the 
presence of an external acoustic stimulus. Approximately, 60 million  Americans experience 
chronic tinnitus and 15 million of these people have bothersome  tinnitus. Research at 
Washington University (WU)[1] and elsewhere showed that  bothersome tinnitus is associated 
with poorer w orking mem ory, slower processing speeds and reaction times, and deficiencies in 
selective attention.   These findings indicate that tinnitus  interferes with attention and other 
important non -auditory cortical networks  and the effects may be mediated by stress and its  
4 Nitrous oxide as treatment for tinnitus – a pilot study  effects on the central  nervous system.  
 
Currently, no  effective front -line therapy exists for tinnitus. Many patients use external  sound 
therapy such as white noise generators to mask the perceived sound, or  counseling therapy to 
habituate the patient to the perceived sound. While these  treatments often help decrease the 
effects tinnitus has on quality of life,  they do not alleviate the tinnitus itself. Surgical treatment 
such as nerve  transection remains cont roversial. [2, 3] Currently, there are no FDA -approved 
drugs specifically for tinnitus. [4, 5, 6] However, there are antidepressant and  antianxiety 
medications such as desipramine (Norpramin), alprazolam (Xanax), or  lorazepam (Ativan) 
prescribed to patients with tinnitus. [6, 7] According to the American Tinnitus  Association, these 
psychotropic drugs can reduce the psychological burden of tinnitus  for some patients, but again 
do not reduce perception of tinnitus itself.  Furthermore, side effects of the drugs include nausea, 
blurr ed vision, and  insomnia, and they can be habit -forming. As such, the side effects often  
interfere with patients’ ability to concentrate and with other cognitive  functions.[ 7] 
 
A previous trial  performed by Dr. Peter Nagele at WU examined using nitrous oxid e as a 
treatment  for major depressive disorder (MDD). Results showed significant and rapid 
improvement  of depressive symptoms.[ 8] Nitrous oxide is an N -methyl -D-aspartate (NMDA) 
receptor antagonist, a class of drugs that have shown to have antidepressant  effects. [9] There is 
a general consensus in tinnitus research that subjective  neural -generated tinnitus results from 
abnormal spontaneous activity somewhere  in the auditory pathway, and the neural events that 
lead to tinnitus are  themselves a result of a ltered activity in the cochlea. [10, 11] Cochlear NMDA  
receptors have been implicated in neural -generated tinnitus. [10, 12, 13] Acute  excitotoxic 
tinnitus results from administration of salicylate, but prior  administration of NMDA receptor 
blockers preven ts salicylate -induced tinnitus. [12] Given this proposed mechanism of action,  
nitrous oxide, an NMDA receptor antagonist, presents a possible therapeutic  strategy for 
treating tinnitus.  
 
In this pilot  study, we plan to assess the impact of nitrous oxide on tin nitus symptoms and 
degree of bother.  For this pilot study, we will not exclud e patients with depression, and thus 
we will not be able to assess  whether the mechanism of  nitrous oxide on reducing tinnitus is 
independent of the aforementioned mechanism in d epression. Regardless, we believe nitrous 
oxide may be an effective treatment for tinnitus  and believe a pilot study is indicated . 
 
3. DRUG INFORMATION  
Nitrous oxide  (laughing gas) is a colorless, odorless gas. Nitrous oxide is the oldest and  most 
widely used FDA -approved anesthetic gas. It is commonly used as a  component of general 
5 Nitrous oxide as treatment for tinnitus – a pilot study  anesthesia and as a sedative/analgesic agent used in  hospitals and dentist offices. The onset as 
well as offset of effect is within  a few minutes. Nitrous oxide is the least po tent of inhalational 
anesthetics.  Concentrations above 1atm are theoretically needed to produce complete general  
anesthesia when nitrous oxide is used as a sole agent. Therefore,  concentrations typically used 
(50%) in dentistry and pediatrics achieve only  mild to moderate sedation (but potent analgesia) 
and are not sufficient to  produce general anesthesia. Well -known side effects include euphoria, 
sedation,  nausea and vomiting, and inactivation of vitamin B12 (commensurate with the 
duration of exposure  and concentration used). In general, exposure to 50% nitrous oxide for 40  
minutes is considered extremely safe. The use of nitrous oxide to treat tinnitus is off -label and 
outside of the approved indication.  
 
4. ELIGIBILITY  
 
Inclusion Criteria  
a) Adult men and wo men 18 -65 years of age  
b) Subjective, unilateral or bilateral, non pulsatile tinnitus  for at least 6 months duration  
c) Either “Bothered more than a little but not a lot”, “Bothered a lot”, or “Extremely 
bothered” on the Global Bothersome scale  
d) Able to give informed consent  
e) Must be able to read, write, and understand English  
 
Exclusi on Criteria  
a) History of:  
a. Bipolar disorder  
b. Schizophrenia  
c. Schizoaffective disorder  
d. Substance abuse or dependence (except for remote substance abuse or dependence 
with remission at least 1 year prior to the study and except for nicotine use 
disorders)  
b) Acute medical illness that may pose subject at risk during nitrous oxide administration  
c) Active psychotic symptoms  
d) Patients with significant pulmonary disease and/or requiring supplement al oxygen  
e) Contraindication against the use of nitrous oxide, including:  
a. Pneumothorax  
b. Bowel obstruction  
c. Middle ear occlusion  
d. Elevated intracranial pressure  
e. Chronic cobalamin and/or folate deficiency treated with folic acid or vitamin B12  
6 Nitrous oxide as treatment for tinnitus – a pilot study  f. Pregnancy  
g. Breastfee ding women  
f) Previous NMDA -receptor antagonist treatment (e.g., ketamine) within the last 3 months  
g) Tinnitus related to cochlear implantation, retrocochlear lesion, Meniere’s Disease, or 
other known anatomic lesions of the ear or temporal bone  
h) Tinnitus relate d to a Workman’s Compensation claim or litigation -related event that is 
still pending.  
i) Any medical condition, which, in the opinion of the PI, confounds study results or places 
the subject at greater risk  
 
 
5. SCREENING AND ENROLLMENT  
 
Participants will be recruited from Washington University School of Medicine Department of 
Otolaryngology -Head and Neck Surgery clinics, including the Division of Audiology. The 
Washington University Volunteers for Health Research Participant Registry and 
Otolaryngology Research Participant Registry will be queried to identify potential participants. 
Potential participants  will be screened according to  inclusion and exclusion criteria over the 
telephone, and those who meet inclusion  criteria will be invited  to the 8th floor McMillan 
Building Clinical Research Outcomes Office  to discuss study participation . The potential 
participant will have the opportunity to review the consent form and have questions about the 
study answered by the study team. The PI , or designee , will obtain written consent prior to the 
start of study related procedures . 
 
We will enroll a total of 40 participants with bothersome tinnitus to achieve at least  30 
evaluable participants.  Participants will be offered $ 50 in remuneration for th eir time and effort  
in this study, to be given upon completion of study participation . 
 
6. METHODS  
 
Study Design  
This is a prospective, randomized, double -blinded, placebo -controlled crossover trial where 40 
patients will undergo two treatment sessions in randomized order. In one session, subjects will 
receive up to 50% nitrous oxide/50% oxygen for 40 minutes (“Treatment”). In the other session, 
subjects will receive up to 50% nitrogen [inert]/50% oxygen for 40 minutes (“Placebo”). The two 
sessions will be held 2 week s apart and will be indistinguishable from each other in setting, 
setup, and monitoring.  
7 Nitrous oxide as treatment for tinnitus – a pilot study  No pre -enrollment laboratory assessments will be required. However, a health history will be 
taken at screening . 
Randomization  
Each participant  will be randomly assigned to either the “Treatment first” or “Placebo first” 
group . The randomization scheme will use permuted blocks of randomly varying sizes 
generated by the study statistician using SAS statisti cal software and a password -protected 
Microsoft Excel spreadsheet will be used to create and store the study IDs and the 
randomization order. Each block will contain equal numbers of assignments to the treatment 
first and placebo first in randomized order.  To account for the anticipated 20% dropout rate (i.e., 
as a result of withdrawal, being lost to follow -up, and so on), the randomization table will be 
generated for 50 subjects . 
Blinding  
Participants  will be blinded to the  randomization order.  Nitrous oxide is a colorless and 
odorless gas , which makes it unlikely for participants  to identify the group assignment. 
Likewise, the study setup will be identical for both sessions, which will make an inadvertent 
unblinding of the study unlikely. For t he anesthesiology team responsible for the administration 
of the nitrous oxide treatment, the group assignment will be known. This team is completely 
separate from the team assessing the study outcomes , which will be blinded to the treatment 
received . Treatment administration and outcomes assessment will also be physically separated 
in different rooms within the  Clinical Research Unit  (CRU) to prevent unblinding.   To assess the 
integrity of the blind, subjects will be asked immediately after each admini stration to guess 
which treatment – active or placebo they just received.  
 
Setting  
 
The study will be performed in the Clinical Research Unit (CRU)  at the Center for Applied 
Research Sciences,  located on the 4th and 5th floors of  Barnard Hospital . The CRU  is staffed by 
nurses, technicians, and medical assistants with experience in implementing clinical research 
studies, including specialized protocol -required procedures . The  facility consists of 6 rooms and 
12 semi -private beds, and is  equipped with state -of-the art anesthesia machine s, monitoring and 
anesthesia equipment, and resuscitation equipment and devices. The CRU  has anesthesia 
equipment set up to allow for treatment of two participants at once . We will pay the CRU an 
annual fee of $500 for this active protocol.  
 
Administration of Study Treatment  
 
8 Nitrous oxide as treatment for tinnitus – a pilot study  Except for the  choice of gas (nitrous oxide or nitrogen [inert]; both mixed with 50% oxygen),  
treatment sessions will be identical. The gas mix will be administered via a  standard anesthesia 
face mask th rough tubing connected to the inhalation apparatus . Inhaled  and exhaled gas 
concentrations of nitrous oxide, oxygen and nitrogen will be  monitored and adjusted according 
to protocol. Total gas flow will be 2-4 L/min.  
 
Participants  will be  NPO (although liq uids may be freely consumed) for 2 hours prior to each 
intervention session as a precaution for possible nausea.  Participants will be monitored during 
and after the treatment according to American Society of  Anesthesiologists (ASA) standard , 
which include s continuous 3 -lead ECG, pulsoximetry,  non-invasive blood pressure and end  
tidal CO2 under the supervision of an attending -level  anesthesiologists. [15] After the 40 minute 
treatment session, participants  will be  monitored in the CRU for 1 hour . Participants  will then 
be asked to complete the Momentary Assessment of Tinnitus  (MAT)  questionnaire  before 
leaving. A study team physician will determine when the participant  meets criteria for  
discharge  as described by the ASA standard .  
 
7. DATA COLLECTION  
 
Assessment of Treatment Efficacy  
 
Baseline and Treatment Efficacy Assessment Forms : 
1. Demographics  
2. Tinnitus Description and History Form  
3. Global Bothersome Scale  (GBS)  
4. Tinnitus Functional Index (TFI)  
5. Momentary Assessment of Tinnitus Questionnaire ( MAT ) 
6. Patient Health Questionnaire ( PHQ -9) 
7. Patients’ Global Impression of Change (PGIC)  
 
The effects of the treatment will be assessed using  repeat administration of  GBS, TFI,  MAT , 
PHQ -9, and PGIC . 
 
Participants  will be  asked to complete forms 1 -6 (detailed above) immediately before each of 
two sessions  as baseline assessment , with Demographics and Tinnitus Description and History 
Form only required before the first session . One hour and then one day following each 
intervention, participants will co mplete EMA. One week following each session, participants 
will complete GBS, TFI , MAT,  PHQ -9, and PGIC . These constitute the  treatment efficacy  
assessment . In total, each participant will complete the baseline assessment at two timepoints 
and treatment efficacy assessment at 6 timepoints. The two sessions will be 14 days  (2 weeks)  
9 Nitrous oxide as treatment for tinnitus – a pilot study  apart. These questionnaire s can be completed online via a link provided through REDCap in an 
email to the participant . At 14 days after administration of nitrous oxide, w e expect the effects of 
nitrous oxide to wear off fully  and patients’  tinnitus should  have  return ed to baseline . The 
baseline assessment for the second session will take place no sooner than 14  days after the first 
session, and therefore will assess whether this washout period of 14 days is accurate.  The 
patient will not be allowed to participate in the second arm of the study until their Global 
Bother Scale score is within one category of their baseline score.  
 
Assessment of Treatment Safety  
 
Treatment  safety will be assessed at several levels: adverse events (AE) related to (i)  
cardiovascular status; (ii) respiratory function; (iii) central nervous system;  (iv) psychiatric 
symptoms,.  
(i) Cardiovascular AEs, such as  hyper - and hypotension, tachy -/bradyca rdia, will be 
identified by continuous  hemodynamic monitoring during and after the  treatment  
(ii) Respiratory AEs, such as  respiratory depression and desaturation, will be identified 
by continuous  pulsoximetry during and after treatment  
(iii) Central nervo us system AEs  will be assessed clinically.  
(iv) Psychiatric AEs, will be assessed clinically . 
 
8. DATA AND SAFETY MONI TORING  
 
 
The specific monitoring plan  for this study is commensurate with the risks and the size and 
complexity of  the investigations planned. The potential risks are attributable to the use of  
nitrous oxide. Based on these considerations the monitoring plan involves a  DSMC  including 
Dr. Peter Nagele,  an attending anesthesiologist knowledgeable in nitrous  oxide pharmacology , 
Dr. Jay Piccirillo , an attending otolaryngologist with experience with tinnitus patients, and Dr. 
Dorina Kallogjeri,  a biostatistician  with experience in conducting clinical trials. All reports of 
Serious Adverse Event s or Unexpected Adverse Event s will be investi gated by the DSM C and 
reported to the WU HRPO/IRB per reporting guidelines.  
 
Furthermore, t he study principal investigator and study coordinator will monitor for breaches 
of confidentiality and other adverse events on an ongoing basis.  Once the PI or stud y 
coordinator becomes aware of a reportable adverse event, the event will be reported to HRPO 
according to institutional guidelines.   
 
9. DATA ANALYSIS  
10 Nitrous oxide as treatment for tinnitus – a pilot study  Standard descriptive statistics will describe the study population, responses to assessments, and 
severity of tinnitus.  Data will be analyzed using SAS version 9. 4 statistical software (SAS 
Institute, Inc. Cary, NC).  
 Aim 1 . To evaluate the effect of nitrous oxide as treatment of tinnitus.  
The primary efficacy parameter will be the in the change in TFI. Secondary outcome measure 
will be the change in MAT . Baseline  TFI and MAT  will be defined as those determined 
immediately before a session. Post -treatment  TFI and MAT  will be compared to baseline  TFI 
and MAT  at each time point .  A mixed model analysis using SAS Proc Mixed procedure will be 
used to explore the change in TFI score after treatment as compared to after placebo  through 
exploration of the interaction effect of time*treatment. The mixed procedure allow s for 
exploring in formation from measures nested within subjects nested within treatment groups. In 
addition , this analytical approach allows for investigation of the carry -over effect due to cross -
over design.  
And finally , the number of subjects with 13 or more points diff erence in TFI (clinically 
important difference) [16] after each treatment arm will be identified and compared between 
active and placebo treatments using McNemars test.  
 
10. RISK ASSESSMENT  
 
Nitrous oxide.  The side effects of nitrous oxide  are well known to  anesthesiologists. The dose 
(50%)  and duration (40 minutes) used in this protocol are considered extremely safe  and of low 
risk. Similar doses and durations are used in everyday dental practice  without vital sign 
monitoring or supervision by a resuscitati on-trained  physician. With this dose of nitrous oxide, 
sedation may occur but not general  anesthesia or respiratory depression. Previous evidence 
shows that the  inactivating effect of nitrous oxide on vitamin B12 is dose and  duration -
dependent and are mino r when used as described in this protocol. An increase in  plasma 
homocysteine by +25% and return to baseline within the next 24 hours  is expected . Minor side 
effects after nitrous oxide  exposure such as nausea and vomiting may occur which are typically 
self-limited  and short. As a precaution against nausea, patients will be NPO for 2 hours prior to 
each intervention session, although liquids may be freely consumed. If a patient develops 
moderate to severe nausea and vomiting, we  will administer 4mg of ondan setron.  
 
Questionnaires.  Participants  may experience frustration and/or boredom completing the 
questionnaires. The participants may refuse to answer any  questions for any reason.  
11 Nitrous oxide as treatment for tinnitus – a pilot study   
12 Nitrous oxide as treatment for tinnitus – a pilot study  REFERENCES  
 
 
1. Pierce KJ, Kallogjeri D, Piccirillo JF, Garcia KS, Nicklaus JE, Burton H. Effects of severe 
bothersome tinnitus on cognitive function measured with standardized tests. J Clin 
Exp Neuropsychol 2012.  
2. Lechtenberg, Richard, and Abraham Shulman. "Benzodiazepine s in the treatment of 
tinnitus."  The Journal of Laryngology & Otology  98.S9 (1984): 271 -276. 
3. Lockwood, Alan H., Richard J. Salvi, and Robert F. Burkard. "Tinnitus."  New England 
Journal of Medicine  347.12 (2002): 904 -910. 
4. Langguth, Berthold, Richard Salvi, and Ana Belén Elgoyhen. "Emerging 
pharmacotherapy of tinnitus."  Expert opinion on emerging drugs  14.4 (2009): 687 -702. 
5. Langguth, Berthold, and Ana Belén Elgoyhen. "Current pharmacological treatments for 
tinnitus."  Expert opinion on pharmacotherapy  13.17 (2 012): 2495 -2509.  
6. Beebe Palumbo, Devon, et al. "The Management and Outcomes of Pharmacological 
Treatments for Tinnitus."  Current neuropharmacology  13.5 (2015): 692 -700. 
7. Drug Therapies, American Tinnitus Association https://www.ata.org/managing -your -
tinnitus/treatment -options/drug -therapies . 
8. Nagele, Peter, et al. "Nitrous oxide for treatment -resistant major depression: a proof -of-
concept trial."  Biological psychiatry  78.1 (2015): 10 -18. 
9. Jevtović -Todorović V, Todorović SM, Mennerick S, Powell S, Dikranian K, Benshoff N, 
Zorumski CF, Olney JW. Nitrous oxide (laughing gas) is an NMDA antagonist, 
neuroprotectant and neurotoxin. Nat Med. 1998 Apr;4(4):460 -3. 
10. Sahley, Tony L.,  Michael D. Hammonds, and Frank E. Musiek. "Endogenous 
dynorphins, glutamate and N -methyl -d-aspartate (NMDA) receptors may participate in 
a stress -mediated Type -I auditory neural exacerbation of tinnitus."  Brain research  1499 
(2013): 80 -108. 
11. Nicolas -Puel, C., et al. "Characteristics of tinnitus and etiology of associated hearing 
loss: a study of 123 patients."  The international tinnitus journal  8.1 (2001): 37 -44. 
12. Guitton, Matthieu J., and Yadin Dudai. "Blockade of cochlear NMDA receptors prevents 
long -term tinnitus during a brief consolidation window after acoustic trauma."  Neural 
plasticity  2007 (2008).  
13. Puel, J. L. "Cochlear NMDA receptor blockade prevents salicylate -induced tinnitus."  B 
ENT  2 (2007): 19 -22. 
14. Beck, Aaron T., Robert A. Steer, and Margery G. Carbin. "Psychometric properties of 
the Beck Depression Inventory: Twenty -five years of evaluation." Clinical psych ology 
review 8.1 (1988): 77 -100. 
15. Standards for Basic Anesthetic Monitoring http://www.asahq.org/For -
13 Nitrous oxide as treatment for tinnitus – a pilot study  Members/Standards -Guidelines -and-Statements.aspx  7/1/ 2011  
16. Meikle, Mary B., et al. "The tinnitus functional index: development of a new clinical 
measure for c hronic, intrusive tinnitus."  Ear and hearing  33.2 (2012): 153 -176. 