  
06/01 /2021       Page 1 of 11    IRB#  10283    Suppressive Antibacterial Therapy with Once -weekly Solosec®(secnidazole) Oral Granules to Prevent Recurrent 
Bacterial Vaginosis   
Drug Name: Solosec®(secnidazole) Oral Granules, 2 g  
 
 
NCT # 05033743  
Document Date: 0 6/01/2021  
 
 
    
Chemen M. Neal MD, Associate Professor 
Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology  
550 N. University Ave Suite 2440  
Indianapolis, IN 46202  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
06/01 /2021       Page 2 of 11    IRB#  10283   STUDY PROTOCOL  
Suppressive Antibacterial Therapy with Once -Weekly Secnidazole Granules to Prevent Recurrent Bacterial 
Vaginosis ; a Pilot Study  
 
Chemen M. Neal MD, Assistant Professor  
Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology  
550 N. University Ave Suite 2440  
Indianapolis, IN 46202  
 
Sub-Investigators and their affiliations:  
Jeffrey Peipert, MD, Ph.D., Professor  
Obstetrics & Gynecology  
Indiana University School of Medicine  
 
David Haas, MD, MS, Professor  
Obstetrics & Gynecology  
Indiana University School of Medicine  
 
IRB# 10283  
IND/IDE#:  155940  
  
  
06/01 /2021       Page 3 of 11    IRB#  10283   Table of Contents:  
 
Study Schema  
1.0 Background & Rationale  
2.0 Objective(s)  
2.1 Primary Objective  
2.2 Secondary Objective  
2.3 Tertiary/Exploratory/Correlative Objectives  
3.0 Outcome Measures  
3.1 Primary Outcome Measures  
3.2 Secondary Outcome Measures  
3.3 Tertiary/ Exploratory/ Correlative Outcome Measures  
4.0 Eligibility Criteria  
4.1 Inclusion Criteria  
4.2 Exclusion Criteria  
5.0 Study Design  
6.0 Enrollment/Randomization  
7.0 Study Procedures  
8.0 Study Calendar  
9.0 Reportable Events  
10.0 Data Safety Monitoring  
11.0 Study Withdrawal/Discontinuation  
12.0 Statistical Considerations  
13.0 Data Management  
14.0 Privacy/Confidentiality Issues  
15.0 Follow -up and Record Retention  
16.0 References  
17.0 Appendix  
 
  
06/01 /2021       Page 4 of 11    IRB#  10283  1. Background & Rationale  
Forty to fifty percent of women with vaginal complaints will be diagnosed with bacterial vaginosis (BV) making 
it the most prevalent cause of vaginal symptoms in women nationally. Greater than 50% of women will have a repeat 
episode of BV within 1 year of standard treatment. 1 Recurrent BV, defined a s three or more symptomatic episodes within 
1 year, may be associated with multiple treatment failures over periods of several years or months. While there are no universally agreed upon treatment protocols for recurrent BV, the current CDC referenced trea tment regimens include a 
14-day course of metronidazole or tinidazole followed by twice -weekly or daily nitroimidazole therapy for up to six 
months.
2  
Secnidazole is a nitroimidazole antimicrobial indicated for the treatment of bacterial vaginosis in adult women 
with a much longer half-life than both metronidazole and tinidazole. While suppressive therapy can be curative or can 
increase symptom free intervals, patient compliance with complicated and prolonged treatment regimens are barriers to 
successful outcomes. Compared to metronidazole and tinidazole, secnidazole has a much lon ger half -life (metronidazole 
and tinidazole: 8 hours and 12-14 hours vs. secnidazole: 17-29 hours).   
To date, there are no studies that have evaluated secnidazole for suppressive therapy of recurrent BV.  In a 
randomized double -blind trial, clinical cure and/or symptom improvement rates were similar in women with bacterial 
vaginosis  treated with a single dose of secnidazole (90.8%) or tinidazole (87.5%). Data from two non- blinded studies 
indicated that a single dose of secnidazole was at least as effective as 7-day treatment with metronidazole (secnidazole 
73.3 to 93.1%; metronidazole 58.5 to 95.8%). 3  
From this data, it is reasonable to speculate that once weekly dosing of secnidazole for suppressive therapy of 
recurrent BV may be at least as effective as the current more complex therapies and would be a valuable treatment 
alternative to women suffering with recurrent BV due to the more simplified dosing regimen.  
Simplifying suppressive protocols could improve patient compliance and decrease the recurrence of disease.  Poor 
adherence increases with longer durations of treatment and studies of compliance rates show that 50% of women do not 
adhere to 5-7 day treatments for BV.4,5 Poor adherence  leads to treatment failures and recurring infections and  increases 
the potential for resistant organisms.6 Utilizing a drug such as secnidazole, which has a much longer half -life may provide 
an improved therapeutic window for suppression of causative microorganisms and could prevent a recurrence.   
2. Objective s 
2.1 Primary Objective. To determine the efficacy and safety  of once -weekly oral secnidazole granules for 
suppressive therapy of recurrent BV to previously published efficacy  and safety  data of multiple -dose 
nitroimidazole suppressive regimen s for the treatment of recurrent BV .  
2.2 Secondary Objective. To determine the meantime to recurrence of BV after treatment.  
2.3 Tertiary/Exploratory/Correlative Objectives. To evaluate participant compliance, tolerance, and occurrence of adverse events.  
3. Outcome Measures/Endpoints  
3.1 Primary Outcome Measures To estimate the efficacy and safety of once- weekly oral secnidazole granules 
for suppressive therapy of recurrent BV and to qualitatively compare to previously published efficacy and safety data of multiple -dose nitroimidazole suppressive regimens for the treatment of recurrent BV to aid in 
the design of a larger comparative trial.   
3.1.1 
 Efficacy: The primary efficacy endpoint is failed treatment, defined as having at least 1 episode 
of RBV in the 30 week follow-up period. An episode of RBV (failed treatment) will be diagnosed if the subject has a Amsel score of 3 or higher. We will report total number of RBV episodes, 
overall failure rate, and time to failure after initial treatment. We will also report rates of RBV if 
diagnosed as >=1  Amsel criteria is met per FDA recommendations, but the primary outcome will 
be >=2 criteria to be consistent with prior literature and recommendations.  
3.1.2  
3.1.2.1  The Amsel criteria:  
3.1.2.1.1  Thin, white, yellow, homogeneous discharge 
3.1.2.1.2  Clue cells on wet mount microscopy 
3.1.2.1.3  a vaginal fluid pH of over 4.5 when placing the discharge on litmus paper  
  
06/01 /2021       Page 5 of 11    IRB#  10283  3.1.2.1.4  Release of fishy odor when adding 10% potassium hydroxide (KOH) solution 
to wet mount - also known as “whiff test.”  
3.1.3 Safety: adverse events via MedDRA criteria . 
3.2 Secondary Outcome Measures Time to recurrence measured by failure rates and time- to-failure. Defined by 
Amsel’s criteria or by Nugent criteria (gram stain results).  To be measured at visit 2 (3 -5 days after initial 
treatment), visits 3 -6 (week 6, 10, 14, and 18 during suppressive treatment), visits 7 & 8 (22 & 30 weeks after 
initiation of treatment).   
3.3 Tertiary/Exploratory/Correlative Outcome Measures Participant compliance, tolerance, and adverse event 
data to be collected via a patient questionnaire at each visit. The s afety of secnidazole was evaluated in five Phase 
1 clinical trials before  FDA approval. The five most common treatment- associated adverse events were: 
vulvovaginal candid iasis, headache, nausea, diarrhea, abdominal pain, and vulvovaginal pruritis. We will monitor 
for the frequency and severity of these events and any other subject -related side effects.  
 
4. Eligibility Criteria  
4.1 Inclusion Criteria 
• Age 18 -50 
• Ability to consent in English 
• Current symptomatic bacterial vaginosis infection ( > 3 Amsel criteria).  
 Amsel’s criteria: Homogenous vaginal discharge, vaginal pH >4.5, positive amine odor, and/or presence of >20% clue cells /hpf on saline mount microscopy 
• History of at least 2 previous episodes of BV in the past 1 year.  
 Continuation after Second Visit  
• Clinical resolution of bacterial vaginosis defined as:  (asymptomatic and < 2 Amsel criteria, will also 
be reported as asymptomatic and < 1 Amsel criteria).  
 
4.2 Exclusion Criteria 
• Current gynecologic infection or condition, including candida vaginitis, gonorrhea, chlamydia, 
trichomonas, desquamative inflammatory vaginitis, atrophic vaginitis. 
• Pre-existing heart conditions 
• Pre-existing neurological conditions 
• Currently Pregnant or breastfeeding 
• Women taking anticoagulants, lithium, metoclopramide, or disulfiram therapy  
• Hypersensitivity to secnidazole or other drugs in the same class.  
5. Study Design  
A single -center prospective pilot study with once- weekly oral secnidazole granule treatment of an acute condition for two 
weeks followed by prophylactic treatment of asymptomatic responders with once- weekly secnidazole for 16 weeks, 
followed by no therapy for 12 weeks. The final follow -up evaluation is at week 30 . 
Eligible women with a current symptomatic bacterial vaginosis infection ( > 3 A msel criteria) and a history of at least 2 
previous episodes of bacterial vaginosis in the past year will be enrolled in the open-label treatment study. All women will be treated with 2g of s ecnidazole granules orally once  weekly for 2 weeks. At the second  visit, 3 -5 days after completion 
of treatment, women who have a clinical resolution of bacterial vaginosis (asymptomatic and <2 Amsel criteria, will also 
be reported as asymptomatic and < 1 Amsel criteria) will continue on once- weekly  secnidazole for 16 weeks.  
Patients will be evaluated at week 6, 10, 14, and 18 for recurrence of bacterial vaginosis.  Th is will include questions 
about symptoms as well as a pelvic examination for assessment of vaginal discharge ( > 3 Amsel criteria). We  will also 
collect any information on other clinical evaluations for recurrence and the dates of diagnoses and types of treatments they 
may have received. Those who remain without recurrence during the 16-week suppressive phase will be followed for an 
additional 12 weeks off therapy, with assessment for recurrence at weeks 22 and 30. Throughout the study, data will be collected on participants’ compliance and on the occurrence of adverse events.  
  
  
  
06/01 /2021       Page 6 of 11    IRB#  10283   
 Flow diagram:  
 At Enrollment  
   
 
Visit 1  
   
 
 
Visit 2  
  
 Visits 3 – 6 
(wk 6, 10, 14, 18)   
 
 
 
 
 
  6. Enrollment  
Participants presenting to the IU Coleman Center with a history of recurrent bacterial vaginosis who are currently symptomatic will be evaluated for enrollment in the study. Informed consent will be obtained. 
 7. Study Procedures  
At each visit where women are evaluated for BV they will be asked about vaginal discharge. Then they will undergo a 
speculum examination of the vagina similar to pelvic examinations performed clinically at most annual gynecologic 
examinations. Any vaginal discharge present will be collected by a swab for assessment of pH, odor, and presence of clue 
cells on microscopy. The speculum examination should take ~2 minutes. At the initial enrollment visit, subjects will be given a point-of- care pregnancy test. If the test is positive, the subject will 
not be placed on study drug, and will receive alternate, traditional suppressive therapy. Women enrolled will be instructed 
in the use of the secnidazole granules by trained study personnel or the medical provider. If  a subject becomes pregnant 
during the study, we will terminate study drug for the subject and follow the subject for any adverse pregnancy outcomes for safety reporting.  The subject will have a basic neurological test at enrollment.  
At follow up visits, women will again be queried about vaginal discharge and will undergo a speculum examination as above, even if they do not endorse vaginal discharge. Subject will have a basic neurological test at follow up visits.  
Women will be asked about any adverse side effects of the secnidazole including vaginal irritation, bleeding, redness, or 
itching. If the subject presents with vulvovaginal candidiasis, they will be treated with oral or vaginal fluconazole , per 
patient preference,  if they present to the PI, or with the standard of care if they present elsewhere. The treatment will be 
noted. If the subject or potential subject has any history of heart disease or disorders of the heart, they will be excluded from 
participation. If a study participant has recurrence of bacterial vaginosis while on protocol, the subject will fail study treatment, and will 
be placed on alternate, traditional suppressive therapy. The participant will have completed the study at this point. 
 
 Total N:  50   
Obtain informed consent. Screen potential participants by inclusion and exclusion criteria.   
Obtain history.  Document.  
Perform baseline assessments  
Symptom assessment, pelvic exam, gonorrhea/chlamydia/trichomonas PCR, pH, UPT, wet mount, whiff test, Gram 
stain, neurological exam   
Dispense  2 packets of 2g dose of Secnidazole granules (will be taken 1 packet weekly for 2 weeks)  
Follow -up assessments of study endpoints and safety  
Symptom assessment, pelvic exam, pH, wet mount, whiff test, Gram 
stain, neurological exam  Follow -up assessments of study endpoints and safety  
Symptom assessment, compliance assessment, pelvic exam, pH, wet mount, whiff test, Gram stain , 
neurological exam Assessment for bacterial vaginosis   
Symptom assessment, pelvic exam, pH, wet mount, whiff test, Gram stain , neurological exam  
If < 1 Amsel criteria, continue to next phase  
Dispense 16 packets of 2g dose of Secnidazole (will be taken 1 packet weekly for 16 weeks)  
 3-5 days post treatment  
Every 4 weeks x 16 weeks  
At Visit 6 
Asymptomatic & < 1 
Amsel Criteria  Visit 7-8  
(week 22, 30)  
  
06/01 /2021       Page 7 of 11    IRB#  10283    
 
8. Study Calendar  
 
 Treatment  Follow Up  Unscheduled  
Event/Procedure  Enrollment/V1  
Day 1  V2 
Day 18  V3 
Week 6  
 V4 
Week 10  
 V5 
Week 14  
 V6 
Week 18  
 V7 
Week 22  
 V8 
Week 30  
 Unscheduled  
Window   +/- 1 
day +/- 5 
days +/- 5 
days +/- 5 
days +/- 5 
days +/- 5 
days +/- 5 
days  
Screening  x         
Confirm 
eligibility  x         
Informed 
consent  x         
Collection of 
MHx x         
Symptom 
Assessment  x x x x x x x x x 
Pelvic Exam  x x x x x x x x Per SOC  
STI Testing  SOC        Per SOC  
Whiff test  x x x x x x x x Per SOC  
Vaginal pH  x x x x x x x x Per SOC  
Wet mount  x x x x x x x x Per SOC  
Gram stain  x x x X x x x x Per SOC  
Study Drug 
Administration  x X* X* X* X* X*    
Med compliance 
assessment    x x x x    
*study  drug provided to asymptomatic subjects only at V2  - V6. 
 
 
9. Reportable Events  
The study is expected to be only slightly greater than minimal risk as the study medications and examinations are those 
that are commonly used during routine clinical care and evaluations. Secnidazole (study drug) has FDA approval for the 
treatment of acute BV with minimal side effects reported.  
 Any severe adverse effects including unexpected hospitalization due to treatment will be reported per IRB guidelines. Any 
non-severe Adverse Events (“AE”s) such as sensitivity or side effects will be reported in aggregate at annual reviews. 
Expected/comm on side effects of the examinations are discomfort and irritation. There is a minimal risk of vaginal 
bleeding. Side effects reported with secnidazole include vulvovaginal candidiasis, headache, mild gastrointestinal 
discomfort, and vaginal itching.  
 An adverse event (“AE”) is defined as any untoward medical occurrence associated with the use of a drug in humans, 
whether or not the event is considered drug-related. An AE can therefore be any unfavorable and unintended sign 
(including an abnormal labora tory finding that is unrelated to the intent of the study), symptom, or disease temporally 
associated with the use of a drug. An adverse reaction means any adverse event caused by a drug. Adverse reactions are a 
subset of all suspected adverse reactions fo r which there is reason to conclude that the drug caused the event. A suspected 
adverse reaction implies a lesser degree of certainty about causality than an adverse reaction.  
Pre-existing conditions are not considered adverse events unless there is an une xpected change in the frequency, intensity, 
or nature of the condition. A newly diagnosed pregnancy during study enrollment will not be considered an adverse event. 
If a pregnancy occurs during the treatment or maintenance phases of the study, the subject will be asked to discontinue the 
study drug and be terminated from the study.  
 
Pregnancy reports:  
Pregnancy reports of subjects should be forwarded to Lupin Research Inc. This also includes normal pregnancies without 
AE. If a pregnancy occurs during the tr eatment or maintenance phases of the study, the subject will be asked to 
discontinue study drug and be terminated from the study.   The pregnancy should be followed up to determine outcome, including spontaneous or voluntary termination, details of 
birth, and presence or absence of any birth defect, congenital abnormalities or maternal and newborn complications. 
Pregnancy follow -up should be conducted until the outcome.  
  
06/01 /2021       Page 8 of 11    IRB#  10283  The pregnancy reporting procedure should be the same as the Serious AE reporting procedure set out in Section 2.7 of the 
Agreement.  
 
 
Additional Notes on Adverse Events and Serious Adverse Events:  
For the purposes of this study, changes in clinical criteria (i.e. Amsel criteria and/or symptoms) from baseline that are associated with BV will b e captured on the corresponding case report forms and should not be recorded as an adverse 
event with the following exception: 
• If in the investigator/clinician’s opinion a subject treated for BV gets a secondary infection (e.g. yeast infection), the yeast infection should be captured as an adverse event. 
Each AE or suspected adverse reaction must be assessed for its seriousness. The term “serious” is not synonymous with 
“severe” that may be used to describe the intensity of an event or reaction. An AE or suspected adverse reaction is 
considered serious if in the view of either the investigator:  
• Results in death  
• Is life threatening (referring to an adverse event or suspected adverse reaction in which either the investigator or the sponsor believes  the subject  was at risk of death at the time of the event or reaction; it does not refer to an 
event that hypothetically might have caused death if it were more severe).  
• Requires inpatient hospitalization or prolongs an existing hospitalization 
• Results in a persisten t or significant disability/incapacity  
• Is considered medically important  
 
Important medical events are those that may not be immediately life threatening but are of major clinical significance and 
may require intervention to prevent one of the other serio us outcomes listed above. Examples include a seizure that did 
not require in-subject hospitalization or allergic bronchospasm that needed emergency treatment. 
 All adverse events or suspected adverse reactions that do not meet the criteria for serious will  be regarded as non -serious.  
Definition of Unexpectedness: An adverse event or suspected adverse reaction is considered unexpected if the 
nature/specificity or severity of the event or reaction is not consistent with applicable product information.  
Documentation of Adverse Events: All adverse events (serious and non -serious) that occur from the time informed 
consent is signed through Visit 8 must be reported and recorded in source documentation and the appropriate page(s) of te 
CRF. Information to be documented for each AE includes the following:  
• Adverse event term  
• Severity of the event (mild, moderate, or severe) 
• Start and stop date (if applicable)  
• Time of the event if it occurred on the first day of study drug administration  
• Relationship to study drug (none, possible, probable, definite) 
• Action taken with the study drug (none, study drug interrupted, study drug discontinued) 
• Action taken (none, new medication/treatment, termination from study, hospitalization, other) 
• Outcome of the event (resolved, resolved with sequalae , ongoing, death, or unknown) 
• Whether or not the event meets serious criteria.  
 If AE signs and symptoms are the result of a specific diagnosis, the diagnosis only (and not the cluster of signs and symptoms tha t make up the diagnosis) should be reported on the CRF.  
Severity criteria:  Severity criteria for adverse events will be defined as follows:  
• Mild: awareness of signs/symptoms that are easily tolerated causing minimal discomfort and not interfering with normal daily activities  
• Moderate: Sufficient discomfort is present and may interfere with normal daily activities  
• Severe: Extreme distress is present causing significant impairment of functioning or incapacitation preventing normal daily activities.  
The inves tigator should use clinical judgement in assessing the intensity of adverse events not directly experienced by the 
subject (e.g., lab abnormalities).  
Relatedness Criteria:  An adverse event is considered associated with the use of the drug if the attribution is possible, 
probable, or definite. Attribution definitions for the relatedness of adverse events will be defined as follows: 
• None: An adverse event that is not related to the use of study drug. 
  
06/01 /2021       Page 9 of 11    IRB#  10283  • Possible: An adverse event that might be due to the use of the drug; an alternative explanation (e.g. a concomitant 
drug or illness) is inconclusive. The relationship to time is reasonable. 
• Probable: An adverse event that might be due to the use of the drug; an alternative explanation (e.g. a concomitant drug or i llness) is less likely. The relationship in time is suggestive.  
• Definite: An adverse event that cannot be reasonably explained with an alternate explanation (e.g. a concomitant drug or illness). The relationship in time is very suggestive. A direct cause a nd effect relationship between the 
study drug and the adverse event exists.  
 
Serious Adverse Event Reporting: All serious adverse events (SAE) that occur during the trial regardless of their 
relationship to the study drug must be reported to the IRB (and sponsor) as soon as possible but no later than 24 hours after learning of the event. A Serious Adverse Event (SAE) Report form must be filed and sent to the sponsor as soon as 
possible. Information included with the initial notification should include as much of the information requested in the 
form as possible. The SAE Report form should not be held up if all the information regarding the SAE is not yet available.   
The Investigator will be responsible for reporting to the regulatory authorities, Lupin and all participating investigators all serious adverse events associated with the use of the study drug. The Investigator will report such SAEs using the FDA MedWatch form, CIOMS, etc. The Investigator will report safety reports to the IRB and institution in accordance with 
IRB regulations and institutional policies.  
The Investigator will also record all non- serious adverse events and share with Lupin as a part of the final study report.  
When additional/new information regarding the SAE becomes available, an updated SAE Report form should be 
submitted to the sponsor/IRB. Copies of any relevant data from hospital notes (e.g. laboratory tests, discharge summary, 
ECGs, ER records, etc.) should also be submitted when they become available. 
All serious adverse even ts should be followed and treated appropriately until there is satisfactory resolution of the adverse 
event, the adverse event becomes stable or can be explained by other causes, clinical judgment indicates further evaluation is not needed, or it appears unlikely that additional information can be obtained given due diligence has been done.  
Rates of SAE will be examined  after the first 5 subjects are completed, then at 10, 20, and 30 subjects. If greater than 25% 
of subjects have an occurrence of a SAE  at any of these milestones, the study team will work with the IR B to determine 
whether the trial should stop.   If CTCAE grade 3 or higher events occur, we will consult the IRB and FDA and halt the 
trial if either entity recommends stopping the trial.  
 10. Data Safety Monitoring  
Lupin will perform a monthly reconciliation with the investigator for the SAEs that were shared with Lupin in the given month. A clinical monitor will perform on -site and/or remote monitoring visits as often as necessary to ensure that all aspects of 
the protocol are followed. Monitors will record their visits on a site visit log that will be k ept on -site, and may be recorded 
electronically . During monitoring visits, source documentation will be reviewed for verification of data entered on the 
CRF. Source documents include, but are not limited to, clinic and office charts (paper and/or electroni c), laboratory and 
vaginal culture results, Gram stain results, and any electronic records generated from computerized medical record systems used at investigational sites that may serve as source documentation for the purposes of this protocol.  
The review of regulatory documents, informed consents, and drug storage and accountability records will also be done during monitoring visits. Monitors will meet with the principal  investigator periodically throughout the study to provide 
feedback on the study and performance.  
Direct access to source documentation and to the drug storage and dispensing area must be allowed during monitoring visits. It is also expected that investigator/study staff will be available to assist the monitor in his/her activities, CRFs  will 
be completed, and ICFs, drug accountability, and regulatory records will be available for review. A suitable area should be provided for the monitor to work during monitoring visits.  
 
11. Study Withdrawal/Discontinuation  
 
All subjects are free to withdraw from participation in the study at any time, and for whatever reason, specified or 
unspecified, and without prejudice. The reason for discontinuation will be entered onto the study termination page of the 
CRF.  
No constraints will be placed on ordinary subject management, and subjects may be placed on other conventional therapy upon request or whenever clinically necessary, as determined by the investigator/clinician.  
 12. Statistical Considerations  
  
06/01 /2021       Page 10 of 11    IRB#  10283   
As this is a pilot project to determine the rates of recurrence with this therapy, no a priori sample size was calculated. We 
aim to recruit 50 women to determine this rate. That is a similar sample size to other studies in this area. The rates 
determined by this pilot study will be used in sample size calcu lations for a larger comparative trial.   If the patient 
population behaves similarly to other BV studies, this study can expect to lose 15% immediately after enrollment as a loss to follow-up. In similar studies, 25.5% had recurrence of BV at the end of the 16- week maintenance phase. A total of 51% 
had recurrence of BV by the end of the 28- week follow -up phase. In a 50- subject trial, if secnidazole has a similar 
performance,  this would yield  approximately 21 subjects that have resolved symptoms through the full 30 weeks of 
participation.
7 For this pilot study, we anticipate this 50% symptom resolution rate ± 15%. In consideration of this, 21/42 
= 0.50 with 95% CI of 0.34 to 0.66 (exact) at 30 weeks, the half -width would be 0.16.  We will report rates as poin t 
estimates and 95% confidence intervals. For proportions/rates, we will use exact binomial confidence intervals, and, for 
time to event, we will estimate the confidence intervals using the Kaplan -Meier method . 
 
13. Statistical Data Management 
Primary data will be collected via subject self -report and EMR review and stored electronically in REDCap electronic 
CRF .  A backup of the CRF data in REDCap will be saved on a nightly basis to a secure environment maintained by the 
Research Technologies division  of University Information Technology Services (UITS)..   
 Quality assurance steps will include:  
• Testing of database prior to being placed into production mode  
• Automated range checks.  
• Manual verification of any self -reported subject data; clinical notes/ electronic medical 
chart will take precedence over self -reported data, except when overridden by PI or their 
designee.  
• Single entry with random checks of accuracy and extraction and cleaning of data that will 
be used for analysis every 6 mo nths. 
 
 
14. Privacy/Confidentiality Issues  
Only study staff involved in the study will have access to study records. Subjects will be given a unique subject number 
once they sign consent. All study staff will complete and maintain the required Indiana University training and study-
specific training  prior to interacting with subjects.  Study data will be maintained on a secure, password-protected 
REDCap database.  
 15. Follow -up and Record Retention  
We expect to complete study enrollment in 12 months. Subjects will be followed for up to 9 months. Hard copy records will be kept in secure areas. Electronic records will be kept on password protected systems. Records will be kept until the 
study ends and follow current guidance. This study utilizes secure IT systems for data gathering, data transfer, data 
mana gement, and analysis. All data transfers are encrypted. Transfers from data sources are governed by an approved 
honest data broker process, ensuring data transfers are in accordance with research protocol and relevant data usage 
agreements. All IT systems used for data gathering, management, and analysis are secure as per HIPAA. Access to patient 
data and research applications is administered to ensure research teams only have access to patient data for which they are 
approved. 
 16. References  
 
1. Allsworth JE, Pe ipert JF. Prevalence of bacterial vaginosis: 2001 -2004 National Health and Nutrition 
Examination Survey data. Obstet Gynecol. 2007;109(1):114-120. 
2. Prevention CfDCa. 2015 Sexually Transmitted Diseases Treatment Guidelines. 2015. 
3. Gillis, J.C., Wiseman, L.R. Secnidazole.  Drugs  1996; 51, 621–638.. 
4. Pentikis, H., Adetoro, N., Tipping, D. et al.  An Integrated Efficacy and Safety Analysis of Single- Dose 
Secnidazole 2 g in the Treatment of Bacterial Vaginosis. Reprod. Sci. 2020; 27, 523 –528.  
5. Cockburn J, Gibberd R W, Reid A L, Sanson-Fisher R W. Determinants of non- compliance with short term 
antibio tic regimens. Br Med J (Clin Res Ed) 1987; 295:814. 
6. Przemyslaw Kardas, Patient compliance with antibiotic treatment for respiratory tract infections, Journal of 
Antimicrobial Chemotherapy   2002;49,897 –903.  
  
06/01 /2021       Page 11 of 11    IRB#  10283   7. Sobel JD, Ferris D, Schwebke J, Nyirjesy P, Wiesenfeld HC, Peipert J, Soper D, Ohmit SE, Hillier SL. 
Suppressive antibacterial therapy with 0.75% metronidazole vaginal gel to prevent recurrent bacterial vaginosis. 
Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2006 May;194(5):1283- 9. 