Title:
Machine Learning for Postoperative Care
Short Title
ODIN-Pilot
Registration: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
Version: 3.0; Dec 28 2022
Version 1.10 adds an education and implementation phase between the pre-intervention and 
post-intervention phases. This will be necessary to give all the participating nurses time to learn 
where the machine-learning information is located in the Epic environment.
Version 1.11 Clarifies the activities of the education and implementation phase, including the 
lack of additional consent for notification of the intervention.
Version 2.0 is a major change.Parent study (TECTONICS) is closing, remove status as a sub-study.
a. Specify anesthesia-control-tower clinical protocols and equipment instead of 
TECTONICS protocol
b. Remove TECTONICS SMB and DSMB
c. Remove TECTONICS data retentionRemove "short report card" comparatorChange to inclusion criteria:
a. remove “observation unit status” and replace it with “risk of unplanned ICU 
admission in 85%ile
b. add Transplant surgery , Otolaryngology, hepatobiliary surgery to included 
surgical services
c. Remove TECTONICS contact-arm inclusion criterion
d. Remove PACU anesthesiologist
e. Add previously implicit inclusion criteria: weekdays during business hoursModify design from pre- vs post-intervention to pre-intervention plus contemporaneous 
controls with intervention/no-intervention on alternating daysClarify many aspects of intervention screening and mechanics as these have updatedRename "run-in phase" to "education and adaptation phase"Remove investigator Wildes (leaving institution)Eliminate secondary outcome measure (handoff checklist)
These changes are based on (1) feedback from existing participants (2) technical issues and 
time-of-day making the existing recruitment strategy too slow (3) transition of parent RCT to 
usual clinical operations
Version 3
- Adds additional time because of updates to the format of the report card in 
response to participant feedback.
- Adds anesthesia clinicians to those who are alerted to the report card
- Adds vascular surgery patients, because the underlying clinical alarms suggest 
that they are a very relevant group
Roles and responsibilities:
Principal Investigator:
Christopher Ryan King
Assistant Professor
Washington University Department of Anesthesiology
660 South Euclid Ave Box 8054
St. Louis, MO 63110
P: 314-362-6978
E: christopherking@wustl.edu
Institutions:
Washington University School of Medicine
660 South Euclid Ave Box 8054
St. Louis, MO 63110
Michael S. Avidan, MBBCh
P: 314-273-4136
E: avidanm@wustl.edu
 
Other Key Personnel:
Philip Payne, PhD
Professor
Washington University School of Medicine
Department of Medicine and Institute for Informatics (I2)
4444 Forest Park Blvd 06309
St. Louis MO, 63110
314-273-1088
prpayne@wustl.edu
Joanna Abraham, PhD
Associate Professor
Washington University School of Medicine
Department of Anesthesiology and Institute for Informatics (I2)
660 S. Euclid Avenue
Campus Box 8054
St. Louis MO, 63110
314-286-1768
joannaa@wustl.edu
Yixin Chen, PhD
Professor of Computer Science and Engineering
Washington University Department of Computer Science and Engineering
660 S. Euclid Avenue
St. Louis MO, 63110
314-935-7528
Ychen25@wustl.edu
Michael S. Avidan, MBBCh
Professor and Chair,
Washington University Department of Anesthesiology
660 South Euclid Ave Box 8054
St. Louis, MO 63110
P: 314-273-4136
E: avidanm@wustl.edu
 
Funding:
National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences of the National Institutes of Health under 
Award Number KL2 TR002346
Non-Technical Summary
Although surgery and anesthesia have become much safer on average, many patients still 
experience complications after surgery. Some of these complications are likely to be avoided or 
less severe with early detection and treatment. Barnes-Jewish Hospital has recently started 
using an Anesthesia Control Tower (ACT), which is a remote group lead by an anesthesiologist 
who reviews live data from BJH operating rooms and calls the anesthesia provider with 
concerns to improve reaction times and improve use of best-practices treatments. The ACT also
uses machine learning (ML) to calculate patient risks during surgery as a way of measuring 
when the patient is doing better or worse.
We think that many times the right interpretation of the data or the right treatment to give isn’t 
clear until the surgery is nearly finished. The medical team in the recovery room (post-
anesthesia care unit, PACU) and surgical wards is responsible for deciding the treatment 
strategy, but they don’t have all the information available from the intraoperative monitors and 
events. The patient may still be too sedated or confused from the anesthesia to explain much 
about their preoperative history. Our goal is to use ML to create a report card for each patient 
that summarizes the preoperative assessment and intraoperative data in a way that is useful for 
postoperative providers. In addition to communicating specific facts and risks, the report card 
may cause the postoperative provider to ask different questions at handoff and spend more time
with vulnerable patients.
The goal of this study is to integrate these ML reports into the clinical workflow and to determine
if it does affect handoff behavior. The screened patients will be all adults having surgery at BJH 
with the division of Acute and Critical Care Surgery, Otolaryngology, Hepato-biliary Surgery, and
Abdominal Transplant Surgery with elevated risk of unplanned ICU admission. Exclusion criteria
are a planned ICU admission or outpatient surgery (no hospital admission).
For each included patient, the ACT clinician will review the report card information, and the 
postoperative providers will receive it via a print-out or an Epic Best Practices Advisory 
integrated into their workflow. Our study will include 3 phases: (1) pre-intervention observation 
of handoff practices, (2) education and workflow adaptation of the intervention, and (3) non-
randomized evaluation. During the education and non-randomized evaluation phases, some 
days will be without-intervention and others with-intervention. On with-intervention days, all 
eligible patients on a given day will receive the intervention. On without-intervention days no 
patients will receive the intervention, but handoff outcome measures will be assessed. The main
comparison will be between with-intervention and without-intervention days in the evaluation 
phase. The primary outcome measure we will study is handoff effectiveness in the recovery 
room or wards. We will also survey providers on any inaccurate items, or major omissions.
This study will be conducted with a waiver of informed consent. It offers non-significant risk to 
patients. The ML report card will not recommend specific treatments, and decisions will remain 
in the hands of the supervising physician in all phases of care. The postoperative provider will 
also be given information about the report card and its limitations.
1 Background and Rationale
The operating room (OR) to post-anesthesia care unit (PACU) handoff is a challenging 
transition for patients where communication errors frequently occur (Segall et al., 2012); 
subsequent adverse events are common and contribute substantially to mortality, costs, and 
other patient harms (Hines et al., 1992; Pearse et al., 2006; Story et al., 2010). Preventing loss 
of information during handoff is an important need to allow accurate early intervention in newly 
admitted patients. Handoff research has almost exclusively focused on checklists of expert-
specified topics that should be discussed. These checklists by their nature do not adapt to the 
specific patient, and there is a tradeoff between checklist length-thoroughness and user fatigue-
compliance. Machine learning risk prediction has been widely recognized for its potential to 
decrease medical errors and failure to rescue (Xiao et al., 2018). However, provider uptake has 
been slow, often preferring simple scoring systems (Sanchez-Pinto et al., 2018).  Providers 
skepticism of black box predictions and the difficulty of interpreting ML outputs has been 
suggested to be a major hindrance (Maddox et al., 2018). As a result, no published research 
explores the ability of ML to augment information transfer during handoff. Additionally, few 
clinical ML projects have been rigorously evaluated for changes in user behavior or designed for
end-user comprehension; development has focused on raw predictive accuracy, despite many 
attempts at creating “interpretable” ML. Innovations in ML reports that improve the adoption and 
provider-understanding of ML predictions are a scalable, low-cost intervention to address the
need for improved information transfer and identification of at-risk patients in the postoperative 
setting.
At BJH, ML-assisted telemedicine for intraoperative providers is provided by the Anesthesia 
Control Tower (ACT) to allow early identification of errors, optimize early treatments, and 
prevent lapses in standard of care. The ACT includes ML-based predictions of multiple 
postoperative complications to identify at-risk and deteriorating patients; the intraoperative 
provider has indirect access to these predictions via a clinician in the ACT who filters the raw 
output and considers the ML prediction in their clinical context.
However, the core ACT clinical protocol does not contemplate providing the data summary and 
ML-prediction information to the receiving provider in the PACU or surgical wards. The 
proposed Outcome predictions, Data summaries, and Interpretive Notes Report (ODIN-Pilot) 
study will provide a "report card" containing automatically generated summaries of pre- and 
intraoperative data along with ML output. This information will be presented to multiple 
postoperative providers with different contexts and use cases. PACU physicians and registered 
nurses (RNs) receive handoff from the intraoperative team and assume care for the patient in 
the immediate postoperative phase (typically 45 minutes to several hours). They observe for 
appropriate recovery from anesthesia, surveil for developing complications, treat common side 
effects of anesthesia. When the patient is ready to leave the PACU and communicate their
findings to the wards (surgical inpatient unit) RN. The PACU team also communicates to the 
intraoperative surgical team, who communicates to the wards "midlevel" (advanced practice 
nurse or resident MD) responsible for routine medical oversight, modifying medication 
strategies, and ordering additional diagnostic studies if necessary.
We hypothesize several mechanisms by which this ML report card may improve patient 
outcomes. First, the report card will function as an “alert” for patients at high risk and direct 
attention to them. This additional review may reduce postoperative complications. Second, the 
report card may frame handoff communications around important data and issues relevant to 
the patient. By focusing the postoperative provider on potential problems, it may improve 
anticipatory guidance between the intraoperative, supervisory, and frontline team members.
This pilot study will not focus on patient outcomes, but will attempt to measure these potential 
mechanisms. We will survey postoperative providers to measure perceived handoff quality and 
coverage of important topics. We will validate these surveys with direct observations, debriefing 
interviews, and structured handoff evaluation tools.
The second objective of this study is to improve the usability of the ML report card and 
determine the rate at which clinicians believe the information it contains to be inaccurate. 
Clinical data is often "messy," and it is possible that the mechanisms we use to filter data may 
make mistakes. We will survey providers on errors (including omissions) to determine the 
"safety" of our implementation of the postoperative ML report card.
1.1 Choice of Comparators
Based on the lack of existing objective evidence of benefit for ML predictions in the 
perioperative setting, and the widespread belief that clinicians do not trust ML predictions, we 
will compare the ML report card intervention to usual care.
2 Objectives
The objectives of the study are to determine the interpretability, workflow role, and effect on 
communications of showing report cards containing ML-based risk profiles based on pre- and
intra-operative data to postoperative providers.
2.1 Primary Objective
The primary objective will be to determine the effect of postoperative ML report cards on handoff
effectiveness.
2.2 Secondary Objectives
2.2.1 Key Secondary Objectives
The secondary objective is to determine the rate of clinician-noted inaccuracies or major 
omissions in postoperative ML report cards.
3 Trial Design
The study will be a non-randomized experimental design with 3 phases. First, data about 
current practices will be collected before interventions begin. Second, we will pilot the 
mechanics of delivering the report card while educating users about it. Third, we will measure 
handoff and usability outcomes on alternating days with and without the intervention. (2:1 
intervention to non-intervention). We anticipate the number of intervention-deliver and education
days to be 30, but may have to periodically update the report card delivery requiring an 
additional delivery-testing period. During the entire study, we will accept and record any safety 
concerns from participants.
Methods
4 Participants, Interventions, Outcomes
4.1 Study Setting
This will be a single center, non-randomized clinical trial at Barnes Jewish Hospital (BJH) in St. 
Louis, a large tertiary care academic medical center affiliated with Washington University in St 
Louis (WUSTL).
4.2 Participants and Eligibility
4.2.1 Inclusion criteriaAdults undergoing OR procedures in BJH South campus, including all of "Pod 2", "Pod 
3", "Pod 5" and excluding all procedure suites such as Interventional Radiology, 
Parkview Tower "Pod 1", Center for Advanced Medicine "Pod 4", Labor and Delivery 
suites.Surgical service is “Acute and Critical Care Surgery”, Otolaryngology, Hepato-biliary, 
Vascular, or Abdominal TransplantPlanned non-ICU disposition ("floor" and "observation unit" collectively "ward" patients).Calculated risk of unplanned ICU admission in the first 7 postoperative days in the top 
15% of historical records.
Risk of unplanned ICU admission will use the same calculator currently employed in the ACT. 
Risk factors considered include the surgery performed, demographics, laboratory values, 
comorbidities, vital signs, and medications.
Although patients are exposed to effects of the intervention, data is obtained from healthcare 
providers. Included providers are PACU nurses, PACU anesthesiology physicians, wards 
nurses, and wards midlevel providers (resident physicians, physician assistants, and advanced 
practice nurses) who are involved in a postoperative handoff for these patients.
4.2.2 Durations and sample sizes
The planned duration and size of each phase isPre-intervention observation: 60 working days, 50 patientsEducation and intervention delivery testing: 30 working days, 50 patientsIntervention evaluation: 90 working days, 350 patients divided into 30 without-
intervention days and 60 with intervention days.
The exact number of providers surveyed is difficult to project, because some providers will care 
for multiple patients, nurses and midlevel providers change their assignments, and staff turnover
may occur. We anticipate surveying fewer than 60 distinct PACU RNs, fewer than 15 PACU 
residents, fewer than 20 PACU physicians, fewer than 60 distinct floor RNs, and fewer than 25 
distinct midlevel providers.
4.2.3 Case screening and identification
Patients eligibility is pre-screened automatically, and a researcher or ACT clinician verifies their 
eligibility. The first two enrollment criteriaAdults undergoing OR procedures in BJH South campus, including all of "Pod 2", "Pod 
3", "Pod 5" and excluding all procedure suites such as Interventional Radiology, 
Parkview Tower "Pod 1", Center for Advanced Medicine "Pod 4", Labor and Delivery 
suites.Surgical service is “Acute and Critical Care Surgery”, Otolaryngology, Hepato-biliary
Surgery, or Abdominal Transplant Surgery
are taken from the surgical schedule. The third enrollment criteriaPlanned non-ICU disposition ("floor" and "observation unit" collectively "ward" patients).
is taken from (1) the procedure schedule request , (2) the anesthesiologist day-of-service 
anesthesia plan documentation, (3) a predictive model based on the scheduled surgery. Cases 
with > 75% likelihood of direct ICU admission or outpatient discharge are automatically 
excluded by the predictive model. The final criterionCalculated risk of unplanned ICU admission in the first 7 postoperative days in the top 
10% of historical records.
is calculated using the same model described in 4.3.2
Once the server has identified patients as likely eligible, they are marked for review in the ACT 
ML dashboard, where final eligibility is confirmed.
During the intervention evaluation (phase 3), each day will be with or without intervention for all 
eligible patients. These will rotate 2:1 over work days , eg week 1 = (with, with, without, with, 
with), week 2= (without, with, with, without, with), week 3 = ( with, without, with, with, without)
4.3 Interventions
Figure 2 is a flow diagram of the activities during a patient’s day and Figure 3 is a patient 
timeline.
Figure 2: Flow of research activities

4.3.1 ML Report Card
The core intervention is the ML report card containing predictors of adverse events. Figure 4 is 
an example of the printed report card on a simulated patient. No personally identifiable 
information is included, other than a randomized study ID. The report card includes the 
operating room and date, to allow providers to know that it is for the current patient. Because 
the printouts are only created in operating rooms and PACU, this is sufficient information to 
place it in the correct chart. However, at other times the report card itself does not contain 
sufficient information for anyone without the studyID-patientID mapping file or pre-exising
access to the EHR to determine the patient. Operating room number and time is included, but 
these can not be mapped to patients without the detailed surgical schedule in the EHR. The QR Figure3:Patientactivitytimeline
Survey other
idT0 + 3-6 
hSurvey 
PACUT0 + 1 
hValidate
enrollment
Validate Identif y 
T0: 
Surgery 
“close”Begin OR 
code study links to an anonymous survey (no patient or provider information) for problems with 
the report card for the education and testing phase. The evaluation phase survey includes the 
additional questions in the appendix (triggered on date.
The ML risk profile generated for each patient will include risk of 30 day mortality, pulmonary 
complications and respiratory failure, acute kidney failure, transfusion, deep venous thrombosis,
cardiac complications, and unplanned ICU admission. Additional predicted outcomes may be 
added based on feedback from healthcare team members. Risk profiles will display the average
for all patients undergoing the same surgery, the risks calculated using preoperative 
assessments only (i.e. excluding intraoperative data), and the end-of-case values (i.e. including 
preoperative and intraoperative data). Literature-based estimates of probability of postoperative 
nausea and vomiting and severe postoperative pain will also be included where elevated. 
Expert-curated summaries of important variables will be included in the Epic report card, which 
include: estimated blood loss, fluids given, opioids given, duration of anesthesia, antibiotics 
given. Explanatory tools for the risk profile will also be generated based on SHAP values 
[Lundberg 2017] identifying the variables with greatest influence on predictions
Figure 4:  Example ML report card
The ACT detects that cases are near completion and that a report card should be triggered in 
two ways. First, the circulating nurse in each room electronically marks that a room is “close” in 
the EHR, usually during closure, to ensure that subsequent patients are called to the
preoperative area and supplies for the next case are readied. This is performed with high fidelity
as it is considered important to prevent case delays. The displayed OR schedule in Epic 
changes color, making this easily recognized. Second, an algorithm detects when changes in 
the anesthesia record suggest that the case is concluding. Both of these features cause the ML 
dashboard in the ACT (Figure 5) to highlight the patient as needing review to validate the report 
card. After manual validation, the report card will print directly in the operating room and a 
notification is sent to the circulating nurse to add it to the chart and provide it to the anesthesia 
team for handoff. The risk profile is then made active in a Best Practice Advisory in Epic.

Communicating from the ACT to the PACU physicians presents several advantages. First, the 
ACT clinician is familiar with the general model of ML output generated by AlertWatch and will 
filter out obvious errors from reaching the care team and potentially harming the patient, 
minimizing risk to participants. Second, because on a given day a single attending physician 
and resident oversees the PACU at BJH South Campus, friction related to communication 
between the ACT and these providers will be minimized as these contacts become routine. Both
parties will have the opportunity to rapidly adjust to the presence of the report card as they will 
process multiple such reports per day. Third, because the ACT-postop communication happens 
before  formal handoff, it will allow these providers to look into higher risk cases before they 
arrive and ask more detailed questions during handoff. We anticipate that most interactions will 
consist of simply forwarding the report card. The ACT will not communicate directly to PACU 
nurses or ward providers.
ML output will be generated on a server controlled by the investigators and administered by 
Washington University Information Technology. This is the same server and data access 
mechanism used by the ACT team. A feed of preoperative and intraoperative data extracted 
from the Epic EHR designed for use in the AlertWatch system is currently saved in a database 
maintained by BJH and exposed for authorized users to access, which we will access using
encrypted transport mechanisms. The server will also have a TLS-encrypted and password 
protected web interface (dashboard) for debugging, message generation, and manual end-of-
case triggering. The web interface will allow study technical staff and ACT clinicians to look up 
current and previous risk profiles by study identifier, patient identifier and date, or date, time, 
and operating room number. It will also allow them to manually enter that a case is concluding, 
and to mark a day as "with-intervention". The study identifiers, date, time, end of case marker, 
intervention indicator, and ML output will be stored on the WUSTL Research Infrastructure 
Services Data Storage Platform. The RIS Data Storage Platform is a scalable distributed 
storage solution with an integrated long-term archive. It is institutionally approved for protected 
health information, and requires WUSTL-key authentication and 2-factor authentication outside 
WUSTL facilities. Data access is granted only on a per-user basis and logged. The ML server is 
behind the Washington University firewall and inaccessible from off-campus computers.
To avoid misleading postoperative providers, we will create a brief educational sheet explaining 
the purpose of the study and the items included in the risk profile (attached). The educational 
sheet will include the calibration accuracy and other appropriate metrics regarding the 
predictions. For example, at the screening threshold we will use the sensitivity for AKI is about 
50%, meaning that the provider should not be falsely reassured by not receiving an alert. We 
will stress that these risk predictions were formed in the context of usual care at BJH, and that a

lower risk prediction does not justify withholding a therapy that they would otherwise give. These
sheets will be linked in the report card. A draft of the sheet is included with this application, but it
may be modified based on feedback from providers. We also plan to periodically recalibrate the 
ML algorithms based on new data, and will update the accuracy metrics accordingly.
4.3.2 Forecasting algorithms.
The core of the intervention is a ML-based summary of predicted postoperative risks, the 
change in those risks during the case, the most relevant input variables for ML predicted risks, 
expert-curated important variables, and other “explanatory tools” derived from the ML risk 
prediction method. Transcribed below from the TECTONICS (IRB# 201903026) protocol is the 
method for generating ML risks from preoperative and intraoperative data (internal citations 
omitted):
We are integrating the machine-learning forecasting algorithms for adverse outcomes with our other 
alerting tools, and will be testing and improving them over the co urse of the study. The feasibility of this 
integration is supported by a previous successful trial, where member s of our investigative team, using 
live data from the EHR, implemented machine learning algorithms to gu ide a rapid response team in 
medical wards. Furthermore, the results of the prior study provide  strong support for using the multi-path 
convolutional neural network (MPCNN) model to build and regularly  improve predictive machine-learning 
algorithms that will be used to forecast adverse outcomes (e.g. , renal failure, respiratory failure, delirium, 
death) in the TECTONICS trial. We found that our algorithms, which a re based on extensive patient 
information (i.e., demographic characteristics [including sex as  a biological variable], surgical risk, co-
morbidities) as well as time series physiological data (e.g., blood pr essure, temperature, heart rate) 
predict outcomes such as death with high area under receiver o perator characteristics curve (~90%), 
acceptable sensitivity (~50%) and excellent specificity (~95%). Th ese algorithms will augment dynamic 
risk assessment in the ACT. Our MPCNN algorithms are unusual in th at they are designed to handle 
heterogeneous data types, including numerical features, cat egorical features, and multivariate time 
series. By integrating feature preprocessing and model learnin g phase together, our algorithms are able 
to jointly learn complex feature interactions among different data ty pes, ultimately improving predictions of
adverse perioperative outcomes (such as in-hospital mortality, po stoperative acute renal failure, 
postoperative respiratory failure). As our models accept raw data  directly, high quality real-time prediction 
can be achieved.
The machine learning algorithms that will be used as part of the TECTONICS trial were developed, 
tested, and validated using multiple studies. We have tried man y other algorithms, including in our 
ACTFAST2 study, and convolutional neural network (CNN) gives th e best overall performance. We 
recently compared our CNN method with more than 10 other state- of-the-art time-series prediction 
algorithms and showed that CNN gives the best predictive perfo rmance. Our team members have been 
pioneers in the use of machine learning to predict adverse pa tient trajectories in the setting of critical 
illness. We have well-developed sophisticated machine learning te chniques, and the application of our 
algorithms to the intraoperative setting – where changes in patien t trajectory occur very rapidly – is a 
novel application of this technology.
4.3.3 Other Interventions
We will notify the PACU anesthesiology resident when report cards are generated for high-risk 
patients. This notification will occur by SMS to a BJH-issued phone which is passed between 
residents at each shift. The notification does not contain PHI or PII, only that a particular OR has
a high-risk patient.
Discussed in the Outcomes section, the study also includes a survey for providers, which we 
mention here because of its patient-information security implications. The Epic BPA (and 
printout) will contain a patient-specific link and QR code to a RedCap survey. This survey 
contains no PII, only a randomized study ID.
Information flow and security.  To minimize the risk of protected health information (PHI) or 
personally identifiable information (PII) leaking from the health-care environment, we will restrict 
communications to providers to secure and auditable delivery modes. A diagram of the flow of 
information is included in Figure 6. There are 3 distinct flows of information: from the ML server 
and ACT tower to the PACU provider notifying them that a high-risk patient is emerging (the 
alert), from the ML server and ACT to the healthcare provider in the body of the report card, and
between the postoperative provider to the research coordinator with their survey responses 
(provider survey).
The alert is designed to include minimal potentially sensitive information. It will contain the 
location of the patient (operating room, PACU bay destination) and that the risk of patient 
decompensation is elevated. The name, MRN, date of birth, or other identifiers are not included.
Figure 6: Information flows and security
The only individuals who can access the report card (which contains no PII) are (1) Epic users 
who access the patient's chart (2) pre-approved users in the ACT who log in with their wustl-key
(3) individuals reading the patient's paper chart. The ML server will be behind the WashU-BJH 
firewall, and therefore only accessible from authenticated users on campus or logged in via 
VPN. Access to the report card will be logged by IP address.
The survey is an outcome measurement, discussed in more detail below. The survey link is
patient and date specific using the study ID, but does not contain the patient name or other 
identifiers. The survey link will be contained in the Epic BPA and the print-out in the form of a 
QR code; because study IDs are long and randomized they are functionally un-guessable. 
Versions of Android and iOS since 2018 include QR code and web-link identification from the 

default camera application. Providers can also use BJH bedside computers, which are equipped
with scanners that read QR codes.
4.3.4 Modifications
We anticipate that the form of the report template will vary as we conduct the study based on 
feedback from providers and qualitative observations of handoffs conducted as part of other 
research projects. The primary objective (comparison of contact versus noncontact) will be 
unaffected. The total number of ACT-postoperative provider contacts is limited by the staffing of 
the ACT and alert fatigue in the postoperative provider. We may adjust the screening threshold 
to avoid overwhelming either provider. We will record PACU participation, and if participation in 
handoff has been low, or the overall subjective utility is low we will revisit the method of ACT-
postoperative provider communication. We anticipate small improvements and changes to the 
underlying risk prediction algorithm. This is required because of ongoing changes in the data 
sources that feed into the algorithm, changes in documentation practices, and periodic need to 
re-calibrate predictions based on changes in unmeasured risk factors. We will update the 
information provided with the report card to reflect any such changes.
4.3.5 Adherence
Crossover from non-contact to contact will not occur because report cards are not generated for
these patients. Our outcome survey will detect if providers believe they used the report, but no 
other encouragement to use it will be provided. Cross-over into non-contact (failing to contact 
the correct provider) will be minimized by appropriate training to ACT clinicians.
4.3.6 Concomitant Care
ACT-intraoperative provider contact will be directed by clinical protocol. Intra- and postoperative 
care will be directed by the responsible physicians without any restrictions from this trial.
4.4 Outcomes
4.4.1 Primary Outcome Measures
The primary outcome will be self-reported handoff effectiveness.
The following survey questions will be asked of postoperative providers:
Did you receive at handoff all the information you needed to safely take care of 
this patient?
[Yes, No]
Did you receive information from the team giving handoff to explicitly help you 
manage any potential complications or problems?
[Yes, No]
If so, please list what problems / topics were discussed?
[ Free response ]
[If with-intervention phase * ] Did you look at or discuss the postoperative report 
card for this patient?
[Yes, No]
[If * yes] Did the report card contain any information that was notably misleading 
or incorrect?
[Yes, No]
[If yes, please describe: text box]
[If * yes] Are there any important pieces of information that the computer should 
have included in the report card but didn't?
[Yes, No]
[If yes, please describe: text box]
[If * yes] How much did the ML report change questions asked or information 
transfer at handoff?
[ Not applicable , Not at all , a little , a fair amount , a great amount ]
[If * yes] How much effort was accessing the report card?
[Very easy, easy, some effort, hard, unable to get to it or had to ask for help]
[If * yes] Was the information presentation in the report card easy to understand?
[Easy, some effort, hard to understand, unable to use or had to ask for help]
[If * yes] Was the information in the report card relevant?
[a great amount, a fair amount, modestly, mostly not, not at all, not sure]
[If * yes] Was the information in the report card useful to decision making or 
helpful to your understanding of the patient?
[a great amount, a fair amount, modestly, mostly not, not at all, not sure]
The following questions will additionally be asked of PACU resident physicians:
Did you participate in handoff for this patient?
[Yes, No]
Did you visit this patient's bedside or speak to their nurse before being asked to 
sign them out?
[Yes, No]
Figure 7  illustrates the RedCAP survey for safety questions which will be included throughout 
the study.
Figure 7: RedCAP Safety Survey
4.4.2 Secondary Outcome Measures
A research assistant will directly observe up to 150 OR - PACU and PACU-Ward handoffs in the
intervention phase. An assessment form is attached. After direct observation, the research 
assistant may ask unstructured clarifying questions and present the survey questions discussed
above.
We will conduct 20-30 debriefing interviews with ward and PACU clinicians on their perception 
of handoff effectiveness and the usefulness of the report card. These will be audio recorded and
transcribed.
We will extract exploratory clinical outcomes from the EHR: ICU admission, hospital length of 
stay, discharge disposition (including death), and changes in serum creatinine (acute kidney 
injury).
4.5 Sample Size
Precision on the absolute rate of clinician-rated inaccurate reports depends on the rate, but for 
0/150 clinically inaccurate reports, the upper 95% confidence limit is 2.4%. Handoff surveys will 
be dichotomized into (un)acceptable. If the baseline rate of "acceptable" handoff is 70%, 50 
patients without and 100 patients with intervention implies an 18% absolute increase as the 
minimum change with 80% power. The study is designed primarily to assess the perceived 
safety and workflow integration of the report card, not any patient outcomes.
4.7 Recruitment
Because of the nature of the study, recruitment of patients will be automatic.
PACU providers will be determined from the schedule and approached in the morning of their 
shifts for consent for participation.
4.8 Allocation
Allocation is determined solely by entry time into the study.
4.9 Blinding
Patients will not be directly informed of their involvement in ODIN-Pilot, nor are they likely to 
discover this as the intervention occurs while they are under or emerging from anesthesia. 
Clinicians will be unblinded by the nature of the intervention; however, they will not know if a
non-contact patient is included in the study.
5 Data collection, management, analysis
5.1 Data Collection Methods
Pre- and intraoperative data will be extracted from the EHR and AlertWatch as specified in the 
TECTONICS (IRB# 201903026) protocol identically to the clinical operations of the ACT. 
Postoperative exploratory outcomes and patient demographics will be extracted from the EHR 
by an Institute for Informatics data broker. Survey instruments are included in the appendix and 
above. Because of the nature of study timing and extraction of data collected during the normal 
clinical process, no additional retention efforts of patient-level communication is planned.
5.2 Data Management
Preoperative and intraoperative data used for machine learning will not be retained for this 
study, but other studies and clinical operations may share the same hardware. Only the 
minimum necessary private patient information will be collected for the purposes of the study. 
Any protected health data will be kept in a secure digital environment that is password protected
and limited to research team only as discussed above. De-identified data may be kept and used
in future studies not pre-specified in the above protocol. The investigators are responsible for 
ensuring the accuracy, completeness, legibility, and timeliness of the data collected. Data 
storage and safety practices are discussed above. Surveys of postoperative providers will be 
stored on REDCap.
The ACT will use clinical applications available to all clinicians to monitor ongoing surgical 
procedures. These applications can only be accessed over the secure hospital network or by 
VPN. This arrangement meets and/or exceeds HIPAA standards Patient Health Information 
(PHI) security. AlertWatch® is an approved clinical application at Barnes-Jewish Hospital, and 
therefore maintains these same levels of protection. Access to the data collected in this study 
will be restricted to approved personnel. It is a strict policy that PHI content cannot be reviewed 
outside of this protected environment. When possible, extracts from this project will avoid the 
use of PHI. De-identified patients can be identified using a special, non-PHI primary key which
will be stored on the RIS Data Storage Platform.
Data will be maintained for at least seven years after the close of the study in accordance with 
Washington University guidelines. Further study record retention will be at the discretion of the 
study investigator. Data may be used for future studies not mentioned in the protocol.
  
5.3 Statistical Methods
Differences in the rate of acceptable handoffs will be compared with chi-square contingency 
table tests.
Although the primary analysis is intention to treat (comparing the with- and without-intervention 
groups directly), we will report as exploratory analyses per-protocol analyses in which patients 
whose report card was never accessed (outside of the ACT) are excluded.
5.4 Education phase
Between the pre-intervention and intervention phases of the study, staff members of the study 
hospital units will be alerted to the function and location in the EHR of the report card. Written
material including the same information and research team contact information will be left in the 
breakrooms of these units and disseminated by email. Research team members will answer any
questions and record any concerns. All staff comments and concerns will be recorded 
completely anonymously. Research team members will review these comments and concerns 
to determine if any modifications to the intervention or clarification to the educational material is 
required. During this period, the report card will be marked as in-testing.
6 Monitoring
6.1 Adverse event and safety monitoring:
No data safety monitoring committee is planned for this sub-study due to the non-significant risk
and pilot nature. No external safety monitor is planned, though all adverse events will be 
reported to NCATS (funder of the study).
6.2 Interim Analyses
No formal interim analyses are planned.
6.3 Harms
The postoperative provider survey will include a link and phone number to contact the research 
coordinator if they believe a serious adverse event or near miss occurred related to the ACT-
postoperative communication. As an example, they may believe that ML risk estimates were 
sent for the incorrect patient. Our communications will all include the role of the ML predictions 
as advisory, and that the responsibility for decision making lies with the provider. These will be 
reported to the WUSTL IRB. Descriptive statistics related to uncommon potential harms will be 
included in the trial reporting.
6.4 Auditing
Auditing will consist of debriefing interviews and surveys described above.
7 Ethics and Dissemination 
7.1 Ethics review approval
This study has been submitted to the Human Research Protection Office at Washington
University (St. Louis, MO). This study will be registered at clinicaltrials.gov.
7.2 Protocol Amendments
Any modifications to the protocol which may impact on the conduct of the study, potential 
benefit of the patient or may affect patient safety, including changes of study objectives, study 
design, patient population, sample sizes, study procedures, or significant administrative aspects
will require a formal amendment to the protocol. Such amendment will be agreed upon by the 
WUSTL IRB. As discussed above, small changes to the ACT report template are anticipated 
and will not be regarded as protocol modifications.
7.3 Consent
A waiver of informed consent for patients  is requested.
1) The study presents non-significant risk to participants. The report card is not intended as
an implant and presents no potential for serious risk to the health, safety or welfare of a 
subject. The report card is not purported or represented to be for use supporting or 
sustaining human life. The report card is not being used for substantial importance in 
diagnosing, curing, mitigating, or treating disease or otherwise preventing impairment of 
human health. Treating physicians retain control over all therapies, and no specific 
therapies are recommended. The warning may at most “drive” clinical management. The
conditions predicted in PACU are not generally life-threatening and providers have time
to correct any errors that they make. The ACT clinician will screen out grossly incorrect 
alerts. The educational sheet presented prior to the report card will remind providers that
the report card is intended to cause them to seek out additional information and draw 
their own conclusions about the best course of action for a particular patient; it is not an 
alarm intended to provoke immediate clinical action.
There is no obvious mechanism for physical, psychological, financial, or legal harm. 
Patients in the usual care (non-contact) period remain in the current standard of care 
with critical-care level oversight by physicians and nurses in phase-one recovery. It is 
unlikely that physicians would take harmful action based on the information in the 
contact-arm report as it does not recommend specific actions. Because the education for
providers will include the ~50% sensitivity of the alert, they will be aware not be falsely 
reassured by the absence of an alert
As documented above, the minimal necessary amount of information about subjects is 
collected, and best practices are used to secure it.
2) The project is not scientifically feasible without a waiver of consent. At the time when 
eligibility can be determined, the patient has undergone anesthesia or sedation, and 
would need to have been consented in preop (or preferably sooner). Difficulty with 
obtaining same-day consent would lead to a much more selected population and not 
answer the pragmatic scientific question. It would also lead to a much slower 
recruitment, making it likely that the trial would fail to complete in a timely fashion and 
“wasting” the effort.
3) Because of the need to link intraoperative risk models to patient locations and outcomes,
it is not possible to conduct it without identifiable private information.
4) The waiver will not affect the rights or welfare of the participants. As the Secretary’s 
Advisory Committee on Human Research Protections notes in 2008, this requirement 
related to any other legal consent requirements, which are not present in this case. 
Additionally, we should consider if the population would object to the waiver if informed 
of it or believe that it could cause them harm. We believe that due to the novel nature of 
the technology, standard-of-care control arm, minimal risk, and diversity of successful 
PACU staffing models participants would not object to participation.
5) There are no special circumstances necessitating post-facto information provision to the 
patient. This requirement is intended for research involving deception.
A participation document will be included at the beginning of the workday for PACU physicians 
and postoperative providers receiving messages describing the study.
A partial  waiver of informed consent for providers is requested. Providers are exposed to the 
report card and may optionally complete the above survey reporting inaccurate data.  Because 
(1) surveys do not collect identifying information and participation requires active effort, (2) 
predicting the applicable providers is impossible, separate consent forms will not be obtained 
and we request a waiver of consent .  Study information is included in the survey link which 
includes that their participation is completely voluntary, that no communication is made to the 
institutional leadership, and that all stored information is anonymized to the extent possible.
1) The study presents non-significant risk to participants. Survey responses are securely 
stored and contain no identifying information. Providers can skip the survey without any 
harm.
2) The project is not scientifically feasible without a waiver of consent. Because the 
midlevel and nursing providers for this subset of patients are not knowable ahead of 
time, we would need to consent every possible nurse and midlevel provider.
3) No identifiable private information is requested.
4) There is no foreseeable effect on the rights or welfare of the participants. Because it is 
unidentified, there is no mechanism for (non) participation to affect the providers.
5) There are no special circumstances necessitating post-facto information provision to the 
patient. This requirement is intended for research involving deception.
For direct handoff observations, participants will be approached and provided with study 
information before handoff begins. We will identify the relevant OR cases and approach the OR 
staff during emergence from anesthesia. Because the participating PACU and ward nurse is 
impossible to identify ahead of time (these are assigned throughout the day), we will approach 
and ask for written consent shortly before handoff begins. We will attempt to approach the pool 
of PACU nurses with study information during the morning of days on which we plan direct 
observations, with the goal of having discussed the study with participants before the patient 
arrives.
Because many PACU nurse to ward nurse handoffs occur over phone calls, having obtained 
consent to observed the handoff observation from the PACU nurse, we will disclose our 
observation of the PACU nurse to any party on the phone, allowing them to request privacy if 
needed.
No consent will be recorded for the education phase in which we notify staff members how to 
use the intervention as all information collected in that phase is completely anonymous.
Because of the nature of the intervention. no provisions are made for ancillary post-trial care or 
participants who are harmed. Participants will receive appropriate care at BJH prior to 
discharge.
7.4 Confidentiality
Identifying data will be protected, as described above.
7.5 Declaration of interests
The investigators have no financial conflicts of interest.
7.6 Dissemination
We will disseminate the results with presentations to relevant stakeholder groups, peer-
reviewed publications, and national meetings. We will also use the BJC Collaborative as a 
vehicle for dissemination.
7.7 Data Sharing Policy
Data from the ODIN-Pilot trial will be made available for analysis in compliance with the 
recommendations of the ICMJE. Individual participant data that underlie the results of the trial 
will be made available after appropriate de-identification, along with the study protocol and 
statistical analysis plan. We plan to make this information accessible to researchers who 
provide a methodologically appropriate proposal for the purpose of achieving the aims of that 
proposal. Data will be available beginning 9 months and ending 36 months following trial 
publication at a third-party website. Data requestors will need to sign a data access agreement 
to gain access to trial data. Proposals should be directed to avidanm@wustl.edu .
This protocol was written in compliance with the SPIRIT Checklist Guidelines for Interventional 
Trials.
7.8 Pandemic Infectious Risks to Participants and Study Personnel
The study has very little to no implications for exposure to sars-cov-2 infection.
The only study personnel on-site are those doing direct observations of handoffs. The study 
personnel will be screened by universal policy before entry to BJH, use appropriate face 
coverings, and practice physical distancing. During obtaining consent to observe, hand hygiene 
will be observed with disposable pens and paper records stored in a daily "used documents" 
cardboard folder to minimize accidental fomites. During observation of handoff the assistant will 
maximize physical distance while being able to overhear the conversation. This activity will not 
continue during any time of increased community transmission (e.g. cancellation of elective 
surgery).
The personnel in the ACT, PACU providers, and wards providers are all present at BJH as part 
of their usual clinical activity with no modification. Individuals are contacted only over telephone.
Electronic informed consent is used, creating no additional risk of exposure.
Patients are exposed to no increased risk of exposure; no study personnel directly interact with 
the patient.
8. Works Cited
Chetta, A., Carrington, J.M., and Forbes, A.G. (2015). Augmenting EHR interfaces for enhanced
nurse communication and decision making. In Proceedings of the 2015 Workshop on Visual 
Analytics in Healthcare, (Chicago, Illinois: Association for Computing Machinery), pp. 1–6.
Hines, R., Barash, P., Watrous, G., and O’Connor, T. (1992). Complications Occurring in the 
Postanesthesia Care Unit. Anesth. Analg. 74, 503–509.
Maddox, T.M., Rumsfeld, J.S., and Payne, P.R.O. (2018). Questions for Artificial Intelligence in 
Health Care. JAMA.
Pearse, R.M., Harrison, D.A., James, P., Watson, D., Hinds, C., Rhodes, A., Grounds, R.M., 
and Bennett, E.D. (2006). Identification and characterisation of the high-risk surgical population 
in the United Kingdom. Crit. Care 10, R81.
Sanchez-Pinto, L.N., Luo, Y., and Churpek, M.M. (2018). Big Data and Data Science in Critical 
Care. Chest 154, 1239–1248.
Segall, N., Bonifacio, A.S., Schroeder, R.A., Barbeito, A., Rogers, D., Thornlow, D.K., Emery, J.,
Kellum, S., Wright, M.C., Mark, J.B., et al. (2012). Can We Make Postoperative Patient 
Handovers Safer? A Systematic Review of the Literature. Anesth. Analg. 115, 102.
Story, D.A., Leslie, K., Myles, P.S., Fink, M., Poustie, S.J., Forbes, A., Yap, S., Beavis, V., 
Kerridge, R., and REASON Investigators, Australian and New Zealand College of Anaesthetists 
Trials Group (2010). Complications and mortality in older surgical patients in Australia and New
Zealand (the REASON study): a multicentre, prospective, observational study. Anaesthesia 65, 
1022–1030.
Xiao, C., Choi, E., and Sun, J. (2018). Opportunities and challenges in developing deep learning
models using electronic health records data: a systematic review. J. Am. Med. Inform. Assoc. 
JAMIA 25, 1419–1428.
Weinger, M.B., Slagle, J.M., Kuntz, A.H., Schildcrout, J.S., Banerjee, A., Mercaldo, N.D., Bills, 
J.L., Wallston, K.A., Speroff, T., Patterson, E.S., et al. (2015). A Multimodal Intervention 
Improves Postanesthesia Care Unit Handovers. Anesth. Analg. 121, 957–971.
Lundberg, S. M. & Lee, S.-I. A unified approach to interpreting model predictions. in Advances 
in Neural Information Processing Systems 4765–4774 (2017).
Appendix: Handoff Direct Observation Guide
Global Rating of Handover Effectiveness
[ ] Not at all effective
[ ] Somewhat effective
[ ] Moderately effective
[ ] Very effective
[ ] Extremely effective
Content and organization of handoff was
[ ] Very disorganized and unclear
[ ] Somewhat disorganized and or irrelevant
[ ] Moderate relevance and organization
[ ]  Mostly relevant and organized
[ ] Very well organized and very effective delivery
Content and Completeness
[ ] No aspects of SBAR adequately covered
[ ] Some but not all critical content
[ ] All critical content (minimally sufficient)
[ ] All critical and most SBAR items
[ ]  All SBAR and pertinent info, very thorough
Confirmation and comprehension
[ ] No questions or concerns raised or addressed
[ ] Questions or concerns not adequately addressed
[ ] Moderate confirmation of comprehension
[ ] Adequately addressed concerns and questions
[ ] All questions and issues fully addressed
Level of Engagement
[ ] None
[ ] Brief engagement by one or both sides, but mostly inattentive
[ ]  Moderate: no negative impact on quality
[ ] Both sides engaged throughout handover
[ ] Ideal engagement