Vaccination of Triple Negative Breast Cancer Patients  IRB: 206010  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Page 1 of 46 
 “Vaccination of Triple Negative Breast Cancer Patients”  
 
 
A Combined Phase I/II Efficacy Study of a Carbohydrate Mimotope -Based 
Vaccine with MONTANIDE™ ISA 51 VG STERILE Combined with Neoadjuvant 
Chemotherapy in Triple Negative Breast Cancer  
 
 
Version 11 
06/02/2022  
 
University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences  (UAMS)  
Principal Investigator:  
Sindhu Malapati, MD  
 
 
Highlands Oncology Group  (HOG)  
Principal Investigator:  
J. Thaddeus Beck, MD  
 
 
Medical Monitor:  
Shi-Ming Tu, MD  
 
 
Biostatisticians:  
Eric Siegel, MS  
Jun Ying , PhD 
 
 
Inventors:  
Thomas Kieber -Emmons, PhD  
Behjatolah Karbassi, PhD  
 
 
Sponsor:  
University o f Arkansas for Medical Sciences  
 
IND 14715  
 
Study ID: [REMOVED]   
Vaccination of Triple Negative Breast Cancer Patients  IRB: 206010  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version: 11 
06/02/2022  
Page 2 of 46 
 TABLE of CONTENTS  
 
1. ABBREVIATIONS  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  3 
2. PROTOCOL SUMMARY  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............................  5 
3. BACKGROUND  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........  6 
4. STUDY DESIGN  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .........  12 
5. TRIAL OBJECTIVES  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 13 
6. PATIENT POPULATION  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................  14 
7. INVESTIGA TIONAL PRODUCT – P10S -PADRE/ MONTANIDE™ ISA 51 VG STERILE  ................................ .. 15 
8. TREATMENT PLAN  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 17 
9. STUDY CALENDARS ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 18 
9.1 Study Calendar for Arm 1 (control arm – no vaccine)  ................................ ................................ .... 19 
9.2 Study Calendar for Arm 2 (chemo+vaccine arm)  ................................ ................................ ............  20 
10. VISIT BREAKDOWNS  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............................  21 
10.1 Visit B reakdown for Arm 1 (control arm – no vaccine)  ................................ ................................ . 21 
10.2 Visit Breakdown for Arm 2 (chemo+vaccine arm)  ................................ ................................ ........  24 
11. RISKS AND TOXICITIES TO BE MONITORED  ................................ ................................ ...........................  29 
12. SPECIMEN HANDLING  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........................  31 
13. ENDPOINT DEFINITIONS, EVALUATION of IMMUNE RESPONSE, and ENDPOINT -ASSAY ME THODS  ... 32 
14. STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............  37 
15. REGISTRATION GUIDELINES  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................  38 
16. DATA SUBMISSION SCHEDULE  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............  38 
17. ETHICAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS  ................................ ................................ ....................  39 
18. ADVERSE EVENTS  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 40 
19. CLINICAL SITE MONITORING  ................................ ................................ ................................ .................  41 
20. DEVIATIONS AND VIOLATIONS ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............  42 
21. BIBLIOGRAPHY  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 43 
  
Vaccination of Triple Negative Breast Cancer Patients  IRB: 206010  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version: 11 
06/02/2022  
Page 3 of 46 
 1. ABBREVIATIONS  
 
AC Doxorubicin  and C yclophosphamide  Combination Chemotherapy  
ACLS  Advanced Cardiac Life Support  
ADCC  Antibody -Dependent Cell -Mediated Cytotoxicity  
AE Adverse Event  
AJCC  American Joint Commission on Cancer  
ALT Alanine Aminotransferase Test  
ANOVA  Analysis of Variance  
AST Aspartate Aminotransferase Test 
BMI Body Mass Index  
BUN  Blood Urea Nitrogen  
CBC Complete Blood Count  
CTO Clinical Trials  Office (within the UAMS WPRCI)  
CD Cluster of Differentiation  
CDC Complement -Dependent Cytotoxicity  
CFR Code of Federal Regulations  
Chemistry  BUN, carbon dioxide, creatinine, calcium, chloride, potassium, sodium  
CMPs  Carbohydrate Mimetic Peptides  
cpm  counts per minute  
CRA Clinical Research Associate  
CRF Case Report Form  
CTCAE  Common Terminol ogy Criteria for Adverse Events  
CTEP  Cancer Therapy Evaluati on Program  
CTL Cytotoxic T -Lymphocyte  
CTLA -4 Cytotoxic T -Lymphocyte -Associated Protein 4  
CY Cyclophosphamide  
dL Deciliter  
DSMB  Data Safety Monitoring Board  
DTH  Delayed -type hy persensitivity  
ECOG score  Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status  
EDTA  Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid  
ELISA  Enzyme -Linked Immunosorbent Assay  
ELISPOT  Enzyme -Linked Immunospot Assay  
ER Estrogen Receptor  
FBS Fetal Bovine Serum  
FDA United Stat es Food and Drug Administration  
FITC  Fluorescein Isothiocyanate  
GCP Good Clinical Practice  
GMP  Good Manufacturing Practice  
HER2  Human Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor 2  
HLA-DR Human Leukocyte Antigen - antigen D Related  
HOG  Highlands Oncology Group  
HRP Horseradish Peroxidase  
ICH International Council for Harmonisation  
IFA Incomplete Freund's Adjuvant  
IFN-γ Interferon Gamma  
IgG Immunoglobulin G  
IgM Immunoglobulin M  
Vaccination of Triple Negative Breast Cancer Patients  IRB: 206010  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version: 11 
06/02/2022  
Page 4 of 46 
 IL Interleukin  
IND Investigational New Drug Application  
IRB Institutional Review Board  
IUDs  Intrauterine Device  
IUL Institutional Upper Limit  
LDH Lactate Dehydrogenase  
LeY Lewis Y antigen  
mAb  Monoclonal Antibodies  
µg Microgram  
mg Milligram  
mL Milliliter  
mm Millimeter  
MDSC  Myeloid -Derived Suppressor Cells  
NCI National Cancer Institute  
NCT Nationa l Clinical Trial  
NIH National Institutes of Health  
NK Natural Killer 
OS Overall Survival  
P10s -MAP  10s-Multivalent -Antigen Peptide  
PBMC  Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cell  
PD-1 Programmed Cell Death Protein  
PD-L1 Programmed Death -Ligand 1  
pCR pathological Complete R esponse  
PE Physical Examination  
PHA  Phytohemagglutinin  
PR Progesterone Receptor  
PRMC  Protocol Review and Monitoring Committee  
RPMI  Roswell Park Memorial Institute medium  
SAE Serious Adverse Event  
SC Subcutaneous  
SGOT  Serum Glutamic -Oxaloacetic Tr ansaminase  
SGPT  Serum Glutamic -Pyruvic Transaminase  
SI Stimulation Index  
SoC Standard/ Standard of Care  
SOP standard operating procedure  
STn sialosyl -Tn 
TACA  Tumor -Associated Carbohydrate Antigen  
TBAPS  Tissue Biorepository and Procurement Service  
TIL Tumor Infiltrating Lymphocytes  
TNBC  Triple Negative Breast Cancer  
TNFα  Tumor Necrosis Factor alpha  
Tregs  Regulatory T cells  
UAMS  University o f Arkansas for Medical Sciences  
UPIRTSO  Unanticipated Problem Involving Risks to Subjects or Others  
WBC  White Blood Cell  
WPRCI  Winthrop P. Rockefeller Cancer Institute  
ypT0/Tis  ypN0  absence of residual invasive cancer in the breast and regional lymph nodes  
  
Vaccination of Triple Negative Breast Cancer Patients  IRB: 206010  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version: 11 
06/02/2022  
Page 5 of 46 
 2. PROTOCOL SUMMARY  
 
The purpose of this study is to evaluate an investigational agent, P10s -PADRE, a peptide mimotope -based 
vaccine, in combination with standard (SoC) neoadjuvant chemotherapy in subject s with clinical stage I, I I 
or III estrogen -receptor (ER) -negative,  progesterone receptor  (PR)-negative  and human epidermal growth 
factor receptor 2  (HER2 )-negative  breast cancer  (known as triple negative breast cancer  (TNBC)) . P10s -
PADRE will be administered with MONTANIDE™ ISA 51 VG as adjuvant. Human breast cancers that express 
Tumor -Associated Carbohydrate Antigens (TACAs) can be immunogenic, and enhancing the ant i-TACA 
antibodies and immune effector function already present may augment the cytotoxic effects of SoC 
therapies.  
 
This randomized  two-arm, open -label, multi -center  Phase I/II trial is designed to evaluate the safety and 
efficacy of combining the P10s -PAD RE vaccine with neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Subject s will be randomly 
assigned  in a 2:1 ratio  to SoC chemotherapy plus P10s -PADRE  or to SoC chemotherapy alone . Efficacy will 
be based on the rate of pathologic Complete Response (pCR) observed among TNBC subject s treated with 
the combination as compared with the group of subject s who receive SoC chemotherapy  alone . 
 
The primary objectives of the study are: 1) to monitor the safety and tolerability of the vaccine when it is 
administered in combination with SoC neoadjuvant chemotherapy; and 2) to determine if the 
chemo+vaccine regimen in TNBC  leads to a significantly higher rate of pCR in breast and axillary lymph 
nodes at the time of definitive surgery compared to the corresponding rate expected in the contr ol arm  
as reported by von Minckwitz et al . (1, 2) . 
 
The secondary objectives are to determine  the short -term and long -term immune resp onses induced by 
treatment , characterize the functionality of cellular and humoral immune responses  and determine  the 
delayed -type hypersensitivity (DTH) response to the P10s -PADRE . In addition, it will also attempt to 
evaluate whether the magnitude of the  immune response to the vaccine (or the ability to mount an 
immune response) is correlated with important prevaccination clinical characteristics such as ECOG 
(Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group) performance status  and the presence of a DTH response at the 
time of enrollmen t. 
 
This study also has the following correlative objective: to evaluate whether the ability to mount an 
immune response is affected by prevaccination performance status, DTH ( delayed -type hypersensit ivity) 
at the time of enrollment, BMI (body mass index) at the time of enrollment, and BMI -adjusted weight loss 
during the six months prior to enrollment . The purpose of this objective is to start laying a foundation of 
knowledge that could be used to help  future researchers distinguish beforehand between patients who 
are more likely versus less likely to benefit from immunization with P10s -PADRE.  
 
Study Population : We pla n to consent  up to  120 women in order  to enroll up to 102 women, 18 years of 
age or older, from the breast cancer clinics (Medical Oncology and Ladies Oncology Clinics) at the 
Winthrop P. Rockefeller Cancer Institute (WPRCI) at the University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences 
(UAMS) campus and the clinics of the Highlands Oncology Group (HOG ) in Northwest Arkansas. A total of 
34 subjects will be enrolled on the control  arm (Arm 1) and 68 subjects will be enrolled on the 
chemo +vaccine arm (Arm 2).  
 
Vaccination of Triple Negative Breast Cancer Patients  IRB: 206010  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version: 11 
06/02/2022  
Page 6 of 46 
 Summary of Inclusion Criteria : Females, 18 years of age or older, with  clinical stage  I, II or III ER -negative, 
PR-negative , and HER2 -negative breast cancer (TNBC) who qualify for SoC neoadjuvant treatment will be 
invited to participate.  
 
Summary of Exclusion Criteria : Females with ER or PR -positive or HER2 -positive, inflammatory, or 
metastat ic breast cancer ; women who are pregnant, breast -feeding, have active autoimmune disease or 
are immunosuppressed or receiving systemic corticosteroids (except from corticosteroids received as 
antiemetics or for hypersensitivity reactions related to chemoth erapy) will be excluded from the study.  
 
Investigational product : P10s -PADRE administer ed with the adjuvant MONTANIDE™  ISA 51 VG  STERILE  
 
Study Treatment : P10s -PADRE/MONTANIDE™ ISA 51 VG in combination with SoC neoadjuvant 
chemotherapy versus SoC neoadjuva nt chemotherapy alone.  
 
Study Design : This randomized  open -label , multi -center  Phase I/II efficacy study will have two arms . The 
first or “control”  arm (Arm 1) will receive SoC chemotherapy for TNBC . The second  or “chemo+vaccine”  
arm (Arm 2) will receive the same SoC chemotherapy as Arm 1 plus P10s -PADRE  vaccine . Subject s will be 
randomized  at a 2:1 allocation ratio to the chemo+vaccine  and control arms, respectively . The total 
sample size in the entire study is 102 subject s (68 vaccinated ver sus 34 controls)  to demonstrate an 
increase of pCR from 40% on the control  arm to 65% on the experimental arm . A formal interim analysis 
for both efficacy and futility will be conducted when the 51st study subject has been evaluated for 
response.  
 
To conduct this study, eligible subjects of all races, age s 18 years or older, will be enrolled . Subjects who 
are randomized to the control arm (Arm 1) will receive no immunizations, whereas subjects who are 
randomized to the chemo+vaccine arm (Arm 2) will be  immunized by administration of P10s -PADRE 
vaccine on each of 3 separate occasions over a three -week period at a dose level of 500 micrograms ( μg) 
per immunization . The vaccine injections will be administered before the initiation of chemotherapy 
based on our Phase I/II study in HR -positive breast cancer, which showed the best immunologic response 
when the vaccine was administered prior to chemotherapy  (data unpublished) . Blood will be collected 
from each subject once before and 4 times after the first immu nization.  Follow -up blood samples will also 
be taken approximately 6 and 12 months after immunization  to assess durations of the anti -P10s titer and 
anti-breast -cancer cytotoxicity. Safety and tolerability of chemo+vaccine  will be evaluated throughout the 
study. The primary efficacy endpoint is pCR and will be used to determine if chemo+vaccine  treatment in 
TNBC subject s will improve pCR at time of the definitive surgery to a rate significantly higher than the 
corresponding rate  expected  in the control arm  (1, 2) . 
 
3. BACKGROUND  
 
Anticipated anti -cancer impact of carbohydrate -targeted vaccines:  The potential impact of vaccines that 
induc e responses to tumor -associated carbohydrate antigens (TACAs) is demonstrated by clinical trials 
where subject  survival significantly correlates with carbohydrate -reactive IgM levels (3). Such results 
suggest that TACA -targeting vaccines might ha ve a beneficial effect on the course of malignant disease.  
Vaccine -induced anti -TACA antibodies can trigger cancer cell death and augmentation of cellular immune 
response through cross presentation of tumor antigens, leading to shrinkage of metastatic lesi ons and 
further improving survival. TACA -induced responses could also augment naturally occurring 
carbohydrate -reactive antibodies that trigger apoptosis of tumor cells (4). TACAs are attractive targets 
Vaccination of Triple Negative Breast Cancer Patients  IRB: 206010  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version: 11 
06/02/2022  
Page 7 of 46 
 because the majority of cell -surface protei ns and lipids are glycosylated, and the glycosyl moiety is 
fundamental to the biological functions of these molecules in cancer cells (5, 6) . A unique advantage in 
targeting TACAs is that multiple proteins an d lipids on the cancer cell can be modified with the same 
carbohydrate structure.  Thus, targeting the carbohydrate antigen broadens the spectrum of antigens 
recognized by the immune response, thereby lowering the risk of developing resistant tumors due to the 
loss of any one antigen (7). In addition, antibodies that recognize glycolipids are more apt to mediate 
complement -dependent cytotoxicity (CDC) and therefore, may be more cytotoxic to tumor cells than  
antibodies that recognize protein antigens (8). 
 
Approaches to augment immune responses to TACA s: A variety of approaches are being taken to 
generate responses to TACAs.  Because TACAs are T -cell-independent anti gens and self -antigens, 
conjugation to immunologic carrier proteins is perceived to be essential to recruit T -cell help in antibody 
generation. Conjugation does not, however, assure an increase in immunogenicity because conjugation 
strategies do not unifor mly enhance carbohydrate immunogenicity (9, 10). Furthermore, even with 
conjugation, the lack o f induction of cellular immune responses that would amplify TACA -reactive humoral 
responses necessitates constant boosting with vaccine.  Representative examples of carbohydrate -based 
conjugate vaccines in clinical development include those directed toward gangliosides (11-14), polysialic 
acid (8), Globo -H (15), LeY (16), and the sialosyl -Tn (STn) antigen (17). 
 
An approach predicted to facilitate cellular responses exploits the molecular mimicry of TACAs by protein 
surrogates, as they are T -cell-dependent antigens.  Clinical characterizations of anti -idiotypic antibodies 
that mimic the GD3 ganglioside antigen (18) and GD2 (19) have been described.  Carbohydrate mimetic 
peptides (CMPs) are alternatives to anti -idiotypic antibodies . The characterization of CMPs is at present 
limited to preclinical studies.  CMPs that induce immune responses cross -reactive with TACA s are also 
referred to as peptide mimotopes. Peptide mimotopes have been described for GD2 (20-22), GD3 (23), 
sialylated Lewis a/x (24) and Lewis Y (LeY) antigens (22, 25) . Importantly, in preclinical prophylactic and 
therapeutic vaccination studies, peptide mimotopes were efficacious in eliciting immune responses that 
reduced tumor burden and inhibited metastatic outgrowth (25-27). Thus, peptide mimotopes of TACAs 
represent a new and very promising tool to overcome T -cell independence and to increase the ef ficiency 
of the immune response to glycan antigens.  
 
Benefits o f peptide mimotope immunization : There are several benefits to vaccination strategies that 
employ peptide mimotopes of TACA s. First, peptide mimotopes function as xenoantigens and, 
consequently, provide an advantage to overcome tolerance to carbohydrate self -antigens. Antibodies 
induced by peptide mimotopes are thought to have low affinities for TACA; specific targeting of tumor 
cells is due in part to over -expression of the carbohydrate antigen on tumor cells, which compensates for 
the low affinity of the carbohydrate cross -reactive antibodies (29). In addition, mimotope -induced 
antibodies preferentially recognize the terminal residues of the TACA oligosaccharides, which are often 
structurally distinct from those found on normal cells (30). Thus , potential immunopathology due to 
destruction of normal tissue is minimized (31-32). 
 
Second, peptide mimotopes have the potential to overcome immune deficiencies that suppress vaccine -
induced carbohydrate -directed responses (33). Unlike carbohydrate antigens and carbohydrate -
conjugate vaccines, peptide mimotopes also prime B - and T -cells for subsequent memory of carbohydrate 
antigens, facilitating long -term surveillance through recall of carbohydrate immune responses (7). This 
effect may minimize the need for constant boosting.  In addition, they can functionally emulate conserved 
Vaccination of Triple Negative Breast Cancer Patients  IRB: 206010  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version: 11 
06/02/2022  
Page 8 of 46 
 structures of TACA, inducing antibodies that recognize multiple TACA, and therefore funct ioning like a 
TACA multivalent vaccine.  
 
Third, peptide mimotopes can be manipulated in ways that TACA cannot. Peptide mimotopes can be 
engineered to induce CD8+ T cells cross -reactive with tumor -associated glycopeptides and/or to induce 
CD4+ T cells that benefit the further expansion of CD8+ T cells and B -cells (7, 25-28). The ability to induce 
a humoral carbohydrate cro ss-reactive response, a CD4+ T helper response, and a CD8+ cytotoxic T 
lymphocyte (CTL) response with one simple inoculation is a novel approach to vaccination.  Therefore, 
peptide mimotopes hold the potential to generate a multifaceted TACA -reactive immune  response.  
 
Target carbohydrate antigens expressed on breast cancer cells:  Tumors expressing high levels of certain 
types of TACAs exhibit greater metastasis than those expressing low levels of these antigens, and this 
negatively impacts prognosis (34-36). In breast cancer, the LeY, STn, and KH -1 antigens, as well as selected 
gangliosides, glycosphingolipids and Globo -H carbohydrate antigens, are considered prime vaccine 
candidates because of their tissue distribution (37-38). In particular, LeY has long been recognized as a 
potential target for immunotherap y because it is expressed in 70 –90% of tumors of epithelial origin (39). 
The abundant gangliosides include GM3, GM2, GM1, and GD2, GD3 and GT3 (40). Antibodies to TACAs 
mediate a variety of effector functions and might lend to cross -presentation of tumor antigens to 
stimulate anti -tumor cellular responses. At present, LeY  conjugate vaccines appear to have only a limited 
ability to induce anti -LeY immune responses in humans.  Our in vitro  studies demonstrate that peptide 
mimotopes of Le Y and gangliosides induce serum antibodies in mice that recognize the appropriate 
carbohydrate antigens on human or murine breast cancer cell lines. Our in vivo  studies demonstrate that 
the peptide mimotopes induce sustained immunity to these antigens. Col lectively, these data provide the 
experimental foundation for evaluating peptide mimotopes as potential cancer vaccines in subjects with 
breast cancer.  
 
Role of Natural Killer (NK) cells in P10s mediated anti -tumor activity : In preclinical studies,  we observed 
a role for NK cells in tumor -growth inhibition upon immunization with the P10s -PADRE vaccine. NK cells 
are known to have potent anti -tumor activity and thus play an important role in metastasis clearance. In 
light of the finding of increased N K activation in similar preclinical setting by Kawashima et al . (41), we 
hypothesize that the anti -tumor effect observed in mice immunized with P10s could be due to interactions 
between NK cells and the anti -tumor B cell response that has been boosted by the immunization (41). 
Human subjects immunized with P10s -PAD RE in the Phase I safety study of P10s -PADRE displayed 
elevated activation of their NK cells.  This finding provides an expectation of benefit upon immunization 
with P10s -PADRE.  
 
Role of B and T cells : Chemotherapy is assumed to be immunosuppressive. However,  each drug might 
have differing effects  when used in combination with specific immunotherapy. Thus, diverse effects may 
have been achieved depending on the time and the dose of administration . For example, high dose 
doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide  (CY), while not beneficial for T -cell response,  have been noted to 
enhance the immunogen -specific antibody -forming cells  (42). Early reports indicated that low dose CY 
treatment might facilitate adapt ive T cell immunity by eliminating “suppressor” T cells.  In addition to its 
role on T lymphocytes, CY has been shown to switch cytokine production of tumor -infiltrating  
macrophages from IL-10 to IFN -γ (43) and polarize Th1/Th2 responses (44). Our own studies indicate that 
immunization with a CMP followed by CY tre atment can facilitate inhibition of tumor growth (45), 
including P10s -PADRE (data unpublished).  The administration of docetaxel to subject s with metastatic 
prostate or breast cancer, as well as that of cisplatin plus vinorelbine to non -small cell lung cancer subject s, 
Vaccination of Triple Negative Breast Cancer Patients  IRB: 206010  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version: 11 
06/02/2022  
Page 9 of 46 
 appears to significantly increase the ratio between effector T cells and regulatory T cells (Tregs) and to 
reduce the immunosuppressive activity of the latter in the majority of subject s (46). Such studies provide 
the rationale for the selective use of active immunotherapy regimens in combination with specific SoC 
therapies to achieve the most beneficial clin ical outcome among carcinoma patients. Developing the time 
and dose schedules therefore may increase the effectiveness of combining chemotherapy and 
immunotherapy.  Recently introduced immunotherapies, such as anti -PD-1 or anti -CTLA -4 therapeutic 
antibodies , need the presence of anti -tumor immune cells to be effective. A targeted vaccination strategy 
may activate cellular response  synergizing  the impact of immune checkpoint -based therapies (47-49). 
 
Potential for benefit with combination therapy: Mechanisms by which chemotherapy enhances vaccine -
induced humoral immunity and vice versa remain largely unknown. It is possible that antibodies can 
sensitize tumor cells for more efficient killing by chemotherapeutics. In a Phase I trial with the P10s -PADRE 
vaccine, we observed that antibodies induced by P10s are cytotoxic to human breast cancer cell lines 
including a Trastuzumab -resistant one (50). TACA expression is part of signaling pathways that confer 
death resistance. Cells  resistant to death are those that cause treatment failure and can colonize distant 
organs and vice versa. Admixing serum from P10s -PADRE immunized subject with docetaxel was shown 
to lower the LC 50 value for the drug in killing a human tumor cell line.  Consequently, immunization with 
P10s -PADRE followed by chemotherapy might augment the chemotherapy.  
 
Summary of results from  the Phase I trial with P10s -PADRE: A Phase I dose  escalation trial was designed 
to determine a maximum tolerated dose of vaccine plus adjuvant in two cohorts of Stage IV breast cancer 
subject s. The study design was the rule  based “traditional” 3+3 design (51), with 3 subjects at each dose 
if no toxicities were observed. This dose -escalation Phase I trial was approved by the UAMS Institutional 
Review Board (IRB) and was carried out from 2011 to 2013 . 
 
Female subjects 18 years of age or older, of all races with histologically or cytologically confirmed stage IV 
breast cancer were eligible, and subjects were enrolled after providing written, informed consent. The 
following eligibility criteria were used:  The cancer must have been newly dia gnosed metastatic or relapsed 
after primary or adjunctive therapy and must not have required a treatment change for 2 months. 
Treatments with anti -estrogen therapy or chemotherapy were allowed. The chemotherapy regimen could 
not contain steroids in the pre  or post supportive care medications. Disease staging was done according 
to the American Joint Commission on Cancer (AJCC), sixth edition; no expectation of response to other 
therapies; an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status of 0 –1; no pr ior therapy within 4 
weeks and adequate organ function  (white blood cell count ≥3,000/ mm3, hemoglobin ≥8.0 g/dL, platelets 
≥100,000/mm3 within 2 weeks prior to registration, total bilirubin ≤3.0 mg/dL, aspartate aminotransferase 
≤200 IU/L, alanine aminotr ansferase ≤200 IU/L, and serum creatinine ≤1.5 mg/dL). Subjects had to be  
immunocompetent as measured by responsiveness to two recall antigens by skin testing. The following 
exclusion criteria were applied: massive ascites; known brain metastasis; pregnanc y or lactation; known 
history of HIV infection; clinically serious infection; severe cardiac insufficiency; other active malignancy; 
history of organ allograft; immunodeficiency or history of splenectomy; concurrent treatment with 
steroids or immunosuppres sive agents; and unsuitability for the trial based on clinical judgment.  
 
The peptide vaccine was administered in liquid form, emulsified with incomplete Freund's adjuvant (IFA ; 
MONTANIDE™ ISA 51 VG , SEPPIC), by subcutaneous (SC) injections on 5 separate o ccasions during Weeks 
1, 2, 3, 7, and 19. The first cohort began with a 300 μg dose, and then the subsequent cohort received a 
500 μg dose of P10s -PADRE. The peptides and IFA were synthesized according to Good Manufacturing 
Practice  (GMP)  guidelines. The p rimary endpoint was the safety of P10s -PADRE vaccination. The 
Vaccination of Triple Negative Breast Cancer Patients  IRB: 206010  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version: 11 
06/02/2022  
Page 10 of 46 
 secondary endpoints were immunologic responses, clinical outcomes, and determination of the optimal 
dose of peptide for further clinical trials. The trial is registered on NIH’s ClinicalTrials.g ov results database  
(number NCT 01390064).  
 
Subjects were evaluated for signs of toxicity during and after vaccination. Adverse events  (AEs)  were 
graded according to the National Cancer Institute Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events  (NCI 
CTCAE)  Version 4.0. Toxicities assessed were the laboratory parameters listed in the study calendar, as 
well as any sign or symptom found during the history and physical examination not noted at pre -study or 
on the baseline evaluation. Special attention was paid to  signs and symptoms related to injection 
reactions, injection -site reactions or symptoms or laboratory findings indicating autoimmune toxicities.  
 
Sixteen subjects were consented, but only 6 that met the eligibility criteria were enrolled.  Six subjects 
consequently received the P10s -PADRE vaccine.  P10s vaccination was well -tolerated. All 6 subjects 
displayed a persistent IgG response to P10s after the three initial vaccination s, and induced serum and 
plasma antibodies displayed cross -reactivity to TACA -expr essing human breast cancer cell lines. Antibody 
induced by P10s displayed cytotoxic functionality to human breast cancer cell lines, including a 
Trastuzumab -resistant one, which established an expectation of therapeutic benefit (expectation of 
efficacy). I n summary, P10s vaccination was well -tolerated with injection site irritation as the only 
repetitive AE, and measurable immune responses and anti -cancer -cell efficacy were noted. This is the first 
study to show that CMP vaccination is safe and can induce f unctional antibodies that might have 
therapeutic benefit in subject s immunized with P10s.  
 
Definition of BMI -Adjusted Weight -Loss Grade:  The BMI -adjusted weight -loss grade is defined by Martin 
et al. (52) using the 5x5 grading matrix that appears as Panel D of Figure 2 of their publication; a table 
showing their grading matrix is rendered below. Subjects who experienced weight loss >2.5% of body 
weight durin g the 6 months prior to enrollment, and subjects whose weight was stable (weight loss within 
±2.5%) during this time will be assigned a BMI -adjusted weight -loss grade according to the grading matrix. 
Grades will range from 0 to 4 as shown in the grading ma trix. The few study subjects who experience 
weight gain  ≥2.5% of body weight during the 6 months prior to enrollment fall outside the scope of this 
grading system, and will not be graded by it. They will instead be graded as “gained weight”.  
 
BMI -Adjusted Weight -Loss Grading Matrix  (from Fig. 2  of Martin et al.  (52)) 
Weight -Loss Grading Matrix1 BMI ≥28  BMI 25 -28 BMI 22 -25 BMI 20 -22 BMI <20  
Weight loss2 
within ±2.49%  GRADE 0  GRADE 0  GRADE 1  GRADE 1  GRADE 3  
Weight loss  
2.50% -5.99%  GRADE 1  GRADE 2  GRADE 2  GRADE 2  GRADE 3 
Weight loss  
6.0% -10.99%  GRADE 2  GRADE 3  GRADE 3  GRADE 3  GRADE 4  
Weight loss  
11.0% -14.99%  GRADE 3  GRADE 3  GRADE 3  GRADE 4  GRADE 4  
Weight loss  
≥15.0%  GRADE 3  GRADE 4  GRADE 4  GRADE 4  GRADE 4  
1. Body -mass index at study entry (“current BMI”).  
2. Weight loss in the 6 months prior to study entry, defined as 100% times (previous weight minus current 
weight) divided by previous weight, where current weight is the body weight at study entry and previous 
weight is the body weight measured within 6 month s prior to study entry, or the “usual body weight” if 
body weight was not measured within 6 months prior to study entry; see Martin et al.  for details.   
Vaccination of Triple Negative Breast Cancer Patients  IRB: 206010  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version: 11 
06/02/2022  
Page 11 of 46 
 Martin et al.  (52) developed their BMI -adjusted Weight Loss grading system using a training sample of 
8,160 patients and a validation sample of 2,693 patients. Cells in the grading matrix that have the same 
grade correspond t o combinations of BMI and weight loss that have similar risk of mortality in multivariate 
Cox regression, such that higher grades of weight loss have increased risk of mortality. The table below 
shows, for each BMI -adjusted weight -loss grade, the aggregate d median overall survivals (95% confidence 
limits) and hazard ratios associated with subjects assigned that grade, and illustrates how mortality risk 
increases with increasing grade of weight loss.  
 
Mortality Risk versus BMI -Adjusted Weight -Loss Grade (from  Fig. 2  of Martin et al. (52)) 
Risk Measure  GRADE 0  GRADE 1  GRADE 2  GRADE 3  GRADE 4  
Median Survival1 20.9  14.6  10.8  7.6 4.3 
95% Conf. Limits2 17.9 -23.9  12.9 -16.2  9.7-11.9  7.0-8.2 4.1-4.6 
Hazard Ratio3 1.0 1.3 1.5 2.0 3.1 
1. Median OS in months.  
2. 95% Confidence Limits on the median OS in months.  
3. Hazard Ratio of higher grades relative to Grade 0 as the reference grade.  
 
These findings by Martin et al.  lead us to hypothesize that BMI -associated weight -loss grade will be 
negatively associated with the ability to mount an immune response to P10s -PADRE in cancer subjects 
vaccinated with this peptide. We will evaluate our hypothesis during the course of mee ting this study’s 
correlative objective.  
 
Neoadjuvant treatment in breast cancer: The treatment of breast cancer  includes the treatment of local 
disease with surgery, radiation therapy, or both, and the treatment of systematic disease with cytotoxic 
chemot herapy, endocrine therapy, biologic therapy (such as Trastuzumab in HER2 positive disease), or 
combination of these. The need for and selection of various local or systemic therapies are based on 
several prognostic and predictive factors that include tumor  histology, clinical and pathologic 
characteristics of the primary tumor, axillary lymph node status, tumor hormone receptor content, tumor 
HER2 status, multi -gene testing, presence or absence of detectable metastatic disease, patient 
comorbidities, patien t age, and menopausal status.  
 
Neoadjuvant chemotherapy has become commonly used based on results from randomized trials 
suggesting no difference in relapse -free or overall survival whether chemotherapy is administered before 
or after surgery (53). A major benefit of neoadjuvant chemotherapy is the increase in the rate  of breast 
conserving surgery. Tumor response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy has proven to be a good surrogate 
end-point for survival; the achievement of pCR is strongly associated with a favorable long -term survival 
rates (75% to 85% at 10 to 15 years) (53-57). Thus,  improving pCR has become a valid strategy in the 
development of new treatment regimens. Specifically, the rat e of pCR achieved in ER/PR/HER2 -negative 
breast cancer subjects following vaccination with P10s -PADRE administered concurrently with 
neoadjuvant chemotherapy will be compared with the corresponding pCR rate with the control arm. 
 
Definition of Pathological Complete Response:  Pathological Complete Response will be defined as “the 
absence of any residual invasive cancer on hematoxylin and eosin evaluation of the resected breast 
specimen and all sampled ipsilateral lymph nodes following completion of neoadjuvant systemi c therapy 
(i.e., ypT0 /Tis ypN0 in the current AJCC staging system).”  (58) 
 
Vaccination of Triple Negative Breast Cancer Patients  IRB: 206010  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version: 11 
06/02/2022  
Page 12 of 46 
 Rationale for using P10s -PADRE in the neoadjuvant setting:  The traditional drug development process 
based on large Phase III trials to show statistical incremental benefit from SoC therapy is slow, expensive, 
and inefficient. In contrast, the neoadjuvant trial model provides rapid assessment o f short -term drug 
efficacy and triage utilizing pCR as the primary endpoint. Thus, improving pCR has become a valid strategy 
in the development of new treatment regimens.  
 
This issue is perhaps best exemplified in the development of HER2 -directed therapies , such as lapatininb 
(NeoALTTO trial) (59), and pertuzumab (NeoSphere trial) (60). Recognizing the importance of neoadjuvant 
trials for drug development, the FDA recently announced the consideration of  neoadjuvant randomized 
trials for accelerated drug approval in early breast cancer (61). In line with this approach, in September 
2013 the FDA granted accelerated approval of pertuzumab for neoadjuvant treatment of women with 
early -stage HER2 -positive breast cancer.  
 
In our Phase I study, we were able to demonstrate that P10s vaccination was well  tolerated, and 
measurable immune responses and anti -cancer -cell efficacy were noted. Our previous  data suggest that 
both anti -peptide IgM and IgG titers rose sharply by week 7 (four weeks after the third immunization) of 
the study (when additional boost was administered) in most subjects. IgM titers were short -lived and 
returned to baseline by week 19 , whereas IgG titers remained elevated through at least week 21. Based 
on the above data, we expect that three doses  of the vaccine will be sufficient to achieve a significant 
immune response.  Interim d ata from  our ongoing Phase I/II trial suggest that thr ee weekly vaccination s 
prior to  the start of the chemotherapy regimen are enough to elevate an anti -peptide antibody response.  
 
Justification for 500  μg vaccine dose:  Whereas medications work via distribution through the 
bloodstream, the immune response generated by vaccination typically occurs at or near the injection site.  
In the Phase I study,  we observed an increase in IgG binding to the P10s peptide after immuniza tion as 
measured by ELISA assay . Anti-P10s serum reactivity surged dramatically from week 4 to week 7 of the 
study in most subjects except in subject #6, in whom it was already surging at week 4.  The increases at 
week 7 compared to pre -immune ranged from 3 1 fold (in subject #2) to 256 fold (in subjects #5 and #6), 
and the titers in subsequent weeks showed little change from their week -7 values.  The cohort immunized 
with the higher dose of vaccine (500 μg dose) displayed higher normalized endpoint titers. In  
nonparametric repeated -measures analysis, the main effects of dose and week were statistically 
significant (both P values <.0001), but the dose×week interaction was not ( P=0.40). While we did not 
observe dose -limiting toxicity in this study, it is difficu lt to determine the maximum tolerated dose of the 
vaccine because of the potential of forming granulomas due to the nature of the adjuvant. P10s is admixed 
with MONTANIDE™ ISA 51 VG, an adjuvant that is known to form granulomas.  
 
4. STUDY DESIGN  
 
This is a  randomized two -arm, open -label, multi -center Phase I/II study designed to evaluate the safety 
and efficacy of combining the P10s -PADRE vaccine with neoadjuvant chemotherapy  with the primary goal 
to determine if the pCR rate among TNBC  subject s treated wit h the chemo+vaccine combination is 
significantly higher than the 40% pCR rate expected among TNBC subjects  treated with SoC chemotherapy 
only. P10s -PADRE vaccine with MONTANIDE™ ISA 51 VG as adjuvant will be given in combination with 
neoadjuvant chemotherapy in female subjects  with clinical stage I, II or III ER/PR/HER2 -negative breast 
cancer.  
 
Vaccination of Triple Negative Breast Cancer Patients  IRB: 206010  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version: 11 
06/02/2022  
Page 13 of 46 
 This Phase I/II safety and effica cy study will randomize subjects to the chemo+vaccine arm (Arm 2) vs. 
control arm (Arm 1) on a 2:1 ratio. The vaccination will start four weeks before chemotherapy treatment. 
The total sample size in the entire study will be 102 subjects : 68 on the chemo+v accine arm and 34 
subjects on the control arm. A formal interim analysis for both efficacy and futility will be conducted when 
51 subjects (50%) have been evaluated for response.  
 
The secondary objectives are to determine the short -term and long -term immun e responses induced by 
the vaccine  and determine the delayed -type hypersensitivity (DTH) response to the P10s -PADRE . In 
addition, it will also attempt to evaluate whether the magnitude of the immune response to the vaccine 
(or the ability to mount an immun e response) is correlated with important prevaccination clinical 
characteristics such as ECOG (Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group) performance status , BMI at the time 
of enrollment , the BMI-adjusted weight change during the six months prior to enrollment , and the 
presence of a DTH response at the time of enrollmen t. 
 
5. TRIAL OBJECTIVES  
 
Primary Objectives  
1) Safety/tolerability:  
To continue to monitor the safety and tolerability of the investigational product, P10s -PADRE in 
MONTANIDETM ISA 51 VG, when it is administered in combination with SoC Neoadjuvant 
chemo therapy. Toxicities will be graded according to the NCI CTCAE Version 5.0. All subjects who 
receive at least one inoculation of vaccine therapy will be monitored for the vaccine’s  safety and 
tolerability. This safety population will also be used for the summaries and analysis of all safety 
parameters (drug exposure, tables of AEs information, including SAEs, etc.).  
 
2) Demonstr ation of clinical response:  
Determine if the Chemo+vaccine  regimen in TNBC would lead to a significantly higher rate of pCR in 
breast and axillary nodes at time of definitive surgery compared to the p CR rate of 40% expected on 
the control arm  (1, 2) . 
 
Secondary Objectives  
1) Determine Short -term Immune Responses Induced by  Treatment : 
a) Determine the functional humoral response as defined by : 
i. P10s -MAP -reactive immunoglobu lin-G endpoint titers in serum  
ii. Cytotoxicity of serum and plasma samples against two TACA  expressing breast cancer cell 
lines following therapy  with either chemo+vaccine  or SoC chemotherapy  
b) Determine the activation profil e of NK cells before and after  therapy  with either chemo+vacc ine 
or SoC chemotherapy  
c) Determine T -cell subpopulations and e valuate the effects of the assigned therapy on the numbers 
of circulating T and B cells a s determined by flow cytometry  
d) Perform functional T -cell immune analysis by performing T -cell proliferatio n, ELISPOT, cytokine 
release and ADCC assays  
e) Determine expression of biomarkers of efficacy and response on tumor tissues and characterize 
tumor infiltrating lymphocytes and their role in response to therapy  
  
Vaccination of Triple Negative Breast Cancer Patients  IRB: 206010  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version: 11 
06/02/2022  
Page 14 of 46 
 2) Determine Long -term Immune Responses Induced by Treatment : 
a) Determine antibody titers against P10s at approximately 6 and 12 months  following t he initial 
response evaluation  (Week 10) 
b) Measure anti -TACA cell -binding levels at ap proximately 6 and 12 months  following the initial 
response evaluation  (Week 10) 
c) Determine the cytotoxic activity against TACA -expressing ce ll lines at  approximately 6 and 12 
months following the initial response evaluation  (Week 10) 
d) Evaluate the functionality of T - and NK cells  
 
3) Determine DTH Responses : 
a) Determine the delaye d-type hypersensitivity (DTH) resp onse to the immunizing mimotope  
 
Correlative Objectives  
Evaluate the relationship of prevaccination performance status , body mass index  (BMI)  at the time of 
enrollment , the BMI-adjusted weight change during the six months prior to enrollment  and DTH at the 
time of enrollment  on the development of P10s -MAP -reactive antibodies.  BMI-adjusted weight change 
prior to enrollment will be graded using the grading system of Martin et al.  (52). 
 
6. PATIENT POPULATION  
 
Eligibility Criteria:  Subjects are eligible for the vaccine study if the following inclusion and exclusion 
criteria are met:  
 
Inclusion Criteria  
1. Females of all races with biopsy -proven clinical stage I, II, or III TNBC  (ER-negative, PR -negative and 
HER2 -negative ) who  will undergo SoC neoadjuvant treatment  
2. Age 18 years and older  
3. ECOG Performance Status 0 or 1  
4. White blood cell (WBC) count ≥ 3,000/mm3 within 3 weeks prior to registratio n 
5. Platelet count ≥ 100,000/mm3 within  3 weeks prior to registration  
6. Bilirubin ≤ 2 x institutional upper limit (IUL) of normal obtained within 3 wee ks prior to registration  
7. Serum glutamic -oxaloacetic transaminase (SGOT) or aspartate  aminotransferase test (AST) ≤ 2 x IUL 
of normal obtained within  3 weeks prior to registration  
8. Serum glutamic -pyruvic transaminase (SGPT) or alanine aminotransferase test (ALT) ≤ 2 x IUL of 
normal obtained within  3 weeks prior to registration  
9. Serum creatinine ≤ 1.8 mg/dl obtained within  3 weeks prior to registration  
10. Must sign an informed consent document approved by the UAMS IRB  
 
Exclusion Criteria  
1. ER-positive , PR-positive, HER2 -positive, inflammatory, metastatic , stage IV  or recurrent  breast cancer . 
2. Active infection requiring tr eatment with antibiotics.  
3. Existing diagnosis or history of organic brain syndrome that might preclude part icipation in the full 
protocol.  
4. Existing di agnosis or history of significant impairment of basal cognitive function that might preclude 
participatio n in the full protocol.  
  
Vaccination of Triple Negative Breast Cancer Patients  IRB: 206010  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version: 11 
06/02/2022  
Page 15 of 46 
 5. Other current malignancies.  Subjects with prior history at any time of any in situ cancer, including 
lobular carcinoma of the  breast in situ, cervical cancer in situ, atypical melanocytic hyperplasia or Clark 
I melanoma in situ or basal or squamous skin cancer are eligible, provided they are disease -free at the 
time of registration. Subjects with other malignancies are eligible if they have been continuously 
disease free for ≥ 5 years pri or to the time of registration.  
6. Active autoimmune disorders or conditions of immunosuppression; Existing diagnosis or history of 
autoimmune disorders or conditions of immunosuppression  that have been in remission for less than 
6 months . 
7. Treatment  with corticosteroids, including oral steroids (i.e. prednisone, dexamethasone [except when 
used as an antiemetic in SoC therapy]), continuous use of topical steroid creams or ointments or any 
steroid -cont aining inhalers. Subjects who discontinue the use of these classes of medication for at 
least 6 weeks prior to registration are eligible if, in the judgment of the treating physician, the subject 
is not likely to require these classes of drugs during the t reatment period. Replacement doses of 
steroids for subjects with adr enal insufficiency are allowed.  
8. Pregnancy or breast feeding (due to the unknown effects of peptide/mimotope vaccines on a fetus or 
infant).  Women of childbearing potential must have a negat ive urine pregnancy test within 72 hours 
prior to starting week 1 and must be counseled to use an accepted and effective method of 
contraception (including abstinence) while on treatment and for a period of 18 months after 
completing or discontinuing treat ment.  Accepted methods of contraception include oral 
contraceptives, barrier  methods, IUDs, and abstinence.  
9. Any other significant medical or psychiatric conditions, which , in the opinion of the enrolling 
investigator, may interfere with consent or compliance of the treatment regimen.  
10. Enrollment in any other clinical trial using investigational drug products or devices  prior to first post -
surgery study lab  (Week 46 visit) . Concurrent enrollment in observational studies is allowed.  
 
7. INVESTIGATIONAL  PRODUCT – P10S-PADRE/ MONTANIDE™ ISA 51 VG  STERILE  
 
a. General Description:  P10s -PADRE is a short peptide (P10s) coupled to PADRE, a synthetic, non -natural 
peptide that binds with high or intermediate affinity to 15 of 16 of the most common HLA -DR types 
tested to date.  Both components contribute to the efficacy of this molecule in stimulating an immune 
response.  Because of its binding promiscuity, PADRE should overcome the problems posed by the 
extreme polymorphism of HLA -DR molecules in the human population.  Furthermore, the PADRE 
peptide was specifically engineered as an antigen -presenting molecule for use in humans.  
Carbohydrate moieties, such as TACAs, typically do not induce T -cell responses.  Thus, P10s, a TACA 
peptide mimotope, was developed.  By coupling  P10s to PADRE, the likelihood of generating an 
immune response increases, including T -cell "help" in the vaccine con struct designed for human use.  
 
MONTANIDE™ ISA 51 VG  STERILE is defined as an oil adjuvant containing surfactant based mannide 
monooleate a nd oil, which is of white mineral oil origin.  
 
b. Vaccine Manufacturing and Formulation:  AmbioPharm , Inc. (Nor th Augusta, SC) will synthesize 
Mimotope P10s covalently linked with PADRE as a powder manufactured under GMP conditions in 
facilities registered with the FDA.  Once P10s -PADRE has been  manufactured by AmbioPharm , the 
powder will be  shipped to Bioserv Corporation , Inc. (San Diego, CA) for sterile packaging as a 
lyophilized powder in quantities of 500 µg/vial in appropriately  sized  glass vials under G MP conditions. 
Advantar Laboratories, Inc. (San Diego, CA) will perform product release and stability testing on the 
P10s -PADRE study drug.  The study drug will be  stored per label instructions.  
Vaccination of Triple Negative Breast Cancer Patients  IRB: 206010  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version: 11 
06/02/2022  
Page 16 of 46 
 MONTANIDE™ ISA 51 VG STERILE is supplied by SEPPIC, Inc. (Fair field, NJ ). See I nvestigator’s Brochure 
for formulation and storage conditions.  
 
c. Vaccine Preparation:  The following doses of P10s -PADRE and MONTANIDE™ ISA 51 VG STERILE 
vaccine will be administered to subjects subcutaneously in rotating injection sites in the abdomen.  
Subjects in Arm 2 will receive  a total of  2 mL SC injections of the vaccine on each of 3 separate 
occasions according to the Arm 2  study schedule.  
 
 500 µg P10s -PADRE/ MONTANIDE™ ISA 51 VG STERILE Vaccine Dose preparation:  Allow P10s -
PADRE to come to room temperature  before reconstitution (15 to 30 min). At the same time, 
remove MONTANIDE™  ISA 51 VG STERILE vial from refrigerator. Reconstitute P10s -PADRE with 
1.1 mL sterile water (final concentration 500  µg/mL).  Use 1 mL of the peptide solution and mix 
with an equal amount of MONTANIDE™ ISA 51 VG STERILE to a final volume of 2 mL. Mix as 
instructed by Seppic until emulsification is complete. The pharmacist will prepare the vaccine dose 
following the manufacturer’s instruction s. 
 
d. DTH Preparation:  
• Candida  albicans  (pre-vaccination DTH testing only) : per insert instructions  
• 100 µg P10s -PADRE  (post -vaccination DTH testing only) : The UAMS Research Pharmacist will 
prepare the DTH dose following the manufacturer’s instructions  
 
The UAMS Research Pharmacy will not provide the Candida albicans antigen for sites other than 
UAMS. Ordering and preparing th is antigen  will be the responsibility of each study site.  
 
e. DTH  Administration : The DTH dose will be injected intradermally on the back of the subject by clinic 
staff.  
 
f. Label Information : The vaccine drug supply (both P10s -PADRE and MONTANIDE™ ISA 51 VG STERILE ) 
will be labeled with the following statement: “Caution: New Drug – Limited by Federal Law to 
Investigational Use.”  
 
g. Agent Or dering: All study drug supplies (P10s -PADRE vials and MONTANIDE™ ISA 51 VG STERILE vials) 
will be  sent to the attention of the UAMS Research Pharmacy staff.  The i nitial drug supply order will 
be placed by principal  investigator and both P10s -PADRE vials an d MONTANIDE™ ISA 51 VG STERILE 
vials will be  shipped directly to Cancer Institute Pharmacy, Room 5132, 4301 W. Markham Street, Slot 
721-11, Little Rock, AR 72205 -7199.  
 
The UAMS Research Pharmacy is the primary pharmacy for this study. All drug ordering an d shipment 
to other sites are described in the Pharmacy Instructions binder.  
 
h. Agent Accountability: P10s -PADRE and MONTANIDE™ ISA 51 VG STERILE will be stored in the 
Pharmacy under the supervision of the research pharmacist who will be responsible for main taining 
the supply according to the manufacturer’s specifications, dispensing the drug for administration and 
maintaining all accountability logs. Standard UAMS accountability logs will be used.  
  
Vaccination of Triple Negative Breast Cancer Patients  IRB: 206010  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version: 11 
06/02/2022  
Page 17 of 46 
 8. TREATMENT PLAN  
 
a. On-study Plan: After signing the IRB -approved informed consent form, research participants with 
eligibility confirmed  will be registered and assigned a study number by a clinical research associ ate 
(CRA) or Study Coordinator.  
 
b. Randomization and Treatment Allocation:  After the subject  has been assigned a study number , the 
study coordinator will use the Clinical Trials Management System to randomize the subject  in a 2:1 
allocation ratio to either the chemo+vaccine  arm or the chemo only ( control ) arm, respectively . 
Subjects will receive either SoC neoadjuvant chemotherapy or SoC neoadjuvant chemotherapy and 
500 μg P10s -PADRE admixed with MONTANIDE™ ISA 51 VG via SC injection s depending on  the study  
arm to  which they are randomized . The two arms will be treated  according to the following schedules:  
 
1. Arm 1 - Chemotherapy  only : Subjects randomized to the control arm will receive SoC neoadjuvant 
chemotherapy starting on week 1. D oxorubicin and cyclophosphamide (AC) will be administered 
concurrently every two weeks for four cycles with pegfilgrastim (or equivalent  growth factor) on 
day 2 of each AC cycle , followed by paclitaxel  weekly x 12 weeks . 
2. Arm 2 - Chemo+vaccine : Subjects randomized to the chemo+ vaccine arm will be immunized with 
P10s -PADRE in MONTANIDE™ ISA 51  VG a total of  three times. The vaccine will be administered 
on week s 1, 2 and 3  prior to chemotherapy. Then, they will start their  SoC neoadjuvant  
chemotherapy on week 4 . Doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide (AC) will be administered 
concurrently every two we eks for four cycles with pegfilgrastim (or equivalent growth factor) on 
day 2 of each AC cycle, followed by paclitaxel weekly x 12 weeks.  
 
Subjects will be monitored for chemotherapy -related toxicities and, if clinically necessary, 
chemotherapy dosing may be modified  according to  the Chemotherapy Dose Adjustment . 
 
c. Chemotherapy Dose Adjustment:  Any or all of the SoC neoadjuvant chemotherapies may be dose -
reduced, as necessary, according  to SoC. If paclitaxel is not tolerated, docetaxel may be used in its 
place. Chemotherapy dosing may be re -escalated to the starting dose at the treating physician’s 
discretion and per SoC. Subjects who require different chemotherapy agents prior to Week 46 will be 
followed for 30 days after the last vaccination  (if applicable ) and then be withdrawn from the study.  
 
SOC neoadjuvant chemotherapy dosing may be delayed up to +7 days  due to AEs (e.g. anemia, 
neutropenia, leukopenia, etc.).  For delays longer than 7 day s, the Medical Monitor and Sponsor 
should be contacted.  
 
Any delay outside the allotted time window will be a deviation. The  remainder of the study visits 
should be adjusted accordingly and documented in a note -to-file. Each initial shift in the study 
calendar would be a deviation due to medical necessity and the following visits would be recalibrated 
without deviation.  
 
Subjects who require dose modifications , treatment delays,  or who are unable to resume their SoC 
neoadjuvant chemotherapy (e.g. due to chemotherapy -related toxicities ) will remain in the study to 
continue with assessments per the study calendar, including collection of study labs.   
Vaccination of Triple Negative Breast Cancer Patients  IRB: 206010  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version: 11 
06/02/2022  
Page 18 of 46 
 d. Sample C ollection and Evaluation of Endpoints : Sera and peripheral blood mononuclear cells 
(PBMCs) will be collected from subjects and immune responses will be assessed according to the Study 
Calendar in Section 9 and as detailed below. Subjects will be evaluated for antibody response to TACAs  
at Week 1 prior to receiving any treatment (chemotherapy or vaccine) . 
 
e. Prohibited Medications:  Immunosuppressant medications are not allowed , including inhaled and 
topical steroids , except for those subjects on chemotherapy as prescribed to reduce chemo symptoms 
by attending oncologist or for subjects  with an adrenal insufficiency . All other medications are 
allowed.  
 
Concurrent  enrollment  in another clinical trial using drugs or devices  may be allowed  only after the 
first post -surgery study lab at Week 46.  Concurre nt enrollment in observational trials is allowed 
throughout the study.  
 
f. Treatment Discontinuation : Vaccination may be discontinued due to dose -limiting toxicity or a 
serious adverse event (SAE) possibly/probably related to the vaccine  (below).  
 
Dose Limiting Criteria : This dose of investigational agent was well tolerated when used in our Phase I 
study in breast cancer subjects. However, if a subject does not tolerate the vaccine, judged by having 
any of the dose -limiting criteria below, their vaccinat ion will be discontinued.  
 
• Any grade 3 or greater toxicity as per NCI CTCAE v5 toxicity criteria  
• Grade 2 or greater autoimmune toxicity, with the exception of vitiligo  
• Grade 2 or greater hypersensitivity reactions  
 
Subjects who any of the above dose -limiti ng toxicities  will be treated and referred for additional care 
as indicated with systemic steroids, topical steroids, epinephrine or Benadryl. These subjects will no 
longer receive the vaccine but will continue with assessments per the study calendar , including 
collection of study labs.  
 
Serious Adverse Event (SAE) during treatment : If an SAE that is possibly/probably /definitely  related 
to the vaccine is detected during the vaccination process, the vaccination treatment will be 
discontinued.  The subject will remain on study to continue to receive SoC therapy, to be assessed per 
the study calendar and followed for both short -term and long -term immunological and clinical 
endpoints.  
 
g. Study Pausing Rules:  The study will be stopped if either of the following occurs:  
• Death (other than due to disease progression or motor vehicle accident or to other fatal 
events determined to be not related to the vaccine)  
• Two Grade 4 toxicity events that are possibly/probabl y related to the vaccine  
 
9. STUDY CALENDARS  
 
See following pages.  
Vaccination of Triple Negative Breast Cancer Patients  IRB: 206010  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version: 11 
06/02/2022  
Page 19 of 46 
 9.1 Study Calendar for Arm 1 (control arm – no vaccine)  
Procedures  Pre-study/  
Screeninga Wk 1b 
(± 2 
days)  Wk 3  
(± 2 
days)  Wk 5  
(± 2 
days)  Wk 7  
(± 2 
days)  Weekly  
Wk 9 -20c 
(± 2 days)  Surgery  
(4-8 wks  
after chemo)  Wk 46  
(±4 wks)  Wk 70  
(±4 wks)  
Informed Consent /Randomizationd X         
BMI and % weight change in the  
6 months preceding enrollment  X         
ACe  X X X X     
Paclitaxelf      X    
AEs  X X X X X  X X 
Concomitant Medications  X X X X X X  X X 
History/PEg X X X X X X q 3wk   X X 
Vital signsh X X X X X X  X X 
CBC with Diff erential  X X X X X X  X X 
Total Bilirubin  X X X X X X q 3wk   X X 
SGOT/AST  X X X X X X q 3wk   X X 
SGPT/ALT  X X X X X X q 3wk   X X 
Alkaline  Phos phate  X X X X X X q 3wk   X X 
LDH X X X X X X q 3wk   X X 
Chem istryi X X X X X X q 3wk   X X 
Urine Pregnancy Test  X         
DTH Skin Test/Readingj X         
Study Labk  X   X   X  
Surgeryl       X   
  
                                                                        
a Pre-study/Screening should be completed within 21 days prior to Week 1.  
b Screening blood tests (CBC, Total Bilirubin, SGOT/AST, SGPT/ALT, Alkaline Phosphate, LDH, Creatinine, Calcium) performed within 7 days of Week 1 visit will not be repeated.  
c CBC, AEs, Concomitant Medications to be completed weekly. History/PE and other blood work should be completed every 3 weeks a nd at last treatment visit (Weeks 9, 12 15, 18 & 20).  
d Registration will occ ur after subject eligibility confirmed as described in Section 15. Registration may occur prior to Week 1.  
e SoC doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide (AC) to be administered concurrently every two weeks for four cycles with pegfilgrastim on day 2 of each AC cy cle. 
f If paclitaxel is not tolerated, docetaxel may be used in its place.  
g Tumor Assessments will be performed by physical exam according to standard practice.  
h Vital signs to include blood pressure, temperature, pulse and weight as described in the visit breakdown section. Height is only required at pre -study/screening.  
i Chemistry (OP Chem 7) includes blood urea nitrogen (BUN), carbon dioxide, creatinine, calcium, chloride, potassium, sodium.  
j DTH skin tests to one recall antigen will be performed as described in the visit breakdown section. Results will be read 48 -72 hrs later.  
k Study lab for Week 1 should be completed prior to the chemotherapy. Blood collection: approximately 50 mL in red vacutainer a nd approximately 50 mL in purple vacutainer  
l Performed according to standard practice unless they are considered inoperable or if surgery is medically contraindicated.  
Vaccination of Triple Negative Breast Cancer Patients  IRB: 206010  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version: 11 
06/02/2022  
Page 20 of 46 
 9.2 Study Calendar for Arm 2 (chemo+vaccine arm)  
Procedures  Pre-study/  
Screeninga Wk 1 
(± 2 
days)  Wk 2 
(± 2 
days)  Wk 3 
(± 2 
days)  Wk 4 
(± 2 
days)  Wk 6 
(± 2 
days)  Wk 7 
(± 2 
days)  Wk 8 
(± 2 
days)  Wk 10 
(± 2 
days)  Weekly 
Wk 12 -23b 
(± 2 days)  Surgery  
(4-8 wks  
after chemo)  Wk 46  
(±4 wks)  Wk 70  
(±4 wks)  
Informed Consent /Randomizationc X             
BMI and % weight change in the  
6 months preceding enrollment  X             
Vaccination with  Mimotope P10s -
PADRE/MONTANIDE™ ISA 51 VG   Xd Xd Xd          
ACe     X X  X X     
Paclitaxelf          X    
Adverse Events   X X X X X X X X X  X X 
Concomitant Medications  X X X X X X X X X X  X X 
History/PEg X X   X X  X X X q 3wk   X X 
Vital signs h X X X X X X  X X X  X X 
CBC with Diff erential  X    X X  X X X  X X 
Total Bilirubin  X    X X  X X X q 3wk   X X 
SGOT/AST  X    X X  X X X q 3wk   X X 
SGPT/ALT  X    X X  X X X q 3wk  X X 
Alkaline  Phos phate  X    X X  X X X q 3wk   X X 
LDH X    X X  X X X q 3wk   X X 
Chem istryi X    X X X X X X q 3wk   X X 
Urine Pregnancy Test  X Xj            
DTH Skin Test/Reading  Xk        Xl     
Study Labm  X     X  X Wk 15, 1 8, 23  X X 
Surgeryn           X   
                                                                        
a Pre-study/screening should be completed within 21 days prior to Week 1 . 
b CBC, AEs, Concomitant Medications to be completed weekly.  History/PE and other blood work should be completed every 3 weeks and at last treatment visit (Weeks 12, 15, 18, 21 & 23).  
c Registration to occur after subject eligibility confirmed as described in Section 15.  
d Post -vaccine administration, the following  vital signs will be monitored every 15 minutes (± 5 minutes) for one hour: blood pressure, temperature and pulse.  
e SoC doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide (AC) to be administered concurrently every two weeks for four cycles with pegfilgrastim on day 2 of ea ch AC cycle.  
f If paclitaxel is not tolerated, docetaxel may be used in its place.  
g Tumor assessments will be performed by physical exam according to standard practice.  
h Vital signs to include weight (except Weeks 1, 2 and 3), blood pressure, temperature , pulse and as described in the visit breakdown section. Height is only required at pre -study/screening.  
i Chemistry (OP Chem 7) includes blood urea nitrogen (BUN), carbon dioxide, creatinine, calcium, chloride, potassium, sodium.  
j To be performed prior t o vaccine dosing. Week 1 test may be omitted if screening urine pregnancy test is performed within the 72 hours prior to firs t vaccine dose.  
k DTH skin tests to one recall antigen  will be performed as described in the visit breakdown section. Results will be read 48 -72 hrs later.  
l DTH skin test to 100 µg P10s -PADRE will be performed as described in the visit breakdown section. Results will be read 48 -72 hrs later.  
m Study lab for Week 1 should be completed prior to the vaccine or chemotherapy. Blood collec tion: approximately 50 mL in red vacutainer and approximately 50 mL in purple vacutainer  
n Performed according to standard practice unless they are considered inoperable or if surgery is medically contraindicated.  
Vaccination of Triple Negative Breast Cancer Patients  IRB: 206010  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version: 11 
06/02/2022  
Page 21 of 46 
 10. VISIT BREAKDOWN S 
10.1 Visit Breakdown for Arm 1 (control arm – no vaccine)  
 
Pre-study/Screening Visit (within 21 days prior to initiating study  treatment)  
• Informed Consent  
• Complete medical history and physical examination. Vital signs to include height, weight, blood 
pressure, temperature and pulse  
• BMI and Assessment of BMI -adjusted weight change during the six months preceding enrollment  
• Concomitant medications  
• Blood tests to include the following : 
o Complete blood count with differential  
o Tota l Bilirubin  
o SGOT/AST  
o SGPT/ALT  
o Alkaline Phosphatase  
o LDH 
o Chem istry  (BUN, carbon dioxide, creatinine, calcium, chloride, potassium, sodium ) 
• Urine pregnancy test for women of childbearing potential  
• DTH skin test:  
o Candida albicans antigen will be administered intradermally as a control antige n on the subject’s 
back, and the resulting induration will be read 48 -72 hours later.  
 
48-72 hour after Pre-study/Screening Visit  
• DTH skin test reading  
 
Week 1  (± 2 days)  
• Complete medical history and physical examination. Vital signs prior to SoC chemotherapy to include 
weight, blood pressure, temperature and pulse . 
• SoC c yclophosphamide and doxorubicin with pegfilgrastim on day 2  of each cycle  
• AEs: events will be monitored u sing the NCI CTCAE Version 5.0 
• Concomitant medications  
• Blood tests to include the following  (screening blood tests performed within 7 days of Week 1 visit  
will not be repeated ): 
o Complete blood count with differential  
o Total Bilirubin  
o SGOT/AST  
o SGPT/ALT  
o Alkaline Phosphatase  
o LDH 
o Chem istry  (BUN, carbon dioxide, creatinine, calcium, chloride, potassium, sodium ) 
• Study Lab  (prior to chemotherapy) : 
o Serum preparation: Approximately 50 mL of blood wi ll be collected in red tubes for serum 
collection to determine the presence of glycan -reactive antibodies through ELISA, and flow -
cytometry assays and also to determine cytotoxicity effect on breast cancer cells.  
o Isolation of plasma and PBMCs and immune -cell characterization: Approximately 50 mL of blood 
will be collected in potassium EDTA tubes to collect plasma and PBMCs, and further assess the 
Vaccination of Triple Negative Breast Cancer Patients  IRB: 206010  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version: 11 
06/02/2022  
Page 22 of 46 
 peripheral -blood NK -cell activation markers pre - and post -vaccine administration. PBMCs will be 
used to characte rize B -cell and T -cell sub -populations in pre and post -vaccination blood samples.  
 
Week 3  (± 2 days)  
• Complete medical history and physical examination. Vital signs prior to SoC chemotherapy to include 
weight, blood pressure, temperature and pulse  
• SoC c yclophosphamide and doxorubicin with pegfilgrastim on day 2  of each cycle  
• AEs: events will be monitored using the NCI CTCAE Version 5.0 
• Concomitant medications  
• Blood tests to include the following : 
o Complete blood count with differential  
o Total Bilirubin  
o SGOT/AST  
o SGPT/ALT  
o Alkaline Phosphatase  
o LDH 
o Chem istry  (BUN, carbon dioxide, creatinine, calcium, chloride, potassium, sodium ) 
 
Week 5 (± 2 days)  
• Complete medical history and physical examination . Vital signs prior to SoC chemotherapy to include 
weight, bloo d pressure, temperature and pulse  
• SoC c yclophosphamide and doxorubicin with pegfilgrastim on day 2  of each cycle  
• AEs: events will be monitored u sing the NCI CTCAE Version 5.0 
• Concomitant medications  
• Blood tests to include the following : 
o Complete blood count with differential  
o Total Bilirubin  
o SGOT/AST  
o SGPT/ALT  
o Alkaline Phosp hatase  
o LDH 
o Chem istry  (BUN, carbon dioxide, creatinine, calcium, chloride, potassium, sodium ) 
 
Week 7  (± 2 days)  
• Complete medical history and physical examination. Vital signs prior to SoC chemotherapy to include 
weight, blood pressure, temperature and pulse  
• SoC c yclophosphamide and doxorubicin with pegfilgrastim on day 2  of each cycle  
• AEs: events will be monitored u sing the NCI CTCAE Version 5.0 
• Concomitant medications  
• Blood tests to include the following : 
o Complete blood count with differential  
o Total Bilirubin  
o SGOT/AST  
o SGPT/ALT  
o Alkaline Phosphatase  
o LDH 
o Chem istry  (BUN, carbon dioxide, creatinine, calcium, chloride, potassium, sodium ) 
Vaccination of Triple Negative Breast Cancer Patients  IRB: 206010  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version: 11 
06/02/2022  
Page 23 of 46 
 • Study Lab:  
o Serum preparation: Approximately 50 mL of blood will be collected in red tubes for serum 
collection to determine the presence of glycan -reactive antibodies through ELISA, and flow -
cytometry assays and also to determine cytotoxicity effect on breast cancer cells.  
o Isolation of plasma and PB MCs and immune -cell characterization: Approximately 50 mL of blood 
will be collected in potassium EDTA tubes to collect plasma and PBMCs, and further assess the 
peripheral -blood NK -cell activation markers pre - and post -vaccine administration. PBMCs will be  
used to characterize B -cell and T -cell sub -populations in pre and post -vaccination blood samples.  
 
Week s 9-20 (± 2 days)  
• Complete medical history and physical exam  (Weeks 9, 12, 15, 18 and 20 only) . Vital signs prior to SoC 
chemotherapy to include weight,  blood pressure, temperature and pulse.  
• Weekly  SoC Paclitaxel  
• AEs: events will be monitored using the NCI CTCAE Version 5.0 
• Concomitant medications  
• Blood tests to include the following : 
o Complete blood count with differential  
o Total Bilirubin (Weeks 9, 12, 15, 18 and 20 only)  
o SGOT/AST (Weeks 9, 12, 15, 18 and 20 only)  
o SGPT/ALT (Weeks 9, 12, 15, 18 and 20 only)  
o Alkaline Phosphatase (Weeks 9, 12, 15, 18 and 20 only)  
o LDH (Weeks 9, 12, 15, 18 and 20 only)  
o Chem istry  (BUN, carbon dioxide, creatinine, calcium, chlo ride, potassium, sodium ) (Weeks 9, 12, 
15, 18 and 20 only)  
 
Breast cancer surgery  
• Definitive surgery will be performed according to standard practice at the investigational site within 
4-8 weeks after completion of chemotherapy. All subject s should undergo  appropriate surgical 
management unless they are inoperable or if surgery is medically contraindicated. This  surgery is SoC. 
 
Week 46 (±4 weeks)  
• Complete medical history and physical examination. Vital signs to include weight, blood pressure, 
temperature a nd pulse  
• AEs: events will be monitored u sing the NCI CTCAE Version 5.0 
• Concomitant medications  
• Blood tests to include the following : 
o Complete blood count with differential  
o Total Bilirubin  
o SGOT/AST  
o SGPT/ALT  
o Alkaline Phosphatase  
o LDH 
• Chem istry  (BUN, carbon dioxide, creatinine, calcium, chloride, potassium, sodium ) 
  
Vaccination of Triple Negative Breast Cancer Patients  IRB: 206010  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version: 11 
06/02/2022  
Page 24 of 46 
 • Study Lab:  
o Serum preparation: Approximately 50 mL of blood will be collected in red tubes for serum 
collection to determine the presence of glycan -reactive antibodies through ELISA,  and flow -
cytometry assays and also to determine cytotoxicity effect on breast cancer cells.  
o Isolation of plasma and PBMCs and immune -cell characterization:  Approximately 50 mL of blood 
will be collected in potassium EDTA tubes to collect plasma and PBMCs,  and further assess the 
peripheral -blood NK -cell activation markers pre - and post -vaccine administration. PBMCs will be 
used to characterize B -cell and T -cell sub -populations in pre and post -vaccination blood samples . 
 
Week 70 (±4 weeks)  
• Complete medical h istory and physical examination. Vital signs to include weight, blood pressure, 
temperature and pulse  
• AEs: events will be monitored u sing the NCI CTCAE Version 5.0 
• Concomitant medications  
• Blood tests to include the following : 
o Complete blood count with differential  
o Total Bilirubin  
o SGOT/AST  
o SGPT/ALT  
o Alkaline Phosphatase  
o LDH 
o Chem istry  (BUN, carbon dioxide, creatinine, calcium, chloride, potassium, sodium ) 
 
10.2 Visit Breakdown for Arm 2 (chemo+vaccine  arm) 
 
Pre-study/Screening Visit (within 21 days prior to initiating study treatment)  
• Informed Consent  
• Complete medical history and physical examination. Vital signs to include height, weight, blood 
pressure, temperature and pulse  
• BMI and Assessment of BMI -adjusted weight change during the six months preceding enrollment  
• Concomitant medications  
• Blood tests to include the following : 
o Complete blood count with differential  
o Tota l Bilirubin  
o SGOT/AST  
o SGPT/ALT  
o Alkaline Phosphatase  
o LDH 
o Chem istry  (BUN, carbon dioxide, creatinine, calcium, chloride, potassium, sodium ) 
• Urine pregnancy test for women of childbearing potential  
• DTH skin test:  
o Candida  albicans  antigen will be administered intradermally as a control antigen on the subject’s 
back, and the resulting induration will be read 48 -72 hours later.  
 
48-72 hour after Pre-study/Screening Visit  
• DTH skin test reading  
 
Vaccination of Triple Negative Breast Cancer Patients  IRB: 206010  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version: 11 
06/02/2022  
Page 25 of 46 
 Week 1  (± 2 days)  
• Complete medical history and physical examination . Vital signs prior to vaccine administration  to 
include blood pressure, temperature and pulse  
• Urine pregnancy test for women of childbearing potential ( within 72 hours prior to  dosing ). Test not 
required if screening pregnancy test  is performed within 72 hours prior to  first vaccine.  
• SC administration of the P10s -PADRE/MONTANIDE™ ISA 51 VG vaccine  
• Post -vaccine administration , the following vital signs will be monitored every 15 minutes ( ± 5 minutes) 
for one hour: blood pr essure, temperature, and pulse  
• AEs: events will be monitored u sing the NCI CTCAE Version 5.0 
• Concomitant medications  
• Study Lab:  
o Serum preparation: Approximately 50  mL of blood will be collected in red tubes for serum 
collection to determine the presence of glycan -reactive antibodies through ELISA, and flow -
cytometry assays and also to determine cytotoxicit y effect on breast cancer cells  
o Isolation of plasma and PBMCs  and immune -cell characterization: Approximately  50 mL of blood 
will be collected in potassium EDTA tubes to collect plasma and PBMCs, and further assess the 
peripheral -blood NK -cell activation markers pre - and post -vaccine administration. PBMCs will be 
used to characterize B -cell and T -cell sub -populations in pre and post -vaccination blood samples . 
 
Week 2  (± 2 days)  
• Vital signs prior to vaccine administration to include blood pressure, temperature, and pulse  
• SC administration of the P10s -PADRE/MONTANIDE™ ISA 51 VG vaccine  
• Post -vaccine administration , the following vital signs will be monitored every 15  minutes  (± 5 minutes) 
for one hour: blood pressure, temperature, and pul se 
• AEs: events will be monitored u sing the NCI CTCAE Version 5.0 
• Concomitant medications  
 
Week 3  (± 2 days)  
• Vital signs prior to vaccine administration to include blood pressure, temperature, and pulse  
• SC administration of the P10s -PADRE/MONTANIDE™ ISA 51 VG vaccine  
• Post -vaccine administration , the following vital signs will be monitored every 15  minutes  (± 5 minutes) 
for one hour: blood pr essure, temperature, and pulse  
• AEs: events will be monitored u sing the NCI CTCAE Version 5.0 
• Concomitant medications  
 
Week 4  (± 2 days)  
• Complete medical history and physical examination. Vital signs prior to SoC chemotherapy to include 
weight, blood pressure, temperature and pulse  
• SoC c yclophosphamide and doxorubicin with pegfilgrastim on day 2  of each cycle  
• AEs: events will be monitored u sing the NCI CTCAE Version 5.0 
• Concomitant medications  
• Blood tests to include the following : 
o Complete blood count with differen tial 
o Total Bilirubin  
o SGOT/AST  
o SGPT/ALT  
o Alkaline Phosphatase  
Vaccination of Triple Negative Breast Cancer Patients  IRB: 206010  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version: 11 
06/02/2022  
Page 26 of 46 
 o LDH 
o Chem istry  (BUN, carbon dioxide, creatinine, calcium, chloride, potassium, sodium ) 
 
Week 6  (± 2 days)  
• Complete medical hi story and physical examination. Vital signs prior to SoC chemotherapy to include 
weight, blood pressure, temperature and pulse  
• SoC c yclophosphamide and doxorubicin with pegfilgrastim on day 2  of each cycle  
• AEs: events will be monitored using the NCI CTCAE Versi on 5.0 
• Concomitant medications  
• Blood tests to include the following : 
o Complete blood count with differential  
o Total Bilirubin  
o SGOT/AST  
o SGPT/ALT  
o Alkaline Phosphatase  
o LDH 
o Chem istry  (BUN, carbon dioxide, creatinine, calcium, chloride, potassium, sodium ) 
 
Week 7  (± 2 days)  
• AEs: events will be monitored using the NCI CTCAE Version 5.0 
• Concomitant medications  
• Blood tests to include the following : 
o Chem istry  (BUN, carbon dioxide, creatinine, calcium, chloride, potassium, sodium ) 
• Study Lab:  
o Serum preparation: Ap proximately 50 mL of blood will be collected in red tubes for serum 
collection to determine the presence of glycan -reactive antibodies through ELISA, and flow -
cytometry assays and also to determine cytotoxicity effect on breast cancer cells.  
o Isolation of p lasma and PBMCs and immune -cell characterization:  Approximately 50 mL of blood 
will be collected in potassium EDTA tubes to collect plasma and PBMCs, and further assess the 
peripheral -blood NK -cell activation markers pre - and post -vaccine administration. P BMCs will be 
used to characterize B -cell and T -cell sub -populations in pre and post -vaccination blood samples . 
 
Week 8  (± 2 days)  
• Complete medical history and physical examination . Vital signs prior to SoC chemotherapy to include  
weight, blood p ressure, temperature and pulse  
• SoC c yclophosphamide and doxorubicin with pegfilgrastim on day 2  of each cycle  
• AEs: events will be monitored u sing the NCI CTCAE Version 5.0 
• Concomitant medications  
• Blood tests to include the following : 
o Complete blood count with differential  
o Total Bilirubin  
o SGOT/AST  
o SGPT/ALT  
o Alkaline Phosphatase  
o LDH 
o Chem istry  (BUN, carbon dioxide, creatinine, calcium, chloride, potassium, sodium ) 
  
Vaccination of Triple Negative Breast Cancer Patients  IRB: 206010  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version: 11 
06/02/2022  
Page 27 of 46 
 Week 10  (± 2 days)  
• Complete medical history and physical examination. Vital signs prior to SoC chemotherapy to include 
weight, blood pressure, temperature and pulse  
• SoC c yclophosphamide and doxorubicin with pegfilgrastim on day 2  of each cycle  
• AEs: events will be monitored u sing the NCI CTCAE Version 5.0 
• Concomitant medications  
• Blood te sts to include the following : 
o Complete blood count with differential  
o Total Bilirubin  
o SGOT/AST  
o SGPT/ALT  
o Alkaline Phosphatase  
o LDH 
o Chem istry  (BUN, carbon dioxide, creatinine, calcium, chloride, potassium, sodium ) 
• Study Lab:  
o Serum preparation: Approximately 50 mL of blood will be collected in red tubes for serum 
collection to determine the presence of glycan -reactive antibodies through ELISA, and flow -
cytometry assays and also to determine cytotoxicity effect on breast cancer cells.  
o Isolation of plasma and PBMCs and immune -cell characterization:  Approximately 50 mL of blood 
will be collected in potassium EDTA tubes to collect plasma and PBMCs, and further assess the 
peripheral -blood NK -cell activation markers pre - and post -vacc ine administration. PBMCs will be 
used to characterize B -cell and T -cell sub -populations in pre and post -vaccination blood samples . 
• DTH skin test:  
o 100 μg Mimotope P10s -PADRE will be administered intradermally on the subject’s back to 
determine subject’s DT H response to the vaccine, and the resulting induration will be read 48 -72 
hours later.  
 
48-72 hour after Week 10  
• DTH skin test reading  
 
Week 12 -23 (± 2 days)  
• Complete medical history and physical exam  (Weeks 12, 15, 18, 21 and 23 only) . Vital signs prior to 
SoC chemotherapy to include weight, blood pressur e, temperature and pulse  
• Weekly SoC Paclitaxel  
• AEs: events will be monitored using the NCI CTCAE Version 5.0 
• Concomitant medications  
• Blood tests to include the following : 
o Complete blood count with differential  
o Total Bilirubin (Weeks 12, 15, 18, 21 and 23 only)  
o SGOT/AST (Weeks 12, 15, 18, 21 and 23 only)  
o SGPT/ALT (Weeks 12, 15, 18, 21 and 23 only)  
o Alkaline Phosphatase (Weeks 12, 15, 18, 21 and 23 only)  
o LDH (Weeks  12, 15, 18, 21 and 23 only)  
o Chem istry  (BUN, carbon dioxide, creatinine, calcium, chloride, potassium, sodium ) (Weeks 12, 15, 
18, 21 and 23 only)  
  
Vaccination of Triple Negative Breast Cancer Patients  IRB: 206010  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version: 11 
06/02/2022  
Page 28 of 46 
 • Study Lab ( Week 15, 18 and 23 only) : 
o Serum preparation: Approximately 50 mL of blood will be collected in red tubes for serum 
collection to determ ine the presence of glycan -reactive antibodies through ELISA, and flow -
cytometry assays and also to determine cytotoxicity effect on breast cancer cells.  
o Isolation of plasma and PBMCs and immune -cell characterization:  Approximately 50 mL of blood 
will be c ollected in potassium EDTA tubes to collect plasma and PBMCs, and further assess the 
peripheral -blood NK -cell activation markers pre - and post -vaccine administration. PBMCs will be 
used to characterize B -cell and T -cell sub -populations in pre and post -vacc ination blood samples . 
 
Breast cancer surgery  
• Definitive surgery will be performed according to standard practice at the investigational site within 
4-8 weeks after completion of chemotherapy. All subject s should undergo appropriate surgical 
management unless they are inoperable or if surgery is medically contraindicated. Th is surgery is SoC. 
 
Week 46 (±4 weeks)  
• Complete medical history and physical examination. Vital signs to include weight, blood pressure, 
temperature and pulse  
• AEs: events will be moni tored u sing the NCI CTCAE Version 5.0 
• Concomitant medications  
• Blood tests to include the following : 
o Complete blood count with differential  
o Total Bilirubin  
o SGOT/AST  
o SGPT/ALT  
o Alkaline Phosphatase  
o LDH 
o Chem istry  (BUN, carbon dioxide, creatinine, calcium, chloride, potassium, sodium ) 
• Study Lab:  
o Serum preparation: Approximately 50 mL of blood will be collected in red tubes for serum 
collection to determine the presence of glycan -reactive antibodies through ELISA, and flow -
cytometry assays and also to determi ne cytotoxicity effect on breast cancer cells.  
o Isolation of plasma and PBMCs and immune -cell characterization:  Approximately 50 mL of blood 
will be collected in potassium EDTA tubes to collect plasma and PBMCs, and further assess the 
peripheral -blood NK -cell activation markers pre - and post -vaccine administration. PBMCs will be 
used to characterize B -cell and T -cell sub -populations in pre and post -vaccination blood samples . 
 
Week 70 (±4 weeks)  
• Complete medical history and physical examination. Vital signs to include weight, blood pressure, 
temperature and pulse  
• AEs: events will be monitored u sing the NCI CTCAE Vers ion 5.0 
• Concomitant medications  
• Blood tests to include the following : 
o Complete blood count with differential  
o Total Bilirubin  
o SGOT/AST  
o SGPT/ALT  
o Alkaline Phosphatase  
Vaccination of Triple Negative Breast Cancer Patients  IRB: 206010  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version: 11 
06/02/2022  
Page 29 of 46 
 o LDH 
o Chem istry  (BUN, carbon dioxide, creatinine, calcium, chloride, potassium, sodium ) 
• Study Lab:  
o Serum preparation: Approximately 50 mL of blood will be collected in red tubes for serum 
collection to determine the presence of glycan -reac tive antibodies through ELISA, and flow -
cytometry assays and also to determine cytotoxicity  effect on breast cancer cells.  
o Isolation of plasma and PBMCs and immune -cell characterization:  Approximately 50 mL of blood 
will be collected in potassium EDTA tube s to collect plasma and PBMCs, and further assess the 
peripheral -blood NK -cell activation markers pre - and post -vaccine administration. PBMCs will be 
used to characterize B -cell and T -cell sub -populations in pre and post -vaccination blood samples.  
 
11. RISKS AND TOXICITIES TO BE MONITORED  
 
a. Potential Toxicities, Risks and Precautions:  
 
Procedure  Risks  Measures to Minimize Risks  
Complete history 
and physical ex am, 
including blood 
chemistries  Identification of previously unknown condition  Qualified health care provide r to evaluate 
potential subject  
Research records are kept in a locked area 
acce ssible only by study personnel.  
Administration of 
study vaccine  -  
Mimotope P10s -
PADRE / 
MONTANIDE™ ISA 
51 VG  Refer to the Investigator’s Brochures for P10s -
PADRE a nd MONTANIDE™ ISA 51 VG for a 
comprehensive list of possible adverse reactions.  
Experimental  agent may be toxic or harmful.  
Risk of local reactions (i.e. swelling, redness, 
tenderness, itching, extravasations)  
Potential for side effects ranging from hemato logic 
toxicities and hypersensitivity reactions to 
anaphylaxis  
Unanticipated or unk nown risks  
Dermatology/Skin: local erythema, rash, pruritu s 
Gastrointestinal: diarrhea, anorexia, nausea, 
vomiti ng, abnormal taste  
Hepatic: elevated hepatic enzymes, hypo -
album inemia with prolonged treatment  
Neurology: confusion, neuropathies  
Pulmonary: dyspnea (due to flu id retention and 
capillary leak syndrome), pleuritis  
Cardiovascular: hypertension, cardiac arrhythmias, 
atrial fibrillation, pericarditis  
Pain: headache, arthralgias, bone pain, abdominal 
pain, chest pain, myalgia  
Fever, flu -like syndrome (chills, rigors, myalgias), 
fatigue, headache, abnormal labs including BUN 
and albumin  Careful monitoring by clinic visits and 24 
hour, 7 days per week physician s on call 
for unexpected problems  
Only non -pregnant, non -lactating females 
may participate. The use of contraception 
during the study and the use of 
contraception for 18 months post 
completion of the trial are required.  
Frequent laboratory tests including CBC 
with differential, liver function tests, etc.  
Close and frequent monitoring of subjects 
by qualified staff  
Emergency equipment including crash 
carts, ACLS certified staff and rescue 
medications such as Benadryl, 
epinephrine, high dose steroids, etc. wi ll 
be on -site during administration.  
The Medical Monitor will review all serious 
toxicities as they occur.  
The study drug may be discontinued if 
significant AE occurs or if subject chooses 
to discontinue.  
Reporting and monitoring mechanisms are 
in place fo r AEs, SAEs and unanticipated 
problems.  
Vaccination of Triple Negative Breast Cancer Patients  IRB: 206010  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version: 11 
06/02/2022  
Page 30 of 46 
 Administration of 
SoC chemotherapy  Refer to the approved Package Insert or 
Investigator’s Brochure for each chemotherapy 
agent for a comprehensive list of possible adverse 
reactions.  
The following is a list of common known possible 
adverse reactions: infections, neutropenia, 
anemia, febrile neutropenia, hypersensitivity, 
thrombocytopenia, anaphylactic reactions, 
dysgeusia, dyspnea, constipation, anorexia, nail 
disorders, fluid retention, asthenia, pain, nausea, 
diarrhea, vomiting, mucositis, alopecia, skin 
reactions, myalgia, arthralgia, fatigue, neuropathy, 
sensory neuropathy, peripheral neuropathy, 
leukopenia, urinary bladder, myeloproliferative or 
lymphoproliferative malignancies, hemorrhagic 
cystitis, cardiot oxicity.  Careful monitoring by clinic visits and 24 
hour, 7 days per week physicians on call 
for unexpected problems  
Only non -pregnant, non -lactating females 
may participate. The use of contraception 
during the study and the use of 
contraception for 18 mon ths post 
completion of the trial are required.  
Frequent laboratory tests including CBC 
with differential, liver function tests, etc.  
Close and frequent monitoring of subjects 
by qualified staff  
Emergency equipment including crash 
carts, ACLS certified staf f and rescue 
medications such as Benadryl, 
epinephrine, high dose steroids, etc. will 
be on -site during administration.  
The Medical Monitor will review all serious 
toxicities as they occur.  
The study drug may be discontinued if 
significant AE occurs or if subject chooses 
to discontinue.  
Reporting and monitoring mechanisms are 
in place for AEs, SAEs and unanticipated 
problems.  
Collection of blood 
samples  Pain, bruising at the inje ction site and rarely 
infection  
Discovery of previously  unknown conditions  Experienced personnel will perform the 
phlebotomies using approved techniques.  
Pressure and dressings will be used to 
minimize pain, bruising and infection.  
Research records are kept in a locked area 
accessible only by study personnel.  
Urine pregnancy 
testing Discovery of previously unknown conditions  
Possible breach of confidentiality  Research records are kept in a locked area 
acce ssible only by study personnel.  
Subjects will only be identified by study 
num bers on all research documents.  
Serum for 
immuno logic 
evaluation  Discovery o f previously unknown conditions  Research records are kept in a locked area 
acce ssible only by study personnel.  
Subjects will only be identified by study 
num bers on all research documents.  
Vaccination of Triple Negative Breast Cancer Patients  IRB: 206010  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version: 11 
06/02/2022  
Page 31 of 46 
 Collection of data  Poss ible breach of confidentiality  Research records are kept in a locked area 
accessible only by study personnel.  
Subject study numbers will be used for 
identification of samples so that they may 
be retained for future research and 
confidentiality is ensured.  
Investigators w ill provide certification of 
completion of Human S ubject Protection 
training course.  
UAMS shall retain the records and reports 
for 2 years after a marketing application is 
approved for the drug; or, if an application 
is not approved for the drug, until 2 years 
after shipment and delivery, or for 2 years 
after the IND (Investigational New Drug 
Application) is closed and discontinued 
with the Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA). After such time all study records 
will be destroyed as well as the links 
between identifiers of the research 
subjects and their research study numbers 
according to UAMS’ record destruction 
policy.  
 
Any subject may voluntarily revoke consent and withdraw from the study at any time. A subject may 
be terminated early (completely withdrawn from the study)  for the following conditions: (i) non -
compliance, (ii) an unrelated intercurrent illness that may affect assessment or place the subject at 
risk for AEs or require systemic steroids, (iii) deterioration in performance status so as  to make 
participation a hardship for the subject, or (iv) for any reason that the investigator feels it is not in the 
subje ct’s best interest to continue  (i.e. different chemotherapy regimen  prior to Week 46  study labs , 
etc.) . These s ubjects must be follo wed for  at least  30 days after the last dose of study vaccine.  
 
b. Benefits:  There is no guarantee that subjects will experience direct benefit from participation in this 
study.  However, it is expected that the rate of pCR following chemo +vaccine  will be at l east as high as  
the rate observed among subject s who  receive only SoC neoadjuvant chemotherapy . Adding 
vaccination with P10s to SoC therapy may potentiate an immune response, which could improve the 
rate of pCR compared to SoC therapy alone.  
 
12. SPECIMEN HANDLING  
 
A trained phlebotomist or registered nurse will draw the blood required for clinical and research purposes. 
Research staff will pick up specimens from the Cancer Institute Blood Draw or Infusion Center. Research 
staff will re -label specimens with  a subject  identifier, date of specimen, and name of visit. Specimens will 
then be delivered to the UAMS Tissue Biorepository and Procurement Service (TBAPS)  in the Cancer 
Institute. The serum tubes will remain in the UAMS TBAPS  and will be stored frozen a t -65°C or lower. The 
EDTA tubes will be delivered to Dr. Kieber -Emmons’ research laboratory for processing and analysis.  
Samples will be kept for the duration of this study and may be used for future P10s -PADRE vaccine 
research . At the end of this cancer vaccine research , any unused specimen will be mixed with  bleach and 
disposed in a sink.   
Vaccination of Triple Negative Breast Cancer Patients  IRB: 206010  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version: 11 
06/02/2022  
Page 32 of 46 
 Tissue specimens from archival tissue collected as part of standard biopsy and/or surgery  will be 
requested for each subject at the time of enrollment . Whenever availa ble, a total of 2 H&E slides and 20 
unstained slides (half from the original biopsy and half from tissues collected at surgery) per subject will 
be requested for all analyses (see Immunohistochemistry  and Characterization of tumor infiltrating 
lymphocytes (TILs) ). 
 
All specimen containers (tubes and containers) will be disposed into biohazard red plastic bags according 
to UAMS Occupational Health & Safety policy. Red bag waste will be picked up by Occupational Heal th & 
Safety for final disposal.  
 
HOG  will have study specimens brought to UAMS by courier service. Study specimen  will be delivered to 
the UAMS TBAPS  the same day they are drawn following  the same process above.  
 
13. ENDPOINT DEFINITIONS, EVALUATION of IMMUNE RESPONSE, and ENDPOINT -ASSAY MET HODS  
 
a. Primary Efficacy  Endpoint: pCR 
We will employ the definition of pCR proposed by the FDA in their May 2012 Draft Guidance for 
Industry, “Pathologic Complete Response in Neoadjuvant Treatment of High -Risk Early -Stage Breast 
Cancer: Use as an Endpoint t o Support Accelerated Approval”.  The FDA’s proposed definition reads 
as follows:  
Pathological Complete Response is defined as the absence of any residual invasive cancer on 
hematoxylin and eosin evaluation of the resected breast specimen and all sampled ip silateral 
lymph nodes following completion of neoadjuvant systemic therapy (i.e., ypT0 /Tis ypN0 in 
the current AJCC staging system) (58). 
 
The baseline tumor pathology , final tumor pathology,  and tumor r esponse  will also be collected . 
• Baseline Tumor Pathology : tumor size, tumor stage and grade, lymph node status  
• Final T umor Pathology  (at surgery) : tumor size, tumor stage and grade, lymph node status  
• Tumor Response : clinical complete response (cCR), clinica l partial response  (cPR) , disease  
progression , and stable disease  
• Pathological Response  Status : (i.e. pCR, residual disease, etc.).  
 
b. Secondary Endpoints for determining short -term  immune responses to Treatment  
• P10s -MAP -reactive immunoglobulin titers : The anti -P10s binding level will be measured via ELISA 
method after incubation with a subject’s serum or plasma sample.  
o The P10s -MAP -reactive immunoglobulin titers will be determined on each subject from serum 
and plasma samples drawn as specified in the study calendar.  
 
• Anti-TACA cell -binding leve l: The anti -TACA cell -binding level will be measured via flow -cytometry 
methods as the median fluorescence intensity of TACA -expressing tumor cells obtained after 
incubation with a subject’s serum or plasma sampl e. 
o The anti -TACA cell -binding level will be determined on each subject from serum and plasma 
samples drawn as s pecified in the study calendar.  
  
Vaccination of Triple Negative Breast Cancer Patients  IRB: 206010  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version: 11 
06/02/2022  
Page 33 of 46 
 • Anti-breast -cancer cytotoxicity : The cytotoxicity of a sample towards a breast cancer cell line will 
be measured as the percent decrease (relative to a control) in the cells’ survival following 
incubation with pre - and postimmune serum and plasma.  
o The anti -breast -cancer cytotoxicity will be determined on each subject from serum and 
plasma samples drawn as sp ecified in the study calendar.  
 
• Frequencies of circulating T cells, B cells, NK cells,  and regulatory T cells (Tregs):  Peripheral blood 
mononuclear cells (PBMCs) will be isolated and the above populations of immune cells will be 
determined by flow cytometr y. See Section f below for additional details.  
 
• Activation profiles of NK cells:  Activated -NK-cell profiles will be determined via flow cytometry as 
the expression levels of different activation markers on NK cells in the subject’s blood sample. See 
Sectio n f below for additional details.  
 
• Functionality of T cells and NK cells:  Effector functions will be determined through stimulation 
with anti -CD3-coated plates, phytohemagglutinin (PHA; Sigma) and tumor cell lysate, and 
production of cytokines will be meas ured. The effector function of NK cells will be measured by 
Antibody Dependent Cell Cytotoxicity (ADCC) assay monoclonal antibodies or using serum 
samples. See Section f below for additional details.  
 
• Biomarkers of response and efficacy:  The expression of glycan antigens and proliferation/  
apoptosis markers will be determined on tumor tissues.  
 
• Characterize infiltrating lymphocytes:  TILs will be characterized and frequency of subpopulation 
with efficacy will be correlated.  
 
c. Secondary Endp oints for determining persist ence of immune responses  
We will further determine the persistence of a subject’s immune responses upon treatment  according 
to the arm to which they are randomized.  
• The anti -P10s antibody titer will be determined on each subject’s serum and plasma samples 
drawn approximately 6 and 12 months, as specified in the study calendar.  
• The anti -TACA cell -binding level will be determined on each subject’s serum and plasma samples 
drawn approximately 6 and 12 months as specified in the study calendar.  
• The anti -breast -cancer cytotoxicity will be determined on each subject’s serum and plasma 
samples drawn approximately 6 and 12 months as specified in the study calendar.  
• Functionality of T and NK cells will be evaluated.  
 
d. Determining DTH  Responses  
To evaluate DTH responses, subjects will be skin -tested according to the time points in the study 
calendar against Candida  albicans antigen  (week 1) and the Mimotope P10s -PADRE  (week 10). The 
Candida  albicans  antigen  serve s as a control antigen.  DTH responses to the control antigen will be 
assessed at pre -study to determine immunocompetency of study subjects. DTH responses to the 
P10s -PADRE will be assessed at week 10 to determine cellular immunogenicity of the vaccine.  All 
antigens will be administered i ntradermally  on the subject’s back. Induration will be measured using 
calipers or a ruler and reported in mm across one diameter at 48 -72 hours post injection. An 
induration > 5 mm across at least one diameter of 1 or more DTH antige ns will b e considered positive.  
 
Vaccination of Triple Negative Breast Cancer Patients  IRB: 206010  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version: 11 
06/02/2022  
Page 34 of 46 
 e. Safety and Tolerability Endpoints  
Subjects on Arm 2 will receive 3 planned vaccine doses unless they withdraw from the study or 
develop any Grade 3 or greater toxicity as per NCI CTCAE Version 5.0 toxicity criteria, Grade 2 or 
greater autoimmune toxicity with the exception of vitiligo, or Grade 2 or greater hypersensitivity 
reactions . Subjects  will be treated and referred for additional care as indicated with systemic steroids, 
topical steroids, epinephrine or Benadryl, at which  time they will discontinue the vaccine injections 
and will continue to have assessments per the study calendar defined in the protocol. Subjects will be 
followed until resolution of toxicity. There will be no dose modifications for toxicity.  
 
The NCI CTCA E Version 5.0 will be used for toxicity and SAE reporting. A copy of the CTCAE Version 
5.0 can be downloaded from the Cancer Therapy Evaluation Program (CTEP) home page. All 
appropriate treatment areas have access to a copy of the CTCAE Version 5.0. 
 
The s tudy will be paused upon Death (other than disease progression or motor vehicle accident) or 
two Grade 4 Toxicity events that are possibly/probably related to the study agent.  
 
The endpoints used to monitor tolerability will mirror safety endpoints, and wi ll be classified into 
reactogenicity endpoints and vaccine -related adverse events (AEs), the most serious of which will be 
reported as serious adverse events (SAEs). Reactogenicity endpoints will be further divided into: (1) 
systemic symptoms that include fever, malaise, and myalgia; and (2) local symptoms that include pain, 
tenderness, and induration at the injection site.  
 
f. Immunological assay methods for determining the endpoints will follow established SOPs  
The following are brief descriptions of the met hods by which the study’ s endpoints will be 
determined.  
 
• Sample cytotoxicity towards MDA -MB-231 and HCC1954 : This assay will be conducted on both 
serum samples and plasma samples.  Cells from each cell line will be grown in 24 -well plates, and 
exposed in triplicate to the samples from each subject, and to fetal bovine serum (FBS) as a 
control.  Cells will be incubated for 24, 48 and 72 hours, after which wells will be photographed 
and then dead cells and debris will be removed and viable cells will be fixed  and stained. More 
pictures will be taken and the number of viable cells for each treatment will be counted. The 
number of alive cells in sample -treated wells will be expressed as a percentage of the number  of 
cells in FBS -treated wells.  
 
• Anti-P10s antibod y titer : In each sample, the anti -peptide reactivity will be determined  by ELISA 
methods using P10s -MAP adhered to 96 -well microtiter plates, with secondary antibody being 
HRP-conjugated anti -human antibody.  Endpoint titers will be determined from reactivi ties via the 
serial 2 -fold dilution method.  Both the IgG titer and the IgM titer will be determined.  
 
• Binding of antibody to TACA -expressing tumor cells : From each sample, aliquots will be removed 
and used to incubate 1 -to-2 x 105 cells from each of three human breast -cancer cell lines: MCF -7 
(which expresses LeY), MDA -MB-231 (which expresses gangliosides), and HCC1954.  Serum -
incubated cells will be post -incubated with FITC -labeled goat antihuman antibody, then fed 
through the flow cytometer.  The median flu orescence intensity of the treated cells will be 
determined and reported as the measure of binding of serum antibody to TACA -expressing tumor 
cells.  The monoclonal antibodies BR55 -2 and 14G2a will be used as positive controls.   
Vaccination of Triple Negative Breast Cancer Patients  IRB: 206010  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version: 11 
06/02/2022  
Page 35 of 46 
 • Determining NK -cell activati on: To count the number of NK cells in a blood sample, PBMCs will  be 
separated from blood using H istopaque® (Sigma), washed and stained with anti -CD3 and anti -
CD56 (BD biosciences), and the number of cells that are determined to be CD3-/CD56+ will be 
count ed and used as the total number of NK cells in the sample. To determine the expression 
levels of activation markers CD69, CD94, CD16, and NKp46, cells will be stained with a third color 
specific for each marker.  The expression level of each activation marker will be determined in CD3-
/CD56+ cells (NK cells) via flow cytometry as either the median or geometric mean of the marker’s 
fluorescence -intensity histogram.  
 
• Determine T -cell and B -cell subpopulations : Both lymphocytes and CD3+ cells will be staine d for 
CD4 and CD8 markers. The CD19+ B cell subpopulations, including naive B cells (IgD+CD27−), 
marginal zone –like/natural effector B cells (IgD+CD27+), class -switched memory B cells 
(IgD−CD27+), transitional B cells (IgM++CD38++) and plasmablasts (IgM−CD383+) will be determined. 
Percentage of CD40+, CD69+, CD83+ and IgG+ CD19 B -cells will be determined.  
 
• Determine T -cell subpopulations:  Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) will be isolated by 
density gradient centrifugation using Ficoll -Paque solution. Lymphocytes will be stained and the 
expression levels of CD69, PD -1, and CTLA -4 among CD4 and CD8 T cells will be determined. The 
regulatory subpopulation of CD4+/CD25hi/CD127-/lo (FOXP3+) and MDSC populations with 
granulocytic (Lin− HLA-DR−/lo CD15+ CD33+CD11b+) and monocytic (HLA -DR−/lo CD14+) phenotype 
will be determined. The expression of PD -L1 on monocytes will also be determined. The above 
cell populations will be assessed and assays performed in each subject’s pre - and post -immune 
blood samples and comparisons will be made to understand whether vaccination affects immune 
cell profile and function.  
 
• Proliferation assay and cytokine detection:  The effector functions through stimulation of T cells 
with P10s and P10s -PADRE peptides, tumor cel l lysate, and anti -CD3-coated plates will be 
conducted and production of cytokines will be measured. 2x10^5 PBMCs will be incubated in 200 
µl of RPMI 1640 medium containing 5% heat inactivated fetal calf serum. Proliferation will be 
induced using P10s, P10 s-PADRE, PHA (10 μg/ml), anti -CD3-coated plates (5 μg/ml) or lysate of a 
representative breast cancer cell line. After 24 (PHA or anti -CD3) to 72 (tumor lysate) hours of 
incubation 3H thymidine will be added and incubated for another 8 hours. Cells stimula ted with 
lysate may need another round of stimulation (total of 6 days) before thymidine addition. A 
fraction of supernatant from each well will be collected before thymidine addition for detection 
of cytokines by ELISA. The cells will be harvested and 3H thymidine incorporation determined 
using a liquid scintillation counter (Perkin Elmer Inc.) and expressed as counts per minute (cpm). 
The stimulation index (SI) will be obtained by calculating total cpm/control cpm. PBMCs that had 
not been subjected to PHA  addition will be used as controls. The collected supernatant will be 
frozen and kept at -80°C. Supernatants will thawed and used for detection of cytokines (IFN -γ, IL-
2, TNFα, IL -4, IL-10, and IL -13) by ELISA using kits from R&D Systems.  
 
• ELISPOT assay:  ELISPOT will be used to further confirm T -cell effector function. PBMCs will be 
stimulated with P10s, P10s -PADREE, tumor cell lysate, and anti -CD3 and cytokine secretion profile 
will be determined using human BD™ ELISPOT kit set following manufacturer’s ins tructions.  
  
Vaccination of Triple Negative Breast Cancer Patients  IRB: 206010  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version: 11 
06/02/2022  
Page 36 of 46 
 • ADCC assay:  ADCC assays will be performed to evaluate functionality of post -immune serum in 
inducing immune cell -mediated cell death and compare it to pre -immune serum for each subject, 
where breast cancer cell lines will be used as targets. T arget cells will be labelled with calcein AM 
and 10^4 cells per well in 50 µl of medium will be added to 96 well microtiter plates and then 50 
µl serum will be added and incubated for 30 minutes. Effector cells will be added in 100µl volume 
of medium to gi ve serially diluted effector:target cell ratios (E:T) with maximum E:T of 50:1. 
Primarily, PBMCs from healthy donors or NK -92 cells will be used as effectors. After 4 hours of 
incubation imaging with Cytation 5 cell imaging reader (BioTek, Winooski, VT) wi ll be performed 
to count live target cells in wells with and without effector cells and percent cytotoxicity will be 
calculated as [1 -(calcein AM target cells with effector cells /calcein AM target cells without 
effector cell)]X100. In separate experiments , pre - and post -immune PBMCs from responder 
subjects will be compared using mAb BR55 -2 (mediates ADCC on LeY -positive cells). This will show 
whether vaccination results in more potent effector cells.  
 
• Immunohistochemistry:  In those subjects with enough pat hological specimens, tumor -tissue 
slides will be requested from tissue collected at both the original biopsy before treatment ( 1 H&E 
and 8 unstained slides) and at time of definitive surgery ( 1 H&E and 8 unstained slides). The tumor -
tissue slides from the original biopsy will be compared to the tumor -tissue slides from surgery in 
order to learn more about the mechanism of action. These slides will be stained for anti -glycan 
mAbs (anti -LeY and GD2 mAb), to evaluate potential correlation of expression of LeY and GD2 
gangliosides levels with clinical response. Caspase -3 and activated caspase -3 (Abcam Inc., MA) 
expression will also be determined. Ki67 staining will be performed and its expression 
determined. Besides pCR, potential tumor response by evaluating in vasion burden and location 
will be evaluated. Staining of provided slides will be performed by the UAMS experimental 
Pathology Core Facility. To perform these analyses, a total of 2 H&E slides and 10 unstained will 
be requested, whenever available, for eac h procedure (half from original biopsy and half from 
tissues collected at surgery) per subject.  
 
• Characterization of tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs):  The characterization of TILs in tumor 
tissues of subjects of this study is planned to help us to und erstand whether vaccination efficacy 
relate to pre -treatment immune infiltrates or whether vaccination affect lymphocyte infiltration 
and the composition of the infiltrates. We also seek to understand whether any response to 
vaccination is associated with immune infiltrates and their compositions. Therefore, we will first 
evaluate H&E and Ki67 expression in tumor specimens collected at original biopsy before 
treatment and tissues collected at surgery. Whenever available, tumor -tissue slides will be 
requeste d to perform staining to detect subpopulations of infiltrating immune cells. Staining will 
be performed with anti -CD3, -CD4, -CD8, -FOXP3, and -CD56 mAbs ( one slide per antibody from 
both biopsy and surgery). In addition to the slides for immunohistochemis try, 10 unstained slides 
(half from original biopsy and half from tissues collected at surgery) will be requested per subject 
for TILs characterization. Staining will be performed through the UAMS Experimental Pathology 
Core Facility.  
 
 Genome -wide gene exp ression and methylation analyses using plasma, immune and tumor cells:  
Genetic and epigenetic variation in plasma samples, immune cells and tumors before and after 
immunization will be explored to study the potential biomarkers of immune and tumor responses.  
 
Vaccination of Triple Negative Breast Cancer Patients  IRB: 206010  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version: 11 
06/02/2022  
Page 37 of 46 
 14. STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS  
 
General Considerations: The primary objectives of this Phase I/II, randomized , multi -center  safety  and 
efficacy  study are (1) to monitor the safety of P10s -PADRE vaccine when used in combination with SoC 
chemotherapy and (2) to  evaluate the efficacy of the combination of chemo+va ccine  as illustrated by the 
pCR rate . The secondary objectives are  to evaluate immunologic endpoints . The size of the study 
population was purposely chos en to provide adequate power (>8 0%) to properly evaluate the clinical 
efficacy of the vaccine -chemother apy combination  while allowing for a formal interim analysis . In 
addition, the translational effectiveness of any cancer vaccine in a large population depends on both the 
level and the functionality of the resultant immune responses.  
 
Analysis Plan for Pri mary Efficacy Endpoint  and Determination of Sample Size : SoC chemotherapy is 
expected to result in  a pCR rate of 40% , consistent with rates reported elsewhere (62). pCR is defined as 
the absence of invasive cancer in the breast and the lymph nodes (ypT0 /Tis, ypN0). The presence of in -
situ cancer in the breast is acceptable and does not disqualify a subject  from the pCR definition. We 
hypothesize that t he combination of chemo+vaccine  will result in a n increase of the  pCR rate to  65% or 
higher.  The two arms will be compared for evidence of this increase using the one -sided Z test with pooled 
variance at a 10% -alpha significance level.  A sample size of 102 subjects, 68 on the chemo+vaccine arm 
versus 34 on the control arm, will provide the planned  Z test with 85.8 % power at 10% target alpha to 
detect the hypothesized increase in pCR between arms . The true attained alpha will be 9.6%.  Assuming 
that the plann ed interim analysis (see below) does not lead to early closure, t his study will be declared a 
success if the planned Z test yields a Z -score of +1.316 or greater (1-sided P≤0.094)  
 
Interim Analysis Plan for Efficacy and Futility:  A formal interim analysis will take place when 51 subjects 
(half the planned total) have been evaluated for response to treatment.  We expect this analysis to occur 
when approximately 75% of the planned study sample has been enrolled. Unless there are toxicity 
concerns or extenuatin g circumstances, the study will not close during this interim assessment. To 
conduct the interim analysis, the treatment arms will be compare d via 1 -sided pooled -variance Z test, 
Results will be evaluated using the following decision boundaries, which were  calculated in East version 
6.4 software (Cytel, Inc ., Cambridge, MA, USA)  using O’Brien -Fleming spending functions for both alpha 
and beta . 
• If the test yields a Z -score of + 2.054 or greater (1 -sided P≤0.0200 or less), then the chemo+vaccine 
arm will be de clared efficacious enough to warrant closin g the study early for efficacy.  
• On the other hand, if the test yields a Z -score of -0.045  or less  (1-sided P≥0.518), then that result 
will be considered negative enough to warrant closing the study early for futil ity. 
 
Findings of either kind that warrant closing the study early will not be binding, but will be evaluated along 
with other evidence by a formal meeting of the Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) . 
 
Analysis Plans for Secondary Endpoints:  To analyze the secondary endpoints, data will be summarized by 
collection time as means, standard deviations, medians, and ranges, and displayed graphically using 
profile plots and box plots. Residuals analysis will be used to examine adherence to distributional 
assumpti ons, and data transformations will be applied if warranted. Each endpoint will be analyzed 
longitudinally using either generalized estimating equations or mixed -models analysis.  In particular, post -
immune levels of each endpoint will be compared to its pre -immune level for (a) occurrence of a 
significant increase, and (b) duration of the significant increase if one occurred.  In addition, subjects will 
be classified individually with respect to each endpoint as a “responder” if any of that endpoint’s post -
Vaccination of Triple Negative Breast Cancer Patients  IRB: 206010  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version: 11 
06/02/2022  
Page 38 of 46 
 immune levels attains an increase of at least two folds relative to its pre -immune level, and the number 
and proportion of “responders” with respect to each endpoint will be reported.  Finally, a mixed -models 
regression approach will be used to determine how much of the samples’ cytotoxicity towards HCC1954 
and MDA -MB-231 can be predicted by the secondary endpoints.  
 
DTH -test results will be summarized by subpopulation as the number and proportion responding. Subjects 
with positive versus negative DTH -test res ults will be compared via Wilcoxon rank -sum tests for 
differences in their anti -P10s -MAP IgG titers . 
 
Missing, Unused and Spurious Data:  Missing data will be treated as missing, and will not be imputed.  All 
data collected will necessarily be reported to th e FDA.  Spurious data will be corrected at the source 
document.  Any data documented as spurious that is unable to be corrected at the sou rce will be treated 
as missing.  
 
Data Safety Monitoring Plan : AEs and safety will be evaluated throughout the study by a DSMB. The DSMB 
will meet at predetermined intervals set forth in the DSMB Charter to review toxicities and serious and/or 
unexpected AEs. The DSMB will primarily evaluate safety data; efficacy data will only be reviewed in the 
event of a serious safety co ncern. Minutes for all DSMB meetings will be generated  and a copy provided 
to the Sponsor . 
 
15. REGISTRATION GUIDELINES  
 
Screening logs will be maintained by research staff at UAMS and HOG.  
 
Subject registration will occur in Clinical Trials Office (CTO) with in the UAMS WPRCI after the IRB -approved 
consent is signed and eligibility has been confirmed. Subjects will be registered in the Clinical Trial s 
Management System  (CTMS) and will be assigned a study number by CTO. The study number will be used 
for ide ntification of the research subject during the study.  
 
HOG  will send registrations to research staff at CTO. CTO will register the subject in the CTM S and will 
assign  each subject  a study number. Once registration has been completed, the information will be sent 
back to HOG . 
 
16. DATA SUBMISSION SCHEDULE  
 
Data must be submitted according to protocol requirements for ALL subjects registered to the treatment 
portion of this trial, wh ether or not assigned treatment is administered . 
 
For subjects deemed to be ineligible to participate in the study or for whom documentation is inadequate 
to determine eligibility, only the eligibility case report form will be completed.  Data obtained duri ng the 
study will be collected at each subject visit and entered into the clinical trial management suite. Data will 
be captured on the case report forms (CRFs).  
 
UAMS and HOG shall retain the records and reports for 2 years after a marketing application i s approved 
for the drug; or, if an application is not approved for the drug, until 2 years after shipment and delivery of 
the drug for investigational use is discontinued and the FDA has been notified. After such time all study 
Vaccination of Triple Negative Breast Cancer Patients  IRB: 206010  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version: 11 
06/02/2022  
Page 39 of 46 
 records will be destroyed as  well as the links between identifiers of the research subjects and their 
research study numbers according to U AMS’ record destruction policy.  
 
17. ETHICA L AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS  
 
a. Study Personnel:  Study personnel must have completed training in Good Clinical Practice (GCP) and 
Protection of Human Subjects.  
 
b. Recruitment and Informed Consent:  Research subjects will be recruited from the WPRCI  on the UAMS 
campus and clinics at HOG. The research subjects will be identified by the research physician or  staff. 
Prior to any research activities, the research subject will be approached for participation in the study 
by her physician, who will discuss the protocol along with the risks and potential benefits of 
participating in it. A clear statement will be m ade concerning the voluntary nature of her participation 
and that her decision will have no effect on her remaining care. The research nurse or research staff 
will follow with a detailed review of the informed consent document. The research subject will be  
encouraged to have family or friends participate in any or all of the process.  The potential  subject will 
be given time to ask questions, will be questioned to be certain she understands the information, and 
if she agrees to proceed, will sign consent. Su bject s will be allowed time to reflect, ask questions or 
withdraw. The consent process will be documented in the medical record. A copy of the informed 
consent document will be given to the subject. The original informed consent will be filed with the 
subject file. The consent process will occur in a private exam room. There will be no additional 
recruitment materials. The principles of informed consent are described by Federal Regulatory 
Guidelines ( Code of Federal Regulations 21 CFR 50) and the Office for  Human Research Protections: 
Protection of Human Subjects (45  CFR 46). These principles must be followed to comply with FDA 
regulations for the conduct and monitoring of clinical investigations.  
 
c. Institutional Review: This study will be approved by the sit es’ IRBs as defined by Federal Regulatory 
Guidelines 21  CFR 56 and the Office for Human Research Protections: Protection of Human Subjects 
45 CFR 46. This study will also undergo scientific review by the Cancer Institute’s Protocol Review and 
Monitoring Co mmittee (PRMC). Approval by both the UAMS PRMC and the IRB of record for each 
institution  is required before the clinical trial can be activated.  
 
d. Investigational Agent Accountability: Documentation of drug disposition (drug receipt, dispensing, 
transfer o r return) will be maintained on the UAMS Investigational Agent Accountability Record  or its 
equivalent that is on file with FDA . Drug supplies (long -term storage)  will be kept in a secure, limited 
access storage area under the recommended storage conditions in the research pharmacy at the 
WPRCI  under the direction of the research pharmacist.  During the course of the study, the following 
information will be noted on the Investigational Agent Accountability Record; the study number, the 
research subject’s initials, the research subject’s assigned number, the dose of drug, the date(s) and 
quantity of drug dispensed to the subject, the balance forward, the lot number and  the recorder’s 
initials. These Investigational Agent Accountability Records will be readily available for inspection and 
are open  to FDA inspection at any time.  
 
e. Dissemination of Data:  The data collected in this study may be used for presentations, poster s, and 
publications or uploaded into open or controlled -access databases, like NIH database of genotypes 
and phenotypes and Gene expression omnibus, upon request. The publications or data uploaded will 
not contain any identifiable information that could be  linked to a participant. We are fully committed 
Vaccination of Triple Negative Breast Cancer Patients  IRB: 206010  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version: 11 
06/02/2022  
Page 40 of 46 
 to the responsible data sharing and therefore, the de -identified data, including analyzed and raw, 
supporting the conclusions made in any publications will be made available to any qualified researcher 
upon legitimate request. The study will be listed on clinicaltrials.gov in accordance with FDA 
requirements.  
 
18. ADVERSE EVENTS  
 
Following consent , safety will be measured by assessment of adverse events through the duration of the 
study , which is approximately 16 months post first vaccination.  
 
a. Adverse Event (AE):  Any unfavorable and unintended sign, symptom or disease temporally associated 
with the use of a medical treatment or procedure regardless of whether it is considered related to the 
medical treatment or procedure.  Each AE is a unique representation of a specific event used for 
medical documentation and scientific analysis.  [ICH E6 1.2]  
 
b. Serious Adverse Event (SAE):  Any adverse drug experience occurring at any dose that results in any 
of the following outcomes: death, a life -threatening adverse drug experience, inpatient 
hospitalization, prolongation of existing hospitalization, a persistent or significant disability/incapacity 
or a congenital anomaly/birth defect.  Important medical  events that may not result in death, be life 
threatening or require hospitalization may be considered a serious adverse drug experience when, 
based upon medical judgment, they may jeopardize the subject and may require medical or surgical 
intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed in this definition.  FDA requires IND sponsors to 
report qualified AEs and SAEs through the expedited reporting system.  [21 CFR 312.32 (a)]  
 
To avoid confusion, as the terms “serious” and “severe” are not synonymous, the following 
clarification is given: The term “severe” is often used to describe the intensity (severity) of a specific 
event (as in mild, moderate or severe myocardial infarction ); the event itself, however, may be of 
relatively minor medical significance (such as severe headache). This is not the same as “serious,” 
which is based on subject/event outcome  or action  usually associated with events that pose a threat 
to a subject’s l ife or functioning. Seriousness (not severity) serves as a guide for defining regulatory 
reporting obligations. [ICH -E2A(II)(B)]  
 
c. Related : An event is related if more likely than not it was caused by the research activity.  
 
d. Unexpected : An event is unexpect ed when its specificity, nature, severity or incidence is not 
accurately reflected in the consent form, protocol, or investigator’s brochure previously reviewed and 
approved by the IRB. Examples include a lower rate of response to treatment or a side effec t that is 
more severe than initially expected.  
 
e. Monitoring, Recording and Reporting of AEs:  All subjects will be monitored for AEs during the study. 
Assessments may include monitoring the subject’s clinical symptoms; laboratory, pathological, 
radiological,  or surgical findings; physical examination; or other appropriate tests and procedures.  
 
Any condition, laboratory abnormality, or physical finding with an onset date prior to the subject 
signing consent for study participation is considered to be pre -existing in nature and part of the 
subject’s medical history. All relevant historical medical  conditions that are known/diagnosed prior to 
the administration of study vaccine are to be recorded. All AEs, which  completely resolve and then 
Vaccination of Triple Negative Breast Cancer Patients  IRB: 206010  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version: 11 
06/02/2022  
Page 41 of 46 
 recur should be recorded as a new AE, regardless of whether it is related or not. In addition to new 
events, an y increase in the severity or frequency of a pre -existing condition that occurs after the 
administration of the first vaccine is considered an AE.  
 
All AEs occurring during the study period must be recorded. The clinical course of each event should 
be foll owed until resolution, stabilization, or until it has been determined that the study treatment or 
participation is not the cause. SAEs that are still ongoing at the end of the study period must be 
followed for up to 30 days to determine the final outcome. Any SAE that occurs after the study period 
and is considered to be possibly related to the study treatment or study participation should be 
recorded and reported immediately to the Sponsor.  
 
All AEs and SAEs must be recorded in the appropriate section of t he CRF.  The report should include, 
whenever possible, the investigator’s written medical judgment as to the relationship of the AE/SAE 
to the vaccine and/or to the study (not the chemotherapy)  (i.e., “definite”,  “probable”, “possible” or  
“unrelated”).  
 
Expedited Reporting : Any instance of a Guillain -Barre Syndrome event will require expedited reporting 
to the FDA, IRB, and IND Sponsor.  
 
AEs that are serious, unanticipated/unexpected, and possibly related to the vaccine qualify for 
expedited reporting. Any adverse experience that meets expedited reporting guidelines for SAEs must 
be reported  immediately  to the Sponsor. The CRA will follow AE reporting plans per institutional 
policies and applicable regulations. All qualified AEs will be reported to the Inv estigators, FDA, IRB, 
Medical Monitor, and the UAMS Office of Research Regulatory Affairs  (Sponsor)  according to this plan.  
The Sponsor will report all events that meet expedited reporting requirements to FDA in accordance 
with 21  CFR 312. All other AEs wi ll be reported to the Sponsor and FDA in the Annual Progress Report.  
 
Only AEs meeting UPIRTSO (Unanticipated Problem Involving Risks to Subjects or Others) will be 
reported to the UAMS IRB within the required 10 -day allotment of being notified of the even t. 
UPIRTSO requires that an unanticipated problem meet the following qualifications: a) unanticipated 
or unexpected; b) related to the research; and c) involves new or increased risk to the subject(s). All 
other AEs should be recorded and reported to the U AMS IRB at continuing review.  
 
Deaths that are related to research will be reported to the Sponsor immediately upon Investigator 
notification. A death due to a terminal condition of the research participant would be considered 
anticipated and not related t o the research.  
 
19. CLINICAL SITE MONITORING  
 
Clinical site monitoring will be conducted by the UAMS Office of Research Regulatory Affairs (ORRA) to 
ensure that the rights and well -being of human subjects are protected, that the reported trial data are 
accurate, complete, and verifiable from source documents, and that the conduct of the trial is in 
compliance with the currently approved protocol/amendment(s), ICH GCP, and applicable regulatory 
requirements.  
 
Vaccination of Triple Negative Breast Cancer Patients  IRB: 206010  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version: 11 
06/02/2022  
Page 42 of 46 
 Monitoring specialists from ORRA will conduct pe riodic on -site, comprehensive monitoring as determined 
by a protocol specific monitoring plan, which will be provided by the ORRA Monitoring Unit to the 
Investigator.  
 
20. DEVIATIONS AND VIOLATIONS  
 
a. Protocol Deviation:  A deviation is any  unintentional  change,  divergence,  or departure  from  the study  
design  or procedures  defined  in the protocol.  Protocol deviations  will be  tracked and  compiled  in a 
Protocol Deviation  Log. Deviations that potentially cause concern for the subject health, safety, or 
rights will be reported to the Sponsor as soon as possible for guidance on reporting.  
 
b. Protocol Violation:  A violation is a change to, or non -compliance with, the IRB -approved procedures 
without prior Sponsor and IRB approval (excluding changes made to eliminate apparent immediate 
hazard to subjects). A violation may affect health, safety, or rights of a subject. Any violation will be 
reported immediately to the Sponsor for guidance on reporting.  
 
If the protocol deviation/protocol violation does not represent a s ignificant alteration in the approved 
protocol and/or affect the safety or welfare of the subject, it will be reported to the UAMS IRB at the 
time of Continuing Review. If the protocol deviation/violation represents a significant alteration in the 
approved  protocol and/or if it affects the safety or welfare of the subject, it must be reported to the 
Sponsor and UAMS IRB immediately.  
  
Vaccination of Triple Negative Breast Cancer Patients  IRB: 206010  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version: 11 
06/02/2022  
Page 43 of 46 
 21. BIBLIOGRAPHY  
 
1. von Minckwitz G, Untch M, Blohmer JU, Costa SD, Eidtmann H, Fasching PA, et al. Definition and 
impact of p athologic complete response on prognosis after neoadjuvant chemotherapy in various 
intrinsic breast cancer subtypes. J Clin Oncol. 2012;30(15):1796 -804. doi: 10.200/JCO.2011.38.8595. 
Epub 2012 Apr 16.  
2. von Minckwitz G. Pathologic complete response after neo adjuvant therapy of breast cancer: pitfalls 
and shortcomings. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2012;132(3):779 -80. doi: 10.1007/s10549 -012-2029 -1. 
3. Takahashi T, Johnson TD, Nishinaka Y, Morton DL, Irie RF. IgM anti -ganglioside antibodies induced by 
melanoma cell va ccine correlate with survival of melanoma patients. J Invest Dermatol. 
1999;112(2):205 -9. 
4. Vollmers HP, Brandlein S. The "early birds": natural IgM antibodies and immune surveillance. Histol 
Histopathol. 2005;20(3):927 -37. 
5. Hakomori S. Tumor -associated carbo hydrate antigens defin ing tumor malignancy: basis for 
development of anti -cancer vaccines. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2001;491:369 -402.  
6. Hakomori S. Carbohydrate -to-carbohydrate interaction, through glycosynapse, as a basis of  cell 
recognition and membrane organiza tion. Glycoc onj J. 2004;21(3 -4):125 -37. 
7. Monzavi -Karbassi B, Shamloo S, Kieber -Emmons M, Jousheghany F, Luo P, Lin KY, et al. Priming 
characteristics of peptide mimotopes of carbohydrate antigens. Vaccine. 2003;21(7 -8):753 -60. 
8. Ragupathi G, Liu NX, Musselli  C, Powell S, Lloyd K, Livingston PO . Antibodies against tumor cell 
glycolipids and proteins, but not mucins, mediate complement  dependent cytotoxicity. J Immuno l. 
2005;174(9):5706 -12. 
9. Gilewski T, Ragupathi G, Bhuta S, Williams LJ, Musselli C, Zhang XF, et  al. Immunization of metastatic 
breast cancer patients with a fully synthetic globo H conjugate: a phase I trial. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S 
A. 2001;98(6):3270 -5. 
10. McCool TL, Harding CV, Greenspan NS, Schreiber JR. B - and T -cell immune responses to pneumococcal  
conjugate vaccines: divergence between carrier - and polysaccharide -specific immunogenicity. I nfect 
Immun. 1999;67(9):4862 -9. 
11. Guthmann MD, Bitton RJ, Carnero AJ, Gabri MR, Cinat G, Koliren L, et al. Active specific 
immunotherapy of melanoma with a GM3 gang lioside -based vaccine: a report on safety and 
immunogenicity. J  Immunother. 2004;27(6):442 -51. 
12. Krug LM, Ragupathi G, Hood C, Kris MG, Miller VA, Allen JR, et al. Vaccination of patients with small -
cell lung cancer with synthetic fucosyl GM -1 conjugated to keyhole limpet hemocyanin. Clin Cancer 
Res. 2004;10(18 Pt 1):6094 -100.  
13. Krug LM, Ragupathi G, Ng KK, Hood C, Jennings HJ, Guo Z, et al. Vaccination of small cell lung cancer 
patients with polysialic acid or N -propionylated polysialic acid conjugated to keyh ole limpet 
hemocyanin. Clin  Cancer Res. 2004;10(3):916 -23. 
14. Ragupathi G, Livingston PO, Hood C, Gathuru J, Krown SE, Chapman PB, et al. Consistent antibody 
response against ganglioside GD2 induced in patients with melanoma by a GD2 lactone -keyhole 
limpet he mocyanin conjugate vaccine plus immunological adjuvant QS -21. Clin Cancer Res. 
2003;9(14):5214 -20. 
15. Slovin SF, Ragupathi G, Fernandez C, Jefferson MP, Diani  M, Wilton AS, et al. A bivalent conjugate 
vaccine in the treatment of biochemically relapsed prostate cancer: a study of glycosylated MUC -2-
KLH and Globo H -KLH conjugate vaccines given with the new semi -synthetic saponin immunological 
adjuv ant GPI -0100 OR  QS-21. Vaccine.  2005;23(24):3114 -22. 
Vaccination of Triple Negative Breast Cancer Patients  IRB: 206010  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version: 11 
06/02/2022  
Page 44 of 46 
 16. Sabbatini PJ, Kudryashov V, Ragupathi G, Danishefsky SJ, Livingston PO, Bornmann W, et al. 
Immunization of ovarian cancer patients with a synthetic Lewis(y)  protein conjugate vaccine: a phase 
1 trial. Int J Cancer. 200 0;87(1):79 -85. 
17. Holmberg LA, Sandmaier BM. Vaccination with Theratope (STn -KLH) as treatment for breast  cancer. 
Expert Rev Vaccines. 2004;3(6):655 -63. 
18. Chapman PB, Wu D, Ragupathi G, Lu S, Williams L, Hwu WJ, et al. Sequential immunization of 
melanoma patie nts with GD3 ganglioside vaccine and anti -idiotypic monoclonal antibody that mimics 
GD3 ganglioside. Clin Cancer Res. 2004;10(14):4717 -23. 
19. Foon KA, Lutzky J, Baral RN, Yannelli JR, Hutchins L, Teitelbaum A, et al. Clinical and immune responses 
in advanced melanoma patients immunized with an anti -idiotype antibody mimicking 
disialoganglioside GD2. J  Clin Oncol. 2000;18(2):376 -84. 
20. Bolesta E, Kowalczyk A, Wierzbicki A, Rotkiewicz P, Bambach B, Tsao CY, et al. DNA vaccine expressing 
the mimotope of GD2 ganglios ide induces protective GD2 cross -reactive antibody responses. Cancer 
Res. 2005;65(8):3410 -18. 
21. Forster -Waldl E, Riemer AB, Dehof AK, Neumann D, Bramswig K, Boltz -Nitulescu G, et al. Isolation and 
structural analysis of peptide mimotopes for the disialogangl ioside GD2, a neuroblastoma tumor 
antigen. Mol Immunol. 2005;42(3):319 -25. 
22. Qiu J, Luo P, Wasmund K, Steplewski Z, Kieber -Emmons T. Towards the development of peptide 
mimotopes of carbohydrate antige ns as cancer vaccines. Hybridoma. 1999;18(1):103 -12. 
23. Wille rs J, Lucchese A, Kanduc D, Ferrone S. Molecular mimicry of phage displayed peptides mimicking 
GD3 gangliosid e. Peptides. 1999;20(9):1021 -26. 
24. O I, Kieber -Emmons T, Otvos L, Jr., Blaszczyk -Thurin M. Peptides mimicking sialyl -Lewis A isolated from 
a random p eptide library and p eptide array. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1999;  886:276 -79. 
25. Kieber -Emmons T, Monzavi -Karbassi B, Wang B, Luo P, Weiner DB. Cutting edge: DNA immunization 
with minigenes of carbohydrate mimotopes induce functional anticarbohydrate antibody respons e. J 
Immunol. 2000;165(2):623 -27. 
26. Monzavi -Karbassi B, Artaud C, Jousheghany F, Hennings L, Carcel -Trullols J, Shaaf S, et al. Reduction 
of spontaneous metastases through induction of carbohydrate crossreactive apoptotic antibodies. J  
Immunol. 2005;174(11): 7057 -65. 
27. Monzavi -Karbassi B, Luo P, Jousheghany F, Torres -Quinones M, Cunto -Amesty G, Artaud C, et al. A 
mimic of tumor rejection antigen -associated carbohydrates mediates an antitumor cellular response.  
Cancer Res. 2004;64(6):2162 -66. 
28. Monzavi -Karbassi B, Cunto -Amesty G, Luo P, Shamloo S, Blaszcyk -Thurin M, Kieber -Emmons T. 
Immunization with a carbohydrate mimicking peptide augments tumor -specific cellular responses. Int 
Immunol. 2001;13(11):1361 -71. 
29. Zuckier LS, Berkowitz EZ, Sattenberg RJ, Zhao QH, Deng HF, Scharff MD. Influence of affinity and 
antigen density on antibody localization in a modifiable tumor targeting model. Cancer Res. 
2000;60(24):7008 -13. 
30. Kabat E. Antigenic determinants and the size of the antibody -combining site: determ inants of cell -
mediated immunity. In: Kabat E, editor. Structural concepts in immunology and immunochemistry. 
New York: Holt, Rinehart  and Winston,; 1976. p. 119 -66. 
31. Hennings L, Artaud C, Jousheghany F, Monzavi -Karbassi B, Pashov A, Kieber -Emmons T. Carboh ydrate 
mimetic peptides augment carbohydrate -reactive immune responses in the absence of immune 
pathology. Cancers (Basel). 2011;3(4):4151 -69. doi: 4110.3390/cancers3044 151.  
32. Monzavi -Karbassi B, Hennings LJ, Artaud C, Liu T, Jousheghany F, Pashov A, et al. Preclinical studies of 
carbohydrate mimetic peptide vaccines for breast cancer and melanoma. Vaccine. 2007;25 (16):3022 -
31. Epub 2007 Jan 26.  
Vaccination of Triple Negative Breast Cancer Patients  IRB: 206010  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version: 11 
06/02/2022  
Page 45 of 46 
 33. Cunto -Amesty G, Luo P, Monzavi -Karbassi B, Lees A, Kieber -Emmons T. Exploiting molecular mimicry 
to broaden the imm une response to carbohydrate antigens for vaccine development. Vaccine. 
2001;19(17 -19):2361 -68. 
34. Dabelsteen E. Cell surface carbohydrates as prognostic markers in human carcinomas. J Pathol. 
1996;179(4):358 -69. 
35. Davidson B, Gotlieb WH, Ben -Baruch G, Kopolovi c J, Goldberg I, Nesland JM, et al. Expression of 
carbohydrate antigens in advanced -stage ovarian carcinomas and their metastases -A 
clinicopathologic study. Gy necol Oncol. 2000;77(1):35 -43. 
36. Nakagoe T, Fukushima K, Tanaka K, Sawai T, Tsuji T, Jibiki M, et a l. Evaluation of sialyl Lewis(a), sialyl 
Lewis(x), and sialyl Tn antigens expression lev els as predictors of recurrence after curative surgery in 
node -negative colorectal cancer patients. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2002;21(1):107 -13. 
37. Zhang S, Graeber LA, Helli ng F, Ragupathi G, Adluri S, Lloyd KO, et al. Augmenting the immunogenicity 
of synthetic MUC1 peptid e vaccines in mice. Cancer Res. 1996;56(14): 3315 -19. 
38. Zhang S, Zhang HS, Reuter VE, Slovin SF, Scher HI, Livingston PO. Expression of potential target 
antigen s for immunotherapy on primary a nd metastatic prostate cancers. Clin Cancer Res. 
1998;4(2):295 -302.  
39. Steplewski Z, Blaszczyk -Thurin M, Lubeck M, Loibner H, Scholz D, Koprowski H. Oligosaccharide Y 
specific monoclonal antibody a nd its isotype switch variants . Hybridoma. 1990;9(2):201 -10. 
40. Marquina G, Waki H, Fernandez  LE, Kon K, Carr A, Valiente O, et al. Gangliosides expressed in human 
breast cancer. C ancer Res. 1996;56(22):5165 -71. 
41. Kawashima I, Yoshida Y, Taya C, Shitara H, Yonekawa H, Karasuyama H, et al. E xpansion of natural 
killer cells in mice transgenic for IgM antibody to ganglioside GD2: demonstration of  prolonged 
survival after challenge with syngeneic tumor cells.  Int J Oncol. 2003;23(2):381 -88. 
42. Montero E, Valdes M, Avellanet J, Lopez A, Perez R, La ge A. Chemotherapy induced transient  B-cell 
depletion boosts antibody -forming cells expansion driven by an epidermal growth factor -based 
cancer vaccine. Vaccine. 2009;27(16):2230 -39. doi: 10.1016/j.va ccine.2009.02.018. Epub Feb 13.  
43. Ibe S, Qin Z, Schuler T,  Preiss S, Blankenstein T. Tumor rejection by disturbing tumor stroma  cell 
interactions. J E xp Med. 2001;194(11):1549 -59. 
44. Matar P, Rozados VR, Gervasoni SI, Scharovsky GO. Th2/Th1 switch induced by a single low dose of 
cyclophosphamide in a rat metastatic lymphoma model. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 
2002;5 0(11):588 -96. Epub 2001 Nov 16.  
45. Monzavi -Karbassi B, Pashov A, Jousheghany F, Artaud C, Kieber -Emmons T. Evaluating strategies to 
enhance the anti -tumor immune response to a carbohydrate mimetic peptide vacci ne. Int  J Mol Med. 
2006;17(6):1045 -52. 
46. Roselli M, Cereda V, di Bari MG, Formica V, Spila A, Jochems C, et al. Effects of conventional 
therapeutic interventions on the number and function of regulatory T cells. Oncoimmunology. 
2013;2(10):e27025.  
47. Tumeh PC, Harview CL, Yearley JH, Shintaku IP, Taylor EJ, Robert L, et al. PD -1 blockade induces 
responses by inhibiting adaptive immune resistance. Nature. 2014;515(7528):568 –71. 
48. Herbst RS, Soria JC, Kowanetz M, Fine GD, Hamid O, Gordon MS, Sosman JA, McDermott DF,  Powderly 
JD, Gettinger SN, Kohrt HE, Horn L, Lawrence DP, Rost S, Leabman M, Xiao Y, Mokatrin A, Koeppen H, 
Hegde PS, Mellman I, Chen DS, Hodi FS. Predictive correlates of response to the anti -PD-L1 antibody 
MPDL3280A in cancer patients. Nature. 2014 Nov 27;515(7528):563 -67. 
49. Korman AJ, Peggs KS, Allison JP. Checkpoint blockade in cancer immunotherapy. Adv Immunol. 
2006;90:297 -339.  
50. Makhoul I , Hutchins L, Emanuel PD, Pennisi A, Siegel E, Jousheghany F, Karbassi -Monzavi B, Kieber -
Emmons T. Moving a Carbohydrate Mimetic Peptide into the clinic: Clinical response of a breast cancer 
Vaccination of Triple Negative Breast Cancer Patients  IRB: 206010  
Sponsor: UAMS  
Version: 11 
06/02/2022  
Page 46 of 46 
 patient after mimotope -based immunotherapy. Hum Vaccin Immunother . 2014 Aug 5;11(1) :37-44. 
[Epub ahead of print] PMID: 25140879.  
51. Rosenberger WF, Haines LM. Competing designs for phase I clinical trials: a review. Stat Med. 
2002;21(18):2757 -70. 
52. Martin L, Senesse P, Gioulbasanis I, Antoun S, Bozzetti F, Deans C, et al. Di agnostic criteria for the 
classification of cancer -associated weight loss. J Clin Oncol. 2015 Jan 01;33(1):90 -99. 
53. Mieog JS, van de Velde CJ. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy for early breast cancer. Expert Opin 
Pharmacother. 2009;10(9):1423 -34. doi: 10.517/1465656 0903002105.  
54. Rastogi P, Anderson SJ, Bear HD, Geyer CE, Kahlenberg MS, Robidoux A, et al. Preoperative 
chemotherapy: updates of National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project Protocols B -18 and B -
27. J Clin Oncol. 2008;26(5):778 -85. doi: 10.1200/JCO.20 07.15.0235.  
55. Chollet P, Amat S, Cure H, de Latour M, Le Bouedec G, Mouret -Reynier MA, et al. Prognostic 
significance of a complete pathological response after induction chemotherapy in operable breast 
cancer. Br J Cancer. 2002;86(7):1041 -46. 
56. Guarneri V, Fra ssoldati A, Giovannelli S, Borghi F, Conte P. Primary systemic therapy for operable 
breast cancer: a review of clinical trials and perspectives. Cancer Lett. 2007;2 48(2):175 -85. Epub 2006 
Aug 21.  
57. Dawood S, Broglio K, Kau SW, Islam R, Symmans WF, Buchholz T A, et al.  Prognostic value of initial 
clinical disease stage after achieving pathological complete  response. Oncologist. 2008;13(1):6 -15. 
doi: 0.1634/theoncologist.2007 -0107. 52.  
58. FDA Guidance for Industry, Pathological Complete Response in Neoadjuvant Trea tment of High -Risk 
Early -Stage Breast Cancer: Use as an Endpoint to Support Accelerated Approval. October 2014 . 
59. Gianni L, Pienkowski T, Im YH, Roman L, Tseng LM, Liu MC, et al. Efficacy and safety of neoadjuvant 
pertuzumab and trastuzumab in women with loc ally advanced, inflammatory, or early HER2 -positive 
breast cancer (NeoSphere): a randomised multicentre, open -label, phase 2 trial. Lancet Oncol. 
2012;13(1):25 -32. doi: 10.1016/S470 -2045(11)70336 -9. Epub 2011 Dec 6.  
60. Baselga J, Bradbury I, Eidtmann H, Di Co simo S, de Azambuja E, Aura C, et al. Lapatinib with 
trastuzumab for HER2 -positive early breast cancer (NeoALTTO): a randomised, open -label, 
multicentre, phase 3 trial. Lancet. 2012;379(9816):633 -40. doi: 10.1016/S0140 -6736(11)61847 -3. 
Epub 2012 Jan 17.  
61. Prowell TM, Pazdur R. Pathological complete response and accelerated drug approval in  early breast 
cancer. N Engl J Med. 2012;366(26):2438 -41. doi: 10.1056/NEJMp1205737. Epub 2012 May 30.  
62. Sikov , William M., et al. "Impact of the addition of carboplatin and/or bevacizumab to neoadjuvant 
once -per-week paclitaxel followed by dose -dense doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide on pathologic 
complete response rates in stage II to III triple -negative breast c ancer: CALGB 40603 (Alliance)."  
Journal of Clinical Oncology  33.1 (2015): 13 -21. 