Dietary Soy Isoflavones in Chronic Pancreatitis      
NCT: 02577640  
Date of original document: 12/5/2013  
 
Research Plan . Study Design/ Overview.   (See Figure 1: Flow Diagram, Appendix)  
Specific Aim 1:   To evaluate the compliance and tolerability of soy bread in patients with 
chronic pancreatitis enrolled in a Phase I dose escalation clinical trial.   A single group, open -
labeled dose escalation study  of soy bread intervention will be conducted in patients  with chronic 
pancreatitis . We hypothesize that the soy bread formulation will be well -tolerated with high 
compliance in CP patients.  This study will be guided by dosing from prior clinical experience with 
this soy bread in patients with prostate cancer.  The use of bread as a food -based delivery vehicle 
is advantageous as compared to administration of a supplement as it provides the opportunity for 
delivery of multiple complex bioactive agents in an appropriate matrix . This is the first study 
designed to d etermine the Grade 1 and 2 toxicities, (Dose Limiting Toxicities ( DLTs ), compliance 
and tolerability of soy bread in human chronic pancreatitis. Once the Maximum Tolerated Dose 
(MTD ) or target dose is reached, 10 subjects will undergo a 4 week verification  study  [Section b, 
below] to confirm tolerance and safety .  Overall, this small clinical trial will provide the necessary 
clinical data required to move this intervention forward in the setting of a future placebo controlled 
trial for patients with CP.  In addition, it will provide us with valuable biologic mater ial to assess 
changes in inflammatory biomarkers relevant to CP and to facilitate future study of individual 
differences in soy isoflavone metabolism within this patient population.  
a. Dose Escalation Phase . (n=15 -25 CP subjects)   This dose escalation stud y of soy isoflavones 
will enroll chronic pancreatitis patients from a single academic medical center in Columbus, Ohio.  
All participants will be informed about the study and potential risks and required to provide written 
informed consent prior to undergo ing study -related pr ocedures.  Here a traditional 3+3 design will 
be used to determine the compliance, tolerability and dose limiting toxicities in this unique patient 
population. [Table 1: Dose Escalation; Appendix] Dose escalation with soy bread will be continued 
until dose -limiting toxici ties are observ ed in > 33% of the participants or the daily target dose of 4 
slices of bread [132 mg soy isoflavone] is reached.   [Table 2: Toxicity Grades; see Appendix] .   
Subject Enrollment . Succe ssive cohorts of patients (3 patients  / cohort) will b e started on a fixed 
dose of 33 mg isoflavones  (IF) for this study [1 slice  of soy bread; 33 mg isoflavones/ 85 gram  
slice] for 1 week .  CP patients will be accrued in cohorts of 3 and dose escalation will be increased 
by 1 slice of bread in each successive cohort based on a modified Fibonacci  sequen ce:  50% [2 
slices; 66 mg  IF], 33%  [3 slices; 99 mg  IF], 25%  [4 slices; 132 mg  IF] in which dose increments 
become gradual ly lowered until the target of 4  slices of bread or a MTD is determined.  Subjects 
will be enrolled in the study for 7 days and will be seen in the clinic on Day 0 and Day 7.  After 
enrollment  (Day 0)  subjects will start a legume free diet through the completion of their enrollment 
(Day 7).   
An estimated 15 -25 CP patients will be needed for this initial dose escalation phase.  
 
Monitoring.  Subjects wil l be monitored for toxicities defined based on type(s), grade(s) and 
duration (s) of symp toms  using a daily diary that will be reviewed by study staff before  and after 
each dose escalation.  Toxicities will be graded using the Common Toxicity Criteria Version 3.0 
(CTC 3.0).  If the CTC 3.0 did not apply to an adverse event, it will be graded as mild, moderate 
or severe.  DLT will be defined as any CTC 3.0 Grade 3 or 4 adverse event determined to be 
related to the soy bread . Our prior experience in prostate cancer patients indicates Grade 1 -2 GI 
discomfort as primary adverse events following bread consumption.  
Dietary Soy Isoflavones in Chronic Pancreatitis      
If no DLTs are observed for 1 week  after administration of soy bread, a new cohort will be enrolled 
at the next planned dose level.  If DLTs are observed in one participant in the cohort, another 
three participants will be tr eated with the same dose level.  The maximum tolerated dose (MTD) 
will be defined as one dose level below the dose in which DLTs were observed in >33% of the 
participants  who are at least 80% adherent to the soy bread intervention, as evidenced by the 
number of empty packets received .  In other words if DLTs are observed  in a least 2 of 3 
participants, the MTD will be determined to be the dose administered to the previous cohort.  
Similarly, in a cohort of 6 participants, 3 of the 6 participants would have to experience DLTs to 
determine the MTD.  
 
Data collection . Subjects will be seen in clinic on Day 0 and at the end of the study on Day 7.  A 
physical exam, vital signs, a blood draw to assess complete blood count with differential, 
cytokines, and comp rehensive metabolic profile, and a urinalysis , will be completed  at both of 
these visits.  Blood and Urine will be collected and stored at -80C to complete batch testing.  Urine 
isoflavones  and their metabolites  will also be analyzed from the urine collected at enrollment.   
Subjects will be given a container to collect  a urine sample starting at 24 hours prior to Day 7 (Day 
6) and ending with the urine collected the morning o f their Day 7 clinic visit.   The subject will bring 
the sample with them to their visit for urine isoflavones analysis.    
Symptoms, toxicity , compliance , and acceptance of the soy bread  will be assessed before  and 
after each dose escalation and maintained in a secure case report form.   Soy bread tolerability, a 
diet record, and consumer acceptance will be measured throughout the subject’s enroll ment via 
a booklet and maintained in a secure case report form.  
 
Dietary compliance : Adherence to the soy bread diet and  legume restriction will be mea sured 
using daily diary entries (see DEG phase I SMc Appendix)  as well as a count of empty packets 
return ed. Additionally, isoflavone s in th e urine will be used to verify  the subject’s self -reported 
compliance. A detailed list of foods to avoid for the legume restricted (peas, beans, soy, sprouts, 
and foods made with these items as well as peanut butter limit ed to 1 tablespoon/week) diet will 
be provided. We have developed a checklist of the most common food sources of isoflavone -rich 
foods based on the USDA Isoflavone Database (release 2.0, September 2008 ) which will be 
included in the daily dairy. Subjects will be instructed on the proper storage, handling, and 
consumptio n of the soy bread slices (see Soy Bread Instruction  Appendix ).  
 
Three day diet record : Subjects  will be instructed by the research team with detailed 
instructions of how to approximate foo d quantities and record all foods and beverages 
consumed for three days during a given week. The three days will be assigned by the study 
coordinator (typically two weekdays and one weekend day). Each participant will be provided 
with an instruction bookle t (see DEG phase I SMc Appendix) and examples of data collection.  
When subjects return for their visit, the study coordinator will review the three day diet record 
with the participant to ensure thoroughness and resolve any ambiguities.   Subjects enrolled  in 
this group will complete this one time over 3 days during their enrollment.  The dietary records 
will be used to assess compliance to the legume restricted diet and analyzed using the Nutrition 
Data System for Research (NDS -R; University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN).   
 
Soy bread tolerability and consumer acceptance: Soy bread tolerability and consumer 
acceptance will be measured using the sensory evaluation questionnaire and visual analogue 
scale to determine satiety.  This will be completed at least once a day.   
 
Dietary Soy Isoflavones in Chronic Pancreatitis      
b. MTD Verification Phase  (n= up to 10). After the Ph ase I study has been completed, an 
additional 10 chronic pancreatitis patients will then be treated at the best tolerated dose for 4  
weeks to further ver ify safety and toxicity.   
  
Subject Enrollment: Subject enrollment will begin 14 days prior to the sta rt of eating the soy 
bread.  Total enrollment time for this group is 6 weeks.  During the first two weeks of enrollment 
subjects will undergo a legume -free washout period and will be asked to refrain from eating 
legumes during this time.  Subjects will con tinue the legume free diet until they complete the study 
(total of 6 weeks).   Subjects enrolled in this phase will be asked to stop any multivitamins that 
they are taking and all will be asked to start a multivitamin with a mineral supplement (MVI) each 
day.  This multivitamin with mineral supplement will be provided to the subjects enrolled in this 
phase for consistency.  
  
Data Collection: Data and bio -specimen collection will be obtained at enrollment, when they start 
eating the soy bread and then weekly  through the end of the study .  Subjects will be seen in clinic 
at enrollment (Day -14), when they start eating the soy bread (Day 0), Week 1, Week 2, Week 3, 
and at the end of the study on Week 4.  A p hysical exam  and vital signs will be completed at each  
of these visits.  A blood draw for complete blood c ount with differential , cytokines testing, 
comprehensive metabolic profile  will be completed at Day 0 and Week 4.  A urinalysis will be 
completed weekly starting with Week 0 and ending with Week 4.  
Subject s will be given a container at Day -14 to collect a urine sample starting at 24 hours prior 
to Day 0 and ending with the urine collected the morning of the Day 0 visit.  The subject will bring 
the sample with them to their Week 0 visit.  They will also be given a container at Week 3 visit to 
collect a urine sample starting at 24 hours prior to their last study visit (Week 4 visit) and ending 
with the urine collected the morning of the Week 4 visit. Urine isoflavones and their metabolites 
will be analyzed wi th this urine collection.  
 
Dietary adherence : Adherence and tolerability to the soy bread diet and  legume restriction will 
be measured using daily diary entries, sensory evaluation questionnaire, and visual analogue 
scale measuring the subject’s satiety (see MTD Phase II SMc Appendix)  as well as count of empty 
packets returned . Additionally, i soflavon es and th eir metabolites  in the urine will be used to verify  
the subject’s self -reported adherence . A detailed list of foods to avoid for the legume restricted 
(peas, beans, soy, sprouts, and foods made with these items as well as peanut butter limited to 
1 tablesp oon/week) diet will be provided. We have developed a checklist of the most common 
food sources of isoflavone -rich foods based on the USDA Isoflavone Database (release 2.0, 
September 2008 ) which will be included in the daily dairy , Appendix . Subjects will be instructed 
on the proper storage, handling, and consumption of the soy bread slices, Appendix.  
 
Three day diet record Subjects  will be instructed by the research team with detailed 
instructions of how to approximate food quantities and record all foods and beverages 
consumed for three days during a given week. The three days will be integrated into the 
booklets  (see MTD Phase II SMc Appendix)  provided . Each par ticipant will be given  written  
instruction s and examples of diet record data c ollection.  When subjects return for their visit, the 
study coordinator will review the three day diet record with the participant to ensure 
thoroughness and resolve any ambiguities.   Two 3 day diet records will be administered in the 
MTD phase, once betwe en enrollment (Day -14) and Day 0 and once between Week 3 and 
Week 4. The dietary records will be used to assess compliance to the legume restricted diet and 
analyzed  using the Nutrition Data System for Research (NDS -R; University of Minnesota, 
Minneapolis, MN).   
 
Dietary Soy Isoflavones in Chronic Pancreatitis      
Soy bread tolerability and consumer acceptance: Soy bread tolerability and consumer 
acceptance will be measured using the sensory evaluation questionnaire an d visual analogue 
scale to determine satiety.  This will be completed at least once a day while subjects are eating 
the bread.   
 
Sensory testing of soy breads will be used to assess the acceptance and physical 
characteristics of the soy bread and will be conducted during the first day of soy bread 
consumption . The information gained will be used to assess the effects of soy bread consumer 
acceptance (liking) to soy bread . In our previous studies, acceptance of the soy bread was 
excellent surrogate measures  of adherence. Overall acceptance of the soy bread will be 
conducted using a nine point hedonic scale (1=dislike extremely to 9=like extremely) whereas a 
five point Just About Right (JAR) scale (1=much too little to 5=much too much) will be used to 
optimiz e the soy bread formulation  for future trials with this cohort , Appendix . Descriptive 
analysis will be used to characterize the organoleptic qualities (saltiness, sweetness, beaniness, 
hardness, and br own color) of the soy bread . A horizontal line scale (6  inch) ranging from 1 to 
10 will be used to measure the intensity of each attribute. At the l ast clinic appointment (week 4)  
general consumer questions regarding the soy bread  will be collected . 
 
The satiety scale will determine the subjects hunger levels after they eat the bread.  Measures 
of satiety (perceived fullness or lack of hunger) will be conducted using visual analogue scale 
(VAS) adapted from Hill and Blundell (1983 )41 and will be used to examine the impact of satiety 
on soy bread compliance. Subjects will be asked to rate their satiety (hunger, fullness, 
satisfaction, and thoughts of food) as well rate their nausea, thirst, and energy. VAS will be 
completed prior to the first slice of soy bread consumed and immediately after bread 
consumption , 240 minutes after consumption of the soy bread as well as before going to bed.   
 
Isoflavone Metabolism and Adherence to Soy Bread Intervention  Patients with pancreatitis 
may have altered metabolism which can cause significant chan ges in glyc ated hemoglobi n. 
HbA1c and is often times closely monitored in these patients.  Advanced glycation end products 
as well as individual differences in activity, nutritional status, and smoking have shown to affect 
isoflavone metabolism and expression of novel isoflavone me tabolites42 43. For these reasons,  
subjects most recent HbA1c will be recorded.   This Hb A1c may be completed prior to enrollment 
in the study or after as their standard medical treatment for Chronic Pancreatitis. Furthermore, 
factors such as activity level , nutritional status, and smoking affect the absorption and metabolism 
of isoflavones within and among individuals  and over time their biological activity44. Therefore a 
standardized vitamin will be provided to participants in the MTD phase of the study as  well daily 
activity and daily exposure to smoking will be monitored .  
  
 
Specific Aim 2:   To determine the effect of soy bread intervention on pro -inflammatory 
cytokine expression in serum and urine  from patients with chronic pancreatitis. Cytokine 
and lipid biomarkers relevant to inflammation will be assessed at baseline and following soy bread 
intervention in patient s’ serum and urine . We hypothesize that dietary soy will be associated with 
reduced levels of key pro -inflammatory cytokines that drive t he pathogenesis of CP including IL -6, 
CRP , IL-1β and TNF -α, among others  
Blood  sampling .  At enrollment,  patients  will present for a blood  draw  at the Outpatient  Clinic.  In 
addition  to standard -of-care blood  work  ordered  by the physician,  a phlebotomist  will collect 
another  30 ml (1 ounce)  into sodium -heparin  Vacutainer  tubes (Fish er) and a clean catch urine 
sample for our study. Blood  and urine will be immediately  processed, and  stored  at -80°C  for 
analyses.  The same  procedure  will be used on  1 subsequent visit  at the end of study , for a total 
Dietary Soy Isoflavones in Chronic Pancreatitis      
of two blood draws to monitor changes in cytokine profile over time.  Cytokine biomarkers will be 
assessed at [1] Baseline  and [ 2] upon completion of the study.   
Immune Biomarkers. Studies investigating the  effect of dietary soy on immune parameters in 
patients with CP are non -existent. This trial will fill a critical gap in understanding how dietary soy 
affects key biomarkers of inflammation in CP patients. Blood from patients will be processed via 
centrifu gation with ficoll -paque. Our primary objective will be to assess the change in three pro -
inflammatory cytokines (IL -6, CRP, IL-1β) known to be important in the pathogenesis of 
pancreatitis  via a Luminex -based assay (Affymetrix). However, our high -throughp ut analytical 
platform will allow for an assessment of other  factors  that regulate inflammatory processes 
including: [1] inflammatory cell mobilization expansion: G -CSF, GM -CSF;  [2] inflammatory cell 
trafficking: IP -10, MCP -1, M-CSF, MIG, RANTES, SDF -1; [3] Th1 -type CD4+ T cell responses: 
IFN-γ, IL-1β, TNF-α;  [4] Th2 or Th17 -type CD4+ T cell responses: IL-4, IL-6, IL-10, IL -17; [5] 
Other measureable factors relevant to inflammation as they relate to pancreatic carcinogenesis: 
IL-11, IL -13, TGFβ, PGE 2, HMGB1.  Sufficient volume of samples will also be available for 
validation by a second method in the event interesting trends are observed (i.e. ELISA).  All 
samples will be analyzed in a batched manner to assess changes across the four individual time 
points per each patient. These data will provide  us with a comprehensive  understanding of how  
dietary soy alters the expression of  soluble factors  implicated in inflammatory processes.  
Lipid Biomarkers  Pro-inflammatory markers from adipose (adiponectin, lepti n, and resistin) and 
lipid metabolism (triglycerides, total cholesterol, LDL, HDL) will be collected  for subjects enrolled 
in the MTD group at enrollment (Day 0) and at the end of study visit (Week 4) , as they are related 
to pancreatitis and soy exposure .  This will be obtained from blood collected after a 12 hour fast . 
One serum separator (10 mL) will be collected for these analyses. Serum lipids (total cholesterol, 
HDL, LDL, triglycerides, adipokines, and leptin) will be batch analyzed by the CRC Core 
Laboratory using Dimension Xpand Clinical Chemistry analyzer or  Immulite 1000 (Siemens 
Medical Diagnostics, Decatur, GA.).    
 
Conclusion . We have assembled a multi -disciplinary research team  to assess compliance, 
toxicity and chan ges in pro -inflam matory cytokine expression from  a soy based dietary bread 
product using a classic 3+3 dose escalation study design in subjects with chronic pancreatitis.  
This novel non -pharmacologic intervention  has a high likelihood of being tolera ble a nd safe in 
patients with chronic pancreatitis  and in down -regulating the pro -inflammatory cytokine cascades 
that drive s the pathobiology  of this debilitating illness . 
 
 
References  
 
 
1. Peery, A.F., et al., Burden of gastrointestinal disease in the United States: 2012 update.  
Gastroenterology, 2012. 143(5): p. 1179 -87 e1 -3. 
2. Steer, M.L., I. Waxman, and S. Freedman, Chronic pancreatitis.  N Engl J Med, 1995. 
332(22): p. 1482 -90. 
3. Maule, W.F., Chronic pancreatitis.  N Engl J Med, 1995. 333(18): p. 1221.  
4. Yadav, D. and A.B. Lowenfels, The epidemiology of pancreatitis and pancreatic cancer.  
Gastroenterology, 2013. 144(6): p. 1252 -61. 
5. Whitcomb, D.C., et al., Multicenter approach to recurrent acute and chronic pancr eatitis 
in the United States: the North American Pancreatitis Study 2 (NAPS2).  Pancreatology, 
2008. 8(4-5): p. 520 -31. 
6. Whitcomb, D.C., What is personalized medicine and what should it replace?  Nat Rev 
Gastroenterol Hepatol, 2012. 9(7): p. 418 -24. 
Dietary Soy Isoflavones in Chronic Pancreatitis      
7. Talukdar, R. and R.K. Tandon, Pancreatic stellate cells: new target in the treatment of 
chronic pancreatitis.  J Gastroenterol Hepatol, 2008. 23(1): p. 34 -41. 
8. Sikkens, E.C., et al., The prevalence of fat -soluble vitamin deficiencies and a decreased 
bone mass in patients with chronic pancreatitis.  Pancreatology, 2013. 13(3): p. 238 -42. 
9. Tignor, A.S., et al., High prevalence of low -trauma fracture in chronic pancreatitis.  Am J 
Gastroenterol, 2010. 105(12): p. 2680 -6. 
10. Rickels, M.R., et al., Detection, evaluation and treatment of diabetes mellitus in chronic 
pancreatitis: Recommendations from PancreasFest 2012.  Pancreatology, 2013. 13(4): p. 
336-42. 
11. Yadav, D., et al., Alcohol consumption, cigarette smoking, and the risk of recurrent acute 
and chronic  pancreatitis.  Arch Intern Med, 2009. 169(11): p. 1035 -45. 
12. Lowenfels, A.B., P. Maisonneuve, and P.G. Lankisch, Chronic pancreatitis and other risk 
factors for pancreatic cancer.  Gastroenterol Clin North Am, 1999. 28(3): p. 673 -85, x.  
13. Gold, E.B. and  J.L. Cameron, Chronic pancreatitis and pancreatic cancer.  N Engl J Med, 
1993. 328(20): p. 1485 -6. 
14. Rebours, V., et al., The natural history of hereditary pancreatitis: a national series.  Gut, 
2009. 58(1): p. 97 -103. 
15. Pandol, S., et al., Epidemiology , risk factors, and the promotion of pancreatic cancer: 
role of the stellate cell.  J Gastroenterol Hepatol, 2012. 27 Suppl 2 : p. 127 -34. 
16. Apte, M.V. and J.S. Wilson, Stellate cell activation in alcoholic pancreatitis.  Pancreas, 
2003. 27(4): p. 316 -20. 
17. Masamune, A., et al., Fibrinogen induces cytokine and collagen production in pancreatic 
stellate cells.  Gut, 2009. 58(4): p. 550 -9. 
18. Hisada, S., et al., Peroxisome proliferator -activated receptor gamma ligand prevents the 
development of chronic pancr eatitis through modulating NF -kappaB -dependent 
proinflammatory cytokine production and pancreatic stellate cell activation.  Rocz Akad 
Med Bialymst, 2005. 50: p. 142 -7. 
19. Logsdon, C.D. and B. Ji, Ras activity in acinar cells links chronic pancreatitis and  
pancreatic cancer.  Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol, 2009. 7(11 Suppl): p. S40 -3. 
20. Stimac, D., et al., Prognostic values of IL -6, IL-8, and IL -10 in acute pancreatitis.  J Clin 
Gastroenterol, 2006. 40(3): p. 209 -12. 
21. Khanna, A.K., et al., Comparison of Ran son, Glasgow, MOSS, SIRS, BISAP, APACHE -
II, CTSI Scores, IL -6, CRP, and Procalcitonin in Predicting Severity, Organ Failure, 
Pancreatic Necrosis, and Mortality in Acute Pancreatitis.  HPB Surg, 2013. 2013 : p. 
367581.  
22. Pooran, N., et al., Cytokines (IL -6, IL-8, TNF): early and reliable predictors of severe 
acute pancreatitis.  J Clin Gastroenterol, 2003. 37(3): p. 263 -6. 
23. Chen, J. and X.F. Huang, Interleukin -6 promotes carcinogenesis through multiple signal 
pathways. Comment on: Clinical significance of interleukin -6 gene polymorphism and IL -
6 serum level in pancreatic adenocarcinoma and chronic pancreatitis.  Dig Dis Sci, 2009. 
54(6): p. 1373 -4. 
24. Mroczko, B., et al., Diagnostic usefulness of serum interleukin 6 (IL -6) and C -reactive 
protein (CRP) in th e differentiation between pancreatic cancer and chronic pancreatitis.  J 
Clin Lab Anal, 2010. 24(4): p. 256 -61. 
25. Zhang, H., et al., IL-6 trans -signaling promotes pancreatitis -associated lung injury and 
lethality.  J Clin Invest, 2013. 123(3): p. 1019 -31. 
26. Clayton, H., et al., Anti-TNF Therapy in the Treatment of Psoriasis in a Patient with 
Acute -on-Chronic Pancreatitis.  Dermatology, 2013. 227(3): p. 193 -6. 
27. Mace, T.A., M. Bloomston, and G.B. Lesinski, Pancreatic cancer -associated stellate 
cells: A vi able target for reducing immunosuppression in the tumor microenvironment.  
Oncoimmunology, 2013. 2(7): p. e24891.  
Dietary Soy Isoflavones in Chronic Pancreatitis      
28. Nicholas, C. and G.B. Lesinski, Immunomodulatory cytokines as therapeutic agents for 
melanoma.  Immunotherapy, 2011. 3(5): p. 673 -90. 
29. Droke, E.A., et al., Soy isoflavones avert chronic inflammation -induced bone loss and 
vascular disease.  J Inflamm (Lond), 2007. 4: p. 17.  
30. Llaneza, P., et al., Soy isoflavones, diet and physical exercise modify serum cytokines in 
healthy obese postmenopau sal women.  Phytomedicine, 2011. 18(4): p. 245 -50. 
31. Tovar, A.R., et al., A soy protein diet alters hepatic lipid metabolism gene expression 
and reduces serum lipids and renal fibrogenic cytokines in rats with chronic nephrotic 
syndrome.  J Nutr, 2002. 132(9): p. 2562 -9. 
32. Fanti, P., et al., Positive effect of dietary soy in ESRD patients with systemic 
inflammation --correlation between blood levels of the soy isoflavones and the acute -
phase reactants.  Nephrol Dial Transplant, 2006. 21(8): p. 2239 -46. 
33. Messina, M., S. Ho, and D.L. Alekel, Skeletal benefits of soy isoflavones: a review of the 
clinical trial and epidemiologic data.  Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care, 2004. 7(6): p. 649 -
58. 
34. Messina, M.J., et al., Soy intake and cancer risk: a review of the in vitro and in vivo data.  
Nutr Cancer, 1994. 21(2): p. 113 -31. 
35. Borzan, J., et al., Effects of soy diet on inflammation -induced primary and secondary 
hyperalgesia in rat.  Eur J Pain, 2010. 14(8): p. 792 -8. 
36. Messina, M.J., Emerging evidence on the ro le of soy in reducing prostate cancer risk.  
Nutr Rev, 2003. 61(4): p. 117 -31. 
37. Hsu, A., et al., Dietary soy and tea mitigate chronic inflammation and prostate cancer via 
NFkappaB pathway in the Noble rat model.  J Nutr Biochem, 2011. 22(5): p. 502 -10. 
38. Messina, M., C. Nagata, and A.H. Wu, Estimated Asian adult soy protein and isoflavone 
intakes.  Nutr Cancer, 2006. 55(1): p. 1 -12. 
39. Franke, A.A., et al., Liquid chromatographic -photodiode array mass spectrometric 
analysis of dietary phytoestrogens from  human urine and blood.  J Chromatogr B Analyt 
Technol Biomed Life Sci, 2002. 777(1-2): p. 45 -59. 
40. Busby, M.G., et al., Clinical characteristics and pharmacokinetics of purified soy 
isoflavones: single -dose administration to healthy men.  Am J Clin Nutr, 2002. 75(1): p. 
126-36. 
41.  Hill, A.J. and Blundell, J.E. Nutrients and behaviour: research strategies for the 
investigation of taste characteristics, food preferences, hunger sensations and eating 
patterns in man . J Psychiatr Res  1983. 17: p 203 -12. 
42. Xie et al. Glycation  of plasma proteins in type II diabetes lowers the non -covalent 
interaction affinities for dietary polyphenols. Integr Biol 2012. 4: p.502 -7 
43.  Lebon et al Additive effects of isoflavones and exercise training on inflammatory 
cytokines and body composition in overweight and obese postmenopausal women: a 
randomized controlled trial . Menopause 2012:21(8):p.869 -75 
44.  Hoshida et al  Different effects of isoflavones on vascular function in premenopausal and 
postmenopausal smokers and nonsmokers: NYMPH study. Heart Vessels 2011. 
26(6):p.590 -9 
45.  Ahn-Jarvis, J.H., et al.  Impact of food matrix on isoflavone metabolism and 
cardiovascular biomarkers in adults with hypercholesterolemia . Food Funct  2012. 3: 
p.1051 -8. 
 
 
Dietary Soy Isoflavones in Chronic Pancreatitis      
 
 
 
 
  
Dietary Soy Isoflavones in Chronic Pancreatitis      
Budget – uploaded  
 
D. Other Support  – uploaded  
E. IRB Approval Letter  – pending submission  
F.  Conflict of Interest  – uploaded  
G.  Curriculum Vitae  – uploaded  
H. Supporting Letters  - uploaded  
 
 
I.Appendix  
 
Figure 1: Study Flow Diagram  
 
a. Dose Escalation Phase [n=15 -25] 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
b. MTD  Verification Phase [n=10]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A. Start at 
dose level 1  
Treat cohort 1 wk  
(3 CP subjects)  
Number 
of DLTs  
No further 
escalation  
Recruit 3 more CP 
subjects  
Further 
DLTs?  
Stop  
B. Escalate dose  
Yes 
No 
<1 
2 or 3  
Start at MTD  
 Treat cohort 4 wks 
(10 CP subjects)  
Monitor 
Toxicites  
No further 
escalation  
Dietary Soy Isoflavones in Chronic Pancreatitis      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 1 :  Dose escalation will proceed within each cohort according to the following scheme.  
Dose -limiting to xicity (DLT) is defined below in Table 2.  
 
Number of Participants with DLT 
at a Given Dose Level  Escalation Decision Rule  
0 out of 3  Enter 3 participants at the next dose level.  
>2 Dose escalation will be stopped.  This dose level will be 
declared the maximally  administered dose (highest 
dose administered).  Three (3) additional participants 
will be entered at the next lowest dose level if only 3 
participants were treated previously at that dose.  
1 out of 3  Enter at least 3 more participants at this dose level.  
 If 0 of these 3 participants experience DLT, proceed 
to the next dose level.  
 If 1 or more of this group suffer DLT, then dose 
escalation is stopped, and this dose is declared the 
maximally administered dose.  Three (3) additional 
participants will be entered at the next lowest dose level 
if only 3 participants were treated previously at that 
dose.  
≤1 out of 6 at highest dose level 
below the maximally administered 
dose  This is generally the recommended phase 2 dose. At 
least 6 participants must be entered at the 
recommended phase 2 dose.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dietary Soy Isoflavones in Chronic Pancreatitis      
 
 
 
 
 
Table 2:  Definition of Toxicity Grades  
 
a. Dose Limiting Toxicity (DLT) – Appearance of side effects during treatment that are 
severe enough to prevent further increase in dosage or strength of treatment agent, or to 
prevent continuation of treatment at any dosage level.   
b. Grade – a numeric scale used to rate the severity of toxicity  associated with a treatment. 
Each side effect is separately rated from "0" to "4." "0" = side effect not present. "1"= present but 
minor. "2"=present,  moderate effect. "3"= present, with significant effect. "4" = potentially life 
threatening effect. G. "3" or "4" toxicity usually results in further treatment being delayed or 
stopped. If resumed, treatment may be at lower dosage or frequency.  
 
Table ___  
Nausea, Vomiting, 
Diarrhea, 
Abdominal pain, 
Bloating  Management/Next Dose for  
[Soy Bread]  Management/Next Dose for  
[Soy Bread]  
≤ Grade 1  No change in dose  No change in dose  
Grade 2  No change in dose  No change in dose  
Grade 3  Hold* until < Grade 2.  Resume at 
one dose level lower, if indicated.** Hold* until < Grade 2.  Resume at 
one dose level lower, if indicated.** 
Grade 4  Off protocol therapy  Off protocol therapy  
*Participants requiring a delay of > 1 week should go off protocol therapy.  
**Participants requiring > two dose reductions should go off protocol therapy.  
Recommended management:  Nausea / vomiting (antiemetics); diarrhea (loperamide); 
abdominal pain (acetaminophen, NSAID)  
 
For the purposes of this Phase I trial, side effects rated  >= 3, lasting > 1 week are considered 
dose limiting. Side effects will be managed with standard medications such as anti -diarrheals, 
antiemetics and non -narcotic analgesics.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dietary Soy Isoflavones in Chronic Pancreatitis      
Appendix  A 
Inclusion  criteria  
1. Diagnosis  of chronic  pancreatitis  by fulfilling any one of the  following  three  
clinical  scenarios  (i.e., a or b or c):  
a. Presence  of pancreatic  calcifications  - Pancreatic  parenchymal  or 
ductal  calcifications  (≥1) seen  on abdominal  imaging study  
b. Suggestive  for chronic  pancreatitis – fulfillment  of any of the following 
3 criteria  (i.e., i or ii or iii): 
i. EUS demonstrating lobular appearing pancreas  (≥3 
continuous  lobules) and  ≥3 minor  EUS criteria  
1. Minor EUS  criteria  (aka Rosemont  criteria) include:  lobular  
appearing pancreas  (1-2 lobules),  hyperechoic  foci without  
shadowing,  cysts,  hyperechoic  stranding,  irregular main  
pancreatic  duct contour,  dilated side branches,  main  
pancreatic  duct dilation,  or hyperechoic  main pancreatic  duct 
walls  
ii. EUS demonstrating ≥ 5 minor EUS criteria  
iii. Presence  of ≥ 3 abnormal  pancreatic  duct side branches  visualized  
on MRCP  or ERCP  (derived from  Cambridge  criteria for mild 
chronic  pancreatitis)  
c. Indeterminate EUS  findings  for chronic  pancreatitis  with evidence  
of exocrine  pancreatic  insufficiency  (EPI) (i.e., i + [ii or iii or iv or v]) 
i. Presence  of 3-4 minor  EUS criteria  (listed above)  
ii. Abnormal  fecal  fat collection  (>15g  fat per day) 
iii. Abnormal  endoscopic  pancreas  function  test (i.e., maximum 
duodenal  bicarbonate concentration  <80 meq/L)  
iv. Decreased serum  trypsin  (<20 ng/mL)  
v. Decreased  fecal elastase  level (<200  microgram/gram stool)  
2. Age ≥18 years  
 
Exclusion  criteria  
1. Inability  to provide  written  consent  
2. Inability  to comply  with the study  protocol  
3. Soy allergy  
4. Pancreatic  cancer  
5. History  of prior pancreatic  surgery  (this does  not include endoscopic  therapies)  
6. Comorbid diseases  characterized  by a chronic  inflammatory  state,  including,  but 
not limited  to rheumatologic  diseases,  chronic  kidney  disease,  extra -pancreatic  
malignancy  (these conditions  would  confound the measurement  of inflammatory  
mediators)  
7. Pregnancy  (based on verbal  history  alone;  the study  intervention  does  not have  
known  harmful  effects  to a mother  or fetus,  and therefore,  pre-study  pregnancy  
testing will not be  mandated).  