Comparison of Hearing Aid Fitting  Outcomes Between Self -fit and Professional 
Fit for MDHearing Smart Hearing Aids  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Initial date:  2/28/2020  
Final date: 7/13/2020  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Exhibit B  
MDHearing App  Clinical Research Protocol  
• Part One: Human Factors Testing  – To be completed prior to the clinical trials.  
• Subjects  
o 20 subjects with mild to moderate sensorineual hearing loss.  
o Subjects must have and be able to use a smartphone that is compatible with the 
MDHearing app.  
o Subjects will not be allowed to participate if they have any signs of middle or outer ear 
infection or abnormality.  
o All subjects will undergo a hearing evaluatio n to ensure they do not have any of the 
following conditions:  
▪ Visible congenital or traumatic deformity of the ear.  
▪ History of active drainage from the ear in the previous 90 days.  
▪ History of sudden or rapidly progressive hearing loss within the previous 9 0 
days.  
▪ Acute or chronic dizziness.  
▪ Unilateral hearing loss of sudden or recent onset within the previous 90 days.  
▪ Audiometric air -bone gap equal to or greater than 15 decibels at 500 Hz, 1,000 
Hz, and 2,000 Hz.  
▪ Visible evidence of significant cerumen accu mulation or a foreign body in the 
ear canal.  
▪ Pain or discomfort in the ear.  
o Subjects will be at least 18 years old. There are no other limits on subject age.  
• Protocol  
o Subjects will unbox the CORE hearing aid and perform usability tasks in simulated use 
environments.  
o Subjects will have access to the manuals and quick start guide for the CORE hearing aid 
and for the MDHearing app.  
o Tasks for usability will include the following:  
▪ Downloading the MDHearing app.  
▪ Registering for the MDHearing app.  
▪ Placing a battery in the CORE hearing aid.  
▪ Pairing the MDHearing app to the CORE hearing aid.  
▪ Using the app to take the personalization profile.  
▪ Using the app to adjust the volume, program, noise reduction, microphone 
direction, bass, treble, and mid pitched settin gs. 
▪ Turning off the CORE hearing aid.  
o Tasks for safety will include the following:  
▪ Identify how a user knows they are a candidate for a hearing aid. See 
Identification Information.  
▪ Sound awareness safety. Identification of sounds that should require  weari ng 
hearing protection ie mowing the lawn, attending a loud concert, shooting a 
gun, etc. Recognition that hearing aids do not provide hearing protection.  
▪ Program safety. Recognition that certain programs are not appropriate for 
certain situations. E.g. Pro gram 4 is a directional microphone program and thus 
is no t appropriate for driving a car  due to compromised awareness of sound 
behind you such as sirens.   
 
 
Part Two :  Clinical Testing Protocol:  Laboratory Evaluation of Validity of MDHearing Self -Fitting Method  
• Subjects:  
o 75 subjects with mild to moderate sensorineural hearing loss.  
o  Subjects will not be allowed to participate if they have any signs of middle or 
outer ear infection or abnormality.  
o All subjects will undergo a hearing evaluation to ensure th ey do not  have any of 
the following conditions:  
▪ Visible congenital or traumatic deformity of the ear.  
▪ History of active drainage from the ear in the previous 90 days.  
▪ History of sudden or rapidly progressive hearing loss within the previous 
90 days.  
▪ Acute or chronic dizziness.  
▪ Unilateral hearing loss of sudden or recent onset within the previous 90 
days.  
▪ Audiometric air -bone gap equal to or greater than 15 decibels at 500 Hz, 
1,000 Hz, and 2,000 Hz.  
▪ Visible evidence of significant cerumen accumulation or a foreign body 
in the ear canal.  
▪ Pain or discomfort in the ear.  
o At least one air conduction threshold must be above 25dB. All air conduction 
thresholds must be below 60db.  
o Subjects will be at least 18 years old. There are no other limits o n subject age.  
• Protocol and ANSI specs  
o Subjects take the personalization profile  on a n iPad  tablet .  
o Subjects then listen to the same recorded speech passage  at their Most 
Comfortable Listening level  3 times and adjust the aids for comfort (volume, 
bass, t reble, and mid)  while the passage is playing. Subjects do not have to make 
changes if they are content with the sound quality.    
o After each passage, Real Ear measurements will be taken. Gain results at 500, 
1000, 2000, and 4000Hz for a 60dB input will be r ecorded.   
o The differences between gain for each frequency will be evaluated per subject. 
See table below for example:  
Subject 
1  500Hz  1000Hz  2000Hz  4000Hz  Total gain 
deviation  
 Passage 1  15dB 18dB 20dB 23dB  
 Passage 2  17dB 19dB 22dB 22dB  
 Passage 3  14dB 18dB 19dB 24dB  
 Average 
deviations  2.5 1 2.5 1.5 1.9dB  
 
 
Part Three : Comparative Clinical  Testing Protocol: Clinical Validation of MDHearing Self -Fitting Method  
• Subjects  
o 75 subjects with mild to moderate sensorineual hearing loss.  
o Subjects must have and be able to use a smartphone that is compatible with the 
MDHearing app.  
o Subjects will not be allowed to participate if they have any signs of middle or outer ear 
infection o r abnormality.  
o All subjects will undergo a hearing evaluation to ensure they do not  have any of the 
following conditions:  
▪ Visible congenital or traumatic deformity of the ear.  
▪ History of active drainage from the ear in the previous 90 days.  
▪ History of sudden or rapidly progressive hearing loss within the previous 90 
days.  
▪ Acute or chronic dizziness.  
▪ Unilateral hearing loss of sudden or recent onset within the previous 90 days.  
▪ Audiometric air -bone gap equal to or greater than 15 decibels at 500 Hz, 1,00 0 
Hz, and 2,000 Hz.  
▪ Visible evidence of significant cerumen accumulation or a foreign body in the 
ear canal.  
▪ Pain or discomfort in the ear.  
o At least one air co nduction threshold must be greater than  25dB. All air con duction 
thresholds must be less than  60db.  
o Subjects will be at least 18 years old. There are no other limits on subject age.  
• First visit  
o A hearing test is performed on all subjects.  
o Subjects complete the  Abbreviated Profile of Hearing Aid Benefit (APHAB) and Speech, 
Spatial, and Qualities of He aring Scale (SSQ -12). 
o Subjects complete the Quick SIN. (Speech in Noise test)   
o All subjects  use the MDHearing  CORE with the tubing and ComfortTIP that is appropriate 
for their hearing loss. The tubing and ComfortTIP sel ection is audiologist fit to half the  
participants.  The other half of the participants chose their own tubing and ComfortTIP.  
The tubing options are thin tubing with open ComfortTIP or thin tubing with closed 
ComfortTIP.  
o The subjects are split into two groups.  
▪ The groups are controlled for de mographic such as age, gender, length of 
hearing loss, previous hearing aid use, length of hearing aid use,  comfort with 
technology  and level of  sensorineural hearing loss.  
o Half of the subjects take the  MDHearing  personalization profile and  are fit using NAL NL 
2 fitti ng software embedded in the MDHearing  app. (Self -fit group)   
o Half of the subjects are  fit using  hearing aid  fitting software  with the NAL NL 2 fitting 
method . (Audiologist fit group)  
o The subjects that are self -fit have access to changing the ir volume control, programs, 
bass, treble, and mid pitched settings, noise reduction, and microphone direction  using 
the MDHearing app . 
o The subjects that are audiologist fit have access to changing their volume control and 
programs  on the CORE hearing aid . The audiologists have access to changing the bass, 
treble, and mid pitched settings, noise reduction, and microphone direction using the 
fitting software.  
• Wearing period  
o Subjects wear  the hearing aids for one month to acclimate. Minimum of 8 hours per da y 
usage is required.  
o Subjects in the audiology fit group will have one audiology appointment approximately 
2 weeks after being fit. This will give them a chance to have questions answered and for 
fine tuning  adjustments to programming as needed.  
o Both groups have access to online rehabilitation programs such as Angelsound, if they 
wish to use it.  
 
• Second visit – One month later  
o Subjects  in the self -fit group  answer the  MDHearing  questionnaire.   
o Perform Quick SIN on subjects in both groups. Compare  results for statistically significant 
differences.  
o Ask subjects to complete the Abbreviated Profile of Hearing Aid Benefit (APHAB) and 
Speech, Spatial, and Qualities of Hearing Scale (SSQ -12). Compare results for statistically 
significant differences.  
o Perform Real Ear on all subjects using their preferred settings.    
o Compare overall gain settings  in relation to hearing loss  in both groups. Compare gain 
settings at 500, 1000, 2000, and 4000Hz  as a 4 frequency average  in both groups .  
▪ See Figure 7 in the Bos e DeNovo for information on this.  
 