Page 1 of 7 
PI: Judy Lee  
Study Number: 17 -01389  
Study Registry ID: [REMOVED]  
Version Date: January 1 7, 2018  
 
Prospective Randomized Trial comparing Narcotics vs NSAIDs for post-operative  analgesia in 
outpatient  Rhinoplasty  
Purpose of the Study and Background  
Hypothesis  
That narcotic pain medication is not required to treat post -operative pain in outpatient rhinoplasty.  
Purpose of the Study  
The purpose of this study is to compare the efficacy and safety of oral opiate pain medication  vs non-
steroidal ant i-inflammatory drugs ( NSAIDs ) in the treatment of postoperative rhinoplasty pain.  This study 
will also evaluate potential contributing factors affecting the efficacy of these  pain control method s.   
Background    
With the  rise of  opioid addiction within the U nited States and its adverse consequences, limiting or 
eliminating narcotic prescriptions  after outpatie nt surgery should be a priority for all surgeons.  In 2012 , 
4.2 billion prescriptions were written in the United States, 289 million (6.8%) for opioids1, and of which  
hydrocodone was the number one most prescribed medication 2. It is believed there are 3.8 million 
misusers of pain relievers3, resulting in a prescription opioid abuse problem costing an estimated 55.7 
billion dollars4.  All physicians, including otolaryngologist s, must  find effective ways to combat this  
epidemic , while still providing appropriate  postoperative care. As ambulatory procedures make up the 
majority  of otolaryngologic surgeries performed in the United States, limiting or eliminating narcotic 
prescriptions for these cases should be a primary goal among st otolaryngologist s.  
Rhinoplasty  and septorhinoplasty  are common procedure s performed by Otolaryngologist and facial 
plastic surgeons with generally  low complication rates.  There is little data describing a patient’s post-
operative  pain course. The majority of these procedures are performed at outpatient surgical centers  or in 
an ambulatory hospital setting  with immediate discharge home  after recovery . Otolaryngol ogist s routinely 
prescribe opioids for these procedures without an understanding of their patients ’ requirement s for pain 
medications.  This leads to overprescribing and eventual left-over narcotics.  A recent study found 67% of 
patients had surplus narcotics from the initial prescription and 91% of those patients kept that medication 
at home following urological surgery5. Additionally, another study found that patients after upper 
extremity surgical procedures relating to soft tissue only requir ed a mean 5.1 opioid pills after surgery and 
in general patients were being prescribed 3 times greater the amount of opioid medications th an needed 4. 
Currently at New York University  Langone Hospital, it  is standard practice to prescribe >12 narcotic pills 
to patients undergoing most procedures ; however , there  are no guidelines or  criteria to assist in managing 
our patient s’ post-operative pain medication s.  
 
Study Design   
The study is a prospective, randomized, clinical trial enrolling patient s undergoing rhinoplasty or 
septorhinoplasty with  Dr. Judy Lee, Dr. Jeffrey  Markey or Dr. Matthew White in the Department of 
Page 2 of 7 
PI: Judy Lee  
Study Number: 17 -01389  
Study Registry ID: [REMOVED]  
Version Date: January 1 7, 2018  
 
Otolaryngology -Head and Neck Surgery at New York Univer sity. The length of  the study participation 
will be approximately 1 week for each patient.   
The randomization process will involve using Microsoft Excel rand() function, which generates and 
evenly distributed random decimal x between 0 and 1.  If 0 < x < 0.5 , the patient wi ll be randomized to 
the NSAID  group.  If 0.5 <= x < 1 , the patient will be randomized to the Norco  group.  This will be 
performed after a patient agrees and consents to participation in this study.  
Patients  will qualify for surgery if they require a septo rhinoplasty for nasal airway obstruction or choose 
to undergo a rhinoplasty for cosmetic purposes. All patients who are recommended a rhinoplasty will be 
offered participation in this randomized clinical trial.  After their surgery, all patients will be disc harged 
home.  Patients will be randomized into the opioid or NSAID arm of the tria l. The control arm will be 
prescribed 20 tablets of Hydrocodone 5mg -Acetaminophen 325mg (Norco) and the test arm  prescribed 
Ibuprofen 400mg for post-operative pain. Patients will be contacted via telephone on post -operative day  0 
and post -operative day 1  and then seen in  the office on post-operative  day 7 to evaluate the patients . Each 
patient will be asked regarding their level of comfort or discomfort, and how effective they feel their pain 
regimen t is. Outcome measure will be both objective and subjective.  A pain scale  from 0 -10 will be 
utilized to assess a patient’s pain objectively. Additionally, each patient will be asked if they felt their 
pain was subjectively controlled  (yes/no) .  In each arm, a survey will be used to assess  the frequency of 
usage, the dose, timin g and amount of the specific analgesic  consumed . Patients within the NSAID arm of 
the trial will have the ability to speak with their surgeon to escalate their level of analgesia if their pain is 
unable to be controlled on any post-operative  day. This will  be recorded in the result s. Additional 
outcome measures will be recorded such as  open vs closed rhinoplasty, use of osteotomies, concurrent 
septoplasty or turbinate reduction. Adverse effects , complications and demographics will also be 
examined.  
 
Characteristics of the Research Population  
Number of subjects ( 
We used similar previous studies to predict baseline pain scores as well as expected improvements after 
surgery6,7. With 30 subjects for each group, we can detect the difference between the intervention group 
with mean 1.6 and the control group with mean 2.6 (SD=1.3) by assumi ng a 80% power and 5% type -I 
error under a two -sided Two -Sample T -Test 
 
Numeric Results for Two -Sample T -Test 
Null Hypothesis: Mean1=Mean2. Alternative Hypothesis: Mean1<>Mean2  
The standard deviations were assumed to be unknown and equal.  
  
                                        Allocation  
Power            N1        N2          Ratio          Alpha            Beta         Mean1         Mean2            S1              S2 
0.80000           25        25          1.000       0.05000       0.20000              2.6             1.5             1.3             1.3 
0.80000           30        30          1.000       0.05000       0.20000              2.6             1.5             1.3             1.3 
0.80000           35        35          1.000       0.05000       0.20000              2.6             1.7             1.3             1.3 
 
 
Page 3 of 7 
PI: Judy Lee  
Study Number: 17 -01389  
Study Registry ID: [REMOVED]  
Version Date: January 1 7, 2018  
 
 
Gender of subjects  
The gender of subjects should be roughly equal within each treatment arm  
Age of Subjects  
Patients will be between the ages of 18 -70. 
Racial and Ethnic Origi n 
Patients should be a representative group across all racial and ethnic origins.  There are no exclusion 
criteria based on race or ethnicity.  
Inclusion Criteria  
Patients 18 -70 years old undergoing  septo rhinoplasty or rhinoplasty for either obstructive or ae sthetic 
reasons.  All approaches to rhinoplasty and surgical techniques utilized will be included.  This will include 
patients that undergo additional procedures during the rhinoplasty including osteotomies, turbinate 
reduction, septoplasty, nasal valve rep air and ear cartilage graft. These procedures are commonly 
performed as part of the rhinoplasty.  
Exclusion Criteria  
Patients who undergo a rhinoplasty requiring a rib cartilage graft for the procedure as this is known to 
cause significant pleuritic chest pain. Additionally,  patients receiving functional endoscopic sinus surgery 
concurrently with the rhinoplasty will be excluded. Patients with known history of gastrointestinal bleeds, 
peptic ulcer disease or who have other comorbidities that prevent them fr om taking NSAIDs. Patients 
with a history of radiation, active head and neck malignancy or other pain disorders such as various 
rheumatologic disease s will be excluded to decrease confounding factors in the control of pain. Anyone 
who is allergic to either of the medications.  
Vulnerable Subjects  
There will be no vulnerable subjects enrolled in this study  
Methods and Procedures  
Methods and Procedures  
The rhino plasties and surgical techniques involved will be performed at the surgeons’ discretion , utilizing 
either an open or closed approach. Incis ion types, cartilage grafts, techniques and correction methods will 
be determined by the surgeon for each individual patient and no patient will be excluded based on the  
techniques used . Nasal splints may be used in the patient’s nose based on the procedur es performed.  All 
patients post operatively will have a n aquaplast nasal splint placed over the bridge of their nose  in the 
standard fashion.  Patients will then be given and instructed on pain medication use depending on the 
treatment arm in which they w ere placed. The narcotic group will be given a prescription for twenty 
Norco tablets (5mg hydrocodone - 325mg acetaminophen) and be told to take for pain every 4-6 hours as 
needed. This is consistent with the standard of care within the department and follows the manufacture r 
labeling for pain management  The NSAID treatment arm will be instructed to take 400mg Ibuprofen  
Page 4 of 7 
PI: Judy Lee  
Study Number: 17 -01389  
Study Registry ID: [REMOVED]  
Version Date: January 1 7, 2018  
 
every 4 -6 hours  for pain as needed  consistent with the manufacture r labeling and the American Pain 
society use . All patients will be co ntacted on POD0 and POD1 to determine what their pain score is on a 
numerical scale and whether or not they believe their pain control has been effective. Patients within the 
NSAID treatment arm, at any point post operatively, will be able to request a pre scription for narcotics if 
they feel that their pain is not well controlled. On POD7, the patients will be given a survey to document 
the total number of doses of pain medication taken (1 Norco tab vs 400mg Ibuprofen), number of days 
requiring pain medicat ion, need to call for a prescription and side effects noted . The study for each patient 
will be concluded at that time point.  
Data Analysis and Data Monitoring  
Data analysis will be performed with the help of Binhuan Wang, a biostatician at NYU affiliated  with the 
Department of Otolaryngology. He will not have any access to PHI, and will only be given de -identified 
patient data.  The primary outcome to be compared will be the overall pain control based on the pain scale 
using a two-sample  proportion test. We will also compare complication rates, necessity of a patient phone 
call, and subjective pain control.  
Data Storage and Confidentiality  
Data storage will be kept in a REDCAP database file.  This ensures patient confidentiality.  Any 
presentations or papers will not include any protected health information (PHI).  Patient information 
entered into the database will include demographic information as well type of surgery performed, any 
complications, and survey results.  Only Dr. Lee, Dr.  Garber, Dr. White and Dr. Markey will be granted 
access to entering information into this database file.  These individuals will have access to the linking 
key. 
 
Risk/Benefit Assessment  
Subject Safety  
Patients will be monitored for safety by each specific  surgeon performing their case. They will see their 
patients in the postoperative period based on current standard of care, and will address any complications 
that their patients may have. Complications will be treated with the current standard of care.  
Any patient within the treatment arm requiring higher levels of pain control will be allowed to have a 
prescription called by their primary surgeon , as needed . These patient s’ data will be included and used as 
a secondary outcome measure to compare.  
Risks  
NSAIDs are known to cause an increased risk of gastrointestinal adverse events  including bleeding, 
ulceration and perforation of the stomach or intestines. Additionally,  other adverse reactions include 
heartburn, nausea, dyspepsia, vomiting.  
Norco, as wit h all opioid medications have a risk associated with addiction, abuse and misuse . 
Additionally,  they can cause respiratory depression. The acetaminophen within Norco has been associated 
with liver failure.   
Page 5 of 7 
PI: Judy Lee  
Study Number: 17 -01389  
Study Registry ID: [REMOVED]  
Version Date: January 1 7, 2018  
 
The risk of randomization exists in any randomiz ed study.  It is possible that one treatment is superior, or 
that one treatment poses additional risk compared to the other.  These outcomes will be monitored at 
regular intervals throughout the study, as described in the data safety monitoring plan.  
Prote ction against risks  
Patient s that enroll in this study are not subject to any additional risks than  they would encounter if they 
underwent rhinoplasty without involvement in the study. For patients in the treatment group, they will 
have the option  to incre ase their pain medication regiment , as needed. The primary surgeon will 
electronically prescribe pain medication for the patient if they feel at any point during their study that 
their pain is not managed appropriately. This will be explained to the patien ts prior to enrolling within the 
study. Additionally,  all patients will be informed of the side effects and risk factors associated with 
narcotic and NSAID use prior to the surgery. Patients will be monitored on POD 0, POD1  and POD7, and 
will have the ability to contact their physicians if they notice any side effects or problems related to the 
pain medications that are listed above.  
Potential Benefits to the subjects  
The patients benefit by potentially not requiring the us e of narcotics and the known side effects related to 
narcotics. Decreasing narcotic use can lead to less addiction and abuse within society.  
Data Safety monitoring plan  
Data and adverse events will be monitored by the principal investigator , who has p erformed hundreds of 
rhinoplasty procedures . Adverse events will include post -operative bleeding, infection, significant 
gastrointestinal illness related to NSAIDs such as bleeding, ulceration or perforation or events of 
respiratory depression or liver failure  related to Norco use. Any adverse events will be recorded in the 
patient ’s chart and within the REDCAP database. Safety information will be collected at the postoperative 
clinic visits  (POD0, POD1, and POD7) . Reportable Adverse events will be reported wit hin 48 hours of 
their occurrence.  
Interim analysis of the data will be conducted every 2 months  to assess safety and/or identify whether a 
treatment arm demonstrates superiority in efficacy . The treatment outcomes , as well as complications , 
will be routine ly analyzed at these intervals. If, after a minimum of 15 subjects in each arm, one treatment 
arm is statistically significant in pain control on the objective pain scale of 1 -10 (based on a t -test 
comparing two means), the study will be closed early. Addi tionally, if it is determined that the risk of a 
major complication is significantly higher in one arm compared to the other (based on a Fisher’s exact 
test), the study will be closed early. . A major complication would be respiratory depression requiring 
hospitalization, significant bleeding event, or a reaction related to the pain medications requiring 
hospitalization. The reason for the minimum number of subjects as stated above is to avoid statistical 
error due to sample size.  
These interim analyses of data safety monitoring will be communicated to the IRB via email.  
Page 6 of 7 
PI: Judy Lee  
Study Number: 17 -01389  
Study Registry ID: [REMOVED]  
Version Date: January 1 7, 2018  
 
Subject Identification, Recruitment and 
Consent/Assent  
 
Method of Subject Identification and Recruitment  
Patients presenting to the office s of Dr. Judy Lee, Dr. Jeffrey  Markey or Dr. Matthew White requiring a 
septorhinoplasty or rhinoplasty for nasal obstruction or cosmetic deformity , with or without septal 
deviation. Each clinician will be part of the recruitment process and will be the ones  to explain the study 
to each patient.  
Process of Consent  
Each clinician will explain the study and both parts of the trial to each patient. The clinicians will explain 
the consent form to each patient. This will be done  privately during  their office visi t. The patients will be 
scheduled for surgery after this office visit. If the patient is agreeable to the study, they will sign the 
consent form for the trial and surgery  at a pre-operative visit  
Subject Capacity  
This study involves only patients who are  capable of making their own medical decisions and are able to 
sign their own consent forms.  
Subject/Representative Comprehension  
Patients will only be eligible for study participation if they are able to demonstrate comprehension of the 
risks, benefits, a nd alternatives of surgery , as well as the risks, benefits, and alternatives of being involved 
in this study.  
Debriefing Procedures  
After the completion of the study, patients will be informed of the outcomes from the trial.  
Consent Forms  
Each patient will be required to understand and sign a consent form for enrollment in this study.  In 
addition, they will sign another consent form for surgery.  
Documentation of Consent  
All study consent forms will be kept on file in Dr. Judy Lee’s office  
Costs to the Subject  
There are no additional costs to the subject.  The subject and/or their health insurance may be billed for 
the costs of medical  care during this study if these expenses would have happened even if they were not 
in the study, or if their insurance agrees in advance to pay.  These costs will be billed to their insurance 
company.  If the subject’s insurance does not cover these costs  or they do not have insurance, these costs 
will be the subject’s responsibility.  
Payment for Participation  
Patients will not be paid or incentivized for participation in this study.  
References  
1.  Levy B, Paul ozzi L, Mack KA, Jones CM. Trends in Opioid Analgesic -Prescribing Rates by 
Page 7 of 7 
PI: Judy Lee  
Study Number: 17 -01389  
Study Registry ID: [REMOVED]  
Version Date: January 1 7, 2018  
 
Specialty, U.S., 2007 -2012. Am J Prev Med . 2015;49(3):409 -413. 
doi:10.1016/j.amepre.2015.02.020.  
2.  Manchikanti L, Helm S, Fellows B, et al. Opioid epidemic in the United States. Pain Physician . 
2012;15(3 Suppl):ES9 -38. doi:10.1016/j.emc.2015.11.002.  
3.  2. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. Results from the 2015 National 
Survey o n Drug Use and Health: Summary of National Findings . Vol H -41.; 2015. 
https://www.samhsa.gov/data/sites/default/files/NSDUH -FFR1 -2015/NSDUH -FFR1 -
2015/NSDUH -FFR1 -2015.pdf.  
4.  Birnbaum HG, White AG, Schiller M, Waldman T, Cleveland JM, Roland CL. Societal C osts of 
Prescription Opioid Abuse, Dependence, and Misuse in the United States. Pain Med . 
2011;12(4):657 -667. doi:10.1111/j.1526 -4637.2011.01075.x.  
5.  Bates C, Laciak R, Southwick A, Bishoff J. Overprescription of postoperative narcotics: A look at 
postoperative pain medication delivery, consumption and disposal in urological practice. J Urol . 
2011;185(2):551 -555. doi:10.1016/j.juro.2010.09.088.  
6.  Chur ch CA, Stewart IV C, O -Lee TJ, Wallace D. Rofecoxib versus hydrocodone/acetaminophen 
for postoperative analgesia in functional endoscopic sinus surgery. Laryngoscope . 
2006;116(4):602 -606. doi:10.1097/01.MLG.0000208341.30628.16.  
7.  Fathi M, Zare MA, Bahman i HR, Zehtabchi S. Comparison of oral oxycodone and naproxen in 
soft tissue injury pain control: a double -blind randomized clinical trial. Am J Emerg Med . 
2015;33(9):1205 -1208. doi:10.1016/j.ajem.2015.05.021.  
 
 