Official  Title:  Delivering  Patient -Centered  Adolescent  Preventative  Care  with Training  
and Technology  
NCT:  02764190  
Unique Protocol ID: IHS-1402-10592 
Date:  April 28, 2016  
 
  Page  1 1. Background  and Rationale   
Adolescents  have  some  of the highest  rates  of risk behaviors  of all age groups  and health  
behaviors  developed  in adolescence  can persist  into adulthood.   Health  risk behaviors,  such  as 
alcohol  and other  drug use, smoking,  unsafe  sexual  activity,  and poor nutrition  and physical  
inactivity  are among  the most  common  causes  of adolescent  illness  and premature  death.   
These  behaviors  carry  significant  risks for subsequent  disease,  disability,  and healthcare  
burden.   Despite  these  risks,  health  risk screening  in primary  care is infrequently  performed  and 
results are rarely  followed  by targeted  intervention.  
Studies  have  shown  that electronic  health  risk screening  is feasible  and efficient  in clinical  
practice,  increases  adolescents’  comfort  with disclosure  of behavior  and encourages  utilization  
of preventive  health  services.   Based  on this evidence,  electronic  multi -risk behavior  screening  
tools  are being  developed  for adolescent  care settings.   However,  to reduce  risk behaviors,  
screening  needs  to be linked  to interventions.   In response  to the need  for scree ning-linked  
interventions,  our study  team  has developed  a web-based,  electronic  screening  and 
Personalized  Motivational  Feedback  tool which  we refer to as the “Check  Yourself”  app.  Based  
on motivational  interviewing,  a technique  to mobilize  personal  chang e, Check  Yourself  is 
designed  to promote  healthy  choices  for the multiple  behaviors  relevant  to adolescents.   
Building  on electronic  health  interventions,  primary  care providers  (PCPs)  can play an essential  
role in helping  adolescents  to make  healthy  behav ior choices.   
Adolescents  list PCPs  among  the first people  with whom  they would  consider  discussing  risk 
behaviors,  and report  greater  satisfaction  with care when  PCPs  discuss  these  sensitive  topics  
with them.   Thus,  primary  care visits  present  a key oppor tunity  for improving  the health  of 
adolescents.  However,  to take advantage  of this opportunity,  health  systems  strategies  are 
needed  that can practically  be implemented  in the time-pressured  environment  of primary  care.   
Emerging  evidence  suggests  that the consistency  of preventive  counseling  can be increased  
through  provider  training  and the provision  of screening  tools;  yet, we know  very little about  the 
quality  of such  counseling,  and if it impacts  outcomes  that are important  to adolescent  patients  
thems elves.  
In order  to address  these  gaps,  this proposal  aims  to test an interactive  adolescent -centered  
PCP training  (I-ACT)  to increase  PCPs’  ability  to engage  and empower  adolescents  to make  
healthy  behavioral  choices  and to stimulate  patient -provider  discu ssions  around  health  behavior  
choices.  We will examine  the impact  of our training  in the presence  of Check  Yourself,  which  
systematizes  screening,  delivers  motivational  feedback  directly  to adolescents,  and generates  a 
targeted  report  to PCPs  summarizing  youth risk behaviors  and recommendations  for next steps  
in care.   
 
1.1. Purpose   
The purpose  of this study  is to evaluate  the perceived  impact  and effectiveness  of our system  of 
interventions  (I-ACT with Check  Yourself)  among  a sample  of adolescents  aged  13-18 drawn  
 
  Page  2 from the targeted  primary  care clinics  using  a group  who receives  usua l care as a comparison.   
This study  has two aims:  
Aim 1. To evaluate  I-ACT with Check  Yourself  on intermediary  targets:  improving  
adolescent  motivation  for health,  increased  provision  of appropriate  preventive  counseling,  
and follow -up care.  We will examin e the impact  of I-ACT with Check  Yourself  on adolescent  
self-report  of motivation  for health  at baseline  and 3, 6 and 12 months  following  the primary  
care visit. We will also examine  the impact  of I-ACT with Check  Yourself  on the adolescent  
self-report  of receipt  of PCP-delivered  risk reduction  counseling  at one day following  the 
primary  care visit and follow -up care at 3, 6 and 12 months  following  the primary  care visit.  
Aim 2. To evaluate  the effects  of I-ACT with Check  Yourself  on adolescent  satisfactio n with 
the provider  visit, perception  of patient -centeredness  of care, and health  risk behaviors.  We 
will explore  the impact  of I-ACT with Check  Yourself  on health  care satisfaction  among  
adolescents  and caregivers  at one day following  the primary  care visit.  We will also explore  
the impact  of I-ACT with Check  Yourself  on adolescent  self-report  of their perception  of 
patient -centeredness  of care at one day following  the primary  care visit.   We will examine  
the effect  of I-ACT with Check  Yourself  on produc ing significantly  lower  rates  of alcohol  
use, marijuana  use, unprotected  sexual  activity,  and depression  compared  to a usual  care 
group  at baseline  and 3, 6, and 12 months  after the primary  care visit. We will also examine  
the effect  of I-ACT with Check  Yourself  on producing  significantly  higher  levels  of physical  
activity,  fruit and vegetable  consumption,  and seatbelt  and helmet  use when  compared  to a 
control  group  at baseline  and 3, 6 and 12 months  after the primary  care visit. 
2. Criteria  for Subject  Select ion 
2.1. Sample  Size 
We plan to enroll  approximately  300 adolescent  (age 13-18) and parent  dyads  who have  an 
appointment  with a participating  provider  affiliated  with one of six participating  practices  in the 
Puget  Sound  Pediatric  Research  Network  (PSPRN).   We also plan to enroll  approximately  30 
PSPRN  providers  (about  5 providers  per clinic).    
2. Gender  of Subjects  
This study  does  not have  any gender -based  restrictions.   However,  given  that women  are more  
frequently  primary  caregivers  and PCPs,  we estimate  the following  gender  distribution  in our 
study  population:  
Adolescents:  150 Females  and 150 Males  
Caregivers:  240 Females  and 60 Males  
PCPs:  18 Females  and 12 Males  
 
 
3. Age of Subjects   
 
 
  Page  3 Participants  will include  adult  caregivers  and PCPs  (over  the age of 18 years)  and adolescents  
(age 13-18).  As health  risk behaviors  typically  begin  in adolescence  and persist  into adulthood,  
we are targeting  adolescents  rather  than children  less than 13 years  of age.   
 
4. Racial  and Ethnic  Distribution  
The proposed  study  population  will include  a wide cross  section  of adolescent  patients  and their 
caregivers,  including  many  families  of ethnoracial  minority  status.  We will monitor  diversity  in 
our sample  throughout  the course  of recruitment  and adapt  recruitment  efforts  as needed  to 
assure  a representative  sample.   The Central  Puget  Sound  geographic  area,  where  our study  
population  is situated,  consists  of the following  approximate  ethnic  and racial  breakdown :   
73% White   
5% African  American  
12% Asian,  Hawaiian  or Other  Pacific  Islander   
1% American  Indian  or Alaska  Native   
9% some  other  race (alone)  or two or more  races  
 
In addition,  9% of individuals  in this geographic  area are of Hispanic  or Latino  ethnic  
background.    
5. Inclusion  Criteria  
Eligible  caregivers  will have  a child 13 to 18 years  old who has an appointment  with a 
participating  provider  at a PSPRN  clinic  and will be able to understand  English.  
Eligible  adolescents  will be 13 to 18 years  old, have  an appointment  with a participating  provider  
at a PSPRN  clinic  and will be able to understand  English.    
Eligible  PCPs  will include  providers  (i.e.,  pediatricians,  famil y practitioners,  physician  assistants  
and nurse  practitioners)  affiliated  with a PSPRN  clinic  who are following  a panel  of adolescent  
patients  and will be able to understand  English.   
6. Exclusion  Criteria  
Caregivers  will be excluded  from the study  if they do not speak  English;  or if their child is not 
eligible  or declines to participate  in the study . 
Adolescents  will be excluded  from the study  if they do not meet  age requirements,  do not have  
an appointment  with a participating  provider  at a PSPRN  clinic,  lack the means  to complete  
follow -up interviews  (i.e., have  neither  telephone  nor internet  access),  have  a sibling  who has 
been/is  being  enrolled  in the study  or have  previously  participated  in our previous  trial 
comparing  Check  Yourself  to usual  care,  and/or  are not able to understand  English.  Our 
experience  in the Seattle  region  is that due to excellent  English  Language  Learning  school  
supports,  inability  to read or understand  English  is a barrier  for <0.5%  of adolescents.   Thus,  we 
do not anticipate  that language  restrictions  will significantly  limit the demographic  distribution  of 
our participants.    
 
  Page  4 PCPs  will be excluded  from the study  if they do not speak  English,  are not following  a panel  of 
adolescent  patients,  and are not affiliated  with a participating  PSPRN  clinic.   
7. Vulnerable  Subjects  
This study’s  focus  is on adolescent  health  care,  and adolescents  are study  participants.  We plan 
to enroll  300 adolescent  subjects  aged  13-18. Most  will be minors.  Study  activities  for minor  
adolescents  will be no different  from study  activities  for 18-year-old adolescents.  The risk/benefit  
ratio is the same  for all adolesc ent participants  regardless  of age.  Research  staff will obtain  oral 
consent  from 18-year-old participants  directly,  without  contacting  a caregiver.   For younger  
adolescents,  research  staff will first obtain  oral parental  consent  before  obtaining  oral asse nt. 
3. Methods  and Procedures  
3.1. Study  Design  
This study  will evaluate  the effect  of I-ACT with Check  Yourself  on adolescent -perceived  quality  
of care (i.e., satisfaction  and perception  of PCP communication),  motivation  for health,  and 
health  risk behaviors  using a stepped  wedge  study  design.   The study  will take place  in 6 
participating  PSPRN  affiliated  clinics,  where  the system  of interventions  (I-ACT with Check  
Yourself)  will be rolled -out sequentially  to the clinics,  chosen  in random  order,  over spaced  time 
intervals  (see Figure  1).  We refer to pre-implementation  of I-ACT with Check  Yourself,  as the 
control  period  and post-implementation  as the intervention  (i.e., case)  period.   
Figure  1: Stepped  Wedge  Study  Design  and Timeline  
 
 
We anticipate  that approxima tely 30% of youth  approached  will participate  in the study.   Thus,  
we will invite  approximately  1000  adolescent/caregiver  dyads  to participate  in the study,  in order  
to yield 300 adolescent/caregiver  dyad  participants  in our total sample.   Upon  enrollment,  
caregiver  participants  will be asked  to complete  a brief (10-minute)  web-based  questionnaire  
about  their education/occupation,  their adolescent’s  health  history,  and an open -ended  question  
about  what  they would  like to get from PCPs  for themselves  and their adolescent.   Adolescents  
who enroll  in the study  will receive  either  electronic  health  screening  alone  (i.e., control  group)  if 

 
  Page  5 their clinic  appointment  occurs  in the pre-I-ACT implementation  period  or Check  Yourself  (i.e., 
intervention  group)  if their clinic  appointment  occurs  in the post-implementation  period.    
 
At baseline  (T1),  adolescents  will be asked  to complete  a web-based  screening  survey  that 
includes  questions  about  guideline -recommended  health  risk behavior  screening  areas,  
including  substan ce use, nutrition,  physical  activity,  sexual  behavior,  depressive  symptoms,  and 
safety.   The screener  questions  themselves  are current  standard  of care.   Adolescents  will also 
be asked  to report  their age, gender,  race/ethnicity,  interest  in discussing  health risks with the 
PCP,  and self-efficacy.    
 
Adolescents  in the control  group  will complete  the web-based  screening  survey  for research  
purposes,  but neither  they nor their PCP will receive  feedback  about  their health  behaviors.   
PCPs  will screen  and coun sel the patient  as they would  normally  do under  usual  care 
conditions,  consistent  with the current  standard  of care.  
 
During  the intervention  period,  participating  PCPs  will receive  adolescent -centered  
communication  training,  based  on the tenets  of motivational  interviewing,  to reinforce  healthy  
behavior  choices  and to engage  youth  and parents  to reduce  risk behaviors  as appropriate .  
PCPs  will also receive  three  feedback  reports  (baseline,  2 months  and 4 months)  on 
adolescent -reported  receipt  of counseling  on each  of the target  behaviors  and adolescent -
reported  visit satisfaction  and follow -up care.   PCPs  will not be asked  to complete  any study  
questionnaires;  all of the outcome  data will be gathered  directly  from adolescents  and 
caregivers.   Outcome  data for the three  feedback  reports  will be given  to providers  in aggregate  
form and will be void of individual  identifiers.     
 
Adolescents  in the intervention  group  will receive  full personalized  motivational  feedback  
following  completion  of the screeni ng survey,  both with web-based  delivery.   Their  PCPs  will 
receive  a summary  report  which  will include  specific  information  on the adolescent’s  responses  
that will allow  them  to reinforce  healthy  behavior  choices  and implement  further  brief,  in-person  
interventions  for moderate  to high risk adolescents.   The personalized  feedback  to the 
participant  and provider  is consistent  with current  standard  of care.   However,  the electronic  
method  of delivery  is unique  to this project.    
 
In order  to administer  follow -up surveys,  we will ask adolescents  to provide  an email  address,  
cell phone  number,  or phone  number.   One day (T2) following  their PCP appointment,  
adolescent  participants  will be asked  via email,  text message  or phone  to complete  a survey  
about  their motivation  for health,  perception  of PCP communication,  and experiences.   Both 
adolescents  and their caregivers  will be asked  about  their satisfaction  with treatment  during  the 
appointment  with their PCP.   In addition,  caregivers  will be asked  open -ended  quest ions to 
assess  the provider’s  delivery  of caregiver  education  regarding  strategies  to reduce  health  risks 
for their child during  the visit.   
 
Three  (T3),  six (T4) and twelve  (T5) months  following  their PCP appointment,  adolescent  
participants  will be asked  via email,  text message  or phone  to complete  all assessments  
 
  Page  6 administered  at T1 and T2 except  the questionnaires  related  to delivery  of preve ntive  
counseling,  demographics,  interest  in discussing  health  risks with PCP,  and self-efficacy.   
Additionally,  adolescents  will be asked  about  follow -up care they may have  received.   At T2 and 
T3, adolescent  participants  will be asked  about  their general  satisfaction  with their provider  and 
will be asked  3-4 follow -up questions  to ascertain  satisfaction  with the Check  Yourself  app and 
study.   These  surveys  are not standard  of care,  because  they are not collected  as part of an 
appointment;  however,  the probability  and magnitude  of discomfort  associated  with the 
completion  of these  surveys  is no greater  than ordinarily  encountered  in daily life or during  the 
performance  of routine  psychological  examinations/tests  or medical  care.   
 
3.2. Measures  by Construct  and Time point  
Tables  1 and 2 describe  the study  measures  by construct.  
 
Table  1: Measures  used  in the study,  organized  by construct  and method.    
Measures  and Constructs  Time  point  
Moderators   
Gender,  age, race,  household  composition,  school,  truancy,  support,  goals,  
interest  in discuss ing health  risks with provider   T1(A)  
Number  of visits  with provider   T2(A)  
Health  Self-Efficacy   T1(A),T2  (A), T3(A),  T4(A),  
T5(A)  
Caregiver  Concerns   
Guidelines  for Adolescent  Preventative  Services  Caregiver  Questionnaire:  
adolescent  health  risk behavior  concerns.    T1(C)   
Perception  of provider  engagement  with the caregiver   T2 (C) 
Intermediary  Targets  
Health  Motivation  (Readiness  to Change  Rulers):   Self-report  used  to assess  
adolescent  motivation  for change  among  specific  health  behaviors.  T1(A),T2  (A), T3(A),  T4(A),  
T5(A)  
Adolescent  Report  of the Visit:  adolescent -report  of the PCPs’  delivery  of risk 
behavior  screening  and counseling  based  on risk level.    T2 (A) 
Interval  Receipt  of Care:  adolescent  self-report  of extent  of follow  up care.  T3 (A), T4(A),  T5(A)  
Main  Outcomes:  Satisfaction  & Perception  of PCP Communication  
 
  Page  7 Satisfaction  Questionnaire:  self-report  of satisfaction  with care based  on 
items  adapted  from the Consumer  Assessment  of Healthcare  Providers  
and Systems  (CAHPS)  measure .  T2(A/C)   
Adolescent  Perception  of Patient -Centeredness : adolescent  self-report  of 
how adolescents  feel about  visits  with their primary  caregiver.  T2(A)  
Main  Outcomes:  Health  Risk  Dimensions*  
Alcohol  Consumption  and Marijuana  Use: self-report  based  on items  about  
typical  quantity  and frequency  of drinking,  smoking/using  tobacco,  and 
marijuana  use (each  calculated  separately)  over the past 30 days.  T1(A),  T3(A),  T4(A),  T5(A)  
Fruit and Vegetable  Screener:  self-report  of fruit and vegetable  consumption.   T1(A),  T3(A),  T4(A),  T5(A)  
Physical  Activity  Screener:  self-report  of physical  activity.   T1(A),  T3 (A), T4(A),T5(A)  
Sexual  Risk:  self-report  of sexual  activity,  birth control,  and condom  use.   T1(A),  T3(A),  T4(A),  T5(A)  
Patient  Health  Questionnaire -9 (PHQ -9): self-report  of DSM -V symptoms  for 
depression.  T1(A),  T3(A),  T4(A),  T5(A)  
Safety:  self-report  to assess  behaviors  that contribute  to unintentional  
injuries  (e.g.,  seat belt use, helmet  use).  T1(A),  T3(A),  T4(A),  T5(A)  
Key: T1 = Timepoint  1 (Baseline)     T4 = Timepoint  4 (6 month)      
 T2 = Timepoint  2 (1-day)         T5 = Timepoint  5 (1 year)           
 T3 = Timepoint  3 (3-month)  
 A = Adolescent  survey  
 C = Caregiver  survey   *See  Table  2 for Individual  Health  Risk Outcomes  and Summary  Risk Variable  
 
Table  2: Summary  Risk Variable  and Individual  Health  Risk Outcomes  
TOPIC  AREA  Original  
variable  Summary  Health  Risk 
Variable  Dichotomized  Individualized  Health  
Risk Variable  (Risk  vs. no risk) 
EATING  
Sweetened  
beverage  
consumption  0, 1, 2, 3+ # of sweetened  beverages  
consumed  in a typical  day 2-3+ vs 0-1 
Fruit and 
vegetable  
consumption  0-5+  # of fruits  and vegetables  
consumed  in a typical  day 0-3 vs. 4+/day    
ACTIVITIES  
 
  Page  8 Physical  activity  
(60+ minutes)  0-7 # of days  with >60 minutes  
of physical  activity  in an 
average  week  0-3 days/week  vs.  
4-7 days/week   
Sleep  0-12+ # of hours  of sleep  on a 
typical  night  0-7 hours  vs. 8+ hours  
SAFETY  
Seatbelt  Use 4 pt. scale  Frequency  of seatbelt  use 
in a car  Not always  vs. always  
Helmet  Use 4 pt. scale  Frequency  of helmet  use 
when  bicycling   Not always  vs. always  
DUI/Riding  with a 
DUI driver  Dichotomous  Yes vs. no Yes vs. no 
Texting  while  
driving  4 pt. scale  Frequency  of texting  while  
driving  (4-point  scale)  NOT  INCLUDED  IN SUMMARY  
RISK  VARIABLE   
ALCOHOL  AND  DRUGS  
Drinking  
frequency  0-30 Decrease  in # of days  on 
continuous  scale  >1 (Ages  13-15)  vs. 0 
>2 (Ages  16-17) vs. 0-1 
>3 (Age  18) vs. 0-2 
Drinking  quantity  
(typical  or 
maximum)  0-15+ # of alcoholic  drinks  
typically  consumed  per 
occasion  >3 (Girls  13-17 and Boys  13) vs. 1-2  
>4 (Girls  18 and Boys  14-15) vs. 0-3 
>5 (Boys  16-18) vs. 0-4 
Marijuana  use 
frequency  0-30 days  
and/or  
0-365 days  #of days   used  marijuana  in 
the past 30 days  and or 
year  ≥1 days/month  (Ages  13-15)  vs. 0 
>2 days/month  (Ages  16-18) vs. 1  
>1 days/year(Ages  13-15)  vs. 0 
>6 days/year  (Ages  16-18) vs. 0-5 
 
 
SEXUAL  ACTIVITY  
 
  Page  9 Condom  Use 4 point  scale  Frequency  of condom  use 
with sexual  intercourse   Not always  vs. always   
(or not sexually  active)  
Birth control  use Dichotomous  Use of any  birth control  at 
last sexual  intercourse  
(yes/no)  Not always  vs. always   
(or not sexually  active)  
EMOTIONS  
Depression  (PHQ -
9) 0-27 Score  on PHQ -9 Total  score  on PHQ  10 or higher  vs. 
0-9 
 
 
3.3. Data  Analysis  and Data  Monitoring  
 
3.3.1  Strategies  to Minimize  Missing  Data.   
At the time of enrollment,  we will gather  the preferred  and all available  email  addresses,  
phone  numbers  (including  mobile  for text messaging),  and social  networking  inbox  
addresses  for eligible  adolescents.  To confirm  accuracy  of the email  address,  partic ipant  
payments  will be sent electronically,  via email,  and participants  will be instructed  to contact  
study  staff if payment  is not received.  We will also collect  phone  numbers  for 3 friends  or 
family  members  who would  know  how to reach  the participant  if we do not.  Our experience  
is that we can maintain  >85%  of our enrollees  over the course  of the study.   Despite  our 
best efforts,  we expect  some  attrition  over the course  of follow  up, which  has been  factored  
into our sample  size calculations.   In the case  that an adolescent  does  not have  an email  
address,  surveys  will be completed  by phone  and payments  will be sent via mail.   
 
Maintaining  statistical  power  is a key consideration.  We will implement  various  
recommended  strategies  for maximizing  power  within  the current  design,  including  use of 
covariates  in data analyses  when  appropriate,  preventing  attrition  and missing  data,  
implementing  advanced  missing  data analyses  such  as multiple  imputation  techniques  
using  reliable  measures,  and maintaining  integrity  of the intervention  throughout  the study.  
For all analyses,  we will start with models  using  all available  data,  not just complete  cases.  
In addition  we will apply  inverse  probability  weighted  methods  to adjust  for missing  data 
and conduct  sensitivit y analyses  looking  at how other  estimates  are impacted  by including  
the variables  with missing  values.  
 
3.3.2  Data  Analysis.    
Data  from the web-based  surveys  will be uploaded  into STATA  analytic  software.   Prior  to 
analysis,  all variables  will be checked  for validity,  missingness,  and distributional  
assumptions.   Preliminary  analyses  required  for variable  construction,  any required  
imputation  of missing  data,  assessment  of psychometric  properties  of scale  scores,  and 
assessment  of the validity  of study  variables  will be completed  before  analyses  assessing  
 
  Page  10 intervention  effects.  Data  set documentation  will then be developed  and distributed  to the 
study  team.  Before  carrying  out analyses  addressing  each  of the research  questions,  an 
analysis  plan will be forma lly presented  to the study  team  and Project  Advisory  Board  so a 
wide range  of expertise  and experience  is brought  to bear on each  work  product  of the 
team.  
 
Some  key features  of the stepped  wedge  design  require  special  consideration  in the 
planned  analyses .  First,  the design  involves  unidirectional  cross -over from the control  arm 
to the intervention  arm for all PCPs.   This has to be captured  by an indicator  specific  to 
PCP and time point.  Second,  there  are natural  hierarchical  structures  in the data with PCPs 
nested  within  clinics,  patients  nested  within  PCPs,  and repeated  assessments  made  within  
patients  for some  outcomes,  such  as health  risk behaviors.   Because  different  patient  
samples  will be surveyed  at each  time point,  within  patient  correlation  over time should  not 
be strong.   Still, clustering  at the clinic  and PCP-levels  needs  to be examined  in all 
analyses.   Third,  secular  time trends  need  to be carefully  examined  and separated  from the 
intervention  effect.   Based  on these  considerations,  we will focus  on model - based  
approaches  (linear  or generalized  linear  mixed  effects  models)  for the main  analyses,  in 
addition  to standard  hypothesis  testing  techniques.  
 
Aim 1  will compare intermediary targets  at all clinics before and after the intervention  using 
an analytic approach that both accounts for design features, repeated assessments within 
adolescents, time trends in these target behaviors during study period and adjust for 
potential confounders. For t his aim we will use patients as the units of analysis. We will 
consider outcomes at the level of the patient  (adolescent reported motivation for health and 
provision  of appropriate  preventive  counseling).  
 
 Our primary analysis will be based on a set of mixed effects regression models. As an 
illustration, let’s consider the adolescent self -reported health motivation (readiness to 
change, as other adolescent reported outcomes can be modelled in a similar fashion.  
Specifically, we will consider the followi ng regression  model:  
Yijk =  +  Xijk+ k Tk + γ k Xijk* Tk  + b i + b ij +φ Covariates + ijk, 
 
in which Yijk denotes  the health motivation reported by  jth patient  within  ith provider  at kth 
time interval , Xijk is a binary indicator of exposure to the intervention for the provider 
and the predictor of interest , Tk is a binary indicator  of the kth assessment , bi and bij are 
PCP and adolescent  specific random effects that account for the within  PCP and within  
adolescent  correlations, and ijk is the error term. Additional patient -level or PCP-level 
confounding  variables  can be adjusted in the model as well.  
 
 With this model, the fixed effects α captures the treatment effects on mean responses 
and time -by-intervention interaction coefficients γk’s captures the treatment effects across 
time. Fixed effects k ‘s aim to capture any temporal  trend or learning effects. Using this 
approach, both within -adolescents and between adolescents  information  will be used to 
estimate the treatment effects. All coefficients will be tested using Wald test. Also note this 
 
  Page  11 model framework is flexible enough that a patient can be enrolled at any time during the 
study and the model can accommodate different numbers of post -intervention 
asses sments. For example, for an adolescent enrolled after his/her PCP has received 
intervention, all X ijk’s would take value 1 for that subject.         
 
We will apply linear mixed effects models for Gaussian outcome Y ijk,  and generalized 
linear mixed effects models for other types of outcomes (e.g., logistic model for binary 
outcome).  
 
For Aim 2 , analyses will be based on patient survey responses to the 8 -item satisfaction 
scale, patient perception of PCP communication, and the summary health risk variable, 
which will all be treated as continuous response variables.  The summary health risk 
varia ble constructed from a count of dichotomized key risk behaviors (as shown in Table 2).  
First, satisfaction levels and risk behaviors will be summarized for each period (pre - and 
post-intervention) and will be compared using two sample t -tests.  For the ma in analysis, 
we will apply mixed effects models similar to those proposed in Aim 1 to examine the 
intervention effect. For patient satisfaction, PCP satisfaction, adolescent’s perception of 
PCP communication and health risk behaviors, the analysis will be cross -sectional 
comparisons at one day following the primary care visit. Let Yij denotes the satisfaction at 
one-day post visit of adolescent  j within PCP I, let X ij denote whether the PCP has received 
intervention at the time of visit, then the following mixed effects model can be applied  
   
Yij =  +  Xij + b i +φ Covariates + ij, 
 
where bi accounts for within -PCP correlations for adolescents seen by the same PCP. The 
fixed effect α captures the intervention effect on the patient satisfaction. Similar model can 
be applied to PCP outcomes and we can account for within -clinic correlations as we ll. 
 
When examining the intervention effects on adolescents individual risky behaviors (alcohol 
use, marijuana use, unprotected sexual activity, depression, physical activity, healthy food 
consumption, seatbelt and helmet use) at baseline, 3, 6, and 12 months after the primary 
care visit, same modeling framework as outlined for Aim 1 can be applied.  
 
3.3.3  Heterogeneity  of Treatment  Effects.  
The goal of any heterogeneity  of treatment  effects  analyses  will be to ascertain  whether  
treatment  effects  vary significantly  across  subgroups  of patients  and to identify  subgroups  
of patients  that achieve  the greatest  benefit  from part or entire  treatment  regimen.  (PCORI  
Methodology  Standard  HT-1) Based  on our current  knowledge,  we hypothesize  that 
treatment  effects  may vary substantially  across  age groups  (13-15 yrs vs. 16-19 yrs), 
gender  groups  (male  vs. female),  racial  groups  (White,  African  American,  Asian/American  
Indian/Pacific  Islander,  and multi -racial),  ethnic  groups  (Hispanic  vs. non-Hispanic),  
adolescents  with differential  baseline  motivation  status  (highly  motivated  adolescents  vs. 
less motivated),  and adolescents  with differential  self-efficacy  (high  vs. low) (PCORI  
Methodology  Standard  HT-2). We recognize  the possibility  that additional  subgroups  may 
 
  Page  12 arise in the course  of the analyses  described  above  as we identify  which  factors  modify  the 
associations.  (PCORI  Methodology  Standard  HT-4) Our stepped  wedge  design  allows  us to 
employ  both within  participants  and between  participants  information  to estimate  and 
compare  treatment  effects.   
As we have  outlined  in the Statistical  Analysis  section,  the primary  analysis  will be based  
on mixed -effects  regression  models  in the following  form,  for example,  when  examining  
PCP outcomes  (similar  models  will be applied  to adolescent  outcomes):  
Yijk = µ+ αXijk+  βk Tk + bi + bij + γcovariates  + εijk, 
in which  Yijk  denotes  the appropriate  preventive  counseling  rate for jth PCP within  ith clinic   
at time interval  k, Xijk is a binary  indicator  of exposure  to the intervention  (predictor  of 
interest),  Tk is a binary  indicator  of the kth assessment  time interval,  bi and bij are clinic  
and PCP specific  random  effects  that account  for the within  clinic  and within  PCP 
correlations,  εijk is the error  term.  Adjustment  for additional  clinic -level or PCP-level 
confounding  variables  can be incorporated  into the model  as well. With this model,  the fixed  
effect  α captures  the treatment  effect,  while  fixed  effects  βk’s aim to capture  any temporal  
trend.  Using  this approach,  both within-PCP and between  PCP information  will be used  to 
estimate  the treatment  effect.   
Our treatment  heterogeneity  (TH) analysis  will consist  of two steps.  The first step will be 
subgroup  analysis,  in which  the above  outlined  regression  models  will be applied  to each  of 
the subgroups.  We will then inspect  the treatment  effect  sizes  and significances  across  
subgroup  analyses  to get a sense  of the direction  and magnitude  of treatment  
heterogeneity.  In second  step we will formally  test the treatment  heterogeneity  by including  
a treatment -by-group  interaction  term in the model:  
    Yijk = µ+ α1Xijk+α2Group+α3  Xijk*Group+βk  Tk + bi + bij + γcovariates  + εijk, 
A wald t-test on the coefficient  α3 formally  tests  the significance  of treatment  heterogeneity  
across  groups . (PCORI  Methodology  Standard  HT-3) We may have  to apply  multiple  
comparisons  adjustments  to minimize  false  discovery  rates  due to large  number  of 
subgroup  analyses.   
Treatment  heterogeneity  can also be interpreted  as effect  modification,  i.e., the treatme nt 
effects  are being  modified  by group  characteristics.  However,  such  modifications  may work  
through  different  mechanisms.  For example,  same  intervention  may be received  
differentially  by different  groups  with one group  embrace  every  aspect  of the interven tion 
and the other  group  does  not comply  at all. Or, different  groups  may respond  differentially  
to the different  treatment  components,  with one group  respond  better  to one part of the 
intervention  and another  group  to another  part of intervention.  Therefo re, when  examining  
treatment  heterogeneity,  we will have  to apply  careful  scientific  reasoning  and scrutinizing,  
in addition  to statistical  analysis.  
 
4.0 Data  Monitoring  and Management   
 
  Page  13  
The proposed  research  involves  no greater  than minimal  risk to participants.    
 
4.1 Adverse  Events  
Project  staff will be trained  to identify  potential  adverse  events  and instructed  to report  them  
immediately  to Dr. Richardson  or Dr. McCarty.   Should  any study  participant  or caregiver  
express  concerns  about  the study  or their participation  or appear  distressed  during  any study  
activities,  the witnessing  research  team  member  will bring  the matter  to the attention  of Dr. 
Richardson  or McCarty,  who will distinguish  serious  adverse  events  from non-serious  adverse  
events.   Serious adverse  events  will be documented  and discussed  with the IRB as soon  as 
possible,  and reported  to the IRB within  48 hours.   An annual  report  will be submitted  to PCORI  
and the IRB summarizing  all adverse  events.  
 
4.2 Data  Quality  Assurance  and Confide ntiality   
Data  quality  assurance  will be monitored  on an ongoing  basis  by the Research  Manager,  
Heather  Spielvogle.   She will each  conduct  routine  protocol  compliance  checks  to ensure  that 
safety  procedures,  such  as ensuring  participant  confidentiality  and maintaining  approved  
standards  for data transport,  are strictly  adhered  to at each  site.  All study  data will be stored  in 
password -protected  computer  files and identified  with study  IDs.  Analytic  data files will contain  
no identifying  information.   Othe r confidentiality  issues  are discussed  in the prior section  
“Protection  Against  Risks.”  
 
4.3 HIPAA  Compliance    
All participants  will be recruited  from clinical  sites,  and as such  their participation  is subject  to 
the Health  Insurance  Portability  and Accou ntability  Act of 1996  (HIPAA)  privacy  and security  
standards.   All relevant  staff has completed  required  HIPAA  training  and all research  activities  
will be conducted  in compliance  with HIPAA  standards.   All study  data will be securely  stored  
and labeled  as discussed  on the “Data  storage  and confidentiality”  section  of this protocol,  
below.   PCPs  of participants  assigned  to the Check  Yourself  intervention  will receive  feedback  
including  specific  information  on adolescents’  responses  that will allow  them  to reinforce  healthy  
behavior  choices  and implement  further  brief in-person  interventions  for moderate  to high risk 
adolescents.   Although  a participant’s  individual  responses  to the health  screener  constitute  
protected  health  information  generated  from the research  study,  since  the results  are shared  
with the participant’s  PCP for treatment  and/or  health  monitoring  purposes,  this disclosure  
appears  to fall within  an exception  of the minimally  necessary  requirement  of the Privacy  Rule 
(Section  164.502).   PCPs  will receive  three  feedback  reports  on adolescent -reported  receipt  of 
counseling  on each  of the target  behaviors  and adolescent -reported  visit satisfaction  and follow -
up care gathered  directly  from adolescents  and caregivers.   Although  the data from the 
feedback  reports  will come  from adolescent  and caregiver  participants,  the data will be 
distributed  in aggregate  form and will be void of individual  identifiers.     
 
 
 
4.4 Data  storage  and confidentiality  
 
  Page  14 One month  prior the adolescent’s  scheduled  appointment  with their PCP,  participating  PSPRN  
clinics  will generate  reports  with potential  participants’  contact  information  from electronic  
scheduling  tools  which  will be provided  to study  staff.   We will request  a full waiver  of 
authorization  under  HIPAA  to obtai n contact  information  for individuals  who have  scheduled  an 
appointment  at the participating  clinics.   We will collect  the minimum  amount  of information  
necessary  to identify  potentially  eligible  participants  from the participating  clinics’  electronic  
sche duling  tools.   Data  used  include:  caregiver/guardian  name,  adolescent  name,  age, date of 
appointment  with PCP,  address,  and telephone  number.   Contact  and identifying  information  will 
be used  solely  for study  recruitment  purposes  and will only be accessibl e to study  staff with a 
direct  need  to access  this information  (e.g.,  research  staff mailing  letters  and conducting  phone  
screening).   We will assign  a unique  study  number  to individuals  for recruitment  purposes.   This 
study  number  is then used  in study  files, rather  than subjects’  names.   We will then maintain  
and protect  a linking  file which  links study  number  to participants’  names  and other  identifying  
information  including  participants’  e-mail addresses  and cell phone  numbers.   This linking  file 
will be stored  in Seattle  Children’s  Research  Institute  (SCRI)  on a secure  database  on the SCRI  
network.   Access  to the SCRI  network  is controlled  by valid,  networked  user accounts  which  
include  study  researchers  and staff.   Identifying  information  used  to recru it participants  will be 
destroyed  within  5 years  of the end of the study.   SCRI  is responsible  for storage  of data 
collected  from participants.   Study  data for enrolled  participants  will be identified  by study  IDs 
and will also be retained  in a SCRI  secure  database  on the SCRI  network.   Analytic  data files 
will contain  no identifying  information.   
 
Subject  demographic  data will be recorded  in a password -protected  database.   Completed  
questionnaire  data will be collected  through  DatStat  Illume,  a platform  used  to develop  secure,  
web-based  surveys,  and then exported  from DatStat  Illume  into SPSS,  Stata/SE,  and SAS for 
analysis  purposes.   Data  are stored  on a secure  SQL server,  and are available  to study  
investigators  for queries,  reports,  and downlo ad for analysis.  
 
Web-based  surveys  will be accessed  by logging  on to a secure  server  with security  and data 
integrity  violations  obviated  by requiring  participants  to log in with a password  unrelated  to any 
identifying  information  on any on-line page  or database.   All information  transferred  between  
client  and server  machines  will be secured  using  128-bit encrypted  Secure  Sockets  Layer.   All 
data stored  in the online  repository  will be encrypted  using  the official  Advanced  Encryption  
Standard  algorithm.   Protocols  have  been  informed  by prior internet -based  studies  conducted  by 
study  investigators.  
 
For participants  enrolled  in the post-implementation  period,  their baseline  report  will be printed  
by study  or participating  clinic  staff and given  to the partic ipant’s  PCP prior to their appointment.   
Participant  reports  will be shared  with PSPRN  staff via a protected,  designated  fax machine  
available  only to clinic  staff and providers  or through  a secure  server  with security  and data 
integrity  violations  obviate d by requiring  them  to log in with a password  unrelated  to any 
identifying  information  related  to the research  participant.  All information  transferred  between  
client  and server  machines  will be secured  using  128-bit encrypted  Secure  Sockets  Layer.  All 
data stored  in the online  repository  will be encrypted  using  the official  Advanced  Encryption  
 
  Page  15 Standard  algorithm.   Protocols  have  been  informed  by prior internet -based  studies  conducted  by 
study  investigators.    
 
For purposes  of analysis  and manuscript  prepar ation,  paper  data files will be maintained  for up 
to 3 years  after the project  ends,  after which  all paper  data will be disposed  of via shredding.  
Secure  electronic  data files will be kept for up to 7 years  after the project  ends  on SCRI’s  secure  
network.  
 
5. Risk/Benefit  Assessment  
 
5.1. Risk Category   
This is a minimal  risk study,  with the probability  and magnitude  of discomfort  no greater  than 
ordinarily  encountered  in daily life or during  the performance  of routine  psychological  
examinations/tests  or medical  care.  We will request  a Full Waiver  of Authorization  under  HIPAA  
for waiver  of documentation  of consent  and waiver  of the requirement  for signature  on the 
authorization  for use and disclosure  of health  information.   
 
5.2. Potential  Risks  and Protection  Against  Them 
5.2.1  Risks.  
We foresee  two potential  risks to study  participation.   The first risk is that we may discover  
a harmful  behavior  requiring  urgent  intervention  such  as suicidality.   Youth  with concerns  
for suicidal  ideation  on the PHQ -9 (reporting  “though ts of being  better  off dead  or of hurting  
yourself  in some  way”  several  days  or more)  will be asked  two additional  questions  from 
the Teen  Screen  (www.teenscreen.org)  version  of this questionnaire  asking  if: a) in the past 
month  the youth  has had “serious  thoughts  about  ending  your life” and b) they have  ever 
made  a suicide  attempt.   Further  details  on addressing  suicidality  are provided  below.   The 
second  risk to participants  is that the information  provided  on the Check  Yourself  app may 
not remain  confide ntial.   The PCP may choose  to put risk behavior  information  in the 
youth’s  electronic  medical  record.   It is also possible  that youth  may leave  their computer  
screen  with information  from the Check  Yourself  app open  in their web-browser  and 
someone  else might  see it.  Although  we will emphasize  the importance  of completing  the 
survey  in a private  setting,  participants  may still complete  the Check  Yourself  app in an 
open  setting  (i.e., computer  in the family  room)  and other  family  members  might  observe  
their responses.   
 
5.2.2  Protections  against  Risks.  
All research  activities  will be reviewed  and approved  by Seattle  Children’s  IRB as well as 
clinic -specific  IRBs  (when  required)  to ensure  participants  are adequatel y protected  against  
risk and all research  activities  are HIPAA  compliant.   Participants  will be fully informed  of 
the potential  risks of participation,  alternate  treatment  options,  and their right to discontinue  
study  participation  at any time.   Specific  steps we will take to reduce  known  risks are 
described  below:  
 
5.2.2.1  Confidentiality  and Protections.  
 
  Page  16 As part of the consent  procedures,  adolescents  and caregivers  will be informed  that 
the adolescent  should  complete  the assessment  privately  and adolescents  will be 
instructed  to exit the web browser  at the completion  of the survey.   Data  collected  
from the web-based  screening  survey  at baseline  may be shared  with treating  PCPs.   
Data  collected  during  all follow -up assessments,  including  receipt  of counseling  on 
each  of the targeted  behaviors,  visit satisfaction,  and receipt  of follow -up will be given  
to providers  in aggregate  form,  segregated  by clinic  and will be void of individual  
identifiers.   All other  data will be held confidential  and will not be shared.   At each  
contact,  study  materials  will clarify  the nature  of data collected  and whether  data will 
be shared  with treating  PCPs.   Study  materials  will also outline  situations  in which  
results  may need  to be shared  with caregivers  (i.e. suicidal  thoughts).   All materials  
included  in the chart  by PCPs  will be considered  part of confidential  patient  data and 
will be bound  by customary  restrictions  on access  to patient  records.   For example,  
Washington  State  law requires  consent  of the youth  to release  information  regarding  
their mental  health,  sexual  health,  and alcohol  and drug use.  It should  be noted  that 
screening  of health  risks including  depression,  sexual  activity,  and alcohol  use is a 
routine  and recommended  aspect  of adolescent  clinical  care.   All study  data will be 
securely  stored  in either  password -protected  computer  files or in locked  file cabinet s 
and identified  with study  IDs (see section  4.4 for specific  data security  measures).   
 
5.2.2.2  Management  of suicidality.  
Regardless  of intervention  status,  participants  with a positive  response  on the items  
assessing  suicidality  will be flagged  for further evaluation  during  their appointment  
with the PCP.   Additionally,  research  staff will track  all flagged  youth  to ensure  that an 
assessment  is completed  by one of the study  clinicians.   A study  clinician  (Dr. 
Richardson,  a board  certified  Adolescent  Medi cine Provider,  Dr. Spielvogle,  a 
licensed  mental  health  counselor,  or Dr. McCarty,  a licensed  clinical  psychologist)  will 
call to evaluate  any youth  with a positive  response  on items  assessing  suicidality  
using  a protocol  that we have  employed  in our prior depression  studies  and will assist  
in connecting  the youth  with care based  on the level of assessed  risk.  The 
assessment  consists  of a semi -structured  interview,  including  questions  about  
pervasiveness  of thoughts,  impulsivity,  presence  of a plan and current supports,  with 
guidance  for assessing  risk.  All youth  judged  to be at higher  than minimal  risk will be 
encouraged  to seek  care and assisted  with identifying  an appropriate  resource  (PCP,  
mental  health  specialty  care,  emergency  services)  based  on seve rity.  Youth  who are 
found  to be actively  suicidal  will be assisted  with receiving  resources  within  24 hours.   
Youth  who are at low risk will be assisted  with connecting  with the PCP within  1-2 
weeks.   For youth  <18 years  old who are found  to be at higher  than minimal  risk, the 
investigator  will also speak  with a parent/guardian  to share  recommendations  and 
offer assistance  in accessing  care.   Consent  procedures  will make  clear  the situations  
in which  a caregiver  would  be notified  using  standard  clinical  language  regarding  
danger  to self or others.  This protocol  has functioned  smoothly  in each  of our prior 
studies,  and youth  and caregivers  have  expressed  gratitude  for the information  
provided  and for additional  assistance  in receiving  care.  
 
  Page  17  
5.3. Potential  Benefi ts 
5.3.1  Individual  Benefit  (other  than remuneration) . 
All participants  may receive  some  satisfaction  or indirect  benefit  from contributing  to this 
research.   PCPs  may benefit  from the training  they will receive  on adolescent -centered  
preventive  counseling , which  may increase  their motivation,  self-efficacy,  and skills  to 
address  challenging  behaviors  and provide  MOC  4 and CME  credits.  Adolescents  may 
benefit  from the additional  training  provided  to their PCPs  in addressing  preventive  and 
high-risk health  behaviors.   Post-implementation  youth  participants  will receive  
personalized  feedback  aimed  at increasing  their readiness  for the visit and motivation  for 
healthy  behaviors,  which  may have  a positive  impact  on their health.  
 
5.3.2  Societal  Benefit.  
Potentia lly preventable  health -compromising  behaviors  are among  the leading  causes  of 
morbidity  and mortality  in the adolescent  age group.   Screening  and preventive  
interventions  are recommended  by multiple  professional  organizations,  but are often  not 
performed.   This project  takes  an innovative  strategy  of training  PCPs  to deliver  preventive  
counseling  in adolescent -centered  ways,  testing  this approach  in tandem  with a tool that 
provides  personalized  feedback  for adolescents  and decision  support  for PCPs.   
 
This project  will be an important  contribution  towards  developing  intervention  strategies  that 
are adolescent -centered  and can be broadly  disseminated  to reduce  health  compromising  
behaviors  in primary  care settings.   Society  and healthcare  settings  will benefi t from the 
knowledge  gleaned  regarding  these  innovative  tools  to enhance  adolescent  preventive  
counseling  quality  and delivery.   In this regard,  the minor  risks incurred  are outweighed  by 
the anticipated  benefits.  
 
 
5.4. Alternatives  to Participation  
Participation  is voluntary  and discontinuation  is an option  at any time during  the study.   
 
6. Recruitment  and Consent  
 
6.1. Recruitment  Method   
 
We plan to recruit  approximately  5 providers  from each  of the participating  clinics  using  the 
following  methods  (a total of 30 providers).  First,  we will develop  a study  overview  sheet  
outlining  the I-ACT intervention  and study  protocols  and expectations.  We will present  
information  on the study  with this study  sheet  at a provider  meeting  in each  clinic.  We will ask 
providers  to indicate  their interest  in the study  and will set up appointments  to review  and obtain  
consent.  
 
Staff from Seattle  Children’s  Research  Institute  (SCRI)  will recruit  and enroll  adolescent  and 
caregiver  participants  through  a rolling  recruitment  process,  organized  by clinic.   
 
  Page  18  
Potential  participants  will be identified  up to six weeks  before  their scheduled  appointment  via a 
data pull from the clinic  scheduling  software.   Research  staff will mail an Introductory  Packet  to 
the youth’s  home  containin g: 
 Introductory  letter  signed  by the clinic  with an opt-out phone  number  
 Introductory  flyer 
 Study  Information  sheet   
 
We will request  a full waiver  of authorization  under  HIPAA  to obtain  contact  information  for 
potential  participants.   Our procedure  will be: 
1. Contact  the caregiver  by phone   
2. Screen  for eligibility,  explain  the study,  and answer  questions.   If the caregiver  wishes  to 
participate,  study  staff will arrange  a meeting  with the caregiver  and adolescent  via 
telephone  to review  the study  inform ation  sheet  and obtain  oral consent/assent.   
 
“Adult  adolescent”  (i.e. 18 year old) recruitment:  “Adult  adolescents”  will be approached  before  
their caregiver.   Study  staff will attempt  to contact  the “adult  adolescent”  by phone.   Once  the 
“adult  adolescen t” is contacted,  study  staff will explain  the study,  give detailed  information,  and 
answer  questions.   If the “adult  adolescent”  wishes  to participate,  staff will arrange  a meeting  
with the adult  adolescent  via telephone  to obtain  oral consent.   Then  the caregiver  will be 
approached  and asked  to participate  in the parent  survey  portion  of the study  if the teen 
consents  to us contacting  and inviting  the parent.  “Adult  adolescents”  will not be excluded  from 
the study  if their parents  do not participate.  
 
6.2. Cons ent and Assent    
We are requesting  a waiver  of documentation  of consent/assent  and waiver  of Authorization  
under  HIPAA.   This research  study  poses  no more  than minimal  risk to research  participants  
and the screening  questions  are standard  of care.   We are requesting  this waiver  because,  
whenever  possible,  we intend  to deliver  the online  screening  survey  and follow -up visits  via the 
internet,  rather  than in-person.   Thus  it would  not be practicable  to obtain  written  parental  
consent  and assent  if study  visits are completed  online.    
  
 6.2.1  PCP oral consent  will be obtained   
Oral consent  will be obtained  prior to study  initiation.  The study  information  sheet  will 
include  the required  elements  of authorization  under  HIPAA.  
 
6.2.1  Parent  oral consent  and permi ssion  and oral assent.  
Oral parent  consent  and permission  will be obtained  over the telephone,  prior to the youth’s  
appointment  at a mutually  agreed  upon  time.   The study  information  sheet  will include  the 
required  elements  of authorization  under  HIPAA.  
 
 
6.2.2  Minor  adolescent  oral assent .  
 
  Page  19 Study  staff will reach  the minor  adolescent  by phone  to explain  the study.   Assent  will be 
obtained  in conjunction  with the oral parental  consent  and permission.  
 
6.3.1“Adult  adolescent”  oral consent  will be obtained  via telephone.   
“Adult  adolescents”  may participate  in the study  even  if their parent  does  not participate.  
 
6.3. Subject  Capability   
All potential  subjects  will have  the capacity  to give consent.  
 
6.4. Subject  Comprehension   
Interested  caregivers  and PCPs  will have  the opportunity  to discuss  the study  with SCRI  staff 
prior to enrollment.   Throughout  this conversation,  SCRI  staff will assess  parental  and PCP 
understanding  of the project  and of participation  expect ations  by asking  parents  and PCPs  to 
use their own words  to describe  the project  and their role in it.  Efforts  to clarify  and simplify  the 
research  and parent’ s/PCP ’s role will be prioritized.   Additionally,  staff will provide  reminders  
that parents  and PCPs retain  the right to withdraw  from the study  at any time.   SCRI  staff will 
invite  questions  from the parents  and PCPs,  reiterate  their right to refuse  participation,  and ask 
whether  they are comfortable  with participation.  
 
Interested  adolescents  will also have  the opportunity  to discuss  the study  with SCRI  staff prior to 
enrollment.   Throughout  this second  conversation,  SCRI  staff will assess  teens’  understanding  
of the project  and of participation  expectations  by asking  them  to describe  the project  in their 
own words.   Staff will remind  youth  that they can withdraw  from the study  at any time without  
adverse  consequences.   SCRI  staff will encourage  questions,  reiterate  the right to refuse  
participation,  and ask whether  they are interested  in participatin g. 
 
6.5. Consent  Forms  
Consent  forms  for parents  and adolescents  will be included  with the submission  to the SCRI  
IRB.   
 
6.6. Documentation  of Consent  
Caregivers,  adult  adolescents,  and PCPs  may consent  orally  and adolescents  may provide  oral 
assent.   Documentation  of oral consent  and assent  will be noted  by research  staff and kept in 
study  files.  
 
6.7. Costs  to Subjects  
There  are no study -related  costs  for any participants.  
 
6.8. Payment  for particip ation  
Adolescents  will be given  $20 for completion  of the baseline  screener  and $20 for each  follow -
up assessment  (up to $100).  Caregivers  will be given  $10 for each  completed  brief caregiver  
survey  ($10 baseline  + $10 1-day follow  up =$20  total).  
 
6.9. HIPAA  
 
  Page  20 The SCRI  IRB requires  that research  participants  provide  authorization  to use their protected  
health  information  in connection  with research.   We have  identified  the information  that will be 
collected  from participating  clinics.   We will provide  participant  protected  health  information  to 
PCPs  including  specific  information  on the adolescent’s  responses,  which  will allow  PCPs  to 
reinforce  healthy  behavior  choices  and implement  further  brief in-person  interventions  for 
moderate  to high risk adolescents .  Although  a participant’s  responses  to the health  screening  
survey  constitute  protected  health  information  generated  from the research  study,  since  the 
results  are shared  with the participant’s  PCP for treatment  and/or  health  monitoring  purposes,  
this disclosure  appears  to fall within  an exception  of the minimally  necessary  requirement  of the 
Privacy  Rule (Section  164.502).   Thus,  we will request  a waiver  of documentation  of consent  
and waiver  of the requirement  of signature  on the Authorization.   As detailed above  in the data 
storage  section,  all information  will be collected  through  fully secure  sites and all participants  are 
coded  to prevent  identification  of individuals.    
 
 