PROTOCOL TITLE: Designing with Dissemination in Mind: Optimization of a mHeal th 
Physical Activity Intervention for  Breast Cancer Survivors  (Fit2Thrive)  
 Page 1 of 63 Revis ed Template : November 10, 2014  OFFICIAL CT.GOV TITLE: Optimization of Remotely Delivered 
Physical Activity Intervention for Breast Cancer Survivors  
 
NCT#:  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
DOCUMENT DATE: J une 14, 2018  
 
 
IRB PROTOCOL TITLE:   
DESIGNING WITH DISSEMINATION IN MIND: OPTIMIZATION OF A 
MHEALTH PHYSICAL ACTIVITY INTERVENTION FOR BREAST 
CANCER SURVIVORS  (FIT2THRIVE  STUDY)  
. 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:   Siobhan M. Phillips, PhD, MPH  
Department of Preventive Medicine  
312-503-4235  
smphillips@northwestern.edu  
 
STUDY TEAM MEMBERS:   Bonnie J. Spring, PhD  
      Frank J. Penedo, PhD  
      David E. Cella, PhD  
      Juned Siddique, PhD  
      Ronald T. Ackermann. MD, MPH  
Danielle Hartigan, PhD, MPH  
William E. Funk, PhD  
        
      
 
VERSION NUMBER:  7 
 
 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Designing with Dissemination in Mind: Optimization of a mHeal th 
Physical Activity Intervention for  Breast Cancer Survivors  (Fit2Thrive)  
 Page 2 of 63 Revis ed Template : November 10, 2014  Table of Contents  
1.0 Objectives  ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 3 
2.0 Background  ................................ ................................ ................................  5 
3.0 Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  ................................ ...............................  11 
4.0 Study -Wide Number of Subjects  ................................ ..............................  13 
5.0 Study -Wide Recruitment Methods  ................................ ............................  14 
6.0 Multi -Site Research  ................................ ................................ ..................  15 
7.0 Study Timelines  ................................ ................................ ........................  15 
8.0 Study Endpoints  ................................ ................................ .......................  16 
9.0 Procedures Involved*  ................................ ................................ ...............  17 
10.0  Data and Specimen Banking  .......................  Error! Bookmark not defined.  
11.0  Data and Specimen Management  ................................ ............................  36 
12.0  Provisions to Monitor the Data to Ensure the Safety of Subjects  .............  42 
13.0  Withdrawal of Subjects  ................................ ................................ .............  42 
14.0  Risks to Subjects  ................................ ................................ ......................  42 
15.0  Potential Benefits to Subjects  ................................ ................................ ... 44 
16.0  Vulnerable Populations ................................ ................................ .............  44 
17.0  Community -Based Participatory Research  ................................ ...............  44 
18.0  Sharing of Results with Subjects  ................................ ..............................  44 
19.0  Setting  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 45 
20.0  Resources Available  ................................ ................................ .................  45 
21.0  Prior Approvals  ................................ ................................ .........................  47 
22.0  Recruitment Methods  ................................ ................................ ...............  47 
23.0  Number of Subjects  ................................ ................................ ..................  50 
24.0  Provisions to Protect the Privacy Interests of Subjects  ............................  51 
25.0  Compensation for Research -Related Injury  ................................ ..............  53 
26.0  Economic Burden to Subjects  ................................ ................................ .. 53 
27.0  Consent Process  ................................ ................................ ......................  53 
28.0  Process to Document Consent in Writing  ................................ .................  54 
 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Designing with Dissemination in Mind: Optimization of a mHeal th 
Physical Activity Intervention for  Breast Cancer Survivors  (Fit2Thrive)  
 Page 3 of 63 Revis ed Template : November 10, 2014  1.0 Objectives  
1.1 Purpose and Specific Aims  
Breast cancer survivors are at an increased risk of chronic conditions and compromised 
quality of life (QOL).1,2 Increased physical activity (PA) is associated with reductions in 
negative treatment -related side effects (e.g . fatigue, depression), cancer recurrence and 
mortality and improved QOL and survival.3-6 However, breast cancer survivors 
demonstrate decreases in PA that persist post -treatment ,7,8 and up to 70% do not meet 
public health recommendations for PA.9-12 Although many factors7,13-18 contribute to 
survivors’ low PA, a lack  of accessible, effective PA programs is a major barrier. Most 
existing PA interventions are resource -intensive, on -site programs tested in controlled 
efficacy trials with little chance of being translated into real -world practice.19 Therefore, it 
is critically important to develop theoretically sound, cost -effective PA interventions that 
can be remotely delivered with greater dissemination and implementation (D&I) 
potential.18-22  
  
Our previous prospective study indicates that social cognitive23 cons tructs including self -
efficacy, outcome expectations, social support and goal -setting may be useful targets for 
PA interventions among breast cancer survivors.15 However, PA inte rventions targeting 
these constructs typically use bundled packages consisting of standardized doses of 
multiple components (i.e. daily logs, support calls, feedback) delivered simultaneously 
making  it impossible to disentangle which intervention componen ts, at what levels, and 
in what combination(s) do, or do not, impact target constructs and maximize PA. Granular 
information about the effects of discrete components is needed to optimize intervention 
configuration so PA and scalability are maximized and b urden and cost minimized.20,24 
Using traditional study designs (i.e. randomized clinical trials) to test each component one 
at a time is inefficient in terms of time and expense. More efficient research methods must 
be used to simultaneously compare the effects of multiple i ndividual intervention 
components.   
 
The purpose of the present study is to apply the Multiphase Optimization Strategy 
(MOST)25 to develop and pilot test a set of mobile health (mHealth) PA intervention 
components for breast cancer survivors that are targeted at social cognitive constructs 
known to impact PA uptake and designed with D&I in mind from the outset. MOST is an 
innovative multi -phase framework adapted from engineering that uses highly efficient 
factorial experiments to evaluate the individual and combined effect of intervention 
components. The present study will use a MOST approach to examine the effect of PA 
intervention components that vary on cost. These data will be used to assemble an 
intervention to be evaluated in a larger R01  that is optimized to yield the maximum 
increase in PA for the minimum cost. The proposed study represents the first systematic 
effort to use MOST to design a highly disseminable PA intervention for breast cancer 
survivors. The  resulting intervention will  have great potential for scalability because it 
engages relevant stakeholders (i.e. survivors, experts, community leaders) in the design, 
uses technology (smartphones) participants already own, requires no on -site visits, and 
recruits using the Army of Wo men,© a national breast cancer research registry the PI 
successfully used previously.  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Designing with Dissemination in Mind: Optimization of a mHeal th 
Physical Activity Intervention for  Breast Cancer Survivors  (Fit2Thrive)  
 Page 4 of 63 Revis ed Template : November 10, 2014   
Specific Aims : 
Aim #1. Use a patient -centered approach to select a set of five PA intervention 
components for breast cancer survivors designed to impact social cognitive 
constructs.  Although we have identified candidate app/intervention components, 
selection of which ones to test will be made based on consensus between investigators 
and relevant stakeholders including survivors, experts and community leaders (n=1 0 of 
each). Survivors (n=10 -20) will also be involved in iterative testing to determine app 
usability and functionality.  
 
Aim #2. Pilot test the feasibility and acceptability of candidate intervention 
components in a 12 -week MOST experiment.  A highly effic ient experimental design 
will be used for this pilot study of survivors (n= 256). Feasibility will be assessed by a) 
intervention reach, b) participant retention, and c) adherence to the intervention protocol. 
Acceptability will be assessed by ratings of th e acceptability and usefulness of 
intervention components.   
 
Aim#3. Examine effects of the intervention components on PA.  The effect of the 
intervention components on changes in accelerometer measured PA (minutes/week) at 
12 weeks and 24 week follow -up wil l be examined using a highly efficient experimental 
strategy powered to detect effects of individual components.   
 
Exploratory Aim. Examine potential effects of the intervention components on 
important patient -reported outcomes  (PROs) . We will examine the effect of each 
intervention component on changes in physical function, fatigue, depression and QOL at 
12 weeks and 24 week follow -up using well -validated self -report measures.   
 
Exploratory Aim 2. Examine the effects of the 5 intervention components on 
biomarkers of breast cancer  (BC) prog ression and cardiovascular disease (CVD)  
risk in a 12 week intervention . We will collect blood samples for future research to examine 
evaluate the extent to which e ach intervention component ameliorates a pro -inflammatory  
phenotype associated with BC progression and CVD risk (i.e. interleukin -6, tumor 
necrosis factor -alpha interleukin -10, c -reactive protein) and cardiometabolic biomarkers 
(i.e. glucose, triglycerides , total cholesterol and high -density lipoproteins) .  
 
1.2 Hypotheses to be tested . 
Aim #1. We hypothesize that a set of 5 components will emerge as favored by participants 
and approved by experts and investigators.   
 
Aim #2. The primary hypotheses are: a) 75% of eligible survivors will agree to participate 
in the intervention; (b) enrollees will demonstrate engagement by monitoring PA on >80% 
of the study days and using one or more additional app components at least weekly. 
Descriptive analyses (means, frequencies) will be used to describe these results  
 
Aim#3  and Exploratory Aim  #1 and #2 . Our hypothesis is that a set of components will 
emerge as most effective for increasing PA and minimizing cost but a additional 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Designing with Dissemination in Mind: Optimization of a mHeal th 
Physical Activity Intervention for  Breast Cancer Survivors  (Fit2Thrive)  
 Page 5 of 63 Revis ed Template : November 10, 2014  configurations of  intervention component may emerge as having the largest, most cost -
efficient impact on PROs , biomarkers of BC progression and CVD risk . 
 
2.0 Background  
2.1 Relevant Prior Experience and Gaps in Current Literature  
Breast Cancer Survivors and Physical Activity Overview. An estimated 3 million 
breast cancer survivors  are  alive in the U.S. with this number expected to increase to 4 
million over the next decade.26 Cancer and its treatment are associated with a host of 
deleterious psychosocial (e.g. fatigue, depression, low self -esteem) and physica l side 
effects (e.g. nausea, vomiting, lymphedema, functional limitations)  that may be chronic 
or have a late onset and result in compromised quality of life (QOL).27  Breast cancer 
survivors are also  at an increased risk of early mortality and the development of both 
comorbid conditions28 and second primary cancers.29 Increased physical activity (PA) has 
been shown to be effective  for reducing these negative treatment -related side effects and 
improving QOL.5,6 Increased PA is also associated with increased survival and reduced 
risk of recurrence, progression and all -cause mortality in this population .30 Consequently, 
evidence -based guidelines recommend that breast cancer survivors engage in moderate 
to vigor ous intensity aerobic PA for 150 minutes per week, with the benefits believed to 
be dose -dependent.31,32  
Despite the benefits of PA, up to 70% of breast cancer survivors do not meet PA 
recommendations.9-12 Although many factors7,13-17 contribute to dismal PA levels, a lack 
of widely available disseminable evidence -based PA programs for breast cancer 
survivors may be a major barrier.19 Most existing PA interventions for breast cancer 
survivors are on -site, intensive, professionally delivered multicomponent programs. The 
few home -based PA interventions involve a large number of face -to-face or phone 
counseling sessions and do not incorporate web or mobile technology.  Historically, 
design o f these time and resource intensive interventions has  largely neglected to 
engage stakeholders (i.e. clinicians, survivors) and ignored contextual barriers (i.e. cost, 
burden, and accessibility) that influence real -world intervention uptake and 
sustainabi lity.19 Thus, existing PA interventions are often not feasible for widespread 
dissemination and implementation (D&I).19 As the number of breast cancer survivors 
continues to increase, it is of critical public health impo rtance to develop more 
disseminable, effective PA interventions to improve health and disease outcomes and 
reduce healthcare costs. The proposed study addresses this critical need by designing 
with D&I in mind from the outset by engaging stakeholders in in tervention development, 
using mobile technology for intervention delivery to increase reach and accessibility, and 
identifying “active” intervention components.  
Social Cognitive Theory (SCT)23 is well recognized as a useful framework for the design 
of PA interventions. However, t he full model has been applied less -frequently in research 
with cancer survivors.33 SCT34-36 specifies a core set of determinants (self -efficacy, goal -
setting, facilitators/barriers outcome expectations) and the mechanisms through which 
they work.35 Specifically, individuals with higher self -efficacy have more positive outcome 
expectations, set higher goals, and are more likely to believe they are capable of 
overcoming barriers (see Figure 1). These relationships are all postulated to be reciprocal 
(i.e. higher self -efficacy is associated with higher outcome expectations and vice versa). 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Designing with Dissemination in Mind: Optimization of a mHeal th 
Physical Activity Intervention for  Breast Cancer Survivors  (Fit2Thrive)  
 Page 6 of 63 Revis ed Template : November 10, 2014  Our work, and the work of othe rs, has demonstrated SCT constructs including self -
efficacy, realistic outcome expectations, facilitators/barriers (i.e. social support), and goal -
setting are associated with increased PA in breast cancer survivors.15,37 -39 Most PA 
interventions that use SCT involve simultaneous delivery of multiple intervention 
components (e.g. goal -setting activities, PA logs, social support) intended to target these 
constructs. While  this approach results in determination of overall intervention 
effectiveness, it provides little insight into which intervention components/SCT constructs 
were, or were not, effective. Identifying which intervention components maximize PA 
while minimizing  cost can help to determine which components should be included, 
eliminated or reduced to meet specific organization or individual needs.  
 
 
Physical activity (PA), breast cancer (BC) prognosis, and cardiovascular disease 
(CVD) risk. Overall  relative survival rates are high for breast cancer.  However, BC 
survivors (BCS) are still at risk for recurrence  and they demonstrate higher CVD incidence 
and mortality40 than healthy controls. CVD is also the leading cause of non -cancer death 
among BCS.41 Increased CVD risk in BCS likely results from a combination of treatment 
toxicities42,43 and poor lifestyle habits.44 Increasing PA may improve both BC 
progression45 and reduce CVD risk46 in BCS. A recent meta -analysis found that BCS who 
participated in the most PA post -diagnosis had a lower risk of BC -related death, death 
from a ny cause, BC progression, and new primary cancers and recurrence compared to 
inactive BCS.  45 Further, data from the general population indicate increased PA is 
associated with reduced CVD risk and mortality.47,48 While these findings are promising, 
the exact biologic mechanisms underlying the benefits of PA on BC progression and CVD 
risk in BCS are not well -established.  
 
 
Fig. 2 Proposed BC Progression and CVD Risk path ways to be Examined  

PROTOCOL TITLE: Designing with Dissemination in Mind: Optimization of a mHeal th 
Physical Activity Intervention for  Breast Cancer Survivors  (Fit2Thrive)  
 Page 7 of 63 Revis ed Template : November 10, 2014  PA and BC prognosis and CVD risk biomarkers. PA is hypothesized to improve  BC 
progression  via its effects on a number biobehavioral pathways , including 
inflammation.49,50 A pro-inflammatory  phenotype is associated with increased BC 
progression and mortality and CVD risk and mortality51-54 while  higher PA is associated 
with amelioration of a pro-inflammatory phenotype .55 Higher PA may be associated with 
further CVD risk and mortality reductions in BCS via its effects on cardiometabolic 
biomarkers.56 Figure 2 displays these pathways. The proposed study will contribute to the 
evidence needed t o advance a public health -level recommendation that BCS should 
engage in PA . Inflammatory biomarkers. Interleukin -6 (IL-6) and tumor necrosis factor -
alpha (TNFα)  are pro -inflammatory cytokines secreted by tumor cells, infiltrating 
macrophages, and adipocyt es. Preclinical studies suggest TNFα is associated with 
increased angiogenesis and invasion57,58 and IL -6 promotes proliferation, inhibiting 
apoptosis and promoting conversion of noncancer cells into tumor stem cells.59 
Interleukin -10 (IL-10) is an anti -inflammatory immunosuppressive cytokine with both  pro- 
(reduces antigen presentation, cell maturation and differentiation which may allow tumor 
cells to evade immune surveillance mechanisms)60 and anti - (inhibits gene expression, 
cytokine synthesis by T cells and macrophages, and their antigen presentation)61 tumoral 
effects.62 C-reactive  protein (CRP) , an acute phase protein,  is a non -specific marker of 
chronic inflammation primarily regulated by IL -6. CRP may con tribute to a  pro -neoplastic 
environment by inducing DNA damage, promoting angiogenesis, and favoring neoplastic 
spread and metastis.54 The pro -inflammatory phenotype propagated by these biomarkers 
is: a) more prevalent in BCS than noncancer controls,63 b) associated with increased BC 
incidence, recurrence, progression and mortality51,52,64 -66 and c) associated with 
increased CVD risk53 and mortality67 via its contribution to the atherosclerotic disease 
process.68 Aerobic PA is associated with amelioration of this pro -inflammatory 
phenotype.55,69 Although the exact underlying mechanisms are unknown,  hypothesized 
effects include:  PA-associated reduction s in visceral fat mass; increased production and 
release of anti -inflammatory cytokines from contracting skeletal muscle and reduced 
expression of Tolllike receptors (TLRs) on monocytes.55 Cardiometabolic biomarker s. 
Higher levels of blood glucose (BG), triglycerides (TG), and total cholesterol (TC) and 
lower HDL -cholesterol (HDL -C) are associated with  increased risk of cardiovascular 
events .70-77 Regular PA improves liver, skeletal muscle and adipose tissue sensitivity to 
insulin resulting in decreased fasting insulin levels and the insulin respon se to glucose, 
resulting in increased glucose disposal rates.78 PA may improve lipid profiles via a number 
of mechanisms including enhancing skeletal muscles’ ability to utilize lipids, increased 
lipoprotein lipase activity and increased lecithin -cholesterol acyltrans.79  
 
Impact of intervention and PA dose on bioma rker outcomes.  Understanding the dose 
of PA needed for specific outcomes in cancer survivors and whether this dose varies by 
participant characteristics has recently been identified as a high research priority by 
NCI.80 The typical approach of testing multiple interven tion components delivered 
simultaneously in a randomized control trial (RCT) only allows us to draw conclusions 
about an entire treatment package when each intervention component may differentially 
influence intervention adherence, PA dose engaged in and h ealth outcomes. By testing 
the individual effects of PA intervention components (i.e. coaching calls, text messaging , 
breast cancer specific app, group support and online gym membership) on BC 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Designing with Dissemination in Mind: Optimization of a mHeal th 
Physical Activity Intervention for  Breast Cancer Survivors  (Fit2Thrive)  
 Page 8 of 63 Revis ed Template : November 10, 2014  progression and cardiometabolic biomarkers and examining potent ial mediators and 
moderators of these relationships  in the proposed study, we will gain important insight 
into the “dose” of: a) PA (i.e. intervention adherence and PA volume) needed to improve 
biomarkers of interest and b) intervention [i.e. which compone nts, at what levels, in what 
combinat ion(s)] needed to achieve these outcomes. We will also gain preliminary insight 
into whether the needed PA and intervention dose varies by individual characteristics. 
This will allow for more specific and personalized i ntervention prescriptions for specific 
outcomes for BCS.  
 
Dried blood spots . Remotely -delivered , technology -supported interventions have 
greater potentially scalability than intensive, on -site interventions and allow for larger 
sample sizes and greater geographic diversity. In contrast, the cost and logistics 
associated with collecting biomarker sam ples, often restricts the assessment of these 
outcomes in larger -scale technology -supported interventions. The self -collection of 
DBS—drops of whole blood collected on filter paper from a simple and inexpensive finger 
prick —proposed in this study provide a  minimally invasive, low cost, feasible and more 
generalizable method81 for measuring biomarkers in the context of a remotely -delivered 
PA intervention with a nationwide sample of BCS. Thus, findings will be more 
generalizable than other PA studies incorporating biomarkers in BCS.       
 
Research Team. The PI, Dr. Phillips, has extensive experience designing and conducting 
similar physical activity studies in older adults and breast cancer survivors. The co -
investigators are nationally and internationally recognized experts in can cer survivorship 
(Penedo , Cella ), be havioral interventions (Spring, Ackermann, Penedo), mHealth 
(Spring), fractional factorial designs/methodology (Spring), and D&I sciences 
(Ackermann).  
2.2 Preliminary data.  
Evidence for the use of SCT.  The PI’s  dissertation used a 6 month prospec tive study 
design to test whether the SCT model using the structural pathways proposed by 
Bandura35 explained changes in PA in a nationwide sample of breast cancer survivors. 
Results from this study indicated SCT explained 41% and 49% of the variance in PA at 
baseline and follow -up, respectively.15 Self-efficacy was the strongest predictor of PA and 
these effects were both direct, and indirect, via social support, goals and outcome 
expectations.15 Findings were largely consistent among changes in constr ucts over the 6 
month period and when using accelerometry to measure PA.  
Feasibility of recruitment and assessment via Army of Women©. The PI’s dissertation  
also supports the feasibility of recruiting breast cancer survivors via the Army of Women© 
and com pletion of the same, or similar, assessments to those in the present study. Within 
12 hours of recruitment initiation for this study , 2,500 women expressed interested in 
participating and recruitment was halted due to capacity limitations. Of that   number , 
1,631 (64%) responded to screening and qualified to participate. I randomized 500 of 
those women to wear accelerometers for 7 consecutive days. Only 4 refused to wear the 
device.  At baseline and follow -up, 1,527 women (94%) completed more than half of t he 
on-line questionnaires. Valid accelerometer data were obtained from 442 (89%) women 
at baseline; 370 (83.7%) of those women also had valid data at 6 month follow -up. 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Designing with Dissemination in Mind: Optimization of a mHeal th 
Physical Activity Intervention for  Breast Cancer Survivors  (Fit2Thrive)  
 Page 9 of 63 Revis ed Template : November 10, 2014  Reasons for missing accelerometer data at baseline and follow -up, respectively, were: 
did not wear (n=36 and n=40), insufficient valid wear time (n=8 and n=17), accelerometer 
malfunctioned (n=5 at both), lost in mail or by participant (n=4 and n=5) and submerged 
in water (n=1).  
Feasibility of mHealth intervention. Data from Pew82 indicate that, as of January 2014, 
58% of Americans own smartphones and 42% own tablet computers suggesting that a 
large proportion of breast cancers likely own this technology. Since we are recruiting from 
the Army of Women© which communicates via e -blasts, we expect these women to be 
relatively tech savvy and interested in mHealth interventions.  
DBS are valid for proposed biomarkers . In studies using self -collection of DBS, ≥90% 
of participant samples83,84 have been adequate for analyses indicating this is a highly 
feasible method for  DBS collection. Dr. Funk’s has rigorously tested the performance 
parameters of the proposed i mmunoassay 
protocol  for IL -6, IL -10 and  TNFα to 
determine the limit of detection [range: 0.3 
pg/mL (IL -6) to 1.25 pg/mL (T NFα)], and 
assay linearity [range: 99.0% (IL6) to 113% 
(IL10) ]. Levels of within -assay precision and 
between assay variation are displayed in 
Table 1. Performance  parameters of the 
proposed CRP immunoassay by the 
Laboratory for Human Biology Research  (LHBR)  have also been rigorously  evaluated to 
determine the limit of detection (0.03 mg/l), within - (95.9%) and between - (109%) assay 
variance and assay linearity (95.4% -109% of expected). T he relationship between DBS 
and matched -serum CRP levels is strong and linear (R= 0.96). The Unive rsity of 
Washington Department of Laboratory Medicine (UWLM) , who will quantify 
cardiometabolic biomarkers, found  high correlations between TG (R = 0.97)  and BG (R= 
0.90)  in matched DBS and plasma samples . However, correlations between matched 
DBS and seru m samples for HDL-C (R=0.55) and TC  (R=0.58)  were less optimal85 which 
was unexpected, given  higher correlations were observed in comparisons using samples 
analyzed under controlled laboratory conditions. The reason for this discrepancy is 
unclear, but new assay standards are developed and these relations hips are being re -
established.  
Summary.  Our preliminary work provides evidence for the use of SCT to guide 
intervention design and demonstrates the feasibility of enrolling/retaining and assessing 
participants using Army of Women©.  National smartphone usage data suggest the 
acceptability of a mHea lth PA intervention.  
2.3 Significance and Innovation  
The proposed study is significant because it represents the first systematic effort to use 
optimization methodology to design a theoretically -guided mHealth PA intervention for 
breast cancer survivors with D &I in mind from the outset. Ultimately, this work will 
significantly contribute to our understanding of how to effectively increase and maintain 
PA to improve health and disease outcomes in breast cancer survivors.  
 
Table 1. Assay Precision of DBS  
Assay  High CV  Med CV  Low CV  
Within -assay precision  
IL-6  8.98 9.73 9.34 
IL-10 10.91  12.92  14.85  
TNF-α  6.78 8.47 21.49  
Between -assay variation  
IL-6  4.34 8.51 3.41 
IL-10 5.41 13.85  7.89 
TNF-α  7.56 3.65 2.62 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Designing with Dissemination in Mind: Optimization of a mHeal th 
Physical Activity Intervention for  Breast Cancer Survivors  (Fit2Thrive)  
 Page 10 of 63 Revis ed Template : November 10, 2014  Methodological Innovation: MOST to Desig n with D&I in mind from the Start. 
Intervention development typically consists of designing an intervention with multiple 
components and then testing whether the intervention, as a whole, has a significant effect 
in randomized clinical trials (RCT).86  However, information about which intervention 
components contribute to the desired effect and which do not is necessary to continue to 
increase intervention effectiveness and efficiency. Because all intervention components 
are turned “On” in the treatmen t group and “Off” in the control group in a typical RCT, this 
information cannot be obtained. The Multiphase Optimization Strategy (MOST)25,87 is a 
comprehensive framework that supports  optimizing an intervention by efficiently and 
systematically identifying the most promising intervention components and component 
levels.  MOST is b ased on is based on the engineering principles of resource 
management and continuous optimization. The overall goal of MOST is to maximize 
public health impact (efficacy x intervention reach) using available resources. MOST is 
an emerging methodology that may be particularly useful for designing mHealth 
interventions with D&I in mind from the start because of its emphasis on optimization, an 
iterative design process and public health impact.20,88 Figure 3 describes how we  plan to 
use MOST to design an optimized PA intervention for breast cancer survivors. MOST, 
like all theory -based approaches to intervention develop ment, starts by using theory, 
scientific literature, clinical experience, and results from previous studies to establish a 
conceptual model (Step 1a). Based on prior work, we am proposing to use SCT for this 
study. We will complete steps 1b to 3b as part o f the proposed project. Step 1b will involve 
further refinement of the model/component selection to inform Step 2, intervention/app 
design and usability testing . These steps will be performed in collaboration with relevant 
stakeholders (cancer survivors, c linicians, research experts).  Step 3a will pilot test the 
feasibility, acceptability, and effects on PA and important patient reported outcomes 
(PROs) of each of the intervention components and component combinations. Step 3b 
involves collection of partici pant feedback and evaluation of the intervention components 
and combinations. The present study will provide the necessary preliminary data to apply 
for future grants  steps 4a -5. The MOST framework has rarely been applied to the 
development of behavioral i nterventions, and to the best of our knowledge, has never 
been specifically applied to the development of a PA intervention in cancer survivors.    
PROTOCOL TITLE: Designing with Dissemination in Mind: Optimization of a mHeal th 
Physical Activity Intervention for  Breast Cancer Survivors  (Fit2Thrive)  
 Page 11 of 63 Revis ed Template : November 10, 2014   
Conceptual and Technological Innovation. Existing evidence indicates that:  (a) home -
based interventions can effectively increase PA among breast cancer survivors5 and (b) 
mHealth supported interventions are effective for increasing PA.89-91 However, to the best 
of our knowledge, there have been no tests of mHealth supported PA interventions in 
breast cancer survivors. As cellphones are b ecoming ubiquitous,82 they may offer a cost -
effective tool to change and maintain PA behavior in a manner that increases intervention 
reach and D&I potential.88,92 Moreover, mHealth interv entions allow researchers to collect 
real-time data and provide real -time feedback.  Those capabilities can: a) provide 
additional insight into relationships between PA and PROs, b) increase safety by alerting 
researchers immediately to problems, c) allow better monitoring of intervention adherence 
and d) increase adherence. While many commercially available PA apps exist, the 
majority have not been empirically tested, are not evidence -based, theoretically -guided 
or designed specifically for cancer survivor s.93-95 Therefore, the feasibility, acceptability 
and effectiveness of mHealth PA interventions needs to be tested in cancer sur vivors. 
Selection of mHealth intervention components will be guided by SCT, engage 
stakeholders in development, and incorporate cutting edge technology and functionality 
to determine, not only whether a mHealth intervention is associated with PA change and  
maintenance, but which components maximize these outcomes for the lowest cost.  
3.0 Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  
3.1 Screening for Eligibility  
Figure 3. Steps for Designing with Dissemination in Mind Using MOST  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Designing with Dissemination in Mind: Optimization of a mHeal th 
Physical Activity Intervention for  Breast Cancer Survivors  (Fit2Thrive)  
 Page 12 of 63 Revis ed Template : November 10, 2014  This study will have two phases (see Figure 4). Phase 1 (Aim #1) will involve intervention 
development. Phase 2 (Aims #2, #3 and Exploratory) will involve the pilot testing of the 
intervention components to be identified in Aim #1.  
Phase 1 and Phase 2.  For both phases, interested participants will be screen ed for 
eligibility either via an on-line screening questionnaires or telephone interview. Eligible 
breast cancer survivors will be offered the opportunity to participate and will complete 
informed consent.   
 
Figure 4. Summary of Phase 1 and 2 of R esearch Protocol 
 
 
 
3.2 Inclusionary and Exclusionary Criteria  
This study will have two phases  (see Figure 3) . Phase 1 (Aim #1) will involve intervention 
development. Phase 2 (Aims #2, #3 and Exploratory) will involve the pilot testing of the 
intervention components  to be  identified in Aim #1.  
Breast Cancer Survivors in Phase 1 and 2. The same inclusionary criteria for breast 
cancer survivors will be used for  all phases of the research. However, all women recruited 
into the intervention in Phase 2 will also be required to pass the Physical Activity 
Readiness Questionnaire (PAR -Q)96 (see attached) or receive medical clearance from 
their primary care physician or oncologist.  
Inclusionary Criteria  for Breast Cancer Survivors :  
• Women ≥ 18 years of age who were diagnosed with Stage I -III breast cancer  within 
the last 5 years  
• Have completed last cancer treatment ( adjuvant chemotherapy ,  radiation therapy  
or surgery) at least 3 months prior to enrollme nt 
• English speaking  
• Currently participate in <60 minutes of  moderate and vigorous PA/week  (Phase 2 
only)  

PROTOCOL TITLE: Designing with Dissemination in Mind: Optimization of a mHeal th 
Physical Activity Intervention for  Breast Cancer Survivors  (Fit2Thrive)  
 Page 13 of 63 Revis ed Template : November 10, 2014  • Own a smartphone  (For Phase 2 only: iPhone –version 5 or greater or an Android 
–version 5 or greater)  
• Have access to a computer  with Internet  
• Participants may be using adjuvant endocrine therapies . 
• Willing to be waitlisted for future wave if current wave reaches capacity (Phase 2 
only)  
Exclusionary Criteria  for Breast Cancer Survivors : 
• Women will be excluded if they report any of the following:  
o Respiratory, joint or  cardiovascular problems precluding PA  
o Metastatic disease  
o Planned elective surgery during duration of the intervention/follow -up that 
would interfere with participation (e.g., breast reconstructive surgery).  
o ONLY IF P ARTICIPATING IN OPTIONAL DBS COLLECTION:  
▪ A prior cardiovascular event (i.e. stroke, myocardial infarction)  
▪ Have been diagnosed with an acute or chronic immune system 
medical conditions, or conditions that impact immune and endocrine 
function (e.g., CFS, Lupus, rheumatoid arthritis, Hepatitis C, or 
immunosuppressive treatment requiring conditions)  
 
Inclusionary Criteria for Other Stakeholders in Phase 1:  
• English -speaking  
• Have expertise in breast cancer or physical activity OR organization the individual 
works for actively works with breast cancer survivors on a regular basis  
• Own a smartphone  
 
Inclus ionary Criteria for “Buddies”:  
• Must be at least 18 years old  
• Have access to a computer and internet  
• Own a smartphone  
• Be willing to receive regular emails from the study team  
• Be willing to wear a Fitbit and transmit Fitbit data to the study team  
• Be willing to “friend” participant in the Fitbit app and provide support and 
encouragement to the participant.  
3.3 High -risk Subpopulation Inclusion.  
The following subgroups will be excluded from the present study:  
• Adults unable to consent  
• Individuals who are not yet adults (infants, children, teenagers)  
• Pregnant women  
• Prisoners  
 
4.0 Study -Wide Number of Subjects :  
Phase 1.  We will recruit s takeholders includ ing breast cancer survivors (n= 30 for 
interviews ; up to 100  for usability testing), experts and clinicians (n=10 -15; e.g. 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Designing with Dissemination in Mind: Optimization of a mHeal th 
Physical Activity Intervention for  Breast Cancer Survivors  (Fit2Thrive)  
 Page 14 of 63 Revis ed Template : November 10, 2014  oncologists, nurses, experts in D&I, PA and rehabilitation) and representatives (n=10 -15) 
from local community organ izations (e.g. Gilda’s Club Chicago, the YMCA and American 
Cancer Society Illinois Chapter).  
 
Phase 2.  We plan to accrue a nationwide sample of 256 women to the intervention pilot 
testing phase.  Approximately 50% of these will be assigned to the buddy co ndition. As 
such we will accrue 128 buddies. We anticipate 80% of these “buddies” (n=102) will 
agree to participate in the optional questionnaire assessments. We will recruit up to 35 
participants for the post -intervention interviews.  
 
 
5.0 Study -Wide Recruitment Methods : 
5.1 When, where and how potential subjects will be recruited.  
Phase 1 . Women  will be recruited from the Army of Women (AOW) e -blast.© The AOW is 
an online initiative that connects breast cancer researchers with women who are wi lling 
to participate in research. The database currently consists of ≥375,000 women. Of these, 
~30% (112,500) self -report a breast cancer history. Women interested in participating in 
the current stud y will respond to the e -blast consenting to have their c ontact information 
released by the AOW to study investigators. Their contact information will , then, be 
forwarded to the study investigator who will provide a description of the study and further 
screen for eligibility either via on -line screening question naires or telephone interview. 
Eligible breast cancer survivors will be offered the opportunity to participate and will 
complete informed consent.   
 
Community representatives will be recruited in conjunction with NU’s Center for 
Community Health (led by Co -I Dr. Ackermann)  via personalized e -mails and phone calls . 
Experts will be recruited through the RHLCCC and the PI’s, co-investigators’  professional 
networks  via listservs and personalized e -mails and phone calls .  
 
Phase 2.  Breast  cancer survivors  will be recruited through an e -blast sent to members of 
the Army of Women©, an online initiative that connects breast cancer researchers with 
women who are willing to participate in research. The database currently consists of 
≥375,000 women and men. Of th ese, ~30% (112,500) self -report a breast cancer history. 
Women interested in participating in the current study will respond to the e -blast.  Their 
contact information will be forwarded to the study investigator who will provide a 
description of the study and further screen for eligibility either via on -line screening 
questionnaires or telephone interview. Eligible breast cancer survivors will be offered the 
opportunity to participate and will complete informed consent.  
 
If our recruitment goals are not be ing sufficiently met via the Army of Women© we will also 
post study fliers and advertisements on social media sites (i.e. Facebook, 
PatientsLikeMe) and on -line forums (i.e. Sisters Network, Nueva Vida, Living Beyond 
Breast Cancer). In addition we will send  recruitment emails to all women from previous 
studies who consented to being contacted regarding future study opportunities. All 
women who are recruited through these alternative strategies will be instructed to contact 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Designing with Dissemination in Mind: Optimization of a mHeal th 
Physical Activity Intervention for  Breast Cancer Survivors  (Fit2Thrive)  
 Page 15 of 63 Revis ed Template : November 10, 2014  the study staff who will provide a description of the study and further screen for eligibility 
either via on -line screening questionnaires or telephone interview .  Eligible breast cancer 
survivors will be offered the opportunity to participate and will complete informed consent.  
 
• Buddy recr uitment: Breast cancer survivors assigned to the Buddy component, 
will be asked to contact their buddy and provide the study team with the name 
and email address of their chosen buddy. The buddy will then be emailed  a brief 
description of the study and a l ink to the on -line buddy screening RedCap. 
Interested and e ligible buddies will be offered the opportunity to participate and 
will complete informed consent. If a buddy indicates, they are not interested or 
fails to respond after 3 contact attempts, we wil l ask the participant for a new 
buddy name and email address.  
• Post -intervention interview:  Individuals who participated in the Fit2Thrive 
intervention within the previous 6 months and agreed to hear about future studies 
will be eligible. Women will be inv ited to participate via email. They will be 
selected for invitation based on adherence to the program and intervention 
component assignment to ensure broad representation. Former participants will 
be contacted up to 3 times to participate after which we will cease contact.  
 
5.2 Methods used to identify potential subjects.  
Women who meet the following criteria will be included in the present study: a) indicate 
they are interested in the present study, b) meet all eligibility criteria and c) consent to 
participation .  
“Buddies” who meet the following the following criteria will  be included in the present 
study: )  indicate they are interested in the present study, b) meet all eligibility criteria 
and c) consent to participation .  
 
5.3 Recruitment materials.  
All recruitment materials will list study eligibility criteria and requirements, will provide a 
link to the study web -page and will not deviate from the IR B-approved language. The 
posting will also include a phone number and study e -mail address where part icipants 
can reach staff if they have any general questions regarding study participation.  
 
6.0 Multi -Site Research : N/A  
 
7.0 Study Timelines  
7.1 Duration of  an individual subject’s  participation  
Phase 1. We will select 30 women to participate in interviews from those interested. We  
anticipate survivor interviews will last 45-60 minutes . We anticipate expert/clinical 
stakeholders and community/advocacy partner interviews will last approximately 30 -45 
minutes . Survivors who participate in the app development process (n= 100) will 
participate in  up to  two app development sessions (approximately 1 hour each) and 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Designing with Dissemination in Mind: Optimization of a mHeal th 
Physical Activity Intervention for  Breast Cancer Survivors  (Fit2Thrive)  
 Page 16 of 63 Revis ed Template : November 10, 2014  possibly a  field testing of the app/intervention components  (duration of 5 to 14 days) . 
During the field testing, participants, will spend approximately 30 -60 minutes interacting 
with the study app  each day  including entering information and providing real time 
feedback to developers on features they do and do not  like. There is a chance 
saturation/consensus will be reached during the field testing before all survivors have had 
a chance to participate. Therefore, some survivors may not participate in the field testing 
and post-field testing app development session .  
Phase 2.  Survivors will participate in a 12 week intervention and a 12 week follow -up for 
a total of 24 weeks. Buddies will provide support to their participant throughout the entire 
24 week period. Women who participate in the post-intervention  intervi ew, will participate 
for approximately 30-45 minutes.  
7.2  Duration anticipated to enroll all study subjects.  
Table 2 details  the full study timeline. Specific details for each phase are as follows:  
 
Phase 1. We anticipate it will take 3 months to recruit/complete initial interviews , 3-6 
months to design/refine and program intervention/app components, and 3 months to 
conduct several field trials with breast cancer survivors (n= 100). We have planned 12 -18 
months f or intervention/app development and will meet bi -weekly with developers to 
ensure suffici ent progress towards this goal.  
 
Phase 2. We anticipate it will take 18 to 24 months to recruit and enroll breast cancer 
survivors and buddies into the intervention pilot phase of the trial. We anticipate it will 
take approximately 6 months to enroll all women in the post-intervention  interviews.  
Table 2. Study Timeline  
  Year 1  Year 2 Year 3  Year 4  Year 5  
Quarter   1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 
App 
Development  
(Phase 1)  Study Preparation                      
App/Component 
Development/Refinement                      
Intervention 
Component 
Piloting  
(Phase 2)  Recruitment/Baseline Data 
Collection                      
Active Intervention Component 
Delivery                      
Follow -up Period                      
Data Analyses                      
 
7.3 Estimated date for study  completion : June 30, 2020  
 
8.0 Study Endpoints  
8.1 Describe the primary and secondary study endpoints.  
Primary study endpoint: intervention feasibility/acceptability.  
Feasibility:  This will be measured during the intervention, immediately post -intervention 
and after the follow -up period. M easures include:  
• Intervention reach :  # of participants enrolled/# of eligible individuals  
• Participant retention : # of participants who drop out/# of participants randomized  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Designing with Dissemination in Mind: Optimization of a mHeal th 
Physical Activity Intervention for  Breast Cancer Survivors  (Fit2Thrive)  
 Page 17 of 63 Revis ed Template : November 10, 2014  • Intervention Adherence : % of weeks adhered to exercise prescription during 
interv ention period  
• Intervention Maintenance : % of weeks adhered to exercise prescription during 
follow -up period  
• Intervention component engagement:  
o During intervention : # of times, on average, participants interacted with each 
intervention component during intervention  
o During follow -up: # of times, on average, participants interacted with each 
intervention component  during follow -up 
o Total:  # of times, on average, parti cipants interacted with each intervention 
component  over intervention and follow -up 
 
Acceptability: This will be measured via a process evaluation immediately post -
intervention at 12 weeks and after the follow -up period  at 24 weeks . This evaluation will 
assess the following:  
• Perceived effectiveness of intervention components/app; use of app/intervention 
materials; plans to continue PA/app use; elements of intervention liked/disliked; 
satisfaction with program delivery, assessments and staff  
 
Secondary study endpoints:  Seconda ry study endpoints include physical activity (self -
report and objectively measured), social cognitive theory constructs (self -efficacy, 
outcome expectations, social support, physical activity enjoyment) ,  patient -reported 
outcomes (fatigue, health -related quality of life, cognitive functioning, physical functioning 
and depression)  and BC progression and CVD risk biomarkers . Secondary study 
endpoints will be assessed at baseline, post -intervention and at the end of the follow -up 
period. We will also assess c ovariates including demographic (i.e. marital status, number 
of children, height, body weight, occupation, age, income and education), breast cancer 
characteristics and history (date of diagnosis, type of treatment, length of treatment, 
disease stage, tumo r receptor status, recurrence, etc.) and general health history (i.e. 
comorbid conditions, height, weight, fruit and vegetable consumption, smoking history, 
etc.) Covariates will be assessed at baseline.  
8.2 Describe any primar y or secondary safety endpoints: N/A  
9.0 Procedures Involved*  
9.1 Study Design.  
Table 3. SCT Construct and Potential Intervention Component to Target   
SCT Construct  Potential Intervention Component to Be Turned “On/Off”  
Self-efficacy  
(1 component)  -Daily feedback on PA accomplishments  
-Weekly motivational stories about similar  survivors   
-Support for interpreting physiological responses  (i.e. heart 
rate, muscle soreness) to PA  
-Messages with weekly PA tasks to master  
Outcome 
Expectations  
(1 component)  -Text message s providing information on expected progress  
-Weekly collection/feedback on outcome of interest (e.g. 
mood) 
Goal -setting   
(1 component)  -Daily PA tracking  using a F itBit  
-Weekly goal -setting prompts/fe edback on progress  
-Prompts to schedule PA for the day  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Designing with Dissemination in Mind: Optimization of a mHeal th 
Physical Activity Intervention for  Breast Cancer Survivors  (Fit2Thrive)  
 Page 18 of 63 Revis ed Template : November 10, 2014   Phase 1. This portion of the 
study will consist of interviews  
and app/ intervention/  
development. Initial  interviews  
with breast cancer survivors , 
experts and community partners  will be conducted before app development begins. The 
purpose of these sessions will be to obtain stakeholders’ perceptions of the intervention/ 
app components proposed in Table 3, identify new potential components and decide on 
5 components to test.  Survivors will  also be selected to participate in a stakeholder 
advisory board session to inform decisions related to Phase 2 of the study. We have 
attached guides for the initial interviews.  At the end of the interviews subject will also be  
asked if they are interested in participating in the advisory board (survivors) . Phase 2.   
Following Phase 1, we will conduct a pilot exper imental test of all components to evaluate 
their feasibility and accessibility  (Aim 2) and preliminary effect on PA (Aim 3) and PROs 
(Exploratory Aim) at 12 weeks and 24 week follow -up in a sample of 256 brea st cancer 
survivors using a MOST design  (See Table 6).   
 
9.2  Research Procedures  
Phase 1  
We will engage survivors in 
developing and tailoring system 
components to fit their needs 
employing three user -centered 
design principles: 1) Focus on Users 
and Tasks, 2) Measure Usability 
Empirically and Design and 3) Test 
Usability Iteratively.97 Similar 
procedures have been followed as 
part of app development for Dr. 
Spring’s existing, effective mHealth 
interventions. Additionally, since 
similar components have been 
developed/used in interventions 
conducted by Dr. Spring’s research 
team, the deve lopment process will 
consist largely of tailoring/refining 
these components for the present 
study.   
 
Assessments  
Interviews:  We are currently 
conducting an online needs assessment that will inform this study. To further inform our 
design, we will conduct i nterviews with stakeholders (survivors, experts, community 
partners) to inform the development of intervention components that are grounded in 
SCT. Expert/community partners’ interviews will take place in -person on Northwestern’s 
Chicago campus whenever po ssible. However, we anticipate that the clinical/research Facilitators/  
Barriers   
(2 component)  -Choose e xercise “buddy”  to participate in intervention with  
-Daily tracking of facilitators/barriers  
-Group or individual competitions or games  
-Message boards for between -participant communication  
-Problem solving support calls  
-“On demand” motivational messages  
-Virtual, on -line gym membership  
Table 4. Usability Measures  
Factor  Objective Measures  Subjective Measures  
  Users’ rating of…  
Learnability:  ease with 
which  use of device is 
earned so users can 
rapidly accomplish 
intended tasks  Time taken for users 
to learn to accomplish 
intended tasks  Ease and time to learn 
system  
Effectiveness:  
usefulnes s for supporting 
intended tasks  Successful 
performance of 
intended task (y/n)  System’s ability to 
promote performance 
and productivity  
Efficiency: productivity 
once users have learned 
the system  Time to accomplish 
tasks once have 
learned system  System’s ability to 
improve speed at whic h 
they perform  
Errors:  low frequency,  
severity of errors and 
easy  recovery  Error rates trying to 
use system; severity 
of errors; recovery 
time for errors  Impact of errors on 
using system and ability 
to recover from errors  
Flexibility:  variety of 
ways to  achieve intended 
tasks  Number of different 
command or routed to 
achieve same goal  System’s ability to 
provide different 
command or routes to 
achieve same goal  
Memorability:  ease with 
which casual users can 
return  to the system  
without having to relearn  Memory failure rate 
on how to use system 
next time; time to re -
learn system after 
periods of non -use Ability to remember 
how to use system next 
time and ability to re -
learn s ystem after 
periods of non -use 
User Satisfaction:  
pleasant for users  Frequency for 
utilization of the 
system and its 
features  Fondness, perceptions 
and opinion of system 
and its features  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Designing with Dissemination in Mind: Optimization of a mHeal th 
Physical Activity Intervention for  Breast Cancer Survivors  (Fit2Thrive)  
 Page 19 of 63 Revis ed Template : November 10, 2014  partners’ and community/advocacy partners’ interviews may be hard to arrange so these 
sessions may occur via the telephone or web (i.e. Skype), at the partner’s workplace or 
at some other public loc ation (i.e. library, coffee house). Breast cancer survivors’ 
interviews will be completed via telephone. Because we anticipate interest will be greater 
than capacity, we will select 30 women of the up to 100 women recruited for interviews. 
All stakeholders  will complete informed consent on -line. Interviews will provide input and 
feedback on desired intervention components as well as components identified in Table 
3. Stakeholders will provide insight into implementation of physical activity programs 
within t heir setting and feedback the perceived usefulness of these components, identify 
potential alternative components, and aid in tailoring intervention content to their needs. 
survivors  to participate in a stakeholder advisory board session to further vet int ervention 
components .. Community and expert stakeholders will also be provided with a study 
information sheet at the end of their interview for their reference. The interview will take 
45-60 minutes  for community partners/experts and 30 -45 minutes for surv ivors .  
 
 App Development Session 1:  Following completion of the interviews with the survivor 
subgroup, all survivors will be invited to participate in the first app development session 
which will be a two -part on -line survey. The first part will ask survivors to provide feedback 
on their pre ferences and opinions for app features. The second part will present 
wireframes of potential components and solicit input on their perceived usefulness and 
effectiveness. All women (n=100) will participate in this session. Both parts of the session 
will ta ke up to 60 minutes to complete. We will use these data to work with programmers 
and breast cancer survivors in an iterative manner to create a minimally viable test version 
of the intervention components. All components selected for testing will meet the following 
criteria: a) hypothesized to target one primary SCT construct and enhance PA adherence 
via pathways detailed in Figure 1; b) have a clear relative advantage in terms of influence 
on PA and cost/burden and c) are approved by stakeholders.  Particip ants will be sent an 
initial e -mail with a link to the survey and up to 3 additional reminder e -mails to complete 
the survey.  
 
Breast Cancer Survivor Stakeholder Advisory Board Session : Survivors will be sent an 
email asking them to participate in a conf erence call to go over an executive summary of 
findings from the interviews and App Development Session 1. This session will ask 
survivors their opinions on the proposed app and intervention components (see attached 
guide). The conference call will be audi o recorded and then be used to reach consensus 
before proceeding with initial development of the app prototype.  
 
Field Test:   Survivors (n=100) will participate in an app field test. They will be assigned in 
waves of up to 20 women to use the intervention components for up to 2 weeks. D uring 
the field test, survivors will provide feedback to developers in real time when they are 
using the app regarding features they do and do not like and app functionality. At the end 
of each wave, the research  team and developers will ask participants to complete an on -
line survey and participate in a telephone or web -based session to solicit feedback on the 
usability components identified in Table 4. Based on these data, the intervention 
components will be twe aked. The new iteration of the intervention components will be 
tested by the next wave using the same procedures until all participants have tested it, or 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Designing with Dissemination in Mind: Optimization of a mHeal th 
Physical Activity Intervention for  Breast Cancer Survivors  (Fit2Thrive)  
 Page 20 of 63 Revis ed Template : November 10, 2014  we have reached saturation (n=up to 100). Thus, all survivors may not participate in this 
session. Th e purposes of this field study is NOT to test how well  it works to increase PA, 
but rather to evaluate the app’s functioning and ease of use in everyday life. Participants 
will be explicitly instructed NOT to change their usual physical activity patterns a s part of 
this field test. They may be asked to enter some data on your behaviors, motivation and 
symptoms to test functionality of these components. However, participants will be 
explicitly instruct that these data do not necessarily need to reflect their  true ratings. These 
data will not be used for any purposes other than to test the functioning of the app.  
Participants will spend approximately 15 -60 minutes interacting with the app each day 
during the field test which will include providing any feedback  to developers in real -time, 
as they use the app, regarding features you do and do not like and functionality. Prior to 
the initiation of field testing participants will be sent an update e -mail and asked to indicate 
whether they own a Fitbit and how tech savvy they are so this information can be taken 
into account when reviewing their responses.   
 
App Development Session 2 :  Immediately after completing the field test, survivors will 
be asked to complete an on -line survey and/or attend a telephone or web -based session 
to provide feedback on the intervention features they liked and disliked and any ideas 
they have on what could be changed and/or improved.  Depending on the ability to 
schedule survivors this may be individual or involve up to 20 other survivo rs. This session 
will last up to 60 minutes.   
• Wave 1  (n=10)  and Wave 3  (n=10 -20) of Field Testing  and App Development 
Session 2:  
o For the field test: Participants will be sent an email notifying them they have 
been selected and asking them to download and use the test version of the 
app for a minimum of 3 days over the course of a 7 -10 days. Participants 
will be provided with instructions on how to down load the app and provide 
feedback to the study team in real -time.  
o For App Development Session 2:  At the end of that period, participants will 
be sent the app post -field test survey and asked to complete it.  
o Participants will be sent up to 3 reminders for  each of the following tasks: 
using and providing feedback on the app and completion of the field test 
survey.   
• Wave 2  of Field Testing  (n=10 -15) and App Development Session 2:  
o For the field test: Participants will be sent an email notifying them they have 
been selected and asking them to complete the App Notification Field Test 
Survey . Participants will be sent up to 3 reminders to complete the survey.  
o For App Development Session 2:  Wave 2 partici pants will not complete this 
since they are not using the app .  
 
Women will be contacted to schedule participation in each session via phone or e -mail.  
 
Because the design process is iterative and the content of each session is dependent 
on prior sessions, materials for each session will be submitted to the IRB as they are 
developed.  
 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Designing with Dissemination in Mind: Optimization of a mHeal th 
Physical Activity Intervention for  Breast Cancer Survivors  (Fit2Thrive)  
 Page 21 of 63 Revis ed Template : November 10, 2014  Retention Strategies .  In order to enhance subject retention we will oc casionally send 
greeting cards for various holidays (i.e. Winter holidays, Thanksgiving, Breast Cancer 
Awareness month, birthdays, etc.) or milestones (i.e. study completion, half way through 
the study, etc.) via the USPS or an on -line service (i.e. Paperl ess Post or  Evite). All 
greeting card language will be submitted and approved by the IRB prior to sending to 
participants.  
 
Monitoring subjects for safety for Phase 1  
This study is  classified as minimal risk because the probability and magnitude of harm or 
discomfort anticipated is not greater than those ordinarily encountered in daily life . For 
participants who engage in interviews, it will be made clear that all of their comments will 
be kept confidential and de -identified. They will also be instructed that they do not have 
to answer any questions that make them uncomfortable and that they can withdraw from 
the study at any points. For breast cancer survivors who will engage in intervention/app 
development and will be directly observed performing tasks a nd answer questionnaires, 
the same procedures as detailed, below for Phase 2 will be followed.   
  
Phase 2  
An overview of the flow of participants through the study is provided in Figure 5.  
 
Screening  
Women who express an interest in participating in the Fit2Thrive intervention  via the Army 
of Women© will be sent an email with a brief study description and eligibility criteria. This 
email will also contain a link to the on -line (RedCap) Screening . The first part of the 
screening will p rovide an in -depth overview of the study . After viewing these materials, 
potential  participants will first confirm interest in research participation  and proceed to 
complete screening questions assessing for eligibility criteria (e.g., demographics, cancer  
diagnosis, age).  After an individual passes the initial screening, they will automatically be 
redirected to complete the Physical Activity Readiness  
Questionnaire (PAR -Q).96 Once completed, they will provide detailed contact informat ion 
and scheduling availability. Scored  PAR-Q respo nses will be reviewed to determine if 
physician approval  is required prior to participation. Those who require approval will be 
flagged for follow -up. 
• If not ineligible :  Participants will be thanked for their interest and directed to on -
line resources for  physical activity and nutrition for cancer survivors.  
• If eligible : Participants will be receive a  study orientation call. Prior to this call, 
they will be sent a copy of the informed consent  and a study overview  handout .  
• Attempts to contact : Study staff will make up to three email attempts to reach 
potential participants to complete the web screening . If unable to reach after the 
third attempt, study staff will mark the individual as “ineligible,” with the reason as 
“unable to contact.”  
 
Recruitment Phone Call  
Because participants will be recruited from all over the country, the orientation session 
will occur remotely via a telephone call. Prior to the call, study staff will email participants 
a copy of the informed consent and a study overview. During the call, study staff will 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Designing with Dissemination in Mind: Optimization of a mHeal th 
Physical Activity Intervention for  Breast Cancer Survivors  (Fit2Thrive)  
 Page 22 of 63 Revis ed Template : November 10, 2014  introduce what is required for study participation and provide instructio ns for completing 
baseline assessments. If they failed  PAR-Q screening, they will also be instructed that 
they will need to obtain physician consent prior to participation. This session will take 
approximately 10 -15 minutes.  
• If still interested : Participants will be 
sent a link to the on -line consent form. If 
they failed PAR-Q screening, they will 
also be sent a link to a RedCap  form to 
consent to allow ing study staff to contact 
their physician and provide physician 
contact information.   
• If no longer interested:   They will be 
thanked and asked if they would be 
willing to be contacted regarding future 
study opportunities.  
• Attempts to contact :  
o Study staff  will make up to three  
call attempts to reach potential 
participants  for the orientation call. 
If they are not reached at this point, 
staff will follow -up with one last call 
and email.  
o Study staff will make up to three  e-
mail attempts to reach potential 
participants  to complete the 
informed consent. If unable to 
reach after the third attempt, study 
staff will call the participant and 
send one final email. Those who 
we are unable to reach after these 
attempts will be marked as 
“ineligible,” with the reason as 
“unable to contact.”  
 
Assessments  
After completion of informed consent, women will 
be e -mailed  baseline study questionnaires via 
RedCap and notification that their accelerometer 
packet has been placed in the mail. The 
accelerometer packet  includes: accelerometer, accelerometer instructions, 
accelerometer log , printed copy of the  informed consent, a  self-addressed stamped return 
envelope  to return the accelerometer . Questionnaires will take approximately 30 -45 
minutes to complete and p artici pants will be asked to complete the  on-line study 
questionnaires  within 10 days of receipt. They will be asked t o wear the accelerometer 
for 7 consecutive day s starting on the day indicated on the log and mail it back to study 
investigators  at the end of t he 7 days period .  
Figure 5. Participant Flow Through Study  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Designing with Dissemination in Mind: Optimization of a mHeal th 
Physical Activity Intervention for  Breast Cancer Survivors  (Fit2Thrive)  
 Page 23 of 63 Revis ed Template : November 10, 2014   
Women will also have the option to participate in the self -collection of a 2.5 mL blood 
sample to be collected by pricking their finger with a retractable lancet and placing 5, 50 
µL spots of blood on a sample collection card.  They wil l be mailed all materials needed 
to collect the blood spot (i.e. lancet, alcohol swab, band -aid) and written instructions with 
pictures for collecting and returning the sample as well as a self -addressed stamped 
envelope.  
 
The same procedures will be foll owed for 12 week  post- intervention and 24 week follow -
up data collection.  
 
o Attempts to contact : Reminder calls or emails will be conducted if 
questionnaires and/or accelerometers a re not received within the specified 
time period  until the activity monitor is returned.  Reminders for 
questionnaires will cease after the activity monitor is returned unless the 
participant has received less than 3 email reminders and one phone/email 
reminder. In these cases, the participant will be  contacted via  email 3 times 
and also receive one final attempt via phone  and email .      
 
Randomization  
Participants will be randomized after they have completed all baseline assessments using 
a computer -generated minimization allocation method to ensure balance in treatment 
groups.  
 
Participants will not be informed they are being randomized. Instead, they  will simply be 
told about the core intervention and the potential to have other intervention strategies. 
We have decided not to disclose randomization for the following reasons: a) being 
randomized does not influence study risk, b) all participants receiv e the core intervention 
at a minimum and c) we hope to minimize attrition. Additionally, this will help to streamline 
the study description and, hopefully, prevent any confusion regarding the study design.  
 
Study Packet Mailing  
Participants will be sent a n email informing them their study packet has been placed in 
the mail and  a study team member will be calling them shortly. If they are assigned to 
the buddy condition, th is email will include a link to complete the Buddy Selection Survey, 
and th ey will b e provided with a recruitment email to forward to their buddy.  
 
The study packet will containing the Fitbit and paper instructions for downloading the 
study app, setting up the Fitbit and for using all components to which they are assigned.  
 
Ideally, the y will receive the packet prior to the study overview call, but this will not always 
be the case. If timing does not allow for this, we will email the instructions to participants 
prior to the overview call.   
 
Study Orientation Phone  Call  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Designing with Dissemination in Mind: Optimization of a mHeal th 
Physical Activity Intervention for  Breast Cancer Survivors  (Fit2Thrive)  
 Page 24 of 63 Revis ed Template : November 10, 2014  Study staff will call all study participants to go over in greater detail the strategies to which 
they have been assigned. This call should take approximately 10 -15 minutes.  
 
Intervention Launch Reminder/Tech Check -In  
Participants will be sent a n email  reminder that the intervention is launching 7-10 days 
prior to the study start date  and will be reminded  to contact study staff if they are having 
any technical difficulties. They will also be called or emailed reminders if they have not 
downloaded the app prior to the intervention start date or used the app on Day 1 or Day 
2 of the intervention.  
 
Intervention  Components  
CORE intervention . The CORE will be delivered to all par ticipants to build essential 
competencies needed to increase physical activity safely . The CORE  will include the 
following:  
• Educational website : This w ill provide participants with  information and  knowledge  
about the benefits for physical activity, safely progressing through an exercise 
program and strategies for effective ly changing and maintaining physical activity 
behavior (i.e. social support, goal -setting) . This site will be available as a 
standalone si te and embedded within the app .  
• Basic smartphone app : Features of this app include , but are not limited to, the  
ability to  monitor  and track  physical activity , pre-specified weekly physical activity 
goals  and feedback on progress.  
• Fitbit : Participants wi ll be instructed to wear the device on the provided belt clip or 
wristband during all waking hours  every day of the study  to assist in monitoring 
and tracking physical activity . The Fitbit will c ommunicate with the app  so data are 
integrated .  
Participants  will also be randomized to receive the following components :  
1. App+ : Participants assigned to this component will receive a “deluxe” version of 
the app .  This will include all of  the features of the basic app plus additional app 
modules  listed below.  
a. Weekly Goal -Setting  Tool: Allows to schedule activities for specific days of 
the week  and set reminders for these activities.  
b. Challenges : Provides weekly challenges (i.e. 5,000 step s/day challenge; 5 
min MVPA/day)  participants can enroll in and automatically tracks progress . 
Progressively harder challenges become “unlocked” as participants 
complete less intense challenges.  
c. Newsfeed : Space where study staff will post content includin g, but not 
limited to , Fit Studies  (lay summaries of physical activity research) , Fit 
Survivor Spotlights  (stories about women who have successfully changed 
their behavior) , Workout Ideas and other motivational content.   
 
2. Telephone Support  Calls . Participants assigned to this component will receive a 
call from study staff to check -on on their progress, provide motivation and 
troubleshoot any issues they may have. These calls will occur bi -weekly (6 total)  
during the initial 12 week intervention pe riod. All calls will be recorded for quality 
control.  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Designing with Dissemination in Mind: Optimization of a mHeal th 
Physical Activity Intervention for  Breast Cancer Survivors  (Fit2Thrive)  
 Page 25 of 63 Revis ed Template : November 10, 2014   
3. “On-line” Exercise Classes : Participants assigned to this condition will receive 
access to a digital download for a commercially available walking DVD and 
suggestions for weekly workouts from the same instructor’s YouTube channel on 
a private study YouTube playlist  that will only be  accessible to individuals assigned 
to this component of the intervention. These videos will be vetted by the research 
team for safety and appropriateness prior to posting. Participants will also receive 
a weekly survey to indicate how frequently they used  this component.  
 
4. Fitbit “Buddy ”: Participants assigned to this condition will select a “buddy” from 
their personal life (friend, co -worker, child, spouse, sibling, etc.) to help support 
them. The buddy will be  mailed a Fitbit. Both the participant and “buddy” will 
receive training materials on how to make the most out of their relationship which 
will include how to use the social features of the Fitbit app, how to seek support 
(participant) and provide support (buddy),  and receive bi-weekly emails (6 total) 
during the initial 12 week intervention period geared towards facilitating social 
support. Participants will also receive a weekly survey to indicate how frequently 
they used this component.  
a. All buddies will receive  an email from the participant explaining the study, 
complete pre -screening and undergo an on -line consent.  
i. Buddies will be required to complete the PAR -Q and will be required 
to get physician consent if they fail.  
b. Buddy Involvement: As a “buddy” individ uals will be asked to agree to the 
following:  
i. Complete  on-line informed consent  
ii. Regularly wear the Fitbit  
iii. “Friend” the study participant on the Fitbit app  
iv. Share their Fitbit data with study investigators  
1. Fitbit study accounts for each individual buddy wil l be created  
by study staff  to streamline the process of obtaining the 
buddy’s Fitbit data. E ach buddy will be asked to use the Fitbit 
account and password provided during their duration of 
participation in the Fit2Thrive Study .  
2. To fully protect confident ially, we will provide a study email 
address that will not include any personally identifying 
information to be used with the Fitbit app (i.e. F2Tbx100 and 
F2Tbx100@gmail.com ). 
3. The RedCap study database is the only place where the 
identification number, the participant’s name, Fitbit email and 
Fitbit username will appear together and will only be 
accessible by the investigators and used for study tracking 
purposes  
4. Since participa nts will be allowed to keep the Fitbit device at 
the conclusion of data collection, all participants will also be 
instructed on how to change their Fitbit email and username 
at the conclusion of the study.  
v. Provide support to the study participant  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Designing with Dissemination in Mind: Optimization of a mHeal th 
Physical Activity Intervention for  Breast Cancer Survivors  (Fit2Thrive)  
 Page 26 of 63 Revis ed Template : November 10, 2014  vi. Complete  optional on -line surveys at baseline, 12 weeks and 24 
week follow -up.  
5. Text messages : Participants in this component  will receive regular messages that 
are motivational and target SCT constructs (i.e. “ The best way to stay on top of 
your game is by schedu ling your plans! Do that here and make things easier! ” ; 
“Exercise not only contributes to a healthier lifestyle, but it has also been shown to 
boost productivity and creativity. Be strong, think smart! ”) and provide feedback on 
intervention progress (i.e. ” You only met y% of your goal last week. It can be hard 
to fit exercise into your schedule, but remember every minute counts! ”).   
 
Follow -up 
At the end of 12 weeks, participants will be encouraged to maintain PA and will have 
access to all “automated” intervention materials for the condition assigned . However, all 
regular contact from the study staff will discontinue.   
 
Retention Plan  
To preven t attrition, study staff will develop good rapport with participants during 
recruitment and maintain the relationship throughout the study . Participants will be  
provided with a phone number to call immediately if they encounter any tech issues with 
the app lication  or Fitbit . Staff will convey reminders of scheduled assessments by phone  
or email. Participants will  also be incentivized $20 to complete baseline, 12 week and 24 
week assessments for a total of $60, and will be allowed to keep the Fitbit if they complete 
the 12 week intervention . Individuals who participate in the optional blood sample 
collection will be paid $ 15.00 at each time point ($ 45.00 total) upon receipt of thei r blood 
sample.   
 
Additionally, i n order to enhance subject retention we will occasionally send greeting 
cards for various holidays (i.e. Winter holidays, Thanksgiving, Breast Cancer Awareness 
month, birthdays, etc.) or milestones (i.e. study completion, half way through the study, 
etc.) via the USPS or an on -line service (i.e. Paperless Post or  Evite).  
 
If a participant does not track any activity via the app or Fitbit for 7 consecutive days, 
study staff will reach out to the participant via phone and/o r e-mail. If we are unable to 
reach a participant after 3 phone calls or emails and a final email attempt, or they do not 
start recording data again after 2 weeks, we will contact the participant’s 
emergency/locator contacts. Participants will identify two  emergency/ locator contacts  that 
may be notified if contact with the study participant is lost. Emergency/l ocator contacts  
will be associates of the participant who have a different telephone and email address 
from the participant  and who agree to serve as  emergency contacts for the participant. 
One locator/emergency contact must not live in the same house as the participant. We 
will only attempt to contact a n emergency/ locator contact  if we are unable to reach an 
active participant after 3 phone call  or e-mail attempts and a final email attempt, or in the 
event of an emergency. After these initial attempts, we will attempt to contact the 
participant’s designated emergency/ locator contact . We will only make one phone call 
attempt to reach a n emergency/ locato r contact . If we are unable to reach the contact , we 
will attempt to leave a voice mail.  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Designing with Dissemination in Mind: Optimization of a mHeal th 
Physical Activity Intervention for  Breast Cancer Survivors  (Fit2Thrive)  
 Page 27 of 63 Revis ed Template : November 10, 2014   
Post -Intervention Interviews  
Approximately 35 women will be selected to complete a post -intervention email. All 
women who have agreed to be contacted regarding futur e studies and have completed 
the program within 6 months will be eligible. Participants will be invited based on 
adherence level and components assignment to ensure equal distribution across these 
variables. Women will be invited via email. Interested wome n will complete on -line 
informed consent. Once they have consented, a study team member will follow -up to 
schedule an interview. Interviews will be conducted via phone or web, depending on 
preference and will take approximately 30 -45 minutes to complete.  
 
 
Monitoring subjects for safety for Phase 2  
This study is  classified as minimal risk because the probability and magnitude of harm or 
discomfort anticipated is not greater than those ordinarily encountered in daily life or 
during the performance of routin e physical and psychological examinations or tests and 
confidentiality is adequately protected. The PI and study investigators will conduct 
continuous review of data and patient safety. Any staff member or investigator can 
spontaneously identify an adverse  event. Participants will be instructed to call or e -mail 
the PI in the event of any emergencies or medical events within 24 hours of the event 
occurring. These instructions will be included in all cover letters that accompany study 
materials and displayed  prominently within the app .  
Events may also be spontaneously reported to staff during contact time. Adverse 
events and serious adverse events may also be identified during regularly scheduled calls  
or emails  by researchers blinded to the treatment condit ion of the participant.  These 
phone interviews  or emails  will be conducted every 8 weeks throughout the 24 week study 
period.  Breast cancer survivors  participants will be asked to complete the Non-
spontaneous Adverse Events Questionnaire  either via RedCap  or via an interview with 
study staff . This form will be completed for all breast cancer survivor participants and will 
query the participant as to whether they have had any health and/or medical problems 
during the preceding 8 week period.  Participants  will be called or emailed until a response 
is received.   Participants will also be required to provide the investigators with at least 
one emergency contact to have on file in the event we are fail to reach the participant 
after 5 or more attempts . If participant reports “YES” to item 5A-5D (see RedCap form) , 
an adverse event form will be filed with the IRB. The non -spontaneous Adverse Events 
Questionnaire will not be given to buddies of BCS participants to complete  since they are 
not being specifically a sked or encouraged to increase their physical activity participaiton . 
All identified adverse events will be reported to the PI and recorded and reported 
in an adverse event log (includes subject’s name, date and event description). The PI will 
consult with  co-investigators , the IRB and NU Office for the Protection of Research 
Subjects to determine whether the event should be classified as ‘non -attributable’, 
‘possibly attributable’ or ‘attributable’ to the current project and ‘serious’ or ‘non -serious.’ 
Adverse event reports will be submitted to the IRB within 5 business  days of the event or 
notification to the PI that the event has occurred. All serious adverse events will be 
reported to the RHLCCC Clinical Research Office for review by the Data Monitoring 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Designing with Dissemination in Mind: Optimization of a mHeal th 
Physical Activity Intervention for  Breast Cancer Survivors  (Fit2Thrive)  
 Page 28 of 63 Revis ed Template : November 10, 2014  Committee, IRB, and the National Cancer Institute, as applicable, using appropriate 
forms. Any action to be taken will be recorded in the adverse event log.  
An adverse events is defined as an unanticipated problem which meets all of the 
following criteria:  a) unexpected (in terms of nature, severity, or frequency) given the 
research procedures described in protocol -related documents and the characteristics of 
the subject population being studied, b) related or possibly related to participation in the 
resear ch and c) suggests that the research places subjects or others at a different or 
greater risk of harm than was previously known or recognized. A ‘serious’ adverse event 
is defined as any event in which the outcome results in any of the following: death, a life-
threatening adverse drug experience, inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing 
hospitalization (for > 24 hours), a persistent or significant disability/ incapacity or 
substantial disruption of the ability to conduct normal life functions; a congenital anomaly 
or birth defect; important medical events that may not result in death, be life threatening, 
or require hospitalization may be considered a serious adverse drug experience when, 
based upon medical judgment, they may jeopardize the part icipant and may require 
medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed, above. All other 
events will be considered ‘non -serious.’  
In addition to reporting any events as they occur to the IRB, a progress report and 
request for IRB re newal will be submitted the Northwestern University IRB annually. All 
non-serious adverse events will also be submitted to the RHLCCC Clinical Research 
office semi -annually. Furthermore, study progress reports will be submitted to the 
RHLCCC Clinical Resea rch Office Data Monitoring Committee semi -annually. These 
reports will include accrual, withdrawals, reported adverse events and compliance issues.  
 
9.3 Procedures performed to lessen the probability or magnitude of 
risks.  
Phase 1. All participants will be informed during screening and in their informed consent 
with respect to how much time interviews,  and/or app development will involve. All 
interviews and telephone/web -based app development sessions and interviews will be 
digitally recorded  when possible ; digital files will be stored on a password -secured 
network drive. Recordings will be transcribed verbatim and de -identified.  Recordings will 
be destroyed at the end of the study. For intervention development, each  participant will 
be randomly assigned an identification number to  ensure confidentiality of data. All raw 
data will be de -identified and kept confidential . 
Although, t he purpose of this field test is NOT to test how well it works to increase 
physical activity, but rather to evaluate the app’s functioning and ease of use in everyday 
life and participants will be explicitly told NOT to change their PA behavior and that the 
data they  enter does not have to be accurate , we do recognize that some individuals 
may still attempt to increase their PA and to accurately respond to questions/prompts. 
Thus, we will follow  the same procedures detailed, below, for Phase 2.  
 Electronic versions o f all data will be kept on a password protected network with access 
limited to study investigators. Only the investigators will have access to participant data. 
Confidentially will be further maintained by reporting only group level data in study 
publicati ons and presentations. All staff with access to the data with have completed 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Designing with Dissemination in Mind: Optimization of a mHeal th 
Physical Activity Intervention for  Breast Cancer Survivors  (Fit2Thrive)  
 Page 29 of 63 Revis ed Template : November 10, 2014  Northwestern University requirements for the responsible conduct of research including 
the Collaborative Institutional Training Initiative (CITI) Training Modules.     
Phase 2.  All participants will be informed during screening and in their informed consent 
with respect to how much time the program, questionnaire completion, and all testing will 
involve. In addition, they will also be informed of the risks associated with partici pating 
in an exercis e program. Survivors and buddies  will be informed that participation is 
completely voluntary and they can discontinue at any point. They  will also be provided 
with the option “I prefer not to answer” for every question in the study so t hey can opt -
out of answering any questions for which they do not want to share responses or which 
make them uncomfortable.  
Breast cancer survivors will be provided with an exercise prescription to progress safely 
through the program to minimize risk  (see Table 5). All participants  will be able to contact 
study investigators at any point by phone, e -mail or messaging through the app should 
they have any concerns regarding participation.  
 Each participant will be randomly assigned an identification number to ensure 
confidentiality of data. RedCap does require an e -mail address to send the patient 
reported outcome measure links to participants and thus, data will be temporarily linked 
to individuals’ e -mail addresses and first names which may be included in the e -mail for 
personalization purposes. However, these links will be removed when questionnaire data 
is downloaded and thi s data will then only be linked to the participant’s identification 
number. Nitro Study Tracker , NOTIS and the study RedCap tracking database are the 
only place s where the identification number and the participant’s name will appear 
together in the present  study and will only be accessible by the investigators.  
For post -intervention interviews, a ll participants will be informed during screening and in 
their informed consent with respect to how much time interviews will involve. All 
interviews will be digita lly recorded  when possible ; digital files will be stored on a 
password -secured network drive. Recordings will be transcribed verbatim and de -
identified.  Recordings will be destroyed at the end of the study.  Table 5. Fit2Thrive Exercise Prescription  
 
Week  Weekly Goal 
(Mins)  # Sessions 
Per Week  Session 
Duration (Mins)  Session 
RPE Session Target Heart Rate  
 (% Max HR)  
1 30  2-3 10-15 10-12 50-60%  
2 45  2-3 15-20 10-12 50-60%  
3 60 3 20 10-12 50-60%  
4 75 3 25 10-12 50-60%  
5 90  3 30 10-12 50-60%  
6 105  3 35 10-12 50-60%  
7 120  3-4 30-40 10-12 50-60%  
8 135  3-4 30-45 13-15 60-75% 
9 150+  3-5 30-60 13-15 60-75%  
10 150+   3-5 30-60 13-15 60-75%  
11 150+  3-5 30-60 13-15 60-75%  
12 150+  3-5 30-60 13-15 60-75%  
13-24 150+  3-5 30-60 13-15 60-75%  
RPE= Rating of Perceived Exertions; HR= Heart Rate  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Designing with Dissemination in Mind: Optimization of a mHeal th 
Physical Activity Intervention for  Breast Cancer Survivors  (Fit2Thrive)  
 Page 30 of 63 Revis ed Template : November 10, 2014  All raw data will be de -identified and kept conf idential. Electronic versions of all data will 
be kept on a password protected network with access limited to study investigators. Only 
the investigators will have access to participant data. Confidentially will be further 
maintained by reporting only grou p level data in study publications and presentations. 
All staff with access to the data with have completed Northwestern University 
requirements for the responsible conduct of research including the Collaborative 
Institutional Training Initiative (CITI) Tr aining Modules.     
9.4 Study Measures.  
A. Phase 1  
Interviews  
• Questions for the interviews  are included in the Appendix. Questions will be related to 
their perceptions of specific intervention/app components, recommendations for 
features, changes or enhancements.  
App Development Session 1 Survey  
• This survey asks participants about their prefer ences and opinions regarding app 
features to assist in app development and design. Participants will also provide 
opinions on images/wireframes of potential app features.  
 
Post -Field Test  Survey for Individuals Given the App to Test : 
• Participants will provide information on:  
o Learnability: E ase and time to learn system  
o Effectiveness: System’s ability to promote performance and 
productivity  
o Efficiency:  System’s ability to improve speed at which they perform  
o Errors:  Impact of errors on u sing system and ability to recover from 
errors  
o Flexibility:  System’s ability to provide different command or routes 
to achieve same goal 
o Memorability: Ability to remember how to use system next time and 
ability to re -learn system after periods of non -use 
o User Satisfaction:  Fondness, perceptions and opinion of system 
and its features  
App Notifications Field Test Survey (Wave 2 Field Test)  
• Participants will be asked to rate app notification message content and 
provide any additional feedback for improving messages .  
 
B. Phase 2  
Primary Outcome Measures  
Feasibility:  This will be measured during the intervention, immediately post -intervention 
and after the follow -up period. Measures include:  
• Intervention reach :  # of participants enrolled/# of eligible individuals  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Designing with Dissemination in Mind: Optimization of a mHeal th 
Physical Activity Intervention for  Breast Cancer Survivors  (Fit2Thrive)  
 Page 31 of 63 Revis ed Template : November 10, 2014  • Participant retention: # of participants who drop out/# of participants randomized  
• Intervention Adherence : % of weeks adhered to exercise prescription during 
intervention period  
• Intervention Maintenance : % of weeks adhere d to exercise prescription during 
follow -up period  
• Intervention component engagement:  
o During intervention : # of times, on average, participants interacted with each 
intervention component during intervention  
o During follow -up: # of times, on average, participants interacted with each 
intervention component  during follow -up 
o Total:  # of times, on average, participants interacted with each intervention 
component  over intervention and follow -up 
 
Acceptability:  This will be measured via a process e valuation immediately post -
intervention and after the follow -up period. This evaluation will assess the following:  
• perceived effectiveness of intervention components/app; use of app/intervention 
materials; plans to continue PA/app use; elements of interve ntion liked/disliked; 
satisfaction with program delivery, assessments and staff  
 
Screening   
Physical Activity Readiness  Questionnaire  (PAR -Q).96 This pre -screening questionnaire 
assesses cardiovascular disease history, symptoms, risk factors and other hea lth issues. 
Women indicating ≥ 1 positive statements will be required to obtain medical clearance 
from their primary care physician or oncologist.  
 
Other Measures  
All measures will be used for both breast cancer survivor participants and buddies 
unless otherwise indicated. Assessment will be conducted at baseline, 3 weeks 
(survivors only), 12 weeks and 24 weeks.  
 
Mobile Device Proficiency Questionnaire.98 This survey assess both assessing both 
basic and advanced proficiencies  related to smartphone and tablet use across eight 
subscales: (a)  Mobile Device Basics, (b) Communication, (c) Data and File Storage, (d)  
Internet, (e) Calendar, (f) Entertainment, (g) Privacy, and (h) Troubleshooting  and 
Software Management.  
 
Demographics .  Data will be collected on participant’s current age, race, ethnicity, 
employment status, number of children, education, marital  status, income, height and 
weight.   
Breast Cancer History . Participants will be asked to indicate their current menopausal 
status and provide details on the prior breast cancer diagnosis including: date of 
diagnosis, stage of disease, treatment type and duration and hormone receptor status. 
Women will be asked to i ndicate similar data for any cancer recurrences or second 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Designing with Dissemination in Mind: Optimization of a mHeal th 
Physical Activity Intervention for  Breast Cancer Survivors  (Fit2Thrive)  
 Page 32 of 63 Revis ed Template : November 10, 2014  cancer diagnoses. This measure will only be used for breast cancer survivor 
participants.  
Health History.  Participants will be asked to rate their general, overall health status, 
indicate whether t hey have been diagnosed with a list of 20 chronic conditions including 
diabetes, heart disease, multiple sclerosis, depression, etc. and provide information of 
other general health behaviors (e.g. smoking, drinking, fruit and vegetable consumption, 
etc.). A slightly different version to capture potential cancer diagnoses will be used 
for buddy participants . 
Godin Leisure Time Exercise Questionnaire (GLTEQ) .99 The GLTEQ is a simple, self -
administered instrument that has been widely used in epidemiological, clinical, and 
behavioral change studies and has been shown to be both a valid and reliable measure 
of PA participation. Participants will be asked indicate th e frequency and average amount 
of time they spent engaging in strenuous (e.g., jogging), moderate (e.g., fast walking), 
and mild (e.g., easy walking) exercise over the past seven days. Weekly frequencies of 
strenuous, moderate, and light activities are mul tiplied by nine, five, and three, 
respectively. These values are added to obtain a total leisure activity score.  Test -retest 
reliability coefficient range from r=0.48 for light and moderate activity to 0.94 for 
strenuous. For total values the test -retest reliability coefficient is 0.74.99  Breast cancer 
survivors will also answer a modified version asking them about their PA before 
diagnosis  at baseline.  
Actigraph Accelerometer (model wGT3X -BT, Health One Technology, Fort Walton 
Beach, FL) . The Actigraph is a valid and reliable objective PA measure .100,101 It is small, 
lightweight, has a rechargeable battery that lasts for up to 25 days and provides no 
feedback to participants. Participants will be instructed to wear t he monitor on the non -
dominant hip during all waking hours for 7 consecutive days, except when bathing or 
swimming. Activity data will be collected in one -minute intervals (epochs). Participants 
will record any time the accelerometer was not worn on a log . The ActiLife software will 
be used to derive wear time, identify outliers and summarize daily variables of the 
minute -by-minute data. Non -wear time will be defined as intervals of at least 60 
consecutive minutes of zero counts, with allowance for up to 2 minutes of observations 
of less than 100 counts/min within the non -wear interval.102A valid day of accelerometer 
wear wi ll be defined as ≥10 hours of wear time. Each valid minute of wear time will be 
classified according to intensity (counts/min) using commonly accepted activity count 
cut-points 102,103 as follows: sedentary (<100), light activity (100 -759), lifestyle activity 
(760-2019), and MVPA (≥ 2020).  This measure will only be used for breast cancer 
survivor participants.  
Sitting Time Questionnaire .104 Women will be asked to indicate the amount of time they 
spend on a typical weekday and weekend sitting in the following activities: traveling to 
and from places, while at work, while watching television, wh ile using a computer at 
home in leisure time NOT including television (e.g. visiting friends, movies, dining out, 
etc.). Test -retest reliability coefficients were high for weekday sitting time at work, 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Designing with Dissemination in Mind: Optimization of a mHeal th 
Physical Activity Intervention for  Breast Cancer Survivors  (Fit2Thrive)  
 Page 33 of 63 Revis ed Template : November 10, 2014  watching television and using a computer at home (r s=0.78-0.84) but are more variable 
for weekend days across all domains (r s=0.23 -0.74).104     
PROMIS Applied Cognition -General Concerns Short Form 8a.105 The PROMIS Applied 
Cognition General Concerns Short Form 8a will be used to assess participants’ 
frequency of perceived cognitive function over the past 7 days ranging  from 1 (not at al l) 
to 5 (very often). Higher scores reflect higher levels of cognitive concerns. The reliability 
of this measure ranges from α=0.90 to α=0.95.106 
 
PROMIS Physical Function Short Form 20a.105 The PROMIS Physical Function Short 
Form 20a will be used to assess participants’ physical function. The scale has two 
subscale limitations and interference. For the 6 limitations items, participants will rate the 
level of difficulty they have had executing discrete activities over the past 7 days on a 
scale from 1 (unable to do) to 5 (without any difficulty). For the 4 limitations items, 
patients will rate the degree to which their health  limits them in specific activities on a 
scale from 1 (cannot do) to 5 (not at all).  Higher scores reflect better physical function. 
The reliability of this measure ranges from α=0.90 to α=0.95.106  
 
PROMIS Fatigue Short Form 8a.105 The PROMIS Fatigue Short Form 8a will be used to 
assess participants’ frequency of fatigue symptoms ranging from 1 (not at all) to 5 (very 
much) and fatigue interference ranging from 1 (never) to 5 (always) over the past 7 days. 
Higher scor es reflect higher levels of fatigue. The reliability of this measure ranges from 
α=0.90 to α=0.95.106 
 
PROMIS Sleep Disturbance Short Form 8a.105 The PROMIS Sleep Disturbance Short 
Form 8a will be used to assess participants’ rating of overall sleep quality from 1 (very 
good) to 5 (very poor) and perceptions of specific characteristics of sleep quality on a 
scale ranging  from 1 (not at all) to 5 (very much). Higher scores reflect higher levels of 
sleep disturbanc e. The reliability of this measure ranges from α=0.90 to α=0.95.106 
 
PROMIS Depression Short Form 8a .105 Participants are asked to indicate the frequency 
of a variety of depressive symptoms over the past 7 days on a 5 point scale from 1 
(never) to 5 (always). Higher scores reflect higher depressive symptoms. The reliability 
of this measures ranges from α=0.90 to α=0.95.106  
 
PROMIS Sleep -Related Impairment Short Form 8a . 105 The PROMIS Sleep –Related 
Impairment Disturbance Short Form 8a will be used to assess participants’ perceptions 
or sleep -related impairment on a scale ranging  from 1 (not at all) to 5 ( very much). Higher 
scores reflect higher levels of sleep -related impairment. The reliability of this measure 
ranges from α=0.90 to α=0.95.106 
Physical Activity Neighborhood Environment Survey.107  Participants are asked to 
indicate the different facilities and features of the area around their home that they could 
walk or bike. The items on this measure have demonstrated test -retest interclass 
correlations ranging from 0.52 to 0.88 an d spearman correlations between single items 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Designing with Dissemination in Mind: Optimization of a mHeal th 
Physical Activity Intervention for  Breast Cancer Survivors  (Fit2Thrive)  
 Page 34 of 63 Revis ed Template : November 10, 2014  and similar subscales from a more detailed measure were significant and ranged from 
0.27 to 0.81.107  
Exercise Self -efficacy Scale .108 The 6 -item Exercise Self -Efficacy Scale will be used to 
assess participants’ beliefs in their ability to exercise five times per week, at a moderate 
intensity, for 30 or more minutes per session at two week increments over the next 12 
weeks. Items will be rated on a 100 -point percentage scale with 10 -point increments, 
ranging from 0% (not at all confident) to 100% (highly confident).  The internal 
consistency for this measure has demonstra ted acceptability (α=0.90).108  
Barriers Self -efficacy Scale .108 The 15 -item Barriers Self -Efficacy Scale will be used to 
assess participants’ beliefs in their ability to exercise three times per week for the next 3 
months in the face of commonly exp eriences barriers to activity. Items will be rated on a 
100-point percentage scale with 10 -point increments, ranging from 0% (not at all 
confident) to 100% (highly confident).  The internal consistency for this measure has 
demonstrated acceptability (α=0.8 6).108  
Social Support for Exercise Scale .109 This scale assesses the degree to which friends 
and family have demonstrated support for  exercise behaviors in the previous 3 months. 
The frequency for each item is rated once for both family and friends on a 5 -point Likert 
scale, ranging from 1 (never) to 5 (very often). The friend and family subscales have 
demonstrated acceptable internal c onsistency (α=0.84 and α=0.84, respectively).  109 
Effective Social Support for Physical Activity .110 This scale assesses perceptions of support 
given (for buddy) and received (for BCS). The scale assesses three different types of help or 
support: 1) Help wit h practical needs, 2) Advice or information, and 3) Emotional support. There 
will be a separate version for Buddies and breast cancer survivor participants assigned 
to the buddy condition only.  
Exercise Goal -setting Scale.111 This 10 -item scale will assess participants exercise -
related goal -setting, self -monitoring and problem solving and instructs participants to 
indicate the extent to which each of the statements describes them on a scale from 1 
(does not describe) to 6 (describes completely). This scale has demonstrated good 
internal consistency (α= 0.89). 111 
Multidimensional Outcome Expectations for Exercise Scale.112 This scale will assess 
participants’ social (4 items), self -evaluative (5 items), and physical (6 items) outcome 
expectations for exercise participation on a 5 point scale ranging from 1 (strongly 
disagree) to 5 (strongly agree).  The three subscales have demonstrated good internal 
consistency (α= 0.82 for physical outcome expectations, α= 0.81 for social outcome 
expectations, and α= 0.84 for self -evaluative outcome ex pectations).112 
Physical Activity Enjoyment Scale.113 This 18-item scale will assess the degree to which 
participants, at the current moment, enjoy doing any sort of physical activity.  This 18 -item 
scale rates enjoyment on a 7 -point bipolar scale (“It makes me depressed”…”It makes 
me happy”).  This measure has demonstrated good internal consistency in previous 
studies (α= 0. 93 to α= 0. 96).113 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Designing with Dissemination in Mind: Optimization of a mHeal th 
Physical Activity Intervention for  Breast Cancer Survivors  (Fit2Thrive)  
 Page 35 of 63 Revis ed Template : November 10, 2014  Table 6. Schedule of Measures   
 Screening  Baseline  3 
weeks  12 
weeks  24 
weeks  
Physical Activity Readiness 
Questionnaire  X     
Mobile Device Proficiency 
Questionnaire   X    
Demographics   X    
Breast Cancer History   X  X X 
Health History   X  X X 
Actigraph Accelerometer   X  X X 
Godin Leisure Time Exercise 
Questionnair e-Current    X X X X 
Godin Leisure Time Exercise 
Questionnair e-Before 
diagnosis   X    
Sitting Time Questionnaire   X  X X 
PROMIS Physical Function 
Short Form 20a  X  X X 
PROMIS Fatigue Short Form 
8a  X  X X 
PROMIS Depression Short 
Form 8a   X  X X 
PROMIS Anxiety Short Form 
8a  X  X X 
PROMIS Emotional Support 
Short Form 8a   X  X X 
PROMIS Sleep Disturbance 
Short Form 8a   X  X X 
PROMIS Sleep -Related 
Impairment Short Form 8a   X  X X 
Rosenberg Self -Esteem Scale   X  X X 
Physical Self -Perception 
Profile Physical Self -worth 
Subscale   X  X X 
Physical Activity Neighborhood 
Environment Survey   X    
Exercise Self -efficacy Scale   X X X X 
Barriers Self -efficacy Scale   X X X X 
Social Support for Exercise 
Scale   X X X X 
Effective Social Support for 
Physical Activity   X X X X 
Exercise Goal -setting Scale   X X X X 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Designing with Dissemination in Mind: Optimization of a mHeal th 
Physical Activity Intervention for  Breast Cancer Survivors  (Fit2Thrive)  
 Page 36 of 63 Revis ed Template : November 10, 2014  Physical Activity Enjoyment 
Scale   X X X X 
Multidimensional Outcome 
Expectations for Exercise 
Scale   X X X X 
Post-Program Evaluation     X X 
*Values in bold indicate BOTH survivors and buddies will be asked to complete 
measure at a given time point. Italics indicate only survivors in buddy condition and 
buddies will complete.  
Post-intervention Interviews.  Questions for the interviews are included in the Appendix. 
Questions will be related to their perceptions  and opinions of the intervention, overall, 
and specific intervention/app components  and recommendations for improving the 
intervention in the future.  
10.0 Data and Specimen  Banking  
All data will be kept for 7 years after publication, as required by Northwestern University.  
Blood  specimens will be banked in a freezer in the basement of 680 N Lake Shore Drive, 
Chicago, IL for future use. Specimens will not be stored linked to direct identifiers (only 
by randomly assigned participant identification number, as described below in data  
security section). The specimens will not be destroyed, and they will only be used in the 
future for research purposes. Specimens will be accessible by Dr. Phillips  and co -
investigators with IRB approval.  
 
11.0 Data and Specimen Management  
11.1 Data Analysis Plan . 
Phase 1. Stakeholders will contribute to intervention component development via 
interviews  which will be digitally recorded; digital files will be stored on a password -
secured network drive . Recordings will be transcribed verbatim and de -identified. Three  
coders will independently review the de -identified transcripts, identify emergent themes, 
and assign initial codes using constant comparative analysis. This iterative process codes 
data based on identified conceptual themes.  Data will be organized using NVivo 
software. Coders will meet often to discuss and refine the emerging themes, and 
triangulate their perspectives. Once a final coding structure is identified, coders will 
independently return to the transcripts to re -examine them and recode as necessar y to 
ensure consistency. Disagreements will be resolved through deliberation and consensus. 
Analysis will identify  the three stakeholder groups (survivors, experts, community 
organizations)  perspecti ves on desirable components for inclusion.  All groups’ 
perceptions of components, how to implement  the proposed intervention and  strategies 
for tailoring intervention content, and tactics for overcoming challenges to implementation  
will be integrated. These components will be vetted via the  Breast Cancer Survivo r 
Stakeholder Advisory Board Session . After vetting from the advisory board, the final 5 
components will be selected for development.   
Once components to be tested are identified and the app is under development, usability 
testing will begin. For this, su rvivors will be given a defined set of tasks to complete. They 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Designing with Dissemination in Mind: Optimization of a mHeal th 
Physical Activity Intervention for  Breast Cancer Survivors  (Fit2Thrive)  
 Page 37 of 63 Revis ed Template : November 10, 2014  will be observed to determine the ease with which they navigate using various app 
functions (e.g. error rates, time to complete tasks, etc.). Survivors will also provide 
qualitative  and quantitative  feedback regarding features, ease of use, and likeability. 
Usability tests will be rapid and iterative. During the field testing  period , design changes 
will be completed after receipt of 2 to 5  survivors’ feedback and then tested with the next  
set of 2 to 5  survivors. The app will be refined to eliminate issues that impeded usability. 
We anticipate 10 -20 survivors will be needed to achieve saturation on issues identified 
during testing.   Following the field testing, they will participate in a s ession to provide 
feedback on the app features and functioning. Because consensus may be reached 
during the field testing before all participants have a chance to participate, survivors may 
or may not participate in the field testing and post -field testing  sessions. Finally, survivors 
will participate in a final lab visit where they evaluate the close -to-final intervention and 
provide feedback.  
 
 Phase 2. The effects of the five individual intervention components will be examined by 
means of a factorial experiment (see Table 4 for an example). The final factors will be 
determined based on the findings from Phase 1 of the study. Although  these components 
will be evidence -based and have been included in bundled PA interventions previously 
found to be successf ul, none of these prior studies were designed to estimate the impact 
of any individual component.   
 
We chose a  factorial experimental design factorial experiments have two characteristics 
essential to the success of MOST. These experiments: a) separate com ponent effects 
enabling the estimation of the main effect contribution of each candidate component and 
interactions between components114 and b) are more economical compared to alternative 
designs because they often require substantially fewer subjects to achieve the same 
power and use less resources .114,115  
 
A complete factorial experiment requires  25=32 experimental conditions. It is important to 
understand that this design should not be considered a multiple arm RCT. All of the 
estimated main effects and interactions will be based on all experimental conditions. 
Table 7 displays the experimental conditions for this study. For example, main effect of 
telephone support calls would be estimated by comparing the mean of experimental 
conditions 1 -7 with the mean of conditions 8-16. Similarly, the main effect of the App+  
would be estimated by comparing conditions1 -4 and 9-12 with conditions 5-8 and 13-16. 
Thus, all 256 participants will be included in all effect estimates.  
 
Table 7. Experimental Conditions  
Exp 
Condition  Support 
Calls  App+  Buddy  Online 
Gym  App 
Notifications  
1 yes no no no no 
2 yes yes no no no 
3 yes no yes no no 
4 yes no no yes no 
5 yes no no no yes 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Designing with Dissemination in Mind: Optimization of a mHeal th 
Physical Activity Intervention for  Breast Cancer Survivors  (Fit2Thrive)  
 Page 38 of 63 Revis ed Template : November 10, 2014  6 no yes no no no 
7 no yes yes no no 
8 no yes no yes no 
9 no yes no no yes 
10 no no yes no no 
11 no no yes yes no 
12 no no yes no yes 
13 no no no yes no 
14 no no no yes yes 
15 no no no no yes 
16 yes yes yes no no 
17 yes yes no yes no 
18 yes yes no no yes 
19 yes no yes yes no 
20 yes no yes no yes 
21 yes no no yes yes 
22 no yes yes yes no 
23 no yes yes yes yes 
24 yes no yes yes yes 
25 no no yes yes yes 
26 no yes no yes yes 
27 yes yes yes yes no 
28 yes yes yes no yes 
29 yes yes no yes yes 
30 no no no no no 
31 no yes yes no yes 
32 yes yes yes yes yes 
 
 
Planned analyses for each aim are as follows:  
Aim 1.  All individual  interviews will be digitally recorded; digital files will be stored on a 
password -secured network drive. Recordings will be transcribed verbatim and de -
identified. Three coders will independently review the de -identified transcripts, identify 
emergent the mes, and assign initial codes using constant comparative analysis. This 
iterative process codes data based on identified conceptual themes.  Data will be 
organized using NVivo software. Coders will meet often to discuss and refine the 
emerging themes, and triangulate their perspectives. Once a final coding structure is 
identified, coders will independently return to the transcripts to re -examine them and 
recode as necessary to ensure consistency. Disagreements will be resolved through 
deliberation and conse nsus. Analysis will identify both aides’ and clients’ perceptions of 
implementing the proposed intervention, strategies for tailoring the existing intervention 
content, and tactics for overcoming identified challenges to implementation .  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Designing with Dissemination in Mind: Optimization of a mHeal th 
Physical Activity Intervention for  Breast Cancer Survivors  (Fit2Thrive)  
 Page 39 of 63 Revis ed Template : November 10, 2014  All information ob tained from direct observation with be entered and analyzed using 
descriptive statistics to determine the learnability, effectiveness, efficiency, errors, 
flexibility , memorability , and user satisfaction  of the app components. We will also 
transcribe verba tim the de -identified digitally audio recorded  files and use these data to 
further assess qualitatively any themes that emerge relative to the components’ 
learnability, effectiveness, efficiency, errors, f lexibility , memorability  and user satisfaction . 
Finally, descriptive statistics (means, standard deviation, frequencies) of questionnaire -
based feedback will be used to further assess the app’s the learnability, effectiveness, 
efficiency, errors, f lexibility , memorability  and user satisfaction .  
Data from participant interviews and questionnaire s completed related to the field 
experiment will be analyzed as described, above, and used to refine the app until 
saturation is reached.   
 
Aim 2. Feasibility and acceptability will be evaluated using the measures detailed above. 
The primary hypotheses are: a) 75% of eligible survivors will agree to participate in the 
intervention; (b) enrollees will demonstrate engagement by monitoring PA on >80% of  the 
study days and using one or more additional app components at least weekly. Descriptive 
analyses (means, frequencies) will be used to describe these results.  Data from post -
intervention interviews will be digitally recorded; digital files will be stored on a password -
secured network drive. Recordings will be transcribed verbatim and de -identified. Three 
coders will independently review the de -identified transcripts, identify emergent themes, 
and assign i nitial codes using constant comparative analysis. This iterative process codes 
data based on identified conceptual themes.  Data will be organized using qualitative data 
analyses software . Coders will meet often to discuss and refine the emerging themes, 
and triangulate their perspectives. Once a final coding structure is identified, coders will 
independently return to the transcripts to re -examine them and recode as necessary to 
ensure consistency. Disagreements will be resolved through deliberation and co nsensus. 
Analysis will identify both aides’ and clients’ perceptions of implementing the proposed 
intervention, strategies for tailoring the existing intervention content, and tactics for 
overcoming identified challenges to implementation .  
 
 
Aim 3 and Exp loratory Aim  1. These aims are to determine the preliminary effectiveness 
of intervention components on minutes of accelerometer -measured moderate and 
vigorous PA  (Aim 3)  and PROs (physical function, fatigue, depression, QOL ; Exploratory 
Aim). Our hypothes is is that a set of components will emerge as most effective for 
increasing PA and minimizing cost , but a second set of intervention component may 
emerge as having the largest, most cost -efficient impact on PROs. These hypotheses will 
be tested using inten tion-to-treat mixed linear model analyses to test differences in 
outcomes by intervention components. The study was not designed to have statistical 
power to detect differences over time with inferential tests. If descriptive statistics suggest 
that the in tervention (a) is feasible and acceptable and (b) seems likely to increase PA, 
we will plan a future randomized controlled trial with sufficient power (>.80) to detect 
clinically -meaningful effects in this population. If we fail to achieve certain benchmar ks for 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Designing with Dissemination in Mind: Optimization of a mHeal th 
Physical Activity Intervention for  Breast Cancer Survivors  (Fit2Thrive)  
 Page 40 of 63 Revis ed Template : November 10, 2014  feasibility, acceptability, or safety, we will refine the protocol as needed prior to 
proceeding.  
 
Exploratory Aim 2. This aim is to explore the relationship between the 5 intervention 
components and each  BC progression (IL -6, IL-10, CRP and TNFα) and cardiometabolic 
(CRP, BG, TG, TC, HDL -C) biomarker. We will also examine effects on overall risk for 
each category using composite z -scores . Our hypothesis is a set of components will 
emerge as most effective  for changing each biomarker, but a second set of components, 
which may not be the same, may emerge as having the greatest composite effect  or being 
most cost -efficient to achieve these outcomes. We will employ an intention -to-treat (ITT) 
approach by inclu ding all participants recruited into the study regardless of compliance. 
These hypotheses will be tested using intention -to-treat linear mixed model analyses to 
test differences in outcomes by intervention components. We will also test 2 -way 
interactions b etween selected intervention components. Because we will use effect ( -1,1) 
coding rather than dummy (0,1) coding, the power for tests to detect main effects and 
interaction effects are identical for effects of identical size. These data will be used in 
conjunction with parent study data to determine which intervention components will be 
tested in a more definitive trial.  
11.2 Power Analysis . 
Because this is a pilot test to evaluate the feasibility, acceptability, and preliminary 
efficacy of the different interve ntion components, sample size planning was determined 
by resource constraints (vs. a power analysis ) for the primary aims . 
Dried Blood Spots.  To determine  if the sample size (n=25 6) is sufficient to address our  
exploratory  aim to explore biomarkers obtained via DBS, we conducted  a power analysis 
to calculate  the minim al detectable difference 
(MDD)116 for each biomarker assuming 20% 
attrition at 24 weeks, an alpha of 0.05, and two -
sided testing. T he MDD defines the difference  
that must  exist between those with the 
component “on” vs. “off” to detect a statistically 
significant  effect . We used standard deviations 
from published BCS PA interventions117 and intra -class correlations (ICC) from Dr. 
Spring’s prior study,118 if available. Otherwise, a conservative ICC of 0.8 is assumed.  
Table 8 displays MDDs for component main effects and two -way interactions at 12 and 
24 weeks. We have 80% power to detect differences at least equal to between group 
differences observed in prior intervention studies for all inflammatory119,120 and CVD 
markers121,122 except for BG. Given no study has evaluated specific  PA intervention 
component effects on biomarkers in BCS in the context of a MOST design, we accept this 
limitation.  
11.3 Data Security  
Each participant will be randomly assigned an identification number to ensure 
confidentiality of data. This will be the only way of matching data with a specific person. 
Nitro Study Tracker will be the only place where the ID will appear with the participant’s 
name in the present study. This database will only be accessible by the investigators. 
 
Table 3.Minimal Detectable Differences   
Marker  SD ICC Study  MDD  
IL-6 1.1 0.80 Jones 2013  0.40 pg/mL  
IL-10 3.8 0.80 Rogers 2012  1.37 pg/mL  
TNFα  0.6 0.80 Jones 2013  0.21 pg/mL  
CRP  2.4 0.44 Jones 2013  0.78 mg/dL  
BG 7.8 0.49 Guinan 2013  2.57 mg/dL  
HDL-C 0.3 0.87 Fairey 2005  0.11 mmol/L  
TG 0.7 0.79 Fairey 2005  0.27 mmol/L  
TC 0.3 0.75 Fairey 2005  0.10 mmol/L  Table 8. Minimal Detectable Differences  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Designing with Dissemination in Mind: Optimization of a mHeal th 
Physical Activity Intervention for  Breast Cancer Survivors  (Fit2Thrive)  
 Page 41 of 63 Revis ed Template : November 10, 2014  This electronic database will hou se participant contact information and is stored on a 
secured, password -protected network, accessible only by the investigators.  
To ensure the integrity of the data collected from study participants several procedures 
will be implemented. All personnel in volved in data collection will be thoroughly trained 
in all assessment methods thus ensuring consistent applications of procedures and 
measurement consistency across participants. All data will be automatically saved in the 
secured, password protected RedC ap system and will be downloaded to a password 
protected network folder protected ensuring access only by the investigators. Any hard 
copies of data will only include the participants ID number and will be entered into the 
RedCap system only using this ID number. All raw data will be de -identified (with the 
exception of the study ID number). These data will be saved to a portable hard drive 
which will be stored in a locked cabinet in the PI’s laboratory. Any hard copies of data 
will be stored in a separate,  locked cabinet from the informed consents in the PI’s 
laboratory. Files containing identifying information obtained for purposes of tracking 
participants and monitoring of subject payments are kept in a locked file in a locked office 
separate from study r elated data. Data will only be linked to identifying information 
through a study ID. Under no circumstances will individually identifiable data be released 
to anyone without the written consent of the subject. Results will be reported as group 
findings onl y. In the past we have found that all of these procedures are effective at 
reducing risk for study participants.  
Issues related to data integrity will be discussed on a weekly basis as a recurring agenda 
item in the weekly project meeting to ensure constan t monitoring of our data integrity. 
Only the investigators will have access to participant data. All staff with access to the 
data with have completed Northwestern University requirements for the responsible 
conduct of research including the Collaborative Institutional Training Initiative (CITI) 
Training Modules.  
11.4 Quality Control of Collected Data  
Given that  the majority of  data will either be recorded electronically, entered electronically 
by participants  or collected electronically via accelerometers or cellphones , we anticipate 
limited issues with quality control. However, all hard copy data that is entered by study 
staff will be double entered and checked to ensure data integrity Additionally, all data will 
be checked for missing data and erroneous data by examining descriptive statistics and 
score ranges of all variables. Subsequently, all data will be examined for violation of basic 
statistical assumptions (i.e., normality, multicollinearity, and homos cedascity) and 
transformed if necessary. In order to ensure data are missing at random, we will compare 
participants who have data on a given variable to those who do not on demographic and 
disease characteristics to ensure there is no pattern to the missi ngness.  
 
11.5 Specimen Handling  
Blood specimens will be self-collected by participants  in their homes and mailed back to 
680 N Lake Shore Drive, Chicago, IL using the U.S. Postal Service for analysis and 
storage for future use which may include analysis of biom arkers of BC progression and 
CVD risk, whole genome sequencing, and epigenetic profiling. Everyone handling the 
blood products will receive Bloodborne Pathogens Training.  As described above, 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Designing with Dissemination in Mind: Optimization of a mHeal th 
Physical Activity Intervention for  Breast Cancer Survivors  (Fit2Thrive)  
 Page 42 of 63 Revis ed Template : November 10, 2014  specimens will not be stored linked to direct identifiers (only b y ID number). Specimens 
will be accessible by Dr. Phillips  and co -investigators with IRB approval.  
 
12.0 Provisions to Monitor the Data to Ensure the Safety of Subjects  
N/A as this study involves only Minimal Risk to subjects.  
 
13.0 Withdrawal of Subjects  
13.1 Procedures for early termination.  
Participants may withdraw from  either Phase 1 or Phase 2 of  the study at any time.  
Procedures specific to Phase 2. For any participant who  elects to withdraw, p ermission 
will be sought to continue to collect outcome data for use in the analysis.  However, all 
participants in the intervention will be accounted for in all follow -up analyses following the 
intent -to-treat principle. If participan ts withdraw from the study, and do not agree to return 
for follow -up assessments, data from their most recent assessment will be carried forward 
and imputed in subsequent assessment points (Last Observation Carried Forward).  
13.2 Procedures to follow when subje cts withdraw from research.  
Participants may withdraw from the study at any time  during Phase 1 or Phase 2 . For 
phase 2, p ermission will be sought to continue to collect outcome data for use in the 
analysis.   
 
14.0 Risks to Subjects  
14.1 Reasonably foreseeable risks, discomforts, hazards, or inconveniences 
related to participation  in the research.  
Phase 1.  Potential risks are considered minimal.  There are some potential minimal 
psychological risks associated with participation in the interviews, intervention 
development sessions and answering some of the  intervention development  
questionnaires . However, participants will be given the option to not answer or skip any 
questions that make them feel uncomfortable.  Further, although the research  team  will 
take every precaution to maintain confidentiality of the data, the nature of some web -
based sessions prevent  the researchers from guaranteeing confidentiality. The research 
team will be sure to reiterate this risk during all group sessio ns and remind participants to 
respect the privacy of your fellow participants and not repeat what is said in these 
sessions  to others.  
For the app field study, participants may increase their PA  compared to their usual level 
of PA , although they will be ex plicitly told this is not the purpose of the field test . Engaging 
in a PA program when one has been sedentary for a considerable period of time incurs 
some risk of injury such as l muscle soreness, strains, aggravation of arthritic conditions, 
etc. However , serious physical injury is considered unlikely.  Participants will be instructed 
to notify study investigators immediately if they experience any adverse effects of using 
the app.   
PROTOCOL TITLE: Designing with Dissemination in Mind: Optimization of a mHeal th 
Physical Activity Intervention for  Breast Cancer Survivors  (Fit2Thrive)  
 Page 43 of 63 Revis ed Template : November 10, 2014  For the app field study, t here is also a small risk to individuals’ priva cy when using the 
mHealth app . However, this will be minimized by the procedures described, above. 
Participants are permitted to refuse to participate in any aspect of the research and may 
withdraw from the study at any point, for any reason without penalt y. 
Phase 2. Potential  risks are considered minimal. Engaging in a PA program when one 
has been sedentary for a considerable period of time incurs some risk of injury such as l 
muscle soreness, strains, aggravation of arthritic conditions, etc. However, ser ious 
physical injury is considered unlikely. In order to reduce and/or prevent any physical harm 
or injury subjects will gradually increase their PA. Additionally, each participa nt will be 
required to pass a screening test or receive medical approval prior to enrollment to ensure 
PA is appropriate. Furthermore, a ll participants, regardless of the intervention 
components they receive, will be provided access to a study website that i s also 
embedded within the app which will include an overview of safety issues and stress the 
need to contact study investigators should they experience any adverse effects of PA.  
Finally, the intervention content will emphasize safety and present instruc tion to reflect 
safe progressions.  
In addition to the potential minimal risk associated with PA participation, t here are some 
potential minimal psychological risks associated with answering some of the 
questionnaires required for participation in this stu dy. However, participants will be given 
the option to skip any questions that make them feel uncomfortable. Should any 
individuals report scores on the PROMIS Cancer Depression Scale, that are in the 75th 
percentile (i.e. ≥ 4.3)  or confer a high level of d istress in interactions with research study 
staff, they will be referred to American Psychosocial Oncology Society (APOS) Toll-Free 
HELPLINE - 1-866-276-7443 (1 -866-APOS -4-HELP) .  We have chosen this method 
because women will be selected from all over the United States. APOS's Helpline is a 
national resource to help people with cancer and their caregivers find emotional support 
in their own communities.  This is a referral program  that is part of the Cancer Support 
Helpline® (affiliated with the Cancer Suppo rt Community)  and connects cancer patients, 
their caregivers and advocacy organizations with psychiatrists, psychologists, nurses, 
social workers, and counselors skilled in the management of cancer -related distress. If 
Helpline counselors cannot find local  support services, and there is an immediate need 
for help, a Helpline mental health counselor can provide short -term emotional support by 
phone while patients seek professional help with coping in their community.   Calls are 
accepted Mon -Fri 9 am - 8 pm ET .  
There is also a small risk to individuals’ privacy when using the mHealth app but this will 
be minimized by the procedures described, above.  
Finally, for those participating in the optional blood sample collection, pricking the finger 
for the blood sam ple may cause some minor discomfort. Additionally, t he risks of taking 
blood include pain, a bruise at the point where the blood is taken, redness and swelling 
of the collection site and infection, and a rare risk of fainting. The risk of fainting could be  
elevated if a participant is already  feeling faint or dizzy. They will be instructed to  delay 
collecting the blood sample until they are feeling better  if this is the case . 
Participants are permitted to refuse to participate in any aspect of the research and may 
withdraw from the study at any point, for any reason without penalty.  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Designing with Dissemination in Mind: Optimization of a mHeal th 
Physical Activity Intervention for  Breast Cancer Survivors  (Fit2Thrive)  
 Page 44 of 63 Revis ed Template : November 10, 2014   
15.0 Potential Benefits to Subjects  
Phase 1. The benefits of this portion of the study are largely scientific. Participants will 
have the benefit of contributing to the advancement of science by contributing to the 
development of a mHealth intervention for breast cancer survivors . This information is 
crucial to  the effective developmen t and implementation of the PA intervention to be 
tested in Phase 2.   
 
Phase 2. Although not guaranteed, the potential benefits of participating in this study 
include improved cardiorespiratory fitness, physical functioning, quality of life, depression 
and fatigue. All participants will be able to participate in the program for free. This study 
has the potential to inform science by improving the understanding of how to promote PA 
in breast cancer survivors, a large, and growing population with many health  concerns. 
Additionally, the approach used to develop the intervention has the potential to be applied 
to other areas of science to facilitate the efficiency by which research can be disseminated 
into practice. We believe that the minimal risk involved wit h study participation are 
reasonable in relation to the anticipated benefits.  
 
 
16.0 Vulnerable Populations  
N/A 
 
 
17.0 Community -Based Participatory Research  
17.1 Involvement of the community in the design and conduct of the research.  
Stakeholders including local, Chicago -area breast cancer survivors and representatives 
from relevant Chicago -area and national  cancer organizations will be involved in 
designing and choosing the intervention components to be tested as part of Phase 1 of 
this study.  
 
18.0 Sharing of Results  with Subjects  
Phase 1.  Women who participate in this portion of the study will have the option of 
selecting to receive a plain language study summary at the end of Phase 1 and to indicate 
whether they would like to receive any manuscripts that result fro m Phase 1 or Phase 2 
of the present study. All women who indicate they would like to  receive either the plain 
language summary or have manuscripts shared with them, will be e -mailed final versions 
of any manuscripts that result from the data upon publicati on in peer -reviewed journals.  
These manuscripts will also be posted on the PI’s website which study participants will 
have access to.  
 
Phase 2. Results  will be shared with subjects via a plain -language study summary that 
will be sent via e -mail to participants at the conclusion of all data collection and cleaning. 
Women will also be given the option to indicate they would like manuscripts that are 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Designing with Dissemination in Mind: Optimization of a mHeal th 
Physical Activity Intervention for  Breast Cancer Survivors  (Fit2Thrive)  
 Page 45 of 63 Revis ed Template : November 10, 2014  publis hed as a result of these data to be shared with them . All women who indicate they 
would like to have manuscripts shared with them, will be e -mailed final versions of any 
manuscripts that result s from the data upon publication in peer -reviewed journals.  These 
manuscripts will also be posted on the PI’s website which study participants will have 
access to.  
 
 
19.0 Setting  
19.1 Sites or locations where  research will be conducted . 
Phase 1. Recruitment. Breast cancer survivors will be recruited from the Lynn Sage 
Breast Cancer Program at RHLCC using pamphlets/fliers and physician referrals. Fliers 
and pamphlets will also be posted in the local community , sent to listservs and posted 
on social media and on -line forums . Additionally, the PI will send a recruitment e -mail to 
an existing database of breast cancer survivors. Community representatives will be 
recruited in conjunction with NU’s Center for Community Health (led by Co -I Dr. 
Ackermann) via personalized e -mails and phone calls. Experts will be recruited throug h 
the RHLCCC and the PI’s, co -investigators’ professional networks via listservs and 
personalized e -mails and phone calls . Research Procedures : All research procedures 
will be performed in the Department of Preventive Medicine, 680 N. Lakeshore Drive, 
Suite 1400, Chicago, IL 60611.  
Phase 2. Recruitment : Our main source of recruitment will be e -blasts sent to women 
registered with the Army of Women.©  Other recruitment sources will include posting on 
on-line forums and websites, RHLCC, and fliers distributed  at local community 
organizations and events. Research Procedures : All research procedures will be 
performed in the Department of Preventive Medicine, 680 N. Lakeshore Drive, Suite 
1400, Chicago, IL 60611.  
 
20.0 Resources Available  
20.1 Qualifications PI and  staff  
All staff with access to the data with have completed Northwestern University 
requirements for the responsible conduct of research including the Collaborative 
Institutional Training Initiative (CITI) Training Modules. The PI (Dr. Phillips) is an As sistant 
Professor in the Department of Preventive Medicine and has a PhD in Kinesiology from 
the University of Illinois Urbana Champaign, MPH in Quantitative Methods from Harvard 
University and completed a postdoc at the National Cancer Institute. She has extensive 
training in randomized physical activity intervention in cancer survivors and older adults 
and has successfully conducted several other, similar, studies while at the University of 
Illinois Urbana Champaign.   
 
Co-Investigators. Dr. Bonnie J. Spri ng, PhD  is the Director  of The  Center for Behavior 
and Health  and Prof essor in Preventive Medicine , and Co -Leader of the Cancer 
Prevention Program at RHLCC at NU. Dr. Spring has extensive experience in mHealth, 
behavioral intervention trials and MOST metho dology. Dr. Frank J. Penedo, PhD is  the 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Designing with Dissemination in Mind: Optimization of a mHeal th 
Physical Activity Intervention for  Breast Cancer Survivors  (Fit2Thrive)  
 Page 46 of 63 Revis ed Template : November 10, 2014  Director of the Cancer Survivorship Institute at RHLCC, Program Leader of Cancer 
Control and Survivorship at the RHLCC, and Professor in Medical Social Sciences at NU. 
D. Penedo has extensive experience in behavioral  interventions in cancer survivors and 
biopsychosocial mechanisms underlying health and disease outcomes in cancer 
survivors. Dr. David Cella, PhD  is the Chair  of the  Department of Medical Social Sciences 
and Director of the Center for Patient -Centered Outcomes  at NU. He is a leading expert 
in cancer survivorship and patient reported outcomes. He also has experience in 
designing and conducting stakeholder focus groups  and interviews . Dr. Ronald T. 
Ackerman, MD, MPH  is the Director of the Center  for Community Health and Professor 
in General Internal Medicine and Geriatrics . He is an expert  in dissemination and 
implementation of behavioral interventions and stakeholder engagement. Dr. Juned 
Siddique, PhD  is an Associate Professor in Biostat istics and Preventive Medicine and an 
expert in using cutting -edge statistical techniques to analyze  behavioral interventions and 
accelerometer data.  Dr. Danielle Hartigan, PhD, MPH is an Assistant Professor at 
Bentley University in Natural and Applied Sciences . She has expertise in qualitative data 
collection and analyses and will provide guidance on these aspects of the study.   
20.2 Other resources available to conduct the research .  
Feasibility of recruiting subjects for Phase 1.  We will use the Army of Women © to 
recruit survivors. Given the large number of survivors in the database and the fact that no 
on-site lab visits are required, we do not anticipate recruitment to be a problem. We 
believe we should be able to recruit participants for the other stakeholde r groups relatively 
easily through NU resources including RHLCC and the Center for Community Health in 
addition to the PI’s and Co -I’s professional networks.  
Feasibility of recruiting subjects  for Phase 2 . Women will primarily be recruited 
through an e -blast sent to members of the Army of Women©, an online initiative that 
connects breast cancer researchers with women who are willing to participate in research. 
The database currently consists of ≥375,000 women and men. Of these, ~30% (112,500) 
self-report a breast cancer history.  This means we only need to recruit (0.2%) of these 
women.  
We are confident sample recruitment through the Army of Women© is feasible, based on 
my prior experience recruiting and retaining a much larger sample. In our prior study, we  
had 2,500 women express interest  within 12 hours of recruitment initiation and 
recruitment was halted due to capacity limitations. Of that   number, 1,631 (64%) 
responded to screening and qualified to participate. I randomized 500 of those women to 
wear a ccelerometers for 7 consecutive days. Only 4 refused to wear the device.  At 
baseline and follow -up, 1,527 women (94%) completed more than half of the on -line 
questionnaires. Valid accelerometer data were obtained from 442 (89%) women at 
baseline; 370 (83. 7%) of those women also had valid data at 6 month follow -up. Reasons 
for missing accelerometer data at baseline and follow -up, respectively, were: did not wear 
(n=36 and n=40), insufficient valid wear time (n=8 and n=17), accelerometer 
malfunctioned (n=5 a t both), lost in mail or by participant (n=4 and n=5) and submerged 
in water (n=1).   
If we are not able to sufficiently meet our recruitment goals using the Army of Women©, 
additional NU resources (e.g. RHLCC and the C enter for Community Health), on -line 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Designing with Dissemination in Mind: Optimization of a mHeal th 
Physical Activity Intervention for  Breast Cancer Survivors  (Fit2Thrive)  
 Page 47 of 63 Revis ed Template : November 10, 2014  forums and social media sites (i.e. Facebook, the Sisters Networ k and Nueva Vida) and 
fliers at community organizations and events will be used.  
Percentage of PI’s Effort Dedicated to Project. The PI will dedicate approximately 6 0-
80% of her effort to this project during data collection and between 30-40% during data 
analyses.  
Facilities. Phase 1 will be conducted in the Department of Preventive Medicine in private 
conference rooms  or using the Northwestern University’s IT services ( for web -based 
conferences) . Phase 2 will be conducted via a mobile app.  All data from this will be stored 
on a secure, password protected server that will only be accessible to study investigators.   
Process to Ensure all Staff are Adequately Informed on P rotocol. All staff with access 
to the data with have completed Northwestern University requirements for the responsible 
conduct of research including the Collaborative Institutional Training Initiative (CITI) 
Training Modules. A manual of procedures will b e developed for the current project which 
will include scripts for any contact research staff will have with study participants. T he PI 
will meet with the research assistant (TBD) from the Department of Preventive Medicine 
to train them in these procedures . Additionally, the PI will meet with the RA on a weekly 
basis, and as needed, to ensure study procedures are being adhered to.  
21.0 Prior Approvals  
We will obtain approval from the National Cancer Institute before beginning the present 
study.  
 
22.0 Recruitment Met hods  
22.1 When, where and how potential subjects will be recruited.  
Phase 1 . Women will be recruited through an e -blast sent to members of the Army of 
Women©, an online initiative that connects breast cancer researchers with women who 
are willing to participate in research. The database currently consists of ≥375,000 women 
and men. Of these, ~30% (112,500) self -report a breast cancer history. Women interested 
in participating in the current study will respond to the e -blast.  Their contact information 
will be forwarded to the study investigator who will provide a description of the study and 
further screen for eligibility either via on -line screening questionna ires or telephone 
interview. Eligible breast cancer survivors will be offered the opportunity to participate and 
will complete informed consent. Breast cancer survivors may also be recruited from the 
Lynn Sage Breast Cancer Program at RHLCC using pamphlets /fliers and physician 
referrals. Fliers and pamphlets will also be posted in the local community  sent to listservs 
and posted on social media and on -line forums . Additionally, the PI will send a recruitment 
e-mail to an existing database of breast cancer s urvivors.  Community representatives will 
be recruited in conjunction with NU’s Center for Community Health (led by Co -I Dr. 
Ackermann)  via personalized e -mails and phone calls. Experts will be recruited through 
the RHLCCC and the PI’s, co-investigators’  professional networks  via listservs and 
personalized e -mails and phone calls .  
 
All individuals interested in participants will be instructed to contact study investigators 
who will provide a description of the study and further screen for eligibility  either  via on -
PROTOCOL TITLE: Designing with Dissemination in Mind: Optimization of a mHeal th 
Physical Activity Intervention for  Breast Cancer Survivors  (Fit2Thrive)  
 Page 48 of 63 Revis ed Template : November 10, 2014  line screening questionnaires or telephone interview. Eligible stakeholders  will be offered 
the opportunity to participate and will complete informed consent.  
 
Phase 2.  Breast cancer survivors  will be recruited through an e -blast sent to members of 
the Army of Women©, an online initiative that connects breast cancer researchers with 
women who are willing to participate in research. The database currently consists of 
≥375,000 women and men. Of these, ~30% (112,500) self -report a breast canc er history. 
Women interested in participating in the current study will respond to the e -blast.  Their 
contact information will be forwarded to the study investigator who will provide a 
description of the study and further screen for eligibility either via  on-line screening 
questionnaires or telephone interview. Eligible breast cancer survivors will be offered the 
opportunity to participate and will complete informed consent.  
 
If our recruitment goals are not being sufficiently met via the Army of Women© we will also 
post study fliers and advertisements on social media sites (i.e. Facebook, 
PatientsLikeMe) and on -line forums (i.e. Sisters Network, Nueva Vida, Living Beyond 
Breast Cancer). All women who are recruited through these alternative strategies, wil l be 
instructed to contact the study staff who will provide a description of the study and further 
screen for eligibility either via on -line screening questionnaires or telephone interview .  
Eligible breast cancer survivors will be offered the opportunity to participate and will 
complete informed consent.  
 
Buddies will be identified  by participants and subsequently contacted by investigators 
via email.  Identified potential buddies  will have access to an online screening tool via 
RedCap which will provide a study overview and allow them to screen for eligibility if 
interested. Eligible buddies will be offered the opportunity to participate and will 
complete informed consent. They wi ll also be offered the opportunity to answer an 
online questionnaire battery that is almost identical to that of the breast cancer survivors 
at baseline, 12 weeks and 24 weeks.  
 
Participants for the post -intervention interviews will be identified by inves tigators based 
on willingness to be contacted regarding future studies, study adherence and condition 
assignment to ensure an equal distribution across the latter two variables.  
 
22.2 Source of subject s. 
Phase 1.  Women will be recruited through an e-blast sent to members of the Army of 
Women©, an online initiative that connects breast cancer researchers with women who 
are willing to participate in research. The database currently consists of ≥375,000 women 
and men. Of these, ~30% (112,500) self -report a breast cancer history. Women interested 
in participating in the current study will respond to the e -blast.  Their contact information 
will be forwarded to the study investigator who will provide a description of the study and 
further screen for eligib ility either via on -line screening questionnaires or telephone 
interview. Eligible breast cancer survivors will be offered the opportunity to participate and 
will complete informed consent.  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Designing with Dissemination in Mind: Optimization of a mHeal th 
Physical Activity Intervention for  Breast Cancer Survivors  (Fit2Thrive)  
 Page 49 of 63 Revis ed Template : November 10, 2014  If we are not able to sufficiently meet our recruitment goals usi ng the Army of Women©, 
additional NU resources (e.g.  Lynn Sage Breast Cancer Program, RHLCC and the 
Center for Community Health), on -line forums and social media sites (i.e. Facebook, the 
Sisters Network and Nueva Vida) and pamphlets fliers at community o rganizations and 
events and clinics will be used.  Additionally, the PI may send a recruitment e -mail to an 
existing database of breast cancer survivors. Community representatives will be recruited 
in conjunction with NU’s Center for Community Health (led b y Co -I Dr. Ackermann). 
Experts will be recruited through the RHLCCC and the PI’s, co -investigators’ professional 
networks.  
Phase 2. Women will primarily be recruited through an e -blast sent to members of the 
Army of Women©, an online initiative that connec ts breast cancer researchers with 
women who are willing to participate in research. The database currently consists of 
≥375,000 women and men. Of these, ~30% (112,500) self -report a breast cancer history.  
If we are not able to sufficiently meet our recrui tment goals using the Army of Women©, 
additional NU resources (e.g. RHLCC and the C enter for Community Health), on -line 
forums and social media sites (i.e. Facebook, the Sisters Networ k and Nueva Vida) and 
fliers at community organizations and events will be used.  
 
Buddies will be identified by study participants.  
 
Participants for the post -intervention interview will be identified by investigators based 
on willingness to be contacted regarding future studies, study adherence and condition 
assignment to ensure an equal distribution across the latter two variables.  
 
22.3 Methods used to identify potential subject s. 
Phase 1. Breast cancer survivors will be recruited through The  Army of Women .© The 
Army of Women .© will send all women in their database an e -blast to advertise the present 
study. Women interested in participating in the current study will respond to the e -blast.  
Their contact information will be forwarded to the study team  who will  contact them via 
phone or e -mail to  provide a description of the study and further screen for eligibility via 
on-line screening questionnaires or telephone interview  (based on participants 
preference) . Fliers and pamphlets will also be posted in the local community sent to 
listservs and posted on social media and on -line forums . Additionally, the PI will send a 
recruitment e -mail to an existing database of breast cancer survivors.   
 
Community representatives will be recruited in conjunction with NU’s Center for 
Community Hea lth (led by Co -I Dr. Ackermann)  via personalized e -mails and phone calls . 
Experts will be recruited through the RHLCCC and the PI’s, co-investigators’  professional 
networks  via listservs and personalized e -mails and phone calls .  
Phase 2. The Army of Women© will send all women in their database an e -blast to 
advertise the present study. Women interested in participating in the current study will 
respond to the e -blast.  Their contact information will be forwarded to the study team  who 
will contact them via phone or e -mail to  provide a description of the study and further 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Designing with Dissemination in Mind: Optimization of a mHeal th 
Physical Activity Intervention for  Breast Cancer Survivors  (Fit2Thrive)  
 Page 50 of 63 Revis ed Template : November 10, 2014  screen for eligibility via on -line screening questionnaires or telephone interview  (based 
on participants preference) .  
Similar procedures will be followed for survivors recruited through other channels. All 
interested women will contact study investigators who will provide them with additional 
details about the study, and if interested, screen them for eligibility.  
Buddie s will be identified by study participants.  
All e ligible breast cancer survivors  and buddies will be offered the opportunity to 
participate and will complete informed consent.  
22.4 Recruitment materials .   
Phase 1.  Potential subjects will be recruited using IRB-approved e-blast to the Army of 
Women©, scripted phone calls and IRB -approved pamphlets/fliers and e -mails.  
Phase 2  For survivors, o ur primary recruitment method will be an e -blast to the Army of 
Women©. If this is not successful, we will post adverti sements on on -line forums and 
distribute fliers at local community organizations and events. Fliers will be posted and 
handed out to potential participants.  
Potential buddy participants will be identified via breast cancer survivor participants and 
invite d to participate in the online screening by study staff.  
Potential post -intervention interview participants will be identified by the study team and 
invited to participate in the interview by study staff via email.  
All recruitment materials will be IRB -approved.  
22.5 Payments to subject s. 
Phase 1. Survivors will be paid $15.00 via Amazon.com e -gift card following participation 
in the interview session. Experts and community partners will b e paid $20.00 via an 
Amazon.com e-gift card following participation in each interview session . Survivors will 
be paid $10.00 via an Amazon.com e -giftcard for  each app development session  (up to 
2) and another $ 20.00 via an Amazon.com e -giftcard for the field test.    
Phase 2. Survivors will be paid $20.00 via check  following completion of baseline, 12 
week and 24 week follow -up assessments (on -line questionnaires and accelerometer ). If 
they only complete one aspect of the assessment (i.e. wear the accelerometer or answer 
questi onnaires), their pay will be pro -rated to $10 for each component completed. Women 
who choose to participate in the optional blood sample collection will receive a $ 15.00 
check  after receipt of their sample at each of the three time points.  
“Buddies” who a gree to complete the optional baseline, 12 week and 24 week on -line 
questionnaire assessments, and complete at least two assessments, will get to keep the 
Fitbit  ($60 value) . Those who do not complete at least two assessments will be asked to 
mail the Fitb it back to the study team.    
Participants who agree to participate in post -intervention interviews will be paid $20.00 
via Amazon.com e -gift card for participation in this portion of the study.  
23.0 Number of Subjects  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Designing with Dissemination in Mind: Optimization of a mHeal th 
Physical Activity Intervention for  Breast Cancer Survivors  (Fit2Thrive)  
 Page 51 of 63 Revis ed Template : November 10, 2014  23.1 Total N umber  of Subjects to be accrued .  
A total of 356 breast cancer survivors , 30 other stakeholders  and 128 “buddies”  will be 
accrued.  
Phase  1.  In phase 1, we plan to recruit breast cancer survivors  up to 100 breast cancer 
survivors, a subgroup (n=30) will participate in interviews and the full sample (n=100) has 
the potential to participate in the app development sessions and field test. A total of 20 -
30 experts (n=10 -15) (n=10 -15) will be recruited  for interviews.   
Phase 2.  For the pilot intervention, we will accrue 256 breast cancer survivors. 
Approximately 50% of these will be assigned to the buddy condition. As such we will 
accrue 128 buddies. We anticipate 80% of these “buddies” (n=102) will a gree to 
participate in the optional questionnaire assessments. For the post -intervention 
interviews, we plan to accrue up to 35 women.  
 
24.0 Provisions to Protect the Privacy Interests of Subjects  
24.1 Steps that to protect subject s’ privacy interests.  
Each participant will be randomly assigned an identification number to ensure 
confidentiality of data. This will be the only way of matching data with a specific person. 
Nitro Study Tracker will be the only place where the ID will appear with the participant’s 
name in the present study. This database will only be accessible by the investigators. 
This electronic database will house participant contact information and is stored on a 
secured, password -protected network, accessible only by the investigators .  
To ens ure the integrity of the data collected from study participants several procedures 
will be implemented. All personnel involved in data collection will be thoroughly trained in 
all assessment methods thus ensuring consistent applications of procedures and 
measurement consistency across participants.  All questionnaire assessment  data will be 
automatically saved in the secured, password protected RedCap system and will be 
downloaded to a password protected network folder protected ensuring access only by 
the investigators. Any hard copies of data will only include the participants ID number and 
will be entered into the RedCap system on ly using this ID number. All raw data will be de -
identified (with the exception of the study ID number). These data will be save d to a 
portable hard drive which will be stored in a locked cabinet in the PI’s laboratory. Any 
hard copies of data will be stored in a separate, locked cabinet from the informed consents 
in the PI’s laboratory. Files containing identifying information obt ained for purposes of 
tracking participants and monitoring of subject payments are kept in a locked file in a 
locked office separate from study related data. Data will only be linked to identifying 
information through a study ID. Under no circumstances wil l individually identifiable data 
be released to anyone without the written consent of the subject. Results will be reported 
as group findings only. In the past we have found that all of these procedures are effective 
at reducing risk for study participants . 
Issues related to data integrity will be discussed on a weekly basis as a recurring agenda 
item in the weekly project meeting to ensure constant monitoring of our data integrity. 
Only the investigators will have access to participant data. All staff with  access to the data 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Designing with Dissemination in Mind: Optimization of a mHeal th 
Physical Activity Intervention for  Breast Cancer Survivors  (Fit2Thrive)  
 Page 52 of 63 Revis ed Template : November 10, 2014  with have completed Northwestern University requirements for the responsible conduct 
of research including the Collaborative Institutional Training Initiative (CITI) Training 
Modules.  
Procedures Specific to Phase 1. All interviews  and telephone/web -based  app 
development sessions  will be digitally recorded  whenever possible ; digital files will be 
stored on a password -secured network drive. Only participants’ first names will be used 
during any recorded sessions and participants will have  the option of using a “fake” name 
if they would like. Regardless, all r ecordings will be transcribed verbatim and de -identified. 
Recordings will be destroyed at the end of the study. Upon download, all data obtained 
via cellphone, will be de -identified and only be linked to participant via study ID number.  
Procedures Specific to Phase 2. RedCap does require an e -mail address to send the 
survey link to participants. Thus, data will be temporarily linked to individuals’ e -mail 
addresses and first names which may be included in the e -mail for personalization 
purposes. However, these links will be removed after completion of the questionnaires 
and these data will then only be linked to the  participant’s identification number. Upon 
download, all data obtained via cellphone, will be de -identifed and only be linked to 
participant via study ID number.  
24.1 Steps taken to make subjects feel at ease with research situation.  
It will be clearly stated during all phases of this protocol that all subjects will have the 
option to withdraw at any time for any reason.  
Phase 1 . All interviews  and direct observation app telephone/web -based app 
development sessions  will be digitally recorded; digital files will be stored on a password -
secured network drive. Only participants’ first names will be used during any recorded 
sessions and participants will have the option of using a “fake” name if they would like. 
Regardl ess, all r ecordings will be transcribed verbatim and de -identified. Recordings will 
be destroyed at the end of the study. All subjects will have the option to withdraw at any 
time for any reason.  
For the app field study, participants may increase their PA compared to their usual level 
of PA, although they will be explicitly told this is not the purpose of the field test. Engaging 
in a PA program when one has been sedentary for a considerable period  of time incurs 
some risk of injury such as l muscle soreness, strains, aggravation of arthritic conditions, 
etc. However, serious physical injury is considered unlikely.  Participants will be 
instructed to notify study investigators immediately if they exp erience any adverse effects 
of using the app.   
Phase 2. Engaging in a PA program when one has been sedentary for a considerable 
period of time incurs some risk of injury such as l muscle soreness, strains, aggravation 
of arthritic conditions, etc. However , serious physical injury is considered unlikely. In 
order to reduce and/or prevent any physical harm or injury subjects will gradually 
increase their PA. Additionally, each participation will be required to pass a screening 
test or receive medical approva l prior to enrollment to ensure PA is appropriate.  To make 
sure subjects are educated on what may be typical, normal side effects of beginning to 
exercise and what might be more serious, a ll participants, regardless of the intervention 
components they rece ive, will be required to attend an on -line study orientation which 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Designing with Dissemination in Mind: Optimization of a mHeal th 
Physical Activity Intervention for  Breast Cancer Survivors  (Fit2Thrive)  
 Page 53 of 63 Revis ed Template : November 10, 2014  will include an overview of safety issues and stress the need to contact study 
investigators should they experience any adverse effects of PA. Finally, the intervention 
content and weekly e -mails will emphasize safety and present instruction  to reflect safe 
progressions.  
There are  also some potential minimal psychological risks associated with answering 
some of the questionnaires required for participation in this study. In addition, for th ose 
participating in the optional blood sample collection, pricking the finger for the blood 
sample may cause some minor discomfort. However, we see no psychological, social, 
or legal risks beyond those of participation in questionnaire based health -relate d 
research in general. Regardless, women will have the option to indicate they “prefer not 
to answer” any questions that make them uncomfortable. Participants will also be 
instructed that they can withdraw at any time and be provided with the PI’s contact 
information should they have any specific questions or concerns.  
All post-intervention interviews  sessions  will be digitally recorded; digital files will be 
stored on a password -secured network drive. Only participants’ first names will be used 
during any recorded sessions and participants will have the option of using a “fake” name 
if they would like. Regardless, all r ecordings will be transcribed verbatim and de -
identified. Recordings will be destroyed at the end of the study. All subjects will have the 
option to withdraw at any time for any reason.  
25.0 Compensation for Research -Related Injury  
N/A. This study does not involve more than Minimal Risk to the subjects.  
 
26.0 Economic Burden to  Subject s 
There is no cost to subjects for participation in this study . Should any subject need to 
park on NU’s campus, study staff will cover the cost of parking for the duration of their 
participants.  
 
27.0 Consent Process  
27.1 Consent Process.  
Phase 1.  All stakeholder participants will complete an on -line version of the informed 
consent. They will be instructed to print a copy of the informed consent for their records 
or to contact the study team at any time if they would like a copy for their records.  
Phase 2. All breast cancer survivor participant s will complete an on -line version of the 
informed consent.  They will also be emailed a copy and instructed to print a copy or to 
contact the study team at any time if they would like a copy for their records. A telephone  
number and e -mail address for the PI will be provided on the informed consent page, in 
the event they should have any questions or need clarification. The informed consent will 
clearly state that p articipation in the present study is completely voluntary and participants 
can discontinue or withdraw at any point without penalty.  
All buddy participants will complete an on -line version of the informed consent. They will 
be instructed to print a copy or to contact the study team at any time if they would like a 
copy for their records. A telephone number and e -mail address for the PI will be provided 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Designing with Dissemination in Mind: Optimization of a mHeal th 
Physical Activity Intervention for  Breast Cancer Survivors  (Fit2Thrive)  
 Page 54 of 63 Revis ed Template : November 10, 2014  on the informed consent page, in the event they should have any questions or need 
clarification. The informed consent will clearly state that p articipation in the present study 
is completely voluntary and participants can discontinue or wi thdraw at any point without 
penalty.  
All participants in the post -intervention interviews will complete an on -line version of the 
informed consent. They will also be instructed to print a copy or to contact the study team 
at any time if they would like a c opy for their records. A telephone number and e -mail 
address for the PI will be provided on the informed consent page, in the event they should 
have any questions or need clarification. The informed consent will clearly state that 
participation in the pres ent study is completely voluntary and participants can discontinue 
or withdraw at any point without penalty.  
27.2 This study is covered by a certificate of confidentiality. This was not 
included in the original consent form participants signed. All consented 
participants who are currently enrolled as of 6/14/18  will be informed  of this 
certificate of confidentiality in  June 2018 via a letter that will be emailed to the 
email address we have on file per instructions  from the IRB on 6/7/18. Waiver or 
Alteration of Consent Process.  
Initial data collected prior to obtaining informed consent includes name, contact 
informati on, and basic medical and health information to determine eligibility for the 
project. This information is obtained on -line, through a phone conversation or in -person 
after the subject is given details about the project. These data are recorded in a passwo rd 
protected database only accessible by study investigators. All data are provided freely by 
the subject. Data for CONSORT purposes will be linked by subject ID, not by name, thus 
protecting the subject’s privacy. Thus, this aspect of the study contains l ittle, if any, risk 
to the subject. This waiver is requested because determining subject eligibility is only 
possible by obtaining basic medical healthy history information during screening. 
Potential participants will be provided with reason(s) for inelig ibility via our online tool or 
initial phone conversation. All subjects will be given the opportunity to be contacted 
regarding  future research opportunities if they so choose, and their contact information 
will be kept in the database for this purpose. If  they prefer no future contact, their name 
and contact information will be deleted from the database but the information they have 
previously provided will be used for final CONSORT purposes.  
 
Non-English Speaking Subjects: N/A  
Subjects  who are not yet adu lts (infants, children, teenagers): N/A  
Cognitively Impaired Adults: N/A  
Adults Unable to Consent: N/A  
 
28.0 Process to Document Consent in Writing  
 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Designing with Dissemination in Mind: Optimization of a mHeal th 
Physical Activity Intervention for  Breast Cancer Survivors  (Fit2Thrive)  
 Page 55 of 63 Revis ed Template : November 10, 2014  Consent will always be obtained before a subject participates in any component of the 
current protocol.   Because we are asking participants to type their full name on any on -
line consents, this is considered equivalent to a written signature.  
 
 
 
 
 
  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Designing with Dissemination in Mind: Optimization of a mHeal th 
Physical Activity Intervention for  Breast Cancer Survivors  (Fit2Thrive)  
 Page 56 of 63 Revis ed Template : November 10, 2014  References  
 1. Weaver KE, Forsythe LP, Reeve BB, Alfano CM, Rodriguez JL, Sabatino SA, 
Hawkins NA, Rowland JH: Mental and Physical Health –Related Quality of Life among US 
Cancer Survivors: Population Estimates from the 2010 National Health Interview Survey. Cancer 
Epidem iology Biomarkers & Prevention. 2012;21:2108 -2117,  
 2. Baker F, Denniston M, Haffer SC, Liberatos P: Change in health ‐related quality 
of life of newly diagnosed cancer patients, cancer survivors, and controls*. Cancer. 
2009;115:3024 -3033,  
 3. McNeely ML,  Campbell KL, Rowe BH, Klassen TP, Mackey JR, Courneya KS: 
Effects of exercise on breast cancer patients and survivors: a systematic review and meta -
analysis. CMAJ. 2006;175:34 -41,  
 4. Kirshbaum MN: A review of the benefits of whole body exercise during a nd after 
treatment for breast cancer. J Clin Nurs. 2007;16:104 -21,  
 5. Speck RM, Courneya KS, Masse LC, Duval S, Schmitz KH: An update of 
controlled physical activity trials in cancer survivors: a systematic review and meta -analysis. J 
Cancer Surviv. 2010 ;4:87 -100,  
 6. Fong DY, Ho JW, Hui BP, Lee AM, Macfarlane DJ, Leung SS, Cerin E, Chan 
WY, Leung IP, Lam SH: Physical activity for cancer survivors: meta -analysis of randomised 
controlled trials. BMJ. 2012;344,  
 7. Irwin ML, Crumley D, McTiernan A, Bernst ein L, Baumgartner R, Gilliland FD, 
Kriska A, Ballard ‐Barbash R: Physical activity levels before and after a diagnosis of breast 
carcinoma. Cancer. 2003;97:1746 -1757,  
 8. Sabiston CM, Brunet J, Vallance JK, Meterissian S: Prospective examination of 
object ively -assessed physical activity and sedentary time after breast cancer treatment: Sitting on 
the crest of the teachable moment. Cancer Epidemiology Biomarkers & Prevention. 2014:cebp. 
1179.2013,  
 9. Bellizzi KM, Rowland JH, Jeffery DD, McNeel T: Health b ehaviors of cancer 
survivors: examining opportunities for cancer control intervention. J Clin Oncol. 2005;23:8884 -
8893,  
 10. Courneya KS, Katzmarzyk PT, Bacon E: Physical activity and obesity in 
Canadian cancer survivors. Cancer. 2008;112:2475 -2482,  
 11. Blanchard CM, Courneya KS, Stein K: Cancer survivors’ adherence to lifestyle 
behavior recommendations and associations with health -related quality of life: results from the 
American Cancer Society's SCS -II. J Clin Oncol. 2008;26:2198 -2204,  
 12. Ottenbach er AJ, Yu M, Moser R, Phillips SM, Alfano CM, Perna F: Population 
estimates of meeting strength training and aerobic guidelines, be gener and cancer survivorship 
status: Findings from the Health Information National Trends Survey. In review,  
 13. Devoogdt  N, Van Kampen M, Geraerts I, Coremans T, Fieuws S, Lefevre J, 
Philippaerts R, Truijen S, Neven P, Christiaens M -R: Physical activity levels after treatment for 
breast cancer: one -year follow -up. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2010;123:417 -425,  
 14. Charlier C,  Van Hoof E, Pauwels E, Lechner L, Spittaels H, De Bourdeaudhuij I: 
The contribution of general and cancer ‐related variables in explaining physical activity in a 
breast cancer population 3 weeks to 6 months post ‐treatment. Psycho ‐Oncology. 2013;22:203 -
211,  
 15. Phillips SM, McAuley E: Social cognitive influences on physical activity 
participation in long ‐term breast cancer survivors. Psycho ‐Oncology. 2012,  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Designing with Dissemination in Mind: Optimization of a mHeal th 
Physical Activity Intervention for  Breast Cancer Survivors  (Fit2Thrive)  
 Page 57 of 63 Revis ed Template : November 10, 2014   16. Thorsen L, Courneya KS, Stevinson C, Fosså SD: A systematic review of 
physical activity in pros tate cancer survivors: outcomes, prevalence, and determinants. Support 
Care Cancer. 2008;16:987 -997,  
 17. Stevinson C, Tonkin K, Capstick V, Schepansky A, Ladha AB, Valance J, Faught 
W, Steed H, Courneya KS: A population -based study of the determinants of  physical activity in 
ovarian cancer survivors. J Phys Act Health. 2009;6:339 -346,  
 18. Kampshoff CS, Jansen F, van Mechelen W, May AM, Brug J, Chinapaw MJ, 
Buffart LM: Determinants of exercise adherence and maintenance among cancer survivors: a 
systemati c review. Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act. 2014;11:80,  
 19. White SM, McAuley E, Estabrooks PA, Courneya KS: Translating physical 
activity interventions for breast cancer survivors into practice: an evaluation of randomized 
controlled trials. Ann Behav Med. 200 9;37:10 -19,  
 20. Phillips SM, Alfano CM, Perna FM, Glasgow RE: Accelerating translation of 
physical activity and cancer survivorship research into practice: recommendations for a more 
integrated and collaborative approach. Cancer Epidemiology Biomarkers &  Prevention. 
2014;23:687 -699,  
 21. Irwin ML: Weight Loss Interventions and Breast Cancer Survival: The Time Is 
Now. J Clin Oncol. 2014:JCO. 2014.56. 4583,  
 22. Jones LW, Alfano CM: Exercise -oncology research: Past, present, and future. 
Acta Oncol. 2013;52:195 -215,  
 23. Bandura A: Social cognitive theory. Annals of child development. 1989;6:1 -60,  
 24. Buffart L, Galvão D, Brug J, Chinapaw M, Newton R: Evidence -based physical 
activity guidelines for cancer survivors: Current guidelines, knowledge gaps and future research 
directions. Cancer Treat Rev. 2014;40:327 -340,  
 25. Collins LM, Murphy SA, Strecher V: The multiphase optimization strategy 
(MOST) and the seque ntial multiple assignment randomized trial (SMART): new methods for 
more potent eHealth interventions. Am J Prev Med. 2007;32:S112 -S118,  
 26. DeSantis CE, Lin CC, Mariotto AB, Siegel RL, Stein KD, Kramer JL, Alteri R, 
Robbins AS, Jemal A: Cancer treatment  and survivorship statistics, 2014. CA Cancer J Clin. 
2014,  
 27. Medicine Io: From Cancer Patient to Cancer Survivor: Lost in Transition, in 
Hewitt M, Greenfield S, Stovall E (eds). Washington, D.C., National Academies Press, 2005  
 28. Hewitt M, Rowland J H, Yancik R: Cancer survivors in the United States: age, 
health, and disability. The Journals of Gerontology Series A: Biological Sciences and Medical 
Sciences. 2003;58:M82 -M91,  
 29. Meadows AT, Friedman DL, Neglia JP, Mertens AC, Donaldson SS, Stovall M,  
Hammond S, Yasui Y, Inskip PD: Second neoplasms in survivors of childhood cancer: findings 
from the Childhood Cancer Survivor Study cohort. J Clin Oncol. 2009;27:2356 -2362,  
 30. Ibrahim EM, Al -Homaidh A: Physical activity and survival after breast cancer  
diagnosis: meta -analysis of published studies. Med Oncol. 2011;28:753 -65,  
 31. Rock CL, Doyle C, Demark ‐Wahnefried W, Meyerhardt J, Courneya KS, 
Schwartz AL, Bandera EV, Hamilton KK, Grant B, McCullough M: Nutrition and physical 
activity guidelines for cancer survivors. CA Cancer J Clin. 2012,  
 32. Schmitz KH, Courneya KS, Matthews CE, Demarkâ€ Wahnefried W , Galvao 
DA, Pinto BM, Irwin ML, wolin KY, segal R, Lucia A, Schneider CM, von Gruenigen VE, 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Designing with Dissemination in Mind: Optimization of a mHeal th 
Physical Activity Intervention for  Breast Cancer Survivors  (Fit2Thrive)  
 Page 58 of 63 Revis ed Template : November 10, 2014  Schwartz AL: American College of Sports Medicine roundtable on exercise guidelines for cancer 
survivors. 2010,  
 33. McAuley E, Blissmer B: Self -efficacy determina nts and consequences of physical 
activity. Exerc Sport Sci Rev. 2000;28:85,  
 34. Bandura A: The explanatory and predictive scope of self -efficacy theory. Journal 
of social and clinical psychology. 1986;4:359 -373,  
 35. Bandura A: Health promotion by socia l cognitive means. Health Educ Behav. 
2004;31:143 -164,  
 36. Bandura A: Self -efficacy: The exercise of control. New York, NY, WH Freeman 
Company, 1997  
 37. Rogers LQ, Hopkins -Price P, Vicari S, Markwell S, Pamenter R, Courneya KS, 
Hoelzer K, Naritoku C, E dson B, Jones L, Dunnington G, Verhulst S: Physical activity and 
health outcomes three months after completing a physical activity behavior change intervention: 
persistent and delayed effects. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2009;18:1410 -8,  
 38. Rogers LQ, McAuley E, Courneya KS, Verhulst SJ: Correlates of physical 
activity self -efficacy among breast cancer survivors. Am J Health Behav. 2008;32:594 -603,  
 39. Rogers LQ, Markwell S, Hopkins -Price P, Vicari S, Courneya KS, Hoelzer K, 
Verhulst S: Reduced ba rriers mediated physical activity maintenance among breast cancer 
survivors. Journal of sport & exercise psychology. 2011;33:235,  
 40. Hooning MJ, Botma A, Aleman BM, Baaijens MH, Bartelink H, Klijn JG, Taylor 
CW, Van Leeuwen FE: Long -term risk of cardiov ascular disease in 10 -year survivors of breast 
cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2007;99:365 -375,  
 41. Patnaik JL, Byers T, DiGuiseppi C, Dabelea D, Denberg TD: Cardiovascular 
disease competes with breast cancer as the leading cause of death for older females d iagnosed 
with breast cancer: a retrospective cohort study. Breast Cancer Res. 2011;13:R64,  
 42. Jones LW, Courneya KS, Mackey JR, Muss HB, Pituskin EN, Scott JM, Hornsby 
WE, Coan AD, Herndon JE, Douglas PS: Cardiopulmonary function and age -related decline  
across the breast cancer survivorship continuum. J Clin Oncol. 2012;30:2530 -2537,  
 43. Jones LW, Haykowsky M, Peddle CJ, Joy AA, Pituskin EN, Tkachuk LM, 
Courneya KS, Slamon DJ, Mackey JR: Cardiovascular risk profile of patients with HER2/neu -
positive br east cancer treated with anthracycline -taxane –containing adjuvant chemotherapy 
and/or trastuzumab. Cancer Epidemiology Biomarkers & Prevention. 2007;16:1026 -1031,  
 44. Weaver KE, Foraker RE, Alfano CM, Rowland JH, Arora NK, Bellizzi KM, 
Hamilton AS, Oakle y-Girvan I, Keel G, Aziz NM: Cardiovascular risk factors among long -term 
survivors of breast, prostate, colorectal, and gynecologic cancers: a gap in survivorship care? J 
Cancer Surviv. 2013;7:253 -261,  
 45. Lahart IM, Metsios GS, Nevill AM, Carmichael AR:  Physical activity, risk of 
death and recurrence in breast cancer survivors: A systematic review and meta -analysis of 
epidemiological studies. Acta Oncol. 2015;54:635 -654,  
 46. Jones LW, Liu Q, Armstrong GT, Ness KK, Yasui Y, Devine K, Tonorezos E, 
Soares -Miranda L, Sklar CA, Douglas PS: Exercise and risk of major cardiovascular events in 
adult survivors of childhood Hodgkin lymphoma: a report from the Childhood Cancer Survivor 
Study. J Clin Oncol. 2014;32:3643 -3650,  
 47. Kohl 3rd H: Physical activity and  cardiovascular disease: evidence for a dose 
response. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2001;33:S472 -83; discussion S493 -4,  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Designing with Dissemination in Mind: Optimization of a mHeal th 
Physical Activity Intervention for  Breast Cancer Survivors  (Fit2Thrive)  
 Page 59 of 63 Revis ed Template : November 10, 2014   48. Sattelmair J, Pertman J, Ding EL, Kohl HW, Haskell W, Lee I -M: Dose response 
between physical activity and risk of coronary heart disease  a meta -analysis. Circulation. 
2011;124:789 -795,  
 49. Ballard -Barbash R, Friedenreich CM, Courneya KS, Siddiqi SM, McTiernan A, 
Alfano CM: Physical activity, biomarkers, and disease outcomes in cancer survivors: a 
systematic review. J Natl Cancer Inst. 20 12;104:815 -840,  
 50. McTiernan A: Mechanisms linking physical activity with cancer. Nature Reviews 
Cancer. 2008;8:205 -211,  
 51. Pierce BL, Ballard -Barbash R, Bernstein L, Baumgartner RN, Neuhouser ML, 
Wener MH, Baumgartner KB, Gilliland FD, Sorensen BE, McTiernan A: Elevated biomarkers of 
inflammation are associated with reduced survival among breast cancer patients. J Clin Oncol. 
2009;27:3437 -3444,  
 52. Han Y, Mao F, Wu Y, Fu X, Zhu X, Zhou S, Zhang W, Sun Q, Zhao Y: 
Prognostic role of C -reactive protein in breast cancer: a systematic review and meta -analysis. 
The International journal of biological markers. 2010;26:209 -215,  
 53. Ridker PM, Hennekens CH, Buring JE, Rifai N: C -reactive protein and other 
markers of inflammation in the prediction of cardiovascular disease in women. N Engl J Med. 
2000;342:836 -843,  
 54. Allin KH, Nordestgaard BG: Elevated C -reactive protein in the dia gnosis, 
prognosis, and cause of cancer. Crit Rev Clin Lab Sci. 2011;48:155 -170,  
 55. Gleeson M, Bishop NC, Stensel DJ, Lindley MR, Mastana SS, Nimmo MA: The 
anti-inflammatory effects of exercise: mechanisms and implications for the prevention and 
treatmen t of disease. Nature Reviews Immunology. 2011;11:607 -615,  
 56. Williams MA, Haskell WL, Ades PA, Amsterdam EA, Bittner V, Franklin BA, 
Gulanick M, Laing ST, Stewart KJ: Resistance exercise in individuals with and without 
cardiovascular disease: 2007 updat e a scientific statement from the american heart association 
council on clinical cardiology and council on nutrition, physical activity, and metabolism. 
Circulation. 2007;116:572 -584,  
 57. Szlosarek P, Charles KA, Balkwill FR: Tumour necrosis factor -α as a tumour 
promoter. Eur J Cancer. 2006;42:745 -750,  
 58. Moore RJ, Owens DM, Stamp G, Arnott C, Burke F, East N, Holdsworth H, 
Turner L, Rollins B, Pasparakis M: Mice deficient in tumor necrosis factor -α are resistant to skin 
carcinogenesis. Nat Med. 1999;5 :828-831,  
 59. Hodge DR, Hurt EM, Farrar WL: The role of IL -6 and STAT3 in inflammation 
and cancer. Eur J Cancer. 2005;41:2502 -2512,  
 60. Changkija B, Konwar R: Role of interleukin -10 in breast cancer. Breast Cancer 
Res Treat. 2012;133:11 -21,  
 61. Esqui vel-Velázquez M, Ostoa -Saloma P, Palacios -Arreola MI, Nava -Castro KE, 
Castro JI, Morales -Montor J: The role of cytokines in breast cancer development and 
progression. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2015;35:1 -16,  
 62. Landskron G, De la Fuente M, Thuwajit P, T huwajit C, Hermoso MA: Chronic 
inflammation and cytokines in the tumor microenvironment. Journal of immunology research. 
2014;2014,  
 63. Seruga B, Zhang H, Bernstein LJ, Tannock IF: Cytokines and their relationship to 
the symptoms and outcome of cancer. N ature Reviews Cancer. 2008;8:887 -899,  
 64. Coussens LM, Werb Z: Inflammation and cancer. Nature. 2002;420:860 -867,  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Designing with Dissemination in Mind: Optimization of a mHeal th 
Physical Activity Intervention for  Breast Cancer Survivors  (Fit2Thrive)  
 Page 60 of 63 Revis ed Template : November 10, 2014   65. Kozłowski L, Zakrzewska I, Tokajuk P, Wojtukiewicz M: Concentration of 
interleukin -6 (IL -6), interleukin -8 (IL -8) and interleukin -10 (IL-10) in blood serum of breast 
cancer patients. Roczniki Akademii Medycznej w Bialymstoku (1995). 2002;48:82 -84,  
 66. Lech -Maranda E, Bienvenu J, Michallet A -S, Houot R, Robak T, Coiffier B, 
Salles G: Elevated IL -10 plasma levels correlate with poor prog nosis in diffuse large B -cell 
lymphoma. Eur Cytokine Netw. 2006;17:60 -66,  
 67. Volpato S, Guralnik JM, Ferrucci L, Balfour J, Chaves P, Fried LP, Harris TB: 
Cardiovascular disease, interleukin -6, and risk of mortality in older women the women’s health 
and aging study. Circulation. 2001;103:947 -953,  
 68. Pearson TA, Mensah GA, Alexander RW, Anderson JL, Cannon RO, Criqui M, 
Fadl YY, Fortmann SP, Hong Y, Myers GL: Markers of inflammation and cardiovascular 
disease application to clinical and public health p ractice: a statement for healthcare professionals 
from the centers for disease control and prevention and the American Heart Association. 
Circulation. 2003;107:499 -511,  
 69. Kasapis C, Thompson PD: The effects of physical activity on serum C -reactive 
protein and inflammatory markers: a systematic review. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2005;45:1563 -1569,  
 70. Lynch BM, Dunstan DW, Healy GN, Winkler E, Eakin E, Owen N: Objectively 
measured physical activity and sedentary time of breast cancer survivors, and association s with 
adiposity: findings from NHANES (2003 –2006). Cancer Causes Control. 2010;21:283 -288,  
 71. Elme A, Utriainen M, Kellokumpu -Lehtinen P, Palva T, Luoto R, Nikander R, 
Huovinen R, Kautiainen H, JÄRVENPÄÄ S, Penttinen HM: Obesity and physical inactivity  are 
related to impaired physical health of breast cancer survivors. Anticancer Res. 2013;33:1595 -
1602,  
 72. van Holten TC, Waanders LF, de Groot PG, Vissers J, Hoefer IE, Pasterkamp G, 
Prins MW, Roest M: Circulating biomarkers for predicting cardiovascul ar disease risk; a 
systematic review and comprehensive overview of meta -analyses. 2013,  
 73. Miller M, Stone NJ, Ballantyne C, Bittner V, Criqui MH, Ginsberg HN, Goldberg 
AC, Howard WJ, Jacobson MS, Kris -Etherton PM: Triglycerides and cardiovascular disea se a 
scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2011;123:2292 -2333,  
 74. Coutinho M, Gerstein HC, Wang Y, Yusuf S: The relationship between glucose 
and incident cardiovascular events. A metaregression analysis of published data  from 20 studies 
of 95,783 individuals followed for 12.4 years. Diabetes Care. 1999;22:233 -240,  
 75. Benn M, Tybjærg -Hansen A, McCarthy MI, Jensen GB, Grande P, Nordestgaard 
BG: Nonfasting glucose, ischemic heart disease, and myocardial infarction: a Mend elian 
randomization study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012;59:2356 -2365,  
 76. Bansal S, Buring JE, Rifai N, Mora S, Sacks FM, Ridker PM: Fasting compared 
with nonfasting triglycerides and risk of cardiovascular events in women. JAMA. 2007;298:309 -
316,  
 77. Norde stgaard BG, Benn M, Schnohr P, Tybjærg -Hansen A: Nonfasting 
triglycerides and risk of myocardial infarction, ischemic heart disease, and death in men and 
women. JAMA. 2007;298:299 -308,  
 78. Press V, Freestone I, George C: Physical activity: the evidence o f benefit in the 
prevention of coronary heart disease. QJM. 2003;96:245 -251,  
 79. Mann S, Beedie C, Jimenez A: Differential effects of aerobic exercise, resistance 
training and combined exercise modalities on cholesterol and the lipid profile: review, syn thesis 
and recommendations. Sports Med. 2014;44:211 -221,  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Designing with Dissemination in Mind: Optimization of a mHeal th 
Physical Activity Intervention for  Breast Cancer Survivors  (Fit2Thrive)  
 Page 61 of 63 Revis ed Template : November 10, 2014   80. Alfano CM, Bluethmann SM, Tesauro G, Perna F, Agurs -Collins T, Elena JW, 
Ross SA, O’Connell M, Bowles HR, Greenberg D: NCI Funding Trends and Priorities in 
Physical Activity and Energy Balance Research Among Cancer Survivors. J Natl Cancer Inst. 
2016;108:d jv285,  
 81. McDade TW, Williams S, Snodgrass JJ: What a drop can do: dried blood spots as 
a minimally invasive method for integrating biomarkers into population -based research. 
Demography. 2007;44:899 -925,  
 82. The Best (and Worst) of Mobile Connectivity . Washington, DC, Pew Research 
Center, 2012  
 83. Sakhi AK, Bastani NE, Ellingjord -Dale M, Gundersen TE, Blomhoff R, Ursin G: 
Feasibility of self -sampled dried blood spot and saliva samples sent by mail in a population -
based study. BMC Cancer. 2015;15:265,  
 84. Roberts S, Seav S, McDade T, Dominick S, Gorman J, Whitcomb B, Su H: Self -
collected dried blood spots as a tool for measuring ovarian reserve in young female cancer 
survivors. Hum Reprod. 2016;31:1570 -1578,  
 85. Lacher DA, Berman LE, Chen TC, Porter  KS: Comparison of dried blood spot to 
venous methods for hemoglobin A1c, glucose, total cholesterol, high -density lipoprotein 
cholesterol, and C -reactive protein. Clinica chimica acta; international journal of clinical 
chemistry. 2013;422:54 -8,  
 86. Collins LM, Baker TB, Mermelstein RJ, Piper ME, Jorenby DE, Smith SS, 
Christiansen BA, Schlam TR, Cook JW, Fiore MC: The multiphase optimization strategy for 
engineering effective tobacco use interventions. Ann Behav Med. 2011;41:208 -226,  
 87. Collins LM, Mur phy SA, Nair VN, Strecher VJ: A strategy for optimizing and 
evaluating behavioral interventions. Ann Behav Med. 2005;30:65 -73,  
 88. Glasgow RE, Phillips SM, Sanchez MA: Implementation science approaches for 
integrating eHealth research into practice and p olicy. Int J Med Inf. 2013,  
 89. Fanning J, Mullen SP, McAuley E: Increasing physical activity with mobile 
devices: a meta -analysis. J Med Internet Res. 2012;14,  
 90. Buchholz SW, Wilbur J, Ingram D, Fogg L: Physical activity text messaging 
interventions  in adults: a systematic review. Worldviews on Evidence ‐Based Nursing. 
2013;10:163 -173,  
 91. Bort-Roig J, Gilson ND, Puig -Ribera A, Contreras RS, Trost SG: Measuring and 
Influencing Physical Activity with Smartphone Technology: A Systematic Review. Sports  Med. 
2014;44:671 -686,  
 92. Bennett GG, Glasgow RE: The delivery of public health interventions via the 
Internet: actualizing their potential. Annu Rev Public Health. 2009;30:273 -292,  
 93. Conroy DE, Yang C -H, Maher JP: Behavior Change Techniques in Top -Ranked 
Mobile Apps for Physical Activity. Am J Prev Med. 2014;46:649 -652,  
 94. Middelweerd A, Mollee JS, van der Wal CN, Brug J, te Velde SJ: Apps to 
promote physical activity among adults: a review and content analysis. Int J Behav Nutr Phys 
Act. 2014;11 :97,  
 95. Direito A, Dale LP, Shields E, Dobson R, Whittaker R, Maddison R: Do physical 
activity and dietary smartphone applications incorporate evidence -based behaviour change 
techniques? BMC Public Health. 2014;14:646,  
 96. Thomas S, Reading J, Shephar d RJ: Revision of the Physical Activity Readiness 
Questionnaire (PAR -Q). Can J Sport Sci. 1992,  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Designing with Dissemination in Mind: Optimization of a mHeal th 
Physical Activity Intervention for  Breast Cancer Survivors  (Fit2Thrive)  
 Page 62 of 63 Revis ed Template : November 10, 2014   97. Gould JD, Lewis C: Designing for usability: key principles and what designers 
think. Communications of the ACM. 1985;28:300 -311,  
 98. Roque NA, Boot WR: A New Tool for Assessing Mobile Device Proficiency in 
Older Adults The Mobile Device Proficiency Questionnaire. J Appl Gerontol. 
2016:0733464816642582,  
 99. Godin G, Shephard RJ: A simple method to assess exercise behavior in the 
community. Canadian Journ al of Applied Sport Sciences. Journal Canadien des Sciences 
Appliquees Au Sport. 1985;10:141,  
 100. Bassett DR: Validity of four motion sensors in measuring moderate intensity 
physical activity. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2000;32:S471,  
 101. Tudor -Locke C, Ai nsworth B, Thompson R, Matthews C: Comparison of 
pedometer and accelerometer measures of free -living physical activity. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 
2002;34:2045,  
 102. Troiano RP, Berrigan D, Dodd KW, Mâsse LC, Tilert T, McDowell M: Physical 
activity in the Uni ted States measured by accelerometer. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2008;40:181,  
 103. Matthews CE, Chen KY, Freedson PS, Buchowski MS, Beech BM, Pate RR, 
Troiano RP: Amount of time spent in sedentary behaviors in the United States, 2003 –2004. Am J 
Epidemiol. 200 8;167:875 -881,  
 104. Marshall AL, Miller YD, Burton NW, Brown WJ: Measuring total and domain -
specific sitting: a study of reliability and validity. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2010;42:1094 -1102,  
 105. Yost KJ, Eton DT, Garcia SF, Cella D: Minimally important d ifferences were 
estimated for six Patient -Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System -Cancer scales in 
advanced -stage cancer patients. J Clin Epidemiol. 2011;64:507 -516,  
 106.  
 107. Sallis JF, Kerr J, Carlson JA, Norman GJ, Saelens BE, Durant N, Ain sworth BE: 
Evaluating a brief self -report measure of neighborhood environments for physical activity 
research and surveillance: Physical Activity Neighborhood Environment Scale (PANES). J Phys 
Act Health. 2010;7:533,  
 108. McAuley E: Self -efficacy and the  maintenance of exercise participation in older 
adults. J Behav Med. 1993;16:103 -113,  
 109. Sallis JF, Grossman RM, Pinski RB, Patterson TL, Nader PR: The development 
of scales to measure social support for diet and exercise behaviors. Prev Med. 1987;16:825 -836,  
 110. Rini C, Redd WH, Austin J, Mosher CE, Meschian YM, Isola L, Scigliano E, 
Mosko witz CH, Papadopoulos E, Labay LE: Effectiveness of partner social support predicts 
enduring psychological distress after hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. J Consult Clin 
Psychol. 2011;79:64,  
 111. Rovniak LS, Anderson ES, Winett RA, Stephens RS: S ocial cognitive 
determinants of physical activity in young adults: a prospective structural equation analysis. Ann 
Behav Med. 2002;24:149 -156,  
 112. Wójcicki TR, White SM, McAuley E: Assessing outcome expectations in older 
adults: the multidimensional out come expectations for exercise scale. The Journals of 
Gerontology Series B: Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences. 2009;64:33 -40,  
 113. Kendzierski D, DeCarlo KJ: Physical Activity Enjoyment Scale: Two validation 
studies. Journal of Sport & Exercise Psychology. 1991,  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Designing with Dissemination in Mind: Optimization of a mHeal th 
Physical Activity Intervention for  Breast Cancer Survivors  (Fit2Thrive)  
 Page 63 of 63 Revis ed Template : November 10, 2014   114. Collins LM, Dziak JJ, Li R: Design of experiments with multiple independent 
variables: a resource management perspective on complete and reduced factorial designs. 
Psychol Methods. 2009;14:202,  
 115. Collins LM, Chakraborty B, Mur phy SA, Strecher V: Comparison of a phased 
experimental approach and a single randomized clinical trial for developing multicomponent 
behavioral interventions. Clin Trials. 2009;6:5 -15,  
 116. Hedeker D, Gibbons RD, Waternaux C: Sample size estimation for longitudinal 
designs with attrition: comparing time -related contrasts between two groups. Journal of 
Educational and Behavioral Statistics. 1999;24:70 -93,  
 117. !!! INVALID CITATION !!!,  
 118. Spring B, Schneider K, McFadden HG, Vaughn J, Kozak AT, Smith  M, Moller 
AC, Epstein LH, DeMott A, Hedeker D: Multiple behavior changes in diet and activity: a 
randomized controlled trial using mobile technology. Arch Intern Med. 2012;172:789 -796,  
 119. Rogers LQ, Fogleman A, Trammell R, Hopkins -Price P, Vicari S, R ao K, Edson 
B, Verhulst S, Courneya KS, Hoelzer K: Effects of a physical activity behavior change 
intervention on inflammation and related health outcomes in breast cancer survivors: pilot 
randomized trial. Integr Cancer Ther. 2012:1534735412449687,  
 120. Fairey AS, Courneya KS, Field CJ, Bell GJ, Jones LW, Martin BS, Mackey JR: 
Effect of exercise training on C -reactive protein in postmenopausal breast cancer survivors: a 
randomized controlled trial. Brain, behavior, and immunity. 2005;19:381 -388,  
 121. Thomas GA, Alvarez -Reeves M, Lu L, Yu H, Irwin ML: Effect of exercise on 
metabolic syndrome variables in breast cancer survivors. International journal of endocrinology. 
2013;2013,  
 122. Guinan E, Hussey J, Broderick J, Lithander F, O’Donnell D, Kennedy M,  
Connolly E: The effect of aerobic exercise on metabolic and inflammatory markers in breast 
cancer survivors —a pilot study. Support Care Cancer. 2013;21:1983 -1992,  
 