Cover Page  
 
 
Title: Utilization of the TAD Device for Dispensing Pain Medications in Hospice Patients  
 
 
Date: 3/9/2018   
Utilization of the TAD Device for Dispensing Pain Medications in Hospice Patients  
 
Introduction  
 
It is well documented that medication adherence is of great concern in many patients including 
those taking opioid pain medication. Taking medications outside of the prescribed regimen can lead to 
adverse events and can lead to improper adjustments to medication regimens. Additionally, diversi on 
issues continue to be a problem  with opioid pain medications, and  the hospice setting is not devoid of 
these issues in palliation of symptoms including pain. A novel device, TAD, has been developed to aid 
adherence to prescribed regimens and may have a roll in hospice pain management.  The TAD device 
collects dose timing information that can help clinicians assess patient compliance and can be 
programmed to dispense a dose in a specific time frame. This device can operate with and without the 
assistance o f a mobile device application. However, concerns about the ability of the hospice patient 
population to use the technology exist.  
 
This study aims to assess medication adherence relating to missed doses or improperly timed 
doses with and without the aid of  a mobile device as a primary endpoint. Secondary endpoints will be 
patient, nursing, and provider satisfaction.  
 
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
 
Inclusion criteria for the study are any Haven patient taking morphine ER or O xycontin  on one of 
three hospice h ome teams, Lake City, Palatka, or Gainesville . There will be no gender or racial bias in 
consideration for inclusion. Vulnerable patients will be included in this study as many of our patients 
suffer from dementia and are cognitively impaired. Inclusion in  the study of a cognitively impaired 
patient will require the presence of a caregiver that is a legally authorized representative (LAR) of the 
patient. Exclusion criteria are age less than 18 and patient or caregiver inability to demonstrate 
competent use of the TAD device. Also, no pregnant women are under hospice care at Haven  as they 
would not be appropriate for hospice . Patients that will be studied will primarily be in their own homes 
but may transition through Haven hospice care centers periodically. A patient’s capacity to consent will 
be determined from the patient’s medical assessment by the patient’s hospice provider. Reassessment 
of the patient’s understanding and willingness will occur with each phone call survey  by asking the 
patient if they wis h to continue the study. If the patient has been enrolled in the study without the 
capability to consent, the caregiver will be asked at every visit if they wish to continue the study.  
 
The study will aim to accumulate approximately 1600 patient days with 20 patients enrolled 
each for 12 weeks. Three sites will be used, and each should have 6 to 7 patients enrolled.  
 
Methods  
 
Potential subjects will be identified by observing Morphine ER and Oxycontin utilization reports 
at Haven. Once a patient is identifi ed as taking one of these medications , they will be contacted by 
telephone by a study investigator to set up a visit time to discuss the study in the patient’s home or in a 
Haven inpatient care center  if the patient is agreeable . All care centers have private rooms and provide a 
confidential environment for discussion. Upon, visiting the patient in person, written informed consent 
will be obtained and the patient will keep a copy for their records. Physicians, ARNPs, and nurses at the 
study sites will receive consent documentation via secure encrypted email but will not be required to 
sign the consent.   
 
Patients will be randomized in a cross -over design to either use the TAD device with a mobile 
device or without a mobile device f or 2 weeks, and then, alternate to the opposite group,  respectively, 
for an additional 2 weeks. After the initial 4 weeks, patients will be allowed to choose whether or not to 
use the TAD device with or without a mobile device for the remaining 2 months of  the study. An 
investigator  will then provide patient education on the TAD device using a demonstration device and 
document the patient’s ability to demonstrate proper use of the device. If a patient owns a mobile smart 
phone, the TAD application will run on the patient’s phone. If a patient does not own a mobile device,  
Intent Solutions will provide a mobile device to the patient for use with the TAD device. If the patient or 
caregiver are unable to operate the mobile device application properly after inst ruction by an  
investigator, the patient will be categorized as “failed” for the mobile device phase of the cross over 
period.  Primary outcome data will be collected by Intent solutions from the TAD device. No PHI will be 
obtained by Intent solutions  in the  data collected . Patient,  nursing , and prescriber  satisfaction surveys 
will be filled out weekly for each patient  for the first 4 weeks and then every 2 weeks thereafter . In the 
event that the patient has a LAR acting on their behalf, the LAR will answer t he survey questions.  
 
 The attending provider for the patient will send a prescription  via fax  to the mail order 
pharmacy  for a 14-day supply . The mail order pharmacy staff will be adequately trained to place tablets 
inside simple gelatin capsules of appropriate size for the purpose of consistent dose delivery size 
pertaining to the TAD device. Also, the pharmacy staff will be trained on all fu nctions of the TAD device 
including data collection. The TAD device filled with the patient’s medication will be mailed to the 
patient 3 days before the last dose of the medication with a return label and packaging for the TAD 
device via second -day deliver y so that there is no delay in drug therapy. If the patient has partial fills left 
on the prescription 3 days before the last dose of the medication, the registered nurse will call the mail 
order pharmacy to send another supply of the medication to the pat ient. When the patient has taken 
the last dose of medication, the patient or caregiver  will send the TAD device to the principle 
investigator who will then ship the device back to Intent Solution upon verification that no patient 
information is labeled on the device . If there are no partial fills left, the registered nurse will notify the 
provider to send a new prescription to the mail order pharmacy. Should the device fail for any reason or 
the patient is unable to access the medication using the device, t he patient will be categorized as 
“failed” for duration of the study, the registered nurse will contact the provider, and the provider will 
fax a prescription immediately to a local pharmacy for the patient. In this scenario, the registered nurse 
would rem ove the medication from the TAD device using a proper tool and dispose of the medication 
stored in the device in the Rx Destroyer product. The patient and/ or caregiver will witness the disposal 
as part of normal clinical practice when a nurse disposes of m edication. The patient would then send the 
TAD device to the principle investigator who will then ship the device back to Intent Solution upon 
verification that no patient information is labeled on the device . If the patient passes away while the 
TAD device still contains medication, the registered nurse will empty the device of med ication and send 
the device  to the principle investigator who will then ship the device back to Intent Solution upon 
verification that no patient information is labeled on t he device . The medication will be disposed of by 
the registered nurse if the nurse attends time of death or if asked by the caregiver. Otherwise, the 
caregiver will be responsible for disposal of the medication  as the caregiver becomes the party 
responsibl e for the medication at the time of death . At the completion of the study or at any point 
during the study the patient chooses to withdraw from participation in the study, the nurse will dispose 
of the medication and send the TAD device to the principle in vestigator who will then ship the device 
back to Intent Solution upon verification that no patient information is labeled on the device . The 
patient will then have a prescription filled at a local pharmacy for the medication.  
 
Any patient safety issues rep orted to the investigators as concerns about the study protocol will be 
assessed monthly at the Haven patient safety committee meeting.  
 
Analysis of Results  
 
Demographic information such as birth date, race, sex, and hospice diagnosis will be collected as 
descriptive characteristics of each group . The primary endpoint will be measured as time of the dose 
taken compared to time when the dose was scheduled and whether the dose was completely missed or 
not. A missed dose will be greater than 1 hour before or a fter the scheduled dosing time. Secondary 
endpoints will evaluate patient, nursing, and physician satisfaction from the weekly survey for trends.  
 
Storage of Data  
 
Data collected by Intent Solutions on the primary outcomes will be sent to the primary inve stigator via 
encrypted email with document password protection. No PHI will be in this data and all data will be 
referenced to the patient’s study identification number. All data will be recorded and stored on a secure 
network drive with limited user acces s. Additionally, the files containing research data will be password 
protected. All paper surveys which only contain the patien t’s assigned study number and  PHI will be 
kept in a locked cabinet in a locked office until completion of the study at which poin t the paper surveys 
will be destroyed in confidential trash.   
 
Risks  and Benefits  
 
The only minimal risk to the patient is that the device could malfunction or the patient may not be able 
to properly operate the device. The process for acquiring the medica tion is noted above and would 
ultimately not prevent the patient from receiving their medication should the device fail.  
 
The potential benefit to the patient is that the device may aid the patient in taking the medication as 
intended by the provider and p revent missed doses.  
 
Informed Consent  
 
Informed consent will be required for every patient to be enrolled.  In the case that the patient suffers 
from dementia and/or is otherwise deemed incapable of consenting by review of the medical records, 
the LAR wil l provide consent.  
 
Cost/Compensation  
 
There is no cost to the patient, and no patient will receive compensation for participation in the study.  
 
 