DESIPHER, PI: Phillips  version 3 Page 1 of 11 04/18/17 Investigator’s Protocol  
Title:  
DESIPHER Speech Degradation as an Indicator of Physiological Degeneration in ALS  
 
Principal Investigator :  
Samuel Phillips, PhD  
 Co-Investigators:  
Elamin Elamin, MD  
 Research Site:  
James A. Haley Veterans’ Hospital  
 Sponsor :  
VA Rehabilitation  Research and Development  
 Project Number :  
1I21RX001902- 01A1  
 Rationale  
A disease called  Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis  (or ALS),  which  leads to difficulty 
swallowing,  breathing, and movement, has  been found to  be higher for  those serving 
in the military  than in the general  population.  There are approximately 4,200  Veterans 
with ALS and roughly 1,000 new  cases each  year.  When doctors attempt to determine 
the degree to which  an ALS patient is suffering from the disease, they apply tests  that 
are “graded” by experts.  However, this approach  to testing  patients  may not be very 
accurate.  Researchers aim to use a system called  DESIPHER  to “listen” to ALS 
patients and  find speech mistakes  related to their condition.  Researchers  believe that, 
by detecting different types of  errors, DESIPHER serves  as a new kind of indicator of  
medical  problems such as difficulty breathing or swallowing, without human “gr ading”.  
This may also lead to a better  electronic system for understanding ALS patients’ 
speech,  even with lots of errors.  
 
Hypotheses : Using a longitudinal  study  of Veterans with recently diagnosed with ALS,  
we propose to test the following two hypotheses:  
H1: Automatic speech recognition can  be achieved for ALS patients, whose speech  
diverges  from a baseline, as  established from transcribed speech data,  using  speech -
model  adaptation.  
H2: Divergence of speech from baseline will serve as  a marker  for disease  
progression.  
 
Specific  Aims : Research questions to  be addressed by this study  are: 
Q1: Is it possible to train a speech recognition system to  adapt to increasingly  more  
frequent  language/speech errors of  particular types,  to produce  an accurate textual 
transcript that  would be readable  by a caregiver or physician?  
Q2: Are specific  changes in physiological functioning (Forced Vital Capacity, tongue  
DESIPHER, PI: Phillips  version 3 Page 2 of 11 04/18/17 strength,  speech velocity, weight  loss, aspiration risk,  or psychological distress)  
associated with  different types of language/speech  errors?  
 
Significance : Results of the proposed study  are expected to improve our ability  to 
appropriately  identify and  intervene when  Veterans with ALS are at risk of serious 
adverse medical  issues  such as respiratory failure  and aspiration.  Detection of  speech 
divergence may  serve as an additional  assessment tool  that requires much less effort 
from the patient than  existing clinical measures.  A future  study may incorporate the 
divergence voice  software into common technology to prolong the Veterans' ability to 
use their natural voice to control the  environment around them.  A further  study  may 
investigate if monitoring changes in  language divergence, which indicate  disease  
progression,  could improve timely  access when  further appropriate interventions might 
be indicated.  
 
Relevance : In 2008,  Amyotrophic  lateral  sclerosis  (ALS) or Lou  Gehrig’s  Disease 
became  a presumptively  compensable (service connected) disease as the  Institute  of 
Medicine  (IOM)  Committee  stated  an association  between  the development  of ALS and 
military  service.  According  to the IOM report, military service increases  life risk of ALS 
by 1.5 fold. There  are approximately  4,200  Veterans  with ALS and roughly  1,000  new 
cases  each  year.  At the Tampa  VA, since  2007,  there  has been  a consistent  rise in the 
number  of Veterans  diagnosed  and treated  with ALS.  
 
Background  
Amyotrophic Lateral  Sclerosis (ALS) is  a rapidly progressive, neurodegenerative 
disease that  involves upper and lower  motor  neurons and is the most  common form of  
motor  neuron disease.  ALS is characterized by muscle atrophy, muscle weakness, 
muscle spasticity, hyperreflexia,  difficulty speaking (dysarthria), difficulty swallowing 
(dysphagia), and difficulty breathing (dyspnea).  A serious healthcare crisis is emerging 
from the lack of capacity to support ALS sufferers, who typically must rely on a 
caregiver (often a family  member) to manage their  daily activities and to assist in 
relaying information between medical professionals  and the patient.  Mean survival  
time is  three  to five years;  however, death may occur  within months, or  survival may 
last decades.  
 There  are a number of  standardized objective assessments of bulbar function in 
patients  with ALS (Green  et al., 2013); for example, breathing patterns, articulatory 
patterns, and  voice  loudness.  These are generally measured by  technologies  that 
record chest  wall movements, oral pressures  and flows, oral movement and strength, 
and speech  acoustics.  However, these  measures  are focused  on the form of speech 
output (e.g., hypernasality) rather than the  content of the speech  output  in terms of 
dialectal variations.   Identifying such  variations is contextually similar  to detecting  
different  accents and dialects in spoken English.  
 Our speech  research focuses on the detection of dialectal variations by identifying 
spoken  language  divergences along a range of  different dimensions.  We borrow the 
notion of divergence  from the study of cross- linguistic  variations (Dorr, 1993,  1994; 
DESIPHER, PI: Phillips  version 3 Page 3 of 11 04/18/17 Dorr et al., 2002; Habash and  Dorr,  2002), where a language is considered "close"  to 
another language  if it shares certain properties  (but possibly not others), and "far" (i.e.,  
divergent ) if very few properties are shared.  To illustrate  the concept  of divergence 
across languages, consider  three properties: vocabulary, pronunciation,  and syntactic 
structure.  Table  1 shows the properties that  are shared between  Spanish and four  
other  languages.  The most radically divergent pair  in the table is Spanish  and 
Chinese, which do not share vocabulary, syntactic structure, or  pronunciation.  We 
note that one could apply the same sort of analysis within  a single  language, such as  
English, by examining different dialectal  variations.  For example, a native U.S. 
English speaker from Massachusetts is likely  to pronounce  certain  terms like "car" in a 
way that is more  closely aligned to  the British  English pronunciation (where the "r" is 
dropped – non-rhotic) than to  that of a native U.S. English speaker from Alabama  
(rhotic).  
 
Table 1:  Linguistic divergence across languages  
Spanish  Portuguese  French  English  Chinese  
Vocabulary  X X X  
Syntactic  structure  X X   
Pronunciation  X    
 We propose to apply this  same notion  of divergence  to the problem  of "speech 
functioning,"  constraining our language pair to  asymptomatic English  speech 
compared to impaired English  speech.  In this case, the properties  to be studied  are 
finer grained than the ones  shown in Table  1, in that they are aligned with articulatory 
patterns in speech.  Although we expect speech  divergences to develop  independently 
of language accent and dialect, we expect that prior work  on dialect adaptation (Lehr 
et al., 2014) will be relevant for tracking speech divergences even withi n a single 
language.  Research on modeling non-native or dialectal speech (Livescu and Glass, 
2000)  is a close approximation to what  we propose for recognition of speech changes 
over time,  though the focus  of dialectal modeling is on detecting  divergent content,  not 
on discerning characteristics  of the speech signal.  In order to test our hypothesis that 
divergence from a baseline serves as a marker for  disease  progression (and that, in 
fact, specific  speech properties  vary systematically in impaired speech), the current 
proposed pilot is for native speakers only; this  allows  for variability in dialect, but  not 
variability regarding  the level of knowledge of  the language, thus  retaining only  one 
variable: the level of progression of the disease  over time.  However,  an important 
follow -up study  is that of speech recognition of accented (non -native) speech, once 
the properties that  vary systematically with disease  progression  have been  carefully 
identified in this  current pilot study.  
 A significant aspect of the proposed work is  the identification of possible speech -
related biomarkers  to be examined for correlations  with other aspects of physiological 
function.  Some that  have been  published  in the literature (e.g.,  Duffy, 2012;  Rudzicz 
at al., 2014) that are relevant to  dialectal variations, but  have not  heretofore  been  
measured objectively through dialectal analysis,  are those listed  below:  
  
DESIPHER, PI: Phillips  version 3 Page 4 of 11 04/18/17  
• Imprecise consonants  
• Distorted vowels  
• Slow rate 
• Short  phrases  • Hypernasality  
• Continuous  voicing  
• Distorted substitutions  or 
additions
Table 2 is a notional table illustrating  a range of  articulatory properties for "baseline" 
English  (as determined  for a native  English  speaker  who has no speech impairment, 
i.e. pre-symptomatic)  compared to those exhibited during different stages of ALS—
early, mid, late —thus providing a framework for capturing  the degree  of divergence.  
The final column has the highest level of  divergence from the baseline: imprecise 
consonants, distorted vowels, and continuous  bilabials.  
 
Table  2: Articulatory  divergence across stages  of ALS 
"Baseline" English  ALS English (early)  ALS English (mid)  ALS English (late)  
consonants  imprecise  imprecise  imprecise  
vowels  ~baseline  distorted  distorted  
bilabials (b,m)  ~baseline  ~baseline  hypernasal  
 Biadsy et al. (2011)  conducted a speech  processing study  similar  to our divergence 
approach,  investigating the variation of  speech properties under intoxicated and sober 
conditions.  Rudzicz et al. (2014) employed  another approach for  recognizing  impaired  
speech for detection of  Alzheimer’s, and  Little  (2012) developed an analogous 
application for detection of Parkinson’s, as  reported by Kepes (2014).  These 
approaches  measured the voice signal to  answer a yes/no  question (presence or 
absence of impairment), rather  than analyzing  the signal to determine the  degree  of 
divergence from a baseline.  Nevertheless, the incidental  but significant discovery from  
these  studies, as well as related work  of Beukelman et al. (2011), Green et  al. (2013), 
and Orimaye et al. (2014) —that pronunciation varies systematically within categories of 
speech impairment —is a critical finding that can be leveraged for correlating the 
divergence from baseline English to different stages of  ALS (i.e., the degree  of 
biophysical degradation).  
 A large part  of our investigation will involve the characterization  of divergence types, 
most notably: pronunciation  divergences (articulatory and acoustic distinctions)  and 
discourse  divergences (word choice, duration of utterances, and  disfluencies).  Table  
3 illustrates these  distinctions  using examples  of divergent speech  characteristics that 
have been  reported by  Duffy  (2012). In our proposed pilot study, we would expect to 
parameterize some—but perhaps not all— of these characteristics, as we have 
reports from clinician  partners conducting  a pilot study  on ALS patients that 
phenomena such  as these  are common in the data they have collected so far (which  
will form our initial dataset, as described in Data Collection  Protocol).  
 Table  3: Examples of Divergent Speech Characteristics 
Level  Speech  
Characteristics  Example  Comparable  ALS 
Utterance  Divergence  Dimensions  
Pronunciation  Vowel  I wrote  to the  owner  I wr[aw]t  to the Substitution of  back  vowels  
DESIPHER, PI: Phillips  version 3 Page 5 of 11 04/18/17 distortion  [ooh]ner  (oh/aw, oh/ooh) for front 
vowels  
Involuntary  
Repetition  The best part of the 
movie  was the 
surprise  ending.  [The bbbbest thing]  * 
the best thing I 
wanted  to tell you 
is… Prolonged or  repeated  sounds 
and syllables,  possibly  revised  
Imprecise  
consonants  The blue shirt didn't  
feel comfortable.  I wasn't  comforful in 
that shirt.  Deletion of  soft alveolar  stop 
([t]/[d])  
Discourse  Short  phrases  I don't  feel like a very 
accomplished chef,  
although  I've made 
eggplant  parmesan.  So how do  you make  
this soup? Well I'm 
not so sure.  See I 
don't  know if I'd go 
that far. Short discourse  words (so, 
well, see), small number of  
words per sentence,  omission  
of large  content  words  
Slow  rate I take pride in being  
able to  cook myself.  Um I do uh some  uh 
cooking myself.  Number  of words  per minute,  
frequency and  pattern of  
unfilled  or filled  pauses (um,  
uh). 
Disfluencies  I walked  the dog to 
the store.  I saw [the dog] * I 
mean  the cat . Substitutions, possibly  edited,  
e.g., I mean,  sorry, excuse  
me, rather  
 
By understanding how speech deterioration correlates with other  physiological 
degradation,  it may be possible to apply  a new, non -invasive measure  for assessing 
the functionality of  an ALS patient.  In addition, the features associated  with speech  
deterioration enable the adaptation of existing speech recognition softw are to a 
patient's speech  as it evolves over time,  so that the quality of life for patients may be 
improved through conversation with  a computer.  
 Work accomplished by PI  
Reducing Barriers to  living at home for the rural Veteran with Amyotrophic  Lateral 
Sclerosis (ORH  N08-FY14Q4- S0-P01503 , PI: Phillips).  This project  consists of 
interviews  with caregivers  and Veterans with ALS about the challenges of  living and 
the barriers to maintaining  living at home.  This study is currently  ongoing, but 
preliminary results point  to timely  and appropriate access  to care as an important 
feature.  Communication  and transportation issues also present as  consistent  
themes.  
 Increasing Access to pulmonary function testing for rural veterans with ALS through at  
home  testing  (ORH FY 2015 , PI: Phillips).  Begun in Oct 2014,  this program provides 
in-home testing  for forced vital capacity (FVC).  FVC is an important measure in this 
study.  Additionally, telehealth  appointments will be available while  the respiratory 
therapist is in the home to  consult with other  members of  the ALS team.  This program 
may provide important access to the population in this study.  
 "Machine Translation Divergences:  A Formal  Description and Proposed Solution,"  
Computational  Linguistics , 20:4,  1994.  Dr. Bonnie J. Dorr was a NSF Presidential  
Faculty Fellow  Awardee in 1997 for her seminal work  on the problem of translating 
from one language into  another in the face of language  divergences  (i.e., cross -
linguistic  distinctions).  Her work resulted in a systematic solution to the divergence 
DESIPHER, PI: Phillips  version 3 Page 6 of 11 04/18/17 problem  based on  the formalization of  linguistically -motivated classes  that facilitate 
the design and  implementation of a language processing system that is general  
enough to be applied to  proble ms in text processing, speech processing, and language 
translation.  
 
Her subsequent research on  cross- language  divergence analysis for statistical word -
level alignment (Dorr  et al., 2002) was successful for analysis  of both minimally  
divergent language pairs  (Spanish and English) and maximally divergent language 
pairs (Spanish and Chinese).  Her experience in studying divergent speech patterns 
will be extremely valuable in  leading data analysis efforts of ALS  patient speech at 
Florida IHMC.  
 Research Plan  
Population: Participants with ALS receiving medical services at James A. Haley 
Veterans ’ Hospital.  According to the National VA ALS registry, one of the highest 
concentrations of  Veterans with ALS is in Mid-Florida.  In FY13,  136 Veterans with 
ALS were served by  the Tampa  VA. All veterans who meet inclusion criteria will be 
approached about the study.  
 
Inclusion criteria : Veterans have been diagnosed with ALS, are native monolingual 
speakers of American English, have bulbar involvement identified during initial ALS inpatient evaluation, a forced vital capacity (FVC) of greater than 50% of the expected value for age, and an ALSFRS -R score of 40 or greater.  
 
Exclusion criteria : a diagnosis of dementia, FVC less than 50%, inability to speak, or 
inability to follow directions.  
 
Number of subjects : We will recruit 2 0 Veterans with  ALS who currently have bulbar 
involvement  into the study.  The process of recruitment begins when  potential 
recruitees are initially assessed in the ALS clinic.  The examining physician will make 
the potentially subject  aware of  the study .   If the potential subject is interested, they 
will be referred to the research assistant, who will inform the subject about the study, and begin the consent process if the potentia l subject is interested in participating.  20 
control healthy subjects without a diagnosed ALS  will be recruited.  A ONETIME 
recording will be done of the TIMIT and Ba repetition.  
 
Timeline : Veterans will provide data quarterly (every 3 months) for two years for 8 
visits total.  Each time the Veteran visits the  Tampa VA, the research  assistant will 
make a set of voice recordings.  If the Veteran is not able to come to the VA within a 3 
month time period, the research  assistant will make a home visit to make  the recording.  
The control 20 healthy subjects without a diagnosed ALS  will be a ONETIME 
recording of the TIMIT and Ba repetition. 
 
Data Collected: In order to minimize the burden to the subjects,  research data collection 
and clinical data collection is being coordinated.  The following data is collected per 
standard of care each time the Veteran is seen   
DESIPHER, PI: Phillips  version 3 Page 7 of 11 04/18/17  
Potential participants will be screened and evaluated for Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis  (or 
ALS) within the Tampa VA systems of care . After screening  a letters will be mailed about 
the study to these potential participants.  For those who respond to the letter showing 
interest in participating in t he study  and who are eligible , an appointment will be 
scheduled to meet for the consent ing and enrollment process . There will be Waiver of 
document; for control 20 healthy subjects without a diagnosis of ALS.  Script for waiver 
of Documentation will be used to recruit the 20 healthy subjects.  
 This information will be extracted by the R esearch Assist ant from participants’ medical 
records on a quarterly basis:  
1. Forced Vital Capacity (FVC),  
2. Penetration -Aspiration Scale  (a paper -pencil screen; Rosenbek, 1996),  
3. ALSFRS- R (Cedarbaum, 1999),  and  
4. Speech Intelligibility  Test (SIT; Beukelman  et al., 2007).  
5. Ba repetition test ( Rong et al., 2015).   
If any measurements  are missing, t he research assistant will confirm collection  of 
clinical measurements  and coordinate with the clinical team.   
 The research assistant will measure tongue strength using  the Iowa  Oral Performance  
Instrument (IOPI Medical, Redmond, WA),  and speech recordings made of four 
preselected passages.  These passages, selected from the Texas -Instrument/MIT 
(TIMIT) corpus (Garofolo et  al., 1993), combat what  would generally lead  to 
unintelligibility  in speech recognition by  providing a "ground truth"; with the knowledge of 
what  the sentence is in advance,  even if the patient is not otherwise able to speak  
intelligibly, the speech recognition system can be appropriately calibrated  to expect 
certain levels  of deviation from a baseline.  And, the ‘Ba’ repetition test (Rong et al., 
2015). The diadochokinetic (DDK) rate test in which the participants were asked to clearly and rapidly repeat /ba/ was used in (Rong  et al. 2015), to help with speech 
intelligibility deterioration as a result neurologic atrophy. While  this pilot study  focuses 
on speech recognition that accommodates varying levels  of impairment, in later stages 
of the disease,  adaptive speech recognition technology would be most  useful in 
combination with alternative and  augmentative communication (AAC) technologies  and 
brain computer interfaces (BCI);  this powerful combination would accommodate typing,  
gaze, and head -mouse input,  in addition to speech input (see related discussion in  Dorr 
et al.,  2015).  
 We would  expect to follow  a patient from  enrollment to the end of the study, or end of 
life. When possible, speech  recordings  and assessments will be coordinated during the 
quarterly  visits  to Tampa VA. If not possible, separate visits will be scheduled.  If the 
patient were unable to come to Tampa  VA, home visits would be  scheduled.  If results  
are promising, we  would seek  additional  funds to follow this cohort beyond the end of 
study.  
 T
he 20 control speakers will participate in ONETIME only , recording  during the rest of 
the study time of the TIMIT Sentences and Ba repetition.  
DESIPHER, PI: Phillips  version 3 Page 8 of 11 04/18/17 Participants  diagnosed with ALS  CPRS notes  will be reviewed for the following co-
existing conditions to be found on the CPRS Notes:  
 
I. Parkinson's disease  
II. Multiple Systems Atrophy  
III. Olivopontinocerebellar degeneration  
IV. Shy Drager syndrome  
V. Progressive Supra nuclear palsy  
VI. Any kind of laryngeal dystonia 
Data Analysis : Data  analysis will be conducted at the Florida Institute of Human and  
Machine Cognition (IHMC) in Ocala, Florida.  Data sharing and  security  will be governed 
under the IPA agreement between James A. Haley Veterans’ Hospital  and IHMC. 
Phonetic annotation of the training data is required  in instances where  we want to 
identify speech  characteristics in the transcribed text (e.g.,  hypernasality).  The Tampa 
VA will provide transcribed,  annotated speech data (in addition  to the audio  recordings)  
to IHMC  for setting  up the baseline speech recognition system.  To perform qua lity 
annotation, we will utilize a consistent set of guidelines to ensure that the system  can 
learn patterns to aid in  understanding speech  with errors.  Speech recordings  will be 
separately annotated for  speech irregularities by two research assistants  using the 
annotation  guidelines, and differences in annotations will be arbitrated  by the PI or his 
designee.  The annotated script, along  with the original recording, will be de-identified  
and sent to IHMC  using Cradeon, a FIPS 140 -2 compliant encryption program . Sample 
annotations are provided  below.  It is critical that the degree to which  the ALS has 
progressed  be associated with each transcript,  so that a different  set of speech models 
can be produced for different degrees of  ALS progression.  
 
From the audio recordings collected, 90% will be used for training the system.  A 
randomly  selected 10%  will be used to  test the divergence construct.  
 Risk/Benefit Assessment  
There are minimal risks to the subject. The subject could fatigue, in which case they would be allowed to rest until they were ready to continue. Subjects could become frustrated while reading the passage. In that case, subjects would be given a break, and then continue with the protocol.
 There are no known benefits to participating in this 
research study.  
 The etiology of ALS frequently creates other health issues. These anticipated issues 
that may require medical intervention and hospitalization include, but are not limited to:  
• Respiratory Insufficiency  
• sleep apnea 
• malnutrition  
• dehydr ation  
• tracheotomy  
• frontotemporal dementia 
• falls 
 
DESIPHER, PI: Phillips  version 3 Page 9 of 11 04/18/17 Data Safety Monitoring Plan  
A data and safety monitoring plan will be implemented to insure that there are no 
changes in the benefit/risk ratio during the study and that confidentiality of research data is maintained. The PI, Co- PI, and research staff will be responsible for data 
safety and monitoring. All data obtained in the course of the study will be confidential. All participants will be informed of their confidentiality rights at the time informed conse nt is administered. Data collection, management and destruction will be 
conducted in strict accordance with the policies and procedures set forth by the Tampa VA Research & Development Office Research Data Security and Privacy 
Policy. Data will be stored on the password- protected research server which sits 
behind the VA firewall. All data will be stored and maintained in a Microsoft SQL Server  or Microsoft Access back- end database. The server is managed by VA TAM  
OI&T and data are backed up on a nightly basis. The following staff members will have access to the data once it is saved on the research server: the PI and the project staff. If a staff member leaves the project, an amendment to the IRB will remove their access to identifiable patient information for the study.  
 Patients and providers will be assigned a number at the time of enrollment in the study and will be identified by that number during the course of the study and data analysis. Identifiable personal information will be stripped from the database so as to protect confidentiality. Monthly meetings of the investigators will include a discussion of issues pertaining to the assurance of patient confidentiality, and any needed changes will be instituted immediately to assure optimal patient protecti on. Breaches of confidentiality 
will be brought to the attention of the appropriate persons immediately as will any proposed changes to the data safety and monitoring plan  
 Process for Obtaining Informed Consent and Protecting Patient Privacy  
Eligible participants  will be referred to the Research Assistant  who will review in detail 
the consent form and study procedures.  After participants  have acknowledged 
complete understanding of the study, they will be asked to sign a consent form.  Subjects will also be given a copy of the signed consent and will be advised of their rights to withdraw from the study at any time without penalty.  
 
Process for assessing ALS -related dementia:  
The cognitive ability of this population is closely followed by the clinical team.  The chart will be reviewed for competence to consent.   If no assessment score is available, 
the RA will administer the exam.  The Mini -Mental Exam will be used for assessing 
dementia.  The cut score for competence  to consent is established in the literature.   
 Documentation of Informed Consent  
The Research Assistant will enter progress notes for study enrollment into the CPRS 
medical records for each subject after consent forms have been signed.  A copy of the consent form will be placed in the participant’s  CPRS medical record and a copy will be 
maintained with the study records which will remained locked in a file cabinet in the Research Assistant’s office.
 
 
Payment to Subjects for Their Participation  
DESIPHER, PI: Phillips  version 3 Page 10 of 11 04/18/17 Participants will be compensated $25 in check  form or direct deposit per session visit for 
up to eight study visits.  
 Provisions for Data Storage and Confidentiality  
All electronic data will be stored in 
R:\PROJECTS_CURRENT \Phillips_DESIPHER_RR&D_SPIRE \Secure.   All original 
documents (i.e. consent forms) will be stored in a locked file cabinet in PI’s office 147A, Grand Oaks Building.   
 Each subject will be given a unique subject number. All data will be stored under that subject  
number. The PI will hold an electronic list with the map between subject number and patient  
information. All information sent to colleagues at IHMC will be de- identified. There is minimal  
risk of loss of identifiable information.  
 Dissemination of Research Results  
The PI will be the take the lead in writing up the results of this work.   
 List of References  
Beukelman,  D.R.,  K. Yorkston,  M. Hakel, and M.  Dorsey.  Speech Intelligibility  Test 
(SIT):  Computer  Software. Lincoln, NE: Madonna  Rehabilitation Hospital, 2007.  
Beukelman,  David, Susan Fager, and Amy  Nordness, "Communication Support for  
People with  ALS," Neurology Research International,  2011.  
Biadsy, Fadi, William  Yang Wang,  Andrew Rosenberg, "Intoxication Detection using 
Phonetic,  Phonotactic  and Prosodic Cues," Proceedings of Interspeech, 2011.  
Cedarbaum, J.M., N. Stambler, E. Malta, C. Fuller, D. Hilt, B. Thurmond, A. 
Nakanishi, "The ALSFRS- R: a revised ALS functional rating  scale  that 
incorporates assessments  of respiratory  function,"  Journal of  the 
Neurological Sciences , 169(1 -2):13 -21, 1999.  
Dorr, Bonnie J., Machine Translation: A View  from the Lexicon , MIT Press, Cambridge, 
MA, 1993.  Dorr,  Bonnie J., "Machine  Translation Divergences: A Formal  
Description and Proposed Solution," Computational Li nguistics , 20:4, pp. 597 --
633, 1994.  
Dorr, Bonnie J., Lisa Pearl,  Rebecca Hwa, and Nizar Habash, "DUSTer: A Method for 
Unraveling  Cross -Language Divergences for Statistical  Word- Level Alignment," 
in Proceedings of the Fifth Conference of the Association for Machine 
Translation in the Americas, AMTA -2002, Tiburon,  CA, pp. 31--43, 2002.  
Dorr, Bonnie J., Lucian Galescu, Edward J. Golob, K. Brent Venable, and Yorick  
Wilks, "Companion -based Ambient Robust Intelligence (CARING),"  
Proceedings of the AAAI Workshop on Artificial Intelligence  Applied to 
Assistive Technologies and Smart Environments , 2015.  
Duffy,  Joseph, Motor  Speech Disorders: Substrates, Differential Diagnosis, and 
Management , 3
rd edition, 2012.  
Garofolo,  John, Lori Lamel, William  Fisher,  Jonathan Fiscus, David Pallett, Nancy 
Dahlgren, Victor  Zue. "TIMIT  Acoustic -Phonetic Continuous Speech Corpus," 
LDC93S1. Web Download.  
Philadelphia: Linguistic  Data Consortium, 1993.  
DESIPHER, PI: Phillips  version 3 Page 11 of 11 04/18/17 http://web.mit.edu/course/6/6.863/share/nltk_lite/timit/allsenlist.txt  
Habash, Nizar  and Bonnie J. Dorr, "Handling  Translation  Divergences: Combining 
Statistical and Symbolic Techniques in Generation -Heavy Machine 
Translation",  Proceedings  of the Fifth Conference of the Association for 
Machine Translation in  the Americas (AMTA), 2002.  
Green,  Jordan R., Yana  Yunusova, Mili S. Kuruvilla, Jun Wang, Gary  L. Pattee,  Lori 
Synhorst,  Lorne Zinman, James  D. Berry,  "Bulbar and speech motor 
assessment in ALS:  Challenges  and future  directions,"  Amyotrophic Lateral 
Sclerosis and Frontotemporal  Degeneration, 14: 494– 500, 2013.  
Kepes, Benjamin, “Using Technology To  Diagnose Parkinson's Disease,”  Forbes  
Magazine, Mar. 27, 
2014. http://www.forbes.com/sites/benkepes/2014/05/27/using -technology -to-
diagnose- parkinsons -disease/  
Lehr, Maider, Kyle  Gorman, and Izhak Shafran,  “Discriminative Pronunciation 
Modeling for Dialectal Speech Recognition”  Proceedings of Interspeech, 2014.  
Little,  Max, “A Test for Parkinson’s  with a Phone Call,”  TED Talk, 2012.  
https://www.ted.com/talks/max_little_a_test_for_parkinson_s_with_a_phone_call  
Livescu, K. and J. Glass, "Lexical  Modeling of  Non-Native Speech for Automatic  Speech 
Recognition,"  Proceedings of ICASSP , pp. 1683 -1686, 2000.  
Orimaye, Sylvester  Olubolu, Jojo Sze-Meng Wong, and Karen Jennifer Golden, 
“Learning Predictive Linguistic  Features  for Alzheimer’s  Disease and Related 
Dementias  Using  Verbal  
Utterances,” Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Computational Linguistics and 
Clinical Psychology: From  Linguistic  Signal to Clinical  Reality , pp. 78–87, 2014.  
Rosenbek, J.C., J. Robbins, E.V. Roecker, J.L.  Coyle, and  J.L. Woods,  "A Penetration -
Aspiration  Scale," Dysphagia 11:93 -98, 1996.  
Rudzicz, F., L. Chan -Currie, A. Danks, T.  Mehta, and S.  Zhao "Automatically identifying 
trouble- indicating speech behaviors in Alzheimer's disease,"  in Proceedings  of 
ACM  ASSETS, Rochester  NY, 2014.  
 