Page 1 of 35 
GLP-1 agonist effects  on energy  balance  in hypothalamic  obesity  
Protocol v. 10.0  7 November  2018    
 
 
 
 
 
Glucagon -Like Peptide -1 Agonist  Effects  on Energy  Balance 
in Hypothalamic  Obesity  (ECHO - Energy  Balance in 
Craniopharygioma with Hypothalamic  Obesity)  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Protocol v.10.0  7  November 2018  
  
Page 2 of 35 
GLP-1 agonist effects  on energy  balance  in hypothalamic  obesity  
Protocol v. 10.0  7 November  2018   RESEARCH  PROTOCOL  
 
1. STUDY  SITES:  
Seattle  Children’s -Christian  Roth, MD, PI 
Vanderbilt  University - Ashley  Shoemaker,  MD, PI 
Children’s  Hospitals  and Clinics  of Minnesota - Jennifer  Abuzzahab,  MD, PI 
 
2. PROJECT  TITLE  
Glucagon -Like Peptide -1 Agonist  Effects  on Energy  Balance in Hypothalamic  Obesity  (ECHO - Energy  
Balance in Craniopharygioma with Hypothalamic  Obesity)  
 
3. INTRODUCTION  
Background/Significance  
Excessive weight  gain and its cardiometabolic  sequela  are frequent  complications of hypothalamic  
tumors,  a condition  known as hypothalamic  obesity  (HO). Most tumors in this region  are 
craniopharyngiomas  (CP),1 which  constitute  5–9% of childhood  brain  tumors.2,3 Patients  with CP 
typically  become obese  and have more features  of the metabolic  syndrome  compared  to matched  
controls.4,5 Overall,  a 3-19-fold higher  cardiovascular  mortality  had been  reported,6,7 and a recent  
nationwide population -based  study  in Sweden demonstrated  increased  rates for  cerebral  infarction  (7- 
fold),  death  due to  cerebrovascular  diseases  (5-fold), and type 2 diabetes  mellitus (6-fold) in CP patients  
in comparison  to the  general  population.8 Thus, early  and effective management  of obesity  is vital for 
this population,9 which  is more  resistant  to treatment  than uncomplicated  obesity.10-18 Recognized  risk 
factors  for severe  obesity  include  large hypothalamic  tumors  or lesions  affecting  several medial  and 
posterior hypothalamic nuclei that impact  satiety  signaling  pathways.19, 26-28 Structural  damage in these  
nuclei  often  lead to uncontrolled appetite,  rapid  weight  gain,  central  insulin and leptin  resistance,  
decreased  sympathetic  activity,  low energy  expenditure (EE),  and increased  energy  storage  in adipose  
tissue.13,19  Recently,  our group developed  a semi-quantitative  assessment  of hypothalamic damage  on 
brain magnetic resonance  imaging  (MRI)  to predict  the risk for HO development  in CP .26 
Previous  results  of treating  HO with a  glucagon -like-peptide -1 receptor  agonist (GLP1RA)  in rats20 
and humans21,22  provide  promising  proof -of-principle  data to support our  randomized clinical  trial. Our 
primary  hypothesis  is that drugs  causing  weight  loss via  intact  hindbrain  signaling  pathways  offer  a 
desperately  needed option for treatment  of HO, even  in very  obese  HO subjects with severe  
hypothalamic damage.  Induction  of weight  loss by GLP1RAs  is believed  to be related to multiple  
mechanisms  involving  the gastrointestinal  tract,  vagus  nerve,  and the brain  leading  to increased  
satiety.23-28 Peripheral  administration  of GLP-1 or GLP1RA  reduces  blood  glucose  and energy  intake  in 
humans and rodents,  and long-term treatment  results in loss of body  weight.23,29 -45 Critically,  we do not  
know whether  GLP1RA  treatment  affects  EE and activity,46-49 or whether  the site and size of brain  
lesions affect  responses  to GLP1RA  treatment.  
Our previous  clinical  studies of  the GLP1RA  exenatide in obese  adolescents and adults have  
generated  the critical  safety  and efficacy  data needed to design  a clinical  trial.21,22,50  In a pilot study  
conducted  at Children’s  Hospitals  and Clinics  of MN , pretreatment  hyperphagia was  associated  with 
BMI reduction.  Using  these  data,  we have  designed  a prospective,  multicenter  trial that will examine the 
effects  of GLP1RA  on BMI,  cardiovascular  disease  (CVD)  risk factors,  energy  homeostasis  and other  
factors  in subjects  with HO secondary  to CP  or other hypothalamic tumors . 
Page 3 of 35 
GLP-1 agonist effects  on energy  balance  in hypothalamic  obesity  
Protocol v. 10.0  7 November  2018   4. STUDY  DESIGN  AND METHODOLOGY  
Specific  Aims  and Hypotheses  
Specific  Aim 1: To test  effects  of GLP1RA on hypothalamic  obesity prospectively.  We hypothesize  
that treatment  with GLP1RA  will significantly  reduce  adiposity  in patients with HO. We furthermore  
hypothesize  that GLP1RA  treatment  will lead to increased satiety.  To this  end, we propose  to conduct a  
double blind, placebo -controlled,  randomized  trial of once weekly  extended  release exenatide (ExQW)  
on metabolic and  clinical  outcomes.  Following  baseline  testing,  48 patients  (10-25y at time of 
enrollment)  with HO will be  randomly  assigned  with equal  allocation  to ExQW or matching  placebo  
injection  for 36 weeks,  followed  by an 18-week open label  extension during  which  all patients  will 
receive ExQW. Our  primary  endpoint  is percent  change  in BMI  after 36 weeks.  Secondary  endpoints  
will include  changes  in body  fat, and satiety  by free buffet  meal  test. 
 
Specific  Aim 2: To determine  effects  of GLP1RA  on cardiometabolic  risk factors.  We hypothesize  
that GLP1RA will also lead to (1) favorable  changes in  blood glucose,  lipid profile,  and inflammatory  
marker,  and (2) reduced  insulin secretion  during an  oral glucose  tolerance  test. In the same  cohort, we  
will examine  changes  in blood glucose,  lipid profile, inflammatory  markers, and insulin resistance by 
testing  insulin secretion  during  an oral glucose  tolerance  test after adjustment  for glucose  response  and 
adiposity.  
 
Specific  Aim 3: To explore  additional outcome  measures,  and predictors  of treatment  responses.  
HO represents  a disorder  of energy  homeostasis.  
Aim 3 A: To test the  hypothesis  that GLP1RA will  normalize  homeostasis  by increasing  EE in relation  
to energy  intake . This and prior  hypotheses  allow  us to test potential  predictors  of treatment  outcomes.  
Aim 3 B: To test the  hypotheses  that (1) a lower hypothalamic lesion score and (2) lower fasting serum  
leptin as well as (3) higher pretreatment  hyperphagia will be associated  with better  BMI outcomes.  
The study  will include  brain lesion  scoring,  behavioral and hormonal  measures, free -living  total daily  
energy  expenditure by doubly  labeled  water  (DLW),  energy  intake by 24h dietary  recall,  and activity  by 
actigraphy.  
 
Overview/Scope  
Study  Design  
The proposed study  is a multi -site 36-week  double -blind,  placebo -controlled  randomized  trial followed  
by an 18-week open  label extension  with all patients  receiving  the GLP1RA treatment.  Therefore,  each 
subject  will be treated  for a total of 54 wk. Subjects will be  required  to travel  to one  of three  research  
sites (Seattle,  Nashville,  St. Paul).  A flowchart  for scheduled  study  visits (SVs)  is outlined below.  
Before  study  start,  there  will be an investigator  kickoff  and training  meeting  guided  by Dr. Yanovski  
from  Seattle  Children’s  to coordinate  and align  all assessments  and interventions.  In addition,  Seattle  
Children’s  radiology  center  will provide standardized  protocols  to the other  two imagin g centers  for 
consistent  imaging  techniques  and analyses.  During  the study  and after ending  the intervention,  there  
will be  bimonthly  investigator  phone  or video  conferences.  
 
Time Frame/Duration  
The timeline for research  activities  is four  years.   This is outlined  as: Years  1-3: Enrollment  and 
treatment  at 3 study  sites.  Years  3 and 4: hormonal  assays.  Year  4: completion of  final data analyses.  
 
Each  patient  will be in the  study  for 56 weeks,  including  the screening  visit.  
Page 4 of 35 
GLP-1 agonist effects  on energy  balance  in hypothalamic  obesity  
Protocol v. 10.0  7 November  2018   Data  Requirements  
A database  will be  designed for  this study  using  REDCap  (Research  Electronic  Data Capture)  hosted at 
the Institute of Translational Health  Sciences  of which Seattle  Children’s  and University  of Washington  
are partners.  REDCap  is a secure,  web-based  application  designed  to support data capture  for research  
studies,  providing  validated  data entry,  audit  trails,  and mechanisms  for securely  importing  and 
exporting  data.  It will reside on a  secure  server  with exclusive  access  by research  personnel  at all study  
sites.  Access  is tailored  for specific  roles  to maintain  blinding.  Subjects  are identified  with a study  
identification  number.  
 
Study  Measures  
Anthropometric  measures.  Anthropometric  measurements including  height, weight,  waist, and hip 
circumference as  well as Tanner  pubertal  staging  will be  collected  (see Fig. 1) at every  visit (except  6 
weeks).  Anthropometric  measures  were  selected  based  on (1) prior  demonstration  as a predictor  of child  
outcomes  in pediatric  weight control,  and (2) being  measures  of treatment  change.  Weight  and height:  
Participant  height  will be  assessed  as the average  of three repeated measures using  a calibrated  
stadiometer.  Weight  will be  assessed  in light clothing  as the average of three  repeated  measures  on a 
calibrated  electronic scale.  In addition,  we will measure  waist  and hip circumference. We  will take all 
measurements  three  times according  to guidelines  (http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nhanes.htm ) and record  the 
average measurements.   Heart  rate (HR)  and resting  office blood pressure (BP) will be measured  with 
an aneroid  sphygmomanometer  according  guidelines  of the  National  High  Blood  Pressure  Education  
Program,51 as successfully  used in other multicenter  pediatr ic studies.52 Body  fat assessment:  BMI  will 
be calculated  as kg/m2. We  will use %  change in BMI to allow for comparison  over various  age groups.  
Dual  energy  x-ray absorptiometry  (DEXA)  will be adjusted  for height,  age, sex, and race as covariates,  
and used to measure body  fat as an additional  descriptive parameter  for adiposity.  
 
Energy  expenditure measures . There  is no previous study  examining  the impact of GLP1RA  treatment  
on EE in subjects  with CP, a  population suffering from  decreased  resting  metabolic rate and physical  
activity.53-56 Total daily  energy  expenditure  (total EE, kcal/day)  will be  measured  using  doubly  
labeled  water (DLW).  Total EE comprises  resting  metabolic rate,  thermic  effect  of meals, and physical  
activity  EE. All three  components can be accurately  determined  by using  the gold standard method,  
DLW  under  free living conditions over a period  of two  wk.57,58  Through  periodic urine  collection,  DLW  
estimates  carbon dioxide production  by measuring the elimination  of the tracers  deuterium  (2H) and 
oxygen -18 (18O) from  the body.47 The DLW  is a reference method for measurements of average total  
EE for a period of  10-14 days in free -living  individuals tested  in a variety  of pediatric59-61 and adult62 
populations, and individuals  with various  diseases.63-65 The DLW  protocol  will be  coordinated  by the 
Energy  Balance  Laboratory  at Vanderbilt University  (M. Buchowski  – Director, see letter of  support) in  
collaboration  with the  Gas-Isotope -Ratio  Mass  Spectrometry  Laboratory  at Baylor  College of 
Medicine's  USDA/ARS  Children's  Nutrition Research  Center (DLW  Lab - Dr. W. Wang,  Director).  
Participants  from  all sites will receive  a DLW  sample  and will collect  urine  according  to the  protocol  
schedule.  Baseline urine samples  will be  collected  at the clinic visits while day  7 and day 14 samples  
will be  mailed from  home.   After  drinking  the doubly  labeled  water  at the site, subjects  will be  
instructed  to rinse  the glass  and to drink  the rinse  water;  they will be  asked  to repeat  this step (rinsing  
and drinking a total of two times). They  will be  asked to void and the urine  sample will be  discarded.  
The next two patient  voids (at 2 hours and 6 hours) will be  collected  for isotope analysis  (deuterium  and 
18O) at Baylor  University. Urine  samples  will be  collected  at day 7 and day 14 for isotope analysis.  
Page 5 of 35 
GLP-1 agonist effects  on energy  balance  in hypothalamic  obesity  
Protocol v. 10.0  7 November  2018   Physical activity . In one of our prior studies  with CP patients,  we assessed  physical  activity  by 
accelerometry.54 In the proposed study,  subjects’ physical  activity  will be  measured  by the Actigraph  
GT3M accelerometer,  worn on the non-dominant  wrist.  To measure  activity  and sleep duration, subjects  
will wear  the actigraph  monitor  continuously  for 2 wk. Drs. Roth54 and Shoemaker  have used these  
devices  before.  The actigraphs  used are  small and unobtrusive, and can provide a  reliable  and valid  
estimate of children’s  moderate -to-vigorous  physical  activity.66-70 Accelerometer  data will be 
categorized  into time spent  in sedentary,  as well as light,  moderate,  and vigorous activity  using  
calibration  thresholds  specifically  for children.69,71,72  The Physical  Activity  Checklist  Interview,73-75 will 
be used to complement  actigraphy  data with descriptive self-reported  assessments of physical  activity.  
 
Behavioral,  and psychosocial  measures.  Energy  intake will be  assessed  by Automated  Self- 
Administered  24-Hour  Dietary  Recall  (ASA24 -Kids,  
http://appliedresearch.cancer.gov/tools/instruments/asa24/),  which  is a validated web-based  free method  
of a 24h dietary  recall  for children  10 y and older  which  will be  performed  at two time  points around  
study  visits  0, 18, 36 and 54 wk. At 0, 18 and 36 wk subject’s  parents  will furthermore  complete  the 
Child Eating Behavior  Questionnaire  (CEBQ),76  or the Adult Eating Behavior Questionnaire (AEBQ) 
which  measures  positive  and negative  eating  behaviors  (food responsiveness,  enjoyment  of food,  
emotional  overeating,  desire  to drink, satiety  responsiveness,  slowness  in eating,  emotional  undereating 
and fussiness)  and the Hyperphagia Questionnaire77, a 13- item questionnaire  developed  for use in 
patients  with Prader -Willi  syndrome  but that has also been used to study  hyperphagic  behavior  in other  
populations.78-80   These  are all validated  questionnaires  and we have used  them in previous studies.  
 
Meal test . At study  visits 1, 3 and 4 (0, 18 and 36 wk), subjects  will have an OGTT  (900-1100 AM)  in 
the fasting condition,   followed  at study  visits 0 and 36 wk by  a standardized  mixed meal  caloric  
preload  (macaroni  & cheese at 1100 AM)  and a free buffet  meal  (at 1230 PM). The buffet  meal  is an 
objective measure of satiety  as it assesses  food intake  and choice  after a caloric  preload.  The 
standardized  test meal  preloa d will provide 12%of estimated  daily  caloric  requirements,81 based  on the  
Schofield -HW equation.82 The purpose  of the test meal  is to ensure that study  participants  are in an  
equally  fed state (together  with oral glucose,  total preload  will be 22 -27% of estimated  daily  caloric  
intake).  Ninety  minutes later,  an ad libitum buffet  meal  will be served  consisting  of a wide  variety  of 
food items  and more  than the child’s  estimated  daily  calorie  requirements  will be offered  (5,000  kcal).  
Participants  will have access  to the buffet  for 30 min, after which  calorie intake  and composition  of 
consumed  foods  will be  measured  by weighing  back uneaten food.  Hunger and fullness  will be assessed  
every  30 min from  fasting  state before  starting  the OGTT  until the end of the buffet  meal using  visual  
analog  scales  (VAS)83 to assess  subjective appetite, reliable  in children  over age 7 y,84 and used by us 
previously.85 
 
Metabolic  outcomes.  Blood  glucose,  insulin, lipid  panel,  hemoglobin  A1c,  and as a measure  of low- 
grade inflammation  C-reactive  protein  will be assessed  by high-sensitive  (hsCRP) testing  at a central  lab 
(Northwest  Lipid  Research  Laboratories,  Seattle).  Glucose  tolerance will be assessed  by a 2-hour oral 
glucose  tolerance  test. After  placement  of an intravenous  catheter  (IV),  a baseline  blood sample will be  
collected  for measurement  of hemoglobin  A1C, and insulin (processed  by the central  lab). A  2-h OGTT  
(1.75  g/kg Glucola [maximum  75 g]) will then be performed  with sample collection  at 0’, 30’, 60’, 90’ 
and 120’ for measurement of glucose and  insulin.  Samples  will be  placed  on ice, and will be  
centrifuged.  Leptin,  total adiponectin,  α-MSH,  and soluble leptin  receptor  (sOB -R) are potential  
indicators  of leptin sensitivity,86-89 and will be  assessed  in fasting  state (leptin, total adiponectin,  and 
sOB-R, R&D Systems,  Minneapolis,  MN; α -MSH, Phoenix  Pharmac.,  Belmont,  CA, the  assay  cross  
Page 6 of 35 
GLP-1 agonist effects  on energy  balance  in hypothalamic  obesity  
Protocol v. 10.0  7 November  2018   reacts  100%  with amidated  and acylated  α-MSH and 79%  with des-acylated  α-MSH).  The leptin to  
adiponecti n ratio provides information  regarding  the risk of metabolic syndrome.90-93 All endocrine  
measures  will be  performed at the PI’s lab at Seattle Children’s  Research  Institute.  In our laboratory,  
intra-assay  coefficients  of variation  (CV) are <8%, and inter-assay  CVs are <10% for these  methods.  
For all  assays,  all samples will be  run in duplicate.  
 
OGTT  derived  measures.  The assessment  of dynamic  changes  of glucose  and insulin secretion  has clear  
advantages  over static tests such as fasting  insulin and glucose  levels.  Calculation models  have  been  
established for using  OGTT insulin and glucose  data to calculate first  and second phase insulin  
secretion  that correlate  well with clamp  data,  and give surrogates  for β-cell function  and insulin  
sensitivity.94-97 In our study,  we will assess  insulin sensitivity  by whole  body  insulin sensitivity  index  
(WBISI)  that encompasses both hepatic and  peripheral  tissue  insulin sensitivity.98 As exploratory  
outcome  parameters,  the first phase  insulin respons e to oral glucose  will be  calculated  by insulinogenic  
index  (IGI),  which  is a surrogate  of the β-cell function,95 using  the formula:  IGI = (Ins 30 min- 
Ins0min)/(Gluc 30 min-Gluc 0min).94 Insulin  resistance  will be  also estimated  by homeostasis model  
assessment  of insulin resistance (HOMA -IR).99 Change in glucose  metabolism parameters  will be  
adjusted  to ΔBMI.  
 
Neuroimaging  analysis.  At all sites,  3T protocols  will be standardized  to yield  anatomical  resolution of  
1 mm3 for T1 volumetric  images  and identical  in-place  resolution at 2 mm slice thickness  for T2- 
weighted  series.  These  parameters are substantially  improved  compared  to in vivo 1.5T (3 mm 
resolution)  work  of Makris100 in which a  segmentation  method for hypothalamus  subregions  using  7T 
scans  of ex vivo pathological  specimens  was developed  as a template.  We will assess  the topographic  
location  and size of damaged  brain areas  using  our established rating  system,  and also quantified  
measurement  of residual  lesion volume, ventricular  volumes , and hypothalamic  region  volumes,100 
using  a combination of  ITK-SNAP101 and MATLAB  (Mathworks,  Natick  MA)  for template  creation  as 
performed  in our previous  work.102 From  these  rating  images,  we will assign  brain  damage to specific  
brain  nuclei  using  the Brain Atlas  from  Mai et al.103 We have found  that this scoring  system  can be 
applied  effectively  even  with mildly  suboptimal  (fair to good) image quality.  We anticipate 40% of 
subjects  to undergo  MRI  examination  within 6 mo  of week  0, precluding  data-collection of  a new MRI.  
Since  Makris100 made  measurements  on 3 mm images,  probably  the minimum spatial resolution  that 
would ever be collected  given  current  standard  MRI scanner  techniques,  we do not anticipate  this will  
impede scoring  or quantifying  lesion/hypothalamic  region  volume. Furthermore,  where anatomical  
distortion  creates  deviations  from  the published  rule-set for  hypothalamic  sub-regions,  we will develop  
a new adaptive landmark  approach  to obtain  an estimate  of total lesion  and hypothalami c sub- 
measurement.  Given these  acquired  and measured  variables,  we anticipate  rating  and volumetric  indices  
will be  available  for the  entire  sample precluding  subjects where  patient  motion makes  hypothalamic  
sub-region  delineation  challenging  (anticipated  to be 5%).  All imaging  studies,  including  those obtained  
at other  facilities  will be burned  on CD and mailed to Seattle  Children's  to be analyzed  by a single  
central  reader blinded  to treatment  and clinical  data (Dr. Perez, neuroradiologist  at Seattle  Children’s)  to 
determine presence  and extent of  hypothalamic involvement  according  to our  scoring  system  and 
analytic methods proposed.  
 
Drug/Device,  Handling,  Storage  
The IND is:  122971  
Page 7 of 35 
GLP-1 agonist effects  on energy  balance  in hypothalamic  obesity  
Protocol v. 10.0  7 November  2018   Rationale  for Medication  
Currently  available  GLP1RAs include  a variety  of schedules:  twice daily  (exenatide),  once daily  
(liraglutide),  and once  weekly  (exenatide,  albiglutide, and dulaglutide).  Alternatively,  levels  of native  
GLP-1 can be increased  by inhibiting  dipeptidyl peptidase  4 (DPP -4), a protease  that rapidly  degrades  
native GLP -1. However,  DPP-4 inhibitors  do not inhibit  appetite  or lead to body  weight  reduction.  
Liraglutide,  the active  ingredient  in Saxenda®, was recently  approved  as a weight  loss medication  
showing  a 7.3%  decrease  in body  weight  over a  56 wk trial in adults with severe  obesity.104,105  
However,  this drug  has not been  made available  for use in pediatric  studies  and this is not expected  to 
change in the  near future  (personal  communication with Medical  Director,  Obesity  at Novo Nordisk  
Inc). Therefore,  we decided to use  the extended -release GLP -1 receptor agonist  ExQW  which  is also  
advantageous  as it requires  only weekly  injections, addressing  some  of the adherence  and side effect  
issues  that could pose  barriers  to therapy.  This drug contains exenatide,  which  is a 39-amino -acid 
synthetic  version of  exendin -4 that shares  approximately  50% sequence  identity  with human  GLP-1. In 
previous  studies  of adults  with T2DM,  ExQW showed  slightly  larger  reductions in body  weight  
compared  with twice  daily  exenatide,  although  this difference was statistically  not different.106 Mild  to 
moderate  GI adverse  events were  common  in previously  tested  three  GLP-1 agonists,  and were  least 
frequent  with ExQW.33,106 -108  ExQW  contains  exenatide encapsulated  in microspheres  consisting  of a 
medical -grade biodegradable  poly-(d,l-lactide -co-glycolide)  polymer, which  has been used in other  
medical  applications  since  1984, and allows  for slow, continuous  release of the active agent into  
circulation  following  injection.34,109  ExQW  will be  started  at 2 mg subcutaneously  once  weekly.  
Treatment  dosage  and duration are based on prescribing  information  and prior successful  clinical  trial 
weight  loss results.31,110  The placebo -control  group  is an essential  arm in this trial as study  measures  can 
change over time  without drug  intervention  and it supports the  evaluation  of efficacy  and safety.  The 
drug and  placebo  kits will be  supplied by  AstraZeneca,  or the  current  pharmacologic  company  
responsible  for ExQW.   Exenatide vials or pens 2.0 mg  powder for injection  will be  supplied.  All 
subjects  will have weekly  phone  calls when  not coming for  a study  visit, to check  adherence  and any 
potential  
adverse  effects.  Any evidence for adverse  effects  will be  discussed  with the  PI of each site and safety  
clinical  visits will be  considered.  
 
All study  medication  will be  stored/locked  in the  investigational  pharmacy  under  appropriate  
temperature conditions.   Dispensing  and accountability  records will be maintained  by appropriate  staff 
members.  
 
Analysis  
Analysis  plan and sample size calculations  by Aim.  
 
The research  team  includes personnel  with statistical  and data  management  expertise for overseeing  data 
collection,  storage methods, and the following analyses  (see letter  of support, Dr.  Shaffer).  Adherence  
data collected  during  the placebo  run-in phase  will be summarized  descriptively.  All subjects  
completing  the run -in phase  will go on to the  randomized treatment  phase.  The primary  analyses  will 
use the  intention -to-treat (ITT)  approach; i.e., subjects  will be  analyzed  according  to their randomized  
assignment  regardless  of treatment  received.  In addition, data  of all completers  will be  analyzed  
separately  as a sensitivity  analysis.  While  every  attempt will be  made  to collect  complete  data and retain  
all subjects,  all sample size  and power  calculations account  for dropout.  Statistical  methods  have been  
selected  to allow  for inclusion of partial  data.  All testing  is two -sided and α=0.05.  Repeated  measures  
analyses  will be  conducted using  SAS (SAS  Institute,  Inc., Cary,  NC, USA)  or R (The  R Foundation  for 
Page 8 of 35 
GLP-1 agonist effects  on energy  balance  in hypothalamic  obesity  
Protocol v. 10.0  7 November  2018   Statistical  Computing).  
Page 9 of 35 
GLP-1 agonist effects  on energy  balance  in hypothalamic  obesity  
Protocol v. 10.0  7 November  2018   Analysis  populations: All eligible subjects  randomized will be  included  in the ITT population.  The ITT 
population will be the  primary  analysis  population for  all primary,  secondary,  and tertiary  outcomes.  
The safety  population will be  the primary  population for  all safety  analyses,  and include  all subjects  
who receive  at least one  dose of study  drug or placebo.  
 
Table  1. Summary  of Study  Measures  and Outcomes  and Their  Use in the Proposed  Research  
Measure  Domain  Instrument  Aim Role/Application  
∆BMI%  Adiposity  Anthropometry  1 Primary  outcome  
Total  body  fat mass  Body  composition  DEXA  1 Secondary  outcome  
Fat and total  calorie  intake  Post test meal satiety  assessment  Free buffet  meal  analysis  1 Secondary  outcome  
Glucose  tolerance  Glucose tolerance,  MetS  Glucose at  0’, 120’ (OGTT)  2 Secondary  outcome  
HDL,  triglycerides  MetS  Fasting  lipids  2 Secondary  outcome  
hsCRP  Inflammation  hsCRP  at fasting time point  2 Secondary  outcome  
Free living  EE Energy  homeostasis  Doubly  labeled  water  3 Tertiary  outcome  
Energy  intake  Energy  intake  24h dietary  recall  (ASA24)  3 Tertiary  outcome  
Leptin,  adiponectin,  sOB- 
R,   α-MSH,  HOMA -IR, 
WBISI  Energy  homeostasis,  leptin  
sensitivity,  and insulin  resistance  Baseline and stimulated  
hormones  3 Tertiary  outcomes and  predictors  
 
Aim 1: To test effects  of GLP1RA  on hypothalamic obesity  prospectively.  
 
Sample:  Available  anthropometry  measures  will be  included  in the  analyses (see  also Fig. 1 below).  
 
Primary  outcome  analysis: For efficacy  analysis  the primary  outcome  is % change in BMI from week  0 
(baseline)  to 36 wk. A piecewise  (separating  the randomized  and run out phases)  linear mixed -effects  
mode l111 will be  fit with % change in BMI from baseline  to 36  wk as the outcome; treatment,  time,  and 
the interaction  between  treatment  and time  as factors of  interest;  and randomization stratification  
variables  (site,  age, and gender)  included as covariates. This model  is a generalization  of analysis  of 
covariance (ANCOVA)  that 
allows  all follow -up repeated  
measures  to be  included.  
Baseline  BMI will be  
considered  as an additional  
covariate.  A spatial  power  
within -subject  correlation  
matrix  will be  used to account  
for the correlated  repeated  
measures.  Separate  contrasts  
based  on the interaction  
between  treatment  and time will be used to specifically  test for a  significant  difference in % change  in 
BMI from baseline to 36  wk post - 
treatment  and 54 wk  (end of open  
label  extension). Additionally,  
descriptive summaries  will be  
prepared  for change  in BMI  z-score  to 
supplement  interpretation  of findings.  
Study  outcomes, their  use, and 
descriptive parameters  are in Tables  1 
& 2. Table  3 
 
Aim  
 
Outcome  Observed  Δ 
Exenatide  vs. 
Control  Observed  
pooled  Std. 
Dev.  Observed  
relative  
effect  size 
1 % ΔBMI  -4.29 3.84 -1.12 
1 Absolute  
ΔBMI  -1.74 1.25 -1.39 
2 ΔGlucose  
AUC  (per 100)  -29.36  26.44  -1.11 
2 ΔInsulin 
(mU/L)  -7.62 7.14 -1.07 
 Table  2. Additional  Descriptive  Parameters,  Predictors  and Covariates  used  in Study  
Measure  Domain  Instrument  Aim 
∆BMI,  ∆BMI z-score  Adiposity  Anthropometry  1 
Subjective  appetite  Hunger  and fullness rating  Visual analog scale  1 
Syst. &  diast.  BP CVD risk  factor,  MetS  Ambulatory  BP 2 
Exercise  Physical  activity  measure  Actigraphy  112,113 3 
Energy  intake  Energy  intake  24h dietary  recall  3 
Eating  behavior  Assessment  of overeating  
and food reward  Overeating (CEBQ),76 
& hyperphagia.77 3 
Brain lesion  score,  
hypothalamic region  and 
residual  lesion  volumes  Structural  lesion  in the 
pituitary -hypothalamic  area Brain  MRI images  3 
 
Page 10 of 35 
GLP-1 agonist effects  on energy  balance  in hypothalamic  obesity  
Protocol v. 10.0  7 November  2018   Sample size and power:  Table  3 shows  observed  relative effect  sizes in our  preliminary  study  for the 
between -treatment comparison of  change  from baseline to 3 mo (data from  previous  study22). Assuming  
a normal  distribution of changes,  a type I error  rate of 0.05,  and a dropout  rate of  up to 20%, a  sample  
size of 24  subjects  per group  (19 evaluable)  will provide  85% power to detect  relative  treatment  effect  
sizes of 1 or  greater  (in absolute value)  for % change in BMI,  which is consistent with the  preliminary  
data.  
 
Expected  result:  We expect  GLP1RA  treatment  will reduce  BMI (primary  efficacy  endpoint).  Further  
we expect  that GLP1RA  treatment  will reduce total  body  fat mass  and increase  satiety  (assessed  by 
hunger  VAS  as well as fat and total calorie intake  at free buffet  test meal).  
 
Aim 2: To determine effects  of GLP1RA  on cardiometabolic risk  factors. Secondary  outcomes  analysis:  
Secondary  outcomes  are change in the  following  metabolic CVD  risk factors: blood glucose,  
triglycerides,  HDL  cholesterol,  and hsCRP. All continuous secondary  efficacy  endpoints  will be  
analyzed  using  similar  repeated  measures analyses  to those  previously  described for the primary  
outcome  to examine  differences  in the  change in secondary  outcomes, one at time,  from  baseline to 36 
wk. Histograms  will be  examined, and if data are markedly  skewed  right,  log transformations  will be 
applied  prior  to analysis.  Measures  of insulin resistance and  insulin secretion will be  compared  from  
baseline to 18 and 36 wk to test whether  treatment  effects  are beneficial  during  the second  half of 
intervention.  Sample size and power:  Table 3 shows  observed  relative effect  sizes in our  preliminary  
study  for between treatment  comparison  of change  from  baseline to 3 mo (dataset  from  previous  
study22). Assuming  a normal distribution of changes,  a type I error  rate of 0.05,  and dropout  rate of up to  
20%,  a sample size of 24  subjects  per group  (19 evaluable)  will provide 85%  power  to detect  relative  
treatment  effect  sizes of  1 or greater  (in absolute  value)  for changes  in cardiometabolic  risk factors  in 
patients  with HO, which  is consistent with the  preliminary  study.  
 
Expected  results  and benchmarks  for success  (secondary  efficacy  endpoints): We  expect  that GLP1RA  
treatment  will lead to improved  metabolic CVD  risk factors  (higher  HDL;  lower blood pressure,  blood  
glucose,  hsCRP, and triglycerides).  
 
Aim 3: To exp lore additional  outcome  measures,  and predictors  of treatment  responses.  
3a: Test GLP1RA  treatment on energy  homeostasis. Sample:  All available  EE and energy  intake  
measures  from DLW  analyses  and ASA24 dietary  recalls  at 0 and 36 wk will be  included  in the  
analyses  (see Fig. 1). Tertiary  outcomes analysis:  The tertiary  outcomes are  change  in EE and energy  
intake from  baseline to 36 wk. Separate analyses  will be  conducted  for EE and energy  intake. For  
example  for EE, an ANCOVA will be used to model the  outcome  of change  in EE from  baseline to 36 
wk post-treatment  with treatment  as the factor  of interest  and Δ  BMI and Δ energy  intake included as 
covariates  as both might  affect  EE independently  of drug.  A similar  ANCOVA  will be used to model  
the outcome  of change in energy  intake  from  baseline  to 36 wk. Exploratory  analyses  will examine  the 
change of energy  intake  after 6 and 18 wk of  treatment to estimate  effect  sizes and  inform  the design of  
future studies.  
 
Sample size and power:  Assuming  a normal distribution of differences,  a type I error  of 0.05,  and a 
dropout  rate of up to 20%, a  final evaluable  sample size  of 19  subjects  per group  will provide  85% 
power  to detect  relative  changes  (average change  divided  by the pooled  standard deviation  (SD)  of the 
change)  in EE  in relation  to energy  intake or energy  intake in relation to EE of  approximately  1 between  
the two groups.  Based  on preliminary  pooled data from  Ambler114 and Eliakim115 et al., the observed  
Page 11 of 35 
GLP-1 agonist effects  on energy  balance  in hypothalamic  obesity  
Protocol v. 10.0  7 November  2018   pooled SDs of EE per DLW  measures were 162 kcal/d and 155 kcal/d, respectively.  Assuming  a 
moderate  correlation  between  baseline  and follow -up measures  (r=0.5),  this would correspond  to 
detectable differences  of one pooled SD, or  162 kcal/d and 155 kcal/d,  respectively.  Expected  results  
and benchmarks  for success (exploratory  efficacy  endpoints):  We expect  that GLP1RA  will lead to 
increased  EE adjusted  for Δ  BMI and Δ energy  intake.  
 
3b: Determine predictors  of GLP1RA  treatment  success.  Sample:  Pretreatment metabolic parameters  
and EE measures  from  DLW  analyses  (see Fig. 1), and all available  outcomes measures  will be  included  
in the  analyses  (collected  at 0 and 36 wk). Outcome measures and  exploratory  analyses:  Potential  
predictors  will be  considered  one at a time.  Potential predictors  include  a hypothalamic lesion score;  
hyperphagia;  EE; and the metabolic predictors  leptin, adiponectin,  sOB-R, α-MSH,  HOMA -IR, WBISI  
including  a leptin/Ob -R ratio.204  In addition  to examining  the relationship  between  the post -surgery  
lesion score (=standard  approach  for all subjects)  and the response to GLP1RA  treatment,  we will 
perform  a measurement study  using  high resolution  images  that would  allow  parcellation of  the 
hypothalamus  and surrounding  areas.  We expect  that we  will obtain images in the required  high 
resolution  quality  in a subgroup of patients  (50%;  n=24).  We will use these  images  for exploratory  
volumetric  as well as topographic  studies  and will test if lesion volume or  deficiencies  in certain  brain  
areas  are associated  with obesity  outcomes  or response  to treatment  using  analyses  similar  to those  
described  for lesion  score.  These  exploratory  measurement studies may be important  for generating  
future hypotheses.  A linear mixed -effects  model  will be fit with % change  in BMI  from  basel ine to 
follow -up as the outcome; treatment,  time,  the interaction  between  treatment and time,  the potential  
predictor,  and interactions between  the potential  predictor and treatment,  time and treatment  x time as 
factors  of interest.  Covariates and within -subject  correlation  matrix  are as described  for Specific  Aim 1.  
Exploratory  analyses  will examine  eating  behavior  and fat and total calorie  intake  as additional  
covariates.  A contrast  based on the interaction  between  the potential  predictor and treatment  x time will 
be used to estimate  the direction  and magnitude of the potential  predictor on treatment  response  at 36 
wk. Predictors  will be  standardized  to be unitless, dividing  by the SD to rank magnitudes  and compare  
across  predictors.  
 
Sample size and power:  For this exploratory  aim no formal  power calculations  are conducted. Analyses  
will focus  on the  direction  and magnitude of effects for  use in planning  future studies. Expected  results  
and interpretation:  We expect  the degree of % change in BMI reduction  (1) is positively  associated  with 
the degree of hyperphagia assessed  by CEBQ,  and (2) higher  energy  expenditure at  baseline;  (3) is  
negatively  associated  with insulin and leptin resistance  as measured  by WBISI,  HOMA -IR, and leptin at  
baseline,  and (4) is negatively  associated  with the  post-operative hypothalamic  lesion score (e.g.,  a 
higher  score indicating  greater  hypothalamic damage).  
 
5. SUBJECTS  
Subjects  
It is anticipated  approximately  16 participants  will be  treated  per year (5-6 per study  site) during  the first 
three  years  of the study.  We expect  to screen  80 subjects to get 48 subjects enrolled  and 38 to complete  
the study  (potential  dropout rate of rate of 20%).  Subjects  will be  between  the ages of 10 -25 y old at  
time of  enrollment  (11-27 y at end of intervention), and we expect  each patient to complete  the 56 week  
study.  
Page 12 of 35 
GLP-1 agonist effects  on energy  balance  in hypothalamic  obesity  
Protocol v. 10.0  7 November  2018   Recruitment  
We will recruit  patients  from the endocrinology  clinics at the  three sites, and will accept  referrals  from  
other  endocrine  providers.  We will be  advertising the study  to other  Pediatric Endocrinologists  through  
a secure message  board.  
 
Enrollment  
The PI at each site will screen  and consent/assent  subject  or designate  other qualified study  staff to do 
so. Qualified  participants  will start with a  2-week  placebo  run-in to test adherence to the  protocol.  
Immediately  afterwards,  subjects  will be  assigned  treatment  using  a permuted -block randomization  
(1:1)  with varying  block  sizes con structed by  the Children’s  Core for  Biomedical  Statistics (CCBS)  of 
Seattle  Children’s  Research  Institute (SCRI)  stratified  by study  site, two age  groups  (10-14y, 15-25y),  
and gender.  This is a double -blind  study  (participants and investigators  both blinded). The  study  
statistician  will be blinded as well;  a second  statistician not involved in the conduct  of the  study  will be  
responsible  for the final preparation  of the randomization scheme.  Only  the independent  CCBS  
statistician  and dispensing  pharmacy  at each site will know assigned  study  medications.  It is anticipated  
approximately  16 participants  will be  treated  per year (5-6 per study  site) during  the first three  years  of 
the study.  We expect  to screen  80 subjects to get 48 subjects  enrolled  and 38 to complete the  study  
(potential  dropout rate of rate of 20%).  As we  would expect  many  of these  participants  to be 
prepubertal  as they  have  hypogonadotropic  hypogonadism by virtue  of their disease,  pubertal  status  will 
not be used as an inclusion or  exclusion  criteria  for the study.  
 
Inclusion  Criteria  
 Age 10-25 years at  time of enrollment  
 Diagnosis  of hypothalamic obesity  with age - and sex adjusted  BMI ≥ 95% or BMI ≥30 kg/m2 
if over 18 y 
 History  of craniopharyngioma  or another tumor located in the hypothalamic area  
 Hypothalamic lesion documented by neuroradiology  
 6 months post-surgical  or radiation  treatment  
 Weight  stable  or increasing  over 3 months prior to screening  visit 
 Stable  hormone  replacement  for at least 3 months prior  to screening  visit 
 
Exclusion Criteria  
 Renal  impairment  (GFR<60  ml/min/1.73m2 using  the Schwarz formula116) 
 History  of gastroparesis;  pancreatitis  or gallstones  (unless  status  post cholecystectomy)  
 Family  history  of multiple  endocrine neoplasia  type 2 or familial  medullary  thyroid  carcinoma  
metabolic disorders  
 Any insulin -treated  diabetes mellitus,  poorly  controlled  type 2 diabetes (HbA1c  10%),  or any 
other  chronic  serious medical  conditions  such as CVD,  malignancy  or hematologic  disorder,  
complicated  syndromic  disorder, or  psychiatric  disorders  (schizophrenia,  major  depression,  
history  of suicide  attempts)  
 Calcitonin  >50 mg/L  at screening  
 Initiation  of weight  loss medications  within 3 months of screening  visit 
 Previous  donation  of blood >10%  of estimated  blood volume  within 3 months  prior  study  
 Current  warfarin  use 
 Current  use of  any other GLP1RA  
 Untreated  thyroid  disorder or  adrenal  insufficiency  
Page 13 of 35 
GLP-1 agonist effects  on energy  balance  in hypothalamic  obesity  
Protocol v. 10.0  7 November  2018    History  of bariatric  surgery  or planned  bariatric  surgery  until end of  study  
 Pregnancy,  lactation or expectation to conceive  during  study  period  
 Subject  unlikely  to adhere  to study  procedures  in opinion of  investigator  
 Subject  with contraindication  to neuroimaging  by MRI  
 
6. STUDY  PROCEDURES  
For the placebo -controlled portion  of the trial, each subject  will have  a screening  visit and 4 study  
visits  (weeks  0 [baseline],  6, 18, 36 [end of  randomized  trial]).  Week  36 will also mark  the 
beginning  of the  open  label  extension phase which  will continue until week  54. 
 
Screening  Visit:  The study  will be  explained to patients and their families  and written  consent/assent  
will be  obtained.  Medical  history  and concomitant  medications  will be documented.  Vital signs  will 
be recorded,  including  blood pressure,  heart rate, respiratory  rate and temperature.  Body  weight  
(lightly  clothed) and  height  will be measured  with a  calibrated  electronic scale and calibrated 
stadiometer.  Hip and waist  circumference  measurements  will be  completed. A physical  exam 
including Tanner  staging  will be  done.  This visit will  also include:  
 Blood  draw  for safety  labs (electrolytes,  CBC, lipase,  amylase,  glucose,  transaminases  (ALT,  
AST),  creatinine,  hemoglobin  A1c,  and thyroid hormones [TSH and free T4, or  in patients 
with panhypopituitarism,  free T4 only])  
o Blood  for carcinoembryonic  antigen  (CEA)  and calcitonin  samples  
 Blood  for DNA  extraction  will be  obtained  for genetic markers  (only  at select sites)  
 Urine  pregnancy  testing  (HCG)  will be  done  
 Instructions for 24h dietary  recall.  
 
Sexually  active  female  participants  are required  to use birth control,  unless they  have  documented  
gonadotropin  deficiency.  
 
Parents  and participants  (if appropriate)  will be taught  how to mix  and inject  the study  medication.  
Parents/participants  should perform  a return  demonstration  before mixing  the actual  study  medication.  
All teaching  will be  documented.  Prior  to leaving  the clinic,  parents/participants  will inject  the first 
dose of study  medication  under  supervision.  Dosing  will be  documented on the dosing  log.  
Participants  will be  dispensed  1 more vial of  study  medication (placebo)  to be  administered  at home  
the following  week.   The dose will be  identical  to the dosing  provided in the blinded portion  of the 
trial. 
 
Study  Visits  (SVs):  After  the initial screening  visit, there  will be  5 study  visits (see overview  and 
measures  in Fig. 1) to assess  adherence,  drug safety,  outcomes,  and to distribute  the drug  or placebo.  
Hypoglycemia medications will be adjusted  as needed.   During  the duration  of the treatment,  subjects  
with persistent  abdominal  pain and nausea/vomiting  will discontinue  study  medication  and be 
evaluated  for acute  pancreatitis  and cholecystitis.  In children,  most adverse  effects  are mild GI effects  
that are transient.117 Subjects  not tolerating  their current  dose will be discontinued  from  study  at PI’s 
discretion.  Study  medication  will resume if and only if no significant adverse  event is found and 
subjects  concur.  Subjects  need to fast and refrain  from  exercise  for ten hours  prior  to study  visits for  
fasting  blood draws.  Physical  exams including Tanner  staging,  and inspection  of injection  sites will 
be done  at all visits  (except  no Tanner  staging  at 6 weeks visit).  If a subject withdraws from the 
study or is withdrawn by an investigator for any reason, subjects will be asked to complete SV4 
study procedures, not incl uding the DEXA scan.   
Page 14 of 35 
GLP-1 agonist effects  on energy  balance  in hypothalamic  obesity  
Protocol v. 10.0  7 November  2018    
 
Other  measures  assessed  at SVs (see Fig. 1): 
 Questionnaires  (eating,  activity):  SVs 1, 3, 4,  
 24h dietary  recall -done the week prior to :  SVs 1, 3, 4, 5  
 Anthropometry:  SVs 1, 2, 3, 4, 5  
 Vital  signs:  SVs 1, 2, 3, 4, 5  
 Actimetry:  SVs 1, 3, 4  
 Blood  for metabolic outcomes: SVs 1, 3, 4, 5  
 OGTT:  SVs 1, 3, 4  
 Energy  intake  at free buffet  meal:  SVs 1, 4  
 Whole body  DEXA  in order to evaluate body  composition: SVs 1, 4  
 DLW  energy  balance  assessment:  SVs 1, 4  
 ECGs: SVs 1, 3, 4, and 5 
 Safety  labs (electrolytes,  CBC,  lipase,  amylase,  glucose,  ALT,  AST,  creatinine, hemoglobin  
A1c,  and thyroid hormones): SVs 2, 3, 4, 5  
o Additional  serum  will be obtained  at all sites and stored at a central  location (SCRI  
Seattle)  for future  use (3 ml in case anti-exenatide  antibodies  will need to be assessed)  
 CEA:  SVs 3, 4, 5  
 Calcitonin:  SV 5  
 MRI  (if needed):  SV 1  
 
Weekly Contact: Research  participants  will be  contacted  weekly  by telephone/email  to assess  for 
potential adverse  events,  concomitant  medications, and compliance  with dosing.   Participants  will also  
be reminded  about  their urine  collections,  diet recalls, and return  of the accelerometer  during  these  
phone  calls.  
Page 15 of 35 
GLP-1 agonist effects  on energy  balance  in hypothalamic  obesity  
Protocol v. 10.0  7 November  2018   
Randomization  
Recruitment
(3 Study
Centers)  
Placebo  
run-in
2 weeks  
 
 18-wk open  label  ext. 
 
 18-wk open  label  trt. Visit Schedule:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Screening  visit 
(-2 weeks,  non- 
fasting)  
• Medical  history  
• Physical  exam  
• Anthropometry  
• Safety  lab 
• CEA 
• Calcitonin  
• Consent/assent  
• MRI score  
• Injection  skills  Study  visit 1 
(0 weeks) : 
Physical  exam  
• Anthropometry  
• Questionnaires  
(activity,   eating)  
• 24h dietary  intake  Study  visit 2 
(6 weeks) : 
Physical  exam  
• Anthropometry  
• Adverse  
effects/adherence  
• Safety  lab Study  visit 3 
(18 weeks) : 
Physical  exam  
• Anthropometry  
• Questionnaires  
(activity,   eating)  
• 24h dietary  intake  
• Adverse  
effects/adherence  
• Safety  lab Study  visit 4 
(36 weeks) : 
Physical  exam  
• Anthropometry  
• Questionnaires  
(activity,   eating)  
• 24h dietary  intake  
• Adverse  
effects/adherence  
• Safety  lab Study  visit 5 
(54 weeks) : 
Physical  exam  
• Anthropometry  
• 24h dietary  intake  
• Adverse  
effects/adherence  
• Safety  lab 
• Actimetry  
• Metab.  outcomes  
• DEXA  
• OGTT  18 • 2H2O, H2   O 
• Free buffet  meal  
• ECG  
• Calcitonin  
• CEA 
• Metab.  outcomes  
• ECG • Actimetry  
• Metab.  outcomes  
• OGTT  
• CEA 
• ECG • Actimetry  
• Metab.  outcomes  
• DEXA  
• OGTT  
18 • 2H2O, H2   O 
• Free buffet  meal  
• CEA 
• ECG   
  
Fig. 1: Participant  flow and timing  of study  procedures  
(gray:  core procedures)  
7. RISKS/BENEFITS  
 
Potential Risks  
The subjects  participating  in this study  will be  exposed  to physical,  psychological,  and financial  risks.  
Participation  in all aspects  of the  research  will be  voluntary.  Subjects,  their parents  or their  legal  
guardians  will be advised  that they  can withdraw  without penalty  or refuse  participation  in any portion  
of the study  at any time.  Overall  there  are moderate risks to subjects.  There  is a risk of breach  of patient  
confidentiality.  
 
Potential risks to the  participants  enrolled  in the  study  include:  
 
1. Discomfort  from  hunger  due to 10h fasting  until 8:30 AM at four of the study  visits (week  0, 18,  
36, 54). 
2. Pain,  minor injury  (bruising),  nausea,  infection  or the development  of a localized inflammation  
(thrombophlebitis)  from  placement  of an intravenous  catheter  and obtaining  serial  blood  
samples.  Rarely  some  people faint.  
3. Loss of a small volume  of blood (16-20 ml at the screening  visit and  week  54 visits; 9 -13 ml at 
week  6 visit; and  32-36 ml per OGTT study  visit at weeks  0, 18,  and 36). 
4. Patients  will have a brain  MRI  if there  was no recent MRI within 6 months prior  to enrollment  in 
the study.  Potential risks from  the MRI  include  anxiety,  claustrophobic reactions  or discomfort  
due to high noise,  need to maintain a  fixed posture,  and/or  interference  between  unidentified  
metal  inside or  outside  the body  and the scanner.  The overall  safety  of MRI  is well established.  
All MRI  pulse sequences  used are within FDA  guidelines  for time-varying magnetic fields.  
Additionally,  echo -planar  imaging  (EPI)  conveys  the potential  for damage  to subjects'  hearing  as 
the EPI  gradients  produce  noise in the  120 dB  intensity  range.  Sound attenuating  headphone  
Page 16 of 35 
GLP-1 agonist effects  on energy  balance  in hypothalamic  obesity  
Protocol v. 10.0  7 November  2018   decrease the sound delivered  by 40 dB,  greatly  reducing  the intensity  of the  sound. Participants  
will be  able to hear verbal commands given  via the sound attenuating  headphones  that are at the 
volume  level  of conversational  speech.  
5. This research  study  involves  exposure  to very  low dose radiation  from  two DEXA  whole  body  
scans . Each DEXA exposes the patient t o the equivalent of less than one day of background 
radiation.  
6. There is a slight risk of skin irritation  during  an ECG from  the electrodes  or gel that is used.  
 
7. Participants  may find it bothersome  to answer  the investigator’s  questions.  
 
8. Discomfort,  significant  hyperglycemia,  nausea,  a reaction  or sensitivity  triggered  by the oral 
dextrose  solution. Discomfort,  nausea,  or a reaction from  an unidentified  food allergy  or 
sensitivity  to used study  foods.  
9. The DLW  tracer is made up of  the stable  isotopes  of hydrogen  (2H) and oxygen  (18O) and 
therefore does  not gives  out harmful  radiation.  These  stable isotopes are found naturally  in our  
drinking  water  and in our  bodies.  These isotopes  have been used extensively  to measure body  
composition  and energy  expenditure in premature  infants,  newborns,  toddlers, children,  
adolescents,  and pregnant and lactating  women with no adverse  effects.   The deuterium  oxide  
has been used across  the world  to measure  human  breast  milk intakes  in infants  from  newborns  
to 12 m onths of age.  The DLW  tracer in fact is cleaner  than any tap water and fountain  water.  
10. Risks associated  with the study  drug.  In this proposed study,  subjects will receive  weekly  
subcutaneous  injections  of placebo  or ExQW 2 mg starting  at week 0. ExQW may  hurt an 
unborn  child.  It can change the way warfarin  is metabolized.  Exenatide is FDA approved  for 
treatment  of people  with diabetes.  Because  the treatment in this study  is investigational,  there  
may be risks  that we  do not know about  at this time.  
In a recent  multicenter  study  including  461 adults  with T2DM treated  with ExQW for 26 weeks,  
61% of patients  had one or  more  adverse events  (AEs).31 Related  to 461 patients,  most frequent  
were  injection site reactions  (10%  injection -site nodule, 4%  subcutaneou s nodule, 3%  injection - 
site pruritus,  3% nodule,  2% injection -site erythema),  followed  by 9% developed nausea,  7% 
nasopharyngitis,  6% diarrhea,  6% headache,  5% decreased  appetite,  5% constipation, 4%  
vomiting  , 3% dizziness,  3% upper  respiratory -tract infection,  3% abdominal pain, 2%  
dyspepsia,  2% unexpected therapeutic  response,  and 2%  bronchitis.  These results  were  similar  to 
another  clinical  trial of adults with T2DM  treated  with ExQW up  to 2 years.37 Here  80% of 
subjects  reported  at least one AE, most frequently  nausea  (17%), injection  site nodule (12%)  and 
nasopharyngitis  (12%).  Overall  expected  AEs associated  with the GLP -1 agonist  ExQW may  
include:  
Page 17 of 35 
GLP-1 agonist effects  on energy  balance  in hypothalamic  obesity  
Protocol v. 10.0  7 November  2018   Gastrointestinal AEs:  The primary  limiting  factor  for using  GLP -1 agonists  in humans has been  
gastrointestinal  adverse events, in particular  nausea, vomiting,  diarrhea,  and constipation,  which  
occurred  primarily  during  the first 6 –8 weeks  of therapy  and declined  thereafter.  In the 
DURATION study  trials  the rates of gastrointestinal  adverse  events  associated with ExQW  
treatment  were  for nausea 9.3 -26.4%,  diarrhea  6.1-18%,  vomiting  3.7-11%,  and constipation  
4.6-10.8%.34,109  For example,  in a study  of non-diabetic patients,  25% experienced  nausea  of 
mild to moderate  severity.118 The severity  and incidence  of nausea  does decrease over  time.  
Pancreatic AEs:  Controversial  data exist regarding  the risk for developing  pancreatitis  during  
treatment  with GLP-1 agonists.119,120  A recent  integrated  safety  analysis  from 19 completed  
randomized  controlled  trials,  composite exposure -adjusted  incidence  rates for pancreatitis  
among  exenatide twice  daily  users (n=3,261)  and a pooled comparator  group  (n=2,333) were  not 
statistically  different.121 However,  the current  package  insert  recommends  that ExQ W be  
discontinued  immediately  if pancreatitis  is suspected.  
 
Risk for hypoglycemia:  In a 24-week  monotherapy  study  of exenatide in subjects with type 2 
diabetes,  there  was an approximately  5% incidence  of minor hypoglycemia.122 These episodes  
were  all treated  with oral glucose  and subjects  did not require  any assistance from  another  
person,  glucagon  or further  medical  attention.  The addition  of exenatide to metformin  therapy  
does not increase the risk of hypoglycemia.123 The overall  reported  rates for mild hypoglycemia  
were  0-5%; symptomatic  hypoglycemia has  not been seen in non -diabetic  patients treated  with 
exenatide.118,124 
Thyroid  AEs:  In rodents,  GLP-1 receptors  are expressed on thyroid  C-cells and administration  of 
GLP-1 agonists  can cause  an increase in calcitonin  levels  and C-cell hyperplasia. 125,126  In human  
and primate  tissue,  however,  few GLP-1 receptors  are expressed  on C -cells and GLP-1 agonists  
do not appear  to increase  calcitonin  levels  in vitro or  in vivo.127 Analysis  of over 5,000  subjects  
treated  with GLP-1 agonists and followed  for up to 2 years  did not reveal  a pattern  of calcitonin  
elevation  or increased  risk for C -cell hyperplasia  or medullary  thyroid carcinoma.128 Although  in 
humans there is no documentation of  such a relationship, we  will include  calcitonin measures  as 
safety  measures.128 Although   Exenatide does  not have an  official  FDA warning  for medullary  
thyroid  carcinoma,  Bydureon  has a boxed warning  for the  potential safety  concern  of thyroid  C- 
cell tumors  in animals  (clinical  correlate being  MTC).  
 
Kidney  AEs:  Exenatide is cleared  by glomerular  filtration.  There  have  been  post-marketing  
reports  of altered  renal  function in patients taking  exenatide.  It is not clear  whether  the alteration  
in renal  function  is due  to exenatide use, but the  FDA  recommends  that exenatide not be used in 
patients  with renal  impairment.  
Cardiovascular  AEs:  Exenatide may cause heart  rate to increase by about  3 beats  per minute.  It 
is not known if  this increase in heart rate causes  any harm.  In animal  models, heart  rate and 
blood pressure  were  increased  by GLP -1 agonists.  This effect  was thought  to be  due to increased  
sympathetic tone.129 In humans, however,  numerous studies have demonstrated  an improvement  
Page 18 of 35 
GLP-1 agonist effects  on energy  balance  in hypothalamic  obesity  
Protocol v. 10.0  7 November  2018   in blood pressure  with exenatide therapy.109,122,130  In one 30 week  trial of exenatide  versus  
placebo,  the between -group  difference was a 4.4 mmHg  reduction  in systolic blood pressure  and 
3.4 mmHg  in diastolic  blood pressure  for the exenatide  group.131 The same  study  did show a  
between -group  difference  in heart  rate with a 3 beat per  minute (95% CI,  0.8-5.2) increase in the  
exenatide group.131 The clinical  importance of the increased  heart rate is unknown. The long 
term effects  of exenatide  on cardiovascular  even ts are unknown. Change  of QT interval  was 
small and clinically  insignificant.  Intervention  over periods  of more  than 6  months has shown  
small favorable  effects  on cardiovascular  risk factors and  biomarkers,  i.e. reductions  from  
baseline in systolic  blood  pressure,  total cholesterol and low -density  lipoprotein cholesterol  
(LDL),  as well as triglycerides.  
Endocrine  AEs: A recent  study132 shows the GLP-1 receptor  agonist  Exendin -4 influences  the 
gonadal  axis, in both adult and prepubertal  female  rats. The effects  of GLP -1 administration  
were  on the hypothalamic  Kiss-1 system,  changed  the amplitude of gonadotropin  secretion,  and 
influenced  reproductive  efficiency  in female  rats. This effect  has not been reported  in humans.  
Allergic reactions  and injection  site reactions:  Some  people  will have mild skin redness,  itching  
or bruising at the site of medication  injection.31,38  Rarely,  the medication  can cause  an allergic  
reaction.  Antibody  formation does occur with exenatide, as is expected  with an injected  amino  
acid.133 The prevalence of antibody  formation  was 27-28%.122 Antibody  formation does not  
appear  to decrease medication effectiveness.123,134,135  There  has been one case report  of 
anaphylaxis  to exenatide administration.  The subject  was treated with epinephrine  and 
corticosteroids  and exenatide was  discontinued.  Injection  site reactions  are mild, include  
redness,  bruising  or pruritus, and occur in up to 10%  of subjects.136 
11. Lastly,  the financial  risks associated  with participating  in this study  are due to the  potential of  
any health information  being  disclosed to health or life insurance  companies or to current  or 
potential employers.  While  this is a  potentially  serious risk, it is very  unlikely,  as we will keep 
all personally  identifiable  informatio n physically  separate  from  all health information.  All 
information  will be on password -protected  computers,  or in locked  file cabinets  in locked  offices  
at the three study  centers.  
Methods to Minimize Risks  
Risks will be  minimized  in a manner  specific  to each procedure  referenced  above.  The risk to  
participants’  privacy  is minimal and every  effort  will be tak en to maintain  confidentiality.  Risks to  
participants  are minimized  by screening  and approaching  only patients who  qualify  or have shown  
interest  in being  in the  study  via advertisements.  The investigators  of the three  study  sites are 
experienced  in reviewing and obtaining consent  and assent.  All study  procedures  will be  performed  by 
staff experienced  with such protocols  and in pediatric research.  The main risk is breach  of patient  
confidentiality.  However, this risk is minimized  by keeping  paper records  in a locked  office,  and 
maintaining  computerized  records  in the password  protected  REDCap  database. Researchers  are trained  
in HIPAA privacy  regulations  and other  applicable privacy  policies.  No information will be released,  
nor will participation  in the research  be acknowledged,  to any party  except  where  compulsory  according  
Page 19 of 35 
GLP-1 agonist effects  on energy  balance  in hypothalamic  obesity  
Protocol v. 10.0  7 November  2018   to law or University  policy.  There  may be unknown or  unan ticipated  adverse  effects  from participation  
in this study  for which  the Principal  Investigators  and study  team will remain  observant.  
 
Any unanticipated  adverse  events  will be  reported  by the site  PI’s according  to applicable  IRB policy.  
The Principal  Investigators  are fully engaged  in the  actual  performance of the study  and this ensures  that 
adverse  events  would be  readily  known  and reported  by the Principal  Investigators.  As per the  Office  
for Human  Research Protections  (OHRP)  guidelines,  appropriate assent  and parental  consent will be  
obtained  in this study.  
 
Blood  draws:  The minimum amount of blood needed  for assays  will be  drawn. Blood  will be collected  
through  phlebotomy  (screening  and visits at weeks  6 and 54) or a small intravenous line (visits  at weeks  
0, 18, and 36) after anesthetizing  the skin with anesthetic cream.  Blood  draws during  study  visits at  
weeks  0, 18, and 36 (OGTT  tests),  require  a total amount  of 32-36 ml blood: 16-20 ml blood at baseline,  
and additionally,  4 blood  draws  of each 4 ml at 30, 60, 90, and 120 min after the oral glucose  load.  Lab 
parameters  at the screening  visit and study  visit 5  (36 weeks)  require each  16-20 ml blood, and 9-13 ml 
at study  visit 2 (6 weeks). Total  estimated  amount  of blood per subject  equals to  137-161 ml or less 
during  the whole  12-month study.  
 
Hyperglycemia:  The oral glucose  load (1.75  g/kg,  max. 75 g) can lead to significant  hyperglycemia.  All 
patients  will be  screened  for diabetes  before  the study  will be  started. Any patient  that meets  the criteria  
for diabetes  mellitus  will be excluded  from  the OGTT  and referred  to the  diabetes outpatient clinic  for 
treatment.  Any subject  with insulin -treated  diabetes  mellitus or poorly  controlled  type 2 diabetes will be 
excluded from  the study  (see exclusion criteria).  If patients  develop  diabetes during  the study,  
management  will be  coordinated with their primary  endocrinologist.  
 
Nausea  and abdominal  discomfort: Due  to the  transient nature  of the  abdominal  discomfort  and nausea  
related  to the  study  drug,  and in order  to prevent  self-imposed  drug holidays,  all patients  who 
experience nausea  or abdominal discomfort  are asked to contact  the study  team.  The PI at each site will 
personally  discuss appropriate therapy  for this self -limited side effect.  
 
Meals:  At weeks  0, 18  and 36, subjects  will have an OGTT  (9:00 -11:00  AM) in the fasting condition,  
which  will be  followed  at weeks  0 and 36 by a standardized  mixed meal  caloric preload  (macaroni  & 
cheese  at 11:00 AM)  and a free buffet  meal  (at 12:30 PM). The test meal  (macaroni  & cheese) will be 
followed  by an ad libitum buffet  meal  will be served consisting  of a wide  variety  of food items  and 
more  than 100%  of the  subject’s estimated  daily  calorie  requi rements. Children  will have access to the  
buffet  for 30 min., after which  calorie intake  and composition  of consumed  foods  will be measured  by 
weighing  back uneaten food. Subjects  will be  screened  for food allergies  and sensitivities.  In addition,  
all meals  will be  prepared  fresh  by the Clinical  Research  Center Nutrition Research  Kitchen,  and stored  
under  adequate  conditions. Duration  of fasting  is limited  to 9:00 AM, and subjects  can have  water.  
 
Neuroimaging:  All subjects  have  had previous brain MRI  scans  before  participation in this study.  
However,  all subjects  and their  parents  will be  fully informed  prior  to beginning  the study  about  the 
MRI  procedure  to reduce  anxiety.  Subjects in the MRI  magnet  will be able to talk to the experimenters  
at all times  during  the assessments,  and are monitored  by video. Should claustrophobia occur,  subjects  
will be  instructed  that they can communicate to the  MR technologist  if they  want  to stop the scan.  
Subjects  will have the option to discontinue  the experiment  at any time, and they will not be  
discouraged  from d oing so. There  are planned procedures  to minimize  potential risks of metal  
Page 20 of 35 
GLP-1 agonist effects  on energy  balance  in hypothalamic  obesity  
Protocol v. 10.0  7 November  2018   interference  with the  scanner  by training  the subjects and screening  them properly  before  they go into 
the MRI  scanning  room.  Subject  safety  requires  that all ferrous  materials  be excluded from  the 
immediate  environment  of the magnet.  Hence,  all subjects  will be  carefully  checked prior  to entering  the 
magnet  to make  sure that no metallic objects  remain on their person.  Every  subject  will be  screened  for 
the presence of metallic  objects.  Any potential subject  with contraindication  to neuroimaging  by MRI  
will be  excluded from  the study  at the time of eligibility  determination.  Participants  will be able to hear 
verbal  commands  given  via the  sound -attenuating  headphones  that are at the volume  level  of 
conversational  speech.  During  MR scanning,  the subjects  will be  monitored  by video  and audio.  If any 
problems  arise,  the study  will be  terminated  immediately.  Additionally,  the subjects  will be  given  a call 
button that can be used at any time to stop the study.  
 
The Principal  Investigators  will be accessible  to answer  questions  and relieve  anxiety  whenever  
possible. Subjects,  or their  parents/legal  guardians,  may withdraw at any time or  refuse to participate  in 
all or part of any procedure  without penalty.  Subjects,  or their  parents/legal  guardians,  will have  the 
option to discontinue the experiment  at any  time,  and they  will not be discouraged  from doing  so. 
 
Potential Benefits  
Individuals :  The subjects  will have a DEXA  scan which  provides  information  on their  bone  density  
and body  composition.  They  will receive information about their metabolism,  such as how many  
calories  they burn per day. All subjects  will receive  the study  medication  during  the second phase  of the 
study.  Subjects  receiving Exenatide may experience weight  loss. 
 
Society :  This research  will test a promising  drug intervention  in the  treatment  of hypothalamic obesity.  
Furthermore,  the proposed work  will help us understand the biological mechanisms  involved in the  
development  of hypothalamic  obesity.  CP tumors  are the most  common  suprasellar tumors of nonglial  
origin in children.137   Severe  obesity  is a major  risk factor  for CP-related  morbidity  and mortality.  The 
general  public will benefit in a substantial way  from an improved  understanding  of the etiology of  
obesity,  and in particular  of hypothalamic  obesity,  with the  potential to lessen  the burden  on individual  
suffering  as well as health care costs.  
 
Adverse  Events/Reporting  
Investigator Oversight  Responsibilities  
Day-to-day oversight of the  trial is provided by the Principal  Investigators,  Drs. Roth and Abuzzahab.  
Along  with Dr. Ashley  Shoemaker,  Drs. Roth and Abuzzahab  assure  that informed  consent  is obtained  
prior  to perfor ming  any research  procedures,  that all subjects  meet  eligibility  criteria,  and that the study  
is conducted  according  to the research  plan approved  by the three local  IRBs  (Seattle,  St. Paul,  
Vanderbilt).   Drs. Roth, Abuzzahab,  and Shoemaker  will review  all study  data,  all adverse  events (AEs),  
and any serious  adverse events (SAEs)  in real -time. All SAEs and dose-limiting  toxicities will be 
reported  to the  independent Data Monitoring  Committee  (DMC) and IRB according  to the  approved  
Data  and Safety  Monitoring  Plan.  
 
External  monitoring  for the study  is provided by the Institute of Translational  Health  Sciences  (ITHS)  
of the University  of Washington,  and includes  regular  onsite data monitoring  and regular  review  by the 
DMC (5 members),  and the study  team (i.e. Principal  Investigators  and co-investigator).  
 
 
 
Page 21 of 35 
GLP-1 agonist effects  on energy  balance  in hypothalamic  obesity  
Protocol v. 10.0  7 November  2018   Monitoring  Procedures  
Please see details outlined separate Data  and Safety  Monitoring  plan for adverse  events monitoring  and 
reviewing  as well as DMC meetings  and reporting for  this study.  
 
Adverse  events  are identified during  study  visits when potential AEs are assessed by clinical history  and 
by physical  examination  of the subject.  Each study  site will report  AEs to their IRBs  as well according  
to their IRB guidelines.  In addition,  all AEs are reported according  to Seattle Children’s  Hospital  IRB 
reporting  guidelines.  
 
Serious  adverse  events  and dose-limiting  toxicities  are submitted within  one day of learning  of the event  
to the  IDMC  via the REDCap  SAE reporting  system.  Serious  adverse events will be  listed by  organ  
system  using  the Medical  Dictionary  for Regulatory  Activities (MedDRA) system.  Study  data and study  
conduct  reports are prepared  by the study  statistician  and include  accrual,  drop-outs, protocol  
deviations,  and AEs in aggregate.  These  reports, including  safety  lab measures,  SAEs and dose-limiting  
toxicities will be provided  to the  IDMC  and the  study  team on a semi-annual  basis for  review.  
 
Monitoring  Reports  
The DMC provides  a written report  to the  study  team with recom mendations  for study  modification,  
study  continuation/discontinuation  as relevant.  The study  team  is responsible  for forwarding  the report  
to the  IRB. 
 
Performance,  Safety, and  Treatment  Issues  
A report  will be generated  semi -annually  by the study  statistician  and submitted to the DMC  and study  
team.  This report  will include performance information including  participant recruitment  and retention,  
study  conduct, data  collection,  quality  control,  and completion,  and protocol adherence.  This report  will 
also include  safety  information, including  any adverse  events or dose -limiting  toxicities. The  report  will 
also include  results  from  treatment  integrity/fidelity  assessments  to ensure  the adequate  and consistent  
provision  of treatment.  
 
Collection  and Reporting  of SAEs  and AEs 
For this study,  the following  standard AE definitions are used:  
 
Adverse  event:   Any unfavorable  and unintended  sign (including  an abnormal laboratory  finding),  
symptom  or disease temporally  associated  with the use of a medic al treatment  or procedure,  regardless  
of whether  it is considered related  to the  medical treatment  or procedure.  
 
Serious  Adverse  Event:  Any  AE that results  in any  of the following  outcomes:  
• Death  
• Life-threatening  
• Event  requiring  inpatient  hospitalization  or prolongation  of existing  hospitalization  
• Persistent  or significant  disability/incapacity  
 
AE grading and  attribution  scale : As outlined  in Data Safety  and Monitoring  Plan.  
 
AE Management: See details in Data Safety  and Monitoring  Plan.  
Page 22 of 35 
GLP-1 agonist effects  on energy  balance  in hypothalamic  obesity  
Protocol v. 10.0  7 November  2018   Emergency  Unblinding . In case of drug-related  SAEs and treatment -emergent  adverse events  (TEAEs)  
the Principal  Investigators  will be  contacted  immediately  to contact the DMC (see data  safety  and 
monitoring  plan)  and consider  the need  to break  the blind.  
 
 
8. ADMINISTRATIVE  PROCEDURES  
Patient  Confidentiality  
A database  will be  designed for  this study  using  REDCap  (Research  Electronic  Data Capture)  tools  
hosted  at the Institute of Translational  Health Sciences  of which  Seattle Children’s  and University  of 
Washington  are partners. REDCap  is a secure,  web-based  application  designed  to support data capture  
for research  studies, providing  validated  data entry,  audit  trails,  seamless  data downloads  to common  
statistical  packages,  and mechanisms  for importing  data from  external  sources.138 It will reside  on a 
secure server with access  provided  exclusively  to the research  personnel.  Access  will be tailored  for 
specific  roles  to maintain  blinding.  Subjects  will be  identified  with a study  identification  number.  A key 
to the  subject  identification  number  will be  kept in a separate  locked file  drawer to which  only the 
research  coordinators  have access.  Reports  will thereby  be generated  without PHI  data and access  will 
be restricted  so that statisticians,  etc. don’t  have  access  to all data.  
 
Privacy  and Confidentiality  
Risk of leakage of PHI is minimized  by keeping  paper records  in a locked  cabinet  and maintaining  
computerized  records  in the password  protected  REDCap data base.  Researchers  are trained in HIPAA  
privacy  regulations.  The study  results  will be  kept for at  least six years  after the  study  is finished.  
The subjects  consent  to use  or share PHI does not expire.  If a subject  changes  their mind, we  ask that 
they contact  Drs. Christian Roth,  Jennifer  Abuzzahab,  or Ashley  Shoemaker  in writing  to withdraw  
consent.  
Page 23 of 35 
GLP-1 agonist effects  on energy  balance  in hypothalamic  obesity  
Protocol v. 10.0  7 November  2018   Appendix: Checklists  and questionnaires  used  in the study  
 
Child  Activity  Checklist  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ACTIVITY   
 
No  
 
Yes How 
many  
days in 
last 7 
days?  On average,  how 
many  minutes  did 
you do this activity  
each  day? 
Leisure Activity      
1. Computer  /Internet  0 1    
days   minutes  
2. Video  games  0 1    
days   minutes  
3. Homework,  studying,  work  brought  
home  0 1    
days   minutes  
4. Reading  (not for school or work)  0 1    
days   minutes  
5. Sitting  and talking with friends  (not on 
phone)  0 1    
days   minutes  
6. Listening  to music  0 1    
days   minutes  
7. Talking  on the phone  0 1    
days   minutes  
8. Television  or video watching  0 1    
days   minutes  
9. Other  (specify):  0 1    
days   minutes  
10. Other  (specify):  0 1    
days   minutes  This part of the  survey is about your activities  over the past 7 days, not including  time you  might  
spend doing these  activities  at school or work.  
 
There  are no right or wrong  answers.  No one  does all these  activities.  Please  be as accurate and  
honest  as possible.  For  each  activity listed, answer  three  questions:  
1. Did you do this activity  in the  past 7 days?   Circle  yes or no.  
2. If yes, on how many  days did you do the  activity in the past 7 days?  
3. On average, how many  minutes did you do the activity on the  days that you did it?  
Page 24 of 35 
GLP-1 agonist effects  on energy  balance  in hypothalamic  obesity  
Protocol v. 10.0  7 November  2018   Child  Eating  Behavior  Questionnaire  (CEBQ)  
Please read  the following statements  and tick the boxes most appropriate  to your child’s  eating  
behavior.  
  
Never   
Rarely   
Some  
times   
Often   
Always  
 
My child  loves food   
□  
□  
□  
□  
□ 
 
My child  eats more  when worried   
□  
□  
□  
□  
□ 
 
My child  has a big appetite   
□  
□  
□  
□  
□ 
 
My child  finishes  his/her  meal  quickly   
□  
□  
□  
□  
□ 
 
My child  is interested  in food   
□  
□  
□  
□  
□ 
 
My child  is always  asking  for a drink   
□  
□  
□  
□  
□ 
 
My child  refuses  new foods  at first   
□  
□  
□  
□  
□ 
 
My child  eats slowly   
□  
□  
□  
□  
□ 
 
My child  eats less when  angry   
□  
□  
□  
□  
□ 
 
My child  enjoys  tasting  new foods   
□  
□  
□  
□  
□ 
 
My child  eats less when  s/he is tired   
□  
□  
□  
□  
□ 
 
My child  is always  asking  for food   
□  
□  
□  
□  
□ 
 
My child  eats more  when annoyed   
□  
□  
□  
□  
□ 
 
If allowed  to, my child  would  eat too  much   
□  
□  
□  
□  
□ 
 
My child  eats more  when anxious   
□  
□  
□  
□  
□ 
 
My child  enjoys  a wide variety  of foods   
□  
□  
□  
□  
□ 
 
My child  leaves  food on  his/her plate  at the end  of 
a meal   
□  
□  
□  
□  
□ 
 
My child  takes  more than 30 minutes  to finish  a 
meal   
□  
□  
□  
□  
□ 
Page 25 of 35 
GLP-1 agonist effects  on energy  balance  in hypothalamic  obesity  
Protocol v. 10.0  7 November  2018    
  
Never   
Rarely   
Some 
times   
Often   
Always  
 
Given  the choice,  my child would eat most of the  
time  
□  
□  
□  
□  
□ 
 
My child  looks forward  to mealtimes   
□  
□  
□  
□  
□ 
 
My child  gets full before  his/her  meal  is finished   
□  
□  
□  
□  
□ 
 
My child  enjoys  eating   
□  
□  
□  
□  
□ 
 
My child  eats more when  she is happy   
□  
□  
□  
□  
□ 
 
My child  is difficult  to please with meals   
□  
□  
□  
□  
□ 
 
My child  eats less when  upset   
□  
□  
□  
□  
□ 
 
My child  gets full up easily   
□  
□  
□  
□  
□ 
 
My child  eats more when  s/he has nothing  else to do  
□  
□  
□  
□  
□ 
 
Even  if my child  is full up s/he  finds  room to eat 
his/her  favorite food   
□  
□  
□  
□  
□ 
 
If given  the chance, my child would drink  
continuously  throughout  the day  
□  
□  
□  
□  
□ 
 
My child  cannot eat a meal if s/he  has had a snack  
just before   
□  
□  
□  
□  
□ 
 
If given  the chance, my child would always  be 
having  a drink   
□  
□  
□  
□  
□ 
 
My child  is interested  in tasting  food s/he hasn’t  
tasted  before   
□  
□  
□  
□  
□ 
 
My child  decides that s/he doesn’t  like a food,  even  
without tasting  it  
□  
□  
□  
□  
□ 
 
If given  the chance, my child would always  have  
food in his/her  mouth   
□  
□  
□  
□  
□ 
My child  eats more and  more  slowly  during  the 
course  of a meal   
□  
□  
□  
□  
□ 
Page 26 of 35 
GLP-1 agonist effects  on energy  balance  in hypothalamic  obesity  
Protocol v. 10.0  7 November  2018   

Page 27 of 35 
GLP-1 agonist effects  on energy  balance  in hypothalamic  obesity  
Protocol v. 10.0  7 November  2018   

Page 28 of 35 
GLP-1 agonist effects  on energy  balance  in hypothalamic  obesity  
Protocol v. 10.0  7 November  2018   Hyperphagia  Questionnaire  
 
 
(1) How  upset  does your child  generally  become when denied  a desired food?  
 
  Not particularly  upset at all 
  A little  upset  
  Somewhat  upset  
  Very  upset  
  Extremely  upset  
 
(2) How  often  does your child try  to bargain  or manipulate  to get more  food at meals?  
 
  A few times  a year 
  A few times  a month  
  A few times  a week  
  Several  times  a week  
  Several  times  a day  
 
(3) Once  your child  has food on their  mind, how easy  is it for  you or others to re -direct  your child  
away  from food to other things?  
 
  Extremely  easy,  takes minimal  effort  to do so  
  Very  easy,  takes  just a little effort  to do so  
  Somewhat  hard,  takes some  effort  to do so  
  Very  hard, takes  a lot of work  to do so  
  Extremely  hard,  takes sustained  and hard work to do so  
 
(4) How  often  does your child forage through the trash for food?  
 
  Never  
  A few times  a year 
  1–2 times a  month  
  1–3 times a  week  
  4 to 7 times a  week  
 
(5) How  often  does your child get up at night  to food seek?  
 
  Never  
  A few nights  a year 
  1–2 nights  a month  
  1–3 nights  a week  
  4 to 7 nights  a week  
 
 
 
 
 
Page 29 of 35 
GLP-1 agonist effects  on energy  balance  in hypothalamic  obesity  
Protocol v. 10.0  7 November  2018    
(6) How  persistent  is your child in asking  or looking for  food after being  told “no”  or “no more”?  
 
  Lets go of food ideas  quickly  and easily  
  Lets go of food ideas  pretty  quickly  and easily  
  Somewhat  persistent  with food ideas  
  Very  persistent with food ideas  
  Extremely  persistent  with food ideas  
 
 
(7) Outside  of normal  meal  times,  how much time  does your child  spend  talking  about  food or 
engaged  in food-related  
behaviors?  
 
  Less than 15 minutes a  day 
  15 to 30 minutes  a day  
  30 minutes to an  hour 
  1 to 3 hours a  day 
  more  than 3 hours  a day 
 
(7) How  often  does your child try  to steal food (that you are aware  of?) 
 
  A few times  a year 
  A few times  a month  
  A few times  a week  
  Several  times  a week  
  Several  times  a day  
 
(8) When others  try to stop  your child  from  talking about food or  engaging  in food-
related  behaviors,  it generally  leads to:  
 
  No distress  or upset  
  Mild distress  or upset  
  Moderate  distress  or upset  
  Severe  distress  or upset  
  Extreme  distress,  behaviors  can’t  usually  be stopped  
 
(9) How  clever  or fast is  your child  in obtaining  food?  
 
  Not particularly  clever or  fast 
  A little  clever  or fast 
  Somewhat  clever  or fast 
  Very  clever  or fast 
  Extremely  clever  of fast 
 
 
 
 
Page 30 of 35 
GLP-1 agonist effects  on energy  balance  in hypothalamic  obesity  
Protocol v. 10.0  7 November  2018    
 
 
 
(11) To what  extent to food-related  thoughts,  talk, or behavior  interfere with your child’s  norma l daily  
routines,  self-care,  
school,  or work?  
 
  No interference  
  Mild interference;  occasional  food-related  interference in completing  school, work,  or hygiene task 
 Moderate  interference;  frequent  food-related  interference in completing  school,  work, or  hygiene  
tasks  
  Severe  interference;  almost daily  food-related  interference in completing  school,  work, or  hygiene  
tasks  
  Extreme  interference,  often  unable  to participate  in hygiene tasks or  to get to school  or work  due to 
food-related  difficulties  
Page 31 of 35 
GLP-1 agonist effects  on energy  balance  in hypothalamic  obesity  
Protocol v. 10.0  7 November  2018   References  
 
1. Muller  HL. Childhood  craniopharyngioma.  Recent  advances  in diagnosis,  treatment  and follow - 
up. Horm  Res 2008;69:193 -202. 
2. Muller  HL, Emser  A, Faldum  A, et al. Longitudinal  study  on growth  and body  mass  index  
before  and after diagnosis  of childhood  craniopharyngioma.  J Clin Endocrinol  Metab  2004;89:3298 - 
305. 
3. Ostrom  QT, Gittleman  H, Farah  P, et al. CBTRUS  statistical  report:  Primary  brain  and central  
nervous  system  tumors  diagnosed  in the United  States  in 2006 -2010.  Neuro  Oncol  2013;15  Suppl  2:ii1- 
56. 
4. Srinivasan  S, Ogle  GD, Garnett  SP, Briody  JN, Lee JW, Cowell  CT. Features  of the metabolic  
syndrome  after childhood craniopharyngioma.  J Clin Endocrinol  Metab  2004;89:81 -6. 
5. Simoneau -Roy J, O'Gorman  C, Pencharz  P, Adeli  K, Daneman  D, Hamilton  J. Insulin  sensitivity  
and secretion  in children  and adolescents  with hypothalamic  obesity  following  treatment  for 
craniopharyngioma.  Clin Endocrinol  (Oxf)  2010;72:364 -70. 
6. Mong  S, Pomeroy  SL, Cecchin  F, Juraszek  A, Alexander  ME. Cardiac  risk after 
craniopharyngioma therapy.  Pediatr  Neurol  2008;38:256 -60. 
7. Erfurth  EM. Endocrine  aspects  and sequel  in patients  with craniopharyngioma.  J Pediatr  
Endocrinol  Metab  2015;28:19 -26. 
8. Olsson  DS, Andersson  E, Bryngelsson  IL, Nilsson  AG, Johannsson  G. Excess  mortality  and 
morbidity  in patients  with craniopharyngioma,  especially  in patients  with childhood  onset:  a population - 
based  study  in sweden. J  Clin Endocrinol  Metab  2015;100:467 -74. 
9. Van Gaal LF, Mertens  IL, De Block  CE. Mechanisms  linking  obesity  with cardiovascular  
disease.  Nature 2006;444:875 -80. 
10. Greenway  FL, Bray  GA. Treatment  of hypothalamic  obesity  with caffeine  and  ephedrine.  
Endocr  Pract  2008;14:697 -703. 
11. Hamilton  JK, Conwell  LS, Syme  C, Ahmet  A, Jeffery  A, Daneman  D. Hypothalamic  Obesity  
following  Craniopharyngioma  Surgery:  Results  of a Pilot  Trial  of Combined  Diazoxide  and Metformin  
Therapy.  Int J Pediatr Endocrinol 2011;2011:417949.  
12. Bereket  A, Kiess  W, Lustig  RH, et al. Hypothalamic  obesity  in children.  Obes  Rev 2012;13:780 - 
98. 
13. Lustig  RH. Hypothalamic  obesity  after craniopharyngioma:  mechanisms,  diagnosis,  and 
treatment.  Front Endocrinol  (Lausanne)  2011;2:60.  
14. Lustig  RH. Hypothalamic  obesity:  causes,  consequences,  treatment.  Pediatr  Endocrinol  Rev 
2008;6:220 -7. 
15. Lustig  RH, Hinds  PS, Ringwald -Smith  K, et al. Octreotide  therapy  of pediatric  hypothalamic  
obesity:  a double -blind, placebo -controlled  trial. J Clin Endocrinol  Metab  2003;88:2586 -92. 
16. Danielsson  P, Janson  A, Norgren  S, Marcus  C. Impact  sibutramine  therapy  in children  with 
hypothalamic obesity  or obesity  with aggravating syndromes.  J Clin Endocrinol  Metab  2007;92:4101 -6. 
17. Mason  PW, Krawiecki  N, Meacham  LR. The use of dextroamphetamine  to treat obesity  and 
hyperphagia  in children treated  for craniopharyngioma.  Arch  Pediatr  Adolesc  Med 2002;156:887 -92. 
18. Ismail  D, O'Connell  MA, Zacharin  MR. Dexamphetamine  use for management  of obesity  and 
hypersomnolence  following  hypothalamic injury.  J Pediatr Endocrinol  Metab 2006;19:129 -34. 
19. Roth  CL. Hypothalamic  obesity  in patients  with craniopharyngioma:  profound  changes  of 
several  weight regulatory  circuits.  Front  Endocrinol (Lausanne)  2011;2:49.  
20. Elfers  CT, Simmons  JH, Roth  CL. Glucagon -like peptide -1 agonist  exendin -4 leads  to reduction  
of weight  and caloric intake  in a rat model  of hypothalamic  obesity.  Horm  Res Paediatr 2012;78:47 -53. 
Page 32 of 35 
GLP-1 agonist effects  on energy  balance  in hypothalamic  obesity  
Protocol v. 10.0  7 November  2018   21. Simmons  JH, Shoemaker  AH, Roth  CL. Treatment  with glucagon -like Peptide -1 agonist  
exendin -4 in a patient  with hypothalamic  obesity  secondary  to intracranial  tumor.  Horm  Res Paediatr  
2012;78:54 -8. 
22. Kelly  AS, Rudser  KD, Nathan  BM, et al. The effect  of glucagon -like peptide -1 receptor  agonist  
therapy  on body  mass  index  in adolescents  with severe  obesity:  a randomized,  placebo -controlled,  
clinical  trial. JAMA  Pediatr  2013;167:355 -60. 
23. Ottney  A. Glucagon -like peptide -1 receptor  agonists  for weight  loss in adult  patients  without  
diabetes.  American  journal of health -system  pharmacy  : AJHP : official  journal of  the American  Society  
of Health -System  Pharmacists  2013;70:2097 -103. 
24. Secher  A, Jelsing  J, Baquero  AF, et al. The arcuate  nucleus  mediates  GLP -1 receptor  agonist  
liraglutide -dependent  weight  loss. J  Clin Invest  2014;124:4473 -88. 
25. Bloom  S, Wynne K, Chaudhri O. Gut feeling --the secret  of satiety?  Clin Med 2005;5:147 -52. 
26. Bojanowska  E. Physiology  and pathophysiology  of glucagon -like peptide -1 (GLP -1): the role of 
GLP-1 in the  pathogenesis of diabetes  mellitus,  obesity,  and stress. Med Sci Monit 2005;11:RA271 -8. 
27. Gutzwiller  JP, Degen  L, Heuss  L, Beglin ger C. Glucagon -like peptide  1 (GLP -1) and eating.  
Physiology  & behavior 2004;82:17 -9. 
28. Ma X, Bruning  J, Ashcroft  FM. Glucagon -like peptide  1 stimulates  hypothalamic  
proopiomelanocortin  neurons. J  Neurosci  2007;27:7125 -9. 
29. Vilsboll  T, Christensen  M, Junker  AE, Knop  FK, Gluud  LL. Effects  of glucagon -like peptide -1 
receptor  agonists  on weight  loss: systematic  review  and meta -analyses  of randomised  controlled  trials.  
BMJ  2012;344:d7771.  
30. Gedulin  BR, Nikoulina  SE, Smith  PA, et al. Exenatide  (exendin -4) improves  insulin  sensitivity  
and {beta} -cell mass  in insulin -resistant  obese  fa/fa Zucker  rats independent  of glycemia  and body  
weight.  Endocrinology  2005;146:2069 -76. 
31. Buse  JB, Nauck  M, Forst  T, et al. Exenatide  once  weekly  versus  liraglutide  once  daily  in 
patients  with type 2 diabetes  (DURATION -6): a randomised,  open -label  study.  Lancet  2013;381:117 - 
24. 
32. Aroda  VR, Ratner  R. The safety  and tolerability  of GLP -1 receptor  agonists  in the treatment  of 
type 2 diabetes: a  review.  Diabetes  Metab Res Rev  2011;27:528 -42. 
33. Pinelli  NR, Hurren  KM. Efficacy  and safety  of long-acting  glucagon -like peptide -1 receptor  
agonists  compared  with exenatide  twice  daily  and sitagliptin  in type 2 diabetes  mellitus:  a systematic  
review and  meta -analysis. Ann Pharmacother  2011;45:850 -60. 
34. Stolar MW,  Grimm  M, Chen  S. Comparison  of extended  release  GLP -1 receptor  agonist  therapy  
versus  sitagliptin  in the  management  of type 2 diabetes. Diabetes  Metab  Syndr  Obes  2013;6:435 -44. 
35. Senda  M, Ogawa  S, Nako  K, Okamura  M, Sakamoto  T, Ito S. The glucagon -like peptide -1 
analog  liraglutide  suppresses  ghrelin  and controls  diabetes  in a patient  with Prader -Willi  syndrome.  
Endocr  J 2012;59:889 -94. 
36. Linnebjerg  H, Kothare  PA, Skrivanek  Z, et al. Exenatide:  effect  of injection time on postprandial  
glucose  in patients with Type 2 diabetes. Diabet  Med 2006;23:240 -5. 
37. Norwood  P, Liutkus  JF, Haber  H, Pintilei  E, Boardman  MK, Trautmann  ME. Safety  of 
exenatide  once  weekly  in patients  with type 2 diabetes  mellitus  treated  with a thiazolidinedione  alone  or 
in combination with metformin  for 2 years.  Clin Ther 2012;34:2082 -90. 
38. Inagaki  N, Atsumi  Y, Oura  T, Saito  H, Imaoka  T. Efficacy  and safety  profile  of exenatide  once 
weekly  compared  with insulin  once  daily  in Japanese  patients  with type 2 diabetes  treated  with oral 
antidiabetes  drug(s):  results  from  a 26-week,  randomized,  open -label,  parallel -group,  multicenter,  
noninferiority  study. Clin Ther  2012;34:1892 -908 e1. 
Page 33 of 35 
GLP-1 agonist effects  on energy  balance  in hypothalamic  obesity  
Protocol v. 10.0  7 November  2018   39. Jensterle  M, Kocjan  T, Kravos  NA, Pfeifer  M, Janez  A. Short -term intervention  with liraglutide  
improved  eating  behavior in obese women  with polycystic ovary  syndrome.  Endocr  Res 2014:1 -6. 
40. Jensterle  Sever  M, Kocjan  T, Pfeifer  M, Kravos  NA, Janez  A. Short -term combined  treatment  
with liraglutide  and metformin  leads  to significant  weight  loss in obese  women  with polycystic  ovary  
syndrome  and previous poor  response  to metformin. Eur  J Endocrinol  2014;170:451 -9. 
41. Feng  P, Yu DM, Chen  LM, et al. Liraglutide  reduces  the body  weight  and waist  circumference  
in Chinese  overweight  and obese type 2 diabetic patients. Acta pharmacologica Sinica 2015;36:200 -8. 
42. Shao  Y, Yuan  G, Feng  Y, Zhang  J, Guo X. Early  liraglutide  treatment  is better  in glucose  
control,  beta-cell function improvement  and mass  preservation  in db/db mice.  Peptides  2014;52:134 -42. 
43. Russo  GT, Labate  AM, Giandalia  A, et al. Twelve -month  treatment  with Liraglutide  ameliorates  
Visceral  Adiposity  Index  and common  cardiovascular  risk factors  in type 2 diabetes  outpatients.  J 
Endocrinol  Invest  2014.  
44. Inoue  K, Maeda  N, Fujishima  Y, et al. Long -term impact  of liraglutide,  a glucagon -like peptide - 
1 (GLP -1) analogue,  on body  weight  and glycemic  control  in Japanese  type 2 diabetes:  an observational  
study.  Diabetol Metab  Syndr 2014;6:95.  
45. Iglesias  P, Civantos  S, Vega  B, Pavon  I, Guijarro  G, Monereo  S. Clinical  Effectiveness  of 
Exenatide in Diabetic Patients  Waiting  for Bariatric Surgery.  Obes Surg 2015.  
46. Flint  A, Raben  A, Ersboll  AK, Holst  JJ, Astrup  A. The effect  of physiological  levels  of 
glucagon -like peptide -1 on appetite,  gastric  emptying,  energy  and substrate  metabolism  in obesity.  Int J 
Obes  Relat  Metab  Disord  2001;25:781 -92. 
47. Bradley  DP, Kulstad  R, Racine  N, Shenker  Y, Meredith  M, Schoeller  DA. Alterations  in energy  
balance  following exenatide  administration.  Appl Physiol  Nutr Metab  2012;37:893 -9. 
48. Pannacciulli  N, Bunt  JC, Koska  J, Bogardus  C, Krakoff  J. Higher  fasting  plasma  concentrations  
of glucagon -like peptide  1 are associated  with higher  resting  energy  expenditure  and fat oxidation  rates  
in humans.  Am J  Clin Nutr 2006;84:556 -60. 
49. Flint  A, Raben  A, Rehfeld  JF, Holst  JJ, Astrup  A. The effect  of glucagon -like peptide -1 on 
energy  expenditure  and substrate  metabolism  in humans.  Int J Obes  Relat  Metab  Disord  2000;24:288 - 
98. 
50. Kelly  AS, Metzig AM, Rudser  KD, et al. Exenatide  as a weight -loss therapy  in extreme  pediatric  
obesity:  a randomized,  controlled pilot study.  Obesity  (Silver  Spring)  2012;20:364 -70. 
51. The fourth  report  on the diagnosis,  evaluation,  and treatment  of high blood  pressure  in children  
and adolescents . Pediatrics  2004;114:555 -76. 
52. Flynn  JT, Mitsnefes  M, Pierce  C, et al. Blood  pressure in  children  with chronic  kidney  disease:  a 
report  from  the Chronic  Kidney  Disease in Children study.  Hypertension  2008;52:631 -7. 
53. Cohen  M, Syme  C, McCrindle  BW, Hamilton  J. Autonomic  nervous  system  balance  in children  
and adolescents  with craniopharyngioma  and hypothalamic  obesity.  Eur J  Endocrinol  2013;168:845 -52. 
54. Harz  KJ, Muller  HL, Waldeck  E, Pudel  V, Roth  C. Obesity  in patients  with craniopharyngioma:  
assessment  of food intake  and movement  counts  indicating  physical  activity.  J Clin Endocrinol  Metab  
2003;88:5227 -31. 
55. Holmer  H, Pozarek  G, Wirfalt  E, et al. Reduced  energy  expenditure  and impaired  feeding - 
related  signals  but not high energy  intake  reinforces  hypothalamic  obesity  in adults  with childhood  
onset craniopharyngioma.  J Clin Endocrinol  Metab  2010;95:5395 -402. 
56. Kim RJ, Shah  R, Tershakovec  AM, et al. Energy  expenditure  in obesity  associated  with 
craniopharyngioma.  Childs  Nerv  Syst 2010;26:913 -7. 
57. Butte  NF, Wong  WW,  Adolph  AL, Puyau  MR, Vohra  FA, Zakeri  IF. Validation  of cross - 
sectional  time series  and multivariate  adaptive  regression  splines  models  for the prediction  of energy  
expenditure in children  and adolescents  using  doubly  labeled  water.  J Nutr 2010;140:1516 -23. 
Page 34 of 35 
GLP-1 agonist effects  on energy  balance  in hypothalamic  obesity  
Protocol v. 10.0  7 November  2018   58. Schoeller  DA. Validation  of habitual  energy  intake. Public  Health  Nutr 2002;5:883 -8. 
59. Treuth  MS, Butte  NF, Wong  WW.  Effects  of familial  predisposition  to obesity  on energy  
expenditure in multiethnic  prepubertal  girls.  Am J Clin Nutr  2000;71:893 -900. 
60. Roberts  SB, Coward  WA,  Ewing  G, Savage  J, Cole  TJ, Lucas  A. Effect  of weaning  on accuracy  
of doubly  labeled water  method in infants.  Am J Physiol  1988;254:R622 -7. 
61. Butte  NF, Wong  WW,  Ferlic  L, Smith  EO, Klein  PD, Garza  C. Energy  expenditure  and 
deposition  of breast -fed and formula -fed infants  during  early  infancy.  Pediatr Res 1990;28:631 -40. 
62. Schulz  LO, Schoeller  DA. A compilation  of total daily  energy  expenditures  and body  weights  in 
healthy  adults. Am J  Clin Nutr 1994;60:676 -81. 
63. Casper  RC, Schoeller  DA, Kushner  R, Hnilicka  J, Gold  ST. Total  daily  energy  expenditure  and 
activity  level  in anorexia nervosa.  Am J  Clin Nutr  1991;53:1143 -50. 
64. Schoeller  DA, Levitsky  LL, Bandini  LG, Dietz  WW,  Walczak  A. Energy  expenditure  and body  
composition  in Prader -Willi  syndrome.  Metabolism 1988;37:115 -20. 
65. Motil  KJ, Schultz  RJ, Wong  WW,  Glaze  DG. Increased  energy  expenditure  associated  with 
repetitive  involuntary  movement  does not contribute  to growth  failure  in girls with Rett syndrome.  J 
Pediatr 1998;132:228 -33. 
66. Welk  GJ, Corbin  CB, Dale  D. Measure  issues  in the assessment  of physical  activity  in children.  
Research  Quarterly  for Exercise and Sport 2000;71:59 -73. 
67. Trost  SG, Ward  DS, Moorehead  SM, Watson  PD, Riner  W, Burke  JR. Validity  of the computer  
science  and applications  (CSA)  activity  monitor  in children.  Medicine  and Science  in Sports  and 
Exercise  1998;30:629 -33. 
68. Janz KF. Validation  of the CSA  accelerometer  for assessing  children's  physical  activity.  
Medicine  and Science in Sports and Exercise  1994;26:369 -75. 
69. Freedson  PS, Melanson  E, Sirard  J. Calibration  of the Computer  Science  and Applications,  Inc. 
accelerometer.  Medicine  and Science in Sports and Exercise  1998;30:777 -81. 
70. Trost  SG, Pate RR, Freedson  PS, Sallis  JF, Taylor  WC. Using objective  physical  activity  
measures  with youth:  How  many  days of monitoring  are needed?  Medicine  and Science  in Sports  and 
Exercise  2000;32:426 -31. 
71. Trost  SG, Pate RR, Sallis  JF, et al. Age and gender  differences  in objectively  measured  physical  
activity  in youth.  Medicine  and Science in Sports and Exercise  2002;34:350 -5. 
72. Trost  SG, Loprinzi  PD, Moore  R, Pfeiffer  KA. Comparison  of Accelerometer  Cut-points  for 
Predicting  Activity  Intensity  in Youth.  Med Sci Sports Exerc  2010.  
73. Sallis  JF, Strikmiller  PK, Harsha  DW,  et al. Validation  of interviewer - and self-administered  
physical  activity  checklists  for fifth grade students. Med Sci Sports Exerc  1996;28:840 -51. 
74. Sallis  JF, Saelens  BE. Assessment  of physical  activity  by self-report:  status,  limitations,  and 
future directions.  Res Q Exerc  Sport 2000;71:S1 -14. 
75. Garcia  AW,  George  TR, Coviak  C, Antonakos  C, Pender  NJ. Development  of the 
child/adolescent  activity  log: a comprehensive  and feasible  measure of  leisure -time physical  activity.  Int 
J Behav  Med 1997;4:323 -38. 
76. Wardle  J, Guthrie  CA, Sanderson  S, Rapoport  L. Development  of the Children's  Eating  
Behaviour  Questionnaire.  J Child  Psychol  Psychiatry  2001;42:963 -70. 
77. Dykens  EM, Maxwell  MA, Pantino  E, Kossler R,  Roof  E. Assessment  of hyperphagia  in Prader - 
Willi  syndrome.  Obesity  (Silver  Spring)  2007;15:1816 -26. 
78. Sherafat -Kazemzadeh  R, Ivey L, Kahn  SR, et al. Hyperphagia  among  patients  with Bardet -Biedl  
syndrome.  Pediatr Obes  2013;8:e64 -7. 
Page 35 of 35 
GLP-1 agonist effects  on energy  balance  in hypothalamic  obesity  
Protocol v. 10.0  7 November  2018   79. Shoemaker  AH, Cone  RD. Drinking  and eating  behaviors  in children  with 
pseudohypoparathyroidism  type 1a Poster  presentation  at the 95th meeting  of the Endocrine  Society,  
San Francisco,  CA, 6/2013 2013.  
80. Han JC, Liu QR, Jones  M, et al. Brain -derived  neurotrophic  factor  and obesity  in the WAGR  
syndrome.  N Engl J Med 2008;359:918 -27. 
81. Mifflin  MD, St Jeor ST, Hill LA, Scott  BJ, Daugherty  SA, Koh YO. A new predictive  equation  
for resting  energy  expenditure  in healthy  individuals. Am J  Clin Nutr 1990;51:241 -7. 
82. Schofield  WN.  Predicting  basal  metabolic  rate, new standards  and review  of previous  work.  
Hum Nutr  Clin Nutr  1985;39 Suppl 1:5 -41. 
83. Flint  A, Raben  A, Blundell  JE, Astrup  A. Reproducibility,  power  and validity  of visual  analogue  
scales  in assessment  of appetite  sensations  in single  test meal  studies.  Int J Obes  Relat  Metab  Disord  
2000;24:38 -48. 
84. Shields  BJ, Palermo  TM, Powers  JD, Grewe  SD, Smith  GA. Predictors  of a child's  ability  to use 
a visual analogue scale.  Child Care Health  Dev 2003;29:281 -90. 
85. Roth  CL, Aylward  E, Liang  O, Kleinhans  NM, Pauley  G, Schur  EA. Functional  Neuroimaging  
in Craniopharyngioma:  A Useful  Tool to Better  Understand  Hypothalamic  Obesity?  Obes  Facts  
2012;5:243 -53. 
86. Myers  MG, Jr., Heymsfield  SB, Haft C, et al. Challenges  and opportunities  of defining  clinical  
leptin resistance.  Cell Metab 2012;15:150 -6. 
87. Reinehr  T, Kratzsch  J, Kiess  W, Andler  W. Circulating  soluble  leptin  receptor,  leptin,  and 
insulin resistance before and after weight  loss in obese children.  Int J Obes  (Lond)  2005;29:1230 -5. 
88. Roth  CL, Enriori  PJ, Gebhardt  U, et al. Changes  of peripheral  alpha -melanocyte -stimulating  
hormone  in childhood obesity.  Metabolism  2010;59:186 -94. 
89. Considine  RV. Increased  serum  leptin  indicates  leptin  resistance  in obesity.  Clin Chem  
2011;57:1461 -2. 
90. Yoon  JH, Park JK, Oh SS, et al. The ratio of serum  leptin  to adiponectin  provides  adjunctive  
information  to the risk of metabolic  syndrome  beyond  the homeostasis  model  assessment  insulin  
resistance:  the Korean Genomic  Rural  Cohort Study.  Clin Chim Acta 2011;412:2199 -205. 
91. Yun JE, Won  S, Mok  Y, Cui W, Kimm  H, Jee SH. Association  of the leptin  to high-molecular - 
weight  adiponectin  ratio with metabolic  syndrome.  Endocr  J 2011;58:807 -15. 
92. Karakas  M, Zierer  A, Herder  C, et al. Leptin,  adiponectin,  their ratio and risk of Coronary  Heart  
Disease:  results  from  the MONICA/KORA  Augsburg  Study  1984 -2002.  Atherosclerosis  2010;209:220 - 
5. 
93. Diamond  FB, Jr., Cuthbertson  D, Hanna  S, Eichler  D. Correlates  of adiponectin  and the 
leptin/adiponectin  ratio in obese  and non-obese  children.  J Pediatr Endocrinol  Metab  2004;17:1069 -75. 
94. Weiss  R, Taksali  SE, Tamborlane  WV,  Burgert  TS, Savoye  M, Caprio  S. Predictors  of changes  
in glucose  tolerance  status in obese  youth.  Diabetes Care 2005;28:902 -9. 
95. Yeckel  CW, Taksali  SE, Dziura  J, et al. The  normal  glucose tolerance  continuum  in obese  youth:  
evidence  for impairment  in beta-cell function  independent  of insulin  resistance.  J Clin Endocrinol  
Metab  2005;90:747 -54. 
96. Yeckel  CW, Weiss  R, Dziura  J, et al. Validation  of insulin  sensitivity  indices  from  oral glucose  
tolerance test parameters  in obese  children  and adolescents.  J Clin Endocrinol  Metab  2004;89:1096 -101. 
97. Stumvoll  M, Mitrakou  A, Pimenta  W, et al. Use of the oral glucose  tolerance  test to assess  
insulin release and  insulin sensitivity.  Diabetes Care  2000;23 :295-301. 
98. Matsuda  M, DeFronzo  RA. Insulin  sensitivity  indices  obtained  from  oral glucose  tolerance  
testing:  comparison  with the euglycemic insulin clamp. Diabetes  Care  1999;22:1462 -70. 
Page 36 of 35 
GLP-1 agonist effects  on energy  balance  in hypothalamic  obesity  
Protocol v. 10.0  7 November  2018   99. Matthews  DR, Hosker  JP, Rudenski  AS, Naylor  BA, Treacher  DF, Turner  RC. Homeostasis  
model  assessment:  insulin  resistance  and beta-cell function  from  fasting  plasma  glucose  and insulin  
concentrations  in man. Diabetologia  1985;28:412 -9. 
100. Makris  N, Swaab  DF, van der Kouwe  A, et al. Volumetric  parcellation  methodology  of the 
human hypothalamus  in neuroimaging:  normative  data and sex differences.  Neuroimage 2013;69:1 -10. 
101. Yushkevich  PA, Piven  J, Hazlett  HC, et al. User -guided  3D active  contour  segmentation  of 
anatomical  structures:  significantly  improved efficiency  and reliability.  Neuroimage 2006;31:1116 -28. 
102. Friedman  SD, Ishak  GE, Poliachik  SL, et al. Callosal  alterations  in pyridoxine -dependent  
epilepsy.  Dev Med Child Neurol  2014;56:1106 -10. 
103. Mai JK, Paxinos  G, Voss  T. Atlas  of the  human brain.  ACADEMIC  PRESS  1997.  
104. Wadden  TA, Hollander  P, Klein  S, et al. Weight  maintenance  and additional  weight  loss with 
liraglutide  after low-calorie -diet-induced  weight  loss: the SCALE  Maintenance  randomized  study.  Int J 
Obes  (Lond) 2013;37:1443 -51. 
105. Petri  KC, Jacobsen  LV, Klein  DJ. Comparable  Liraglutide  Pharmacokinetics  in Pediatric  and 
Adult  Populations  with Type  2 Diabetes:  A Population  Pharmacokinetic  Analysis.  Clinical  
pharmacokinetics  2015.  
106. Aroda  VR, Henry  RR, Han J, et al. Efficacy  of GLP -1 receptor  agonists  and DPP-4 inhibitors:  
meta -analysis  and systematic  review.  Clin Ther 2012;34:1247 -58 e22. 
107. Buse  JB, Rosenstock  J, Sesti  G, et al. Liraglutide  once a day versus  exenatide  twice  a day for 
type 2 diabetes:  a 26-week  randomised,  parallel -group,  multinational,  open -label  trial (LEAD -6). Lancet  
2009;374:39 -47. 
108. Bradley  DP, Kulstad R, Schoeller  DA. Exenatide  and weight  loss. Nutrition 2010;26:243 -9. 
109. Drucker  DJ, Buse  JB, Taylor  K, et al. Exenatide  once weekly  versus  twice daily  for the  
treatment  of type 2 diabetes: a randomised,  open -label, non -inferiority  study.  Lancet  2008;372:1240 -50. 
110. Ridge  T, Moretto  T, Macconell  L, et al. Comparison  of safety  and tolerability  with continuous  
(exenatide  once  weekly)  or intermittent  (exenatide  twice daily)  GLP -1 receptor  agonism  in patients  with 
type 2 diabetes. Diabetes  Obes  Metab  2012.  
111. Fitzmaurice  GM, Laird  NM, Ware  JH. Applied  Longitudinal  Analysis.  Wiley:  Hoboken,  NJ 
2004.  
112. Dunton  GF, Liao Y, Intille  SS, Spruijt -Metz  D, Pentz  M. Investigating  children's  physical  
activity  and sedentary  behavior  using  ecological  momentary  assessment  with mobile  phones.  Obesity  
(Silver  Spring)  2011;19:1205 -12. 
113. Trost  SG, Loprinzi  PD, Moore  R, Pfeiffer  KA. Comparison  of accelerometer  cut points  for 
predicting  activity  intensity  in youth.  Med Sci Sports Exerc  2011;43:1360 -8. 
114. Ambler  C, Eliakim  A, Brasel  JA, Lee WN,  Burke  G, Cooper  DM. Fitness  and the effect  of 
exercise  training  on the dietary  intake  of healthy  adolescents.  Int J Obes  Relat  Metab  Disord  
1998;22:354 -62. 
115. Eliakim  A, Brasel  JA, Mohan  S, Wong  WL, Cooper  DM. Increased  physical  activity  and the 
growth  hormone -IGF-I axis in adolescent  males.  Am J  Physiol  1998;275:R308 -14. 
116. Schwartz  GJ, Munoz  A, Schneider  MF, et al. New  equations  to estimate  GFR  in children  with 
CKD.  J Am Soc  Nephrol  2009;20:629 -37. 
117. Boland  CL, Harris  JB, Harris  KB. Pharmacological  Management  of Obesity  in Pediatric  
Patients.  Ann Pharmacother  2015;49:220 -32. 
118. Rosenstock  J, Klaff  LJ, Schwartz  S, et al. Effects  of exenatide  and lifestyle  modification  on 
body  weight  and glucose  tolerance  in obese  subjects  with and without  pre-diabetes.  Diabetes  Care 
2010;33:1173 -5. 
Page 37 of 35 
GLP-1 agonist effects  on energy  balance  in hypothalamic  obesity  
Protocol v. 10.0  7 November  2018   119. Elashoff  M, Matveyenko  AV, Gier B, Elashoff  R, Butler  PC. Pancreatitis,  pancreatic,  and 
thyroid  cancer  with glucagon -like peptide -1-based  therapies.  Gastroenterology  2011;141:150 -6. 
120. Raschi  E, Piccinni  C, Poluzzi  E, Marchesini  G, De Ponti  F. The association  of pancreatitis  with 
antidiabetic  drug use: gaining  insight  through  the FDA  pharmacovigilance  database.  Acta  Diabetol  
2013;50:569 -77. 
121. Macconell  L, Brown  C, Gurney  K, Han J. Safety  and tolerability  of exenatide  twice  daily  in 
patients  with type 2 diabetes:  integrated  analysis  of 5594  patients  from  19 placebo -controlled  and 
comparator -controlled  clinical  trials.  Diabetes  Metab Syndr  Obes  2012;5:29 -41. 
122. Moretto  TJ, Milton  DR, Ridge  TD, et al. Efficacy  and tolerability  of exenatide  monotherapy  
over 24 weeks  in antidiabetic  drug-naive  patients  with type 2 diabetes:  a randomized,  double -blind,  
placebo -controlled,  parallel -group  study.  Clin Ther 2008;30:1448 -60. 
123. DeFronzo  RA, Ratner  RE, Han J, Kim DD, Fineman  MS, Baron  AD. Effects  of exenatide  
(exendin -4) on glycemic  control  and weight  over 30 weeks  in metformin -treated  patients  with type 2 
diabetes.  Diabetes  Care  2005;28:1092 -100. 
124. Khoo  EY, Wallis  J, Tsintzas  K, Macdonald  IA, Mansell  P. Effects  of exenatide  on circulating  
glucose,  insulin,  glucagon,  cortisol  and catecholamines  in healthy  volunteers  during  exercise.  
Diabetologia 2010;53:139 -43. 
125. Bjerre  Knudsen  L, Madsen  LW, Andersen  S, et al. Glucagon -like Peptide -1 receptor  agonists  
activate  rodent  thyroid  C-cells causing  calcitonin  release  and C-cell proliferation.  Endocrinology  
2010;151:1473 -86. 
126. Vangoitsenhoven  R, Mathieu  C, Van der Schueren  B. GLP1  and cancer:  friend  or foe? Endocr  
Relat  Cancer  2012;19:F77 -88. 
127. Bjerre  Knudsen  L, Madsen  LW, Andersen  S, et al. Glucagon -like Peptide -1 receptor  agonists  
activate  rodent  thyroid  C-cells causing  calcitonin  release  and C-cell proliferation.  Endocrinology  
2010;151:1473 -86. 
128. Hegedus  L, Moses  AC, Zdravkovic  M, Le Thi T, Daniels  GH. GLP-1 and calcitonin  
concentration  in humans:  lack of evidence  of calcitonin  release  from  sequential  screening  in over 5000  
subjects  with type 2 diabetes  or nondiabetic  obese  subjects  treated  with the human  GLP-1 analog,  
liraglutide.  J Clin Endocrinol  Metab  2011;96:853 -60. 
129. Yamamoto  H, Lee CE, Marcus  JN, et al. Glucagon -like peptide -1 receptor  stimulation  increases  
blood pressure  and heart rate and activates  autonomic  regulatory  neurons. J Clin  Invest  2002;110:43 -52. 
130. Tokuda  M, Katsuno  T, Ochi  F, et al. Effects  of exenatide  on metabolic  parameters/control  in 
obese Japanese patients  with type 2 diabetes. Endocr J  2014;61:365 -72. 
131. Buse  JB, Bergenstal  RM, Glass  LC, et al. Use of twice -daily  exenatide  in Basal  insulin -treated  
patients  with type 2 diabetes: a  randomized,  controlled  trial. Ann Intern  Med 2011;154:103 -12. 
132. Outeirino -Iglesias  V, Romani -Perez  M, Gonzalez -Matias  LC, Vigo  E, Mallo  F. GLP -1 increases  
pre-ovulatory  LH source  and the number  of mature  follicles,  as well as synchronizing  the onset  of 
puberty  in female  rats. Endocrinology  2015:en20141978.  
133. Jespersen  MJ, Knop  FK, Christensen  M. GLP-1 agonists  for type 2 diabetes:  pharmacokinetic  
and toxicological  considerations.  Expert Opin  Drug  Metab  Toxicol 2013;9:17 -29. 
134. Buse  JB, Henry  RR, Han J, Kim DD, Fineman  MS, Baron  AD. Effects  of exenatide  (exendin -4) 
on glycemic  control  over 30 weeks  in sulfonylurea -treated  patients  with type 2 diabetes.  Diabetes  Care 
2004;27:2628 -35. 
135. Kendall  DM, Riddle  MC, Rosenstock  J, et al. Effects  of exenatide  (exendin -4) on glycemic  
control  over 30 weeks  in patients  with type 2 diabetes  treated  with metformin  and a sulfonylurea.  
Diabetes  Care  2005;28:1083 -91. 
Page 38 of 35 
GLP-1 agonist effects  on energy  balance  in hypothalamic  obesity  
Protocol v. 10.0  7 November  2018   136. Blevins  T, Pullman  J, Malloy  J, et al. DURATION -5: Exenatide  Once  Weekly  Resulted  in 
Greater  Improvements  in Glycemic  Control  Compared  with Exenatide  Twice  Daily  in Patients  with 
Type 2 Diabetes.  J Clin Endocrinol  Metab  2011;96:1301 -10. 
137. Harwood -Nash  DC. Neuroimaging  of childhood  craniopharyngioma.  Pediatr  Neurosurg  1994;21  
Suppl 1:2-10. 
138. Harris  PA, Taylor  R, Thielke  R, Payne  J, Gonzalez  N, Conde  JG. Research  electronic  data 
capture  (REDCap) --a metadata -driven  methodology  and workflow  process  for providing  translational  
research  informatics  support. J  Biomed  Inform  2009;42:377 -81. 