 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
HealthyMe Online Weight Management  
Education/HealthyMe at Home (HOME ) 
 
Protocol  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
IRB Protocol #: 1201007860  
       Principal Investigator Name: Clark, Daniel  
8/13/2015  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.5.2. Specific Aims  
08/13/2015  
The Institute of Medicine report on comparative effectiveness research priorities notes that “Identifying effective 
methods for treating obese populations could significantly improve health in this country” and gives particular 
emphasis to high risk populations such as the urban poor.7  Communit y Health Centers provide primary care to 
poor, often ethnic minority, populations.8  Community health center s provide care to 20 million persons and this 
is expected to  grow to 40 million in less than a decade .8  Thus, obesity treatment through community health 
center s has the potential to reach millions of obese, poor persons, reduce  disease disparities, and , possibly, 
reduce  health care costs.  
 
However, community health center s are chronically short -staffed9 and have limited space thus mitigating their 
potential effectiveness.10  Alternative weight loss solutions are needed.11-13  In an editorial on obesity , James 
Hill and Holly W yatt wrote “we need research with social networks and need to embrace new technology.”14 
 
We have conducted successful pilot tests of a  socially interactive multiparty  video -conference weight loss 
program delivered to community health center  patients in their homes using ubiquitous  hardware and Internet 
access supplied by the project.  Video -conferencing enables two -way communication, interactive on -screen 
displays of text and images, group discussion, and behavior modeli ng.  Video -conferencing helps overcome 
many barriers to participation including transportation, childcare, and the time and cost demands of traveling to 
and from group meetings conducted at a central location.  Using this approach a single staff person can  serve 
patients of multiple community health center s and patients can be located anywhere with broadba nd Internet . 
 
For the proposed efficacy trial we will randomize 210 adult community health center  patients with body -mass 
index ≥30 and <50 to either an i n-person weight loss program, a video -conference  delivered weight loss 
program, or to a usual care control group.  Both active intervention arms will use the same protocol of the 
same services delivere d by the same interventionists who will be trained and monitored following a treatment 
fidelity checklist5 developed from an NIH workgroup’s recomm endations.4  In-person sessions will be held at 
community health centers , and in public community spaces such as the public library conference and meeting 
rooms and church class rooms;  and video -conference  sessions will be conducted by interventionists located in 
communit y health centers  or at Regenstrief Institute  with participants accessing the program from home using 
project supplied hardware and Internet connection.  Both active interventions will include nutrition education, 
support group discussion, and exercise clas ses tailored to the needs of obese community health center  
patients.  These intervention programs were developed using principals of social cognitive theory, and have 
been modified for a participant population with a range of literacy and numeracy skills.  All participants will 
receive their usual community health center medical care .   
 
Primary aims  are to compare weight loss in the two active treatment arms to the control condition at 6 - and 12 -
months.  We hypothesize  that, compared to usual care, 30% more persons in each of the active arms wil l have 
a clinically significant weight loss (≥2 kg) at 6 -months, and will maintain this weight loss at 12 -months.  We 
consider 2 kg a minimally clinically significant weight loss  based on sound evidence that a 2 kg weight loss is 
associated with a 20% reduction in the 3yr risk of hypertension15 and a 32%  reduction in the 3yr risk of type 2 
diabetes.16  
 
Secondary aims  are: 1) to compare the costs of the two active treatment arms a nd their cost -effectiveness to 
usual care, 2) to compare the two active treatment arms to the usual care arm in health outcomes (health -
related quality of life, blood pressu re, waist circumference) and 3) to assess processes of change (social 
support, enjoyment, attendance, nutrition lit eracy, self-efficacy, energy expenditure, and energy intake) .  
 
Summary of Impact : 1) Multiparty  video -conferencing has the potential to become a new, more effective way 
of delivering behavioral interventions to a much wider base than is possible with in -person sessions.  Access to 
video -conference weight loss resources could substantially reduce the  opportunity costs of weight loss 
participation for all persons .  2) Our proposed work could form the foundation for a longer term trial in a more 
geographically and socially diverse sample.  3) This work could result in a cost -effective weight loss 
interv ention that could be widely disseminated through either or both community health center s and broadband 
Internet.  Our study will be conducted in community health center s operated by the 3rd largest safety -net health 
system in the U.S.  Through the National  Association of Public Hospitals and Health Systems this safety -net 
system has the capacity to facilitate dissemination of model programs throughout t he country and is currently 
doing so with  recently developed care models .17 
 
5.5.3 (a). Significance  
a.1. Obesity disparities may be related to unequal access to resources .  Obesity rates are higher among l ower 
socioeconomic status and minority groups13, 18 and disadvantaged subjects, particularly African -American 
women,  have been less successful in weight loss  interventions .19-23  Culturally tailored interventions have had 
modest success13, 23 leading some experts to conclude that unequal access to resources is a main factor in 
disparties .11-12  In in-depth home  intervie ws, we have heard lower income persons verbalize this hypothesis 
themselves.24  In fact, it has been hypothesized that attention to  information and counseling without attention to 
resource  disparities will lead to even greater socioeconomic and ethnic disparities in obesity .11-12   
 
a.2. Attendance and physical activity are critical to weight loss suc cess.  Both the Pounds of f with 
Empowerment (POWER ) trial 25 and the Weight Wise  trial26 adapted the core of the Diabetes Prevention 
Program ( DPP) for delivery to lower income persons.  Mean weight loss was 2.7kg to 3.7kg at 6 months but 
63% (Weight Wise) and 27% (POWER) of participants attended one -half or fewer intervention sessions.  In 
both studies, a strong relationship between attendance and weight loss was observed.  Similarly, in the 
ongoing multi -site Look AHEAD trial, individuals in the highest quartile of program attendance were five times 
more likely than those in the lowest quartile to meet the 12 -month, 7% weight loss goal .21  And, the odds of 
reaching weight loss goal were nine times greater for  persons in the highest vs. lowest quartile of physical 
activity minutes .21  Similar findings have been reported elsewhere .23, 25 -29  Key goals of the proposed 
intervention are to improve opportunities for physical activity and  reduce barriers to attendance.    
 
a.3. Broadband Internet is rapidly becoming availab le and affordable .  Although building an intervention for 
disadvantaged communities based on broadband Internet may at first seem counterintuitive, broadband is 
available  in most all urban  areas whereas  resources such as gyms, community meeting roo ms, transportation, 
comfortable weather, etc. are often limited or do not exist .30-31  Currently 42% of lower income households,32 
52% of African -American , and 47% of Hispanic households  (English and Spanish speaking)  have a home 
broadband Internet connection.33  Internet access  rates  for low income people and minorities  are growing by 
10% per year  34 and the federal government has dedicated billions to broadband growth.  On March 17, 2010, 
the FCC delivered a National Broadband P lan to Congress to bring greater high -speed Internet availability to 
improve  education,  energy , and health care .  The FCC plan calls for Internet broadband to become a universal 
service like the telephone system of old.  FCC objectives include: 1) broader adoption and innovation in e -care 
technologies, 2)  assigning airwaves for reduced cost or free broadband service, and 3)  service in 90% of U.S. 
homes .  Thus, the proposed intervention will become increasingly relevant and applicable over time.  
 
a.4. Importance of keeping food diaries .  The number of food records (diaries) kept is often correlate d with  
weight loss  23, 26, 35 but the process of keeping food diaries is  challenging  for persons of lower health literacy .  
Health literacy is define d as the degree to which individuals have the capacity to obtain, process, and 
understand health information36 and is closely related to more general forms of literacy.37  Among lower literacy 
populations, food records can be difficult to keep due to linguistic, graphic, and particularly numeric skills 
required for reading, measuring, calculating, and recording.  A translation of the DPP in medically underserved 
urban locations found considerable resistance to an d inaccuracy in recording fat grams and calories .38  Among 
obese community health center patients in one of our prior studies, 81% tested inadequate in health literacy 
based on the New Vital Sign (NVS).39,40  In reviewing audio -tapes of the administration of the NVS, it was clear 
that numeracy was a limiting factor —enough so that m any subjects would not attempt the math required to 
answer the questions.  There i s emerging evidence that numeracy contributes to racial disparities in health 
behaviors41-42 and D r. Rothman , our consultant, has  found a strong correlation between literacy and numeracy 
skills  and the estimation and measurement of portion si ze.43,44  The proposed protocol provides image -based 
education and portion control tools . 
 
5.5.3 (b ). Innovation  
b.1. Simplified, tool -based nutrition protocol .  Prior trials have taught nutrition label reading and reviewed food 
records with participant s21, 23, 26 but persons who lack numeracy c onfidence or ability may need assistance and 
practice to apply ab stract nutrition concepts.   The Diabetes Literacy and Numeracy Toolkit (DLNET) developed 
by Dr. Rothman contains education modules  and tools with  image -based and color -coded information  for 
persons with a 4th -6th grade reading ability .45  We have modified the DLNET to develop a nutrition and portion 
size toolkit for persons without diabetes.   Information and tools are designed to make it easier to eat less.       
 
b.2. Innovative u se of technology to deliver intensive weight loss s ervices .  Both community health center s and 
broadband Internet will be key resources in health care reform46 and trials of Internet delivered weight loss 
services to community health center  patients are currently underway.10, 47 -48  There are significant reach49 and 
cost advantages of information technology  weight loss interventions50 but, to date, IT interventions have had 
less weight loss efficacy than in -person .27, 29, 49, 51 -57,58  The most effective elements of interventions have been 
social support  and interactive communication52, 59 but current and  prior IT approaches have not had live 
communication or social interaction .  Multiparty v ideo-conference enables live, interactive communication, 
group interaction, supervision, and behavior modeling without travel .  A trial of multiparty video -conference for 
exercise in older adults showed greater attendance and better outcomes when compared to individual 
exercise.60  And, a  2009 rando mized trial showed that satisfaction with primary care visits was similar across 
face-to-face and video -conference visits .61   
 
b.3. Conceptual emphasis on costs of attendance, social support, and enjoyment .  Social cognitive theory  
(SCT) is known best for its attention to internal factors such as self -efficacy (i.e., confidence), which has been 
the basis for the majority of behavior change interventions.62  The DPP and Look AHEAD interventions , for 
example,  helped participants  establish realistic goals that are achievable and th ereby contribute  to increased 
self-efficacy.63  SCT has its roots in social learning theory, which recognizes learning as a process resulting in 
part from direct observation and imitation of others.64  Dr. Noreen Clark has shown  the critical role s of social 
support and social networks in the social cognitive model.65-66  Social networks represent the many social 
interconnections an individual may have.  A recent study showed  that friends of an individual who had become 
obese were 57% more lik ely to become obese themselves.67  Another  study showed through a path analysis 
that 40% of the variance in 18 -month exercise adherence was accounted for in a model with perceived social 
support operating indirectly via self -efficacy .68  These data also showed that perceived social support for 
exercise was associated with enhanced reports of enjoyment, which was also a strong predictor of adherence.   
 
Lifestyle behavior change  has been  significan tly greater in interventions with more  frequent staff -subject 
communication  either face -to-face or by telephone and one -on-one or group format .21, 25, 27, 56  The content and 
length of interactions  has varied across these trials with no apparent effect.69  The more frequent the 
interaction , the greater  the behavior change70-71 and weight loss.25, 27   
 
Figure 1 above shows  that we are proposing to implement a program that can provide frequent social 
interaction and a sense of social support and enjoyment  and that these  will improve self -efficacy and increase 
performance and maintenance of weight loss behaviors.  We expect this process to operate in both in -person 
and VC delivery arms although we ex pect VC delivery to reduce the costs of  attendance.  We will explore 
theoretically guided hypo theses regarding intervention mediators  (see section c.22 ).     
 
In sum, our proposed intervention is innovative  in its use of: 1) literacy/numeracy sensitive nutrition materials 
and tools, 2) twice w eekly social interaction, physical activity, and education , and 3) multiparty video -
conference.  Multiparty video -conference is  an innovative and potentially cost -effective strategy that may 
overcome many barriers to weight loss participation for urban poor adults cared for in community health 
centers wh ile also potentially preserving the critical elements of social interaction and support.  
 
5.5.3 (c).  Approach  
c.1. Overview.   Obese community health center  patients will be randomly assigned to either in-person or VC 
weight loss program, or to a usual car e control condition .  The content and staff will be identical across active 
treatment arms .  The primary aim is to compare weight loss outcomes in VC and  in-person arms to usual care .   
 Weig
ht 
loss Social 
suppor
t, 
enjoy
ment, 
nutriti
on 
literac
y Energy 
expend
iture 
and 
energy 
intake  Session 
attenda
nce Costs of 
attenda
nce VC vs. 
In-
person 
deliver
y Self-
efficac
y 
Before presenting details of the proposed trial, we present our trial  experience , recruitment of minority and 
socioeconomic ally disadvantaged persons, intervention development and implementation  experience  in 
community health center s, and video -conference pilot work .  We have organized a team with complementary 
expertise.  Drs. Clark, Weiner, Marrero, Miller, and Stevens all have experience directing large study teams.  
Drs. Clark, Weiner, Marrero, Morrison, Keith, and Li all have office space in the Health Information and 
Technology Sciences building on the Indiana Universi ty School of Medicine campus.  Drs. Stevens, Rothman, 
and Mauskopf will participate in study meetings via teleconference and will travel to Indianapolis multiple times 
throughout the study.  Drs. Rothman and Mauskopf  have an ongoing working relationship through another 
project and the Indiana faculty has ongoing working relationships that span from four to 17 years.   
 
c.2. Trial  Experience .  Dr. Clark has worked with multidisciplinary teams in the  complet ion of  sever al recent  
randomized trials among  primary care patients , including behavioral interventions for medication adherence in 
hypertension72 and congestive heart  failure73 and clinical interventions in the collaborative care of elders .74  As 
noted earlier, Dr. Wein er has experience with a video -conference trial.3  Dr. Stevens has been a leader of a 
number of large behavioral weight loss trials, including PI of the coordinating center for the weight loss 
maintenance trial.35, 50  He was also PI of the coordinating center for the PREMIER trial, which assessed the 
effects of  weight loss and dietary  chang e on hypertension.15  Dr. Marrero  has decades of experience in 
behavioral interventions and  was the Indi ana University (IU) site PI of the DPP.  The I U DPP site recruited 192 
subjects (second largest cohort among 27 participating centers) with 58 assigned to the intensive lifestyle 
condition.  For the follow -up DPP Outcomes Study, IU kept over 89% of subject s and continue s to study them 
after 15 years.   Our consultant Dr. Rothman and colleagues recently complet ed two randomized controlled 
trials to test the efficacy of the DLNET.45,75  Dr. Li is an experienced clinical trials biostatistici an and Dr . 
Mauskopf has decades of experience in cost -effectiveness in randomized trials.   
 
c.3. Recruitment of Disadvantaged Persons .  Our research team has  recruited and retained socioeconomically 
disadvantaged participants in a number of recent trials with careful attention to the protection of human 
subjects .74, 76 -77  The GRACE  trial randomized 951 , low income  older adults to usual care or collaborative care .  
We completed 850 out of 951 24-month assessments.74  The mean Rapid Estimate of Adults Literacy in 
Medicine -revise d (REALM -R) score was 4.7.24,74  A score of six on t he REALM -R corresponds to a sixth -grade 
reading level, below which individuals have difficulty understanding written instruction.78  A majority (58%) of 
the sample was African -American.   Dr. Miller’s African -American Health (AAH) project is a population -based 
cohort study of non -institutionalized African -Americans born between 1936 and 1950 and l iving in St. Louis, 
Missouri.  There were 998 subjects enrolled in 2000 -2001, with an overall enrollme nt rate of 76%.  The AAH 
has completed six assessments  in eight years;  only 79 have  refused further participation  (190 have died) .     
 
c.4. Evaluation an d Needs Assessments of Obese Community Health Center  Patients.  In an eff ort to further 
improve the reach and effectiveness of our weight loss program, our team r ecently  completed in -depth home 
interviews with  community health center  women  (n=10 African -American; n=9 Mexican -American interviews 
conducted in Spanish; n=11 non -Hispanic white) who were eligible but did not participate in the TCL weight 
loss program .  Negative themes that emerged included: 1) exercise is pain,  2) frustration wit h a primary focus 
on education, particularly repetitious education based on food guide pyramids, and 3) strong dislike of food 
diaries  and monitoring .  As we mentioned, women had great difficulty interpreting nutrition label information 
as indicated by the  NVS and it seemed due less to word recognition difficulty than to numeracy limitations.   
We also learned that, for varied reasons, it is  very difficult for most  of these women  to get to  central meeting 
location s.  Strong positive themes were that  patients  wanted:  1) more discussion  with community health 
center  providers  about their weight , 2) more support at home for weight management, 3) exercise options , 
and 4) help with portion size control.   
 
A survey assessment of 141 obese female, Englis h speaking community health center  patients aged 40 to 64 
who were non -Hispanic white (n=77) or African -Ameri can (N=64) showed that 71% have 12 or fewer years of 
education, 43% have inadequate health literacy, and 76% have  annual household  incomes of less than 
$25,00 0.  In  health  behavior, 39% smoke, 49% have v ery high fat diets, and 48% have v ery low fruit and 
vegetable consumption.     
   
c.5. Community Health Center  Weight Management Program: Take Charge Lite (TCL).  Dr. Clark is PI of  TCL, 
a weight management progr am for obese English and Spanish speaking adult s that was implemented in five  
community health centers  operated by Wishard Health Services .40, 79  TCL was developed following principles 
of community -based participatory  research and implemented as a quality improvement project .  To date, TCL 
has provided weight loss services to over  4,700 obese patients.  TCL is based on the five ‘ A’s of behavior 
change counseling  (for more  details see http://medicine.iupui.edu/IUCAR/roybal/dissemination.asp ).  Our team 
of patient advisors, clinicians, and scientists completed multiple plan -do-study -act (PDSA) cycles in the 
process of adapting established protocols for local implementation of each ‘A’ (assess, advise, agree, assist, 
arrange).  Written materials are simple and kept to a minimum  to address low health literacy.  This program 
has provided crucial insights for the trial proposed in this applicat ion, particularly the need to address health 
literacy and numeracy and the critical importance of and barriers to physical activity and program attendance.79   
 
c.6. Video -Conference Pilot s.  As noted, o ur co -investigator Dr. Weiner piloted computer -enabled video -
conference for clinical evaluations of patients in nursing homes .3  We have  now piloted multiparty video -
conference for home -based exercise  and weight loss education and discussion .   
 
Our experience with five  separate video -conference pilots —three exercise only pilo ts and two  exercise plus 
education and discussion pilots —demonstrates:  1) ability of users wi th no prior computer experience  to 
participate fully , 2) exercise,  education,  and discussion feasibility, 3) no adverse events related to the protocol, 
4) high satisfaction  (3.5 out of 4.0) , 5) high attendance (85% to 94 %), and 6 ) highly reliable  technology .  
 
Communication via video -conference can be described as live, interactive television.  Multiple persons can be 
in the same conference creating a group or m ultiparty conference.  A conference “call” is answered in a way 
similar to a telephone in that one hears an incoming call and “clicks ” the answer button on the screen at which 
time one joins the conference.  Everyone in the conference can hear and be heard , and see and be seen.  O ff-
the-shelf  equipment  is set up wherever the participant  prefers in their home.  We have used several different 
base desktop computer models (Compaq Presario or HP 500B; $325) .  We attach a webcam (we used 
Logitech c200; $23) to t he top of a 19” monitor (Asus VH192D; $109) and we use external speakers with 
volume control (Logitech s120; $11).  The speakers can be turne d up so adults who can hear a  television can 
hear the conference session.  The instructor’s unit is similar but wit h a larger screen; we use a 40" LED model.  
A basic DSL or cable broadband Internet service is used for all participants (just 200 Kbps speed is needed 
which is well below standard DSL or cable modem speeds).  There are many options for picture -in-picture 
views.  We use a view where each subject sees a larger image of the interventionist and slightly smaller 
images of the other participants.  Each person’s name is visible at the bottom of his/her  picture -in-picture 
image.  We have tested several off -the-shelf video -conference software products, including Skype, Oovoo, 
Polycom, and Movi.  These all work for multiparty video -conference.  We will use Movi for this trial because in 
our experience the audio quality with Movi is a little better than with the other  products.  Our most recent pilot 
(n=6) had no technical difficulties across four weeks of twice weekly multiparty video -conference sessions; all 
participants used the system error free and reported high satisfaction with  the exercise, education, and 
discussion content,  audio and video quality , and usability.  Our pilots have included adults with no prior 
computer experience and all have been able to participate fully.   
 
In our first three pilots of video -conference among obese community health center  patients, we conducted 
exercise classes only  to establish  the exercise and safety protocols .  No dietary or  weight loss education or 
discussion was completed .  The number of class participants ranged from 4 to 8.  All three pi lots had both non -
Hispanic white and African -American participants.  This was a 2 -day per week progressive exercise program 
as described in Section c.16.  We ran these classes for 2 months each —16 total classes in each pilot .  There 
were no adverse events.  Overall attendance was 85%.  Nine subjects completed 15 or more of 16 sessions .  
Table 2.  Two month physical performance outcomes in exercise via video -conference pilot study.  
Measure  Baseline  2-month  Change  
Chair stands in  30 seconds, mean (n=16)*  11.4 14.1 24% 
Steps in 2 minutes, mean (n=16)*  74.7 97.7 31% 
*Baseline values carried forward for one subject.   
 
In a fourth  pilot (n=6; 2 African -American and 4 white ) and a fifth pilot ( n=6; 5 African -American and 1 white ), 
we conducted exercise (45min) followed by nutrition education and discussion (30min)  twice weekly for one 
month .  The purpose of these two pilots was to demonstrate feasibility of education and discussion  following 
exercise and the reliability and usabilit y of the  technology.  The details of the pilot recruitment, enrollment, 
baseline assessment, and intervention protocol were the same as the proposed trial and are presented in 
Sections c.11, c.12, c.16, c.17 and c.18 below.  We consented and enrolled 1 in 4 eligible patients .  
Attendance in both pilots was 94% (90/96 person -sessions attended).  Education sessions and discussion 
were completed to the high satisfaction of participants.   At the completion of the pilot , participants were asked 
what they liked o r didn’t like about the program in an open -ended question.  The negative comments were : 
“better time”, “earlier in the day”, “more education”, “increase intensity”, and “include a session about support 
group.”  Positive comments were:  “I love it --the girls  are very detaile d”, “very educational and helpful ”, “it is at 
home but still other people to do it with” , “community like aspect ; comfortable in home and still have group in 
home ; feel safe in home ; no self -image insecurities at home” , “convenience” , “fellowship.”  Satisfaction with th e 
program was also assessed using questions on a Likert -type scale ranging from (4) very  satisfied to (1) very 
dissatisfied.  Mean satisfaction was 3.55 .  No one reported that the system affected their doctor -patient 
relation ship.   All reported ease of use and total  satisfaction with answering the “call” and audio and visual 
quality.   In the fourth pilot, an electrical storm disrupted service for one class session.  In the fifth pilot, there 
were no technical errors or difficulties.   
 
c.8. Weight Loss In-Person .  Through TCL we have conducted hundreds of  in-person weight loss, nutrition, 
exercise and discussion groups  over 4 years in five different community health center s.  Community health 
center  meeting rooms have bee n used for this program.  Retention of coaches has been good with 4 current 
coaches.  We have had to replace 3 coaches over the 4 years who have moved on to other things.   
 
c.9. Overview of Experience.   We have the infrastructure and experience for: 1) recruiting and retaining low 
socioeconomic status and ethnic minority adults , 2) running behavioral weight loss randomized trials  using 
both the DLNET and the DPP protocols , 3) developing and operating weight loss interventions  through 
community health center s, and 4) designing and operating video -conference interventions.  
 
PROPOSED  Design  
 
c.10. Study Setting and Population .  The setting will be community health center s located around 
Indianapolis —an area consisting of mainly African -American and lower income non-Hispanic white persons.    
We have full support of Wishard Health Services (see letter of support from Dr. Harris, CEO).  The targe t 
population is English speaking  patients aged 40 to 6 9 years without type 2 diabetes and  a BMI  ≥30<50.  The 
age range is where obesity is most prevalent.  We exclude persons with diabetes to avoid multiple nutrition 
messages for the same class (Drs. Rothman and Marrero have evolving protocols and projects for persons 
with diabetes that could serve as video -conference models for this subgroup).  Less than 5% of the Wishard 
population has a BMI of 50 or higher and intensive medical interventions may be necessary for this group.80  
Exclusion criteria  are modeled after weight loss trials  under way at this time .10, 47 -48  Changing location of 
residence will be ok; we had one pilot participant do t his. However, persons will need a physical space with 
utility services available.   
Inclusion Criteria  Exclusion Criteria  
EMR/Physician report:  
1. Aged 40 to 6 9 years.  
2. One or more community health center  visits 
in the past 12 months  
3. Body -mass index of ≥30< 50. 
 
Self-report:  
4. English speaking.  
5. Access to telephone.  
6. A residence.  
7. Willingness to be randomized.  
8. Willingness to have computer installed in 
home.  
 EMR/Physician report:  
1. Current diagnosis of type 2 diabetes.  
2. Any serious medical condition likely to hinder accurate weight measurement, or for 
which weight loss is contraindicated or could cause weight loss (e.g., cancer).  
3. Cognitive Impairment based on the 6 item screener.  
4. Current diagnosis of  psychosis or bipolar disorder.  
5. Unstable or recent onset of cardiovascular disease within 6 months or presence of 
congestive heart failure.  
6. Illness that might be associated with weight change, such as asthma (because of 
treatment with corticosteroids), psychosis  
7. Use of medications that might cause weight gain such as hypoglycemic oral 
medicines or insulin, anti -depressants, and weight loss medications.  
8. One no show to a pri mary care visit in the past 12 months . 
 
Self-report:  
9. Unwilling or unable to provide informed consent.  
10. Receiving  or plans to obtain  disability insurance  at enrollment . 
11. Pregnant or nursing in past 6 months, or plans to become so within 12 months.  
12. Enrolled in a weight loss program or member of household enrolled in study.  
13. Residence outside of Marion County, Indiana ( a PO box will not be counted as a 
Marion County address.  
14. Residence relocation plans within 12 months.  
15. Planned or prior bariatric surgery.  
16. Substance abuse.  
17. History of treatment for eating disorder.  
18. Unstable weight with loss or gain of ≥ 10% in last 3 mont hs. 
 
c.11. Recruitment . First, an electronic medical records review will identify initial demographic, clinic visit, 
medical, and BMI eligibility.   Second, community health center  providers will be  given  a list of their potentially 
eligible  patients  and asked to exclude persons they do not want approached for this study.  Providers will be 
given a list of contraindications  to exercise and asked to exclude any persons who have these 
contraindications .  Third, potentially eligible patients will  be met in person before a clinic visit or  receive a 
telephone call from the Practice -Based Research Network (PBRN) research assistant (RA)inviting the patient’s 
participation in the study.  Those indicating interest will receive further screening at this time. 
 
c.12. Enrollment, Baseline Assessment, and Randomization . Final screen, consent, baseline assessment, and 
randomization will follow the telephone screen.  Baseline assessments will be completed in patients’ homes , 
community centers, or community health cent ers prior to randomization.    Random assignment to study arms  
will occur  after at least three assessments  have been completed .  We will stratify randomization by race (we 
expect that all Hispanics in our sample will be white) .  We will also stratify randomization by Patient Health 
Questionnaire (PHQ) scores (a score of 10 or higher indicates major depression).   The biostatistician (Dr. Li) 
will provide one stack of sealed envelopes for each of the strata and the research assistants will take the next 
available envelope from the appropriate stack.   Each of the planned recruitment, enrollment, assessment, and 
randomization steps were used successfully in our VC pilot studies.  Subjects in all arms will receive a $100  gift 
card for completi on of the baseli ne and 6 month assessment.  A research assistant will travel to participants’ 
homes, inform them of their arm assignment, give them the materials, if needed, for their assignment, and take 
an additional weight measurement.  If the first assessment occurs in community center, health center or similar 
location, randomization  may occur at the same time as the assessment if space and sta ffing allows.  
Arrangements may  be made at that time for the computer to be installed for those randomized into the video 
confer ence arm.  
 
c.13. Final Assessment and Close -out. The follow -up assessment s will be completed in patients’ home s, 
community center , health center , or similar location  6 and 12 months after the start of the intervention .  To 
achieve blinded final assessments, the 12 -month assessment will be completed by assessors who did not 
carry -out 6 -month assessments and only  after equipment has been retrieved from the VC arm participants’ 
homes  by research assistants.   Every effort will be made  to retrieve equ ipment within 2 days of the final 
meeting.  Compensation for completing the 12-month assessment  will be a $5 0 gift card  for subjects of all 
arms .   
 
c.14. In-person Arm .  Participants assigned to t he in -person  arm will have access to weight loss services at set 
times in  community health center meeting room s or in nearby community rooms in churches , community 
centers , SoBeFit or other similar exercise facilities  and public libraries .  The structure, size, goals,  and content 
of the sessions will be the same as that for the VC group.   
 
c.15. Video -Conference ( VC) Arm .  Participants assigned to VC  treatment will have a windows -based desktop 
computer with broadband Inte rnet installed in their home.  C omputers will b e setup  in kiosk mode and Internet 
brow sing will not be possible .  Participants are shown what they will see and need to “click” to answer the 
video -conference call.    
 
c.16. Treatment Fidelity Strategies .  The study will use two interventio nists and each will deliver  in-person and 
VC sessions.  Detailed protocols exist and allow consist ent delivery and replication of  DPP sessions, modified 
DLNET  sessions , and physical activity movements and progression.  Treatment fidelity and monitoring 
strategies follow the NIH Behavior Change Consortium Strategies4 and checklist5 as detailed in the table 
below.  
 Five Treatment Fidelity Categories and 
Associated Strategies  Active Arms (video -conference arm and in -person)  
1. Treatment design   
a) specify theory, content, and dose  See sections b.1, b.3, and c.17  
b) specify provider credentials  Bachelor’s degree in exercise science or nutrition  
2. Training providers   
a) describe and standardize provider training  Trained according to revised DPP (Dr. Marrero) and DLNET (Dr. Rothman) protocols and 
physical activity (Dr. Keith) protocol; Listed investigators are very experienced in training 
interventionists according to their respective protocols.   
b) conduct posttraining evaluations  Each interventionist will lead and be rated in 2 practice sessions ( one session in -person and 
video -conference) with investigators as participants; investigators will independently rate and 
critique on dietary and behavioral recommendations and physical activity instruction; 
retraining as needed; rating measure based on pr otocol fidelity across delivery modes  
3. Treatment delivery   
a) provide delivery manual and checklists  Manuals established for DPP and DLNET sessions, and physical activity protocol; procedural 
and safety checklists created and approved by team and IRB  
b) assess provider adherence to treatment plan  Ratings of protocol compliance following method described under “posttraining evaluations” 
based on random, approximately biweekly evaluations of audio and video recorded sessions 
(digital recording of video -confere nce sessions is an option in Movi that we have tested; for 
in-person sessions we will have a digital video -camera setup for all sessions — research 
shows that recording -induced effects disappear after three data -gathering sessions82-83) 
4. Receipt of treatment   
a) assess subject understanding  Discussion and review of prior session lesson and homework; practice nutrition label reading  
b) assess subject ability to use skills taught in 
the treatment  Observation of physical activity movements; nutrition and ph ysical activity logs; New Vital 
Sign (NVS) test for nutrition literacy  
5. Skill enactment   
a) assess subject performance of intervention 
outside of treatment setting  2-week accelerometry  for energy expenditure and 24 -hour dietary recall for energy intake 
(see section 5.5.3.c.19)  
 
c.17. Weight Loss Session  Content: Both  In-Person and VC Treatment  Arms .  A weight loss goal of 1lb per 
week will be suggested however we will not prescribe specific goals.  Lasting motivation is more likely to 
develop when individuals set their own goals and receive support for their goals.84-85  The primary focus is 
reduction in energy intake through portion control and increased energy expenditure.  Very recent, high quality 
trials confirm that the most effective weight loss strategy is a combination of reduced caloric consumption and 
increased exercise.86-87  The first five  months of the intervention  schedule is shown below .  Lesson content is 
based on  modified material from the DPP  and DLNET and discussion groups are structured similar to Look  
AHEAD .  Through week 19, one session per week is  a DPP or DLNET lesson  and the other session that week 
is a discussion of that lesson.  A t every session, exercise will fill the first 45 minutes .  The sessions will take 
place for 75 to 90 minutes twice per  week.  We acknowledge the comparative high frequency of meetings but 
as discussed earlier trials have shown that more frequent contact leads to greater weight loss and there is no 
evidence that adherence is less in more frequent programs. We may  have a fo cus group of participants that  
have  attended at least 25% of their sessions.  Participants will have completed at least 50% of the study. The 
focus group will be a conversation style asking questions pertaining to what could make the classes more 
enjoyable and ways to increase the participant’s attendance.  
 
  Each week as has two sessions; first weekly session introduces a topic and second weekly session is a discussion of that topi c 
 Every session starts with 45 minutes of supervised, group exercise ; progressing to 60 minutes  
  Week  Session 1 Lesson Topic  Source  Session 2 Discussion Topic  
 Notes  
 1 Tip the calorie balance  DPP Tip the calorie balance  
   2 Use your plate (Dry food)  Revised DLNet  Use your plate (Dry food)  
   3 Use your cup (Liquid food)  " Use your cup (Liquid food)  
   4 Being Active: A way of life  DPP Being Active: A way of life  
 Add PA minutes  
5 Carbohydrates  Revised DLNet  Carbohydrates  
 outside of class  
6 Protein  " Protein  
   7 Fats and oils  " Fats and oils  
   8 Nutrition label -how to count calories  " Nutrition label -how to count calories         Progress to 1/2  
 9 Nutrition label -how to count fat  " Nutrition label -how to count fat         standing exercise  
10 Nutrition label -how to count fiber  " Nutrition label -how to count fiber  
  11 Nutrition label -how to count sodium  " Nutrition label -how to count sodium  
  12 Eating out                DPP Eating out                
 Progress to all  
 13 Snack ideas  Revised DLNet  Snack ideas  
 standing exercise  
14 Budget shopping  New  Budget shopping  
   15 Take Charge of What’s Around You  DPP Take Charge of What’s Around You  
  16 Social cues  DPP Social cues  
   17 Slippery Slope  DPP Exercise/brief discussion  
 Progress to 60 minute  
18 Stay motivated  DPP Exercise/brief discussion  
 exercise class  
 19 Nutrition label -booster session  Revised DLNet  Exercise/brief discussion  
 20 Interventionist led support/exercise  
 Maintenance information  
  
Exercise .  Physical activity is critical to weight loss maintenance but obese adults often report functional 
limitations and discomfort with traditional exercise.88  Thus, t he initial exercise training session includes a 
series  of movements for whic h the participants remain seated .  The Ratings of Perceived Exertion scale will be 
introduced and subjects will receive a copy.  Subjects will be advised to exer cise at the intensity level of five  to 
six on a 10 point scale.  For adults over the age of 40 years, moderate -intensity is five to six on a 10 -point 
exertion scale .89  The session include s flexibility  but emphasizes  muscular and cardiovascular fitness.  Each 
exercise is performed in sets of two or three  and the exercise leader counts out loud to maintain appropriate 
movement pace .  There is a focus on proper breathing techniques and good posture and the exercise leader 
gives feedback and encouragement to the participants during the session.   Brief interactive games woven into 
the exercise sessions give an opportunity for  exertion checks (e.g., “talk test” ).90   
 
In the first three  weeks, exercise recommendations will be limited to participation in the supervised, seated 
group exercise sessions.  Starting in week 4 , participants will be encouraged to progress over weeks four and 
five to achieving a  minimum of at least 60 additional (i.e., outside of class)  minutes of moderate -intensity (e.g., 
brisk walking) physical activity per week for a total of 150 minutes.  We will give subjects maps and details of 
exercise program s that operate  throughout the city, including walking trials.   In addition, t he seated exercise 
progress es in pace each week as participants become familiar with the routine.  At the end of six  weeks, the 
exercise session s will progress to  ½ seated and ½ standing  althoug h the movements stay the same —seated 
movements are repeated in the standing position .  At the end of 10 weeks, the exercise sessions will be 
standing aerobic movements (any subject who wishes to remain seated can do so).  Starting in week 17 , the 
sessions will be 60 minutes of standing exercise followed by 15 minutes of cool down and discussion.   
Community health center patients have  progressed from seated to standing exercise in TCL program classes.  
 
Exercise Safety.   While large scale home based exercise programs have reported few adverse events ,91 we 
will nonetheless have a detailed plan for any potential emergencies that might occur.  We have incorporated 
exercise program elements that are associated with lower risks of cardiovascular complications and 
musculotendinous injury, such as employing a warm up, flexibility exercise, using moderate intensity exercise, 
and a gradual progression of exercise intensity and dur ation.92-93  Supervised exercise programs, even in 
persons with known cardiovascula r disease, also have a low rate of complications80 suggesting that the use of  
trained exercise instructors will also provide a margin of safety to the participants.  Detailed staff and patient 
emergency protocols are  in the Human Subjects section and a Data Safety and Monitoring Plan is provided 
that includes an NIH Project Officer ex officio.   
 
DPP/DLNET Lessons and Look AHEAD Discussion Group . In weeks 1 through 1 8, exercise will be 
followed by a 30 -minute lesson in the first session of the week and a 30 -minute discussion  of that lesson will 
be held in the second session of the week .  This format was met with high satisfaction in our pilot trial.   
Subjects will receive a binder that has participant h andouts clearly  marked by session  number.  The education 
lesson content will follow core DPP sessions  excluding nutrition lessons that will follow modified DLNET 
content as shown in the box above.  Nutrition lessons incorporate the use of portion size tools —plate, bowl, 
and tumbler.  Each lesson handout presents subject s with a take home message and action plans related to 
the content.  The DPP and DLNET artwork and content have been extensively reworked to coordinate with one 
another, as well as self -monitoring forms and  portion size tools.  The coordinated DLNET, DPP and portion 
size tools can be viewed at http://medicine.iupui.edu/IUCAR/roybal/ tools .asp.   
 
Discussion s will be carried out following the support group structure and rules of the Look AHEAD study 
(https://w ww.lookaheadtrial.org/public/dspMaterials.cfm).  Action plans and take home messages  from the prior 
session will be used in the discussion group session as a way of providing review and support, and discussion 
of barriers and solutions.  The interventionis ts will lead the discussion with the goal of creating peer interaction 
and support.  Look AHEAD  training materials state that “rather than lecturing the group or interviewing 
individual participants, you should encourage participants to interact freely wit h each other; participants should 
pose questions to each other, offer suggestions, and share experiences. ”  
 
Self-Monitoring .  Many lower literacy subjects desire simplified food consumption and activity monitoring.  
From the first session, subjects will receive portion size tools and instruction in their use as well as supervised 
exercise.  Self -monitoring forms will be include d with the program binder but subjects will not be asked to use 
the activity log until after the DPP Being Active a Way of Life lesson in week 4 and will not be asked to use the 
food log until after the fifth DLNET nutrition lesson in week 7.  In weeks 5 t hrough 7, subjects will be asked to 
bring their activity logs to share with the group.  In weeks 8 through 11, which cover nutrition label use, 
subjects will be asked to bring their food logs to review, ask questions, and discuss at meetings.  The logs wil l 
be used for behavior support and reinforcement as well as supplemental teaching.    
 
6 to 12 -month Tapered Intervention . Our maintenance schedule is modeled after the intensive arm of the 
POWER trial.  For both intervention arms, in the 6th through 9th months we will hold twice monthly meetings 
and in months 10 through 12 we will hold monthly meetings. The meetings will include an exercise session, 
review lesson concepts from the core 5 -month program, and allow subjects to discuss  their successes and 
setba cks.  Subjects will keep their binders and portion size tools and be reminded of these tools.   
 
Session  Reminder and Technical Assistance Calls .  Subjects in either study group who miss a session will 
receive a 1 to 2 -minute telephone call from an interve ntionist  with the opening script “I missed you, is 
everything okay?” and the closing script “I look forward to seeing you (day and time of next session).”  If 
persons in the VC group receive calls or visits for technical assistance, the same number of rand omly selected 
persons in the in -person group will receive a brief telephone call with the script “I am just calling to check that 
everything is going okay for you in the program.”  All calls will be documented for subject, length, and reason.    
 
c.18. Data  Collection Procedures .  Our team has decades of experience collecting field data from vulnerable 
middle and older aged adults.  The assessors will have laptop computers with a database that is distinct fr om 
that used for monitoring  safety.  They will each  have a scale, blood pressure cuff, and any other necessary 
equipment.  Regenstrief Institute, Inc has two separate sets of office buildings on opposite ends of the IU 
School of Medicine campus.  We will house assessors and interventionists  in different lo cations.  We will 
schedule the retrieval of study computers prior to final assessment.  We will check assessor blinding by asking 
them to guess at subject assignment.  This will allow a reporting of the extent to which assessors remained 
masked to assignme nt.  Dr. Miller will lead the training of assessors.  Dr. Miller will accompany each assessor  
to at least the ir first three assessments to observe procedures and review safety protocols.   
 
c.19. Measures .  All measures will be taken at baseline , 6, and 12  months.   Age, gender, ethnicity, health 
literacy, chronic disease diagnoses, height, goals, activity plans, telephone contacts, and attendance are all 
recorded and captured in web tracking and electronic medical records.  We will include questions about 
tobacco use at the baseline and follow -up assessments.  At baseline, persons will also be asked to report  their 
marital status, household size, and  their weight history including frequency of weight cyc ling (change of 20 lbs 
or more)  and number of previous weight loss attempts .  The baseline assessment for the exercise plus 
nutrition education and discussion via video -conference pilots used the measures below and averaged 40 
minutes .  To address literacy issues, all survey measures are interviewer -administer ed.   At the start of the 
intervention an additional weight measurement will be taken.  
 
Primary Measure: Body Weight . We will measure body weight to the nearest 0.1 lb using the Scale -Tronix  
5125 portable scale that has a capacity of 660lbs.  It is accurate to within 0.1lbs.  Subjects will stand flat footed, 
shoes removed, and light clothing.   We will take two separate measurements and average the two; if they differ 
by more than 0.2lbs, a th ird measurement will be taken and the least congruent measurement dropped.     
 
Secondary Measures: ACTIVE ARMS ONLY:  
Attendance.   Session a ttendance  will be documented by visible video -conference attendance ( VC arm ) or 
physical presence (in -person  arm).  Research staff will keep a record of the time, date, and study subject for 
each session.  Partial sessions will be counted based on the proportion of the session time completed.   
 
Program Costs and Cost -Effectiveness .  The one year cost of the first year of the individual -based DPP 
intervention was $1400 per subject.94  The cost per subject of the group -based Weight Wise intervention was 
$242 over 5 months.95  We are propo sing meeting twice as frequently  for 2.4 times as long .  We estimate the 
fixed personnel and material intervention costs, whether in -person or VC, would be around $400 per subject 
over the first 5 months and $140 per subject over the remaining 7 months.  C omputer and broadband service 
costs add to the VC arm but clinic space and staff and subject time  are likely greater in the in -person arm.  
 
Participant  and Societal Costs.  Our piloted resource use questionnaire  will be completed at 6 and 12 months  
to collect patients’ costs to participate in the weight loss interventions  (i.e., attendance costs) .  These costs 
include transportation costs, travel time, time off of work, and dependent care.  Cost of participation will be 
estimated by multiplying pati ents’ reported time by age -appropriate national wages f rom the Bureau of Labor 
Statistics ( BLS).  Intervention costs consist of non -research fixed and variable costs of administering the 
intervention.  Personnel costs will be calculated from interventionis t’s time logs and national median wages for 
registered dietitians or certified fitness instructors available online from the BLS.  Space cost charges will be 
prorated for size of space and time in use  from the clinic cost accounting system .  Actual compute r equipment 
and broadband service costs will be used.  All costs will be adjusted for inflati on, if necessary, using the 
Consumers’ Price Index (U.S. city average, all items) from the BLS.   The societal costs will be estimated by 
adding the participant cos ts to the clinic space, computer/broadband, and intervention staff costs to estimat e 
the incremental cost s from the societal perspective of VC vs. in -person interventions.  Average intervention 
costs will be the sum of intervention costs divided by the num ber of subjects in the study group.   As was done 
in the cost -effectiveness analyses of the Weight Wise intervention,95 we will assume the incremental costs 
associated with the inte rvention for the usual care group are zero .    
     
Cost-Effectiveness Analysis .  Cost-effectiveness estimates w ill be generated; we will estimate the cost -
effectiveness of each active treatment arm compared to usual care and to one another.  For each comp arison, 
the cost -effectiveness estimates will be generated by dividing the incremental costs —the difference between 
the costs associated with the intervention for the treatment arms —by the differential proportion achieving 2 kg 
weight loss at 6 months and maintaining to 12 months.   Secondary analysis will use , as the denominator of the 
cost-effectiveness ratio, QALYs calculated by mapping from the SF -36 to the SF -6D and then to utility weights 
during the 12 month trial period .96  We will use intention -to-treat analysis.  Baseline observations will be carried 
forward for any subject not completing a 6 -month or 12 -month assessment.  Additional s ensitivity analyses will 
include 95% confidence limits for the estimated delivery and resource use costs and computer and broadband 
access costs.  For the latter, we will complete a n analysis in which the costs of computer and broadband 
access are discounted by the proportion of persons in the target ag e and ethnicity groups shown in the latest 
Pew Internet and American Life Project survey to have home computer and broadband Internet.   Finally, we 
will estimate duration of effectiveness assuming 1) one-half of weight regained by 24 months  and 2) all of 
weight regained by 24 months.95  Health care costs related to  obesity are substantial97 however we do not 
expect significant impact on health care use or costs over a one year time frame in a relatively small sample  
and so health care use and costs will not be compared for the two intervention groups or for the control group .   
 
Secondary Measures: ALL GROUPS:  
Energy Expenditure and  Energy Intake .  Total and  Physical Activity  Energy Expenditure  (via accelerometry) .  
We will estimate physical activity EE and total EE using the Actigraph Accelerometer  We will use a 2-week 
period  requiring at least 7 days of continuous wear   Assessors will give instructions and observe the participant 
putting on the accel erom eter.  Persons  may be asked to  wear the accelerometer  on the right wrist and will be 
instructed not to remove the band for reasons other than showering/bathing/water immersion.  The assessor 
will call the next day to ask about any difficulties.  At 2 weeks, the assessor will make a visit to recover the 
acce lerometer .  It is important to note that these accelerometers will not have a display for participants to view 
and monitor their physical activity or EE.  We successfully used similar devices for one week in an exercise 
intervention among community health center  wome n66 and have  ongoing  experience with accelerometers in an 
ancillary study to the DPP Outcomes Study.  Energy Intake (via 24 -hour dietary recall).   At baseline, 6, and 12 
months, w e will complete  the 2010 National Cancer Institute (NCI) web -based 24 -hour dietary recall (ASA24)  
during the main assessment and again two weeks later when the a ssessor returns to recover the 
accelerometer (6 total dietary recalls).  The ASA24 uses v oice tutorial and navigation assistance for use in 
persons of all literacy levels that takes 20 minutes to complete online.  The ASA24 is based on the US 
Department of  Agriculture Automated Multiple Pass Method (AMPM) instrument currently used in the National 
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey.  The AMPM method is among the most valid approaches to dietary 
recall.102  A researcher web site allows researchers to register participants, set study parameters (e.g., number 
of recalls, time to complete a recall), and obta in analysis files.  NCI scientists have created algor ithms for 
combining recalls to estimate “usual intake” that we will use.103-104  The output  enable s computation o f total EI.  
Importantly, participants do not  view data from the ASA24.  We have NCI approval and registration to  use the 
ASA24 and have tested  it with  6 obese  community health center  patients using a laptop computer with network 
card and Internet service.   
 
Nutrition Literacy and Numeracy .  We will measure nutrition label competency at baseline and 6 months using 
the NVS.  For re -test at follow -up we will use an alternative ice cream  nutrition label but all questions will 
remain the same.   We will also use the Subjective N umeracy Scale  which correlates 0.6 and higher with 
objective  numeracy scales  and takes only a few minutes.105-106  Dr. Rothman  recently admini stered this to over 
600 patients and found good internal reliability and strong correlation with the more burdensome WRAT -4.  
 
Health.   Blood pressure  will be the average of two measures taken from the right ar m using an automatic 
device after the participan t has been resting 5 minutes in an upright, seated position.  Waist circumference will 
be measured to the nearest 0.1 cm at the midpoint between highest point of the iliac crest and lowest part of 
the costal margin in the mid -axillary line.  Health -Related Quality of Life  will be measured using the SF -36.  The 
SF-36 is well established, both on national populations107-108 and in our patient population.74  Test-retest 
reliability h as been consistently  in the 0.70 to 0.85 range.109  Adverse Events . An adverse event is any 
unwanted outcome.  An adverse event is considered serious if it is life or disability threatening  or requires 
significant medical treatmen t.  In all study arms , both non -emergent and serious adverse events will be 
recorded and handled as soon  as they become known to study staff.  The Data Safety and Monitoring Board 
will address adverse events and review existing safety protocols.  Note that  our IRB reviewed and approved 
the training and safety protocols that were used for the video -conference pilot s.  In addition to ongoing reports, 
and in a distinct database, blinded assessors will  document medical events a s part of the  assessments.  
 
Psychosocial.   Social support for dietary and exercise behavior  will be measured using the Social Support 
and Eating Habits Survey and the Social Support and Exercise Survey.110  Exercise Enjoyment will be captured 
using the physical activity enjoyment scale.111  This scale has 18 items that range from “I enjoy it” to “It’s no fun 
at all.”  Internal consistency has been around 0.9 and test -retest reliability 0.60 to 0.90.  Self-efficacy .  The 
Weight Efficacy  Lifestyle (WEL) questionnaire asks participants to rate their confidence in their ability to control 
eating in different situations —negative emotions, availability, social pressure, physical discomfort, and positive 
activities.  WEL has Cronbach alpha coe fficients from 0.70 to 0.90 and has been established in seven weight 
loss studies.112  Low-fat diet self -efficacy will be measured using a validated 16 -item scale .113  A 5-item, 
validated exercise self -efficacy scale will be used to measure confidence in ability to exercise in various 
situations, representing negative effect, resisting relapse, and making time for exercise.114  
 
c.20. Data Management.   As in our prior studies, asses sors will have laptop  computers with Microsoft Access 
software carrying the da ta collection instruments.  Access programs allow data to be input once, response 
restrictions to be set, data checks that are re al time, and facilitate skip patterns.  The data are backed up onto 
the data manager’s computer at each day’s end.  Access data will be in SAS files for editing and analyses.  All 
computers are password -protected so they can be accessed only by authorized personnel.  ASA24 data are 
stored on the NCI maintained site and will be merged into the local study dataset.  Assessors will give collected 
accelerometers to the data manager for data downloads within one business day of retrieval.  
 
c.21. Power and Sample  Size.   Based on evidence that a 2kg weight loss leads to a 20% reduction in 
hypertension15 and a 32% reduction in type 2 diabetes over three years ,16 2kg is a minimally clinically 
significant weight loss.   We have drawn on weight loss data from the POWER trial which was conducted 
through a community health center  and provided 12 month weight change data .  Based on these data, we 
expect 40% in the in -person and VC arms and 10% in the usual care arm to achieve a 2kg or greater weight 
loss.  The POWER trial obtained a 12 month weight measurement on 81% of randomized subjects but required 
a visit to the comm unity health center  for this measurement.  We have achieved 90% follow -up at 12 -months in 
our prior trials where we have conducted home assessments.  Assuming 90% follow -up, we need to randomize 
50 persons per arm to have 80% power to detect a difference o f 30% in the proportion achieving 2kg or more 
weight loss at a two -sided alpha level 0.025 for the two comparisons of an intervention arm to  usual care  arm.   
 
c.22. Study Limitations and Design Rationale .  
This is an efficacy trial  of weight loss servic es delivered via video -conference and in -person .  We have 
modified protocols successfully evaluated in prior trials for ease of use in community health center  populations.  
Piloting shows high participant satisfaction.  The use of home broadband Internet h as pros and cons.  Many 
barriers to participation in the target population are addressed by this technology.  But, increased broadband 
access and affordability as laid out by the FCC is a key for reaching socially and medically vulnerable 
populations.  Our  team elected not to limit the sample to persons who currently have home broadband 
because it would limit generalizability to a subset that will not exist in the years ahead.  In the very near future, 
through video -conference and broadband Internet, a  central interventionist could serve patients of multiple 
community health center s located v irtually anywhere in the nation.   For persons with equipment and broadband 
service , we estimate that $400 per participant would cover the costs to run the proposed 5 -month core 
program with a group size of eight.  With health care costs for an obese adult averaging $1, 429 more per year  
than for a non -obese adult97 this may be a reasonable cost to pay.  Following a successful trial of what is 
proposed here, future work would include tests of maintenance strategies and costs, including peer support 
models that have been successful in other formats.116  Dr. Stevens’ vast experience in weight loss 
maintenance will b e critical to these next steps.  