UF-GU-001 2020 -09-17 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 1 of 38  Version 7.1 
  
 A Single Arm Phase II Trial of the Intraoperative Intravesical Instillation of 
Mitomycin C During Nephroureterectomy for Urothelial Carcinoma of the Upper 
Urinary Tract  
 
Protocol  Number:  UF-GU-001 
IRB #: 201802090 
 
Coordinating  Center:  University of  Florida  
Principal  Investigator:  Paul Crispen, MD 
University of Florida 1600 SW Archer Road Gainesville, FL  32608 
Telephone: (352) 273- 8634 
Fax: (352) 273- 7515 
Email: paul.crispen@urology.ufl.edu 
Statistician:  Shu Wang, PhD  
Protocol  Managers:  UFHCC Protocol Management Office pmo@cancer.ufl.edu 
 
Clinical Phase:  Phase II  
IND Status:  IND 141176 
Investigational Agent(s):         mitomycin C  
Date of  Original  Protocol:  January  4, 2018 
Date of  Current  Protocol:  September 17, 2020 
NCT#  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 Version of  Current  Protocol:   7.1 
 
PROTOCOL REVISION RECORD Version 7.0, dated 13MAR2020  
       Version 6.0, dated 18JUN2019 
Version 5.0, date d 2MAY2019 
Version 4.0, dated 25FEB2019 
Version 3.0, dated 16NOV2018 Version 2.0, dated 15OCT2018 
 Keywords :  urothelial carcinoma; mitomycin c; upper urinary tract; nephroureterectomy  

UF-GU-001 2020 -09-17 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 2 of 38  Version 7.1 
  
 TABLE OF CONTENTS  
TABLE OF CONTENTS  ................................................................................................................ 2 
ABBREVIATIONS  ......................................................................................................................... 3 
Protocol Signature P age .................................................................................................................... 5 
PROTOCOL SYNOPSIS  .................................................................................................................. 7 
1. BACKGROUND  ..................................................................................................................... 11 
2. OBJECTIVE  ............................................................................................................................ 13 
3. STUDY  DESIGN  .................................................................................................................... 13 
4. SELECTION OF SUBJECTS  ................................................................................................. 13 
5. REGISTRATION  PROCEDURES  ......................................................................................... 15 
6. STU DY PROCEDURES  ......................................................................................................... 15 
7. STUDY  TREATMENT  .......................................................................................................... 16 
8. TREATMENT  DISCONTINUATION  ................................................................................... 18 
9. STUDY DRUG INFORMATION  .......................................................................................... 20 
10. ADVERSE  EVENTS  .............................................................................................................. 21 
11. STATISTICAL METHODS  ................................................................................................... 27 
12. DATA AND SAFETY  MONITORING  ................................................................................. 28 
13. EMERGENCY PROCEDURES  ............................................................................................. 29 
14. ADMINISTRATIVE, ETHICAL, AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS  ................ 29 
15. REFERENCES ........................................................................................................................ 33 
16. APPENDICES  ........................................................................................................................... 35 
Appendix A: SCHEDULE OF EVENTS  ........................................................................................ 36 
Appendix B: PERFORMANCE SCALE  ........................................................................................ 37 
 
UF-GU-001 2020 -09-17 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 3 of 38  Version 7.1 
  
 ABBREVIATIONS  
AE adverse event  
ALT  alanine transaminase (also  SGPT)  
ANC  absolute neutrophil  count  
AST  aspartate transaminase (also  SGOT)  
BTR  bladder tumor  recurrence 
BUN  blood urea  nitrogen  
CBC  complete blood count  
CI confidence  interval  
CRF  case report  form 
CRO  Clinical Research  Office  
CT computed tomography 
      CTCAE  Common Terminology Criteria for A dverse Events  
CTMS  clinical trials management  system  
DISC  Data Integrity and Safety  Committee  
DNA  deoxyribonucleic  acid 
eCRF  electronic case report form  
FSH follicle stimu lating  hormone  
GCP  Good Clinical  Practice  
HR hazard  ratio 
HRT  hormone replacement  therapy  
ICF informed consent  form 
ICH International Conference on Harmonization  
UF-GU-001 2020 -09-17 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 4 of 38  Version 7.1 
  
 IND Investigational New  Drug  
IRB Institutional Review Board  
MMC  mitomycin  C 
MRI  magnetic resonance  imaging  
NCI National Cancer  Institute  
NSAE  non-serious adverse event  
PI principal  investigator  
PMO  Project Management  Office  
POD0  post-operative day zero 
POD1  post-operative day one 
PS performance  status  
RBC  red blood cells 
RNU  radical  ureteronephrectomy  
SAE  serious adverse event  
SGOT  serum glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase   
SGPT  serum glutamic pyruvate transaminase 
TUR  transurethral  resection  
UF University of  Florida  
         UFHCC University  of Florida Health Cancer Center  
US United  States  
         WBC  white blood cell 
         WHO  World Health Organization  
        WOCBP  Women of C hildbearing Potential  
UF-GU-001 2020 -09-17 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 5 of 38  Version 7.1 
  
 Protocol Signature Page  
 
A Single Arm Phase II Trial of the Intraoperative Intravesical Instillation of 
Mitomycin C During Nephroureterectomy for Urothelial Carcinoma of the 
Upper Urinary Tract  
 
 
  
Principal Investigator Protocol Signature Page  
Signature of Investigator  
 Date (DDMMMYYY)  
Printed Name of Investigator  
Name of Facility  
Location of Facility (City/State)  
 
By my signature, I agree to personally supervise the conduct of this study and to ensure its conduct in 
compliance with the protocol, informed consent, IRB procedures, the Declaration of Helsinki, ICH Good 
Clinical Practices guidelines, and the applicable parts of the United States Code of Federal Regulations or local 
regulations governing the conduct of clinical studies.  
UF-GU-001 2020 -09-17 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 6 of 38  Version 7.1 
  
 STUDY SCHEMA  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Accrual Goal: 53 subjects  
 
Intraoperative administration of 
mitomycin C during 
nephroureterectomy  
 
 
Surveillance for bladder tumor 
recurrence  
UF-GU-001 2020 -09-17 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 7 of 38  Version 7.1 
  
 PROTOCOL SYNOPSIS  
 
 
Title:  A Single Arm Phase II Trial of the Intraoperative Intravesical 
Instillation of Mitomycin C During Nephroureterectomy for Urothelial Carcinoma of the Upper Urinary Tract  
 
Funding Organization:   
University of Florida  
 
Investigational 
Agent Supplier:   
Commercial supply  
 
 
 
 
Rationale:  We have recently completed a retrospective review of our experience at the 
University of Florida of the administration of intraoperative of mitomycin C 
compared to mitomycin C administered post -operative day one or later. 
Results of this study suggest that the timing of intravesical mitomycin C 
may impact bladder tumor recurrence rate following radical 
nephroureterectomy. This is the first stu dy of its kind to attempt to identify 
the importance of timing of mitomycin C administration relative to bladder 
tumor recurrence rate following radical  nephroureterectomy.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Objectives:   
Primary: 
• Determine the one -year bladder tumor recurrence rate in 
patients with urothelial carcinoma of the upper urinary  tract 
following intraoperative administration of mitomycin  C 
 
Secondary:  
• Evaluate the time to bladder tumor recurrence in patients with 
urothelial carcinoma of the upper urinary tract following intraoperative administration of  mitomycin  
 
• Determine the three -year tumor recurrence rate in patients 
with urothelial carcinoma of the upper urinary tract following intraoperative administration of mitomycin  C 
Study Design:  This is a single arm, open label,  phase II study.  
UF-GU-001 2020 -09-17 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 8 of 38  Version 7.1 
  
  
 
Accrual Goal:  A total of 53 subjects.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Inclusion 
Criteria:  Individuals eligible for study participation must meet the following criteria:  
 
A. Both males and females ≥ eighteen years of age  
B. Clinical diagnosis of urothelial carcinoma of the renal pelvis and/or 
ureter. Clinical diagnosis of urothelial carcinoma may be based upon radiographic, pathologic or cytological findings alone or in combination with one another .  No other histology is  allowed.  
C. The TNM stage of the subject’s disease (using the American Joint Committee on Cancer [AJCC] Cancer Staging Manual, 8th Edition) must be Tis, Ta, T1, T2, or T3, N0, M0. Subjects may have either a high- grade or low -grade  tumor.  
D. ECOG performance status of  0-2 
E. Written informed consent obtained from the subject and the ability for the subject to comply with all the study- related  procedures. 
F. Women  of childbearing potential  (WOCBP)  must  be using an adequate 
method of contraception to avoid pregnancy prior to and for at lea st 
three months after mitomycin C instillation to minimize the risk of 
pregnancy. Prior to study  enrollment,  women  of childbearing  potential 
must be advised of the importance of avoiding pregnancy during trial participation and the potential risk factors f
or an unintentional 
pregnancy.  
WOCBP include any woman who has experienced menarche and who has not undergone successful surgical sterilization (hysterectomy, bilateral tubal ligation, or bilateral oophorectomy) or who is not post-  
menopausal. Post - menopa use is defined as:  
• Amenorrhea that has lasted for ≥ 12 consecutive  months  
without another cause, or  
• For women with irregular menstrual periods who are taking hormone replacement therapy (HRT), a documented serum follicle -stimulating hormone (FSH) level of greater than 35 
mIU/mL.  
G. Males with female partners of child -bearing potential  must  
agree to use physician -approved contraceptive methods ( e.g., 
abstinence, condoms, vasectomy) and should avoid conceiving children 
prior to and for three months following mitomycin C  instillation.  
H. Subjects must have hemoglobin ≥ 9 g/dL and a platelet  count  
≥ 100,000/μL.   
UF-GU-001 2020 -09-17 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 9 of 38  Version 7.1 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Exclusion 
Criteria:   
Subjects with any of the following will not be eligible for study participation: 
 
A.  Active urothelial carcinoma of the bladder within 12 months prior 
to enrollment  
B. History of adverse reaction to mitomycin C 
C. Subjects must not have evidence of regional or  metastatic 
disease.  
D. History of radical  cystectomy  
E. Planned radical cystectomy at the ti me of 
nephroureterectomy  
F. Females or males of childbearing potential who are unwilling or 
unable to use an acceptable method to avoid pregnancy prior to and 
for at least 3 months after mitomycin C  instillation.  
G. Females who are pregnant or  breastfeeding.  
H. History of any other disease, metabolic dysfunction, physical 
examination finding, or clinical laboratory finding giving reasonable suspicion of a disease or condition that contraindicates the use of protocol therapy or that might affect the interpretation of 
the results of the study or that puts the subject at high risk for treatment complications, in the opinion of the treating  physician. 
I. Prisoners or subjects who are involuntarily  incarcerated.  
J. Subjects who are compulsorily detained for treatment of  either 
a psychiatric or physical  illness.  
K. Subjects demonstrating an inability to comply with the study 
and/or follow -up procedures.  
 
 
Efficacy 
Assessments:  Patients will be evaluated for bladder tumor recurrence every 3 months for 
the first two years and then every 6 months for the third year following 
nephroureterectomy by cystoscopy and urine cytology with UroVysion 
testing if urine cytology results are aty pical or suspicious. Patients with 
suspected recurrence of urothelial carcinoma within the bladder will require 
bladder biopsy for histologic confirmation.  
UF-GU-001 2020 -09-17 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 10 of 38  Version 7.1 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Statistical 
Considerations:  The primary endpoint for this study is the bladder tumor recurrence (BTR) rate 
at 1-year post -surgery. A one -sided, one sample exact test of proportion will 
be used to assess the primary endpoint, 1- year BTR rates, with level of 
significance set at 0.10. T ime to BTR will be characterized using Kaplan - 
Meier plots. Log -rank tests and Cox proportional hazard modeling will be 
used to examine the impact of baseline characteristics. A p -value of less  than 
0.05 will be considered statistically significant.  
 
In our previous study, there was a 16% recurrence rate for those that received mitomycin C on day 0 and a 33% recurrence rate for those receiving it on day 1 or later. From this we will assume that the underlying proportion of BTR at 1 year is 25% for our population. A sample size of 53 subjects is needed to detect the decrease of 1 -year BTR rate from 25% to 12.5% based on Simon's 
optimal two -stage design and to reach more than 80% power with a one -sided 
type 1 error rate 0.10.  
 
In the first stage, 16 subjects  will be recruited and the study will be 
terminated early if 4 or more BTR happens. If the study proceeds to the 
second stage, 53 subjects will be studied. If the total number of BTR at 1 - 
year post -surgery is less than 10, the treatment will be considered  a success. 
The sample size was calculated using the PASS 16.  
Estimated Enrollment 
Period:   
48 months  
Estimated Study Duration:  84 months  
UF-GU-001 2020 -09-17 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 11 of 38  Version 7.1 
  
 1. BACKGROUND  
 
1.1 Urothelial Carcinoma Cancer  Therapy  
Urothelial carcinoma is projected to be the sixth most common malignancy in the 
United States in 2017, affecting over 79,000 individuals 1. The majority of urothelial 
carcinoma occurs in the bladder, while urothelial carcinoma involving the upper tract is relatively rare. Upper tract urothelial carcinoma accou nts for less than 10% of 
malignancies of the upper urinary tract 2. The incidence of upper tract urothelial 
carcinoma has slowly increased over the past 30 years, and treatment options continue to evolve 3. Radical nephroureterectomy with bladder cuff excisi on remains the 
standard surgical management for high- risk upper tract urothelial carcinoma and lower 
risk tumors not amenable to endoscopic management 2, 4. Unfortunately, recurrence in 
the bladder is common, occurring in 22- 47% of cases4.  
1.2 Overview of Mitom ycin in the Treatment of Urothelial  Carcinoma  
Mitomycin C (MMC) is an alkylating agent which cross links DNA between adenine and guanine residues thus blocking DNA synthesis and mitosis 5. Activity against 
urothelial carcinoma has been documented for over 50 years, including intravesical 
instillation.  
Intravesical MMC presents potential advantages over systemic use including direct 
contact of chemotherapeutic agent with the tumor and limited systemic toxicity. MMC is hydrophobic and characterized by a high m olecular weight resulting in slow 
diffusion and low capillary permeability, allowing for a deep penetration and persistent tissue concentration 5. 
Pharmacokinetic studies suggest there should be little systemic absorption of MMC 
from an intact bladder6. Dru g concentration has been shown to be more important than 
total dose with duration of exposure and drug concentration being more influential on tumor cell kill than dose 7. With the recognized importance of drug concentration on 
tumor cell kill the recommend ed concentration of MMC is 1 mg per ml and complete 
bladder emptying should be performed prior to instillation 8. 
The standard intravesical dwell time ranges from 60 to 120 minutes. Prior studies have demonstrated a benefit of a 60- minute dwell time over a 30- minute dwell time with a 
significant reduction in tumor recurrence noted in the 60- minute treatment group9.  
The prophylactic efficacy of MMC in decreasing bladder tumor recurrences following 
transurethral resection of bladder tumors is well documented. It is theorized the decreased recurrence rates are accomplished via both destroying implanted tumor cells after transurethral resection (TUR) and an ablative effect on residual cells at the resection site and on small overlooked tumors. A combined analysis  randomized trials 
including 2535 patients demonstrated a 20% decrease in tumor recurrence in patients receiving a single dose of chemotherapy with TUR compared to TUR alone 10. The 
timing of MMC administration has been documented to be an important factor on the 
rate of tumor recurrence following TUR. Early drug administration (within 24 hours) 
was noted to be superior over delayed drug administration (between 7- 15 days) in a 
randomized trial with a 30% reduction in tumor recurrence 11. 
UF-GU-001 2020 -09-17 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 12 of 38  Version 7 .1  
 These results are further supported by Kassien et al. whose trial demonstrated a 50% 
relative reduction of tumor recurrence when MMC is administered within 24 hours of TUR12. Finally, a meta -analysis of studies evaluating TUR alone and TUR with one 
immedia te instillation of chemotherapy noted a 39% decrease in the odds of recurrence 
with the addition of a single dose of chemotherapy compared to TUR alone 13. 
Two separate prospective trials have demonstrated a single dose of adjuvant intravesical 
chemotherapy with either mitomycin C or pirarubicin reduces the risk of BTR during the 
first year following radical nephroureterectomy 15,16. These results were confirmed in a 
meta -analysis by Deng et. al in 2014, with a pooled hazard ratio of 0.38 for patients 
receivi ng intravesical chemotherapy 16. Although the data are strong, the timing of 
intravesical chemotherapy administration varied significantly across these studies. Additionally, Lu et. al demonstrated underutilization of intravesical chemotherapy and 
significa nt heterogeneity of its timing among Society of Urologic Oncology members 17. 
It is clear that there is a paucity of evidence regarding the timing of intravesical 
chemotherapy on BTR and further investigation is  necessary.  
 
1.3 Rationale for Current  Study 
We ha ve recently completed a retrospective review of our experience at the University 
of Florida of the administration of intraoperative of mitomycin C compared to 
mitomycin C administered post -operative day one or later. A total of 51 patients were 
identified meeting our inclusion criteria. Patients were categorized into two separate groups based on the timing of mitomycin C administration: (1) patients who received mitomycin C on the day of surgery (POD0) and (2) patients who received mitomycin C on post -opera tive day 1 or later (POD1). Our primary endpoint was BTR rate within the 
first year after surgery. Our secondary endpoint was overall BTR rate during follow up. 
Associations between treatment groups and recurrence rates were assessed using 
Kaplan -Meier plo ts, log -rank tests, and univariable and multivariable Cox proportional 
hazard models. Mean length of follow -up for each group was 22.1 and 12.5 months, 
respectively (p=0.02). There were no statistically significant differences in baseline characteristics o f age, gender, race, surgical approach, tumor grade, tumor stage, 
surgical margins, nodal status, concomitant CIS, or history of bladder cancer.  
 
BTR rates at 1 year for the POD0 and POD1 groups were 16% and 33%, respectively 
(p=0.09). Overall BTR rates, including time points beyond the first year, were 23% and 
33%, respectively (p=0.16). Multivariable analysis noted that the POD0 patients had a significantly lower rate of BTR in the first year postoperatively (HR=0.082, 95% CI=0.01- 0.56, p=0.01). Other fa ctors that were associated with a higher rate of BTR 
within the first year were open surgery (HR=7.9, 95% CI=1.18- 53.88, p=0.03), positive 
surgical margins (HR=37.89, 95% CI=1.74- 825.35, p=0.02), and concomitant CIS 
(HR=10.8, 95% CI=1.08 -108.72). Our resul ts suggest that the timing of intravesical 
mitomycin C administration may affect the rate of BTR following radical nephroureterectomy (RNU) for urothelial carcinoma.  
 
1.4 Rationale for  Regimen/Doses/Schedule  
UF-GU-001 2020 -09-17 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 13 of 38  Version 7 .1  
 This is the first study of its kind to attempt to id entify the importance of timing of 
MMC administration relative to BTR following RNU. Based on these initial results we 
propose a single arm phase II trial to further evaluate the impact of intraoperative 
MMC on BTR.  
2. OBJECTIVE 
 
2.1 Primary  
• Determine the one -year bladder tumor recurrence rate in patients with 
urothelial carcinoma of the upper urinary tract following intraoperative 
administration of mitomycin C  
2.2 Secondary  
• Evaluate the time to bladder tumor recurrence in patients with urothelial 
carcinoma  of the upper urinary tract following intraoperative administration 
of mitomycin  
• Determine the three -year tumor recurrence rate in patients with urothelial 
carcinoma of the upper urinary tract following intraoperative administration of mitomycin  C 
 
3. STUDY DESIGN 
 
3.1 Study Overview  
This is a single arm, open -label, phase II study. Subjects with clinically localized 
urothelial carcinoma of the renal pelvis and/or ureter who are scheduled to undergo 
nephroureterectomy will be intraoperatively treated with mitomycin C duri ng their 
nephroureterectomy procedure. Subjects will then be monitored post -operatively for 
bladder tumor recurrence every three months for the first two years and every six months for the third year after their nephroureterectomy.  
 
Screening data will be reviewed to determine subject eligibility. Subjects who meet all 
inclusion criteria and none of the exclusion criteria will be entered into the study.  
 
Total duration of subject participation will be approximately three years. Total duration 
of the study is expected to be seven years.  
 
4. SELECTION OF  SUBJECTS  
 
Subjects with a diagnosis of urothelial carcinoma of the renal pelvis and/or ureter who 
meet the following inclusion and exclusion criteria will be eligible for participation in 
this study.  
 
4.1 Number of  Subjects  
A total of 53 subjects will be enrolled on this study.  
 
4.2 Inclusion Criteria  
UF-GU-001 2020 -09-17 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 14 of 38  Version 7 .1  
 Subjects must meet all of the following criteria to be eligible for study participation:  
A. Both males and females ≥ eighteen years of  age 
B. Clinical diagnosis of urothelial car cinoma of the renal pelvis and/or ureter. Clinical 
diagnosis of urothelial carcinoma may be based upon radiographic, pathologic or cytological 
findings alone or in combination with one another. No other histology is allowed.  
C. The TNM stage of the subject’s disease (using the American Joint 
Committee on  Cancer [AJCC] Cancer Staging Manual, 8th Edition) must be 
Tis, Ta, T1, T2, or T3, N0, M0. Subjects may have either a high- grade or 
low-grade  tumor.  
D. ECOG performance status of  0-2 
E. Written informed consent obtained from the subject and the ability for 
the subject to comply with all the study- related  procedures.  
F. Women of childbearing potential (WOCBP) must be using an adequate 
method of contraception to avoid pregnancy prior to and for at least 3 
months after  mitomycin C instillation to minimize the risk of pregnancy. 
Prior to study enrollment, women of childbearing potential must be advised of the importance of avoiding pregnancy during trial participation 
and the potential risk factors for an unintentional  pregnancy.  
WOCBP include any woman who has experienced menarche and who has 
not undergone successful surgical sterilization (hysterectomy, bilateral tubal 
ligation, or bilateral oophorectomy) or who is not post -menopausal. Post -
menopause is defined as:  
• Amenorrhea that has lasted for ≥ 12 consecutive months without another cause, 
or 
• For women with irregular menstrual periods who are taking hormone  
replacement therapy (HRT), a documented serum follicle -stimulating 
hormone (FSH) level of greater than 35 mIU/mL.  
G. Males with female partners of child -bearing potential must agree to use 
physician-  approved contraceptive methods ( e.g., abstinence, condoms, 
vasectomy) should avoid conceiving children prior to and for 3 months 
following mitomycin C  instillation.  
H. Subjects must have hemoglobin ≥ 9 g/dL and a platelet count ≥  100,000/μL. 
 
4.3 Exclusion Criteria  
Subjects with any of the following will not be eligible for study participation:  
A.  Active urothelial carcinoma of the bladder within 12 months prior to enrollment  
B. History of adverse reaction to mitomycin C 
C. Subjects must not have evidence of regional or metastatic disease.  
D. History of radical  cystectomy  
E. Planned radical cystectomy at the time of  nephroureterectomy  
F. Females or males of childbearing potential who are unwi lling or unable to use an 
acceptable method to avoid pregnancy prior to and for at least 3 months after  
UF-GU-001 2020 -09-17 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 15 of 38  Version 7 .1  
 mitomycin C instillation.  
G. Females who are pregnant or  breastfeeding.  
H. History of any other disease, metabolic dysfunction, physical examination finding, or 
clinical laboratory finding giving reasonable suspicion of a disease or condition that contraindicates the use of protocol therapy or that might affect the interpretation of the results of the study or that puts the subject at high risk for treatment co mplications, in 
the opinion of the treating  physician.  
I. Prisoners or subjects who are involuntarily  incarcerated.  
J. Subjects who are compulsorily detained for treatment of either a psychiatric or  physical illness.  
 
4.4 Inclusion of Women and Minorities  
Both men a nd women and members of all races and ethnic groups are eligible for this trial.  
 
5. REGISTRATION PROCEDURES  
 
All subjects must be registered with the UF Health Cancer Center prior to 
participation in this trial. This is not registration into the trial. Subjects failing to 
meet all study eligibility requirements will not be registered and will be unable to participate in the trial.  
 
6. STUDY PROCEDURES  
 
Please see the Schedule of Events located in Appendix A.  
 
6.1 Screening  Evaluations  
Written informed consent m ust be obtained prior to performing any study- specific 
evaluations or tests. Tests or evaluations performed as standard of care within the 
specified screening period, but prior to informed consent, may be accepted for this study and need not be repeated.  
A comprehensive medical history, physical exam, and assessment of ECOG 
performance status will be performed within 60 days pre -operatively. The following 
laboratory assessments will be performed within 60 days pre -operatively, with the 
exception of a urine pregnancy test, which will be performed the day of surgery in appropriate patients. Radiographic disease staging will be performed within 90 days preoperatively:  
• Laboratory  evaluations  
• Complete blood count (CBC), including red blood cell count (RBC), 
white  blood cell count (WBC), platelets, hemoglobin, and hematocrit  
• Basic metabolic panel (BMP), including sodium, potassium, chloride, bicarbonate, blood urea nitrogen (BUN), creatinine, and  glucose  
• Urinalysis  
UF-GU-001 2020 -09-17 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 16 of 38  Version 7 .1  
 • Radiographic disease  staging 
• CT scan or MRI or PET  CT of the abdomen and pelvis  
• Chest X -ray or chest CT or PET CT of  chest  
 
6.2 On Study Procedures/Evaluations  
Subjects will undergo a single instillation of mitomycin C during their 
nephroureterectomy as described in section 7.1. An adverse event assessment wi ll be 
performed before and after instillation of mitomycin C the day of nephroureterectomy, 
as well as within 30 days following mitomycin C instillation, during a clinic visit.  
6.3 Follow up/Survival  Evaluations  
Subjects will have a follow -up visit every three  months (+/ - 3 weeks) post -
operatively for two years to assess for bladder tumor recurrence. Subjects will have a 
follow -up visit every six months (+/ - 3 weeks) post -operatively the third year to 
assess for bladder tumor recurrence.  
Subjects will have the following procedures at each of these visits:  
• Urinalysis  
• Surveillance  cystoscopy  
Urine cytology with reflex UroVysion .  UroVysion testing will be performed if 
urine cytology result is atypical or suspicious . If recurrence of urothelial 
carcinoma within the  bladder is suspected at any point , a subject will undergo a 
bladder biopsy to confirm recurrence. Once recurrence has been confirmed, the subject will no longer be followed for purposes of this study.   
7. STUDY TREATMENT  
 
All subjects entering the screen ing phase will receive a unique subject number. This 
number will be used to identify the subject throughout the study. Subjects withdrawn from the study will retain their subject number.  
 
7.1   Treatment  Schedule/Administration  
A urethral catheter will be placed in a sterile fashion in the operating room and all urine 
will be drained. 40 mg of mitomycin C in 40 mL of sterile water will then be 
administered intravesically via a urethral catheter immediately following catheter 
placement. Immediately following mitomycin C instillation, the urethral catheter will be 
clamped for one hour. The nephroureterectomy procedure will start even while the 
urethral catheter is clamped. After this hour has elapsed, the mitomycin C will be 
drained from the bladder and the ur ethral catheter will be flushed with 100mL -200 mL 
(as clinically indicated) of sterile saline and drained. The urethral catheter will remain in place for the remainder of the surgical procedure. Timing of urethral catheter removal 
after the completion of the nephroureterectomy will be based on surgeon discretion.  
 
7.2 Specific Supportive  Care  
UF-GU-001 2020 -09-17 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 17 of 38  Version 7 .1  
  
7.2.1 Concomitant  Therapy  
Relevant medical history should be obtained at screening and include prior 
medications and treatment history. All medications taken within two weeks prior to screening will be collected .  
During the study, only concomitant  medication s used to treat side effects from the 
Mito -C installation  will be collected.  Standard of care medications used during 
surgery through discharge  will not be recorded.    
However, if another course of anti -cancer therapy is initiated prior to the thirty -day 
follow -up period visit; a record of concomitant medications will no longer be 
performed.  
 
If the use of any concomitant treatments (medications or procedures) becomes necessary, the treatment must be recorded, including the name of the drug or treatment, dose, route, date, indication for use, expected duration, and frequency of treatment.  
 
7.2.2   A llowed Concomitant Therapy 
Supportive measures consistent with optimal  patient care will be given throughout the study.  
 
Bladder  spasms:  Anticholinergics should be administered per institutional  
guidelines for treatment or urethral catheter related bladder spams if bothersome to the  patient.  
 
Dysuria:  Medications for urinary  pain relief should be administered 
per institutional guidelines for pain associated with urination. Urinary tract infection should be evaluated with a urinalysis prior to starting medications to treat the symptom of  dysuria.  
 
Nausea:           Anti -emetics should be administered per institutional  guidelines.  
 
Diarrhea:  Subjects should be provided with instructions on use of  
loperamide (Imodium) in the event of diarrhea, as well as instructions to contact the treating physician. Other anti-diarrheals are also allowed. Subjects should be given 
mouth care instructions per institutional guidelines. 
7.2.3 Prohibited Concomitant  Therapy  
Subjects are prohibited from receiving the following therapies during the 
Screening and Treatment Phase of this trial:  
• Antineoplastic s ystemic chemotherapy or biological  therapy  
• Immunotherapy not specified in this  protocol  
• Chemotherapy not specified in this  protocol  
UF-GU-001 2020 -09-17 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 18 of 38  Version 7 .1  
 • Investigational agents other than the study drug in this  trial 
• Radiation  therapy  
• Live vaccines within 30 days prior to the first dose of trial treatment 
and while participating in the  trial. 
 Examples of live vaccines include but are not limited to: measles, 
mumps,  rubella, chicken pox, yellow fever, rabies, BCG, and typhoid 
(oral) vaccine.  
 Seasonal influenza vaccines for injection are generally killed by virus vaccines and are permitted. However, intranasal influenza vaccines (e.g. Flu-Mist ®) are live attenuated vaccines and are not  permitted.  
 
7.3 Dose  Modifications  
The National Cancer Institute (NCI) Common Toxicity Criteria for Adverse Events Version 4 (CTCAE) will be used to grade toxicity (http://evs.nci.nih.gov/ftp1/CTCAE/About.html ).
 
 
7.3.1 Dose Modification  Table  
No dose modification to the single 40 mg intrave sical instillation of mitomycin C 
will be included in the study. No dose reduction is required based on intravesical 
administration and elimination via catheter drainage. Additionally, dose reduction 
is not anticipated based on results of prior randomized trials and published 
retrospective trials.  
 
7.3.2 Supportive Care  Guidelines  
Subjects should receive full supportive care, including transfusions of blood and blood 
products, antibiotics, antiemetics, antidiarrheals, analgesics, etc., when appropriate.  
 
7.3.3 Trial Stopping Criteria  
The Stopping Criteria for the study will be based on the occurrence of clinically significant and causally related serious adverse reactions higher than Grade 3 (as defined by the CTCAE criteria) which are life -threatening and require urgent medical 
intervention. The UFHCC DISC will monitor the study and will meet at regular intervals or as events dictate to review any emerging safety data. If serious adverse reactions as highlighted do occur, then the UFHCC DISC will be consult ed with respect to stopping 
the clinical trial.  
Stopping rule for efficacy corresponds with Simon optimal two- stage design as described 
in section 11.1. An interim analysis will be conducted when 16 subjects are enrolled and completed evaluation of the primary  endpoint.  If 4 or more  BTR at 1-year post-surgery  are 
observed, the study will be terminated  early.  
 
8. TREATMENT DISCONTINUATION 
 
8.1 Removal of Subjects from  Study  
UF-GU-001 2020 -09-17 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 19 of 38  Version 7 .1  
 Subjects who di scontinue participation in the clinical study on their own or subjects 
who are withdrawn by the investigator, for reasons other than completion of treatment 
or toxicity, will be defined as premature withdrawals.  
Subjects who are not initiated on study drug, but sign informed consent and undergo at least some of the screening procedures will be considered screening failures. A record 
of these subjects will be maintained by the study site.  
 
8.2 Criteria for  Study Treatment  Discontinuation  
A subject will be discontinued from protocol therapy under the following circumstances:  
• Any adverse  event which, in the Investigator’s opinion, requires termination of 
the study medication.  
• Substantial non- compliance with the requirements of the  study. 
• The subject  presents with a beta-HCG test consistent  with pregnancy. 
Pregnancy will be reported along the same timelines as a serious adverse event.  
• The subject uses illicit drugs or other substances that may, in the 
opinion of  the Investigator, have a reasonable chance of contributing 
to toxicity or otherwise interfering with results.  
• The development of a  second malignancy that requires treatment, which would 
interfere with this study.  
• The subject is lost to follow -up. 
• Development of an intercurrent illness or situation which would, in the 
judgment of the investigator, affect assessments of clinical status and the study 
endpoint to a significant degree.  
The Investigator will make every reasonable effort to keep each subject in the study unless it is in the subject’s best interests to discontinue participation. A description of the reason(s) for withdrawal f rom the study must be recorded on the case report form 
(CRF).  
 
Relevant visit data should be entered on the CRF and any unused study medication will be accounted for and returned for all subjects participating in the study, even for a brief period of time. Subjects who discontinue following entry will have relevant information 
completed and recorded on the CRF. All subjects who discontinue because of adverse 
events or clinically significant laboratory abnormalities should be followed up until they recover or stabilize, and the subsequent outcome will be recorded. If any subject should die during the trial or within 30 days of stopping study treatment, the Investigator will inform the UF Health Data Integrity and Safety Committee.  
 
8.3 Replacement of  Subjects  
Subjects will be replaced if they do not receive the single intravesical instillation of 
mitomycin C or if the nephroureterectomy is not completed in the protocol for any 
reason, or if the subject wishes to discontinue participation in the protocol, but is not 
discontinued for toxicity or any of the reasons listed in section 8.2. 
 
UF-GU-001 2020 -09-17 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 20 of 38  Version 7 .1  
 9. STUDY DRUG  INFORMATION 
 
9.1 Study Drug 
Name  
Mitomycin  C 
9.1.1 Identification  
Chemical name: 7 -amino -9-
methoxymitosane Chemical 
structure:  
 
Molecular formula: 
15H18N4O5 Molecular 
weight: 334.33 daltons  
Physical description: Mitomycin C is a blue -violet crystalline powder that is heat- stable 
and that is freely soluble in organic solvents.  
 
9.1.2 Packaging and Labeling  
Mitomycin C is packaged in sterile, single use vials. Each vial contains a sterile 
mixture of mitomycin and mannitol in a 1:2 ratio. Each vial contains either 5 mg mitomycin C and 10 mg mannitol, 20 mg mitomycin C and 40 mg mannitol, or 40 mg 
mitomycin C and 80 mg mannitol.  
 
9.1.3 Drug  Supply 
Mitomycin C will be supplie d commercially for this study.  
 
9.1.4 Storage, Handling and Dispensing  
Unreconstituted mitomycin C powder should be stored at controlled room temperature, 15 to 30°C (59 to 86°F). Mitomycin C powder should also be protected from light. To 
reconstitute mitomycin C powder for administration, add of 40 mL sterile water to 40 
mg mitomycin C powder and shake to dissolve. If mitomycin C powder does not dissolve immediately, let stand at room temperature until solution is obtained. Protect 
mitomycin C solution from ligh t. 
 
9.1.5 Contraindications  
Mitomycin C is contraindicated in patients who have had a hypersensitivity reaction 
to it in the past.  
Mitomycin C is FDA pregnancy category D and is contraindicated for pregnant women because it can cause fetal harm if administered during pregnancy. Females of 
childbearing potential should be advised to avoid becoming pregnant and should be 

UF-GU-001 2020 -09-17 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 21 of 38  Version 7 .1  
 informed of the potential for harm to the fetus.  
It is unknown whether mitomycin C is excreted in human milk. For this reason, 
women who are breast -feeding should not receive mitomycin C. 
Mitomycin C is also contraindicated for use in patients with thrombocytopenia, bleeding disorders, or an increased tendency for bleeding due to other causes. 
 
9.1.6 Special Warnings and Precautions for Use 
Mitomycin C s hould not be administered intravesicularly to patients with a 
known or suspected bladder perforation. 
 
9.1.7 Adverse Event  Profile  
Common side effects of intravesicular treatment with mitomycin C can include bladder 
irritation/inflammation, dysuria, fever, flu -like symptoms, skin rash, malaise, 
hematuria, urinary incontinence, urinary frequency, urine discoloration, and urinary urgency.  
Bladder fibrosis and contraction has also been reported following intravesicular treatment with mitomycin C, which in rare cases  has required cystectomy. Potential complications 
that could result from intravesicular treatment with mitomycin C can include urinary tract infection, fever > 101.3  
°F (> 38.5 °C), epididymitis, orchitis, abscess formation, hematuria with clot retention, myelosuppression, neutropenia, ureteral obstruction, pneumonitis, and hepatitis. 
 
10. ADVERSE EVENTS  
 
10.1 Definitions  
 
10.1.1  Adverse  Event  
The term “adverse event” (AE) includes any sign, symptom, syndrome, or illness that appears or worsens in a subject during the period of observation in the clinical study and that may impair the wellbeing of the subject. The term also covers laboratory findings or 
results of other diagnostic procedures that are considered to be clinically significant (e.g., that requires unschedul ed diagnostic procedures or treatment measures, or result in 
withdrawal from the study). An AE is therefore any unfavorable and unintended symptom or disease temporally associated with the administration of an investigational product, whether or not relate d to that investigational product.  
The adverse event may be:  
• A new illness/condition;  
• Worsening of a sign or symptom of the condition under 
treatment, or of  a concomitant  illness/condition;  
• An effect of the study drug;  or 
• A combination of 2 or more of thes e factors.  
No causal relationship with the study drug or with the clinical study itself is implied by the use of the term “adverse event.”  
UF-GU-001 2020 -09-17 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 22 of 38  Version 7 .1  
 The Investigator will probe, via discussion with the subject, for the occurrence of AEs 
during each subject visit and record the information in the site’s source documents. AEs will be recorded in the subject CRF. AEs will be described by duration (start and stop dates and times), severity, outcome, treatment and relation to study drug, or if unrelated, the cause.  
 
Surgical procedures themselves are not adverse events; they are therapeutic measures for conditions that require surgery. The condition(s) for which the surgery is required may 
be an adverse event. Planned surgical measures permitted by the clinical study protocol 
and the condition(s) leading to these measures are not adverse events.  
 
When a clear diagnosis is available that explains the abnormal objective findings, this 
diagnosis will be recorded as an adverse event and not the abnormal objective findings (e.g., viral hepatitis will be recorded as the adverse event and not the transaminase 
elevation). If a definitive diagnosis is not available, then the sign(s) ( e.g., clinically 
significant elevation of transaminase levels) or symptom(s) ( e.g., abdominal pain) will 
be recorded as the adverse event.  
Adverse events fall into the categories “serious” and “non -serious.”  
 
10.1.2  Serious Adverse Event  
 
A serious adverse event is one that at any dose of the study drug or at any time during 
the period of observation:  
• Results in  death  
• Is life -threatening (defined as an event in which the subject was at risk of 
death at the time of the event; it does not refer to an event which 
hypothetically might have caused death if it were more  severe)  
• Requires inpatient hospitalization  or causes prolongation of existing 
hospitalization (see note below for  exceptions)  
• Results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity  
• Is a congenital anomaly/birth  defect  
• Is an important medical event, defined as a medical event that may not be immediately life -threatening or result in death or hospitalization but, based 
on appropriate medical and scientific judgment, may jeopardize the subject or may require intervention (e.g., medical, surgical) to prevent one of the other serious outcomes listed above. Examples of such events include but are not limited to intensive treatment in an emergency department or at home for allergic bronchospasm; blood dyscrasias or convulsions that do not result in hospitalization. “Medically important” 
should be marked only if no other serious criteria are  met. 
 
An “unexpected SAE” is any SAE for which the nature, specificity or severity is not consistent with the currently known adverse event profile of the investigational agent(s).  
 
NOTE: The following hospitalizations are not considered SAEs in UFHCC clinical studies:  
UF-GU-001 2020 -09-17 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 23 of 38  Version 7 .1  
 • a visit to the emergency room or other hospital department lasting less 
than 24 hours that does not result in admission (unles s considered an 
“important  medical event” or  a life-threatening event)  
• elective surgery planned before signing consent  
• admissions as per protocol for a planned medical/surgical  procedure  
• routine health assessment requiring admission for baseline/trending 
of health status (e.g., routine  colonoscopy)  
• medical/surgical admission for purpose other than remedying ill health state that was planned before study entry. Appropriate documentation is required in these  cases.  
• admission encountered for another life circumstance that carries 
no bearing on health status and requires no medical/surgical 
intervention (e.g., lack of housing, economic inadequacy, caregiver respite, family circumstances, administrative).  
 
Clarification of the difference in meaning between “ severe” and “serious”  
The term “severe” is often used to describe the intensity (severity) of a specific event (as in mild, moderate, or severe myocardial infarction); the event itself, however, may be of relatively  minor medical significance (such as severe headache). Any grade ≥ 3 
adverse events  per CTCAE  are generally considered severe AE s. 
 
This is not the same as “serious,” which is based on the outcome or action criteria 
usually associated with events that pose a threat to life or functioning. Serious ness 
(not severity) serves as a guide for defining regulatory reporting obligations. 
 
10.1.3  Non-Serious Adverse  Event  
 
A non- serious adverse event is any adverse event not meeting any of the serious 
adverse event criteria.  
 
10.2 Period  of Observation 
Following the subject’s written consent to participate in the study, all SAEs must be collected, including those thought to be associated with protocol -specified procedures. 
Collection of all SAEs must continue until the postoperative clinic visit which will occur within 30 days after mitomycin C instillation. If applicable, SAEs must be collected that relate to any later protocol-  specified procedure (e.g., a follow -up skin 
biopsy). The investigator should notify the DISC of any SAE occurring after this ti me 
period that is believed to be related to the investigational product or protocol -specified 
procedure.  
The investigator will begin collecting non- serious adverse event (NSAE) information 
once administration of the investigational product is initiated. This NSAE information should also be collected from the start of a placebo lead -in period or other observational 
period intended to establish a baseline status for the subjects. Treated subjects, including those who were prematurely discontinued from the study, will be followed for any adverse events that occur during the study until 30 days following mitomycin C instillation. However, if another course of anti -cancer therapy is initiated prior to the 
UF-GU-001 2020 -09-17 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 24 of 38  Version 7 .1  
 end of this period, collection of adverse events will no l onger be performed, with the 
exception of events that may be possibly, probably, or definitely related to the 
investigational agent or are clinically significant.  
 
10.3 Documenting and Reporting of Adverse Events by Investigator   
 All adverse events must b e fully recorded in the subject’s case record  form.  Documentation must be 
supported by an entry in the subject’s file. A laboratory test abnormality considered clinically 
relevant, e.g., causing the subject to withdraw from the study, requiring treatment or causing 
apparent clinical manifestations, or  judged relevant by the investigator, should be reported as an 
adverse event. Each event should be described in detail along with start and stop dates, severity, 
relationship to investigational product, action taken and outcome.
 
 
Every attempt should be made to describe the adverse event in terms of a diagnosis that 
encompasses the component signs and symptoms. If only nonspecific signs or symptoms are present, then these should be recorded as separate diagnoses on the pages of the case report form.  
 
 All subjects who have adverse events, whether considered associated with the use of study 
drug or not, must be monitored to determine the outcome. The clinical course of the adverse event will be followed according to accepted standards of medical practice, even after the end of the period of observation, until a satisfactory explanation is found or the Principal Investigator considers it medically justifiable to terminate follow -up. Should the 
adverse event result i n death, a full pathologist’s report should be supplied, if possible. 
 
10.3.1 Assessment of Causal Relationship of Study  Drug  
The Investigator will provide an assessment of the potential causal relationship between adverse events and study medication by determining whether or not there is a reasonable possibility that the event was caused by the study medication. The relationship or association of the adverse event to the study medication will be characterized as not related, probably not related, possibl y related, probably related, or related:  
 
Not Related: There is not a temporal relationship to the study drug administration or 
the adverse event is clearly due only to the progression of the underlying disease state, 
intercurrent illness, concomitant medication, concurrent therapy, or other known 
cause.  
 
Probably Not Related: There is little or no chance that the study drug administration 
caused the adverse event; the event is most likely due to another competing cause, including intercurrent illness, disease progression, or expression of the disease state, or 
a reaction to a concomitant medication or concurrent therapy appearing to explain the reported adverse event.  
 
Possibly Related: The association of the adverse event with the study drug administra tion is unknown; however, the adverse event is not reasonably attributed 
UF-GU-001 2020 -09-17 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 25 of 38  Version 7 .1  
 to any other condition.  
 
Probably Related: When a reasonable temporal relationship exists between the 
adverse event and the study drug administration; significant symptoms abate upon discontinuation of the study drug and there is a reasonable explanation based on known characteristics of the study drug and there is no clear association with preexisting disease or therapy, intercurrent illness, concurrent therapy or other factor(s).  
 
Related: When the adverse event is a known side effect of the study drug or there is a 
temporal relationship to the administration of the study drug; or the adverse event reappears upon re - administration of the study drug (rechallenge); or the significant 
symptoms of the adverse event  
abate upon discontinuation of the study drug (dechallenge).  
 
10.3.2 Intensity of Adverse  Events  
The intensity of adverse changes in physical signs or symptoms will be graded according to the CTCAE version 4. For all other adverse events not described in the CTCAE, the intensity will be assessed by the Investigator using the following categories:  
 
Mild (Grade 1) – transient or mild discomfort; no limitation in activity; no medical intervention/therapy required.  
 
Moderate (Grade 2) – mild to moderate limitation in activity, some assistance may 
be needed; no or minimal medical intervention/therapy required. 
 
Severe (Grade 3) – marked limitation in activity, some assistance usually required; medical intervention/therapy required, hospita lization is possible.  
Life-threatening (Grade 4) – extreme limitation in activity, significant assistance 
required; significant medical intervention/therapy required, hospitalization or hospice care probable.  
 
Death (Grade 5) – the event resulted in death.  
 
10.3.3 Action Taken with Study  Drug  
 
The action the Investigator took with study drug as a result of the event should be 
recorded as one of the following:  
 
None – No action was taken with regard to the study drug as a result of the adverse event.  
Interrupted – Study drug was stopped due to the adverse event, but was later 
resumed at the same dose.  
Dose decreased – The dose of study drug was decreased as a result of the adverse event.  
Permanently discontinued – The subject was withdrawn from the study due to the adverse event.  
UF-GU-001 2020 -09-17 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 26 of 38  Version 7 .1  
  
Only one item should be chosen. If multiple actions apply, the following “worst case” 
scenario hierarchy should be used to determine the preferred entry: Discontinued > dose decreased > therapy interrupted.  
 
10.3.4 Definition of  Outcome  
The outcome of the AE should be recorded as one of the following:  
 
Resolved without sequelae – The subject fully recovered from the adverse event with no observable residual effects.  
Resolved with sequelae – The subject recovered from the adverse event with 
observable residual effects.  
Not resolved – The adverse event was present at the time of last observation.  
Death – The subject died as a result of the adverse event.  
 
10.4 Immediately Reportable  Events  
 
10.4.1 Serious Adverse Events  
The UFHCC Protocol Management Office (PMO) must be notified of the SAE within 24 hours of knowledge of the event by email at PMO@cancer.ufl.edu .
 
Serious adverse events (SAE's) must be documented on an FDA MedWatch 3500A form.  
In addition to completing appropriate subject demographic and suspect medication information, the report should include the following information within the Event Description of the MedWatch 3500A form:  
 
• Treatment regimen (dosing frequency, combination therapy)  
• Protocol description (and number, if  assigned)  
• Description of event, severity, treatment, and outcome, if  known 
• Supportive laboratory results and  diagnostics  
• Investigator’s assessment of the relationship of the 
adverse event to  each investigational product and 
suspect medication  
 
The MedWatch form must be emailed to the UFHCC Project Management Office 
(PMO; pmo@cancer.ufl.edu) and PMO will submit this form to the UFHCC DISC 
Safety Team within 5 days of discovery of the event. The original copy of the 
MedWatch form and any email correspondence must be kept within the Trial Master 
File at the study site. The site investigator is responsible for informing the IRB and/or the Regulatory Authority of the SAE as per local requirements.  
 
Follow -up information will be emailed or faxed to the UFHCC PMO using an FDA 
MedWatch 3500A form stating that this is a follow -up to the previously reported SAE 
and giving the date of the original report. Each re -occurrence, complication, or 
progression of the original event should be reporte d as a follow -up to that event 
regardless of when it occurs. The follow -up information should describe whether the 
UF-GU-001 2020 -09-17 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 27 of 38  Version 7 .1  
 event has resolved or continues, if and how it was treated, whether the blind was broken 
or not (if applicable), and whether the participant continued or withdrew from study participation.  
 
10.4.2 Other Events Requiring Immediate  Reporting  
All pregnancies, regardless of outcome, must be reported to the UFHCC DISC, 
including pregnancies that occur in the female partner of a male study subject. All 
pregnancies must be followed to outcome.  
 
Although overdose (dose variance of 10 % ) and cancer are not always serious by 
regulatory definition, these events should also be reported to the DISC in an expedited 
manner. In case the overdose did not result in any adverse event, the Investigator 
should report this as “overdose, no adverse event” on the SAE form and provide the 
intended amount, as well as the actual amount, of drug administered. In the event of 
overdose or exaggerated response, appropriate supportive  measures should be 
employed. Actual treatment should depend on the severity of the clinical situation and the judgment and experience of the treating physician.  
Pregnancies and overdoses should be documented and reported per the SAE reporting 
guidelines in section 10.4.1 above. 
 
10.5 IND Safety Reports Unrelated to this  Trial  
IND safety reports not occurring on this trial but involving the study intervention 
(outside SAEs) received from outside sources will be submitted to the Institutional Review Board per their guidelines.  
11. STATISTICAL  METHODS  
 
The sections below provide an overview of the statistical considerations and analyses.  
 
11.1  Sample Size  Determination  
 
The primary endpoint for this study is bladder tumor recurrence (BTR) rate at 1 -year post - 
surgery. In our previous study, there was a 16% recurrence rate for those that received 
mitomycin C on day 0 and a 33% recurrence rate for those receiving it on day 1 or later. 
From this, we will assume that the underlying proportion of BTR at 1 year is 25% for our  
population. A sample size of 53 subjects is needed to detect the decrease of 1 -year BTR 
rate from 25% to 12.5% based on Simon optimal two- stage design. A sample size of 53 
will allow more than 80% power with one -sided type 1 error rate of 0.10.  
In the first stage, 16 subjects will be recruited and the study will be terminated early if 4 or more BTR happen. If the study proceeds to the second stage, a total of 53 subjects will be studied. If the total number of BTR at 1- year post surgery is less than 10, the treatment 
will be considered a success. Sample size was calculated using PASS 16.  
 
UF-GU-001 2020 -09-17 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 28 of 38  Version 7 .1  
 11.2  Analysis of Primary  Endpoint  
A one -sided, one sample exact test of binomial proportion will be used to assess the 
primary endpoint, 1- year BTR rates, with level of significance set at 0.10. The 
proportion with BTR will be estimated, along with a 90% confidence interval.  
 
11.3Analysis of Secondary Endpoint  
Time to BTR will be characterized using Kaplan -Meier plots. Log rank tests and Cox 
proport ional hazard modeling will be used to examine the impact of baseline 
characteristics. A p -value of less than 0.05 will be considered statistically significant.  
 
12. DATA AND SAFETY  MONITORING  
 
12.1   Data Integrity and Safety  Committee  
 
This protocol will be reviewed and monitored by the University of Florida Health 
Cancer Center (UFHCC) DISC in accordance with their policies and procedures. They will review and monitor study progress, toxicity, safety and other data from this trial. Questions about subject sa fety or protocol performance will be addressed with the 
sponsor -investigator, statistician, and study team members. Should any major concerns 
arise; the DISC will offer recommendations regarding whether or not to suspend the trial. 
 
UFHCC DISC data and saf ety monitoring activities include:  
• Review of clinical trial conducted for progress and safety  
• Review of all adverse events requiring expedited reporting as defined in the  protocol  
• Review of reports generated by data quality control review  process  
• Notification of the sponsor -investigator of recommended action  
• Notification of sites coordinated by the UFHCC of adverse events requiring 
expedited reporting and subsequent committee recommendations for study 
modifications  
 
12.2 On-site Monitoring  
UFHCC monitor s will make monitoring visits to the trial sites periodically during 
the trial to determine if sites are complying with the protocol. Source documents 
will be reviewed for verification of agreement with data as submitted via the data collection system. The  site investigator/institution guarantee access to source 
documents by UFHCC or its designee and appropriate regulatory agencies. 
 
The trial site may also be subject to quality assurance audit by any collaborating sponsors or their designee as well as insp ection by appropriate regulatory agencies.  
 
It is important for the site investigator and their relevant personnel to be available during the monitoring visits and possible audits and for sufficient time to be devoted to 
UF-GU-001 2020 -09-17 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 29 of 38  Version 7 .1  
 the process.  
 
12.3 Principal Investigator Responsibilities  
As part of the responsibilities assumed by conducting this study, the Principal 
Investigator (PI) agrees to maintain and have available for monitoring adequate case records (accurate source documents and CRFs) for the subjects treated under this protocol.  
The PI will be primarily responsible for monitoring of adverse events, protocol violations, and other immediate protocol issues. The study coordinator will collect information on subjects enrolled through the use of electronic  or paper adverse event 
(AE) forms, CRFs, and informed consent forms.  
 
13. EMERGENCY PROCEDURES  
 
13.1   Emergency  Contact  
In emergency situations, the treating physician should contact the Principal Investigator by telephone at the number listed on the title page of the protocol.  
 
13.2 Emergency Identification of Investigational  Products  
This is a non -blinded, non- randomized study. Thus, there will be no need for unmasking 
procedures, and the identification of the investigational product can be made by simple inquiry to the investigational pharmacy. 
 
13.3 Emergency  Treatment  
During and following a subject’s participation in the study, the treating physician 
and/or institution should ensure that adequate medical care is provided to a subject for 
any adverse events, including clinically significant laboratory values, related to the 
study.  
 
14. ADMINISTRATIVE, ETHICAL, AND REGULATORY  CONSIDERATIONS  
14.1 Good Clinical  Practice  
The procedures set out in this study protocol pertaining to the conduct, evaluation, 
and documentation of this st udy are designed to ensure that the Principal 
Investigator and Co- Investigators abide by Good Clinical Practice (GCP), as 
described in International Conference on Harmonization (ICH) Guideline E6 and 
in accordance with the general ethical principles outli ned in the Declaration of 
Helsinki.  
The study will be conducted in compliance with the protocol. The protocol, any 
amendments, and the subject informed consent will receive Institutional Review Board 
(IRB) approval before initiation of the study.  
The Princ ipal Investigator will conduct all aspects of this study in accordance with 
applicable national, state, and local laws of the pertinent regulatory authorities.  
UF-GU-001 2020 -09-17 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 30 of 38  Version 7 .1  
 All potential serious breaches must be reported immediately to the UFHCC DISC 
and IRB of record, if applicable. A serious breach is a breach of the conditions and 
principles of GCP in connection with the study or the protocol, which is likely to 
affect, to a significant degree, the safety or physical or mental integrity of the 
subjects of the study or the scientific value of the study.  
 
14.2 Institutional Review Board  
Before study initiation, the investigator must have written and dated approval from the 
IRB for the protocol, consent form, subject recruitment materials/process (e.g., 
advertisements), and any other written information to be provided to subjects. The 
investigator should also provide the IRB with a copy of the Investigator Brochure or 
product labeling, information to be provided to subjects, and any updates. The 
investigator should provide the IRB with reports, updates, and other information (e.g., 
amendments, and administrative letters) according to regulatory requirements or 
institution procedures.  
 
14.3 Compliance with Laws and Regulations  
It is intended that the proposed study be conducted according to the International 
Conference on Harmonization E6 Guideline for Good Clinical Practice (GCP) and the Declaration of Helsinki. Please refer to the International Conference on Harmonization and GCP:  
http://www.fda.gov/oc/gcp/guidance.html ; 
Declaration of Helsinki: 
http://www.fda.gov/oc/health/helsinki89.html ; Code of Federal Regulations, 
Title 21: 
http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfcfr/CFRSearch. cfm]  
All UF Health Cancer Center investigator -initiated trials, meeting the criteria of the 
FDAAA’s applicable clinical trials,  will be registered with ClinicalTrials.gov by the 
Protocol Development Officer or assigned designee. All studies must be registered no later than 21 days after enrollment of the first participant. The Protocol Development Officer will maintain the respons ibility of updating trials registered with 
ClinicalTrials.gov; per the FDA’s updating requirements of information must  be updated  
at least every  twelve  months  and the registry  must  be updated within thirty days of any 
changes in recruitment status or compl etion of the  study.  
 
14.4 Delegation of Investigator  Responsibilities  
The Principal Investigator will ensure that all persons assisting with the study are 
adequately informed about the protocol, any amendments to the protocol, the study 
treatments, and their study -related duties and functions.  
The Principal Investigator will maintain a list of Co - Investigators and other 
appropriately qualified persons to whom he has delegated significant study-
related duties.  
UF-GU-001 2020 -09-17 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 31 of 38  Version 7 .1  
 Study personnel involved in conducting this study will be qualified by education, 
training, and experience to perform their respective tasks. This study will not use the 
services of study personnel where sanctions have been invoked or where there has 
been scientific misconduct or fraud (e.g., loss of medical licensure; debarment). 
Systems with procedures that ensure the quality of every aspect of the study will be 
implemented. 
 
14.5  Subject Information and Informed Consent  
Before being enrolled in this clinical trial, the subject must consent to participate after 
the nature, scope, and possible consequences of the clinical study have been explained in a form understandable to him or her. An informed consent document that includes both information about the study and the consent form will be prepar ed and given to the 
subject. This document will contain all ICH, GCP, and locally required regulatory elements. The document must be in a language understandable to the subject and must specify the person who obtained informed consent. 
After reading the in formed consent document, the subject must give consent in 
writing. The written informed consent will be obtained prior to conducting any study- related procedures or tests. The subject’s consent must be confirmed at the 
time of consent by the personally dat ed signature of the person conducting the 
informed consent discussions. A copy of the signed consent document must be given to the subject.  
The PI will retain the original signed consent document. The PI will not undertake any measures specifically required only for the clinical study until valid consent has been obtained.  
 
14.6 Confidentiality  
All records identifying the subject will be kept confidential and, to the extent 
permitted by the applicable laws and/or regulations, will not be made publicly 
available.  
 
Should direct access to medical records require a waiver or authorization separate from the subject’s statement of informed consent, it is the responsibility of the Investigator to obtain such permission in writing from the appropriate individual.  
 
Subje cts will be told that the IRB, UF Health DISC, or regulatory authorities may 
inspect their medical records to verify the information collected, and that all personal information made available for inspection will be handled in strictest confidence and in accordance with local data protection  law. 
 
14.7 Protocol  Amendments  
Once the study has started, amendments should be made only in exceptional cases. Protocol amendments cannot be implemented without prior written IRB approval except as necessary to eliminate immediate safety hazards to subjects. A protocol 
UF-GU-001 2020 -09-17 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 32 of 38  Version 7 .1  
 amendment intended to eliminate an apparent immediate hazard to subjects may be 
implemented immediately, provided the IRB and CRO are notified within five business days.  
All amendments will be submitted to the IRB and written verification that the 
amendment was submitted and subsequently approved is to be obtained.  
 
14.8  Case Report  Forms  
The Principal Investigator and/or his/her designee will prepare and maintain adequate 
and accurate participant case histories with observations and data pertinent to the study. Study specific Case Report Forms (CRFs) will document safety and treatment 
outcomes for safety monitoring and data analysis. All study data will be entered into 
OnCore® via standardized CRFs in a ccordance with the CTMS study calendar, using 
single data entry with a secure access account.  
An electronic case report form (eCRF) is required and must be completed for each 
included subject. The completed dataset is the sole property of UFHCC and should not be made available in any form to third parties, except for authorized representatives of appropriate Health/Regulatory Authorities, without written permission from UFHCC.  
 
14.9 Record  Retention  
Study documentation includes all eCRFs, data correction forms or queries, source documents, Sponsor -Investigator correspondence, monitoring logs/letters, and 
regulatory documents (e.g., protocol and amendments, IRB correspondence and approval, signed subject consent forms).  
 
Source documents include all recordings of observations or notations of clinical 
activities and all reports and records necessary for the evaluation and reconstruction of the clinical research study.  
Government agency regulations and directives require that all study documentation 
pertaining to the  conduct of a clinical trial must be retained by the study investigator. In 
the case of a study with a drug seeking regulatory approval and marketing, these  
documents shall be retained for at least two years after the last approval of marketing application  in an International Conference on Harmonization (ICH) region. In all other 
cases, study documents should be kept on file until three years after the completion and final study report of this investigational study.  
 
UF Health Cancer Center requires that all study documentation be maintained for at least 6 years from the date of final study publication. No study records may be destroyed without prior authorization from UF.  
UF-GU-001 2020 -09-17 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 33 of 38  Version 7 .1  
 15. REFERENCES  
 
1. Siegel RL, Miller KD, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2018. CA Cancer J Clin.  2018;68(1):7- 30. 
 
2. Rouprêt M, Babjuk M, Compérat E, Zigeuner  R, Sylvester RJ, Burger M, et al. 
European Association of Urology Guidelines on Upper Urinary Tract Urothelial 
Cell Carcinoma: 2015 Update. Eur Urol. 2015;68(5):868 -79. 
 
3. Raman JD, Messer J, Sielatycki JA, Hollenbeak CS. Incidence and survival 
ofpatients w ith carcinoma of the ureter and renal pelvis in the USA, 1973-
2005. BJU Int. 2011;107(7):1059 -64. 
 
4. Rouprêt M, Babjuk M, Compérat E, Zigeuner R, Sylvester RJ, Burger M, et al. European Association of Urology Guidelines on Upper Urinary Tract Urothelial 
Carc inoma: 2017 Update. Eur Urol. 2018;73(1):111- 22. 
 
5. Serretta V, Gesolfo C, Alonge V, et al. Mitomycin C from birth to adulthood. 
Urologia 2016; 83(suppl  2):s2 -s6. 
 
6. Van Helsdingen PJ, De Bruijin EA, Seeborn, HP, et al. Behavior and 
absorption of mitomycin C f ollowing multiple intravesical 
administrations. J Pharm Sci. 1988; 77(10):843 - 846. 
 
7. Gao X, Au JLS, Badalament RA, et al. Bladder tissue uptake of mitomycin C 
during intravesical therapy is linear with drug concentration in urine. Clin Care 
Res. 1998;4(1): 139- 143.  
 
8. Hopkins SC, Buice RG, Matheny R, et al. The stability and antitumor activity of  
recycled (intravesical) mitomycin C. Cancer,  1984;53(10):2063- 2068. 
 
9. De Bruijin EA, Sleeboom HP, van Helsdingen PJ, et al. Pharmacodynamics and 
pharmacokinetics of intravesical mitomycin C upon different dwelling times. Int 
J Cancer. 1992;51(3):359- 364. 
 
10. Pawinski A, Sylvester R, Kurth KH, et al. A combined analysis of European 
Organization for Research and Treatmen t of Cancer, and Medical Research 
Council randomized clinical trials for the prophylactic treatment of stage TaT1 bladder cancer. J Urol. 1996;156(6):1934- 1940. 
 
11. Bouffioux C, Kurth KH, Bono A, et al. Intravesical Adjuvant chemotherapy for  
superficial transitional cell bladder carcinoma: results of 2 European 
Organization for Research  and 
UF-GU-001 2020 -09-17 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 34 of 38  Version 7 .1  
  
Treatment of Cancer randomized trials with mitomycin C and doxorubicin 
comparing early versus delayed instillations and short -term versus long -term 
treatment. J. Urol. 1995;153(3 pt 2):934- 941. 
 
12. Kaasinen E, Rintala E, Hellstrom P, et al. Factors explaining  recurrence in 
patients undergoing chemoimmunotherapy regimens for frequently recurring 
superficial  bladder carcinoma. Eur Urol.  2002;42(2):167- 174. 
 
13. Sylvester RJ, Oosterlinck W, van der Meijden APM. A single immediate postoperative instillation  of chemotherapy  decreases the risk of recurrence in 
patients  with Stage  Ta T1 bladder cancer: a meta- analysis of published results 
of randomized clinical trials. J Urol. 2004;171(6 pt  1):2186 -2190. 
 
14. O'Brien T, Ray E, Singh R, Coker B, Beard R, Oncology BAoUSS o. 
Prevention of bladder tumours after nephroureterectomy for primary upper 
urinary tract urothelial carcinoma: a prospective, multicentre, randomised 
clinical trial of a single  postoperative intravesical dose of mitomycin C (the 
ODMIT -C Trial). Eur Urol.  2011;60(4):703 -10. 
 
15. Ito A, Shintaku I, Satoh M, Ioritani N, Aizawa M, Tochigi T, et al. Prospective 
randomized phase II trial of a single early intravesical instillation of pirarubicin (THP) in the  prevention of bladder recurrence after nephroureterectomy for upper 
urinary tract urothelial carcinoma: the THP Monotherapy Study Group Trial. J Clin Oncol. 2013;31(11):1422- 7. 
 
16. Deng X, Yang X, Cheng Y, Liu X, Wu B, Wang Z, et al. Prognostic value and efficacy valuation of postoperative intravesical instillation in primary urothelial carcinomas of upper urinary tract. Int J Clin Exp Med.  
2014;7(12):4734- 46. 
 
17.  Lu DD, Boorjian SA, Raman JD. Intravesical chemotherapy use 
after radical nephroureterectomy: A national survey of urologic oncologists. Urol Oncol. 2017;35( 3):113.e1- .e7. 
 
UF-GU-001 
UF-GU-001 2020 -09-17 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 35 of 38  Version 7.1   
 16. APPENDICES  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Page intentionally left blank. Please proceed to the following  page.)  
 
UF-GU-001 
UF-GU-001 2020 -09-17 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 36 of 38  Version 7.1   
  
Appendix A: SCHEDULE OF EVENTS  
 
 
VISIT:  
 
PROCEDURE:  PREOPERATIVE SCREENING 
(UP TO 60 DAYS BEFORE DATE 
OF NEPHROURETERECTOMY;  
RADIOLOGIC ASSESSMENTS  
MAY BE PERFORMED UP TO 90 
DAYS PREOPERATIVELY )   
 
NEPHROURETERECTOMY  
POST - 
OPERATIVE 
FOLLOW UP1 
Informed Consent  X   
Medical History  X   
Physical Exam  X   
ECOG Performance Status 
Assessment  X   
CT or MRI or PET CT of the abdomen  
and pelvis2 X   
Chest X -Ray or chest CT or PET CT  
of chest2 X   
CBC3 X   
BMP4 X   
Urinalysis  X  X 
Urine Pregnancy Test8 X   
Mitomycin C Administration5  X  
Adverse Event Assessmente  X  
Surveillance Cystoscopy    X 
Urine Cytology    X 
UroVysion Testing (if indicated)6   X 
Bladder Biopsy7   X 
1 Subjects will first be monitored for bladder tumor recurrence every three months (± 3 weeks) for the first two years post - 
operatively. Subjects will then have a follow -up visit every six months (+/ - 3 weeks) for the third year post- operatively to assess for 
bladder tumor  recurrence.   Follow up visits will discontinue upon confirmation of bladder tumor recurrence.  
2 Radiologic  disease staging  evaluation  will be by CT or  MRI  or PET CT of the abdomen and pelvis  and chest  X-Ray or chest  C or 
PET CT of  chest.  
3 Complete  blood count (CBC)  is to include  red blood cell count  (RBC), white  blood cell count  (WBC),  platelets,  hemoglobin,  and 
hematocrit will be completed as described in section 6.1. 
4 Basic  metabolic  panel  is to include  sodium,  potassium,  chloride,  bicarbonate,  blood urea nitrogen  (BUN),  creatinine,  and glucose 
will be completed as described in section  6.1. 
5 Mitomycin C is to be administered as described in section  7.1. 
6 UroVysion will be performed if urine cytology result is atypical or  suspicious , 
7 A bladder biopsy will be required only if  bladder tumor recurrence is suspected based upon cystoscopy or urine testing findings for 
histologic confirmation of  recurrence.  
8 Urine pregnancy testing will be completed on the day of the nephroureterectomy prior to the  nephroureterectomy.  
9 Adverse event assessment will be as described in section 10  
 
UF-GU-001 
UF-GU-001 2020 -09-17 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 37 of 38  Version 7.1   
  
Appendix B: PERFORMANCE SCALE  
 
ECOG Performance Status Scale  
Grade  Descriptions  
0 Normal activity  
Fully active, able to carry on all pre -disease performance without restriction  
1 Symptoms, but ambulatory 
Restricted in physically strenuous activity, but ambulatory and able to carry out 
work of a light or sedentary nature ( e.g., light housework, office work)  
2 In bed < 50% of the time  
Ambulatory and capable of all self -care, but unable to carry out any work activities 
Up and about more than 50% of waking hours  
 
3 In bed > 50% of the time  
Capable of only limited self -care, confined to bed or chair more than 50% of waking 
hours  
4 100% bedridden Completely disabled 
Cannot carry on any self -care 
Totally confined to bed or chair  
5 Dead  
 