Dental Appliance for Parkinson Disease (DAPD)  
 
1 
 Official Title: Dental Appliance for Parkinson ’s Disease  
NCT Number:  04082663  
Document Date:  April 23, 2019   
Dental Appliance for Parkinson Disease (DAPD)  
 
2 
 I. SPECIFIC AIMS  
The primary objective of this study is to determine if the use of a dental mouthpiece  can improve 
gait and motor signs and symptoms, sleep, or quality of life for people with Parkinson’s disease 
(PD).  We will conduct a pilot study with participants who have been diagnosed with PD 
recruited from the community. For this study, participants will have one in -person study visit 
where they will be fitted with a  dental mouthpiece  and complete motor tests while wearing the 
mouthpiece and while not wearing the mouthpiece. Participants will also complete sleep 
questionnaires and quality of life ques tionnaires. Participants will then be asked to take the 
mouthpiece home and wear it at night while they sleep and during the day, except while eating , 
for one month . At the end of th e month, they will complete the same sleep and quality of life 
questionnai res a dministered remotely by mail and answer questions about their experience with 
the dental mouthpiece.   
 
Specific Aim 1:  To determine the immediate effect of a dental mouthpiece on Parkinsonian gait 
and motor symptoms. A 4.8m GAITRite (CIR Systems, Inc. , Franklin, NJ) will be utilized to 
quantify gait mechanics with and without mouthpiece use. Gait and balance tasks will be 
assessed.   
Hypotheses:  
a. People with PD will show improvements in gait speed with the mouthpiece in place 
compared to without.  
b. People  with PD will show improvements in balance with the mouthpiece in place 
compared to without.  
 
Specific Aim 2:  To determine the longer -term feasibility of use and effect of dental  mouthpiece 
on sleep  and quality of life (QOL) for people with PD.  
Hypotheses:  
a. People with PD will show improvements in sleep quality and duration after one 
month of wearing the mouthpiece as compared to baseline.   
b. People with PD will show improvements in health -related quality of life after one 
month of wearing the mouthpiece as compared to baseline.   
 
II. BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE  
For people with Parkinson’s disease  (PD) advances in medical treatments have 
increased lifespans but have not effectively mitigated the decline in function and the 
characteristic signs and symptoms of the disease.1, 2 People with PD often report disturbances in 
sleep, activities of daily li ving, and general quality of life . Gait and balance dysfunction are 
known to negatively affect quality of life in this patient population and are considered risk factors 
for falls.3 Walking ability appears to be particularly important in this population, a s impairments 
in ambulation tend to precede impairments with other gait -dependent activities.4   
Dental Appliance for Parkinson Disease (DAPD)  
 
3 
 Several clinical reports and case studies have shown assorted benefits from use of a 
dental mouthpiece  in people with PD. Specific characteristics of these mouthpieces  differ 
somewhat across cases, but the mouthpieces are typically modeled after those used for 
temporomandibular joint disorder. A clinical report for one woman with PD showed 
improvements in grip strength and subjective improvements in motor functi on and quality of life 
while using a mouthpiece.5 This report relied on observation for determining improvements in 
motor function and did not report a formal quality of life measure or questionnaire. In another 
case report, a participant subjectively repo rted use of a bruxism splint improved their sleep 
quality and fatigue levels.6 However, again, no quality of life or sleep measures were reported.6 
A more recent case study found some objective improvements in selected gait and 
balance measures in a participant with P D while using a dental mouthpiece .7 The Four Square 
Step Test and grip strength in the non -dominant hand showed significant improvements with the 
mouthpiece  compared to the patient’s baseline condition without the mouthpiece . Additionally , 
this participant reported significant increases in quality of life while using the mouthpiece , as 
evidenced by significant improvements in P arkinson Disease Questionnarie -39 (PDQ39) and 
Global Rate of Change Scale. The researchers reported the participan t’s gait mechanics 
differed with use of the mouthpiece , with the participant holding his arms closer to midline.7 
The mechanism underlying the mouthpiece’s effect  on gait and motor function is not well 
understood. It is possible that because afferent inputs from the trigeminal nerve project to the 
nucleus raphe of the reticular formation, abnormal input from the mandibular branch of the 
trigeminal nerve may affect rhythmic motor function and balance.8  Stimulation of the nucleus 
raphe can produce rhythmic contractions of muscle groups which could potentially affect gait 
and posture.8 A mouthpiece  may function to promote a more optimal maxillomandibular vertical 
interrelationship and reduce irritation or abnormal feedback from the mandibular branch of the 
trigeminal nerve, or more specifically the auriculotemporal nerve, to the nucleus raphe.9  
Current knowledge regarding the effects of a mouthpiece  on motor function and quality 
of life in people with PD is limited by slight variance in design between mouthpieces  and by the 
small number of participants studi ed thus far. Our understanding of the topic is based on a small 
handful of clinical reports an d case studies. By conducting an exploratory pilot s tudy, we will 
examine whether a  mouthpiece  can affect motor symptoms and gait in a larger gro up of 
participants with PD. Additionally, we will determine whether use of a mouthpiece  can improve 
sleep and q uality of life in people with PD. Donald R. Moeller, DDS, MD, MA , ThM  will custom 
fabricate the mouthpieces  for this study. Dr. Moeller has authored several peer -reviewed, 
journal -published studies in which he fabricated mouthpieces  to treat various sympto ms 
resulting from neurological disorders .10,11   
 
III. METHODS  
Participants  
Participants will be recruited from the community.  
For inclusion in the study, participants must:  
(1) have a diagnosis of idiopathic, typical Parkinson Disease according to the UK Brain 
Bank Criteria, Hoehn & Yahr stages 1 -3; 
Dental Appliance for Parkinson Disease (DAPD)  
 
4 
 (2) stable PD medications for the two weeks prior to baseline  visit;  
(3) be able to walk at least 10 m eters  at baseline with or without an assistive device;  
(4) have their own teeth and/or dentures;  
(5) be willing to try to wear a mouthpiece for one month;  
(6) are over the age of 30; and 
(7) provide written or verbal informed consent.   
Exclusion criteria include:  
(1) pre-existing medical conditions that wou ld inhibit full participation in the study’s tasks ;  
(2) absence of any dentition ;  
(3) cognitive impairments indicated by Mini Mental Status Exam (MMSE) score of <24 ;  
(4) freezing of gait which moderately or severely impacts walking ; or 
(5) current  use of an oral appliance (e.g., a dental mouthpiece, retainer, or braces ). 
 
Measures and Materials  
The MMSE will be administered to ensure absence of cognitive impairment.  The New Freezing 
of Gait Questionnaire ( nFOG ) includes participants watching a short video about freezing of gait 
and a questionnaire about whether they experience freezing of gait and if so, questions that 
help describe the types of freezing of gait they experience.  
Mouthpiece  
Each participant will be fitted with a maxillary orthotic (mouthpiece) fabricated by Dr. Moeller.  
The process for fabrication of the mouthpiece will be as follows:  
1) The participant  is seated in a normal straight -backe d chair with feet on the floor.  
2) A dental impression tray is size d appropriately for the participant’s  lower jaw to e nsure 
that no impingement o f soft tissue structures occurs . 
3) A quick setting dental alginate impression m aterial is mixed for one minute and then 
placed i nto the dental impression tray.  
4) The dental impression tray is fi lled with the alginate material, and the  tray and material 
are placed into the participant’s mouth.  
5) The tray will remain in the mouth approximately 1  to 2 minutes and will then be 
removed.  
6) A fast se tting dental stone is placed in the tra y. 
7) The dental stone is allowed to set for one -half h our in the alginate impression.  
8) The dental s tone model is removed from the alginate impression.  
9) The lower jaw model is trimmed and then taken to the dental  vacuum f ormer machi ne 
where a poly -vinyl-acetate ( medical-dental grade) thermoplastic  sheet of material is 
heated to a temperature to all ow deformation of the material.  
Dental Appliance for Parkinson Disease (DAPD)  
 
5 
 10) The vacuum is turned on and the thermoplastic material is sucked down over the 
dental stone model. A small 5  mm wide s trip of thermoplastic material is placed directly 
over the occlusal portion of all the mandibular tee th to act as a reinforcement.  
11) The thermoplastic material is cooled to below room temperature  with cold water until 
stiff. 
12) All thermoplastic material which approximates any structu re but the dental hard 
tissue (teeth ) is removed from a height ju st above the attached gingival tissue so that the 
mouthpiece  will be entirely tooth borne.  
13) The occlusal material is adj usted at chairside so that an even continuous contact 
with the maxillary t eeth is created on all teeth from the rear -most molar teeth including 
anterior teeth. The mouthpiece  will then have the general appearance of  a "horse shoe" 
in shape.  
14) All areas w hich contact oral soft tissue on the perimeter of the device will be 
smoothed to allow placement without any trauma or discomf ort to any tissue in the 
participant’ s mouth.  
15) The mouthpiece  will be placed in the participant’s mouth for a period of about ten 
minutes to ensure there is no interference  with any normal jaw and biting movements . 
The mouthpiece  is fabricated with polyvinyl  ethylene acetate which is non -toxic to humans.  
There are similar mouthpieces  sold over the cou nter by pharmacies for patient use without a 
physician /dentist’s prescription.   
Participants will be instructed to return the mouthpiece at the end of the study period.  
Motor assessments  
Movement Disorder Society -Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale Part III (MDS -UPDRS -III) 
Motor subsection will be used to assess disease severity.   
The GAITRite system will be used to assess gait performance. The GAITRite is a portable 
electronic walkway mat (600 cm long and 64 cm wide). All participants will walk alo ng the mat 
so that imbedded sensors are activated by foot pressure and deactivated when pressure is 
released. A computer will process the footsteps for gait velocity (cm/s) . The mat is located in a 
well-lit room, with starting and ending limits marked one meter from the mat to prevent recording 
acceleration and deceleration phases.    
Balance will be assessed using the Mini -BESTest. The Mini -BESTest is a 14 -item evaluation 
designed to assess a variety of balance components.   
Quality -of-life questionnaires  
Parkinson’s Disease Questionnaire -39 (PDQ -39) contains 39 self -report items designed 
specifically for people with PD. There are eight subscores that are calculated along with a total 
score.  
Parkinson’s Disease Sleep Scale (PDSS)  contains 15 self -report items designed specifically to 
assess various indicators of sleep quality in people with PD.  
Dental Appliance for Parkinson Disease (DAPD)  
 
6 
 Participant information  
Participants will fill out a demographic form, a medication form, and medical comorbidity form at 
the in -person visit, and note any changes in their health or medications after wearing the 
mouthpiece for one month .   
Journal  
Participants will keep a journal documenting how long they wore the mouthpiece at night and 
during the day, reasons for taking it out, and can make comments about the mouthpiece.  
Exit questionnaires  
Participants will complete  an open -ended exi t questionnaire regarding their experience with the 
mouthpiece and the Global Rate of Change Scale (GRC) after wearing  the mouthpiece for one 
month.  
 
Proto col 
A phone screen will be used to screen for preliminary study suitability. If the potential participant 
passes the phone screen and would like to enroll in the study, we will then schedule them for 
their in -person visit.  
The first visit will be  in-person on the ground floor of the Movement Science Research Center at 
4444 Forest Park Ave, St. Louis, MO, 63110. The study visit will follow the following schedule:  
Informed consent, MMSE, nFOG  (15 minutes):  A trained researcher will review the infor med 
consent document with the participant, outlining the study objectives and ensuring the 
participants have the opportunity to ask the researcher any questions they may have regarding 
the study and procedure s. If the participant wants to continue, they wi ll sign the consent form. 
The MMSE will be performed to screen for cognitive impairments which would affect study 
participation.  The nFOG will provide us with information about freezing of gait if applicable.  
Motor Assessment #1 without mouthpiece  (45 mi nutes) : MDS -UPDRS -III, GAITRite, Mini -
Bestest (order will be randomized)  
Dental Measurements  (15 minutes) : Dr. Moeller will take dental measurements for the purpose 
of creating a custom -fitted mouthpiece as outlined in the Methods section.  
Questionnaires, Medical History, Medications  (30 minutes) : The participants will complete 
demographic, medical history/medications forms, sleep and quality of life questionnaires while 
their mouthpiece is being fabricated.   
Mouthpiece in  (25 minutes) : After their mouthpi ece has been fabricated and adjusted (smoothed 
as needed), participants will sit with the mouthpiece in for 25 minutes.  
Motor Assessment #2 with mouthpiece (45 minutes):  MDS -UPDRS -III, GAITRite, Mini -Bestest, 
(order will be randomized)  
Participants  who take  medication for Parkinson symptoms, will be asked to take their medication 
30 minutes before arrival to ensure participants are in the “on” phase for the motor tasks.  
Dental Appliance for Parkinson Disease (DAPD)  
 
7 
 At completion of the in -person visit, participants will be instructed to use th e mouthpiece as 
much as possible for the next month. Participants will be informed they can take the mouthpiece 
out while eating and will be instructed to keep track of how long they wear the mouthpiece each 
day by journal entry.  
Follow -up will occur one month later . 
Questionnaires, Medical History, Medications (30 minutes):  The participants will complete sleep 
and quality of life questionnaires, record any changes in their medical history or medications, 
and complete an open -ended questionnaire regarding their thoughts on the mouthpiece and the 
GRC.   
Randomization Method  
 
The order in which the motor assessments are given in regards to wearing the mouthpiece or 
not will be ra ndomized for each participant. The motor tasks ( disease severity, gait, balance) will 
be randomized within each participant.   
 
Safety and Adverse Events  
 
The research team will do everything possible to ensure safety of all participants over the 
course of this study. The adverse event most likely to occur in this study is risk of falling  while 
walking . Participants will be fitted with a gait belt. Members of the research team are trained in 
fall prevention and will closely monitor all participants throughout all aspects of the study in case 
of a need to assist with balance to prevent a fall. In the case of an adverse event, emergency 
medical care will be sought immediately if needed. Any  serious  adverse events will be reported 
to the local IRB immediately.  Occurrence of an adverse event will be noted in a participant’s file.  
 
Potential  risks will be addressed in the following ways:  
 
a) Discomfort in answering questionnaires: Participants may refuse to answer any questions 
they prefer not to answer.  
 
b) Loss of confidentiality: Loss of confidentiality is highly unlikely. To safe guard against this, we 
will comply with all HIPAA regulations. Data will not be identified by participant name. All data 
will be coded, and code sheets will be stored in locked files.  
 
c) Stumbling during locomotion : Participants will be closely attended by a trained research staff 
member during walking  and fitted with a gait  belt. Walking will be performed in a large, open 
space and the staff member will be prepared to assist participants who may stumble.  
 
d) Falling : Participants will be closely attende d by a trained assistant who will ensure the safest 
of conditions. It is unlikely that participants will experience falls during testing or will be injured 
as the result of a fall. If a participant appears unsteady, breaks will be encouraged or testing wil l 
be terminated.  
 
e) Fatigue from walking : Rest breaks will be provided as needed.  
 
Dental Appliance for Parkinson Disease (DAPD)  
 
8 
 f) Discomfort or irritation while being fitted for the mouthpiece or while wearing the mouthpiece : 
the participants may remove the mouthpiece at any time.  
 
Benefits  
 
We do not yet know the full extent to which the mouthpiece may improve symptoms associated 
with Parkinson disease. This study may help inform future treatment techniques to improve 
motor and non -motor function in people with PD.  
 
Interi m Monitoring and Earl y Stopping  
 
Data will be monitored throughout the  study  and, should any issues arise, we will adjust our 
protocol and submit any changes to the IRB project for review. We will not conduct interim data 
analyses.  
 
Statistical Analyses  Plan  
We will use paired t-tests to determine if there are differences between conditions  (with 
mout hpiece vs without mouthpiece). We will also use paired t-tests to compare sleep and quality 
of life questionnaire s from baseline (prior to study) to follow up (aft er one month of mouthpiece 
use). 
R will be used for data analysis across all aims.  
Power  
Because of the exploratory nature of this pilot study and relative lack of information in the 
literature, no formal power analysis was conducted.   
Dental Appliance for Parkinson Disease (DAPD)  
 
9 
 References:  
1. Olanow CW, Stern MB, Sethi K. The scientific and clinical basis for the treatment of 
Parkinson disease (2009). Neurology 2009;72:S1 -136. 
2. Shulman LM. Understanding disability in Parkinson's disease. Mov Disord 2010;25 Suppl 
1:S131 -5. 
3. Ellis T, Cavanaug h JT, Earhart GM, Ford MP, Foreman KB, Dibble LE. Which measures of 
physical function and motor impairment best predict quality of life in Parkinson’s disease? 
Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2011;17(9):693 -697 
4. Ellis TD C, JT, Earhart GM, Ford MP, Foreman KB , Thackeray A, Thiese MS, Dibble LE. 
Identifying clinical measures that most accurately reflect the progression of disability in 
Parkinson disease. Parkinsonism Relat Disord 2016;25:65 -71. 
5. Nomoto S, Nakamura M, Sato T, Hisanaga R. Occlusal treatment wit h bite splint improves 
dyskinesia in Parkinson’s disease patient: a case report. Bull Tokyo Dent Coll. 2013;54(3):157 -
161. 
6. Durham TM, Hodges ED, Henry MJ, Geasland J, Straub P. Management of orofacial 
manifestations of Parkinson’s disease with splint th erapy: a case report. Spec Care dentist. 
1993;13(4):155 -158. 
7. Lane, H , Rose, L, Woodbrey, M, Arghavani, D, Lawre nce, M and Cavanaugh, J . Exploring the 
effects of using an oral appliance to reduce movement dysfunction in an individual w ith 
Parkinson d isease. Journal of Neurologic Physical Therapy. 2017; 41(1):  52-58. 
8. Torvik, A. Afferent connections to the sensory trigeminal nuclei, the nucleus of the solitary 
tract and adjacent structures. An experimental study in the rat. Journal of Comparative 
Neurolo gy. 1956 ; 106(1):  51-141. 
9. Stack, B, Sims, A.  The Relationship Between Posture and Equilibrium and the 
Auriculotemporal Nerve in Patients with Disturbed Gait and Balance. The Journal of 
Craniomandibular & Sleep Practice. 2009; 27(4): 248-260. 
10. Moelle r, DR. Evaluation of a removable intraoral soft stabilization splint for the reduction of 
headaches and nightmares in military PTSD patients: a large case series. Journal of Special 
Operations Medicine. 2013; 13(1): 49 -54. 
11. Moeller, DR, Duffey, JM, Goolsby, AM, Gallimore, JT. Use of a removable mandibular 
neuroprosthesis for the reduction of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and mild traumatic 
brain injury/PTSD -associated nightmares, headaches, and sleep disturbances. J ournal of  
Spec ial Oper ations  Medicine. 2014; 14(3):  64-73. 
 