Statistical Analysis Plan (Methods)  Page 1 of 85 
Protocol Number: VX15- 440-101 Version 2.0  
  
Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated    
 
VERTEX PHARMACEUTICALS INCORPORATED  
Statistical Analysis Plan 
(Methods)  
Protocol Number VX15 -440-101  Version 2.0  
(Final Analysis)  
 
A Phase 2, Randomized, Double blind, Controlled Study to Evaluate 
the Safety and Efficacy of VX 440 Combination Therapy in Subjects 
Aged 12 Years and  Older With Cystic Fibrosis  
 
 
Author s of SAP:   
 
Version:  Version 1.0 
Version Date of SAP:  12 June 2017 
 
Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated  
50 Northern Avenue 
Boston, Massachusetts 02210-1862 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  
This document contains confidential information.  Any use, distribution, or disclosure without the prior written 
consent of Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated is strictly prohibited except to the extent required under 
applicable laws or regulations.  Persons to whom the information is disclosed must be informed that the 
information is confidential and may not be further disclosed by them.  

Statistical Analysis Plan (Methods)  Page 4 of 85 
Protocol Number: VX15- 440-101 Version 2.0  
 
Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated   8.4.3  Electrocardiogram  ............................................................................................ 39  
8.4.4  Vital Signs  ........................................................................................................ 39  
8.4.5  Pulse Oximetry  ................................................................................................. 40  
8.4.6  Physical Examination  ....................................................................................... 40  
  
9 Interim and IDMC Analyses  ......................................................................................... 40  
9.1 Interim Analysis  ....................................................................................................... 40  
9.2 IDMC  Analysis  ......................................................................................................... 40  
10 References  ....................................................................................................................... 41  
11 List of Appendices .......................................................................................................... 42  
Appendix A: Schedule of Assessments .............................................................................. 42  
Appendix B: Analysis Visit Windows for Safety and Efficacy Assessments  ................... 56  
Appendix C: Imputation Rules for Missing Prior/Concomitant Medication Dates  ........... 60  
Appendix D: Important Protocol Deviation Programming Rules (Based on the Clinical 
Database)  .................................................................................................................. 61  
Appendix E: Details of GLI Equations for Calculating ppFEV 1 ....................................... 63  
 
Appendix G: Calculation of BMI z- score for subjects <20 years old at screening ........... 66  
Appendix H: Imputation Rules for Missing AE dates  ....................................................... 67  
Appendix I: Criteria for Threshold Analysis  ..................................................................... 70   
 

Statistical Analysis Plan (Methods)  Page 6 of 85 
Protocol Number: VX15- 440-101 Version 2.0  
 
Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated   3 INTRODUCTION  
This statistical analysis plan (SAP) for the final analysis is based on the approved clinical 
study protocol (CSP), Version 2.0, dated 16 SEP 2016, approved electronic case report form (eCRF), Version 1.0, dated 13 Jul 2016, and approved eCRF completion guidelines, Version 1.0, dated 18 Oct 2016. This SAP will also be used to perform two separate interim analyses (IAs), after all subjects participating in Part 1  have completed  the safety follow -up, and 
correspondingly, after all subjects participating in Part 2 have completed the safety follow -
up.  
This is a Phase 2, randomized, double-blind, placebo- and TEZ/IVA-controlled, parallel 
group, multicenter study to evaluate the safety and efficacy of VX -440 combination therapy 
in subjects aged  12 years and older with cystic fibrosis. 
This SAP (Methods) documents the planned statistical analyses of efficacy endpoints and safety endpoints. 
Vertex  Biometrics will perform the statistical analysis  for each IA , and the final analysis. 
SAS
® Version  9.2 or higher software (SAS Institute, Cary, North Carolina, USA) will be 
used to generate all statistical outputs (tables, figures, listings, and datasets).   
The SAP (Methods) will be finalized and approved prior to the data cut  for the first  IA. Any 
revisions to the approved SAP will be documented and approved in an amendment to the 
SAP prior to the clinical database lock for the final analysis. Any changes made to the 
SAP Methods after the clinical database lock  has occurred will be document ed in the clinical 
study report for this study.  
4 STUDY OBJECTIVES  
4.1 Primary Objective  
• To evaluate the safety and tolerability of VX -440 in  triple combination with 
TEZ and IVA  
• To evaluate the efficacy of VX -440 in  triple combination with TEZ  and IVA  
4.2 Secondary Objectives  
• To evaluate the pharmacodynamic (PD) effect of VX -440 in  triple combination 
with TEZ  and IVA on sweat chloride concentrations 
• To evaluate the PK of VX -440 when administered in  triple combination with 
TEZ and IVA  
• To evaluate the PK of TEZ , IVA, and their respective metabolites when administered 
with VX-440 

Statistical Analysis Plan (Methods)  Page 7 of 85 
Protocol Number: VX15- 440-101 Version 2.0  
 
Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated   5 STUDY ENDPOINTS  
5.1 Efficacy Endpoint  
5.1.1  Primary Efficacy Endpoint  
• Absolute change in percent predicted forced expiratory volume in 1 second1 (ppFEV 1) 
from base line through Day 29 (Parts 1 and 2)  
5.1.2  Secondary Efficacy Endpoints  
• Absolute change in sweat chloride concentrations from baseline through Day 29 (Parts 1 
and 2)  
• Relative change in ppFEV 1 from baseline through Day 29 (Parts 1 and 2)  
 
  
  
  
  
  
• Absolute change in Cystic Fibrosis Questionnaire- Revised2, 3, 4 (CFQ -R) respiratory 
domain score from baseline at Day  29 (Parts 1 and 2)  
• PK parameters of VX -440, TEZ, M1-TEZ, IVA, and M1- IVA 
5.2 Safety Endpoints  
The safety and tolerability is evaluated via the following endpoints: 
• adverse events (AEs)  
• clinical laboratory values  
• standard 12- lead electrocardiograms (ECGs)  
• vital signs  
• pulse oximetry  
 

Statistical Analysis Plan (Methods)  Page 9 of 85 
Protocol Number: VX15- 440-101 Version 2.0  
 
Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated   Table 6 -1 Key St udy Elements by Part  
 Part 1a Part 2  
Genotype  F508del /MF F508del /F508del  
Age ≥18 years  ≥18 years  
ppFEV 1 criteria  ≥40 to ≤90  ≥40 to ≤90  
Number of subjects  Approximately 42a Approximately 24  
Stratification c ppFEV 1d 
• ≥70  
• <70 ppFEV 1  
• ≥70 
• <70 
Study design  Parallel  Parallel  
Comparator  Placebo  TEZ/IVA  
VX-440 treatment 
duration  4 weeks  4 weeks  
IVA: ivacaftor; MF: minimal function; ppFEV 1: percent predicted forced expiratory volume in 1 second; q12h: 
every 12  hours; TC: triple combination; TEZ: tezacaftor  
a Part 1 consists of Cohort 1A and Cohort 1B. Approximately 10 subjects will be in Cohort  1A and 
approximately 32 subjects will be in Cohort 1B.  
c Additional stratification information is provided in Section  8.1.3  of protocol . 
d Stratification will be conducted for Cohort 1B subjects only.  

Statistical Analysis Plan (Methods)  Page 10 of 85 
Protocol Number: VX15- 440-101 Version 2.0  
 
Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated    
Table 6-2 Treatment Arms and Planned Doses by Part  
Part  
Randomization ratio   
Treatment Arm  VX-440 Dosage  TEZ 
Dosage  IVA 
Dosage  
Part 1 Cohort 1A  TC-1A 200 mg q12h  100 mg qd  150 mg q12h  
4:1 Triple placebo  Placebo  Placebo  Placebo  
Part 1 Cohort 1B TC-1B-high 600 mg q12ha 50 mg q12h  300 mg q12ha 
2:1:1  TC-1B-low 200 mg q12h  50 mg q12h  150 mg q12h  
 Triple placebo  Placebo  Placebo  Placebo  
Part 2b TC-2  600 mg q12ha 50 mg q12h  300 mg q12ha  
3:1 TEZ/IVA  Placebo  100 mg qd  150 mg q12h  
a In the “TC -1B-high” and “TC -2” treatment arms, the dosage of VX -440 will be determined based on safety 
and PK data from Cohort  1A. The planned dose is shown, but may be reduced to 400 mg q12h.  
b In Part 2, all subjects will also receive TEZ 100 mg qd/IVA 150 mg q12h during the Run -in Period and the 
Washout Period.  
 

Statistical Analysis Plan (Methods)  Page 13 of 85 
Protocol Number: VX15- 440-101 Version 2.0  
 
Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated   Table 6 -3 Probability of Observing an Adverse Event 
AE Incidencesa Number of Subjects per Treatment Groupb 
10 20 30 40 50 
5% 40% 64% 79% 87% 92% 
10%  65% 88% 96% 98% >99%  
15% 80% 96% >99%  >99%  >99%  
AE: adverse event  
a AE incidences are based on 4 weeks of treatment in Parts 1 and 2,  
b Applies to Parts 1  
6.2.1.2  Efficacy  
The primary efficacy endpoint is the absolute change from baseline in ppFEV 1 through 
Day 29 in Parts 1 and 2,  Table 6 -4 provides the power to 
reject the null within -group hypothesis of no difference in the mean absolute change from 
baseline for ppFEV 1 through Day 29 or Week 12, as applicable, for any treatment group in 
Parts 1, 2,  with a sample size ranging from 8 to 44 subjects per treatment group. The 
power calculations are based on a 2- sided 1-sample t -test at alpha = 5% using the PASS 
software package (Version 11.0), assuming an absolute mean change of 3 to 7 percentage points and an SD of 8 percentage points in the absolute change from baseline for ppFEV
1. 
Sample sizes of 16 to 44 subjects per treatment group provide adequate power for mean changes of 5  to 7 percentage points as expected in Parts 1, 2, . 
Table 6 -4 Power for Within -group Difference for Mean Absolute Change From 
Baseline in  ppFEV
1 
Mean Absolute 
Change From 
Baseline in ppFEV 1 Number of Subjects per Treatment Groupa 
8 16 20 22 24 40 42 44 
3% 15% 29% 36% 39% 42% 64% 66% 68% 
4%  23% 46% 56% 61% 65% 87% 89% 90% 
5% 33% 65% 76% 80% 83% 97% 98% 98% 
6% 45% 80% 89% 92% 94% >99%  >99%  >99%  
7% 57% 90% 96% 97% 98% >99%  >99%  >99% 
ppFEV 1: forced expiratory volume in 1 second; SD: standard deviation  
Note: An SD of 8  percentage points for the absolute change from baseline in ppFEV 1 was used for power 
calculations.  
a Applies to Parts 1  
6.2.2  Secondary Objectives  
A secondary objective of the study is the evaluation of the PD effect of VX-440 in TC with TEZ/IVA (all parts)   
6.2.2.1  Pharmacodynamic Effect (Part 1)  
The absolute change from baseline through Day 29 in sweat chloride is a secondary endpoint used to evaluate the PD objective of the study. In Part 1, a test for a decreasing dose-response trend between placebo and the TC dose groups will be performed using a multiple 

Statistical Analysis Plan (Methods)  Page 14 of 85 
Protocol Number: VX15- 440-101 Version 2.0  
 
Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated   comparisons procedure (MCP). The procedure consists of testing the null hypothesis of the 
lack of a decreasing dose -response trend versus a decreasing trend using the 1-sided 
maximum t-statistic that controls the type I error at alpha  = 5%. The procedure requires a 
family of candidate dose-response models to be prespecified, the range of plausible and diverse dose-response profiles.  
The candidate models that best describe the expected decreasing dose-response profile of the 
TC groups compared to placebo include a linear model, a maximum effect (E
max) model, and 
a sigmoid E max model. The contrasts (i.e., linear combinations of the treatment group means 
through Day 29) selected to perform the MCP that captures  the shape of these candidate 
models are described in Table 6 -5 below.  
Table 6 -5 Contrast Coefficients for the Multiple Comparisons Procedure in Part  1, 
Cohort 1B 
Candidate Model  Placebo  TC-1B-low TC-1B-high  
Linear  1.0 0.0 -1.0 
Emax 1.0 -0.5 -0.5 
Sigmoid E max 0.5 0.5 -1.0 
Emax: maximum effect; TC: triple combination  
 
Table 6 -6 provides the power to detect a dose-response trend with the MCP procedure for 
3 different expected dose -response profiles with a total sample size of 32 subjects in 
Cohort 1B assigned to TC-1B-high, TC- 1B-low, and placebo in the ratio 2:1:1, based on 
5000 simulations for each profile using the MCPMod R software package [Version 1.0-8]. 
Table 6 -6 Power to Detect a Dose- response Trend Based on Change From Baseline 
in Sweat Chloride in Part 1, Cohort 1B 
 Mean Change From Baseline in Sweat Chloride   
Candidate Model  Placebo  TC-1B-low TC-1B-high  Power  
Linear  0 -15 -20 95% 
Sigmoid E max 0 0 -20 99% 
Emax 0 -20 -20 96% 
Emax: maximum effect; TC: triple combination  
Note: A 1 -sided maximum t-statistic with a sample size of 32  subjects in Cohort 1B assigned to TC -1B-high, 
TC-1B-low, and placebo at a ratio 2:1:1 was used for power calculations. An SD change from baseline in 
sweat chloride of 13 mmol/L was used for power calculations.  
Table 6 -7 provides the power to reject the null within-group hypothesis of no difference in 
the mean absolute change from baseline for sweat chloride t hrough Day 29 (Parts 1 and 2)  
for any treatment group with a sample size ranging from 8 to 44 subjects 
per treatment group. The power calculations are based on a 2-sided 1- sample t -test at 
alpha = 5% using the PASS software package (Version 11.0), assuming a mean change 
of -10 to -20  mol/L and an SD of 13 mmol/L in the absolute change from baseline for sweat 
chloride.  

Statistical Analysis Plan (Methods)  Page 15 of 85 
Protocol Number: VX15- 440-101 Version 2.0  
 
Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated   Table 6 -7 Power for Within -group Difference for Mean Absolute Change From 
Baseline in  Sweat Chloride 
Mean Absolute Change 
From Baseline in Sweat 
Chloride (mmol/L)  Number of Subjects per Treatment Groupa 
8 16 20 22 24 40 42 44 
-10 47% 82% 90% 93% 95% >99%  >99%  >99%  
-12  61% 93% 97% 98% 99% >99%  >99%  >99%  
-15 80% 99% >99%  >99%  >99%  >99%  >99%  >99%  
-18 92% >99%  >99%  >99%  >99%  >99%  >99%  >99%  
-20 96% >99%  >99%  >99%  >99%  >99%  >99%  >99%  
SD: standard deviation  
Note: An SD of 13  mmol/L for the absolute change from baseline in sweat chloride  was used for power 
calculations.  
a Applies to Parts 1  
 
6.3 Randomization 
Treatment arms, randomization ratios, and stratification factors for each part are described in 
Table 6 -1. An interactive web response system (IWRS) will be used to assign subjects to 
treatment. The randomization code list will be produced by Vertex Biostatistics or a qualified randomization vendor. 
6.4 Blinding and Unblinding 
6.4.1  Blinding  
All subjects, site personnel (including the investigator, the site monitor, and the study team), 
and the Vertex study team will be blinded to the treatment codes with the exception of the following:  
• Any site personnel for whom this information is important to ensure the safety of the 
subject in the event of a life- threatening medical emergency  
• Any site personnel for whom this information is important to ensure the safety of the subject and her fetus in the event of a pregnancy 
• Vertex Global Patient Safety (GPS) and Regulatory Affairs personnel to satisfy serious adverse event (SAE) processing and reporting regulations 
• Unblinded statistician preparing the final (production) randomization list who is not part of the study team 
• Vertex IWRS Manag er 
• Vertex Clinical Supply Chain  
• IDMC  
• Vendor preparing the unblinded analysis for the ongoing reviews of efficacy and safety data, and the IDMC  
• Vendor analyzing PK samples  

Statistical Analysis Plan (Methods)  Page 16 of 85 
Protocol Number: VX15- 440-101 Version 2.0  
 
Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated   • Vertex Modeling and Simulation personnel or vendor conducting the population PK and 
PK/PD analyses  
• Vertex medical monitor (or contract medical monitor) may, for matters relating to safety concerns, unblind individual subjects at any time 
Vertex Drug Metabolism and Pharmacokinetics laboratory personnel will not be involved in 
the conduct of the study and will be unblinded to the bioanalysis results but will remain blinded to subject number and treatment assignment. 
Spirometry and Sweat Chloride Data Blinding
: During the conduct of the study, the Vertex 
study team will not have access to the  spirometry results or sweat chloride concentration 
values after the morning dose on Day 1. Furthermore, sites, subjects, and their 
parents/caregivers/companions should not be informed of their study-related spirometry and sweat chloride results during the Treatment Period regardless of whether the subject has prematurely discontinued treatment.  
A limited Vertex team will be unblinded and have access to safety, efficacy, and PD data for the purpose of conducting ongoing reviews of safety and efficacy data for planning and enabling clinical development, regulatory, and chemistry, manufacturing, and controls (CMC) decisions. Members of the limited unblinded Vertex team will not be part of the Vertex study team and will not be involved in or influence the conduct of the study.   
The Vertex study team and lead investigator(s) will conduct a blinded review of all available 
safety and PK data after all Cohort 1A subjects complete the Day 15 Visit. The Vertex study team will not have access to unblinded data from ongoing reviews by the limited Vertex team.  
After all subjects within Parts 1 and 2 have completed the Safety Follow- up Visit, results 
from each part will be unblinded for full review by the Vertex study team (Section  12.3.6.1 
of protocol). 
6.4.2  Unblinding 
At th e initiation of the study, each study site will be instructed on the method for breaking the 
blind. The unblinding method will be either a manual or electronic process.  
Unblinding of the individual subject's treatment by the investigator will be limited to medical 
emergencies or urgent clinical situations in which knowledge of the subject's study treatment is necessary for clinical management. In such cases, investigators will use their best judgment as to whether to unblind without first attempting to contact the medical monitor to discuss and agree to the need for unblinding. If investigators deem it not necessary to unblind immediately, they will first attempt to contact the medical monitor to discuss and agree to the need for unblinding. If investigators have tried but are unable to reach the medical monitor, they will use their best judgment, based on the nature and urgency of the clinical situation, and may proceed with unblinding without having successfully reached and discussed the situation with the  medical monitor.  
Contact information for the medical monitor (or appropriate backup) will be provided in a separate document.  

Statistical Analysis Plan (Methods)  Page 18 of 85 
Protocol Number: VX15- 440-101 Version 2.0  
 
Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated   7.3.2  Part 2  
The Safety  Set for the Run -in Period  will include all subjects who received at least 1 dose 
of study drug TEZ/IVA in the Run-in Period. This Safety Set  will be used for individual 
subject data listings for the Run-in Period, unless specified otherwise.  
The Safety Set for the Treatment Period will include all subjects who received at least 1 
dose of study drug in the Treatment Period. This Safety Set  will be used for all safety 
analyses for the Treatment Period, unless specified otherwise. 
If a subject receiv ed at least 1 dose of the higher TC treatment group in  the increasing 
priority order: p lacebo + TEZ/IVA, TC -2 (VX-440 + TEZ /IVA),  the subject will be analyzed 
in the higher treatment group.  
Note: T he safety analysis will focus on the Safety Set for the Tr eatment Period only, unless 
otherwise specified .  
8 STATISTICAL ANALYSIS  
8.1 General Considerations  
The analysis will be performed for each part, and presented by treatment group and overall, 
for the Treatment Period , unless specified otherwise. The treatment groups are defined as 
follows:  
• Part 1: F508del/MF genotype group 
o TC-1B-high, TC- 1B-low, TC -1A, and placebo, with the TEZ component in the 
TC-1B-low and TC-1B- high groups administered as 50 mg q12h, and that in th e 
TC-1A group administered as 100 mg qd. More specifically, Part 1 includes 
cohorts 1A and 1B; Cohort 1A includes TC-1A while Cohort 1B includes TC-1B-
low and TC-1B-high. The placebo group is randomized in  both cohorts. 
• Part 2: F508del/F508del genotype group  
o TC-2, and TEZ/IVA, with the TEZ component in the TC group administered as 
50 mg q12h 
The Schedule of Assessments is provided in Appendix A. The precision standards for reporting safety and efficacy variables are provided in an internal Biometrics document that specifies the programming rules including the precision for derived variables.  
All individual subject data for those randomized or dosed with any amount of study drug will 
be presented in data listings. 
Continuous variables  will be summarized using the following descriptive summary 
statistics: the number of subjects (n), mean, SD, st andard error (SE), median , minimum value 
(min), and maximum value (max). SE may not be reported for safety summary tables.  

Statistical Analysis Plan (Methods)  Page 19 of 85 
Protocol Number: VX15- 440-101 Version 2.0  
 
Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated   Categorical variables  will be summarized using counts and percentages. Percentages will be 
presented to 1 decimal place.  
Baseline  value , unless otherwise specified, will be defined as the most recent non- missing 
measurement (scheduled or unscheduled ) collected before the f irst dose of study drug on Day 
1 of the Treatment Period. For ECG, baseline will be defined as the most re cent non- missing 
measurement (the average of tri plicate measurements, if the most recent non- missing 
measurem ent is obtained in triplicate) , before the first dose of study drug on Day 1 of the 
Treatment Period . 
Absolute change  from baseline will be calculated as postbaseline value – baseline value.  
Relative change  from baseline will be calculated as (postbaseline value – baseline 
value)/baseline value.  
Treatment -emergent (TE) period  for Parts 1  will include the time from the first dose  
of study drug in the Treatment Period to the Safety Follow-up (SFU) Visit, or 28 Days after 
the last dose of study drug for subject s who do not complete the S FU Visit.  
For Part 2 , the TE period will be defined separately for the Run -In Period, and the Treatment 
Period: 
• The TE period for the Run-in Period  will include the time from  the first dose of study 
drug in the Run-in Period to: (1) the  last day prior to the first dose of study drug in the Treatment Period for subjects who complete the Run -in Per iod and continue to the 
Treatment Period, or  (2) the SFU Visit for subjects who do not continue to the Treatment Period and have an S FU Visit, or (3) 28 days after the last dose of study drug in the Run-
in Period for subjects who do not have an S FU Visit (e.g., subjects who do not meet the 
criteria to enter the Treatment Period and re-enter Study 661-110).  
• The TE period for the Treatment Period  will include the first dose of study drug in the 
Treatment Period to: (1) the S FU Visit, or (2) 28 days after th e last dose of study drug for 
subjects who do not have an S FU Visit (e.g. subjects whose E arly Treatment T ermination 
(ETT) Visit occurs 3 weeks or later following the last dose of study drug and the ETT visit replaces the SFU visit, or who leave the Treatment Period early and re- enter Study 
661-110).  
Note: only data collected up to the end of study for a subject will be included in analysis. 
Unscheduled visits:  Unscheduled visit measurements will be included in analysis as follows: 
• In scheduled visit windows per specified visit windowing rules 
• In the derivation of baseline and last on -treatment measurements  
• In the derivation of maximum and minimum on -treatment values , and maximum and 
minimum change from base line values for safety analyses  
• In individua l subject data listings as appropria te 
Visit windowing rules:  The analysis visit windows for protocol-defined visits are provided 
in Appendix B .  

Statistical Analysis Plan (Methods)  Page 20 of 85 
Protocol Number: VX15- 440-101 Version 2.0  
 
Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated   Incomplete/missing data  will not be imputed, unless specified otherwise.  
Outliers:  No formal statistical analyses will be performed to detect or remedy the presence 
of statistical outliers, unless specified otherwise.  
Multiplicity:  There will be no multiplicity adjustment for performing multiple hypothesis 
tests, unless specified otherwise.  
8.2 Background Characteristics  
8.2.1  Subject Disposition 
For the Treatment Period  in Part 1, Part 2, , subject disposition will be summarized 
as described below.  
The n umber of subjects in the following categories will be summarized by treatment group  
and overall, for each part :  
• All Subjects Set (r andomized or dosed  in the Treatment Period) 
• Randomized 
• Full Analysis Set (FAS)  
• Safety Set ( for Part 2, this is the Safety S et for the Treatment Period)  
The number and percentage (based on FAS) of subjects in each of the following disposition 
categories will be summarized by treatment group  and overall: 
• Completed study drug treatment  
• Prematurely discontinued treatment and the reason  for discontinuation (i.e., discontinued 
all study drugs)  
• Completed study (i.e., completed Safety Follow- up Visit or completed all study drug s 
and re-entered Study 661-110 without Safety Follow-up per protocol) 
• Prematurely discontinued the study and the reason for discontinuation  
For the Run-in Period  in Part 2, a separate disposition table will be provided with the 
following categories:  
• All Subjects Set (enrolled or dosed in the Run-in Period) 
• Completed treatment in the Run-in Period (i.e., completed randomization) 
• Prematurely discontinued  treatment during the Run-in Period and the reason for 
treatment discontinuation (i.e., discontinued all  study drugs in the Run-in Period) 
• Prematurely discontinued the study during the Run-in Period and the reason for study 
discontinuation 
A listing will be provided by part, for subjects who discontinued treatment (including the Run-in Period in Part 2) or who discontinued study with reasons for discontinuation. A randomization listing of subjects will also be provided , by part . 

Statistical Analysis Plan (Methods)  Page 21 of 85 
Protocol Number: VX15- 440-101 Version 2.0  
 
Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated   8.2.2  Demographics and Baseline Characteristics  
Demographics, medical history and baseline characteristics will be summarized based on the 
FAS, and presented by treatment group and overall , for each part and cohort , as applicable. 
Demographic data will include the following: 
• Age at baseline (in years)  
• Sex (female and male)  
• Ethnicity (Hispanic or Latino, not Hispanic or Latino, and not collected per local 
regulations) 
• Race (White, Black or African American, Asi an, American Indian or Alaska Native, 
Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander, and Other)  
Baseline characteristics will include the following:  
• Weight (kg)  
• Height (cm)  
• BMI (kg/m2) 
Stratification categories will include the following:  
• ppFEV 1 at stratification  (< 70 and ≥ 70)  
For subjects who are naïve to TEZ/IVA treatment in Part 2, ppFEV 1 at Day -14 will be used 
for stratification; o therwi se, ppFEV 1 at screening will be used for stratification.  
Disease characteristics will include the following:  
• ppFEV 1 at baseline ( <40, ≥ 40 to <70, ≥70 to ≤90, >90) 
• ppFEV 1 at baseline (continuous)  
• Sweat Chloride at baseline (continuous) 
• FEV 1 (L) at baseline (continuous) 
• CFQ -R Respiratory Symptoms domain at baseline (continuous) 
• Prior use of dornase alfa before first dose of study drug (Yes, No)  
• Prior use of inhaled antibiotic before first dose of study drug (Yes, No)  
• Prior use of any bronchodilator before first dose of study drug (Yes, No)  
• Prior use of any inhaled bronchodilator before first dose of study drug (Yes, No)  
• Prior use of any inhaled hypertonic saline before first dose of study drug (Yes, No)  
• Prior use of any inhaled corticosteroids before first dose of study drug (Yes, No)  

Statistical Analysis Plan (Methods)  Page 22 of 85 
Protocol Number: VX15- 440-101 Version 2.0  
 
Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated   • Colonization with Pseudomonas aeruginosa at baseline (Positive, Negative)  
A summary of medical history will be provided  by MedDRA system organ class  (SOC) and 
preferred term  (PT) for the FAS . In addition, the number of subjects reported to have had 
positive cultures for respiratory pathogens in 2 years prior to screening will be summarized 
for the FAS . Further, the CFTR genotype for each subject will be provided in an individual 
subject data listing.   
8.2.3  Prior and Concomitant Medications  
Medications will be coded using the World Health Organization Drug Dictionary Enhanced (WHODDE) and categorized as follows: 
For Parts 1 
  
Prior medication:  any medication that started before the first dose date of study drug, 
regardless of when the medication ended. Concomitant medication:  medication continued or newly received on or after the first dose 
date of study drug through the end of the TE period. Post- treatment medication:  medication continued or newly received after the TE period. 
For Part 2
:  
Prior medication:  any medication that started before the first dose date of study drug in the 
Run-in Period, regardless of when the medication ended. Concomi tant medication during the Run- in Period:  medication continued or newly 
received on or after the first dose date of study drug during the Run-in Period through the end 
of the TE period for the Run-in Period. 
Concomitant medication during the Treatment Peri od: medication continued or newly 
received on or after the first dose date of study drug during the Treatment Period through the 
end of the TE period for the Treatment Period. 
Post-treatment medication:  medication continued or newly received after the TE period. 
A given medication may be classified as follows: prior, concomitant, post-treatment, both 
prior and concomitant, both concomitant and post-treatment, or prior, concomitant, and post- treatment. In Part 2, concomitant may  be concomitant during the Run-in Period, or 
concomitant during the Treatment Period, or both.  
If a medication has a completely missing or partially missing start/stop date and it cannot be 
determined whether it was taken before the first dose date of study drug, concomitantly, or after the TE period, it will be classified as prior, concomitant, and post- treatment.  
Prior medications and concomitant medications will be summarized descriptively using frequency tables by preferred name.  
Summaries of medications will be based on the FAS , and presented by treatment group and 
overall for each part .  
Post- treatment medications will be listed by subject.  

Statistical Analysis Plan (Methods)  Page 23 of 85 
Protocol Number: VX15- 440-101 Version 2.0  
 
Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated   Details for imputing missing or partial start and/or stop dates of medication are described in 
Appendix C . 
8.2.4  Study Drug Exposure  
Study drug exposure (in days) will be calculated as: last dose date of study drug – first dose 
date of study drug + 1 day, regardless of study drug interruption, and will be summarized descriptively. Study drug exposure will be summarized for the overall study drug period, which includes the Run-in Period, Treatment Period and Washout Period for Part 2, and the Treatment Period for Parts 1  Further, s tudy d rug exposure for the combined Treatment 
Period  and Washout Period in Part 2 will also be summarized descriptively .  
Study drug exposure (in weeks) will be summarized descriptively by the number of subjects (n), mean, SD, SE, median, min, and max. It will a lso be summarized in  categories: ≤2 
weeks, >2 - ≤4 weeks, and >4 weeks (for Parts 1 and 2); and ≤2 weeks, >2- ≤4 weeks, >4 - ≤8 
weeks, >8 - ≤12 weeks, and >12  weeks  (for Part 4), using counts and percentages. 
Additionally, the total study drug exposure, defined as the sum total of t he study drug 
exposure across all subjects (in patient -weeks) , will be provided. 
Exposure summaries will be based on the Safety Set , and presented by treatment group and 
overall, f or each part . For Part 2, exposure summaries will be based on the Safety  Set for the 
Treatment Period .  
8.2.5  Study Drug Compliance  
Percentage of tablets taken will be calculated as: 100 ×  [(total number of tablets dispensed) – 
(total number of tablets returned)]/( total number of tablets planned to be taken per 
day ×  duration of study drug exposure in days). The maximum percentage of tablets taken 
will be 100%.  
Study drug compliance will be calculated as: 100  × [1 - (total number of days of study drug 
interruption) / (duration of study drug exposure in days)].  A study drug interruption on a 
given day will be determined by an interruption of all drugs on that day. 
Percentage of tablets taken and s tudy drug compli ance will be summarized descriptively by 
the number of subjects (n), mean, SD, SE, median, min, and max. It will also be summarized 
in categories: <80% and ≥80% using frequency tables.  
For all parts , study drug compliance will be summarized for the Treatment Period only.  
Similarly, for all parts, percentage of tablets taken will be summarized for  the Treatment 
Period  only. 
Percentage of tablets taken and s tudy drug compliance summaries will be based on the FAS, 
and pres ented by treatment group  and overall, for each part . 
8.2.6  Important Protocol Deviations  
An important protocol deviation (IPD) is a deviation that may significantly  affect the 
completeness, accuracy, or reliability of the study data or that may significantly affect a 
subject’s rights, safety, or well -being. IPD rules will be developed and finalized before 
database lock.  

Statistical Analysis Plan (Methods)  Page 25 of 85 
Protocol Number: VX15- 440-101 Version 2.0  
 
Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated   8.3.1.1  Primary Analysis  of the Primary Efficacy Variable  
8.3.1.1.1  Parts 1 and 2 
The null hypothesis to be tested is that the mean absolute within -group change from baseline 
in percent predicted FEV 1 (ppFEV 1) through Day 29 is zero for VX-440 in triple 
combination (TC) with TEZ/IVA , for each part, separately . A 2-sided p-value of 0.05 or less 
will be interpreted as sufficient evidence to reject the null hypothesis.   
The primary analysis will be performed using a mixed -effects model for repeated measures 
(MMRM) with change from baseline in ppFEV 1 as the dependent variable for each part, 
separately . This MMRM a nalysis will include all treatment groups  within a part. For Part 1, 
the analysis  will include 3 treatment groups: placebo, pooled TC -1A and  TC-1B-low, and 
TC-1B-high. For Part 2, the analys is will include 2 treatment  groups: placebo + TEZ/IVA, 
and TC -2 (VX -440 + TEZ/IVA). The model will include treatment group, visit, and 
treatment -by-visit interaction as fixed effects, with  the continuous baseline ppFEV1 as a 
covariat e, and will include all data from each treatment group and visit in the analysis. The 
model will be estimated using restricted maximum likelihood. Denominator degrees of 
freedom for the F  test for fixed effects will be estimated using the Kenward -Roger 
approximation. An unstructured covariance structure will be used to model the within -subject 
errors. If the model estimation does not converge, a reduced compound symmetry covariance 
structure will be used instead. Conditional on the observed data and covariates, missing ppFEV
1 data due to treatment or stud y discontinuation will be assumed to be missing at 
random; consequently, no imputation of missing data will be performed.  
The adjusted mean s and 95% confidence intervals (CI) of the average treatment effect 
through Day 29 (Day 15 and Day 29 only) for each  triple combination , with a 2-sided p-
value will be estimated within MMRM using  PROC MIXED in SAS, for all within -treatment  
and between -treatment comparisons, for each  part, separately . Contrasts based on the fixed 
effects in the model, defined at the baseline covariate mean  for the combined treatment 
groups using unique subjects in the FAS who have at least one post -baseline measurement 
through Day 29, will be u sed to estimate the average treatment effect across post -baseline 
visits  through Day 29.  
Further, t he adjusted mean and 95% CI of the treatment difference between each triple 
combination and placebo at each post- baseline visit through Day 29 will be provided along 
with the corresponding p -value, for each part. In addition, the adjusted mean and 95% CI of 
the within -treatment difference at each post -baseline visit through Day 29 for each treatment 
group will be provided along with the p- value, for each part.   
The adjusted mean ( with 95% CI) obtained from the MMRM analysis at each post- baseline 
visit through Day 29 will be plotted by treatment group, for each part. In addition, a waterfall 
plot showing the subject -level absolute change in ppFEV 1 at Day 29 will be presented, by 
treatment group. The plots will be based on the pooled treatment groups for Part 1.  
In addition, for each part, descriptive analyses of the change from baseline will be performed 
for all treatment groups by post- baseline visit through the safety follow- up visit . Treatment 
groups in Part 1 will be presen ted both with TC -1A and TC-1B-low pooled, and separately  
for descriptive analysis.  

Statistical Analysis Plan (Methods)  Page 26 of 85 
Protocol Number: VX15- 440-101 Version 2.0  
Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated   

Statistical Analysis Plan (Methods)  Page 28 of 85 
Protocol Number: VX15- 440-101 Version 2.0  
Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated   8.
3.2 Analysis of Secondary Efficacy Variables  
The secondary efficacy variables include:  
• Relative change in ppFEV 1 from baseline through Day 29 (Parts 1 and 2)  
 

Statistical Analysis Plan (Methods)  Page 32 of 85 
Protocol Number: VX15- 440-101 Version 2.0  
Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated   8.
3.2.9  Multiplicity adjustment  
There will be no multiplicity adjustment to control the overall type 1 error rate for secondary 
efficacy variables . 

Statistical Analysis Plan (Methods)  Page 36 of 85 
Protocol Number: VX15- 440-101 Version 2.0  
Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated   8.
3.5.3  Absolute Change in S weat Chloride from Baseline through Day 29 
(Parts 1 and  2)  
8.3.5.3.1  Parts 1 and  2 
The analysis of the absolute change in s weat chloride from baseline through Day 29 will be 
based on an MMRM model similar to the analysis of the primary efficacy variable in Part 1, 
with the continuous baseline sweat chloride as a covariate.  The presentation of results will 
also be similar.  
The adjusted mean ( with 95% CI) obtained from the MMRM analysis at each post- baseline 
visit through Day 29 in the Treatment Period will be plotted by treatment group, for ea ch 
part.  
A waterfall plot showing the subject -level absolute change in sweat chloride at Day 29 will 
be presented , by treatment group. The plots will be based on the pooled treatment groups for 
Part 1.  
In addition, for each part, descriptive analyses of the change from baseline will be performed 
for all treatment groups by post- baseline visit. Treatment groups TC -1A and TC -1B-low in 
Part 1 will be p resented both pooled and separately, for descriptive anal ysis. 

Statistical Analysis Plan (Methods)  Page 37 of 85 
Protocol Number: VX15- 440-101 Version 2.0  
 
Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated   8
.4 Safety Analysis 
For Parts 1  a ll safety analyses will be based on data from the TE Period  for all subjects 
in the Safety Set. For Part 2, all safety analyses will be based on the TE Period for the 
Treatment Period for all subjects in the corresponding Safety Set for the Treatment Period . 
The overall safety profile of study drug will be assessed in terms of the following safety and tolerability endpoints:  
• Treatment -emergent adverse events (TEAEs)  
• Clinical laboratory values (i.e., hematology, serum chemistry, coagulation, and 
urinalysis) 
• ECGs  
• Vital signs  
• Pulse oximetry  
All safety data will be summarized by treatme nt group and overall, for each part.  
All safety data will be presented in individual subject data listings.  
8.4.1  Adverse Events  
For analysis purposes, AEs will be classified as pretreatmen t AEs, TEAEs, or post- treatment 
AEs, defined as follows:  

Statistical Analysis Plan (Methods)  Page 38 of 85 
Protocol Number: VX15- 440-101 Version 2.0  
 
Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated   For Parts 1   
Pretreatment AE:  any AE that started before the first dose date of study drug 
TEAE:  any AE that worsened (either in severity or seriousness) or that was newly developed 
at or aft er the first dose date of study drug through the end of the TE period  
Post-treatment AE: any AE that worsened (either in severity or seriousness) or that was 
newly developed beyond the TE period 
For Part 2 :  
Pretreatment AE:  any AE that started before the first dose date of study drug 
TEAE during the Run- in Period:  any AE that worsened (either in severity or seriousness) 
or that was newly developed at or after the first dose date of study drug through the end of 
the TE period for the Run-in Period 
TEAE dur ing the Treatment Period:  any AE that worsened (either in severity or 
seriousness) or that was newly developed at or after the first dose date of study drug through 
the end of the TE period for the Treatment Period  
Post-treatment AE: any AE that worsened (either in severity or seriousness) or that was 
newly developed beyond the TE period For AEs with completely missing or partially missing start dates, if there is no clear evidence 
that the AEs started before or after study treatment, the AEs will be class ified as TEAEs.  
Details for imputing missing or partial start dates of adverse ev ents are described in 
Appendix H. 
AE summary tables will be presented for TEAEs only, for the TE period , or accordingly, the 
TE Period for T reatment Period  in Part 2 , by treatment group and overall, for each part and 
cohort, as applicable, for the following :  
• Number of TEAEs (total number of TEAEs only) 
• Subjects with any TEAEs  
• Subjects with TEAEs by Strongest Relationship  
• Subjects with TEAEs by Maximum Severity  
• Subjects with TEAEs Leading to Study Drug  Discontinuation (Discontinuation of all 
study drug) 
• Subjects with TEAEs Leading to Study Drug Interruption (Interruption of all study drug) 
• Subjects with  Serious TEAEs  
• Subjects with TEAE Leading to Death  
Summaries will be presented by MedDRA system organ class (SOC) and preferred term (PT) 
using frequency counts and percentages (i.e., number and percentage of subjects with an event). When summarizing the number and percentages of subjects, s ubjects with multiple 
occurrences of the same adverse event or a continuing adverse event will be counted once, 

Statistical Analysis Plan (Methods)  Page 40 of 85 
Protocol Number: VX15- 440-101 Version 2.0  
 
Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated   and cohort , as applicable. The following vital signs parameters will be summarized: systolic 
and diastolic blood pressure (mm Hg), body temperature ( °C), HR (beats per minute), and 
respiratory rate (breaths  per minute). 
The number and percentage of subjects meeting at least 1 threshold analysis criterion during 
the TE period, or TE period for the Treatment Period in Part 2, will be summarized by treatment group  and overall, for each part . The threshold analysis criteria are provided in 
Appendix I. 
8.4.5  Pulse Oximetry  
For the treatment -emergent pulse oximetry measurements, a summary of observed values and 
change from baseline values will be provided at each scheduled visit, for the percent of 
oxygen saturation, by  treatment group, for each part. 
The number and percentage of subjects with shift changes from baseline (normal/missing and low according to the reference range) to the lowest percent of oxygen saturation during the TE Period , or accordingly, the TE period for the Treatment Period in Part 2, will be 
summarized by treatment group  and overall, for each part. 
8.4.6  Physical Examination  
PE findings will be presented as an individual subject data listing only. 
9 I
NTERIM AND IDMC ANALYS ES 
9.1 Interim Analysis  
The first interim analysis will be performed after all subjects in Part 1 have completed the 
Safety Follow -up Visit. All Data from Part 1 will be unblinded after the data from Part 1 are 
cleaned for analysis and a data cut is performed. The Vertex Study Team will be unblinded to the interim analysis results from Part 1.  
The second interim analysis will be performed after all subjects in Part 2 have completed the 
Safety Follow -up Visit. The Vertex Study Team will be unblinded to the interim analysis 
results from Part 2 , following a process similar to Part 1 . 
9.2 IDMC Analysis  
An independent data monitoring committee (IDMC) was formed before study initiation. The IDMC’s objectives and operational details were defined in a separate document (IDMC Charter) which was finalized before the first subject was screened in the study. The IDMC ’s 
planned safety  reviews of study data are outlined in the IDMC Charter and IDMC Statistical 
Analysis Plan.  Furth er, planned ongoing reviews of key study data by the limited Vertex 
team  are al so described in the IDMC Statistical Analysis Plan .  

Statistical Analysis Plan (Methods)  Page 41 of 85 
Protocol Number: VX15- 440-101 Version 2.0  
 
Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated   10 REFERENCES  
1Quanjer PH, Stanojevic S, Cole TJ, Baur X, Hall G, Culver BH, et al. Multi- ethnic reference 
values for spirometry for the 3-95-yr age range: the global lung function 2012 equations. Eur 
Respir J. 2012;40(6):1324-43. 
2Quittner AL, Modi A, Cruz I . Systematic review of health -related quality of life measure for 
children with respiratory conditions. Pediatr Respir Rev. 2008;9:220-32. 
3Goss C, Quittner AL. Patient-reported outcomes in cystic fibrosis. Proc Am Thorac Soc. 
2007;4:1-9. 
4Modi AC, Quittner AL. Validation of a disease- specific measure of health -related quality of 
life for children with cystic fibrosis. J Pediatr Psychol. 2003;28(8):535-45. 

Statistical Analysis Plan (Methods)  Page 42 of 85 
Protocol Number: VX15- 440-101 Version 2.0  
 
Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated   11 LIST OF APPENDICES 
Appendix A: Schedule of Assessments  
Table 11-1 Study VX15 -440- 101: Schedule of Assessments for Part  1 (Cohort 1A)  
Event/Assessmenta Screening  Treatment Periodb 
Day 43 
(± 3 days)   
ETT  
Visitc Safety 
Follow -up 
28 (± 7) Days 
After Last 
Dose  Days  -28 
to -1d Day 1  Day 8 
(± 1 day)  Day 15 
(± 2 days)  Day 29 
(± 2 days)  
Inform ed consent  X        
Randomizatione  X       
Demographics  X        
Medical history  X        
Ophthalmological history  X        
CFQ -Rf,g  X  X X X Xh  X 
Weighti X X X X X X X X 
Height  X        
                                                 
a  All assessments will be performed before dosing, unless noted otherwise. Assessments that are collected before and after dosing will only be collected once 
if study drug is not administered on the day of the visit (i.e., if subject prematurely discontinued study drug treatment).  
b  To be eligible to continue into the Treatment Period, subjects must have stable CF disease and have remained on stable CF med ication regimen during the 
28 days before the Day 1 Visit AND must not have had an acute non- CF illness within 14 days before the Day 1 Visit. See Section 8.1.3 of  the protocol.  
c  If the subject prematurely discontinues study treatment, an ETT Visit should be scheduled as soon as possible after the decis ion to termi nate study drug 
treatment. Subjects who prematurely discontinue treatment will also be required to complete the Safety Follow -up Visit. If the ETT Visit occurs 3 weeks or 
later following the last dose of study drug, then the ETT Visit will replace the Safe ty Follow -up Visit, and a separate Safety Follow -up Visit will not be 
required.  
d  All screening results must be reviewed by an appropriately qualified member of the investigator’s team before randomization, unless noted otherwise.  
e  Randomization may occ ur on the previous day (Day  -1) after all inclusion and exclusion criteria have been confirmed.  
f  CFQ -R must be completed before the start of any other assessments scheduled at that visit.  
g  The predose assessment on Day  1 may be performed on the previou s day (Day -1) if randomization has occurred.  
h  Subjects will complete the CFQ -R at the ETT Visit only if it has been 2 weeks or more since their last visit.  
i  Weight and height will be measured with shoes off.  

Statistical Analysis Plan (Methods)  Page 43 of 85 
Protocol Number: VX15- 440-101 Version 2.0  
 
Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated   Table 11-1 Study VX15 -440- 101: Schedule of Assessments for Part  1 (Cohort 1A)  
Event/Assessmenta Screening  Treatment Periodb 
Day 43 
(± 3 days)   
ETT  
Visitc Safety 
Follow -up 
28 (± 7) Days 
After Last 
Dose  Days  -28 
to -1d Day 1  Day 8 
(± 1 day)  Day 15 
(± 2 days)  Day 29 
(± 2 days)  
Vital signsj X X X X X X X X 
Pulse oximetry  X X X X X X X X 
                                                 
j  Vital signs and pulse oximetry will be collected after the subject has been seated for at least 5  minutes.  

Statistical Analysis Plan (Methods)  Page 44 of 85 
Protocol Number: VX15- 440-101 Version 2.0  
 
Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated   Table 11-1 Study VX15 -440- 101: Schedule of Assessments for Part  1 (Cohort 1A)  
Event/Assessmenta Screening  Treatment Periodb 
Day 43 
(± 3 days)   
ETT  
Visitc Safety 
Follow -up 
28 (± 7) Days 
After Last 
Dose  Days  -28 
to -1d Day 1  Day 8 
(± 1 day)  Day 15 
(± 2 days)  Day 29 
(± 2 days)  
Physical examinationk Complete  Abbreviated   Abbreviated  Abbreviated   Abbreviated  Complete  
Ophthalmologic 
examinationl X        
Standard 12 -lead ECGm X X X X X X X X 
Sweat chlorideg,n X X X X X X X X 
Spirometryo X X X X X X X X 
Urinalysis  X X X X X X X X 
Pregnancy test (all females 
of childbearing potential)  Serum  Urine    Urine   Serum   Serum  
CFTR  genotypep X        
FSHq X        
                                                 
k  Complete and abbreviated PEs are described in Section  11.7.3  of the protocol . Symptom -targeted PEs will occur at any time during the study if triggered by 
AEs or if deemed necessary by the investigator or healthcare provider.  
l  The ophthalmological examination can be performed at any time during the Screening Period through the Day  1 Visit (before the first dose of study drug). 
The screening ophthalmological examination does not have to  be performed if there is documentation of an examination that met protocol criteria and was 
within 3  months before the date of informed consent, or if there is documentation of bilateral lens removal for the subject.  
m  All standard 12 -lead ECGs will be performed after the subject has been seated for at least 5  minutes. On Days 1 and 15, ECGs will be collected before 
dosing and 4 hours (±  1 hour) after dosing. At all other visits, ECGs will be collected before dosing (as applicable). ECG s collected on Day  1 before dosing 
will be performed in triplicate.  
n  Sweat chloride will be measured in all subjects. If the value cannot be determined from the screening test, a sweat chloride value documented in the subject’s 
medical record may be used to establish eligibility.  
o  Spirometry may be performed pre - or post -bronchodilator at the Screening Visit. Spirometry will be performed pre -bronchodilator, before the morning dose 
of study drugs, and should be performed at approximately the same time a t every other study visit. On Days  1 and 15, spirometry will also be performed 
pre-bronchodilator 5 hours (± 1 hour) after study drug administration.  
p  CFTR  genotyping will be performed for all subjects. If the screening CFTR  genotype result is not received before randomization, a previous CFTR  genotype 
laboratory report may be used to establish eligibility.  
q  FSH will be measured for any suspected postmenopausal female subjects with at least 12 months of continuous spontaneous ameno rrhea.  

Statistical Analysis Plan (Methods)  Page 45 of 85 
Protocol Number: VX15- 440-101 Version 2.0  
 
Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated   Table 11-1 Study VX15 -440- 101: Schedule of Assessments for Part  1 (Cohort 1A)  
Event/Assessmenta Screening  Treatment Periodb 
Day 43 
(± 3 days)   
ETT  
Visitc Safety 
Follow -up 
28 (± 7) Days 
After Last 
Dose  Days  -28 
to -1d Day 1  Day 8 
(± 1 day)  Day 15 
(± 2 days)  Day 29 
(± 2 days)  
G6PD activity testr X        
Serum chemistry and 
hematology  X X X X X X X X 
Coagulation  X X  X X   X 
PK samplingt  X X X X X X   
Study drug dosingu  Day 1 through Day 29     
AEs, medicationsv, 
treatments, and procedures  Continuous from signing of the ICF through the Safety Follow -up Visit  
 
                                                 
r  A single blood sample will be collected for the G6PD activity test  
  Blood samples will be collected for PK analysis of VX -440,  TEZ, M1- TEZ, IVA, and M1 -IVA. On Day 1, samples will be collected before dosing (0  hours) 
and at 1, 2, 4, and 6 hours after dosing (relative to the morning dose). On Days 8 and 29, a predose sample will be collected before the morning dose of study 
drug. On Day 15, samples will be collected before dosing (0 hours)  and at 1, 2, 4, 6, and 8 hours after dosing. At the Day 43 and the ETT Visits, a single 
blood sample for PK analysis will be collected.  
u  The last dose of study drug will be the morning dose on Day  29. 
v  Refer to Section 9.4 of  the protocol for details.  

Statistical Analysis Plan (Methods)  Page 46 of 85 
Protocol Number: VX15- 440-101 Version 2.0  
 
Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated   Table 11-2 Study VX15 -440- 101: Schedule of Assessments for Part  1 (Cohort 1B) 
Event/Assessmenta Screening  Treatment Periodb 
Day 43 
(± 3 days)   
ETT  
Visitc Safety 
Follow -up 
28 (± 7) Days 
After Last Dose  Days  -28 
to -1d Day 1  Day 15 
(± 2 day)  Day 29 
(± 2 day)  
Informed consent  X       
Randomizatione  X      
Demographics  X       
Medical history  X       
Ophthalmological history  X       
CFQ -Rf,g  X X X X Xh  X 
Weighti X X X X X X X 
Height  X       
Vital signsj X X X X X X X 
Pulse oximetry  X X X X X X X 
                                                 
a  All assessments will be performed before dosing, unless noted otherwise. Assessments that are collected before and after dosing will only be collected once 
if study drug is not administered on the day of the visit (i.e., if subject prematurely disconti nued study drug treatment).  
b  To be eligible to continue into the Treatment Period, subjects must have stable CF disease and have remained on stable CF med ication regimen during the 
28 days before the Day 1 Visit AND must not have had an acute non- CF illn ess within 14 days before the Day 1 Visit. See Section  8.1.3 of  the protocol.  
c  If the subject prematurely discontinues study drug treatment, an ETT Visit should be scheduled as soon as possible after the decision to terminate study drug treatment. Subjects who prematurely discontinue treatment will also be required to complete the Safety Follow -up Visit. If the ETT Visit occurs 3 weeks or 
later following the last dose of study drug, then the ETT Visit will replace the Safety Follow -up Visit, and a separate Safety Follow -up Visit will not be 
required.  
d  All screening results must be reviewed by an appropriately qualified member of the investigator’s team before randomization, unless noted otherwise.  
e  Randomization may occur on the previous day (Day  -1) after all inclusion and exclusion criteria have been confirmed.  
f  CFQ -R must be completed before the start of any other assessments scheduled at that visit.  
g  The predose assessment on Day  1 may be performed on the previous day (Day -1) if randomization h as occurred. 
h  Subjects will complete the CFQ -R at the ETT Visit only if it has been 2 weeks or more since their last visit.  
i  Weight and height will be measured with shoes off.  
j  Vital signs and pulse oximetry will be collected after the subject has been seated for at least 5  minutes.  

Statistical Analysis Plan (Methods)  Page 47 of 85 
Protocol Number: VX15- 440-101 Version 2.0  
 
Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated   Table 11-2 Study VX15 -440- 101: Schedule of Assessments for Part  1 (Cohort 1B) 
Event/Assessmenta Screening  Treatment Periodb 
Day 43 
(± 3 days)   
ETT  
Visitc Safety 
Follow -up 
28 (± 7) Days 
After Last Dose  Days  -28 
to -1d Day 1  Day 15 
(± 2 day)  Day 29 
(± 2 day)  
Physical examinationk Complete  Abbreviated  Abbreviated  Abbreviated   Abbreviated  Complete  
Ophthalmologic 
examinationl X       
Standard 12 -lead ECGm X X X X X X X 
Sweat chlorideg,n X X X X X X X 
Spirometryo X X X X X X X 
Urinalysis  X X X X X X X 
Pregnancy test (all females 
of childbearing potential)  Serum  Urine   Urine   Serum  Serum  
CFTR  genotypep X       
FSHq X       
                                                 
k  Complete and abbreviated PEs are described in Section  11.7.3  of the protocol . Symptom -targeted PEs will occur at any time during the study if triggered by 
AEs or if deemed necessary by the investigator or healthcare pro vider.  
l  The ophthalmological examination can be performed at any time during the Screening Period through the Day  1 Visit (before the first dose of study drug). 
The screening ophthalmological examination does not have to be performed if there is document ation of an examination that met protocol criteria and was 
within 3  months before the date of informed consent, or if there is documentation of bilateral lens removal for the subject.  
m  All standard 12 -lead ECGs will be performed after the subject has been seated for at least 5  minutes. On Days 1 and 15, ECGs will be collected before 
dosing and 4 hours (±  1 hour) after dosing. At all other visits, ECGs will be collected before dosing (as applicable). ECGs collected on Day  1 before dosing 
will be performed in triplicate.  
n  Sweat chloride will be measured in all subjects. If the value cannot be determined from the screening test, a sweat chloride value documented in the subject’s 
medical record may be used to establish eligibility.  
o  Spirometry may be performed pre - or post -bronchodilator at the Screening Visit. Spirometry will be performed pre -bronchodilator, before the morning dose 
of study drugs, and should be performed at approximately the same time at every other study visit. On Days  1 and 15, spirometry will also be performed 
pre-bronchodilator, 5 hours (± 1 hour) after study drug administration.  
p  CFTR  genotyping will be performed for all subjects. If the screening CFTR  genotype result is not received before randomization, a previous CFTR  genoty pe 
laboratory report may be used to establish eligibility.  
q  FSH will be measured for any suspected postmenopausal female subjects with at least 12 months of continuous spontaneous ameno rrhea.  

Statistical Analysis Plan (Methods)  Page 48 of 85 
Protocol Number: VX15- 440-101 Version 2.0  
 
Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated   Table 11-2 Study VX15 -440- 101: Schedule of Assessments for Part  1 (Cohort 1B) 
Event/Assessmenta Screening  Treatment Periodb 
Day 43 
(± 3 days)   
ETT  
Visitc Safety 
Follow -up 
28 (± 7) Days 
After Last Dose  Days  -28 
to -1d Day 1  Day 15 
(± 2 day)  Day 29 
(± 2 day)  
G6PD activity testr X       
Serum chemistry and 
hematology  X X X X X X X 
Coagulation  X X X X   X 
PK samplingt  X X X X X   
Study drug dosingu  Day 1 through Day 29     
AEs, medicationsv, 
treatments and procedures  Continuous from signing of the ICF through the Safety Follow -up Visit  
 
                                                 
r  A single blood sample will be collected for the G6PD activity test.  
  B lood samples will be collected for PK analysis of VX -440, TEZ, M1- TEZ, IVA, and M1 -IVA. On Day 1, samples will be collected before dosing (0  hours) 
and at 1, 2, 4, and 6 hours after dosing (relative to the morning dose). On Day  15, samples will be collected before dosing (0 hours) and at 1, 2, 4, 6, and 8 
hours after dosing. On Day 29, a predose sample will be collected before the morning dose of study drug. At the Day 43 and the ETT Visits, a  single blood 
sample for PK analysis will be collected.  
u  The last dose of study drug will be the morning dose on Day  29. 
v  Refer  to Section  9.4 of the  protocol for details.  

Statistical Analysis Plan (Methods)  Page 49 of 85 
Protocol Number: VX15- 440-101 Version 2.0  
 
Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated   Table 11-3 Study VX15 -440-101: Schedule of Assessments for Part 2  
Event/Assessmenta Screening  Run- in Period  Treatment Periodb Washout Period  
ETT  
Visitc Safety 
Follow -up 
28 (± 7) Days 
After Last  
Dosed Days  -56 
to -29e Day -28 
(± 1 day)  Day -14f 
(± 1 day)  Day 1  Day 15 
(± 2 days)  Day 29 
(± 2 days)  Day 43 
(± 3 days)  Day 57  
(± 3 days)  
Informed consent  X          
Randomizationg    X       
Demographics  X          
Medical history  X          
Ophthalmological 
history  X          
CFQ -Rh,i    X X X X X Xj  X 
Weightk X X  X X X X X X X 
Height  X          
                                                 
a  All assessments will be performed before dosing, unless noted otherwise. Assessments that are collected before and after dosing will only be collected once 
if study drug is not administered on the day of the visit (i.e., if subject prematurely discontinued study drug treatment).  
b  To be eligible to continue into the Treatment Period, subjects must have stable CF disease and have remained on stable CF med ication regimen during the 
28 days before the Day 1 Visi t AND must not have had an acute non- CF illness within 14 days before the Day 1 Visit. See Section  8.1.3  of the protocol.  
c  If the subject prematurely discontinues study treatment, an ETT Visit should be scheduled as soon as possible after the decis ion to  terminate study drug 
treatment. Subjects who prematurely discontinue treatment will also be required to complete the Safety Follow -up Visit. If the ETT Visit occurs 3 weeks or 
later following the last dose of study drug, then the ETT Visit will replace th e Safety Follow -up Visit, and a separate Safety Follow -up Visit will not be 
required.  
d  Part 2 subjects who meet criteria specified in Section 8.1.5  of the protocol will not have a Safety Follow -up Visit.  
e  All screening results must be reviewed by an appropriately qualified member of the investigator’s team before the subject receives the first dose of TEZ/IVA 
in the Run -in Period on Day  -28, unless noted otherwise.  
f  The Day  -14 Visit is only required for subjects who are naïve to TEZ/IVA treatment.  
g  Randomization may occur on the previous day (Day  -1) after all inclusion and exclusion criteria and criteria for entry into the Treatment Period have been 
confirmed. See Section  8.1.3  of the protocol.  
h  CFQ -R must be completed before the start of any other assessments scheduled at that visit.  
i  The predose assessment on Day  1 may be performed on the previous day (Day -1) if randomization has occurred.  
j  Subjects will complete the CFQ -R at the ETT Visit only if it has been 2 weeks or more since their last visit.  
k  Weight and height will be measured with shoes off.  

Statistical Analysis Plan (Methods)  Page 50 of 85 
Protocol Number: VX15- 440-101 Version 2.0  
 
Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated   Table 11-3 Study VX15 -440-101: Schedule of Assessments for Part 2  
Event/Assessmenta Screening  Run- in Period  Treatment Periodb Washout Period  
ETT  
Visitc Safety 
Follow -up 
28 (± 7) Days 
After Last  
Dosed Days  -56 
to -29e Day -28 
(± 1 day)  Day -14f 
(± 1 day)  Day 1  Day 15 
(± 2 days)  Day 29 
(± 2 days)  Day 43 
(± 3 days)  Day 57  
(± 3 days)  
Vital signsl X X  X X X X X X X 
Pulse oximetry  X X  X X X X X X X 
Physical 
examinationm Complete  Abbreviated   Abbreviated  Abbreviated  Abbreviated   Abbreviated  Abbreviated  Complete  
Ophthalmologic 
examinationn X          
Standard 12 -lead 
ECGo X X  X X X X X X X 
Sweat chloridei,p X  X X X X X X X  
Spirometryq X   X X X X X X X X 
Urinalysis  X X  X X X X X X X 
                                                 
l  Vital signs and pulse oximetry will be collected after the subject has been seated for at least 5  minutes.  
m  Complete and abbreviated PEs are described in Section  11.7.3  of the protocol . Symptom -targeted PEs will occur at any time during the study if triggered by 
AEs or if deemed necessary by the investigator or healthcare provider.  
n  The ophthalmological examination can be performed at any time during the Screening Period through the Day  1 Visit (before the first dose of study drug). 
The screening ophthalmological examination does not have to be performed if there is documentation of an examination that met  protocol criteria and was 
within 3  months before the date of informed consent, or i f there is documentation of bilateral lens removal for the subject.  
o  All standard 12 -lead ECGs will be performed after the subject has been seated for at least 5  minutes. On Days 1 and 15, ECGs will be collected before 
dosing and 4 hours (±  1 hour) after  dosing. At all other visits, ECGs will be collected before dosing (as applicable). ECGs collected on Day  1 before dosing 
will be performed in triplicate.  
p  Sweat chloride will be measured in all subjects. If the value cannot be determined from the screening test, a sweat chloride value documented in the subject’s 
medical record may be used to establish eligibility.  
q  Spirometry may be performed pre - or post -bronchodilator at the Screening Visit. Spirometry will be performed pre -bronchodilator, before the morning dose 
of study drugs, and should be performed at approximately the same time at every other study visit. On Days  1 and 15, spirometry will also be performed 
pre-bronchodilator, 5 hours (± 1 hour) after study drug administration.  

Statistical Analysis Plan (Methods)  Page 51 of 85 
Protocol Number: VX15- 440-101 Version 2.0  
 
Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated   Table 11-3 Study VX15 -440-101: Schedule of Assessments for Part 2  
Event/Assessmenta Screening  Run- in Period  Treatment Periodb Washout Period  
ETT  
Visitc Safety 
Follow -up 
28 (± 7) Days 
After Last  
Dosed Days  -56 
to -29e Day -28 
(± 1 day)  Day -14f 
(± 1 day)  Day 1  Day 15 
(± 2 days)  Day 29 
(± 2 days)  Day 43 
(± 3 days)  Day 57  
(± 3 days)  
Pregnancy test (all 
females of 
childbearing 
potential)  Serum  Urine   Urine   Urine   Urine  Serum  Serum  
CFTR  genotyper X          
FSHs X          
G6PD activity testt X          
Serum chemistry 
and hematology  X X  X X X X X X X 
Coagulation  X X  X X X    X 
PK samplingv    X X X X  X   
TEZ/IVA dosingw  Day -28 through Day 57    
VX-440 or placebo 
dosingx    Day 1 through Day 29      
                                                 
r  CFTR  genotypi ng will be performed for all subjects. If the screening CFTR  genotype result is not received before Day  -28, a previous CFTR  genotype 
laboratory report may be used to establish eligibility.  
s  FSH will be measured for any suspected postmenopausal female su bjects with at least 12 months of continuous spontaneous amenorrhea.  
t  A single blood sample will be collected for the G6PD activity test.  
  B lood samples will be collected for  PK analysis of VX -440, TEZ, M1- TEZ, IVA, and M1 -IVA. On Day 1, samples will be collected before dosing (0  hours) 
and at 1, 2, 4, and 6 hours after dosing (relative to morning dose). On Day 15, samples will be collected before dosing (0 hours) and at 1, 2,  4, 6, and 8 hours 
after dosing. On Day  29, a predose sample will be collected before the morning dose of study drug. At the Day 43 Visit, a single blood sample for PK 
analysis will be collected before the morning dose of TEZ/IVA. At the ETT Visit, a single blood sample for PK analysis will be collected.  
w  The last dose of TEZ/ivacaftor will be the morning dose on Day  57. 
x  The last dose of VX- 440 or placebo will be the morning dose on Day  29. 

Statistical Analysis Plan (Methods)  Page 52 of 85 
Protocol Number: VX15- 440-101 Version 2.0  
 
Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated   Table 11-3 Study VX15 -440-101: Schedule of Assessments for Part 2  
Event/Assessmenta Screening  Run- in Period  Treatment Periodb Washout Period  
ETT  
Visitc Safety 
Follow -up 
28 (± 7) Days 
After Last  
Dosed Days  -56 
to -29e Day -28 
(± 1 day)  Day -14f 
(± 1 day)  Day 1  Day 15 
(± 2 days)  Day 29 
(± 2 days)  Day 43 
(± 3 days)  Day 57  
(± 3 days)  
AEs, medicationsy, 
treatments and 
procedures  Continuous from signing of the ICF through the Safety Follow -up Visit  
                                                 
y  Refer to Section  9.4 of the protocol for details.  

Statistical Analysis Plan (Methods)  Page 56 of 85 
Protocol Number: VX15- 440-101 Version 2.0  
     
Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated    Appendix B: Analysis Visit Windows for Safety and Efficacy Assessments  
Table 11- 5 Analysis Visit Windows for Safety and Efficacy Assessments  
Assessment  Visita Target Study 
Dayb Analysis Visit Window  
(in study days)  
Safety Assessment (Part 1, Cohort 1A)  
Serum Chemistry  
Hematology 
Urinalysis  
Vital Signs (including 
Weight)  
 Day 1 (Baseline)  
Day 8  
Day 15  
Day 29  
Day 43  
Safety Follow -up 1 
8 
15 
29 
43 
57 ≤1 Pre-dose 
[1, 12]  
(12,22]  
(22, 36]  
(36, 50]  
Use nominal visit  
Coagulation  Day 1 (Baseline)  
Day 15  
Day 29  
Safety Follow -up 1 
15 
29 
57 ≤1 Pre-dose 
[1, 22] 
(22, 43]  
Use nominal visit  
Standard 12 -Lead ECG  Day 1 (Baseline; before dosing)  
Day 1 (4 hours after dosing)  
Day 8  
Day 15 (before dosing and 4 
hours after dosing)  
Day 29  
Day 43 
Safety Follow -up 1 
1 
8 
15 
 
29 
43 
57 Use nominal visit for all 
visits  
Safety Assessment (Part 1, Cohort 1B)  
Serum Chemistry  
Hematology Urinalysis  
Vital Signs (including 
Weight)  Day 1 (Baseline)  
Day 15  
Day 29  
Day 43  
Safety Follow -up 1 
15 
29 
43 
57 ≤1 Pre-dose 
[1,22]  
(22, 36]  
(36, 50]  
Use nominal visit  
Coagulation  Day 1 (Baseline)  
Day 15  
Day 29  
Safety Follow -up 1 
15 
29 
57 ≤1 Pre-dose 
[1,22]  
(22, 43]  
Use nominal visit  
Standard 12 -Lead ECG  Day 1 (Baseline; before dosing)  
Day 1 (4 hours after dosing)  
Day 15 (before dosing and 4 
hours after dosing)  
Day 29  
Day 43  
Safety Follow -up 1 
1 
15 
 
29 
43 
57 Use nominal visit for all 
visits  
Safety Assessment (Part 2)  
                                                 
a  Visit name is used to report data in tables, listings and figures.   
b  Target day time point per protocol is predose, except for ECG measurements.  
Statistical Analysis Plan (Methods)  Page 57 of 85 
Protocol Number: VX15- 440-101 Version 2.0  
     
Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated    Table 11-5 Analysis Visit Windows for Safety and Efficacy Assessments 
Assessment  Visita Target Study 
Dayb Analysis Visit Window  
(in study days)  
Serum Chemistry  
Hematology 
Urinalysis  
Vital Signs (including 
Weight)  Day 1 (Baseline)  
Day 15  
Day 29 
Day 43  
Day 57  
Safety Follow -up 1 
15 
29 
43 
57 
85 ≤1 Pre-dose 
[1,22]  
(22, 36]  
(36, 50]  
(50, 71]  
Use nominal visit  
Coagulation  
 Day 1 (Baseline)  
Day 15  
Day 29  
Safety Follow -up 1 
15 
29 
85 ≤1 Pre-dose 
[1,22]  
(22, 57] 
Use nominal visit  
Standard 12 -Lead ECG  Day 1 (Baseline; before dosing)  
Day 1 (4 hours after dosing)  
Day 15 (before dosing and 4 
hours after dosing)  
Day 29  
Day 43  
Day 57  
Safety Follow -up 1 
1 
15 
 29 
43 
57 
85 Use nominal visit for all 
visits  
Efficacy Assessment (Part 1, Cohort 1A)  

Statistical Analysis Plan (Methods)  Page 58 of 85 
Protocol Number: VX15- 440-101 Version 2.0  
     
Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated    Table 11-5 Analysis Visit Windows for Safety and Efficacy Assessments 
Assessment  Visita Target Study 
Dayb Analysis Visit Window  
(in study days)  
Spirometry  
Sweat Chloride  Day 1 (Baseline)  
Day 1 (5 hours after dosing for 
Spirometry ) 
Day 8  
Day 15   
 
Day 29  
Day 43  
Safety Follow -up 1 
1  
8 
15 
 29 
43 
57 ≤1 Pre-dose 
1 Post -dose for Spirometry  
 (1, 12]  
(12,22]  (Pre and Post for 
Spirometry ) 
(22, 36]  
(36, 50]  
Use nominal visit  
CFQ -R Day 1 (Baseline)  
Day 15  
Day 29  
Day 43  
Safety Follow -up 1 
15 
29 
43 
57 ≤1 
(1,22]  
(22, 36]  
(36, 50]  
Use nominal visit  
Efficacy Assessment (Part 1, Cohort 1B)  
Spirometry  
Sweat Chloride  
CFQ -R Day 1 (Baseline)  
Day 1 (5 hours after dosing for 
Spirometry ) 
Day 15  
 
Day 29  
Day 43  
Safety Follow -up 1 
1  15 
 29 
43 
57 ≤1 
1 
 
(1,22]  (Pre and Post for 
Spirometry ) 
(22, 36]  
(36, 50]  
Use nominal visit  
Efficacy  Assessment (Part 2)  
Spirometry  
Sweat Chloride  
CFQ -R Day 1 (Baseline)  
Day 1 (5 hours after dosing for 
Spirometry )   
Day 15  
 
Day 29  
Day 43  
Day 57  
Safety Follow -up 1 
1  15 
 29 
43 
57 
85 ≤1 
1  
(1,22]  (Pre and Post for 
Spirometry ) 
(22, 36]  
(36, 50]  
(50, 71]  
Use nominal visit  
aVisit name is used to report data in tables, listings and figures.  
bTarget day time point is predose.  

Statistical Analysis Plan (Methods)  Page 59 of 85 
Protocol Number: VX15- 440-101 Version 2.0  
     
Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated    Table 11- 5 Analysis Visit Windows for Safety and Efficacy Assessments  
Assessment  Visita Target Study 
Dayb Analysis Visit Window  
(in study days)  
 
Notes:  
The analysis visit windows will be applied using the following rules for both scheduled and unscheduled visits:  
1. If no numerical measurement is available within a visit window, the measurement will be considered 
missing for the visit.  
2. If there is more than 1  numerical measurement available within the same vis it window, use the 
following rules:  
a. For efficacy parameters: if there are multiple measurements within a visit window, the measurement at the scheduled visit will be used. Otherwise,  
i. If there are no measurements at the scheduled visit, then the measuremen t closest to the target 
day will be used; or  
ii. If there are multiple measurements with the same distance to the target day, the latest 
measurement will be used.   
b. For safety parameters: if there are multiple measurements within a visit window,   
i. The measurement closest to the target day will be used; or  
ii. If there are multiple measurements within the same distance from the target day, the latest measurement will be used.  
iii. For tables of the extreme lab measurement based on ULN or LLN, convert the lab  
measurements into times of ULN or LLN first, and then select the extreme measurement.  
 
Derived Variables  
1. Age (in years) at first dose date  
Obtain age at screening (in days) in yy mm format (e.g., 24 years, 6 months) from screening vital signs page, 
and add 0.5 month to convert to days.  
Obtain screening date from Date of Visit (DOV) page.  
Then age (in years) at first dose date = integer part of {[(first dose date- screening date) in  days + age at 
screening (in days)]/365.25}.  
Correspondingly, age (in months) at first dose date = integer part of 12*{[(first dose date -screening date) in 
days + age at screening (in days)]/365.25}.  
2. Age (in years) at post -baseline visit (for use in calcul ation of percent predicted spirometry variables)  
Age (in years) at post -baseline visit = integer part of {[(post- baseline visit date –  screening date) in days + age 
at screening (in days)]/365.25}  
3. Missing First Dose Date or Last Dose Date  
If the first dose  date is missing, use Day 1 visit date.  
If the last dose date is missing at final analysis, use maximum of Early Treatment Termination  (ETT) visit date 
and last study drug administr ation date from EX SDTM domain ( excluding PK dosing dates).  When a subject is 
lost to follow up  without ETT , impute the last dose date as the last on -treatment visit date.
 
  
Statistical Analysis Plan (Methods)  Page 60 of 85 
Protocol Number: VX15- 440-101 Version 2.0  
     
Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated    Appendix C: Imputation Rules for Missing Prior/Concomitant Medication Dates  
Imputation rules for missing or partial medication start/stop dates are defined below:  
1. Missing or partial medication start date:  
a. If only DAY is missing, use the first day of the month.  
b. If DAY and Month are both missing, use the first day of the year.  
c. If DAY, Month and Year are all missing, use a date before the first dose date  
(in practical, use Jan. 01, 2000 to impute) . 
2. Missing or partial medication stop date: 
a. If only DAY is missing, use the last day of the month. 
b. If DAY and Month are both missing, use the last day of the year.  
c. If DAY, Month and year are all missing, assign ‘c ontinuing’ status to stop 
date (in practical, use Dec. 31, 2050 to impute) . 
In summary, the prior, concomitant or post categorization of a medication is described below.  
Table 11 -6 Prior, Concomitant, and Post Categorization of a Medication in Parts  1 and  4 
Medication Start Date  Medication Stop Date  
< First Dose Date of Study 
Drug  ≥ First Dose Date and ≤ 
End Date of TE Period  > End Date of TE Period  
< First dose date of study drug  P PC PCA  
≥ First dose date and  
≤ End date of TE period  - C CA 
> End date of TE period  - - A 
P: Prior; C: Concomitant; A: Post  
Table 11 -7 Prior, Concomitant, and Post Categor ization of a Medication in Part  2 
Medication Start Date   Medication Stop Date  
< First Dose 
Date of Run -in 
TE Period  ≥ First Dose Date and ≤ 
End Date of Run- in TE 
Period  ≥ First Dose Date and ≤ End 
Date of Treatment TE Period  > End Date of 
Treatment TE 
Period  
< First dose date of Run -in 
TE period  P PC1 PC1C2  PC1C2A  
≥ First dose date and  
≤ End date of Run -in  TE 
Period  - C1 C1C2  C1C2A  
≥ First dose date and  
≤ End date of Treatment TE 
Period  - - C2 C2A  
> End date of Treatment TE 
Period  - - - A 
P: Prior; C1: Concomitant during the Run -in Period; C2: Concomitant during the Treatment Period; A: Post  
  
Statistical Analysis Plan (Methods)  Page 61 of 85 
Protocol Number: VX15- 440-101 Version 2.0  
     
Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated    Appendix D : Important Protocol Deviation Programming Rules (Based on the 
Clinical Database)  
Important protocol deviations before first dose 
1. Inclusion criteria:  
a) I1: Subject (or subject’s legally appointed and authorized representative) will sign 
and date an informed co nsent form (ICF), and, when appropriate, an assent form. 
b) I3: Subjects will be aged 18 years or older for Parts  1 and 2,  
 on the date of informed consent and, when appropriate, date of 
assent.  
c) I4: Body weight ≥35 kg.  
d) I6: Subjects must have an eligible CFTR genotype as noted below. If the screening 
CFTR genotype result is not received before randomization (Parts 1 ) or before Day -28 (Part 2), a previous CFTR genotype laboratory report may be used to 
establish eligib ility. Note: Subjects who have been randomized and whose screening 
genotype does not confirm study eligibility must be discontinued from the study (Section  9.5).  
e) I7: Part  1 
 Heterozygous for F508del  with a second CFTR allele carrying 
an MF mutation that is not likely to respond to TEZ and/or IVA therapy (Appendix A) 
Part 2: Homozygous for F508del  
Parts 1, 2,  subjects must have an FEV 1 ≥40% and ≤90% of predicted normal 
for age, sex, and height (equations of the Gl obal Lung Function Initiative [GLI])13 at 
the S creening Visit. Spirometry measurements must meet American Thoracic 
Society/European Respiratory Society criteria10 for acceptability and repeatability.  
2. Exclusion criteria: 
a) E4: History of hemolysis.  
b) E5: G6PD deficiency, defined as G6PD activity less than the lower limit of normal 
(LLN) or 70% of the mean of the LLN and the ULN, whichever is greater.  
c) E6: Any of the following abnormal laboratory values at screening: 
• Hemoglobin <10 g/dL  
• Total bilirubin ≥2 × ULN  
• Aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alanine aminotransferase (ALT), gamma-
glutamyl transpeptidase  (GGT), or alkaline phosphatase (ALP) ≥3 × ULN  
• Abnormal renal function defined as glomerular filtration rate 
≤50 mL/min/1.73 m2 (calculated by the Modification of Diet in Renal Disease 
Study Equation)14, 15 for subjects ≥18 years of age and ≤45 mL/min/1.73 m2 

Statistical Analysis Plan (Methods)  Page 62 of 85 
Protocol Number: VX15- 440-101 Version 2.0  
     
Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated    (calculated by the Counahan -Barratt equation)16 for subjects aged 12 to 17 
years (inclusive) 
d) E10: A standard digital ECG demonstrating QTc >450 msec at screening. If QTc 
exceeds 450  msec for the screening ECG, the ECG should be repeated 2 more times 
during the Screening Period, and the subject will be excluded if the average of the 3 QTc values is >450 msec.  
e) E11: History of solid organ or hematological transplantation. 
f) E16: Use of restricted medications as defined in the clinical study protocol, within the specified window before the first dose of study drug (Day 1 in Parts 1 , Day -28 in Part 2).  
g) E17: Pregnant or nursing females: Females of childbearing potential must have a negative pregnancy test at screening and Day  1. 
3. Stratification error  based on comparing the IWRS stratification with the clinical database:  
• Age at Screening V isit (<18, ≥18 years)  from IWRS versus age at screening visit 
in the clinical databas e 
• % predicted FEV
1 at Stratification  (<70 , ≥70)  from IWRS versus  ppFEV 1 at the 
screening visit or Day -14 (Part 2) of the R un-in Period from the clinical database  
Important protocol deviations during the Treatment Period  
1. Compliance < 80% based on the number of tablets taken 
2. Use of prohibited medications 
3. Actual treatment received is different from  the randomized treatment  
  

Statistical Analysis Plan (Methods)  Page 63 of 85 
Protocol Number: VX15- 440-101 Version 2.0  
     
Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated    Appendix E: Details of GLI Equations for Calculating ppFEV 1 
Percent predicted values will be calculated for parameters of FEV 1,  
 using the Quanjer GLI-2012 R egression Equations and Lookup Tables. 
The regression equations and lookup tables required to implement the Quanjer GLI-2012 
predicted values are available in:  
Quanjer GLI -2012 Regression Equations and Lookup Tables. Philip H. Quanjer, Sanja 
Stanojevic, Tim J. Cole, Janet Stocks. Version 7 April 2013. Available at:  
http://www.ers -education.org/guidelines/global-lung-function- initiative/tools/quanjer -gli-
2012- regression -equations -and-lookup- tables.aspx .  
Accessed March 13, 2017.  The instructions and tools on how to implement the Quanjer GLI-2012 equations are:   Implementing GLI -2012 regression equations. Philip H. Quanjer, Sanja Stanojevic, Tim J. 
Cole, Janet Stocks. Version 19 July 2015. Available at:  http://www.ers -education.org/guidelines/global-lung-function- initiative/gli-2012-
explained.aspx.  
Accessed March 13, 2017 .   GLI-2012 - SAS Macro. Sanja Stanojevic. Version 2, 7 April 2013. Available at:  
http://www.ers -education.org/guidelines/global-lung- function- initiative/tools/sas -macro.aspx  
Accessed March 13, 2017. 
  

Statistical Analysis Plan (Methods)  Page 66 of 85 
Protocol Number: VX15- 440-101 Version 2.0  
     
Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated    Appendix G: Calculation of BMI z -score for subjects <20 years old at screening  
BMI will be calculated from weight and height at baseline and  post- baseline time points (Day 
15, Week 4, 8, and 12), as applicable for Parts 1, 2  
BMI, adjusted for age and sex, will be referred to as BMI- for-age z- score (BMI z -score). 
BMI z -score will be calculated by using Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) 
growth charts. The BMI z -score will be calculated as follows:  



=

≠−


=
0 ,ln0 ,1
LSMXLLSMX
zL
 
where X  is the derived BMI value in kg/m2 based on the raw weight and raw height and L , M, 
and S are selected from the CDC BMI -for-age chart by subject sex and age. The BMIAGE 
file contains these parameters by sex (1=male, 2=female) and age; it is available at :  
http://www.cdc.gov/growthcharts/percentile_data_files.htm .  
Additionally, SAS code for calculating percentiles and z- scores is available at:    
http://www.cdc.gov/growthcharts/computer_programs.htm . 
NOTE: The CDC BMI -for-age charts are designed for use in pediatric populations (2 to  20 
years of age); in this analysis plan, BMI z- score will be calculated only for subjects between 
2 and <20 years. 

Statistical Analysis Plan (Methods)  Page 67 of 85 
Protocol Number: VX15- 440-101 Version 2.0  
     
Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated    Appendix H: Imputation Rules for Missing AE dates  
H.1 Parts 1  
Imputation rules for missing or partial AE start date for Parts 1  are defined below. 
• If only Day of AE start date is missing: 
o If the full (or partial) AE end date is NOT before the first dose date of the 
Treatment Period or AE end date is missing, then  
 if AE start year and month are equal to the month and year of first dose date of the Treatment Period, then impute the AE start day as the day of first dose date of the Treatment Period;  
 else impute the AE start day as 1.  
o else impute the AE start day as 1.  
Compare the imputed AE start date with TE period to determine whether the AE is pretreatment AE, TEAE or post- treatment AE.  
• If Day and Month of AE start date are missing: 
o If the full (or partial) AE end date is NOT before the first dose date of the Treatment Period or AE end date is missing, then  
 if AE start year is equal to the year of first dose date of the Treatment Period, then impute the AE start month and day as the month and day of first dose date of the Treatment Period;  
 else impute the AE start month as January and day as 1.  
o else impute the AE start month as January and day as 1.  
Compare the imputed AE start date with TE period to determine whether the AE is pretreatment AE, TEAE or post- treatment AE.  
• If Year of AE start date is missing: 
If the year of AE start is missing or AE start date is completely missing then query site 
with no imputation.  
o If the full (or partial) AE end date is NOT before the first dose date of the Treatment Period or AE end date is missing, then the AE will be considered as TEAE for the Treatment Period.  
o else the AE will be considered as  a pretreatment AE . 
 
H.2 Part 2  
Imputation rules for missing or partial AE start date for Part 2 are defined below.  
• If only Day of AE start date is missing: 

Statistical Analysis Plan (Methods)  Page 68 of 85 
Protocol Number: VX15- 440-101 Version 2.0  
     
Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated    o If the full (or partial) AE end date is NOT before the first dose date of the 
Treatment Period or AE end date is missing, then  
 if AE start year and month are equal to the month and year of first dose date of the Treatment Period, then impute the AE start day as the day of first dose date of the Treatment Period;  
 else if AE start year and month are equal to the month and year of first dose date of the Run- in Period, then impute the AE start day as the day of 
first dose date of the Run -in Period;  
 else impute the AE start day as 1.  
o else if the full (or partial) AE end date is NOT before the first dose date of the Run- in Period, then impute the AE start day as the day of first dose date of the 
Run- in Period;  
 if AE start year and month are equal to the month and year of first dose date of the Run- in Period, then impute the AE start day as the day of first 
dose date of the Run- in Period;  
 else impute the AE start day as 1.  
o else impute the AE start day as 1.  
Compare the imputed AE start date with TE period to determine whether the AE is pretreatment AE, TEAE or post -treatment AE.  
• If Day and Month of AE start date are missing:  
o If the full (o r partial) AE end date is NOT before the first dose date of the 
Treatment Period or AE end date is missing, then  
 if AE start year is equal to the year of first dose date of the Treatment Period, then impute the AE start month and day as the month and day of first dose date of the Treatment Period;  
 else if AE start year is equal to the year of first dose date of the Run -in 
Period, then impute the AE start month and day as the month and day of first dose date of the Run -in Period;  
 else impute the AE start month as January and day as 1.  
o else if the full (or partial) AE end date is NOT before the first dose date of the Run- in Period, then impute the AE start day as the day of first dose date of the 
Run- in Period;  
 if AE start year is equal to the year of fir st dose date of the Run- in Period, 
then impute the AE start month and day as the month and day of first dose date of the Run- in Period;  
 else impute the AE start month as January and day as 1.  
o else impute the AE start month as January and day as 1.  
Statistical Analysis Plan (Methods)  Page 69 of 85 
Protocol Number: VX15- 440-101 Version 2.0  
     
Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated    Compare the imputed AE start date with TE period to determine whether the AE is 
pretreatment AE, TEAE or post -treatment AE.  
• If Year of AE start date is missing:  
If the year of AE start is missing or AE start date is completely missing then query site with no imputation.  
o If the full (or partial) AE end date is NOT before the first dose date of the Treatment Period or AE end date is missing, then the AE will be considered as TEAE for the Treatment Period.  
o else if the full (or partial) AE end date is NOT bef ore the first dose date of the 
Run- in Period, then the AE will be considered as TEAE for the Run- in Period. 
o else the AE will be considered as  a pretreatment AE . 
 Imputation rules  for partial AE end date are defined below:  
If partial end date, then impute as min (the last day of the month, end of study) if day is 
missing,  or min (Dec , end of study) if month is missing.  
  
Statistical Analysis Plan (Methods)  Page 70 of 85 
Protocol Number: VX15- 440-101 Version 2.0  
     
Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated    Appendix I: Criteria for Threshold Analysis  
Table 11- 10 Threshold Analysis Criteria for Laboratory Tests  (as applicable)  
Parameter  Threshold Analysis  Comments  
Clinical Chemistry  (LFT)  
ALT  >ULN - ≤3xULN  
>3x - ≤ 5xULN  
>5x - ≤ 8xULN  
>8x - ≤ 20.0xULN  
>20.0xULN  FDA DILI Guidance Jul  2009.  
AST  >ULN - ≤3xULN  
>3x - ≤ 5xULN  
>5x - ≤ 8xULN  
>8x - ≤ 20.0xULN  
>20.0xULN  FDA DILI Guidance Jul  2009.  
ALT or AST   (ALT>ULN - ≤  3xULN) or (AST>ULN - ≤  
3xULN)  
(ALT>3x - ≤  5xULN) or  (AST>3x -  ≤  
5xULN)  
(ALT>5x - ≤  8xULN) or  (AST>5x -  ≤    
8xULN)  
(ALT>8x  - ≤  20xULN) or (AST>8x -  ≤ 
20xULN)  
ALT>20xULN or AST> 20 xULN  FDA D ILI Guidance  
Alkaline 
Phosphatase  >ULN - ≤ 1.5xULN  
>1.5 – ≤ 2.5 xULN  
>2.5 – ≤ 5.0 x ULN  
>5.0 – ≤ 20.0 x ULN  
>20.0 x ULN  FDA DILI Guidance Jul  2009.  
Total Bilirubin  >ULN - ≤ 1.5xULN  
>1.5 – ≤ 2xULN  
>2 – ≤ 3xULN  
>3 – ≤ 10xULN  
>10xULN  FDA DILI Guidance Jul 2009.  
Direct  Bilirubin  >ULN - ≤ 1.5xULN  
>1.5 – ≤ 2xULN  
>2 – ≤ 3xULN  
>3 – ≤ 10xULN  
>10xULN  FDA DILI Guidance Jul  2009.  
ALT and Total 
Bilirubin  ALT>3xULN and TBILI>2xULN  FDA DILI Guidance Jul  2009.  
 
AST and Total 
Bilirubin  AST>3xULN and TBILI>2xULN  FDA DILI Guidance Jul  2009.  
 
(ALT or AST) and 
Total Bilirubin  (ALT>3xULN or AST>3xULN) and 
TBILI>2×ULN  FDA DILI Guidance Jul 2009.  
Statistical Analysis Plan (Methods)  Page 71 of 85 
Protocol Number: VX15- 440-101 Version 2.0  
     
Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated    Table 11- 10 Threshold Analysis Criteria for Laboratory Tests  (as applicable)  
Parameter  Threshold Analysis  Comments  
GGT  >ULN - ≤ 2.5xULN  
>2.5 –  ≤ 5.0xULN  
>5.0 –  ≤ 20.0xULN  
>20.0xULN  CTCAE grade 1 -4 
Clinical Chemistry  (NON -LFT)   
Albumin  <LLN - ≥ 30 g/L  
<30 – ≥ 20 g/L  
<20 g/L  CTCAE grade 1 -3 
Amylase  >1x -  ≤  1.5xULN  
>1.5x -  ≤  2xULN  
>2x -  ≤  5xULN  
>5xULN  Criteria based upon CTCAE  
Creatinine  >ULN - ≤ 1.5xULN  
>1.5 - ≤ 3.0xULN  
>3.0 - ≤ 6.0xULN  
>6.0xULN  CTCAE grades 1 -4 
Lipase  >ULN  -  ≤  1.5xULN  
>1.5x -  ≤  2xULN  
>2x -  ≤  5xULN  
>5xULN  Criteria based upon CTCAE  
Total  protein  
 <LLN  
>ULN  No CTCAE  
Hematology  
Hemoglobin Hgb decreased (anemia)  
<LLN - ≥ 100 g/L  
<100 – ≥ 80 g/L  
< 80 g/L  CTCAE grade 1 -3 
 Hgb increased  
>ULN - ≤ 20 g/L above ULN  
>20 g/L above ULN -  ≤ 40 g/L above ULN  
>40 g/L above ULN  CTCAE grade 1 -3 
Platelets  Platelet decreased  
<LLN - ≥ 75.0 x 10e9 /L  
<75.0 – ≥ 50.0 x 10e9 /L  
<50.0 – ≥ 25.0 x 10e9 /L  
<25.0 x 10e9 /L  CTCAE grade 1 -4 
 Platelet increased   
>ULN  No CTCAE available  
 
Reticulocytes  
 <LLN  
>ULN  No CTCAE  
 
Statistical Analysis Plan (Methods)  Page 72 of 85 
Protocol Number: VX15- 440-101 Version 2.0  
     
Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated    Table 11- 11 Threshold Analysis Criteria for ECGs  
Parameter  Threshold Analysis  Comments  
HR Bradycardia  
 
<50 bpm  
<45 bpm  
Decrease from baseline ≥10 bpm  
Decrease from baseline ≥20 bpm  
<50 bpm and decrease from baseline ≥10 bpm  
<50 bpm and decrease from baseline ≥20 bpm  
 Per HV grade 2, 3, plus shift change  
 
 
 Tachycardia  
 >100 bpm  
>115 bpm  
>130 bpm  
Increase from baseline ≥10 bpm  
Increase from baseline ≥20 bpm  
>100 bpm and increase from baseline ≥10 bpm  
>100 bpm and increase from baseline ≥20 bpm  Per HV grade 1, 2, 3, plus shift change  
  
PR ≥240 ms  
≥300 ms  
≥200 ms and increase from baseline ≥40 ms  
≥200 ms and increase from baseline ≥100 ms   
QRS  >110 ms  
>160 ms  
Increase from baseline ≥20 ms  
Increase from baseline ≥40 ms   
QTc 
Borderline  
Prolonged*  
Additional  
  
>450 ms (Male)  and <500ms ; >470 ms  and 
<500ms  (Female)  
≥500 ms  
 
Increase from baseline  
Increase from baseline >10 ms  
Increase from baseline >20 ms  
Increase from baseline >40 ms  
Increase from baseline >60 ms  
 To be applied to any kind of QT correction 
formula.  
 
 
  
Note: Based on CPMP 1997 guideline.  
 
Statistical Analysis Plan (Methods)  Page 73 of 85 
Protocol Number: VX15- 440-101 Version 2.0  
     
Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated    Table 11- 12 Threshold Analysis Criteria for Vital Signs  
Parameter  Threshold Analysis  Comments  
HR Same  as above in ECG category  
  
SBP increased  
  
>140 mmHg 
>160 mmHg 
>10 mmHg increase from baseline  
>20 mmHg increase from baseline  
 
>140 mmHg & >10 mmHg increase from 
baseline  
>140 mmHg & >20 mmHg increase from baseline  
>160 mmHg & >10 mmHg increase from 
baseline  
>160 mmHg & >20 mmHg increase from 
baseline  
 809/770 analyses  
SBP decrease  
  
<90 mmHg  
<80 mmHg  
>10 mmHg decrease from baseline  
>20 mmHg decrease from baseline  
 
<90 mmHg and >10 mmHg decrease from 
baseline  
<90 mmHg and >20 mmHg decrease from 
baseline  
<80 mmHg and >10 mmHg decrease from baseline  
<80 mmHg and >20 mmHg decrease from baseline  
 Per HV grade 1, 3, plus shift change  
Statistical Analysis Plan (Methods)  Page 74 of 85 
Protocol Number: VX15- 440-101 Version 2.0  
     
Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated    Table 11- 12 Threshold Analysis Criteria for Vital Signs  
Parameter  Threshold Analysis  Comments  
DBP  increased   
>90 mmHg  
>100 mmHg 
>5 mmHg increase from baseline  
>10 mmHg increase from baseline  
 
>90 mmHg and >5 mmHg increase from 
baseline  
>90 mmHg and >10 mmHg increase from 
baseline  
>100 mmHg and >5 mmHg increase from 
baseline  
>100 mmHg and >10 mmHg increase from baseline  
  
DBP decreased  
  
<60 mmHg  
<45 mmHg  
>5 mmHg decrease from baseline  
>10 mmHg decrease from baseline  
 
<60 mmHg and >5 mmHg decrease from 
baseline  
<60 mmHg and >10 mmHg decrease from baseline  
<45 mmHg and >5 mmHg decrease from baseline  
<45 mmHg and >10 mmHg decrease from baseline  
 
 
  
Weight   Weight gain  
≥5 % increase from baseline   
≥10 % increase from baseline  
≥ 20% increase from baseline  
 CTCAE grade 1 -3 
 
 Weight loss  
≥5 % decrease from baseline   
≥10 % decrease from baseline  
≥ 20% decrease from baseline  
 CTCAE grade 1 -3 
 
 