1 
 Protocol Title:  Break It Up:  A study evaluating breaking up daily sedentary behavior in 
youth.  
Abbreviated Title :  Evaluation of interrupting daily sedentary behavior  
Protocol Number : 17-CH-0130  
Date of This Submission/Version : February 1 3, 2020  
Principal Investigator:  
Name, 
Degree  Branch/Institute  Bldg/Rm  Phone  E-mail  
Jack A. 
Yanovski, 
MD, PhD  
 Section on 
Growth and 
Obesity, NICHD  Building 10, 
Rm 2 -3130  301.496.0858  jy15i@nih.gov  
 
Additional Investigators: Please see Study Personnel Sheet  
 
Study type (check all that apply):  
        x      Archived biological specimens/medical information  
                Natural history; definition of phenotype, genotype/phenotype correlation  
                Prospective linkage/gene identification, NOT providing information to participants  
                Prospective linkage/gene identification, providing information provided to participants  
                Social science; assessments of knowledge, attitudes and behavior  
                Genetic counseling  
                Drugs or devices  
                Gene transfer  
        x      Other interventions  
  
Estimated Duration of study: 2 years  
Human Research Protections Program Investigator and Staff Training:  
For this protocol, the following “Just in time” human subjects protection training cou rses are 
required for investigators and staff:  
• Biomedical - Vulnerable Subjects - Research with Children  
• CITI GCP modules  
2 
 • Unanticipated Problems and Reporting Requirements in Biomedical Research  
• Unanticipated Problems and Reporting Requirements in Social and Behavioral Research  
 
Total requested accrual  
Subjects of Study:    Number  Sex  Age Range  
Healthy Cohort  (BMI 5th to < 85th percentile ) 
--Screened but not enrolled   15  M, F   7-11.99 y at study entry  
--Randomized     60  M, F   7-11.99 y at study entry  
Overweight Cohort ( BMI ≥ 85th percentile ) 
--Screened but not enrolled   15  M, F   7-11.99 y at study entry  
--Randomized     60  M, F   7-11.99 y at study entry  
 
Project Uses Ionizing Radiation :  
  No   Yes  
 
  Medically -indicated only  
 Research -related only (attach RSC/RDRC documentation)  
 
  Both (attach RSC/RDRC documentation)  
 
IND/IDE      No   
 Yes (attach FDA documentation)  
  Drug/Device/#_____________________  
  Sponsor: __________________________  
 
Durable Power of Attorney     No   
  Yes  
 
Multi -institutional Project    No   
  Yes  
 
Data and Safety Monitoring Board    No   
  Yes  
3 
  
Technology Transfer Agreement   
  No    Yes  
 
Samples are being stored    
  No    Yes  
 
Flesch -Kincaid reading level of consent form : ____ 9.6________   
Flesch -Kincaid reading level of assent form: _______ 5.8_____   
4 
 Précis:  
 
Background:  Sedentary behavior is defined as a set of low -intensity activities involving limited 
body movement (e.g.: TV viewing, prolonged sitting). Some studies have found higher levels of 
childhood sedentary behavior predict higher body mass index (BMI) and metabolic 
abnormalities. We and others have found that interrupting sitting with short, 2 -3 minute bouts of 
moderate  activity (walking) can improve glucose tolerance during a single session. Thus, 
interrupting sedentary behavior may be an intervention strategy to reduce health risks. 
Objective:   We propose to conduct a randomized pilot study to assess whether interrupting 
sedentary behavior for 6 consecutive days provides sustained improvement in carbohydrate 
metabolism without negatively impacting executive function, attention, mood, anxiety, d ietary 
intake or usual physical activity. Design & Population:  Using a randomized parallel group 
design, children, ages 7 -11.99 years, will complete an assigned randomized condition of either 6 
consecutive days of 3 hours of monitored sedentary activity  (sitting) or 6 consecutive days of 3 
hours of interrupted sitting (in which they will be prompted to walk for 3 minutes every 30 
minutes). Outcome measures: Twenty -four-hour continuous glucose monitoring and  
postprandial insulin incremental area under the c urve (iAUC) on post -condition oral glucose 
tolerance testing will be the primary measures.  Secondary measures include:  postprandial 
glucose iAUC, executive function, attention, mood, anxiety, dietary intake, and free-living 
physical  activity. Impact:  This project will investigate if  consecutive  daily interruption of 
sitting  behaviors  improves glucose tolerance, a potential negative health consequences of 
sedentary behavior in children. If repeatedly interrupting sitting  with short bouts has sustained 
beneficial effects among children, interventions examining the frequency, duration, and intensity 
of such interruptions could be developed for use in the community setting. Thus, these results 
have the potential to provide insight  into novel behavioral intervention targets in youth.   
5 
 II. Table of Contents  
Outline/Table of Contents:                Page  
Précis   4 
List of Abbreviations    6 
1. Introduction  and Background  8 
 a. Obesity and Sedentary Behaviors  8 
 b. Effec ts of Interrupting Sedentary Behavior  11 
 c. Continuous Glucose Monitoring  15 
 d. Executive function  and Attention  18 
 e. Conclusion  22 
2. Study Objectives  and Specific Hypotheses  24 
3. Subjects  25 
a. Description of study populations  25 
 i. Inclusion Criteria  26 
  ii. Exclusion Criteria  26 
4. Study Design and Methods  28 
a. Study Overview  28 
 i. Trial Design  28 
 ii. Visit Work Flow  29 
 iii. Relationship with other protocols  29 
b. Recruitment   29 
i. Description of Recruitment Strateg y 29 
ii. Recruitment Methods  30 
iii. Anticipated Accrual Rate  30 
iv. Initial contact  30 
 c. Screening   30 
 d. Study Procedures  36 
i. Test Days #1 -6 Daily Procedures  36 
ii. Test Day #1  39 
iii. Test Day # 5 40 
iv. Test Day #6  40 
v. End of Participation  43 
5. Management of Data and Samples  44 
 a. Storage   44 
 b. Data and Sample Sharing Plan 45 
 c. Collaborating Researchers and Affiliated Institutions  47 
6. Additional Considerations  47 
7. Risks and Discomforts  47 
8. Subject Safety Monitoring  50 
 a. Criteria for withdrawal of subjects from study  50 
9.  Outcome Measures   51 
a. Primary Outcome Measure  51 
b. Secondary outcomes  51 
10. Statistical Analysis   52 
6 
 a. Analysis of Data  52 
b. Power Analysis   53 
11. Human Participant Protections  54 
a. Rationale for Subject Selection  54 
b. Equitability   54 
c. Justifications for exclusions  54 
d. Justification for sensitive procedures  55 
e. Safeguards for vuln erable populations (Children)  55 
f. Qualifications of Investigators  Error! 
Bookmark not defined.  
12. Risks/Benefits Analysis  55 
a. Anticipated Benefit  Error! 
Bookmark not defined.  
b. Classification of Risk (for the study as a who le Error! 
Bookmark not defined.  
c. Assessment of Risk/Benefit Ratio  Error! 
Bookmark not defined.  
13. Consent/Assent Documents and Process  56 
a. Designation of those obtaining consent  56 
b. Consent procedures  56 
c.  Non-English –Speaking Participants  57 
d. Consent documents  58 
14. Data and Safety Monitoring  58 
 a. Data and Safety Monitor  58 
 b, Data and S afety Monitoring Plan for Non -IND 58 
15. Quality Assurance   60 
16. Reporting of Unanticipated Problems, Adverse Events and P rotocol Deviations  60 
17. Alternatives to Participation  61 
18. Privacy    61 
19. Confidentiality   61 
20. Conflict of Interest    62 
21. Technology Transfer    62 
22. Research and Travel Compensation   62 
23. References     64 
Appendix A 1: Public Media  Announcement  
Appendix A2:  Recruitment Mailing Letter  
Appendix A3:  Patient Flyer  
Appendix A4:  Listserv Email Template  
Appendix B:  Study Visit Flow Table 1  
Appendix C:  Protocol Consent  
Appendix D:  Protocol Assent  
Appendix E:  Inclusion and Exclusion Checklist  [E.1 Supplemental MRS Arm]  
Appendix F:  Data Sharing Planned, Approval from Scientific Director  
7 
 Appendix G:  Questionnaires ( Hollingshead , IPAQ, Daily  Health History)  
Appendix G2:  Clinical Trials Survey System Questionnaires  
List of Abbreviations  
• BMI: Body mass index  
• CGM:  Continuous Glucose Monitor  
• IMCL:  Intramyocellular lipid content  
• MAGE:  Mean amplitude glycemic excursion  
• MET:  Metabolic equivalent of task  
• MRS:  Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy  
  
8 
  
1. Introduction and Background  
 
Pediatric Obesity and Sedentary Behaviors  
Excessive weight gain in children is one of the foremost global health concerns because 
of its metabolic consequences.1, 2 In the United States, nearly 1 in 5 children who are 6-11 years  
old are considered obes e (BMI ≥ 95th percentile) by the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention standards, almost quadrupling since 1971.3  Excessive weight gain in childhood is 
associated with many adverse outcomes. Children with excessive weight have increased 
incidence of impaired glucose metabolism, dyslipidemia and cardiovascular strain.  4, 5  Long 
term, such children demonstrate increased incidences of musculoskeletal complications6-8 and 
have more difficulty with chronic illnesses such as asthma9 and depres sion.10  These childhood 
morbidities are reason enough to demand investigation and intervention but childho od obesity is 
also predictive of adult obesity and with it numerous adult morbidities including cardiovascular 
disease, metabolic syndrome, cancer, and increased all -cause mortality.11, 12  
The single most important factor of pathologic weight gain is an unhealthy balance 
between energy intake and energy expenditure.  One component of energy expenditure that has 
received more attention in the last decade is sedentary behavior.13, 14  Sedentary behavior is 
defined as lo w-intensity [<1.5 metabolic equivalent of task (MET)] activity that involves limited 
body movement.14 Sedentary behavior encomp asses TV viewing, computer use and prolonged 
sitting , and is highly prevalent in the modern society of developed countries.    
Adult Studies on Sedentary Behavior and Obesity  
There is a growing body of work describing the influence of sedentary behavior on health 
outcomes in adults. Field studies provide support for the role of sedentary behavior in poor 
health outcomes. In a classic study, Morris et al. observed that sedentary bus drivers had higher 
rates of cardiovascular disease (CVD) than the  more active conductors, independent of waist 
circumference.15 Similar increased CVD risk is seen in patients with spinal cord injuries who are 
forced to spend the majority of the day seated.16 This is supported by a review of longitudinal 
studies that suggest a consistent positive relationship between sedentary behavior, mortality and 
9 
 weight gain from childhood to adulthood.17 These findings support the negative health effects of 
sedentary behavior that may begin in childhood and inc rease the risk for disease in adulthood.  
Pediatric Studies on Sedentary Behavior & Obesity  
Using data from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES), 
Matthews et al. estimated that U.S. 6 -11 year olds spend over 6 hours per day in sedentary 
behaviors.18 Furthermore, a high amount of time spent in sedentary behaviors is associated with 
pediatric obesity.19-21  This is support ed by the finding that sedentary behavior in youth predicts 
greater gain in BMI from 9 to 15 years22 independent of moderate to vigorous physical activity 
(MVPA). Summative data from a recent meta -analysis reported that nineteen longitudinal studies 
found greater time spent watching TV at baseline predicted greater increases in BMI and fat 
mass over time,23 and other reviews indicate that the majority of studies report positive 
associations between reported TV viewing and body fat mass.24-27  
Sedentary Behavior & Metabolic Dysfunction  
In addition to weight gain, sedentary behavior has been associated with metabolic 
dysfunct ion.  Extensive epidemiology and clinical observational data in adults associate negative 
metabolic outcomes and sedentary behavior.28-31   For example, Healy et al. evaluated markers of 
the cardiometabolic profile and accelerometer -derived activity in 4757 subjects >20 years in the 
US National Health & Nutriti on Examination Survey (NHANES).31 This study identified 
persistent negative associations such that, while controlling for moderate to vigorous activity, 
increased sedentary time in adults was a ssociated with worsening HDL -cholesterol, C -reactive 
protein, triglycerides, and the homeostatic model of insulin resistance.31  Additionally, Balkau et 
al. identified a significant association  between sedentary time (also recorded with accelerometry) 
and insulin resistance as measured by hyperinsulinemic -euglycemic clamps in 801 adults ages 
30-60 years.28  This finding was only partially attenuated when adjusted for body fat.28   
However, data have been more contradictory in youth.  In 308 children ages 9 -10 years 
old, accelerometer -measured sedentary behavior was significantly associated with insulin 
resistance as measured by the homeostatic model of insulin resistance independent of fat mass.32 
Conversely, using a large pooled convenience sample of 20,871 children ages 4 -18 years 
supplied by the International Children’s Accelerometry Database, Ekelund et al. reported that 
10 
 total sedenta ry time measured by accelerometry was not associated with cardiometabolic risk (as 
measured by waist circumference, systolic blood pressure, fasting triglycerides, high -density 
lipoprotein or insulin ) after adjusting for MVPA.33 The conflicting findings among the studies 
may be related to age, as sedentary time is higher in adolescence than childhood,34 and may 
change the power to detect associations. The conflicting findings in pediatric studies may also be 
due to how sedentary behavior is measured. The majority of published studies operationalized 
sedentary behavior as TV viewing time. TV viewing has t raditionally been assumed to be a good 
measure of sedentary behavior in children, yet it is weakly correlated (r < .20) with device -based 
measures (e.g.: accelerometers) of sedentary time,35, 36 suggesting that they are measuring 
different behaviors. These scre en-based behaviors may be a marker for other behaviors 
associated with poor health or socioeconomic status that could drive relationships with 
adiposity.24 However, other self -report measures designed to capture multiple sedentary 
behaviors (e.g.: the 3 -day physical activity recall) have found that sedentary behavior is 
associated with increased risk of metabolic disease.37  In-lab studies have the potential to greatly 
contribute to this area through the investigation of basic biological pathways  between sedentary 
behavior and metabolic characteristics and clarify the existing literature.  
Thus, in summary, recent data suggest that sedentary behavior may be contributing to the 
perpetuation of the high prevalence of pediatric obesity  and metabolic d ysfunction . Diet and 
increasing physical activity have been largely unsuccessful at producing long -term effects on 
body fatness .38-40 There is a need for novel behavioral intervention strategies to prevent pediatric 
obesity  and its metabolic complications.  Interrupting sedentary behavior is an innovative 
technique.  
Intervention:  Limiting Sedentary Beh avior  
Limiting sedentary behavior has been proposed as a strategy for pediatric obesity 
prevention and intervention.  1, 41-43 Sedentary behavior has most often been operationalized as 
TV viewing or screen -based beha vior. In a seminal randomized controlled trial, Robinson et al 
reported that children who received an intervention aimed at reducing TV viewing had 
significant decreases in BMI, waist circumference, and waist -to-hip ratio.44  A recent review 
reported that interventions aimed at reducing TV viewing produce modest improvements in 
weight parameters and slowing of BMI increases during childhood and adolescence.45 However, 
11 
 many of these interventions included other health messages, so it is difficult to distinguish the 
contributions of the TV -reduction messages alone. Also, continued research on the physiologic 
mechanisms linking sedentary behavior and obesity may help explain potential behavioral 
intervention targets that go beyond TV viewing.  
Effects of interrupting sedentary behavior  
As humans continue to spend the majority of their day sedentary,46 it is important to 
investigate how intervening on this behavio r influences health outcomes. In adults, 
epidemiological and cross -sectional evidence suggests that interrupting prolonged sedentary 
behavior is associated with: lower waist circumference,31 lower triglyceride levels,47 and lower 
postprandial glucose.48 In children, school -based studies indicate that breaks in sitting increase 
attention.49 Reviews of the literature did not find sufficient support for the prospective50 or cross -
sectional51 effects of sedentary behavior on cardiometabolic health outcomes. However, the 
findings from the reviews must be interpre ted cautiously because sedentary behavior was 
measured differently across the reviewed studies, and there were no randomized control trials 
that manipulated the behavior.  
Pathophysiologic basis:  
There are acute physiologic mechanisms that relate sedentary behavior with increased 
metabolic risk which support the potential effectiveness of interrupting sedentary behavior.52 
Early research in this area focused on the acute effects of prolonged sedentary behavior on 
lipoprotein lipase (LPL) activity as a potential link between behavior and health  risk. LPL is 
central in lipid metabolism, and plays a role in free fatty acid (FFA) uptake among different non -
hepatic tissues.53 LPL concentration is high in oxidative (slow twitch, postural) muscle, and is 
hypothesized to mediate the relationship between sedentary behavior and cardiometabolic risk 
because prolonged s itting reduces the use of oxidative muscles (such as those used for standing), 
lowers LPL, and reduces the body’s ability to take up fatty acids into tissues after a meal. The 
result is prolonged exposure of the arterial walls to plasma triglycerides that increases 
cardiometabolic risk.54, 55 This mechanistic hypothesis may explain why cross -sectional pediatric 
studies have found that more time spent in sedentary behavior is associated with increased 
concentration of circulating cell adhesion molecules that play a role in the development of 
atherosclerosis and type 2 diabetes.35 Thus, sedentary behavior may exert a cumulative effect on 
health risk over the lifespan.  
12 
 Sedentary behavior has also been associated with chronic physiologic alterations that 
may increase the risk for type 2 diabetes. Prolonged sedenta ry behavior is associated with lower 
insulin sensitivity and increased postprandial glucose concentrations.56 Sustained sedentary 
behavior diminishes the use of skeletal muscle to assist with glucose uptake from the 
bloodstream after a meal, requiring the pancreas to secrete more insulin that may increase the 
risk for beta cell dysfunction and type 2 diabetes.57, 58 Also, once insulin -mediated glucose 
uptake by skeletal muscle is decreased due to prolonged sitting, the elevated glucose 
concentrations lead to a longer exposure to high circulating insulin in the blood. This 
hyperinsulinemia promotes lipogenesis (fat synthesis) in the liver and uptake of fatt y acids into 
adipose tissue.59 The result is increased adiposity and worsening insulin resistance.60 These 
pathways still need to be further explored to explain how the duration and patterns of sedentary 
behavior may produce negative health effects.  
 
Adult Studies Interrupting Sedentary Behavior  
To date, there have been a few 
published studies evaluating the 
effect of interrupting sedentary 
behavior on metabolism.  48, 61-63  
Dunstan et al. conducted a 
randomized  crossover study where 
prolonged sitting was interrupted 
with 2 minutes of light - and 
moderate - intensity walking every 20 
minutes for five hours in 
overweight/obese adults (Figure 1).48 
They hypothesized that a lower 
postprandial glucose response would 
be observed when  interrupting sitting 
with brief sessions of activity, 
regardless of the intensity  of the 
Uninterrupted Sitting + Light- Sitting + Moderate-012345678
Sitting Intensity
Activity BreaksIntensity
Activity Breaksp<0.01Plasma Glucose iAUC
(mmol/L • hr)
Uninterrupted Sitting + Light- Sitting + Moderate-0100200300400500600700800900
Sitting Intensity
Activity BreaksIntensity
Activity Breaksp<0.01Plasma Insulin iAUC
(pmol/L • hr) 
Fig 1. Dunstan et al. Diab Care 2012;35:976 -983 
13 
 activity . Study par ticipants attended three lab visits in random order to complete the three 
conditions: prolonged sitting, sitting interrupted by light walking, and sitting interrupted by 
moderate walking. A standard test drink was given at time 0 after which blood was take n every 
hour. Compared to the prolonged sitting condition, the glucose responses were significantly 
lower in the light - and moderate - intensity walking conditions – 24.1% and 29.6% respectively – 
with both  conditions  statistically significant vs. sitting ( p<0.0001). Compared to the prolonged 
sitting condition, the insulin incremental area under the curve (iAUC) was 23% lower in the 
light- and moderate - intensity walking conditions. There were no significant differences in 
glucose or insulin responses betwee n the different walking activity conditions, suggesting that 
intensity of activity during breaks per se did not influence metabolic outcomes, but rather the 
simple act of interrupting sitting with any activity might be beneficial for metabolic health .   
More recently, a separate research group sought to confirm these findings with a similar 
intervention strategy.  Pulsford et al. performed a randomized, cross over intervention of three 
arms in 25 inactive men (Figure 2).62  The three arms consisted of:  7 hours of continuous sitting, 
7 hours of sitting interrupted by 2 minutes of light intensity walking every 20 minutes, and 7 
hours of sitting interrupted by 2 minutes of 
standing every 20 minutes.  Similar to 
Dunstan et al., the subjects also received a 
standardized mixed test meal but they also 
received a fasted OGTT during the 
beginning of the day.  Serum glucos e and 
insulin monitoring every 30 minutes 
throughout the day revealed significantly 
decreased glucose and insulin AUC during 
the walking -interruption arm.62  They 
found no significant improvement from the 
standing -interruption arm.  
 
 
Fig. 2  Pulsford et al.  J Sci Med Sport. 2016; 16;30155 -4 
14 
 Pediatric Studies Interrupting Sedentary Behavior  
In youth, recent data (including our own) 
suggest that interrupting sedentary 
behavior has beneficial metabolic 
effects.64, 65  In protocol 13 -CH-0169 we 
examined if an intervention to interrupt 
sedentary behavior in children would 
provide identifiable improvement in 
glucose metabolism (Figure 3).65  Using 
a randomized cross -over design in 28 
healthy weight children, we 
demonstrated that interrupting prolonged 
sedentary behavior in non -overweight 
children by intervening with 3 minutes of  
moderate intensity walking every 30 
minutes for 3hr significantly improved 
carbohydrate metabolism.65  In the 
children studied, interrupting sitting resulted in a 32% lower insulin iAUC ( P =.001), 17% lower 
C-peptide iAUC ( P = .001), and 7% lower glucose iAUC ( P = .018) vs continuous sitting. Mixed 
model results indicat ed that insulin ( P = .036) and free fatty acid concentrations ( P = .009) were 
also significantly lower in the interrupted versus the continuous sitting condition.65  In addition 
to our published data obtained using a healthy weight cohort, we have obtained confirmatory 
results from a methodologically similar study carried out in a separate cohort of 37 children 
whom were overweight or obese .  In this cohort, interrup ting sitting resulted in a 21% lower 
insulin iAUC (p<0.001) & 18% lower C -peptide iAUC (p=0.002). However, no significance 
difference was identified in glucose iAUC ( p = 0.12).  
In addition to our study, Saunders et al. published a similar randomized cross  over study 
in 2013.64  This research group applied a si milar interrupted activity intervention only with light -
(rather than moderate -) intensity walking every 20 minutes for a full day (8 hours).64 The 
outcomes measured were also similar:  AUC for glucose and insulin.  But notably, in addition to 
0 3 0 6 0 9 0 1 2 0 1 5 0 1 8 002 04 06 08 01 0 0
T im e  (m in u te s )In s u lin  (m c U /m L )S IT
S IT  +  W A L K
S IT S IT  +  W A L K02 0 0 04 0 0 06 0 0 08 0 0 01 0 0 0 01 2 0 0 0A U C  In s u lin  (m c U /m L ) •m inp  =  0 .0 0 1
0 3 0 6 0 9 0 1 2 0 1 5 0 1 8 002468
T im e  (m in u te s )C -P e p tid e  (n g /m L )
S IT S IT  +  W A L K02 0 04 0 06 0 08 0 01 0 0 01 2 0 0A U C  C -P e p tid e  (n g /m L ) •m inp  <  0 .0 0 1
0 3 0 6 0 9 0 1 2 0 1 5 0 1 8 07 51 0 01 2 51 5 0
T im e  (m in u te s )G lu c o s e  (m g /d L )
S IT  +  W A L K S IT  +  W A L K1 5 0 0 01 7 5 0 02 0 0 0 02 2 5 0 02 5 0 0 0A U C  G lu c o s e  (m g /d L ) •m in p  <  0 .0 5A B
C D
E F*
* *
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*Fig. 3 Belcher  et al.  JCEM. 2015; 100:3735 –3743  
15 
 the strength of the intervention being different (light intensity [30% of VO2 peak for Saunders et 
al] vs moderate intensity [80% of ventilatory threshold for us] walking), the serum sampling was 
much less frequent occurring only every  90 minutes instead o f every 30 minutes as obtained by 
Dunstan et al. and during our study.  Finally, Saunders et al. only evaluated 19 total subjects.  
With these differences in methods, Saunders et al. failed to identify a difference in glucose 
metabolism by interrupted acti vity (i.e. no change in AUC of insulin or glucose).64  This directly 
contra dicts all previous adult findings and our pediatric studies.48, 62, 65 As noted above, their null 
findings may be  due to the  small sample size and other  methodological differences  that limited 
their ability to detect the effects of interrupting sedentary time .   Regardless, all the positive data 
are reported from comparisons  of outcome at single sessions of interrupted sedentary behavior 
and there are no available data testing if t he changes observed acutely are sustainable.  
Continuous Glucose Monitoring to examine sustained effects on glucose homeostasis  
All the data presented above were obtained using indwelling catheters for venous 
sampling. As a result, only limited data from relatively infrequent sampling during in -lab studies 
are available.  Continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) using transcutaneous sensor s that collect 
interstitial glucose concentrations is a method that can obtain 
frequent data sampling over prolonged periods.   The devices 
are approximately the size of a quarter and are inserted on the 
upper arm ( Figure 4, Abbott Pharmaceuticals).  Adult data 
indicate that altering physical activity, even minimally, in 
non-diabetic adults can significantly affect glycemic variation 
as identified on continuous glucose monitoring.66-68  Such 
data specifically include interrupting sedentary behavior, which has been demons trated to 
decrease nocturnal glycemia as well as glycemic variability and post -prandial glucose.66, 67 
Blankenship et al. recently published novel CGM data collected on 10 sedentary 
overweight/obese no n-diabetic adults who were given 3 different activity interventions while 
wearing CGMs.66  The arms of intervention included: A work day with no activity except one 30 
minute block of walking mid -day; A work day with ‘frequent long breaks’ which varied in 
length and frequency but totaled the same energy expenditure as one 30 minute block of 
walking; and A work day with ‘frequent short breaks’ which varied in length and frequency but 
Fig. 4 Continuous Glucose Monitor,  
Abbott Freestyle Libre  
16 
 were more frequent and shorter in duration that ‘frequent long breaks’.  The participants were 
fitted with a CGM at the beginning of the day and wore the device for  24hrs.  During the testing 
day, they were given a standardized meal tolerance test in order to collect the main outcome data, 
AUC of glucose and insulin during the meal tolerance test.  (Participants were also given 
standardized fixed meals based on total  daily energy expenditure for the remaining meals during 
each intervention 24hr -day).  The mixed meal tolerance test data indicated no difference in AUC 
of glucose or insulin.  However, there was lower glycemic variability in the ‘frequent long 
breaks’ com pared to the day with one 30 -minute block of walking with CGM data.   The mean 
amplitude of glycemic excursion  (MAGE) was significantly lower when participants performed 
‘frequent long breaks’ for the day (p < 0.05 ).66  [Mean amplitude of glycemic excursion  is the 
arithmetic average of all glycemic amplitudes greater than a pre -specified threshold (most 
commonly set at 1 SD)].69  Also, nocturnal duration of hypergly cemia (glucose > 7.8 mmol/l or 
>140 mg/dL) was significantly lower in both ‘frequent long breaks’ and ‘frequent short breaks’ 
compared to the day with one 30 minute block of walking (frequent long breaks = 2.5 ± 2.5 min;  
frequent short breaks = 45.6 ± 29. 6 min; one 30 minute block of walking = 32.7 ± 16.4 min, p = 
0.05).66  It is important to note that this study did not include a nonintervention control a rm and 
studied only 10 subjects; nevertheless, the data are highly suggestive the CGM may provide 
valuable data that cannot be obtained from traditional in -lab sampling during interrupted 
sedentary activity interventions.   
To our knowledge, there are no published data on CGM  outcomes from interrupting 
sedentary behavior in youth.  Limited published data from CGM monitoring in non -diabetic 
youth have demonstrated associations between glycemic variability and vascular stress and show 
CGM devices are capable of demonstrating differences in glucose outcomes from dietary 
interventions.70, 71  For example, Desari et al. evaluated the relationship between CGM 
parameters including MAGE and markers of oxidative and vascular stress including c -reactive 
protein, cholesterol, triglycerides, non -esterified fatty acids, intercellular adhesion molecule -1 
and vascular cellular adhesion molecule -1, and E -selectin.71  In 34 children ages 13 -21 years (12 
healthy weight, 10 healthy obese, 12 with Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus) with 5 consecutive days of 
CGM data, MAGE was significantly correlated with many markers of vascular stress in cluding 
but not limited to oxidized low -density lipoprotein, E -selectin and intercellular adhesion 
17 
 molecule 1.71 These data indicate that parameters of glycemic variability, as obtained by CGM, 
in youth can provide additional helpful information about carbohydrate metabolism.   
In addition to exploring glycemic variability and vascular health associations with CGM 
in non -diabetic youth, researchers have also begun to evaluate CGM outcomes for dietary 
interventions.  Bauer et al. evaluated the effects of a high protein breakfast i n 28 overweight but 
non-diabetic teenagers.70 CGM outcome data were collected on day three of the intervention for 
a 24hr time period and included:  24hr AUC, morning glucose AUC, overnight glucose AUC, 
average, SD, maximal response, glucose fluctuat ion (max -min), and time spent above the 
glucose threshold of 100 mg/dl.70 No main effect by intervention was detected but post -hoc 
analyses revealed reduced 24hr -glucose variability (SD) in the individuals receiving a high 
protein diet.70   
The extant data have not evaluated CGM outcomes in sedentary behavior but provide 
insight and guidance into useful data that become  accessible thr ough CGM monitoring in youth. 
These novel exploratory studies demonstrate successful use of CGM in non -diabetic youth . 
When such data are combined  with the positive CGM outcomes in adult interrupted sedentary 
behavior interventions, CGM monitoring of seden tary-interruption interventions  in children  
could add important additional information for the effects of this intervention strategy in young 
cohorts.   
In conclusion, given the significant improvements in glucose homeostasis demonstrated 
in our acute intervention studies, along with the dearth of pediatric studies involving either 
continuous sampling or sustained interventions to interrupt sedentary behav ior, a study that 
examines how beneficial repeated days of interrupted, versus non -interrupted, sedentary behavior 
might be to alter children’s glucose homeostasis measured with CGM is the logical next step. 
Such a study would be the first of its kind to a ssess sustained effects of brief sedentary 
interruptions in the clinical lab among youth and will provide novel data for within - and 
between - day effects of the intervention with continuous glucose monitoring.   However, it is 
important to note that metabol ism is the not the only outcome that may be affected by 
interrupting sedentary behavior in youth.  Understanding that such an intervention strategy 
would be ultimately applied in a school or community setting on a routine basis, it is important to 
18 
 evaluate  effects on cognitive function, mood, anxiety, dietary intake, and non -intervention 
physical activity habits.   
Executive function and attention – definitions and alterations associated with obesity  
Executive functions are those mental processes that are c entral to goal planning, decision -
making, and choice of behavior.72 This construct is comprised of several underlying elemental 
processes such as inhibition, working memory, and cognitive flexibility (e.g.: task switching).73 
Development of executive functions is associated with the prefrontal cortex and emotional 
systems in the brain.74 Some data exist that indicate adult -level simple executive functions such 
as motor in hibition can develop as early as age 10, with gains in functional efficiency extending 
through early adulthood.75-77 Cognitive flexibility, goal setting, and information processing 
develop most rapidly from ages 7 to 9.78 Thus, executive functions are rapidly evolving during 
childhood and are necessary for beh avioral development, emotional control, and social 
interactions.79 
Attention refers to the cognitive process of selectively concentrating on one 
environmental stimulus while ignoring other stimuli.80 There are several underlying processes 
such as sustained attention,  selective attention, and divided attention81 that serve as the 
foundation for other mental processes. There are rapid changes in attention between the ages of 8 
and 10.82 In a sample of 400 3 -12 year old Finnish children, maximum improvement in selective 
and sustained attention were reached by age 10.81 Thus, intervening in this age group may be an 
effective way to support the development of several sub -processes of attention. It is important to 
support attentional development because it is necessary for academic a chievement in children. A 
longitudinal study in 2595 children reported that focused attention scores in preschool predicted 
achievement outcomes in childhood, whereas impulsivity scores in preschool predicted 
behavioral outcomes in childhood.83 
Relationship to obesity  
Executive function and attention are lower in overweight/obese children compared to 
their lean counterparts.79, 84 Data from NHANES indicate that higher BMI is associated with 
decreased cognitive function in children .85 Other studies also support these findings in 
children .86-88 Obese children have lower inhibitory control scores than their normal weight 
counterparts.89 Another study found that overweight boys had lower  focused attention scores and 
19 
 more inattention symptoms than their normal weight counterparts.90 Executive function deficits 
are also related to low physical activity and high sedentary b ehavior levels. In a latent class 
analysis of fourth to sixth graders, children in the “high sedentary, high fat/high sugar snacks, not 
weight conscious” category had more executive function problems than children in the “active, 
healthy eating” category.91 Executive function and attention in early childhood track into 
adolescence,79 suggesting that deficits may promote obesogenic behaviors that have long -term 
consequences.  
Obesity risk may be mitigated by the positive relationship between physical activity and 
executive function and attention in children. A seminal meta -analysis repo rted a positive 
association between physical activity level and aspects of executive function in children and 
adolescents, with a stronger effect in younger age groups (4 -13 years).  92, 93 This positive 
relationship was independent of type of activity. Fourth grade children who were physically 
active had higher concentration scores,94 suggesting that attention performance is enhanced after 
physical activity. Physical activity is of much interest because it has effects on brain activation 
and development, and children may particularly benefit because their centr al nervous system is 
developing.95 A review of the existing literature on physical ac tivity, fitness, and aspects of 
cognitive function indicated that physically fit children have greater mobilization of brain 
resources that allow them to perform cognitive tasks m ore rapidly than unfit children.96 Thus, 
research has focused on the effects of acute and chronic physical activity on executive function 
tasks in children .  
Executive function, attention, and physical activity  
Mechanisms  
There are two primary mechanisms that have been used to describe the relationship 
between physical activity and executive function and attention. The first mechanism relates to 
the physiologic changes produced by physical activity. Physical activity promotes central 
nervous system development, and the refinement of the prefrontal cortex97 through the 
attentional network of the brain that is active in cognitively challenging tasks.98 Thus, physical 
movement results in changes in brain activation and function99 that support the development of 
executive functions and attention during childhood. The second mechanism relates to the 
20 
 learning and developmental changes produced by physical activity. Motor and pro -social skills 
that children learn through physical movement transfer to tasks involving aspects of executive 
function and attention, such as behavior inhibition and working  memory, that relate to academic 
achievement.100 
Acute Physical Activity  
Executive function and attention are impr oved by acute physical activity.101 Researchers 
hypothesize that short bouts of exercise facilitate transient modulation of neural ne tworks 
involved with specific cogniti ve tasks following the exercise.102 A review found that there was a 
small to moderate improvement in attention following acute physical activity in a classroom 
setting.103 In an early study, Gabbard and Barton found that mathematical scores increased in 
second grad e children following 50 -minutes of PE class participation.104 A more recent crossover 
study with 20 children (mean age= 9.5 years) reported increased response accuracy and academic 
achievement test scores following a 20 -minute moderate -intensity walking bout.105 These studies 
support the view that acute bouts of exercise improve specific aspects of executive function and 
attention, and may be an intervent ion target to increase both physical and cognitive health in 
children.  
Chronic Physical Activity  
Chronic physical activity is positively associated with executive fun ction and attention in 
children.106, 107 Longitudinal repetition of physical activity results in durable structural changes in 
the brain .102 A recent randomized control trial used functional MRI to measure brain activity 
while cognitive tasks were performed by overweight children randomized to either a 13 -week 
exercise or control program. Results demonstrated a dose -response relation ship existed: 
executive function and math achievement were increased in both the low exercise and high 
exercise groups, but more so in  the high exercise group.108 A review of the longitudinal literature 
found that participation in school PE was positively assoc iated with academic performance.109 
Donnelly et al. reported that a 3 -year cluster ed randomized control trial on a classroom -based 
physical activity curriculum that promoted 90 minutes/week of MVPA resulted in a 6% 
improvement in standardized academic achievement scores and a slowing of BMI increa ses in 
21 
 the intervention schools.107 These studies support the role of chronic physical activity in 
executive function and academic performance in children.  
Sedentary Behavior  
Research on the effects of sedentary behavior on executive function and attention is still 
developing. Longitudinal studies in children have found that more time spent watching TV is 
associated with greater attention difficulti es and worse cognitive function.110 Results from a 
randomized control trial indicate that reducing sedentary behavior through 20 - or 40 - minute 
bouts of vigorous exercise increased academic performance in 222 sedentary ov erweight 7 -11 
year old children.79, 111 A study conducted in 60 children (age 4) found that executive function 
was decreased immediately follo wing a 9 -minute television show.112 Because sedentary b ehavior 
has traditionally been operationalized as TV viewing in cognitive studies, it is unclear whether 
other sedentary behaviors influence components of executive function in children.  
Psychosocial health  
Acute and chronic physical activity produces be neficial effects on mood. Higher levels of 
physical activity have been associated with lower levels of depression,113 less perceived 
anxiety ,114, 115 and better mood,116, 117 in children.  In a sample of 64 children (ages 9 -10 years), 
15 minutes of exercise increased feelings of positive mood whereas a 15 -minute video decreased 
feelings of positive mood.118 The research clearly demonstrates that acute physical activity 
increases p ositive affect and mood in children.  
While there is an extensive literature examining the effect of physical activity on mood 
and affect, more research is needed to examine the effect of sedentary behavior on psychosocial 
outcomes in children .119  High levels of sedentary behavior are associated wit h increased 
depressive symptoms.120, 121 In a sample of 4320 children, sedentary behavior was positively 
associated with perceived  anxiety and emotional symptoms .122 A recent crossover trial found that 
after an acute stressor, children spent more tim e being sedentary (watching TV).123 Early 
evidence suggests that sedentary behavior may increase negative mood and depressive 
symptoms. No previous studies have investigated if interrupting sedentary behavior  in a 
sustained fashion  affects psychosocial outcomes in children.  
22 
 Dietary intake a nd activity  
 Dietary intake is related to metabolic risk in children. In overweight children, higher 
soluble dietary fiber intake was associated  with lower waist circumference124 whereas high sugar 
intake was associated with poor beta cell function, an early sign of in creased risk of type 2 
diabetes.58 Findings from NHANES indicated that youth with higher fruit intake and Healthy 
Eating  Index scores have a lower p revalence of metabolic syndrome.125 The findings from these 
studies sugges t that balanced dietary macronutrient intake is essential for normal metabolic 
functioning.  
Dietary intake is associated with physical activity in children. Increases in physical 
activity in are associated with i ncreases in total energy intake.126, 127 However, few studies have 
addressed the direct influence of specific dietary macronutrients on physical activity. In a sample 
of 210 girls, accelerometer -measured moderate -to-vigorous physical activity wa s negatively 
associated with percentage of ca lories from fat and carbohydrate.128 Other studies have found 
that diets high in simple carbohydrates have been associated with feelings of fatigue, and low 
levels of physical activity .129, 130 
Dietary intake is hypothesized to co -occur with some sedent ary behaviors. A recent 
review found that high amounts of TV viewing was associated with lower fruit and vegetable 
consumption, higher consumption of energy -dense sna ck foods, fast food, and drinks.131 In a 
sample of 2908 adolescents (ages 14 -19 years), screen -based behavior was inversely correlated 
with fruit and vegetable intake.132 A cross -sectional study in 1860 children ( ages 5 -12 years), fast 
food and snack consumption was positively ass ociated with sedentary behavior.133 The limited 
evidence thus far suggests that higher levels of sedentary behavior are associated with unhealthy 
dietary intake.   There are no studies examining the effects of experimentally interrupting 
sedentary behaviors in a sustained fashion on dietary intake.  
Subject Selection  
 Epidemiologic data indicate that sedentary behavior is associated wit h cardiovascular 
disease and all -cause mortality irrespective of adiposity.  For example, Thorp et al. report meta -
analysis findings on increased all -cause mortality, cancer, and cardiovascular disease in adults 
after controlling for BMI.17  Additionally, the effectiveness of this intervention in the prel iminary 
23 
 data described above was not dependent on adiposity .48, 64, 65  Also, the non -metabolic parameters 
such as cognitive function  are independent of weight.  T herefore, our proposed intervention will 
likely a ffect healthy weight and overweight children equally within these outcomes.  Finally, our 
intervention is designed to be a preventative strategy intended to prevent dysfunctional 
metabolism before the onset of pathology such as Impaired Glucose Tolerance or Diabetes 
Mellitus Type 2  and be feasible for broad spread application into the community setting where 
the majority of subjects are expected to be healthy . For broad spread application, it is pivotal that 
preliminary data demonstrate p otential benefits and negligible adverse outcomes in all subject 
populations within which it will be applied.  Given this, we will study healthy weight and 
overweight children who do not have evidence of metabolic disease.  
Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy  Arm: Use in Exercise Physiology  
A novel technique to explore the underlying physiologic mechanisms of interrupted activity is 
through skeletal muscle magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS).  MRS provides a technique to 
evaluate cellular level fat (specifical ly intramyocellular lipid, IMCL) content which in turn 
provides information on FFA storage and usage.134, 135  IMCL is positively correlated with 
insulin resistance and thus associated with the diabetes mellitus type 2.136, 137 Although details of 
the association (causal or not) have yet to be elucidated, it is readily hypothesized that acutely 
reducing IMCL impro ves insulin sensitivity.  However, it is also known that repeated, exercise 
training increases basal or fasting IMCL content in parallel with improved insulin sensitivity.138, 
139  Thus, the generally accepted understanding of IMCL and physical activity is that static, 
accumulation of IMCL is associated with poor insulin sensitivity but repeated depletion and 
replenishment of IMCL stores, which leads to increased basal IMCL is associated with improved 
insulin sensitivity.140  My collaborator for this proposal, Ahmed Gharib, MD, Ph D, Head of  
Biomedical and Metabolic Imaging Branch within the National Institute of Diabetes and 
Digestive and Kidney Disease, has used MRS to evaluate skeletal muscle lipid content as a 
function of insulin resistance.141  MRS has also been successfully used to identify acute change 
in intramyocellular fat content surrounding physical activity142, 143 but has yet to be utilized for 
evaluating the effects of interrupting sedentary behavior.  As such, we propose, as an exploratory 
analysis, the use of MRS to explore associations of IMCL in children and fat mas s and determine 
24 
 if interrupted sedentary behavior in children acutely alters IMCL content.  MRS will be used in 
accordance with its labeling and not operated in research mode.  
 
Conclusion  
In final summary, there are few data for the effects of experimentally interrupting sedentary 
behaviors on metabolism, cognition, mood, or dietary intake, and no such data for programs that 
study such interruptions in a sustained fashion. However, what are  available suggest that one-
session interventions with at least moderate intensity bouts applied 2 or 3 times per hour may be 
successful at improving glucose homeostasis  by decreasing circulating insulin . Therefore, we 
plan to conduct a pilot study that ex amines sustained metabolic outcomes from interrupting daily 
sedentary behavior in children  applied with 3-minute interrupting bouts every 30 minutes  for a 3 -
hour duration over 6 days. With this study we will also collect exploratory mechanistic data from 
liver and muscle spectroscopy. Our chosen intervention mirrors our one -session preliminary 
trials and is in line with similar published intervention trials.64, 65   We have chosen the details of 
this strategy to maintain the potential of translation to  the real -world setting.  Although some 
preliminary data have been obtained with an intervention applied every 20 minutes64 instead of 
every 30 minutes, this intervention is  too frequent to be practical in a school setting . 
Additionally, the duration of 6 days has been chosen as an ideal intermediary to demonstrate 
sustain ed effects prior to broad spread application that will require extensive resources and as of 
yet are not strongly data -supported.  Finally, in addition to g lucose homeostasis , we will explore 
the potential impacts of interrupting prolonged sitting on children’s executive function, mood, 
anxiety, dietary intake, and usual physical activity habits  which aim to strengthen the rationale 
for broad application of this approach in the school setting.  
2. Study Objectives  
 
Project Goal:   The overall goal of this research is to examine whether providing brief 
interrupt ions in  prolonged sitting produces long-term salutary changes in metabolism, without  
adversely impacting executive function, attention, anxiety, mood, or dietary intake. As a bridge 
between the acute studies that have demonstrated efficacy for this approach and long -term 
25 
 school - or home - based transl ational programs, we will examine  if brief interruptions of 
sedentary behavior applied for 6 consecutive days will pro duce  sustained improvements in 
metabolism and to explore any changes in  cognitive function or energy intake in children  with 
intervention .   
Objective 1 : To investigate if daily interruptions of sedentary behavior  (sitting ) versus prolonged 
sitting  on 6 consecutive days improve glucose homeostasis .  Hypothesis 1a :   Compared to non -
interrupted sedentary behavior, interrupted behavior will result in significantly lower insulin and 
glucose incremental area under the curve (iAUC ) during a 3 -hour oral glucose tolerance test.  
Hypothesis 1b : As measured by continuous g lucose monitoring, children with daily interrupted 
sitting  will have lower average 24 -hr glucose iAUC and lower mean amplitude glycemic 
excursion (MAGE)  than children who engage in non -interrupted sedentary behavior . 
Objective 2 :  To investigate if daily interruption of sedentary behavior adversely influences 
cognitive and psychological measures, dietary intake, or usual physical activity.  Hypothesis 2:   
Executive function, attention, mood, anxiety, dietary intake, and physical activity (at times 
outside the testing period) will not differ significantly between children randomized to daily 
interrupted versus daily non -interrupted sedentary behavior.   
Objective 3:   To investigate if acute or daily interruption of sedentary behavior affects 
intramyocellular lipid content within the vastus lateralis, tibialis anterior or soleus muscles .  
Hypothesis 3a:  Acute interrupted sedentary behavior will decrease intramyocellu lar lipid 
content.  Hypothesis 3b:   Daily interrupted sedentary behavior will increase resting/basal 
intramyocellular lipid content.    
 3. Subjects  
a. Description of study populations  
 
The proposed intervention has demonstrated acute efficacy in the general pediatric 
population, among both healthy weight65 and overweight children, ages 7 -12 years.  
Therefore, we will enroll generally healthy child volunteers  in a 1:1 ratio of healthy and 
overweight .  We will adhere to a maximum accrual ceiling of 1 50 participants.  Based on 
previous ex perience, we anticipate that no more than  20% of screened children will be 
26 
 ineligible for the study. Thus, we will randomize  up to 120 participa nts and , anticipating  
that at most 36 children will drop -out of the study before completion  or have technical 
issues limiting data analysis , we expect at least 84 participants to complete the protocol 
(our target completion  sample size  is based on power analyses described below).  
Withdrawal s/dropouts will not be replaced.  
i. Inclusion criteria  
Participants will qualify for the study if they meet the following criteria:  
(a) Good general health.  
(b) Age ≥ 7 and < 12 years.  
(c) Fasting plasma glucose < 100 mg/dL  
(d) Body mass index (BMI) ≥ the 5th percentile, as determined by the CDC age - and 
sex- specific growth charts.144 
ii. Exclusion criteria  
 
Participants will be excluded from the study for:  
 
(a) Significant cardiac or pulmonary disease likely to or resulting in hypoxia or 
decreased perfusion.  
(b) Evidence of impaired glucose tolerance or type 2 diabetes, including fasting 
plasma glucose ≥ 100 mg/dL.  
(c) Presence of other endocrinologic disorders leading to obesity (e.g.: Cushing 
Syndrome).  
(d) Participants who have, or whose parent/guardians have, current substance abuse 
or a psychiatric disorder or other condition that, in the opinion of the 
investigator s, would impede competence, compliance, or prevent the completion 
of the study.  
(e) Participants who have, or are currently receiving, anti -psychotic drugs that would 
affect metabolism, cognitive outcomes, and body habitus.  
(f) Participants receiving medic al treatment other than diet for hypertension or 
dyslipidemia.  
(g) Participants with precocious puberty and/or receiving androgen and estrogen 
therapy.  
27 
 (h) Participants currently taking medications for ADHD, or any disorder or use of 
medications known to a ffect body composition or weight  including but not 
limited to glucocorticoids or other steroid compounds . 
(i) Presence of pre -existing neurocognitive disabilities, or an age -adjusted score 
below 85 on the Picture Vocabulary Test  at the screening visit.  
(j) Presence of food allergies, such as peanut/tree nut, dairy, soy or any other food 
allergy or personal dietary restrictions that would preclude participant from 
consuming the daily diet or the buffet.  
(k) Presence of significant skin disease or allergy to adhesive material prohibiting 
placement of a continuous glucose monitor . 
(l)  Participants unable or unwilling to abstain from acetaminophen, ascorbic acid, or 
salicylic acid during study duration.  
(m)Participant does not speak fluent English.  
(o) Participant is or becomes pregnant.  
(p) Participant has an ambulatory impairment  
 b. Optional MRS Supplemental Arm   
iii. Inclusion criteria  
(a) Participants will qualify for the study if they qualify for the primary Break It Up! 
study.  
iv. Exclusion criteria  
(a) Cannot have MRI scanning. Some of the reasons a child might not be able to have 
MRI include:  
• Implanted cardiac pacemaker or defibrillator  
• Cochlear Implants  
• Ocular foreign body (e.g. metal shavings)  
• Embedded shrapnel fragments  
• Central nervous system aneurysm clips  
• Implanted neural stimulator  
• Medical infusion pumps  
• Any implanted device that is incompatible with MRI.  
28 
 (b) Is not likely to tolerate an MRI scan. Examples of medical conditions that would 
make it difficult to  undergo MRI include severe anxiety (nervousness) or 
hyperactivity which make it hard for your child to lay flat for the study.  
(c) Requires sedation for MRI studies.  
(d) Has a condition that makes entry into the scanner difficult (e.g. weight over 550 
lbs, claustrophobia, etc.).  
(e) Has severe back -pain or motion disorders that make it hard for a child to lie on 
his/her back within the MRI scanner and hold still for the scan.  
4. Study Design and Methods  
 
a. Study Overview:    
i. Trial Design: We will carry out a parallel group randomized controlled trial that 
compares child carbohydrate metabolism and co gnitive function during 5 days of 
sedentary after -school activities versus after -school activit ies with structured 
interruptions provided by walking for 3  minutes on a treadmill every 30 minutes at a 
moderate activity rate selected according to each participants’ level of fitness. A final 
6th day will compare results between groups from  an oral glucose tolerance test 
conducted in the fasted state. Subjects w ill be randomized to one of two conditions:  
(a) Study Intervention : Interrupted sedentary behavior.  This test condition will 
consist of 6 consecutive daily after-school /afternoon visits for a three -hour 
experimental session.  The first five session s will be  performed mid -afternoon 
(Monday – Friday, after school  or late afternoon ); the 6th will be in the morning  
(Saturday, approximately 8am) . Each session will consist of prompted 3 -minute 
moderate -intensity walking bouts performed on a treadmill every 30 minutes for 3 
hours. There will be a total of 6 walking bouts (18 minutes total)  each day .  
‘Moderate -intensity walking’ speed and grade will be selected to achieve 80% of 
the heart rate achieved at the ventilatory thresho ld as determined during a V0 2max 
test.   
29 
 (b) Study Control: Non -Interrupted sedentary behavior .  This control condition 
will consist of children attending similarly -timed visits for 6 consecutive days 
providing 3 hours of sedentary behavior/sitting during which the children will not 
engage in any physical activity.  Rather, they will engage in continuous sedentary 
behaviors (e.g. watching TV or working on homework while seated) for 3 h ours 
each day without interruption.   
ii. Visit Work Flow (Also see Figure 1):   There are no inpatient visits. Participants will 
be evaluated at a series of day -hospital visits (7 in total) using both the 1NW pediatric 
day hospital and the 5SW N metabolic units  of the Hatfield  Clinical Research Center.  
The initial screening evaluation visit will use the 1NW pediatric day hospital and will 
involve approxima tely 6  hours of testing.  Following screening, the daily test visits 
will be conducted in the 5SW N Metabolic Unit and involve approximately 3.5 hours 
each day for the  5 daily visits.  The final visit will also take place in the metabolic 
unit and involve approxi mately 5 hours of testing.  In summary, each participant will 
complete a screening visit and, if randomized, will complete 6 consecutive days of 
study visits.  The block of daily visits wil l be initiated no further than 9 0 days from 
the date of screening; therefore, each participant should complete study participation 
within 97 days of screening.   
iii. Relationship with other protocols:   This is an independent protocol with no direct 
relationship to other study protocols.  
b. Recruitment  
i. Description of recruitment strategy . Our team has considerable experience in 
recruiting and retaining child participants in research studies at the Clinical Research 
Center. Most germane to this study, Drs. Yanovski and Broadney successfully 
recruited 95 children ages 7 -11.99y for the pilot  studies of protocol 13 -CH-0169 over 
3 years to evaluate this sedentary intervention strategy in the acute setting.  Dr. 
Broadney has been in close communication with the NIH Clinical Center Patient 
Recruitment and Public Liaison (PRPL) Office to develop r ecruitment materials and 
strategies to successfully reach the target population. All recruitment efforts will 
include a n email and  telephone number for parents to call if interested (See 
30 
 Appendices  A for all media, email, and letters documents drafted for PRPL use). 
These include flyers, social media content, and mailings to local pediatricians , school 
listservs  and community centers throughout the greater District of Columbia, 
Maryland, and Virginia metropolis.  
ii. Recruitmen t Methods: Participants will be recruited via multiple methods:  
(a) Letters will be mailed to the parents of appropriate -aged children in local areas 
including Montgomery County, Fairfax County, and Washington, DC . 
(b) Flyers posted at NIH and other local facilit ies (e.g. elementary schools, 
community centers, churches, public libraries) with permission.  
(c) Local community groups will be asked to send the flyer to their listservs.  
(d) Schools, churches, pediatricians, and community centers will be contacted 
regarding t he study and fliers will be distributed.  
(e) Potential volunteers that have registered on the NIH Clinical Center 
ResearchMatch program will be contacted.  
iii. Anticipated Accrual Rate:   We expect approximately 5 interested participants will 
be screened per month, with increases in accrual during school vacation dates and 
declines when the surrounding public school districts are in session.  
iv. Initial contact:   Potential participants who h ave sent their information to the study 
team will be contacted via telephone and/or email communication upon first inquiry  
(See Appendix A for telephone script, email template and FAQ’s that will be 
provided) .  If basic participation criteria are met (i.e.  child within age range and 
without significant medical diagnoses), parents/guardian(s) and participants will 
receive consent and assent forms (written explanations of the purposes, procedures, 
and potential hazards of the study) before the screening appoi ntment. If a family 
wishes to join the study, the participant and a care provider able to give consent for 
research participation will be invited to the Clinical Research Center for formal 
screening.  
c. Screening  
 Participants will complete the following during their screening visit.  
i. Vital signs, height, weight.  Blood pressure, height (in cm), weight (in kg), 
temperature, respiratory rate, and pulse rate will be obtained by NIH nursing staff. 
31 
 BMI will be computed to  determine eligibility. Subjects with BMI <5th percentile for 
age and sex will be excused from the study.  
ii. Protocol review and signing of consent and assent forms . Parents/guardian(s) and 
participants will review the consent and assent forms  with study personnel designated 
to do so by the PI . All study procedures will be discussed, and study risks and 
benefits explained. Communication of this information and of the participant’s 
consent will be documented in the medical record  before any stud y procedures, 
including other screening procedures, are done . All participants will be informed of 
their right to withdraw from the study at any point. Participants will be informed of 
compensation. Parent/guardian(s) and participants will be given signed copies of the 
consent and assent form for their records.  
iii. Complete medical history and physical exam will be conducted by a trained 
practitioner . The exam will include Tanner pubertal staging. Waist and hip 
circumference (cm) will be measured in triplicate  by nutrition staff (see  below) .  
iv. Practice measures.  Participants will be oriented to all procedures that will occur 
throughout the screening visit day (with the assistance of Child Life services) to 
reduce any anxiety.  
v. Fasting blood draw.  A fasting blood sample will be drawn to screen for exclusion ary 
conditions and determine metabolic, hematologic, renal, and hepatic function  
including : acute care panel , insulin, c-peptide, free fatty acids, triglycerides, 
hemoglobin, creatinine, thyroid function tests (including anti -thyroid antibody panel) , 
mineral, and hepatic panel s, thyroid function tests (TSH and Free Thyroxine) , C-
reactive protein,  Hemoglobin A1C , complete blood count, serum beta -human 
chorionic gonadotropin or urine pregnancy test , and serum and plasma samples to be 
saved for future research . ELA Max cream will be applied to numb the blood draw 
site.  
vi. Socioeconomic status (SES). A demographics questionnaire that assesses 
race/ethnicity and parent/guardian education level and income will be completed by 
the parent/guardian  so that the Hollingshead t wo-factor index of social position can 
be calculated .145  See Appendix G.  
32 
 vii. Receptive vocabulary.  Participants will be given a Picture Vocabulary Test to 
measure baseline receptive vocabulary, which may serve as a proxy for IQ. The 
participants are presented with an audio  recording of a word and four photographic 
images on the computer screen and asked to select the picture that most closely 
matches the meaning of the word. This test was selected from the NIH Toolbox 
(http://www.n ihtoolbox.org ). Participants whose age -adjusted score is below 85 
(below average function) will be excluded from the study.  
viii. Heart rate monitor.  Participants will be familiarized with the heart rate monitor 
(Polar Vintage NV, Polar, Port Washington, NY, USA), and will practice wearing the 
same monitor that will be worn during the test visit (s). 
ix. Cognitive Testing.   Participants will be shown a 2 -minute overview  video  of the 
Cognitive Brief Battery  (Cogstate, New Haven, CT  that will be administered to them 
on Test Day #1 and Test Day #5  (https://cogstate.com/featured -batteries/ ). 
CogState Brief Battery (CBB)  is an approximately 20 -minute computerized battery 
for children and adults ages 4 - 90 years, which includes tasks tapping processing 
speed, attention and vigilance, learning and memory, working memory and executive 
functions .146 This measure was designed for repeated assessments over a shor t time 
period with virtually no practice effects in adults and children du e to multiple 
forms .147, 148 Age-based standard scores (mean = 100, SD 10) are computed for each 
task based on a normative sample of several hundred individuals.  CogState has 
strong construct validity, minimal practice effects, and good stability.  It was 
designed to be language ind ependent in order to ensure the validity of the tests in a 
cross -cultural setting.149-152 Further, CogState has been used in  numerous pediatric, as 
well as adult, oncology clinical trials.   
a. Detection Task:  This subtest of the CogState takes 2 minutes to administer 
and measures psychomotor function and processing speed.  It uses a well -
validated simple reaction time paradigm using playing card stimuli.  In this 
task, the playing cards are all red and black j okers.  The subject is asked to 
press the Yes key as soon as the card in the center of the screen flips over.  
b. Identification Task:  This task takes 2 minutes to administer.  It is a measure 
of visual attention and uses a well -validated choice reaction ti me paradigm 
33 
 using playing card stimuli.  In this task, the playing cards are all either red or 
black jokers.  The subject is asked whether the card currently being presented 
in the ce nter of the screen is red.  The  subject responds by pressing the Yes key 
when the joker card is red and No when it is black.  
c. One Back Task:  The One Back Memory task takes approximately 2 minutes 
to administer and is a measure of working memory.  It uses a well -validated n -
back paradigm using playing card stimuli.  In this ta sk, the playing cards are 
identical to those found in a deck of playing cards except for  the joker.  The 
subject is asked whether the card currently being presented is the same as the 
one presented immediately previously.  The subject responds by pressing the 
Yes or No key.  
d. One Card Learning Task:  This task takes 5 minutes to administer. The One 
Card Learning task is a measure of visual recognition memory and uses a well -
validated pattern separation paradigm using playing card stimuli to measure 
hippocam pal functioning.  In this task, the playing cards are identical to those 
found in a deck of playing cards except for  the joker.  The subject is asked 
whether the card currently being presented in the center of the screen was seen 
previously in this task.  The subject responds by pressing the Yes or No key.  
x. Mood.  Participants will complete a practice Positive and Negative Affect Scale -Child 
(PANAS -C). The test will be explained and any words that the child does not 
understand will be explained. The 20 -item scale consists of a 10 -item Positive Affect 
(PA) scale and  a 10-item Negative Affect (NA) and takes approximately 10 minutes 
to complete.153  Participants indicate how often they have experienced several states 
on a 5 -point Likert scale (1= very slightly/not at all; 5= extremely). This 
questionnaire has been validated in children ,153, 154 and demonstrates alphas of .91 and 
.88 for PA and NA, respectively. Item -total correlations range from .49 -.78 on PA 
and .36 -.80 on the NA scales, respectively. The test -retest reliability is high 
(correlations of .66 -.82).  Subjects will complete the PANAS -C and the “Feelings 
Questionnaire” through the NIH Clinical Trials Survey System.   
xi. Anxiety.  Participants will complete a practice State Trait Anxiety Inventory for 
Children (STAIC) .155 The test will be explained an d any words that the child does not 
34 
 understand will be explained. The scale measures acute (state) anxiety and longer -
term (trait) anxiety. It asks the child to rate 20 statements from ‘hardly every true’ to 
‘often true’ and takes approximately 15 minutes to complete. The scale has been 
validated in 1551 children ages 6 -14 years. Subjects will complete the STAIC 
through the NIH Clinical Trials Survey System.   
xii. Physical Activity Evaluation.  To determine the average amount of moderate -to-
vigorous physical ac tivity each participant has engaged in within the previous week, 
children will be asked two items from the International Physical Activity 
Questionnaire (IPAQ) screening form  (See Appendix G) .156  This information will be 
used to:  
a. Determine caloric requirements for standardized meal calculation  
b. Stratify participants for randomization purposes.  
xiii. Dietary Evaluation & Metabolic Diet Education.   Participants will be interviewed 
by and receive education instruction from the nutrition  staff.  This will allow us to 
obtain each participant’s meal prefere nces and provide metabolic diet education (i.e. 
goals of the metabolic diet throughout the study period) to improve adherence. 
Additionally, waist and hip measurements will be obtained in triplicate.  
xiv. Electrocardiogram (EKG).  All children will undergo an EK G. If the EKG or 
physical examination suggests possible concerns in cardiovascular function, 
echocardiography &/or formal cardiology consultation will be obtained before the 
participant performs the maximal exercise test.  
xv. Dual -energy x -ray absorptiometry (DXA) scan.  As part of a whole -body  
composition and bone mineral density assessment, DXA scan will be performed to 
identify lean and fat mass. DXA involves passing a collimated X -ray beam of 40 and 
70 KeV through the subject and collecting the X -rays that pass through the patient 
with a standard X -ray detector. Because the delivery and attenuation of the X -rays are 
measured separately for the two principal energies, the procedure allows the 
differentiation of substances in their path if the attenuation coef ficients of these 
substances are known. The manufacturer specifies that the array beam delivers an 
effective dose of 0.003mrem total body irradiation. Participants will undergo DXA 
scans in the Metabolic Clinical Research Unit (MCRU) using the Lunar iDXA ( GE 
35 
 Healthcare, Madison, WI, USA) machine. The scan takes approximately 20 -30 
minutes. An external standard, simulating bone, fat, and muscle, is scanned once a 
week to validate measurements. This standard allows calculation of total body fat, 
muscle, and b one mass, and percentage of body fat.  
xvi. Treadmill fitness test to determine maximal oxygen uptake (V0 2max). 
Cardiorespiratory fitness will be measured via a modified Balke continuous ramp 
treadmill protocol with some individual tailoring if necessary. We wil l monitor the 
heart electrical rhythm strip and continuous vital signs as participants exercise, and 
stop exercise if there are any signs of cardiovascular compromise. A Pediatric 
Advanced Life Support (PALS) certified physician or nurse practitioner will be 
present during this test. Each participant  will exercise on the treadmill to the limit of 
their exercise tolerance, according to previously established criteria 157. Participants 
will be familiarized with the equipment and procedures prior to any testing. The 
metabolic cart will be calibrated prior to data collection. Rest ing heart rate and blood 
pressure will be determined when the participant has been seated in a chair for at least 
5 minutes before testing. EKG lead sites will be prepped and participants will be 
fitted with the leads, and a facemask, to measure expired ga s exchange during 
exercise. Prior to testing, the participant will be given a 4 -minute warm -up at a self -
selected pace with 0% grade to orient them to the equipment and prepare them for the 
first stage of testing. Treadmill speed and grade will then be con tinuously increased 
until the subject reaches the limit of their exercise tolerance. Treadmill speed and 
grade increase will be based on body height, weight and predicted peak VO 2. 
Participants will be encouraged to exercise to their tolerance limit, but w ill be allowed 
to stop the test at any time. EKG, blood pressure, rating of perceived exertion (RPE), 
and any signs and symptoms of exercise intolerance will be monitored throughout 
exercise and during recovery. Expired gas exchange will be measured breath  by 
breath by metabolic cart. Lactate threshold (LT  estimated by gas exchange, will be 
determined using the V -slope method and dual criteria graphs158 Peak oxygen uptake 
(peakVO 2) will be defined as the highest VO 2 achieved at the end of exercise. 
Treadmill speed and grade equivalent to 80% LT will be used to program walking 
during the interrupted sitting portion of the  study (see text below). Pediatric exercise 
36 
 testing guidelines, published by the American Heart Association, will be observed 
regarding termination of exercise:157 
a. The child requests to stop the test.  
b. Ventricular tachycardia.  
c. Any significant drop in systolic blood pressure or a failure of systolic blood 
pressure to rise in the presence of increasing workload.  
d. Signs and symptoms indicating potential hazard to the patient such as pain, 
headache, dizziness, syncope, excessive dyspnea or fatigue.  
e. A > 3 mm ST segment depression or elevation.  
f. Significant arrhythmia precipitated by exercise such as PVC’s with increasing 
frequency, supraventricular tachycardia, ventricular tachycardia or 
atrioventricular block.  
g. Excessive rise in blood pressure: systolic blood pressure >250 mm Hg.  
h. Failure of the monitoring system.  
d. Study procedures  
All procedures are for research purposes; there is no provision of standard medical care. 
Participants found eligible after screening will be scheduled for 6 visits (Days #1 -6) on 
consecutive days. Participants will be randomized to one of the two conditions for all of 
their sub sequent visits . Randomization will be done by randomizing each subject to a 
single treatment by using the method of randomly permuted blocks with average block 
size 4. Subjects will be stratified by s ex (M, F), age (7 -9.49 vs. 9.5-11.99y ) weight status 
(BMI<85th percentile vs. ≥85th percentile), and IPAQ  result (low, moderate, and high 
usual physical activity)  to promote similar subject characteristics in the two groups . 
See Appendix B study visit flow table.  
 
i. Test Days #1 -6 Daily Procedures:  
a. Vital  Sign s. Blood pressure, height (in cm), weight (in kg), temperature, 
respiratory rate, and pulse rate will be obtained.  
37 
 b. Questionnaire s. Parents and/or participants will answer a brief health 
questionnaire about participants’ medication use, general health, and sleep 
duration in the previous 24 -hours , see Appendix G .  Additionally, a 24hr food 
recall will be administered.  
c. Randomized condition.  Each participant will execute their assigned 
randomized condition as f ollows:  
(i) Sedentary condition.   The participant will execute 3 hours of sedentary 
(seated or recumbent) activity of their choice. Activity monitoring  
(described below) will be obtained . Continuous heart rate monitoring 
(described below) will be obtained on test visit #6.  
(ii) Interrupted condition:   Throughout the visit, the study team will prompt 
the participant to walk on the test treadmill for 3 -minutes every 30 minutes 
for 3 hours. There  will be a total of 6 walking bouts  (total exercise time: 18 
minutes) . This walking activity will be ‘moderate -intensity walking’ 
determined as 80% of maximum heart rate determine during the V02max 
test described in screening. We will calculate and set the  treadmill speed and 
gradient per the estimated target heart rate prior to beginning the test 
protocol.  Heart rate will be monitored  during each walking bout , and 
maximum heart rate will be manually recorded after each walking bout . 
Activity monitoring  (described below)  will be obtained . Continuous heart 
rate monitoring (described below) will be done on test visit #6.   Participants  
will be required to remain sedentary (seated or recumbent) in between their 
walking bouts.  
d. Continuous heart rate monitoring:  A heart rate monitor (Polar Vintage NV, 
Polar, Port Washington, NY, USA) will be used to determine activity state  
during walking bouts for participants randomized to the “interrupted” condition 
on all test visit days. Participants randomized t o the “sedentary  
 condition will wear a heart rate monitor during test #6  only..  After vital signs 
are obtained, participant s will wear the monitor  for the duration of test visit (s) 
(as specified above),   and remove  it prior to patient dismissal.  Device initiation 
and data collection will be performed weekly, such that one device will be 
38 
 initiated prior to the test day (s)  of each participant ’s study week , they will use 
the same device for the entirety of their visit(s) and data will be collected from 
the device at the conclusion of the visit (s)(no further than 5 business days post 
study conclusion) .   
e. Continuous glucose monitoring :  Beginning on day #1 of testing/intervention, 
a continuous glucose monitor (Libre Pro, Abbott products) will be placed on 
each child to record glucose trends continuously throughout their 6-day study .  
The Libre Pro device will be evaluated for placement,  skin irritation, function, 
and data collection daily at each testing visit.  It is expected that only 1 device 
will need to be placed to complete the entire 6 -day study. On Day #6, the final 
day of testing, the Libre Pro device  will be removed.  Continuou s glucose 
monitoring data will allow calculation of average daily glucose iAUC as well as 
mean amplitude glycemic excursion (MAGE ; the arithmetic mean of all 
increases or decreases in glucose that exceed 1 SD of the total set of glucose 
values ).  If a device is lost/falls off between study sessions, a replacement 
device will be placed on the subject.  If a child consumes a listed medication 
known to interact with glucose readings (acetaminophen, vitamin C, and 
aspirin), the following 24hrs of CGM  data will be admitted from their analyses 
but the device will otherwise remain on the subject to continue collecting data 
throughout the remainder of their study block.   
f. Continuous physical activity monitoring:    On day #1 of testing/intervention  
participants will be given a wrist accelerometer  (Actigraph GT3X+)  to wear 
continuously throughout their 6 -day intervention to assess in-study as well as 
free-living activity, sedentary behavior, and sleep efficiency.  This device will 
also be removed on d ay #6 and data will be downloaded.  These data will be 
used to determine if physical activity outside of the test condition changes as a 
result of intervention. Additionally, the participant will be fitted with a hip 
accelerometer on test visit #6, which w ill be worn for the entirety of test visit 
#6. These monitor s will provide added data to evaluate fidelity  of the 
intervention s.  
39 
 g. Standardized meal intake:   Beginning on day #1 of intervention, the 
participants will be given daily standardized meals to consume throughout the 
duration of the intervention.  Specifically, they will be given a standardized 
snack (10% of daily caloric intake) upon arrival for their  daily test visit (days 1 -
5 of intervention) which will be consumed during their 3 hours of intervention.  
Then they will be sent home with 3 packed meals and one snack (dinner, mid -
morning snack, breakfast and lunch) each day to be consumed as their sole 
caloric intake until they return for their next daily clinic visit.  (Meals with 
consist of the following caloric proportions for daily total intake: breakfast 20%, 
lunch & dinner 30% each, snacks 20% of total daily requirement).  This cycle 
will continue until they return for their final fasting visit on day #6 (see below).  
Nutrition staff will verify intake of provided foods and collect any leftover 
foods to be weighed back. Participants will also be asked to report any 
additional food (not from the stan dardized meals) that was consumed. The 
energy content of the s tandardized meals and snacks will be calculated based on 
individual weight & caloric expenditure assessed from weekly physical activity 
ascertained from questionnaire data  (International Physica l Activity 
Questionnaire screening form ).156  
Food handling details :  All foods are weighed on electronic balance scales in 
gram weights to the nearest gram; foods consumed are determined by subtracting 
the food weights after the participant’s meals from initial weights. Nutrition staff 
preparing and measuring food have yearly HACCP food safety training that 
focuses upon safe food handling, proper temperatures, hand washing, and using 
gloves for handling foods. All nutrition staff has additionally received training in 
weighing/processing foods for controlled feeding studies to ensure consistency in 
the method and presentation.  
 
ii. Test Day #1:  Cognitive function, mood and anxiety qu estionnaires. (See details 
under Screening visit).   On the first day of testing , participants will perform the same 
anxiety and mood questionnaires as performed during the Initial Screening and be 
administered the Cogstate Brief Batt ery (both practice and baseline) as follows:   
40 
 a. *Cogstate Brief Battery practice battery.   Administered  10 minutes prior to 
beginning of 3-hour session.  
b. Cogs tate Brief Battery.   Administered at time 0 and again at time 120 minutes 
of study visit.  
c. PANAS -C.   Administered at time 0 and again at time 180 minutes of study 
visit.  
d. STAIC.  Administered at time 0 and again at time 180 minutes of study visit.   
     * 
iii. Test Day #5:  Cognitive function, mood and anxiety questionnaires.   (See details 
under Screening visit).  On the second to last day of testing, the participants will 
perform the same cognitive function, anxiety, & attention questionnaires as 
performed during Test Day#1  as follows:  
a. Cogstate Brief Battery .  Administered at time 0 and again at time 120 minutes 
of study visit.  
b. PANAS -C.   Administered at time 0 and again at time 180 minutes of study 
visit.  
c. STAIC.  Administered at time 0 and again at time 180 minutes of study visit.   
 
iv. Test Day#6:   Participants will be asked to fast overnight in preparation for this 
morning visit. In addition to the daily procedures described above for Test Days #1 -6 
(including engaging in their randomized assignment to sitting -only or sitting 
interrupted with walkin g), the participant will perform the following final study 
procedures:   
a. Placement of IV catheter . ELA Max cream will be applied to numb the IV 
site. The NIH Vascular Access Device service will be consulted as needed to 
place the IV catheter for this test.  
i. Fasting oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT).  A standardized 
dextrose oral solution  (75 g per 300mL; dose 1.75g per kg of body 
weight up to a maximum dose of 75g) will be given at time 0. The 
participants will be asked to execute their randomized cond ition 
(seated or interrupted seated as described above). Blood will be 
41 
 sampled at times -5, 0, +20, +30, +60, +90, +120, +150, and +180 
minutes for measurements of insulin, C -peptide, glucose, cortisol, 
FFA, and triglycerides. Research specimens (10ml) wil l be 
obtain ed for future analyses at time 0, 30 and 120 minutes . During 
the 180 minutes of prolonged sitting, participants will be permitted 
to use the restroom if necessary and drink water. After completion 
of this sampling, the intravenous line will be removed.  
b. Cognitive function, mood and anxiety questionnaires.   (See deta ils under 
Screening visit).  On the last day of testing, the participants will perform the same 
cognitive function, anxiety, & attention questionnaires as performed during Test 
Day#1 & #5 as follows:  
i. Cogstate Brief Battery.  Administered at time 0 and again at time 
120 minutes of study visit.  
ii. PANAS -C.   Administered at time 0 and again at time 180 minutes 
of study visit.  
iii. STAIC.  Administered at time 0 and again at time 180 minutes of 
study visit.   
c. Hunger ratings.  Hunger will be assessed using a visual analog scale (VAS) , 
through Clinical Trials Survey System (CTSS). The VAS is a simple category 
scale of satiety with ancho rs at the end -points and at five equally spaced intervals 
between the anchors.159 The VAS assesses satiety using a 0mm to 100mm range, 
with “Not at all hungry” at 0mm and “Greatest imaginable hunger” at 100mm. 
The VAS will be administered at pre -test, +30, +60, +90, +120, +150, and +180 
minutes after the walking and blood draws. They w ill take approximately 5 
minutes to complete. VAS scale scores are reproducible across multiple time 
points and predict subsequent food intake in children.160-162 A comparison 
between different VAS scales found the bipolar hunger/fullness scale to have the 
best correl ation (r= 0.64) and reliability.163 
d. Buffet test meal.  A standardized multiple -item buffet test meal (approximately 
10,000 kcal) will be given at the end of each condition block, day #6 of testing. 
The meal h as an array of macronutrients ( approximately 12% protein, 51% 
42 
 carbohydrate, and 37% fat) from foods fr equently consumed by children .65 Food 
energy and macronutrient content are calculated using the USDA National 
Nutrient Database for Standard Reference. Participants are instructed to ‘eat as 
much as you want’ and the amounts of foods and beverages consumed are 
calculated by measuring the differences in weights (g) of each  item be fore and 
after the meal . Duration of eating is measured from the time the experimenter 
leaves the room until the participant indicates eating is completed.  Energy  and 
macronutrient consumption will be calculated.  
Food handling details:   See Standardized Meal I ntake above  
e. CGM device removal.  
f. Accelerometer device removal.  
 
Optional Supplemental MRS  Arm Study Design : 
a. We will enroll up to 75 children from the Break It Up protocol for this 
supplemental arm. Participants qualifying for the Break It Up parent protocol will 
be offered the opportunity to participate.  A separate consent and assent form have 
been prepared and will be signed before these studies are done.  
b. Baseline MRS scan:   Participants will attend a visit 0 -21 days prior to beginning 
their Break It Up! test week to perform a baseline 1H -MRS scan of liver and  up to  
3 skeletal muscles (vastus lateralis, tibialis anterior and soleus muscles) using  3T 
Magnetic Resonance scanner  and a multi -channel flexible 
receiver  coils.  Magnetic Resonance Sp ectroscopy (MRS) will be performed to 
quantify liver fat and  intra- and extramyocellular lipid content.   This pre -
intervention, baseline scan will be performed in a standard fashion after 
participants consume a standard meal shake (calculated to be approxi mate 30% of 
daily energy needs).  In effort to minimize external factors, subjects will be asked 
to refrain from strenuous activity, such as aerobic exercise 30minutes 
consecutively or more, on the day prior and the morning of this scan.  
Additionally, a 2 4hr dietary recall will be performed.  
c. Post Intervention MRS scans:   On day # 4 or #5 of the main study (based on 
equipment availability), participants will repeat the same MRS scan of their 
43 
 skeletal muscle as their pre -intervention baseline scan two more times.  The first 
will be performed at approximately 12pm under the s ame conditions of the 
baseline scan (including consuming the same breakfast shake and refraining from 
strenuous activity, such as aerobic exercise 30minutes consecutively or more, on 
the day prior and the morning of this scan).  After this scan, the subjec t will be 
transferred to the metabolic unit (via wheelchair) for their main study intervention 
session.  The subject will then carry out their randomized intervention session and 
consume their standard diet (per the Break It Up! protocol).  The third and f inal 
MRS scan will be performed immediately after the subject has completed their 3 -
hour intervention session at approximately 4pm.  
*Of note, on this day the original CGM device will be removed prior to the MRS scan 
and new device placed after the final MR S given that the CGM device is not 
compatible with MRI scanning.  
 
End of participation  
a. Participants will complete study participation at the end of the Test Day #6 visit.   
b. Participant families will be told they should return for routine medical care to 
their usual pediatrician.  
c. The guardians of each participant will receive the following information.  
Additionally, this information will be shared with a participant’s health care 
provider upon request:   
1) Abnormal fasting blood test results, such as high fa sting blood sugar, from 
the outpatient  screening visit.  
2) Abnormal findings from the physical exam or EKG at the outpatient 
screening visit.  
3) Questionnaire results from the outpatient screening visit if there is any 
evidence of significant emotional concerns on the anxiety or mood 
questionnaires.  
d. Formal medical records will be available to all participants through the NIH 
Medical Records Department:   
44 
 1) Clinical center laboratory results  
2) Physical exam documentation  
3) Electrocardiogram  
5. Management of Dat a and Samples  
a. Storage  
i. Human biospecimens will be collected and stored using procedures appropriate for 
the type of biospecimen being collected and will be handled in accordance with the 
U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration’s Bloodborne Pathogens 
Standard for Sampl es. Sample freezers will be operated using facility environments 
that include ambient temperature controls, good air circulation, lighting, and 
security. Systems are in place to allow for local and remote temperature monitoring 
of freezers. The NIH has an emergency preparedness plan that covers equipment 
failures and power interruption, including back ‐up storage capacity and back ‐up 
power generators.  
ii. The principal investigator and the co -investigators will have access to identifiable 
participant records. We  will follow guidelines developed by the NIH for projects 
funded by the Federal Government for managing such samples.  
iii. Samples and data will be coded. Data will be coded by subject number, but will be 
readily associated with identifiable participant records . Records containing personal 
identifiers will be maintained consistent with the security measures required by the 
NIH. Data will either be transferred directly from the electronic medical record into 
the NICHD Clinical Trials Data Base (CTDB), or for data  where direct transfer is 
unavailable, will be double -entered by hand into CTDB.   
iv. All data will be kept on secure computers in the SGO office, whose doors will be 
locked when staff is not present.  All paper data will also be kept in locked areas in 
the SGO office.   
• Serum and plasma samples not analyzed immediately (as described above) will be 
stored in locked freezers by the NICHD sample management team supervised by 
the NICHD Clinical Director and tracked/managed through CTDB. Human 
45 
 biospecimens in storage will have a unique identifier, will be labeled with a printed 
label and will contain a barcode. Samples will be tracked using a computer ‐based 
inventory system that records the location and detailed information of every 
specimen in the repository.  
• Data will be stored in a password -protected computer system and in paper files in 
locked file cabinets and office areas to which only the NIH research team will have 
access.   
• Samples and data collected from participants in this research st udy will be saved 
and used for future biochemical testing related to body weight and metabolism. This 
testing may be done by research laboratories that are not at the NIH.  Additional 
consent will be obtained to use these samples if the consent form indica tes that such 
consent is required.  Prior to transfer of samples and data to non -NIH collaborators, 
a material transfer agreement (MTA) with the outside institution will be established.  
We will provide the NICHD IRB with a listing of MTA’s that have been 
established under these provisions at the time of each Continuing Review.  
• If unauthorized disclosure of identifying information linked with samples or data 
occurs, the IRB will be notified by the Principal Investigator within 7 days of 
learning of the occu rrence.  
• Samples and data will be stored for a minimum of 3 years after completion of 
analyses for this study, but may be kept indefinitely.  Furthermore, in compliance 
with federal law, records will be maintained until all subjects enrolled in the study 
have reached a minimum age of 23 years. Subjects may choose to withdraw from 
the study at any time and may request for their stored samples to be destroyed.  All 
withdrawals from the study will be documented and included in the annual report 
for continuing r eview by the IRB.   
• The PI will report to the IRB loss or destruction of data or samples when substantial 
numbers of samples/data records (more than 10) are unintentionally destroyed (for 
instance, by a freezer failure). Loss or destruction of samples save d only for tertiary 
outcomes or future unspecified research will not be routinely reported, unless such 
loss also entails a breach of the Privacy Act.  
b. Data  and sample sharing plan  (See Appendix F for Scientific Director Approval)  
46 
 • This protocol is not subject to the Genomic Data Sharing policy as no genomic data 
will be collected . 
• Data will be submitted to the Clinical Trial Database (CTDB) for storage  
throughout data collection  and to BRRIS at the conclusion of data collection .   
• A Data Sharing Plan fo r this study has been approved by  the NICHD Scientific 
Director. See Appendix F, Data Sharing Plan for complete details.  
• Additionally:  
Data will be shared with Cogstate LTD and Britni Belcher, PhD, MPH  (see 
Collaborating Researchers and Affiliated Institutions  below).  
 
Data and samples may also be shared with collaborating laboratories at NIH or 
outside of NIH and/or submitted to additional NIH-designated repositories 
and data bases if consent for sharing is  obtained in the future with pro tocol 
amendment.  
 
Samples and data will be  stripped of identifiers and will  be coded (“de -identified”) 
or unlinked from an identifying code (“anonymized”). When coded data is 
shared, the key to the code will not be provided to collaborators, but will 
remai n at NIH  to permit the NIH research team to link clinically significant 
findings with a subject so that the subject can be informed and appropriate 
follow -up arranged if medically indicated .  Data and samples may be shared 
with investigators and institutio ns with an FWA or operating under the 
Declaration of Helsinki (DoH) and reported at the time of continuing review.  
Sharing with investigators without an FWA or not operating under the DoH 
will be submitted for prospective IRB approval.  Submissions to NIH -
sponsored or supported databases and repositories will be reported at the time 
of Continuing Review.  Submission to non -NIH sponsored or supported 
databases and repositories will be submitted for prospective IRB approval.  
 
47 
 c. Collaborating Researchers and Affiliated Institutions:  This paragraph may be 
amended in the future to describe any MTAs that are established to use samples from 
this study.   
• A technology transfer agreement with Cogstate LTD has been executed for this 
study.  This study will use Cogstate software as detailed throughout the protocol 
and in turn Cogstate LTD will be provided the following de -identified data:  
questionnaire performance, medical status (specifically any neurologic or 
psychologic diagnoses), ethnicity, level o f education, yearly household income, and 
randomization assignment.  
• Extramural collaborator Britni Belcher, PhD, MPH will have continuous access to 
deidentified data (coded by subject number and  otherwise without name,  date of 
birth  or other unique identi fiers) throughout study to assist with data analyses.  
6. Additional Considerations  
a. Research with investigational drugs or devices  
 Not Applicable.  
b. Gene therapy  
 Not Applicable.  
7. Risks and Discomforts  
 
As with any research study, there may be risks, inconveniences, and discomforts that occur 
during the course of the study. There will be an effort make to minimize the risk and discomfort 
associated with the study.  
a. The physical examination  by a health care provider will be conducted with the 
participant unclothed. While all efforts will be made to protect privacy, some participants 
may find this embarrassing.  
b. Non-invasive body composition methods  such as waist circumference measurements 
will be done with a flexible tape measure; th ese measurements  involve no risk and are not 
painful. However, some participants may find it embarrassing to stand in their underwear.  
48 
 c. Total blood draw  amount will remain within the NIH guideline of 5 mL/kg in a s ingle 
day and 9.5 mL/kg every 8 weeks. Blood collection by venipuncture is associated with 
mild discomfort (which will be attenuated by offering to administer ELA max cream 
before venipuncture), and the possibility of localized bruising or extravasation. T he risk 
of infection, phlebitis (a blood clot), or fainting is extremely small. An area of white or a 
red rash that usually goes away within a few hours may be seen after use of ELA max 
cream.   
d. The DXA scan  may cause inconvenience of the time required and  results in minor risk 
from radiation . DXA scanning involves radiation exposure for research purposes only.  
According to the manufacturer’s specifications, DXA scanning for body composition 
using the array beam delivers an effective dose of 0.003mrem total body radiation. This 
calculated value is known as the “effective dose” and is used to relate the dose received 
by each organ to a single value. This amount is well below the recommended radiation 
exposure for child volunteers (< 500 mrem pe r year). For comparison, the average person 
in the U.S. receives a radiation exposure of 0.3 rem (300 mrem)/yr from natural 
background sources, such as from the sun, outer space, and from radioactive materials 
that are found naturally in the earth’s air an d soil.  
e. The exercise tests  conducted in the study are low risk for participants without known 
heart disease. The major risk of exercise is that unsuspected heart disease could be 
uncovered. Even though participants will be examined before the study to try to rule out 
the presence of heart disease, it is possible to have undetected heart disease leading to 
exercise -related chest pain, an unusual heart beat rhythm (arrhythmia), or myocardial 
infarction (heart attack) with heart damage or death. All participan ts will undergo EKG 
and, if indicated by EKG results or physical examination, echocardiography before 
performing the maximal exercise test. We will monitor heart function as participants 
exercise, and stop the exercise if there are any signs of heart probl ems. A physician or 
Pediatric Advanced Life Support (PALS) (PALS) certified nurse practitioner will be 
readily available during these tests. In settings where apparently healthy adults undergo 
maximal exercise tests, the risk of death has been estimated to  be between 0 and 3 
deaths/100,000 tests.  Risk for death in otherwise healthy children will be lower than the 
rate cited for adults.  Other risks of exercise include the possibility of slipping and falling 
49 
 while exercising, muscle or joint soreness, and mus cle fatigue caused by exercising that 
could last several days. Some individuals may exhibit mild skin irritation of the areas 
required for EKG lead placement.  
f. The Cognitive Tests and Mood Questionnaires  involve no known risk. Participants 
may feel embarras sment or discomfort about answering questions about mood, anxiety, 
and performing cognitive tests. Although we expect this embarrassment or discomfort to 
be minimal, these tests and questionnaires do take time and may cause inconvenience. If 
there is sligh t discomfort due to the wording of some questions, the participan t is not 
required to answer those  particular question s. 
g. Using continuo us glucose monitor  (CGM)  devices may cause some mild discomfort , as 
this device includes a subcutaneous insertion site  through a minimally invasive needle 
stick .  The most common cited complication of CGM use is pain during insertion and 
skin irritation from a dhesive material.  T hese concerns are infrequently reported.   For 
example, in randomizing approximately 100 adults and children to a CGM device, Diess 
et al. reported that 4 individuals withdrew CGM use citing pain, adhesive complication, 
or alarm complications .164 We will minimize these complications b y using:  1.  Child Life 
services for educatio n and distraction techniques in preparation for and during  the 
insertion procedure, and 2.  Multiple adhesive techniques for skin application including 
skin preparation and various covering materials including skin tape and Tegaderm.  
Other than these concerns , CGM devices have  never been reported to directly cause 
medical harm.  Zero significant adverse events such as infection were reported by Diess 
et al. (n = 108 randomized to CGM use ).164 However, g iven that the insertion procedure 
requires  breaking the dermis, there is always  potential for introduction of infectious 
material into the body.  The procedure requires appropriate skin preparation and clean 
technique to prevent this.  For our study , only proficiently train ed license d providers will 
insert CGM devices to ensure prope r technique.  Furthermore, given the superficial 
placement, if the skin and device preparation fail to prevent inoculation, prompt 
identification and removal of the device will allow for healing and clearing of a potential 
infection.  Our study will be pro viding close monitoring with daily evaluation of the 
CGM site by research study staff, making note of any signs or symptoms of infection or 
allergic reaction.  If any signs or symptoms develop, such as redness, swelling, skin 
50 
 pealing, or drainage, or the s ubject reports irritation or discomfort to the study staff, a 
licensed provider will be notified,  and the site will be removed  if deemed appropriate .  
Replacement of a new device in a separ ate location will only be performed if removal 
was indicated due to  skin irritation and will be executed by using new adhesive 
mechanisms.  If removal is indicated due to concern for infection, no additional CGM 
monitoring will be obtained on the participant in question.     
h. The study as a whole requires a significant time commitment  on the part of study 
participants and their families. The screening  visit will take approximately 6  hours. Each 
test visit will t ake approximately 3.5  hours.  
i. False Positives . Abnormal test results  may cause anxiety and could lead to additional 
medical evaluations.   
j. MRS Scan .  This machine requires laying supine for up to approximately 120 minutes; 
therefore, there may be some discomfort or restlessness.  The child will be able to be in 
communicatio n with their guardian and study team throughout the entire imaging in order 
to communicate significant distress or request to terminate the study.  
8. Subject Safety Monitoring  
 
Study participants will be examined at the screening visit and both test visits. At the beginning of 
each visit, participants will be asked whether they are experiencing any unusual symptoms, and 
measurements will be made of their vital signs (oral temperature and arm blood pressure).  
Stopping procedures for the VO2max test are  outlined above.  Heart rate will be monitored 
during  test visit #6 and during walking bouts for participants randomized to “interrupted” 
condition  (see above) ..  If unanticipated serious adverse events occur during the course of the 
study, subjects will be  withdrawn and we will promptly report them to the IRB.  
Criteria for withdrawal of subjects from study:  
 Participants will be informed that they can withdraw from the study at any time. 
Noncompliance with study procedures may lead to subjects being withdra wn by Investigators . 
Other events that will result in study discontinuation include:  
a. Inability to complete treadmill fitness test.  
b. Inability to tolerate sitting (or sitting + walking) protocol.  
51 
 c. The development of a severe psychiatric disorder.  
d. Any verified abnormal laboratory values or physical status that is not allowed by the 
study.  
9. Outcome Measures  
a. Primary outcome measure . The primary outcome is insulin iAUC obtained during the 
oral glucose tolerance  test at the final experimental visit.  A difference in insulin demand, 
demonstrated by a difference in iAUC between groups, is hypothesized to occur  with this 
intervention through increased non -insulin mediated glucose uptake.165, 166 A decrease in 
insulin demand is clinically relevant as it is a marker of improved carbohydrate 
metabolism a nd decreased risk of dysglycemia or the development of diabetes mellitus.  
b. Secondary outcomes  are glucose iAUC  obtained during the oral glucose tolerance  test; 
mean  iAUC as obtained from 24hr - continuous glucose monitoring, and Mean Amplitude 
Glycemic Excursion (MAGE) as obtained from 24hr - continuous glucose monitoring . 
Tertiary outcomes are  cognitive function ( working memory , inhibition, attention,  and 
processing speed) , mood, anxiety, daily physical activity (steps counts/day), and dietary 
intake  at the final test meal .  Improved circulating glucose values as demonstrated by 
lower glucose iAUC would directly support  our primary insulin outcome  and would be 
clinically relevant as this result would indicate improved metabolism.  Additionally, 
MAGE has been demonstrated to be associated with metabolic control such that elevated 
MAGE is associated with worsening cardiometabolic outcomes in individuals w ith 
diabetes .167 
The executive function, mood and anxiety outcomes are being collected for independent 
objectives.  This group of measures is an important objective to provide  information that 
will be necessary to know for fea sibility of this intervention.  This intervention is poised 
to community application such as school class rooms.  Therefore, it is important to 
understand i f executive function is adversely affected by the  intervention as this would 
limit its feasibility for implementation.  Finally, all analyses will be performed within the 
subgroups of healthy weight and overweight subjects to evaluate for differential 
effectiveness based on weight status.  
52 
  
10. Statistica l Analysis  
 
a. Analysis of data .  Prior to conducting the main model analysis, descriptive analyses will 
be conducted on all outcome and covariate to assess potential outliers and calculate 
summary statistics. If significant deviations from the assumed distri bution (e.g.: normal) 
occur, then appropriate transformations will be applied to fulfill model assumptions. If 
transformations are not sufficient to meet model assumptions, then nonparametric tests 
will be used. Descriptive statistics will investigate corr elations between variables at pre -
test and post -test to assess potential confounders prior to analyses.   
The parallel study design allows for the examination of between -individual comparisons 
of test effects and within -individual longitudinal test effects (i.e. repeated daily CGM 
metrics ).  Significance level will be set at α= 0.05. Covariates will include:  age, sex, 
race/ethnicity, baseline cognitive ability  (for cognitive outcomes only) , baseline 
homeostatic model of insulin resistance (HOMA -IR), body fat mass  (except for subgroup 
analysis by weight status) , and Tanner stage.   We will also evaluate for a wei ght status 
interaction (intervention x healthy weight / overweight).   
 The following analyses will be performed:  
i. Participant characteristics will be summarized using means (standard deviations) and 
frequencies.  
ii. Baseline (time 0) values for participant cha racteristics, insulin, glucose, heart rate, 
and blood pressure between the groups  will be compared using t -tests.  
iii. The primary analysis will be ANCOVA comparing children randomized to the two 
groups for insulin iAUC  at the end -study oral glucose tolerance test , with age, sex,  
race/ethnicity,  HOMA -IR, body fat mass, and Tanner stage as variables in the model. 
If all covariates are nonsignificant, unpaired t -tests will be reported for the  differences 
in OGTT insulin iA UC by condition (prolonged vs interrupted sitting).  Similar 
analyses will be used to examine  glucose iAUC, 5 - or 6-day average 24hr CGM 
iAUC  and 24hr MAGE.  (Subjects may only have 5 days of CGM data if a device is 
53 
 accidentally removed and replaced at the next visit or subject uses a medication that 
interacts with glucose readings such as acetaminophen -after which 24hrs of data will 
be omitted from analysis).  Mixed models will also be used to assess the influence of 
prolonged vs. interrupted sitting on insulin and glucose iAUC over the 3 hours of 
observation. To evaluate differences in the dependent variables at each time point, 
planned comparisons of model -based mean d ifferences between each  time points will 
be calculated.   Additionally, mixed models wi ll be used to asse ss condition influence 
on mean 24hr CGM glucose iAUC and 24hr MAGE.  
iv. ANCOVA or (as indicated above) t -tests will investigate differences in working 
memory, inhibition , attention, processing speed, mood, anxiety, and kcal intake 
between pro longed sitting and interrupted sitting at the post - test. 
v. Mixed models will also be used to assess the influence of prolonged vs. interrupted 
sitting on change in cognitive function, mood and anxiety (pre -post test scores) 
controlled for significant covari ates.  Covariates to be considered include those list ed 
above in addition to free living activity and sleep.  
vi. As a secondary analysis, all  the analyses described above will be performed on the 
subgroups:  Healthy weight and overweight subjects.   
vii. Supplemental MRS Study:  Repeated measures ANOVA will investigate the change 
in IMCL content between baseline & pre -session (thus, evaluating for da ily 
intervention effect) as well as immediately pre - and post -intervention session (thus, 
evaluating the immediate effect of intervention) by condition.  ANCOVA analyses 
will compare the change in IMCL content by condition with age, sex, race/ethnicity, 
HOMA-IR, body fat mass, and Tanner stage as variables in the model.  
 
b. Power Analysis  
Based on our preliminary published data,65 and our unpublished data in overweight 
youth, we expect a moderate to large ( Cohen’s d = 0.8) effect size.  With an 80% power, 
α=0.05, our sample size requires evaluable data from 21 in each group;  with our goal of 
subgroup analysis within healthy weight and overweight groups, we will require 84 
participants total  (42 overweight and 42 healthy weight) .  This is supported by previously 
reported adult data publishe d by Dunstan et al. who identified the mean (standard 
54 
 deviation) difference between the two groups was 191.0 (334.9) pmol/L  yielding a 
moderate to large effect size .48 Taking into consideration more variability due to the 
parallel design (versus cross over designs used previously), we will randomize  up to 120 
participa nts and estimate that at most 36 children will drop -out of the study before 
completion. We expect at least 84 participants to complete the protocol which is our 
target completion based on these analyses.  
11. Human Participant  Protection s 
a.  Rationale for subject selection  
This is a study to examine the effects of interrupting sitting on metabolic characteristics, 
executive function and attention, mood, anxiety, and dietary intake  in children . Both 
healthy  weight  and overweight  children  will b e studied because our pilot data suggest 
similar effects on insulin iAUC are seen. Pre -adolescent children were selected because 
the approach being studied is most suitable as a preventive measure that could be 
implemented in elementary or middle schools.  This pilot study therefore has the potential 
to inform future intervention studies aimed at intervening on behaviors that promote 
pediatric obesity. Recruitment efforts will aim to enroll 50% girls, 50% boys , age 7 to 
<12. Participants from all socioeconom ic backgrounds in the metropolitan Washington 
D.C. area will be invited to participate in the study. Children of all race/ethnic groups will 
be included.  
b. Equitability  
This study will provide equal opportunity to participants.  We will screen and enroll 
interested participants without concern of  race, ethnicity, sex, disability, nationality, 
religion, handedness, or age (within inclusion criteria).  
c.  Justifications for exclusions:  
 All exclusions are either based on identification of problems in the participant's 
physical or mental health, based on the ability of the participant to complete protocol 
studies, or are required for the goals of the study (e.g., age 7 -11.99y). Individuals will be 
excluded if they are not proficient in Engli sh due  to the availability of our mood and 
55 
 anxiety testing questionnaires which are only available in English ).  Identification of 
exclusions will lead to referral to an appropriate physician or mental health professional.  
d.   Justification for sensitive procedures :  N/A  
e.  Safeguards for vulnerable populations :  Children  
This study involves many minimal risk procedures: outpatient visits, physical 
examination, phlebotomy, anthropometric measurements, cognitive testing, exercise 
testing, and DXA scanning for child participants. Efforts will be made to schedule 
Clinical Cent er visits during school holidays and breaks to minimize absences. The 
protocol considers  psychological as well as physical discomfort, and provision has been 
made for soliciting the written assent of children and the written permission of parents.  
Study st aff will emphasize to participants that they are able to withdraw from the study at 
any time without penalty. To protect against the risk of embarrassment or discomfort, 
participants will be allowed to skip questionnaire items they do not wish to answer, o r 
stop any study procedures. Written, active informed consent will be obtained from at 
least one parent /guardian  (both will need to sign if otherwise required becaus e, for 
example of joint custody) , and assent will be obtained from children.  
Every effort will be made to maintain the confidentiality of participant medical records 
for this study. Only group information without personal identifiers will be included when 
submitting manuscripts for publication. All information gathered for the purposes of this 
study will be treated as a medical record with the s ame degree of confidentiality.  
 
12. Risks/Benefits Analysis  
a. Known Potential Benefits : 
There are no expected benefits to participants .  
b. Known Potential Risks  
Potential risks and discomforts are described in the consent form  and in Section 7 . These 
include  discomfort or bruising during intravenous catheter placement and blood draws, 
56 
 nausea during glucose tolerance testing, and the risks of walking on a treadmill (such as 
spraining an ankle) and of undergoing MRI (claustrophobia), In the literature, there are 
reports of healthy children who have undergone each of these tests in IRB -approved 
studies. Individually, all the procedures proposed as part of this protocol have been 
considered to represent minimal risk. For example, a panel convened in 1993 by the 
Secretary of Health found that placement of two intravenous catheters, administra tion of 
insulin and dextrose for the purpose of inducing mild hypoglycemia, and monitoring of 
blood glucose measurements every 5 minutes for many hours were of "minimal risk." 
The investigators have further taken many steps to minimize potential discomfort , for 
instance by administration of ELA max cream before blood is drawn. Children also 
routinely undergo venipuncture, which in children not infrequently requires multiple 
sticks to obtain samples. Furthermore, children are routinely required to complete 
cognitive tests during school. We believe the studies outlined in this protocol are 
reasonably commensurate with those children may be exposed to in their actual or 
expected medical, dental, psychological, social, or educational experiences. We therefore 
believe that the minimal risks of this study are reasonable in relation to anticipated 
benefit .  
 
13. Consent Documents and Process  
 
a. Designation of those obtaining consent  
 
Study investigators desig nated as able to obtain consent  in this protocol document will 
obtain informed consent  from parents or guardians of study subjects .  Written assent 
will be also obtained from the minor subjects  of this study.   See Appendices C & D for 
consent and assent documents.  
b. Consent procedures  
Each participant will receive a written explanation of the purposes, procedures, and 
potential hazards of the study. Communication of this information and of the 
participant’s assent as well as the consent of a parent or guardian will be documented in 
the medical record. Written, active informed consent will be obtained in -person during 
57 
 the screening visit from a parent/guardian, and assent will be obtained from youth by 
the PI or designated associat e investigators. All participants will be informed of thei r 
right to withdraw from the study. The purpose of the project, all testing procedures, and 
study components, and possible risks and inconveniences will be described in detail in 
language understandable to the parent(s)/guardian(s). The investigator will a lso explain 
the study to the minor who is of a younger age and level of understanding. Sufficient 
time and opportunity will be given for discussion of the research as well as to answer 
any questions they may have, taking care to minimize or eliminate the p erception of 
coercion or undue influence. When the NIH informed consent and assent forms are 
signed, parents or guardians will be given a signed copy of the consent and assent form 
for their records. In the unlikely event that the parents/guardians of prot ocol-eligible 
subjects cannot travel to the NIH Clinical Center for a considerable period of time, the 
PI or other protocol staff designated to obtain consent will obtain informed consent by a 
telephone conversation. Consent may be obtained via telephone a nd/or another 
electronic process, rather than in person. In such cases, the written signed consent will 
be faxed and/or mailed and made part of the patients' NIH records.  No research 
procedures will commence until the investigator has confirmed that writte n, legally 
effective consent has been obtained. In general, Investigators obtaining consent 
(whether in person or over the telephone) will be encouraged to have a second person 
(who is not obtaining informed consent) present during the entire informed cons ent 
discussion and, if applicable, the signature process. Investigators will also document the 
consent process in a note placed in the research record for all consent discussions.  
 
As noted above, given the minimal risk of the study, the consent of one parent will be 
considered sufficient for protocol participation  except in cases where two signatures are 
required (for instance because of shared medical decision -making explicated in a 
divorce decree).  
c. Non-English –Speaking Participants  
If a child who spea ks English has a parent who is found not to be English -speaking  is 
eligible for enrollment, the parent will be provided with the CC Short Written Consent 
Form for Non -English Sp eaking Research Participants and a verbal explanation of the 
58 
 purpose, procedure s and risks of the study as described in MAS Policy M77 -2, NIH 
HRPP SOP 12 and 45 CFR 46.117(b)(2). The IRB -approved English consent form will 
serve as basis for the verbal explanation of the study. All NIH policies on utilizing the 
“short form” consent pr ocess, including having a witness during the "short form" 
consent process, will be followed.   
d. Consent documents  
The submitted consent form contains all required elements for consent. One consent 
form, for parents/guardians to sign for their minor children, and one assent form, for 
minor children, are submitted with this protocol .  See Appendices C & D . 
 
14. Data and Safety Monitoring  
a. Data and safety monitor  
 
For this un -blinded , minimal risk trial, we propose that the PI will be sufficient to 
monitor the study.  
 
b. Data and safety monitoring plan for Non -IND 
The following monitoring plan will be implemented to ensure the protocol data are in 
compliance with Good Clinical Practice (GCP), NICHD Institutional Review Board 
(IRB) and Federal regulations. This will ensure the validity, accuracy and integrity of 
the data.  
 
1.  Study Staff Responsibilities  
Dr. Jack Yanovski , Principal Investigator , will be responsible for all aspects of the study . 
Some responsibilities may be delegated to other  associate investigators  as detailed in the  
Study Personnel Sheet & Delegation of Responsibility Log.  
 
2.  Source Documentation and Case Report Forms  
Jack A. Yanovski, MD, Ph D is responsible for coordinating data collection and will 
review the data for accuracy and completeness  within seven days of each subject visit.  
59 
 The PI a long with study associate investigator s will conduct the monitoring. Patient 
consent documents, primary outcome and safety laboratory results, and diagnostic test results 
will be monitored for accuracy, correct dating, and agreement between case report forms and 
source documents. As case report forms are entered electronically into the NICHD Clinical 
Trials Database, the computer system contains logs indicating changes made and the 
circumstances leading to these changes.  
The medical records of active subjects (defined as subjects undergoing stud y procedures 
in the current year) will be monitored quarterly or more frequently as required.  Any major 
findings will be summarized in writing and reported to the NICHD Institutional Review Board, if 
indicated. Investigator credentials, training records, and the delegation of responsibility log will 
also be reviewed on an annual basis.  
3.  IRB and DSMC Documentation  
All IRB documentation can be found in iRIS. The Principal Investigator, Jack Yanovski, 
MD, PHD , is responsible for maintaining IRB correspondence related to this protocol, including 
records of all reviews of the study and submissions to the IRB. This protocol does not meet the 
criteria as outlined in the NIH HRPP SOP 17 for data to be submitted to a data safety monitoring 
committee.   The PI and IRB can provide adequate oversight for this open trial.  
Clinical Trial Studies (non IND/IDE) will have random audits performed by the NICHD 
Office of the Clinical Director: 
https://science.nichd.nih.gov/confluence/display/ocd/Protocol+Navigation ). 
4.  FDA Documentation  
Not Applicable – no IND.  
5. Study Completion  
Upon completion of the study Jack A. Yanovski, MD, PhD  will retain possession of the 
electronic Protocol Binder in a secure location.  HHS regulations require that subjects’ records be 
maintained for at least three years after completion of a study.  Since subjects of this investigation 
include children age 7-11.9 years, even longer record retention is required. All records will be 
retained until all participants have reached age 23 years.  
6. Data safety and monitoring board (DSMB)  
Because there is no blinded component to these studies, the studies do not involve 
administration of any pharmaceutical agents, and the procedures are of minimal risk, we propose 
60 
 that a formal DSMB is not required, and that the investigators and IRB can ad equately supervise 
this study. All adverse events will be documented and reported to the NICHD IRB as described 
above in ‘Protocol Monitoring Plan.’ We expect that the risk for an adverse event will be within 
the “Rare but serious (Event Rate < 1%)” catego ry. 
 
15. Quality Assurance  
a. Quality assurance monitor  
Jack A. Yanovski, MD, PhD is responsible for coordinating data collection and will 
review the data for accuracy and completeness within seven days of each subject visit. 
The NICHD Standard Operating Procedure for Intramural Clinical Protocol Monitoring 
(rev. 5.20.2015) will be followed.  
 
b. Quality assurance plan  
 
Quality assurance will be executed in accordance with the NICHD quality assurance 
plan.  Adverse events and protocol deviations will be reviewed and recorded on a 
weekly basis at the SGO protocols review meeting.  
Protocol -specific monitoring will include:  
Review of biochemical results from OGTT testing within 72 hours of test.  
Daily data retrieval from continuous glucose monitoring devi ces. 
Weekly data retrieval from continuous actigraph and heart rate monitoring devices.  
Weekly data retrieval from the NIH Toolbox Assessment center for cognitive 
measure outcomes.  
16. Reporting of Unanticipated Problems, Adverse Events and 
Protocol Deviations  
 
Event Characterization and Reporting to the IRB and Clinical Director (CD): 
Unanticipated problems, non -compliance, and other reportable events will be reported to the NIH 
IRB as per Policy 801 (“Reporting Research Events.”). All repor table events occurring during 
61 
 the study, including those observed by or reported to the research team, will be recorded. 
Reportable  Events  will be reported by the PI verbally and in writing as soon as possible . but not 
more than 7 days after the PI first l earns of the event.  Deaths will be reported to the Clinical 
Director within 24 hours  after the PI first learns of the event. All adverse events (serious and 
non-serious, expected and unexpected) will be reported annually to the IRB for review. 
Electronic data sheets or summary language will be supplied for IRB review of adverse event 
reports at continuing reviews.  
The Principal Investigator is responsible for detecting, documenting, and reporting 
unanticipated problems, adverse events (AEs), inc luding serious adverse events (SAEs), and 
deviations in accordance with NIH policy, IRB requirements, and federal regulations.  
17. Alternatives to Participation  
The current proposal is a physiological study that does not treat any known condition; as 
a result, there are no alternatives other than non -participation. Participants and their families will 
be informed that they will not receive treatment as a result of study participation. For participants 
found to have medical conditions , treatment referrals will be provided.  
18. Privacy  
All research activities will be conducted in as private a setting as possible .  This will be most 
noteworthy during the history and physical examination will be conducted in a private room in 
the pediatric day hospital.  
19. Confidentiality  
 
• Samples and data will be stored using codes that we assign. Data will be kept in 
password -protected computers and on the secured data server hosted by the Section 
on Growth and Obesity  as described above .  Samples will be kep t in locked storage. 
Only study investigators will have access to the samples and data.   
• De-identified results will be posted on c linical trials.gov  
62 
 20. Conflict of Interest  
 
a. Distribution of NIH guidelines  
• NIH guidelines on conflict of interest have been distributed to all investigators.   
b. Conflict of interest  
This is a covered protocol  because of the research agreement with Cogstate  LTD . 
There are no conflicts -of-interest to report for NIH investigators .  Non -NIH 
investigators will abide by the conflict -of-interest policies of their own institutions.  
c.  Role of a commercial company or sponsor   
Cogstate supplies software for collection of cognitive data during the study and will 
have access to some data under the terms of the signed agreement . The company 
had no role in the study design and will have no role in the decision to publish.  
21. Technology Transfer  
There is a technical transfer agreement negotiat ed with Cogstate LTD.  See Collaborating 
Researchers and Affiliated Institutions  under Management of Data and Samples above.  
22. Research and Travel Compensation  
Volunteers will be compensated for time and research -related inconveniences as follows:  
1. Complete screening visit: $10 0 
2. Complete outpatient test visits days #1 -5: $100/visit ( 5 visits; $50 0 total)  
3. Complete f inal testing visit, day #6:  $150  
4. Complete CGM wear: $20/wear (6 days; $ 120 total)  
5. Complete wrist activity monitor wear:  $10/day (6 days; $6 0 total)  
(Study total $930 ) 
 
Volunteers taking part in the MRS Supplemental arm of the study will be compensated 
for time and research -related inconveniences as follows:  
1. Complete baseline MRS scan: $100  
2. Complete follow up scan #1 (immediately befor e testing session): $75  
3. Complete follow up scan #2 (immediately after testing session): $75  
(Study Total $250)  
 
 
Compensation will be prorated for parts completed if subjects do not complete the 
study as guided by the reimbursement plan above.  
No additional incentives will be provided.  
Payment will be provided in the name of child in check form.  
63 
 Payment will be issues within 7 days after completion of last study visit.  
Travel/lodging compensation.  Local travel may be covered to facilitate the daily 
visits required.  
• No escort fee will be provided.  
• NIH employees or staff who  wish to have their child  participate during work hours 
must have permission from their supervisor. NIH employees or staff must either 
participate outside of wo rk hours or take leave in order to receive compensation.  
 
 
 
  
64 
 23. References  
 
1. Styne DM, Arslanian SA, Connor EL, Farooqi IS, Murad MH, Silverstein JH, et al. Pediatric 
Obesity —Assessment, Treatment, and Prevention: An Endocrine Society Clinical Practice Guideline. The 
Journal of Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism. 2017;102(3):709 -57. 
2. World Health Organization. Report of the Commission on Ending Childhood Obesity. Available 
at: http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/204176/1/9789241510066_eng.pdf . Report. Geneva: 
WHO Press, World Health Organization, 2016  Contract No.: March 16.  
3. Ogden CL, Carroll MD, Lawman HG, Fryar CD, Krus zon-Moran D, Kit BK, et al. Trends in Obesity 
Prevalence Among Children and Adolescents in the United States, 1988 -1994 Through 2013 -2014. JAMA. 
2016 Jun 07;315(21):2292 -9. 
4. Lobstein T, Jackson -Leach R. Estimated burden of paediatric obesity and co -morbi dities in 
Europe. Part 2. Numbers of children with indicators of obesity -related disease. Int J Pediatr Obes. 
2006;1(1):33 -41. 
5. Freedman DS, Mei Z, Srinivasan SR, Berenson GS, Dietz WH. Cardiovascular risk factors and 
excess adiposity among overweight ch ildren and adolescents: the Bogalusa Heart Study. J Pediatr. 2007 
Jan;150(1):12 -7 e2.  
6. Dietz WH, Jr., Gross WL, Kirkpatrick JA, Jr. Blount disease (tibia vara): another skeletal disorder 
associated with childhood obesity. J Pediatr. 1982 Nov;101(5):735 -7. 
7. Manoff EM, Banffy MB, Winell JJ. Relationship between Body Mass Index and slipped capital 
femoral epiphysis. J Pediatr Orthop. 2005 Nov -Dec;25(6):744 -6. 
8. Taylor ED, Theim KR, Mirch MC, Ghorbani S, Tanofsky -Kraff M, Adler -Wailes DC, et al. 
Orthopedic  complications of overweight in children and adolescents. Pediatrics. 2006 Jun;117(6):2167 -
74. 
9. Vijayakanthi N, Greally JM, Rastogi D. Pediatric Obesity -Related Asthma: The Role of Metabolic 
Dysregulation. Pediatrics. 2016 May;137(5).  
10. Barlow SE. Expe rt committee recommendations regarding the prevention, assessment, and 
treatment of child and adolescent overweight and obesity: summary report. Pediatrics. 2007 Dec;120 
Suppl 4:S164 -92. 
11. Must A, Jacques PF, Dallal GE, Bajema CJ, Dietz WH. Long -term mor bidity and mortality of 
overweight adolescents. A follow -up of the Harvard Growth Study of 1922 to 1935. The New England 
journal of medicine. 1992 Nov 5;327(19):1350 -5. 
12. Kelsey MM, Zaepfel A, Bjornstad P, Nadeau KJ. Age -related consequences of childhood obesity. 
Gerontology. 2014;60(3):222 -8. 
13. Sedentary Behaviour Research Network. Letter to the editor: standardized use of the terms 
"sedentary" and "sedentary behaviours". Appl Physiol Nutr Metab. 2012 Jun;37(3):540 -2. 
14. Pate RR, O'Neill JR, Lobelo F. The evolving definition of "sedentary". Exerc Sport Sci Rev. 2008 
Oct;36(4):173 -8. 
15. Morris JN, Heady JA, Raffle PA, Roberts CG, Parks JW. Coronary heart -disease and physical 
activity of work. Lancet. 1953 Nov 28;265(6796):1111 -20; concl.  
16. Bauman WA, Spungen AM. Coronary heart disease in individuals with spinal cord injury: 
assessment of risk factors. Spinal Cord. 2008 Jul;46(7):466 -76. 
17. Thorp AA, Owen N, Neuhaus M, Dunstan DW. Sedentary behaviors and subsequent health 
outcomes in adu lts a systematic review of longitudinal studies, 1996 -2011. Am J Prev Med. 2011 
Aug;41(2):207 -15. 
65 
 18. Matthews CE, Chen KY, Freedson PS, Buchowski MS, Beech BM, Pate RR, et al. Amount of time 
spent in sedentary behaviors in the United States, 2003 -2004. Am  J Epidemiol. 2008 Apr 01;167(7):875 -
81. 
19. Crespo CJ, Smit E, Troiano RP, Bartlett SJ, Macera CA, Andersen RE. Television watching, energy 
intake, and obesity in US children: results from the third National Health and Nutrition Examination 
Survey, 1988 -1994. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2001 Mar;155(3):360 -5. 
20. Must A, Tybor DJ. Physical activity and sedentary behavior: a review of longitudinal studies of 
weight and adiposity in youth. Int J Obes (Lond). 2005 Sep;29 Suppl 2:S84 -96. 
21. Vandewater EA, Shim MS, Caplovitz AG. Linking obesity and activity level with children's 
television and video game use. J Adolesc. 2004 Feb;27(1):71 -85. 
22. Mitchell JA, Pate RR, Beets MW, Nader PR. Time spent in sedentary behavior and changes in 
childhood BMI: a longitudinal  study from ages 9 to 15 years. Int J Obes (Lond). 2013 Jan;37(1):54 -60. 
23. Tremblay MS, LeBlanc AG, Kho ME, Saunders TJ, Larouche R, Colley RC, et al. Systematic review 
of sedentary behaviour and health indicators in school -aged children and youth. Int J  Behav Nutr Phys 
Act. 2011 Sep 21;8:98.  
24. Biddle SJ, King J, Yates T. TV viewing, but not total sedentary behaviour, is associated with 
adverse cardiometabolic biomarkers in adolescents. Evid Based Nurs. 2012 Oct;15(4):113 -4. 
25. Chinapaw MJ, Yildirim M,  Altenburg TM, Singh AS, Kovacs E, Molnar D, et al. Objective and self -
rated sedentary time and indicators of metabolic health in Dutch and Hungarian 10 -12 year olds: the 
ENERGY -Project. PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e36657.  
26. Ekelund U, Brage S, Froberg K, Harro M, Anderssen SA, Sardinha LB, et al. TV viewing and 
physical activity are independently associated with metabolic risk in children: the European Youth Heart 
Study. PLoS Med. 2006 Dec;3(12):e488.  
27. Hancox RJ, Milne BJ, Poulton R. Association between child  and adolescent television viewing and 
adult health: a longitudinal birth cohort study. Lancet. 2004 Jul 17 -23;364(9430):257 -62. 
28. Balkau B, Mhamdi L, Oppert JM, Nolan J, Golay A, Porcellati F, et al. Physical activity and insulin 
sensitivity: the RISC s tudy. Diabetes. 2008 Oct;57(10):2613 -8. 
29. Rogerson MC, Le Grande MR, Dunstan DW, Magliano DJ, Murphy BM, Salmon J, et al. Television 
Viewing Time and 13 -year Mortality in Adults with Cardiovascular Disease: Data from the Australian 
Diabetes, Obesity and Lifestyle Study (AusDiab). Heart Lung Circ. 2016 Aug;25(8):829 -36. 
30. Dunstan DW, Barr EL, Healy GN, Salmon J, Shaw JE, Balkau B, et al. Television viewing time and 
mortality: the Australian Diabetes, Obesity and Lifestyle Study (AusDiab). Circulation. 20 10 Jan 
26;121(3):384 -91. 
31. Healy GN, Matthews CE, Dunstan DW, Winkler EA, Owen N. Sedentary time and cardio -
metabolic biomarkers in US adults: NHANES 2003 -06. Eur Heart J. 2011 Mar;32(5):590 -7. 
32. Sardinha LB, Andersen LB, Anderssen SA, Quiterio AL, Orn elas R, Froberg K, et al. Objectively 
measured time spent sedentary is associated with insulin resistance independent of overall and central 
body fat in 9 - to 10 -year -old Portuguese children. Diabetes Care. 2008 Mar;31(3):569 -75. 
33. Ekelund U, Luan J, She rar LB, Esliger DW, Griew P, Cooper A, et al. Moderate to vigorous physical 
activity and sedentary time and cardiometabolic risk factors in children and adolescents. JAMA. 2012 
Feb 15;307(7):704 -12. 
34. Belcher BR, Berrigan D, Dodd KW, Emken BA, Chou CP, S pruijt -Metz D. Physical activity in US 
youth: effect of race/ethnicity, age, gender, and weight status. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2010 
Dec;42(12):2211 -21. 
35. Martinez -Gomez D, Eisenmann JC, Healy GN, Gomez -Martinez S, Diaz LE, Dunstan DW, et al. 
Sedentary beh aviors and emerging cardiometabolic biomarkers in adolescents. J Pediatr. 2012 
Jan;160(1):104 -10 e2.  
66 
 36. Henderson M, Gray -Donald K, Mathieu ME, Barnett TA, Hanley JA, O'Loughlin J, et al. How are 
physical activity, fitness, and sedentary behavior associat ed with insulin sensitivity in children? Diabetes 
Care. 2012 Jun;35(6):1272 -8. 
37. Hsu YW, Belcher BR, Ventura EE, Byrd -Williams CE, Weigensberg MJ, Davis JN, et al. Physical 
activity, sedentary behavior, and the metabolic syndrome in minority youth. Med S ci Sports Exerc. 2011 
Dec;43(12):2307 -13. 
38. Oude Luttikhuis H, Baur L, Jansen H, Shrewsbury VA, O'Malley C, Stolk RP, et al. Interventions for 
treating obesity in children. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009 Jan 21(1):CD001872.  
39. Kamath CC, Vickers KS, E hrlich A, McGovern L, Johnson J, Singhal V, et al. Clinical review: 
behavioral interventions to prevent childhood obesity: a systematic review and metaanalyses of 
randomized trials. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2008 Dec;93(12):4606 -15. 
40. Oude Luttikhuis H, Baur L, Jansen H, Shrewsbury VA, O’Malley C, Stolk RP, et al. Interventions for 
treating obesity in children. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009;1(1).  
41. Epstein LH, Valoski AM, Vara LS, McCurley J, Wisniewski L, Kalarchian MA, et al. Effects of 
decreasing sedentary behavior and increasing activity on weight change in obese children. Health 
Psychol. 1995 Mar;14(2):109 -15. 
42. Sherry B. Food behaviors and other strategies to prevent and treat pediatric overweight. Int J 
Obes (Lond). 2005 Sep;29 Suppl 2:S116 -26. 
43. Simon C, Kellou N, Dugas J, Platat C, Copin N, Schweitzer B, et al. A socio -ecological approach 
promoting physical activity and limiting sedentary behavior in adolescence showed weight benefits 
maintained 2.5 years after intervention c essation. Int J Obes (Lond). 2014 Jul;38(7):936 -43. 
44. Robinson TN. Reducing children's television viewing to prevent obesity: a randomized controlled 
trial. JAMA. 1999 Oct 27;282(16):1561 -7. 
45. DeMattia L, Lemont L, Meurer L. Do interventions to limit s edentary behaviours change 
behaviour and reduce childhood obesity? A critical review of the literature. Obes Rev. 2007 Jan;8(1):69 -
81. 
46. Ng SW, Popkin BM. Time use and physical activity: a shift away from movement across the 
globe. Obes Rev. 2012 Aug;13( 8):659 -80. 
47. Healy GN, Dunstan DW, Salmon J, Cerin E, Shaw JE, Zimmet PZ, et al. Breaks in sedentary time: 
beneficial associations with metabolic risk. Diabetes Care. 2008 Apr;31(4):661 -6. 
48. Dunstan DW, Kingwell BA, Larsen R, Healy GN, Cerin E, Hamilto n MT, et al. Breaking up 
prolonged sitting reduces postprandial glucose and insulin responses. Diabetes Care. 2012 
May;35(5):976 -83. 
49. Mahar MT, Murphy SK, Rowe DA, Golden J, Shields AT, Raedeke TD. Effects of a classroom -
based program on physical activi ty and on -task behavior. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2006 Dec;38(12):2086 -
94. 
50. Chinapaw MJ, Proper KI, Brug J, van Mechelen W, Singh AS. Relationship between young 
peoples' sedentary behaviour and biomedical health indicators: a systematic review of prospecti ve 
studies. Obes Rev. 2011 Jul;12(7):e621 -32. 
51. Carson V, Janssen I. Volume, patterns, and types of sedentary behavior and cardio -metabolic 
health in children and adolescents: a cross -sectional study. BMC Public Health. 2011 May 04;11:274.  
52. Hamilton M T, Hamilton DG, Zderic TW. Role of low energy expenditure and sitting in obesity, 
metabolic syndrome, type 2 diabetes, and cardiovascular disease. Diabetes. 2007 Nov;56(11):2655 -67. 
53. Hamilton MT, Hamilton DG, Zderic TW. Exercise physiology versus inacti vity physiology: an 
essential concept for understanding lipoprotein lipase regulation. Exerc Sport Sci Rev. 2004 
Oct;32(4):161 -6. 
67 
 54. Peddie MC, Rehrer NJ, Perry TL. Physical activity and postprandial lipidemia: are energy 
expenditure and lipoprotein lipas e activity the real modulators of the positive effect? Prog Lipid Res. 
2012 Jan;51(1):11 -22. 
55. Zilversmit DB. Atherogenesis: a postprandial phenomenon. Circulation. 1979 Sep;60(3):473 -85. 
56. Hamburg NM, McMackin CJ, Huang AL, Shenouda SM, Widlansky ME, Schulz E, et al. Physical 
inactivity rapidly induces insulin resistance and microvascular dysfunction in healthy volunteers. 
Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2007 Dec;27(12):2650 -6. 
57. Gupta D, Krueger CB, Lastra G. Over -nutrition, obesity and insulin resis tance in the development 
of beta -cell dysfunction. Curr Diabetes Rev. 2012 Mar;8(2):76 -83. 
58. Davis JN, Ventura EE, Weigensberg MJ, Ball GD, Cruz ML, Shaibi GQ, et al. The relation of sugar 
intake to beta cell function in overweight Latino children. Am J Clin Nutr. 2005 Nov;82(5):1004 -10. 
59. Charansonney OL, Despres JP. Disease prevention --should we target obesity or sedentary 
lifestyle? Nat Rev Cardiol. 2010 Aug;7(8):468 -72. 
60. Maffeis C. Aetiology of overweight and obesity in children and adolescents. Eur J Pediatr. 2000 
Sep;159 Suppl 1:S35 -44. 
61. Chastin SF, Egerton T, Leask C, Stamatakis E. Meta -analysis of the relationship between breaks in 
sedentary behavior and cardiometabolic health. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2015 Sep;23(9):1800 -10. 
62. Pulsford R M, Blackwell J, Hillsdon M, Kos K. Intermittent walking, but not standing, improves 
postprandial insulin and glucose relative to sustained sitting: A randomised cross -over study in inactive 
middle -aged men. J Sci Med Sport. 2017 Mar;20(3):278 -83. 
63. Peddi e MC, Bone JL, Rehrer NJ, Skeaff CM, Gray AR, Perry TL. Breaking prolonged sitting reduces 
postprandial glycemia in healthy, normal -weight adults: a randomized crossover trial. Am J Clin Nutr. 
2013 Aug;98(2):358 -66. 
64. Saunders TJ, Tremblay MS, Mathieu ME, Henderson M, O'Loughlin J, Tremblay A, et al. 
Associations of sedentary behavior, sedentary bouts and breaks in sedentary time with cardiometabolic 
risk in children with a family history of obesity. PLoS One. 2013;8(11):e79143.  
65. Belcher BR, Berrigan D, Papachristopoulou A, Brady SM, Bernstein SB, Brychta RJ, et al. Effects of 
Interrupting Children's Sedentary Behaviors With Activity on Metabolic Function: A Randomized Trial. J 
Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2015 Oct;100(10):3735 -43. 
66. Blankenship J M, Granados K, Braun B. Effects of subtracting sitting versus adding exercise on 
glycemic control and variability in sedentary office workers. Appl Physiol Nutr Metab. 2014 
Nov;39(11):1286 -93. 
67. Little JP, Jung ME, Wright AE, Wright W, Manders RJ. Effect s of high -intensity interval exercise 
versus continuous moderate -intensity exercise on postprandial glycemic control assessed by continuous 
glucose monitoring in obese adults. Appl Physiol Nutr Metab. 2014 Jul;39(7):835 -41. 
68. Mikus CR, Oberlin DJ, Libla JL, Taylor AM, Booth FW, Thyfault JP. Lowering physical activity 
impairs glycemic control in healthy volunteers. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2012 Feb;44(2):225 -31. 
69. Baghurst PA. Calculating the mean amplitude of glycemic excursion from continuous glucos e 
monitoring data: an automated algorithm. Diabetes Technol Ther. 2011 Mar;13(3):296 -302.  
70. Bauer LB, Reynolds LJ, Douglas SM, Kearney ML, Hoertel HA, Shafer RS, et al. A pilot study 
examining the effects of consuming a high -protein vs normal -protein bre akfast on free -living glycemic 
control in overweight/obese 'breakfast skipping' adolescents. Int J Obes (Lond). 2015 Sep;39(9):1421 -4. 
71. Dasari PS, Gandomani BS, Teague AM, Pitale A, Otto M, Short KR. Glycemic Variability Is 
Associated with Markers of Va scular Stress in Adolescents. J Pediatr. 2016 May;172:47 -55 e2.  
72. Tomporowski PD. Methodological Issues: Research Approaches, Research Design, and Task 
Selection.  Exercise and Cognitive Function: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd; 2009. p. 91 -113.  
73. Diamond A. T he early development of executive functions. Lifespan cognition: Mechanisms of 
change. 2006:70 -95. 
68 
 74. Zelazo PD, Muller U, Frye D, Marcovitch S, Argitis G, Boseovski J, et al. The development of 
executive function in early childhood. Monogr Soc Res Child Dev. 2003;68(3):vii -137.  
75. De Luca CR, Wood SJ, Anderson V, Buchanan JA, Proffitt TM, Mahony K, et al. Normative data 
from the CANTAB. I: development of executive function over the lifespan. J Clin Exp Neuropsychol. 2003 
Apr;25(2):242 -54. 
76. Reynolds CR , Horton AM. Assessing Executive Functions: A Life -Span Perspective. Psychol 
Schools. 2008 Nov;45(9):875 -92. 
77. Welsh MC, Pennington BF, Groisser DB. A Normative Developmental -Study of Executive 
Function - a Window on Prefrontal Function in Children. Dev Neuropsychol. 1991;7(2):131 -49. 
78. Anderson P. Assessment and development of executive function (EF) during childhood. Child 
Neuropsychol. 2002 Jun;8(2):71 -82. 
79. Davis CL, Lambourne K. Exercise and cognition in children. In: McMorris T, Tomporowski PD, 
Audiffren M, editors. Exercise and cognitive function. West Sussex, UK: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.; 2009. p. 
249-67. 
80. Luria AR. Higher Cortical Functions in Man. 2nd ed. New York: Basic Books; 1980.  
81. Klenberg L, Korkman M, Lahti -Nuuttila P. Differential  development of attention and executive 
functions in 3 - to 12 -year -old Finnish children. Dev Neuropsychol. 2001;20(1):407 -28. 
82. Rebok GW, Smith CB, Pascualvaca DM, Mirsky AF, Anthony BJ, Kellam SG. Developmental 
changes in attentional performance in urba n children from eight to thirteen years. Child 
Neuropsychology. 1997 Apr;3(1):28 -46. 
83. Martin A, Razza RA, Brooks -Gunn J. Sustained attention at age 5 predicts attention -related 
problems at age 9. Int J Behav Dev. 2012 Nov;36(6):413 -9. 
84. Grissom J. Phy sical fitness and academic achievement. J Exerc Physiol. 2005;8:11 -25. 
85. Li Y, Dai Q, Jackson JC, Zhang J. Overweight Is Associated With Decreased Cognitive Functioning 
Among School -age Children and Adolescents. Obesity. 2008;16(8):1809 -15. 
86. Graziano PA, Calkins SD, Keane SP. Toddler self -regulation skills predict risk for pediatric obesity. 
Int J Obes (Lond). 2010 Apr;34(4):633 -41. 
87. Anzman SL, Birch LL. Low inhibitory control and restrictive feeding practices predict weight 
outcomes. J Pediatr. 200 9 Nov;155(5):651 -6. 
88. Wentz E, Bjork A, Dahlgren J. Neurodevelopmental disorders are highly over -represented in 
children with obesity: A cross -sectional study. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2017 Jan;25(1):178 -84. 
89. Nederkoorn C, Braet C, Van Eijs Y, Tanghe A, Jansen A. Why obese children cannot resist food: 
the role of impulsivity. Eat Behav. 2006 Nov;7(4):315 -22. 
90. Braet C, Claus L, Verbeken S, Van Vlierberghe L. Impulsivity in overweight children. Eur Child 
Adolesc Psychiatry. 2007 Dec;16(8):473 -83. 
91. Riggs NR, Huh J, Chou CP, Spruijt -Metz D, Pentz MA. Executive function and latent classes of 
childhood obesity risk. J Behav Med. 2012 Dec;35(6):642 -50. 
92. Sibley BA, Etnier JL. The relationship between physical activity and cognition in children: A meta -
analysis. Pediatric exercise science. 2003;15(3):243 -56. 
93. Zoeller RF. Exercise and Cognitive Function: Can Working Out Train the Brain, Too? American 
Journal of Lifestyle Medicine. 2010 September/October 2010;4(5):397 -409.  
94. Caterino MC, Polak ED. Eff ects of two types of activity on the performance of second -, third -, 
and fourth -grade students on a test of concentration. Percept Mot Skills. 1999 Aug;89(1):245 -8. 
95. Tomporowski PD, Lambourne K, Okumura MS. Physical activity interventions and children's  
mental function: an introduction and overview. Prev Med. 2011 Jun;52 Suppl 1:S3 -9. 
96. Tomporowski PD, Davis CL, Miller PH, Naglieri JA. Exercise and Children's Intelligence, Cognition, 
and Academic Achievement. Educ Psychol Rev. 2008 Jun 01;20(2):111 -31. 
69 
 97. Hillman CH, Erickson KI, Kramer AF. Be smart, exercise your heart: exercise effects on brain and 
cognition. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2008 Jan;9(1):58 -65. 
98. Colcombe SJ, Kramer AF, Erickson KI, Scalf P, McAuley E, Cohen NJ, et al. Cardiovasc ular fitness, 
cortical plasticity, and aging. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Mar 02;101(9):3316 -21. 
99. Nelson C. The neurobiological bases of early intervention. In: Shonkoff J, Meisels S, editors. 
Handbook of early childhood intervention. Cambridge: Camb ridge University Press; 2000. p. 204 -27. 
100.  Trudeau F, Shephard RJ. Physical education, school physical activity, school sports and academic 
performance. Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act. 2008 Feb 25;5:10.  
101.  Hillman CH, Kamijo K, Scudder M. A review of chron ic and acute physical activity participation on 
neuroelectric measures of brain health and cognition during childhood. Prev Med. 2011 Jun;52 Suppl 
1:S21 -8. 
102.  Audiffren M. Acute Exercise and Psychological Functions: A Cognitive -Energetic Approach.  
Exerc ise and Cognitive Function: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd; 2009. p. 1 -39. 
103.  Mahar MT. Impact of short bouts of physical activity on attention -to-task in elementary school 
children. Prev Med. 2011 Jun;52 Suppl 1:S60 -4. 
104.  Gabbard C, Barton J. Effects of Physi cal-Activity on Mathematical Computation among Young -
Children. J Psychol. 1979;103(2):287 -8. 
105.  Hillman CH, Pontifex MB, Raine LB, Castelli DM, Hall EE, Kramer AF. The effect of acute treadmill 
walking on cognitive control and academic achievement in pre adolescent children. Neuroscience. 2009 
Mar 31;159(3):1044 -54. 
106.  Fedewa AL, Ahn S. The effects of physical activity and physical fitness on children's achievement 
and cognitive outcomes: a meta -analysis. Res Q Exerc Sport. 2011 Sep;82(3):521 -35. 
107.  Donnelly JE, Lambourne K. Classroom -based physical activity, cognition, and academic 
achievement. Prev Med. 2011 Jun;52 Suppl 1:S36 -42. 
108.  Davis CL, Tomporowski PD, McDowell JE, Austin BP, Miller PH, Yanasak NE, et al. Exercise 
improves executive function and achievement and alters brain activation in overweight children: a 
randomized, controlled trial. Health Psychol. 2011 Jan;30(1):91 -8. 
109.  Singh A, Uijtdewilligen L, Twisk JW, van Mechelen W, Chinapaw MJ. Physical activity and 
performance at school: a s ystematic review of the literature including a methodological quality 
assessment. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2012 Jan;166(1):49 -55. 
110.  Tremblay MS, LeBlanc AG, Kho ME, Saunders TJ, Larouche R, Colley RC, et al. Systematic review 
of sedentary behaviour and  health indicators in school -aged children and youth. Int J Behav Nutr Phys 
Act. 2011;8:98.  
111.  Davis CL, Tomporowski PD, McDowell JE, Austin BP, Miller PH, Yanasak NE, et al. Exercise 
improves executive function and achievement and alters brain activatio n in overweight children: a 
randomized, controlled trial. Health Psychology. 2011 Jan;30(1):91 -8. 
112.  Lillard AS, Peterson J. The immediate impact of different types of television on young children's 
executive function. Pediatrics. 2011 Oct;128(4):644 -9. 
113.  Calfas KJ, Taylor WC. Effects of physical activity on psychological variables in adolescents. 
Pediatric exercise science. 1994;6(4):406 -23. 
114.  Norris R, Carroll D, Cochrane R. The effects of physical activity and exercise training on 
psychological stress and well -being in an adolescent population. J Psychosom Res. 1992 Jan;36(1):55 -65. 
115.  Dishman RK. Brain monoamines, exercise, and behavioral stress: animal models. Med Sci Sports 
Exerc. 1997 Jan;29(1):63 -74. 
116.  Biddle SJH. Emoti on, mood and physical activity. In: Biddle SJH, Fox KR, Boutcher SH, editors. 
Physical activity and psychological well -being. London: Routledge; 2000. p. 63 -87. 
117.  Lennox SS, Bedell JR, Stone AA. The effect of exercise on normal mood. Journal of 
Psychoso matic Research. 1990;34(6):629 -36. 
70 
 118.  Williamson D, Dewey A, Steinberg H. Mood change through physical exercise in nine -to ten -
year -old children. Perceptual and Motor Skills. 2001;93(1):311 -6. 
119.  Strong WB, Malina RM, Blimkie CJ, Daniels SR, Dishman RK , Gutin B, et al. Evidence based 
physical activity for school -age youth. J Pediatr. 2005 Jun;146(6):732 -7. 
120.  Sund AM, Larsson B, Wichstrom L. Role of physical and sedentary activities in the development 
of depressive symptoms in early adolescence. Soc P sychiatry Psychiatr Epidemiol. 2011 May;46(5):431 -
41. 
121.  Biddle SJ, Asare M. Physical activity and mental health in children and adolescents: a review of 
reviews. Br J Sports Med. 2011 Sep;45(11):886 -95. 
122.  Brodersen NH, Steptoe A, Williamson S, Wardle  J. Sociodemographic, developmental, 
environmental, and psychological correlates of physical activity and sedentary behavior at age 11 to 12. 
Ann Behav Med. 2005 Feb;29(1):2 -11. 
123.  Balantekin KN, Roemmich JN. Children's coping after psychological stress.  Choices among food, 
physical activity, and television. Appetite. 2012 Oct;59(2):298 -304.  
124.  Ventura EE, Davis JN, Alexander KE, Shaibi GQ, Lee W, Byrd -Williams CE, et al. Dietary intake and 
the metabolic syndrome in overweight Latino children. J Am Diet Assoc. 2008 Aug;108(8):1355 -9. 
125.  Pan Y, Pratt CA. Metabolic syndrome and its association with diet and physical activity in US 
adolescents. J Am Diet Assoc. 2008 Feb;108(2):276 -86; discussion 86.  
126.  Jago R, Fox KR, Page AS, Brockman R, Thompson J L. Parent and child physical activity and 
sedentary time: do active parents foster active children? BMC Public Health. 2010 Apr 15;10:194.  
127.  Fulton JE, Dai S, Steffen LM, Grunbaum JA, Shah SM, Labarthe DR. Physical activity, energy 
intake, sedentary beh avior, and adiposity in youth. Am J Prev Med. 2009 Jul;37(1 Suppl):S40 -9. 
128.  Jago R, Baranowski T, Yoo S, Cullen KW, Zakeri I, Watson K, et al. Relationship between physical 
activity and diet among African -American girls. Obes Res. 2004 Sep;12 Suppl:55S -63S.  
129.  Muraven M. Calm energy: How people regulate mood with food and exercise. Contemp Psychol. 
2003 Dec;48(6):742 -4. 
130.  Ammons CH, Ammons B, Ammons RB. The Biopsychology of Mood and Arousal - Thayer,Re. 
Psychol Rep. 1989 Oct;65(2):703 -. 
131.  Pearson  N, Biddle SJH. Sedentary Behavior and Dietary Intake in Children, Adolescents, and 
Adults A Systematic Review. American Journal of Preventive Medicine. 2011 Aug;41(2):178 -88. 
132.  Al-Hazzaa HM, Abahussain NA, Al -Sobayel HI, Qahwaji DM, Musaiger AO. Physic al activity, 
sedentary behaviors and dietary habits among Saudi adolescents relative to age, gender and region. Int J 
Behav Nutr Phys Act. 2011 Dec 21;8:140.  
133.  Mushtaq MU, Gull S, Mushtaq K, Shahid U, Shad MA, Akram J. Dietary behaviors, physical 
activi ty and sedentary lifestyle associated with overweight and obesity, and their socio -demographic 
correlates, among Pakistani primary school children. Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act. 2011 Nov 25;8:130.  
134.  Popadic Gacesa J, Schick F, Machann J, Grujic N. Intramyo cellular lipids and their dynamics 
assessed by 1 H magnetic resonance spectroscopy. Clin Physiol Funct Imaging. 2016 Feb 11.  
135.  Roden M. Future of muscle research in diabetes: a look into the crystal ball. Diabetologia. 2015 
Aug;58(8):1693 -8. 
136.  Jacob S, Machann J, Rett K, Brechtel K, Volk A, Renn W, et al. Association of increased 
intramyocellular lipid content with insulin resistance in lean nondiabetic offspring of type 2 diabetic 
subjects. Diabetes. 1999 May;48(5):1113 -9. 
137.  Krssak M, Falk Peterse n K, Dresner A, DiPietro L, Vogel SM, Rothman DL, et al. Intramyocellular 
lipid concentrations are correlated with insulin sensitivity in humans: a 1H NMR spectroscopy study. 
Diabetologia. 1999 Jan;42(1):113 -6. 
71 
 138.  Haus JM, Solomon TP, Lu L, Jesberger JA,  Barkoukis H, Flask CA, et al. Intramyocellular lipid 
content and insulin sensitivity are increased following a short -term low -glycemic index diet and exercise 
intervention. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2011 Sep;301(3):E511 -6. 
139.  Schrauwen -Hinderling V B, Schrauwen P, Hesselink MK, van Engelshoven JM, Nicolay K, Saris WH, 
et al. The increase in intramyocellular lipid content is a very early response to training. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab. 2003 Apr;88(4):1610 -6. 
140.  Schrauwen -Hinderling VB, Hesselink MK, S chrauwen P, Kooi ME. Intramyocellular lipid content 
in human skeletal muscle. Obesity. 2006 Mar;14(3):357 -67. 
141.  Muniyappa R, Noureldin R, Ouwerkerk R, Liu EY, Madan R, Abel BS, et al. Myocardial Fat 
Accumulation Is Independent of Measures of Insulin Sen sitivity. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2015 
Aug;100(8):3060 -8. 
142.  Bucher J, Krusi M, Zueger T, Ith M, Stettler C, Diem P, et al. The effect of a single 2 h bout of 
aerobic exercise on ectopic lipids in skeletal muscle, liver and the myocardium. Diabetologia.  2014 
May;57(5):1001 -5. 
143.  Ith M, Huber PM, Egger A, Schmid JP, Kreis R, Christ E, et al. Standardized protocol for a 
depletion of intramyocellular lipids (IMCL). NMR Biomed. 2010 Jun;23(5):532 -8. 
144.  Kuczmarski RJ, Ogden CL, Grummer -Strawn LM, Flegal K M, Guo SS, Wei R, et al. CDC growth 
charts: United States. Adv Data. 2000;314(314):1 -27. 
145.  Hollingshead AB. Hollingshead two factor index of social position (1957). In: Miller DC, editor. 
Handbook of research design and social measurement. 5th edition e d. Newbury Park, CA: Sage 
Publications; 1991. p. 351 -9. 
146.  Maruff P, Thomas E, Cysique L, Brew B, Collie A, Snyder P, et al. Validity of the CogState brief 
battery: relationship to standardized tests and sensitivity to cognitive impairment in mild trauma tic 
brain injury, schizophrenia, and AIDS dementia complex. Arch Clin Neuropsychol. 2009 Mar;24(2):165 -
78. 
147.  Mollica CM, Maruff P, Collie A, Vance A. Repeated assessment of cognition in children and the 
measurement of performance change. Child Neuropsyc hol. 2005 Jun;11(3):303 -10. 
148.  Falleti MG, Maruff P, Collie A, Darby DG. Practice effects associated with the repeated 
assessment of cognitive function using the CogState battery at 10 -minute, one week and one month 
test-retest intervals. J Clin Exp Neur opsychol. 2006 Oct;28(7):1095 -112.  
149.  Bangirana P, Seggane M, Allebeck P, Giordani B, John CC, Opoka OR, et al. A preliminary 
examination of the construct validity of the KABC -II in Ugandan children with a history of cerebral 
malaria. Afr Health Sci. 200 9 Sep;9(3):186 -92. 
150.  Dingwall KM, Cairney S. Detecting psychological symptoms related to substance use among 
Indigenous Australians. Drug Alcohol Rev. 2011 Jan;30(1):33 -9. 
151.  Dingwall KM, Cairney S. Psychological and cognitive assessment of Indigenous  Australians. Aust 
N Z J Psychiatry. 2010 Jan;44(1):20 -30. 
152.  Louey AG, Cromer JA, Schembri AJ, Darby DG, Maruff P, Makdissi M, et al. Detecting cognitive 
impairment after concussion: sensitivity of change from baseline and normative data methods using the 
CogSport/Axon cognitive test battery. Arch Clin Neuropsychol. 2014 Aug;29(5):432 -41. 
153.  Laurent J CS, Joiner T, Rudolf K, Potter K, Lambert S. A measure of positive and negative affect 
for children: scale development and preliminary validation.  Psychological Assessment. 1999;I:326 -38. 
154.  Hughes AA, Kendall PC. Psychometric properties of the Positive and Negative Affect Scale for 
Children (PANAS -C) in children with anxiety disorders. Child psychiatry and human development. 2009 
Sep;40(3):343 -52. 
155.  Spielberger CD. Manual for State -Trait Anxiety Inventory for Children. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting 
Psychologists Press; 1973.  
72 
 156.  Craig CL, Marshall AL, Sjostrom M, Bauman AE, Booth ML, Ainsworth BE, et al. International 
physical activity questionnai re: 12 -country reliability and validity. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2003 
Aug;35(8):1381 -95. 
157.  Washington RL, Bricker JT, Alpert BS, Daniels SR, Deckelbaum RJ, Fisher EA, et al. Guidelines for 
exercise testing in the pediatric age group. From the Committee on  Atherosclerosis and Hypertension in 
Children, Council on Cardiovascular Disease in the Young, the American Heart Association. Circulation. 
1994;90(4):2166 -79. 
158.  Beaver WL, Wasserman K, Whipp BJ. A new method for detecting anaerobic threshold by gas 
exchange. J Appl Physiol. 1986;60(6):2020 -7. 
159.  Holt SH, Brand -Miller JC, Stitt PA. The effects of equal -energy portions of different breads on 
blood glucose levels, feelings of fullness and subsequent food intake. J Am Diet Assoc. 2001 
Jul;101(7):767 -73. 
160.  Flint A, Raben A, Blundell JE, Astrup A. Reproducibility, power and validity of visual analogue 
scales in assessment of appetite sensations in single test meal studies. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord. 
2000 Jan;24(1):38 -48. 
161.  Parker BA, Sturm K, MacI ntosh CG, Feinle C, Horowitz M, Chapman IM. Relation between food 
intake and visual analogue scale ratings of appetite and other sensations in healthy older and young 
subjects. Eur J Clin Nutr. 2004 Feb;58(2):212 -8. 
162.  Stubbs J, Ferres S, Horgan G. Energ y density of foods: effects on energy intake. Crit Rev Food Sci 
Nutr. 2000 Nov;40(6):481 -515.  
163.  Merrill EP, Kramer FM, Cardello A, Schutz H. A comparison of satiety measures. Appetite. 2002 
Oct;39(2):181 -3. 
164.  Deiss D, Bolinder J, Riveline JP, Batteli no T, Bosi E, Tubiana -Rufi N, et al. Improved glycemic 
control in poorly controlled patients with type 1 diabetes using real -time continuous glucose monitoring. 
Diabetes Care. 2006 Dec;29(12):2730 -2. 
165.  Hayashi Y, Nagasaka S, Takahashi N, Kusaka I, Ishib ashi S, Numao S, et al. A single bout of 
exercise at higher intensity enhances glucose effectiveness in sedentary men. The Journal of clinical 
endocrinology and metabolism. 2005 Jul;90(7):4035 -40. 
166.  Brun J, Guintrand -Hugret R, Boegner C, Bouix O, Orsett i A. Influence of short -term submaximal 
exercise on parameters of glucose assimilation analyzed with the minimal model. Metabolism: Clinical 
and Experimental. 1995;44(7):833 -40. 
167.  Di Flaviani A, Picconi F, Di Stefano P, Giordani I, Malandrucco I, Maggio  P, et al. Impact of 
glycemic and blood pressure variability on surrogate measures of cardiovascular outcomes in type 2 
diabetic patients. Diabetes Care. 2011 Jul;34(7):1605 -9. 
168.  Ventura EE, Lane CJ, Weigensberg MJ, Toledo -Corral CM, Davis JN, Goran MI.  Persistence of the 
metabolic syndrome over 3 annual visits in overweight Hispanic children: association with progressive 
risk for type 2 diabetes. J Pediatr. 2009 Oct;155(4):535 -41. 
169.  Qin L, Knol MJ, Corpeleijn E, Stolk RP. Does physical activity modif y the risk of obesity for type 2 
diabetes: a review of epidemiological data. Eur J Epidemiol. 2010;25(1):5 -12. 
170.  Maffeis C, Tato L. Long -term effects of childhood obesity on morbidity and mortality. Horm Res. 
2001;55 Suppl 1:42 -5. 
 