 
  
Study Protocol and Analysis Plan  
A Novel Worksite Smoking 
Cessation Intervention for 
Hispanic Construction Workers  
Date:  August 8, 2018  
NCT Number :  NCT0287337 7 
STUDY PROTOCOL AND ANALYSIS PLAN  
 Page 1 of 15  Revised : 8/8/18  1) Protocol Title  
A Novel Worksite Smoking Cessation Intervention for Hispanic Construction 
Workers  
 
2) Objectives * 
The objective of this study is to develop a brief, culturally sensitive face- to-face 
smoking cessation intervention for Hispanic construction workers  and c onduct 
a pilot two -arm,  cluster -randomized clinical trial (RCT) to test the developed 
intervention for acceptability and potential efficacy - A two -arm, cluster -
randomized controlled trial will be conducted with at least 14 construction sites (dependent on how many smokers can be recruited from each site), selected from one Construction Company in south Florida. Cluster randomization is used with construction site chosen as the unit of allocation because it is most practical in this setting and minimizes the risk of spillover effects from the intervention to the control group. Computer-generated random selection will be used to randomiz e 
construction sites. Then, construction sites will be randomly assigned to the intervention (enhanced care) or the control group (usual care), and study participants working in these sites will receive treatment accordingly.  In 
conjunction with the site safety manger , we w ill recruit at least 126 adult Hispanic 
construction workers who smoke ≥5 cigarettes/day.  Participants in the enhanced 
care will receive one culturally ada pted brief face -to-face behavioral counseling 
session developed in phase 1 and delivered during breaks, two brief follow-up phone counseling calls, fax referral to the Florida quitline (QL), and provision of up to 8 weeks of free NRT . Participants in the  usual  care will receive fax referral to the 
Florida QL, and provision of up to 8 weeks of free NRT. Main  outcomes  include: 1) 
estimating yield (number of workers available divided by number eligible; and number eligible divided by number randomized), 2) facilitators and barriers to delivering the intervention in the proposed setting, 3) willingness of participants to be randomized and acceptability of the intervention, 4) follow-up rates, response rates to questionnaires, adherence/compliance rates, and the time needed to collect and analyze data, 5) QL enrollment rates, and 6) exploring the willingness of the target population in involving in the research design and conduct. Potential efficacy  
outcomes include the difference in prolonged abstinence, and point- prevalence 
abstinence rates at 6 -month follow up confirmed by saliva cotinine < 15ng/ml .  
 
This study will be the first to develop and evaluate a novel, low cost recruitment and intervention strategy in a hard- to-reach and underserved population of Hispanic 
male construction workers. Our data will inform a larger study of the effectiveness of cessation approaches that have great potential for translation and dissemination to minority construction workers throughout the US.  
3) Background * 
According to the US Surgeon General’s report, cigarette smoking causes more death and disability among American workers than their workplace environment (e.g., workplace injuries). Construction workers have the highest rate of smoking among all occupations, and are frequently exposed to a wide range of workplace 
STUDY PROTOCOL AND ANALYSIS PLAN  
 Page 2 of 15  Revised : 8/8/18  hazards (e.g. toxins), which interact with smoking to increase their health risks. 
Minority construction workers, in particular, have higher smoking and lower cessation rates compared to other groups, and they generally show lower access and participation in cessation and health promotion services. The number of Hispanic workers employed in the construction industry in the US has tripled in the past decade to 2.6 million (23% of all construction workers). Given that construction trades remain overwhelmingly male dominated, male Hispanic workers constitute a large and increasing group in need for smoking cessation and health promotion.  High mobility and turnover rates among construction workers are major challenges to delivering smoking cessation interventions.  An additional challenge is that cessation interventions have yet to be tailored culturally or to the often difficult work/life circumstances of minority construction workers, although culturally sensitive smoking cessation interventions are more effective in minority groups. Therefore, novel methods are needed to reach and  intervene with this at- risk 
population. A novel approach that was recently piloted by our team, is to partner with the lunch truck that routinely visits construction sites to deliver brief, effective interventions. Further development and evaluation of this promising approach is warranted, and should meaningfully involve the target population in these efforts to optimize its cultural relevancy and potential for success and dissemination.   Our approach is guided by recent developments in how to address smoking cessation in underserved smokers,  defined as: 1) having high smoking rate and 
disproportionate tobacco- related health burden, 2) lacking access to effective 
treatment and/or barriers to treatment, and 3) being underrepresented in cessation clinical tr ials. This framework stresses the need for innovative approaches for 
underserved smokers  based on cultural adaptation of evidence- based treatments. 
Guided by this framework, we have assembled a team with years of experience in smoking cessation development and work with minority construction workers in order to develop and pilot test a culturally sensitive smoking cessation intervention for Hispanic construction workers. 
 
4) Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria*  
• Inclusion criteria:  1) Hispanic male, 2) 18 years  and older, 3) current 
smoker, 4) have access to a telephone, 5) have no plans to move in the next six months, 6) interested in making a serious quit attempt in the next 30 days, and 7) have no contraindication to NRT. 
• Exclusion criteria: 1) Inability to u nderstand consent procedures, 2) 
non-Hispanic, 3) female, 4) under 18 years of age , 5) non-smoker, 6) 
not interested in making a serious quit attempt in the next 30 days, 7) no access to a telephone, and 8) have a contraindication to NRT. 
 
STUDY PROTOCOL AND ANALYSIS PLAN  
 Page 3 of 15  Revised : 8/8/18  5) Procedures Involved* 
 
Design - This study is a two -arm cluster RCT designed to evaluate the main outcomes 
and potential efficacy of the brief behavioral intervention developed in Phase 1 plus 
NRT, compared to referral to the State Quitline (QL). At least 14 construction sites will be randomly assigned into two groups: Enhanced Care (treatment group), and Usual  Care (control group). Participants in the “Enhanced Care” intervention arm will 
receive a single face -to-face behavioral counseling session delivered at the lunch 
truck, two brief follow- up phone counseling calls, fax referral to the Florida tobacco 
quitline (QL), and provision of up to 8 weeks of free NRT ( up to 6 weeks provided by 
the study and 2 weeks provided by the QL).
 The comparison group, called “ Usual  
Care,” will receive fax referral to the Florida QL  and provision of up to 8 weeks of 
free NRT ( up to 6 weeks provided by the study and 2 weeks provided by the QL). 
Participants in both groups will receive two follow -up phone assessments at 3-, and 6-
months of enrolment. Information about number and time of total contact in both groups will be collected at 3 - and 6-month follow-ups. 
 
Recruitment, Study Participants, and Procedures- Our target sample size is up to 150 Hispanic smokers. We will coordinate with the safety managers of the participating construction sites to identify smokers who are interested in quitting smoking and arrange a visit to meet these workers. On day 1, two bil ingual PH graduate assistants 
will approach these workers during their break to explain the study, complete the screening, and then obtain the consent form from those who are eligible. To participate in the study participant should be Hispanic male construction workers  on 
site who are ≥ 18 year old and have smoked ≥ 5 cigarettes/day in the past year. 
Additionally, potential participants need to be available on site in the following two days,  have access to telephone, have no plans to move in the next six months, and be 
interested in making a serious quit atte mpt in the next 30 days,
 and have no 
contraindication to NRT . Exhaled carbon monoxide levels and saliva cotinine will be 
tested among eligible participants to verify the self -reported smoking status. 
Individuals who decline to participate or who are ineligible (e.g., non-Hispanics, 
women) will be referred to the QL and provided with brochures that include information about the QL contact number and services. They will also be given a flyer about the UM Quitville smoking cessation study for whi ch they may be eligible  
(only for English speakers). Those who are potentially eligible and interested in participating in the study will sign a consent form , then undergo a baseline screening 
to confirm eligibility and to collect information about: demogr aphics, job 
characteristics, acculturation,
41 smoking history, nicotine dependence,42 stages of 
change,43 quit ladder,44 smoking self- efficacy,45 depression,46 social support,47 
exposure to secondhand smoke, and quality of life. All questionnaires, informed consent, and educational materials will be available in English and Spanish and will be administrated by the bilingual graduate assistants. After completing the baseline assessment, a second visit in the following day will be scheduled to provide the intervention. If time does not permit to complete  the entire baseline assessment, the 
exhaled carbon monoxide and saliva cotinine test,  demographics and smoking 
behavior questions will be administered on- site and the remainder will be given to the 
STUDY PROTOCOL AND ANALYSIS PLAN  
 Page 4 of 15  Revised : 8/8/18  participant to be completed. Participants will receive a text -message reminder about 
the second visit at the evening. If time permits on the first day of recruitment to 
deliver the intervention, all aspects will be completed on that day rather than on day 
2. Dr. Asfar, who has years of experience in training and supervising cessation trials,
37,38,48 will be responsible for the training of PH graduate students in recruitment 
and conduct of the cessation trial such as 1) human subjects protection, 2) consequences of smoking, 3) motivational strategies, 4) pharmacotherapies used in smoking cessation, and 5) the study’s protocol. Photographs and/or video may be taken during the sessions to be used for progress reports and presentations.  Participants in the Usual  Care will receive up to six week supply of NRT, brochures 
about the QL services, and will be referred to the QL using the “fax referral form”. Participants will be informed that the QL is free, and the QL counselor will work with them to devise a specific plan to quit smoking and will arrange the delivery of free 2 -
week NRT for their quit attempt. Participants will have access to free NRT for a total of eight weeks (2 -week supply from the QL, and 6-week supply from the study). 
 Participants in the Enhanced Care  will receive in ad dition to the above, a brief one 
face-to-face behavioral counseling session delivered at the “lunch truck”, and two 
brief follow -up phone calls. The face- to-face session will be an evidence- based 
intervention that is culturally adapted based on focus groups,
17 and expected to 
feature three key processes: 1) preparing to quit, 2) the quitting process, and 3) relapse prevention and proper use of NRT.
34 Additionally, participants will be given a 
“Patient Card” that summarizes “take home” messages for the most important points of each of the three phases. During the preparation- to-quit discussion, we will focus 
on reducing the number of cigarettes, stimulus control, and other quit preparation strategies (e.g., disposal of cigarettes before the quit date). We will also emphasize the importance of a quit date and discuss when a good quit date would be.
34 During 
the quitting discussion, we will emphasize proper use of NRT, reinforce the use of NRT, and what to expect during the first few days of being a nonsmoker and how to cope. Finally, during the relapse prevention discussion, we will discuss the 5A’s for preventing relapse (Avoid high temptation situations, Alter those situations you can’t avoid, use Alternatives, Anticipate high risk situations,  and become Active).
34 The 
first phone call will occur one day before the quit date to remind participants about their quit date and provide more support, and the second will occur two weeks after quit date to review progress and skills to prevent relapse 
 Nicotine Replacement Therapy (NRT) - Participants in both trial arms will receive a 
free supply of NRT to enhance their chances of quitting. Participants in the QL referral group will receive up to 8 (up to 6 weeks provided by the study and 2 weeks 
provided by the QL). Participants in the bri ef intervention group will receive a free up 
to 8 week s supply of NRT after enrollment (up to 6 weeks provided by the study and 
2 weeks provided by the QL- type will depend on participants’’ preference elicited at focus groups). Participants will be provided information on the side effects of NRT and will receive detailed instructions regarding proper use.
 In addition, potential 
participants will be screened for NRT contraindications. Individuals will be 
STUDY PROTOCOL AND ANALYSIS PLAN  
 Page 5 of 15  Revised : 8/8/18  disqualified from the study if they report a history of hypersensitivity to nicotine, 
recent (past month) myocardial infarction, or any history of serious arrhythmias or unstable angina pectoris, consistent with Clinical Practice Guidelines. In addition, individuals will not be eligible if they have a generalized chronic dermatological 
disorder (e.g, psoriasis), a contraindication for patch use, unless they are able to use nicotine gum.  If there are no contraindications, participants will be given their preferred form and will be provided information on the side effects and proper use. Concomitant smoking and NRT use, as well as use of additional prescription and/or OTC NRT or cessation drugs (e.g., bupropion) will be tested  at recruitment, and 3- 
and 6- month follow ups.  Follow-up and Retention-  Parti cipants in both arms will receive two follow -up phone 
calls at 3 and 6 months after enrollment to assess their smoking status. Those who report quitting smoking at 6 months will be visited at a mutually agreed -upon location 
to obtain a saliva sample to val idate their smoking cessation status using saliva 
cotinine< 15 ng/ml.
50,51 Saliva samples will be collected using NicAlertTM kits and 
analyzed by automated gas liquid chromatography using nitrogen-phosphorus detection and structural analogues of cotinine as internal standards.
52 To increase 
completion of the 6-month follow-ups, for those participants that we are unable to meet in person we will mail the NicAlert
TM kits with instructions on how to complete 
and mail back to us.   To maintain active participation for the entire length of the study, extensive retention measures will be taken. These include collecting detailed contact information for relatives/friends, who would know the participant's whereabouts, contacting participants with personalized letters/cards, sending out study- relevant information at 
3-month, and individual case management. Participants who complete al l portions of 
the intervention will be given a $50 incentive. T wenty  dollars will be provided after 
completing the first treatment session, and $30 at the 6-month follow-up assessment . 
 
Protocol for Retention  - After the participant received the intervention for their 
assigned group, the follow -up phone calls will vary in number. In the Enhanced 
care, the participant will receive 4 phone calls in total. The first will be the day 
before the quit date and the second will be 2 weeks after the quit date to provide 
them with additional support. The last two phone calls will be a 3 and 6 month 
follow -up phone call to review their status. The Usual care will only receive 2 
phone calls after their intervention. These phone calls will be placed 3 months and 6 months after their quit date to review their smoking status. If the 
participants fail to be contacted at any of their scheduled dates, we will proceed 
as follows:  
 Every participant will receive up to 10 phone calls to their preferred phone 
number. T hroughout these 10 calls, voicemails will be left to remind the 
participant that we are trying to get in contact with them. Within the 10 phone 
calls, 2 text messages will be sent. One text after 5 calls and the second text after the 10 phone calls. In t he text, we  will encourage participant to call us back to get 
STUDY PROTOCOL AND ANALYSIS PLAN  
 Page 6 of 15  Revised : 8/8/18  more support  regardless of their smoking status. After we have completed the 2 
text messages, the voicemails and the 10 phone calls, we will send a “thinking of 
you” letter to their house indicating that we are still interested in speaking to 
them to assess their progress and provide additional support at any step they 
may be in the process. We will stress that we are here to help them and to increase their chances of quitting smoking in the future. We will also remind them that they must keep in contact with us until the 6 month follow up to 
receive the additional $30. After 2 weeks of not hearing back from the date of the 
card being sent, we will begin to contact their references that were written down in the baseline survey.  
 
Sample Size : Major goals of this pilot study are to explore acceptability of our 
intervention. These data also will help us to estimate the intervention’s effect size to help determine sample size needs for a future full -scale RCT. We will follow the 
general rule of thumb and recruit at least 126 participants (63 per group) to estimate the parameters. We will use a two -group comparison of proportions at the two -tailed 
alpha level and  assume that the intra -cluster correlation will be low (0.01). This 
sample size will allow us to detect a 22% difference between the two groups (a moderate effect size of 0.46) at the two- tailed 0.05 alpha with 80%  power. Expecting 
20% attrition rate this will leave us with a sample of 51 subjects per group.  We will, however, include all randomized participants in assessment of endpoints.  We realize limitations of using pilot data to power subsequent studies, related to the inherent imprecision of estimates with small sample sizes. It is important to note, though, that our sample size is large enough to estimate the effect with a reasonably tight confidence interval, and we will not rely exclusively on this effect to estimate power, but will also make use of the extant literature.     
6) Data and Specimen Banking*  
The following self -reported measures  will be obtained specifically for research 
purposes.  These data will be stored in stored on a password- protected computer 
accessed only by approved study personnel.  
i. Demographic Data and Work Characteristics :  This will include:  Age, 
ethnicity, native borne, non native born, acculturation, income, education, health insurance status, and job activities. 
 
ii. Fagerstrom T est for Nicotine Dependence (FTND) :  All participants will 
be given the FTND to assess nicotine dependence.  This instrument has been widely tested and used in smoking studies.   
 
iii. Tobacco Use History:   This will include: age when the participant began 
smoking, number of years as a smoker, the number of cigarettes smoked per day, whether the participant had made a quit attempt in the last year, the number of past year quit attempts, and the number of last year successful quit attempts (defined as being quit for at least one month).  
STUDY PROTOCOL AND ANALYSIS PLAN  
 Page 7 of 15  Revised : 8/8/18   
iv. Depressive Symptomatology: will be assessed with the Center for 
Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale (CES-D; Radloff, 1977; Thomas 
et al., 2001).    
 
v. Additional measures such as: social support, smoking self- efficacy, 
nicotine dependence FTND, stages of change, quit ladder, exposure to 
secondhand smoke, and Hatsukami withdrawal scale will be also 
collected.  
 
vi. Medication Side Effects, Adverse Events and Participant Adherence:  
These will all be monitored on study participants thr oughout the study.  
These will be reported to the study’s PI and co -investigators for 
appropriate follow -up. 
 
vii. Concomitant Medication Use or Behavior Therapy During Follow-up 
Visits :  The use of additional gum, patch, nicotine nasal spray, inhaler or 
lozenge, or antidepressants prescribed for smoking cessation will be monitored as they can affect cessation rates.  Participation, in additional behavioral cessation programs, will also be carefully tracked for this reason.  
viii. Saliva cotinine: For participants claiming via self -report that they have 
quit smoking at 6-month follow up, we will obtain biomedical validation using salivary cotinine. The saliva cotinine test is noninvasive with virtually no risks.  This involves providing saliva. Participants will be visited at a mutually agreed -upon location to obtain a saliva sample. This 
procedure will be explained during administration of consent as well as in detail, during the 6- month follow up phone interview. Note that in the event that participants (a) report they are not smoking, but (b) refuse to provide a saliva sample, they will be considered smokers. A monetary incentive of $30 will be given to participants at 6 -month follow- up after 
completing of the test.  
 
7) Data Management*  
Outcome Measures - This pilot study aims to explore the  acceptability  potential and 
efficacy of the developed intervention compared to QL. Main  outcomes include: 1) 
estimating yield (number of workers available divided by number eligible; and 
number eligible divided by number randomized), 2) facilitators and barriers to delivering the intervention in the proposed setting, 3) willingness of participants to be randomized and acceptability of the intervention, 4) follow-up rates and response rates to questionnaires, adherence/c ompliance rates, and the time needed to collect 
and analyze data, and 5) exploring the “willingness” of the target population to be 
involved in the research design and conduct.
60-62 Potential efficacy outcomes will 
focus on comparing  prolonged abstinence (defined as no smoking, not even a puff, 
after a grace period of two weeks after quit date), and point- prevalent abstinence 
(defined as self -report of not smoking in the past 7-days; not even a puff) confirmed 
STUDY PROTOCOL AND ANALYSIS PLAN  
 Page 8 of 15  Revised : 8/8/18  by saliva cotinine level of <15ng/ml at 6-month between the two study arms. For 
individuals who do not quit entirely, the decrease in smoking (i.e., cigarettes/day) will be assessed.
63,64 Relapse is defined as smoking at least once/week on two consecutive 
weeks.65 Secondary outcome measures will focus on differences in stage of 
change/readiness to quit,66 and treatment adherence according to intervention 
assignmen t.37 
 All participant data will be c oded with an identification number and only approved 
personnel will have access to the key linking identification numbers with participant names.  Data will be stored and managed in REDCap and accessed only by approved 
study personnel. Paper interview inst ruments will be stored in a locked filing cabinet.  
 Quality Assurance - Our research team is well versed in quality assurance processes for 
intervention studies.
44,45,59 Following the strategy suggested by Sechrest,69 evaluation 
of any treatment program should involve satisfactory answers to three questions: 1) was the intervention both standardized and delivered as intended to the participant? 2) if so, did the participants receive it? and 3) if so, was the intervention efficacious in changing behavior? Sechrest's 3
rd question involves the evaluation of outcomes, which 
is outlined in the Data Analysis section belo w. However, Sechrest's 1st and 2nd 
questions address treatment implementation issues. To ensure standardization of intervention content and delivery, we will use standardized treatment manuals/procedures developed particularly for this study. Participants will respond to a brief questionnaire at baseline and the 3 - and 6- month follow -up to assess whether 
key points were learned, including the techniques and information discussed in the intervention sessions. Standard procedures will be used for instrument development, protocol and forms, and data management (e.g. entry, reconciliation, updating, and data security and confidentiality). Additionally, we will audiotape a random sample of 10% of counseling sessions for review and feedback. Participants will be asked for 
permission to audiotape these selected sessions as part of the consent process. 
 
Data Analysis 
The analyses of the outcomes were mainly descriptive. Chi -square tests and between -
group t -tests were used to compare between -group differences in baseline 
characteristics, and indices of treatment implementation, adherence, and retention. 
Intra -class correlation coefficients were used to adjust for clustering within sites.55 This 
adjustment accounted for within- site clustering of workers characteristics at each of the 
17 participating sites in the trial. Chi- square tests were used to compare cessation  rates 
in the two arms . Analyses were performed on an intention -to-treat basis, with 
individuals with missing outcome data or self -reported abstinence not confirmed by 
eCO at 6 -month follow -up classified as not quit. Logistic regression analyses were 
conducted to assess baseline predictors of prolonged abstinence at 6 -months.   
  
8) Risks to Subjects*  
Potential risks and adverse effects of the study medication will be explained to each participant when informed consent is obtained.  Each participant will be instructed to 
STUDY PROTOCOL AND ANALYSIS PLAN  
 Page 9 of 15  Revised : 8/8/18  keep a record and notify the center of any potential adverse effects, illnesses, or 
hospitalizations.  Potential risks to study participants may include:  
 
i. Randomization:  Although it is expected that both the study treatments will 
be beneficial, it is possible that the treatment a participant is assigned to may later be shown to be less effective.   
 
ii. Nicotine Withdrawal:  Smoking cessation is associated with a variety of  
nicotine withdrawal symptoms including: depressed mood, difficulty sleeping, irritability, anxiety, difficulty concentrating, restlessness, and increased appetite or weight gain.  These symptoms are typically not severe and dissipate within a few weeks of  cessation, with the exception of weight 
gain, which may persist for up to one year. 
 
iii. NRT Use : type of NRT will depend on participants’’ preference elicited at 
phase 1 (focus groups).  
 
Nicotine Patch Use:  Although most persons do not experience any major adverse 
effects from the nicotine patch, it is possible that a participant could experience any of the following side effects.  All participants will be questioned or evaluated for these specific side effects at each session.  
a. Skin erythema, pruritus, edema, burning, and rash at the application site of the patch  
b. Dizziness, dry mouth 
c. Arthralgia, myalgia, back pain  
d. Abdominal pain, constipation, diarrhea, dyspepsia, flatulence, nausea, vomiting 
e. Impaired concentration, depression, headache, insomnia, abnormal dreams, nervousness 
f. Cough, sinusitis 
g. Allergy to nicotine  
h. Cardiovascular side effects (cardiac arrhythmia, tachycardia, vasospasm, elevated blood pressure) 
 
Nicotine Gum Use:  Although most persons do not experience any major adverse 
effects from the nicotine gum, it is possible that a participant could experience any of the following side effects.  All participants will be questioned or evaluated for these specific side effects at each follow -up visit. 
a. Mouth soreness.  Very rare; probability of occurrence is low and risk is low. 
b. Hiccups.  This typically occurs through improper use of the gum.  If participants report this, we work on how they are using the gum.  Probability is common in those who misuse the gum; risk is low  
c. Dyspepsia.  Probability and risk is low. 
d. Jaw ache.  Probability and risk is low. 
STUDY PROTOCOL AND ANALYSIS PLAN  
 Page 10 of 15  Revised : 8/8/18   
Although these adverse events have been reported in those who use NRT, they have been infrequent and are less likely to be obs erved in persons who are regular cigarette 
smokers.  In addition, many of these same symptoms are reported by persons who quit smoking without NRT, and have been attributed to nicotine withdrawal from smoking cessation.  
 
9) Potential Benefits to Subjects*  
Participants will benefit by being involved in a no -cost program that may help them 
to quit smoking, reducing their risk for a variety of health conditions.  Given the substantial potential benefits and the minimal risks for participants involved in this project, it is felt that the benefits significantly outweigh the possible risks.  
 
10) Recruitment Methods  
Two bilingual (English, Spanish) public health graduate students will approach construction workers either at their morning or noon food break at multiple 
construction sites in South Florida in partnership with the lunch truck service. Using a 
verbal consent script, potential participants will be asked if they are interested in participating in our study.  If they agree, they will asked a series of questions to determine whether they are eligible ( Hispanic male construction workers who are ≥ 
18 year old and have smoked ≥ 5 cigarettes/day in the past year ). Additionally, 
potential participants need to have access to telephone, have no plans to move in the next six months, and be interested in making a serious quit attempt in the next 30 days. Individuals who decline to participate will still be encouraged to quit smoking, and given a list of available cessation resources. Those willing to participate but who are ineligible (e.g., non -Hispanics, women) will be referred to the QL and provided 
with brochures that include information about the QL contact number and services. Those who are potentially eligible and interested in participating in the study will be consented, then undergo a baseline screening to confirm eligibility and to collect information. All questionnaires, informed consent, and educational materi als will be 
available in English and Spanish and will be administrated by the bilingual graduate assistants.   
11) Local Number of Subjects  
We seek to enroll up to 150 participants who are eligible according to the inclusion criteria.  
 
To avoid intervention contamination within participating construction 
worksites, the RCT design will be a two-group cluster randomized design with seven sites  per group. Our resources for this R21 allow seven subjects per 
group. We assume that the intra- cluster correlation will be low (0.01). We will 
use a two -group comparison of proportions at the two- tailed alpha level. 
Assuming that 10%- 15% of the control group and 25% of the intervention 
group respond to the intervention, we will have 23% power to detect a 10% difference and  50% power to detect a 15% difference. To achieve 80% power 
STUDY PROTOCOL AND ANALYSIS PLAN  
 Page 11 of 15  Revised : 8/8/18  for a 10% and 15% difference under the same assumptions would require 
sample sizes of 64 and 16 subjects per site, respectively. 
 
12) Confidentiality  
Participant names will be replaced with ID numbers and a key linking the two will be kept separate from other data and accessed only by Drs. Lee and Asfar.  Survey data 
will be stored on Dropbox and access ible only by approved study personnel. Survey 
data f rom the RCT will stored and managed in REDCap. These data will be stored for 
the duration of the study protocol and until all data analysis is complete and manuscripts have been published. 
 
13) Provisions to Protect the Privacy Interests of Subjects  
Participan ts will interact with only a limited number of approved study personnel and 
will be assured that their personal information will be kept private, will be used only 
for research purposes, and will not be accessible to non-study personnel. 
 
14) Consent Process 
Verbal consent will first be obtained after potential participants are screened on site. Those who verbally consent will then sign a written consent before the intervention begins.  Because we are recruiting Hispanic participants the consent documents will be available in both English and Spanish.  
 
 
STUDY PROTOCOL AND ANALYSIS PLAN  
 Page 12 of 15  Revised : 8/8/18  References  
 
1. Lee DJ, Fleming LE, Arheart KL, et al. Smoking rate trends in U.S. occupational 
groups: the 1987 to 2004 National Health Interview Survey. J Occup Environ 
Med. Jan 2007;49(1):75-81. 
2. Lee DJ, Fleming LE, McCollister KE, et al. Healthcare provider smoking cessation advice among US worker groups. Tob Control. Oct 2007;16(5):325-328. 
3. Dong S, Chowdhury R, McCann M, Trahan C, Gittle-man JS. The Construction 
Chart Book: The U.S. Construction Industry and Its Workers, 3rd ed. Silver Spring, MD: CPWR - Center for Construction Research and Training; 2002. 
4. Driscoll T, Steenland K, Imel Nelson D, J. L. Occupational airborne particulates: 
assessing the environmental burden of disease at national and local levels. Geneva: World Health Organization;2004. 
5. Driscoll T, Steenland K, Pruss-Ustin A, Nelson DI, Leigh J. Occupational 
carcinogens: assessing the environmental burden of disease at national and local levels. Geneva: World Health Organization;2004. 
6. Chau N, Mur J-M, Benamghar L, et al. Relationships between certain individual 
characteristics and occupational injuries for various jobs in the construction industry: A case-control study. American journal of industrial m edicine. 
2004;45(1):84-92. 
7. U.S. Census Bureau. 2012; http://quickfacts.census.gov/qfd/states/00000.html
  
8. Martinez -Tyson D, Barnett Pathak E, Soler-Vila H, Flores A. Looking Under the 
Hispanic Umbrella: Cancer Mortality Among Cubans, Mexicans, Puerto Ricans and Other Hispanics in Florida. J Immigrant Minority Health. 2009/08/01 2009;11(4):249- 257. 
9. CPWR - Th e Center for Construction Research and Training. The Construction 
Chart Book, Fourth Edition. December 2007: http://www.elcosh.org/en/document/54/1317/d000038/sect15.html
. 
10. Caban-Martinez A, Clarke T, Davila E, Fleming L, Lee D. Application of 
handheld devices to field research among underserved construction worker populations: a workplace health assessment pilot study. Environmental Health. 2011;10(1):27. 
11. U.S. Department of Labor BoLS. Employment and Earnings. Washington1996. 12. Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor. The Construction Chart 
Book. The Center to Protect Workers' Rights. Female Workers in Construction and Other Industries. Washington, D.C2000: http://www.cpwr.com/pdfs/pubs/chartbook_02/page%2019.pdf
  
13. Sorensen G, Barbeau EM, Stoddard AM, et al. Tools for health: the efficacy of a 
tailored intervention targeted for construction laborers. Cancer causes & control : CCC. Feb 2007;18(1):51- 59. 
14. Lee DJ, Fleming LE, Arheart KL, et al. Smoking rate trends in U.S. occupational 
groups: the 1987 to 2004 National Health Interview Survey. J Occup Environ Med. 2007;49:75-81. 
15. Sorensen G, Barbeau E, Hunt MK, Emmons K. Reducing Social Disparities in 
Tobacco Use: A Social -Contextual Model for Reducing Tobacco Use Among 
STUDY PROTOCOL AND ANALYSIS PLAN  
 Page 13 of 15  Revised : 8/8/18  Blue -Collar Workers. American Journal of Public Health. 2004/02/01 
2004;94(2):230-239. 
16. Borrelli B. Smoking cessation: Next steps for special populations research and 
innovative treatments. J Consult Clin Psychol. 2010;78(1):1-12. 
17. Hawkins RP, Kreuter M, Resnicow K, Fishbein M, Dijkstra A. Understanding 
tailoring in communicating about health. Health Education Research. 
2008;23(3):454-466. 
18. Resnick MD, Bearman PS, Blum RW, et al. Protecting adolescents from harm. 
Findings from the National Longitudinal Study on Adolescent Health. JAMA. Sep 10 1997;278(10):823-832. 
19. Glasgow RE, Emmons KM. How can we increase translation of research into 
practice? Types of evidence needed. Annu. Rev. Public Health. 2007;28:413-433. 
20. Caban -Martinez AJ, et al. The “Lunch Truck” Experience: Active and passive 
tobacco smoke exposures: a construction workplace health assessment pilot study. Poster Presentation presented at International Conference on Occupational Health; 2012; Cancun, MX. 
21. McCollister KE, Arheart KL, Lee DJ, et al. Declining health insurance access among US hispanic workers: Not all jobs are created equal. Am J Ind Med. Jun 29 
2009. 
22. Caban AJ, Lee DJ, Clarke TC, et al. Self -Reported Joint and Back Pain among 
Construction Workers: A Pilot Workplace Musculoskeletal Assessment. J Muscoskel Res. 2010 Jun;13(2):49- 55. 
23. Caban AJ, Lee DJ, Fleming LE, et al. Cancer Health Education Preferences among Miami-Dade County Construction Workers. FPHR. 2009(6):58-61. 
24. Caban AJ, Lee DJ, Clarke TC, et al. Active and passive tobacco smoke exposures: 
a construction workplace health assessment pilot study. ORAL Abstract ID: A1069. Presented at the 30th International Congress on Occupational Health ed. Cancun, Mexico  March 18-23, 2012. 
25. Denzin NK, Lincoln Y. Qualitative research. Thousand Oaks ua. 2000. 26. Resnicow K, Soler R, Br aithwaite RL, Ahluwalia JS, Butler J. Cultural sensitivity 
in substance use prevention. Journal of community psychology. 2000;28(3):271-290. 
27. Borrelli B, McQuaid EL, Novak SP, Hammond SK, Becker B. Motivating Latino 
caregivers of children with asthma to  quit smoking: a randomized trial. Journal of 
consulting and clinical psychology. 2010;78(1):34. 
28. Fiore MC, Jaén CR, Baker TB, et al., eds. Treating Tobacco Use and 
Dependence: 2008 Update. Clinical Practice Guideline. Rockville, MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 2008. Quality AfHRa, ed. 
29. Andrews JO, Felton G, Ellen Wewers M, Waller J, Tingen M. The effect of a multi-component smoking cessation intervention in African American women residing in public housing. Res Nurs Health. Feb 2007; 30(1):45-60. 
30. Curry SJ, Ludman EJ, Graham E, Stout J, Grothaus L, Lozano P. Pediatric- based 
smoking cessation intervention for low-income women: a randomized trial. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. Mar 2003;157(3):295-302. 
31. Strauss A. J., Corbin, 1990, Basi cs of Qualitative Research. Grounded Theory 
Procedures and Techniques. Newbury Park, CA: Sage. 
STUDY PROTOCOL AND ANALYSIS PLAN  
 Page 14 of 15  Revised : 8/8/18  32. Bandura A. Health promotion from the perspective of social cognitive theory. 
Psychology and Health. 1998;13(4):623-649. 
33. Bandura A. Social learning theory.  Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J 1977. 
34. Lancaster T, Stead L. Individual behavioural counselling for smoking cessation. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2005;2.  
35. Lancaster T, Stead LF. Self -help interventions for smoking cessation. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev. 2005;3(3).  
36. Stead LF, Perera R, Lancaster T. Telephone counselling for smoking cessation. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2006;3. 
37. Asfar T, Weg MV, Maziak W, Hammal F, Eissenberg T, Ward KD. Outcomes 
and adherence in Syria's f irst smoking cessation trial. Am J Health Behav. Mar-
Apr 2008;32(2):146- 156. 
38. Ward KD, Asfar T, Al Ali R, et al. Randomized trial of the effectiveness of 
combined behavioral/pharmacological smoking cessation treatment in Syrian primary care clinics. Add iction. 2012:n/a- n/a. 
39. Maziak W, Eissenberg T, Klesges R, Keil U, Ward K. Adapting smoking 
cessation interventions for developing countries: a model for the Middle East. The International Journal of Tuberculosis and Lung Disease. 2004;8(4):403-413. 
40. Ward KD, Weg MWV, Sell MA, Scarinci IC, Read MC. Characteristics and correlates of quitting among black and white low-income pregnant smokers. American journal of health behavior. 2006;30(6):651-662. 
41. Ellison J, Jandorf L, Duhamel K. Assessment of the S hort Acculturation Scale for 
Hispanics (SASH) among low- income, immigrant Hispanics. J Cancer Educ. Sep 
2011;26(3):478-483. 
42. Piper ME, McCarthy DE, Baker TB. Assessing tobacco dependence: a guide to measure evaluation and selection. Nicotine Tob Res. Ju n 2006;8(3):339- 351. 
43. Vilela FA, Jungerman FS, Laranjeira R, Callaghan R. The transtheoretical model 
and substance dependence: theoretical and practical aspects. Rev Bras Psiquiatr. Dec 2009;31(4):362-368. 
44. Biener L, Abrams DB. The Contemplation Ladd er: validation of a measure of 
readiness to consider smoking cessation. Health Psychology. 1991;10(5):360. 
45. Hendricks PS, Wood SB, Baker MR, Delucchi KL, Hall SM. The Smoking 
Abstinence Questionnaire: measurement of smokers' abstinence- related 
expectancies. Addiction. Apr 2011;106(4):716-728. 
46. Reuland DS, Cherrington A, Watkins GS, Bradford DW, Blanco RA, Gaynes BN. 
Diagnostic accuracy of Spanish language depression -screening instruments. Ann 
Fam Med. Sep -Oct 2009;7(5):455-462. 
47. Zimet GD, Dahlem NW, Zimet SG, Farley GK. The multidimensional scale of perceived social support. Journal of personality assessment. 1988;52(1):30-41. 
48. Asfar T, Klesges RC, Sanford SD, et al. Trial design: The St. Jude Children's 
Research Hospital Cancer Survivors Tobacco Quit Line study. Contemporary clinical trials. Jan 2010;31(1):82-91. 
49. Treating tobacco use and dependence: 2008 update U.S. Public Health Service 
Clinical Practice Guideline executive summary. Respir Care. Sep 2008;53(9):1217-1222. 
STUDY PROTOCOL AND ANALYSIS PLAN  
 Page 15 of 15  Revised : 8/8/18  50. Rebagliato M. Validation of self reported smoking. Journal of Epidemiology and 
Community Health. 2002;56(3):163-164. 
51. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Environmental 
Health. National report on human exposure to environmental chemicals. 
Atlanta2001. 
52. Jacob Iii P, Wilson M, Benowitz NL. Improved gas chromatographic method for 
the determination of nicotine and cotinine in biologic fluids. Journal of Chromatography B: Biomedical Sciences and Applications. 1/2/ 1981;222(1):61-70. 
53. Stevinson C, Ernst E. A pilot study of Hypericum perforatum for the treatment of 
premenstrual syndrome. BJOG: An International Journal of Obstetrics & 
Gynaecology. 2000;107(7):870-876. 
54. Ross ‐McGill H, Hewison J, Hirst J, et al. Antenatal home blood pressure 
monitoring: a pilot randomised controlled trial. BJOG: An International Journal of Obstetrics & Gynaecology. 2000;107(2):217-221. 
55. Browne RH. On the use of a pilot sample for sample size determination. Statistics 
in Medicine. 1995;14(17):1933-1940. 
56. Klesges RC, Brown K, Pascale RW, Murphy M, Williams E, Cigrang JA. Factors 
associated with participation, attrition, and outcome in a smoking cessation program at the workplace. Health Psychology. 1988;7(6):575. 
57. Leon AC, Davis LL, Kraemer HC. The role and interpretation of pilot studies in 
clinical research. Journal of psychiatric research. 2011;45(5):626-629. 
58. Kraemer HC, Mintz J, Noda A, Tinklenberg J, Yesavage JA. Caution regarding 
the use of pilot studies to guide power calculations for study proposals. Archives of General Psychiatry. 2006;63(5):484. 
59. Sechrest et al. Evaluation of treatment program. 1979. 
60. Lancaster GA, Dodd S, Williamson PR. Design and analysis of pilot studies: 
recommendations for good practice. Journal of evaluation in clinical practice. 
2004;10(2):307-312. 
61. Arain M, Campbell MJ, Cooper CL, Lancaster GA. What is a pilot or feasibility 
study? A review of current practice and editorial policy. BMC medical research methodology. 2010;10(1):67. 
62. Julious SA. Sample size of 12 per group rule of thumb for a pilot study. 
Pharmaceutical Statistics. 2005;4(4):287-291. 
63. Asfar T, Ebbert JO, Klesges RC, Relyea GE. Do smoking reduction interventions 
promote cessation in smokers not ready to quit? Addicti ve Behaviors. 
2011;36(7):764-768. 
64. Asfar T, Ebbert JO, Klesges RC, Klosky JL. Use of smoking reduction strategies 
among U.S. tobacco quitlines. Addictive Behaviors. 2012;37(4):583- 586. 
65. Hughes JR, Hatsukami D. Signs and Symptoms of Tobacco Withdrawal. Archives 
of General Psychiatry. 1986;43(3):289-294. 
66. DiClemente CC, Prochaska JO, Fairhurst SK, Velicer WF, Velasquez MM, Rossi 
JS. The process of smoking cessation: An analysis of precontemplation, contemplation, and preparation stages of change. Journal of Consulting and 
Clinical Psychology. 1991;59(2):295-304. 
 