1-407HUMAN SUBJECTS PROTOCOL
Protocol No.  11-00369
Title: Preventive Approach to Congenital Heart Block with Hydroxychloroquine (PATCH)
Sponsor: NIH 
Principal Investigator:Jill P. Buyon, MD.
New York University School of Medicine
Hospital for Joint Disease
Department  of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology
301 East 17th Street, Suite  1410, 14th Floor
New York, NY
10003
Tel: 212-598-6110
Email: jill.buyon@nyumc.org
Version date: August 6, 2019
 
P.I. Signature:
__________________________________ 08/6/2019
Jill P. Buyon, M.D., Professor of Medicine Date
Purpose of the Study and Background
Purpose of the Study  
One of the strongest  clinical associations with autoantibodies (Ab) directed to components  of the SSA/Ro-
SSB/La ribonucleoprotein complex is the development of congenital heart  block  (CHB) in an offspring, 
an alarming prospect facing 2% of primigravid mothers with these reactivities  [reviewed in 1].  The risk is 
10-fold higher in women who have had a previously affected child. Once 3rd degree block is identified, 
permanent reversal has never been achieved. Despite  the attempts  of large multicenter studies to 
forestall disease  by careful  monitoring, irreversible  block  and extensive  myocardial  injury  have  been  
documented within 7 days of a normal rhythm and PR interval.  CHB is associated with a significant 
mortality and morbidity. Current prophylactic  and treatment strategies include maternal steroids,  
plasmapheresis, sympathomimetics, and in utero cardiac pacing but none  have significantly altered 
mortality, justifying the need for continued  research.  Two recent studies [2,3] utilizing  an identical  protocol 
of IVIG demonstrated that 1) this intervention does not  prevent the recurrence of CHB 2) the recurrence 
rate of 17-18%  is robust and reproducible  3) recruitment of patients is feasible.  During the time period of 
the IVIG trials, basic  science exploring  the pathogenesis of disease supported the notion that 
macrophage Toll Like Receptor (TLR)  signaling following ligation of the ssRNA complexed to the Ro 
protein contributes to cardiac fibrosis [4]. TLR signaling and fibrotic endpoints could be abrogated by 
chloroquine (CQ),  which inhibits endosomal acidification.  This in vitro observation was “translated”  to 
patients by evaluating the use of hydroxychloroquine (HCQ)  in an extensive  retrospective chart  review  
[5]. The combined  data suggested a possible  efficacy of HCQ, raising the consideration of this drug as a 
highly promising candidate for the prevention of CHB.   
Specific Aim: To determine  whether hydroxychloroquine use during pregnancy prevents the 
recurrence of CHB.
This will be approached  in an open label Phase II trial entitled: Preventative  Approach to Therapy 
for Congenital Heart Block  with Hydroxychloroquine (PATCH),  in pregnant  women who have had a 
previous child with CHB.   This is designed  as an open-label trial employing Simon’s 2-stage optimal 
Human Subjects Protocol  # 11-00369 PI: BUYON, Jill P., MD Version date: 08/06/2019
design to allow for early  stopping due to absence of treatment  efficacy. The first stage requires  19 
subjects, which are expected to be enrolled in the year of this award.  Despite the rarity of disease  and 
the requirement of a previous child with CHB, based  on the US Research Registry  for Neonatal  Lupus  
(RRNL) and data from the UK, this proposal is feasible.  If 3 mothers  have a child with 2nd or 3rd degree 
CHB, the study  is terminated after the first stage.  Serial  echocardiograms (monitor  PR interval) and 
evaluation of biomarkers (HCQ levels, IFNa signatures, and Ab titers) will be part of the protocol.   The 
results of this study should become an integral component  of the counseling of women with anti-Ro/La 
Ab who are considering pregnancy. 
Background 
CHB associated with maternal anti-Ro Ab has a high mortality  (20-30%, primarily fetal/neonatal)  and 
morbidity (67% require permanent pacing before adulthood) [6,7].  In addition to conduction disease, 
10-15% of affected offspring will have  a life-threatening cardiomyopathy [8,9].  Histopathologic studies 
constitute a major basis  for formulating hypotheses regarding the pathogenesis  of CHB,  which  in turn 
guide the rationale for therapeutic approaches.  Studies of several fetal hearts identified  in utero with 
CHB or isolated  myocarditis revealed that fibrosis is extensive and replaces the AV node,  even in 20 
and 22 week hearts [10], supporting the clinical observation that 3rd degree CHB is irreversible.  The 
identification of a macrophage infiltration  in fetuses dying most proximate to the time of diagnosis 
suggests that inflammation may be integral  to the development of fibrosis  [10].
Prenatal Considerations
From an immunologic  perspective, reduction of a generalized inflammatory response  has traditionally  
been considered a logical approach to the prevention or treatment of CHB. The use of maternal  oral 
dexamethasone has been popularized by several  groups but its scientific  merit is underwhelming, and 
the risks may be substantial [11-13].  The PRIDE (PR Interval Dexamethasone Evaluation)  in CHB  
study revealed no reversibility of 3rd degree CHB with dexamethasone, a higher mortality with 
dexamethasone (albeit  these may have been  sicker fetuses), and inconsistent  effects on reversal  of 
incomplete blocks [14]. 
Intravenous Immunoglobulin G (IVIG): A prospective study  in which  feasibility of recruitment and 
reproducibility of the recurrence rate was demonstrated but prevention of CHB was not achieved:  
The consideration of IVIG in the prevention of CHB was based  on our working hypothesis of the 
pathogenesis of disease. Tissue injury in the fetus  is presumed to depend  on the FcRn-mediated  
transplacental passage of maternal IgG Ab [15]. Anti-Ro/La Ab, by binding to translocated  antigens on 
the surface of apoptotic  cardiocytes generated during remodeling  of the conduction system and 
surrounding tissue, may inhibit the normal physiologic removal  of these cells [16]. Uncleared opsonized  
apoptotic cardiocytes may be subsequently  efferocytosed by infiltrating macrophages with release of 
pro-inflammatory and profibrosing cytokines which transdifferentiate cardiac  fibroblasts to a scarring  
phenotype [17]. This scenario supported the consideration of prophylactic therapy with IVIG based on 
2 presumed mechanisms of efficacy.   The first relates  to the saturation of FcRn  by IVIG,  which would 
be expected  to decrease fetal exposure to anti-Ro/La Ab by accelerating IgG catabolism in the maternal  
circulation and by decreasing placental transport [18]. The second relates to the potential  attenuation  
of anti-inflammatory responses  by increasing  the macrophage expression of FcRIIB  [19]. This would  
represent a downstream effect  in the targeted organ.
Accordingly, a multicenter, prospective, open-label study in the U.S. was initiated  [2] (Preventative  IVIG 
Therapy for CHB, PITCH).  Enrollment  criteria  included the presence of anti-Ro Ab in the mother, birth 
of a previous child with CHB/neonatal lupus  rash, current treatment with 20 mg/day  of prednisone, and 
<12 weeks pregnant. IVIG (400 mg/kg) was given every 3 weeks  from gestational week  12 - 24. The 
primary outcome was the development of 2nd or 3rd degree CHB.  Twenty  mothers completed the IVIG 
protocol before the predetermined  stopping rule of 3 cases  of advanced CHB was reached.  CHB was 
detected at 19, 20, and 25 weeks; none  occurred  following a prolonged PR interval. One of these 3 
mothers had 2 previous  children with CHB. One child without CHB developed a transient rash consistent 
Human Subjects Protocol  # 11-00369 PI: BUYON, Jill P., MD Version date: 08/06/2019
with neonatal  lupus. Sixteen children had no manifestations of neonatal lupus at birth. No significant 
changes in maternal titers of Ab to Ro60, Ro52, or La48 were detected over the course of therapy or at 
delivery. There were no safety issues. 
In parallel with enrollment of the PITCH study, a European study was initiated in December, 
2004.  We and the P.I., Dr. Munther  Khamashta, had agreed on the protocol.  The study was terminated 
after 3 recurrent cases of CHB  were identified  following enrollment of 15 mothers  [3].  Combining data 
generated from the U.S. and the European PITCH studies, there were  6 (18%) recurrences in 33 women 
who had previous pregnancies complicated by CHB. Each study  was originally designed to conclude  
inefficacy of IVIG if 6 cases of 54 were identified. However, since the chances of one further recurrence 
in the next 21 (if combined US and UK) was greater than 98% assuming the 18% recurrence rate 
observed, the trial was deemed futile and terminated.  
Hydroxychloroquine: A potential prophylactic approach
Antimalarials are among the most frequently prescribed medications  in SLE patients.  The 
prevention of flares  and reduction of mortality are associated  with the use of these medications as 
supported by a recent systematic review of high quality published  evidence  [20]. Serious adverse events 
such as cardiotoxicity are rare, even after prolonged use. With regard  to retinal  toxicity, CQ appears to 
be more toxic than HCQ [20].
          The use of antimalarials to prevent  SLE flares  during pregnancy has been addressed by several  
studies.  In a small,  randomized  double-blind trial of 10 SLE pregnant  patients receiving HCQ 
(surprisingly, dose not stated) compared to 10 on placebo,  the drug was administered  between 8 – 18 
weeks of gestation [21].  In the active drug group, there were  no flares of disease  activity  compared to 
3/10 in the placebo group. Importantly, neither congenital abnormalities at birth nor ophthalmologic or 
auditory abnormalities were detected up to a minimum  follow up of 1.5 years.   A second study, non-
randomized, compared  three groups of pregnant patients: those continuously  exposed to HCQ before 
and throughout pregnancy (N = 56), those with no exposure (N = 163), and those  in whom  HCQ was 
discontinued prior to or during the first trimester (N = 38) [22].  The patients who discontinued HCQ 
were reported  to have a higher degree of SLE activity and an increased frequency of flares.  
Ophthalmologic and auditory tests were limited to routine infant care although the authors did not report 
any clinically  significant fetal abnormalities attributable to HCQ exposure. A third study showed that 
discontinuation of HCQ at the onset of pregnancy  was associated  with increased lupus activity  [23].  
Our own data from the Prospective  Predictors  of pRegnancy Outcome: bioMarkers  In Antiphospholipid 
Antibody Syndrome and Systemic Lupus Erythematosus  (PROMISSE) study also suggested the benefit 
of HCQ.  Specifically,  105 patients  with SLE were taking HCQ throughout pregnancy [24].   Overall, 
mild/moderate and severe  flares were infrequent (<10%) and maintaining HCQ during  pregnancy 
appeared to be of benefit in preventing flares. One child was reported to have an abnormal audiology 
screen at birth,  which  was considered inconsequential upon subsequent testing. 
         Despite accumulating evidence supporting the prevention  of SLE flares  during pregnancy, some  
physicians may remain reluctant to prescribe HCQ given isolated case reports  of auditory toxicity [25] 
and retinal toxicity [26] in fetuses exposed  to HCQ, in addition to data from an animal model regarding 
retinal deposition [27]. Currently, the FDA lists both CQ and HCQ as pregnancy risk category  C (safety  
in human pregnancy  has not been  determined).  However, recent  reviews of the literature suggest that, 
in particular,  HCQ  is safe to use during pregnancy [20,28,29].  None of the studies  (inclusive of over 250 
children) found an increased frequency  of congenital malformation.  In 58 children tested, maternal use 
of HCQ was not associated with either hearing or visual abnormalities [28]. Available  ECGs revealed 
no differences with regard to duration  of the PR or QTC intervals between  unexposed or exposed 
children [28].              
The rationale  for HCQ rests on translation of the pathophysiology  of CHB which likely  involves 
a complex cascade  linking antibody  to ultimate scar. Dual receptor signaling  via uptake of the anti-
Ro/La immune  complexes by FcγR  on macrophages,  and delivery of associated ssRNA to the 
endosomal compartment for ligation with Toll Like Receptors (TLR7/8) may be critical steps  toward  
Human Subjects Protocol  # 11-00369 PI: BUYON, Jill P., MD Version date: 08/06/2019
conduction damage. Since endosomal TLR binds ligand at low pH, pharmacologic approaches to 
attenuate TLR-dependent readouts have  utilized CQ and bafilomyocin which  interfere with acidification  
[30,31]. Our own laboratory  has recently  demonstrated that both macrophage transfection  with non-
coding ssRNA that bind Ro60 and an immune complex generated by incubation of Ro60-ssRNA with 
an IgG fraction from a CHB mother or affinity purified anti-Ro60 significantly increased TNF  secretion,  
an effect  not observed using  control  RNAs or normal IgG. Dependence on TLR was supported  by the 
significant inhibition of TNF  release by IRS661 (inhibits TLR7)  and CQ. Fibrosis markers  were  
noticeably increased  in fetal cardiac  fibroblasts after incubation with supernatants generated from 
macrophages transfected  with ssRNA  or incubated with the immune complex, an effect abrogated by 
IRS661 or CQ [4]. These in vitro findings generate the hypothesis that HCQ, which reduces  the 
acidification required for optimal ligation of TLR and has been shown to be safe in pregnancies, as 
detailed above,  may prevent cardiac  tissue injury associated with antibodies to these  ssRNA-complexed 
proteins.
Another potential  mechanism favoring efficacy in preventing  CHB,  is that HCQ by virtue of 
reducing endosomal acidification might also decrease transplacental transport of maternal antibodies.   
This possibility is supported by the fact that maternal IgG is pinocytosed at the apical surface of the 
syncytiotrophoblast into an acid endosomal compartment containing FcRn, and migrates via transport 
vesicles to the basolateral surface of the cell, where at physiologic  pH it uncouples from the receptor 
(15).   
Study Design  
Nineteen women in Stage 1 and an additional 51 women  in Stage 2 (if reached, for a total of 
70 subjects) meeting  eligibility criteria will receive  400mg per day of HCQ beginning as soon as 
pregnancy is established  and informed  consent  obtained.  Mothers  already on HCQ will remain  on 
400mg, or escalate to 400mg if on 200mg. The primary investigator, Jill Buyon, M.D.,  holds a U.S. 
Federal Drug Administration-issued IND (Investigational New Drug) number (112357)  for HCQ.
A. Screening  visit: Prior to the qualifying visit, the consent form will be reviewed  and signed.  
Laboratory tests will include: CBC, liver-function tests (routine chemistries;  albumin will be important 
to standardize the effect of physiologic  hemodilution of pregnancy  in gauging  changes  in autoantibody 
titers), urinalysis, and a 24 h collection for measurement of creatinine clearance and protein excretion 
as deemed appropriate. Serologic profiles will include: measurement of ANA, anti-DNA,  C3 and C4.  
Blood will be drawn  for baseline anti-Ro/La titer HCQ level,  and IFNαactivity. Only the former will be 
available prior to qualification for enrollment. In total,  35 ml of blood will be drawn  at screening.
B. Qualifying  Visit:  This is done as soon as Ab status is established, which  should  take several days 
(ship overnight and assay in Dr. Buyon’s laboratory  is one day turnaround time; for Khamashta, it is 
equivalent). A detailed  history and physical examination will be performed. The patient will either be 
given a prescription for HCQ 200mg, 2 tabs hs, and advised to see an ophthalmologist, or told to 
maintain dose if 400mg. For women who have  SLE, data will be collected to calculate the Systemic 
Lupus Erythematosus Pregnancy Disease Activity Index (SLEPDAI). Rheumatologists will complete 
assessment forms, which will be reviewed by Drs. Buyon and Izmirly to address any effect of 
treatment on underlying SLE activity per se. Of note,  Dr. Buyon  has provided these forms for use in 
the ongoing NIH-supported PROMISSE trial.
C. Follow-up Assessments: Fetal echocardiograms will be performed after enrollment (16-18 weeks)  
and weekly thereafter  until 26 weeks, then biweekly until 34 weeks. Fetal  echocardiographic scans 
will be performed according  to standard methods [14,33,39], recorded  on VHS videotape  or 
DVD/Optical Disc by the pediatric cardiologist or obstetrician, and sent to the core echocardiographic 
lab and quantified  on data abstraction forms by Dr. Friedman. After the final fetal echo at 34 weeks,  
patients will continue with routine obstetric  and rheumatologic care as appropriate.  Neonates will 
have an EKG and echocardiogram  at birth and at 1-year follow-up (it is acknowledged that this will be 
Human Subjects Protocol  # 11-00369 PI: BUYON, Jill P., MD Version date: 08/06/2019
out of the window of LFM award but not affect outcome since to date CHB has not occurred de novo 
after birth).   Each woman will undergo routine  obstetrical ultrasounds  as per the treating obstetrician.   
Targeted Level  2 ultrasounds will be required between 21-24 weeks, and between  30-32 weeks  to 
assess fetal well-being. Mothers enrolled  in Europe will have their echocardiograms initially  read by 
their primary cardiologists with the tapes then forwarded to Dr. Friedman. 
Between 20-25 weeks and 30-35 weeks, and at delivery for all women, 20 ml of blood will be 
drawn (10 for serum, 10 for plasma and isolation of DNA). Cord  blood will also be obtained.   Both 
HCQ levels and IFN-α activity will be evaluated in each sample to serve  both as a proxy  for 
compliance and as a potential  biomarker of efficacy, respectively.  Samples will be sent overnight to 
Dr. Buyon’s  lab at each  visit (screening, 2nd trimester, 3rd trimester,  and delivery), rather than having  
each site process the bloods, which may be unduly  cumbersome for busy obstetrical practices.  For 
patients enrolled in Europe, samples will be stored  in Dr. Khamashta’s lab and shipped in batch. 
Serum samples will be divided  into aliquots of 500 l: 2 will have  sodium azide added (final  
concentration 0.1%) and be stored at 4oC; remaining samples  will be stored  without azide at -70oC to 
form the serum specimen  bank available to other investigators with approved research protocols (as 
in the RRNL).  Plasma will be similarly  stored.   DNA will be stored for future  investigations as 
spawned by the clinical results. 
Enrolled patients will continue usual care dictated by their underlying  rheumatic disease. 
Outcome Measures: The primary outcome is recurrence of advanced  heart block: i.e., 
echocardiogram reveals 2nd or 3rd degree  AV block. First-degree block  [PR >150 msec, i.e., 
>(normal mean +3 SD)] [33,39] does not constitute  a primary outcome unless it progresses to more  
advanced block. In these situations the mother will be fully counseled regarding morbidity and 
mortality of 2nd and 3rd degree block, and discussion regarding data on dexamethasone will be 
provided. Follow-up  will be continued by the patient’s treating physician. Secondary outcomes include:  
1) Prolonged mechanical PR interval (>150 msec) is detected but does  not progress to more  
advanced AV block.  EKG at birth must  confirm  1st degree AV block.   It is also possible that a fetus 
developing 1st degree block on study  medication  might have developed more advanced block in the 
absence of study medication.  The detection of 1st degree block will prompt  discussion with the 
steering committee,  treating physician and patient which may lead to treatment with dexamethasone.  
The mother  will be informed  of the PRIDE  results in which 2 women elected to take dexamethasone  
and the block  reverted to normal sinus rhythm [33].  However, the patient will be informed  that we do 
not know the natural progression or regression of 1st degree  block, and that 1st degree block  may 
spontaneously reverse.  The mother will continue in the study. 2) Any sign of myocardial  injury,  
without change in cardiac rate or rhythm: a) shortening fraction <28% = 2 SD below normal mean or 
qualitatively reduced  systolic function;  b) cardio-thoracic ratio >0.33; c) hydropic changes; d) 
moderate/severe tricuspid regurgitation.  3) Echocardiographic densities consistent  with EFE 
confirmed postnatally. 4) Fetal death  not related to cardiac dysfunction. An autopsy with full evaluation  
of the heart will be encouraged but cannot be mandated.  If AV block or evidence  of a cardiomyopathy 
can be “proven,” then these will provide the basis for final categorization.  If not possible, the death 
will not be considered  a recurrence rate but will be reported. 5) NL rash.  6) Prematurity  (gestational  
age <37 weeks at birth.  7) Birth weight <10% in the context of gestational age.  8) Abnormal fluid 
collection. 
Evaluation of Ab Levels:  This will be done exactly as described for the IVIG trial, using  recombinant  
proteins Ro60, Ro52,  and La48 in an ELISA [2]. 
 HCQ levels, This assay will be done in Dr. Costedoat-Chalumeau’s laboratory in France.  At each 
patient encounter,  the interval  between  the last ingestion of HCQ and blood  sampling is recorded. 
HCQ is assayed by HPLC with fluorometric detection as described [35] with minor  modifications. The 
detection limit is 10ng/ml, and the between-day and within-day coefficients of variation  are <8%.
IFNα activity: This assay  will be done in Dr. Peggy Crow’s laboratory and will utilize the WISH cell 
assay, as we have previously reported  in anti-Ro  positive mothers of children with neonatal  lupus [40]. 
Human Subjects Protocol  # 11-00369 PI: BUYON, Jill P., MD Version date: 08/06/2019
The reporter WISH cells are incubated  with 50% patient plasma  or serum for 6 hours.  Total mRNA is 
purified from WISH  cell lysates and cDNA synthesized from total mRNAs. Forward and reverse  
primers are used  for the genes  MX1,  PKR, and IFIT1, which are highly and specifically induced by 
type I IFN. The relative expression of each of the 3 tested  IFN-induced genes is calculated  as a fold 
increase compared  to its expression in WISH  cells cultured  with media  alone.   The  ability of patient 
serum to cause  IFN-induced gene expression  in the reporter cells is then compared  to the mean  and 
SD induced  by healthy donor serum.  The number of SD above the mean  of healthy donors for each 
gene is calculated.   Data are expressed  quantitatively  as the sum of the number of SD of each of the 
three genes above the mean of healthy  donors.  The 3 transcripts chosen for measurement represent  
coordinate activation  of the IFN-α pathway  as would be expected after ligation of the type I IFN 
receptor, instead  of measurement  of only one IFN-α-induced transcript  which may not accurately 
represent pathway activation.  Patients are considered to have high type I IFN activity  if either of the 
two following  criteria are met:  1)  2/3 tested IFN-induced genes are expressed >1 SD above the mean 
of healthy donors, and at least 1 is greater  than or equal to 2 SD above the mean of healthy donors, 
or 2) 1 IFN-induced gene is expressed  greater than 4 SD above the mean of healthy donor sera.  If 
neither criterion is met, the sample is considered  to have low type I IFN activity.  Two-sided Fisher’s 
exact test (sum of small p’s method for observed  ≥ expected)  is used to analyze the categorical data, 
and Mann-Whitney  non-parametric  t-test  is used to compare quantitative data. All evaluations will be 
done in batch (with the exception of screening  anti-Ro/La) when the patient  has completed the study.
Characteristics of the Research  Population 
Number of Subjects and Subject Recruitment
Stage 1, 19 subjects will be given HCQ.  If fewer than 3 recurrences are observed, an additional 
51subjects will be treated  in Stage 2 (Years 2-3, seeking a renewal and/or NIH funding). However, if 3 
or more  recurrences  are observed after Stage  1, it will be concluded that HCQ is not effective in 
preventing CHB.  Ultimately, HCQ will be considered efficacious for CHB  if fewer than 6 CHB cases 
occur among  70 subjects  evaluated on no potentially confounding medications.  
While some subjects will be prescribed the study drug (HCQ) by the PI, Dr. Buyon, or a designated 
study team member  (covered by Consent Form Version 1), many patients  will be referred to the study  
from other sites.  In these  cases, patients’  own doctors will take responsibility for prescribing  the study 
drug, and patients  will consent to have their bloods  and medical  records sent to the investigators at 
NYU for data and sample  analysis  (as delineated in Consent Form Version  2).  Dr. Buyon  or another  
study team member  will discuss the study  with each  potential subject and complete the informed 
consent process prior to enrollment.  All subjects (74 in total)  will be considered enrolled at NYU and 
consented using  NYU  IRB-approved  consent  forms.   
  Gender of Subjects
Because the aim of this study is to determine  whether hydroxychloroquine  use during pregnancy  
prevents congenital  heart block, only female  subjects will be recruited.  
Age of Subjects
18-45
Racial and Ethnic  Origin
No subject will be excluded from participation in this study on the basis of race or ethnic origin.   
Eligibility (Inclusion) Criteria
1) Mothers must have  anti-Ro and/or anti-La Ab documented in the NYU immunology  laboratory 
(CLIA-approved), which  utilizes  an ELISA (Immunovision) as well as reactivity on ELISA to at least  
one of three recombinant  antigens  (48La, 52Ro,  60Ro,  JB laboratory).  Dr. Khamashta  will likewise 
Human Subjects Protocol  # 11-00369 PI: BUYON, Jill P., MD Version date: 08/06/2019
verify Ab in his laboratory. 2) Mothers must have a previous child with cardiac NL, defined herein as: 
the presence of heart block (1st, 2nd, or 3rd degree)  documented by electrocardiogram (EKG),  
echocardiogram, pacemaker,  or statement in the medical record, and/or; presence of cardiac injury,  
which specifically includes autopsy evidence of a mononuclear infiltrate  in the endocardium,  
myocardium, and pericardium and/or EFE on echocardiogram always  associated with cardiac  
dysfunction.  In PITCH, we included women  with a prior child with rash; however, recent data 
generated from the RRNL  suggest that recurrence of CHB following  rash is 11%, not 18% [34]. Thus,  
inclusion of previous rash could lead to a falsely lowered recurrence rate, and will therefore be 
excluded. 3) Intrauterine pregnancy 12 weeks. 4) Mother may be taking ≤20 mg prednisone 
because, in our experience, CHB has developed  in the presence of this dose. 5) Mother  may be 
asymptomatic, or have a rheumatic disease  such as SLE or SS.  Maternal health status has not been 
considered an influence on the development of CHB  [1].  6) Mother may or may not already be taking 
HCQ.  This  latter point was discussed  with Dr. Nathalie Costedoat-Chalumeau,  who has published  
extensively on measurement of HCQ [35,36].   While  it might be optimal  for the mothers  anticipating 
enrollment in the study to all have been  on HCQ prior to conception,  this is impractical.   Some  may 
never achieve pregnancy and not want to take HCQ unless they conceive  (especially those  
asymptomatic).  On the other hand,  women  with SLE are likely to already  be on HCQ and it would 
limit enrollment  to exclude these patients  if all must initiate HCQ only at enrollment in the first 
trimester. Although the accepted dogma is that HCQ requires several months  for maximal  efficacy  in 
treating rheumatic disease, it is unknown whether this would apply to transplacental passage  or fetal 
levels (which are impossible to measure).   Dr. Costedoat-Chalumeau suggests that HCQ is probably 
a three  compartment  model which includes the circulation, tissues  and cells.  In the circulation, the 
half life is approximately  7 days and in the tissues, it is 40 days [37,38]. In Dr. Costedoat-Chalumeau’s 
experience, steady state blood levels of HCQ are achieved in 4-6 weeks. Thus, dosing the mother no 
later than 10 weeks gestation should provide sufficient fetal exposure before the vulnerable period  of 
CHB which is generally accepted to span 18-24 wks.  Furthermore, the placenta  has to be formed for 
HCQ to gain access to the fetus  and it may be effective quickly  for the biology  we are considering. 
Exclusion Criteria
1) Mother does not have  Ab to Ro or La. 2) Identification of any of the following structural lesions 
considered causal for CHB, i.e., those that could  account for block because of fibrous disruption 
between the atrium and AV node or due to absence of the penetrating bundles of the AV node: a) 
atrioventricular septal  defects; b) single ventricle c) developmental tricuspid  valve disease; d) L-
transposition of the great arteries; e) heterotaxia. 3) Mother  is taking >20 mg prednisone/day.  
Although unlikely to be preventative, higher doses will constitute an exclusion.   The  final point of 
intense discussion centered around whether another exclusion should be the use of HCQ in the first 
pregnancy in which CHB occurred.  While one could argue that in these mothers HCQ was not 
effective and perhaps will not be again,  this assumption remains speculative  and thus prior absence 
of efficacy of HCQ will not constitute an exclusion  criteria. 
Vulnerable Subjects
This study  will examine  two groups  of vulnerable subjects – pregnant women and their fetuses.  
Congenital heart block associated with maternal  anti-Ro antibodies, the rare disease  this study seeks  
to understand  and ultimately prevent, affects  the fetuses of mother  who carry these anti-Ro  
antibodies.  It is therefore essential  to include these vulnerable populations in this study, as our  
ultimate goal is to protect these mothers and their children by understanding  and ultimately preventing  
this devastating  disease.  
Methods and Procedures
Methods and Procedures
Human Subjects Protocol  # 11-00369 PI: BUYON, Jill P., MD Version date: 08/06/2019
With over 400 families now enrolled  in the RRNL and our success at rapid  enrollment in PITCH, we 
are well positioned to enroll in the current study.  Most of the women enrolled in the RRNL are of 
childbearing age, motivation  is quite high, and based on review  of overall data,  it is likely  that at least 
20% will again become  pregnant and available for this study. Importantly, PRIDE and PITCH solidified 
a referral base of obstetricians and pediatric cardiologists. Furthermore, Dr. Khamashta has agreed to 
participate given  that all 19 patients must be recruited in one year.  The DSMB for the U.S. based 
PITCH study (Dr. Ware Branch, maternal-fetal  medicine, Dr. Bonnie Bermas, rheumatologist with 
expertise in pregnancy and women’s  health issues, and Dr. Joan Merrill, rheumatologist with expertise 
in design and monitoring of clinical trials in SLE) in conjunction with Drs. Jill Buyon, Peter Izmirly,  
Deborah Friedman (pediatric cardiologist), and Mimi Kim (statistician) have had extensive discussions 
regarding the results of PITCH and the design  of this current study. With regard to a randomized  trial 
comparing any drug with placebo, Dr. Kim prepared the following analysis:
Assumptions 1. Recurrence rate of CHB  (whether  previous child had CHB or rash) is approx  19%.  
2. Clinically meaningful outcome would be at least 50% reduction in recurrence rate.
Power Calculations 19% to 10% recurrence  rate: 261 per group (N = 522) 
19% to 5% recurrence rate: 97 per group  (N = 194)
Data Analysis And Data  Monitoring 
Statistical considerations for overall  study:   
The proposed design has the following operating  characteristics. Let p1 = recurrence 
rate definitely not worthy of further investigation; p2 = recurrence definitely worthy of further  
investigation. In this study, we define p1 = 18% [41] and p2 = 5%. According  to Simon’s optimal  2-
stage approach [32], the expected sample  size is 29.8 subjects  with a probability of early termination 
of 0.69 when the recurrence rate is equal to p1. The probability of accepting the treatment for further 
study is at most 5%  if the recurrence rate is unacceptably high (>18%) with that treatment. In 
contrast, there is a 90% probability of accepting  the treatment for further study if the true recurrence 
rate is 5%.  .It is important to emphasize  that the purpose is to obtain critical data on the efficacy of 
HCQ in the prevention of recurrent CHB and determine whether this preventive approach  should  be 
studied further. At study completion, the proportion of mothers  having a child with advanced  CHB  will 
also be computed, along with corresponding 95% confidence intervals.  Secondary  endpoints  that are 
binary (i.e., occurrence  of 1st degree block, abnormal fluid collection) will be analyzed  by similar 
approaches. Continuous variables (e.g., shortening  fraction,  gestational age) will be summarized by 
estimating means  and standard deviations.  The effect of therapy on HCQ levels,  IFN-α signatures,  
and Ab titers  will be evaluated  by fitting mixed  effects linear models  to repeated  assessments of titers 
obtained during follow-up. In addition,  change in any of these analytes  at specific time points  from 
baseline will be analyzed  using the paired t-test or Wilcoxon signed rank test, depending on 
distribution of the data.  
Safety committee.  An independent DSMB will convene by teleconference three times during the year.   
The members include Drs. Joan T. Merrill, Ware Branch, and Bonnie Bermas  (all of whom served in 
PITCH). 
Data Storage  and Confidentiality 
Data management. Study information  will be recorded at the patients’ obstetrical and rheumatology 
sites. Standardized, computer-adapted case report forms (CRFs)  have been  developed.  Within 2 
weeks of each visit, completed CRFs and tapes of the echocardiograms will be sent to Dr. Friedman. 
Following review, CRFs will be faxed  to the coordinator at NYU for final error checks and entered into 
the computer  database.  The coordinator will maintain a calendar for each patient, monitor completion 
Human Subjects Protocol  # 11-00369 PI: BUYON, Jill P., MD Version date: 08/06/2019
of data collection forms, and mail delinquency lists to investigators  and Drs. Friedman and Buyon 
monthly.  The coordinator  will generate monthly reports summarizing accrual by institution and 
country; demographic and clinical characteristics; adherence to treatment and follow-up; and 
unexpected or severe complications  of treatment.  Raw data will be transferred to Dr. Kim for analysis.  
Separate CRFs for demographics,  SLEPDAI (as appropriate), medications, physical exam, laboratory 
data, and adverse  events  will be sent within 2 weeks to the coordinator  who will review each form with 
Drs. Buyon and Izmirly.  Serious adverse events  will be reported to the local IRB and the DSMB within 
24 h. A database structure and computer data entry  interface has been  developed using database  
management software. Data entry procedures will include  quality control  features such  as duplicate  
record entry  and comparison for verification,  logic checks  and range checks, computer logging of 
record entry  and editing, and automated back-up.  The computer is protected  with a password at the 
BIOS level.  Data on patients enrolled  in Europe will be forwarded  to the coordinating center  at NYU.  
Blood collected as part of this study  will be stored for future research
SPECIMEN BANKING
1. The samples  will be labeled with anonymous  and unique  codes generated  by the FreezerWorks  
database.  
2. In the FreezerWorks  database, only authorized users with password  will be able to access  PHI.  
Paper charts will be kept in a locked room in MSB room 611.   
3. Samples will be stored for future use for an indefinite time period.  
4. The samples  will be stored in MSB room 606 and Dr. Buyon will have access  to them.  
5. The type of research that will be done on stored  samples at this time is not known at this time.   
6. Genetic testing  will not be done  on these samples.  
7. If a subject requests  withdrawal of sample(s)  the samples will be appropriately discarded and 
confirmation of this will be provided  to the subject.  
Risk/Benefit Assessment
Risk
The potential physical  risks and discomforts to you which  may relate  to the treatment with 
hydroxychloroquine are discussed  below.    
Hydroxychloroquine is part of a group of medications initially used to treat malaria, but usage has 
expanded to rheumatologic  conditions  such  as systemic lupus and rheumatoid arthritis.  Even though 
the U.S. Food and Drug  Administration (FDA) lists hydroxychloroquine as a medication that has not 
been determined  to be safe in pregnancy,  extensive  review of the medical literature suggests that this 
drug is safe during pregnancy.  Results from animal  studies showed  that hydroxychloroquine could 
have visual  side effects on the baby and there  are also isolated  case reports  of hearing and visual 
problems in babies whose mothers received this drug during pregnancy. However, none of the clinical  
studies (inclusive of over 300 children) using hydroxychloroquine during pregnancy  have found  a 
higher frequency of hearing problems, visual problems or any other malformation in the babies 
exposed to the medication  during  pregnancy than in pregnancies  in which the baby’s mother  did not 
take hydroxychloroquine. The potential side effects  for the mothers are rare and consist  of temporary  
gastrointestinal discomfort,  discoloration  of the skin and visual  problems.  A patient  taking  this drug 
should be seen  by an eye doctor  once  per year and therefore if you have never been on this drug and 
are taking it only for this study, you should see an eye doctor. Two pills each day is the dose of 
hydroxychloroquine used for this study and both pills can be taken together.   
Human Subjects Protocol  # 11-00369 PI: BUYON, Jill P., MD Version date: 08/06/2019
With regard to having blood drawn,  minor bruising at the site of blood  drawing  is common.   Less 
common are larger  bruises, inflammation of the vein where  the blood was drawn, infection, and blood 
clots.  Rarely, people faint from having blood  drawn.  We will draw your blood while  you are sitting  or 
lying on your back  and ask you to remain in that position for several minutes to further minimize the 
risk of fainting.  The risk of removing the amount of blood  required  for the study is minor.   The  
additional amount of blood drawn only for this study is not large  (1 tablespoon at each visit) and does 
not pose an additional risk to you or your unborn  child.
No independently confirmed adverse effects on the fetus resulting from prenatal diagnostic ultrasound 
exposure have been  reported.   Acoustic  output  (the amount of sound applied to the mother's 
abdomen to produce the ultrasound image of the fetal heart) will be kept below acceptable  limits. 
Protection Against Risks
Safety committee.  An independent DSMB will convene by teleconference three times during the year.   
The members include Drs. Joan T. Merrill, Ware Branch, and Bonnie Bermas  (all of whom served in 
PITCH). 
Individual stopping rules:  Fetal:  1) Development of advanced block  (2nd or 3rd degree);  1st degree 
block will not constitute a formal stopping point. 2) Decrease of amniotic fluid index <5 cm. 3) 
Intrauterine growth  restriction (IUGR) - no fetal growth over 2 weeks.  4) Hydrops  or myocardial  
dysfunction or EFE. 5) Death. Maternal: 1) Serious reaction to study drug, e.g. severe  rash or 
intractable G.I. intolerance. 2) Withdrawal of consent. If isolated 1st degree heart block occurs,  
dexamethasone may be offered,  and the patient may continue  in the study. If a patient achieves an 
individual stopping  point  due to CHB and hydropic changes, she will be offered dexamethasone and 
the outcome of the pregnancy will be prospectively followed. 
Study stopping rules:  Enrollment is stopped if 3 fetuses develop  2nd or 3rd degree block.  
Potential Benefits  to the Subjects
We hope that this study shows that treatment  with hydroxychloroquine prevents the development of 
heart block in your baby.  
The potential benefits are substantial in relation to the small  risks posed  by participation. 
This study  is important  because there  is information from basic  science research  suggesting that 
hydroxychloroquine may be effective in preventing  the inflammation and fibrosis which may result in 
heart block.  This is only testing done with test tubes, not animals or humans.  There is also a large  
study that reviewed  the charts of many women with anti-Ro antibodies and this study found that 
hydroxychloroquine may be beneficial. However,  we also are not sure whether for those mothers  who 
received hydroxychloroquine, they may have had normal babies even without taking the drug.   The 
results of this study will be used not only for a potential benefit to your own baby but also as a guide to 
help other  pregnancies in which the baby is at risk for heart disease.  
Subject Identification, Recruitment  and Consent/Assent 
Method of Subject  Identification and Recruitment
With over 400 families now enrolled  in the RRNL and our success at rapid  enrollment in PITCH, we 
are well positioned to enroll in the current study.  Most of the women enrolled in the RRNL are of 
childbearing age, motivation  is quite high, and based on review  of overall data,  it is likely  that at least 
20% will again become  pregnant and available for this study. Importantly, PRIDE and PITCH solidified 
a referral base of obstetricians and pediatric cardiologists. Furthermore, Dr. Khamashta has agreed to 
participate given  that all 19 patients must be recruited in one year.
Human Subjects Protocol  # 11-00369 PI: BUYON, Jill P., MD Version date: 08/06/2019
Innovative Plans for recruitment: 1.) Recruiter for patients: Sterling Larnerd  is a mother  enrolled  in the 
RRNL and has agreed to participate in this project. She has two children with CHB and moderates 
Heart Block Kids (http://health.groups.yahoo.com/group/heartblockkids/), a support group for parents  
of children affected by neonatal lupus. The group will organize forums  and educational  panels to 
address CHB mothers’ inquiries regarding planning pregnancy  and participating in preventive  trials 
and existing therapies. This approach allows us to create a link with an established group of mothers  
actively seeking counsel who are motivated to participate. 2.) Conference Call for Patients: This will 
take place every 3 months between Drs. Buyon,  Izmirly, and Friedman, and patients  who would like 
information about participation in the study. 
Process of Consent 
Each subject  meeting  the above-described  eligibility  requirements (or the authorized representative of 
the subject) will have  the opportunity to review  a consent form specific  to this study and approved  by 
New York University  School of Medicine’s  Institutional Review Board.  Either  the P.I. of this study, Jill 
Buyon, M.D.,  or another individual authorized to obtain consent will review  the consent  form with each 
subject and will answer any questions  the subject may have.  Subjects will give their consent in writing  
by signing their name in the appropriate  sections  of the consent  form, and this will only be done once 
the P.I. and/or other study personnel believes that the subject  truly understands the significance  of 
what they are signing.  
Subject Capacity 
All subjects  will have  the capacity to give informed  consent to participate in this study.   
Subject/Representative Comprehension  
The initials and/or signatures at the appropriate  sections of the consent  form will provide the indication  
that the subject  or subject’s authorized representative has understood the information presented.  The  
opportunity that will be provided each subject to review the consent form with authorized  study 
personnel and to address any questions or concerns she may have will provide  further  assurance  that 
the signatures and initials  on the consent form indicate true “consent.”  
Debriefing Procedures 
Not applicable.   
Consent Forms  
A consent form has been submitted.  The P.I. is responsible for ensuring that valid consent  is 
obtained and documented for all subjects.  
Costs to the Subject
It will not cost subjects  anything to participate in this study.  Subjects (or their insurance company) will 
be charged or held responsible for the costs  of their routine  care (the care they would have received if 
they were not in this study).
Any study-related costs  associated with subjects being in this study that are not part of their routine 
care will be paid by study funds.   
This study  is being sponsored by a grant.  Portions of Dr. Buyon’s and her research  team’s  salaries 
are being  paid by this grant. 
Human Subjects Protocol  # 11-00369 PI: BUYON, Jill P., MD Version date: 08/06/2019
Payment for Participation  
You will not receive any reimbursement for participating in this study.  