   RO 02803          
  
1/11/06 
Version 9  1  
 
 
 
 
Phase I/II Trial Examining Dose-per-fraction Escalation using Intensity 
Modulated Radiation Therapy in the Treatment of Prostate Cancer 
 
      
A University of Wisconsin Tomotherapy Group Study 
   
University of Wisconsin Participants: 
 Study Chair  Mark A. Ritter, M.D., Ph.D. 
 
Radiobiology   Jack F. Fowler, Ph.D., D.Sc. 
 Statistician   Richard Chappell, Ph.D.  
M.D. Anderson Cancer Center Orlando: 
 
Institutional PI:   Patrick Kupelian, M.D. 
 
Wayne State University: 
 Institutional PI:  Jeffrey Forman, M.D.  
Medical College of Wisconsin:  
 Institutional PI:  Dian Wang, M.D.       
 
INDEX
 
 
   RO 02803          
  
1/11/06 
Version 9  2  
 
   
1.0 
2.0 3.0 4.0 5.0 6.0 7.0 8.0 9.0 
10.0 
 
Appendix I 
Appendix II 
Appendix III 
Appendix IV 
Appendix V 
Appendix VI 
Appendix VII  Schema 
Background Objectives Selection of Patients Registration Procedures Treatment Plan Measurement of Effect Study Parameters Statistical Considerations Records to be Kept References  Patient consent form Fox Chase Bowel/Bladder Toxicity Questionnaire International Erectile Function Questionnaire The Spitzer Quality of Life Index (SQLI) 
Acute and Late Toxicity Data Sheet Eligibility Checklist Partin Tables 
           
STUDY CHAIR  
 Mark Ritter, M.D., Ph.D. Clinical Science Center 600 Highland Avenue, K4/B100 Madison, WI  53792 (608) 263-8500  Protocol Information Network Contact Person
 
 Diana Trask – (608) 263-8500 Wendy Walker- (608) 263-8500 
   RO 02803          
  
1/11/06 
Version 9  3  
     
SCHEMA 
     
4.3Phase I/II HYPOFRACTIONATION TRIAL
Š 50 PTS                                    S     Š 50 PTS         Š 50 PT≤50PTS 50 PTS*a 50 PTS a,b50 PTS b 
   
* As described in Section 5.1, institutions join ing the study after Level  I is filled will treat 
two patients at Level I before proceeding to enter patients at the level that the overall trial is 
currently accruing to.  
 
a 50 evaluable patients will be enrolled per dose/fraction level and followed for toxicity.  
These 50 patients will be analyzed for dose-per-fraction escalation and fraction-per-week 
escalation.  Additional patients may be enrolled in Levels one and two while waiting for higher dose level data and toxicity information to mature per Section 4.0  
b An additional 100 patients will be enrolled at  the MTS (Maximum Tolerated Schedule) level 
in addition to the 50 patients already accrued at that level  
 
   RO 02803          
  
1/11/06 
Version 9  4  
 
1.0 BACKGROUND 
 1.1 Introduction  
Prostate cancer is the most co mmon non-skin cancer in American men, resulting in over 30,000 
deaths annually in this country.  Optimal treatment  for localized, potentially curable, prostate 
cancer has not been determined, but radiation therapy has an established and major role in the 
management of localized disease, a role support ed by evidence that disease control rates 
comparable to radical prostatectomy are achieved but with less toxicity.  
 
The probability of achieving biochemical control a fter radiation therapy is  related to the pre-
treatment PSA, tumor grade and loca l stage, with PSA and grade being the most important factors.  
For example, patients with pre-tr eatment PSAs of less than 6 ng/ml and Gleason scores less than 
or equal to 6, have 5-year bioc hemical control rates of 87%, whereas patients with PSAs 10 – 20 
ng/ml and Gleason scores of 7 have control rates of only 45%. Radical prostatectomy outcomes 
are also influenced strongly by thes e same pre-treatment predictors. 
 It has long been felt that one of the most important factors limiting the success of radiation therapy 
has been the inability to deliver adequate radiation dose without producing unacceptable toxicity.  
More recently, however, innovations in cancer im aging, radiation treatment planning and treatment 
delivery technology have created opportunities for safe dose escalation.    
1.2 The rationale for dose escalation 
 
Retrospective studies have indicated a substantial dose response for prostate cancer.  Hanks et al 
(1) examined Patterns of Care dat a and found actuarial local recurrence rates of 37% for Stage C 
patients treated to less than 60 Gy , 36% for doses of between 60-64.9 Gy, 28% for 65-69.9 Gy and 
19% for doses of 70 Gy or more .  Similarly, Perez et al (2) found 38% local recurrences for doses 
less than 60 Gy, 20% for doses between 60 and 70 Gy  and only 12 % for doses of 70 Gy or 
greater.  More recently, a number of retrospective studies (3-7) and one randomized trial (8) have 
demonstrated superior PSA recurrence-free survival when doses higher than 70 Gy are delivered, 
at least for intermediate or higher risk patients (Figure 1) .  These results and the unsatisfactorily 
high rates of disease persistence in intermediat e to higher risk patients after conventional dose 
radiation therapy (66-70 Gy) provi de a strong rationale for the deliver y of higher than conventional 
radiation doses.   
 
         
   RO 02803          
  
1/11/06 
Version 9  5  
 
    Figure 1.   
Tumor control probabilities for “intermediate 
risk” patients.  Data de rived from 4 published 
series (Fowler, unpublished)        
 When delivered with conventionally planned techni ques, however, doses higher than 70 Gy are 
associated with higher complication risks (9). It has now become clea r that 3D conformal 
radiotherapy demonstrates better than historically expected tolerance of normal tissues to higher 
doses (6, 10, 11)  but complication rates, particularly rectal  bleeding, can still be substantial. Various 
analyses suggest that the total area of  rectal wall exposed to greater than 60 or 70 Gy predicts the 
rate of rectal bleeding or more severe grade 4 complications such as ulceration (Figure 2) . 
Therefore, the implementat ion of intensity modulat ed radiotherapy, with its ability to further reduce 
rectal irradiation, should further reduce toxiciti es, as has indeed been reported by Zelefsky et. al. 
(12). 
 
 
 
     Figure 2.  Grade 2 or higher rectal 
complications versus rectal area receiving higher than specified radiation doses.  A summary of 6 
clinical trials. (13) 
 
 
    
 
   RO 02803          
  
1/11/06 
Version 9  6 With these advancements in delivery precision fo r radiation to a planned treatment volume, the 
minimizing of daily uncertainties regarding pati ent setup reproducibility and the change of position 
of the prostate within the pelvis because of rectal and/or bladder f illing takes on a significant role. 
Currently at the University of Wisconsin Department of Radiation Oncology, we are using an 
optically guided 3D-ultrasound tar get localization system (SonArrayTM, Zmed, Inc., Ashland, MA) to 
correct daily for these misalignments at the time of treatment to within 2 mm along each axis 
(Tome, in press, 2001). As an alternative, the implantation of small metal seeds into the prostate to 
serve as fiduciaries during daily portal imaging has  also proven reliable as a means of localizing 
the prostate  In addition, it has been demonstrated that the use of a rectal ball oon catheter can immobilize the 
prostate and facilitate localization on port films potentially allowing ti ghter margins for the treatment 
volume. Also, the lateral and posterior aspects of t he rectal wall are displace d out of the high dose 
region by the rectal balloon, which should offe r the potential for significant rectal sparing (14, 15) . 
  
1.3 Hypofractionated Radiotherapy for prostate cancer 
 
While the above-described physical improvements in dose delivery have permitted larger total 
doses of radiation to be delivered to the pr ostate without undue toxicity, the added number of 
fractions of radiation required have produced an increasing burden in  terms of cost, utilization of 
resources and inconvenience to the patient.  Some dose escalation regimens currently exceed 43 treatments and exceed 8 weeks in duration. Ev idence has emerged over the past two years, 
however, of a unique prostate cancer radiobiology that may offer the opportunity to dramatically 
improve the efficiency and safety with wh ich radiation therapy is delivered.  
Conventional fractionation schemes employing frac tion sizes of 1.8 – 2.0 Gy are based upon the 
premise that tumors typically are less responsiv e to fractionation than are late-responding normal 
tissues.  The α/β ratios are one measure of fractionat ion response, with low ratios (high β ‘s) being 
more associated with late responding normal tiss ues, indicating greater repair between fractions 
with an accompanying greater relati ve sparing with small fraction sizes than for tumors with their 
higher α/β ratios.  Under these conditions, an improved therapeutic ratio is achieved with multiple 
small fractions.  In contrast, prostate cancers appear to be better
 able to repair radiation in jury than late responding 
normal tissues. This is probably related to the very  slow growth fractions and growth rates typical 
for prostate cancer. Growth fraction (or av erage cell cycle time) has often been associated with 
fractionation response, with slowly  proliferating normal tissues ( and some slowly proliferating 
tumors) generally displaying strong fractionation responses (low α/β ratios).  This relationship has 
been demonstrated for melanomas (16) and for some sarcomas (17) , for example.  In the case of 
prostate cancer, there is ample evidence for slow proliferation, based both upon direct 
measurement of pot ential doubling times and labeling indices (18) and upon analysis of the kinetics 
of rising PSA during tumor recurrence (19).  Recent analyses of clinical tumor response data have 
argued for a low α/β ratio for prostate cancer as well (20, 21) . Brenner and Hall (20) , for example, 
analyzed dose response data for bot h external beam radiation and I-125 brachytherapy data and 
derived a very low α/β ratio of 1.5 Gy for prostate cancer.  Duschene and Peters (21) argue in 
analogous fashion that the α/β ratio for prostate cancer may be more similar to that expected for 
late responding normal tissue than for the typi cal, more rapidly proliferating tumor. 
   RO 02803          
  
1/11/06 
Version 9  7  
Our own analysis of tumor control versus dose response for external beam and brachytherapy also 
indicates a very low α/βratio of 1.49 (95% CI of 1.25 to 1.76) (22), significantly lower than the ratio 
of 3 expected for most late responding normal tissues. 
 
Under these unusual conditions, in which the α/β  ratio of the tumor is lower (the radiation repair 
capacity is higher) than that for t he limiting normal tissue, a new par adigm is created in which it 
becomes advantageous to use larger fractions; in ot her words, to use hypofractionation, rather 
than the traditionally larger number  of smaller fraction size radi ation treatments employed when 
treating most other tumor types.  In fact, the ol d way of fractionating woul d be the least efficient 
method.  Using the linear quadratic model, one can predict that it s hould be possible to improve the 
ratio of tumor control to normal tissue toxicity (the therapeutic ratio)  for prostate cancer by using 
hypofractionation. 
 Although begun before this unique prostate cancer r adiobiology was understood, a relatively large 
clinical trial has already been ca rried out using hypofractionation for prostate cancer.  Cleveland 
Clinic investigators have carried out a trial of hypofra ctionation consisting of 28  fractions of 2.5 Gy 
each for a total dose of 70 Gy (23).  Intensity modulated radi otherapy (IMRT) and daily 
pretreatment ultrasound-based prosta te localization were employed to improve treatment precision 
and reduce radiation dose to the rect um.  These investigators are now  reporting 2-year follow-up in 
which rectal and bladder toxicities are no greater and likely lower that previously experienced with 
conventional fractionation of 2 Gy per day to 76 Gy using conventional 3D conformal radiotherapy 
techniques (Mohen, in press, 2002). Furthermore, t hese early results appear to indicate better 
tumor control (PSA recurrence-free survival) t hat was seen with standard fractionation, although 
follow-up is too short to reach definit ive conclusions regarding tumor control.
 1.4  Biomarkers of Prostate Cancer Radiation Response  There is increasing evidence that cancers can have molecular alterations t hat render them poorly 
responsive to radiation therapy and that are associated with a signi ficant proportion of treatment 
failures. Preliminary findings indica te, for example, the status of certain biomarkers, such as p53, 
and Bcl-2, correlate with success or failure of radi ation therapy treatment for prostate cancer (30-
36) but more such studies are needed to further identify markers and to define the strength of 
these correlations with treatment outcome, particularly in favorabl
e or intermediate risk patients, 
the type of patient most frequently diagnosed today  and the type treated in this present study. 
 We will therefore study certain biomarkers in t he diagnostic biopsy specimens of patients treated 
on this protocol. These biomarkers hav e been selected based upon prognostically useful 
prevalences in early to intermediate risk pr ostate cancer and based upon their having pathways 
linked to radiation response. We will immunohistochemic ally measure the levels  of p53, Bcl-2,  and 
Ki-67 in pre-treatment diagnostic biopsy specimens from patients enrolled on this study and will 
analyze correlations between these markers and clin ical outcomes (freedom from biochemical and 
metastatic failure) in univariate and multivariate fashion, taking conventi onal prognosticators such 
as stage, grade and PSA into account.  
 
 
1.5 Study Rationale 
   RO 02803          
  
1/11/06 
Version 9  8  
Hypofractionation Trial  
The purpose of this study is to examine the clinic al feasibility of using IM RT combined with daily 
pretreatment prostate localizat ion to deliver increasingly hypof ractionated treatment courses.  
Progressively larger fraction sizes will be deliv
ered in a phase I design based on both acute and 
long-term tolerances to the treatment.  The dos e-per-fraction escalation design utilizes schemas 
that maintain an isoeffective dose for late effects,  while predicting that tumor control will actually 
improve.  A natural consequence of t hese constraints is that the tota l dose of radiation that can be 
delivered over an entire course of  therapy must decrease as the dose delivered with each fraction 
increases.  
 Late effects increase with fraction size and total dose delivered whereas acute toxicities increase 
with total dose and as overall treat ment time is shortened.   Ex cessive shortening of overall 
treatment time could be a natural consequence of hypofractionation if treatments continue to be 
delivered daily even as fraction size is increased.  Thus, any hypofractionation trial design must 
guard against an unacceptable increase in acute toxicities by cons idering whether treatments can 
continue to be delivered daily (5 days per week),  as is generally the case with conventional 
treatment, or whether treatm ent frequency needs to be reduced.    The proposed study will 
therefore initiate treatm ent at each fraction size level with on ly 4 fractions per week and will only 
increase to 5 fractions per week if tolerated.  The delivery of fewer, larger frac tions of radiation, if proven effe ctive and safe, would result in 
significant cost saving and a more efficient use of resources. In addition, pat ients would be spared 
the burden of undergoing the 40 or more treatments required in most current, conventionally 
fractionated, dose escalation regimens.  Time and effort saved could be applied to upgrading 
pretreatment verification of  patient and organ position. 
 
Biomarker Study
 
The purpose of the biomarker study is to iden tify tumor biomarkers useful in predicting 
wh
ich prostate cancers are or are not likely to respond to radiation therapy. If successful, 
this proposed study will define biomarkers that are clinically useful in predicting response 
to radiation therapy in favorable-to-intermediat e risk patients.  This will provide insight into 
the mechanisms of resistance to radiation therapy and will potentially allow future 
therapies, including novel biologic/molecular therapy appro aches, to be prospectively 
individualized to optimize clinical outcome.   
 Participation in the tissue study is optional and is also dependent on the availability of tissue. The decision to participate in Biomar ker study will not affect nor influence any
 
patient treatment according to the remainder of  this hypofractionation protocol.  Subjects 
agreeing to tissue study participation will sign a consent indicating this decision. 
 
2.0 OBJECTIVES 
 2.1 To evaluate acute and long-term tolerances to dose-per-fraction escalation in the treatment 
of prostate cancer using optimized treatment  delivery that employs IMRT, daily rectal 
balloon displacement, and transabdominal ul trasound localization of the prostate. 
   RO 02803          
  
1/11/06 
Version 9  9 2.2 To clinically evaluate local tumor control and biochemical progression-free survival and 
metastasis-free survival. 
2.3 To immunohistochemically measure the levels of p53, Bcl-2,  and Ki-67 in pre-
treatment diagnostic biopsy specimens from patients enrolled on this study and w
ill 
analyze correlations between these marker s and clinical outcomes (freedom from 
biochemical and metastatic failure) in univariate and multivaria te fashion, taking 
conventional prognosticators such as stage, grade and PSA into account. 
 
 
3.0 SELECTION OF PATIENTS  
• Histologically proven adenocarcinoma of the prostate.  
• Stage ≤ T2b disease, as defined by 1997 AJCC classification 
• Predicted risk of lymph node involvement (by standard nomograms) of 15% or less (24), OR 
histologically negative pelvic nodes   
• Gleason score ≤ 7 
• No evidence of distant metastasis 
• Age 18+ 
• Informed consent signed in accor dance with institutional protocol 
• Pretreatment evaluations must be comp leted as specified in Section 7.0. 
• ECOG performance status 0-1 
• No previous or concurrent cancers, other  than localized basal cell or squamous cell skin 
carcinoma, unless continually disease free for at least 5 years 
• No prior pelvic irradiation, prostate brachytherapy, or bilateral orchiectomy 
• Gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist (GnRH- a) use permitted (maximum of 6 months 
duration).  Anti-androgen therapy pe rmitted concurrently with GnRH-a. 
• 
No previous or concu rrent cytotoxic chemotherapy  
• No radical surgery or cryosurgery for prostate cancer 
• The absence of any co-morbid medical condition which would constitute a contraindication 
for radical radiotherapy 
• The absence of serious concurrent illness of psychological, familial, sociological, 
geographical or other concomitant conditions  which do not permit adequate follow-up and 
compliance with the study protocol. 
• No current use of anticoagulati on therapy, other than aspirin. 
 
 
 4.0 REGISTRATION PROCEDURES  
 
Patients can be registered only after eligibility criter ia are met.  Patients must have signed informed 
consent.  Patients are registered pr ior to any protocol treatment by faxing the registration page to 
608-263-3526 and calling 608-263-8500.  T he UW data managers will verify  eligibility, assign a 
case number, dose level, and confirm the number of fractions per week. 
 Patients will be enrolled on the hi ghest available dose level open to accrual.  If the highest dose 
level has reached full accrual with insufficient fo llow-up for further dose-per-fraction escalation, 
accrual will take place at one dose level lower, if one exists. 
   RO 02803          
  
1/11/06 
Version 9  10  
Enrollment will be permanently closed when the maximum tolerated dose per frac tion is reached or 
when the dose per fraction escalation is complete.     
5.0 TREATMENT PLAN  
 5.1 General 
 
The accrual goal will be 50 evaluable patients in each of the three dose levels. An additional  100 
patients will be enrolled at the determined MTS (Maximum Tolerated Schedule). An exception to 
this accrual target will be made for any new institut ional participant joining the trial after Level I 
accrual has been completed, in which case that institution will  treat two patie nts to completion at 
Level I (22 fractions, 5 treatments a week) irrespec tive of the current  hypofractionation level the 
overall trial currently is treati ng. After two such patients have been treated, these institutions will 
then be allowed to accrue to the Level currently open in the trial. In addition, if the highest dose 
level has reached full accrual with insufficient fo llow-up for further dose-per-fraction escalation, 
accrual will take place at one dose level lower.  
As a result, patients will be enrolled on the highest 
available dose level open to accrual.    Both acute and late toxicities will be monitored and will dictate subsequent accrual.  The level of 
acute toxicity observed will dictate the number of fractions delivered per week, whereas the level of 
late toxicities will determine both whether accrual to a dose-per-fraction level is continued and 
whether escalation to the next dose-per-fraction leve l is allowed. The escala tion rules are as stated 
in 5.2 and 5.3, with the statistical rationale being described in Section 8.  Given this study design, 
predicting the overall number of patients accrued is difficult.  Assuming we are able to complete 
Levels 1-3 without dose limiting toxi city and taking into account the possibility of further enrollment 
into a lower dose level per escalation rules, the enrollment could be as high as 400 patients.   
 
5.2  Dose-per fraction escalation 
 
Escalation to the next higher dose-per-fraction leve l (or the accrual of an additional 100 patients to 
the MTS) will only be allowed when there is at leas t 20 patient years of fo llow-up and at least 5 
patients have been followed for at least 12 m onths.  A rate of 20% grade 2 or higher  late rectal 
toxicity per patient follow-up y ear will be considered dose limiting. Late toxicities will be scored > 90 
days from completion of therapy.  The statis tical rationale and methodol ogy for this dose-per-
fraction escalation strategy is described in section 8. 0.  Of note, statistical fl uctuations in measured 
toxicity rates could occasionally lead to an init ial over- or underestimation of these rates.  
Therefore, cumulative toxicity rates will be updated every 6 months throughout the life of the 
protocol and will be utilized accordi ng to the rules stated above. 
 The expected accrual timetable, the proposed dos e-per-fraction and total fraction levels, and 
patient accrual goals for this phase I/II trial are shown in Table 1 below.      
Table 
1:  Fraction size dose escalation protocol  
   RO 02803          
  
1/11/06 
Version 9  11 Level Approx. 
Interval 
(mo) Dose per 
Fx (Gy) # Fxs 
# pts Treatments 
per week Total 
dose 
(Gy) Equiv. 
dose (Gy)
I 1-15 2.94 22 50* 3         4        5  64.68 82.6 
II 16 - 30 3.63 16 50 3       4        5 58.08 85.1 
III 31 - 45 4.3 12 50  3       4        5 51.6 85.5 
* See section 5.1 for exceptions. Patients are init ially treated 3 or 4 times per week, with this 
treatment frequency subsequently in creasing, decreasing or remaining the same based upon the 
number of acute toxicities observed, as described in Section 5.3.  
 All of the three above levels ar e predicted to be approximately isoeffective for late effects at BED
3 
equals approximately 128 Gy 3.  In other words, each of thes e dose-per-fraction levels would be 
predicted to produce about the same level of late toxi city, all other factors such as high dose rectal 
wall volume remaining constant.  Furthermore, the above schemas are all predicted to produce the 
same late toxicity as the fractionation regi men successfully piloted by Kupelian and Mohan (23) of 
2.5 Gy times 28 fractions.  
 
An additional 100 patients may be accrued to the MTS  if toxicities observed in the first patients at 
the level are within the limits specif ied in the standard escalation rules. 
 
The accrual intervals for each level stem directly  from the escalation rules that will be followed, 
which are described in detail in Se ction 8.  While not shown, predicted tumor control at each of the 
levels can be extrapolated fr om the fitted model of actual tumor control data in Figure 1, combined 
with the increased biologically effective doses calc ulated for each dose-per fraction-level as shown 
in the last column of Table 1. Such calculations are theoretical, but provide the rationale to believe 
that the hypofractionation schem as proposed here may produce increasingly better tumor control 
with fewer fractions.    
5.3  Number of fractions per week and acute toxicities 
 
Acute toxicities, as defined in se ction 5.6, will be assessed to dete rmine the number of fractions at 
the given fraction size that can be delivered per week.  The first 10 patients enrolled at each 
fraction size level will receive either 3 or 4 fx/week, depending upon how well tolerated previous 
fractionation levels and weekly treatment frequenc ies were tolerated. Acute toxicities will be 
reanalyzed and acted upon if necessary for subsequent  groups of 10 patients. For toxicities 
observed within the first 10  patients at each hypofractionation level, ≥20% acute grade 3 or higher 
GI or GU toxicity will constitute a threshold toxi city level and will dictate a decrease in frequency of 
treatment by one treatment per w eek for the next 10 patients to be treated at that hypofractionation 
level. If > 20% acute toxicity is also observed in this second gr oup of 10 patients,  treatment 
frequency will be further reduced by one treatment per week for all remaining patients in that 
hypofractionation level.  If excess toxicity is not seen after changing to a  lower treatment 
frequency, then all remaining patients in that hypof ractionation level will continue to be treated at 
that frequency. 
• If exactly 20% of patients wit hin the first group of ten patients at any hypofractionation 
level experiences acute grade III or higher GI or GU toxicity, then the next ten patients at 
that hypofractionation level will remain at  the same weekly frequency of treatment, 
   RO 02803          
  
1/11/06 
Version 9  12 subject to the usual treatment frequency de-e scalation if excess acute toxicities are 
observed. 
 
• If < 20% of the first ten pati ents within the level experience th is threshold toxi cities, then 
the subsequent patients will be tr eated at the next higher treat ment frequency sublevel, 
again subject to de-escalation if excess acute toxicities are observed. 
 
• For an individual patient who develops acute to xicity at or above the Grade 3 level, that 
patient will be placed on treatment break fo r one week and treatments will then resume 
at the next lower treatment frequency.  For ex ample, if that patie nt was being treated 4 
times per week at the time  grade 3 or higher acute toxicities developed, he would 
subsequently be treated 3 times per week.  A longer treatment br eak can also be 
prescribed if the treating physician feels 
that it is clinically indicated. 
 
• At any hypofractionation level, a reduction in treatment frequency to two fractions per 
week will be allowed for a given patient if that patient exper iences a threshold or higher 
toxicity at 3 fractions per week. 
 
 
• Acute toxicities will be scored from the start of treatment through 90 days post 
completion of radiation therapy.  Late radiat ion toxicities will be scored from 90 days post 
completion of radiation therapy. 
 
5.4 Target volume and rectal dose limits.  
 
Target volume .  The GTV will generally be defined to in clude the entire prostate gland as 
visualized on CT scan.  Seminal vesicles will be in cluded in the GTV for 75% of the prescription 
dose if the estimated risk for se minal vesicle involvement is ≥15% (24). For situations where there 
is less than 15% risk of seminal vesicle involvem ent, the base of the semi nal vesicles may be 
included in the GTV at the discret ion of the treating physician.  The CTV will represent the same 
volume as the GTV plus a 0.3 cm margin in all di mensions except at the pr ostate-rectal interface, 
for which a margin of between 0 and 0.3 cm can be used. The PTV will include the CTV with a 
margin to account for patient and organ motion.  This margin beyond the CTV is expected to range 
between 0 – 0.4 cm depending upon the accuracy of the daily pretr eatment localization method 
used. Some form of pretreatment  prostate localization must be used, either transabdominal 
ultrasound, Megavoltage CT (using Tomotherapy) or fiducial markers. Block margins will be 
chosen to provide adequate coverage of the PT V with no more than 10 % dose heterogeneity 
across the PTV.  At least 95% of  the PTV must receive the pre scription dose or higher.  All 
planning will be carried out using an intensity modul ated radiation therapy treatment planning 
system and delivered with an IMRT capable LINA C or with the tomotherapy machine. 
 
Rectal dose limits .  The rectal wall volume (outer minus inner) will be contoured for a total length of 
11-12 cm beginning at approximately the inferior-most  portion of the ischial tuberosities and 
extending to at least one cm above t he most cranial extent of the treatment fields.  Rectal wall 
percent volumes versus dose, as derived from t he dose volume histogram, should be kept at or 
below values given in Table 2 whenever possible:  
Table 2:  Rectal Percent Limits vs. Dose  
   RO 02803          
  
1/11/06 
Version 9  13 Dose (Gy) Level Dose per 
Fx (Gy) # Fxs Total dose 
(Gy) 30 35 40 50 55 60 
I 2.94 22 64.68 - - 37% 25% - 13.5
% 
II 3.63 16 58.08 - 38% 32% 19% 12% - 
III 4.3 12 51.6 40% - 26.5% 12% - - 
  
5.5  Patient Positioning and Treatment delivery  
Patients will be positioned supine.  Use of a rectal  displacement balloon is optional but  daily 
pretreatment prostate localization is requir ed. Treatments will be carried out using Intensity 
Modulated Therapy with 6 MV or higher photons , using either a LINAC or tomotherapy. 
 
5.6  Adverse Effects 
5.6.1 Acute toxicity 
Acute toxicities will be scored from the start of radiation to 90 days after completion of radiation.    
Early urinary and GI toxicity will be used to determine the number of fractions deliverable per week 
as described in Section 5.2.  Toxicity gradi ng will be based on a modified RTOG grading criteria 
(25) (see below).  
 
 Grade 1 Grade 2* Grade 3 Grade 4 
Acute 
GU Requiring no medication Frequency of urination or nocturia, which is less frequent than every hour, dysuria, urgency, bladder spasm requiring local 
anesthetic. New 
obstructive 
sy
mptoms requiring 
an alpha blocker  Frequency with 
urgency and nocturia hourly or more frequently/dysuria, pelvis pain or bladder spasm requiring frequent narcotic; gross hematuria with or without clot formation. Hematuria requiring transfusion; acute bladder obstruction not secondary to clot passage, ulceration, or necrosis 
Acute 
GI Requiring no medication Diarrhea requiring parasympatholytic drugs; mucous discharge not necessitating sanitary pads; rectal or abdominal pain requiring narcotic analgesics. Diarrhea requiring parenteral support; severe mucous discharge necessitating sanitary pads, abdominal distension. Acute or sub-acute obstruction, fistula or perforation; GI bleeding requiring transfusion; abdominal pain or tenesmus, requiring tube decompression or bowel diversion 
* The pre-existing use of an alpha blocker for GU symptoms or of an antidiarrheal agent for GI 
symptoms does not constitute a Grade 2 toxicity 
 
 5.6.2 Late toxicity  
   RO 02803          
  
1/11/06 
Version 9  14 Rectal toxicities  
Late toxicities will be scored > 90 days from completion of radiation therapy. Late rectal 
complications will be used as the primary endpoint for dose-per-fraction escalation in this study, 
from which the maximum tolerated dose-per-f raction will be determined.  The most common 
clinical syndrome of radiation proctitis is rectal bleeding, urgency/tenesmus, and loose bowel 
movements.  Other, less common late complicat ions include perforation, fistula, and bowel 
obstruction.  Toxicity grading will be based on the FC-LENT grading criteria (see below).  Patients 
will be monitored after treatment at  regular intervals, and toxicity determined by history and 
physical examination.  Greater than 40% Grade 2 or higher late re ctal toxicity at 2 years will be 
considered dose limiting and the escalation rules are described in section 8  
 
FC-LENT rectal toxicity scale* 
Grade 1 Symptoms not requiring medication 
Grade 2 >4 stools daily above baseline for ≥ 3 months; regular 
blood in stool for at least 6 months; pain not requiring narcotics; minor outpatient therapies ( ≤ 3 coagulations; 
enemas; steroids; antibiotics; opiates) 
Grade 3 Dysfunction requiring non-surgical hospitalization for 
management; bleeding requiring transfusion and/or more than 3 coagulations; pain requiring narcotics 
Grade 4 Dysfunction requiring surgery; perforation; life-
threatening bleeding 
Grade 5 Fatal complications 
       * pre-existing use of opiates does not constitute Grade 2 toxicity 
 
 Late GU toxicities
 
 Late 
GU Requiring 
no medication Moderate frequency; generalized telangiectasia, 
intermittent macroscopic 
hematuria Severe frequency and 
dysuria; severe generalized 
telangiectasia; frequent 
hematuria; reduction in 
bladder capacity (<150 cc) Necrosis; contracted 
bladder (capacity 
<100 cc); severe hemorrhagic cystitis 
 
5.6.3 Serious Adverse Events  
Serious adverse events (SAE) will be defined as all Grade 4 and Grade 5 toxicity. SAE’S will be 
phoned in to the Study Chairman at 608-263-8500 within one working day of the event.   SAE’s will 
be reported by the UW data manager s to the DSMB and the Clinical Trials Monitoring Committee 
administrator within one business day of notification of SAE.  These will also be discussed at 
regularly scheduled Disease Oriented Working Group meetings. 
 
5.6.4 Quality of Life  
Quality of life will be assessed by  three separate questionnaires with special emphasis on bowel, 
bladder, and erectile function. Questionnaires will be performed prior to treatment, one , two and 
three  years after completion of treatment.  Overall quality of life will be assessed using The Spitzer 
Quality of Life Index (SQLI) (26).  Bowel and bladder quality of life will be assessed using a 
questionnaire developed at Fox Chase Cancer Center (27).  Erectile function will be assessed 
   RO 02803          
  
1/11/06 
Version 9  15 using the International Index of Er ectile Function Questionnaire (IIEF) (28).  Data will be used to 
compare these patients to those who received conventional external beam radiation therapy. 
  
5.7  Supportive Care 
 
All supportive measures consistent with optimal patient care  will be given throughout the study.  
 
5.8  Duration of Therapy
 
 
Study treatment will be stopped if: 
• The patient refuses the study treatment 
• The patient’s physician feels that continuing the study treat ments would not be in the 
patient’s best interest. 
• The patient experiences severe treatment rela ted toxicities as outlined in section 5.6.3. 
• There is clear evidence of progressive disease. 
• Treatment interruption more than 2 weeks. 
 
All patients will be followed for disease status unt il progression and for survival until death.   
 
5.9  Biomarker Assessment 
 
Biomarker studies will be carried out at UW Ho spital by performing immunohistochemistry 
analyses on the original diagnostic biopsy material whenev er this is available. In most cases, this 
will be needle biopsy material. The emphasis will be on a proliferation markers,  Ki-67 and apoptotic 
pathway markers (e.g., p53, bcl-2, bax and mdm-2).   The apoptotic markers are all involved in 
molecular radiation response pathways and have s hown promise in predict ing prostate cancer 
patient outcome after radiotherapy , while the proliferation marker , Ki-67, may have particular 
relevance for hypofractionation since the slow proliferation typical of many  prostate cancers is 
thought to be causally related to their high capacity for interfraction repair and their suitability for a 
hypofractionated radiotherapy appr oach. All of these markers will be determined by quantitative 
immunohistochemistry, using the ACIS Chromavisi on system, as has been us ed, for example, in 
immunohistochemistry studies carried out in RTOG 86-10 (37).  
 Clinical outcomes (biochemical control) determined from the trial described  here will not be ready 
for correlative analysis comparisons with these biom arker analysis for approximately 7 years.   This 
analysis is for research purposes only and is not expected to have an impact on the patients 
enrolled on this study.   
6.0 MEASUREMENT OF EFFECT  
 
6.1 General  
 
The primary objectives of this  study are to potentially establish the maximum tolerated 
hypofractionation intensity (or to determine whet her the most hypofractionated schedule tested in 
this study is tolerated) for prostate cancer patients and to determine clinical response. Analyses for 
   RO 02803          
  
1/11/06 
Version 9  16 clinical tumor control and PSA disease free surv ival will be performed when median 5-year follow-
up is obtained. Data will be collected for efficacy evaluation as stated in section 6.2 and 6.3. 
 
6.2 Disease-free Status  
 
Patients will be considered to be without biochemical recurrence if either the PSA is still declining 
or the PSA nadir has been reached and is below 1.0 ng/mL, there is no palpable or radiologic 
evidence of disease, PSA is not rising (defined as  3 successive increases in measured PSA levels 
each at least two months apart) and there is no evidence of metastasis.  Patients not meeting 
these criteria will be judged to have a recurrence.  
6.3 Progressive Disease  
 
Any patient with rising PSA on 3 successive se rum measurements will be considered to have 
recurrent or progressive disease. The date of  failure will be taken as midway between the nadir 
PSA date and the date of the firs t of the three rising PSAs. 
 
7.0 STUDY PARAMETERS 
 
7.1 All pre-study laboratory tests must  be done within 6 weeks of registration. 
 
7.2 Patients will be evaluated weekly during radiotherapy by one of the clinical study investigators 
to assess acute toxicities and functional status  7.3.  The follow-up schedule and evaluations are outlined below:  
 
 
 Pre-
study Weekly 
during 
RT 4 weeks 
post-RT 3 months 
post-RT Subsequent 
follow-upa
H & P X  X X X 
Weight X X X X X 
Performance status X X X X X 
PSA X  X X X 
CBC/platelets X     
Toxicity notation X X X X X 
QOL assessment X    Xb
IPSS score X  X X X 
 
a  Subsequent follow-up will be every 3 months  x 1 year post-treatment, every 4 m onths during years 2 - 3, every 6 
months years 4 – 5 and then annually.  Follow-up frequency can be increased if thought medically necessary by 
the treating physician
b QOL assessment will be completed pre-treatment and at 12, and 24 and 36 months post-treatment . 
* For patients for whom travel to the treating institution creates a hardship,  scheduled follow-ups, with the exception 
of the 4 week and all annual follow-ups, can be conduc ted via telephone interview with PSA and any other 
indicated testing being carried out at a facility near to the patient. 
  
   RO 02803          
  
1/11/06 
Version 9  17 8.0 STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS 
 
8.1 Treatment and Toxicities 
 
This phase I/II trial will be conducted with three potential fraction size levels, wit h a potential of 50 
patients per level (plus an additional  100 patients at MTS if permitted by the escalation rules) and 
an accrual rate of approximately 50 patients per year ant icipated. This may estimate the maximum 
tolerated dose-per-fraction (MTD), defined as that fractionation schema that yields at most a 40% 
rate of late grade 2 rectal toxicity at 2 years. A modified LENT grading system  for rectal toxicity will 
be used (28). That outcome is chosen for its clinical relevance; howev er, the extended follow-up 
makes the standard sequential designs  impractically long at 3 year s (one year accrual plus two 
years follow-up for each of three cohorts). We ther efore use the simply modi fied class of prorated 
designs (R. Chappell and K. Cheung, Simple designs  for phase I clinical trials of long-term 
toxicities, abstract presented at the 1998 meeting of the Society fo r Clinical Trials). Proration 
implies, for example, that two patients observed for one year each, constituting two patient-years of follow-up, are equivalent in info rmation to one patient followed for two years. This implicitly uses 
the result of Teshima (29) that  the cumulative incidence of late grade 2 rectal complications 
reaches 50% of the final value wit hin twelve months of treatment and that the cumulative incidence 
of complications is approximately linear with time.  The prorated design will require the following conditi ons for escalation: at least twenty patient-
years of observation; and a minimum of 5 pati ents followed for one year ; and at most a 40% 
toxicity rate per two years (i.e., at most 2 toxicities per 10 patient -years) observed. Proration allows 
a great reduction in the overall ti me of the trial - with fifty pati ents accrued at a uniform rate over 
each year, the first two conditions will be satisfied after 15 months. Thus th e entire study will take 
at most 45 months. The requirem ent of 5 patients being followed for one year is made for safety's 
sake. The situation may arise that the maximum 50 patients hav e been accrued at a particular 
dose-per-fraction step, but there is insufficient follow-up to allo w escalation to the next dose-per-
fraction step. Under these circum stances, additional patients may be accrued at the previous (next 
lower) dose-per-fraction level until follow-up conditions for the next escalation are met. 
 
8.2 Disease-free 
Survival 
 
A primary endpoint is Disease-Free Survival (DFS ), as defined in Section 6.2.  The 95% 
confidence interval for DFS observed on 150 fully followed patients will have half-width of 8% or 
less; that is, it will be the observed DFS rate plus  or minus 8%.  This figure is conservative 
in that the width will be less for DFS rates far from 50%.  It is slightly anticonservative in the presence of loss to follow-up.  The DFS estimate and its confidence interval will be compared to similar statistics observed for 
patients treated with standard care fractionation schedules such as those presented in [Zelefsky et 
al. High dose rate radiotherapy delivered by intens ity modulated conformal radiotherapy improves 
the outcome of localized prostate cancer, J. Ur ol. 166: 876, 2001].  In addition, efficacy in these 
data will be modeled with the linear-quadratic formula [Chappell, R., Nondahl, D., and Fowler, J.F.  
Modeling dose and local control in radiotherapy. Jour nal of the American Statistical Association.  
Vol. 90 (1995), pp. 829-838] to ex amine the hypothesis, which underlies the logic of fractionation, 
that prostate cancers have an alpha/beta ratio wh ich makes them better able to repair radiation 
injury than surrounding late responding tissues. 
   RO 02803          
  
1/11/06 
Version 9  18  
8.3 Correlation of Biomarkers with Clinical Outcome 
 
The percent labeling observed i mmunohistochemically with each biomarker studied will ultimately 
be analyzed for correlations with clinical outcome once sufficient clinical follow-up is achieved 
(median follow-up of at least 5 years. Three markers (p53, bcl-2, and Ki-67) will be analyzed for 
prognostic significance using a Cox proportional hazards regression analysis accounting for each of the 250 
patients' follow-ups, and adjusting for pretreatment PSA and tumor grade.  For purposes of power calculations only, we will assume that marker scores will be divided at their medians and modeled as binary covariates, so that prevalences are by definition 50%.  Also, we compute power using binary failure/no-failure five year outcomes; these produce conservative (slightly too small) estimates of power.  We invoke the usual two-sided test of significance at the conducted .05 level, divided by three using a Bonferroni adjustment to avoid bias due to multiple comparisons. 
  Suppose that the relative risk induced by positive markers is 3.  This, by the proportional hazards 
assumption, implies five-year failure rates of approximately 22% vs. 8% which average to 15%, a failure rate consistent with that reported in a patient population such as this treated with dose-escalated radiotherapy.  Then by the above assumptions the power to detect each marker's effect, after adjusting for multiple comparisons, is approximately 79%.  This is  reasonable for an exploratory study. Should failure 
rates be higher than the assumed 15%, then the power would be greater.
 
 
8.4     DSMB 
 
Hypofractionation of radiation therapy for prostate  cancer was identified in the funded Tomotherapy 
Program Project Grant as a key investigational ar ea, irrespective of whether the treatment was 
delivered by a tomotherapy device or by conv entional LINAC-based equipment.  Therefore, the 
DSMB established for tomotherapy-related protocols will also be utilized in this study.  This Data 
Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) has been formally constituted for the “Improving Cancer Outcome With Adaptive Helical Tomotherapy” NIH gr ant.  The DSMB consists of one statistician 
who will chair the Board (Associate Professor Mary Lindstrom, Ph.D.), one radiation oncologist 
(Professor Emeritus Richard Steeves, Ph.D., M.D. ), and one medical physicist (Heath Odau).  
None of these individuals are involved with this  study.  The DSMB meetings will be held semi-
annually and more often depending on the nature and pr ogress of the trial.  The DSMB will be 
responsible for recommendations regarding specific actions or no action for the continuing conduct 
of this trial.  The DSMB will be notified immediatel y (within 24 hours) if any grade 4-5 toxicities are 
observed.  
 
 9.0 DATA COLLECTION  
This protocol will be conducted according to Good Clinical Practice Guidelines.  Participating 
investigators/institutions  agree to permit trial related monito ring, audits, IRB review, and regulatory 
inspections, providing direct access to source documents/data.  
 
All data identified in patient ev aluation table, section 7.0 will be collected. The following dosimetry 
data will be collected within 10 days of the end of radiation:  copy of DVH plan, copy of daily 
treatment record, and axial CT cuts at several levels with superimposed isodose curves. Follow-up 
data and signed informed consents will be kept for a mini mum of five years.  Forms will be labeled 
with name codes and sequence numbers. 
   RO 02803          
  
1/11/06 
Version 9  19  
For patients that agree to participat e in the Biomarker study the following info will be collected:  one 
paraffin tissue block containing tumor* (*any unused tissue will be returned to the site) and the 
corresponding pathology report.  Tissue and repor t will be labeled with name codes and sequence 
numbers.   
 
10.0 REFERENCES 
 
1. Hanks, G. E.; Martz, K. L.; Diamond, J. J. The effect of dose on local control of prostate cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol 
Phys  1988;15(6): 1299-305. 
 2. Perez, C. A.; Walz, B. J.; Zivnuska, F. R.; Pilepich, M.; Prasad, K.; Bauer, W
 . Irradiation of carcinoma of the prostate 
localized to the pelvis: Analysis of tumor response and prognosis. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys   1980;6: 555 - 563. 
 3. Hanks, G. E.; Lee, W. R.; Hanlon, A. L .; Hunt, M.; Kaplan, E.; Epstein, B. E.; Movsas, B.; Schultheiss, T . E. Conformal 
technique dose escalation for prostate cancer: biochemical evidenc e of improved cancer control w 
ith higher doses in patients wi th 
pretreatment prostate-specific ant igen > or = 10 NG/ML [see comments]. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys   1996;35(5): 861-8. 
 4. Pollack, A.; Zagars, G. K. External beam r adiotherapy  dose response of prostate cancer. Int J 
 Radiat Oncol Biol Phys   
1997;39(5): 1011-8.  5. Zelefsky, M. J.; Leibel, S. A.; Gaudin, P. B.; Kutcher, G. J.; Fleshner, N. E.; Venkatramen, E. S.; Reuter, V. E.; F
 air, W. R.; 
Ling, C. C.; Fuks, Z. Dose escalation with  three-dimensional conformal radiation therapy affects the outcome in prostate cancer . Int 
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys   1998;41(3): 491-500. 
 6. Zelefsky, M. J.; Leibel, S. A.; Kutcher, G. J.; Fuks, Z. Three-dimensional conformal r adiotherapy
  and dose escalation: 
where do we stand? Semin Radiat Oncol   1998;8(2): 107-14. 
 7. Roach, M., 3rd; Meehan, S.; Kroll, S.; Weil, M.; Ryu, J.; Sm all, E. J.; Margolis, L. W .; Presti, J.; Carroll, P. C.; Phillip s, T.
  L. 
Radiotherapy for high grade clinically localized adenocarcinoma of the prostate [see comments]. J Urol  1996;156(5): 1719-23. 
 8. Pollack, A.; Zagars, G. K.; Smith, I. G.; Antolak, J. A.; Rosen, I. I. Prelimi nary results of a randomized dose-escalation 
study  comparing 70 Gy 
 to 78 Gy for the treatment of prostate cancer. Int. J. Radiat. On col. Biol. Phys.   1999;45(3 (suppl.)): 146-7a. 
9. Hanks, G. E. Optimizing the radiation treatment and outcome of prostate cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys   1985;11: 
1235-1245.  10. Nguyen, L. N.; Pollack, A.; Zagars, G. K. Late effects afte r radiotherapy  for prostate canc er in a randomized dose-response  
study : results of a self-assessment questionnaire. Urology   1998;51(6): 991-7. 
 11. 
Michalski, J. M.; Roach, M.; Vijayakumar, S.; Winter, K.; Harms, W . B.; Sandler, H. M.; Ma rkoe, A.; Ritter, M. A.; Russell,  
K. J.; Sailer, S.; Purdy
, J. A .; Perez, C. A.; Hanks, G. E.; Cox, J. Prelimi nary report of toxicity following 3D radiation ther apy for 
prostate cancer on 3DOG/RTOG 9406. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys   2000;46(2): 391-402. 
 12. Zelefsky, M. J.; Fuks, Z.; Happersett, L.; Lee, H. J.; Ling, C. C.; Burman, C. M.; Hunt, M.; Venkatraman, E. S.; Jackson, A .; 
Leibel, S. A. Improved conformality  and reduced toxicity  w 
ith hi gh-dose intensity modul ated radiation therapy (IMRT) for patien ts 
with prostate cancer. Int. J. Radiat. On col. Biol. Phys.   1999;45(3 (suppl.)): 170a. 
 13. Fenwick, J. Biological modeling of pelvic radiot herapy : potential gains from conformal techniques. 1999. 
 14. T 
eh, B. S.; Mai, W. Y.; Uhl, B. M.; Augspurger, M. E.; Grant, W. H., 3rd; Lu, H. H.; Woo, S. Y.; Carpenter, L. S.; Chiu, J.  K.; 
Butler, E. B. Intensity -modulated radiation therapy  (IMRT
) for prostate cancer with the use of a rectal balloon for prostate 
immobilization: acute toxicity and dose-volume analysis. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys   2001;49(3): 705-12. 
 15. D'Amico, A. V.; Manola, J.; Loffredo, M.; Lopes, L.; Nissen, K.; O'F a
 rrell, D. A.; Gordon, L.; Tempany, C. M.; Cormack, R. 
A. A practical method to achieve prostate gland immobilization and target verification for daily treatment. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol 
Phys  2001;51(5): 1431-6.  16. Bentzen, S. M.; Overgaard, J.; Thames, H. D.; Overgaard, M.; Vejby  Hansen, P.; von der Maase, H.; Meder, J. Clinical 
radiobiology  of malignant melanoma. Radiother 
Oncol   1989;16(3): 169-82. 
   RO 02803          
  
1/11/06 
Version 9  20  
17. Thames, H. D.; Suit, H. D. Tumor radior esponsiveness versus frac tionation sensitivity.  Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys   
1986;12(4): 687-91.  18. Haustermans, K. M.; Hofland, I.; Van, P. H.; Oyen, R.; Van;  de; Voorde; W; Begg, A. C.; Fow ler, J. F. Cell kinetic 
measurements in prostate cancer. Int 
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys   1997;37(5): 1067-70. 
 19. Pollack, A.; Zagars, G. K.; Kavadi, V. S. Prostate specif ic antigen doubling time and disease relapse after radiotherapy  for 
prostate cancer. Cancer   1994;74(2): 670-8. 
 20. Brenner, D. J.; Hall, E. J. F
ractionation and protraction for radiot herapy  of prostate carcinoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys   
1999;43(5): 1095-101.  21. Duchesne, G. M.; Peters, L. J. What  is the alpha/beta ratio for prostate c ancer? Rationale for hy pofractionated high-dose-
rate brachy therapy
 [editorial]. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys   1999;44(4): 747-8. 
 22. Fowler, J.; Chappell, R.; Ritter, M. Is alpha/beta for prostate tumors really  low?
  Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys   2001;50(4): 
1021-31.  23. Kupelian, P. A., C. A. Reddy, et al. Preliminary  observations on biochemical rel apse-free survival rates after short-course  
intensity -modulated radiot herapy
 (70 Gy at 2.5 Gy/fraction) for localized pr ostate cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys  2002; 53(4): 
904-12.   24. Partin, A. W.; Mangold, L. A.; Lamm, D. M.; Walsh, P. C.; Epstein, J. I.; Pearson, J. D.  Contemporary  update of prostate 
cancer staging nomograms (Partin T
ables) for the new millennium. Urology   2001;58(6): 843-8. 
 25. Schultheiss, T. E.; Lee, W. R.; Hunt, M.  A.; Hanlon, A. L.; Peter, R. S.; Hanks, G. E. Late GI and GU complications in the 
treatment of prostate cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys   1997;37(1): 3-11. 
 26. Spitzer, W. O.; Dobson, A. J.; Hall, J.; Chesterman, E.; Levi,  J.; Shepherd, R.; Battista, R. N.; Catchlove, B. R. Measurin g 
the quality  of life of cancer patients: a concise QL-index for use by  phy
sicians. J Chronic Dis  1981;34(12): 585-97. 
 27. Hanlon, A. L.; Watkins Bruner, D.; Peter,  R.; Hanks, G. E. Quality  of life study  in prostate cancer patients treated w
 ith 
three- dimensional conformal radiation t herapy: comparing late bowel and bladder quality of life symptoms to that of the normal  
population. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys   2001;49(1): 51-9. 
 28. Rosen, R. C.; Riley, A.; Wagner, G.; Osterloh, I. H.; Kirkpatrick,  J.; Mishra, A. T he international index  of erectile funct ion 
(IIEF
): a multidimensional scale for assessment of erectile dysfunction. Urology   1997;49(6): 822-30. 
 29. Teshima T, Hanks GE, Hanlon AL, Peter RS, Scultheiss TE.  Rectal bleeding after conforma l 3D treatment of prostate 
cancer:  time to occurrence, response to  treatment and duration of morbidity .  Int 
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.   39:77-83, 1997. 
 30. Bristow , R. G., Benchimol, S., and Hill, R. P. T
 he p53 gene as a modifier of intrinsic radios ensitivity: implications for 
radiotherapy. Radiother Oncol, 40: 197-223, 1996. 
 31. Chiarugi, V., Magnelli, L., and Cinelli, M.  Role of p53 mutations in the radiosensit ivity status of tumor cells. T u
 mori, 84 : 517-
20, 1998.  32. Colletier, P. J., Ashoori, F., Cowen, D., Meyn, R. E., Tof ilon, P., Meistrich, M. E., and Pollack, A. Adenoviral-mediated p 53 
transgene expression sensitizes both wild-ty pe and null p53 prostate cancer cells in vitro to radiation. Int J Radiat Oncol Bio l Phy
s, 
48: 1507-12, 2000.  33. Sasaki, R., Shirakawa, T., Zhang, Z. J., Tamekane, A ., Matsumoto, A., Sugimura, K., Matsuo, M., Kamidono, S., and 
Gotoh, A. Additional gene therapy  wi
th Ad5CMV-p53 enhanced the efficacy of radiotherapy  in human prostate cancer cells. Int J 
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys, 51: 1336-45, 2001.  34. Mu, Z ., Hachem, P., Agraw a
 l, S., and Pollack, A. Antisense MDM2 sensitiz es prostate cancer cells to androgen 
deprivation, radiation, and the combination. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys, 58: 336-43, 2004. 
 35. Ritter, M. A., Gilchrist, K. W., Voytovich, M., Chappell, R.  J., and Verhoven, B. M. T he ro le of p53 in radiation therapy  
outcomes for favorable-to-intermediat e-risk prostate cancer. Int J Radiat  Oncol Biol Phy 
s, 53: 574-80, 2002. 
 36. Pollack, A., Cowen, D., Troncoso, P., Zagars, G. K., von E schenbach, A. C., Meistrich, M. L., and McDonnell, T . Molecular 
markers of outcome after radiotherapy
 in patients with prostate carcinoma: Ki-67, bcl-2, bax , and bcl-x. Cancer, 97: 1630-8, 20 03. 
   RO 02803          
  
1/11/06 
Version 9  21  
37. Khor, L. Y.; Desilvio, M.; Al-Saleem, T.; Hammond, M. E.; Gr ignon, D. J.; Sause, W.; Pilepich, M.; Okunieff, P.; Sandler, H .; 
Pollack, A.  MDM2 as a predictor of prostate carcinoma outco me: an analys is of Radiation T
herapy Oncology Group Protocol 8610.  
Cancer,104: 962-7, 2005 
 
  
  
 