 
IRB Protocol Number: 1104011622 
Version Date: November 27th, 2018 
Clinicaltrials.gov ID: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 Title: Sustaining Remission of Psychotic Depression 
 
Coordinating Center:  Weill Cornell Medical College 
Department of Psychiatry, Institute of Geriatric Psychiatry 
 
Principal Investigator: George Alexopoulos, MD 
   21 Bloomingdale Road    White Plains, NY  10605    914-997-5767 (phone)    914-997-5926 (fax)    gsalexop@med.cornell.edu   
 
Weill Cornell Medical College – Data Coordinating Center 
 
Principal Investigator George Alexopoulos, MD Institute of Geriatric Psychiatry 
21 Bloomingdale Road 
White Plains, NY  10605 914-997-5767 
gsalexop@med.cornell.edu Co-Investigators Barnett Meyers, MD 
Patricia Marino, PhD 
 
Collaborating Institution – University of Toronto Health Network 
 
Principal Investigator Alastair Flint, MD 200 Elizabeth St 
8 Eaton N, 238, Medical Sciences Toronto, ON, M5G 2C4 416-340-4788 alastair.flint@uhn.ca 
 
Collaborating Institution – University of Massachusetts Medical School 
 
Principal Investigator Anthony Rothschild, MD 55 Lake Avenue, North 
Worcester, MA 01655 
508-856-5928 
Anthony.Rothschild@umassmemorial.org 
 
Collaborating Institution – University of Pittsburgh 
 
Principal Investigator Ellen Whyte, MD 3811 O’Hara St 
Pittsburgh, PA  15213 whyteem@upmc.edu 
412-246-6010 
 
Statistician:       Data Coordinator: 
 
Samprit Banerjee, PhD     Cristina Pollari, MPH 21 Bloomingdale Road     21 Bloomingdale Road 
White Plains, NY  10605     White Plains, NY  10605 914-997-5469 (phone)     914-997-5912 (phone) 914-682-6979 (fax)      914-682-6979 (fax) sab2028@med.cornell.edu      cdp2002@med.cornell.edu  
 Regulatory and Study Coordinator: 
 
Patricia Marino, PhD 21 Bloomingdale Road White Plains, NY  10605 
914-997-8691 (phone) 
914-682-6979 (fax) pam2029@med.cornell.edu  
  Protocol Versions and Dates: 
 Original Version  5/16/11 
 Amendment 1  11/7/11 
 Amendment 2  3/23/12 
 Amendment 3  12/21/12 
 Amendment 4  4/18/13 
 Amendment 5  8/12/13 
 Amendment 6  10/7/13 
 Amendment 7  10/30/13 
 Amendment 8  5/15/14 
 Amendment 9  8/7/14 
 Amendment 10 3/18/15 
 Amendment 11 12/30/15 
 Amendment 12 2/25/16 
 Amendment 13 6/7/16 
 Amendment 14 7/25/16 
 Amendment 15 10/6/16 
 Amendment 16 2/14/17 
 Amendment 17 7/21/17 
 Amendment 18 12/13/17 
 Amendment 19 11/27/18 
 
SUSTAINING REMISSION OF PSYCHOTIC DEPRESSION 
PROTOCOL & DATA ANALYTIC PLAN 
 
Project Summary------------------------------------ --------------------------------------------------- -------------------2  
Specific Aims-------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------- ----------------------3 
Research Strategy 
- Significance------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------- ----------------------- 4 
- Innovation--------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------- ------------------------5 
- Progress report on STOP-PD----------------------- --------------------------------------------------- ---------------6 
- Research design and methods---------------------- --------------------------------------------------- ---------------7 
- Data analysis------------------------------------ --------------------------------------------------- ------------------------13 
Protection of Human Subjects 
- Leadership plan to protect the integrity of subje ct data-------------------------------------------- --------------16 
- Risks to subjects-------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------- ------------------------21 
- Adequacy of protection against risks------------- --------------------------------------------------- ------------------24 
- Potential benefits------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------- -------------------------27 
- Importance of knowledge to be gained------------- --------------------------------------------------- ---------------27 
- Data and safety monitoring board----------------- --------------------------------------------------- ------------------28 
Inclusion of Women and Minorities------------------ --------------------------------------------------- ------------------28 
Resource Sharing----------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------- -----------------------29 
Bibliography--------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------31 
Appendix 1: Pharmacotherapy Protocol--------------- --------------------------------------------------- ---------------39 
 
 
 
                                                                
 
 
 
 2   1. PROJECT SUMMARY 
Psychotic depression (PD) is a severe disabling dis order with considerable morbidity and mortality.  B etween 
19% and 45% of inpatients with major depression hav e psychotic features, with greater prevalence in ol der 
patients. Although electroconvulsive therapy has we ll-established efficacy in the treatment of PD, its  use is 
limited by several factors. As a result, the pharma cologic treatment of PD is common.  Expert guidelin es 
recommend the combination of antidepressant and ant ipsychotic medications in the pharmacologic treatme nt 
of PD.  The recently completed Study of the Pharmac otherapy of Psychotic Depression (STOP-PD) was the 
first NIMH-funded randomized controlled trial (RCT)  to examine the efficacy and tolerability of newer 
antidepressant and antipsychotic medications in the  acute treatment of younger and older persons with PD.  
The combination of sertraline and olanzapine was si gnificantly more efficacious than olanzapine combin ed with 
placebo. Both treatments were equally well tolerate d, but were associated with clinically significant weight gain 
and elevation of lipids. Older persons, however, ha d significantly less weight gain than younger perso ns. 
 
Little is known about the continuation treatment of  PD. Of particular concern, it is not known whether  
antipsychotic medication needs to be continued once  an episode of PD responds to pharmacotherapy. This  
issue has profound clinical relevance. On the one h and, the unnecessary continuation of antipsychotic 
medication exposes a patient to adverse effects, su ch as weight gain and metabolic disturbance. On the  other 
hand, premature discontinuation of antipsychotic me dication has the potential risk of early relapse of  a severe 
disorder. The primary goal of this Renewal applicat ion, therefore, is to assess the risks versus benef its of 
continuing olanzapine in younger and older patients  with PD, once the episode of depression has respon ded to 
treatment with sertraline and olanzapine. This goal  will be addressed through a 36-week double-blind R CT, in 
which placebo is substituted for olanzapine in half  the study group, following a period of sustained r emission. 
We hypothesize that sertraline+olanzapine will be m ore efficacious than sertraline+placebo in preventi ng 
relapse of PD. This study provides the unique oppor tunity to systematically assess the effect of antip sychotic 
discontinuation (as opposed to switching from one a ntipsychotic to another) on olanzapine-related weig ht gain 
and metabolic disturbance. Additional innovative ai ms of the study are to examine age and genetic 
polymorphisms as predictors/moderators of treatment  variability, potentially leading to more personali zed 
treatment of PD, and to employ population pharmacok inetics to determine the magnitude and consistency of 
exposure to study drugs. Olanzapine is selected bec ause it is the only atypical antipsychotic with est ablished 
efficacy and tolerability in the treatment of both younger and older adults with PD . This research wi ll be 
transformative, by providing clinicians with a much -needed evidence base to guide the continuation tre atment 
of one of the most disabling and lethal psychiatric  disorders. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3   2. SPECIFIC AIMS 
2.1 INTRODUCTION TO STUDY AIMS: Major depression with psychotic features (psychotic  depression; PD) 
is a severe disorder associated with considerable m orbidity and mortality. 1 Although ECT has well-established 
efficacy as a treatment for PD, 2,3  its use is limited by several factors: a high rate  of relapse following completion 
of ECT, 4,5  lower rates of response in non-academic centers, 6 significant disparities in its availability, 7 and the 
fact that many patients prefer pharmacologic treatm ent, because they find the concept of ECT and the 
potential side effect of cognitive impairment unacc eptable. Because of these limitations, the pharmaco logic 
treatment of PD is common. 8 Expert guidelines recommend the combination of ant idepressant and 
antipsychotic medications as an alternative to ECT in the treatment of PD. 9,10  The recently completed Study of 
the Pharmacotherapy of Psychotic Depression (STOP-P D) 11, which involved collaboration of the current group  
of principal investigators, was the first NIMH-fund ed RCT to examine the efficacy and tolerability of 
combination therapy using newer antidepressant and antipsychotic medications in the acute treatment of  PD. 
The combination of sertraline and olanzapine was si gnificantly more efficacious than olanzapine monoth erapy, 
and the two treatments had comparable tolerability.11 Nevertheless, both treatments were associated with  
increases in weight and lipids over the 12-week stu dy. 11 
Once an episode of major depression responds to ant idepressant medication, the antidepressant must be 
continued to prevent relapse. 12  However, it is not known whether antipsychotic med ication needs to be 
continued once an episode of PD has responded to co mbined antidepressant-antipsychotic treatment. This  
issue is of profound clinical importance.  On the o ne hand, the unnecessary continuation of antipsycho tic 
medication exposes a patient to adverse effects, so me of which have considerable public health signifi cance.  
On the other hand, premature discontinuation of ant ipsychotic medication has the potential risk of ear ly relapse 
of a severe, disabling disorder.  The main goal of this collaborative Renewal Application, therefore, is to assess 
the benefits and risks of continuing olanzapine in older and younger persons with PD, once the episode  of 
depression has responded to treatment with sertrali ne and olanzapine. This goal will be addressed thro ugh a 
RCT, in which placebo is substituted for olanzapine  in half the study group, following a period of sus tained 
remission. Specifically, we propose a three-phase s tudy. In the Acute Phase, participants will receive  open-
label sertraline and olanzapine for a maximum of 12  weeks. Subjects who respond to treatment will ente r the 
Stabilization Phase, where they will continue to re ceive open-label sertraline and olanzapine for an a dditional 8 
weeks. Participants who meet remission criteria wil l then be randomized to 36 weeks of double-blind tr eatment 
with either sertraline+olanzapine or sertraline+pla cebo. 
 
2.2 PRIMARY AIM 
Aim 1: Assess the efficacy of olanzapine, in combin ation with sertraline, in preventing relapse of 
psychotic depression 
H1: The combination of sertraline and olanzapine wi ll be associated with less risk of relapse than the  
combination of sertraline and placebo  
 
2.3. SECONDARY AIMS  
Aim 2: Assess the effect of continuation versus dis continuation of olanzapine on weight and metabolic 
variables in remitted psychotic depression 
H2: The combination of sertraline and olanzapine wi ll be associated with higher weight, higher total c holesterol, 
and higher triglycerides compared with the combinat ion of sertraline and placebo in the randomized pha se 
Aim 3: Assess the effect of age on olanzapine–assoc iated weight gain in the acute and stabilization 
treatment of psychotic depression (open-label phase  of the study) 
H3: Older age will be associated with less weight g ain during the open-label phase 
 
2.4 EXPLORATORY AIMS 
Aim 4. Explore older age as a moderator of change i n weight and metabolic variables during the 
randomized phase 
Aim 5. Explore the association of selected genetic polymorphisms with: i) response, ii) relapse, and i ii) 
weight and metabolic variables during the open-labe l and randomized phases of the study 
 
 
 
 
 4   3. RESEARCH STRATEGY 
SIGNIFICANCE 
3.1 PD is a severe, disabling disorder  with considerable morbidity and mortality.1,13  15-20% of persons with 
major depression have a lifetime history of psychot ic features.14,15  19-45% of inpatients with major depression 
have psychosis, with older depressed persons at gre atest risk of PD.16,17  PD has been associated with more 
severe symptoms, slower recovery, greater risk of r elapse and recurrence, greater frequency of psychia tric 
hospitalizations, more psychosocial impairment, hig her all-cause mortality, and (in some studies) a hi gher 
frequency of suicide than non-psychotic depression (non-PD). 13,18-21 
3.2 The Acute Pharmacologic Treatment of PD. Several studies have found that PD has better respo nse to 
a combination of antidepressant and antipsychotic m edications, than to either medication alone.11  For the most 
part, these studies used older generation antidepre ssant and antipsychotic medications. These findings  
resulted in practice guidelines recommending combin ation treatment as the pharmacologic treatment of c hoice 
for the acute treatment of PD. 9,10  Following the availability of SSRI and SNRI antide pressants, a single group of 
investigators reported a high rate of response of P D to monotherapy with SSRIs and venlafaxine, based on 3 
separate RCTs. 22-24   The findings of these studies are, however, limit ed by the fact that none included a 
placebo-control group, and they lacked a validated measure of psychosis, raising the possibility that persons 
with non-delusional ideation may have been inadvert ently included in the studies. 25  Also, these findings have 
not been replicated in studies by other groups of i nvestigators. 26-28  Thus, the efficacy of SSRI and SNRI 
monotherapy to treat PD is uncertain, and combined antidepressant-antipsychotic medication remains the  
pharmacologic treatment for PD that is recommended by expert guidelines. 
3.3 Longer Term Treatment of PD: The Conundrum. Little is known about the continuation and maintena nce 
treatment of PD.  Once an episode of major depressi on responds to antidepressant medication, the 
antidepressant needs to be continued to prevent rel apse and recurrence of depression. 12,29,30  However, it is not 
known whether antipsychotic medication needs to be continued once an episode of PD has responded to 
combined antidepressant-antipsychotic treatment.  O n the one hand, premature discontinuation of 
antipsychotic medication has the potential risk of relapse of a severe, disabling disorder. On the oth er hand, 
the unnecessary continuation of antipsychotic medic ation exposes a patient to potential adverse effect s. The 
two sides of this very significant clinical conundr um will now be discussed. 
3.4 Relapse of PD. Naturalistic observational studies of PD report rel apse rates of 17%-50% (mean=30%) 
over 12-months of follow-up.31-36  Studies that have specifically examined the freque ncy of relapse of PD 
following a course of ECT have, with one exception,  found 12-month rates of 35-50%, despite adequate 
continuation pharmacotherapy. 37-40  The high rate of relapse after the discontinuation  of ECT, and the lack of 
clarity regarding optimal continuation treatment fo llowing ECT, underscores the importance of examinin g 
pharmacologic approaches to the longer-term treatme nt of PD. 
There are few data on the relation between disconti nuation of antipsychotic medication and relapse of 
PD. In a chart review of persons with PD who had re sponded to pharmacotherapy, Aronson et al. 32  found that 
approximately 35% of relapses occurred following th e discontinuation of antipsychotic medication in pe rsons 
who continued to take antidepressant medication; th e 3 months after antipsychotic discontinuation was the 
period of greatest risk of relapse. The only prospe ctive study of antipsychotic discontinuation in PD found a 
frequency of relapse of 27% over 8 months in 30 mid -life adults who had recovered with combined fluoxe tine 
and perphenazine; 41  the findings of this single study are, however, li mited by its open and uncontrolled design, 
the relatively small number of patients, and the ab sence of older patients who, based on studies of no n-PD, 42  
may conceivably be at greater risk of relapse.  
Finally, a few uncontrolled studies have examined r elapse in persons with PD who are maintained on 
the treatment to which they responded. 39,43,44  In contrast with the aforementioned findings, rela pse rates in 
these studies range from only 0% to 6% over 12 mont hs. Although the findings of these studies are limi ted by 
relatively small numbers of patients and uncontroll ed design, they suggest a low risk of relapse in pa tients with 
PD who are maintained on the treatment regimen that  was associated with response. 
3.5 Atypical Antipsychotics in the Treatment of PD:  Choice of Olanzapine. Atypical antipsychotics have 
become the first-line treatment of psychosis. Olanz apine is the only atypical with RCT-evidence of eff icacy and 
tolerability in the treatment of both younger and o lder persons with PD. 11,45  In STOP-PD, only 5% of 
participants withdrew from the 12-week study becaus e of side effects. 1 Nevertheless, olanzapine is associated 
with weight gain and metabolic effects. 11,46  Our choice of olanzapine for the proposed study is  based on careful 
consideration of alternative atypical antipsychotic s that have less severe metabolic effects but do no t have 
documented efficacy for the treatment of PD. Withou t evidence, efficacy of other atypical antipsychoti cs in PD 
 5   cannot be assumed; for example, olanzapine has been  found to be more effective than other atypicals in  
several RCTs of the treatment of schizophrenia.47-51  Each atypical antipsychotic has a number of advers e 
effects, some of which are potentially problematic in the treatment of PD, especially in older patient s. 52-54  
Although aripiprazole and ziprasidone have a low in cidence of clinically significant weight gain and m etabolic 
dysregulation, 52,53  there are few data on the efficacy, tolerability, and safety of these drugs in older persons.54  
Ziprasidone’s potential for QTc interval prolongati on is a potential concern in older persons with car diac 
disease 54  and would potentially result in the exclusion of m any older patients who would otherwise be eligible 
for the study.  Both ziprasidone and aripiprazole a re associated with activation and insomnia, 52-54  and in the 
case of aripirazole, akathisia and nausea.52-54  In a recent open-label pilot study of combined ari piprazole and 
citalopram in 16 younger adults with PD, 63% of par ticipants developed akathisia on a mean daily aripi prazole 
dose of 14.4 ± 5.5 mg.55 The tolerability of aripiprazole and ziprasidone in  persons with agitation (a frequent 
symptom of PD) is unclear. In addition, patients wi th PD are at high risk of attempted and completed 
suicide. 20,21  It is unknown whether the activating effects of ar ipiprazole and ziprasidone, especially when given 
in combination with an SSRI, would increase the ris k of suicidality in persons with PD. In light of th e efficacy of 
the sertraline/olanzapine combination in STOP-PD,11 and the good overall tolerability and safety of th is 
treatment,11 we have chosen to continue to study this regimen r ather than simply assuming that a different 
antidepressant-antipsychotic combination would be c omparably efficacious and better tolerated in young er and 
older patients. Finally, olanzapine accounts for 25 % of sales of atypical antipsychotics in the United  States and 
30% of sales worldwide. 56  These figures have remained constant over the past  4 years.56  This ongoing, 
widespread use of olanzapine, despite its known met abolic effects, underscores the importance of the 
proposed study, to provide patients and clinicians with the best available evidence about the risks an d benefits 
of discontinuing this medication in the long-term t reatment of PD.    
3.6 Personalizing the Treatment of PD: Pharmacogene tic Considerations. As with other psychiatric 
disorders, the pharmacologic treatment of PD is ass ociated with considerable treatment variability.8 
Pharmacogenetic findings have the potential to resu lt in more personalized treatment and possibly prev entive 
strategies. Because the number of individuals recru ited to a clinical trial is insufficient to conduct  a genome-
wide association study, 57  we will use a candidate-gene approach to explore t he following important issues:  
1) Genetic predictors of relapse of either mood dis orders or primary psychotic disorders are currently  unknown. 
We will therefore explore this issue in relation to  the proposed study. We assume that the withdrawal of 
olanzapine will remove pharmacologic antagonism of principally D2 and 5HT2A postsynaptic receptors; th e 
synaptic system will then adapt using autoreceptor mechanisms that might include 5HT1A. 58-60  We therefore 
hypothesize that the genes producing these receptor s will be of primary interest as potentially involv ed in 
relapse of PD following discontinuation of olanzapi ne. Of note, the 5HT1A -1019 C/G polymorphism has b een 
implicated in vulnerability to both depression and psychosis, 61,62  and the Taq1A and -141ins/del polymorphisms 
of the D2 gene have been associated with vulnerabil ity to psychosis. 63  
2) Several genetic polymorphisms (5HT2C -759C/T, 5H TTLPR s allele, SNAP 25, Leptin -2584 A/G, ADR α2a -
1291C/G, INSIG2) have been associated with antipsyc hotic-related weight gain. 64-77  However, it is not known 
whether these polymorphisms predict reversal of wei ght gain following discontinuation of the antipsych otic. We 
will explore this important issue.  
3) There have been no published studies of the phar macogenetics of response or remission in PD. We wil l 
therefore explore whether genetic polymorphisms tha t have been associated with antidepressant response  in 
non-PD (5HTTLPR s and lg alleles, 5HT2A -1438G/A, F KBP5, CRHR1) 78-86  and antipsychotic response (D2 -
141 ins/del and Taq1A, D3 ser9gly, SNAP 25) and wei ght gain in schizophrenia 64-77,87-93 pertain to PD. 
Finally, it is important to note that we will parti cipate in the NIMH Human Genetics Initiative so tha t cell 
lines, DNA, and genetic data from this very well ch aracterized sample will be available to the wider s cientific 
community. For example, there is emerging evidence that certain genes (e.g.DISC1, 94  CACNA1C 95 )may confer 
risk for severe psychiatric illness, as opposed to specific disorders. The genetic data from our study  will provide 
scientists with the unique opportunity to include p ersons with psychotic depression in analyses pertai ning to 
these ‘susceptibility genes’.  
INNOVATION 
 3.7 In addition to being transformative, the proposed r esearch is innovative in several important ways:  
• By focusing on PD, this study provides the unique  opportunity to assess the effect of antipsychotic 
discontinuation (as opposed to switching from one a ntipsychotic to another, which is the case in studi es of 
schizophrenia) on treatment-associated weight gain and metabolic disturbance; 
 6   • The study is unique in its inclusion of both youn ger and older adults. This novel approach will allo w us to 
address age-related questions pertaining to treatme nt variability; 
• An innovative aspect of the design is to include persons in the RCT who have achieved ‘near-remissio n’ of 
depressive symptoms. This will allow us to examine whether substantial, but not complete, resolution o f 
depressive symptoms in PD increases the risk of rel apse following discontinuation of antipsychotic med ication,  
• Studying genetic predictors of relapse of PD will be highly innovative. Moreover, this will be the fi rst study to 
examine whether genetic polymorphisms that predict antipsychotic-related weight gain also predict weig ht loss 
following antipsychotic discontinuation; 
• Population pharmacokinetics will be used to evalu ate drug exposure, which will allow for a more info rmed and 
sophisticated interpretation of the study’s finding s; 
• This study will continue work started in STOP-PD in  developing innovative assessment instruments, such  as 
the Delusion Assessment Scale,96  in this population. During the course of STOP-PD, we developed the 
Resolution of Delusions Scale (RODS) to evaluate ch ange in a person’s insight, as a delusion resolves with 
treatment. In the proposed study, we will assess th e psychometric properties of the RODS. If metrics a re 
acceptable, we will use the RODS in exploratory ana lyses to determine to what extent insight into the prior 
delusional belief is associated with stability of r emission and risk of relapse;  
• A novel feature of the assessment is the use of a  behavioral sign-based measure of psychomotor funct ion 
(the ‘CORE’ 97 ) to examine the effect of psychomotor change, whic h is common in PD, on treatment outcome; 
• If the proposed study is funded, we are committed  to promptly submitting a competing supplement that  will 
have a cognitive neuroscience focus, integrating ne uropsychology and neuroimaging, to study the relati onships 
between age, brain function, and course of PD.  
APPROACH 
3.8 PROGRESS REPORT ON STOP-PD (Dates of Award: 6/1/2002-5/31/2007).  
STOP-PD was a 12-week double-blind RCT that compare d the efficacy, tolerability, and safety of olanzap ine 
plus sertraline (‘combination therapy’) with olanza pine plus placebo (‘olanzapine monotherapy’) in you nger and 
older persons with major depressive disorder and de lusions ± hallucinations. The study addressed the 
following hypotheses: 1) combined olanzapine and se rtraline would be more efficacious than combined 
olanzapine and placebo; 2) the younger age group wo uld have a higher rate of remission than the older age 
group; 3) treatment would be less well tolerated by  older than younger participants. Full details of t his study are 
reported in Arch Gen Psychiatry 2009;66 (8):838-47.11 To summarize:  
• The study’s recruitment goal was met, with 259 pa tients randomized to treatment (n=142 ≥60 years and 
n=117 <60 years) (Cornell: n=56; Massachusetts: n=5 9; Pittsburgh: n=63; Toronto: n=81). 
• Combination therapy was associated with a higher re mission rate over the trial than olanzapine monothe rapy 
(OR=1.28, 95% CI =1.12-1.47, p<.001).  41.9% of ran domized combination participants were in remission at 
their last assessment compared to 23.9% of olanzapi ne monotherapy participants ( χ2
1= 9.53, p=0.002; 
NNT=5.6). Of the participants who completed 12 week s of treatment, the remission rate was 66.7% with 
combined treatment versus 49.2% with monotherapy ( χ2
1=4.4, p=0.036; NNT=5.7). 
• Younger and older participants did not differ in rate of remission (OR=1.05, 95% CI=0.80-1.37, p=0.7 5). 
• There was no significant difference between age gro ups in overall tolerability of treatment or in 
extrapyramidal side effect scores. Both age groups had statistically significant increases in weight, cholesterol, 
and triglycerides. Of note, older subjects had sign ificantly less weight gain than younger subjects (7 .3 ± 10.3 
lbs versus 13.9 ± 4.0 lbs respectively; F 1,226 =14.51, p=0.0002). A statistically significant incr ease in fasting 
plasma glucose levels occurred in younger subjects only (mean change of 8.4 ± 41.3 mg/dL from a mean 
baseline of 93.6 ± 20.4 mg/dL, t 211 =2.65, p=0.009). Only 5% of participants withdrew f rom the study because of 
adverse effects.   
Unpublished Pilot Data from STOP-PD that is Relevan t to the Proposed Study: 
• As an unfunded pilot project, blood was obtained at week 12/termination in a sub-set of participants  (n=66 
young and n=102 old) for future pharmacokinetic ana lyses. Since younger and older groups differed in w eight 
gain, we used population pharmacokinetics to explor e whether younger and older groups differed in: i) 
variability of exposure, which could indicate poore r adherence with olanzapine in one group versus the  other 
[105,106], and ii) magnitude of exposure. Younger a nd older groups did not differ in either variabilit y 
(0.98±0.27 vs. 0.96±0.30; t [166] =0.36, p=0.72) or magnitude (1128.9±737.6ug/mL *h vs.1027.1±477.6ug/mL *h; 
unequal variances t [102] =1.0, p=.32) of exposure, suggesting that the age-r elated difference in weight gain was 
not explained by exposure. The proposed study will examine drug exposure in all participants.  
 7   • Participants who were in remission with either com bination therapy or olanzapine monotherapy at the 
completion of STOP-PD were invited to participate i n a 3-month double-blind stabilization phase, durin g which 
they continued their acute phase treatment. The sta bilization phase was designed to collect pilot data  on: i) the 
stability of remission, and ii) the course of side effects. 74 persons (n=29 young and n=45 old) parti cipated in 
this phase. Of the 48 patients who experienced remi ssion with combination treatment, 10.4% subsequentl y 
had a relapse of major depression, psychosis, or bo th. Participants continued to gain weight in the st abilization 
phase, but at a slower rate than during STOP-PD (ap proximately 1.5 lbs/month in stabilization, compare d with 
4.4 lbs/month in STOP-PD). Tests of fixed effects f or changes in metabolic variables during the 6 mont hs of 
both STOP-PD and the stabilization phase found a st atistically significant age x time effect for gluco se (F 3,149 = 
3.16, p<0.03), and trends in age x time effects for  triglycerides (p=0.08), total cholesterol (p=0.07) , and LDL 
cholesterol (p=0.09). The younger remitters experie nced more of an increase in these metabolic variabl es than 
the older remitters. Thus, whereas there was no sig nificant difference between age groups in elevation s of 
glucose and lipids by the end of STOP-PD, differenc es started to emerge after 6 months of treatment. T his 
suggests that older age may moderate olanzapine-ass ociated metabolic dysfunction, but that this effect  may 
not be apparent until later in the course of treatm ent. Thus, Aim 3, which pertains to the acute/stabi lization 
phases of treatment (which the majority of particip ants are expected to complete within 16 weeks), 
hypothesizes that older age will moderate weight ga in only, whereas Aim 4, which pertains to the longe r-term 
treatment of PD, explores whether older age moderat es change in both weight and metabolic variables. 
3.9 RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS  
3.9.1 General Overview. 392 patients (n=196 aged 18-59 years 
and n=196 aged ≥60 years) with non-bipolar major depression with 
psychotic features (delusions, with or without hall ucinations) will be 
enrolled, across 4 sites, in open-label treatment w ith the 
combination of sertraline (target dose of 150 mg/da y) and 
olanzapine (target dose of 15 mg/day). Participants  who no longer 
have delusions and hallucinations and either a) hav e a 17-item 
Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HAM-D)98  score of ≤10 for 2 
consecutive assessments (‘full-remission’), or b) a re rated ‘very 
much improved’ or ‘much improved’ on the Clinical G lobal 
Impression (CGI) Scale 99  and have a HAM-D score of 11-15 and 
have ≥50% reduction in the baseline HAM-D score during th e last 
two assessments of the Acute Phase (‘near-remission ’) will 
continue with open-label sertraline and olanzapine for an 8-week 
stabilization phase. The acute phase of the study w ill last a 
maximum of 12 weeks, but participants will enter th e stabilization 
phase as soon as they meet full-remission criteria.  Participants who 
continue to meet full-remission or near-remission c riteria and who 
have a Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE)100  score ≥24 at the 
end of the stabilization phase will enter the 36-we ek double-blind, 
placebo-controlled olanzapine discontinuation phase  (‘the RCT’). 
 
Participants in full-remission or near-remission at  the end of the 
stabilization phase who have a MMSE total score bel ow 24 may be allowed to enter the RCT when specific ally 
approved on a case-by-case basis by the Study's Ste ering Committee, if the steering committee believes  that 
the lower MMSE score is not caused by clinically si gnificant cognitive impairment and the participant is capable 
of giving informed consent to participate in the RC T. Participants who achieved near-remission at  the  end of 
the Acute Phase and who have a Ham-D score >15 but no delusions or hallucinations at the Week 8 
stabilization visit can have two additional weekly stabilization visits.  These visits will be used to  determine 
whether the increase in HAM-D score above the parti al remission cut-off was transient and ensure that two 
consecutive weeks of partial remission criteria are  met prior to entry in to the RCT. The Steering Com mittee 
must discuss and agree to this extension.  If the H am-D score does not return to ≤15 at each of the two 
additional stabilization visits, the participant wi ll not be eligible to enter the RCT. 
 
Participants will be randomized to either continue olanzapine or to switch from olanzapine to placebo following 
a 4-week placebo-controlled taper of the olanzapine . All participants will take open-label sertraline for the Figure 1: Study Design & Subject Flow 
Acute Phase (N=392)  
Open Treatment with  
Sertraline and Olanzapine 
(up to 12 weeks) 
Stabilization Phase (N =196)  
Open Treatment with  
Sertraline and Olanzapine 
(8 weeks) 50% Meet 
Remission/Near-Remission Criteria 
10% Relapse  
or Withdraw 
Discontinuation RCT (N=176)  
Open Sertraline plus Blinded Study 
Medication (Olanzapine or Placebo) 
(36 weeks) 
 8   duration of the RCT. Randomization will be stratifi ed according to age group (18-59 years and 60 years  or 
older) and stabilization phase outcome (‘full-remis sion’ versus ‘near-remission’). Relapse is the prim ary 
outcome. Participants who experience a relapse will  be immediately referred to a designated psychiatri st at the 
research site, who is not affiliated with the study , for clinical management. 
3.9.2 Participant Recruitment and Flow  
Overview:  Recruitment will begin after 4 months of start-up time and will extend for 38 months (to the end of 
month 6 of Year 04).  The RCT will begin in month 8  of Year 01 and extend 47 months (to the end of mon th 7 
of Year 05).  The final 5 months of Year 05 will be  used for the completion of data cleaning, data ana lyses, and 
write-up of results.  
Figure 2: Study Time Line 
                                                             
  4-months 51-month Acute, Stabilization, & RCT pha ses           5-months   
  start-up          (Including 38 months recruitmen t)                    analysis &        
                                                                                                                                            write-up                                                                                                           
Recruitment into Open-Label Acute Phase: This study will use the same methods of recruitment  and at the 
same study sites that were successfully used in STO P-PD. 11 In addition, we will systematically screen at site s 
that are affiliated with the study’s academic cente rs, some of which are community settings. Individua ls at 
these affiliate sites who are eligible for, and con sent to, the study will then participate in the stu dy at the 
primary academic center. This approach will facilit ate target enrollment and will extend generalizabil ity of the 
study’s findings by recruiting persons from ‘less a cademically-oriented settings’. Entry criteria (see  Section 
4.2.1) will be the same as those used in STOP-PD wh ich achieved its recruitment goal. Given that the a cute 
phase of the proposed study will use open-label com bination treatment, we anticipate that more patient s will 
agree to participate in the proposed study compared  with STOP-PD where participants had a 50:50 chance  of 
being randomized to olanzapine plus placebo. Based on 38 months of recruitment, the recruitment goal 
equates to an average 2.6 participants enrolled per  site per month. 
Enrollment in the Stabilization and RCT Phases:  In the double-blind combination treatment arm of S TOP-
PD, 63/129 (48.8%) participants who were randomized  to combination treatment met remission criteria at  
some point during treatment, based on the criterion  of a Schedule for Affective Disorders and Schizoph renia 
(SADS) 101  delusion item score of 1 (‘definitely not delusion al’) and a minimum of 2 consecutive assessments of 
a 17-item HAM-D score ≤10. In addition, 10/129 (7.8%) combination treatmen t participants had the absence of 
delusions, a CGI improvement score of ‘very much’ o r ‘much’ improved, and a 17-item HAM-D score of 11- 15.  
Thus, 56.6% of participants who were randomized to combination treatment experienced remission of 
delusions and remission or substantial improvement of depressive symptoms. Given that treatment in the  
acute phase of the proposed study will be open-labe l, we anticipate that remission/near-remission will  be 
higher and drop-out due to withdrawal of consent wi ll be lower than under the double-blind, placebo-co ntrolled 
conditions of STOP-PD. 11 We therefore predict that 60% of participants in t he proposed study will achieve 
remission of psychosis and either remission or subs tantial improvement in depressive symptoms, allowin g 
them to proceed to the stabilization phase. Neverth eless, we plan to recruit 392 patients to the acute  phase of 
the study, which will facilitate reaching our targe t recruitment to the RCT should remission plus near -remission 
in the acute phase be as low as 50%.  
In the STOP-PD stabilization phase, 10% of particip ants who experienced remission with combination 
treatment had a relapse (Section 3.8). In contrast,  Rothschild et al. 41  found that none of the patients with PD 
who responded to combined fluoxetine and perphenazi ne had a relapse or dropped out during 12 weeks of 
open-label  continuation treatment. Based on these data, we es timate that approximately 10% of acute phase 
full/near-remitters will not complete the 8-week op en-label stabilization phase of the proposed study,  either 
because of relapse or discontinuation. Thus, we pre dict that 176 participants will be available for th e RCT. 
3.9.3 Justification for Aspects of the Design: 
Duration of Acute Treatment: Although most studies of the acute treatment of PD have been of 6-8 weeks 
duration, 8 a maximum of 12 weeks of acute treatment is more s uitable for this study for several reasons.  First,  
one of the goals of the acute phase is to maximize the chance of achieving remission of delusions and 
antidepressant response, in order for participants to enter the RCT. In STOP-PD, 1/3 of participants w ho 
experienced remission with combined sertraline and olanzapine did not do so until between weeks 6 and 12 of 
treatment. Second, studies of 6-8 weeks typically u se one cross-sectional assessment of ≥50% decrease in 
severity of depression as the primary outcome crite rion.  The acute treatment outcome criterion that w ill be 
used in this study requires a longer period of obse rvation. On the other hand, the decision to limit a cute 
 9   treatment to a maximum of 12 weeks is based on stud y time frame considerations (completion of the stud y in 5 
years) and the fact that patients who do not experi ence remission of psychosis and at least substantia l 
improvement in depression following 12 weeks of int ensive antidepressant-antipsychotic treatment shoul d 
probably be considered for additional or alternativ e treatment.  
Duration of Stabilization Phase: There are no data, and there is no consensus among experts, 102  about how 
long to continue antipsychotic medication, once an episode of PD has responded to combination 
pharmacotherapy. However, a survey of 50 experts in  the treatment of late-life depression found that t he 
majority would not recommend stopping antipsychotic  medication immediately after remission of PD. 102  In the 
absence of data to the contrary, we believe that it  is prudent to allow for a period of stability of r emission of 
psychosis prior to withdrawal of the antipsychotic.  On the other hand, continuation of the antipsychot ic for too 
long exposes a patient to the hazards of ongoing we ight gain and metabolic dysfunction. We therefore c hose 8 
weeks for the stabilization period to strike a bala nce between assuring sustained remission of the psychosis, 
while minimizing the duration of exposure to weight  gain and metabolic disturbance.   
Discontinuation Design: The primary aim of this study is to assess whether olanzapine, in combination with 
antidepressant medication, prevents relapse of PD. This question can be addressed through a double-bli nd 
RCT, in which placebo is substituted for olanzapine  in half the study participants, at a fixed point i n time. We 
also considered a placebo-controlled sequential dis continuation design, whereby placebo is substituted  for 
olanzapine at different time points. Although a seq uential discontinuation design could provide inform ation 
about how long to continue olanzapine once an episode of PD has re mitted, we believe that the first step is to 
determine whether or not antipsychotic medication i s of any benefit in preventing relapse of PD. If an tipsychotic 
medication is found to be beneficial, the next step  would then be to assess the optimal duration of 
antipsychotic treatment. A sequential discontinuati on design would require many more study participant s than 
the design that we propose, and would therefore be more challenging in terms of recruitment and more c ostly 
than the current proposal. 
Duration of the RCT: Limited data from naturalistic studies of PD sugges t that when antipsychotic medication 
is discontinued, the 3 months after discontinuation  is the period of greatest risk of relapse. 32,41  The choice of 36 
weeks for the proposed RCT therefore: a) covers the  period of greatest risk of relapse of PD following  the 
discontinuation of the antipsychotic, yet allows fo r a period of observation beyond that time, b) save s on the 
cost that would be associated with a longer study, and c) allows the study to be completed within 5 ye ars. 
Duration of Antipsychotic Taper: In the aformentioned open-label study of the withdr awal of antipsychotic 
medication in PD, Rothschild et al.41  tapered antipsychotic medication over a period of 4 weeks. No patient 
experienced discontinuation side effects or re-emer gence of psychosis during the 4-week taper.   
Stratification by Age:  PD is prevalent in older adults with major depress ion. 16,17,103,104  Age-related 
pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic changes may res ult in age-related differences in treatment efficac y 
and tolerability. It is therefore important to incl ude a sufficient number of older persons in order t o examine the 
relation between age, efficacy, tolerability, and s afety. 
Remission Criteria to Enter the RCT: Studies of major depression have found that partial  improvement in 
depressive symptoms may increase the risk of subseq uent relapse of depression. 105   We therefore believe 
that, in addition to experiencing full remission of  psychosis, participants should experience substant ial 
improvement in depressive symptoms prior to changes  being made to the treatment to which they responde d. 
There were patients in STOP-PD who experienced remi ssion of psychosis and were rated by a research 
psychiatrist as ‘very much improved’ or ‘much impro ved’ on the CGI, yet had a final visit HAM-D score in the 
range of 11-15, which still represented ≥50% improvement in the baseline HAM-D score. Given that patients in 
this study will continue with an antidepressant thr oughout the RCT, and may therefore continue to expe rience 
improvement in depression beyond the acute/stabiliz ation phases of treatment, we will include persons with 
substantial improvement in depressive symptoms, eve n though the symptoms may not have reached the 
conventional < 8-10 HAM-D cut point for remission u sed in studies of non-psychotic depression. 29,30    
MMSE Score ≥24 to Enter the Stabilization Phase: Persons with clinically significant cognitive impai rment 
prior to the index episode of PD will be excluded f rom the study (Section 4.2.1). In addition, partici pants with a 
MMSE score <24 at the end of the stabilization phas e will be excluded from participation in the RCT (s ince 
poor cognitive performance at that stage of the stu dy can not be explained by depression or psychosis) ,unless 
a MMSE score of <24 is explained by factors other t han cognitive impairment, such as low education lev el, 
visual impairment, or lack of fluency in the Englis h language.Of the STOP-PD participants who achieved  
remission with combination treatment and participat ed in the stabilization phase, only 1/37 had a MMSE  score 
 10   <24 at the end of stabilization. Thus, we expect th at this exclusion will have minimal impact on subje ct flow in 
to the RCT. 
3.9.4 Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  for participants are described in Human Subjects ( Section 4.2.1) 
3.9.5 Assessments and Measures: 
Primary Clinical Measures pertain to the study’s aims and hypotheses and/or e ligibility criteria. They are: 
Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV-TR (SCID-I V),106  the GRID version of the 17-item HAM-D,98,107  
Delusion Assessment Scale (DAS),96  delusion and hallucination items of the SADS,101  Scale for Suicidal 
Ideation (SSI) 108 , CGI,99  and MMSE.100  The 26-item Informant Questionnaire for Cognitive Decline 
(IQCODE) 109,110  will be used to screen out clinically significant cognitive decline that began prior to the index 
episode of PD, to help avoid the inclusion of perso ns in the early stage of dementia. 
Secondary  Clinical Measures:  Anxiety symptoms, medical burden, executive dysfun ction, psychomotor 
change, and ‘treatment resistance’ during the index  episode of depression have each been associated wi th 
increased risk of relapse/recurrence of major depre ssion. 111-115  These variables will therefore be included as 
covariates in the Cox model examining risk of relap se (Section 3.10.3). The pertinent measures are: an xiety 
subscale of the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Sca le, 116,117  Cumulative Illness Rating Scale, 118  DKEFS 
Stroop Conditions 1-3, 119 the  CORE 97 , and the Antidepressant Treatment History Form. 120    
• Given the age range of study participants, there will be 3 additional cognitive tests to help charac terize the 
sample at entry in to the RCT; these tests, which t arget previously described impairments in PD 121  and late-life 
depression,121,123  will be: i) a test of delayed recall (RBANS Immedi ate and Delayed Recall, 124  ii) a test of 
psychomotor speed (RBANS coding task 124 ), and iii) a test of cognitive flexibility (DKEFS Trail Making Test 
Conditions 4 & 5. 119  The DKEFS and RBANS tests were selected as they ha ve norms available for the entire 
age range of our proposed sample and the two DKEFS tasks and the two RBANS tasks were co-normed.   
• Measures of non-metabolic safety will be: UKU Sid e Effects Scale;125  Simpson Angus Scale; 126  Barnes 
Akathisia Scale; 127  Abnormal Involuntary Movement Scale;128  Orthostatic hypotension assessed after standing 
for 1 minute, following 5 minutes in a supine posit ion; and Falls Log (incidence and number of falls).  
Anthropometric Measures  : The selection of anthropometric measures and metabo lic parameters is based on 
Consensus Recommendations regarding the clinical mo nitoring of patients treated with atypical 
antipsychotics. 129  Subjects will be weighed, and their height measure d, in light clothing without shoes. In 
addition, pre-morbid weight (average weight in the year prior to the onset of the index episode of dep ression) 
will be obtained from the patient’s primary care ph ysician’s records. When pre-morbid weight is not av ailable 
from primary care physicians, the patient will be a sked for this information. Pre-morbid weight will b e used to 
calculate weight loss during the index episode of d epression; depression-related weight loss will be t aken in to 
account in a secondary statistical analysis of weig ht change during the proposed study. In addition to  weight, 
body mass index (BMI) and waist circumference are k ey clinical measures of body fat. 129  BMI, a measure of 
weight relative to height, is an index of total bod y fat. Waist circumference, measured at the umbilic us, is a 
measure of abdominal obesity, which is more specifi cally associated with cardiovascular risk and metab olic 
syndrome than BMI. 130  BMI and waist circumference will be assessed at ea ch study visit.  Separate secondary 
statistical analyses pertaining to Aims 2-5 will be  conducted, using each of these measures as an alte rnative to 
weight. 
Metabolic Measures:  Homeostatic model assessment (HOMA), a measure of i nsulin resistance 131,132 and the 
primary measure of glycemic function in this study,  will be calculated based on an established formula ,132  each 
time fasting glucose and insulin are measured. HbA1 c will be a secondary measure of glycemic function,  to 
assess the longitudinal stability of serum glucose levels during the course of the study. Triglyceride s and 
cholesterol (total, LDL, HDL) will also be measured .   
 
Table 1: Schedule of Events:  Acute and Stabilizati on Phases and RCT  
Instrument 
Baseline Acute  
Phase A, B 
(week) 
(4-12 wks 
in duration) Stabili-
zation  
Phase C 
(week)   Discontinuation RCT C  
(week) 
4 8 12 D 4 8 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 12  16  20  24  28  32  36 E 
SCID x                    x 
Clinical Ratings F x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x 
Weight & Waist Circumference x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x 
Height x                     
 11   Metabolic Labs  x x  x  x        x  x  x  x x 
Drug Plasma Levels  x  x  x          x     x 
Genetic Testing  x                     
Biomarkers x     x               x 
Baseline Physical G x                     
Vital Signs x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x  x 
Anxiety x     x                
Medical Burden x     x                
Cognition H  x     x               x 
Psychomotor Change x     x                
ATHF x                     
SF-36 I x     x               x 
EPSE Ratings  x x x x x x    x    x x x x x x x x 
Best Guess Form J                     x 
Intent-to-Attend Form K      x                
Pill Count  x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x 
A  The duration of the Acute Phase is variable and can  last between 4 and 12 weeks, depending on time to response. 
B In-person clinical evaluation will be performed by a research psychiatrist at weeks 1,2,3,6, and 10 of  the Acute Phase (more frequently 
for inpatients) in order to provide intensive clini cal monitoring during the early part of the study.  
C Participants will have over-the-phone clinical eval uation by research associates (RAs) at weeks 2 and 6 of the Stabilization Phase and 
weeks 10, 14, 18, 22, 26, 30 and 34 of the RCT, so as to allow for close clinical monitoring throughou t these phases of the study, yet 
lessening the burden on participants that would be associated with more frequent in-person assessments . During the phone 
assessments, RAs will administer the SCID major dep ressive episode questions, the SSI, and the DAS con viction items. These clinical 
assessments will be reviewed by a research psychiat rist. Participants with evidence of clinical deteri oration will be promptly seen in 
person by a research psychiatrist and RA.  
D These assessments will be completed at the end of t he Acute Phase, which occurs between 4 and 12 weeks  after starting study 
medications.  
E These assessments will be completed at week 36 or at the point of termination.  
F Primary clinical ratings are HAM-D, DAS, SADS delu sion and hallucination items, SSI, and CGI. In addi tion, the UKU side effects 
scale, Falls Log, and Concomitant Medication Log wi ll be completed at these visits. 
G Baseline physical includes physical examination and  screening lab tests (CBC; serum electrolytes, crea tinine; liver function tests(AST, 
ALT); TSH; Vitamin B12; serum pregnancy test; urine  drug screen) and EKG if they have not been done in  the week prior to starting the 
study.  
HCognitive evaluation will include: the IQCODE at ba seline; and the MMSE, Immediate and Delayed Recall,  Stroop, Trail Making, and 
Coding task at the end of the Stabilization Phase, and Delayed Recall, Stroop, Trail Making, and Codin g task at RCT termination. 
I The SF-36 will be administered to: i) examine the a ssociation of acute and remitted psychotic depressi on with participants’ health-
related quality of life, and ii) explore the effect  of continuation versus discontinuation of antipsyc hotic medication on participants’ health-
related quality of life. 
JThe Best Guess Form will be completed independently  by participant and rater at RCT termination, to de termine, once the study is 
completed, whether participants and/or raters could  guess treatment assignment on a greater than chanc e basis. This will serve as an 
indicator of how well the study’s double-blind was preserved. 
KThe purpose of the Intent-to-Attend form is describ ed in Section 3.10.5 (‘Strategies for Attrition’) 
Rater Training and Rater Reliability: All raters will  participate in standardized training before being a llowed to 
assess and rate study participants. In addition, in ter-rater reliability of the HAM-D and DAS will be assessed on 
an annual basis. Please see ‘Reliability and Qualit y Control’ in Section 4.1.6 for full details. 
3.9.6 Pharmacogenetics:   Processing of DNA:  Whole blood on all consenting participants will be sent directly 
to the NIMH Center for Collaborative Genetic Studie s (‘the Center’) for the generation of cell lines a nd 
extraction of DNA. Blood samples will be sent as th ey are collected and shipped at room temperature us ing the 
Center’s established protocols that are designed to  minimize trauma. In the rare event that a sample i s lost in 
transit, or if the sample is unsuitable for DNA ext raction, or if a cell line is not successfully made , we will obtain 
a repeat blood sample to send to the Center. DNA wi ll be shipped from the Center to Dr. James Kennedy’ s 
genetics laboratory at CAMH in Toronto within 4 mon ths of the blood sample being received by the Cente r.  
With the exception of data entry personnel at Corne ll, the study’s research staff will not be privy to  the genetic 
data until after the study has finished, so as to m aintain the blind.  
Genotyping: We will use standard TaqMan methods on our ABI-7500 for SNP markers and ABI-3100 for 
repeat polymorphisms. To ensure a clear result, any  ambiguous genotypes will be discarded and the 
participant’s DNA will be re-genotyped until the re sults are unambiguous. 10% of the participants will  be re-
genotyped to check for error rates (the test error rate in Dr. Kennedy’s lab is 0.5%).  We will type s elected 
SNPs (functional and certain tagged SNPs) across th e candidate genes described in Section 3.6, and als o 
explore any highly promising genes emerging from th e literature. We will test both single markers and 
haplotypes.  
 12   Population Stratification will be examined using th e STRUCTURE program. 133 We will select a set of unlinked 
SNPs from our set of selected markers, augmented by  an additional 96 markers that are known to be ‘anc estry 
informative’ and run the STRUCTURE program under an  admixture model, assuming correlated frequencies, 
with 20,000 burn-ins and 20,000 repetitions. The gr oup membership probabilities thus obtained would be  used 
as a covariate in the pharmacogenetic statistical a nalyses.  
3.9.7 Drug Exposure: Pharmacokinetic changes associated with aging and o ther factors 134,135 can result in 
variability of drug concentrations, which in turn c an result in differences in pharmacodynamics. Drug exposure 
is therefore an important piece of information when  interpreting variability in treatment efficacy and  adverse 
effects. 134,136  Blood will be collected for determination of plasm a sertraline and olanzapine concentrations. 
Each site will send frozen batched plasma samples t o Dr. Pollock’s psychopharmacology lab in Toronto e very 
6 months for pharmacokinetic analyses. The analytic  strategy will use population pharmacokinetics whic h uses 
nonlinear mixed effect modeling 137  to identify intra- and inter-individual sources of  variability.  The modeling 
provides: (1) magnitude of exposure, expressed as a verage drug concentration or Area Under the Curve, and 
(2) variability of exposure from what is expected, expressed as a ratio of the predicted drug concentr ation for a 
given time point to the observed concentration (Cpr ed/obs). Variability from the norm in drug concentr ations 
can be determined using sparse (between two and fou r) plasma samples per patient. 138   
3.9.8 Outcomes  
Outcome Criteria: Relapse is the primary measure of outcome. Relapse criteria are broad, to reflect a range 
of clinically relevant outcomes of PD.  The criteri on for relapse will be at least one of the followin g:  1) SCID 
symptoms of major depressive episode (preferably ma intained for at least 1 week over two consecutive w eekly 
visits); 2) 17-item HAM-D score of ≥18 (preferably maintained for at least 1 week over two consecutive weekly 
visits) and a mean absolute increase of 5 points on  at least one visit relative to entry into the RCT;  3) re-
emergence of SCID-rated psychosis (delusions or hal lucinations) (preferably for at least 1 week over t wo 
consecutive weekly visits) and a score of ≥3 on the SADS delusion or hallucination severity it ems 
(delusion/hallucination ‘definitely present’); 4) s ignificant clinical worsening, defined as either i)  emergence of 
‘high risk’ of suicide at any time (current suicide  plan or suicide attempt), and/or ii) development o f SCID-rated 
mania or hypomania (preferably for at least 1 week over two consecutive weekly visits), and/or iii) ps ychiatric 
hospitalization for depression, psychosis, suicidal ity, or mania/hypomania, regardless of the duration  of these 
symptoms. Although a one-week time duration is pref erable, the research psychiatrist is allowed to dec lare that 
a relapse has occurred if the clinical criterion is  established at an in-person visit and postponing f urther 
intervention for another seven days is considered t o place the subject at undue risk. Time to relapse will be 
defined as time from randomization to the first vis it at which relapse is established or the start of psychiatric 
hospitalization. These relapse criteria reflect a c linical deterioration for which most clinicians wou ld consider a 
change of treatment.  Even though patients with a h istory of bipolar affective disorder will not be al lowed to 
enter the study (Section 4.2.1), mania or hypomania  is included as an outcome variable because onset o f PD 
in younger adults may predict subsequent developmen t of bipolar affective disorder. Participants who a re 
suspected of having a relapse will be seen by one o f the study’s research psychiatrists who will deter mine 
whether relapse criteria are met. 
Management of Relapse: Patients who meet relapse criteria will be seen for  clinical management by a 
psychiatrist at the research site who is not affili ated with the study within 48-72 hours of referral.   Alternatively, 
patients can be referred for acute psychiatric hosp italization, if deemed appropriate by the study psy chiatrist. 
The non-study psychiatrist will be notified by the research pharmacist whether the patient was taking 
olanzapine at the time of relapse. Other research p ersonnel will not be aware of the treatment assignm ent. 
Based on the frequency of relapse postulated for th e study, we estimate that there will be an average of 3 
cases of relapse per year per study site. 
3.9.9 Pharmacotherapy:  Please see the appended Pharmacotherapy Protocol ( Appendix1) for full details 
regarding pharmacotherapy in all phases of the stud y.  
Acute phase : The only psychotropic medications allowed in the study will be i)olanzapine, ii)sertraline, and 
iii)‘as needed’ lorazepam and benztropine (doses of  lorazepam and benztropine will not be permitted in  the 12 
hours prior to psychometric testing, so as to minim ize the effect of these medications on cognitive 
performance). Psychotropic medications that are not  permitted in the study will be withdrawn prior to starting 
study medications, but if this is not feasible, by the end of the first week of the study. Sertraline and olanzapine 
will be dispensed in a non-blind, open-label fashio n during the acute and stabilization phases of the study. The 
titration schedule of sertraline and olanzapine, an d the target dosages of these medications, will be the same 
as that successfully employed in STOP-PD. Sertralin e will be started at 50mg/day and increased by 50 m g 
 13   increments to reach a target dose of 150 mg/day by the end of the first week of treatment. Participant s who did 
not experience at least partial improvement (based on operationalized criteria) in depressive symptoms , after 
taking sertraline at a dosage of 150 mg/day for 4 w eeks, will have the sertraline dose increased to 20 0 mg/day, 
as tolerated. Olanzapine will be started at 5 mg/da y and increased by 5 mg increments to reach a targe t dose 
of 15 mg/day by the end of the first week of treatm ent. If there is no improvement or inadequate impro vement 
in psychosis after 7 days of 15 mg/day of olanzapin e, the dosage of olanzapine will be increased to 20  mg/day, 
as tolerated. Slower titration or temporary dose re ductions of one or both medications will be allowed  if there 
are clinically significant side effects, but a conc erted effort will be made to achieve the target dos ages, as 
tolerated.  
Stabilization Phase:  When participants meet remission criteria, they wi ll continue with open-label sertraline 
and olanzapine during the 8-week stabilization phas e. Since the goal of this phase is to consolidate s tability of 
remission, adjustment of the doses of study medicat ions will be allowed, if necessitated by clinical w orsening 
or significant side effects. The maximum allowable daily dosages of sertraline and olanzapine, respect ively, will 
be 200mg and 20mg, and the minimum allowable daily dosages will be 50mg and 5mg. Because sustained 
remission of psychosis during the stabilization pha se will be required for eligibility for the RCT, pa rticipants will 
leave the stabilization phase if they experience a relapse of delusions or hallucinations during that time as 
determined by SCID interview. 
Randomized Phase:  Participants who meet the study’s remission criter ia will be randomly allocated, following 
completion of the stabilization phase, to either co ntinue olanzapine or switch, over a period of 4-wee ks, from 
olanzapine to placebo. All participants will take o pen-label sertraline for the duration of the RCT. T he goal will 
be to maintain sertraline at the same acute dose th at the participant was prescribed at the time of 
randomization to the RCT. Because participants will  have taken sertraline for a minimum of 10 weeks be fore 
entering the RCT, we anticipate that the dose of se rtraline will rarely need to be adjusted in the RCT  because 
of side effects. However, a reduction of the dosage  of sertraline will be allowed if the site PI agree s. An 
increase in dose of sertraline will not be permitte d at any time during the RCT, because it will confo und testing 
of H1. The goal will be to maintain olanzapine/plac ebo at the same acute dose that the participant was  
prescribed at the time of randomization to the RCT.   However, a change in dose of olanzapine/placebo w ill be 
permitted, if necessitated by adverse effects or cl inical worsening during the RCT, following discussi on with the 
site PI. The rationale for allowing a change in ola nzapine/placebo dose, is that the primary aim of th e study is 
to assess whether olanzapine, administered within a  clinically relevant dose range, prevents relapse, not 
whether a specific dose of olanzapine prevents rela pse. Dose changes of sertraline and olanzapine/plac ebo 
will be carefully recorded and will be reported in a descriptive fashion for each treatment arm.  
 
3.10 DATA ANALYSIS 
3.10.1 Data Management is described as a part of Quality Control in Sectio n 4.1.6.  
3.10.2 Randomization: We will randomize 88 participants to each of the tw o treatment arms using a 1:1 
allocation ratio, stratified by age, remission grou p at randomization, and site. In order to reduce th e probability 
that a disproportionate number of subjects are rand omized to any one level of the factors a blocking s trategy 
will be used. Randomization will be conducted by Dr . Leon, the study’s statistician, using the Dallal software.   
3.10.3 Data Analytic Procedures:  Initially, baseline demographic and clinical charac teristics will be 
examined. Frequency distributions will be produced.  Descriptive and graphical displays will be produce d. 
Transformations will be used when distributional as sumptions are not fulfilled for inferential tests. Treatment 
groups will be compared on baseline demographic and  clinical variables using t-tests for continuous va riables, 
Mann-Whitney tests for ordinal variables, and chi-s quare tests for categorical variables. If significa nt baseline 
group imbalance is detected on any particular varia ble, that variable will be included as a covariate in the 
inferential analyses if its correlation with outcom e is 0.30 or greater. Dropouts and completers will also be 
compared on baseline variables using t-tests, Mann- Whitney tests, or chi-square tests. The primary ana lyses 
will adhere to the Intent-to-Treat principle. Each statistical test for H1-3 will involve a two-tailed  alpha of .05.  
Primary Hypothesis: Efficacy.  
H1: The combination of sertraline and olanzapine wi ll be associated with less risk of relapse than the  
combination of sertraline and placebo. H1 will be tested with a Cox proportional hazards m odel that 
compares survival time across treatment groups.  Su rvival time will be defined as time from randomizat ion to 
relapse (Section 3.9.8) and will be measured in wee ks. A subject’s survival time will be classified as  censored 
at the point of study discontinuation, (e.g., due t o withdrawal of consent or a severe intervening non -psychiatric 
medical event) or at end of follow-up, if relapse h as not yet occurred. Kaplan Meier survival curves w ill be used 
 14   for descriptive analyses of time to relapse. The Co x models will include treatment group and the strat ification 
variables: site, remission group at randomization ( full-remission vs. near-remission), and age group a t 
randomization (18-59 vs. ≥60 years). Treatment groups will be compared on 5 v ariables at the time of 
randomization that have the potential to be associa ted with risk of relapse (anxiety, medical burden, executive 
dysfunction, psychomotor change, and treatment resi stance prior to study entry; Section 3.9.5); if the  treatment 
groups differ significantly on one or more of these  variables (p ≤.05) and the variable in question is correlated 
with relapse (r>.30), the variable will be included  as a covariate in the Cox model. Based on our prio r 
studies, 38,41,139  we expect no more than 10% attrition during the RC T among these participants who have 
already been enrolled for 12-20 weeks prior to rand omization and who are in sustained remission at the  time of 
randomization. This attrition rate might appear to be low, but this is because those subjects most vul nerable to 
attrition will likely drop out in the phases prior to randomization. Non-informative censoring will be  examined by 
comparing those who do and do not dropout on their HAM-D ratings from the prior week. The constant haz ards 
assumption will be examined by examining the increm ental contribution of a treatment x vulnerable peri od of 
relapse interaction (exploring the possibility of h igher risk in the first 3 months following disconti nuation).  
Secondary Hypotheses: Weight and Metabolic Safety  
H2: The combination of sertraline and olanzapine wi ll be associated with higher weight, higher total 
cholesterol, and higher triglycerides compared with  the combination of sertraline and placebo in the 
randomized phase.  This will be tested using separate mixed-effects li near regression analyses for weight, 
cholesterol, and triglycerides during the randomize d phase.  Models will include up to 15 repeated 
assessments of weight and up to 5 repeated measures  of total cholesterol and triglycerides over the 36 -week 
trial, as the respective dependent variables.  Usin g a regulatory approach to safety analyses (H2, H3,  E1 and 
E2), we will classify subjects based on medications  taken during protocolized treatment. Likelihood ra tio (LR) 
tests will successively examine the incremental con tributions of a quadratic term for time and two int eractions 
(treatment by site and treatment by time).140  The decision rule calls for rejection of H 0 if the latter interaction is 
statistically significant. Interaction and quadrati c terms will only be included in subsequent models if statistically 
significant. LR tests will determine if the time be tter approximated with weekly time indicators that allow for 
other forms of non-linear change over time. In addi tion a spline-based approach will examine metabolic  
changes. If a participant receives new treatment or  a change of treatment for hyperlipidemia during th e RCT, 
his/her pertinent metabolic data from that point on wards will be excluded from the mixed model, althou gh the 
metabolic measures in question will continue to be collected for safety analyses and reporting to the DSMB. 
Based on data from STOP-PD, we expect that fewer th an 5% of participants (i.e. <10 participants in the  RCT) 
will have metabolic data censored for this reason. We chose not to include these post-randomization me tabolic 
data as covariates in the mixed model, because doin g so could confound ‘cause and effect’ and result i n a 
biased estimate of the treatment effect, thereby co mpromising the primary goal of the analysis. 141   
H3:  Older age will be associated with less weight gain during the open-label phase. Mixed-effects linear 
regression analysis will examine weight change from  Acute Phase baseline. The model will include up to  6 
weight assessments over the 12-20 week acute and st abilization phases.  We will use the strategy above  (H2) 
except that age will be the primary fixed effect be cause treatment is a constant in the open-label pha se. LR 
tests will examine incremental contributions of a q uadratic term for time and the age by time interact ion. In 
addition a spline-based approach will be used to fi t metabolic measures. H 0 will be rejected if the interaction is 
statistically significant.   
Exploratory Analyses 
E1.  Explore older age as a moderator of change in weight and metabolic variables during the 
randomized phase.   Analyses of age as a moderator are exploratory and,  as recommended 142  will focus on 
the magnitude of the effect and not involve signifi cance testing.  Separate mixed-effects linear regre ssion 
models will examine change on weight, total cholest erol, triglycerides, and insulin resistance.   
E2.  Explore the association of selected genetic polymor phisms with: i) remission, ii) relapse, and iii) 
weight and metabolic variables during the open-labe l and randomized phases of the study. We will 
apply quality control for the genotyped genetic mar kers: i) all tag SNPs with a call rate less than 95 % and 
minor allele frequency less than 10% will be exclud ed to provide sufficiently informative variation, a nd ii) we will 
test for Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (HWE) for each marker; markers not in HWE will be discarded (p<.00 1). 
The analyses for remission and relapse will compare  those with and without each candidate genotype on time 
until remission/relapse in separate Cox proportiona l hazards models. Analyses will examine one genotyp e per 
model. Mixed-effects linear regression analyses wil l compare those with and without each candidate gen otype 
on weight and metabolic variables.  There will be s eparate models for weight and each pertinent metabo lic 
 15   variable; these analyses will examine one genotype per model. Each open-label analysis will involve a main 
effect of genotype, whereas each randomized phase a nalysis will involve both the main effects and inte raction 
of genotype and randomized treatment. Haplotype ana lyses will follow the same approach as for genotype  
analyses. Haplotypes occurring at a frequency of <1 0% will not be included in analyses.  
Analysis of Non-Metabolic Safety Data:  Data on non-metabolic adverse events during each ph ase will be 
collected for reporting to the DSMB. In addition, t hese data during the RCT will allow for a descripti ve 
comparison between participants maintained on olanz apine and those switched to placebo. For each phase  of 
the study, we will report the number and % of parti cipants who meet criteria for specific adverse even ts, who 
did not meet these criteria at acute phase baseline . Adverse events will be defined as: an increase of  ≥2 points 
from baseline or a score of 3 on individual items o f the UKU; a global severity score of ≥2 on the AIMS; a 
global assessment score of ≥2 on the Barnes Akathisia scale; a mean score of ≥2 on the Simpson Angus 
Scale; a score of ≥1 on item #4 or #5 of the SSI; a reduction in systo lic blood pressure of ≥20 mm Hg or in 
diastolic blood pressure of ≥10 mm Hg within 3 minutes of standing; one or more falls.  We will also report the 
N and % of individuals who meet criteria for an adv erse event from week 8 onwards of the RCT, to allow  for 
the possibility of improvement in adverse effects o nce open-label phase olanzapine is cleared from the  body. 
We will also report the N and % of individuals who are started on a lipid-lowering or glucose-lowering  drug after 
study enrollment.  Because of the large number of v ariables, these data will be presented descriptivel y. 
Analysis of Drug Exposure:  The analyses of drug exposure are exploratory and will not directly influence the 
findings of H1-3 and E1-2, but will instead provide  supplementary information for interpretation of th ese 
findings. Mixed effects linear regression analyses will compare treatment groups on magnitude and vari ability 
of sertraline exposure in the randomized phase. Mix ed effects linear models will compare age groups on  
magnitude and variability of i) sertraline exposure  and ii) olanzapine exposure during the open-label and 
randomized phases. There will be separate models fo r each phase and for each measure of drug exposure.   
3.10.4 Sample Size Determination and Statistical Po wer Analyses:    
Assumptions for Power Calculations for H1:  We propose 20% as the minimal clinically meaningfu l 
difference in relapse rates between olanzapine and placebo over 36 weeks. A 20% difference would mean that 
5 patients (NNT) would need to be treated with olan zapine to prevent 1 case of relapse. Based on the r eview 
of literature (Section 3.4) and STOP-PD stabilizati on data (Section 3.8), we estimate that 15% of part icipants 
who are maintained on sertraline+olanzapine will ha ve a relapse in the RCT. A relapse rate of 35% in t he 
sertraline+placebo group would therefore be consist ent with the hypothesized 20% difference between 
treatment groups.  A 35% relapse following olanzapi ne discontinuation is the same as the rate reported  by 
Aronson et al. 32  in a naturalistic study of antipsychotic discontin uation in PD, but not as high as some of the 
rates of relapse of PD following cessation of a cou rse of ECT.4,37-39  Based on our previous experience of 
conducting studies of the continuation and maintena nce treatment of PD, 38,41,139  we predict that attrition during 
the RCT will not exceed 10%. 
 
Table 2. Statistical Power for Survival Analyses fo r H1. 
Power calculations for H1:  The sample size proposed for this 
study was determined based on statistical power ana lyses for 
the primary hypothesis (H1), which will be tested w ith survival 
analysis.  The protocol specifies randomization of a total of 176 
participants (88/group), and specifies a two-tailed  alpha level of 
.05. Power was estimated in a simulation study usin g S+ 
survfit.  The proposed sample size will provide suf ficient 
statistical power to detect clinically meaningful d ifferences in 
H1 (Table 2). 
Assumptions for Power Calculations for H2:  1) Data from RCTs in schizophrenia show that olanz apine-
related weight gain slows after the first 12 weeks of treatment 143  but can continue by an average of 1lb/month 
for up to 9 months of treatment. 144-146 In the post-acute stabilization phase of STOP-PD, w eight gain slowed to 
an average 1.5lbs/month; 2) We propose that partici pants assigned to placebo will lose most, but not a ll, of the 
weight gained during the open-label phase of the st udy, because some of the weight gained will have be en 
restoration of depression-related weight loss; 3) O ngoing increases in triglycerides, averaging 8-10 m g/dl/ 
month over periods of 4-12 months, have been report ed with olanzapine in studies of schizophrenia.145-147  In 
STOP-PD, there was a similar mean increase of appro ximately 9mg/dl /month. We therefore assume an 
increase in triglycerides in the olanzapine arm of the RCT; 4) RCTs of schizophrenia report only a sli ght 
increase in total cholesterol with olanzapine after  the first 12-16 weeks of treatment.145,146   We therefore Sert + Pla 
Relapse Sert  +Olanz 
Relapse  Attrition  Power 
40% 15% 10% 0.95 
40% 15% 15% 0.94 
35% 15% 10% 0.84 
35% 15% 15% 0.82 
35% 10% 10% 0.98 
35% 10% 15% 0.97 
 16   assume little or no change in total cholesterol fro m randomization values in the olanzapine arm; 5) We  
hypothesize that triglycerides and total cholestero l in placebo-treated patients will return towards a cute phase 
baseline values.    
Table 3:  Statistical Power of Mixed-Effects  
Linear Regression Analyses for H2 and H3 
 
Power Calculations for H2 (Weight and Metabolic 
During RCT) : Power was estimated in a simulation study 
using SAS PROC MIXED.  To account for attrition in H2, 
the power analyses assumed we would collect at leas t 8 
of 15 repeated assessments of weight and 4 of 5 
measures of total cholesterol and triglycerides.dur ing the 
RCT. The proposed design will have power ≥.80 to detect 
differential slopes that result in standardized dif ferences at 
endpoint ≥.35 for weight and ≥.40 for triglycerides and total cholesterol. To put  these in perspective, based on 
STOP-PD data, these effects correspond to group dif ferences as small as 4.9 lbs in weight, 38 mg/dl in  
triglycerides, and 22 mg/dl in total cholesterol.  
Assumptions and Statistical Power for H3 (Weight Du ring Open-Label Phase): Power analyses for H3 
assumed that we would collect at least 4 of the 6 p lanned assessments of weight during open-label trea tment. 
The proposed design will have power >.80 to detect differential slopes that result in a standardized d ifference 
as small as .40 by the end of the open-label phase (Table 3). To put this in context, of the participa nts in 
STOP-PD who completed 12 weeks of acute treatment, the younger group gained a mean 16.6 ± 16.5 lbs and  
the older group gained a mean 10.7 ± 11.3 lbs; the standardized effect size for this weight difference  was 0.42.   
3.10.5 Strategies for Attrition:  Attrition can introduce bias and reduce power, pre cision and generalizability.148  
Based on our prior studies, we expect no more than 10% attrition during the RCT (see above).  Cox mode ls 
assume non-informative censoring.  The assessment f requency allows us to gauge survival status no more  
than 2 weeks prior to dropout.  Also, for the survi val analysis of H1, we will adhere to the Intent-to -Treat 
principle, in that we will make every effort to con tinue assessments for the entire course of randomiz ed 
treatment or until relapse (which ever comes first) , even among those nonadherent to randomized 
assignment. 149,150   Mixed models (H2, H3, E1, E2) yield valid inferen ces assuming ignorable attrition (i.e. 
attrition is accounted for by covariates/dependent variable measured prior to drop-out). 151  Following the 
regulatory approach to safety, we will classify sub jects based on medications taken during protocolize d 
treatment.  We will examine the ignorable attrition  assumption. First, using a pattern mixture model, 152  
implemented in a longitudinal framework. 153  Second, Intent-to-Attend at entry to the RCT will be used as a 
covariate to account for attrition. 154  Estimates of treatment effect from the models desc ribed above will be 
compared with models that also include the main eff ects of either dropout pattern or Intent-to-Attend.   
 
4. PROTECTION OF HUMAN SUBJECTS 
 
4.1. LEADERSHIP PLAN TO PROTECT THE INTEGRITY OF HU MAN SUBJECT DATA COLLECTED 
ACROSS MULTIPLE SITES  
 
4.1.1 Rationale: This grant proposal is a Renewal (formally known as  Competing Continuation) of a NIH-
funded U01 ‘Acute Pharmacotherapy of Unipolar Psych otic Depression’ (MH62446, MH62518, MH62565, and 
MH62624).  This U01 is also known as the Study of t he Pharmacotherapy of Psychotic Depression (STOP-PD ) 
for the purpose of communications, presentations of  research findings, and publications.  The change i n title of 
the renewal, ‘Sustaining Remission of Psychotic Dep ression’ reflects the focus of the proposed study o n 
treatment of PD beyond the acute phase.  
 
STOP-PD was a multi-center study involving the foll owing four sites: Weill Medical College of Cornell 
University (PI: Dr. Barnett Meyers), University of Toronto (PI: Dr. Alastair Flint), University of Mas sachusetts 
Medical School (PI: Dr. Anthony Rothschild), and Un iversity of Pittsburgh School of Medicine (PI: Dr. Benoit 
Mulsant).  The coordinating centre for STOP-PD was based at Cornell, under the leadership of Dr. Meyer s, 
who was the overall principal of the study.  The ST OP-PD grant proposal was submitted as four identica l R01s.  
At the time of funding, the mechanism was changed t o U01s by NIMH, consistent with the approach taken by 
NIH with other multi-center clinical trials.   # observations 
/subject Standardized 
Effect ICC=.50  
Lipids ICC=.95  
Weight 
4 .35 .74 .77 
4 .40 .84 .85 
4 .45 .89 .93 
8 .35 - .80 
8 .40 - .89 
8 .45 - .95 
 17    
The proposed study will include the same sites as S TOP-PD.  At Cornell University, University of 
Massachusetts, and University of Toronto, the same principal investigators as in STOP-PD will serve as  
principal investigators of the new study.   At the Pittsburgh site, Ellen Whyte M.D. will serve as pri ncipal 
investigator for that site.  Dr. Whyte joined the S TOP-PD PI team in September 2005, when Dr. Mulsant 
partially relocated to the University of Toronto.  She assumed day-to-day operations of the Pittsburgh  site and 
actively participated in the overall leadership of the previous study through participation in the stu dy’s Steering 
Committee and Publications Sub-Committee, participa tion in weekly conference calls and annual face-to- face 
meetings with the principal investigators from the other sites, reviewing and approving the results of  data 
analyses, presenting findings at scientific meeting s, and writing and publishing manuscripts.  In the proposed 
study, Dr. Mulsant will serve as a co-investigator at the Pittsburgh site (in addition to his leadersh ip role at the 
Centre for Addiction and Mental Health [CAMH] conso rtium site in Toronto), and will continue to collab orate 
closely with Dr. Whyte in the management of this si te.   
 
Use of multiple sites (through the Collaborative Cl inical Studies of Mental Disorders mechanism [PAR-0 9-153])  
is justified by the fact that the majority of patie nts with PD need to be recruited from inpatient set tings due to 
the severity of their illness.  Recruiting and reta ining patients in a treatment study of PD is labor intensive and 
challenging; a single site would not be able to rec ruit and retain the number of patients with PD that  are 
needed for the proposed study. 
 
4.1.2 Experience And Background: Drs. Meyers, Flint, Mulsant, and Rothschild have ma ny years of 
experience in conducting research in PD.  The princ ipal investigators of the proposed study have worke d as a 
group on STOP-PD for the past 8 years.  This collab oration has involved: conceptualization, formulatio n, 
writing, and revision of the STOP-PD grant applicat ion; recruiting and training of research personnel;  
recruitment and treatment of participants in the st udy; data collection and oversight of the transfer of data to 
the coordinating center; membership of, and partici pation in, the study’s Steering Committee and Publi cations 
Sub-Committee; participation in weekly conference c alls and annual face-to-face meetings; reviewing an d 
approving the results of data analyses, presenting findings at scientific meetings; and writing and pu blishing 
manuscripts.  This partnership will continue in the  proposed renewal.  The successful completion of ST OP-PD, 
including meeting the planned recruitment target, i s testimony to the successful collaboration of this  group of 
investigators.  
 
In addition to leading STOP-PD, Dr. Meyers has othe r experience in leading and coordinating multi-cent er 
studies.  Dr. Meyers used support from a R24 award (MH53816) to develop a clinical mental health servi ces 
research infrastructure that completed 10 pilot pro jects at 16 diverse sites.  These studies recruited  2,500 
subjects, and managed systematically collected 6-mo nth longitudinal data on 250 patients with major 
depression from multiple primary care and mental he alth sector sites. 
 
4.1.3 Site Functions: Dr. Meyers will be the overall principal investigat or of the proposed study, with support 
in this role from Dr. Flint. The coordinating cente r will be based at Cornell.  The inter-site project  coordinator, 
data manager, and the project’s statistician/method ologist will be based at Cornell.  Other investigat ors 
associated with the Geriatric Psychiatry Institute at Cornell (Drs. Alexopoulos, Bruce, and Young) hav e several 
R01s, R24 research infrastructure grants, as well a s a U01, that allow for synergy in supporting and s haring 
research staff between projects at Cornell.  In add ition, the Institute’s Advanced Centre for Interven tions and 
Services Research (PI: Alexopoulos GS) will contrib ute to infrastructure support for research operatio ns at 
Cornell, as it did for STOP-PD. Each study site wil l contribute equally to recruitment of patients.  
Pharmacogenetic and pharmacometric analyses of the proposed study will be conducted in Toronto, in the  
research laboratories of Drs. James Kennedy and Bru ce Pollock, respectively.  
 
Table 4: Functions Performed by Each of the Four Si tes 
Function  Site  Areas of Primary Responsibility  
Subject recruitment 
& clinical 
management All four 
sites • Each site will recruit 98 acutely ill participants  and randomize 44 
remitted participants, with anticipated differences  in race and 
ethnicity as described in Section 7;   
• Recruitment and subject management are identical a cross sites 
 18   Coordinating Center  Cornell  • Coordinates and oversees research activities acros s sites;  
• Inter-site Coordinator communicates with and monit ors activities of 
site raters and reports to Principal Investigators;  
• Assures adherence to the Study Manual; 
• Assures completeness and quality of data; manages data base; 
• Chairs Steering Committee and Publication Committe e; 
• Communicates with regulatory bodies and external a gencies 
Recruitment, 
Assessment, and 
Adherence  University 
of Toronto; 
Cornell  • Develops the Study Manual; 
• Coordinates training on clinical assessments and r eliability testing 
in collaboration with the Cornell Inter-site Projec t Coordinator; 
• Provides leadership for monitoring recruitment, re tention, and 
medication adherence; coordinates strategies to ove rcome 
obstacles 
 
Neuropsychological 
Training Pittsburgh • Conducts training and annual re-training on neurop sychological 
assessments and coordinates analyses of test result s  
Methodology, Data 
Management and 
Data Analysis  Cornell • Provides centralized data management for all sites ; 
• Provides methodological leadership and consultatio n (e.g., blinding, 
consistency across sites, reliability assessments);  
• Provides biostatistical leadership for analyses of  project data 
Pharmacokinetics 
and 
Pharmacogenetics  Toronto • Oversees quality assurance efforts regarding sampl e acquisition, 
pre-processing, and storage; 
• Carries out all pharmacokinetic and pharmacogeneti c assays; 
• Applies population pharmacokinetic modeling to the  drug 
concentration data  
 
4.1.4 Roles and Responsibilities of PIs: The principal investigators will be responsible for  hiring, training, 
and supervising research staff at their respective sites, overseeing the recruitment and retention of patients at 
their sites, overseeing the quality of data collect ion, and ensuring that data are sent to the Coordin ating Center 
in a timely manner.  In addition, each of the princ ipal investigators will be members of the study’s S teering 
Committee and Publications Sub-Committee.   
 
In addition to these general responsibilities, the investigators will have specific functions.  Dr. Me yers will lead 
the Coordinating Center, which will coordinate the research activities at the 4 sites.  He will overse e the work of 
the project coordinator, who will be a Ph.D. clinic al psychologist, and the data manager. He collabora te with Dr 
Andy Leon, who will serve as the study’s statistici an/methodologist.  Along with Dr. Flint, he will co -chair the 
study’s Steering Committee.  He will chair weekly t elephone conference calls attended by the PIs, the 
Coordinating Center’s staff, and the NIH project of ficer, and prepare minutes summarizing the discussi on and 
action items arising from each of these calls.  Dr.  Meyers and Coordinating Center staff under his sup ervision 
will prepare quarterly reports and if needed, inter im reports, for the NIMH Data and Safety Monitoring  Board, 
communicate with the NIMH project officer, and moni tor the study’s overall budget. 
 
Dr. Flint will be responsible for overseeing develo pment of the manual of study operations and case re cord 
forms, overseeing overall recruitment of participan ts across sites, and overseeing both rater training  and 
assurance of inter-rater reliability across sites. These responsibilities will be carried out in colla boration with the 
inter-site project coordinator under the direction of Dr. Meyers. Drs. Flint and Meyers collaborated s uccessfully 
in the implementation and operations of the recentl y completed STOP-PD. Dr. Flint will work with Gary Lewis 
M.D., the endocrinologist consultant at the Univers ity of Toronto, in coordinating the analyses of the  metabolic 
data and interpreting these data. 
 
Dr. Mulsant, who has appointments at both the Unive rsity of Toronto and University of Pittsburgh, will  oversee 
the genetic and pharmacometric aspects of the study .  He will collaborate closely with Drs. Kennedy an d 
Pollock, both based at CAMH in Toronto, with respec t to all aspects of these analyses, and will take t he lead in 
preparing reports pertaining to these data. 
 19    
Dr. Whyte will collaborate with Meryl Butters, Ph.D ., a neuropsychologist at the University of Pittsbu rgh, who 
will supervise the collection of all neuropsycholog ical data.  Dr. Butters will train and re-train sit e raters in the 
administration of neuropsychological tests.  
 
4.1.5 Governance: The Steering Committee, composed of the 4 principal  investigators and Dr. Mulsant, and 
co-chaired by Drs. Meyers and Flint, will be respon sible for oversight of the research.  The committee  will have 
weekly telephone conference calls that will review progress at the 4 sites, including recruitment and retention 
of participants, adherence to study procedures, and  the safety of participants.  Protocol violations, serious 
adverse events, and obstacles to the study’s progre ss will be discussed. Email will be used for as-nee ded 
communication between conference calls, unless an u rgent operational issue dictates the scheduling of a 
special conference call. The Steering Committee wil l receive and review reports from the inter-site pr oject 
coordinator about results of reliability testing an d the status of reliability training exercises. The  Steering 
Committee will also meet in person for a 1-day meet ing, at a minimum frequency of once per year.  A 
publications sub-committee will be composed of the principal investigators and Dr. Mulsant as standing  
members; co-investigators will be invited on an ad hoc basis, as appropriate.  The publication sub-com mittee 
will plan for data analyses, presentation of result s at scientific meetings, and manuscript preparatio n, in 
collaboration with the data manager and statisticia n, and will make decisions about authorship.  All 
manuscripts using project data will be reviewed and  approved by the Publications Sub-committee before 
submission.  In the event of any disagreement perta ining to the study amongst the members of the Steer ing 
Committee, that is not resolved through discussion,  a vote will be taken and the majority will prevail . 
 
 
4.1.6 Reliability and Quality Control:  
Rater Training and Rater Reliability. Research associates at each site will be trained by  the site’s study 
coordinator and primary investigator in the adminis tration of the instruments.  General oversight of t his training 
will be provided by the Coordinating Center’s Proje ct Coordinator, in collaboration with Dr. Flint and  Dr. 
Meyers. The project coordinator will have biweekly conference calls with Dr. Meyers and Dr. Flint to r eport on 
study progress. Training of research associates at each site will involve the following: the observati on and 
discussion of training videotapes supplied by the C ornell Coordinating Center pertaining to the primar y 
instruments (SCID, HAM-D, DAS, and SSI); in-person observation of interviews conducted by research 
psychiatrists and experienced research coordinators ; and in-person supervision of training interviews 
conducted by research associates. A 2-day launch me eting will take place at the Cornell Coordinating C enter 
prior to the start of the study, to solidify this t raining and to review rating conventions of each sc ale. Meryl 
Butters Ph.D. will attend the launch meeting to tra in the research team on the proper administration o f the 
neuropsychological instruments. Research associates  will receive ongoing supervision from research 
coordinators and research psychiatrists at each sit e. In addition, the inter-site Project Coordinator will lead 
weekly conference calls with the site study coordin ators and research associates. These calls will add ress 
subject recruitment and retention, training and rel iability of research personnel, the completeness an d accuracy 
of data entry, and other quality assurance issues.  
 
Inter-rater reliability of the HAM-D and DAS will b e assessed on an annual basis.  Reliability assessm ents will 
require research associates and research coordinato rs at each center to independently rate 12 videotap ed 
interviews of patients with varying levels of sever ity of psychotic depression.  Inter-rater reliabili ty assessments 
performed during each year of STOP-PD yielded ICCs of 0.93-0.98 for the GRID HAM-D total score and 0.6 9-
0.84 for the conviction dimension of the DAS, demon strating good reliability for these primary measure s. One-
day working meetings in Years 2-4 will be attended by the principal investigators, research coordinato rs and 
associates, and inter-site Project Coordinator to a ddress study operational issues, rater training, an d inter-rater 
reliability. 
 
Data Management and Data Integrity. The coordinating center at Cornell will be responsi ble for standardizing 
data collection forms and data entry procedures, en suring the reliability and completeness of data ent ry, and 
overall data integrity across all 4 sites.  The Coo rdinating Center will also be responsible for data analyses. Dr. 
Meyers will receive weekly reports from the project  coordinator and the data manager on activities at 
participating sites, and review these reports with the Steering Committee. 
 20    
During the start-up phase, the data manager and Dr.  Leon will help standardize data collection forms a nd data 
auditing procedures across the four sites in collab oration with the Cornell Inter-Site Project Coordin ator. The 
data management team has developed a set of standar ds and procedures for data entry and checking and f or 
the documentation of data sets generated for statis tical analysis. These methods, which assure the int egrity of 
study data, are described below. In addition to pre paring and then locking data sets that report resul ts from this 
project, the data manager will analyze results of t he annual rater inter-rater reliability assessments .  He will 
also oversee and execute procedures for data securi ty and access, data quality control, storage, and b ack-up, 
and will provide periodic reports of accrual, follo w-up, and summary statistics as required by the Dat a Safety 
Monitoring Board (DSMB).  
 
Data Integrity: Sites will send original copies of de-identified hard data to the data management team  at Cornell 
by overnight shipping every second week. Sites will  retain hard copies of these records.  The de-ident ified hard 
data will be stored in a locked filing cabinet stor ed in a locked office to further protect subject an onymity. 
Results will be published as group data without the  use of characteristics that would identify individ ual subjects. 
Data auditing, entry and quality control will be ca rried out at Cornell under the supervision of the d ata 
management team. The Cornell data management team h as many years of experience in data management 
and coordination of multi-study, multi-site researc h projects.  The data management team has developed  an 
infrastructure that supports the design of and stan dardization of databases, data entry, data quality control, and 
preparation of data for statistical analysis. This expertise will be applied in implementing a system that assures 
the quality of data entry, storage, verification, a nd validation, and the reporting of data from this study.  This will 
involve consultation with the study’s statistician on the design of study databases and other issues r elated to 
the study's data management infrastructure.   Empha sis will be given to incorporate database component s that 
were used in STOP-PD because the proposed project i s also a randomized controlled trial and uses varia bles 
that overlap with those used in STOP-PD.  This syst em will also support the tracking of subjects and d ata at 
the individual sites. The Cornell data management t eam will maintain regular communication with site s tudy 
coordinators to ensure that data collection is comp lete and accurate. Regularly scheduled, and as need ed, 
communications between the inter-site project coord inator at Cornell, the data manager, and raters and  
investigators will be used to clarify inconsistenci es and ambiguities in data submitted to Cornell. 
 
A project team dedicated to the study led by the st udy’s statistician will oversee all data management  and 
quality assurance procedures, including coordinatio n across sites. All data management resources used at 
Cornell in the multi-site and single site studies c onducted through the Geriatric Institute will be ma de available 
to the proposed study.  Data management resources w ill be devoted to overall quality assurance includi ng: 
maintaining interview schedules and subject trackin g, monitoring scale completion, monitoring the accu racy of 
scale completion and data entry, analyzing results of inter-rater reliability assessments as instructe d by the 
investigators, and developing and maintaining a dat aset for use in analyses that have been approved by  the 
Publications Sub-Committee. The data management sta ff has automated many data management steps, 
which will facilitate the development of the databa se and the standardization of databases and procedu res 
across sites. For example, several steps in databas e design have been automated previously so that whe n the 
database of the proposed study is set up, it will h ave a standard structure, with all tables set up th e same way 
and variables named following a standard convention .  The data management team has also has developed a 
set of standards and procedures for documentation o f data sets produced for statistical analysis.  
 
To assure that the entry of subject data is accurat e, the data management team audits 100% of the data  
turned in by research assistants and investigators for necessary identifiers, item completeness and 
consistency of major clinical indicators.  Audits i nclude such factors as diagnosis, depression severi ty (Ham-D) 
and whether the severity score is consistent with t he diagnosis. Data are audited and tracked by scale .  To 
date, the auditing system at Cornell has tracked ov er 170,000 individual scales representing all studi es 
conducted at Cornell.  These data have been contrib uted by users of the Advanced Center for Services a nd 
Intervention Center (Dr. Alexopoulos); through vari ous R24 research infrastructure grants (Dr. Meyers and Dr. 
Bruce); through the two U01 grants led by Cornell i nvestigators (Dr. Meyers and Dr. Young); and by 
investigators conducting R01s at Cornell.  When pro blems are found (approximately 6% of scales), the 
instrument is returned to the interviewer.   Also, errors are entered into a report, which is then sen t to the 
relevant site’s coordinator.  The coordinator is re sponsible for ensuring the errors are corrected wit hin two 
 21   weeks.  Also, reports on error rates are prepared a t regularly scheduled intervals. The data managemen t team 
tracks this information over time to assure that al l data errors are corrected and that the error rate s of individual 
interviewers and individual sites are consistently low over time.  If error rates are not acceptable, the inter-site 
project coordinator intervenes and additional train ing is provided to problematic raters with interven tions made 
by site principal investigators and the overall pri ncipal investigator as needed. The audit system als o keeps 
track of the physical location of all data. As scal es are entered, a proportion (10%) will be randomly  chosen 
and flagged for double entry. When the data entry p erson finishes entering such a scale, he or will re ceive a 
message that the scale must be entered a second tim e, and this second entry must be completed before a ny 
further tasks are allowed. The system automatically  checks each item and tabulates and records error r ates.  
This system is completely automatic and the current  overall data entry error rate is 0.27%.  
 
4.2 RISKS TO HUMAN SUBJECTS 
 
4.2.1 Human Subjects’ Involvement and Characteristi cs: This proposed multi-centered study will involve 
four research sites, with each site recruiting 82 p atients 18 years or older with non-bipolar major de pression 
with psychotic features (PD). Patients meeting the study entry criteria will be recruited from inpatie nt,  partial 
hospitalization, and outpatient programs at partici pating sites.   Participants who begin the study as  inpatients 
can continue to participate in the study on an ambu latory basis as determined by the participant’s cli nical state.  
Potential participants will be identified using the  same broad approach that was employed in STOP-PD a nd 
that adhered to local IRB requirements and privacy legislation: daily screening (on week days) of inpa tient 
units, partial hospitalization programs, psychiatri c emergency rooms and outpatient clinic referrals, and 
referrals from clinical staff.   
 
Inclusion criteria 
1) Aged 18-85 years, inclusive; 
 
2) Diagnosis: DSM-IV non-bipolar major depression w ith psychotic features, established through both a clinical 
interview by a research psychiatrist and the subseq uent administration of the SCID-IV by a research as sociate 
 
3) Score of ≥3 on the delusion severity item of the SADS (‘delus ion definitely present’), with or without 
hallucinations on the SADS hallucination item; 
 
4) Score of >2 on any of the three conviction items  of the DAS (the participant is certain a belief is  true and 
does not change the belief in response to reality t esting by the interviewer); 
 
5) 17-item Ham-D score of >21. 
 
Exclusion criteria    
1) Current or lifetime DSM-IV criteria for schizoph renia, other psychotic disorders (e.g., schizoaffec tive 
disorder, delusional disorder, brief psychotic diso rder, and shared psychotic disorder), or mental ret ardation,  
or meeting DSM-IV criteria for current brief psycho tic disorder, body dysmorphic disorder, or obsessiv e-
compulsive disorder; 
 
2) Current or lifetime DSM-IV criteria for bipolar affective disorder; 
 
3) History of DSM-IV defined substance abuse or dep endence, including alcohol, within the last three m onths; 
 
4) DSM-IV defined Alzheimer’s dementia, vascular de mentia, or dementia due to other medical conditions , or a 
history of clinically significant cognitive impairm ent prior to the index episode of depression, and/o r a mean 
score of ≥4 on the 26-item IQCODE. The IQCODE will be used to  screen for clinically significant cognitive 
decline that began prior to the index episode of PD . The IQCODE is not significantly confounded by age , 
education, or premorbid intelligence. 110  Persons with a mean total IQCODE ≥4 will be excluded from 
participation in the study; this cut score has been  found to have a sensitivity of 84-93% and specific ity of 88-
94% in screening for dementia in general, psychiatr ic, and medical populations of older adults.109,110,155,156 
 22    
5) Type 1 diabetes mellitus (defined as insulin-dep endent diabetes mellitus with onset < 35 years of a ge and/or 
diabetes mellitus that has been complicated by a pr ior documented episode of ketoacidosis 157 ) 
 
6) Acute or unstable medical illnesses (e.g., delir ium; metastatic cancer; unstable diabetes; decompen sated 
cardiac, hepatic, renal or pulmonary disease; strok e; or myocardial infarction) within the last three months; 
current abnormal serum free T4; current abnormally low serum vitamin B12 or folic acid level;  medical 
conditions and/or medications for which psychotic o r depressive symptoms can be a direct manifestation   (e.g. 
Cushing’s disease, high-dose systemic corticosteroi ds, L-dopa); neurological disease associated with 
extrapyramidal signs and symptoms (e.g. Parkinson’s  disease); epilepsy, if the person has had one or m ore 
grand mal seizures in the past 12 months; 
 
 
7) The need for treatment with any psychotropic med ications other than sertraline, olanzapine, or lora zepam; 
or with an anticonvulsant medication with mood-stab ilizing properties (carbamazepine, lamotrigine, val proic 
acid); 
 
 8) Current pregnancy or a plan to become pregnant during the duration of the study in woman of childb earing 
age; breast-feeding in woman with infants; 
 
9) A clearly documented history of being unable to tolerate sertraline and/or olanzapine, including ha ving had 
an untoward previous reaction to sertraline such as  significant bradycardia (heart rate of <50 bpm) or  
development of the syndrome of inappropriate antidi uretic hormone secretion with a serum sodium of 129  
mmol/L or below; 
10) History of non-response of the index episode of  PD to at least a 6-week trial of ≥150mg/day sertraline 
combined with ≥ 15mg/day olanzapine; 
11) Patients showing ongoing improvement in the ind ex episode of PD with treatment, other than sertral ine and 
olanzapine, initiated prior to the study; 
12) Sufficiently ill to require immediate ECT (e.g. , imminent risk of suicide, refusing to eat or seve re 
malnutrition, catatonic ) 
 
Rationale for inclusion and exclusion criteria  
 1) Age criterion:  Excluding children below the ag e of 18 years from this study of PD is justified on  ethical and 
scientific grounds.  We do not know enough about th e efficacy of these medications or their tolerabili ty in 
children at target doses to justify including child ren .  
 
2) Excluding patients with bipolar affective disord er:  Persons with bipolar affective disorder requir e 
continuation and maintenance treatment with a mood- stabilizing medication to lessen the risk of relaps e or 
recurrence of mania, hypomania, or depression. Anti depressant medication alone is not recommended in t he 
continuation or maintenance treatment of bipolar di sorder. As a result, we exclude patients with a kno wn 
history of bipolar disorder, because it would not b e ethical to discontinue olanzapine, which has effi cacy as a 
mood-stabilizer in bipolar disorder, in these indiv iduals. 
 
3) Depression severity criteria: Only subjects with  moderately severe to severe depression will be inc luded to 
increase the likelihood that delusions are a sympto m of PD, rather than of schizophrenia or another ps ychotic 
disorder with secondary depression.   
 
4) Requiring delusions, with or without hallucinati ons: The rationale for requiring delusions, whether  or not 
hallucinations are present, is based on the infrequ ency of hallucinations alone (that is, without delu sions) in 
PD. 158,159  Psychotic patients with hallucinations only, who d o not have delusions, are more likely to be sufferi ng 
from another disorder, such as schizophrenia, schiz oaffective disorder, brief psychotic disorder, or a  toxic-
metabolic encephalopathy, as a cause of their psych otic symptoms. Thus, the requirement of delusions w ill 
facilitate diagnostic precision. 
 
 23   5) Exclusion of recent substance abuse or dependenc e: The DSM-IV criteria for substance abuse or 
dependence defines these disorders as a maladaptive  pattern of substance use occurring within a 12-mon th 
period.  We elected to use a narrower exclusion cri terion of abuse (within the past 3 months) in order  to allow 
participation by subjects with histories of substan ce abuse or dependence problems that could be secon dary to 
their mood disorders.  However, we decided to exclu de individuals in whom very recent substance abuse or 
dependence might be contributing to the mood or psy chotic symptoms.  A valid and reliable diagnostic 
distinction between unipolar PD and a substance-ind uced mood disorder with psychotic features can not be 
made in the presence of current substance abuse. Pa rticipants with a secondary psychotic depression ma y 
have a different treatment response and longer term  outcome than those with primary PD.  However, allo wing 
participation by patients with histories of substan ce abuse or dependence more than three months earli er 
broadens the inclusion criteria to more closely app roximate patients seen in ‘real world’ settings. 
 
6) Patients with schizophrenia, schizoaffective dis order, and other psychotic disorders are excluded, because 
the focus of this study is on major depressive diso rder with psychotic features, not ‘primary’ psychot ic disorders 
with associated depression. Current body dysmorphic  disorder and obsessive-compulsive disorder are 
excluded because the ideation and phenomenology ass ociated with these disorders may be difficult to re liably 
distinguish from PD.   
7) Persons with dementia are excluded for the follo wing reasons:  
a)delusions and depression may be symptomatic manif estations of dementia. The pathophysiology, 
treatment response, and course of these symptoms of  dementia may differ from those of PD. 160  Moreover, 
non-delusional confabulations are a frequent sympto m of dementia and may be difficult to reliably 
distinguish from delusions;  
b) dementia may affect a person’s ability to reliab ly and accurately report the presence and course of  
symptoms, which could affect the validity of rating s of outcome. 
 
8) Persons with Type 1 diabetes mellitus are at ris k of ketoacidosis if they become hyperglycaemic, wh ereas 
ketoacidosis is a very rare event in persons with T ype 2 diabetes mellitus. 157  Therefore, to avoid the potential 
risk of ketoacidosis precipitated by olanzapine-ass ociated hyperglycemia, persons with Type I diabetes  will be 
excluded from the study. In STOP-PD, no more than 7  of the 259 participants had Type 1 diabetes; there fore, 
we do not anticipate that this exclusion will have a significant impact on recruitment, the aims perta ining to 
metabolic changes, or generalizability of the study ’s findings. 
 
9) Acute or unstable medical illnesses may prevent participants from tolerating the acute trial target  doses of 
study medications, interfere with subjects’ ability  to complete the study, and/or contribute to psychi atric 
symptomatology.  We will, however, include subjects  with stable chronic physical illness, to examine t he 
interaction between chronic medical burden, duratio n of treatment with olanzapine, and risk of 
relapse/recurrence. 
 
10) Exclusion of women who are pregnant, plan to be come pregnant or are breast-feeding. Sertraline and  
olanzapine are not specifically known to harm the f etus, but the data are limited. As a result, to err  on the side 
of caution, pregnancy is an exclusion criterion. Se rtraline is present in breast milk and, therefore, may be 
transmitted to breast-feeding infants. 
 
11) Exclusion of patients with a history of treatme nt resistance to an adequate trial of combined sert raline and 
olanzapine during the index episode is justified on  ethical and scientific grounds. It would not be et hical to 
include patients whose current episode of depressio n had previously failed to respond to an adequate t rial of 
the same treatment used during the acute phase of t he study. Moreover, the inclusion of such patients would 
likely reduce the overall frequency of remission an d near remission of the acute phase of the trial, t hereby 
reducing the potential pool of patients available t o enter the RCT. We expect that this exclusion crit erion will 
have little impact on recruitment of participants t o the acute phase of the study: in STOP-PD, only 5%  of 
participants had received at least a three-week tri al of adequate doses of combined treatment with any  
antidepressant and antipsychotic medications during  the index episode prior to the study. 161   
 
12) Exclusion of patients considered at imminent ri sk for suicide and/or whose symptoms are severe eno ugh to 
warrant immediate treatment with ECT is appropriate  on ethical grounds .   
 24    
4.2.2 Sources of Materials: Following written informed consent, the research ma terials will come from 3 
sources: 
1) Interviews of patients, and when indicated, othe r reliable informants.  Interviews and rating scale s described 
in Section 5.4 will be administered by trained rese arch associates to patients.  In the case of some s cales, 
collateral information will also be obtained from a  reliable informant who is familiar with the partic ipant. 
2) Medical and pharmacy records: information from i npatient and outpatient medical records will, at ti mes, be 
used to supplement information obtained from patien ts and reliable informants, to facilitate completio n of rating 
scales.  In addition, information from pharmacy rec ords may at times be required for completion of the  ATHF, 
which rates the type and adequacy of antidepressant  and antipsychotic treatment received by participan ts 
during the index episode of depression. 
3) Blood tests: tests for genetic analyses, metabol ic analyses, and sertraline and olanzapine plasma l evels, will 
be based on blood samples obtained from participant s. 
 
4.2.3 Potential Risks: The most common side effects associated with the us e of sertraline and olanzapine in 
STOP-PD (occurring in more than 10% of participants ) were: weight gain, somnolence/sedation, gastroint estinal 
symptoms, experiencing at least one fall, and ortho static dizziness. In addition, elevated levels of b lood glucose, 
cholesterol and triglycerides have been associated with olanzapine. Olanzapine, along with other atypi cal 
antipsychotics, has been associated with a slight i ncreased absolute risk of cerebrovascular events (m ainly 
TIAs) in persons with severe dementia. However, we will not be including persons with dementia in this  study. 
Users of antipsychotic drugs have an increased risk  of mortality compared with non-users of this class  of 
drugs: in the case of users of olanzapine, the incr eased absolute risk across diagnostic groups has be en 
estimated at 0.9% over 2-3 years of current use. 162 We will explicitly discuss the potential mortality risk in the 
consent process.  Blood tests may cause some minor discomfort or bruising.  
 
Severe depression increases the risk of suicidal id eation and behavior. Participation in the study wil l likely reduce 
this risk, but this is not guaranteed. The FDA reco mmends close observation of people taking antidepre ssant 
medication, including sertraline, for worsening dep ression or the emergence of suicidal thoughts or pl ans. As 
described in Section 3.9.5 participants will be clo sely monitored for suicidal ideation and behavior. 
 
Discontinuation of antipsychotic medication in PD m ay possibly be associated with an increased risk of  relapse 
and recurrence of PD, although this is not known.  We have estimated the overall risk of relapse to be  
approximately 25% during the course of the RCT. Cas es of relapse will be treated promptly.  
 
Alternative Treatments: ECT can be used to successf ully treat PD. However, ECT is associated with its own risks, 
including cognitive impairment, cardiac arrythmias,  musculoskeletal injury, damage to teeth, and very small risk of 
death. Although ECT is a successful acute treatment  for PD, it is associated with up to a 50% risk of relapse of PD 
in the 6 months following discontinuation of ECT. A ntidepressant medications other than sertraline and  
antipsychotic medications other than olanzapine are  used in clinical practice to treat PD. However, as  discussed in 
Section 3.5, olanzapine is the only atypical antips ychotic with evidence of efficacy in the treatment of PD. 
 
4.3 ADEQUACY OF PROTECTION AGAINST RISKS 
 
4.3.1 Recruitment and Informed Consent  
Recruitment:  It is imperative to screen, recruit and treat stud y participants as quickly as possible.  This is 
emphasized because patients with PD are frequently recruited from inpatient services and these units a re 
under pressure to begin treatment rapidly.  The stu dy coordinator and principal investigator, both of whom will 
be on beeper call, will aim to ensure that potentia l subjects are screened by the research associate w ithin 24 
hours of admission to a clinical  service, or as close to that time frame as possible  for patients admitted on 
weekends. Each principal investigator has considera ble experience in recruiting and studying patients with PD. 
In addition, by maintaining close communications wi th the admitting personnel of participating hospita ls, the 
principal investigator and study coordinator will b e aware of scheduled admissions that may meet inclu sion 
criteria before they arrive at the hospital. The re search associate will discuss potential subjects wi th the 
treating physician about potential suitability. The  study coordinator and principal investigator will be contacted if 
the treating physician agrees that the patient is s uffering from a unipolar delusional PD and the pati ent has 
 25   agreed to meet with the research team. This will fa cilitate rapid screening and scheduling of a meetin g to 
assess eligibility and of capacity assessment soon after admission.  For scheduled admissions, the res earch 
team will attempt to schedule a preliminary meeting  with the patient and accompanying family members a t the 
time of admission, if the treating physician and th e patient agree to the meeting. 
 
Informed Consent:  PD may impair a person’s capacity to consent to pa rticipate in a research study. To recruit 
people who are representative of the population bei ng studied, the study will allow people who do not have the 
capacity to give informed consent to participate in  the open-label phase of the study (acute and stabi lization), 
as long as they assent to participate and informed consent is obtained from a surrogate decision maker . 
Subjects who are eligible for the randomized phase must have achieved sustained remission or near remi ssion 
by the end of stabilization and will therefore need  to be capable of giving informed consent in order to 
participate in the randomized controlled trial.  
 
We are not able to provide uniform criteria for app ointment of a surrogate, because sites in the propo sed study 
differ in their local requirements for how surrogat es are selected. The Cornell IRB, in accordance wit h New 
York State regulations, stipulates that incapable r esearch participants must have the capacity to know  that they 
are appointing a surrogate and must be aware of the ir relationship to the surrogate they are appointin g. On the 
other hand, IRBs of the other sites of the proposed  study stipulate a priority order in which potentia l surrogates 
may be approached, although the details of the assi gned order differ between sites. We will ensure tha t the 
surrogate appointment process meets all local requi rements and that the process to be used at each sit e is 
approved by the local IRB.  
 
To protect the rights of people whose decision maki ng capacity may be impaired, those who are deemed 
capable of consenting to treatment by the research psychiatrist will have a second capacity assessment . The 
second assessment will be completed by either a lic ensed mental healthcare professional (psychiatrist,  
psychologist, or mental health social worker) who i s independent of the study or by a research associa te’s 
administration of the MacArthur Competence Assessme nt Tool for Clinical Research (MacCAT-CR). 163  The 
MacCAT-CR is a semi-structured interview for assess ment of capacities related to consent to research. It has 
been found to be a valid measure of capacity to con sent in persons with psychosis. The principal inves tigators 
of this study were trained in the use of the MacCAT  by Dr. Paul Applebaum, who developed the instrumen t; 
they have several years of experience in the use of  this instrument in STOP-PD. Because time is of the  
essence in starting treatment in a study of PD, use  of the MacCAT-CR will allow for situations where a n 
independent healthcare professional cannot provide a timely capacity assessment. If the second capacit y 
assessment suggests that the person lacks capacity to consent, surrogate consent must then be obtained . 
 
All participants for whom surrogate consent is obta ined at the start of the study will have their capa city to 
consent to participate in the study re-assessed at the start of the stabilization phase. Given that pa rticipants will 
have experienced remission of psychosis and remissi on or near remission of depressive symptoms by the start 
of stabilization, we expect that incapable particip ants will have gained capacity to consent to the st udy by that 
stage. Once a participant is deemed capable of cons enting to treatment by the research psychiatrist, s /he will 
have a second capacity assessment as described in t he paragraph immediately above. If the second capac ity 
assessment finds that the participant has capacity to consent to participate in the study, the partici pant will then 
be asked to provide written informed consent . 
 
Participants will have their capacity assessed by t he research psychiatrist at the end of 8 weeks of s tabilization 
to determine whether they have capacity to give inf ormed consent to participate in the randomized cont rolled 
trial. If the participant has capacity to consent t o participate in the randomized trial, the particip ant will then be 
asked to provide written informed consent.  Capacit y to consent to the randomized trial will be requir ed for 
subjects to participate in that phase of the study.  
 
4.3.2 Protections Against Risks 
 
Non-Response or Worsening of Depression:   Patients who do not meet the study’s remission cr iteria after 
12 weeks of acute treatment with sertraline and ola nzapine will not be eligible to participate in the stabilization 
phase and the RCT.  These patients will leave the s tudy at the end of 12 weeks of acute treatment and be 
 26   treated on a ‘doctor’s choice’ basis by an attendin g physician.  Participants who are judged to have s ignificant 
clinical worsening during the acute or stabilizatio n phases of the study will be withdrawn from the st udy, so that 
treatment can be administered under routine clinica l conditions by an attending physician.  Significan t clinical 
worsening will be operationalized as a CGI change s core of 6 or 7 (‘much worse’ or ‘very much worse’).        
 
Monitoring During and Following Antipsychotic Disco ntinuation : Study participants will have in-person 
research assessments on a weekly basis during the f irst 8 weeks of the RCT. These weekly assessments w ill 
cover the period of olanzapine taper and its immedi ate aftermath, thereby providing intensive follow-u p of 
patients during this period. In addition, for the r emainder of the RCT, participants will be assessed every 2 
weeks (alternating research and clinical assessment s) to monitor for the possibility of clinical worse ning. If a 
participant experiences clinical worsening, he/ she  will be seen on an urgent basis by a research psyc hiatrist 
associated with the study, to determine if the part icipant meets criteria for relapse or whether a cha nge in 
olanzapine/placebo dose or the use of lorazapam is indicated. 
 
Management of Relapse:  Patients who meet relapse criteria will be referre d to a psychiatrist who is not 
affiliated with the study, who has agreed to see pa tients within 48-72 hours of referral.  Alternative ly, patients 
can be referred for acute psychiatric hospitalizati on, if deemed appropriate by the study psychiatrist .  Based on 
the frequency of relapse postulated for the study, we estimate that there will be an average of 3 case s of 
relapse per year per study site.  
 
Management of Suicide Risk:   Lifetime suicidal ideation and behavior will be a ssessed with the SCID.  
Suicidal thoughts, plans, and attempts during the s tudy will be rated with the SSI.  Patients at ‘immi nent risk’ of 
suicide will not be enrolled in the study.  Patient s at ‘high risk’ of suicide must start the study as  an inpatient.  
High risk of suicide is operationalized as any one of the following: 1) a current suicide plan; 2) a s uicide attempt 
during the index episode; 3) one or more lifetime s erious suicide attempts, defined as attempts requir ing 
inpatient medical treatment.  Suicidal ideation and  behavior will be rated with the SSI at each study visit. As 
outlined in Section 3.9.5, participants will be see n weekly by a research psychiatrist for the first 6  weeks of the 
Acute Phase of the study, and then every two weeks for the remainder of the Acute Phase and the 
Stabilization Phase. If a participant has a current  suicide plan or has had a current suicide attempt,  he/she will 
be removed from the study and the research psychiat rist will make a clinical decision about the most 
appropriate course of action, including whether the  patient requires immediate hospitalization. In the  case of 
participants who are found to have a current suicid e plan or had a current suicide attempt based on th e 
research associate’s clinical phone assessment, the  research psychiatrist, who will be available by pa ger, will 
be immediately informed by the research associate a nd the psychiatrist will then talk on the phone wit h the 
participant. The psychiatrist will then make a deci sion about whether the patient should be referred f or 
immediate psychiatric hospitalization or whether it  is safe for the participant to be seen for a resea rch 
termination visit, and subsequent clinical manageme nt, the following business day.  
 
If a participant has current suicide ideation (as i ndicated by a score of 1or 2 on items #4 or 5 of th e SSI) but no 
current suicide plan or attempt, he/she may remain in the study at the discretion of the research psyc hiatrist, 
based on the psychiatrist’s clinical assessment of the participant’s suicide risk. If the participant remains in the 
study, he/she will be followed in-person by the res earch psychiatrist on a weekly basis to monitor the  
participant’s safety, to decide whether ongoing par ticipation in the study is appropriate, and, if ind icated, to 
adjust the dosages of study medications as allowed by the treatment protocol. These weekly clinical vi sits, 
which will be in addition to the scheduled research  assessment visits, will continue until the partici pant no 
longer has suicidal ideation or is removed form the  study and managed ‘clinically’. 
 
Adverse Effects:  Side effects will be systematically monitored at e ach assessment and visit (Section 3.9.5).  
As described in Section 3.9.9 and the appended Phar macotherapy Protocol, reduction in dosing of sertra line 
and olanzapine, to specified minimum dosages, will be allowed during the acute and stabilization phase s and 
RCT, if necessitated by clinically significant side  effects.  In addition, benztropine can be prescrib ed if clinically 
significant extrapyramidal side effects do not adeq uately improve with a reduction in dose of olanzapi ne (see 
Section 3.9.8 and appended Pharmacotherapy Protocol ).  Participants who are withdrawn from the study w ill 
be treated on a physician choice basis by their att ending physician. 
 
 27   Monitoring of metabolic effects: As described in th e Schedule of Events (Section 3.9.5), metabolic par ameters 
will be measured at week 4 of the Acute Phase and t hereafter every 8 weeks of the study. If a particip ant 
develops clinically significant elevations of fasti ng serum glucose(>100mg/dL), triglycerides(>150mg/d L), total 
cholesterol(>200mg/dL), and/or LDL cholesterol(>130 mg/dL), s/he will be referred to his/her primary ca re 
physician (PCP) for further assessment and manageme nt of the metabolic finding(s), including a discuss ion 
about the risks and benefits of ongoing participati on in the study. If a participant does not have a P CP, the 
research psychiatrist will refer the patient to a P CP who has agreed to see patients enrolled in the s tudy. 
 
Confidentiality of Information:   The consent form will stipulate that participants ’ information will remain 
strictly confidential, with access limited to resea rch staff, and, if indicated, local IRBs, the NIMH- run DSMB, and 
state or federal regulatory personnel.  No one but study personnel will have access to the lists linki ng 
participant’s names to code numbers.  All informati on pertaining to participants will be coded to prot ect 
participants’ identities and will be stored in lock ed cabinets in locked offices of the investigators.   Publications 
or presentations of findings will not include infor mation that identifies participants. 
 
Sharing of Genetic Data:  We plan to collaborate with the NIMH Center for Ge netic Studies, a facility operated 
under federal contact to manage data and establish high-quality cell lines for human genetics projects  
supported by NIMH. Our biomaterials and the associa ted clinical data will be incorporated with other s uch data 
and biomaterials as part of the NIMH Human Genetics  Initiative. NIMH will then follow existing procedu res and 
protocols and distribute these data and biomaterial s to qualified researchers in the wider scientific community. 
Please see Section 15 (Resource Sharing), for the d etailed plan of sharing of biomaterials and data wi th the 
NIMH Center for Genetic Studies. 
 
We are in receipt of the NIMH-written model consent  form pertaining to the sharing of genetic data. We  will 
utilize this consent form, which will clearly stipu late: (1) disclosure that biological materials (DNA  and cell lines) 
and clinical data will be stored at a central data management/laboratory facility, as part of a nation al resource 
of data and materials distributed by NIMH for the g enetic analysis of the disease under investigation;  (2) 
assurance that such data will be provided to a cent ral facility without personal identifiers; (3) disc losure that 
analyses of these data will be conducted by other s cientists currently not included within the current  research 
team; and (4) disclosure that there is no plan to p rovide subjects with any financial benefits from co mmercial 
products derived from the data. We will provide NIM H with our approved consent form prior to the start  of the 
proposed study.  Any data-sharing with investigator s outside of Cornell University, the University of 
Massachusetts, the University of Pittsburgh, and Un iversity of Toronto will involve making all of shar ed data 
anonymous (so that no identifiers could link data b ack to subjects), per IRB policy. 
 
4.4 POTENTIAL BENEFITS 
 
 The benefits to participants will include:  
1. Evaluation of their mental and physical health; 
2. Ongoing monitoring of their clinical condition; 
3. Treatment with a medication regimen that has bee n shown to be efficacious in the acute treatment of  PD; 
4. The possibility that symptoms of PD will improve  with treatment. 
 
The potential benefit to society is determining whe ther continued antipsychotic medication prevents re lapse of 
PD. 
 
4.5 IMPORTANCE OF KNOWLEDGE TO BE GAINED 
 
It is not known whether antipsychotic medication ne eds to be continued once an episode of PD has respo nded 
to combined antidepressant-antipsychotic treatment.  This issue is of tremendous clinical importance.  On the 
one hand, the unnecessary continuation of antipsych otic medication exposes a patient to adverse effect s, 
some of which have considerable public health signi ficance.  On the other hand, premature discontinuat ion of 
antipsychotic medication has the potential risk of early relapse of a severe, disabling disorder. Addr essing 
these issues will be of major public health importa nce.  In our view, given the precautions that will be taken in 
this study, the likely benefits to participants and  society outweight the potential risks. 
 28    
4.6 DATA AND SAFETY MONITORING BOARD (DSMB) 
 
A NIMH-run DSMB oversaw the STOP-PD U01 to ensure t he safety of participants and the validity and 
integrity of the data. Our understanding is that th is grant, submitted as a Collaborative R01, will be  converted to 
a U01 upon funding. As a result, members of the DSM B will be chosen by NIMH.  The responsibilities of the 
DSMB will include, but not limited to, the followin g: 
1. Review of protocols, consent procedures, consent  forms, and safety plans prior to initiation of the  study; 
2. Monitoring the progress of the study, including recruitment and retention of participants, adverse events, 
serious adverse events, reasons for participant wit hdrawal, adherence to the time line of the study, q uality 
of data, and protocol violations; 
3. Make recommendations about the continuation, mod ification, or termination of the study, based on th e 
balance of adverse events and beneficial outcomes; 
4. Request addition data, as needed. 
 
The responsibilities of the overall principal inves tigator of the study (Dr. Meyers), in collaboration  with the study 
statistician/methodologist, in relation to the DSMB , will include, but not be limited to, the followin g: 
1. Preparation of quarterly reports of all adverse events, SAEs, participant recruitment, and reasons for 
participant withdrawal; 
2. Respond to questions and recommendations from th e DSMB, based on their review of the quarterly 
reports, or at any other time as needed; 
3. Inform the DSMB and the Coordinating Center IRB within 48 hours of any SAE; 
4. Send blinded data to the DSMB for DSMB-performed  interim analyses, if requested by the DSMB; 
5. Send the DSMB a final report of the study’s find ings; 
6. In addition, the principal investigators of each  study site will be responsible for reporting any S AE to the 
Cornel IRB within 48 hours, as well as reporting th e SAE to their specific site IRB, based on local IR B 
requirements. 
 
a. CLINICAL TRIALS.GOV 
 
This is a renewal of the NIMH-funded U01 ‘Acute Pha rmacotherapy of Unipolar Psychotic Depression’, whi ch 
has a clinical trials.gov identifier [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] . 
 
5. INCLUSION OF WOMEN AND MINORITIES 
 
 
5.1 RECRUITMENT OF WOMEN AND MINORITIES 
Eligible patients will be offered the opportunity t o participate regardless of gender or minority stat us. 
Considering that 50% of subjects will be elderly pa tients, and considering the gender distribution of PD, the 
proportion of females to males will approximate 2:1  at all sites. The composition of the study sample will reflect 
the racial diversity of patients seen at the four r esearch sites. Although sites vary somewhat by raci al 
composition, the overall distribution of major ethn ic and racial groups will assure all groups are rep resented as 
outlined in the Targeted/Planned Enrollment Table.  
 
Cornell Westchester serves a large county that refl ects the socioeconomic diversity of the United Stat es.  For 
example, Yonkers, the third largest city in New Yor k State, has a more indigent population and has hig her 
proportions of Hispanic and African American person s, while northern Westchester is comprised of semi-
urban, suburban, and rural communities that tend to  be over-represented by Caucasians and more affluen t 
individuals. Among subjects recruited from Westches ter, 13% are anticipated to be African American and  13% 
Hispanic; these percentages may, however, turn out to be higher, because of the greater prevalence of 
minorities among New York City residents recruited via Payne Whitney Manhatten. 
 
The University of Pittsburgh Medical Center serves the City of Pittsburgh and the surrounding Alleghen y 
County.  We anticipate that recruitment in the prop osed study will reflect the demographic diversity o f the City 
of Pittsburgh [67% white, 27.1% African American, 2 .8% Asian, 1.3% Hispanics with minimal representati on of 
 29   other ethnic minorities] and the City of McKeesport  [72% white, 25% African American, 0% Asian, 1.5% 
Hispanic with minimal representation of other ethni c minorities.] 
 
The University Health Network serves patients from the greater Toronto area. Toronto is one of the wor ld’s 
most ethnically diverse cities, with approximately 40% of its population classified as of visible mino rity. 34% of 
patients recruited at the Toronto site of STOP-PD w ere Asian, Black, or Hispanic. We anticipate that 
recruitment in the proposed study will continue to reflect Toronto’s racial and ethnic diversity. 
 
At the University of Massachusetts Medical School, we expect 15-20% of the subjects recruited to be Hi spanic. 
The 2000 United States Census indicated the Hispani c population of Worcester County to be 15.2%, a 52%  
increase from 1990 to 2000. 
 
5.2 CULTURAL COMPETENCE OF STUDY PERSONNEL 
Investigators, research coordinators, and research associates will participate in training in cultural  competence, 
as part of the study’s personnel training. These pe rsonnel will be required to complete the five core modules of 
the Curriculum in Ethnogeriatrics, an internet-base d resource for education and training in cultural c ompetence 
[http://www.stanford.edu/group/ethnoger] supported by the Bureau of Health Professions, Health Resourc es 
and Services Administration, U.S. Department of Hea lth and  Human Services. The five modules cover the  
following topics: i) an introduction to, and overvi ew of, culturally-competent care of elders, ii) pat terns of health 
risk among people from diverse ethnic backgrounds, iii) culturally-based health beliefs, iv) knowledge  and skills 
needed to provide a culturally competent assessment , and v) cultural issues in the delivery of health care after 
assessments are completed, including health promoti on, informed consent, treatment, and working with 
families. The Curriculum in Ethnogeriatrics also ha s 12 ethnic-specific modules that can be used as an  
additional resource when needed. Although this educ ational tool has a focus on the older population, w hich is 
very pertinent to the proposed study, its principle s and themes are also applicable to younger and mid dle-aged 
adults.  
 
Data from STOP-PD are consistent with our research group having culturally competent attitudes and ski lls. In 
STOP-PD, 84.2% of participants were white,11.2% wer e African American or black, and 4.6% were Asian; 
11.6% of participants described themselves as Hispa nic or Latino. Based on census data, these percenta ges 
were comparable to the racial and ethnic make-up of  the U.S. population at the time that the study was  
conducted. Rates of completion at Weeks 6 and 12 of  the 12-week study were highly comparable between 
racial and ethnic groups (see Table 5). Thus, these  data show that we were successful in both recruiti ng and 
retaining minorities in STOP-PD. 
 
Table 5: Percentage of Participants Completing the 12-Week STOP-PD Study by Ethnicity and Race  
 
Race and Ethnicity  Number of Randomized 
Participants 
 % Completers  
(Week 6)            % Completers  
(Week 12) 
Asian 12 75.0 50.0 
Black or African 
American 29 75.9 51.7 
White 218 74.8 55.5 
    
Hispanic or Latino 30 80.0 53.3 
Not Hispanic or Latino 229 73.8 55.0 
 
 
6. RESOURCE SHARING 
 
6.1 THE STUDY’S DATABASE 
 
Once the main findings of the study have been accep ted for publication, the database will be made avai lable to 
clinical investigators and others as requested, The  public use database will be de-identified using HI PAA 
 30   standards and will consist of several data files in cluding baseline data and outcome assessments. Each  data 
file will be made available as formatted SAS datase ts (other upon request). The permanent SAS dataset 
format has been adopted on the basis of SAS’s wides pread acceptance in the scientific community, stron g 
data management capabilities, and robust statistica l procedures. The permanent SAS data files are stor ed on 
one server at Weill Cornell Medical College and arc hived for all data transfers including transfers fo r data 
sharing. The SAS data files can be copied to a CD f or transfer off site or can be electronically trans ferred via 
the secure study website. SSL encryption methods al low for a secure internet transfer. A complete data  
dictionary listing of all data validation procedure s (rules) and labels is also included in the transf er for 
reference. Those wishing access to the data will su bmit a written request to the overall study Princip al 
Investigator (Dr. Meyers), specifying the purpose f or which the data will be used and the desired tran sfer 
method. Publications reporting the study’s findings  will be listed on the Clinical Trials.Gov website,  consistent 
with NIH requirements.  
 
6.2 SHARING OF BIOMATERIALS AND DATA WITH THE NIMH CENTER FOR GENETIC STUDIES 
 
We plan to collaborate with the NIMH Center for Col laborative Genetic Studies (‘the Center’), a facili ty 
operated under federal contract to establish high-q uality cell lines and manage data for human genetic s 
projects supported by NIMH. Our biomaterials, and t he associated clinical data, will be incorporated w ith other 
such data and biomaterials as part of the NIMH Huma n Genetics Initiative. NIMH will then follow existi ng 
procedures and protocols to distribute these data a nd biomaterials to qualified researchers in the wid er 
scientific community. Yin Yao Ph.D., Director of th e Genetics and Genomic Research Resources Program a t 
NIMH, has expressed her willingness for us to acces s the Center (personal communication, 11/13/2009) a nd 
has read and approved the data sharing plan below ( personal communication, 1/12/2010).  
 
6.2.1 Biomaterials: Whole blood on all consenting participants will be sent directly to the Center for the 
generation of cell lines and extraction of DNA. Blo od samples will be sent as they are collected, on a n ongoing 
basis during the proposed 38 months of recruitment.  Blood samples will be shipped using the Center’s 
established protocols that are designed to minimize  trauma (e.g. excessive heating or freezing). DNA w ill be 
shipped from the Center to Dr. James Kennedy’s gene tics laboratory at CAMH in Toronto, within 4 months  of 
the blood sample being received by the Center. Bloo d samples sent to the Center will be identified by code 
number only. We anticipate that approximately 10 bl ood samples per month during the 38 months of 
recruitment will be sent by our study personnel to the Center. Verified genotypic data will be provide d for 
release as stated below under “Data and Biological Materials Dissemination”.  
 
6.2.2 Clinical Data: Verified  clinical data will be electronically submitted from  the study’s coordinating center at 
Weill Cornell Medical College to the Center every 6  months. As described in detail in other sections o f the 
grant application, the following issues will be add ressed to ensure and check the quality of data: 
Structured Diagnostic Criteria.  The diagnosis of non-bipolar major depression with  psychotic features (PD) 
will be established according to DSM-IV criteria.  
Comprehensive Phenotypic Assessment.  The diagnosis of PD will be based on a clinical in terview by a 
research psychiatrist associated with the study, fo llowed by an research associate’s administration of  the 
Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV-TR (Diagno stic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4 th  edition, 
text revision; SCID-IV-TR). 103  As a third line of assessment, diagnostically uncl ear or complex cases will be 
discussed by the principal investigators to reach a  consensus about the patient’s eligibility for the study. In 
addition, as described in Section 3.9.5, participan ts will be well characterized at baseline in terms of 
demographic characteristics, severity of depression , type and severity of psychosis, suicidal ideation  and 
behavior, severity of concomitant anxiety, cognitiv e function, medical burden, and history of treatmen t 
resistance.  
Rater Training and Reliability.  As described in Section 4.1.6, all raters will par ticipate in formal training prior 
to assessing participants for the study and collect ing data, receive ongoing supervision from study co ordinators 
and research psychiatrists at each site, and partic ipate in weekly conference calls led by the inter-s ite Project 
Coordinator to address quality assurance issues. In ter-rater reliability on primary outcome measures w ill be 
evaluated and addressed on an annual basis. Inter-r ater reliability assessments performed during each year of 
the 5-year STOP-PD yielded ICCs of 0.93-0.98 for th e GRID HAM-D total score and 0.69-0.84 for the 
conviction dimension of the DAS, demonstrating good  reliability for these primary measures. 
 31   Computerized Database and Data Management. The data management center at Cornell has  an extensive, 
fully-functioning computerized database to manage a ll data derived form the proposed study. Procedures  for 
ensuring data integrity are described in detail in Section 4.1.6. To date, the data auditing system at  Cornell has 
tracked over 170,000 individual rating scales over a period of more than 20 years.  
 
6.2.3 Data and Biological Materials Dissemination: Dissemination of phenotypic and genotypic data will  
occur at the points in time stipulated below : 
- Verified diagnostic data:  Will be submitted to t he Center no later than 6 months after generation.  
- Remaining verified clinical data: Will be submitt ed to the Center no later than 6 months after gener ation.   
- Genotype data: Will be submitted to the database of Genotypes and Phenotypes (dbGaP) when manuscript s 
reporting the results based on these data are accep ted for publication or no later than at the end of the award, 
depending on which occurs first. 
- Cell lines and DNA samples: To be negotiated with  Center’s’ Program Official.  
- Diagnostic and clinical data will be eligible for  release by the Center, and genotype data will be e ligible for 
release by dbGaP, 12 months after receipt. 
 
6.2.4 Human Subjects Issues: We are in receipt of the NIMH-written model consent  form pertaining to the 
sharing of genetic data. We will utilize this conse nt form, which will clearly stipulate: (1) disclosu re that 
biological materials (DNA and cell lines) and clini cal data will be stored at a central data 
management/laboratory facility, as part of a nation al resource of data and materials distributed by NI MH for the 
genetic analysis of the disease under investigation ; (2) assurance that such data will be provided to a central 
facility without personal identifiers; (3) disclosu re that analyses of these data will be conducted by  other 
scientists currently not included within the curren t research team; and (4) disclosure that there is n o plan to 
provide subjects with any financial benefits from c ommercial products derived from the data. We will p rovide 
NIMH with our approved consent form prior to the st art of the proposed study.  Any data-sharing with 
investigators outside of Cornell University, the Un iversity of Massachusetts, the University of Pittsb urgh, and 
University of Toronto will involve making all of sh ared data anonymous (so that no identifiers could l ink data 
back to subjects), per IRB policy. 
 
 
BIBLIOGRAPHY AND REFERENCES CITED 
 
1. Rothschild AJ.  Challenges in the treatment of d epression with psychotic features.  Biol Psychiatry  
2003;53:680-690 
2. Kroessler D:  Relative efficacy rates for therap ies of delusional depression.  Convulsive Ther 
1985;1:173-182 
3. Petrides G, Fink M, Husain MM, Knapp RG, Rush AJ , Mueller M, Rummans TA, O’Connor KM, 
Rasmussen KG, Bernstein HJ, Biggs M, Bailine SH, Ke llner CH.  ECT remission rates in psychotic 
versus nonpsychotic depressed patients: a report fr om CORE.  J ECT 2001;17:244-253 
4. Sackeim HA, Prudic J, Devanand DP, Decina P, Ker r B, Malitz S.  The impact of medication resistance  
and continuation pharmacotherapy on relapse followi ng response to electroconvulsive therapy in major 
depression.  J Clin Psychopharmacol 1990;10:96-104 
5. Sackeim HA, Haskett RF, Mulsant BH, Thase ME, Ma nn JJ, Pettinati HM, Greenberg RM, Crowe RR, 
Cooper TB, Prudic J.  Continuation pharmacotherapy in the prevention of relapse following 
electroconvulsive therapy.  A randomized controlled  trial.  JAMA 2001;285:1299-1307 
6. Prudic J, Olfson M, Marcus SC, Fuller RB, Sackei m HA. Effectiveness of electroconvulsive therapy in  
community settings. Biol Psychiatry. Feb 1 2004;55( 3):301-312 
7. Olfson M, Marcus S, Sackeim HA, Thompson J, Pinc us HA: Use of ECT for the inpatient treatment of 
recurrent major depression. Am J Psychiatry 155: 2- 29, 1998 
8. Andreescu C, Mulsant B, Rothschild A, Flint A, M eyers B, Whyte E. Pharmacotherapy of Major 
Depression with Psychotic Features: What is the Evi dence? Psychiatric Annals. 2006;36(1):31-38 
9. American Psychiatric Association. Practice guide line for the treatment of patients with major depre ssive 
disorder (revision).  Am J Psychiatry 2000; 157 (Su ppl 4):1-45 
10. National Institute for Clinical Excellence. Dep ression: management of depression in primary and 
secondary care - NICE guidance. Vol Clinical Guidel ine 23. London: NICE; 2004 
 32   11. Meyers BS, Flint AJ, Rothschild AJ, Mulsant BH,  Whyte E, Peasley-Miklus C, Heo M, Papademetriou E,  
Leon A, for the STOP-PD Study Group. A double-blind  randomized controlled trial of olanzapine plus 
sertraline versus olanzapine plus placebo for psych otic depression - the STOP-PD study.  Archives of 
General Psychiatry, 2009, 66:838-847 
12. Deshauer D, Moher D, Fergusson D, Moher E, Samp son M, Grimshaw J.  Selective serotonin reuptake 
inhibitors for unipolar depression: a systematic re view of classic long-term randomized controlled tri als.  
CMAJ 2008;178(10):1293-1301 
13. Schatzberg AF, Rothschild AJ:  Psychotic (delus ional) major depression: should it be included as a  
distinct syndrome in DSM-IV?  Am J Psychiatry 1992; 149:733-745 
14. Johnson J, Horwath E, Weissman MM. The validity  of major depression with psychotic features based 
on a community study. Arch Gen Psychiatry. Dec 1991 ;48(12):1075-1081 
15. Ohayon MM, Schatzberg AF.  Prevalence of depres sive episodes with psychotic features in the genera l 
population.  Am J Psychiatry 2002;159:1855-1861 
16. Post F. The significance of affective symptoms in old age; a follow-up study of one hundred patien ts. 
New York: Oxford University Press; 1962 
17. Meyers BS, Greenberg R. Late-life delusional de pression. J Affect Disord. 1986;11:133-137 
18. Vythilingam M, Chen J, Bremner JD, Mazure CM, M aciejewski PK, Nelson JC.  Psychotic depression 
and mortality.  Am J Psychiatry 2003;160:574-576 
19. Avery D, Lubrano A. Depression treated with imi pramine and ECT: the DeCarolis study reconsidered. 
Am J Psychiatry. Apr 1979;136(4B):559-562 
20. Roose SP, Glassman AH, Walsh BT, Woodring S, Vi tal-Herne J.  Depression, delusions and suicide. Am  J 
Psychiatry 1983;140:1159-1162 
21. Schneider B, Phillipp M, Muller MJ. Psychopatho logical predictors of suicide in patients with majo r 
depression during a 5-year follow-up. Eur Psychiatr y 2001; 16:283-288 
22. Zanardi R, Franchini L, Serretti A, Perez J, Sm eraldi E.  Venlafaxine versus fluvoxamine in the 
treatment of delusional depression: a pilot double- blind controlled study.  J Clin Psychiatry 2000;61: 26-
29 
23. Zanardi R, Franchini L, Gasperini M, Perez J, S meraldi E:  Double-blind controlled trial of sertra line 
versus paroxetine in the treatment of delusional de pression.  Am J Psychiatry 1996;153:1631-1633 
24. Zanardi R, Franchini L, Gasperini M, Lucca A, S meraldi E, Perez J.  Faster onset of action of 
fluvoxamine in combination with pindolol in the tre atment of delusional depression: a controlled study .  
J Clin Psychopharmacol 1998;18(6):441-446 
25. Rothschild AJ, Phillips KA. Selective serotonin  reuptake inhibitors and delusional depression. Am J 
Psychiatry. Jun 1999;156(6):977-978 
26. van den Broek WW, Birkenhäger TK, Mulder PGH, B ruijn JA, Moleman P.  A double-blind randomized 
study comparing imipramine with fluvoxamine in depr essed inpatients.  Psychopharmacology 
2004;175:481-486 
27. Wijkstra J, Lijmer J, Balk FJ, Geddes JR, Nolen  WA. Pharmacological treatment for unipolar psychot ic 
depression: Systematic review and meta-analysis. Br  J Psychiatry 2006;188:410-415 
28. Simpson GM, El Sheshai A, Rady A, Kingsbury SJ,  Fayek M.  Sertraline as monotherapy in the 
treatment of psychotic and nonpsychotic depression.   J Clin Psychiatry 2003;64:959-965 
29. Frank E, Kupfer DJ, Perel JM, Cornes C, Jarrett  DB, Mallinger AG, Thase ME, McEachran AB, 
Grochocinski VJ:  Three-year outcomes for maintenan ce therapies in recurrent depression.  Arch Gen 
Psychiatry 1990;47:1093-1099 
30. Reynolds III CF, Dew MA, Pollock BG, Mulsant BH , Frank E, Miller MD, Houck PR, Mazumdar S, 
Butters MA, Stack JA, Schlernitzauer MA, Whyte EM, Gildengers A, Karp J, Lenze E, Szanto K, 
Bensasi S, Kupfer DJ.  Maintenance treatment of maj or depression in old age.  N Engl J Med 
2006;354:1130-1138 
31. Robinson DG, Spiker DG:  Delusional depression.  A one year follow-up.  J Affective Disord 1985;9:7 9-
83 
32. Aronson TA, Shukla S, Gujavarty K, Hoff A, DiBu ono M, Khan E:  Relapse in delusional depression: a  
retrospective study of the course of treatment.  Co mpr Psychiatry 1988; 29(1):12-21 
33. Baldwin RC:  Delusional and non-delusional depr ession in late life.  Evidence for distinct subtype s.  Br J 
Psychiatry 1988;153:39-44 
 33   34. Coryell W, Leon A, Winokur G, Endicott J, Kelle r M, Akiskal H, Solomon D:  Importance of psychotic  
features to long-term course in depressive disorder . Am J Psychiatry 153: 483-489, 1996 
35. Gaudiano BA, Beevers CG, Miller IW.  Differenti al response to combined treatment in patients with 
psychotic versus nonpsychotic major depression. J N erv Mental Dis 2005;193:625-628 
36. Naz B, Craig TJ, Bromet EJ, Finch SJ, Fochtmann  LJ, Carlson GA.  Remission and relapse after the 
first hospital admission in psychotic depression: a  4-year naturalistic follow-up.  Psychol Med 
2007;37:1173-1181 
37. Spiker DG, Stein J, Rich CL:  Delusional depres sion and electroconvulsive therapy: one year later.   
Convulsive Ther 1985;1(3):167-172 
38. Flint AJ, Rifat SL.  Two-year outcome of psycho tic depression in late life.  Am J Psychiatry 
1998;155:178-183 
39. Navarro V, Gasto C, Torres X, Masana G, Penades  R, Guarch J, Vasquez M, Serra M, Pujol N, Pintor 
L, Catalan R.  Continuation/maintenance treatment w ith nortriptyline versus combined nortriptyline and  
ECT in late-life psychotic depression : A two-year randomized study. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry 2008 ; 
16 : 498-505 
40. Birkenhäger TK, van den Broek WW, Mulder PGH, d e Lely A.  One-year outcome of psychotic 
depression after successful electroconvulsive thera py.  J ECT 2005;21:221-226 
41. Rothschild AJ, Duval SE.  How long should patie nts with psychotic depression stay on the antipsych otic 
medication?  J Clin Psychiatry 2003;64:390-396 
42. Reynolds CF, Frank E, Kupfer DJ, Thase ME, Pere l JM, Mazumdar S, Houck PR. Treatment outcome 
in recurrent major depression: a post hoc compariso n of elderly (”young old”) and midlife patients. Am  J 
Psychiatry 1996; 153: 1288-129 
43. Clower CG:  Recurrent psychotic unipolar depres sion.  J Clin Psychiatry 1983;44:216-218 
44. Zanardi R, Franchini L, Gasperini M, Smeraldi E , Perez J.  Long-term treatment of psychotic 
(delusional) depression with fluvoxamine: an open p ilot study.  Int Clin Psychopharmacol 1997;12:195-
197 
45. Rothschild AJ, Williamson DJ, Tohen MF, Schatzb erg A, Andersen SW, Van Campen LE, Sanger TM, 
Tollefson GD.  A double-blind, randomized study of olanzapine and olanzapine/fluoxetine combination 
for major depression with psychotic features. J Cli n Psychopharmacol 2004;24:365-373 
46. Newcomer JW.  Antipsychotic medications: metabo lic and cardiovascular risk.  J Clin Psychiatry 
2007;68[suppl 4]:8-13 
47. Lieberman JA, Stroup TS, McEvoy JP, Swartz MS, Rosenheck RA, Perkins DO, Keefe RS, Davis SM, 
Davis CE, Lebowitz BD, Severe J, Hsiao JK; Clinical  Antipsychotic Trials of Intervention Effectiveness  
(CATIE) Investigators.  Effectiveness of antipsycho tic drugs in patients with chronic schizophrenia.  N 
Engl J Med 2005;353(12):1209-1223 
48. Leucht S, Komossa K, Rummel-Kluge C, Corves C, Hunger H, Schmid F, Lobos CA, Schwarz S, Davis 
JM. A meta-analysis of head-to-head comparisons of second generation antipsychotics in the treatment 
of schizophrenia. Am J Psychiatry 2009; 166:152-163  
49. Fleischhacker WW, McQuade RD, Marcus RN, Archib ald D, Swanink R, Carson WH. A double-blind, 
randomized comparative study of aripiprazole and ol anzapine in patients with schizophrenia. Biol 
Psychiatry 2009; 65:510-517 
50. Newcomer JW, Campos JA, Marcus RN, Breder C, Be rman RM, Kerselaers W, L’Italien GJ, Nys M, 
Carson WH, McQuade RD. A multicenter, randomized, d ouble-blind study of the effects of arapiprazole 
in overweight subjects with schizophrenia or schizo affective disorder switched from olanzapine. J Clin  
Psychiatry 2008; 69:1046-1056 
51. Kane JM, Osuntokun O, Kryzhanovskaya LA, Xu W, Stauffer VL, Watson SB, Brier A. A 28-week, 
randomized, double-blind study of olanzapine versus  aripiprazole in the treatment of schizophrenia. J 
Clin Psychiatry 2009; 70:572-581 
52. Masand PS. Differential pharmacology of atypica l antipsychotics: clinical implications. Am J Healt h Syst 
Pharm 2007, 64(2 suppl 1): S3-8 
53. Haddad PM, Sharma SG. Adverse effects of atypic al antipsychotics: differential risk and clinical 
implications. CNS Drugs 2007; 21:911-936 
54. Gareri P, De Fazio P, De Fazio S, Marigliano N,  Ferreri Ibbadu G, De Sarro G.  Adverse effects of 
atypical antipsychotics in the elderly.  Drugs Agin g 2006;23:937-956 
 34   55. Matthews JD, Siefert C, Dording C, Denninger JW , Park L, van Nieuwenhuizen AO, Sklarsky K, Hillike r 
S, Homberger C, Rooney K, Fava M. An open study of aripiprazole and escitalopram for psychotic 
major depressive disorder. J Clin Psychopharmacolog y 2009; 29: 73-76 
56. Data provided by IMS Health Incorporated, Norwa lk, CT, USA, 2009 
57. Spencer CC, Su Z, Donnelly P, Marchini J. Desig ning genome-wide association studies: sample size, 
power, imputation, and the choice of genotyping chi p. PLoS Genet. 2009 May;5(5):e1000477. Epub 
2009 May 15. 
58. Kapur S, Zipursky RB, Remington G, Jones C, DaS ilva J, Wilson AA, Houle S. 5-HT2 and D2 receptor 
occupancy of olanzapine in schizophrenia: a PET inv estigation. Am J Psychiatry 1998;155:921-8. 
59. Albert PR, Lemonde S. 5-HT1A Receptors, Gene Re pression, and Depression. Neuroscientist 2004;10: 
575-593 
60. Capacity for 5-HT1A-mediated autoregulation pre dicts amygdala reactivity. Fisher PM, Meltzer CC, 
Ziolko SK, Price JC, Moses-Kolko EL, Berga SL, Hari ri AR. Nat Neurosci. 2006 Nov;9(11):1362-3 
61. Lemonde S, Turecki G, Bakish D, Du L, Hrdina PD , Bown CD, Sequeira A, Kushwaha N, Morris SJ, 
Basak A, Ou XM, Albert PR. Impaired repression at a  5-hydroxytryptamine 1A receptor gene 
polymorphism associated with major depression and s uicide. J Neurosci. 2003 Sep 24;23(25):8788-99. 
62. Kishi T, Tsunoka T, Ikeda M, Kitajima T, Kawash ima K, Okochi T, Okumura T, Yamanouchi. Serotonin 
1A receptor gene is associated with Japanese metham phetamine-induced psychosis patients. 
Neuropharmacology. 2010 Feb;58(2):452-6. Epub 2009 Sep 10. 
63. Ujike H, Katsu T, Okahisa Y, Takaki M, Kodama M , Inada T, Uchimura N, Yamada M, Iwata N, Sora I, 
Iyo M, Ozaki N, Kuroda S. Genetic variants of D2 bu t not D3 or D4 dopamine receptor gene are 
associated with rapid onset and poor prognosis of m ethamphetamine psychosis.  Prog 
Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2009 Jun 15;3 3(4):625-9. Epub 2009 Mar 10. 
64. Muller DJ, Kennedy JL. Genetics of antipsychoti c treatment emergent weight gain in schizophrenia. 
Pharmacogenomics. 2006 Sep;7(6):863-87.  
65. Arranz MJ, de Leon J. Pharmacogenetics and phar macogenomics of schizophrenia: a review of last         
decade of research. Mol Psychiatry. 2007 Aug;12(8): 707-47. 
66. Reynolds GP, Zhang ZJ, Zhang XB.  Association o f antipsychotic drug-induced weight gain with a 5-
HT 2c  receptor gene polymorphism.  Lancet 2002;359:2086- 2087 
67. Buckland PR, Hoogendoorn B, Guy CA, Smith SK, C oleman SL, O’Donovan MC.  Low gene 
expression conferred by association of an allele of  the 5-HT2C receptor gene with antipsychotic-
induced weight gain.  Am J Psychiatry 2005,162(3):6 13-615 
68. Ellingrod VL, Perry PJ, Ringold JC, Lund BC, Be ver-Stille K, Fleming F, Holman TL, Miller D.  Weig ht 
gain associated with the -759C/T polymorphism of th e 5HT2C receptor and olanzapine.  Am J Med 
Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet 2005;134B(1):76-78 
69. De Luca V, Mueller DJ, de Bartolomeis A, Kenned y JL. Association of the HTR2C gene and 
antipsychotic induced weight gain: a meta-analysis.  Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2007 Oct;10(5):697-
704 
70. Mulder H, Franke B, van der-Beek van der AA, Ar ends J, Wilmink FW, Scheffer H, Egberts AC.  The 
association between HTR2C gene polymorphisms and th e metabolic syndrome in patients with 
schizophrenia.  J Clin Psychopharmacol 2007;27(4):3 38-343 
71. Bozina N, Medved V, Kuzman MR, Sain I, Sertic J . Association study of olanzapine-induced weight 
gain and therapeutic response with SERT gene polymo rphisms in female schizophrenic patients. J 
Psychopharmacol 2007; 21: 728-734 
72. Muller DJ, Klempan TA, De Luca V, Sicard T, Vol avka J, Czobor P, Sheitman BB, Lindenmayer JP, 
Citrome L, McEvoy JP, Lieberman JA, Honer WG, Kenne dy JL. The SNAP-25 gene may be associated 
with clinical response and weight gain in antipsych otic treatment of schizophrenia. Neurosci Lett. 200 5; 
May 6;379(2):81-9. 
73. Musil R, Spellmann I, Riedel M, Dehning S, Douh et A, Maino K, Zill P, Müller N, Möller HJ, Bondy B . 
SNAP-25 gene polymorphisms and weight gain in schiz ophrenic patients. J Psychiatr Res. 2008; 
42(12):963-70. 
74. Gregoor JG, van der Weide J, Mulder H, Cohen D,  van Megan HJGM, Egberts ACG, Heerdink ER. 
Polymorphisms of the LEP- and LEPR gene and obesity  in patients using antipsychotic medication. J 
Clin Psychopharmocology 2009; 29:21-25 
 35   75. Park YM, Chung YC, Lee SH, Lee KJ, Kim H, Byun YC, Lim SW, Paik JW, Lee HJ. Weight gain 
associated with the alpha2a-adrenergic receptor -1, 291 C/G polymorphism and olanzapine treatment. 
Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2006 Jun 5;1 41B(4):394-7 
76. Wang YC, Bai YM, Chen JY, Lin CC, Lai IC, Liou YJ. Polymorphism of the adrenergic receptor alpha 
2a -1291C>G genetic variation and clozapine-induced  weight gain. J Neural Transm. 2005 
Nov;112(11):1463-8. 
77. Le Hellard S, Theisen FM, Haberhausen M, Raeder  MB, Fernø J, Gebhardt S, Hinney A, Remschmidt 
H, Krieg JC, Mehler-Wex C, Nöthen MM, Hebebrand J, Steen VM. Association between the insulin-
induced gene 2 (INSIG2) and weight gain in a German  sample of antipsychotic-treated schizophrenic 
patients: perturbation of SREBP-controlled lipogene sis in drug-related metabolic adverse effects? Mol 
Psychiatry. 2008 Jan 15. [Epub ahead of print] 
78. Kim H, Lim SW, Kim S, Kim JW, Chang YH, Carroll  BJ, Kim DK. Monoamine transporter gene 
polymorphisms and antidepressant response in Korean s with late-life depression. JAMA. 2006 Oct 
4;296(13):1609-18 
79. Hu XZ, Rush AJ, Charney D, Wilson AF, Sorant AJ , Papanicolaou GJ, Fava M, Trivedi MH, Wisniewski 
SR, Laje G, Paddock S, McMahon FJ, Manji H, Lipsky RH. Association between a functional serotonin 
transporter promoter polymorphism and citalopram tr eatment in adult outpatients with major 
depression. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2007 Jul;64(7):783 -92 
80. Serretti A, Benedetti F, Zanardi R, Smeraldi E.  The influence of Serotonin Transporter Promoter 
Polymorphism (SERTPR) and other polymorphisms of th e serotonin pathway on the efficacy of 
antidepressant treatments. Prog Neuropsychopharmaco l Biol Psychiatry. 2005 Jul;29(6):1074-84.  
81. Smeraldi E, Zanardi R, Benedetti F, Di Bella D,  Perez J, Catalano M. Polymorphism within the promo ter 
of the serotonin transporter gene and antidepressan t efficacy of fluvoxamine. Mol Psychiatry. 1998 
Nov;3(6):508-11. 
82. Pollock BG, Ferrell RE, Mulsant BH, Mazumdar S,  Miller M, Sweet RA, Davis S, Kirshner MA, Houck 
PR, Stack JA, Reynolds CF, Kupfer DJ. Allelic varia tion in the serotonin transporter promoter affects 
onset of paroxetine treatment response in late-life  depression. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2000 
Nov;23(5):587-590 
83. McMahon FJ, Buervenich S, Charney D, Lipsky R, Rush AJ, Wilson AF, Sorant AJ, Papanicolaou GJ, 
Laje G, Fava M, Trivedi MH, Wisniewski SR, Manji H.  Variation in the gene encoding the serotonin 2A 
receptor is associated with outcome of antidepressa nt treatment. Am J Hum Genet. 2006 
May;78(5):804-14. 
84. Binder EB, Salyakina D, Lichtner P, Wochnik GM,  Ising M, Pütz B, Papiol S, Seaman S, Lucae S, Kohl i 
MA, Nickel T, Künzel HE, Fuchs B, Majer M, Pfennig A, Kern N, Brunner J, Modell S, Baghai T, Deiml 
T, Zill P, Bondy B, Rupprecht R, Messer T, Köhnlein  O, Dabitz H, Brückl T, Müller N, Pfister H, Lieb R , 
Mueller JC, Lõhmussaar E, Strom TM, Bettecken T, Me itinger T, Uhr M, Rein T, Holsboer F, Muller-
Myhsok B. Polymorphisms in FKBP5 are associated wit h increased recurrence of depressive episodes 
and rapid response to antidepressant treatment. Nat  Genet. 2004 Dec;36(12):1319-25. 
85. Lekman M, Laje G, Charney D, Rush AJ, Wilson AF , Sorant AJ, Lipsky R, Wisniewski SR, Manji H, 
McMahon FJ, Paddock S. The FKBP5-gene in depression  and treatment response--an association 
study in the Sequenced Treatment Alternatives to Re lieve Depression (STAR*D) Cohort. Biol 
Psychiatry. 2008 Jun 15;63(12):1103-10. 
86. Licinio J, O'Kirwan F, Irizarry K, Merriman B, Thakur S, Jepson R, Lake S, Tantisira KG, Weiss ST,  
Wong ML. Association of a corticotropin-releasing h ormone receptor 1 haplotype and antidepressant 
treatment response in Mexican-Americans. Mol Psychi atry. 2004 Dec;9(12):1075-82. 
87. Arinami T, Gao M, Hamaguchi H, Toru M. A functi onal polymorphism in the promoter region of the 
dopamine D2 receptor gene is associated with schizo phrenia. Hum Mol Genet. 1997 Apr;6(4):577-82 
88. Hwang R, Shinkai T, De Luca V, Müller DJ, Ni X,  Macciardi F, Potkin S, Lieberman JA, Meltzer HY, 
Kennedy JL. Association study of 12 polymorphisms s panning the dopamine D(2) receptor gene and 
clozapine treatment response in two treatment refra ctory/intolerant populations. Psychopharmacology 
(Berl). 2005 Aug;181(1):179-87.  
89. Hwang R, Shinkai T, Deluca V, Macciardi F, Potk in S, Meltzer HY, Kennedy JL. Dopamine D2 receptor 
gene variants and quantitative measures of positive  and negative symptom response following 
clozapine treatment. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol. 2006  May;16(4):248-59. 
 36   90. Wu S, Xing Q, Gao R, Li X, Gu N, Feng G, He L ( 2005): Response to chlorpromazine treatment may be 
associated with polymorphisms of the DRD2 gene in C hinese schizophrenic patients. Neurosci Lett 
376: 1-4 
91. Lundstrom K, Turpin MP. Proposed schizophrenia- related gene polymorphism: expression of the 
Ser9Gly mutant human dopamine D3 receptor with the Semliki Forest virus system. Biochem Biophys 
Res Commun. 1996 Aug 23;225(3):1068-72. 
92. Scharfetter J, Chaudhry HR, Hornik K, Fuchs K, Sieghart W, Kasper S, Aschauer HN. Dopamine D3 
receptor gene polymorphism and response to clozapin e in schizophrenic Pakastani patients. Eur 
Neuropsychopharmacol. 1999 Dec;10(1):17-20. 
93. Lane HY, Hsu SK, Liu YC, Chang YC, Huang CH, Ch ang WH. Dopamine D3 receptor Ser9Gly 
polymorphism and risperidone response. J Clin Psych opharmacol. 2005 Feb;25(1):6-11. 
94. Chubb JE, Bradshaw NJ, Soares DC, Porteous DJ, Millar JK. The DISC locus in psychiatric illness. 
Molecular Psychiatry 2008; 13: 36–64 
95. Green EK, Grozeva D, Jones I, Jones L, Kirov G,  Caesar S, Gordon-Smith K, Fraser C, Forty L, 
Russell E, Hamshere ML, Moskvina V, Nikolov I, Farm er A, McGuffin P; Wellcome Trust Case Control 
Consortium5, Holmans PA, Owen MJ, O'Donovan MC, Cra ddock N. The bipolar disorder risk allele at 
CACNA1C also confers risk of recurrent major depres sion and of schizophrenia. Mol Psychiatry. 2009 
Jul 21. [Epub ahead of print] 
96. Meyers BS, English J, Gabriele M, Peasley-Miklu s C, Moonseong H, Flint AJ, Mulsant BH, Rothschild 
AJ., for the STOP-PD Study Group. A delusion assess ment scale for psychotic major depression: 
reliability, validity, and utility.  Biol Psychiatr y 2006;60:1336-1342 
97. Wilhelm K. Rating the CORE: A user’s guide. In Melancholia: A Disorder of Movement and Mood. 
Parker G, Hadzi-Pavlovic D (eds), Cambridge Univers ity Press, 1996: pp 211-219 
98. Hamilton M.  A rating scale for depression.  J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1960;23:56-62 
99. Guy W:  Clinical Global Impressions.  ECDEU Ass essment Manual for Psychopharmacology.  
Washington, DC, US Dept. of Health, Education, and Welfare, 1976a, pp 217-222 
100. Folstein M, Folstein S, McHugh P. "Mini mental  state": a practical method for grading the cogniti ve state 
of patients for the clinician. J Psychiatr Res 1975 ; 12: 189-198. 
101. Spitzer RL, Endicott J.  Schedule for Affectiv e Disorders and Schizophrenia (third edition).  New  York: 
New York State Psychiatric Institute, Biometrics Re search; 1979 
102. Alexopoulos GS, Katz IR, Reynolds CF, Carpente r DL, Docherty JP. The expert consensus guideline 
series: pharmacotherapy of depressive disorders in older patients. Postgrad Med Special Report 2001 
(October): 1-86 
103. Brodaty H, Luscombe G, Parker G, Wilhelm K, Hi ckie I, Austin M-P, Mitchell P.  Increased rate of 
psychosis and psychomotor change in depression with  age.  Psychol Med 1997;27:1205-1213 
104. O'Connor MK, Knapp R, Husain M, Rummans TA, Pe trides G, Smith G, Mueller M, Snyder K, Bernstein 
H, Rush AJ, Fink M, Kellner C.  The influence of ag e on the response of major depression to 
electroconvulsive therapy.  A C.O.R.E. report.  Am J Geriatr Psychiatry 2001; 9:382-390 
105. Keller MB, Boland RJ:  Implications of failing  to achieve successful long-term maintenance treatm ent of 
recurrent unipolar major depression.  Biol Psychiat ry 1998; 44:348-360 
106. First MB, Spitzer RL, Gibbon M, Williams JBW.  Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV-TR Axis I  
Disorders - Patient Edition  (SCID-I/P). New York: Biometrics Research Departmen t; 2001 
107. Williams JBW, Kobak KA, Bech P, Engelhardt N, Evans K, Lipsitz J, Olin J, Pearson J, Kalali A.  T he 
GRID-HAMD: standardization of the Hamilton Depressi on Rating Scale.  Int Clin Psychopharmacology 
2008;23:12 
108. Beck AT, Kovacs M, Weissman M.  Scale for suic ide ideation.  J Consult Clin Psychol 1979; 47:343 
109. Jorm AF, Jacomb PA. The informant questionnair e on cognitive decline in the elderly (IQCODE): soc io-
demographic correlates, reliability, validity, and some norms. Psychological Med 1989; 19:1015-1022  
110. Jorm AF. The informant questionnaire on cognit ive decline in the elderly (IQCODE): a review. Int 
Psychogeriatrics 2004; 16: 275-293 
111. Flint AJ, Rifat SL.  Two-year outcome of elder ly patients with anxious depression.  Psychiatry Re search, 
1997, 66:23-31 
112. Flint AJ, Rifat SL.  The effect of treatment o n the two-year course of late-life depression.  Bri tish Journal of 
Psychiatry, 1997, 170:268-272 
 37   113. Flint AJ, Rifat SL.  Nonresponse to first-line  pharmacotherapy may predict relapse and recurrence  of 
remitted geriatric depression.  Depression and Anxi ety, 2001, 13:125-131 
114. Alexopoulos GS, Meyers BS, Young RC, Kalayam B , Kakuma T, Gabrelle M, Sirey JA, Hull J. Executive  
dysfunction and long-term outcomes of geriatric dep ression. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2000;57: 285-290 
115. Parker G, Hickie I, Mason C. Validity of the C ORE measure: III. Outcome and treatment prediction.  In 
Melancholia: A Disorder of Movement and Mood. Parke r G, Hadzi-Pavlovic D (eds), Cambridge 
University Press, 1996:160-171 
116. Zigmond AS, & Snaith, R. P. The Hospital Anxie ty and Depression Scale. Acta Psychiatr Scand 
1983;67(6):361-370 
117. Flint AJ, Rifat SL. Validation of the Hospital  Anxiety and Depression Scale as a measure of sever ity of 
geriatric depression.  Int J Geriatr Psychiatry 199 6;11:991-994 
118. Miller MD, Paradis CF, Houck PR, Mazumdar S, S tack JA, Rifai AH, Mulsant B, Reynolds CF 3d:  Rati ng 
chronic medical illness burden in geropsychiatric p ractice and research:  application of the Cumulativ e 
Illness Rating Scale.  Psychiatry Res 1992; 41:237- 48 
119. Oquendo MA, Baca-Garcia E, Kartachov A, Khait V, Campbell CE, Richards M.  A computer algorithm 
for calculating the adequacy of antidepressant trea tment in unipolar and bipolar depression.  J Clin 
Psychiatry 2003;64:825-833 
120. Delis D, Kaplan E, Kramer J. Delis-Kaplan Exec utive Function Scale, San Antonio, TX: The 
Psychological Corporation; 2001 
121. Hill SK, Keshavan MS, Thase ME, Sweeney JA. Ne uropsychological dysfunction in antipsychotic-naïve  
first-episode unipolar psychotic depression. Am J P sychiatry 2004; 161:996–1003 
122. Butters MA, Whyte EM, Nebes RD, Begley AE, Dew  MA, Mulsant BH, Zmuda MD, Bhalla R, Meltzer 
CC, Pollock BG, Reynolds CF 3rd, Becker JT. The nat ure and determinants of neuropsychological 
functioning in late-life depression. Arch Gen Psych iatry. 2004; 61:587-95.  
123. Sheline YI, Barch DM, Garcia K, Gersing K, Pie per C, Welsh-Bohmer K, Steffens DC, Doraiswamy PM. 
Cognitive function in late life depression: relatio nships to depression severity, cerebrovascular risk  
factors and processing speed. Biol Psychiatry 2006;  60:58-65. 
124. Randolph C. The repeatable battery for the ass essment of neuropsychological status, San Antonio, TX: 
The Psychological Corporation;1998 
125. Lingjaerde O, Ahlfors UG, Bech P, Dencher SJ, Elgen K.  The UKU side effect rating scale. A new 
comprehensive rating scale for psychotropic drugs a nd a cross-sectional study of side effects in 
neuroleptic-treated patients.  Acta Psychiatr Scand  1987;334 (Suppl): 1-100 
126. Simpson GM, Angus JW.  A rating scale for extr apyramidal side effects. Acta Psychiatr Scand Suppl  
1970;212:11-19 
127. Barnes TR . A rating scale for drug-induced ak athisia.  Br J Psychiatry 1989;154:672-676 
128. Guy W.  Abnormal Involuntary Movement Scale (A IMS).  ECDEU Assessment Manual for 
Psychopharmacology.  Washington, DC: US Dept. of He alth, Education, and Welfare; 1976: pp 534-537 
129. American Diabetes Association, American Psychi atric Association, American Association of Clinical  
Endocrinologists, North American Association for th e Study of Obesity.  Consensus development 
conference on antipsychotic drugs and obesity and d iabetes.  Diabetes Care 2004;27:596-601 
130. Eckel RH, Grundy SM, Zimmet PZ. The metabolic syndrome. Lancet 2005;365:1415–28 
131. Matthews DR, Hosker JP, Rudenski AS, Naylor BA , Treacher DF, Turner RC. Homeostasis model 
assessment: insulin resistance and beta-cell functi on from fasting plasma glucose and insulin 
concentrations in man. Diabetologia 1985,28:412-419  
132. McAuley KA, Mann JI, Chase JG, Lotz TF, Shaw G M.  HOMA: The best bet for the simple 
determination of insulin sensitivity, until somethi ng better comes along.  Diabetes Care 
2007;30(9):2411-2413 
133. Pritchard JK, Stephens M, Donnelly P. Inferenc e of population structure using multilocus genotype  
data. Genetics. 2000 Jun;155(2):945-59. 
134. Bigos KL, Bies RB, Pollock BG. Population phar macokinetics in geriatric psychiatry. Am J Geriatr 
Psychiatry 2006; 14:993-1003 
135. Bigos KL, Pollock BG, Coley KC, Miller DD, Mar der SR, Aravagiri M, Kirshner MA, Schneider LS, Bie s 
RR. Sex, race, and smoking impact olanzapine exposu re. J Clin Pharmacol 2008; 489: 157-165 
136. Pollock BG. The pharmacokinetic imperative in late-life depression. J Clin Psychopharmacol. 2005 
Aug;25(4 Suppl 1):S19-23 
 38   137. Beal SL, Sheiner LB. Estimating population kin etics. Crit Rev Biomed Eng. 1982;8(3):195-222. 
138. Feng Y, Pollock BG, Ferrell RE, Kimak MA, Reyn olds CF 3rd, Bies RR. Paroxetine: population 
pharmacokinetic analysis in late-life depression us ing sparse concentration sampling. Br J Clin 
Pharmacol. 2006 May;61(5):558-69. 
139. Meyers BS, Klimstra SA, Gabriele M, Hamilton M , Kakuma T, Tirumalasetti F, Alexopoulos GS.  
Continuation treatment of delusional depression in older adults.  Am J Geriatr Psychiatry 2001; 9:415-
422 
140. Hedeker D. & Gibbons R.D.  Longitudinal Data A nalysis.  Hoboken, NJ:  John Wiley and Sons, 2006  
141. International Conference on Harmonization.  St atistical Principles for Clinical Trials.  US Food and Drug 
Administration, Center for Drug Evaluation Research , 1998.   
142. Kraemer, HC, Wilson, T, Fairburn, CG et al: Me diators and moderators of treatment effects in 
randomized clinical  trials.  Arch Gen Psychiatry 2 002; 59:877-883 
143. Hester EK, Thrower MR. Current options in the management of olanzapine-associated weight gain. 
Annals of Pharmacotherapy 2005; 39: 302-310 
144. Stroup TS, Lieberman JA, McEvoy JP, Swartz MS,  Davis SM, Rosenheck RA, Perkins DO, Keefe RSE, 
Davis CE, Severe J, Hsiao JK, for the CATIE Investi gators. Effectiveness of olanzapine, quetiapine, 
risperidone, and ziprasidone in patients with chron ic schizophrenia following discontinuation of a 
previous atypical antipsychotic.  Am J Psychiatry 2 006;163:611-622 
145. McQuade RD, Stock E, Marcus R, Jody D, Gharbia  NA, Vanveggel S, Archibald D, Phil M, Carson WH.  
A comparison of weight change during treatment with  olanzapine or aripiprazole: results from a 
randomized, double-blind study.  J Clin Psychiatry 2004;65[Suppl 18]:47-56 
146. McEvoy JP, Lieberman JA, Perkins DO, Hamer RB,  Gu H, Lazarus A, Sweitzer D, Olexy C, Weiden P, 
Strakowski SD. Efficacy and tolerability of olanzap ine, quetiapine, and risperidone in the treatment o f 
early psychosis: a randomized, double-blind 52-week  comparison. Am J Psychiatry 2007; 164:1050-
1060 
147. McEvoy JP, Lieberman JA, Stroup TS, Davis SM, Meltzer HY, Rosenheck RA, Swartz MS, Perkins DO, 
Keefe RS, Davis CE, Severe J, Hsiao JK; CATIE Inves tigators. Effectiveness of clozapine versus 
olanzapine, quetiapine, and risperidone in patients  with chronic schizophrenia who did not respond to 
prior atypical antipsychotic treatment. Am J Psychi atry. 2006;163: 600-610 
148. Leon A.C., Mallinckrodt C.H., Chuang-Stein C.,  Archibald D.G., Archer G.E., Chartier K. (2006). 
Attrition in randomized controlled clinical trials:   methodological issues in psychopharmacology. Biol  
Psychiatry 2006; 59(11):1001-1005 
149. Lavori P.W. Clinical trials in psychiatry: sho uld protocol deviation censor patient data? 
Neuropsychopharmacology 1992; 6(1), 39-4 
150. Leon AC, Davis LL.  Enhancing Clinical Trial D esign of Interventions for Posttraumatic Stress Dis order.  
J Traumatic Stress 2009; 22(6):603-611. 
151. Laird N.M. Missing data in longitudinal studie s. Statistics in Medicine 1988; 7(1-2):305-315 
152. Little R.J.A. Pattern-mixture models for multi variate incomplete data. Journal of the American St atistical 
Association 1993; 88(421):125-133 
153.  Hedeker D., Gibbons R.D. Application of rando m-effects pattern-mixture models for missing data i n 
longitudinal studies. Psychological Methods 1997; 2 (1): 64-78 
154. Leon AC, Demirtas H, Hedeker D. Bias reduction  with an adjustment for participants’ intent to dro pout 
of a randomized controlled clinical trial.  Clinica l Trials 2007; 4:540-547 
155. De Jonghe JFM. Differentiating between demente d and psychiatric patients with the Dutch version o f 
the IQCODE. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry 1997; 12:462-4 65 
156. Pisani MA, Inouye SK, McNicoll L, Redlich CA. Screening for preexisting cognitive impairment in o lder 
intensive care unit patients: use of a proxy assess ment. J Am Geriatr Soc 2003; %1:689-693 
157. Expert Committee on the Diagnosis and Classifi cation of Diabetes Mellitus. Report of the expert 
committee on the diagnosis and classification of di abetes mellitus. Diabetes Care. 2003 Jan;26 Suppl 
1:S5-20. 
158. Parker G, Hadzi-Pavlovic D, Hickie I, Mitchell  P, Wilhelm K, Brodaty H, Boyce P, Eyers K, Pedic F :  
Psychotic depression: a review and clinical experie nce.  Aust N Z J Psychiatry 1991;25:169-180 
159. Anton RF, Burch EA. Amoxapine versus amitripty line combined with perphenazine in the treatment of  
psychotic depression.  Am J Psychiatry 1990;147:120 3-1208 
 39   160. Flint AJ.  Delusions, hallucinations and depre ssion in Alzheimer's disease:  a biological perspec tive.  
American Journal of Alzheimer's Care and Related Di sorders and Research 1991; 21-28 
161. Andreescu C, Mulsant BH, Peasley-Miklus C, et al. Persisting low use of antipsychotics in the tre atment 
of major depressive disorder with psychotic feature s. J Clin Psychiatry. Feb 2007;68(2):194-200 
162. Ray WA, Chung CP, Murray KT, Hall K, Stein CM.  Atypical antipsychotic drugs and the risk of sudde n 
cardiac death. N Engl J Med 2009;360:225-235. 
163. Applebaum PS, Grisso T.  MacArthur Competence Assessment Tool for Clinical Research (MacCAT-
CR).  Sarasota, Fl, Professional Resource Press; 20 01 
 
 
APPENDIX 1. PHARMACOTHERAPY PROTOCOL 
 A1. ACUTE PHASE  
 
After written consent is obtained, psychotropic med ications that are not permitted in the study (Secti on 4.2.1) 
will be withdrawn over a period of up to 4 days, wh en feasible, prior to starting study medications. H owever, 
withdrawal of anticonvulsant medications with mood- stabilizing properties that are not permitted in th e study 
will be extended to 10 days, and may therefore incl ude the first week of the acute treatment phase.  I n addition, 
if a participant experiences withdrawal symptoms as sociated with the taper of psychotropic medication during 
the 4-day period, the taper may be slowed and conti nued over 10 days, which will overlap with the firs t week of 
the acute phase treatment.  Since one of the goals of the acute phase is to maximize the recruitment o f 
participants to the RCT, it is important to allow f lexibility in the rate of withdrawal of preexisting  psychotropic 
medications, to maximize the chance of recruiting a nd retaining participants. Persons who are taking s ertraline, 
olanzapine, or both medications at the time of sign ing consent for the acute phase of treatment, where  this 
does not affect eligibility for the study (Section 4.2.1), will remain on these medications, and upon entry to the 
study will have the existing dosages adjusted, when  necessary, to reach target doses, based on the pro tocol’s 
titration schedule. The only psychotropic medicatio ns allowed in the study will be olanzapine, sertral ine, and 
‘as needed’ lorazepam; ‘as needed’ benztropine will  be allowed to treat EPSE (see below).  
 
Sertraline and olanzapine will be dispensed in a no n-blind, open-label fashion during the acute and 
stabilization phases of the study.  Sertraline will  be dispensed in the morning as 50 mg tablets. Olan zapine will 
be dispensed in the evening as 5 mg tablets. The ti tration schedule of sertraline and olanzapine, and the target 
dosages of these medications, will be the same as t hat successfully employed in STOP-PD. Thus, sertral ine 
will be started at a dosage of 50 mg/day and olanza pine will be started at a dosage of 5 mg/day.  On d ay 4, the 
dosages of sertraline and olanzapine will be increa sed to 100 mg/day and 10 mg/day, respectively, as 
tolerated. On day 7, the dosages of sertraline and olanzapine will be increased to the target doses of  150 
mg/day and 15 mg/day, respectively, as tolerated.  If a participant experiences side effects during th e titration 
phase, downward titration of one or both medication s will be allowed as indicated, and the titration o f 
medications can proceed more slowly.  In these case s, however, the goal of titration will be to reach target 
doses within 14 days of starting the medications.   
 
A1.1 Dosage Adjustments Due to Inadequate Improveme nt: If there is no improvement or inadequate 
improvement in psychosis, based on the research psy chiatrist’s clinical judgment, after 7 days of 15 m g/day of 
olanzapine, the dosage of olanzapine will be increa sed to 20 mg/day, as tolerated.  This flexibility i n dosing will 
allow for dosages to be used at the maximum dose re commended in the product monograph by 2 weeks of 
starting treatment.  Participants who did not exper ience at least partial improvement in depressive sy mptoms 
(partial improvement defined as a 17-item HAM-D sco re of below 16) after taking sertraline at a dosage  of 150 
mg/day for 4 weeks, will have the sertraline dose i ncreased to 200 mg/day, as tolerated.  
 
A1.2 Dosage Adjustments Due to Side Effects: The treating psychiatrist will be allowed to adjust  the titration 
of sertraline, olanzapine, or both if the participa nt experiences side effects that are troublesome or  otherwise 
clinically significant (e.g., sedation, orthostatic  hypertension).  In such cases, the titration of bo th sertraline and 
olanzapine will be halted, or if clinically indicat ed, the dosage of one or both medications can be re duced.  
However, titration to reach the target dose will re sume, if and when the side effects resolve.  If, af ter a further 
attempt at titration, a participant is unable to to lerate 150 mg/day of sertraline or 15 mg/day of ola nzapine, the 
 40   participant may be maintained on a lower dose of th ese medications, with a minimum allowable dose of 5 0 
mg/day of sertraline and 5 mg/day of olanzapine. 
 
A1.3 Rationale for Dosing: In STOP-PD, by the end of the second week of treatm ent, the average daily dose 
of sertraline was 150 mg/ day, for both younger and  older age groups, and the average daily dose of 
olanzapine was 14 mg in the younger group and 13 mg  in the older group.  These data indicate the feasi bility 
of aiming for target dosages of 150 mg/day of sertr aline and 15 mg/day of olanzapine in both age group s.  The 
target dosages of sertraline and olanzapine are des igned to ensure that participants receive therapeut ic 
dosages of these medications early in treatment, in  an attempt to facilitate improvement as rapidly as  possible.  
Although sertraline has a flat dose-response curve (Preskorn 1993), meaning that, at a group level, hi gher 
doses are not necessarily associated with a higher frequency of response, there are individuals who do  require 
higher doses in order to respond.  Thus, in order t o maximize the chance of early response in all part icipants, 
we elected to increase the dose of sertraline to 15 0mg/day early in treatment, rather than maintain th e dose at 
a lower level for several weeks, before increasing the dose in non-responders.   
 
Many persons with PD are hospitalized, they are fre quently severely distressed by their delusions, and  food 
and fluid intake may be compromised by their psycho sis.  As a result, it is imperative to treat the ps ychosis in 
an expeditious manner.  Thus, in patients who fail to show significant improvement in psychosis by the  end of 7 
days of treatment with 15 mg/day of olanzapine, the  dosage will be increased to 20 mg/day, as tolerate d.  
  
A1.4 As-Needed Lorazepam: Persons with severe anxiety, restlessness, or insom nia that would prevent them 
from continuing in the study can be prescribed lora zepam, starting at 0.5 to 2 mg/day, as needed.  A m aximum 
daily dosage of 3 mg/day will be allowed during the  study, but doses will be kept at a minimum and the  
lorazepam will be withdrawn as early as possible.  
 
A1.5 As-Needed Benztropine: Among participants who develop clinically significa nt EPSE, the dose of 
olanzapine will be reduced by 5 mg increments, to a  minimum dose of 10 mg/day, if needed to lessen 
extrapyramidal effects.  However, if problematic EP SE persist, despite the dose reduction of olanzapin e, 
benztropine can be prescribed, to a maximum dose of  2 mg/day. Lorazepam and benztropine will not be 
administered within the 12 hours prior to administr ation of cognitive tests, so as not to disrupt cogn itive 
function.The prescription of benztropine will be ta ken into account in the secondary statistical analy ses of 
EPSE. 
 
A2. STABILIZATION PHASE  
 
When participants meet remission criteria, they wil l continue with open-label sertraline and olanzapin e during 
the 8-week stabilization phase. Since the goal of t his phase is to consolidate stability of remission,  adjustment 
of the doses of study medications will be allowed, if necessitated by clinical worsening or significan t side 
effects. In the case of exacerbation of depressive symptoms, sertraline can be increased as tolerated by 50mg 
increments every 7 days, to the maximum dose of 200 mg/day. Because sustained remission of psychosis 
during the stabilization phase will be required for  eligibility for the RCT (Section 3.9.2), participa nts will leave 
the stabilization phase if they experience a relaps e of delusions or hallucinations as determined by S CID 
interview. Nevertheless, in the case of participant s who experience worsening of worry that is not del usional, 
olanzapine can be increased as tolerated by 5 mg in crements every 7 days, to the maximum dose of 
20mg/day. If dosage reductions are necessitated by side effects, sertraline can be decreased by 50 mg 
increments every 7 days as needed, to a minimum dos e of 50 mg/day, and olanzapine can be decreased by 
5mg increments every 7 days as needed, to a minimum  dose of 5 mg/day.  
 
A3. RANDOMIZED CONTROLLED TRIAL   
 
Participants who meet the study’s remission criteri a, will be randomly allocated, following completion  of the 
stabilization phase, to either continue olanzapine or switch from olanzapine to placebo (see Data Anal ysis 
section for details of the randomization procedure) . Randomization assignments will be generated by Dr . Andy 
Leon, the study’s statistician, and sent to the res earch pharmacist at each site who will dispense stu dy 
medications.  Records of each subject’s treatment a ssignment will be kept at the respective pharmacies  and 
 41   made available if a clinical emergency occurs.  Sit e principal investigators and their co-investigator s will carry 
beepers to ensure that 24-hour/day coverage is prov ided for medical emergencies that may arise in stud y 
participants. 
 
A3.1 Sertraline: Participants will take open-label sertraline for th e duration of the RCT. The goal will be to 
maintain sertraline at the same acute dose that the  participant was prescribed at the time of randomiz ation to 
the RCT.   Because participants will have been taki ng sertraline for a minimum of 10 weeks and a maxim um of 
20 weeks before entering the RCT, we anticipate tha t the dose of sertraline will rarely need to be adj usted in 
the RCT because of side effects.  However, if for a ny reason, side effects do necessitate a dose reduc tion, the 
reason for contemplating a dose reduction will need  to be discussed with the site’s principal investig ator, to 
ensure that this is the most appropriate course of action.  If a dose reduction is agreed upon, the do se can be 
reduced by 50 mg increments every 7 days, to a mini mum dose of 50 mg/day, if required. An alternative 
approach to side effect burden during the RCT would  be to disallow any reduction in the dose of sertra line, so 
as not to confound the analyses of relapse and recu rrence.  However, forcing a participant to leave th e RCT 
because of intolerable side effects, when a dose re duction may alleviate the problem and allow the par ticipant 
to continue, does not reflect ‘real world’ clinical  practice, and would potentially weaken the power o f the 
statistical models through forced attrition. An inc rease in dose of sertraline will not be permitted a t any time 
during the RCT, because it will confound testing of  H1. Dose changes of sertraline will be carefully r ecorded 
and will be reported in a descriptive fashion for e ach treatment arm.  
 
A3.2 Placebo-Controlled Olanzapine Discontinuation:  Eli Lilly has agreed to donate Olanzapine and 
matching placebo to the study. The placebo will be identical in size, weight, and appearance to the 5 mg 
olanzapine tablets that participants took during th e acute and stabilization phases of the study. With  the 
exception of Dr. Leon and research pharmacists at e ach study site, none of the study’s research person nel or 
study’s participants will be aware of treatment ass ignment. The following table lists the schedule for  the 
substitution of ‘blinded’ olanzapine or placebo for  open-label olanzapine, depending on the number of 
olanzapine pills the participant takes at the time of starting the switch. 
 
Table: Schedule of Randomized, Double-Blind Switch of Open-Label Olanzapine to ‘Blinded’ Olanzapine Or  
Placebo 
 Number of pills of open-label olanzapine at the st art of switch to ‘blinded’ olanzapine/placebo 
 4 pills 3 pills 2 pills 1 pill 
Switch Week  Bottle A     Bottle B Bottle A         Bottle B Bot tle A     Bottle B Bottle A         Bottle B 
Week 1       3             1      2               1         1             1       1                0 
Week 2       2             2      2               1         1             1       1                0 
Week 3       1             3      1               2         1             1       1                0 
Week 4       1             3      1               2         1             1       1                0 
Thereafter       0             4      0               3        0             2       0                1 
Bottle A = Open-Label Olanzapine; Bottle B = ‘Blind ed’ Olanzapine or Placebo 
 
A3.3 Dose Adjustments of Olanzapine/Placebo During the RCT: The goal will be to maintain 
olanzapine/placebo at the same acute dose that the participant was prescribed at the time of randomiza tion to 
the RCT.  However, a change in dose of olanzapine/p lacebo will be permitted, if necessitated by advers e 
effects or clinical worsening during the RCT. The r ationale for allowing a change in olanzapine/placeb o dose, is 
that the primary aim of the study is to assess whet her olanzapine, administered within a clinically re levant dose 
range, prevents relapse, not whether a specific dos e of olanzapine prevents relapse. Moreover, permitt ing a 
dose adjustment in response to side effects or symp toms of the illness reflects ‘real world’ practice and 
increases the likelihood of retention of participan ts in the study. If a change in dose of olanzapine/ placebo is 
indicated, the daily dose can be adjusted by 1 tabl et every 7 days, as needed, within the dose range o f 5-20 
mg/day of olanzapine/placebo. The reason(s) for eac h change of dose will need to be discussed with the  site’s 
PI and will be documented in the case record form.  Dose changes of olanzapine/placebo will be careful ly 
recorded and will be reported in a descriptive fash ion for each treatment arm.  
 
A3.4 Lorazepam and Benztropine During the RCT: If lorazepam is prescribed during the acute phase o f 
treatment, an attempt will be made to taper and dis continue this medication during the acute phase, on ce 
patients experience improvement in depressive sympt oms. However, if necessary, lorazepam may be 
 42   continued during the RCT, up to a maximum dose of 3  mg/day, for treatment of residual insomnia or anxi ety. If 
benztropine is required during the acute phase of t reatment, it may be continued during the RCT, up to  a 
maximum of 2 mg/day. [In STOP-PD, only 5/259 (1.9%)  participants required benztropine, so we anticipat e 
very few patients will need this medication during the RCT]. 
 
REFERENCE 
 
Preskorn SH:  Recent pharmacologic advances in anti depressant therapy for the elderly.  Am J Medicine 
1993;94 (suppl 5A):2S-12S 
 