CLINICALTRIALS.GOV  Title:  Physiologic Effect  of Topical  Nitroglycerin on 
Microcirculation Capacity in Patients With Circulatory  Shock. 
NCT: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
PI Name: John C. Greenwood, MD  
Contact Email: john.greenwood@pennmedicine.upenn.edu  
 
 Date: June 1, 2021
Study Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan 
Patient selection  
Adult patients (age>18 years) receiving electiv e cardiac surgery requiring cardiopulmonary 
bypass were screened for eligibility from August -October 2021. Written informed consent was 
obtained from eligible patients prior to surgery. Patients were excluded if they had a nitroglycerin 
allergy, were taking oral phosphodiesterase inhibitors, were unable to tolerate microcirculatory flow image acquisition or did not have a pulmonary artery catheter for continuous cardiac output 
monitoring after surgery. Patients only received the study drug if they met the clinical criteria for 
circulatory shock, defined as having postoperative vasopressor -dependent hypotension or low 
cardiac output requiring inotropic support, with signs of end -organ injury (capillary refill time > 3 
seconds, lactate > 2, SvO2 < 60%). A seco nd cohort of patients were enrolled to serve as a 
preoperative control, which were matched to the experimental group for age, co -morbidities, and 
planned operation. Study data were collected and recorded using a well -established clinical 
database tool (REDCap, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN) hosted at the University of 
Pennsylvania
1,2. 
 
Study design and drug administration 
This investigator -initiated, open -label study was conducted at the Hospital of the University of 
Pennsylvania, an urban quaternary  academic medical center. The study was approved by the 
University of Pennsylvania’s institutional review board, registered with ClinicalTrials.gov 
([STUDY_ID_REMOVED]), and conducted in accordance with the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki. 
Sample size w as determined based on an anticipated 30% increase in TVD, and setting a one - 
sided α of 0.1, and ß of 0.8. A 1% topical  nitroglycerin solution was prepared immediately  prior to 
enrollment by reconstituting 400 mcg of nitroglycerin (Pfizer Pharmaceuticals,  New York, NY, 
USA) in 4mL of sterile water within a dropper bottle that would administer the solution in 0.05mL 
aliquots. Two drops (0.1 mL) of the 1% nitroglycerin solution (5 mcg or 2.27*10−2 μmol per  drop)  
were applied to the sublingual space  after obtaining baseline post -operative microcirculation 
images. A microdosing (approximately 1/50th of the lowest therapeutic sublingual dose) was 
administered to avoid any systemic effects. 
 
Microcirculatory imaging and analysis  
Sublingual  microcirculation  imaging  was performed  using HVM  (CytoCam,  Braedius  Medical  BV, 
the Netherlands)  in the preoperative staging  area (for controls) or within 2 hours of arriving to the 
intensive care unit after  surgery by a trained member of the investigative team (JCG or FMT)3. 
The sublingual microcirculation was measured at 3 time points: baseline, 3 minutes post - 
nitroglycerin, and then 30 minutes later. Images were obtained by gently placing the 
videomicrosc ope under the subject’s tongue until an adequate view of the microcirculation was 
obtained. A series of six second video clips (120 frames) duration were taken at each time point 
with attention to quality factors, especially the absence of pressure artifac t, excess saliva, and 
proper location in accordance with the accepted consensus for microcirculation analysis. Image 
quality was assessed using the 6 -factor Massey quality score, which scores each video for 
appropriate illumination, duration, focus, content, stability, and pressure. Images were only 
included in the final analysis if the Massey quality score was < 10 4. Acceptable clips were 
deidentified and coded for analysis after enrollment was  complete. 
 
Microcirculation videos were exported using commer cial software (CCTools 2, Braedius Medical 
BV, the Netherlands) and manually analyzed using the validated Automated Vascular Analysis 
software  (AVA  3.2; Microvision  Medical  B.V.,  the Netherlands).  Video  analysis  was performed  by 
trained investigators (JCG and FMT) who were blinded to the conditions of the subject. Only 
microvessels < 20 µm in diameter were included in the calculation of TVD and  PVD.  
Red blood cell flow velocity was calculated within appropriate venule s 20- 30 µm in diameter by 
manually  measuring  the slope of individual  RBC movement  within software  generated space- time 
diagrams 5. Microcirculatory function was quantified according to the current best practice 
guidelines for microcirculation imaging5. Blo od flow within each microvessel was graded using a 
semiquantitative scale, based on the vascular flow pattern ranging from 0 -3 (0=no flow, 
1=intermittent, 2=sluggish, or 3=continuous flow). Vessel perfusion was dichotomized as 
nonperfused (no flow or intermittent flow) or perfused (continuous or sluggish) for the calculation 
of PPV and  PVD.  
 
Individual pharmacodynamic response to the nitroglycerin challenge  
An exploratory analysis was planned to identify the incidence of a patient specific 
pharmacodynamic r esponse to the nitroglycerin challenge. A PD response threshold was set as 
a post -administration PVD > 1.8 standard deviations from the baseline, which was calculated by 
averaging the intra-patient  variance  between the three baseline  PVD video sequences, which was 
then pooled across the entire cohort. This 1.8SD threshold was set to achieve 90 percent confidence  interval (assuming  a one-sided alpha,  since there was only an anticipated increase  in 
PVD). This method has been used in previous Phase 0 trials to provide a statistically rigorous 
threshold for individualized PD responses to novel therapeutic  interventions
6. 
 
Patient data and safety monitoring  
Subject demographics, pre -operative risk score (euroSCORE II) and medical history were 
collected during initial screening. Cardiac index (CI), central venous pressure (CVP), pulmonary 
artery  pressure (PAP),  and mixed  venous oxygen saturation  (SvO 2) were continuously  monitored 
by pulmonary artery ca theter (Edwards Lifesciences LLC, Irvine, CA, USA). Arterial blood 
pressure was measured continuously using a standard invasive arterial line. Systemic hemodynamic data,  vasopressor infusion  doses,  and mixed  venous oxygen saturation  were 
recorded  at baseline then every 3 minutes for 30 minutes after application of the topical 
nitroglycerin solution7. The vasopressor -inotrope score (VIS) was calculated to summarize the 
degree of post -operative vasoactive support was required at the time of the study8. 
Norepinephrine equivalents were calculated for each patient at each time point9. 
 
Availability of data and materials 
The dataset supporting the results of this report is available via the Zenodo research data 
repository10. 
 
Statistical Analysis  
Data normality was assessed using the D’Agostino -Pearson omnibus normality test. Global 
hemodynamic and microcirculation  variabl es are reported  as mean  ± SD. Variables  that were  not 
normally distributed are reported as median with interquartile range [25th – 75th percentiles]. 
Student t-test was used to test for differences between normally distributed variables. Mann - 
Whitney U te st was used to analyze non- normal data. Repeated measure one -way ANOVA with 
Tukey’s post -hoc testing was used to assess for changes in microcirculatory function during the 
nitroglycerin challenge. Inter -rater reliability between coders was assessed in 10% of the videos 
using a Bland -Altman plot. Statistical analysis was conducted using Prism v 8.0 (Graph -Pad 
Software, San Diego, CA). Statistical significance was assumed at p < 0.05.  
REFERENCES 
 
 
1. Harris PA, Taylor R, Thielke R, Payne J, Gonzalez N,  Conde JG. Research electronic data 
capture (REDCap)--a metadata -driven methodology and workflow process for providing 
translational research informatics support. J Biomed Inform. 2009 Apr;42(2):377 –381. 
PMCID:  PMC2700030  
2. Harris PA, Taylor R, Minor BL, Elliott V, Fernandez M, O’Neal L, McLeod L, Delacqua G, 
Delacqua F, Kirby J, Duda SN. The REDCap consortium: Building an international 
community of software platform partners. Journal of Biomedical Informatics. 2019 
Jul;95:10 3208. PMID: 31078660 PMCID:  PMC7254481  
3. Hutchings S, Watts S, Kirkman E. The Cytocam video microscope. A new method  for 
visualising the microcirculation using Incident Dark Field technology. Clin Hemorheol 
Microcirc. 2016;62(3):261 –271. PMID:  26484715 
4. Massey MJ, Larochelle E, Najarro G, Karmacharla A, Arnold R, Trzeciak S, Angus DC, 
Shapiro NI. The microcirculation imag e quality score: development and preliminary 
evaluation of a proposed approach to grading quality of image acquisition for bedside 
videomicroscopy. J Crit Care. 2013 Dec;28(6):913 –917. PMID:  23972316 
5. Ince C, Boerma EC, Cecconi M, De Backer D, Shapiro NI, D uranteau J, Pinsky MR, 
Artigas A, Teboul JL, Reiss IKM, Aldecoa C, Hutchings SD, Donati A, Maggiorini M, Taccone FS, Hernandez G, Payen D, Tibboel D, Martin DS, Zarbock A, Monnet X, Dubin 
A, Bakker J, Vincent JL, Scheeren TWL, Cardiovascular Dynamics Secti on of the ESICM. 
Second consensus on the assessment of sublingual microcirculation in critically ill patients: results from a task force of the European Society of Intensive Care Medicine. Intensive Care Med. 2018;44(3):281 –299. PMID:  29411044 
6. Rubinstein L V, Steinberg SM, Kummar S, Kinders R, Parchment RE, Murgo AJ, 
Tomaszewski JE, Doroshow JH. The statistics of phase 0 trials. Statist Med. 2010 May 10;29(10):1072 –1076.  
7. Boden WE, Padala SK, Cabral KP, Buschmann IR, Sidhu MS. Role of short -acting 
nitroglycer in in the management of ischemic heart disease. Drug Des Devel Ther. 
2015;9:4793– 4805. PMCID:  PMC4548722  
8. Nguyen HV, Havalad V, Aponte -Patel L, Murata AY, Wang DY, Rusanov A, Cheng B, 
Cabreriza SE, Spotnitz HM. Temporary biventricular pacing decreases the v asoactive-  
inotropic score after cardiac surgery: A substudy of a randomized clinical trial. The Journal 
of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery. 2013 Aug;146(2):296 –301. 
9. Goradia S, Sardaneh AA, Narayan SW, Penm J, Patanwala AE. Vasopressor dose 
equivalence : A scoping review and suggested formula. Journal of Critical Care. 2021 
Feb;61:233 –240. 
10. Greenwood, John C, Talebi, Fatima M, Jang, David, Abella, Benjamin S. Using a topical 
nitroglycerin challenge to detect reversible microcirculatory dysfunction in pati ents with 
circulatory shock. Zenodo; 2021 Dec 9 [cited 2021 Dec 8]; Available from: 
https://zenodo.org/record/5768720  