7866/135  
08/23/2021  Page 1 of 39  
 
 
 
 
UNIVERSITY OF WASHINGTON  
DEPARTMENT OF MEDICINE  
DIVISION OF ONCOLOGY  
  
Protocol 135  
 
Phase I/II Ra ndomized Study of Combination Immunotherapy With or Without Polysaccharide 
Krestin  (PSK ®) Concurrently with a HER2 ICD Peptide- Based Vaccine in Patients with Stage IV 
Breast Cancer  Receiving HER2- Targeted Monoclonal Antibody Therapy  
 
 
Investigators     
William R. Gwin, MD  Assistant Professor  Division of Oncology, UW  (206) 221- 5956  
Mary  L. Disis, M.D. Professor of Medicine  Division of Oncology, UW  (206) 616- 1823  
    
John Liao, M.D.  Assistant Professor  GYN/ONC, UW  (206) 543- 3915  
    
Andrew Coveler, M.D.  Assistant Professor  Division of Oncology, UW  (206) 221- 7509  
Sasha Stanton, M.D.  Acting Instructor  Division of Oncology, UW  (206) 685- 8849  
Doreen Higgins, B.S.N.  Research Nurse  Division of Oncology, UW  (206) 616- 9538  
Jennifer Childs, M.P.H. Research Coordinator  Division of Oncology, UW  (206) 616- 2305  
    
Ted Gooley , Ph.D Biostatistician  Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center  (206) 667- 6358  
 
Emergency (24 hour) pager:  William R. Gwin , M.D.  (206) 314- 1279  
 Mary L. (Nora) Disis, M.D.   (206) 427- 8700  
IRO received 08/23/21
FHCRC IRB Approval  
SEP 03 2021 
Document Released Date
7866/135  
08/23/2021  Page 2 of 39 Table of Contents    Page  
S
ynopsis  3 
Li
st of Appendices  6 
Li
st of Abbreviations  7 
I
ntroduction  8 
B
ackground  8 
S
tudy Rationale 13 
O
bjectives  13 
E
xperimental Agent Preparation  
HER2 ICD Peptide -Based Vaccine 14 
GM-CSF 14 
Vaccine Dose Compounding and Dispensing 15 
PSK Product and Placebo 15 
Experimental Agent Accountability  16 
I
nclusion and Exclusion criteria  16 
E
xperimental Design 
Study Design  17 
Sample Size  18 
Outcome Measures  18 
P
lan of Treatment  – Arms 1 and 2  
Pre Screen  19 
Initial Evaluation  19 
Monthly Immunizations  20 
Evaluation after Final Vaccine 20 
Management of Potential Study Risks  20 
P
atient Withdrawal from Study  21 
E
valuation and Management of Toxicity  21 
D
ose Modifications  22 
A
ccrual and Criteria for Premature Study Termination 22 
S
tatistical Consideration  22 
A
dministrative Considerations  25 
R
eferences  26 
A
ppendices  29 
7866/135  
08/23/2021  Page 3 of 39 SYNOPSIS 
Title  Phase I/II Ra ndomized Study of Combination Immunotherapy With or Without 
Polysaccharide Krestin (PSK®) Concurrently with a HER2 ICD Peptide -Based 
Vaccine in Patients with Stage IV Breast Cancer  Receiving HER2 -Targeted 
Monoclonal Antibody Therapy  
Study Population  Patients with S tage IV HER2+ b reast cancer who have been treated with 
definitive therapy  and are receiving maintenance HER2 -targeted monoclonal 
antibody therapy  (defined as trastuzumab monotherapy or combination 
trastuzumab and pertuzumab therapy) ; and are currently without evidence of 
disease (NED) or have stable- bone only disease.   
Rationale  Hot-water extracts of mushrooms have been used in traditional medicine in China, 
Japan, and other Asian countries for centuries.  PSK was isolated in Japan from 
the Trametes versicolor  mushroom in the 1960s and has been studied in more 
than 48 cl inical trials  for various types of cancers.  R andomized clinical trials have 
show n low toxicity profile and improved survival in breast cancer patients treated 
with PSK .   Pre-clinically, in vitro studies have shown PSK to be a potent TLR -2 
agonist that activates dendritic cell maturation , activates human NK cells , induces 
pro-inflammatory cytokine /chemokine  secretion and potentiates trastuzumab-
mediated ADCC against breast cancer cells.  PSK has al so been shown to 
potentiate antitumor effect s of anti -HER2 mAb therapy in neu- transgenic mice .  
We hypothesize that the use of PSK  will augment the innate anti -tumor immune 
responses specifically NK -cell activity.  Additionally , PSK could potentially 
augment HER vaccine induced Th1 immunity and collectively the combination 
therapy could result in enhanced eradication of micrometastatic disease which 
could prevent relapse in patients with optimally treated HER2+ Stage IV Breast 
Cancer.  
Oral PSK at 3000 mg/day has been shown to be safe with and without 
chemotherapy in breast cancer .  Moreover, combination immunotherapy with 
HER2 -directed immunotherapy ( HER2 ICD vaccination and HER2 -targeted 
monoclonal antibody therapy ) has been shown to be safe and immunogenic.  
However, the safety of PSK when added to HER2 -directed immunotherapy is less 
well known and warrants further investigation.  This study will allow us to better 
define the safety and immunomodulatory effects of this combined immunotherapy 
regimen . 
Objectives 
Primary  1. To evaluate the safety of PSK when given with HER2- directed immunotherapy . 
 
Secondary  1. To evaluate the effect of PSK on NK cell functional activity when given with 
HER2 -directed immunotherapy . 
 
Tertiary   1. To investigate the effect of  PSK when given with HER2 -directed 
immunotherapy  on: 
a. Serum levels of pro-inflammatory cytokine and/or chemokines.  
b. Intermolecular epitope spreading.  
c. Serum TGF -β levels.  
d. Progression free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS).  
Study Design A phase I/ II double- blind randomized two -arm clinical trial designed to examine 
the safety and immune effects of PSK when given as combination HER2 -directed 
immunotherapy  (a HER2 ICD peptide vaccine and HER2 -targeted monoclonal  
antibody therapy ) in patients with Stage IV  HER2+ breast cancer.  Eligible 
patients will be enrolled and randomized in equal numbers to one of 2 arms (15 
patients per arm).  
7866/135  
08/23/2021  Page 4 of 39 Arm 1 :  
HER2 ICD vaccine + HER2 -targeted monoclonal antibody therapy*  + 
Placebo: Patients will receive HER2 ICD peptide vaccine administered 
concomitantly with HER2 -targeted monoclonal antibody  therapy  and placebo 
product.  
Arm 2 :  
HER2 ICD vaccine + HER2 -targeted monoclonal antibody therapy*  + PSK : 
Patients will receive HER2 ICD peptide vaccine administered concomitantly with 
HER2 -targeted monoclonal antibody  therapy  and PSK.  
*Trastuzumab (or trastuzumab and pertuzumab) will be administered per 
standard of care by patient’s  primary oncologist.   
Number of Patients   A total of 30 patients will be enrolled and randomized in equal numbers to one of 
2 arms  with PSK or placebo.  
Outcome Measures   
Primary Endpoint:  1. Evaluation of safety of PSK when administered with HER2 -directed 
immunotherapy .  Evaluation of safety and systemic toxicity will include 
physical examination and clinical labs performed at various timepoints.  
Toxicity grading will be evaluated per CTEP CTCAE 4.0 and monitoring of 
adverse events will be done per FDA and NCI guidelines.   Additionally, 
stopping rules for accrual to study will become operational if there is sufficient 
evidence of excessive toxicity.  
Secondary  Endpoint:  1.  Evaluation of the effect of PSK on NK cell functional activit y.  PBMC will be 
obtained and cryopreserved at baseline (prior to start of PSK) and then at  4, 
8, and 16 weeks .  PBMC will subsequently be thawed and used to determine 
the effect of PSK on NK cell functional activity specifically, induction of IFN -
gamma production and CD107a expression in NK cells, via flow cytometry .  
Augmentation of NK cell activity is defined by a 2 -fold increase in NK cell IFN -
gamma production and CD107a expression from baseline after 4 weeks of oral administration of PSK.  
Tertiary Endpoints:  1. Assessment  of the effect of PSK on pro- inflammatory serum cytokine and/or 
chemokines when administered with a HER2 -directed immunotherapy .  Serial 
blood draws will be done before initial dose of PSK (time 0) and 30 min, 4 
hours, and 24 hours post -initial PSK dose to  assess serum 
cytokines/chemokines (i.e., IL -6, IFN -γ, and TNF- α) via Luminex analysis.  
Serum cytokine/chemokine levels at different timepoints post -PSK will be 
compared to baseline levels.   Serum will be cryopreserved and subsequently 
be thawed at time o f analysis.  
2. Assessment of the effect of PSK on intermolecular epitope spreading when 
administered with HER2 -directed immunotherapy .  IFN -γ ELISPOT assay will 
be used to evaluate T cell precursor frequency to specific breast tumor antigens (HER2, IGFBP -2, TOPO -IIα, p53, and PRAME) at various 
timepoints.  A positive immune response will be defined as a post -vaccination 
T cell precursor frequency >1:20,000 antigen -specific PBMCs.  In patients 
with a baseline precursor frequency >1:20,000, a positive post -vaccination 
immune response will be defined as a 2 -fold increase in antigen- specific 
PBMC.   PBMC will be cryopreserved and subsequently be thawed at time of 
analysis.  
3. Assessment of the effect of PSK on serum TGF -β levels when administered 
with HER2 -directed immunotherapy .  Serum levels of TGF -β will be assessed 
with ELISA at various timepoints to determine incidence and magnitude of 
7866/135  
08/23/2021  Page 5 of 39 serum TGF- β reduction pre-  and post -combination immunotherapy.  Serum 
will be cryopreserved and subsequently be thawed at time of analysis.  
4. Evaluation of PFS and OS .  Evaluation of PFS and OS will be followed and 
compared between the treatment arms.  Thoug h not statistically powered to 
this endpoint, large differences if observed between the treatment groups will 
be noted and described.  
7866/135  
08/23/2021  Page 6 of 39 Appendices  
 
Appendix A   Zubrod Performance Status Scale  
 Appendix B    Schedule of Events  
 
Appendix C    Data Safety Monitoring Plan 
7866/135  
08/23/2021  Page 7 of 39 Abbreviations:  
ADCC  antibody -dependent cell -mediated cytotoxicity  
ALND  axillary node dissection  
APC  antigen presenting cells  
BUN  blood urea nitrogen  
CBC  complete blood count  
CFC cytokine flow cytometry  
CMP  Complete metabolic panel  
CTCAE  Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events  
CTEP  Cancer Therapy Evaluation Program  
CTL cytotoxic T lymphocytes  
DC dendritic cell  
DTH delayed type  hypersensitivity  
DSMP  Data Safety Monitoring Plan  
ECD  extracellular domain of HER2  
FISH  fluorescen ce in situ  hybridization  
rhuGM -CSF rhu granulocyte macrophage colony stimulating factor  
GMP  good manufacturing practice  
HER2  HER -2/neu  
HPLC  high pressure liquid chromatography  
ICD intracellular domain of HER2  
id. intradermal  
IFNγ  interferon -gamma  
IHC immunohistochemistry  
LVEF  left ventricular ejection fraction  
MBC  Metastatic breast cancer  
MHC  major histocompatability complex  
MUGA  multigated acquisition  
NED  no evidence of disease  
NK Natural Killer Cell  
OS overall survival  
PBMC  peripheral blood mononuclear cells  
PSK Polysaccharide Krestin  
PFS progression free survival  
Th T helper cells  
TLR Toll-like receptor agonist  
TNF Tumor necrosis factor  
7866/135  
08/23/2021  Page 8 of 39 UPN  unique patient number  
7866/135  
08/23/2021  Page 9 of 39 1. Introduction  
Patients with advanced breast cancer have been shown to have defects in anti -tumor immunity including 
impairment of n atural killer (NK) cells.[1-3]  NK cells are key components of innate immunity which play a 
fundamental role in tumor immune surveillance. Recent findings in breast cancer patients show peripheral 
blood and tumor -infiltrating NK cells to have tumor -promoting alter ations in their activating and inhibitory 
receptors which correlate with decreased cytotoxic NK cell function .[3]  Additionally, inhibitory factors in 
the tumor microenvironment including TGF -beta (TGF- β) have been shown to be directly involved in the 
impairment of NK cells’ phenotype and functions.  It is postulated that invasive breast tumors escape NK 
cell antitumor immunity via a strong inhibitory microenvironment resulting in tumor progress ion and 
recurrence.  Thus, novel approaches to improve NK cell function and overcome tumor cell -mediated NK 
suppression are needed.  
Toll-like receptor agonists (TLRs) are a group of pathogen recognition receptors that can recognize the 
pathogen associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) from virus, bacteria, and fungus resulting in initiation of 
innate immunity.  Several TLR agonists have been shown to activate NK cells, either directly or indirectly 
via dendritic cells (DC).[4-6]  Activation of NK cells can result in direct NK cell mediated cytotoxicity of tumor.  
Activated NK cells also secrete proinfl ammatory cytokines and chemokines which regulate and direct 
immune responses.[7]  Specifically, activated NK cells secrete IFN -γ which can promote maturation and 
differentiation of DCs toward a Th1 profile and drive the activation of adaptive immunity.  Our group has 
been studying the immune modulatory and anti -tumor potential of Polysaccharide Krestin (PSK), a hot 
water extract from Tremetes Versicolor  mushroom as a means to enhance NK cell function via stimulation 
of TLR2.  Our pre -clinical studies have shown that PSK: (1) is a selective TLR2 agonist with potent 
antitumor effects whi ch are dependent on enhanced PSK -induced NK and CD8 T cells activity[8], (2) can 
activate human NK cell function and enhance tr astuzumab- mediated antibody -dependent cell -mediated 
cytotoxicity (ADCC)[9], (3) can induce NK cell and gamma -delta T cell secretion of multiple inflammatory 
cytokines including IFN -γ resulting in DC maturation and activation[8, 9] and (5) may  also work as a vaccine 
adjuvant to significantly augment antigen- specific T cell immunity.  Collectively, these findings suggest 
the potential of PSK to augment antitumor immunity via stimulation of DCs and NK cel ls and also to 
enhance the therapeutic effect of trastuzumab and HER2 vaccination in breast cancer patients.   
We hypothesize that the use of PSK will enhance the innate anti -tumor immune responses specifically 
NK-cell activity and result in prolonged upre gulation of IFN -γ production; this could also result in 
stimulation of adaptive Th1 immunity.  Thus, we have designed a phase I/II randomized study of 
combination immunotherapy with oral PSK administered concurrently with trastuzumab and HER2-
targeted pept ide vaccination.  Our primary and secondary objectives are to assess the safety of PSK as 
a component of combination immunotherapy and to evaluate effect of PSK on NK cell functional activity.  Additionally, we will investigate if PSK stimulates circulatin g proinflammatory cytokine/chemokines, 
enhances HER2 vaccine- induced T cell immunity (epitope spreading) and decreases serum TGF -β. 
2. Background 
A. Natural killer (NK) cell deficiency has been found in patients with breast cancer.   NK cells are 
part of the innate immunity that plays a fundamental role in tumor immune surveillance.  As surveillance 
cells in the tumor microenvironment, DCs and NK cells have been shown to infiltrate tumors and monitor 
the presence of different antigen  derived from tumors.[10]  Thus, NK cells limit not only the emergence of 
viral infections but also of cancers by surveillance of “missing- self” and “induced- self” ligands, and by 
direct r ecognition of pathogen -associated molecules.  Unfortunately, NK cell maturation and cytotoxic 
function is frequently impaired in breast cancer patient s.[1-3]  Moreover, NK cell activity of IFN -γ production 
has been shown to be significantly impaired in invasive breast tumors, especially in advanced stage diseas e.
[3] 
The activation of NK cells is regulated by a balance of signals transduced by activating and inhibitory 
receptors expressed on the surface of NK cells.  More recently, it has been shown that breast tumor cells 
can alter NK cell function through modulation of their surface recepto rs.3  Specifically, expression of 
activating NK cell receptors (i.e., NKp30, NKG2D) were significantly decreased while expression of 
inhibitory receptors (i.e.,  NGK2A) were increased in both peripheral blood NK cells (p- NK) and breast 
tumor infiltrating NK cells (Ti- NK); and this alteration was correlated with decreased NK cell function, 
especially cytotoxicit y.3  Moreover, impairment of Ti -NK cytotoxicity was more pronounced when 
compared to that of peripheral NK cells.  Additionally, in situ levels of inhibitory factors such as TGF -β and 
7866/135  
08/23/2021  Page 10 of 39 regulatory T cell infiltrates correlated with the NK cell impaired phenotype and functions.  These data 
support the notion that breast tumors are able to model their environment to evade NK cell antitumor 
immunity which likely contributes to tumorigenesis .  Thus, further investigation of immunomodulators such 
as PSK to restore NK cell maturation and activity within an immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment and prevent breast cancer progression and/or recurrence is warranted.  
B. Mushroom extract PSK is a TLR2 agonist that activates  human NK cells.   Hot-water extracts of  
mushrooms have been used in traditional medicine in China, Japan, and other Asian countries for 
centuries.  Among other properties, the anticancer and immunomodulatory effects of certain mushroom 
extracts have been described and studied in depth in the lab and in clinical trials, mainly in Asia.  PSK 
was isolated in Japan from the Trametes Versicolor  mushroom in the 1960s and has been studied in more 
than 48 clinical trials, mainly for colorectal, gastric, esophageal, lung, and breast cancer.  Based on the  
findings of randomized PSK clinical trials which showed a low toxicity profile and improvements in patient 
survival, PSK is commonly used as adjuvant or neoadjuvant treatment with or without chemotherapy for 
patients with colorectal, breast, and gastric c ancer in Japan.
[11-14]  
TLRs play a crucial role in the innate immune response and the subsequent induction of adaptive immune 
responses against microbial infection or tissue injur y.[15]  Specifically, TLRs are a group of pathogen 
recognition receptors that can recognize the pathogen associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) such as dsRNA or ssRNA, unmethylated DNA, or lipopeptide from virus, bacteria, and fungus.  TLRs can induce 
strong anti -tumor activity by regulating the functions of the immune cells that infiltrate the tumor 
microenvironment.  The potential of TLR agonists, such as polyI:C (TLR3), resiquimod (TLR7/8), and CpG 
(TLR9), to activate NK cells, either directly or indirectly via  dendritic cells (DC), have been shown in both 
pre-clinical and clinical studies.
[4-6]  Our gr oup has been studying the immune modulatory and anti -tumor 
potential of PSK.  Our research studies have demonstrated that PSK is a potent TLR2 agonist (Fig. 1).  
Pre-clinically, in vitro studies have shown that PSK can activate human NK cells to produce IFN -γ and 
lyse tumor cells; and induce secretion of pro- inflammatory cytokines and chemokines (e.g., IL- 12, TNF- α, 
MIP-1α, and MIP -1β).   
NK cells represent a highly specialized lymphoid population with potent cytolytic activity against tumor or 
virus infected cells.  There are two subpopulations of NK cells, the CD56bright NK cells which are mainly 
responsible for cytokine production and the CD56dim NK cells that are mainly responsible for the cytotoxic 
effect of NK cells.[16]  Our preclinical studies have shown that PSK can activate both subpopulations of NK 
cells and stimulates both the IFN -γ production and cytotoxicity of NK cells (Fig. 2 ).[9]   
 
In a recent Phase 1 study of Trametes versicolor ( Tv) in women with breast cancer conducted by  Standish 
et al, NK cell activity increased to approximately 2- fold of baseline after 4 weeks of oral administration of 
Tv.[17]  Thus, the immune measure of PSK -induced NK cell activity in this study will be assessed with 
functional NK flow cytometry assays used in our previously published papers and at  similar time points as  
described in Section 7. C.2. (Outcome Measures).[18]    
 
1 10 100 10000123
PSK (µg/mL)TLR4TLR2SEAP Activity (OD650 nm)
    A      B 
 PBS PSK K562
12.525 50100020406080
PBSPSK
***
E:T ratio% Specific Lysis
  CD56bright 
  
CD56dim 
   
  
Figure 1.   PSK selectively activates TLR2.   
HEK cells transfected TLR2 or 4 were 
stimulated with serial dilutions of PSK (0.5-
1000 µg/mL, 24 hr). PSK also had no effect 
on TLR3, 5, 7, 8, 9 ( data not shown).     Figure 2.  PSK stimulates IFN -γ production and augments the cytotoxicity  of 
NK cells.   (A) Intracellular staining showing that PSK induces IFN γ production 
by NK cells.  (B) PSK- stimulated PBMC have enha nced lysis against K562.  
Data shown is representative of results from 3 donors.  
CD56 IFN-γ 
7866/135  
08/23/2021  Page 11 of 39 C. PSK enhances trastuzumab mediated ADCC and may improve its clinical efficacy.  Trastuzumab 
is a humanized anti -HER2 monoclonal antibody (mAb), and is the first HER2- targeted therapy approved 
by FDA.  Tr astuzumab has significantly advanced the clinical management of patients with HER2+ breast 
cancer by prolonging disease- free survival in patients with locally advanced breast cancer, and 
progression- free and overall survival in patients with metastatic breast cancer.[19, 20]  Trastuzumab inhibits 
tumor cell growth through multiple mechanisms including signaling blockade and downregulating the 
HER2/ne u receptor.  One of the major mechanisms is believed to be ADCC, in which the tumor cells are 
coated with trastuzumab and then lysed by immune cells via binding of Fc gamma recep tor (FcγR) to the 
Fc portion of the mAb.[21]  Increase in tumor infiltrating NK cells after trastuzumab therapy has been  found 
in human breast cancer biopsy samples[22, 23] and FcγR gene polymorphism can impact the clinical 
response to trastuzumab.[24]  NK cells constitutively express FcγRIIIA  (CD16) and are the major effectors 
of ADCC.[25]  Therefore the function of NK cells may impact the efficacy of ADCC and clinical response to 
trastuzumab.[26]   
In our pre -clinical studies, we have found 
that PSK significantly enhanced 
trastuzumab- mediated ADCC against two 
breast cancer cell lines, SKBR3 and MDA -
MB-231.  Furthermore , we showed that 
combination of oral PSK and a HER2-
targeted mAb therapy in mice resulted in 
enhanced anti -tumor effect .[18]  Patients 
enrolled to this study will have metastatic breast cancer which has been optimally 
treated to a state of NED (no evidence of 
disease) and therefore off cytotoxic 
chemotherapy.  However, our patient 
population will continue use of  
maintenance trastuzumab monotherapy 
or combination trastuzumab and 
pertuzumab therapy  as dictated per standard of care.  Although not a study outcome, combination of PSK 
with trastuzumab could potential ly enhance NK-cell-mediated ADCC of residual microscopic disease (i.e., 
HER2+  tumor  cells) in our study patients.    
D. PSK can act ivate DC and augment antigen -specific T cells when used as a vaccine adjuvant.  
TLR2 is highly expressed on DC, and treatment with PSK can induce DC maturation and secretion of multiple inflammatory cytokines, including TNF- γ, IL-12p40, and IL -12p70.
[8, 9]  Furthermore, PSK -induced 
IFN-γ produced by NK cell s and gamma -delta T cells can reciprocally activate DC.  Therefore, we 
hypothesize that PSK may work as vaccine adjuvant to augment antigen -specific T cells.  Our pre -clinical 
studies in a mouse model of vaccination with ova peptide antigen p323 has shown that PSK as a vaccine 
adjuvant significantly enhanced ova- specific T cell immunity.  Specifically, BALB/c mice were given a 
vaccine of OVA p323 -339 peptide at the dose 0.5 mcg per mouse concurrently with an intradermal (ID) 
adjuvant of either PSK (1000 mcg ), GM -CSF (5 mcg), or PBS.  For two days following initial injection, 
adjuvant was given alone once per day and animals were sacrificed on Day 4.  Draining lymph nodes (dLN) were harvested for evaluation of DC activation and antigen -specific T cells.  dLNs  from mice that 
received GM -CSF or PSK were enlarged compared to dLNs from mice in the PBS control group (Fig. 4A); 
and the percentage and number of CD11c
+ DC were significantly increased in GM -CSF and PSK treated 
mice per FACS analysis.  The expression of  activation markers, CD80, CD86, MHCII, and CD40 were 
also up- regulated in DC isolated from dLNs from PSK treated animals (Fig. 4B).  The number of ova 
antigen -specific T cells, as evaluated in an IFN -γ ELISPOT assay was also significantly increased in mic e 
that received PSK as adjuvant (Fig. 4C).  Although PSK was given ID in these experiments, we hypothesize that oral PSK may also enhance the effect of vaccination.  Indeed, a recent publication by 
Tanaka et al has shown that combining peptide vaccine with oral ingestion of Lentinula endodes  mycelia 
extract enhances anti -tumor activity in B16 melanoma- bearing mice.
[27]   SKBR3
12.525 50100020406080100
PSK
PBS
E:T ratio% Specific Lysis
 MDA-MB-231
12.525 50100010203040
PBSPSK
E:T ratio% Specific Lysis
 
Figure 3. PSK enhances trastuzumab -mediated ADCC in lysing of 
SKBR3 and MDA -MB-231 breast cancer cells . PSK or PBS- stimulated 
PBMCs were incubated with 3000 target cells at the indicated E:T ratio. 
Shown are specific lysis at each E:T ratio (mean±sem of triplicate wells).  
A 
PBS GM-CSF PSK    B 
CD80          CD86         MHCII         CD40  C 
7866/135  
08/23/2021  Page 12 of 39 E. PSK may augment vaccine- induced HER2  Th1 immunity in optimally treated metastatic breast 
cancer patients.  Disease relapse in optimally treated HER2+ breast cancer patients who are in complete 
remission suggest the presence of persistent residual microscopic disease not eradicated by systemic 
therapy.  One approach to the eradication of residual subclinical disease in this high- risk population is the 
development of tumor vaccines that target HER2, an immunogenic biologically relevant protein.  Generation of vaccine- induced HER2- specific Type I inflammatory CD4+ T helper immunity (Th1) could 
result in immunolo gic eradication of residual HER2+ tumor cells and potentially prevent disease relapse 
or tumor spread.  Recent evidence indicates that Type I immunity which is associated with the production 
of high levels of IFN -γ enhances cross priming, the primary method by which immunity is generated 
against cancer, at the site of cancer.  Moreover, vaccine induced Th1 immunity has the potential to 
generate epitope spreading, a broadening of the immune response to multiple potential antigens in the 
tumor which may resul t in more efficient kill of residual tumor cells by T cells.  This is particularly important 
as impaired IFN signaling with associated T cell activation defects have been identified in breast cancer and may be a contributing factor to decreased Th1 immune responses to breast cancer vaccines.   
As previously described, our pre- clinical studies have shown that PSK can induce DC maturation and 
secretion of multiple inflammatory cytokines that result in antigen- specific T cell immunity.  Additionally, 
growing evidence indicates that NK cells have mechanisms to efficiently promote maturation and differentiation of DCs toward a Th1 profile.  Specifically, activated DCs in the tumor microenvironment are 
able to take up tumor antigens and migrate to lymph nodes wher e they present their antigens to CD8+ T 
cells and CD4+ T cells which then undergo clonal expansion and are able to infiltrate and destroy tumor 
in an antigen specific manner.  Thus, NK cell activation and resultant IFN -γ production indirectly promote 
adapt ive antitumor T cell responses via activated DCs .
[10]  Similarly, activated DCs induce potent NK cell 
activation.  Together, NK cell and DC activation are key in the priming process of CD8+ and Th1 immunit y 
and development of adaptive immunity.[10]  Recognizing the importance of NK cells and their role in 
stimulating adaptive immunity, recent immunotherapeutic strategies such DC vaccination have focused 
on overcoming impaired Th1 immunity via NK cell activation.  Specifically, Baek et al, showed that DC 
vaccines when given with IL- 12 were able to induce antigen specific immunity; and NK cell activation with 
reduction of inhibitory immunity.[28, 29]  In a follow -up study, Qi et al, demonstrated the ability of DC 
vaccination to promote secretion of Th1 cytokines and significantly increase the number of peripheral 
blood NK cells resulting in tumor specific CD8+ T cell expansion and further differentiation into IFN -γ 
producing effector cells.[29]   
We have previously demonstrated our ability to induce  tumor -specific immunity and also epitope 
spreading in patients with HER2+ breast cancer.[30, 31]  Moreover, epitope spreading was associated with 
potential survival benefit in vaccinated patients .[32]  Key elements to inducing HER2 -specific Th1 immunity 
and epitope spreading  in the majority of HER2+ breast cancer patients were the use of vaccines which 
elicit T h1 immunity given in combination with GM -CSF as adjuvant and our targeted patient population 
(optimally treated patients to state of NED). The addition of immunomodulatory agents such as PSK as 
adjuvants to vaccines may help enhance, sustain, and skew the immunogenicity of antigens toward a Th1 
phenotype via robust NK cell activation, allowing for development of robust and durable vaccine- induced 
Th1 immunity; and potentially prevention of cancer recurrence.  Thus, we propose to investigate if PSK 
when given orally with HER2 peptide based vaccination and trastuzumab can enhance both development 
and magnitude of HER2 vaccine- induced Th1 T cell immunity specifically, epitope spreading.      
 
 
PSK 
 
 
PBS  
 
Figure 4.  PSK as vaccine adjuvant stimulates dendritic cell (DC) activation in vivo  and enhances antigen -specific T cells.  (A) 
Representative pictures of draining lymph nodes (dLN ) from mice vaccinated with ova peptide with PBS, GM -CSF or PSK as 
adjuvant.  (B) The expression of DC activation markers, CD80, CD86, MHCII, and CD40 on DC in dLN from mice received 
ova plus PSK (empty histogram) or PBS control (shaded histogram). (C) The number of spots per well in IFN -γ ELISPOT 
assay evaluating ova -specific T cells using dLN cells from mice received ova plus PBS, GM -CSF or PSK.   
PBS GM-CSF PSK050100150200***
Adjuvant TreatmentSpots per well

7866/135  
08/23/2021  Page 13 of 39 F. PSK may enhance NK cell activation by inhibiting TGF-β production in the tumor 
microenvironment.   TGF- β is a hormonally active polypeptide that inhibits the proliferation of normal 
epithelial cells, and enhances matrix formation and angiogenesis .[33]  Most epithelial cancer cells lose 
responsiveness to TGF- β induced growth inhibition.[34, 35]  TGF-β is secreted by both breast cancer cells 
and the tumor  stroma resulting in increased proliferative capacity, enhanced epithelial -mesenchymal 
transition (EMT); and subsequent increased metastatic potential of tumors .[36, 37]  TGF-β, a potent 
immunosuppressive cytokine acts in the tumor  microenvironment to blunt immune- surveillance via 
multiple mechanisms, including suppression of NK cells.   Additionally, TGF- β is secreted by T regulatory 
cells which function to inhibit the development of adaptive immunity to “self -antigens” such as tumor 
antigens .[38]  Moreover, elevated levels of serum TGF -β have been found to be related with diseas e 
progression and worse prognosis in breast cancer patients .[39]  Recent studies have shown that inhibitory 
molecules in the tumor microenvironment such as TGF- β directly contribute to impairment of NK cell 
phenotype and function.  As described above, Mamessier et al showed that expression of activating NK 
cell receptors were significantly decreased while expression of inhibitory receptors were increased in both 
peripheral blood and breast tumor infiltrating NK cells; and stroma- derived inhibitory f actors particularly 
TGF- β were involved in driving the impaired NK cell activity.  Additionally, increased in situ levels of TGF-
β and regulatory T cell infiltrates correlated with worse NK cell impairment.  Thus, inhibition of the TGF- β 
via immunomodulati on of the tumor microenvironment may restore NK cell activity and result in 
development of robust tumor antigen specific Th1 immunity.  Previous studies have suggested that PSK 
may modulate the biological activity of TGF-β and thus restore robust NK cell activity.  Additionally, 
enhanced NK cell activity with subsequent increased IFN -γ production may result in decreased TGF-β 
production in the tumor microenvironment .  In a more recent study, PSK was shown to inhibit the Smad 
pathway, the major regulator of TGF -β signaling.[40]  Treatment with PSK inhibited the expression of 
several TGF- β pathway target genes and prevented TGF-β1-induced EMT.   
Studies by our group have demonstrated that circulating levels of TGF- β are significantly elevated in sera 
from breast cancer patients compared to controls; and that vaccine- induced HER2 specific IFN -γ T cell 
responses specifically  epitope spreading , were associated with reductions in serum TGF- β levels.  
Additionally, the magnitude of the epitope spreading T cell response  elicited with active vaccination was 
inversely correlated with TGF- β levels assessed in serum throughout immunization.  As described in 
Section 13 (Statistical Considerations) our previous study data suggest a modest decrease in ser um TGF -
β levels among patients who received HER2 ICD vaccination and trastuzumab alone.  Therefore we aim 
to investigate if administration of PSK with HER2 vaccination and trastuzumab results in enhanced 
downregulation of TGF- β expression in the tumor and augmented NK cell induced IFN -γ production; and 
subsequent decrease in detectable circulating serum levels of the cytokine.  
G. Concomitant administration of pertuzamab and trastuzumab has been shown to be safe and 
effective in treating HER2+ metastatic breast cancer (MBC) .  Pertuzumab is a recombinant humanized 
monoclonal antibody that binds to the extracellular dimerization domain II of HER2, and inhibits 
heterodimerization of HER2 with other HER family members, including EGFR, HER3, and HER4.  
Blockade of HER2- HER3 likely represents the most relevant action of .[41]  In pre- clinical models, 
pertuzumab when given in combination with trastuzumab, is associated with a more complete HER2 
blockade.  Additionally, the treatment combination is more effective in HER2- positive tumor xenografts 
than when either antibody is given alone.[41]  Moreover, enhanced efficacy of the combined use of 
trastuzumab and pertuzumab when given with docetaxel has now been demonstrated in several clinical studies in HER2+ MBC.
[42]  
Over the past 2 years, the first -line treatment of HER2+ MBC has been changing and now also includes 
other HER2 targeted agents specifically pertuzumab (perjeta).  In 06/2012, the FDA approved the 
combination of docetaxel and pertuzumab/trastuzumab for t he treatment of HER2+ MBC.  This was based 
on data from the CLEOPATRA study, a large Phase III trial enrolling 808 patients which showed the 
combination of docetaxel + pertuzumab/trastuzumab improved progression free survival (PFS) by 6 
months compared to docetaxel + placebo/trastuzumab.[43]  Given the PFS benefit, oncologists started 
using the triple regimen more readily.  As a result, HER2+ MBC patients started receiving indefinite 
concomitant pertuzamab and trastuzumab as maintenance therapy once docetaxel was stopped.  More 
recently, final results from CLEOPATRA (reported 02/2014) showed that first -line treatment with docetaxel 
+ pertuzumab/trastuzumab in patients with HER2+ MBC significantly improved overall survival (O S) when 
7866/135  
08/23/2021  Page 14 of 39 compared to docetaxel + placebo/trastuzumab.  Median OS was 56.5 months (pertuzumab arm) vs 40.8 
months (placebo arm) with difference of 15.7 months.   
Extensive cardiac surveillance was conducted in CLEOPATRA and treatment with docetaxel + 
pertuzumab/trastuzumab did not increase the rate of left -ventricular systolic dysfunction (LVSD) when 
compared to docetaxel + placebo/trastuzumab.  Specifically, the incidence of LVSD (all grades) was 8.6% in placebo arm vs 5.4% in pertuzumab arm.  Additionally, the incidence of symptomatic LVSD was 1.8% 
in placebo arm vs 1.2% in pertuzumab arm.  Lastly, incidence of LVEF decline to <50% and by ≥10% 
points from baseline was 7.4% in placebo arm vs 4.6% in pertuzumab arm; and LVEF recovery to ≥50% 
was 89.3% in placebo arm vs 88.9% in the pertuzumab arm.  Altogether, no increased cardiotoxicity was 
observed in patients receiving concomitant pertuzumab and trastuzumab with docetaxel when compared 
to concomitant placebo and trastuzumab with docetaxel.  Given the signifi cant OS benefit, and the 
acceptable toxicity data, it has been recommended that the new standard of care for first -line treatment 
of HER2+ MBC include docetaxel + pertuzumab/trastuzumab.   
3. Study Rationale   
The proposed oral dose of PSK (3000 mg/day) in this study has been demonstrated to be safe with and 
without chemotherapy in large randomized breast cancer studies .[44, 45]  In a review of PSK us e and 
adverse events (AEs), 114 ( 1%) AEs were reported from a total of 11,300 individuals who used PSK alone 
or with other medical treatments (Table 1).  Principal AEs were diarrhea (0.25%), nausea (0.24%), vomiting (0.15%), and anorexia (0.15%).  These data are taken from the Japanese Mi nistry of Health and 
Welfare and are in the PSK Package Insert.  Severe PSK- related AEs have not been reported since 
clinical trials began in Japan in the 1970s  thus, PSK appears to be extremely well tolerated.   
Table 1.  Adverse Event Summary for PSK Dos e (3g/day) Based on 11,300 Individuals  
Symptomatic  Diarrhea (0.25%)  
Nausea (0.24%)  
Vomiting (0.15%)  
Anorexia (0.15%)  
Hives (0.1 %) 
Stomach discomfort (0.1 %) 
Hematologic  None  
Combination immunotherapy with HER2 -directed immunotherapy  has also been shown to be both safe 
and immunogenic in our previous studies.  However, the safety of PSK when added to HER2- directed 
immunotherapy is less well known and warrants further investigation.  This study will allow us to better 
define the safety and immunomodulatory effects of this regimen on the tumor microenvironment and 
systemic immunity.   
4. Objectives 
A. Primary objectives:  
1. To evaluate the safety of PSK when given with HER2 -directed immunotherapy . 
B. Secondary objectives:  
1. To evaluate the effect of PSK on NK cell functional activity when given with HER2 -directed 
immunotherapy . 
C. Tertiary objectives:  
1. To investigate the effect of PSK when given with HER2 -directed immunotherapy  on: 
a. Serum of pro -inflammator y cytokine and/or chemokines.  
b. Intermolecular epitope spreading.  
c. Serum TGF -β levels.  
d. Progression free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS).  
 
 
 
5. Experimental Agent Preparation  
A. HER2 ICD peptide- based vaccine  
7866/135  
08/23/2021  Page 15 of 39 The s ynthetic HER2 peptides to be used in the vaccine (Table 2 ) are 15 amino acids in length with an 
amino acid sequence identical to the normal HER2 sequence.  This HER2 vaccine has been evaluated in 
a previous study (see Background) and is covered by BB IND 6524 (Sponsor: Mary L Disis, M.D.).   
1. Peptide synthesis and characterization:  
The peptides are manufactured by Multiple Peptide Systems, San Diego, CA. using standard solid 
phase synthesis techniques employing Boc  chemistry.  Amino acids are analyzed by TLC and 
polarimetry prior to use.  The peptides are cleaved from the solid support using anhydrous hydrogen fluoride and conventional techniques.  Each peptide is purified by HPLC using a Waters Delta- prep 
system wi th a gradient of acetonitrile (containing 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid) in water (also containing 
0.1% trifluoroacetic acid).  The peptides are lyophilized to dryness before being passed over an anion exchange column to exchange the trifluoroacetate for aceta te.  GMP procedures are followed for the 
manufacture of these sequences.  After formulation is complete,  the peptides are characterized by 
mass spectrometry to confirm their identity, by HPLC for purity using two different elution buffers, and by amino aci d analysis for identity and peptide content.  The water content of each peptide was 
determined by the Karl Fischer procedure and the data obtained used to verify the mass balance of the peptides.  
These peptides are vialed as the HER2 ICD by the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, 
Biologics Product Facility ( a GMP facility ). 
2. Peptide formulation and stability : 
Prior to formulation, the solubility of each peptide in 10 mM sodium acetate buffer (pH 4.0) is 
determined.  T hree peptides were  made up in a 10 mM sodium acetate buffer (pH 4.0).   The stability 
of each individual peptide in the acetate buffer, as well as the peptide mixtures, is monitored by HPLC and mass spectrometry.  The dissolved peptides are stored at - 20 ± 5˚C prior to use.  Microbial and 
sterility testing are conducted to ensure safety.   The peptide formulation is labeled to accurately reflect 
the product identity, concentration, lot number and fill date.  These labels are attached to vials immediately post -fill.
 
B.  GM -CSF 
Recombinant hum an GM -CSF (rhuGM -CSF; Sargramostatin, LEUKINE) will be used as adjuvant admixed 
with HER2 vaccine, obtained by commercial suppliers  and stored at their specifications .  GM -CSF is a 
growth factor that supports the survival, clonal expansion, and differentiation of hematopoietic progenitor cells including dendritic APCs.  In general, the use of GM -CSF is associated with little toxicity ; and rhuGM -
CSF, when given IV or subcutaneously  is well tolerated at doses ranging from 50 -500 mcg/m
2/day.  
Severe toxicity is extremely rare in patients treated with rhuGM -CSF.  For the current study, rhuGM -CSF 
will be used at a total injection dose of 100 mcg.  
Administration of rhuGM -CSF may aggravate fluid retention in patients with pre- existent edema , capillary 
leak syndrome, or pleural or pericardial effusions.  In some patients with pre- existing renal or hepatic 
dysfunction, elevation of the serum creatinine or bilirubin and hepatic enzymes has occurred during 
rhuGM -CSF administration.  Dose reducti on or interruption of rhuGM -CSF administration has resulted in 
a decrease to pretreatment values.  Occasional transient and reversible supraventricular arrhythmia has 
been reported in uncontrolled studies, particularly in patients with a previous history o f cardiac arrhythmia.  
Stimulation of marrow precursors with rhuGM -CSF may result in a rapid rise in white blood cell count.  If 
rhuGM -CSF is being used for the purpose of hematopoietic reconstitution, dosing should be stopped if the 
ANC exceeds 20,000/cm3.  The dose being used in this study should not affect ANC levels.  RhuGM -CSF 
may stimulate the growth of myeloid malignancies; therefore caution must be exercised in its use in these 
malignancies or myelodysplastic syndromes.  RhuGM -CSF is a sterile, whit e, preservative- free lyophilized 
powder in 250 mcg vials.  Reconstituted rhuGM -CSF will be admixed and administered with the HER2 
vaccine.  
C.  Vaccine Dose Compounding and Dispensing Table 2.  HER2 ICD peptides  
HER2 ICD Vaccine  Sequence  
p776 -790 GVGSPYVSRLLGICL  
p927 -941 PAREIPDLLEKGERL  
p1166 -1180  TLERPKTLSPGKNGV  
7866/135  
08/23/2021  Page 16 of 39 The HER2 ICD Vaccine is supplied in single -use vials as a sterile, frozen solution.  Each single- use 1.1 
ml vial contains equal volumes of ICD peptides, p776- 790, p927- 941, p1166- 1180 (625 mcg of each 
peptide per ml ) for a final concentration of 1.9 mg/ml total ICD peptide mix.  The ICD va ccine  will be 
supplied as frozen vials  and each vial  will carry a label bearing the drug identification and conditions for 
storage. The University of Washington Investigational Drug Pharmacy (UW IDS) will prepare and dispense 
the drug for administration per their standard operating procedure as follows :  
1. Reconstitute rhuGMCSF 250mcg with 0.5ml sterile preservative free water  and add rhuGMCSF 
125mcg/0.25ml to a sterile empty 2ml vial . 
2. Thaw HER2 ICD Vaccine 1.9mg/ml and w ithdraw 1 ml and add to vial containing the rhuGMCSF.   
Total volume in vial is 1.25ml .  Rotate vial gently to mix.  
3. Total dose is H ER2 ICD 1500mcg and GMCSF 100mcg in 0.99ml.  Divide dose into 3 syringes, 
containing 0.33ml each for intradermal injection.  
D. PSK Product and Placebo  
This PSK and Placebo  characterization and storage are  covered by BB IND 114546  (Sponsor: Leanna 
Standish, PhD, ND). The PSK® and Placebo are to be stored at room temperature (59ºF -  86ºF).  
 
1. Description and Composition of PSK® Clinical Drug Product  
The PSK® clinical drug product is a granular powder, light tan to dark brown in color, which is 
packaged in unit  dose aluminum pouches (Table 3) by First Priority in Ferndale, WA .  There are no 
excipients, other botanical substances, synthetic or highly purified drugs, biotechnology -derived 
drugs, or other naturally derived drugs in the drug product.  Once reconstituted with water , a clear to 
slightly turbid brownish solution is obtained for oral administration.   
 
2. Description and Composition of Placebo : 
The placebo is a granular powder, light tan to dark brown but mottled with white in color, which is packaged in unit dose aluminum pouches  by First Priority in Ferndale, WA .  There are no  botanical 
substances, synthetic or highly purified drugs, biotechnology -derived drugs, or other naturally derived 
drugs in the drug product (Table 4).  Once reconstituted with water , a clear to slightly turbid brownish 
solution is obtained for oral administration.  
 
3. Description and Composition of Container Closure System : 
The primary container closure system for PSK
® clinical drug product and placebo is a laminated 
aluminum pouch.  The aluminum pouch is composed of components that are commonly used in the pharmaceutical industry for solid, oral dosage form products.  The container closure system is selected 
based on c omparable specifications to that used for the marketed drug product.  
4. Description and Composition of Dosage Preparation Kit :   
A shaker cup/lid is provided to facilitate preparation of the oral dosage solution.   Briefly, the PSK
® 
clinical drug product or placebo is emptied into the shaker cup, which has already been filled with 
approximately 4-8 oz. of warm water .  The lid is then applied to seal the cup and shaken vigorously to 
dissolve the powder.   The liquid preparation is to be consumed within 15 minutes.   After the initial Table 3. Quantitative Composition of the PSK® Clinical Drug Product in Each Unit Dose Pouch  
Component  Source  Amount  Function  
PSK® Bulk Drug Product  Kureha  1.5 g  Active Ingredient  Table 4.  Description and Composition of Placebo  
Component  Source  Amount  Function  
Mannogem®™ 2080, 
Granular Mannitol, USP  SPI Pharma (Wilmington, DE)  1.2 g  Bulking Agent  
Caramel Color 643a D. D. Williamson & Co., Inc. 
(Louisville, KY)  0.3 g  Colorant  
aClass  III caramel color used in sauces, gravy, beer, baking, other foods.  
7866/135  
08/23/2021  Page 17 of 39 preparation is consumed, additional warm  water is added, shaken and consumed to rinse the cup and 
ensure the entire dose has been taken.  
E. Experimental Agent  Accountability  
The HER2 vaccine, GM-CSF and PSK will be managed by the UW IDS.  UW IDS will be responsible for 
study drug disposition (drug receipt, dispensing, transfer or return).   Once IDS receives notification of the 
subject  visit they will begin thawing the vaccine and prepare the appropriate number of syringes ready for 
injection as described in Section 5. C.  UW IDS  will deliver the HER2 vaccine, PSK and/or the placebo to 
the Clinical Research Center , where patients  will be  seen .  The disposal of clinical trial materials that are 
in UW IDS will be incinerated under a state contract through an EPA licensed facility.   Unused PSK 
pouches  will be destroyed.  
As part of our Data Safety Monitoring Plan (DSMP) (see Appendix C) an independent monitor will be 
assigned by the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center Clinical Trials Support Office to monitor  our 
study twice per year , which includes a review of the UW IDS dispensing logs for the vaccine and PSK.   
6. Subject Selection  
A. Inclusion criteria  
1. Patients with stage IV HER2+ breast cancer treated to:  
a. No evidence of disease  (NED) , or  
b. Stable bone only disease after definitive therapy.  
2. HER2 overexpression by IHC of 2+ or 3+ in the primary tumor or metastasis; or documented gene 
amplification by FISH analysis.  IHC ≤ 2+ must have HER2 gene amplification documented by FISH.  
3. Patients  must continue HER2 -targeted monoclonal antibody  therapy  dosing  per standard of care  
through the entire study period (one year).  
a. HER2 -targeted monoclonal antibody  therapy is defined as either trastuzumab monotherapy, or 
trastuzumab and pertuzumab combination therapy administered per standard of care.  
4. Patients must be at least 21 days post cytotoxic chemotherapy prior to enrollment.  
5. Patients must be at least 28 days post immunosuppressants prior to enrollment . 
6. Patients must be at least 28 days from use of any mushroom supplements (examples: turkey tail,  
reishi, maitake, shiitake,) and agree to withhold them for the entire study period (one year).  
7. Patients on bisphospho nates and/or endocrine therapy are eligible.  
8. Patients who are having sex that could lead to pregnancy must agree to contraceptive use during the 
entire study period.  
9. Patients must have Zubrod Performance Status Score of ≤ 2 (Appendix A).  
10. Patients must have recovered from major infections and/or surgical procedures, and in the opinion of 
the investigator, not have significant active concu rrent medical illnesses precluding study treatment.  
11. Laboratory values must be as follows and p erformed within 30 days of enrollment:  
a. WBC ≥ 3000/mm3 
b. Hgb ≥ 10 g/dl  
c. Serum creatinine ≤ 2.0 mg/dl or creatinine clearance > 60 ml/min 
d. Total bilirubin  ≤ 1.5 mg/dl  
e. SGOT ≤ 2.5 times the upper limit of normal  
12. Patients must be at least 18 years of age  
13. Patients must have adequate cardiac function as demonstrated by normal left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) ≥ the lower limit of normal for the facility on MUGA scan  or echocardiogram (ECHO) 
within 3 months of enrollment.  
 
B. Exclusion criteria  
1. Patients with any of the following cardiac conditions:  
a. Restrictive cardiomyopathy  
7866/135  
08/23/2021  Page 18 of 39 b. Unstable angina within 6 months prior to enrollment  
c. New York Heart Association functional class III -IV heart failure  
d. Symptomatic pericardial effusion.  
2. Patients with any contraindication to receiving rhuGM -CSF based products.  
3. Patients with any clinically significant autoimmune disease requiring active treatment.  
4. Patients receiving any concurrent  immunosuppressants . 
5. Patients who are pregnant or breast -feeding.  
6. Patients who are simultaneously enrolled in other treatment studies . 
7. Patients who have received a previous HER2 breast cancer vaccine . 
8. Known hypersensitivity reaction to mushroom products . 
Subjects must meet all of the listed criteria in order to be eligible for study.  
7. Experimental Design  
A. Study design 
This will be a phase I/II double- blind randomized two-arm clinical trial designed to examine the safety and 
immune effects of PSK when given as combination immunotherapy with a HER2 ICD peptide vaccine in 
patients with Stage IV  HER2+ breast cancer  receiving HER2 -targeted monoclonal antibody  therapy .  
Eligible patients will be enrolled and randomly assigned in equal numbers to one of two treatment arms 
(15 patients per arm)  shown below.  However, s tagger enrollment of 2 weeks will occur for the first 2 
patients in each arm .  
Arm 1 :  
HER2 ICD vaccine + HER2 -targeted monoclonal antibody therapy * + Placebo: Patients will 
receive HER2 ICD peptide vaccine administered concomitantly with HER2 -targeted monoclonal 
antibody  therapy  and placebo product.  
Arm 2 :  
HER2 ICD vaccine + HER2 -targeted monoclonal antibody therapy * + PSK : Patients will receive 
HER2 ICD pept ide vaccine administered concomitantly with HER2 -targeted monoclonal antibody  
therapy  and PSK.  
*Trastuzumab (or trastuzumab and pertuzumab) administered per standard of care by patient’s primary 
oncologist .  
All study patients will receive the HER2 ICD vaccine administered monthly for a total of 3 vaccines in 
addition to HER2 -targeted monoclonal antibody  therapy  (administered per standard dosing guidelines).  
Additionally, patients randomized to Arm 1 will receive continuous placebo product given orally and 
patients randomized to Arm 2 will receive continuous PSK given orally at 3000 mg/day (1500 mg twice 
daily before meals).  Both the placebo product in Arm 1 and PSK in Arm 2 will be started on the day of the 
first HER2 vaccine and continued for a total of 4 months.  All patients will be followed for immune response 
at designated timepoints as shown in the patient treatment schema below.  
Patient Treatment Schema  
 

7866/135  
08/23/2021  Page 19 of 39 B. Sample size  
The study will accrue a maximum of 30 subjects : 15 subjects per arm  as described in Section 13 
(Statistical Considerations ). 
C. Outcome measures  
1. Primary Endpoints : 
a. Evaluation of safety of PSK when administered with HER2 -directed immunotherapy .  Evaluation 
of safety and systemic toxicity includes physical examination and clinical labs performed at 
baseline, before each vaccination, and 1 month after the 3rd vaccine.  Toxicity grading will be 
evaluated per CTEP CTCAE 4.0.  Type and grade of toxicit ies noted during treatment will be 
summarized.  Additionally, stopping rules for accrual to the study will become operational if there 
is sufficient evidence of excessive toxicity as described in Section 12.    
2. Secondary Endpoints : 
a. Evaluation of the effect  of PSK on NK cell functional activit y.  PBMC will be obtained and 
cryopreserved at baseline (prior to start of PSK) and then at  4, 8, and 16 weeks .  PBMC will 
subsequently be thawed and used to determine the effect of PSK on NK cell functional activity 
specifically, induction of IFN -γ production and CD107a expression in NK cells, via flow cytometr y.  
Augmentation of NK cell activity is defined by a 2- fold increase in NK cell IFN -γ production and 
CD107a expression from baseline and after 4 weeks of oral adm inistration of PSK.   
3. Tertiary Endpoints : 
a. Assessment of the effect of PSK on pro-inflammatory serum cytokine and/or chemokines when 
given with HER2 -directed immunotherapy .  Serial blood draws will be done at baseline before the 
initial dose of PSK (time 0)  and 30 min, 4 hours, and 24 hours after the initial dose of PSK to 
assess serum cytokines/chemokines (i.e., IL- 6, IFN -γ, TNF -α) via Luminex analysis.  Serum 
cytokine/chemokine levels at different timepoints post -PSK will be compared to base -line.  Serum 
will be cryopreserved and subsequently be thawed at time of analysis.  
b. Assessment of the effect of PSK on intermolecular epitope spreading when given with HER2 -
directed immunotherapy .  PBMC will be obtained and cryopreserved prior to the 1st vaccine and 
at 1 and 9 months after the 3rd vaccine (months 4 and 12)  by IFN -γ ELISPOT .  PBMC will 
subsequently be thawed and used  to determine T cell precursor frequency specific for tumor 
antigens, HER2, IGFBP -2, TOPO -IIα, p53, and PRAME.  A positive immune response wil l be 
defined as a T cell precursor frequency > 1:20,000 antigen- specific PBMCs.  Development of a 
positive immune response after treatment begins will constitute augmentation in patients without 
pre-existent immune responses.  In patients with pre -existent immune response to the tumor 
antigens, augmentation is defined as a final response to tumor antigen >2 times the baseline level.  Epitope spreading will be defined as the generation of significant immunity to the HER2 ECD as 
the patients will receiv e an IC D vaccine.   
c. Assessment of the effect of PSK on serum TGF -β levels when given with HER2 -directed 
immunotherapy .  Serum TGF- β levels will be assessed via ELISA prior to the 1st vaccine 
(baseline), and 1, and 9  months after the 3rd vaccine (months 4 and 12) to determine the incidence 
and magnitude of reduction of serum TGF -β levels pre - and post -combination immunotherapy.  A 
decrease in serum TGF -β levels will be defined as a reduction of ≥  25% from baseline value to 
post-vaccination values.   Serum will be cr yopreserved and subsequently be thawed at time of 
analysis.   
d. Evaluation of PFS and OS .  PFS and OS will be followed and compared  between study arms.  This 
study will not enroll sufficient numbers of subjects to give statistical power to this endpoint however, 
large differences if observed between the treatment groups ( PSK + HER2 -directed immunotherapy  
versus Placebo + HER2 -directed immunotherapy ) will be noted and described.  PFS and OS will 
7866/135  
08/23/2021  Page 20 of 39 be defined as time from first vaccine t o time of first event.   While on study, patients will be followed 
for disease progression by their primary oncologist per  conventional practice standards.   
Information on patient disease status will be obtained biannually from their primary oncologist for 
up to 3 years  after enrollment .    
8. Plan of Treatment  - Arms 1 and 2  
The following section outlines the patient evaluation and treatment schedule prior to and during study.  
A. Pre Screen  
Potential subjects will be screened for eligibility by a study team  member.   Standard- of-care procedures, 
done prior to signing consent , can be used for  eligibility  assessment as long as they are conducted within 
required windows (Section 6).   During this evaluation a pathology report will be obtained to ensure a 
patient’s tumor is HER2 positive as described in Section 6.  
B.  Initial evaluation (may be performed up to 2 weeks prior to initial vaccine visit)  
1. Sign consent form before initiating  any study procedures  and eligibility is confirmed.  
2. The clinical trial procedures wi ll occur at the UW CRC.  Patients , who meet the inclusion/exclusion 
criteria after consent, will be assigned a unique study numbers and randomized to either PSK or 
placebo at time of study visit #1 – Day 1.  Following an algorithm developed by the study statistician, 
a randomization table will be generated and provided to an un -blinded IDS pharmacist .  Patients, 
clinicians, and study staff will be blinded to treatment assignment.  
a. Arm 1 : Patients will be a ssign ed to the placebo agent  
b. Arm 2 : Patients will be  assigned to PSK 
3. Medical history and complete physical examination which includes weight, vital signs, symptom 
assessment , Zubrod scoring, medication/supplement changes  (Appendix A).   
4. Urine pregnancy testing will be performed on female patients  of childbearing potential .  If a patient is 
found to be pregnant, she will not be able to participate in the study.  
5. A tetanus -diphtheria vaccine (Td) will be administered as a positive control if patient has not received Td 
immunization within the last six months.  Patients who have experienced any of the following described under a. and b. below will not receive the Td  vaccine but will continue all other study related treatment and 
procedures.  
• Patients that have ever had a life- threatening allergic reaction after a dose of any tetanus or 
diphtheria containing vaccine, OR have had a severe allergy to any part of a tetanus or diphtheria 
vaccine.  
• Patients with epilepsy or another nervous system problem, severe pain or swelling after any vaccine 
containing diphtheria or tetanus, or ever had Guillain Barré Syndrome (GBS).  
6. Clinical labs (baseline):  
a. Complete blood count which includes a differential and platelet count  
b. Comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) which includes electrolytes, creatinine, blood urea 
nitrogen (BUN) , AST, ALT, alkaline phosphatase, and total bilirubin.  
7. Research blood includes:  
a. 200 mls for immunologi c monitoring , including, cytokine k inetics and an assessment of single 
polymorphisms and T cell function that may contribute to PSK responsiveness .  
8. The research staff will instruct each patient on the mixing and administration of study drug using “dummy” pouches .  The study  staff will  ensure that they do not witness the preparation of the tea in 
order to preserve the  study blind.  
9. Immediately after the 1
st vaccine, patients will take a total dose of PSK 3000 mg/placebo while in the 
UW CRC.  
a. 30 minutes  (+15 min) after the placebo/ PSK dose, 10 mls of blood will be drawn for cytokine 
kinetics  
b. 4 hours (+/-15 min), after their first dose of  placebo/ PSK dose, 10 mls  blood will be drawn for 
cytokine kinetics  
7866/135  
08/23/2021  Page 21 of 39 10. Day 2  
a. 24 hours (+/-30 min) after  finishing their first dose of placebo /PSK, patients will return to the UW 
CRC for an additional 10 ml s blood draw for cytokine kinetics  
b. After this blood draw, patients will start taking the placebo/ PSK at 1500 mg orally BID (total daily 
dose = 3000 mg) 
c. Patients will be given a sufficient amount of placebo/ PSK which will equal a 30 day supply + 7 
additional days as needed, in order to provide continuous dosing until the subsequent study visit  
d. Patients will be given a monthly tea diary  
C. Monthly immuniza tions  
1. The following procedures and tests will be done prior to each vaccination:  
a. Physical examination which includes weight, vital signs, symptom/toxicity assessment  and 
medication/supplement changes.  
b. Urine pregnancy test in patients capable of child beari ng (patients found to be pregnant will not 
receive further study treatment ). 
c. Clinical labs: CBC and CMP .   
d. Research blood: 40  mls for immunologic monitoring 
2. Monthly vaccines will be administered intradermally (i.d.) on the arm or leg for 3 months.  
a. Patients  with axillary lymph node dissection (ALND) will have vaccine administered to the 
contralateral arm.  Patients with bilateral ALND will have vaccine administered in the thigh.  As 
much as possible each vaccine dose will be given within the same draining ly mph node site.  
b. Vaccines may be scheduled 28 +  7 days apart . 
3. Post-vaccination monitoring: Patients will be observed on the UW CRC for minimum of 60 minutes 
and vital signs will be documented.  
4. Arm 1: Patients will be given a 1- month supply + 7 additional day s of placebo agent and a monthly tea 
diary.  
5. Arm 2: Patients will be given a 1- month supply + 7 additional days of PSK (1500 mg twice daily) and 
a monthly tea diary.  
6. Collect any unused PSK pouches  for destruction.  
Should patients show evidence of disease progression, they will be removed from the study if their 
treatment conflicts with the eligibility criteria (e.g., concurrent administration of chemotherapy, immune 
modulators, steroids, etc.).  
D. Evaluation after the final vaccine  
1. One month after the final vaccination (approximately month 4)  patients will undergo : 
a. A physical examination w hich i ncludes weight, vital signs, symptom/toxicity assessment  and 
medication/supplement changes.   
b. Clinical labs : CBC and CMP  
c. Research blood draw of 200 mls for immunologic monitoring 
d. Arm 1:  Patients will be given a 1 -month supply of placebo agent and a monthly tea diary.  
e. Arm 2:  Patients will be given a 1- month supply of PSK (1500 mg twice daily) and a monthly tea 
diary.  
2. Two months after last vaccine (approxi mately month 5) patients will undergo research blood draw of 
40 mls for immunologic monitoring . 
3. Three months after last vaccine (approximately month 6) toxicity information will be collected from the 
patient’s primary oncologist which will include recent notes  and labs. Recent i maging reports may be 
collected if available.  
4. Nine months after the last vaccine (approximately month 12)  patients will undergo  research blood 
draw of 200 mls for immunologic monitoring.  
7866/135  
08/23/2021  Page 22 of 39 5. Information on patient’s disease status will be obtained biannually from their primary oncologist  for up 
to 3 years  from enrollment . 
E.  Management of Potential Study Risks 
Although patients have a small chance of experiencing an allergic -type reaction to the vaccine, if a reaction 
were to happen, it would usually occur within one hour of the vaccination.  For this reason, all patients will 
undergo post-vaccination monitoring  in the UW CRC which will include observation and monitoring of vital 
signs for a minimum of 60 minutes.  
Patients must have a baseline LVEF measured by MUGA or ECHO equal to or greater than the lower limit 
of normal for the facility  within three months of  enrollment .  Subsequent LVEF monitoring while on HER2 -
targeted monoclonal antibody therapy  will be done per standard of care by patient’s oncologist or as 
clinically indicated.  
9. Patient Withdrawal from Study 
The Principal Investigator/Study Physician may deem it appropriate to remove a patient from study participation for toxicity (as described in Section 12), recurrent disease, or other reasons.   
Patients who are no longer being vaccinated or provided PSK/Pl acebo may continue to be followed for 
disease status  and/or research blood may be requested to follow immunity.  Whether it was the decision 
of the patient or the Principal Investigator/Study Physician to withdraw participation from the study, it will 
be reported in the annual renewal report to all appropriate agencies.  We will report the reason for the 
withdrawal and whether it was related to the study.  
Patients who have persistent grade 3 or 4 toxicity at time of withdrawal from study treatment will cont inue 
to be followed until toxicity resolves or returns to baseline for that patient.  
Patients may decide to withdraw from the study at any time and for any reason, at which time all research-
related treatment procedures (vaccine and/or PSK/Placebo) will then cease.   
10. Evaluation and Management of Toxicity  
Toxicity grading will be evaluated according to the CTEP CTCAE v. 4.0 common terminology and the 
DSMP (Appendix C).  DLT will be  defined as Grade 2 autoimmune reactions and any incidence of Grade  
3 or 4 adverse events (AEs) other than those listed in Table 5.  
For grade 2 treatment -related reactions, patients will be treated with acetaminophen and/or 
diphenhydramine or as clinically indicated per standard of care; and will not receive further vaccinations 
or PSK.  
Table 5: Expected and Allowable Grade 3 Toxicities (CTCAE v4.0) that are not DLT  
Category  Toxicity/Adverse Event  Allowable Duration  
General disorders and administration  Flu-like symptoms  1 week  
Musculoskeletal and connective tissue 
disorders  Arthralgia  1 week  
Myalgia  1 week  
Investigations  Lymphocyte count decreased  2 week  
Hemoglobin decrease  2 week  
White blood cells decreased  2 week  
 
Rationale for allowing the above Grade 3 toxicity is based on the following.  Our proposed target 
population (patients with Stage 4 breast cancer who are NED or have stable bone disease) most likely 
have received ≥2 regimens of chemotherapy which can resul t in long -lasting grade 1 and 2 hematologic 
abnormalities specifically decreased WBC, lymphocyte counts and hemoglobin which are clinically insignificant (e.g., do not place patient at significant increased risk and/or require medical intervention).  
We ha ve extensive experience in vaccinating this patient population and it is expected that despite their 
Grade 1 and 2 hematologic abnormalities, these patients will have fairly normal and functional bone 
marrow reserve and not be at increased risk of harm due  to transient perturbations in the immune system.  
Additionally, we have now conducted 3 HER2 vaccine studies in over 100 optimally treated patients with stage 4 NED and/or stable bone disease on trastuzumab monotherapy  and have observed only transient 
Grade 3 hematologic toxicity that did not require medical intervention.  While the incidence of transient 
7866/135  
08/23/2021  Page 23 of 39 Grade 3 hematologic toxicity in our previous vaccine studies is low (<2%) it can occur due to patients 
having low blood counts at baseline.  The combinat ion of trastuzumab and pertuzumab as maintenance 
therapy has also been extensively studied and found to have an acceptable toxicity profile with no 
increased cardiotoxicity.[43]  Additionally, all patients in our proposed target population will be on either 
trastuzumab or combination trastuzumab/pertuzumab; and the majority will be on endocrine and/or 
bisphosphonate therapy.  All of these therapies independent of vaccination and PSK can incur flu- like 
symptoms, myalgias and arthralgias and enhance similar and expected symptoms related to vaccination.  
Lastly, PSK has not been associat ed with grade 3 flu -like symptoms, arthralgias, myalgias or hematologic 
toxicity (lymphopenia, anemia, or leukopenia) . 
We will monitor patients closely for the above Grade 3 toxicities and should they occur will only be allowed 
for a limited duration of 1- 2 weeks.  If any of these Grade 3 toxicities exceed the 1 -2 week period, they 
will constitute DLT and patient would not receive further treatment.  
If there is a Serious Adverse Event (Appendix C; Section C), that in the opinion of the Independent Medical Monitor, may constitute increased risk to other study participants (i.e. , risk section of consent may need 
to be amended ), un-blinding of treatment assignment for an individual subject may be requested by the 
medical monitor.   The study statistician would provide the code if requested directly by the medical 
monitor.  The study team would remain blinded and would follow the recommendations of the Independent 
Medical Monitor to amend the necessary study documents. 
 
11. Dose Modifications  
There will not be any modifications to the vaccine , PSK or placebo doses .  There may be allowances for 
the timing of the administration of vaccine to accommodate patient schedules or special circumstances .  
Subsequent v accinations will be scheduled 28  + 7 days from when the previous vaccine was actually 
administered, not when it should have been administered.  
12. Accrual and Criteria for Premature Study Termination   
Combination immunotherapy with HER2 -directed immunotherapy  has been shown to be both safe and 
immunogenic.  Additionally, the proposed oral dose of PSK (3000 mg/day) has been demonstrated to be safe with and without chemotherapy in large randomized breast cancer studies  with the most common  
and expected AEs being diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, anorexia, hives and stomach discomfort (incidence 
of all listed AEs was <1%) .
[44, 45]  Although we expect minimal toxicity from HER2 vaccination administered 
concomi tantly with PSK, criteria for stopping the trial for excessive treatment -related toxicity will be 
instituted  as follows:  
The study will be terminated for safety reasons if there is sufficient evidence to suggest that the true incidence of Grade 3 or higher toxicity exceeds 40%, the true incidence of Grade 4 toxicity exceeds 20%, 
or both.  The toxicity rates (adverse events) will be evaluated after every 5th enrolled patient has become evaluable, and sufficient evidence will be defined as observed rates of toxicity that correspond to 1- sided 
80% confidence int ervals with lower limits greater than 40% (Grade 3 or higher) or 20% (Grade 4).  
Operationally, these limits would be achieved if 4/5, 6/10, or 9/15 patients experienced Grade 3 or higher toxicity, or if 3/5, 4/10, or 5/15 patients experienced Grade 4 toxi city.  Monitoring and reporting of AEs and 
toxicity rates will be done per the DSMP (Appendix C).
 
13. Statistical Considerations 
A. Study statistics  
1. Determination of Sample Size:   
This sample size is chosen to be sufficient for gathering preliminary data on both the sa fety of PSK 
and its efficacy in enhancing NK cell activity when combined with HER2 vaccination and HER2 
monoclonal antibody therapy in this patient population.  Thirty patients will be enrolled and randomized 
in equal numbers to one of 2 arms (15 patients/arm) unless there is excessive toxicity as defined in 
Section 12.  Up to 5 additional patients may be enrolled per arm to replace subjects who fail to receive 
study treatment to meet the target accrual of 30 subjects.  
2. Randomization:  
Eligible subjects will be enrolled and randomly assigned in equal proportions to one of two treatment 
arms, Arms 1  (Placebo)  and 2 (PSK) via a permuted block design.  Following an algorithm developed 
by the study statistician, a randomization table will be generated and provided to IDS pharmacy .  
7866/135  
08/23/2021  Page 24 of 39 Patients , clinicians and study staff  will be blinded to the treatment  assignment.  The dispensing UW 
IDS pharmacy staff will be un- blinded.  
a. Randomization will take place following completion of the screening evaluations and eligibility 
assessment.  
b. Patient information will be entered into the study database and patients will be assigned a unique 
study identification number.  
c. The study staff will notify the dispensing pharmacy to request the patient’s randomization.  
d. Patients will be randomly assigned per the randomization table described above.  
3. Statistical Analysis of Study Endpoints : 
This is a randomized phase I/ II double- blind study designed to examine the safety and immune effects 
of PSK when given as combination HER2 -directed immunotherapy  in patients with advanced HER2+ 
breast cancer.   
a. Evaluation of safety and systemic toxicity among the different treatment arms .  Clinical and /or 
chemical parameters for all study patients will be evaluated for potential toxicity at baseline, before each vaccine, and 1 month after the third vaccine.  Toxicity grading will be evaluated per CTEP 
CTCAE 4.0 and monitoring of  AEs will be done per FDA and NCI guidelines.  The type and grade 
of toxicities noted during treatment will be summarized.  AEs will be tabulated per CTCAE 4.0 
system organ class and descriptive statistics will be used to summarize toxicity profiles for the 
PSK and placebo groups .  Stopping rules based on toxicity are described in Section 12.  
b. Evaluation of the effect of PSK on NK cell functional activity .  Our previous in vitro studies on PSK 
have shown that PSK can enhance NK cell function.   It significantly induced IFN -γ production and 
CD107a expression in NK cells.   After overnight stimulation with 100ug/mL PSK, the percentage 
of NK cells that express CD107a is 1.8+/ -1.3% in control group and 6.1+/ -3.8% in PSK group (n=7, 
p=0.01).   Therefore we chose CD107a expression as  the primary marker of NK cell activation .  
However we do not have direct information on the ability of PSK to activate NK cells after in vivo administration.   Based on a recent Phase 1 clinical trial of Trametes versicolor (PSK) in women 
with breast cancer conducted by Standish et al, NK cell activity increased to approximately 2- fold 
of baseline after 4 weeks of oral administration of PSK.   We hypothesize that oral administration 
of PSK will have a similar effect and augment NK cell activity by 2- fold whi le NK cell activity in the 
placebo group will be unchanged compared to the baseline (pre- treatment) level.  Under these 
assumptions and the assumption that the standard deviation of change in NK cell activity is 1.6, a 
sample size of 15 will provide 91% power (at the 2- sided significance level of .05) to test the null 
hypothesis that the change (post -treatment vs. pre- treatment) in CD107a expression is the same 
in the PSK group as it is in the control group.  These assumptions imply a true effect size of 2/ 1.6 
= 1.25.  
c. Assessment of the association between changes in pro -inflammatory serum cytokine and/or 
chemokines and treatment with PSK .  Serial blood draws will be done at baseline before the initial 
dose of PSK (time 0) and 30 min (+15 min), 4 hours (+/ -15 min), and 24 hours (+/ -30 min) after 
the initial dose of PSK to assess serum cytokines/chemokines (i.e., IL- 6, IFN -γ, and TNF -α) via 
Luminex analysis.  Serum cytokine/chemokine levels at different timepoints post -PSK will be 
compared to baseline levels us ing linear regression or linear mixed models.  A global treatment 
group comparison will be made for all post -baseline measurements, for the rate of change in 
cytokine/chemokine levels, and for the 24 hour timepoint.  
d. Assessment of the association between d evelopment of intermolecular epitope spreading and 
treatment with PSK.   Preliminary data show that HER2 Th1 vaccines given with trastuzumab elicit 
or augment tumor -specific immunity including epitope spreading.  We have identified a panel of 
breast cancer associated antigens that could provide coverage to approximately 61% of all breast 
cancer patients as an immunogenic profile (HER2, IGFBP -2, TOPO -IIα, p53, and PRAME).  We 
will evaluate PBMC from patients pre-  and post -treatment for the development of T cell immunity 
to these antigens by ELISPOT (indicating epitope spreading).   We hypothesize that PSK will boost 
circulating IFN -γ secreting tu mor-specific Th1 CD4+ in treated patients.  The development of a 
positive antigen- specific T cell immune response will be defined as a precursor frequency more 
robust than 1:20,000 antigen -specific PBMCs.  In patients without a pre- existent immune 
7866/135  
08/23/2021  Page 25 of 39 response, the acquisition of a positive immune response after treatment begins will constitute 
augmentation.  In patients with pre- existent immune response to the tumor antigens, augmentation 
will have occurred if the final response to tumor antigen is >2 times the baseline level.  Significant differences in the levels of immunity to HER2 will be compared between groups using a two-tailed 
T test.  Intramolecular epitope spreading will be defined as generation of significant immunity to 
the HER2 ECD as the patients will be receiv ing an ICD vaccine.   
The degree of intermolecular epitope spreading in each arm may be summarized as the proportion 
of the 5 antigens that exhibit T cell augmentation as defined above.  If, on average, 2/5  antigens 
are expected to demonstrat e epitope spreading in Arm 1 (vaccine and HER2 -targeted monoclonal 
antibody therapy alone) and the expected rate is 4/5 in Arm 2 (PSK arm), a generalized linear 
model of binomial proportions with 15 patients per group (two- sided test with α=0.05) will have 
99% power to detect a difference in proportion of antigens that exhibit epitope spreading , and 77% 
power to detect a rate of 4/5 compared to 3/5 .  We will also assess the correlation of reduction in 
TGF- β level with the extent of epitope spreading, where each is quantified as a continuous linear 
variable.  Linear regression will be used to assess this correlation, and all patients (both PSK and 
non-PSK patients) will be used for this analysis.  
e. Assessment of the association between changes in TGF-β levels a nd treatment with PSK.   As 
previously described,  PSK may directly inhibit TGF- β signaling resulting in decreased TGF- β 
production and enhanced NK cell  activity and increased IFN-γ secretion.  Additionally, our previous 
study data demonstrated vaccine- induced HER2 specific IFN -γ T cell responses to be associated 
with modest reductions in serum TGF -β levels.  We hypothesize that addition of PSK to HER2 
vaccination and HER2 -targeted monoclonal antibody therapy  will result in increased NK cell -
induced IFN -γ production;  and a greater decrease from baseline to post -vaccination ser um TGF-
β levels compared to HER 2 vaccination and HER2 -targeted monoclonal antibody therapy  alone.   
In our previous vaccine trial, decrease in ser um TGF- β levels among patients who receive HER2 
ICD vaccination and trastuzumab alone was  modest .  Specifically, the mean decrease in TGF- β 
(pre-vaccine vs. post -vaccine) was 294 pg/ml (10% reduction) with a standard deviation of roughly 
1000 pg/ml in 23 vaccinated patients.  The average pre- vaccine value among these patients was 
just over 2900 pg/ml.  If we assume that the true decrease in TGF-β level among patients who 
receive PSK is 1450 pg/ml (50%), a sample size of 30 provides 89% power to conclude that 
change in TGF- β is different for groups with and without PSK, using two- sided tests with α=0.05.  
Actual power should be greater, since the statistical analysis will use the pre -test TGF-β as a 
covariate in a linear regression model  with transformations performed as needed t o satisfy 
regression assumptions .[46]  Combined analys is of multiple post -baseline immune measurements 
(using generalized estimating equations) may also increase precision.  
f. Evaluation of PFS and OS.   PFS and OS (time of first vaccine t o time of first event) will be 
compared between treatment arm cohorts.  Thi s study was not designed to be sufficiently powered 
for any particular hypothesis testing, since time- to-event analyses generally require larger sample 
sizes than simple two- way comparisons.  However, large differences, if observed between the 
different vaccine treatment groups will be noted and described.  
B. Projected gender and ethnic distribution  
The ethnic and gender distribution chart below (Table 6 ) reflects estimates of race and gender of the 
population to be included in this study.  These estimates are based on the following general statistics of 
the population in Washington State based on recent 2010 US Census data.  The population pool from 
which patients will be drawn is 83.8% Caucasian, 7.0% Asian American, 3.9% African American, 1.8% 
American Indian or Alaska Native and 0.5% Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander.   Although men with 
breast cancer are not excluded from this study, less than 1% of all breast cancers occur in men.    
 
Table 6.  Targeted/Planned Enrollment: Number of Subjects  = 30 
Ethnic Category  Sex/Gender  
Females  Males  Total  
Hispanic or Latino  3 0 3 
7866/135  
08/23/2021  Page 26 of 39 Not Hispanic or Latino  26 1 27 
Ethnic Category: Total of All Subjects *  29 1 30 
Racial Categories   
American Indian/Alaska Native  1 0 1 
Asian  2 0 2 
Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander  0 0 0 
Black or African American  1 0 1 
White  25 1 26 
Racial Categories: Total of All Subjects *  29 1 30 
14. Administrative considerations  
A. Institutional review board 
In accordance with federal regulations, an Institutional Review Board that complies with the regulations in 
21 CFR 56 must review and approve this protocol and the informed consent form prior to initiation of the 
study.  
B. Consent  
The P.I., study physician or their designated physician extender must explain verbally and in writing the 
nature and duration of the study and possible consequences of the treatment.  Patients should also be 
informed that they may withdraw from the study at any time and for any reason without jeopardizing their 
future t reatment.  At the initiation of eligibility screening and prior to enrollment, the investigators or their 
associates will obtain permission from the patient to access medical records for research purposes.   
Additionally, patients will remain blinded until publication of study manuscript.    
C. Reporting adverse events  
Adverse events will be reported using the NCI’s CTEP CTCAE v 4.0.  A copy of the CTCAE v 4.0 can be 
downloaded from the CTEP homepage ( http://ctep.info.nih.gov).  Guidelines for adverse event reporting 
to the FDA and the NCI are described in the DSMP, Appendix C.  
All serious adverse events are communicated to the Principal Investigator, IRB, FDA , NCCAM, CRC, and 
Independent Medical Monitor .  A status report including accrual, adverse events and death information 
will be reviewed by the Principal Investigator and the FHCRC –  Cancer Consortium Protocol Data 
Monitoring Committee (PDMC) annually.  In addition, the study will be monitored by the CTSO according 
to the FH CRC – Cancer Consortium monitoring plan.  
D. Confidentiality of patient records  
All eligible patients will be assigned a unique study ID number that will not contain any personally 
identifying information, such as name, initials, medical record number, social security number, etc.  The 
study ID number will be used on all specimens, research study records and associated documents 
collected in the research record.  To maintain confidentiality, we protect the link between the patients’ 
personal identifying information and study ID number by limiting who ha ve access to the patients’ chart 
documentation.  Only specified clinical research staff has  access to the data, which remains locked at all 
times when not in use.  
All hard copy research records collected on potential and enrolled patients are stored in a locked filing 
cabinet that is  accessed only by approved clinical research staff.  This staff which includes  the Principal 
Investigator, study physician(s), and designated clinical research staff  are the only  ones with access to the 
link between patients’ personal identifying information and their assigned UPN codes.  
Protections and security of electronic clinical data it is being performed by the UW Medicine Information 
Technology (IT) Services.  The UW Medic ine IT security policy is to protect UW Medicine information and 
information systems ; and  ensure compliance with UW  policy , state and federal regulations.   
E. Study Team Roles and Responsibilities  
Dr. Gwin , the Principal Investigator will be responsible for the oversight of the research.  Dr. Gwin  is 
responsible for ensuring that all information and documentation related to the conduct and safety of the 
study is disseminated to the proper agencies in the pr oper timeframe.   Dr. Gwin  will delegate tasks  to 
qualified research staff for this study as needed.  
7866/135  
08/23/2021  Page 27 of 39 Research physicians/physician extenders will be responsible for conducting consent conferences  and 
eligibility determination  at the initial visit .  They will perform monthly assessments prior to vaccination.   In 
addition, they will be available to answer any patient questions.   
Research Nurses/Coordinators will be responsible for initial screening and scheduling patient visits, that 
data is entered into the database in a timely manner, so as to have real time data to review and report any 
safety concerns trends.  They will also be responsible for maintaining regulatory documentation to the various agencies involved with this research and ensure that  all research team members are following the 
protocol and all regulations.   
7866/135  
08/23/2021  Page 28 of 39 15. References  
1. Lee, J.C., K.M. Lee, et al., Elevated TGF -beta1 secretion and down- modulation of NKG2D underlies 
impaired NK cytotoxicity in cancer patients . J Immunol, 2004. 172(12): p. 7335- 40. 
2. Varker, K.A., C.E. Terrell, et al., Impaired natural killer cell lysis in breast cancer patients with high 
levels of psychological stress is associated with altered expression of killer immunoglobin- like 
receptors . J Surg Res, 2007. 139(1): p. 36 -44. 
3. Mamessier, E., A. Sylvain, et al., Human breast cancer cells enhance self tolerance by promoting 
evasion from NK cell antitumor immunity . J Clin Invest, 2011. 121(9): p. 3609- 22. 
4. Roda, J.M., R. Parihar, et al., Cp G-containing oligodeoxynucleotides act through TLR9 to enhance the 
NK cell cytokine response to antibody -coated tumor cells . J Immunol, 2005. 175(3): p. 1619 -27. 
5. Schmidt, K.N., B. Leung, et al., APC -independent activation of NK cells by the Toll -like re ceptor 3 
agonist double- stranded RNA . J Immunol, 2004. 172(1): p. 138 -43. 
6. Friedberg, J.W., J.L. Kelly, et al., Phase II study of a TLR -9 agonist (1018 ISS) with rituximab in patients 
with relapsed or refractory follicular lymphoma . Br J Haematol, 2009. 146(3): p. 282- 91. 
7. Reefman, E., J.G. Kay, et al., Cytokine Secretion Is Distinct from Secretion of Cytotoxic Granules in 
NK Cells . Journal of Immunology, 2010. 184(9): p. 4852- 4862.  
8. Lu, H., Y. Yang, et al., Polysaccharide Krestin Is a Novel TLR2 Agonist that Mediates Inhibition of 
Tumor Growth via Stimulation of CD8 T Cells and NK Cells . Clin Cancer Res, 2011. 17(1): p. 67-
76. 
9. Lu, H., Y. Yang, et al., TLR2 agonist PSK activates human NK cells and enhances the antitumor effect 
of HER2 -targeted monoc lonal antibody therapy . Clin Cancer Res, 2011. 17(21): p. 6742 -53. 
10. Alshaker, H.A. and K.Z. Matalka, IFN -gamma, IL -17 and TGF- beta involvement in shaping the tumor 
microenvironment: The significance of modulating such cytokines in treating malignant sol id 
tumors . Cancer Cell International, 2011. 11.  
11. Iino, Y., T. Yokoe, et al., Immunochemotherapies versus chemotherapy as adjuvant treatment after 
curative resection of operable breast cancer . Anticancer Res, 1995. 15(6B): p. 2907- 11. 
12. Nakazato, H., A . Koike, et al., Efficacy of immunochemotherapy as adjuvant treatment after curative 
resection of gastric cancer. Study Group of Immunochemotherapy with PSK for Gastric Cancer . 
Lancet, 1994. 343(8906): p. 1122 -6. 
13. Oba, K., S. Teramukai, et al., Efficacy  of adjuvant immunochemotherapy with polysaccharide K for 
patients with curative resections of gastric cancer . Cancer Immunol Immunother, 2007. 56(6): p. 
905-11. 
14. Sakamoto, J., S. Morita, et al., Efficacy of adjuvant immunochemotherapy with polysacchari de K for 
patients with curatively resected colorectal cancer: a meta -analysis of centrally randomized 
controlled clinical trials . Cancer Immunol Immunother, 2006. 55(4): p. 404- 11. 
15. Sato, Y., Y. Goto, et al., Cancer Cells Expressing Toll -like Receptors and the Tumor Microenvironment . 
Cancer Microenviron, 2009. 2 Suppl 1: p. 205- 14. 
16. Cooper, M.A., T.A. Fehniger, et al., Human natural killer cells: a unique innate immunoregulatory role 
for the CD56(bright) subset . Blood, 2001. 97(10): p. 3146- 51. 
17. Torkelson, C.J., E. Sweet, et al., Phase 1 Clinical Trial of Trametes versicolor in Women with Breast 
Cancer . ISRN Oncol, 2012. 2012: p. 251632.  
18. Lu, H., Y. Yang, et al., TLR2 agonist PSK activates human NK cells and enhances the antitumor effect 
of HER2 -targeted monoclonal antibody therapy . Clinical cancer research : an official journal of the 
American Association for Cancer Research, 2011. 17(21): p. 6742- 53. 
19. Hudis, C.A., Drug therapy: Trastuzumab - Mechanism of action and use in clinical practice.  New 
England Journal of Medicine, 2007. 357(1): p. 39 -51. 
20. Gianni, L., W. Eiermann, et al., Neoadjuvant chemotherapy with trastuzumab followed by adjuvant 
trastuzumab versus neoadjuvant chemotherapy alone, in patients with HER2- positive locally 
advanced breast cancer (the NOAH trial): a randomised controlled superiority trial with a parallel 
HER2 -negative cohort . Lancet, 2010. 375(9712): p. 377 -84. 
21. Clynes, R.A., T.L. Towers, et al., Inhibitory Fc receptors modulate in vivo cytoxicity against tumor 
targets. Nat Med, 2000. 6(4): p. 443 -6. 
22. Varchetta, S., N. Gibelli, et al., Elements related to heterogeneity of antibody -dependent cell 
cytotoxicity in patients under trastuzumab therapy for primary operable breast cancer 
overexpressing Her2 . Cancer Res, 2007. 67(24): p. 11991 -9. 
7866/135  
08/23/2021  Page 29 of 39 23. Arnould, L., M. Gelly, et al., Trastuzumab- based treatment of HER2- positive breast cancer: an 
antibody -dependent cellular cytotoxicity mechanism? Br J Cancer, 2006. 94(2): p. 259 -67. 
24. Musolino, A., N. Naldi, et  al., Immunoglobulin G fragment C receptor polymorphisms and clinical 
efficacy of trastuzumab- based therapy in patients with HER -2/neu -positive metastatic breast 
cancer . J Clin Oncol, 2008. 26(11): p. 1789 -96. 
25. Zamai, L., C. Ponti, et al., NK cells and cancer . J Immunol, 2007. 178(7): p. 4011 -6. 
26. Ferris, R.L., E.M. Jaffee, et al., Tumor antigen- targeted, monoclonal antibody -based immunotherapy: 
clinical response, cellular immunity, and immunoescape.  J Clin Oncol, 2010. 28(28): p. 4390 -9. 
27. Tanaka, K ., S. Ishikawa, et al., Combining a peptide vaccine with oral ingestion of Lentinula edodes 
mycelia extract enhances anti -tumor activity in B16 melanoma- bearing mice.  Cancer Immunol 
Immunother, 2012. 61(11): p. 2143- 52. 
28. Baek, S., S.J. Lee, et al., Dendritic Cell (DC) Vaccine in Mouse Lung Cancer Minimal Residual Model; 
Comparison of Monocyte- derived DC vs. Hematopoietic Stem Cell Derived- DC. Immune Netw, 
2012. 12(6): p. 269 -76. 
29. Roberti, M.P., J. Mordoh, et al., Biological role of NK cells and immunotherapeutic approaches in breast 
cancer . Front Immunol, 2012. 3: p. 375.  
30. Disis, M.L., T.A. Gooley, et al., Generation of T- cell immunity to the HER- 2/neu protein after active 
immunization with HER -2/neu peptide- based vaccines . J Clin Oncol, 2002.  20(11): p. 2624 -32. 
31. Disis, M.L., D.R. Wallace, et al., Concurrent trastuzumab and HER2/neu- specific vaccination in 
patients with metastatic breast cancer . J Clin Oncol, 2009. 27(28): p. 4685- 92. 
32. Salazar, L.G., V. Goodell, et al., Persistent immuni ty and survival after immunization with a HER2/neu 
(HER2) vaccine . Journal of Clinical Oncology, 2009. 27(15).  
33. Massague, J., S.W. Blain, et al., TGFbeta signaling in growth control, cancer, and heritable disorders . 
Cell, 2000. 103(2): p. 295- 309. 
34. Massague, J., TGFbeta signaling: receptors, transducers, and Mad proteins . Cell, 1996. 85(7): p. 947 -
50. 
35. Grau, A.M., L. Zhang, et al., Induction of p21waf1 expression and growth inhibition by transforming 
growth factor beta involve the tumor suppressor gene DPC4 in human pancreatic adenocarcinoma 
cells. Cancer Res, 1997. 57(18): p. 3929- 34. 
36. Ehata, S., A. Hanyu, et al., Transforming growth factor -beta promotes survival of mammary carcinoma 
cells through induction of antiapoptotic transcription factor DEC1 . Cancer Res, 2007. 67(20): p. 
9694- 703. 
37. Stuelten, C.H., S. DaCosta Byfield, et al., Breast cancer cells induce stromal fibroblasts to express 
MMP -9 via secretion of TNF- alpha and TGF- beta. J Cell Sci, 2005. 118(Pt 10): p. 2143- 53. 
38. Wahl, S.M., J. Wen, et al., TGF -beta: a mobile purveyor of immune privilege.  Immunol Rev, 2006. 213: 
p. 213 -27. 
39. Grau, A.M., W. Wen, et al., Circulating transforming growth factor -beta- 1 and breast cancer prognosis: 
results from the Shanghai Breast Cancer Study . Breast Cancer Res Treat, 2008. 112(2): p. 335 -
41. 
40. Ono, Y., T. Hayashida, et al., Direct inhibition of the transforming growth factor -beta pathway by 
protein- bound polysaccharide through inactivation of Smad2 signaling . Cancer Sci, 2012. 103(2): 
p. 317 -24. 
41. Metzger -Filho, O., E.P. Winer, et al., Pertuzumab: optimizing HER2 blockade.  Clin Cancer Res, 2013. 
19(20): p. 5552 -6. 
42. Kumler, I., M.K. Tuxen, et al., A systematic review of dual targeting in HER2- positive breast cancer . 
Cancer Treat Rev, 2014. 40(2): p. 259- 70. 
43. Swain, S.M., S.B. Kim, et al., Pertuzumab, trastuzumab, and docetaxel for HER2- positive metastatic 
breast cancer (CLEOPATRA study): overall survival results from a randomised, double- blind, 
placebo- controlled, phase 3 study . Lancet Oncol, 2013. 14(6): p. 461 -71. 
44. Toi, M., T. Hattori, et al., Randomized adjuvant trial to evaluate the addition of tamoxifen and PSK to 
chemotherapy in patients with primary breast cancer. 5 -Year results from the Nishi -Nippon Group 
of the Adjuvant Chemoendocrine Therapy for Breast Cancer Organization.  Cancer, 1992. 70(10): 
p. 2475 -83. 
45. Morimoto, T., M. Ogawa, et al., Postoperative adjuvant randomised trial comparing chemoendocrine 
therapy, chemotherapy and immunotherapy for patients with stage II breast cancer: 5 -year results 
7866/135  
08/23/2021  Page 30 of 39 from the Nishinihon Cooperative Study Group of Adjuvant Chemoendocrine Therapy for Breast 
Cancer (ACETBC) of Japan.  Eur J Cancer, 1996. 32A(2): p. 235- 42. 
46. Laird, N., Further Comparative Analyses of Pretest -Posttest Res earch Designs . American Statistician, 
1983. 37(4): p. 329 -330. 
 
  
7866/135  
08/23/2021  Page 31 of 39  
Appendix A  
Zubrod Performance Scale  
 
Performance status will be assessed according to the current ECOG performance scale*  
Grade  Description  
0 Fully active, able to carry on all pre -disease performance without restriction  
1 Restricted in physically strenuous activity but ambulatory and able to carry out work of a light 
or sedentary nature, e.g., light house work, office work  
2 Ambulatory and capable of all self -care but unable to carry out any work activities. Up and 
about more than 50% of waking hours  
3 Capable of only limited self -care, confined to bed or chair more than 50% of waking hours  
4 Completely disabled. Cannot carry on any self -care. Totally confined to bed or chai r 
5 Dead 
 Oken, M.M., Creech, R.H., Tormey, D.C., Horton, J., Davis, T.E., McFadden, E.T., Carbone, 
P.P.: Toxicity And Response Criteria Of The Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group. Am J Clin 
Oncol 5:649- 655, 1982.  
*The ECOG Performance Status is in the public domain therefore available for public use.  To duplicate the scale, please cite the reference above and credit the Eastern Cooperative 
Oncology Group, Robert Comis M.D., Group Chair.  
 
7866/135  
08/23/2021  Page 32 of 39 Appendix B  
Schedule of Events 
 
 Visit Time Point  Procedures  
Vaccine #1: Day 1  
(First Visit) • Consent  
• Medical history, physical examination,  symptom assessment  and 
medication/supplement changes  
• Clinical Labs:  CBC and CMP  
• Vital signs and weight  
• Urine pregnancy test if applicable  
• Research Labs: 200 mls for immunologic monitoring  
• Tetanus -diphtheria (Td) immunization  
• HER2 Vaccination  
• Administration of total daily dose of PSK or placebo then 10 ml blood 
draw 30 minutes and 4 hours post -administration for cytokine kinetics  
Vaccine #1: Day 2  • Research Labs: 10 mls for cytokine kinetics at CRC then take Day 2 
dose of PSK or placebo as instructed  
• Take home 30 day supply plus 7 additional days  of PSK or placebo  
Vaccine #1: Day 2 until Vaccine #2 visit  • PSK or placebo daily as instructed and complete  daily tea diary  
Vaccine #2: Day 1  • Interim medical history, physical examination, vital signs and weight  
• Symptom/toxicity assessment  and medication/supplement changes  
• Review tea diary  
• Clinical Labs:  CBC and CMP  
• Research Labs: 40  mls for immunologic monitoring  
• Urine pregnancy test if applicable  
• HER2 Vaccination  
• Take home 30 day supply plus 7 additional days  of PSK or placebo  
Vaccine #2: Day 1 until Vaccine #3 visit  • PSK or placebo daily as instructed and complete daily  tea diary  
Vaccine #3: Day 1  • Interim medical history, physical examination, vital signs and weight  
• Symptom/toxicity assessment  and medication/supplement changes  
• Review tea diary  
• Clinical Labs: CBC and CMP  
• Research Labs: 4 0 mls for immunologic monitoring  
• Urine pregnancy test if applicable  
• HER2 Vaccination  
• Take home of 30 day supply plus 7 additional days  of PSK or placebo  
Vaccine #3: Day 1 until Month 4 visit  • PSK or placebo daily as instructed and complete daily  tea diary  
Month 4  
(1 month after the last vaccine)  • Interim medical history, physical examination, vital signs and weight  
• Symptom/toxicity assessment  and medication/supplement changes  
• Review tea diary  
• Clinical Labs:  CBC and CMP  
• Research blood: 200 mls  
• Take home of 30 day supply of PSK or placebo  
Month 4 : Day 1 until Month 5 visit • PSK or placebo daily as instructed and complete daily  tea diary  
Month 5  
(2 months after the last vaccine)  • Research Labs: 40 mls for immunologic monitoring   
• Send tea diary  to study nurse  
Month 6  
(3 months after the last vaccine)  • Collection of recent oncologist notes and lab results  
• Collection of recent imaging reports  if available  
Month 12 (9 months after last vaccine)  • Research blood: 200 mls  
• Collection of physician notes including most recent lab results and 
imaging reports  
May be done up to 2 weeks prior to initial vaccine visit  
Clinical Labs:  Complete blood count (CBC) includes differential/platelets; and Comprehensive Metabolic Panel (CMP) includes 
serum electrolytes, creatinine, BUN, AST, ALT, alkaline phosphatase, total bilirubin  
7866/135  
08/23/2021  Page 33 of 39  
Appendix C  
Data Safety Monitoring Plan  
A. Purpose 
To ensure that the Tumor Vaccine Group (TVG) follows NIH/NCI/CTEP/FDA guidelines with respect to: 
(1) accurate assessment and timely reporting of adverse drug reactions associated with investigational 
drugs, (2) adherence to protocol, and (3) accurate reporting of data.  The DSMP will be approved by Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center –  Cancer Consortium IRB (FHCRC –  CC IRB) in Seattle, 
Washington.  
The Principal Invest igator  (P.I.) , for this project, is responsible for every aspect of the design, delegating 
responsibility/authority, study conduct and final analysis of the protocol.  Regulations defining the 
responsibilities for assessment and reporting of adverse events  (AE), serious AE (SAE), and unexpected 
AEs are defined by the Code of Federal Regulations:  21 CFR 312.32 and Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) Version 4.0 published by the Cancer Therapy Evaluation Program (CTEP), 
a division of the N CI/NIH. A matrix of reporting requirements and schedules is at the CTEP web- site at 
http://ctep.infi.nih/gov
. 
This clinical study will rely upon the monitoring of the trial by the P.I. in conjunction with a Research  Nurse, 
a Statistician, an Independent  Medical Monitor, and an Independent Study Monitor assigned by the 
Clinical Trials Support Office (CTSO) of the University of Washington (UW)/Fred Hutchinson Cancer 
Research Center (FHCRC) Cancer Consortium.   
The Medical Monitor , Robert Montgomery, M.D.  will meet openly with the P.I. and/or their designee, 
Statistician, Research Nurse, Research MD and/or Research Coordinator(s) prior to patients being 
recruited in order to orient committee participants to the study . The Medical Monitor will then discuss the 
study every 6 months throughout the study treatment period with the P.I., Research MD(s), Research 
Nurse(s), Research Coordinator(s), and/or other related clinical research staff. The Medical Monitor will 
review patient recruitment and retention, adherence to protocol, follow -up, data quality, and participant 
risk versus benefit.  
 
B. Objectives 
1. To ensure that the Principal Investigator and clinical research staff follow federal and institutional 
regulatory guideli nes with respect to timely reporting of adverse reactions associated with 
investigational drugs.  
2. To define classification of adverse drug reactions as expected or unexpected.  
3. To define classification of adverse drug reactions as serious or non- serious.  
4. To ensure compliance and accuracy of documentation of adverse drug reactions reportable to: (1) 
FHCRC – CC IRB , (2) FDA , (3) UW Clinical Research Center, (4) Independent Medical Monitor  and 
(5) NIH  - NCCAM . 
 
C. Adverse event reporting policy and procedures 
1. Evaluation of adverse events:   
AEs are graded on a scale of 1- 5 and attribution is assigned, using the CTCAE v4 common 
terminology. Patients are monitored at: (1) eligibility, (2) at each vaccination visit, and (3) at Month 4, 
for the development of end organ damage by assessing AEs  with serum chemistries, liver function 
studies, complete blood counts and physical exams.  Information pertaining to toxicity is recorded into 
a database  AE Log.   
2. Definitions of adverse events:   
Adverse Event  - any unfavorable and unintended sign (including abnormal laboratory finding* ), 
symptom or disease temporally associated with the use of a medical treatment or procedure regardless of whether it is considered related to the medical trea tment or procedure.  
 
  
7866/135  
08/23/2021  Page 34 of 39 a. An adverse event may include:  
• an exacerbation of a pre -existing illness  
• an increase in frequency or intensity of a pre- existing episodic event or condition  
• a condition detected or diagnosed after study drug administration  
• continuously persistent disease or symptoms that were present at baseline and worsen 
following the start of the study  
• *An abnormal laboratory value will be considered an AE if the laboratory abnormality is  
characterized by any of the following:  
o Results in  discontinuation from the study;  
o Is associated with clinical signs or symptoms;  
o Requires treatment or any other therapeutic intervention;  
o Is associated with death or another serious adverse event, including hospitalization; or  
o Is judged by the Investigator to be of significant clinical impact.  
 
If any abnormal laboratory result is considered clinically significant, the investigator will provide details about the action taken with respect to the test drug and about the patient’s 
outcome.  
b. An adverse event does not  include:  
• medical or surgical procedures (e.g., surgery, endoscopy, tooth extraction, or transfusion); 
however, the condition that leads to the procedure may be an adverse event  
• pre-existing diseases, conditions, or laboratory abnormalities present  or detected at the start 
of the study that do not worsen  
• hospitalizations or procedures that are done for elective purposes not related to an untoward medical occurrence (e.g., hospitalizations for cosmetic or elective surgery or 
social/convenience admis sions)  
• the disease being studied or signs/symptoms associated with the disease unless more severe than expected for the patient's condition  
• overdose of study drug without any clinical signs or symptoms  
c. Expected Adverse Event  - an event that may be reasonably anticipated to occur as a result of the 
study procedure and is described in the Investigators Brochure and/or consent form.  
d. Unexpected Adverse Event  - an AE that is not described in the investigator brochure and/or 
consent form and is unanticipated.  An event that might have been anticipated but is more serious than expected or occurs more frequently than expected, would be considered an unexpected AE.  
e. Life-threatening Adverse Event  - the patient was at substantial risk of dying at the time of the AE 
or it is suspected that the use or continued use of the product would have resulted in the patient’s 
death.  
f. Serious Adverse Event  - grade 4 or 5 toxicity or any AE occurring at any dose that results in any 
of the following outcomes: death, a life threatening AE, inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of 
existing hospitalization due to the AE, a persistent or significant disability/incapacity or a congenital 
anomaly/birth defect that is unexpected and unrelated.   
g. Hospitalizations that do not meet these criteria are:  
• reasons described in the protocol, e.g., drug administration, protocol -required testing  
• social reason in the absence of an AE  
• surgery or procedure planned prior to entry into the trial  
Note: Medical and scientific judgment should be exercised in deciding whether expedited reporting is appropriate in other situations; for example, important medical events may not be immediately life -
7866/135  
08/23/2021  Page 35 of 39 threatening or result in death or hospitalization but may jeopardize the patient or may require 
intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed in the definition above.  Any AE is considered a 
serious AE if it is associated with clinical signs or symptoms judged by the investigator to have a 
significant clinical impact.  
3. Adverse event  score   
a. Grade 1 = mild adverse event  
b. Grade 2 = moderate adverse event  
c. Grade 3 = severe adverse event  
d. Grade 4 = life -threatening or disabling adverse event  
e. Grade 5 = death related to adverse event.  
 
4. Attribution of adverse event  
a. 5 (definite): the adverse event is clearly related to the investigational agent   
b. 4 (probable): the adverse event is likely related to the investigational agent  
c. 3 (possible): the adverse event may be related to the investigational agent  
d. 2 (unlikely): the adverse event is doubtfully related to the investigational agent  
e. 1 (unrelated): the adverse event is clearly NOT related to the investigational agent  
5.  Adverse event reporting 
This procedure is outlined below by regulatory agency (Table 1).  
Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center: Cancer Consortium IRB  - We will follow the current AE 
reporting policy of the FHCRC –  CC IRB.  
FDA (for trials using an Investigational New Drug (IND)  – Adverse events will be reported per  21 CFR 
312.32 by telephone or facsimile transmission (using MedWatch Form 3500A) as soon as possible but no 
later than 7  calendar days after initial receipt of the information concerning the event.  All unexpected, 
serious adverse events are reported in w riting (using MedWatch Form 3500A) to the FDA (Center for 
Biologics) within 15 calendar days after initial receipt of the information concerning the event.  Yearly written progress reports to the FDA will summarize expected or non -serious unexpected AEs.  
NCCAM – Serious adverse events will be reported to  NCCAM Program Officer within 24 hours of FDA 
notification.  A copy of the documents submitted to the FDA will also be submitted to NCCAM within 7- 15 
calendar days. Submit written summaries of all reviews conducted by the monitoring group to the 
responsible NCCAM Program Officer within 30 days of reviews or meetings. If reviews are frequent, 
quarterly  reports are sufficient.  
University of Washington Clinical Research Center (UW CRC)  – The CRC will receive c opies of the 
documents submitted to the FHCRC – CC IRB within 7 -10 calendar days.  
Independent Medical Monitor -  At a minimum, the medical monitor should comment on the outcomes of 
serious adverse event(s) and relationship of the AE to the vaccine or prepar e an unbiased written report 
of the event. They should also indicate whether they agree with the details of the report provided by the 
study investigator.  
Table 1.   Adverse event reporting  
 Expected  Expected  Unexpected  Unexpected  
 Non-Serious  Serious  Non-Serious  Serious (including 
grade 4 & 5 toxicity)  
 Attribution* 
(Possible, 
Probable, Definite)  Attribution * 
(Possible, 
Probable, Definite)  Attribution * 
(Possible, 
Probable, Definite)  Attribution * 
(Possible, Probable, 
Definite)  
FHCRC – IRB Continuation 
Review Report  Continuation 
Review Report  Continuation 
Review Report  FHCRC Adverse 
Event Expedited 
7866/135  
08/23/2021  Page 36 of 39  Expected  Expected  Unexpected  Unexpected  
 Non-Serious  Serious  Non-Serious  Serious (including 
grade 4 & 5 toxicity)  
 Attribution* 
(Possible, 
Probable, Definite)  Attribution * 
(Possible, 
Probable, Definite)  Attribution * 
(Possible, 
Probable, Definite)  Attribution * 
(Possible, Probable, 
Definite)  
Reporting Form – 
ASAP but within 7 
days  
FDA Annual Progress 
Report  Annual Progress 
Report  Annual Progress 
Report  FDA Form 3500A – 
ASAP but within 7 
days  
NCCAM  Annual Review  Annual Review  Annual Review  Notify Program 
Officer within 24 
hours  of FDA 
notification  
 
FDA Form 3500A –  
ASAP but within 7 -
15 days  
UW Clinical 
Research 
Center (CRC)  Copy of 
Continuation 
Review Report  Copy of 
Continuation 
Review Report  Copy of 
Continuation 
Review Report  Copy of FHCRC 
Adverse Event 
Expedited Reporting 
Form  
Medical 
Monitor  Bi-annual Meeting 
(twice a year)  Bi-annual Meeting 
(twice a year)  Bi-annual Meeting 
(twice a year)  Copy of FHCRC 
Adverse Event 
Expedited Reporting 
Form  
 
 
6.  Procedure for reporting serious adverse events:  
a. Identify the classification/attribution of the AE as defined above using CTCAE v4 . 
b. After appropriate medical intervention has been instituted, the P.I.  or his/her designee will be 
notified within 24 hours.  
c. File appropriate reports immediately by phone/fax with appropriate agencies, as descri bed in Table 
1. 
d. Notify the patient’s primary physician or referring physician within a medically appropriate timefr ame, depending on the classification of the adverse event.  
e. Submit written reports to appropriate agencies.  
f. Document the AE  in the patient’s research file, using a progress note to describe the event and 
treatment, if appropriate.   
g. File copies of all forms /correspondence relating to the AE in the patient’s research file.  
 
D. Clinical trials monitoring operational procedures (Table 2)  
1. Clinical data documentation 
a. Internal study monitoring:  
All patients actively enrolled in the study are seen monthly during the treatment period and one month 
following the final vaccine administration. Clinical labs are evaluated at baseline,  before each 
vaccination and 1 month after the 3rd vaccine for the development of toxicity (adverse events) related 
to the vaccine.  Any clinically significant abnormal lab values may be faxed to the patient’s physician.  The Research Physician, physician extender or P.I. sees each study participant at each visit and the 
following evaluations are completed: toxicity evaluation, physi cal assessment and AE summary (these 
7866/135  
08/23/2021  Page 37 of 39 evaluations are part of the source documentation that is filled out at each visit).  Grade 3 and 4 non-
serious and expected AEs  will be reviewed with the P.I. regularly at clinical meetings.  All other AEs  
will be repor ted to the P.I. at the time they become known and reported as outlined above in Section 
C. 
Each patient research file is audited for completeness.  Audits may be conducted by a designated 
clinical research staff member on an ongoing basis and the results may be presented clinical meetings.  
Patient’s research files are audited for completeness, legibility, and accuracy.  Clinical research staff 
members will review all patient research files for patient recruitment and retention, protocol adherence, 
follow -up, data quality, and participant risk versus benefit.   
Additionally, correspondence with primary physicians and patients is maintained in the patient 
research file.  Copies of email communications and of verbal communications are maintained.  
b. Biannual review with the independent Medical Monitor : 
The Medical Monitor will meet/or conference call with the P.I. or designee, and other members of the 
clinical team, approximately every 6 months. All patients are reviewed for AEs. Conduct of the study 
is review ed for any practice changes and documentation of proper notification of changes as 
appropriate to the IRB and FDA.  
c. Biannual study audit:  
An independent Study Monitor will be assigned by the CTSO of the FHCRC/ UW Division of Oncology 
and an independent stud y audit may be performed two times a year (approximately every 6 months).  
This audit will be conducted on a select percentage of enrolled patients.  Patient research files will be 
formally audited for completeness, accuracy and compliance to protocol. In addition, a certain 
percentage of all computer data entry will also be reviewed.   In addition to the routine visit of the UW 
IDS pharmacy, the monitor will also confirm the correct randomized product (PSK/Placebo) was 
dispensed to the patient.  
2. Data validit y/integrity  
Systems to insure data integrity have been put into place to provide multiple checks to data entry.  Patient 
eligibility is initially reviewed by the Research Coordinator/Research Nurse at screening, by the Research 
MD prior to enrollment in select cases, approved by the P.I. before enrollment, and biannually by the 
Independent Study Monitor of a certain percentage of charts.  Source documents are initially reviewed by 
the Research Nurse and/or any clinical research staff member involved with recruitment for completeness.   
Clinical laboratory monitoring data is reviewed by a qualified clinician (Research MD, physician extender, 
Research Nurse and/or P.I.) and any abnormalities are assessed.  All patients’  records are kept in the 
patient’s research file and reviewed at biannual monitoring visits.  All toxicity scoring is done by a study 
clinician .  
Data is taken from the patient’s source documentation, the patient’s research file, and entered into a 
databas e which links data to patient by a Unique Patient Identifier and is accessible by password code 
only.  Data entry is made by the Research Coordinator/designated clinical research staff member and is verified at end of study by the Research Nurse/designated clinical research staff member reviewing source 
documents and case report forms ; and reconciling them to the study database.  A percentage of all data 
entry is reviewed by a clinical research team member and the Independent Study Monitor.  At the time of 
study reports or publications , print outs of all data from the database are reviewed by the P.I.  
Table 2.  Operational procedures  
Study Event  Specific Action Performed By  
Screen  Screening of interested 
patients  Research Coordinator/physician 
extender/Research Nurse/other 
designated clinical research staff 
member assigned by PI  
Eligibility  Initial review w/interested 
patient  Research Coordinator/physician 
extender/Research Nurse/other 
designated clinical research staff 
member assigned by PI  
7866/135  
08/23/2021  Page 38 of 39 Study Event  Specific Action Performed By  
 Obtain source documents to 
determine eligibility  Research Coordinator/Research 
Nurse/other designated clinical 
research staff member assigned by PI  
 2nd review of eligibility with final 
approval from the PI  Research MD/P.I.  
 Biannual review  Independent Study and Medical 
Monitor s 
Consent  Obtain Informed Consent  P.I/ Research MD/physician extender  
Monthly Visits  Blood draw/ Urine Collection  Research Nurse (including nurses from 
CRC)/physician extender  
 Physical assessment/toxicity 
evaluation  P.I/ Research MD/physician extender  
 Vaccination  Research Nurse (including nurses from 
CRC)/physician extender  
 Monitor for immediate reactions  Research Nurse (including nurses from 
CRC), Study Physician  
Toxicity  Monitoring  Monitoring of AEs with patient 
at each visit  
Review of non serious and 
grade 2 expected AEs regularly  Research MD/P.I./physician extender  
 
P.I. 
 Biannual review of 
documentation of AEs Independent Study  and Medical 
Monitor s 
Report of serious  
adverse events  See sections B and C of DSMP  Research Nurse/P.I./Physician 
Extender/Research MD/ Research 
Coordinator  
Immunologic Monitoring - 
Research data  Performed at specified 
timepoints for each patient  Immunologic Monitoring Lab 
Technologist(s)  
 Review of immunologic data  PI /Research MD  
 Computer entry of immunologic 
data  Research Coordinator/physician 
extender/other designated clinical 
research staff member assigned by PI  
Study review with P.I.  
 
 
 
 
 
 Regularly scheduled meeting to 
report study status/evaluate 
eligibility, patient recruitment 
and retention, protocol 
adherence, and AE  
evaluations. Daily on an as needed basis for all 
unexpected grade 3 -5 AEs P.I./Research MD/Physician 
Extender/Research Nurse/Research 
Coordinator  
Study Review by 
Medical Monitor  Biannual evaluation of patient 
recruitment and retention, 
protocol adherence, AEs  and 
participant risk versus benefit.  Medical Monitor, P.I., Research MD,  
Research Nurse, and Research Coordinator  
Twice yearly chart audits  Biannual evaluation of patient 
recruitment and retention, protocol adherence, AEs  and 
participant ri sk versus benefit. 
Validation of computer data 
entry from the source 
document.  Independent Study Monitor w/ wrap up 
meeting with t he P.I./Study 
physician/physician extender/Research Nurse/Research Coordinator(s)  
Assurance of Data 
Accuracy and Integrity  Validation of computer data 
entry for clinical data  Research Nurse and Research 
Coordinator(s)  
7866/135  
08/23/2021  Page 39 of 39 Study Event  Specific Action Performed By  
 Validation of data entry for 
immunologic monitoring -
research data  Independent Study  and Medical  
Monitor s/P.I. 
Annual reports to:    
IRB 
  PI with Research  
Coordinator(s)/Research Nurse  
FDA  PI with Research  
Coordinator(s)/Research Nurse  
CRC   PI with Research  
Coordinator(s)/Research Nurse  
NCCAM   PI with Research  
Coordinator(s)/Research Nurse  
  
 
 
 