 
 
 
 
 
Official  Title:  Bridging Pediatric and Adult Biomarkers in Graft -Versus -Host Disease  
 
NCT number: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Document date:  01Feb2020  
Study population  
The study accrued 415 HCT recipients between 2013 and 2018; 170 children ≤10 years  and 245 subjects 
>10 years, including both children and adults. All subjects were  followed for at least 1 year. This study 
registered at clinicaltrial.gov under  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] was approved by the respective Institutional Review 
Boards at six adult  and pediatr ic centers: Children's National Medical Center, Texas Children's Hospital,  
Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Boston Children’s/Dana Farber Cancer  Institute, Johns 
Hopkins, and Indiana University. Adult patients were solely from two  centers. Informed consent was 
btained from all patients or their legal guardians.  
 
Samples preparation and ELISA  
 
All plasma samples were prospectively collected and stored per institutional guidelines.   Frozen samples 
were shipped to the Paczesny Laboratory at Indiana Univer sity for  analysis. ST2, IL6, REG3α, and TNFR1 
were measured pre -HCT (day -7) and on days  +7, +14, +21 post -HCT as previously examined in the 
aGVHD setting.  All of these  biomarkers were measured using sequential enzyme -linked immunosorbent 
assay  (ELISA), as previously reported.  
 
Statistical analysis  
 
Descriptive statistics of demographic variables and NRM including frequencies and  percentages were 
summarized by age groups (≤10 years vs. >10 years). Chi -square or  nonparametric Mann -Whitney tes ts 
were performed to assess potential differences in  demographic variables between age categories. 
Cumulative incidences of NRM and  aGVHD were analyzed with relapse as a competing risk.  The Aalen -
Johansen  estimator was used to nonparametrically estimate the cumulative incidence function  (CIF) of 
NRM and aGVHD. In order to account for th e time -dependent biomarker values  (pre-HCT, and at 7, 14 
and 21 days post -HCT) we employed landmark analyses.  Separate CIFs were estimated by biomarker 
category (above and below the median at  day 21 for the whole cohort which is also a clinically rele vant 
threshold based on  previous studies)  for each landmark time point, the biomarker value at this  
landmark time point was considered and, also, patients who survived until that  landmark. To statistically 
evaluate the difference of the CIFs of NRM and GVHD  between the two biomarker groups, while 
accounting for the left truncation at each  landmark point, we used two -sample nonparametric linear 
tests.  To perform a  multivariable co mpeting risks analysis, the biomarker values for all landmarks points  
were stacked into a single variable and a semiparametric proportional cause -specific  hazards model was 
fitted to the data.  Hazard ratios with confidence intervals were  reported to demo nstrate effect size. To 
account for the potential association across the  repeated records for each patient we used a proper 
sandwich variance estimator in a  population -averaged estimation framework. For each model, the 
interaction between the  biomarker and  the landmark quantified the change of the association between 
each  biomarker and the outcome over time. If the interaction was not statistically significant  then there 
was no evidence that the association between the biomarker and the  outcome changed over  time. The 
models also included an interaction term between the  biomarker and patient’s age. A significant 
biomarker by age interaction indicated that  the association between the biomarker and the outcome 
differed between age groups.   Multivariable analyses were conducted using the following covariates: 
race/ethnicity,  malignant disease, g raft source, and aGVHD prophylaxis. A cause -specific analysis that  
included type of malignant disease type, disease risk index, and disease status at HCT  was also 
performed in the subgroup of patients with malignant diseases. We sought to  determine if the 
combination of biomarkers improves the predictive accuracy for NRM.  
 
To compare the predictive accuracy across different baseline biomarkers we used the  time -dependent 
prediction error estimate proposed by Schoop et al.  This measure,  estimates predictive accuracy in 
situations with time -to-event outcomes and competing  risks. A lower value of the estimated prediction 
error indicates a better predictive  performance. A p -value of <0.05 was considered significant.  