 
Intermountain Healthcare IRB  
IRB NUMBER: 1050955  
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 02/12/2019  
IRB EXPIRATION DATE: 11/18/2019  
 
TITLE:  
Assessing the Feasibility of Continuous Glucose Monitoring in Reimagine Primary 
Care Clinics  
 
SUMMARY : 
A parallel randomized, multi -site prospective trial was conducted at four Intermountain 
Healthcare Clinics using a new CGM device (Dexcom G6) compared to a standard of care finger 
stick glucometer (FSG) (Contour Next One). All participants received usual care in Primary Care 
clinics for six consecutive months while using these d evices. Data were  collected via  electronic 
medical record s, device outputs, exit surveys, and insurance company (SelectHealth) claims in 
accordance with Institutional Review Board approval.  
 
AUTHORS : 
Isaacson B, Kaufusi S, Sorensen J, Joy E, Jones C, Ingram V, Mark N, Phillips M, Briesacher M  
PROTOCOL  ID #: 1050955  
IRB # : 1050955   
DOCUMENT DATE: November 08 , 2018  
 
 
 
 
Intermountain Healthcare, Salt Lake City, Utah, United States  
May 21, 2020  
Assessing the Feasibility of Continuous Glucose Monitoring in Reimagine Primary Clinics Number: 1 
Liz Joy, MD, MPH  
Intermountain Healthcare IRB  
Page 2 of 5IRB NUMBER: 1050955  
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 02/12/2019  
IRB EXPIRATION DATE: 11/18/2019  
 
 
 
Consent Form  
Title:  Assessing the Feasibility of Continuous Glucose Monitoring in 
Reimagine Primary Care Clinics  
Location:  Intermountain Healthcare’s Reimagine Primary Care Clinics 
(Cottonwood Family Practice, Cottonwood Senior, Avenues Internal 
Medicine, and Holladay Internal Medicine)  
Principal Investigator: Liz Joy, MD, MPH  
Co-Investigator:  Brad Isaacson, PhD, MBA, MSF  
Sponsor:  Intermountain Healthcare  
When:  13 Months (November 1, 2018 – December 31, 2019)  
Background:  Intermountain is conducting a pilot on continuous glucose monitoring  
(CGM) to understand if this study can help with diabetes 
management. Successful demonstration of CGM may allow patients 
to manage their condition, which may avoid the highs and lows of 
glucose monitoring and make patients feel better. This may reduce 
healthcare utilization and cost for the patients and the healthcare 
system on a whole.  
We are asking you to join because you have been identified as a 
patient in one of our Reimagine Primary  Care clinics who may 
benefit from enhanced diabetic management. You are being asked 
to track your glucose levels and share feedback and your clinical 
experience to improve our clinical workflows. Your contribution will 
involve downloading mobile applicati ons, entering/tracking your data, 
engaging with your physicians, and participating in an exit survey. As 
part of this study, you will be randomly put into one of two groups. 
The people in one of these groups will receive care as usual which 
involves checki ng sugars with a finger stick and a familiar 
glucometer. The people in the other group will check sugars with an 
FDA-approved device that monitors sugars continuously and does 
not involve finger sticks. Approximately 125 people will take part in 
this study  at Intermountain Healthcare. The length of participation in 

Assessing the Feasibility of Continuous Glucose Monitoring in Reimagine Primary Clinics Number: 1 
Liz Joy, MD, MPH  
Intermountain Healthcare IRB  
Page 3 of 5IRB NUMBER: 1050955  
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 02/12/2019  
IRB EXPIRATION DATE: 11/18/2019  
the study will include patient recruitment, three months of device 
usage, and six months of follow up.  
Please read this form and ask any questions you may have before 
you decide whether to be in this research study.  
Study Procedures  
You will be recruited from the waiting room in the Reimagine Primary Care clinics because you have been 
identified as a patien t with diabetes who currently participates in glucose monitoring or you will be offered this 
during your current appointment. If you wish to participate, you agree to be placed into one of two groups and 
follow the directions for that group. Your placement  will be done randomly, and you have a 50% chance of 
being in either study group. Group #1 will use the Dexcom G6 continuous monitor or “Dexcom CGM”. Group 
#2 will use standard of care which means that you will check your sugars with a ContourNext One gluc ometer 
as many times as is determined appropriate by you and your doctor. If you are randomized into Group #1, your 
coordinator will instruct you on how to properly install the device. You will then be required to wear the patch 
for the duration of the stu dy (6 months). The patch will need to be changed every ten days and your 
coordinator will also instruct you on how to do this and will provide you with enough patches to last the duration 
of the study. The Dexcom CGM and ContourNext One devices are equippe d with Bluetooth and data will be 
automatically uploaded and sent to Intermountain Healthcare personnel through online portals. This will require 
downloading applications on your phone (apps) (e.g. Dexcom G6, Dexcom Clarity, ContourNext One) to view 
and tr ansmit your data. A pamphlet with pictures about the devices will be provided at your appointment 
(Appendix A). During your study participation two blood draws will be required to compare HbA1c levels at 
study start up at study closing. The first blood dra w will be performed on day of consent and the last blood 
draw will be performed upon study completion (6 month follow up ± 2 weeks). Cost of the first blood draw will 
be fully covered by the study and the second blood draw will be covered by your insurance . If your insurance 
will cover a 3 -month blood draw or if your Reimagine Provider believes one should be conducted to measure 
your HbA1c, the study will also collect those samples for data comparison.  
Risks  
Patient safety is our number one goal, however wi th any research trial there may be risks involved. The 
primary risks of this study are to your privacy. All glucose -related data will be secured in approved  
Intermountain apps (REDCap, Contour Next and/or Dexcom Clarity). Data from Intermountain Healthcar e’s 
Enterprise Data Warehouse (EDW), which stores your standard health record information (medications, 
laboratory services used, clinical encounters, demographic information, etc.) will be combined to make a 
dashboard without your personal information (Ta bleau or similar) to understand the device use on care 
delivery. We may perform predictive analytics with a research partner of ours (Savvysherpa) to help future 
patients, however, your identifiable information will not be shared with that entity.  
You may also experience pain with obtaining a blood sample for the finger stick glucose readings, however it 
is just like you are already doing without any expectation for additional pain or bleeding. If you are in the 
Dexcom CGM group there is potential for pain on application of the patch every ten days, but the pain is 
about the same as a finger stick glucose. Unforeseeable risks may occur, outside of what is noted above, 
and the study team will report these findings to you if there is a health concern.  
Benefits  
You may benefit from this study if you are able to manage your glucose levels more carefully. This can improve 
your health/wellbeing and reduce doctor visits which are costly. Further, information that we learn from this 
study may help us to better treat patients in the future.  
Assessing the Feasibility of Continuous Glucose Monitoring in Reimagine Primary Clinics Number: 1 
Liz Joy, MD, MPH  
Intermountain Healthcare IRB  
Page 4 of 5IRB NUMBER: 1050955  
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 02/12/2019  
IRB EXPIRATION DATE: 11/18/2019  
Voluntary Participation  
You do not have to be in the study. Your decision to take part in this study is completely voluntary. You may 
discontinue participation at any time. You can change your mind later and ask us to stop collectin g your 
information. You can give this notice to your study team or mail it to:  
Liz Joy, MD, MPH  
Intermountain Healthcare  
36 S. State Street  
Salt Lake City, UT 84111  
If this happens, we will not collect new information about you and you will not be able t o continue in the study. 
However, we will continue to use the information we have already collected.  
You may be voluntary terminated from this study if you fail to use the glucose devices and report data back on 
a daily basis. You will be notified by the s tudy personnel if this occurs. Further, if new study findings are 
discovered that may influence your decision to participate in this study (e.g. additional risks), then they will be 
communicated to you.  
Costs and Compensation  
You will not be charged for an y of the study costs nor will your insurance. You will not be paid for being in this 
study, but you will receive the appropriate glucose meter and replacements sensors/strips for participation 
during the study period. These devices/strips/sensors will be p aid for by Intermountain Healthcare however if 
you are randomized into The Contour Next One group, we will ask you to please mail the device back upon 
study completion. A prepaid card will be given to you to cover the mailing expense at the time of consent ing. 
Alternative (Non -Research) Treatments  
In this study, we will be using devices that are commercially available. The ContourNext One glucometer is the 
current standard of care and is the most accurate of its kind available while the Dexcom G6 CGM is a n ovel 
FDA-approved device that will continue to measure your glucose every 5 minutes throughout each day. These 
devices are commonly used by patients to understand and control their blood glucose. Other devices do exist, 
but the only other alternative for d iabetic management is diet, exercise and blood draws for HBA1c levels.  
Aside from these options, you may choose to not participate in this study.  
Will the researchers be paid for running this study?  
This study is paid for by Intermountain Healthcare. The researchers do not receive extra payment for 
conducting this study.  
In research a conflict of interest (COI) can happen when someone has more than one interest in the study. For 
example, a physician doing research could also own stock in a company that is paying for his or her research 
or the development of a new drug or p roduct used in a study. In this study, the researchers have indicated that 
they do not have any conflicts of interest.  
Research Injury:  
If you become injured while taking part in this study, Intermountain Healthcare can provide medical treatment. 
We will b ill you or your insurance company in the usual way. Because this is a research study, some insurance 
plans may not pay for your treatment. If you believe you have been injured as a result of being in this study, 
please call the Principal Investigator right  away. You may also contact the Intermountain Institutional Review 
Board (IRB) at 1 -800-321-2107 or IRB@imail.org.  
Assessing the Feasibility of Continuous Glucose Monitoring in Reimagine Primary Clinics Number: 1 
Liz Joy, MD, MPH  
Intermountain Healthcare IRB  
Page 5 of 5IRB NUMBER: 1050955  
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 02/12/2019  
IRB EXPIRATION DATE: 11/18/2019  
Person to Contact:  
If you have questions, concerns, or complaints about this study, you can contact Dr. Liz Joy at liz.joy@imail.org 
or 801 -442-3721.  
If you have questions regarding your rights as a research subject or if problems arise which you do not feel you 
can discuss with the study team, please contact Intermountain’s IRB at 1 -800-321-2107 or IRB@imail.org.  
How will my information be use d and protected?  
If you decide to take part in this study, Intermountain Healthcare will use your glucose data to understand how 
these management techniques impact patient outcomes, cost and utilization of services. This information will 
be stored up to 5 years, along with the survey data we collect. However, any data shared with our research 
partner (Savvysherpa) will always be anonymized to protect your confidentiality.  
Consent  
I have read and I understand this consent document. I have had the opportunity  to ask questions. I understand 
that my participation is voluntary and that I am free to withdraw at any time, without giving any reason, without 
my legal rights being affected. I will be given a signed copy of the consent and authorization form to keep.  
I agree to participate in this research study and authorize you to use and disclose information about 
me for this study, as you have explained in this document.  
 
Participant’s Name (Print)  
  Participant’s Signature  
Name of Person Obtaining Authorization and Consent  Date  
Signature of Person Obtaining Authorization and Consent  Date  
Assessing the Feasibility of Continuous Glucose Monitoring in Reimagine Primary Clinics Number: 1 
Liz Joy, MD, MPH  
Intermountain Healthcare IRB  
Page 6 of 5IRB NUMBER: 1050955  
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 02/12/2019  
IRB EXPIRATION DATE: 11/18/2019  
Appendix A: Pamphlet with Device and Study Information  
 

 
 CGM Pilot Phone Script  
Hi [patient name],  
My name is [site coordinator’s name]. I am working with your doctor, [physician’s name], at [their 
Reimagine Clinic] and Intermountain Healthcare. Thank you for taking my call. How are you today?  
I’m calling because [physician’s name] informed me that you may benefit from a study that we are 
currently enrolling for; do you have a moment to talk?  
IF THEN  
Yes Proceed with Script  
No Ask to schedule a call back.  
Call back Declined  “We can meet with you in the clinic prior to your 
appointment to walk through it.”  
Meet patient in clinic and attempt to recruit/consent.  
As a brief overview,  
Intermountain is conducting this pilot study to understand the impact of continuous glucose moni toring 
versus the standard of care, or finger -prick method, of glucose monitoring. Successful demonstration of 
this study may allow patients to better manage their condition.  
We are asking you to participate because your doctor has identified you as someon e who may benefit 
from enhanced diabetic management. If you qualify, you will receive 6 months of glucose monitoring 
supplies at no cost to you. Your contribution would involve downloading mobile applications, 
entering/tracking your data, engaging with you r physicians, completing an exit survey, and providing two 
blood draws.  
Is this something that would interest you?  
IF THEN  
Yes Proceed with script.  
No Thank patient for their time, provide contact info for if they have any further 
questions  
Qualifying factors for this study include:  
 
 • Being between the ages of 18 and 80.  
• Current diagnosis of Type 1 or Type 2 Diabetes. 
  Most recent HbA1c 
level of 6.5 or higher. 
  Monitoring glucose levels on a daily basis 
  Have 
daily access to a smart phone.  
Do you have any questions or concerns with the study criteria?  
IF THEN  
Yes Answe r questions appropriately  
No Continue with script  
Do not qualify per 
exclusion above  Thank patient for their time, provide contact info if patient has further questions  
As part of this study, you will be randomly assigned to one of two groups. Group 1 will check sugars with 
an FDA -approved device that monitors blood sugar continuously and does not involve finger sticks.  Group 
2 will receive care as usual which means chec king blood sugar with a familiar FDA approved finger stick 
glucometer. Either device would be supplied to you at no cost for the duration of your participation, which 
will last six months.  
Do you have any questions about this study?  
Is this something you’ d be willing to participate in?  
IF THEN  
Yes Continue with script  
No Thank patient for their time, provide contact info if patient has further questions  
Thank you! I would like to schedule a time when we can meet at [site name] to review eligibility and sign 
a consent form for participation. The consent form will further explain what we have discussed over the 
phone and provide details as to how your infor mation will be protected.  
When are you available to meet? (obtain date and time)  
Thank you for taking the time to speak with me.  
Here is my phone number so that you may call or text me with any questions. [phone #]  
 
{Todays Date}  

 
 {Study Designee}  
Intermo untain Healthcare  
36 S. State Street  
Salt Lake City, UT 84111  
{Recipients Name}  
{Recipients Street Address}  
{Recipients City/State/Zip code}  
Dear {Recipients Name},  
You have been identified as a patient who is currently enrolled in Intermountain Healthcare’s 
continuous glucose monitoring pilot study.  
This letter is to inform you that a maximum of 3 telephone calls and/or emails have been 
attempted for your participat ion in study #1050955, Assessing the Feasibility of Continuous 
Glucose Monitoring in Reimagine Primary Care Clinics . We are requesting a verbal or written 
response in an effort to reestablish contact between you and your Study Coordinator. If contact 
is re established, interest in continued participation will be verbally confirmed and documented, 
and you will return to active study participation as appropriate.  
With failure to re -establish contact, and failure to find new contact information, you will be 
considered lost to follow up and removed from this study.  
Sincerely,  
{Study Designee}  