UT Houston Protocol Template  
Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines  IRB NUMB EPRag: eHS1Co-fM6S-18-0242  
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 06/26/2018    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Are NSAIDs effective enough for postoperative pain control after functional 
endoscopic sinus surgery and septoplasty?  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Version Date: 6/26/2018  
  
UT Houston Protocol Template  
Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines  IRB NUMB EPRag: eHS2Co-fM6S-18-0242  
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 06/26/2018   Protocol  Title:  Are NSAIDs effective enough for postoperative pain control after functional 
endoscopic sinus surgery and  septoplasty?  
Principal  Investigator:  Martin Citardi  MD 
 
Co-Investigators:  Alok Saini MD, William Yao MD, Amber Luong MD PhD, Zi Yang Jiang,  MD 
 
Study  Coordinator:  None  
 
Population:  100 adult patients undergoing functional endoscopic sinus surgery and/or 
septoplasty with Drs. Citardi, Luong, or Yao at Memorial Hermann -Texas 
Medic al Center  and the Plaza  Ambulatory  Surgery  Center  will be included  
Number  of Sites:  Single site /  UTHEALTH  
 
Study  Duration:  We anticipate recruitment will take 9  months.  
 
Subject  Duration:  Each subject will be followed for 5 days after  surgery.  
 
 
 
General Information  
 Endoscopic sinus surgery (ESS) is a common procedure performed in the US with roughly 500,000 
cases occurring annually. Many surgeons prescribe opioid pain medications for pain control in the 
postoperative period. Given the current opioid epidemic, studies  ought to determine the true 
necessity of their use to prevent unnecessary narcotic  usage.  
 
Background Information  
 Endoscopic sinus surgery is an extraordinarily common procedure performed in the US. Currently, 
there is no standardized postoperative pain r egimen. Generally, most surgeons prescribe opioids for 
postoperative pain control in patients undergoing functional endoscopic sinus surgery. Traditionally, 
rhinologists have avoided the use of non -steroidal anti -inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) due to fear of 
increased bleeding risks in the postoperative period. However, opioids have their own side effects, 
including respiratory depression, constipation, addiction, and nausea/vomiting. Recently, our group 
has found the use of NSAIDs to be safe and effective in the postoperative period. There is now 
equipoise regarding the medication of choice for pain control after FESS. No definitive study has 
compared the level of pain control in patients receiving NSAIDs to those receiving opioids in the 
postoperative period after ESS. In fact, there is a significant paucity of data regarding postoperative 
pain scores in patients undergoing  ESS. 
 Our hypothesis is that NSAIDs, specifically diclofenac, are safe and effective in the postoperative 
period after ESS. We believe that  NSAIDs will provide pain relief that is non -inferior to opioids in the 
days following ESS. To our knowledge, no studies have compared the use of NSAIDs to opioids in the 
postoperative period following ESS. If our hypothesis is true, this study will provid e the basis for a 
significant shift in prescribing patterns following ESS and obviate the need of opioid usage in the 
roughly 500,000 patients undergoing ESS  annually.  
 
Objectives  
UT Houston Protocol Template  
Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines  IRB NUMB EPRag: eHS3Co-fM6S-18-0242  
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 06/26/2018    Our primary objective is to compare overall pain score (10 cm visual analog scale) at 24 hours post - 
surgery between patients receiving diclofenac sodium to those receiving acetaminophen - 
hydrocodone following ESS and/or  septoplasty.  
 Secondary objectives w ill be to compare average, most severe, and least severe 24 hour pain score 
at 48 hours, 72 hours, and 120 hours post -surgery between patients receiving diclofenac sodium to 
those receiving acetaminophen -hydrocodone following ESS. Additional secondary obje ctives will be 
to determine the rate of bleeding complications in patients receiving diclofenac sodium to those 
receiving acetaminophen -hydrocodone following ESS as well as noting the rates of constipation and 
nausea/vomiting in each group.  
 
Study Design  
 We propose to perform a randomized, controlled study to compare the safety and efficacy of 
diclofenac sodium when compared to the acetaminophen -hydrocodone following ESS. Patients will 
be randomized  by computer -generated  sequencing  in conjunction  with  a standard  envelope  system.  
 Our primary outcome will be the overall pain score on a 100 mm visual analog scale at 24 hours 
following  ESS. 
 Secondary outcome measures will be the overall pain scores, most severe pain score experienced in 
the 100 mm VAS, and le ast severe pain score experienced at 48 hours, 72 hours, and 120 hours 
following ESS. An additional secondary outcome will be the number of bleeding complications as 
defined as those requiring a trip to the emergency room or requiring intervention or epist axis as 
well as rates of constipation and nausea/vomiting among participants in each  group.  
 
Study Population  
 Inclusion criteria will be English speaking adults (age >18) who are candidates for endoscopic sinus 
surgery as determined by medical necessity by the treating  rhinologist.  
 Exclusion  criteria  will be allergy  to either  NSAIDs  or opioids,  contraindication  to NSAIDs  (ex. gastritis, 
chronic kidney disease), surgical plan exceeding basic endoscopic sinus surgery, use of anti - 
coagulation, the presence of any pain disorder, the current usage of any analgesic medication, 
history of opioid addiction, pregnancy, his tory of chronic pain or fibromyalgia, current daily use of 
NSAIDs, acetaminophen, opioids or other analgesics (pregabalin, tramadol,  etc).  
 All patients scheduled for surgery will be offered inclusion in the  study.  
 
Study Procedures  
 This study will require no additional study visits beyond the routine clinical postoperative  visits.  
 An electronic  REDCap  database  will be created  and postoperative  pain  surveys  will be emailed  to 
each patient at 24 hours, 48 hours, 72 hours, and 120 hours  post -ESS. 
 Background information including age, sex, history of migraines, temporomandibular joint disorder, 
fibromyalgia, pain disorders and the current use of pain medication or NSAIDs will be input into the 
REDCap database prior to surgery.  
 
Data and Safety Monit oring  
 No adverse  events  are expected.  Epistaxis  after  ESS is not uncommon  and patients  receive 
instructions regarding postoperative epistaxis as standard  procedure.  
 Any unexpected events (including adverse events, protocol deviations, other problems) will be 
reported directly to the principal investigator at the time of the  incident.  
UT Houston Protocol Template  
Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines  IRB NUMB EPRag: eHS4Co-fM6S-18-0242  
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 06/26/2018    On the first day of every month after study initiation, information regarding bleeding events 
experienced postoperatively will be reviewed. In the event of a >5% increase in bleeding rate in the 
group receiving diclofenac, the study will be  halted.  
 
Statis tics 
 Based off of a small pilot series of 9 patients, the means score 24 hours after FESS was 30 with a 
range of 10 -75 and standard deviation of  22.8.  
 Sample calculations were performed for a non -inferiority limit of 15mm on the 100mm VAS score, 
90% power,  alpha of 0.025, with an estimated standard deviation of  22.8.  
 41 patients are calculated to be required in each group for a total patient count of  82 
 Due to roughly  an anticipated  10%  dropout  (failure  to complete  survey  at 24 hours),  we plan  to 
recruite 100  patients  
 Interim  analysis  for safety  purposes  will only  be performed  via the proportionality  test for epistaxis 
requiring unplanned visits to the emergency room or physician’s office. The anticipated baseline 
rate for this complication is 1 % each month of the trial. The trial will be terminated if a significant 
number of epistaxis beyond the baseline is found in the NSAID  group.  
 Analysis  for primary  and secondary  outcomes  will be performed  via a t-test for two independent 
means for pain scores at 24, 48, 72, and 120 hours after  FESS  
 Analysis of other secondary outcomes of patients’ experiences with epistaxis, constipation, and 
nausea/vomiting is to be done via the proportionality  test 
 All randomized subjects wit h returned questionnaires will be included in the statistical  analysis.  
 Analysis is performed with STATA 14 (College Station,  TX) 
 
Ethics  
 IRB approval will be sought from  CPHS.  
 Patients  will be offered  inclusion  in the clinic  and will be consented  at that time  if they  elect  to 
participate.  
 
Data handling and record keeping  
 All data will be maintained in the UTHEALTH REDCap database. Data will only be accessible by the 
principal investigator and co -investigator  Saini.  
 The only identifying information that wi ll be stored in the REDCap database will be the patient’s 
Allscripts MRN and email address. Once all information is collected, medical record numbers and 
email  addresses  will be removed  from  the dataset  so that the information  is no longer  identifiable.  
 
Quality control and assurance  
 Co-investigator  Saini  will aggregate  data  directly  from  Allscripts  for input  into the REDCap  database. 
This will ensure that data is accurate, consistent, complete and  reliable.  
 There are no plans to have ongoing third party  monitoring.  
 
Publication Plan  
 The study  results  will be submitted  to the American  Rhinologic  Society  for oral presentation  for the 
Spring 2019  meeting.  
 The results will not be directly returned to the study  participants.  
 
ATTACHMENTS  
UT Houston Protocol Template  
Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines  IRB NUMB EPRag: eHS5Co-fM6S-18-0242  
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 06/26/2018    
1. Schematic of Study  Design  
2. Study  Schedule  
3. Consent  Document  
4. Case Report Form  
UT Houston Protocol Template  
Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines  IRB NUMB EPRag: eHS6Co-fM6S-18-0242  
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 06/26/2018   Sinus Surgery  
Postop Day 1  Pain Survey 1  
Postop Day 2  Pain Survey 2  
Postop Day 3  Pain Survey 3  
Postop Day 5  Pain Survey 4  Schematic Design of Study  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
UT Houston Protocol Template  
Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines  IRB NUMB EPRag: eHS7Co-fM6S-18-0242  
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 06/26/2018   Study Schedule  
1. Study  Initiates:  April 1, 2018  
2. Data  Collection  Concludes  January 1,  2018  
3. Data  Analysis  Complete  February 1, 2018  
4. Submission  for Publication  March 1,  2018  