 
 
 
 
 
Protocol Title : The Esthetic Effect of Bio -OSS Collagen® on the Mid -facial 
Gingival Dimensions When Placed Into Gaps Between 3i® Implants Placed Into 
Fresh Extraction Sockets and the Labial Plate of Bone  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]   
AAAM4053  
Version October 18, 2016  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nurit Bittner Fogel , DDS, MS, Dip. ABP  
Assistant Professor of Dental Medicine  
Columbia University  
College of Dental Medicine  
 
 
 
 
 
Protocol AAAM4053  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
2 
 Background  
 
Dental implants have traditionally been placed in a two stage sur gical procedure. Initially, the 
implant body is placed, followed by three to six months later for the c onnection of the implant 
to the abutment. The implant is finally loaded when a prosthetic restorat ion is affixed to the 
abutment. Today, evidence exists which reveals that immediately l oaded i mplants may have 
survival rates that are equal to those of implants loaded after a time delay. Mijiritsky et al. 
(2009) showed a survival rate of non -functional immediately loaded implants of 9 5.8%. The 
amount of dimensional changes of the soft tiss ues, however, has been poorly documente d in 
the literature. A study by Cardaropoli et al. (2006) evaluated peri -implant tissue alterations i n 
the maxillary anterior region and found 0.6mm apical displacement of labial tissues. However, 
their approach emplo yed the two stage surgical procedure. Therefore, many questions remain 
in regard to the clinical success of immediately loaded implants.  Following tooth extractio n, the 
alveolar ridge undergoes remodeling of the buccal and lingual walls of the extraction so cket, 
with more pronounced bone loss on the buccal aspect. The placement of an implant into a  
fresh extraction site does not prevent bone remodeling (Araujo, 2005), and therefore, these 
ridge  alterations must be considered when placing immediate implants, especially in the 
esthetic zone.  After installation of implants into fresh extraction sockets, marginal 
circumferential defects of varying sizes usually exist.  
 
Whether complete bone fill may occur, regardless of the size of the gap distance between the 
buccal plate and implant, is still a question to be answered. Bott icelli et al. (2004) fo und that 
marginal gaps of 3.4 mm can heal with substantial bone forma tion without the use of barrier 
membranes or filler materials. Also, a convex surface such as a prope rly designed provisional 
restoration provides a template against which soft tissue can heal and remodel (Weinlander,  
2010). Ideally, it will allow for adequate bulk of tissue formati on and proper emergence profile 
while meeting esthetic demands and protect ing any graft material placed in the gap. Studies 
have also addressed the effect of gingival biotype on hard and soft  issues in immediate 
extraction implant procedures in the esthetic zone (Kois, 2001, Kan, 2011). Kan (2011) reported 
apicoocclusal facial g ingival tissue stability following immediate imp lant placement in the 
maxillary esthetic zone without guided bone regeneration, favorable succes s rates and peri -
implant tissue responses. Although this study reported spontaneous interproximal papilla 
regene ration, there was however, continued overall facial recession, more so in the th in soft 
tissue b iotype than the thick tissue biotype. Raes at el. (2011) reported successful results  and 
less vertical recession of the facial gingival with a flapless surgical  approach during immediate 
implant placement in thick  biotype cases where the bony walls are intact and proper treatment  
planning with diagnostic tools is executed in appropriate cases.  It is a challenge to measure 
chang es in soft tissue width because this dimension is difficult to assess and reproduce. 
Windlisc h et al. (2007) described a new method to measure intra -oral volume changes based 
upon an  optical system which scans the intraoral anatomy with a camera (Schneider, 2003.) In 
an in vitro study, s everal datasets of 3 -D objects were captured and volumetric differences 
measured. The r esults were highly accurate and reproducible. The same method was reported 
by Strebel et al. (20 09) and Schneider et al . (2010) to measure soft tissue changes of the den tal 
papilla, alveolar ridge and buccal mucosa. In a  recent study by Thoma et al. (2010), soft tissue 
Protocol AAAM4053  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
3 
 volume gain with a newly developed collagen matrix was evaluated in chronic ridge defects 
compared to sub -epithel ial connective tissue grafts in dogs. Cast s were obtained and soft tissue 
changes were digitally analyzed.  The aim of the current study is to evaluate the soft tissue 
dimensional changes after extr action of teeth in the esthetic zone, when combined with the 
placement of implants into these fresh ex traction sockets. Furthermore, the effect of placing a 
graft material, Bio -OSS Collage n®, into the gap between the 3i ® implant and the labial plate of 
bone will be evaluated after an  immediately loaded provisional restoration is placed.  
 
Study Design  
 
This is a single -blind, randomized, controlled, single -center study : 
32 subjects will have an immediate implant placed in the maxillary anterior reg ion (#4 -12) after 
extractio n of a hopeless tooth. 16 subjects will be randomly selec ted to receive Bio -Oss 
Collagen ® (Test gr oup) and 16 subjects will have no graft (Control group) in the gap between 
the implan t and the labial plate of bone.  
 
Hopeless maxillary anterior teeth will be extracted and implants will be placed in a flapless 
procedure. Implants will be immediately loade d with provisional restorations once determi ned 
that the implant is stable. Changes in vertical height and horizontal dimensional changes of the 
free gin gival margins will be evaluated at 3, 6, and 12 months post -immediate implant 
placement. Both groups are only different by the draft tha t will be placed at the time of implant 
placement.  Both treatment choices are currently standard of care in immediate implant 
therapy. Patients will only be include  into the study if the extraction  socket is intact as outlined 
below and, therefore, imm ediate i mplant placement with or without  drafting would be 
possible. If patients decide not to go ahead with the study, treatment could be performed 
either way in our clinic. Both methods are sta ndard of care.  
 
Based on the literature (see above and here ):  
 
Cornelini R, Cangini F, Co vani U, Wilson TG Jr. Immediate restoration of implants placed into 
fresh extraction sockets for single -tooth replacement: a prospective clinical study. Int J 
Periodontics Restorative D ent. 2005 Oct;25(5):439 -47. 
 
De Rouck T, Collys K, Cosyn J. Immediate single -tooth implants in the anterior maxilla: a 1 -year 
case cohor t study on hard and soft tissue response. J Clin Periodontol. 2008 Jul;35(7):649 -57. 
Epub 2008 Apr 16.,  
 
Mijiritsky E, Mar dinger O, Mazor Z, Chaushu G. Immediate provisionalization of single -tooth 
implants in fresh -extraction sites at the  maxillary esthetic zone: up to 6 years of follow -up. 
Implant Dent. 200 9 Aug;18(4):326 -33.).  
 
Immediate implant placement can be done with or without grafting. An intact sock et does not 
necessarily require  grafting. Currently, both procedures (placement with grafting and without 
grafting) are considered standard  of care). One group will receive grafting and the other group 
Protocol AAAM4053  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
4 
 will receive no grafti ng. Whether the patient can really participate in the study can only be 
decided after the socket has been evaluated and has been classified as intact (no buccal bone 
loss, no dehisced bone). Nevertheless, p atients will sign study consent before the surgica l 
treatment at the time of initial consultation. If the soc ket has been compromised during 
extraction and an immediate implant placement will not be possible, pati ent will not proceed 
with study implant therapy and will continue his treatment in the clinic . A standard of c are 
treatment would be to place a delayed implant at a later time point. There is no risk involved in 
partic ipating in the study since both treatment choices are standard of care.  
 
Statistica l Procedures  
 
Our current  study aims to analyze dimensional stability after immediate implant placement in 
fresh extraction sockets. We will simultaneously graft the socket with a synthetic combination 
bone material and compare it to sockets that will not be grafted. Currently, th ere are no 
randomized controlled clinical studies available that compare these two different treatment 
modalities. However, we will use a randomized controlled study that compared different socket 
/implant treatments (immediate versus delayed implant place ment). They found a difference in 
buccal/lingual dimensional stability (1.9 in an immediate group versus 3.06 in a delayed group) 
(Covani et al, 2004). In order to detect a difference of 10% with a power of 80% at a significance 
level of 0.05 between contr ol and study group, we will need to perform at least 16 procedures 
per group. Primary efficacy variable is the height and thickness of keratinized tissue at 3,6,12, 
24 months post surgery. Post surgery assessment of recession width, color, texture and cont our 
ratings, marginal gingival level, biotype assessment are secondary variables. Summary statistics 
(mean, SD, median, p25, p75, min, max) will be calculated for all measured variables in each 
group. Results between both groups will be compared using the Student’s t -test for normal 
distribution and the Mann - Whitney -U test for a non -parametric distribution of values. 
Categorical values will be compared using the chi -square test. For secondary analyses, we will 
use appropriate parametric or nonparametric te sts to compare group differences.  
 
Confidentiality of Study Data  
 
Confidentiality of Study Data Patients will receive a study number that corresponds the medical 
record number. Notes and evaluation results during the visits will be recorded electronically or 
on paper. All paper informa tion will be entered into a Microsoft Excel database for storage 
and/or stored in a locked cabinet. All consent forms, after being 09/18/2015 signed by the 
patient and the study documentations will be kept in a locked cabinet in the principal 
investigator' s office. Besides the personnel involved in the study, the following parties may 
review or copy consent forms, dental records or study documentation: The sponsor and their 
designees; Agents of the FDA; CUMC and OHRP. Because of the need to release informat ion to 
these parties, absolute confidentiality cannot be guaranteed. Furthermore, the aggregate 
results of this study may be used for teaching purposes, at meeting, or in publications, the 
subject's identity will not be disclosed in these presentations.  Electronic data will be stored on 
encrypted end user devices.  
 
Protocol AAAM4053  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
5 
 Study Procedures  
 
At the present time, grafting or no grafting at the time of implant placement can be considered 
standard of care. We will take measurements to compare both groups. How measurements are 
taken is outlined below:  
 
The surgic al technique is described as:  
1. Admi nistration of 2000mg Amoxicillin -1 hour prior to surgery. For patients allergic to 
Amoxicillin, 600mg Clindamycin 1 hour prior to  surgery will be substituted.  
2. Administration of local anesthesia and impression using alginate will be taken to measure 
ridge  dimensions.  
3. Extraction of hopeless tooth will  be performed without a flap. Dental extractions are usually 
done without raising a flap. Only if the tooth is very compromised and the tooth is difficult 
to access, a flap needs to be raised. Extraction sockets will be evaluated to determine 
whether it is intact and has no lesion or shows signs of bone loss. This can be done using a 
periodontal probe. Dental implants will only be plac ed if the socket is intact.  
4. Check for labial plate of bone that is  <4mm from the gingiv al margin.   
5. Placement of implant into socket towards palatal wall.  
6. Measure:  
a. Thickness of buccal plate 1 mm from  crest with special calipers.  
b. Distanc e from buccal of implant to buccal crest of bo ne (horizontal gap distance).  
c. Vertical depth of ga p on facial aspect of implant  
d. 16 subjects will randomly get Bio -OSS Colla gen® packed firmly into gap.  
7. Place temporary abutment and fabricated screw -retai ned provisional.  
8. No sutures will be used since no flap was raised. However, if at the surgeon’s discretion 
sutures were indicated, they will be placed.  An X -ray will be taken after implant placement. 
This is standard  of care. However, a half arch alginate impression will be taken and attached  
to the rim that is being used to hold the X -ray film. This way the pati ent will always bite 
down in the same way and the X -ray will always be shot in the same angulation.  
9. Take 2nd alginate impression:  
10. Placement of subject on appropriate analgesic (i.e. Acetominophen with or without codeine 
#3 or #4, or Motrin 600mg, or Vicodin 500/5/1 -2 tabs q6h prn. Rinses with 0.12% 
Chlorhexidine  Gluconate BID for 14 days.  
11. Subject w ill be seen at 1 week post op.  
12. Subject will be seen at 3,6 and 12 months. At each of these visits, alginate impressions will 
be taken and digi tally scanned and analyzed. At 6 months, periapical film will be taken and 
pick-up impression with o pen tray impression coping.  
13. Delive r screw retained final restoration with zirconia framework and  pressed  lithium 
disilicate.  
14. Take 6th alginate impression. At one year (6 months after delivery of final restoration.) 
Measure Vertical height of free gingival margin from MGJ Visits 1, 2, 4 -6. Measure 
horizontal dimensional change to tenth of mm using calipers 1mm, 2mm below gingival  
margin at Visits 1, 2, 4 -7.  
Protocol AAAM4053  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
6 
 15. All models created from alginates will be poured with Whip Mix labstone. All models used 
for fabrication of the final crown will b e poured in silky Rock (Whip Mix ) or Resin Rock 
(Whip Mix).  
16. Measurements will be done by scanning the facial tissues on each model and then 
superimposing them on the original one. The difference in height (wKT) and facial -lingual 
dimension (thickness o r tKT) of the free gingival will be evaluated at 3, 6 and 12 months.  
17. The cast that was used for the final crown will be evaluated for facial thickness of tissue by 
measuring one mm and 2mm below the margin of the free gingiva . 
18. Images of the implant crown, the surrounding gum tissue and the neighboring teeth will be 
shown to people outside of the study and they will be asked to rate the color change of the 
gum tissue.  
19. De-identified data wil l be transferred from Columbia to Jena University. Transfer will be 
done using an encrypted external device. Data will be stored on a desktop computer at Jena 
University. The computer is password protected.  
 
Recruitment  
 
Patients will be recruited from patients who pr esent to the Division of Periodontics, 
Postgraduate Periodontology, College of Dental Medicine, Columbia University for bilateral 
sinus augmentation and subsequent implant placement. They should be over the age of 18 and 
meet the eligibility criteria. Subjects are clinical patients and the treating physician will provide 
the contact information of the study team to subjects.  
 
The treating dentist will make initial patient contact. After evaluat ing the patients, the patient 
will be made aware of the study and it will be made clear that participation is completely 
voluntary. When the patient agrees to participate, the study examiner will verbally inform and 
consent the patient (listed on consent f orm). In addition, examiner and subject will sign consent 
and HIPPA forms. Two copies will be made one for the subject and one copy will be for the 
study records.  
 
Potential Risks  
 
As with any surgical procedure, complications may occur as part of the surgical protocol. 
Possible complication relate d to an implant surgery are:  
1. Allergic or other unfavor able reaction to medications  
2. Pain and/or swelling  
3. Hematoma or bleeding  
4. Infec tion 
5. Change in appearance of the teet h or soft tissue (gum tissue)  
6. Change in function and chewing comfort  
7. Change in sen sation on the palate and lip  
8. Loss, fracture or loose ning of the temporary crown  
9. Bone loss around implant  
 
Protocol AAAM4053  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
7 
 Study Population  
 
Subjects will b e selected from the patient population Division of Periodontics, College of Dental 
Medicine Columbia University School of Dentistry, New York, NY according to stated inclusion 
and exclusion criteria. A total of 32 subjects with the need for a single tooth maxillary 
immediate implant (#4 -12). 
 
Inclusion Criteria  
 
1. Subject must have read, understood and sig ned an informed consent form.  
2. Subjects must be willing and able to follow study  procedures and instructions.  
3. Subjects must have labial plate of bone present after extrac tion no more than 4 mm 
from the free gingival margin.  
4. Subjects must require on e maxillary anterior implant.  
5. Subjects must be older than 18 years.  