PROTOCOL TITLE: Efficacy of Nitric Oxide Administration in Attenuating Ischemia / 
Reperfusion Injury During Neonatal Cardiopulmonary Bypass  Version 3_6.3.16  
 
HRP -503 Template Protocol  Page 1 of 20 Revised: 11/08/13   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Title: Efficacy of Nitric Oxide Administration in Attenuating Ischemia / Reperfusion 
Injury During Neonatal Cardiopulmonary Bypass  
 
NCT: 02151877  
 
 
Version 3_ 3Jun2016  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Efficacy of Nitric Oxide Administration in Attenuating Ischemia / 
Reperfusion Injury During Neonatal Cardiopulmonary Bypass  Version 3_6.3.16  
 
HRP -503 Template Protocol  Page 2 of 20 Revised: 11/08/13  Protocol Title   
Efficacy of Nitric Oxide A dministration in Attenuating Ischemia / Reperfusion 
Injury During Neonatal C ardiopulmonary Bypass  
1) IRB Review History  
N/A 
2) Objectives  
 
Hypothesis : The introduction of nitric o xide (NO) directly into the cardiopulmona ry 
bypass circuit, during neonatal surgical repair of congenital heart lesions, will a ttenuate 
ischemia reperfusion injury that can complicate the surgical procedure and postoperative 
recovery.  
 
Specific Objectives:  During the Norwood procedure for hypopla stic left heart syndrome  
(HLHS)  or its variants, there is around 20 to 30 minute s of ischemia to the myocardium 
between cardioplegia doses, and 20 to 30 minutes of interruption of flow to the lower 
body during reconstruction of the aortic arch. The propose d study  will help to know if 
NO can decrease ischemia reperfusion injury to the myocardium, as well as to the lower 
body org ans (liver, kidney, gastro -intestinal tract) . 
 
Specific Aims :   
1) Evaluate whether NO delivered through the neonatal CPB circuit can d ecrease the 
clinical signs of ischemia/reperfusion injury and/or cardiac  dysfunc tion as 
reflected by fluid balances, inotropic support, diuretic requirement , length of 
ventilator support , length of ICU stay , and length of hospital stay.  
 
2) Evaluate whether N O delivered through the neonatal CPB circuit can decrease 
various biochemical ma rkers of ischemia/reperfusion injury and oxidative damage  
[cardiac troponin I, interleukens (IL), tumor necrosis factor  (TNF) , N-terminal 
prohormone for brain natriuretic pepti de (NT -proBNP),lactate dehydrogenase 
(LDH), plasma anti -oxidant levels, plasma m alondialdehyde (MDA) levels ].  
 
3) Evaluate the safety of NO delivered through the neonatal CPB circuit as measured 
by adverse events during the course of the study.  
 
3) Background  
 
Around 25,000 -30,000 cardiac surgical operations are performed on pediatric pat ients 
each year, and around 7500 of them are performed on neonates. These operations are 
made possible by the use of cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB), which allows for circulatory 
and pulmonary support while the heart is being repaired. Although life -saving, t he use of 
CPB is associated with a variety of adverse effects, such as systemic inflammatory 
responses, neurological insufficiencies, coagulopathies, and most importantly 
ische mia/reperfusion (I/R) injury. Adverse heart -related events after surgically indu ced 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Efficacy of Nitric Oxide Administration in Attenuating Ischemia / 
Reperfusion Injury During Neonatal Cardiopulmonary Bypass  Version 3_6.3.16  
 
HRP -503 Template Protocol  Page 3 of 20 Revised: 11/08/13  I/R continues to be a major contributor to the morbidity and mortality after pediatric 
cardiac surgery. With the absence of pulsatile flow of the cardiopulmonary bypass, th e 
ischemia/reperfusion cellular injury is even more exaggerated in different vit al organs, 
like the heart, lung, liver, and kidneys. This is exaggerated by episodes of circulatory 
arrest or low flow status necessitated by the complexity of the repair. This  is also more 
prominent in neonates because of the complexity of the heart defec ts requiring longer 
time on cardiopulmonary bypass, and because of the immaturity of neonatal organ 
systems. According to the Society of Thoracic Surgeons database, most of the  neonatal 
cardiac repairs belong to the Risk Adjustment for Congenital Heart Sur gery (RACHS ) 5 
and 6 complexity categories, with a national hospital mortality of around 20% (1).  
 
The morbidity associated with inadequate cardiac protection suggests that new  strategies 
to enhance cardiac protection are needed. Recently, there has been m uch interest in the 
pharmacological conditioning of the heart to produce adequate protection during CPB -
associated surgically induced I/R.  More specifically, and at a cellular  level, recent 
laboratory data suggests that certain agents, such as nitric oxid e (NO), can protect cardiac 
cells against I/R injury by protecting the cardiac mitochondria. The mitochondria are the 
energy producing apparatus in human cells. Thus, by protec ting the mitochondria, one 
can protect the cardiac cell and minimize the effects  of surgically induced I/R injury 
during the repair of congenital heart defects.  
 
Ischemia/reperfusion injury and systemic inflammatory response syndrome are linked. 
After a p eriod of ischemia, reperfusion stimulate s the production of additional pro -
inflammatory mediators, in particular, reactive oxygen free radicals and cytokines by 
parenchymal, endothelial, platelet, and inflammatory cells, contributing to elevated serum 
levels of inflammatory mediators. Cell death results from coagulation necrosis and 
inflammatory mediator -induced apoptosis. Endothelial cell injury results in impairment 
of the NO -cyclic guanosine monophosphate signaling cascade and endothelial -dependent 
vasod ilatation (2). Alternations in NO generation appear to underpin the interrelatio nship 
of endothelial function and inflammation (3). NO might play several protective roles in 
reperfusion injury (4). NO is an important regulator of apoptosis, capable of both  
inducing and inhibiting apoptosis (5). NO has been shown to inhibit platelet ad hesion and 
aggregation (6) and is able to block monocyte adherence and migration (7). Furthermore, 
NO is an inhibitor of leukocyte activation, preventing neutrophil -endothelial  adhesion 
and the generation of oxygen free radicals (8).   
 
The use of inhaled NO as a pulmonary vasodilator agent in neonates is well established.  
In addition to its potent vasodilatory effects in the pulmonary vasculature, inhaled NO 
has also been show n to have significant peripheral anti -inflammatory effects. The safety 
of periop erative administration of NO via the CPB circuit has been described in animals 
and human beings (9,10,11). Inhaled NO during adult cardiac surgery patients has been 
reported to  reduce systemic inflammatory markers, attenuate endothelial dysfunction, and 
reduce ischemia/reperfusion injury (12,13,14). Administration of NO to adult patients 
undergoing cardiac surgery has been shown to blunt the release of markers of cardiac 
injury and decreases ventricular dysfunction during and immediately after CPB.  
 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Efficacy of Nitric Oxide Administration in Attenuating Ischemia / 
Reperfusion Injury During Neonatal Cardiopulmonary Bypass  Version 3_6.3.16  
 
HRP -503 Template Protocol  Page 4 of 20 Revised: 11/08/13  A more  recent study in infants has also shown that the NO administration via the CPB 
circuit can reduce various markers of inflammation and reduce postoperative 
complications (15). T o date, there have been no such studies relating NO administration 
via the CPB c ircuit and ischemia reperfusion injury in neonates undergoing surgical 
repair of congenital heart lesions.  
  
4) Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  
 
Inclusion criteria : 
 
• Neonates, ag e 0-30 days  
• Full term, > 37 weeks gestation  
• Birth weight ≥ 2.6 kg  
 
Exclusion criteria : 
 
• Preoperative sepsis   
• Renal dysfunction, (preopera tive creatinine greater than 1.0 ) 
• Intracranial hemorrhage  (preoperative intraventricular hemorrhage more or equal 
to grade 1)  
• Known Chromosomal abnormalities and/o r known genetic syndromes . (The 
Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) test is routinely done on all neonates 
with cardiac disease. If the test results are not received before surgery, the 
subject will be withdrawn as indicated in protocol section 14.)  
• Prior cardiac intervention , catheter -based or surgical  
• RV wall and endocardial fibroelastosis (as determined by pre -operative 
echocardiography).  
 
6)    Study -Wide Number of Subjects  
We will enroll a total of 24 subjects with 12 subjects in the treatment group 
and 12 subjects in the control group.   
 
7) Study -Wide Recruitment Methods  
 
The study will be performed at  ACH -OL. The pediatric cardiac surgery division 
performs approximately  400 surgeries each year at this site. Twenty -four neonates 
with HLHS  or its v ariants requiring surgical repair in the first few days of life will be 
randomized into 2 groups.  
 
All newborns with diagnosis of HLHS  or its variant, who undergo Norwood 
procedure and satisfy the inclusion criteria will be invited to participate  in the study .  
Most of these patients are diagnosed prenatally by fetal echocardiography and are 
born at ACH -OL. Few patients with no prenatal diagnosis or who are born at an 
outside institution are transferred to ACH -OL for further management.  Parents will 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Efficacy of Nitric Oxide Administration in Attenuating Ischemia / 
Reperfusion Injury During Neonatal Cardiopulmonary Bypass  Version 3_6.3.16  
 
HRP -503 Template Protocol  Page 5 of 20 Revised: 11/08/13  be inform ed about the study by our team of Pediatric Cardi ac surgeons  when they see 
the child  for a clinical preoperative exam . This exam  typicall y occurs after the child  is 
born and the diagnosis is confirmed by echocardiography, and before the scheduled 
surgical procedure.   
 
8) Study Timelines  
The estimated duration needed to recruit the 24 subjects  for the stud y is 
around 2 years. Each subject  will be enrolled in the study from the time of 
surgery  (Norwood procedure ) until discharge.  After all the subjects have been  
enrolled and the data has been collected,  we anticipate that 2 to 3  months to 
finish analyzing the data and writ e the manuscript.  
 
9) Study Endpoints  
 
The primary study endpoints are t o evaluate whether NO delivered through the 
neonatal CPB circuit can decr ease the clinical signs of ischemia/reperfusion injury 
and/or cardiac dysfunction . Clinical parameters include : 
o fluid balance  
o diuretic s requirement  
o inotropic support  
o duration of mechanical ventilation  (hours)  
o ICU length of stay (LOS)  
o Hospital LOS  
o End organ  failure (measured by BUN, creatinine, and liver function tests)  
 
The secondary  study endpoints are to  evaluate whether NO delivered through the 
neonatal CPB circuit can decrease various biochemical markers of 
ischemia/reperfusion injury and oxidative dama ge. Markers to be analyzed wi ll 
include:  
o cardiac troponin I   
o N-terminal prohormone for brain natriuretic peptide ( NT-proBNP ) 
o plasm a malondialdehyde (MDA) levels   
o superoxide dismutase  
o interleukens (IL)  
o lactate dehydrogenase ( LDH ) 
o procalcitonin  
o tumor necrosi s factor  (TNF alpha)  
o C-reactive protein (CRP)  
o Creatine phosphokinase -MB (CPK -MB)  
 
The primary safety measure  is the level of methemoglobin  while NO is being 
administered during cardiopulmonary bypass. The level will be checked every 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Efficacy of Nitric Oxide Administration in Attenuating Ischemia / 
Reperfusion Injury During Neonatal Cardiopulmonary Bypass  Version 3_6.3.16  
 
HRP -503 Template Protocol  Page 6 of 20 Revised: 11/08/13  ½ hour per standard cli nical practice , and NO administration  will be adjusted 
accordingly , to keep  the methemoglobin level below 3 %.  
 
10) Procedures Involved  
 
Design  
The study will employ a double -blind placebo -controlled randomized  block  design . 
 
Sample  
Twenty -four neonates with HLHS or its variants requiring surgical repair in the first few 
days of life will be randomized into 2 groups.  
 
Group 1 will include 12 subjects  who will receive inhaled NO via the CPB circuit for the 
duration of surgery. Group 2 will include 12 control  subjects. These controls will receive 
an identical NO via CPB set -up, but  will not receive NO during surgery. The subject s in 
both groups will undergo the standard Norwood procedure with a central systemic to 
pulmonary shunt or right ventricle to pulmonary ar tery shunt (Sano shunt). The only 
difference between groups will be the administration of NO via CPB.  
 
Standard Intra -operative protocol:  
After induction of general anesthesia using opiates (Fentanyl) and muscle relaxant, 
appropriate arterial line and cent ral venous line access will be obtained. Intra -operative 
monitoring of arterial blood pressure, central venous pressure, systemic oxygen 
saturation, cerebral and somatic (kidney) near -infrared spectroscopy, will be done 
throug hout surgery.  
 
After adequate  positioning, a regular median sternotomy incision will be done. The 
thymus gland is resected for better exposure. Under full heparinization ( activated clotting 
time >300sec) , CPB is instituted using an arterial cannula inserted in the ascending aorta 
(or ductus arteriosus in patients with HLHS ), and a venous cannula inserted in the right 
atrium or 2 separate superior and inferior vena cava cannula s.  
 
Once on CPB, the patient’s temperature is cooled down to 28 degrees Celsius. Cooling 
and war ming the patie nt are done with p H stat strategy, during which  the carbon dioxide 
level is allowed to rise in the CPB circuit to maintain a normal temperature corrected p H. 
All patients receive inhaled NO through the endotracheal tube after weaning from CPB.   
 
Research procedures  
The subjects  will be  randomized by the research perfusionist to either groups of the 
study. Only the perfusionist will be aware of the randomization process and NO delivery.  
The surgeon will be blinded to group assignment . Group 1  (treatment gro up) will receive 
NO via the CPB for the duration of surgery. Once the patient is off CPB, NO 
administration via CPB will be discontinued and switched to endotracheal tube 
administration. Group 2 (control group) will be treated with a strategy identical to that in 
the treatment group, with the exception that they will not receive NO via CPB.  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Efficacy of Nitric Oxide Administration in Attenuating Ischemia / 
Reperfusion Injury During Neonatal Cardiopulmonary Bypass  Version 3_6.3.16  
 
HRP -503 Template Protocol  Page 7 of 20 Revised: 11/08/13    
For subjects in Group 1, NO will be  delivered using the Inovent Transport delivery 
device (Ikaria, Hampton, NJ) after calibrating the machine according to the 
manufac turer’s instruction. While setting up and priming the CPB circuit, the NO 
delivery tubing will be  incorporated into the oxygenator inlet gas tubing using special 
reducing connectors. NO sampling will be  performed by adding a luer lock connector to 
the inle t gas tubing proximal to the oxygenator and attaching the sampling line to it.  
 
Once CPB is initiated , NO delivery will be  started at 40ppm as measured by the sampling 
line, and maintained at 40ppm during the procedure unless the serum methemoglobin  
level  increases above 3%. Once the patient is off CPB, NO delivery will be  discontinued, 
and the subject will be  managed similar to control s. 
 
Post-surgical care  
After finishing surgery, all subjects  will recover in the Pediatric Surgical Heart Unit 
(PSHU) unde r the direct care of the pediatric cardiac intensivist and the surgical team. 
Neither physician nor nurse involved in the post -operative care will be aware of the 
subject’s randomization assignment . 
 
Data collection (see schedule  of events  below ) 
All patie nts will have the following pre -operative labs drawn before surgery  as part of our 
standard of care : complete blood count (CBC), complete metabolic panel, coagulation 
profile, and blood type and cross match.  
 
On the day of surgery, the following research related markers will be drawn in the 
operating room after the patient is under anesthesia and after insertion of arterial and 
central venous access  (Time 0) : cardiac troponin  I, NT p ro-BNP, p lasma (MDA) level,  
superoxide dismutase,  IL-6, IL -8, lactate dehy drogenase (LDH), procalcitonin,  TNF 
alpha , CRP and CPK -MB. These markers will be rechecked at the end of CPB  and before 
modified ultrafiltration (Time 1), after modified ultrafiltration (Time 2) , 12 hours  (+/- one 
hour)  after CPB  (Time 3)  and 24 hours  (+/- one hour)  after CPB (in the PSHU ) (Time 4) . 
The amount of blood needed for each research blood draw will be 2 ml for a total of 10 
ml of blood to be drawn for research purposes.  
 
All patients will have an echo cardio gram, chest radiography and the followi ng blood tests 
drawn in the PSHU  on a daily basis that includes: complete blood count (CBC), complete 
metabolic panel with kidney function and liver function tests, and coagulation profile.  
These tests are conducted as part of our standard of care.  
 
All s tandard of care lab oratory tests will be performed and billed in accordance with 
usual hospital procedures. All research only labs will be shipped in batch to Immunetech  
labs and processed according to the appropriate procedures.  
 
Clinical data that will b e collected will include: CPB time and aortic cross clamp time, 
fluid requirement s, diuretic requirement inotropic support, ventilator hours , need to leave 
sternum open, ICU LOS  and total hospital  LOS, transfusions, blood and coagulation 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Efficacy of Nitric Oxide Administration in Attenuating Ischemia / 
Reperfusion Injury During Neonatal Cardiopulmonary Bypass  Version 3_6.3.16  
 
HRP -503 Template Protocol  Page 8 of 20 Revised: 11/08/13  factors, total amo unt of chest tube drainage, post -operative complications like bleeding, 
infection or seizure s, renal dysfunction, arrhythmias,  and post-operative need for 
extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) support.   
 
Schedule of Events  
 
 Screening         End 
of 
Study Post 
study 
follow -
up 
Visit description  Preop  Time  
0  
(Preop)  Time 
1 
(end 
of 
CPB 
and 
before 
MUF ) Time 
2 (end 
of 
CPB, 
after 
MUF)  Time 
3  (12 
hrs +/ - 
one 
hour  
 Post 
CPB)  Time 
4 (24 
hrs +/ - 
one 
hour  
Post 
CPB)  Time 
5 
Day 2 
Postop  Time 
6 
Day 3 
Postop  Time 
7 
D/C 
date Time 
8 
Informed Consent  X          
Demographic 
information  X          
Concomitant 
medications  X        X X 
Laboratory tests            
Cardiac Troponin  I  X X X X X     
NT pro -BNP   X X X X X     
Plasma MDA   X X X X X     
Superoxide 
Dismu tase  X X X X X     
IL-6  X X X X X     
IL-8  X X X X X     
LDH   X X X X X     
Procalcitonin   X X X X X     
TNF alpha   X X X X X     
CRP   X X X X X     
CPK -MB  X X X X X     
BUN and Cr   SOC    SOC   SOC  SOC    
Liver function tests   SOC    SOC   SOC  SOC    
Diagnostic tests            
CXR  SOC     SOC  SOC  SOC  SOC    
Echo cardiogram  SOC     X SOC  SOC   SOC   
Clinical course            
Fluid balance      X X X X   
Diuretic 
requirement      X X X X   
Inotropic support      X X X X   
Ventilator Hours      X X X X   
ICU LOS          X  
Hospital LOS         X  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Efficacy of Nitric Oxide Administration in Attenuating Ischemia / 
Reperfusion Injury During Neonatal Cardiopulmonary Bypass  Version 3_6.3.16  
 
HRP -503 Template Protocol  Page 9 of 20 Revised: 11/08/13  Safety Adverse 
Event Reporting    X  X X X X X X 
Complications          X X 
Mortality          X X 
SOC=standard of care, MUF = modified ultrafiltration  
 
11) Data and Specimen Banking  
The data will be collected and  saved on a  password -protected  Excel data sheet  
which will be stored on the password -protected computer of princip al 
investigator.  
 
12) Data Management  
Sample Size Estimation  
Sample size estimation was calculated using PASS 12 ( 15) based on the 
number of subje cts needed to compare the difference in fluid balance as 
measured by the total amount of fluid administered in the first 24 and 48 
hours for the two  group s. Power analysis was run based on published data 
that showed a difference 130 mL between similar grou p assignments . (14) 
A sample size of 12 achieves 83% power to detect a mean d ifference of 75 
mL with an estimated standard deviation of 60 mL  and with a significance 
level (alpha) of 0.05 using a  two sample t-test.  
Data Management  
Standard of care l ab val ues and clinical indicators as identified in protocol 
Section 9 will be recorded in the electronic medical record (EMR) p er 
routine hospital  procedure . Lab values of markers being collected for 
research only will be received in a report directly from the l abs. 
Investigators will extract study data from the EMR or lab results onto a 
source document for data collection and record into an electronic 
spreadsheet.  
Statistical Analysis Plan  
Data analysis will include measures of central tendency for all 
demograph ic and outco me variables. The primary endpoint of clinical 
indicators, including fluid balance, inotropic support, ventilator hours, and 
LOS  will be co mpared between groups using a Repeated Measures 
ANOVA with post hoc comparisons , Student’s t -test or chi -square as 
appropriate . A p -value less than, or equal to, 0.05 will be regarded 
statistically significant.  
Secondary outcomes to be compared between groups include the 
biochemical markers . Analysis will be done using Student’s t -test and a p -
value less than , or equal t o, 0.05 will be regarded statistically significant.   
PROTOCOL TITLE: Efficacy of Nitric Oxide Administration in Attenuating Ischemia / 
Reperfusion Injury During Neonatal Cardiopulmonary Bypass  Version 3_6.3.16  
 
HRP -503 Template Protocol  Page 10 of 20 Revised: 11/08/13  The other indicators, n umber of adverse events (as determined by 
methemoglobin) will also be described  and reported as indicated in 
protocol Section 13.  Differences in adverse event rates wil l be evaluat ed 
using descriptive and inferential statistics as appropriate.  
Data Storage  
All information gathered during this study will be kept confidential. 
Subjects will be assigned case numbers and data collection forms that 
including the patient name will only be  seen by the research team. All data 
collection  forms will be placed in a confidential folder within the  principal  
investigator’s locked office. Tabulation of data will be stored in a 
password protected file within a password protected computer . The result s 
of this study may be published in scientific journals or be presented at 
professional meetings, but no individuals will be identified. The collection 
and handling of data will be in complete accordance with the HIPPA 
regulations. The research -related rec ords for this study may be inspected 
by a federal regulatory agency and the Institutional Review Board.  
Data collected for this study will be maintained for t hree years after the 
investigation is complete and the FDA is notified.  
13) Provisions to  Monitor the  Data to Ensure the Safety of Subjects  
MONITORING PLAN  
The individuals responsible for data safety and monitoring will be Dr. 
Elzein  (PI). Quality control will include regular data verification and 
protocol compliance checks by Dr. Elzein . 
COLL ECTION AND R EPORTING OF SAEs AND AEs  
Throughout the study, Dr. Elzein and the study research coordinator  will 
monitor study participants f or adverse events.  Dr. Elzein  will review all 
adverse events (AEs) and serious adverse events (SAEs) individually and  in 
aggregat e on a biweekly basis.  Dr. Elzein  will report all AEs and SAEs to 
the Advocate Health Care IRB according to the AE reporting guidelines.  
For this study, the following standard AE definitions will be used:  
Adverse event:   Any unfavorable and u nintended si gn (including an 
abnormal laboratory finding), symptom or disease, that did not exist at the 
time of the subject’s entry into the study and that is temporally associated 
with the use of the study medication, regardless of whether it is consider ed 
related t o the study medication.   
Suspected adverse reaction : A suspected adverse reaction means any 
adverse event for which there is a reasonable possibility that the drug caused 
the adverse event. For the purposes of IND safety reporting, ‘reasonable  
possibility ’ means there is evidence to suggest a causal relationship between 
the drug and the adverse event. A suspected adverse reaction implies a lesser 
degree of certainty about causality than an adverse reaction.  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Efficacy of Nitric Oxide Administration in Attenuating Ischemia / 
Reperfusion Injury During Neonatal Cardiopulmonary Bypass  Version 3_6.3.16  
 
HRP -503 Template Protocol  Page 11 of 20 Revised: 11/08/13  Adverse Reaction:  An adverse reaction  means any a dverse event caused by 
a drug. Adverse reactions are a subset of all suspected adverse reactions 
where there is reason to conclude that the drug caused the event.  
Unexpected Adverse E vent:   An adverse event or suspected adverse 
reaction is con sidered “une xpected” if it is not consistent with the risk 
information described in this plan.    
The following list of medically important unexpected  events is intended to 
serve as a guideline for determining which condition may be considered 
reportable. The list is not intended to be exhaustive:  
• Renal failure  
• Delay of chest closure (i.e. > 7 days)  
• Surgical wound from study related surgery necessitating 
debridement  
• Sepsis (i.e. confirmed by positive laboratory culture)  
• Delayed extubation (i.e. intubation period lasti ng > 3 weeks)  
 
Serious Adverse Event:   A significant hazard or side effect, regardless of 
the Investigator’s opinion on the relationship to treatment group .  SAEs will 
be recorded and reported using the INO Therapeutics/Ikaria SAE form  (see 
Attachment A) . A serious adverse event is any untoward medical occurrence 
that at any dose:  
• Results in death  
• Is life -threatening (defined in this case as an event in which the 
subject was at risk of death at the time of the event/reaction; it does 
not ref er to an eve nt/reaction which hypothetically might have 
caused death if it were more severe)  
• Requiring prolongation of existing hospitalization  (i.e., > 4 weeks  
which is a typical hospitalization time for this population ) 
• Results in persistent or signi ficant disab ility/incapacity  (e.g., stroke, 
seizure)  
• Required intervention to prevent permanent impairment/damage 
(e.g., re-intubation, ECMO, additional surgical intervention)  
AEs will be graded by the investigator according to the following scale:  
Mild :  An event that is easily tolerated by the subject, causing minimal 
discomfort and not interfering with everyday activities.  This includes 
transient laboratory test alterations.  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Efficacy of Nitric Oxide Administration in Attenuating Ischemia / 
Reperfusion Injury During Neonatal Cardiopulmonary Bypass  Version 3_6.3.16  
 
HRP -503 Template Protocol  Page 12 of 20 Revised: 11/08/13  Moderate:   An event that is sufficiently discomforting to interfere with 
normal everyday  activities.  This includes laboratory test alterations 
indicating injury, but without long -term risk.  
Severe:   An event that prevents normal everyday activities. If 
prolongation of hospitalization is greater than 4 weeks, required for 
treatmen t it becomes  an SAE.  (An AE that is severe should not be 
confused with a SAE.  Severity is a category utilized for rating the 
intensity of an event; and both AEs and SAEs can be assessed as mild, 
moderate or severe.)  
However, relating the intensity of cli nical AEs to  functional daily life and 
everyday activities may not be assessable in children in the P SHU.  
Therefore, if not possible to assess, the intensity of clinical AEs will be 
assessed by the investigator as per his/her best judgment.  
The study will  use the fol lowing AE attribution scale :  
Unrelated:   The AE is clearly related to other factors such as the 
subject’s clinical state, therapeutic interventions, or concomitant drugs 
administered to the subject (i.e., another cause of the event is most 
plausible and/o r a clinically plausible temporal sequence is inconsistent 
with the onset of the event).   
Unlikely related:   The event was most likely produced by other factors 
such as the subject’s clinical state, therapeutic interventions or 
concomitant dru gs administe red to the subject, and does not follow a 
known response pattern to the study drug.  
Possibly related:   The event follows a reasonable temporal sequence 
from the time of drug administration and/or follows a known response 
pattern to the study dr ug; but it c ould have been produced by other 
factors such as the subject’s clinical state, therapeutic interventions, or 
concomitant drugs administered to the subject.  
Probably related:   The event follows a reasonable temporal sequence 
from the time of dru g administra tion and follows a known response 
pattern to the study drug; and it cannot be reasonably explained by other 
factors such as the subject’s clinical state, therapeutic interventions, or 
concomitant drugs administered to the subject.  
AEs will be m onitored thr oughout the time that a subject is in the trial  
(hospital length of stay ). AEs will be assessed through a review of the hospital 
chart on a weekly basis and with a physical examination of the subject, if 
indicated.   
REPORTING OF ADVERSE EVENTS   
Events det ermined by the PI to involve injury or to be unexpected problems involving 
risk and probably related to the study drug will be reported by the PI to the IRB 
within 5 days per HRP 214. Adverse events that are determined by the PI not to 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Efficacy of Nitric Oxide Administration in Attenuating Ischemia / 
Reperfusion Injury During Neonatal Cardiopulmonary Bypass  Version 3_6.3.16  
 
HRP -503 Template Protocol  Page 13 of 20 Revised: 11/08/13  involve injury or not a related  risk of the use of NO during  the Norwood  surgery,  will 
be reported per IRB policy at the time of continuing review.   
 
An IND safety report will be reported to the FDA by the PI when an event meet all 
three of the definitions for suspected adver se reaction, serious  and unexpected . All 
FDA reporting will be consistent with 21 CFR 312.32 (c). For each reportable event, 
the information to be recorded in the source document includes the nature, date, 
intensity, duration, attribution (rela tionship to study drug), action taken and outcome 
of the event.  
• Unexpected serious suspected adverse reactions will be reported to FDA as 
soon as possible but no later than within 15 calendar days following the PI 
initial receipt of the information.  
• Unexpe cted fatal o r life -threatening suspected adverse reactions will be 
reported to FDA as soon as possible but no later than 7 calendar days 
following the PI initial receipt of the information.  
 
 
DATA ANALYSIS PLANS AND INTERRIM REPORTS  
An independent Data Sa fety Monitor ing Board (DSMB) will perform a 
statistical review of the study data and will have access to fully unblinded* 
patient data if necessary, to ensure patient safety. The DSMB will be 
comprised of 3 individuals  who are not involved in the conduct o f the study,  
representing pediatric cardiology or pediatric intensive care, perfusion and 
research. The DSMB will be empowered to recommend, based on safety 
considerations, modifications to the protocol or early termination of the study.  
The board will fu nction indep endently of the investigators.  AEs and SAEs  
will be monitored by the DSMB in an unblinded* manner during the study 
after half of the subjects (N=12, 6 in each group) are enrolled . Subsequent 
safety reports will be completed after each set of 6  subjects.  
*A the randomization code will be kept strictly confidential.  It will be 
provided to the DSMB by the perfusionist s (Vincenzo Rizzo, Cindy Urbas)  to 
ensure patient safety.    
The i nterim analyses will be performed to evaluate differences in AE an d SAE 
rates between the two treatment groups, and to evaluate the primary endpoint 
(fluid balance, morbidity and mortality ). The DSMB will prepare a report 
after each review which will be given to the PI, and, in turn, this report will be 
submitted by Dr. Elzein  to the IRB.  
The DSMB will be comprised of the following individuals:  
• Denise Angst, PhD, RN – Chair of DSMB, Director, Advocate Center for 
Pediatric Research   
• Christine Steffensen, PharmD, MA  - Clinical Coordinator, Pediatr ics 
and Pediatric Cr itical Care , Advocate Children’s Hospital -Oak Lawn  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Efficacy of Nitric Oxide Administration in Attenuating Ischemia / 
Reperfusion Injury During Neonatal Cardiopulmonary Bypass  Version 3_6.3.16  
 
HRP -503 Template Protocol  Page 14 of 20 Revised: 11/08/13  • Luis E. Torero, MD – Pediatric Pulmonologist, Torero Pulmonary 
Specialists, S.C.  
14) Withdrawal of Subjects  
The FISH test to test for chromosomal abnormality is done routinely on all 
neonates with cardiac disease.  If the FISH test result is  abnormal after the 
Norwood procedure is performed, ind icating genetic syndromes, the subject  
will be withdrawn from the study.  
It may be possible that RV wall and endocardial fibroelastosis may not be 
evident on the pre-operativ e echo but that it would be identified during the 
operation. If this condition is identified during the operation, the subject will 
be withdrawn at that time, randomization will be unblended and the subject 
will be treated as if they are not in the study ( e.g. will not have extra study 
blood drawn).  
At any time, the attending physician can withdraw a patient from this study if 
they feel it is warranted based on clinical condition .  Parents will be notified 
by the attending physician. The parents have the ri ght to withdraw their child  
from the study at any time.  If the parent decides to w ithdraw their child from 
the study, they will be asked if medical record collection can continue until 
the end of hospitalization. Documentation of the conversation and their  
decision will be entered into the research chart and medical record.  
 
15) Risks to S ubjects  
We have been using inhaled  NO during and after surgery at our center for 
over 8 years. The direct risk of using NO  in the CPB circuit  during surgery is 
related to ele vated methemoglobin serum level. An elevated methemoglobin 
level  is usually treate d effectively by decreasing the rate of NO 
administration. All  surgical  staff and team members are familiar with NO use.  
NO administration via the cardiopulmonary bypass cir cuit will be monitored 
by checking frequent methemoglobin levels. Per our standard  practice, this  
level is checked with every arterial blood gas which is usually performed 
every 30 minutes while the patient is on cardiopulmonary bypass. If the 
methemoglobi n level increases to 3%, NO administration will be decreased 
until methemoglobin  falls below this level . No other research -related risks are 
anticipated.   
After the surgery, subjects will be monitored for any adverse events 
throughout the course of their h ospitalization as outlined in safety monitoring 
plan protocol (Section 13 ). Approp riate medical care will be provided for any 
adverse events.  
 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Efficacy of Nitric Oxide Administration in Attenuating Ischemia / 
Reperfusion Injury During Neonatal Cardiopulmonary Bypass  Version 3_6.3.16  
 
HRP -503 Template Protocol  Page 15 of 20 Revised: 11/08/13  16) Potential Benefits to Subjects  
There are no guaranteed benefits to any subjects in this study.  The results of 
this study will be used to enhance our understanding of the effectiveness of 
NO to p otentially decrease ischemia reperfusion injury that can complicate the 
surgical procedure and postoperative recovery and may benefit future patients.  
Potential benefits to t he subject  could include decreased ischemia/reperfusion 
injury and systemic inflam matory reaction that is commonly seen after 
neonatal cardiac surgery. This will be reflected by improved post -operative 
myocardial function and preserved end organ function ( kidney, lung, liver), 
shorter intensive care unit and hospital stay and improved m ortality and 
morbidity.  
 
17) Vulnerable Populations  
 
This research involves children as a vulnerable population.  Informed 
consent /parental permission  will be assured by offerin g parents multiple opportunities 
to ask and have their questions answered about th e study before enrollment and 
throughout the study time period. Informed consent /parental permission  
documentation will be completed as discussed in Section 30. Subjects will  be too 
young to provide assent as they will all be neonates .  
 
18) Multi -Site Researc h 
The study will be performed exclusively at ACH -OL. 
 
19) Community -Based Participatory Research  
Not applicable  
 
20) Sharing of Results with Subjects  
The results of some tests routin ely performed  as standard of care  (including 
lab values ) may be shared with the fa mily by the physician involved in the 
care.  No further sharing of research -only procedures  or data will be provided  
to subjects or their families .  
 
21) Setting  
The research will  be conducted at ACH -OL with the research interaction 
taking place in the operatin g room and post -surgical data collection occurring 
while subjects are cared for in the PSHU.  
 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Efficacy of Nitric Oxide Administration in Attenuating Ischemia / 
Reperfusion Injury During Neonatal Cardiopulmonary Bypass  Version 3_6.3.16  
 
HRP -503 Template Protocol  Page 16 of 20 Revised: 11/08/13  22) Resources Available  
The Norwood procedure has been performed at our institution for over 20 
years. Our oper ative mortality varie s between 5 and 10 %; the national 
operative mortality for the Norwood procedure is around 16%. In the past, we  
perform ed between 20 and 30 Norwood procedure per year. During 2013, we 
performed around 15 proce dures with zero mortality. Our estimated period to 
recruit the 24 subjects  for the  study is 2 years (taking into consideration 
parents who decline participation ). 
Dr. Michel Ilbawi and I (Chawki Elzein) are the surgeons who will be 
performing these surgeri es. Dr . Ilbawi ha s over 20 years experience and Dr. 
Elzein  has approximately 10 years’ experience  with the Norwood procedure 
and the postoperative care of patients. The PSHU  is covered 24 hours a day, 
seven days a week, with a team of experienced pediatric  cardiac intensivists 
and experienced nursing staff.  Dr. Andrew VanBergen, chief o f cardiac 
critical care, has approximately 7 years’ experience  with postoperative care of 
Norwood procedure patients. The perfusionists run the cardiopulmonary 
bypass machine  during the Norwood procedure. They have more than 10 
years experience with extrac orporeal circulation during complex pediatric 
cardiac operations.  There is  a back -up ECMO (extracorporeal membrane 
oxygenation) team available in case of sudden postoperative  cardiorespiratory 
decompensation.  In addition, Vivian Cui and Robert Metzger, Pe diatric Echo 
cardiographers will be performing the echocardiography on the subjects.   
 
 
23) Prior Approvals  
Not applicable  
 
24) Recruitment Methods  
 
See protocol Section 7.    
 
25) Local  Number of Subjects  
See protocol Section 6.  
 
26) Confidentiality  
All information gathe red during this study will be kept confidential.  Data collection 
forms and the database that include the patient name and other PHI will be seen only 
by the principal invest igator and research team. All information and data gathered in 
this study will be placed in a password protected  computer  with restricted access by 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Efficacy of Nitric Oxide Administration in Attenuating Ischemia / 
Reperfusion Injury During Neonatal Cardiopulmonary Bypass  Version 3_6.3.16  
 
HRP -503 Template Protocol  Page 17 of 20 Revised: 11/08/13  only the investigative team. The results of this study may be publishe d in scientific 
journals or be present ed at professional meetings, but no individuals will be 
identified. The research -related records for this study may be inspected by a federal 
regulatory agency and the Institutional Review Board.    
 
Data will be stored on Advocate’s secure computer network  which will only be  
accessible by  the study  investigators.  
 
27) Provisions to Protect the Privacy Interests of Subjects  
See protocol Section 12 and 26.  
 
28) Compensation for Research -Related Injury  
No compensation will be provided for research -related injury . No funds have 
been set aside by Advocate Health Care as compensation for injury or any  
associated costs.   
 
29) Economic Burden to Subjects  
The patient is not responsible for any extra  costs related to  the research. The 
cost of NO use d in CPB during surgery, and th e cost of the serum 
ischemia/reperfusion and inflammatory markers , will be covered  by IKARIA  
Inc.  
 
30) Consent Process  
Written  parental permission/informed consent will be obtained from each child’s 
parent or legal guardian prior to surgery  (See Attachment B - Parental Permission 
form and Attachment C – HIPPA Authorization Form) .  We will f ollow procedures 
outlined in  SOP HRP -090 to obtain informed consent/parental permission.  
The neonate remains in the hospital from birth until the Norwood procedure is 
perform ed.  Parents  will be informed about the study by our team of Pediatric Cardiac 
surgeons when they see the child for a clinical preoperative exam.  This exam 
typically occurs after the child  is born and the diagnosis is confirmed by 
echocardiography, and be fore the scheduled surgical procedure.   
The informed consent /parental permission  process will take place at the same 
time as obtaining consent for surgery. The consent for surgery is usually 
obtained 1 -2 days before surgery date. Only the study investigato rs (Chawki 
Elzein, Andrew VanBergen) will be involved in obtaining t he research 
consent .  Approximately 15 to 30 minutes will be assigned for discussing the 
research study and potential related risks  to the subject .  The person obtaining 
the research conse nt will clearly distinguish its difference from the surgical 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Efficacy of Nitric Oxide Administration in Attenuating Ischemia / 
Reperfusion Injury During Neonatal Cardiopulmonary Bypass  Version 3_6.3.16  
 
HRP -503 Template Protocol  Page 18 of 20 Revised: 11/08/13  consent.  If the pare nts want to think about the research study , they will have 
ample time  to decide whether to enroll or not.   All questions will be answered 
prior to obtaining consent.   
Non-English Speaking Subjects  
There is a potential that a neonate  with Spanish speaking parents will be 
invited to participate in this study. In this case,  the Spanish short form will be 
used for consent with the English consent presented orally in Spanish with the 
assistance of an interpreter  (we have computer Skype based interpreters for 
over 10 languages are available at ACH -OL). In addition, one of the sub -
investigator s, Andrew VanBergen, MD , speaks fluent Spanish and may be 
available to present the study to any Spanish speaking patients. It is 
anticipated that this process may be used for  1-2 patients only.  
Subjects  who are not yet adults (infants, children, teenagers)  
All patients are neonate s with HLHS  or its variants. The Norwood procedure 
is usually perfo rmed at 4 to 7 days  old. The consent form will be obtained 
from at least one paren t before any study procedures are performed , though 
both parents will be encouraged to discuss the child’s participation . The 
mother will have to sign the consent form if the  parents are not married. If 
there are social issues and DCFS is involved in conse nting for the patient, the 
patient will not be enrolled.  
31) Process to Document Consent in Writing  
We will be following procedures outlined in SOP HRP -091. The consent for 
the research study will be documented together with the consent for surgery as 
a note i n the medical record of the patient.  
 
32) Drugs or Devices  
Inhaled  NO is a lready available and has been  used at ACH -OL for over 7 
years. This study  will be the first time that N O will be  administered via the 
cardiopulmonary bypass circuit at ou r institution b ut it has been used as part 
of the cardiopulmonary bypass circuit in children at another institution.  (14) 
An investigator -initiated IND application was submitted to the FDA.  
Registration at clinicaltrials.gov has been submitted and i s under review.   
 
33) References  
1- Society of Thoracic Surgery Database.  
2- Cooper WA, Duarte IG, Thourami VH, Nakamura M, Wang NP, Brown 
WM III, et al. Hypothermic circulatory arrest causes multisy stem vascular 
endothelial dysfunction and apoptosis. Ann Thorac Surg, 2000;69:696 -703. 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Efficacy of Nitric Oxide Administration in Attenuating Ischemia / 
Reperfusion Injury During Neonatal Cardiopulmonary Bypass  Version 3_6.3.16  
 
HRP -503 Template Protocol  Page 19 of 20 Revised: 11/08/13  3- Chello M, Mastroroberto P, Perticone F, Celi V, Colonna A. Nitric oxide 
modulation if neutrophil -endothelium interaction: difference between arterial 
and venous coron ary bypass graft. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1998;31:823 -6. 
4- Gianetti J, Del Sarto P, Be vilacqua S, Vassalle C, De Filippis R, Kacila M, 
et al. Supplemental nitric oxide and its effect on myocardial injury and 
function in patients undergoing cardiac surgery with  extracorporeal 
circulation. J Thrac Cardiovasc Surg. 2004;127:44 -50. 
5- Uchiyama T, Otani H, Okada T, Ninomiya H, Kido M, Imamura H, et al. 
Nitric oxide indices caspase -dependent apoptosis and necrosis in neonatal rat 
cardiomyocytes. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2 002;34:1049 -61. 
6- Sawicki G, SalasE, Murat J, Miszta -Lane H, Radomski MW Release of 
gelatinase a during platelet activation mediates aggregation.. Nature. 
1997;386:616 -9. 
7- Comini L, Bachetti T, Agnoletti L, Gaia G, Curello S, Milanesi B, et al. 
Inductio n of functional inducible nitric oxide synthase in monocytes of 
patients with cong estive heart failure: links with tumor necrosis factor –alpha. 
Eur Heart J. 1999;20:1503 -13. 
8- Van Dervort AL, Yan L, Madara PJ, Cobb JP, Wesley RA, Corriveau CC, 
et al. Nitric oxide regulated endotoxin -induced TNF -alpha production by 
human neutrophils. J  Immunol. 1994;152:4102 -9.  
9- Palatianos GM, Paziouros K, Vassili MI. Effects of exogenous nitric oxide 
during cardiopulmonary bypass on lung postperfusion histology. ASAIO J, 
2005 Jul -Aug:51(4):398 -403. 
10- Zhou Jing, W u Xiao -dong, L in Ke. Blood Hibernat ion: a novel strategy to 
inhibit systemic inflammation and coagulation induced by cardiopulmonary 
bypass. Chinese Medical Journal 2010; 123(13):1741 -1747.  
11- Lowson SM, Hass an HM, Rich GF The effect of nitric oxide on platelets 
when delivered to the cardi opulmonary bypass circuit.. Anesthesia and 
Analgesia 1999 Dec; 89(6):1360 -5. 
12- Vinten -Johansen J, Sato H, Zhao ZQ. The role of nitric oxide and NO -
donor agents in myocardia l protection from surgical ischemic -reperfusion 
injury. Int Jour Cardiology 1995 J uly; 50(3): 273 -81.  
13- Lefer AM. Attenuation of myocardial ischemia -reperfusion injury with 
nitric oxide replacement therapy. Ann Thor Surg 1995 Sept; 60(3):847 -51. 
14- Checchia PA, Bronicki RA, Muenzer JT, Dixon D. Nitric oxide delivery 
during cardiopulm onary bypass reduces postoperative morbidity in children - a 
randomized trial. J Thorac cardiovasc Surg 2013 Sept;146(3): 530 -6. 
15- Hintze, J. PASS 12 . Kaysville, Utah : NCSS,  LLC; 2013.  
 
Attachments  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Efficacy of Nitric Oxide Administration in Attenuating Ischemia / 
Reperfusion Injury During Neonatal Cardiopulmonary Bypass  Version 3_6.3.16  
 
HRP -503 Template Protocol  Page 20 of 20 Revised: 11/08/13  Attachment A – INO Therapeutics / Ikaria Serious Adverse Event Form  
Attachment B - Parental  Permission form  
Attachment C – HIPPA Authorization Form  
Attachment D – Eligibility Checklist  
Attachment E – Data Collection Form  
Attachment F – FDA letter of receipt  
 