 
Title Research Project: Ketamine Infusion for Social Anxiety Disorder   
 
Principal Investigator: Michael H. Bloch, MD  
 
HIC# 1310012947 
 
Date of Approval: 18NOV2015 valid through 28NOV2016  
 
NTC02083926  
 
HIC 1310012947 
Page 1 of 40 
 
 
YALEUNIVERSITY 
   HUMAN INVESTIGATION COMMITTEE  
 
            Application to Involve Human Subjects in Biomedical Research  
100 FR1(2013-1) 
 
 
 
 
SECTIO N I: ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION  
 
Title of Research Project:  
Ketamine Infusion for Social Anxiety Disorder  
Principal Investigator:  
Michael H. Bloch, MD Yale Academic Appointment:  
Assistant Professor in the Yale Child Study Center  
 
Department:  Yale  Child Study Center  
Campus Address:  CNRU at CMHC, Yale University School of Medicine, 34 Park Street, New Haven, CT 
06519 
 
Campus Phone:  203-974-
7071  Fax:  203-785-7611  Pager:  E-mail: Michael.bloch@yale.edu  
Protocol Correspondent Name & Address  (if different than PI ): 
Jerome Taylor, MD, Fellow Yale Child Study Center, 333 Cedar Street, New Haven CT 06510  
Campus Phone: 785-2516, 
785-7094  Fax: 785-7400  E-mail: Jerome.taylor@yale.edu ; Alt #: 203 -589-0132  
YaleCancerCenter CTO Protocol Correspondent Name & Address ( if applicable ): 
 
Campus Phone:  Fax:  E-mail:  
Business Manager:  
Campus Phone  : Fax : E-mail  
Faculty Advisor :(required if PI is a student, 
resident , fellow  or other trainee )XNA 
 Yale Academic Appointment:  
 
DATE STAMPED -RECEIVED  
PROTOCOL NUMBER  Please refer to the HIC website for application 
instructions and information required to complete 
this application.  The Instructions are available at 
http://www.yale.edu/hrpp/forms -
templates/biomedical.html  
Submit the original application and one (1) copy  
of all materials including relevant sections of the 
grant which funds this  project (if applicable) to 
the HIC.   HIC  OFFICE USE ONLY 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 18NOV2015 VALID THROUGH 28NOV2016Approved -  Valid through 28-NOV-2016
HIC 1310012947 
Page 2 of 40 
  
Investigator Interests : 
Does the principal investigator, or do any research personnel who are responsible for the design, conduct or reporting of this project or any of their family member s (spouse or dependent child) 
have an incentive or interest , financial o r otherwise,  that may  affect the protection of the human 
subjects involved in this project , the scientific objectivity of the research or it s integrity?  Note:  
The Principal Investigator (Project Director), upon consideration of the individual’s role and degree of independence in carrying out the work, will determine who is responsible for the design, conduct, or reporting of the research.  
See Disclosures and Management of Personal Interests in Human Research http://www.yale.edu/hrpp/policies/index.html#COI
 
ο  Yes   X  No   
 Do you or does anyone on the research team who is determined by you to be responsible for the design, conduct or reporting of this research have any patent (sol e right to make, use or sell an  
invention) or copyright (exclusive rights to an original work) interests related to this research protocol? 
ο  Yes   X No   
   
If yes  to either question above, l ist names  of the investigator or responsible person: 
   The Yale University Principal Investigator, all Yale University co -investigators, and all Yale 
University individuals who are responsible for the design, conduct or reporting of research must have a current financial disclosure form on file with the University’s Conflict of Interest Office. Yale New Haven Hospital personnel who are listed as con-investigators on a protocol with a Yale University Principal Investigator must a lso have a current financial disclosure form on file 
with the University’s Conflict of Interest Office. If this has not been done, the individual(s) 
should follow this link to the COI Office Website to complete the form:   http://www.yale.edu/coi/
   
 NOTE: The requirement for maintaining a current disclosure form on file with the University’s Conflict of Interest Office extends primarily  to Yale University and Yale- New Haven Hospital 
personnel.  Whether or not they are required to maintain a disclosure form with the 
University’s Conflict of Interest Office, all investigators and individuals deemed otherwise 
responsible by the PI who are  listed on the protocol are required to disclose to th e PI any 
interests that are specific to this protocol.  
 
SECTION II: GENERAL INFORMATION  
 Campus Address:  
 
Campus Phone:  Fax:  Pager:  E-mail:  
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 18NOV2015 VALID THROUGH 28NOV2016Approved -  Valid through 28-NOV-2016
HIC 1310012947 
Page 3 of 40 
 1. Performing Organizations: Identify the hospital, in -patient or outpatient facility, school or 
other agency that will serve as the location of the research.  Choose all that apply : 
 
a. Internal Location[s] of the Study: 
Magnetic Resonance Research Center   Yale University  PET Center  
     (MR -TAC)        YCCI/Church Street Research Unit (CSRU)  
 Yale Cancer Center /Clinical Trials Office (CTO) YCCI/Hospital Research Unit (HRU)  
 Yale Cancer Center /Smilow     YCCI/Keck Laboratories  
 Yale -New Hav en Hospital     Yale -New Haven Hospital —Saint Raphael Campus 
 Cancer Data Repository/Tumor Registry  
 Specify Other Yale Location: Yale Child Study Center   
 
 
b. External Location[s]: 
 APT Foundation, Inc.     Haskins Laboratories  
Connecticut Mental Health Center    John B. Pierce Laboratory, Inc. 
Clinical Neuroscience Research Unit (C NRU) VeteransAf fairsHospital, West Haven   
 Other Locations, Specify:    International Research Site 
(Specify location (s)): 
 
 
c. Additional Required Documents (check all that apply) :  N/A 
*YCCI -Scientific and Safety Committee (YCCI -SSC)   Approval Date:  
*Pediatric Protocol Review Committee (PPRC)    Approval Date:  
*YCC Protocol Review Committee (YRC -PRC)   Approval Date:  
*Dept. of Veterans Affairs, West HavenVA HSS   Approval Date:  
*Radioactive Drug Research Committee (RDRC)   Approval Date:  
 YNHH- Radiation Safety Committee (YNHH -RSC)   Approval Date:  
 Magnetic ResonanceResearchCenter PRC (MRRC -PRC) Approval Date:  
 YSM/YNHH Cancer Data Repository (CaDR)    Approval Date:  
 Dept. of Lab Medicine request for services or specimens form 
 Imaging on YNHH Diagnostic Radiology equipment request form (YDRCTO request) found 
at  http://radiology.yale.edu/research/ClinTrials.aspx ) 
*Approval from these committees is required before final HIC approval is granted. See instructions for documents required for initial submission and approval of the protocol. Allow sufficient time for these requests. Check with the oversight body for their time requirements.  
 
2. Probable Duration of Project: State the expected duration of the project, including all follow- up and data analysis activities. 4 Years  
 
3. Research Type/Phase: (Check all that apply)  
a. Study Type  
 Single Center  Study 
 Multi- Center Study  
Does the Yale PI serve as the PI of the multi -site study? Yes  No  
 Coordinating Center/Data Management  
 Other:  
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 18NOV2015 VALID THROUGH 28NOV2016Approved -  Valid through 28-NOV-2016
HIC 1310012947 
Page 4 of 40 
  
 
b. Study Phase   N/A 
Pilot    Phase I   Phase II   Phase III   Phase IV  
 Other ( Specify)  
 
 
4. Area of Research: (Check all that apply) Note that these are overlapping definitions and 
more than one category may apply to your research protocol. Definitions for the following can be found  in the instructions section 4c: 
 Clinical Research: Patient -Oriented     Clinical Research: Outcomes and  
 Clinical Research: Epidemiologic and Behavioral         Health Services  
 Translational Research #1 (“Bench -to-Bedside”)    Interdisciplinary Research  
 Translational Research #2 (“Bedside- to-Community”)   Community- Based Research  
 
 
5. Is this study a clinical trial ? Yes  No  
NOTE the current ICMJE  (International Committee of Medical Journal Editors) definition of a 
clinical trial: “any research  study that prospectively assigns human participants or groups of humans 
to one or more health-related interventions to evaluate the effects on health outcomes.” Health- related 
interventions include any intervention used to modify a biomedical or health- related outcome (for 
example, drugs, surgical procedures, devices, behavioral treatments, dietary interventions, and process -of-care changes). Health outcomes include any biomedical or health- related measures 
obtained in patients or participants, including pharmacokinetic measures and adverse events” 
  If yes, where is it registered?  
   Clinical Trials.gov registry  
   Other ( Specify )  
 
Registration of clinical trials at their initiation  is required by the FDA, NIH and by the ICMJE. 
 
If this study is registered on clinicaltrials.gov, there is new language in the consent form and compound 
authorization that should be used. 
For more information on registering clinical trials, including whether your trial must be 
registered, see the YCCI webpage, 
http://ycci.yale.edu/researchers/ors/registerstudy.aspx or  contact YCCI at 203.785.3482) 
 
6. Does the Clinical Trials Agreement (CTA) require compliance with ICH GCP (E6)?  
Yes   No  
  
7. Will this study have a billable service ? A Billable Service is defined  as a service or procedure 
that will be ordered, performed or result in charging  in EPIC for individuals who are enrolled in 
a clinical research study, regardless  if the charge is intended to be paid by the subject/their 
insurance or the research study.  
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 18NOV2015 VALID THROUGH 28NOV2016Approved -  Valid through 28-NOV-2016
HIC 1310012947 
Page 5 of 40 
  
Yes   No  
If you answered "yes", this study will need to be set up in OnCore Support  
http://medicine.yale.edu/ymg/systems/ppm/index.aspx  
 
8..Are there any procedures involved in this protocol that will be performed at YNHH or one of its affiliated entities?   Yes ___ No _X__If Yes, please answer questions a through c and note 
instructions below.  If No, proceed to Section III.  
a. Does your YNHH privilege delineation currently include the specific procedure that you will 
perform?  
b.Will you be using any new equipment or equipment that you have not used in the past for this procedure? 
  c. Will a novel approach using existing equipment be applied?   If you answered “no” to question 7a, or "yes" to question 7b or c, please contact the YNHH  
Department of Physician Services (688 -2615) for prior approval before commencing with your 
research protocol
. 
 
SECTION III: FUNDING , RESEARCH TEAM AND TRAINING  
 1. Funding Source:  Indicate all of the funding source(s) for this study. Check all boxes that apply.  
Provide information regarding the external funding source.  This information should include identification of the agency/sponsor, the funding mechanism (grant or contract), and whether the award is pending or has been awarded. Provide the M/C# and Agency name (if grant -
funded).  If the funding source associated with a protocol is “pending” at the time of the protocol submission to the HIC (as is the case for most NIH submissions), the PI should note “Pending” in the appropriate section of the protocol application, provide the M/C# and Agency name (if grant -funded) and further note that University (departmental) funds support 
the research (until such time that an award is made).    
  
PI  Title of Grant  Name of Funding Source  Funding  Funding Mechanism  
 
Michael H. Bloch, MD  
Ketamine Infusion for Social Anxiety Disorder  Patterson Trust Award  Federal  
  State  
Non Profit  
Industry 
Other For 
Profit  
  Other  
 Grant -M#            
Contract#  
Contract Pending 
Investigator/Department 
Initiated  
  Sponsor Initiated 
Other, Specify: 
 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 18NOV2015 VALID THROUGH 28NOV2016Approved -  Valid through 28-NOV-2016
HIC 1310012947 
Page 6 of 40 
  
   Federal  
  State  
Non Profit  
Industry 
Other For 
Profit  
  Other  
 Grant -M#            
Contract#  
Contract Pending 
Investigator/Department 
Initiated  
  Sponsor Initiated 
Other, Specify: 
 
 
   Federal  
  State  
Non Profit  
Industry 
OtherFor 
Profit  
  Other  
 Grant -M#            
Contract#   
Contract Pending 
Investigator/Department 
Initiated  
  Sponsor Initiated 
Other, Specify:  
 
 
IRB Review fees are charged for projects funded by Industry or Other For-Profit Sponsors.  
Provide the Name and Address of the Sponsor Representative to whom the invoice should be 
sent.  Note:  the PI’s home department will be bille d if this information is not provided.  
 Send IRB Review Fee Invoice To:  N/A 
 Name:  
 Company: 
Address: 
  2. Research Team:  List all members of the research team. Indicate under the affiliation column whether 
the investigators or study personnel are part of the Yale faculty or staff, or part of the faculty or staff from a collaborating institution, or are not formally affiliated with any institution. ALL members of 
the research team MUST complete Human Subject Protection Training (HSPT) and Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) Training  before they may be listed on the 
protocol.  See NOTE below.  
 Name  Affiliation: Yale/Other 
Institution (Identify) 
 NetID  
Principal Investigator  Michael H. Bloch, MD  Yale Faculty  at the 
Child Study Center ; Clinical Neuroscience Research Unit (CNRU) 
at CMHC  Mhb32  
Role:  Co-Investigator  Jerome H. Taylor Jr, MD  Yale Fellow  in Adult 
and Child Psychiatry  Jht28  
    
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 18NOV2015 VALID THROUGH 28NOV2016Approved -  Valid through 28-NOV-2016
HIC 1310012947 
Page 7 of 40 
  
NOTE: The HIC will remove from the protocol any personnel who have not completed required training. 
A personnel protocol amendment will need to be submitted when training is completed . 
 
SECTION IV: 
 PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR /FACULTY ADVISOR / DEPARTMENT CHAIR 
AGREEMENT  
 
           Role:  Co-Investigator  Angeli Landeros -Weisenberger, 
MD Yale  Child Study Center  Al495  
Role:  Co-Investigator  Christopher Pittenger, MD  CMHC, Psychiatry  Pitt 
    
    
    
    
As the principal investigator  of this research project, I certify that:  
 The information provided in this application is complete and accurate. 
 I assume full resp onsibility for the protection of human subjects and the proper conduct of the 
research.  
 Subject safety will be of paramount concern, and every effort will be made to protect subjects’ 
rights and welfare.  
 The research will be performed according to ethical principles and in compliance with all federal,  
state and local laws, as well as institutional regulations and policies regarding the protection of   
human subjects.  All members of the research team will be kept apprised of research goals.  
 I will obtain app roval for this research study and any subsequent revisions prior to my initiating the 
study or any change and I will obtain continuing approval of this study prior to the expiration date      of any approval period.  I will report to the HIC any serious injuries and/or other unanticipated problems involving risk to 
participants.  
 I am in compliance with the requirements set by the University and qualify t o serve as the  
principal investigator of this project or have acquired the appropriate approval from the        Dean’s Office or Office of the Provost, or the Human Subject Protection Administrator at Yale-NewHavenHospital, or have a faculty advisor.  I will identify a qualified successor should I cease my role as principal investigator and facilitate a  
smooth transfer of investigator responsibilities.  
_____             
 PI Name (PRINT) and Signature      Date  
As the faculty advisor  of this research project, I certify that:  
 The information provided in this application is complete and accurate. 
 This project has scientific value and merit and that the student or trainee investigator has the  
necessary resources to complete the project and achieve the aims.  
 I will train the student investigator in matters of appropriate research compliance, protection of  
human subjects and proper conduct of research.  The research will be performed according to ethical principles and in compliance with all federal,  
state and local laws, as well as institutional regulations and policies regarding the protection of   
human subjects.  
               
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 18NOV2015 VALID THROUGH 28NOV2016Approved -  Valid through 28-NOV-2016
HIC 1310012947 
Page 8 of 40 
  
                   
Department Chair’s Assurance Statement  
Do you know of any real or apparent institutional conflict of inte rest (e.g., Yale ownership of a 
sponsoring company, patents, licensure) associated with  this research  project?  
 Yes (provide a description of that interest in a separate letter addressed to the HIC. ) 
 No 
 
As Chair, do you have any real or apparent protocol- specific conflict o f interest between yourself and  
the sponsor of the research project, or its competitor or any interest in any intervention and/or method 
tested in  the project  that might compromise this research  project? 
Yes (provide a description of that interest in a separate letter addressed to the HIC) 
No 
 
I assure the HIC that the principal investigator and all members of the  research team are qualified by  
education, training, licensure and/or experience to assume participation in the conduct of this research 
trial. I also assure that the principal investigator has departmental support and sufficient resources to  
conduct this trial appropriately. 
 
____________________________        
Chair  Name (PRINT) and Signature       Date  
 
   _________________________________ 
   Department  
    
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 18NOV2015 VALID THROUGH 28NOV2016Approved -  Valid through 28-NOV-2016
HIC 1310012947 
Page 9 of 40 
 YNHH Human Subjects Protection Administrator Assurance Statement  
Required when the study is conducted solely at YNHH by YNHH health care providers. 
 
As Human Subject Protection Administrator (HSPA) for YNHH, I certify that: 
 I have read a copy of the protocol and approve it being conducted at YNHH. 
 I agree to notify the IRB if I am aware of any real or apparent institutional conflict of interest. 
 The principal investigator of this study is qualified to serve as P.I. and has the support of the hospital 
for this research project.  
 
______________________________________         
YNHH HSPA Name (PRINT) and Signature     Date  
 
 
 
 
For HIC Use Only  
 
              
Date Approved      Human Investigation Committee Signature 
 
This protocol is valid through ______________________________________________ 
 
 
 
SECTION  V: RESEARCH PLAN 
 
1. Statement of Purpose:  State the scientific aim(s) of the study, or the hypotheses to be tested.  
 
To determine the short -term efficacy of ketamine compared to placebo in the treatment of severe social 
anxiety disorder (SAD) . We will conduct a crossover trial in which 18 patients  with severe SAD will be 
given a single infusion of ketamine or saline (placebo) and their SAD symptoms will be followed over a 
two week period.  We will require 4 weeks between infusion doses in order to minimize carry over effects.  
Our primary outcome will be average improvement during the first 3 days following infusion on the 
Visual Analog Scale (VAS)  of Anxiety States . 
 
 2. Background:  Describe the background information that led to the plan for this project. 
Provide r eferences to support the expectation of obtaining useful scientific data.  
 
• Social Anxiety Disorder is common and causes significant impairment.  
• First-line treatments for Social Anxiety Disorder are only partially effective.  Many SAD patients 
experience little or inadequate symptom relief with available treatments.  
• Ketamine is a potent NMDA receptor antagonist.  Ketamine represents an agent with a potential ly 
novel mechanism of action for the treatment of anxiety disorders.   
• Ketamine has demonstrated efficacy in the treatment of psychiatric disorders closely related to 
Social Anxiety Disorder including Major Depression, Bipolar Depression and possibly Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder. 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 18NOV2015 VALID THROUGH 28NOV2016Approved -  Valid through 28-NOV-2016
HIC 1310012947 
Page 10 of 40 
  
Social anxiety disorder (SAD) affects  approximately 12.1% of all American s and is defined as a 
“marked and persistent fear of one or more social situations,” causing impairment and distress( Kessler, 
Peters et al. 2005 ).  SAD typically  impairs academic achievement, work productivity, social relationships, 
and results in a significantly poorer quality of life ( Lipsitz and Schneier 2000) . SAD is associated with 
subsequent development of depression, alcoholism, and cardiovascular disease ( Kessl er 2003, Kessler, 
Peters et al. 2005 ).  
Roughly one- third to one -half of patients with generalized SAD do not experience significant clinical 
benefit from current evidence- based treatment for SAD such as pharmacotherapy with selective serot onin 
reuptake inhibitors  (SSRI) or venlafaxine and cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) (Blomhoff, Spetalen et 
al. 2001 , Davidson 2004, Baldwin, Anderson et al. 2005, Baldwin and Nair 2005 ). Failure of anxiety 
relief in patients with SAD is a source of substantial morbidity, distress, and decreases in quality of life.   
Novel pharmacological treatments are needed to improve patient outcomes wi th SAD . 
Converging lines of evidence from neuroimaging and pharmacological studies support the importance 
of glutamate abnormalities in the pathogenesis of SAD. In a Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy (MRS) 
study, an elevated glutamate to creatinine ratio was found in the anterior cingulate cortex of  SAD patients 
when compared to healthy controls ( Phan, Fitzgerald et al. 2005 ).  Elevated thalamic glutamine lev els 
have been demonstrated in patients with SAD (Pollack, Jensen et al. 2008 ).   P re-clinical rodent studies 
have also established a strong link between glutamate regulation and anxiety  (Linden 2002, Walker and 
Davis 2002, Bergink, van Megen et al. 2004, Johnson, Inderbitzen-Nolan et al. 2005). 
Ketamine is a p otent antagonist of the N -methyl -D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor, a major type of 
glutamate receptor in the brain. Ketamine is routinely used for anesthetic induction because of its dissociative properties. However in research studies, ketamine is effective tr eatment in reducing 
symptoms in depressive and possibly anxiety disorders.  In multiple controlled clinical studies, ketamine 
has produced a rapid antidepressant effect in unipolar and bipolar depression( Berman, Cappiello et al. 
2000, Zarate, Singh et al. 2006, Maeng and Zarate 2007, Murrough, Perez et al. 2011, Valentine, Mason et al. 2011) .  Ketamine’s anti -depressant effects peak 1 -3 days following infusion.  Ketamine’s 
antidepressant effect is observed long after ketamine has been metabolized and excreted by the body and 
after ketamine’s sedative and  dissoci ative effects have dissipated  (Figure 1 -3).  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
The results of several clinical studies suggest that ketamine may also have significant anxiolytic 
effects.  Patients with major depressive disorder given a single ketamine infusion have shown strong and 
significant reductions in comorbid anxiety symptoms.  A trial including 11 depressed patients 
demonstrated a significant reduction in anxiety symptoms (Hamilton Anxiety Rating Scale (HAM- A)) 
following ketamine infusion ( mean HAM -A pretreatment score 23.4 ± 6.5; mean HAM -A score after 230 
minutes 14.3 ± 7.8; t(9) = 3.39, p < .01, Effect Size=1.4 )(Salvadore, Cornwell et al. 2009 ).  This 
improvement is supported by one of the earlier placebo- controlled trials of ketamine which demonstrated 
that the psychic anxiety item was one of 4 (out of 21) items on the HAM- D demonstrating significant 
improvement after ketamine infusion ( Hofmann, Newman et al. 1995, Zarate, Singh et al. 2006).   We 
propose a randomized, placebo-controlled crossover study to explore the efficacy and time course of 
action of intravenous ketamine in the treatment of SAD.  
 
               Figure 1: RM Berman et al (2000)            Figure 2: CA Zarate et al (2006 )                     Figure 3: GW Valentine et al (2011 )                  
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 18NOV2015 VALID THROUGH 28NOV2016Approved -  Valid through 28-NOV-2016
HIC 1310012947 
Page 11 of 40 
  
3. Research Plan:  Summarize the study design and research procedures using non- technical 
language that can be readily understood by someone outside the discipline. Be sure to 
distinguish between standard of care vs. research procedures when applicable, and include any flowcharts of visits specifying their individual times and lengths.  Describe the setting in 
which the research will take place.  
 
• We propose a crossover trial in which 18 adults  with severe SAD will  be given a single infusion 
of ketamine or saline (placebo) and their SAD symptoms will be followed over a two week 
period. 
• We will require at least a 4 -week interval between infusions in order to minimize carryover 
effects.  
• An 18 subject crossover trial will give us sufficient power to  demonstrate a significant effect of 
ketamine (compared to placebo) if the symptom improvement is comparable to that observed in 
Major Depressive Disorder.  
 
Overview:  
We propose a double-blind, placebo-controlled crossover trial to study the effects of int ravenous ketamine 
for the treatment of SAD. All patients will be offered the option of at least one first line treatment (an 
SSRI, SNRI, or CBT) prior to study enrollment. We will perform the first blinded infusion (ketamine or saline) on the first study day.  The second blinded 
infusion (ketamine or saline) will be administered 28 days after the initial infusion.  The study investigators will be blinded to the order of infusion which will be determined offsite by the Connecticut 
Mental Health Center (CMHC) Investigational Drug Service.  The infusions will occur on the Clinical 
Neuroscience Research Unit (CNRU). Patients  will be followed with clinical ratings and behavioral 
assessments for 2 weeks following each infusion.  Clinical ratings (excluding the inf usion day) will take 
place at a separate location (the Yale Child Study Center) by a rater unaware of clinical and side- effect 
ratings on the day of infusion.  The side- effects and psychotomi metic ratings for ketamine will be 
performed by a separate rater , than the ratings of anxiety and depression.  We chose this design because 
the psychometric and physiologic side-effects of ketamine often lead to unblinding and because the 
beneficial effects of ketamine have lasted for 3 weeks in depression, making the carry -over effects in 
shorter- duration crossover st udies problematic.  
  
 
 
  
 
Table 1. Assessments 
  Screening  Day 0 - First Infusion (Ketamine 
or Saline)  Day 
1 Day 
2 Day 
3 Day 
5 Day 
7 Day 
10 Day 14  
and and and and and and and and 
Day 0+28 - Second Infusion 
(Ketamine or Saline)  Day 
1+28  Day 
2+28  Day 
3+28  Day 
5+28  Day 
7+28  Day 
10+28  Day 14+28  
    -1 
hour 0 
hour 1 
hour 2 
hour 3 
hour               
INTERVENTION                            
Infusion      X                     
BAT                            
Impromptu 
Speech*    X        X       X    
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 18NOV2015 VALID THROUGH 28NOV2016Approved -  Valid through 28-NOV-2016
HIC 1310012947 
Page 12 of 40 
  
Table 1 presents the overall design of this study in terms of interventions, clinical ratings, behavioral assessments and laboratory examinations.  A baseline screening  assessment to determine study eligibility, 
clinical ratings, and physical health will be conducted at least one week prior to study enrollment.  On the first study day, the patients will receive an infusion of ketamine or p lacebo , and the second infusion will 
be performed on day 28. A battery of clinical and cognitive rating scales will be employed to determine the effects of ketamine administration on mood, anxiety, perceptual distortions, and cognitive function for 
the fir st 3 hours and first 14 days following the placebo and ketamine infusion period.  Twenty- eight days 
will separate the first and second infusions . 
 
Medical Assessments  
During the screening visit, vital signs, physical exam, and clinical laboratory tests (i.e. CBC with 
differential, complete metabolic  panel  (CMP) ( including electrolytes, LFTs, BUN, creatinine and 
glucose), TFTs, urine drug screen, and routine urinalysis) will be completed. A pregnancy test will be given to all females enrolled in the study prior to participating in the study sessions. Only the subject will be told the results of this testing. A total of 30 cc of blood will be drawn at this visit. In addition, an EKG will be performed and read in order to rule out any cardiac abnormalities. If the urine drug screen or the pregnancy test is positive, the subject will not be able to participate in the protocol.
 
 
Patients  
18 SAD patients will be recruited through the Yale Center for Anxiety and Mood Disorders , local 
providers, social anxiety groups, flyers around the New Hav en area, Clinicaltrials.gov, YCCI               
              
MEDICAL 
ASSESSMENT                            
Vital Signs  X X X X X X            
Physical Exam  X X       X            
EKG  X X       X            
Blood Tests  X                        
Urine Tests  X X                    
CLINICAL 
RATINGS                            
SCID  X                         
LSAS  X X       X X X X X X X X 
SDS X X    X X X X X X X X 
VAS**  X X   X X X X X X X X X X 
ASI  X            
SSPS**   X        X       X     
PANAS**   X     X    X   
BAI** X X       X X X X X X X X 
HAM -D X X       X X X X X X X X 
STAI ** X X    X X    X  X 
CGI X X       X X       X   X 
OE  X            
TE      X X    X   
MMSE  X X   X X X X             
BPRS -PS X X   X  X X X             
CADSS  X X   X X X X             
*All ratings and tests are assessed before the impromptu speech on the behavioral assessment test (BAT) days  
**These ratings are assessed both before and after the impromptu speech on the behavioral assessment test (BAT) days  
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 18NOV2015 VALID THROUGH 28NOV2016Approved -  Valid through 28-NOV-2016
HIC 1310012947 
Page 13 of 40 
 sponsored events and recruitment database, and anxiety -related events in the area. (See below for 
inclusion criteria).  
 
Intervention 
Ketamine Administration :  Following an overnight fast, ketamine 0.5 mg/kg (or saline) will be 
administered over a 40 minute period. Ketamine administration will be performed on the Clinical 
Neuroscience Research Unit. A research nurse and physician will be present at all times du ring the 
procedure.  Ketamine has been studied in over 10,000 patients in more than 100 separate studies. 
Ketamine has a wide therapeutic window, and is usually given in doses of 1mg/kg – 4.5mg/kg IV over 60 
seconds when used as a sole anesthetic agent.  Ketamine side effects include elevated blood pressure and 
disorientation, among others. Our institution has had experience using ketamine safely in research studies involving psychiatric patients for the last 15 years.  
  
The most common side effects of ketamine are (1) Elevated blood pressure, breathing rate and pulse rate, 
(2) Local pain at injection site and temporary rash and (3) A variety of temporary psychological 
symptoms including, but not limited to anxiety, sadness, disorientation, insomnia, flashba cks, 
hallucinations, and psychotic- like symptoms.  These types of reactions have occurred in approximately 
12% of patients  given higher doses of ketamine when used for anesthesia.  These symptoms usually last 
no more than a few hours.  The most serious pos sible side effects of ketamine use are (1) Substance 
abuse/dependence, (2) Elevations in intraocular pressure that could lead to vision problems, (3) Allergic reaction and (4) Elevation in blood pressure that could result in stroke, heart problems and death.  All the 
serious possible side effects of ketamine are rare.  As a precaution all patients  will be administered 
ketamine and monitored at the Clinical Neuroscience Research Unit for 3 hours following ketamine infusions.  If the side- effects do not dissi pate we will additionally offer patients  hospitalization at 
Connecticut Mental Health Center for psychiatric side- effects or YNHH for medical side- effects.  
 
Assessments  
The rating scales utilized in the trial are detailed in the table below.  Ratings 1 -14 days post infusion will 
be conducted by raters that are blinded to treatment assignment and will not be present or have access to 
the data collected on the initial infusion day.  All rating scales documenting the psychotomi metic side 
effects of ketamine (BPRS and CADSS) will be performed by a separate rater who is blinded to treatment 
assignment but was present at the initial infusion.  All ratings and assessments will be performed by 
trained research staff.  
 
The SCID (Structured Clinical Interview for DSM disorders) on the screening day may take up to 2 hours 
with complex patients. All other assessments combined will likely take less  than 3 hours on assessment 
days. Of note, “Day 0” will likely require a full 8 -hour day because patients receive the infusion  and 
receive assessments before and after the infusion . On Day 0, food after the infusion will be provided at 
CMHC . 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 18NOV2015 VALID THROUGH 28NOV2016Approved -  Valid through 28-NOV-2016
HIC 1310012947 
Page 14 of 40 
 RATING SCALES : 
1) Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale (LSAS) : The LSAS is a standardized rating scale that assesses SAD severity 
(Liebowitz 1987) . 
2) Visual Analog Scale (VAS) of Anxiety States: The VAS includes scales for anxiety, drowsiness, high, irritability, 
anger, and sadness. These scales are 100 mm lines marked by participants at a point corresponding to the apparent intensity of the feeling state (0=none, to 100=most ever) ( Aitken 1969) .  
3) Self-Statement During Public Speaking Scale (SSPS):  The SSPS is a rating scale used to measure cognitions that 
occurred during a speech ( Hofmann and Dibartolo 2000) .  
4) Beck Anxiety Inventory  (BAI): The BAI is a standardized rating scale of anxiety severity ( Beck, Epstein et al. 
1988) .  
5) Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HAM -D): The HAM -D is a standardized rating scale of depression severity 
(Williams 1988 ).  
6) Anxiety Sensitivity Index (ASI):  The ASI is a standardized rating scale of anxiety severity (Reiss, Peterson et al. 
1986 ). 
7) State -Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI):  The STAI is a standardized rating scale of trait and state anxiety 
(Spielberger 1983).  
8) Positive and Negative Affect Schedule (PANAS):  The PANAS is a rating scale of positive and negative affect 
(Watson, Clark et al. 1988 ). 
9) Clinical Global Impressions (CGI): The CGI is a widely used instrument which assesses overall severity of illness 
and symptom improvement on 7 point scales. (Guy 1976).  
10) Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale, Positive Symptom Subscale (BPRS -PS): The BPRS contains subscales assessing 
symptom and behavior clusters. We will only be using the positive symptoms subscale portion of the BPRS, 
which examines thought content, conceptual disorganization, hallucinatory behavior, and grandiosity (Overall 
and Gorham 1962, Shafe r 2005).  
11) Clinician -Administered Dissociative States Scale (CADSS): CADSS has self and interviewer administered items 
and evaluates aspects of dissociative symptoms. (Bremner, Krystal et al. 1998 ). 
12) Outcome expectancy (OE) – The outcome expectancy will measure whether patients believe the treatment 
will be effective.  
13) Sheehan Di sability Scale (SDS) – The SDS is a rating scale that measures  functional impairment due to anxiety 
(Sheehan  1983)  
14) Treatment Evaluation  (TE) – We will ask participants whether they believe they have received ketamine or 
placebo.  
 
Impromptu Speech Behavioral Assessment Test 
 
In addition to rating scales, the imprompt u speech BAT will be used to assess SAD sym ptoms ( Beidel, 
Turner et al. 1985, Hofmann, Newman et al. 1995, Ries, McNeil et al. 1998 ). Participants will be asked to 
speak about pre- determined topics for 10 minutes to a small audience of research staff ( Beidel, Turner et 
al. 1985). P atients with more severe social anxiety symptoms ar e often no t able to speak for the full 10  
minutes and have shorter speech lengths when compared to those with less sever e social anxiety 
symptoms ( Beidel, Turner et al. 1985, Hofmann, Newman et al. 1995, Ries, McNeil et al. 1998 ). 
Furthermore, VAS -anxiety, BAI , STAI, PANAS, and SSPS will be assessed before and after the speech. 
Participants will also be asked to rate on a scale of 1 -100 how well they think they will 
perform/performed on the speech. The speeches will be videotaped.  
 
 
  
4. Genetic Testing    N/A  
A. Describe  
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 18NOV2015 VALID THROUGH 28NOV2016Approved -  Valid through 28-NOV-2016
HIC 1310012947 
Page 15 of 40 
 i. the types of future research to be conducted using the materials , specifying if 
immortalization of cell lines, whole exome or genome sequencing, genome wide 
association studies, or animal studi es are planned  
ii. the plan for the collection of material or the conditions under which material will be received  
iii. the types of information about the donor/individual contributors that will be entered into a database  
iv. the methods to uphold confidentiality 
 
B. What  are the conditions or procedures for sharing of materials and/or distributing for 
future research projects ? 
C. Is widespread sharing of materials planned?  
D. When and under what conditions will materials be stripped of all identifiers?  
E. Can donor- subjects withdraw their materials at any time , and/or withdraw the identifiers 
that connect them to their materials ? 
i. How will requests to withdraw materials be handled (e.g., material no longer identified: that is, anonymized) or  material destroyed)?  
 
F. Describe the provis ions for protection of participant privacy 
G. Describe the methods for the security of storage and sharing of materials   
 
5. Subject Population: Provide a detailed description of the types of human subjects who will 
be recruited into this study.  Adults ages 18 -65 with SAD with or without co -morbid MDD will be recruited through the 
Yale Anxiety and Mood Disorders clinic in the Yale University Psychology Department, 
local providers, social anxiety groups, flyers around the New Haven area, Clinicaltrials.gov, YCCI sponsored events and recruitment database, and anxiety- related events in the area.  
 
PATIENTS  WITH  SOCIAL  ANXIETY  DISORDER : 
 
 Inclusion Criteria:  
1) Male or female (post -menopausal, surgically sterile, or negative pregnancy test at screening and agreement to 
utilize an established birth control including complete abstinence during the testing period) between the age of 
18 and 65 yrs.  
2) Meet DSM- 5 criter ia for social anxiety disorder by structured clinical interview (SCID) and have a LSAS score 
>60.  No current diagnosis of a psychotic disorder.   
3) Psychiatrically stable. Patients must have had stable doses of all psychiatric medications for the month prior  to 
treatment prior to study enrollme nt. If a patient has just  begun taking an SSRI or SNRI, the patient must be 
taking the medication  for at least 2 months prior to starting the study and it must be at least 1 month since SSRI 
dose change. Patients cannot  receive CBT while in the study. 
4) Medically and neurologically healthy on the basis of physical examination, CMP (including LFT’s), TFT’s,, 
CBC w/ diff, urinalysis, urine toxicology, EKG, and medical history. Individuals with stable medical problems 
that do  not have CNS effects or interfere with medications administered (e.g., oral hypoglycemics) may be 
included if their medications have not been adjusted in the month prior to entry.  
5) Patients abusing cocaine, opiates, and PCP will be excluded from the study . A urine toxicology screen will be 
used to ensure these substances are not being abused  prior to study enrollment .  
6) Able to provide written informed consent according to the Yale Human Investigation Committee (HIC) 
guidelines in English. 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 18NOV2015 VALID THROUGH 28NOV2016Approved -  Valid through 28-NOV-2016
HIC 1310012947 
Page 16 of 40 
  
 
 
6. Subject classification:  Check off all classifications of subjects that will be specifically 
recruited  for enrollment  in the research project.  Will subjects who may require additional 
safeguards or other considerations be enrolled in the study? If so, identify the population of 
subjects requiring special safeguards and provide a justification for their involvement. 
 
Children    Healthy   Fetal material, placenta, or dead fetus  
 Non -English Speaking  Prisoners    Economically disadvantaged persons 
 Decisionally Impaired   Employees    Pregnant women and/or fetuses 
 Yale Students   Females of childbearing potential 
 
NOTE: Is this rese arch proposal designed to enroll children who are wards of the state as 
potential subjects?  Yes   No (If yes, see Instructions section VII #4 for further 
requirements)  
 A pregnancy test will be administered to all females of childbearing potential. This result must be negative before enrolling in the study. 
 
7. Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria : What are the criteria used to determine subject inclusion or    
exclusion?  
 
See inclusion criteria in table above.  
 
Exclusion Criteria:  
1. Positive pregnancy test  
2. History of substance abuse disorder (cocaine, opiates, PCP) within the last 6 months or 
positiv e urine toxicology on screening (within the previous 6 months). 
3. History of p ervasive developmental disorder  or psychotic disorder by DSM -IV-TR criteria  
4. Medical comorbidity that significantly increases the risks associated with ketamine infusion (e.g. untreated hypertension, significant cardiovascular disease , glaucoma ) 
 
 
8. How will eligibility  be determined, and by whom?  
 
Screening : After an initial telephone contact to rule out obvious exclusions from the study 
protocol, potential participants will be scheduled for a screening visit at the Yale Child Study 
Center. A member of our research team will discuss all aspects of this research: its purpose, the 
procedures that will be performed, any/all risks of the procedures, possible benefits, and possible 
alternative treatments. .All patients will also be informed that the standard of care for patie nts 
with SAD who have failed the first line treatments (SSRI, SNRI (or alternative SSRI), and CBT) 
is a trial of a monoamine oxidase inhibitor (MAOI) , not ketamine ( National Institute for Health 
and Care Excellence 2013). The research team will discuss the inclusion and exclusion criteria for 
the study. If patients are considered eligible according to their diagnosis of SAD with disabling symptoms  with or without comorbid MDD based on the SCID, Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 18NOV2015 VALID THROUGH 28NOV2016Approved -  Valid through 28-NOV-2016
HIC 1310012947 
Page 17 of 40 
 (LSAS) > 60 ( Liebowitz 1987), and if they agree to enroll in the study, they will sign the cons ent 
forms and schedule a time to go to the CNRU for screening visit 2.  
 
Screening visit 2 will occur on the CNRU (may be done directly after Screening Visit 1 if 
convenient for the participant), and medical assessments (physical exam, EKG, blood draw, and urinalysis), and a battery of psychological rating scales will be performed , as indicated in Table1 
(excluding the SCID which is done during screening visit 1). We will also contact the subject’s primary care provider or treating provider to confirm their psychiatric history and SAD diagnosis 
after receiving a signed release f orm from the subject. 
 
 
Participants will be enrolled if a clinical diagnosis of generalized social anxiety disorder, meeting DSM-V criteria as determined by the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM- V – Patient Edition 
(SCID-P). All participants in our study will identify formal public speaking as one of their social 
fears.  Additional diagnostic, demographic, and clinical data, including course of illness, education 
level, history of formal and public speaking, history of suicidal ideation and attempts, treatment 
history, and family psychiatric history, will be obtained by direct clinical interview. All such data will be formally recorded on the CNRU Patient Profile and entered into a computer.  
 
Participants will be excluded from the study if they present with major active suicidal ideation, a 
history of serious medical or neurological illness, current  psychoactive substance dependence 
(with the exception of marijuana, caffeine, and nicotine), mental disorders due to identified medical conditions, or non-affective psychotic disorder. Participants will also be excluded if they manifest signs of major medical or neurological illness on examination or as detected by laboratory studies. The routine laboratory studies will include a CMP (including LFT’s), TFTs,  , 
CBC w/ diff, urinalysis, urine toxicology, EKG, and medical history, and a urine pregnancy test for females. Care will be taken to exclude pregnant women. Female participants will have a serum pregnancy test prior to receiving any treatment or testing in the study and will be informed 
of the importance of not becoming pregnant during the study. Participants will be excluded if 
they are judged to be so clinically unstable that participation in the study might represent a significant clinical risk or are unwilling to stay on a stable medication regimen for the length of this study.  
 
After lab results are received and if the patient remains eligible as indicated by meeting the inc lusion 
criteria, the patient will be called in order to schedule their first infusion. In the case of abnormal test 
results, the proper referrals will be made to ensure the patients receive the appropriate clinical care.  
  
 
Eligibility  will be determined by  the PI and co -investigators based on the study inclusion 
criteria (above).  
 
9. Risks:  Describe the reasonably foreseeable risks, including risks to subject privacy, 
discomforts, or inconveniences associated with subjects participating in the research.  
 
 
Ketamine administration: Ketamine is a medication approved by the Food and Drug 
Administration to be used as an anesthetic. It is a dissociative anesthetic that has been used in humans since the late 1960's. Despite extensive experience there is no clear evidence of long-
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 18NOV2015 VALID THROUGH 28NOV2016Approved -  Valid through 28-NOV-2016
HIC 1310012947 
Page 18 of 40 
 term toxicity associated with ketamine administration. However the acute behavioral side 
effects of this medication warrant particular attention. Krystal et al, administered ketamine to healthy subjects at the West Haven VAMC (Krystal, Karper et al. 1994). The study showed 
that ketamine produces dose-related effects at sub -anesthetic effects in healthy subjects. At 
0.1 mg/kg administered over 40 minutes, the low dose in the VA protocol, ketamine produced little more than a tingling in the extremities and a "little buzzing in the head". At 
0.5 mg/kg, the VA study’s high dose, and the dose proposed in this protocol, ketamine transiently elicited bo th the positive and negative symptoms of schizophrenia, dissociative 
symptoms, attentional impairments, a preferential impairment in delayed over immediate recall, increased perseverative errors on the Wisconsin card sort test, and decreased verbal fluency. In the sub-anesthetic dose utilized in this study, perceptual changes dissipate within 10-20 minutes following the termination of ketamine infusion. Ketamine also increased prolactin and cortisol, while blunting a test day decline in plasma HVA. Ketamine increased 
systolic and diastolic blood pressure by approximately 10-15 mm Hg, without a clear effect 
on pulse. Ketamine did not produce gross disorientation, as evidenced by complete absence of an effect on the MMSE and the successful completion of all categories on the Wisconsin card sort test. There have been no medical complications of ketamine administration to date. Out of the 18 subjects administered ketamine 0.5 mg/kg over 40 minutes, 8 complained of 
blurred vision and two subjects vomited. Both the individuals who vomited were noted to 
have horizontal nystagmus. There have not been adverse psychological reactions in any of the healthy subjects. There is no doubt that ketamine has clear and, in some cases, dramatic effects upon cognitive function. Some people find these effects pleasant or interesting and others find these effects frightening. In prior studies, all subjects have been thoroughly 
prepared for possible ketamine response prior to testing and debriefed at the end of each test 
day. As a res ult, only two subjects terminated their participation in either study prematurely. 
No subject has had adverse or lingering responses to ketamine following a test day. Also, none of the subjects experienced "flashbacks" to their ketamine experiences followi ng a test 
day. These findings are very consistent with the earlier work of Domino and his colleagues. 
Thus, ketamine appears to be safe and, despite the intensity of its short-term behavioral 
effects, well tolerated. The extent to which the effects of ketamine are perceived as unpleasant is context dependent and can be reduced by preparing individuals in advance for the possible responses to ketamine. The response to ketamine appears to be reduced by a number of medications, including benzodiazepines and antipsychotic agents.
 
 
Since 1989, Yale researchers have administered ketamine to over 140 healthy subjects, 30 
recovering alcohol patients and 20 patients with major depression. Adverse effects in 
response to ketamine infusion have been mild and transient , with no evidence of any 
clinically significant adverse side effects. We have reported 8 adverse events associated with ketamine administration to the Institutional Review Boards of Yale and/or the West Haven 
VA since October of 2000. None was considered serious and all resolved shortly after 
discontinuation of the ketamine infusion or within two weeks of the ketamine test day. Adverse events included nausea and vomiting, sedation, hypotension, insomnia and nightmares, headaches, visual and somatosensory perceptual alterations, strong paranoid feelings, and anxiety.  
 
None of the patients or healthy subjects studied to date has had any long-term adverse 
consequences as a result of ketamine administration. This impression is supported by follow-up data up to 2 years on 132 healthy subjects participating in ketamine studies at Yale 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 18NOV2015 VALID THROUGH 28NOV2016Approved -  Valid through 28-NOV-2016
HIC 1310012947 
Page 19 of 40 
 University and at Washington University at St. Louis (unpublished data). We examined 
follow-up assessments collected in a sub -sample of 132 healthy subjects who returned for 
subsequent testing over a duration of 1 week to 2 years. These subjects completed a similar 
battery of assessments when they reappeared as they completed in their earlier testing. In this 
analysis, no significant changes occurred in any measure between their initial and follow-up 
assessment.  
 
In a previous study where ketamine was administered to depressed subjects there were 
adverse effects, though none were severe and none persisted beyond 110 minutes. 
Conversely, there was a significant transient improvement of depressive symptoms.  
 
Blood drawing/intravenous placement: Bruising or thrombosis can occur with placement 
of the intravenous line. A total of 30cc will be drawn at baseline to ensure subject health 
before entering the study. The risks of blood draws include brief pain at the time of needle insertion, bruising, swelling at needle site and rarely, fainting or infection. The amount drawn 
is considerably less than 500 cc, the amount approved by the Red Cross.  
 
Psychiatric evaluation, rating scales and questionnaires: These are all non -invasive, 
should add no risk, and have been used without difficulty or adverse events in previous 
studies with a similar population. The major disadvantage is the time taken to complete the m. 
 
Clinical Deterioration: There is a risk that a participant may experience an increase in SAD 
or depressive symptoms due to the natural course of the illness or poor response to ketamine administration. Because subjects will be asked to refrain from changing any psychotropic medication over the course of the study, clinical progress will be monitored closely with 
frequent HAM-A and HDRS ratings and frequent contact with clinic personnel. The 
following are criteria for evaluation and possible pharmacological and/or non-pharmacological treatments: (1) An increase of 25% in HAM-A score at any time over the course of treatment (lasting beyond acute administration studies), (2) new-onset of suicidal ideation or an increase in passive suicidal ideation.  
 
 
 
10. Minimizing Risks:  Describe the manner in which the above- mentioned risks will be 
minimized.  
 
Protection of subjects: Effective screening should exclude individuals who will be placed at greater risk 
in this study because of medical conditions or psychiatric symptomatology. A detailed medical and 
psychiatric history, physical examination, and laboratory studies must be conducted prior to commencing the study. All the tests will be done in the presence of constant medical supervision with experienced 
nursing and technical staff.  
  
Ketamine Administration : The most common side effects of ketamine are (1) Elevated blood pressure, 
breathing rate and pulse rate, (2) Local pain at injection site and temporary rash and (3) A variety of temporary psychological symptoms including, but not limited to anxiety, sadnes s, disorientation, 
insomnia, flashbacks, hallucinations, and psychotic- like symptoms.  These types of reactions have 
occurred in approximately 12% of patients given higher doses of ketamine when used for anesthesia.  
These symptoms usually last no more tha n a few hours.  The most serious possible side effects of 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 18NOV2015 VALID THROUGH 28NOV2016Approved -  Valid through 28-NOV-2016
HIC 1310012947 
Page 20 of 40 
 ketamine use are (1) Substance abuse/dependence, (2) Elevations in intraocular pressure that could lead to 
vision problems, (3) Allergic reaction and (4) Elevation in blood pressure that could resul t in stroke, heart 
problems and death.  All the serious possible side effects of ketamine are rare.  As a precaution all patients will be administered ketamine and monitored at the Clinical Neuroscience Research Unit for 3 
hours following ketamine infusions.  If the side-effects do not dissipate we will additionally offer patients 
hospitalization at Connecticut Mental Health Center for psychiatric side -effects or YNHH for medical 
side- effects.  
 
In order to minimize these risks for research subjects, vital s igns will be monitored regularly throughout 
and for the first hour following the ketamine infusion.  Subjects will be monitored for at least 3 hours following ketamine infusion by Dr. Bloch.  In the event, that a research subject has a significant psychiatric event requiring hospitalization, they will be treated on the Clinical Neuroscience Research 
Unit (the inpatient unit where the infusion takes place).  Emergent medical care would be provided at 
Yale -New Haven Hospital which is directly across the street from the site of infusion.   
 The dose of ketamine established in prior research (0.5 mg/kg over 40 minutes) will be used in this study 
to minimize risks. Yale New Haven Hospital policy currently does not require any special credentialing 
privileges to administer ketamine at sub anesthetic doses such as those utilized in this study. A study doctor and nurse will be at the bedside at all times during the infusion and recovery. During the infusion, 
heart rate, respiratory rate, oxygen saturation, level of consciousness, and pain are monitored 
continuously and blood pressure is monitored every 5 minutes. Heart rate, respiratory rate, blood pressure, 
oxygen saturation, and pain are documented every 15 minutes. During the recovery period, the patient is 
monitor ed every 15 minutes for at least one hour after the last dose of the sedative agent is given. The 
patient will remain on this sedation for 3 hours following the ketamine infusion.  
 
Patients who receive ketamine will not be permitted to drive home after the infusion. Research staff will  
arrang e transportation for the patient.  P atients will be allowed to stay on the Yale Clinical Neuroscience 
Research Unit (CNRU) the night of the ketamine infusion. All participants will be asked not to engage in 
demanding work for the first 3 days after the ketamine infusion. If participants develop psychiatric 
symptoms, we may admit them to the hospital. Hospitalization may be involuntary if patients are in 
danger of harming themselves or others.  
 
The consent forms will p rovide a description of what participants may experience during the intravenous 
ketamine infusion at a dose of 0.5 mg/kg over the course of 40 minutes, so that they will be well prepared 
for possible responses to ketamine. Participants will be told that so me people have reported mildly 
decreased concentration or a “hangover” on the day after ketamine, but since subjects will not be allowed to drive home, there is less of a concern regarding driving. A research nurse will be present throughout 
the study to m onitor the patient’s response and note any changes in physical or mental state. A research 
clinician will be present throughout the study to offer support and to help clarify the progress of the test 
day in case the medication causes feelings of confusion.  A research doctor will also be available. The 
physician would be informed in case of any alarming changes in the patient’s physical or mental state. The research nurse will also offer support and provide consistent “reality testing” for individuals 
experiencing confusion or transient psychosis.  
 
Intravenous and oral diazepam will be kept available to control markedly distressing behavioral effects of ketamine, should they emerge.  
 
All participants will be asked to contact us at any time if any unpleasant effects occur. All participants 
will be given wallet- sized cards, which provide contact information. The cards will identify the Yale 
Human Investigation Committee number for the study, the study PI (Michael Bloch, MD with phone 
number), off-hour contact number (203-974-7560, CNRU inpatient nursing station), Connecticut Mental 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 18NOV2015 VALID THROUGH 28NOV2016Approved -  Valid through 28-NOV-2016
HIC 1310012947 
Page 21 of 40 
 Health Center Investigational Drug Service phone number, and regular hours telephone numbers of their 
study physician and research support staff (Jerome Taylor, MD 203-936-7716), should unpleasant effects 
occur after the subject has left the testing facility. All participants are contacted 1, 2, 3,  5, 7, 10, 14, 21, 
and 28 days after each infusion for safety reasons. In addition, participants will be contacted 1, 2, 3, 5, 7,  
10, and 14 days after each infusion to administer symptom ratings. Participants will be instructed and 
encouraged to contact the treatment team between scheduled meetings should their distress worsen.  
 
In order to enroll in the study, patients must not have a lifetime history of substance abuse or dependence, 
thereby reducing the risk of ketamine substance abuse/dependence by study participants.   
  
Blood drawing/intravenous placement:  The risks of blood draws and intravenous line placements are 
rare, and when these are done under sterile conditions by trained personnel the occurrence is even more remote.  
 
Psychiatric evaluation, rating scales, questionnaires , speech tasks, and attention bias tasks: In order 
to minimize risks associated with the psychiatric ratings a nd ensure the accuracy of reporting, these 
measures will be administered by a trained research nurse and supervised by a study physician. During 
the impromptu speech, participants have the option to stop the speech at any time if they experience 
significant distress.  
 
Clinical deterioration: If a participant shows significant worsening of symptoms, he or she will be 
evaluated for clinically appropriate pharmacological and non- pharmacological treatments by a clinic 
psychiatrist and followed until s uccessful contact with a community provider is made. Patients will be 
informed that the decision to initiate a course of psychotropic medication will not affect their eligibility to 
participate in future studies, to receive treatment at the Connecticut Mental Health Center  or Yale , or to 
receive treatment on a private basis from a referring clinician.  
 
 
 11. Data and Safety Monitoring Plan:  Include an appropriate Data and Safety Monitoring Plan 
(DSMP) based on the investigator’s risk assessment stated below. (Note: the HIC will make the final determination of the risk to subjects.) For more information, see the Instructions, page 24. 
a. What is  the investigator’s assessment of the overall risk level for subjects 
participating in this study?  This is a moderate risk study.  
b. If children are involved, what is the investigator’s assessment of the overall risk 
level for the children participating in this study? N/A  
c. Copy, paste, and then tailor an appropriate Data and Safety Monitoring Plan  
from http://www.yale.edu/hrpp/forms- templates/biomedical.html
  for 
i. Minimal risk  
ii. Great er than minimal/moderate risk  
iii. High risk  
  
Moderate Risk DSMP 
 1. Personnel responsible for the safety review and its frequency:  
 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 18NOV2015 VALID THROUGH 28NOV2016Approved -  Valid through 28-NOV-2016
HIC 1310012947 
Page 22 of 40 
 The principal investigator will be responsible for monitoring the data, assuring protocol 
compliance, and conducting the safety reviews at the specified frequency which must be conducted at a minimum of every 6 months (including when re-approval of the protocol is sought).  During the review process, the principal investigator (monitor) will evaluate whether the study should continue unchanged, require modification/amendment, or close to enrollment. Either the principal investigator or the IRB have the authority to stop or suspend the study or 
require modifications. 
 
2. The risks associated with the current study are deemed moderat e for the following 
reasons: (choose those that apply)  
 
1. We do not view the risks associated with the ketamine infusion as minimal.  
2. Given the now established safety and validity of the current dose of ketamine in our prior 
work, we do not view the proposed studies as high risk. 
 Although we have assessed the proposed study as one of moderate risk, the potential exists for anticipated and/or unanticipated adverse events, serious or otherwise, to occur since it is not possible to predict with certainty the abs olute risk in any given individual or in advance of first-
hand experience with the proposed study methods. Therefore, we provide a plan for monitoring the data and safety of the proposed study as follows: 
 
3. Attribution of Adverse Events: 
Adverse events w ill be monitored for each subject participating in the study and attributed to the 
study procedures / design by the principal investigator (Michael H. Bloch, MD) according to the 
following categories:  a.) Definite: Adverse event is clearly related to investigational procedures(s)/agent(s).  
b.) Probable: Adverse event is likely related to investigational procedures(s)/agent(s). c.) Possible: Adverse event may be related to investigational procedures(s)/agent(s). d.) Unlikely: Adverse event is likely not to be related to the investigational 
procedures(s)/agent(s). 
e.) Unrelated: Adverse event is clearly not related to investigational procedures(s)/agent(s). 
 
4. Plan for Grading Adverse Events: 
 
The following scale will be used in grading the severity of adverse events noted during the study:  
1. Mild adverse event  
2. Moderate adverse event  
3. Severe  
 5. Plan for Determining Seriousness of Adverse Events:  
 Serious Adverse Events:  
In addition to grading the adverse event, the PI will determine whether the adverse event meets the criteria for a Serious Adverse Event (SAE).  An adverse event is considered serious if it: 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 18NOV2015 VALID THROUGH 28NOV2016Approved -  Valid through 28-NOV-2016
HIC 1310012947 
Page 23 of 40 
  
1. is life -threatening OR  
2. results in in -patient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization OR  
3. results in persistent or significant disabilit y or incapacity OR 
4. results in a congenital anomaly or birth defect OR  
5. results in death OR 
6. based upon appropriate medical judgment, may jeopardize the subject’s health and may 
require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the other outcomes listed in this definition, OR 
7. adversely affects the risk/benefit ratio of the study  
 An adverse event may be graded as severe but still not meet the criteria for a Serious Adverse Event.  Similarly, an adverse event may be graded as moderate but still meet  the criteria for an 
SAE.  It is important for the PI to consider the grade of the event as well as its “seriousness” when determining whether reporting to the IRB is necessary.  
 6. Plan for reporting Reportable Adverse Events and other unanticipated probl ems 
involving risks to subjects or others to the IRB 
 
The principal investigator will report the following types of events to the IRB: a) adverse events 
that are serious or life -threatening AND unanticipated (or anticipated but occurring with a 
greater frequency than expected ) AND possibly, probably or definitely related to the 
drug/device/intervention; and b) other unanticipated problems involving risks to subjects or others.  These adverse events or unanticipated problems involving risks to subjects or ot hers will be 
reported to the IRB in accordance with IRB Policy 710, using the appropriate forms found on the website.  
 
 
7. Plan for reporting adverse events to co -investigators on the study, as appropriate the 
protocol’s research monitor(s), and funding and regulatory agencies, and regulatory and 
decision -making bodies.  
 
For the current study, the following individuals, funding, and/or regulatory agencies will be notified (choose those that apply):  
xAll Co -Investigators listed on the protocol. 
 
xFood and Drug Administration 
  
 The principal investigator (Michael H. Bloch, MD ) will conduct a review of all adverse events 
upon completion of every study subject. The principal investigator will evaluate the frequency 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 18NOV2015 VALID THROUGH 28NOV2016Approved -  Valid through 28-NOV-2016
HIC 1310012947 
Page 24 of 40 
 and severity of the adverse events and determine if modifications to the protocol or consent form 
are required.  
 
 
d. For multi- site studies for which the Yale PI serves as the lead investigator:  N/A 
i. How will adverse events and unanticipated problems involving risks to subjects or others be reported, reviewed and managed? 
ii. What provisions are in place for management of interim results?  
iii. What will the multi-site process be for protocol modifications? 
 
12. Statistical Considerations:  Describe the statistical analyses that support the study design.  
 
We will use a paired t -test to compare average improvement over the first 3 days following infusion 
between ketamine and saline.   Ketamine greatly reduces anxiety and depressive symptoms in MDD with 
an effect size of 1.4 -1.5 in similarly designed saline controlled studies  (Zarate, Singh et al. 20 06). If 
ketamine proves to be as efficacious in SAD as it is in MDD, a sample size of 18 would allow a placebo to ketamine comparison study to have statistical power greater than 0.80 to detect a statistically 
significant change at the α = 0.05 level (Cohen 1988).  However, it is quite possible that the benefits of ketamine will be smaller in SAD than depression. Therefore, even if the results of our primary analysis 
are not statistically significant, we would consider having 6 of 18 patients exhibiting a response to 
ketamine (but not placebo) during the first week following infusion as sufficient evidence towards 
conducting a more definitive trial.  Treatment response is defined as at least a 30% reduction in VAS  
scores anytime in the first 3 days foll owing infusion. 
 
 
SECTION  VI: RESEARCH INVOLVING DRUGS , BIOLOGICS , RADIOTRACERS , PLACEBOS  AND 
DEVICES  
 
 If this section (or one of its parts, A or B) is not applicable, state N/A and delete the rest of the section.  
 
A. DRUGS , BIOLOGICS  and RADIOTRACERS  
 
1. Identification of Drug , Biologic or Radiotracer : What is (are) the name(s)  of the drug(s)  
biologic(s)  or radiotracer(s) being used? Identify whether FDA approval has been granted and for 
what indication(s).   Ketamine (Ketalar) has USDA approval as the sole anesthetic agent for diagnostic and surgical procedures that do not require skeletal muscle relaxation. The drug is also indicated for the induction of anesthesia prior to the administration of other general anesthetic agents or to supplement low potency agents, such as nitrous oxide. In this study, ketamine will be used for a therapeutic purpose .  
Nonetheless,  Dr. Pittenger  holds the research license for administering this controlled substance in a 
non-therapeutic research study.  
 
All protocols which utilize a drug , biologic or radiotracer not approved by, but regulated by, the FDA, 
or a radiotracer regulated by the RDRC,  must provide the following information: N/A.  
a.What is the Investigational New Drug (IND) number  assigned by the FDA?  
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 18NOV2015 VALID THROUGH 28NOV2016Approved -  Valid through 28-NOV-2016
HIC 1310012947 
Page 25 of 40 
 b. Who holds the IND?  
c. All protocols which utilize a radiotracer not approved by, but regulated by the FDA must 
provide the IND number: _______________ Alternatively, use of the investigational radiotracer may be under RDRC/RSC oversight: (check if appropriate)_____________  For all investigational radiotracers, attach a cop y of the RDRC/RSC application ( for 
radioisotopes used in the PET Center, PET Center personnel may complete this step) Go to http://rsc.med.yale.edu/login.asp?url=myApps.asp
.  When you have logged in, complete 
the application and attach a copy to this submission.      
 Alternatively, an  exemption from IND filing requirements  may be sought for a  clinical  
Investigation  of a drug product that is lawfully marketed in the United States. If there is no IND and 
an exemption is being sought, review the following categories and complete the category that applies  
 (and delete the inapplicable categories) : 
 
Exempt Category 1 
The clinical investigation of a drug product that is lawfully marketed in the United States can be  
exempt from IND regulations if all of the following are yes:  
 
i.   T he intention of the investigation is NOT to report to the FDA as a well -controlled study in support 
of a new indication for use or to be used to support any other significant change in the labeling for 
the drug.  Yes   No 
ii. The drug that is undergoing investigation is lawfully marketed as a prescription drug product, and  
the intention of the investigation is NOT to support a significant change in the advertising for the  
product.  Yes   No 
iii.  The investigation does NOT involve a route of administration or dosage level or use in populations 
or other factor that significantly increases the risks (or decreases the acceptability of the risks)    
associated with the use of the drug product.  Yes   No 
iv. The investigation will be conducted in compliance with the requirements for institutional (HIC)    
review and with the requirements for informed consent of the FDA regulations (21 CFR Part 50  and 
21 CFR Part 56).  Yes   No 
v.   The investigation will be conducted in compliance with the requirements regarding promotion and 
charging for i nvestigational drugs.  Yes   No 
 
 2.  Background Information:  Provide a description of previous human use, known risks, and data 
addressing dosage(s), interval(s), route(s) of administration, and any other factors that might influence risks. If this is the first time this drug is being administered to humans, include relevant data on animal models.  
 
Ketamine is a medication approved by the Food and Drug Administration to be used as an anesthetic. It 
is a dissociative anesthetic that has been used in humans since the late 1960's (32). Despite extensive 
experience there is no clear evidence of long-term toxicity associated with ketamine administration 
(33). Please see Risks and Minimizing Risks Sections labeled “K etamine Administration” above.  
 
 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 18NOV2015 VALID THROUGH 28NOV2016Approved -  Valid through 28-NOV-2016
HIC 1310012947 
Page 26 of 40 
 3.  Source:  a) Identify the source of the drug or biologic to be used.  
    
Ketamine (Ketalar) will be obtained from the CMHC Research Pharmacy  
   b) Is the drug provided free of charge to subjects ?  Yes   No 
       If yes, by whom?   4.  Storage, Preparation and Use:  Describe the method of storage, preparation, stability information, 
and for parenteral products, method of sterilization and method of testing sterility and pyrogenicity.  
 
Ketalar is chemically designated d,l – 2- (0-chlorophenyl)-2-(methylamino) cyclohexanone 
hydrochloride. It is formulated as a slightly acidic (pH 3.5-5.5) sterile solution for intravenous or intramuscular injection in concentrations containing he equivalent of either 10, 50, or 100 mg ketamine base per milliliter and contains not more than 0.1 mg/mL Phemerol®  (benzethonium chloride) added as a preservative. The 10mg/mL solution has been made isotonic with sodium chloride. The medication will be obtained and stored at the CMHC research pharmacy, and will be picked up by investigators on the morning of infusion.  
 Check applicable Investigational Drug Service utilized:  
      YNHH IDS                                                                         Yale Cancer Center  
       CMHC Pharmacy                                                            West Haven VA 
        PET Center                                                         None        
     Other:  
Note: If the YNHH IDS (or comparable service at CMHC or WHVA) will not be utilized, explain in detail how the PI will oversee these aspects of drug accountability, storage, and preparation. 
   
 
5.  Use of Placebo:  Not applicable to this research project  
 If use of a placebo is planned, provide a justification which addresses the following: 
a. Describe the safety and efficacy of other available therapies . If there are no other  
available therapies, state this.  
 
Since this is a crossover trial, all subjects will receive both ketamine and placebo during the course of 
the study.  A placebo control is necessary because there is a significant improvement with time and to 
treatment expectancy  that occurs in anxiety disorders.  Using a crossover design allows all subjects to 
get the research medication being studied in the protocol, yet provide an appropriate comparison 
condition.   
Before beginning the study, participants will be informed of typical first- line treatments for SAD. 
Generally, one would try all three first line treatments sequentially followed by an MAOI  as standard of 
care treatment (Pilling, Mayo -Wilson et al. 2013 ).  However, roughly one- third to one -half of patients 
with generalized SAD do not experience significant clinical benefit from the combination of first- line 
interventions such as pharmacotherapy with selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRI), venlafaxi ne, 
or cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) ( Blomhoff, Spetalen et al. 2001, Davidson 2004, Baldwin, 
Anderson et al. 2005 ). Benzodiazepines, gabapentin, pregabalin, and monoamine oxidase inhibitors 
phenelzine and moclobemide are also effective in the treatment of social anxiety; however, to our 
knowledge, there are no randomized, placebo-controlled studies that examine the treatment of SAD 
patients who do not respond to first- line treatments. Moreover, aside from benzodiazepines, which have 
significant abuse potential, the medications often take at least a week for the p atient to experience 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 18NOV2015 VALID THROUGH 28NOV2016Approved -  Valid through 28-NOV-2016
HIC 1310012947 
Page 27 of 40 
 benefits. This delay in anxiolytic effect coupled with side effects, which often begin immediately, can 
lead to premature discontinuation of these treatments. Finally, there is little evidence that combination 
of interventions (pharmac ologic or psychotherapeutic) is e ffective( Blanco, Bragdon et al. 2013) 
(Blomhoff, Spetalen et al. 2001, Baldwin, Anderson et al. 2005).  
 
 
b. State the maximum total length of time a participant may receive placebo while on the study.  
 One dose of IV saline will be given, and the patient will not receive the ketamine infusion one month (psychotropic medication changes are not allowed for the duration of the study – two  
months). 
 
c. Address the greatest potential harm that may come to a participant as a result of  receiving     
  placebo.  
 
Anxiety  symptoms may not improve or even worsen depending on the clinical course of illness.  
Subjects have the option of withdrawing from the research protocol at any point if their symptoms worsen.  Additionally, inpatient hospitalization resources a re available to the 
investigator if subject’s symptoms worsen to the point of requiring inpatient hospitalization as 
part of the protocol.
 
 
 
d. Describe the procedures that are in place to safeguard participants receiving placebo.  
 As stated in the “Minimize Risk” section under “Clinical Deterioration above, if
 a participant 
shows significant worsening of symptoms, he or she will be evaluated for clinically appropriate 
pharmacological and non- pharmacological treatments by a clinic psychiatrist and followed until 
successful contact with a community provider is made. Patients will be informed that the deci sion to 
initiate a course of psychotropic medication will not affect their eligibility to participate in future 
studies, to receive treatment at the Connecticut Mental Health Center or Yale, or to receive treatment on a private basis from a referring clini cian.  
 
 
6. Use of Controlled Substance s: 
 Will this research project involve the use of controlled substances in human subjects? 
  Yes   No  See HIC Application Instructions to view controlled substance listings .  
  If yes, is the use of the controlled substance considered: 
  Therapeutic: The use of the controlled substance, within the context of the research, has the 
potential to benefit the research participant.  
  Non -Therapeutic: Note, the use of a controlled substance in a non-therapeutic research study 
involving human subjects may require that the investigator obtain a Laboratory Research License. Examples include controlled substances used for basic imaging, observation or biochemical studies or other non-therapeutic purposes. See Instructions for further information. 
  Dr.Pittenger  holds a Laboratory Research License for use of a controlled substance in an on-
therapeutic study involving human subjects.  
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 18NOV2015 VALID THROUGH 28NOV2016Approved -  Valid through 28-NOV-2016
HIC 1310012947 
Page 28 of 40 
  
7. Continuation of Drug Therapy After Study Closure    Not applicable to this project  
 Are subjects provided the opportunity to continue to receive the study drug(s) after the study has 
ended? 
 Yes  If  yes, describe the conditions under which continued access to study drug(s) may apply 
as well as conditions for termination of such access.  
 
  No    If no, explain why this is acceptabl e. Ketamine is a controlled substance with the potential 
for abuse and/or psychiatric symptoms if used chronically. Furthermore, ketamine is administered 
IV in this study, which is untenable on an outpatient basis.  
 
 B.  D EVICES  - NA 
 
SECTION  VII: RECRUITMENT /CONSENT AND ASSENT P ROCEDURES  
1. Targeted Enrollment: Give the number of subjects:  
a.   targeted for enrollm ent at Yale for this protocol 18 
b.    If this is a multi-site study, give the total number of subjec ts targeted across all sites 
NA 
 
2. Indicate recruitment methods below.   Attach copies of any recruitment materials that will be used.  
 
Flyers       Internet/Web Postings    Radio  
 Posters       Mass E -mail Solicitation     Telephone 
 Letter       Departmental/Center Website    Television  
 Medical Record Review     Departmental/Center Research Boards   Newspaper  
 Departmental/Center Newsletters   Web -Based Clinical Trial Registries   
  YCCI Recruitment database    Clinicaltrials.gov Registry (do not send materials to HIC)  
 Other (describe):  
 
3. Recruitment Procedures:  
a. Describe how potential subjects will be identified.  – Patients with Social Anxiety 
Disorder in the Yale Center for Anxiety and Mood Disorders Clinic  will be recruited 
for this study. Additionally, some subjects will respond to the contact phone number on 
the clinicaltrials.gov trial listing , flyers , or postings on the departmental website/YCCI 
recruitment database. We will also reach out to local providers and leaders of local social anxiety groups by letter to inform them of our study.  
 
b. Describe how potential subjects are contacted.  Clinicians at the clinic will be informed 
about the opportunity and asked to inform their patients about the opportunity if appropriate. Potential subjects interested in the trial will initiate first contact with the study recruitment coordinator or another member of the research team.  
 
c. Who is recruiting potential subjects? Co-investigators David Klemanski, PhD and 
Jerome Taylor, MD will inform clinicians at the clinic about the opportunity and may ask patients directly if they are seeing the patients clinically. 
 
  
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 18NOV2015 VALID THROUGH 28NOV2016Approved -  Valid through 28-NOV-2016
HIC 1310012947 
Page 29 of 40 
 4. Screening Procedures  
a. Will email or telephone correspondence  be used to screen potential subjects for 
eligibility prior to the potential subject coming to the research office?  Yes   No 
b.  If yes, identify below all health information to be collected as part of screening and 
check off any of the following HIPAA identifiers to be collected and retained by the research team during this screening process. 
 
 
HEALTH INFORMATION  TO BE COLLECTED :  
A brief psychiatric and medical history will be collected during telephone screening including Axis I diagnoses, medical and neurologic diagnoses, as well as recent medication and psychotherapy changes. All information will be stored in locked cabinets/password protected 
computer in an office that is locked. Information that will breach subject confidentiality will not be shared. Rather, data will only be released upon written consent of the subject and will be available for review by the Yale human Investigation Committee. We will hold paper files for seven years at which point they will be destroyed. 
  HIPAA identifiers:  
Names  
All geographic subdivisions smaller than a State, including: street address, city, county, precinct, zip codes and th eir 
equivalent geocodes, except for the initial three digits of a zip code if, according to the current publicly -available data from 
the Bureau of the Census: (1) the geographic unit formed by combining all zip codes with the same three initial digits cont ains 
more than 20,000 people, and (2) the initial three digits of a zip code for all such geographic units containing 20,000 or fe wer 
people is changed to 000.  
 Telephone numbers  
Fax numbers  
E-mail addresses  
Social Security numbers  
Medical record numbers  
Health plan beneficiary numbers  
Account numbers  
 All elements of dates (except year) for dates related to an individual, including: birth date, admission d ate, discharge date, 
date of death, all ages over 89 and all elements of dates (including year) indicative of such age, except that such ages and 
elements may be aggregated into a single category of age 90 or older  
Certificate/license numbers  
Vehicle identifiers and serial numbers, including license plate numbers  
Device identifiers and serial numbers  
Web Universal Resource Locators (URLs)  
Internet Protocol (IP) address numbers  
Biometric identifiers, including finger and voice prints  
Full face photographic images and any comparable images  
Any other unique identifying numbers, characteristics, or codes  
 
 
5. Assessment of Current Health Provider Relationship for HIPAA Consideration:  
Does the Investigator or any member of the research team have a direct existing clinical relationship with any potential subject?  
 Yes, all subjects  
 Yes, some of the subjects 
 No 
 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 18NOV2015 VALID THROUGH 28NOV2016Approved -  Valid through 28-NOV-2016
HIC 1310012947 
Page 30 of 40 
 If yes, describe the nature of this relationship. 
Jerome Taylor, MD is to start seeing a few patients at the clinic.  
 
 
6. Request for waiver of HIPAA authorization:  (When requesting a waiver of HIPAA Authorization 
for either the entire study, or for recruitment purposes only.  Note: if you are collecting PHI as part of 
a phone or email screen, you must request a HIPAA waiver for recruitment purposes.) 
 
Choose one: For entire study: ______ For recruitment purposes only: __X____ 
i. Describe why it would be impracticable to obtain the subject’s authorization for use/disclosure of this data; 
ii. If requesting a waiver of signed  authorization, describe why it would be 
impracticable to obtain the subject’s signed authorization for use/disclosure of this data;  
I. We are requesting a waiver of HIPAA authorization for recruitment purposes only. Subjects 
will be initially recruited through clinicians at Yale Anxiety and Mood Disorders clinic in the Yale University Psychology Department  and the clinicaltrials.gov registry . We will need to use 
PHI such as  name, telephone number and email addresses to schedule initial screening 
interviews. It would be impractical to coordinate initial subject enrollment and recruitment without this data.  
 
II. Signed authorization is impractical because initial screening of patients recruited  
through clinicaltrials.gov  or clinician referral may occur over the telephone or email.  
 
 
By signing this protocol application, the investigator assures that the protected health information for which a Waiver of Authorization has been r equested will not 
be reused or disclosed to any person or entity other than those listed in this application, except as required by law, for authorized oversight of this research study, or as specifically approved for use in another study by an IRB.  
 
Resea rchers are reminded that unauthorized disclosures of PHI to individuals outside of the Yale 
HIPAA-Covered entity must be accounted for in the “accounting for disclosures log”, by subject name, purpose, date, recipients, and a description of information provided.  Logs are to be forwarded to the Deputy HIPAA Privacy Officer.  7. Required HIPAA Authorization:  If the research involves the creation, use or disclosure of 
protected health information (PHI), separate subject authorization is required under the HIPAA Privacy Rule. Indicate which of the following forms are being provided: 
   Compound Consent and Authorization form 
    HIPAA Research Authorization Form 
  8. Consent Personnel:  List the names of all members of the research team who will be obtaining 
consent/assent.  
 
Michael Bloch, MD; Jerome T aylor, MD, and 
Angeli Landeros- Weisenberger, MD . 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 18NOV2015 VALID THROUGH 28NOV2016Approved -  Valid through 28-NOV-2016
HIC 1310012947 
Page 31 of 40 
  
9. Process of Consent/Assent:  Describe the setting and conditions under which consent/assent will 
be obtained, including parental permission or surrogate permission and the steps taken to ensure 
subjects’ independent decision-making.  
 Investigators will obtain consent during a screening visit at the Yale Child Study Center. During this visit, all aspects of the study will be discussed and the inclusion criteria will be explained.  
 
10. Evaluation of Subject(s) Capacity to Provide Informed Consent/Assent:  Indicate how the 
personnel obtaining consent will assess the potential subject’s ability and capacity to consent to the research being proposed.  
 Patients with SAD are considered capable of consent. Individuals with limited capacity to consent will not be enrolled in the study. The principal investigators and co- investigators 
responsible for consenting potential subjects will use their clinical judgment to determine whether potential subjects have the capacity to consent. Patients must be able to understand the study protocol, appreciate and rationally manipulate the risks and benefits, and verbalize their consent.   
11. Documentation of Consent/Assent:  Specify the documents that will be used during the 
consent/assent process. Copies of all documents should be appended to the protocol, in the s ame 
format that they will be given to subjects.  
 The Compound Authorization and Consent form is included in this application  
12. Non-English Speaking Subjects:  Explain provisions in place to ensure comprehension for 
research involving non-English speaking subjects. Translated copies of all consent materials must be submitted for approval prior to use.  
 
Non-English speaking subjects will not be enrolled in this pilot study because the number of 
subjects is small and translating the rating scales and employing trained personnel to administer 
the assessments would be too time -intensive for this sample size.  
 
13. Consent Waiver: In certain circumstances, the HIC may grant a waiver of signed consent, or 
a full waiver of consent, depending on the study. If you will request either a waiver of consent, 
or a waiver of signed consent for this study, complete the appropriate section below.   
 Not Requesting a consent waiver 
 
Requesting a waiver of signed consent  
 Requesting a full waiver of consent  
 
 
A. Waiver of signed  consent : (Verbal consent from subjects will be obtained. If PHI is 
collected, information in this section must match Section VI I, Question 6) 
 Requesting a waiver of signed consent for Recruitment /Screening  only for those subject 
who may call in with an interest from flyers or clinicaltrials.gov 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 18NOV2015 VALID THROUGH 28NOV2016Approved -  Valid through 28-NOV-2016
HIC 1310012947 
Page 32 of 40 
 If requesting a waiver of signed consent, please address the following: 
a. Would the signed consent form be the only record linking the subject and the research? 
 Yes   No 
b. Does a breach of confidentiality constitute the principal risk to subjects?  
 Yes   No 
 
    OR 
 
c. Does the research  activity pose greater than minimal risk?  
 Yes If you answered yes, stop. A waiver cannot be granted.  Please note: 
Recruitment/screening is generally  a minimal risk research activity   
 No  
AND 
d. Does the research include any activities that would require signed consent in a non-
research context?  Yes   No 
 
 
Requesting a waiver of signed consent for the Entire Study  (Note that an information sheet 
may be required.)  
   If requesting a waiver of signed consent, please address the following: 
a. Would the signed consent form be the only record linking the subject and the research? 
 Yes   No 
b. Does a breach of confidentiality constitute the principal risk to subjects?  
 Yes   No 
 
    OR 
 
c. Does the research pose greater than minimal risk?  Yes If you answered yes, stop. A 
waiver cannot be granted.  No  
AND 
d. Does the research include any activities that would require signed consent in a non-research context? 
 Yes   No 
   
 B. Full waiver  of consent: (No consent from subjects will be obtained for the activity .)  
 Requesting a waiver of consent for Recruitment/ Screening  only  
a. Does the research activity pose greater than minimal risk to subjects?   
Yes  If you answered yes, stop. A waiver cannot be granted. Please note: 
Recruitment/screening is generally  a minimal risk research activity  
 No 
   b. Will the waiver adversely affect subjects’ rights and welfare?  Yes   No 
   c. Why would the research be impracticable to conduct without the waiver?  
 d. Where appropriate, how will pertinent information be returned to, or shared with 
subjects at a later date?  
 
 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 18NOV2015 VALID THROUGH 28NOV2016Approved -  Valid through 28-NOV-2016
HIC 1310012947 
Page 33 of 40 
  Requesting a full waiver of consent for the Entire S tudy  (Note: If PHI is 
collected, information here must match Section VII, question 6.) 
    
If requesting a full waiver of consent, please address the following: 
 
   a. Does the research pose greater than minimal risk to subjects?  
Yes  If you answered yes, stop. A waiver cannot be granted. 
 No 
   b. Will the waiver adversely affect subjects’ rights and welfare?  Yes   No 
   c. Why would the research be impracticable to conduct without the waiver?  
 d. Where appropriate, how will pertinent information be returned to, or shared with 
subjects at a later date?  
 
SECTION  VIII: PROTECTION OF RESEARCH SUBJECTS  
 
Confidentiality & Security of Data:  
a. What protected health information  (medical information along with the HIPAA identifiers)  
about subjects will be collected and used for the research? 
PHI about subjects will include name, age, diagnosis, medical record data, results of physical examination including EKG information, laboratory tests, psychiatric rating scores, and performance on psychiatric tests (impromptu speech and attention bias tests). The urine toxicology results will be placed in the research study record. The subject will have a medical record at CMHC. Since the baseline urine toxicology and lab results will be collected during a visit at CMHC, the results of this test will become part of the CMHC medical record. This will be disclosed to the subject in the consent form and the investigator has obtained a  Certificate of 
Confidentiality to protect all sensitive information connected with this study.   
  b. How will the research data b e collected, recorded and stored?  
 All study ratings completed during study visits, histories obtained at screening and medical records pertaining to study procedures are secured in locked files and stored on password -
protected computers. Since this is an investigator -initiated study, the PI and study team will 
develop Clinical Research Forms (CRFs) for this study. These forms will be labeled with a unique random study code that cannot identify the patient. The key linking the code to the subject’s identifiable information will be kept in an electronic excel file which is kept in a password protected file, on a password protected computer on the secure Yale server. A paper copy of this “master file” will be kept in a locked file cabinet as noted above. This  master file 
will be kept separately from any coded data so that the identity of the participant will not be disclosed. Information which is required to be part of the medical record will be filed into the CMHC medical record. If a medical record has not been created, one will be created with this visit. The results of the medical and psychiatric evaluations conducted as part of this research will be available to clinicians caring for the subject unless the participant requests otherwise. The Yale Human Investigation Committee may review records of this research. In the case of published reports of this study, the identities of all participants will be protected.   
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 18NOV2015 VALID THROUGH 28NOV2016Approved -  Valid through 28-NOV-2016
HIC 1310012947 
Page 34 of 40 
  
c.    How will the digital data be stored? CD   DVD   Flash Drive  Portable Hard    
Drive   Secured Server   Laptop Computer   Desktop Computer   Other  
d.    What methods and procedures will be used to safeguard the confidentiality and security of 
the identifiable study data and the storage media indicated above during and after the subject’s  
participation in the study?  
 
All of the information obtained from subjects in this research study will be locked clinic files or on a password protected server to insure confidentiality. Also, the methods utilized include storing identified data separately from that which need not be identified, storing medical 
records according to CMHC policy, and utilizing a secure server.   
Do all portable devices contain encryption software?  Yes    No 
If no, see http://hipaa.yale.edu/guidance/policy.html  
 
e. What will be done with the data when the research is completed? Are there plans to destroy  the 
identifiable data? If yes, describe how, by whom and when identifiers will be destroyed. If no, 
describe how the data and/or identifiers will be secured.  
 Data will be kept in a locked filing cabinet whose access is only obtainable by study personnel and 
electronic clinical data will be kept on a password protected server. The PI will also conduct periodic assessments to ensure that confidentiality provisions established at the onset of the study are maintained throughout the study and during data analysis. Additionally, all staff involved in the handling of subject data are/or will be trained on the requirements of HIPAA Privacy Rule and Human Subject Protection. If the PI should leave Yale, the PI will collaborate with his Department Chair and Faculty  Advisor to ensure that proper and continued protection of individually 
identifiable information and protected health information continues.   After a period of five years these files will be destroyed by ITS approved methods or de -identified 
to protect subject confidentiality. All identifiable data will be destroyed by Dr. Jerome Taylor when the research is completed. Paper will be shredded via the confidential CMHC bins and all electronic files will be deleted or edited so that there is no identifiable in formation. 
 Impromptu speeches will be videotaped during the study. The videotapes will be kept for 5 years. After that time they will be destroyed or de -identified. 
   
f. Who will have access to the protected health information  (such as the research sponsor, the  
investigator, the research staff, all research monitors, FDA, Yale Cancer Center Data and Safety Monitoring Committee (DSMC), SSC, etc.)? (please distinguish between PHI and de-
identified data)  
 In addition to study investigators, members of the HIC, the study sponsor, and the FDA may have access to study data.  
 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 18NOV2015 VALID THROUGH 28NOV2016Approved -  Valid through 28-NOV-2016
HIC 1310012947 
Page 35 of 40 
 g.   If appropriate, has a Certificate of Confidentiality  been obt ained?  
A Certificate of Confidentiality  has been obtained to protect the drug toxicology results. Where 
possible, information will be destroyed that may link the subject to illicit drug use. Since a CMHC 
chart will need to be created for these subjects by virtue of their visit to the site, there is a concern that these results could be traced back to the subject. Subjects who test positive on the toxicology 
test will not be able to participate in this protocol. Subjects will be encouraged to seek treatment for their substance use, as appropriate.    
h. Are any of th e study procedures likely to yield information subject to mandatory reporting   
requirements? (e.g. HIV testing – reporting of communicable diseases; parent interview -
incidents of child abuse, elderly abuse, etc.). Please verify to whom such instances will need to be reported.   Although considered unlikely to be encountered, limits to confidentiality such as mandatory reporting requirements for abuse of children or the elderly will be complied with.  
 
SECTION  IX: POTENTIAL BENEFITS  
 
 Potential Benefits:  Identify any benefits that may be reasonably expected to result from the 
research, either to the subject(s) or to society at large. (Payment of subjects is not considered a benefit in this context of the risk benefit assessment.)  
 
There may be no direct benefit from a subject’s participation in this study. The potential benefits to 
society of these investigations are considerable. SAD continues to be a major public health problem 
with tragic cost to the individual, the family, and the community. The present study may improve our 
understanding of SAD by providing a pharmacologic rationale for developing novel treatments.  
 
 
SECTION  X: RESEARCH ALTERNATIVES AND ECONOMIC CONSIDERATIONS  
 1.     Alternatives:  What other alternatives are available to the study subjects outside of the research?  
 The subject may discuss other non- research treatments for SAD wit h their practitioner or remain 
on their current standard of care regiment. This will include a discussion of pharmacologic, psychosocial, and somatic treatments.  
 
2. Payments for Participation (Economic Considerations):  Describe any payments that will be 
made to subjects, the amount and schedule of payments, and the conditions for receiving this 
compensation.  
 
Participant p ayments will be $750 per subject if the study is completed.  Participants  will be 
compensated $25 for each of 14 baseline and follow-up ass essments  and$100 for participating in 
each of 2 infusion days.  They will also receive an additional $200 for completion of all study 
procedures. Additionally, transportation to and from the appointment on infusion days will be provided to subjects. Subjec ts who are traveling from a distance will be offered  lodging and 
transportation reimbursement up to $500. 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 18NOV2015 VALID THROUGH 28NOV2016Approved -  Valid through 28-NOV-2016
HIC 1310012947 
Page 36 of 40 
  
 
3. Costs for Participation (Economic Considerations):  Clearly describe the subject’s costs 
associated with participation in the research, and the in terventions or procedures of the study that 
will be provided at no cost to subjects.     
  The study drugs and all medical treatment in this research study will be provided free of charge. There are no charges for the study visits, including the cost of transportation on infusions days and transportation and lodging up to $500 for subjects traveling from a distance. Costs to the participant are thus limited to the cost of transportation to and from study appointments other 
than infusion days.  
 4. In Case of Injury:  This section is required for any research involving more than minimal risk. 
 a.     Will medical treatment be available if research -related injury occurs?  
  If a physical injury or illness occurs as a direct result of participatio n in this study, study 
physicians and nursing personnel will be provided emergency medical care and ensure that research participants receive prompt evaluation and medical treatment as necessary. In severe cases this may involve a transfer to Yale- New Have n Hospital emergency room. The cost of 
treatment for any such injury or illness will not be paid for through the study and will be the responsibil ity of the research participant .  
 
b. Where and from whom may treatment be obtained?  
 In the event of a significant medical emergency the participant  will be transported to Yale New 
Haven Hospital. Should there be adverse psychiatric effects as a result of the study they will receive either inpatient treatment on the CNRU at CMHC or as an o utpatient from the Yale 
Anxiety and Mood Disorders Clinic.  
 
c. Are there any limits to the treatment being provided?  
 In the unlikely event that any psychiatric care more intensive than regular clinic visits and a couple of nights of observation on the CNRU is required as a direct result of participation in this study, study personnel will provide emergent care and stabilization. Longer observation on the CNRU and more frequent clinic visits, if necessary in the short term may also be provided. If longer- term psychiatric care is required, beyond what is normally provided by a research clinic, 
then study personnel will provide referrals and othe rwise endeavor to assist participant s in 
arranging such care.  
 
d. Who will pay for this treatment?  
 The study investigators will provide additional short- term inpatient hospitalization that is 
needed to provide emergent care and stabilization following any adverse psychiatric events. 
Longer -term psychiatric care to alle viate a participant’s symptoms below their severity w hen 
entering the study or medical treatments provided at other facilities will be billed to the 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 18NOV2015 VALID THROUGH 28NOV2016Approved -  Valid through 28-NOV-2016
HIC 1310012947 
Page 37 of 40 
 participant or the participant’s insurance company. Participants do not give up any of their 
legal rights by signing the consent forms.   
e. How will the medical treatment be accessed by subjects?  
 As part of the study protocol, participants will be systematically asked about any adverse events they experience and their SAD symptom severity by study personnel. They will also be instructed to inform study personnel if they believe they have suffered an adverse event or worsening of their SAD symptoms as a result of the protocol. Help in coordination of their outpatient psychiatric care for SAD is a regular part of the clinical care provided at the Anxiety and Mood Di sorders Clinic. Participants are free to request this at any time.   
   
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 18NOV2015 VALID THROUGH 28NOV2016Approved -  Valid through 28-NOV-2016
HIC 1310012947 
Page 38 of 40 
 REFRENCES  
 
Aitken, R. C. (1969). "Measurement of feelings using visual analogue scales." Proc R Soc Med  
62(10): 989-993. 
Baldwin, D. S., I. M. Anderson, D. J. Nutt, B. Bandelow, A. Bond, J. R. Davidson, J. A. den 
Boer, N. A. Fineberg, M. Knapp, J. Scott and H. U. Wittchen (2005). "Evidence- based 
guidelines for the pharmacological treatment of anxiety disorders: recommendatio ns from the 
British Association for Psychopharmacology." J Psychopharmacol 19(6): 567 -596. 
Baldwin, D. S. and R. V. Nair (2005). "Escitalopram in the treatment of generalized anxiety disorder." Expert Rev Neurother 5(4): 443-449. 
Beck, A. T., N. Epstein, G. Brown and R. A. Steer (1988). "An inventory for measuring clinical anxiety: psychometric properties." J Consult Clin Psychol 56(6): 893-897. 
Beidel, D. C., S. M. Turner and C. V. Dancu (1985). "Physiological, cognitive and behavioral aspects of social anxiety." Behav Res Ther  23(2): 109 -117. 
Bergink, V., H. J. van Megen and H. G. Westenberg (2004). "Glutamate and anxiety." Eur 
Neuropsychopharmacol 14(3): 175-183. 
Berman, R. M., A. Cappiello, A. Anand, D. A. Oren, G. R. Heninger, D. S. Charney and J. H. Krystal (2000). "Antidepressant effects of ketamine in depressed patients." Biol Psychiatry  
47(4): 351-354. 
Blanco, C., L. B. Bragdon, F. R. Schneier and M. R. Liebowitz (2013). "The evidence- based 
pharmacotherapy of social anxiety disorder." Int J Neuropsychopharmacol 16(1): 235-249. 
Blomhoff, S., S. Spetalen, M. B. Jacobsen and U. F. Malt (2001). "Phobic anxiety changes the function of brain- gut axis in irritable bowel syndrome." Psychosom Med 63 (6): 959-965. 
Bremner, J. D., J. H. Krystal, F. W. Putnam, S. M. Southwick, C. Marmar, D. S. Charney and C. M. Mazure (1998). "Measurement of dissociative states with the Clinician- Administered 
Dissociative States Scale (CADSS)." J Trauma Stress  11(1): 125-136. 
Davidson, J. R. (2004). "Use of benzodiazepines in social anxiety disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, and posttraumatic stress disorder." J Clin Psychiatry  65 Suppl 5 : 29-33. 
Hofmann, S. G. and P. M. Dibartolo (2000). "An instrument to assess self- statements during 
public speaking: scale development and preliminary psychometric properties." Behav Ther  
31(3): 499-515. 
Hofmann, S. G., M. G. Newman, A. Ehlers and W. T. Roth (1995). "Psychophysiological differences between subgroups of social phobia." J Abnorm Psychol 104(1): 224 -231. 
Johnson, H. S., H. M. Inderbitzen-Nolan and A. M. Schapman (2005). "A comparison between socially anxious and depressive symptomatology in youth: a focus on perceived family environment." J Anxiety Disord  19(4): 423-442. 
Kessler, D., T. J. Peters, L. Lee and S. Parr (2005). "Social class and access to specialist palliative care services." Palliat Med  19(2): 105-110. 
Kessler, R. C. (2003). "The impairments caused by social phobia in the general population: implications for intervention." Acta Psychiatr Scand Suppl(417): 19-27. 
Krystal, J. H., L. P. Karper, J. P. Seibyl, G. K. Freeman, R. Delaney, J. D. Bremner, G. R. Heninger, M. B. Bowers, Jr. and D. S. Charney (1994). "Subanesthetic effects of the noncompetitive NMDA antagonist, ketamine, in humans. Psychotomimetic, perceptual, cognitive, and neuroendocrine responses." Arch Gen Psychiatry  51(3): 199-214. 
Liebowitz, M. R. (1987). "Social phobia." Modern Problems of Pharmacopsychiatry 22: 141-
173. 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 18NOV2015 VALID THROUGH 28NOV2016Approved -  Valid through 28-NOV-2016
HIC 1310012947 
Page 39 of 40 
 Linden, E. (2002). "The wife beaters of Kibale." Time  160(8): 56 -57. 
Lipsitz, J. D. and F. R. Schneier (2000). "Social phobia. Epidemiology and cost of illness." 
Pharmacoeconomics  18(1): 23-32. 
Maeng, S. and C. A. Zarate, Jr. (2007). "The role of glutamate in mood disorders: results from the ketamine in major depressio n study and the presumed cellular mechanism underlying its 
antidepressant effects." Curr Psychiatry Rep  9(6): 467 -474. 
Murrough, J. W., A. M. Perez, S. J. Mathew and D. S. Charney (2011). "A case of sustained remission following an acute course of ketamine in treatment -resistant depression." J Clin 
Psychiatry  72(3): 414-415. 
Overall, J. E. and D. R. Gorham (1962). "THE BRIEF PSYCHIATRIC RATING SCALE." Psychological Reports  10(3): 799-812. 
Phan, K. L., D. A. Fitzgerald, B. M. Cortese, N. Seraji-Bozorgzad, M. E. Tancer and G. J. Moore (2005). "Anterior cingulate neurochemistry in social anxiety disorder: 1H- MRS at 4 Tesla." 
Neuroreport 16(2): 183-186. 
Pilling, S., E. Mayo-Wilson, I. Mavranezouli, K. Kew, C. Taylor and D. M. Clark (2013). "Recognition, assessment and treatment of social anxiety disorder: summary of NICE guidance." BMJ  346: f2541. 
Pollack, M. H., J. E. Jensen, N. M. Simon, R. E. Kaufman and P. F. Renshaw (2008). "High- field 
MRS study of GABA, glutamate and glutamine in social anxiety disorder: re sponse to treatment 
with levetiracetam." Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry 32 (3): 739 -743. 
Reiss, S., R. A. Peterson, D. M. Gursky and R. J. McNally (1986). "Anxiety sensitivity, anxiety frequency and the prediction of fearfulness." Behav Res Ther  24(1): 1 -8. 
Ries, B. J., D. W. McNeil, M. L. Boone, C. L. Turk, L. E. Carter and R. G. Heimberg (1998). "Assessment of contemporary social phobia verbal report instruments." Behav Res Ther  36(10): 
983-994. 
Salvadore, G., B. R. Cornwell, V. Colon-Rosario, R. Coppola, C. Grillon, C. A. Zarate, Jr. and H. K. Manji (2009). "Increased anterior cingulate cortical activity in response to fearful faces: a neurophysiological biomarker that predicts rapid antidepressant response to ketamine." Biol 
Psychiatry  65(4): 2 89-295. 
Shafer, A. (2005). "Meta -analysis of the brief psychiatric rating scale factor structure." Psychol 
Assess 17(3): 324-335. 
Sheehan, D. V. (1983). The Anxiety Disease. New York, NY, Charles Scribner and Sons. 
Spielberger, C. D., Gorsuch, J.S., Lushene, R., Vagg, P.R., Jacobs, G.A. (1983). Manual for the 
State -Trait Anxiety Inventory. Palo Alto, CA, Consulting Psychologists Press. 
Valentine, G. W., G. F. Mason, R. Gomez, M. Fasula, J. Watzl, B. Pittman, J. H. Krystal and G. Sanacora (2011). "The antidepressant effect of ketamine is not associated with changes in occipital amino acid neurotransmitter content as measured by [(1)H] -MRS ." Psychiatry Res  
191(2): 122-127. 
Walker, D. L. and M. Davis (2002). "The role of amygdala glutamate receptors in fear learning, fear-potentiated startle, and extinction." Pharmacol Biochem Behav  71(3): 379-392. 
Watson, D., L. A. Clark and A. Tellegen (1988). "Development and validation of brief measures of positive and negative affect: the PANAS scales." J Pers Soc Psychol  54(6): 1063-1070. 
Williams, J. B. (1988). "A structured interview guide for the Hamilton Depression Rating Scale." Arch Gen Psychiatry  45(8): 742-747. 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 18NOV2015 VALID THROUGH 28NOV2016Approved -  Valid through 28-NOV-2016
HIC 1310012947 
Page 40 of 40 
 Zarate, C. A., Jr., J. B. Singh, P. J. Carlson, N. E. Brutsche, R. Ameli, D. A. Luckenbaugh, D. S. 
Charney and H. K. Manji (2006). "A randomized trial of an N- methyl -D-aspartate antagonist in 
treatment -resistant major depression." Arch Gen  Psychiatry  63(8): 856-864. 
 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 18NOV2015 VALID THROUGH 28NOV2016Approved -  Valid through 28-NOV-2016