INVESTIGATOR STUDY PLAN -  REQUIRED 
 
 Page 1 of 10  Revis ed: 6/30/16 Approved 7/7/16  1) Title: The Effect of oral PhenazopyrIdine on Perioperative voiding  After 
mid-urethral sliNg (EPIPhANy study)  
 
2) IRB Review History*  
N/A 
3) Objectives*  
a) Primary objective: Evaluate the effect of phenazopyridine (brand name Pyridium) 
on immediate postoperative  voiding function in patients undergoing midurethral 
slings  
b) Secondary objective: Evaluate percent pain reduction with and without use of oral 
Pyridium  at two hours post -procedure.  
. 
4) Background*  
The midurethral sling (MUS) is a very common, highly successf ul 
procedure for the management of stress urinary incontinence due to urethral mobility, with cure rates ranging from 80 to 86%.
1 A common 
complication of the MUS procedure is short -term postoperative voiding 
dysfunction. Approximately 20% (7) of patients undergoing MUS are unable to void in the immediate postoperative period and are discharged 
home with indwelling bladder catheter  for 3 -5 days.
1, 2 Virtually all 
patients discharged with a catheter are able to effectively void within 5 
days of the procedure  and long -term voiding dysfunction is extremely 
uncommon.  
A secondary analysis of a recent study at UMass examining the effect of 
local anesthetic on postop voiding function showed a potentially dramatic effect of oral p henazopyridine  on reducing postoper ative voiding 
dysfunction. During the study, a medication used to dye the urine blue to assess for ureteral injury became briefly unavailable commercially. As a result, we preoperatively gave all patients Pyridium because it has the side effect of dying th e urine orange. This allowed us to evaluate the flow from 
the ureters if needed. This transition occurred in the middle of the study and at the conclusion, we observed that the rate of voiding dysfunction decreased from approximately 28% in those not recei ving pyridium to 
10% in those receiving pyridium. Because the study was not designed to study this serendipitous finding, we propose to formally assess the validity of this observation.
3Other than our study, there are no other publications 
that demonstrate  that phenazopyridine may have an effect on 
postoperative short -term voiding dysfunction. At this time there is no 
evidence of adverse effect to denying patients phenazopyridine. Because of the nature of our surgical practice, many of the procedures we per form 
have the risk of ureteral injury and we made a decision to give this medication preoperatively to all of our patients. In the 15 years that the PI has practiced, we have never seen a ureteral injury in a patient undergoing a midurethral sling.  The documented risk of injury to the lower urinary 
INVESTIGATOR STUDY PLAN -  REQUIRED 
 
 Page 2 of 10  Revis ed: 6/30/16 Approved 7/7/16  tract during anti- incontinence surgery is approximately 2.6%, with all of 
these injuries being to the bladder or urethra and 0 ureteral injuries in 351 
cases.4 There is no place for phenazopyridine in the manage ment or 
assessment of injuries to the bladder or urethra and many providers at UMass and other institutions in the US do not give phenazopyridine to their patients undergoing a midurethral sling. Phenazopyridine is the only oral medication that is available to evaluate the patency of the ureter after pelvic surgery.   
 
References:  
1. Nilson CG, Rezapour, M, Falconer C (2003) 7 year follow -up of the tension –
free vaginal tape (TVT) procedure. Int Urogynecol J Pelvic Floor Dysfunct 14 
(Suppl I.): S 35.  
2. Nilson CG  Kuuva N, Falconer C, Rezapour M, Ulmsten U, (2001) Long term 
results of he tension- free vaginal tape (TVT) procedure for the vaginal 
treatment of female stress incontinence. Int Urogynecol J Pelvic Floor Dysfunct 12( Supple. 2): S5- 8. 
3. Voiding function aft er Mid -Urethral Slings with and without local anesthetic:  
Randomized Controlled Trial. UMass IRB H-14197 
4. Tulikangas PK , Weber AM , Larive AB , Walters MD . Intraoperative 
cystoscopy in conjunction with anti -incontinence surgery. Obstet 
Gynecol.  2000 Jun;95(6 Pt 1):794- 6. 
 
  
5) Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria*  
Inclusion criteria:  
1. Any female subjects scheduled to undergo Mid- Urethral Sling (MUS) 
through the UMass urogynecology service for incontinence.  
Exclusion criteria:  
1. Planned concurrent prolapse or other procedure besides cystoscopy  
2. Using intermittent self catheterization preoperatively  
3. Undergoing spinal anesthesia for the procedure  
4. Known allergy to phenazopyridine (AKA Pyridium)   
5. Renal insufficiency  
6. Any condition or situation that in the attending physician’s opinion would contra -indicate the use of phenazopyridine  
7. Subjects not competent to give  consent  
8. Prisoners  
9. Non-English  or non- Spanish speaking patients  
10. Age <18  
11. Pregnant patients  
12. Contraindications to the use of IV methylene blue including a) Patients with known hypersensitivity reactions  
INVESTIGATOR STUDY PLAN -  REQUIRED 
 
 Page 3 of 10  Revis ed: 6/30/16 Approved 7/7/16  b) Severe renal insufficiency  
c) Patients with G6PD deficiency  
 
6) Study -Wide number of Subjects*  
N/A not a multicenter study  
 
7) Study -Wide R ecruitment Methods * 
 N/A n ot a multicenter study  
 
8) Study Timelines*  
• Participants will be enrolled  in the study for approximately 6 weeks.  
• We anticipate 2  years to enroll all the subjects into the study  
• Primary analysis will be completed with in 6 months aft er enrollment is 
completed . 
 
9) Study Endpoints*  
• Primary outcome is the rate of voiding  dysfunction between the two 
groups.  
• Secondary outcomes include: complications, perioperative pain scores,  
• Once 50% of the subjects have completed their procedures, we will perform an interim analysis of the rates of voiding dysfunction. If there is a statistically significant difference (p<0.01) at this interval analysis, we will terminate the study.  
 
10) Procedu res Involved* 
Study design and  randomization  
This study is a randomized controlled trial. Randomization will be performed using software and a block randomization scheme.  Study assignment will be completed using sequentially numbered sealed opaque envelo pes. All the research procedures described other than the use or not 
of phenazopyridine will be applicable to both arms of the study. Subjects will have a 50% chances of getting either phenazopyridine or nothing.  
Because pyridium turns the urine orange, i t is impossible to blind the 
patients and researchers to the study assignment. Because there is no known placebo that turns the urine orange, there is no value to using an actual placebo tablet. Subjects will be assigned to either receive pyridium or not r eceive pyridium  preoperatively.  
INVESTIGATOR STUDY PLAN -  REQUIRED 
 
 Page 4 of 10  Revis ed: 6/30/16 Approved 7/7/16  Screening potential subjects: Investigators will screen potential subjects 
for contraindications to methylene blue. Prior obtaining the routine 
surgical consent for the potential subject’s surgical procedure, the patient’s medical history in the UMass Electronic Medical Record is routinely 
reviewed. The medical record will be reviewed for a diagnosis of G6PD and if found, the potential subject will be excluded.  
Once written consent has been obtained, subject number will be a ssigned 
and the appropriate randomization envelope will be opened. The study 
assignment will not be formally shared with the subject. Those assigned to the “pyridium” arm will have orders written for the standard 200 mg dose of pyridium to be given on arri val to the Surgical Admissions Care Unit 
(SACU).  Those assigned to the “NO pyridium” arm with have their routine preoperative orders written along with an order for “No preoperative pyridium”.  
Subjects will then follow the routine perioperative care for their 
procedures with the only study interventions being the gathering of PHI 
and performing postoperative pain assessments.  
PHI will be obtained at the time of the surgical consent with the purpose to 
evaluate for possible confounders affecting the postoperative bladder 
function.  
Surgical procedure:  
The Mid Uret hral Sling will be performed in standard fashion based on 
manufacturer’s recommendations and instructions to minimize inter -observer 
variations. We will perform the procedure according to our usua l and customary 
techniques. The subject will receive the same technique and interventions that a 
routine patient on the Urogyn service would expect to undergo.  There will be no 
changes to the technique for the purpose of the study.  
 Bladder challenge:  
Patient will undergo voiding trial at same day surgery per our usual and 
customary protocol.  This is the same protocol the subject would undergo as a patient on the Urogyn service. The bladder challenge will be interpreted in our 
usual manner and the subje ct managed according to our routine clinical protocols.  
 Postoperative care:  
Subjects will undergo routine postoperative care and followup. Subjects failing their bladder challenge will be seen in the Urogyn clinic according to routine clinical protocols  and data councerning their void trials 
collected . Subjects will undergo routine followup evaluation 6 weeks 
postoperatively  in the order to assess any potential long -term voiding 
dysfunction.  Information on any postoperative complications will be 
collect ed   
 
Administration of Visual analog scale:  
INVESTIGATOR STUDY PLAN -  REQUIRED 
 
 Page 5 of 10  Revis ed: 6/30/16 Approved 7/7/16  (1) Visual analog scale for assessment of pain will be administered at two time 
intervals.  
(a) VAS #1) Preoperative VAS will be done by the principal investigator or any of the study assistants. The VAS form will be par t of subject’s packet.  
(b) VAS#2) VAS will be administered by one of the study investigators  2 to 3 hours  after the surgical procedure in  the SACU.  
 
11) Data and Specimen Banking*  
N/A 
12) Data Management*  
Power Calculation: We used data from the  recent “Urine and Me ” study 
conducted at UMass. A 2 0% percent difference in  subjects passing the 
bladder challenge was felt to be clinically significant.   In order to capture this difference a power calculation was performed via the Wilcoxon signed -rank test . Based on this, to detect a 2 0% difference with a α -error = 
0.05 and a power (1-  β error) = 0.80, a minim um of 41 subjects per group 
(82 total) will need to be recruited. Assuming ~ 10% dropout rate (8), we 
will seek to recruit 90  patients.  
Data analysis:  Continuous m easures will be compared using the unpaired 
Student’s t test. Association between outcome measures and graph assignment will be adjusted according to demographic differences using an analysis of covariance. Standard statistical programs (SAS, SPSS) will be use d to determine the mean differences between the voided/catheterize 
and bladder scanner volumes.   
13) Provisions to Monitor the Data to Ensure the Safety of Subjects*  
There is minimal risk involved with the denial of pyridium to subjects. Prior to the withdraw al of indigo carmine from the market in 2014, 
patients did not routinely receive pyridium preoperatively. Currently a minority of surgeons use pyridium in sling procedures with most using nothing. In the event that the ureters need to be assessed for patency, subjects will be given methylene blue to dye the urine. This is the intervention currently used to assess ureters in procedures where ureteral patency is assessed. Thus both groups are receiving care that is considered within the standard of care.  
Subjects will be monitored in a similar manner to all of our postoperative 
patients. There is a chance that pyridium may be beneficial to patients and that denying this medication may result in less desirable outcomes. This study is specifically designed to look at the issue. We plan to perform an interim analysis of the data once 50% of subjects have completed the study and if there is a clear benefit (or harm) from this medication, will terminate the study early and offer the medication to all patients.   
 
INVESTIGATOR STUDY PLAN -  REQUIRED 
 
 Page 6 of 10  Revis ed: 6/30/16 Approved 7/7/16  14) Withdrawal of Subjects*  
Subjects are free with withdraw from the study at any time . If subjects 
withdraw their participation, any data that has already been collected for 
research purposes will be destroyed or anonymized so that it can no longer be identif ied with the subject. There should not be additional data 
collection of demographic information for research purposes at the time a subject withdraws their consent for the study.   
  
15) Risks to Subjects*  
This study poses minimal risk to subjects. Subjects randomized to the pyridium arm will receive pyridium as it is commonly given to patients undergoing reconstructive procedures currently through the Urogyn division at UMass. Subjects denied pyridium will undergo the same procedures and techniques that our patients not in the study will receive.  
One risk from the study is the risk associated with denying subjects preoperative pyridium for their procedure. Because pyridium is used to dye the urine for evaluation of the ureters, in the event there is concern for 
ureteral injury, patients will be given methylene blue to dye the urine. In addition over the last 5 years and over 300 cases at UMass, there have been no cases where there has been concern for ureteral injury at the time of a midurethral sling placeme nt. In patients undergoing gyn procedures 
where injury to the ureter is suspected, methylene blue is routinely given to evaluate for ureteral patency. Thus the patients in both arms will be receiving care that is considered standard for these procedures.  
Investigators will screen potential subjects for contraindications to methylene blue. Prior obtaining the routine surgical consent for the potential subject’s surgical procedure, the patient’s medical history in the UMass Electronic Medical Record is routi nely reviewed. The medical 
record will be reviewed for a diagnosis of G6PD and if found, the potential subject will be excluded.  
There is a risk of unauthorized disclosure of protected health information. 
The datasheets will be kept in a locked cabinet in  a locked office in the 
administrative offices of the division on Jaquith 2. The data will be 
entered into a de- identified, password protected file kept on the 
departmental computer servers.  
 
16) Potential Benefits to Subjects*  
Subjects who receive pyridium m ay have a lower rate of perioperative 
voiding dysfunction and a lower rate of perioperative catheterization.  
 
INVESTIGATOR STUDY PLAN -  REQUIRED 
 
 Page 7 of 10  Revis ed: 6/30/16 Approved 7/7/16  17) Vulnerable populations  
N/A 
 
18) Multi -Site Research * 
N/A 
19) Community -Based Participatory Research * 
N/A. 
 
20) Sharing of Results with Subjects * 
N/A. 
 
21) Setting  
Subjects will be identified and recruited at the u rogynecology clinic located at UMass 
Memorial and the urogynecology clinic at Westborough UMass Memorial Health 
Care. The urogynecology division has two full time designated surgeons (the PI is one of them) and both will be part of the study. In addition one urogynecology fellow will work as a study assistant. All these three members will participate recruiting subjects and obtaining intraoperative and postoperative data.  
There will be no composition or involvement of any community advisory board, and this research will not be conducted outside of UMass or its affiliates.  
 
 
22) Resources Available  
This research will be conducted through the  scheduled urogynecology 
clinic.  
Roles of the members of the study:  
• Principal investigator. Identifying potential subjects for the study, consenting of 
subjects, performing surgical procedures, participating  in the data analysis, 
preparing submissions to the IRB, oversight of the conduct of the study and research perso nnel.  
• Study assistants. Identifying potential subjects for the study, consenting of 
subjects, assisting in the surgical procedures.  
• Biostatistician. The OBGYN Department has a designated biostatistician who 
will help with the data analysis. The biostatistician will not participate in the recruitment of study subjects.   
The PI , co-investigator  and all study assistants are CITI -trained. All of 
them are also clinical members of the urogynecology division at UMass Memorial Medical Center Department of Obstetri cs and Gynecology.  
Before initiation of the research, all study assistants will be instructed on 
INVESTIGATOR STUDY PLAN -  REQUIRED 
 
 Page 8 of 10  Revis ed: 6/30/16 Approved 7/7/16  the protocol and research procedures at the urogynecology department’s 
scheduled bimonthly research meetings.  
 
23) Prior Approvals 
N/A 
 
24) Recruitment Methods  
Subjects will be recruited through the outpatient Urogynecology clinic s of 
the Urogyn faculty. Patients scheduled to undergo a midurethral slings and meeting criteria will be approached for participation when they present for their preoperative evaluation.     Investigators will screen potential subjects for inclusion and exclusion criteria  to the study including contraindications to methylene blue. Prior 
obtaining the routine surgical consent for the potential subject’s surgical procedure, the patient’s medical history in the UMass Electronic Medical 
Record is routinely reviewed. The medical record will be reviewed for a diagnosis of G6PD and if found, the potential subject will be excluded.  
 Potential subjects will be approached by their surgeon at thei r preoperative 
visit.  Once eligibility has been confirmed, potential subjects  will be 
offered  the opportunity  to participate in the study. The study will be 
reviewed in detail  and ample opportunity for questions will be given.  The 
opportunity to decline participation will also be given.  For women agreeing to participation, informed written consent will be obtained. 
25) Local Number of Subjects  
90 subjects will be enrolled in the study.  
26) Confidentiality  
Data on participants will be stored under a participant  ID number to ensure 
confidentiality.  This data will be stored initially in a locked filing cabinet until it can be transcribed into the redcap database which will be password protect ed on the protected redcap server. The database will be a de -
identified database. Data will be stored for seven years.  
Data security . De-identified subject data will be stored in locked filing 
cabinet in the locked office of the PI.   A study key will be maintained linking study numbers to subject identifiers. This dataset wi ll be entered in 
a computer database which will be stored on a firewall protected, password- protected computer of the PI in a locked office.  The subject ID 
and source documents will be stored in a locked cabinet in the PI office. Personal identifiers will be destroyed at the earliest opportunity, no later than completion of the study.  
INVESTIGATOR STUDY PLAN -  REQUIRED 
 
 Page 9 of 10  Revis ed: 6/30/16 Approved 7/7/16   
27) Provisions to Protect the Privacy Interests of Subjects (HIPAA)  
Participants will be asked to sign a HIPAA authorization. The data 
collected on participants will be stored in a locked filing cabinet in the locked office of the primary investigator.  Only the primary investigator and a  co-investigator s will have access to it.  To further ensure 
confidentiality , all data will be stored under assigned study ID numbers 
rather than personal identifiers such as name or medical record number.  
 
28) Compensation for Research -Related Injury  
Because this is minimal risk, there will be no compensation for subjects participatin g in the study. In the unlikely event of research -related injury, 
no funds have been set aside and the study subject will be responsible for cost of care of any research related injury.  
 
29) Economic Burden to Subjects  
There is no economic burden to the subjec ts. Both groups are receiving 
care that is considered within the standard of care and all examinations, interventions and procedures will be occurring regardless of the subject’s participation in the study. The pyridium is administered as part of a global fee for the surgical procedure and there is no charge to the patient or her insurance for this medication. Because phenazopyridine is a low cost generic medication, its cost compared to the cost of the surgical procedure is negligible to the medical center . 
 
30) Consent Process 
The PI and study staff will  follo w the UMMS Investigator Guidance for 
Informed Consent (HRP -802). Subjects who agree to participate will be 
consented per SOP at Urogynecology clinic by the attending performing the mid urethral sling procedure. Patients will be given ample time to decide and after written and verbal consent is given they will be told they can withdraw from study at anytime despite consenting for the study. Additionally, subjects will be encouraged to ask additional que stions 
regarding the study and their participation. A copy of the consent will be provided with the principal investigator number. Subjects will be encouraged to call with any additional questions.  
 Non- English Speaking Subjects  
Spanish speakers will be invited to the study. A Spanish consent translated 
from the English version will be used  (attachment 8) . Dr. Duenas  and Dr. 
Sierra , who is a co -investigators, are native Spanish speaker s, and 
INVESTIGATOR STUDY PLAN -  REQUIRED 
 
 Page 10 of 10  Revis ed: 6/30/16 Approved 7/7/16  developed the Spanish versions of the consents and summary (Attachment 
# 9). Only Dr. Duenas and Dr. Sierra will be recruiting Spanish speaking 
subjects following the same steps as above employed for English speakers.   
31) Process to Document Consent in Writing  
The PI and study staff  will follow the UMMS Investigator Guidance for 
Documentation of Informed Consent (HRP -803) 
  
32) Drugs or Devices  
Phenazopyridine is a lawfully marketed drug in the United States. The medication is IND exempt based on the following categories:  
This medication is considered within the standard of care for the 
assessment of ureters after an urogynecologic procedure, including midurethral slings. The medication will be orally administered and does not involve a route that increases the risk associated with the use of the product.  
This investigation is not intended to be reported to FDA as a well -controlled study 
in support of a new indication for use nor intended to be used to support any other 
significant change in the labeling for the drug.  
 
This investigation is not intended to support a signif icant change in the 
advertising for the product. 
 