 Yuan Yang, Version 1.1  
IRB version 03/12/2019  1  
  
Study Protocol and Sta tistical Analysis Plan  
Official Title: Targeted HD -tDCS for Reducing Post -stroke  Movement Impairment s 
NCT Number: 14011  
Document Dat e: 11/24/202 1 
 
Principal Investigator:  Yuan Yang,  Ph.D.,  Stephenson School of Biomedical Engineerin g, 
University of Okl ahoma  
Co-Principal Inves tigator :   Evgeny Si dorov, M.D. , Ph.D.,  Depart ment of Neurology , 
University  of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center.  
Project Biostatistician  Co-investigator : Shirley James, PhD, PT, Hudson College of Public 
Health, Department of Biostatistics and Epidem iology, University of Oklahoma Health Sci ences 
Center.  
 Yuan Yang, Version 1.1  
IRB version 03/12/2019  2  
 
Abstract  
Stroke is the leading cause of serious, long- term disability. The emergence of abnormal muscle 
synergies following a stroke presents a major limitation to the recovery of independent f unction. Despite 
the development  of many interv entions for movement reco very post -stroke, rehabilitation treatments 
are minimally effective to muscle synergy impairment. Treatment advances have been hampered by 
our poor  understanding of neural plastici ty post -stroke and the overall l ack of precis e interventions in 
neurorehabilitation. Thus, our long- term objectives are to 1) improve the understanding of the 
underlying neurobiological mechanism of neural pl asticity that drives the recovery of motor function; 2) 
develop targeted interventions that i mprove stroke rehabilitation in more impaired individuals. Our 
previous studies have found that muscle synergy impairment is associated with the damage to the 
corticospinal tract and the maladaptiv e recruitment of contralesional cortico -reticul ospinal trac t. We 
hypothe size that facilitating the damaged cortico- spinal tract (via primary motor cortex) and/or inhibiting 
the contralesional cortico- reticulospinal tract ( via dorsal premotor cortex) will r educe muscle synergy 
impairment  and im prove upper extremity motor function.  In this OSCTR pilot projec t, we propose to run 
a proof -of-concept pilot trial to evaluate the effect of the targeted high- definition  transcranial direct 
current stimulation (HD-tDCS ) on mitigating the muscle synergy impairm ent. This study will determine 
the effect of th e proposed t argeted HD -tDCS on reducing the upper limb motor im pairment , via a pilot 
trial with a randomized, double- blinded, sham -controlled cross -over design.  
  
A. Specific Aims  
Stroke is the leading cause of s erious, long- term disability. Th ree months after a stroke, 80% of 
individuals with moderate to severe stroke report m ovement  impairment  on the side of the body 
contralateral to the lesioned hemisphere(1). The specif ic mo vement  impairments inc lude a loss of fine 
motor  control with the emergence of  highly stereotyped pattern s of coarse , multi -joint mo vements, 
clinically known as muscle  synergies(1). Despite the developm ent of many interventions for movement 
recovery post -strok e, rehabilitation treatments are minimally effective to  the muscle  synerg y impairment 
in more impaired individuals. Treatment advances have been hampered by our poor under standing of 
neural plasticity post -stroke and the overa ll lack of lack of precise intervention in neurorehabilitation.  
Thus, our long- term objectives  are to 1) improve the  understanding of the underlying neurobiologic al 
mechanism of neural plasticit y that drives the recovery of motor function; 2) develop targeted 
interventions that improve stroke rehabilitation in more im paired individuals.   
As a result of damage to the cort icospinal tract in the lesioned hemisphere, t here is evidence of 
upregulation of cortico -reticulospinal tract excitability in the contralesional side (i.e., the o pposite side to 
the lesion)(2). Both animal and human studies (including the PI Yang’s mult i-sites R21 study(3-5)) in 
stroke suggest and support the critical role of maladaptive use of the contralesional  cortico -
reticulospinal tract to post -stroke movement impairments ,(2, 6)  specifically, the presence of spasticity 
exhibited by upper extremity muscle  synerg ies(3-5). Previous studies applyi ng transcranial magnetic 
stimulation  (TMS) to patients after stroke demonstrated that the  use of the contralesional cortico-
reticulospinal tract requires cortical input  from th e premotor cort ex at the non -lesioned he misphere(7, 8). 
These studies provide potential targets  of facilitating the damaged corticospinal tr act (via the primary 
motor cortex) and/or inhibiting the contralesional cortico- reticulospinal tract (via the  premotor cortex)  for 
intervention . 
In this  project , we propo se to run a proof-of-concept  trial to evaluate the effect of the targeted HD-tDCS  
on mitigating the motor  impairment, via the following two specific aims .  
Aim 1. Demonstrate the feasibility of stroke subject recruitment and retainmen t. Our pilot power 
analysis determine d that at le ast 40 stroke patients will be needed in a full R01 trial.  We hypothesize  
that our experimental site at the OUHSC campus  has the full ability  to recruit 12 eligible patients in one 
year and retain most of th em to complete this  trial (detailed in Aim 2).  
 Yuan Yang, Version 1.1  
IRB version 03/12/2019  3 
 
Fig. 1. Reduce d expression of muscle 
synergies after the targeted HD -tDCS. A1 -3 
Anodal, C1 -2 Cathodal.  Aim 2. Determine t he effect of the targeted HD -tDCS on reducing the upper limb motor 
impairment . We hypothesize  that: 1)  facilitating the ipsilesional primar y motor cortex will improve the 
function of the  damaged corticospinal tract and therefore,  reduce upper limb musc le synergies . 2) 
inhibiting the contralesional premotor cortex  will reduce the maladaptive use of the cortico- reticulospinal 
tract and thus, also reduce impairment . This randomized,  double- blinded, sham -controlled cross -over 
study will include the anodal HD-tDCS targeting the ipsilesional primary motor cortex (Aim 2a) , and 
the cathodal HD-tDCS  over the contralesional  premotor cortex  (Aim  2b), compared to  sham 
stimu lation . We will use a  subset of Fugl -Meyer Upper Extremity  assessment which is m ainly related to 
the muscle synergies(9) as the primary outcom e measure. The TMS -induced  motor -evoked potentials 
(MEP) will be measured to determine the use of ipsilesional corticospinal tract and the contralesional 
cortico -reticulospinal tract(7, 8), with the MEP latency as the secondary outcome measure(7, 10). Resting -
state EEG  will also be obtained to have the brain symmetry index(11) as the third  outcome measure for 
evaluating the acut e effort of HD -tDCS on brai n plasticity.  
  
 
B. Background and Significance  
Stroke survi vors account for 795,000 adults per year and approximately 7 million individuals living in the 
US (data from CDC and AHA websites) . In stro ke rehabilitation research, individu als exhibiting  
moderate- to-severe upper limb impairment after stroke are underserved and under -investigated. 
Reviews of existing studies indicate that treatments are minimally in improving  of upper  limb 
functio n(12). Moreover, c onstraint -induced therapy, a wel l-established c linical tech nique, requires a 
large dosage (30- 40 hours/week) that is not always f easible in the current healthcare climate nor can it 
be used in individuals with more se vere motor impairment (12). New interventions are needed that can 
easily translate to the clinic. Improved intervention strongly rel ies on our understanding of neural 
circuitry ch anges in the motor system after a stroke and how they  could be positively and specifically 
influenced by neuro- rehabilitation technology . Previous studies ( including the PI’s  R21 study (3-5)) 
found that post -stroke muscl e synergy impairment  is associated with increased recruitment of the 
contralesional cortico -reticulospinal tract, following damage to t he cort icospinal tract at the lesioned 
side(2, 6)  (Fig.1 ). This finding  provides potential neuro- targets to reduce muscle synergies , i.e., 
facilitating the use of the lesioned corticospinal tract or inhibiti ng the recruitment of the contra lesional 
cortic o-reticulosp inal tract. This pilot study will provide the first prelim inary data to evaluate the effect of 
our novel targeted HD -tDCS interve ntion on reducing upper  limb muscle synergies. This proposal is 
significant because it targets patients who ha ve had strokes and continue to experience muscle 
synerg y impairment with limited options for improving upper limb movement . 
 
C. Preliminary Studies/Progress Report   
The contact  PI Yang has colle cted pilot data from  both his 
previous institute North western  Medicine , as well as in his 
current Tulsa lab (OU #IRB 12550) . The data demonstrated  
the feasibility of proposed HD -tDCS technology, showing 
both anodal (over the ipsilesional primary motor cortex) and 
cathodal (over  the contralesi onal premoto r cortex) HD-tDCS 
reduced  the expression of muscle synergi es (Fig. 2 ). The 
anodal HD-tDCS reduce d the latency of MEP of the 
damaged corticospinal tract while the cathodal HD -tDCS 
increase the latency of the MEP of the contralesio nal cortico- reticulospinal tract. Thus, the  previous 
pilot data support our hypothes es that 1) facilitating the ipsilesional  primary motor cortex will improve 
the function of the damaged corticospinal tract and enhance upper l imb movement . 2) inhibiting the 
contralesional premotor cortex will reduce the maladaptive use of the cortico- reticulospinal tract and 
reduces the synergy impairment.   
 
D. Research Design and Methods (What, When, How, Where)  
 Yuan Yang, Version 1.1  
IRB version 03/12/2019  4 The st atistical  analysis o f our prelim inary  data indi cated that 4 0 stroke participants are required to 
ensure the detection  of the significance of our results  in a complete trial. We will screen up to 50 
patients to ensure we can enroll at least 12 stroke partic ipants in the first year as the pilot sponsored 
by OSCTR pi lot grant. The participants living around the Okl ahoma City area (main site ) will be asked 
to come to:  
- OU Physician Neurology  Clinic  825 NE 10th Stree t ,Oklahoma City, OK 73104 ( the primary  site).  
- College of Allied Health at the University of  Oklahoma Health Sciences Center  located at 1200 
N. Stonewall, Oklaho ma City, OK 7311 7 (the se condary site)  
Baseline s tandard clinical screen s incl uding the Fugl -Meyer Motor Assessment ( Upper Extrem ity 
Portion)  will be conducted prior to any intervention trials . 
Overall Overview of T rial Design. This sham -controlled cross -over stu dy design will include three 
visits:  1) anodal stim ulation targeting ipsilesional h emisphere, 2) c athodal stimulation at the 
contralesional hemisphere, 3) sham stimulation . The sequence of the stimulations  will be randomized 
and double -blinded. After  each intervention,  there will be a 2-week  wash -out period (minimum ) prior 
to providing the next intervention in the sequence.  Each  visit will last up to 3 hours  including  the 
preparation time and break s.  
We will use neuro- navigation high- definition tDCS (NNG HD -tDCS) to target specific brain regions in a 
novel and precise manner . A subject -speci fic head mod el will be built to evaluate the effect of lesion 
size and location on the electrical field of tDCS. The  MR images ( or CT images) will be used to build 
these subject -specific he ad model s. The stimulation electr ode montage and inter-elect rode distance will 
be carefully examined by  computer si mulation to determine the optimal setup and dosage for NNG HD -
tDCS. Based on our pilot test , the stimulation dosage will be set as 2 mA, 20 mi n, the dosage for best -
influenci ng neuroplastic ity according to the safety guidelines of HD -tDCS (13,14). 
 
Assessments and Outcome  Measures.  The following assessments will be performed for baseline,  
pre- and (immedi ate) post-intervention time frames.  The  Fugl-Meyer -Upper Extremity (FM -UE) 
assessment Part A -  mainly related to t he muscle synergies(9) and serves as the  primary out come 
measure. This subset FM -UE assessment increases the sensitivity of  the measure and red uces the test 
time from 30 mins (full assessment) to 10 mins(9). The TMS -evoke motor -evoked potentials (MEP) wi ll 
be measured to det ermine the use of  the ipsilesional  corticospinal and the contralesional cortico-
reticulospinal tract(7, 8), with M EP late ncy serving as the secondary outcome measure(7, 10). The single or 
paired- pulse  TMS w ill be applied at the respective hotspots for the elbow flexor  muscle, i.e., Biceps  
Brachii , over the ipsilesional primary motor cortex ( from which the corticospinal tract originates ) and 
contralesional premotor cortex ( from which the cortic o-reticulospinal tra ct orig inates ) with reference to 
the impaired arm(13, 14). A 3 min 20 channel Resting- state EEG  will also compute the brain symmetry 
index  (BSI)(11) as the third outcome measure for evaluating the acute effort of HD -tDCS on brain 
plasticity. The BSI is defined as the mean of the absolute v alue of t he difference in the me an 
hemispheric ampli tude sp ectrum; values range from 0 (no asymmetry, normal contr ol) to 1 (maximal 
asymmetry, more impaired brain function)(11).  The total three assessment s will last for ~ 33 min ( 10 
mins subs et FU -UE assessment, ~10 mins  TMS MEP , and 3 mins  EEG  recording plus 10 mins 
procdure time), which will be within the effec tive period of HD -tDCS(15). Baseline measurement will be 
performed at the beginning of the study on the f irst visit. To ensure there is no carry -over effect, we wi ll 
compare the outcomes of pre- stimulation measurement with the baseline for  each visit.  
All recor ded data will be de- identified f or the analysis. Identifiers  might be removed, and the de-
identifi ed information may be used for f uture research witho ut addi tional informed consent from the 
subject.  
E. Chart Review  
Chart review ( including av ailable medical records and MRI/CT ) and enrollment will be performed  by our 
study doc tor Co-PI Dr. Si dorov .  
 
F. Banking/Repository/ Database  
 Yuan Yang, Version 1.1  
IRB version 03/12/2019  5 The re corde d data (EEG, MEP and clinical assessments ) will be de -identifi ed and stored for fut ure use. 
These data may be used as preliminary data for  a future large R01 grant application. These data may 
be re- analy zed for data science projects or publication s.  
The d ata wil l be in OU/OUHSC  using the Shared Services Fi le Storage Service offered by O U/OUHSC 
IT. Shared Services F ile Storage service offers  a secure, state- of-the-art clustered storage sys tem for 
the research team’s data and files, simil ar to typical W indow s or Li nux file shares.  This service features 
a robu st filesys tem utilizing high -speed networking for faster acc ess and enables the resear ch team to 
store and access files from on or off -campus (with VPN)  using Windows, Mac OSX, or Unix /Linux 
operatin g sys tems  in a secured way .  
 
G. Inclusion / Exclusion Crite ria 
Stroke  participants should have sustained an ischemic unilateral lesion  (confirmed by the most recent 
clinical or radiological rep orts) at least 3 months prior to participation in this project. The following 
inclusio n criteria will be applied to the stroke part icipants: 1) Paresis confined to one side, with 
moderate to severe motor impairment of the upper limb (Fugl -Meyer upper extremity scores of 10- 40); 
2) Absence of muscle tone abnormalities and motor or sensory im pairment in the unimpaired limb; 3) 
Absence of  severe wasting or c ontracture or significant sensory deficits in the paretic upper limb; 4) 
Absence of severe cognitive or affective dysfunc tion that prevents normal communication and 
understanding of consent or instruction; 5) Absence of severe concurren t medical problems ( e.g. 
cardiorespiratory impairment); 6) Capacity to provide informed consent; 7) Not using a pacemaker, 8) 
No metal implants in the head 9) No known adverse reaction to TMS and tDCS; 10) Capacity to provide 
informed consent; 11) Not  pregnant.   
We are not performing specific assessments since the main goal  of our study is to inves tigate the motor 
functi on and movement recovery after stroke. If participants  can communicate wi th the researcher, and 
understand the procedures well and have the ability to consent , they meet this c riterion (5). Stroke 
participants using a wheelchair or other assistive mobility  devices are eligible to participate if they meet 
the inclusion  criteria  (1)-(11).  
There may be circu mstances under which participation may be terminated by the investigator without 
consent. The examples may include but not limited to:  
• The i nvestigator feels that it is in the individual’ s best inter est. 
• The indiv idual’s c ondition worsens, or any new con dition makes the indi vidual no longer 
qualified for this study.  
• New information becomes available resulting in the indi vidual no longer meet ing the 
inclusion criteria.  
• The indiv idual fails to follow study  requirements.  
• The study is stopped by the sponsor . 
 
H. Gender/Minority/Pediatr ic Inclusion for Research  
Women and minorities eligible to participate in our study based on our i nclusion criteria will be actively 
recruited to mimic t he gender and r ace/ethnicit y distribution in strok e survivors. The most recent upd ate 
on Heart Disease and Stroke Statistics from the American Heart Association includes data on the 
prevalence and inci dence of stroke among w omen and minorities. Both of these statistics v ary by age 
and race/ethnic ity but o n average indicate a similar pre valence between males  and females (2.4 vs 
2.9% of  Americans ≥ 18 y) with similar prevalence within race/ethnicity of non -Hispanic white, black , 
and Hispanic males and females (2.2 vs 2.8%, 3.9 vs. 4.0% and 2.0 vs 2.6% of Americans ≥ 18 y). The incidence of new and recurring attacks across all ages is sli ghtly higher in females compared to males 
(53.5 vs 46.5% of Americans ≥ 18 y). Annual age- adjusted incidence for the first-ever stroke was higher 
in black individuals th an white individuals in data collected from  1993 to 1994, 1999, and 2005 and 
reflected in the prevalence statistics. In addition, the age- adjusted incidence of first ischemic strok e per 
1000 was 0.88 in whites, 1.91 in blacks, and 1.49 in Hispanics accordi ng to data from NINDS for 1993 
to 1997. Finally, a smaller study in Texas found a higher incidence of ischemic stroke among Mexican-
 Yuan Yang, Version 1.1  
IRB version 03/12/2019  6 Americans compared to non- Hispanic white America ns.  
Although there is no theoretical basis upo n which to assume that gender  or race/ethnicity differences 
will affect movement control following brain injury in t he upper limb, we will nonetheless use our 
quantitative measure of max imum reaching abduction load to evaluate gender and race/ethnicity 
differences in abnormal joint torque coupling.  
The risk of pediatric stroke is approximately 5 per 100,000 children. Our laboratory environment has 
been designed such that children age 6 and up can have access to our experimental facility. However, 
the impact  of age/development of the nervous system and the timing of brain injury in children is still 
unclear, which could be very different from the adult stroke. This study focuses on the expl oration of our 
innovati ons in studying adult stroke survivors, and, therefore, children will not be recruited for the study.  
 
I. Recruitment  and Enrollment  
Our primary patient resource is from OU Physician Neurology Clinic  and Allied Health Clinical Netw ork.  
We will also seek referrals from clinicians in the  Oklahoma City  areas and recruit stroke survivor s 
residing in these two area s who wish to participate in the study. The recruitment method will include 
doctor referrals  and direct contact ( if study doctor ’s patient s) via the study do ctor. 
Stroke participants will be examined by the  study doctor  to veri fy their admissibility to the study based 
on the inclusion criteria. Participants will t hen undergo the upper extremity portion of the Fugl -Meyer 
Motor Assessment, and a structured interview pertaining to the inclusion criteria stated above.  
Our cli nician investig ators and/or clinical research assistant will discuss t he proposed study with 
potential participants and answer all questions. Potenti al participants will also be introduced to 
laboratory facilities at study sites. Th e PI will review the Institu tional Rev iew Board- approved consent 
form and HIPAA authorization with the participant and give them a copy of the signed consent form 
prior to any experimental procedures.  Upon the request, we will allow the partici pant to have additional 
time to consider the consent and discuss it with their family member or physician.   The participant must 
sign both the consent form, as well  as the HIPAA f orm prior to participating in this study.  
 
 
J. Risks a nd Benefits  
The self -adhesive surface electrodes used to record muscl e activity  (EMG) may produce minor irritation 
of the skin; there is al so the poss ibility of an  allergic reaction to the electrode paste. The possibil ity of 
irritation will be minimized by  cleaning the skin with alcohol before and after the application of t he 
electrodes. There is a similar possibility of scalp irritation due to a reacti on to the use of EEG/tDCS 
electrodes.  
The tDCS may cause transient itching and ti ngling at the beginning of the deliver y of stimulation due to 
the change of voltage/c urrent as it ramps up to the tar geted intensity. However, most people reported 
that these ar e very mild and fade qui ckly. A small number of participants may report moderate fatigue, 
particularly during, but not after stimul ation. Minor scalp skin irritation may occur bu t will be minimized 
by screening participants who self -report having sensitive skin (based on the tDCS Safety Scr eening 
Tool (TSST) (16)).  
If stroke patients participate in this  study , possible benef its may in clude  an improved ability to control 
their paretic arm  during movement tasks. Benefits may or may not continue after the research has 
ended. Possible benefits to others include an enhanced understanding and treatm ent of movement 
distur bances fol lowing a stroke.  
K. Multiple Sites  
Dr. Yang will be the lead PI  and Dr. Si dorov will be Co-PI and study doctor  for the whole study. The 
study includes three visits at one of the following sites:  
- OU Physician Neurology Clinic  825 NE 10th Stree t Okla homa City,  OK 73104 ( the primary site).  
 Yuan Yang, Version 1.1  
IRB version 03/12/2019  7 - College of Allied Health at t he University of Oklahom a Health Sciences Center  located at 1200 
N. Stonewall, Oklahoma City, OK 73117 (back up site) 
Dr. Yang and Dr. Sidorov (the chief study doctor ) will oversee the study and wil l be responsible to 
report advers e events occ urring in the Oklahoma City  site to the  OUHSC IRB office.  
L. Statis tical Analysis P lan 
 
The statistical and power analysis will be led by Dr. Shirley James , Assistant Professor of Re search 
in Department of Biostatistics  & Epidemiol ogy, Hudson College of Public Health within the University of 
Oklahoma Health Sciences Center . The obtained pr eliminary data will refine our power analysis to 
provide a more precise estimation of sample size for a future full trial. The effect of HD -tDCS i s 
determined by the change in Fugl-Meyer upper extremity  Part A score  (primary outcome measure) , 
change in Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (TMS) -Evoke Motor -evoked Potentials (MEP , secondary  
outcome me asures) , and  change in Brain Symmetry Inde x (other outcome measures ). All statistical 
analysis was completed using commercial software Statistical Analysis Systems (9.4, SAS, Carey, NC, 
USA). After checking for and finding no evidence of a non- normal outcome measure distribution, we 
analyzed the data using generalized estimating equation (GEE) in SAS using PROC GENMOD . The 
fixed factors are group (anodal, cathodal, sham), time (pre and post intervention), and their interaction, 
and the random factor is  subject ID . This technique uses correlated linear mod els for each outcome 
variable (17,18) .  
  
 
M. Data and Safety Monitoring Plan  
 
Overall framework for safety monitoring and what information will be monitored.       
The PIs will be r esponsible f or ensuring participants’  safety on a daily basis due to the low risk  of this 
mechanistic clinical trial study. All reportable new information (safety data) will be reported to the IRB 
within 5 days per University policy by the PI following a r eview with t he study team and DSMB . These 
include but are not limited to new or i ncreased r isks, adverse events, serious adverse events, non-
compliance w ith IRB policy, researcher error/protocol vi olation, and unresolved participant complaints .  
Research data will be m onitored for completeness  every week. The RedCap™ (Rese arch Data 
Capture)  system wi ll be utilized to store all patient demographic information (coded), clinical 
assessment scores,  and all processed data via encrypted university computers.  The raw/unprocessed 
data be coded with a unique patient identifier and stored of fline on an encrypted and password 
protected laboratory computer and bac ked up to secure online storage through the Shared Services 
File Storage Service managed by OU/OUHSC IT . Raw data on the computer cluster  will be accessible 
only to study investigators .  
  
Frequ ency of monitoring plans for interim analysis and stopping rul es. 
A monthly summary of reportable new information (safety data) will be made by the Clinical Research 
Coordinator  (covered by the s ubcontract to OUHSC), in  collaboration with team me mbers in t he project 
and then reviewed by the PIs. Raw research data wil l be reviewed weekly by the study investigat ors for 
organization, completeness, and confirmation of bac kup. Data qu ality issues, if a ny, will be discussed 
with the investigators and re commendati ons will be made for immediate solutions by the investigators.  
An interim analysis will be conducted on research data and directly available to the Program Officer on request. D ue to the low risk  of the proposed study, minimal adverse events are e xpected, and no ‘ a 
priori ’ stopping rules will be assigned.  
 
 Yuan Yang, Version 1.1  
IRB version 03/12/2019  8 Management a nd reporting of adverse events and serious adverse events.  
Upon first knowledge of an adverse event or serious adverse event (also i ncluding any reportable new 
information), the event w ill be re ported to the clinical research coordinator.  After reviewing w ith the PIs, 
the OUHSC clinical research team, and relevant personnel, the clinical rese arch coordin ator will 
generate the  IRB report and queue for review and submission by the PI  to the IRB within 5 days per 
University/IRB policy. A copy wi ll also be sent to the Office of HRPP. The s tudy PI will report all adverse 
and serious adverse events to the NIH w ithin the same t ime fr ame. The PI will h ave weekly meetings 
with team  members t o review all reportable new information.  
 
Individual responsi ble for study monitoring 
Overall study monit oring will be the responsibility of the study doc tor and PI . The study doctor and PI 
will utilize a clinical re search coordinator  to prepare safety and data monitoring reports  as required.  
 
N. Data S haring 
 
We are committed to enhancing the value of research and furthering the advancement of public 
knowledge.  We re cognize that  the public disseminat ion of our scienti fic results can facilitate th e 
creation of collaborative efforts with domestic and internation al collaborators. Furthermore, we 
recognize that the proposed project may result in novel ideas for new method s, technologies, and data 
that could benefit the ent ire research community.  Ther efore, fin al research data will be shared openly 
and timely in ac cordanc e with the most recent NIH guidelines 
(http://grants.nih.gov/grants/policy/data_sharing/) while being m indful that the confidentiality an d privacy 
of parti cipants in research must be pr otected at all times.  
 
More specifically, s haring of data and r esources generated by this project is an essential part of our 
proposed activities and will be carried out in several diff erent ways including presentations at national 
scientific meetings, a nd publications in peer -reviewed journals. We wish to make our results a vailable 
to the community of scientists interested in stroke rehabilitation and to help avoid unintenti onal 
duplication of research. All research data obtained at  this study will be sh ared with members in our 
interdisciplinary team across the Univer sity of  Oklahoma (OU) and OU  Health Sciences Center  
(OUHSC) . We welcome collaboration with others (outside our  team) who c an fruitfully use and apply 
the rehabili tation plan we developed in t his pilot trial and following R01 study . The research team shall 
create and maintain a database to integrate de-identified  clinical assessment results and acquired 
EEG , EMG, b ehavior data,  in order to facilita te data sharing. T he database shall be accessed through a  
secured  web portal. All investigators at this project will employ best practice implementations for  
acces sing the data via institute -owned, encrypted computers to i ncrease the security of the networ k 
and to assure th e availability, integrity , and confidentiality of information. Any data distributed to 
additional pot ential research collaborators outside of thi s project  will be de -identified prior to sharing to 
preserv e the confid entiality of the parti cipants’ identity  to protect Human Subject Priv acy. 
 The results of this pilot trial will be disseminated through Clini calTrials.gov, in accordance with 
institutio nal policies that ensure compliance with NIH policies on cl inical trial registration and reporting. 
The results  of the study will also be di sseminated through publications and presentations at 
national/international meetings, and discussed at local seminar s.  The PI Dr. Yang together with 
clinician investigator Co- PI Dr. Sido rov will be r esponsibl e for handling Cli nicalTrials.gov requirements 
for this project.  The trial will be registered with ClinicalTrials.gov p rior to enrolling in the first subject. 
Once  a record is established, Dr. Yang and Dr. Sidorov  will con firm the accuracy of record content; 
resolve problem s; maintain records including content updates  and modifications ; and aggregate results 
reporting at t he conclusion of the project and adverse event  reporting (if any) . All reporting and 
submission of results will occ ur within  the timefram es in the NIH Poli cy on Dissemination of NIH -
Funded Clini cal Trial Information.  Informed consent documents for this cli nical trial will include a 
specific statement relating to the posting of this trial 's information and r esults at Cl inicalTrials.gov.  
 Yuan Yang, Version 1.1  
IRB version 03/12/2019  9  
We will make availabl e final research data when fi ndings from our study are accepted for publication, 
as recommended in NI H guidelines on data sharing. While there wi ll be no restrictions on access, the 
distribution of final research dat a will be strictly con trolled and documented  based on university  policies 
and t he NIH Principles and Guidelines document. Data requests will require registration, including a 
valid emai l address. The PI  will issue (by email) to each requestor a password that  will allow access t o 
a cloud- based do wnload page, and data will be downloade d over an encrypted (SSL2) connection. We 
will make all analys is tools, algorithms, software interfaces, s ource codes and documentation, modeling 
tools, and other software technol ogies developed and/ or enhanced during the project freely available to 
the sc ientific community with an open- source license through the lab website. If any source code is 
developed in the course of analyzing the data collected in the study, w e will also de posit source code in  
open- source libraries. Should any intellectual  property arise which requires a patent, we will ensure that 
the technol ogy (materials and data) remains widely avai lable to the research community in accordance 
with universi ty policies and the NIH Principles  and Guidelines do cument. In general, we expect  the data 
will be available through speaking engagements and publications, presentations at scientific symposia 
and seminars. The effort will be made to publish our research f indings in s cientific journals.  
 
All published work will likely be presented in a bstract fo rm at relevant international conferences of the 
American Society of Neurorehabilitation, Society for Neuroscience, American Heart/Stroke Association, American Physic al Therapy A ssociation, American C ongress of Rehabil itation Medicine, etc.  
 
O. Conf identiality   
OUHSC RedCap ™ (Research Data Capture) sy stem will be utilize d for the storage of all patient 
demographic  information (coded), clinical assessment sc ores, and all  processed data via encrypted 
univer sity computers. Th e raw/unprocessed data be cod ed with a unique patient identifier and stored 
offline on an encrypted and password protected laboratory computer an d backed up to secure online 
storage through the Shared S ervices File  Storage Service managed by OU/OUHSC . Raw data on the 
computer cluster  will be ac cessible only to study investigators.  
All recorded experiment al data (including videos) will de -identifie d before the analysis. The database 
shall be accessed thr ough a secur e web portal. All invest igators employ bes t practice implementations 
for personal  computers to increase the security of the network and to assure the availability, integrity , 
and confidentiality of information. Any data distributed to additional potential research collaborators 
outside of the study team will be de- identified  prior to s haring to preserve the confidentiality of the 
participants’ id entity.  
With written permission from the subjects, video recordings may be performed using a regular camera. 
The videos will be used to d etect the abnormal  movement patterns from the stroke subj ects to aid with 
data analysis. All vid eos will be de- ident ified by adding a face cover to the subject's i mage. However, it 
may not be destroyed af ter the study si nce the result from video analysis m ay be a part of our 
publications. The videos a s the origi nal data will be saved in an encrypted and password protected 
laboratory computer and backed up to secure online storage through the Shared Service s File Storage 
Service manag ed by OU / OUHSC IT. 
 
P. Literature Cited  
1. Parker VM , Wade DT, Langton Hewer R. Loss of arm function after stroke: measurement, 
frequency, and recovery. International rehabilitation medicine. 1986;8(2):69- 73. PubMed PMID: 
3804600.  
2. Li S, Chen YT, Francisco GE,  Zhou P, Rymer WZ.  A Unifying Pathophysiologic al Account for 
Post-stroke Spasticity and Disordered Motor Control. Front  Neurol. 2019;10:468. Epub 2019/05/28. doi: 
10.3389/fneur.2019.00468. PubMed PMID: 31133971; PMCID: P MC6524557.  
3. Tian R, Dewald JPA, Yang Y. Assessing th e usage of indirect motor pat hways foll owing a 
hemiparetic stroke. medRxiv. 2020:2020.12.23.20248683.  doi: 10.1101/2020.12.23.20248683.  
 Yuan Yang, Version 1.1  
IRB version 03/12/2019  10 4. Yang Y , Sinha N, Tian R, Gurari N, Drogos JM, Dewald JPA. Quant ifying Alter ed Neural 
Connectivity of the Stretch Refl ex in Chronic Hemiparetic St roke. IEEE Trans Neural Syst Rehabil Eng. 
2020;28(6):1436- 41. Epub 2020/0 4/11. doi: 10.1109/TNSRE.2020.2986304. PubMed PMID: 32275603; 
PMCID: PMC7340533.  
5. Yang Y,  Tian R, S anha N, Gurari N, Drogos J, Dewald J PA, editors. Deter mining the Increased 
Usage of  Indirect Motor Pathways in Hemiparetic Stroke. 2020 Combined Sections M eeting (CSM); 
2020: APTA.  
6. Li S. Spasticit y, Motor Recovery, and Neural Plasticity after Stroke. Fr ont Neurol. 2017;8:120. 
Epub 2017/04/20. doi: 10.3389/ fneur.2017.00120. PubMed PMI D: 28421032; PMCID: PMC5377239.  
7. Schwerin SC, Yao J, Dewald JP. Using p aired pulse TMS to facilitate contralateral and 
ipsilateral MEPs in upper extremity muscles  of chroni c hemipareti c stroke patients. Journ al of 
Neuroscience Methods. 2011;195(2):151- 60; PMCID: PM C3118562.  
8. Bestmann S, Swayne O, Blankenburg F, Ruff CC, Teo J, Weiskopf N, Driver J, Rothwell JC, 
Ward NS. The role of contralesional dorsal premotor cortex after stroke as  studied with concurrent  
TMS -fMRI. Journal  of Neuroscience. 2010;30(36) :11926 -37. 
9. Owen M, Ingo C, Dewald JPA. Upper Extremity Motor Impairme nts and Microstructural 
Changes in Bulbospinal Pathways in Chronic Hemiparetic Stroke. Front Neurol. 2017;8(8):25 7. Epub 
2017/07/01. doi:  10.3389/fneur.2017.00257. PubMed PMID: 2865985 5; PMCID: P MC5468392.  
10. Schwerin S, Dewald JP, Haztl M, Jovanovich S, Nickeas M, MacKinnon C. Ipsilateral versus 
contralateral cortical motor projections to a shoulder add uctor in chr onic hemiparetic stroke:  
implications for the expression of arm synergi es. Exp Br ain Res. 2008;185(3):509- 19. Epub 
2007/11/09. doi: 10.1007/s00 221-007-1169- 8. PubMed PMID: 17989973; PMCID : PMC2831614.  
11. Agius Anastasi A, Falzon O, Camilleri K , Vella M, M uscat R. Brain symmetry index in healthy 
and stroke patients for asses sment and p rognosis. Stroke research and treatment. 2017;2017.  
12. Dobkin  BH. Strategies for stroke rehabilitation. T he Lancet Neurology. 2004;3(9):528- 36. 
13. Gbadeyan O, St einhauser M,  McMahon K, Meinzer M. S afety, Tolerabilit y, Blinding Efficacy and 
Behavioural Ef fects of a Novel MRI -Compatible, High- Definition tDCS Set -Up. Brain Stimul. 
2016;9(4):545- 52. Epub 2016/04/25. doi: 10.1016/j.brs.2016.03.018. PubMed PMID: 27108392.  
14. Godin ho MM, Junqueira DR, Cas tro ML, Loke Y, Golder S, Neto HP. Safety of t ranscranial  
direct current stimulation: Evidence based update 2016. Brain Stimul. 2017;10(5):983- 5. Epub 
2017/07/29. doi: 10.1016/j.brs.2017.07.001. PubMed PMID: 28751225.  
15. Nitsche MA, Paulus W. Sustained ex citability elevations induced by transcranial D C motor 
cortex stimulation in humans. Neurology. 2001;57(10):1899- 901. E pub 2001/11/28. doi: 
10.1212/wnl.57.10.1899.  PubMed PMID: 11723286.  
16. Bornheim S, Croisier JL, Ma quet P, Kaux JF. Proposal of a New Tra nscranial Direct C urrent 
Stimulation Safety Scr eening Tool . Am J Phys Med Rehabil. 2019;98(7):e77- e8. Epub 2018/11/16. doi: 
10.1097/PHM.0000000000001096. PubMed PMID: 30431445.  
17. Jiang J. Linear and generalized linear mixed models and their applications: Springer Science & 
Business Media; 2007.  
18. Jones B, Ken ward MG. Design and analysis of cross -over trials: CRC press; 2014.  