April  17, 2019   
 
 
 
 
Theranova,  LLC 
 
CLINICAL  STUDY  PRO TOCOL  – TNV-0514 -WVD ; CRD -09-1105  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Wearable  Vibration  Device  to Prevent  Bone  Loss  in Postmenopausal  Women  – Aim 2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
April 17, 2019  Protocol  Summary  
 
Title  Wearable  Vibration  Device  to Prevent  Bone  Loss  in Postmenopausal  Women– Aim 2 
Sponsor  Theranova,  LLC  
Device  Wearable  Vibration  Device  (WVD)  
Background  
and Rationale  An emerging  alternative  to pharmacological  interventions  for osteoporosis  is whole -body  
vibration  (WBV).  The wearable  vibration  device  (WVD)  aims  to consistently  deliver  vibrations  
directly  to the hip and spine  and allowing  use during  many  everyday  activities.  We propose  that 
demonstrating  higher  rates  of compliance  and consistent  delivery  of optimal  force  with 
accelerome ter-based  force  feedback  will provide  a superior  alternative  to WBV  platforms  and is 
plausibly  more  effective  at preventing  bone  loss in postmenopausal  women  than vibration  
platforms  in the home  setting.  
Objectives.  To demonstrate  that postmenopausal  women  will:  
1. Tolerate  our device;  
2. Receive  consistently  therapeutic  levels  of vibration ; and  
3. See changes  in bone  turnover . 
Indications  for 
Use/Patient  
Population  The device  is to be worn  by women  who are postmenopausal  to deliver  vibration  to the hips 
and spine  to prevent  bone  loss. Subjects  will be instructed  to wear  the device  30 minutes  while  
walking  or standing.  
Trial  Design  Single  center  prospective,  non-randomized,  unblinded,  Non-Significant  Risk (NSR)  trial.  
Study  
Population  Postmenopausal  women  
Number  of 
Subjects  Up to 24  
Number  of 
Sites  1 
April 17, 2019  Study  Flow  Outline  Revised  
 
Recruitment  
and Screening  Baseline Visit  
(Office Visit #1)  Intervention 
Assessment  
(Office Visit #2)  
Process Payment  Contact Interested Subjects  
Determine Eligibility  
Schedule Baseline Visit  
Enrollment Consent  
Fit Device  
Pre-Activity Blood Draw  
30 Min Self -Selected Activity  
 (WVD Motor Off)  
Wait 30 Minutes  
Patient Questionnaires  
Post Activity Blood Draw  
Fit Device  
Pre-Activity Blood Draw  
30 Min Self -Selected Activity  
 (WVD Motor On)  
Wait 30 Minutes  
Patient Questionnaires  
Post Activity Blood Draw  
   
Internal Control  
Acute assessment of bone 
marker with no vibration 
stimulus.   
Treatment  
Acute assessment of 
bone marker with 30 
minute vibration.  
 
 
Study  
Procedures  Screening  Period  (Ongoing)  
Potential  subjects  will answer  screening  questions  via phone  to determine  eligibility.  Women  
who qualify  based  on screening  criteria  will be scheduled  for a baseline  visit at the University  of 
Nebraska  Medical  Center .  Subjects  with low or normal  bone  mass  may be enrolled  in the 
study.  
 
Study  Period  (1-2 weeks)  
The two week  protocol  consists  of subjects:  1) visiting  the clinic  for a Wearable  Vibration  Device  
(WVD)  pack  fitting , wearing  the device  (motor  off) for 30 minutes  while  standing  or walking,  and 
completing  a pre-post activity  blood  draw,   2) visiting the clinic  at the end of week  one to 
measure  acceleration , wear  the device  (motor  on) for 30 minutes  while  standing  or walking,  and 
complete  a pre-post activity  blood draw.  
Safety  & Safety  
Monitoring  It is the responsibility  of the investigator  to report  when  an adverse  event  has occurred.   
Adverse  event  information  will be collected  throughout  the study . Adverse  Events  (both  
expected  and unexpected)  will be recorded and reported  appropriately.  
Inclusion  
Criteria  1. Female  
2. Last menstrual  period  at least  one year and not more  than six years.  
3. 19 years  of age and older . 
4. BMD  T-score at or above  -2.5 at the total hip and L1-L4 spine  skeletal  sites as measured  by 
DXA. 
5. Ambulatory  (can walk or stand  without  an assistive  device  for a minimum  of 30 minutes ). 
6. Able to understand  spoken  and written  English . 
7. Capable  and willing  to follow  all study -related  procedures . 
April 17, 2019  Exclusion  
Criteria  1. BMD  T-score  at or below  -2.49 at the total hip and L1-L4 spine  skeletal  sites as measured  
by DXA. 
2. A 10-year probability  of hip fracture  > 3% or major  fracture  or > 20% based  on results  of DXA 
using  the FRAX  tool (see attached).  
3. Weight  > 300 lbs. 
4. Are currently  taking  or have taken  bisphosphonates  within  the past 6 months,  estrogen  
replacement  therapy,  or drugs  affecting  bone  such  as tamoxifen  or aromatase  inhibitors  
within  the past 6 months . 
5. Active  cancer  or cancer  treatment . 
6. Any change  in Calcium  or Vitamin  D supplementation  within  the last 3 months . 
7. Any change  in exercise  in the past 6 months.  
8. Fracture s or major  surgery  within  the past 6 months . 
9. Medical  Implants  (excluding  dental  implants) . 
10. Diagnosed  with Paget’s  disease,  heart  disease,  uncontrolled  hypertension,  renal  disease,  
chronic  fatigue  syndrome,  herniated  disc, severe  peripheral  neuropathy,  severe  
osteoarthritis . 
11. Any bleeding  disorder  or treatment  with a blood  thinning  medication  within  the last 2 years . 
 
Statistical  
Analysis  This study  is observational,  is not statistically  powered  and no formal  statistical  analyses  are 
planned.  Data  will be listed  by subject;  treatment  number,  and subject  tolerability  during  
treatment.  
 