 
  
    
  
 
  
 
 
Investigational Plan for 
Pivotal Study  of the Preceptis  Medical Inc. 
Hummingbird ® Tympanostomy  Tube System  (H-TTS)   
in the Otolaryngology Clinic  
A Non -Significant Risk Study  
 
Protocol Date: 29 Jul 2020  
Revision: 1.5 
 
 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL:  
DO NOT COPY ANY PORTIONS OF THIS DOCUMENT  
WITHOUT WRITTEN PERM ISSION FROM  
Preceptis Medical , Inc.  
 
 
 
 
__________________________________  
  
 
 
Preceptis Medical, Inc.  
10900 89th Av N, Suite #4 
Maple Grove, MN   55369  
Telephone:  763-568-7809 
  

2 
 
Preceptis Medical, Inc.   Pivotal Clinic Study Protocol Rev 1. 5 29 July2020
  INVESTIGATIONAL PLAN SUMMARY  
1.0 BACKGROUND  
1.1 Device Name  
The Preceptis Hummingbird ® Tympanostomy Tube System (H- TTS)  
1.2 Device Description  
The Hummingbird ® Tympanostomy Tube System (H -TTS)  is a disposable surgical tool 
designed to  deliver a tympanostomy tube (“ear tube”) into the tympanic me mbrane of 
patients during a tympanostomy tube placement procedure .  
More than 1,000,000 ear tubes are inserted annually in the US, making it one of the most 
common surgical procedures performed in children.  Most ear tubes are inserted by 
otolaryngologists  using  either local anesthesia (usually adults) or general anesthesi a (usually 
children) . 
Preceptis Medical, Inc. has  developed the H-TTS to reduce trauma, pain, and risk to the 
patient while reducing  the overall surgical procedure time .  The H-TTS integrates the multiple 
surgical instruments necessary for current surgical procedure into a single, one -pass device .  
The H-TTS creates an incision in the tympanic membrane  (“ear drum”)  and inserts a 
tympanostom y tube with the push of a lever .  Thus, the H -TTS allows placement of a 
tympanostomy tube with a single pass down the ear canal.  The ear tube used with the H-TTS 
is a standard, commercially available tympanostomy tube.   
 1.3 Summary of Previous Clinical Results  
285 patients have been treated in an OR or ASC under GA or sedation as part of  two prior 
clinical studies  at the University of Minnesota  Masonic  Children’s Hospital,  Children’s 
Hospitals and Clinics  of Minnesota, and Mayo Clinic.  Procedural outcomes and feedback 
from the otolaryngologists have s hown that the H -TTS reduces surgical trauma for the 
patient as designed.  Safety was evaluated by two independent otolaryngologist reviewers, and no safety issues were identified.  There were  no intra -operative or immediate post -
operative adverse events.    
Additionally, a feasibility study was initiated in 2017 in up to 20 patients at Health Partners 
with Dr. Rimell as the PI.  The study is evaluating the intra -operative performance of the H -
TTS in children from 6 -60 months.  Twelve  (12) children were enrolled in the feasibility study 
and treated successfully in an office setting with the H -TTS and only local anesthetic.  There 
have been no intra -operative  adverse events.  Using the H -TTS in  an office may be even safer 
than under sedation or a stan dard tube procedure under GA since the child’s movement can 
be mitigated in the office environment.  Under sedation, there is still some minor movement, and, under GA, patients can still move from a painful stimul us and are frequently restrained 
with induc tion or wake up . Due to the positive results of the feasibility study patients, the 
decision was made to proceed to a larger multi- site assessment.   
Enrollment of 225  children  (209 6-24 months  and 16 5- 12 years ), for a  total of 437 ears  have  
been completed in this Pivotal Clinic Study.  Study enrollment  was allowed to surpass the goal  
of 200 enrollments to allow collection of FDA requested patient tolerability videos in the 6 -
3 
 
Preceptis Medical, Inc.   Pivotal Clinic Study Protocol Rev 1. 5 29 July2020
  24 month old group and to give study investigators access to office tube placement  due to 
limited operating room  availability during the COVID -19 pandemic . The study results 
demonstrate the safety, efficacy and tolerability of in- office tube placement in young 
children using the HTTS, patient restraint, and topical anesthe tic.  Tubes were successfully 
placed in the office in 98.9% of the cases (success); the anticipated AE rate was 0. 46% and 
there were no serious AEs reported (safety); and the HTTS successfully delivered the tube 
across the TM in 9 7.0% of the ears (efficacy).  
 
1.4 Regulatory Status  
The H -TTS has been cleared by the FDA  under the following conditions:  
• In adults, the H -TTS is cleared for use in any location with any type of anesthetic.  
 
• In children, the H -TTS is cleared for use in a hospital or ASC setting under  both 
general anesthesia and moderate (conscious) sedation.  
 
• In children 6 -24 months, the H -TTS is cleared for use in an office  setting.  
1.5 Indications for Use and Intended Use  
The H-TTS is intended to deliver a tympanostomy tube (also referred to as a ventilation tube) 
through the tympanic membrane of the patient and is indicated to be used in office settings for children 6 -24 months old.  
 
2.0 STUDY  OBJECTIVES  
The objective of thi s study is to evaluate the safety and performance of the H -TTS for the 
placement of ear tubes in children  2-21 years old  undergoing tympanostomy tube placement 
in an otolaryngology clinic using local anesthetic  and control of patient movement, as 
applicable .  
3.0 STUDY DESIGN OVERVIEW  AND DURATION  
The study  is a continuation of a multi -site, prospective , treatment -only study of the  H-TTS to 
enroll patients 2 -21 years old. Enrollment is complete for the 6 -24 month old group.  
Enrollment in the study at each site will begin after receipt of Institutional Review Board 
(IRB) approval.  The goal is to enroll 30 patients in the 2 -4 year old group and 30 patients in 
the 5 -21 year old group  at up to 10 clinical sites .  
4.0 STUDY ENDPOINTS  
4.1 Safety Endpoint  
The rate of  AEs, and the rates for each specific type of event, will be analyzed .  
4.2 Efficacy Endpoint  
Efficacy evaluation will consist of determining whether the H -TTS device  successfully delivers  
the tympanostomy tube  across the tympanic membrane .  
 
4 
 
Preceptis Medical, Inc.   Pivotal Clinic Study Protocol Rev 1. 5 29 July2020
  4.3  Success Criteria  
Success will be defined as the ability of the surgeon to place ear tubes using the H -TTS device 
in the office setting with the use of local anesthetic . 
5.0 STATISTICAL METHODS AND DATA ANALYSIS  
5.1 Data Analysis  
Data from the study will be a nalyzed on an a s-treated basis  using a common closing date .  
Standard summary statistics will b e calculated for all study o utcome variables.  Categorical 
data will be summarized in frequency distributions.  Detailed summaries of all adverse 
events will be provided.   
The analysis outlined below will be completed first on all subjects aged 2 to 21 years (N=60) and then separately for the subgroups of 2 to 4 years (N=30) and 5 to 21 years (N=30).  
The rate of adverse events and the delivery success rate will be calculated, along with corresponding 95% exact confidence intervals  which will be calculated using the Clopper -
Pearson method .   
The adverse events of interest are primarily  those  specific to  the delivery of the tube.  These 
events are acute extrusion of the tube and tube displacement into the middle ear.  The proportion of ears experiencing one of these adverse events will be calculated and an exact 
95% confidence interval will be constructed  about that estimate.  These data will be 
compared heuristically to published AE rates , in particular, to those found in Kay et. al. 
(2001) who performed a meta -analysis on tympanostomy tube sequelae  and to Steele et. al. 
(2017) published in AHRQ which pro vides incidence rates for the adverse events of interest.  
From these two sources of information an expected adverse event rate of 4.5% of ears 
treated  is anticipated.   Since the adverse events of interest can also be summarized on a 
subject  basis, the proportion of subjects  experiencing an adverse event will also be 
calculated and 95% exact confidence intervals about that proportion provided.   Again, these 
estimates an d confidence intervals will be done separately for each event type.  
The proportions of successfully delivered tubes will be calculated, along with the 
corresponding 95% exact confidence intervals  which are constructed using the Clopper -
Pearson method .  This estimate is on a per ear basis.  
The proportion of successful procedures will also be summarized on a per subject basis.  A successful subject will be one who has both ears successfully treated .  Again, exact 95% 
confidence intervals will be provided.  
Study success will be determined based on a qualitative clinical analysis of all data.   
5.2 Enrollment  
A patient will be considered enrolled after  informed consent is signed and the incision is 
made in the tympanic membrane and delivery of the ear tube  is attempted with the H -TTS.  
Inclus ion and exclusion evaluation  will not require baseline testing and will thus be evaluated 
prior to signing the consent.   
Enrollment may begin wh en the following criteria are met:  
• IRB approval of the study protocol and informed consent documents . 
• Signed Investigator Agreement -Clinical Study Agreement.  
5 
 
Preceptis Medical, Inc.   Pivotal Clinic Study Protocol Rev 1. 5 29 July2020
  • Investigational site personnel training on the study protocol.  
• Inclusion -exclusion criteria met for each patient.  
 
6.0 SAMPLE SIZE  
The overall sample size for this study is 60 subjects aged 2 to 21 years.  There are two 
subgroups which will be analyzed separately as outlined in section 5.1.  These subgroups are those subjects aged 2 to 4 years and those subjects aged 5 to 21 years.  
Adverse events related to delivery of the tube are expected to occur in approximately 4.5% of ears .  The width of the 95% confidence intervals will vary  between the overall analysis and 
the analysis of the subgroups.  The table below shows the width of the 95% exact confidence 
intervals for various analyses .   
Subject  
Group  # of 
Subjects  # of Ears  95% Lower  
Bound (%)  95% Upper 
Bound (%)  Confidence  
Interval  
Width (%)  
Overall  60 120 1.4 9.5 8.1 
Subgroup 30 60 1.0 13.9  12.9  
The width of the 95% confidence intervals for this endpoint are on a per ear  basis.  The 
interval width for the overall analysis is  less than 1 0 percentage points .  For the subgroup 
analysis, the width of the 95% confidence interval is approximately 13 percentage points.  
The rate for successful delivery of the tube is expected to be at least 95%.  Again, depending on the analysis being done , the width of the exact 95% confidence interval will vary.  The 
table below shows the width of the confidence intervals for the various analyses .  These 
confidence intervals an d widths are based on a per ear basis.  
Subject  
Group  # of 
Subjects  # of Ears  95% Lower  
Bound (%)  95% Upper 
Bound (%)  Confidence  
Interval  
Width (%)  
Overall  60 120 89.4  98.1  8.7 
Subgroup 30 60 86.1  99.0  12.9  
 
Again, t he width of the 95% confidence interval  for the overall analysis  is less than 10 
percentage points  and for the subgroup analysis the width is approximately 13 percentage 
points.   
7.0 PATIENT POPULATION  
Selection Criteria  
Patients considered for this study  must meet  all of the i nclusion criteria in section 7 .1 below.  
However, if they meet any  of the ex clusion criteria in section 7. 2, they will not be eligible to 
participate in the study .   
6 
 
Preceptis Medical, Inc.   Pivotal Clinic Study Protocol Rev 1. 5 29 July2020
  7.1 Inclusion Criteria  
Patients must meet all of the following:  
1. Scheduled to undergo tympanostomy tube insertion in the clinic .   
2. Children  2 to 21 years  old. 
3. Signed parental consent and child assent documents as applicable.  
4. Parent is fluent in English  
7.2 Exclusion Criteria  
Patients will be excluded should they meet any  of the following:  
1. Any condition that, in the opinion of the investigator , may place the subject at greater 
risk (e.g., child with developmental delay ).  
2. Anatomy  precludes sufficient visualization and access to the tympanic membrane . 
8.0 INVESTIGATOR AND SITE TRAINING  
This study is a continuation of the multi -site, prospective, treatment -only study of the H -TTS. 
All investigators participating in this study have been trained according to previous versions 
of the protocol. No new sites will be added.   
9.0 TYMPANOSTOMY  PROCED URE  
The tympanostomy procedure will take place in the otolaryngology clinic .  Movement in 
young children will be controlled  as appropriate  (i.e. swaddling, papoose board) .  Parents will 
be informed  and must agree  to the methods that will be used to control movement for their 
child  prior to the procedure . All patients will have a local (topical)  anesthetic  of surgeon’s 
choice  (i.e. Phenol)  applied to the tympanic membrane prior to insertion of the H -TTS into 
the ear c anal.  Medical staff  may choose to provide additional analgesics (i.e. Tylenol) per 
clinic standard of care .  
Distraction /comfort  techniques may be used per clinic standard of care, and may include, 
but are not limited to:  
• Pre-procedure medication (i.e. Ty lenol)  
• Presence of parent for the  procedure  
• Use of media/videos during the procedure  
10.0 CONSENT  
A parental consen t document will be used for all children  under 18 years of age . Patients 
over 18 years of age will sign a consent document.   In addition, a child assent document will 
be used for children 7 -17 years of age (age range may be site -dependent) .  Prior to obtaining 
consent, the study will be explained to the parents and ol der children by the investigator  or 
appropriate designee .  Parents and assenting children must sign the appropriate consent 
document(s ) prior  to enrollment . In addition, a video release form will be required for 
parents to sign to give permission for the procedure to be audio and video recorded for patient tolerability assessments.  
Additionally, personal health information created or received for the purposes  of this study 
is protected under HIPAA.  Patients will be required to sign a HIPAA form allowing the 
7 
 
Preceptis Medical, Inc.   Pivotal Clinic Study Protocol Rev 1. 5 29 July2020
  principal investigator, research staff, and Preceptis  access to their individual health 
information.  The site may incorporate the HIPAA form within the c onsent  documents .  
The consent documents are located in Attachment A . 
11.0   STUDY PROCEDURES 
11.1   Summary of Study Procedures  
The Principal I nvestigator (PI) is responsible for the quality of all data submitted to Preceptis .  
Documentation of patient eligibility, procedural experience , first follow up visit  
(approximately 3 -10 weeks after the procedure) , and adverse events will be collected.   
(Sample case report forms  are in  Attachment B )  
CRFs  Type  of Form  Timing  
#1 Enrollment  Prior to tympanostomy procedure  
#1 Procedure  Time of procedure  
#2 AE As applicable  
#3 Parent Survey  Upon completion of procedure  and at first 
follow up visit  
#4 Follow Up  First follow up visit after procedure  
(approximately 3 -10 weeks)  
#5 Additional Events of 
Interest  Upon completion of follow up visit  
 
11.1.1 Baseline  
Parents of children who require a tympanostomy tube procedure and meet all study 
inclusion criteria and none of the exclusion criteria, will be approached for participation 
in the study by the PI .  If the patient and parent  agree to participate, the appropriate 
consent documents will be signed.  There are no further baseline tests required for the 
study.  
11.1.2 Procedure  
Once app ropriate written consent has been obtained, the procedure will take place  in 
the ENT  (otolaryngology)  clinic .  Patient demographic and procedure data will be 
collected.  A parent survey will be  completed  upon completion of the procedure , but the 
decision to complete the  survey is at the discretion of the parent.  If a parent opts not to 
complete the survey , it will not be considered a protocol deviation.  
11.1.3  Additional Information Collection  
11.1.3.1  Collection of Videotapes for Patient Tolerability Evaluation  
Procedures  for a sub -set of patients in the 2 -4 and 5 -21 year old group   who  provide  
consent will be audio and video  recorded  along with their caregivers  (if applicable)  to 
evaluate patient tolerability  of the procedure  at sites with the capability and 
resources  to perform  such recordings . The video will begin on patient arrival to the 
8 
 
Preceptis Medical, Inc.   Pivotal Clinic Study Protocol Rev 1. 5 29 July2020
  procedure room and continue until 3 minutes after the procedure has been 
completed. These video  reco rdings  will be independently reviewed by  independent 
observer (s) to evaluate patients using pre -defined descriptors of 4 different levels of 
behaviors at 5 different time -points  of the procedur e: 1) when patient enters room  
and otoscopy  (as applicable) , 2) after papoose or swaddling, 3) during wax removal  
(as applicable) , 4) during the Hummingbird procedure and 5) three minutes after 
procedure is completed.  
11.1.3.2  Tympanic Membrane Quadrant  
The quadrant of the tympanic membrane where the tube was placed will be recorded 
(e.g., anterior inferior).  
11.1.3.3  Additional Events of Interest  
Additional events of interest will also be collected. Definitions are included in 
Appendix D.  
 11.1.4 Follow Up  
Standard of care  data will be collected  at the first follow up visit (with audiogram or OAE 
testing if possible) approximately 3 -10 weeks after the procedure . The parent survey will 
be completed again at the follow up visit, but the decision to complete the survey is at the discretion of the parent. If a parent opts not to complete the survey, it will not be considered a protocol deviation.  If a patient does not return for any follow up  or the 
follow up is outside of the expected timeframe , it will not be considered a protocol 
deviation .  
11.2 Study Termination  
After the last patient has completed the first follow up visit after the procedure  
(approximately 3 -10 weeks) , the study will be terminated.  Once monitoring has been 
completed , the database will be frozen and a clinical report will be pre pared and submitted 
to the IRB.  
12.0 ADVERSE  EVENTS  
Reporting Criteria  
All adverse events (AE) , both anticipated and unanticipated,  will be reported.  The event 
type, treatment, severity,  and relationship of the event to the procedure or to the study 
device will be assessed by the PI  performing the procedure .  For validation, all AEs will be 
reviewed by all participating PIs at a clin ical site . 
Anticipated adverse events and the definitions for serious adverse events are found in Attachment C. Common occurrences (e.g., minor bleeding, purulent discharge) during a tympanostomy procedure are not considered AEs.  
 
 
9 
 
Preceptis Medical, Inc.   Pivotal Clinic Study Protocol Rev 1. 5 29 July2020
  13.0 BENEFIT -RISK ANALYSIS  
13.1  Benefits  
The H -TTS is designed to make an incision and place a tube with one pass through the ear 
canal and into the tympanic membrane .  This has been shown to be a significant reduction in 
patient trauma compared to  the 4 -6 passes required for a standard tympanostomy 
procedure .  It also makes the procedure easier for the surgeon particularly in a patient not 
under general anesthesia.   This reduction in trauma is of  both  benefit to the patient  and 
surgeon  because it can reduce the su rgical time and the need for anesthetic agents  and 
make placement of a tympanostomy tube under local anesthetic easier for the surgeon . 
Additional b enefits of using the H -TTS and performance of the procedure in an 
otolaryngology clinic  include: avoiding risks associated with general anesthesia, no NPO 
restrictions, more cost effective , convenien t immediate treatment vs. having to return at a 
later sch eduled date for the procedure ( as well as no need for pre - or post -op 
appointments).   The increase cost  of both time and money  to society of a preoperative  visit 
to primary care prior to general anesthesia is also eliminated.    
The position of the American  Academy of Otolaryngology –  Head and Neck Surgery ( AAO -
HNS ) is that tympanostomy tubes are safe and effective for managing otitis media in children 
who meet current guidelines for tube insertion.   Although insertion of tympanostomy tubes 
in children is ge nerally accomplished in the operating room under general anesthesia, 
insertion in the clinic in appropriately selected patients using shared decision making 
between clinicians and families can be appropriate.  
13.2  Risks  
Previous clinically studies have demonstrated that the risks for this study are no different from those associated with standard tympanostomy procedures.  
Potential risks or discomforts associated with any tympanostomy tube surgery  include,  but 
are not limited to , the following : otorrhea, ac ute tube extrusion, chronic tube extrusion, tube 
dislocating into the middle ear, t ube plugging, b leeding,  vertigo, nausea, infection, hearing 
loss, facial nerve injury.  
Older children and adults typically receive ear tubes in a clinic setting using only local anesthetic since they can remain still and tolerate the procedure.  In this study, movement will be controlled  to prevent motion that could interfere with the procedure while the 
surgical instruments are in the ears.  Except for movement, which will be controlled by the nurse and doctor, the researcher and sponsor are not aware of any risks in this study that are different from normal ear tube procedures in an office setting.   Methods to control 
patient movement in this study are no different than those normally used for children treated in the clinic for a procedure such as removal of a foreign body in the ear or nose or 
remove cerumen , or to perform such routine proc edures as flexible nasopharyngoscopy or 
flexible laryngoscopy in the clinic . 
14.0  PROTOCOL MODIFICATIONS AND DEVIATIONS  
The investigator may not modify this protocol without obtaining written concurrence from 
Preceptis .  The investigator , in conj unction with Preceptis , will submit protocol modifications 
to the IRB as necessar y. 
10 
 
Preceptis Medical, Inc.   Pivotal Clinic Study Protocol Rev 1. 5 29 July2020
  Any deviations from this protocol intended to protect the physical well- being of a patient are 
to be reported to Preceptis and the IRB as soon as possible and no later than five (5) w orking 
days after the deviation occurred . Other deviations should be reported according to IRB 
policies  and to Preceptis as soon as possible . 
15.0 STUDY MATERIALS  
Study materials will be provided by Preceptis .  The site  will be responsible for the securing, 
storage, and handling of study materials according to site -specific institutional processes.  
16.0  INVESTIGATIONAL DEVICES  
For purposes of this study, the H -TTS is considered an investigational device and inventory 
must be stored in a secure, locked location  with limited access.  Inventory records must be 
maintained to document disposition of each device.  
17.0 MONITORING PROCEDURES 
An employee  of Preceptis Medical, Inc., or its designee, will serve as study monitor.  At least 
one monitoring visit will occur prior to conclusion of the study , COVID -19 permitting . Study 
monitoring activities will include verification of study data to source documents .  Monitors 
may also assume responsibility for communications b etween th e investigator and Preceptis . 
Site visits are performed to ensure that the proper medical records are reviewed and that 
study data is complete and accurate.  Database downloads and study documentation will be 
compared to source documentation and reviewed for accuracy, completeness, and protocol compliance.  The following documents will also be  monitored : 
• Consent documents :  Appropriate consent documents must be signed by each 
patient/parent.  These documents will be monitored 100% to ensure they ar e in 
compliance.  
• IRB:  All approvals, adverse event s reports, unanticipated adverse device effect 
reports, protocol deviations, annual reports and other correspondence with the site’s 
IRB must be up to date and on file.  These documents will be monitored 100% to 
ensure they are in compliance.  
Site visits will also be used to verify source data, assess the maintenance of records and 
reports, evaluate progress toward meeting study objectives, and identify any concerns that 
stem from observations of study management documents.  Resolution of concerns a nd 
completion of corrective actions will be documented by the study monitor in monitoring reports.   At the conclusion of the study, a final monitoring visit will occur to close out the 
study .
 
  
   ATTACHMENT A  CONSENT FORMS  
  
12 
 
Preceptis Medical, Inc.   Pivotal Clinic Study Protocol Rev 1. 5 29 July2020
   
ATTACHMENT B CASE REPORT FORMS  
 
  
    
ATTACHMENT C  ADVERSE EVENTS  
 
 
 
SERIOUS ADVERSE EVENT DEFINITIONS 
 
1. Event resulted in death 
2. Event was life -threatening  
3. Event required new hospitalization (> 24 hours stay)  
4. Event required prolonged hospitalization (> additional 24 hours)  
5. Event resulted in disability or permanent damage (e.g., permanent hearing loss)  
6. Event required medical or surgical intervention to preclude permanent impairment of a body 
function, or prevent permanent damage to a body structure, due to the use of a medical 
device.   Anticipated AE  Definition  
Acute tube extrusion  During the surgical procedure, a myringotomy incision is completed but the tympanostomy tube will not stay in the tympanic membrane.  
Tube dislocating into middle 
ear space  and cannot be 
retrieved  Tube passes completely through the tympanic membrane and falls 
into the middle ear cavity and is unable to be retrieved (either in the 
office or in the OR) . 
14 
 
Preceptis Medical, Inc.   Pivotal Clinic Study Protocol Rev 1. 5 29 July2020
  ATTACHMENT D – Definitions  for Additional Events of Inte rest  
 
Events  Definition  
Infection  Infection as defined as:  
• Patient has fever > 101 F beyond 24 hours post -surgically  (per 
parent feedback)  OR 
• Unusual or excessive TM inflammation OR  
• Otitis externa  
Unintended TM perforation  During the procedure, the surgeon inadvertently creates a perforation 
in the TM without successfully delivering a tube.  
Hearing loss due to damage to 
middle ear structures  Hearing loss due to procedural damage to the ossicular chain due to the 
tube being placed in the posterior -superior quadrant.  
Abrasion of the external auditory 
canal  Excessive or unusual abrasion to the external auditory canal at time of 
procedure.  
Ear bleeding  Excessive or unusual bleeding in the ear canal or tympanic membrane 
that requires epinephrine or oxymetazoline at the time of the 
procedure.  
Medialized or partially medialized 
tube  Ear tube is medialized or partially medialized at follow -up. 
Ear Pain  Excessive or unusual ear pain exhibited by the child or reported by the 
parent or by the child at follow -up. 
 Lateral displacement of tube  Lateral displacement of tube during deployment  