 
 
 
 
PROTOCOL VIS -2014  
 
 
A PROSPECTIVE, MULTICENTER CLINICAL TRIAL OF  
THE VISABILITY  IMPLANT SYSTEM  
FOR  IMPROVEMENT OF NEAR VISUAL ACUITY IN PRESBYOPIC PATIENTS  
 
 
Refocus Group, Inc.  
10300 North Central Expressway  
Suite 104  
Dallas, TX 75231  
 
Date of Protocol : October 13, 2014  
Date of Protocol Amendment 2: March 3 , 2015  
 
 
 
I have read and agree to follow the study procedures as outlined in this protocol.  
 
 
 
 
Print Name of Investigator  
 
 
 
 
Investigators’ Signature        Date  
 
 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL – DO NOT COPY  OR DISTRIBUTE  
 
This protocol contains confidential proprietary information with respect to Refocus products and 
clinical trials.  I agree to hold this information in confidence and not to disclose it to any third 
parties for a period of three years from th e date of this agreement, or until this information 
becomes a matter of public knowledge or until a formal agreement for that purpose has been 
entered into by the parties.  
  
 
 
 
 PROTOCOL VIS -2014  
TABLE OF CONTENTS  
1.0 PERSONNEL AND FACILITIES  ................................ ..........................  1 
2.0 ABBREVIATI ONS  ................................ ................................ ..............  2 
3.0 STUDY  SYNOPSIS  ................................ ................................ ..............  4 
4.0 BACKGROUND AND REGULATORY CHRONOLOGY  .....................  5 
5.0 SCIENTIFIC BACKGROUND ON PRESBYOPIA  ...............................  7 
6.0 PRIOR SCLERAL IMPLANT CLINICAL STUDIES  ...........................  10 
7.0 STUDY OUTLINE  ................................ ................................ ..............  13 
8.0 STUDY METHODS  ................................ ................................ ............  16 
9.0 INVESTIGATIONAL MATERIALS  ................................ .....................  24 
10.0 ADVERSE EVENT R EPORTING  ................................ .......................  30 
11.0 STATISTICAL MET HODS  ................................ ................................ . 35 
12.0 MONITORING  ................................ ................................ ....................  44 
13.0 REFERENCES  ................................ ................................ ...................  45 
LIST OF APPENDICES  
Appendix 1  Examination Methods  ................................ ................................ .. 46 
Appendix 2  VisAbility Implant System Surgical Procedure  .........................  54 
Appendix 3  Patient Reported Outcomes Questionnaire  
(Navq)  ................................ ................................ ............................  61 
Appendix 4  Patient Questionnaire  ................................ ................................ .. 74 
Appendix 5  Data Safety Monitoring Board Charter  ................................ ....... 75 
Appendix 6  Anterior Segment Ischemia; Detection,  
Mitigation and Reporting  ................................ .............................  81 
Appendix 7  Sponsor Commitments  ................................ ..............................  88 
Appendix 8  Investigator Commitments and Responsibiliti es ......................  89 
Appendix 9  Declaration of Helsinki  ................................ ...............................  91 PROTOCOL VIS -2014                   TABLE OF CONTENTS  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3, 2015  
        
 
 
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 1  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3, 2015   
 
 
 1.0 PERSONNEL AND FACILITIES  
 
STUDY SPONSOR   Refocus Group, Inc.  
    10300 North Central Expressway  
Suite 104  
    Dallas, TX 75231  
    (214) 368 -0200  
 
MEDICAL MONITOR   Mark Packer, M.D.  
    4075 Southpointe Dr ive 
    Eugene, Oregon 97405  
    (541) 915-0291  
 
CLINICAL MONITOR   Quality Data Services, Inc.  
    1000 Continental Drive  
    Suite 200  
    King of Prussia, Pennsylvania 19406  
    (610) 354 -0404    
 
  
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 2  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 2.0 ABBREVIATIONS  
AE  Adverse Event  
AIDS   Acquired Immu ne Deficiency Syndrome  
ASI  Anterior Segment Ischemia  
BCDVA  Best Corrected Distance Visual Acuity  
BCNVA  Best Corrected Near Visual Acuity  
BSS  Balanced Salt Solution  
CPS  Critical Print Size  
CRF  Case Report Form  
CRO   Clinical Research Organization  
CRSE   Cycloplegic Refraction Spheri cal Equivalent  
CSLO   Confocal Scanning Laser Ophthalmology  
dB  Decibel  
DCNVA  Distance Corrected Near Visual Acuity  
eCRF   electronic Case Report Form  
EDC   Electronic Data Capture  
GCP   Good Clinical Practice  
HIV  Human Immunodefic iency Virus  
ICC  Intraclass Correlation Coefficient  
ICD  International Classification of Diseases  
ICF  Informed Consent Form  
IDE  Investigational Device Exemption  
IOL  Intraocular Lens  
IOP  Intraocular Pressure  
IRB  Institutional Review Board  
LASIK   Laser Assisted In -Situ Keratomileusis  
LogMAR  Logarithm of the Minimum Angle of Resolution  
LST  Lamellar Scleral Tunnel  
MD  Mean Deviation  
mm  millimeters  
mm Hg   Millimeters of Mercury  
MRSE   Manifest Refraction Spherical Equivalent  
NAVQ   Near Acuity Visual Quest ionnaire  
NSAID   Non-Steroidal Anti -Inflammatory Drug  
OCT   Optical Coherence Tomography  
OD  Right Eye  
OS  Left Eye  
PG  Prostaglandin  
PI  Principal Investigator  
PMA   Premarket Approval  
PMMA   Polymethylmethacrylate  
PRO   Patient Reported Outcomes  
PSD  Pattern Standard Deviatio n 
PSI  PresVIEW Scleral Implants  
PTFE   Polytetrafluoroethylene  
SAE  Serious Adverse Event  
SITA   Swedish Interactive Threshold Algorithm  
SOP   Standard Operating Procedure  
SPK  Superficial Punctuate Keratitis  
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 3  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 UADE   Unanticipated Adverse Devi ce Effect  
UBM   Ultrasound Biomicroscopy  
UCDVA  Uncorrected Distance Visual Acuity  
UCIVA   Uncorrected Intermediate Visual Acuity  
UCNVA  Uncorrected Near Visual Acuity  
UK  United Kingdom  
US  United States  
VIS  VisAbility Implant  
VIS  VisAbility Implant System  
VR-QOL  Vision R elated Quality of Life  
  
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 4  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 3.0 STUDY SYNOPSIS   
The objective of this study is to evaluate the safety and effectiveness of the VisAbility  Implant 
System (VIS) for the improvement of near visual acuity in presby opic patients.  This is a 
prospective clinical study that will enroll and determine eligible a total of 360  subjects  ranging in 
age between 45 and 60 years of age  at up to 14 clinical  sites.  Subjects will be implanted with the 
VisAbility  Implant model SGP -046 in the primary eye  and then in the fellow eye no sooner than 
14 days later.  Subjects will be examined at one day, one week and at 1, 2, 3, 6, 12, 18 and  
24 months post -operatively.   
The study will also include a 60 subject randomized controlled sub-study at 3 investigational sites. 
Subjects enrolled and eligible at these sites will be randomized (1:1 ratio)  to a surgery group or a 
control group. Subjects randomized to the surgery group will undergo surgery and will be followed 
for 24 months in the s ame manner as the larger non -randomized surgical group. Subjects 
randomized to th e control group will be followed for 6 months , and will be eligible to undergo 
surgery  after completion of this 6 -month follow -up period .   
The primary endpoint is achievement  of distance corrected near visual acuity (DCNVA) of Snellen 
equivalent 20/40 or better (at 40 cm)  and at least 10 letters (ETDRS) improvement in DCNVA  in 
the primary eye.  
This endpoint will be evaluated against two objectives, a ) 75% or more of  primary e yes achieve 
the effectiveness endpoint at 12 months postoperative and b) the percentage of primary eyes 
achieving the effectiveness endpoint at 6 months postoperative (6-month responder rate) is higher 
than the percentage in the randomized  contro l group.   
A PMA  application will be submitted when the full study cohort has completed the 12 month follow -
up visit.  
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 5  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 4.0 BACKGROU ND AND REGUALORY CHRONOLOGY  
4.1 Background  
Clinical evaluation of PresVIEW Scleral Implants (PS I) was initiated in 1997  following FDA 
approval of G970152.   The initial clinical trial was a feasibility study in presbyopic subjects desiring 
improvement in near visual acuity.  Based on the encouraging outcomes of the feasibility study a 
large clinical tri al of the PSI was initiated in 2003  under Protocol  P-277-5, and two models of the 
PSI have been evaluated.  
 
The PSI model PSI -001 was implanted in 164 subjects  (213 eyes)  from 1999 through 2007.  The 
PSI model SGP -046 was introduced in 2009 to provide better fixation of the PSI in the scleral 
tunne l.  Since there were significant differences in the design of the PSI models PSI -001 and 
SGP -046, a full cohort of 330 subjects (645 eyes) was implanted with the SGP -046 model . 
 
Both scleral implant models PSI-001 and SGP -046 consist of four segments which are implanted 
in scleral tunnels in the four oblique quadrants of the eye. From 1999 through 2000, scleral tunnels 
were created using a diamond blade.  An automated, electricall y powered, re -usable device 
designed specifically for scleral tunnel crea tion, called the Scleratome, was introduced in 2003 
and this incision system was used through mid -2012.  In April 2012, FDA approved introduction 
of a smaller, lighter, disposable Scleratome into the ongoing IDE clinical trial.   Since the tunnel 
configurat ion was the same for both Scleratomes, as demonstrated in performance testing 
submitted in the IDE supplement supporting introduction of the disposable Scleratome, Refocus 
assumed tha t clinical data from both the re -usable and the disposable Scleratome w ere expected 
to be comparable.  
 
After  introduction of the disposable Scleratome in May 2012, 56 subjects (119 eyes) were  
implanted  in incisions made with this improved S cleratome .  An exploratory analysis of 12 month 
clinical outcomes of these eyes as compar ed to eyes implanted with the earlier reusable 
Scleratome provide d evidence  of greater improvements in near vision with the disposable 
Scleratome.  While this finding was unanticipated, it was also very encouraging since the se 
improvements in near vision w ere achieved considerably earlier in the postoperative period . 
This finding was also important since it confirmed Refocus’ expectation that improved surgical 
instrumen tation would have a favorable effect  on postoperative clinical outcomes, as evidenced 
in the transition from the original IDE pilot study in which scleral tunnels were created using a 
diamond blade to use of the automated, re -usable Scleratome introduced i n 2003 and to the more 
recent introduction of the disposable Scleratome.  
 
In Protocol P -277-5, conducted under G970152, the location of the scleral incisions for placement 
of the PSI was identified by marking the targeted position of the incisions. This me thod was not 
completely reliable since the marking can be difficult for the surgeon to se e during the procedure. 
As a result, some surgeons ha d experienced difficulty  placing the Scleratome in the proper 
position relative to the marks created.    
 
  
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 6  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 4.2  Rational e for Protocol VIS -2014  
In a further effort to develop improved surgical instrument ation that would provide more reliable 
placement of the scleral tunnels creat ed by the Scleratome, the company has developed an 
integrated surgical instrumentation system, called the VisAbility  Implant System.  
The VisAbility  Implant System consists of  the:  
• VisAbility  Implant (previously referred to as the PSI model SGP -046), 
• VIS Docking Station  (previously referred to as the Oculock)  
• VIS Scleratome (the Docking and Scleratome together, previously called the  
“Oculock Incision System”)  
• Other custom surgical  instrument s for use during the procedure .  
The Docking Station is a fixation device that addresses sources of variability in the creation of 
scleral tunnels and provides a simple method for placing the Scleratome in the correct location 
on the eye . The Do cking Statio n provides stabilization of the eye and serves to “dock” the 
Scleratome  during creation of the scleral tunnels , ensuring consistent placement of the 4 scleral 
tunnels to be created.   Use of the Docking Station with the Scleratome is expected to  result in a  
shorter duration procedure as well as in improved reproducibility of the implantation procedure.   
The VisAbility  Implant System, and specifically the Docking Station, prevents creation of scleral 
tunnels too close to the limbus by establishin g a guide fo r the positioning of the Scleratome blade 
at a distance of approximately 4.0 millimeters from the corneal limbus. When the Docking Station 
is properly aligned, the 4 PSI segments will be equally spaced between the rectus muscles, 
minimizing the  likelihood of pressure on the anterior ciliary muscles, which could result in reduced 
iris perfusion.  It should be noted that the PSI model SGP -046, renamed the VisAbility  Implant,  
has not been modified since its introduction into the clinical trial cond ucted under G970152, 
and there are no plans to modify this implant . 
Given the potential for the VisAbility  Implant System  to improve results of the implantation 
procedure, Protocol V IS-2014 , a new pivotal trial, is being conducted to definitively evaluate the 
safety and effectiveness of the VisAbility  Implant System . 
 
  
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 7  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 5.0 SCIENTIFIC BACKGROUN D ON PRESBYOPIA  
Presbyopia is the most prevalent of all visual deficiencies, affecting virtually 100% of the 
population over the course of a normal life span. It is characterized by a progressive, age -related 
loss of accommodation, or the ability of the human eye to focus clearly on objects over a range 
of near to intermediate dist ances from the eye.  By the fifth decade of life, the amplitude of 
accommodation has dec lined so that the near point of the eye is more remote than typical reading 
distance.  Once presbyopia occurs, emmetrop es will need an optical aid for near vision .  Myopes 
will find they see better at near without their distance correction and hyperop es will require  a 
correction  for both distance and near vision.  
When the eye accommodate s to focus on a near object, converge nce and pupil constriction also 
occur .  The com bination of these three movements (accommodation, convergence and miosis) is 
under the c ontrol of the Edinger -Westphal nucleus and is referred to as the near triad, or 
accommodation reflex.  Accommodation is accomplished by the ability of the human eye to alter 
the refraction of the crystalline lens, depending on the distance of the object fr om the eye.   In the 
eye of a presbyopic emmetrope, the lens cannot accommodate sufficiently to focus the light rays 
from a near object onto a single point on the retin a. Thus, a point object is imaged as a blur circle 
on the retina. Loss of accommodation typically begins in mid -life, eventually culminating in a 
nearly complete loss of the ability of the eye to clearly visualize near objects.     
Currently, no universall y accepted surgical treatments are available for presbyopia.  Vision 
correction options include near vision reading glasses and/or contact lenses. As the physiological 
mechanisms of accommodation are investigated, more therapeutic and corrective options ar e 
being explored.  These include the use of multifocal intraocular lenses (IOLs), monovi sion and 
anisometropic corneal refractive surgical procedures using laser -assisted in situ keratomileusis 
(LASIK), corneal implant devices, and the VisAbility  Implant.  
5.1 Lenticular and Extralenticular Theories  
The underlying cause(s) of presbyopia, loss of accommodation of the eye over time, is not 
completely understood or agreed upon by the medical community.   Scientific t heories for 
accommodative loss may be generall y ascribed  to two schools of thought:  
• Lenticular Theories  are broadly based on age -related changes in properties of the lens of 
the eye, including the lens substance, the lens capsule, and the zonular fibers. These 
theories stem not only from purported changes in the elasticity of the tissues, but also from 
continued growth and changes in the  thickness and the curvature of the lens with age.  
Helmholtz’s lenticular theory of the loss of accommodation is the most widely accepted of 
these types o f theories.1 The majority of current approaches for the treatment of 
presbyopia are based upon lentic ular theories of accommodation.  
 
• Extralenticular Theories  consider age -related changes in the accommodative structures 
outside of the lens, capsule, and zo nules. These factors include anatomical, 
morphological, and physiological changes in the ciliary musc le, connective tissue, and 
choroid.  The Scleral Implant approach to the treatment of presbyopia is based on 
extralenticular theories.  
  
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 8  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 5.2 Theories of Accommodation  
For the past 150 years, Helmholtz's lenticular theory of the loss of accommodation has be en the 
accepted basis for the underlying physiological mechanisms that lead to presbyopia1  Helmholtz 
hypothesized that presbyopia is caused by the hardening of the lens with age.  According to 
Helmholtz, as the ciliary body contracts for accommodation, it  constricts inwardly  and relax es the 
zonules .  The relaxation of the zonules causes the lens to "round up", and as the lens becomes 
more conv ex, it adds dioptric  power thus bringing near objects into focus.  According to 
Helmholtz’s theory, the decrease in  flexibility of the lens and the loss in elasticity of the lens 
capsule that occur with aging progressively hinder the focusing mechanism.   
Although generally accepted, Helmholtz’s theory cannot fully explain the mechanism by which the 
lens alters its sha pe, nor can it satisfactorily explain the reason or means by which aging uniformly 
affects accommodation across the population.   
An extralen ticular theory that may explain age -related changes in accommodation is Dr. Jackson 
Coleman’s catenary theory of ac commodation.2,3,4  Coleman’s theory proposes that the lens, 
zonules, and anterior vitreous comprise a diaphragm between the anterior and vitr eous chambers 
of the eye.  According to Coleman, this construct behaves in a manner analogous to a hydraulic 
suspen sion bridge, or catenary .  When the ciliary muscles contract to accommodate the lens, 
pressure is increased in the vitreous compartment . 
Simu ltaneously, pressure in the anterior chamber is decreased due to the expansion of the 
trabecular meshwork, which oc curs with ciliary body contraction.  A pressure gradient is thus 
established between the 2 chambers, resulting in a posterior flattening of t he lens and, anteriorly, 
in a steeper radius of curvature in the center of the lens with a slight flattening at the  peripher y.6 
The anterior capsule and the zonules form a hammock -shaped surface (a modified catenary) that 
can be predicted mathematically based on the circumference of the ciliary body (Müeller’s 
muscle).7  Much like the pylons of a suspension bridge, the  ciliary body dictates the shape of the 
catenary.  Thus, the accommodated state appears to be supported by the fluid volume differential 
with very little energy expenditure, much like a viscose -damped hydraulic door closer.  
Coleman’s hypothesis has been te sted by comparing a mechanical model of accommodation with 
in vivo  measurements of lens geometry changes during accommodatio n (measurements included 
ultrasound, MRI, and optical techniques).,6,7,8  The mechanical model consisted of fluid -filled latex 
ballo ons which were supported by a plastic wrap hammock to form a curve that potentially models 
the human lens.  Increasing ballo on volumes were used to simulate growth of the aging lens, and 
variations in curvature were measured.   
  
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 9  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 Schachar  proposed an alter native extralenticular theory.  He hypothesize d that presbyopia is a 
result of a decrease in distance between the ciliary mu scles and lens equator.  It is known that 
lens tissue continues to grow over the lifetime of an individual,8 while sclera stops grow ing at 
approximately age 13.10 Therefore, there is a linear decrease in the distance between the ciliary 
muscles and the lens over time.  Ciliary muscles are smooth with striations, and thus, the amount 
of tension they can develop is directly related to th e degree to which they are str etched.  Over 
time, the amplitude of accommodation is reduced because the distance between the lens and the 
muscles is decreased, resulting in presbyopia.  Stretching the ciliary muscles by surgical 
intervention would increase  their ability to exert force on the lens and improve near vision.  
More recently, Goldberg and colleagues have made efforts to incorporate the research findings 
of others in a computer -animated model of accommodation11.  Dr. Goldberg notes that, “ A team 
of European investigators (Elke Lutjen -Drecoll, MD, and colleagues at the Institute of Anatomy in 
Erlangen, Germany) and American investigators (Mary Ann Croft, MS; Paul Kaufman, MD; and 
colleagues at the National Primate Lab and University of Wisconsin in M adison) have used 
electron mic roscopy and video ultrasound biomicroscopy (UBM) and endoscopy to define the 
complex, separate elements of the zonules and document the interconnected movements of the 
extralenticular tissues. ”  Dr. Goldberg suggests that the mechanism of accommodation sho uld 
include a new theory of reciprocal zonular action, which he describes as follows: “ During ciliary 
body contraction, the anterior zonules lose tension while the posterior zonules stretch.  During 
ciliary body relaxation, th e posterior zonules lose tensi on as the lens flattens and is pulled back 
by the increasing tension of the anterior zonules .”     
The exact cause of the loss of accommodation over time is not known and may be associated 
with the above theories, a combinatio n of these theories, or theori es not yet introduced.  
 
  
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 10  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 6.0 PRIOR SCLERAL IMPLANT CLINICAL STUDIES  
As briefly described in the introduction to this protocol, Refocus  has conducted a feasibility study 
of the scleral implant s in 29 presbyopic subjects, followed by a pivotal trial that enrolled 135 
subjects  with the PSI-001 design of the PresVIEW Scleral Implant and 330 subjects with the SGP -
046 design . The results of th ese studies are described briefly below.  
6.1 Feasibility Clinical Study  
Clinical evaluation of the scleral implants was initiated in March 1999 following FDA approval of 
G970152.  The feasibility clinical trial enrolled 29 presbyopic subjects desiring impr ovement in 
near visual acuity at 6 clinical sites . Subjec ts were implanted in the primary eye only and followed 
for 24 months. Four PMMA segments were implanted in partial thickness scleral tunnels in the 
four oblique quadrants of the eye. The scleral tunn els were made using a diamond blade.   
While s ome study subjects experienced a clinically significant improvement in near visual acuity  
in this study, the effectiveness results were mixed as a result of difficulty in accurately and 
consistently creating th e scleral tunnels. Notwithstanding these challenges, the initial results 
provided evidence of safety and effectiveness and supported initiation of a larger clinical trial.  
Importantly, the findings regarding difficulty in scleral tunnel creation led to development of an 
automated, electrically powered, re -usabl e incision device, the Scleratome, which was used in 
subsequent clinical studies.   
6.2 Pivotal Trial of the PSI-001 Scleral Implant  (Protocol P -277-5) 
A prospective, randomized control led multicenter clinical trial of the PSI-001 scleral implant  was 
appro ved by FDA in December 2003 .  Subjects were implanted with the PSI-001 and followed for 
24 months.  In the initial r andomized  controlled stage  of this study , 150 subjects were to be 
randomized in a 2:1 ratio either to a surgical cohort (N=100) or to a Deferred Treatment / C ontrol 
cohort (N=50) with an interim report to be provided to FDA upon obtained preliminary data o n 75 
randomized subjects.  Subjects randomized to the deferred surgery/control cohort were eligible 
to receive the implant after completion of 6 mon ths of follow -up in the study.  
In the initial stage of this study, a  total of 81 subjects were enrolled and randomized to either the 
PSI Treatment Group (53) or the Deferred Treatment Control Group  (28) at a ratio of 2:1 per the 
study protocol. At  the 3 -month visit, 64% (23/36) of the eyes assigned to the PSI Treatment Group 
had distance corrected n ear visual acuity 20/40 or better, as compared with 6% (1/18) of Deferred 
Treatment Control Group.  At the 6 -month postoperative exam 70% (30/43) of the  eyes in the PSI 
Treatment Group eyes had distance corrected near visual acuity 20/40 or better, as comp ared 
with 4% (1/23) of the Deferred Treatment Control eyes.    
While t hese data supported expansion to the full study cohort of 330 subjects  and up to 66 0 eyes, 
with bilateral implantation , only a  total of 184  eyes of 135 subjects were implanted with the PSI-
001 under this protocol .   
  
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 11  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 Initial eff ectiveness  outcomes were consistent with  the results of the initial subjects in the 
randomized  substudy , howev er the improvement in near visual acuity was not sustained over time  
in some  subjects . During investigation of this unexpected finding, imaging of the PSI-001 
segments using the Visante OCT (Carl Zeiss Meditec, Jena, Germany) revealed displacement of 
at least one of the implant segments  in subjects who experienced an initial improvement in n ear 
vision followed by loss of this improvement .  
Subsequent ly, in a group of patients with displaced segments , repositioning and suturing of the 
segments was associated  with clear improvements in near acuity, and confirmed that the stability 
of the PSI-001 segments in the scleral tunnel was directl y related to clinical efficacy.  
Since suturing of the PSI-001 significantly  increased procedure time and complexity,  Refocus 
deferred further enrollment in the study pending design changes to the scleral impla nt segment 
to resolve the displacement issue.  A new design was developed, which incorporat ed a two part 
implant segment ; a main body with “feet” at both ends that protrude d beyond the edges of the 
tunnel  and a secondary locking insert . This design , known as the PSI model SGP -046, was 
introduced into Protocol P -277-5, and has been shown to reliably maintain the implant segment 
firmly in place , as described further below.  
6.3 Pivotal Trial of the SGP -046 Scleral Implant ( continuation of Protocol P-277-5) 
The PSI model SGP -046, designed to provide better fixation of the PSI in the scleral tunnel , was 
introduced into Protocol P -277-5 in June 2009 . Since 135 subjects had already been enrolled and 
implanted with the PSI-001 design, enrollment was incr eased to 465 subjects to ensure that 330 
subjects could be enrolled and implanted with the PSI SGP -046 in support of a Premarket 
Approval Application  (PMA) .  
With the modified design o f the PSI segment, another 48 patients were to be enrolled in a sub -
study and randomized (2:1 ratio) with 32 patients receiving the PSI SGP -046 and 16 deferred 
surgery/control patients. As before, subjects randomized to the deferred surgery/control cohort 
were eligible to receive the PSI after completion of 6 months of follow -up in the study. The results 
of patients  who elect ed to have PSI surger y after completion of 6 months of follow -up in the 
deferred /control  surgery  group were included in the total pat ient cohort.  
A smaller, lighter, disposable Scleratome was also introduced into the ongoing IDE clinical trial  in 
April 2012 .  Since the tunnel configuration was the same for both Scleratomes, as demonstrated 
in performance testing, Refocus assumed that cli nical data from both the re -usable and the 
disposable Scleratome would be comparable.  However, an exploratory analysis of 12 month 
clinical out comes  for 56 primary eyes (119 total eyes) implanted with PSI using the disposable 
Scleratome  showed greater impr ovements in near vision following surgery with th is improved 
surgical tool  as compared to earlier subjects in the cohort .  While this finding was unanticipated, 
it was also very encouraging since the improvements in near vision were also achieved 
considera bly earlier in the postoperative follow -up period . These finding s were important since 
they confirmed Refocus’ expectation that improved surgical instrumentation would have a 
favorable impact on the post -operative clinical outcomes, as evidenced in the tra nsition from the 
original IDE pilot study in which scleral tunnels were cr eated using a diamond blade to use of the 
automated, re -usable Scleratome introduced in 2003 and to th is more recent introduction  of the 
disposable Scleratome.  
  
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 12  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 A total of 645 eyes  of 330 subjects were enrolled and implanted with the PSI SGP -046 in this 
clinical study. Subjects implanted with the PSI SGP -046 experienced clinically meaningful 
improvement with DCNVA (Sloan) at 40cm.  DCNVA (Sloan) of 20/40 or better was achieved by 
80% (237/298) of subjects at 12 months, by 84%  (210/249)  of subjects at 18 months and by 91%  
(120/132)  of subjects at 24 months . 
Further, during the course of this clinical trial no persistent loss in BCDVA or BCNVA was 
observed in any eye.  BCDVA remained g enerally unchanged from baseline through the 24 month 
visit and all (100%) of the PSI treated eyes achieved BCNVA of 20/32 or better at all postoperative 
examinations.  
The PSI model SGP -046 has not been modified since its introduction into the clinical tr ial 
conducted under G970152, and there are no plans to  modify this model of the PSI.  
Frequently reported ocular adverse events in this clinical trial were dry eye and improper 
conjunctival closure after the surgical procedure , the latter resulting in expo sed implant  segments.  
Exposed segments  were treated with revised conjunctival closures.  Other ocular adverse events  
included conjunctival tags, corneal abrasion s, conjunctival injection, superficial punctuate keratitis 
(SPK), conjunctival thinning, and e xposed suture.  All of these were trans ient in nature and 
resolved without sequelae , generally with no or limited medical intervention . IOP increase s 
secondary to postoperative administration of topical steroid  drops were reported; in all cases, IOP 
return ed to the baseline level after disconti nuation of the steroid drops  and/or short -term use of  
IOP lowering medications in a few cases .  
Three ( 3) cases of decreased iris vascular perfusion resulting in decreased pupil reactivity to light , 
and iris atrophy were reported  in the complete cohort of 858 eyes of  this IDE study  for an incidence  
of 0.35% .  This adverse event has been  mitigated with a high level of standardization of the 
immediate post -operative surgical protocol to ensure detect ion of any adverse ch ange in pupil 
function where recovery falls below minimum standards .  In those rare cases,  the implant 
segments  will be removed on the day of surgery prior to discharge, thereby reversing any 
decrease in iris vascular perfusion . All prior cases achieving a  measured pupillary response of ≥ 
25% constriction by digital infrared pupillometry within 6 hours  post-operatively have  
demonstrate d no long-term compromi se in pupillary function, nor have  they develop ed any further 
signs or symptoms  of decreased  perfusio n.  Therefore, this protocol will require removal of implant 
segments  on the day of surgery in the rare circumstance that the pupillary constriction does not 
return to an acceptable level in the immediate postoperative  period .   
In summary, adverse events were observed  in the original IDE study  but these were generally 
mild in nature, self -limiting and largely resolved by 6 months postoperatively. The majority of the 
adverse events occurred during the early postoperative period , with no serious or significa nt 
adverse events o bserved  in the late postoperative period, i.e., at 6 months or later.  
 
  
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 13  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 7.0 STUDY OUTLINE   
7.1 Study Objective  
The primary objective of this study is to evaluate the safety and effectiveness of the VisAbility  
Implant System with the VisAbility  Implant, model SGP -046, for improvement in distance 
corrected near visual acuity (DCNVA) in presbyopic subjects.   
7.2 Stud y Design  
This is a prospective  multicenter  clinical study that will enroll and determine eligible 360 subjects 
ranging in ag e between 45 and 60 years of age  with distance corrected near visual acuity 
(DCNVA) and uncorrected near visual acuity (UCNVA) of 20 /50 to 20/ 80 (inclusive).  Subjects will 
be enrolled at up to 1 4 clinical sites  with no site enrolling and determining eligi ble more than 20% 
of the 360 eligible subject cohort . A PMA application will be submitted when all study subjects 
have completed 12 months of follow -up.     
Subjects will be consented and screened based on medical  history, ocular history  and visual 
acuity criteria.  Subjects will be required to satisfy specif ic inclusion and exclusion criteria during 
a baseline examination to be eligible for surgery.  Subjects will be implanted with the VisAbility  
Implant model SGP -046 in the dominant eye, which will be des ignated as the primary eye.  The 
fellow eye will be im planted no sooner than 14 days after the primary eye and only in the absence 
of unresolved adverse events in the primary eye. Subjects primary eye will be examined at one 
day, one week and at 1, 2, 3, 6 , 12, 18 and 24 months post -operatively. The fellow ey e will be 
examined at one day, one week and one month postoperatively. The one week and one month 
examinations of the fellow eye may be combined with visits for the primary eye if the visit windows 
perm it. After the fellow eye one month visit, the fellow e ye will be examined  in accordance  with 
the subsequent primary eye examination visits. A validated Patient Reported Outcome 
Measurement instrument  (the NAVQ ) will be given to all enrolled and eligible subjects pre -
operatively and at 6, 12, 1 8 and 24 months.   
The study also include s a 60 subject randomized controlled sub-study at 3 investigational sites. 
Eligible subjects enrolled at these sites will be randomized (1:1 ratio)  to a surgery group or a 
contro l group. Subjects assigned to t he randomized surgery group will be implanted and followed 
for 24 months in the same manner as the larger non -randomized surgery  group. Subjects 
randomized to the control group will be followed for 6 months, and will be eligible to undergo 
VisAbility  Implant surgery after completion of the six month observation period.  These subjects 
that elect surgery will be followed for 24 months  in accordance with the same schedule as the 
non-randomized surgery group .  Randomized  control group subjects who do not chose to  under go 
VisAbility  Implant surgery at the end of the 6 month observation period  will be exited from the 
study at that time.  
7.3 Effectiveness Endpoint  
The primary endpoint is  achievement of distance corrected near visual  acuity (DCNVA) of Snellen 
equivalent 20/40 or better (at 40 cm)  and at least 10 letters (ETDRS) improvement in DCNVA  in 
the primary eye.  
 
This endpoint will be evaluated against two objectives, a) 75% or more o f primary eyes achieve 
the effectiveness end point at 12 months postoperative and, b) the percentage of primary eyes 
achieving the effectiveness endpoint at 6 months postoperative (6-month responder rate) is higher 
than the percentage in the randomized  control group.   
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 14  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 7.4 Analysis of Safety Data  
Safety data analyses will be performed and separate summaries will be provided for 
primary and all eyes.  Descriptive statistics on the following attributes will be provided:  
• BCDVA  
• IOP 
• Slit Lamp findings   
• Fundus exam findings  
• Rate of adverse events  
7.5 Study  Population  
A total of 360 subjects who meet the following criteria w ill be enrolled and determined eligible in 
this study:  
7.5.1  Inclusion Criteria  
1. Subjects must be between ages of 45 to 60 at the time of enrollment.  
 
2. Subjects must have best corrected di stance visual acuity (BCDVA)  of 20/20 in each eye . 
 
3. Subjects must have distance corrected near visual acuity (DCNVA) @ 40 cm of 20/50, 
20/63  or 20/80 in each eye.    
 
4. Subjects must have uncorrected near visual acuity (UCNVA) @ 40 cm of 20/50, 20/63  
or 20/80  in each eye.   
 
5. Subjects must have preoperative manifest refraction spherical equivalent (MRSE) in 
each eye of -0.75 to +0.50 diopters with no more than 1.00 diopter of astigmatism. The 
difference between the MRSE and cycloplegic refraction spherical equiv alent (CRSE) 
should be ≤0.50 diopter.  
 
6. Subjects must require a minimum add of +1. 25 or greater to read 20/20  at near (40 cm) . 
 
7. Subjects must be phakic in each eye. 
 
8. Subjects must be alert, mentally competent, and able to understand and comply with the 
requirements of the clinical study, and be personally motivated to abide by the 
requirements and restrictions of the clinical study.   Patients must be available fo r the 
follow -up period.  
 
9. Subjects must be able to provide written informed consent.  
7.5.2  Exclus ion Criteria  
1. Subjects where either pupil has a baseline percent change from scotopic to photopic of 
less than 30% or an absolute difference of less than 1.00 mm between scotopic and 
photopic pupil size as measured by the NeurOptics Pupillometer.  
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 15  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 2. Subjects  with ocular inflammation, chronic uveitis, or other recurrent anterior or posterior 
segment inflammatory conditions in either eye; subjects with any ocular or  systemic 
disease(s) posting a significant risk for ocular inflammation, including but not limite d to 
autoimmune disorders (e.g., rheumatoid arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, Reiter's 
syndrome, ulcerative colitis, Crohn’s disease, psoriasis, sarcoidosis, Behcet’s 
disease), infections ( toxoplasmosis, cat -scratch fever, West Nile virus,  syphilis, 
tuber culosis, herpes zoster, herpes simplex, adenovirus), ocular trauma, or gout.  
3. Subjects with scleral thickness of less than  530 microns as measured 3.5 to 4.0 mm 
posterior to the superior temporal quadrant limbus in either eye.  
4. Subjects with  a history of  any prior intraocular procedure (e.g., corneal transplant, 
filtering procedures for glaucoma, vitrectomy, retinal detachment repair, cataract 
surgery) or a ny prior refractive procedure (e.g. LASIK , surface excimer, or incisional 
surgery) in either eye.  
5. Subje cts with any history of prior extraocular muscle surgery  or orbital surgery . 
6. Subjects with chronic ocular disease, including but not limited to corneal p athology, 
primary or secondary  glaucoma, iritis, herpes simplex, uveitis, trachoma, ocular 
pemphigoid, Sjogren’s disease, uveal melanoma, Thyroid Related Immun e Orbitopathy  
or clinically significant retinal pathology in either eye.  
7. Subjects with any acute ocular disease that has not been completely treated and 
resolved for at least three  months such as conj unctivitis, blepharitis,  chalazion,  corneal 
abrasion or keratitis  in either eye.  
8. Subjects with chronic systemic diseases  which may affect the eye , includ ing but not 
limited to diabetes, ulcerative colitis, systemic lupus erythematosus, Crohn’s disease, 
collagen vascular disease, rheumatoid arthritis, any bleeding diathesis, or systemic 
manifestations of HIV/AIDS.   Any other uncontrolled systemic disease (e .g., 
hypertension, cancer, etc.) that could compromise the patient’s participation . 
9. Use of any medicati on, such as coumadin, that could make the surgical procedure more 
difficult.   Subjects  using Coumadin, aspirin or NSAID medication under orders from a 
doctor must be able to provide written approval from the treating doctor for discontinu ing 
this medicatio n at least ten (10) days prior to surgery.  
10. Subjects with chronic ocular surface disease , including  but not limited to  subjects with a 
prior diagnosis of chronic dry eye syndrome based on tests such as but not limited to, 
corneal or conjunctival staining, O cular Surf ace Disease Index symptom score  or 
Schirmer tear testing.   
11. Subjects who are allergic to any medications used in the protocol.  
12. Subjects who are pregnant, lactating,  or of child-bearing  age and not practicing  a 
medically  approved  method of  birth control  
  
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 16  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 8.0 STUDY  METHODS  
8.1 Patient Screening and Enrollment  
Prior to enrollment in the study, interested subjects will be screened to determine initial eligibility. 
The investigator or a designee will explain the study purpose and summary procedures  and 
subject  responsibilities to the potential subject .  If it appears that the subject is interested and may 
be a candidate for the study, the subject will be asked to review and sign a Screening Informed 
Consent.  The Screening Informed Consent provides a summary of  the preliminary screening 
testing which will include standard of care testing including a medical history, vision testing and 
an examination of ocular health .  
 
If preliminary eligibility is met, the subject will be asked to sign a Study Informe d Consent Form 
which describes the surgical procedure ; the potential benefits and risks, study examinations to be 
conducted, the frequency of follow -up visits , the expense reimbursement to be provided to the 
subject as well as other topics.  When the Study  Informed Consent  is signed by the subject and 
by the Investigator or designee, the Subject is considered to be enrolled. A dditional study specific 
testing of the subject’s ocular and medical condition as specified in the baseline examination will 
be perfo rmed  to determine eligibility . If during th is testing, the Investigator or Sub -Investigator 
determines that the subject will not meet the protocol inclusion or exclusion criteria the 
examination may be terminated.  
 
If the subject satisfies all inclusion an d exclusio n criteria, the full baseline examination data will 
be provided to the Sponsor for verification that all data ha ve been obtained  and meets eligibility 
criteria .  Upon approval  by the Sponsor, the subject will be scheduled for surgery if the subje ct 
has bee n enrolled  and determined to be eligible at an Investigational site that is participating in 
the non-randomized cohort .   
 
If the subject has been enrolled  and determined to be eligible at an Investigational site that is 
participating in the rand omized controlled sub-study, the subject will be randomized (1:1 ratio) to 
either the surgery group or the control group. Subjects randomized to the control group will be 
followed for 6 months, an d will be eligible to undergo VisAbility Implant surgery aft er completion 
of the six month observation period.   
     
8.2 Clinical Parameters and Examination Schedule  
The clinical parameters to  be recorded  at baseline and post-operative examinations are shown in 
Table 1: Schedule of Visits and Measurements  on the f ollowing page .  
  
  
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 17  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 TABLE 1:  SCHEDULE OF VISITS AND MEASUREMENTS  
  Initial  Follow -up 
Pre-Op 0    Day  1    Day  1     
Week 1    
Month  2   
Months  3   
Months  6   
Months  12  
Months  18 
Months  24 
Months  
Slit Lamp Biomicroscopy  
OD, OS  ✓2  ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 
Applanation Tonometry  
OD, OS  ✓2  ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 
Gonioscopy  
OD, OS  ✓        ✓   
Scleral Thickness 
Measurement  
OD, OS  ✓           
Implant Assessment  
OD, OS    ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 
Axial Length  / ACD  
OD, OS  ✓        ✓  ✓ 
Corneal  Topography / 
Keratometry  OD, OS  ✓           
Pupillometry  
OD, OS  ✓2 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 
Posterior Pole  exam with 78   
/90D lens      
OD, OS  ✓2  ✓  ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓  ✓  
Dilated Indirect 
Ophthalmoscopy 20/30D lens  
OD, OS  ✓   ✓     ✓  ✓ 
Visual Fields  
OD, OS  ✓           
Cup/Disk Ratio OD, OS  ✓        ✓  ✓ 
Cycloplegic Refraction w/ VA  
OD, OS  ✓        ✓  ✓ 
Manifest Refraction  
OD, OS  ✓   ✓4 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 
BCDVA  
OD, OS  ✓2   ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 
UCDVA  
OD, OS  ✓  ✓1 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 
UCNVA @ 40 cm  
OD, OS, OU  ✓      ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 
UCIVA @ 6 6 cm  
 OU ✓      ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 
DCNVA @ 40 cm  
OD, OS, OU  ✓    ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 
Patient Preferred Distance  
DCN - OD, OS, OU  
UCN - OU ✓      ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 
Minimum add to achieve  
20/20  ✓      ✓3 ✓3 ✓3 ✓3 ✓3 
NAVQ (Validated PRO) & 
Patient Questionn aire ✓       ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 
Sub-Study Only  
Wavefront measurements ³ ✓      ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 
Sub-Study Only  
Defocus Curve ³ ✓      ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 
1Visual acuity will be measured using pinhole on day 1  
2Fellow Eye Safety Exam (when fellow eye surgery is 61-180 days after prim ary eye surgery ) 
3Randomized Sub -study subjects only – control group subjects are examined through 6 month s and the  surgery group through 24 months.  
4Measure BCDVA using baseline refraction  
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 18  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 Examination methods are provided in Appendix 1: Examination Meth ods. 
 
8.3 Surgical Procedure  
The VisAbility Implant System surgical procedure will be performed by the Investigator 
according to the detailed steps described in Appendix 2: VisAbility Implant System Surgical 
Procedure. The surgical procedure involves the fo llowing basic steps:  
 
• Marking  – To indicate the correct rotational position of the VIS Docking Station,  
two or more drops of xylocaine 2% sterile solution without epinephrine or the 
equivalent are used topically for anesthesia and marks are made at the 12: 00 and 
6:00 limbus along the axis of the center of the superior and inferior recti muscle 
insertions.  Additional marking from these two points with the VIS Barrel Marker 
further aids in VIS Docking Station positioning by providing Vernier visual 
feedback of proper x/y centering and rotational placement of the VIS Docking 
Station.  
 
• Peritomy  – Additional xylocaine 2% sterile solution without epinephrine or the 
equivalent is suffused in the anterior subtenon’s space for anesthesia. Opening of 
the conjunctiva and Tenon’s capsule at the limbus by standard techniques such 
as might be used in certa in strabismus, glaucoma, or retina surgery is done to 
provide exposure of the sclera in the area of VIS Docking station fixation points 
and scleral tunnels.  Due to the potential detrimental effect on perfusion and 
scleral thickness, bipolar and or thermal  cautery should not be used during  this 
procedure .   
 
• Placement of the VIS Docking Station  – The VIS Docking Station uses  a four point 
fixation system to provide ocular fixation and a fixed docking location for the VIS 
Scleratome.  The VIS Docking Station is centered around the limbus with its 
internal arrow points on the 6:00 and 12:00 marks and the channels line d up with 
the four radial lines from the VIS  Barrel Marker.   Each of the four VIS Docking 
Station’s fixation points are then actuated 180 degrees clockwise to its stop.  The 
surgeon should assess fixation and position and correct any deficiency prior to 
proceeding .   
 
• Scleral Tunnel Creation  – The V IS Scleratome l ocating r idge is docked to the VIS 
Docking Station channel with the blade guard flush with its corresponding edge.  After  
the footplate is squarely on the sclera, the VIS Scleratome is activated to form each of 
four scleral tunnels at a fixe d position appr oximately 4mm from the limbus and 
centered between adjacent recti muscles.  USE OF A MANUAL LAMELLAR BLADE 
IS NOT ALLOWED FOR USE IN CREATING OR AUGMENTING ANY SCLERAL  
TUNNEL . To minimize manipulation of the eye, a VisAbility Implant  Segment should 
be place d in each Lamellar Scleral Tunnel made prior to proceeding to the creation of 
the next Lamellar Scleral tunnel.  
 
  
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 19  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 • Implantation of the VisAbility Implant  – Pre-operatively, The VisAbility Implant  Main 
Body is loaded into the VIS Feeder Tube to close the le ading stabilization feet and 
facilitate their placement thru the scleral tunnel.  The VIS Feeder Tube is guided by 
the blunt titanium VIS shuttle to transit the tunnel.  After the leading stabili zation feet 
fully traverse and exit the scleral tunnel it is disinserted from the VisAbility Implant  Main 
Body.  With the VisAbility Implant  Main Body in this position, the VIS Center Insert is 
clasped to lock into place, creating a uniform, smooth and sta ble VisAbility Implant  
Segment in each of the four oblique qu adrants. If for any reason, only one or two 
Scleral Tunnels can be implanted with VisAbility Implant  Segments, these segments 
will be removed from the eye.  
 
• VIS Docking Station Removal  – The VIS  Docking Station fixation is detached at 
each of its four poi nts of fixation with 180 degree counterclockwise reverse 
actuation to the stop and it is removed in a careful manner to avoid corneal 
abrasion . 
 
• Conjunctival Closure  – Assess all VisAbility Impla nts for position .  Should 
hemostasis be required, Evicel fibr in sealant (Omrix Biopharmaceuticals, Ltd., Kiryat 
Ono, Israel ) or TISSEEL  fibrin sealant (Baxter International, Inc ., Deerfield, IL) may be 
used.   The conjunctiva is brought up to cover the VisAbility Implant s and re -
approximated to the perilimbal area wi th 9-0 braided vicryl suture or equivalent as 
needed.  Special care should be taken to have a smooth, minimally wrinkled or 
bunched closure to the li mbus that fully covers the VisAbility Implant s. 
 
• After Conjunctival Closure  – At the completion of the surg ery, a removable 
punctual plug should be placed in the inferior punctum and an initial dose of 
antibiotic drops such as moxifloxacin ophthalmic solut ion or equivalent and steroid 
drops such as prednisolone acetate 1% ophthalmic suspension or equivalent 
should be instilled in the eye.  
 
8.4 Post -Operative Care  
Following surgery, physicians should adhere to the following guidelines of topical ophthalmic 
medications and care:  
 
• To help control pain postoperatively, an icepack should be applied to the eye  at 
intervals  for approximately 30 minutes or longer as needed.  A topical non -steroidal 
anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) such as nepafenac ophthal mic suspension or 
equivalent may also be instilled immediately postoperatively.  Chilled BSS may be 
instilled every 1 5 minutes and topical steroid drops such as prednisolone acetate 
1% ophthalmic suspension or equivalent may be used every 15 to 30 minutes until 
the pupil reaction is greater than 25% as described in the next step.  Prior to discharge 
the patient should be given Diamox 500mg Sequel PO or equivalent.  
 
  
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 20  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 • Pupil functionality will be evaluated postoperatively using a NeurOptics Pupillometer 
every 15 to 30 minutes until the percent pupil constriction reading is at least 25%.  A 
second, confirmatory reading may be  taken as soon as 5 minutes after the first.  If two 
pupil constriction reading s of at 25% or greater are not achieved within the first 4 h ours 
after surgery, preparation for removal of the implant segments will commence.  T he 
Investigator must  remove  all four implant  segments no later than 6 hours after the 
surgery  if two pupil constriction readings of 25% or greater are not achieved within 6 
hours postoperatively .  
 
• During the first week after the surgery, antibiotic drops such as moxifloxacin 
ophthalmic solution or equivalent and a topical steroid such as Lotemax gel or 
equivalent should be instilled in the eye. Additionally, NSAIDs such as topical 
nepafenac ophthalmic suspension or equivalent and / or oral medications such as 
naproxen or equivalent or ac etaminophen with codeine or equivalent may be given as 
needed for pain during this time.  
 
• Absorbable and / or non -absorbable conjunc tival sutures may be removed at one week 
post-operatively or later as needed.  
 
8.5 Scheduled Post -Operative Visit  Schedule  
 
8.5.1   Primary Eye  Visit  Schedule  
Subjects enrolled and eligible in the non -randomized cohort of the study and subjects 
enrolled , eligible and assigned to  the randomized surg ery group will be examined 
according to the following schedule  based on the date o f primary eye surgery .  Surgery 
on the primary eye may not occur more than 60 days after a baseline examination  
establis hing eligibility .  Visit windows are calculated on a 30 day month.  
 
 Pre-operative Baseline E valuation    (Day -60 to Day -1)  
 
 Surgery       (Day 0)  
 
 One Day Exam      (18 to 36 hours)  
 
 One Week Exam      (7 days  +/- 2 days)  
 
 One Month Exam      (1 month + /- 7 days)  
 
 Two Month Exam      (2 months +/ - 14 days)  
 
 Three Month Exam      (3 months +/ - 14 days)  
 
 Six Month Exam      (6 months +/ - 21 days)  
 
 Twelve Month Exam      (12 months +/ - 45 days)  
 
 Eighteen Month Exam     (18 months +/ - 45 days)  
 
 Twenty -four Month Exam     (24 months +/ - 60 days)  
  
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 21  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 8.5.2  Subjects Randomized to the Control Group  – Visit  Schedule  
Subjects enrolled , eligible and assigned to the  randomized control group will be examined 
within the visit windows according to the following schedule.  
 
 Enrollment Randomization     (Day 0)  
 
 Three Month Exam      (3 months +/ - 14 days)  
 
 Six Month Exam      (6 months +/ - 21 days)  
   
Subje cts in the rand omized control group that have completed the 6 month follow -up exam 
may elect to undergo placement of the VisAbility  Implant.  For these subjects, the 6 month 
visit will serve as the baseline eligibility examination.  Subjects that undergo  surgery will 
be examined  in accord ance with  the primary eye visit schedule shown above.    
 
8.5.3  Fellow Eye Visit  Schedule  
Subjects undergo ing surgery in the fellow eye will be examined according to the following 
visit schedule.  The one week and one month e xaminations may be combined  with visits 
for the primary eye if the visit windows permit.  After the one month  visit, the fellow eye 
will be examined at the same time as scheduled follow -up visits for the primary eye.  
 
Surgery       (Day 0)  
 
 One Day Exam      (18 to 36 hours)  
 
 One Week Exam      (7 days  +/- 2 days)  
 
One Month Exam      (1 month +/ - 14 days)  
 
If the fellow eye surgery is 61 to 180 days  after the primary eye surgery, the fellow eye will 
be examined postoperatively after  the one month  visit,  on a separate visit schedule for the  
3 and 6 month visits only, established based on the same intervals and visit windows as 
shown above for the pri mary eye. Subsequent to the 6 month visit, the fellow eye will be 
examined at the same visit as the primary ey e. Fellow eye and OU data will be recorded as 
attributable to the fellow eye visit timing  through the fellow eye 6 month postoperative visit.  
 
8.5.4 Fellow Eye S upplemental Baseline  Examination   
Fellow eye surgery may be performed 61 to 180 days after the baseline examination  that 
has determined eligibility if a safety exam is performed and the findings do not alter the 
subject’s continued eligibility.  The following clinical parameters  will be evaluated  in the 
safety exam : 
 
1. Medical h istory  
2. BCDVA  
2. Slit lamp biomicroscopy  
3. Goldmann tonometry  
4. Pupillometry  
5. Poster ior pole  examination.  
 
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 22  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 If fellow eye surgery is to be performed 18 1 days or more after a baseline exam  
determining eligibility , a complete  baseline examination must be repeated.   Baselin e 
efficacy data for the fellow eye and for OU will always be from the baseline examination 
established prior to the primary eye surgical intervention .  
 
8.5.5  Long -Term Follow -Up  
Long-term follow -up (up to an additional 3 years beyond the end of this stud y) may be  
requir ed by  the FDA  for this study . If required s tudy participants will be examined 
according to the following schedule based on the primary eye surgery if they  choose to 
participate,  
 
Thirty -six Month Exam     (36 months +/ - 60 days)  
Forty -eight  Month Exam     (48 months +/ - 60 days)  
Sixty Month Exam      (60 months +/ - 60 days)  
 
The clinical parameters to be recorded for these long -term follow -up examinations  will be  
established in accordance with the FDA’s requirements.  
 
8.6 Data Collection  
Samp le paper source documents will be provided by the Sponsor for each subject enrolled and 
determined eligible in the study and will be completed by the Investigator or Sub -Investigator at 
the time of  the subject examination.  The source documents  will be  completed in a clear and 
legible manner in black  or blue  ink and then signed and dated by the Investigator as indicated on 
the form.  Any correction will be made by drawing a single line through the incorrect entry, adding 
the correct entry, and then initiali ng and dating the corrected entry.  
The information  recorded on the source documents  will then be entered into the electronic case 
report form (eCRF) in the Electronic Data Capture (EDC) System by the Investigator, Sub -
Investigator o r designee.  The origin al dated and signed source document  will be kept in the 
subject ’s study file at the Investigat or’s site.  Instructions for the entry of data into the EDC will be 
provided to the clinical sites.   
8.7 Study Completion  
Subjects are considered to have complet ed the study when they complete the 24 month exam 
regardless of earlier missed visits. The length of participation of subjects in the study is as follows.   
 
• Subjects enrolled and eligible in the non -randomized surgery cohort and subjects that are 
enrolled and eligible in the randomized surgery group as part of the randomized sub -study 
will participate in the study for 24 months.  
 
• Subjects enrolled and eligible in the control group  of the ra ndomized sub -study who  elect 
not to under surgery will participate i n the study for 6 months.  
 
• Subjects enrolled and eligible in the control group of the randomized sub -study who elect 
to undergo surgery after 6 months in the observation period will partic ipate in the stu dy for 
30 months.  
 
 
 
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 23  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 8.8 Subject Termination or With drawal  
Subjects may be terminated from the study if the Investigator believes that continu ed participation 
in the study may jeopardize the subject’s health or welfare.  Subjects may also elect to withdraw 
from the study at their discretion.  Every effort w ill be made to encourage the subject to maintain 
compliance with the protocol and to continu e in the study.  Further, e very effort will be made in 
both instances to conduct examinations as determined by the Investigator to ensure the safety of 
the subject.   The Sponsor should be notified promptly by the Investigator upon the termination or 
withdr awal of a subject by completion of the Study Exit form.  Terminated or withdrawn subjects 
may not be replaced with additional enrolled and eligible subjects. Subjec ts who have all implant 
segments removed (explanted) from both eyes will be exited from the study after at least 3 months 
post-explant  follow -up. 
 
  
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 24  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 9.0 INVESTIGATIONAL MATERIALS  
The investigational materials provided for the clinical study of the VisAbili ty™ Implant System 
include the following:  
• VisAbility  Implant  
• VisAbility  Incision System : 
• VIS Scleratome  
• VIS Docking Station  
• VIS Feeder Tube and VIS Shuttle  
• VIS Instrument Set  
9.1 VisAbility  Implant  Segment  
The VisAbility  Implant is a curved scleral implan t segment that is injection molded from 
polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA), a material with an extensive history of long -term implantation in 
the human eye, including intraocular lenses (IOLs).  Four (4) V isAbility  Implant segments are 
placed in a single presby opic eye to improve near vision.  
Each VisAbility Implant  segment consists of 2 pieces, a main body with 2 legs and a center insert. 
The center insert has trans -longitudinal grooves on both sides that correspond to 2 small “rails” 
on the interior edges of t he legs of the main body ( Figure 1 ). These features allo w the insert to 
be smoothly snapped into place in the main body. The design of the VisAbility Implant  segments 
includes stabilization feet at each end intended to fixate at the entrance and exit sides  of the 
scleral tunnel incision, thereby preventing disp lacement or migration of the implanted 
VisAbility Implant  segments. The VisAbility Implant  segments are provided sterile in a Tyvek® 
peel pouch.  
 
FIGURE 1:  VISABILITY IMPLANT  SEGMENT SHOWING 2 INTER LOCKING PIECES AND  
STABILIZATION FEET 
Each VisAbility Implant  segment is implanted in a scleral tunnel approximately 4.0 mm 
posterior to the corneal limbus through scleral belt loop incisions centered at the 10:30, 
1:30, 4:30 and 7:30 oblique quadrants.  Figure 2  shows a human eye implanted with th e 4 
VisAbility  Implants.  
 
 
 
 
 
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 25  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
  
 
FIGURE 2: PLACEMENT OF VISABILITY IMPLANT  SEGMENTS  
9.2 VisAbility  Incision System  
The VisAbility  Incision System consists of the specialized surgical instruments provided to creat e 
precisely positioned scleral tunnels:  
• VIS Scleratome  
• VIS Docking Station  
9.2.1  VIS Scleratome  
The VIS Scleratome ( Figure 3 ) is a custom designed disposable Scleratome used to create 
the scleral tunnel incisions into which the VisAbility Implant s segments  are placed.  The VIS 
Scleratome is designed to create consistent scleral tunnel incisions for implantation of the 
VisAbilit y Implant  segments. Ultrasound imaging is performed as part of the patient screening 
examination to confirm that the thickness of th e sclera in the region of placement of the 
VisAbility Implant  segments  satisfies the requirements for making the scleral inc isions. The 
VIS Scleratome  is provided sterile in a disposable plastic tray with a Tyvek® cover and is for 
single patient use only.  
 
FIGURE 3: VIS SCLERATOME  
9.2.2  VIS Docking Station  
The VIS Docking Station ( Figure s 4A and 4B) is a template made of titanium and medical 
grade stainless steel that is temporarily fixated on the eye centered around  the geometric 
corneal limbus to provide  a guide for placement of the VIS Scleratome .   The VIS Scleratome 
docks with the VIS Docking S tation to provide a consistent location for the scleral tunnel 
incisions ( Figure s 5A and 5B).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE S 4A AND 4B: VIS DOCKING STATION  
 
 
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 26  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
  
 
FIGURE S 5A AND  5B: VIS SCLERATOME IS USED WITH VIS DOCKING STATION  
  
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 27  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 When the VIS Docking Station is placed on the eye, a point on the VIS Docking Station is 
positioned to align with the 6:00 and 12:00 o’clock hour mark s on the patient’s limbus  
(Figure 4 ) corresponding to the radial center of the inferior and superior recti muscles . The 
surgeon is then able to verify that the VIS Scleratome docking channels in the oblique 
quadrants are properly located between the rectus muscles.  The VIS Docking Station is then 
temporarily fixated to the eye with 4 titanium double helix twist picks . The VIS Scleratome is 
then docked, 1 quadrant at a time, into each of the channels located at the 1:30, 4:30, 7:30, 
and 10:30 clock positions of the VIS Docking Station. The VIS Scleratome is docked using 
the “locating ridge” on the blade guard of the Scleratome  (see Figure 5).   
Actuate the Scleratome by turning the integrated winding knob in the clockwise direction. After 
placing the VIS Scleratome in position on the sclera usin g the VIS Docking Station, the 
actuator button on the Scleratome  handle is p ressed, releasing and retracting the blade and 
creating the scleral tunnel. The Scleratome  is then reloaded for the next actuation by turning 
the integrated winding knob in the clo ckwise direction.  
The VIS Docking Station is a re -usable instrument that can be sterilized by standard autoclave 
procedures.  It is provided in a plastic case along w ith the other re -usable surgical instruments.  
Directions for cleaning and autoclave steri lization of the VIS Docking Station and the other re -
usable surgical instruments are provided to the surgeon . 
9.3 VIS Feeder Tube and VIS Shuttle  
After the scleral tu nnels have been formed, the VisAbility Implant  segments are inserted using 
the VIS Feeder Tube and VIS Shuttle.  The VIS Feeder Tube is made of PTFE (Teflon), a 
commonly used medical grade polymer.  The soft, lubricious and flexible PTFE tubing provides 
the optimal means of traversing the lamellar scleral tunnel with the least amount of externa l stress 
on surrounding tissue.  Each VisAbility Implant  main body can be loaded into a VIS Feeder Tube 
by the surgical assistant prior to transport from the assistan t’s sterile workspace to the surgeon 
for implantation.   
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 28  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 The VIS Shuttle is a titanium in strument consisting of 2 sections: a trailing section, cylindrical in 
shape, which is inserted into the tubing of the VIS Feeder Tube, and a leading section that 
tapers from the tubing outer diameter down to a dull round tip to facilitate positioning into the 
scleral tunnel.   
The VIS Shuttle is inserted into the larger end of the VIS Feeder Tube.  The main body of the 
VisAbility Implant  segment is compressed into the other end.   The VIS Shuttle is then passed 
through the scleral tunnel, pulling with it th e VIS Feeder Tube with the compressed main body of 
the VisAbility Implant  segment.  As the tube exits the tunnel, the trailing stabilization feet on the 
legs of the i mplant catch the entrance of the tunnel and hold it in place as the tubing is removed, 
and the forward locking stabilization feet open to engage the exit incision.  Final assembly of the 
implant follows, as the center insert is positioned and snapped into place creating a single 
VisAbility Implant  segment.  Figure 6  shows how the VisAbility Imp lant main body is used with 
the VIS Feeder Tube and VIS Shuttle.   
Figure s 7A, 7B and 7C shows how the VIS Feeder Tube and VIS Shuttle are used to place the 
VisAbility Implant  segments in the scleral tunnel.  
 
FIGURE 6:  VISABILITY IMPLANT  MAIN BODY, VIS FEEDER TUBE AND VIS SHUTTLE (LEFT TO RIGHT ) 
 
 
FIGURE S 7A, 7B AND  7C:  PLACEMENT OF VISABILITY IMPLANT  SEGMENTS WITH  
VIS FEEDER TUBE AND VIS SHUTTLE  
  
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 29  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 The VIS Feeder Tubes are provided sterile in a Tyvek® peel pouch.  The VIS Shuttle is a 
re-usab le component that can be sterilized by standard autoclave procedures.  Four (4) VIS 
Shuttles are provided in a plastic case along with the other re -usable surgical instruments.  
Directions for cleaning and autoclav e sterilization of the VIS Shuttles and th e other re -usable 
surgical instruments are provided to the surgeon.  
9.4 VIS Instrument Set  
The VIS Instrument Set contains an array of Class 1 re -usable manual surgical instruments, 
including the VIS Docking Station and the VIS Shuttles.  All of these inst ruments are manufactured 
from 6Al 4V titanium alloy and/or medical grade stainless steel ma terials that have a lengthy 
history of safe use in ophthalmic surgical procedures.  These instruments are provided non -sterile 
in a plastic case .  They may be steril ized by standard autoclaving  procedures and are provided 
with instructions for cleaning and sterilization.   
9.5 VisAbility Implant  Removal  
In the event that VisAbility Implant  segments require removal, this can be accomplished easily by 
utilizing the VisAbility Implant  Removal Cutte r instrument provided in the VIS Instrument Set to 
remove the locking barbs from solid end of the VisAbility Implant  segment , then using forceps to 
withdraw the remaining implant segment through the scleral tunnel ( Figure s 8A, 8B and 8C). 
 
 
FIGURE S 8A, 8B AND  8C: VISABILITY IMPLANT  REMOVAL PROCEDURE  
 
  
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 30  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 10.0 ADVERSE EVENT R EPORTING  
An Adverse Event (“AE”) is any untoward sign, symptom or disease observed during the course 
of the study regardless of the suspected cause.  Conditi ons or diseases that are pre-existing or 
chronic but stable are not Adverse Events .  Changes in pre-existing or chronic condition s or 
disease s that are consistent with natural disease progression are not Adverse Events.   
10.1 Serious Adverse Events  (SAE)  
An A dverse Event should be classified as a S erious Adverse Event (“SAE”) and reported as such, 
if it meets one or more of the following criteria:  
• It results in death (i.e., the A dverse Event actually causes or leads to death) . 
 
• It is life threatening (i.e. , the A dverse Event places the subject at immediate risk of death) . 
 
• It is considered sight -threatening (i.e., the A dverse Event involves loss of vision at the time 
of diagnosis and carries a relatively grave prognosis of irrevocable loss of vision withou t 
timely high risk intervention ). 
 
• It requires or prolongs inpatient hospitalization  (i.e., the A dverse Event requires  at least a 
24-hour inpatient hospitalization or prolonge d hospitalization beyond the expected length 
of stay ) Hospitalization or prolonged  hospitalization for diagnostic or elective surgical 
procedures for preexisting conditions  are not SAEs . 
 
• It results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity (i.e., the A dverse Event results in 
substantial disruption of the subject’s ability to c onduct normal life functions) . 
 
• It results in a congenital anomaly/birth defect in a neonate/infant born to a mother exposed 
to the investigational product . 
 
• It does not meet any of the above serious criteria but may jeopardize the subject or may 
require m edical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed above.  
If a subject is hospitalized to undergo a medical or surgical procedure as a result of an A dverse 
Event, the event responsible for the procedure, not the procedure itself, should be recorded as 
the event. (For example, if a subject is hospitalized to undergo coronary bypass surgery, record 
the heart condition that necessitated the bypass ). 
Investi gators must notify Refocus of any SAE within 24  hours of observing or learning of the 
event.  For initial SAE reports, Investigators should record all case details that can be gathered 
within 48 hours on the SAE Form and fax immediately upon completion to Refocus . 
10.2 Unanticipated Adverse Device Effects (UADE)  
An unanticipated adverse dev ice effect (UADE) is any serious adverse effect on health or safety 
or any life -threatening or sight -threatening problem or death caused by or associated with a 
device, if that effect, problem, or death was not previously identified in nature, severity or degree 
of incidence. UADEs also include any unanticipated sig ht-threatening events and any other 
unanticipated serious problem associated with a device that relates to the rights, s afety, or welfare 
of subjects.  
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 31  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 Investigators must notify Re focus of any UA DE within 24 hours of observing or learning of the 
event.  Refocus  will be responsible for informing Regulatory Authorities and all other IRBs and 
Investigators participating in the study of the UADE.    
10.3 Adverse Event Assessment  
All subjects who have  been exposed to the study treatment will be evalua ted for Adverse Events  
as defined in this  protocol . All adverse events, regardless of severity and whether or not  they are 
ascribed to the study treatment, will be recorded in the source documents using st andard medical 
terminology. Pre-existing conditions or diseases present at baseline that remain stable or change 
in a manner consistent with natural disease progres sion are not considered Adverse Events.   
All Adverse Events will be evaluated beginning at the time of onset, and evaluation will continue 
until resolution or until the investigator determines that the subject’s condition is stable. The 
investigator will take appropriate and necessary therapeutic measures required for resolution of 
the Adverse Event. Any medication necessary for the treatment of an Adverse Event must be 
recorded on the concomitant medication source document .  
All AEs will be character ized by the following criteria:  
• Event term  
• Intensity or severity  
• Expectedness  
• Relationship to stu dy treatment  
• Outcome  
• Treatment or action taken.  
Whenever possible, recognized medical terms should be used when recording AEs. Colloquialisms 
and/or abbreviations should not be used. Only one medical concept, preferably a diagnosis instead 
of individual sy mptoms, s hould be recorded as the event.  
If known at the time of reporting, a diagnosis (i.e., disease or syndrome) should be r ecorded on 
the source document  rather than individual signs and symptoms (e.g., record congestive heart 
failure rather than dyspn ea, rales, and cyanosis). If a constellation of signs and/or symptoms 
cannot be characterized with a single medical diagnosis or syndrome and they are considered 
unrelated to an encountered syndrome or disease at the time of reporting, these individual eve nts 
should be recorded as separate AE s (e.g., if congestive heart failure and severe headache are 
observed at the sa me time, each event should each be recorded as an individual AE). If a 
diagnosis was not initially reported, and is subsequently established  it should be reported as 
follow -up information  and the original AE documents updated accordingly . 
Adverse Events oc curring secondary to other events (e.g., sequelae) should be identified by the 
primary cause; a "primary" event, if clearly identifiable, sh ould represent the most accurate clinical 
term to record as the AE event term.  For example:  
Orthostatic hypotension    fainting and fall to floor   head trauma   neck pain  
The primary event is orthostatic hypotension  and the sequelae are head trauma and n eck pain.  
 
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 32  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 10.4 Classification of Adverse Events by Intensity  / Severity  
All Adverse Events should be graded on a four-point scale (mild, moderate, marked, severe) for 
intensity/severity. These definitions are as follows:  
Mild: Transient discomfort; no med ical intervention/therapy required and does not 
interfere with daily activities.  
Moderate:  Low level of discomfor t or concern  with mild to moderate limitation in daily 
activities; some assistance may be needed; minimal or no medical intervention/therapy 
required.  
Marked: Considerable discomfort with limitation in daily activities, some assistance 
usually required; me dical intervention/therapy usually required.  
Severe: Extreme discomfort and limitation in daily activities, significant assistance 
required; significant  medical intervention/therapy required.  
There is a distinction between the severity and the seriousness of an Adverse Event. Severity is 
a measurement of intensity; thus  a severe reaction is not necessarily a Serious Adverse Event. 
For example, a  headache may be severe in intensity, but would not be serious unless it met one 
of the criteria for Serious Adverse E vents.  
10.5 Classification of Adverse Events by Expectedness / Relatedness  
All AEs will be evaluated as to whether they are expected or un expected, as defined below:  
Expected (anticipated):  An Adverse Event is expected when the nature, severity, or 
degree of incide nce was previously described.   
Unexpected (unanticipated): An Adverse Event is unexpected when the nature, severity, 
or degree of incidence  was not previously described.  
    All AEs will be evaluated as to whether they are related to the device , as defined below:  
Not Related : Strong evidence exists that the Adverse Event definitely has a cause other 
than the investigational devic e (e.g. pre -existing condition or underlying disease, 
concurrent  illness, or concomitant medication), or the investigational device cannot be 
implicated based on the available information  
Possibly Related : There is a temporal association with the investig ational device and 
it cannot be excluded as a cause but other etiologies are also likely to be the cause based 
upon available information  
 
Probably Related : There is a temporal association wit h the investigational device 
which makes a causal relationship p robable where other etiologies are possible but 
unlikely to be the cause, based upon available information.  
Definitely Related : Strong evidence exists that the investigational device definitel y 
caused the Adverse Event.   There is a temporal relationship be tween the event onset and 
the investigational device and the subject’s clinical state and concomitant therapies have 
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 33  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 been ruled out as a cause, based upon available information.  
10.6 Adverse Event Outcome  
The clinical outcome of an A dverse Event will be recorded and characterized as follows:  
• Resolved without sequelae  
• Resolved with sequelae (specify)  
• Ongoing (i.e. continuing at time of study discontinuation)  
• Death.  
10.7 Treatment or Action Taken  
The clinical treatment of an A dverse Event will be documented a nd characterized as follows:  
• None  
• Medical Intervention  
• Surgical Intervention  
• Other  
10.8 Anticipated Adverse Events  
Adverse Events  that might reasonably be expected to occur i n this study are listed below. The 
time periods refer to the exam visit that occur s corresponding  to the post -operative follow -up visit 
schedule  (i.e., 3 months means the 3 month  postoperative visit) .  Exams for the primary eye and 
fellow eye may be done at the same visit if windows permit.   For purpose of determining 
whether a fellow eye event is an Adverse Event, the time period used shall be based on the date 
of the fellow eye surgery.  
    
These specific examples of anticipated A dverse Events include, but are not limited to:  
 
 Intraoperative Events  
• Scleral perforation  
• Scleral perfora tion with vitreous prolapse  
Lids and Lashes  
• Ptosis  
• Onset of or worsening to severe clinically significant lid margin disease  
 (e.g., blepharoconjunctivitis, blepharitis, meibomitis, meibomian gland 
dysfunction, etc.) after 3 months  postoperative   
Cornea  
• Corneal dellen after 1 week  postoperative  
• Corneal abrasion > 2mm after 1 week postop erative  
• Dry eye signs (moderate or severe)  of corneal and/or conjunctival staining, etc. , 
 requiring prescription medication after 6 months  postoperative  
• Corneal edema (mode rate or severe) after 1 month postoperative   
• Corneal infiltrate or ulcer  
  
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 34  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 Conjunctiva/Sclera  
• Conjunctival cyst  
• Conjunctival thinning or erosion  
• Moderate or severe conjunctival injection at 3 months  postoperative  or later  
• Subconjunctival hemorrhage after 3  months  postoperative  
   
Anterior Segment, Iris, Lens  
• Pupil abnormalities p ersisting after 3 months  
• Grade 4 anterior segment ischemia  (corneal edema, anterior chamber reaction,  
  and decreased pupil reactivity) * 
• Anterior chamber  cells or flare greater than  mild at Day 1 through 1 Week  
• Anterior chamber  cells or flare after 1 week postoperative  
• Intraocular Inflammation other than anterior chamber cells and flare (e.g.,vitritis)  
• Two grade change in lens opacity compared to baseline on two consecutive  
 post-operative visits  
• Displaced or missing implant seg ments  
Intraocular Pressure  
• Hypotony  (IOP < 6mmHg)  
• Increase in IOP of > 10mm Hg over baseline or IOP > 30mm Hg at two  
 consecutive visits at 1 week or later  
 
BCDVA Loss  
• Decrease in BCDVA of greater than or equa l to 2 lines (≥10 letters ETDRS)  
 at 3 months or later  
Fundus  
• Choroidal effusion  
• Retinal detachment  
• Retinal or vitreous hemorrhage  
Secondary Surgical Intervention  
• Implant segment removal  
• Exposed implant segments or conjunctival retraction requiring conjunc tival re -
approximation   
Other  
• Eye pain  requiring oral prescription pain medication after 1 week postoperative  
• Allergic reactions to medications, devices, sutures or anesthesia  
• Other findings worsening two grades from baseline to a grade of +3 or +4  
 
* Refer to Appendix 6: Anterior Segment Ischemia (ASI): Detection, Mitigation and Reporting   
  
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 35  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 11.0 STATISTICAL METHODS  
This is a prospective, multicenter study with a randomized, controlled sub -study that is designed 
to evaluate the safety and effectiveness of  the scleral implant procedure. The percentage of 
primary eyes achieving the effectiveness endpoint will be evaluat ed at 12 months postoperatively.  
Within the study cohort, a subgroup will be randomized on a 1:1 ratio to a surgery group and a 
control grou p.  Subjects in the randomized control group will not receive surgery and will be 
examined at 3 months and 6 months .  After completion of the 6 month observation period , subjects 
in the randomized control group will be eligible to receive surgery as part o f the 360 subject cohort.  
This randomized controlled sub -study will be used to evaluate the effectiveness of the s cleral 
implant procedure in the randomized surgery group compared to effectiveness in the randomized  
control group at 6 months postoperativel y. 
 
The effectiveness endpoint, hypotheses, sample size calculations, analysis population, handling 
of missing data , analysis methods, and analysis of safety data are as follows.  
 
11.1 Effectiveness Endpoint  
The effectiveness endpoint is:  
 
Achievement of d istance corrected near visual acuity (DCNVA) of Snellen equivalent 20/40 
or better (at 40 cm)  and at least 10 letters (ETDRS) improvement in DCNVA  in the primary 
eye.  
 
11.2 Statistical Hypotheses  
For the effectiveness endpoint, two objectives must be met.  
 
Objective #1:  
The scleral implant procedure is defined as successful if 75% or more of primary eyes 
achieve the effectiveness endpoint at 12 months postoperative. The corresponding 
statistical hypothesis is as follows:  
 
H0 (null hypothesis):   p < 0.75  
Ha (alternative hypothesis):  p  0.75 
Where, p is the probability that subjects achieve the effectiveness endpoint at 12 
months postoperative  (12-month responder rate) . 
 
Objective #2:  
An analysis of the randomized surgery group and randomize d control grou p will be 
conducted.  The randomized  surgery group is defined as successful if the percentage of 
primary eyes achieving the effectiveness endpoint at 6 months postoperative (6-month 
responder rate) is higher than the percentage in the randomized  control gr oup.  The 
corresponding null and alt ernative hypotheses are as follows:  
 
H0 (null hypothesis):   p1 ≤  p 2   
Ha (alternative hypothesis) :  p1 > p 2  
Where:  
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 36  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 ▪ p1 is the percentage of primary eyes in the randomized  surgery group 
who achieve the  effectiveness en dpoint at  6 months.  
▪ p2 is the percentage of primary eyes in the randomized  control group 
who achieve the effectiveness endpoint at 6 months.  
 
The primary eye is defined as the subject’s dominant eye and the eye that will undergo 
surgery first.  It is inten ded that all subjects w ill also undergo surgery in the fellow eye at 
a subsequent date as specified in the protocol.  
 
11.3  Sample Sizes  
Both Objective #1 and #2 will need to be statistically significant in order to determine the 
effectiveness of the stud y device.  Therefore th e two -sided significance level of 0.05 is not 
adjusted for the multiplicity.  
 
Full Study Cohort Effectiveness Endpoint  
The sample size calculation for the statistical hypotheses described for Objective #1 in Section 
11.2 is based on  the following criteria:  
 
• The two -sided significance level = 0.05 (or one -sided significance level = 0.025).  
• The statistical power = 90% at p = 0.825.  The assumption of true responder rate 
of 0.825 is based on the simple average of success rate observed i n previous 
Refo cus clinical study data, as follows:  
• Disposable Scleratome group had an observed success rate of 88%.  
• Re-usable Scleratome group had an observed success rate of 77%.  
• Simple average of 88% and 77% is 82.5%.  
• Binomial distribution is used for s ample size calculation.  
Based on the criteria above for Objective #1, 330 treated primary eyes should be available 
for analysis at 12 months. If a dropout rate of 10% of subjects by 12 months is considered, 
then the surgery cohort should include a pproximat ely 360  treated primary eyes.   
 
For safety analysis, i n order to detect an Adverse Event (AE) with a true probability of 
occurrence among subjects of 1% with 95% probability, based on the binomial distribution, 
a sample of at least 299 eyes would be requi red (in accordance with ANSI Z80 29 
18Nov2013 AIOL [rev 20]).  Assuming a drop -out rate of approximately 10% of subjects by 
12 months, the surgery cohort should include a minimum of 333 treated primary eyes.  
 
A sample size of 3 33 treated primary eyes will m eet the sample size requirements for both 
safety and ef fectiveness. The study cohort is planned for 360 surgery subjects at up to 14 
study sites.  However, n o site may enroll and determine to be eligible more than 20% of 
the subject surgery cohort.  
  
Rando mized Sub -study  
The sample size for Objective #2 in Section 11.2 is based on the following criteria:  
 
• The two -sided significance level = 0.05 (or one -sided significance level = 0.025).  
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 37  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 • Based on the randomized control group data collected in IDE G970152, th e 6-
month responder rate is estimated as 10% for the  control group.  
• Based on the surgery group data collected in IDE G970152, the 6 -month 
responder rate was lower than the 12 -month responder rate.  Therefore, it is 
assumed that the 6 -month responder rate o f the randomized surgery group in this 
study will be  approximately 0.75.   
• The statistical power = 90%.  
• Fisher’s exact test is used for sample size calculation.  
 
Based on the criteria above, a sample of 1 4 randomized surgery group primary eyes and 
14 rando mized control group primary eyes at 6 months will en sure a power greater than 
90% for Objective #2, using a one -sided alpha of 0.025.   
 
A sample size of 30 randomized surgery group subjects and 30 randomized control group 
subjects has been selected which will account for a possible 10% subject drop -out rat e 
and allow for greater accuracy in point estimates for both groups.  This randomized sub -
study will be conducted at 3 clinical sites.  Sites will be chosen based on availability of 
equipment for addition al sub -study measures, such as availability of an iT race unit (Tracey 
Technologies, Houston, TX), and the ability and willingness of the site to participate in the 
additional sub -study.  The target enrollment at each of the 3 sites in the randomized sub -
study will be 20 eligible subjects to provide an even distribution.  However, no site may 
enroll and determine eligible more than half of the randomized sub -study cohort or 30 
subjects.      
 
11.4 Cohort Population  
Potential subjects will sign a screening co nsent to undergo preliminary screening for eligibility that 
consist s of standard of care eye examinations.   Subjects who may be eligible based on the 
preliminary screening criteria and are willing to participate in the study will sign a full informed 
conse nt and are considered enrolled. At that tim e, the study specific examinations required to 
complete the baseline examination will be administered to determine eligibility for the 
study.   Subjects who have signed the full informed consent but do not meet all  of the inclusion 
and exclusion criteria wi ll be considered enrolled but ineligible for the study.   The reason for the 
disqualification will be recorded and reported.   
  
Safety Cohort: All eyes (both primary and fellow eyes) that have undergone surgical pr eparation 
of the ocular surface.  
 
Effective ness Cohort:  All primary eyes that have been implanted with at least one implant 
segment and primary eyes of subjects that have been enrolled and determined eligible in the 
randomized control group.   
 
Figure 9, below, summarizes the status of enrolled subjects and the cohort populations for the 
study, except that the randomized control group is not shown.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 38  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
  
 
 
 
FIGURE 9 – ILLUSTRATION OF STUDY POPULATION AND ACCOUNTABILITY  
 
  

PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 39  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 11.5 Subject Accountability  
 
The following terms and definitions will be used for the accountability of the study population and are 
based on the definitions found in ANSI Z80.29 Rev 018, section B.5.3 as modified and explained 
below.  
• Enrolled – the total number of subjects that have  signed the full informed consent.  
• Enrolled but ineligible – the total number of subjects that have signed the full 
informed consent but do NOT  meet all of the inclusion/exclusion criteria.  
 
• Enrolled and eligible – the total number of subjects that hav e sig ned the full 
informed consent and meet all of the inclusion/exclusion criteria.  
• Surgical Withdrawal – Subjects (eyes) that have been enrolled and determined  eligible but 
do not undergo surgical preparation of the ocular surface for any reason.  
 
• Discontinue d– Subjects (eyes) that have discontinued treatment prior to the visit window 
associated with the form as a result of death, the removal of all 4 implant segments 
(explant), or any other reason except lost to follow -up.  
• Explanted Eye – Eyes tha t underwent  implantation surgery, but have had all 
implanted segments removed.   
 
• Lost to Follow -up – Subjects that have withdrawn from the study after initial eye surgery or 
subjects that have missed the visit window associated with the form and all subsequent 
sched uled visits despite documented efforts by the Investigator to schedule the subject for 
follow -up.  
 
• Missed Visit – Data for subjects  (primary eyes) that is not available for a follow -up visit 
within the specified visit window associated with the form , but data is available for a 
subsequent follow -up visit for such subject .   
 
11.6 Analysis of Effectiveness Cohorts  
For the primary analysis of Objective #1, all observed 12 -month data of the surgical primary eyes 
will be included in the effectiveness analysis.    Missing data will not be imputed except that 
explanted primary eyes will be imputed as failures.  
 
For the primary analysis of Objective #2, all reported 6 -month data of the randomized primary 
eyes will be included in the analysis.  Missing data will be imputed as follows:  
 
• Randomized Control Group:  In the abs ence of 6 month visit data, the nearest available 
data recorded between and including the 3 month visit up to the 6 month visit will be 
utilized.  Since this randomized control group does not receiv e the benefit of the surgery 
during this 6 month observati on period, the lost to follow -up and missed visit rate could be 
higher and since no intervention occurs during the 6 month period, this imputation of 
missing data is warranted.  In the absence of an y observed data between the 3 month visit 
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 40  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 and 6 month visi t, this missing data will not be imputed since  failure  to achieve the 
effectiveness endpoint is expected.  
• Randomized Surgery Group:   
• Explanted primary eye s will be imputed as failures.  
• In the abse nce of 6 month visit data, the nearest recorded data after  6 months up 
to and including 12 -month visit data will be used.  This imputation is warranted as 
the visit data between 6 and 12 months provides a predictive indicator of 6 month 
results. In the abs ence of any observed data between 6 and including 12 month s, 
this other missing data will not be imputed.   
 
11.7  Baseline Demographic Characteristics  
Demographic data including, but not limited to, age, race, sex and ethnicity and baseline 
characteristic s including, but not limited to, DCNVA, UCNVA, UCDVA, BCDV A, manifest 
refraction spherical equivalent (MRSE), cycloplegic refraction spherical equivalent (CRSE), wi ll 
be reported for each subject.  Baseline characteristics such as age, sex, race, and near visual 
acuity will be summarized . 
 
11.8 Analysis of Effectiveness Data  
As noted previously, both Objective #1 and Objective #2 of the primary effectiveness endpoint 
must be satisfied in order for the study to be considered a success.  
 
 Analysis of Objectiv e #1:  
The one -sided 97.5% lower confidence limit of the 12-month responder  rate will be 
calculated based on the exact binomial distribution.  This goal is met if the one -sided 
97.5% lower confidence limit of the 12-month responder  rate is at least 75%.  
 
The per centage of primary eyes achieving the Effectiveness Endpoint at 12 months will 
be compared among the study sites.  The Fisher’s exact test will be used to evaluate the 
possible study site effect. If the site effect is significant, i.e., p -value ≤ 0. 15, the n  
12-month responder  rates stratified by study site will be provided and the average of the 
site 12-month responder  rates will be calculated. The normal distribution approximation 
will be used to  estimate the one -sided lower 97.5% confidence limit for the  average  
12-month responder  rate. 
 
Fisher’s exact test will also be used to assess the effects of subject sex, race and age 
category at surgery on the 12-month responder  rates for primary eyes us ing a p -value of 
0.15.  For this analysis, age will be categorized into 3 interval groups (i.e., 45 -49, 50 -54, 
and 55 -60).   
  
 Analysis of Objective #2:  
The number and percentage of primary eyes achieving the Effectiveness Endpoi nt at  
6 months will be su mmarized for the randomized surgery group and randomized control 
group separately.  The two -sided Fisher’s exact test will be used to compare the difference 
between 6-month responder  rates of the two randomized groups.   
 
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 41  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 In order  to assess potential diffe rences of randomized group allocation and/or site  
6-month responder  rates, a logistic regression analysis examining with the following will 
be performed:  
 
• treatment effect (the randomized surgery group and the randomized control  
group at that same site),   
• study site effect (site by site success rate comparison), and  
• site by treatment interaction  
 
If there is a significant difference (p  ≤ 0.15) in treatment effect, study site effect, or a 
significant interaction effect between stu dy site effect and treatme nt effect (p  ≤ 0.15), then 
the 6-month responder  rate for each study group and the difference in the 6-month 
responder rate  between the two randomized groups (p treatment  - pdeferred ) will be summarized 
by each study site.  
  
Sensitivity Analysis of Objectiv e #1:  
Sensitivity analysis will be performed for Objective #1 using the following imputation 
methods for missing 12 -month data:  
 
• Best Case Analysis: All discontinued primary eyes will be imputed as effectiveness 
failures. F or primary eyes lost to follow -up or for primary eyes missing 12 -month visit 
data, the best value from any protocol scheduled visit at 1 month or later (1 month, 3 
month or 6 month visit) will be used . If such visit data does not exist for a primary eye, 
the effectiveness will be imputed  as a success.    
    
• Worst Case Analysis: All discontinued primary eyes will be imputed as effectiveness 
failures.  For primary eyes lost to follow -up or missing 12 month visit data, the worst 
value from any protocol schedu led visit at 1 month or later (1  month, 3 month or 6 
month visit) will be used.  If such visit data does not exist for a primary eye, the 
effectiveness will be imputed as a failure.    
 
• Tipping Point Analysis:  All discontinued primary eyes will be imputed  as effectiveness 
failures.  For  primary eyes missing 12 -month visit data for reasons other than 
discontinued, effectiveness will be initially be set to success.  At this step, the lower 
limit of the one -sided 97.5% confidence intervals (CI) will be calcul ated.  Serial 
calculations will then be performed using a decreasing number (i.e., n -1, n-2, …1) of 
successes to determine the maximum number of additional failures allowed for the 
lower bound one -sided  97.5% CI of the effectiveness endpoint percent estim ate to 
achieve or exceed 75% suc cess.   
 
Sensitivity Analysis of Objective #2:  
• Tipping Point Analysis:  All discontinued primary eyes will be iteratively imputed as 
effectiveness success or failures.   Let n 1 and n 2 be the number of discontinued primary 
eyes for the randomized surgery gr oup and the randomized control group, 
respectively.   For the n 1 discontinued randomized surgery group primary eyes, they 
can be imputed as 0 failures, 1 failure, 2 failures, and up to  n1 failures, for a total of 
(n1+1) possible imputations.  For the n 2 discontinued randomized control group primary 
eyes, there are (n 2+1) possible imputations.   Therefore, there are (n 1+1) × (n 2+1) 
possible combinations of success and failure imputations for these discontinued 
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 42  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 primary eyes.   For each of these possible imputati ons, the lower limit of the one -sided 
97.5% confidence intervals (CI) will be calculated.   The imputations that have the lower 
one-sided 97.5% CI < 75% will be identified.    
11.9 Analysis of Safety Data  
Safety data such as BCDVA, slit lamp findings, and f undus findings will be summarized 
descriptively (mean, standard deviation, minimum, and maximum for continuous outcomes, and 
counts and percentages for categorical outcomes) for primary and all eyes.  
 
For IOP at each visit, the mean, standard deviation, mi nimum and maximum  and change from 
baseline  will be summarized for all implanted eyes.   Additionally, number and percentage of eyes 
with a IOP change from baseline of “decrease > 10 mmHg”, “decrease ³ 5 mmHg to ≤ 10 mmHg”, 
“change within ± 4 mmHg”, “increas e³ 5 mmHg to ≤ 10 mmHg”, and “increase > 10 mmHg” will 
be prepared for each study visits.  
 
Manifest spherical equivalence (MRSE) will be summarized descriptively with the 95% 
confidence interval for the mean for primary eyes and all eyes at each visit.  Additionally, the 
same analyses will be performed on the MRSE adjusted by normal aging (i.e. , minus 0.082 D 
per year1,2,3,4). 
 
11.10  Analysis of Other Clinical Parameters  
Means, st andard deviations, and ranges will be derived from the continuous measurements; 
numbers and percentages will be used for summarizing the categorical outcomes.  No specific 
claims will be made based on outcomes not pre -specified as an endpoint and no p-values will be 
presented for analyses without a pre -specified hypothesis.  
 
11.11 Analysis of Patient Reported Outcomes (NAVQ)   
The NAVQ instrument will be scored using Rasch analyses consistent with the analytic framework 
used during development.  An interval score for near visual function will be produced for each 
participant at each assessment.  This score will plotted against b inocular DCNVA and correlations 
explored.  
 
The pre - and post -surgery comparison will be made using data from the 12 month visit and p aired 
t-tests.  The NAVQ score will also be evaluated across visits, with adjustments for correlated data 
within patients b eing assessed on multiple occasions using Generalized Estimating Equations.  
 
There is an option of ‘Not applicable’ within the respo nse categories and these responses will be 
scored as 0.  This is necessary as not all study subjects may engage in the acti vity described and 
may therefore be unable to comment on their vision during the named activity.  Rasch analyses 
can still be complet ed with missing data, although some precision in the estimate of the score for  
                                                           
1Grosvenor T and Skeates  PD. Is there a hyperopic shift in myopic eyes during the presbyopic years? 
Clin Exper Optom  1999; 82:236 -243 
2Charman WN. Developments in the correction of presbyopia I: spectacle and contact lenses. Ophthalmic 
Physiol Opt 2014; 34:8–29 
3Saunders  H. A longi tudinal  study  of the age-dependence  of human  ocular  refraction  – I. Age-
dependent changes  in the equivalent  sphere.  Ophthalmic  Physiol Opt  1986; 6:39 
4 Gudmundsdottir E, Arnarsson A, Jonasson  F. Five -Year Refractive Changes in an Adult Population: 
Reykjavik Eye Study. Ophthalmology 2005; 112:672 -677 
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 43  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 near visual function will be lost.  Subjects  will be encouraged to complete all questions and 
missing data will not be imputed.   
 
The PRO data will not be used to support speci fic labeling claims, thus this assessment is not a 
formal study endpoint.  The PRO data will be described in the product la beling using descriptive 
statistics only. The difference between the baseline and 12 month NAVQ scores will be calculated 
for each pa rticipant to determine if there is a measurable improvement in subjective report of near 
visual function.   Correlations be tween the change in near visual function (NAVQ score) and 
overall satisfaction (0=completely satisfied; 4= completely unsatisfied) an d changes in objective 
measures of monocular and binocular DCNVA will be investigated using correlation coefficients 
in linear regression models.  It is hypothesized that there would be a moderate positive correlation 
between DCNVA and NAVQ score based on previous associations found between this instrument 
and visual acuity5.  
  
The stability of any improvement in near visual function (NAVQ score) will be assessed by 
evaluating the change in scores across the post -operative follow -up visits (6, 12, 18 and 2 4 
months) using Generalized Estimating Equations (GEE) models.   
 
Responses to the NAVQ questions will be used to develop a n initial raw score based on the scale 
shown on the NAVQ. The NAVQ was developed using the Rasch model and is recommended to 
be score d using item response theory. [1]  As the NAVQ will be administered before and after 
surgery,  all response data will be scored using the Andrich Rating Scale model for polytomous 
data in WinSteps (Version 3.80.1 Chicago, IL).  Interval scores will be produced for each 
participant based on  their responses to the 10 -item NAVQ before surgery and at e ach follow -up 
visit and rescored onto a 0 -100 scale for ease of interpretation.  Rasch analysis weights the items 
and the scales for the responses to adjust for the varying level of difficulty for  the tasks described 
in each item . 
 
11.12 Additional Sub -studies 
For sub -studies, only observed data will be used for analysis and only descriptive statistics will 
be performed.  All statistical analyses for sub -studies will be exploratory, since no formal  
secondary objective is specified in this statistical method s section .  
 
  
                                                           
5 Buckhurst, P.J., et al., Development of a questionnaire to assess the relative subjective benefits of 
presbyopia correction.  J Cataract Refract Surg, 2012. 38(1): p. 74 -9 
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 44  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 12.0 STUDY MONITORING  
Sponsor or CRO personnel will monitor all clinical studies in accordance with FDA guidelines. 
Study monitoring will involve the following elements:  
• Sponsor or CRO personnel will meet with Investigators prior to the init iation of the study in 
order to review the adequacy of the facility, equipment and clinical personnel with respect to 
the needs of the study and to familiarize the Investigator and clin ic staff with the protocol.  
 
• Sponsor or CRO personnel will meet with In vestigators and clinic staff at initiation of the time 
of study to ensure that subjects are being properly consented, the protocol examination 
methods are being complied with and that s tudy data is being properly recorded.  
 
• Sponsor or CRO personnel will me et with the Investigator and clinic staff at any time during 
the study regarding study conduct to ensure ongoing compliance with the protocol and data 
recording requirements.  
 
• Sponsor or CRO personnel will maintain ongoing email and telephone communicatio n with 
the Investigator and clinic staff regarding study conduct.  
 
• The CRO shall select, train and manage qualified contract personnel to visit each 
Investigational site to review and m onitor source documents  and electronic data in 
accordance with FDA guid ance.  
  
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 45  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 13.0 REFERENCES  
1. von Helmholtz H. Uber die akkommodation des auges. Albrecht Von Graefe Arch Opthalmol 
1855;1:1 -89. 
2. Coleman DJ. Unified  model for the accommodative mechanism. Am J Ophthalmol 
1970;69:1063 -1079.  
3. Coleman DJ. On the hydraulic suspensio n theory of accommodation. Trans Am Ophthalmol 
Soc 1986;84:846 -868. 
4. Coleman DJ, Fish SK. Presbyopia, accommodation, and the mature catenary.  
Ophthalmolgy. 2001;108(9):1544 -1551.  
5. Buckhurst, P.J., et al., Development of  a questionnaire to assess the relativ e subjective 
benefits of presbyopia correction.  J Cataract Refract Surg, 2012. 38(1): p. 74 -9. 
6. Glasser A, Kaufman PL. The mechanism  of accommodation in primates. Ophthalmology 
1999;106:863 -872. 
7. Glasser A, Campbell MCW. Presbyopia and the optical changes in  the human crystalline 
lens with age. Vision Res 1998;38:209 -229. 
8. Koretz JF, Cook CA, Kaufman PL. Accommodation and presbyopia in t he human eye. 
Changes in the anterior segment and crystalline lens with focus. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 
1997;38:569 -578. 
9. Rafferty, NS. Lens Morphology. In: The Ocular Lens, edited by: H. Maisel. New York: 
Dekker, 1985;2 -6. 
10. Duke -Elder S and Wybar KC.  The anatomy of the visual system. In: System of 
Ophthalmology, edited by Duke -Elder S.  London: Henry Kimpton, 1961;2:80 -81. 
11. Gold berg, DB.  Understanding Accommodation.  Cataract & Refractive Surgery Today 
Europe 2014  ; 20-22 
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 46  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 APPENDIX 1: EXAMINATION METHODS  
Refractions and acuity measurem ents shall be obtained by an ophthalmologist, optometrist or 
trained technician (who is superv ised directly by the ophthalmologist or optometrist).   
Manifest Refraction  
Manifest refraction will be performed pre and post -operatively using ETDRS acuity charts and 
standard phoropters. All systems will employ actual or equivalent optical distances of at least 4 
meters (13 feet) and ambient lighting will be adjusted based on chart specifications.  Chart 
luminance will fall within the ANSI required ra nge of 80 -160cd/m2 and chart contrast will be a 
minimum of 85%.  
Cycloplegic Refraction  
Cycloplegic refrac tion will be performed ~ 20 minutes after application of 1 drop of tropicamide 1% 
at select pre and post -operative visits using the same systems as for  manifest refraction.  
Instrument for Measuring Visual Acuities  
All visual acuities will be measured via t he OPTEC 6500 (Stereo Optical, 8623 W. Bryn Mawr Ave., 
Suite 502, Chicago, IL 60631 USA 1.773.867.0380 or 1.800.344.9500 ).  This system utilizes a lens  
system to simulate various test distances for distance, intermediate and near.   The Optec 6500 
has a mi croprocessor controlled internal illumination system that results in constant luminance of 
85cd/m2; therefore, normal ambient lighting may be used as l ighting conditions are not a factor in 
the testing set up.  The manufacturer’s instructions for use will be provided to each Investigational 
site. 
Distance Visual Acuity  
Distance visual acuity will be measured at a simulated (optical) distance of 20 feet.     
Intermediate Visual Acuity  
Intermediate visual acuity will be measured at a simulated (optical) dist ance of 66cm.      
Near Visual Acuity  
Near visual acuity will be measured at a simulated (ocular) distance of 40cm.  
Determination of Near Add  
The add power will be determined by adding plus lenses, using the Optec 6500 at a 
simulated distance of 40cm.  
Determination of Dominant Eye  
The subject will be advised to perform the following steps for determination of the dominant eye.  
 
1. Hold your hands at ar m's length out in front of you.  Your palms should be pointing forward - 
in other words, you should be looking  at the backs of your hands.  
2. Make a "triangle. " Extend both of your thumbs so that they're roughly perpendicular to the 
rest of the hand. Overlap your hands so that the space between makes a triangle. Your two 
1 
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 47  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 thumbs should be at the bottom of the triangl e, while the edge and index finger of each hand  
form the two remaining sides.  
 
3. The triangle space between your hands acts as a viewing window - you should be able to 
clearly see objects through it.  
 
4. Look at an object through the triangle hole made by your hands with both eyes open.  Find 
a nearby object  that's small enough (or far enough away) that you can see the whole object 
through the viewing window between your hands. This can be anything - a door knob, a 
coffee mug, or even a letter on a faraway billbo ard. 
 
5. Focus on the object.  Try to focus your ey es on the object between your hands - not your 
hands themselves. Your hands should become somewhat blurry, while the object remains 
clear and in -focus. It's important to line this object up directly in front o f you and to stare 
straight at it - turning you r head to either side can distort your results.  
 
6. For best results, at this point, make minor adjustments to your hands so that the object 
you're looking at fits almost exactly within the edges your viewing win dow. In other words, if 
your triangle is bigger  than the object you're looking at, move your hands together to make 
it smaller, and vice versa.  
 
7. Alternate closing each eye to see which gives better vision.  Close one eye, then open it and 
close the other. E ach time you switch eyes, the object you're loo king at should do one of 
two things. It should either become obscured behind one of your hands  or remain visible. 
Next, try your other eye. Your dominant eye is the one that allows you to see the object 
while it remains open.  
 
Scleral Thickness Measurement  
Scleral thickness will be measured and printed using the Sonomed Ultrasonic Biomicroscope 
(UBM). The manufacturer’s instructions for use will be provided to each Investigational site.  
Pupil size, shape and r eaction  
The NeurOptics  Pupillometer is a portable, battery -operated, hand -held device used to measure 
the iris’ reaction to a standardized level and duration of light.   The manufacturer’s instructions for 
use will be provided to each Investigational site.  
The pupils of both ey es will be assessed at each and every visit as follows:  
• Round  
• Elliptical  
• Irregular  
  
2 
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 48  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 Slit Lamp Evaluation – Grading  
Lids / Lashes  
Blepharitis (using the Efron Grading scale and reference drawings):  
o 0 = none  
o 1 = trace (1+)  
o 2 = mild (2 +) 
o 3 = moderate (3 +) 
o 4 = marked / severe (4)  
 
Meibomian Gland Dysfunction (using the Efron Grading scale and reference drawings):  
o 0 = none  
o 1 = trace (1+)  
o 2 = mild (2+)  
o 3 = moderate (3+)  
o 4 = marked / severe (4)  
Cornea  
Superficial punctate keratitis (using t he Efron Grading scale and reference drawings):  
o None  
o Mild 
o Moderate  
o Marked or Severe  
 
Corneal abrasion:  
o None  
o Tiny 
o 1-2mm  
o 2-3mm  
o > 3mm  
Corneal edema (using the Efron  Grading scale and reference drawings):  
o 0 = no evidence of corneal edema  
o 1 = trace corneal edem a (edema involves 0% to 5% of the cornea)  
o 2 = mild corneal edema (edema involves 5% to 25% of the cornea)  
o 3 = moderate corneal edema (edema involves 26% to 50% o f the cornea)  
o 4 = marked/severe corneal edema (edema involves > 50% of the cornea)  
 
Corneal end othelial gutatta:  
o 0 = no corneal gutatta  
o 1 = rare corneal gutatta  
o 2 = few corneal gutatta  
o 3 = many corneal gutatta  
o 4 = marked/severe corneal gutatta with stromal  edema and bullous lesions  
o Other abnormal corneal findings (specify)  
  
3 
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 49  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 Conjunctiva  
Conjunctiva  injection (using the Efron Grading scale and reference drawings):  
o 0 = none  
o 1 = trace (1+)  
o 2 = mild (2+)  
o 3 = moderate (3+)  
o 4 = marked/severe (4)  
 
Subconjunctival hemorrhage:  
o 0 = none  
o 1 = less than or equal to 1 quadrant  
o 2 = 2 quadrants  
o 3 = 3 -4 quadrants  
 
Conjunctiva edema:  
o 0 = none  
o 1 = trace  
o 2 = mild  
o 3 = moderate  
o 4 = marked/severe  
Other abnormal conjunctival findings (specify)  
Crystalline Lens  
Crystalline  lens pathology  using  the LOCSII  scale  (with reference  photos  as published  
in Archives  of Ophthalmology  July 1989)  as follows:  
o Normal  
o Lens  Opacity  
o Other  Abnormal Findings  (specify)  
If lens opacity, please complete the following:  
o Nuclear/Color Opalescence:    □ N0     □ N1    □ N2    □ N3  
o Cortical:             □ C0        □ C1     □ C2     □ C3      □ C4  
o Posterior Subcapsular:     □ P0        □ P1     □ P2     □ P3  
o Anterior Subcapsular:      □ A0        □ A1     □ A2     □ A3 
  
4 
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 50  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 Anterior Chamber  
Cell and flare will be graded according to the SUN grading scheme (using a 1x1 mm slit 
lamp beam):  
SUN Grading for AC  Cells  
GRADE  CELLS IN 1x1mm Field  
0 <1 
0.5+ 1-5 
1+ 6-15 
2+ 16-25 
3+ 26-50 
4+ 50+ 
 
SUN Grading for AC Flare  
GRADE  Description  
0 None  
1+ Faint  
2+ Moderate (iris/lens details clear)  
3+ Marked (iris/lens details hazy)  
4+ Intense (fibrin/plastic aqu eous)  
 
Iris appearance  
o 1 = Normal  
o 2 = Abnormal (if abnormal, please describe)  
  
5 
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 51  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 Intraocular Pressure  
Intraocular pressure will be measured using Goldmann applanation tonometry.  Measurements will 
be taken according to the published guidelines set forth b y Michael A. Kass [ Kass MA. 
Standardizing the measurement of intraocular pressure for clinical research . Guidelines from the 
Eye Care Technology Forum. Ophthalmology. 1996 Jan;103 (1):183 -5]. Copies of this guideline will 
be provided to all sites.  
Goniosco py 
 The angle will be evaluated using a 3 or 4 mirror lens and the following grading scheme:  
o Grade 3 – 4 (Wide Open: Angle > 20 degrees < 45 degrees)  
o Grade 2 (Moderately Narrow: Angle = 20 degrees)  
o Grade 1 (Extremely narrow: Angle = 10 degrees)  
o Grade 0 (An gles Closure: Angle + 0 degrees  
o Other:  (Specify)  
A-Scan  
Axial length and ACD will be measured and recorded.  
Internal Examination  
Peripheral Fundus Examination  
o Normal  
o Abnormal (if abnormal, please describe)  
Cup to Disc Ratio  will be assessed  by means of a  dilated  fundus  exam using  condensing  
lenses  and the slit lamp  biomicroscope.      
Other Observations:  
Photographs, drawings and / or standard descriptive ophthalmic terms may be used as needed to 
describe any other ocular findings.  
Randomized Sub -Study – Additional Examinations  
 
All subjects enrolled an d eligible in the randomized sub -study, i.e., both the randomized surgery 
group and the randomized control group, will undergo the following additional testing:  
 
• Wavefront measurements  
• Defocus curves  
Wavefron t Measurements  
 
Wavefront measurements will be recorded for each eye will be tested individually with a target at 6 
m (distance), 66 cm (intermediate or 1.50 dpt), 40 cm (near or 2.5 dpt), and at the preferred reading 
distance (PRD) which will be recorded  in centimeters a nd diopters. Three wavefront scans will be 
captured at each target distance.  
Each of the wavefront scans will be analyzed by the iTrace software (version 5.3.1) for the following 
parameters:   6 
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 52  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 1. Refraction (sphere and cylinder) over a calcul ated 4 mm entry p upil,  
2. Zernike polynomials up to the eighth order,  
3. RMS of higher order aberrations (HOA)  
4. Total depth of focus (DoF).  
Defocus Curves  
Defocus curve testing will be performed to subjectively measure the effectiveness of presbyopia 
correction by using minus and plus lenses.  Testing will be performed using phoropter with a 
computer -controlled LCD distance chart with ETDRS letters at 6m/20ft.  The phoropter will contain 
the subject’s best manifest distance refraction.  
A range of lens powers from  -4.00 D to +2.00 D will be used over the best distance refraction for 
this testing. The lens power in the phoropter will be progressively reduced in +0.50 D steps, starting 
at -4.00 D and moving towards +2.00 D.  After each lens power change, the letters should be  
changed to a new set of letters of the same size or smaller and the letters read per line should be 
recorded.  The testing should proceed as follows:  
1. The subject should be seated and looking through a phoropter with the contralateral eye 
occlude d. 
 
2. The c omputer -controlled ETDRS letter chart should be used at a 6 m/20ft distance from 
the patient.  
 
3. The patient's best distance correction should be dialed in to the phoropter.  
 
4. With the patient viewing the smallest letters corresponding to the patien ts BCDVA,  a –
4.00D lens should be added to the patient’s distance correction.  (If the subject cannot 
read any of the letters, the letter size should be increased by 1 line until the acuity can 
be measured.)  As the letters are read, the correct letters sh ould be c ircled and the visual 
acuity should be recorded with the corresponding lens power.  To prevent memorization, 
the letters should be changed to a new set of letters between each lens change and 
reading attempt.  
 
**If the patient reads all the letter s on the line correctly, then switch to the next smallest 
line of letters and instruct that patient "Can you read any letters on this next smallest 
line?" If the patient again reads all letters correctly, repeat until either some or all letters 
in the next  smallest  line are missed.  Once the subject has missed letters, do not proceed 
to the next line and only record the letters that the subject got correct. (If 5 letters on the 
line are read plus 2 letters on the next line down, the total is 7 letters). In addition,  record 
the corresponding acuity for the previous line, where the all the letters were read 
correctly.  
  
7 
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 53  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
  
5. Repeat the testing sequence on the fellow eye with the other eye occluded.  
 
The above defocus testing protocol is based on the following pu blication with associated 
graphs:  
 
Win-Hall DM, Glasser A.: Objective accommodation measurements in pseudophakic 
subjects using an autorefractor and an aberrometer.  J Cataract Refract Surg. 2009 Feb;35 
(2):282 -90. 
   
8 
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 54  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
  
APPENDIX 2: VISABILITY IMPLANT SYSTE M SURGICAL PROCEDURE  
The VisAbility Implant System surgical procedure is performed as an outpatient procedure by 
the Investigator as described and categorized in eight major steps below.  
1. Marking  
Approximately ten minutes prior to  the procedure, a topica l anesthetic such as proparacaine 
ophthalmic solution or equivalent is instilled in the eye(s).  With the patient in the standing or seated 
position and fixating on an object straight ahead, mark the limbus at 12:00 and 6:00 o’clock  with a 
sterile gentian violet marker.  Reinforce these marks as needed and place on drop of Brimonidine 
0.1% or 0.15% or equivalent on the patient’s operative eye.  Have the patient close their eyes for 
two minutes.  
In the operating room, with the patient ’s vital signs monitored , use systemic relaxation as needed 
(e.g. Valium, Fentanyl, and/or Versed).  
Clean the eye and the skin around the eye in the usual manner for sterile intraocular surgery and 
drape the patient and their lids and lashes from the surgical field.  
Use a locking  eyelid speculum that will hold the eyelids widely open.  
Instill sterile 2% xylocaine drops without epinephrine or equivalent topically to the cornea and 
conjunctiva, drying off any excess.  
Positively identify the superior and inferior rectus muscle insert ions and the anterior ciliary arteries 
accompanying them such as by gently blanching the area with a flat spatula or the flat handle of a 
forceps or other alternative method.  Confirm that the previously placed 6:00 and 12:00 o ’clock 
limbal marks correspon d to the axis of the center of the respective rectus muscle insertion or correct 
their position to this axis as needed.  
On a relatively dry limbus, align the positioning barrel to the geometric limbus and rotate it to align 
the internal grooves with previo usly placed limbal marks.  Place the barrel marker in its positioning 
slits and mark the eye.  
2. Peritomy  
Re-instill sterile 2% xylocaine drops without epinephrine or equivalent topically to maintain good 
anesthesia.  
Make two 3 mm or longer vertical conjunc tival incisions approximately 0.5mm from the limbus at 3 
and 9 o’clock using a 0.3 forceps and blunt Westcott scissors.  
Taking care not to tear the conjunctive, utilize blunt Westcott scissors to bluntly dissect posteriorly 
into sub -Tenon’s space at an ang le to avoid the horizontal plane of the medial and lateral recti 
muscles.  
 1 
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 55  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 With a blunt cannula on a syringe containing sterile 2% xylocaine solution without epinephrine or 
equivalent, enter the sub -Tenon’s space posteriorly.  Advance the cannula and then  sweep the 
cannula toward the limbus. Inject about 0.25 cc of the sterile 2% xylocaine solution without 
epinephrine or equivalent in each of the 4 quadrants.  
After the sub -Tenon’s injection of anesthetic has been c ompleted, perform a 360 degree limbal 
peritomy of the conjunctiva and Tenon’s capsule.  
Upon completion of the peritomy inspect the sclera at 3, 6, 9 and 12 o’clock for bare sclera in 
preparation for placement of the VIS Docking Station. Utilize an absorben t stick, forceps if additional 
blunt disse ction of the sclera is required.  
CAUTION:  
If after completing the conjunctival peritomy, the surgeon observes the insertions of the rectus 
muscles nearer than 4.5mm posterior to the limbus, aborting the procedure a nd closing the 
conjunctiva must be conside red. This is done to avoid the risk of impinging upon the vasculature 
supplying the anterior segment, thus decreasing the risk of Anterior Segment Ischemia.  
CAUTION:  
Due to the potential of a detrimental effect on perfusion and / or scleral thickness, bipo lar 
and / or thermal cautery should not be used during surgery.  
 
 3. VIS Docking Station Placement  
Place the VIS Docking Station on the eye by holding the unit sligh tly above the eye. Carefully drape 
the conjunctiva over the four corners and perimeter of the VIS Docking Station to avoid engaging 
any conjunctiva in the helical twists.  
Center the VIS Docking Station on the geometric limbus by keeping the inside diameter  of the unit 
concentric with the limbus. Maintain the desired rotational position by align ing the 6 and 12 o’clock 
internal arrow points on the unit with the 6 and 12 o’clock limbal marks and the docking channels 
on the unit with the oblique line marks fro m the VIS Barrel Marker.  
Once concentricity and rotational position have been satisfactori ly achieved, use the VIS Actuation 
Tool to rotate each of the four fixation points clockwise 180˚ to the stop while pressing down on the 
VIS Docking Station to engage  the helical twists into the limbal sclera.  
After fixation, visually confirm satisfactory x/y and rotational positioning and verify sufficient four 
point fixation of the VIS Docking Station by lightly proptosing the eye with gently lifting of the unit. 
Reposition if necessary.  
  
2 
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 56  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 4. Lamellar Scleral Tunnel Creation  
Each of four tunnels will be created solely with the VIS Scleratome positioned by the VIS Docking 
Station.  USE OF A MANUAL LAMELLAR BLADE IS NOT ALLOWED FOR USE IN CREATING 
OR AUGMENTING ANY SCLERAL TUNNEL . 
Tunnels should be created in the following seque nce to facilitate hand positi oning and ensure the 
superior temporal quadrant tunnel is created last, due to the sclera in that quadrant being the 
thinnest on the eye:  
1. Inferior Nasal   (IN) 
2. Superior Nasal  (SN) 
3. Inferior Temporal  (IT)  
4. Superior Temporal  (ST)  
Beginning with the inferior nasal quadrant, rotate and proptose the eye to provide adequate 
exposure of the sclera. Confirm the sclera near the VIS Docking Station is bare. Perform additional 
blunt dissection if required.  
Prior to placing the VIS Sclerato me, verify the winding knob h as been fully actuated.  
Dock the VIS Scleratome locating ridge to the corresponding channel in the VIS Docking Station 
and line up the blade guard with the surrounding edge.  While maintaining this docked position, 
bring the VI S Scleratome perpendicular to  the sclera such that the footplate is flat to bare sclera.  
With a balance of pressure with the VIS Scleratome and proptosis with the VIS Docking Station, 
activate the VIS Scleratome by advancing the slide button toward the ey e. 
Confirm the length of each  lamellar scleral tunnel created using the VIS Spatula.  
CAUTION:  
When advancing the VIS Spatula thru the scleral tunnel, the leading tip must be directed 
outwards (anteriorly) along the roof of the tunnel to facilitate exiting from the tunnel and to avoid 
unintentional scleral perforation.  
To minimize manipulation of the eye, a VIS Implant Segment should be placed in each Lamellar 
Scleral Tunnel made prior to proceeding to the creation of the next Lamellar Scleral tunnel.  If fo r 
any reason, only one or two  Lamellar Scleral Tunnels are able to be implanted with VIS Implant 
Segments, these segments will be removed from the eye.  
The VIS Scleratome requires winding of the knob prior to creation of the next scleral tunnel.   
3 
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 57  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 5. Implantation of the VisAbility I mplant Segment  
To facilitate hand positioning, inferior quadrant tunnels (IN and IT) should be entered forehand from 
the inferior end of the tunnel. Superior quadrant tunnels (SN and ST) should be entered backhand 
from the superior end of the tunnel.  
While  continuing to maintain fixation of the eye with the VIS Docking Station, immediately after the 
creation and verification  of each tunnel, grasp the Shuttle / Implant segment assembly 
approximately 12mm from its leading edge and insert the front end of the shuttle into the tunnel and 
advance the VIS Shuttle / Implant segment assembly into the tunnel.  
CAUTION:  
When advancing t he VIS Shuttle / Implant segment assembly thru the scleral tunnel, the leading 
tip must be directed outwards (anteriorly) along the roo f of the tunnel to facilitate exiting from 
the tunnel and to avoid unintentional scleral perforation.  
After 3mm or more o f the VIS feeder tube has exited the tunnel, grasp the exited VIS feeder 
tube and pull the assembly until the feet of the VIS implant s egment have exited the tunnel.  
CAUTION:  
While pulling the VIS feeder tube thru the scleral tunnel, pay close attention t hat the Feeder 
tube does not begin to disinsert from the VIS implant segment prematurely.  
After the feet of the VIS implant segment hav e exited the tunnel, continued pulling of the VIS feeder 
tubing will disinsert it from the VIS Main Body Implant allowing  the compressed feet to open, 
effectively locking the VIS Main Body Implant into the tunnel.  
Using the VIS Center insert implant loadin g forceps, grasp the top edges of the VIS Center Insert 
implant at the midpoint and guide it into the receiving slot of t he VIS Main Body Implant. Use the 
VIS Center Insert implant loading forceps to then clasp the VIS center insert implant fully into the 
VIS main body Implant. A snap -like action will be apparent when the VIS center insert implant has 
been properly placed, I n addition, the outer edge of the assembled VIS Implant Segment will line 
up flush and smooth.  
Repeat tunnel creation and implantation for each of the four quadrants. If for any reason, only one 
or two Lamellar Scleral Tunnels are able to be implanted with  VIS Implant Segments, these 
segments will be removed from the eye.  
  
4 
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 58  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 6. VIS Docking Station Removal  
Use the Actuation Tool to rotate each of the four fixation points of the VIS Docking Station 
counterclockwise 180 ˚ to the stop, to disengage the helical twists from the limbal sclera and 
completely unlock the device from the eye.  Once free of fixation, carefully lift the VIS Docking 
Station from the eye to avoid causing any corneal abrasion with the underside helical twists.  
After lifting the unit  from the eye, rinse away any excess clotted blood in the field. Reapply sterile 
2% xylocaine drops without epinephrine or equivalent topically  to maintain good anesthesia as 
needed.  Check the implant location by measuring from the anterior center of the implant to the 
limbus.  
7. Conjunctival Closure  
Ensure adequate hemostasis is obtained prior to closing the conjunctiva  
CAUTION:  
Due to the pote ntial of a detrimental effect on perfusion and / or scleral thickness, bipolar 
and / or thermal cautery should no t be used during surgery.  Should hemostasis be 
required, Evicel fibrin sealant (Omrix Biopharmaceuticals, Ltd., Kiryat Ono, Israel)  or 
TISSEEL  fibrin sealant (Baxter International, Inc ., Deerfield, IL)  may be used.  
 
Bring the conjunctiva into position to approximate where it will need to be located when closed.  
Starting nasally, use a 9 -0 braided Vicryl suture or equivalent with a modified mattr ess technique, 
starting nasally, close 3 and 9 o’clock as needed such as using a 3mm scleral bite tan gential to the 
limbus and a 4 -5mm conjunctival bite then at 6 and 12 o’clock as needed.  
Care must be taken to ensure a smooth, uniform, minimally wrinkled conjunctival closure.  
8. After Conjunctival Closure  
At the completion of the surgery, a removable punctual plug should be placed in the inferior 
punctum and an initial dose of antibiotic drops such as moxifloxacin ophthalmic solution or 
equivalent and ster oid drops such as prednisolone acetate 1% ophthalmic  suspension or 
equivalent should be instilled in the eye. Instruct the patient to keep their eyes closed, and use 
ice compresses to decrease swelling.  
  
5 
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 59  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 9.  Post -Operative Care  
Following surgery, physic ians should adhere to the following guidelines o f topical ophthalmic 
medications and care:  
• To help control pain postoperatively, an icepack should be applied to the eye at intervals for 
approximately 30 minutes or longer as needed.  A topical non -steroidal  anti-inflammatory drug 
(NSAID) such as nepafena c ophthalmic suspension or equivalent may also be instilled immediately 
postoperatively.  Chilled BSS may be instilled every 15 minutes and topical steroid drops such as 
prednisolone acetate 1% ophthalmic sus pension or equivalent may be used every 15 to 30  
minutes until the pupil reaction is greater than 25% as described in the next step.  Prior to discharge 
the patient should be given Diamox 500mg Sequel PO or equivalent.  
• Pupil functionality will be evaluated  postoperatively using a NeurOptics Pupillometer  every 
15 to 30 minutes until the percent pupil constriction reading is at least 25%.  A second, confirmatory 
reading of 25% or greater may be taken as soon as 5 minutes after the first.  If two pupil constri ction 
readings of at least 25% are not achieved within the first 4 hours after surgery, preparation for 
removal of the implant segments will commence.  The Investigator must remove all four implant 
segments no later than 6 hours after the implantation surg ery if the two pupil constriction readings 
of at least 25% are not achieved within 6 hours postoperatively.  
• During the first week after the surgery, antibiotic drops such as moxifloxacin ophthalmic 
solution or equivalent and topical steroid drops such as Lotemax gel or equivalent should be 
instilled in  the eye.  Additionally, NSAIDs such as topical nepafenac ophthalmic suspension or 
equivalent and / or oral medications such as naproxen or equivalent or acetaminophen with codeine 
or equivalent may be given as needed for pain during this time.  
Procedure t o Surgically Remove VIS Implant Segments  
Subjects may request to have the VIS implant segments removed at any time. The VIS Implant 
segment removal procedure, if requested and deemed safe to do so by the Inve stigator will be 
performed by the Investigator as described below.  
Magnification of the surgical area at a surgical microscope is advised.  
Preoperative sterile prep and drape is required.  
Topical anesthesia with sterile 2% xylocaine drops without epinephr ine or equivalent should be 
applied to the operative eye requiring I mplant segment removal.  A drop of Brimonidine 0.1% or 
0.15% or equivalent may also be used to decrease bleeding.  
Using a sterile sharp blade such as a 15 degree ophthalmic sharp, 18 to 21  gauge hollow injection 
needle, or equivalent, a small (2mm) scratch  down incision of the conjunctiva is made over both 
exposed ends of the VIS Implant segment.  
Use a forceps such as a .12 forceps to further expose the ends of the VIS Implant Segment from 
the overlying conjunctiva.  
  
6 
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 60  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 Once the ends of the VIS Implant s egment are un -encapsulated, grip the solid end of the VIS Main 
Body implant with the jaws of the VIS Cutter (966 -0030) with the tips perpendicular to the length of 
the implant and one tip flat  to the sclera. Ensure that the full portion of the widened extr a lamellar 
scleral tunnel portion of the VIS Main Body implant is fully enclosed within the VIS Cutter. Close the 
VIS cutter to sever the complete solid, wide end of the VIS Main Body Implant.   
Carefully remove the severed piece(s) of the VIS Main Body Imp lant segment from the Cutter and 
inspect the cut end for any barb that might remain and carefully sever it.  
Using the VIS Implant Loading Forceps, the distal end of the Shuttle forceps or othe r toothed 
forceps grasp the uncut end of the VIS Implant segment , and pull it through the tunnel with a slight 
twisting motion to remove it from the eye.  
Repeat for each Implant segment requiring removal.  
After completing removal of all required VIS implan t segments, the scleral and conjunctival areas 
that have been op ened should be assessed to see if they will heal primarily, if they need inflated 
with an intra tenon’s injection of BSS or need to be sutured with an appropriate gauge suture.  
An initial dose  of antibiotic drops such as moxifloxacin ophthalmic solution or  equivalent and 
steroid drops such as prednisolone acetate 1% ophthalmic suspension or equivalent should 
be instilled in the eye.  
A light dressing may be applied to keep the eyes closed overni ght for patient comfort.  
During the first week after the surgery , antibiotic drops such as moxifloxacin ophthalmic solution 
or equivalent and topical steroid drops such as prednisolone acetate 1% ophthalmic 
suspension or equivalent should be instilled in t he eye.  Additionally, NSAIDs such as topical 
nepafenac ophthalm ic suspension or equivalent and / or oral naproxen or equivalent may be 
given as needed for pain during this time.  
 
 
  
7 
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 61  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 APPENDIX 3: PATIENT -REPORTED OUTCOME (PRO) INSTRUMENT  
FOR USE IN PROTOCO L VIS -2014  
 
I. Introduction  
The Near Activity Visual Questionnaire (NAVQ) is a PRO instrument designed for use in study 
subjects receiving presbyopia correcting devices and is currently being used in an ongoing IDE 
study. The Near Activity Visual Questionnair e (NAVQ) consists of 10 items which are combined t o 
produce a single score for near visual function and an 11th item which is a global satisfaction 
question.  
In Protocol VIS -2014 the NAVQ will be administered at the pre -operative visit and at 6, 12, 18 an d 
24 months. The repeated assessments over the pos t-operative period will provide an indication of 
the stability of the near visual function. This schedule is appropriate for the purpose of assessing 
near vision before surgery and at a minimum of 6 months after surgery since it allows for recovery 
and ada ptation to the bilateral surgery.  The full questionnaire to be used in the IDE study of the 
VisAbility Implant System is provided in Exhibit A .   
The NAVQ is uni -dimensional and produces a single score rel ated to difficulty with near vision tasks.  
The gl obal satisfaction question will be considered on its own and is not scored with the first 10 
items.  
II. Instructions for NAVQ Use  
The NAVQ instrument should be self -administered to avoid bias in reporting, as r ecommended by 
the authors of the NAVQ. [1]   It is anticipated that completion of the NAVQ wi ll be a modest burden 
on the trial sub jects.  The layout and font size were optimized by the instrument developers for good 
legibility and self -administration, and it is being used as published.  
At designated  visits, the questionnaire will be completed by each study subject in the clinic, prio r to 
any clinical assessments of vision.  Study subjects will be instructed to answer each question about 
their recent everyday experience with near vision without any spectacle correction.  All responses 
will be docum ented by the study subjects on a paper  case report form.  Subjects will be encouraged 
to complete the full questionnaire and completed questionnaires will be checked by clinic staff to 
ensure all questions were answered.  The script to be used by clinic st aff in instructing subjects on 
how to complete the PRO instrument is provided in Exhibit C.  
It is critical that study subjects understand that they are reporting on their near visual function 
without the use of reading glasses.  It is expected that study participants will be close to emmetrop ic 
with a need for some add power for certain near tasks.  As a result, subjects will be instructed to 
answer the questions about their near vision when they are not using their reading glasses or any 
other corrective lenses.  
Testing of the NAVQ has been associated with minimal missing data, indicating that the content of 
the questions is generally relevant and acceptable to patients who have had surgical correction of 
presbyopia. [1, 3]. 
 
 
  
1 
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 62  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 III. The PRO Instrument’s Conceptual Framework  
 
The sections below describe the NAVQ and its validation using the principles described i n FDA’s 
Guidance, “Patient -Reported Outcome Measures: Use in Medical Product Development to Support 
Labeling Claims”.  
The NAVQ was designed with the stated purpose of creating a standardized questionnaire to 
subjectively assess near visual function and sat isfaction with a variety of presbyopia -correction 
techniques. [1, 2]   The NAVQ is a 10 -item questionnaire wi th an additional global question about 
satisfaction.  The 10 -items are combined into a single score where high scores indicate greater 
difficulty with near vision ta sks (Table 1). The NAVQ therefore measures the construct of difficulty 
with near visual tas ks using 10 items and the concept of ‘satisfaction with near vision’ is assessed 
separately with a single global question (Figure 1).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 1: CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK FOR THE NAVQ [1] 
 
IV. Content Validity Documentation  
 
A. Literature review and documentation of expert input:  
 
The patient perspective on the outcome of a medical intervention is helpful  because such a 
perspective may provide supplemental information both to patients and physicians regarding the 
performance of the interven tion.  The VisAbility Implant Procedure is designed to improve near 
vision in presbyopic patients.  The primary outcom e of the proposed trial is the improvement in 
distance corrected near visual acuity (DCNVA) at a distance of 40cm in the primary eye at 12  
months.  However, the VisAbility Implant Procedure is a bilateral procedure and the NAVQ may 
provide additional patie nt perspective on reduction in limitations in vision due to presbyopia.   
  
2 
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 63  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
   
A review of the literature has been completed to identify a suitable PRO instrument.  Cochener 
published a meta -analysis of outcome data for clinical trials of multifocal intra -ocular lenses in 2011 
which included literature up until June 2009.  Like the V isAbility Implant System, multifocal IOLs are 
designed to correct presbyopia.   While there was uniformity in the collection of visual acuity data, 
there was no consistency in th e questionnaires used for Patient Reported Outcomes (PRO).   
Patient satisfact ion and spectacle independence have mostly been collected as individual items, 
usually on a Likert scale (14/20 trials).  One trial used the VF -14 index, a questionnaire designed  to 
assess the impact of cataract on visual function.  
 
Although there are a nu mber of PRO questionnaires related to visual function that have undergone 
extensive validation, only one was specifically conceptualized, designed and validated for the 
assessmen t of the correction or reduction of presbyopia.  That questionnaire is the Nea r Activity 
Visual Questionnaire (NAVQ). [1-3]   
 
B. Qualitative study protocols  
The N AVQ was developed with the aim to be able to assess near visual function and satisfaction 
with a variety of presbyopia -correction techniques. [1, 2]  As the VisAbility Implant Procedure is a 
surgical correction for presbyopia, the application of the NAVQ falls within the scope of the intended 
population for this instrument .  Because NAVQ is a published instrument  for which content validity 
has already been demonstrated as described herein, Refocus Group, Inc. has not performed 
additional qualitative studies to investigate content validity.   
 
C. Origin and derivation of items with chronology of events for item genera tion, 
modification and finalization:  
 
The development of the NAVQ has been described in a publication by Gupta, et al (n=22) [2]  and 
in a second larger study by Buckhurst, et al (n=150). [1]  The proces s of item generation involved a 
review of published vision -related quality of life (VR -QOL) questionnaires to identify any items 
relating to near vision tasks.  This search found 374 candidate items. [2]  This bank of items was 
reduced by combining duplicate items and through review by ophthalmic professionals (5 
ophthalmolo gists and 3 optometrists) and 10 lay -peop le with presbyopia [2] at which time it was 
possible to add questions to cover any new areas identified.  This  review process resulted in 19 
candidate items which was reduced to a 9 -item questionnaire plus a global question about 
satisfaction using the Rasch Model. [2]   
 
Though this questionnaire was considered to be internally consistent, reliable and a valid instrument 
for assessing accommodating IOLs, the authors suggested the addition of items to better target 
patient s with good near vision and to allow assessment of other types of presbyopic correction. [2]  
Subsequently, Buc khurst  expanded the instrument to 26 items and revisited the psychometric 
properties in a population of 150 patients with varying types of corrections for presbyopia. [1]   
  
  
3 
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 64  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 The Rasch model was used to reduce the 26 items to those relevant to near visual function, the 
concept being measured. [1]  The number of items was reduced by consider ing in priority order: 
item fit statistics, item targeting, frequency of endorsement and skew an d kurtosis.  The outfit mean 
square was required to fall within the range of 0.6 to 1.4 where items below 0.6 were considered 
too predictable and those above 1. 4 were considered too variable.  The targeting was evaluated 
using a person map of items. [4]  Frequency of endorsement was kept in the range of 65 to  85% to 
ensure the questions were relevant.  Skew indicates the symmetry of the frequency distribution of 
responses and kurtosis the height of the peak of the d istribution.  Items with skew or kurtosis >2 
were excluded.  Items were removed one at a time an d item statistics recalculated each time until 
all of the items fitted the Rasch model. [1]  This final NAVQ had 10 items and a global item about 
satisfaction.  
 
D. Summary that supports content validity:  
 
Item content : The involvement of patients in review of the candidate items is recommended in 
the FDA guidance document regarding the use of PRO’s i n clinical studies. [5]  .Patient input 
was part of the development of the NAVQ instrument as described above [2].   
 
Additionally, Refocus Group, Inc. has conducted a pilot stud y to confirm whether patients who 
have undergone the VisAbility Implant Procedure understand the NAVQ and are able to answ er 
the questions.  The NAVQ was administered over the telephone to 11 post -operative subjects 
in the IDE G970152 clinical trial so the ir understanding could be ascertained.  The subjects were 
able to understand and answer all of the questions.  
   
Response Options:  During development, items were required to have frequency of 
endorsement in the range of 65 to 85% to ensure the questions we re relevant but not 
redundantly predictable. [1]  All items were originally assigned a 6 -point Likert scale, however 
the rating scale was scrutinized using category function statistics to refine the respons e scale 
and a 4 -point scale was recommended. [1]  With the 4 -point scale, respondents were ab le to 
use the scale to reliably represent their level of difficulty with the task.  For the satisfaction scale 
the 6 -point Likert scale was ret ained. All items are consistent in that higher scores represent 
greater difficulty or greater dissatisfaction.  
 
Recall period:   The questionnaire does not specify a recall period and refers to the patient’s 
current vision status.  As the tasks are commonly  encountered in everyday life , the subject 
should be able to reference a recent experience within the past few d ays relevant to all 
questions in the NAVQ. If a subject does not perform an activity or has stopped doing the activity 
for a reason other than because of their vision, they will be asked to answer “0”, for “Not 
Applicable”.  As the instrument is scored usi ng the Rasch model rather than a raw score, the 
person score can be created despite any missing data for individual items.  
 
Scoring:   The instr ument is recommended to be scored using the Rasch Model to enable 
generation of an interval score. [1]    Buckhurst validated the scoring in a clinical population 
comprised of 150 subjects including patient s with a range of corrections for presbyopia:  
monofocal, accommodating, and multifocal intraocular lenses, multifocal contact lenses and 
varifocal spectacles. The questionnaires were administered 3 months after any surgeries, 1 
month after contact lens fi tting and 3 to 8 months after varifocal spectacles were dispensed.   
 
  
4 
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 65  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 Table 1 summarizes the patient characteristics in the validation study [1] and Table 2 shows the 
NAVQ scores stratified by type of correction.  In the table, a low er score represents better near 
visual function.  
 
TABLE 1: CHARACTERISTICS OF PA TIENTS RECRUITED FOR  VALIDATION OF NAVQ [1] 
 
Type of Correction   
N=20 (13%) Monofocal IOL  
N=60 (40%) Multifocal IOL  
N=30 (20%) Accommodating IOL  
N=20 (13%) Multifocal spectacles  
N=20 (13%) Varifocal spectacles  
 
Age, mean±standard deviation [range]   
63 years±11 [30 -82] 
 
Sex, male:female   
N=66:n=84  
 
 
TABLE 2: NAVQ  SCORES RESCALED TO 1-100 FOR EACH TYPE OF PR ESBYOPIA CORRECTION [1] 
 
Type of correction   
Mean NAVQ score  ± SD  
 
Monofocal IOL   
59.0 ±  10.5  
 
Multifocal IOL   
18.9 ±  13.2  
 
Accommodating IOL   
34.2  ±  12.1  
 
Multifocal spectacles   
24.0  ±  11.6  
 
Varifocal spectacles   
17.9  ±  11.6  
 
V. Assessment of  Other Measurement Properties  
 
The attributes of reliability, validity and ability to detect change have been assessed during 
instrument development and these reports have been published. [1, 2] and are summarized as 
follows.   
 
A. Reliability:   It is important that a PRO can yield a consistent, reproducible estimate of effect.  
The repeatability of the NAVQ score h as been assessed by calculating its intra -class 
correlation coe fficient (ICC) in a sub -set of 90 patients who repeated the NAVQ two weeks 
after the first administration.  The 2 way random effects intraclass correlation coefficient 
(ICC) for test -retest rel iability was estimated as 0.72.  This can be interpreted as hig h 
reliability.  Internal consistency was also investigated and the Cronbach α coefficient was 
0.945 showing good construct validity. [1]  The instructions for completing the questionnaire 
will be scripted to ensure no variability between administrations such that the reliability of 
the instrument will be maintained during the IDE study.  
 
  
5 
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 66  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 B. Construct validity:   Buckhurst investigated the relationship between the NAVQ and 
objectively measured distance corrected near visual acuity (DCNVA, logMAR) and critical 
print size (CPS).  CPS was th e smallest print size on the Minnesota Low Vision Reading  
Test (MN -Read) chart that could be read at the patient’s maximum reading speed.  The 
correlation coefficient was 0.543 for DCNVA and 0.526 for CPS representing moderate 
correlations. [1]  The moderate correlation to reading is not surprising, since reading speed 
can also be affected by moti vation, education and intelligence; and DCNVA at a 
standa rdized distance by no means captures the variability in near tasks and preferred 
working distances among patients.    
 
C. Ability to detect change:   The person separation index (PSI) is the ratio of the  true variance 
in the estimated measures to the observed variance and indicates the number of distinct 
person strata that can be distinguished by the PRO. [6]  The NAVQ was reported to have a 
PSI of 2.92 which indicates excellent discriminant ability. [1]  Further, the NAVQ 
demonstrated the ability to distinguish between different types of presbyopia correction. [1]  
It is anticipated that the NAVQ will be able to measure a change in near visual function from 
before to after surgery and det ermine if the near visual function is relatively stable a cross 
visits.  
 
VI. Interpretation of scores  
 
The NAVQ provides a score for patient reported near visual function and satisfaction with 
presbyopia correction.  It was found to be reliable and valid, using  standard, current psychometric 
techniques. [1]  The NAVQ was also able to discriminate betwe en those with and without near vision 
difficulties as shown by the difference in mean scores by type of refractive correction (Table 3) and 
as shown by the separation index (2.92). [1]   Therefore, NAVQ interval scores provide a relative 
measure of difficulty with near visual tasks and can be compared between subjects and across 
different time poi nts.   
 
VII. Language and cultural adaptation  
 
The NAVQ was developed and validated in the United Kingdom in an English speaking population.  
The questionnaire has been pilot tested with 11 patients who have undergone the VisAbility Implant 
Procedure.  All ques tions were understood and there was no miss ing data.  Because the instrument 
has been successfully self -administered to 150 patients in the UK during development [1] and in an 
evaluation of 15 patients in the UK with a diffractive trifocal IOL [3], it is  likely that the readability is 
sufficient for an English speaking U.S. study population. As a result, the instrument will be 
administered in its original form in English without cultural adaptation.  
 
VIII. Modifications  
 
A comparison of the original NAVQ instr ument provided in Exhibit B and the PRO instrument to be 
used in the IDE clinical study, Exhibit A, shows that they are virtually identical.  The instructions, 
which have been adapted for the context of  this trial, are also virtually the same as the origin al 
NAVQ instrument.  Since there is only one presbyopic correction being considered, the field where 
type of presbyopic correction is indicated has been replaced with a single option. A subject identity  
field has been added at the top for completion by the  clinical staff to ensure proper recordkeeping.  
  
6 
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 67  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 IX. Conclusion  
 
Although the PRO outcomes are not intended to support specific labeling claims, the NAVQ 
questionnaire’s characteristics, conceptual framework, content validity, and other measurement 
properti es (i.e. reliability, construct validity, and ability to detect change) are adequate for the 
instrument to serve as an additional evaluation in the IDE investigation of the VisAbility Implant 
System.  
 
X. Key references  
 
1. Buckhurst, P.J. , et al., Development of a questionnaire to assess the relative su bjective 
benefits of presbyopia correction.  J Cataract Refract Surg, 2012. 38(1): p. 74 -9. 
2. Gupta, N., et al., Development of a near activity visual questionnaire to assess 
accommodating i ntraocular lenses.  Cont Lens Anterior Eye, 2007. 30(2): p. 134 -43. 
3. Sheppard, A.L., et al., Visual outcomes and subjective experience after bilateral 
implantation of a new diffractive trifocal intraocular lens.  J Cataract Refract Surg, 2013. 
39(3): p. 34 3-9. 
4. Stelmack, J., et al., Use of Rasch person -item map in exploratory data analysis: a clinical 
perspective.  J Rehabil Res Dev, 2004. 41: p. 233 -244. 
5. Food and Drug Administration, Patient -Reported Outcome Measures: Use in Medical 
Product Development  to Support Labeling Claims , in Guidance for Industry 2009, US 
Department of Health and Human Services,: Washington.  
6. Pesudovs, K.P., et al., The Development, Assessment, and Selection of Questionnaires. 
[Article].  Optometry & Vision Science, 2007. 84(8): p. 663 -674. 
 
  
7 
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 68  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 EXHIBIT A  
Near Activity Visual Questionnaire (NAVQ) to be used in the IDE study of the VisAbility Implant 
System  
  
8 
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 69  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
  
  
9 
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 70  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
  
 
EXHIBIT B  
Original Published Near Activity Visual Questionnaire (NAVQ)  
  
10 
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 71  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
  
  
11 
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 72  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
  
EXHIBIT C  
Manual for NAVQ A dministration  
The Sponsor shall provide training regarding the administration of the NAVQ questionnaire used in 
the clinical trial of the VisAbility Implant System.  This administrative manual is the training to be 
used by the staff at the clinical sites.  
This guidanc e includes instructions on WHEN the NAVQ is to be administered, WHERE the 
administration should take place, HOW it is to be given to the subject, HOW questions are to be 
answered and WHAT the plan is for the scoring process.  
Clinic staff is to use the scri pt provided in Section C below each time a subject is asked to complete 
the NAVQ questionnaire.   
A.  WHEN and WHERE to give the NAVQ:  
The NAVQ should be given either in the waiting room or in the examination room BEFORE the 
patient has a ny examination of their vision by the doctor or study staff. It is not necessary for the 
subject to be in complete privacy while taking the short questionnaire, but study staff will be 
instructed to insure the subject completes the questionnaire independen tly.  
B.  HOW to g ive the NAVQ and HOW to answer questions:   
1. Give the subject a pen and the paper copy of the NAVQ on a clipboard.  
 
2. It is important that the patient is instructed to answer about their experience when not 
wearing reading glasses, magnifiers or corrective le nses of any type.  Ask the subject if 
they understand what is meant by “reading glasses, magnifiers or corrective l enses.    
 
3. Verbally give the subject the scripted instructions, visually checking after each 
instruction to see if the subject apparently und erstood the instruction.  
  
4. If subjects have questions, emphasize that there is no right or wrong answer and that i f 
they no longer perform some tasks due to non -visual reasons that they should mark “X” 
in the first column.  If they have stopped doing a ta sk because of vision, they should 
mark “3” for Extreme Difficulty.   
C.  Script  for Administration of NAVQ : 
1. ‘Please  fill out this short questionnaire before we get started with the examination.  You 
will need to write in your name, date of birth and today’s  date.  Circle the answer that 
most closely reflects your amount of difficulty with near vision tasks.  There is no  right or 
wrong answer.  I will check that you have completed all questions but will not p ay 
attention to any answers.  
 
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 73  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 2. ‘You should answer the questions about your near vision when you are not wearing 
reading glasses  or using magnifiers or  corrective lenses  of any type . Please let me know 
that you understand.’   
 
3. ‘The questions are about different activities where you need to see up close.  Again, y ou 
should respond based on your experience with these activities when you are not wearing 
reading glasses.’  
 
4. ‘If you don’t do or have stopped doing the activity for a reason other than because of 
your vision – please circle ‘X’ in the first column fo r ‘not applicable.’  We would like you 
to complete all of the questions .’   
 
5. 'Please answer the questions by writing on the paper form .  Please  answer the questions 
independently without advice or input of clinic staff or family members. ’   
 
Clinic staff i s to check to determine that all questions have been answered and to ask the subject 
to complete  any unanswered questions.   Make sure that all fields are completed and that the Subject 
ID# is correct.  Place the completed form without scoring in the subjec ts’ study file.  
WHAT the plan is for the scoring process.  Scoring of the questionnaire results will not be conducted 
at the clinical sites.  The Sponsor will handle the statistical scoring process for each NAVQ 
questionnaire at a later time.   
 
  
13 12 
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 74  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
   
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 75  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
  
  
APPENDIX 5: DATA SAFETY MONITORING BOARD CHARTER  
 
 
 
Refocus Group, Inc.  
 
DATA SAFETY MONITORING BOARD (DSMB) CHARTER  
 
A PROSPECTIVE, MULTICENTER CLINICAL TRIAL OF  
THE VISABIITY IMPLANT SYSTEM (VIS)  
 FOR THE IMPROVEMENT OF NEAR VISUAL ACUITY IN PRESBYOPIC 
PATIENTS  
 
Protocol: VSI -2014  
 
Date of Protocol: October 13, 2014  
Date of Protocol Ame ndment 1: January 10, 2015   
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 76  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 1. INTRODUCTION  
This charter governs the Data Safety Monitoring Board (the “DSMB”) established by 
Refocus Group, Inc. (the “Sponsor”) for the prosp ective, multicenter clinical trial of the 
VisAbility Implant System for the improvement of near visual acuity in Presbyopic p atients 
under Protocol VIS -2014 (the “Clinical Trial”).  The charter describes; the role and 
responsibilities of the DSMB, its memb ers, conduct of meetings, its access to data and the 
manner of communication with the Sponsor.  
2. ROLE OF THE DSMB: RESPONSIBILI TIES & FUNCTION  
The primary role of the DSMB will be to ensure subject safety during the conduct of the 
Clinical Trial.  
The DSMB wi ll periodically evaluate the conduct of the Clinical Trial, adverse events and 
related safety data, and efficacy data from th e perspective of relative benefit.  The DSMB 
will make recommendations to the Sponsor as follows.  
The recommendations of the DSMB t o the Sponsor may include:  
Modification of the study protocol, subject to approval of FDA or the IRB as applicable.  
Continuat ion of the study according to the protocol and any related amendments.  
Modification of the manner of study conduct.  
Discontinuation  of the study (with provisions for orderly discontinuation in accord with good 
medical practice).  
Discontinuation of enrollme nt into the study.  
3. DSMB MEMBERSHIP  
3.1       Members  
The DSMB will consist of three members with at least two members being licensed 
ophthalmologists or optometrists.  The names and contact information of the DSMB 
members are as shown in the Appendix and will be updated periodically as needed 
should changes in DSMB membership occur. A copy of each DSMB member's 
curriculum vitae, updated a t least annually, will be maintained by the Sponsor and 
available upon request. DSMB members will not act as investigators or  sub-
investigators for the Clinical Trial and will have no involvement in the Clinical Trial 
outside their role on the DSMB. DSMB m embers may not participate in any other 
IDE clinical study of a presbyopia correcting surgical device or technique, other tha n 
studies of presbyopia correcting intraocular lenses, nor may DSMB members serve 
as a personal physician to any subject enrolled i n the Clinical Trial.  
 
 
Confidential Refocus DSMB Charter               January 10, 2015  
       Page 2  
 
 
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 77  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 3.2  Financial Disclosure and Conflict of Interest  
Each DSMB member must disclose any financial or other material interests which 
may create a potential conflict with respect to their role on the DSMB including, but 
not limited to , equity interests in the Spons or. Members of the DSMB will be 
responsible for advising the Sponsor of any change in related financial interests.  
The Sponsor will be responsible for deciding whether financial or material interests 
may impact a member's obj ectivity, and may ask a member to resign from the DSMB.  
3.3  Duration of DSMB Membership and Replacement of Members  
The DSMB membership will cover the duration of the Clinical Trial, including any 
extension of the follow -up period of the subjects.  
3.4 Replacement of Members  
If a member  cannot continue to serve on the DSMB, the reason must be 
communicated in writing to the DSMB Chairperson and the Sponsor. If a member or 
the Chairperson leaves the DSMB, the Sponsor will select an appropriate 
replacement. If  a member cannot reasonably be available for meetings of the DSMB, 
the Chairperson may request the member be replaced and the Sponsor may remove 
such member with the recommendation of the Chairperson. The Sponsor will be 
responsible for providing any new D SMB member with necessary study  related 
materials.  
 
4 DSMB MEETINGS  
The DSMB will meet in person or by conference call according to the following schedule.  
4.1  Initial Organizational Meeting  
The initial meeting of the DSMB will be to acquaint the DSMB membe rs with Protocol 
VIS-2014, Sponsor personnel, Sponsor communication, planned study conduct as 
well as other pertinent information. The DSMB may also recommend changes to this 
charter during this organizational meeting. Invited attendees include the DSMB 
members, the Medica l Monitor and the Sponsor’s representatives.  
4.2  Scheduled Meetings  
Meetings will be held by phone or in person twice per year during the Clinical Trial. 
The frequency of scheduled meetings may change at the discretion of the DSMB 
Chairpe rson depending on  subject enrollment and safety event rates. Meetings will 
also be held upon the occurrence of a device -related SAE or UADE, or at the request 
of the Medical Monitor.   
 
Confidential Refocus DSMB Charter               January 10, 2015  
       Page 3  
 
 
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 78  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 4.3  Quorum and Voting  
A quorum of two of the three DSMB members is required to hold any teleconference 
or in-person meeting. All three DSMB members must participate for a vote on any 
recommendation to the Sponsor other than normal continuance of the Clini cal Trial.  
4.4  Meeting Format  
The meeting will begin with an open s ession to review enrollment, study conduct and 
safety information generated in the Clinical Trial. Representatives from the Sponsor 
and the Medical Monitor will present the information and  answer any questions from 
the DSMB.  
A closed session will follow t o discuss safety data and any actions required by the 
DSMB regarding the available safety information. This session will be attended by 
only the DSMB members and, if requested with reasona ble advance notice, an 
independent statistician retained by the Spon sor with access to the Clinical Trial 
database. The DSMB members will discuss the safety data, formulate any 
recommendations, and conduct their voting.  
A final session will then convene to  be attended by the DSMB members and 
representatives from the Sponso r and the Medical Monitor. The DSMB will verbally 
convey its recommendations to the Sponsor's representatives. The DSMB 
Chairperson will convey written DSMB recommendations within a timely  fashion 
(within three weeks after the meeting) to the Sponsor.  
 
5       COMMUNICATION  
5.1  Data Reports  
The Sponsor will prepare and provide safety data to the DSMB in advance of each 
meeting. All available data will be used to create a summary report and s ummary 
tables of safety data, listings of adverse events and specifi c case histories for 
selected AEs, SAEs or UADEs. The data in these tables will be drawn from active 
study databases. The Sponsor and Medical Monitor shall present and explain the 
data in the open session to the DSMB and answer any questions. The DSMB 
Chairperson may, on behalf of the DSMB, communicate in advance to the Sponsor 
a request for additional information and the Sponsor shall make reasonable efforts 
to comply.  
If requested, the S ponsor will designate an independent statistician with access to 
the Clinical Trial database to be available to prepare and provide data directly to the 
DSMB regarding the Clinical Trial effectiveness outcomes.  
The DSMB chairperson will be notified by the  Sponsor or Medical Monitor upon the 
occurrence of a device -related SAE or UADE.  
If the DSMB requests additional information concerning the study data, the DSMB 
Chairperson may contact the Sponsor’s designated independent statisticians directly 
and the st atistician shall be instructed by the Sponsor to provide any informa tion 
reasonably requested.  
 
Confidential Refocus DSMB Charter               January 10, 2015  
       Page 4  
 
 
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 79  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 5.2 DSMB Minutes  
Following each meeting, summary minutes of both the open and closed meeting 
sessions will be drafted and distributed on a timely basis for approval.   Minutes from 
open session meetings will be compiled by a S ponsor representative and reviewed 
by Sponsor re presentative(s) as well as DSMB members attending the 
meeting.   Minutes from closed session meetings will be compiled by a DSMB 
member and reviewed only by DSMB members attending the meeting.   Both open 
and c losed session meeting minutes will be retained t hroughout the study by the 
DSMB Chairperson.   The minutes of both open and closed meetings will be 
approved by the DSMB at the subsequent meeting.  
Upon completion of the Clinical Trial follow -up period and th e locking of the database 
by the CRO, the DSMB w ill forward a complete set of both open and the closed 
meeting minutes to the Sponsor.  
5.3 DSMB Recommendations  
At each DSMB meeting, the DSMB will recommend whether the study should 
continue, stop, or be mod ified based on study findings. The DSMB will pro vide 
written recommendations about the trial to the Sponsor within a timely fashion but 
not longer than three weeks after the meeting. In addition, the DSMB will also 
communicate verbally with the Sponsor's r epresentatives immediately regarding any 
safety issues or other findings.  
Upon receipt of the DSMB recommendations, the Sponsor will consider the 
recommendations, review the status of the Clinical Trial, and determine a timely 
course of action.  
The Sponsor  may identify expert individuals to review the D SMB Reports. These 
individuals will not have any direct involvement with the Clinical Trial but will have 
the clinical, statistical, and regulatory expertise needed to contribute to any decisions 
on behalf of  the Sponsor. The Sponsor may seek input from re gulatory agencies and 
make a decision to accept or disregard the recommendation from DSMB. The 
Sponsor and DSMB will assure that confidentiality of the data will be maintained.  
If a DSMB recommendation is imp lemented, the Chairperson of the DSMB will 
recei ve written notification of this fact. If the Sponsor does not implement a 
recommendation, the reasons for such a decision will be documented in writing and 
provided to the DSMB Chairperson. The Sponsor will a ssume the responsibility to 
notify the regulator y agencies of all recommendations of the DSMB.  
If the DSMB recommends stopping the trial and the Sponsor agrees, the Sponsor 
will inform all regulatory agencies of the decision and notify all Investigational sites. 
Public disclosure of the decision to stop  the trial is entirely at the Sponsor's 
discretion.  
 
Confidential Refocus DSMB Charter               January 10, 2015  
       Page 5  
 
 
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 80  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 APPENDIX  
VIS-2014 Clinical Trial DSMB Member List  
XXXXXXXXX, M.D.  
Ophthalmologist/Optometrist  INSERT ADDRESS & CONTACT INFO  
 
XXXXXXXXX, M.D.  
Ophthalmolo gist/Optometrist  INSERT ADDRESS & CONTACT INFO  
 
XXXXXXXXX,  
 INSERT ADDRESS & CONTACT INFO  
 
  
Confidential Refocus DSMB Charter               January 10, 2015  
       Page 6  
 
 
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 81  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
  
APPENDIX 6: ANTERIOR SEGMENT ISCHEMIA (ASI):  DETECTION, MITIGATION AND 
REPORTING  
Anterior Segment Ischemia (ASI) is a potentially serious but most often self -limited response to 
decreased perfusion that even in s evere cases generally resolves without sequelae or detrimental 
effects on vision.  The rich collateral blood supply of the anterior segment likely explains its 
relatively benign  common clinical course.  
Decreased constriction of the pupil in response to lig ht is the earliest physiological indicator of ASI 
and serves as a bellwether indicating diminished perfusion.  Recovery of perfusion, when it occurs 
at this mild stage, avoids potential sequelae such a s persistent pupillary abnormalities.  
Monitoring the p upillary reflex in the immediate postoperative period helps prevent progression by 
allowing prompt intervention to restore perfusion while the condition remains completely 
reversible.  
In this clinical study of the VisAbility Implant, Refocus has adopted di gital infrared dynamic 
pupillometry as a sensitive indicator of neuromuscular disturbance secondary to decreased iris 
vascular perfusion in the immediate postoperative period.  Pupillometry serves the primary 
purpose of evaluating the impact of surgery on perfusion and allowing for prompt removal of 
scleral implants from eyes that demonstrate compromised perfusion, thus reversing impaired 
pupillary function and preventing pro gressive damage from ischemi a. 
Clinical Syndrome, Natural History and Severity Grad ing 
ASI represents an acute, generally self -limited response of the anterior segment of the eye to 
decreased vascular perfusion.  While mild cases most often resolve without sequelae, more 
severe cases  may develop persistent pupillary abnormalities and iris at rophy.  Though rare, 
cataract and hypotony have been reported in a few isolated, very severe cases.  
The clinical syndrome of ASI was first described in 1954 and has become recognized as an 
uncommo n complication of surgery involving the extraocular muscles .1  Risk factors for the 
development of ASI include advanced age, previous extraocular surgery, blood dyscrasias, 
hypercoagulable states, atherosclerosis, carotid artery disease and thyroid related  immune 
orbitopathy.  In the setting of strabismus surgery, these risk factors play a larger role in 
determining susceptibility to ASI than the number or combination of muscles operated.2 
Anatomical studies have demonstrated that the anterior ciliary arte ries are the source of 70 to 
80% of the circulation of the anterior segment, including the iris and ciliary body.  The long 
posterior ciliary arteries provide the remainder, along with some contribution from the 
conjunctiva .3  The anterior ciliary arteries  run along the rectus muscles, divid ing into multiple 
branches and forming three levels of collateral anastomoses near the muscles’ scleral insertion 
points.  This rich collateral circulation likely explains the rarity and generally self -limited nature of 
postoperative ASI.   
1 
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 82  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
   
Delayed perfusion of the iris as demonstrated by angiography is recognized as Grade 1 ASI .4  
However, iris fluorescein angiography is not a useful tool in predicting which patients are likely to 
progress to higher grades of ASI or de velop long -term sequela e postoperatively.9  Acutely 
decreased pupil reactivity represents Grade 2 ASI.  Anterior chamber reaction in addition to 
decreased pupil reactivity constitutes Grade 3.  Striate keratopathy, which is similar to the type of 
corneal e dema typically seen fol lowing cataract surgery, in addition to anterior chamber reaction 
and decreased pupil reactivity represents the highest level of severity, Grade 4.  
Patients with Grade 4 ASI typically experience pain and reduced visual acuity beginni ng one or 
two days afte r surgery.  Without any surgical re -intervention, a period of gradual clinical 
improvement follows, with return of preoperative visual acuity in nine weeks or less.9 It is not 
known whether medical treatment with topical or systemic anti-inflammatory agent s has any effect 
on the natural history of ASI.  Patients with severe iris ischemia may develop iris atrophy, 
decreased pupil reactivity a nd an oval or irregular pupil.  
Case reports and series in the literature reveal the natural his tory typical of ASI.  F or example, 
Forbes reported on a case of Grade 4 ASI occurring after a four muscle operation.  Striate 
keratopathy initially reduced the visual acuity to 20/200.  Over two months the vision improved to 
20/30. Iris atrophy and an irre gular pupil were the on ly sequelae .5 Keech et al described a case of 
Grade 4 ASI following a transposition procedure in a 74 year old  woman with hypertension. On 
postoperative day 1, visual acuity was reduced to 20/100.  Slit lamp exam revealed an oval pup il 
with an atonic sphincter, anterior chamber reaction and striate keratopathy.  By 6 weeks all clinical 
signs had resolved except fo r a sluggishly reactive, oval pupil .6  
  
2 
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 83  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 Saunders et al reported on a series of cases involving surgery on three extraocul ar muscles .7 Five 
adult patients developed acute ASI, including 3 with pupil signs and anterior chamber reaction 
(Grade 3) and 2 with striate keratopathy (Grade 4).  Treatment consisted of topical and systemic 
steroids.  With the exception of corectopia, t here was complete resolution of all signs within 9 
weeks postoperatively. No patient suffered permanent visual loss.  Olver and L ee reported a 
series including 17 eyes with Grade 1, 11 eyes with Grade 2 and 5 eyes with Grade 3 ASI.16 
Recovery of the iris c irculation in most patients occurred within 4 weeks of surgery.  Only 2 eyes 
in the entire series demonstrated long -term pupil changes; the re maining eyes had no sequelae.  
To further elucidate the natural history of ASI, Bagheri et al investigated ASI in a rabbit model, 
chosen for its anatomic similarity to the human, including the significant contribution of the 
vasculature of the 4 rectus muscles to nourishment of the anterior segment .8  Performing various 
combinations of surgery i nvolving from 1 to 4 mu scles, they found that 51 eyes (30.4%) 
developed signs of ASI, but in most cases inflammation and corneal edema resolved 
spontaneously and histopathology revealed no major permanent ischemic changes.  Long -term 
complications included  pupil irregularity and  decreased response to light in 12 eyes and cataract 
in 4 eyes. A single case in the 4 -muscle group showed neovascularization of the cornea and iris.  
These findings support the clinically recognized natural history of ASI, which inv olves complete 
resoluti on without sequelae in most cases.  
Digital Pupillometry  
Because pupillary dysfunction constitutes the earliest functional sign of ASI, sensitive and precise 
measurement of the pupillary response to light in the immediate postoperati ve period represents a 
useful indicator of the risk of disease progression.  Other methods of detecting changes in anterior 
segment perfusion, including iris angiography and laser Doppler flowmetry, have not been proven 
as useful.  Iris angiography is not a useful tool for predi cting which patients may develop clinical 
signs of decreased perfusion; therefore, iris angiography has not been standardized as a means 
of assessing postoperative iris perfusion, nor has it been utilized to assess the risk of sequel ae.9 
In addition, iris angiography does not reveal filling of intrastromal vessels in eyes with highly 
pigmented irides.  Further, the dye pattern is different in each individual, with a wide range of 
normal filling times and patterns. Additionally, valida ted commercial instrume nts designed 
specifically for iris angiography are not currently available, so iris angiography requires 
modification of existing equipment.10 Lastly, iris angiography adds risk due to potential reactions 
to intravenous fluorescein d ye and may also prove d ifficult due to the status of the ocular surface 
and subjects’ reduced ability to comply with the procedure in the immediate postoperative period 
due to fatigue and residual effects of intraoperative sedation.  
  
3 
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 84  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 While laser Doppler flowmetry has found uti lity in the study of the retinal and optic nerve head 
circulation, it has had only limited investigational use for the purpose of measuring the blood flow 
of the iris in humans.11,12,13  This technique requires adaptation of a laser delivery system, 
photod etector and target fixation device to a slit lamp, and while it has been used to investigate 
the effects of increased intraocular pressure and increased arterial pressure on perfusion, it has 
not to date been used to investig ate the impact of reduced blood  flow in the anterior ciliary 
arteries.14 
Therefore, digital infrared dynamic pupillometry is the optimal indicator of iris neuromuscular 
function relative to iris vascular perfusion.  Measurement of the dynamic response of t he pupil to 
standardized illumi nation is the most sensitive means to assess the eye’s recovery from surgery 
because pupillary abnormalities represent the earliest functional sign of anterior segment 
ischemia (ASI).15  The purpose of pupillometry in the imm ediate postoperative period in this study 
is to allow for timely removal of scleral implants and prevent the deve lopment of potential 
sequelae.  
Infrared digital pupillometry consists of an integrated intense light source for pupil stimulation; an 
image capture system with an infrared di gital camera capable of obtaining pupil measurements 
throughout the entire examination process (pupil diameter at rest, during light stimulation, and at 
the end of the stimulus), without interfering with pupil respon se because it provides no visible 
light;  and a data processor to perform calculations.16  Using this type of device, i.e., the 
NeurOptics NPi™ -200 Pupillometer (Neuroptics, Inc., Irvine, CA)], the mean percent pupil 
constriction in a population of healthy adults has been determined to be 34% acc ording to the 
formula %CH ={[dilated pupil diameter – constricted pupil diameter]/[dilated pupil diameter]} x 
100.17  The authors of this study noted that, “in only one of 2432 measurements was the 
percentage of redu ction below 10%.17 Therefore, digital in frared pupillometry offers a non -invasive 
method of obtaining a precise, numerical clinical measurement that serves as an early indicator of 
risk for progressive ASI and provides a clear threshold criterion value, al lowing for timely 
intervention. Of note,  an enrollment criterion for this study excludes any subject in whom the 
baseline mean percent pupil constriction is less than 30% in either eye, so that any impact of 
surgery on pupillary function can be readily dis cerned.  
In this protocol we have adopted  the following instrumentation, threshold criterion and standard 
operating procedures:  
• Measurement of the pupillary reflex in both eyes with the NeurOptics NPi™ -200 
Pupillometer (Neuroptics, Inc., Irvine, CA)18 in the immediate post -operative period at 
15-30 minute intervals and recording the pupillary reflex in the eye as a percentage 
constriction based on the following formula:  
Percent Change (%CH) = {[dilated pupil diameter – constricted pupil diameter]/[dilated pu pil 
diameter]} x 100  
• A threshold criteri on value of %CH ≥ 25% constriction in the operative eye at two 
distinct time points at least 5 minutes apart  
• Immediate removal of all PSI from any eye which does not achieve the threshold 
criterion within 6 hours postoperatively and before the patient is released from the 
facility; and  
4 
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 85  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 • Mandatory electronic reporting of pupil constriction values to Refocus.  
 
This procedure is shown in the flow chart below.  
 
 
These procedures are designed to allow for timely recognition of persistent reduction in the 
pupillary reflex and to insure removal of all implant segments from any eye at risk of developing 
sequelae of ASI prior to discharge of the subject from the surgical facility on the day of surgery.  
Adverse Event Reporting  
As described above, implant segments are to be removed from any eye with Grade 2 ASI (acutely 
decreased pupil reactivity) or Grade 3 ASI (decre ased pupil reactivity plus anterior chamber 
reaction) persisting 6 hours postoperative; therefore, the AE category “Secondary Surgical 
Intervention: I mplant segment removal”  should be reported for these cases.  At postoperative day 
one or later, the conste llation of findings of Grade 4 ASI, i.e., corneal edema, anterior chamber 
5 
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 86  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 reaction and decreased pupillary reactivity, should be reported with the AE category “Grade 4 
anterior segment ischemia.”  Additionally, any persistent pupillary abnormalities due to reduced iris 
vascular perfusion should be reported with the AE category, “Pupil abnormalities persisting after 3 
months. ” 
1  Wilson WA, Irvine SR.  Pa thologic changes following disruption of blood supply to iris and 
ciliary body. Trans Am Acad Ophthalmol Otolaryngol. 1955 Jul -Aug;59(4):501 -2. 
 
2  Hiatt RL. Production of anterior segment ischemia.  Trans Am Ophthalmol Soc. 1977;7 5:87-
102. 
3  Wilcox LM, K eough EM, Connolly RJ, Hotte CE. The contribution of blood flow by the anterior 
ciliary arteries to the anterior segment in the primate eye. Exp Eye Res. 1980 Feb;30(2):167 -
74. 
 
4  Olver JM, Lee JP. The effects of strabismus surger y on anterior segment cir culation. Eye 
(Lond). 1989;3 ( Pt 3):318 -26. 
 
5   Forbes SB. Muscle Transplantation for External Rectus Paralysis : Report of Case with  
 Unusual Complications. Am. J. Ophth. 48:248 -251 (Aug.) 1959.  
 
6   Keech RV, Morris RJ, Ruben J B, Scott WE. Anterior seg ment ischernia following vertical 
muscle transpositionand botulinum toxin injection (letter) . Arch Ophthalmol 108:176, 1990.  
 
7   Saunders RA, Phillips MS. Anterior segment ischemia after three rectus muscle surgery. 
Ophthalmology . 1988 Apr;95(4):533 -7. 
 
8   Bagheri A, Tavakoli M, Torbati P, Mirdehghan M, Yaseri M, Safarian O, Yazdani S, Silbert D.  
Natural course of anterior segment ischemia after disinsertion of extraocular rectus muscles in 
an animal model. J AAPOS. 2013 Aug;17( 4):395 -401. 
 
9  Saunders RA, Bluestein EC, Wilson ME, Berland JE. Anterior segment ischemia after 
strabismus surgery.  Surv Ophthalmol. 1994 Mar -Apr;38(5):456 -66. 
 
10  Brancato R, Bandello F, Lattanzio R.  Iris fluorescein angiography in clinical practice.  Surv 
Ophthalmol. 1997 Ju l-Aug;42(1):41 -70. 
 
11 Chamot SR, Movaffaghy AM, Petrig BL, Riva CE. Blood flow in the human iris measured by 
laser Doppler flowmetry. Microvasc Res. 1999 Mar;57(2):153 -61. 
 
12  Chamot SR, Movaffaghy A, Petrig BL, Riva CE. Iris blo od flow response to acute  decreases in 
ocular perfusion pressure: a laser Doppler flowmetry study in humans.  Exp Eye Res. 2000 
Jan;70(1):107 -12. 
 
13  Michelson G, Groh M, Gründler  A. Regulation of ocular blood flow during increases of arterial 
blood pressure. Br J Ophthalmol. 199 4 Jun;78(6):461 -5. 
 
14  Riva CE, Geiser M, Petrig BL; Beijing 100193, PR China. Ocular Blood Flow Research 
Association. Ocular blood flow assessment using continuous laser Doppler flowmetry. Acta 
Ophthalmol. 2010 Sep;88(6):622 -9.  
 
 
 6 
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 87  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 15  Olver JM, Lee JP.    Recovery of anterior segment circulation after strabismus surgery in adult 
patients.  Ophthalmology. 1992 Mar;99(3):305 -15. 
 
16  Martínez -Ricarte F,  Castro A, Poca MA, Sahuquillo J, Expósito L, Arribas M, Aparicio J. 
Infrared pupillometry. Basic princip les and their application in the non -invasive monitoring of 
neurocritical patients. Neurologia. 2013 Jan -Feb;28(1):41 -51.  
 
17 Taylor WR, Chen JW, Melt zer H, Gennarelli TA, Kelbch C, Knowlton S, Richardson J, Lutch MJ, 
Farin A, Hults KN, Marshall LF. Quant itative pupillometry, a new technology: normative data 
and preliminary observations in patients with acute head injury. Technical note. J Neurosurg. 
2003 Jan;98(1):205 -13. 
 
18 http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfRL/rl.cfm?lid=83319&lpcd=HLG  
 
  
7 
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 88  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 APPENDIX 7: SPONSOR COMMITMENTS  
Refocus Group, Inc. is committed to:  
1. Complying with the Declaration of Helsinki, and all applicable health authority regul ations 
governing the conduct of clinical research studies.  
  
2. Protecting the rights, health, safety and welfare of study subjects.  
 
3. Informing the clinical investigators of any new information about the study which may 
affect the health, safety or welfare of  the subjects, or may influence their decision to 
continue participation in the study.  
 
4. Providing the clinical investigators with the study protocol, and a full set of Case Report 
Forms on which to document the study evaluation variables for each  subject e ntered into 
the study.  
 
5. Providing the statistical analysis and study report writing resources necessary to complete 
reporting of the study results.  
 
6. Ensuring equity of consideration among all investigators in multicenter studies in all 
matters of  publicati ons, meeting presentations, etc.  
 
7. Certifying that IRB approval of the protocol and Investigator’s Clinical Agreement will be 
completed prior to initiation of study at an investigational site.  
 
  
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 89  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 APPENDIX 8: INVESTIG ATOR COMMITMENTS AND RESP ONSIBI LTIES  
Each Investigator must be a licensed physician who has completed a residency in ophthalmology.  
The investigators have the following responsibilities:  
1. Subject Selection  
The investigator is responsible for assuring that all subjects enrolled and determined elig ible for the 
study meet all inclusion and exclusion criteria stated in this protocol.  
2. Informed Consent  
The investigator is responsible for fully reviewing the nature of the study, the possible risks, and 
alternative treatments with prospecti ve subjects pri or to their enrollment in the study.  The 
investigator is responsible for obtaining written Study Informed Consent in compliance with 21 CFR 
50 for each subject, prior to performing surgery on a subject .  The original signed Informed Consent  
Form will be m aintained in the subject's medical record, and a redacted copy of the signed Informed 
Consent Form will become an integral part of each Case Report file provided to the Sponsor.  
3. Institutional Review Board (IRB) Approval  
The investigator will  obtain or veri fy approval for his/her participation in this study from the IRB for 
the institution at which the procedure will be performed, prior to enrolling any subjects in the study.  
The Informed Consent document to be used must also be approved by t he IRB prior to  initiation of 
the study.   
4. Subject Evaluations and Data Reporting  
The investigator is responsible for performing the subject evaluations as described in the study 
protocol.  All information generated by the subject evaluation will be record ed on the subje ct source 
document or case report forms.  The investigator will sign and date each individual form upon its 
completion.  Originals of all case report forms will be retained in the investigator’s office in order to 
be available for monitoring  by authorized regulatory bodies.  
The investigator will not deviate from the study protocol without prior approval from the Sponsor 
unless protection of the health, safety or welfare of study subjects requires prompt action.  
5. Record Retention  
The investigat or shall mainta in all subject records for whichever of the following periods is shortest:  
• A period of two years after the date on which the FDA approves the marketing of the device 
for the purpose that was the subject of the study.  
• A period of five years after the date o n which the results of the study are submitted to the 
FDA in support of the marketing of the device for the purpose that was the subject of the 
study.  
 
  
1 
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 90  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 6. Investigational Material Accountability  
The investigator must maintain accurate records of the receip t, use and return of all investigational 
devices, including the product identification and serial numbers as applicable.    The investigator 
must assure that study supplies be dispensed only to subjects enrolled and e ligible to be in the 
study and under th e direct supervision of the investigator or co -investigators.  
The principal investigator must keep records of all investigational supplies.  Investigational material 
accounting procedures must be completed before the study is considered completed.  
 
  
2 
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 91  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 APPE NDIX 9: DECLARATION OF HELSINKI  
WORLD  MEDICAL  ASSOCIATION  DECLARATION  OF HELSINKI  
Ethical  Principles  for Medical  Research  Involving  Human  Subjects  
 
Adopted by the 18th WMA General  Assembly,  Helsinki,  Finland, June 1964, and  amended by the: 
29th WMA General  Assembly,  Tokyo,  Japan, October 1975  
35th WMA General  Assembly,  Venice, Italy,  October 1983  41st 
WMA General  Assembly,  Hong Kong, September 1989  
48th WMA  General  Assembly, Somerset  West,  Republic  of South Africa,  October 1996  
52nd WMA General  Assembly, Ed inburgh,  Scotland,  October  2000  
53rd WMA General  Assembly, Washington 2002 (Note of Clarification on paragraph 29 added)  
55th WMA General  Assembly,  Tokyo 2004  (Note of Clarification  on Paragraph 30 added)  
59th WMA General  Assembly,  Seoul, October 2008  
 
A.        INTRODUCTION  
 
1. The World  Medical  Association  (WMA)  has developed  the Declaration  of Helsinki  as a 
statement  of ethical  principles  for medical  research  involving  human  subjects , including  
research  on identifiable  human  material  and data.  
 
The Declarat ion is intended  to be read as a whole  and each of its constituent  paragraphs  
should  not be applied  without  consideration  of all other  relevant  paragraphs.  
 
2. Although  the Declaration  is addressed  primarily  to physicians,  the WMA  encourages  
other  participants  in medical  research  involving  human  subjects  to adopt  these  
principles.  
 
3. It is the duty of the physician  to promote  and safeguard  the health  of patients,  including  those  
who are involved  in medical  research.  The physician's  knowledge  and conscience  are 
dedicated  to the fulfilment  of this duty.  
 
4. The Declaration  of Geneva  of the WMA  binds  the physician  with the words,  “The  health  
of my patient  will be my first consideration,”  and the International  Code  of Medical  
Ethics  declares  that, “A physician  shall  act in the patient's  best interest  when  providing  
medical  care.”  
 
5. Medical  progress  is based  on research  that ultimately  must  include  studies  involving  
human  subjects.  Populations  that are underrepresented  in medical  research  should  be 
provided  appropriate  access to participation  in research.  
 
6. In medical  research  involving  human  subjects,  the well-being  of the individual  research  
subject  must  take precedence  over all other  interests.  
 
7. The primary  purpose  of medical  research  involving  human  subjects  is to underst and the 
causes,  development  and effects  of diseases  and improve  preventive,  diagnostic  and 
therapeutic  interventions  (methods,  procedures  and treatments).  Even  the best current  
interventions  must  be evaluated  continually  through  research  for their safety,  effectiveness,  
efficiency,  accessibility  and quality.  
8. In medical practice and in medical research, most interventions involve risks and burdens.  
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 92  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
  
9. Medical research is subject to ethical standards that promote respect for all human subjects 
and protect thei r health and rights. Some research populations are particularly vulnerable 
and need special protection. These include those who cannot give or refuse consent for 
themselves and those who may be vulnerable to coercion or undue influence.  
 
10. Physicians should consider the ethical, legal and regulatory norms and standards f or 
research involving human subjects in their own countries as well as applicable international 
norms and standards. No national or international ethical, legal or regulatory requirement 
shoul d reduce or eliminate any of the protections for research subjec ts set forth in this 
Declaration.  
 
B. PRINCIPLES  FOR  ALL  MEDICAL  RESEARCH  
 
11. It is the duty of physicians  who participate  in medical  research  to protect  the life, health,  
dignity,  integrity,  right to self-determination,  privacy,  and confidentiality  of personal  
information  of research  subjects.  
 
12. Medical  research  involving  human  subjects  must  conform  to generally  accepted  scientific  
principles,  be based  on a thorough  knowledge  of the scientific  literature,  other  relevant  
sources  of information,  and adequate  laboratory  and, as appropriate,  animal  
experimentation.  The welfare  of animals  used for research  must  be respected.  
 
13. Appropriate  caution  must  be exercised  in the conduct  of medical  research  that may 
harm  the environment.  
 
14. The design  and performance  of each research  study  involving  human  subjects  must  be 
clearly  described  in a research  protocol.  The protocol  should  contain  a statement  of the 
ethical  considerations  involved  and should  indicate  how the principles  in this Declaration  
have  been  addressed.  The protocol  should  include  information  regarding  funding,  sponsors,  
institutional  affiliations,  other  potential  conflicts  of interest,  incentives  for subjects  and 
provisions  for treating  and/or  compen sating  subjects  who are harmed  as a consequence  of 
participation  in the research  study.  The protocol  should  describe  arrangements  for post-
study  access  by study  subjects  to interventions  identified  as beneficial  in the study  or 
access  to other  appropriate  care or benefits.  
 
15. The research  protocol  must  be submitted  for consideration,  comment,  guidance  and 
approval  to a research  ethics  committee  before  the study  begins.  This committee  must  be 
independent  of the researcher,  the sponsor  and any other  undue  influ ence.  It must  take into 
consideration  the laws and regulations  of the country  or countries  in which  the research  is 
to be performed  as well as applicable  international  norms  and standards  but these  must  not 
be allowed  to reduce  or eliminate  any of the protections  for research  subjects  set forth  in 
this Declaration.  The committee  must  have  the right  to monitor  ongoing  studies.  The 
researcher  must  provide  monitoring  information  to the committee,  especially  information  
about  any serious  adverse  events.  No change to the protocol  may be made  without  
consideration  and approval  by the committee.  
  
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 93  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 16. Medical research involving human subjects must be conducted only by individuals with the 
appropriate scientific training and qualifications. Research on patients or healt hy volunteers 
requires the supervision of a competent and appropriately qualified physician or other 
health care professional. The responsibility for the protection of research subjects must 
always rest with the  physician or other health care professional and never the research 
subjects, even though they have given consent.  
 
17. Medical  research  involving  a disadvantaged  or vulnerable  population  or community  is 
only justified  if the research  is responsive  to the health  needs  and priorities  of this 
population  or community  and if there  is a reasonable  likelihood  that this population  or 
community  stands  to benefit  from  the results  of the research.  
 
18. Every  medical  research  study  involving  human  subjects  must  be preceded  by careful  
assessment  of predictable  risks  and burdens  to the individuals  and communities  involved  
in the research  in comparison  with foreseeable  benefits  to them  and to other  individuals  
or communities  affected  by the condition  under  investigation.  
 
19. Every  clinical  trial must  be registered  in a publicl y accessible  database  before  
recruitment  of the first subject.  
 
20. Physicians  may not participate  in a research  study  involving  human  subjects  unless  they are 
confident  that the risks  involved  have  been  adequately  assessed  and can be satisfactorily  
managed.  Physicians  must  immediately  stop a study  when  the risks  are found  to outweigh  
the potential  benefits  or when  there  is conclusive  proof  of positive  and beneficial  results.  
 
21. Medical  research  involving  human  subjects  may only be conducted  if the importance  of the 
objective  outweighs  the inherent  risks  and burdens  to the research  subjects.  
 
22. Participation  by competent  individuals  as subjects  in medical  research  must  be 
voluntary.  Although  it may be appropriate  to consult  family  members  or community  
leaders,  no competent  individual  may be enrolled  in a research  study  unless  he or she 
freely  agrees.  
 
23. Every  precaution  must  be taken  to protect  the privacy  of research  subjects  and the 
confidentiality  of their personal  information  and to minimize  the impact  of the study  on 
their physical,  mental  and social  integrity.  
 
24. In medical  research  involving  competent  human  subjects,  each potential  subject  must  be 
adequately  informed  of the aims,  methods,  sources  of funding,  any possible  conflicts  of 
interest,  institutional  affilia tions  of the researcher,  the anticipated  benefits  and potential  
risks  of the study  and the discomfort  it may entail,  and any other  relevant  aspects  of the 
study.  The potential  subject  must  be informed  of the right  to refuse  to participate  in the 
study  or to withdraw  consent  to participate  at any time without  reprisal.  Special  attention  
should  be given  to the specific  information  needs  of individual  potential  subjects            as 
well as to the methods  used to deliver  the information.  After  ensuring  that the potential  
subject  has understood  the information,  the physician  or another  appropriately  qualified  
individual  must  then seek the potential  subject’s  freely -given  informed  consent,  preferably  
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 94  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
 in writing.  If the consent  cannot  be expressed  in writing,  the non-written  consent  must  be 
formally  documented  and witnessed.  
 
25. For medical  research  using  identifiable  human  material  or data,  physicians  must  normally  
seek consent  for the collection,  analysis,  storage  and/or  reuse.  There  may be situations  
where  consent  would  be impossible  or impractical  to obtain  for such research  or would  
pose a threat  to the validity  of the research.  In such situations  the research  may be done  
only after consideration  and approval  of a research  ethics  committee.  
 
26. When  seeking  informed  consent  for participation  in a research  study  the physician  should  
be particularly  cautious  if the potential  subject  is in a dependent  relationship  with the 
physician  or may consent  under  duress.  In such situations  the informed  consent  should  be 
sought  by an appropriately  qualified  individual  who is completely  independent  of this 
relationship.  
 
27. For a potential  research  subject  who is incompetent,  the physician  must  seek informed  
consent  from  the legally  authorized  representative.  These  individuals  must  not be 
included  in a research  study  that has no likelihood  of benefit  for them  unless  it is intended  
to promote  the health  of the population  represented  by the potential  subject,  the research  
cannot  instead  be performed  with competent  persons,  and the research  entails  only 
minimal  risk and minimal  burden.  
 
28. When  a potential  research  subject  who is deemed  incompetent  is able to give assent  to 
decisions  about  participation  in research,  the physician  must  seek that assent  in addition  to 
the consent  of the legally  authorized  representative.  The potential  subject’s  dissent  should  
be respected.  
 
29. Research  involving  subjects  who are physically  or mentally  incapable  of giving  consent,  
for example,  unconscious  patients,  may be done  only if the physical  or mental  condition  
that prevents  giving  informed  consent  is a necessary  characteristic  of the research  
population.  In such circumstances  the physician  should  seek informed  consent  from  the 
legally  authorized  representative.  If no such representative  is available  and if the research  
cannot  be delayed,  the study  may proceed  without  informed  consent  provided  that the 
specific  reasons  for involving  subjects  with a condition  that renders  them  unable  to give 
informed  consent  have  been  stated  in the research  protocol  and the study  has been  
approved  by a research  ethics  committee.  Consent  to remain  in the research  should  be 
obtained  as soon  as possible  from  the subject  or a legally  authorized  representative.  
 
30. Authors,  editors  and publishers  all have  ethical  obligations  with regard  to the publication  of 
the results  of research.  Authors  have  a duty to make  publicly  available  the         results  of 
their research  on human  subjects  and are accountable  for the completeness  and accuracy  of 
their reports.  They  should  adhere  to accepted  guidel ines for ethical  reporting.  Negative  and 
inconclusive  as well as positive  results  should  be published  or otherwise  made  publicly  
available.  Sources  of funding,  institutional  affiliations  and conflicts  of interest  should  be 
declared  in the publication.  Repo rts of research  not in accordance  with the principles  of this 
Declaration  should  not be accepted  for publication.  
 
PROTOCOL VIS -2014   Page 95  
Compilation Protocol Amendment 2 - March 3 , 201 5   
  
   
   C.     ADDITIONAL  PRINCIPLES FOR  MEDICAL RESEARCH COMBINED WITH  
MEDICAL  CARE  
 
31. The physician  may combine  medical  research  with medical  care only to the extent  that 
the research  is justified  by its potential  preventive,  diagnostic  or therapeutic  value  and if 
the physician  has good  reason  to believe  that participation  in the research  study  will not 
adversely  affect  the health  of the patients  who serve  as research  subjects.  
 
32. The benefits,  risks,  burdens  and effectiveness  of a new intervention  must  be tested  
against  those  of the best current  proven  intervention,  except  in the following  
circumstances:  
• The use of placebo,  or no treatment,  is acceptabl e in studies  where  no current  
proven  intervention  exists;  or 
• Where  for compelling  and scientifically  sound  methodological  reasons  the use of 
placebo  is necessary  to determine  the efficacy  or safety  of an intervention  and the 
patients  who receive  placebo  or no treatment  will not be subject  to any risk of 
serious  or irreversible  harm.  Extreme  care must  be taken  to avoid  abuse  of this 
option.  
 
33. At the conclusion  of the study,  patients  entered  into the study  are entitled  to be informed  
about  the outcome  of the study and to share  any benefits  that result  from  it, for   
example,  access  to interventions  identified  as beneficial  in the study  or to other  
appropriate  care or benefits.  
 
34. The physician  must  fully inform  the patient  which  aspects  of the care are related  to the 
research.  The refusal  of a patient  to participate  in a study  or the patient’s  decision  to 
withdraw  from  the study  must  never  interfere  with the patient -physician  relationship.  
 
35. In the treatment of a patient, where proven interventions do not exist or have been 
ineffective, the physician, after seeking expert advice, with informed consent from the 
patient or a legally authorized representative, may use an unproven intervention if in 
the physician's judgement it offers hope of saving life, re -establishin g health or 
alleviating suffering. Where possible, this intervention should be made the object of 
research, designed to  evaluate its safety and efficacy. In all cases, new information 
should be  recorded and, where appropriate, made publicly available.  
 