CONFIDENTIAL:  This document  is the intellect ual property  of Michael  Montana,  MD, PhD,  David  S. Leonard,  MD, Alan  
Hifko,  MD, and Shahroz  Fatima,  BS. Acceptance  of this document  constitutes  the agreement  by the recipient  that not 
unpublished  information  contained  herein  will be published  or disclosed  without  prior  written  approval.   RESEARCH  PROTOCOL  
 
 
Effectiveness  of a Combined  Acetaminophen  and Ibuprofen  Regimen  for Management  of 
Post -Tonsillectomy  Pain  in Pediatric  Patients   
 
 
 
 
 
Shahroz  Fatima,  BS 
Washington  University  School  of Medicine  
shahrozfatima@wustl.edu  
 
Alan Hifko,  MD 
Clinical  Research  Coordinator  
Division  of Clinical  and Translational  Research  
Department  of Anesthesiology  
Ahifko@anest.wustl.edu  
 
David  S. Leonard,  MBBCh  
Pediatric  Otolaryngology  
dsleonard@wustl.edu  
 
Michael  C. Montana,  MD, PhD 
Pediatric  Anesthesiology  
montana@wustl.edu  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Version  2 
January  26, 2020  

CONFIDENTIAL:  This document  is the intellect ual property  of Michael  Montana,  MD, PhD,  David  S. Leonard,  MD, Alan  
Hifko,  MD, and Shahroz  Fatima,  BS. Acceptance  of this document  constitutes  the agreement  by the recipient  that not 
unpublished  information  contained  herein  will be published  or disclosed  without  prior  written  approval.   Study  Title 
 
 Effectiveness  of Combined  Acetaminophen  and Ibuprofen  Regimen  for Management  of Post -
Tonsillectomy  Pain  in Pediatric  Patients  
Objectives  To compare  the effectiveness  of a combined  regimen  of acetaminophen  and ibuprofen  dosed  every  6 hours  
with the current  practice  of alternating  acetaminophen  and ibuprofen  every  3 hours  in the treatment  of post-
operative  tonsillectomy  pain in the pediatric  population . 
Study  Period  1 year 
Number  of 
Subjects  200 subjects’  ages  4-17 who undergo  tonsillectomy  with or without  adeno idectomy  at St. Louis  Children’s  
Hospital  (SCLH)  and the Children’s  Specialty  Care  Center  (CSCC) . 
Study  
Treatment  A combined  acetaminophen  and ibuprofen  medication  regimen  administered  every  6 hours  following  surgery  
through  the end of post-operative  day (POD)  3 compared  against  the current  practice  of alternating  
acetaminophen  and ibuprofen  every  3 hours  following  surgery  throu gh the end of post-operative  day 3. 
Study  Design  Single -center,  randomized,  open -label,  non-inferiority  treatment  pilot study  to evaluate  the effectiveness  of a 
combined  acetaminophen  and ibuprofen  regimen  for treatment  of post-operative  tonsillectomy  pain in the 
pediatric  population.  200 children  undergoing  tonsillectomy  will be randomized  to receive  either  a combined  
acetaminophen  and ibuprofen  regimen  dosed  every  6 hours  or an alternat ing regimen  of acetaminophen  and 
ibuprofen  dosed  every  3 hours.   
Inclusion  and 
Exclusion  
Criteria  Inclusion  Criteria  
a) 4 to 17 years  of age at time of enrollment  
b) Undergoing  tonsillectomy  with or without  
adenoidectomy  
c) Able to provide  informed  consent  from parent  or 
legal  guardian   
d) Able to provide  assent  if subject  is a minor  of 
appropriate  age Exclusion  Criteria  
a) Allergy  to acetaminophen  or ibuprofen  
b) Inability  for study  participant  to cooperate  
with pain assessments  
c) Known  pregnancy   
d) Any condition  which  would  make  the 
participant,  in the opinion  of the 
investigator,  unsuitable  for the study  
Measurements  Pain scores  will be measured  in the post-anesthesia  care unit (PACU)  when  first awakening,  at 30 minutes,  and 
then hourly  after PACU  arrival,  as well as at the time of discharge  and prior to administration  of rescue  
medication . Safety  assessments  will be performed  as standard  of care in the PACU.  A medication  log will be 
given  to subjects  to assess  their adherence  to the study  regimen,  duration  of medication  usage,  and use of 
break  through  analgesic  medication.  Follow  up surveys  to assess  pain scores  will be sent to participants  twice  
a day on post-operative  day (POD ) 1, 3, and 7. Pain will be assessed  using  the standardized  FLACC  scale  for 
all subjects,  as well as an additional  assessment  using the standardized  Wong -Baker  Faces  scale  for subjects  
ages  7 and older.   
Outcomes  Primary :  The proportion  of FLACC  pain scores  ≥7 from POD  1 through  POD  3 between  the combined  and the 
alternating  medication  regimen s 
 
Secondary : (between  the combined  and the alternating  medication  regimens)  
1. The proportion  of FLACC  pain scores  ≥7 on each  individual  POD  1, 3, and 7 
2. The proportion  of cumulative  FLACC  pain scores  ≥7 from POD  1 through  POD  7  
3. The proportion  of Faces  pain scores  8 on POD  1, 3, and 7  
4. The proportion  of cumulative  Faces  pain scores  ≥8 from POD  1 through  POD  7  
5. The proportion  of rescue  medication  usage  from POD  1 through  POD  3  
6. The proportion  of rescue  medication  usage  from POD  1 through  POD  7  
7. Adherence  to the assigned  study  medication  regimen    
8. Incidence  of adverse  events  

CONFIDENTIAL:  This document  is the intellect ual property  of Michael  Montana,  MD, PhD,  David  S. Leonard,  MD, Alan  
Hifko,  MD, and Shahroz  Fatima,  BS. Acceptance  of this document  constitutes  the agreement  by the recipient  that not 
unpublished  information  contained  herein  will be published  or disclosed  without  prior  written  approval.   1. Background  and Rationale:   
Tons illectomy  is the 2nd most  common  outpatient  pediatric  surgical  procedure  performed  
in the U.S. with over half a million  surgeries  annually.  The two main  primary  indications  for 
pedia tric tonsillectomy  are recurrent  infection s and sleep  disordered  breathing  (SDB)1. 
Tonsillectomy  is define d as a surgical  procedure  performed  with or without  adenoidectomy  that 
completely  removes  the tonsil,  including  its capsule,  by dissecting  the peritonsillar  space  between  
the tonsil  capsule  and muscular  wall1. They  are relatively  low risk surgical  procedures  usually  
done as a same-day surgery2. The Royal  College  of Surgeons  of England  found  that 
tonsillectomies  had a delayed  discharge  rate of 1.9 % due to various  reasons,  including  post-op 
pain,  hemorrhage,  respiratory  complications,  and vomiting.  The top reason  for these  delays  was 
inadequate  pain control  accounting  for 36% of delayed  discharges  3. Acute  pain can cause  stress,  
fear, and anxiety  for both the patient  and the caregiver  4. Furthermore,  it is also associated  with 
poor oral intake,  vomiting,  and sleep  disturbances  for the patient  5.  Thus , adequate  post-op pain 
control  is an essential  component  to ensuring  timely  healing  and patient  well-being  following  
surgery.  Additionally,  according  to prior research  done  on adult  tonsillectomy  patients , the 
incidence  of severe  pain, defined  as pain ≥7 on a 10-point  scale,  is 14.5%  on post-op Day 1, 
39.9%  on Day 3, 28.4%  on Day 7 6.  
One of the most widely used drugs for post -operative pain relief  in tonsillectomy prior  to 
2013 was codeine. Codeine is a prodrug that is metabolized to morphine via the CYP2D6 
enzyme, providing an oral  form of pain control that was thought to have a good safety profile  7. 
However , recent research has found significant genetic variability in this enzyme, where poor 
metabolizers get  little or  no pain r elief while  ultra-rapid metabolizers are at high risk for 
respiratory depression  8. Although genetic testing f or CYP2D6  exists, it is expensive , and 
normal metabolizers may still  experience adverse effects. In  2013 , the FDA issued a “black box 
warning” for codeine , advising  health care professionals “to prescribe an alternative analgesic 
for postoperative pain control in children ” 8. Furthermore, a randomized trial in S DB patients 
undergoing tonsillectomy found that t he number of desaturation events per hour (preoperative to 
postoperative) was reduced by a mean of 1.79 ± 7.57 in the group given ibuprofen compared 
with an average increase of 11.17 ± 15.02 in the morphine group  9. Thus, identifying the best 
alternatives to opioids for post op pain control for pediatric tonsillectomy patients  are critical .  
The main alternatives are acetaminophen and NSAIDs. Scheduled acetaminophen is the 
recommended first line treatment for post op pain relief following discharge from the hospital  10. 
However,  to ens ure adequate pain control, acetaminophen is generally used in conjunction with 
other drugs, namely opioids 1 However, a potential alternative to opioids are NSAIDs . NSAIDs 
were initially avoided due to the potential increased risk of bleeding and hemorrhage when 
compared  to opioids  11. However , this conflicts with a recent Cochrane review of 900 patients 
from various RCTs that demonstrated no  increased  risk of bleeding with NSAIDs use in post -
tonsi llectomy patients  compared to patient that did not receive NSAIDs  12. Thus, t he current 
guidelines from the American Academy of Otolaryngology -Head and Neck surgery recommend 
the use of NSAIDs  alongside acetaminophen for post -tonsillectomy pain relief1. A recent  trial in 
adults  compared a combined acet aminophen+ ibuprofen regimen against only acetaminophen 
or only ibuprofen and found that the combined regimen had improved pain control  13. This 
suggest s that a combined regimen  may be superior to a single non -opioid analgesic strategy . 
Furthermore, there is also evidence of potential synergistic effects when the 2 drugs are given 
at the same time 14. Some otolaryngologists  at SLCH currently advise their patients to take 
acetaminophen and ibuprofen on an alternating basis, with one drug administered every 3 
hours, but each drug only given every 6 hours. This is done on the belief that more frequent 
analgesic dosing will provide  superior pain control. However, this practice has never been 
compared directly to giving both drugs simultaneous every 6 hours.  
Necessary caretaker  involvement  in the pediatric population  adds a new layer of 
complexity  to medication dosing . Adhering to v arious, often confusing or tedious, pain control 
CONFIDENTIAL:  This document  is the intellect ual property  of Michael  Montana,  MD, PhD,  David  S. Leonard,  MD, Alan  
Hifko,  MD, and Shahroz  Fatima,  BS. Acceptance  of this document  constitutes  the agreement  by the recipient  that not 
unpublished  information  contained  herein  will be published  or disclosed  without  prior  written  approval.   regimens post -operatively can be a challenge for caregivers  who are balancing many other 
aspects of life while caring for the child. This is especially true for families with caregivers who 
are working and cannot always be available around the clock to give frequent scheduled pain 
medication. Furthermore, despite various oral formulations, children do not enjoy taking 
medications, which can further frustrate caretakers. The American Academy of Family 
Physicians notes these limitations and suggests h aving a simplified regimen  to assist patients 
and families in adhering to the medication regiment  15. Thus , we aim to assess a means to limit 
this confusion while also assessing pain control and patient satisfaction . We will compare a 
combined regimen where both acetaminophen and ibuprofen are administered together every 6 
hours, with a regimen that is currently practiced at St. Louis Children’s Hospital where 
acetaminophen and ibuprofen are alternated, one medication given every three hours . There is 
currently a dearth of information regarding adherence to medication regimens and we hope our 
study will help elucidate a more convenient regimen with equal or improved pain control to a 
more tedious current standard pain control regimen 16.  
In this study , we will compare the common post-tonsill ectomy pediatric pain regimen of 
alternating acetaminophen and ibuprofen every three hours with a  regimen in which a patient is 
given both medications every  6 hours.  Since the black box warning placed on codeine, there 
has been no one standard of care, for post -tonsillectomy pain. We hope  that this study will 
provide objective data regarding optimal pain control for this patient population.  
 
2. Objectives  
The goal of this research proposal is to assess the effectiveness of two dosing regimens in 
controlling post -tonsillectomy pain in pediatric populations . We aim to assess  how a combined 
scheduled dosing regimen of acetaminophen and ibuprofen every 6 hours compares with the 
dosing regimen currently used at SLCH of alternating acetaminophen and ibu profen every 3  
hours. We hope to show that  a combined regimen is non-inferior  in terms of instances of severe 
pain experienced by patients following hospital discharge, and/or in need for  rescue pain 
medication to the alternating regimen.  
In addition, w e believe th at based on the current guidelines for  pediatric post -tonsillectomy 
pain control, the simultaneous administration of acetaminophen  and ibuprofen may play a 
significant role in improving patient satisfaction and compliance. This regimen was relatively well 
tolerated with minimal adverse events reported in adults undergoing dental surgery  13. A recent 
double -blind study  performed in adults following wisdom teeth removal show ed improved pain 
control with a combined regimen whe n compared to either acetaminophen or ibuprofen alone13. 
However, there is a dearth of studies to guide therapy in the pediatric  population.  We hope to 
expand on this by introducing a new regimen that may be easier to follow , and will likely improve 
compliance and satisfaction amongst patients and caregivers. Furthermore, there are no studies 
comparing a combined dose of acetaminophen and ibuprofen administered at the same time 
versus an alternating dosing strategy. As the com bined dosing strategy is markedly easier for 
families to comply with , if it is non -inferior to the alternating dosing strategy , it would likely be 
preferred.  
This pilot study is the first step in determining both the safety and eff ectiveness  of combined 
pain medication vs. the current practice of alternating each medication regimen following 
tonsillectomy in pediatric populations. It will allow us to assess the degree of difference in both 
pain relief and patient satisfaction while also assessing for any u nforeseen adverse outcomes. 
We will use information gleaned here to power and design a larger scale study.  
 
 
 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL:  This document  is the intellect ual property  of Michael  Montana,  MD, PhD,  David  S. Leonard,  MD, Alan  
Hifko,  MD, and Shahroz  Fatima,  BS. Acceptance  of this document  constitutes  the agreement  by the recipient  that not 
unpublished  information  contained  herein  will be published  or disclosed  without  prior  written  approval.   3.  Preliminary  Data   
Over  the past year from 2017 -2018,  there  were  over 700 tonsillectomies  and 
adenotonsillectomies  performed  at St. Louis  Children’s  Hospital  (SLCH)  and the ambulatory  
surgery  center  at the Children’s  Specialty  Care  Center  (CSCC) . The ages  of the patients  ranged  
from 1 to 18 and indications  included  recurrent  infections,  sleep  disordered  breathing,  and a 
variety  of other  conditions.  These  numbers  illustrate  the feasibility  of conducting  a study  of 100 
patients  in a reasonable  time frame,  ideally  in less than 1 year.   
 
4. Patient  Selection   
Subjects  will be recruited  through  the St. Louis  Children’s  Hospital  (SLCH)  Otolaryngology  
Department . Subjects  will be approached  prior to surgery  in person.  Prior  to study  initiation  written  
informed  consent  will be obtained  from subject s’ parent  or legal guardian , and assent  will be 
obtained  from minors  of appropriate  age. Goal  enrollment  is 200 children  (4-17 years  old) who 
are undergoing  tonsillectomy  with or without  adenoidectomy .  
 
4.1. Inclusion  Criteria  
4.1.1.  4 to 17 years of age at time of enrollment   
4.1.2.  Undergoing  tonsillectomy  with or without  adenoidectomy  
4.1.3.  Able to provide  informed  consent  from parent  or legal  guardian   
4.1.4.  Able to provide  assent  if subject  is a minor  of appropriate  age 
 
4.2. Exclusion  Criteria  
4.2.1.  Allergy  to acetaminophen  or ibuprofen  
4.2.2 . Inability  for study  participant  to cooperate  with pain assessments   
4.2.3.  Known  pregnancy  
4.2.4. Any condition  which  would  make  the participant,  in the opinion  of the investigator,  
unsuitable  for the study  
 
5. Methods:   
5.1. Study  design:   
Single -center,  randomized,  open -label,  non-inferiority  pilot study .  
 
5.2 Enrollment  
The  surgery  schedule  at  SLCH  is  posted  in  advance  which allows us  to evaluate 
daily for eligible subjects to approach for inclusion.  The patients’  medical record will be 
screened for: age of child, type of surgical procedure planned, pertinent medical history, 
whether the child is in the custody of a legal caregiver, and ability to consent/assent to the 
study. Eligible candidates scheduled to undergo tonsillectomy at SLCH will be approached 
either in the outpatient setting  or preoperative holding area prior to surgery  by a member of the 
study team . Study details  will be explained and informed c onsent obtained from parents or legal 
guardian, and assent as appropriate .  
CONFIDENTIAL:  This document  is the intellect ual property  of Michael  Montana,  MD, PhD,  David  S. Leonard,  MD, Alan  
Hifko,  MD, and Shahroz  Fatima,  BS. Acceptance  of this document  constitutes  the agreement  by the recipient  that not 
unpublished  information  contained  herein  will be published  or disclosed  without  prior  written  approval.   Figure 1. Study Protocol  
 
 
5.3 Treatment  phase  
Patient s will be randomized  to one of two post-operative  pain control  medication  regimens  
through  POD  3. Randomization  will follow  a block randomization  with blocks  of 10 subjects.  To 
maintain  allocation  concealment  the research  associate  who assigns  patients  has no knowledge  
of the randomization  sequence.  The study clinicians  will not be blinded,  as they will be required  
to write  prescriptions  and caregivers  will not be blinded  as they will carry  out the assigned  
treatment  regimen . Participants  will be randomized  to either  the alternating  medication  regimen,  
which  is the current  practice  of alternating  doses of acetaminophen  and ibuprofen  every  3 hours  
following  surgery  through  the end of POD  3 or the combined  medication  regimen,  which  is a 
combin ed administration  of acetaminophen  and ibuprofen  every  6 hours  following  surgery  through  
the end of POD  3.  
 
As standard  of care, all patients  will receive  a single  dose  of intravenous  acetaminophen  
intraoperatively  which  will also serve  as time-point  0. The combined  treatment  group  will receive  
the first dose  of oral (PO)  ibuprofen  in the post-anesthesia  care unit (PACU)  with all subsequent  
doses  given  as a combination  of PO acetaminophen  and ibuprofen  every  6 hours  (with  IV 
acetaminophen  counting  as time-point  0). The alternating  treatment  group  will receive  the first 
dose  of PO ibuprofen  3 hours  after the intra-operative  IV acetaminophen.  All subsequent  doses  
of alternating  PO acetaminophen  and ibuprofen  will be given  on an alternating  basis,  every  3 
hours.   

CONFIDENTIAL:  This document  is the intellect ual property  of Michael  Montana,  MD, PhD,  David  S. Leonard,  MD, Alan  
Hifko,  MD, and Shahroz  Fatima,  BS. Acceptance  of this document  constitutes  the agreement  by the recipient  that not 
unpublished  information  contained  herein  will be published  or disclosed  without  prior  written  approval.    Figure  2. Pain medication  regimens  for each  arm of the study.  
  
Post operatively  pain scores  will be measured  in the PACU  when  first awakening,  at 30 
minutes,  and then hourly  after PACU  arrival,  as well as at the time of discharge  and prior to 
administration  of rescue  medication.  Safety  assessments  will be performed  as standard  of care 
in the PACU. Follow  up surveys  to assess  pain scores  will be sent to participants  twice  a day on 
POD  1, 3, and 7. In the event  a participant  doesn’t  have  an email  address  or access  to a 
smartphone  or computer,  they will be sent home  with a copy  of the surveys  and the study  team  
will call them  to obtain  the responses.   Pain will be assessed  using  the standardized  FLACC  scale  
for all subjects,  as well as an additional  assessment  using  the standardized  Wong -Baker  Faces  
scale  for subjects  ages  7 and older.  Note  that the day of surgery  is post-operative  day 0. Pain 
assessment  surveys  will be sent electronically  to participants  via Redcap  or completed  through  
the MyCap  app on their smartphone . Participants  will be given  the option  to utilize  MyCap  to 
receive  their follow  up surveys.  Mycap  is a mobile  phone  application  that allows  research  
participants  to report  outcomes  directly  to a REDCap  database  using  their personal  mobile  phone  
or tablet.  A traditional  REDCap  database  is utilized  to setup  the data collection  instruments  and 
store  study  data.  MyCap  translates  the defined  REDCap  instruments  into a format  compatible  
with Android  or IOS devices  and allows  participants  to complete  them  from their mobile  device.  
Once  a task is completed,  MyCap  conver ts the results  into a format  compatible  with REDCap  
before  synchronizing  back  to the REDCap  database.  Perceived  likeability  of the assigned  
medication  regimen  will be assessed  on POD  3 using  a 7 point  Likert  scale.   
 
Orders  and prescriptions  for medication  will be provided  by the operating  surgeons.  
Patients  who are admitted  post operatively  will have  their medication  regimen  administered  by 
hospital  nursing  staff until their discharge . The timing  of these  medications  and any breakthrough  
analgesic  medications  will be obtained  from the patient’s  electronic  medical  record.  Upon  
discharge , the timing  of acetaminophen  and ibuprofen,  and the use of any break  through  
analgesic  medication  will be recorded  by caregivers  in a paper  journal  provided  by the study  team.  
Upon  completion  of the study  regimen , at the end of POD  3, caregivers  may continue  to provide  
analgesic  medications  as needed  using  whichever  regimen  they prefer.  We will continue  to collect  
medication  usage,  and pain scores  through  POD  7 regardless  of medication  timing  after POD  3.  
 
All patients  will be prescribe d a rescue  analgesic  medication , oxycodone , for breakthrough  
pain relief  as needed . Caregivers  will be provided  with a copy  of the FLACC  criteria,  and Wong -
Baker  Faces  scoring  criteria  if the subject  is 7 years  of age or older,  as well as instructions  on 
how to properly  score  on the 2 different  scales .  
 

CONFIDENTIAL:  This document  is the intellect ual property  of Michael  Montana,  MD, PhD,  David  S. Leonard,  MD, Alan  
Hifko,  MD, and Shahroz  Fatima,  BS. Acceptance  of this document  constitutes  the agreement  by the recipient  that not 
unpublished  information  contained  herein  will be published  or disclosed  without  prior  written  approval.    
Figure  3. FLACC  scale   
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/283575369_Physicians'_use_of_pain_scale_and_treatment_proce
dures_among_children_and_youth_in_emergency_primary_care_ -_a_cross_sectional_study  
 
 
 
 
Figure  4. Wong -Baker  Faces  scale  via the Wong -Baker  Faces  Foundation  
https://wongbakerfaces.org/  
 
 
 
 
Figure  5. Likert  Scale  
 
 
 

CONFIDENTIAL:  This document  is the intellect ual property  of Michael  Montana,  MD, PhD,  David  S. Leonard,  MD, Alan  
Hifko,  MD, and Shahroz  Fatima,  BS. Acceptance  of this document  constitutes  the agreement  by the recipient  that not 
unpublished  information  contained  herein  will be published  or disclosed  without  prior  written  approval.   5.4. Conclusion  of study  
The study  period for each  subject  ends  once  all surveys  are submitted . The total time 
spent  per subject  for this study  will be approximately  8 days .  
 
6.  Data  Collection  and Monitoring  
6.1. Demographic  Data   
After  consent  is obtained  we will collect  basic  demographic  information  (age,  race,  
gender),  indication  for tonsillectomy,  surgical technique,  and pertinent  medical  history.   
 
6.2. Clinical  Assessments  
Prior  to pain medication  administration  the patient  will undergo  a focused  history  and 
physical  exam performed  by a member  of the research  team  to check  contraindications  to the 
proposed  medications .  
 
6.3 Pain Assessments   
Post operatively  pain scores  and safety  assessments  will be measured  in the PACU  upon  
awakening,  prior to administration  of any rescue  medications,  and prior to discharge . Following  
discharge  from the hospital,  each study  participant ’s caregiver  will receive  online  survey s to 
complete  twice  a day (12 hours  apart)  on POD  1, 3, and 7. Caregivers  will be requested  to 
complete  one survey  between  6am and 9am and another  survey  between  6pm and 9pm.  Surveys  
will be distributed  via Redcap.  They  will evaluate  and record  the following  information  prior to the 
administration  of the morning  and evening  medication s that day:  
 
1) Patient’s  Faces,  Legs,  Arms,  Cry, Consolability  (FLACC)  score  for all children  (Fig. 3) 
2) Patient’s  Wong -Baker  Faces  Pain Scale  score  for children  ages 7 and older  (Fig. 4)  
3) Dose  in milligrams  of rescue  pain medication  (oxycodone)  used  in the past 12 hours  
4) Has the patient  experienced  severe  pain >= 7/10 on either  scale.  (yes or no)  
5) Any adverse  events  since  the surgery  or submission  of the previous  survey 
6) Ease  of use of the assigned  regimen  on the Likert  scale  rated  from very easy  to very difficult   
 
6.4 Medication  Log 
 Time  and date of medication  administration  will be obtained  from the subjects’  electronic  
medical  record  during  their time in the PACU  and for those  admitted  post operatively.  Upon  
discharge  a paper  medication  log will be given  to subjects  to record  the time and date medication  
is administered . This log will be used  to assess  adherence  to the study  regimen,  duration  of 
medication  usage,  and use of break  through  medication.    
 
7. Outcome  Measures  
7.1 Primary  Outcome   
The cumulative  proportion  of FLACC  pain scores  ≥7 from POD  1 through  POD  3 between  the 
combined  and the alternating  medication  regimens  
 
7.2. Secondary  Outcome  Measures  (between  the combined  and the alternating  medication  
regimens)  
7.2.1 . The proportion  of FLACC  pain scores  ≥7 on each  individual  POD  1, 3, and 7 
7.2.2.  The proportion  of cumulative  FLACC  pain scores  ≥7 from POD  1 through  POD  7  
7.2.3. The proportion  of Faces  pain scores  ≥8 on POD  1, 3, and 7  
7.2.4.  The proportion  of cumulative  Faces  pain scores  ≥8 from POD  1 through  POD  7  
7.2.5.  The proportion  of rescue  medication  usage  from POD  1 through  POD  3  
7.2.6. The proportion  of rescue  medication  usage  from POD  1 through  POD  7  
7.2.7.  Adherence  to the assigned  study  medication   
CONFIDENTIAL:  This document  is the intellect ual property  of Michael  Montana,  MD, PhD,  David  S. Leonard,  MD, Alan  
Hifko,  MD, and Shahroz  Fatima,  BS. Acceptance  of this document  constitutes  the agreement  by the recipient  that not 
unpublished  information  contained  herein  will be published  or disclosed  without  prior  written  approval.   7.2.8. All adverse  events  including  but not limited  to presenting  to the emergency  department  for 
severe  bleeding,  anorexia,  or intractable  nausea  or vomiting . 
 
7.3 Exploratory  Outcome  Measures  
7.3.1.  Comparison  of pain scores  in patients  over versus  under  the age of 12 
Perception  of pain and the expression  of pain vary considerably  amongst  older  and 
younger  patients.  The FLACC  scale  in particular,  has components  such  as crying  and body  
movements  that may not entirely  reflect  the expression  of pain in older  children  in particular.  Thus  
in order  to account  for this difference,  we would  like to conduct  a separate  analysis  for children  
above  and below  the age of 12 to ensure  there  are no significant  differences  between  the groups,  
If there  are significant  differences,  we will report  those  in a stratified  analysis.  
7.3.2.  Comparison  of pain scores  based  on surgical  technique  
Surgical  technique  for tonsillectomy  can be divided  into 3 major  categories:  cold 
dissection,  electrocautery,  and harmonic  scalpel  tonsillectomy.  The cold knife  method  removes  
the tonsils  by use of a standard  scalpel  and is the most  common  procedure.  The electrocautery  
meth od burns  tonsillar  tissue  and assists  with bleeding,  but causes  thermal  injury  to surrounding  
tissue.  Studies  show  that although  bleeding  was significantly  lower,  pain intensity  at 4 and 24 
hours  post-surgery  was significantly  higher17. Finally,  the Harmon ic scalpel  uses  ultrasonic  energy  
to vibrate  the blade,  which  results  in simultane ous cutting  and couterizing18. Previous  studies  have  
shown  that the use of the Harmonic  scalpel  during  surgery  reduces  both the volume  of intra-
operative  bleeding  and pain intensity  level on postoperative  day one19. Thus  given  these  findings,  
surgical  technique  is a potential  confounder  in the study  which  we will account  for by doing  a 
stratified  subgroup  analysis  to detect  any strata  specific  differences.  
 
7.4. Analysis  
This is a non-inferiority  pilot study  comparing  the proportion  of patients  with severe  pain 
(FLACC  score≥7)  in the combined  regimen  vs. the alternating  regimen.  Our null hypothesis  is that 
the combined  regimen  is inferior  to the currently  used  alternating  regimen  and our alternative  
hypothesis  is that it is non-inferior.  Based  on clinical  judgment,  the margin  within  which  we will 
consider  the proposed  combined  dosing  regimen  to be similar  in effectiveness  to the current  
clinical  practice  of an alternating  regimen  is 0.15.  Based  on prior studies  in adult  tonsillectomy  
patients  using  a 10-point  scale,  the incidence  of severe  pain (≥7) on  post-op Day 1 is 0.145,  Day 
3 is 0.399,  and Day 7 is 0.284,  with a final total proportion  of pain ≥7 divided  by total pain scores  
collected  of 0.1946. There  is no data analyzing  these  proportions  with our proposed  combined  
regimen  as it is a novel  medication  regimen  not used  before.  
Pain between  POD  1 and POD  3 was chosen  as the primary  outcome  because  prior 
research  has indicated  POD  3 to be the day with most  severe  pain in adults6. In order  to obtain  
this proportion , we will first convert  FLACC  pain scores  (graded  on a 10 point  scale)  into a binary  
outcome:  those  with severe  pain (scores  ≥7) and those  without  severe  pain (scores  ≤ 7). We 
chose  7 as pain scores  ≥7 are considered  to be “severe ” based  on prior studies6,17. In addition  to 
providing  current  pain assessments,  caregivers  will also be asked  whether  or not their child had 
severe  pain since  they left the hospital  (first survey)  or since  they last filled out a previous  survey  
(all other  surveys).   
 As this is a pilot study,  we based  our sample  size on 2018 -2019  hospit al data which  
revealed  that over 700 pediatric  tonsillectomies  +/- adenoidectomies  were  conducted  at the St. 
Louis  Children’s  Hospital  and Children’s  Specialty  Care  Center  combined.  Thus  we plan to 
approach  and recruit  at least  100 patients  for our study.  The secondary  outcome  measures  are 
the proportion  of patients  with severe  pain (FLACC  score  ≥7), the average  use of breakthrough  
pain medication,  and all adverse  events.  Thus,  if the hypothesis  is correct,  we anticipate  no 
significant  difference  with using  the alternating  versus  combined  pain regimen  in pediatric  patients  
CONFIDENTIAL:  This document  is the intellect ual property  of Michael  Montana,  MD, PhD,  David  S. Leonard,  MD, Alan  
Hifko,  MD, and Shahroz  Fatima,  BS. Acceptance  of this document  constitutes  the agreement  by the recipient  that not 
unpublished  information  contained  herein  will be published  or disclosed  without  prior  written  approval.   undergoing  tonsillectomy.  We hope  that these  findings  will allow  for a more  simplified  pain 
regimen  with ease  of use amongst  caregivers.     
 
8.  Potential  Risks  
8.1. Breach  of confidentiality  
 There  is minimal  risk associated  with the collection  and recording  of patient  medical  record  
numbers  to permit  review  of the patient’s  medical  record.  
 
MyCap  App Security:  
Participant  data is stored  locally  on the device  in an AES-256+SHA2  encrypted  database.  Data  
remains  on the device  if an internet  connection  is not available.  Applies  to both iOS and Android  
devices.  
 
When  an internet  connection  is available,  data is transmitted  to REDCap  using  an SSL 
connection.  A hash -based  message  authentication  code  (HMAC)  is used  to verify  the integrity  of 
the data and to authenticate  the sender.  
 
Data  is deleted  from the device  after the MyCap  app verifies  that data has been  successfully  
transmitted.   
 
Authentication  to Device:  
Participants  create  a 6-digit PIN that is used  to open  the MyCap,  this is in addition  to the 
authentication  already  on their device.  
 
8.2. Combined  acetaminophen  and ibuprofen  risk 
 There  is minimal  risk associated  with either  acetaminophen  or ibuprofen.  The American  
Academy  of Otolaryngology -Head  and Neck  Surgery  Foundation  makes  a strong  
recommendation  that “clinicians  should  recommend  ibuprofen,  acetaminophen,  or both for pain 
control  after tonsillectomy .”1  
 
8.3 Steps  Taken  to Mitigate  Risk 
Studies are conducted under the supervision of the investigating physicians who are 
trained and experienced in performing research in human subjects, and in monitoring local 
anesthetic  related adverse effects.  
Inclusion and exclusion criteria, monitoring, and the clinical protocol are designed to 
ensure that risks are minimal. Subjects are informed that partici pation is voluntary and they may 
refuse to participate and may withdraw from the study at any time without penalty . A pregnancy 
test will be performed on women of childbearing potential , as is standard of care,  and subjects 
excluded if pregnant. Subjects will be told that in the event of a physical injury as the direct result 
of study procedures, they will be cared for by a member of the investigating team at no cost, within 
the limits of the Washington University compensation plan.  
The first dose of both regimens will be administered while the patient is in the post -
operative recovery area with monitoring for any adverse effects. If the patient is unable to tolerate 
the treatment  they may request to be removed from the study or may be removed by the princi ple 
investigator if they are unable to complete the study.  
Regarding  confidentiality; 1) all subjects will be assigned a study ID number, 2) The link 
to identifiers will be destroyed at the end of the study. 3) Data will be stored under lock and key 
(offic e, file cabinet) and only the investigators and research team will have access. If data are 
published, there will be no link to identifiers. Study data will not be revealed  to any organization, 
individuals other than the subject s, or the subjects themselve s. 4) Study data will not be entered 
in subjects' medical records.  
CONFIDENTIAL:  This document  is the intellect ual property  of Michael  Montana,  MD, PhD,  David  S. Leonard,  MD, Alan  
Hifko,  MD, and Shahroz  Fatima,  BS. Acceptance  of this document  constitutes  the agreement  by the recipient  that not 
unpublished  information  contained  herein  will be published  or disclosed  without  prior  written  approval.    
9. Management of Intercurrent Events  
9.1. Adverse  Experiences  
The investigator  will closely  monitor  subjects  for evidence  of adverse  events.   All adverse  
events  will be reported  and followed  until satisfactory  resolution.   The description  of the adverse  
experience  will include  the time of onset,  duration,  intensity,  etiology,  relationship  to the study  
drug (none,  unlikely,  possible,  probable,  highly  probable),  and any treatment  required.  
 
9.2. Premature  Discontinuation  
If a subject  withdraws  from the study,  the subject  will be replaced  to provide  the required  
number  of subjects.  Subjects  will be withdrawn  if the investigator  decides  that discontinuation  is 
in the best interest  of the subject,  or the subject  requests  withdrawal  from the study.  
 
 
 
 
10.  Data  and Safety  Monitoring  Plan  
Studies  conducted  in the Department  of Anesthesiology  follow  the Washington  University  
Institutional  Review  Board  Policies  and Procedures  (last revision  January  21, 2019). All 
individuals  working  on the study  are required  to read and be familiar  with and compliant  with the 
IRB Policies  and Procedures.  The specific  monitoring  plan for this investigation  is commensurate  
with the risks and the size and complexity  of the investigations  planned.  The potential  risks are 
attributable  to the use of ibuprofen  and acetaminophen . Based  on the small  size and relatively  
low risk nature  of the protocol,  the investigating  physicians  are involved  in the monitoring  plan.  A 
full DSMB  is not needed . These  individuals  will review  the annual  summary  of adverse  events.  In 
addition,  they will review  all reports  of a Serious  Adverse  Event,  or an Unexpected  Adverse  Event.  
The investigators  will follow  the requirements  for principle  investigator  reporting  requirements  as 
outlined  in Section  X of the IRB Policies  and Procedures.    
 
 
References:  
1. Mitchell, R. B. et al.  Clinical Practice Guideline: Tonsillectomy in Children (Update). Otolaryngol. 
Neck Surg.  160, S1–S42 (2019).  
2. Ingram, D. G. & Friedman, N. R. Toward Adenotonsillectomy in Children: A Review for the General 
Pediatrician. JAMA Pediatr.  169, 1155 –1161 (201 5). 
3. National Prospective Tonsillectomy Audit Final Report. Royal College of Surgeons  
https://www.rcseng.ac.uk/library -and-publications/rcs -publications/docs/tonsillectomy -audit/.  
4. Power, N. M. et al.  Correspondence to . (2012).  
5. Stanko, D., Bergesio,  R., Davies, K., Hegarty, M. & von Ungern -Sternberg, B. S. Postoperative pain, 
nausea and vomiting following adeno -tonsillectomy - a long -term follow -up. Paediatr. Anaesth.  23, 
690–696 (2013).  
6. Álvarez Palacios, I., González -Orús Álvarez -Morujo, R., Alon so Martínez, C., Ayala Mejías, A. & 
Arenas Brítez, O. Postoperative Pain in Adult Tonsillectomy: Is There Any Difference Between the 
Technique? Indian J. Otolaryngol. Head Neck Surg.  69, 187 –193 (2017).  
7. Lauder, G. & Emmott, A. Confronting the challenges  of effective pain management in children 
following tonsillectomy. Int. J. Pediatr. Otorhinolaryngol.  78, 1813 –1827 (2014).  
8. Tobias, J. D., Green, T. P., Coté, C. J., Medicine, S. on A. and P. & Drugs, C. O. Codeine: Time to 
Say “No”. Pediatrics  138, e20 162396 (2016).  
9. Kelly, L. E. et al.  Morphine or Ibuprofen for Post -Tonsillectomy Analgesia: A Randomized Trial. 
Pediatrics  135, 307 –313 (2015).  
CONFIDENTIAL:  This document  is the intellect ual property  of Michael  Montana,  MD, PhD,  David  S. Leonard,  MD, Alan  
Hifko,  MD, and Shahroz  Fatima,  BS. Acceptance  of this document  constitutes  the agreement  by the recipient  that not 
unpublished  information  contained  herein  will be published  or disclosed  without  prior  written  approval.   10. Ismail Zaidan & Amanda Lent. Post -Tonsillectomy Pain in Children: The Postcodeine Era. US 
Pharm.  41, 31–34 (2016).  
11. D’Souza, J. N., Schmidt, R. J., Xie, L., Adelman, J. P. & Nardone, H. C. Postoperative nonsteroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs and risk of bleeding in pediatric intracapsular tonsillectomy. Int. J. Pediatr. 
Otorhinolaryngol.  79, 1472 –1476 (2015).  
12. Lewis, S. R., Nicholson, A., Cardwell, M. E., Siviter, G. & Smith, A. F. Nonsteroidal anti‐
inflammatory drugs and perioperative bleeding in paediatric tonsillectomy. Cochrane Database Syst. 
Rev. (2013) doi:10.1002/14651858.CD003591.pub3.  
13. Merry, A.  F. et al.  Combined acetaminophen and ibuprofen for pain relief after oral surgery in adults: 
a randomized controlled trial. BJA Br. J. Anaesth.  104, 80–88 (2010).  
14. Miranda, H., Puig, M., Prieto, J. & Pinardi, G. Synergism between paracetamol and nonste roidal anti -
inflammatory drugs in experimental acute pain. Pain  121, 22–28 (2006).  
15. Promoting Medication Adherence in Children - American Family Physician. 
https://www.aafp.org/afp/2006/0901/p793.html.  
16. Brian Haynes, R., Ann McKibbon, K. & Kanani, R. Systematic review of randomised trials of 
interventions to assist patients to follow prescriptions for medications. The Lancet  348, 383 –386 
(1996).  
17. Uitti, J. M., Salanterä, S., Laine, M. K., Tähtinen, P. A. & Ruohola, A. Adaptation of pain scales for 
parent observation: are pain scales and symptoms useful in detecting pain of young children with the 
suspicion of acute otitis media? BMC Pediatr.  18, (2018).  
 
 
 
 FOR IRB USE ONLY  
IRB ID #: 202002118  
APPROVAL DATE: 02/10/21  
RELEASED DATE: 02/10/21  
EXPIRATION DATE: 02/09/22  
 
 
INFORMED CONSENT DOCUMENT  
 
Project Title:  Effectiveness of a Combined Acetaminophen and Ibuprofen Regimen for 
Management of Post -Tonsillectomy Pain in Pediatric Patients  
 
Principal Investigator:  David Leonard  
 
Research Team Contact:  Dr. David Leonard 314 -454-2136  
 
 If you are the parent/guardian  of a child under the age of 18 who is being invited to participate in  this 
study, the word “you” in this document refers to your child.  As the parent/guardian, y ou will be 
asked to read and sign this document to give permiss ion for your child to participate.   
 If you are under the age of 18 and reading this document, the word “you” in this document refers to 
you.  You will be asked to read and sign this document to indicate your willingness to participate.  
 
This consent form describes the research study and helps  you decide if you want to participate.  It 
provides important information about what you will be asked to do during the study, about the risks and 
benefits of the study, and about your rights and res ponsibilities as a research participant . By signing this 
form you are agreeing to participate in this study.  
 You should read and understand the information in this document including the procedures, 
risks and potential benefits.  
 If you have question s about anything in this form, you should ask the research team for more 
information before you agree to participate.   
 You may also wish to talk to your family or friend s about your participation in this study . 
 Do not agree to participate in this st udy unless the research team has answered your 
questions and you decide that you want to be part of this study.  
 
WHAT IS THE PURPOSE OF THIS STUDY?  
 
This is a research study.  We invite you  to participate in this research study because you  are scheduled to 
undergo a tonsillectomy with or without adenoidectomy at St. Louis Children’s Hospital (SCLH) and 
the Children’s Specialty Care Center (CSCC).  
 
The purpose of this research study is to compare the effectiveness of a combined regimen of 
acetaminophen and ibuprofen dosed every 6 hours with the current practice of alternating 
acetaminophen and ibuprofen every 3 hours in the treatment of post -operative tonsillectomy pain . 
 
Acetaminophen and ibuprofen  are approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Admin istration to reduce pain 
and fever.  
 
WHAT WILL HAPPEN DURING THIS STUDY?  
 
You will be randomized (like flipping a coin) to either : 
 the alternating medication regimen which is the current practice of alternating doses of 
 FOR IRB USE ONLY  
IRB ID #: 202002118  
APPROVAL DATE: 02/10/21  
RELEASED DATE: 02/10/21  
EXPIRATION DATE: 02/09/22  
 
 Page 2 of 10 acetaminophen and ibuprofen every 3 hours following surgery through the end of post -operative 
day 3 (POD 3) ; or  
 the combined medication regimen  which is a combined dose of acetaminophen a nd ibuprofen 
every 6 hours following surgery through the end of POD 3  
 
Surgery will occur per standard protocol.  The surgery itself is not part of the research , however 
information about the surgery, including medications given during surgery, will be re corded for research 
purposes.  As standard of care, all patients will receive a single dose of intravenous (IV) acetaminophen 
during surgery.  
 
The alternating treatment group will receive the first dose of oral ibuprofen 3 hours after the intra -
operative I V acetaminophen. All subsequent doses of alternating oral acetaminophen and ibuprofen will 
be given on an alternating basis, every 3 hours.  Dosages are done as standard of care.  
 
The combined medication  group will receive the first dose of  oral ibuprofen i n the post -anesthesia care 
unit (PACU) with all subsequent doses given as a combination of oral acetaminophen and ibuprof en 
every 6 hours. Dosages are done as standard of care.  
 
All patients are prescribed a rescue pain medication for breakthrough pain rel ief as needed.  
Breakthrough pain is severe pain that occurs while a patient is already medicated with a long -acting 
painkiller.  
 
Post operative pain scores will be measured when first awakening, at 30 minutes, and then hourly after 
PACU arrival, as well a s at the time of discharge and prior to administration of rescue medication  
(medicine intended to relieve your symptoms immediately)  if rescue medication is needed.  
 
Follow up surveys to assess pain scores will be completed  twice a day on post -op days 1, 3, and 7.  
 
In the event you don’t have an email address or access to a smartphone or computer, you will be sent 
home with a copy of the surveys and the study team will call you to obtain your responses.  
 
You will record the  timing of acetaminophen and ibuprofen, and the use of any breakthrough pain  
medication in a paper journal provided to you. Upon completion of the study medication regimen, at the 
end of POD 3, you may continue to provide pain relieving medications as nee ded using whichever 
regimen you prefer. You will continue to record medication usage and timing and pain scores through 
POD 7.  
 
We will collect information about you and your medical history as it relates to the surgery from your 
medical record  for up to 30 days  This information will be used for research.  
 
Will you save my  research information to use in future research studies?  
 
We would like to use th e data we are obtaining in this study for studies going on right now as well as 
studies that are conducted in the future.  These studies may provide additional information that will be 
helpful in understanding post-tonsilectomy pain management in pediatric patients  or other diseases or 
condition s, including research to develop investigational tests, treatm ents, drugs or devices that are not 
 FOR IRB USE ONLY  
IRB ID #: 202002118  
APPROVAL DATE: 02/10/21  
RELEASED DATE: 02/10/21  
EXPIRATION DATE: 02/09/22  
 
 Page 3 of 10 yet approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration.  It is unlikely that what we learn from these 
studies will have a direct benefit to you.  There are no plans to provide financial compensation to you 
should this occur.  By allowing us to use your data you give up any property rights you may have in the 
data.  
 
We will share your data with other researchers. They may be doing research in areas similar to thi s 
research or in other unrelated areas.  These researchers may be at Washington University, at other 
research centers and institutions, or industry sponsors of research.  We may also share you r research data 
with large data repositories ( a repository is a database of information) for broad sharing  with the 
research community.  If your individual research data is placed in one of these repositories only 
qualified researchers , who have received prior approval from individuals that monitor the use of the 
data, will be able to look at your information.   
 
If you change your mind and do not want us to store and use your data for future research  you should 
contact  the research team  member identified at the top of this document.  The data will no longer be 
used for  research purposes.  However, if some research with your data has already been completed, the 
information from that research may still be used. Also, if the data has been shared with other researchers 
it might not be possible to withdraw the data to the extent it has been shared.  
 
Please place your initials in the blank next to Yes or No for each of the questions below:  
 
My data may be stored and used for future research as described above.  
 
_____ Yes  _____ No  
Initials   Initials  
 
My data  may be sh ared with other researchers and used by these researchers for the  future 
research as described above.  
 
_____ Yes  _____ No  
Initials   Initials  
 
Identifiers may be removed from your private information and used for future research or shared with 
others. If t his occurs, we will not ask you for additional consent.  
 
HOW MANY PEOPLE WILL PARTICIPATE?  
 
Approximately 100 people will take part in this study conducted by investigators at Washington 
University.   
 
HOW LONG WILL I BE IN THIS STUDY?  
 
If you agree to take part in this study, your involvement will last for approximately 8 days.  We will be 
collecting data from their medical record  for up to 30 days following your surgery.  
 
 FOR IRB USE ONLY  
IRB ID #: 202002118  
APPROVAL DATE: 02/10/21  
RELEASED DATE: 02/10/21  
EXPIRATION DATE: 02/09/22  
 
 Page 4 of 10  
 
WHAT ARE THE RISKS OF THIS STUDY?  
You may experience one or more  of the risks indicated below from being in this study. In addition to 
these, there may be other unknown risks, or risks that we did not anticipate, associated with being in this 
study.  
 
Ibuprofen   
Allergy alert - May cause severe allergic reaction, espec ially in people allergic to aspirin.  Symptoms 
may include:  
 Hives  
 Facial swelling  
 Asthma (wheezing)  
 Shock  
 Skin reddening  
 Rash  
 Blisters  
 
If an allergic reaction occurs, stop use and seek medical help right away.  
 
Stomach bleeding warning – ibuprofen contains NSAID, which may cause severe stomach bleeding.  
The chance is higher if you:  
 Have had stomach ulcers or bleeding problems  
 Take a blood thinning or steroid drug  
 Take other drugs containing prescription or nonprescription NSAIDs (aspirin, ibuprofen, 
naproxen or others)  
 Take more or for a longer time than directed  
 
Heart attack and stroke warning – NSAIDs, except aspirin, increase the risk of heart attack, heart f ailure, 
and stroke.  These can be fatal.  The risk is higher if you use more than directed or for longer than 
directed.  
 
Acetaminophen  
Liver warning - Severe liver damage may occur if you use more than directed. In case of overdose, get  
medical help or contact a Poison Control Center right away (1 -800-222-1222).  
 
Breach of Confidentiality  
One risk of participating in this study is that confidential information about you may be accidentally 
disclosed.  We will use our best efforts to keep the information about you secure .  Please see the section 
in this consent form titled “How will you keep  my information confidential?”  for more information.  
 
WHAT ARE THE BENEFITS OF THIS STUDY?  
 
You may or may not benefit from being in this study.    
 
 FOR IRB USE ONLY  
IRB ID #: 202002118  
APPROVAL DATE: 02/10/21  
RELEASED DATE: 02/10/21  
EXPIRATION DATE: 02/09/22  
 
 Page 5 of 10 Howe ver, we hope that, in the future, other people might benefit from this study because it will allow us 
to assess safety and effectiveness of combined pain medication versus the current practice of alternating 
each medication regimen following tonsillectomy.  
 
WHAT OTHER TREATMENT OPTIONS ARE THERE?  
 
Before you decide whether or not to be in this study, your doctor will discuss the other options that are 
available to you.  Instead of being in this study, you could receive the same medications  without being in 
the research  study.  
 
WILL IT COST ME ANYTHING TO BE IN THIS STUDY?  
 
You and/or your medical/hospital insurance provider will remain responsible for your regular medical 
care expenses  including the pain relieving medications .   
 
WILL I BE PAID FOR PARTICIPATING?  
 
You will not be paid for being in this research study.   
 
WHO IS FUNDING THIS STUDY?  
 
The University and the research team are not receiving  payment from other agencies, organizations, or 
companies to conduct this researc h study.   
 
WHAT IF I AM INJURED AS A RESULT OF THIS STUDY?  
 
Washington University investigators and staff will try to reduce, control, and treat any complications 
from this research. If you feel you are  injured because of the study, please contact the inve stigator Dr. 
Leonard at 314 -454-2136 and/or the Human Research Protection Office at 1 -(800) -438-0445.  
 
Decisions about whether payment for medical treatment for injuries relating to your participation in 
research will be made by Washington University . If you need to seek medical care for a research -related 
injury, please notify the investigator as soon as possible.  
 
HOW WILL YOU KEEP MY INFORMATION  CONFIDENTIAL?  
 
Other people such as those indicated below may become aware of your participation in this study and 
may inspect and copy records pertaining to this research.  Some of these records could contain 
information that personally identifies you. We will keep your participation in this research study 
confidential to the extent permitted by law.    
 Government representatives (including the Office for Human Research Protections) to complete 
federal or state responsibilities  
 The U.S. Food and Drug Administration  
 Hospital or University representatives to complete Hospital or University responsibilities  
 Information about your participation in this study may be documented in your health care records 
and will be available to anyone with access to your health care record, including your health 
 FOR IRB USE ONLY  
IRB ID #: 202002118  
APPROVAL DATE: 02/10/21  
RELEASED DATE: 02/10/21  
EXPIRATION DATE: 02/09/22  
 
 Page 6 of 10 insurance company.  This information may also be released as p art of a release of information 
request.  
 The last four digits of your social security number may be used in hospital or University systems 
to track billing information for research procedures . 
 Washington University’s Institutional  Review Board ( a committee that oversees the conduct of  
research involving human participants ) and the Human Research Protection Office.  The 
Institutional Review Board has reviewed and approved this study.   
 Any report or article that we write will not include information  that can directly identify you.  
The journals that publish these reports or articles require that we share your information that was 
collected for this study with others to make sure the results of this study are correct and help 
develop new ideas for res earch. Your information will be shared in a way that cannot directly 
identify you.  
 
To help protect your confidentiality, we will assign you a study ID. The master list linking you and your 
study ID will be kept separate from your research record. Any repo rt or article that we write will not 
include information that can directly identify you. The journals that publish these reports or articles 
require that we share your information that was collected for this study with others. Sharing this 
information will  allow others to make sure the results of this study are correct and help develop new 
ideas for research. Your information will be shared in a way that cannot directly identify you.  
 
A description of this clinical trial will be available on http:// www.ClinicalTrials.gov , as required by U.S. 
Law. This Web site will not incl ude information that can identify you. At most, the Web site will 
include a summary of the results. You can search this Web site at any time.   
 
Are there additional protections for my health information?  
 
Protected Health Information (PHI) is health information that identifies you. PHI is protected by federal 
law under HIPAA (the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act). To take part in this 
research, you must give the research team permission t o use and disclose (share) your PHI for the study 
as explained in this consent form .  The research team will follow state and federal laws and may share 
your health information  with the agencies and people listed under  the previous  section titled, “How wil l 
you keep my information confidential ?” 
 
Once your health information is shared with someone outside of the research team, it may no longer be 
protected by HIPAA.   
 
The research team will only use and share your information as talked about in this form  or as permitted or 
required by law .  When possible, the research team will make sure information cannot be linked to you 
(de-identified).  Once information is de -identified, it may be used and shared for other purposes not 
discussed in this consent form. If you have questions or concerns about your privacy and the use of your 
PHI, please contact the University’s Privacy Officer at 866 -747-4975.  
 
Although you will  not be allowed to see  the study information, you may be given access to your health 
care records by contacting your health care provider.  
 
 

 FOR IRB USE ONLY  
IRB ID #: 202002118  
APPROVAL DATE: 02/10/21  
RELEASED DATE: 02/10/21  
EXPIRATION DATE: 02/09/22  
 
 Page 7 of 10 If you decide not to sign this form, it will not affect  
 your treatment or the care given by your health provider.  
 your insurance payment or enrollment in any health plans.   
 any benefits to which you are entitled.  
However, it will not be possible for you to take part in the study.  
 
If you sign this form:  
 You authorize the use of your PHI for this researc h 
 This authorization does not expire.  
 You may later change your mind and not let the research team use or share your information 
(you may revoke your authorization).  
 To revoke your authorization, complete the withdrawal letter, found in the Participant sect ion 
of the Human Research Protection Office website at 
https://hrpo.wustl.edu/participants/withdrawing -from -a-study/  or you may request that the 
investigator send you a copy of the letter.       
o If you revoke your authorization:  
 The research team may only use and share info rmation already collected for 
the study.  
 Your information may still be used and shared as necessary to maintain the 
integrity of the research, for example, to account for a participant’s 
withdrawal from the research study or for safety reasons.  
 You wil l not be allowed to continue to participate in the study.  
 
Can we contact you by email?  
We would like to contact you by email for the purposes listed below.  Some of these emails may contain 
health information that identifies you.  
 Survey completion;  appointment scheduling  containing PHI  
 
Only the research team  will have access to your email communications.  We will only communicate by 
email  to send you the information listed above.  If you have any questions or need to contact us for an 
urgent or eme rgent situation, please contact the research team member identified  at the top of this 
document.  
 
You should be aware that there are risks associated with sending  your health information via email .   
 There is always a risk that the message could be intercepted or sent to the wrong email 
address.  To avoid sending messages to the wrong email address, the first email we send you 
will be a test message to ensure we have the correct email address.  
 When u sing any computer you should be careful to protect your username and password.  
Make sure you log -out before getting up from the computer.   
 If you share a home computer with other family members, and do not want them to know you 
are participating in thi s study make sure you  provide  an email add ress that only you can 
access.  
 Your employer will have access to any email communications sent or received on any 
electronic devices used for work or through a work server . 
  

 FOR IRB USE ONLY  
IRB ID #: 202002118  
APPROVAL DATE: 02/10/21  
RELEASED DATE: 02/10/21  
EXPIRATION DATE: 02/09/22  
 
 Page 8 of 10 Do you agree to allow us to send you r health information via email?   
 
_____ Yes  _____ No  
Initials   Initials  
 
IS BEING IN THIS STUDY VOLUNTARY?  
 
Taking part in this research study is completely voluntary.  You may choose not to take part at all.  If 
you decide to be in this study, you may stop participating at any time. Any data that was collected as 
part of your participation in the study will rem ain as part of the study records and cannot be removed.   
 
If you decide not to be in this study, or if you stop participating at any time, you won’t be penalized or 
lose any benefits for which you otherwise qualify.    
 
What if I decide to withdraw from th e study?  
 
You may withdraw by telling the study team you are no longer interested in participating in the study or 
you may send in a withdrawal letter. A sample withdrawal letter can be found at 
https://hrpo.wustl.edu/partici pants/withdrawing -from -a-study/  under Withdrawing from a Research 
Study . 
 
Will I receive new information about the study while participating?  
 
If we obtain any new information during this study that might affect your willingness to continue 
participatin g in the study, we’ll promptly provide you with that information.  
 
Can someone else end my participation in this study?  
 
Under certain circumstances, the investigator might decide to end your participation in this research 
study earlier than planned.  This  might happen for no reason or because in our judgment it would not 
be safe for you to continue . 
 
WHAT IF I HAVE QUESTIONS?  
 
We encourage you to ask questions.  If you have any questions about the research study itself, please 
contact: Dr. Leonard at 314 -454-2136.  If you experience a research -related injury, please contact: Dr. 
Leonard at 314 -454-2136.  
 
If you have questions, concerns, or complaints about your rights as a research participant, please contact 
the Human Research Protection  Office  1-(800) -438-0445 , or email  hrpo@wustl.edu .   General 
information about being a research partic ipant can be found on the Human Research Protection Office 
web site, http://hrpo.wustl.edu .  To offer input about your experiences as a research participant or  to 
speak to someone other than the research staff, call the Human Research Protection Office at the number 
above.  
 
 

 FOR IRB USE ONLY  
IRB ID #: 202002118  
APPROVAL DATE: 02/10/21  
RELEASED DATE: 02/10/21  
EXPIRATION DATE: 02/09/22  
 
 Page 9 of 10 This consent form is not a contract. It is a written explanation of what will happen during the study if 
you decide to participate. You are not waiving any legal rights by agreeing to participate in this study. 
As a participant you have rights and responsibilities as described in this document and including:  
 To be  given enoug h time before signing below to weigh the risks and potential benefits and 
decide if you want to participate without any pressure from the research team or others . 
 To understand all of the information included in the document, have your questions  answered , 
and receive  an explanation of anything you do not understand.  
 To follow the procedures described in this document and the instructions of the research team to 
the best of your ability unless you choose to stop your participation in the research study . 
 To give the research team accurate and complete information . 
 To tell the research team promptly about any problems you have related to your participation, or 
if you are unable to continue and wish to stop participating in the research study . 
 
Your signature indicates that this research study has been explained to you, that your questions have 
been answered, and that you agree to take part in this study.  You will receive a signed and dated copy 
of this form.  
 
 
Do not sign this form if today’ s date is after EXPIRATION DATE: 02/09/22 . 
 
__________________________________________  _______________________________  
(Signature of Participant )     (Date)  
 
__________________________ __________________  
(Participant's n ame – printed)  
 
 
Parent/Guardian Name  and Relationship to Participant : 
 
 
Do not sign this form if today’s date is after  EXPIRATION DATE: 02/09/22 . 
 
 
_______________________________  
(Child’s name – printed)  
 
 
__________________________________________  _______________________________  
(Signature of Parent/Guardian )    (Date)  
 
 
__________________________________________  _______________________________  
(Name of Parent /Guardian - printed)     (Relationship to participant – printed)  
 
 
 FOR IRB USE ONLY  
IRB ID #: 202002118  
APPROVAL DATE: 02/10/21  
RELEASED DATE: 02/10/21  
EXPIRATION DATE: 02/09/22  
 
 Page 10 of 10  
 
 
Statement of Person Who Obtained Consent  
 
The information in this document has been discussed with the participant  or, where appropriate, with the 
participant ’s legally authorized representative.  The participant has indicated that they understand  the 
risks, benefits, and procedures involved with participation in this research study.  
 
 
__________________________________________  _______________________________  
(Signature of Person who Obtained Consent)    (Date)  
 
 
__________________________ _________________  
(Name of Person who Obtained Consent - printed) 
 