	
	IRB Protocol Number: 1609017593  Clinicaltrials.gov ID: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  NIH/NCI  contract: HHSN261201700005C Study design, Procedures and Statistical  Analysis Plan (SAP): 6/21/2017   Title: Validation of SHADE a Mobile Technology for Monitoring of Ultraviolet Exposure Coordinating Center: Weill Cornell Medical College, Department of Dermatology Collaborating Sponsor: YouV Labs, Inc. d/b/a Shade   IRB Protocol Version and Date: Version 3: 08/14/2018 Original, Version 1 dated June 21st, 2017 Amendment 1: 4/28/2018 – Updating the CRF to include a page for patients to document the medication they are currently taking, to change the order of documents within the CRF to assist with filing and to update the inclusion/exclusion criteria on the CRF to reflect the IRB  		
	
p.2		Table	of	Contents	LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 7 STATEMENT OF COMPLIANCE 7 PROTOCOL SUMMARY 8 SCHEMATIC OF STUDY DESIGN 9 1 KEY ROLES 9 2  INTRODUCTION: BACKGROUND INFORMATION AND SCIENTIFIC RATIONALE 10 2.1 Background Information 10 2.2 Rationale 10 2.3 Potential Risks and Benefits 11 2.3.1 Known Potential Risks 11 2.3.2 Known Potential Benefits 11 3 OBJECTIVES AND PURPOSE 11 4 STUDY DESIGN AND ENDPOINTS 12 4.1 Description of the Study Design 12 4.2.1 Primary Endpoint 12 4.2.2 Secondary Endpoints 12 4.2.3 Exploratory Endpoints 13 5 STUDY ENROLLMENT AND WITHDRAWAL 13 5.1 Participant Inclusion Criteria 13 5.2 Participant Exclusion Criteria 13 5.3 Strategies for Recruitment and Retention 13 5.4 Participant Withdrawal or termination 14 5.4.1 Reasons for Withdrawal or Termination 14 5.4.2 Handling of Participant Withdrawals or termination 14 5.5 Premature Termination or Suspension of Study 14 6 STUDY AGENT 14 6.1 Study Agent(s) and Control Description 14 6.1.1 Acquisition 14 6.1.2 Appearance, Packaging, and Labeling 14 Application User Interface 15 Alarms 17 6.1.3 Product Storage and Stability 17 
	
p.3		6.1.4 Preparation 17 6.1.5 Dosing and Administration 17 6.1.6 Route of Administration 17 6.1.7 Starting Dose and Dose Escalation Schedule 17 6.1.8 Dose Adjustments/Modifications/Delays 17 6.1.9 Duration of Therapy 17 6.1.10 Tracking of Dose 17 6.1.11 Device Specific Considerations 17 6.2 Study agent Accountability Procedures 18 7 STUDY PROCEDURES AND SCHEDULE 18 7.1 Study Procedures/Evaluations 18 7.1.1 Study specific procedures 18 7.1.2 Standard of care study procedures 18 7.2 Laboratory Procedures/Evaluations 19 7.2.1 Clinical Laboratory Evaluations 19 7.2.2 Other Assays or Procedures 19 7.2.3 Specimen Preparation, Handling, and Storage 19 7.2.4 Specimen Shipment 19 7.3 Study Schedule 19 7.3.1 Screening 19 7.3.2 Enrollment/Baseline 20 7.3.3 Follow-up 20 7.3.4 Final Study Visit 20 7.3.5 Early Termination Visit 20 7.3.7 Schedule of Events Table 21 7.4 Justification for Sensitive Procedures 21 7.5 Concomitant Medications, Treatments, and Procedures 21 7.5.1 Precautionary Medications, Treatments, and Procedures 21 7.6 Prohibited Medications, Treatments, and Procedures 22 7.7 Prophylactic Medications, Treatments, and Procedures 22 7.8 Rescue Medications, Treatments, and Procedures 22 7.9 Participant Access to Study Agent At Study Closure 22 8 ASSESSMENT OF SAFETY 22 8.1 Specification of Safety Parameters 22 
	
p.4		8.1.1 Definition of Adverse Events (AE) 22 8.1.2 Definition of Serious Adverse Events (SAE) 22 8.1.3 Definition of Unanticipated Problems (UP) 23 8.2 Classification of an Adverse Event 23 8.2.1 Severity of Event 23 8.2.2 Relationship to Study Agent 23 8.2.3 Expectedness 23 8.3 Time Period and Frequency for Event Assessment and Follow-Up 24 8.4 Reporting Procedures 24 8.4.1 Adverse Event Reporting 25 8.4.2 Serious Adverse Event Reporting 25 8.4.3 Unanticipated Problem Reporting 25 8.4.4 Events of Special Interest 25 8.4.5 Reporting of Pregnancy 25 8.5 Study Halting Rules 25 8.6 Safety Oversight 25 9 CLINICAL MONITORING 26 10 STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS 26 10.1 Statistical and Analytical Plans 26 10.2 Statistical Hypotheses 26 10.3 Analysis Datasets 26 10.4 Description of Statistical Methods 26 10.4.1 General Approach 27 10.4.2 Analysis of the Primary Efficacy Endpoint(s) 27 #1 (Primary): Quantify the impact of Shade on the cumulative number of new actinic keratoses developed over the study period. 27 10.4.3 Analysis of the Secondary Endpoint(s) 27 #2 (Secondary): Quantify the impact of Shade on the numbers of new AK’s observed at the final visit 27 #3 (Secondary): Quantify the impact of Shade on the numbers of new cutaneous squamous cell carcinomas confirmed by histology during follow up over the study period. 27 #4 (Secondary): Quantify the impact of Shade on the number of new nonmelanoma skin cancers (basal cell carcinomas, cutaneous squamous cell carcinomas) confirmed by histology over the study period. 28 
	
p.5		#5 (Secondary): Test the correlation between measured UV exposure and the number of new actinic keratoses. 28 #6 (Secondary): Test the correlation between measured UV exposure and the number of new nonmelanoma skin cancers. 28 #7 (Secondary): Quantify the impact of Shade on keratinocyte DNA damage approximated by the measurement of cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers by ELISA. 28 #8 (Secondary): Quantify the impact of Shade on patients’ quality of life assessed by PROMIS (Patient-Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System) in the fields of anxiety (Mental Health), depression (Mental Health), and Ability to Participate in Social Roles and Activities (Social health). 28 #9 (Secondary): Assess sensor usage in the study patient population and compare characteristics of observant vs non-observant and responsive vs non-responsive patients. 29 #10 (Secondary): Assess feasibility of the intervention for kidney transplant recipients through report of their rates for compliance and retention. 29 10.4.4 Safety Analyses 29 10.4.5 Adherence and Retention Analyses 29 10.4.6  Baseline Descriptive Statistics 29 10.4.7 Planned Interim Analyses 30 10.4.7.1 Safety Review 30 10.4.7.2 Efficacy Review 30 10.4.8 Additional Sub-Group Analyses 30 10.4.9 Multiple Comparison/Multiplicity 30 10.4.10 Tabulation of Individual Response Data 30 10.4.11 Exploratory Analyses 31 10.5 Sample Size 31 10.6 Measures to Minimize Bias 32 10.6.1 Enrollment/ Randomization/ Masking Procedures 32 10.6.2 Evaluation of Success of Blinding 32 10.6.3 Breaking the Study Blind/Participant Code 32 11 SOURCE DOCUMENTS AND ACCESS TO SOURCE DATA/DOCUMENTS 33 12 QUALITY ASSURANCE AND QUALITY CONTROL 33 13 ETHICS/PROTECTION OF HUMAN SUBJECTS 33 13.1 Ethical Standard 33 13.2 Institutional Review Board 33 13.3 Informed Consent Process 33 
	
p.6		13.3.1 Consent/assent and Other Informational Documents Provided to Participants 33 13.3.2 Consent Procedures and Documentation 33 13.4 Participant and data Confidentiality 33 13.4.1 Research Use of Stored Human Samples,Specimens or Data 34 13.5 Future Use of Stored Specimens 34 14 DATA HANDLING AND RECORD KEEPING 34 14.1 Data Collection and Management Responsibilities 34 14.2 Study Records Retention 34 14.3 Protocol Deviations 34 14.4 Publication and Data Sharing Policy 34 15 STUDY ADMINISTRATION 35 15.1 Study Leadership 35 16 CONFLICT OF INTEREST POLICY 35 17 REVISION HISTORY 35 17.1 Versions 35 17.2 Managing Protocol Changes for continuing subjects 36 APPENDIX 1  User Instructions 37 			
 
 
 
1300 York Avenue, New York, NY 10065 LIST	OF	ABBREVIATIONS		AE	Adverse	Event	AK	Actinic	Keratosis BT	Bluetooth	low	energy	CAT	Computer	Adaptive	Test	CFR	Code	of	Federal	Regulations	CPD	cyclopyrimidine	dimer	CRF	Case	Report	Form	ELISA	Enzyme	Linked	ImmunoSorbent	Assay	IC	Informed	Consent	ICF	Informed	Consent	Form	IRB	Institutional	Review	Board	IS	Immunosuppressive	LN2	Liquid	nitrogen	NCI	National	Cancer	Institute	NIH	National	Institutes	of	Health	PI	Principal	Investigator	NMSC	Non-Melanoma	Skin	Cancer	PROMIS	Patient	Reported	Outcome	Measurement	Information	System	SAE	Significant	Adverse	Event	SCC	Squamous	Cell	Carcinoma	SPF	Sun	Protection	Factor	UV	Ultraviolet	Light	UVI	Ultraviolet	Index	WC	Weill	Cornell	Medical	College		STATEMENT	OF	COMPLIANCE	The	trial	will	be	conducted	in	accordance	with	the	ICH	E6,	the	Code	of	Federal	Regulations	on	the	Protection	of	Human	Subjects	(45	CFR	Part	46),	and	the	Terms	of	Subcontract	to	Weill	Cornell	from	the	prime	contract	HHSN261201700005C	to	YouV	Labs,	Inc.	The	Principal	Investigator	will	assure	that	no	deviation	from,	or	changes	to	the	protocol	will	take	place	without	prior	agreement	from	the	sponsor	and	documented	approval	from	the	Institutional	Review	Board	(IRB),	except	where	necessary	to	eliminate	an	immediate	hazard(s)	to	the	trial	participants.	All	personnel	involved	in	the	conduct	of	this	study	have	completed	Human	Subjects	Protection	Training.	I	agree	to	ensure	that	all	staff	members	involved	in	the	conduct	of	this	study	are	informed	about	their	obligations	in	meeting	the	above	commitments.		Principal	Investigator:	George	I.	Varghese,	M.D.		Signed:	_____________________________________	Date:	______________			
	
 8 PROTOCOL	SUMMARY	Title:	Validation	of	shade,	a	wearable	ultraviolet	light	monitor,	for	reduction	of	actinic	keratosis	Summary:	The	incidence	of	non-melanoma	skin	cancers,	due	to	increased	ultraviolet	(UV)	exposure,	has	increased	by	300%	over	the	past	2	decades.	The	innovative	UV	sensor,	Shade,	is	designed	to	help	people	manage	their	UV	exposure	by	quantifying	their	UV	exposure	levels	through	a	linked	smartphone	application.	In	order	to	validate	the	effectiveness	of	Shade,	we	propose	conducting	a	study	communicating	the	level	of	UV	exposure	and	correlating	it	with	the	development	of	actinic	keratosis	(AK),	a	precancerous	lesion	of	the	skin.	We	will	recruit	patients	with	multiple	AK¿s.			We	will	include	renal	transplant	patients	as	this	population	develop	AKs	as	well.		We	will	evaluate	the	UV	monitor's	effectiveness	in	decreasing	the	number	of	AKs	over	a	summer.	This	randomized	partially	blinded	study	will	recruit	120	patients	with	a	recent	history	of	AKs	and	evaluate	the	incidence	of	new	AKs	after	one	summer.	We	will	perform	a	control	versus	study	group	analysis.	Half	of	the	subjects	(study	group)	will	be	randomly	assigned	to	use	the	sensor	along	with	its	smartphone	application,	while	the	other	half	(control	group)	will	receive	standard	of	care	treatment	involving	counseling	to	avoid	sun	exposure.	Subjects	will	have	regular	standard	of	care	visits	with	the	dermatologist	who	will	follow	the	number	of	actinic	keratosis	via	clinical	exam	and	photography.	The	primary	outcome	will	be	a	statistically	significant	reduction	by	at	least	25%	of	the	cumulative	number	of	newly	occurred	AK	lesions	between	the	control	and	the	study	group	over	one	summer,	counted	at	enrollment	and	follow-up.	In	subjects	at	one	study	site,	skin	DNA	damage	will	also	be	assessed	using	cyclobutane	pyrimidine	dimers	(CPD)	levels	measured	by	ELISA	in	both	sun	exposed	(nose)	and	sun	protected	skin	(buccal	mucosa)	in	both	the	study	and	control	groups.	Secondary	outcomes	will	look	at	clinical	decreases	by	25%	in	CPD	levels	after	using	the	sensor.		 	
	
 9 SCHEMATIC	OF	STUDY	DESIGN				1	KEY	ROLES		Weill	Cornell	Medical	College		Name	Title	Degrees	Unit	Role	George	I.	Varghese	Assistant	Prof.	M.D.	Dermatology	Principal	Investigator	Jonathan	H.	Zippin	Assistant	Prof.-Clinical	M.D.,	Ph.D.	Dermatology	Protocol	design,	laboratory	analytics	Darshana	Dadhania	Assoc.	Prof.,	Assist.	Dir.	M.D.,	M.S.	Nephrology	Rogosin	Institute	Co-investigator		Melissa	Platt	Physician	Assistant	MMS	Dermatology	Study	coordinator	Susan	Koshy	Administrator	M.B.A.	Dermatology	Administrative	Contact	The	following	physicians	are	associated	with	the	study	mainly	with	the	role	of	recruiting	appropriate	subjects.	Clinical	Co-Investigators	Name	Title	Degrees	Unit	Role	Meredith	Anull	Associate	Prof.	–Research	Pharm	D.	Surgery	Screen	subjects	Choli	Hartono			M.D.	Nephrology	&	Hypertension	Screen	subjects	Joseph	Jorizzo	Prof.	–	Clinical	M.D.	Dermatology	Screen	subjects	Sandip	Kapur	Prof.	M.D.	Surgery	Screen	subjects	Jim	Kim	Assistant	Prof.	M.D.	Surgery	Screen	subjects	John	Richard	Lee	Assistant	Prof.	M.D.	Nephrology	&	Hypertension	Screen	subjects	Jun	Lee			M.D.	Nephrology	&	Hypertension	Screen	subjects	Kira	Minkis	Assistant	Prof.	Ph.D.,	M.D.	Dermatology	Screen	subjects	Patrice	Robin	Powell	Staff	Associate	B.S.,	M.S.	Nursing	Screen	subjects	David	Serur			M.D.	Nephrology	&	Hypertension	Screen	subjects	
	
 10 Manikkam	Suthanthiram	Prof.	M.B.,	B.S.	Nephrology	&	Hypertension	Data	analysis	Muthukumar	Thangamani	Associate	Prof.	M.D.,	M.B.,	B.S.	Nephrology	&	Hypertension	Screen	subjects				2		INTRODUCTION:	BACKGROUND	INFORMATION	AND	SCIENTIFIC	RATIONALE			2.1	BACKGROUND	INFORMATION		The	incidence	of	non-melanoma	skin	cancers	(NMSC)	has	increased	by	300%	over	the	past	2	decades.	Increasing	ultraviolet	(UV)	exposure	from	the	sun	has	been	largely	recognized	as	the	primary	risk	factor	for	the	development	of	these	NMSCs.	Actinic	keratosis	(AK)	is	a	frequent	pre-cancerous	skin	lesion	caused	by	damage	from	ultraviolet	exposure.	Without	treatment,	1-2%	of	these	lesions	evolve	into	squamous	cell	carcinoma	(SCC)[1].		Therefore,	the	number	of	AKs	reflects	the	effect	of	UV	exposure	and	the	risk	for	SCC.	The	burden	of	SCC	is	especially	high	in	immunosupressed	patients	such	as	transplant	patients	who	are	at	high	risk	of	skin	cancer	because	of	their	immunosuppressive	medications.	Morbidity/mortality	of	SCC	in	transplant	patients	can	be	as	high	as	25%[2].	Sunscreen	use	has	been	demonstrated	to	decrease	the	number	of	actinic	keratosis	from	24%-44%[3].	However,	despite,	counseling	and	protection,	UV	exposure	can	still	be	difficult	to	control	due	to	a	variety	of	factors	including	the	lack	of	real	time	UV	intensity	monitoring,	incomplete	adherence	to	preventive	measures,	and	misuse	of	sunscreen.			2.2	RATIONALE			The incidence of non-melanoma skin cancers (NMSC) has increased by 300% over the past 2 decades. Increasing ultraviolet (UV) exposure from the sun has been largely recognized as the primary risk factor for the development of these NMSCs. Actinic keratosis (AK) is a frequent pre-cancerous skin lesion caused by damage from ultraviolet exposure. Without treatment, 1-2% of these lesions evolve into squamous cell carcinoma (SCC)[1]. Therefore, the number of AKs reflects the effect of UV exposure and the risk for SCC. Transplant patients are at high risk of skin cancer because of the immunosuppressive medications required to prevent organ rejection. Morbidity/mortality of SCC in this patient population can be as high as 25%[2]. Sunscreen use has been demonstrated to decrease the number of actinic keratosis from 24%-44%[3]. However, despite, counseling and protection, UV exposure can still be difficult to assess and control due to a variety of factors including UV intensity, shade, the use of protective clothing and the amount of sunscreen used. A new innovative ultraviolet (UV) sensor, Shade, helps quantify daily UV exposure and can enable users to manage their UV exposure through alerts and self-reporting through a smartphone app. In order to validate the effectiveness of Shade, we propose conducting a study looking at amount of UV exposure and the development of actinic keratosis over a 12 month period in transplant patients with a history of AKs. The study protocol will be similar to the 2015 Chen et al. NEJM paper[4] which observed a difference between 11% and 20% between their study group (nicotinamide) and the control group (placebo) in the number of actinic keratoses at 3, 6, 9, and 12  months after randomization. In addition, we will test the effect of UV exposure on cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers (CPD). These are biological markers that are increased immediately with UV exposure in a dose dependent fashion. Measurement of CPD following the delivery of a known UV dose allows for a biological readout of UV effects. In addition, CPD levels represent an equilibrium between UV induced formation and DNA repair; therefore, they can also reflect chronic UV exposure[5]. The 
	
 11 control group will not wear a sensor. This choice of control group allows us to provide standard  of care advice to these subjects. The behavior change in the treatment group is expected to be a result of both the decision to engage with the device, for example by putting it on and opening the App as well as due to the knowledge of personal UV exposure reported by the device. We expect to gather information on the cumulative UV exposure of all subjects by using an ELISA assay for cyclopyridimine dimers (CPD) from photoexposed skin.   References: 1. Criscione, V. D. et al. Actinic keratoses: Natural history and risk of malignant transformation in the Veterans Affairs Topical Tretinoin Chemoprevention Trial. Cancer 115, 2523-2530 (2009).  2. Zavos, G. et al. Nonmelanoma skin cancer after renal transplantation: a single-center experience in 1736 transplantations. Int. J. Dermatol. 50, 1496-1500 (2011).  3. Thompson, S. C., Jolley, D. & Marks, R. Reduction of solar keratoses by regular sunscreen use. N. Engl. J. Med. 329, 1147-1151 (1993).  4. Chen, A. C. et al. A Phase 3 Randomized Trial of Nicotinamide for Skin-Cancer Chemoprevention. N. Engl. J. Med. 373, 1618-1626 (2015).  5. Yamaguchi,Y. et al. Cyclobutane pyrimidine dimer formation and p53 production in human skin after repeated UV irradiation. Exp. Dermatol. 17, 916-924 (2008). 	2.3	POTENTIAL	RISKS	AND	BENEFITS			2.3.1	KNOWN	POTENTIAL	RISKS		This	is	a	minimal	risk	study.	All	subjects	will,	over	the	duration	of	the	study,	have	one	dermatology	visit	and	skin	check	beyond	the	standard	of	care.	Subjects	in	the	treatment	group	will	have	additional	information	and	interaction	on	their	UV	exposure	to	help	them	make	the	choice	to	minimize	such	exposure.		2.3.2	KNOWN	POTENTIAL	BENEFITS		The	incidence	of	non-melanoma	skin	cancers	(NMSC)	has	increased	by	300%	over	the	past	2	decades.	Vulnerable	populations,	such	as	transplant	patients,	have	a	65	times	higher	risk	for	developing	squamous	cell	carcinoma	(SCC),	and	once	diagnosed	they	have	a	far	higher	rate	of	developing	metastases	and	higher	mortality	rate.	Modification	of	UV	exposure	is	difficult	to	teach	because	the	rays	are	invisible,	intuition	about	their	intensity	is	demonstrably	poor,	and	the	ability	to	recollect	exposure	events	is	generally	poor.	In	addition,	a	sudden	medical	change,	such	as	immunosuppression	following	transplantation,	can	make	some	patients,	especially	skin	types	III-IV,	become	more	susceptible	to	UV	exposure	and	vulnerable	due	to	limited	knowledge	of	their	daily	UV	requirement.	The	use	of	the	UV	sensor,	Shade,	is	designed	to	help	people	manage	their	UV	exposure	by	quantifying	their	UV	exposure	and	alerting	them	of	their	levels	through	a	smartphone	app.	The	sensor	is	small,	easy	to	use,	and	user	friendly.	Therefore,	this	device	would	provide	an	immediate	benefit	to	study	participants.	In	addition,	if	the	study	due	to	the	use	of	Shade	can	demonstrate	a	25%	reduction	in	the	levels	of	actinic	keratosis	(AK),	and	hence	SCC	risk,	then	we	can	extrapolate	that	the	use	of	this	device	may	decrease	the	morbidity	and	mortality	of	SCCs.	In	addition,	by	including	a	cohort	of	transplant	patients,	this	study	will	help	assess	feasibility	for	groups	at	high-risk	of	SCC.		3	OBJECTIVES	AND	PURPOSE	This	study	will	evaluate	the	safety	and	effectiveness	of	Shade	for	the	management	of	UV-induced	skin	complications	and	data	collected	from	this	study	will	be	used	to	support	the	proposed	indications	for	use.		The	purpose	of	this	investigation	is	to	demonstrate	the	safety	and	effectiveness	of	the	Shade	UV	sensor	and	mobile	
	
 12 phone	application	product	to	reduce	actinic	keratosis.		4	STUDY	DESIGN	AND	ENDPOINTS	4.1	DESCRIPTION	OF	THE	STUDY	DESIGN	This randomized partially blinded study will recruit 120 patients with a history of actinic keratosis (AK) lesions. A control versus study group analysis will be performed where 50% of the subjects will be randomly assigned (balanced by Fitzpatrick skin type, separate randomization lists will be made for type I&II and types III-VI, at time of first visit subjects will be assigned to study or control group by giving them the next assignment on the appropriate list) to use the SHADE sensor and its app (study group), while the other 50% (control group) will receive standard of care UV  ounseling(placebo). Subjects will have 3 visits. The first and last visit will be standard of care visits at 0 month (enrollment), and the conclusion of their involvement. The second visit will be scheduled 3 months after the enrollment visit. The final visit will be scheduled be as soon as practical, but at least 3 months after  isit 2 and after September 30. On arrival at each visit, study personnel will pre-screen patients to ensure that the sensor is not visible to physician prior to examination, for example by placing it in their pocket. At each follow up visit, the number of actinic keratosis on the face and hands will be counted and photographed. They will be treated as per standard of care protocol with cryotherapy or curettage. General use of field therapies will not be permitted during the trial. Any lesions suspicious of non-melanoma or melanoma skin cancer will be photographed and biopsied as part of the standard of care algorithm. Cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers (CPD) levels will be measured by ELISA from exposed (cheek) and unexposed (buccal mucosa) skin scrapings collected at the first and last visit. For each patient, the CPD level from exposed skin will be  normalized to the sun protected CPD level measured from unexposed skin. We will compare the normalized CPD level of control versus study participants at each timepoint and  their average CPD change over time. We will then compare these levels with Shade UV measurements. Finally, patients will also answer questions in PROMIS (Patient-Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System) in the fields of anxiety, depression and ability to participate socially to gauge their attitudes toward the sensor 4.2.1	PRIMARY	ENDPOINT	1.	Quantify	the	impact	of	Shade	on	the	cumulative	number	of	new	actinic	keratoses	developed	over	the	study	period.	4.2.2	SECONDARY	ENDPOINTS	2.	Quantify	the	impact	of	Shade	on	the	cumulative	number	of	new	actinic	keratoses	observed	at	the	final	study	visit.	3.	Quantify	the	impact	of	Shade	on	the	cumulative	numbers	of	new	cutaneous	squamous	cell	carcinomas	confirmed	by	histology	over	the	study	period.	4.		Quantify	the	impact	of	Shade	on	the	cumulative	number	of	new	nonmelanoma	skin	cancers	(basal	cell	carcinomas,	cutaneous	squamous	cell	carcinomas)	confirmed	by	histology	over		the	study	period.	5.	Test	the	correlation	between	measured	UV	exposure	and	the	number	of	new	actinic	keratoses.	6.	Test	the	correlation	between	measured	UV	exposure	and	the	number	of	new	nonmelanoma	skin	cancers.	7.	Quantify	the	impact	of	Shade	on	keratinocyte	DNA	damage	approximated	by	the	measurement	of	cyclobutane	pyrimidine	dimers	by	ELISA.	8.		Quantify	the	impact	of	Shade	on	patients’	quality	of	life	assessed	by	PROMIS	(Patient-Reported	Outcomes	Measurement	Information	System)	in	the	fields	of	anxiety	(Mental	Health),	depression	(Mental	Health),	and	Ability	to	Participate	in	Social	Roles	and	Activities	(Social	health).	9.		Assess	sensor	usage	in	the	study	patient	population	and	compare	characteristics	of	observant	vs.	non-observant	and	responsive	vs.	non-responsive	patients.	
	
 13 10.	Assess	feasibility	of	the	intervention	for	kidney	transplant	recipients	through	report	of	their	rates	for	compliance	and	retention.		4.2.3	EXPLORATORY	ENDPOINTS	None		5	STUDY	ENROLLMENT	AND	WITHDRAWAL		5.1	PARTICIPANT	INCLUSION	CRITERIA	1. Open	to	men	and	women	of	all	skin	types	between	the	ages	of	18-80	2. Prior	history	of	actinic	keratosis.	Specifically,		a. Was	given	a	diagnosis	of	actinic	keratosis	in	the	past	year	and/or	has	had	a	history	of	5	or	more	actinic	keratosis	in	the	past	5	years.	b. If	the	patient	has	received	a	kidney	transplant,	the	date	of	transplant		should	be	longer	than	6	months	and	should	be	currently	on	transplant	immunosuppression	therapy.	3. Has	a	smartphone	that	support	Bluetooth	low	energy	using	a	compatible	operating	system	(iOS	8+	or	Android	4+)	4. Able	to	commit	to	dermatology	visits	three	times	during	the	study	period.	5.2	PARTICIPANT	EXCLUSION	CRITERIA	1. Has	received	UV	therapy	in	the	past	6	months.		2. Has	had	field	therapy	(e.g.,	entire	face	or	scalp)	for	the	treatment	of	actinic	keratosis	(e.g.	topical	imiquimod,	5-fluorouracil,	photodynamic	therapy)	in	the	past	3	months.	3. Patient's	work	and	or	their	lifestyle	is	not	compatible	with	wearing	a	UV	sensor.	4. Has	difficulty	controlling	their	own	UV	exposure	(nursing	home,	long	term	hospitalization).	5. Has	a	medical	condition	judged	incompatible	with	the	study	by	the	enrolling	physician	including	the	presence	of	an	ICD	or	an	existing	plan	for	an	extended	inpatient	treatment.	6. Is	an	employee	or	direct	relative	of	an	employee	of	the	investigational	site	or	study	sponsor.	7. Must	have	a	smartphone	that	is	compatible	with	the	Shade	app	and	is	comfortable	using	a	new	app	(the	Shade	app)	on	their	smartphone.	a. Jitterbug	and	the	Samsung	Galaxy	J3	are	not	compatible	with	the	app	Ongoing	exclusion	criteria:	If	subject	is	not	able	to	meet	the	commitment	to	ongoing	visits	or	their	answer	to	the	exclusion	criteria	questions	changes	the	subject	will	be	removed	from	the	study.	If	the	change	in	status	is	temporary,	less	than	three	months,	the	decision	to	remove	a	subject	from	the	study	will	be	at	the	discretion	of	the	PI.		5.3	STRATEGIES	FOR	RECRUITMENT	AND	RETENTION	Recruiting	will	be	performed	mainly	at	Weill	Cornell	Medical	Center	which	is	closely	affiliated	with	HSS	and	MSKCC	providing	additional	access	to	patients.		Dermatologists	at	Weill	Cornell	Medicine	will	be	primary	sources	of	referral	within	the	department.		In	addition,	Darshana	Dadhania	MD,	MS,	Transplant	Nephrologist	and	Medical	Director,	Histocompatible	Transplant	Program	will	help	recruit	transplant	patients	from	their	transplant	center.	Each	patient	regarding	of	study	arm	will	receive	$50	for	each	visit	for	a	maximum	of	3	visits.		Patients	in	the	study	arm	who	use	the	device	on	a	consistent	basis	(>40%	of	days	per	month	with	no	gaps	longer	than	seven	days)	will	receive	$20	per	month	for	up	to	12	months.		The	sponsor	may	offer	additional	prize	based	motivations	for	use	which	will	not	exceed	$1,000	for	any	single	subject	in	a	given	month.		
	
 14 5.4	PARTICIPANT	WITHDRAWAL	OR	TERMINATION	Participants	may	withdraw	for	any	reason	during	the	study.	5.4.1	REASONS	FOR	WITHDRAWAL	OR	TERMINATION	Participants	who	can	not	comply	with	the	requirement	for	quarterly	visits	will	be	dropped	from	the	study.	5.4.2	HANDLING	OF	PARTICIPANT	WITHDRAWALS	OR	TERMINATION	Subject	compensation	will	not	be	affected	by	study	withdrawal	or	termination.	Each	endpoint	will	be	analyzed	using	only	data	for	which	there	is	a	complete	data	set	relevant	to	that	analysis.		5.5	PREMATURE	TERMINATION	OR	SUSPENSION	OF	STUDY	Study	will	be	terminated	if	the	PI	or	IRB	feels	that	the	rate	of	adverse	events	warrants	termination	or	suspension.	Study	will	be	suspended	if	recruiting	targets	are	not	met,	specifically,	if	fewer	than	70	subjects	are	recruited	at	the	end	of	three	months,	the	study	will	be	suspended.			6	STUDY	AGENT		6.1	STUDY	AGENT(S)	AND	CONTROL	DESCRIPTION		6.1.1	ACQUISITION	Shade	sensors	will	be	delivered	to	the	study	coordinator	by	the	sponsor.		6.1.2	APPEARANCE,	PACKAGING,	AND	LABELING	Device:	Figure	6.1.2.1	Shade	device	
		Specifications	:	Size:	1.58”	diameter,	0.49”	height	Weight:	0.48	oz	Battery	Life:	4	days	(from	a	full	charge);	low	battery	notifications[JC3]		Magnet:	Neodynium	Notifications:	Light	and	vibrations	Connectivity:	Bluetooth	Low	Energy	Compatibility:	iPhone	5	and	above	|	Android	4.4	and	above	Charging:	Micro-USB	cable	included	Recharge	time:	1.5	hours	

	
 15 Materials:	plastic	case	UV	Measurement	Sensitivity:	Wavelength	range:	280-400	nm	erythemally	weighted	Limit	of	detection:	0.01	UVI.	The	UV	Index	is	the	unit	of	intensity	recommended	by	the	World	Health	Organization’s	INTERSUN	working	group.	Maximum	UV:	16	UVI	Dosimetry:	accuracy	and	precision	1.5	J/cm2		Software	The	software	consists	of	firmware	in	the	device,	a	mobile	application,	and	backend	servers	to	support	it.	The	mobile	application	has	been	designed	based	on	user	feedback	to	highlight	issues	important	to	people	concerned	about	their	exposure	to	UV	light.	Specifically	it	reports	the	devices	estimate	of	the	current	UV	Index	as	well	as	the	user’s	cumulative	exposure	for	the	day	in	units	of	J/m2.	The	software	keeps	a	history	of	the	exposure	and	allows	the	user	to	set	a	daily	limit	of	UV	exposure	at	which	they	will	receive	alerts.	The	backend	manages	each	user	account	and	stores	their	historical	data	to	allow	retrieval	and	analysis.		When	the	device	is	charged,	it	indicates	connection	by	momentarily	glowing	green,	then	it	indicates	charging	by	glowing	red.	When	the	device	is	fully	charged,	and	connected	to	power,	it	indicates	green.	Once	powered	up,	it	sends	a	Bluetooth	(BT)	signal	advertises	its	presence.	In	this	state	it	can	be	paired	to	a	phone	using	app	set	to	the	pairing	function.	If	the	device	is	covered,	for	example	by	a	jacket,	it	provides	a	vibration	alert	and	a	mobile	phone	alert	periodically	until	it	is	uncovered.	
	APPLICATION USER INTERFACE 		When	the	device	is	first	activated	and	paired	with	a	new	mobile	device	an	onboarding	protocol	is	run	through	(see	Attachment	4).	The	application	contains	five	tabs:		dashboard,	history,	symptoms,	chat,	and	settings.	Dashboard:	The	dashboard	allows	the	user	to	visualize	their	current	exposure,	total	exposure	for	the	day,	as	well	as	an	estimate	of	the	time	remaining	during	the	day	that	the	user	can	be	exposed	to	the	sun	at	current	intensity	levels.	From	the	dashboard	the	user	is	also	capable	of	logging	their	sunscreen	(SPF)	usage	during	the	day.		For	a	period	of	time	after	logging	the	sunscreen	(90	minutes)	the	reported	UV	dose	is	reduced	by	an	amount	corresponding	to	the	reported	SPF.	The	history	tabs	allows	the	user	to	visualize	their	daily	UV	exposure	over	the	last	12	days.	Symptoms:	From	the	symptom	tab	the	user	is	capable	of	inputting	their	symptoms	with	a	timestamp	that	could	provide	useful	feedback	to	the	user	on	the	correlation	between	symptoms	and	UV	exposure.	Chat:	

	
 16 Chat	enables	users	to	receive	real-time	feedback	from	the	company	regarding	the	Shade	device	and	the	mobile	application	usage.	This	is	also	a	platform	for	providing	feedback	to	the	company,	application	troubleshooting,	or	any	other	questions,	comments,	or	queries	the	users	may	have.	Settings:	The	user	can	manage	general	application	settings	from	this	tab.	For	example:	it	is	from	this	tab	that	a	user	can	pair	their	Shade	sensor	to	their	mobile	phone.	Figure	2-3:	Shade	Application	Key	Screenshots	
	
	

	
 17 ALARMS In	use,	the	device	uses	two	methods	to	notify	the	user.	(1)	shade	device	vibration	and	(2)	mobile	phone	alerts.	Notifications	are	triggered	by	the	following	events:	1)	UV	exposure	reaches	a	20	percent	interval	of	the	user’s	specified	daily	limit.	2)	The	sensor	has	been	covered	making	it	insensitive	to	UV.	Additionally,	the	user	can	trigger	both	alert	methods	by	covering	the	proximity	sensor	with	their	finger	or	the	vibration	alert	by	triple	tapping	the	battery	indicator	on	the	app’s	dashboard	screen	(Figure	2-3,	first	screen).		Packaging:	The	device	and	user	guide	are	supplied	in	a	white		4.7	x	6.25	x	1.5	inch	cardboard	box	labeled	‘Shade.’		Labeling:	User	instructions	are	attached	as	Appendix	1.	The	device	packaging	will	be	labeled	with	a	sticker	indicating	‘For	Investigational	Use	Only.’		6.1.3	PRODUCT	STORAGE	AND	STABILITY	Store	indoors	(0-40°C).	Product	is	stable	indefinitely.			6.1.4	PREPARATION	Prior	to	use,	subject	must	install	a	device	specific	application	on	their	mobile	phone.	The	Study	Coordinator	or	a	sponsor	representative	will	assist	them	in	this	process.	As	part	of	the	use	of	this	application	the	user	enters	an	email	address.	Subjects	will	not	enter	their	own	email	address	and	will	instead	enter	a	non-functional	study	email	address	assigned	by	the	study	coordinator.	See	data	management	sections	for	details.		6.1.5	DOSING	AND	ADMINISTRATION	N/A		6.1.6	ROUTE	OF	ADMINISTRATION	N/A		6.1.7	STARTING	DOSE	AND	DOSE	ESCALATION	SCHEDULE	N/A		6.1.8	DOSE	ADJUSTMENTS/MODIFICATIONS/DELAYS	N/A		6.1.9	DURATION	OF	THERAPY	9-12	months		6.1.10	TRACKING	OF	DOSE	N/A		6.1.11	DEVICE	SPECIFIC	CONSIDERATIONS	The	device	is	worn	externally,	magnetically	affixed	to	the	subject’s	clothing.	The	device	vibrates	to	communicate	to	
	
 18 subjects	when	they	have	accumulated	UV	dosage	and	when	the	device	is	covered.	The	mobile	application	provides	similar	alerts	with	accompanying	explanatory	text.	6.2	STUDY	AGENT	ACCOUNTABILITY	PROCEDURES	Product	will	be	delivered	to	the	study	coordinator	by	the	sponsor.	The	delivery	slip	will	include	a	receipt	with	a	list	of	device	serial	numbers.	The	study	coordinator	will	acknowledge	receipt	and	return	the	signed	packaging	invoice	to	sponsor.	Supplies	should	be	kept	in	a	secure	area.		The	study	coordinator	will	maintain	a	device	disposition	table	with	the	columns:	S/N,	Subject	ID,	Date	dispensed,	Dispensed	by	(name	of	study	personnel),	Date	returned,	Returned	to	(name	of	study	personnel),	Comments	(e.g.	working/broken/lost).	The	device	disposition	table	is	considered	confidential	and	should	be	viewed	only	by	the	study	coordinator	and	study	monitors,	physicians	must	remain	blinded	to	the	device	disposition	table.	7	STUDY	PROCEDURES	AND	SCHEDULE	7.1	STUDY	PROCEDURES/EVALUATIONS	7.1.1	STUDY	SPECIFIC	PROCEDURES		Cyclobutane	pyrimidine	dimers	(CPD)	levels	will	be	measured	by	ELISA	from	exposed	(cheek)	and	unexposed	(buccal	mucosa)	skin	scrapings.	The	area	from	which	the	cutaneous	scraping	is	collected	will	be	cleaned	with	an	alcohol	swab.	Using	a	15	blade,	the	epithelial	cell	will	be	lightly	scraped	on	the	cutaneous	cheek	and	the	buccal	mucosa.		The	skin	cells	will	be	placed	in	an	eppendorf	tube	and	put	on	ice.	These	eppendorf	tubes	will	be	transported	to	a	research	lab	where	ELISA	testing	will	be	performed	by	a	technician.	For	each	patient,	the	CPD	level	from	exposed	skin	will	be	normalized	to	the	sun	protected	CPD	level	measured	from	unexposed	skin.	A	physician	will	compare	the	normalized	CPD	level	of	control	versus	study	participants	at	each	timepoint	and	their	average	CPD	change	over	time.				Clinical	counting	of	AKs:	The	physician	will	identify	actinic	keratosis	based	on	a	visual	and	textural	examination.	If	the	actinic	keratosis	is	large	and	continuous	it	will	be	counted	as	one	actinic	keratosis.		The	actinic	keratosis	will	then	be	circled	and	photographed.	The	photograph	will	be	available	in	the	patient	medical	record	but	will	not	be	copied	to	the	CRF.	The	areas	that	are	identified	during	the	visit	will	be	treated.	Photos	will	be	taken	at	each	visit.	At	subsequent	visits,	the	previous	visits,	photos	will	be	reevaluated	to	prevent	double	counting.	All	lesions	suspected	of	malignancy	will	be	biopsied	and	subject	to	histological	examination.	These	lesions	will	be	reclassified	according	to	histology	diagnosis	if	necessary.		7.1.2	STANDARD	OF	CARE	STUDY	PROCEDURES		Skin	Check	A	standard	skin	examination	will	be	performed	by	a	dermatologist.	The	scalp,	face,	mucous	membranes,	chest,	back	abdomen,	arms,	legs,	genitalia,	digits	will	be	examined	at	the	first	and	last	visit	(V1	and	V3).	A	focused	examination	of	the	scalp,	face,	hands	and	any	other	pertinent	areas	will	be	performed	at	the	second	visit	(V2).				Treatment	of	actinic	keratosis	When	an	actinic	keratosis	(AK)	is	identified,	the	area	will	be	identified	with	a	marking	pen.	The	areas	will	be	photographed	and	the	photos	attached	to	the	patient’s	chart.	The	areas	will	then	be	treated	with	a	destructive	modality.	The	most	common	technique	that	will	be	employed	is	cryotherapy	with	liquid	nitrogen	or	curettage	of	the	actinic	keratosis.	Any	AK	that	is	suspicious	or	resistant	to	treatment	will	be	biopsied	via	shave	technique.	Shave	technique	is	described	as	the	removal	of	entire	lesion	using	a	dermablade	with	1-2	mm	margins.		Ultraviolet	Exposure	Counseling	The	dermatologist	will	make	the	following	recommendations	to	each	patient	having	a	skin	cancer	screening.		
	
 19 -Always	use	a	sunscreen	product	with	a	minimum	SPF	of	30	when	going	outdoors,	even	on	a	cloudy	day.	-Avoid	exposure	to	the	sun	during	the	peak	hours	between	10	AM	and	4	PM	and	to	stay	in	the	shade	when	possible.	-Wear	protective	eyewear	during	peak	sun	hours.			-If	sunscreen	is	not	available,	always	wear	protective	clothing,	such	as	long-sleeved	shirts	and	pants,	wide-brimmed	hats,	and	sunglasses	with	UV	protection.	-Routinely	examine	skin	at	least	once	a	month	for	any	visible	changes	or	changing	lesions.	-Avoid	the	use	of	tanning	products	or	tanning	beds.	-See	your	dermatologist	yearly	for	a	professional	skin	exam		7.2	LABORATORY	PROCEDURES/EVALUATIONS		7.2.1	CLINICAL	LABORATORY	EVALUATIONS		7.2.1.1	CPD	Assay	The	CPD	Assay	will	employ	a	commercial	ELISA	based	test.	It	will	be	carried	out	following	a	detailed	written	protocol	developed	by	the	investigating	laboratory	based	on	the	manufacturer’s	published	procedure.	The	validation	of	this	procedure	will	be	presented	by	the	laboratory	manager	and	this	validation	along	with	the	protocol	will	be	reviewed	by	the	PI	and	the	sponsor.	Once	implemented,	the	procedure	will	be	carried	out	on	clinical	samples	with	attention	to	good	laboratory	practice.		7.2.2	OTHER	ASSAYS	OR	PROCEDURES	N/A		7.2.3	SPECIMEN	PREPARATION,	HANDLING,	AND	STORAGE	Skin	scraping	will	be	collected	as	described	in	7.1.1	Study	specific	procedures.	The	tubes	containing	the	samples	and	any	secondary	containers	will	be	labeled	by:		###-S	and	visit	number	-	study	subject	number	###	-	site	S	which	is	one	of		B	(buccal	mucosa)	or	S	(skin)	-	visit	number	#	=	1,2,3		The	specimens	will	be	stored	in	liquid	nitrogen	or	at	-80°C	in	the	clinic	in	a	labeled	separate	container	for	materials	for	this	study.	Samples	will	remain	in	this	container	until	collected	by	laboratory	staff.			7.2.4	SPECIMEN	SHIPMENT	Skin	scrapings	will	be	transferred	to	the	New	York	Presbyterian	Laboratory	at	525 East 68th Street,  New York, NY 10065.		Staff	will	carry	the	samples	to	the	clinical	lab	in	an	insulated	container	immersed	in	liquid	nitrogen	and	then	samples	will	be	stored	in	liquid	nitrogen	or	at	-80°C	prior	to	being	processed	by	the	laboratory	technical	staff.			7.3	STUDY	SCHEDULE		7.3.1	SCREENING	A	pre-screening/recruiting	phone	call	will	occur	before	scheduling	the	screening	visit.	This	call	will	establish	the	subjects	probable	eligibility	for	the	study.	At	the	screening	visit	the	study	coordinator	will	assess	eligibility	by	checking	for	inclusion	and	exclusion	criteria	and	entering	these	results	in	the	CRF.	Following	inclusion/exclusion	questions,	the	study	coordinator	will	obtain	informed	consent	from	the	subject.	Only	subjects	who	satisfy	all	screening	criteria	and	provide	consent	will	be	enrolled	in	the	study.	
	
 20 	7.3.2	ENROLLMENT/BASELINE	During	the	enrollment	visit	the	physician	will	complete	a	medical	history	including	an	assessment	of	Fitzpatrick	skin	type.	The	enrollment	visit	will	include	standard	of	care	counseling	on	the	importance	of	UV	avoidance.	For	transplant	recipients,	condition	appropriate	information	will	be	included.		Ultraviolet	Exposure	Counseling:	as	described	in	7.1.2	Standard	of	Care	Study	Procedures		The	enrollment	visit	will	include	the	skin	check	described	in	7.1.2	Standard	of	Care	Study	Procedures.		Skin	Check:	as	described	in	7.1.2	Standard	of	Care	Study	Procedures		Treatment	of	Actinic	Keratoses	as	described	in	7.1.2	Standard	of	Care	Study	Procedures.		At	the	conclusion	of	the	enrollment	visit	the	study	coordinator	will	discuss	with	enrolling	physician	for		for	determination	of	Fitzpatrick	skin	type.	The	coordinator	will	then	assign	the	subject	to	treatment	or	control	groups	following	the	procedure	in	section	10.6.1.	The	subject’s	assignment	will	be	noted	on	the	randomization	table	to	be	kept	confidential	to	the	coordinator	and	study	monitors.			The	coordinator	will	meet	with	the	subject	in	a	separate	room	to	schedule	the	first	follow	up	visit.	If	the	subject	is	in	the	treatment	arm,	in	this	meeting	the	subject	will	be	given	the	box	with	the	Shade	sensor.	The	coordinator	or	a	sponsor	representative	will	observe	and	support	the	subject	in	the	process	of	opening	the	box	and	installing	the	application	on	their	phone.	At	this	time	the	coordinator	will	assign	a	study	email	address	to	the	subject	and	enter	that	address	in	the	randomization	table	and	an	electronic	table	along	with	the	subject’s	actual	email	address.		7.3.3	FOLLOW-UP		A	focused	examination	of	the	scalp,	face,	hands	and	any	other	pertinent	areas	will	be	performed	at	the	follow	up	visit(s).	AKs	will	be	identified	and	photographed.		Any	other	suspicious	lesions	will	be	biopsied	as	described	as	above.		AKs	will	be	treated	as	previously	described.			The	study	coordinator	will	maintain	the	schedule	of	follow	up	visits	and	will	contact	subjects	via	phone	or	email.	In	the	event	that	a	subject	in	the	treatment	arm	is	having	difficulty	achieving	compliance,	the	study	coordinator	will	be	available	for	counseling,	training,	to	provide	replacement	of	broken	or	lost	devices,	and	encouragement.	Calls	will	be	logged	in	the	study	binder.		7.3.4	FINAL	STUDY	VISIT	For	the	final	visit,	a	standard	skin	examination	will	be	performed	by	a	dermatologist.		The	scalp,	face,	mucous	membranes,	chest,	back	abdomen,	arms,	legs,	genitalia,	digits	will	be	examined.		Any	AKs	will	be	identified,	photographed	and	treated	as	previously	described.		Any	suspicious	lesions	will	be	biopsied.		If	the	patient	is	in	the	study	arm,	the	device	will	be	collected	by	the	study	coordinator	at	this	visit.				7.3.5	EARLY	TERMINATION	VISIT	Subjects	who	withdraw	consent	or	otherwise	voluntarily	leave	the	study	will	be	offered	the	opportunity	to	participate	in	the	next	visit	scheduled	for	the	study.			
	
 21 Subjects	who	are	dropped	from	the	study	for	any	reason	will	be	contacted	by	phone	to	explain	the	reason	they	have	been	dropped	from	the	study.	An	early	termination	visit	is	not	required.		Subjects	who	terminate	early	will	be	asked	to	return	their	Shade	device	and	will	be	given	the	same	offer	to	obtain	a	new	device	of	their	own	as	subjects	who	complete	the	study.		The	study	coordinator	will	fill	out	a	study	termination	form	for	all	subjects	including	those	who	leave	early.		7.3.7	SCHEDULE	OF	EVENTS	TABLE		Procedures	Prior	to	enrollment	Enrollment	Visit	1	Before		visit	2	Visit	2	Before		visit	3	Visit	3	AE	Visit	Screening	call	X								Screening	questions		x							Informed	consent		x							Medical	history		x							Patient	survey			x		x		x		Dermatology	Visit			x		x		x		UV	counseling			x		x		x		Full	Skin	Check			x		x		x		Focused	Skin	Check			x		x		x		Collect	skin	scraping	(WCM	only)			x		x		x		Randomization			x						Compliance	engagement				x		x			Return	study	materials							x		Condition	driven	medical	exam								x		Screening	call:	Screening	questions:	These	are	listed	in	the	CRF	Informed	consent:	As	approved	by	IRB	Medical	history:	Key	questions	listed	in	CRF	Patient	survey:		Dermatology	visit:	Collect	skin	scraping:	Randomization:	Compliance	engagement:	Return	study	materials:		See	section	7.9		7.4	JUSTIFICATION	FOR	SENSITIVE	PROCEDURES	There	are	no	sensitive	procedures	in	this	study.		7.5	CONCOMITANT	MEDICATIONS,	TREATMENTS,	AND	PROCEDURES		Concomitant	medications,	treatments	and	procedures	will	be	recorded	in	the	CRF.			7.5.1	PRECAUTIONARY	MEDICATIONS,	TREATMENTS,	AND	PROCEDURES	None	
	
 22 	7.6	PROHIBITED	MEDICATIONS,	TREATMENTS,	AND	PROCEDURES		The	use	of	topical	and	oral	medications	prescribed	as	field	treatment	for	actinic	damage	(i.e.,	imiquimod,	acitretin,	etc.)	would	be	prohibited	during	this	study.		Targeted	topical	treatment	of	biopsy-proven	non	melanoma	skin	cancer	(e.g.	imiquimod)	would	be	allowed	at	the	provider’s	discretion.			Any	treatment	of	actinic	keratoses	or	any	biopsies	of	suspected	malignancies	by	an	outside	dermatologist	would	be	prohibited	during	the	study		7.7	PROPHYLACTIC	MEDICATIONS,	TREATMENTS,	AND	PROCEDURES		None		7.8	RESCUE	MEDICATIONS,	TREATMENTS,	AND	PROCEDURES		None		7.9	PARTICIPANT	ACCESS	TO	STUDY	AGENT	AT	STUDY	CLOSURE		At	the	conclusion	of	the	study	subjects	in	the	treatment	arm	will	1. Return	the	Shade	device	used	in	the	study.		2. Receive	a	printout	of	their	UV	history	from	the	study	coordinator.	3. Delete	the	shade	mobile	application	from	their	phone.	All	subjects	will	4. Choose	between	receiving	the	final	study	compensation	at	the	visit	or	a	coupon	usable	to	purchase	a	new	sensor.	The	coordinator	will	explain	that	if	they	use	the	coupon,	Shade	will	know	that	they	participated	in	the	study.	But	Shade	will	not	know	their	subject	ID	and	will	therefore	not	be	able	to	connect	their	identity	to	medical	records	provided	in	the	study.		8	ASSESSMENT	OF	SAFETY		8.1	SPECIFICATION	OF	SAFETY	PARAMETERS	The	primary	safety	endpoint	is	the	number	of	adverse	events	related	or	possibly	related	to	the	device	or	sun	exposure	experienced	within	the	study	period.	To	test	this	hypothesis	the	number	of	adverse	events	related	or	possibly	related	to	the	device	or	sun	exposure	experienced	by	the	treatment	group	should	not	be	significantly	greater	than	the	number	of	adverse	events	related	or	possibly	related	to	the	device	or	sun	exposure	experienced	by	the	control	group	throughout	the	duration	of	the	study.	Adverse	events	will	be	categorized	by	type,	duration,	severity,	relationship	to	the	study	device	and	need	for	treatment.		8.1.1	DEFINITION	OF	ADVERSE	EVENTS	(AE)	An	AE	is	any	untoward	medical	occurrence	in	a	patient	or	clinical	investigation	subject	administered	a	pharmaceutical	product	and	that	does	not	necessarily	have	a	causal	relationship	with	this	treatment.	An	AE	can	therefore	be	any	unfavorable	and	unintended	sign	(including	an	abnormal	laboratory	finding),	symptom,	or	disease	temporally	associated	with	the	use	of	a	medicinal	(investigational)	product,	whether	or	not	related	to	the	medicinal	(investigational)	product	(see	the	ICH	guidance	for	Clinical	Safety	Data	Management:	Definitions	and	Standards	for	Expedited	Reporting).		8.1.2	DEFINITION	OF	SERIOUS	ADVERSE	EVENTS	(SAE)	● Any	untoward	medical	occurrence	that	at	any	dose:	● Results	in	death,	
	
 23 ● Is	life-threatening,	● Requires	inpatient	hospitalization	or	prolongation	of	existing	hospitalization,	● Results	in	persistent	or	significant	disability/incapacity,	or	● Is	a	congenital	anomaly/birth	defect.		8.1.3	DEFINITION	OF	UNANTICIPATED	PROBLEMS	(UP)	Unanticipated	problems	include	any	incident,	experience,	or	outcome	that	meets	all	of	the	following	criteria:	1) unexpected	(in	terms	of	nature,	severity,	or	frequency)	given	(a)	the	research	procedures	that	are	described	in	the	protocol-related	documents,	such	as	the	IRB-approved	research	protocol	and	informed	consent	document;	and	(b)	the	characteristics	of	the	subject	population	being	studied;	2) related	or	possibly	related	to	participation	in	the	research	(in	this	guidance	document,	possibly	related	means	there	is	a	reasonable	possibility	that	the	incident,	experience,	or	outcome	may	have	been	caused	by	the	procedures	involved	in	the	research);	and	3) suggests	that	the	research	places	subjects	or	others	at	a	greater	risk	of	harm	(including	physical,	psychological,	economic,	or	social	harm)	than	was	previously	known	or	recognized.		8.2	CLASSIFICATION	OF	AN	ADVERSE	EVENT		8.2.1	SEVERITY	OF	EVENT	Classifications	often	include	the	following:	·						Mild:	Awareness	of	signs	or	symptoms,	but	easily	tolerated	and	are	of	minor	irritant	type	causing	no	loss	of	time	from	normal	activities.	Symptoms	do	not	require	therapy	or	a	medical	evaluation;	signs	and	symptoms	are	transient.	·						Moderate:	Events	introduce	a	low	level	of	inconvenience	or	concern	to	the	participant	and	may	interfere	with	daily	activities,	but	are	usually	improved	by	simple	therapeutic	measures;	moderate	experiences	may	cause	some	interference	with	functioning	·						Severe:		Events	interrupt	the	participant’s	normal	daily	activities	and	generally	require	systemic	drug	therapy	or	other	treatment;	they	are	usually	incapacitating	Severity	is	not	synonymous	with	seriousness.	A	severe	rash	is	not	likely	to	be	an	SAE.	Likewise,	a	severe	headache	is	not	necessarily	an	SAE.		However,	mild	chest	pain	may	result	in	a	day’s	hospitalization	and	thus	is	an	SAE.		8.2.2	RELATIONSHIP	TO	STUDY	AGENT	Adverse	events	may	be	caused	by	one	or	more	of	the	following:	1. the	procedures	involved	in	the	research;	2. an	underlying	disease,	disorder,	or	condition	of	the	subject;	or	3. other	circumstances	unrelated	to	either	the	research	or	any	underlying	disease,	disorder,	or	condition	of	the	subject.		In	general,	adverse	events	that	are	determined	to	be	at	least	partially	caused	by	(1)	would	be	considered	related	to	participation	in	the	research,	whereas	adverse	events	determined	to	be	solely	caused	by	(2)	or	(3)	would	be	considered	unrelated	to	participation	in	the	research.		8.2.3	EXPECTEDNESS		AEs	must	be	assessed	as	to	whether	they	were	expected	to	occur	or	unexpected,	meaning	not	anticipated	based	on	current	knowledge	found	in	the	protocol,	investigator	brochure,	product	insert,	or	label.	Categories	are:		·      Unexpected	-	nature	or	severity	of	the	event	is	not	consistent	with	information	about	the	condition	under	study	or	intervention	in	the	protocol,	consent	form,	product	brochure,	or	investigator	brochure.		
	
 24 ·      Expected	-	event	is	known	to	be	associated	with	the	intervention	or	condition	under	study.		Relatedness		The	potential	event	relationship	to	the	study	intervention	and/or	participation	is	assessed	by	the	site	investigator.	A	comprehensive	scale	in	common	use	to	categorize	an	event	is:	·      Definitely	Related:		The	adverse	event	is	clearly	related	to	the	investigational	agent/procedure	–	i.e.	an	event	that	follows	a	reasonable	temporal	sequence	from	administration	of	the	study	intervention,	follows	a	known	or	expected	response	pattern	to	the	suspected	intervention,	that	is	confirmed	by	improvement	on	stopping	and	reappearance	of	the	event	on	repeated	exposure	and	that	could	not	be	reasonably	explained	by	the	known	characteristics	of	the	subject’s	clinical	state.	·      Possibly	Related:		An	adverse	event	that	follows	a	reasonable	temporal	sequence	from	administration	of	the	study	intervention	follows	a	known	or	expected	response	pattern	to	the	suspected	intervention,	but	that	could	readily	have	been	produced	by	a	number	of	other	factors.	·      Not	Related:		The	adverse	event	is	clearly	not	related	to	the	investigational	agent/procedure.	-		i.e.	another	cause	of	the	event	is	most	plausible;	and/or	a	clinically	plausible	temporal	sequence	is	inconsistent	with	the	onset	of	the	event	and	the	study	intervention	and/or	a	causal	relationship	is	considered	biologically	implausible.	Mild	sunburns,	not	requiring	medical	treatment,	are	expected	to	be	over	reported	in	the	treatment	group	because	of	their	constant	communication	with	the	application.	These	will	not	be	considered	AE’s	for	the	purposes	of	the	safety	endpoint.		8.3	TIME	PERIOD	AND	FREQUENCY	FOR	EVENT	ASSESSMENT	AND	FOLLOW-UP	Adverse	events	reported	will	be	assessed	and	followed	up	as	soon	as	practical.	Subjects	reporting	adverse	events	will	be	contacted	by	the	study	coordinator	to	schedule	an	assessment.	Follow	up	timing	will	be	sufficient	to	meet	the	following	reporting	requirements.		Unexpected	fatal	or	life-threatening	suspected	adverse	reaction	reports:	The	sponsor	(or	sponsor-investigator)	must	notify	the	FDA	of	any	unexpected	fatal	or	life-threatening	suspected	adverse	reaction	as	soon	as	possible	but	no	later	than	7	calendar	days	after	the	initial	receipt	of	the	information.		Other	reporting	requirements:	The	sponsor	(or	sponsor-investigator)	must	also	notify	the	FDA	and	all	participating	Principal	Investigators	(in	multi-site	studies)	in	an	safety	report	about	potential	serious	risks,	from	clinical	trials	and	any	other	source,	no	later	than	15	days	in	the	following	cases:	·						Serious	and	unexpected	suspected	adverse	reactions.	Any	suspected	adverse	reaction	that	is	both	serious	and	unexpected	must	be	reported.	The	report	must	proceed	only	if	there	is	evidence	to	suggest	a	causal	relationship	between	the	drug	and	the	adverse	event.	·						Finding	from	other	studies.	Any	findings	from	epidemiological	studies,	pooled	analysis	of	multiple	studies,	or	clinical	studies	(other	than	those	reported	under	serious	and	unexpected	adverse	reactions	above)	must	be	reported	whether	or	not	conducted	under	an	IND	or	whether	or	not	conducted	by	the	investigator,	that	suggest	a	significant	risk	in	humans	exposed	to	the	drug.	·						Increased	rate	of	occurrence	of	serious	suspected	adverse	reactions.	Any	clinically	important	increase	in	the	rate	of	serious	suspected	adverse	reactions	over	that	listed	in	the	protocol	must	also	be	reported.		8.4	REPORTING	PROCEDURES	
	
 25 8.4.1	ADVERSE	EVENT	REPORTING		If	any	medical	event	reaches	the	threshold	of	an	adverse	event	(AE)	as	judged	by	a	treating	physician,	the	AE	will	be	reported	by	study	staff	or	medical	staff	within	24	hours	using	both	email	and	telephone	to	the	clinical	PI,	the	study	PI	and	the	IRB.			Appropriate	action	will	be	taken	by	the	clinical	PI	and	reported	in	writing	to	Shade	and	the	IRB	within	72	hours.			A	written	summary	of	any	Adverse	Events	and	their	disposition	will	be	submitted	by	the	study	PI	(E.	Dumont)	to	the	funding	NIH	I/C	within	two	weeks	of	receiving	the	written	disposition	from	the	clinical	PI.		8.4.2	SERIOUS	ADVERSE	EVENT	REPORTING		As	in	8.4.1		8.4.3	UNANTICIPATED	PROBLEM	REPORTING		Unanticipated	problems	with	the	device	or	application	will	be	reported	to	the	study	coordinator	who	will	relay	the	reports	to	Sponsor.	These	will	be	managed	by	the	sponsor	using	their	process	for	Corrective	and	Preventive	Actions.	If	a	device	is	lost	or	becomes	inoperable,	a	new	device	will	be	shipped	to	the	subject	by	the	study	coordinator.	Sponsor	and	study	coordinator	will	communicate	regularly	about	the	inventory	of	devices	and	resupply	as	needed.		8.4.4	EVENTS	OF	SPECIAL	INTEREST		The	study	team	has	not	defined	any	events	of	special	interest.		8.4.5	REPORTING	OF	PREGNANCY		Pregnancy	will	be	noted	on	the	CRF	as	a	change	in	health	status.	Pregnancy	will	not	result	in	exclusion	from	the	study.		8.5	STUDY	HALTING	RULES		The	study	can	be	halted	at	the	request	of	the	sponsor,	the	funding	organization,	the	principal	investigator	or	the	IRB.	It	is	expected	that	the	study	would	be	halted	in	the	event	that	one	or	more	of	these	reach	the	conclusion	that	as	result	of	reported	AE’s	it	is	unethical	to	continue	the	study.		8.6	SAFETY	OVERSIGHT						Study	staff	will	record	all	visits	(regularly	scheduled	and	others)	and	any	hospitalization	events.			Safety	Monitoring	a.	Adverse	events:	If	any	medical	event	reaches	the	threshold	of	an	adverse	event	(AE)	it	will	be	reported	and	handled	as	described	in	8.4.1.	b.	Overall	rates	of	hospitalization	and	occurrence	of	AK	will	be	reported	by	Shade	to	the	clinical	PI	and	the	IRB	every	six	months	until	the	study	closes.	c.	Final	rates	of	hospitalization	and	occurrences	of	AK	will	be	included	in	the	final	study	report.	d.	The	Shade	device	does	not	require	an	FDA	issued	IDE.	Shade,	in	consultation	with	its	legal	consultants,	has	determined	that	is	a	non-significant	risk	device	because	it	is	not	an	implant,	is	not	used	to	sustain	human	life	and	is	not	used	in	the	diagnosis	or	treatment	of	disease,	and	does	not	otherwise	present	a	significant	health	risk.	As	such	the	device	is	subject	to	abbreviated	requirements	under	21	CFR	812.2(b)						•It	will	only	be	used	in	at	risk-populations	with	IRB	approval	including	monitoring	and	consent.		•The	devices	will	be	labeled	‘Investigational	Use	Only’	•All	FDA	requirements	concerning	data	reporting,	monitoring	and	promotion	will	be	observed.	Shade	will	request	an	IRB	determination	that	the	device	is	not	significant	risk	prior	to	the	submission	of	the	study	protocol.	
	
 26 Shade	may	also	request	an	FDA	determination	of	non-	significant	risk	prior	to	initiation	of	this	study.						9	CLINICAL	MONITORING	All	clinical	data	will	be	recorded	on	CRFs	and	monitored	by	a	representative	of	Shade	who	may	be	an	employee	or	an	external	study	consultant.	Monitors	will	perform	source-data	verification	prior	to	study	analysis.	The	data	monitor	will	ensure	that	subject	confidentiality	is	not	breached	by	reviewing	each	CRF	for	the	presence	of	identifying	information.	Monitoring	visits	will	be	held	within	two	weeks	of		the	first	day	of	scheduled	subject	visits	and	continue	periodically	at	the	discretion	of	the	sponsor	but	in	no	case	less	than	at	at	six	month	intervals	until	study	closeout.	To	facilitate	an	orderly	and	timely	analysis	and	to	avoid	an	accumulation	of	data	queries	at	closeout,	there	will	be	a	monitoring	visit	four	to	six	weeks	before	the	end	of	data	collection.	At	the	conclusion	of	each	monitoring	visit	a	report	indicating	any	issues	with	data,	outstanding	queries	or	protocol	compliance	issues.	This	report	will	be	shared	with	Shade	and	the	clinical	PI.	The	results	of	monitoring	visits	and	queries	will	be	made	available	to	the	funding	agency’s	project	officer.		10	STATISTICAL	CONSIDERATIONS			10.1	STATISTICAL	AND	ANALYTICAL	PLANS	The	statistical	analysis	of	the	study	is	the	responsibility	of	the	study	statistician.	Intermediate	data	reviews	will	be	conducted	after	6	months	to	check	for	potential	problems	with	data	integrity.		10.2	STATISTICAL	HYPOTHESES	The	general	hypothesis	is	that	sun	damage	will	be	lower	in	the	treatment	group.	The	null	hypothesis	is	that	sun	damage	is	the	same	or	higher.	Below	there	is	a	more	precise	statement	of	the	hypothesis	for	each	study	aim.		10.3	ANALYSIS	DATASETS	Datasets	will	be	prepared	by	the	study	coordinator	from	case	report	forms.	The	tables	will	be	formatted	as	requested	by	the	study	statistician	and	will	be	monitored.		10.4	DESCRIPTION	OF	STATISTICAL	METHODS	Actinic keratosis (AK) is a frequent pre-cancerous skin lesion caused by damage from ultraviolet exposure. Without treatment, 1-2% of these lesions evolve into squamous cell carcinoma (SCC).19 Therefore, the number of AKs reflects the effect of UV exposure and the risk for SCC.  Transplant patients are at high risk of skin cancer because of their immunosuppressive medications required to prevent organ rejection. Morbidity/mortality of SCC in this patient population can be as high as 25%. 		The	primary	outcome	of	this	trial	will	be	a	statistically	significant	reduction	by	at	least	25%	in	the	cumulative	number	of	newly	developed	AK	lesions	between	the	control	and	the	study	group.			AK	lesions	on	sun	exposed	skin	areas	(scalp,	face,	hands)	will	be	counted	and	reported	by	dermatologists	at	enrollment	and	at	each	subsequent	visit.	AKs	are	defined	as	keratotic	macule(s)	or	papule(s)	on	an	erythematous	base	by	dermatological	examination.	In	addition	to	the	enrollment	visit,	this	study	will	include	a	follow	up	dermatological	visit	after	the	summer.	For	each	patient,	the	number	of	newly	occurred	AKs	will	correspond	to	the	cumulative	AK	counts	during	the	study	period.	To	insure	that	only	new	occurrences	of	AK	lesions	after	V1	will	be	counted,	data	from	subsequent	study	visits	will	include	the	location	of	AK	lesions	and	pictures	of	the	lesions.		
	
 27 10.4.1	GENERAL	APPROACH	All	tests	will	be	two-tailed	with	the	significance	level	set	at	0.05.	Analysis	will	be	performed	using	STATA	statistical	software	(StataCorp.	2015)	or	R	(R:	A	language	and	environment	for	statistical	computing.	R	Foundation	for	Statistical	Computing,		Vienna,	Austria).		10.4.2	ANALYSIS	OF	THE	PRIMARY	EFFICACY	ENDPOINT(S)	#1	(Primary):	Quantify	the	impact	of	Shade	on	the	cumulative	number	of	new	actinic	keratoses	developed	over	the	study	period.				To	test	our	primary	aim,	we	will	perform	a	control	versus	study	group	analysis.	The	study	group	will	receive	a	Shade	sensor	and	Shade	app	while	the	control	group	will	standard	of	care	sun	avoidance	counseling.	The	study	will	be	randomized	and	single-blinded	as	described	in	section	10.6.1.	This	will	also	allow	us	to	control	for	the	effect	of	UV	level	variation	on	the	primary	outcome	since	the	two	groups	will	have	balanced	enrollment	dates.	All	the	patients	will	receive	recommendations	about	UV	exposure	protection	as	defined	by	the	recommendations	of	the	American	Academy	of	Dermatology	and	the	National	Cancer	Institute.			Patients	who	will	have	used	the	Shade	sensor	for	less	than	15%	of	the	days	over	the	study	period	will	be	excluded	from	these	analyses.	We	will	use	a	Student’s	t-test	with	the	following	null	and	alternative	hypothesis:	H0:	mean	Ct12	(AK)	=	meanI12	(AK)	Ha:	meanCt12	(AK)	≠	meanIt12	(AK)	where	meanCt12	(AK)	is	the	averaged	cumulative	number	of	AK	between	enrollment	follow	up	of	controls	and	meanCt12	(AK)	is	the	averaged	cumulative	number	of	AK		of	intervention	patients.			In	this	analysis,	demographic	and	clinical	factors	such	as	gender,	age,	baseline	count	of	AKs,	skin	type,	immunosuppressive	treatment	and	comorbidity	can	be	confounding	factors.	To	test	and	control	for	confounding,	demographic	and	clinical	data	(skin	type,	living	area,	gender,	age,	count	of	AK	at	enrollment,	immunosuppressive	(IS)	treatment,	level	of	immunosuppression		and	comorbidity)	will	be	collected.	We	will	use	a	stepwise	multivariate	approach	with	backward	selection:	1)	the	effect	of	potential	confounding	factors	will	be	tested	using	the	same	statistical	tests,	2)	factors	with	p-value	<0.2	and	less	than	25%	of	missing	values	will	be	included	in	the	multivariate	model	and	3)	only	covariates	with	significant	adjusted	p-value	(<0.05)	will	be	kept	in	the	final	model.	Clinically	relevant	interactions	will	also	be	tested	(e.g.	skin	type,	gender,	age)	and	kept	in	the	final	model	if	significant.	The	adjusted	effect	of	Shade	use	will	be	estimated	using	a	multivariate	linear	regression.		10.4.3	ANALYSIS	OF	THE	SECONDARY	ENDPOINT(S)	#2	(Secondary):	Quantify	the	impact	of	Shade	on	the	numbers	of	new	AK’s	observed	at	the	final	visit	This	analysis	will	follow	the	same	procedure	as	the	primary	analysis	but	will	only	include	AK	data	from	the	final	visit.	#3	(Secondary):	Quantify	the	impact	of	Shade	on	the	numbers	of	new	cutaneous	squamous	cell	carcinomas	confirmed	by	histology	during	follow	up	over	the	study	period.			To	test	the	early	effect	of	Shade	on	skin	cancer	risk	and	the	robustness	of	our	findings,	we	will	perform	a	longitudinal	analysis	to	test	a	reduction	by	at	least	25%	of	squamous	cell	carcinoma.	The	effect	of	Shade	use	will	be	estimated	using	a	single	mixed	linear	model	(with	random	intercept	and	slope)	for	repeated	(longitudinal)	data	including	study	group	and	time	since	enrollment	as	explanatory	variables.	A	similar	stepwise	multivariate	approach	with	backward	selection	as	described	in	the	primary	aim	will	be	perform	to	take	into	account	confounding	factors.	
	
 28 		#4	(Secondary):	Quantify	the	impact	of	Shade	on	the	number	of	new	nonmelanoma	skin	cancers	(basal	cell	carcinomas,	cutaneous	squamous	cell	carcinomas)	confirmed	by	histology	over	the	study	period.	To	test	the	early	effect	of	Shade	on	skin	cancer	risk	and	the	robustness	of	our	findings,	we	will	compare	the	cumulative	numbers	of	new	nonmelanoma	skin	cancers	between	the	control	and	study	group	and		test	a	reduction	by	at	least	25%	of	non-melanoma	skin	cancer	s	as	secondary	outcome,	using	a	t-test.		A	similar	stepwise	multivariate	approach	with	backward	selection	as	described	in	the	primary	aim	will	be	perform	to	take	into	account	confounding	factors.	#5	(Secondary):	Test	the	correlation	between	measured	UV	exposure	and	the	number	of	new	actinic	keratoses.	We	will	test	the	correlation	between	the	cumulative	UV	exposure	and	the	number	of	AK	lesions	at	each	time	point	using	a	Pearson	correlation	test	or	a	non-parametric	Spearman	test	if	the	requirements	for	the	parametric	test	are	not	met.	A	significant	correlation	will	be	defined	as	⍴	>	0.2	and	p-value	<	0.05.	UV	exposure	will	be	defined	as	the	cumulative	UV	exposure	in	erythemally-weighted	J/m2	at	each	time	point	since	enrollment.	#6	(Secondary):	Test	the	correlation	between	measured	UV	exposure	and	the	number	of	new	nonmelanoma	skin	cancers.	We	will	test	the	correlation	between	the	cumulative	UV	exposure	and	the	number	of	new	nonmelanoma	skin	cancers	using	a	Pearson	correlation	test	or	a	non-parametric	Spearman	test	if	the	requirements	for	the	parametric	test	are	not	met.	A	significant	correlation	will	be	defined	as	⍴	>	0.2	and	p-value<0.05.	UV	exposure	will	be	defined	as	the	cumulative	UV	exposure	in	erythemally-weighted	J/m2	at	each	time	point	since	enrollment.		#7	(Secondary):	Quantify	the	impact	of	Shade	on	keratinocyte	DNA	damage	approximated	by	the	measurement	of	cyclobutane	pyrimidine	dimers	by	ELISA.	Cyclobutane	Pyrimidine	Dimers	(CPD)	are	induced	by	UV	exposure	in	a	dose	dependent	fashion.6	UV	exposure	can	lead	to	immediate	CPD	increase;	therefore	measurement	of	CPD	following	the	delivery	of	a	known	UV	dose	allows	for	a	biological	readout	of	UV	effects.	In	addition,	CPD	levels	represent	an	equilibrium	between	UV	induced	formation	and	DNA	repair;	therefore,	they	can	also	reflect	chronic	UV	exposure.21			CPD	level	will	be	measured	from	ELISA	from	exposed	(cheek)	and	unexposed	(buccal	mucosa)	skin	samples	collected.	For	each	patient,	the	level	from	exposed	skin	will	be	normalized	to	the	basal	CPD	level	measured	from	unexposed	skin.	Correlation		of	CPD	level	to	Shade	UV	measurement	24	hours	prior	to	collection	will	allow	for	an	acute	UV	biological	validation	that	Shade	measured	UV	levels	correspond	to	levels	of	CPD	damage	(using	Pearson	correlation	test	or	a	non-parametric	Spearman	test).	We	will	also	compare	the	normalized	CPD	level	of	control	versus	study	participants	at	each	timepoint	and	their	average	CPD	change	over	time	using	a	t-test.	These	comparisons	will	assess	the	accuracy	of	Shade	measurements	as	it	relates	to	chronic	UV	exposure.			The	outcome	will	be	a	statistically	significant	reduction	by	at	least	25%	of	the	normalized	CPD	level	of	exposed	keratinocytes.	#8	(Secondary):	Quantify	the	impact	of	Shade	on	patients’	quality	of	life	assessed	by	PROMIS	(Patient-Reported	Outcomes	Measurement	Information	System)	in	the	fields	of	anxiety	(Mental	Health),	depression	(Mental	Health),	and	Ability	to	Participate	in	Social	Roles	and	Activities	(Social	health).		To	assess	the	impact	of	Shade	on	quality	of	life,	patients	will	be	surveyed	using	short	form	paper	versions	of	PROMIS	(Patient-Reported	Outcomes	Measurement	Information	System)	scores	in	the	fields	of	depression,	anxiety,	and	the	ability	to	participate	in	social	roles	and	activities.		PROMIS	survey	will	be	performed	at	each	visit.	We	will	compare	the	change	in	PROMIS	scores	between	group	and	study	using	a	t-test	at	each	time-point.	
	
 29 		The	outcome	will	be	assessed	for	statistical	significance	(p-value	of	change	in	PROMIS	score	between	groups)	and	clinical	significance	(changes	of	3	points	on	a	single	score	are	generally	considered	meaningful	to	subjects).	#9	(Secondary):	Assess	sensor	usage	in	the	study	patient	population	and	compare	characteristics	of	observant	vs	non-observant	and	responsive	vs	non-responsive	patients.	To	assess	sensor	usage,	we	will	estimate	the	overall	percentage	(and	95%	confidence	interval)	of	days	used	in	the	study	patient	population,	the	average	(and	standard	deviation)	and	median	(and	quartile)	of	the	daily	UV	threshold	set	by	the	patients	and	the	percentage	of	days	below	and	above	the	UV	threshold.			The	Shade	sensor	and	the	mobile	application	enables	users	to	decide,	by	looking	at	self-reported	symptoms	and	daily	cumulative	UV	exposure	over	15	and	30	days,	how	much	UV	exposure	in	J/m2	they	would	like	to	manage	per	day,	which	we	call	the	daily	UV	threshold.	Users	can	select	a	daily	UV	threshold	that	is	lower	than	their	previous	maximum	daily	UV	exposure.	Of	course,	users	are	free	to	go	beyond	this	threshold	if	they	chose	to	and	the	app	will	let	them	know	in	real	time	by	how	much	they	have	exceeded	their	threshold.	The	threshold	can	be	adjusted	at	any	time	through	the	app.	The	Shade	app	does	not	make	any	recommendation	regarding	the	daily	threshold.	Note	that	each	subject	will	be	individually	counseled	to	minimize	UV	exposure.			We	will	also	quantify	the	percentage	of	observant	and	non	observant	patients,	as	well	as	the	percentage	of	responsive	and	non-responsive	patients.	While	observance	will	be	based	on	the	use	of	the	sensor,	responsiveness	will	be	based	on	“safe”	UV	behaviors.	Observance	will	be	defined	as	at	least	50%	of	days	used,	poor	observance	between	15%	to	50%	and	non-observance	as	inferior	to	15%.	Responsiveness	will	be	defined	as	less	than	15%	days	over	the	UV	threshold	and	more	than	85%	of	days	with	an	UV	threshold	set	within	one	standard	deviation	of	the	study	group’s	average	UV	threshold.	Conversely,	non-responsiveness	is	defined	as	more	than	15%	days	over	the	UV	threshold	or	more	than	85%	of	days	with	an	UV	threshold	set	above	one	standard	deviation	of	the	study	group’s	average	UV	threshold.			The	sociodemographic	and	clinical	characteristics	of	observant,	poorly	observant,	non-observant,	responsive	and	non-responsive	patients	will	be	assessed	separately	and	compared	using	Student’s	t-tests	for	quantitative	characteristics	and	𝝌2	for	categorical	characteristics.	These	comparisons	will	provide	useful	information	to	better	understand	the	determinants	of	UV	behaviour	change.			To	be	conservative,	only	non-observant	subjects	(<15%	of	days	use)	will	be	excluded	from	the	analyses	while	poorly	and	non-responsive	patients	will	be	included.	The	comparison	of	their	characteristics	will	rule	out	a	selection	bias.		#10	(Secondary):	Assess	feasibility	of	the	intervention	for	kidney	transplant	recipients	through	report	of	their	rates	for	compliance	and	retention.	Rates	will	be	reported	but	are	not	expected	to	be	analyzed	for	significance.		10.4.4	SAFETY	ANALYSES	No	safety	analyses	are	planned.	10.4.5	ADHERENCE	AND	RETENTION	ANALYSES	See	specific	Aim	#8.	10.4.6		BASELINE	DESCRIPTIVE	STATISTICS	Demographic	statistics	(#	and	%	male/female,	%ethnicity,	%	race)	will	be	collected	and	reported.	
	
 30 	10.4.7	PLANNED	INTERIM	ANALYSES			10.4.7.1 SAFETY REVIEW As	this	is	a	low-risk	study,	no	specific	safety	review	will	be	conducted.	See	the	handling	of	Adverse	Events	for	mechanisms	for	safety	assurance.		10.4.7.2 EFFICACY REVIEW N/A		10.4.8 ADDITIONAL SUB-GROUP ANALYSES N/A	10.4.9	MULTIPLE	COMPARISON/MULTIPLICITY	The	planned	analyses	do	not	include	multiple	comparisons.			10.4.10	TABULATION	OF	INDIVIDUAL	RESPONSE	DATA	Clinical	data	tables	will	be	reduced	into	a	table	of	individual	responses	for	analysis	as	follows:		Column	Source	(name	of	CRF	with	data)	SubjectID	N/A	AK		baseline	(count)	Actinic	Keratosis	AK		follow	up	(cumulative	count)	Actinic	Keratosis	NMSC		baseline	(count)	NMSC	NMSC		follow	up	(cumulative	count)	NMSC	Observant		%	of	days	Compliance	database	Responsive	Y/N	Shade	database:	days	with	UV	limit	below	90%	of	exposures	CPD		R	0	Lab	data	CPD		R	12	month	Lab	data	MHA	1	PROMIS	MHA	visit	1	MHA	2	PROMIS	MHA	visit	2	MHA	3	PROMIS	MHA	visit	3	MHD	1	PROMIS	MHD	MHD	2	PROMIS	MHD	MHD	3	PROMIS	MHD	SHP	1	PROMIS	SHP	SHP	2	PROMIS	SHP	SHP	3	PROMIS	SHP	UV	Ave	Sensor	data	AE	(count)	CRF	comment		
	
 31 group	Randomization	exclude				10.4.11	EXPLORATORY	ANALYSES	None		10.5	SAMPLE	SIZE	The	most	efficient	approach	to	performing	the	power	calculation	for	this	study	via	Monte	Carlo	simulation	as	the	underlying	phenomenon,	AK	rate,	is	best	modeled	by	a	Poisson	distribution.22			As	a	starting	point,	we	took	the	distribution	of	AK	rates	from	actual	clinical	data.	The	data	were	assembled	by	querying	EPIC	on	2014	visits	of	kidney	transplant	patients	to	dermatology	(this	subset	of	the	population	will	have	fewer	AK’s	than	the	non-transplant	subjects	and	therefore	use	of	this	distribution	will	err	on	the	side	of	caution	toward	overpowering	the	study).	For	each	visit	in	which	the	dermatologist	chose	to	treat	by	LN2	destruction,	the	query	retrieved	the	number	of	procedures	performed.	This	approach	is	conservative	as	the	input	data	potentially	underestimates	AK	count	as	some	AK’s	may	not	have	been	treated.			The	structure	of	the	Monte	Carlo	was	straightforward.	A	set	of	potential	study	sizes	(N	recruited)	and	effect	sizes	were	chosen.	For	each	input	condition,	two	thousand	random	experiments	were	performed.	In	each	of	these	interactions,	baseline	AK	rates	were	drawn	from	the	clinically	observed	distribution	of	AK’s.	Subjects	were	sequentially	assigned	to	treatment	or	control	groups.	Observed	AK	rates	were	generated	using	a	Poisson	distribution	for	each	visit.	The	analysis	expected	for	the	study	was	then	performed.	In	this	analysis	the	total	count	of	AK’s	for	each	subject	was	obtained	and	the	means	and	distributions	compared	for	directionality	(AK_treated	<	AK_control)	and	significance	(p-value	from	a	one-tailed	t-test).			Analysis	was	performed	in	R	(R	Open	3.2.3)	with	statistical	calculations	and	random	number	generation	using	the	base	and	stat	libraries.	
	Figure	10.5.1.	With	an	effect	size	of	0.25	and	recruitment	of	100	patients	(50	treatment,	50	control)	we	predict	a	power	of	0.81.		

	
 32 10.6	MEASURES	TO	MINIMIZE	BIAS	This	study	will	be	partially	blinded.		We	will	divide	study	participants	into	2	groups.		The	experimental	group	will	wear	an	ultraviolet	sensor	which	will	record	their	UV	exposure.		The	control	group	will	receive		standard	of	care	counseling	about	photoprotection	from	their	dermatologist.			The	study	coordinator	will	spend	the	first	10	minutes	of	the	visit	with	each	patient	reviewing	any		issues	related	to	the	study,	including	sensor	related	issues.			The	study	coordinator	will	remind	the	patient	at	each	visit	to	put	the	sensor	away	from	view	and	to	not	discuss	any	sensor	related	questions	to	the	dermatologist.			The	dermatologist	will	then	come	in	and	perform	a	total	body	skin	examination.		Actinic	keratosis	will	be	identified,	circled	and	photographed.		The	actinic	keratosis	will	then	be	treated	via	a	destruction	method.		Any	potential	skin	cancers	will	be	biopsied	and	sent	for	pathology.		Cyclopyridimine	butane	dimer	(CPD)	analysis	will	be	obtained	via	light	curettage	of	the	skin	and	mucosa.		They	will	be	sent	to	a	lab	and	the	data	will	be		processed.		A	different	physician	will	evaluate	the	results	and	will	not	have	access	to	clinical	data.	This	physician	will	remain	completely	blinded	to	the	study.		10.6.1	ENROLLMENT/	RANDOMIZATION/	MASKING	PROCEDURES	The	randomization	schedules	will	be	developed	prior	to	the	enrollment	of	the	first	subject.	There	will	be	one	schedule	for	Fitzpatrick	types	I-II	and	a	second	schedule	for	Fitzpatrick	types	III	and	higher.	The	randomization	schedule	is	a	simple	list	of	assignments	to	the	groups	‘Treatment,’	meaning	that	the	subject	will	be	given	the	Shade	device	and	mobile	application	and	‘Control,’	meaning	that	the	subjects	will	be	given	only	the	standard	of	care	counseling	to	avoid	UV.	The	following	sequence	of	events	at	enrollment	will	ensure	that	the	treating	physician	will	be	blinded	to	the	subject	assignment:	(1) visit	with	study	coordinator	for	screening,	informed	consent,	and	medical	history.		If	the	subject	passes	screening	and	grants	consent	(2) physician	visit.	During	the	physician	visit,	the	study	coordinator	will	take	the	next	randomization	from	the	randomization	schedule.	This	schedule	will	be	prepared	by	the	sponsor	in	such	a	manner	that	the	coordinator	remains	blind	to	the	next	assignment	until	it	is	requested.	The	sponsor	has	latitude	to	implement	this	using	any	reasonable	physical	or	computational	system.	The	subject	assignment	will	be	entered	on	the	randomization	schedule	available	only	to	the	study	coordinator	and	the	study	monitor.	(3) wrap	up	conversation	with	study	coordinator.	After	the	physician	visit	the	study	coordinator	will	sit	with	the	subject	in	a	separate	room.	The	next	visit	or	visits	will	be	tentatively	scheduled.	If	the	subject	is	in	the	treatment	group,	the	device	will	be	provided	and	either	the	coordinator	or	a	sponsor	representative	will	work	with	the	subject	to	setup	the	mobile	application	and	ensure	that	subject	understands	how	to	use	the	device.		At	subsequent	visits	subjects	in	the	treatment	group	will	be	instructed	to		(1) avoid	discussing	their	assignment	with	the	physician.	(2) place	the	shade	sensor	in	a	purse	or	pocket	out	of	view	of	the	physician	(3) mention	to	the	study	coordinator	if	the	subject	of	the	assignment	came	up	in	conversation	with	the	physician.		10.6.2	EVALUATION	OF	SUCCESS	OF	BLINDING		The	study	coordinator	will	note	any	failures	of	blinding	in	the	randomization	table.			10.6.3	BREAKING	THE	STUDY	BLIND/PARTICIPANT	CODE	The	study	blind	will	be	broken	after	PI	and	sponsor	agree	that	the	clinical	data	tables	are	complete	and	that	all	remaining	data	queries	have	been	followed	to	their	logical	conclusion.	
	
 33 Just	prior	to	breaking	the	study	blind,	the	study	data	tables	will	be	frozen.	The	blind	will	be	broken	by	the	study	coordinator	who	will	provide	the	full	team	with	a	copy	of	the	randomization	table.		11	SOURCE	DOCUMENTS	AND	ACCESS	TO	SOURCE	DATA/DOCUMENTS	Sources	of	data	for	the	CRF	include:	Medical	records	created	by	the	examining	physician	Survey	data	filled	in	by	the	subjects	Other	medical	records	stored	in	the	study	site	electronic	medical	records	system		The	study	coordinator	will	have	access	to	all	of	these	data	sources.	The	examining	physician	and	the	PI	will	have	access	to	all	of	these	data	sources.	The	study	monitor	will	have	supervised	access	to	these	sources	during	monitoring	visits.	It	is	the	responsibility	of	the	study	coordinator	to	assist	study	monitors	in	source	data	verification.	Study	monitors	will	record	only	non-identifying	information	in	their	queries.		Data	queries	will	include	the	subject	ID	and	the	nature	of	the	query.		12	QUALITY	ASSURANCE	AND	QUALITY	CONTROL	The	study	team	will	implement	quality	assurance	and	quality	control	measures	documented	in	this	protocol.	The	intent	of	the	protocol	and	the	commitment	of	all	staff	is	to	be	in	compliance	with	good	clinical	practice,	including	its	requirements	for	quality	management.		13	ETHICS/PROTECTION	OF	HUMAN	SUBJECTS			13.1	ETHICAL	STANDARD		This	study	is	conducted	under	the	ethical	standards	described	in	ICH	E6.	Please	see	the	compliance	statement	on	the	PI	sign-off	page	at	the	beginning	of	the	protocol	for	details.		13.2	INSTITUTIONAL	REVIEW	BOARD		This	study	will	be	under	the	review	of	the	Weill	Cornell	Institutional	review	board.		13.3	INFORMED	CONSENT	PROCESS		Informed	consent	will	be	obtained	at	the	beginning	of	the	screening	phase	of	the	first	visit.	No	subjects	will	be	enrolled	in	the	study	unless	they	have	completed	the	screening	and	provided	consent.		13.3.1	CONSENT/ASSENT	AND	OTHER	INFORMATIONAL	DOCUMENTS	PROVIDED	TO	PARTICIPANTS	See	Appendix	2	Informed	Consent,	and	Appendix	3	Advertising	Material		13.3.2	CONSENT	PROCEDURES	AND	DOCUMENTATION	At	the	initiation	of	the	screening	and	consent	process,	a	subject	ID	will	be	assigned,	and	the	subject	ID	entered	into	the	central	table	of	subjects.	Once	consent	is	provided,	the	IC	form	will	be	added	to	the	study	binder.	At	this	point	the	subject	table	value,	‘Screen	passed’	will	be	entered	in	the	table.		13.4	PARTICIPANT	AND	DATA	CONFIDENTIALITY		
	
 34 At	the	study	site,	medical	and	research	staff	will	have	access	to	patient	information	for	the	purpose	of	transferring	this	information	to	non-identifiable	CRFs.	Study	data	monitors	will	match	clinical	data	to	CRFs	under	supervision	of	the	study	coordinator.	Sponsor	will	maintain,	any	identifiable	private	information	will	be	encrypted	and	stored	in	Shade’s	HIPAA	compliant	storage.	No	identifying	information	will	be	available	to	sponsor	except	during	monitoring	activities.		13.4.1	RESEARCH	USE	OF	STORED	HUMAN	SAMPLES,SPECIMENS	OR	DATA	The	study	team	may	use	any	stored	samples,	specimens	or	data	for	future	research	or	analysis.	All	future	analyses	will	respect	subject	confidentiality.	Non-identifying	study	data	will	be	retained	by	the	sponsor	and	made	available	to	any	qualified	researcher	upon	request	as	described	in	section	14.4.		13.5	FUTURE	USE	OF	STORED	SPECIMENS		Stored	specimens	may	be	subject	to	future	analysis	for	research	purposes	related	to	or	unrelated	to	the	purpose	of	this	study.	Such	analyses	will	respect	subject	confidentiality.			14	DATA	HANDLING	AND	RECORD	KEEPING			14.1	DATA	COLLECTION	AND	MANAGEMENT	RESPONSIBILITIES		Clinical	data	collection	is	the	responsibility	of	the	Weill	Cornell	team	with	the	PI	having	overall	responsibility	for	supervision	and	the	study	coordinator	having	responsibility	for	execution	of	data	collection.	Study	coordinator	will	prepare	monthly	reports	summarizing	progress	on	data	completion.		The	sponsor	will	review	and	monitor	data	periodically.		14.2	STUDY	RECORDS	RETENTION		IRB	records	will	be	retained	by	WMC	for	no	less	than	three	years,	and	research	records	will	be	retained	by	WMC	for	no	less	than	three	years	after	the	completion	of	the	research.		14.3	PROTOCOL	DEVIATIONS		Protocol	deviations	will	be	reported	to	the	sponsor	and	the	IRB	within	72	hours.	The	following	events	are	expected	and	should	be	marked	on	the	CRF	but	do	not	require	reporting	as	deviations:	1. Rescheduled	visit.	While	visits	should	be	scheduled	within	7	days	of	the	target	visit	date,	visits	may	be	rescheduled	within	21	days	of	the	visit	target	date.	2. Screen	fail.	A	subject	may	be	enrolled	based	on	passing	screening	questions	but	subsequently	dropped	if	there	is	evidence	in	their	medical	record	that	they	have	failed	screening.	In	that	event	the	subject’s	CRF	will	indicate	a	screen	fail	(by	initialing	the	appropriate	CRF)	and	the	subject	will	be	dropped	from	the	study.			14.4	PUBLICATION	AND	DATA	SHARING	POLICY	Sponsor	and	Investigators	are	committed	to	enhancing	the	value	of	research	and	furthering	the	advancement	of	public	knowledge	as	well	as	to	the	development	of	its	commercial	products	and	the	protection	of	its	intellectual	property.	We	recognize	that	this	project	will	result	in	the	collection	of	data	useful	to	the	research	community.	Therefore,	final	research	data	will	be	shared	openly	and	timely	in	accordance	with	the	most	recent	NIH	guidelines	(http://grants.nih.gov/grants/policy/data_sharing)	while	being	mindful	that	the	confidentiality	and	privacy	of	participants	in	research	must	be	protected	at	all	times.	Timelines	for	distribution	of	data	will	vary	depending	on	any	required	restrictions	in	accordance	with	federal	and/or	institutional	policies	and	guidelines.	In	general,	we	expect	the	
	
 35 data	will	be	available	through	publications,	presentations	at	scientific	symposia	and	seminars.	In	some	cases,	Shade	may	determine	that	a	licensing	program	may	be	necessary	to	better	serve	the	public	and	the	research	community	whether	or	not	patents	have	been	filed.	Efforts	will	be	made	to	publish	our	research	findings	in	scientific	journals.	All	final	peer-reviewed	manuscripts	that	arise	from	this	proposal	will	be	submitted	to	the	digital	archive	PubMed	Central.		In	order	to	protect	the	identity	of	subjects	in	this	study,	a	more	detailed	discussion	of	the	clinical	data	collected	in	this	project	is	required.	Data	will	come	from	two	sources	which	will	be	handled	differently.	Data	collected	from	the	clinic	itself	will	include	subject	demographics	including	race,	gender,	Fitzpatrick	skin	type,	in	addition	to	key	metadata	related	to	the	study	hypothesis	including	transplant	status,	prior	cancer	history	and	prior	history	of	actinic	keratosis.	These	data	will	be	published	in	an	appropriately	aggregated	tabular	form.		The	second	source	of	data	will	be	from	the	Shade	device	and	software.	While	more	specific,	and	potentially	identifying,	data	may	be	collected	by	the	device,	as	discussed	in	the	human	subjects	protection	section,	potentially	identifying	data	will	not	be	available	to	study	staff.	Device	data	will	include	usage	data,	sun	exposure,	self-reported	adherence	to	sun	protection	guidelines,	self-	reported	symptoms	of	sun	exposure	including	erythema.	Subject	level	device	data	is	likely	to	include	subgroups	of	fewer	than	20	people	with	specific	combinations	of	metadata.	For	that	reason,	there	will	no	release	of	subject	level	device	data	with	direct	links	to	metadata.	Subject	level	data	will	be	linked	to	Fitzpatrick	skin	type,	gender	and	age	rounded	to	the	nearest	multiple	of	10	as	well	as	the	assignment	of	the	subject	to	the	test	or	control	group.	These	data	will	be	plotted,	statistically	analyzed	and	tabulated	for	publication.	To	encourage	use	of	the	data,	subject	level	device	data	will	be	made	available	on	request	to	qualified	researchers	including	to	NIH	staff	who	agree	to	restrictions	against	public	release	of	the	data,	attempts	to	identify	study	participants,	destruction	of	the	data	after	analyses	are	completed,	reporting	responsibilities,	restrictions	on	the	redistribution	of	the	data	to	third	parties,	and	proper	acknowledgement	of	the	data	resource.	Requests	will	be	made	directly	to	Shade	by	email	through	contact	information	to	be	provided	on	its	web	site	and	included	in	each	publication	based	on	these	data.	These	data	will	be	shared	without	fee	through	a	single	use	web	link	which	will	enable	the	secure	download	of	subject	level	device	data	in	.csv	format.			15	STUDY	ADMINISTRATION		15.1	STUDY	LEADERSHIP	N/A		16	CONFLICT	OF	INTEREST	POLICY	The	WC	conflict	of	interest	policy	applies	to	all	personnel	involved	in	this	study.	The	policy	is	available	at	https://www.dfa.cornell.edu/policy/azindex/conflicts	It	is	expected	that	all	personnel	will	complete	training	in	this	policy	which	is	available	through	the	CITI	program	with	links	available	at	http://researchintegrity.weill.cornell.edu/conflicts_management_office/		17	REVISION	HISTORY	17.1	VERSIONS	2017A1_v1		Approved	date:	2017A_v2_1		Submitted	date:	Change	summary:	remove	requirement	for	subjects	to	be	kidney	transplant	recipients.	motivation:	on	examination,	the	recruiting	pool	of	KTR	is	small	and	there	is	not	an	underlying	medical	belief	that	the	risk	
	
 36 or	mechanism	is	different	for	the	non	KTR	pool,	with	significant	and	recurring	AK’s.		17.2	MANAGING	PROTOCOL	CHANGES	FOR	CONTINUING	SUBJECTS	All	subjects	who	signed	consent	forms	prior	to	the	protocol	change	will	be	reconsented	at	their	next	visit.	Visits	one	and	two	are	unchanged.	Visits	3	and	4	have	been	removed	from	the	protocol.	At	the	time	of	this	protocol	change	some	subjects	have	completed	visit	2.	These	subjects,	who	were	scheduled	to	have	a	visit	that	is	no	longer	part	of	the	study	design	will	be	informed	that	this	visit	is	no	longer	required.	As	no	action	is	required	of	these	subjects	there	will	be	no	need	to	reconsent	until	their	final	study	visit.	For	subjects	who	have	not	yet	had	their	3	month	visit,	reconsent	at	visit	2	will	be	appropriate.				
	
 37 APPENDIX	1		USER	INSTRUCTIONS			
 
