Hoffman  
Version date: 2-1-2021 0 Alcohol and Nicotine  Neurobiology of Alcohol and Nicotine Co-Addiction  
William Hoffman, PhD, MD  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
Table of Contents and Guide  
Specific Aims and Rationale  1 
Detailed Research Plan  2-3 
Subject Recruitment/Inclusion  2-3 
Detailed Analysis  4-8 
Power  7-8 
Risks and Protection from Risk  8-9 
Participation of Non -Veterans  9 
Data and Safety Monitoring Plans  10 
Data Repository  10 
Vulnerable Populations  10 
Determining VA Research  10 
  
Hoffman  
Version date: 2-1-2021 1 Alcohol and Nicotine  2. Specific Aims:  This proposal, Neurobiology of Alcohol and Nicotine  Co-Addiction  addresses the 
critical absence of information about the neurobiology of recovery from alcoholism in patients with co -existing 
alcohol use disorder (AUD) and nicotine use disorder (NUD).  AUD and NUD (almost entirely cigarette 
smoking) are the most commonl y abused (non -prescription) substances in the U.S.  Co -addiction is particularly 
high in military veterans.  For example, t he Substance Abuse Treatment Program (SATP) at the  Veterans 
Affairs Portland Health Care System (VAPORHCS) finds that 90% of veterans treated for AUD also meet 
criteria for NUD.  Therefore, t his Merit Review submission proposes to create a multidimensional quantitative 
model of alcohol and nicotine co -addiction (NAUD).  The purpose s of this quantitative model are twofold:   
(1) construct an integrative model which will add to the mechanistic understanding of the neurobiology of co-
addiction by providing insight into the causal relationships among  cerebral structure , function and behavior and  
(2) provide intermediat e phenotypes or biomarkers in order to predict relapse or recovery in individuals with 
AUD with and without NUD .   
We will systematically approach the challenge associated  with the quantitative neurobiological study of 
co-addiction . We thoroughly characterize four subject groups demographically, clinically, cognitively and 
neurally.  In order to construct the model, we will integrate several readily quantifiable aspects of brain function 
in individuals addicted to either alcohol, nicotine, both or neither.  SA1 uses the capabilities of the Advanced 
Imaging Research Center  (AIRC)  at Oregon Health & Science University (OH SU, VAPORHCS affiliated 
university) to obtain measures of  task based neural activation,  functional and anatomical connectivity and 
cortical density. Our preliminary data demonstrate that we can use functional and anatomical neuroimaging  to 
differentiate groups who primarily use either nicotine or alcohol  from both each other and from non-addicted 
control subjects (CS).  Importantly, Preliminary Study 1  demonstrates that neural response on a 
Probability/Delay Discounting task (PDD) differentiates individuals  who remain abstinent after initial sobriety 
from alcohol and those who do not.  SA2 will use the data generated by SA1 to develop the predictive 
multidimensional neural model and leverage  our understanding of the cerebral basis of AUD and NUD  to 
differentiate co -addicted vs. singly addicted individuals and to use neurobiological markers to predict success 
during early recovery.    
SA 1 :  Test a dual network model of alcohol and nicotine co -addiction via contrast of multiple 
neural aspects of AUD, NUD, NAUD and CS:  a) task based (PDD) and stress modulated cue induced 
craving, b) volumetric estimates of cortical density (voxel -based morphom etry [VBM]), c) anatomical 
(diffusion tensor imaging [DTI]) and d) resting state functional connectivity .  
Hypothesis 1 a.1:   We hypothesize  that individuals co -addicted to alcohol and nicotine will exhibit a 
pattern of cortical activation  to delay, magnitude and probability characterized by both increased sensitivity to 
reward in striatum and aversion to risk and delay in dorsal cognitive control regions. (1 a.2) Furthermore,  
difference s in neural activity between stressed and unstressed drug associated stimuli ( DAS) will identify 
regions associated with cognitive control  of DAS . We predict that parametric varia tion in cortical structures 
hypothesized to control response to DAS, will show greater stress -induced variation when the DAS represent 
the preferred substance.  
Hypothesis 1b:   We hypothesize  that connections within the decision making network will exhibit both 
anatomical ( measured  by DTI  and VBM ) and functional disruption in NAUD, AUD  and NUD  groups relative to  
CS.  We predict that alcohol and nicotine use are associated with greater cortical (cingulate and prefrontal 
cortex) thinning and decreased white matter integrity in superior and inferior longitudinal fasciculi and rostral 
trans -callosal fibers.  
SA 2 :  Develop a machine learning model that integrates behavioral, task and resting state 
functional activation, volumetric data and structural connectivity  that a) differentiates the four groups 
and b) predicts treatment outcome at 3 months . 
Hypothesis 2a:  We hypothesize  that a support vector machine (SVM) learning paradigm can exploit 
the substantial differences in quantitative neuroimaging measures among NAUD, AUD, NUD  and CS groups 
(obtained in SA1) to construct  and validate a quantitative classifier that predicts group membership .  The 
classifier will  produce a neural model that offers insight  into the specific neuroadaptations that occur in  co-
addiction .  
Hypothesis 2b:  We hypothesize  that an SVM classifier can be used to predict treatment outcomes and  
provide intermediate phenotypes that can be used in future treatment studies. We predict that co -addiction to 
nicotine is an additional risk for alcohol relapse and make a primary prediction that subjects in the NAUD group 
will be more likely to relapse than AUD only.  Secondarily, we expect that subjects who maintain sobriety will 
show decreases in responsivity to reward characteristics and show recovery from decreased cortical density 
and fractional anisotropy.  We further hypothesize  that comparison of imaging measures at baseline and three 
months will find recovery associated with improved pre -frontal cortical structural and functional integrity.  
Hoffman  
Version date: 2-1-2021 2 Alcohol and Nicotine   
C. Research  Design  and Methods ( Figure 1):  The overarching aim of this proposal is to 
neurobiologically characterize and predict the effect of NAUD co -addiction on the outcome of patients who 
enroll in alcohol abuse treatment .  In order to accomplish this goal, we will recruit four subject groups who will 
be characterized primarily with anatomical and functional neuroimaging ( SA1).  These measures will yield 
elements that become part of a quantitative predictive model that characterizes the neurobiological signatures 
of AUD, NUD, CS and NAUD co -
addiction ( SA2).  These s ubjects 
will be well characterized with 
respect to their substance use and 
will then be evaluated with t wo 
functional MRI (fMRI) tasks, resting 
state MRI ( rsMRI ), high resolution 
anatomical MRI , standard DWI and 
high angular resolution diffusion 
imaging (HARDI).  Imaging data 
will be used to test specific 
hypotheses about the effects of 
alcohol and nicotine on the brain 
and behavior.  
C1. Subject Recruitment  
and Initial Evaluation : Two 
hundred subjects , ages 18 to 55,  
will be recruited from the Portland 
VA, Oregon Health & Science 
University (OHSU),  community 
substance abuse treatment 
programs.  Study staff will visit participating treatment 
programs and give initial presentation to program 
staff to explain the study and hand out fliers that 
treatment staff may give to prospective subjects.  
Study staff will also make periodic (approximately 
monthly) presentations to clients about the 
neurobiology of addiction and this study.  We will 
hand out fliers and ask interested subjects to call the 
lab for screening .  We may also screen potent ial 
participants at treatment centers following 
presentations.  A packet containing a n approved  
letter describing the study and approved research 
flyers  will be sent through the mail to regional 
treatment centers/programs . The study team may 
contact Alcoholics Anonymous district/area offices for 
permission to send flyer packets to AA meetings.  
They will include a letter explaining the project, 
indicating that we have approval from the district/area 
offices to send informati on to meeting s and ask that 
they distribute our IRB -approved flyers if they are 
willing.    
Approved flyers will be distributed throughout 
the community (retail locations, community 
assistance programs, primary care clinics, 
emergency departments, dental clinics, community 
outreach programs) as well as at treatment 
centers/programs that are willing to put them up. 
Advertisements will be posted  online  externally 
utilizing  OHSU’s Research Opportunities pages, 
Craigslist,  the VAPORHCS  web page, the OHSU Clinical Interviewa 
  -  Demographics   
  -  Medical History  
  -  Psychiatric History  
  -  Substance Use History  – Timeline Followback  
         Tobacco Use (Current and lifetime)  
         Alcohol Use (Current and lifetimes)  
         Other Drug Use (marijuana, stimulants, 
sedatives, club drugs, cocaine, heroin, opioids , PCP, 
hallucinogens, inhalants  & c.) 
Structured Psychiatric Interview  
  -   Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview 
(MINI)  
  
Neuropsychological Assessment  
  -  Standard Neuropsychological Battery  
   Assessment of attention, memory, language, 
visual spatial and executive function  
  -  Computerized Battery  
         Delay Discounting, standard administration  
         Probability Discounting, standard 
administration  
         Stop Task  
         NIH Toolbox  Cognitive Batterya 
         DSNBACK  
Questionnaire Battery  
  -  Barratt Impulsiveness Scale  
  -  Multiple measures of SES (incl.  Hollingshead) 
and Quality of Life  
Table 2:  Standard evaluation. aAdapted from PhenX toolkit.  
 Group  Inclusion Criteria  
CS If any history of severe addictions  to other substance s must 
be at least 5 years clean. No history of gambling.  Less than 
20 lifetime cigarettes or equivalent.  
NUD  DSM -V criteria for Nicotine Use Disorde r Current Smoker , at 
least 5 cigarettes/da y. If any  history of  severe addictions  to 
other substance s must be at least 5 years clean. No history 
of gambling.   
NAUD  DSM -V criteria for Nicotine Use Disorder and Alcohol Use 
Disorder. At least 8 heavy drinking episodes in the past 
month . Current Smoker. Alcohol free from 2 to 8 weeks. If 
any history of severe addictions  to other substance s must be 
at least 5 years clean. No history of gambling.  
AUD  DSM -V criteria for Alcohol Use Disorder. At least 8 heavy 
drinking episodes in the past month .  Alcohol free from 2 to 8 
weeks. Less than 20 lifetime cigarettes or equivalent. If any  
history of  severe addictions  to other substance s must be at 
least 5 years clean. No history of gambling.  
Table 1:  Inclusion criteria emphasize both diagnostic (DSM -V) and severity of use 
criteria for each group.  
 
Hoffman  
Version date: 2-1-2021 3 Alcohol and Nicotine  website (MARC page or dedicated lab page), the quarterly newsletter (Veteran Connection ), the VA Facebook  
page , Indeed.com, Ziprecruiter, Google Jobs, Localwise.com, Skoll.org, and community news publications 
(Street Roots, Portland Mercury, Willamette Weekly and possibly others) . All Craigslist ad s, other job board 
postings and social media will have email reply turned off so that potential participants  will have to call the 
study team . Facebook post s will have a link to a PDF of the approved flyer, which  will direct  any subjects to 
contact the study team . Internal publication will  be done throug h the we ekly E-news  employee newsletter and 
an all staff E -mail. All content published for both  internal and external promotion will utilize the approved flyer 
so that anyone interested in the  study will have to call the study team  for more information. Newspaper, job 
board and social media ads will utilize the approved Craigslist ad language unless other language is 
specifically approved.   
 If potential subjects are referred by their VA providers, the provider will first ask permission from the subject to 
discuss the research project.  If the subject gives permission, the provider will document this either in a CPRS note 
or encrypted email to  the study team.  VA providers may also send out our approved flyer with their regular 
occurring mail outs to their clients.  
Research Match and OHSU OCTRI Research Volunteer Registry  will be used to recruit potential 
subjects.  An IRB approved description of the study will be sent to individuals by Research Match  who meet 
criteria for the study.  If the individual indicates they are interested , their contact information (i.e. name, mailing 
address, email, phone number)  will be sent through Research Match to the Hoffman Lab Research Match 
account. This information will remain in the ResearchMatch system and/or be exported to the O HSU RDS 
server. OHSU OCTRI Research Volunteer Registry will provide contact information of individuals who meet 
study criteria  and this information with be stored on the OHSU RDS server .  Research assistants will contact 
these individuals using phone or email to set -up a phone screen .  Subjects will be emailed via 
hoffmanlab@ohsu.edu to set up a phone screen . 
Currently e nrolled subject s or subjects who have completed their participation will have the opportunity to 
refer others to the study.  The referrer will receive a gift card as incentive  for each individual who attends their 
first study visit . In order to protect the confidentiality of the  referrer /referee  we will not confirm or deny either  is 
enrolled in the study . Interactions with the referrer/referee will have  a scripted response to protect 
confidentiality  (see separate word document) .  We will attempt to contact a current address and payment will 
only be received if we can verify a current address.  We will add a tab to our PHI spread that will include: 
referrer/referee, outcome, referrer’s address and whether referrer received a gift card.  
In addition, subjects may be recruited from the previous MARC project (mIRB 8702) where an IRB -
approved member of that study will contact individuals who consented to be contact ed for future studies by 
phone.  The study team member will give a short overview of the study and give the potential participant 
contact information for our lab to call if they are interested.  Recruiters who directly interact with subjects (e.g., 
at scheduled visits to SATP intake meetings ) will identify subjects who meet criteria fo r this study ( Table 2) and 
obtain informed consent .  
We will conduct a  CPRS search of patients using Data Access Request Tracking (DART ) who are 
between the ages of 18 and 55 and meet the inclusion criteria listed in table 2 of the protocol to identify 
potential participants. We will further refine the search by using the following exclusion criteria; a history of 
medical conditions that a ffect the brain (i.e., Multiple Sclerosis), any medical problems that may prevent them 
from being able to have an MRI done, taking medications for anti -psychotics/anti -Parkinson’s, or have a  
current substance dependence besides alcohol or methamphetamine. We will then perform a pre -screening 
medical record review of individuals who meet the search criteria to identify individuals who meet study criteria.  
The individual will either be contacted by letter or secure email:   
Letter:  We will then send individuals who meet the study criteria a letter addressed to the patient from 
the Clinical Director of Mental Health about the study; the Director’s letter will be accompanied by our study 
flyer and a form letter (not individualized) fro m the study PI.  The letter will include a summary of the study, and 
will provide the Research Assurance Officer’s telephone number so the potential participant can verify that the 
study constitutes VA research.  The letter will state that the indi vidual may opt out by calling the research team 
or returning an enclosed document indicating that they do not wish to be contacted (using a pre -
stamped/addressed return envelope that we will provide).   They may indicate they are interested in learning 
more about the study by calling the study team or returning the enclosed document saying they want to be 
contacted.   Study personnel will call all those who are interested in the study to answer any questions they 
might have about the study and to schedule a n initial study visit if they remain interested.   
Email:   We may email individuals who meet the search criteria and who have email addresses available 
Hoffman  
Version date: 2-1-2021 4 Alcohol and Nicotine  through DART. The email will be sent from a VA email (a common lab email which approved study team 
members have access to) and utilize the Azure Information Protection (encrypted email) and any 
communication over email with this recruitment population will  be through Azure.  The body of the email will 
contain a summary of the study and provide the Research Assurance Officer’s telephone number so the 
potential participant can verify that the study constitutes VA research.  The body of the email will state th at the 
individual may opt out by responding to the email or calling the research team.  They may indicate they are 
interested in learning more about the study by calling the study team or responding to the email with their 
phone number.  The body of the em ail will remind them not send any additional PHI via email. The email will 
include a pdf attachment with a letter addressed to the patient from the Clinical Director of Mental Health about 
the study; the Director’s letter.  There will also be an attachment  of our approved study flyer.  
 
We will conduct a search of poten tial participants using OHSU's Cohort Discovery T ool. Potential 
participants must be between ages 18 -55 and meet the inclusion criteria listed in table 2 of the protocol. The 
search may be further refined by including the following exclusion criteria; a history of medical conditions that 
affect the brain (i.e., Multiple Sclerosis), any medical problems that may prevent them from being able to have 
an MRI done, taking medications for anti -psychotics/anti -Parkinson’s, or have a current substance dependence 
besides alcohol or metham phetamine. We will then perform  a pre -screening medical record review of 
individuals who meet the search criteria to identify individuals who meet study criteria. Those who meet the 
study criteria will receive a letter  or email  from the study PI as well as an approved study flyer.  
Letter: The letter will provide OHSU’s office of integrity’s telephone number so the individual  can verify 
that the study constitutes OHSU research .  The letter will state that the individual may opt out by calling the 
research team or returning an enclosed document indicating that they do not wish to be contacted (using a pre -
stamped/addressed return en velope that we will provide).  They may indicate they are interested in learning 
more about the study by calling the study team or returning the enclosed do cument sa ying they want to be 
contacted.   Study personnel will call all those who are interested in the study to answer any questions they 
might have about the study and to schedule an initial study visit if they remain interested.  The letter will briefly 
describe the study and what will occur if they participate .  
Email : We may email individuals who meet the search criteria and who have email addresses available 
through the Cohort Discovery data. Emails will be sent via OHSU email (a common email that approved study 
staff have access to).  The body of the email will cont ain a summary of the study and provide the OHSU’s 
office of integrity’s telephone number so the individual can verify that the study constitutes OHSU research The 
body of the email will state that the individual may opt out by responding to the email or calling the research 
team.  They may indicate they are interested in learning more about the study by calling the study team or 
responding to the email with their phone number.  The body of the email will remind them not send any 
additional PHI via emai l. There will also be an attachment with an approved study flyer.  
 
For both OHSU and VA perspective subjects will only be respective subjects will only be initially contacted by 
secure email or letter. Both the The initial letter will state that, if the individual has not returned a response to 
the letter or email within t wo weeks, research personnel may  contact them by phone.  Therefore, if no 
response to the letter or email is received within two weeks, the research team may contact the individual by 
phone and use a script. The researcher will identify themselves, explai n why they are calling, and ask if the 
individual received the letter. If they did, the researcher will ask if they have reviewed the letter and whether or 
not they are interested in hearing more about the study. If the individual has received, but not rev iewed, the 
letter, the researcher may ask if they are interested in hearing more about the study or receiving more 
information.   If the individual  declines to speak with the researcher or indicates disinterest in the study, caller 
will thank the individua l and end the call.  If the individual  is interested, after answering their questions, the 
researcher will schedule an initial study visit.  If the individual  has not received the letter, the researcher will  
ask the individual  if they are interested to be in a research study that they may be eligible for .  Screening will 
take place over the phone after initial email correspondence.  No screening will happen via email except in the 
case where the potential subject offers information that will screen them out without being asked for the 
information.  Then the  study team may answer the email to let them know they do not qualify.    
Subjects who call in response to advertisements will be given a brief screening interview to verify age, 
gender, treatment status, time abstinent, current medications, concurrent medical illnesses and 
contraindications to MRI.  Additional questions will be asked to screen for recent exposure and symptoms of 
COVID -19. If recent exposure or symptoms are disclosed, and the subject otherwise qualifies, we will wait to 
schedule them until they have self -isolated for two weeks from tim e of exposure and/or when the ir symptoms 
have completely resolved.  Our screening criteria already excludes those who are at increased risk of severe 
Hoffman  
Version date: 2-1-2021 5 Alcohol and Nicotine  illness from COVID -19; however some subjects who might  be at an increased risk may still qualify to 
participate during modified operations including smokers and those with well -controlled moderate -to-severe 
asthma, hypertension, and/or high blood pressure. These subjects will be informed that they may be at h igher 
risk for COVID -19 infection and they may not want to put themselves at risk by participating in research.   
Contact information will be collected on the screening form for scheduling purposes and,  if the potential subject 
agrees, email will be collected to send an appointment confirmation email (Azure).  Subjects are excluded for 
significant medical problems or drugs known to affect functional MRI.  Subjects who fall under the AUD or 
NAUD group  will undergo a breathalyzer test before consent and at the beginning of visits 2, 3, and 7. If a 
subject has a blood alcohol content (BAC) above 0.08 they will be either excluded from the study or have the  
study  visit reschedule d. The breathalyzer test result  before consent will not be collected and is intended to 
ensure subject is fully capable of consenting. Subjects will be screened for COVID -19 symptoms during 
confirmation calls prior to study visits and again at the beginning of each in -person visit along with a 
temperature check. If any symptoms are revealed, the visit will be rescheduled for at least two weeks or until 
symptoms are resolved. Subjects will be evaluated per the Standardized Human Participant Protocol used by 
the Translational Service Core of the  Methamphetamine Abuse Research Center  (MARC ) (Table 1). To 
maximize the quantification of alcohol  and nicotine use, the instruments have been modified to emphasize both 
recent (30 days prior to sobriety) and lifetime sub stance use with the National Institute of Drug Abuse PhenX 
Toolkit and the Alcohol Use Disorder and Associated Disabilities Interview Schedule 5 (AUDADIS -5). The 
evaluation includes diagnostic instruments, a battery of cognitive tests, standard measures of impulsivity, PDD, 
the S top Signal  task, DSNBACK  and the Barratt Impulsiveness scale.  NAUD and AUD subjects will be 
required (as an inclusion criterion) to permit contact with two reliable collateral informants, preferably family 
members with whom they have regular contact. Collaterals will be contacted to obtain their consent to be an 
informant for the study and contacted if su bjects drop out.  Subjects will also be asked to give permission to 
contact clinicians (case managers, physicians) involved in their care.  The Hoffman Lab has established 
relationships with community treatment programs (including alcohol -specific centers)  from prior projects which 
will facilitate our recruitment.  Subjects who are veterans will also be asked for permission to look at their VA 
medical records for recent blood test results, medication and drug use, as well as treatment/relapse status.  
This information may be used as study data and blood test results may be used in lieu of repeat testing for the 
study.  
 Subjects will be reimbursed for the initial assessment visit ($50) and for the MRI visit  ($100) as well as 
the result of one choice, chosen at random, during the scanner PDD task ( average  = $55 , this gift card may be 
given immedi ately or delayed up to one year  and it may range from $0 - $140, depending on the random 
answer selected .  During the task, subjects will choose whether they want $20 now or a different amount at a 
later date - we will randomly select one of their answers ).  The third visit for cognitive battery will be an 
additional ($50).  Subjects who participate in follow ups ( NAUD  and AUD groups)  will receive $ 40 for each 
monthly visit and individuals receiving a second scan will be paid an additional $ 100 and variable amount 
(average $55 , also may be delayed ).  Additionally, any enrolled subject who refers another individual will 
receive  $10 for each referral  that participates in the first visit of  the study .  Some of these visits may be 
combined but reimbursement will remain the same.  To avoid giving subjects cash, p ayment is provided in the 
form of widely accepted  gift cards .  Comments :  As VA subjects are overwhelmingly male, special efforts will 
be made to recruit women, not only veterans, but from community detox and treatment programs.  Gender is 
an important consideration and will be used as a covariate in all our analyses and gender effects will be 
specifically investigated in both Aims.  We make special efforts to collect severity of use criteria, including age 
of onset, lifetime use and average daily use.  We will use these variables as covariates and explore 
dependence of imagin g measures on severity criteria.  
Subjects may be contacted over the phone at two weeks after Visits 3, 4, and 5 so that we maintain 
contact and reduce drop out.  Subjects will be asked to provide information kept in their study journals (see 
C3b2) including alcohol and cigarette use.  If subjects are unable to make it to Visits 4, 5 or 6, these visits may 
be conducted over the phone and subjects will be paid at their next in -person appointment.  
Appointment confirmation emails may be sent .  They will be sent to participants using  Azure.  Brief 
scheduling correspondence may also happen through Azure if the study team is not able to connect with the 
subject via phone.  
C2. Laboratory :  Urine drug abuse screen (UDS), thyroid -stimulating hormone test , HIV, Hepatitis C Ab 
screen, complete blood cell count , creatinine, liver enzymes (aspartate aminotransferase, alanine 
aminotransferase and gamma -glutamyl transferase) will be performed to ensure subjects meet criteria for 
inclusion in the study.  U rinary cotinine tests will  help quantify smoking and urine human chorionic 
gonadotropin ( HCG ) tests will screen women for pregnancy  (pregnant women will be excluded from the study) . 
Hoffman  
Version date: 2-1-2021 6 Alcohol and Nicotine  HCG tests may not be performed on women who have been surgically sterilized or who are post -menopausal.   
HCG will be performed at the initial visit and at the MRI scan visits.  UDS will be obtained at all visits.  
Comments:   In addition to alcohol  and nicotine , casual  use of cannabis  is common.  We will exclude any 
subject who me ets criteria for current dependence  of cannabis (or any other substance ), but will not exclude 
subjects for casual recreational use ( or mild lifetime dependence for drugs other than nicotine and alcohol ).  
We may also accept subjects with current methamphetamine use disorder into the study.  We will document 
the amount of cannabis and other recreational drug use for statistical control purposes.  We use < 20 lifetime 
cigarettes (Pomerleau et al., 2004)  for inclusion in our AUD and CS groups.  If we encounter significant 
problems with recruitment, then we will change criteria to 100 lifetime cigarettes.  
C2a:  Banked specimens : Subjects will be asked to donate 10 - 20 mL whole blood and a cheek swab 
for specimen banking in the MARC Translational Service Core Biorepository.  Future analyses may include 
genetic analyses and blood samples may be stored as whole blood or plasma.   All subjects will have a blood 
draw at Visit 2 and AUD/NAUD subjects will also have a banking blood draw at V7.  Cytokine analysis : 
Plasma samples (pulled from the MARC biorepository) from both visit 2 and visit 7 will be analyzed in 
duplicate using a customized, high -sensitivity magnetic bead multiplex assay Luminex system. Samples 
will be prepared in the Loftis lab and then processed at the  OHSU Flow Cytometry Core.   We will measure 
peripheral immune biomarkers associated with inflammation including IL -1beta, IL -6, IL-10, TNF -alpha, 
BDNF, MCP -1 and NCAM. Intra - and inter -assay coefficients of variations, as indices of within - and 
between -assay precision, respectively, will be calculated to examine the reliability of the cytokine 
measurements. A linear regression will be used to test for the main effects of group, age, and sex on 
differences in each cytokine/chemokine. Levels of peripheral imm une markers will also be correlated with 
anatomical and functional neuroimages  
C2b: Banked contact information : Subjects will be asked to have the  following  information  collected for 
a contact repository: contact information,  date of birth, gender, Veteran status, smoking status, substance use 
information, mental health status and previous participation in a Hoffman lab research study . This will be used 
to contact subjects who may be eligible for future studies with the Hoffman lab. Subjects will sign an addendum 
to the VA ICF if they consent to having their information stored for fut ure contact, this is optional.  
C3. Functional MRI Tasks:  Subjects will perform  two functional MRI tasks, the PDD and the 
DSNBACK.  Subjects will be familiarized with the tasks at a pre -MRI visit.  See C7. Specific Methods  for 
details of MRI image acquisition and preprocessing.  Subjects are screened with a comprehensive MRI safety 
checklist at initial telephone screen, pre -MRI visit and scan days.  
C3a. Probability Delay Discounting Task:  Data from discounting tasks will be fit to equations in Figure 
2.  Standard temporal and probability discounting data will be fit  (Eq. 1.1) using a softmax procedure (Miedl et 
al., 2012) .  The constants, k and h, are an adjustable  parameters that characterize the discounting rates 
(Bickel and Marsch, 2001) .  For standard discounting, M = $100.  As k and h are not normally distributed, we 
calculate the fractional areas under the discounting curves as impulsivity  measures. We will use the 
formulation of Ho et al. (1999)  for the PDD which posits the actual value of a delayed and probabilistically 
discounted reward, M, as Eq 1.2.  T he second function is that of the indifference surface with the immediate 
certain reward set at $20. As the integral of the discounting function is separable, we calculate the volume 
under the surface as the product of a temporal and probability discountin g function (Eq. 1.3), where the 
fractional areas A’k and A’h are equivalent to the areas under the curves for standard delay and probability 
discounting.  
C3b. DSNBACK T ask: Before the task, subjects will be evaluated for their level of craving for alcohol 
and nicotine  by filling out a Visual Analog Scale (VAS) for each substance .  Participants are shown two sets of 
images , each containing 36 nicotine or alcohol related stimuli .  From the larger sets, they select  the 6 alcohol  
images and 6 nicotine  images that they consider most salient . Another VAS will be administered to determine if 
viewing the stimulus  images caused increases in craving.  Subjects then complete  a familiarization task.  At 
their next study v isit, the participants will perform the DSNBACK in the MRI scanner . 0-back  and 2-back blocks  
are administered in a randomized order with stimulus images shown to each side of the letter.  Correct or 
incorrect response s and reaction time s will be recorded for each letter in each trial.  Subjects will rate craving 
for each drug before and after the scan . 
C3b2. Follow Up Visits: During 3 monthly follow up visits, subjects will turn in journals which will 
document any lapse or relapse episodes, craving for nicotine and alcohol , treatment status, and use of 
nicotine, alcohol, drugs or medications .  They will also undergo a short cognitive battery which repeats 
measures taken during the initial visits.  All subjects will keep study journals throughout their participation in the 
study.  
 
Hoffman  
Version date: 2-1-2021 7 Alcohol and Nicotine  C3c. PDD Behavioral Analysis :  Amplitude Modulated Regression (AMR):  Within -subject AMR will 
be carried out using AFNI package 3dDeconvolve. AMR is performed by scaling the expected hemodynamic 
response on a trial -by-trial basis according to the magnitude of each specific characteristic on that trial. In 
addition to the inclusion of trial -by-trial modulated predictors, a constant amplitude predictor is included for 
each to identify regions that respond to the stimulus but did not vary according to its value. The general linear 
model (GLM) will include amplitude -modulated predictors for the  presentation of the three reward 
characteristics to identify blood oxygen level dependent (BOLD) signals that scale parametrically with 
probability, delay or magnitude . Group differences will be tested on the set of a priori  ROIs  (Table 3) identified 
in PS1 and literature . This  analysis will calculate decision profiles for each subject with values that represent 
sensitivity to delay, risk and magnitude . 
Hypothesis 1 a.1:  Individuals co -addicted to alcohol and nicotine will exhibit a pattern of cortical activation  
to delay, 
magnitude and 
probability 
characterized by 
both increased 
sensitivity to 
reward in striatum 
and aversion to 
risk and delay in 
dorsal cognitive 
control regions.  
Expected 
Outcomes and 
Alternatives:  Our 
working model 
predicts that (1) NUD 
subjects (compared 
to CS) will exhibit 
greater sensitivity to 
reward in salience network regions and modestly greater sensitivity to delay and probability in executive 
regions, (2) AUD subjects will exhibit greater sensitivity in all regions compared to CS and NUD.  (3) The co -
addicted, NAUD, group  will show greater sensitivity to delay and probability in dorsal cognitive control regions 
(Error! Reference source not found. ; Table 3) than the AUD group and a similar pattern, but smaller effect 
size between the NUD and CS groups. The combination of these effects is predicted to increase discounting of 
delayed and probabilistic rewards . For this and all our hypotheses concerning the co -addicted groups, our 
initial prediction is that the groups will show a synergistic effect of nicotine and alcohol.  It is possible, however, 
that there is a simply additive or even an antagonistic effect of  the two drugs.  Our analysis will differentiate 
among these possibilities.    
C3d. DSNBACK  Analysi s:  This task is designed to identify brain regions in both the salience network 
that responds to drug cues and the executive network that suppresses responding to cues in order to attend to 
other tasks.  For each subject a voxelwise linear mixed effect s analysis (3dLME) with main effects of difficulty, 
stimulus class and a difficulty X stimulus interaction term will be calculated.  The analysis of the scanner task 
will calculate parametric regressors (0  or 2-back) for each s timulus class (nicotine,  alcohol and n eutral). 
Contrasts between the drug and neutral stimuli during the 0 back condition will identify salience attribution 
regions, while the same contrasts during the 2 -back will identify congitive control regions.  
Hypothesis 1 a.2:  Difference s in neural activity between stressed and unstressed drug-associated stimuli 
(DAS) will identify regions associated with cognitive control of DAS . We predict that parametric variation in 
cortical structures hypothesized to control response to DAS, will show greater stress -induced variation when 
the DAS represent the preferred substance.   
Figure 1: Pictorial representation of overall experimental design.  All subject groups have the same 
initial assessment, including MRI scans.  AUD and NAUD will be followed for three months and 
subjects will be rescanned.  
 

Hoffman  
Version date: 2-1-2021 8 Alcohol and Nicotine  Expected Outcomes and Alternatives:  We predict  that addicted individuals  will show a significant 
interaction between difficulty and drug condition.  Specifically, we hypothesize that activation in ACC, PPC and 
DLPFC will show greater parametric scaling with stress when the subject suppresses drug cue distractors.  
More speculatively, we hypothesize that  within individuals, preference for the drugs can be characterized by  
differences in neural response,  difficulty and drug condition .  Thus, w e predict that the co -addicted group will 
show stress -induced parametric modulation with both nicotine  and alcohol  stimuli , although individual subjects 
may exhibit a preference for one substance .  For example, although NUD subjects may use alcohol, they are 
predicted to have a more robust response to smoking cues.  We will also correlate the ability to suppress drug 
stimuli to the volumetric and connectivity measures obtained in SA1.  Secondarily, we expect cortical thinning 
in rostral ACC, PPC and DLPFC, as well as incr eased FA in white matter connections between these regions 
to correlate with inability to suppress drug stimuli and perform the task.  
We will also consider alternative tasks to test differential attention to drug cues, particularly if the first 
sample of 12 subjects does not perform as expected. For example, a drug word Stroop (Marhe et al., 2013)  
with substitution of nicotine and alcohol stimuli could be an alternative.  We are planning to pilot alternatives 
before the project starts so they will be available.   
C4. Resting State F unctional Connectivity  Analysis:  We will use the methods of the Fair Laboratory 
(Miranda -Dominguez et al., 2014)  to analyze the rsMRI scans .  We will use an ROI -to-ROI approach  to 
calculate connectivity in the pre -processed data, based on the a priori  regions previously associated with 
alcohol effects ( Table 3). Bivariate correlations between the average (BOLD) signal from these regions provide 
connectivity estimates. Several sources of spurious variance along with their temporal derivatives are then 
removed from the data through linear regression (e.g., signal fr om ventricular regions and signal from the white 
matter). The magnitude of connectivity changes between AUD, NUD, NAUD and CS groups will be compared 
utilizing two -tailed t -tests. Finally, the raw p values will be corrected for multiple comparisons and thr esholded 
at a false discovery rate (FDR) correction of PFDR < 0.05.   
C5. Cortical Density (VBM) and White Matter 
Integrity (DTI):  These analyses are described in  C7. 
Hypothesis 1b:  Connections within the decision -
making network will exhibit both anatomical (DTI 
and VBM ) and functional disruption in NAUD, AUD  
and NUD  groups relative to  CS.  We predict that 
alcohol and nicotine use are associated with greater 
cortical (cingulate and prefrontal cortex) thinning and  
decreased white matter integrity in superior and 
inferior longitudinal fasciculi and rostral trans -
callosal fibers.  
Expected Outcomes and Alternatives: Our 
hypothesis would be supported by finding reduce d FA 
in the tracts that connect (directly or indirectly) regions 
between which there is decreased functional 
connectivity.  The combined anatomical/functional 
connectivity analysis we propose has not been 
previously used in addicted populations, although a 
similar approach yielded informative data in 
schizophrenia  (Kubicki et al., 2009;Skudlarski et al., 
2010) .  We will perform regular QA to ensure that the 
quality of the data is high.  This will allow us to make 
any modifications to our protocol and, if necessary, 
recruit additional subjects.  We will consult regularly 
with Dr. Fair about anatomical and functional connectivity.  
SA 2 :  Develop a machine learning model that integrates behavioral, task and resting state 
functional activation, volumetric data and structural connectivity  that a) differentiates the four 
groups and b) predicts treatment outcome at 3 months . 
C6. Machine Learning: SVM Approach: The SVM algorithm [LIBSVM, (Chang and Lin, 2011) ] 
calculates a hyper -surface that separates the groups.  This process requires selection of a kernel function that 
describes the projection of the feature vector (e.g., AMR in a priori  ROIs, Error! Reference source not 
found. ,Table 3) associated with each individual into multidimensional space (e.g., a simple scalar product for a ROI CM x CM y  CM z  
R/L ACC -SMA ±3 23 42 Sal 
R/L MFG  (DLPFC)  ±38 18 44 Exec  
R/L SFG  (DMPFC)  ±16 18 55 Exec  
R/L PPC ±44 -60 36 Exec  
R/L PCC  ±3 -30 32 Def 
R/L rINS  ±32 19 1 Sal 
R/L rMFG  ±39 46 13 Exec  
R/L IFG  ±55 30 6 Sal 
R/L AMYG  ±28 -1 -19 Dal 
R/L RS ±10 5 -9 Sal 
BS 0 -22 -12 Sal 
Table 3:  Center of mass (CM) for a priori  ROIs for planned 
comparison of multimodal imaging measures (SA1).  ACC -
SMA anterior cingulate cortex -supplementary motor area, 
(r)MFG: (rostral) middle frontal gyrus, SFG:  superior frontal 
gyrus, PPC: posterior parietal cortex including angular gyrus 
(AG), supramarginal gyrus (SMG) and inferior parietal lobule 
(IPL), PCC: posterior cingulate cortex.  rINS: rostral insular 
cortex, RS:  rostral striatum, IFG: inferior frontal gyrus, AMYG: 
amygdala, BS:  brainstem. Sal: salience, Exec: executive.  
 
Hoffman  
Version date: 2-1-2021 9 Alcohol and Nicotine  linear kernel) and requires selection of parameters characteristic of each kernel and a constant, C, that 
characterizes the error penalty. Our approach (schematic in Figure 3) to a machine learning model 
(Schoelkopf and Smola, 2001)  closely follows the method of Ding et al. (2015) .  Feature extraction:  The first 
step in this analysis is extraction of features from the functional, resting state, volumetric and white matter 
connectivity datasets that will be used in the Support Vector Machine.  We plan an ROI based analysis (e.g., 
see Table 3).  This set of regions will be adjusted and expanded after preliminary analysis of functional and 
anatomical measures that statistically separate the four groups.  Specifically, we use the following suitably 
scaled features:  1) average cortical density i n the ROIs extracted from VBM; 2), average FA in white matter 
tracts connecting the ROIs (from atlas tract -based spatial statistics (TBSS)), 3) rsMRI connectivity correlation 
matrices between ROIs, 4) regional parametric regressor means and 5) clinical and  demographic variables.   
C6a. C lassification of AUD, NUD, NAUD and CS (SA2a) :  The method can be extended to multigroup 
classification [see, e.g., (Hsu and Lin, 2002;Forkert et al., 2015) ;(Lajnef et al., 2015) , albeit with somewhat 
greater complexity.  LIBSVM uses the “one -against -one” method, which essentially approaches the problem as 
multiple binary classification problems (there are 6 binary classifiers for 4 groups).  We will use the same set of 
features a s above, but the rank order of features may differ.  
C6b. Three -month outcome  (SA2b) :  For the outcome predictor, cigarettes per day and pack -years will 
be added as a feature .  We cross -validate the model using a bootstrapping procedure ( Figure 3).  We plan on 
testing a range of kernels such as the linear, polynomial, radial, and sigmoid kernels. The data will be divided 
into a training set and a test set (70%/30% split, stratified by relapse status ). For each kernel type, we will use 
10-fold cross -validation within the training set to determine optimal parameters amongst a wide range of 
values. The SVM’s with the optimal parameters will 
then be applied to the test set. This procedure will be 
simulated 10,000 times , from which an optimal 
kernel and corresponding parameters will be 
selected.  
C6c.  Expected Outcomes and Alternatives:   
We will examine the performance of the SVM 
classifier by calculating sensitivity, specificity and 
balanced accuracy.  Sensitivity = TP/(TP + FN), 
Specificity = (TN/(TN+FP) and Balanced Accuracy = 
(1/2)(TP/(  TP+FN )+TN/(  TN+FP)), where TP is true 
positive, FP is false positive, FN is false negative, 
and TN is true negative.  The model will be 
especially useful if balanced accuracy reaches 
~70%.  If accuracy is below this number, we will 
investigate refinements or alternati ves to our model 
building techniqu es. If SVM methods still prove 
intractable, we are currently developing alternative 
methods including a random forest approach and 
multivariate distance matrix regression [MDMR 
(Zapala and Schork, 2012) ].  These methods have 
been used to classify individuals with addiction [ (Squeglia et al., 2016) , random forest] and ADHD [ (Yang et al., 
2016) , MDMR].  
C6d. Interpretation:  Alcohol and Smoking Groups:  We expect that this method will identify a set of 
brain regions, their function and their connectivity that will differentiate NAUD and AUD groups from each 
other, from NUD and from CS.  We expect that we will confirm damage to white matter microstructure in long 
tracts connecting, in particular the PPC (AG, IPL) with frontal regions (DLPFC, VMPFC, ACC).  We expect 
functional abnormalities in the salience circuit.  We predict that these neural abnormalities  will be more 
pronounced in alcohol users than nicotine users but that co -addicted individuals will exhibit the highest level of 
abnormality. Outcome:  We expect that decreased cortical density, sensitivity to cues and reward 
characteristics, increased FA, poor functional connectivity and co -addiction to smoking will predict poor 
outcome in the AUD and NAUD groups.  We specifically expect that functional and anatomic deficits in 
salience and, especially, cognitive control regions will be important predictor s of outcome.  
C7. Specific Methods : Human MRI Imaging Acquisition:  We will use the Human Connectome Project 
(HCP) Lifespan Protocol  using a 3 T Siemens Magnetom  Prisma scanner and a 32 -channel phased array head 
coil. fMRI ( T2*-weighted): Three (2 PDD and 1 DSNBACK ) T2*- weighted echo -planar imaging (EPI) functional 
runs will be acquired (60 slices, 2 mm thick, TR/TE/α=2000 ms/38 ms/55°, matrix=128 × 128, FOV=220 mm2, 1.1   
1.2   
1.3   
Figure 2: Analysis of discounting tasks . Vp is the immediate 
value of the amount M, available after delay,  t or odds against, θ 
= (1 – p)/p, where p is the probability of receiving the reward.   
 is the fractional volume under the discounting surface.  
()() 11ppMMVVkt h ==++
()()()()20 1
1 1 1 1pMVkt h M kt h=  =+ + + +
()()
()()12 3
00
12 3
001
1 12 3 1 1
12 1 3 1 12 3uc
uc
tot
kh
khV dtdVV kt h
dt d A AAAkt h


= = =  + +
 ==++

'
ucV
Hoffman  
Version date: 2-1-2021 10 Alcohol and Nicotine  PAT mode/Accel factor = GRAPPA/2, 310 volumes per run) with an in -plane pixel size of 2.0 mm2 while 
subjects perform the PDD or the DSNBACK . Each run will be 10.3 minutes long. rsfMRI : Identical to fMRI 
settings with 200 volumes. High -resolution anatomical (T 1-weighted  [T1w]): One magnetically prepared rapid 
acquisition gradient echo  (MPRAGE)  (208 0.8 mm isovoxels , TR/TE/TI/α = 2400 ms/2.24 ms/1060 ms/8 °, 
FOV= 256x240  mm, 2x Parallel Imaging,  duration 6.38 min), will be acquired for co -registration with functional 
images and statistical overlay. High -resolution anatomical (T 2-weighted  [T2w]): 208 slices, 0.8 mm 
isovoxels, TR/TE:  3200 ms/564 ms; variable flip angle; FOV 256x263 mm, 2x Parallel imaging; Futsyion 5.57 
min.  HARDI : Two HARDI scans will be acquired (66 axial slices, 2.2 mm thick, TR/TE/α = 4300 ms/96 ms/90°, 
FOV= 25.6 cm2, PAT mode  /Accel factor = GRAPPA/2) consisting of six non -diffusion weighte d (B0) images 
followed by 32 non -collinear directions at B0 = 1000 s mm-2 and at B0 = 2000 s mm-2. Each HARDI scan lasts 
4.73 min.  
C7a. fMRI Standard P reprocessing:  Task -related and resting -state fMRI data will be preprocessed 
identically. We include only scans  with minimal movement  (< 3 mm) and free of artifacts (Murphy et al., 2013)  .  
Functional images will be realigned for motion corrections, unwarped then co -registered to structural images 
for each subject and then transformed to Talairach coordinates and then resampled into atlas space with 3 mm 
isovoxels.  Motion correction is applied with the standard 6 parameters and then frame -by frame spatial 
deviations  are assessed with the temporal derivative of the time course.  The anatomical volume is then 
segmented into gray matter, 
white matter, and cerebrospinal 
fluid. Next, we apply a temporal 
bandpass filter (0.009 Hz <  < 
0.08Hz), spatial smoothing (6 
mm full  width at half maximum 
(FWHM) Gaussian kernel), 
regression with the 6 rigid body 
motion parameters, regression 
of the whole brain signal and 
regression of the signal for 
ventricles and white matter.  
Opposite phase -encode polarity 
spin echo images will be used to 
estimate  the B0 distortion field , 
which will be applied to each 
gradient echo frame after 
accounting for estimated head  
motion . Gradient nonlinearity 
distortions will be corrected 
using scanner -specific field 
maps. Both corrections are vital 
for pr oper registration to 
structural images.  Images will 
be pr eprocessed using AFNI_16.1.26 . The motion censoring technique described recently by Power and 
colleagues (Power et al., 2012;Power et al., 2014;Power et al., 2015) , will greatly reduce the residual effect of 
head motion on observed time courses.   
To enable cortical surface -based analyses, fMRI time courses will be sampled to the cortical surface 
mesh, using the extent of overlap with the cortical ribbon as a weighting factor to account for partial voluming. 
Voxels with high variability relative to their local neighborhood will be excluded.  The functional EPI images will 
be despiked (3dDespike), slice time corrected (3dTshift), motion corrected (3dvolreg), aligned to warped 
MPRAGE (align_epi_anat.py) and corrected for oblique slice acquisition. A 4 mm FWHM  three -dimensional 
Gaussian blur will be applied to the functional images (3dmerge) and each voxel time series will be scaled to 
have a mean of 100 (3dTstat, 3 dcalc).   Anatomical (T 1w and T 2w). MPRAGE and T2w structural images  will be 
corrected for gradient nonlinearity distortions using scanner specific, nonlinear transformations, provided by 
MRI scanner manufacturers , and verified using phantom scans.  Spatial distortion  in the readout direction due 
to B 0 variation will be corrected based on the distortion maps generated from our fast field mapping.  T2w 
images will be registered to T1w images using mutual information  after coarse pre -alignment via within -modality 
registration to atlas brains.  Intensity non -uniformity correction will be performed by dividing image intensities by 
a smooth bias field estimated from the geometric mean of the T 1w and T 2w images. A natomical scans  will be  
Figure 3: Schematic [after Ding et al. (2015) ] of the classification approach proposed for 
SA2a and b.   
 

Hoffman  
Version date: 2-1-2021 11 Alcohol and Nicotine  corrected for oblique acquisition, skull stripped (3dSkullStrip ), and warped into MNI-152 space with @auto_ tlrc.  
C7b. Diffusion -Weighted Imaging : DTI pre processing will be performed using the DTI preprocess script 
(Takuya Hayashi, Center for Life Science Technologies, RIKEN, Kobe, JP) for FSL [ (Smith et al., 2004)  
FMRIB, Oxford]. Scans will be corrected for eddy current distortion and motion. B0 inhomogeneity distortion 
will be corrected using a B0 field map (magnitude and phase)  in FSL's  fugue . DTI estimates (FA 1-3, V 1-3, MD) 
will be calculated using DTIFIT. Voxelwise statistical  analysis will be performed with TBSS  (Smith et al., 2006)  
and nonlinear registration to the FMRIB58_FA common space will be conducted. Each subject's aligned FA 
data will be projected onto a mean skeleton. Voxelwise cross -subject statistics will be performed with FSL's 
Randomise  with threshold -free cluster enhancement (TFCE).  
C7c. Voxel -Based Morphometry : Structural images will be analyzed with FSL -VBM (Douaud et al., 
2007)  an optimized VBM protocol (Good et al., 2001)  carried out with FSL (Smith et al., 2004) . Images will be 
brain -extracted and tissue segmented, registered to the MNI -152 standard space using non -linear registration 
(Andersson et al., 2007) , and flipped along the x -axis to create a left -right symmetric, study -specific gray matter 
template and modulated with a voxel -wise division by the Jacobian determinant of the non -linear 
transformation matrix to correct for local expansion or contraction. The m odulated gray matter images will be 
smoothed with an isotropic Gaussian kernel with a sigma of 3 mm (FWHM = 7 mm). Group contrasts will be 
tested with FSL's Randomise , a permutation -based non -parametric procedure.  
C8. Power:   We made an estimate for group size using two approaches. We used the statistical map of 
magnitude from 20 AUD subjects and 20 CS that had been compared with 3dANOVA as input to two power 
calculators.  We used fmripower  (Mumford and Nichols, 2008) , a MATLAB -based program that calculates a 
power estimate given the between -group and within -subject error terms associated with a two -tailed t -test of 
regression coefficients.  We also used  Neuropower , an online toolkit that calculates group sizes from statistical 
maps.  For whole brain analyses, the results from fmripower suggested that 31 subjects per group would yield a 
power of .8 for the test comparison, while Neuropower suggested 29 and 45 subjects per group with the 
Benjamini -Hochberg and Random Fiel d theory correction for multiple comparisons, respectively. When we 
used the ROIs in Table 3 to mask the voxels in the statistical map, power for 50 subjects per group was 0.99.  
We are, therefore,  confident that the proposed 50 subjects per group will provide us with sufficient power to 
test the predictions.  
Hoffman  
Version date: 2-1-2021 12 Alcohol and Nicotine  C9. Timeline, Benchmarks:  Timeline for this 4 -year project is presented in graphical form ( Figure 4). 
 
C10. Risk to Subjects  
Human Subjects Involvement : Approximately 200 individuals will be recruited for this project.  
Potential subjects will call Dr. Hoffman or his designee after seeing a presentation about the study, in response 
to a study advertisement or by referral from a clinician.  All subjects wil l have been offered a flyer with contact 
information.  When subjects call, they will undergo a brief telephone interview to determine if they are likely to 
qualify and, if so, will be invited for visit 1.  Subjects may also be screened at treatment centers  during 
recruitments visits.  Each subject will then give informed consent before any data collection takes place.   Study 
visits may take place at the Portland VA, OHSU or at local treatment centers.   
Sources of Materials : All study data derived from subject procedures (including behavioral working 
memory and discounting tasks, neuropsychological tests, screening interview questionnaires and MRI scan) is 
obtained specifically for research purposes and not for treatment.  Blood specimens will be obtained and 
analyzed by the VA lab and destroyed according to protocol  or banked for future research .  Blood samples 
may also be drawn by study team doctors  or by study staff who have undergone OHSU’s phlebotomy draw 
class .  UAs will be obtained and analyzed by the research team or the VA lab and will be destroyed according 
to protocol.  MRI scans are obtained at the Advanced Imaging Research Center at OHSU and the data are 
downloaded to a computer located at the VA.  
Potential Risks : This study does not involve treatment or invasive procedures. Participants may become 
upset while answering personal questions during the interview or during administration of the 
neuropsychological tests.   
Subjects who are claustrophobic may become frightened in the MRI machine.  Subjects with metal 
fragments, wire sutures, staples, implanted pacemakers or defibrillators or metal fragments from welding are at  
Figure 4: Timeline for completion of the study.  

Hoffman  
Version date: 2-1-2021 13 Alcohol and Nicotine  risk from damage due to movement of metal fragments in the 3T magnetic field.  Participants will be 
systematically assessed for ferromagnetic metallic foreign bodies and excluded if there is any doubt. Rarely, 
subjects experience vertigo, a metallic taste or muscle stimulation.  Although none are currently known, there 
may be unknown risks to fetuses in from the MRI procedure.  
Subjects may experience an increase in cue -induced craving if they are in recovery from a substance 
use disorder as a result of their assessment, particularly on the craving task, the DSNBACK.   
As there are risks to confidentiality, particularly if sensitive information about drug use and abuse and 
past legal problems were sought. We will apply for a Certificate of Confidentiality from the NIH for this study.  
Blood drawing may cause pain or bruising at the site and carries a small risk of infection.  
 
Adequacy of Protection from Risk  
Recruitment and Informed Consent: Members of the research staff will meet regularly with personnel 
in the VA Substance Abuse Treatment Program (SATP), with inpatient and outpatient psychiatry staff and with 
the staff at community treatment programs (to enhance recruitment of women and unde r-represented subject 
groups), who may refer possible subjects.  In addition to referrals from clinicians or responses to 
advertisements, we will also recruit patients via informational presentations in treatment settings.   A study 
member will give regular presentations of the study at SATP access meetings and at weekly meetings in 
community treatment centers and detox programs.  Attendance at these recruitment meetings by potential 
subjects is entirely voluntary.  Potentia l subjects will be given the IRB -approved advertisement with contact 
information and asked to call the contact number if they are interested in participation  or screened on site.  Any 
study data or information collected outside of the Portland VA will be k ept inside a storage clipboard or on an 
OHSU -encrypted laptop until it is returned to the VA. Any specimens collected outside of the Portland VA will 
be kept in a small Styrofoam cooler until they are  returned to the VA.  
Protection Against Risk : Subjects are interviewed extensively to screen for any contraindication to 
MRI, e.g., surgical aneurysm clips, pacemaker, prosthetic heart valve, neuro -stimulator, implanted pumps, 
cochlear implants, metal rods, plates or screws, previous surgery, hearing aids, history of welding, metal 
shrapnel. If there is any doubt, the subject will be excluded. The research team will obtain orbital x -rays if 
subjects have any history of welding, grinding or other exposure to metallic particles t hat could lodge in the 
orbit. Pregnant women (negative urine pregnancy test required before the scan), because of the unknown risk 
to the fetus, will also be excluded.  Participants will be taken to a mock MRI prior to the procedure if they are 
concerned a bout claustrophobia. If a subject becomes frightened during the procedure, it can be terminated 
immediately.  
A clinician will be available to consult with any participants who experience discomfort for any reason 
during the study visit.  Subjects will be asked to remain in laboratory either until the problem has been resolved 
or immediate referral to appropriate treatment is accomplished.  Subjects not in need of emergent treatment 
will be offered referral to counseling or other support resources as appropriate.  Substance -dependent subjects 
(except control smokers) will all be in remission and undergoing resident ial treatment to ensure availability of 
counseling and support after study visits.  The subject may request termination of the assessment at any time.  
Subjects may refuse any single non -critical procedure in the study if it makes them uncomfortable without 
disqualification from the rest of the study.  
 
C11. Participation of Non -Veterans : This is an ambitious study and requires recruitment of subjects who 
have been abstinent less than one month and one group of subjects who have AUD, but do not use nicotine.  
There are also significant gender effects which necessitate have a gender balanced  sample.  We will, 
therefore, need to recruit non -veterans to meet our ambitious recruitment goals, recruit sufficient women and 
subjects rare in the veteran treatment population.  The Hoffman lab has established relatio nships with 
treatment programs within and outside the VA Portland HCS which will facilitate recruitment.  Non -veterans will 
be recruited from community alcohol detox and treatment programs, through advertisement on OHSU’s Study 
Participation Opportunities web page, and, if necessary for controls, Craig’s List.  
 
C12. Potential Benefits of Research to Subjects and Others  
This project is not intended to benefit individual subjects but results may help us understand the 
neurobiology of alcohol and tobacco co -addiction and tailor treatment approaches to co -addicted individuals 
seeking treatment in the future.  
 
C13. Importance of Knowledge to be Gained  
The results of this project will be valuable for planning treatment options for dually addicted individuals by 
Hoffman  
Version date: 2-1-2021 14 Alcohol and Nicotine  predicting and evaluating treatment response using neuroimaging.  A predictive model will help individualize 
relapse risk through a better understanding of neurobiological factors that influence addiction, craving and 
cognition.  
C14. Data and Safety Monitoring Plans  
Data Security and Privacy : Data will be stored in a manner intended to preserve patient confidentiality.  
Hard -copy PHI will be stored in locked cabinets in the PIs VA office and laboratory space.  Electronic PHI will 
be stored only on servers behind the VA firewall accessed by pass word -protected VA computers.  Each 
subject is given a unique identifier (UI) based on a random number and study identifier, in this instance 
NAUDxxx.  Only coded or de -identified data, not PHI, are used for analysis.  The file li nking the UI to the 
patient’s name will be stored in a separate password -protected file on a secure server behind the VA firewall.  
Once the study has ended, the link will be stored by the VA R&D office (or destroyed if regulations change)  
The primary repository for coded  data and neuroimages will be stored on a password -protected network drive 
at the OHSU Advanced Computing Center, to which only the research team has access.  Coded data will also 
be stored on OHSU's REDCap application, a highly secure and robust web -based  research data collection and 
management system.  No identifiable information will be entered into this application at any time.  The 
statisticians will not have access to the code or PHI at any time . The spreadsheet linking the code to the 
subject will remain behind the VA firewall at VAPORHCS.   Any email contact with subjects will occur through 
Azure secure email (with the exception of recruitment emails sent to OHSU patients which will use OHSU 
email).  
MRI images are collected at the Advanced Imaging Research Center (AIRC) at OHSU.  No PHI is used 
to identify subjects and only the subject’s coded ID is entered at the time of the scan.  Images are archived on 
a separate partition on the AIRC PACS server ( AETitle = HOFFNA UD) to which only Hoffman Lab research 
computers and the AIRC IT specialist have access.  The raw data for each MRI scan is downloaded to 
Hoffman Lab Linux workstations in room 5C -107 at the VA.  These workstations are, by necessity, hooked  up 
to the OHSU network, but can be accessed only by Hoffman Lab personnel.  Image analysis takes place on 
these workstations in VA space.   
At the end of the study, the AIRC will scrub the partition containing archives and remove the partition, so 
that the data are permanently erased from the AIRC.  The Hoffman Lab will archive the raw image files in the 
already established Hoffman Data Reposi tory (estimated to be about 12 Tbyte).  
 
C15. Blood and Data Banking  
Serum, leukocytes  (from whole blood samples)  and a buccal swab will be obtained (via separate 
permission on the HIPAA and ICF), linked to study data for coded storage in the MARC Translational Service 
Core Biorepository  (Jennifer Loftis, PhD, Administrator).  No PHI will be stored in the data repository and 
repository data will be coded by a n identifier (NA UDXXX), where XXX is a pseudorandom number.  The code 
for the  repository identifier will be identical to the  study identifier and there will be a single spreadsheet linking 
to identifiable information that will be destroyed or encrypted at  the closure  of this study.  Information  collected 
for the contact repository will be stored on a password protected spreadsheet separate from the coded study 
data and will just have PHI  and contact information . 
 
C16. Oversight  
IRB-approved study staff will ensure that any protocol deviations or adverse event will be reported 
immediately to the PI, who will examine the patient and determine if any additional evaluation or treatment is 
needed. The PI will ensure that significant adverse events are properly reported to the IRB (within 5 days to 
comply with VA policy).  The Hoffma n Lab will examine all cumulative adverse events semi -annually to 
determine if there are any systematic problems.  
 
C17. Inclusion/Vulnerable Populations  
Women and Minorities : Given that gender effects may be prominent in this population, it is important 
that the ratio of male/female subjects approach 50/50.  We will recruit outside of the VA SATP to ensure that 
women are represented equally with men, in alcohol detox and treatm ent centers in the Portland area.  
Minority subjects will be recruited to be a representative cross section of the Portland, Oregon population. That 
population is primarily Caucasian 82.4%, with 7% African -American, 7%, Asian, 1.8% Na tive Hawaiian or 
Other Pacific Islander, and 1.8% Native American. Additionally, the population will be primarily non -Hispanic 
93%, with 7% Hispanic. Pregnant Women are excluded and must have a negative pregnancy test.  
Hoffman  
Version date: 2-1-2021 15 Alcohol and Nicotine  Children : Children will be excluded from this study.  
Prisoners : No prisoners will be included.  If subjects are incarcerated at the time of follow -up, they will 
be dropped from the study.  
Decisional ly Impaired: Decisionally impaired subjects will not be recruited or included in the study.  
 
C18. Determining VA from Non -VA Research  
This study will take place both at the Portland VA and at OHSU.  VA Research will include consent, 
screening, questionnaires, blood draws, urinalyses, and x -rays.  Non -VA Research will be only the MRI scans 
acquired at OHSU’s AIRC.  Recruitment talks will be given at SATP (VA) and community treatment programs.   
Screening and study visits may take place at treatment centers.  