Page 1 of 7  
 The University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas  
Institutional Review Board  
 
PROJECT SUMMARY  
 
 
 
Study Title: Ultrasound -guided f ascia iliaca  compartment block versus  periarticular 
infiltration  for pain management after  total hip arthroplasty : a randomized controlled 
trial 
 
Principal Investigator: Irina Gasanova, MD  
 
 
Sponsor/Funding Source:  Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Management, UT 
Southwestern Medical School  
 
 
IRB Number : STU 122015 -022 
 
 
 
Study ID: [REMOVED]  
 
 
 
Date of Document : 01 April 2016  
 
 
 
  
Page 2 of 7  
  
 Purpose:  
In this randomized,  controlled,  observer -blinded study we plan to evaluate  ultrasound -guided 
fascia iliaca  compartment block with ropivacaine  and periarticular  infiltration with ropivacaine  
for postoperative pain management after total hip arthroplasty  (THA) . 
 
Background:  
Despite substantial advances in our understanding of the pathophysiology  of pain and 
availabili ty of newer analgesic techniques , postoperative pain is not always effectively treated 
(1). Optimal pain management technique  balance s pain relief with  concerns about safety and 
adverse  effects  associated with analgesic techniques . Currently, p ostoperative pain is 
commonly  treated with systemic opio ids, which are associated with numerous adverse effects 
including nausea and vomiting, dizz iness, drowsiness, pruritus,  urinary retention , and 
respiratory depression  (2). Use of regional and local anesthesia has been shown to reduce 
opioid  requirements and opioid -relate d side effects.  Therefore, their use has been  emphasized 
(3, 4, 5 , 6).  
 
Fascia Iliaca  compartment  block (FI CB) is a field block that blocks the nerves from the lumbar 
plexus supplying the thigh (i.e., lateral femoral cutaneous femoral and obturator  nerves). The 
obturator nerve  is sometimes involved in the FI CB but probably plays little role in postoperative 
pain relief for most surgeries of the hip and proximal femur.  It has been traditionally used by 
loss of resistance using palpable anatomical la ndmarks to provide analgesia for procedures 
involvin g the hip joint,  anterior thigh and knee surgery  (7, 8, 9 ).  The extent of nerve blockade 
depends on the spread of local anesthesia under the fascia, therefore , a large volume of local 
anesthetic up to 60 mL may be needed to ensure adequate coverage  (8, 10, 11). One study 
compared FI CB to sham block without showing significant benefit, but used significantly lower 
volume (30  mL) than proposed for this study (12). Another study showed use of doses of 
ropiva caine up to 300mg for wound infiltration is safe which is equivalent to 60  mL 0.5% 
ropivacaine (13).  The advent of ultrasound guided regional anesthesia has brought more 
precision to this technique , including the ability to visualize the anatomy, perform real-time 
navigation, and direct observation of local anesthetic spread , as it allows a greater degree of 
sensory and motor blockade (4,1 4).  
 
An alternative to the FICB is periarticular infiltration , which is increasingly being used, as it has 
also been reported to prove adequate analgesia  (15). However, to date, FICB has not been 
compared with periarticular  infiltration.  
 
We hypothesize that  a FICB would provide superior analgesia when  compared to infiltration , 
because infiltration is surgeon and technique dependent . The primary aim of this study  is to 
compare the pain scores and the secondary objectives are to compare opioid requirements 
and opioid related adverse  effects such as nausea and vomiting.  
 
Concise Summary of Project:  
Patients undergoi ng THA (n=60) at Parkland and UT Hospital s will be randomized into one of 
two groups to receive either ultrasound -guided FICB with ropivacaine  300 mg and 150 mcg 
epinephrine  diluted to 60 mL  (Group 1) or periarticular  infiltration ropivacaine 300 mg and 150 
mcg epinephrine  total volume 60 mL  (Group 2) for postoperative pain management . The 
remaining aspect of perioperative care, including the anesthetic  technique  (i.e., spinal 
anesthetic) , pre- and postoperative care  will be standardized and will be similar for all patients.  
Page 3 of 7  
 The duration of the involvement in the study will be until 48 hours postoperatively.  Subjects will 
be identified by pre -anesthesia care unit personnel during their preoperative clinic visit and Day 
Surgery unit. There will be no i ncentive or payment to the patients.  
 
Patients in G roup 1 will receive ultrasound -guided FICB after surgery.  Patients in Group 2  will 
receive ropivacaine  via periarticular infiltration  prior to closing the incision . All patients  in both 
groups will receive gabapentin 600 mg , acetaminophen 1000 mg , and oxycodone CR 10 mg 
po 2-3 hours preoperatively. Intraoperative all patients will receive dexamethasone 8 mg,  and 
acetaminophen 1000mg  IV at the start of surgery and ondansetron 4 mg , IV at the end of 
surgery. In the first 24 -h postoperative period,  patients in both groups will receive 
acetaminophen 1000  mg and gabapentin 300 mg, po every 8  h, meloxicam  15 mg, po daily , 
Oxycodone 10 mg, in the evening and hydromorphone  0.4 mg, IV bolus, q 3h, prn  as a rescue . 
In the 24 -48 h study period, all patients will receive  meloxicam 15 mg, po daily, gabapentin 300 
mg, po  every 8 h , and a hydrocodone/acetaminophen 10 mg/ 325 mg, po q 4 h, as needed .  
 
The postoperative analgesia will be documented using the visual analog score (0=no pain,  
10=worst pain). In addition, total opioid  dose over the 48-h study period will be documented. 
Postoperative n ausea will be measured using a categorical scoring system (none=0, mild=1, 
moderate=2,  severe=3)  and episodes of vomiting will be documented . Rescue  antiemetics will 
be given to any patient who complain s of nausea and/or vomiting. All variables  will be assessed 
at 2, 6, 12, 24 , and 48 hours , postoperatively by an investigator blinded to group allocation.   
 
Study Procedures:  
We will  study  60 American Society of Anesthesiologists ( ASA) physical status 1 -3 subjects  
scheduled for total hip arthroplasty who will be identified by  pre-anesthesia care unit personnel  
during the  preoperative clinic visit  or at the day of surgery at Parkland , Zale, Clements 
hospitals . If the subjects agree to participate in the study , the researchers will determine 
eligibil ity. If the subject meets all inclusion/exclusion criteria , the subject will be asked to sign 
the Consent Form and HIPAA Authorization Form prior to any study procedures  in a face -to-
face meeting with the researchers .  
 
Protected patient information will include name, medical record nu mber, date of birth, and 
contact information including telephone number. Height and weight will also be recorded.  All 
patients will receive a standardized spinal  anesthetic  including antiemetic prophylaxis  with 
ondanse tron 4 mg IV and dexamethasone 8 mg IV. One of the investigators will randomly 
allocated p atients using computer generated randomization schedule to one of two groups - 
ultrasound -guided FICB with ropivacaine or periarticular infiltration with ropivacaine .  
 
Fascia iliaca  compartment block will be performed by anesthesiologists with previous 
experience of the ultrasound -guided technique using  the SonoSite Edge  and linear 6 -13 MHz 
transducer . With the patient placed supine position, the ultrasound transducer will be placed in 
a para -sagittal orientation inferior -medially to the anterior superior iliac spine, over the inguinal 
ligament (4).  Using real -time ultrasound imaging we will identify internal oblique,  sartorius  and 
iliacus muscles , covered by the fascia iliacus . Following asep tic preparation of the injection site 
and the ultrasound probe, a 22-gauge 10 mm insulated needle (Stimuplex A, B -Braun Medical, 
Melsungen, Germany)  will be introduced parallel  to the ultrasound guided beam ( in- plane 
technique) from caudad -to-cephalad  direction, through the sartorius muscle , directed towards 
the iliacus muscle, until its tip reaches the plane between internal oblique and iliacus  muscl es. 
With the needle  tip placed beneath the fascia and above the muscle), a few milliliters of 
Page 4 of 7  
 ropivacai ne, injected slowly, will push the fascia off the iliacus muscle. After negative aspiration, 
the rest of 0.5% ropivacaine  (total 60 ml)  will be injected in 5 ml increments to further separate 
the iliaca  fascia from the iliacus  muscle. We will observe local  anesthetic spread under real -
time imaging between the internal oblique and iliacus  muscles.  
 
Periarticular w ound infiltration w ill be performed by surgeons  using  a 22 gauge 1 .5 inch needle . 
20 ml of ropivacaine will be infiltrated deep into the posterior capsule and posterior soft tissue , 
20 ml will be given in the mid layer  and 20 ml will be infiltrated into the subdermal tissues and 
around the drain . All injections will as the needle is withdrawn.   
 
A standard postoperative analgesic regimen  for the first 24 -h postoperative period  
patients  in both g roups will include  acetaminophen 1000  mg and gabapentin 300 mg, po  
every 8 h, meloxicam 15 mg, po daily, oxycodone 10 mg, in the evening and 
hydromorphone 0.4 mg, IV bolus, q 3h, prn  as a rescue . In the 24 -48 h study period, all 
patients will receive, meloxicam 15 mg, po daily, gabapentin 300 mg, po every 8 h and a 
hydrocodone/acetaminophen 10mg/ 325 mg, po q 4 h, as needed.   
 
The efficacy of postoperative analgesia will be documented in all pati ents using the visual 
analog score ( 0=no pain , 10=worst pain). In addition, total opioid dose  over the 48-h study 
period will be documented. Postoperative nausea will be measured using a categorical scoring 
system (none=0, mild=1, moderate=2, severe=3) and episodes of vomiting will be documented. 
Rescue antiemetics will be given to any patient who complain s of nausea or vomiting. All 
variables will be assessed at 2, 6, 12, 24 , and 48 hours  postoperatively by an investigator 
blinded to group allocation.  
 
Sub-Study Pro cedures: N/A 
 
Criteria for Inclusion of Subjects:  
 Female  and male  ASA physical status 1 -3 scheduled for total hip arthroplasty   
 Age 18 -80 years old  
 Able to participate personally or by legal representative in informed consent in English 
or Spanish  
 
 
 
 
Criteria for Exclusion of Subjects:  
 History of relevant drug allergy  
 Age less than 18 or greater than 8 0 years  
 Chronic opioid  use or drug abuse  
 Significant p sychiatric disturbance  
 Inability to understand the study protocol  
 Refusal  to provide written consent  
 
Sources of Research Material:  
Patient information including name, medical record number, birth date, and contact information 
including phone number  
Patients undergoing total hip arthroplasty  
Baseline vital signs  (heart rate, blood pressure)  
Page 5 of 7  
 SonoSite Edge  ultrasound machine  
Performance of fascia iliaca  plane block for the  purpose of postoperative pain relief  
Evaluation of efficacy of postoperative analgesia with visual analog score  
Evaluation of nausea with categorical scoring system  
Total amount of opioids used  
 
Recruitment Methods and Consenting Process:  
Subjects will be identified by pre-anesthesia care unit  personnel during their preoperative clinic 
visit and Day Surgery unit . Patients scheduled for total hip arthroplasty will be selected for this 
study. The researchers  will then be contacted to review t he patient’s chart for eligibility with the 
use of the HIPAA waiver form.  If the subject meets all inclusion/exclusion criteria, the subject 
will be informed  about the study in a face -to-face meeting with the researchers. If the subject 
agrees to participate, then he or she will sign the consent form and HIPAA Authorization Form 
prior to any study procedures. Once patient information is obtained, it will be pr otected by the 
study team in locked cabinets.  
 
Potential Risks:  
Risk of ropivacaine : 
 The incidences of adverse neurologic reactions associated with the use of local 
anesthetics may be related to the total dose of local anesthetic administered and are 
also dependent upon the particular drug used, the route of administration, and the 
physical status of the patient . 
 There is minimal risk of local anesthetic toxicity  with in advert injection of local anesthetic 
into the blood ve ssel while performing the block.  If injected into a blood vessel, in large 
amounts it can cause seizures and even cardiac arrest. There are no major vessels  at 
the site of injection with both techniques , therefore the risk is minimal.  If it is happen lipid 
emulsion will be given which is  standard treatment of local anesthetic toxicity.  
Risk of Injection:   
There is a risk of h ematoma at the site of block placement  or local infiltration.  Anytime a needle 
is used there is a risk of bleeding, infection, or damage to surrounding tissue.  
 
 
 
 
Risk for epinephrine:  
Epinephrine may increase heart rate and blood pressure, however the dose of epinephrine use 
in study is very low and investigators don't expect the increase of heart rate and blood pressure . 
 
Risk of increased opioid use for pain reli ef during postoperative period:  
Opioids are part of the standard treatment for pain after surgery and will be given as needed 
after surgery in addition to the scheduled pain control medications.  
 
There is risk of loss of confidentiality and psychological stress with any research participation.  
 
Subject Safety and Data Monitoring:  
Independent research experts , Drs. John Pennant  and Weike Tao,  will review data and safety 
information at 5 subject recruitment intervals and report any safety co ncerns to PI and IRB 
within twenty four hours of discovery.  
Page 6 of 7  
 As with any local anesthetic products, monitoring of cardiovascular and neurological status, as 
well as vital signs should be performed during and after injection of ropivacaine . 
 
Procedures to Maint ain Confidentiality:  
A non -identifiable code will be assigned to the data collection sheet so that there is not a direct 
link to specific names. Patient IDs will be standardized as Principal Investigator initials followed 
by the 3 digit number: IG01, IG02… ….IG30 .  
 
A key to the coding system will be maintai ned in a locked storage cabinet  with limited access 
until all the data is collected and analyzed.  Patient identifiers will not be destroyed, as they are 
necessary for one of  the functions of this research , however , identifiers and protected health 
information will not be stored together.  Only the Principal Investigator will have access to the 
code linking patient identities to the information contained within the research da tabase. 
Subject identifiers will not be reused or disclosed to any othe r person or entity for research  
unless required by law, for authorized conduct and oversight of the study, or for other IRB -
approved research . 
 
Following the completion of the analysis and the project , the key to the coding system or subject 
identifiers themselves will be destroyed by shredding the documents so that there is no direct 
or indirect link to subjec t identifiers and information.  
 
All electronic data generated will be password  protected with access limited to the immediate 
study team.  
 
Potential Benefits:  
The study is not designed for direct benefit to study subjects who participate in research. 
However, patients who involved in this study  may have superior  postoperative pain relief . 
However, the  potential benefits to patients in the future could be substantial. We can potentially 
improve the course of the early postoperative period in terms of b etter pain control, less opioid  
use and less opioid -related side effects.  
 
 
 
Statistics:  
Sample size was calculated assuming a standard deviation of 2.5 and an alternative mean 
difference of 1.5 in favor of patients undergoing FIB procedure.  With an alpha level of 0.05, 
the study will need a total of 52 patients to have 80% power using  a repeated measures ANOVA 
F test.  Assuming a 14% loss to follow -up, n = 60 patients will be enrolled at 1:1 ratio.  
Demographic data will be summarized  as means and standard deviations for continuous 
variables and frequencies and percentages for categori cal variables.   Repeated measures 
ANOVA analyses with one between subject (FIB vs. local infiltration) and one within subject 
(time) factor will be used for the primary outcome of pain scores and other continuous outcome 
measures.  Model assumptions will be assessed using standard residual diagnostics and 
alternative analyses procedures will be considered in case of violations.  All analyses will be 
done using SAS 9.3 (SAS Inc., Cary, NC) software and p -values less than 0.05 will be 
considered statistical significance.  Bonferroni adjustments will be used for multiple 
comparisons where appropriate.  
 
References : 
Page 7 of 7  
  
1. Joshi JP, Schug SA, Kehlet H.  Procedure -specific pain management and outcome strategies . 
Best Practice & Research Clinical Anaesthesiology  2014;  28:191 -201  
2.Ovendyk FJ, Carter R,  Maddox RR, Callura J et al. Continuous oximetry/capnometry 
monitoring reveals frequent desaturation and bradypnea during patient -controlled analgesia. 
Anesth.Analg 2007;105:412 -18 
3.Joshi GP, Kehlet H. Procedure -specifi c pain management: the road to improve postsurgical 
pain management? Anesthesiology 2013;  118:718 -2 
4.Hebbard P, Ivanusic J, Sha S. Ultrasound -guided supra -inguinal fascia iliaca block: a 
cadaveric evaluation of a novel approach. Anaesthesia 2011; 66:300 -5 
5. Gasanova I, Alexander J, Ogunnaike B, Hamid C, Rogers D, Minhajuddin A, Joshi PG. 
Transversus Abdominis Plane Block versus Surgical Site Infiltration for Pain Management after 
Open Total Abdominal Hysterectomy . Anesth Analg  2015;  121: 1383 --8 
6. Sun Y, Li T, Gan TJ. The Effect of Perioperative Regional Anesthesia and Analgesia on 
Cancer Recurrence and Su rvival after Oncology Surgery: A Systematic Review and Meta -
Analysis. Reg Anesth Pain Med 2015; 40:589 -98 
7. Dalens B, Tanguy A, Vanneuville. Lumb ar plexus block and lumbar plexus nerve blocks. 
Anesth Analg 1998; 69;852 -4 
8. Diakomi  M, Papaioannou M, M ela A, Kouskouni E, Makris A.  Preoperative Fascia Iliaca 
Comp artment Block for Positioning Patients With Hip Fractures for Central Ne rvous Blockade.  
Reg Anesth Pain Med 2014; 39:394 -8  
9. Newman B, McCarthy L, Thomas PW, May P, Layzell M, Horn K. A comparison of pre -
operative nerve stimulator -guided femoral nerve block and fascia iliaca compartment block in 
patients with femoral neck fracture. Anaesthes ia 2013; 68:899 -903 
10. Stevens M, Harrison G, McGrail. A modified fascia iliaca compartment block has significant 
morphine -sparing effect after total hip arthroplasty. Anaesth Intensive Care 200 -7; 35:949 -952 
11. Vaughan B, Manley M, Stewart D. Distal Inj ection Site May Explain Lack of Analgesia From 
Fascia Iliaca Block for Total Hip. Reg Anesth Pain Med 2013;  38:556 -7. 
12. Shariat A, Hadzic A, Xu D, Shastri U, Kwofie K, Gandhi K, McGally CM, Gratenstein K, 
Vandepitte C, Gadsden J, Unis D. Fascia Iliaca Bl ock for Analgesia after Hip Arthroplasty: A 
Randomized Double -Blind, Placebo Controlled Trial. Reg Anesth Pain Med 2013; 38: 201 -5 
13. Pettersson N, Emanuelsson BM, Reventlid H, Hahn RG. High -Dose Ropivacaine Wound 
Infiltration for Pain Relief after Inguin al Hernia Repair. Reg Anesth and Pain Medicine 1998; 
23(2); 189 -96 
14. Dolan J, Williams A, Murney E, Smith M, Kenny G. Ultrasound Guided Fas cia Iliaca Block: 
A Comparison with the Loss of resistant Technique. Reg Anesth Pain Med 2008; 33:526 -31 
15. Joshi JP, Cushner FD, Barrington  JW, Lombardi AV, Long WJ, Springer BD, Stulberg BN. 
Techniques  for Periarticular Infiltration With Liposomal Bupivacaine for the Management of 
Pain After Hip and Knee Arthroplasty: A Consensus  Recommendation . J Surg Orthopaedic  
Advances 2015; 24:27 -36 
 
 
 