1 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
HPV Vaccine Intervention for Young Sexual Minority Men  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
March 8, 2021  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 STUDY AIMS  
This study will evaluate a mobile health (mHealth) HPV vaccine intervention  (called the Outsmart 
HPV intervention)  for young sexual minority men (YSMM) . In doing so , we will conduct a randomized 
controlled trial ( RCT) of unvaccinated YSMM ages 18 -25 from the US recruited via social media . We 
will randomize YSMM to: a) standard information about HPV and HPV vaccine via a mobile -friendly 
website (control g roup); b) Outsmart HPV with unidirectional vaccine reminders ( Out-U group); or c) 
Outsmart HPV with interactive vaccine reminders ( Out-I group).  Specific aims are to:  
 
Aim 1: Determine the efficacy of the Outsmart HPV  intervention on increasing HPV vaccin e 
initiation and completion. Hypothesis 1a:  HPV vaccine initiation  (i.e., receipt of at least one dose of 
the three -dose HPV vaccine series)  and completion  (i.e., receipt of all three doses)  will be higher 
among particip ants in both the Out-U and Out-I groups compared to the control group. Hypothesis 1b:  
HPV vaccine initiation and completion will be higher among participants in the Out-I group compared 
to the Out-U group.  
 
Aim 2: Identify mediators that explain the relati onship between study arm and HPV vac cine 
initiation and completion. Hypothesis 2:  The effects of the intervention will be mediated by changes 
in theoretical constructs, including increased perceived v ulnerability  to HPV and HPV -related disease , 
reduced res ponse costs of getting HPV vaccine ( e.g., reduced concerns about vaccine safety and 
side effects ), increased self -efficacy to get HPV vaccine, and increased intention to get HPV vaccine.   
 
Aim 3: Determine if intervention efficacy differs across key demog raphic and health -related 
characteri stics  of participants . Hypothesis 3:  Intervention effects will be stronger (i.e., moderation) 
among participants who are not married or in a relationship , live in urban areas, report having a 
routine medical check -up in the last year , or report having disc losed their sexual orientation to a 
healthcare provider.  
 
 
 
FUNDING  
This study is funded by the National Cancer Institute (NCI) Grant #R37CA226682 (originally awarded 
as Grant #R01CA226682). Please note t he mHealth inte rvention was developed and pilot tes ted in  a 
previous  NCI-funded study ( R21CA194831), and the current study extends this line of research.    
 
 
 
BACKGROUND  
Human papillomavirus (HPV) infections cause 
a significant disease burden among males. 
Oncogenic HPV types (mainly types 16 and 
18) can cause cancers of the anus, 
oropharynx, and penis among males,  and 
nononcog enic HPV types (mainly types 6 and 
11) cause genital warts.8,9 In fact, HPV causes 
over 90% of anal cancers and genital warts.8,9 HPV causes about 8,000 cases of cancer and 160,000 
cases of genital warts among males in the US each year.10 Over $4 billion is spent annually in the US 
on treating and managing HPV -related disease.11,12  
 
There are over 4 million sexual minority men ( i.e., reports ever having oral or anal sex with a male  or 
being sexually attracted to males;  or identifies as gay , bisexual , or queer ) in the US.13 These me n 
have high rates of HPV infection a nd HPV -related disease (Table 1). At least 57% of sexual minority  
men have an anogenital HPV infection, which is higher than the prevalence among heterosexual men Table 1. HPV-Related Disparities among Sexual Minority Men   
 Sexual Minority  Heterosexual  
 HPV infe ction prevalence (any type)1 57%-93% 26%-43% 
 Anal cancer incidence (cases per   
 100,000 population)2-6  14-69 2 
 History of genital warts7 7% 4% 
3 
 (26% -43%).1 Anal cancer incid ence rates among sexual minority  men range from 14 -69 cases per 
100,000 population, compared to only 2 cases per 100,000 among heterosexual men.2-6 Genital warts 
are also more common among sexua l minority  men than heterosexual men .7 
 
HPV vaccination is a promising strategy for preventing HPV -related disease, but vaccine coverage is 
low among males.  The quadrivalent HPV vaccine (agains t HPV types 6, 11, 16, and 18) was l icensed 
for US males in October 200914 and a 9 -valent vaccine ( against types 6, 11, 16, 18, 31, 33, 45, 52, 
and 58) was licensed in December 2014.15 The Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices 
(ACIP) currently recommends  routine vaccination for males ages 11 -12 with catch -up vaccination for 
ages 13 -2116 to prevent anal cancer and genital warts.17 Importantly, t he ACIP recomme nds routine 
HPV vaccination for sexu al minority men through age 26.16 The HPV vaccine series consists of two 
doses if the series is initiated before turning age  15, and three doses if initiated after turning age 15.18 
Recent data suggest less than 20% of YSMM  ages 18 -26 in the US have received any doses of HPV 
vaccine.19  
 
In response to the low HPV vaccine coverage among YSMM, we received funding from NCI 
(R21CA194831) to develop and pilot test a culturally appropriate HPV vaccine intervention for YSMM 
(the Outsmart HPV  intervention). Th e intervention is an mHealth interve ntion that consists of : 1) 
population -targeted, individually -tailored content about HPV and HPV vaccine  that is delivered via a 
project website ; and 2) vaccination reminders sent via text message /email . For the pilot tes t, we used 
Facebook advertisements to recruit 150 YSMM  from the United States . Results of the pilot study 
showed that Outsmart HPV increased both HPV vaccine initiation (45% vs. 26%) and completion 
(11% vs. 3%)  compared to a control group. Initiation is receipt of one or more doses of the HP V 
vaccine series, and completion is receipt of all three doses recommended for young adults.  
 
For the next step in this line of research , we recently received additional NCI funding ( R37CA226682 ; 
originally awarded as R 01CA226682)  to test the intervention  in a large RCT.  This protocol focuses 
on this large RCT.  
 
 
 
METHODS  
1. Intervention Overview.  
1.a. Intervention Development and Pilot Testing. We developed the Outsmart HPV  intervention for 
YSMM under a previous  proto col that was approved by both CSRC ( OSU -15100 ) and IRB 
(2015C0079). We then pilot tested this mHealth intervention in a separate protocol ( CSRC: OSU -
15234 and IRB: 201 6C0004). More recently, we submitted a protocol to make updates to the 
intervention  based  on results of our pilot study (CSRC : OSU -15234 and IRB: 201 6C0004). The study 
described in this application is an extension of these prior protocols, as it will formally test the newly 
updated mHealth intervention in a large randomized controlled trial.  The methodologies and materials 
included for this protocol are patterned heavily after those used successfully in our pilot study.    
4 
 1.b. Theoretical 
Framework. The Outsmart 
HPV intervention was 
developed with a framework 
(Figure 1)  that includes 
aspects of  the Protection 
Motivation Theory (P MT),20 
Information -Motivation -
Behavioral Skills Model 
(IMB),21 and the Minority 
Stress Mod el (MSM).22 The 
PMT is the base of the 
framework since it can 
predict vaccination  
behaviors ,23 but it is 
important to include  
const ructs from these other models given their relevance to sexual minority  health.22,24 The PMT  
posits that behavior results from two parallel co gnitive processes (threat and coping  appraisals) and 
is a positive function of perceived severity, perceived vulnerability , response efficacy , and self-
efficacy , and a negative function of the perceived rewards of the maladaptive response  and the 
response  costs of the adaptive behavior . Our framework also incorporates key IMB constructs 
including information  about HPV and HPV 
vaccination , motivation  for getting HPV vaccin e 
(e.g., response efficacy) , and skills  training  for 
increasing self -efficacy to get H PV vaccine and 
to talk with a provid er about HPV vaccine . 
Lastly, the MSM  posits  that the 
health/healthcare of sexual minorities is 
affected by their chronic stress in a hostile 
social environment, and our framework includes 
key aspects of th is model  (i.e., stigma , 
discrimination , concealmen t of sexual 
orientation ). We developed the Outsmart HPV  
intervention to target the constructs in this 
framework .  
2. Randomized Controlled Trial (RCT) . An 
overview of the RCT is depicted in Figure 2.   
2.a. Eligibility/ Recruitment.  Eligibility criteria 
will include: a) cisgender male; b) ages 18 -25; 
c) sexual minority (reports ever having oral or anal sex with a male or being sexually attracted to 
males; or identifies as gay, bisexual, or queer) ; d) lives in the US; e) has not received any doses of 
HPV vac cine; and f) did not participate in the pilot study . We will require men to read English and able 
to provide informed consent (inferred by completi ng the screener survey and consent form; see 
Section 2. b.). Age 25, inste ad of 26, will be the RCT’s upper ag e limit so men do not “age out” of the 
recommended vaccine age range while participating in the study.  
We will recruit  by using advertisements  (see Appendix)  on soc ial media sites, existing onl ine panel s 
(e.g., Amazo n Me chanical Turk) , and throu gh professi onal contacts (e .g., co-investigators distributing 
approved social media  advertisement s). Social media  sites will include some of the most frequently 
used sites (e.g., Facebook, Instagram).25 We recruited via social media  in our pilot study, and 
participants were demographically similar to n ationally representative samples of YSMM.26-28 

5 
 Potential participants will be directed  to either the  project website  or the study’s Facebook page ( see 
Appendix). The study’s Facebook page will simply  serve to provide basic information about  the 
project and then direct potential participants to the project website.  
2.b. Project Website.  The project websit e was developed for our pilot study and i s a mobile -friendly 
website accessible by desktop/laptop, tablet, or smartphone (iOS and Andro id). The landing page for 
the project website and the information it provides about the study team can be f ound in  an inc luded  
Appendix.  The portal will first ask potential participants to complete the eligibility scree ner ( see 
Appendix).  For those who ar e ine ligible, they will receive a brief message thanking them for their 
interest in the study (see end of A ppendix for el igibility screener ).  For those who are eligible, they will 
then view the consent form (which also includes the HIPAA authorization) an d pro vide consent ( see 
Appendix).  
For eligible and consented participants, they will then be asked to creat e a project we bsite 
username/password and provide an email address and text message number for study 
communicatio ns ( see Appendix for Landing Page an d Acc ount Creation ). After creating a 
username/password, participants will receive a project welcome messag e (see Appendi x for Survey 
Notifications ). Accounts suspected of being fraudulent (e.g., identical or similar con tact information to 
an existing acco unt a lready in the study)  will be deactivated immediately and sent an account 
deactivation email (see Appen dix). 
Addition al study communications will include survey notifications and vaccination  reminders ( Out-U 
and Out -I group s only), as described further  in the below sections.  Also as described below, the 
project website  will also randomize participants  to a study group , include online study surveys, send 
survey notifications, provide intervention and control group mat erials, send vaccination reminders 
(Out-U and Out -I group s only), and collect usage data.  
2.c. T1 Survey.  After  project account setup , particip ants will begi n their initial project website session , 
which will include  completing the T1 (baseline) survey, viewing study materials  online  (either  
Outs mart HPV  or control ), and completing the T2 survey. T he T1 survey  will be completed on the 
project web site and asses s demographics, health  characteristics, and theoretical  constructs  (about 15 
minutes in duration; see Appendix ). All survey items will be ba sed on those used in past research. 
19,29 -35 For all sur vey items (for the T1 -T4 surveys), a reminder will appear if a participant tries to skip 
an item.   The reminder will say, “Please answer each question.”  If  participants still want to skip a 
question after the reminder is shown, they will be allowed to.  For a few items, as indicated in the  
appe ndices included with this application, participants will be required to answer the question.  
2.d. Rand omization.  Participants will next be randomized at the individual -level to a study arm : a) 
standard information a bout HPV and HPV vaccine (control gr oup);  b) Outsmart HPV that includes 
unidirectional vaccine reminders ( Out-U); or c) Outsmart HPV that inclu des interactiv e vaccine 
reminders ( Out-I). A 1:1:1 allocation scheme will be used, with assignments determined by  an 
algorithm on the project website . Recruitment will continue  until 2100  YSMM  are randomized  (700 per 
study arm ).  
2.e. Control Group . The co ntrol group wi ll receive standard information about HPV and HPV vaccine 
(see Appendix).  This content will be mod eled after the Vaccine Information S tatem ent (VIS) for HPV 
vaccine36 (created by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention) and viewed by control group 
participants on the project website. Th e VIS  provides basic information about HPV and HPV vaccine.  
We modeled the control group content after the  VIS because p roviders are required to give patients a 
VIS before vaccination.36 Thus, the VIS may be considered the “standard of care.”  A printable 
version of  this content will be available to control group participants for viewing/printing following 
completion of the T2  survey.  If they wish, control grou p par ticipants will also have the ability to log 
back into the portal after the T2 survey to view this cont ent again ( see Appendix for Re -accessing 
Information ). 
6 
 2.f. Out-U Group . The Out-U group will receive the Outsmar t HPV intervention that includes : a) 
popu lation -targeted, individually -tailored content via the project website; and b) unidirectional text 
message/ email  vaccine reminders  (Table 2) . This is the intervention  from our pilot study.      
Population -targeted, i ndividually -tailored content.  Outsma rt HP V content is divided into  four 
sequential  sections: “Learn About HPV,” “Learn About the Vaccine,” “Get  Answers,” and  “Get 
Vaccinated!”  (see Appendix) . These sections provide : a) information about HPV and HPV  vaccine ; b) 
resources, skills training, and  information that address barriers/concerns about HPV vaccine; and c) 
prompt s for men to create a plan for getting vaccin ated. Table 2 provides an overview of each 
section , including the theoretical constructs targeted  by each .  
Content in the four section s is a combination of text, infographics, and other visual formats. As 
described  below, certain content in these sections  is population -targeted (i.e., applies to a population 
segment37) and/o r individually -tailored. T argeted/tailored content increases relevance and improves 
health outcomes.37-42 A PDF summary  of viewed  content will be availabl e for printing/emailing  (see 
Appendi x). If they wish , participants who receive Outsmart HPV  will be able to  log back into the 
website after the ir initial ses sion to review this content  (see Appendix for Re -accessing Information ). 
“Learn ab out HPV”  provides information about HPV ( prevalence, transmission, etc.) and HPV -related 
diseases (prevalence, risk factors, etc.). This includ es population -targeted information for YSMM  
(e.g., HPV and HPV -related disease rates among sexual minority men ). It is critical to provide this 
type of in formation  since research has repeatedly shown that many  sexual minority men  lack 
knowledge about these  topics .30,45 -48 
“Learn about the Vaccine”  provides information  about  HPV vaccine , including reco mmendations,  
vaccine effectiveness, and current vaccine coverage  estimates . This section includes population -
targeted information for YSMM  and testimonials illustrating  YSMM ’s motivations for getting 
vaccinated (based on past work19,49).  
“Get Answers”  addresses common barriers/con cerns about ge tting the HPV vaccine reported in past 
work  among YSMM .19,45,49 -52 Resources, skills training, and /or information are provided to address 
each barrier/concern . Providing ad olescents/youn g adults with resources and skills training improves 
health behaviors.44,53,54  
“Get Vaccinated !” provides p rompts  for participants to create a tailored HPV vaccination plan of when 
(i.e., target date) and where to get H PV vaccine and their reasons for wanting to get vaccinated (i.e., 
motivations). Thus, this section helps participant s specify their HPV vaccine implementation 
intentions , an approach that improve s goal achievement a nd engagement in health behaviors.59 The 
resulting tailored HPV vaccinatio n plan is available for printing/emailing  (see Appendix for Summary 
Sheet ).    
Unidirectional vaccin e reminders.  Participants in  the Out-U group  will be s ent monthly 
unidirectional reminders via text message /email  about getting HPV vaccine  (see Appendix) . All Table 2. Outsmart HPV   Intervention Components  
Component  Desc ription Content  Theoretical Constructs*  
“Learn about HPV”  • Provide s information about HPV & HPV-related dis eases (prevale nce, risk factors , etc.) 
• Targeted information for sexual minority  men Targeted  • Vulnerability, sever ity (P MT) 
• Information (I MB) 
“Learn About  the 
Vaccine”  • Provide s information about HPV vaccine (recommendations, vaccine coverage, etc.)  
• Targete d information for sexual minority men  and testimonials  for vaccination  Targeted 
& Tailored  • Response efficacy (P MT) 
• Information , motivation  (IMB) 
“Get Ans wers” • Provide s resources, skills training, and information  (including targeted information)  that 
addre ss common  barriers/concern s in an order that is tailor ed to the participant’s 
rankings  Targeted 
& Tailored  • Reward s, response costs (P MT, 
IMB, MSM); Self-efficacy (P MT) 
• Information , skills  (IMB) 
“Get Vaccinated!”  • Prompts  for participants  to create  a tailor ed plan that i ncludes  when and where to get 
HPV vaccine and their reasons for wanting to get  vaccinated  (i.e., mo tivations)   Tailored  • Self-efficacy , intention (PMT) 
• Motivation , skills  (IMB) 
Vaccine reminders  • Monthly text message /email  reminders that inclu de information  about  getting HPV 
vaccine ( unidirectional for the Out-U group and interactive for the Ou t-I group)  Tailored  • Motivation (I MB) for all; and o thers 
for interactive reminders, as needed  
*Theoretical framework  has aspects of Protection Motivatio n Theory (PMT) , Information -Motivation -Behavioral Skills Model (IMB), and Minority Stress Model (MSM)  
7 
 reminders for the Out-U group  will be unidirectional, meaning that participants will not have  the option  
to respond  to reminders . Reminders will be se nt via an automated process linked to the project 
website. The monthly reminders will start one month after randomiz ation and continue for the 9 -month 
follow -up period, as they can help promote  both HPV vaccine init iation and completion.     
2.g. Out-I Grou p. The Out-I group will receive  the Outsmart HPV intervention that includes : a) 
population -targeted, i ndividually -tailored content via the project website; and b) interactive text 
message /email  vaccine reminders.  The Out-I and Out-U group s will be ide ntica l except in the type of 
vaccine reminders sent to YSMM .  
Population -targeted, individually -tailored co ntent.  Identic al to the Out-U group  (see Section 2. f.).  
Interactive vaccin e reminders.  Participants in the Out-I group  will be sent monthly tailored  
interactive  reminders via text message /email  about getting HPV vaccine  (see Appendix) . All 
reminders for the Out-I group  will be interactive, meaning that participants will have the option  to 
respond to obtain additiona l information that is tailored to th eir individual needs . As with the Out -U 
group, the monthly reminders will start one month after randomizati on and continu e for the 9 -month 
follow -up period.  
Communications for the interactive reminders will be sent thro ugh a combination of automated and 
manual  processes, as described further below.  To increase participant engagement, some of the 
interactive r eminder texts will also contain a meme or brief animation in Graphics Interchange Format 
(GIF).  Similar to the a pproach taken in other technology -based i nterventions with adolescents and 
young adults,34 the m emes and GIFS are intended to be funny or motivational and reinforce behavior.  
For each month, the  initial text sent to participants w ill be automated and include a question that 
prompts a response. Including a prompted message can increase participant re sponsivity compared 
to texts without unprompted messages.35 Depending  on h ow a participant responds to this initial 
communication, additional automated communications with info rmation and re sources will be sent to 
participants. Participants will then have the opportunity to text further q uestions they may have to the 
study team (participants can ask as many questions as needed). A study team member will review 
questions received  and manually send an appropriate response, based on a library of example 
responses that has been developed for t his study  (see Appendix) ; responses for u nanticipated 
questions will be discussed and agreed upon by the study team.   
2.h. T2 Survey.  Immediat ely after view ing intervention or control materials, participants will complete 
the T2 survey on the project webs ite (about 10 minutes in duration; see Appendix). The T2 survey will 
assess theoretical constructs and satisfaction with study materials. Parti cipants will n ot be able to 
access any study materials during the T2 survey. T2 survey completion will end the in itial project 
website session. Parti cipan ts will receive a $40 gift card for completing the T1/T2 surveys.  Incentives 
will be sent to particip ants via email  (see Appendix).  
If, for some reason, a participant fails to complete all study activities up to th is point, they will receive 
survey c omple tion notifications ( see Appendix for Survey Notifications ) via email/text message. 
Survey completion n otifications w ill be sent: 1) immediately after the participant  leaves the project 
website ; and 2) 2 days later i f study activities have not yet been  comp leted.  Participants will have a 
maximum 3 -day window to complete the study activities up to this poin t. If the 3 -day window expires 
and a participant has not yet been randomized, they will not continue in the study . If the 3 -day window 
expires and a participant has been randomized, they will continue in the study and be offered the 
opportunity to complete  the T3 and T4  surveys.    
2.i. T3 & T4 Surveys . Participant s will complet e the T3 and T4 surveys  on the project website at 3 
and 9 months  after randomiza tion. The T4 survey will occur 9 months later to allow participants ample 
time to receive all 3 doses of HPV vaccine . The T3 and T4 surveys are included in appendices.  
Both the T3 and T4 surveys will  take about 10 m inutes and assess  HPV vaccin ation  status and 
theoretical constructs . The T4 survey will also assess satisfaction with study vaccin e reminders ( Out-
8 
 U and Out-I groups  only). Participants will not be able to access any study materials  during  the T3 
and T4 su rveys.  Participants will receive a $ 20 gift card (sent via email) for completing the T3 survey 
and a $35 gift card (sent via email) for complet ing the T4 sur vey (see Appendix).     
If, for some reason, a participant fails to complete a survey it has been s tarted, they will receive 
survey com pletion notifications ( see Appendix for Survey Notifications ) via email/text message. 
Survey completion not ifications wil l be sent: 1) immediately after the participant leaves the project 
website; and 2) 2 days later if the survey has not yet been complete d.  P articipants will have a 
maximum 3 -day window to complete the survey once it has been started .  
To impr ove retention,  the project website  will send all participants email /text message notifications to 
complete each s urvey ( see Appendix for Survey Notif ications). For the T3 and T4 survey s, 
notifications will occur: 1) the day the survey becomes active; 2) 5 days after the  initial invite (if the 
survey has not yet been completed); 3) 8 days after the initial invite (if the survey has not yet been 
complete d); and 4) 11 days after the initial invite (if the survey has not yet been completed).  For both 
the T3 an d T4 surveys, participants will have a maximum 14 -day window to complete their survey 
(after which the survey bec omes unavailable to complete).   
If a par ticipant does not complete the T3 survey in the 14 -day window, they will continue in the study 
and be offered the op portunity to complete the T4 survey.  Project website  accounts for participants 
will be deactivated  after completion of all study activ ities or expiration of the 14 -day T4 survey 
completion window (if the T4 survey is not completed).   
2.j. Medical Record Release . If a participant indicates he has received HPV vaccine during the T3 or 
T4 survey, the end  of the T3/T4 survey will contain a link to a medical record release form that can be 
completed online ( see Appendix).  The form will open in a  new window fr om the project website and 
be managed using Research Electronic Data Capture (REDCap) . REDCap  is a software toolset and 
workflow method ology  for electronic collection and management of clinical and research data, to 
collect and store data. RE DCap provides a secure, web -based application that provides an intuitive 
data manipulation interface, custom repo rting capabilities, audit trail func tiona lity, real -time data 
monitoring/querying of participant records, and variations of data exporting/impo rting. REDCap is 
hosted by OSUWMC IT in the Ackerman Datacenter . Participants will have the option of whether or 
not to complete the MRR form; those who d o not will still continue in the study. Completing this form  
will allow the study team to contact the appropriate he althcare providers to confirm HPV vaccination 
status.  
Following completion of a participant’s T4 su rvey or expiration of the 14 -day T4 surve y completion 
window (if the T4 survey is not completed), we will confirm HPV vaccination status via medical 
records (for those who completed an  MRR form).  A copy of the signed MRR form along with a 
request letter f rom the study team will be presented  to a medical facility (via fax, phone, or secure 
email).  The request letter will inform the facility abou t the study an d request information from the 
medical record about the participant’s HPV vaccination history be se nt to the study team (via fax, 
phone , or secure email).  Non -responding medical facilities will be contacted again by project staff.  
2.k. Onlin e Data Collect ion and Storage. As mentioned above, data from the MRR will be captured 
and managed via REDCap.  REDCap is hosted by OSUWMC IT in the A ckerm an Datacenter , and all 
data collected via REDCap is secured behind the OSUWMC firewall . 
All other onli ne data (e.g.,  from surveys, etc.) will be collected via the project website  and stored by 
The Center for Health Communications Research (CHCR) at th e Uni versity of Michigan.63  CHCR 
ensures that data collection and storage processes are undertaken with atte ntion to human subjects 
protections,  respect for proprietary data, and maintaining integrity of the source data.  CHCR was 
responsible for data storage and pr otection during our previous pilot study as well.  
To ensure that the data are protected, CHCR uses  virtualized servers provided by the  University of 
Michigan Information Technology Services group.  The virtualized servers are housed at two 
9 
 redundant datac enters. These datacenters provide protection from lengthy outages, 24/7 staffing, 
restricted physic al access, and disaster recovery. Vi rtual servers are backed up automatically onto 
encrypted tape for recovery and security.  The datacenters a lso reduce the  use of physical resources 
such as electricity and air conditioning.  
  
All servers and the back -end databases are password protected. The s erver runs the Red Hat 
Enterprise Linux operating system and security patches and updates are download ed and install ed 
regularly.  Each server is also protected by firewalls to restrict network access to the server.   
Additional details are available a t http://services.it.umich.edu/miserver/ . 
  
When a p articipant acc esses the study portal, content will be transmitted securely using a secure 
socket layer (SSL) prot ocol, the same protocol used to prot ect f inancial and other personal 
information when transmitted from a web site to a user's browser. This pre vents anyone e lse on the 
network from intercepting and viewing the content that is being provided to the particip ant. 
 
Data files that will be sent t o the  study team will be done so using MiShare, a secure collaborate file 
exchange system administered by t he University of Michigan Health System.  The MiShare 
infrastructure provides a method approved by the UMHS Compl iance Office for UMHS personnel, 
non-UMHS  business partners, patients and researchers to securely transfer files, including files that 
contain electronic Pro tected Health Information (ePHI), protected research data, or other sensitive 
information.  Files a re encrypted while being uploaded or  down loaded, and are encrypted while they 
are on the MiShare server.  With MiShare, uploaded packages are n ot transferred  from UMHS 
systems to external systems.  Rather, packages remain on the server and must be retrieve d from the 
UMHS server by the recipi ent u sing a provided link.  The MiShare system can only be used to 
transfer files either through SSH/sFTP o r through a we b https; it is not possible to mount a MiShare 
volume as a drive letter for a desktop computer.  As  files are uploaded and bundled in p ackag es, they 
are also encrypted to allow secure transfer.  Packages will only be available for five days.  Packages 
older than 5 days are automatically deleted.  
 
CHCR will also retain a completely de -identified data set  to use for quality improvement acti vities 
within the Center.  No data will be used for the purposes of publication or public presentations wit hout 
express p ermission of the project PI s. 
2.l. Study Portal Usage Data. For participants in both the interventi on and control groups, the project 
websit e will capture usage data.  These data will include the number of study portal logins during the 
study , time spent o n the project website , and other usage metrics.   All of these data will be securely 
stored using th e protections at CHCR described in S ectio n 2.k.    
2.m. Sample Size/Data Analyses. We will randomize about 2100  men ( 700 per arm), expecting 70 % 
retention ov er the 9 -month follow -up (based on our pilot study).  We are confident in reaching this 
sample size given the large number of YSMM on social media and that similar  sample sizes have 
been recruited via social media .64,65 All analyses will use an intent -to-treat approach.  
Aim 1  (Efficac y). We hypothesize HPV vaccine initiation and completion will be higher among 
participants in both the  Out-U and Out-I groups compared to participants in the control group 
(Hypothesis 1a). Further, we hypothesize th at HPV vaccine initiation and comple tion will be higher 
among participants in the Out-I group compared to participants in the Out-U group (Hypo thesis 1b).  
We will first examine descriptive statistics (i.e., proportions and 95% confidence intervals [CIs]). We 
will then use logistic regression  to test our hypotheses , with  separate model s for HPV vaccine 
initiation and completion. Models will contro l for any pote ntial confounders (i.e., variables that differ 
between study arms  [p<0.10] at baseline ). For each o utcome, we will perform all pairwise  
comp arisons of study arms, using a Bonferroni corrected two-sided alpha of 0.017 to control the 
overall ty pe I error rat e. We will have at least 80% power for all comparisons ,66 assuming our  
10 
 projections of initiation (control=20%; Out-U=35%; Out-I=45%) and completion (control= 10%; Out-
U=22%; Out-I=35%). Projec tions are based on pilot study results and past work on different types of 
reminders.67,68 Logistic regression models wil l produce odds  ratios (ORs) and 95% CIs. Results will 
determine the efficacy of Outsmart HPV  and identify which t ype of HPV vaccine  reminder most 
effectively increase s vaccination.    
Aim 2  (Mediation) . We will examine all theoretical constructs as potentia l mediators (s ee Section 
2.n.). We hypothesize the effects  of the intervention  will be mediated by changes in the oretical 
constructs, including incre ased perceived v ulnerability  to HPV and HPV -related disease , reduced 
response costs of getting HPV vaccine  (e.g., reduced  concerns about vaccine safety and side 
effects), increased self -efficacy to get HPV vaccine, and i ncreased intention to get HPV vaccin e 
(Hypothesis 2) . This hypothesis is based on our pilot study  results , where Outsmart HPV  caused  
larger cha nges in each o f these constructs than the control group.69 We expect mediators will be 
similar  for both HPV vaccine initiation and completion.   
To test this hypothesis and identify mediators, we w ill use struct ural equation modelling (SEM). SEM 
has several advantages over standard regression analyses, includ ing the ability to assess multiple 
potent ial pathways in one model.70 We will e xamine HPV vac cine initiation and completion separately 
and use a probit link to transform each binary outcome to  a standard Normal scale.70 For each 
outcome, w e will fit two models using a ma ximum likeliho od approach: a “full” model and a  more 
parsimonious  “final” model. The “full” model will include st udy arm, all theoretical constructs,  and an 
outcome variable. We will examine  the overall model fit of the “full” model via the Root Mean Squar e 
Error  of App roximation (RMSEA) and other metrics ( chi-square test, etc.).71,72 We will consider a 
RMSEA<0.07 to indicate acceptable  fit.72 To create  the “final” model, we will remove pathway s (i.e., 
associations) from the “ful l” mo del based on effect size and the chi -square test for nested models. 
This process will continue until removing pathwa ys no longer improves the model. The resulting 
model will be the “final” model. SEM models will produce standardized path coefficients that estimate 
the direct and indirect effects of study arm and the theoretical constructs. Given our analyt ic sample 
size, we will have at le ast 90% power to rule out RMSEA >0.08 with 95% confidence. Results will  
identify  which changes in theoretical constr ucts are the key drivers of Outsmart HPV  increasing HPV 
vaccination.  
Aim 3  (Moderation ). We will examine d emographic  and health -related  characteristics from the 
screener  and T1 survey s as potential moderators. We hypothe size intervention effects will be 
stronge r (i.e., moderation) among YSMM  who are not married or in a relationship  (due to higher 
perceived vuln erability to H PV and HPV -related disease ), live in urban areas  (due to greater access 
to care, including LGBT -friendly providers), report having a ro utine  medical check -up in the last year  
(due to higher utilization of healthcare and self -efficacy to get H PV vaccine), or report having 
disclosed their sexual orientation to a healthcare provider  (due to higher self -efficacy to talk with a 
healthcare prov ider about HPV vaccine)  (Hypothesis 3) . We expect moderators will be similar for both 
HPV vaccine initiatio n and completi on (which will be examined as separate outcomes) . 
We will use logistic regression models that inclu de an interaction term between each  poten tial 
moderator  and study arm  to test this hypothesis and identify moderators . Logistic regression mode ls 
will produc e ORs and 95% CIs . We will consider an interaction present if an interaction term has 
p<0.05. Given  our analytic sample size, w e will h ave 8 0% power to detect interaction terms with 
ORs>2.30. Results will determine if intervention efficacy di ffers by demog raphic and health -related 
characteristics.  
2.n. Potential Challenges . Recruitment: We have expertis e recruit ing YSMM  via social media26,44,73 -
77 and will offer study incentives. Retention : We expect 70% reten tion based on our pilot study  and 
will provide incentives and survey notifications  to aid retention . Missing data:  Missing survey data 
will be minimized by using prompts for skipped items. This resulted in less than 5% missing data in 
our pilot study. Outc ome ascertainment: HPV vaccination s tatus  will be confirmed by medical 
records if MRR is provided, otherwise self -reported data will be used . Generalizabilit y: To maximize 
11 
 generalizability, p articipants will be recruited throughout the US . YSMM  recruited via Facebook  in our 
pilot study we re demog raphically similar to YSMM  from nationally representative samples .26-28 
Contamination:  We do not expect contamination  since we will recruit throughout the US , the project 
website  will require log in, and partic ipants will receive only the study materials for their randomized 
study arm .   
2.o. Project Timeline  (Table 3). The 
timeline is based on our past work on 
RCTs and interventions.44,61,62,69,78 -86    
 
 
 
 
 
PROTECTION OF HUMAN SUBJECTS  
1. Risks to Human S ubjects  
1.a. Human Subjects In volvement and Characteristics. During the RCT, we will randomize 2100  
YSMM . Eligibility criteria will include: a) cisgender male; b) ages 18 -25; c) sexual minority (reports 
ever having oral or anal sex with a male or b eing sex ually attracted to males; or i dentifies as gay, 
bisexual, or queer); d) lives in the US; e) has not received any doses of HPV vaccine; and f) did not 
participate in the pilot study. We will require men to read English and able to provide informed 
consent ( inferred by completing the scr eener survey and consent form).  Participants will be 
randomized to either: a) standard information about HPV and HPV vaccine via a mobile -friendly 
website (control group); b) Outsmart HPV with unidirectional vaccine re minders (Out-U group); or c) 
Outsmart HPV with interactive vaccine reminders (Out -I group). Participants will complete four online 
surveys over a nine -month period. All online surveys will be self -administered.  
 
1.b. Sources of Materials. Research material s for th is project will be obtained th rough online 
surveys and medical record review (if medical record release is provided) for the RCT. All data will be 
collected in a standardized manner in an effort to protect the validity and integrity of the research  
project . Only members of the study te am will have access to the collected information.  
 
1.c. Potential Risks. We believe th is research will present minimal risk to human subjects. We do not 
anticipate any psychosocial harm, economic harm, legal jeopardy, or other  side effects for 
participants  in the RCT. There is the small possibility that some RCT participants may find some of 
the survey topics embarrassing or worrisome. However, surveys of this type are routinely conducted, 
with no ill effects to partici pants. B ecause surveys will be complet ed online in participants’ homes (or 
elsewhere if they prefer ) with the option to not complete each survey, we feel that this is a minimal 
risk. The instructions for the study surveys will clearly indicate that partici pants do  not have to answer 
any questi ons that they do not want to answer. All communications for vaccine reminders (Out -U and 
Out-I groups only) will be sent via text message/email. We do not anticipate that any of these 
communications will contain inform ation th at would cause any psychosocia l harm, economic harm, 
legal jeopardy, or other side effects. All reasonable efforts will be made to ensure the emotional 
safety and well -being of each participant. However closely monitored, there may be risk associat ed 
with loss of confidentiality of inf ormation. Lastly, there could be unlikely circumstances when the study 
team may need to breach confidentiality (e.g., if for medical reasons, as required by law, etc.).   
 
2. Adequacy of Protection Against Risks  
2.a. Re cruitmen t and Informed Consent Procedu res. During the RCT, we will randomize about 
2100  YSMM who will be recruited  from social media sites, existing onl ine panel s (e.g., Amazo n 
Mechanical Turk) , and throu gh professi onal contacts (e .g., co-investigators  distributin g approved 
social media  advertisement s). Eligibility criteria will include: a) cisgender male; b) ages 18 -25; c) Table 3. Project Tim eline  
 Year 1  Year 2  Year 3  
 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 
Randomized trial              
  Recruitment  ● ● ● ● ●        
  Data colle ction  ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●   
  Data mgmt. / analyses  ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● 
  Manuscript writing      ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● 
12 
 sexual minority (reports  ever having o ral or anal sex with a male or being sexually attracted to males; 
or identifies as gay, bisexual, or quee r); d) lives in the US; e) has not received any doses of HPV 
vaccine; and f) did not participate in the pilot study. We will require men to read Englis h and able to 
provide informed consent (inferred by completing the screener survey and consent form).  All men will 
provide informed consent to participate in the RCT. The project website will provide participants with 
detailed information abo ut the study p rior to consent. For the RCT, participants will also be asked to 
provide medical record release (MRR), al lowin g for confirmation of HPV vaccination status during the 
study. The MRR form will be accessed  through the project website  and be mana ged using Rese arch 
Electronic Data Capture (REDCap) . A completed MRR form will not be required for study 
continuation.     
 
2.b. Protection Against Potential Risk(s). Every means will be taken to minimize the risk 
associated with participating in this proj ect. The auton omy of participants will be protected by 
informing all participants of the purpose of the study and allow ing them to opt out of participation 
without repercussion. Participants will be able to withdraw from the study at any time, and they wil l be 
able to r efuse to answer any question. Participants will be provided with study contact information in 
case they h ave a ny questions or concerns or experience any negative outcomes.  
 
Several precautions will be taken to avoid any breach of confidentia lity. Particip ant ID numbers will be 
used instead of names of participants on study -related documents and in the study datab ases. The ID 
numbers and names will be linked to a master list that will be accessible only to the study team. The 
master list will be kept in a c omputerized tracking system that will be password protected behind a 
firewall. All electronic files and d ataba ses will be kept on a password protected computer accessible 
only to study team members behind a firewall. This includes de -identifi ed datasets. A ll paper -based 
study forms will be stored in locked file cabinets that are only accessible to study team membe rs. For 
participants in the Out -I group, communications for the interactive vaccine reminder process will not 
include any confidenti al information . All study team members will complete National Institutes of 
Health (NIH) and institutional requirements  in training for responsible research and the ethical 
treatment of human subjects. Documentation of completion of training will be mainta ined on file. If for 
medical reasons or as required by law, the study team may have to breach confidentiality.    
 
3. Potent ial Benefits of the Research to Human Subjects and Others  
There may or may not be direct benefits to the participants of this study.  Potential ben efits to the 
participants will come in the form of improved HPV vaccination knowledge and behaviors. The 
information learned from this study may benefit sexual minority men in the future. The participants 
and society in general will benefit f rom this study  to the extent that the results improve our 
understanding strategies to improve HPV vaccination among sex ual m inority men. The benefits far 
outweigh the risks of this study, since the possible risks are minimal and because the possible benefi t 
is so great.  
 
4. Importance of the Knowledge to be Gained  
Sexual minority men have high rates of HPV infection and HP V-related disease, and therefore YSMM 
can benefit greatly from HPV vaccination. We recently developed and pilot tested Outsmart HPV , the 
first HPV vacc ine intervention for YSMM that we are aware of.  This study is the necessary next step 
in this line of res earch  and will comprehensively evaluate the Outsmart HPV  intervention. In doing so, 
it will provide an evidence base regarding the interv ention’s effic acy (including what type of HPV 
vaccine reminders are most effective for the intervention), mediators, an d mod erators. We will make 
every effort to present findings at scientific meetings and to publish findings in peer -reviewed journals.   
 
5. Data and Saf ety Monitoring Plan  
We have developed a Data and Safety Monitoring Plan for th is study. The purpose of th e dat a and 
safety monitoring plan is to ensure the safety of participants, the validity and integrity of data, and the 
13 
 appropriate termin ation of studi es for which significant benefits or risks have been uncovered or when 
it appears that the study cannot b e con cluded successfully. Risks associated with participation in 
research must be minimized to the extent practical and the method and de gree of monito ring should 
be commensurate with risk. The essential elements of the Data and Safety Monitoring Plan incl ude: 
a) monitoring the progress of the study and the safety of participants; b) plans for assuring 
compliance with requirements regarding  the reporting  of adverse events; c) plans for assuring that 
any action resulting in a temporary or permanent suspensio n of the study is reported to the 
appropriate agencies; and d) plans for assuring data accuracy and protocol compliance.  
 
Prior to the in itiation of th e project, all study team members will receive standardized training to 
ensure that the activities of the  study are conducted in a uniform, safe, confidential, and secure 
manner. The project website contains an administrative console that wil l allow the st udy team to 
document and monitor study activities (e.g., recruitment, data collection, etc.). Study team meeti ngs 
will take place on a monthly basis to monitor study activities and to continually reassess the progress 
of the study, including assessments of  data quality, timeliness, participant recruitment, accrual, 
retention, protocol compliance, and monitori ng of  the risk versus benefits throughout the study period.  
 
All adverse events will be reported according to the policy outlined by the IRB at OSU. Th e 
appropriate forms will be completed and sent in accordance to the timeline set forth by the IRB. All 
adverse  events will be reported to and reviewed by the study team. All protocol violations will be 
documented and reported to the IRB. Also , any privacy violations will be reported to the IRB and the 
institutional privacy offices. All privacy violations, adv erse events, and protocol violations will be 
reviewed by the multi -PIs (Drs. Paul Reiter and Annie -Laurie McRee) and the rest of the stud y team. 
Dr. Re iter will be responsible for reporting to the OSU Office of Responsible Research Practices/IRB 
and the NI H pro ject officer. The IRB will be provided feedback more frequently if there should be any 
adverse events or other recommendations. Dr. Reiter will al so be responsible for reporting to the NIH 
project officer any action resulting in temporary or permanent  susp ension of the research project at 
OSU. These actions must be reported to the NIH project officer within 72 hours of notification. Al l 
documents or  correspondence that are generated in the course of correcting or appealing the 
suspension status must al so be  forwarded to the project officer within 72 hours of it being presented 
to the institutional body that put forth directive to tempor arily or perma nently suspend the research 
project. During this time, no research project activities can occur.  
 
Dr. Rei ter w ill be responsible for submitting reports, including annual reports to the OSU IRB and the 
NIH. Information included in the reports will include t he number of individuals enrolled in the study, 
dropout rates, and any protocol deviations.  
 
6. ClinicalT rials.gov and Good Clinical Practice (GCP) Training  
This study will involve a randomized controlled trial of an HPV vaccine intervention for YSMM. 
Therefore, it will be registered in ClincialTrials.gov. Throughout the ClincialTrials.gov process, we will 
adhere to the policy recently released by the NIH. Specifically, we will: a) ensure registration to 
ClincialTrials.gov occurs no later than  21 days after  the first participant is enrolled into the 
randomized controlled trial; b) submit all required informati on du ring the registration process 
(descriptive, recruitment, location/contact, and administrative information); c) ensure results 
inform ation is submi tted no later than one year after the primary completion date of the randomized 
controlled trial; d) subm it all required information during results reporting (participant flow information, 
demographics and baseline characteristics of enrolled  participants,  primary and secondary outcomes 
including results of any scientifically appropriate statistical tests, an d adv erse events); and e) update 
all submitted information once a year. Related, study team members will complete training in Good 
Clinic al Practice (G CP) regarding clinical trials, as appropriate. This expectation was established by a 
recent policy statem ent from the NIH.  
 
14 
 REFERENCES  
1. Smith JS, Melendy A, Rana RK, Pimenta JM. Age -specific prevalence of infection with hum an 
papillomavi rus in males: A global review. Working Paper . 2009.  
2. D'Souza G, Wiley DJ, Li X, et al. Incidence and ep idemiology of anal cancer in the multicenter 
AIDS cohort study. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr . 2008;48(4):491 -499. 
3. Park IU, Palefsky JM.  Evaluation an d management of anal intraepithelial neoplasia in HIV -negative 
and HIV -positive men who have sex with men . Curr Infect Dis Rep . 2010;12(2):126 -133. 
4. Joseph DA, Miller JW, Wu X, et al. Understanding the burden of human papillomavirus -associa ted 
anal cance rs in the US. Cancer . 2008;113(10 Suppl):2892 -2900.  
5. Chaturvedi AK, Madeleine MM, Biggar RJ, Engels EA.  Risk of human papillomavirus -associated 
cancers among persons with AIDS. J Natl Cancer Inst . 2009;101(16):1120 -1130.  
6. National Cancer Institute. Sur veillance, epidemiology and end results. http://seer. cancer.gov/ . 
Updated 2014.  
7. Dinh TH, Sternberg M, Dunne EF, Markowitz LE. Genital warts among 18 - to 59 -year-olds in the 
united states , national hea lth and nutrition examination survey, 1999 --2004. Sex Transm Dis . 
2008;35(4):357 -360. 
8. Gillison ML, Cha turvedi AK, Lowy DR. HPV prophylactic vaccines and the potential prevention of 
noncervical cancers in both men and women. Cancer . 2008;11 3(10 Suppl):30 36-3046.  
9. Lacey CJ, Lowndes CM, Shah KV. Chapter 4: Burden and management of non -cancerous HPV -
related conditions: HPV -6/11 disease. Vaccine . 2006;24 Suppl 3:S3/3 -41. doi: 
10.1016/j.vaccine.2006.06.015.  
10. The President's Cancer Panel. Acc elerating HPV vaccine uptake: Urgency for action to prevent 
cancer. A report to the president of the united states from  the president's cancer panel. bethesda, 
MD. national cancer institute. http://deainfo.nci.nih.gov/advisory/pcp/annualReports/HPV/index.htm . 
Updated 2014.  
11. Insinga RP, Dasbach EJ, Elbasha EH. Assessing the annual economic burden of preventing and 
treating anogenital human papillomavirus -related disease in the US: Analytic framework and review of 
the literature. Pharmacoeconomics . 2005;23(11):1107 -1122.  
12. Hu  D, Goldie S. The economic burden of noncervical human papillomavirus disease in the united 
states. Am J Obstet Gynecol . 2008;198(5):500. e-500.e7.  
13. Gates GJ. How manhy people are lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender? 
http://williamsinstitute.law.ucla.edu/wp -content/uploads/Ga tes-How-Many -People -LGBT -Apr-
2011.pdf . Updated 2011.  
14. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. FDA  licensure of quadrivalent human papillomavirus 
vaccine (HPV4, gardasil) for use in males and guidance from the advisory committee on 
immunization prac tices (ACIP). MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep . 2010;59(20):630 -632. 
15. Food and Drug Administration. FDA appro ves gardasil 9 for prevention of certain cancers caused 
by five additional types of HPV. 
http://www.fda.gov/NewsEvents/Newsroom/PressAnnouncements/ucm426485 .htm. Updated 2014.  
16. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, (CDC). Recommendations on the use of 
quadrivalent human papillomavir us vaccine in males --advisory committee on immunization practices 
(ACIP), 2011. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep . 2011;60(50): 1705-1708. 
17. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Gardasil. 
http://www.fda.gov/BiologicsBloodVaccines/Vaccines/ApprovedProducts/ucm094042.htm . Updated 
2010.  
18. Meites E, Kempe A, Markowitz LE. Use of a 2 -dose schedule for human papillomavirus 
vaccination - updated recommendations of the advisor y committee on immunization practices. 
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep . 2016;65(49):1405 -1408.  
19. Reiter PL, M cRee AL, Katz ML, Paskett ED. Human papillomavirus vaccination among young 
adult gay and bisexual men in the united states. Am J Public H ealth . 2015;10 5(1):96 -102. 
15 
 20. Rogers RW. Cognitive and physiological processes in fear appeals and attitude change: A revised 
theory of protection motivation. In: Cacioppo JT, Petty RE, eds. Social psychophysiology: A source 
book. New York: Guilford Press ; 1983:153 -176. 
21. Fisher JD, Fisher WA. Changing AIDS -risk behavior. Psychol Bull . 1992;111(3):455 -474. 
22. Meyer IH.  Prejudice, social stress, and mental health in lesbian, gay, and bisexual populations: 
Conceptual issues and research evidence. Psychol Bull. 2003;129 (5):674 -697. 
23. Bish A, Yardley L, Nicoll A, Michie S. Factors associated with uptake of vaccination aga inst 
pandemic influenza: A systematic review. Vaccine . 2011;29(38):6472 -6484.  
24. Fisher JD, Fisher WA, Williams SS, Malloy TE. Empirical  tests of an i nformation -motivation -
behavioral skills model of AIDS -preventive behavior with gay men and heterosexual u niversity 
students. Health Psychol . 1994;13(3):238 -250. 
25. Pew Research Center. Social media update 2016. http://www.pewinternet.org/2016/11/11/social -
media -update -2016/. Updated 2016.  
26. Reiter PL, Katz ML, Bauermeister JA, Shoben AB, Paskett ED, McRee AL. Recruiting young gay 
and bisexual men fo r an HPV vacci nation intervention through social media: The effects of 
advertisement content. JMIR Public Health Survei ll. In press.  
27. Fasula AM, Oraka E, Jeffries WL,4th, et al. Young sexual minority males in the united states: 
Sociodemographic characte ristics and se xual attraction, identity and behavior. Perspect Sex Reprod 
Health . 2016;48(1):3 -8. 
28. Strutz KL, Herrin g AH, Halpern CT. Health disparities among young adult sexual minorities in the 
U.S. Am J Prev Med . 2015;48(1):76 -88. 
29. Reiter PL, McRe e AL, Pepper J K, Gilkey MB, Galbraith KV, Brewer NT. Longitudinal predictors of 
human papillomavirus vaccination among a national sample of adolescent males. Am J Public Health . 
2013;103(8):1419 -1427.  
30. Reiter PL, Brewer NT, McRee AL, Gilbert P, Smith JS . Acceptabilit y of HPV vaccine among a 
national sample of gay and bisexual men. Sex Transm Dis . 2010;37(3):197 -203. 
31. Reiter PL, Brewer NT, Gottlieb SL, McRee AL, Smith JS. Parents’ health beliefs and HPV 
vaccination of their adolescent daughters. Soc Sc i Med . 2009;69 (3):475 -480. 
32. McRee AL, Brewer NT, Reiter PL, Gottlieb SL, Smith JS. The carolina HPV immunization 
attitudes and beliefs scale (CHIAS): Scale development and associations with intentions to vaccinate. 
Sex Transm Dis . 2010;37(4):234 -239. 
33. Reiter PL, M cRee AL, Kadis JA, Brewer NT. HPV vaccine and adolescent males. Vaccine . 
2011;29(34):5595 -5602.  
34. CSQ S cales. The client satisfaction questionnaire. http://www.csqscales.com/ . Updated 2 008. 
35. Lewis  JR. IBM computer system usability questionnaire. psychometric evaluation and instructions 
for use. http://drjim.0catch.com/usabqtr.pdf . Updated 1993.  
36. Centers for Disease Co ntrol and Prev ention, (CDC). Vaccine information statements (VIS). 
https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/hcp/vis/current -vis.html . Updated 2017.  
37. Rimer BK, Glassman B. Is there a use for tailor ed print communications in cancer risk 
communication? J Natl Cancer Inst Monogr . 1999;(25)(25):140 -148. 
38. Rimer BK, Orleans CT, Fleisher L, et al. Does tailoring matter? the impact of a tailored guide on 
ratings and short -term smoking -related outcomes fo r older smokers. Health Educ Res . 1994;9(1):69 -
84. 
39. Hawkins RP, Kreuter M, Resnicow K, Fishbein M, Dij kstra A. Understanding tailoring in 
communicating about health. Health Educ Res . 2008;23(3):454 -466. 
40. Kreuter MW, Wray RJ. Tailored an d targeted hea lth communication: Strategies for enhancing 
information relevance. Am J Health Behav . 2003;27 Suppl 3:227 . 
41. Kreuter MW, Strecher VJ, Glassman B. One size does not fit all: The case for tailoring print 
materials. Ann Behav Med . 1999;21(4):2 76-283. 
42. Lu stria ML, Noar SM, Cortese J, Van Stee SK, Glueckauf RL, Lee J. A meta -analysis of web -
delivered tailored  health behavior change interventions. J Health Commun . 2013;18(9):1039 -1069.  
16 
 43. Nadarzynski T, Smith H, Richardson D, Jones CJ, Llewell yn CD. Human p apillomavirus and 
vaccine -related perceptions among men who have sex with men: A systematic review. Sex T ransm 
Infect . 2014;90(7):515 -523. 
44. Sanchez DM, Pathela P, Niccolai LM, Schillinger JA. Knowledge of human papillomavirus and 
anal canc er among men w ho have sex with men attending a new york city sexually transmitted 
diseases clinic. Int J STD AIDS . 2012 ;23(1):41-43. 
45. Wheldon CW, Daley EM, Buhi ER, Nyitray AG, Giuliano AR. Health beliefs and attitudes 
associated with HPV vaccine intent ion among youn g gay and bisexual men in the southeastern 
united states. Vaccine . 2011;29(45):8060 -8065.  
46. Gilbert P, Brewer NT, Reiter PL, Ng TW, Smith JS. HPV vaccine acceptability in heterosexual, 
gay, and bisexual men. Am J Mens Health . 2011;5(4):297 -305. 
47. Wheld on CW, Daley EM, Walsh -Buhi ER, Baldwin JA, Nyitray AG, Giuliano AR. An integrative 
theoretical framework  for HPV vaccine promotion among male sexual minorities. Am J Mens Health . 
2016.  
48. Gerend MA, Madkins K, Phillips G,2nd, Mustanski B. P redictors of h uman papillomavirus 
vaccination among young men who have sex with men. Sex Transm Dis . 2016;43(3):185 -191. 
49. Cummings T, Kasting ML, Rosenberger JG, Rosenthal SL, Zimet GD, Stupiansky NW. Catching 
up or missing out? human papillomavirus vac cine acceptabi lity among 18 - to 26 -year-old men who 
have sex with men in a US national sample. Sex Transm Dis . 2015;42( 11):601-606. 
50. Fontenot HB, Fantasia HC, Vetters R, Zimet GD. Increasing HPV vaccination and eliminating 
barriers: Recommendations from  young men who  have sex with men. Vaccine . 2016;34(50):6209 -
6216.  
51. Bauermeister JA, Pingel ES, Jadwin -Cakmak L, et a l. Acceptability and preliminary efficacy of a 
tailored online HIV/STI testing intervention for young men who have sex with men: The get 
connected! pro gram. AIDS Behav . 2015;19(10):1860 -1874.  
52. Dittus PJ, De Rosa CJ, Jeffries RA, et al. The project conne ct health systems intervention: Linking 
sexually experienced youth to sexual and reproductive health care. J Adolesc Health . 
2014;55(4):5 28-534. 
53. Ro bertson AA, St Lawrence J, Morse DT, Baird -Thomas C, Liew H, Gresham K. The healthy teen 
girls project: C omparison of health education and STD risk reduction intervention for incarcerated 
adolescent females. Health Educ Behav . 2011;38(3):241 -250. 
54. Gollw itzer PM, Sheeran P. Implementation intentions and goal achievement: A meta -analysis of 
effects and proce sses. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology . 2006;38:69 -119. 
55. Freund KM, Battaglia TA, Calhoun E, et al. Impact of patient naviga tion on timely  cancer care: 
The patient navigation research program. J Natl Cancer Inst . 2014;106(6):dju115.  
56. Pasket t ED, Katz ML, Post DM, et al. The ohio patient navigation research program: Does the 
american cancer society patient navigation model im prove time to resolution in patients with abnormal 
screening tests? Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev . 2012;21(10):1620 -1628. 
57. Paskett ED, McLaughlin JM, Lehman AM, Katz ML, Tatum CM, Oliveri JM. Evaluating the efficacy 
of lay health advisors for increas ing risk -appro priate pap test screening: A randomized controlled trial 
among ohio appalachian women. Cancer Epidemiol B iomarkers Prev . 2011;20(5):835 -843. 
58. Rabbi M, Philyaw Kotov M, Cunningham R, et al. Toward increasing engagement in substance 
use data  collection: D evelopment of the substance abuse research assistant app and protocol for a 
microrandomized trial using a dolescents and emerging adults. JMIR Res Protoc . 2018;7(7):e166. doi: 
10.2196/resprot.9850 [doi].  
59. Psihogios AM, Li Y, Butler E, et al . Text message  responsivity in a 2 -way short message service 
pilot intervention with adolescent and young adult survivo rs of cancer. JMIR Mhealth Uhealth . 
2019;7(4):e12547. doi: 10.2196/12547 [doi].  
60. University of Michigan Center for Health Communicatio ns Research. C enter for health 
communications research. http://chcr. umich.edu/. Updated 2014.  
61. Lane TS, Armin J, Gordon JS. Online recruitment methods for web -based and mobile health 
studies: A review of the literat ure. J Med Internet Res . 2015;17(7):e183.  
17 
 62. Amon KL, Campbell AJ, Hawke C, Steinbeck K. Facebook as a r ecruitment tool for adolescent 
health research: A systematic review. Acad Pediatr . 2014;14(5):43 -447.e4.  
63. Diggle PJ, Heagerty P, Liang  KY, Zeger SL.  Analysis of longitudinal data. New York, NY: Oxford 
University Press; 2002.  
64. Hofstetter AM, Vargas CY , Cam argo S, et al. Impacting delayed pediatric influenza vaccination: A 
randomized controlled trial of text message reminders. Am J Prev  Med. 2015;48( 4):392 -401. 
65. O'Leary ST, Lee M, Lockhart S, et al. Effectiveness and cost of bidirectional text messag ing for 
adolescent vaccines and well care. Pediatrics . 2015;136(5):1220.  
66. McRee AL, Shoben AB, Bauermeister JA, Katz ML, Paskett ED, R eiter PL. Outs mart HPV: 
Acceptability and short -term effects of a web -based HPV vaccination intervention for young adul ts 
gay and bisexual men. Under Review .  
67. Gunzler D, Chen T, Wu P, Zhang H. Introduction to mediation analysis with structural equation  
modeling. Shanghai Arch Psychiatry . 2013;25(6):390 -394. 
68. Hu L, Bentler PM. Cutoff criteria for fit indexes in covar iance structure analysis: Conventional 
criteria versus new alternatives. Structural Equation Modeling . 1999;6:1 -55. 
69. Steiger JH. Under standing the l imitations of global fit assessment in structural equation modeling. 
Personality and Individual Differenc es. 2007;42(5):893 -898. 
70. Bauermeister JA, Yeagley E, Meanley S, Pingel ES. Sexting among young men who have sex 
with men: Results from  a national su rvey. J Adolesc Health . 2013.  
71. Bauermeister JA. Romantic ideation, partner -seeking, and HIV risk among  young gay and 
bisexual men. Arch Sex Behav . 2012;41(2):431 -440. 
72. Bauermeister JA, Ventuneac A, Pingel E, Parsons JT. Spectrums of lov e: Examining t he 
relationship between romantic motivations and sexual risk among young gay and bisexual men. AIDS 
Behav . 2012;16(6):1549 -1559.  
73. Bauermeister JA, Johns MM, Pingel E, Eisenberg A, Santana ML, Zimmerman M. Measuring 
love: Sexual minority ma le youths' ide al romantic characteristics. J LGBT Issues Couns . 
2011;5(2):102 -121. 
74. Bauermeister JA, Leslie -Santana M, Johns MM, Pingel E, Eisenberg A. Mr. right and mr. right 
now: Romantic and casual partner -seeking online among young men who have sex with men. AIDS  
Behav . 2011;15(2):261 -272. 
75. Reiter PL, Stubbs B, Panozzo CA, Whitesell D, Brewer NT. HPV and HPV vacc ine education 
intervention: Effects on parents, healthcare staff, and school staff. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers 
Prev. 2011;20(11):2354 -2361. 
76. Katz M L, Oldach BR, Goodwin J, Reiter PL, Ruffin MT,4th, Paskett ED. Development and initial 
feedback about a h uman papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine comic book for adolescents. J Cancer Educ . 
2014.  
77. Paskett ED, Tatum CM, D'Agostino R,Jr, et al. Comm unity -based in terventions to improve breast 
and cervical cancer screening: Results of the forsyth county cancer screeni ng (FoCaS) project. 
Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev . 1999;8(5):453 -459. 
78. Katz ML, Fisher JL, Fleming K, Paskett ED. Patient activatio n increases co lorectal cancer 
screening rates: A randomized trial among low -income minority patients. Cancer Epidemiol 
Biomarkers Prev . 2012;21(1):45 -52. 
79. Katz ML, Pennell ML, Dignan MB, Paskett ED. Assessment of cancer education seminars for 
appalachia n populations.  J Cancer Educ . 2012;27(2):287 -293. 
80. Stubbs BW, Panozzo CA, Moss JL, Reiter PL, Whitesell DH, Brewer N T. Evaluation of an 
intervention providing HPV vaccine in schools. Am J Health Behav . 2014;38(1):92 -102. 
81. Moss JL, Reiter PL, Dayton A , Brewer NT. I ncreasing adolescent immunization by webinar: A 
brief provider intervention at federally qualified health  centers. Vaccine . 2012;30(33):4960 -4963.  
82. Ohio Colorectal Cancer Prevention Initiative. Ohio colorectal cancer prevention initiative. 
https://www.occpi.org . Updated 2016.  
18 
 83. Horvath KJ, Bauermeister J A. eHealth literacy and intervention tailo ring impacts the acceptability 
of a HIV/STI testing intervention and sexual decision making among  young gay and bisexual men. 
AIDS Educ Prev . 2017;29(1):14 -23. 
  