 
SDR 14 -392 
Pilot Study to Improve Care Coordination  
Document Date  4/18/2019  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
  
SPECIFIC AIMS:  
 Recent studies reveal that a large portion of veterans receiving care from the Department of Veterans 
Affairs (VA) also seek services outside the VA health care system .   Though estimates are highly variable, 
ranging from 28-75%, (1-9) they reveal that dual use is mo re the rule than the exception for veteran s receiving  
VA health care .  Moreover , dual use is likely to rise in light of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act  
because  veterans can also enroll in insurance plans offered through the new health insura nce exchanges, and 
they may become eligible for Medicaid plans in states implementing Medicaid expansion .   
 Though common, dual use is a concern because a small but growing literature  indicate s that dual use 
vetera ns have poorer outcomes than VA -only pati ents(10-12). One of the main reasons for poor outcomes in 
dual users is poor coordination of care which increases the risk for medica l errors.  Interventions designed to 
improve coordination of care, most often using staff designated  specifically as care coordinators, show promise 
but have mixed results (13).   The VA has implemented several services that either directl y or indirectly aim to 
improve coordination of care such as Care Coordination and Home Telehealth (CCHT) or Patient Aligned Care 
Teams (PACT).    Mo reover, the VA does support fee -based care outsid e the VA when deemed appropriate .   
Though successful in th eir own right, the impact of these programs  on coordination with providers and systems 
outside the VA is unclear. Results from studies comparing outcomes between dual user and VA-only veterans 
suggest the need for a more concerted effort targeting this population  specifically.   
 The Iowa City VA Health Care System (ICVAHCS ) is home t o the VA Center for Access and Delivery 
Research and Evaluation ( CADRE ), the VA Office of Rural Health - Rural Health Resource Center —Central 
Region ( VRHRC -CR), the VISN 23  PACT Demonstration Laboratory , a Women’s H ealth core with a focus on 
OIF/OEF women veterans, and investigators from  the eHealth QUERI .  As a  primary and tertiary care center 
in a largely rural state, issues of dual use are common.  Investigators in each of these cores have conducted 
mixed methods studies of dual use in rural veterans which have explored  1) the scope and quality of 
information exchanged, 2)  the level of patient care coordination,  3)  health benefit coordination between VA 
and Medicare, and 4)  satisfaction  between  VA and non -VA health care teams .   The results of this work, 
described herein, indicate major impediments to effective management for dual use veterans.    
 Investigators  at the ICVAHCS  have started to develop interventions to address the gaps in care 
identified in these studies.  Dr. Carolyn Turvey is currently developing and implementing ways to improve 
health information sharing through the Blue Button feature of My Health eVet.   Dr. Mary Charlton has 
developed and disseminated a Co-management Toolkit which  contains materials to help inform non -VA 
providers when a patient also gets care at the VA, and specific information about VA pharmacy benefits.  The 
PACT Demonstration Laboratory has conducted extensive analyses of patterns of dual use for veterans  who 
are also enrolled in Medicare .    
 Pilot funding is sought to integrate both the descriptive background studies and the pilot interventions to 
begin developing best practi ces for care of dual use veterans  in rural settings .   Many of the ICVAHCS  studies 
described focused on informing non -VA providers about VA healthcare and benefits.   We aim to pilot an 
intervention that combines our prior tools with strategies to help VA p roviders become more aware of non -VA 
care for dual use veterans.   As this intervention is in its early stages, most of the strategies will rely on veteran 
education and training.   However, in conducting this pilot, we will explore the acceptability and f easibility of 
care coordination  protocols for providers.   This proposed pilot aims to do so through the following Specific 
Aims :   
1) To conduct a pilot randomized controlled trial comparing  usual care to an intervention which  aims to 
improve  care coordination for dual use rural veterans by educating them about the use of 
information technology to share health information  and informing their providers about the extent 
and nature of care from other health care systems.  
2) To determine the impact o f this intervention on patient perceptions of integrated care  coordination, 
provider perception of relational coordination , and  the impact of health information sharing as 
indicated by concordance of medication lists, and lower levels medical duplication  when compared 
with usual care.  
3) To integrate the results from prior background research and ongoing interventional studies 
conducted at ICVAHCS into a White Paper  that makes recommendations for best practic es to 
improve care in rural settings for veterans w ho are dual users . 
4) Exploratory Aim:  To explore the acceptability and feasibility of Co-Management Care Coordination 
Agreements between VA and non -VA providers.  
 
 
 
Overview of Pilot Intervention :  
 The basic structure of the pilot and its evaluation is very similar to that of Dr. Turvey’s HSR&D study 
and her multi -site ORH study.  Dual use veterans will be identified through mailed recruitment and screening, 
they will be trained to use My HealtheVet to improve CC, and their next provider visits will be evaluated for 
impact of added information , satisfaction, and evidence of medical  duplication .  Evaluation will be conducted 
through brief post -visit surveys and patient and provider interviews .  Dr. Tur vey’s experience in her current 
studies demonstrates the feasibility of these methods including provider completion of the brief evaluation 
forms.    
However, there are several new components to the proposed intervention.   Once dual use veterans 
are ident ified, they will complete a comprehensive interview determining their full care team and veterans ’ 
perceptions of the role each provider plays in their care  (Appendix C ).   Then, all identified non -VA providers 
will receive a letter indicating that the vet eran receives ca re at the VA and a copy of the Co -management 
Toolkit.   Veterans will be trained to use My Health eVet to generate a CCD , but they will also be trained to use 
My Health eVet secure messaging to provide their VA providers information about their non -VA care.  They will 
be requested to exchange a complete medication list, problem list, most recent laboratory values and visit note 
from their non -VA providers.  If veterans’ non -VA provider has a patient porta l with CCD functions, we will 
assist the patient in learning that system if requested .   Veterans will be followed to their next two visits – their 
first post training non -VA provider visit and their first VA provider visit.  Both of these visits will be evaluated to 
determine  the impact of additional  information  provided by the veteran .  At these visits, veterans will be asked 
to share their perceptions of the roles providers play in their healthcare to receive feedback from t heir 
providers.  
This study focuses on the role the veteran can play in CC.   However, we believe that both VA and non -
VA providers must also be active partners  in the CC process .   The proposed intervention is seen as the start 
of a broader conceptualizat ion of how patients and providers can negotiate co -management.  Veteran report of 
the nature of their discussion with their providers about role sharing and provider  input will be integrated to 
develop further interventions targeting improvements in provid er behavior regarding CC.  Development of 
provider -based interventions will be done in consultation with both local and national PACT leadership 
representatives in the Executive Committee and will be tested in later studies .   More over, we acknowledge 
that information technology is a necessary but not sufficient requirement  for the cultivation of actual 
collaborative relationships (14).   This study aims to develop and test the information technology, but also start 
the proce ss of helping to improve collaborative relationships , with the veteran being at the center of that 
discussion .   
In addition  to the above considerations , this intervention targets the role of patient facing technologies 
in health information sharing.   The  availability of both patient and provider -facing technologies to improve 
health information exchange is rapidly evolving.  The My Health eVet Program O ffice anticipates that veterans 
will be able to send their CCD electronically directly from the MyHeltheVet website as of Fall/Winter 2014.   In 
addition, Dr. Turvey is  working with local and national initiatives to promote provider -to-provider and state -
based health information exchanges where the patient is not  the intermediary.   Though exciting, these 
technical developments  are not currently available so they could not be inc orporated into the design of this  
study.   However, if they do become available during the study, the team and the Executive Committ ee will 
explore whether or not it would mak e sense to revise study methods to include them .   The main focus of the 
assessments within  the study is not whether  a specific technolo gy is used, but whether  there is accurate and 
timely communication.   At this level of analysis, we may be able to chang e the specific technology used, yet 
still determine the impact of health information sharing on the quality and efficiency of care provided.    
 
Sample:  Sixty  dual use veterans who have a non -VA provider  and who are not already using My Health eVet 
for health information sharing  will be recruited from the Iowa City VA Health Care System.  Based on earlier 
research that identified criteria for optimal impact of CC(15-17), participants must have at least one of the 
following  chronic illnesses or ambulatory  care sensitive conditions: diabetes, chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease, hypertension, congestive heart failure, angina, asthma, coronary artery disease, arthritis, gynecologic 
conditions, or cancer  -as determined by medical record review.  We will ove rsample women veterans so that 
the final sample contains at least 20 women  veterans  -30% of the total sample.  Eligible veterans will be sent a 
recruitment letter with a postage paid return postcard asking them to indicate whether they have a non -VA 
provid er or have ever used My Health eVet for sharing health information with providers .  When contacted, the 
research assistant will confirm inclusion criteria and request the date of the next scheduled VA-provider and 
non-VA provider appointment . Only those with upcoming visits with both providers in the next 6 months will be 
recruited .  In our current work , we were able to use comparable methods to find veterans who had non -VA 
providers and we expect similar success in this study.  To complete the study procedures, participants will be 
required to have access to a computer with internet, phone, and printer.  At the time of enrollment, veterans will 
also be asked to complete a release of information so we may communicate with their non -VA provider and 
obtain a copy of their recent visit note, problem list, and medication list.   
 This pilot will be a randomize d controlled trial comparing the CC intervention to usual care.   This will 
allow for more conclusive determination of the impact of the intervention.   In addition, results from this pilot 
can be compared to Dr.Turvey’s pilot study examining unidirectiona l sharing of health information from the VA 
to non -VA providers only , to determine whether there was any additional b enefit to bi -directional information 
sharing, the inclusion of the Co -Management T oolkit , and discussion of provider roles.    
 The study statistician will develop a computer program to implement randomization grouped in blocks 
to ensure equal distribution in study arms by age, gender, and race.  The study coordinator will maintain 
randomization assignments in sealed envelopes to e nsure that randomization and recruitment of specific 
patients is not influenced by future assignments.  Veterans and providers in the usual care condition will 
complete all the same assessments, but will otherwise receive no aspects of the intervention.    
Intervention Arm : 
Veteran Intake Interview :   In the intake interview, conducted by phone, v eterans will be asked to confirm their 
medical conditions and list all their providers , including pharmacies, provide provider contact information, and 
to specify what roles and responsibilities are held by these providers  (initial draft of form can be found in 
Appendix C) .   Veterans will also provide the dates of upcoming VA and non -VA provider visits .  The results of 
the interview will be summarized. Veterans will also complete the Patient Perceptions of Integrated Care 
Survey (18, 19)  with instructions to rate their experience in the past year.    This initial assessment will serve as 
the bas eline measure for patients ’ perceptions of CC.  
 The Patient Perception of Integrated Care Survey  (Appendix D ) is a 33 -item measure assessing 
perceived coordination within the care team, across care teams, between care teams and community 
resources, continuity, patient centeredness and shared responsibility.   It has demonstrated internal 
consis tency, disc riminant validity, and goodness -of-fit.   
Upon completion of the intake interv iew, study staff will send the v eteran the training materials and link 
to online training videos that teach the veteran to use My Health eVet to generate a CCD,  share with their non -
VA provider , and to compile information from non -VA providers that can be shared with VA providers through 
secure messaging.    If the non -VA provider supports an online patient portal (e.g. Epic’s My Chart), the staff 
will assist the veteran in using that tool if the veteran is amenable.  A research assistant will contact the 
participant by phone to determine if they are having difficulties with the program and to provide any further 
assis tance needed to bring success.   In -person trai ning and assistance will be offered when needed.   In Dr. 
Turvey’s current study, veterans have rarely needed assistance beyond the training materials provided.  It 
appears that once veterans are made aware of the Blue Button Feature, the value of the feat ure in CC, and 
receive some guidance about how to go about generating a CCD, they can be fairly independent progressing 
through the whole process.  More of a challenge has been finding veterans with scheduled visits within the 
next 6 months, though the ori ginal study did not target veterans with specific chronic or ambulatory care 
sensitive conditions.   We expect that these patients will have more regular visits to manage their illness.    
Within My Health eVet, a vete ran can attach a file to their secure m essage and send that file to their VA 
health care team. If deemed clinically relevant, the VA health care team can then save that secure m essage  in 
CPRS as a note and also save the file attachment In VistA  Imaging. Phase 1 of this functionality was released 
in March 2014 and P hase 2 is scheduled for the12.9 release of My Health eVet in June 2014. Phase 2 will allow 
for a total of 4 file attachments per message with a maximum cumulative size of 6MB.   The con tent included in 
the materials sent to the VA through secure messaging will be determined during the initial intake interview and 
will be shaped by perceived functions of health care team members.   However, in general, patients will be 
asked to include a copy of their medication list, problem list, and most recent labs and most recent visit note.  
We will instruct veterans to secure message non -VA health information to their PACT nurse care  
manager.   The nurse care manager will then save the relevant info rmation in CPRS and also notify other VA 
treatment team members, such as specialty care providers, of receipt of this information.   We have discussed 
this process with ICVAHCS PACT leadership and they agree to promote this workflow.    
 
Provider Visit :   Veterans in both conditions will be followed in the study unti l they have had one VA and one 
non-VA provider visit.   Those in the intervention arm  will receive a reminder call one week prior to these visits 
instructing them to bring hard copies of their list of providers  and either their CCD fro m the VA , and 
informational aspects  of the co -management toolkit  (for non -VA providers) or most recent information from 
their non -VA care (for VA providers).  Veterans will be asked to share this information wi th their providers and 
discuss whether or not the provider was aware of the other care and whether or not the provider concurs with 
the attributed roles.   If discrepancies in expectations exist, the veteran will notify the PACT nurse care 
manager and work  with the relevant stakeholders to start to clarify roles.  Data about such discrepancies will 
be described in detail as part of the qualitative study of clarification of roles.  
 Veterans in both study conditions will also be provided a postage paid envelope and brief evaluation 
forms to be completed by their providers and by the veteran.  The patient post -visit questionnaire will inclu de 
the Patient Perceptions  of Integrated Care S urvey.   The provider forms include  confirmation of receipt of 
informa tion, its  impact on care, provider satisfaction  (Appendix E), and Gittell’s Seven Item Measure of 
Relational Coordination designed for providers (20). (Appendix F)  Gittell’s 7 -item measure of Relational 
Coordination assesses providers ’ perceptions of the frequency, timeliness, accuracy and problem -solving 
nature of communication, as well as relationships of shared goals, knowledge, and mutual respect. To facilitate 
participation, a waiver of signature of consent will be obtained from th e IRB for providers.   
 The provider post-visit questionnaire will be comparable to the one curren tly used in the HSR&D study 
but additional questions will be added pertaining to the designation of provider roles , knowledge of and 
acceptability of CC agreements, and the usefulness of the Co -management T oolkit for non -VA provider 
questionnaires . The questionnaire will also include a section where the physician can indicate if he or she 
would be willin g to complete a 15 minute audio -recorded qualitative  interview about the medical visit.  Although 
the proposed methods make some immediate demands on non -VA providers, response rate for the brief 
evaluation forms was high and 5 out of 21 providers agreed to be interviewed .  Non-VA providers will also 
receiv e a small financial incentive for participation.  
 
Post Medical Visit Provider and Veteran Interviews:   Providers and veterans who agree will be interviewed 
briefly by phone about their experience during the medical visit with a focus on CC. Willing veterans will be 
interviewed regardless of whether their provider does an interview.  We will plan to conduct these interviews 
within one week of the scheduled appointment . If the non -VA provider agrees to complete a qualitative 
interview, a separ ate consent letter will be provided at that time prior to data collection detailing the information 
to be obtained.  Again, a waiver of signature of consent will be utilized with clear instructions that by completing 
the audio recorded interview that he/sh e is providing consent to participate.  The intervi ew will address two 
main issues:  the impact of the information exchange on the visit , and the acceptability and optimal design of a 
co-management care coordination agreement.  
 
Outcome Assessments and Quant itative Analysis :  The main outcomes of this study and when they will be 
collected are prese nted in Table 2.     Though ordered in the table, we will not dictate what order the VA and 
non-VA provider appointments must occur – though this order will be noted in data collection.  As this is a pilot 
study, we are conducting analyses to determine an estimate of effect size and expected variability to be used 
in a later power calculation for a larger experimental or quasi -experiment al study.   
Table 2:  Study Assessments  
Outcome     
Patient Perceptions of Integrated Care  Baseline  Post VA Visit  Post Non-VA Visit  
Provider Relation al Coordination Survey   Post VA Visit  Post Non-VA Visit 
Medication Concordance - From Chart   Post VA Visit  Non-VA Visit 
Medical Duplication - From Chart   Post VA Visit  Post Non-VA Visit 
 
 Hypothesis 1 : Patients in the intervention arm will have greater increase in the Perceptions of 
Integrated Care Survey score from baseline to the two provider visits when compared with usual care. This 
hypothesis will involve three dependent sample t -tests , assuming that Patient Perceptions of Integrated C are 
are distributed normally (if not normally distributed, analyses will use a Wilcoxon rank sum test).  Specifically, 
we will examine differences between intervention and usual care patients with respect to the with in-patient 
change between baseline perceptions and 1) perceptions after the first subs equent visit with a VA provider,  2) 
perceptions after the first subseque nt visit with a non -VA provider,  and 3) perceptions after subsequent VA and 
non-VA provider visits  averaged.  Sub-analyses looking for differences between demographic groups based on 
age and gender will also be conducted.  
 Hypothesis 2 :  Providers in the interventional arm will have higher scores on the Relational 
Coordination Survey  as compared to tha t of providers in usual care.   The Relational C oordination survey will 
be completed by providers at each patient’s first VA visit and first non -VA visit subsequent to baseline.  
Assuming coordination perceptions are normally distributed, analysis will use independent sample t -tests to 
evaluate differences in relational coordination perceptions between providers caring for patients in the 
treatment and usual care groups (alternatively, the Wilcoxon test may be used for non -normal measures).  
Differences in p erceptions between usual care and treatment groups will be evaluated separately for VA 
providers and non -VA providers.   These analyses assume that no two patient participants share a provider.   If 
this assumption is not met, analyses will be adjusted to account for clustering within physician.   
 Hypothesis 3 :   Medication concordance will be higher for patients in the intervention arm than usual 
care.  Medication concordance for each of the two medical visits will be calculated by making two lists, the 
current VA medication list and the current non -VA medication list.  The former will be taken from CPRS while 
the latter will be taken from the non -VA provider visit most proximal temporally to the VA visit.   We will obtain 
both the visit note and the me dication list from the provider s’ visits.  If the note does not indicate any 
medication change and there is none indicated on the form we ask the provider to complete, the provide r’s 
medication list will be designated the final medication list  documented for that visit.  If there is an indication of a 
specific medication change, either in the note, or in the form we request providers to complete, the discrepancy 
pertaining to this change will not be counted as an “unreconciled” medication.       
 Our metric for concordance of medication lists will be based on reviewing both the VA and non -VA 
medication lists and determining the total number of distinct medications.   A distinct medication is defined by 
1) the type of medication and 2) the daily dose.  The final calculation of appropriate medication concordance 
will be calculated as the total number of distinct medications included on both lists divided by the total number 
of distinct medications.   This way, the  possible range is from 0 to 1 with  1 indicating perfect concordance of 
medication lists.  The  metric will range from 0 to 1 , but we expect agreement between the two medication lists 
to yield estimates ranging between 0.50 and 0.90 based on prior research in medication appropriateness (10, 
21).  We will first examine the distribution of medication concordance to determine the app ropriate statistical 
test.  If the distribution is highly skewed, we may categorize the variable into two or more categories (e.g., 
<10%, 50%, or >=80% agreement) and evaluate differences between patients in the intervention  and usual 
care groups using a C hi-square test.  Alternatively, medication concordance may be treated as a continuous 
variable and evaluated using the t -test or Wilcoxon rank sum.   
 Hypothesis 4 :  Medical duplication will be lower for patients in the intervention arm than  usual care.  
Prior research has quantified therapeutic and laboratory duplication, yet these are clearly difficult constructs to 
operationalize (10, 21 -23). Therapeutic duplication will be defined as concurrent use of more than one 
medication from the same therapeutic class, based on modified VA classes, according to the method published 
by Fitzgerald et al. (24) and more recently adapted by Chrischilles et al. (10).  For laboratory duplication, we will 
identify all orders for labs occurring within the 6 months prior to the non -VA provider visit.  For sensitivity 
analysis, we will compare different intervals, e.g., 14 days, 30 days, 60 days.  Since there are multiple 
indications for laboratory referr als, we will collect temporally associated diagnoses. Each patient will be 
assigned a dichotomous indicator for whether they received therapeutic duplication and/or laboratory 
duplication duri ng their non -VA provider visit.  
 To validate these metrics, all instances of identified duplication plus a random sample of visits where no 
apparent duplication occurred will be reviewed by Dr. Matt Witry , a clinical pharmacist,  and Dr. Stacey Klutts , 
head of the ICVAHCS pathology department .  Both are current collabor ators on Dr. Turvey’s HSR&D and ORH 
study.   Drs. Witry and Klutts  will be blind to whether or not the visit met criteria for treatment  or diagnostic 
redundancy and they will also be blind to the treatment arm of the patient whose visit is being reviewed.    Their 
clinical assessment of presence of duplication will be used to validate the metric.  If agreement is poor between 
these two raters and the criteria described above (Kappa > 0.80), the investigative team will meet to determine 
the source of the dis crepancy and how to remedy it. Each patient will be assigned a dichotomous indicator for 
whether they received either therapeutic or laboratory duplication during their non -VA provider visit. 
Differences in the occurrence of medical duplication between usu al care and intervention groups will be 
examined using the Chi -square test.   
  
 
REFERENCES  
 
1.  2011 Survey of Veteran Enrollees' Health and Reliance upon VA.  . 2011.  
2.  Borowsky S, Cowper DC. Dual use of VA and non -VA primary care. Journal of general internal medicine. 
1999;14:274 -280.  
3.  Carey K, Montez -Rath ME, Rosen AK, Christiansen CL, Loveland S, Ettner SL. Use of VA and Medicare 
services by dually eligible veterans with psychiatric problems. Health services research. 2008;43:1164 -
1183.  
4.  Hoff RA, Rosenheck RA. The use of VA and non -VA mental health services by female veterans. Medical 
care. 1998;36:1524 -1533.  
5.  Humensky J, Carretta H, de Groot K, Brown MM, Tarlov E, Hynes DM. Service utilization of veterans 
dually eligible for VA and Medicare fee -for-service: 1999 -2004. Medicare Medicaid Res Rev. 2012;2.  
6.  Hynes DM, Koelling K, Stroupe K, Arnold N, Mallin K, Sohn MW, Weaver FM, Manheim L, Kok L. 
Veterans' access to and use of Medicare and Veterans Affairs health c are. Medical care. 2007;45:214 -223.  
7.  Liu CF, Chapko M, Bryson CL, Burgess JF, Jr., Fortney JC, Perkins M, Sharp ND, Maciejewski ML. Use of 
outpatient care in Veterans Health Administration and Medicare among veterans receiving primary care 
in community -based and hospital outpatient clinics. Health services research. 2010;45:1268 -1286.  
8.  Liu CF, Manning WG, Burgess JF, Jr., Hebert PL, Bryson CL, Fortney J, Perkins M, Sharp ND, Maciejewski 
ML. Reliance on Veterans Affairs outpatient care by Medicare -eligible veterans. Medical care. 
2011;49:911 -917.  
9.  Nayar P, Yu F, Apenteng B. Improving care for rural veterans: are high dual users different? The 
Journal of rural health : official journal of the American Rural Health Association and the National Rural 
Health Care Association. 2014;30:139 -145.  
10.  Chrischilles EA, VanGilder R, Wright K, Kelly M, Wallace RB. Inappropriate Medication Use as a Risk 
Factor for Self -Reported Adverse Drug Effects in Older Adults. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2009;57:1000 -1006.  
11.  Wolins ky FD, An HG, Liu L, Miller TR, Rosenthal GE. Exploring the association of dual use of the VHA 
and Medicare with mortality: separating the contributions of inpatient and outpatient services. Bmc 
Health Serv Res. 2007;7.  
12.  Wolinsky FD, Miller TR, An HG, Brezinski PR, Vaughn TE, Rosenthal GE. Dual use of Medicare and the 
Veterans Health Administration: are there adverse health outcomes? Bmc Health Serv Res. 2006;6.  
13.  Hansen LO, Young RS, Hinami K, Leung A, Williams MV. Interventions to Reduce 30 -Day 
Reh ospitalization: A Systematic Review. Annals of internal medicine. 2011;155:520 -U594.  
14.  Graetz I, Reed M, Shortell SM, Rundall TG, Bellows J, Hsu J. The association between EHRs and care 
coordination varies by team cohesion. Health services research. 201 4;49:438 -452.  
15.  Ajmera M, Wilkins TL, Sambamoorthi U. Dual Medicare and Veteran Health Administration use and 
ambulatory care sensitive hospitalizations. Journal of general internal medicine. 2011;26 Suppl 2:669 -
675.  
16.  Finegan NS, Gao J, D. P, Campbe ll J. Trends and geographic variation of potentially avoidable 
hospitalizations in the veterans healthcare system. Health Services and Managment Research. 
2010;23:66 -75. 
17.  Thorpe JM, Van Houtven CH, Sleath BL, Thorpe CT. Rural -Urban Differences in Preve ntable 
Hospitalizations Among Community -Dwelling Veterans With Dementia. Journal of Rural Health. 
2010;26:146 -155.  
18.  Singer SJ, Burgers J, Friedberg M, Rosenthal MB, Leape L, Schneider E. Defining and Measuring 
Integrated Patient Care: Promoting the Nex t Frontier in Health Care Delivery. Med Care Res Rev. 
2011;68:112 -127.  
19.  Singer SJ, Friedberg MW, Kiang MV, Dunn T, Kuhn DM. Development and Preliminary Validation of 
the Patient Perceptions of Integrated Care Survey. Med Care Res Rev. 2013;70:143 -164.  
20.  Gittell JH. Coordinating mechanisms in care provider groups: Relational coordination as a mediator 
and input uncertainty as a moderator of performance effects. Manage Sci. 2002;48:1408 -1426.  
21.  Fitzgerald LS, Hanlon JT, Shelton PS, Landsman PB, Schm ader KE, Pulliam CC, Williams ME. Reliability 
of a modified medication appropriateness index in ambulatory older persons. Ann Pharmacother. 
1997;31:543 -548.  
22.  Hanlon J, Schmader K. The Medication Appropriateness Index at 20: Where It Started, Where It H as 
Been, and Where It May Be Going. Drug Aging. 2013;30:893 -900.  
23.  Samsa GP, Hanlon JT, Schmader KE, Weinberger M, Clipp EC, Uttech KM, Lewis IK, Landsman PB, 
Cohen HJ. A Summated Score for the Medication Appropriateness Index - Development and Assessme nt 
of Clinimetric Properties Including Content Validity. J Clin Epidemiol. 1994;47:891 -896.  
24.  Fitzgerald LS, Hanlon JT, Shelton PS, Landsman PB, Schmader KE, Pulliam CC, Williams ME. Reliability 
of a modified medication appropriateness index in ambulato ry older persons. The Annals of 
pharmacotherapy. 1997;31:543 -548.  
 