 
 
 
 
   Page 1 of 11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              PROJECT 
TITLE: Evaluation of Post -Exposure Sauna 
Treatment of Firefighters – A Pilot Study  
 
  
 
 
      
 
 
        
    
 
     
S
TUDY PROTOCOL  
 
NCT  NUMBER : NCT034 29348 
 
DOCUMENT DATE:  MAY 14, 2018  
 
 
 
 
   Page 2 of 11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
 1) Background  
Firefighters are at increased risk of cancer, and both inhalatio n and dermal routes contribute to 
overall exposure to carcinogens, including polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs).  PAHs can be measured in urine samples so urine sampling has been shown to be a good measurement of exposure to toxicants.  
Training fires are performed as part of fire suppression continuing education and/or training events 
scheduled by fire departments to review or present new departmental concepts in fire suppression 
activities under closely monitored safety conditions.  The National Fire Protection Agency (NFPA) requires fire department to annually test active firefighters for competency in fire suppression.  This can be done using training fires.   
Two types of structure training fires are flashover and burn room fires.  Flashover train ing fires are 
fires that simulate the transitional phase of a structure fire between the growth stage and the fully developed stage of a fire.  During a flashover, ignition of the room contents are ignited at once, includes smoke, and the entire space is c onsumed by fire. Burn room training fires simulate fires that 
burn wood, straw, excelsior, hay, wood pallets, generating enough heat for fire training purposes.   
After fighting a fire, the standard operating procedures for fire department require a post- fire 
rehabilitation to prevent the risk of injury that may result from extended field operations under adverse conditions.  At t he Fire Department, the rehabilitation consists of:  1)  assessment of vital 
signs; 2)  revitalization p rest, hydration, refr eshments, and temperature regulation; 3) medical 
evaluation and treatment of injuries, if needed; 4) transportation for those requiring treatment at 
medical facilities, and 5) reassignment as needed.  
 
Sauna post- fire incident exposure detoxification was pe rformed post 9 -11 and studied in research  
published in 2006 by Cecchini, etal., ( article attached) but the results of the study are  incomplete 
and were not controlled.  Crinnion, 2007, as director of the Environmental Medicine Center of 
Excellence at the S outhwest College of Naturopathic Medicine in Tempe, Arizona, summarized that 
saunas, “…can be used very effectively for certain cardiovascular problems an d as a means to 
enhance the mobilization of fat- soluble xenobiotics.   When saunas are used to reduce blood 
pressure and enhance blood flow and cardiac functioning, only short sauna sessions (15 minutes) are necessary . 
 A traditional sauna generates heat by heating rocks  to heat the air , adding in steam to  heat the skin, 
and generally op erate at 180 -190 deg F.  An infrared sauna uses light to create heat that warms your 
body directly without warming the air and operate at lower temperatures, 110 -140 deg F.  A Mayo 
Clinic Consumer Health report by Dr. Brent A Bauer, MD, accessed 12/21/2017 (attached) reported “…no adverse effects have been reported with infrared saunas.”  
 The purpose of the current study is to determine if treatment in an infrared sauna: a) affects absorption of PAHs as measured by urinary metabolites; and b) changes core bo dy temperature and 
heart rate. Infrared exposure from the sauna treatment is expected to increase the core body temperature , which may have a detrimental effect on the firefighter performance; heart rate will be 
used as a measurement of stress. There is sp arse literature concerning the subject of using infrared 
sauna as a post -exposure treatment.  
 
 
 
 
   Page 3 of 11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
2) Purpose  
The purpose of the current study is to determine if post -fire training exercise treatment in an 
infrared sauna  as compared to the standard post- fire trea tment:  
a) Affects  absorption of PAHs as measured by urinary metabolites . (Aim 1)  
b) Changes core body temperature and heart rate.  (Aim2)  
 
These two aims will be achieved by the following objecti ves: 
a. Coordinating with the Fire Department to recruit an d consent firefighters scheduled for 
training fires  to participate  
b. Obtaining 12 hour pre and post- fire urine samples, along with dermal samples.  
c. Monitoring core body temperature and heart rate at baseline, during fire response, and for 8 hours after  
d. Splitt ing the post- fire post -standard Rehab firefighters into 2 groups:  no additional treatment 
group or sauna rehab group.  
e. Answering a survey to gather demographic information and information about recent exposures that might affect the results of the urine re sults and information about their 
participation in the fire  
 The results of the biological samples may tell us if sauna post- fire rehab is an effective means for 
increasing the body’s removal of toxic chemicals during post -fire rehab with less than a 102 d egree 
core body temperature increase .  
 
3) Lay Summary ( approximately 400 words ) 
The fire d epartment chosen is a career fire department with approx. 260 active firefighters on staff.  
They respond to fire incidents and other medical emergencies in  a 184 s quare mile  area.  They train 
recruits to become firefighters and annually proving drill training in various skills, such as live fire training.  Following live fire responses (including training fires) their standard operating procedure  
includes a rehabilitation requirement to insure that no firefighter will be permitted to continue emergency operations beyond safe levels of physical or mental exertion (rehab).   
 They would like to add the use of a sauna post -fire response to their reha b SOP and have supported 
the UA study team lead by Dr. Jeff Burgess to compare a chemical commonly excreted after firefighting to compare the value of adding sauna to rehab post -fire and monitoring the heart rate 
and temperature using a core body temperature/heart rate monitor data recorder. Urine will be collected for 12 hours immediately before the scheduled training fire and for 12 hours afterwards.  
 The core body temperature/heart rate monitor works by having the firefighter swallow a sensor shaped lik e a pill that the data recorder senses the temperature.  The pill passes thru the gut and is 
removed with bowel movement, approximately in 24 hours, depending on the normal excretion timing of the person.  A Polar heart rate belt that is worn around the bo dy in the chest area  and 
records the heart rate/pulse of the person wearing it.  The firefighter will swallow the sensor and put on the Polar heart rate belt and the UA study team will start the data recorder before the firefighter enters the training fir e and will continue to wear it for up to 8 hours afterwards . 
 
 
 
 
 
   Page 4 of 11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              After the fire, the firefighter will perform the standard rehab.  During this time, the UA study team 
will randomly select half of the firefighters to and additional sauna rehab and the other ha lf of the 
firefighters to no additional rehab.  Dermal (skin) wipe samples will be taken off the calf, arm, and neck before the fire, before standard rehab, and after sauna/no additional treatment.  
 If it is available, a personal air monitor will be worn to assess the air quality in the fire.  A post -fire 
survey will be administered to gather demographic information, pre -fire exposure information, job 
duties in the training fire, and other information.  
 The UA study team will perform the urine PAH -OH analysis , download the air monitor data (if 
performed) , results of the surveys, skin wipe analysis (if performed) , and download and compare  
the core body temperature and heart rate  data between the sauna rehab and the no additional 
treatment groups.  
 
4) Setting of the Human Research  
The recruitment, consenting, and training fire exercises will take place at the fire d epartment ’s main 
office, stations, and training centers used to train firefighters  to respond to live -fires.  The University 
of Arizona (UA) st udy team will be responsible for recruiting and consenting interested firefighters 
and in collecting samples and surveys before and after the training fire.  T he fire d epartment 
personnel are responsible for the training and safety of the firefighte rs with regard to the fire 
training exercise.  At the University of Arizona, data and sample analysis and manuscript writing will 
be done at Drachman Hall, Office 317C or A241, at the Medical Research Building Lab 130, or Keating 
Building, Lab 402.  The UA study team  are trained in human subjects protection, sample collection, 
processing, transportation, and analysis.  
 5) Resources available to conduct the Human Research   
The fire d epartment has fire training for both flashover and burn room fires a s standard operating 
training exercises.   Making space available to the UA study team to recruit, consent, and collect samples has not caused undue problems to their department as is evidenced in their support letter . 
The supplies needed for the UA study team’s research will be funded by the PI’s fixed price complete account, or alternate sources as determined by the PI.    
The sauna already belongs to the f ire department and it is NOT being purchased for this research.   
6) Study Population  
The study will see k participation from the fire d epartment firefighters assigned or soon to be 
assigned to a training fire exercise .  To test the best type of training fire exercise (flashover or burn 
room) we will need four  for each group; this  is referred to as Stage 1 in section 1, page 3 of this 
document.  They may be the same firefighters or different, depending on the fire department 
schedule and the firefighters consent preferences.   
After the training fire type is chosen (flas hover or burn -room) up to 24 firefighters already scheduled 
to participate in a training fire as part of their continuing education will be selected  as participants in 
the study exercise referred to as Stage 2 involving urine collection,  skin wipes, core body 
temperature monitoring, survey collection, etc .  They will be selected based on the availability of the 
UA study team to be present during their training fire exercise and their consent preferences.  This 
group of 20 -up to 24 firefig hters may consist of the same firefighters who partici pate d in the Stage 1 
 
 
 
 
   Page 5 of 11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              fire(s) or may be different, depending on the f ire d epartment training fire schedules and the 
firefighters consent preferences.  
The fire department employees can b e included in the study if they:  
1) Are employed as an active fire responder by the f ire department  
2) Are scheduled for a training fire exercise by the f ire department in the next year.  
3) Are currently a non -smoker  (including cigarettes, cig ars and e -cigarettes)  
4) Cannot have any contraindications to the core temp pill,  which are:  
a. Do you weigh less than eighty (80) pounds?  
b. Do you have any known or suspected obstructive disease of the gastrointestinal tract, 
including but not limited to divertic ulitis and inflammatory bowel disease?  
c. Do you exhibit or have a history of disorders or impairment of the gag reflex?  
d. Have you had a previous gastrointestinal surgery?  
e. Do you have any diseases or disorders of the esophagus?  
f. Will you be undergoing Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) or MRI scanning less than 3 days after swallowing the sensor?  
g. Do you have a low motility disorder of the gastrointestinal tract including but not limited to ileus?  
h. Do you have a cardiac pacemaker or other implanted electromedical de vice? 
i. Do you have a swallowing disorder? (problems swallowing)  
 
In order to insure we have enough firefighters consented for the scheduled training fires, we will plan to consent more than 2 4 firefighter s, requesting approval for up to 40 firefighters.   There is no 
power analysis planned for the recruitment of the firefighters.  
7) Recruitment Methods  and Consenting Process  
a. Recruitment  Process : We will recruit using a recruiting flyer that may be distributed at the fire 
department’s  main office, stations , newsletters, and list -serves.    
b. Informed Consent:    
We will consent  firefighters, individually, who are interested in participating in a private area 
prior to the training fire exercise.  Consent will be a written version, signed by the firefighter and administered by the UA study team who are well versed in the proper consenting process.  The consenting process may be over the phone to facilitate urine collection prior to t he training day. 
If consent is obtained over the phone, a signature will be obtained, in person, prior to the firefighter turning in the urine sample, or otherwise participating in any part of the research.  Each page of the consent form will be individually discussed with the firefighter and will provide the firefighter with an opportunity to ask questions.  Coercion and undue influence will be avoided by ensuring the voluntary nature of this study is stressed.  Additionally, no supervisors will be involve d in the consenting process.   
As a condition of employment, all fire department firefighters are adults, fluent in English so all 
information and consenting materials will be presented in English.   Only non -smoking firefighters 
(including cigarettes, cigars and e -cigarettes) will be recruited, to minimize smoke exposure not 
associated with live -fire training.   
 
 
 
 
 
   Page 6 of 11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              8) Research p rocedures involved in the Human Research  
Stage 1:  An initial four firefighters will be evaluated for change in PAHs associate d with standard fire 
department flashover training to determine if urinary PAH metabolites increase following exposure, 
comparing baseline urine samples before training to a repeat sample collected after cessation  of 
training.  If a significant increase is not seen, then repeat testing with four additional firefighters will 
be completed using alternate burn room training  fire.  Prior to starting the training fire, the subjects 
will provide a 12 -hour pre -fire urine sample, swallow a core temperature probe and  wear a monitor 
and heart rate belt for recording both their core temperature and heart rate. In addition, dermal 
wipes will be collected prior to the training fire. Firefighters may  wear a personal air monitor to 
capture the quality of the air during the training exercise. Post -fire dermal wipe samples will be 
collected after the firefighter removes turnout gear.  Post -fire 12 hour urine samples will be 
collected in the same manner as the pre -fire urine samples.  Subjects will also be asked to complete 
the exposure assessment survey . Specific procedures as explained in more detail below.   
 
Stage 2:  Once a measurable increase in post -fire urinary PAH has been documented, the associated 
training fire (flashover training or burn room training), testing will be  carried out in up to 2 4 subjects.   
Urine, core temperature, heart rate, dermal wipe and air monitoring samples will be collected as in 
Stage 1 collection.  
In addition, following the standard rehab, the firefighters will be randomly selected to eithe r sauna -
treatment or no additional treatment as explained in the “Sampling Protocol Timeline” below.   
 The Sampling Protocol Timeline  for the Stage 1 and Stage 2 training fires : 
1. Beginning of sampling period: The UA study team will meet each firefighter at  the training 
fire facility prior to beginning their training fire.  Firefighters will have already been consented 
and their contraindications forms completed at an earlier date as described in the “Informed Consent” and “Risks to Subjects” sectio ns. T he U A study team will read the contraindicat ed 
form to the participant one more time to confirm that they have not experienced any of the contraindications.  If they answer ‘yes’ to any of the contraindications, they will be excluded from the study.  If the fi refighter consented by phone, the consent form will be signed by the 
firefighter before continuing.  
2. If the firefighter answered ‘no’ to all contraindications, the UA study team will instruct the 
firefighter to swallow the core thermo pill ( the sensor will pass through the body and 
excreted with their normal bowel movement at the subject’s nor mal rate of motility , which is 
typically 24 -36 hours).   
3. The UA study team will accept  the urine sample collection the firefighter began  collecting 
approximately 12 hou rs before the anticipated start of the fire. I f one of the 12 hour urine 
samples has not yet been collected by the firefighter , a “zero” hour baseline sample will be 
collected at the  time  of the scheduled training . 
4. The Polar heart rate belt will be donned by the firefighter and  three dermal skin wipes (calf, 
arm, and neck) will be collected prior to the firefighter donning the turnout gear.   
 
 
 
 
   Page 7 of 11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              5. When the fire department personnel say that it is time for the firefighter to don their turnout 
gear, the  UA study team will turn on the core body/heart rate monitor data recorder. Next, 
the UA study team will place the core body/heart rate monitor data recorder in  the 
firefighter’s inner pocket of their turnout jacket.   The UA study team will make sure the d ata 
is recording  by pressing the  “run” button to see that it registers a digital reading.   After the 
firefighter is in full gear, the placement of the heart rate monitor/data recorder will be 
accessed for firefighter activity safety (not impeding movement)  and a personal air monitor 
may  be attached to the outside of the turnout gear jacket in an unobtrusive location.  
6. The firefighter will enter the training fire room as instructed by standard fi re department  
protocol for the standard period of time for participation in the training fire.  Following cessation of the training fire , the subjects will follow their standard fire department 
procedures  for post -fire treatment  (rehab) .   
7. The UA study team will remove the personal air monitor from the firefighter’s turnout jacket 
(if applicable) .The firefighters will remove their turnout gear at this time. The heart rate/core 
body temperature monitor data recorder will be transferred from the turnout jacket inner pocket to a pants pocket.  A dermal wipe  (a gauze pad moistened with  alcohol)  of the left 
calf, arm, and neck will be obtained prior to cleaning their skin with  their standard rehab 
baby wipes (part of the standard fire department procedures for post- fire treatment.)  
8. (For Stage 2 fires only)  The subjects will then be rando mized to either an infrared sauna 
treatment , or no additional treatment  following their fire department protocols.   The 
firefighters will be randomized by the UA study team as such:  Firefighters will pull a piece of paper out of a helmet; i f it says “saun a” they will participate in the sauna treatment.  If it is 
blank, they will participate in no additional  post -fire treatment.  “Sauna treatment” consists 
of a firefighter enter ing the sauna for 20 minutes as soon as the fire department  has 
completed their standard rehab .  
 
9. Following the sauna treatment or no additional treatment time period, dermal wipes of the left calf, arm, and neck will be repeated and the subjects wil l complete a survey  and return to 
work. The dermal wipe samples will be transported under Arizona D epartment of 
Transportation guidelines for transportation of samples to the University of Arizona.  
 
10. Core temperature and heart rate will continue to  be monitored for up to 8 hours after 
training scenario.  At the end of the 8 hour period, the firefighter w ill turn the monitor off  by 
pressing the “stop” button and the “On/Off” button.   
 
11. The subjects will collect all their urine after the fire training for a period of up to 12 hours  in 
the same manner that urine was collected prior to the fire training .  
 
12. End of sampling period: At the end of the sampling period, the UA study team will, again, 
meet the firefighters at the f ire d epartment to collect the data recorder/heart rate monitor 
data recorder, Polar Heart Rate belt, and urine samples.  
 
13. The u rine will be stored at the Medical Research Building at - 80 deg C until analyzed for 
urinary PAH metabolites and potentially other toxicants from the fire, and, dependent on the available budget, similar evaluations may be carried out on the skin wipes.  T he core 
 
 
 
 
   Page 8 of 11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              temperature and heart rate data will be downloaded from the data recorder onto a password 
protected computers and will be analyzed for comparison to  the pre -fire data .  The personal 
air monitors will be downloaded in the same manner and analyzed fo r air quality.  
 
  We would like to take pictures during the activities such as wearing the monitors, performing skin wipes, going into or coming out of the training fires or sauna, including cleaning up gear, for possible 
use in manuscripts, presentations,  posters, and/or brochures to present a visual description of the 
activities involved in the training fire study.  The subjects will be asked to agree or decline being in 
photos.  
Specific Sampling Protocols for Stage 1 and Stage 2 training fires:  
Urine sampling: before and after the fire:  
For each urine sample collected, the total amount of each voided sample will be collected in a 200ml sample collection container and stored in a n ice chest until picked up by the UA study team.  The 
subjects will collect all their urine after the fire training for a period of up to 12 hours in the same manner as they collected their urine prior to the fire training.   
Core body/heart rate monitoring before and after the fire : 
The monitor that records their core temperature and heart rate is a small instrument, approximately 
the size of a double deck of playing cards (3/4” x 1 ¾” x 4 ¾”) in a fabric protective pouch that can be worn on a belt or placed into a jacket pocket.  The monitor will be turned on before the firefighte r 
enters the training room fire and not turned off until up to 8 hours after the fire . 
The hear t rate belt is a 3/4“ strap (T31 Polar Transmitter) that is worn around the body in the chest 
height area. It will be donned by the firefighter before the monitor  is turned on and not removed 
until the monitor is turned off.  
Monitoring of the core body temperature and the heart rate by the UA study team begins before the fire and continues for up to 8 hours after the fire so that a comparison between the standard p ost-
fire and the sauna post- fire methods can be compared for core body temperature return to normal 
and heart rate return to normal.  
Dermal wipes: before and after the fire:  
Dermal wipes are 2x4” alcohol wipes.  They will be collected by the UA study team from the right calf, right arm, and right neck before the firefighter dons turnout gear (before entering the training room fire.)  To collect the samples, the UA study team member will gently wipe the area of the right calf (midway between the back of the knee and the heel) in a 2x4” rectangle gently but firmly in 2 up and down wiping directions.  This process will be repeated on the opposite calf, arm, and neck after the fire when the firefighter removes the turnout gear  and before the firefighter wipes hi s skin off 
with the standard rehab baby wipes , and again right after exit from the sauna (if in the sauna 
treatment group) or at the same time post -fire (if in the standard treatment group— the no -sauna 
group.)   
 
9) Cost to subjects   
 
 
 
 
   Page 9 of 11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              There will be no monetary  cost to the subjects.  The f ire d epartment has given their support for the  
time required to recruit and consent firefighters individually.  The department has also given support 
for allowing the firefighters the time to participate in the research portions of the training exercise.  
 
 
10) Risks to subjects  
• Biological and Air Sampling:  There is no risk to the firefighter to self- collect urine samples or skin 
wipes, or to wearing a personal air monitor.  
 
• Survey:  There are no known risks with filling out survey questions; the firefighters will be informed 
that any section can be left unanswered if unknown or stressful.  Individual participant’s answers to 
the questions will not be made available to the fire department.   
 
• Flashover or Burn Room Training :  The fire training itself is a part of the job and is a continuing 
education event re quired by fire department for active firefighters .  According to NFPA (National Fire 
Protection Agency) 1001, fire department s must develop recurring proficie ncy cycles for fighting 
structure fires with the goal of preventing skill degradation and potential for injury and death of members and an annual skill check to verify minimum professional qualifications of its members.  The firefighter may be required by the fire department to have training in the burn room and/or 
flashover training. If the firefighter is not scheduled for a specific training, the fire department will 
not schedule them.  As documented in the supporting letter  from the fire department, ther e is no risk 
to the firefighter’s job for not participating in the study.   
 
• Infrared Sauna:  No adverse effects have been reported with infrared saunas  
 
• Core Body Temperature/Heart Rate monitoring:  In accordance with the CorTemp User Manual, page 6, use of the CorTemp ingestible temperature sensor is contraindicated for the following condi tions:  
• In any subject whose body weight is less than eighty (80) pounds.  
• In the presence of any known or suspected obstructive disease of the gastrointestinal tract, inc luding but not limited to diverticulitis and inflammatory bowel disease.  
• In any subject exhibiting or having a history of disorders or impairment of the gag reflex.  
• In any subject with previous gastrointestinal surgery.  
• In any subject having felinization * of the esophagus.  
• In any subject who might undergo Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR)/Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) scanning during the period that the CorTemp Core Body Temperature Sensor is within the body.  
• In any subject with hypomotility disorders of the gastrointestinal tract, including but no limited to ileus.  
• In any subject having a cardiac pacemaker or other implanted electromedical device.  
 
*Felinization =Transient transverse folds of the esophageal mucosa as seen by barium 
esophagography and on endoscopic examination have been termed “ felinization .” This finding has 
been considered a normal variant or has been associated with reflux esophagitis. No symptoms have 
been associated with its presence.  
 
 
 
 
 
   Page 10 of 11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Additionally, the CorTemp Core Body Temperature Sen sor may not be appropriate in individuals who 
have experienced swallowing disorders.  If an individual experiences difficulty swallowing the sensor, 
they may not be a candidate for the study.  
 The minimal risk will be mitigated by having all participants c omplete a contraindications form at the 
time of consenting and then reviewing their fo rm prior to swallowing the pill.  Any firefighter who 
indicates they suffer from one or more of the contraindications will be excluded from the study.  The contraindications form has been clinically verified by Dr. Jeff Burgess and found to be an adequate 
screening tool to ensure the safety of study participants.  Additionally, if any participants experience 
difficulty swallowing the sensor, they will be excluded from the study.  
 
11) Potential benefits to subjects  and/or society  
There is no direct benefit to the participants in this study.  However, there are very few studies to 
actually monitor a firefighters core body temperature in a post -fire sauna detoxification period.  T his 
study is expected to aid in a better understanding if infrared sauna treatment reduces absorbed toxicants from the fire and if it results in an increased core body temperature.  
 
12) Provisions to protect the privacy of subjects  and the confidentiality of data  
a. Protection of subject privacy : Subjects will be consented individually, under private conditions.  
Fire department officers responsible for scheduling training fires will have access to a list of 
firefighters who consented to participate in the study so that they may be efficiently scheduled for the training fires.  
In order to protect the privacy of participants, the consent forms, and contraindication forms will be accessible only to the UA study team.  When not in use, they will be kept in a locked drawer in the Medical Research Building, Lab 130.   Urine samples and skin wipes will be identified only by a subject ID number and whether baseline or post -fire collections.  Survey answers, personal air 
monitors, and the core body temperature/he art rate data downloaded will be identified by subject 
ID number only.   
b. Protection of data confidentiality : As described above, all personally identifiable information will 
either be kept in a locked cabinet or on a password protected computer.  The final  report to fire 
department and any manuscripts or publications will contain aggregate and statistical representation 
of the study population.  If pertinent to discuss individual results in the report, random anonymous numbers (subjected ID numbe rs) will be assigned to each study participant and any results discussing 
individuals will be referenced by such an anonymous identifier.   
 
13) Subject compensation  
Subjects will not be compensated.  
14) Medical care and compensation for injury  
There are no funds  set aside for injury to the subjects.  If the subject suffers an injury from 
partic ipating in this study, they are advised in the consent form to seek treatment and that the 
University of Arizona has no funds set aside for the payment of treatment expense s for this study .  
 15) Monitoring for subject safety  
 
 
 
 
   Page 11 of 11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              The fire department’s  training fire is a required training exercise, but the research concerns the 
comparison of the post -fire sauna treatment versus the standard (no -sauna) treatment post -fire.  The 
data from the core body temperature/heart rate monitor data recorder will be downloaded within 48 
hours and examined for excessive core body temperature rise (above 102 Deg F) by the PI, Dr. Jeff 
Burgess.   The firefighter, after exiting the sauna, will have blood pressure pu lse readings taken and 
documented as part of the fire department ’s post -fire treatment protocols.   Firefighters who do not 
participate in the sauna treatment will be monitored and the data downloaded in a likewise time period, but the data will not be examined by Dr. Bu rgess until the data are analyzed by statistical 
methods as the standard treatment is not being changed by the study from what the fire department  
normally performs on its firefighters during their normal annual fire training exercises.   
 16)  Withdrawal of subjects  
It wi ll be made clear to the firefighters that their participation is voluntary and that  they may 
withdraw on their own volition at any time.  It is not anticipated that the PI or other UA study team members  will have to withdraw a subject after the consent and  verification of the contraindication 
form.  However, there is potential that the firefighter may become  not medically fit for duty for an 
unrelated reason between the consenting and sampling period.  This situation would result in the subject being withdr awn from the study.   
 In addition, in order to adequately achieve the end total of up to 24 firefighter participating in the 
Stage 2 exercise, it may become imperative to consent more than 2 4 firefighters.  When the time is 
reached that 2 4 firefighters ha ve been evaluated for the Stage 2 training fire testing, additional 
testing of firefighters who consented but haven’t been tested will be stopped and the untested 
firefighters will be withdrawn from the study.   
 
17) Sharing of results with subjects   
Firefight ers will not be given individual results to the urine analysis for PAHs, their dermal wipe 
analyses, nor their core body/heart rate data analysis, nor any comparison of their individual survey results to the other firefighters in the study.  However, aggre gate results will be shared with the f ire 
department, a report will be prepared for distribution via the f ire department newsletter, and 
potential manuscripts, publications or Power Points may be prepared for presentation at meetings 
and c onferences.  
18) Future use and long -term storage of data or specimens  
Urine samples will be stored by subject ID number and baseline or post- fire sampling methods until 
the end of the study or longer, if space is available for storage.  Subjects will be asked if their samples can be used for other testing during the consenting process.   We have no immediate plans for future 
research for the stored urine or dermal samples, but if there are samples remaining after the pilot study urine or dermal analysis is complete, we will store the samples in accordance with the selection chosen by the subject in the consent form.   Data from the core body temperature analysis 
will be kept indefinitely for future firefighter related occupational toxic chemical, heat, or infrared  
exposure research  