1   
 
PROTOCOL  
 
 
 
 
NANOPULSE  SEBORRHEIC KERATOSIS STUDY  
(NP-SK-002) 
 
 
 
March  17, 2017  
Rev. 4/17/17  
Rev. 4/ 28/17 
Rev. 7/14/17  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2   
 
BACKGROUND  
The Pulse TX is  a medical  device  intended  to clear  the skin of benign,  
undesired  skin lesions  as an alternative  to surgery  and other  more  ablative  
methods  for removing  benign  lesions . The system  is designed  to deliver  a 
timed  series  of very low energy , high voltage  (lesser than  the voltage  of static  
electricit y) pulses  of a time length  between  100 and 750 nanoseconds  
(billionths )    of a second . The non-thermal  effect  on tissue takes  place  in a 
very shallow  depth  of skin directly  below  the sterile  treatment  tip. The device  
emits  significantly  less energy  than existing  laser, electro -surgery  or electro -
cautery  equipment . 
 
Extensive  in vitro  research  demonstrates  a stimulation  of a programmed cell  
death  called  apoptosis  in a treated  area, which  is one of the presumed  
mechanisms  for observations of clinical  and histologic  changes  t o  c e l l s  in 
multiple studies of in-vivo treated  tissue.  In animal  studies  with over 1000  rats 
and mice , nano -pulsed  devices  have  been  demonstrated  to reduce  or 
eliminate  b e n i g n  tumors  with a c lin ic a lly  acceptable  margin  of safety.  
A pilot clinical  trial was conducted  under  IRB oversight  in 2012  with a similar  
version  of the Pulse TX  device,  with the findings  published  in Experimental  
Dermatology.  (See  Attachment  A) A total of ten basal  cell carcinomas  on 
the skin of three  Subjects  were  treated with a range  of settings.  Seven  of 
the ten lesions  were  free of basal  cells at the conclusion  of the study , two 
partially  resolve d, and one recurre d. No scars  were  visible  at the healed  
sites of any of the successfully  treated  lesions.  
 
PRIOR CLINICAL  INVESTIGATIONS  
Study Name:   NanoPulse  Human  Tissue  Study  
Study Number:   NP-ABD-001 
Device Named:   Pulse  TX System  
PI Name:    David Kaufman, MD  
Co PI:    Michele Martinez, RN  
Study Dates:   November 2016 to January 2017  
 
A total of seven subjects participated in this prospective, single site, non -
randomiz ed study.  All  of the participants were females representing several 
Fitzpatrick Skin Tone Classifications , and ranging from the low 40’s to middle 
60’s in age.   
 
3   
 
The study  was comprised  of two sequential  segments.  The first segment called  
for the serialized  use of  the test device  in specific  locations  on intact  abdominal  
skin predetermined  to be resected  during  a standard  abdominoplasty.  The 
primary  endpoint  of the first segment  of the study  was to establish  that the 
trauma  to the tested  skin would  be minimal.  The appearance  of each  intact  
tested tissue  location  was comparable  to that anticipated  following  any 
minor  surgical  insult.   
 
Lidocaine was injected prior to use of the Pulse TX  skin exposure .  Subjects 
reported little or no sensation during the treatment session. Subjects further 
reported little or no discomfort after the Lidocaine effect had diminished . There 
were no adverse events, no reports of bleeding, and no scarring noted by the 
investigator at the end of the 60 day study.  
 
The second  segment  of the study  called  for the histological  analysis  of 
tissue  samples  prepared  from the abdominal  section  that were  resected  at 
the time of the abdominoplasty.  Internal  and outside  expert  histologists  were 
consulted.  This second  segment  did not impact  the participating  subject.  
Consequently , Pulse  Biosciences , Inc. secured  IRB oversight  concentrated  on 
the first segment  of the study. It should be noted however that the histological 
analysis to date confirms that the Pulse TX was successful i n achieving its 
intended effect.   See Attachment B for a Summary Histological Report . 
 
PROPOSED SEBORRHEIC KERATOSIS STUDY  
Study Name:  Nanopulse  Seborrheic Keratosis Study   
Study Number:  NP-SK-002    
Device Named:  Pulse  TX System  
PI Name:   David Kaufman, MD  
PI Name:   James Newman, MD  
PI Name:   TBD 
Study Dates:  TBD   
 
PURPOSE  AND  SCOPE  OF THE STUDY  
The primary  purpose  of the study  is to evaluate the use of the Pulse TX System 
when used to remove Seborrheic Keratosis  (SK) lesions from  the non -facial 
areas of healthy  adult subjects.  These benign skin lesions are frequently 
located on the limbs and/or trunk and not considered to be pre -canc erous. 
Patients routinely seek their removal for cosmetic/aesthetic reasons.  SK 
lesions are typically treated using cryogen or a scalpel, or dessication with a 
4  heat-based energy technology such as a laser or electrosurgery.   SKs do not 
self-resolve without treatment.   
STUDY  OBJECTIVES  
The specific objectives of the study are as follows:  
 
• Document  the non -treated  appearance of  off-face SK’s 
• Evaluate  the clearanc e of SK’s in off -face locations after removal using 
the Pulse TX System vs. pretreated appearance of the same lesion  
• Evaluate  the clearance  of the treated SK ’s at various  points  in time over  
several  weeks following the initial procedure, compared to the pre -treated 
SK’s  
 
PRIMARY ENDPOINT  
• The primary endpoint of the study is the degree of clearing of benign  SK 
lesions as rated by the independent reviewer’s assessment of 
photographs of the lesions at the  final study visit.  
 
o A 4-point scale (0, 1, 2, 3) will be used wherein each lesion will be 
characterized as “Clear”, “Mostly Clear“, “Partially Clear”, “Not Clea r”.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
o See Attachment C for a protocol specific to the Independent Review.  
 
SECONDARY ENDPOINTS  
• A secondary endpoint of the study is the degree of clearing  by the final 
visit as rated by the treating physician’s assessment.  
 
o The same 4 -point scale will be used as that used for the Photographic 
Review.  Photographic Review of SK Lesions  
Rating Scale  
Clear  Mostly  
Clear  Partially Clear  Not  
Clear  
0 1 2 3 
Investigator Assessment of SK Lesions  
Rating Sc ale 
Clear  Mostly  
Clear  Partially Clear  Not  
5   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
• An additional secondary endpoint of the study is subject  satisfaction with 
the SK’s  area at the final study visit. A 5-point scale (0, 1, 2, 3 4) will be 
used wherein the Subject will be asked to rate their level of satisfaction 
with each SK area as “Satisfied”, “Mostly Satisfied”, “Partially Satisfied”, 
“Dissatisfied” Highly Dissatisfied”.  
 
Patient Satisfaction for ea ch SK area at day 106  
Satisfied  Mostly 
Satisfied  Partially 
Satisfied  Dissatisfied  Highly  
Dissatisfied  
(worse)  
0 1 2 3  
4 
 
SUCCESS CRITERIA  
• Independent Reviewer Assessment  of Photograph :  A score of “0” or 
“1” at the last follow -up will represent a successful outcome for that 
lesion.    The study will be considered a success if 65% of treated 
lesions are reduced by a score of 2 or more points on the lesion 
scale  
• Physician Assessment: A score of “0” or “1” at the last follow -up will 
represe nt a successful outcome for that lesion.   Success for this 
criteria is 65% of lesions rate d as a 0 or 1 on the scale.  
• Patient Assessment: A score of “0” or “1” at the last follow -up will 
represent a successful outcome for that lesion.   Success for this 
criteria will be 65% of lesion areas evaluated as “Satisfied” or “Mostly 
Satisfied”.  
• The overall study will be considered a success if 2 of the 3 criteria 
listed above are met.  
 Clear  
0 1 2 3 
6  STUDY  DESIGN  
A prospective, randomized, open label,  multi -site, NSR study  design  
where each subject serves as his or her own control will be employed.  A 
Principle Investigator will be identified at each of up to five participating sites.  A 
total of up to 60 Subjects will be consented and enrolled with anticipated 
enrollment expe cted to be uniformly distributed across sites. The PI will 
consider  the study  inclusion  and exclusion  criteria  and invite  appropriate 
patients  to participate  in the study.   
No significant  risk is posed  by either  the use of the Pulse  TX System  or 
the study  process. While safety  can never  be taken  lightly,  this study  is not 
meant  to measur e, monitor  or analyze  any significant  disease  or disorder for 
which medical treatment is mandatory . (See  additional  information regarding  
Non-Significant  Risk statement  in the following  pages .) 
 
ANALYTICAL METHODS  
Three sets of data will be analyzed:  
1. Clinical observational data as derived from the examinations.  
2. Data captured during the photograph review process.  
3. Patient self -reported symptoms and observational data.  
 
The statistical analysis for this single -arm NSR study will be performed after 
collection of safety, effectiveness and secondary outcomes during th e baseline 
period and each evaluation interval.  
  
• Analysis of primary endpoints in intent -to-treat population  
• Analysis of primary and secondary endpoints in the per protocol population  
• The calculation of the change from baseline in the treated lesion siz e and 
appearance will be adjusted by the observed effect on the untreated lesion 
change in size and appearance  
• Exploratory Data Analysis to describe distributions and to explore trending  
• Repeated measures ANOVA or non -parametric equivalent to compare 
means  
• Likelihood ratio statistics to assess categorical data  
• Chi-Square Tests to compare binary proportions  
• Exact probabilities will be computed for any inferential analysis performed  
• 95% confidence levels will be calculated using exact methods  
• Agreement statistics to estimate the inter - and intra -photographic reviewer 
variability  
• All analysis will be adjusted for the correlated nature of the data since more 
than one lesion is being sampled from the host subject  
 
7  All tables and listings will be produced and stored in SAS datasets.  No data 
imputations will be performed.  
 
SAMPLE SIZE ESTIMATE  
A one group 2 test with a 0.050 two -sided significance level will have 91% 
power to detect the difference between the Null h ypothesis proportion 0, of 
0.510 (51%) and the Alternative proportion, A, of 0.650 (65%) when the 
sample size is 135.  
DEVICE  DESCRIPTION  
The Pulse  TX System  consists  of an electrical  pulse  generator  (similar  to 
devices  used  to electro -coagulate  tissue)  combined  with a hand -piece  which  
is held by the clinician  during  application  of pulses  to the skin surface.  The 
hand -piece  is coupled  to a sterile , single  patient -use treatment  tip. The tip has 
an array  of pins no greater  than 1.27 mm in diameter  (18 gauge)  which  
penetrate the  skin between  1 and 3 mm. Power  settings  within  a minimum  
and maximum  range  are available  for selection  by the physicia n, and are 
software  limited  to defined setting for each treatment tip  by the sponsor . Once  
the electrical  pulse  generator  is turned  on and a power  setting  is selecte d, a 
foot switch  triggers  a sequence  of pre-programmed  electrical  pulses  to an 
area of skin directly  beneath  the treatment  tip.  
 
A common  commercially  available  sterile  coupling  gel is applied  to the skin 
or treatment  tip surface to  ensure  good  electrical  coupling  to the tissue . 
 
The three  system  components  are as follows : 
 
1. Pulse  Generator  including  a built-in touch  screen  for setting  selection,  
a power cord,  and a mandatory  foot pedal  for activation  of a pulsing  
sequence  
2. Hand -piece  (re-usable)  
3. Single  patient -use Tip (five different  versions  available,  described  
below)  
 
Pulse TX Graphic  
 
 
LCD touch  screen  
Handpiece  holder  
 
          Hand piece holder   
handpiece receptacle  

8   
 
Footswitch  connector   
Locking  brakes  
 
 
Figure 1.  Pulse generator  
Electrode Handpiece  
A reusable  handpiece  allows  the operator  to connect  the single -use patient  treatment  tip 
to the generator.  One end of the handpiece  connects  to the generator;  the other  end 
connects  to the treatment  tip. The handpiece  can be cleaned and after each use.  
 
Single -use Treatment Tip 
A sterile  single -use patient  Treatment T ip attaches  to the hand -piece.  The tip delivers  the 
nano  pulses  to the area to be treated  through an array of micro -needles.  Five tip sizes 
are available:  
• 2.5 mm x 2.5 mm Treatment tip  
• 5 mm x 5 mm Treatment Tip  
• 7.5 x 7.5 mm Treatment Tip  
• 10 mm x 10 mm Treatment Tip  
 
 
 
9  

 
10  SITE/INVESTIGATOR SELECTION   
Up to 5  study sites  will be selected to participate in the study.  Two of the five sites 
have been identified.  The additional sites have not  yet been  determined. The table 
below provides additional information  
 
NAME OF STUDY SITE  ADDRESS OF STUDY SITE  
Site 1: Aesthetic  Artistry  Surgical  
and Medical  Center  or AASMC  2220  E Bidwel l St  
Folsom , CA 95630  
T 916-983-9895  
David  Kaufman,  MD 
Michele Martinez, RN  2220  E Bidwel l St  
Folsom , CA 95630  
T 916-983-9895  
  
Site 2: Aesthetic Center   
James Newman, MD  
Melba Herrera, MD  1795 El Camino Real  
Palo Alto, CA 94306  
T 650 321 3223  
 
Same Investigators at alternate 
location  316 South Eldorado Street, Suite 105  
San Mateo, CA650 -340-7200  
T 650 321 3223  
  
  
TBD 
  
NAME OF STUDY MONITOR   
Pamela  M. Buckman,  MSN   
Consultant  , Pulse Biosciences  2800  Pleasant  Hill Rd., Suite  175 
Pleasant  Hill, CA 94523  
T  925 980 7007  
F  925 705 7381  
pmbuckman@gmail.com  
 
Site #1 above will be the first to initiate the study.  This site and the Investigators have 
been approved by BioMed for a study that is currently open but not active. The required  
forms  and information  about  subsequent sites and Investigators  will be provided to 
BioMed  prior to any study related activities at the site in questions.  Prior  to enrolling  
a Subject at any particular site the investigator  and appropriate  members  of the study  
team  at that site will participate  in a comprehensive  training  program  designed  by 
Pulse . 
 
 
11  SUBJECT  RECRUITMENT  AND  SELECTION  
Convenience sampling will be used to enroll s ubjects  exclusively  from the patient  
population  at each of the sites . The planned  enrollment  is set at up to 15  subjects  
at each site  for a total of 60.  Recruitment  will be conducted  via direct  communication  
between potential Subjects with each PI and/or  the designated  staff.    
 
The invitation to participate  will be extended  to those  patients  who are known or 
present with SK lesions that they individually choose to have removed . The Informed 
Consent  discussion  and signature  process  will be conducted  by the PI  and/or  the 
designated  staff.  Once  consented , each  Subject  will be assigned  a unique Study  
Identification  Number.   See Attachment D for statistical discussion and analysis of 
proposed Subject population.  
 
Recruitment  Statement   
If recruitment is not adequate to meet the study requirements, a counter card or other 
media format may be used.  Se e Attachment D for a proposed recruitment statement . 
The study  Inclusion  and Exclusion  criteria  are noted  below . 
 
Inclusion  Criteria:     
• Willing  to sign the informed  consent  
• Males  or females  
• At least  18 years  of age but less than 65 years  of age 
• Has a clinical diagnosis of stable, clinically typical seborrheic keratosis  
• Medically  determined  candidate  for at least 4 off-face SK lesion s 
• Must have at least four treatable SK’s and be willing to have Pulse TX 
treatments on any three of the four treatable SK’ s. Treatable SK’s must :  
• be at least 1 mm in height, and no greater than 3 mm in height.   
• not have a dimen sion perpendicular to the longest dimension of 
greater  than 7.5mm  or longer in any dimension than 20mm. . 
• Willing  to have  three of the designated SK’s treated  in a single treatment 
session  
• Willing  to return  to the PI’s  office  for five additional  study  visits  at specified 
intervals over 106 days  
• Agrees to  high resolution photos of both the treated SK lesions and the 
untreated SK  lesion   
• No subject identity will be possible via the “lesion -only” photograph  
• Has no evidence  of active  infection  in the designated  tissue  prior to treatment  
 
12  • Is not allergic  to Lidocaine  or Lidocaine -like products  
• Not pregnant or lactating  
• In the investigator s’ opinion, be in good general health and unlikely subject to 
risks from treatment  
 
Exclusion  Criteria:  
• Implantable  electronic  devices.  e.g., automatic  defibrillator  
• Active  infection  or history  of infection  within  90 previous  days  in designated  
test area 
• Not willing  or able to sign the Informed  Consent  
• Non English  speaking  or reading  
• Is known  to be immune -compromised  
• Known to be keloid producer  
• On blood  thinning  medications  
• Disease s, conditions,  or situations  wherein  PI judges  that the patient  is 
not appropriate  for participation  in the study  
 
NON  SIGNIFICANT  RISK  STATEMENT  
The proposed  study  fits the criteria  for a non-significant designation  for the 
following reasons:  
• Subjects  will be recruited  for the study  strictly  on a voluntary  basis  
• Participation  in the study  takes  approximately  1 hour for the first 
treatment visit and 3 0 minutes for  each  of the five post treatment 
evaluation visits , which include s photographs of both treated and control 
lesion(s)   
• Localized  anesthesia  will be used  to control  discomfort  at the time of 
the test device  application . 
• After  the test device  is deployed  and the anesthesia  is dissipated, there  
may be mild, localized  discomfort  at the  site of the treatment . A small  
scab  or crust  may develop . This occurrence  is transient  and should  
resolve  without intervention.  
• Transient and minor discomfort at the treated site and appearance of a 
small scab typically occurs when other standard treatments are used, i.e., 
cryogen to remove SK’s. Use of the Pulse TX does not raise any additional 
concerns  compared to current methods of lesion removal  
• There  is no loss of privacy  as no study  records  will be viewed  or retrieved  
by anyone  other  than the study  team  members . 
 
13  • Protected  information  will not be captured  
• Subjects  are protected  by a coding  system  to de-identify  them  
 
STUDY  PROCEDURE  
The following  is an example  of the Subject  related  activities  to be 
completed  for each  Subject  in the study . The exact  order  may differ  
depending  on Subject/Pl  schedules  and preferences.  
 
Activities  prior to or on same day as study  enrollment  and occur on same 
day as treatment visit : 
• evaluation for Inclusion/Exclusion criteria  
• sign the consent  form prior to any study  activities  
• receive  a copy  of the signed  consent  form 
 
Activities  on 1st Study  Visit Day 
• Four SK’s are selected  that meet the study criteria  for treatable SK’s .  If 
more than four lesions are present, the patient can state a preference for 
which 4 lesions are included in the study  
• Photographs of each of the four selected SK’s  will be taken pri or to 
anesthesia or treatment  
• Local  anesthesia  w i l l  b e  applied  to the four selected  SK’s.   
• Using a randomization method, exactly  three of the selected SK’s will be  
designated to be  treated and one will be designated as a n untreated  
control   
• The test device  will be deployed  to the selected SK's  according to the 
randomized order  
• a light bandage  will be applied  
• Subject  will be discharged  
 
Activities  on 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th and 6th Study  Visit Days  
• Photographs of each of the 3 treat ed lesions and one non-treated  lesion 
will be taken  
• Each lesion will be clinically assessed and the  appearance will be rated  
according to specified criteria .  
• Any adverse events will be identified  and documented.  
 
 
 
14  RANGE  OF DAYS  FOR  STUDY  VISIT  INTERVALS  
STUDY  VISITS  TARGET  VISIT  DATES  VISIT  DATE  RANGES  
1 Treatment Day  NA 
2 1 week  post TX  7 to 9 days post TX  
3 1 month  post TX  28 to 35 days post TX  
4 60 days post TX  50 to 60 days post TX  
5 90  post TX  80 to 90 days post TX  
6 106 days post  100 to 111 days post  
 
SUBJECT  COMPENSATION  
Each  subject  will be compensated  for any inconvenience  that study  participation 
may represent.  Specifically,  each  patient  will make  6 total visits to the surgeon's  
office  (approximately 4  hrs. total time) .  In return  for this time commitment,  the patient 
will receive $200 for the treatment visit, $100 for each of the 5 follow up visits and $400 
bonus for  completing all of the scheduled visits.  The total amount of compensation will 
be $1,100.  
 
STUDY  BENEFITS  
A volunteer for the proposed study is someone  who has elected removal of benign 
lesion (s).  Such lesions are typically removed via cryogen or a scalpel. Participation  in 
the study  offers another technique to accomplish the same thing  as the typical tools .  
Experience with the Pulse TX to date offers some confidence that the lesions will be 
succes sfully removed although no assurances will be offered. The information  learned 
may contribute  to the ultimate  use of a more  safe and effec tive device  available  
to ablate  tissue  in future  patients.  
 
STUDY /DEVICE  RISKS  
The Investigators  for the study  are experienced  physicians . Use of the Pulse  TX 
System  poses  very minimal  risk, including  scabbing , minor skin pigment changes or 
scarring  and minor  discomfort  which  can be further  minimized  by covering  the spot 
with a small  bandage.  Typical  wound  complications  such  as infection,  bleeding  and 
discomfort  which  requires  prescription  medication  for relief  are not anticipated.  If 
they should  occur  they would  be considered  an unanticipated  adverse  event  and 
managed  as such. If the Subject  has any questions  or concerns  about  their medical  
condition  or if an unforeseen  event  should  occur  the subject  will be advised  to 
contact the PIs or their designate.     
 
 
15  SITE  TRAINING  PLANS  
Training  to be conducted  can be divided  into two  pertinent  categories.  First is training  
on use of the Pulse  TX System  from a technical  and clinical  perspective.  The PIs 
and their designated assistants will  be instructed  in aspects  of set up, application , 
management  and maintenance  of the Pulse  TX System.  Those  persons  conducting  
the training  will be Pulse  Bioscience  technical  experts  in this area of expertise.  A 
select  group  of these  experts  will be present  during  the testing  sessions  to provide  
support  as needed . Training  will include  a dry run. The second  category  is training  
in the clinical  study  requirements  and processes.  The study  team  members  at the 
Study  Site will be trained  via the pertinent  documents  and files as well as the planned  
logistics  to perform  the study  according  to the protocol  and applicable  IRS, GCP  and 
Pulse  requirements.  
 
INSTITUTIONAL  REVIEW  BOARD  OVERSIGHT  
The following  Institutional  Review  Board  will be asked  to review  and approve  the 
proposed  study : 
 
Biomedical  Research  Institute  of America  
P.O. Box 600870  
San Diego, CA 92160   
T - 619 282 9997  
F - 619 282 9998  
 
If the Subject  has any questions  or concerns  about  the study  process , they will be 
advised  to contact  Biomed  at 619-282-9997  
 
 
 
STUDY  MANAGEMENT  AND  MONITORING  PLAN  
Pulse  Bioscience s, and/or  their designated  representatives  are solely  responsible  for 
the proposed  study .  Pulse  will take the necessary  steps  to assure  that the study  is 
conducted  in accordance  with all regulating  authorities  as well as applicable  
Standard  Operating  Procedures . The Study  Monitor will  oversee  the conduct  of the 
study  on a continual  basis . Minimal  Monitoring  visits  will be conducted  at the 
following  intervals:  Site Qualification  Visit, Study  Initiat ion Visit, Interim  Study  Visit and  
Study  Close -Out Visit.  
 
 
 
 
16   
ATTACHMENT A  
 
ARTICLE REPRINT  
 
NUCCITELLI 
ARTICLE.pdf
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
17   
ATTACHMENT B  
 
HISTOLOGY REPORT  
  
 
18  A Summary Histology Report of a Dose Ranging Study of Nano -Pulsed Cell 
Stimulation in a Pre -Excised Human Tissue Model  
 
Microscopic samples of abdominal tissue from seven subjects treated with a novel non -
thermal energy device that delivers short low energy pulses to a controlled tissue 
volume have been reviewed in a detailed histologic analysis.  The treatment intervals 
of the targeted normal abdominal tissue ranged from 10 hours to 60 days prior to a 
previously scheduled abdominoplasty procedure in which the treated tissue was 
demarcated six months prior to excision.   Six treatment energy levels are reviewed per 
patient per time interval.   Various tissue staining techniques intended to identify 
specific cellular changes and tissue morphology were utilized in the histologic analysis 
to characterize the initial tissue responses and the subsequent recovery processes, 
and sequential findings for each of the six energy levels were compared to normal 
control punch biopsies in the same patient.  
 
Epidermal Changes :  Review of the changes of the entire thickness of the 
epiderm al/dermal layer and subcutaneous fat from day 1 through day 60 was 
performed.  The primary changes due to the non -thermal energy exposure were 
observed in the treated skin within the epidermal layer of skin.  At day one post -
treatment, tissue samples from all subjects showed evidence of “ghost cells” in the 
epidermal layer characterized by intact cell membranes and absence of nuclei within 
those cells, which indicates a non -viability of those cells.  The non -viability of epidermal 
cells was full -thickness a nd complete for all energy settings by 1 day post -treatment.  
In many patients, hair follicles and eccrine glands within the dermal layer of the skin 
were also visible for histologic review.  In specimens in which hair follicles and eccrine 
ducts were visi ble, there is partial (50%) to full necrosis of the upper portions of the hair 
follicles and eccrine ducts.  5 days post -treatment epidermal changes range from 50% 
to 90% healing (50% - 90% viable epidermal cells).  Hair follicles and eccrine ducts 
when vi sible in the tissue samples show focal dyskeratotic cells within the hair follicles 
at 5 and 15 days consistent with partial healing at 5 days and complete recovery by 15 
days.  Eccrine ducts often showed focal squamous metaplasia, a sign of re -
epitheliali zation.  By 15 days the epidermis layer had returned to normal in almost all 
cases.  By 60 days the epidermis, hair follicles, and eccrine glands had all completely 
returned to normal.  Of note in two patients treated at the highest energy level, 
epidermal  necrosis was followed by a formation of an inflammatory eschar.  This 
formation healed by 60 days with some epidermal flattening and minimal papillary 
dermal fibrosis.  
 
 
 
 
19  Alterations of dermal collagen :  Alterations in the dermal collagen observed were 
minimal, with no evidence of thermal injury.  In several tissue samples exposed to 
treatment levels five and six, there was focal papillary dermal necrosis evident.  This 
effect was observed at the 1 day and 5 day intervals, but was not observed at the 15 -
60 day intervals.  In two patients at treated at the highest energy level, there was some 
parallel fibrosis of the dermal collagen bundles at 60 days.  
 
Elastic tissue staining :  Elastic tissue remained in tact in the vast majority of patients.  
In treatment levels 4, 5 and 6 there was occasional slight decrease in elastic fiber noted 
in earlier specimens, at days 1, 5 and 15, with return of elastic fibers observed by days 
30 and 60.  Taken in summary with t he results of the trichrome collagen stain, these 
findings indicate relative minimal effects on the dermis. This predicts a very low risk of 
scarring. The risk is greatest in treatment level 6.  
 
Melanocytic density :  The number of melanocytes was observed using a MITF 
immunostain.  Staining for melanocytes shows a marked loss of melanocytes in the 
treatment areas at day one.  By day 15 the number of melanocytes return to normal 
density, comparable to the control specimens.  This was observed through 60 days .  
The rapid return of the melanocytic density to levels comparable to control should be 
consistent with a relative normalization of skin pigmentation over time  
 
Dermal fibroblasts :  The number of dermal fibroblasts appear to decrease at day 1 
and day 5.  However, by day 15, 30 and 60 the number of dermal fibroblasts was 
equivalent to pretreatment samples.  This suggests a temporary decrease in the 
number of dermal fibroblasts after treatment and possibly some loss of dermal 
fibroblasts secondary to the tre atment.  However, fibroblasts are recruited from normal 
surrounding skin and peripheral circulation and the population of fibroblasts returned 
to levels similar to the control in the 15 -60 day time period. This finding suggests a 
recovery of fibroblasts an d the associated normal capacity to rebuild connective tissue.  
 
Apoptosis :  Measurement of epidermal Caspace staining was performed using 
immune -histochemical stains to active Caspace 3. This analysis shows no significant 
expression within the epidermis in  the 1 and 5 day post -treatment time frames tested.  
These findings do not provide clear evidence of apoptotic cell death during the 
analyzed time frames.   Therefore, the precise mechanism for the observation of “ghost 
cells” and associated cell death was  not identifiable by this method.  
 
 
 
 
 
20  Inflammation : Overall, the degree of dermal inflammation was minimal compared to 
other thermal or physical methods of intentionally damaging surface epidermal tissue.  
There is a small amount of inflammation seen at da y 1 and day 5, however the amount 
of inflammation appears to be sparse and perivascular.  Of note, there were several 
samples which showed focal perivascular inflammation with fibrin deposition 
suggestive of low grade vascular damage.  This can be seen at day 5 through day 60.  
This appeared to have no clinical correlation to degree of epidermal necrosis or impact 
on healing.  
 
Summary :  The novel method of using low energy nano -pulse cellular stimulation on 
skin and subcutaneous tissue at six different ener gy settings was observed to lead to 
a predictable loss of the epidermal layer of skin at all energy levels by one day 
posttreatment.  The lack of observed effect on dermal collagen suggest that the effect 
is non -thermal, with a relatively low level of infl ammation given the amount of epidermal 
damage.    This lack of inflammatory effect is consistent with preservation of fibroblasts, 
elastin, and melanocyte recovery.  The transient effect on deeper cellular structures in 
the dermis suggest an affinity of na nopulse energy for highly cellular tissue, and a 
sparing effect on the less cellular connective tissue of the collagen layer . 
 
Author Information  
 
Darius Mehregan, MD  
Pinkus Dermatopathology Laboratory  
Hermann Pinkus, Chairman, Dept. of Dermatology  
Wayne S tate University  
1314 North Macomb St.  
Monroe, MI 48162  
T 734 242 6870  
F 734 242 4962  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21  ATTACHMENT C  
 
INDEPENDENT PHOTOGRAPHIC REVIEW  
 
 
 
 
  
 
22  INDEPENDENT PHOTOGRAPHIC REVIEW  
STUDY PROTOCOL  
BACKGROUND  
The NanoPulse System  is a medical  device  intended  to create a controlled non -
thermal reduction or clearing of targeted tissue areas  as an alternative  to excisional 
surgery  and other  more  thermally ablative  methods  for removing  undesired tissue 
or cells . The system  deployed  in the study  is designed  to deliver  a timed  series  of 
very low energy , high voltage  (similar  to the voltage  of static  electricit y) pulses  of a 
time length  between  100 and 750 nanoseconds  (billionth s) of a second.  The non-
thermal  effect  takes  place  in a shallow  depth  of tissue  directly  below  the sterile  
treatment  tip. The device  emits  significantly  less energy  than other currently used  
electro -surgery  or electro -cautery  equipment.   
 
In several well -designed animal studies , nano -pulsed  devices  have  been  
demonstrated  to reduce  or eliminate  skin tumors  with an acceptable  margin  of 
safety.  An NSR  pilot clinical  trial was conducted  under  IRB oversight beginning  in 
2012  with a similar  version  of the Nano  Pulse  device .  A total of ten basal  cell 
carcinomas  on the skin of three  Subjects  were  treated with controlled energy 
settings with a varying number of pulses.  Seven  of the ten treated areas  were  free of 
basal  cells at the conclusion  of the study,  two partially  resolve d, and one recurre d. 
No scars  were  visible  at the healed  sites of any of the successfully  treated  basal 
cell carcinomas.  
 
A Human Tissue Study was conducted in late 2016 to early 2017 for the primary 
purpose of collecting biopsied samples of human tissue that had been tested with 
controlled exposures to the NanoPulse System at varying energy levels and number 
of pulses, and f ollowed at 5 standardized time intervals up to 60 days.  This single site 
study enrolled 5 Subjects who were previously identified candidates for 
abdominoplasty.  Each Subject provided 30 treated areas to be biopsied.  
 
A  Photographic Review Study was perf ormed including images of 150 non -thermal 
lesions  that were created among the enrolled Subjects. For each of these 150 lesion s, 
specific characteristics associated with normal wound healing were evaluated and 
rated according to a predetermined scale.   This Photographic Review Study was 
executed according to a comprehensive Protocol including Pre Training and followed 
by Intra - and Inter -rater analysis.  The described Independent Photographic Review 
Study serves as a model for the proposed Photographic R eview SK Study.  
 
 
 
 
23  PURPOSE  of the PHOTOGRAPHIC REVIEW  
 
The independent review of the lesions photographed at each evaluation interval is 
being conducted to standardize the interpretation of the lesion clearance and 
appearance over time. The centralized independent review of the photographs can 
also reduce potential  bias in these types of c linical trials  where the assessment of the 
images can be  subjective . Ensuring consistency and lack of bias is a critical issue for 
the Sponsor and FDA. The image acquisition and interpretation protocols help 
standardize the process across the clinical site s. A central review allows an auditable, 
rigorous, and uniform process of evaluation , thus  achieving higher confidence in the 
integrity of the data.  
 
OBJECTIVES and SUCCESS CRITERIA  
1st objective is to confirm that reported ratings are reproducible over time when 
considering one reviewer’s ratings at two different times so the agreement between the 
two time intervals should be at least 80%  
 
2nd objective is to confirm that reported ratings are reproducible when considering 
responses among 3 reviewer’s rat ings when each is compared to the other two so the 
agreement between and among the reviews should be at least 80%  
 
REVIEWER SELECTION  
 Not affiliated with the study  
2-3 reviewers  qualified by experience with evaluating skin lesions and wound 
healing  
Multiple  locations  
Independent of each other  
 
PHOTOGRAPH SELECTION & SET UP  
• For each lesion in each of the 60 patients, five post -treatment photos of that 
lesion will be printed in a randomized order, along with an identified baseline 
photograph of that s ame lesion.  Consistent standard of  photographic analysis 
to select all images to be reviewed at all time points  according to uniform criteria  
• Images will be masked to time interval, energy settings, size of treatment 
tip,and specific subject identifiers.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
24  STUDY PROCESS  
MATERIALS NEEDED  
1.  Set of photographs (Training/Reference Set) to be given to each of 
the reviewers  
• One set of images representing each  SK lesion rating 
option and labeled with the rating it represents  
• One set of images representing  each of the skin 
characteristics to be rated  
• Narrative description of each of the rating options  
• No time intervals displayed  
• No energy settings displayed  
 
2.  Set of phot ographs (Scoring Set) to be given to each of the reviewers  
• Images are restricted to those taken at each of the visit 
intervals i.e., 7 days , 30 days, 60 days, 90  days and 106 
days  post initial treatment  
• Images do not include those displayed in Training Set  
• Narrative description of each of the rating options  
• No time intervals displayed  
• No energy settings displayed  
 
3.  Set of photographs ( V/V Set) to be given to each of the reviewers  
• Redistribute, rearrange images for at least 50% of the 
randomly ch osen images  
• Renumber image identifiers  
 
REVIEWER TRAINING  
The training session may be done in person or via use  of electronic 
communication and media formats.  Steps to be taken for the training 
session are as follows:  
• Send Training/Reference Set of images to reviewer  
• Set up telephone training session (options: Go to Meeting or similar).  
Should take about 15 -30 m inutes  
• Use c onsistent trainer for each reviewer session  
• Reviewer to keep Training/Reference Set of images to use as 
reference  during the Review session  
• Trainer to document time, date, location, attendees , communication 
format  and the topics discussed, etc.  
 
25  REVIEWER SESSION  
The Review session may be done in person or via use of electronic 
communication and media formats.  Steps to be taken for the Review 
Sessions are as follows:  
• Send Scoring Set of images to reviewer  
• Set up telephone call (options: Go to Me eting or similar). Should take 
about 10 minutes to assure understanding of process  
• Use c onsistent contact person for each reviewer call  
• Set up deadline date for completion of the review  
• Contact person to document time, date, loca tion, attendees, topics 
covered and communication format.  
• Instruct the Reviewer to return the Scored set of images  but retain 
the Training/Reference set  
VALIDATION SESSION   
The Validation session may be done in person or via use of electronic 
communication and media formats.  Steps to be taken for the Validation 
Sessions are as follows:  
• Send V & V Set  of images  to Reviewers  
• Set up telephone call (options: Go to Meeting or si milar). Should take 
about 10 minutes to assure understanding of process  
• Use c onsistent contact person for each reviewer call  
• Set up deadline date for completion of the review  
• Contact person to document time, date, location, attendees, topics 
covered, and c ommunication format.  
• Instruct the Reviewer to return all study materials  
NOTE:  Inter- and intra -rater reliability tests are done to confirm that…  
1.  a reviewer can look at the same image at two different times 
and consistently rate the characteristic in bot h instances. (Intra -
rater Reliability) and  
2. reviewers are in agreement with each other when they rate the 
same characteristics under the same circumstances and 
looking at the same images (Inter -rater Reliability)  
DATA MANAGEMENT  
All data captured for the Independent Photographic Review Study will b e entered into 
a database specifically designed for this study.   
 
 
 
26   
ATTACHMENT D 
 
RECRUITMENT STATEMENT  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
27   
RECRUITMENT STATEMENT  
 
 
Are you bothered by small dark spots on you r limbs or torso?  
 
Are the spots raised?  
 
Are there at least 4 spots?  
 
Would you like to have them removed?  
 
If you are a good candidate to have the spots removed , you may be eligible to 
participate in a scientific study.   
 
This clinical study provides financial compensation for study -qualified 
parti cipants.   
 
For more information about this study, please call our Patient Care Coordinator, 
xxxxxxx  at xxxxxxxxx .    
 
Study participation is limited.  
 
 