Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 16 -224 A(11)  
Approval date: 10 -Sep-2019  
Page  1 of 36  
 A Phase II Randomized  Trial of Intralesional Talimogene Laherparepvec 
(TALIMOGENE LAHERPAREPVEC)  with or without Hypofractionated  Radiotherapy 
for Cutaneous  Melanoma, Merkel Cell Carcinoma, or Other Solid Tumors  
PROTOCOL  FACE  PAGE  FOR 
MSK  THERAPEUTIC/DIAGNOSTIC  PROTOCOL  
 
Principal  Investigator/Department:  Christopher  Barker,  MD Radiation  Oncology  
Co-Principal 
Investigator(s)/Department : Simon N. Powell, MD, PhD 
Charlotte  E. Ariyan,  MD, PhD Radiation  Oncology 
Surgery  
Investigator(s)/Department:  Nancy Lee, MD 
Sean  McBride,  MD 
Nadeem  Riaz,  MD 
Boris Mueller, MD  
Borys  Mychalczak,  MD 
Daphna Gelblum, MD 
Melissa Zinovoy, MD 
Michael  Bernstein,  MD 
Atif Khan, MD  
Lior Braunstein,  MD 
Carla Hajj,  MD 
David  Guttmann,  MDDhwani 
Parikh, MD  
Justin Mann,  MD 
Ariel Marciscano,  MD 
Yao Yu, MD  
Neeta  Pandit -Taskar,  MD 
Sandra D’Angelo,  MD 
Chrisann Kyi, MD  
Mario  Lacouture,  MD 
Susan Seo, MD  
Dmitriy  Zamarin,  MD, PhD 
Alexander  N. Shoushtari,  MD 
Paul B. Chapman, MD 
Michael  Postow, MD 
Margaret Callahan, MD  
Jedd  D. Wolchok,  MD, PhD 
Parisa Momtaz, MD  
James  Harding,  MD 
Mimma  Errante,  NP 
Nana  Prempeh -Keteku,  NP 
Zhigang Zhang, PhD  
Dina Boulos,  RPh Radiation Oncology 
Radiation Oncology 
Radiation Oncology 
Radiation Oncology 
Radiation Oncology 
Radiation Oncology 
Radiation Oncology 
Radiation Oncology 
Radiation Oncology 
Radiation Oncology 
Radiation Oncology 
Radiation OncologyRadiation 
Oncology  
Radiation  Oncology 
Radiation  Oncology 
Radiation  Oncology 
Radiology  
Medicine 
Medicine 
Medicine 
Medicine 
Medicine 
Medicine 
Medicine 
Medicine 
Medicine 
Medicine 
Medicine 
Medicine 
Nursing 
Nursing  
Epidemiology  and Biostatistics 
Pharmacy  
Consenting 
Professional(s)/Departm ent: Christopher Barker, MD 
Simon  N. Powell, MD, PhD 
Nancy Lee, MD  
Sean  McBride,  MD 
Nadeem Riaz,  MD 
Boris Mueller, MD  
Borys  Mychalczak,  MD Radiation  Oncology 
Radiation  Oncology 
Radiation  Oncology 
Radiation  Oncology 
Radiation  Oncology  
Radiation  Oncology 
Radiation  Oncology  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 16 -224 A(11)  
Approval date: 10 -Sep-2019  
Page  2 of 36  
  
 Daphna Gelblum, MD 
Melissa Zinovoy, MD 
Michael  Bernstein,  MD 
Chiaojung  Jillian Tsai,  MD, PhD 
Tzu-I Jonathan Yang, MD  
Oren Cahlon, MD 
Beryl  McCormick,  MD 
Lior Braunstein, MD 
Atif Khan, MD  
Carla Hajj,  MD 
David  Guttmann,  MD 
Dhwani Parikh, MD 
Justin Mann,  MD 
Ariel Marciscano,  MD 
Yao Yu, MD  
Sandra  D’Angelo,  MD 
Chrisann Kyi, MD 
Mario Lacouture,  MD 
Susan Seo, MD  
Dmitriy  Zamarin,  MD, PhD 
Alexander  N. Shoushtari,  MD 
Paul B. Chapman, MD  
Jedd D. Wolchok, MD, PhD 
Michael A. Postow, MD 
Margaret  K. Callahan,  MD, PhD 
Parisa Momtaz, MD  
James  Harding,  MD 
Charlotte  E. Ariyan,  MD, PhD Radiation  Oncology 
Radiation  Oncology 
Radiation  Oncology 
Radiation  Oncology 
Radiation  Oncology 
Radiation  Oncology 
Radiation  Oncology 
Radiation  Oncology 
Radiation  Oncology 
Radiation  Oncology 
Radiation  Oncology 
Radiation  Oncology 
Radiation  Oncology 
Radiation  Oncology 
Radiation  Oncology 
Medicine  
Medicine 
Medicine 
Medicine 
Medicine 
Medicine 
Medicine 
Medicine 
Medicine 
Medicine 
Medicine 
Medicine 
Surgery  
Please  Note:  A Consenting  Professional  must have  completed  the mandatory Human 
Subjects Education and Certification Program . 
 
OneMSK  Sites  
Manhattan  
Westchester  
Monmouth,  NJ 
 
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
1275 York Avenue  
New York,  New York 10065  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 16 -224 A(11)  
Approval date: 10 -Sep-2019  
Page  3 of 36  
 Table  of Contents  
1.0 PROTOCOL  SUMMARY  AND/OR  SCHEMA  ................................ ................................ ..... 4 
2.0 OBJECTIVES  AND  SCIENTIFIC  AIMS  ................................ ................................ ..............  5 
3.0 BACKGROUND  AND  RATIONALE  ................................ ................................ ....................  6 
4.0 OVERVI EW OF STUDY  DESIGN/INTERVENTION  ................................ ..........................  10 
4.1 Design  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........................  10 
4.2 Intervention  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................  10 
5.0 THERAPEUTIC/DIAGNOSTIC  AGENTS ................................ ................................ ..........  11 
6.0 CRITERIA  FOR  SUBJECT  ELIGIBILITY  ................................ ................................ ..........  11 
6.1 Subject  Inclusion  Criteria  ................................ ................................ ...............................  11 
6.2 Subject  Exclusion  Criteria  ................................ ................................ ..............................  12 
7.0 RECRUITMENT  PLAN  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 12 
8.0 PRETREATMENT  EVALUATION ................................ ................................ .....................  13 
9.0 TREATMENT/INTERVENTION PLAN  ................................ ................................ ..............  13 
10.0 EVALUATION  DURING  TREATMENT/INTERVENTION ................................ ...................  17 
11.0 TOXICITIES/SIDE  EFFECTS  ................................ ................................ ............................  18 
12.0 CRITERIA  FOR  THERAPEUTIC  RESPONSE/OUTCOME  ASSESSMENT  ......................  21 
13.0 CRITERIA  FOR  REMOVAL  FROM  STUDY  ................................ ................................ ...... 22 
14.0 BIOSTATISTICS  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............  22 
15.0 RESEARCH  PARTICIPANT  REGISTRATION  AND  RANDOMIZATION  PROCEDURES  23 
15.1 Research  Participant  Registration  ................................ ................................ ..................  23 
15.2 Randomization ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............  24 
16.0 DAT A M ANAGEMENT  ISSUES  ................................ ................................ .......................  24 
16.1 Quality  Assurance  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........  26 
16.2 Data  and Safety  Monitoring ................................ ................................ ............................  27 
17.0 PROTECTION  OF HUMAN  SUBJECTS  ................................ ................................ ...........  26 
17.1 Privacy  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........................  27 
17.2 Serious  Adverse  Event  (SAE)  Reporting  ................................ ................................ ........  27 
17.2.1   28 
18.0 INFORMED  CONSENT  PROCEDURES  ................................ ................................ ...........  28 
19.0 REFERENCES  ................................ ................................ ................................ .................  29 
20.0 APPENDICES  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................  31 
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 16 -224 A(11)  
Approval date: 10 -Sep-2019  
Page  4 of 36  
 \ 
Arm B: 
Intralesional TALIMOGENE  
LAHERPAREPVEC without  radiotherapy  
Arm A: 
Intralesional TALIMOGENE  
LAHERPAREPVEC with radiotherapy  
Randomize  1:1 
 
Stratify  by disease  (melanoma,  Merkel  cell carcinoma,  or other  solid  tumor  malignancy)  
Patients  with melanoma,  Merkel  cell carcinoma,  or other  solid  tumor  malignancy with  cutaneous, 
superficial subcutaneous  soft tissue  or lymphatic  metastases  1.0 PROTOCOL  SUMMARY  AND/OR  SCHEMA  
This is  a randomized  phase II study  entitled “A Phase II Randomized  Trial of Intralesional 
Talimogene Laherp arepvec with  or without Hypofractionated Radiotherapy for Cutaneous 
Melanoma  or Merkel  Cell Carcinoma,  or Other Solid Tumors.”  Patients with cutaneous 
metastases  from melanoma,  Merkel  cell carcinoma,  and other solid tumor  malignancies will 
be studied.  Patients must  have at  least  one cutaneous metastasis  amenable  to intralesional 
oncolytic immunotherapy  with Talimogene Laherparepvec and radiotherapy and one 
metastasis amenable to observation.  
The primary objective of the stu dy is to characterize  the systemic response  of metastases 
not injected  or irradiated in  patients  treated  with Talimogene  Laherparepvec  with or without 
radiotherapy.  
The secondary  objectives of the  study  are to  characterize  the clinical efficacy,  safety, patient 
reported quality of life, duration  of response,  time to response  onset, progression free and 
overall survival associated  with the treatment of patients with Talimogene Laherparepvec 
with or without radiotherapy.  
The exploratory  objective of  the study is to characterize  the immunologic response 
associated  with the treatment  of patients with  Talimogene Laherparepvec  with or without 
radiotherapy.  
It is estimated  that a  minimum  of 18 and  a maximum  of 34 patients will be  enrolled over a 
minimum  of 2 and a  maximum  of 3 years to  complete  the study  over a minimum  of 3 and  a 
maximum of 4 -year time period.  
 
 
2.0 OBJECTIVES  AND  SCIENTIFIC  AIMS  
Primary  Objectives:  
 
1. To assess the  systemic efficacy  of Talimogene Laherparepvec  with or without 
radiotherapy  in patients  with cutaneous metastases  from melanoma,  Merkel  cell 
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 16 -224 A(11)  
Approval date: 10 -Sep-2019  
Page  5 of 36  
 carcinoma,  or other solid tumor  malignancy.  Systemic efficacy  will be measured  by 
the subject level modified WHO (mWHO)  defined response  of a metastasis not 
injected with Talimogene Laherparepvec  or irradiated 16  weeks after initiation of 
therapy.  A systemic  response  rate of ≤ 7.5% is unacceptable  and a  rate of ≥ 27%  is 
acceptable (for both arms).  
Secondary  Objectives:  
 
1. To assess the  clinic al efficacy  of Talimogene Laherparepvec  with or without 
radiotherapy  in patients  with cutaneous metastases from melanoma,  Merkel  cell 
carcinoma,  or other solid tumor  malignancy.  Clinical efficacy will be measured  by 
determining the objective response rate (ORR)  defined as patients  achieving 
complete response  or partial response defined by the modified World Health 
Organization (mWHO)  criteria.  Response will be assessed  approximately 16 weeks 
after the first treatme nt. Among patients  randomized to receive Talimogene 
Laherparepvec, we  expect  ORRs  to be comparable  to previous  studies  (26.4% 95% 
CI 21.4 -31.5%).  Patients randomized to receive Talimogene Laherparepvec  and 
radiotherapy are  expected to  have ORRs  higher  than previously  published studies  of 
Talimogene Laherparepvec alone.  
2. To assess the  safety of Talimogene Laherparepvec  with or without radiotherapy in 
patients with cutaneous metastases from melanoma, Merkel  cell carcinoma,  or other 
solid tumor malignancy as measured  by the frequency of adverse events  (grade 2 -5 
adverse  events).  The window for  adverse  event assessment  will include the  20 week 
time period from first treatment until 5 weeks after last treatment.  We expect that 
frequency and grade of adverse events in patients receiving Talimogene 
Laherparepvec  will be similar  to previous studies of Talimogene Laherparepvec 
alone, and that  radiotherapy will  increase  the frequency and  grade of  adverse events.  
3. To evaluate the  patient reported quality of  life following Talimogene Laherparepvec 
with or without radiotherapy  in patients with cutaneous  metastases  from melanoma, 
Merkel  cell carcinoma,  or other solid tumor malignancies treated with Talimogene 
Laherparepvec with  or without hypofractionated radiotherapy.  It is expected that 
quality of life (described  further in section 12.0) will improve after Talimogene 
Laherparepvec with or without radiotherapy.  
4. To assess  the duration  of response  (DOR)  in patients  achieving a  partial or  complete 
response.  DOR  will be defined as the duration  of time from occurrence  of partial or 
complete  response  until first occurrence  of progression  or date  of death  if the  patient 
dies due to any causes before progression.  
5. To assess  the time to response  onset  in following  Talimogene  Laherparepvec  with or 
without radiotherapy.  It is expected that the time  to response  onset in patients 
randomized  to receive Talimogene Laherparepvec  will be  similar  to previous studies 
of Talimogene Laherparepvec  alone (median  4.1 months,  range  1.2-16.9 months).  It 
is anticipated that the time to response  onset in patients receiving Talim ogene 
Laherparepvec and radiotherapy will be  earlier than prior studies of Talimogene 
Laherparepvec alone.  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 16 -224 A(11)  
Approval date: 10 -Sep-2019  
Page  6 of 36  
 6. To estimate  progression  free and  overall  survival in  patients receiving Talimogene 
Laherparepvec  with or without radiotherapy for cutaneous metastases from 
melanoma  and Merkel  cell carcinoma.  Progression  free survival will  be defined as 
the time elapsed from start of protocol treatment until progression (acc ording to 
mWHO criteria) or death.  
Exploratory  Objectives:  
 
1. To characterize  the immunologic response to Talimogene Laherparepvec  with or 
without  radiotherapy  in patients  with cutaneous metastases  from melanoma,  Merkel 
cell carcinoma,  or other solid maligna ncies.  Tumor  biopsies and peripheral blood 
specimens will be used to characterize  immunologic effects of treatment such  as 
tumor infiltrating lymphocytes and peripheral blood immunophenotype, serum 
antibody titers and cytokine array analyses.  
3.0 BACKGROUND  AND  RATIONALE  
Cutaneous  metastases . Secondary malignant neoplasms of the skin (also referred to as 
cutaneous metastases)  are not infrequently encountered in patients with advanced cancer. 
According to one study, 5.3% of patients  with solid tumors develop  cutaneous metastases 
(Krathen RA South Med  J 2003).  Practically, the anatomic compartment  of “cutaneous 
metastases”  includes the skin (cutis) and superficial subcutaneous soft  tissues and 
lymphatics  (in-transit channels  as well  as lymph  nodes).  The disorder  is especially common 
in high -risk skin malignancies, including melanoma and Merkel  cell carcinoma.  Cutaneous 
metastases  can lead to  problems  such  as infection, hemorrhage,  and discomfort.  One study 
demonstrated that the presence  of cutaneous metastases wa s the single most  deleterious 
factor in  patient quality  of life (Shimozuma  K Surg  Today 1995).  Surgical  excision  may be a 
simple  and effective means  of dealing  with cutaneous metastasis,  but is not  always possible 
because of patient comorbidities or extent of the cutaneous metastases.  System  ic therapy 
alone often has limited efficacy for cutaneous metastases (Richtig  E Br J Dermatol  2005).  
We have  recently  reported  on the efficacy  of a variety  of skin-directed  therapies  (such  as 
radiation therapy and intralesional therapy) for cutaneous metastases,  and found that 
treatment is well -tolerated, associated  with improvements  in quality of life, and frequently 
leads to reduction in size of the treated tumor (Spratt DE  J Clin Oncol  2014).  The systemic 
efficacy  of skin-directed  therapy  on non-treated  metastases  has not been  well-characterized.  
Radiotherapy  for cutaneous  metastase s. Radiotherapy has been used  for many  years as 
a palliative  treatment for cutaneous metastases.  Our recent meta -analysis of skin -directed 
therapies for cutaneous metastases demonstrated  that radiotherapy yields a complete 
response  in 62.7% (95%  CI 22.8-90.5%), and  an objective response  in 83.8%  (95% CI  37.9- 
97.8%).  Moreover,  studies  that combined  radiotherapy with other skin -directed  therapies 
(intralesional therapy or topical therapy) demonstrated  even higher overall response  rates 
(Spratt DE J Clin Oncol 2014).  As noted above, the systemic efficacy  to skin -directed 
radiotherapy has  not been well -characterized.  However, studies from  our group and others 
have suggested  that radiotherapy  may augment  immunologic  response  to produce systemic 
responses in non -irradiated  metastases (Postow  M N Engl J Med  2011, Barker CA  Cancer 
Immunol Res 2013, Teulings  H Br J Derm 2013).  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 16 -224 A(11)  
Approval date: 10 -Sep-2019  
Page  7 of 36  
 Talim ogene laherparepvec (TALIMOGENE LAHERPAREPVEC) for cutaneous 
metastases . Talimogene laherparepvec (TALIMOGENE  LAHERPAREPVEC) is an 
intralesional oncolytic immunotherapy consisting  of a modified type -1 herpes simplex virus 
that selectively  replicates in mal ignant  cells and  stimulates an  immune  response.  A phase  I 
trial of Talimogene Laherparepvec  (formerly  OncoVEXGM-CSF) in 30 patients with  cutaneous 
or subcutaneous metastases from a  variety  of malignancies (breast,  head and neck, 
melanoma, gastrointestinal) who had failed prior therapy demonstrated the safety of this 
approach (Hu JC Clin Cancer Res  2006).  A subsequent  phase II study  of 50 patients with 
cutaneous metastases from melanoma  demonstrated an overall respon se rate of 26%, an 
revealed responses of metastases that were not injected (Senzer NN J Clin Oncol  2009).  
Correlative analyses suggested  that response  in metastases  that were  not injected were  due 
to immunologic effects  of Talimogene Laherparepvec  (Kaufman  HL Ann Surg Oncol  2010). 
Preliminary  results of a  phase  III study  of Talimogene Laherparepvec  versus  granulocyte 
monocyte colony  stimulating factor (GM -CSF) for patients  with unresectable stage IIIB -IV 
melanoma  have  been presented, and  demonstrated  an overall response  rate of 26.4%  (95% 
CI 2.7 -29.2%), with a trend toward improved overall survival (Andtbacka  RHI ASCO 2013). 
Responses were  seen most  often at the site of the injected cutaneous metastasis (64.3%), 
but also in non -injected cutaneous metastases (33.7%),  and non -injected visceral 
metastases (15.2%). Importantly, the median time to response was 16 weeks, therefore 
approximately 7.5% of pati ents are expected to have response  in uninjected metastases  at 
this time  point  (Andtbacka RHI HemOnc  Today Melanoma and  Cutaneous Malignancies 
Meeting  2014).  Increasing the  response  rate by combining  Talimogene  Laherparepvec  with 
other therapies is an acti ve area of study.  
Preclinical  rationale for combining  TALIMOGENE LAHERPAREPVEC with 
radiotherapy . As previously reviewed, there is an  abundance of preclinical  literature to 
suggest  that combining oncolytic immunotherapy (such  as TALIMOGENE 
LAHERPAREPVEC) w ith radiotherapy  can increase the antineoplastic effects of each 
treatment modality (Touchefeu  Y Rad  Onc 2011, Advani  S IJROBP 2006).  Irradiation  of 
cancer  cells can  increase  viral uptake, replication, gene expression  and the induction of  host 
cell death, thereby enhancing the effects of oncolytic immunotherapy  (see Figure 1).  
Conversely,  viral proteins can  inhibit  components  of the DNA  damage  response  pathway,  
thereby sensitiz ing cancer  cells to the effects  of radiation  therapy  (see Figure  2). 
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 16 -224 A(11)  
Approval date: 10 -Sep-2019  
Page  8 of 36  
  
  
Clinical experience combining TALIMOGENE LAHERPAREPVEC  and 
radiotherapy.  Several studies have investigated the combination of oncolytic 
immunotherapy  (such  as TALIMOGENE  LAHERPAREPVEC)  and radiotherapy.  Most  
relevant  to the current  protocol  is a phase  I/II trial of Talimogene  Laherparepvec  (formerly  
OncoVEXGM-CSF) and chemoradiation therapy that was  reported in 2010 (Harrington KJ Clin 
Cancer  Res 2010).  Seventeen  patients with locally advanced mucosal  squamous cell 
carcinoma  of the head  and neck  (mSCCHN)  underwent high dose  radiotherapy  (70 Gy in 35 
fractions),  with concomitant  cisplatin chemotherapy (100 mg/m^2)  and escalating doses 
(10^6 – 10^8 plaque forming  units (pfu)/mL) of  intralesional  Talimogene  Laherparepvec 
during radiotherapy (day  1, 22, 43  and 64, see  Figure 3).  Escalating  doses  of Talimogene 
Laherparepvec were  delivered  without observation  of dose  limiting  toxicities.  Adverse  events 
(AEs) were  consistent  with those  normally  observed during standard  chemoradiation  therapy 
for locally advanced mSCCHN),  and grade  3 or 4  observed  in ≥2  patients were  unrelated  to 
Talimogene Laherparepvec  dose.  The recommended  dose of Talimogene Lahe rparepvec 
for concomitant  administration with radiotherapy  in future studies of mSCCHN  was 10^6 
followed by  10^8.  This dosing  schedule  is consistent  with previous and  ongoing studies in 
melanoma, and other diseases (Figure 3).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Mechanisms  through which 
ionizing radiation may enhance 
oncolytic immunotherapy.  From 
Touchefeu Y Radiother Oncol 2011.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Mechanisms through 
which  oncolytic immunotherapy  may 
enhance radiotherapy.  From 
Touchefeu Y Radiother Oncol  2011.  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 16 -224 A(11)  
Approval date: 10 -Sep-2019  
Page  9 of 36  
  
 
The efficacy  of this combination was  promising.  At a median follow -up of 29 months,  100% 
of patients achieved locoregional disease  control, and 76.5% of patients were relapse -free. 
Notably,  no patient participating  in this study  had measurable metastases that  were not 
irradiated  or injected with  Talimogene  Laherparepvec  (Harrington KJ  Clin Cancer  Res 2010). 
Therefore, the systemic efficacy  of this therapeutic  combination was not assessed.  
Combining immunotherapy and  radiotherapy.  We have previously reviewed and reported 
on the combinations of radiotherapy a nd immunotherapy (Barker and Postow  IJROBP  
2014).  Of particular  interest  is the  ability  of the radiotherapy  to augment  the systemic  
response  to immunotherapy.  Evidence of  this phenomenon is  demonstrated  by the  abscopal 
effect, or regression  of a non-irradiated  tumor after radiotherapy.  Investigators have 
previously found that the combination of granulocyte -monocyte colony stimulating factor  
(GM-CSF) and  radiotherapy can  produce  an abscopal  effect in 27% of patie nts. In the 
OPTiM  trial described  above, patients treated with  GM-CSF demonstrated  a non -injected 
visceral response  rate of <5%, while those treated with Talimogene Laherparepvec 
demonstrated a non -injected visceral metastasis response  rate of 15.2%.  Whether 
radiotherapy  combined  with Talimogene Laherparepvec  can increase the response  rate 
among non -injected visceral metastases is unknown.  Given that systemic response  of 
visceral metastases that  have not been injected or irradiated  is a sign of successful 
immunotherapy, it is  this endpoint  that is of considerable  interest for investigation.  
To our knowledge,  a study  of Talimogene  Laherparepvec  and radiotherapy to characterize 
the systemic  efficacy  of this therapeutic combination has  never  been performed,  and has not 
been initiated elsewhere.  The present  study  will provide information  for society  regarding the 
potential benefit of this therapeutic combination.  For patients with  cutaneous  metastases 
from melanoma, Merkel  cell carcinoma,  or other solid tumor malignancy this study may 
provide valuable therapeutic benefit from  treatment using 2 active agents.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Schedule  of concurrent  T-VEC and chemoradiotherapy  in a previously 
reported phase I/II  clinical trial.  From Harrington  KJ Clin Cancer  Res 2010.  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 16 -224 A(11)  
Approval date: 10 -Sep-2019  
Page  10 of 36  
 4.0 OVERVIEW  OF STUDY  DESIGN/INTERVENTION  
4.1 Design  
This is  a prospective, single  site phase  II randomized  trial examining the  systemic  efficacy 
(primary  objective), clinical  efficacy,  safety,  quality  of life effects,  duration of response,  time 
to response, progression -free and overall  survival (secondary objectives) of patients of 
Talimogene Laherparepvec  with or without radiotherapy in patients with  cutaneous 
metastases from melanoma, Merkel  cell carcinoma,  or other solid tumor malignancies.  
4.2 Intervention  
Patients with cutaneous metastases from melanoma,  Merkel  cell carcinoma  or other solid 
tumor  malignancy  will be screened  for eligibility.  If a patient is  found to  have anything other 
than cutaneous metastases from melanoma, Merkel  cell carcinoma  or other solid tumor 
malignancy, appropriate  clinical management will be undertaken.  
If eligible,  patients will  undergo baseline PET/CT  imaging,  quality of  life assessment,  followed 
by intralesional Talimogene Laherparepvec with or without radiotherapy.  
Talimogene Laherparepvec  will be administered  at weeks 0, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 13  and 15.  The 
first dose  of Talimogene Laherparepvec  will be 10^6  plaque forming  units  (PFU)/mL,  followed 
three weeks  later by  a dose  of 10^8  pfu/mL.  Up to 4  mL will be  injected at each  treatment.  
Metastases will be  injected, be ginning with the  largest  tumor  first, with volumes  indicated 
below, until a maximum of 4 mL  has been used.  
 
Tumor size 
(longest  dimension)  Talimogene  laherparepvec  
(TVEC)  
injection  volume  Dose  concentration  
>5 cm ≤4 mL 10^6  PFU/mL  at week  0, 
10^8  PFU/mL  thereafter  
2.6-5 cm ≤2 mL 10^6  PFU/mL  at week  0, 
10^8  PFU/mL  thereafter  
1.6-2.5 cm ≤1 mL 10^6  PFU/mL  at week  0, 
10^8  PFU/mL  thereafter  
0.6-1.5 cm ≤0.5 mL 10^6  PFU/mL  at week  0, 
10^8  PFU/mL  thereafter  
≤0.5 cm ≤0.1 mL 10^6  PFU/mL  at week  0, 
10^8  PFU/mL  thereafter  
Table  1. TALIMOGENE  LAHERPAREPVEC injection  volume  and concentration  based  on 
tumor size.  
Patients randomized  to Arm A  will receive 3  radiotherapy  treatments  (one treatment  every 3 - 
6 days) during weeks 3 and 4.  The first treatment will occur  6 (+/- 2) hours after the 
Talimogene Laherparepvec  administration at week 3.  
Patients randomized  to Arm B  will receive Talimogene Laherparepvec  alone, as  described 
above, without radiotherapy.  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 16 -224 A(11)  
Approval date: 10 -Sep-2019  
Page  11 of 36  
 Patients will undergo  disease  re-evaluation  with PET/CT  and quality  of life assessment  at 
week 16.  
Patients  with potential for  clinical  benefit may  continue Talimogene  Laherparepvec  every  2 
weeks,  after week  15, for up to 24 weeks.  This will be determined  by the treating  clinician.  
5.0 THERAPEUTIC/DIAGNOSTIC  AGENTS  
Please  see Investigational  Product  Information  – Talimogene  Laherparepvec (AMG 678). 
The agent is under  review by  the FDA  for use  in patients with  melanoma  and will  be used 
under a cross -referenced  IND for use  in other diseases.  
External  beam  radiation  therapy  is a standard,  non-investigational  treatment  for cutaneous 
metastasis.  
6.0 CRITERIA  FOR  SUBJECT  ELIGIBILITY  
6.1 Subject  Inclusion  Criteria  
• Man or woman  ≥ 18 years  old 
• Life expectancy  > 4 months  
• Histopathologically  confirmed  melanoma,  Merkel  cell carcinoma  or other  solid tumor 
malignancy  
• Cutaneous,  subcutaneous soft  tissue,  or superficial  lymphatic metastasis  not suitable 
for surgical resection  
• Eastern  Cooperative  Oncology  Group  (ECOG)  performance  status  0 to 2 
• Cutaneous,  subcutaneous soft  tissue,  or superficial  lymphatic metastasis  that is 
amenable to injection and irradiation  and > 10 mm in longest dimension  
o Cutaneous metastasis  in a region of  previous radiation therapy is amenable  to 
radiation therapy as part  of this protocol  if at least  6 months  has elapsed  since 
prior radiotherapy  and the dose of radiotherapy  previously administered did 
not exceed an  equivalent  dose  of 60 Gy in  2 Gy equivalent  fractions at the 
skin surface  (using linear -quadratic  modeling with alpha/beta=11.5)  
• Metastasis that is  > 10 mm in longest dimension  or exhibits radiotracer  uptake 
consistent with metastasis on PET/CT  
• Adequate coagulation  function  (platelet count  >50 k/mcL,  international normalized 
ratio of < 1.5)  
• Resolution  or stabilization  of clinically  significant  adverse  events  from prior  therapy  
• Able to provide  valid written  informed  consent  
6.2 Subject  Exclusion  Criteria  
• Active herpetic skin  lesions or  prior complications  of HSV-1 infection (such  as 
herpetic keratitis, herpetic encephalitis)  
• Receipt  of a therapeutic  anticoagulant  
• Receipt  of live vaccine  within  28 days  of planned  first dose  of TVEC  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 16 -224 A(11)  
Approval date: 10 -Sep-2019  
Page  12 of 36  
 • Receipt  of another cancer  therapy  (targeted  therapy, chemotherapy,  investigational 
therapy, immunotherapy, radiotherapy or surgery) which is  yielding  an overall 
response  (by response  criteria in this study)  
o Patients with stable or progressing  disease (as  determined by at least 2 
consecutive  assessments  at 6-week  interval)  can continue to  receive  the 
same  therapy during treatment as part of this protocol  
• History of symptomatic autoimmune  disease (such  as lupus, scleroderma,  Crohn’s 
disease,  ulcerative colitis)  requiring systemic  treatment  (for example  corticosteroids  or 
immunosuppressants);  replacement  therapy (for example, thyroxine,  insulin) is not 
considered a systemic treatment  
• History of  high grade  (CTCAE > Grade 3)  immune  mediated adverse  event from  prior 
cancer  immunotherapy  
• History of  CTCAE  > Grade  2 immune  mediated  endocrinopathy  from prior cancer 
immunotherapy  
• Intermittent  or chronic  use of oral or intravenous  antiherpetic  drug (such  as acyclovir)  
• Active  or chronic  hepatitis  B or C infection  
o Previously  infected  with evidence of immunity  and no  evidence of  active 
hepatitis is not an exclusion criterion  
• Known  human  immunodeficiency  virus  (HIV)  infection  
• Known  leukemia  or lymphoma  
• Common  variable  immunodeficiency  
• Patients requiring chronic high  dose  immunosuppressants  including  steroids 
(prednisone daily equivalent of ≥ 10 mg)  
• Known  severe  congenital or  acquired cellular  or humoral  immunodeficient  or 
immunocompromised  patients (as noted in Investigators  Brochure  and 
Developmental Core Safety Information)  
• High likelihood  of protoc ol non-compliance  (in opinion  of investigator)  
• Woman  of childbearing potential  unwilling to use effective contraception during 
protocol  treatment  and for  3 months after  last dose  of Talimogene Laherparepvec  
• Woman  of childbearing potential that is pregnant or breast -feeding, or planning to 
become  pregnant or  breast -feed during protocol  treatment  and for 3 months  after last 
dose of Talimogene Laherparepvec  
7.0 RECRUITMENT  PLAN  
Investigators  and their research  teams  will serve  as the primary  recruiters  for this study.  
Potential research  subjects  will be  identified  by a member  of the patient’s  treatment  team,  the 
protocol investigator, or the research  team.  If the investigator is a member  of the treatment 
team, s/he will screen  the patient’s  records for  suitable research  study  criteria and discuss 
the study and the potential for enrolling  in the research  study.  Potential  subjects contacted 
by their treating physician will be referred to the  investigator/research staff of the study.  
Women  and minorities  will be identified  in this same  manner.  
During  the initial contact  between  the investigator/research  staff and the patient, the patient 
may be asked  to provide certain  health information that is necessary  to the recruitment  and 
enrollment process.  The investigator/research  staff may also review portions of the  patients  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 16 -224 A(11)  
Approval date: 10 -Sep-2019  
Page  13 of 36  
 medical records at MSKCC to further assess eligibility.  They  will use the information 
provided by the  patient  and/or medical  record  to confirm  that the  patient is eligible  and to 
contact  the patient regarding study  enrollment.  If the patient is  ineligible  for enrollment  in the 
research  study, the research  staff will destroy all information col lected on the patient during 
the initial  conversation and medical  records  review, except for any  information that must  be 
maintained for screening log purposes.  
In most  cases,  the initial  contact  with the prospective subject  will be by a member  of the 
treatment team, investigator  or research  staff working in consultation with the treatment 
team.  The recruitment  process  outlined presents  no more  than minimal  risk to the privacy  of 
the patients  who are screened and minimal PHI w ill be maintained as part of the screening 
log. For these  reasons,  we seek  a (partial) limited waiver  of authorization  for purposes  of (1)  
(2) handling  of PHI contained  within those  records  and provided  by potential  subjects;  and 
(3) maintaining  information  in a screening  log of patients  approached  (if applicable).  
This limited  waiver will  apply only to MSKCC for  the purpose of  maintaining screening  logs. 
The study will not be advertised.  Subjects  will not be reimbursed for participation.  
We plan to accrue  18 - 34 patients  at our center  over 2 – 3 years.  
8.0 PRETREATMENT  EVALUATION  
The following  tests  and procedures are  required prior  to protocol  registration.  These 
procedures are standard of care.  
Within  4 weeks  prior to registration  
• Physical  examination  
• ECOG  performance  status  
• Vital signs  (weight,  heart rate,  blood pressure,  respiratory  rate, oxygen  saturation) will 
be assessed in clinic  
• Complete  blood  count  (CBC)  
• Comprehensive  metabolic  profile  (CMP)  
• Hepatitis B  and C  panels (Hepatitis B Surface  Antigen,  Hepatitis B  Core  Antibody 
(total),  Hepatitis  B Surface  Antibody,  Hepatitis C  Antibody),  and possible  additional 
testing, depending  on serological testing  
• Prothrombin  and activated  partial  thromboplastin  time test (PT&APTT)  
• Clinical  review  of the MSK  histopathology  report  confirming  cancer  
• Quality  of life assessment  (Skindex  -16, Appendix  B) will be completed  by subjects  
• Pregnancy  test for women  of childbearing  potential  (by either  blood  or urine)  
• Digital photography  will be performed  to document  the location  and size  of cutaneous 
metastases.  
• PET/CT  (IV or oral contrast  is not required,  but is permissible  if clinically  indicated.)  
 
9.0 TREATMENT/ INTERVENTION  PLAN  
Study  Assessments  and Procedures 
During  Treatment  
Weeks  0, 3, 5, 7, 11 and 15 (+ 1 week)  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 16 -224 A(11)  
Approval date: 10 -Sep-2019  
Page  14 of 36  
 • Physical  examination  
• ECOG  performance  status  
• Vital signs  (weight,  heart rate,  blood pressure,  respiratory  rate, oxygen  saturation)  will 
be assessed in clinic  
• Complete  blood  count  (CBC)  
• Basic  metabolic profile  (BMP)  
• Prothrombin  and activated  partial  thromboplastin  time test (PT&APTT)  
• Pregnancy  test for women  of childbearing potential,  by blood or  urine (at  weeks 3,  7, 
11 and 15 only)  
• Research  blood  test 
• Research  skin tumor  biopsy  (at weeks  0, 7 and 15 only)  
Weeks  0-15 (+ 1 week)  
• Administration  of Talimogene  Laherparepvec  (T-VEC)  
* Patients with  potential  for clinical benefit may continue TALIMOGENE 
LAHERPAREPVEC  after week  15 every  2 weeks  for up to  24 weeks  (to be 
determined by treating clinician)  
• Radiation therapy for patients randomized  into Arm A; first  fraction  given 6  (+/-2) 
hours after  week 3  Talimogene Laherparepvec  administration;  2nd and 3rd fraction 
given every 3 -6 days over next 14 days  
• Adverse  event  review  (including  NCI PRO -CTCAE  v1.0,  Appendix  C) 
End of Treatment  
 
Week  16 (+ 1 week)  or when  TVEC is  discontinued  prior to week  15 
• Physical  examination  
• ECOG  performance  status  
• Vital signs  (weight,  heart rate,  blood pressure,  respiratory  rate, oxygen  saturation)  will 
be assessed in clinic  
• Adverse  event  review  (including  NCI PRO -CTCAE  v1.0,  Appendix  C) 
• Complete  blood  count  (CBC)  
• Comprehensive  metabolic  profile  (CMP)  
• Prothrombin  and activated  partial  thromboplastin  time test (PT&APTT)  
• Research  blood  test (If TVEC  stopped  before  week  15) 
• Pregnancy  test for women  of childbearing  potential  (by either  blood  or urine)  
• Research  skin tumor  biopsy  (If TVEC  stopped  before  week  15) 
• Quality  of life assessment  (Skindex  -16, Appendix  B) to be completed  by subjects  
• Digital  photography  
• PET/CT  (IV or oral contrast  is not required,  but is permissible  if clinically  indicated.)  
 
Follow -Up 
 
Week  20 (+ 1 week)  or 4 weeks  after last TVEC  dose 
• Adverse  event  review  (including  NCI PRO -CTCAE  v1.0,  Appendix  C) 
 
 
9.1 Oncolytic  immunotherapy  by Talimogene  Laherparepvec  (TALIMOGENE 
LAHERPAREPVEC)  administration  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 16 -224 A(11)  
Approval date: 10 -Sep-2019  
Page  15 of 36  
 Intralesional administration  of Talimogene  Laherparepvec  will be performed  in a private  room 
in the outpatient  clinic area.  
Intralesional  therapy for  cutaneous metastasis  is a standard procedure,  but Talimogene 
Laherparepvec is an investigational agent.  
The selection  of cutaneous  metastasis  for Talimogene Laherparepvec  injection will  be based 
on lesion size.  Injections will begin with  the largest metastasis,  and then will  proceed  to the 
next largest me tastasis,  until all the cutaneous metastases have been injected, or the 
maximum  volume of Talimogene Laherparepvec  (4 mL) has  been used for that treatment 
cycle.  The injection of all of the cutaneous metastases  is expected  to take no more  than 20 
minutes.  
Visceral  metastases  will not be injected  with Talimogene  Laherparepvec  during the protocol 
therapy.  
During the course  of Talimogene Laherparepvec administration, patients will be clinically 
evaluated  every 2 -3 weeks (as  indicated in section 10.0), for any symptoms  or signs  of 
toxicity.  If a patient experiences a  grade 2  or higher immune  mediated adverse  event, 
Talimogene Laherparepvec  administration  will be  delayed until the adverse  event is grade  1 
or less in severity.  Non-immune  related adverse  events grade 3  or greater will  also lead to  a 
delay in Talimogene  Laherparepvec  administration, until they have resolved  to grade 1 or 
less. In the event of a dose limiting toxicity, as described in section 11.1.3, Talimogene 
Laherparepvec administration will be discontinued indefinitely.  
9.2 External  beam  radiation  therapy  
Radiation therapy will be administered in the Department of Radiation Oncology, in a 
treatment suite  in the  outpatient  clinic  area.  The largest cutaneous metastasis amenable  to 
radiation therapy (see section 6.1 for criteria) will be targeted. This metasta sis will also be 
injected  with Talimogene  Laherparepvec  before  and after radiation therapy. Other  cutaneous 
metastases causing  symptoms may  also be targeted with radiation therapy at  the discretion 
of the radiation oncologist.  
Radiation therapy  will be  simulated  prior to the  initiation of  radiation therapy.  The patient will 
be positioned comfortably  in a manner that facilitates the  delivery  of radiation therapy.  
Generally,  this will be lying supine, recumbent on  a dedicated treatment couch  for radiation 
therapy.  Immobilization equipment will  be created and  alignment markings  generated to 
ensure  setup  reproducibility.  A CT scan  of the  region being treated with  radiation therapy will 
be performed with the patient in t he treatment position.  The simulation process  takes 
approximately 1 hour.  
Radiation therapy will be  planned by delineating  the grossly  evident tumor  (the gross  tumor 
volume,  or GTV) on  the simulation  CT, and creating  a margin  around this to  account  for the  
setup uncertainty and organ motion.  An isotropic volumetric expansion of 1 cm  will be 
performed  to generate the planning target volume  (PTV).  The radiation dose  will be 
prescribed  so that the  ≥ 95% of  the PTV  receives the  prescription  dose  (27 Gy in 3  fractions 
over 7 -9 days).  Custom  shielding and  bolus will be  created  and beam type  (megavoltage 
photons or electrons) and energy will be  selected  to ensure  that the  irradiated  volume  is as 
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 16 -224 A(11)  
Approval date: 10 -Sep-2019  
Page  16 of 36  
 small  as possible, but able to  deliver  an adequate dose  to the  PTV.  The irradiated  skin 
surface  receiving the prescription dose of radiation (27 Gy) will be limited to 65 cm  2 
(equivalent  to a round field with  diameter  of 9 cm, or a square  field 8x8 cm).  The process  of 
target delineation  and shielding creation  is expected to  take 20  minutes, but will be 
performed offline, and does require the patient to be present.  
Simulation  will be scheduled  prior to radiation  therapy.  
The first dose of radiation  will be delivered 6  (+/- 2) hours after the second  dose of 
Talimogene Laherparepvec.  Preclinical  studies  have demonstrated  this sequence  of therapy 
and interval of time is necessary  to yield synergistic effects  of oncolytic immunotherapy and 
radiotherapy.  The subsequent  two doses  of radiation therapy will  occur  every 3 -6 days,  over 
no more than 14 days.  
During  the course  of radiation  therapy patients will be  clinically evaluated at least  once  a 
week, for any symptoms or  signs of toxicity.  
9.3 Cutaneous  metastasis  biopsy  
Punch  biopsy  will be  obtained for immunologic  correlative analyses.  Local  anesthesia  will be 
provided by intradermal  injection of lidocaine 1%  mixed  with epinephrine  at 1:100,000  by a 
30 gauge needle.  After allowing 5  minutes  for adequate anesthesia,  a 3 mm  punch  biopsy 
will be obtained.  The biopsy  site will be  closed  with cuticular  sutures or steri -strips.  Patients 
will be instructed to keep the biopsy site clean after the procedure.  This procedure will be 
done as  an outpatient.  The biopsy  is expected to  take no  longer than 15  minutes  and will  be 
performed  on the day of (but prior to  first dose)  of oncolytic  immunotherapy.  The biopsy  will 
be repeated around 7  and 15  weeks after  the first  dose,  at the site of the  prior biopsy,  and at 
up to two other sites  (if present): (1) the site of another cutaneous metastasis  that was  not 
injected or irradiated (if present ), (2) the site of another cutaneous metastasis  that was 
injected but not irradiated (if present).  
 
 
10.0 EVALUATION  DURING  TREATMENT/INTERVENTION  
 
Study  Timeline  Pre- 
Treatment  Treatment  End of 
Treatment6 Follow - 
Up7 
 
Week 
(+/-)  
-4 to 0  
0 
(1)  
3 
(1)  
5 
(1)  
7 
(1)4  
9 
(1)  
11 
(1)  
13 
(1)  
15 
(1)  
16 
(1)  
20 
(1) 
Assessments   
Pathology  Review  X           
PET/CT  (with or 
without contrast)  X         X  
Quality of  life 
questionnaires  X         X  
Digital  photography  X         X  
Adverse  event   X X X X X X X X X X 
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 16 -224 A(11)  
Approval date: 10 -Sep-2019  
Page  17 of 36  
  
review1            
ECOG  performance  
status  X X X X X  X  X X  
Vital signs  (weight, 
heart rate, blood 
pressure, 
respiratory rate,  
oxygen  saturation)   
X  
X  
X  
X  
X  
 
X  
 
X  
X  
Physical  exam  X X X X X  X  X X  
Complete  medical  
history  X           
Hepatitis B  Surface 
Antigen,  Hepatitis  B 
Core Antibody 
(total), hepatitis B 
surface  Antibody, 
Hepatitis C 
Antibody5  
 
 
X           
Comprehensive  
metabolic  profile  X         X  
Basic  metabolic  
profile   X X X X  X  X   
Complete  blood  
count  X X X X X  X  X   
PT&APTT  X X X X X  X  X   
Pregnancy  testing 
(blood or urine);  
WOCBP  only  
X2  
X  
X  
X  
X   
Research  blood  
test3  
X X X X  
X  
X   
Research  skin 
punch  biopsy4  
X   
X    
X   
Treatment   
TALIMOGENE  
LAHERPAREPVEC   X X X X X X X X†   
Radiation  therapy    X*         
†Patients  with potential  for clinical  benefit  may continue  TALIMOGENE  LAHERPAREPVEC  after week  15 every 2 
weeks for up to  24 weeks (as determined bytreating  clinician)  
*Only  for Arm A; first fraction  given  6 (+/-2) hours  after week  3 TALIMOGENE  LAHERPAREPVEC  administration;  
2nd and 3rd fraction  given  every  3-6 days  over no more  than 14 days 
1Including  Appendix  C, “NCI PRO -CTCAE  v1.0”  
2Within  2 weeks  of starting  Talimogene  Laherparepvec  treatment  
3 Research  bloods  will be 3 tubes (3 CPT) at  each time  point;  stored  at immune  monitoring  core facility  for up to 1 
year after completion of  study  
4One lavender top (EDTA)  tube of  blood  will be drawn on  the same  day as the research  skin punch  biopsy; 
window for biopsywill be +/ - 3 weeks  
5Additional  testing  to evaluate  for hepatitis  maybe  required  depending  on the serological  results  
6For patients  that discontinue  TVEC  before  week  16, the End of Treatment  visit occurs  after last dose  of TVEC  
7Follow -Up at week 20  or 4 weeks  after last TVEC  dose 
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 16 -224 A(11)  
Approval date: 10 -Sep-2019  
Page  18 of 36  
 11.0 TOXICITIES/SIDE  EFFECTS  
The study  will use the Common  Terminology  Criteria  for Adverse  Events  (CTCAE)  version  
4.0 for assessing  toxicity  related  to oncolytic  immunotherapy  and radiotherapy.  
Overall, toxicities grade 2 -5 will be identified,  graded  and scored  using  “Common  Toxicity 
Criteria for Adverse Events, version 4.0, grading criteria and definitions”.  
11.1 TALIMOGENE  LAHERPAREPVEC  
Side effects of  Talimogene Laherparepvec  for cutaneous metastasis  are listed below.  Also 
see Investigators Brochure,  Developmental Core  Safety  Information,  Toxicity Management 
Guidelines for studies  with Talimogene Laherparepvec [AMG  678] and Core  Informed 
Consent Form Risks and Discomforts Section.  
11.1.1.0  Important  Identified  Risks  
 
• Disseminated herpetic infection in severely immunocompromised 
individuals  (those  with any severe  congenital  or acquired  cellular and/or 
humoral immune deficiency)  
• Accidental  exposure  of healthcare  providers  (HCPs)  to talimogene 
laherparepvec  
• Cellulitis  at site of injection  
11.1.1.1  Important  Potential  Risks  
 
• Disseminated  herpetic infection in  immunocompromised  patients  (such  as 
those with HIV/AIDS,  leukemia, lymphoma, common  variable 
immunodeficiency, or those who require high dose steroids or other 
immunosuppressive  agents)  
• Symptomatic  talimogene laherparepvec  infection in  non-tumor  tissue  in 
treated patients  
• Transmission  of talimogene laherparepvec  from patient to  close  contacts 
or HCPs via  direct  contact  with injected lesions  or body fluids resulting  in 
symptomatic infection (primary or reactivation)  
• Symptomatic  herpetic  infection due  to latency  and reactivation of 
talimogene laherparepvec or wild type HSV -1 
• Immune -mediated  adverse  events  
• Plasmacytoma  at the injection  site 
• Impaired  wound  healing  at the injection  site 
• Talimogene  laherparepvec  mediated  anti GM-CSF antibody  response  
 
 
11.1.2.0  Adverse  Drug  Reactions  (ADRs)  
 
Adverse drug  reactions  observed  in talimogene laherparepvec clinical  trials  are listed below 
in Table 2. Consult  the current Investigator’s Brochure for the full information on ADRs.  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 16 -224 A(11)  
Approval date: 10 -Sep-2019  
Page  19 of 36  
  
System  Organ Class  
Preferred  Term  CIOMS  Frequency  
Very  Common:  ≥10%  
Common:  1%-<10%  
Uncommon:  <1% 
General  disorders  and administration  site conditions  
Fatigue  Very Common  
Chills  Very Common  
Pyrexia  Very Common  
Influenza  like illness  Very Common  
Malaise  Common  
Axillary  pain Common  
Injection  site reactions*  Very Common  
Gastrointestinal  disorders  
Nausea  Very Common  
Vomiting  Very Common  
Diarrhea  Very Common  
Constipation  Very Common  
Abdominal  pain Common  
Abdominal  discomfort  Common  
Musculoskeletal  and connective  tissue disorders  
Myalgia  Very Common  
Arthralgia  Very Common  
Pain in extremity  Very Common  
Groin  pain Common  
Skin  and subcutaneous  tissue  disorders  
Vitiligo  Common  
Rash  Common  
Dermatitis  Common  
Infections  and infestations  
Cellulitis  Common  
Oral herpes  Common  
Incision  site infection  Uncommon  
Nervous  system  disorders  
Headache  Very Common  
Dizziness  Common  
Eye disorders  
Herpetic  keratitis  Uncommon  
Respiratory,  thoracic  and mediastinal  disorders  
Oropharyngeal  pain Common  
Obstructive  airway  disorder  Uncommon  
Metabolism  and nutrition  disorders  
Dehydration  Common  
Injury,  poisoning  and procedural  complications  
Contusion  Common  
Procedural  pain Common  
Wound complication  Common  
Wound secretion  Common  
Neoplasms  benign,  malignant  and unspecified  (incl cysts  and polyps)  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 16 -224 A(11)  
Approval date: 10 -Sep-2019  
Page  20 of 36  
  
System  Organ Class  
Preferred  Term  CIOMS  Frequency  
Very  Common:  ≥10%  
Common:  1%-<10%  
Uncommon:  <1% 
Tumor  pain Common  
Infected  neoplasm  Common  
Plasmacytoma  at the injection  site Uncommon  
Investigations  
Weight  decreased  Common  
Vascular  disorders  
Deep  vein thrombosis  Common  
Flushing  Common  
Blood  and lymphatic  system  disorders  
Anemia  Common  
Immune  system  disorders  
Worsening  psoriasis  Uncommon  
Pneumonitis  Uncommon  
Glomerulonephritis  Uncommon  
Vasculitis  Uncommon  
* Injection  site reactions include: very common  term of injection site pain, common  terms of 
injection site erythema, injection site hemorrhage, injection site swelling, injection site 
reaction,  injection site  inflammation, secretion  discharge,  injection site  discharge,  uncommon 
term of injection site w armth.  
Table  2. ADRs  Observed  in Talimogene  Laherparepvec  Clinical Trials  
11.1.3.0  Dose  Limiting  Toxicities  (DLTs)  
 
Dose  limiting toxicities  (DLTs)  are defined  below.  
11.1.3.1  Definitions  of Dose  Limiting  Toxicity  
Toxicity should be evaluated according to CTCAE version 4.0, and should 
only include events assessed  as related to talimogene laherparepvec during 
treatment  and up  to 30 days after  the last  talimogene  laherparepvec  injection.  
The following  herpetic  events  should  be considered  as DLTs:  
• Serious  herpetic  events  such  as herpetic  encephalitis,  encephalomyelitis 
or disseminated herpetic infection  
• Any herpetic events confirmed  due to talimogene laherparepvec that 
require treatment with acyclovir or similar anti -viral agent. Talimogene 
laherparepvec  treatment  should  be suspended  if treatment  is required with 
systemic  acyclovir  or other anti -virals. If ongoing anti -viral treatment is 
required, talimogene laherparepvec treatment should be permanently 
discontinued  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 16 -224 A(11)  
Approval date: 10 -Sep-2019  
Page  21 of 36  
 Consider  also including  the following  as DLTs:  
• Grade  3 or greater  immune -mediated  adverse  events  
• Any grad e plasmacytoma  at or near the  injection site  or evidence of 
impaired wound healing at the injection site  
• Grade 3  or greater allergic reactions considered  at least  possibly  related to 
talimogene laherparepvec  
• Grade  4 non-hematologic  toxicity  
• Grade 3  non-hematologic toxicity  lasting  > 3 days  despite  optimal 
supportive care  
- Grade  3 fatigue  will not be classified  as DLT,  irrespective  of duration  
• Any grade  3 or higher  non-hematologic  laboratory  value  if the abnormality:  
- fails to respond  to medical  intervention,  or 
- leads  to hospitalization,  or 
- persists  for > 1 week  unless deemed  not clinically important  per both 
investigator and sponsor  
• Grade  3 or 4 febrile  neutropenia  
• Grade 4  thrombocytopenia associated  with a bleeding  event deemed  at 
least possibly related to talimogene laherparepvec  and requiring 
intervention  
• Any other intolerable toxicity  leading  to permanent  discontinuation  of 
talimogene laherparepvec  
• Grade  5 toxicity  (ie. Death)  
If an unexpected DLT  deemed at least possibly rela ted to talimogene 
laherparepvec  occurs,  talimogene  laherparepvec administration  should  be 
delayed until the DLT has  resolved to at least CTCAE (v. 4.0) Grade 1.  
If talimogene laherparepvec dosing  is delayed  by more  than 6 weeks  from the 
date of the planned  dose due to the occurrence  of an adverse event that is 
considered related to talimogene laherparepvec, the subject  must  be 
permanently taken off talimogene laherparepvec treatment.  
11.1.3  Dose  Reductions  
Dose  reductions with regards to changes in the concentrations of talimogene 
laherparepvec are  not permitted.  However, patients  may require a  reduction in 
the volume injected due to a disease  response (defined in dosing section)  or 
due to local toxicity at the i njection site. However, if in the course  of 
administration  of talimogene laherparepvec the  subject  cannot  tolerate the  full 
dose  due to an  injection -related  adverse  event such  as pain, the  total volume 
given should be recorded, and the reason for intoleran ce should be 
documented as an adverse event.  
11.1.4  Talimogene  Laherparepvec  Dosage  Adjustments, Delays, Rules  for 
Withholding  or Restarting, Permanent Discontinuation  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 16 -224 A(11)  
Approval date: 10 -Sep-2019  
Page  22 of 36  
 If talimogene laherparepvec treatment  was delayed  by > 2 weeks,  that dose  will 
be deemed to have been missed  and the subject will proceed to the next 
scheduled treatment visit. Dose reductions of talimogene laherparepvec  is not 
permitted, other than a reduction in the volume injected due to a disease 
response.  
If a sub ject experiences any of the following treatment -related toxicities, 
talimogene  laherparepvec administration  should  be delayed until  the toxicity  has 
resolved to at least CTCAR grade 1 or baseline:  
• Grade 2  or greater immune -mediated  adverse events,  with the exception 
of vitiligo  
• Grade  2 or greater  allergic  reactions  
• Any other  grade  3 or greater  hematologic  or non-hematologic  toxicity  
Subjects  who are receiving  talimogene laherparepvec may  not receive  systemic 
antiherpetic drugs (eg, acyclovir, valacyclovir, famciclovir), but may receive a 
topically administered antiherpetic  drug more  than 20 cm from a talimogene 
laherparepvec  injection site. Dosing should be permanently discontinued if, in 
the opinion  of the investigator, the  subject develops clinical  evidence of any 
systemic  herpes  infection (such  as encephalitis  or disseminated  infection). If  the 
subject  requires corticosteroid  dosing  of > 10 mg  prednisone daily (or  equivalent) 
for related toxicities, talimogene  laherparepvec dosing must  be withheld until the 
corticosteroid  dose has decreased to < 10 mg  prednisone daily (or equivalent).  
Talimogene  laherparepvec treatment  should  be continued  based  on the potential 
benefit/risk assessment  of the subject. If talimogene laherparepvec  dosing is 
delayed by more than 4 weeks from the date of the planned  dose (ie, 
approximately 6 weeks  or 7 weeks  depending whether the patient is receiving 
Q2W or Q3W dosing  from t he previous  dose) due to the occurrence  of an 
adverse event that is  considered related to talimogene laherparepvec,  the 
subject must  be permanently withdrawn from talimogene laherparepvec 
treatment.  
Talimogene laherparepvec is  to be  permanently  discontinue d for subjects 
meeting any of the following criteria:  
• The subject, for any reason, requires treatment with  another anticancer 
therapeutic agent for treatment of the study disease.  In this case, 
discontinuation from  the treatment  occurs  immediately  upon  introduction 
of the new agent.  
• Confirmed  PD 
• A grade  2 or greater  immune -mediated  adverse  event (with  the exception 
of vitiligo)  or allergic reactions  attributed to  talimogene laherparepvec  
that would  require a  dose  delay of  greater than 4  weeks  from the  date of 
the planned  dose (ie, approximately  6 weeks  from the previous dose).  
Note:  immune -mediated  glomerulonephritis, vasculitis,  and pneumonitis 
and exacerbation  of psoriasis  have  been  observed  in subjects  receiving  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 16 -224 A(11)  
Approval date: 10 -Sep-2019  
Page  23 of 36  
 talimogene laherparepvec in  clinical trials.  Most of  these  subjects  had a 
history  of other autoimmune  disease  and/or prior treatment with  agents 
that offered  plausible  alternative etiologies,  however,  immune -mediated 
adverse events can  potentially involve any organ system  
• Any other talimogene laherparepvec -related non -hematologic or 
hematologic toxicities grade  3 or greater occur  that, in  the opinion of the 
investigator, would require  a dose  delay of  greater than  4 weeks from the 
date of the planned  dose (ie, approximately  6 weeks  from the previous 
dose)  
• The subject  develops  clinical  evidence of  any systemic  herpes  infection 
(such  as encephalitis or disseminated infection)  
• A female  subject  becomes  pregnant  or fails t o use  acceptable  method(s) 
of affective contraception (for those subjects who are able to conceive)  
• Concurrent  medical  illness that, in  the judgment  of the  investigator, would 
make  continued treatment with  talimogene laherparepvec dangerous for 
the subject  
For additional  information related to  special  warnings  and precautions for  the use  of 
talimogene laherparepvec, please refer to the latest version of the Investigator’s 
Brochure.  
11.2 Side  effects  of radiation  therapy  for cutaneous  metastasis  are listed  below.  
 
Common  Terminology  Criteria  
Adverse  Event  Grade 1 
frequency  Grade 2 
frequency  Grade 3 
frequency  Grade 4 
frequency  
Radiation  dermatitis  100%  50% 10% <2% 
Pruritis  50% 10%   
Pain of skin 50% 10% <2%  
Skin ulceration  50% 10% <2%  
Alopecia  100%  10%   
Skin hyperpigmentation  50% 10% <2%  
Skin hypopigmentation  100%  10%   
Telangiectasia  50% 10%   
Skin atrophy  100%  10% <2%  
Skin induration  100%  10% <2%  
 
12.0 CRITERIA  FOR  THERAPEUTIC  RESPONSE/OUTCOME  ASSESSMENT  
The primary  endpoint  for systemic  efficacy  is the  week  16 response  of the  largest  metastasis 
not injected with Talimogene Laherparepvec  or irradiated.  Overall  subject level response  is 
defined as partial or complete (>50%  or greater decrease in largest lesion) by  the modified 
World  Health  Organization (mWHO)  criteria,  and will include measurements  of tumor size  by 
CT component  of PET/CT,  by standard uptake value (SUV) by PET  component of PET/CT, 
and clinically  by digital photography.  Please  see Appendix A for complete  radiographic 
assessment details and the mWHO response criteria.  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 16 -224 A(11)  
Approval date: 10 -Sep-2019  
Page  24 of 36  
 Study radiologists will be specifically informed which lesion is the target for response 
assessment.  A separate calculation  of response  within and outside  the irradiated volume w ill 
be determined.  Study radiologists will  be blinded, however, as  to which  treatment arm the 
patient has been assigned.  
Radiographic imaging  evaluations are considered  standard of  care for patients  treated for 
cutaneous metastases.  
Patients  are considered  evaluable  for the primary  endpoint  if they:  
• Receive  one dose  of Talimogene Laherparepvec, and  for patients enrolled on Arm  A, 
one dose  of RT,  as well as a baseline and at least one post -baseline disease 
assessment  
• Discontinue  the study  due to  symptomatic  progression,  death,  or toxicity  at any  point, 
even  if they have not  received one dose  of Talimogene Laherparepvec and  one dose 
of RT  
Patients who  discontinue  the study  and do  not meet  evaluable  criteria  above are replaceable. 
In this event, the replacement patient will be assigned  to the same  treatment arm that lost a 
patient.  
Patient reported  health -related  quality  of life outcomes  will be assessed  using  the Skindex -16 
(Appendix  B). The Skindex -16 is a 1 page instrument  consisting  of 16  items with  responses 
provided on a 7 -point Likert scale  based on experience over the last week.  Responses  are 
categorized in 3 subscales:  emotions,  functioning, and symptoms,  with combined  subscale 
scores  yielding an overa ll score  ranging from  0 (best) to 100 (worst).  Of the 16 items in the 
instrument, 7 contribute to  symptoms,  4 contribute to  emotion, and  5 contribute to 
functioning.  In a psychometric  analysis,  subscales  have a high degree of internal 
consistency  reliability  (Cronbach’s alpha = 0.86, 0.93, 0.92 for symptoms,  emotions and 
functioning).  The subscale  scores were also highly reproducible  after 72  hours (r= 0.90, 
0.89,  and 0.88 for symptoms,  emotions  and functi oning)  (Chren MM  J Cutan Med  Surg 
2001).  
13.0 CRITERIAFOR  REMOVAL  FROM  STUDY  
Consent  for participation in the  study  may be withdrawn by  the patient or  patient’s health 
care proxy at any time.  
If at any  time,  the patient develops clinically  significant progressive  disease,  s/he will be 
withdrawn from the study and referred for alternative  therapy.  
If at any  time the patient is  found to  be ineligible  for the protocol  as designated  in the  section 
on Criteria for  Subject  Eligibility  (i.e., a  change  in diagnosis),  the patient will be  removed  from 
the study.  
If at any  time,  the protocol  therapy jeopardizes the safety  of the patient, s/he  may be 
withdrawn from the study.  
14.0 BIOSTATISTICS  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 16 -224 A(11)  
Approval date: 10 -Sep-2019  
Page  25 of 36  
 Patients will be  randomized  into two separate arms  (stratified  by disease  type), each  of which 
will use a Simon’s optimal two -stage design to assess the primary endpoint of systemic 
response  (defined  as patients  achieving partial response  or complete response) of a 
metastasis that was not injected or irradiated.  The single largest measureable metastatic 
disease site will be used for this assessment  16 weeks after the first  dose of Talimogene 
Laherparepvec. For each arm,  a 7.5% or lower response rate is considered not promising, a 
27% or higher response  rate is considered  promising, and  the prob abilities  of a type  I error 
(falsely accepting  a non -promising therapy) and type II error (falsely rejecting a promising 
therapy) are set to 0.10 and 0.20, respectively.  
In the first stage, 9  evaluable  patients will be  accrued  to each  arm. If at least 1  patient 
achieves response  among these 9 patients, then an additional  6 patients  will be accrued  to 
that arm  in the second  stage.  If no patients achieve response  then that arm  will be  closed  to 
further accrual  and declared negative.  At the end  of the  trial if 3 or more  patients achieve 
response  out of 15 then that treatment arm will be considered worthy of further  
investigation.  This design  has an  early stopping  probability of 0.06  if the  true response  rate is 
at least 27%  and 0.50  if the  true response  rate is at most  7.5%.  Although  a comparison  will 
be done between the two arms by a two -sample  proportion test on response  rates, this 
sample  size may  not have enough power to distinguish the two arms.  Thus  if both treatment 
arms are declared worthy of fur ther investigation  compared  to historical control rate, the 
treatment arm with the higher  observed response rate will be selected as the preferred 
treatment modality for future studies.  The probabilities  of selecting  correctly  the arm with  the 
true higher response  rate are given below.  The maximum  number of patients  needed is  30, 
for which we e xpect to enroll in 36 months.  
 
True response  rates  for the two arms  27% 
vs 
35% 27% 
vs 
40% 27% 
vs 
45% 30% 
vs 
35% 30% 
vs 
40% 35% 
vs 
40% 35% 
vs 
45% 35% 
vs 
50% 
Probability  of picking  the correct  arm 
(i.e., the  one with  the higher response 
rate) 0.61 0.72 0.80 0.54 0.65 0.54 0.65 0.74 
 
Note that in  the above, all  patients are  assumed  evaluable.  However, it  might happen that 
some  patients are not evaluable  due to  various reasons such  as withdrawal or loss  to follow - 
up, etc. Such  inevaluable  patients  will be replaced. We  expect that about 13% of patients 
might  need to  be replaced.  In other words,  we expect  to enroll  up to  34 patients in total.  The 
clinical  efficacy  of Talimogene Laherparepvec  will be measured  by the  ORR  and summarized 
by the s ample  proportion  for each of the two arms.  A comparison  will be  done  between the 
two arms.  Safety of Talimogene Laherparepvec  will be summarized  and compared  similarly. 
QOL  total and subscale  scores will be  summarized  numerically  and graphically,  and trends 
will be observed  and reported per arm.  Wilcoxon  rank sum  tests  will also be used  to compare 
the QOL scores between  the two arms for each assessment  time point.  DOR will be 
assessed  using  actuarial curves based on patients who ac hieved response  and compared 
between the two arms using a stratified log -rank test.  Time to response onset, progression 
free and overall survival will  be analyzed in  a similar way  but will  be based  on all patients.  
Immunologic response  data will be  summari zed descriptively,  with mean,  median  and 
standard deviations calculated.  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 16 -224 A(11)  
Approval date: 10 -Sep-2019  
Page  26 of 36  
 15.0 RESEARCH PARTICIPANT  REGISTRATION  AND  RANDOMIZATION PROCEDURES  
15.1 Research  Participant  Registration  
 
Confirm eligibility as defined in  the section  entitled Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria. Obtain 
informed consent, by following procedures defined in section  entitled  Informed Consent 
Procedures.  During the registration process registering individuals  will be required to 
complete  a protocol  specific  Eligib ility Checklist.  The individual  signing  the Eligibility  Checklist 
is confirming  that the participant  is eligible  to enroll in  the study. Study staff are  responsible 
for ensuring that all institutional requirements necessary  to enroll a participant to the s tudy 
have been completed.  See related Clinical Research  Policy and Procedure  #401 (Protocol 
Participant Registration).  
15.2 Randomization  
 
Patients will be randomized into two separate arms (stratified by disease type). Once  the 
participant’s  eligibility  is established,  the registration  will be finalized  and the participants  will 
be randomized using the Clinical Research  Database (CRDB).  Rand omization  will be 
accomplished  by the method of random permuted block, and will be stratified by disease 
type. After treatment arm  is determined by  randomization, RSAs at MSKCC will notify the 
physicians at MSKCC of the treatment arm  and participant ID via  email  within 24  hours of 
randomization.  
16.0 DATA  MANAGEMENT  ISSUES  
A Research  Study  Assistant  (RSA)  will be assigned  to this study.  The responsibilities of  the 
RSA include project compliance,  data collection, abstraction and entry, data reporting, 
regulatory  monitoring, problem  resolution  and prioritization,  and coordination  of the  activities 
of the protocol study team.  
The data collected  for this study  will be  entered into the  Clinical Researc h Database  (CRDB). 
Source documentation will be available  to support the computerized  patient record.  
Data  
 
Standardized Case  Report  Forms  (CRFs)  will not be  used  for this study.  Data  will be entered 
directly into the CRDB.  The study  RSA will ensure data i s populated  in the CRDB  accurately 
and in a timely manner.  
Source  Documentation  
Source  documentation  refers  to original records  of observations, clinical  findings  and 
evaluations  that are  subsequently recorded  as data. Source  documentation  should  be 
consistent with data entered into CRDB.  
16.1 Quality  Assurance  
 
Monthly registration reports will  be generated to  monitor  patient accrual  and completeness  of 
registration data.  Routine data -quality reports will be generated to assess  missing  data an 
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 16 -224 A(11)  
Approval date: 10 -Sep-2019  
Page  27 of 36  
 inconsistencies.  Accrual  rates,  and extent and accuracy  of evaluations and follow -up, will  be 
monitored  periodically and  potential  problems  will be  brought to  the attention of the  study 
team for discussion and reaction.  
Random -sample  data quality  and protocol compliance  audits will be  conducted  by the study 
team,  at a minimum  of two times  per year,  with the first  audit occurring  after the 3rd patient  is 
registered, and then more  frequently if indicated.  The audit will include  a review of source 
documentation to evaluate compliance for:  
• Informed  consent  documents  and procedures  
• Adherence  to eligibility  criteria  
• Protocol  defined  treatment  
• Required  baseline,  on study  and follow -up protocol  testing  
• IRB documents  (submitted  amendments,  annual  continuing  review  reports,  SAEs)  
After the audit is complete, a summary  will be sent to the PI and research team.  The 
summarized  findings will generate specific recommendations for corr ecting shortcomings or 
inadequately performed  tasks.  The audit report  and any corrective  plans will  be submitted  to 
the IRB/PB, CRQA  and maintained in the department’s protocol regulatory binder.  
16.2 Data  and Safety  Monitoring  
The Data  and Safety Monitoring (DSM) Plans  at Memorial Sloan -Kettering Cancer Center 
were  approved by the  National Cancer  Institute in  2001.  The plans address  the new  policies 
set forth by the  NCI in the  document  entitled “Policy  of the  National  Cancer  Institute for  Data 
Safety and Monitoring  of Clinical Trials”  which can be found at:  
http://www.cancer.gov/clinicaltrials/conducting/dsm -guidelines/page1  
The DSM  Plans at  MSKCC were  established  and are  monitored by  the Office  of Clinical 
Research.  The MSKCC  Data and  Safety Monitoring Plans can  be found on  the MSKCC 
Intranet at:  
http://smskpsps9/dept/ ocrOCR%20Website%20Documents/Clinical%20Research%20Quality  
%20Assurance%20(CRQA)/MSKCC%20Data%20and%20Safety%20Monitoring%20Plan.pdf  
There  are several  different mechanisms  whereby  clinical  trials are monitored  for data, safety, 
and quality.  There are institutional proces ses in place for quality  assurance  (e.g., protocol 
monitoring, compliance  and data verification audits, therapeutic response, and staff 
education on clinical research  quality  assurance)  and departmental procedures for quality 
control, plus there are two institutional committees that are responsible for monitoring the 
activities of our clinical trials programs.  The committees,  Data  and Safety Monitoring 
Committee  (DSMC) for Phase I and II clinical trials, and the Data and Safety  Monitoring 
Board (DSMB) for Phase  III clinical trials, report to the Center’s Research  Council and 
Institutional Review Board.  
During  the protocol  development and review process,  each  protocol  will be assessed  for its 
level of risk  and degree of monitoring required. Every  type of protocol (e.g., National 
Institutes of  Health  sponsored,  in-house sponsored,  industrial sponsored,  National  Cancer  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 16 -224 A(11)  
Approval date: 10 -Sep-2019  
Page  28 of 36  
 Institute cooperative group, etc.)  will be addressed  and the  monitoring procedures  will be 
established at the time of protocol activation.  
16.3 Regulatory  Documentation  
 
Prior  to implementing this protocol  at MSKCC,  the protocol,  informed  consent  form,  HIPAA 
authorization  and any  other information pertaining to  participants must  be approved by  the 
MSKCC Institutional  Review Board/Privacy Board (IRB/PB).  
16.3.1  Amendments  
 
Each  change  to the protocol  document  must  be organized  and documented  by MSKCC and 
first approved by the MSKCC IRB/PB.  
16.3.2  Additional  IRB Correspondence 
Prospective and  Retrospective Deviations  
A protocol  deviation  Is any change  or departure  from an  IRB approved research  protocol 
and/or the MSK IRB Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs).  Deviation may be either 
prospective or retrospective.  
 
A prospective  deviation  is one that requires  IRB approval  piror to implementing the  proposed 
change. As per IRB SOP  RR-407, only specif ic events require a prospective deviation 
request. These include requests to treat a research  participant who does not meet all 
eligibility  criteria,  who requires alteration in their treatment  plan or requires a change in  the 
informed consent procedures ou tlines  in the IRB SOP.  
A retrospective deviation is  a deviation that has already occurred.  Any retrospective 
deviations that do  not meet  the definition  of an unanticipated  problem must  be reported to  the 
Human  Research  Protection  Program (HRPP)  Office  within 10 business  days of identification 
by the  MSK PI or study  team. These  deviations will  be reviewed and  approved by the  HRPP 
staff and escalated to the IRB Chair/Associate  Chairs, as appropriate.  
16.3.3  Document  Maintenance  
 
The MSKCC  PI will maintain  adequate  and accurate  records  to enable the implementation  of 
the protocol to be fully  documented  and the data to be subsequently verified.  
A regulatory binder will be  maintained at MSKCC; this binder  will be electronic. 
After study  closure,  study  related documents  and CRFs will  be retained for  3 years.  
17.0 PROTECTION  OF HUMAN  SUBJECTS  
This protocol  does not involve children, because  children do  not develop cutaneous 
metastases from melanoma,  Merkel  cell carcinoma  or other solid malignancies often, and 
radiation therapy is preferable for  adult patients.  This statement  is based  on exclusion 4B  of 
the NIH Policy  and Guidelines on  the Inclusion of Children as  Participants in Research 
Involving  Human  Subjects.  In confor mity with the NIH Revitalization  Act of  1993, every  effort  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 16 -224 A(11)  
Approval date: 10 -Sep-2019  
Page  29 of 36  
 will be made  to include participation of  all ethnicities.  There will  be no  restrictions  based  on 
racial/ethic background.  The risk of participating in  this protocol is  related to the  risk of skin 
injury from radiation (radiation dermatitis,  pruritis,  pain of  skin, skin  ulceration,  alopecia, skin 
hyperpigmentation,  skin hypopigmentation,  telangiectasia, skin  atrophy, skin  induration), 
and/or the risk of undertreating  the cutaneous metastasis.  These  risks are low, and the 
relative  risk/benefit is favorable, compared  with other treatment  options.  Alternative  options 
for management include observation, topical or systemic chemical  or immunologic therapy.  
 
Subjects will be res ponsible for all charges associated  with the items that are part of the 
routine  clinical  care,  including diagnostic  evaluations  as well as the intralesional injections 
and radiation therapy procedures.  The subjects will not be compensated  for their 
participation.  If a patient is injured as  a result of being in  this study, emergency  care, 
hospitalization, and outpatient care  will be made  available  by the hospital  and billed to  the 
patient and his/her insurance company  as part of his/her medi cal expenses.  
The exams, tests  or procedures  in the  study are  part of regular cancer  care.  The patient 
and/or health plan/insurance  company  will need to  pay for  the following tests  in the  study:  
• Pathology  review  
• Physical  exam  
• Blood  tests 
• Imaging  tests 
• Intralesional  drug administration  
• Radiation  therapy  
17.1 Privacy  
 
MSK’s Privacy Office  may allow the use and disclosure  of protected health information 
pursuant  to a completed  and signed  Research  Authorization  form.  The use  and disclosure  of 
protected health in formation will be limited to the individuals  described  in the Research 
Authorization  form.  A Research  Authorization  form must  be completed by the Principal 
Investigator  and approved  by the IRB and Privacy  Board (IRB/PB).  
17.2 Serious  Adverse  Event  (SAE)  Reporting  
 
An adverse  event  is considered  serious  if it results  in ANY of the following  outcomes:  
• Death  
• A life-threatening  adverse  event  
• An adverse  event that results  in inpatient hospitalization  or prolongation of existing 
hospitalization  
• A persistent  or significant  incapacity  or substantial disruption  of the  ability  to conduct 
normal life functions  
• A congenital  anomaly/birth  defect  
• Important Medical Events (IME)  that may not result  in death, be  life threatening,  or 
require hospitalization may  be considered  serious  when,  based upon  medical  judgment, 
they may jeopardize the patient or subject and may require medical  or surgical 
intervention  to prevent one of the outcomes  listed in this definition  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 16 -224 A(11)  
Approval date: 10 -Sep-2019  
Page  30 of 36  
 Note : Hospital admission  for a planned procedure/disease  treatment  is not  considered  an 
SAE.  
 
SAE reporting is required as soon  as the participant signs consent.  SAE reporting is 
required  for 30-days  after the  participant’s last  investigational treatment  or intervention.  Any 
events that occur  after the 30 -day period and  that are  at least possibly  related to protocol 
treatment must be reported.  
 
If an SAE requires submission  to the IRB office per IRB SOP  RR-408 ‘Reporting of Seriou s 
Adverse Events’,  the SAE  report must  be sent to the IRB within 5  calendar  days of the  event. 
The IRB requires a Clinical Research  Database  (CRDB) SAE report be submitted 
electronically to the SAE Office as follows:  
Reports  that include a  Grade 5  SAE should be  sent to saegrade5@mskcc.org . All other 
reports should be sent to sae@mskcc.org . 
The report  should contain  the following  information:  
Fields  populated  from CRDB:  
• Subject’s  initials  
• Medical  record  number  
• Disease/histology  (if applicable)  
• Protocol  number  and title 
Data  needing to be  entered:  
• The date the adverse  event  occurred  
• The adverse  event  
• The grade  of the event  
• Relationship  of the adverse  event  to the treatment  (drug,  device,  or intervention)  
• If the AE was expected  
• The severity  of the AE 
• The intervention  
• Detailed  text that includes  the following  
o A explanation  of how the AE  was handled  
o A description  of the subject’s  condition  
o Indication  if the subject  remains  on the study  
• If an amendment  will need  to be made  to the protocol  and/or  consent  form 
• If the  SAE is an Unanticipated  Problem  
The PI’s signature  and the date it was signed  are required  on the completed  report.  
17.2.1  Sponsor Reporting  
17.2.1.1  Safety  Reporting  to Amgen  
 
The Sponsor/Investigator  is responsible for compliance  with expedited  reporting 
requirements  for serious,  unexpected and related adverse  events  (SUSARs),  for generati on 
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 16 -224 A(11)  
Approval date: 10 -Sep-2019  
Page  31 of 36  
 of SAE reports  including narratives, and for  periodic  reporting to Amgen  of SAEs  are outlined 
in Table 3 and  Table 4 below. Individual  safety  reports (table  3) should  be accompanied  by 
the Fax Cover Form provided and  sent to Amgen  Global  Safety, utilizing the fax or email 
information provided on  the cover page. Aggregate safety reporting (table  4) including 
listings, tabulations  and summary  reports should be scanned and accompanied  by the Fa x 
Cover  Form provided and  sent to Amgen  NASCR, utilizing the  email  information provided on 
the cover page.  
In addition  to the requirements  outlined  in Table  3 and 4  Sponsor/Investigators are  required 
to report direct  exposures  to talimogene  laherparepvec  (e.g., needle stick,  splash  back)  of 
herpetic illness and all suspected  herpetic  events  (refer  to Section 17.2.1.2 ‘Accidental 
Exposures to Talimogene Laherparepvic  and Herpetic Event Reporting’).  
Table  3 Reporting  Requirements  for Interventi onal Studies  
 
Safety  Data Timeframe  for Submission  to Amgen  
Suspected  Unexpected Serious  Adverse  Reaction 
(SUSARs)  Individual  reports  sent to Amgen  at time 
of expedited  reporting to IRB  
Serious  Adverse Events  (SAEs)  (related)  Individual  reports  sent to Amgen at  time 
of expedited  reporting  to IRB 
Pregnancy/Lactation  Individual  reports  sent within  10 days  of 
Sponsor/Investigator  awareness  
Individual  reports should  be faxed to  1-888-814-8653 or  scanned  and sent  via email  to svc - 
ags-in-us@amgen.com  
Table  4. Aggregate  Reports  
 
Safety  Data Timeframe  for submission  to Amgen  
Adverse  events  (all serious  and non-serious  
adverse  events,  regardless  of relatedness)  Line listing  and summary  tabulation  of all 
adverse  events  sent annually AND at  end of 
study  
US IND Annual  Safety  Report  Annually  
Other  Aggregate  Analyses  
(any report  containing  safety  data generated 
during the course  of the study)  At time of ISS sponsor  submission  to any 
body  governing research  conduct  (e.g., RA, 
IRB, etc.)  
Final  (End  of Study)  Report,  including:  
• Unblinding  data for blinded  studies  
• Reports  of unauthorized use  of a 
marketed product  At time of ISS sponsor  submission  to any 
body  governing research  conduct  (e.g., RA, 
IRB, etc.)  but not  later than  1 calendar  year 
after study completion  
Aggregate  reports should  be submitted  via email  to the Amgen  NASCR manager, 
accompanied by the Fax Cover Form  
17.2.1.2  Accidental  Exposures to  Talimogene Laherparepvec  and Herpetic 
Event  Reporting  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 16 -224 A(11)  
Approval date: 10 -Sep-2019  
Page  32 of 36  
 In order to  better assess  and understand  the potential risks to  treated patients and/or 
third parties following the treatment of clinical trial subjects with talimogene 
laherparepvec, special reporting procedures apply for accident exposures to 
talimogene laherparepvec and for suspected  herpetic events. See Table 5 bel ow 
“Accidental Exposure and Herpetic Event Reporting Requirement Summary”.  
Clinicians  should  review the  lmlygic  package  insert  (available  online)  for additional 
information on the safe  handling of talimogene laherparepvec.  
17.2.1.2.1  Accidental  Exposure  of HCPs  to Talimogene  Laherparepvec  
 
HCPs  involved  in your clinical trial who were directly exposed to talimigene 
laherparepvec (e.g., needle stick,  splash  back)  but who are without signs  or 
symptoms  of herpetic  illness  should  be reported  to Amgen  at 1-855-IMLYGIC 
(1-855-465-9442).  
17.2.1.2.2  Suspected  Herpetic  Events  
Suspected  herpetic  events  must  be reported  to Amgen  within 24 hours  of 
awareness.  
Reporting is  required for: (1) suspected  herpetic events in treated patients; (2) 
suspected  herpetic events  in at risk HCPs with  direct or  indirect  exposure and  (3) 
suspected  herpetic events in treated patient’s close  contacts.  
In addition  to reporting these  events,  suspected  herpetic lesions  should be  swabbed 
and submitted  for qPCR testing for the detection of talimogene laherparepvec.  
Samples  should  be collected  using  appropriate  technique  and a flocked  swab  from 
site supplies. This test  is likely  to be more  reliable if performed within the  first three 
days  of symptom  appea rance . However, all  lesions  should  be swabbed,  regardless 
of the timing  of presentation. Amgen does not  require qPCR  or other testing  for wide 
type HSV -1. 
o Reporting  Process  for ISS Treated  Patients:  
▪ Any suspected  herpetic lesion  should  be reported  to Amgen  at 1-855- 
IMLYGIC  (1-855-465-9442), evaluated by the Sponsor/Investigator 
and swabbed for qPCR testing  
▪ Once  an initial report has been made, additional  materials will be 
provided, including reporting forms  and supplies needed for shipment 
of swab  samples.  Amgen  will require patient consent  for qPCR  testing, 
which must be obtained prior to swabbing.  
o Reporting  Process  for HCPs  and Close  Contacs:  
▪ Sponsor/Investigator  should  advise  any HCPs  and/or  Close  Contacts 
with suspected  herpetic lesions to  contact their personal physician  to 
facilitate reporting to Amgen. Suspected  herpetic lesions should be 
reported by  the Sponsor/Investigator,  personal  phys ician or exposed 
individual to Amgen  at 1-855-IMLYGIC  (1-855-465-9442).  Once  an 
initial report has been  made, additional materials will  be provided, 
including reporting forms and supplies needed for the shipment of  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 16 -224 A(11)  
Approval date: 10 -Sep-2019  
Page  33 of 36  
 swab  samples.  Amgen will  require patient consent  for qPCR  testing, 
which must be obtained prior to swabbing.  
 
 
Table 5.  Accidental  Exposure  and Herpetic  Event  Reporting  Requirement  Summary  
 
Exposed 
Person   
Reporter  Timeframe  
for Reporting 
to Amgen  Report  
Mechanism  Timing  of Swab 
Collection  qPCR  
Testing 
Required?  Responsible  
Party  for 
Lesion  
Sw abbing  qPCR  Test 
Result 
Distributio  
n* 
Treated 
Patients 
w ith 
suspected 
herpetic 
lesions   
 
Sponsor  / 
Investigator  Within 24 
hours  of 
Sponsor  / 
Investigator 
aw areness  Contact  Amgen 
at 1-855- 
IMLYGIC  (1- 
855-465-9442)  
to report  event  Collect  sw abs 
fromsuspected 
lesions  (ideally 
w ithin 3 days  of 
appearance  of 
symptoms)   
Yes, if 
consent 
obtained   
 
Sponsor  / 
Investigator   
Sponsor  / 
Investigator 
and Amgen  
HCP directly  
exposed  to 
product 
(e.g.,  needle 
stick,  splash 
back)  
w ithout 
signs  or 
symptoms  of 
herpetic 
illness   
 
 
HCP’s  Personal 
Physician  or 
impacted  person   
 
Within 24 
hours  of 
Reporter 
aw areness   
 
Contact  Amgen 
at 1-855- 
IMLYGIC  (1- 
855-465-9442)  
to report  event   
 
 
 
N/A  
 
 
 
N/A  
 
 
 
N/A  
 
 
 
N/A 
HCP  directly 
or indirectly 
exposed  to 
product  w ith 
suspected 
herpetic  
lesions   
HCP’s  Personal 
Physician  or 
impacted  person   
Within 24 
hours  of 
Reporter 
aw areness  Contact  Amgen 
at 1-855- 
IMLYGIC  (1- 
855-465-9442)  
to report  event  Collect  sw abs 
fromsuspected 
lesions  (ideally 
w ithin 3 days  of 
appearance  of 
symptoms)   
Yes, if 
consent 
obtained   
HCP or 
HCP’s  
Personal 
Physician   
HCP’s  
Personal 
Physician 
and Amgen  
Close  
Contact  (eg 
caregiver, 
spouse, 
child)  w ith 
suspected 
herpetic  
lesions  Sponsor/ 
Investigator, 
Close  Contact’s 
Personal 
Physician  or 
Close  Contact   
Within 24 
hours  of 
Reporter 
aw areness  Contact  Amgen 
at 1-855- 
IMLYGIC  (1- 
855-465-9442)  
to report  event  Collect  sw abs 
fromsuspected 
lesions  (ideally 
w ithin 3 days  of 
appearance  of 
symptoms)   
Yes, if 
consent 
obtained  Sponsor/ 
Investigator, 
Close 
Contact’s 
Personal 
Physician  Sponsor/  
Investigator  
, Close 
Contact’s 
Personal 
Physician 
and Amgen  
*The lab conducting  the qPCR  testing  on behalf  of Amgen  is Viracor.  
 
18.0 INFORMED  CONSENT  PROCEDURES  
Before protocol -specified procedures are carried out,  consenting professionals will  explain  
full details of the  protocol  and study  procedures as  well as  the risks involved  to participants 
prior to their inclusion in  the study. Participants  will also  be informed  that they are  free to 
withdraw from  the study  at any time. All participants must  sign an IRB/PB -approved consent 
form indicating their consent to participate. This consent  form meets  the requirements of the 
Code  of Federal Regulations and  the Institutional  Review  Board/Privacy  Board  of this Center. 
The consent form will include the followi ng: 
1. The nature  and objectives,  potential  risks and benefits  of the intended  study.  
2. The length  of study  and the likely  follow -up required.  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 16 -224 A(11)  
Approval date: 10 -Sep-2019  
Page  34 of 36  
 3. Alternatives  to the proposed  study. (This will  include available  standard  and 
investigational therapies.  In addition,  patients will  be offered  an option  of supportive 
care for therapeutic studies.)  
4. The name  of the investigator(s)  responsible  for the protocol.  
5. The right of  the participant to  accept  or refuse  study  interventions/interactions  and to 
withdraw from participation  at any time.  
Before  any protocol -specific  procedures can  be carried  out, the consenting  professional  will 
fully explain  the aspects  of patient privacy concerning research  specific  information.  In 
addition to signing the IRB Informed Consent, all patients must  agree to the Research 
Authorization  component  of the informed consent form.  
Each  participant  and consenting  professional  will sign  the consent  form.  The participant must 
receive a copy of t he signed informed consent  form.  
 
19.0 REFERENCES  
 
Krathen  RA, Orengo  IF, Rosen  T. Cutaneous metastasis:  a meta -analysis of  data. South 
Med J. 2003 Feb;96(2):164 -7. PubMed link  
Shimozuma  K, Sonoo  H, Ichihara K.  Analysis of  the factors  influencing the  quality of life of 
patients with advanced or recurrent breast cancer.  Surg Today. 1995;25(10):874 -82. 
PubMed  link 
Richtig  E, Ludwig  R, Kerl H, Smolle  J. Organ - and treatment -specific  local response  rates to 
systemic and local treatment modalities in stage IV melanoma.  Br J Dermatol. 2005 
Nov;153(5):925 -31. PubMed link  
Spratt  DE, Gordon Spratt  EA, Wu  S, DeRosa  A, Lee  NY, Lacouture  ME, Barker CA.  Efficacy 
of skin-directed therapy for  cutaneous metastases  from advanced  cancer:  a meta -analysis.  J 
Clin Oncol. 2014 Oct  1;32(28):3144 -55. PubMed  link 
Postow  MA, Callahan MK,  Barker CA,  Yamada Y, Yuan J, Kitano S,  Mu Z, Rasalan  T, 
Adamow M,  Ritter E, Sedrak  C, Jungbluth  AA, Chua R,  Yang  AS, Roman  RA, Rosner S, 
Benson  B, Allison JP,  Lesokhin AM,  Gnjatic S,  Wolchok  JD. Immunologic correlates  of the 
abscopal  effect in  a patient with  melanoma.  N Engl J  Med.  2012 Mar 8;366(10):925 -31. 
PubMed  link 
Barker  CA, Postow  MA, Khan SA,  Beal K,  Parhar  PK, Yamada  Y, Lee NY, Wolchok  JD. 
Concurrent radiotherapy and ipilimumab i mmunotherapy for patients  with melanoma.  
Cancer  Immunol  Res. 2013 Aug;1(2):92 -8. PubMed  link 
Teulings  HE, Tjin EP, Willemsen  KJ, Krebbers G, van Noesel CJ, Kemp EH, Nieuweboer - 
Krobotova L, van der Veen JP, Luiten RM.  Radiation -induced melanoma -associated 
leucoderma, systemic antimelanoma  immunity and disease -free survival in a patient with 
advanced -stage  melanoma:  a case  report and  immunological  analysis.  Br J Dermatol.  2013 
Apr;168(4):733 -8. PubMed link  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 16 -224 A(11)  
Approval date: 10 -Sep-2019  
Page  35 of 36  
 Hu JC, Coffin  RS, Davis CJ, Graham NJ, Groves N, Guest PJ, Harrington KJ, James ND, 
Love  CA, McNeish I, Medley LC,  Michael A, Nutting  CM, Pandha  HS, Shorrock  CA, Simpson 
J, Steiner J, Steven NM,  Wright D, Coombes  RC. A phase I study  of OncoVEXGM -CSF,  a 
second -generation oncolytic herpes simplex virus expressing granulocyte macrophage 
colony -stimulating factor.  Clin Cancer  Res. 2006 Nov 15;12(22):6737 -47. PubMed link  
Senzer NN, Kaufman  HL, Amatruda  T, Nemunaitis M, Reid T, Daniels G, Gonzalez R, 
Glaspy  J, Whitman  E, Harrington  K, Goldsweig  H, Marshall  T, Love C,  Coffin R,  Nemunaitis  
JJ. Phase  II clinical  trial of a granulocyte -macrophage  colony-stimulating  factor -encoding,  
second -generation oncolytic herpesvirus in  patients with  unresectable  metastatic  melanoma. 
J Clin Oncol.  2009 Dec 1;27(34):5763 -71. PubMed  link 
Kaufman HL,  Kim DW,  DeRaffele G,  Mitcham J,  Coffin RS, Kim -Schulze  S. Local and 
distant  immunity  induced by  intralesional  vaccination  with an oncolyti c herpes virus encoding 
GM-CSF in patients  with stage  IIIc and IV melanoma.  Ann Surg  Oncol.  2010  Mar;17(3):718 - 
30. PubMed  link 
Andtbacka RHI,  Collichio  FA, Amatruda T, Senzer NN, Chesney  J, Delman  KA, Spitler LE, 
Puzanov  I, Doleman  S, Ye Y, Vanderwalde  AM, Coffin  R, Kaufman  H. OPTiM: A 
randomized  phase  III trial  of talimogene  laherparepvec (TALI MOGENE  LAHERPAREPVEC) 
versus  subcutaneous (SC)  granulocyte -macrophage  colony -stimulating factor (GM -CSF) for 
the treatment (tx) of unresected  stage  IIIB/C  and IV melanoma.  J Clin Oncol  31, 2013 
(suppl; abstr LBA9008).  ASCO link  
Andtbacka RHI,  Ross  MI, Delma  K, Noyes  RD, Zager  JS, Hsueh  E, Ollila DW,  Amatruda  T, 
Chen  L, VanderWalde A, Shilkrut M,  Kaufman  H. Responses  of Injected and  Uninjected 
Lesions  to Intralesional Talimogene  Laherparepvec (TALIMOGENE  LAHERPAREPVEC)  in 
the OPTiM Study and the Contribution of Surgery to Best Response.  HemOnc Today 
Melanoma and  Cutaneous Malignancies  meeting, April 2014.  
Touchefeu  Y, Vassa ux G, Harrington KJ.  Oncolytic  viruses  in radiation oncology. 
Radiother Oncol.  2011 Jun;99(3):262 -70. PubMed link  
Advani SJ,  Mezhir JJ, Roizman  B, Weichselbaum  RR. ReVOLT:  radiation -enhanced viral 
oncolytic therapy.  Int J Radiat Oncol  Biol Phys.  2006 Nov 1;66(3):637 -46. PubMed link  
Harrington KJ,  Hingorani M, Tanay  MA, Hickey  J, Bhide  SA, Clarke PM, Renouf  LC, Thway 
K, Sibtain  A, McNeish  IA, Newbold  KL, Goldsweig  H, Coffin  R, Nutting  CM. Phase  I/II study 
of oncolytic HSV GM -CSF in  combination  with radiotherapy and cisplatin  in untreated stage 
III/IV squamous  cell cancer  of the  head and  neck.  Clin Cancer  Res. 2010  Aug 
1;16(15):4005 -15. PubMed link  
Barker  CA, Postow  MA. Combinations  of radiation therapy  and immunotherapy  for 
melanoma: a review of clinical outcomes.  Int J Radiat Oncol  Biol Phys. 2014 Apr 
1;88(5):986 -97. PubMed link  
Chren  MM, Lasek  RJ, Sahay  AP, Sands  LP. Measurement properties  of Skindex -16: a  brief 
quality -of-life measure  for patients with skin diseases.  J Cutan Med  Surg. 2001 Mar - 
Apr;5(2):105 -10. PubMed link  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 16 -224 A(11)  
Approval date: 10 -Sep-2019  
Page  36 of 36  
  
 
20.0 APPENDICES  
Appendix  A. Radiographic  assessment  details  and the mWHO  response  criteria 
Appendix B.  Skindex -16 
Appendix  C. NCI PRO -CTCAE  v1.0 