 
                          Page 1 Protocol Title:   Family -Centered Cesarean: A Randomized Controlled Tri al 
 
Protocol Version:   11 
 
Protocol Date:    3/15/2019  
 
Locatio ns:   Aurora Sinai Medical Center , Milwaukee, Wisconsin  
    Aurora BayCare Medical Center, Green Bay, Wisconsin  
 
 
 
                          Page 2 I. BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE  
 
Cesarean section s are one of the most common surgical procedures performed world -wide . They 
are performed  for both maternal and neonatal indications .  Today , cesarean sections account f or 
20% of all births globally .1 From 1996 -2009, the rates of cesarean sections in the United States 
rose approximately 60%; these rates have  remained unchanged  since 2010 . The national rate  of 
cesarean deliveries in 2012 was 32.8% .2 
 
As the number of cesarean sections increase and vaginal deliveries decrease , women report that 
they are  less satisfied with their overall chi ld birthing  experience .1, 3-6 Mother and partner 
experience s differ between cesarean and vaginal delivery ; the biggest difference is that, during 
vaginal delivery , the newborn  is more often directly given to mom immediately after  birth , which 
initiates ear ly mother -newborn  interactions through skin -to-skin contact and breastfeeding. 
Additionally, a mother and her support people are able to see their child enter the world without 
a barrier between them.  Cesarean sections create  a delay in the mother -newborn  interaction , as 
the newborn is routinely separated from the mother . Such separation leads to later skin -to-skin 
contact  and makes it harder for mothers  to initiate breast feeding .1, 4 This separation also leads to 
greater dissatisfaction with the birth ing process and  a mother is more likely to feel she was  
unable to participate in the birth of her child.3  
  
To improve the overall child birthing experience, the family -centered/gentle cesarean delivery 
method mimic s a vaginal birth ing experience . Similar to a vaginal delivery, a mother can watch 
the birth , and the newborn  is immediately placed on the mother’s chest  following cesarean 
delivery. Studies have shown that immediate mother -newborn  interactions and  skin-to-skin 
contact is advantageous in promoting the bond between mother and newborn, breastfeeding,  and 
overall patient satisfaction with the birthing process .1, 5 The family -centered/gentle cesarean 
method is relatively new. Limited information is available in regards to differences in maternal 
and neon atal outcomes when comparing traditional cesarean  methods to that of the family -
centered/gentle cesarean . Additionally, available information often refers to this methodology as 
either family -centered cesarean or gentle cesarean; we will refer to this meth od as the family -
centered cesarean  from here on out . 
 
One European study conducted in Germany compared family -centered and traditional  cesarean 
delivery methods , and determined that no additional complications arose for mother or newborn 
when using the fam ily-centered cesarean method .6 Although the Memorial Hospital of Rhode 
Island has implemented the family -centered cesarean method as the standard of care during 
cesarean delivery, to our knowledge , no studies have been conducted in the United States that 
compare  the family -centered cesarean  method to traditional methods of cesarean delivery .4 
Magee et al. further supports that the techniques used in their hospital have not been evaluated 
and that the hospital’s approach to family -centered cesarean deliverie s should be further 
examined as it relates to maternal and neonatal outcomes , as well as overall patient satisfaction.4  
 
The purpose of this study is to determine if patient birthing experiences differ between the 
family -centered and traditional  cesarean methods . We hypothesize that the family -centered  
cesarean method  will lead to more unique and personal ized cesarean birthing experience s 
without increasing the risk s of adverse neonatal and maternal outcomes from those documented 
 
                          Page 3 with the traditional  cesar ean.  
 
II. SPECIFIC AIM S 
 
Primary Objective  
 
The primary objective of this study is to compare patient satisfaction  of the family -centered 
cesarean birthing experience  with that of  the traditional  cesarean experience .  
 
Secondary Objective  
 
The secondary objec tive of this study is to determine if skin-to-skin contact  (i.e., family bond 
initiation) occurs earlier  and in-hospital breastfeeding initiation  is more likely with the family -
centered cesarean delivery method than traditional cesarean  delivery method . 
 
Tertiary Objective  
 
The tertiary objective of this study is to determine if differences in maternal  and neonatal  
outcomes exist between  cesarean delivery methods  (family -centered versus traditional cesarean).  
 
III. STUDY DESIGN  
 
Subject Enrollment  
Women  undergo ing a scheduled cesarean delivery at  ≥38 weeks of gestation who present at  
Aurora Sinai Medical Center and Aurora BayCare Medical Center and have their bab ies 
delivered by obstetrics and gynecology physician s during June 1, 2016 through  May 31, 2019 
will b e enrolled in this study. Patients who meet the study criteria will be recruited via obstetrics 
and gynecology physician s on the day of their scheduled cesarean section. Patients who agree to 
participate in this study will be formally consented.  The study will be described to the patient 
using the following script , containing objective language so as to minimize bias  or influence 
when the patient is later asked to identify her preference of the 2 cesarean delivery method s. 
Note that Method 1 below describes  the family -centered delivery method, while Method 2 
describes the traditional  delivery  method.  
 
“We are conducting a patient satisfaction study on two methods of cesarean 
section.  Both of these methods are used throughout the United States , and neither 
has been proven to be better than the other. Method 1 involves lowering part of 
the surgical drape exposing a transparent window through which you can watch 
the birth of your baby ; the baby will be  placed on your chest immediately after the 
delivery. Cleani ng and evaluation of your baby  will be done by a nurse who is 
standing next to you at the head of the bed. Method 2 involves keeping the 
surgical drape up throughout the entire surgery so that the birthing process will 
not be visible, and your baby  will be  taken to the warmer to be evaluated and 
cleaned  after birth but is available to be laid on your chest at any point upon 
request .” 
 
 
                          Page 4 Randomization to Method  
Eligible patients will be formally consented on the day of their scheduled cesarean section s by 
the research coordinator, resident physician(s), charge nurse or nurse . Following enrollment , 
each patient will be asked to state which  method of cesarean delivery she would prefer, if given  
the option to choose . Preference represents a potential factor influe ncing patient satisfaction that 
will be later incorporated into the statistical analysis, based on a 2 x 2 factorial  (Method x 
Preference ) design . Documentation of preference at this time  (versus following random 
assignment to cesarean delivery method) is important for minimizing the bias or influence of the 
random assign ment upon the patient’s declared preference.  
 
The patient wi ll be randomized to 1 of the 2 delivery methods by the research coordinator , 
resident physician (s), charge nurse or nurse , who will present the patient with a sealed envelope. 
The envelope will contain a slip of paper identifying the patient’s random assignment to either 
the family -centered cesarean delivery method (Method 1) or the traditional delivery method 
(Method 2) . Fifty per cent of all envelopes preassembled for patients will contain paper slips 
stating “ Family -centered ”, while the remaining 50% will contain slips stating “ Traditional ,” 
allowing for a 1:1 allocation of delivery methods.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Subject Recr uitment & 
Enrollment  
Method 1: Family -centered 
Cesarean Delivery  
 Method 2: Traditional Cesarean 
Delivery   
Preference : 
Traditional  
 
(comprising Y% 
of women in 
Method 2)  
 Preference : 
Family -
centered  
(comprising X% 
of women in 
Method 2)  
 Preference : 
Traditional   
 
(comprising Y% 
of women in 
Method 1)  
 Preference : 
Family -
centered  
(comprising X% 
of women in 
Metho d 1)  Subjects Randomized 1:1 to  
Family -centered  and Traditional 
Cesarean Delivery Groups  
 
                          Page 5 Assessment of patient satisfaction following delivery  
The primary objective of this study is to compare  levels of patient satisfaction with the  birthing 
experience between  the two cesarean delivery method s. To assess patient satisfaction, each 
patient will be verbally surveyed by the study coordinator using an 11-item questionnaire . 
Similar to the questionnaire used by Armbrust and his colleagues6, items on our questionnaire 
will relate specifically to the mother’s birthing experience  and answers availa ble per item will be 
in the form of a modified Likert scale, ranging from 1, the lowest level of agreement or degree of 
satisfaction, to 5, the highest level of agreement or d egree of satisfaction. The survey questions 
will be asked before discharge (appro ximately within 48 hours after the delivery ), to allow 
sufficient opportunity for the mother and newborn  to bond before discharge . 
 
IV. STUDY POPULATION  
 
Pregnant patients who plan to deliver at Aurora Sinai Medical Center  (ASMC)  and Aurora 
BayCare Medical Cen ter (ABMC) will be enrolled in this study. ASMC  is a 177 -bed, urban 
community -based  hospital located in Milwaukee, Wisconsin. In 2014, 2 ,479 deliveries were 
performed at this facility with 26.4% of births deliver ed via cesarean sections. ABMC is a 167-
bed, urban community -based hospital, located in Green Bay, Wisconsin. In 2014, 1,623 
deliveries were performed at this facility with 26.4% of births delivered via cesarean section.  
These numbers reflect all cesarean deliveries, but do not necessarily reflect d eliveries that are 
planned, which may total less than ½ of all cesarean deliveries.  
Inclusion  
• Women ≥18 years of age  
• Women with planned  cesarean section  
• ≥38 weeks of gestation  
• Singleton fetus  
• Reassuring fetal status  (status of scheduled, green and some yellow)  
 
Exclusion  
• Women with an urgent or emergency clinical situation in which the medical staf f 
caring for the patient determines that obtaining consent would interfere with the 
patient’s clinical care  
• Patients that decline to consent to participate  (an opt out log including  the consenters 
initials, time  of day , and reason is kept)  
• Patients with anticipated heavy intraoperative bleeding ( bleeding disorders , placenta 
previa , suspected placenta abruption , etc.) 
• Known maternal co-morbidities  that could impact neonatal well -being (e.g., 
uncontrolled diabetes, etc.) 
• Chorioamnionitis or prolonged rupture of membranes (≥18 hours  in duration ) 
• Known fetal anomalies  
• BMI ≥ 45 kg/m2 
• Estimated fetal weight <2000 grams  
 
V. SAMPLE SIZE  
 
No randomized control led trials have focused on outcomes associated with the family -centered  
 
                          Page 6 cesarean method in the United States. Furthermore, t he only randomized controlled trial 
published in the obstetrics literature was a study conducted in Berlin, Germany by Armb rust and 
his colleagues, who assessed the eligibility of 250 women with indication for planned cesarean 
section. From thi s initial population, 205 total women  were randomized  to the study groups of 
Charité (family -centered) cesarean  delivery  and traditional  cesarean  delivery .6  
 
In our study, a factorial design with 2 design variables (Cesarean Delivery Method  [Gentle, 
Tradi tional ] and Preference  of Method  [Gentle, Traditional] ) will be used.  A sample size of 508 
total patients (127 patients in each of the 4 Method x Preference combinations) has been 
determined necessary t o detect a 0.5-point difference in mean satisfaction s cores (on a 5-point 
scale) and a 15 -minute difference in time -to-initiation of family bond between the 2 groups of 
each design variable, given 2 -factor generalized linear model ing with normally -distributed (or 
log-transformed ) responses, standard deviation  of 2 points (for satisfaction score) and 1 -hour (for 
family bond initiation) , alpha of 0.05, and power of 0.80 . Moreover, to detect a 15% difference 
in probability of breastfeeding prior to discharge between the 2 groups of each design variable 
using logi stic regression, a sample size of 432 total patients (108 patients in each of the 4 Method 
x Preference combinations) would be necessary. To detect  clinically -relevant  differences for all 
outcomes ( responses ) of interest  in the Primary and Secondary Object ives, we will target 508 
total patients.  
 
VI. DESCRIPTION OF DELIVERY METHODS  
 
Method 1: Family -centered cesarean  
Standard preoperative preparation will be performed  in the patient’s room , including surgical site 
hair clipping, chlorhexidine  wash  (at ASMC only ), IV placement , compl etion of pre -procedure 
operating room  checklist, and administration of prophylactic antibiotics , antiem etics (at ASMC 
only) , and fluids . The p atient will then be taken to the operating room . The p ulse oximeter will 
be placed on the mother, and the electrocardiogram leads will be  placed away from anterior chest 
wall or via an EKG back -patch to allow space for newborn  and mom skin contact. Regional 
spinal anesthesia will be administered in normal fashion. The m other will lie  down on the bed 
and, once sufficient anesthesia block is obtained, her gown will be removed and a blanket will be 
provided for her to cover her chest, allowing for easier skin -to-skin contact after delivery. Prior 
to the lowering of the drape, the mother’s head will b e elevated. Fetal heart tracing will be  
monitored until adequate block is obtained to confirm fetal well -being.  
 
Preoperative preparation will continue with abdomen preparation . We will then wait 3 minutes 
from wash to dry before placing the blue drape on the mother’s  abdomen and attach ing it to the 
IV poles, thereby screening the mother from the first part of the surgery.  After the fetal head 
enters the uterine incision , the opaque layer  of the drape will be  lowered , exposing a transparent 
drape layer that  will enable the mother and her support person to watch the birth. The drape will 
only be lowered and the rest of the family -centered technique carried out if no complications 
occur during the operation. In the event of unexpected complications , such as  heavy bleeding or 
problems with delivery  of the newborn ’s head, the surgical drape will not be lowered. Provided 
that the technique  is continued , the newborn ’s head , followed by the rest of the body , will be  
delivered by the surgeon in full view of the mothe r. The umbilical cord will be  clamped and cut 
by the surgeon , and the newborn  will then be handed off to the nurse waiting by the mother’s 
 
                          Page 7 head. The nurse will be holding a sterile drape to receive the newborn  and prevent contamination 
of the surgeon’s han ds. The nurse will then immediately place the newborn  on the mother’s bare 
chest skin, or be given to the mother’s support person, where the newborn  will be  dried and 
warmed with fresh towels. The opaque layer the drape will then be raised back up, screeni ng the 
mother from the remaining surgery.  
 
While on the mother’s chest, the newborn ’s well -being will be  initially evaluated by the nurse 
and respiratory therapist per hospital cesarean section protocol . APGAR scores  will be obtained , 
and the pulse oximet er will be applie d to the newborn’s right hand . Suctioning needed at that 
time will be performed using a bulb or mechanical suction . The n urse will remain near  the 
patient’s  head , as long as needed to ensure maternal and neonatal well-being . Should the mot her 
develop complications that prevent her from being able to comfortably hold the newborn , such as 
nausea/vomiting, fatigue , or drowsiness from medications, the nurse will be  available to help 
with the newborn . As long as the patient remains stable, t he newborn  will be  laid on mother’s 
chest in a way that allow s suckling. The newborn  vitamin K administration and erythromycin 
ointment can b e applied per hospital protocol , either while she is holding the newborn or after 
she is in recovery.  The newborn  will be weighed following  surgery , while the mother is 
transferred to her bed , unless she requests it be done earlier.  
 
Method 2: Traditional cesarean  
Standard preoperative preparation will be performed in the patient’s room , including surgical site 
hair clipp ing, chlorhexidine wash  (at ASMC only) , IV placement, completion of pre -procedure 
operating room  checklist, and administration of prophylactic antibiotics, antiem etics (at ASMC 
only) , and fluids. The patient will then be taken to the operating room . The pu lse oximeter will 
be placed on the mother’s finger , and electrocardiogram leads will be  placed in the usual fashion 
on the chest. Regional spinal anesthesia will be administered in normal fashion. The mother will 
lie down on the bed, and fetal heart tracin g will be  monitored until adequate block  is obtained to 
confirm fetal well -being.  
 
Preoperative preparation will continue with abdomen preparation. We will then wait 3 minutes 
from wash to dry before placing the blue drape on the mother’s  abdomen and attac hing it  to the 
IV poles, thereby screening the mother from the entire surgery . After delivery, the newborn will 
be handed off to a nurse  waiting  at the side of the mother who will take the newborn  to the 
warmer on the opposite side of the operating room.  The newborn  will be dried  and warmed with 
fresh towels  on the warmer , while being evaluated by the nurse and respiratory therapist per 
hospital cesarean section protocol . The nurse will then proceed with newborn  measurements, 
weight, bath, and administratio n of vitamin K and erythromycin ointment. The newborn  will be  
swaddled and kept in the warmer until the mom requests that the newborn  be brought to her or 
until the surgery has been completed and the mom is ready to be transferred to the recovery 
room.  
 
VII. DATA COLLECTION  
 
Patients will be followed throughout their hospital stay. The following variables of interest will 
be retrospectively collected from EPIC  or recorded during the surgery  on the OR Worksheet (* - 
Note, the OR Worksheet was updated on 2/16/201 8.):  
 
                          Page 8  
Maternal Variables of Interest  
• Medical record number  
• Date of birth  
• Delivery Hospital (0= ASMC ; 1=ABMC ) 
• Date of consent for scheduled cesarean section  
• Date of procedure  
• Calculated maternal age  
• Race 
• Ethnicity  
• Gravidity  (Gx)  
• Parity  (Pxxxx)  
• Gestational A ge (XwXd)  
• Height  (inches)  
• Weight  (lbs) 
• Calculated BMI  (kg/m2) 
• History of previous vaginal delivery (0=No; 1=Yes)  
• History of p revious cesarean delivery (0=No;  1=Yes)   
• Reason for previous cesarean delivery  
• History of previous abdominal/ pelvic s urgery (0=No; 1=Yes)  
• Reason for planned cesarean delivery  
• Type of cesarean delivery t echnique (0=Family -centered ; 1=Traditio nal) 
• Identified mother preference (0=Family -centered; 1=Traditional)  
• Type of cesarean d elivery (0=NA; 1=Classical; 2=Low Transverse)  
• Type of skin incision (0=NA; 1=Pfannenstiel; 2=vertical)  
• Operative s tart time (00:00:00)  
• Operative s top time (00:00:00)  
• Duration of o peration  (minutes)  
• Estimated b lood loss (mL) 
• Hemorrhage EBL >1000mL (0=No; 1=Yes)  
• Complications occurred (0=No; 1=Yes)  
• Type(s) of compli cation (s) that occurred  
• If the mother’s delivery technique was family -centered, was she switched to a 
traditional  cesarean? (0=No; 1=Yes) * 
• Was mom offered to view the birth of her baby?  (0=No; 1=Yes)*  
• If offered to view the birth of her baby, was the drape  dropped? (0=No; 1=Yes)*  
• Was mom/other support person offered baby right away? (0=No; 1=Yes)*  
• Physician Name  
• Did family bond occur in the OR? (0=No; 1=Yes)*  
• Time from birth to initiation of family bond  (minutes) * 
• Person w ho initiated family bond (0=Mother;  1=Father; 2=Other  Support Person )* 
• Family bond  interrupted in the OR (0=No; 1=Yes) * 
• Reason family bond  interrupted in the OR * 
• If the family bond DID NOT occur, why not?*  
 
                          Page 9 • Surgical site infection associated with this surgery (0=No; 1=Ye s) 
• Time to skin -to-skin contact  & all other related skin -to-skin variables identified  
• Breastfeeding status flowsheet data (3=Unknown; 2=No; 1=Yes)  
 
Neonatal Variables of Interest  
• Birth weight  
• 1-min APGAR  
• 5-min APGAR  
• Documented  neonatal  infection (0=No, 1=Yes)  
• Newborn heart r ate at 1 0 minutes * 
• Newborn respiratory rate at 10 minutes * 
• Newborn temperature at 1 0 minutes * 
• Time take n for newborn to reach  oxygen saturation >90%* 
 
Assessment of patient satisfaction will be conducted following delivery. Questions from a n 11-
item questi onnaire will be asked of the patient by the study coordinator, Jessica  Kram , or one of 
the resident physicians or the nurses/charge nurses at ASMC and study coordinator, Taylor 
Romdenne, or one of the nurses or charge nurses at ABMC . Please see the questio nnaire  
displayed in a separate document . 
 
Please note, that while we aim to obtain the OR worksheet and patient satisfaction survey from 
all patients enrolled in the study, there may be circumstances in which one or the other were not 
completed. If a patie nt has either the OR worksheet or the patient satisfaction survey completed, 
we will not exclude them from the study/analyses, but it will be adjusted for.  
 
We will perform interim analyses throughout the study . In order to identify those individuals 
who may not have been asked to participate within our study or who did not participate within 
our study (we will not know specifically who declined or who was not asked to participate),  we 
are requesting data from our Quality Teams, within our labor and delive ry units, and Research 
Analytics. I ndividuals who were classified as scheduled or planned non-emergent (green  or 
yellow ) cesarean deliveries will be identified , as planned emergent (those deemed red) cesarean 
deliveries are not eligible for the study . Addi tionally, all variables of interest identified above 
may be requested in addition to variables of interest that would allow us to further determine 
whether a patient was ever eligible for the study  (see study inclusion and exclusion criteria) .   
 
Please no te, the OR Worksheet and patient satisfaction surveys were updated on 2/16/2018. 
Based on our interium analyses, we have decided to change  the OR worksheet and patient 
satisfaction surveys to further clarify how we want data to be collected /recorded . Our 
biostatistician carefully reviewed the changes to make sure that we are acquiring the same 
information, but in a clearer manner (i.e., there is less room for interpretation). Furthermore, 
changes on the translated patient satisfaction survey were reviewed by a certified Aurora 
Translator, who verified that the document was clear/the changes made are appropriate . 
 
VIII.  STATISTICAL PLAN  
 
 
                          Page 10 To describe our study population and assess equivalency in characteristics among patients in the 
4 Method x Preference combinati ons, we will compute frequencies, means with 95% confidence 
intervals, and medians with interquartile ranges, as appropriate per variable type. Differences 
among the groups will be tested using the Pearson chi -squared test of independence, Student’s t -
test, or Wilcoxon’s rank sum test, respectively. To generally describe the outcomes (responses) 
corresponding to each of our 3 study objectives, both within and across the 4 Method x 
Preference combinations, we will again compute frequencies, means with 95% co nfidence 
intervals, and medians with interquartile ranges, as appropriate per variable type.  
 
For each outcome of interest, we will also develop a mixed regression model to examine the 
fixed main and interaction effects of Method  and Preference . All models  will be structured with 
appropriate response distributions, likely including the lognormal (normal distribution with 
natural log -transformed response) for continuous responses (e.g., time, weight, vitals), 
multinomial for survey questions of satisfaction,  and binomial for 2 -category outcomes (e.g., 
breastfeeding). Following back -transformation or exponentiation of parameter estimates, model 
results will be interpreted, respectively, as the percentage difference between groups, ratio of 
odds of a lower valu e, and ratio of odds of an outcome occurring. Unobserved outcome 
heterogeneity will be captured by the delivering physician nested within hospital, each 
combination of which will define a separate random variable and model intercept.  
 
IX. POTENTIAL RISK S AND B ENEFITS  
 
Risks associated with Method 1 (family -centered cesarean delivery ) include  unforeseen patient 
and/or family discomfort with viewing the surgical field. Patients will be made aware of the 
potential risk of such discomfort  prior to consenting to par ticipating in the study.  Notably, risks  
of this nature  are a normal  component of  any cesarean delivery. Therefore, we  will discuss the 
risk of viewing discomfort with all patients regardless of study participation.  An additional r isk 
associated with partic ipating in either method could be loss of confidentiality due to obtaining 
limited protected health information. However, to minimize risk, a ll data will be stored on a 
password protected computer.  
 
A potential benefit of our study is that we may be able gather level -1 evidence to support local, 
regional, and possibly broader use of a novel  method of cesarean delivery, currently being 
explored nation ally and internationally . We hypothesize that there will be improved maternal 
satisfaction using the family -centered method. We also hypothesize that neonatal morbidity will 
not be increased and benefits may include earlier skin -skin contact  and greater likelihood of 
breastfeeding .  
 
X. REFERENCES  
1. Alba -Romero  C, Cama ño-Gutiérrz I, López-Hern ández P , et al. Postcesar ean Section 
Skin-to-Skin Contact of Mother and Child. Journal of Human Lactation. 2014 ; 30(3): 
283-286. 
2. Martin JA, Hamilton BE, Osterman MJK, et al. National Vital Statistics Report - 
Births: Final Data for 2012.  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention . 2013 ; 62(9).  
3. Smith  J, Platt F, Fisk NM. The natural cesarean: a woman -centred technique.  BJOG.  
2008 ; 115:1037 -1042.  
 
                          Page 11 4. Magee SR, Battle C, Morton J, Nothnagle M. Promotion of Family -Centered Birth 
with Gentle Cesarean Delivery. Journal of American Board o f Family Medicine. 
2014; 27(5): 690 -693. 
5. Moran -Peters JA, Zauderer CR, Goldman S, et al. A Quality  Improvement Project 
Focused on Women’s Perceptions of Skin -to-Skin Contact After Cesarean Birth. 
Nursing for Women’s Health. 2014; 18(4): 296 -303. 
6. Armbrust  R, Hinkson L, Von Weizsä cker K, Henrich W. The Charité cesarean birth: 
a family orientated approach of cesarean section. The Journal of Maternal -Fetal & 
Neonatal Medicine.  2015 ; 1-6. 