Page 16of 75Abbreviations and Definitions of Terms
AE Adve rse event 
BDDE 1,4-butanediol digl ycidyl ether
CE “Conformité  Européenne” the qualit y and branding mark for products 
made or sold within the European Union.
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
CIP Clinical I nvestigational Plan
Childbearing 
PotentialThe ability  of a pre-menopausal female to become pregnant . This 
includes women using oral, injectable or barrier contraception; women 
who have had a tubal ligation; women who are single ;and women whose 
male partners have been vasectomized or utiliz ebarriercontraceptive 
methods.
CTA Clinical trial agreement
CTN Clinical trial number
CV Curriculum vitae
Device 
deficiencyInadequacy  of a medical device with respect to its identity , quality , 
durability , reliability , safety  or performance (includes malfunctions, use 
errors, and inadequate labelling)
DMP Data management plan
eCRF Electronic case report form
ET Early termination
FDA United States Food and Drug Administration
First subject in First subject screened, i.e. who signs the informed consent fo rm
First subject out First subject who completed their last study  visit
FST Fitzpatrick Skin Ty pe
G Gauge
GCP Good clinical practice
HA Hyaluronic acid
HIPAA Health Insurance Portability  and Accountability  Act
ICH International Conference on Harmonization
IFU Instructions for use
Investigational 
ProductMedical device being assessed for safet y or performance in a stud y. 
“Investigational product” is the same as “stud y device”, “investigational 
device”, or “in vestigational medical device”.

Page 17of 75Institution Any public or private entity  or agency  or medical or dental facility  where 
a clinical study  is conducted.
Investigator The Principal Investigator (PI) or other qualified person, i.e. sub -
investigator, designated and supervised b y the PI at a study site to 
perform critical study -related procedures or to make important study -
related decisions as specified on the signature and delegation log
Investigator file Essential documents relating to a clinical study  as defined in applicable 
GCP guidance document and maintained b y the Investigator.
IRB Institutional review board
ISO International Organization for Standardization
ITT Intention- to-treat
Last subject in Last subject who entered the study
Last subject out Last subject who completed their last study  visit
MedDRA Medical dictionary  for regulatory  activities
NSAID Non-steroidal anti -inflammatory  drugs
PI Principal I nvestigator; qualified person responsible for conducting the 
study  at a stud y site
PP Per protocol
PT Preferred term
QA Quality  assurance
RA Regulatory  authority
ROPI Report of Prior Investigations, i.e. compilation of the current clinical and 
non-clinical information on th e investigational product, relevant to the 
clinical study
SAE Serious adverse event
SAP Statistical Analy sis Plan
SDV Source data verification
SOC System Organ Class
Sponsor file Essential documents relating to a clinical study  as defined in applicabl e 
GCP guidance document and maintained b y the Sponsor.
Study  files The Investigator file and the Sponsor file
Study  products The investigational product and the reference product under study
Study  site Institution or site where the study  is carried out
TC Telephone Call

Page 18of 75Touch -up Repeated injection to be performed after treatment if necessary  to achieve 
optimal correction 
Tx Treatment
WAS Wrinkle Assessment Scale
WHO World Health Organization

Page 19of 75Table of Contents
INVESTIGATORS AND STUDY ADMINISTRATIVE S TRUCTURE 2
SIGNED AGREEMENT OF THE CLINICAL INVESTI GATIONAL PLAN 4
SYNOPSIS 5
ABBREVIATIONS AND DE FINITIONS OF TERMS 16
LIST OF TABLES 22
LIST OF FIGURES 22
LIST OF APPENDICES 22
ETHICAL CONSIDERATIO NS 23
1.1 Statement of ethical compliance 23
1.2 Application to independent ethics committee and/or regulatory authorities 23
2. BACKGROUND INFORMATI ON 23
2.1 Indication and population description 23
2.2 Investigational and comparator produ ct descriptions 23
2.2.1 Clinical documentation 24
2.3 Study rationale 24
2.4 Justification for the design of the study 25
2.5 Risks and benefits 25
3. OBJECTIVE(S) AND END POINT(S) 26
3.1.1 Primary objective and endpoint 26
3.1.2 Secondary objectives and endpoints 26
3.1.3 Safety objectives and endpoints 27
3.1.4 Exploratory objectives 27
4. DESIGN OF THE STUDY 27
4.1 General outline 27
4.2 Number of subjects 30
4.3 Duration of subject particip ation 30
4.4 Randomization and blinding 30
4.4.1 Randomization 30
4.4.2 Blinding 30
4.4.3 Emergency unblinding 30
4.5 Medical history 30
4.6 Concomitant medications, treatments, and procedures 30
4.7 Schedule of events 32

Page 21of 758. SAFETY ASSESSMENTS 56
8.1 Assessment of AEs by direct question to subject and evaluation of subject 56
8.2 Pre-defined, expected, post -treatment events 56
8.3 Product palpability 57
8.4 E valuationof lip texture and symmetry 57
8.5 Evaluation of lip movement, function and sensation 57
8.6 Laboratory Assessments 57
8.7 Adverse events 58
8.7.1 Definition of an adverse event 58
8.7.2 Definition of a serious adverse event 58
8.7.3 Recording instructions 58
8.7.4 Reporting of adverse events 60
8.7.5 Reporting of serious adverse events 60
8.7.6 Follow up of ongoing related events after termination of the study and events with onset after termination of 
study (subject last visit) 61
8.7.7 Pregnancy 61
8.7.8 Anticipated adverse events 61
8.8 Device deficiencies 62
8.8.1 Definition of a device deficiency 62
8.8.2 Recording instructions 62
8.8.3 Reporting of device deficiencies 62
9. DATA HANDLING AND MA NAGEMENT 62
9.1 Data management 62
9.2 Electronic case report forms 63
9.2.1 Data entry 63
9.2.2 The query process 64
9.2.3 User identification 64
9.2.4 Audit trail 64
9.3 Source documents 64
9.4 Record keeping and access to source data 64
9.5 Document and data retention 65
10. STATISTICAL METHODS 65
10.1 General 65
66
10.3 Demographics, baseline assessments, and subject characteristics 66

Page 22of 7510.4 Efficacy analysis 66
10.5 Safety analysis 67
10.6 Handling of missing data 67
10.7 Interim analysis 68
10.8 Withdrawals and deviations 68
10.9 Sample size 68
11. PROTECTION O F PERSONAL DATA 69
12. QUALITY CONTROL AND QUALITY ASSURANCE 69
12.1 Quality control 69
12.2 Quality assurance 70
12.3 Changes to the clinical study protocol 70
13. FINANCING, INDEMNIFI CATION, AND INSURANCE 70
14. PUBLICATION POLICY 70
15. SUSPENSION OR PREMAT URE TERMINATION 71
16. REFERENCES 72
17. APPENDICES 73
List of Tables
List of Figur es
List of Appendices

Page 28of 75Investigator blinding will be accomplished by using a Treati ng Investigator to administer the 
treatments and a Blinded Evaluator, to whom randomization and treatment are concealed, to 
conduct the blinded assessments.  Safety  assessments will be performed by non-blinded 
personnel.
Eligible subjects randomized to re ceive treatment will be injected by the Treating Investigator 
at Day 1.  The method of injection is at the discretion of the Treating Investigator and will be 
recorded.  Sufficient amount of product should be injected to achieve optimal correction of 
the lips, in the opinion of the Treating Investigator and subject .  Optimal appearance is 
defined as at least 1 MLFS step improvement from Baseline and best correction that can be 
achieved as agreed by the Treating Investigator and the subject .  Touch -up treatment may be 
administered after 4weeks if deemed necessary  to obtain optimal aesthetic result; this 
decision should be agreed upon by the Treating Investigator and the subject.  Touch -up 
treatment will not be performed if the subject has a disease or condition described in the 
exclusion criteria, or an ongoing treatment -related AE that in the opinion of the Treating 
Investigator would be worsened by a touch -up.  It is recommended that the dose should not 
exceed 1.5 mL in each lip (including vermillion, vermi llion border and cupid’s bow) per 
treatment session. The study  product may  also be injected for optimal correction of the upper 
perioral rhytids, philtral columns, and/or oral commissures.  The recommended maximum 
injected volume per subject and treatment is 6mL (i.e. 3 mL for lips and 3 mL for perioral 
area).   
Subjects will have in-clinic follow up visits at 2, 4, 8, 16, 24, 32, 40, and 48weeks after the 
last injection.    If a touch-up is performed, a second 2-week and 4-week follow -up visits
should be scheduled.  At the 48-week visit after all study  procedures for the visit are 
completed, subjects can receive an optional additional treatment if optimal aesthetic 
improvement is not maintained with Restylan e® Kysse . If re-treatment is performed, a second 
2-week and 4-week follow -up visitsshould be scheduled.  In addition to the clinic visits, 
phone visits will also occur as specified in the study flow chart below.
A Study  Flow Chart is provided on the next page .

Page 34of 75
   
Effective date: Effective
 2017-08-17 12:21
4.0
Print date:
 2019-12-11 18:57

Page 43of 754.8.18 Unscheduled Visits
•When necessary ,unscheduled visits could take place (inparticular because of an AE 
needing a specific treatment).   Unscheduled visits related to the study  should be 
documented and all adverse events captured. 
5.Subjects
5.1 Subject information and informed consent
The Investigator or his/her authorized designee must alway s use the IRB-approved subject 
information and informed consent form and it must not be changed without prior discussion 
with the Sponsor and approval from the applicable I RB.
It is the responsibilit y of the Investigator or his/her authorized designee to give each subject 
prior to inclusion in the study , full and adequate verbal and written information regarding all 
aspects of the clinical study  that are relevant to the subject’s decision to participa te 
throughout the study , e.g. explain the purpose and procedures of the study , the duration and 
number of expected participants, possible risks involved, and the opinion of the IRB.  The 
subject shall be informed that the participation is confidential and voluntary  and that the 
subject has the right to withdraw from the study at any time, without any effect on his/her 
future medical care, treatment or benefits to which the subject is otherwise entitled.  The 
information shall beprovided ina language clear lyandfullyunder standable tothesubject. 
The subje ctshall begiven sufficient time to read and understand the informed consent form 
and to consider participation in the study .  Before any study-related activities are performed, 
the informed consent form shall be personally  signed and dated by the subject and the 
Investigator or his/her authorized designee responsible for conducting the informed consent 
process.  
All original signed informed consent forms shall be filed in the Investigator file.  The subject 
shall be provided with a copy  of the signed and dated informed consent form and any other 
written information.
The Investigator shall ensure that important new information is provided to new and existing 
subjects throughout the study .
5.2 Inclusion criteria
The subjects must meet the following criteria to be eligible for the study :

Page 58of 758.7 Adverse events
8.7.1 Definition of an adverse event
An AE is any untoward medical occurrence, unint ended disease or injury , or untoward 
clinical signs (including abnormal laboratory  findings) in subjects, users or other persons1, 
whether or not related to the study  product. 
This definition includes:
a)events related to the investigational product or the reference product
b)events related to the procedures involved
8.7.2 Definition of a serious adverse event
A serious adverse event (SAE) is an AE that:
a)led to death,
b) led to serious deterioration in the health of the subject, that either resulted in
1.a life -threateni ng2illness or injury , or
2.a permanent impairment of a bod y structure or body function, or
3.in-patient or prolonged hospitali zation3, or
4.medical or surgical intervention to prevent life-threatening illness or injury  or 
permanent impairment to a body  structur e or a body  function, 
c)led to fetal distress, fetal death, or a congenital abnormality  or birth defect
An AE does not need to be recorded as a SAE if it only represents a relapse or an expected 
change or progression of the condition that was the cause of the treatment, without the 
development of new s ymptoms and signs.
In cases of doubt, whether an AE fulfils a serious criterion or not, there should be a 
predisposition to report as a SAE rather than not report as such
8.7.3 Recording instructions
Each subject with an AE occurring after signing of the informed consent form through 
study  exit should be fully recorded in the source document for further transcription to the 
eCRF.  Each subject should be questioned about AEs at each study  visit following the 
screening visit.The question asked should be: “Since your last clinical visit have you had 
any health problems?” Information on AEs can also be obtained from signs and symptoms 
detected during each examination.  
                                                
1For users or other persons, this definition is restricted to events related to the investigational product.
2The term “life -threatening” in the def inition of “serious” refers to an event in which the patient was at risk of 
death at the time of the event; it does not refer to an event which hypothetically might have caused death if it 
were more severe. (Source: ICH -E2A clinical safety data management :definitions and standards for expedited 
reporting ).
3Planned hospitaliz ation for a pre- existing condition, o r a procedure required by the CI P, without serious 
deterioration in health, is not considered a SAE. (Source: ISO14155:2011).

Page 59of 75When an AE is related to a device deficiency  including technical device malfunction, the 
AE should be recorded in the AE eCRF and technical complaint should be reported 
separately  on the study  complaint form.  
Investigators, or other study  site personnel, shall record all AEs in the eCRF, including:
a)Event term (recorded in standard medical terminology  and avoiding abbreviations)
b)Description of event and affected area 
c)Start date (first day  with sy mptoms)
d)Stop date (last day  with sy mptoms)
e)Intensit y (mild, moderate, or severe according to definition in Section 8.5.3.1 )
f)Seriousness (serious or not serious, according to definition in Section 8.5.3.2 )
g)Causal relationship to study  product or study  product injection procedure (y es or no)
h)Action taken (none, medication treatment, non-medication treatment, or other 
procedures/tests, subject withdrawn)
i)Outcome of the AE(ongoing, recovered, recovered with sequelae, death, chronic/ 
stable, not recovered at the end of the stud y)
The pre -define d, expected post-treatment events shall be assessed separately . These events 
shall be collected b y subjects in a diary  used daily  for 30days after the treatment .
8.7.3.1 Intensity
Intensit y will be recorded for each reported AE. The following definitions of intensity  are to 
be used:
Mild : Awareness of s ymptoms or signs, but easily  tolerated (acceptable )
Moderate: Enough discomfort to interfere with usual activity  (disturbing) 
Severe: Incapacity  to work or to do usual activity  (unacceptable) 
If the intensity  changes within one day, the maximum intensity  of the AEduring that day 
shall be recorded.
8.7.3.2 Causal relationship and seriousness
Each AE, serious as well as non-serious, shall be assessed by the Investigator for causal 
relationship with the study  product andits use(the injection procedure) and for seriousness
(Yes or No)of the event . 
A two -point scale (Yes or Noresponse ) shall be used for the causality assessments . The 
Investigators shall be asked to indicate aresponse to each of the following questions in the 
eCRF :
“Do you consider that there is a reasonable possibility  that the event may have been 
caused b y the study product ?”,and 
“Do you consider that there is a reasonable possibility  that the event may have been 
caused b y the device injection proce dure?”
If any of these questions is answered ‘Yes’, the AE is considered related.

Page 63of 75management, data entry  and verification, data validation, and documentation of the 
performed activities including information of discrepancies in the process. The data 
management process will be described in detail in the data management plan (DMP).
The database, the data entry  screens and program will be designed in accordance with the CI P 
and the eCRF. Data validati on will be performed by computerized logical checks and manual 
review. Drugs and events will be coded in accordance with World Health Organization 
(WHO) Drug and medical dictionary  for regulatory  activities (MedDRA) dictionaries as 
specified in the DMP. SAEs in the clinical database will be reconciled against the data in the 
safet y database.
When all efforts have been made to ensure that the data recorded in the eCRFs and entered in 
the database is as correct and complete as possible, the clinical database will be locked. Study  
data will be transferred to SAS datasets which thereafter will be write -protected. Statistical 
analyses will be generated in SAS using data from the locked datasets.
9.2 Electronic case report forms
A 21 Code of Federal Regulations Part 11-compliant electronic data capture application will 
be used to collect, modify, maintain, archive, retrieve, and transmit study  data.  An eCRF is 
required and shall be completed electronically  for each screen failure as well as enrolled 
subjects. 
The eCRF includes password protection and internal quality  checks, such as automatic range 
checks, to identify  data that appear inconsistent, incomplete, or inaccurate.  Study data shall 
be entered directl y from the source documents, which are to be defined at each site before 
inclusion of the first subject.
Authorized study  site personnel designated by  the Investigator shall complete data collection. 
Appropriate training and securit y measures shall be completed with all authorized 
investigation site personnel prior to the study  being initiated and any data being entered into 
the sy stem for any  subject.
The study  data is the sole propert y of the Sponsor and shall not be made available in an y form 
to third parties, except for authorized representatives of appropriat e RA, without written 
permission from the Sponsor.  At the end of the study , electronic data are kept at the Sponsor 
and a copy (provided b y the vendor) at the study  site as part of the Investigator file.
Any delegation of collection of data shall be speci fied in a signature and delegation log.
9.2.1 Data entry
All data shall be entered in English. The eCRFs should alway s reflect the latest 
observations on the subjects participating in the study . Therefore, the eCRFs shall be 
completed as soon as possible during or after the subject’s visit. The subject’s identity  must 
always remain confidential, i.e. the name and address of the subjects must not be registered 
in the eCRFs or in the database. The Investigator must verify  that all data entries in the 
eCRFs are accurate and correct. If some assessments are not done, or if certain information 
is not available, not applicable or unknown, the Investigator shall indicate this in the eCRF. 
The Investigator shall electronicall y sign off the study  data. By signing, the Investigator 
takes responsibility  for the accuracy , completeness, and legibility  of the data reported to the 
Sponsor in the eCRF . 

Page 64of 759.2.2 The query  process
The monitor shall review the eCRFs and evaluate them for completeness and consistency . 
Each eCRF shall be compa red with the respective source documents to ensure that there are 
no discrepancies between critical data. All entries, corrections, and alterations shall be 
made by the PI  or his/her authorized designee. The monitor cannot enter data in the eCRFs. 
Once study data have been submitted to the central server via the eCRF, corrections to the 
data fields will be audit trailed, meaning that the reason for change, the name of the person 
who made the change, together with time and date will be logged. Roles and rights of the 
site personnel responsible for entering study  data into the eCRF shall be determined in 
advance. If discrepant data is detected during review of the data, either by  the Sponsor or its 
representatives, the responsible data manager or monitor shall raise a query  in the electronic 
data capture application. The query  shall state the question or data to be changed and shall 
be resolved in the system by the PI or his/her authorized designee. The appropriate study  
site personnel shall answer the queries in the eCRF. This will be audit trailed by the 
electronic data capture application meaning that the name of study  site personnel, time, and 
date is logged.
9.2.3 U seridentification
eCRF records will be automatically  appended with the identification of the creat or, by 
means of their unique User ID. Specified records shall be electronically  signed by the 
Investigator to document his/her review of the data and acknowledgement that the data are 
accurate. This will be facilitated by means of the Investigator’s unique User ID and 
password; date and time stamps will be added automatically  at time of electronic signature. 
If an entry  in an eCRF requires change, the correction shall be made in accordance with the 
relevant software procedures . 
9.2.4 Audit trail
All changes will be fully  recorded in a protected audit trail and a reason for the change shall 
be stated. Once all data have been entered, verified, and validated, the database will be 
locked.
9.3 Source documents
Source documents are all documents used by the Investigator or hospital that relate to the 
subject’s medical history , that verifies the existence of the subject, the inclusion and 
exclusion criteria, and all records covering the subject’s participation in the study .  They 
include laboratory  notes, memoranda, materia l dispensing records, subject files, etc.
The Investigator is responsible for maintaining source documents.  These shall be made 
available for inspection by the monitor at each monitoring visit.  The Investigator must 
submit a completed eCRF for each subje ct for whom signed informed consent has been 
collected.  All supportive documentation submitted with the eCRF, such as laboratory  or 
hospital records, shall be clearl y identified with the CTN and subject number. Any personal 
information, including name, shall be removed or rendered illegible to preserve individual 
confidentiality .
9.4 Record keeping and access to source data
The Investigator/Institution shall permit study -related monitoring, audits, IRB review, and 
RA inspections and shall provide direct access to the source data/medical record including 

Page 70of 7512.2 Quality assurance
The study  site may be subject to quality  assurance audit by the Sponsor as well as inspection 
by appropriate RA.  It is important that the Investigator and other relevant study  site 
personnel are available during the monitoring visits, possible audits, and inspections, and that 
sufficient time is devoted to the monitoring process.
Each participating member of the study  site team shall provide a curriculum vitae (CV) or 
equivalent that demonstrates their qualifications to conduct the study .  
It is the responsibility  of the Investigator to ensure that all personnel involved in the study  are 
fully  informed of all relevant aspects of the study , including detailed knowledge of and 
training in all procedures to be followed.  All Investigators and other responsible persons 
shall be listed together with their function in the study  on a signature and delegation log .
12.3 Changes to the clinical study protocol
The Investigator and other site personnel involved in the study  must not implement any 
deviation from or changes to the CIP without agreement with the Sponsor and prior review 
and documented approval from the IRB, except where neces sary to eliminate an immediate 
hazard to the subjects. All changes to the final CIP must be documented in a written protocol 
amendment.  However, administrative changes are to be documented in the Sponsor file 
without requiring a protocol amendment.  The Sponsor will assessif the changesrequire prior 
FDAapproval,and in formtheInvestigator w hensuch approval has been r eceived.
13.Financing, Indemnification, and I nsurance
The CTAoutlin esthe compensation and p ayment t ermsof the study.  The CTAmust be 
signed before the firstsubjectisscreenedinthe study.  If there are differences betw eenthe 
CTAand the CIP reg arding c ertain rights and obligations, theCTA is theprevailing
docume nt.
The Sponsor’s oblig a tions in this clinical study are cove red by Gald erma’s global gene ral 
liability prog ram.An insurancecertificatewill be p rovidedupon request.  The
Institu tion/I nvestigator is obligated tomaintain in surance cov erage for theirobligations in
theclinical study acco rding to the CTA.
14.Publication Policy
The Investigator’s, Institution’s, and Sponsor’s obligations regarding intellectual propert y 
rights, confidentiality , and publications are described in detail in the CTA.
This study  will be display ed on clinicaltrials.gov in accordance with local regulatio ns.  The
aim is to submit theresults ofthis stu dy forpubli cation.  Ev eryone who istobe listed as an 
author of the publi cation shall have made a substantial, direct, intellectual 
contr ibution tothework.  Author ship will be based on (1) s ubstantial contr ibutions tothe 
conception or design ofthework; or theacquisi tion, analysis,orinterpreta tion of datafor
the work; and (2) d rafting thework or revising itcriticall y forimpo rtant intellectual conte nt;
and (3 ) final app roval of the versiontobe publish ed; and ( 4) agreement tobeaccounta ble for 
allaspects oftheworkinensuringthat qu estions related totheaccuracy orintegrity ofany 

Page 71of 75part of thework are appropriatel y investigated a ndresolved1.  Con ditions 1, 2, 3, and 4 must
allbe met inorderto be designated as a uthor. Those who do not m eet a llfour criteriawill
be ac knowl edged.   Amon g theauthorsthat fulfiltheabove me ntion ed cr iteria, one a uthor
will be ap point ed by Q-Med A B to take p rimary re sponsibili ty for theoverall work as 
primary a uthor.
15.Suspension or Premature Termination
TheSponsor will susp end orterminatethestudy when so instructe d by the IRB or FD A, or if
it is judgedthatthe subjectsare subjected tounreasonabl e risks, or for validscientific or 
administ rativereasons.
The Sponsor may a lsodecidetoclose asinglestudy sitedue tounsatisfactory subject
enrollme nt or non-compli ancewith the CIP, GCP, orapplicableregula tory requi rements.
Intheevent o f prema ture termination, the Sponsor willprovide information on the handling
of currently enr olled subj ects who have not compl eted the study.
                                                
1Defining theroleofauthors and contr ibuto rs, compiled bytheInternational Committeeof Medical 
Journal Edito rs (ICMJ E)(http://www.i cmje.org).

Page 72of 7516.References
1.https://www.very well.com/fitzpatrick -classification -scale -1069226
2.Alam M, Gladstone H, Kramer EM, et al.  ASDA guidelines of care: injectable fillers.  
Dermatol Surg.  2008; 34 (suppl 1): S115- S148.
3.Carruthers J, Fagien S, Dolman P. Retro or PeriBulbar Injection Techniques to 
Reverse Visual Loss After Filler Injections. Dermatol Surg. 2015 Dec; 41 Suppl 
1:S354 -7.
4.Cohen JL, Biesman BS, Dayan SH, et al. Treatment of Hyaluronic Acid Filler -
Induced Impending Necrosis With Hyaluronidase: Consensus Recommendations. 
Aesthet Surg J. 2015 Sep; 35 (7):844 -9.
5.Fitzpatrick T.B. (1988). The validity  and practicality  of sun-reactive skin types I 
through VI. Arch. Dermatol. 124, 869 871.
6.Kane MA, Lorenc ZP, Lin X, Smith SR. Validation of a lip fullness scale for 
assessment of lip augmentation. PlastReconstrSurg. 2012;129(5):822e -
8e
7.Lemperle, G. A Classification of Facial Wrin kles. Plastic Reconstructive Surgery . 
2001:1735-1750.
8.Restylane®Silk(SPHAL  study ) PMA P040024/S072.
9.Signorini M, Liew S, Sundaram H, et al. Global Aesthetics Consensus Group. Global 
Aesthetics Consensus: Avoidance and Management of Complications from 
Hyaluronic Acid Fillers- Evidence -and Opinion- Based Review and Consensus 
Recommendations. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2016 Jun; 137(6):961e- 71e.

Page 73of 7517.Appendices
