 
Accuracy of pulse oximeters with profound hypoxia  
Test protocol  
 
 
 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
January 22, 2019  
IRB # 10 -00437  UCSF Hypoxia Lab  
2  
  
Accuracy of pulse oximeters with profound hypoxia  
Test protocol  
 
Principal Investigators  
Philip Bickler  MD, PhD and John Feiner, MD  
 
Clinical Research Coordinator  
Koa Gudelunas,  
 
Additional Investigators 
Eilers, Helge, MD 
Lipnick, Michael, MD 
Sall, Jeffrey, MD, PhD 
Schober, Andrew E, MD  
 
Aims  
The aim of this project is to test the accuracy of pulse oximeter s during mild, moderate and 
severe hypoxia; i.e. a range of arterial HbO 2 saturations from 100 to down to 70%. This is done 
by comparing the reading of the pulse oximeter during brief, steady state hypoxia with a gold - 
standard measurement of blood oxyhemo globin saturation (arterial blood sample processed in a 
laboratory hemoximeter). The data obtained is submitted by pulse oximeter manufacturers to the 
FDA for device approval, or may be used for engineering or calibration purposes.  
 
Subjects  
A typical study will include at least 10 subjects (up to 14 if needed to reach the 200 necessary 
data points to meet th e ISO 80601 -2-61:201 7). 
 
Per FDA guidance, at least 2, or 15% of the subjects will have dark skin. Equal numbers of men 
and women will be enrolled.  
 
Inclusion Criteria  
1. The subject is male or female, aged ≥18 and  <50. 
2. The subject is in good general health with no evidence of any medical  problems.  
3. The subject is fluent in both written and spoken  English.  
4. The subject has provided informed consent and is willing to comply with the  study 
procedures.  
 
Exclusion criteria:  
1. The subject is obese  (BMI>30).  
2. The subject has a known history of heart disease, lung disease, kidney or liver  disease.  
3. Diagnosis of asthma, sleep apnea, or use of  CPAP.  
4. Subject has  diabetes.  
5. Subject has a clotting  disorder.  
IRB # 10 -00437  UCSF Hypoxia Lab  
3  
 6. The subject a hemoglobinopathy or history of anemia, per subject report or the first  blood 
sample, that in the opinion of the investigator, would make them unsuitable for study 
participation.  
7. The subject has any other serious systemic  illness.  
8. The subject is a current  smoker.  
9. Any injury, deformity, o r abnormality at the sensor sites that in the opinion of  the 
investigators’ would interfere with the sensors working correctly.  
10. The subject has a history of fainting or vasovagal  response.  
11. The subject has a history of sensitivity to local  anesthesia.  
12. The s ubject has a diagnosis of Raynaud’s  disease.  
13. The subject has unacceptable collateral circulation based on exam by the  investigator  
(Allen’s test).  
14. The subject is pregnant, lactating or trying to get  pregnant.  
15. The subject is unable or unwilling to provide i nformed consent, or is unable or unwilling  to 
comply with study  procedures.  
16. The subject has any other condition, which in the opinion of the investigators’ would  make  
them unsuitable for the study.  
 
 
Procedures  
After injection of a local anesthetic, a 22 -gauge catheter is inserted in one radial artery. 
Pulse oximeters are attached to fingers, ears or flat body surfaces. Subjects are in a comfortable 
semi -recumbent position. Subjects then breathe air mixtures containing reduced amounts of 
oxygen to produce the desired level of hypoxemia. Stable, safe and controlled hypoxia is breath - 
by breath by breath respiratory gas analysis and a computer program that permits the inspired gas 
mixture to be adjusted to achieve a level of lung alveolar gas  that will achieve the desired degree 
of saturation.  
Typically, saturation levels involve one period with air breathing and then at one of 6 
levels with reduced oxygen, e.g. 94%, 90%, 85%, 80%, 75% and 70% saturation. Each level of 
saturation is held for 3 0-60 seconds. At appropriate intervals and when oxygen levels are stable, 
arterial blood samples are obtained from the radial arterial catheter. The operator then changes 
the inspired oxygen concentration to attain the next desired stead -state level of hyp oxia. A "run" 
consists of several stable steady -state hypoxia levels and together takes 10 -15 minutes. Each run 
is terminated by a breath of 100% O 2 followed by room air. Two runs together enable obtaining 
a total of 20 -25 blood samples, 2 samples at each plateau. Saturation of each arterial blood 
sample is determined by direct oximetry in a Radiometer ABL -90 multi -wavelength  oximeter.  
The precise target levels of saturation can be adjusted to suit the sponsor, but typical testing is 
done to satisfy IS O and FDA standards for testing, which is 70% to 100%.  
The study takes about 1 hour of each subject's time. Analysis of the data requires several 
days. We encourage manufacturer’s representatives to be present for these tests, and to mount the 
probes. An e xtra charge is made if no representative is present, requiring us to mount the probes 
and record data.  
 
Sponsor Pulse oximeter study data  
Data from test pulse oximeters for comparison to blood values can be obtained in several 
ways. In every case, the goal  is to obtain a reading from the oximeter that corresponds to the  
IRB # 10 -00437  UCSF Hypoxia Lab  
4  
 associated blood sample or a reference oximeter. Because of circulation delays and instrument 
averaging time, we attempt to create steady state conditions at each level of oxygenation.  
Therefore, a means should be provided to record the instrument reading at each blood sample. 
This instrument reading may be obtained with several different approaches. Some instruments 
have no digital or analog output and the instrument readin g may be recorded manually or 
recorded by a video of the instrument display. Other instruments may have an analog output. 
The laboratory can record analog data by use of LabView. Digital recording of output can also 
be obtained via LabView but his requires  information from the sponsor concerning the structure 
of the digital signal. Consultation with us is recommended.  
If a manufacturer prefers to collect and analyze the data, the continuous digital signal of 
each oximeter should be read, for comparison with  the blood sample, 9 seconds before the  record 
shows a sudden fall or rise in oxygen saturation, not at the time of blood sampling. This 
procedure accounts for the delays of finger circulation and uses the estimated delay from the 
lung to the sample site. There is no useful correlation between the actual time of blood sampling 
and the oximeter recording because of the variability of tissue blood flow lag. As mentioned, 
steady -state hypoxia avoids the concern that oximeter reading is not aligned with a blood  sample 
reading.  
 
Statistics  
The number of subjects and the number of comparisons (paired pulse oximeter readings 
and arterial saturation values) is determined by current FDA guidance requirements [2]. This is a 
minimum of 200 data points and 10 subjects. In the course of this type of study, some subjects 
may drop out, some  readings  can be lost due to motion  or other  interference  and occasionally  some 
do not  consent.  
 
The following demographic data will be collected on the subjects:  
- gender (male, female,  other) 
- age 
- skin tone (dark, medium,  light)  
- height  (cm)  
- weight  (kg) 
- wrist circumference  (cm)  
- dominant hand (left or  right)  
 
Data Analysis  
In all cases, the blood analysis data are provided, including the SaO2, MetHb, COHb and Hgb 
concentration.  
The data analysis report will consist of the following:  
• A Table of the oximeter readings versus corresponding blood SaO2  values.  
• Graphic plots of the  bias between the oximeter reading and the SaO2 measured by the 
hemoximeter (on the blood sample, i.e Modified Bland -Altman plots for each instrument or 
instrument probe  combination.  
• Regression equations for the bias of each  instrument.  
• Tables of the mean error or bias, its standard deviation, standard error, 95% confidence 
interval, maximum and minimum and root mean square error, all computed both overall  and 
by several sub -ranges of  desaturation.  
IRB # 10 -00437  UCSF Hypoxia Lab  
5  
 • A table of the demographics of the sub ject population is  provided.  
 
Subject Safety  
Pulse oximeters are typically considered non -significant risk medical devices. The LED light 
energy utilized in typical test measurements is within the same range as other cleared marketed 
devices  and introduces  no further  risks.  An LED  light emits  light that passes  through  the tissue.  A 
light detector then measures how much light was absorbed by the tissue. Based on the ratio of 
absorbance of different wavelengths of light, the device calculates the ox ygen  saturation.  
 
Risks  
Breathing a very low oxygen mixture may cause dizziness and might cause loss of  
consciousness for a few seconds. It may make one feel very short of breath during the test and  for 
a few seconds afterwards. There is a remote possibili ty that if the subject loses consciousness 
he/she  might  have  muscular  twitching  or convulsions.  This study  will not seek to reach  saturations 
below 70%. Hypoxia may cause tachycardia and increased blood pressure during the test, and 
might  cause  headache.  In all the years  of conducting  the study  no subject  has mentioned  headache. 
Much  more  severe  and prolonged  lack of oxygen  could  cause brain  injury  or death,  but the duration 
and depth of hypoxia is limited by the test protocol to short intervals. The needle catheter used to 
take blood  may hurt when  it is inserted  despite  the use of local  anesthesia,  and there  may be a black 
and blue spot afterward. It is remotely possible the artery might be damaged or clot, or a tendon 
sheath  near it be injured  by the needle,  resulting  in some  soreness.  These  risks  are unlikely  because 
none of the enrolled 2000+ subjects has ever had a serious c omplication. Hyperventilating during 
the part of the study requiring reduced PCO2 may make subjects lightheaded or dizzy. Breathing 
air with added CO2 may make subjects feel short of breath and cause a headache. Some subjects 
feel faint when  they arrive  for the study,  apparently  related  to the thought  of having  an arterial  line. 
These subjects were excluded from the study and suffered no further  discomfort.  
 
Risk Mitigations  
Subjects are all monitored with accurate reference oximeters and continuou s end -tidal 
gas analysis to prevent the risk of more profound hypoxia than desired. Investigators are 
experienced anesthesiologists adept at assessing breathing and in maintaining appropriate airway 
conditions. The study room is set up like an OR with all resuscitation equipment immediately 
available.  
 
Informed Consent  
Written  informed  consent  is obtained  before  any study  interventions.  In discussions  with 
the study coordinator before the day of the study, potential subjects will be offered the consent 
form to review. On the day of the study subjects are given the consent form which they read and 
sign if they wish to participate. A study doctor is present to answer  questions.  
 
Only subjects clearly able to understand and read English will be enro lled. Subjects will be asked 
if they have any questions and are told they can withdraw at any time.  
 
Data Storage  
IRB # 10 -00437  UCSF Hypoxia Lab  
6  
 Identifiable subject information is always stored securely following all applicable rules 
and regulations. Consent forms and o ther study related documents are retained following UCSF 
data retentions policy.  
 
Other testing  
Special testing, with various conditions or with special subject populations can also be 
arranged, at extra charge.  
We also offer testing for performance during  controlled subject hand motion. Three  types 
of motion are typically used: tapping, rubbing and random motion. Tapping and random motion 
are done with a computer -controlled motion  machine.  
Testing during low perfusion conditions is also available at an ext ra charge.  