 
 
 
   
NHLBI 5R01HL123609- 05 
Treating Caregiver Depression to Improve Childhood Asthma: 
Impact and Mediators  
Protocol and Statistical Design  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
September 8 , 2021 
 
STU022014 -069, Brown, FormA -ResearchProtocol, Mod_38, 04 -29-20  3. Research Strategy  
 
3.1. Significance  
Asthma prevalence, morbidity , and mortality remain high despite a tremendous increase in knowledge 
about the pathogenesis of asthma and new medications.  A staggering 7.2% of  Americans have  asthma .1 
Well o ver 4000 Americans die each year from asthma ,2 and asthma accounts for over 1.5 million emergency 
room visits and 500,000 hospitalizations each year .3 Health -related expenditures for asthma are over $12.7 
billion per year in the United States  (US).4  In the past three decades , the prevalence of asthma has increased 
by 75% ,5 asthma -related hospitalizations have increased by over 70%, and asthma -related  mortality rates 
have doubled .6 The highest prevalence of asthma and asthma -related morbidity and mortality is in low -
income ,7-9 inner -city,9-11 minority  communities,7-10, 12-14 and this is especially true for children .15  In the US , 9% of 
children have asthma ,16 and asthma is the most common chronic illness affecting children.17 Asthma 
prevalence and morbidity remain a significant public health concern for children, despite a tremendous 
increase in knowledge about the pathogenesis of asthma  and n ew medications. We suggest  that a barrier to 
progress  in the field is that the impact of depression on asthma  adherence and outcomes is  underappreciated. 
The goal of our project is t o begin to close this gap in  the scientific knowledge base by examining the 
impact of the treatment of caregiver depression on childhood asthma.  
3.1.a. Depression is common in asthma patients and is associated with negative asthma  outcomes. 
Depression is associated with increased asthma -related morbidity, mortality, and unscheduled service 
utilization.  Adults and children with asthma have higher levels of depressive symptoms than controls and 
persons with most other medical illnesses .18 When present, depression is associated with unfavorable asthma 
outcomes, including medication non -adherence, increased frequency of emergency room visits, 
hospitalizations, unscheduled visits for asthma ,19 and even asthma -related death .20  Youth with asthma have 
an almost twofold highe r prev alence of comorbid anxiety and depressive disorders compared to controls.21  
Brown (PI) found that 30% of children with asthma had scores on the Children’s Depression Rating Scale -
Revised consistent with m ajor depressive disorder (MDD) (see section 3.3.a.iii),  which was associated with a 
greater number of hospitalizations for asthma in the year before .22 Miller and Wood (PIs) have shown that 
depressive symptoms are associated  with increased asthma severity23 and with compromised pulmonary 
function in children with a sthma.24  
Depression and other psychiatric disorders are also common in caregivers  of children with asthma, 
and are associated with poor outcomes in the child including greater use of acute care resources . 
Wade et a l. found that 50% of 1628 caregivers of children with asthma had significant psychiatric symptoms 
based on Brief Symptom Severity (BSI) Global Severity scores .25 Leao et al.26 reported that the prevalence o f 
depression was over twice as high among mothers of children with asthma as in mothers of non -asthmatic 
children (Odds Ratio [OR] 2.74), and that depression was more common in mothers of children with persistent 
asthma than intermittent asthma (OR 2.77). Similar findings were reported by Szabo et al.27 Thus, depression 
is not only common in asthma caregivers, but related to the severity of the child’s asthma.  
While it is likely that having a child with severe asthma contributes to caregiver depression, there is also 
evidence that caregiver depression, in turn, contributes to poor asthma control in the child. Otsuki et al. ,28 using 
a path analysis, observed that in inner -city African  American families, maternal depression at baseline 
predicted the child’s a sthma symptoms 6 months later, but baseline asthma symptoms in the child did not 
predict the deve lopment of maternal depression.  
Caregiver depression, when present, is associated with increased use of unscheduled asthma -related 
services by the child.  Weil et al. found that asthma caregivers with BSI scores indicating significant 
psychopathology were twice as likely to report an asthma -related hospitalization by the child in the past 9 
months , as those with scores below the cutoff .29 Bartlett et al.30 found that 47% of mothers of children with 
asthma had clinically significant levels of depressive symptoms. Mothers with high levels of depression were 
40% more likely to report an emergency room visit by the child in the following 6 months than were mothers 
with lower depressive symptom severity. Other reports suggest that in addition to increased asthma service 
utilization by the child, caregiver depres sion is associated with lower caregiver self -efficacy, lower quality of 
life, fewer symptom -free days and nights, as well as greater use of as needed bronchodilators by the child .31, 32 
Brown , Miller and Wood (PIs) examined 175 caregivers of children hospitalized with asthma .33 A total of 26% 
had a current depressive episode and 22% had an anxiety disorder (section 3.3.a.i). Caregiver depression was 
associated with a 50% increase in  unscheduled visits and anxiety with a 43% increase in asthma -related 
hospitalizations .33 These findings suggest that caregiver depression may influence asthma outcomes 
rather than be solely a consequence of the asthma symptoms, but no study to date has definitively 
tested this hypothesis. Our proposed study will do so by treating caregiver depression with 
antidepressants to see if  the child’s asthma subsequently improves. Affirming that caregiver 
STU022014 -069, Brown, FormA -ResearchProtocol, Mod_38, 04 -29-20  depression actively impacts asthma outcomes would extend the knowledge base of factors influencing 
asthma outcomes, and provide clinically relevant scientific knowledge.  
3.1.b . Treating ma ternal depression to improve child outcomes. A study of physically healthy chil dren 
demonstrated that improvement in  maternal depression with antidepressant treatmen t improved  functional 
status  and reduced the child’s depression and anxiety .34 This supports the idea that maternal depression 
compromises child emotional function, and that it is possible to improve child’s function by treating the 
depressed mother. We conducted, what is, to our knowledge, the only caregiver depression intervention study 
in pediatric asthma (section 3.3.a.ii). In this pilot study, antidepressant treatment of the caregivers (n  = 8) was 
associated with improvement in depressive symptoms in the caregiver, accompanied by reduction in the child’s 
unscheduled visits and im provement in asthma symptoms .35 Strong associations were observed between 
changes in caregiver depression and the child’s asthma symptoms (r  = 0.78), asthma -related quality of life 
(QOL) (r  = -0.85) and peak flow (r  = -0.93). Findings from this pilot study suggest that treating the caregiver’s 
depression may be important in improving asthma -related outcomes in the child. Our study aims to test this 
hypothesis. If affirmed, this could significantly change clinical practice in pe diatric asthma and 
improve pediatric asthma outcomes .  
3.1.c. Mediators of the relationship between caregiver depression and child asthma outcomes . Another 
critical barrier to progress is that most research, to date, has focused on assoc iations between caregiver 
depression  and asthma, without examining how these associations are mediated. In order to develop 
effective ly targeted child asthma interventions , it is necessary to know not only whether caregiver depression 
contributes to poorer asthma control in the child, but how it affects asthma control . Much of the research in this 
area focusing on “ how” has been conducted by Drs. Wood and  Miller (PIs ). Lim, Wood and Miller36 
demonstrated that maternal depression predicted depression and anxiety in the child which, in turn, predicted 
worse asthma disease activity. More recently these investigators replicated this finding and extended it to 
fathers .37  Furthermore, Miller and Wood’s findings show how the child’s depression may impact asthma 
through emotion and stress -related pathways (autonomic dysregulation) ,38 while others have shown the impact 
of child’s s tress on asthma -related immune dysregulation.39 Our proposed study will test the proposition 
that improvement in the child ’s anxiety and depression may mediate the effect of improvement in 
caregiver  depression on the child’s asthma, thus , providing knowledge that may inform future 
scientific theory and clinical practice.  
Adherence is  a key factor  in determining child asthma outcomes,40 and i s highly influenced by family 
context.41, 42 Kub et al.32 reported a relationship between maternal depression and the use of as -needed rescue 
medications (bronchodilators ), suggesting  poor adherence to controller medications  in depressed mothers . 
Furthermore, a longitudinal study of low -income African American children, showed an association between 
caregiver depression and poor adherence.43 Treatment adherence is critical for asthma cont rol. Bender et al . 
noted  that adherence in pediatric asthma is inadequate and that there is relatively little agreement on how to 
correct the problem .44 Our study will test the proposition that medication adherence may be an 
additional mediating pathway by which caregiver depression  impacts child asthma, thus , contributing 
scientific knowledge about causes of poor adherence and  how to improve adherence.  
Based on the literature reviewed above, a  model of two possible pathways linking caregiver depression to 
asthma symptoms and servic e utilization by the child is provided in Figure 1. We propose that improvement in 
caregiver depression results in improved asthma medication adherence and decreased anxiety/depression in 
the child, both of which contribute to 
improved asthma control and quality 
of life and decreased unscheduled 
service utilization. We include quality 
of life in our outcome measures 
because an essential purpose of 
asthma control is to ensure that the 
children thrive in their everyday 
lives.45 
Based on t he literature 
reviewed above , we propose a 
longitudinal study in which we 
will follow depressed caregivers 
treated with antidepressant 
medications and their children wit h asthma every 4 weeks for 52 weeks  to determine if improvement in 
caregiver depression is associated with subsequent improvement in the child ’s asthma . We will assess 
whether improved asthma outcomes is due to improved adherence, reduced child anxiety/depression 
or both. We will use an established antidepressant algorithm to guide treatment. The findings of this 

STU022014 -069, Brown, FormA -ResearchProtocol, Mod_38, 04 -29-20  study will lay the groundwork for a futur e clinical trial of a multi -modal intervention targeting caregiver 
depression and the mediating pathways of adherence and child stress and depression.  
3.1.d.  Summary of significance: The results of the prop osed study may lead to a very different, and more  
efficacious, way of conceptualizing childhood asthma treatment in clinical practice,  and thus improve outcomes 
and reduce morbidity. In add ition, the algorithm -based anti depressant treatment approach we chose lends 
itself to primary care -based interventio n, which makes such an intervention widely accessible.   
 
3.2. Innovation: The clinically innov ative aspect of this study is the  attempt to improve child hood  asthma 
outcomes by treating caregiver depression. If the finding supports the hypothes is that treating caregiver 
depression improves a sthma outcomes, then, as discussed  above, this approach may lead to a very different 
way of conceptualizing asthma treatment in clinical practice . The most methodologically innovative part of the 
study is using a rep eated measures longitudinal design with cross -lagged panel modeling (CLPM) to 
statistically test whether the improvement of caregiver depression precedes and predicts subsequent child 
asthma improvement. To our knowledge , this method has not been used in a sthma outcomes research. The 
scientifically  innovative part of the proposal is identifying mediating pathways by which the effect of 
improvement in caregiver dep ression is transmitted to asthma improvement  in the child . We will examin e not 
only if caregiver depression impacts the child’s asthma, but also how it makes this impact , by examining 
mediating pathways . Such specific knowledge has not been sought, to date, in previous studies. F inally,  most 
studies focus on either adherence  or stress  and emotions as factors affecting  asthma control. Our study will 
look at both potential pathways concurrently in order to examine their relative and joint contributions to asthma 
outcomes . This overall approach may offer a powerful new way of conceptualizing fu ture outcomes research in 
asthma and in other phys ical and psychiatric diseases.  
 
3.3. Approach  
3.3.a. Preliminary Studies:  The contact PI (Dr. Brown) has had four NIH grants, several foundation and 
industry grants, and a  grant from the State of Texas o n asthma patients. An ongoing R18 from National Heart, 
Lung, and Blood Institute ( NHLBI ) by the contact PI examines the treatment of depressio n in adults with 
asthma. Drs. Wood and Miller (PIs) have  collaborated with him on many of these earlier studies . Their own 
Child and Family Asthma research program has  been steadily funded by three National Institute of Mental 
Health ( NIMH ) grants for studies highly relevant to the current proposal.  These studies demonstrated , in 
laboratory -based  stress parad igms, pathways by which caregiver depression, negative parenting , and child 
stress and depression contribute directly to child asthma disease activity . All of the PIs’ research staff 
members also have experience with this research  population. Three prior studies  of the contact PI  (Dallas) , 
and four  by the other PIs  (Buffalo) , which are  directly pertinent to the proposed study , are highlighted  below .  
3.3.a.i. Pilot Study 1: Psychiatric Symptomatology and Disorders Are Common in Care givers of 
Children with Asthma: We examined the prevalence of psychiatric symptoms and disorders and their 
relationship to asthma -related service utilization in caregivers of Dallas children hospitalized for asthma .33 
Methods: Caregivers (n = 175 enrolled over app roximately 15 months) were assessed du ring the child’s 
asthma  hospitalization . Number of asthma -related hospitalizations, emergency room visits and unscheduled 
clinic visits in  the past 12 months were  quantified. The BSI, an assessment of psychiatric sympt oms including 
somatic, anxiety and depression subscales, and the Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview (MINI),46 a 
structured clinical interview for psychiatric disorders , were administered.  
Results: Mean age of the caregivers was  34.2 ± 7.3 years, and 96% were women . Both depressi ve (26%) and 
anxiety disorders ( 22%) were common. Caregivers with clinically significant elevation s in the anxiety or 
depression BSI subscale s reported more asthma -related hospitalizations f or the child in the past 12 months 
than did caregivers  with lower BSI scores (all p < 0.05) . Asthma -related hospitalizations correlated with BSI 
total (r  = 0.20, p ≤ 0.0 1), anxiety (r  = 0.21, p <  0.01) , and depression (r  = 0.16, p ≤ 0.05) subscale scores.  
Caregiver psychiatric diagnosis of an anxiety disorder (n  = 36) was associated with 43% more asthma -related 
hospitaliz ations (2.0  ± 2.5 vs. 1.4  ± 1.2, p <  0.05) in the child while current caregiver depression (n  = 44) was 
associated with 50% more unschedu led clinic v isits (3.0  ± 3.4 vs. 2.0 ±  2.6, p <  0.05).  
Significance:  This study  demonstrates that the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders ( DSM -
IV)-defined psychiatric disorders, particu larly depressive disorders, are  common in asthma caregivers and 
associated with a greater frequency of asthma -related service utilization by the ch ild. The study also supports  
feasibility by demonstrating that we can enroll large numbers of caregivers in a research study.  
3.3.a.ii. Pilot Study 2: Antidepressant Treatment of Caregivers of Children with Asthma  Improved the 
Child’s Asthma : This pilot study , conducted in Dallas, examined the impact of antidepressant tr eatment on 
the caregiver’s depression and the child’s asthma .35 
Methods:  Eight currently depressed asthma caregivers (6 women and 2 men, mean age of 35.8  ± 6.6 years) 
were enrolled in this intervention study with monthly assessments for 6 months , and received algorithm -based 
STU022014 -069, Brown, FormA -ResearchProtocol, Mod_38, 04 -29-20  antidepressant treatment . The children were 5 boys and 3 girls  with a mean age of 9.8±3.8 years. Caregiver 
depressive symptoms were assessed with the Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression ( HRSD )47 and Quick 
Inventory of Depressive Sympt omatology -Self-Report (QIDS -SR).48 Spirometry was obtained and asthma 
symptoms quantified using the Pediatric Asthma Symptom Scale ( PASS). Hospitalizations, emergency room 
visits , and unscheduled clinic visits were also assessed.  
Results: Caregiver depressive symptoms and the child’s asthma symptoms  improved significantly (Table 1 ). 
Emergency Room ( ER) and uns cheduled visits decreased with substantial effect sizes, but did not reach 
statistical significance because of the small sample size.  Reduction in caregiver HRSD  scores correlated 
strongly with change in peak expiratory f low (r  = -0.93, p  = 0.002) , PASS (asthma symptoms) scores in 
the child (r  = 0.78) , as well as  quality of life in the caregiver (r  = -0.85, p  = 0.007) .  
Table 1 . Caregiver Depressive Symptoms, Caregiver and Child Quality of Life, Child Asthma 
Symptoms, and Asthma -related Service Utilization Before and During Antidepressant Treatment  
Assessment  HRSD  
(Caregiver)  QIDS -SR 
(Caregiver)  PASS 
(Child)  Asthma Related 
Hospitalizations (per month)  ER Visits  
(per month)  Unscheduled Clinic Visits  
(per month)  
Baseline  
Exit 20.9 ± 5.8 
15.5 ± 7.9 13.9 ± 3.9 
10.9 ± 4.9 19.4 ± 9.9 
13.3 ± 8.0 0.13 ± 0.06 
0.11 ± 0.17 0.30 ± 0.21 
0.16 ± 0.18 0.34 ± 0.39 
0.14 ± 0.18 
Significance  p = 0.08 p = 0.03 p = 0.05 p = 0.76 p = 0.06 p = 0.07 
Effect size 
(Cohen’s d) 0.84 0.68 0.68 0.16 0.72 0.66 
Significance: Findings from this pilot study suggest that antidepressant treatment was associated with 
improvement in car egiver depression as well  as reduction in asthma symptoms and service utilization 
for the child.  In addition,  the study demonstrates a strong relationship between change in caregiver 
depressive symptoms and the child’s asthma. These findings  suggest that improvement in depressive 
symptoms in  caregivers may be associated with improved outcomes related to the child’s asthma.   
3.3.a.iii. Pilot Study 3: Depressive Symptoms are Common in Children  with A sthma , and They May 
Impact  Asthma -related Service Utilization: This pilot  study  examined depressive symptoms in children  with 
asthma , not their caregivers .22 
Methods:  Participants were recruited during  visits at a Dallas  asthma clinic. Inclus ion criteria included a 
physician diagnosis of asthma, and age s 6-17. Demographic and medical information was obtained from the 
patient and guardian, treating physician, and medical record including age, gender, current medications, 
number of hospitalizations, ER visits , and oral steroid courses in the past year . In addition, the current Forced 
Expiratory Volume ( FEV 1) % predicted was obtained from routine spirometry on the day of clinic visit. The valid 
and standardized Children's Depression Rating Scale, Revised (CDRS -R)49 was administered.  Participants 
were divided by FEV 1% predicted (>  80 vs.  80), inhaled steroid dose (high dose vs. medium/low dose/none 
based on NHLBI  guidelines ),50 oral steroid use, and number of hospitaliza tions or ER visits in the past 12 
months.  
Results:  A total of 46 children with asthma  were enrolled (63% male, mean age 9.9   2.8 years ). Eighty -six 
percent of children were on medium or high doses of inhaled corticosteroids. Forty -one percent of children had 
FEV 1% predicted < 80% despite taking  inhaled corticosteroids. In this population of children with asthma  14 
(30%) had CDRS -R scores with the range of likely, very likely,  or almost certain depression. Higher mean 
CDRS -R scores were found in child ren with a hospitalization in the past year (64.2  ± 9.1 vs. 56.9  ± 12.5, p  = 
.03, Cohen’s d = 0.67) . 
Significance:  These data demonstrate that depression was common in the children and was associated with 
hospitalization in the past  year. Thus , they suggest that one possible pathway by whic h maternal depression 
may affect  a child’s asthma is  through the child’s own depression .  
 Drs. Miller and Wood (PIs) report four studies below from the Buffalo site directly pertinent  to the current 
proposal.  
3.3.a.iv. Pilot Study 4 : Relationship between Maternal Depression, and Depression and Asthma Control 
in the Child: This study examined the relationship between maternal depression and  child depression and 
asthma disease activity  mediated by parenting and medication adherence.  A sample of 242 children  (59% 
male)  with asthma, aged 7 to 17, participated with their mothers.  Maternal depres sion was assessed by the 
Beck Depression Inventory  (BDI) , and parenting was observed and rated during family  interaction tasks  using 
the Iowa Family Interaction Rating Scale (IFIRS), a widely used valid rating scale . Child depression and 
anxiety  were assesse d by the Child Depression Inventory  (CDI) , the CDRS -R, and  the Speilber ger State Trait 
Anxiety Inventory for Children (STAI C). Asthma  disease activity was assessed according to NHLBI  guidelines,  
and medication adherence was evaluated with Bender’s  validated  24-hr recall method  (Childhood Asthma 
Management Program Continuation Study, CAMPCS) . Structural  equation modeling indicated that maternal 
depression predicted child depression and anxiety  (B = .39, p < .001) and, in turn, c hild depression and a nxiety 
mediated associations between maternal depression, negative  parenting and asthma disease activity  (B = .36, 
STU022014 -069, Brown, FormA -ResearchProtocol, Mod_38, 04 -29-20  p < .001). Medication adherence did not mediate the link from  maternal depression to disease activity.51 
3.3.a.v. Pilot Study 5 : Replication of Pilot Study 4 with Fathers and Mothers: Using the same 
methodology as above, Wood replicated this study with co -habiting fathers and mothers of children with 
asthma aged 7 -17 (n = 106, 65% male ). Structural Equation model ing showed that the path from maternal 
depressive  symptoms to child depression and anxiety  through  mothers’ parent ing behaviors was significant, 
Chi Square ( 32, N 106) = 57.50, p < .004; incremental fix index ( IFI)= .89, comparative fit index ( CFI) = .87, 
root mean square err or of approximation ( RMSEA ) = .09; and in turn, child depression and anxiety  predicted  
asthma disease activity ( B = .28, p < .05). Paternal depressive  symptoms were linked to  child asthma disease 
activity only through the effect of inter -parent  negativity ( B=.32, p<.01 ) on maternal parenting of the child.52    
Significance: These two studies illustrate possible mediating pathways by which  caregiver depression impacts 
the child’s asthma by way of depression  in the child . 
3.3.a.vi. Pilot Study 6 : Relationship Between Child Stress and Emotions  with Asthma and Airway 
Function: Miller (PI) developed a laboratory film stress protocol to test autonomic mechanisms by which child 
depressive emotions impact airway function in asthma. M iller chose the film “E.T., the Extraterrestrial” because 
of its ecological validity in evoking emotional responses to situations similar to those experienced by children 
with asthma, e.g. family stress, separation and loss, illness, and fear of death . A preliminary study of 2 4 
children with asthma assessed the effects of the film stress on continuous heart rate, heart rate variability 
(HRV), oxygen saturation , and pulmonary function (FEV 1). FEV 1 was associated with emotional and 
physiological (HRV) reactivity and decreased pul monary function in response to the movie,53 especially during 
sad/hopeless scenes.24  
3.3.a.vii. Pilot  Study 7 : Airway Reactivity in Depressed Children with Asthma:  Using the same film stress 
methodology, the effect of child depression/ autonomic n ervous system ( ANS) dysregulation on airway function 
was demonstrated in a study of depressed (D) and non -depressed (ND) children with asthma  (N = 171). The D  
group, in comparison with the ND  group , showed significantly  greater vagal activation in response  to the family 
distress/loss scene (p  < .03); the E.T. dying scene (p  < .003); and the E.T.  death scene (p  < .03). The ND 
group showed consistent sympathetic activation ( p < .04), whereas the D group showed vagal activation (p < 
.03). Furthermore , the D group showed robustly and significantly higher airway resistance compared with the 
ND group (p  < .001). Finally, vagal bias (vagal vs . sympathetic activation) was associated with respiratory 
resistance (r  = 0.39, p < .004) .38 These findings are consist ent with Miller’s autonomic dysregu lation theory of 
the effect of depression on pulmonary function  which posits that depression is accompanied by a 
preponderance of vagal over sympathetic activation, which is problematic for asthma because  
cholinergic/ vagal activation is one mechanism of airw ay constriction .54  
Significance: These studies demonstrate a psychobiologic  stress pathway by which the child’s depression 
affects  asthma.  This is a plausible  mediating pathway by which caregiver depression affects child asthma .  
3.3.a.viii. Summary of Findings from Preliminary Studies and the Literature : 1) Our pilot studies show that 
we can successfully enrol l and retain caregivers and children with asthma in research studies . 2) Our pilot data 
sugges t that psychiatric disorders, especially depression, are very common in car egivers of children with 
asthma.  3) Caregiver depression is associated with more severe  childhood  asthma and greater service  
utilization . 4) The literature and Miller and Wood’s preliminary studies suggest that caregiver depression 
contributes to worse asthma  in the child , possibly mediated through stress/depression pathways . 5) The 
literature suggests that poor adherence is also a likely  mediator between caregiver depression and child 
asthma. 6) Based on our pilot data, treatment of depressio n in the caregiver was  associated with im provement 
in caregiver depression and a reduction in asthma symptom severity and service utilization by the child.   
 Given these findings, a study of caregivers and their children  with asthma  is proposed . We will test the se 
hypotheses:  1) Improvement in caregiver depression leads to subsequent improvement in the child’s 
asthma control, quality of life , and service utilization. 2) Improved adherence and/or decreased child 
anxiety/depression mediates the effect of improved caregiver depression on child asth ma outcomes.  
To test these hypotheses  depressed caregivers will be offered algorithm -based antidepressant treatment by 
the research psychiatrists , and the impact of changes in caregiver depression on asthma in the child will be 
examined  for 52 weeks (1 yea r). Mediating pathways  linking caregiver depression and the  child’s asthma will 
be examined .  
3.3.b. Overview  and rationale  of study design:  We propose a one-year, repeated measures, within -subject 
design to examin e the impact of improved caregiver depression on child asthma outcomes. A CLPM for 
longitudinal data will be fit using a maximum likelihood structural equation model (SEM) in order to explore 
longitudinal mediation between asthma outcomes (asthma control, s pirometry, QOL) and depressive 
symptoms. CLPM will test whether caregiver improvement preceded child asthma improvement, and SEM will 
test whether improved adherence and/or decreased child anxiety/depression mediat ed the effect.  We 
considered  a randomized control trial,  but it would not be ethically acceptable to withhold medication from 
caregivers diagnosed with MDD for the proposed one-year duration of the study . It is unl ikely that potential 
STU022014 -069, Brown, FormA -ResearchProtocol, Mod_38, 04 -29-20  participants in  the study would find this acceptable . Furthermore a controlled design is not necessary since we 
are not testing the efficacy of antidepressants for depression, but rather the impact of improvement on 
caregiver depression on the child.  
3.3.c. Experimental  Procedure s: Depressed caregivers will be identified using two methods. At the Buffalo 
and Dallas sites , clinicians at clinics specializing in childhood asthma will inform caregivers that we are doing a 
study to t ry to figure out how best to help  children with asthma and their caregivers , and will ask the caregivers 
if a research coordinator can ask them some scr eening questions related to  depression  and their child’s 
asthma . If they agree , then a research coordinator at the clinic will introduce themselves, provide a brief, 
scripted desc ription of the study , and, after obtaining verbal permission , will ask the caregiver questions from a 
2-item questionnaire55 for current depression (assessing depressed mood and anhedoni a) (Appendix 1). 
Caregivers who screen negatively (not likely depressed) will be debriefed and thanked for their willingness to 
be screened. Caregivers with a positive response to either screening question will be given additional 
information about the stu dy. The aims of the study will be clearly presented. The study will be framed in the 
context of developing more comprehensive assessment and treatment of stress -related conditions with the 
goal of improving the caregiv er’s and child’s QOL  and the child’s a sthma management. At this point  potential 
caregivers who are interested in the study will complete an IRB -approved informed consent process , and an 
appointment will be scheduled for a full baseline assessment. In order to ensure recruitment from the broadest 
possible population of children with asthma, an  additional  method of recruitment will be used at the Dallas site . 
This approach  will be through a very large database in the Parkland Hospital Community Oriented Primary 
Care (COPC) clinics. Using me thods employed in prior IRB and HIPAA office -approved studies using  this 
system , caregivers of children with an asthma diagnosis and within the study age range will receive a letter by 
mail describing the study and providing contact information. This recru itment letter has been presented to the 
Community Advisory Panel (CAP) at Parkland for evaluation, and the feedback from the community members 
has been incorporated into the wording of the recruitment letter. If no response is received in 2 weeks , then the  
research coordinator  will call the caregiver  and ask if they might  tell the caregiver about this study . If they 
decline , no further contact will be made. If they express interest and answer “yes” to one of the 2 -item 
depression screening questions above , then an appointment will be scheduled to ob tain written consent and 
for a complete  baseline assessment.  
 The baseline assessment will take approximately 2.5 hours and will consist of a 45 -60 minute structured 
clinical interview (SCID) using DSM -4 criteria to establish psychiatric diagnoses, depression , quality of  life, and 
other assessments  (see Table 2 for a complete list) , as well as information about number of asthma -related 
hospitalizations, ER visits, and unscheduled clinic appointments by th e chi ld within the preceding 12 months  as 
assessed by caregiver report (and confirmed th rough medical records when possible). Caregivers not meeting 
criteria for the intervention study will be paid for the initial assessment, informed of any psychiatric di sorders 
identified  (e.g. a psychiatric disorder other than MDD)  and, when appropriate, given referral information. 
Caregivers with current MDD and meeting all inclusion criteria will be offered algorithm -based depression 
pharmacotherapy  for 52 weeks . If a caregiver does not elect to participate in the algorithm -based treatment, 
they will remain eligible to enroll in the study and will receive referral information for an alternative depression 
treatment (e.g., psychotherapy ) from a study psychiatrist . The caregiver will be still eligible to enroll in 
pharmacotherapy during a later stage of t he study and will be advised by a study psychiatrist if they elect this 
option.  Furthermore, participants who are currently receiving or plan to receive treatment for  depression (e.g. 
medication, psychotherapy) by a healthcare provide r outside of the study may also participate. In these cases 
the participants will receive all of the assessments and physician evaluation but will not receive algorithm -
based treatment as part of the study. This protocol modification should improve enrollment by allow potential 
participants who prefer psychotherapy or want to receive antidepressant care from their PCPs to enroll. Given 
the inclusion,  exclusion and discontinuation criteria, as well as the careful monitoring during the study this 
change should not adversely impact the safety profile of the study. The change is scientifically sound because 
the aims of the study are related  to relationships between depressive symptom changes in the caregiver and 
asthma contro l in the child regardless of  the method by which the changes were achieved.   A total of 196 
caregivers w ill be enrolled . A modified and simplified version the Texas Medication Algorithm Project (TMAP) 
MDD guidelines (Appendix 2) will be utilized  to guide treatment . Caregivers and children will be assessed 
every four weeks  (weeks 4 , 8, 12, 16, 20, 24, 28, 32, 36, 40, 44, 48 an d 52) with additional phone assessments 
2 weeks after medication changes  to assess for adverse events, medication side effects , or suicidality, and to 
confirm the next clinical appointment . Follow -up assess ments will take approximately 1.5 hours including 
psychiatrist assessment  and quality of life, asthma adherence, anxiety and depression questionnaires 
administered by a research team member . Caregivers will be assessed  by a study psychiatrist at appointments 
for medication management.  Caregivers  will be  paid $60  for the baseline  visit and assessments every 4 weeks 
(weeks 4 -52). Children will be paid $20 at each visit. Bus, rail, or taxi expenses will be reimbursed if these 
transportation methods are needed. Both caregivers and children will be paid using  a UT Southwestern issued 
STU022014 -069, Brown, FormA -ResearchProtocol, Mod_38, 04 -29-20  Greenphire ClinCard, which can be used as a credit or debit card.  Caregivers who are cons ented and come to 
our clinic for a baseline assessment but not meet all of the entry criteria will be given $20 for their time and 
inconvenie nce. This smaller payment reflects the generally shorter ti me required when a participant does not 
qualify for the study because the assessments stop at the point that an exclusion criterion is identified.   
3.3.c.i. Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
Inclusion Criteria:  Primary Caregivers  (defined as the adult who is primarily responsible for the child’s asthma 
management) : Male or fema le, ages 18 to 70, primary asthma caregiver of the child, currently meeting criteria 
for MDD (based on DSM -4 depression symptoms for at least 2 weeks and causing  clinically significant distress 
or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning) based on a SCID interview.  
Child : Male or female , ages 7-17 years  who have a diagnosis of persistent asthma  as classified by either of 
the following criteria: A. requirement for treatment with daily controller medication; or B. symptoms of 
persistent asthma in children not on a daily controller medication : 1. Daytime symptoms two  or more days per 
week ; 2. Rescue bronchodilator use two  or more times per week ; 3. Nocturnal symptoms two  or more nights 
per month ; or 4. Two or more oral steroid bursts in the last year .56 
Exclusion Criteria:  Caregivers : Severe cognitive impairment that could impair their ability to provide informed 
consent; member of a vulnerable population (i ncarcerated, pregnant or breastfeeding  women); women of 
childbearing age who will not use acceptable methods of birth control or abstinence during the study; s evere 
psychiatric disorder in ad dition to MDD that should be a primary focus of treatment (e.g. severe and disabling 
eating or anxiety disorders) ; treatment refractory depression defined as failing ≥  3 adequate trials of 
antidepressants (≥ 4 weeks at a therapeutic dose) ; electroconvulsiv e therapy or repeated transcranial 
magnetic stimulation during the current episode; depression as part of bipolar disorder or schizophrenia or 
schizoaffective disorder, or current depression secondary to substances or general medical condition, or with 
psychotic features  or accompanied by severe obsessive compulsive disorder ( OCD ), or high risk for suicide 
defined by multiple recent suicide attempts (> 2 in the past year) or any attempt in the past month, or current 
suicidal ideation with a well -formed plan  or intent.  Child: Severe cognitive impairment that could impair their 
ability to provide informed consent; high risk for suicide defined by multiple recent suicide attempts ( > 2 in the 
past year) or any attempt in the past month, or current suicidal ideation with a well -formed plan or intent; 
severe or life -threatening medical illness , such as other serious cardiopulmonary conditions (e.g. congenital 
heart disease, cystic fibrosi s, alpha -1-antitrypsin disease)  or cancer,  which would confound the assessment  of 
asthma, anxiety, depressi on or QOL ; severe psychiatric illness, such  as autism, bipolar disorder, schizophrenia 
or current drug/alcohol abuse/dependence . If an eligible careg iver presents with more than one child meeting 
inclusion criteria for the study, only one child, randomly selected, will be enrolled.  
 
Figure 2. Timeline for Study  
 
Startup meeting for both sites  
In Dallas  .          
 
Staff training in use of outcome 
measures and reassessment  •  •  •  •  •  
 
Phone calls  and site visits  
between Dallas and Buffalo 
sites            
 
Enrollment of participants             
Antidepressant treatment             
Data entry             
Data Analysis             
 Month    0 6 12 18 24 30 36 42 48 54 60 
 
 
3.3.c.ii. Participant Enrollment: Dallas: The Dallas pediatric asthma clinic (Dr. Neaville) that will be used for 
enrollment has 459 current active patients in the age ran ge proposed for the study and 17 4 new patients in this 
age range each year. Given these numbers , if 26% of caregivers have current MDD (as in our pilot study) then 
over a 4 year en rollment period , we will have 300  eligible participan ts. To enroll 98 participants , 33% of these 
will need to agree to participate. We realize that enrollment is challenging  in any clinical research study. 
STU022014 -069, Brown, FormA -ResearchProtocol, Mod_38, 04 -29-20  Furthermore, MDD rates could be lower than in our pilot , and participation rates coul d be less than 33%. 
Therefore, to augment enrollmen t at the Dallas site , we w ill use the Parkland COPC  database to identify and 
contact potential partic ipants. As of September 4, 2013 , this database had  3500  children with asthma in the 
age range with 707 new patients entering the system each year. If, as i n our pilot study, 26% of caregivers 
have current MDD , this potentially provides 1645 potential participants. Thus, if 6% of potential participants 
agreed , we could enroll 98 over 4 years. A study by Drs. Tiro and Persaud (co-Is) using this database  to rec ruit 
girls ages 11 -18 in a study about the human papilloma virus ( HPV) vaccine  employed similar recruitment 
methods to those in the proposed study. In this study  from February and December 2011 , the investigators 
evaluated 2160 Parkland COPC patient records , of which 875 (40.5%) appeared to be eligibl e. Of these 875 , a 
total of 337 (38.5%) were enrolled. About 1.4% of recruitment letters were returned due to an incorrect 
address, in which case recruitment calls were still attempted. Over 3000 recruitm ent calls were made, with 
patient  contact  attempted an average of 3.7 t imes  per patient . The 538 patients who did not complete the pre -
clinic survey had  the following study outcomes: unable to contact (19.1%), wrong number /out of order (10.7%), 
maybe later  (14.2%), not eligible (11.4%), no -shows (9.8%), and not interested (6.5%) . These data suggest 
that the database is a useful method for recruit ing research participants and will supplement recr uitment from 
the asthma clinic.  
 
Buffalo: The Buffalo pediatric  asthma service (Dr. Lehman, co -I) that will be used for enrollment is a three -site 
practice with a diverse patient demographic. The main clinic site is an inner -city clinic attached to the Women 
and Children's Hospital of Buffalo. In addition, there is a suburban satellite clinic and a suburban/rural satellite 
clinic. The Buffalo pediatric asthma service has 1160 patients in the age range proposed for the study and 315 
new patients in this age range each year. Given these numbers, if 26% of caregivers have  current MDD (as in 
our pilot study) , then over a 4 year enrollment period the site will have 547 eligible participants. To enroll 98 
participants , 18% of these wil l need to agree to participate.  
 
Participant retention: We will use established methods for  recruiting and retaining popula tions over long 
periods of time. Drs. Wood and Miller have used these methods throughout their multi -visit studies and 
obtained excellent retention statistics (95% compl etion of a 6 week study ). Dr. Brown (PI) was an investi gator 
on TMAP, a large multisite study using treatment algorithms for one year in patients with psychiatric illnesses  
in a similar fashion as the proposed study . In the MDD module of TMAP , retention was 100% at 3 months, 
99.5% at 6 months, 83.2% at 9 month s and 75.9% at 12 months. To maximize retention in the proposed study , 
multiple contact numbers (home, cell, work, family, friend s), mailing addresses , and e -mail addresses will be 
obtained . Participants wi ll be compensated appropriately for participation , transportation, time, and effort . 
Participants will have contact w ith research staff every 2 -4 weeks either by phone or in person to keep them 
engaged in treatment. Participant s are in the study for 52 weeks  even if they miss some appointments, and we 
will collect as much data from each participant as possible.  It is noteworthy that our data analytic procedures 
have robust methods of dealing with missing data.  In addition, we propose enrolling 196 participants, rather 
than the 175 needed based on a power  analysis, to allow for some early attrition.  
 
3.3.c.iii. Medication:  Caregivers with current MDD will be offered antidepressant treatment from a 
researc h psychiatrist at no cost for 52  weeks. All medications used will be FDA -approved for MDD. The 
antidepressants and augmenting agents selected are  widely used . We will provide these to the participants  
at each  visit. This method of dispensing medications is different than in clinical practice where a patient 
would receiv e the medication at a pharmacy. We propose to use this method to enhance medication 
adherence  and optimize internal validity of the study . Adherence to medica tion will be assessed by  pill 
count s. We will use a simplified version of the TMAP MDD algorithm t hat has been adapted for this study. 
The algorithm is flexible because participants will potentially enter the study with different treatment 
histories.  The doses of antidepressant will be  titrated upward, to the FDA -approved maximum if needed, 
with the go al of achieving depression re mission or full response . If the participan t is already taking an 
antidepressant, they will remain on the prescribed medication until the first evaluation stage required by the 
algorithm and the doctor will assess how well the medication is working at that stage.  If this is the first 
depressive ep isode and during the course of the study  the participant’s depression symptoms improve to 
the point at which they may no longer require medication, the doctor can evaluate if subject should be 
tapered off  the medication. This would only be after at least 6  months of full remission of symptoms.  At any 
time, the subject is free to decide to discontinue taking medication but can remain in the study under the 
study doctor’s care.  This decision will be fully discussed with the study doctor for safety reasons . After 12 
weeks a change of medication or augmentation can be performed depending upon level of response. This 
process is repeated at week s 24 and 36  at which time additional augmentation strategies are allowed. The 
STU022014 -069, Brown, FormA -ResearchProtocol, Mod_38, 04 -29-20  objective is to provide active treatment with careful monitoring of depressive symptoms using remission as 
the goal. For additional medication and algorithm information see Appendix 2. Due to the known side effect 
profiles of these medications, ECGs and blood tests will be performed in the study as deemed necessary 
by clinician judgment.  
 
Table 2. Assessment Schedule (Baseline + 13 assessments)  
Instrument  Respondent  Wk 0  Wk 4 – 48 Wk 52  Time  
2-SRSD  Caregiver  X   3 min  
SCID  Caregiver  X   45-60 min  
HRSD  Caregiver  X X X 15 min  
QIDS -SR 16 Caregiver  X X X 10 min  
STAI  Caregiver  X X X 15 min  
PACQOL  Caregiver  X X X 10 min  
PRD -III Caregiver  X X X 5 min  
UPT*  Caregiver  X X X 1 min  
ECG*  Caregiver  X X X 5 min  
Blood panels*  Caregiver  X X X 5 min  
CAMPCS  Caregiver & Child  X X X 5 min  
PSS Caregiver & Child  X X X 5 min  
CVLT/CVLT -C Child  X   20 min  
CASI  Child  X X X 10 min  
Relatedness Scale  Child  X X X 5 min  
SCARED  Child  X X X 10 min  
CDI Full Length  Child  X X X 15 min  
PAQOL  Child  X X X 15 min  
ACT/cACT  Child  X X X 3 min  
Spirometry  Child  X X X 5 min  
Debriefing Interview  Caregiver & Child    X 30 min  
COVID -19 Interview  Caregiver   X X 5 min  
*these tests will be performed as clinically indicated based on physician judgment.  UPT will be performed at Wk 0 and 
again as clinically indicated.  
3.3.d. Assessments and Outcome Measures  
3.3.d.i. Psychiatric diagnoses : The SCID  for DSM -4 Clinician Version (SCID -CV) is a fairly brief version of the 
SCID that assesses Axis I disorders in DSM -4 including MDD , dysthymic disorder, bipolar disorders, 
schizophrenia, anxiety disorder s, eating disorders, and drug/alcohol  abuse/dependence . 3.3.d.ii. Depression 
and anxiety measures : A 2-item self -report screening tool for depression (2 -SRSD) taken from the Primary 
Care Evaluation of Mental Disorders Procedure (PRIME -MD) screening interview will be used to detect 
suspected cases of depression among asthma clinic caregivers .55 This instrument had  better sensitivity (96%) 
than either the Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale (CES -D) (93%) or BDI (89%) in identif ying 
depression as defined by structured clini cal interview in a general medical clinic .55 Specifi city of the 2 -SRSD 
was 57%.  A positive answer to either 1) “During the past month, have you often been bothered by feeling 
down, depressed, or hopeless?” or 2) “During the past month, have you often been bothered by little interest or 
pleasure in  doing things?” will be cons idered a possible case of depression and qualify for further assessment. 
Dr. Brown has used this screening tool in prior studies including an ongoing NHLBI -funded study in adults with 
asthma. The HRSD (17-item version)47 is an observer -rated measure of depressive symptomatology. The 
HRSD will be given at every visit. Because of its wide use for many decades ,  the HRSD will be the primary 
measure of caregiver depressive symptoms in the study. The QIDS -SR48 is a validated 16 -item self -report scale 
that assesses depressive symptom severity. Scores of ≤ 7 are considered normal, 8 -12 suggest mild 
depressive symptoms, 13 -16 moderate depressive symptoms, 17 -20 moderate to severe depressive symptoms, 
and ≥ 21 seve re depression. The use of these two depression instruments allows us to assess changes in both 
clinician -rated and self -reported depressive symptoms and their relationship to asthma outcomes. Perceived 
Stress Scale (PSS) is a 10 question self -report measur e validated in middle school children and adults, and 
available in both English and Spanish. This instrument will be administered to the caregiver and the child at 
each visit, and will allow for detection of changes in stress levels that are not as severe as depression and 
anxiety. Research coordinators  will assist younger children, if necessary, by helping them read and understand 
the questions. The Relatedness Questionnaire is a validated 17 -item questionnaire completed by the child 
regarding his or her p rimary caregiver. It will assess the quality of the child’s self -reported relationship with the 
caregiver.57 Screen for Child Anxiety Related Disorders (SCARED) is a 41 -item self -report scale, validated in 
STU022014 -069, Brown, FormA -ResearchProtocol, Mod_38, 04 -29-20  both English and Spanish. This scale has 3 -point r esponse options and assesses children’s anxiety level within 
the last 3 months.58 The Children’s Depression Inventory Full Length (CDI Full Length) is a 27 -item self -report 
scale designed to assess depression in children and validated in both English and S panish.  
The COVID -19 Interview is intended to take into account the impact of the COVID19 pandemic on the factors 
under study in our research.  One goal is to assess whether caregiver depression and child asthma control 
worsened after the onset of the COVI D19 pandemic.  We will accomplish this by comparing the severity of 
caregiver depression and the degree of control of the child’s asthma in the months before the COVID19 to the 
caregiver severity depression of and control of child’s asthma during the COVID 19.  This is data that is collected 
under the currently approved study protocol. In addition, one of our IRB approved research staff and/or a study 
psychiatrist will ask the caregivers to report on the perceived impact of COVID19 on their own emotional sta te 
and functioning, and on the emotional state and asthma control in their child.  
3.3.d.iii. Quality of Life : The Pediatric Asthma Caregiver's Quality of Life Questionnaire ( PACQOL )59 measures 
the problems that the parents o f children with asthma experience as a result of their child's asthma. There are 
13 questions in 2 domains (activity limitations and emotional function) that were selected on the basis of their 
importance to the parents themselves. The questionnaire is sel f-administered and has 7 -point response options. 
Pediatric Asthma Quality of Life Questionnaire ( PAQOL )59 measures problems that children experience as a 
result of their asthma. It has 23 items in 3 domains (symptoms, activity limitations, emotional function); 3 of the 
activity questions are "pat ient-specific" and identified by the patient at the beginning of the study. Items were 
selected on the basis of their importance to the children themselves. The questionnaire has 7 -point response 
options and takes approximately 10 minutes to complete. California Verbal Learning Test (CVLT -II or CVLT -C 
for children under 16 years of age) is a validated assessment that measures episodic verbal learning and 
memory, and is sensitive to the effects of inhaled corticosteroids that many child participants with ast hma take 
daily. CVLT consists of 16 nouns read aloud to the participant in one -second intervals over five learning trials. 
After each trial, participants are asked to recall as many words as the can in any order.  
3.3.d.iv. Asthma Severity, Control and Outcomes : Asthma outcome measures to be used in this study will 
adhere to the recommended asthma clinical research core outcome measures recently proposed by the NIH’s  
Asthma Outcomes Workshop.60 We will incorporate information on asthma exacerbations, healthcare 
utilization, pulmonary function, quality of life, composite control scores, and asthma symptoms into our 
outcome measures. Exacerbations w ill be assessed by caregiver report at each study visit. Exacerbation 
outcomes will include systemic steroid courses, asthma -specific hospitalizations, asthma -specific emergency 
department visits/urgent care visits, and asthma -specific intensive care unit admissions/intubations since the 
last appointment.  Healthcare utilization relating to each child’s asthma will be assessed, including asthma -
specific hospitalizations, asthma -specific emergency department visits/urgent care visits, asthma -specific  
outpatie nt visits, and asthma -specific medication use. The number of asthma -specific hospitalizations, 
emergency department visits and unscheduled clinic appointments by  the child in the prior year and during the 
1 year  of the intervention will be assessed by care giver report using a calendar to facilitate recall. This 
information will be supplemented with data obtained directly from the child’s hospital, primary physician/asthma 
specialist, and pharmacy records.  
 Spirometry data, including % predicted of FEV 1, forced vital capacity ( FVC), and FEV 1/FVC ratio will be 
collected on the child at all study visit s using a portable spirometer (EasyOne Plus, NDD  Medical 
Technologies, Inc. Andover, MA).   
 As a measurement of asthma control, the Asthma Control Test (ACT) will be administered to children ages 
12+ at each caregiver depression study visit and the Childhood Asthma Control Test (cACT) will be 
administered to children ages 5 -11.61, 62 The ACT and cACT tools represent a continuum  of asthma control 
assessment tools across childhood age ranges. In both tools, a score of >  19 signifies controlled disease and 
scores of  19 signifies uncontrolled asthma.  Thus, the scores can be combined in the data analysis.  
 The Composite Asthma Severity Index (CASI) will be obtained on the child at baseline and at all study 
visits.63 CASI was developed by the National Institutes of Health –supported Inner City Asthma Consorti um 
(ICAC) and includes five domains: day symptoms and albuterol use, night symptoms and albuterol use, 
controller treatment, lung function measures, and exacerbations. The CASI tool has been validated to assess 
asthma severity in children between 6 and 20 years of age. Because it combines domains of impairment and 
treatment level to assess asthma severity, the CASI score remains steady through changes in standard 
guidelines -based asthma care (i.e. step -up or step -down asthma controller therapy). Therefore, it has utility in 
assessing response to new asthma treatment/intervention modalities such as our proposed intervention, which 
may not only alter asthma symptoms but the requirement for asthma controller treatments as well.63  
3.3.d.v. Adherence:  CAMPCS medication adherence interview is a brief 9 -item clinician -rated scale assessing 
controller medication adherence in the past week  that can be administered over the phone or in person .64 The 
CAMPCS interview, along with its specific manner of presentation, has established reliability and validity.65 The 
interview shows impressive sensitivity to asthma inhaler adherence, assessed via electronic monitoring.66  
STU022014 -069, Brown, FormA -ResearchProtocol, Mod_38, 04 -29-20  3.3.d.vi. Medication Side Effects and Adverse Events:  Antidepressant s ide effects and adverse events will 
be inquired about at each clinic and phone visit. In addition, The Psychobiology of Recovery in Depression 
III - Somatic Symptom Scale (PRD -III),67 a 24-item side effects rating scale developed for a longitudinal 
depression study at the University of Pittsburgh , will be utilized to for mally assess somatic complaints . The 
PRD -III covers a wide range of common medication side effects and can be quickly and easily administered by 
a clinici an. Dr. Brown has used this scale in numerous prior studies.  Spirometry results at each visit will be also 
used to evaluate whether the children need to follow up with their primary care provider or the emergency 
room. Dr. Lehman has designed a safety prot ocol to ensure that if any of the following signs/symptoms are 
present, then a child needs to be referred to the medical doctor or the emergency services: albuterol use prior 
to the study visit more closely spaced than every 4 hours, child’ s FEV 1 on spirom etry is 50% predicted or less, 
caregiver is concerned that child’s is experiencing a significant asthma attack. Additionally, the children will be 
immediately referred to 911/emergency room for transport in presence of the following: child can’t talk witho ut 
gasping/losing breath, child is hunched forward with deep breathing, chest/neck pull is during each breath, 
nostrils flaring (open wide) during each breath, lips or fingertips look blue.  
 
 
3.3.e. Assessment  Training  
Staff members are already famil iar wi th the assessments from prior or ongoing research projects  at the Dallas  
and Buffalo  sites. We will schedule formal training in the instruments  for research staff  from both sites in Dallas 
prior to participant enrollment. For the psychiatric diagnosis  and mood and anxiety scales , we will arrange 
training through the UT Southwestern Psychiatry Clinical Research Infrastructure ( P-CRI) by David Morris, 
Ph.D. Dr. Morris is a highly experienced train er for almost all commonly used psychiatric symptom scales and  
performs this role in the ongoi ng multisite NIMH Establishing Moderators and Biosignatures of Antidepressant 
Response for Clinical Care (EMBARC) study. A mock pa tient will be  interviewed. Intra class Correlation 
Coefficients (ICC) will be calculated and additio nal training will be provided , when needed , for individual raters 
with scores outside the acceptable range. The goal will be an ICC of at least 0.8. The most recent  assessment 
of Dr. Brown’s research team showed a n ICC of 0.98 on the HRSD. Dr. Wood will provide training on the use of  
the CAMPCS, PACQOL, PAQOL questionnaires, which she has used extensively in previous studies. Training 
in the use of asthma -related outcomes, including the CASI and portable spirometer, will be conducted by Dr. 
Lehman. Research coordinators at the Dallas site already use a portable spirometer in an ongoing NHLBI -
funded study examining the effect of antidepres sant treatment on adult asthma. However, to assure proper use 
of the spirometer , reassessment of proper sp irometry use will take place on site (Drs. Lehman -Buffalo, Dr. 
Khan -Dallas) every 4  months. Retraining and reassessment for other scales will be conducted on an annual 
basis.  
Rater Blinding:  We propose to have different raters assess the child’s asthma symptoms and the caregiver’s 
depression. Each  rater will be blinded to the data obtained by the other rater. Participants will be instructed to 
not discuss the results with the other rater  or the raters among themselves. This procedure is proposed to 
maximize the objectivity of the ratings of the outcome variables and minimize any biases or assumptions based 
on the hypotheses of the study . One outcome measure (CAMPCS) will use adherence feedback  from both 
caregiver and child. Since this is an outcome related to the child’s asthma management , this assessment will be 
administered by the staff member performing ratings on the child , and this staff member will be blind to the 
caregiver mood ratings a nd scores .  
3.3.f. Data Management: A highly experienced data manager from the UT Southwestern P -CRI will set up the 
database , and monitor and advise the research team throughout the study. The data manager has managed 
data in much larger multisite depress ion research studies (e.g. TMAP, STAR*D). At the beginning of the study, 
a database format will be designed by the Dallas -based data management team in collaboration with Dr. Wood 
in Buffalo. A manual containing that format will be transmitted to Buffalo, and Dr. Wood will supervise its 
implementation and maintenance. Data will be maintained at the site of collection (Dallas or Buffalo). However, 
de-identified data (containing a study ID number but not name, SS#, or DOB) that will be used in the data 
analys is (e.g. depressive symptoms, asthma control) from the Buffalo site will be sent electronically to the 
Dallas site on a weekly basis. These data will be reviewed each week by the Dallas monitor and any errors or 
inconsistencies will be discussed. A data mo nitor from both the Dallas and Buffalo sites will review data charts 
and corresponding digital database content weekly and provide feedback to the PIs and research staff on data 
quality and recommend remediation, if necessary. To assure consistency and acc uracy between sites, the data 
monitor from the Dallas site will travel to Buffalo every 6 months to review the data collected (e.g. charts) at the 
Buffalo site. The data will be checked for errors or inconsistencies, extreme values, and missing data which will 
be discussed and resolved.  
 
3.4. Statistical Analyses  
STU022014 -069, Brown, FormA -ResearchProtocol, Mod_38, 04 -29-20  Aim 1 . Determine if improvement in depressive symptoms in caregivers of children with asthma 
predicts subsequent improvement in the child’s asthma control. A CLPM for longitudinal data will be fit 
using a maximum likelihood SEM in order to explore reciprocal causation  between asthma ou tcomes and 
depressive symptoms  with lagged effect. A separate model will be constructed for each asthma outcome  (e.g. 
CASI, AC T, steroid bursts) . The full CLPM with all cross -lagged paths will test  if both  the asthma outcome s and 
depressive symptoms predict each other at subsequent visits. For each full model, paths will connect the value 
of the depressive symptom score (e.g. HRSD)  at ea ch visit to the asthma outcome (e.g. CASI)  at each 
subsequent visit  (e.g. 4 weeks later, 8 weeks later) . Another set of paths will connect the asthma outcome at 
each visit to the HRSD at each subsequent visit. The full model will be compared to reduced models containing 
either the first set of paths or the second set. We hypothesize that the model with the first set of paths will 
provide a better fit than the second set. The models will be compared on goodness of fit criteria, a non -
significant X2 p-value .05 or more , fit indices .90  or more , RMSEA  .05 or less , and significant path 
coefficients.68-75  Extensive overviews of the use of this CLPM for long itudinal data analyses are given by Cole 
and Maxwell and MacKinnon.70, 75 We will follow Cole and M axwell’ s70 guidelines for testing the proposed 
causal relationship, caregivers’ depressive symptom s preceding child’s asthma outcomes, with longitudinal 
data using SEM software Mplus . We will control for variables that might impact depressive symptoms or 
asthma response including age, gender and race/ethnicity. The primary analysis for this aim will us e CASI 
scores for the child and caregiver HRSD scores. The HRSD is a widely used clinician -rated depression scale 
while the CASI scores take into account both asthma symptoms and asthma medication use to treat 
symptoms. Similar analysis will be conducted using the QIDS -SR as the depression measure and STAI as a 
caregiver anxiety measure . ACT scores and steroid bursts will be used as well as CASI scores in the analysis.   
Aim 2 . Determine if improvement in depressive symptoms in caregivers of children with a sthma 
predicts reduced unscheduled asthma -related service utilization. Separate analyses will be done fo r each 
event ( ER visits , hospitalizations and unscheduled appointments). The dependent variable will be a count of 
the number of times the event occurre d during the 52 week study period. This number will be converted to 
events per month to adjust for subjects who do not complete 52 weeks. The independent variables will be 
caregiver depressive symptoms as measured by HRSD along with site, baseline depressi ve symptoms, 
baseline asthma symptoms, and season of the year. Other baseline demographic and clinical variables (such 
as child’s age) will be added if they impro ve the fit of the final model. Because the dependent variable is 
accumulated over the study pe riod, caregiver HRSD will also be summarized over the study period for each 
subject by computing a seasonally adjusted slope of change over time during the 52 week study. All 
participants with two or more post -baseline HRSD measurements will be included in  the analyses. Count data 
typically follow a Poisson distribution . Therefore, a generalized linear mixed model with Poisson link function 
will be used (SAS Proc GLIMMIX). Intercepts will be random effects. If an excessive number of subjects have 
zero events and the Poisson distribution is not appropriate (which often occur s with count data), then we will 
consider negative binomial models, zero -inflated Poisson models, and hurdle models. At times caregiver 
depression may get worse, despite treatment. Therefore, we will examine whether increases in caregiver 
depressive sympto m severity predicts worse child asthma outcomes. The same model used above will be used 
here except that an indicator variable will be added to indicate if caregiver HRSD scores worsened or stayed 
the same during the study (zero or positive slope) versus i mproved (negative slope). The addition of this 
indicator variable will allow the relationship between change in HRSD and utilization events to differ for those 
who worsen or stay the same versus those who improve. This aim will be tested by the significanc e of this 
additional indicator variable. The primary analysis for this aim will use HRSD scores and ER visits (sensitive to 
the intervention in Pilot Study #2 and an important clinical outcome). However, s imilar analysis will be 
conducted using the QIDS -SR and STAI in place of the HRSD , and using unscheduled clinic visits and 
hospitalizations.  
Aim 3 . Determine if improvement in depressive symptoms in the caregivers of children with asthma 
predicts improvement in asthma -related QOL in the caregiver and chil d. We will use the same approach 
outlined above under Aim 1 above but substituting the quality of life measure ( PAQOL and PACQOL ) in place 
of the asthma control measure.  
Aim 4 . Examine medication adherence and child anxiety/depression  as possible mediators transmitting 
the effect of decreased caregiver depression on asthma control and unscheduled service utilization.  
The goal of Aim 4 is to validate the following relationships:  
 
      Caregiver HRSD (1)  medication adherence or child  anxiety/depression (2) child asthma outcomes (3)  
 
 The relationship between (1) and (3) is considered in Aim 1. For Aim 4, two sets of CLPM analyses , (1)  
(2) and (2)  (3), will be done independently as described for Aim 1. The first set of analyses will de termine if 
caregiver HRSD improv ement (1) precedes child adherence (CAMPCS scores) and anxiety/ depression  
STU022014 -069, Brown, FormA -ResearchProtocol, Mod_38, 04 -29-20  improveme nt (SCARED , CDI -Full Length  scores) (2). Separate models will be fit for adherence and 
anxiety/depression. The second set of analyses will determine if child adherence  and anxiety/depression  
improvement (2) precedes child asthma outcome improvement (3). Separate models will be fit relating 
adherence to each asthma outcome and relating anxiety/depression  to each asthma  outcome (6 models 
altogether). Similar analysis will be conducted replacing the HRSD with the caregiver scores on the QIDS -SR 
and STAI.  
Missing Data:  The analyses described here for the Primary Aim and Secondary Aim 2 will make use of data 
from all available subjects, even subjects with some missing data.  Also, these models are unbiased if the 
missing data are missing at random (MAR) .76 However, in case the MAR assumption is not satisfied, we will 
investigate the effect of dropouts on the final results by introducing a variable into the models to indicate 
whether the patient dropped out or completed.71 If this dropout status variable is significant , then sensitivity 
analyses will be done to determine the possible effects of dropouts on the f inal results.72-74, 76, 77 The impact of 
missing data in the structural equation models will be assessed by using full information maximum l ikelihood.78 
Power:   No data exist on which to base a power analysis. However, the hypothesis tests used here involve 
testing regression coefficients.  To obtain an approxima te idea of the power of our tests , we can refer to the test 
of a regression coefficient that can be detected with 80% power given a sample of 175.  If we conservatively 
assume 10 predictors for the Primary Aim and Secondary Aim 2, then an effect size of f2 = 0.10 could be 
detected.  This effect size is classified as small (f2 = 0.02) to medium (f2 = 0.15) according to Cohen.69 In the full 
model for Secondary Aims 1, 2 and 3 there are 13 measurement occasions and approximately 200 paths ; 
however,  the hypotheses to be tested involve the 78 paths between each visit and each later visit.  Given this 
number of predictors to be tested, an effect size of 0.31 could be detected with 80% power.  This effect size is 
classified as medium (f2 = 0.15) to large (f2 = 0.35) according to Cohen.69 
 
3.5. Design Considerations  
Why target MDD?  MDD is a common and disabling disorder.  Our data and the literature support  a relationship 
between caregiver depression an d asthma outcomes in the child. Anxiety disorders were also common in Pilot 
Study #1 and associated with unscheduled service utilization. However, in this study , 53% with an anxiety 
disorder also had MDD. Many  of the antidepressants that will be used in the study (e.g. SSRIs, SNRIs) are also 
effective treatments for most anxiety disorders. Thus, by including MDD , we also include and treat anxiety 
disorders.  The outcome measures are different for each anxiety di sorder (e.g.  panic, specific phobia)  which 
would further complicate a study focusing on specific anxiety disorders . However, we will use a general anxiety 
symptom assessment tool (STAI) in the study. Thus, for both the internal and external validity of the  study we 
elected to target MDD, allow co -occurring anxiety disorder s, and exclude only those with an anxiety disorder 
that should be the primary focus of clinical treatment (e.g. severe OCD).  
Why target asthma?  1) Childhood asthma is a major public health concern. 2) Asthma symptoms are 
influenced by mood and emotions in both the child and caregiver. 3) We have substantial pilot data and an 
extensive track record relevant to the proposed study. 4) In addition to reasons 1-3 which were also discussed 
earlier in the application, it is important to note that asthma is a pulmonary disease that is, at least partially, 
reversible and is influenced  by medication adherence. Therefore, it is reasonable to expect to observe a 
positive effect on a sthma control with an intervention that improve s treatment adherence. Finally, it is important 
to note that the findings from the proposed study could have implications beyond asthma treatment. Positive 
findings could lead to the testing of similar approac hes in other common illnesses (e.g. diabetes).  
Why was algorithm -based treat ment  selected?  A randomized, placebo -controlled antidepressant trial was 
considered but rejected , in part because of the relative strengths of  a clinical trial versus the experimental 
longitudinal within subject design  described above in  section  3.3.b. In addition, a lengthy placebo -controlled 
antidepressant trial would raise both safety and ethical concerns . Most importantly , our interest is not whether 
antidepressants wor k for MDD (this is already established) but whether improvement in caregiver depression 
has an impact on the child’s asthma. A placebo -controlled design is not needed to observe a range of 
depression responses.  
 Non-pharmacologic interventions were consid ered. Brief interventions for depression are generally 
associated with small effect sizes .79 Psychotherapy, while potentially very effecti ve, requires more frequent and 
longer  visits than pharmacotherapy . Another alternative design that we considered was treatment of the child’s 
depression. Our pilot data suggest high rates of depression in the children with asthma as well as their 
caregiver s. However, we rejected this approach because 1) of concerns regarding the safety of antidep ressant 
treatment in children, 2 ) literature suggests that the impact of depression in children with asthma on asthma 
outcomes is largely mediated through caregiver  depression ,36 and 3) a large depression study conducted as 
part of the STAR*D project observed that treatment of mat ernal depression was effective in treating depression 
in the child .80 These finding s suggest that a study addressing caregiver depression would have the greatest 
STU022014 -069, Brown, FormA -ResearchProtocol, Mod_38, 04 -29-20  clinical impact. Finally, an algorithm -based antidep ressant treatment is desirable because it lends itself t o 
primary care settings . 
Why a 52 -week period of antidepressant treatment?  We observed positive changes in the child’s asthma 
symptoms at 6 mont hs in Pilot S tudy # 2. However, it may take some time for improvement in caregiver 
depression to result in improvement in the child’s asthma control. In addition, to assess differences in relatively 
infreq uent events (e.g. emergency care ), 52 weeks may be needed. A period o f 52 weeks 1) allow s a 
preliminary determination of the impact of depression treatment o n unscheduled service utilization , 2) allow s a 
reasonable assessment of changes in the child’s a sthma control , and 3) allows us to assess the child’s asthma 
through all four seasons .  
Will a range of changes in depression symptom severity be observed?  Available data suggest that a range 
of degree s of improvement and time to improvement will be observed. Participants will receive state -of-the-art 
depression care. A concern might be that if depressive symptoms w ere quickly and fully ameliorate d in all of the 
participants , the study would have little ability to assess relationships between improvement in depression and 
asthma outcomes. Howe ver, available data suggest  that many people receiving sequential depression 
treatment  remain symptomatic. Antidepressant effectiveness trials conducted in clinical practice settings 
suggest remission (virtual absence of symptoms) of 15% to 35% in primary and specialty care.81-84 In the 
STAR*D study , remission rates  were 36.8%, 30.6%, 13.7%, and 13.0% for the first, second, third, and fourth 
acute treatment steps.  In those achie ving remission , 90% continued to have some residual depressive 
symptoms after 12 months.85 These findings suggest that while the cumulative percentage achieving remiss ion 
increased  through treatment steps , the percentage remitting at each step decrease d. 
STU022014 -069, Brown, FormA -ResearchProtocol, Mod_38, 04 -29-20  References  
 
1. Self reported asthma prevalence among adults, United States (2000). 2001.  
2. Mannino DM, Homa DM, Pertowski CA, Ashizawa A, Nixon LL, Johnson CA, et al. Surveillance for asthma --United 
States, 1960 -1995. MMWR CDC Surveill Summ. 1998;47(1):1 -27. PubMed PMID : 9580746.  
3. Morgan M, Khan DA. Asthma: epidemiology, burden, and quality of life. Adv Psychosom Med. 2003;24:1 -15. 
PubMed PMID: 14584344.  
4. Weiss KB, Sullivan SD. The health economics of asthma and rhinitis. I. Assessing the economic impact. J Allergy 
Clin Immunol. 2001;107(1):3 -8. PubMed PMID: 11149982.  
5. Yawn BP, Wollan P, Kurland M, Scanlon P. A longitudinal study of the prevalence of asthma in a community 
population of school -age children. J Pediatr. 2002;140(5):576 -81. PubMed PMID: 12032525.  
6. Yunginger JW, Reed CE, O'Connell EJ, Melton LJ, 3rd, O'Fallon WM, Silverstein MD. A community -based study of 
the epidemiology of asthma. Incidence rates, 1964 -1983. Am Rev Respir Dis. 1992;146(4):888 -94. PubMed 
PMID: 1416415.  
7. Crain EF, Weiss KB, Bijur P E, Hersh M, Westbrook L, Stein RE. An estimate of the prevalence of asthma and 
wheezing among inner -city children. Pediatrics. 1994;94(3):356 -62. PubMed PMID: 8065863.  
8. Evans R, 3rd, Mullally DI, Wilson RW, Gergen PJ, Rosenberg HM, Grauman JS, et al. Nat ional trends in the 
morbidity and mortality of asthma in the US. Prevalence, hospitalization and death from asthma over two 
decades: 1965 -1984. Chest. 1987;91(6 Suppl):65S -74S. PubMed PMID: 3581966.  
9. Schwartz J, Gold D, Dockery DW, Weiss ST, Speizer FE. Predictors of asthma and persistent wheeze in a national 
sample of children in the United States. Association with social class, perinatal events, and race. Am Rev Respir 
Dis. 1990;142(3):555 -62. PubMed PMID: 2389907.  
10. Gergen PJ, Mullally DI, Evans R, 3 rd. National survey of prevalence of asthma among children in the United 
States, 1976 to 1980. Pediatrics. 1988;81(1):1 -7. PubMed PMID: 3336575.  
11. Evans R, 3rd. Asthma among minority children. A growing problem. Chest. 1992;101(6 Suppl):368S -71S. PubMed 
PMID: 1591933.  
12. Weitzman M, Gortmaker SL, Sobol AM, Perrin JM. Recent trends in the prevalence and severity of childhood 
asthma. JAMA. 1992;268(19):2673 -7. PubMed PMID: 1304735.  
13. Weiss KB, Wagener DK. Changing patterns of asthma mortality. Identifyin g target populations at high risk. JAMA. 
1990;264(13):1683 -7. PubMed PMID: 2398607.  
14. Ray NF, Thamer M, Fadillioglu B, Gergen PJ. Race, income, urbanicity, and asthma hospitalization in California: a 
small area analysis. Chest. 1998;113(5):1277 -84. PubMe d PMID: 9596306.  
15. Lieu TA, Lozano P, Finkelstein JA, Chi FW, Jensvold NG, Capra AM, et al. Racial/ethnic variation in asthma status 
and management practices among children in managed medicaid. Pediatrics. 2002;109(5):857 -65. PubMed 
PMID: 11986447.  
16. Asthma [updated 05/30/2013]. Available from: http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/asthma.htm . 
17. Bloom B, Dey AN, Freeman G. Summary Health Statistics for U.S. Children: National Health Interview Survey, 
2005. National Center for Health Statistics. Vital Health Stat. 2006;10(231).  
18. Zielinski TA, Brown ES. Depression in patients with asthma. Adv Psychosom Med. 2003;24:42 -50. PubMed PMID: 
14584346.  
19. Eisner MD, Katz PP, Lactao G, Iribarren C. Im pact of depressive symptoms on adult asthma outcomes. Annals of 
allergy, asthma & immunology : official publication of the American College of Allergy, Asthma, & Immunology. 
2005;94(5):566 -74. PubMed PMID: 15948301.  
20. Mancuso CA, Rincon M, McCulloch CE, Charlson ME. Self -efficacy, depressive symptoms, and patients' 
expectations predict outcomes in asthma. Med Care. 2001;39(12):1326 -38. PubMed PMID: 11717574.  
21. Katon W, Lozano P, Russo J, McCauley E, Richardson L, Bush T. The prevalence of DSM -IV anxiety  and depressive 
disorders in youth with asthma compared with controls. J Adolesc Health. 2007;41(5):455 -63. PubMed PMID: 
17950165; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC2153460.  
22. Morrison KM, Goli A, Van Wagoner J, Brown ES, Khan DA. Depressive Symptoms in Inner -City Children With 
Asthma. Prim Care Companion J Clin Psychiatry. 2002;4(5):174 -7. PubMed PMID: 15014704; PubMed Central 
PMCID: PMC327131.  
STU022014 -069, Brown, FormA -ResearchProtocol, Mod_38, 04 -29-20  23. Waxmonsky J, Wood BL, Stern T, Ballow M, Lillis K, Cramer -Benjamin D, et al. Association of depressive 
symptoms and disease activity in children with asthma: methodological and clinical implications. J Am Acad Child 
Adolesc Psychiatry. 2006;45(8):945 -54. PubMed PMID: 16865037.  
24. Miller BD, Wood BL. Influence of specific emotional states on autonomic reactivity and pul monary function in 
asthmatic children. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 1997;36(5):669 -77. PubMed PMID: 9136502.  
25. Wade S, Weil C, Holden G, Mitchell H, Evans R, 3rd, Kruszon -Moran D, et al. Psychosocial characteristics of inner -
city children with ast hma: a description of the NCICAS psychosocial protocol. National Cooperative Inner -City 
Asthma Study. Pediatr Pulmonol. 1997;24(4):263 -76. PubMed PMID: 9368260.  
26. Leao LL, Zhang L, Sousa PL, Mendoza -Sassi R, Chadha R, Lovatel R, et al. High prevalence of  depression amongst 
mothers of children with asthma. J Asthma. 2009;46(4):388 -91. PubMed PMID: 19484675.  
27. Szabo A, Mezei G, Kovari E, Cserhati E. Depressive symptoms amongst asthmatic children's caregivers. Pediatr 
Allergy Immunol. 2010;21(4 Pt 2):e667 -73. PubMed PMID: 19744221.  
28. Otsuki M, Eakin MN, Arceneaux LL, Rand CS, Butz AM, Riekert KA. Prospective relationship between maternal 
depressive symptoms and asthma morbidity among inner -city African American children. J Pediatr Psychol. 
2010;35(7):758 -67. PubMed PMID: 19850709; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC2915621.  
29. Weil CM, Wade SL, Bauman LJ, Lynn H, Mitchell H, Lavigne J. The relationship between psychosocial factors and 
asthma morbidity in inner -city children with asthma. Pediatrics. 1999;104(6):1274 -80. PubMed PMID: 10585977.  
30. Bartlett SJ, Kolodner K, Butz AM, Eggleston P, Malveaux FJ, Rand CS. Maternal depressive symptoms and 
emergency department use among inner -city children with asthma. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2001;155(3):347 -
53. PubMed PMID:  11231800.  
31. Martinez KG, Perez EA, Ramirez R, Canino G, Rand C. The role of caregivers' depressive symptoms and asthma 
beliefs on asthma outcomes among low -income Puerto Rican children. J Asthma. 2009;46(2):136 -41. PubMed 
PMID: 19253118; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC2717719.  
32. Kub J, Jennings JM, Donithan M, Walker JM, Land CL, Butz A. Life events, chronic stressors, and depressive 
symptoms in low -income urban mothers with asthmatic children. Public Health Nurs. 2009;26(4):297 -306. 
PubMed PMID: 19573208.  
33. Brown ES, Gan V, Jeffress J, Mullen -Gingrich K, Khan DA, Wood BL, et al. Psychiatric symptomatology and 
disorders in caregivers of children with asthma. Pediatrics. 2006;118(6):e1715 -20. PubMed PMID: 17142496.  
34. Wickramaratne P, Gameroff MJ, Pilowsky  DJ, Hughes CW, Garber J, Malloy E, et al. Children of depressed 
mothers 1 year after remission of maternal depression: findings from the STAR*D -Child study. Am J Psychiatry. 
2011;168(6):593 -602. PubMed PMID: 21406462; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC3423977.  
35. Brown ES, Gan V, Jeffress J, Wood BL, Miller BD, Khan DA. Antidepressant treatment of caregivers of children 
with asthma. Psychosomatics. 2008;49(5):420 -5. PubMed PMID: 18794511.  
36. Lim J, Wood BL, Miller BD. Maternal depression and parenting in relation  to child internalizing symptoms and 
asthma disease activity. J Fam Psychol. 2008;22(2):264 -73. PubMed PMID: 18410213.  
37. Lim J, Wood BL, Miller BD, Simmens SJ. Effects of paternal and maternal depressive symptoms on child 
internalizing symptoms and asthm a disease activity: mediation by interparental negativity and parenting. J Fam 
Psychol. 2011;25(1):137 -46. PubMed PMID: 21355653; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC3061476.  
38. Miller BD, Wood BL, Lim J, Ballow M, Hsu C. Depressed children with asthma evidence incr eased airway 
resistance: "vagal bias" as a mechanism? J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2009;124(1):66 -73 e1 -10. PubMed PMID: 
19523670.  
39. Chen E, Miller GE. Stress and inflammation in exacerbations of asthma. Brain, behavior, and immunity. 
2007;21(8):993 -9. PubMed  PMID: 17493786; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC2077080.  
40. McQuaid EL, Kopel SJ, Klein RB, Fritz GK. Medication adherence in pediatric asthma: reasoning, responsibility, 
and behavior. J Pediatr Psychol. 2003;28(5):323 -33. PubMed PMID: 12808009.  
41. Bender B, Z hang L. Negative affect, medication adherence, and asthma control in children. J Allergy Clin 
Immunol. 2008;122(3):490 -5. PubMed PMID: 18602153.  
42. McQuaid EL, Walders N, Kopel SJ, Fritz GK, Klinnert MD. Pediatric asthma management in the family context: the 
family asthma management system scale. J Pediatr Psychol. 2005;30(6):492 -502. PubMed PMID: 16055487.  
43. Celano MP, Linzer JF, Demi A, Bakeman R, Smith CO, Croft S, et al. Treatment adherence among low -income, 
African American children with persistent asthma. J Asthma. 2010;47(3):317 -22. PubMed PMID: 20394517.  
44. Bender B, Milgrom H, Apter A. Adherence intervention research: what have we learned and what do we do 
next? J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2003;112(3):489 -94. PubMed PMID: 13679805.  
STU022014 -069, Brown, FormA -ResearchProtocol, Mod_38, 04 -29-20  45. Juniper EF. H ow important is quality of life in pediatric asthma? Pediatric pulmonology Supplement. 1997;15:17 -
21. PubMed PMID: 9316097.  
46. Amorim P, Lecrubier Y, Weiller E, Hergueta T, Sheehan D. DSM -IH-R Psychotic Disorders: procedural validity of 
the Mini Internati onal Neuropsychiatric Interview (MINI). Concordance and causes for discordance with the CIDI. 
Eur Psychiatry. 1998;13(1):26 -34. PubMed PMID: 19698595.  
47. Hamilton M. A rating scale for depression. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 1960;23:56 -62. PubMed PMID:  
14399272; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC495331.  
48. Rush AJ, Trivedi MH, Ibrahim HM, Carmody TJ, Arnow B, Klein DN, et al. The 16 -Item Quick Inventory of 
Depressive Symptomatology (QIDS), clinician rating (QIDS -C), and self -report (QIDS -SR): a psychometric 
evaluation in patients with chronic major depression. Biol Psychiatry. 2003;54(5):573 -83. PubMed PMID: 
12946886.  
49. Poznanski EO, Mokros HB. Children's Depression Rating Scale, Revised (CDRS -R), Administration Booklet. Los 
Angeles: Western Psychological Serv ices; 1995.  
50. National Heart L, and Blood Institute. Practical Guide for the Diagnosis and Management of Asthma. Based on 
the Expert Panel Report 2: Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Asthma. Bethesda: NIH publication; 
1997. p. 97 -4053.  
51. Lim J, Wood BL, Miller BD. Maternal depression and parenting in relation to child internalizing symptoms and 
asthma disease activity. Journal of family psychology : JFP : journal of the Division of Family Psychology of the 
American Psychological Association . 2008;22(2):264 -73. PubMed PMID: 18410213.  
52. Lim J, Wood BL, Miller BD, Simmens SJ. Effects of paternal and maternal depressive symptoms on child 
internalizing symptoms and asthma disease activity: mediation by interparental negativity and parenting. 
Journal of family psychology : JFP : journal of the Division of Family Psychology of the American Psychological 
Association. 2011;25(1):137 -46. PubMed PMID: 21355653; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC3061476.  
53. Miller BD, Wood BL. Psychophysiologic reactivity in a sthmatic children: a cholinergically mediated confluence of 
pathways. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 1994;33(9):1236 -45. PubMed PMID: 7995789.  
54. Miller BD. Depression and asthma: a potentially lethal mixture. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 1987;80(3 Pt 2): 481-6. 
PubMed PMID: 3624703.  
55. Whooley MA, Avins AL, Miranda J, Browner WS. Case -finding instruments for depression. Two questions are as 
good as many. J Gen Intern Med. 1997;12(7):439 -45. PubMed PMID: 9229283; PubMed Central PMCID: 
PMC1497134.  
56. Exper t Panel Report 3 (EPR -3): Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Asthma -Summary Report 2007. 
J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2007;120(5 Suppl):S94 -138. PubMed PMID: 17983880.  
57.  Lynch M, Cicchetti D. Patterns of relatedness in maltreated and nonmaltreate d children: Connections among 
multiple representational models. Development and Psychopathology. 1991;3(2):207 -226.  
[http://journals.cambridge.org/article_S0954579400000080]  
58.  Birmaher B, Khetarpal S, Brent D, Cully M, Balach L, Kaufman J, Neer SM. The Screen for Child Anxiety Related 
Emotional Disorders (SCARED): scale construction and psychometric characteristics. J Am Acad Child Adolesc 
Psychiatry. 1997;36(4):545 -53. PubMed PMID: 9100430.  
59. The Pediatric Asthma Caregiver's Quality of Life Questionnaire (PACQLQ) 
[http://www.qoltech.co.uk/pacqlq.html ] 2011.  
60. Busse WW, Morgan WJ, Taggart V, Togias A. Asthma outcomes workshop: overview. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 
2012;129(3 Suppl):S1 -8. PubMed PMID: 22386504.  
61. Nathan RA, Sorkness CA, Kosinski M, Schatz M, Li JT, Marcus P, et al. Development of the asthma control test: a 
survey for assessing asthma control. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2004;113(1):59 -65. PubMed PMID: 14713908.  
62. Liu AH, Zeiger R, Sorkness C, Mahr T, Ostrom N, Burgess S, et al. Development and cross -sectional validation of 
the Childhood Asthma Control Test. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2007;119(4):817 -25. PubMed PMID: 17353040.  
63. Wildfire JJ, Gergen PJ, Sorkness CA , Mitchell HE, Calatroni A, Kattan M, et al. Development and validation of the 
Composite Asthma Severity Index --an outcome measure for use in children and adolescents. J Allergy Clin 
Immunol. 2012;129(3):694 -701. PubMed PMID: 22244599; PubMed Central PMCID : PMC3294274.  
64. Bender BG, Rankin A, Tran ZV, Wamboldt FS. Brief -interval telephone surveys of medication adherence and 
asthma symptoms in the Childhood Asthma Management Program Continuation Study. Annals of allergy, 
asthma & immunology : official publi cation of the American College of Allergy, Asthma, & Immunology. 
2008;101(4):382 -6. PubMed PMID: 18939726; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC2949348.  
STU022014 -069, Brown, FormA -ResearchProtocol, Mod_38, 04 -29-20  65. Bender BG, Rankin A, Tran ZV, Wamboldt FS. Brief -interval telephone surveys of medication adherence and 
asthma symptoms in the Childhood Asthma Management Program Continuation Study. Ann Allergy Asthma 
Immunol. 2008;101(4):382 -6. PubMed PMID: 18939726; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC2949348.  
66. Bender BG, Bartlett SJ, Rand CS, Turner C, Wamboldt FS, Zhang L. Impact of i nterview mode on accuracy of child 
and parent report of adherence with asthma -controller medication. Pediatrics. 2007;120(3):e471 -7. PubMed 
PMID: 17698578.  
67. Thase ME, Fava M, Halbreich U, Kocsis JH, Koran L, Davidson J, et al. A placebo -controlled, rand omized clinical 
trial comparing sertraline and imipramine for the treatment of dysthymia. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1996;53(9):777 -
84. PubMed PMID: 8792754.  
68. Bentler PM, Bonett DG. Significance tests and goodness of fit in the analysis of covariance structur es. 
Psychological Bulletin. 1980;88(3):588 -606.  
69. Cohen J. Statistical Power Analysis for the Behavioral Sciences. New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates; 1988.  
70. Cole DA, Maxwell SE. Testing mediational models with longitudinal data: questions and ti ps in the use of 
structural equation modeling. Journal of abnormal psychology. 2003;112(4):558 -77. PubMed PMID: 14674869.  
71. Hedeker D, Gibbons RD. Application of random -effects pattern -mixture models for missing data in longitudinal 
studies. Psychologica l Methods. 1997;2(1):64 -78. 
72. Little RJA. Pattern -mixture models for multivariate incomplete data. Journal of the American Statistical 
Association. 1993;88:125 -33. 
73. Little RJA. Modeling the drop -out mechanism in repeated -measures studies. Journal of t he American Statistical 
Association. 1995;90:1112 -21. 
74. Rubin DB. Inference and missing data. Biometrika. 1976;63(3):581 -92. 
75. MacKinnon DP. Introduction to Statistical Mediation Analysis. New York, NY: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates; 
2008.  
76. Verbeke GM , G. Linear Mixed Models for Longitudinal Data. New York: Springer; 2000.  
77. Schafer JL. The Analysis of Incomplete Multivariate Data. London: Chapman and Hall; 1997.  
78. Muthen B, Kaplan K, Hollis M. On structural equation modeling with data that are not  missing at random. 
Psychometrika. 1987;42:431 -62. 
79. Donker T, Griffiths KM, Cuijpers P, Christensen H. Psychoeducation for depression, anxiety and psychological 
distress: a meta -analysis. BMC Med. 2009;7:79. PubMed PMID: 20015347; PubMed Central PMCID: 
PMC2805686.  
80. Weissman MM, Pilowsky DJ, Wickramaratne PJ, Talati A, Wisniewski SR, Fava M, et al. Remissions in maternal 
depression and child psychopathology: a STAR*D -child report. JAMA. 2006;295(12):1389 -98. PubMed PMID: 
16551710.  
81. Katon WJ, Von Kor ff M, Lin EH, Simon G, Ludman E, Russo J, et al. The Pathways Study: a randomized trial of 
collaborative care in patients with diabetes and depression. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2004;61(10):1042 -9. PubMed 
PMID: 15466678.  
82. Trivedi MH, Rush AJ, Crismon ML, Kas hner TM, Toprac MG, Carmody TJ, et al. Clinical results for patients with 
major depressive disorder in the Texas Medication Algorithm Project. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2004;61(7):669 -80. 
PubMed PMID: 15237079.  
83. Trivedi MH, Rush AJ, Wisniewski SR, Nierenberg  AA, Warden D, Ritz L, et al. Evaluation of outcomes with 
citalopram for depression using measurement -based care in STAR*D: implications for clinical practice. Am J 
Psychiatry. 2006;163(1):28 -40. PubMed PMID: 16390886.  
84. Unutzer J, Katon W, Callahan CM, Williams JW, Jr., Hunkeler E, Harpole L, et al. Collaborative care management 
of late -life depression in the primary care setting: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2002;288(22):2836 -45. 
PubMed PMID: 12472325.  
85. Nierenberg AA, Husain MM, Trivedi MH, F ava M, Warden D, Wisniewski SR, et al. Residual symptoms after 
remission of major depressive disorder with citalopram and risk of relapse: a STAR*D report. Psychol Med. 
2010;40(1):41 -50. PubMed PMID: 19460188.  
 
 