 
 
 
 
Novel Executive Function Training for Obesity  
NCT: 03724396  
Study Protocol: Last updated: 12/7/2021  
 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 2  
 
UCSD Human Research Protections Program  
New Biomedical Application  
RESEARCH PLAN  
Instructions for completing the Research Plan are available on the  HRPP website.  
The headings on this set of instructions correspond to the headings of the Research Plan.  
General Instructions: Enter a response for all topic headings.  
Enter “Not Appli cable” rather than leaving an item blank if the item does not apply to this project.  
Version date: 9/30/2013  
1. PROJECT TITLE  
Novel Executive Function Training for Obesity (NEXT)  
 
2. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR   
Dawn Eichen , PhD  
 
3. FACILITIES  
UC San Diego  – Center for Healthy Eating and Activity Research  
8950 Villa La Jolla Drive, Suite C-203 
La Jolla, CA 92037  
 
4. ESTIMATED DURATION OF THE STUDY  
5 years  
 
5. LAY LANGUAGE SUMMARY OR SYNOPSIS (no more than one paragraph)  
Currently, the best behavioral tre atments for obesity only work for 50% of adults, and of those who initially 
succeed, most do not maintain their weight loss. One reason for this failure may be due to neurocognitive 
deficits found among individuals with obesity, particularly related to exe cutive function , which make it difficult 
for these adults to adhere to treatment recommendations. Executive function are mental processes that enable us 
to plan, focus attention, remember instructions, and juggle multiple tasks successfully. The proposed s tudy aims 
to develop a Novel Executive Function Treatment (NEXT), which when administered prior to the behavioral 
treatment, could help improve outcomes by addressing the neurocognitive deficits in adults with overweight or 
obesity.  
 
 
6. SPECIFIC AIMS  
Aim 1:  Develop an initial treatment manual for NEXT.  
 
Aim 2:  Iteratively pilot NEXT on two cohorts of participants , and collect qualitative feedback which will be 
integrated into the NEXT program.  (Study 1)  
 
Aim 3: Determine feasibility and acceptability o f NEXT  (Study 1  & 2) 
 
Exploratory Aim: Evaluate Mediators and Moderators of NEXT (e.g, depression, eating behaviors, self -
efficacy)  
 
Aim 4:  Establish preliminary effe cts of NEXT on weight loss , executive function, and self -monitoring through 
a randomized -control trial comparing NEXT + behavioral weight loss (BWL) to BWL alone (Study 2)  
 
7. BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE  
     Nearly two thirds of adults in the United States are overweight or obese.1 The most successful obesity 
treatment to date is Behavioral Weight Loss (BWL); however, up to half of adults do not respond to BWL 
initially, and most responders do not maintain a clinically significant weight loss.2-4 The recommendations and 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 3 strategies provided by BWL to change behaviors require high levels of exe cutive function (EF), including 
planning, decision making, and problem solving.5 Thus, it is possible that obesity treatment failure is due to 
impaired neurocognitive mechanisms  that negatively impact an individual’s ability carry out the recommended 
behav ioral strategies, resulting in non -adherence to treatment or failure to maintain behavioral changes.  
     Research has shown that individuals with obesity demonstrate difficulties with EF across numerous 
domains.5-9 Specifically, impairments have been sho wn on measures of decision making,10-12 set-shifting,8,13 
planning,9 inhibition,5 working memory,14 and fluency5. Better initial performance predicts weight loss and 
improvement on some of these tasks was seen after weight loss due to bariatric surgery.15,16 A recent NIH 
Working Group Report17 concluded that a need exists for a “deeper understanding of cognitive function” 
including: 1) the impact on physical activity and eating behaviors, and 2) if it can be used to develop more 
impactful strategies for wei ght loss and maintenance. Training EF is consistent with these recommendations 
and could be a promising mechanism which can be targeted to improve BWL outcomes.  
     Cognitive training, which targets aspects of EF, has improved cognitive performance and f unctional 
outcomes in healthy individuals and various populations with cognitive impairments.18-21 Cognitive training has 
improved delay discounting among individuals with substance use disorders,22 and i nhibition and attention 
training paradigms in the context of high calorie foods have been associated with reduced palatable food 
consumption, reduced binge eating, and increased weight loss.23,24 Cognitive Symptom Management and 
Rehabilitation Therapy (Cog SMART) is a manualized compensatory cognitive training intervention targeting 
EF which is efficacious among individuals with traumatic brain injury.25,26 A similar intervention is efficacious 
with individuals with psychosis.27 Modifying and applying CogSMA RT to address EF deficits found in people 
with overweight or obesity could improve weight loss and maintenance outcomes.      
 Computer training programs targeting implicit neurocognitive processes (i.e., attention, inhibition) show 
preliminary effects to c hange eating behavior and weight.  23,24 A number of experimental studies have 
demonstrated training inhibition can impact eating behavior and weight loss.24 Thus, it is promising that 
changing elements of EF can improve treatment outcomes.  
 
 
8. PROGRESS R EPORT  
Study 1 treatment materials were developed and recruitment of participants began in May 2019. The first group 
of 10 participants began baseline assessments in June 2019 and started in a 12 -week pilot group in July 2019. 
The group program ended in Oc tober 2019 and 8 of 10 participants completed their post -treatment assessments 
thereafter. Some revisions were made to treatment materials based on feedback received from participants. 
Recruitment for the second pilot group began in September 2019 and part icipants completed baseline 
assessment visits thereafter. The second pilot group began group sessions in November 2019 and finished in 
February 2020  and 8 of 11 participants completed their post -treatment assessments.  
 
Study 2 recruitment began in Februar y 2020.  
 
Dr. Eichen, the PI, has closely monitored the study. Recruitment has progressed according to plan for Study 1. 
There have been no formal reports given that no adverse events have occurred and all monitoring has been 
conducted by the PI and other i nternal team members.  
 
Study 2 recruitment was recently completed.  
 
9. RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS  
INTERVENTIONS :  
NEXT will be an adjunctive program  to the gold standard behavioral treatment for obes ity, Behavioral weight 
loss (BWL). NEXT is based on CogSMART25 and Compensatory Cognitive Training, developed by co -mentor 
Dr. Twamley, which has been successful at improving EF skills such as planning, problem solving, and 
cognitive flexibility in individuals with psychiatric disorders or history of trauma tic brain injury. I will also use 
Cognitive Remediation Therapy for AN to inform NEXT.28 NEXT will focus on teaching compensatory 
strategies, habit learning, and plan for generalization to real -world behaviors (e.g., self -monitoring of food 
intake).  Each s ession will include interactive exercises to help train an aspect of EF. Skills taught will be 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 4 presented to be practiced with real -world applications. For example, planning skills will be taught and 
participants will apply the skills learned into developin g a weekly meal plan, which is a skill suggested in BWL 
to help with tracking and staying within the recommended calorie range. The EF domains targeted by NEXT 
were carefully selected to enhance the EF domains (e.g., planning, organization) which underlie the successful 
use of skills recommended in BWL. BWL recommends skills, but does not provide in -depth, step -by-step 
training in these basic functions. As part of NEXT, participants will receive compensatory strategies to 
overcome deficits in underlying EF that could impede success in BWL. Furthermore, NEXT will teach when it 
is most advantageous to use these skills with particular attention towards training how the skills can be used in 
the context of aiding weight loss. For example, BWL encourages particip ants to plan meals ahead of time. 
NEXT will provide step -by-step strategies to improve meal planning, such as researching recipes, creating 
efficient shopping lists, organizing shopping in the store, and using similar ingredients in multiple meals. 
Impleme ntation of meal planning will also be addressed in NEXT, such as when to purchase ingredients and 
when to prepare meals to be successful. Additionally, participants in NEXT will practice meal planning in 
session and will complete practice worksheets to imp rove chances of success in meal planning outside of group. 
NEXT will provide an additional benefit in that the cognitive skills taught can be used to improve EF across all 
domains in life, which could potentially decrease stress and improve quality of life . 
 
BWL includes daily self -monitoring of calorie intake and physical activity. Calorie goals will be shaped down 
to 1200 -1400 calories for females and 1500 -1700 for males. Physical activity recommendations will be 
consistent with guidelines suggesting a mi nimal of 150 minutes of at least moderate intensity activity each 
week with the ideal being >250 minutes. Lifestyle activity goals focus on building increased activity into 
typical, daily activities, such as walking or bicycling.  Participants are also ins tructed to decrease sedentary 
behaviors, such as TV watching or computer usage outside of work. Participants will be encouraged to work 
toward achieving 10,000 steps per day. BWL  will include elements of behavioral change recommendations 
including stimulus  control, self -monitoring, goal setting, managing high -risk situations, meal planning, slowing 
eating, problem solving, social support, cognitive restructuring, lapse and relapse prevention skills, and 
maintaining weight loss.   
 
Study 1 : This is a study t o aid in treatment development of a Novel Executive Function Treatment for Obesity 
(NEXT) and thus the design will be open label. After consenting to be a part of the study, participants will 
attend an in person assessment visit which will take approximate ly 3 hours. Then when enough people have 
completed assessments and meet inclusion criteria, they will attend a pilot program group (approximately 10 -15 
other adults). Group will meet weekly for 12 weeks and be scheduled for 75 minutes. There will be anothe r in-
person assessment that will take approximately 3 hours following the 12 weeks of pilot program  groups.  
 
Group programs  will consist of 12  weekly , 75 minutes  groups consisting of NEXT only, NEXT and BWL or 
BWL curriculum only.  
 
Study 2:  Study 2 w ill consist of a randomized contro l trial . Study participants will consist of at least 64 adults 
who will be randomized to one of two conditions , one which will receive NEXT + BWL and one which will 
receive BWL alone. Each group will consist of 10 -20 participan ts. Study participants will be blind to their 
condition. All groups  will be t wenty  75-minute sessions over the course of 6  months. Groups will be held in -
person or via password -protected ZOOM meetings. If groups are held via ZOOM, on treatment nights, 
participants will be sent treatment materials and information on how to access the meetings via email.  
Assessment measures are specified below but assessments will occur at two additional time  points for a total of 
four assessments per participant: baseline , at mid -program  (take place approximately between sessions 10 -14), 
post program , and 6 month follow -up. Assessment visits will be held in -person or in password -protected 
ZOOM meetings. Links for assessment tasks that can be completed online including comput er tasks and 
surveys will  be emailed to the participant before the assessment appointment with instructions on how to access 
the ZOOM meeting.  
 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 5  
Table 1. Measurement table  and assessment time -points  for study 2 : 
  Instrument  Baseline  During 
group  visits  Mid-
program  Post -
Program   6-month f -
up 
Anthropometry  Height/Weight  X X X X X 
  WRAT -4 X         
Screening Measures  MINI  X   X X 
  Medical and medications  X    X X X 
Binge Eating  EDE X   X X X 
 EDEQ  X X X X X 
  DKEFS  X  X X X 
Executive Function  BRIEF  X   X X 
 PSI X  X X X 
  Delay Discounting  X  X X X 
  Brain Health Index  X   X X X 
  DFLEX  X X X X X 
 Digit Span  X  X X X 
 WCST  X  X X X 
 CVLT - Food  X X X X X 
 Stop Signal Task  X X X X X 
 Tower of London  X X X X X 
 TMT X X X X X 
 CPT X  X X X 
  PHQ -9 X  X X X 
  DERS  X  X X X 
Questionnaires -- psychiatric  GAD -7 X   X X X 
Questionnaires -- stress  PSS X   X X X 
Questionnaires -- eating behavior  YFAS 2.0  X  X X X 
  EAH X  X X X 
  Adult Eating Behavior 
Questionnaire (AEBQ)  X  X X X 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 6   Reward Based Eating Drive 
Scale (RED)  X   X X X 
Questionnaires --  impulsivity  S-UPPS -P X X  X X X 
Questionnaires -self-efficacy  General Self Efficacy Scale  X  X X X X 
Questionnaires -- other health 
behaviors  GPAQ  X  X X X 
  Godin leisure time exercise 
questionnaire  X X X X X 
  Q-LES-Q-SF X X X X X 
Adherence  ADH  X  X X X 
  BWL  X   X X X 
Feasibility/Acceptability  Attendance   X X X X 
  Acceptability survey    X X X X 
Self-Monitoring  Habit books    X       
 
Measurements  
Screening Measures (baseline only):  Participa nts will complete the Mini -International Neuropsychiatric 
Interview (MINI)29 to confirm eligibility (i.e., absence of exclusionary psychiatric condition). The WRAT30 
reading assessment will be administered at baseline to evaluate reading level and ensure v alid administration of 
the assessments.     
Anthropometry (all assessment timepoints and each program  visit):  At CHEAR Height will be measured 
using a portable Schorr height board (Schorr Inc, Olney, MD) in triplicate. Height will be recorded to the 
nearest  0.1 cm . Body weight in kilograms will be measured in triplicate  on a Tanita Digital Scale (model WB-
110A). Body weight will be recorded to the nearest 0.1 kg. The average of the 3 height and weight values will 
be used for analysis. Height and weight will be converted to body mass index (BMI=[kg/m2]). If height and/or 
weight is not collected at CHEAR, participants will be asked to self -report their height and weight using a scale 
they own or a Bluetooth  provided scale.   
Binge Eating (all assessment timepoi nts): The Eating Disorder Examination31 (EDE) interview will be 
administered as the EDE is the gold standard for assessing binge eating is a valid and reliable measure.  
Executive Function (all assessment timepoints) : Standardized, well -validated neurocogn itive tests to assess a 
broad range of EF domains will be conducted. We will include selected subtests from the widely used Delis -
Kaplan Executive Function System (D -KEFS)32 and various other well -validated measures of EF. Lastly, self -
report measures of E F are included. Administration of all EF tasks should take about 80 minutes.   
BRIEF:  To identify individuals with EF difficulties, the Behavior Rating Inventory of Executive Function – 
Adult33 (BRIEF -A) will be administered at baseline  and again at post -program .  
D-KEFS.  32 The D -KEFS is a widely used battery of EF that has strong validity and comparable reliability to 
other neuropsychological tasks.  Three  D-KEFS subtests (Color -Word Interference [CWI], Design Fluency , and 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 7 Verbal Fluency ) will be administe red.  
 
Problem Solving Inventory (PSI ).34 Participants rate statements describing their own problem -solving behaviors 
and attitudes using 32, six -point Likert -type items. Three factors are derived: Problem Solving 
Confidence  (self-assurance while engaged i n problem solving), Approach -Avoidance Style  (tendency to 
approach or avoid different types of problem -solving activities), and Personal Control  (control over emotions 
and behavior while problem solving). The PSI has strong validity and reliability.35 
 
Delay Discount ing35 – Participants choose between two hypothetical rewards, one sooner and one more in the 
future to measure decision making.  
 
Brain Health  Index 36 – the Brain Health Index includes a measure of nonverb al reasoning and processing speed 
which  provide an index of general cognitive functioning and allow interpretation of other executive function 
tasks. These tasks are briefly administered on the computer.  
 
Digit Span37 -- The Wechsler Digit Span Task is a well -established measure of short -term memory. The test 
administrator reads 1 digit per second. The participant must repeat the digits verbatim. The number of digits 
increases by one until the participant consecutively fails two trials of the same digit span length.  
 
Wisconsin Card Sort Test (W CST)38- The Wisconsin Card Sort Test is a well-validated neuropsychological 
measure of “set -shifting ”, or how well a participant can adapt to changing rules . The participant is presented 
with a number of stimulus cards that can be matched in three  ways:  the color of its symbols, the shape of its 
symbols, or or the number of shapes on each card. The participant must classify cards without knowing the 
classification rule and only receiving feedback on if the classificat ion is  correct or not. The classificatio n rule 
changes every 10 cards.  
 
California Verbal Learning Test (CVLT)  – Food39 -- The California Verbal L earning Test -II consists of two 
lists that are read aloud. Each list is comprised of 16 words drawn from 4 semantic categories (e.g. furniture), 
with 4 words per category. The first list (list A) is read 5 times followed each time by an immediate free recall 
test. The second list (list B) is then read, also followed by an immediate recall test. Then short -delay free - and 
cued -recall of list A is measur ed followed by a 20 -minute non -verbal distractor task  (Stop Signal Task - see 
below) . Finally, long -delay free - and cued -recall and recognition of list A are tested. The CVLT -II generates 
over 30 indices that help to understand an individual’s learning stra tegies. The CVLT -food is identical except 
for one category of words (4 words) is replaced with high calorie food words that are matched on word 
frequency with those of the original CVLT -II. 
 
Stop Signal Task - Food Version40- The Stop Signal Task measures i nhibition to food and non -food cues.  On 
each trial, participants are asked to discriminate between a picture of calorically -dense food or neutral object 
(e.g, chair). The two primary outcomes, stop signal reaction time for food pictures (SSRT -food) and neu tral 
pictures (SSRT -neutral) will be compared to assess for food -specific impulsivity versus general impulsivity.  
 
Tower of London41 – The Tower of London test is an extensively used measure of mental planning. Partic ipants 
move  disks between pegs of diffe rent lengths  one at a time to match a sequence that has been presented to them 
in the fewest number of moves possible.  
 
Trail Making Test (TMT)42- The Trail Making Test is an extensively used neuropsychological test of visual 
attention and task switching. Participants are instructed to connect a sequence of 25 dots as quickly as possible 
first connecting numbers, then letters, then switching between numbers and letters.  
 
Continuous Performance T ask (CPT)43 – The Continuous Performance Task is a neuropsychol ogical test that 
measures a subject’s sustained and selective attention. Participants must press a key when a certain stimulus is 
presented but ignore other stimuli.  
 
Questionnaires (all timepoints):  Standardized questionnaires will also be assessed to eva luate psychiatric 
symptoms, stress, eating behavior, impulsivity and self -efficacy. The following questionnaires will be 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 8 administered: Eating Disorder Examination Questionnaire (EDEQ)44, Detail and Flexibility Questionnaire 
(DFLEX)45, Short -form of the UPP S-P Impulsive Behavior Scale ( S-UPPS -P)46, Perceived Stress Scale 
(PSS)47, Yale Food Addiction Scale 2.0 (YFAS 2.0)48, Patient Health Questionnaire – 9 (PHQ9)49, Quality of 
Life Enjoyment and Satisfaction Questionnaire – Short Form (Q -LES-Q-SF)50, General Self Efficacy scale51, 
Adult Eating Behaviour Questionnaire52, Eating in the Absence of Hunger53, Reward Based Eating Drive 
Scale54, global Physical Activity Questionnaire55, godin leisure time exercise questionnaire56, GAD 757 , 
Difficulties in Emotion Re gulation Scale (DERS)58 
 
Adherence:  Frequency of behaviors and skills taught in the program (e.g., self -monitoring, use of calendar, 
problem solving, exercising) will be assessed to evaluate whether treatment impacts behavior . 
 
Feasibility and Acceptabilit y (post -program  only).  Feasibility will be assessed by attendance of participants 
in program  sessions. Acceptability will be assessed by survey (all time points except baseline), created by the 
study team based on established surveys used for Dr. Boutelle’ s current  studies ( e.g, IRB 151110 ). Likert -type 
ratings will be used to respond to questions, such as “How much did you enjoy the program ?” and “How 
helpful did you find the program ?” Participants will also be asked to complete a brief interview to descri be their 
experience and respond to certain aspects of program  to provide qualitative data to be used in future program  
development.  
 
Self-Monitoring (at each program  visit) . At each program  session, participants will turn in self -monitoring 
from the previo us week and ratings of adherence will be assigned daily based on completeness of entry.  
  
Audiorecording : All program  sessions and assessments will be audiotaped for the purposes of supervision and 
fidelity. As audiotaping is required, participants will no t need to sign a supplemental consent as this will be 
specified in the standard consent form.  
Data collection protocol.  The data for this study will include a number of different methods of collecting data. 
The questionnaires will be available as a secure  web-based survey. All surveys and computer tasks 
administered online will be identified with the unique study ID rather than any identifying information.  All 
interview data and executive function tasks will be collected under the unique ID . Following the first 
assessment visit, participants will be given the option of completing some surveys via the secure -web-based 
survey format prior to attending the in -person visit to reduce the amount of time they need to be present at 
CHEAR. If participants do not com plete the surveys in advance, they will complete them as part of the visit. 
For survey  questions completed at home that may warrant immediate follow -up (i.e., questions about suicidal 
ideation or self -harm) , a REDCap alert via email will be set up to notif y the study coordinator when those 
questions are complete . The study coordinator will check these alerts every business day and will send 
appropriate resources if the participant endorses suicidal ideation or self -harm. All assessors will be trained and 
certified in the tasks and interviews and supervised by the study PI. De -identified data will be stored in a 
database. It may be shared with others to aid future research efforts or put in a repository as recommended by 
the NIH. No identifying information wi ll be kept with the data for future efforts or if entered into a repository. 
Permission to use this de -identified data has been included in the consent form for future studies on obesity, 
weight loss or executive function. It specifies that all identifiabl e data will be removed. The dates that data were 
collected will not be shared – only the length of time between collections will be provided to aid anonymity. 
The de -identified data will be kept by Dr. Eichen according to procedures identified with data st orage below 
and she will only share data with those who have received permission to use it (e.g., have an approved exempt 
protocol).   
Data Analysis and Interpretation: The pilot aspect of this study is to help evaluate the feasibility and 
acceptability of  the program  to aid in program  development for a future randomized control trial. Data analyses 
will consist primarily of descriptive data, evaluating weight loss change and changes in executive function by 
evaluating pre and post assessment changes. Quali tative data will be used to continue to improve the NEXT 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 9 program  development. Women and minorities will be included in recruitment for this study. Typically previous 
weight loss studies have had ~75% women participants.   
10. HUMAN SUBJECTS  
Study 1:  It is expected that up to 60 individuals may be consented with a goal to have at least 20 participants 
enroll in pilot program  who meet the following eligibility criteria  for study 1 ,  
Inclusion criteria:  
1. Age 18 -65 
2. Ability to read English at a 6th grade level   
3. BMI >25 and ≤45  
4. Difficulties with executive functioning  
Exclusion Criteria:  
1) Medical condition  that requires physician monitoring to participate in weight control program  or 
prohibits safely participating in recommended physical activity  
2) Psychiatric cond ition that could interfere with program  participant (e.g., substance abuse, suicide 
attempt within previous 6 months, active purging)  
3) Currently pregnant, lactating or plan to be in the timespan of program  follow -up 
4) Current enrollment in an organized weight  control program  
5) Change in psychotropic medication or other medication that could have impact on weight during the 
previous 3 months  
6) History of bariatric surgery  
7) History of learning disorder, neurological condition or injury  
 
Study 2:  It is expected that up to 150 participants may be consented with the goal to have at least 64 
participants randomized to start group  in study 2 with the same eligibility criteria that was used in Study 1 
(presented above).  
 
11. RECRUITMENT AND PROCEDURES PREPARATORY TO RESEA RCH  
Participants will be recruited using online advertisements such as Craigslist, university listservs, flyers to 
physicians, flyers posting on campus , in the community,  and in physician offices, and direct mailings and direct 
email to participants, radi o ads, ResearchMatch, social media, and professional referrals to the lab from local 
physicians.  Participants may be recruited through the use of electronic medical records (EPIC system), a request 
for partial HIPAA waiver for recruitment purposes is submi tted to do so.  
 
We will also recruit potential participants through a “snowball recruitment” effort . Participants who have 
completed the study and have indicated that they have agreed to be contacted about future research will be sent 
an email requesting them to refer potentially eligible families to our recruitment team to be screened for the 
project. Participants who are currently enrolled will also be emailed the same materials. The emails sent to 
participants will contain information about the programs  currently recruiting participants, a link to our lab’s 
website, and a previously approved recruitment flyer.  
 
Participants who respond to recruitment efforts will be asked to complete an initial online screen to determine 
initial eligibility if individua ls do not have online access, they can complete an extended screening call that will 
include these questions as part of the telephone screen. Participants who meet study inclusion criteria will then 
complete a phone screen to further assess eligibility. If  participants meet initial screening criteria, following the 
phone screen, they will be scheduled for an orientation at an in -person meeting or in a password -protected ZOOM 
meeting to learn more about the study, review the informed consent and have all que stions answered.  
 
12. INFORMED CONSENT  
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 10 The online screening will assess for basic inclusion and exclusionary criteria.  This process presents no more 
than minimal risk of harm to subjects, the waiver will not adversely affect the rights and welfare of t he subjects 
and the research could not practicably be carried out without the waiver. For these reasons, we request a waiver 
of documented consent for the online screening. For individuals who do not have online access, the questions 
asked on the online sc reen can be administered over the phone in conjunction with the phone screen.  
The phone screening will assess for basic inclusion and exclusionary criteria.  Again, t his process presents no 
more than minimal risk of harm to participants , the waiver will n ot adversely affect the rights and welfare of the 
subjects and the research could not practicably be carried out without the waiver.  For these reasons, we request 
a waiver of documented consent for the phone screen.  
 
All participants will complete written  informed consent prior to enrollment at an orientation session. It is not 
likely that participants for this population will lack the capacity needed for consent. If there are any concerns, to 
ensure participants understand the consent form, they will be a sked to describe what the study is about. For 
participants in which capacity for consent is judged to be questionable, they will complete the Mini -mental 
State Examination (MMSE) and if they receive under a 24, they will not be eligible for enrollment (i.e ., 
surrogate consent will not be acceptable). It is highly unlikely that the MMSE will need to be administered to 
this patient population but if it is administered, documentation of the test results will be kept in the participant 
file.  
 
This study will c onsent participants, either in -person or in a password -protected ZOOM meeting. For those who 
are consented in a ZOOM meeting, the participant will be emailed a copy of the consent form. During the ZOOM 
call, the study staff member will provide an opportuni ty for the potential participant to ask questions. When all of 
the potential participant’s questions have been answered, the study staff member will ask the participant if they 
are ready to provide consent and then verbal consent will be obtained. Should t he potential participant desire more 
time to make a decision to participate, they will be provided information on how to reschedule their ZOOM 
verbal consent call. We require a waiver of written consent for participants consented via zoom. Justification fo r 
this oral consent procedure is that the research presents no more than minimal risk of harm to subjects and 
involves no procedures for which written consent is normally required outside of the research context. If the  
participant consents, they will then  be scheduled for the initial assessment to confirm eligibility.  
 
Both remote and in -person orientation and consent process es may take place with a group of potential 
participants. Participants may ask questions as a group and they will also be informed th at they can each have 
an opportunity to privately ask additional questions. For those who attend a group ZOOM orientation, the 
consent form will be explained to the group of potential participants and then the consent  process will occur 
individually betwee n one staff member an d one potential participant using the  breakout room  function on 
ZOOM . The potential participant will be given the opportunity to ask questions privately and provide verbal 
consent  privately. If individuals are unsure as to whether they  are willing to participate in the study, they may 
take the consent form home with them. If they later decide they wish to participate, they may schedule their 
first assessment and sign the consent form  or provide verbal assent  prior to participating in th e assessment.  
 
CHEAR staff members able to provide information about the study and carry out the consent procedures 
include : 
Natalie Alamo, Daylin Anderson, Kerri Boutelle, Anthony DeBenedetto Dawn Eichen, Barbara English, Heather 
Halford, , Michael Manza no, Kayle n Moline, Monica Montoya, Saori Obayashi, Ellen Pasquale, Nicole Virzi, 
Jessica Willis.   
 
Partial waiver of HIPAA authorization is being requested to aid in the recruitment purposes. We are requesting 
this so participants can provide verbal confir mation to their physician about their interest in participating and the 
physician can provide us the participant’s name, age/date of birth, and contact information. This use of disclosure 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 11 involves no more than minimal risk, gra nting this waiver will not ad versely affect privacy rights and welfare of 
the individuals whose records will be used, this recruitment could not practicably be conducted without the 
waiver, this could not practicably be conducted with the PHI to know who to contact, identifiers will o nly be used 
for the stated purpose and will be kept securely in our facility and electronically protected. Identifiers will be 
destroyed as soon as possible and at a maximum 3 years after study completion. P HI will not be used for any 
other purposes. Parti cipants will be provided with all pertinent information as soon as possible upon formal 
consent.   
13. ALTERNATIVES TO STUDY PARTICIPATION  
The alternatives to participation in this study are to not participate and to seek a program  with another therapist  
or community program.   
 
14. POTENTIAL RISKS  
1). Potential risk of psychological assessments. For some participants, disclosing potential information about 
mental health symptoms and eating behaviors may be uncomfortable. Questions regarding individual behaviors, 
emotions or attitudes may be considered sensitive to some participants.  
 
2). Potential risk of program . Weight loss program  may result in discussions of sensitive or distressing topics 
(e.g., challenges, difficulties) which may provoke emotional  responses . Further, participants will be encouraged 
to increase their level of physical activity. Improper or too -vigorous exercise or physical activity, if performed 
by the participant against the advice of the research staff, could be associated with in jury or 
discomfort.  Although increasing physical activity can have great benefits, participants may also experience 
some general fatigue or sore muscles or joints from being active.  It is also possible that participants could fall 
or be injured in associa tion with being physically active. Although engaging in physical activity improves 
overall health, it is also associated with some risks, such as injuries and rare sudden events (e.g., heart attack, 
sudden death related to heart problems).  
 
3). Potential r isk of loss of confidentiality: Risk associated with breach of confidentiality of behavioral research 
data.  Since this study includes interviews, recorded data and audio recordings, there is a small  potential that 
this information might not be kept confid ential (for instance by theft of study material).  
 
 
15. RISK MANAGEMENT PROCEDURES AND ADEQUACY OF RESOURCES  
Risks of psychological assessments:  Participants will receive consistent support from the study staff 
throughout the study.  Participants will be  told that they are free to choose not to answer any questions that may 
cause them distress if they wish.  
 
For any unidentified/unreported psychiatric concerns identified during assessments for this project, we will 
execute the following protocol:  
 
1. Participant will be notified of concerns identified.  
2. Participant will be given a list of referrals in the community.  
3. If significant concern is warranted (participant reports suicidal ideation, significant binging and 
purging), participants will be imme diately assessed by the clinical staff or a licensed clinical psychologist 
present at the meeting regarding severity and an appropriate psychiatric referral will be made. If the assessment 
visit is held via ZOOM, a clinical staff member or licensed clinica l psychologist will join the ZOOM meeting 
to assess the participant for severity. Participants experiencing significant psychological distress or discomfort 
will be discontinued from the protocol and referred for counseling with their consent. If suicidal ideation is 
reported, thorough suicide risk evaluation consisting of the assessment of past suicide attempts, plans, 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 12 availability of means, and current stressors to evaluate extent of risk will be conducted. A safety plan will be 
completed in collaboration  with the participant and referrals will be made for therapy or to a crisis center. If the 
participant appears to be at imminent risk for suicide, the clinician will call 911.  
 
Potential risk of program : Participants will receive consistent report from stu dy staff . If significant distress 
occurs during program , they will be allowed to take a break from program  and talk to one of the study staff. If 
suicidal ideation is reported the above protocol will be followed.   
 
We will aim to enroll individuals in who m the level of activity recommended is highly unlikely to pose a 
medical problem. To address readiness, questions in the online screen and phone screen will be asked that 
evaluate whether participants have conditions in need of special monitoring (physical  impairments, history of 
heart condition, doctor ever say can’t do physical activity). The staff will be trained in appropriate guidelines, 
recommendations and advice relating to physical activity for a community -based program of this type, in order 
to min imize the likelihood of injury or discomfort. For patients who may be at higher risk due to medication or 
previous history (e.g., taking beta blockers, history of cardiac problems), clearance from their medical doctor 
may be required before starting progra m. In these cases, participants will sign a release form and the study team 
will contact the physician to see whether the physician agrees the participant can participate in the 
recommended level of activity (at least 150 minutes of moderate intensity exer cise). If there is any concern for 
safety/readiness and physician approval cannot be obtained, participants won’t be enrolled.  Potential 
complications associated with moderate intensity exercise training at levels recommended by the CDC/ACSM 
are rare. Howe ver, subjects may find exercising uncomfortable and may experience sprains, other soft tissue 
injuries, or bone injuries.  
 
Potential risk of loss of confidentiality:  The research team will make every effort to keep any information 
confidential. Any study m aterial will be stored in locked cabinets in UCSD sponsored facilities. Furthermore, a 
unique identification number will be used for each person in data sets and spreadsheets that do not readily 
identify a name. The identifying name information containing material will be locked  and stored separately 
from data files . Any electronic files containing identifying information will be password protected and stored 
on Pediatrics secure servers with only appropriate study staff having access. The online screen  will be collected 
as 2 separate surveys on REDCAP so that the  identifying information is collected separately from the other  
screening responses  linked by an ID number . Only study staff, who are trained in confidentiality and HIPAA 
will have access to th e password protected identifying information and ID link . Accordingly, the online screen 
is submitted as 2 separate parts to delineate this separation. Similarly, the phone screen has been officially split 
into two documents. An ID number will be assigned and kept password protected with the identifying 
information only accessible to PI and designated study staff. Part 2 will be identified only with the ID number. 
Part 1 and Part 2 of the phone screens will be stored in separate locked filing cabinets.  
 
Lastly , participants are informed of the option to complete all of the information on the online screen on the 
phone where they can provide the information . 
To help maintain confidentiality of participants, if emailing more than one participant (e.g., emailing a bout 
reminder for program  session), all participant’s email addresses will be kept confidential by using the BCC 
function and no participant names will be included. When emailing participants from email templates, staff will 
copy from our templates instead  of forwarding from emails sent to other participants and to always start new e -
mail documents to ensure no participant email information is accidentally disclosed to another participant.  
 
 
Data Safety Monitoring Plan:  Because of this low risk status, the data and safety monitoring plan (DSMP) for 
this trial focuses on close monitoring by the principal investigator (PI) and Drs. Boutelle and Twamley, the 
primary mentors, and Dr. Robert El -Kareh, the safety officer, along with prompt reporting of excessive a dverse 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 13 events and any serious adverse events to the NIH and to the IRB at the University of California, San Diego.  
Although the likelihood is low, there will be established procedures for monitoring and responding to adverse 
events resulting from moderate intensity physical activity. All participants will be given an instruction sheet at 
the start of the study that details what to do for common exercise -related injuries. Participants will be asked to 
reported injuries and health related problems that arise during program  to the study PI.  In the event of an injury 
requiring immediate assistance, the participant will be instructed to contact their primary care physician, and if 
necessary, go to the closest emergency center.  All adverse events, UPRs or protoc ol deviations will be 
submitted to the IRB and the NIH as appropriate according to current policies . For Study 2, formal reports of 
adverse events will additionally be send to the safety officer.  
 
Qualifications and responsibilities of the Safety Officer: The safety officer for study 2  will be Robert El -Kareh, 
MD, MS, MPH. Dr. El -Kareh is an internal medicine physician at UCSD with an MPH in clinical effectiveness. 
Dr. El -Kareh has an in depth understanding of the types and severity of comorbidities and inj uries associated 
with adult obesity.  As Safety Officer, Dr. El -Kareh will review the reports sent by Dr. Eichen or her study 
coordinator and will evaluate the information below presented to him to determine whether there is any 
corrective action, trigger of an ad hoc review, or stopping rule violation that should be communicated to the 
study investigator, the University of California San Diego IRB, and the NIDDK.  
 
16. PRIVACY AND CONFIDENTIALITY CONSIDERATIONS INCLUDING DATA ACCESS AND 
MANAGEMENT  
We will  implement the following security plan to promote security of the data and privacy of the participants.  
• Data collection will be completed with an emphasis upon maintenance of confidentiality. We plan to 
extract data from questionnaires and in -study behavio ral measures. Only Dr. Eichen /her research staff, 
each of whom has completed the required trainings will have access to any personal health information 
collected. We will assign participants a study identification number unrelated to identifying informati on. 
The study ID number will be used by participants on their questionnaires and data collection forms. The 
only materials containing subject identifying information will be the consent and HIPAA forms. We 
will create a master list linking the de -identifie d study identification number to the participant’s record. 
The master list will be maintained by Dr. Eichen in her laboratory. There will be only one password 
protected electronic version of this file. Access to the master list will be limited to the P.I.s  and their 
designees, all of whom will have completed UCSD IRB training requirements. At the earliest 
opportunity and no later than 36 months following data analysis, the master list (i.e., the only source 
that links the study identification numbers to the  individuals) will be destroyed by Dr. Eichen.  
 
• All study data will be electronically entered only using the study ID number. These data will be stored 
on secure UCSD pediatrics servers only accessible to study staff.  
 
Use of the study data will be limit ed to the proposed study unless future approval of use of the de -identified 
data is granted. The consent form has been modified to include permission of the participants for their de -
identified data to be used. De -identified data will be kept securely by t he PI Dawn Eichen. It is common 
practice to store de -identified data for use in the future.  
 
17. POTENTIAL BENEFITS  
Potential benefits include weight loss and improvement in executive function.  
 
 
18. RISK/BENEFIT RATIO  
There is a relatively low risk t o participants given the potential benefit of losing weight and improving 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 14 executive function and the knowledge gained from this study is significant. Given that the risks are minimal 
and the potential for benefit is great, the risk/benefit ratio is conside red to be small and reasonable for the 
conduct of this study.   
19. EXPENSE TO PARTICIPANT  
There is no cost to participants to participate in the study  
 
20. COMPENSATION FOR PARTICIPATION  
Each study 1  participant will receive $25 for the baseline asses sment, and $50 for the post -group  assessment .  
 
Each study 2 participant will receive $50 for the mid -program  assessment, $100 for the post -program  
assessment, and $150 for the 6 -month follow -up assessment.  Participants who withdraw, but who wish to have 
their weight measured or self -report their weight to study staff at follow -up time points will receive a $25 gift 
card at each assessment time point (mid -program , post -program , and 6 -month follow -up) that remains after the 
point which they withdrew. Partici pants who enroll and complete all assessment visits can earn up to $300.  
 
21. PRIVILEGES/CERTIFICATIONS/LICENSES AND RESEARCH TEAM RESPONSIBILITIES  
Dawn Eichen Ph.D. (PSY27823) is a licensed clinical psychologist and PI of the study.  She will be respons ible 
for training and supervising study and certifying assessors and will oversee the budgetary and administrative tasks 
management of the study, including the budget, hiring personnel, personnel issues, equipment management, NIH 
compliance and implementat ion of refinements to the protocols. She may also conduct assessment and group  and 
supervise group . 
  
Kerri Boutelle, Ph.D (PI) is a professor in residence in the UCSD department of psychiatry and a licensed clinical 
psychologist.  Her research specializes  in the study of obesity and eating disorder behaviors. Dr. Boutelle will 
help with study design, supervision of treatment and assistance with interpretation of findings.  
 
Elizabeth Twamley, PhD, is a licensed clinical psychologist and mentor on this proj ect. She will aid in 
development of the treatment, supervision of treatment  
 
Sonia Jain, PhD, is a statistician and may help with study analysis and database set up. She will only have access 
to de -identified data.  
 
Dr. Eastern Kang, is a postdoctoral fe llow. He will oversee data analyses including evaluating all data entry 
accuracy, merging of data files, creation of scales, and evaluating initial frequencies and means.  
 
Ms. Ana Lopez, is the data manager. She will assist with creating the database, ente ring and cleaning the data.  
 
Kaylen Moline  is the study recruitment coordinator.  She will coordinate all the recruitment and maintenance of 
the cohort for the study.  
 
Allison Tietz  is the study coordinator. She will maintain and communicate with the stu dy cohort, run 
assessments, and aid in recruitment, the preparation of assessment and group  materials, scheduling, and the 
collection of program  data.  
 
The following individuals are part of the CHEAR Assessment staff. They include graduate students and re cent 
graduate program graduates and postbacs who conduct clinical assessments and can serve as group leaders or 
co-leaders. They may also introduce the study and obtain consent. Everyone has CITI training:  
Natalie Alamo  
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 15 Daylin Anderson  
Paige Awtrey  
Anthon y DeB enedetto  
Barbara English Carmen Garcia -Sevillano  
Heather Halford  
Farah Krayem  
Michael Manzano  
Monica Montoya  
Saori Obayashi  
Ellen Pasquale  
Mieko Pretlow  
Alicia Rickels  
Alexiss Rivas  
Nicole Virzi  
Jessica Willis  
Rachel Wynveen  
 
 
The following individuals  are Research Assistants at CHEAR. These include undergraduate research assistants 
and high school volunteers who help oversee the assessments and introduce the studies to the participants and 
may obtain consent. They also may help assist with group materi al preparation and obtaining heights/weights. 
Everyone has verified CITI training prior to beginning.  
Research assistants:  
 
Corinne Blucher  
Lucia Ferrer  
Lauren Hamel  
Andre Hirakawa  
Alexander Lane  
Matthew Moncayo  
Sarah Perlman  
Nyako -Senait Saadiq  
Maya Selv araj 
 
Connie Zhang  
Alison Zhao  
 
 
 
22. BIBLIOGRAPHY  
1. Ogden CL, Carroll MD, Kit BK, Flegal KM. Prevalence of childhood and adult obesity in the United 
States, 2011 -2012. Journal of the American Medical Association. 2014;311(8):806 -814. 
2. Foster GD, Makr is AP, Bailer BA. Behavioral treatment of obesity. The American Journal of Clinical 
Nutrition. 2005;82(1):230S -235S.  
3. Look Ahead Research Group. Reduction in weight and cardiovascular disease risk factors in 
individuals with type 2 diabetes: One -year res ults of the Look AHEAD trial. Diabetes Care. 
2007;30(6):1374 -1383.  
4. Knowler WC, Barrett -Connor E, Fowler SE, et al. Reduction in the incidence of type 2 diabetes with 
lifestyle intervention or metformin. New England Journal of Medicine. 2002;346(6):393 -403. 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 16 5. Smith E, Hay P, Campbell L, Trollor JN. A review of the association between obesity and cognitive 
function across the lifespan: implications for novel approaches to prevention and treatment. Obesity 
Reviews. 2011;12(9):740 -755. 
6. Prickett C, Brenna n L, Stolwyk R. Examining the relationship between obesity and cognitive function: A 
systematic literature review. Obesity Research & Clinical Practice. 2015;9(2):93 -113. 
7. Galioto R, Spitznagel MB, Strain G, et al. Cognitive function in morbidly obese in dividuals with and 
without binge eating disorder. Comprehensive Psychiatry. 2012;53(5):490 -495. 
8. Gunstad J, Paul RH, Cohen RA, Tate DF, Spitznagel MB, Gordon E. Elevated body mass index is 
associated with executive dysfunction in otherwise healthy adults . Comprehensive Psychiatry. 
2007;48(1):57 -61. 
9. Fitzpatrick S, Gilbert S, Serpell L. Systematic review: Are overweight and obese individuals impaired 
on behavioural tasks of executive functioning? Neuropsychology review. 2013;23(2):138 -156. 
10. Danner UN,  Ouwehand C, van Haastert NL, Hornsveld H, de Ridder DTD. Decision -making 
impairments in women with binge eating disorder in comparison with obese and normal weight women. 
European Eating Disorders Review. 2012;20(1):e56 -e62. 
11. Weller RE, Cook EW, Avsar KB, Cox JE. Obese women show greater delay discounting than healthy -
weight women. Appetite. 2008;51(3):563 -569. 
12. Davis C, Patte K, Curtis C, Reid C. Immediate pleasures and future consequences. A 
neuropsychological study of binge eating and obesity. Appetite. 2010;54(1):208 -213. 
13. Lokken KL, Boeka AG, Yellumahanthi K, Wesley M, Clements RH. Cognitive performance of morbidly 
obese patients seeking bariatric surgery. The American Surgeon. 2010;76(1):55 -59. 
14. Coppin G, Nolan -Poupart S, Jones -Gotman M, S mall DM. Working memory and reward association 
learning impairments in obesity. Neuropsychologia. 2014;65:146 -155. 
15. Best JR, Theim KR, Gredysa DM, et al. Behavioral economic predictors of overweight children's weight 
loss. Journal of Consulting and Clin ical Psychology. 2012;80(6):1086.  
16. Alosco ML, Galioto R, Spitznagel MB, et al. Cognitive function after bariatric surgery: Evidence for 
improvement 3 years after surgery. The American Journal of Surgery. 2014;207(6):870 -876. 
17. MacLean PS, Wing RR, Dav idson T, et al. NIH working group report: Innovative research to improve 
maintenance of weight loss. Obesity. 2015;23(1):7 -15. 
18. Wykes T, Huddy V, Cellard C, McGurk SR, Czobor P. A meta -analysis of cognitive remediation for 
schizophrenia: Methodology and  effect sizes. American Journal of Psychiatry. 2011;168(5):472 -485. 
19. Cicerone KD, Langenbahn DM, Braden C, et al. Evidence -based cognitive rehabilitation: Updated 
review of the literature from 2003 Through 2008. Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabil itation. 
2011;92(4):519 -530. 
20. Rebok GW, Ball K, Guey LT, et al. Ten -year effects of the advanced cognitive training for independent 
and vital elderly cognitive training trial on cognition and everyday functioning in older adults. Journal of 
the American  Geriatrics Society. 2014;62(1):16 -24. 
21. McGurk SR, Twamley EW, Sitzer DI, McHugo GJ, Mueser KT. A meta -analysis of cognitive 
remediation in schizophrenia. American Journal of Psychiatry. 2007;164(12):1791 -1802.  
22. Bickel WK, Yi R, Landes RD, Hill PF, B axter C. Remember the future: Working memory training 
decreases delay discounting among stimulant addicts. Biological Psychiatry. 2011;69(3):260 -265. 
23. Boutelle KN, Monreal T, Strong DR, Amir N. An open trial evaluating an attention bias modification 
program for overweight adults who binge eat. Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental 
Psychiatry. 2016;52:138 -146. 
24. Lawrence NS, Verbruggen F, Morrison S, Adams RC, Chambers CD. Stopping to food can reduce 
intake. Effects of stimulus -specificity and in dividual differences in dietary restraint. Appetite. 
2015;85:91 -103. 
25. Twamley EW, Thomas KR, Gregory AM, et al. CogSMART compensatory cognitive training for 
traumatic brain injury: Effects over 1 year. The Journal of Head Trauma Rehabilitation. 2015;30( 6):391 -
401. 
26. Twamley EW, Jak A, Delis DC, Bondi MW, Lohr JB. Cognitive Symptom Management and 
Rehabilitation Therapy (CogSMART) for Veterans with traumatic brain injury: Pilot randomized 
controlled trial. Journal of Rehabilitation Research & Development . 2014;51:59 -70. 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 17 27. Twamley EW, Vella L, Burton CZ, Heaton RK, Jeste, Dilip V. Compensatory cognitive training for 
Psychosis: Effects in a randomized controlled trial. The Journal of Clinical Psychiatry. 2012;73(9):1212 -
1219.  
28.    Tchanturia K, Davies H , Reeder C, Wykes T. Cognitive Remediation Therapy for Anorexia Nervosa. 
2010.  
29.       Sheehan DV, Lecrubier Y, Sheehan KH, et al. The Mini -International Neuropsychiatric Interview 
(M.I.N.I): The development and validation of a structured diagnostic psyc hiatric interview for DSM -IV 
and ICD -10. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry. 1998;59:22 -33. 
30.     Wilkinson, G. S., & Robertson, G. J. (2006).  Wide Range Achievement Test 4 professional manual . 
Lutz, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.   
31.     Cooper Z,  Fairburn C. The Eating Disorder Examination - a semistructured interview for the assessment 
of the specific psychopathology of eating disorders. International Journal of Eating Disorders. 
1987;6(1):1 -8. 
32. Delis DC, Kaplan E, Kramer  JH. Delis -Kaplan exe cutive function system (DKEFS).  San Antonio, TX: 
Psychological Corporation; 2001.  
33. Roth RM, Isquith PK, Gioia GA. Behavioral Rating Inventory of Executive Function - Adult Version.  
Lutz, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources, Inc; 2005.  
34. Heppner PP,  Petersen CH. The development and implications of a personal problem -solving inventory. 
Journal of Counseling Psychology. 1982;29(1):66.  
35.       Kirby KN.  One‐year temporal stability of delay ‐discount rates . Psychon Bull Rev 2009 ;16:457‐462. 
36.     Germi ne, L., Nakayama, K., Duchaine, B., Chabris, C., Chatterjee, G., & Wilmer, J. (2012). Is the web 
as good as the lab? Comparable performance from web and lab in cognitive/perceptual experiments. 
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 19(5): 847 -857. 
37.       Wechs ler D. Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale –Fourth Edition (WAIS –IV). San Antonio, TX: The     
            Psychological Corporation; 2008.  
38.       Kongs  SK, Thompson  LL, Iverson  GL, Heaton  RK. Wisconsin  Card  Sorting  Test—64 Card  Version   
            (WCST -64) Odessa,  FL: Psychological  Assessment  Resources;  2000.   
39.       Delis DC, Kramer J, Kaplan E, Ober BA. CVLT -II: California verbal learning test: adult version.  
            Psychological Corporation; 2000.  
40.       Verbruggen F, Logan G, Stevens M. S TOP-IT: Windows executable software for the stop -signal  
            paradigm. Behav Res Methods. 2008;40(2):479 -483. 
41.       Krikorian, R., Bartok, J., & Gay, N. (1994). Tower of London procedure: A standard method and  
            developmental data. J ournal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology, 16(6), 840 –850. 
42.       Delis DC, Kaplan E, Kramer JH. Delis -Kaplan Executive Function System (D -KEFS). Psychological        
            Corporation: San Antonio, TX, 2001 . 
43.      Rosenberg, M., Noon an, S., DeGutis, J.  et al.  Sustaining visual attention in the face of distraction: a  
           novel  gradual -onset continuous performance task.  Atten Percept Psychophys  75, 426–439 (2013).  
44.       Fairburn C, Beglin S. Eating Disorder Examination Quest ionnaire (EDE -Q 6.0) C.G. Fairburn (Ed.),   
            Cognitive behavior therapy and eating disorders. Guilford Press, New York. 2008:309 -13. 
45.     Roberts ME, Barthel FMS, Lopez C, Tchanturia K, Treasure JL, Development and validation of the 
Detail and  Flexibility Questionnaire (DFlex) in eating disorders, Eating Behaviors. 2011; 12(3) 168 -74 
46.    Cyders, M. A., Littlefield, A. K., Coffey, S., & Karyadi, K. A. (2014). Examination of a short English 
version of the UPPS -P Impulsive Behavior Scale.  Addic tive behaviors , 39(9), 1372 -6. 
47.      Cohen S, Kamarck T, and Mermelstein R. A global measure of perceived stress. Journal of Health and  
           Social Behavior. 1983;24:386 -396. 
48.      Gearhardt, A. N., Corbin, W. R., & Brownell, K. D. (2016). Dev elopment of the Yale Food Addiction  
           Scale Version 2.0. Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, 30, 113 –121. 
49.      Kroenke K, Spitzer R, Williams W. The PHQ -9: Validity of a brief depression severity measure. Journal  
           of General Interna l Medicine. 2001;16:606 -616. 
50.      Schechter, D., Endicott, J, Nee, J. (2007). Quality of life of ‘normal’ controls: Association with lifetime 
history of mental illness.  Psychiatry Research, 152 (1), 45 -54. 
51.       Chen, G., Gully, S. M., & Eden, D. (2 001). Validation of a New General Self -Efficacy 
Scale.  Organizational Research Methods , 4(1), 62 –83.  
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 18 52.       Hunot C, Fildes A, Croker H, Llewellyn CH, Wardle J, Beeken RJ. Appetitive traits and relationships    
with BMI in adults: development of the ad ult Eating Behaviour Questionnaire.  Appetite  105, 2016, 356 -
363. 
53.      Tanofsky -Kraff, M. et al. (2008). Psychometric properties of a new questionnaire to assess eating in the 
absence of hunger in children and adolescents. Appetite, 51:148 -155. 
54.       Mason A, Vainik U, Acree M, Tomiyama A, Dagher A, Epel E, Hecht F. Improving Assessment of the 
Spectrum of Reward -Related Eating: The RED -13. Front Psychol. 2017;8:795. doi: 
10.3389/fpsyg.2017.00795; PMID: 28611698.  
55.      Chu AH, Ng SH, Koh D, Müller -Riemenschneider F. Reliability and Validity of the Self - and Interviewer -
Administered Versions of the Global Physical Activity Questionnaire (GPAQ). PLoS One. 2015 Sep 
1;10(9):e0136944.  
56.     Godin, G., & Shephard, R.J.  (1985). A simple method to assess  exercise behavior in the community.    
Canadian Journal of Applied Sport Sciences, 10(3):141 -6. 
57.      Spitzer RL, Kroenke K, Williams JB, & Lowe B. A brief measure for assessing generalized anxiety 
disorder: the GAD -7. 2006; 166:1092 -1097 .  
58.  Gratz KL, Roemer L. Multidimensional Assessment of Emotion Regulation and Dysregulation: 
Development, Factor Structure, and Initial Validation of the Difficulties in Emotion Regulation Scale. 
Journal of Psychopathology and Behavioral Assessment. 2004;26(1):41 -54. 
  
 
23. FUNDING SUPPORT FOR THIS STUDY  
Funding will be provided by NIDDK K23 DK114480 -01A1  
 
24. BIOLOGICAL MATERIALS TRANSFER AGREEMENT  
N/A 
 
25. INVESTIGATIONAL DRUG FACT SHEET AND IND/IDE HOLDER  
N/A 
 
26. IMPACT ON STAFF  
N/A 
 
27. CONFLICT OF INTEREST  
There are no conflicts of interest  
 
28. SUPPLEMENTAL INSTRUCTIONS FOR CANCER -RELATED STUDIES  
N/A 
 
29. OTHER APPROVALS/REGULATED MATERIALS  
none  
 
30. PROCEDURES FOR SURROGATE CONSENT AND/OR DECISIONAL CAPACITY 
ASSESSMENT  
 
N/A 
 
 
 