 
2009- 0528: A phase II study of hyperthermic peritoneal perfusion (HIPEC) for 
adolescent and young adults with desmoplastic small round cell tumor (DSRCT ) and 
other non- carcinomas   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  Principal Investigator:   A. Hayes -Jordan, MD  
  
  
  Co-Investigators:   Paul Mansfield,  MD 
      Richard Royal , MD 
      Keith Fournier , MD 
 
  
                                                                                                                   2009-0528  
                                                                                                                                          Dr. Hayes -Jordan    
                                                                                                                  14 Nov.  2013 
Background  
Extensive peritoneal disease or peritoneal carcinomatosis  represents an 
aggressive mode of spread for many tumors which ultimately results in death.  In most 
cases progression of the intraperitoneal disease precedes distant metastasis and 
patients typically die of complications related to the intraperitoneal dis ease. There is 
no standard chemotherapy which has shown promise in the treatment of peritoneal 
carcinomatosis for adults or children. The extent of retroperitoneal disease can limit 
complete surgical resection and the intensive post -operative chemotherapy  regimens 
are only useful if a complete response (CR) is evident. For sarcomatosis as is found 
in desmoplastic small round cell tumor (DSRCT), if residual disease is present there 
have been no survivors after intensive chemotherapy even with stem cell rescue.  (1) 
This may be related to the difficulty in obtaining cytotoxic concentrations of 
chemotherapy within the tumor parenchyma. A regional approach to treating the 
intraperitoneal tumor is appealing as a means of delivering high concentrations of 
chemother apeutic agents directly to the tumor while limiting systemic toxicity.  (By 
means of using the peritoneal surface as barrier to systemic absorption)  (2)  This 
approach has been demonstrated to be very effective for advanced ovarian cancer, 
appendiceal carci noma and has become the standard care for adults in many cancer 
centers.  (3)  In phase I and II clinical trials, this strategy has also been found to 
improve disease free survival in mesothelioma and gastric cancer. (4- 6) 
DSRCT primarily presents in childr en and young adults age 5- 30, 90% male, 
with dozens to hundreds of abdominal tumor implants.  Less than 200 cases are 
reported in the world literature and therefore treatment options are limited. Despite 
chemotherapy, aggressive tumor debulking and radiotherapy, 3 year survival is 20 -
30%. After aggressive tumor debulking of Desmoplastic round cell tumor (DSRCT), 
various strategies have been employed which direct therapy toward the peritoneal 
disease because of the characteristic loco- regional pattern of spread . Such 
approaches have included intraoperative radiation therapy (IORT) and hyperfractionated radiation therapy.  (7-10) Some chemotherapy and radiation 
responses have been documented, but local abdominal recurrence shortly follows.  While these approaches attest to the acknowledged importance of controlling intra -
abdominal disease, they have not been uniformly successful in the long term 
complications of secondary tumors. (11 -13)   
Other rare pediatric tumors which can recur and metastasize in the abdominal 
cavity include Wilms’ tumor, colon carcinoma, sarcoma, and malignant ovarian germ 
cell tumor. With advanced intraperitoneal disease, these tumors are usually fatal 
despite aggressive chemotherapy and radiation therapy.  In a novel approach to these 
aggressive tumors, here at UT MDACC, an investigator initiated phase I  study found 
that continuous hyperthermic peritoneal perfusion, also known as HIPEC, is safe in children.   
HIPEC is a technique for combining hyperthermia and chemotherapeutic 
agents delive red intraoperatively to the peritoneal and retroperitoneal surface via a 
recirculating perfusion circuit. (14)  In addition to adult clinical trials, the support for this concept comes from in vivo and in vitro laboratory studies.  The selective lethal 
effect of supranormal temperatures on human and murine neoplastic cells has been 
well established in laboratory models. (15- 17) A variety of cell lines including colon 
carcinoma and melanom a have been shown to be sensitive to temperatures ranging 
from 42 to 45°C  when exposed for a period of 2 to 4 hours while their non- neoplastic 
parental cell  types are largely unaffected. In vivo, there appears to be a differential 
Page 2 of 21 
 
                                                                                                                   2009-0528  
                                                                                                                                          Dr. Hayes -Jordan    
                                                                                                                  14 Nov.  2013 
response of normal and tumor microcirculati on in response to hyperthermia. (18)  In 
response to hyperthermia,  normal tissue will show a dramatic and temperature 
dependent increase in blood flow at temperatures up to 50°C. In contrast , blood flow 
through neoplastic tissue will increase to a much smaller extent and stasis occurs at 
lower temperatures which are well tolerated by normal tissue. Therefore, there 
appears to be two fundamental mechanisms by which supranormal temperatures can 
be selectively toxic to neoplastic cells via both direct cytotoxic effects and vascular 
stasis.  
As mentioned, for drugs administered into the peritoneal cavity, the 
simultaneous systemic administration of neutralizing agents can provide protection 
against the systemic toxic effects of drug whi ch leaks into the circulation. Systemic 
sodium thiosulfate has been shown to covalently bind and inactivate cisplatin in the 
systemic circulation and obviate the expected renal toxicities. The use of sodium 
thiosulfate allows the administration of high doses of intraperitoneal cisplatin which 
might result in blood levels comparable t o an intravenous administration of drug.  (19)  
A loading dose of sodium thiosulfate,  followed by continuous infusion  has completely 
prevented any substantial rise in serum creatinine with doses of cisplatin up to 270 
mg/M2 administered intraperitoneally wi th a 4 -hour dwell time.  
The major disadvantage of intraperitoneal drug administration appears to be 
that drug uptake by tumor tissue is mostly through capillary diffusi on rather than 
capillary flow. With cisplatin in a normothermic environment, tumor penet ration up to 3 
mm has been shown. This would theoretically be adequate to penetrate a tumor deposit 6 mm in diameter. Thus it is clear that aggressive surgical debulking, leaving 
minimal gross residual disease, will be optimal for the maximum therapeutic effect 
with cisplatin.   
In adult studies of carcinomatosis, there were no procedure related mortalities; 
morbi dity included renal impairment, ascites, and pancreatitis. Dose limiting toxicity 
included grade III leukopenia, grade IV neutropenia and grade II I and IV 
thrombocytopenia at the higher doses only (greater than 800 mg/M
2). (20, 21)  
Specifically, no patient had a prolonged postoperative ileus and no adverse e ffect on 
wound healing was observed. Following surgery, the median time before tolerating 
enteral feeds was 5 days (range 1- 7 days ), and patients could tolerate a regular diet 
at a medi an of 7 days (range 4- 8 days). Neither patient who had undergone bowel 
resection and anastamosis followed by HIPEC had any anastamotic c omplication. 
One patient suffered a subfascial hematoma incurred from trauma to the left inferior 
epigastric artery.  (20) In the mesothelioma study, the MTD of cisplatin was 300 
mg/M2. Above this dose there were significant rises in creatinine and one patient 
required temporary hemodialysis.  (21)  There have not been any untoward effects of 
the HIPEC on the ability of these patients to heal incisional wounds and convalesce uneventfully.  
This intraoperative treatment using HIPEC in children has provided some very 
encouraging results.  The phase I  study of HIPEC in children done here (protocol 
#2005- 0917) proved to be safe. There were no protocol related deaths.  Two SAE’s 
included temporary cardiomyopathy likely related to the 4 kg+ tumor resected and 
supraventricular tachycardia likel y related to centra l venous catheter malposition. 
Several children had temporary increased creatinine, up to 1.9. However, no 
problems were seen with urinary output; serum creatinine returned to normal within 1-
2 weeks without treatment  or dialysis .  
Page 3 of 21 
 
                                                                                                                   2009-0528  
                                                                                                                                          Dr. Hayes -Jordan    
                                                                                                                  14 Nov.  2013 
  Preliminary results suggest 3 year disease free survival is 71% (compared to 
26% in historic controls) and disease free interval is increased 5 times from 1.6 to 9 
months in the subset of patients with DSRCT. The 2 sarcoma patients died within 6 
months and one mesothelioma patient is alive with minimal disease. Another 
mesotheliom a patient in 3rd relapse was treated with surgery + HIPEC is > 2 years 
from surgery. In summary there appears to be benefit in many and we have reached a 
dose limiting toxicity (DLT), elevated creatinine using HIPEC with cisplatin at 150 
mg/M2.  
   
Rationale 
Desmoplastic small round cell tumor (DSRCT) is a rare diseas e of children, 
adolescents and young adults, which begins in the abdominal cavity.  Less than 200 
cases are reported in the world literature.  The  primary organ of DSRCT origin is the 
peritoneum.  It is a very unique tumor that is difficult to treat becaus e of the infiltrative 
and diffuse nature of the peritoneum.  Patients may present with dozens to hundreds 
of tumors studding the peritoneal cavity.  DSRCT was only recently described in 1991 
and since then multimodality treatment including chemotherapy, ra diation and 
aggressive surgery, has not improved outcome.  Here at UT MDACC the PI has 
conducted a phase I trial in children with 'carcinomatosis' who underwent continuous 
hyperthermic peritoneal perfusion using cisplatin after cytoreductive surgery. (This  
was an investigator initiated trial and we were the only center in the North America 
embarking on this effort)  
 For continuity, we propose to open the phase II study on the subset of patients 
with t he best prognosis after HIPEC, those with DSRCT. In data  not yet published, we 
compared the 9 patients with DSRCT who have undergone HIPEC with 15 historical 
adolescent and adult patients with DSRCT at UT MDACC who had chemotherapy +/ - 
radiation therapy only and no HIPEC and found a survival advantage of 41 weeks in the patients undergoing HIPEC, a 3 year median survival of 26% for those not 
undergoing HIPEC and 71% for those who had HIPEC. This is very preliminary data 
with few patients and follow up is only 1- 3 years. Further study of HIPEC in DSRCT is 
warrant ed. The surgical study plan and delivery of hyperthermic chemotherapy are 
the same as the previously approved phase I protocol. The maximum tolerated dose, 
the safe dose of cisplatin found in phase I, is 100 mg/M2. Pediatric and adult patients 
with other non- carcinoma tumors wi th extensive peritoneal disease will be eligible if 
no standard HIPEC treatment has been established for these patients.  Results of the 
research analysis will not be shared with the patient during the conduct of this study 
nor will th e results influence the clinical strategy.  
 
 
1.0      Primary objectives of the study  
Primary objective 1:  To determine the efficacy of HIPEC using hyperthermic 
cisplatin  given as a continuous perfusion after complete abdominal tumor excision in 
patients with DSRCT.  
   
Primary objective 2:  To determine the morbidity of extensive tumor resection 
and HIPEC on patients with DSRCT and other non- carcinoma tumors w ith extensive 
abdominal disease.  
 
Page 4 of 21 
 
                                                                                                                   2009-0528  
                                                                                                                                          Dr. Hayes -Jordan    
                                                                                                                  14 Nov.  2013 
 
Methods and Research Plan  
The current study is designed to evaluate the efficacy of HIPEC with cisplatin, in 
children adolescents and young adults with disseminated intra -peritoneal disease. 
This phase II pilot study will include aggr essive surgical debulking, in patients with 
abdominal desmoplastic small round cell tumor.   
 
2.0 ELIGIBILITY ASSES SMENT AND ENROLLMENT  
 2.1 Inclusion Criteria  
 2.1.1  Age greater than or equal  to 1 year . 
 2.1.2  Histologically or genetically proven diffuse peritoneal or 
retroperitoneal tumor from desmoplastic round cell tumor, 
ovarian germ cell, sarcoma, Wilms’ tumor, or other non-
carcinoma tumors.  
 2.1.3  Radiologic workup must demonstrate that the disease is 
confined to the abdominal cavity  
 2.1.4  Radiologic workup or prior abdominal exploration must be consistent with disease which can be debulked to a 
residual size of less than or equal to  1 cm thickness per 
tumor deposit  
 2.1.5  Patient s must have a minimum expected duration of 
survival of g reater than 6 weeks as determined and 
documented by the attending surgeon or medical 
oncologist.  
 2.1.6  Patients must not have any systemic illness which 
precludes them from being an operative candidate as 
determined by anesthesia preoperative evaluation.  This 
includes but is not limited to, sepsis, liver failure, pregnant or lactating females.  
 2.1.7  Patients must have fully intact mental status and normal 
neurologic abilities. Intact mental status is defined by ‘the 
capacity to identify and recall one's identity and place in 
time and space.’ Assessment of mental status and 
documentation of fully intac t mental status will be 
completed using physical and mental exam by the referring doctor or oncologist.   
 2.1.8  Patients must have adequate renal function (serum 
creatinine < 1.5 mg/d l without history dialysis or renal 
failure or creatinine clearance less  than 50 mL/min/1. 73 M2 
if less than 5 years of age)  
 2.1.9  Patients will be eligible if the WBC is > 2000/µl or ANC is 
>1,500 and  platelets are > 100,000/mm3 
 2.1.10  Patients will be eligible if serum total bil irubin and liver 
enzymes are <  2 times the upper limit of normal  
 2.1.11  Patients must be recovered from any toxicity from all prior chemotherapy, immunotherapy, or radiotherapy and be at 
least 14 days past the date of their last treatment  
 
Page 5 of 21 
 
                                                                                                                   2009-0528  
                                                                                                                                          Dr. Hayes -Jordan    
                                                                                                                  14 Nov.  2013 
 2.2 Exclusion criteria  
 2.2.1  Patients will be ineligible if they have any concomitant 
cardiopulmonary disease which would place them at unacceptable risk for a major surgical procedure  
 2.2.2  Patients will be ineligible if they have disease outside of 
the abdominal cavity which is uncontrolled  
 2.2.3  Patients will be ineligible if they have a baseline neurologic 
toxicity of Grade 3 or greater (because of the potential neurotoxicity associated with platinum)  
 2.2.4  Patients who have failed previous intraperitoneal platinum 
therapy will be ineligible (“Failed” is having disease 
recurrence < 3 months.)  
 2.2.5  Patients with R etroperitoneal Liposarcoma will be ineligible  
 
 2.3 Research Eligibility Evaluation  
 2.3.1  A complete history and physical examination  
 2.3.2  Chest, abdomen and pelvic CT scan or MRI  within 3 
weeks of study entry  
 2.3.3  Blood tests including, CBC, PT/PTT, sodium, potassium, chloride, carbon dioxide, BUN, creatinine, calcium, 
amylase, magnesium, phosphorus, AST, ALT, total 
bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase, albumin within one week of 
study entry  
 2.3.4  Bone scan and brain MRI as clinically indicated within two 
weeks of study entry  
 2.3.5  Echocardiogram and ECG required within two weeks of 
study entry  
 2.3.6  Review of pathology slides of tumor specimen obtained from biopsy or surgical resection, by MDACC pathologist  
(unless genetic confirmation is previously obtained)  
 2.3.7  Urine pregnancy test will be required per institutiona l 
pregnancy assessment. (Policy no. CLN1114)  
 2.3.8  Audiol ogy evaluation will be done before beginning 
therapy  as a baseline  
 2.3.9    Patients under 5 years of age must have a 24 hour urine 
collec tion for creatinine clearance. The value obtained 
from the lab at MDACC will be multiplied by 1.73 and 
divided by the patients BSA to obtain the corrected 
creatinine clearance in the units mL/min/1.73 M2 
 
 3.0 Study Implementation: Surgery  
 3.1 Procedures and therapeutic agents  
 3.1.1  Each operation will be carefully planned and informed 
consent obtained from the patient 18 or older or the parents (and assent from chi ld if age appropriate)  after a 
detailed discussion of possible complications, risks and possible benefits.   
Page 6 of 21 
 
                                                                                                                   2009-0528  
                                                                                                                                          Dr. Hayes -Jordan    
                                                                                                                  14 Nov.  2013 
 3.1.2  A general anesthetic is administered and the patient is 
placed on a cooling blanket that will initially not be turned 
on).  Esophageal and b ladder temperature probes will be 
inserted.  Unless already in place upon arrival to the OR; a central venous catheter, large bore IV ’s and an arterial line 
will be placed.  An exploratory laparotomy will be performed.  If the surgeon determines the operat ion to be 
feasible and safe, a debulking operation will be performed which will include all disease possible, leaving tumor 
nodules no greater than 1 cm thick. If the surgeon 
determines that the patient cannot be cytoreduced leaving 
no tumor nodules in aggregate greater than 1 cm, patients 
will not receive HIPEC . These patients may then receive 
surgical debulking but will not be eligible to be enrolled on 
this protocol.  The extent of the operation will vary 
depending on the tumor.  Possible procedures incl ude 
partial liver resection, partial, limited pancreatic resection, 
splenectomy, or bowel resection. Non -surgical ablation of 
liver tumors is acceptable.   
 3.1.3  HIPEC - After cytoreductive surgery and lysis of adhesions, 
two large bore catheters are placed in the peritonea l cavity 
through the incision. The first is placed over the dome of 
the liver for perfusion influx and a second catheter is 
placed so that the tip lies in th e pelvis for perfusion efflux. 
Up to  eight temperature probes are placed beneath the  
peritoneal surface or at the influx and efflux catheters . The 
abdominal incision is closed and HIPEC is performed.  
 3.1.4  HIPEC and Cisplatin - Thirty minutes before HIPEC  is 
begun, body t emperature is cooled to 35°C. During the 
procedure, the cooling blanket and ice packs at the patients head and legs will be adjusted as necessary to 
maintain core body temperature below 38.5°C (as 
measured by esophageal probe). The catheters are 
connected to a perfusion circuit. The perfusate passes 
from a reservoir through a roller pump, heat exchanger and t hen into the abdominal cavity. Efflux from a second 
catheter is then recirculated t hrough the reservoir and 
pump. The perfusion flow rate will be maintained to distend 
the abdomen 5 (+2) liters/minute, and a perfusate volume 
will be maintained which moderately distends the 
abdominal cavity.  Before the instillation of Cisplatin, the 
peritoneal cavity is warmed to a target of 40°C  (+1°C) as 
estimated by the influx/efflux catheter or peritoneal probe 
and the anesthesiologist will hydrate the patient with 
isotonic solution.  The perfusion is continued for 90 
minutes after adding the cisplatin. Cisplatin at 100 mg/M2 
(1mg/1mL concentration in syringes)  is to be added to the 
perfusate. The total maximum dose will  not exceed  
Page 7 of 21 
 
                                                                                                                   2009-0528  
                                                                                                                                          Dr. Hayes -Jordan    
                                                                                                                  14 Nov.  2013 
 
                                                                      130 mg. Constant physical manipulation of the abdomen is 
maintained for the entire 90 minutes to assure even 
distribution of the perfusate. Peritoneal temperature is 
measur ed every 10- 15 minutes by up to eight  probes 
placed either  beneath the perit oneal  surface  or at the influx  
and efflux catheters . At the end of the perfusion, the 
abdomen is re -opened and the perfusate is again irrigated 
from the abdominal cavity. The bowel  is then thoroughly 
re-inspected for any perforations incurred and bowel 
anastamosis are completed. Throughout the procedure urine output must be maintained at 1- 2 cc/kg/hr. Post-
operative hydration will include 1.5 x maintenance normal 
saline or lactating ringer  and maintenance of uri ne output 
of at least 1cc/kg/hr  and replacing urine output cc/cc every 
hour with normal saline, for the first 4 8 hours to prevent 
hypovolemia and renal failure.  
 3.1.5  Retroperitoneal tumors - In the case of a retroperitoneal 
tumor, after tumor debulking, exposure of the entire 
retroperitoneum in the area of the tumor bed, will be 
maintained. The remainder of the procedure will be the 
same as above.  Stable perfusion parameters are obtained 
and the peritoneal cavity is warmed to a minimum of 40°C  
(+1°C), prior to adding the cisplatin.  The perfusion is 
continued for 90 minutes after adding the cisplatin. At the 
end of the perfusion the perfusate is irrigated from the 
abdominal cavity and the abdominal wall is closed in the 
usual fashion.   
 3.1.6  Sodium thiosulfate-  In order to limit the systemic toxicity of 
cisplatin,  sodium thiosulfate will be administered by 
loading dose and then a 12 hour  continuous intravenous 
infusion. A loading dose of 7.5 gm/ M2 (maximum 12.5 gm) 
of sodium thiosulfate will be diluted in 20 ml/kg of 0.9% normal saline up to 500 mL. This loading dose will be 
infused over 20 minutes beginning 30 minutes  (+ 15 
minutes)  after the addition of cisplatin to the peritoneal 
perfusion circuit. Then maintenance infusion of sodium 
thiosulfate 1.275 gm/ M2/hr for 12 hours will be  delivered by 
infusion pump  
 
 4.0 Data Collection and Evaluation  
 4.1 Data Collection   
All patients will be entered in PDMS /CORe  with fields to reflect 
the information on the data collection forms included in Appendix 1.   
  
 
Page 8 of 21 
 
                                                                                                                   2009-0528  
                                                                                                                                          Dr. Hayes -Jordan    
                                                                                                                  14 Nov.  2013 
 4.2 Response Criteria and Statistical Considerations  
 4.2.1  This is a phase II study of continuous hyperthermia 
peritoneal perfusion (HIPEC) in patients with desmoplastic round cell tumor (DSRCT)  and non- DSRCT patients . The 
primary objective is to assess the efficacy of this treatment, with a primary endpoint of ti me to relapse. The 
historical median time to relapse for DSRCT patients without HIPEC treatment was about 1.6 months. A 
maximum of 2 2 patients will be enrolled in MDACC at an 
estimated accrual rate of 1 patient every 2 months including a total of 5 non- DSR CT patients. Patients will be 
followed up until relapse, death or for 6 months after the treatment, which ever occur first. It would be encouraging 
if the median time to relapse could increase to 3.2 months 
with the HIPEC treatment. The toxicity and efficacy will be 
monitored during the study, and all the data will be used to 
update the prior distributions for toxicity and efficacy 
parameters. The study will be stopped for toxicity and 
futility based on the following stopping rules.   
 4.2.2  The primary endpoint TTP will be monitored using the 
method of Thall et al. (23). Denote median (TTP) = m H for 
patients without HIPEC treatment and m E for patients with 
HIPEC treatment. We assume that TTP is distributed 
exponentially with mean of m H and m E, respectively,  in 
patients without and with HIPEC treatment.  Under a Bayesian model, we will further assume that m
H has an 
inverse gamma (IG) prior with parameters (16.2, 24.3), with a mean of median TTP=1.6 months and variance = 
0.18. We also assume that m
E follows IG prior (2.03, 1.64) 
with the same median TTP as m H but with a much larger 
variance (100) to reflect much greater uncertainty about 
TTP in patients with HIPEC treatment. The TTP data will 
be monitored continuously , and the study will be 
terminated early if Pr (mH + d < m E | data) < 0.05, where d= 
1.6 month. Specifically, the trial will be stopped early if, 
given the current data, there is less than 5%  chance that 
the median TTP will improve by more than 1.6 month in 
patients treated with HIPEC, compared to t hose without 
HIPEC treatment. The operating characteristics of this 
decision rule are summarized in Table 1.  
 4.2.3  In addition, toxicity will be monitored closely in all patients. 
The evaluation of the  toxicity data will begin after 
enrollment of  8 patients . Denote the probability of toxicity 
by θE, where toxicity is defined as any Grade 3 or greater 
renal, cardiac, respiratory or G rade 4 hematologic 
complications attributable to HIPEC.  We assume θ E ~ 
beta (0.6, 1.4).  Our stopping rule is given by the fo llowing 
probability statement: Pr  (θE > 0.30 | data) >0.8. That is,  
Page 9 of 21 
 
                                                                                                                   2009-0528  
                                                                                                                                          Dr. Hayes -Jordan    
                                                                                                                  14 Nov.  2013 
 
                                                                      we will stop the trial if, at any time during the study, we 
determine that there is more than 80% chance that the 
toxicity rate is more than 30%. Stopping boundaries 
corresponding to this stopping rule are to terminate the 
trial if (# G rade 3 or greater rena l, cardiac, respiratory or 
Grade 4 hematologic complications) / (# patients 
evaluated) ≥4/8, 5/9, 6/12 , 7/15, 8/18.  That is, the trial will 
be stopped if 4 or more patients out of 8 patients, 5 or more patients out of 9 patients, and 6 or more patients out  
of 10, 11  and 12 patients, 7 or more patients out of 13,  14 
and 15 patients, 8 or more patients out of 16,  17, 18 
patients experience toxicity.  Please note that for the first 8 
patients, if 4 or more out of 4- 7 patients experience 
toxicity, the trial will  also be stopped, because the stopping 
boundary is already passed.  The operating characteristics 
are summarized in Table 2.  
4.2.4 Analysis Plan: For discrete or categorical data, descriptive 
statistics will inclu de tabulations of frequencies. For 
continuous data, summary statistics including n, mean, standard deviation, median, minimum and maximum will 
be computed. The median time to progression and its 95% 
confidence interval will be estimated.  Kaplan -Meier 
method, Log rank test and Cox proportional hazards regression modeling will be utilized to analyze time to 
progression and overall survival. The study will use 
Department of Biostatistics Clinical Trial Conduct website to conduct/monitor with regard to the defined Bayesian 
rules.  
 
Table 1.  Operating characteristics for the design 
True median  
Time to 
progression 
(month)  Pr(stop early)  Average Number of 
Patients  Treated 
(25th, 75th 
percentiles)  
 1         0.998          4 (1,5)  
 1.6         0.775          9 (2,18)  
 3.2         0.178        17 (2,20)  
4         0.126        18 (20,20)  
 
Table 2.  
  
  
 
 
 
 True toxicity rate  Early Stopping  Probability  
0.1                 0.006  
0.2                 0.094  
0.3                  0.344  
0.4                  0.665  
0.5                  0.897  
Page 10 of 21 
 
                                                                                                                   2009-0528 
                                                                                                                                          Dr. Hayes -Jordan    
                                                                                                                  14 Nov.  2013  
  
                                                      4.3 Pathologic response criteria  
 4.3.1 At the completion of cytoreductive surgery, one 1cm  
  nodule will remain in the peritoneal cavity during the  
  perfusion procedure.  
  
 One nodule of  
tumor removed before hyperthermic perfusion  
treatment will be preserved  for comparison. Tumor  
nodules will be divided in three portions and  
preserved in paraffin, a frozen block and as snap  
frozen tissue. Slides will then be cut and then used  
for immuno histochemical analysis of apoptosis,  
 proliferation and autophagy.  
4.3.2     Snap frozen tissue will be used for RNA extraction  
           and gene expression profiling for the purpose of  
           categorizing patient tumors based on response to  
           hyperthermic peritoneal perfusion treatment. The  
           Illumina platform will be used. A comparison of 6  
 patient samples, pre and post treatment, for a total of 
          12 samples will be analyzed. We will create a log of  
          response comparing pre and post treatment gene 
          expression and identify gene signatures for pathologic  
          vs. non pathologic r esponders. Paraffin embedded 
          samples will be used for tissue microarray, comparing  
          pre and post treatment, to validate gene expression  
          data at the protein level using IHC.  Upon completion  
          of full analysis, the tissue samples will be destroyed.               
4.3.3    This information will be critical in the future in that it  
          will allow the treating physician to identify which 
          DSRCT patients would best respond to hyperthe rmic 
          peritoneal perfusion cisplatin treatment by genetic  
          tumor characteristics.  (Dr. Alexander Lazar,  
          pathologist, is part of the sarcoma center under the  
          direction of Dr . Lev) 
 
 4.4 Re treatment criteria  
 4.4.1 If patients return with recurrent measurable disease and 
experienced a 6 month disease free interval since the last HIPEC, they will be offered a reperfusion when there is 
radiographic evidence of recurrent intra -abdominal disease 
and no new contraindications.  Patients having a reperfusion will be treated with 50 mg/M
2 of cisplatin. (This 
is based on renal insufficiency seen in 2 patients who underwent 2 perfusions at 100  mg/M
2)  
 4.4.2 Patients who progress will be offered other treatment 
alternatives  
 
Page 11 of 21 
 

                                                                                                                   2009-0528  
                                                                                                                                          Dr. Hayes -Jordan    
                                                                                                                  14 Nov.  2013 
 
 4.5 On study evaluation  
 4.5.1  Patients will undergo laboratory tests, imaging and 
physical exam as per on study criteria.    
 4.5.2  During HIPEC patients will have continuous core temperature monitoring by the esophageal probe and 
bladder probe .  Peritoneal temperature is measured every 
10-15 minutes by up to eight probes placed either  beneath 
the perit oneal surface or at the influx and efflux catheters.  
If the temperatures are increasing above 40°C  (+1), the 
temperature of the perfusate will be reduced. I f the 
temperature readings are too low, the emphasis of the manual agitation will be redirected to that area of the 
abdomen.   
 4.5.3  Patients will be followed postoperatively with daily CBC, 
sodium, potassium, chloride, carbon dioxide , BUN, 
creatinine, AS T, ALT, calcium, albumin,  magnesium,  
phosphorous, total bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase, 
amylase for 5 +/ -2 days and then twice weekly until 
discharge; and post -discharge at day 14+/ -3 days and day 
30+/- 3 days and at 3 and 6 month (+/-2 weeks)  follow -up 
(Appendix 1) Adverse events will be assessed on the 
same timetable.  
 4.5.4  Patients will be monitored in the PICU no less than 48 
hours . If necessary, a dult patients will be admitted to ICU.  
 4.5.5  Evaluation of measurable disease will be performed one mont h, 3 months and 6 months postoperatively (+/ - 2 
weeks) using CT or MRI and physical exam . (CT or MRI 
scan performed only at 3 and 6 months)  
 4.5.6  Audiology evaluation will also be performed at one month 
evaluation.  
 
 4.6 Concurrent Therapies  
 4.6.1  Patients will be allowed to proceed with any post -operative 
chemotherapy including allogeneic or autologous bone 
marrow transplantation. No concurrent medications will be 
given at the time of study drug administration since this is only a 90 minute period in the operating room. However, 
baseline medications and all medications through the 30 days follow up will be entered into PDMS/CORe.   
 
 4.7 Pharmacokinetics (Optional)  
 4.7.1  Blood and peritoneal fluid samples (2.0 ml) will be 
collected in purple top tubes, centrifuged, and supernatant 
or plasma collected and stored at - 20°C until analyzed.  
 4.7.2  Blood and peritoneal fluid will be collected prior to the start 
of cisplatin- HIPEC and then at times 0, 30, 60  and 90  
 
Page 12 of 21 
 
                                                                                                                   2009-0528  
                                                                                                                                          Dr. Hayes -Jordan    
                                                                                                                  14 Nov.  2013 
 
                                                                      minutes. An additional blood sample will be collected 24 
hours (+/- 8 hours) after the start of HIPEC. 
 4.7.3  Platinum levels in plasma and perfusate will be determined 
by the laboratory . 
 4.7.4  Pharmacokinetic profiles of cisplatin in plasma and 
perfusate will be determined and compared.    
 
 4.8 Off Study Criteria  
 4.8.1  Progression of disease - Once patients demonstrate 
progression of disease at follow up MRI or CT or PET -CT 
scans at 3  or 6 months, other therapies may be offered 
(but are not considered part of this study) . Disease 
progression is defined by radiographically visible nodules 
greater than 1.5 cm. However, patients would be followed 
until death even after the 6 month follow -up by notification 
by primary oncologist.    
 4.8.2  Voluntary withdrawal  
 4.8.3  Non-compliance with follow -up scheme  
 4.8.4  At the time of cytoreductive surgery if patients are found to 
have disease which cannot be debulked to a diameter <1 
cm in aggregate will be taken off study and not given the 
perfusion treatment.  
  
4.9       Serious Adverse Event Reporting (SAE)  
An adverse event or suspected adverse r eaction is considered “serious”   
if, in the view of either the investigator or the sponsor, it results in any of         
the following outcomes:  
• Death  
• A life -threatening adverse drug experience – any adverse experience that 
places the patient, in the view of the initial reporter, at immediate risk of death from the adverse experience as it occurred. It does not include an 
adverse experience that, had it occurred in a more severe form, might have 
caused death.  
• Inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization  
• A persistent or significant incapacity or substantial disruption of the ability to conduct normal life functions.  
• A congenital anomaly/birth defect.  
 
Important medical events that m ay not result in death, be life 
threatening, or require hospitalization may be considered a serious 
adverse drug experience when, based upon appropriate medical 
judgment, they may jeopardize the patient or subject and may require 
medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed in 
this definition. Examples of such medica l events include allergic 
bronchospasm requiring intensive treatment in an emergency room or at home, blood dyscrasias or convulsions that do not result in inpatient 
hospitalization, or the development of drug dependency or drug abuse 
(21 CFR 312.32).  
Page 13 of 21 
 
                                                                                                                   2009-0528  
                                                                                                                                          Dr. Hayes -Jordan    
                                                                                                                  14 Nov.  2013 
 
• Important medical events as defined above may also be considered 
serious adverse events. Any important medical event can and should 
be reported as an SAE if deemed appropriate by the Principal 
Investigato r or the IRB . 
• All events occurring during the conduct of a protocol and meeting the 
definition of a SAE must be reported to the IRB in accordance with the 
timeframes and procedures outlined in "University of Texas M. D. Anderson 
Cancer Center Institutional Review Board Policy on Reporting Serious 
Adverse Events".  Unless stated otherwise in the protocol, all SAEs, 
expected or unexpected, must be reported to the IRB , regardless of 
attribution (within 5 working days of knowledge of the event).  
• All life -threatening or fatal events, that are unexpected, and relate d to the 
study drug, must have a written report submitted within 24 hours (next 
working day) of knowledge of the event to the IRB.    
• The MDACC "Internal SAE Report Form for Prompt Reporting" will be 
used  for reporting to the IRB .  
• Serious adverse events wi ll be captured from the time the patient 
signs consent until 30 days after the last dose of drug. Serious 
adverse events must be followed until clinical recovery is complete 
and laboratory tests have returned to baseline, progression of the 
event has stabi lized, or there has been acceptable resolution of the 
event.  
• Additionally, any serious adverse events that occur after the 30 day 
time period that are related to the study treatment must be reported to 
the IRB . This may include the development of a secondary 
malignancy.  
 
Reporting to FDA:  
• Serious adverse events will be forwarded to FDA by the IRB according to 21 
CFR 312.32.  
 
It is the responsibility of the PI and the research team to ensure serious adverse 
events are reported according to the Code of  Federal Regulations, Good 
Clinical Practices, the protocol guidelines, the sponsor’s guidelines, and Institutional Review Board policy. 
         
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                    
Page 14 of 21 
 
                                                                                                                   2009-0528  
                                                                                                                                          Dr. Hayes -Jordan    
                                                                                                                  14 Nov.  2013 
The PI is responsible for ADR reporting. Adverse events will be documented 
according to the recommended adverse event recording guidelines for Phase II 
protocols as seen below.  
 
Recommended Adverse Event Recording Guidelines   
Attribution  Grade 1  Grade 2  Grade 3  Grade 4  Grade 5   
           
Unrelated  Phase I  Phase I  Phase I 
Phase II    Phase I 
Phase II  
Phase III  Phase I 
Phase II    
Phase III   
 
 
Unlikely  Phase I  Phase I  Phase I  
Phase II    Phase I 
Phase II    
Phase III  Phase I 
Phase II    
Phase III   
 
 
Possible  Phase I  
Phase II  Phase I 
Phase II    
Phase  III Phase I 
Phase II    
Phase III  Phase I 
Phase II    
Phase III  Phase I 
Phase II    
Phase III   
 
 
Probable  Phase I  
Phase II  Phase I 
Phase II    
Phase III  Phase I 
Phase II    
Phase III  Phase I 
Phase II    
Phase III  Phase I 
Phase II    
Phase III   
 
 
Definitive  Phase I 
Phase II  Phase I 
Phase II    
Phase III  Phase I 
Phase II    
Phase III  Phase I 
Phase II    
Phase III  Phase I 
Phase II    
Phase III   
 
 
 
 5.0 Human Subjects Protection  
 5.1 Rationale for use in children - Presently there is no standard 
treatment in children for tumors limited to peritoneal or 
retroperitoneal metastasis. In combination with other intravenous 
agents cisplatin has shown activity against various refractory, 
solid,  pediatric tumors.  In the treatment of many recurrent solid 
tumors, cisplatin is utilized as part of the intravenous regimen.  Its use in HIPEC in adults has been promising. The PI has 
experience with this procedure in children and is the only one 
who wil l be performing the HIPEC procedure.  
 
 5.2 Informed Consent Benefits, Risks, Discomforts and Alternatives  
 5.2.1  Consent and Assent --  The investigational nature and 
objectives of this trial, the procedures involved and the attendant risks, discomforts, p otential benefits and 
potential alternative therapies will be carefully explained to the adult patient (>/=18 year old) or to the parent and 
when appropriate, the child, prior to treatment and prior to 
obtaining a signed informed consent as well as assent 
from the child. These discussions will take place in the 
clinic setting as well as the hospital. During the initial 
consultation, the parents are presented a forthright and 
detailed overview of the experimental nature of the 
procedure, its theoretical advantages and disadvantages 
Page 15 of 21 
 
                                                                                                                   2009-0528  
                                                                                                                                          Dr. Hayes -Jordan    
                                                                                                                  14 Nov.  2013 
and an overview of the operative procedure and 
anticipated convalescence. The fact that the patient must 
undergo an operative procedure in order to receive 
therapy, without any assurance of benefit, the aggressive 
nature of the treatment and the likelihood of serious or 
potentially life threatening complications are presented. 
The adult patient (>/=18 year old) and/or parents will be 
informed that this therapy could make the patient or the 
child extremely ill and the risks of experi encing short or 
long term adverse effects from this treatment are high. The adult patient (>/=18 year old) and/or family is asked to 
review the informed consent document, encouraged to 
make notes, and a follow up discussion is scheduled either 
by phone or in person with the physician or nurse 
investigator and any additional questions will be answered 
prior to considering treatment on this protocol. At the time 
of consent and again the day of surgery, the family is reassured that participation in the trial i s entirely voluntary 
and that they can withdraw or decide against treatment at any time without adverse consequences. Signed consent 
will be verified by the surgeon responsible for the care of 
the patient.  A child life advocate will be a part of the 
informed consent process when the patient is a child.   
 5.2.2  Risks and Benefits - The potential benefit to a patient 
undergoing this therapy would be palliation in terms of preventing or delaying intr a-abdominal tumor progression, 
which can be a devastating an d painful source of 
symptoms and cause for demise. In addition, significant 
tumor  response may extend survival. The risks of this 
protocol include those inherent t o extensive abdominal 
surgery. This includes postoperative bleeding, wound 
infection, intra- abdominal abscess, wound dehiscence, 
enterocutaneous fistula, anesthetic complications and 
postoperative death. Also, toxicities of cisplatin ther apy 
place the patient at risk. In addition, in the case of intra-
abdominal  catastrophe, patients may require re- operation.   
 5.2.3  Alternatives - Children dying of extensive peritoneal, 
retroperitoneal disease, or carcinomatosis, suffer with 
recurrent bowel obstructions, nausea, vomiting, abdominal 
pain, inability to pass stool, poor appetite and in late 
stages refractory ascites. Because there is presently no 
other treatment alternatives offered in this clinical scenario, 
aggressive treatment as a means of palliation and survival 
benefit, are justified.  There have been many phase I and 
II trials in adults in whic h long term remissions after HIPEC 
in patients who were otherwise terminal, have been realized. Patients will be informed of other experimental 
chemotherapy options available.  
 
Page 16 of 21 
 
                                                                                                                   2009-0528  
                                                                                                                                          Dr. Hayes -Jordan    
                                                                                                                  14 Nov.  2013 
 6.0 Pharmaceutical Information 
 6.1 Cisplatin (cisplatin)  
 6.1.1  General  
Cisplatin will be purchased from the Pharmacy for the use 
in this trial. Commercial supply of FDA approved Cisplatin 
will be used. For drug information: Cisplatin Aqueous 
formulation 1mg/ml concentration (Various Vendors). Lot 
numbers will be tracked per drug accountability 
requirements.  It will be purchased by an institutional grant 
for this protocol.  
 6.1.2  Stability and Storage  
Cisplatin is stable at controlled room temperature 15° - 
25°C protected from light and 7 days under fluorescent 
room light. Further dilution at 0.05 or 0.5 mg/mL with 0.9% 
sodium chlorine injection (NS), USP, yields a solution that 
is stable for at least  24 Hours at room temperature. Intact 
vials in reconstituted solution should be maintained at 
room temperature.  Do not refrigerate and protect 
unopened container  from light.  
 6.1.3  Preparation  
The total dose of cisplatin will be injected into a bag of 
0.9% sodium chloride for injection, USP, to make 500 mL 
of final volume ( + 10%) prior to administration.  
 6.1.4  Administration  
Cisplatin  100 mg/ M2 {up to 130 mg/M2 maximum dose} (in 
500 mL) will be added to a stable perfusi on system . 
 6.1.5  Toxicities  
Cisplatin  produces renal tubular toxicity’s associated with 
renal insufficiency and electrolyte, (i.e. magnesium, potassium, calcium, phosphate, carbon dioxide) wasting 
which may result in significant hypomagnesaemia and 
hypokalemia. Neurotoxicity manifests as both sensory and 
motor peripheral neuropathies. Cisplatin is also toxic to the 8
th cranial nerve producing ototoxicity which consists of 
primarily deficits in high frequency auditory acuity, but may include vestibular abnormalities. Systemic administration 
of cisplatin at doses similar to those planned in this study 
is associa ted with significant nausea and     
thrombocytopenia. Transient moderate elevations of 
hepatic transaminases and acute systemic allergic 
reaction including anaphylaxis may also occur. The prior 
phase I study of HIPEC with heated cisplatin has not 
identified any regional intraperitoneal toxicity from cisplatin and the dose to be used is 100 mg/ M
2. The heat may 
cause a prolonged gastroparesis . 
 
 
 
Page 17 of 21 
 
                                                                                                                   2009-0528  
                                                                                                                                          Dr. Hayes -Jordan    
                                                                                                                  14 Nov.  2013 
 
 6.2 Sodium Thiosulfate  
 6.2.1  Formulation  
Sodium thiosulfate injection, USP, is commercially 
available as a sterile nonpyrogenic solution of sodium 
thiosulfate dissolved in water for injection, USP, at 
concentrations of 10% (100 mg/mL) at 25% (250 mg/mL) . 
The commercial formulation may also contai n boric acid 
and sodium hydroxide to adjust the pH to 8.5 – 9.0.   
 
 6.2.2  Stability and Storage  
Manufacturer’s expiration date is present on the 
commercial formulation.   
 
 6.2.3  Preparation  
A loading dose of 7.5 gm/M2 (maximum 12.5 gm) of 
sodium thiosulfate will be diluted in 20 mL/kg of  0.9% 
normal saline up to 500 mL. An additional dose of sodium 
thiosulfate 1.275 gm/M2/hr for 12 hours will be diluted in 
0.9% normal saline for maintenance infusion.   
 
 6.2.4  Administration  
  Sodium thiosulfate w ill be administered by a loading dose 
and then a 12 hour continuous intravenous infusion .  A 
loading dose of 7.5 gm/ M2 (maximum 12.5  gm) of sodium 
thiosulfate will be diluted in 20 mL/kg of 0.9% normal 
saline up to 500 mL. This loading dose will be infused over 
20 minutes beginning 30 minutes  (+ 15 minutes ) after the 
addition of cisplatin to the peritoneal perfusion circuit. Then 
maintenance infusion of sodium thiosulfate 1.275 gm/  
M2/hr for 12 hours will  be delivered by infusion pump.   
 
 6.2.5  Toxicities  
Other than osmotic disturbances, sodium thiosulfat e is well 
tolerated in humans. Large orally administered doses are associated with a cathartic effect. In preclinical studies in 
dogs continuous intravenous administration  of sodium 
thiosulfate has produced hypokalemia  presumably due to 
an osmotic diuretic effect.   
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 18 of 21 
 
                                                                                                                   2009-0528  
                                                                                                                                          Dr. Hayes -Jordan    
                                                                                                                  14 Nov.  2013 
 
Appendix 1 
                                     Clinical and Laboratory Follow up 
 Eval.  
days  Baseline 
(Pre-op) D1       
 D2 D3 D4 D5 D11 D14 D30 3mo 6mo 
Labs/  
Tests              
Hb  X X X X X X X X X X X 
Hct  X X X X X X X X X X X 
Plt  X X X X X X X X X X X 
Na  X X X X X X X X X X X 
K  X X X X X X X X X X X 
Cl  X X X X X X X X X X X 
CO 2  X X X X X X X X X X X 
BUN   X X X X X X X X X X X 
Cr   X X X X X X X X X X X 
Mg++   X X X X X X X X X X X 
Ca++   X X X X X X X X X X X 
Alb  X X X X X X X X X X X 
PO 4  X X X X X X X X X X X 
AST  X X X X X X X X X X X 
ALT  X X X X X X X X X X X 
Alk 
Phos   X X X X X X X X X X X 
PT/PTT   X           
TB  X X X X X X X X X X X 
Amy  X X X X X X X X X X X 
PE  X X X X X X X X X X X 
ECG   X           
Echo   X           
CT scan   X*         X X 
MRI  X*         X X 
Audio   X        X   
AE  X X X X X X X X X X X 
PK   X          
Preg.   X           
24-hr 
UCr  X**           
*Choose one or both as clinically indicated. May include PET -CT. TB=total bilirubin, Audio=audiology, 
AE advers e events evaluation, PK=  pharmacokinetic cisplatin level at 24 hours, Preg.=pregnancy test 
(blood or urine), Alb=Albumin , D=post op day  
**24 hour urine collection for creatinine clearance calculation for children <5 years old  
 
Optional PK Testing  
 0 (pre -perfusion)  30 min  60 min  90 min  24-hr (post -op) 
Blood  X X X X X  
Peritoneal Fluid  X X X X X 
 
 
Page 19 of 21 
 
                                                                                                                   2009-0528  
                                                                                                                                          Dr. Hayes -Jordan    
                                                                                                                  14 Nov.  2013 
 
 
References  
 
1. Daw NC, Kauffman WM, Bodner SM, Pratt CB, Hoffer FA, Patterns of abdominal 
relapse and role of sonography in Wilms’ tumor.  Pediatr Hematol Oncol 2002 Mar 
19 (2): 107 -115 
2. Dome JS, Liu T, Krasin M, Lott L, Shearer P, Daw NC, Billups CA, Wilimas JA, 
Improved survival for pati ents with recurrent Wilms ’ tumor: the experience at St 
Jude Children’s Research Hospital. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol 2002 Mar -Apr 24(3): 
192-198 
3. LaQuaglia MP, Brennan MF, The clinical approach to desmoplastic small round 
cell tumor. Surg Onc 2000, 9 (2): 77 -81 
4. La Quaglia MP, Heller G, Filippa DA, Karasakalides A, Vlamis V, Wollner N, Enker 
W, Cohen AM, Exelby PR, Prognostic factors and outcome in patients 21 years 
and under with colorectal carcinoma.  J Pediatr Surg 1992, Aug 27 (8): 1085- 1090  
5. Rescorl a FJ, Germ Cell Tumors. Semin Ped Surg 1997; 6: 29- 37 
6. Dedrick, R.L., Myers CE, Bungay PM, DeVita VTJr., Pharmacokinetic rationale for 
peritoneal drug administration in the treatment of ovarian cancer. Cancer Treat Rep 1978, 62: 1 -11 
7. Markman M, Reichman B, Hakes T, Curtin J, Jones W, Lewis JL, Barakat R, 
Rubin S, Mychalczak B, Saigo P, Almadrones L, Hoskins W, Intraperitoneal 
chemotherapy in the management of ovarian cancer.  Cancer 1993, 71:1565- 1570  
8. Park BJ, Alexander HR, Libutti SK, Wu P, R oyalty D, Kranda KC, Bartlett DL, 
Treatment of primary peritoneal mesothelioma by continuous hyperthermic peritoneal perfusion (HIPEC), Ann of Surg Onc 1999, 6 (6): 582- 590 
9. NIH/NCI 2810  
10. Alexander HR, Bartlett DL, Libutti SK, National Cancer Institut e experience with 
regional therapy for unresectable primary and metastatic cancer of the liver or 
peritoneal cavity.  Current Clinical Oncology 1999, Chapter 8, Humana Press Inc. 
Totowa, NJ  
11. Kaneko M, Tsuchida Y, Uchino J, Takeda T, Iwafuchi M, Ohnuma N , Mugishima 
H, Yokayama J, Nishihira H, Nakada K, Sasaki S, Sawada T, Kawa K, Nagahara 
N, Suita S, Sawaguchi S, Treatment results of advanced neuroblastoma with the 
first Japanese study group protocol.  J Pediatr Hem Onc 1999, 21(3): 190 -197 
12. Berthold F , Hero B, Breu H, Christainsen R, Erttmann R, Gnekow A, Hermann F, 
Klingebiel T, Lampert F, Muller -Weihrich St, Weinel P, The recurrence patterns of 
stages I, II and III neuroblastoma: Experience with 77 relapsing patients. Ann of Onc 1996, 7:183 -187 
13. DuBois SG, Kalika Y, Lukens JN, Brodeur GM, Seeger RC, Atkinson JB, Haase 
GM, Black T, Periz C, Shimada H, Berging R, Stram D, Matthay KK, Metastatic sites in stage IV and IVS neuroblastoma correlate with age tumor biology and 
survival. J Pediatr Hem Onc 1999, 21 (3): 181 -189 
14. Kushner BH, Wolden S, La Quaglia MP, Kramer K, Verbel D, Heller G, Cheung N -
K V, Hyperfractionated low dose radiotherapy for high -risk neuroblastoma after 
intensive chemotherapy and surgery.  2001, 19 (11): 2821 -2828  
Page 20 of 21 
 
                                                                                                                   2009-0528  
                                                                                                                                          Dr. Hayes -Jordan    
                                                                                                                  14 Nov.  2013 
15. Haas -Kogan DA, Fisch BM, Wara WM, Swift PS, Farmer DL, Harrison MR, 
Albanese C, Weinberg V, Matthay KK, Intraoperative radiation therapy  for high- risk 
pediatric neuroblastoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2000 Jul 1;47 (4):985- 992 
16. Leavey PJ, Odom LF, Poole M, Mc Neely L, Tyson RW, Haase GM, Intra- operative 
radiation thera py in pediatric neuroblastoma. Med Pediatr Oncol. 1997 Jun 28(6): 
424-428 
17. Hale GA, Marina NM, Jones -Wallace C, Greenwald CA Jenkins JJ, Rao BN, Luo 
S, Hudson MM, Late effects of treatment for germ cell tumors during childhood 
and adolescence.  J Pediatr Hematol Oncol 1999 Mar -Apr; 21 (2): 115- 122 
18. Densmore TL, Langer JC, Molleston JP, Dehner LP, Coffin CM, Colorectal 
adenocarcinoma as a second malignant neoplasm following Wilms’ tumor and 
rhabdomyosarcoma. Med Ped Onc 1996, 27: 556- 560  
19. Sugarbaker PH, Cunliffe WJ, Belliveau J, DeBruihn EA, Graves T, Mulins RE, 
Schlag P. Rationale for integrating early post operative intraperitoneal 
chemotherapy into the surgical treatment of gastrointesti nal cancer. Semin Oncol 
1989, 16:83- 97 
20. Fujimoto S, Shrestha RD Kolkuban M et al Positive results of combined therapy of 
surgery and intraperitoneal hyperthermic perfusion for far -advanced gastric 
cancer, Ann Surg 1990; 212:592- 596 
21. Fujimura T, Yonem ura Y, Muraoka K, Takamur H, Hirono Y, Sahara H, Ninomiya I, 
Matsumoto H, Tsugawa K, Nishimura G, Sugiyama K, Miwa K, Itsuo M, 
Continuous hyperthermic peritoneal perfusion for the prevention of peritoneal 
recurrence of gastric cancer: randomized controlled study.  World J Surg 1994; 18: 
150-155 
22. B. H. Kushner, M. P. LaQuaglia, N. Wollner, et al., “Desmoplastic small round- cell 
tumor: prolonged progression- free survival with aggressive multimodality therapy,” 
Journal of Clinical Oncology, vol. 14, no. 5, pp. 1526– 1531, 1996.  
23. Peter F. Thall, Leiko H. Wooten, and Nizar M. Tannir. Monitoring Event    
      Times in Early Phase Clinical Trials: Some Practical Issues, Clinical Trials 2,  
      467 -478 (2005).  
Page 21 of 21 
 