IRB-HSR# 13789: Effect of Metformin on Sensitivity of the GnRH Pul se Generator to Suppression by 
Estradiol and Progesterone in Hyperandrogenic Adolescent Girls  
 
Page 1 of 47 
Version Date: 1 2/14/2015 IRB-HSR PROTOCOL  
Investigator Agreement  
 
BY SIGNING THIS DOCUMENT, THE INVESTIGATOR CONFIRMS:  
1. I am not currently debarred by the US FDA from involvement in clinical research studies.  
2. I am not involved in any regulatory or misconduct litigation or investiga tion by the FDA.  
3. That if this study involves any funding or resources from an outside source, or if you will be sharing data 
outside of UVA prior to publication that you will contact the Dean’s office regarding the need for a contract 
and letter of indemni fication.  If it is determined that either a contract or letter of indemnification is needed, 
subjects cannot be enrolled until these documents are complete.  
4. The proposed research project will be conducted by me or under my close supervision.  It will be c onducted 
in accordance with the protocol submitt ed to and approved by the IRB including any modifications, 
amendments or addendums submitted and approved by the IRB throughout the life of the protocol.  
5. That no personnel will be allowed to work on this protocol until they have completed the IRB -HSR On -line 
training and the IRB -HSR has been notified.  
6. That all personnel working on this protocol will follow all IRB -HSR Policies and Procedures as stated on 
the IRB -HSR Website http://www.virginia.edu/vprgs/irb/ and on the School of Medicine Clinical Trials 
Office Website:  http://knowledgelink.healthsystem.virginia .edu/intranet/hes/cto/sops/sop_index.cfm  
7. I will ensure that all those delegated tasks relating to this study, whether explicitly or implicitly, are capable 
through expertise, training , experience or credentialing  to undertake those tasks.   
8. I confirm tha t the implications of the study have been discussed with all Departments that might be affected 
by it and have obtained their agreement for the study to take place.  
9. That no subjects will be recruited or entered under the protocol until the Investigator ha s received the signed 
IRB-HSR Approval form stating the protocol is open to enrollment  
10. That any materials used to recruit subjects will be approved by the IRB -HSR prior to use.  
11. That all subjects will sign a copy of the most current consent form that has a  non- expired IRB -HSR 
approval stamp. 
12. That any modifications of the protocol or consent form will not be initiated without prior written approval 
from the IRB -HSR, except when necessary to eliminate immediate hazards to the subjects.  
13. Any significant finding s that become known in the course of the research that might affect the willingness 
of subjects to enroll or to continue to take part, will be promptly reported to the IRB.   
14. I will report immediately to the IRB any unanticipated problems involving risk to  subjects or to others 
including adverse reactions to biologics, drugs or medical devices.   
15. That any serious deviation from the protocol will be reported promptly to the Board in writing.  
16. That any data breach will be reported to the  IRB, the UVa Corporat e Compliance and Privacy Office , UVa 
Police as applicable.  
17. That the continuation status report for this protocol will be completed and returned within the time limit 
stated on the form. 
18. That the IRB -HSR office will be notified within 30 days of a change in the Principal Investigator or of the 
closure of this study.  
19. That a new PI will be assigned if the current PI will not be at UVA for an extended period of time.  If the 
current PI is leaving UVa permanently, a new PI will be assigned PRIOR to the departu re of the current PI.  
20. All study team members will have access to the current protocol and other applicable documents such as the 
IRB-HSR Application, consent forms and Investigator Brochures.  
IRB-HSR# 13789: Effect of Metformin on Sensitivity of the GnRH Pul se Generator to Suppression by 
Estradiol and Progesterone in Hyperandrogenic Adolescent Girls  
 
Page 2 of 47 
Version Date: 1 2/14/2015 21. Signed consent forms and other research records will be retaine d in a confidential manner.  Records will be 
kept at least 6 years after completion of the study.  
22. No data/specimens may be taken from UVa without a signed Material Transfer Agreement between 
OSP/SOM Grants and Contracts Office and the new institution.  Or iginal study files are considered 
institutional records and may not be transferred to another institution. I will notify my department 
administration regarding where the originals will be kept at UVa.  The material transfer agreement will 
delineate what co pies of data, health information and/or specimens may be taken outside of UVa.  It will 
also approve which HIPAA identifiers may be taken outside of UVa with the health information or 
specimens.  
23. If any member of study team leaves UVa, they are STRONGLY ENC OURAGED to use Exit Checklist 
found on IRB -HSR website at http://www.virginia.edu/provost/facultyexit.pdf . 
 
 The IRB reserves the right to terminate this study at any time if, in its opinion, (1) the risks of further 
experimentation are prohibitive, or (2) the above agreement is breached.  
 
Investigators Experience 
 
The PI is a board certified general pediatrician and fellowship- trained board eligible pediatric endocrinologist 
who has been worki ng with children clinically for the last 10 years. The PI has performed clinical research as a 
medical student, as a pediatric endocrinology fellow, and as a UVA faculty member (Department of Pediatrics, 
Division of Endocrinology). The PI has been actively  involved in the current clinical research protocols of Dr. 
John Marshall studying the early manifestations and abnormalities of PCOS in pubertal girls. All sub -
investigators have experience via participation in the pediatric protocols of the adolescent PC OS research group 
within the UVA Center for Research in Reproduction led by Drs. John Marshall and Chris McCartney.  
 
Signatures  
 
Principal Investigator  
 
____________________________ ____________________________ _______ 
Principal Investigator  Principal Inv estigator  Date  
Signature  Name Printed  
 
Department Chair 
BY SIGNING THIS DOCUMENT THE DEPARTMENT CHAIR AGREES:  
1. To work with the investigator and with the board as needed, to maintain compliance with this 
agreement.  
2. That the Principal Investigator is qualified to perform this study.  
3. That the protocol is scientifically relevant and sound. 
 
___________________________ _______________________  _________ 
Department Chair or Designee  Department Chair or Designee  Date  
Signature  Name Printed   
 
The person signing as  the Department Chair cannot be the Principal Investigator or a sub- investigator on this 
protocol. 
IRB-HSR# 13789: Effect of Metformin on Sensitivity of the GnRH Pul se Generator to Suppression by 
Estradiol and Progesterone in Hyperandrogenic Adolescent Girls  
 
Page 3 of 47 
Version Date: 1 2/14/2015 The Department Chair or Designee signature is ONLY required if this is a new protocol or a modification 
changing the Principal Investigator  
 
 
Brief Summary/A bstract  
 
Women with PCOS have decreased GnRH pulse generator sensitivity to suppression by estradiol and 
progesterone.  Adolescent hyperandrogenemia is thought to be a precursor of adult PCOS.  In previous studies, 
while some hyperandrogenic girls have decreased hypothalamic sensitivity to progesterone similar to their adult 
counterparts with PCOS, others maintain normal hypothalamic progesterone sensitivity.  The girls with 
decreased hypothalamic progesterone sensitivity have higher fasting insulin levels despite similar BMIs, 
suggesting that hyperinsulinemia may in part mediate the reduction in sensitivity.  We hypothesize that 
metformin will improve hypothalamic progesterone  sensitivity in hyperandrogenic adolescent  
girls by improving insulin sensitivity  and lowering insulin levels.  LH (GnRH) pulse frequency will be assessed 
before and after 7 days of oral estradiol and progesterone in hyperandrogenic adolescent girls both before and 
after 3 months treatment with Metformin 1000 mg BID.  P rogesterone adju sted change in 11 -hour LH pulse 
frequency will be used as the measure of hypothalamic progesterone sensitivity.   
 
Background  
 
Etiology of PCOS 
 
Polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS) is a common clinical disorder affecting 6 -7% of reproductive aged 
women.  PC OS is associated with hyperandrogenism, multiple ovarian cysts, and oligo-  or amenorrhea (Stein 
and Leventhal 1935). It is also a leading cause of infertility.  The etiology for PCOS has not yet been elucidated.  
It has been proposed that hyperinsulinemia, altered ovarian steroidogenesis, and neuroendocrine abnormalities 
may play key roles either alone or in combination.   
  
Neuroendocrine Abnormalities in PCOS  
 
Neuroendocrine abnormalities, whether primary or secondary, play an important role in PCOS.  A g roup of 
neurons collectively known as the GnRH pulse generator control the pulsatile secretion of GnRH (gonadotropin 
releasing hormone) from the hypothalamus.  GnRH, in turn, controls the synthesis and secretion of luteinizing 
hormone (LH) and follicle sti mulating hormone (FSH) from the pituitary gland.   LH and FSH are both made by 
the same gonadotrope cell, and which hormone is preferentially synthesized and secreted depends in part on the 
GnRH pulse frequency.  In primates, a GnRH pulse frequency of 1 pulse per hour favors secretion of LH, 
whereas slower pulses, on the order of 1 pulse every three hours, favor release of FSH  
(Wildt 1981). In normally cycling women, the GnRH pulse frequency in the follicular phase is relatively fast, 
favoring LH secretion .  Following the rise in estrogen and progesterone after ovulation, there is a slowing of 
GnRH pulse frequency, resulting in a decrease in LH and increase in FSH synthesis, which is important for 
subsequent follicular development.  Physiologic doses of exogenous progesterone have been shown to slow LH, 
and by inference GnRH, pulsatility when given during the follicular phase (Soules et al 1984).  Therefore, 
progesterone plays an important role in regulating the GnRH pulse generator.    
IRB-HSR# 13789: Effect of Metformin on Sensitivity of the GnRH Pul se Generator to Suppression by 
Estradiol and Progesterone in Hyperandrogenic Adolescent Girls  
 
Page 4 of 47 
Version Date: 1 2/14/2015  
PCOS is characterized by persistently rapid LH (GnRH) pulse frequency without the cyclic luteal phase slowing 
seen in ovulatory women.  Our group has shown that w omen with PCOS have reduc ed hypothalamic sensitivity 
to progesterone  mediated suppression of LH (GnRH) pulsatility  compared to ovulatory controls (Pastor et al 
1998).  Thus, they re quire higher plasma progesterone  concentrations to achieve the same degree of GnRH 
suppression seen in controls .  Especially when coupled to the fact that women with PCOS generally  have low  
levels of progesterone  secondary to infrequent ovulation, this relative insensitivity contributes to the persistently 
rapid GnRH pulsatility characteristic of PCOS.  The resultant increase in LH leads to augmented ovarian 
androgen production, while the re sultant decrease in FSH leads to impaired follicular development and 
anovulation.  Androgens play an important r ole in mediating hypothalamic progesterone insensitivity, as 
progesterone  sensitivity can be restored in women with PCOS with the use of the androgen blocker flutamide 
(Eagleson et al 2000).  In adult women, short term treatment with the insulin sensitizer Metformin does not 
normalize hypothalamic progesterone sensitivity (Eagleson et al, 2003).   
 
Adolescent Hyperandrogenemia as a Precursor for P COS  
 
Excess androgen production during adolescence is thought to be a precursor of adult PCOS.  Women with 
PCOS often report a history of irregular menstrual cycles during adolescence.  A study of girls with menstrual 
irregularities showed that while some subjects normalized endocrine function as they mature, the majority 
maintained hyperandrogenism along with the elevated LH levels and polycystic ovaries characteristic of PCOS 
(Venturoli et al. 1987).  Adolescent hyperandrogenemia has also been shown to be  associated with higher 
androgen levels and lower fertility rates in adulthood (Apter and Vihko 1990).  
 
Similar to women with PCOS, girls with hyperandrogenemia have an increased frequency of LH pulses when 
compared to age matched controls (Apter et al. 1 994). An ongoing study by our group (IRB -HSR# 8588) is 
investigating whether the progesterone insensitivity of the GnRH pulse generator in adult women with PCOS is 
also seen in adolescent girls with hyperandrogenemia.  Analysis of the data to date suggests  that overall the 
hyperandrogenic adolescent girls have decreased hypothalamic progesterone sensitivity when compared to 
adolescent controls.  However, one subgroup of the hyperandrogenic girls have marked progesterone 
insensitivity similar to that seen in  adult women with PCOS, while another subgroup retains relatively normal 
hypothalamic progesterone sensitivity despite similarly elevated androgen levels.  In an effort to understand the 
factors that may make some girls more susceptible to the adverse neur oendocrine consequences of 
hyperandrogenemia, we have analyzed the differences between these two subgroups.  Fasting insulin levels 
were higher in t he progesterone -insensitive group than in the progesterone -sensitive group (31.2+ 3.3 vs. 
20.9+ 3.7 uIU/ml, p= 0.02) despite similar BMIs (33 +4 vs. 34+ 2 kg/m2). This suggests that h yperinsulinemia 
may have neuroendocrine actions during adolescence that are not present in adults. Alternatively, these findings 
may indicate differential sensitivity to the adverse effe cts of androgens on both hypothalamic P sensitivity and 
insulin resistance.  
 
A better understanding of the factors that make adolescent girls more or less susceptible to the adverse 
neuroendocrine effects of elevated androgens will hopefully lead to improved prevention and treatment 
strategies for PCOS.  In this study, we propose to explore the role of hyperinsulinemia on neuroendocrine 
function in hyperandrogenic adolescent girls by assessing the effect of the insulin sensitizer Metformin on 
hypothalamic p rogesterone sensitivity.  Other differences between the progesterone sensitive and progesterone 
insensitive subgroups, including racial and ethnic differences between the two populations and a trend towards 
IRB-HSR# 13789: Effect of Metformin on Sensitivity of the GnRH Pul se Generator to Suppression by 
Estradiol and Progesterone in Hyperandrogenic Adolescent Girls  
 
Page 5 of 47 
Version Date: 1 2/14/2015 older gynecologic age in the progesterone insensi tive population, are being pursued through other ongoing 
studies (IRB -HSR# 8588 and 12160).   
 
 
Hypothesis to be Tested  
 
We hypothesize that metformin will improve  the sensitivity of the GnRH pulse generator to suppression by 
estradiol and progesterone in hyp erandrogenic adolescent girls.   LH pulse frequency will be assessed before and 
after 7 days of oral estradiol and progesterone both before and after treatment with metformin. The primary 
linear contrast will compare the progesterone adjusted change in 1 1-hour LH pulse frequency between the 1st 
and the 2nd admissions (Δ (2-1)) (pre -metformin) to the progesterone adjusted change in the 11- hour LH pulse 
frequency between the 3rd and the 4th admissions (Δ (4-3)) (post -metformin) . 
 
Study Design: Biomedical  
1.  Will controls  be used?  Yes.  
 
►IF YES, explain the kind of controls to be used. 
The subject will serve as her own control, as assessments will be made both before and after Metformin.  
 
2. What is the study design? This study is not blinded. 
 
3. Does the study involve a placebo? No.  
Human Participants  
Ages  10-17 years  
Sex Female  
Race  All races will be recruited and enrolled.  
Subjects - see below  
1.  Provide target # of subjects (at all sites) needed to complete protocol .30 
 
2.  Describe expected rate of screen fail ure/ dropouts/withdrawals from all sites.   
     In a similar study (JCM010), we have historically obtained complete, usable data in approximately 65% of 
the subjects who enrolled in the study.  However, that study was shorter in duration and did not invol ve taking 
metformin.  Because of the added length of this study, as well as the possibility that some participants may 
develop side effects with Metformin (most likely nausea or diarrhea) and choose to withdraw, we suspect that 
the screen failure/dropout/w ithdrawal rate will approach 50%.  Therefore, we plan to enroll 60 subjects, with a 
goal of obtaining complete, usable data in 30.   
 
3.  How many subjects will be enrolled at all sites?   60 
 
4.  How many subjects will sign a consent form under this UVa p rotocol?    60  
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
 
IRB-HSR# 13789: Effect of Metformin on Sensitivity of the GnRH Pul se Generator to Suppression by 
Estradiol and Progesterone in Hyperandrogenic Adolescent Girls  
 
Page 6 of 47 
Version Date: 1 2/14/2015 1.  List the criteria for inclusion   
• Girls ages 10  to 17  
• Hyperandrogenemic (free testosterone greater than 2 standard deviations above the mean for normal 
control subjects of the same Tanner Stage  and/or hirsuti sm) 
• Creatinine clearance > 90 ml/min as calculated by the Cockcroft -Gault equation  
• Hemoglobin ≥  11.0 g/dL  for African American subjects; Hemoglobin ≥ 11.5 for non- African American 
subjects  
• Normal screening labs (with exception of the expected hormonal abnormalities inherent in 
hyperandrogenemia)  
• Sexually active subjects must agree to abstain or use double barrier contraception during the study  
• Subjects must agree not to take any other medications during the course of the study without approval 
by the study investigators. 
 
2.  List the criteria for exclusion  
• Abnormal screening labs (with the exceptio n of the expected hormonal abnormalities inherent in 
hyperandrogenemia)  
• Creatinine clearance less than 90 ml/min as calculated by Cockcroft -Gault equation 
• Hemoglobin <11.5 g/dL for non- African American subjects; Hemoglobin < 11.0 g/dL for African 
American subjects  
• Abnormal liver function tests (including AST, ALT, Bilirubin, Albumin, and Alkaline Phosphatase)  
• Weight < 34 kg  
• History of renal dysfunction, liver dysfunction, congestive heart failure, deep venous thrombosis, breast 
cancer, endometrial cancer, o r cervical cancer  
• Pregnant or breast feeding  
• On medications known to affect the reproductive axis  within 3 months of the study (including oral 
contraceptive pills, metformin, and spironolactone)  
• Are currently participating in another study or have been in one in the last 30 days.  
• Subjects using restricted medication (see restrictions below) are excluded unless the subject’s primary 
care provider approves stopping the medication. 
 
 
3.  List any restrictions on use of other drugs or treatments .    
  Subjects  must not take  medications known to affect the reproductive axis (including oral 
contraceptives, metformin, and spironolactone) for 90 days prior to and during  the study.   
 
Subjects must not take medications that have the potential to increase metformin b lood concentration 
(including cationic drugs such as amiloride, digoxin, morphine, procainamide, quinidine, quinine, ranitidine , 
triamterene, trimethoprim, vancomycin  which are eliminated by renal tubular secretion have the potential for 
interaction with metformin by competing for common renal tubular transport systems; cimetidine, which 
increases (by 60%) peak metformin blood concentr ations; furosemide which can increase metformin blood 
concentration without altering metformin renal clearance; and nifedipi ne, which can increase metformin 
absorption).  Subjects should limit their intake of alcohol.  
 
IRB-HSR# 13789: Effect of Metformin on Sensitivity of the GnRH Pul se Generator to Suppression by 
Estradiol and Progesterone in Hyperandrogenic Adolescent Girls  
 
Page 7 of 47 
Version Date: 1 2/14/2015 Statistical Considerations  
1. Is stratification/randomization involved? No.  
 
2.  What are the statistical considerations for the protocol?  
 
Sample Size Calculation .  The primary aim will be to compare the change in 11- hour LH pulse frequency 
between the 1st and the 2nd admissions (Δ (2-1)) to the change in the 11- hour LH pulse frequency between the 3rd 
and the 4th admissions (Δ (4-3)).  To perform the sample size calculation, we assumed that the linear contrast Δ (4-3) 
- Δ(2-1) will follow a normal distribution with standa rd deviation 1.02 units.  Base on the sample size formula for 
the paired one -sample standard normal z -test, our calculation indicates that if 30 subjects complete the study, 
we will have at least an 80% chance of detecting a 1.02 unit or greater difference  between Δ (4-3) and Δ (2-1) with 
the two sided type I error rate of the statistical test not exceeding 0.05.  
 
Our prior studies indicate that the subject dropout rate in this stud y population should not exceed 50%, so 60 
subjects will be enrolled to insure  that we have 30 completers.  
 
Statistical Analysis:  The 11- hour LH pulse frequency data from study admissions 1- 4, will be analyzed by 
way of a mixed -effects linear model.  The four 11 -hour LH pulse frequency measurements; one measurement 
from each admiss ion, will function as the respond data. The study admission will be treated as a categorical 
explanatory factor in the analysis, while the mean 11 -hour progesterone level from each admission will be 
treated as a continuous covariate.    Hypothesis testing will be conducted by constructing apriori defined within-
subject linear contrasts of the 11- hour LH pulse frequency measurements.  The primary linear contrast will 
compare the progesterone adjusted change in 11- hour LH pulse frequency between the 1st and t he 2nd 
admissions (Δ (2-1)) to the progesterone adjusted change in the 11- hour LH pulse frequency between the 3rd and 
the 4th admissions (Δ (4-3)). We will base our decision whether to reject the null hypothesis that Δ (4-3) - Δ(2-1)=0 on 
a two -sided p≤ 0.05 decision rule.   We will used the same decision rule to determine whether Δ (2-1)=0 and Δ (4-
3)=0.  The SAS PROC -MIX procedure (SAS Institute Inc., Cary NC) will be used to conduct the 
aforementioned data analysis.                
 
3.  Do you have an adequate sample  size, or is your sample size larger than necessary?  
We calculated that we will need a sample size of 60  subjects in this study  in order to achieve a statistical 
significance with a power of 80% and Type 1 error rate of 0.05.  Given the historical screen 
failure/dropout/with drawal rate for 8588/JCM010 of 35% and the additional demands of this study secondary to 
the addition of metformin , we anticipate a screen failure/dropout/withdrawal rate of around 50%.  Therefor e, we 
propose enrolling up to 60 girls with the goal of obtaini ng complete, analyzable data in 30 .  We believe this 
sample size is adequate and not excessive.   
 
4.  What is your plan for primary variable analysis? 
The primary linear contrast will compare the progesterone adjusted change in 11- hour LH pulse frequency 
between the 1st and the 2nd admissions (Δ (2-1)) to the progesterone adjusted change in the 11- hour LH pulse 
frequency between the 3rd and the 4th admissions (Δ (4-3)). 
 
5.  What is your plan for secondary variable analysis? Not applicable.  
6. Have you been working with a statistician  in designing this protocol? Yes.  
  
IF YES, what is their name?  Jim Patrie  
IRB-HSR# 13789: Effect of Metformin on Sensitivity of the GnRH Pul se Generator to Suppression by 
Estradiol and Progesterone in Hyperandrogenic Adolescent Girls  
 
Page 8 of 47 
Version Date: 1 2/14/2015  
 
 
Biomedical Research  
1.  What will be done in this protocol?    
 
All procedures performed in this protocol are being done solely to answer a research question and generate 
generalizable knowledge.  
 
Outpatient Consent  and Screening  
 After a potential subject is identified , we will arrange for her  to come to the CRU or alternate UVA 
clinical unit for an outpatient consent and screening exam.  The goals and procedures of the study wi ll be 
explained to the potential subject and her parents, and they will be given the opportunity to ask any questions.  
The potential subject and her parents will be asked to sign the assent and consent forms.  A physician w ill 
record a medical history and  perform a physical exam. Subjects will need to fast for a minimum of 8 hours prior 
to screening blood draw.  Blood will be drawn for screening te sts (CBC, Comprehensive metabolic panel , 
prolactin, LH, FSH, E 1, E2, P, total T, androstenedione, 17- OHP, DHEA -S, fasting insulin, Insulin- like Growth 
Factor 1 (IGF -1),  glucose, SHBG, TSH, hCG, cholesterol, LDL , HDL , and a number of cytokines and 
adipokines (including adiponectin, leptin, resistin, PAI -1, IL -1b, IL -6, IL -8, TNFa, MCP -1, HGF and NGF) .  In 
the rare event a subject has an  elevated 17 -OHP on screening , she will be given a  repeat 17 -OHP.  If the value 
remains elevated, she will be referred to her pediatrician for further testing to rule out congenital adrenal 
hyperplasia.  They will only be able to continue with the study if they have documented normal 17- OHP levels 
following  cortrosyn stimulation . Potential subjects must fall within the normal range on all blood tests to be 
admitted to the study, except for hyperandrogenemic girls who will be expected to have some abnormal 
hormone levels.  Subjects will be administered 1 month of iron supplementation following screening, provided 
their screening labs show they are eligible to participate in the study.  As soon as screening lab results are 
available, and  subjects are found to be eligible for study participation, subjects weighing ≤ 36 kg will be given 
1- 325 mg tablet a day and subjects weighing >36 kg will be give n 2- 325 mg tablets a day .  The first overnight 
admission may occur anytime within this 30 d ay period or after the 30 day period.  Subjects will be given the 
option to pick up this supply of iron in the Clinical Research Unit or have it mailed to them. 
 
If admission is scheduled to occur greater than one month after the most recent hemoglobin (su ch as that 
obtained during screening), a hemoglobin will be repeated 2- 5 days before the overnight admission.  
Documentation of hemoglobin ≥ 11.5 g/dL for non -African American subjects and documentation of 
hemoglobin ≥ 11.0 g/dL for African American subjects in the previous month is required for the frequent 
sampling protocol.  If overnight admission is scheduled to occur greater than 3 months after screening, then the 
safety labs (complete blood count, comprehensive metabolic panel) will be repeated at this time.  
 
Day 0:  Admission #1  
 
Note:  
• Admission #1 will occur on Day 7- 11 of the cycle in girls who are cycling with some regularity and on 
day ≥7 in those with infrequent cycles (girls with < 10 cycles per year) provided they have a 
progesterone level of < 1.5 ng/mL within 3 days of their scheduled first admission.  If the progesterone 
level is >1.5 ng/mL within 3 days of the first admission, the  first admission will be cancelled.  
IRB-HSR# 13789: Effect of Metformin on Sensitivity of the GnRH Pul se Generator to Suppression by 
Estradiol and Progesterone in Hyperandrogenic Adolescent Girls  
 
Page 9 of 47 
Version Date: 1 2/14/2015 • At each overnight admission a urine HCG will be done to rule out pregnancy and must be negative for 
the study to continue.   
 
Subjects will be instructed to eat a diet including at least 150 gm of carbohydrate a day for the 3 days preceding 
the admission.  Written and oral instructions regarding this diet will be given at the time of the screening. The 
subject will be admitted to the CRU, alternate UVA hospital unit, or off -site hotel at 1700 hr.  In general, parents 
are welcome to stay with their child at the off -site hotel if they wish.  If the overnight portion of the study is to be done at 
an off -site hotel, the subject may stay without a parent or legal guardian, as long as two CRU staff are present.  Whether 
or not a  parent needs to remain during the overnight admission will be discussed when the visit is scheduled. A small 
amount of topical lidocaine/prilocaine cream (EMLA cream) may be applied to facilitate IV line placement..   If 
IV placement is found to be difficult, the IV team may be called to assist in obtaining adequate access.  
Frequent blood draws will begin at 1900 hr.  Samples will be taken every 10 minutes.  Most samples will be 
0.75 mL, used to analyze levels of FSH and LH.  2.5 mL  samples will be taken every 2 hours to analyze levels 
of estradiol, progesterone , testosterone , cortisol and DHEA   An additional 5 mL sample at 6 AM will be 
analyzed for  lipids, estro ne, SHBG , DHEA- S, androstenedione , IGF -1, and a number of cytokines and 
adipokines, including adiponectin, leptin, resistin, PAI -1, IL -1b, IL -6, IL -8, TNFa, MCP -1, HGF and NGF.  A 
formal "lights out" will occur at 2300 hr so that we may obser ve any nocturnal  changes in hormonal  secretion  
patterns. During the admission, the subject will wear a wrist a ctigraph (Motionlogger Basic -L; Ambulatory 
Monitoring, Inc.) to estimate periods of sleep (Motionlogger Basic -L; Ambulatory Monitoring, Inc.). The 
Motionlogger Basic -L is a watch -like device that includes an accelerometer.  Q10 minute blood sampling wil l 
end at 0600 hr, although one additional Q2H sample will be  draw n at 0700 hr. At 07:00 hr, the subject will also 
undergo a 2- hour oral glucose tolerance test.  75 grams of glucose will be administered at 07:00 (Time 0), with 
2.5 ml blood draws for glucose, insulin, and c -peptide at times 0, 10, 20, 30, 60, 90, and 120 minutes. The  
subject will be offered dinner at standard CRU meal time and will be offered breakfast following completion of 
the blood draws.  They will not have anything to eat or drink except wa ter from 2300 hr until the completion of 
the blood draws . At the time of discharge, the subjects will be given oral estrogen, progesterone, and iron 
supplements.   
 
Day 1: Begin Estradiol and Progesterone  
Starting the day of discharge from the first inpatient admission, subjects will be given oral estrogen (estrace, 
0.5-1 mg once a day) and oral progesterone suspension (20 mg/ml, 25- 100 mg) three times a day at 0700, 1500, 
and 2300 hr  for seven days. The first dose will be given at 1500 on the day of discha rge. If the 1500 dose is 
incompatible with school schedules, alternative dosing schedules can be arranged.  Generally this will entail 
taking the afternoon dose immediately upon returning home from school without any change in the morning and 
evening dosing times.  Dosages will be based on weight.  The target mean plasma progesterone concentration is 
2-8 ng/dL. Each subject will be instructed to eat a  small snack with the progesterone syrup as i t has been 
observed that the absorption of progesterone is infl uenced by the presence or absence of food.  
 
Subjects will also be given oral iron supplementation at a dose of 1 -2 mg /kg. Subjects  will be given iron tablets  
(which contains 27 -  65 mg elemental iron) with proper dose instructions.  Subjects weighing ≤ 36 kg will be 
given 1 tablet a day and subjects weighing >36 kg will be give n 2 tablets a day  to be taken for the duration of 
the study.   
 
Day 3 an d Day 5: Outpatient blood draws  
On study days 3 subjects will have blood drawn at 1700 hr (two hours after the  1500 hr progesterone dose to 
check serum estrogen, peak progesterone levels, and hemoglobin.  On study day 5, subjects will have blood 
IRB-HSR# 13789: Effect of Metformin on Sensitivity of the GnRH Pul se Generator to Suppression by 
Estradiol and Progesterone in Hyperandrogenic Adolescent Girls  
 
Page 10 of 47 
Version Date: 1 2/14/2015 drawn  at 1700 hr (two hours after the  1500 hr  progesterone dose ) to check serum estrogen and peak 
progesterone levels. 
 
 
Day 7: Second inpatient admission  
The second inpatient admission will begin on day 7. The procedure will be identical to the first inpatient 
admission  until 07:00 hr.  An OGTT will not be done during this admission; however, a fasting glucose and 
insulin will be drawn at this time and then the admission will end at 07:00 hr . Subjects will be required to bring 
any unused estrogen and progesterone (or the empty bottles) to the admission.  S ubjects will discontinue the 
estradiol and progesterone  after the com pletion of the second inpatient admis sion, but will continue taking iron 
supplementation.  At the time of discharge, subjects will be given Metformin.  
 
Day 8: Begin Metformin  
Starting the day of discharge from Admission #2, subjects will begin taking Metformin 500 mg daily.  
 
Day 14: Increase Metformin dose 
 On Day 14 , the dose of Metformin will be increased to 500 mg twice a day.   The subjects will be 
contacted by phone to inquire regarding adverse events related to the metformin and to remind them to incr ease 
the dose of the medication.   
 
Day 21: Increase Metformin dose 
 On Day 21 , the dose of Metformin will be increased to 1000 mg in the morning and 500 mg at night.  
The subjects will be contacted by phone to inquire regarding adverse events related to t he metformin and to 
remind them to increase the dose of the medication.   
 
Day 28: Increase Metformin dose 
 On Day 28 , the dose of Metformin will be increased to 1000 mg twice a day.  The subjects will be 
contacted by phone to inquire regarding adverse eve nts related to the metformin and to remind them to increase 
the dose of the medication.   
 
Day 42- 49: Outpatient blood draw  
Girls will come in after an overnight (>8 hour) fast and have blood drawn for testosterone, SHBG, 
fasting insulin, fasting glucose, and comprehensive metabolic panel.  
 
Day 84: Admission #3  
 
Note:  Admission #3 is timed to the subject’s cycles, and therefore is unlikely to occur exactly on Day 84.  All 
girls will take at least 11 weeks (77 days) of Metformin and will then come in for a dmission #3 at the first 
appropriate time in their cycle, which will be either on Day 7 -11 of their cycle or day ≥7 in those with 
infrequent cycles (girls with < 10 periods per year) provided they have a progesterone level of < 1.5 ng/mL 
within 3 days of t heir scheduled first admission.  If the progesterone level is >1.5 ng/mL within 3 days of the 
first admission, the admission will be cancelled.   
 
Admission #3 will be identical to Admission #1.  Subjects will be instructed to eat a diet including at least 150 
gm of carbohydrate a day for the 3 days preceding the admission 
 
IRB-HSR# 13789: Effect of Metformin on Sensitivity of the GnRH Pul se Generator to Suppression by 
Estradiol and Progesterone in Hyperandrogenic Adolescent Girls  
 
Page 11 of 47 
Version Date: 1 2/14/2015 Day 85: Begin Estradiol and Progesterone  
Starting the day of discharge from the third  inpatient admission, subjects will be given oral estrogen (estrace, 
0.5-1 mg once a day) and oral pr ogesterone suspension (20 mg/ml, 25- 100 mg) three times a day at 0700, 1500, 
and 2300 hr  for seven days .  Doses will be the same as on Days 1- 7.  Subjects should continue to take 
Metformin 1000 mg twice a day and iron supplementation.  
 
Day 87 an d Day 89: Outpatient blood draws  
On study days 3 subjects will have blood drawn at 1700 hr (two hours after the 1500 hr progesterone dose to 
check serum estrogen, peak progesterone levels, and hemoglobin.  On study day 5, subjects will have blood 
drawn  at 1700 hr (two hours after the  1500 hr  progesterone dose ) to check serum estrogen and peak 
progesterone levels. 
 
 Day 91: Admission #4 
Admission #4 will be identical to Admission #2.   
Following the final blood draw for Admission #4, the patient will discontinue all s tudy medications.  
 
Follow -up   
There is an optional 1 year follow up period. If the subject agrees to participate, she will complete f ollow -up 
questionnaires and/or phone intervie ws 6 and 12 months after the study .  These questionnaires/interviews will 
ask about the  frequency of me nses and changes in hirsutism.  Whenever possible we will also s ee the subjects 
on 1- 2 occasions  during the 12 months to obtain blood for T, SHBG, fasting insulin, fasting glucose, DHEA- S, 
E2, and P measurements (depending on cyc le stage).  
 
2. List the procedures, in bullet form, that will be done for research as stipulated in this protocol.  
  Do NOT list those procedures which are being ordered for clinical care.  
All procedures performed in this protocol are being done solely t o answer a research question and generate 
generalizable knowledge.  
 
3.  Will any of the procedures listed in item # 2 have the potential to identify an incidental finding?  Yes.  
►IF YES, check one of the following two options:  
__X___The examination(s) uti lize(s) the same techniques, equipment, etc., that would be used if the 
subject were to have the examination(s) performed for clinical care.  There exists the potential for 
the discovery of clinically significant incidental findings.   
• The PI takes full responsibility for the identification of incidental findings:  
• The PI will inform the subjects  verbally of all incidental findings that are of clinical 
significance or are of questionable significance.   
• A follow -up letter describing the finding should be pr ovided to the subject with 
instructions to either show the letter to their PC or if the subject has no PCP, the subject 
should be instructed to make an appointment at UVa or at the Free Clinic.   
 
4.  Do any of the procedures listed above, under question # 2, utilize any imaging procedures ( e.g. 
ultrasound, CT scans/ x -rays etc.)?   No.  
 
5. Will you be using viable embryos? No.  
6. Will you be u sing embryonic stem cells?  No. 
 
IRB-HSR# 13789: Effect of Metformin on Sensitivity of the GnRH Pul se Generator to Suppression by 
Estradiol and Progesterone in Hyperandrogenic Adolescent Girls  
 
Page 12 of 47 
Version Date: 1 2/14/2015 Family History/Pedigree  
 
1.  What kind of information is being sought?  
Family history (n o questionnaire is being used)  
 
2.  What identifiers will be recorded with the info (e.g. names, initials, relationship such as mother, 
father, brother, sister, random number)?Relationship 
 
3.  Does any of the information sought potentially expose the subj ect or a family member to additional 
risk? No. 
 
Specimens :  Will not be u sed for Genetic Research or Banking  
If the specimens in this protocol will only be used for Genetic Research and or Spec imen Banking, you may 
delete the Specimen Labeling and Specimen Shipping section s below.  
If specimens will be taken for other reasons, the questions below should be answered and referenced to the 
samples taken for things other than Genetic Research and or Specimen Banking.  
 
Specimen Information 
1.  Describe the type of specimen to be used: Blood  
 
2.  Will the specimen be obtained BEFORE a subject has signed a consent form? No. 
3.  Will you be using discarded specimens? No. 
 
►IF NO , and taking a blood sample, will blood be taken more than 2 times/week? 
Yes. 
►IF NO , and taking a blood sample, check the option(s) below which match the subject 
population.  
 _X____ non - healthy or pregnant adults and/or children  
 _____ Amount will  NOT exceed the lesser of 50ml or 3 ml/kg in an 8 week period  
___X __ Amount will exceed the lesser of 50 ml or 3 ml/kg in an 8 week period  
 
Specimen Labeling  
1.  What information/ HIPAA identifiers  will be on the specimen label when it is given to the study team  
(from clinical labs or other source outside the study team)  and/or what information  will you put on the 
specimen ? 
 
Name, medical record #, CRU protocol #, time (date and clock hour) drawn.  
 
2.  If the specimen is given to the study team with informa tion on the label will you delete any of the 
informa tion on the specimen label?   No.  
 
3.  Will any additional data be linked to the specimen by way of a code?  No.  
4.  Will the analysis on the specimen be done soon (within 24 hours) after it is collected?  
Yes and No.  See the explanation below.  
 
IRB-HSR# 13789: Effect of Metformin on Sensitivity of the GnRH Pul se Generator to Suppression by 
Estradiol and Progesterone in Hyperandrogenic Adolescent Girls  
 
Page 13 of 47 
Version Date: 1 2/14/2015 Samples from the screening exam that are analyzed by UVA clinical labs will be run within 24 hrs.  
 
►IF NO, where will the specimen be stored until analysis is done?  
Some samples from the screening exam (TSH, LH, FSH, P, Testosterone, E2, c-peptide, and insulin) and all 
samples from the inpatient admissions will be analyzed and stored in the Center for Research in 
Reproduction Ligand Core lab.  
 
Specimen Shipping  
1.  Do you plan to ship any specimens outside of UVA? No. 
 
Data and Safety Monitoring Plan  
If you have any questions completing this section call 982- 4311, 924- 8660 or 243- 9847 for assistance  
A Sponsor is defined as entity that will receive data prior to publication.  
1.  Definition:  
1.1 How will you define adverse events  (AE)) for this study ?  
__X___An adverse event will be considered any undesirable sign, symptom or medical or 
psychological condi tion even if the event is  not considered to be related  to the investigational 
drug/device/intervention. Medical condition/diseases present before starting the investigational 
drug/intervention will be considered adverse events only if they worsen after sta rting study 
treatment/intervention.  An adverse event is also any undesirable and unintended effect of research 
occurring in human subjects as a result of the collection of identifiable private information under the 
research.  Adverse events also include any problems associated with the use of an investigational 
device that adversely affects the rights, safety or welfare of subjects.  
1.2 How will you define serious adverse events ? 
__X___A serious adverse event will be considered any undesirable sign, symptom, or medical 
condition which is fatal, is life -threatening, requires or prolongs inpatient hospitalization, results 
in persistent or significant disability/incapacity, constitutes a congenital anomaly or birth defect, 
is medically significant and which th e investigator regards as serious based on appropriate 
medical judgment. An important medical event is any AE that may not result in death, be life -
threatening, or require hospitalization but may be considered an SAE when, based upon 
appropriate medical ju dgment, it may jeopardize the patient and may require medical or surgical 
intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed in the definitions of SAEs.  
1.3 What is the definition of an unanticipated problem?   
An unanticipated problem is any event, experi ence that meets ALL 3 criteria below:  
 Is unexpected in terms of nature, severity or frequency given the research procedures that are 
described in the protocol -related documents AND in the characteristics of the subject 
population being studies  
 Related or p ossibly related to participation in research.  This means that there is a reasonable 
possibility that the incident may have been caused by the procedures involved in the research 
study.  
IRB-HSR# 13789: Effect of Metformin on Sensitivity of the GnRH Pul se Generator to Suppression by 
Estradiol and Progesterone in Hyperandrogenic Adolescent Girls  
 
Page 14 of 47 
Version Date: 1 2/14/2015  The incident suggests that the research placed the subject or others a t greater risk of harm 
than was previously known or recognized OR results in actual harm to the subject or others  
 
1.4 What is the definition of a protocol violation ?  
A protocol violation is defined as any change, deviation, or departure from the study design or 
procedures of a  research project that is NOT approved by the IRB -HSR prior to its initiation or 
implementation, OR deviation from  standard operating procedures, Good Clinical Practices 
(GCPs), federal, state or local regulations.  Protocol violations m ay or may not be under the control 
of the study team or UVa staff. These protocol violations may be major or minor violations.  
 
Additional Information:  see the IRB -HSR website at  
http://www.virginia.edu/vpr/irb/HSR_docs/Forms/Protocol_Violations_%20Enrollment_Exceptions
_Instructions.doc  
 
1.5 If pregnancy occurs how will this information be managed?  
__X___  Adverse Event - will follow adv erse event recording and reporting procedures outlined in 
section 3.  
 
1.6 What is the definition of a Protocol Enrollment Exception?   
__X___NA - No outside sponsor  
 
1.7 What is the definition of a data breach? 
A data breach is defined in the HITECH Act (43 USC 17932) as an unauthorized acquisition, 
access, or use of protected health information (PHI) that compromises the security or privacy of 
such information. 
 
Additional Information  may be found on the IRB -HSR Website: Data Breach  
2.  Identified risks and plans to minimize risk  
 
 
2.1 What risks are expected  due to the intervention in this protocol?  
 
Risk associated with  frequent blood sampling : 
 
Expected Risks related to study participation.  Frequency  
Please pick one frequency from each box below  
• significant  anemia related to frequent 
blood sampling (hematocrit < 30%)  Occurs frequently,  
Occurs infrequently  
Occurs rarely  
Frequ ency unknown, but very rare  
• mild anemia (hematocrit < 36%) 
related to frequent blood sampling Occurs frequently,  
Occurs infrequently  
Occurs rarely  
Frequency unknown  
 
Risk associated with  IV needle placement:  
 
Expected Risks related to study participation.  Frequency  
Please pick one frequency from each box below  
IRB-HSR# 13789: Effect of Metformin on Sensitivity of the GnRH Pul se Generator to Suppression by 
Estradiol and Progesterone in Hyperandrogenic Adolescent Girls  
 
Page 15 of 47 
Version Date: 1 2/14/2015 • Infection at needle site  Occurs frequently,  
Occurs infrequently  
Occurs rarely  
Frequency unknown, but very rare  
• Fainting  Occurs frequently,  
Occurs infrequently  
Occurs rarely  
Frequency unknown, but very rare  
• Bleeding at needle site  Occurs frequently,  
Occurs infrequently  
Occurs rarely  
Frequency unknown  
• Blood clot at needle site  Occurs frequently,  
Occurs infrequently  
Occurs rarely  
Frequency unknown  
• Pain at needle site  Occurs frequently,  
Occurs infrequently  
Occurs rarely  
Frequency unknown  
• Bruise at needle site  Occurs frequently,  
Occurs infrequently  
Occurs rarely  
Frequency unknown  
 
Risks associated with  iron s upplementation:  
 
Expected Risks related to study participation.  Frequency  
Please pick one frequency from each box below  
• nausea Occurs frequently,  
Occurs infrequently  
Occurs rarely  
Frequency unknown  
• constipation  Occurs frequently,  
Occurs infrequently  
Occurs rar ely 
Frequency unknown  
• dark or black stools  Occurs frequently,  
Occurs infrequently  
Occurs rarely  
Frequency unknown  
 
Risks associated with  Progesterone : 
 
Expected Risks re lated to study participation.  Frequency  
Please pick one frequency from each box below  
• Mood changes/irritability  Occurs frequently,  
Occurs infrequently  
Occurs rarely  
Frequency unknown  
• Fluid retention  Occurs frequently,  
Occurs infrequently  
Occurs rarely  
Frequency unknown  
IRB-HSR# 13789: Effect of Metformin on Sensitivity of the GnRH Pul se Generator to Suppression by 
Estradiol and Progesterone in Hyperandrogenic Adolescent Girls  
 
Page 16 of 47 
Version Date: 1 2/14/2015 • Withdrawal bleeding 1 -5 days after 
stopping progesterone  Occurs frequently,  
Occurs infrequently  
Occurs rarely  
Frequency unknown  
 
Risks associated with  Estradiol : 
 
Expected Risks related to study participation.  Frequency  
Please pick one frequency from each box below  
• Nausea  Occurs frequently,  
Occurs infrequently  
Occurs rarely  
Frequency unknown  
• Fluid retention  Occurs frequently,  
Occurs infrequently  
Occurs rarely  
Frequency unknown  
• Breast Tenderness  Occurs frequently,  
Occurs infrequently  
Occurs rarely  
Frequency unknown  
• Deep vein thrombosis  Occurs frequently,  
Occurs infrequently  
Occurs rarely  
Frequency unknown, however occurs very rarely 
with long -term estrogen use (as with oral 
contraceptive pills), so would expect to be 
exceedingly rare with the short term administration 
in this protocol  
 
Risks associated with  Metformin : 
 
Expected Risks related to study participation.  Frequency  
 
• Diarrhea  
 Occurs frequently,  
Occurs infrequently  
Occurs rarely  
Frequency unkn own 
• Nausea  Occurs frequently,  
Occurs infrequently  
Occurs rarely  
Frequency unknown  
• Lactic Acidosis  Occurs frequently,  
Occurs infrequently  
Occurs rarely  
Frequency unknown, but very rare  
 
Other Risks:  
 
Expected Risks related to study 
participation. 
  Frequency  
 
Reproductive Risks  Minimized due to the requirements of this 
IRB-HSR# 13789: Effect of Metformin on Sensitivity of the GnRH Pul se Generator to Suppression by 
Estradiol and Progesterone in Hyperandrogenic Adolescent Girls  
 
Page 17 of 47 
Version Date: 1 2/14/2015 Specify potential reproductive  risks  
 protocol.   
Violation of subject’s privacy and 
confidentiality  Minimized due to the requirements of the 
privacy plan in this protocol  
 
NOTE: Risk of unplanned pregnancy: If a research subject is sexually active and stops using hormonal 
contraception while failing to u se another non- hormonal method of contraception, there is a risk of unplanned 
pregnancy. (However, subjects will be counseled to use non- hormonal methods of contraception if sexually 
active.)  
 
NOTE regarding the risk  associated with  EMLA cream (topical l idocaine and prilocaine, used to alleviate pain):  
The risks of lidocaine and prilocaine in general may include (frequency not defined) hypotension, angioedema, shock, 
hyperpigmentation, erythema, itching, rash, burning, urticaria, burning, stinging, edema, bronchospasm, and 
hypersensitivity reactions. However,  in the case of topical lidocaine /prilocaine  use, the non- dermatologic adverse events 
mentioned above would be extremely unlikely unless large amounts of topical lidocaine /prilocaine  were used (allowing  
significant systemic absorption).  
 
2.2   List by bullet format a summary of safety tests/procedures/observations to be performed.  
• Sterile technique will be used.   
• Before participation in the studies, all participants will be required to have a normal he moglobin (≥ 11.5 
g/dL for non- African American subjects and ≥ 11.0 g/dL for African American subjects) .  Hemoglobin 
levels will be measured prior to every admission .  For African American subjects, if the hemoglobin 
level is <11.0, the study will be discont inued.  For non- African American subjects,  if the hemoglobin 
level is <1 1.5 g/d l, the study will be discontinued.   
• Blood loss will be carefully recorded and limited to a maximum of 7cc/kg (10% of estimated total blood 
volume) in 8 weeks.  A  total of 467 m l of blood will be drawn during the study (including estimated 
waste from frequent blood draws), with no more than 243.5 being drawn during any 8 week period.  
Therefore, girls weighing less than 35 kg will not be able to participate.  Iron supplementation (325 mg 
once or twice a day dependent on weight) will be prescribed to all participants. 
• We will warn participants against becoming pregnant during the stud y.  We will require that sexually 
active subjects use effective double barrier method s of birth control as needed during the study.  β -hCG 
levels will be measured  at screening and prior to each admission; if the β-hCG is positive, the study will 
be discontinued. 
 
2.3 Under what criteria would  an INDIVIDUAL SUBJECT’S study treatment or study participati on be 
stopped or modified 
__X___At subject, PI or sponsor’s  request  
 
__X___Treatment would b e stopped if the subject had a s erious adverse  event deemed related to 
study.  
__X___ Other: The study would be stopped if the patient has a positive pregnancy test or if 
hemoglobin levels were below the required levels ( For African American subjects, they must 
have a hemoglobin of ≥ 11.0.  For non- African American subjects, they must have a hemoglobin 
of ≥ 11.5. 
 
2.4 Under what criteria would THE ENTIRE STUDY need to be stopped.   
These are called stopping rules for early termination of the entire study. 
IRB-HSR# 13789: Effect of Metformin on Sensitivity of the GnRH Pul se Generator to Suppression by 
Estradiol and Progesterone in Hyperandrogenic Adolescent Girls  
 
Page 18 of 47 
Version Date: 1 2/14/2015 List criteria regardless of whet her the study is sponsored or not.  
Be sure to include any criteria for which the UVa PI would halt the study at UVa. 
___X __Per IRB, PI, DSMB, or sponsor discretion 
 
___X __Other:  If there are an excessive number of unexpected adverse events that significantly alter the 
risk/benefit ratio for the study, the study will be terminated.  All adverse events will be evaluated both 
individually and cumulatively by the study team and principal investigator as they arise, allowing for 
timely decisions regarding stud y continuation/termination.   
 
2.5 What are the criteria for breaking the blind/mask?  
___X __NA – Not blinded/masked 
 
2.6 How will subject withdrawals/dropouts be reported to the IRB prior to study completion?  
___X __IRB-HSR continuation status form  
3.  Adverse  Event / Unanticipated Problem Recording and Reporting  
 
3.1 Will all adverse events, as defined in section 1.1, be collected/recorded? Yes.  
 
3.2 How will adverse event data be collected/recorded ?  
__X___Paper A E forms/source documents  
___X __Spreadsheet (paper or electronic)  
 
3.3. How will AEs be classified/graded?  
___X __Mild/Moderate/Severe  
__X__ Serious/Not serious  
 
 
3.4 What scale will the PI use when evaluating the relatedness of adverse events to the study 
participation?   
__X___The PI will determine the relationship of adverse events to the study 
 using the following scale:  
 
Related:       AE is clearly related to the intervention  
Possibly related:  AE may be related to the intervention  
Unrelated:   AE is clearly not related to intervention  
 
3.5 When will recording/reporting of adverse events/unanticipated problems begin?  
 
__X___After subject begins study drug/ device placement/intervention /study -related 
procedure/specimen collection  
 
3.6 When will the recording/reporting of adverse events/unanticipated problems end?  
_____End of study drug/device/intervention/participation  
IRB-HSR# 13789: Effect of Metformin on Sensitivity of the GnRH Pul se Generator to Suppression by 
Estradiol and Progesterone in Hyperandrogenic Adolescent Girls  
 
Page 19 of 47 
Version Date: 1 2/14/2015 _X____30 days post study drug 
 
3.7 How will Adverse Events, Unanticipated Problems , Protocol Violations and Data Breaches be 
reported?   Complete the table below to answer this question  
 
Type of Event  To whom will it 
be reported:  Time Frame for 
Reporting  How reported?  
Any internal event resulting 
in death that is deemed 
DEFINITELY related to 
(caused by) study 
participation  
An internal event is one that 
occurs in a subject enrolled 
in a UV a protocol  IRB-HSR  Within 24 hours  IRB Online and phone call  
 
www.irb.virginia.edu/  
 
Internal, Serious, Unexpected 
adverse event  
 
 IRB-HSR  Within 7 calendar 
days from the time 
the study team 
received knowledg e 
of the event.  
 
Timeline includes 
submission of signed 
hardcopy of AE form.  IRB Online  
 
www.irb.virginia.edu/  
 
Unanticipated Problems that 
are not adverse events or 
protocol violations  
This would include a D ata 
Breach.   IRB-HSR  
 
 Within 7 calendar 
days from the time 
the study team 
received knowledge 
of the event.   Unanticipated Problem report 
form.  
 
http://www.virginia.edu/vp
rgs/irb/HSR_docs/Forms/R
eporting_Requirements -
Unanticipated_Problems.d
oc ) 
 
  
Protocol Violations  
 (The IRB -HSR only requires 
that MAJOR violation be 
reported, unless otherwise 
required by your sponsor, if 
applicable.)  
 
Or  
 
Enrollment Exceptions  IRB-HSR  
 
 Within 7 calendar 
days from the time 
the study team 
received knowledge 
of the event.   
 Protocol Violation and 
Enrollment Exception Reporting 
Form  
 
 
http://w ww.virginia.edu/vp
rgs/irb/hsr_forms.html  
 
Go to 3rd bullet from the 
bottom. 
  
IRB-HSR# 13789: Effect of Metformin on Sensitivity of the GnRH Pul se Generator to Suppression by 
Estradiol and Progesterone in Hyperandrogenic Adolescent Girls  
 
Page 20 of 47 
Version Date: 1 2/14/2015 Data Breach  The UVa 
Corporate 
Compliance  and 
Privacy Office, a  
 
 
ITC:  if breach 
involves  
electronic data-   
 
 
UVa Police if 
breach includes 
such things as 
stolen 
computers.  As soon as possible 
and no later than 24 
hours from the time 
the incident is 
identified.  
 
As soon as possible 
and no later than 24 
hours from the time 
the incident is 
identified.  
IMMEDIATELY.   
 
 UVa Corporate Compliance and 
Privacy Office - Phone 924- 9741  
 
 
 
 
ITC:  Information Security 
Incident Reporting procedure ,  
http://www.itc.virginia.edu/secur
ity/reporting. html 
 
 
Phone - (434) 924- 7166  
  
UVa PI Held IND/IDE  
Life-threatening and/or fatal unexpected events 
related or possibly related to the use of the 
investigational agent.  FDA  Within 7 calendar days of 
the study team learning of 
the event  Form FDA 
3500A 
(MedWatch) or 
narrative  
Serious, unexpected and related or possibly 
related adverse events  FDA  Within 15 calendar days 
after the study team 
receives knowledge of the 
event  Form FDA 
3500A 
(MedWatch) or 
narrative  
All adverse events  FDA  Annually  IND annual 
report 
 
 
4.    How will the endpoint data be collected/recorded.  
__X___Database: specify  
5. Data and Safety Oversight Responsibility 
 
5.1. Who is responsible for overseeing safety data for this study ?  
 
___X __No additional oversight body other than PI at UVa ( skip question 5.2)  
 
5.2. What is the composition of the reviewing body and how is it affiliated with the sponsor?  N/A 
5.3. What items will be included in the aggregate review conducted by the PI?  
 
__X___All adverse events  
___X __Unanticipated Problem s 
___X __Protocol violations  
___X __Audit results  
_____Application of dose finding  escalation/de- escalation rules T hese should be outlined under 2.4. 
__X___Application of study designed stopping/decision rules  
IRB-HSR# 13789: Effect of Metformin on Sensitivity of the GnRH Pul se Generator to Suppression by 
Estradiol and Progesterone in Hyperandrogenic Adolescent Girls  
 
Page 21 of 47 
Version Date: 1 2/14/2015 __X___Early withdrawals  
___X __Whether the study accrual pattern warrants continuation/action  
___X __Endpoint data  
 
5.4 How often will aggregate review occur?  
For additional information on aggregate review see: 
www.virginia.edu/v pr/irb/hsr/continuations.html#aggreview  
 
__X___Annually  
 
5.5. How often will a report, regarding the outcome of the review by the DSMB/DSMC, be sent to 
the UVa PI?  
A copy of these reports must be sent to the IRB  if applicable as soon as they are received by the PI.  
Do not wait until the next continuation to submit them to the IRB.   
_X____ NA - there is no DSMB/ DSMC overseeing this study  
 
5.6. How will a report of the information discussed in question 5.4 OR 5.5 be submitted to the 
IRB?   
 
__X___Part of I RB-HSR continuation status form  
Payment  
 
1.  Are subjects being reimbursed for travel expenses ( receipts /mileage required )? No. 
 
2.  Are subjects compensated for being in this study?  Yes.  
 
2a.  What is the maximum TOTAL compensation to be given over the d uration of the protocol?  
$400 
 
2b.  Explain compensation to be given. 
All participants will receive a $75 Simon Mall gift card per inpatient admission. In addition, participants will 
receive a $10 0 bonus, also in the form of a gift card, for completing the  medication regimen and outpatient 
blood draws. Therefore, a participant who completes the entire study will receive a total  of $400 in gift cards. 
This payment will not be provided to the subject until the end of study participation at the last overnight 
admission.   If a subject withdraws from the study before it is complete, she will receive a $75 gift card for each 
overnight admission she has completed.  
 
2c.  Is payment pro -rated ( e.g. some compensation is given even if subjects do not complete the 
entire study)?  
Yes.  See explanation above.   
If No, explain why payment cannot be pro- rated.   
 
 
IRB-HSR# 13789: Effect of Metformin on Sensitivity of the GnRH Pul se Generator to Suppression by 
Estradiol and Progesterone in Hyperandrogenic Adolescent Girls  
 
Page 22 of 47 
Version Date: 1 2/14/2015 2d.  Is money paid from UVa or State funds (including grant funds)  or will items such as gift cards 
be distributed through UVa ? Yes.  
 
2d(i).  How will the researcher compensate the subjects?  
___X __ Gift card s 
 
2d(ii) .  Which category/ categories best describes the process of compensation?  
 
___X __ Compensation will include an alternative method  (petty cash, gift card, other) 
and tax information will be collected , securely stored, and submitted electronically 
to Procurement Services as required.  
►If an alternate method will be used justify why you are unable to issue 
checks through the UVa Oracle or state system.  
 
This study involves adolescent girls.  In past and on- going studies involving the same patient population, we 
have found that the girls  prefer being given gift cards directly at the end of the study to receiving a check in the 
mail 4 -6 weeks later, and this preference is reflected in our ability to recruit subjects.  Therefore, we prefer to 
compensate the adolescent subjects with gift car ds.  We obtain social security numbers for IRS purposes.   
 
IMPORTANT:  If you check this box you will be required to submit the subjects’ name, Social Security 
number, full address and amount of payment to Procurement at the end of each calendar year.  The Office of the 
VP for Research will send you instructions on this procedure at a later date.   
Risk/ Benefit Analysis  
 
1.  What are the potential benefits for the participant as well as benefits which may accrue to society in 
general, as a result of this study?  
The goal of this study is to advance our knowledge of the effects of adolescent hyperandrogenemia and 
the mechanisms of development of polycystic ovary syndrome.  Hopefully, this knowledge will lead to more 
effective means of preventing and treating  PCOS in the future.     
While treatment is not the goal of this study, it is possible that individual subjects may experience 
improvement in symptoms during the course of the study given that Metformin is commonly used in clinical 
practice to treat adoles cent hyperandrogenemia and PCOS.   
 
2.  Analyze the risk -benefit ratio.  
 
This study involves minimal risks and  may provide valuable information about the development of polycystic 
ovary syndrome (PCOS).  There are no long -term risks associated with blood s ampling or the short term 
administration of physiologic doses of estradiol and progesterone.  Metformin is associated with minimal risk in 
subjects with normal kidney, liver, and cardiac function, and subjects with such organ dysfunction will be 
excluded f rom the study.  This study offers significant potential benefits to society as a whole and girls with 
hyperandrogenemia in particular. We hope that a better understanding of the effects of hyperandrogenemia in 
adolescent girls and the role of adolescent hy perandrogenemia in the development of PCOS will lead to 
improved prevention of the disorder as well as more effective treatments.  In addition, some subjects may 
experience improvement in their hyperandrogenic symptoms while being treated with Metformin, a s this 
IRB-HSR# 13789: Effect of Metformin on Sensitivity of the GnRH Pul se Generator to Suppression by 
Estradiol and Progesterone in Hyperandrogenic Adolescent Girls  
 
Page 23 of 47 
Version Date: 1 2/14/2015 medication is commonly used in clinical practice to treat adolescent hyperandrogenia and PCOS.  Therefore, 
potential benefit s are great while risks are small.  
Bibliography  
 
Apter D, Butzow GA, Laughlin GA, Yen SSC  (1994). Accelerated 24- hour luteniz ing hormone pulsatile 
activity in adolescent girls with ovarian hyperandrogenism: relevance to the developmental phase of polycystic 
ovarian syndrome. Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism 79(1):119- 125. 
 
Apter D, Vihko R  (1990). Endocrine deter minants of fertility: serum androgen concentrations during follow -up 
of adolescents into the third decade of life. Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism 71:970- 974. 
 
Eagleson CA, Gingrich  MB, Pastor CL, Arora TK, Burt CM, Evans WS, Marshall JC (2000).  Polycystic ovary 
syndrome: evidence that flutamide restores sensitivity of the gonadotropin- releasing hormone pulse generator to 
inhibition by estradiol and progesterone.  Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism 85: 4047- 4052.   
 
Eagleson  CA, Bellow s AB, Hu K, Gingrich MB, Marshall JC (2003). Obese patients with polycystic ovary 
syndrome: evidence that metformin does not restore sensitivity of the gonadotropin releasing hormone pulse 
generator to inhibition by ovarian steroids. JCEM 88(11) :5158- 62. 
 
Pastor CL, Griffin -Korf ML, Aloi JA, Evans WS, Marshall, JC (1998). Polycystic ovary syndrome: evidence 
for reduced sensitivity of the gonadotropin- releasing hormone pulse generator to inhibition by estradiol and 
progesterone. Journal of Clinica l Endocrinology and Metabolism 83 (2): 582- 590. 
 
Soules MR, Steiner RA, Clifton DK, Cohen NL, Aksel S, Bremmer WJ (1984). Progesterone modulation of 
pulsatile luteinizing hormone secretion in normal women.  Journal of Endocrinology and Metabolism 58:378-
383.   
 
Stein I, Leventhal M (1935).  Amenorrhea associated with bilateral polycystic ovaries.  American Journal of 
Obstetrics and Gynecology 29: 181- 191.     
 
Venturoli S, Paradisi R, Porcu E, Pallotti G, Fabbri R, Gammi L , Magrin i O, Flamigni C  (1987). Pos tmenarchal 
evolution of endocrine pattern and ovarian aspects in adolescents with menstrual irregularities. Fertility and 
Sterility 48(1):78 -85.  
 
Wildt L, Hausler A, Marshall  G. et al. (1981). Frequency and amplitude of GnRH stimulation and gonadotropin 
secretion in the rhesus monkey. Endocrinology 109:376- 385. 
APPENDIX:  Legal/Regulatory  
Recruitment  
The following procedures will be followed:  
• Finders fees will not be paid to an individual as they are not allowed by UVa Policy  
• All recruitment materials will be approved by the IRB -HSR prior to use.  They  will be submitted to 
the IRB afte r the IRB -HSR has assigned an IRB -HSR # to the protocol . 
IRB-HSR# 13789: Effect of Metformin on Sensitivity of the GnRH Pul se Generator to Suppression by 
Estradiol and Progesterone in Hyperandrogenic Adolescent Girls  
 
Page 24 of 47 
Version Date: 1 2/14/2015 • Only those individuals listed as personnel on this protocol will recruit and or conduct the consenting 
process with potential subjects.  
 
Retention Incentives  
Any item used by the sponsor/ study team to provide incentive to a subject to remain in the study, other than 
compensation identified in the Payment section, will be submitted to the IRB for review prior to use.  The IRB -
HSR will provide the study team with a Receipt Acknowledgement for their records.  Retention incentive items 
are such things as water bottles, small tote bags, birthday cards etc.  Cash and gift cards are not allowed as 
retention incentives.  
 
Clinic al Privileges  
The following procedures will be followed:  
• Investigators who are members of the clinical staff at the University of Virginia Medical Center must 
have the appropriate credentials and been granted clinical privileges to perform specific clinic al 
procedures whether those procedures are experimental or standard.  
• The IRB cannot grant clinical privileges.   
• Performing procedures which are outside the scope of the clinical privileges that have been granted 
may result in denial of insurance coverage  should claims of negligence or malpractice arise.  
• Personnel on this protocol will have the appropriate credentials and clinical privileges in place before 
performing any procedures required by this protocol.  
• Contact the Clinical Staff Office - 924- 9055 or  924-8778 for further information. 
 
Sharing of Data/Specimens  
Data and specimens collected under an IRB approved protocol are the property of the University of Virginia.  
You must have “permission” to share data/ specimens outside of UVa other than for a g rant application and or 
publication.  This “permission” may come in the form of a contract with the sponsor or a material transfer 
agreement (MTA) with others.  A contract/ MTA is needed to share the data outside of UVa even if the data 
includes no HIPAA i dentifiers and no code that could link the data back to a HIPAA identifier.   
• No data will be shared outside of UVa, beyond using data for a grant application and or publication, 
without a signed contract/MTA approved by the SOM Grants and Contracts office / OSP or written 
confirmation that one is not needed.  
• No specimens will be shared outside of UVa without a signed contract/MTA approved by the SOM 
Grants and Contracts office/ OSP or written confirmation that one is not needed.  
 
Prisoners  
If the original protocol/ IRB application stated that no prisoners would be enrolled in this study and 
subsequently a subject becomes a prisoner, the study team must notify the IRB immediately.  The study team 
and IRB will need to determine if the subject will remain in th e study.  If the subject will remain in the study, 
the protocol will have to be re -reviewed with the input of a prisoner advocate.  The prisoner advocate will also 
have to be involved in the review of future continuations, modifications or any other report ing such as protocol 
violations or adverse events.   
 
Prisoner - Individuals are prisoners if they are in any kind of penal institution, such as a prison, jail, or juvenile 
offender facility, and their ability to leave the institution is restricted. Prisone rs may be convicted felons, or may 
be untried persons who are detained pending judicial action, for example, arraignment or trial.  
For additional information see the OHRP website at  http://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/policy/populations/index.html  
IRB-HSR# 13789: Effect of Metformin on Sensitivity of the GnRH Pul se Generator to Suppression by 
Estradiol and Progesterone in Hyperandrogenic Adolescent Girls  
 
Page 25 of 47 
Version Date: 1 2/14/2015 APPENDIX:  Recruitment  
Recruitment includes identifying, review of records to determine eligibility or any contact to determine a 
potential subjects interest in the study.  
 
*The UVa HIPAA covered entity is  composed of the  UVa VP Office of Research, the Health System, School 
of Medicine, School of Nursing, the Sheila C. Johnson Center, the Exercise and Sports Injury Laboratory 
and the Exercise Physiology Laboratory.   
 
1. How do you plan to identify  potential subjects?  
To "identify" a potential subject refers to steps you plan to take to determine which individuals 
would qualify to participate in your study. This does NOT include steps to actually contact those 
individuals. 
If your study involves more than one group of subjects (e.g. controls and cases or subjects and 
caregivers) note below which groups are being identified by the given method.  
 
a. __X__ Chart Review/ Clinic Schedule Review/ Database Review from a database 
established for health care operations (d epartmental clinical database) or quality 
improvement. 
 
DHHS: Study team requests Waiver of Consent to identify potential subjects.  
 
HIPAA - Allowed under Preparatory to Research if PHI to be accessed.  
IMPORTANT  
Keep in mind that PHI in the medical record may only be accessed by individuals 
who work under the UVa HIPAA covered entity; which means they meet one of 
the following criteria:  
 a UVa stude nt working in the UVa HIPAA Covered Entity*   
 a faculty  or staff member in a PAID appointment in  the UVA HIP AA 
Covered Entity*  
b. __X__ Review of a database that was established to keep data to be used for future 
research such as the CDR, departmental research database or use of data from a separate 
current active research protocol.     
 
DHHS: Study team requests W aiver of Consent to identify potential subjects.  
 
HIPAA - Allowed under Preparatory to Research if PHI to be accessed.  
IMPORTANT  
Keep in mind that PHI in the medical record may only be accessed by 
individuals who work under the UVa HIPAA covered entity; which means 
they who meet one of the following criteria:  
 a UVa stude nt working in the UVa HIPAA Covered Entity*   
 a faculty  or staff member in a PAID appointment in  the UVA HIPAA 
Covered Entity*  
IRB-HSR# 13789: Effect of Metformin on Sensitivity of the GnRH Pul se Generator to Suppression by 
Estradiol and Progesterone in Hyperandrogenic Adolescent Girls  
 
Page 26 of 47 
Version Date: 1 2/14/2015 NOTE:  The information  from which you are obtaining potential  subjects must 
also have an IRB protocol appr oval.  
 
IRB# 10797 
If obtaining information from the Clinical Data Repository (CDR) insert IRB # 10797.  
 
c. ____ Patients  UVa health care provider supplies the UVa study team with  the patients  
contact information w ithout patients knowledge.  
 
DHHS: Study team requests Waiver of Consent to identify potential subjects.  
 
HIPAA - Allowed under Preparatory to Research if PHI will be shared by the health care 
provider.  
IMPORTANT  
Keep in mind that PHI may only be given to individuals who work under the UVa 
HIPAA covered entity; which means they meet one of the following criteria:  
 a UVa stude nt working in the UVa HIPAA Covered Entity*   
 a faculty  or staff member in a PAID appointment in  the UVA HIPAA 
Covered Entity*  
 
d. _X___ Patient obtains information about the study from their health care provider.  The 
patient contacts the study team if interested in participating.  
DHHS:   NA 
HIPAA:   Allowed under Health Care Operations  
If this choice is checked, check 3d- INDIRECT CONTACT  below.  
 
e. __X__ Potential subjects will not be directly identified. They will respond to an 
advertisement such as a flyer, brochure etc.   
If this choice is checked, check 3d-  INDIRECT CONTACT below.  
DHHS & HIPAA:   NA 
 
f. _____  Potential subjects have previ ously  signed a consent to have their name in a 
registry/database to be contacted for future studies of this type.   
IRB#  of registry/ database:  ________________  
DHHS & HIPAA:   NA 
 
If item # a, b or c is checked above and if this protocol involves the us e of protected health 
information you  confirm the following to be true:  
• The use or disclosure is sought solely to review protected health information as necessary 
to prepare the research protocol or other similar preparatory purposes.  
• No PHI will be remove d from the UVa covered entity . 
• The PHI that the researcher seeks to use or access is necessary for the research purposes.  
 
 
IRB-HSR# 13789: Effect of Metformin on Sensitivity of the GnRH Pul se Generator to Suppression by 
Estradiol and Progesterone in Hyperandrogenic Adolescent Girls  
 
Page 27 of 47 
Version Date: 1 2/14/2015 2. How will potential subjects be contacted ? 
To "contact" a potential subjects refers to the initial contact you plan to take to reach a potential 
subject to determine if they would be interested in participating in your study.  This may include 
direct contact by such methods as by letter, phone, email or in- person or indirect contact such as 
the use of flyers, radio ads etc.  
If your study involves more than one group of subjects (e.g. controls and cases or subjects and 
caregivers) note below which groups are being contacted by the given method.    
 
a.__X __Direct contact of potential subjects by the study team via letter, phone, direct e -
mail. Members of study team ARE NOT health care providers of patients.  Information 
will not be collected from psychotherapy notes.  
Note:  Letter, phone, direct email scripts must be approved by IRB prior to use.  
See IRB -HSR Website  for templates.  
 
DHHS/HIPAA: Study team requests a Waiver of Consent and Waiver of 
HIPAA Authorization to contact potential subjects.   
IMPORTANT:   
Keep in mind that if PHI was collected during the identification phase that 
contact with potential subjects may only be performed by individuals who work 
under the UVa HIPAA covered entity; which means they meet one of the following 
criteria:  
 a UVa stude nt working in the UVa HIPAA Covered Entity*   
 a faculty  or st aff member in a PAID appointment in  the UVA HIPAA 
Covered Entity*  
b._X ___Potential subjects will be approached while at UVa Hospital or Health Clinic by 
a person who is NOT a member of their health care team.  Information will not be 
collected from psychotherapy notes.  
 
DHHS & HIPAA:  Study team requests a Waiver of Consent and a Waiver of 
HIPAA Authorization to contact potential subjects.   
 
IMPORTANT:   
Keep in mind that contacting individuals in a clinical setting may only be 
performed by individuals who work under the UVa HIPAA covered entity; which 
means they  meet one of the following criteria:  
 a UVa stude nt working in the UVa HIPAA Covered Entity*   
 a faculty  or staff member in a PAID appointment in  the UVA HIPAA 
Covered Entity*  
 
You should share the following information with the potential subject:  
1. Your name  
2. Who you are:  physician, nurse etc. at the University of Virginia.    
IRB-HSR# 13789: Effect of Metformin on Sensitivity of the GnRH Pul se Generator to Suppression by 
Estradiol and Progesterone in Hyperandrogenic Adolescent Girls  
 
Page 28 of 47 
Version Date: 1 2/14/2015 3. Why you want to speak with them  
4. Ask if you have their permission to explain the study to them  
5. If asked about how you obtain ed their information use one of the following 
as an option for response.     
• DO NOT USE THIS RESPONSE UNLESS YOU HAVE OBTAINED 
PERMISSION FROM THEIR UVa PHYSICIAN:    
Your doctor, Dr. insert name  wanted you to be aware of this research 
study and gave us per mission to contact you.    
• We obtained your information from your medical records at UVa.   
Federal regulations allow the UVa Health System to release your 
information to researchers at UVa, so that we may contact you regarding 
studies you may be intereste d in participating.  We want to assure you that 
we will keep your information confidential.  
IF THE PERSON SEEMS ANGRY, HESITANT OR UPSET, THANK THEM 
FOR THEIR TIME AND DO NOT ENROLL THEM IN THE STUDY.  YOU 
MAY ALSO REFER THEM TO THE IRB- HSR AT 924- 9634. 
 
c.__X __Direct contact of potential subjects by the study team by approaching in person 
at UVa or  via letter, phone, direct e -mail. Members of study team contacting potential 
subjects ARE health care providers of patients.  
If you are not approaching them i n person but using a letter, phone call or direct 
email please note that the l etter, phone, direct email scripts must be approved by 
IRB prior to use.  See IRB -HSR Website  for templates. 
DHHS:  Study team requests a Waiver of Consent to contact potential subjects  
HIPAA:  Allowed under Health Care Operations.  
 
d.__X __ Indirect contact (flyer, brochure, TV, broadcast emails, patient provided info 
about the study from their health care provider and  either the  patient contacts study team  
or gives their healthcare provider permission for the study team to contact them .) 
The indirect method used (flyer, brochure, TV, broadcast emails) must be approved by 
the IRB prior to use.    The IRB does not need to review any type of script to use when the 
potential subject responds to the indirect method.   
 
DHHS & HIPAA:   NA 
 
e. ____  Potential subjects are not patients.  The study does not include obtaining 
subjects health information.   Subjects will be contacted directly via email, phone, 
letter or presentation in group setting with consent then obtained individually in a 
private setting.  
If you are not approaching them in person but using a letter, phone call or direct 
email please note that the l etter, phone, direct email scripts must be approved by IRB 
prior to use.   
See IRB -HSR Website  for templates . 
DHHS : Study team requests a Waiver of Consent  to contact potential subjects.   
HIPPA :  NA  
 
IRB-HSR# 13789: Effect of Metformin on Sensitivity of the GnRH Pul se Generator to Suppression by 
Estradiol and Progesterone in Hyperandrogenic Adolescent Girls  
 
Page 29 of 47 
Version Date: 1 2/14/2015  
3. Will any additional information be obtained from a potential subject during "prescreening"?   
Yes. 
 
Pre-screening  for IRB purposes is the term used to describe activities PRIOR to obtaining Informed Consent  and may not 
include any research procedure s.  
  
The activities may involve p re-screening of potential subjects over the telephone or in person is generally performed to 
determine their initial eligibility for, and, interest in a study and is a common strategy in the recruitment process.  
Questions  appropriate for pre -screening address the specific inclusion/exclusion criteria for the study and other issues of 
suitability, for example, an individual's ability to come to the research site multiple times.  
It is not appropriate at this point in the pr ocess (i.e. prior to obtaining informed consent/enrollment) to gather information that 
is not directly related to assessing eligibility and suitability (e.g. obtaining complete medical histories, obtaining blood 
specimens for lab tests).  
An additional tel ephone script is not required, for this pre -screening process, in addition to any scripts required under 
Recruitment question # 2.   
 
IF YES, submit any documents that will be used to collect pre -screening information so that 
the IRB may confirm what quest ions will be asked. 
NOTE: To comply with HIPAA regulations only the minimum necessary information may be 
collected at this time.  This means that only questions pertaining to the Inclusion and Exclusion 
Criteria may be asked.   
 
IF YES,  
 
DHHS :   study team  requests a Waiver of Documentation of Consent for Pre -screening 
questions.  
 
HIPPA:  
 HIPAA does not apply  if : 
o no PHI is collected or  
o  if PHI is collected from a potential subject  by an individual from a department 
that is not part of the HIPAA covered entity  
 HIPAA does apply if  the collection occurs by individuals* who work in a department 
that is part of the HIPAA covered entity.  In this case the collection will be covered under 
Health Care Operations/  
o These individuals are those that meet one of the f ollowing criteria:  
 a UVa stude nt working in the UVa HIPAA Covered Entity*   
 a faculty  or staff member in a PAID appointment in  the UVA HIPAA 
Covered Entity*  
IF YES, Will any of the questions involve health information? Yes.  
 
IF YES, w ill you collect HIP AA identifiers with  the health information?Yes.  
IF YES, which HIPAA identifiers will be recorded ? 
IRB-HSR# 13789: Effect of Metformin on Sensitivity of the GnRH Pul se Generator to Suppression by 
Estradiol and Progesterone in Hyperandrogenic Adolescent Girls  
 
Page 30 of 47 
Version Date: 1 2/14/2015 Name, MR#, date of birth, age, postal address, telephone number, email address (if 
applicable)  
 
Do you confirm that health information with HIPAA identifiers will not  be shared 
outside of UVa  until a consent form is signed or only shared in a de -identified 
manner ? Yes. 
4. Do you plan to ask the subjects to do anything, other than answering questions, for the study 
prior to signing a consent? Yes.  
 
►IF YES, explain in detail what you will ask them to do.  
 
Tips to Study Team  
• You must document their verbal consent in the study records.  
• If a subject is asked to stop taking a drug, document the date and name of the person 
on the study team giving the ve rbal order to stop medications (again-  must be a 
person with a DEA#). 
DHHS : Study team requests the use of Verbal Consent (Waiver of Documentation of 
Consent) for minimal risk screening procedures.  
 
HIPPA:  
If the individual, obtaining consent, works unde r the HIPAA Covered Entity this is 
covered under Health Care Operations  
If the individual obtaining consent does not work under  the HIPAA covered entity, 
HIPAA does not apply.  
 
Subjects will be asked to fast overnight prior to the screening visit.  If subjects are on hormonal 
medications (such as oral contraceptive pills, spironolactone, and metformin), they will be told that in 
order to participate in the study, they must discontinue the hormonal medications for 3 months.  They 
will be strongly urged to discuss the decision regarding whether or not to discontinue hormonal 
medications with their perso nal physician prior  and to discontinue medications only with the agreement 
of their physician. Verbal consent for fasting and discontinuing medications will be documented in the 
study records, as will the discussion regarding consulting their personal physician.   
 
5. How will the consenting process take place?    
HIPPA:  
• If the individual, obtaining consent, works under the HIPAA Covered Entity consenting is 
covered under Health Care Operations. 
• If the individual obtaining consent does not work under the HIPAA covered entity, HIPAA 
does not apply.  
 
An outpatient consenting and screening visit is scheduled for volunteers who express interest in the study  
Copie s of the approved consent and assent forms are sent to potential subjects beforehand, and we request that 
the volunteer and her parents review and discuss the forms prior to the screening visit.  
The consent and screening visit is held in an outpatient exa mination room in the CRU or alternate UVA clinical 
unit. This allows a private conversation between the screening physician and/or study coordinator, the potential 
IRB-HSR# 13789: Effect of Metformin on Sensitivity of the GnRH Pul se Generator to Suppression by 
Estradiol and Progesterone in Hyperandrogenic Adolescent Girls  
 
Page 31 of 47 
Version Date: 1 2/14/2015 participant, and at least one of her parents (other individuals such as family members are a llowed in the room if 
desired by the potential participant). The screening visit usually occurs in the morning, although rarely it will 
occur in the afternoon. The aims, procedures, and potential risks of the study are first explained by the study 
physicia n.  Importantly, the potential participant and her parents are given an opportunity to ask any questions, 
and concerns are addressed. In cases where the potential participant wants to begin the study and her parents 
concur, the participant, parents, and ph ysician and/or study coordinator sign the consent form. In cases where 
only one parent is able to come to the screening visit, we allow the second parent to sign the form in advance of 
the visit.  This is done in conjunction with a conversation during whic h we offer that parent an opportunity to 
ask any questions and confirm that they understand the study and are willing for their daughter to participate.  
We routinely inform potential participants verbally that signing the consent form does not compel them  to 
continue participation in the study. The remainder of the outpatient screening visit (i.e., history, physical, 
screening blood tests) occurs immediately thereafter.  Participants generally begin the main part of the study 
within 1 -2 months of the scree ning visit.   
 
6. Will subjects sign a consent form for any part of the study? Yes.  
7.  Will the study procedures be started the same day the subject is recruited for the study? Yes.  
 
►IF YES, explain in detail why the subject cannot be given more time to make a decision 
to consent.  
Potential subjects are given a copy of the consent form prior to their screening visit.  Subjects  are 
instructed to review the consent form, and are encour aged to ask any questions prior to 
scheduling a screening visit.  At the screening visit, subjects are lead through a discussion of the 
consent form.  Subjects are given the opportunity to ask any additional questions during this 
portion of the screening visit.  After the study team has read through the entire consent form with 
the subject, they are then given the opportunity to sign the consent form, decline to enroll in the 
study, or take more time to review the consent form before making a decision whether or not to 
enroll.  If the subject decides to enroll in the study on the day of the screening visit, then we will 
proceed with the study procedures outlined in the study visit above, unless the subject objects.   
 
Therefore, the study team feels that the  subject is under no pressure to give consent at the 
screening visit without having ample opportunity to review the consent form.  In addition, 
subjects are given the option to decline consent or delay study procedures at any point during this 
initial visit.  
 
►IF YES, explain in detail what will be done to assure the potential subject has enough 
time to make an informed decision.See explanation above.  
 
8. Do you need to perform a “dry run” of any procedure outlined in this protocol?   No.  
 
APPENDIX:  Clinic al Data Repository  
1.  Will you be obtaining data from the UVa Clinical Data Repository (CDR)?   Yes  
 
 
►If YES, check the categories of data elements below that you plan to obtain from the CDR.  
You are advised to talk to CDR personnel prior to completing this section.   
IRB-HSR# 13789: Effect of Metformin on Sensitivity of the GnRH Pul se Generator to Suppression by 
Estradiol and Progesterone in Hyperandrogenic Adolescent Girls  
 
Page 32 of 47 
Version Date: 1 2/14/2015  
CATEGORY  DATA ELEMENTS  CHECK  ALL THAT APPLY  
Demographics  e.g. Gender, race, age  X 
Administrative  e.g. Includes payor, payscale, length 
of stay, fact of visits (inpatient or 
outpatient), locations of service 
(inpatient or outpatient), pr oviders  X 
Financial  e.g. Charges or costs associated with 
care  
Clinical Data  e.g. Diagnoses  X 
e.g. Procedures  x 
e.g. Mortality   
e.g. Laboratory / Microbiology 
Results  X 
e.g. Medications  X 
e.g. Vitals, Height / Weight, Other 
Clinical Parameters  X 
e.g. Other (specify)   
Narrative Reports  e.g. Includes discharge summaries, 
pathology reports, operative notes, 
etc.  X 
 
APPENDIX:  Participation of Children  
In the state of Virginia a person under the age of 18 is considered a child. 
1. Explain why this research topic is relevant to children .    
PCOS is a common clinical disorder affecting 6 -8% of reproductive age women and significantly affects 
women’s reproductive, metabolic, and cardiovascular health.  PCOS is generally thought to begin in 
adolescence, and is increasingly recognized and diagnosed in this age group.  Given the association between 
obesity and increased androgen levels in girls, there is concern that the childhood obesity epidemic may lead to 
a rise in the incidence of hyperandrogensi m and PCOS.  By studying the origins of PCOS in adolescence, we 
hope to develop better strategies for screening and prevention of PCOS in this patient population.   
 
2. Is the knowledge being sought in this study already available for children or is it cur rently being 
acquired through another ongoing study?    
No.  Although other studies have treated hyperandrogenic girls with metformin, they have focused on clinical 
and metabolic parameters.  This study is unique in that it is exploring the neuroendocrine effects of metformin 
in adolescent girls.   
 
3. Provide data that is available in adults in order that the IRB may judge the potential risk in children.  
If there is no adult data available, provide reasons why not.  If this information is available in a s ponsor’s 
protocol, you may reference the section # here and not duplicate the information .    
Please see Drug  Information for data regarding the use of metformin and micronized progesterone in both adults 
and minors. 
 
IRB-HSR# 13789: Effect of Metformin on Sensitivity of the GnRH Pul se Generator to Suppression by 
Estradiol and Progesterone in Hyperandrogenic Adolescent Girls  
 
Page 33 of 47 
Version Date: 1 2/14/2015 4. Is the potential subject population li kely to include wards of the state or children who are more at risk 
for becoming a ward of the state?   Yes.  
If the study will enroll subjects from patients at UVa, this question MUST be answered YES  
 
►IF YES:  If the caregiver is someone other than the person providing permission for the child to 
participate, the study team may wish to consider the use of an additional form for them.  (example -a 
child is in foster care however the biological parent has  not lost legal custody and provides their 
permission for the child to participate, but the foster parent will be the person involved in driving the 
child to their study visits.  This form might address things such as who will receive the compensation 
for driving the child to the visits - the foster parent or the biological parent).   
►IF YES and if neither  of the items 4a or 4b listed below is answered YES, children who are wards of 
the state must be excluded from this protocol. Add” wards of state” as an additional exclusion criteria.    
 
4a.  Is the re search in  this protocol related to the child’s  status as a ward of the state?   No.  
 
4b.  Is the research to be conducted in schools, camps, hospitals, institutions, or similar settings in 
which the majority of children involved as subjects are not wards?    Yes.  
If this study will be do ne at UVa, answer this question YES.   
 
If you answered YES to # 4 and YES to EITHER  4a or 4b you may NOT exclude children who 
are wards of state. 
If you answered YES to # 4 and you answered NO to both 4 a or 4b you must exclude children 
who are wards of the state from the protocol - Add “ Wards of State” as an exclusion criteria.    
 
4c.  Are you aware of the following requirement? Yes.  
If the consent form contains a signature line for both parents the study team will notify the IRB 
immediately, if at any time during the course of the research, it becomes known that a potential 
subject is a ward of the state or that a child already enrolled in this protocol becomes a ward of the 
state.  
    APPENDIX:  Drug Information  
 
1   What is the drug name, manufacturer  and IND# if available?    
Micronized progesterone powder (Spectrum Chemical Manufacturing Corporation, Irving, CA), IND# 
64,126 
 
2.   If IND application has been submitted to the FDA, who is the Principal Investigator on the IND?     
John C. Marshall, MD, PhD  
 
3.  What is the phase or stage of this study?   NA  
 
APPENDIX:  Drug Information  
 
1   What is the drug name, manufacturer and IND# if available?    
IRB-HSR# 13789: Effect of Metformin on Sensitivity of the GnRH Pul se Generator to Suppression by 
Estradiol and Progesterone in Hyperandrogenic Adolescent Girls  
 
Page 34 of 47 
Version Date: 1 2/14/2015 Estrace ( Warner -Chilcott, Rockaway, NJ); IND # 64,126 
 
2.   If IND application has been submitted to th e FDA, who is the Principal Investigator on the IND?     
John C. Marshall, MD, PhD  
 
3.  What is the phase or stage of this study?   Not applicable.  
APPENDIX:  Drug Information  
 
1   What is the drug name, manufacturer and IND# if available?    
Metformin (ge neric metformin manufacturers); IND # 64, 126 
 
2.   If IND application has been submitted to the FDA, who is the Principal Investigator on the IND?     
John C. Marshall, MD, PhD  
 
3.  What is the phase or stage of this study?   NA  
 
 
APPENDIX:  Pharmacy -Inve stigational Drugs/Biologics  
 
1.   What is the name of the investigational drug/biologic ?   Estrace (Warner -Chilcott, Rockaway, NJ) IND 
#64,126 
 
2. Where will the subjects be seen for the administration/dispensing of the drug?     
___X __  Inpatient Unit:  Subject will be dispensed estrace when discharged from the first and third 
inpatient admissions.  Subject will be instructed to take the estrace tablets once daily for 7 days after the 
first and third overnight admissions. (Thus subjects will take two rounds of estrace for 7 days). ___  
 
3.  What dose will be utilized in this study?    
Estrace, 0.5 -1 mg once a day  
 
4. What will be the frequency of dosing in this study?     
Daily  
 
5.  What will be the duration of dosing in this study?    
7 days after the first  overnight admission and 7 days after the second overnight admission (thus a total of 
14 days)  
 
6.  What route of administration will be utilized?    
PO 
 
7.  Will drug need to be prepared by the UVa Investigational Drug Service (IDS)?     
__X___  NO-  Drug will be prepared and/or administered per package insert  
 
IRB-HSR# 13789: Effect of Metformin on Sensitivity of the GnRH Pul se Generator to Suppression by 
Estradiol and Progesterone in Hyperandrogenic Adolescent Girls  
 
Page 35 of 47 
Version Date: 1 2/14/2015 8.  Are there any special handling instructions mandated by the study (e.g. weighing hazardous 
materials)?   No.  
 
9.  Does the protocol provide provisions for dose titration, dose reductions, and or re- challenged (if drug 
is stopped), etc.?   No.  
 
10.  How will missed doses be handled?     
The subject should take a dose as soon as she remembers, unless it has been a full 24 hours, at which point the 
missed dose should be skipped and the regularly sche duled daily dose should be taken.  
 
11.  Will a comparator (active or placebo) be utilized in the protocol ?   No. 
 
12.  Does this study involve research on a drug, biologic, supplement or food additive ?    Yes.  
 
►IF YES , is this stud y investigator initiated ?   Yes.  
 If yes, answer questions # 13 and 14  
 If no, answer question # 13 only. 
 
13    A re you using a drug/supplement/ food additive in a manner not approved by the FDA?    Yes.  
 
IF YES , answer question s 13a- 13f 
You may reference the non -IRB protocol to answer these questions. 
 
13a.  Describe pertinent animal data that is available regarding the toxicity/safety of this drug.     
Not applicable as sufficient human data is available.   
 
13b. Describe pertinent human data that is available regarding the toxi city/safety of this drug.    
Although Estrace is not often prescribed to adolescent girls, there is significant experience with 
estrogens in this population, generally in the form of oral contraceptive pills.  Oral contraceptive pills 
have been shown safe and effective in adolescent girls, and are commonly used for a number of medical 
conditions, including hyperandrogenism, as well as for contraception.    
 
13c. Have there been any human deaths associated with this drug?     
None known. 
 
13d. In how many hum ans has this drug been used previously?     
Oral estrogens, in various formulations, have been used to treat millions of women, although 
exact numbers are unknown. 
 
13e. If this protoc ol will be used in children describe any previ ous use of this drug with c hildren  of 
a similar age range.    
Although Estrace is not often prescribed to adolescent girls, there is significant experience with 
estrogens in this population, generally in the form of oral contraceptive pills.  Oral contraceptive 
pills have been shown safe and effective in adolescent girls, and are commonly used for a number 
of medical conditions, including hyperandrogenism, as well as for contraception.  There is no data 
for the use of estrace in pre- pubertal girls.  
IRB-HSR# 13789: Effect of Metformin on Sensitivity of the GnRH Pul se Generator to Suppression by 
Estradiol and Progesterone in Hyperandrogenic Adolescent Girls  
 
Page 36 of 47 
Version Date: 1 2/14/2015  
14.  Do the following criteria app ly?  
 
_____  The investigation is intended to be reported to FDA as a well -controlled study in support of a 
new indication for use or intended to be used to support any other significant change in the labeling for 
the drug;  
 
_____  If the drug that is unde rgoing investigation is lawfully marketed as a prescription drug product, 
the investigation is intended to support a significant change in the advertising for the product;  
 
_____  The investigation does involve a route of administration or dosage level or use in a patient 
population or other factor that significantly increases the risks (or decreases the acceptability of the 
risks) associated with the use of the drug product.  
 If Not checked - explain why you believe the risk to subjects is not increased:   
Although Estrace is not often prescribed to adolescent girls, there is significant experience with 
estrogens in this population, generally in the form of oral contraceptive pills.  Oral contraceptive pills 
have been shown safe and effective in adolescent g irls, and are commonly used for a number of medical 
conditions, including hyperandrogenism, as well as for contraception.  
 
___X _  The investigation will be conducted in compliance with the requirements for institutional review 
set part in part 21CFR56 and with the requirements for informed consent set forth in part 21CFR50 ; and   
This item  must  be checked.  
 
__X__ The investigation will be conducted in compliance with the requirements of 21CFR312.7 
(Promotion and charging for investigational drugs)  
 This item  must  be checked.  
 
15.  Is this a post -marketing study?      No.  
 
APPENDIX:  Pharmacy -Investigational Drugs/Biologics  
 
1.   What is the name of the investigational drug/biologic ?    
• Micronized progesterone powder (Spectrum Chemical Manufacturing Corpora tion, Irving, CA), 
IND# 64,126 
 
2. Where will the subjects be seen for the administration/dispensing of the drug?     
__X___  Inpatient Unit: Subject will be dispensed micronized progesterone when discharged from the first 
and third inpatient admissions.  Subject will be instructed to take the progesterone suspension three times a 
day for 7 days after the first and third overnight admissions. (Thus subjects will take two rounds of 
progesterone for 7 days).  
 
3.  What dose will be utilized in this study?    
20 mg/ml, 25- 100 mg 
 
IRB-HSR# 13789: Effect of Metformin on Sensitivity of the GnRH Pul se Generator to Suppression by 
Estradiol and Progesterone in Hyperandrogenic Adolescent Girls  
 
Page 37 of 47 
Version Date: 1 2/14/2015 4. What will be the frequency of dosing in this study?     
Three times a day at 0700, 1500, and 2300 hr  
 
5.  What will be the duration of dosing in this study?    
7 days after the first overnight admission and 7 days after the second overnight admission (thus a total of 
14 days)  
 
6.  What route of administration will be utilized?    
PO 
 
7.  Will drug need to be prepared by the UVa Investigational Drug Service (IDS)?     
___X __  YES  
 
►IF YES, complete t he following information under 7a- 7d.  
If you need assistanc e completing this section  contact the Investigational Pharmacists at 982- 1048 
7a.  Concentration  
__X___ Standard 
_____  Non-  Standard -  specify   
 
7b.  Diluents  
__X___ Standard 
_____  Non-  Standard -  specify   
 
7c.  Stability after prepared  
__X___ Standard 
_____  Non-  Standard -  specify   
 
7d. Special storage requirements  
___X __ Standard 
_____  Non-  Standard -  specify   
 
8.  Are there any special handling instructions mandated by  the study (e.g. weighing hazardous 
materials)?   No.  
 
9.  Does the protocol provide provisions for dose titration, dose reductions, and or re -challenged (if drug 
is stopped), etc.?   No.  
 
10.  How will missed doses be handled?     
The subject should take the missed dose when she remembers it unless she is due for the next dose.  If 
the next dose is due, it should be taken and the missed dose should be skipped. 
 
11.  Will a comparator (active or placebo) be utilized in the protocol ?   No. 
 
12.  Does this st udy involve research on a drug, biologic, supplement or food additive ?    Yes.  
 
►IF YES , is this stud y investigator initiated?   Yes.  
IRB-HSR# 13789: Effect of Metformin on Sensitivity of the GnRH Pul se Generator to Suppression by 
Estradiol and Progesterone in Hyperandrogenic Adolescent Girls  
 
Page 38 of 47 
Version Date: 1 2/14/2015  If yes, answer questions # 13 and 14  
 If no, answer question # 13 only. 
 
13    A re you using a drug/supplement/ food additive in a manner not approved by the FDA?    Yes.  
 
IF YES , answer question s 13a- 13f 
You may reference the non -IRB protocol to answer these questions. 
 
13a.  Describe pertinent animal data that is available regarding the toxicity/safety of this drug.     
Not applicable, as abundant human data is available.  
 
13b. Describe pertinent human  data that is available regarding the toxicity/safety of this drug.    
We are using a micronized progesterone suspension which is formulated/constituted by our 
investigational pharmacy. There are no specific data regarding human toxicity/safety of the UVAH S’s 
progesterone suspension, but the progesterone used to formulate the suspension is FDA approved. We 
have used this progesterone suspension in other protocols, and we have thus far administered the 
progesterone suspension over 30 adolescent girls and at least 12 adult women; no adverse events have 
occurred.  
 
13c. Have there been any human deaths associated with this drug?    None known.  
 
13d. In how many humans has this drug been used previously?     
The micronized progesterone suspension, as formulated by the UVa Investigational Drug Pharmacy, has 
been  administered to over 30 adolescent girls and to at least 12 adults in the context of our clinical 
studies.   
 
13e. If this protoc ol will be used in children describe any previ ous use of this drug with childre n of 
a similar age range.    
The oral micronized progesterone suspension formulated by the University of Virginia Investigational 
Drug Pharmacy has been given to over 30 adolescent girls as part of our protocols.  There have been no 
adverse effects.  
 
 
14.  Do the following criteria apply?  
 
_____  The investigation is intended to be reported to FDA as a well -controlled study in support of a 
new indication for use or intended to be used to support any other significant change in the labeling for 
the drug;  
 
_____  If the drug that is undergoing investigation is lawfully marketed as a prescription drug product, 
the investigation is intended to support a significant change in the advertising for the product;  
 
_____  The investigation does involve a route of admi nistration or dosage level or use in a patient 
population or other factor that significantly increases the risks (or decreases the acceptability of the 
risks) associated with the use of the drug product.  
IRB-HSR# 13789: Effect of Metformin on Sensitivity of the GnRH Pul se Generator to Suppression by 
Estradiol and Progesterone in Hyperandrogenic Adolescent Girls  
 
Page 39 of 47 
Version Date: 1 2/14/2015  If Not checked - explain why you believe the risk to  subjects is not increased:   
 The oral micronized progesterone suspension formulated by the University of Virginia 
Investigational Drug Pharmacy  has been given to at least 30  adolescent girls as part of our protocols.  
There have been no adverse effects.  
 
_X___  The investigation will be conducted in compliance with the requirements for institutional review 
set part in part 21CFR56 and with the requirements for informed consent set forth in part 21CFR50 ; and   
This item  must  be checked.  
 
_X___ The investi gation will be conducted in compliance with the requirements of 21CFR312.7 
(Promotion and charging for investigational drugs)  
 This item  must  be checked.  
 
15.  Is this a post -marketing study?      No.  
APPENDIX:  Pharmacy -Investigational Drugs/Biologics  
 
1.   What is the name of the investigational drug/biologic ?    
Metformin (generic metformin manufacturers); IND# 64,126 
 
2. Where will the subjects be seen for the administration/dispensing of the drug?     
__X___  Inpatient Unit: Subject will be given suppl y of metformin upon discharge from the second 
overnight study admission. 
 
3.  What dose will be utilized in this study?    
Subject will start a 500 mg dose and gradually increase up to 2000 mg a day.   
 
4. What will be the frequency of dosing in this study ?    
Upon discharge from admission 2 (day 8 of study), subjects will take 500 mg of metformin once daily.   
On day 14 of study, subjects will begin taking 500 mg of metformin twice daily.  
On day 21 of study, subjects will begin taking 1000 mg of metformin in the morning and 500 mg of 
metformin at night.  
On day 28 of study, subjects will begin taking 1000 mg of metformin twice daily.  
 
5.  What will be the duration of dosing in this study?    
Subjects will take metformin for at least 11 weeks.  
 
6.  What route  of administration will be utilized?    
PO 
 
7.  Will drug need to be prepared by the UVa Investigational Drug Service (IDS)?     
__X___  NO-  Drug will be prepared and/or administered per package insert   
 
8.  Are there any special handling instructions mandated by the study (e.g. weighing hazardous 
materials)?  No.  
IRB-HSR# 13789: Effect of Metformin on Sensitivity of the GnRH Pul se Generator to Suppression by 
Estradiol and Progesterone in Hyperandrogenic Adolescent Girls  
 
Page 40 of 47 
Version Date: 1 2/14/2015  
9.  Does the protocol provide provisions for dose titration, dose reductions, and or re -challenged (if drug 
is stopped), etc.?   Yes.   
 
►IF YES, provide specifics .  Dose of metformin will be increased gradually (as outlined above).   
 
10.  How will missed doses be handled?     
The subject should take the missed dose when she remembers it unless she is due for the next dose.  If 
the next dose is due, it should be taken and the missed dose should be skipped. 
 
11.  Will a comparator (active or placebo) be utilized in the protocol ?   No. 
 
12.  Does this study involve research on a drug, biologic, supplement or food additive ?    Yes.  
 
►IF YES , is this stud y investigator initiated?   Yes.  
 If yes, answer questions # 13 and 14  
 If no, answer question # 13 only. 
 
13    A re you using a drug/supplement/ food additive in a manner not approved by the FDA?    Yes.  
 
 
IF YES , answer question s 13a- 13f 
You m ay reference the non -IRB protocol to answer these questions. 
 
13a.  Describe pertinent animal data that is available regarding the toxicity/safety of this drug.     
Not applicable as sufficient human data is available.  
 
13b. Describe pertinent human data that is available regarding the toxicity/safety of this drug.    
 
          Metformin is widely used for the treatment of Type 2 diabetes and polycystic ovary syndrome.  In 
general, the medication is well tolerated.  The most concerning adverse effect associated with metformin 
is lactic acidosis.  This is a very rare effect, with a reported incidence of 0.03 cases per 1000 person -
years of treatment.  In over 20,000 person -years exposure to metformin in clinical trials, there were no 
reported cases of lactic acidosis.  However, when it does occur, it is associated with a mortality rate of 
50%.  The majority of cases have been described in diabetics with impaired renal function, often in the 
context of multiple other medical and surgical issues and multiple oth er pharmacologic agents.  
Therefore, it is recommended that metformin be avoided in patients with other risk factors for lactic 
acidosis, including renal dysfunction, hepatic dysfunction, congestive heart failure, hypoxemia, and 
sepsis.   
          There h ave been 3 case reports of hepatotoxicity thought to be secondary to metformin in the 
literature.  Liver function normalized following cessation of the drug, although causality was not 
definitively established. 
          Gastrointestinal adverse symptoms, including bloating, nausea, and diarrhea, are common, 
occurring in approximately 30% of patients taking metformin.  The symptoms are generally mild and 
resolve with continued treatment.  They can be minimized by starting with a low dose of metformin and 
IRB-HSR# 13789: Effect of Metformin on Sensitivity of the GnRH Pul se Generator to Suppression by 
Estradiol and Progesterone in Hyperandrogenic Adolescent Girls  
 
Page 41 of 47 
Version Date: 1 2/14/2015 gradually increasing the dose. Metformin has not been associated with hypoglycemia when given in 
therapeutic doses.  
 
13c. Have there been any human deaths associated with this drug?     
Metformin has been associated with deaths secondary to lactic acidosis.  As described above, lactic 
acidosis is a very rare complication of metformin use, with the rate of fatal lactic acidosis being 
estimated at 0.015 cases per 1000 patient -years.  Reported cases occurred primarily in those with other 
risk factors for lactic acidosis, including renal insufficiency and congestive heart failure.   
 
13d. In how many humans has this drug been used previously?     
Metformin has been used in innumerable adults with Type 2 diabetes, as well as many women with 
PCOS.  Metformin is used w idely for the treatment of Type 2 diabetes and PCOS in adolescence, 
although the total number of children treated to date is unclear.   
 
13e. If this protoc ol will be used in children describe any previ ous use of this drug with children of 
a similar age range.     
Metformin is approved for use in children with Type 2 diabetes from ages 10 to 16 (ages 17 or older are 
considered “adult” for this FDA -approval) , and has been evaluated for safety in that population.  A 
number of small studies have evaluated Metfo rmin as a potential treatment for adolescent girls with 
PCOS or its precursors, including hyperandrogenism and precocious puberty.  
 
Number of girls treated with metformin for PCOS  
Unfortunately, there is no registry documenting this information precisely. However, i n a survey of 
pediatric endocrinologists published in 2005, 68% of surveyed pediatric endocrinologists said t hat they 
use metformin as first- line therapy for obese adolescents with PCOS (“Approach to adoles cent 
polycystic ovary syndrome [PCOS]  in the pediatric endocrine community in the U.S.A.,” Guttmann -
Bauman I, Journal of Pediatric Endocrinology and Metabolism , 2005).  The prevalence of PCOS in of 
American young women is 5- 10% (“ Metformin for the Treatment of the Polycystic Ovary Syndrome,” 
Nestler JE, NEJM  2008), and the onset of PCOS among these young women is commonly in 
adolescence (though exact number s have not been published as to prevalence in adolescence). There are 
currently approximately 20 million girls in the US between 10 -19 years old 
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Demographics_of_the_United_States).  Thus, if even 25% of young 
women with PCOS developed it during adolescence and if just half  of these saw a pediatric 
endocrinologist for treatment of their disease, and 68% of these endocrinologists started metformin as 
treatment, that would mean that at any given time 170,000 girls in this age range would be taking 
metformin for PCOS. Therefore, in our estimation, thousands of girls in this age range have been 
prescribed metformin off -label for PCOS.  
 
Here at UVA, in Pediatric Endocrinology and the Children’s Fitness Clinic, all of our providers use 
metformin as a first -line therapy for overweight adolescent girls with PCOS (which represents hundreds 
of patient -care visits  here at UVA a lone). Collectively, in our experience, this medication has been safe 
in children and we have seen no serious side effects, beyond mild and reversible GI disturbances 
(nausea, abdominal discomfort, loose stools). 
 
14.  Do the following criteria apply?  
 
IRB-HSR# 13789: Effect of Metformin on Sensitivity of the GnRH Pul se Generator to Suppression by 
Estradiol and Progesterone in Hyperandrogenic Adolescent Girls  
 
Page 42 of 47 
Version Date: 1 2/14/2015 _____  The investigation is intended to be reported to FDA as a well -controlled study in support of a 
new indication for use or intended to be used to support any other significant change in the labeling for 
the drug;  
 
_____  If the drug that is undergoing i nvestigation is lawfully marketed as a prescription drug product, 
the investigation is intended to support a significant change in the advertising for the product;  
 
_____  The investigation does involve a route of administration or dosage level or use in a  patient 
population or other factor that significantly increases the risks (or decreases the acceptability of the 
risks) associated with the use of the drug product.  
 If Not checked - explain why you believe the risk to subjects is not increased:   
 
Metform in is approved for use in children with Type 2 diabetes from ages 10 to 16, and has been 
evaluated for safety in that population.  Therefore, as this medication will be given to a similar 
population in this study, we do not believe this represents increase d risk. 
 
__X__  The investigation will be conducted in compliance with the requirements for institutional review 
set part in part 21CFR56 and with the requirements for informed consent set forth in part 21CFR50 ; and   
This item  must  be checked.  
 
_X___ The  investigation will be conducted in compliance with the requirements of 21CFR312.7 
(Promotion and charging for investigational drugs)  
 This item  must  be checked.  
 
15.  Is this a post -marketing study?   No.     
APPENDIX:  Privacy Plan for Studies With Consen t 
1.  Answer the questions below (1a -1e) to d escribe your/central registry’s plan to protect the 
identifiable data from improper use and disclosure.   
 
1a.  How will data be stored ? 
___X __  Data, which may include h ealth information , or other highly sensit ive data will 
be stored with HIPAA identifiers.   
You MUST choose this option if case report forms will include such items as initials.  
 
1b. Will specimens be stored by the UVa study team ? Yes.  
If YES, t he following security precautions will be implemen ted:  
• Specimens will be kept  in a locked freezer/ or locked room  
• __X___ Access to the freezer/room will be limited to authorized 
personnel.  Specimens with HIPAA identifiers will never be shared 
outside of UVa without the written permission of the subject.  
 
1c.  Will any of the data be stored electronically  by the UVa study team ? Yes.  
 
IRB-HSR# 13789: Effect of Metformin on Sensitivity of the GnRH Pul se Generator to Suppression by 
Estradiol and Progesterone in Hyperandrogenic Adolescent Girls  
 
Page 43 of 47 
Version Date: 1 2/14/2015 ►IF YES, will it include any HIPAA identifiers with health information or other 
highly sensitive data? 
 
►IF YES, where will it be stored?  
_X____  a Health Systems Computing S ervices (HS/CS) managed server that is 
configured to store data regulated by HIPAA . 
 
1d. Will any of the data be collected or stored in hard copy format by the UVa study team 
(e.g.- on paper ) ?  Yes.  
 
►IF YES, where will it be stored?  
 
__X___ case report forms will be stored in a secure area with limited access.   
 
1e.  The following procedures will also be followed.  
• Only investigators for this study and clinicians caring for the patient will have access 
to the data.  They will each use a unique log -in ID and password that will keep 
confidential.  
• Each investigator will sign the University’s Electronic Access Agreement  forward the 
signed agreement to the appropriate department as instructed on the form.  
If you currently have access to clinical data it is likely that you have already signed 
this form.  You are not required to sign it again.  
• UVa Institutional Data Protection Standards will be followed  
http://itc.virginia.edu/security/dataprotection .  Identifiable data is considered to be   
“Highly Sensitive”.  A Limited Data Set is usually considered to be “Moderately 
Sensitive” and de -identified data is usually considered to be “Not  Sensitive”.   
• If identifiable data ( data with health information and HIPAA identifiers ) is transferred 
to any other location such as a desktop, laptop, memory stick, CD etc. the researcher 
must follow the University’s  “Electronic Storage of Highly Sensitive Data  Policy ”. 
Additional requirements may be found in the Universities Requirements for  Securing 
Electronic Devices.   
• If identifiable health information is taken away from the UVa Health System, Medical 
Center Policy # 0218  will be followed.  
• The data will be securely removed from the server, additional computer(s), and 
electronic media according to the University's Electronic Data Removal Policy .  
• The data will be encrypted or removed if the electronic device is sent outside of UVa 
for repair a ccording to the University's Electronic Data Removal Policy . 
• If PHI will be faxed, researchers will follow the Health System Policy # 0194.     
• If PHI will be emailed, researchers will follow th e Health System Policy #  0193  and 
UVa Institutional Data Protection Standards  . 
• The data may not be analyzed for any other study without additional IRB approval.  
• If you are using patient information you must f ollow  Health System Policy  # 0021 . 
 
Summary of Requirements to Comply with UVa Health System, Medical Center and University Policies 
and Guidance as noted above:  
IRB-HSR# 13789: Effect of Metformin on Sensitivity of the GnRH Pul se Generator to Suppression by 
Estradiol and Progesterone in Hyperandrogenic Adolescent Girls  
 
Page 44 of 47 
Version Date: 1 2/14/2015  
Highly Sensitive Data is:  
-personal information that can lead to identify theft if exposed or  
-health information that reveals an individual’s health condition and/or history of health services 
use.  
 
PHI- a type of Highly Sensitive Data, is health information combined with a HIPAA identifier  
 
• LIMIT - Limit the HIPAA identifiers to the minimal amo unt needed-  e.g. use initials 
instead of name, use a code instead of initials, limit amount/type of health information 
collected , and collect and share only those items you state you will in this protocol.  
• SECURE - Secure Highly Sensitive Data 
o Because sing le-use electronic devices and media, such as desktops, laptops, memory 
sticks, CDs,  smartphones  etc., can be easily lost or stolen, the University strictly 
limits the circumstances under which Highly Sensitive Data  may be stored on them. 
In accordance with  the University’s Electronic Storage of Highly Sensitive Data 
Policy , you must obtain written approval from your Department AND VP or Dean 
prior to moving data to single use devices or media by using the Highly Sensitive 
Data Storage Request  Form.  
  You addi tionally are responsible for  applying all security safeguards covered 
in that policy, including but not limited to password protecting and encrypting 
any document on a single access electronic device.  
 If you use your smartphone to send email and your phone is not managed was 
not purchased and/or set up for you by the Health System, you cannot send 
Highly Sensitive Data via email.   
 In addition, do not use Outlook Web to send your email if it contains 
sensitive data.   
 Also, you are not allowed to auto forw ard your email to outside email 
systems like Gmail or Yahoo.   
 Do not save any email attachment containing Highly Sensitive Data to 
a single use device.   
 You are allowed to access Highly Sensitive Data stored on the University or 
Health Systems network via a VPN, however you cannot download any of the 
information onto your desktop or laptop. 
 Store files containing Highly Sensitive Data  on a network drive  specifically 
designated for storing this type of data, e.g. high- level security servers 
managed by Information Technology Services or the  “F” and “O” managed 
by H eath Systems C omputing Services .  You may access it via a shortcut icon 
on your desktop, but you are not allowed to take it off line to a local drive.  
 If data will be collected and/or viewed via a website, it is critical that the 
website and associated data file are set up in a highly secured manner. Do not 
attempt without assistance from:  
University Side:    ITCmicrosystems@virginia.edu  
Health System:   Web Development Center:   (434-243-6702)  
o Encrypt any electronic file containing Highly Sensitive Data that is not on a network 
drive specifically  designated for this purpose.  . See encryption solutions guidance .  
IRB-HSR# 13789: Effect of Metformin on Sensitivity of the GnRH Pul se Generator to Suppression by 
Estradiol and Progesterone in Hyperandrogenic Adolescent Girls  
 
Page 45 of 47 
Version Date: 1 2/14/2015 o Password protect any electronic device containing Highly Sensitive Data.  
o Lock up hard copies of Highly Sensitive Data.  
• PROTEC T- Protect Highly Sensitive Data  
o Do not leave a  hard copy  file open on your desk when not using it and secure your 
computer when not attended. 
o Have discussions in private.  
o If you lose Highly Sensitive Data, you must report it in accordance with the 
Information Security Incident Reporting Policy . 
o Do not share  Highly Sensitive Data  with those not on the study team or those who 
do not have a need to know. 
o Do not share with sponso r unless subject has already signed a consent form or 
IRB has approved waiver of consent.  
o If fax ing Highly Sensitive Data  within UVa  
 Verify fax numbers before faxing, and use fax cover sheets with a 
confidentiality statement.  
 If printing to a central pri nter, ensure that names and identifiers on the 
documents are given to the correct patient.  
o Highly Sensitive Data may not be stored in a Drop Box. 
o If you plan to store data in the Cloud, you must consult with UVa Information 
Technology Services (ITS) to ver ify all essential security measures are in place.  
If you have a contract to use the cloud, the contract must include required security 
measures as outlined by ITS.   
o DO NOT email health information with name, medical record number or Social 
Security numbe r to or from an email address that does not have an *HS in the 
address.  May use subject initials if within the UVa HIPAA covered entity:  The 
"UVA HIPAA covered entity" includes the hospital, health system, School of 
Medicine School of Nursing and the VP for Research Office.   
o Be aware:  PHI collected without consent/ HIPAA authorization will NOT be 
allowed to leave UVa in an identifiable form unless the disclosure is tracked with 
Health Information Services.   
o Any Highly/Moderately Sensitive Data sent out side of UVa (e.g. to sponsor) that 
was obtained under a consent must be encrypted and password protected.   
o If your electronic device is sent outside of UVa for repair, all institutional data, 
whether Highly Sensitive or not, must be either encrypted or re moved.  
o If transporting Highly/Moderately Sensitive Data in paper format from one UVa 
building to another, take the following steps to protect it:  
1. Put paper inside a closed container such as a briefcase, or sealed 
envelope to limit the chance of a losing a  piece.  
2. Do not leave Highly Sensitive Data unattended in a public area if it is 
not locked up.  
o When the study is complete, all electronic files containing Highly/Moderately 
Sensitive Data must be stored on a network drive specifically designated for that 
purpose.  They may not be stored on a single use device such as a CD.  
• STOP, THINK and BE CAREFUL - 
o If this was your Highly Sensitive Data how would you want it protected?  
IRB-HSR# 13789: Effect of Metformin on Sensitivity of the GnRH Pul se Generator to Suppression by 
Estradiol and Progesterone in Hyperandrogenic Adolescent Girls  
 
Page 46 of 47 
Version Date: 1 2/14/2015 o There are significant monetary fines  to the individual and the institution for loss 
or misuse of sensitive data.  
o Your job may also be on the line . 
  
2.  Describe your/central registry’s plan to destroy the HIPAA identifiers at the earliest opportunity 
consistent with the conduct of the research  and in accordance with any stipulations in the research 
sponsor contract and UVa records management guidelines.  
 
__X___The HIPAA identifiers (except full dates and or address information if needed) will be destroyed 
as soon as all publications are complete.  
This wording would allow the researcher to keep HIPAA identifiers until all queries/ request for 
additional information from publisher are addressed 
 
3.  Do you confirm that you will not reuse the identifiable data (HIPAA identifiers or health information) 
or disclose any of this information to an y other person or entity except as outlined in this protocol, except 
as required by law, for authorized oversight of the research study, or use it for other research unless 
approved by the IRB -HSR?  Yes.  
  
This means that after the study is closed at UVa:   
• You cannot contact the subject by any method (you cannot call them, send a letter, talk to them in 
person about the study, etc) without additional IRB approval  
• You cannot use the data for any research that is not already described in your IRB protocol 
without additional IRB approval (if you change your hypothesis you must modify your protocol)  
• You cannot share your research data with another researcher outside of your study team without 
additional IRB approval  
• Any health information with HIPAA identifiers  will be shredded or discarded by using recycling 
bins for confidential material found in clinic settings.  For large item disposal of confidential 
material contact Environmental Services at 2- 4976 or University Recycling at 2- 5050.  
TABLE A:  HIPAA Identi fiers (Limited Data Set)  
1.  Name  
2.  Postal address information, other than town or city, state, and zip code  
3.  Telephone numbers  
4  Fax numbers  
5.  Electronic mail addresses  
6.  Social Security number  
7.  Medical Record number  
8.  Health plan b eneficiary numbers  
9.  Account numbers  
10.  Certificate/license numbers  
11.  Vehicle identifiers and serial numbers, including license plate numbers  
12.  Device identifiers and serial numbers  
13.  Web Universal Resource Locators (URLs)  
14.  Internet Protocol (IP) address numbers  
15.  Biometric identifiers, including finger and voice prints  
16.  Full face photographic images and any comparable images  
17.  Any other unique identifying number, characteristic, code that is derived from or related to i nformation 
about the individual (e.g. initials, last 4 digits of Social Security #, mother’s maiden name, first 3 letters of last 
name.)  
 
IRB-HSR# 13789: Effect of Metformin on Sensitivity of the GnRH Pul se Generator to Suppression by 
Estradiol and Progesterone in Hyperandrogenic Adolescent Girls  
 
Page 47 of 47 
Version Date: 1 2/14/2015 APPENDIX:  Sponsor  
Sponsor Information 
1. Explain the sponsorship for this study.  
INSTRUCTIONS:  
• List names of companie s, institutes, foundations with which you have a grant or a contract from an 
entity that is not a support source.   
• Example:  This study is funded via a contract with the University of New York, which has a grant from 
the NIH to conduct this study.  We wil l be receiving free drug from Glaxo.  Glaxo will receive data 
prior to publication.  
• If the outside entity will be monitoring the study or receiving data prior to publication enter them as a 
sponsor.   
• If you are receiving things such as free supplies/ drug / devices from a company   who WILL NOT be 
monitoring the study or be receiving data prior to publication do NOT enter them here - enter this 
information under Support Source below.   
Answer/Response:  National Institutes of Health (NIH)  
 
2. Do you confirm that  you will obtain a contract/ material transfer agreement with the sponsor via the 
School of Medicine Grants and Contracts Office or the Office of Sponsored Programs (OSP)  
ospnoa@virginia.edu ? 
INSTRUCTIONS:  
You should have answered YES to the following question in Protocol Builder:   
--“Do you/will you have a contract with an outside entity to support this protocol?”  
Answer/Response:  Yes 
 
 