 
 
 
TITLE  
Histological evaluation of alveolar ridge preservation using MInerOss® versus Osteogen plug®  
bone graft  techniques : clinical study analysis part II . 
 
  
 
 
 
NCT Number: Unassigned  
 
 
 
Date:  February 8, 2019  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
ABSTRACT   
Background : The aim of this histological study was to compare the percentage of hard tissue 
(bone) after 12 -weeks to 20  weeks post -ridge augmentation surgery after using two different 
ridge preservation procedures.  
Methods : Eleven  extraction sites were randomly allocated to either group using a computer -
generated randomization assignment software. The groups were: group CCBC , received cortico -
cancellous bone c hips (CCBC) mix and a dense polytetrafluoroethylene (dPTFE) barrier membrane; 
and group CPCAC, received type I bovine Achilles  tendon collagen plug with bioactive resorbable 
calcium apatite crystals - OsteoGen - (CPCAC) . The histomorphometry analyses were done using a 
computer -based image analysis system (IMAGE -J 1.4, National Institute of Health, Bethesda, MD, 
USA) to calculate pixel area of bone tissue  and remaining bone graft material. The 
histomorphometry data were analyzed by the Student  t test to compare the data from both 
groups. In addition, histological quantitative evaluation was conducted for evidence of presence 
of foreign body reaction in both groups.  Statistical significance was evaluated at p< 0.05. 
Results : There was no  statistical significance when comparing percentage of surface area of  bone  
for both experimental groups , CCBC  and CPCAC . However, there was evidence of  foreign  body 
reaction in group CPCAC. Conclusion : The sockets that received CPCAC showed less bone 
formation compare d to the CCBC group . However, there was no  statistically significant difference 
between  the experimental  groups. In addition, group  CPCAC showed  more  evidence of  foreign  
body reaction  when compared  to group CCBC .  
Keywords:  ridge preservation, histomorphometry. Bone graft(s), alveolar bone, osteocyte(s), 
osteoblast(s), osteoclast(s), collagen(s) . 
  
Introduction   
Ridge dimensions preservation after tooth extraction is critical to success of dental implant 
placement.1 Ridge preservat ion procedures are also necessary for esthetic purposes. Even if an 
implant is not plan ned to be placed in the site, the healed site  will be more aesthetic for the final 
restorative  plan .2 
Following tooth extraction, the alveolar ridge undergoes resorption and  exhibits a wide range of dimensional changes.
3, 4 The soft and hard tissue healing within the extraction sockets following 
tooth removal was studied by histologic and clinical evaluations.4, 5In this study, healing of the 
extraction socket involved a series of events, including the formation of a coagulum that was 
replaced with a connective tissue matrix: after 1 month, woven bone filled the extraction socket; 
a cortical ridge, including woven and lamellar bone, was observed after 3 months . Subsequently, 
the woven bone was gradually replaced with lamellar bone and marrow.6 According to Tan et al. 
(2012), extraction without ridge preservation can result in a mean height loss of 1.24 mm and 
mean width reduction of 3.79 mm.  7 If the ridge is severely resorbed , the dimension loss may 
prevent implant placement in the ideal restoratively driven position.  
Also, Avila- Ortiz et al.  (2014 ), 1 demonstrated that  ridge  preservation procedures show  beneficial 
effect on reducing resorption by an average of 1.89 mm in the buccal -lingual width and 2.07 mm 
in the mid-buccal height when compared to no ridge preservation. Anatomic concerns of the 
maxillary sinus and the mandibular nerve make implant placement precarious at times, limiting 
the general dentist’s desire to place implants in compromised situations. Therefore, considering 
that more than 45  million teeth are extracted annually in the United States, socket grafting must 
become a routine procedure . 8 
Wound healing can be described as a race between various cells, like pluripotent, osteogenic, 
epithelial, fibroblasts cells to the healing site. The epithelium invagination can compromise the use 
of the socket grafting technique, so the graft material must be shielded from the epithelial 
advance ment . The socket preservation procedures are centered on the migration of pluripotent 
and osteogenic cells from the periosteum and alveolar  bone to the extraction site while at the 
same time excluding epithelial cells and fibroblasts from infiltrating and pote ntially disrupting new 
bone formation.2, 9 This tissue exclusion process is accomplished using  resorbable or non -
resorbable barrier membranes.  it is critical that either resorbable or non -resorbable membrane 
extend at least 2.0 mm beyond the  facial and lingual defect  to avoid premature bone exposure. 
The non -resorbable barrier membrane can be removed 4 -6 weeks after placement,  but it requires  
an extra  patient visit. If the membrane is prematurely lost, the prognosis becomes compromised 
due to invagination of the epithelium cells  into the grafted site  or infection. In addition , a 
resorbable membrane must be a long -lasting resorbable membrane to contain the bone graft 
particulates in the extraction site.1 
To achieve these goals a variety of materials and techniques are commonly used including autogenous tissues, allografts, alloplasts, and xenografts.  Allograft and Xenograft materials have 
gained recognition because they do not require a second surgical site and have slower resorption rates when compared to  some materials and hence can maintain dimensional stability of the ridge.  
1, 10 Freeze- dried bone allograft (FDBA) is a n alternative  to alloplasts . The performance of the FDBA 
is similarly to autogenous grafts,  which are the  gold standard  for bone graft , and has out -
performed alloplastic materials regarding dimensional stability and new bone formation. 11, 12 
Benefits of FDBA also include low -cost, unlimited supply, and lack of a seco ndary surgical site . 11 
FDBA has is  osteoconductive , and therefore  serves as a scaffold to permit capillary proliferation 
and migration of host osteoprogenitor cells to initiate the process of new bon e formation , In this 
process, h ost cells will slowly resorb the residual graft particles as new bone is forming.13 14 Ideally, 
a graf t material would provide enough resistance to resorption to maintain dimensional stability 
while simultaneously permitting adequate proliferation of blood vessels and migration of host cells 
for new bone formation. 11 
Cortical and cancellous FDBA are available for use in ridge preservation procedures. The healing  
process after grafting procedures with cortical bone is different compared with cancellous bone. 
11 Cortical allografts have been indicated to have slower rate of resorption by the host compared 
with cancellous allografts.  15 Others have found a cancellous allograft to be beneficial over a 
cortical allograft in that the lower density of cancellous bone offers a greater surface area for more rapid revascularization and cell proliferation, then providing faster healing.
16 However, an animal 
study showed no difference in healing patte rns and new bone formation when comparing cortical 
with cancellous grafts. 17 In human study Eskow & Mealey  (2014)18  showed similar new bone 
formation when comparing cortical and cancellous FDBA in ridge preservation. Also Demetter , 
Calahan & Mealey  (2017)11  compared a 50% :50% of cortico :cancellous allograft to  100% cortical 
allograft and 100% cancellous allograft when used in alveolar ridge preservation in non -molar 
teeth sites . The histomorphometric analysis showed  no significant differences among groups 
regarding percentage of vital bone or CT.  
Placing a collagen -based clotting material, also called collagen plug, such as a 100% collagen plug, 
is not considered a simple  procedure  and won’t preserve the ridge in the edentulous site  due to  it 
resorb ing in less than 2 weeks and not provid ing sufficient scaffold ing for new bone formation. 2 
The OsteoGenR ® nonceramic bone graft with bovine Achilles tendon collagen contains  crystals 
inside of the collagen matrix and therefore cannot wash out after placement , as it happens with 
particulate graft materials . 19, 20 This feature allows the use of this material as a plug, without the 
need to add  a separate membrane over the site.   OsteoGen® is highly hydrophilic and has been 
used as a particulate graft material since 1984 . It shows documented clinical success when used 
for prior to imp lant plac ement  in periodontal procedures . 20, 21 OsteoGen® strips were cleared by 
the FDA in 2009 and, more recently,   OsteoGen® p lugs  were introduced to address the grafting 
needs of ridge  preservation  procedures .  
The OsteoGen® plug is radiolucent , on the radiograph, when placed in the socke t after the 
extraction and as the crystals are resorbed and replaced by host bone, the site gradually become s 
radiographically radiopaque. The collagen component promotes keratinized tissue coverage while 
the graft component promotes new bone formation .2 
Clinical case studies have been reported in the use of OsteoGen® plugs for  ridge  preservation.2 To 
date, and to the best knowledge of the authors, no histological  studies have compared  FDBA 
allograft with OsteoGen® plug in alveolar ridge preservation after tooth extraction. Therefore, the 
purpose of this study is to compare bone healing after the use  of FDBA  allograft with a non -
resorbable membrane to OsteoGen® plug  alone in alveolar ridge preservation  procedures . The 
primary outcome of the current study is to histologically evaluate bone  formation in the two 
groups. The secondary outcome is  to evaluate the foreign body reaction on each of the groups . 
 
Materials and Methods  
The present histomorphological study is part  II of a previous ly conducted  clinical study on wound 
closure after the use of the s ame experimental groups described below. The part I of this study 
had 17 patients. Of those, 11 were used for the present histomorphometry study.  
 
 In the present study, the samples were collected from study part I to  conduct histomorpho metric 
analysis. This study had 2 experimental groups. The groups were:  
 
Experimental group (CCBC)  
Exodontia was  conducted as part of the patient’s treatment plan. After extraction  the socket s were 
thoroughly curetted,  and a clot was left in place . Cortico -cancellous allograft (MinerOss®, 
BioHorizons, Birmingham, AL, USA) were hydrated with saline solution and compacted into the  
socket up to the level of the alveolar crest. The cortico- cancellous allograft was selected for this 
study due to its confirmed bone formation at the treatment site that would receive osseointegrated implants to replace the missing maxillary posterior teeth . Expanded 
polytetrafluoroethylene (ePTFE) (Cytoplast™ TXT -200 non -resorbable high -density) membrane 
were mapped, trimmed , and placed on the surgical site. 4 -0 ePTFE (Cytoplast) thread were  used 
to conduct a hidden “X” suture.  
  
Experimental group  (CPCAC)  
Same surgical protocol was  conducted as indicated in experimental group CPCAC until exodontia . 
After exodontia and preparation of the socket, the OsteoGen® plug was  compacted into the site.  
 
Sample collection  phase  
 The patients from the study were monitored during the healing phase. At the time of planned 
implant placement, the samples were collected for histomorphometric analysis. Patients that were 
submitted to mandibular ridge preservation procedures were    scheduled for dental implant 
placement 3 -4 months after the ridge preservation procedure had been conducted. Patients that 
were submitted to maxillary ridge preservation procedures were scheduled for dental implant 
placement 5 -6 months after the ridge preservation procedure had been conducted. At the implant 
placement visit, the bone sample was collected  from the surgical site  by a 3.0 mm by 4.0 mm 
trephine and subsequently placed into  a 10% buffered formalin  solution . An osteotomy site was 
then prepared fo r the dental implant followed by manufacturer instruction. Flaps were replaced 
and sutured with 4 -0 chromic gut.  
 
Histologic Analysis 
The Trephine cores  (Figure 1) were submitted for routine formalin -fixed, paraffin -embedded 
histologic studies . All the specimens were decalcified using Decal solution, then processed, 
longitudinally sectioned, and stained with hematoxylin and eosin. Then the microscopic slides 
were scanned and viewed using the software of CaseViewer  (2.4.0.119028).    
For histo morphometric analysis  for each core sample  three components including viable bone, 
residual graft, and connective tissue . Other tissues, such as:  vascular  tissue, macrophages, and 
adipose tissue  were considered. Viable  bone was defined by visualization of osteocytes within 
lacunae of the mineralized tissue. Residual bone  graft  was defined as  a mineralized  tissue with  no 
lacunae. Connective tissue/other was defined as the absence of the above categories and the 
presence of fibrous  connective  tissue. Once tracing of components was completed , individual 
images for each layer were created and converted to binary images (ImageJ, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD). Binary images were then used to calculate the total number of pixels in each image. Using the total number of pixels per component and the total number of pixels in all three images, the percent of total ar ea occupied by vital and  residual graft material, and 
connective tissue/other were calculated.  
 
Statistical analysis  
Student paired ‘t’ test was be conducted to evaluate differences between groups . Student ‘t’ test 
was employed to compare the data in two sets of groups to identify the significance of difference 
in their means (intergroup). Probability values (p) less than 0.05 will be used considered significant  
(Table  3). 
 
 
 
 
 
RESULTS  
Fifteen  (15) patients were enrolled from the period of July 2019 to January 202 1. The patient 
profile included 7 females and 8  males, with ages ranging from 25 to 75. Two ( 2) patients were 
withdrawn due to lack of compliance to the scheduled PO  visits. An additional two  patients were 
withdrawn due to the COVID -19 related school closure, leaving a total of 11 patients who 
completed the study. Of the 11 patients  who completed the study, the average age was 55 (range 
27 to 82) , consist ing of 6 fema les and 5 males  (Table 1 ).  
 
The patients received a VAS pain rating  scale to report their pain levels at 1 -, 3- 5- and 7 -days post -
operatively.  The patient pain levels evaluated by the VAS pain rati ng scale showed no statistical 
significance between groups I and II.  
 None of the patients developed any complications and PO  infections. A total of 11 extraction sites 
were evaluated , of which 5 patients were in the group  CCBC and the remaining  patients were in 
the extraction  sites were for group  CPCAC.    
 Histologic studies of the group  CCBC (CBCT/PTEF, total 5 cases) samples revealed variable viable 
lamellar bone exhibiting focal reversal lines and osteoblastic rimming (except one case which 
showed woven bone) interspersed wi th fibrous/fibro -vascular connective tissue.  Minimal or no 
inflammation was noted and all the cases except one demonstrated minutes remnants of the graft 
material (Figure 1). In the group CPCAC (the OsteoGen® plug, total 6 samples) a variable amount 
of viable bone, either of lamellar or woven type, intermixed with fibro- vascular connective tissue 
was noted.  Reversal lines and plump osteoblastic rimming were also noted.  The remnants of graft 
material were found in all the cases and 3 out of the 6 cases showed foreign body granulomatous inflammation  (Figure 2) .  
 
Table  2 shows average of the bone area measurements in (pixels) for each of the experimental 
sample of groups CCBC and CPCAC . Table 3 shows the percent bone area measurements for each 
of the experimental sample of groups CCBC  and CPCAC . Note a higher average bone  presence in 
the histological sections for group  CCBC when compared to group CPCAC. The histomorphometric 
results showed  an average  of 35.13% of  bone area in group  CPCAC when compare d to an average 
of 42.38% group  CCBC , but there is no statistically significant difference between  the groups.  
 
DISCUSSION  
The primary purpose of ridge preservation is to maintain the ridge dimensions to allow for 
restoratively driven implant placement22, 23. Secon dly, ridge preservation procedures may provide 
adequate vital bone for dental implant placemen t 23. Xenografts and allografts are the two most 
used  bone graft materials in dentistry.  Osteogen® plug is a unique product in that it is a synergy 
between both bovine type I bovine Achilles  tendon collagen and non -ceramic resorbable calcium 
apatite bone graft crystals.  To the knowledge of the authors no study compared the Osteogen plug 
bone formation to the allograft material. 
In this histomorphometric study comparing two different ridge preservation techniques, there 
were no histomorphometric  statistically significant differences  found between the two 
experimental groups . Primary outcome variable tested w as percent age of bony tissue area present 
for both experimental groups . The second outcome variable observed was trace of inflammatory 
reaction for group CPCAC , which may affect  the long- term  outcome of implant success.  
From the standpoint of implant placement, both experimental groups  evaluated in this study 
showed similar results in a short -term success  basis , but long- term analysis is necessary in order 
to further evaluate the success of future implants place in the sites using both techniques , 
especially for the technique that included the use of Osteogen® plug, due to it’s histological 
evidence of foreign body reaction in the sites presenting this product . 
Also, the maxillary bone type could be deferent from mandibular24 , so with larger sample group 
the bone formation may be evaluated in each arch.  
The radiograph CBCT can also be used for comparing the  dimensional changes before  and after 
grafting in the future studies.  
The benefits of using Osteogen® plug is it’s simplified clinical application, no needs of second 
surgery for removal of the membrane, in addition to  being cost effective when compared to the 
technique for group CCBC .  
There was a limitation in  our study , the sample size became limited due to the COVID -19 pandemic 
which caused three patients to withdraw from the study.  
 
CONCLUSION  
To our knowledge, this is the first study to compare the amount of the bone available between 
use of Osteogen® plug   and the use of MinerOss  and Cytoplast membrane for ridge augmentation 
procedures. The current findings indicate that there was no significant difference for the hard 
tissue available for placing the implant 3 -5 months after grafting . 
REFERENCES  
1. Avila -Ortiz G, Elangovan S, Kramer KW, Blanchette D, Dawson DV. Effect of alveolar 
ridge preservation after tooth extraction: a systematic review and meta -analysis. J Dent Res  
2014;93:950- 958. 
2. Kosinski T. A Simple and Cost -Effective Socket Preservation Technique. Dent Today  
2016;35:90, 92, 94- 95. 
3. Devlin H, Ferguson MW. Alveolar ridge resorption and mandibular atrophy. A review of 
the role of local and systemic factors. Br Dent J 1991;170:101- 104. 
4. Lekovic V, Kenney EB, Weinlaender M, et al. A bone r egenerative approach to alveolar 
ridge maintenance following tooth extraction. Report of 10 cases. J Periodontol  
1997;68:563- 570. 
5. Schropp L, Wenzel A, Kostopoulos L, Karring T. Bone healing and soft tissue contour changes following single -tooth extracti on: a clinical and radiographic 12- month 
prospective study. Int J Periodontics Restorative Dent  2003;23:313- 323. 
6. Cardaropoli G, Araujo M, Lindhe J. Dynamics of bone tissue formation in tooth extraction sites. An experimental study in dogs. J Clin Period ontol  2003;30:809- 818. 
7. Tan WL, Wong TL, Wong MC, Lang NP. A systematic review of post -extractional alveolar 
hard and soft tissue dimensional changes in humans. Clin Oral Implants Res  2012;23 Suppl 
5:1-21. 
8. Zhao R, Yang R, Cooper PR, Khurshid Z, Shavandi A, Ratnayake J. Bone Grafts and Substitutes in Dentistry: A Review of Current Trends and Developments. Molecules  
2021;26. 
9. Becker W, Becker BE. Guided tissue regeneration for implants placed into extraction sockets and for implant dehiscences: surgica l techniques and case report. Int J Periodontics 
Restorative Dent  1990;10:376- 391. 
10. Corbella S, Taschieri S, Francetti L, Weinstein R, Del Fabbro M. Histomorphometric 
Results After Postextraction Socket Healing with Different Biomaterials: A Systematic Review of the Literature and Meta- Analysis. Int J Oral Maxillofac Implants  2017;32:1001-
1017. 
11. Demetter RS, Calahan BG, Mealey BL. Histologic Evaluation of Wound Healing After Ridge Preservation With Cortical, Cancellous, and Combined Cortico- Cancellous  Freeze-
Dried Bone Allograft: A Randomized Controlled Clinical Trial. J Periodontol  
2017;88:860- 868. 
12. Ten Heggeler JM, Slot DE, Van der Weijden GA. Effect of socket preservation therapies following tooth extraction in non- molar regions in humans: a syst ematic review. Clin Oral 
Implants Res  2011;22:779- 788. 
13. Burchardt H. The biology of bone graft repair. Clin Orthop Relat Res  1983:28- 42. 
14. Mastrogiacomo M, Muraglia A, Komlev V, et al. Tissue engineering of bone: search for a better scaffold. Orthod C raniofac Res  2005;8:277- 284. 
15. Balabhadra RS, Kim DH, Zhang HY. Anterior cervical fusion using dense cancellous allografts and dynamic plating. Neurosurgery  2004;54:1405- 1411; discussion 1411- 1402. 
16. Dux SJ, Ramsey D, Chu EH, Rimnac CM, Hernandez CJ. Alterations in damage processes in dense cancellous bone following gamma -radiation sterilization. J Biomech  
2010;43:1509- 1513. 
17. Malinin TI, Carpenter EM, Temple HT. Particulate bone allograft incorporat ion in 
regeneration of osseous defects; importance of particle sizes. Open Orthop J  2007;1:19-
24. 
18. Eskow AJ, Mealey BL. Evaluation of healing following tooth extraction with ridge 
preservation using cortical versus cancellous freeze- dried bone allograft . J Periodontol  
2014;85:514- 524. 
19. Valen M, Ganz SD. A synthetic bioactive resorbable graft for predictable implant reconstruction: part one. J Oral Implantol  2002;28:167- 177. 
20. Epstein SR, Valen M. An alternative treatment for the periodontal infrabony defect: a synthetic bioactive resorbable composite graft. Dent Today  2006;25:92- 97. 
21. Corsair A. A clinical evaluation of resorbable hydroxylapatite for the repair of human intra -
osseous defects. J Oral Implantol  1990;16:125- 128. 
22. Evian CI, Rosenberg ES, Coslet JG, Corn H. The osteogenic activity of bone removed from healing extraction sockets in humans. J Periodontol  1982;53:81- 85. 
23. Dahlin C, Linde A, Gottlow J, Nyman S. Healing of bone defects by guided tissue regeneration. Pla st Reconstr Surg  1988;81:672- 676. 
24. Devlin H, Horner K, Ledgerton D. A comparison of maxillary and mandibular bone mineral densities. J Prosthet Dent  1998;79:323- 327. 
 
 
 
 