IRB#:  97-007A(12)  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering Cancer Center  
Amended:  4/10/07  
Page  1 of 16  
  
11C-METHIONINE,  2-[18F]-FLUORO -2-DEOXY -D-GLUCOSE,  AND  [18F] 
DIHYDROTESTOSTERONE  (FDHT)  PET  IMAGING  IN PATIENTS  WITH  PROGRESSIVE  
PROSTATE  CANCER  
 
 
1.0 PROTOCOL SUMMARY:  3 
2.0 OBJECTIVES:  3 
3.0 RATIONALE AND  BACKGROUND  4 
3.1 DISEASE  INFORMATION  4 
3.2 CONVENTIONAL  IMAGING  MODALITIES  5 
3.3 POSITRON  EMISSION  TOMOGRAPHY  5 
3.4 EQUIPMENT  INFORMATION  (PET)  7 
3.5 STANDARD  EVALUATION  SCHEMA  7 
4.0 BACKGROUND  DRUG INFORMATION  8 
5.0 PATIENT ELIGIBILITY  8 
6.0 PRETREATMENT EVALUATION  9 
7.0 TREATMENT PLAN  9 
8.0 TOXICITY  ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  11 
9.0 GUIDELINES FOR  REPORTING  ADVERSE  DRUG  REACTIONS  11 
10.0 CRITERIA  FOR  REMOVAL  FROM  STUDY  11 
11.0 DATA  ANALYSIS  12 
12.0 BIOSTATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS  12 
13.0 SUBJECT  REGISTRATION  13 
14.0 PROTECTION OF HUMAN SUBJECTS  13 
15.0 INFORMED CONSENT PROCEDURES  14 
16.0.  BIBLIOGRAPHY  Z15 
 
 
STUDY  COORDINATORS:  
 
Steven  M. Larson,  M.D.  (212)  639-7373  
Michael  J. Morris,  M.D.  (*) (212)  639-5132  
Mentor:  Howard  I. Scher,  MD(*)  (212)  639-2364  
IRB#:  97-007A(12)  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering Cancer Center  
Amended:  4/10/07  
Page  2 of 16  
  
DEPARTMENT  OF DIAGNOSTIC  RADIOLOGY:  
 
Nuclear  
Medicine/Cylotron  : Tim Akhurst,  MD, Henry  Yeung,  MD, Ronald  D. Finn,  PhD,  Heiko  Schoder,  
MD 
 
Medical  Imaging:  Larry  Schwartz,  MD.  
DEPARTMENT  OF MEDICAL  PHYSICS:  
John  Humm,  PhD,  Yusef  Erdi,  PhD 
 
GENITOURINARY  ONCOLOGY  SERVICE,  DEPARTMENT  OF MEDICINE:  
 
Howard  I. Scher,  MD,*  Susan  Slovin,  MD,PhD*;  Christine  Liebertz,  RN;   Tracy  Curley,  RN; Robert  
Motzer,  MD;  Dean  Bajorin,  MD;  Lou Kampel,  MD;  Jason  Koutcher,  MD,PhD.  
 
DIVISION  OF HEMATOLOGIC  ONCOLOGY:  
 
David  Golde,  MD. 
 
DEPARTMENT  OF BIOSTATISTICS  AND  EPIDEMIOLOGY:  
 
Glen  Heller,  Ph.D.  
 
DEPARTMENT  OF CLINICAL  CHEMISTRY:  
 
Morton  Schwartz,  PhD.  
CLINICAL  TRIALS  OFFICE:  
Karen  Siedlecki  
 
(*) designated  to obtain  informed  consent  
 
MEMORIAL  SLOAN -KETTERING  CANCER  CENTER  
1275  York  Avenue  
New  York,  NY 10021  
(212)  639-2364  
IRB#:  97-007A(12)  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering Cancer Center  
Amended:  4/10/07  
Page  3 of 16  
  
1.0 PROTOCOL  SUMMARY:  
The imaging  modalities  used to monitor  prostate  cancer  in man are limited.  The disease  typically  
spreads  to osseous  sites,  where  changes  are difficult  to quantitate  on a serial  basis.  The proposed  
trial is the first in a series  of studies  designed  to evaluate  the biology  of prostate  cancer  in vivo 
using  PET imaging.  It is based  on the ability  of positron  emitting  radiopharmaceuticals  to serve  as 
tracers  of biologic  events.  In this study,  we will examine  the metabolic  properties  of 11C- 
methionine  and FDG  in prostate  cancer  by PET imaging.  
 
Initially,  we will define  the degree  of correlation  between  FDG  or C-11-methionine  and standard  
imaging  modalities  such as CT/MRI  and bone  scans.  We have  observed  discordance  between  
uptake  of [11C]-methionine  (CMET) and  FDG  in individual  sites.( 1) Pilot  studies  have  given  us a 
basis  for estimates  of variability  and differences  between  FDG  and CMET,  and kinetic  data has 
led to the design  of acquisition  protocols  that make  whole  body  PET imaging  of CMET  practical  
in patients.  As such,  we will continue  to compare  on a site by site basis  the uptake  of 11C- 
methionine  and FDG  by performing  whole  body  PET imaging  following  each 
radiopharmaceutical  administration.  Comparisons  will be made  to bone  scintigraphy  using  99m- 
Tc scanning,  computed  tomography,  and, when  clinically  indicated,  magnetic  resonance  imaging  
to assess  whether  sites detected  by PET  imaging  are identified  using  standard  imaging  techniques  
and vice versa . Also, where tumor  sites are identified on PET  scans, a semiquantitative  index, the  
standardized  uptake value  (SUV), as well as  related parameters  of total  lesion metabolism  (TLM)  
will be calculated  as an objective  measurement.  In selected  patients,  imaging  will be performed  
with F-18 fluoro  dihydrotestosterone  (FDHT),  obtained  through  a collaboration  with Michael  
Welch,  Ph.D.  of Washington  University,  St. Louis.( 2) 
 
We will also define  the utility  of PET as an outcome  measure  following  treatment  by assessing  
the effects  of treatment  on SUV.  Selected  patients  will be asked  to undergo  follow -up PET 
scanning  along  with follow -up bone  scintigraphy,  CT or MRI,  where  clinically  appropriate.  
 
All patients  with histologically  documented  progressive  prostate  cancer  are eligible,  including  
those with  localized  disease, rising  PSA,  non-castrate  metastatic,  and castrat e metastatic  disease.  
Progression  may be defined  either  by a rise in PSA of > 50%,  development  of new bone  lesions  
or an increase  in pre-existing  lesions,  or an increase  in measurable  disease.  
 
Patients  will undergo  PET scanning  using  either  FDG  either  alone  or with CMET  or DHT  
(performed  the day following  the FDG  scan).  Serum  will be drawn  to define  the 
pharmacokinetic  properties  of the tracer.  Serial  PET scans  will be performed  at baseline,  four 
weeks,  and twelve  weeks  and six months,  in conjunction  with bone  scanning,  CT/MRI,  where  
clinically  appropriate,  unless  the patient  is on a clinical  trial that dictates  otherwise.  These  will 
be compared  with baseline  scans  and available  prior  scans  . 
 
2.0 OBJECTIVES:  
The primary  objectives  of this study  are: 
 
2.1    Homogeneity  of the metabolism  of prostate  cancer  metastases:  To explore  the FDG  
and CMET  metabolism in  tumors  by PET in progressive  prostate  cancer,  on a site by site 
basis.  
IRB#:  97-007A(12)  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering Cancer Center  
Amended:  4/10/07  
Page  4 of 16  
 2.1 Diagnostic  ability:  To explore  the diagnostic  ability  of FDG  and, in selected  cases  11C- 
methionine,  by comparing  PET scanning  to standard  of care diagnostic  studies,  which  
include  the 99m-Tc bone  scan,  computed  tomography,  and magnetic  resonance  imaging.  
 
2.2. Treatment  effects:  To explore  changes  in the relative  tumor  uptake,  as defined  by such 
quantitative  measures  as the standardized  uptake  value  (SUV)  and the total lesion  
metabolism  (TLM),  for FDG  and 11C-methionine  after systemic  therapy(ies).  To 
determine  which  tracer,  FDG  or CMET,  surrogates  for glucose  metabolism  and amino  
acid synthesis  respectively,  is the superior  predictor  of treatment  response.  
2.3 FDHT  Imaging:  In selected  patients  who are progressing  and have  advanced  androgen - 
independent  prostate  cancer,  we will develop  pilot data on the in vivo targeting  and 
biokinetics  of F-18 FDHT  by PET imaging.  When  feasible,  biopsy  samples  will be 
obtained  from  index  lesions  in order  to correlate  the level  of FDHT  uptake  with androgen  
receptor  expression,  as determined  by immunohistochemistry.  
 
3.0 RATIONALE  AND  BACKGROUND  
3.1 Disease  Information  
 
The patterns  of spread  of prostate  cancers  make  it difficult  to quantify  tumor  regression  
and progression  in a reproducible  way,  because  the standard  phase  II response  criteria  do 
not apply.( 3) Bone,  the most  common  site of spread,  is particularly  difficult  because  
tumor  growth  in the marrow  results  in osteoblastic  changes  on plain  radiographs  which,  
in the end stage,  results  in complete  replacement  of the marrow  space.  While  most  
physicians  accept  that sclerotic  healing  of a lytic lesion  constitutes  tumor  regression,  the 
sequential  monitoring  of lesions  that are initially  sclerotic  is problematic  as histologic  
reversion  to a normal  bone  architecture  rarely  occurs.  Even  if all tumor  cells are 
destroyed  there  may be no visible  plain  radiographic  changes.  In these  cases,  only a direct  
biopsy  can determine  if viable  tumor  cells are present.  
 
To circumvent  this problem,  and before  the availability  of PSA measurements,  many  
investigators  restricted  entry  on clinical  trials  to selected  patients  with bi-dimensionally  
measurable  tumor  masses.( 4) This excluded  the majority  of patients  from  trials.  Others  
attempted  to assess  response  by combining  subjective  parameters,  such as changes  in 
performance  status  or pain relief,  with indirect  objective  measures  such as changes  in 
hemoglobin  or weight.( 5) Over  the past five years,  we have  developed  a clinical  trial 
methodology  to evaluate  new therapeutic  approaches  based  on serial  PSA 
determinations.( 6) Entry  requires  clear  documentation  of disease  progression,  controlling  
for the hormone  sensitivity  of the tumor,( 7) controlling  for steroid  hormone  withdrawal  
responses,( 8) and reporting  the outcomes  of the trial on  the basis  of post-therapy  changes  
in PSA,  measurable  disease,  and radionuclide  imaging  independently.( 6) The definition  
of progression  includes  serial  elevations  in PSA values,  which  have  been  shown  to 
antedate  clinical  and radiographic  evidence  of progression  for patients  with both 
hormone -naive  and hormonally  relapsing  disease.  
IRB#:  97-007A(12)  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering Cancer Center  
Amended:  4/10/07  
Page  5 of 16  
 More recently,  we developed  a clinical states  model  for progression that highlights  easily  
recognized  clinical  milestones,  and provides  a background  to determine  when  to 
recommend  treatment,  to select  a particular  approach,  and to assess  treatment  effects.( 9) 
In this trial, patients  with progressive  disease  in all disease  states  will be studied.  
 
 
 
   
  
  
 
3.2 Conventional  Imaging  Modalities  
 
Radionuclide  bone scanning : Standard bone scintigraphy  is limited  because it  reflects the  
reaction  of bone  to surrounding  cancer  rather  than providing  a direct  measure  of cancer  
activity.  In one series  of patients  with a total of 100 bone  scan abnormalities,  57 were  
confirmed  by plain  radiographs,  and 42 showed  normal  corresponding  plain  radiographs;  
and 1 patient  had a radiographic  abnormality  not detected  by scintigraphy.( 10) The flare 
phenomenon,  a paradoxical  increase  in intensity  after successful  therapy,  further  
complicates  the interpretation  of scans  on a serial  basis.( 11) To begin  to address  these  
questions,  we have  developed  a novel  bone  scan index,( 12) which  quantifies  the 
percentage  of bone  involved  by tumor,  but this too does not provide  an index  of the 
viability  of tumor.  
 
Cross  sectional  imaging : Cross -sectional  imaging  modalities  used in the evaluation  of 
prostate  cancer  include  computed  tomography  (CT)  and magnetic  resonance  imaging  
(MRI).  The utility of  each of these  modalities  varies according  to stage  of the disease.  CT 
is well suited  for the detection  of soft tissue  disease,  but has limited  utility  in assessing  
early  changes  in bone.  It is not sensitive  in detecting  microscopic  nodal  disease  or for 
detecting  tumor  in non-enlarged  lymph  nodes.  In our experience,  CT is also limited  in 
evaluating  disease  confined  to the prostate  and adjacent  area.  MRI  imaging  is considered  
the modality  of choice  for the most  accurate  assessment  in the region  of the prostate,  
neurovascular  bundles  and seminal  vesicles.( 13) MRI  can also detect  soft tissue  disease  
and is most  useful  to corroborate  bone  scintigraphic  findings,  since  the earliest  
involvement  is thought  to be present  in the bone  marrow.  MRI  exhibits  the highest  
sensitivity  in the axial  skeleton  and pelvis,  and is less effective  in the ribs, chest wall,  and 
skull.  
 
3.3 Positron  Emission  Tomography  
 
Positron  Emission  Tomography  (PET)  has the potential  to detect  the altered  metabolism  
of the malignant  state.  This may improve  detection  as well as permit  the quantitative  
monitoring  of metabolic  changes  in tumors  that are under  treatment.  Of the many  
radiopharmaceuticals  used for PET scanning,  the glucose  analogs  have  been  highly  
successful  for imaging  of a variety  of human  tumors  and for monitoring  response  to 
therapy.( 14) However,  in a trial using  FDG  and PET imaging  in androgen  independent  
prostate  cancers  at MSKCC,  only 18% of the metastatic  sites detected  by conventional  
bone  scintigraphy  metabolized  FDG  sufficiently  to be visualized  on PET imaging(14).  
Our preliminary  results  for this study  show that  over 70% of the abnormalities  visualized  
on  radionuclide  bone  scan  are  visible  using  FDG.  This  shows  the  importance  of Clinical  
Metastases:  
Castrate  Clinical  
Metastases:  
Noncastrate   
Rising  PSA Clinically  
Localized  
Disease  Initial  Prostate  
Evaluation:  
No Cancer  
Diagnosis  
IRB#:  97-007A(12)  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering Cancer Center  
Amended:  4/10/07  
Page  6 of 16  
 controlling  for disease  progression  prior  to imaging  as is required  in this trial.( 1) 
Rece ntly, Dr. David  Agus  and coworkers  studied  the uptake  of FDG  in the androgen - 
dependent  human  prostate cancer xenograft  CWR -22. High uptake  values were  recorded,  
but of greater  interest  was the finding  that FDG  uptake  decreased  within  24 hours  
following  castration.  The decrease  preceded  declines  in PSA,  suggesting  that PET 
imaging  may be useful  to monitor  the response  to treatment.( 15) This suggests  that for 
many  patients,  serial  changes  in FDG  may be useful  to monitor  disease  status.  One 
limitation  of the study,  however,  was that entry  did not require  a strict  definition  of 
disease  progression  prior  to imaging.  
 
One hypothesis  under  study  in this trial is whether  11C- methionine  is more  effective  in 
visualizing  androgen  independent  prostate  cancer  by PET imaging.  The essential  amino  
acid,  11C- methionine  is a tracer  that has been  used to image  a variety  of human  
tumors.( 16-18) In a preliminary  report  from  Nilsson  and coworkers,  12 patients  with 
androgen  independent  prostate  cancer  underwent  PET imaging  with 11C- methionine.  
Uptake  of the radiotracer  was discovered  in all known  sites of bone  and soft tissue  lesions  
of patients  visualized  by standard  bone  scintigraphy  or cross  sectional  imaging.( 19) Ten 
patients  had repeat  PET scans.  Those  who responded  to treatment  had a reduced  uptake  
of the radiotracer  with no changes  in the images  generated  by standard  techniques.  Our 
ongoing  results  show  that 93% of index  lesions  were  visible  using  11C-methionine  and 
83% visible  using  FDG.( 1) These  biodistribution  and metabolic  findings  require  
additional  verification  in a larger  series.  
 
11C-methionine  and 18FDG  whole  body  imaging  
 
We have  performed  a preliminary  comparative  study  of 11C-methionine  and 18F-FDG  in 
10 patients  with prostate  cancer,  who were  referred  for PET imaging  with progressive  
prostate  cancer,  as defined  by serially  rising  PSA values  and one or more  new (“index”)  
lesions  on bone  scan.  Among  the 10 patients,  there  were  13 such index  lesions  on bone  
scans.  11C-methionine  imaged  12/13  (93%),  and 18F-FDG  11/13  (83%)  index  lesions.  
The one lesion  not imaged  by CMET  was subsequently  judged  to be avascular  necrosis,  
based  on its pattern  of resolution  on subsequent  bone  scans.  11C-methionine  is very 
rapidly  cleared  from  the blood,  with rapid  equilibration  (10 minutes)  in the tumor.  The 
tumor  uptake of  11C-methionine  is consistently  high,  with standard  uptake values (SUVs)  
ranging  from  4.9 to 11.6.  We have  therefore  shown  that high-quality  whole  body  PET 
imaging  is feasible  with 11C-methionine,  despite  the short  20-min physical  half-life of 
carbon -11. 
As accrual  to the study  has been  limited  by the need  to generate  11C-methionine  
immediately  prior  to administration,  and based  on our preliminary  results  showing  that a 
higher  percentage  of tumors  are visualized  with FDG  than previously  anticipated,  we 
plan to perform  FDG  scans  in all patients,  and 11C-methionine  when  it is available.  In 
cases  where  uptake  is visible  with FDG,  repeat  studies  will be conducted  after therapeutic  
intervention.  
 
A few fully  informed  and consenting  patients  will be selected  for studies  with tracer  
FDHT.  We will choose  subjects  that have  actively  metabolizing  tumors  on FDG  or 
CMET,  and who are expected  to have  high expression  of androgen  receptor  such as 
hormonally  naïve  patients.  In the first 10 subjects,  we will perform  dynamic  acquisitions  
to study  the rate of uptake  over index  lesions  for 1 hour.  If possible,  we will obtain  a 
biopsy  of this site for immunohistochemical  staining  of AR expression.  
IRB#:  97-007A(12)  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering Cancer Center  
Amended:  4/10/07  
Page  7 of 16  
 3.4 Correlations  between  PET and standard  imaging  modalities : 
 
In a preliminary  analysis  of 157 lesions  in 18 patients  with progressive  metastatic  disease,  
we have  shown  a high (71%)  degree  of concordance  between  FDG  avid lesions  and 
osseous  metastases  visualized  by bone  scans.  In selected  cases,  lesions  appeared  on FDG  
PET earlier  in the disease  course  relative  to the bone  scans.  The correlation  between  
FDG  avid lesions  and radiographically  evident  soft tissue  disease  is limited  in areas  
around  the ureters  and bladder,  through  which  the tracer  is excreted  ((20) and Morris  et 
al, unpublished).  As well,  preliminary  data suggest  that changes  in SUV  may be useful  
as an early  outcome  measure  in patients  with castrate  metastatic  disease  undergoing  
chemotherapy.( 21) These  data require  confirmation  and validation  using  larger  numbers  
of patients  and lesions.  In addition,  such associations  cannot  be presumed  to be 
applicable  to other  disease  states.  To date,  we have  focused  on patients  with progressive  
metastatic  disease;  this protocol  will include  patients  from  all disease  states.  
 
Additional  studies  are therefore  required  to: (1) assess  FDG -PET in prostate  cancer  
patients  with progressive  disease  of all clinical  states,  (2) to confirm  these findings  where  
the metastatic  sites are rigorously  assessed  with larger  numbers  of patients,  (3) to 
compare  PET findings  with those  of standard  bone  scintigraphy,  CT, or MRI,  and (4) to 
compare  posttreatment  changes  in SUV  with changes  in standard  outcome  measures  such 
as PSA.  
 
3.4 Equipment  Information  (PET)  
 
The ADVANCE  (General  Electric  Medical  Systems)  whole  body  PET scanner  consists  
of 336 BGO  detector  units  arranged  to form  18 rings  (separated  by 1 mm retractable  
tungsten  septa)  with 672 crystals  each,  giving  35 contiguous  2-D image  planes  through  an 
axial  field of view  of 15.2 cm. The maximum  transaxial  FOV  is 55 cm in diameter  
through  a 58 cm diameter  patient  port. The average  axial  resolution  (FWHM)  is 4.2 mm 
at r=0 cm; 5.5 mm at  r = 10 cm; and 6.6 mm at r = 20 cm. Total  system  sensitivity  is 223 
Kcps/ uCi/cc  with septa  in and 1200  Kcps/ uCi/cc  with septa  out. Reconstruction  time is 
<2 seconds  per 4.25 mm slice at 128x128  pixels.( 22,23 ) 
 
3.5 Standard  Evaluation  Schema  
 
The initial  evaluation  of a patient  with progressive  disease  be it locoregional  or 
metastatic,  androgen  dependent  or independent,  is directed  toward  determining  disease  
extent  and pattern  of spread.  This usually  consists  of a history  and physical  examination,  
a hematology,  chemical  and PSA profile,  and for patients  with androgen  independent  
disease,  a serum  testosterone  level.  Imaging  studies  typically  include  a chest  radiograph,  
a CT of the abdomen  and pelvis,  and radionuclide  bone  scan.  To assess  the prostate  and 
pelvic  lymph  nodes,  magnetic  resonance  imaging  is recommended,  because  CT scanning  
is too insensitive  to accurately  reflect  the presence  or absence  of disease,  and to 
determine  local  extent  within  the prostate  itself.  Our experience  to date shows  that 
frequently,  magnetic  resonance  imaging  of the pelvis  is negative,  and because  some  
patients  do not have  pelvic  disease,  we will only advise  this test when  clinically  
indicated.  Further,  because  the results  of CT and/or  MR imaging  do not change  in the two 
week  interval  following  an intervention,  we will no longer  require  that all studies  be 
completed  prior  to the performance  of the PET scan.  The presence  or absence  of other  
medical  co-morbidities,  such as cardiac  or pulmonary  disease,  frequently  mandates  
additional  testing  in this patient  population.  
IRB#:  97-007A(12)  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering Cancer Center  
Amended:  4/10/07  
Page  8 of 16  
 4.0 BACKGROUND  DRUG  INFORMATION  
4.1 11C- methionine:  L-methyl -11C- methionine  has undergone  general  safety  testing.  The 
preparation is  apyrogenic  and sterile,  and is prepared  in a form suitable for  injection.  It is 
formulated  by the radiochemistry/cyclotron  facility  using  established  procedures.  The 
individual  patient  doses  will be tested  by appropriate  quality  control  procedures  to ensure  
expected  potency,  purity,  and apyrogenicity.  An IND is not required  at this time,  as this 
study  will be submitted  for authorization  and approval  under  the MSKCC  Committee  on 
radiation  (Title  21, Part 361.1  of the Federal  Code  of Regulations).  The product  is 
produced  at high specific  activity,  has been  used on multiple  occasions  in humans  at 
other  centers,  and has no evidence  of pharmacological  effect.  
 
4.2 [18F]-fluoro -2-deoxy -D-glucose:  FDG  has undergone  general  safety  testing,  is approved  
by the FDA,  and is on the hospital  formulary  for use as a diagnostic  agent.  
 
4.3 [18F]-dihydrotestosterone  (FDHT ): Dihydrotestosterone  is the predominant  testosterone   
that is present  in the prostate  gland  itself  in animals.  Welch,  Katzenellenbogen  and their 
colleagues  have  developed  a variety  of tracers  for study  of the androgen  receptor.  
Preclinical  evaluation  of a variety  of fluorinated  steroids  was undertaken  in baboons.  
16-[18F]-fluoro -5dihydrotestosterone  (FDHT)  appeared  to be the preferred  agent  in 
mammals  due to favorable  biodistribution  and demonstrable  androgen  receptor  binding.  
The plasma  protein  sex-hormone  binding  globulin  (SHBG)  is found  in high concentration  
in primates  in contradistinction  to rodents.  Plasma  SHBG  may therefore  explain  the 
higher  uptake  of FDHT  into baboon  prostatic  tissue  in comparison  to other  fluorinated  
steroids  possibly  related  to reduced  metabolic  breakdown.  The activity  of FDHT  in the 
region  of the prostate  peaked  at 30-90 minutes  post injection.  At 60 minutes  there  was a 
high ratio of prostatic  activity  to soft tissue,  blood  and bone  (>6:1,  >3.5:1  and >7:1 
respectively).( 24,25 ) It appears that the  ligand FDHT exhibits sufficient  specific binding  
to androgen  receptors  in vivo to allow  imaging  of androgen  receptor -positive  tissue.  
Accordingly,  in the orchiectomized  host,  where  androgen  receptor  occupancy  would  be 
expected  to be low, it seems  feasible  to image  androgen  receptor -positive  human  cancers.  
A protocol  for the usage  of this tracer  in humans  has yet to be developed.  Using  dynamic  
imaging  with venous  blood  sampling  we will determine  the feasibility  of use of this tracer  
in humans.  
Washington  University  has initiated  a clinical  trial, and has studied  6 patients  with PET 
imaging.  The study  is done  under  the auspices  of the Washington  University  Radioactive  
Drug  Research  Committee  (B. Siegal,  Chairman),  and this has been  the basis  for the 
dosimetry  reported  in the Appendices.  No toxicity  has been  observed.  
 
5.0 PATIENT  ELIGIBILITY  
5.1 Entry  requirements : 
 
5.1.1 Patients  with histologically  confirmed  prostate  adenocarcinoma.  
 
5.1.2 Disease  progression  as demonstrated  by: 
 
5.1.2.1  A  50% increase  in PSA which  is sustained  for a minimum  of 3 
observations  obtained  at least 1 week  apart;  
IRB#:  97-007A(12)  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering Cancer Center  
Amended:  4/10/07  
Page  9 of 16  
 OR 
 
5.1.2.2  Development  of new lesions  or an increase  in pre-existing  lesions  on 
bone  scintigraphy,  or in measurable  disease  by CT or MRI.  
 
5.1.3 Karnofsky  performance  status  > 60%.  
 
5.1.4 Informed  consent.  
 
5.2 Exclusion  Criteria : 
 
5.2.1 Patients  with an active  infection  not controlled  by antibiotics.  
 
5.2.2 Patients  with clinically  significant  pulmonary  or cardiac  (NYHA  Class  III or IV) 
disease.  
 
6.0 PRETREATMENT  EVALUATION  
6.1 History  and physical  examination  
 
6.2 Laboratory  studies:  CBC,  PSA (within  2 weeks  of study  entry);  serum  testosterone  
(within  4 weeks  of study  entry).  
 
6.3 Urinalysis  (if normal,  no culture  required)  to exclude  urinary  tract infection  (within  2 
weeks).  
 
6.4 Bone  scintigraphy  (within  6 weeks  of study  entry  or up to 2 weeks  after entry);  using  the 
MSKCC  bone  scan index  (appendix  D) 
 
6.5 Computed  tomography  of abdomen  and pelvis  (within  6 weeks  before  entry  or up to 2 
weeks  after entry)  and/or  Modified  MRI  of the pelvis  to image  the prostate  (includes  
retroperitoneum)  at MSKCC  within  6 weeks  before  entry  or up to 2 weeks  after entry  as 
clinically  indicated.)  
 
6.6 Chest  radiograph  (within  6 weeks  before  entry  or up to 2 weeks  after entry)  
 
7.0 TREATMENT  PLAN  
7.1 Patients  will be fasting  for 6 hours  prior  to PET imaging,  with the exception  of liberal  
water  intake  which  is encouraged.  
 
7.2 A blood  glucose  level  will be obtained  prior  to FDG  administration.  Elevated  baseline  
serum  glucose  levels  have  been  reported  to cause  false  negative  results  with FDG -PET 
imaging.  
 
7.3 An intravenous  catheter  (heplock)  will be placed  in the nuclear  medicine  department  for 
radiopharmaceutical  administration  and blood  sampling.  
 
7.4 11C-methionine:  Each  patient  will receive  10 -15 mCi of 11C-methionine  intravenously  
with PET imaging  beginning  10 minutes  after the injection,  for approximately  60 minutes  
total using  standard  imaging  procedures,  as described  (B). 
IRB#:  97-007A(12)  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering Cancer Center  
Amended:  4/10/07  
Page  10 of 16  
 FDG : Each  patient  will receive  10 mCi of FDG  intravenously  followed  by PET imaging  
for a total imaging  time of approximately  60 to 75 minutes  using  standard  imaging  
procedures.  
 
7.5 Patients  will be imaged  using  the ADVANCE  (General  Electric  Medical  Systems)  whole  
body  PET scanner.  
 
7.6 The radiopharmacy  will keep  a log of all doses  administered.  
 
7.7 The intravenous  catheter  will be removed  at the conclusion  of imaging.  
 
7.8 Unless  otherwise  specified  by a clinical  trial, patients  can undergo  serial  scans  4 weeks,  
12 weeks,  and 6 months  following  the baseline  scan.  If the patient  is receiving  treatment  
on a clinical  trial, then PET scanning  will be performed  according  to the schedule  
outlined  in the treatment  trial. No more  than 7 repeat  studies  will be performed  in a one- 
year period.  This ensures  that the total exposure  is less than 15 rads to the organ  receiving  
the highest  radiation  dose per year (the left ventricle)  (See appendix  ). 
 
7.9 Baseline  18F-FDHT  scans  can be performed  within two weeks  of a baseline  FDG  scan,  as 
long as there  has been  no change  to the patient’s  treatment  in the interim.  Those  patients  
selected  for serial  PET imaging  with 18F-FDHT  will have  all additional  18F-FDHT  scans  
performed  the day after the FDG  scan.  An index  lesion  will be selected  from  the previous  
CMET  or FDG  scan.  The patient  will be positioned  on the scanner,  with the index  lesion  
positioned  at the center  of the 14.25  cm field of view.  A 5 minute  transmission  scan will 
be performed  to verify  the correct  location of  the patient on the scanner.  A dynamic PET 
image  acquisition  will be initiated  immediately  post injection  with 10 mCi (370 MBq)  of 
18F-FDHT,  to evaluate  the rate of 18F-FDHT  uptake  in the index  lesion.  Dynamic  scans  
consisting of  10 one-minute,  and 10 five-minute  frames will be acquired  (total duration  = 
60 minutes).  Up to a maximum  of 17 serial  blood  samples  will be taken  at the following  
collection  times  when  possible:  0, 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 10, 15, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, and 
120 minutes post injection.  Blood  samples  will be counted  on a well scintillation  counter  
(LKB  Wallac),  to determine  the blood  clearance  kinetics  of the radiotracer.  After  the 
dynamic  scan,  a whole  body  scan will be performed,  either  in immediate  continuation  or 
following  a short  rest, if required  by the patient.  The whole  body  scan will follow  our 
department  18F-FDG  guidelines  of 6-minute  emission  and 4-minute  transmission  scans  
per field-of-view.  In selected  patients,  additional  views,  partial  or total body,  will be 
acquired  between  2-4 hours  post injection  when  possible,  to assess  retention  of the tracer  
in the tumor.  All images  will be reconstructed  by filtered  backprojection  and iterative  
reconstruction,  with attenuation  correction.  The kinetics  of tumor  uptake  will be 
determined  by region -of-interest  (ROI)  analysis  of the dynamic  image  data set. This data 
will provide  plots  of the tumor  relative  specific  activity  (Ci/cc  of the 18F-FDHT)  versus  
time post administration.  Region -of-interest  analysis  over tissues  e.g. brain,  heart,  liver,  
spleen,  kidney,  bladder,  muscle  and tumor  on the decay  corrected  whole  body  images  
will enable  relative  uptake  ratios  (tumor/normal  tissues)  of the 18F-FDHT  to be 
determined  at between  1-2 hours  post 18F-FDHT injection.  Changes in the absolute tumor  
uptake  of 18F-FDHT  per unit administered  dose relative  to normal  organs  should  reflect  
changes  in androgen  level  expression  in the tumor.  
 
7.9.1  Patients  will have  a testosterone,  sex hormone  binding  globulin,  and DHT  level  
drawn  within  2 weeks  prior  to any FDHT  scan.  
IRB#:  97-007A(12)  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering Cancer Center  
Amended:  4/10/07  
Page  11 of 16  
 8.0 TOXICITY  ASSESSMENT  AND  MANAGEMENT  
8.1 No toxicity  is anticipated  with the described  radiopharmaceutical  preparations  or PET 
scanning.  The formulations  and doses  of radiotracers  are below  defined  levels  for 
radiation  toxicity.  (Title  21,361.1).  
 
8.2 Dosimetry  Assessment : The total rad dose is below  the limits  set by the FDA  for 
investigational  radioactive  drug studies,  and falls within  the Radioactive  Drug  Research  
Committee  guidelines  as defined  by 5 rad/single  organ/dose  and 5 rad/year  to the whole  
body,  hematopoietic  organs,  gonads  and eyes.  
 
9.1 SERIOUS  ADVERSE  EVENTS  (SAE)  REPORTING  
Any SAE  must  be reported  to the IRB as soon  as possible  but no later than 5 calendar  days. The 
IRB requires  a Clinical  Research  Database  (CRDB)  AE report  to be delivered  to the Institutional  
SAE  Manager  (307 East 63rd Street,  1st Floor)  containing  the following  information:  
Fields  populated  from  the CRDB : 
• Subject’s  name  (generate  the report  with only initials  if it will be sent outside  of 
MSKCC)  
• Medical  record  number  
• Disease/histology  (if applicable)  
• Protocol  number  and title 
 
Data  needing  to be entered:  
• The date the adverse  event  occurred  
• The adverse  event  
• Relationship  of the adverse  event  to the treatment  (drug,  device,  or intervention)  
• If the AE was expected  
• The severity  of the AE 
• The intervention  
• Detailed  text that includes  the following  information:  
o A explanation  of how the AE was handled  
o A description  of the subject's  condition  
o Indication  if the subject  remains  on the study  
o If an amendment  will need  to be made  to the protocol  and/or  consent  form  
The PI’s signature  and the date it was signed  are required  on the completed  report.  
For IND/IDE  protocols:  
The CRDB  AE report  should  be completed  as above  and the FDA  assigned  IND/IDE  number  
written  at the top of the report.  The report  will be forwarded  to the FDA  by the Institutional  SAE  
Manager  through  the IND Office.  
 
10.0 CRITERIA  FOR  REMOVAL  FROM  STUDY  
Patients  will be removed  from  the study  at their request  or for failure  to comply  with protocol  
requirements.  
IRB#:  97-007A(12)  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering Cancer Center  
Amended:  4/10/07  
Page  12 of 16  
 11.0 DATA  ANALYSIS  
The study  design  is such that the PET scan will be compared  to the gold standards  for the 
determination  of sites of tumor.  Each  imaging  modality  will be independently  evaluated.  The 
PET protocol  data analysis  form  (appendix  E) allows  the selection  and recording  of involved  
sites.  Following  independent  recording  and submission  of the imaging  interpretation  data to the 
protocol  data manager  (JM),  sites of uptake  on PET scan will be compared  to the detected  sites by 
other  imaging  modalities  with concurrence  by HS and SML.  
 
CT: Lesions  on computed  tomography  will be selected  and recorded  which  are reproducibly  
bidimensionally  measurable  (greatest  dimension  X perpendicular  to greatest  dimension)  including  
adenopathy  in the pelvis  or retroperitoneum  and soft tissue  masses.  
 
MRI : T1 and T2 weighted  sequences  will be obtained  for each modified  MRI  scan of the pelvis  
which  includes  the retroperitoneum.  Reproducible  bidimensionally  measurable  (greatest  
dimension  X perpendicular  to greatest  dimension)  lesions  will be selected  and recorded including  
adenopathy  in the pelvis  or retroperitoneum,  soft tissue  masses,  and bone  metastasis.  
 
PET: PET images  will be interpreted  and the results  recorded  on a standardized  form  (appendix  
E). The transmission  data will be displayed  alongside  the emission  corrected  scans  to allow  
anatomic  localization  of activity.  The images  should  be reviewed  in all standard  planes  and a 
volumetric  projection  if available.  
 
Visual  analysis  will require  the identification  of abnormal  uptake  as being  greater  than 
background  activity  on the attenuation  corrected  images.  Features  of the primary  tumor,  including  
the presence  or absence  of metastases,  will be recorded  on a 5 point  scale.  (5 = definitely  
abnormal,  4 = probably  abnormal,  3 = indeterminate,  2 = probably  normal,  1 = definitely  normal).  
Estimates  of size will be provided  for each lesion.  
 
Using  the attenuation  corrected  images,  semiquantitative  analysis  will require  identifying  regions  
of interest  (ROI)  in areas  of abnormality  and the standard  uptake  value  will be calculated  based  
on the following  formula:  
 
 
SUV  = decay  corrected  mean  ROI activity  (mCi/ml)  
 
 
injected  dose (mCi)/body  wt (g) 
Lesions  will be indicative  of malignancy  if the SUV  is > 2.5 in soft tissue  or > 2.0 in bone.  
Values  below  these  levels  will be considered  benign.  Lesion  to background  ratios  will also be 
calculated  for the transmission  corrected  scans.  
 
This analysis  will be used on all selected  PET scans,  including  retrospectively  analyzing  PET 
scans  received  prior  to patient  registration.  
 
12.0 BIOSTATISTICAL     CONSIDERATIONS  
To assess  the diagnostic  implications  of PET scanning  with 11C-methionine  and FDG,  the 
sensitivity  and specificity  will be estimated  by comparing  PET scan results  to "standard  
of care"  diagnostic  measures  that include  the 99m-Tc bone  scan,  computed  tomography,  
and magnetic  resonance  imaging.  Each  patient  will receive  these  standard  diagnostic  
measures  and  PET  scanning  with  both  11C-methionine   and  FDG.  The  diagnostic  
IRB#:  97-007A(12)  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering Cancer Center  
Amended:  4/10/07  
Page  13 of 16  
 "standard  of care"  scan (bone  scan,  CT or MRI)  will be recorded  as positive  or negative  
for each site: bone  and bone  marrow  and/or  soft tissue  
 
The sensitivity  of PET imaging  with 11C-methionine  or FDG  is defined  as the ability  of 
PET scanning  to identify  those  metastatic  lesions  diagnosed  by standard  diagnosis  using  
bone  scan,  CT, or MRI  as "gold  standard"  and is determined  by the proportion  of patients  
with positive  lesions  as diagnosed  by standard  method  who were  identified  by the PET 
imaging.  The sensitivity  will be measured  for both androgen -dependent  and androgen - 
independent  prostate  cancer  patients,  and on a site by site basis  (bone  and bone  marrow,  
and soft tissue).  
Assuming  at least one site in each patient  is assessed  positive  by the gold standard,  the 
sensitivity  of FDG  and 11C-methionine  can be conservatively  estimated  to within  +/- 
0.16.  The total sample  size for this study  is 265. 
 
To explore  changes  in metabolism  during  treatment  based  on PET imaging,  the average  
SUV  value  will be recorded  at 4 weeks,  12 weeks,  and 6 months  following  the baseline  
scan.  Summary  measures  such as the slope  of the SUV  trajectory  and the area under  the 
SUV  curve  will be recorded  separately  for FDG  and 11C-methionine.  
 
13.1 RESEARCH  PARTICIPANT  REGISTRATION  AND  RANDOMIZATION  
PROCEDURES  
 
13.2 Research  Participant  Registration  (PPR)  
 
The following person(s) can obtain informed  consent:  
 
Michael  Morris,  MD 
Howard  Scher,  MD 
Susan Slovin, MD, PhD  
 
Confirm  in the electronic  medical  record that the patient  has received the Notice  of 
Privacy Practice.  This must be obtained before the eligibility confirmation  and obtaining  
of the research informed  consent.  
 
Confirm  eligibility as defined  in the  section entitled Crite ria for Patient/Subject  
Eligibility.  
 
Obtain written informed  consent, by following  procedures defined in section entitled  
Informed  Consent Procedures.  
 
All particpants must  be registered through  the Protocol Participant Registration (PPR)  
Office at Memorial Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center.  PPR is available Monday through 
Friday from  8:30am  - 5:30pm  at (646)  735-8000.  The PPR fax numbers are (646)  735- 
0008 and  (646) 735 -0003.  Registrations can  be phoned  in or faxed.  The completed  
signature page of the informed  consent form,  the completed  signature page of the  
Research  Authorization and a completed Eligibility  Checklist must  be faxed to  PPR.  
IRB#:  97-007A(12)  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering Cancer Center  
Amended:  4/10/07  
Page  14 of 16  
 During  the registration  process  registering individuals  will be required  to answer  specific  
eligibility questions and provide  the following information:  
Registering  Individual  [Last, First Name]  
Notice of Privacy Status  [Yes, No, N/A]  
Research Authorization  [Date]  
MSKCC IRB Protocol#  
Attending  of Record  (if applicable)   [Last, First Name]  
Consenting  Professional  [Last, First Name]  
Informed  Consent Date  
Participant's  Full Name  [Last, First Name]  
Participant  MRN  
 
14.1 PROTECTION  OF HUMAN  SUBJECTS  
 
14.2 Privacy  
 
It is the responsibility  of the Research  Staff  to ensure  that Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  
Center  has on file a written  acknowledgment  of receipt  by the subject  of the Center’s  Notice  of 
Privacy  Practices.  If the subject  has not already  done  so, he/she  must  sign such an 
acknowledgment  before  participating  in this study.  
 
MSKCC’s  Privacy  Office  may allow  the use and disclosure  of protected  health  information  
pursuant  to a completed  and signed  Research  Authorization  form.  The use and disclosure  of 
protected  health  information  will be limited  to the individuals  described  in the Research  
Authorization  form.  A Research  Authorization  form  must  be completed  by the Principal  
Investigator  and approved  by the IRB and Privacy  Board.  
 
 
15.1 INFORMED  CONSENT  PROCEDURES  
Patients  will be required  to sign a statement  of informed  consent  (appendix  F), which  meets  the 
requirements  of the code  of Federal Regulations  (Federal Register Vol.  46, No.  17, Jan. 27,  1981,  
part 50) and the IRB of this center.  
 
 
Documentation  of informed  consent : The informed  consent  will be signed  by the patient  and 
consenting  physician  in triplicate.  A signed  original  consent  form  is given  to the patient.  The 
second  original  is placed  in the  patient's medical  record  and the third original  is kept on file in the 
office  of clinical  research.  
 
15.2 Research  Authorization  
 
Procedures  for obtaining  Research  Authorization:  Before  any protocol -specific  procedures  are 
carried  out, investigators  and/or  designated  staff will fully explain  the details  of the protocol,  
study  procedures,  and the aspects  of patient  privacy  concerning  research  specific  information.  In 
addition  to signing  the IRB Informed  Consent,  all patients  must  sign the Research  Authorization  
component  of the informed  consent  form.    The Research  Authorization  requires  a separate  
IRB#:  97-007A(12)  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering Cancer Center  
Amended:  4/10/07  
Page  15 of 16  
 signature  from  the patient.   The original  signed  documents  will become  part of the patient’s  
medical  record,  and each patient  will receive  a copy  of the signed  documents.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
16. BIBLIOGRAPHY  
 
(1) Macapinlac  HA, Humm  JL, Akhurst  T, et al: Differential  metabolism  and pharmacokinetics  of L- 
[1-11C]-methionine  and 2-[18F] fluro -2-deoxy -D-glucose  (FDG)  in androgen  independent  
prostate  cancer.  Clin Pos Imag  2:173 -181, 1999  
 
(2) Liu A, Dence  CS, Welch  MJ, et al: Fluorine  labeled  androgens:  radiochemical  synthesis  and 
tissue  distribution  studies  on six fluorine -substituted  androgens,  potential  imaging  agents  for 
prostate  cancer.  J Nucl  Med 33:724 -734, 1992  
 
(3) Yagoda  A, Watson  RC, Natale  RB, et al: A critical  analysis  of response  criteria  in patients  with 
prostatic  cancer  treated  with cis-diamminedichloride  platinum  II. Cancer  44:1553 -1562,  1979  
 
(4) Scher  HI, Yagoda  A: Clinical  trials  in prostatic  cancer:  Methodology  and controversies.  In 
Adenocarcinoma  of the Prostate  (Bruce  AW,  Trachtenberg  J, eds).  New  York:  Springer -Verlag,  
1987,  pp 197-220 
 
(5) Robinson  MRG:  Carcinoma  of the prostate:  objective  criteria  of response.  Am.J.Clin.Oncol.  
Suppl.2:s48 -s52, 1988  
 
(6) Scher  HI, Mazumdar  M, Kelly  WK:  Clinical  trials  in relapsed  prostate  cancer:  defining  the 
target.  J Natl Cancer  Inst 88:1623 -1634,  1996  
 
(7) Scher  HI, Steineck  G, Kelly  WK:  Hormone -refractory  ("D3")  prostate  cancer:  refining  the 
concept.  Urology  46:142 -148, 1995  
 
(8) Scher  HI, Kelly  WK:  The flutamide  withdrawal  syndrome:  its impact  on clinical  trials  in 
hormone -refractory  prostatic  cancer.  J Clin.Oncol.  11:1566 -1572,  1993  
 
(9) Scher  HI, Heller  G: Clinical  states  in prostate  cancer:  towards  a dynamic  model  of disease  
progression.  Urology  55:323 -327, 2000  
 
(10) Jones  SC, Alavi  A, Christman  D, et al: The radiation  dosimetry  of 2-[F-18] fluoro -D-glucose  in 
man.  J Nuc Med 23:613 -617, 1982  
 
(11) Larson  SM, Schwartz  LH: Advances  in imaging.  Semin.Oncol.  21:598 -606, 1994  
 
(12) Sabbatini  P, Yeung  H, Imbriaco  M, et al: The correlation  of serial  bone  scintigraphy  and PSA 
determinations  in patients  (Pts)  with androgen  independent  prostate  cancer.  
Proc.Am.Soc.Clin.Oncol.  15:254,  1996  
IRB#:  97-007A(12)  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering Cancer Center  
Amended:  4/10/07  
Page  16 of 16  
 (13) Rifkin  M: Comparison  of magnetic  resonance  imaging  and ultrasonography  in staging  early  
prostate  cancer.  Results  of a multi -institutional  cooperative  trial. Invest.Radiol.  26:1024 -1025,  
1991  
 
(14) Larson  SM: Positron  Emission  Tomography  in Oncology  and Allied  Diseases.  In Cancer:  
Principles  and Practice  of Oncology.  (DeVita  VT, Hellman  S, Rosenberg  SA, eds).  Philadelphia:  
J.B. Lippincott,  1989,  pp 1-12 
 
(15) Agus  D, Golde  DW,  Sgouros  G, et al: Change  in deoxyglucose  accumulation  is a biologic  
surrogate  for response  to hormone  manipulation  in a human  xenograft  model  for prostate  cancer.  
Proc Amer  Assoc  Cancer  Res 39:(Abstract  1613),  1998  
 
(16) Lindholm  P, Leskinen -Kallio  S, Grenman  R, et al: Evaluation  of response  to radiotherapy in head  
and neck  cancer  by positron  emission  tomography  and [11C] -methionine.  Int.J 
Radiat.Oncol.Biol.Phys.  32:787 -794, 1956  
 
(17) Kubota  K, Matsuzawa  T, Ito M, et al: Lung  tumor  imaging  by positron  emission  tomography  
using  C-11 L-methionine.  J Nucl.Med.  26:37 -42, 1985  
 
(18) Mosskin  M, Bergstrom  M, Collins  VP, et al: Postiron  emission  tomography with  11C-methionine  
of intracranial  tumors  compared  with histology  of multiple  biopsies.  Acta  Radiol.[Oncol].  
369:157 -160, 1986  
 
(19) Nilsson  S, Kalkner  K-M, Ginman  C, et al: C-11 methionine  positron  emission  tomography  in the 
management  of prostatic  carcinoma.  Antibody,  Immunoconjugates  and Radiopharmaceuticals  
8:23,  1995  
 
(20) Osman  I, Akhurst  T, Macapinlac  H, et al: C-11 methionine  and F-18 PET imaging:  use in the 
evaluation  of progressive  prostate  cancer.  Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol  18:abstract  1203,  1998  
 
(21) Morris  MJ, Akhurst  T, Kelly  K, et al: PET as an outcome  measure  for metastatic  prostate  cancer  
(PC)  treated  with chemotherapy.  Proc Amer  Assoc  Clin Oncol  , 2000  (submitted)  
 
(22) Degrado  TR, Turkington  TG, Williams  JJ: Performance  characteristics  of a new generation  PET 
scanner.  J Nucl.Med.  34(5):101P,  1993  
 
(23) Dahlbom  M, Hoffman  EJ, Hoh CK: Whole  body  Positron  Emission  Tomography:  Part I. Methods  
and Performance  Characteristics.  J Nucl.Med.  33:1191 -1199,  1992  
 
(24) Choe YS,  Lidstrom  PJ, Chi DY, et al: Synthesis  of 11-[18F]Fluoro -5−dihydrotestosterone  and 
11-[18F]Fluoro -19-nor-5-dihydrotestosterone:  Preparation  via halofluorination -reduction,  
receptor  binding,  and tissue  distribution.  J. Med.  Chem.  38:816 -825, 1995  
 
(25) Bonasera  TA, O'Neil  JP, Xu M, et al: Preclinical  evaluation  of Fluorine -18-labeled  androgen  
receptor  ligands  in baboons.  J Nucl  Med 37:1009 -1015,  1996  