Behavioral Activation-Rehabilitation to Improve Depressive 
Symptoms & Physical Function After Acute Respiratory 
Failure
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
9/5/2020
 
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007   
Page 1 of 24 
 
 Date:  9/5/2020 
Principal Investigator: Ann M. Parker, MD 
Application Number: IRB00143231  
 
 
 
JHM IRB  - eForm A  – Protocol  
 
  
• Use the section headings to write the JHM  IRB e Form A , inserting the appropriate material 
in each. If a secti on is  not applicable, leave heading in and insert N/A.  
• When submitting JHM IRB eF orm A (new or revised) , enter the date submitted to the field at 
the top of JHM  IRB eForm A . 
 
*************************************************************************************************** 
 
 
1. Abstract  
a. Provide no more than a one page research abstract briefly stating the problem, the research 
hypothesis, and the importance of the research.  
 
A growing number of Acute Respiratory Failure (ARF) survivors are burdened by depress ive 
symptoms and physical impairments that last for years after intensive care unit discharge. Notably, depressive symptoms are independently associated with subsequent development of new impairments in physical functioning. There are no randomized control led trials (RCT), in 
ARF survivors, evaluating any intervention for depression. To improve mental and physical health outcomes in ARF survivors, the following gaps within existing patient -oriented research 
must be addressed: 1) interventions to improve depressive symptoms and associated physical 
functioning impairments, 2) evaluation of modifiable psychosocial risk factors for depressive 
symptoms, and 3) validation of screening instruments to assess depressive symptoms. This K23 application, by Ann Parker, MD, aims to address these gaps by designing and conducting a pilot RCT (Aim 1) of an intervention combining Behavioral Activation and physical rehabilitation (delivered via telephone and 2 home visits over 12- weeks) versus a “usual care” 
control group, and evaluating its feasibility (primary outcome) and efficacy to reduce depressive symptoms and improve physical functioning (secondary outcomes). Behavioral Activation, as proposed for this pilot RCT, is an evidence -based  psychological treatment for 
depressi on, which increases adaptive behaviors to achieve patient -valued goals. This project 
will evaluate the feasibility and efficacy of the BA -R intervention both quantitatively and 
qualitatively, through semi -structured interviews. Using the combined patient c ohort from the 
intervention and control groups of the RCT, Dr. Parker also will evaluate modifiable psychosocial risk factors for depressive symptoms in ARF survivors and the association between the intervention and these modifiable factors (Aim 2), and the measurement properties of two commonly used depression screening instruments in ARF survivors versus a “gold standard” clinician diagnostic interview that she will be trained to perform (Aim 3).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007   
Page 2 of 24 
 
 2. Objectives (include all primary and secondary obj ectives)  
 
Aim 1: To conduct a single -site, pilot RCT (N= 54) evaluating the feasibility (primary objective) and 
efficacy (secondary objective) of a 12- week behavioral activation- rehabilitation (BA -R) intervention versus 
“usual care”, in acute respiratory failure (ARF) survivors.  
Hypothesis 1a:  A 12 -week BA- R intervention in ARF survivors will be feasible, as demonstrated  
by an average accrual rate of 1.5 patients per month, completion of > 80% of the 12- week phone calls, and 
<15% of enrolled patients lost to follow -up at the end of the 12- week intervention.  
Hypothesis 1b:  At the end of the 12- week BA- R intervention, ARF survivors in the BA -R versus “usual 
care” group will demonstrate decreased depressive symptoms, less impairments in physical function and 
quality of life, and reduced healthcare utilization  
Hypothesis 1c:  We will conduct qualitative research, using thematic analysis, t o identify key barriers and 
facilitators to engaging with the BA -R intervention, as well as perceived satisfaction, acceptabilit y and 
feasibility of BA -R. 
 
Aim 2: To evaluate the association between resilience, coping and social engagement  with depressive 
symptoms and the association between these factors and the BA -R intervention among at -risk ARF 
survivors from Aim 1.  
Hypothesis 2a: Increased resilience, adaptive coping, and social engagement  are associated with fewer 
depressive symptoms using the combined patient cohort from the BA -R and control groups in Aim 1  
Hypothesis 2b:  At the end of the 12- week intervention, ARF survivors in the BA -R versus “usual care” 
control group will demonstrate improvements in coping, resilience and social engagement . 
Hypothesis 2c: We will conduct qualitative research, using thematic analysis,  to identify the role of 
resilience, coping, and social en gagement  in recovery from ARF.  
 
Aim 3: To evaluate measurement properties (e.g., sensitivity, specificity, positive/negative predictive 
values) of two commonly- used depression screening instruments (i.e., Hospital Anxiety and Depression 
Scale (HADS) and Personal Health Questionnaire Depression Scale- 8 (PHQ- 8)) for detecting depressive 
symptom severity using a “gold standard” depression measure (i.e., Structured Clinical Interview for the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders 5
th Edition (SCI D-5)), in at -risk ARF survivors from 
Aim 1.  
Hypothesis 3:  The HADS and PHQ- 8 will adequately discriminate depressive symptom severity compared 
to the SCID -5 “gold standard” using the combined patient cohort from the BA -R and control groups in  
Aim 1.  
  
3. Background (briefly describe pre -clinical and clinical data, current experience with procedures, 
drug or device, and any other relevant information to justify the research ) 
 
BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE:  Annually, >750,000 Americans have acute respiratory fail ure 
(ARF) requiring mechanical ventilation.1-3 As the population ages, the incidence of ARF is increasing, with 
a projected 80% rise by 2026.4,5 At the same time, due to medical advances, ARF survival is improving,6 
leading to a growing number of survivors who frequently experience significant psychological sequelae (e.g., depression)
7 and physical morbidities (e.g., impairments in physical functioning).8-12 After ARF, the 
cumulative incidences, over 2 years, of new depressive symptoms and impairment physical functioning are 
40% and 66%, respectively.10 Psychological and physical impairments may synergistically yield worse 
outcomes,13 with ARF research, conducted by my mentors, showing depressive sympt oms are an 
independent risk factor for new onset of impaired physical functioning.10 
 As part of the scientific premise for this proposal, prior work, conducted by co -mentor, Mark Hegel, 
PhD, showed that only treating depression in other medically ill populations with functional impairments is 
NOT sufficient to achieve optimal improvement in patient outcomes. With depressed, medically ill older 
 
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007   
Page 3 of 24 
 
 adult outpatients, there were improvements in emotional outcomes, without improvements in physical 
functioning.14 In a depression prevention study in older adults with low vision, depression incidence was 
halved at 2 -month follow up, but the benefit was not maintained at 6 months.15 However, a depression 
prevention study that included BOTH a  depression treatment (Behavioral Activation (BA)) and an 
occupational therapist (OT) rehabilitation intervention again halved the incidence of depression that was then sustained for 4 months AND improved physical function.
16 These findings support including physical 
rehabilitation with psychological interventions for at- risk chronically ill populations.  
 In ARF survivors, in addition to a paucity of efficacious int erventions to address impairments in 
physical function and depressive symptoms, gaps remain in the existing literature regarding understanding and measuring depressive symptoms. First, while prior studies have identified risk factors for depressive 
symptom s in ARF survivors,
7 few have evaluate d important psychosocial factors, such as social 
engagament ,17-20 resilience21-24 and coping,18,25-29 that may be important in designing interventions. 
Moreover, a “gold standard” depression diagnostic outcome measure is not feasible for large studies,7,30 
and no existing depression screening instruments have been evaluated against a “gold standard” clinician 
diagnostic interview in ARF survivors.31 
          The urgent need to identify modifiable risk factors for depressive symptoms and develop new strategies that address the multi -faceted nature of impairments after ARF has been recognized by the 
American Thoracic Society and Society of Critical Care Medicine.
13,32 Further, as per the NHLBI’s new 
Strategic Vision, there is a need to develop interventions, within a multidisciplinary framework, to facilitate behavioral modification for disease treatment and incorporate such interventions into c ommunity- level 
patient care.
33  
 
SCIENTIFIC PREMISE:   Gaps in Existing Literature on Risk Factors for Depressive Symptoms in ARF 
Survivors: Resilience,34,35 coping style36 and social support  and engagement37,38 are inter -related 
psychosocial factors associated with depressive symptoms in other popula tions, but have been evaluated in 
only 2 studies in ARF survivors.7,39,40 Moreover, resilience and coping are important in mediating the 
positive effects of depression interventions in other populations,41-43 but have had little study in ARF 
survivors. Moreover, engaging social support networks may enhance interventions to address depressive 
symptoms.44 Hence, there are major gaps in existing literature for these factors.  
 
No Validation of Depression Screening Instruments against a “Gold Standard” in ARF Survivors: A recent 
Scoping Review of outcome measures in ARF research reported the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS)
45 was the most common depression instrument (60% of ARF studies).30 The Personal Health 
Questionnaire -9 (PHQ- 9), likewise, is widely used both cl inically and in research studies.46 The PHQ -8 and 
PHQ- 9 are highly correlated,47 differing only in omission of 1 question regarding self -harm, and for 
medicolegal reasons, the PHQ -8 is often preferred for research.48,49 While both the HADS and PHQ -8 are 
valid and reliable in other populations, their measurement properties have never been evaluated against a 
“gold standard” c linician diagnostic interview in ARF survivors. Importantly, ARF patients may differ 
from other populations in etiology and manifestations of depressive symptoms given the potential 
contribution of co- morbidities50 and the physiologic stress of critical illness (e.g., prolonged inflammatory 
state).7 Indeed, our systematic review demonstrated that traditional risk factors for depressive symptoms in 
the general population (e.g. sex) did not apply to ARF s urvivors, suggesting that other factors, such as 
neuro- inflammation, might play a larger role in these patients.7 These issues make validation51 of 
depressive screening instruments in this unique ARF survivor population essential to the validity of future 
research in the field.  
 
Strengths and weaknesses of Exis ting Research in ARF Survivors: Compared to the large number of studies 
describing impairments in ARF survivors, a systematic review reported that the number of interventional studies is modest, and interventions with proven effects are “rare.”
52,53 Recent systematic reviews 
demonstrate there are no existing trials specifically evaluating evidence -based depressio n interventions and 
only one54 evaluating a combined psychological/physical intervention in ARF.7,52,53,55,56  
 
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007   
Page 4 of 24 
 
  Three r andomized trials in ARF survivors offer insights. First, an 8- week, home -based exercise 
intervention with home visits and phone calls from a physical therapist (PT) versus usual care in 195 ARF 
survivors discharged to home found no significant effect on physical function, measured via 6 -minute walk 
test (mean outcome: ~400 meters) and SF -36 survey (mean outcome: ~1.5 SD below norm) at the end of 
treatment (8 weeks), with little change at 26 weeks.57 The investigators hypothesized poor adherence to the 
exercise intervention influenced this null finding. Second, an exercise intervention in 150 ARF patients 
randomized to rehabilitation in -ICU and continued for 8 weeks as outpatient versus usual care showed no 
significant effects on 6 -minute walk test (primary outcome) or quality of life at discharge, 3, 6, or 12 month 
follow -up.58 Adherence with the outpatient rehabilitation intervention was poor (41%) and investigators 
hypothes ized that (1) a home -based (vs. clinic- based) intervention may be superior to improve adherence 
and (2) failure to address psychological problems contributed to null results. Finally, the authors suggested 
that future studies use outcome measures focused o n participation restrictions in the home (e.g. patient -
reported physical function), which may demonstrate treatment effects beyond standardized performance -
based physical measures (e.g., 6 -minute walk test). Third, a United Kingdom (UK) trial,54 which 
randomized patients to a rehabilitation manual vs usual care, demonstrated better quality of life scores (via 
SF-36 survey) at the end of the 6- week intervention. However, there was no difference in depressive 
symptoms between the two groups. Given vastly lower access to outpatient physical rehabilitation, as part 
of “usual care” in the UK vs. USA, these results are not generalizable to the USA setting.  
 Lack of Clinical  Trials Demonstrating Effective Interventions to Improve Depressive Symptoms in ARF: In 
a systematic review by our group, there was a paucity of clinical trials evaluating an intervention specifically to reduce depressive symptoms in ARF survivors,
7  and there was preliminary evidence 
supporti ng post -ICU outpatient physical rehabilitation interventions to improve depressive symptoms in 
ARF survivors.  
 
Behavioral Activation is Effective & Accessible Treatment for Depression : For depression, behavioral 
activation (BA) is the primary behavioral treatment within the class of evidence -based psychotherapies 
known as Cognitive Behavioral Therapy.59,60 BA the ory holds that inadequate environmental reinforcement 
(i.e., behaviors leading to positive or desired outcomes) and/or too much environmental punishment (i.e., 
behaviors leading to aversive or undesired outcomes), can contribute to depression via extinction of 
adaptive behaviors and avoidance of taking action.60,61 BA addresses these issues by “activating” depressed 
persons to re -engage with their environments. BA interventions for depression have shown large effect 
sizes (e.g., 0.87).62 BA is superior to cognitive therapy (the most widely studied psychotherapy for 
depression) with compar able effect to antidepressant medication, even for severely depressed patients.63 
Moreover, these positive effects of BA were retained 2 years later and comparable to continued medication 
treatment.64 Finally, BA is time -efficient, not requiring advanced skills or complex training, making BA 
suitable for wide -scale dissem ination.62  For additional SCIENTIFIC PREMISE,  see Section 3.1  
 Summary of Significance: Given the increasing number of ARF survivors, and associated public health 
burden due to long- lasting mental and physical impairments, research evaluating modifiable psychosocial 
risk factors and establishing val idated screening instruments for future research is a priority as per the 
American Thoracic Society, Society of Critical Care Medicine and NHLBI’s strategic vision. Moreover, 
designing effective interventions to address co -existing, long- lasting psychologi cal and physical 
impairments is essential to enhancing recovery in ARF survivors as per existing literature. Existing studies 
are limited, focused primarily on physical interventions, and not demonstrating efficacy. Improving 
existing interventions by addr essing depressive symptoms, physical functioning AND adaptation to ARF 
survivorship is a key component missing in prior studies; the proposed BA -R intervention addresses this 
gap.  
PRELIMINARY DATA:  Depressive Symptoms and Physical Impairments are Very Com mon in ARF: Our 
research team has conducted seminal studies on the psychological and physical impairments of ARF 
 
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007   
Page 5 of 24 
 
 survivors. These papers, several of which were authored by Dr. Parker, include systematic and narrative 
reviews regarding post -ARF depression,7,56,65 PTSD,65-67 anxiety,65,68 neuromuscular abnormalities,69-71 and 
physical impairments.72-75 Importantly, our recent systematic and scoping reviews found limited prior 
research in ARF survivors regarding: 1) modifiable risk factors (e.g. resilience, coping) for depressive symptoms,
7 2) consensus regarding depression screening instruments,30 and 3) comparison of any 
depression screening instrument against a “gold standard” diagnostic interview.31 Our research 
demonstrated high prevalences of depressive symptoms and physical impairments after ARF (40% and 66%, respectively), and depressive symptoms are independently associated with new impairments in physical functioning (OR=2.7, P=0.02).
10  
 Behavioral Intervention Research in Medical Populations: Mark Hegel, PhD  (co-mentor) previously 
designed a psychological intervention similar to the proposed BA intervention, called Problem Solving 
Therapy (PST), administered by nurses in primary care,
76 for th e largest geriatric depression treatment trial 
(N=1801): Project IMPACT.77 Participants receiving PST (vs. a community- based therapy control) showed 
significantly improved depressive symptoms at 12 months post -intervention.78 Thereafter, his group 
conducted RCTs to evaluate PST to prevent depression in older adults after stroke79 and with macular 
degeneration.15,16 PST was superior to usual care controls, and equivalent to antidepressant medication. 
More recent ly, Dr. Hegel evaluated delivery of PST via Skype (Tele -PST) to homebound elders with 
depression, showing that Tele -PST was highly acceptable.80-82 This evidence sh ows that this intervention, 
that is closely related to BA, is effective in adults with medical co -morbidities and functional impairment, 
when administered in -person, by phone or by Skype. These studies demonstrate our group’s proficiency 
with conducting RC Ts of psychosocial, phone -assisted interventions. Drs. Hegel and Lyons (co -mentors) 
also conducted research integrating Behavioral Activation with PST and occupational therapy (OT) interventions (BA -Rehabilitation or BA -R) for cancer survivors
83-86 and for older adults with macular 
degeneration.16 The following theories provide the foundation for the prior research: (1) OT, which 
emphasizes participation in daily activities, is synergistic with BA and PST, (2) having BA provided by OT 
and other non- mental health providers expands i ts accessibility (BA requires less psychotherapeutic 
expertise than PST), and (3) the unique treatment focus of OT may extend the effectiveness of BA for improving both psychological and physical functioning.  
 
4. Study Procedures  
a. Study design, including the sequence and timing of study procedures  (distinguish research 
procedures from those that are part of routine care ). 
 
Overview of Research Methods for Aims 1, 2, & 3  
A single cohort of patients will be used for all 3 Aims (i.e. both intervention and control  groups recruited 
into the randomized controlled trial (RCT) will form a single cohort for analyses in Aims 2 and 3).  We will 
enroll 54 patients from all Johns Hopkins Hospital adult ICUs . If patients are lost to follow -up, we will 
enroll up to 10 additional patients to obtain 12 -week outcomes assessments on a total of 54 patients (27 in 
each group). Oral informed consent  will be obtained from  all participants.  
 Aim 1 Methods: We will conduct a single -site, pilot RCT (N= 54) evaluating the feasibility (prim ary 
objective) and efficacy (secondary objective) of a 12 -week behavioral activation- rehabilitation (BA -R) 
intervention versus “usual care”, in acute respiratory failure (ARF) survivors.  We will evaluate the BA -R 
intervention via an RCT study design, with blinded outcome assessments. We will test the feasibility of this intervention (primary outcome) and its effica cy (secondary outcome) at the end of intervention. Figure 2 
shows study timeline.  
 After return home, consented patients will be randomized to: (1) behavioral activation and rehabilitation 
(BA- R) intervention or  usual care. Randomization will occur via web -based tool, using variable -sized 
 
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007   
Page 6 of 24 
 
 blocks from  2 to 4, and stratified by history of depression prior to ICU admission (based on chart review 
and patient interview). Baseline variables are detailed in Table 1 below.  
Table 1:  Baseline Variables  
Variable  Collection  Measurement Scale  
Patient Variables  
Age/sex/race  Chart review  Continuous/Binary/Categorical  
Education (number of years/highest attain ment)  Patient interview  Continuous/Categorical  
Employment & Health Insurance status  Patient interview  Categorical  
Comorbidity indices: Charlson (CCI)a & Functional (FCI)b Chart review  Ordinal  
Alcohol intake/misuse  / Drug abuse  chart review  Categorical  
Physical function at baseline : AMPAC -CAT87,88 c Patient interview  Continuous  
ICU and Hospital Variables  
ICU a dmission diagnosis (e.g., sepsis, renal failure)  Chart review  Categorical  
Severity of illness: APACHE IId Chart review  Continuous  
Benzodiazepine use and dosing56,89,90  Chart review  Continuous  
Daily ICU Sedation Status: RASS91 Chart review  Ordinal  
Daily ICU Delirium Status: CAM -ICU92,93 Chart review  Categorical  
Daily Minimum Gluco se90  Chart review  Continuous  
ICU and Hospital Length of Stay  Chart review  Continuous  
Before start of intervention, once participant at homec 
Depressive Symptom s: HADS45 Patient interview  Continuous  
Coping Style & Social Engagement: Brief Cope94  & BADS95  Patient interview  Continuous  
Resilience: CD RISC96 Patient interview  Continuous  
Abbreviations: AMPAC -CAT = Activity Measure for Post-Acute Care - Computer Adaptive Test, RASS = Richmond Agitation Sedation Scale, CAM -ICU = Confusion 
Assessment Method for the ICU, HADS= Hospi tal Anxiety and Depression Scale, PHQ= Personal Health Questionnaire, SCID -5= Structured Clinical Interview for DSM -5 
(Mood Disorders Section only), BADS= Behavioral Activation for Depression Scale, CD RISC= Connor Davidson Resilience Scale, S F-36= 36 item  Short Form Survey  
a:Charlson index: a score derived from 19 comorbidities, with an increased score reflecting increased 1-year mortality97 
b:Functional Index: derived from 18 comorbidities using physical function as outcome; increased score predicts decreased function98  
c: See Section 3.3.8 for description of instruments  
d: APACHE II: severity score that accounts for age, medical conditions, and 12 acute physiologic variables in ICU99  
 
 
 
 
 
Physical and Occupational Therapy Initial Home Visits: Within about 2 weeks of arriving home, 
participants will receive a n audiovisual visit from a p hysical therapist (PT) and occupational therapist (OT). 
The PT will (1) assess home safety, (2) recommend environmental modifications (e.g., grab bars) and (3) 
when indicated, use standardized, validated and feasible tests for ICU survivors to assess stren gth (via 
manual muscle testing)9,73 and mobility (via 4 meter timed walk).100 Given current restrictions (as of March 
 
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007   
Page 7 of 24 
 
 13, 2020) due to the coronavirus pandemic, home visits have been converted to audiovisual visits. The PT 
will provide resources to obtain low cost equipment (e.g., walkers), if required. In both groups, acute need 
for PT/OT services will be as per standard of care (i.e., physician referral); study participation (in either 
randomized group) will not impact standard care. The OT will then assist the patient in  identifying  valued 
activities (i.e., activities performed for their intrinsic worth) in the participant’s life . The OT will guide and 
facilitate de veloping goals for completing valued activities, based on ratings of importance and satisfaction 
with performance  on the COPM and performed in the participant’s home, by the end of the first week. The 
OT will then evaluate the participant's ability to perform the prioritized activities. The  OT will work with 
the participant to set BA goals for these selected activities, by embedding physical exercise (as 
recommended by PT) into valued daily routines. Goals will be divided into step- by-step plans, which 
incorporate appropriate expectations for participant activity during recovery. If the necessary steps to 
achieve thes e goals are not readily apparent to the participant, the OT will implement standard problem -
solving strategies.16,83,85 The visit will end with the OT entering the identified goals for the valued activities 
into the participant’s Progress Worksheet (see below).  
 BA-R Phone intervention:  WEEKS 1 -6: Approximately one week after the OT home visit, and weekly 
thereafter throughout the initial 6 -week intervention period, the participant will receive a phone call from 
the OT. During each call, the OT will query participants’ success with BA -R goals and adherence barriers 
(e.g., need for assistance, lack of motivation). If goals are met, the OT will help the participant establish goals for the next week, and these goals along with an action plan will be delineated in a Progress Worksheet. If the goals are not met, the OT w ill assist the participant in addressing barriers as detailed 
above. WEEKS 7- 12: At about 6 weeks, the PT will conduct a second audiovisual  visit. Given current 
restrictions (as of March 13, 2020) due to the coronavirus pandemic, home visits have been converted to audiovisual visits. The PT will assess if the exercise level should be changed (e.g., increase or decrease 
intensity/duration). The OT will review progress on the action plan. Depending on achievement, participant preferences, and recovery traject ory, the OT  and participant will develop new goals for participating in 
valued activities over the next 2 weeks. An action plan to achieve these goals will be entered into the Progress Worksheet. Phone calls will continue every 2 weeks during weeks 8- 12. T his will allow the OT to 
determine whether the participant has mastered the concept of goal setting and can stay on track with less contact.  
 Usual Care Control Group:  Participants randomized to this arm will receive usual care only, in order to reflect a real -world comparator. This group is expected to include primary care, possibly outpatient 
physical therapy, mental health, and ho me health nurses. As per Table 2 , these data will be collected to 
describe usual care received by the control group. These same data also will be collected for the intervention group to characterize usual care received outside of the BA -R intervention. These data will be 
recorded from the time of enrollment until end of the intervention.  
Table 2 : Mental Health & Physical Rehabi litation “Usual Care” Data Collection ( both  Intervention & Control Group)  
Mental Health Care  
1.  Psychiatric pharmacotherapy  (e.g., anti -depressant, anti -anxiety meds)  
a. Including drug name, dose, frequency & duration of use  
2. Provider Visits* (including psychotherapy, counselling and support) 
a. Number, frequency & duration  
b. Type,** frequency & duration of intervention  
Physical Rehabilitation Care  
1.  Provider Visits: Physical therapist, Occupational therapist, Physiatry/Rehabilitation Physician  
a. Number, frequency &  duration  
b. Location (clinic vs. home -based)  
* categories for Psychiatrist, Psychologist, Social Worker, Counselor, Support Group, and Primary Care Physician (if mental health services provided)  
** including goal setting, homework, problem solving, family m eetings, discussion of personal relationships, group interactions and relaxation techniques  
 
Methods for Aim s 1c & 2c:  Using thematic analysis, semi -structured  telephone interviews will be 
conducted by Dr. Parker and a trained research assistant using a w ritten interview guide. The guide will be 
 
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007   
Page 8 of 24 
 
 developed by Dr. Parker with input from Drs. Eakin and Needham  (co-mentor & primary mentor, 
respectively) and the questions will be iteratively refined throughout the study period in order to optimize 
information gained about themes as they arise. The interviews will begin with open- ended questions about 
patient experiences in recovery after ARF. Broad questions will then be followed by more specific questions about: 1) resilience, coping and social engagement ; 2) key barriers and facilitators to engag ing 
with the BA -R intervention; and 3) perceived satisfaction, acceptability and feasibility of BA -R. The 
anticipated duration is 25- 30 minutes per interview.  
 Methods for Aim 3:  The 3 instruments required for Aim 3 ar e described in Table 4 and under Secondary 
Outcomes below – all instruments are measured at the end of the 12- week intervention. The SCID -5 will be 
administered by Dr. Parker blinded to results of HADS and PHQ -8. The HADS and PHQ -8 will be 
administered by a research assistant blinded to the SCID -5. 
  
b. Study duration and number of study visits required of research participant s. 
 As described above, the intervention will start within approximately 2 weeks of hospital discharge  and last 
about 12 weeks. After th e 12 week intervention period, all participants will be contacted for outcomes 
assessments via telephone. This will take place as soon as possible after the end of the intervention. They will also be contacted by phone weekly for weeks 2- 5 and then every other week for weeks 8- 12.  
 
c. Blinding, including justification for blinding or not blinding the trial, if applicable.  
 Participants cannot be blinded to the intervention.  Treatment allocation will be concealed, except to staff 
performing the intervention. R esearch staff performing all outcome assessments will be blinded  (except Dr. 
Parker who will not be masked to treatment assignment and will administer the SCID). Patients will be 
instructed (using standard language, as per prior research)
101-103 not to discuss treatment all ocation with 
staff prior to each  assessment. Adequacy of blinding will be assessed by asking assessors to indicate if they 
were un -blinded and for  their “best guess” of patients’ treatment allocation.103 
 
d. Justification o f why participant s will not receive routine  care or will have current therapy 
stopped.  
 All study participants in the usual care group will receive routine care. Participants in the intervention group will receive the intervention in addition to routine care.  
 
e. Justification for inclusion of a placebo or non- treatment group. 
 
We chose to compare our intervention against a “usual care”, rather than a sham control that would attempt 
to control for extra attention but does not represent real -world usual care. We wi ll measure usual care for 
both control and intervention groups (Table 2). Participants in the usual care group will not be deprived of 
any known potential benefits by not being included in the  intervention group (no proven benefit yet in the 
ARF population).  
 
f. Definition of treatment failure or participant  removal criteria.  
 Participants will only be removed from the study if they withdraw consent.  
 
g. Description of what happens to participant s receiving therapy when study ends or if a 
participant ’s participat ion in the study ends  prematurely.  
 
 
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007   
Page 9 of 24 
 
 If a participation in the study ends prematurely, the participant will continue to receive usual care. Ending 
the intervention prematurely does not pose any harm to the participant.  
 
5. Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
  
6. Drugs/ Substances/ Devices  
 
N/A  
 
7. Study Stat istics  
a. Primary outcome variable.  
 
The primary outcome variable is feasibility. We will assess the total number of intervention phone calls completed per patient as a proportion of the number of intervention phone calls each patient is intended to complete (i.e., 9 intervention calls –  weekly during first 6 weeks and bi -weekly for second 6 weeks of the 
12-week protocol). We also will assess total number of intervention phone calls completed by all study 
participants as a proportion of total intervention phone calls expected in the study (i.e., 9 calls/patient x 27 intervention patients = 243 calls). We will calculate the number of patients completing the 12- week  follow -
up session as a proportion of the number of patients enrolled to measure of loss to follow -up. 
 
b. Secondary outcome variables . 
 Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale ( HADS)
45: The HADS (Tables 1  and 4), separately assesses 
depressive and anxiety symptoms in a wide variety of patients, is valid, reliable45,56,65,105,106 and highly 
correlated with psychiatric evaluation in other populations,107 but never validated in ARF survivors. A 
HADS score ≥8 indicates clinic ally important depressive symptoms. Scores of 8 -10 indicates “mild” 
symptoms, 11- 14 “moderate”, and ≥15 “severe”. HADS is the most commonly used measure of depressive 
symptoms in ARF survivors10,56,108 and is considered to be particularly appropriate in ARF patients because  
Table 3 . Eligibility Criteria  
Inclusion Criteria:  
≥18 years old  
Living at home before the current admission (not in a facility)  
Acute respiratory failure  managed in the ICU ≥ 24hrs  (≥1 of the following):  
1) Mechanical ventilation via an endotracheal tube or trach eostomy > 12hrs (and not ventilator-dependent before admission) OR 
2) Non-invasive ventilation (CPAP, BiPAP) > 4 hours in a 24 hour period provided for acute respiratory failure (not for OSA or other  
stable use) OR  
3) High flow nasal cannula with FiO2 ≥ 0.5 for ≥4 hours  in a 24hr period  
At least mild depres sive symptoms (score ≥2 on PHQ -2 scale46)  
Exclusion Criteria:  
Pre-existing cognitive impairment (based on review of medical records, or proxy -administered IQ -CODE104 score >3.3)  
Declines informed consent or not capable of providing informed consent  
Non-English speaking  
Homelessness  
Bedbound prior to the current admission  
Expecte d survival < 6 months according to ICU attending  
ICU LOS > 30 days  
Not discharged home from the hospital  
Complex medical care expected soon after discharge (e.g. multiple planned surgeries, transplantation evaluation, extensive travel needs for 
hemodialysi s, chemotherapy or radiation therapy, etc)  
Active substance abuse or psychosis   
Pregnancy 
Suicidality  
Incarcerated  
Lack of access to telephone or inability to use telephone independently 
Pregnancy 
Suicidality  
 
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007   
Page 10 of 24 
 
 HADS does not emphasize the physi cal symptoms of depression that may be confounded by post -ARF 
physical morbidity.  
Personal Health Questionnaire (PHQ- 8)46: The PHQ -8 uses a 4 -point Likert scale  to assess depressive 
symptoms (Scores 5 -9 indicate “mild” symptoms, 10- 14 “moderate”, and ≥20 “severe” depressive 
symptoms). While PHQ -9 has been validated for diagnostic accuracy in many other populations, it has not 
been evaluated against a “gold standa rd” clinician diagnostic interview in ARF survivors. As commonly 
done for medicolegal reasons in research, the PHQ -8, rather than PHQ -9, is used since it removes a 
question regarding suicidal ideation.48 
Structured Clinical Interview for the DSM- 5 (SCID- 5) – Mood Disorders Section109: is a semi -
structured, clinician -based psychiatric interview for making diagnoses according to Diagnostic and 
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders -5 (DSM -5).110  Prior versions are validated143;144 and demonstrate 
high inter -rater reliability for the diagnosis of major depression.111-114  
Activity Measure for Post -Acute Care Computer Adaptive Test (AMPAC -CAT): will be licensed fo r 
this study to evaluate the functional status of participants. The AMPAC has 269 items across three domains 
(basic mobility, daily activity and applied cognitive). The computer adaptive test, validated for use in the currently proposed post -acute care set tings, requires a mean  of 22 items from the item bank (administration 
time: 6 min.).
87,88,115,116 The test will be administered, using a computer, by blinded research staff.117   
Health -Related Quality of Life (HR -QOL): will be measured using the EQ -5D-5L. 
Healthcare Utilization: We will collect data on the post -discharge healthcare utilizations, including in-
patient admissions to hospitals, and skilled nursing, acute and sub- acute rehabilitation facilities (Table 4).  
Moreover, we will collect data on utilization of out -patient mental health and physical rehabilitation 
services (Tab le 1).  We will evaluate these measures using existing methodology from our prior research in 
ARF survivors.118-121  
 
Table 4. Secondary outcomes  
 Brief Cope:  Coping strategies will be assessed using the self -reported 28 -item Brief Cope Scale.
94 The 
scale is a valid and reliable, used in medical populations, with strong measurement properties.94,120,122 It 
will assess active (e.g. problem solving) versus avoidant cop ing (e.g., behavioral disengagement, self -
blame).  Description  Instru ment  
(# items; time to complete (minutes))  Baseline  Week 6  End of 
Intervention  
Depressive 
Symptoms  HADS (7 items; 2min)  
PHQ -8 (8 items, 2min)  
SCID -5a (30 min)  x 
 
 x x 
x 
x 
Functional status  AMPAC -CAT(~22 item; 6 min)  
Return to baseline work/activity (8 it ems; 3 min)  x  x 
x 
Health -Related  
Quality of Life  EQ-5D-5L (2 min)    x 
Employment status     x 
Health Care 
Utilization and 
Estimated Costs  Admission to hospital, nursing & rehabilitation 
facilities; plus mental health & physical rehab 
utilization (8 min )   x 
Survival status  Patient/Proxy (<1 min)    x 
Coping Style  Brief Cope (28 items; 10 min)  x  x 
Social Engagement  BADS (25 items; 5 min)  x  x 
Resilience  CD RISC (25 items; 10 min)  x  x 
Cognitive Function  MoCA -BLIND ( 8 questions; 5 min)    x 
PTSD  IES-R (22 items; 6 min)    x 
Abbreviations: HADS= Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale, SCID -5= Structured Clinical Interview for DSM -5 (Mood 
Disorders Section only), AMPAC -CAT= Activity Measure for Post -Acute Care --Computer Adaptive Test, BADS= 
Behavioral A ctivation for Depression Scale, CD RISC= Connor -Davidson Resilience Scale 
a: semi -structured interview  
 
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007   
Page 11 of 24 
 
 Behavioral Activation for Depression (BAD) Scale:  This 25 -point scale95 assesses social engagement and 
other aspects of behavioral activation. We demonstrated BADS’s validity in medical populations with 
depressi ve symptoms and its sensitivity to change with depression treatment.16  
Connor -Davidson Resilience Scale (CD RISC): This 25- item scale96 assesses resilience. It has been 
validated in a variety of patient populations and specifica lly used in research involving ARF 
survivors.102,105,106 
Adherence to the BA -R Intervention:  will be evaluated as done in prior studies83,85 by: (1) measuring the 
number of phone attempts needed by the OT t o reach the participant for each session, and (2) calculating 
the proportion of sessions fully completed (with sub- analysis for number partially completed).   
Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) – BLIND:  is a validated phone -based version of the original 
MoCA,123 a rapid screening instrument for mild cognitive dysfunction. The MoCA -  BLIND assesses 
different cognitive domains including attention and concentra tion, memory, language, conceptual thinking, 
calculation and orientation. It will take 5 minutes to administer the MoCA -BLIND.  
Impact of Events Scale – Revised (IES -R): This is the most commonly used instrument for assessing 
PTSD symptoms in ARF survivors.107 It has 22 items, is reliable a nd valid.124  
 
c. Statistical plan including sample size justification and inte rim data analysis. 
 Sample Size
: As a pilot RCT, we aim to enroll a convenience sample of ~1.5 patients/month, for a total of 
54 patients ( based on 36 months of recruitment; see Timeline -Candidate Statement). Extensive experience 
enrolling ARF patients in prior studies by our group10,121,125-127 suggests this rate is feasible for a K -23 
award at this study site. We expect an overall <15% missing completion rate due to mortality and loss to follow-up (in our prior study of >500 ARF survivors, loss to follow -up was 2% with 7% mortality at 6 
months
125), thus, we expect 54 patients to complete the inter vention. With 54 participants (27 in each 
group), assuming 5% alpha, 80% power and HAD SD of 4.2 points based on our prior research in ARF 
survivors89,90, for our secondary aim of efficacy, we can detect a 3.1 point difference in HADS score 
between the 2 treatment groups, which approximates HAD’s 2.9 point minimum important difference 
(MID) in ARF survivors,128 This proposed enrollment rate and sample size is consistent with existing 
pilot/feasibility trials in ARF research.101,129,130 
 
Statistical Analysis  
Hypothesis 1a:  A 12 -week BA -R intervention in ARF survivors will be feasible, as demonstrated by an 
average accrual rate of 1.5 patients per month, completion of >80% of the intervention phone calls, and 
<15% of enrolled patients lost to follow -up for outcomes assessments at end of the 12 -week intervention. 
We will assess the total number of intervention phone calls completed per patient as a proportion of the number of intervention phone calls each patient is intended to complete (i.e., 9 intervention calls – weekly 
during first 6 weeks and bi -weekly  for second 6 weeks of the 12- week protocol). We also will assess total 
number of intervention phone calls completed by all study participants as a proportion of total intervention phone calls expected in the study. We will calculate the number of patients  completing the 12- month 
follow -up session as a proportion of the number of patients enrolled to measure loss to follow -up.  
 
Hypothesis 1b:  At the end of the 12 -week BA -R intervention, ARF survivors in the BA -R versus “usual 
care” group will demonstrate d ecreased depressive symptoms, less impairments in physical function and 
quality of life, and reduced healthcare utilization.  Analyses will follow a modified intention -to-treat 
principle  and a  2-tailed p<0.05 is statistically significant. Patient mortality is expected to occur infrequently 
(see Sample Size above) and not to differ by treatment vs. control group; therefore, all analyses will be conducted for 12- week survivors only. The analysis will include separate comparisons of the effect of the 
BA-R intervention vs usual care control on each of the blinded outcomes in Table 4. These analyses will 
estimate the average treatment effect, i.e. the difference in the mean 12 -week outcome comparing the BA -R 
intervention to the usual care control, using the precis e locally efficient augmented simple estimator 
(PLEASE) described in Colantuoni and Rosenblum[REF: 135]. This method for estimating the average 
 
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007   
Page 12 of 24 
 
 treatment effect is similar to the analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) approach in that it incorporates the 
baseline outcome (if measured) which, if correlated with the 12- week outcome, can improve the precision 
of the estimated average treatment effect [Ref 134].  This method also accounts for more general patient 
drop- out models than the ANCOVA approach. Specifically, the ANCOVA approach is valid under 
completely at random drop- out, whereas the PLEASE is valid under missing at random drop- out, i.e. when 
patient drop -out differs by treatment group or across levels of the baseline outcome or other measured 
variables at baseline. The PLEASE requires a priori specification of three models: an outcome regression model (fit separately for each treatment group) that will include age, gender and the baseline outcome (if measured), a propensity score model that will include age, gender and the baseline outcome (if measured) and a drop- out model (fit separately for each treatment group) that will include age, gender, and the 
outcomes measured at baseline (HADS, Brief Cope, CD RISC, BADS). As exploratory analyses, the 12-week outcom es (e.g. HADS scores) will be summarized (summary statistics including counts of missing 
values and histograms) and the correlation of the baseline (if appropriate) and 12- week outcomes will be 
computed, separately by treatment arm.  Patient mortality, dro p-out and missing data will be described for 
all variables, separately for treatment vs control groups. Patient characteristics will be compared between those with vs. without missing outcomes (due to drop- out and missing values).
136-138 
 
A series of secondary analyses will be conducted to improve our understanding of the changes in the outcomes over time under the BA -R interv ention and usual care control and to improve the design of 
subsequent larger randomized trials evaluating the effect of the BA -R intervention.  Specifically, the 
outcomes over time within each treatment group will be visualized using spaghetti plots to dis play each 
patient's data with the mean outcome over time trajectory over time highlighted.  Longitudinal linear regression models for the longitudinal outcomes (i.e. baseline, 6- week and 12- week outcomes) will be 
constructed that account for time (factor),  treatment and the interaction of treatment and time.   These 
longitudinal models will be fit using weighted least squares and will allow for the possibility that the 
variance in the outcomes can change over time and that outcomes measured on the same patient over time 
may be correlated.   In addition, w e will explore the prognostic ability of other baseline variables (e.g. age, 
sex and history of depression) for the 12- week outcomes using the method described by Colantuoni and 
Rosenblum.
135 Specifically, we will compute the leave -one-out cross -validated relative R -square which 
compares the  R -square obtained when modeling the 12- week outcomes as a function of selected baseline 
variables, separately for each treatment arm, to that obtained by predicting the 12- week outcomes with the 
treatment arm specific mean.  The statistic (1 – 1/relative R -square) is roughly the sample siz e reduction 
that can be achieved if the selected baseline variables are incorporated into an adjusted treatment effect estimator compared to using an unadjusted estimator.  This assessment will provide relevant information to improve the design and analysi s of subsequent larger randomized trials evaluating the effect of the BA -R 
intervention; specifically, by informing which additional prognostic baseline variables to include in the ANCOVA approach described above to further improve the precision of the est imated treatment effects.  
 
Hypothesis 1c:  We will conduct qualitative research, using thematic analysis, to identify key barriers and 
facilitators to engaging with the BA -R intervention, as well as perceived satisfaction, acceptability and 
feasibility of B A-R. All interviews will be audio recorded using a digital recorder and subsequently 
transcribed on a rolling basis. Using a data -driven approach, the first five interviews and associated 
interviewer field notes will be independently read by Dr. Parker and a second coder with expertise in 
qualitative research methods. The data will be segmented by identifying information pertinent to the research question then categorizing and giving identifying names (codes) to the patterns that emerge. Following the revie w of the five initial interviews, the two investigators will meet to discuss common 
findings and key themes. A code book will then be developed to guide the analysis of the transcripts through an iterative process of discussion and review. Transcripts will  be reviewed on an ongoing basis to 
identify when thematic saturation is reached, defined by at least 3 interviews without additional information. Nvivo software will be used to organize the data for analysis. Coding will be compared 
 
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007   
Page 13 of 24 
 
 between the coders usi ng percentage agreement and Cohen’s kappa coefficient. Discrepancies will be 
reviewed and resolved through discussion between reviewers and a th ird review , if needed.  
 
Hypothesis 2a:  Increased resilience, adaptive coping, and social engage ment  are associat ed with fewer 
depressive symptoms using the combined patient cohort from the BA -R and control groups in Aim 1. Our 
primary outcome is depressive symptoms from the Hospital Anxi ety and Depression Scale (HADS). First, 
descriptive statistics (i.e. mean, stand ard deviation, histograms) will be performed for the baseline HADS 
and the exposure and confounding variables. Next, a bi -variable analysis will be conducted for the HADS 
vs the baseline exposure variables for Aim 1 (i.e., CD -RISC 10, Brief COPE, BADS) usi ng linear 
regression. In multivariable analyses, we also will include potentia l confounding variables (Table 1), 
including no more than 4 covariates in each model to avoid overfitting with sample size 54 (after 
accounting for mortality and loss to follow -up). These analyses will be conducted for all patients in the 
combined cohort in Aim 1.  
 
Hypothesis 2b:  At the end of the 12 -week intervention, ARF survivors in the BA -R versus “usual care” 
control group will demonstrate improvements in coping, resilience and social engagement . Analyses for 
the comparison between the intervention and usual care groups  will follow a modified intention -to-treat 
principle, with a  2-tailed p<0.05 is considered significant. Analysis will include separate comparisons of 
the interv ention vs control for each of outcomes (Brief Cope, CD RISC, BADS), in accordance with the 
description above for  Hypothesis 1b.  
 
Hypothesis 2c:  We will conduct qualitative research, using thematic analysis, to identify the role of 
resilience, coping, and social engagement in recovery from ARF.  See analysis plan above for Hypothesis 
1c. This analysis will include all patients in the combined cohort from Aim 1.  
 
Hypothesis 3:  The HADS and PHQ -8 will adequately discriminate depressive symptom severity vs. the 
SCID- 5 “gold standard” using the combined patient cohort from the BA -R and control groups in Aim 1. 
All analyses will be conducted using only the 12 -week outcomes data. The RCT inclusion criteria (in Aim 
1), which establish the patient cohort for Aim 3, i nclude only patients with PHQ- 2 ≥2 (i.e., at least mild 
depressive symptoms). Therefore, for Aim 3 analyses, we will categorize depressive symptoms based on 
severity category for the SCID -5 (mild vs moderate to severe ). We will then examine  the screening 
characteristics of HADS and PHQ8 total scores  vs the SCID -5 using a receiver operating characteristics 
(ROC) curve, including the area under the ROC curve (AUC), and sensitivities, specificities, and positive 
and negative predictive values at each HADS and PHQ8  total- score cut point . Our sample size (N=54 
patients)  is adequate to permit an assessment of criterion validity that is rated, at least, as “good” quality 
according to the COSMIN standard for psychometric analyses.131 In addition to assessment of criterion 
validity, we will assess internal consistency of the PHQ -8 using Chronbach’s alpha, with a result of > 0.7 
and <0.95 indicating “good” quality as per COSMIN132 (HADS has an existing publication demonstrating 
good internal consistency in ARF survivors so no such analysis will be repeated for HADS)133.  
 
d. Early stopping rules.  
 
There will be no interim analyses to determine early stopping for efficacy or futility with respect to the 
main  efficacy hypothesis. The primary outcome for this study is feasibility.  
 
8. Risks  
a. Medical risks, listing all procedures, their major and minor risks and expected frequency.  
 1) Depression:  Participants will be asked questions about depression using the PHQ -8, HADS and the 
SCID. While asking questions, we may detect that the patient has worsening depressive symptoms.   
 
 
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007   
Page 14 of 24 
 
 2) Breach of confidentiality: We will be collecting data about the participant , and hence, there is a risk of 
breach of confidentiality.  
 
b. Steps taken to minimize the risks.  
 Depression (PHQ -8, HADS and SCID) : All potential participants who have worsening depression 
symptoms will be informed that they may be depressed and advised to consult with their health care provider.  
 If there is any potential concern regarding safety of a participant, a physician on our st udy team will 
become involved. The research assistant will be instructed to take the steps outlined in Figure 2 below. 
− Complete a Serious Adverse Event Report (SAE) form documenting the outcome of this questionnaire 
and subsequent action taken. 
− If unsure a bout the patient’s risk, contact a study physician to notify them immediately and discuss 
action to take.   
          
                          
 
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007   
Page 15 of 24 
 
 Figure 2. Suicide Risk Management Protocol  
 
 
 
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007   
Page 16 of 24 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007   
Page 17 of 24 
 
  
Breach of confidentiality : We will keep all participant infor mation confidential in accordance with Public 
Health Services Act (42 USC 299a- 1(c)).  There is a low  risk of a breach of confidentiality.   
 We will maintain subject confidentiality by keeping all study files in locked cabinets in locked rooms accessible only to study personnel with permission to examine study files. Electronic data will be password protected with daily back up procedures.  Once data is entered into an analytic file, all identifying information will be removed.     
c. Plan for reporting unant icipated problems or study deviations.  
 The primary investigator (Dr. Parker) is a board -certificated Internal Medicine physician practicing in the 
intensive care unit at Johns Hopkins. She will be involved in the daily conduct of the clinical trial and closely supervise the daily screening for patient eligibility, informed consent, and study procedures such as 
outcomes assessments and safety monitoring during the trial. Consequently, immediate knowledge of any unanticipated problem or study deviation that may arise will be available to the P.I. (Dr. Parker) on a timely basis for immediate action and reporting to the IRB as necessary. If Dr. Parker is unavailable, the study will maintain a list of clinicians who are co -mentors to Dr. Parker on this study who can provide medical 
guidance.   
 If clinically important, unanticipated adverse problems or clinically important study -related, serious 
adverse events occur, they will be recorded on a designated case report form.  All events that are serious and unantici pated, or study- related and adverse will be reported to IRB within the required reporting 
timeline.  
 
Definitions:  
Adverse event: any untoward medical occurrence associated with the use of a drug in humans, whether or 
not considered intervention related.  
Serious Adverse Event (SAE)  - an adverse event will be considered "serious" if, in the view of the 
investigator, it results in any of the following outcomes:  death, a life -threatening adverse reaction, re -
hospitalization, a persistent or significant incapa city, or substantial disruption of the ability to conduct 
normal life functions.  
 Suspected  Adverse Event  - any adverse event for which there is a reasonable possibility that the drug 
caused the adverse event . 
 Unexpected Adverse Event  - an adverse event or suspected adverse reaction is considered "unexpected" if 
it is not listed in the investigator brochure or is not listed at the specificity or severity that has been observed; or, of an investigator brochure is not required or available, is not consisten t with the risk 
information described in the general investigational plan or elsewhere in the current application.  
  
d. Legal risks such as the risks that would be associated with breach of confidentiality.  
 All patient data will be confidential and secure d ue to physical and electronic data security measures, 
including locked offices and locked filing cabinets for records and computers, and password protection for computers and electronic data storage.  All participant -identifying information will be removed fro m the 
dataset before analysis. Only study staff who are required to, will know the linkage between the unique 
identifier and partic ipant -identifying information. We will keep all patient information confidential in 
 
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007   
Page 18 of 24 
 
 accordance with Public Health Services Act (42 USC 299a -1(c)). There is low risk of a breach of 
confidentiality . 
 
e. Financial risks to the participant s. 
 
There are no expected financial risks to the participants.  
 
9. Benefits  
a. Description of the probable benefits  for the participant and for society.  
 
Currently, there are few therapeutic options with proven, or potential, efficacy to prevent or minimize depressive symptoms in acute respiratory failure survivors .  Hence, this study offers important new 
knowledge through testing the BA- R intervention i n this patient population. The BA -R intervention has 
been demonstrated to improve depressive symptoms in other chronically ill populations. Given the prevalence of depressive symptoms in acute respiratory failure survivors, gaining information regarding th e 
feasibility and potential benefit of BA-R in this pilot study has great importance. This therapy is especially 
ideal in acute respiratory failure survivors because it can be delivered via phone with only 2 home visits 
required by PT and OT. The potential  benefit s far outweigh the minimal potential risks of this intervention.  
 
If successful, the use of BA- R therapy may improve post -acute respiratory failure depressive symptoms, 
improve physical function and decrease healthcare utilization while improving quality of life.  
 
10. Payment and Remuneration  
a. Detail compensation for participant s including possible total compensation, proposed 
bonus, and any proposed reductions or penalties for not completing the protocol . 
 
For each assessment during the study, both int ervention and control group patients will be remunerated as 
follows: $25 for baseline assessment prior to intervention period, and $50 for assessment at the end of the intervention period.  
 
In addition, the intervention group only  will be remunerated $ 100 for completion of all intervention visits .   
 
11. Costs  
a. Detail costs of study procedure(s) or drug (s) or substance(s) to participant s and identify 
who will pay for them.  
 
There will not be any additional costs to participants beyond routine financial obligat ions for their 
hospitalization.   
 
 
 
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007   
Page 19 of 24 
 
 References  
1. Kahn JM, Goss CH, Heagerty PJ, Kramer AA, O'Brien CR, Rubenfeld GD. Hospital volume and the outcomes of mechanical 
ventilation. N Engl J Med 2006;355:41 -50. 
2. Zilberberg MD, Luippold R S, Sulsky S, Shorr AF. Prolonged acute mechanical ventilation, hospital resource utilization, and 
mortality in the United States. Crit Care Med 2008;36:724- 730. 
3. MacIntyre NR, Epstein SK, Carson S, Scheinhorn D, Christopher K, Muldoon S, National Associa tion for Medical Direction 
of Respiratory C. Management of patients requiring prolonged mechanical ventilation: report of a NAMDRC consensus 
conference. Chest 2005;128:3937- 3954.  
4. Carson SS, Cox CE, Holmes GM, Howard A, Carey TS. The changing epidemiology of mechanical ventilation: a population -
based study. J Intensive Care Med 2006;21:173- 182. 
5. Needham DM, Bronskill SE, Calinawan JR, Sibbald WJ, Pronovost PJ, Laupacis A. Projected incidence of mechanical 
ventilation in Ontario to 2026: Preparing for th e aging baby boomers. Crit Care Med 2005;33:574 -579. 
6. Spragg RG, Bernard GR, Checkley W, Curtis JR, Gajic O, Guyatt G, Hall J, Israel E, Jain M, Needham DM, Randolph AG, 
Rubenfeld GD, Schoenfeld D, Thompson BT, Ware LB, Young D, Harabin AL. Beyond mortal ity: future clinical 
research in acute lung injury. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2010;181:1121- 1127.  
7. Rabiee A, Nikayin S, Hashem MD, Huang M, Dinglas VD, Bienvenu OJ, Turnbull AE, Needham DM. Depressive Symptoms 
After Critical Illness: A Systematic Review and Meta -Analysis. Crit Care Med 2016;  
8. Herridge MS, Tansey CM, Matte A, Tomlinson G, Diaz -Granados N, Cooper A, Guest CB, Mazer CD, Mehta S, Stewart TE, 
Kudlow P, Cook D, Slutsky AS, Cheung AM, Canadian Critical Care Trials G. Functional disability 5 ye ars after acute 
respiratory distress syndrome. N Engl J Med 2011;364:1293- 1304.  
9. Fan E, Dowdy DW, Colantuoni E, Mendez -Tellez PA, Sevransky JE, Shanholtz C, Himmelfarb CR, Desai SV, Ciesla N, 
Herridge MS, Pronovost PJ, Needham DM. Physical complications in acute lung injury survivors: a two -year 
longitudinal prospective study. Crit Care Med 2014;42:849 -859. 
10. Bienvenu OJ, Colantuoni E, Mendez -Tellez PA, Dinglas VD, Shanholtz C, Husain N, Dennison CR, Herridge MS, Pronovost 
PJ, Needham DM. Depressive sym ptoms and impaired physical function after acute lung injury: a 2 -year longitudinal 
study. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2012;185:517- 524. 
11. Herridge MS, Cheung AM, Tansey CM, Matte -Martyn A, Diaz -Granados N, Al -Saidi F, Cooper AB, Guest CB, Mazer CD, 
Mehta S, Stewart TE, Barr A, Cook D, Slutsky AS, Canadian Critical Care Trials G. One -year outcomes in survivors of 
the acute respiratory distress syndrome. N Engl J Med 2003;348:683 -693. 
12. Cheung AM, Tansey CM, Tomlinson G, Diaz -Granados N, Matte A, Barr A, M ehta S, Mazer CD, Guest CB, Stewart TE, 
Al-Saidi F, Cooper AB, Cook D, Slutsky AS, Herridge MS. Two -year outcomes, health care use, and costs of survivors 
of acute respiratory distress syndrome. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2006;174:538 -544. 
13. Needham DM, D avidson J, Cohen H, Hopkins RO, Weinert C, Wunsch H, Zawistowski C, Bemis -Dougherty A, Berney SC, 
Bienvenu OJ, Brady SL, Brodsky MB, Denehy L, Elliott D, Flatley C, Harabin AL, Jones C, Louis D, Meltzer W, Muldoon SR, Palmer JB, Perme C, Robinson M, Schmidt DM, Scruth E, Spill GR, Storey CP, Render M, Votto J, 
Harvey MA. Improving long -term outcomes after discharge from intensive care unit: report from a stakeholders' 
conference. Crit Care Med 2012;40:502 -509. 
14. Callahan CM, Kroenke K, Counsell SR, Hendri e HC, Perkins AJ, Katon W, Noel PH, Harpole L, Hunkeler EM, Unutzer J, 
Investigators I. Treatment of depression improves physical functioning in older adults. J Am Geriatr Soc 2005;53:367 -
373. 
15. Rovner BW, Casten RJ, Hegel MT, Leiby BE, Tasman WS. Preven ting depression in age -related macular degeneration. Arch 
Gen Psychiatry 2007;64:886 -892. 
16. Rovner BW, Casten RJ, Hegel MT, Massof RW, Leiby BE, Ho AC, Tasman WS. Low vision depression prevention trial in 
age-related macular degeneration: a randomized cl inical trial. Ophthalmology 2014;121:2204 -2211.  
17. Frasure -Smith N, Lesperance F, Gravel G, Masson A, Juneau M, Talajic M, Bourassa MG. Social support, depression, and 
mortality during the first year after myocardial infarction. Circulation 2000;101:1919 -1924.  
18. Walker MS, Zona DM, Fisher EB. Depressive symptoms after lung cancer surgery: Their relation to coping style and social 
support. Psychooncology 2006;15:684- 693. 
19. Aneshensel CS, Stone JD. Stress and depression: a test of the buffering model of social support. Arch Gen Psychiatry 
1982;39:1392- 1396.  
20. Volz M, Mobus J, Letsch C, Werheid K. The influence of early depressive symptoms, social support and decreasing self -
efficacy on depression 6 months post -stroke. J Affect Disord 2016;206:252- 255. 
21. Loprinzi CE, Prasad K, Schroeder DR, Sood A. Stress Management and Resilience Training (SMART) program to decrease 
stress and enhance resilience among breast cancer survivors: a pilot randomized clinical trial. Clin Breast Cancer 
2011;11:364- 368. 
22. Southwick SM, Charney DS. The science of resilience: implications for the prevention and treatment of depression. Science 
2012;338:79 -82. 
23. Min JA, Yoon S, Lee CU, Chae JH, Lee C, Song KY, Kim TS. Psychological resilience contributes to low emotional distr ess 
in cancer patients. Support Care Cancer 2013;21:2469- 2476.  
24. Robb SL, Burns DS, Stegenga KA, Haut PR, Monahan PO, Meza J, Stump TE, Cherven BO, Docherty SL, Hendricks -
Ferguson VL, Kintner EK, Haight AE, Wall DA, Haase JE. Randomized clinical trial of  therapeutic music video 
 
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007   
Page 20 of 24 
 
 intervention for resilience outcomes in adolescents/young adults undergoing hematopoietic stem cell transplant: a report 
from the Children's Oncology Group. Cancer 2014;120:909 -917. 
25. Swan J, Sorrell E, MacVicar B, Durham R, Matt hews K. "Coping with depression": an open study of the efficacy of a group 
psychoeducational intervention in chronic, treatment -refractory depression. J Affect Disord 2004;82:125- 129. 
26. Sturrock BA, Xie J, Holloway EE, Hegel M, Casten R, Mellor D, Fenwic k E, Rees G. Illness Cognitions and Coping Self -
Efficacy in Depression Among Persons With Low Vision. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2016;57:3032- 3038.  
27. Choi NG, Hegel MT, Sirrianni L, Marinucci ML, Bruce ML. Passive coping response to depressive symptoms am ong low -
income homebound older adults: does it affect depression severity and treatment outcome? Behav Res Ther 
2012;50:668- 674. 
28. Visser MM, Heijenbrok -Kal MH, Spijker AV, Oostra KM, Busschbach JJ, Ribbers GM. Coping, problem solving, 
depression, and he alth-related quality of life in patients receiving outpatient stroke rehabilitation. Arch Phys Med 
Rehabil 2015;96:1492- 1498.  
29. Sullivan MJ, Wood L, Terry J, Brantley J, Charles A, McGee V, Johnson D, Krucoff MW, Rosenberg B, Bosworth HB, 
Adams K, Cuffe MS. The Support, Education, and Research in Chronic Heart Failure Study (SEARCH): a mindfulness -
based psychoeducational intervention improves depression and clinical symptoms in patients with chronic heart failure. Am Heart J 2009;157:84 -90. 
30. Turnbull A E, Rabiee A, Davis WE, Nasser MF, Venna VR, Lolitha R, Hopkins RO, Bienvenu OJ, Robinson KA, Needham 
DM. Outcome Measurement in ICU Survivorship Research From 1970 to 2013: A Scoping Review of 425 Publications. 
Crit Care Med 2016;44:1267- 1277.  
31. Robinson KA, Davis WE, Dinglas VD, Mendez -Tellez PA, Rabiee A, Sukrithan V, Yalamanchilli R, Turnbull AE, Needham 
DM. A systematic review finds limited data on measurement properties of instruments measuring outcomes in adult intensive care unit survivors. Journal of Clinical Epidemiology 2016;In Press: 
32. Fan E, Cheek F, Chlan L, Gosselink R, Hart N, Herridge MS, Hopkins RO, Hough CL, Kress JP, Latronico N, Moss M, 
Needham DM, Rich MM, Stevens RD, Wilson KC, Winkelman C, Zochodne DW, Ali NA, Adults ATSCoI -aWi, 
American Thoracic S. An official American Thoracic Society Clinical Practice guideline: the diagnosis of intensive care 
unit-acquired weakness in adults. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2014;190:1437 -1446.  
33. National Heart LaBI. Charting the Future Together: The  National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute Strategic Vision.  
https:// www.nhlbi.nih.gov/about/documents/strategic -vision
. Accessed Aug 11, 2016.  
34. Sharpley CF, Bitsika V, Jesulola E, Fitzpatrick K, Agnew LL. The association between aspects of psychological resilience 
and subtypes of depression: implications for focussed clinical treatment models. Int J Psychiatry Clin Pract 
2016;20:151- 156. 
35. Fredrickson BL, Tugade MM, Waugh CE, L arkin GR. What good are positive emotions in crises? A prospective study of 
resilience and emotions following the terrorist attacks on the United States on September 11th, 2001. J Pers Soc 
Psychol 2003;84:365 -376. 
36. Grassi L, Malacarne P, Maestri A, Ramelli E. Depression, psychosocial variables and occurrence of life events among 
patients with cancer. J Affect Disord 1997;44:21 -30. 
37. Grav S, Hellzen O, Romild U, Stordal E. Association between social support and depression in the general population: the 
HUNT study, a cross- sectional survey. J Clin Nurs 2012;21:111 -120. 
38. Santini ZI, Koyanagi A, Tyrovolas S, Mason C, Haro JM. The association between social relationships and depression: a 
systematic review. J Affect Disord 2015;175:53 -65. 
39. Maley JH, Br ewster I, Mayoral I, Siruckova R, Adams S, McGraw KA, Piech AA, Detsky M, Mikkelsen ME. Resilience in 
Survivors of Critical Illness in the Context of the Survivors' Experience and Recovery. Ann Am Thorac Soc 
2016;13:1351- 1360.  
40. Cox CE, Porter LS, Hough CL, White DB, Kahn JM, Carson SS, Tulsky JA, Keefe FJ. Development and preliminary 
evaluation of a telephone -based coping skills training intervention for survivors of acute lung injury and their informal 
caregivers. Intensive Care Med 2012;38:1289- 1297.  
41. Haglund ME, Nestadt PS, Cooper NS, Southwick SM, Charney DS. Psychobiological mechanisms of resilience: relevance to 
prevention and treatment of stress -related psychopathology. Dev Psychopathol 2007;19:889 -920. 
42. Connor KM, Zhang W. Recent advances in the understanding and treatment of anxiety disorders. Resilience: determinants, 
measurement, and treatment responsiveness. CNS Spectr 2006;11:5- 12. 
43. Taylor SE, Stanton AL. Coping resources, coping processes, and mental health. Annu Rev Clin Psychol 2007;3:377 -401. 
44. Cohen S, Wills TA. Stress, social support, and the buffering hypothesis. Psychol Bull 1985;98:310 -357. 
45. Zigmond AS, Snaith RP. The hospital anxiety and depression scale. Acta Psychiatr Scand 1983;67:361- 370. 
46. Kroenke K, Strine TW, Sp itzer RL, Williams JB, Berry JT, Mokdad AH. The PHQ -8 as a measure of current depression in 
the general population. J Affect Disord 2009;114:163- 173. 
47. Corson K, Gerrity MS, Dobscha SK. Screening for depression and suicidality in a VA primary care settin g: 2 items are better 
than 1 item. Am J Manag Care 2004;10:839 -845. 
48. Kroenke K, Spitzer RL, Williams JB, Lowe B. The Patient Health Questionnaire Somatic, Anxiety, and Depressive Symptom 
Scales: a systematic review. Gen Hosp Psychiatry 2010;32:345- 359. 
49. Razykov I, Ziegelstein RC, Whooley MA, Thombs BD. The PHQ -9 versus the PHQ -8--is item 9 useful for assessing suicide 
risk in coronary artery disease patients? Data from the Heart and Soul Study. J Psychosom Res 2012;73:163 -168. 
 
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007   
Page 21 of 24 
 
 50. Jackson JC, Pandhari pande PP, Girard TD, Brummel NE, Thompson JL, Hughes CG, Pun BT, Vasilevskis EE, Morandi A, 
Shintani AK, Hopkins RO, Bernard GR, Dittus RS, Ely EW, Bringing to light the Risk F, Incidence of 
Neuropsychological dysfunction in ICUssi. Depression, post -trauma tic stress disorder, and functional disability in 
survivors of critical illness in the BRAIN -ICU study: a longitudinal cohort study. Lancet Respir Med 2014;2:369 -379. 
51. Higgins JPT, Green S, Cochrane Collaboration. Cochrane handbook for systematic review s of interventions.  Chichester, 
England ; Hoboken, NJ: Wiley -Blackwell; 2008.  
52. Denehy L, Elliott D. Strategies for post ICU rehabilitation. Curr Opin Crit Care 2012;18:503 -508. 
53. Mehlhorn J, Freytag A, Schmidt K, Brunkhorst FM, Graf J, Troitzsch U, Sc hlattmann P, Wensing M, Gensichen J. 
Rehabilitation interventions for postintensive care syndrome: a systematic review. Crit Care Med 2014;42:1263- 1271.  
54. Jones C, Skirrow P, Griffiths RD, Humphris GH, Ingleby S, Eddleston J, Waldmann C, Gager M. Rehabil itation after critical 
illness: a randomized, controlled trial. Crit Care Med 2003;31:2456- 2461.  
55. Dowdy DW, Eid MP, Sedrakyan A, Mendez -Tellez PA, Pronovost PJ, Herridge MS, Needham DM. Quality of life in adult 
survivors of critical illness: a systemati c review of the literature. Intensive Care Med 2005;31:611- 620. 
56. Davydow DS, Gifford JM, Desai SV, Bienvenu OJ, Needham DM. Depression in general intensive care unit survivors: a 
systematic review. Intensive Care Med 2009;35:796- 809. 
57. Elliott D, McKi nley S, Alison J, Aitken LM, King M, Leslie GD, Kenny P, Taylor P, Foley R, Burmeister E. Health -related 
quality of life and physical recovery after a critical illness: a multi -centre randomised controlled trial of a home -based 
physical rehabilitation prog ram. Crit Care 2011;15:R142.  
58. Denehy L, Skinner EH, Edbrooke L, Haines K, Warrillow S, Hawthorne G, Gough K, Hoorn SV, Morris ME, Berney S. 
Exercise rehabilitation for patients with critical illness: a randomized controlled trial with 12 months of follo w-up. Crit 
Care 2013;17:R156.  
59. Hollon. Psychol Sci Public Interest 2002;39.  
60. Ferster CB. A functional anlysis of depression. Am Psychol 1973;28:857 -870. 
61. Lewinsohn PM. A behavioral approach to depression. In: The psychology of depression: Contempo rary theory and research.  
Oxford, England: Wiley; 1974.  
62. Cuijpers P, van Straten A, Warmerdam L. Behavioral activation treatments of depression: a meta -analysis. Clin Psychol Rev 
2007;27:318- 326. 
63. Dimidjian S, Hollon SD, Dobson KS, Schmaling KB, Kohl enberg RJ, Addis ME, Gallop R, McGlinchey JB, Markley DK, 
Gollan JK, Atkins DC, Dunner DL, Jacobson NS. Randomized trial of behavioral activation, cognitive therapy, and 
antidepressant medication in the acute treatment of adults with major depression. J Consult Clin Psychol 2006;74:658-
670. 
64. Dobson KS, Hollon SD, Dimidjian S, Schmaling KB, Kohlenberg RJ, Gallop RJ, Rizvi SL, Gollan JK, Dunner DL, Jacobson 
NS. Randomized trial of behavioral activation, cognitive therapy, and antidepressant medication in t he prevention of 
relapse and recurrence in major depression. J Consult Clin Psychol 2008;76:468 -477. 
65. Davydow DS, Desai SV, Needham DM, Bienvenu OJ. Psychiatric morbidity in survivors of the acute respiratory distress 
syndrome: a systematic review. Psyc hosom Med 2008;70:512- 519. 
66. Parker AM, Sricharoenchai T, Raparla S, Schneck KW, Bienvenu OJ, Needham DM. Posttraumatic stress disorder in critical 
illness survivors: a metaanalysis. Crit Care Med 2015;43:1121- 1129.  
67. Davydow DS, Gifford JM, Desai SV, Needham DM, Bienvenu OJ. Posttraumatic stress disorder in general intensive care 
unit survivors: a systematic review. Gen Hosp Psychiatry 2008;30:421 -434. 
68. Nikayin S, Rabiee A, Hashem MD, Huang M, Bienvenu OJ, Turnbull AE, Needham DM. Anxiety Symptoms i n Survivors of 
Critical Illness: A Systematic Review and Meta -Analysis. General Hospital Psychiatry  
69. Fan E, Zanni JM, Dennison CR, Lepre SJ, Needham DM. Critical illness neuromyopathy and muscle weakness in patients in 
the intensive care unit. AACN Adv  Crit Care 2009;20:243 -253. 
70. Stevens RD, Dowdy DW, Michaels RK, Mendez- Tellez PA, Pronovost PJ, Needham DM. Neuromuscular dysfunction 
acquired in critical illness: a systematic review. Intensive Care Med 2007;33:1876- 1891.  
71. Hough CL, Needham DM. The role of future longitudinal studies in ICU survivors: understanding determinants and 
pathophysiology of weakness and neuromuscular dysfunction. Curr Opin Crit Care 2007;13:489- 496. 
72. Hashem MD, Parker AM, Needham DM. Early Mobilization and Rehabilitation  of the Critically Ill Patient. Chest 2016; 
73. Fan E, Ciesla ND, Truong AD, Bhoopathi V, Zeger SL, Needham DM. Inter- rater reliability of manual muscle strength 
testing in ICU survivors and simulated patients. Intensive Care Med 2010;36:1038- 1043.  
74. Needham DM. Mobilizing patients in the intensive care unit: improving neuromuscular weakness and physical function. 
JAMA 2008;300:1685- 1690.  
75. Parker A, Sricharoenchai T, Needham DM. Early Rehabilitation in the Intensive Care Unit: Preventing Physical and M ental 
Health Impairments. Curr Phys Med Rehabil Rep 2013;1:307 -314. 
76. Hegel MT, Imming J, Cyr -Provost M, Hitchcock Noel P, Arean PA, Unutzer J. Role of behavioral health professionals in 
collaborative stepped care treatment model for depression in primar y care: Project IMPACT. Families, Systems & 
Health 2002;20:265- 277. 
77. Unutzer J, Katon W, Callahan CM, Williams JW, Jr., Hunkeler E, Harpole L, Hoffing M, Della Penna RD, Noel PH, Lin EH, 
Arean PA, Hegel MT, Tang L, Belin TR, Oishi S, Langston C, Treatme nt IIIM -PAtC. Collaborative care management 
of late -life depression in the primary care setting: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2002;288:2836- 2845.  
 
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007   
Page 22 of 24 
 
 78. Arean P, Hegel M, Vannoy S, Fan MY, Unuzter J. Effectiveness of problem -solving therapy for older, primary care patients 
with depression: results from the IMPACT project. Gerontologist 2008;48:311- 323. 
79. Robinson RG, Jorge RE, Moser DJ, Acion L, Solodkin A, Small SL, Fonzetti P, Hegel M, Arndt S. Escitalopram and 
problem -solving therapy for prevention of poststroke depression: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2008;299:2391-
2400.  
80. Choi NG, Wilson NL, Sirrianni L, Marinucci ML, Hegel MT. Acceptance of home -based telehealth problem -solving therapy 
for depressed, low -income homebound older adults: qualitative interviews with the participants and aging -service case 
managers. Gerontologist 2014;54:704- 713. 
81. Choi NG, Marti CN, Bruce ML, Hegel MT, Wilson NL, Kunik ME. Six -month postintervention depression and disability 
outcomes of in -home telehealth p roblem -solving therapy for depressed, low- income homebound older adults. Depress 
Anxiety 2014;31:653- 661. 
82. Choi NG, Hegel MT, Marti N, Marinucci ML, Sirrianni L, Bruce ML. Telehealth problem -solving therapy for depressed 
low-income homebound older adult s. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry 2014;22:263 -271. 
83. Hegel MT, Lyons KD, Hull JG, Kaufman P, Urquhart L, Li Z, Ahles TA. Feasibility study of a randomized controlled trial of 
a telephone- delivered problem -solving- occupational therapy intervention to reduce part icipation restrictions in rural 
breast cancer survivors undergoing chemotherapy. Psychooncology 2011;20:1092- 1101.  
84. Lyons KD, Erickson KS, Hegel MT. Problem -solving strategies of women undergoing chemotherapy for breast cancer. Can 
J Occup Ther 2012;79:33 -40. 
85. Lyons KD, Hull JG, Kaufman PA, Li Z, Seville JL, Ahles TA, Kornblith AB, Hegel MT. Development and initial evaluation 
of a telephone -delivered, behavioral activation, and problem -solving treatment program to address functional goals of 
breast ca ncer survivors. J Psychosoc Oncol 2015;33:199- 218. 
86. Lyons KD, Svensborn IA, Kornblith AB, Hegel MT. A Content Analysis of Functional Recovery Strategies of Breast Cancer 
Survivors. OTJR (Thorofare N J) 2015;35:73- 80. 
87. Haley SM, Coster WJ, Andres PL, Ludlow LH, Ni P, Bond TL, Sinclair SJ, Jette AM. Activity outcome measurement for 
postacute care. Med Care 2004;42:I49- 61. 
88. Haley SM, Siebens H, Coster WJ, Tao W, Black -Schaffer RM, Gandek B, Sinclair SJ, Ni P. Computerized adaptive testing 
for follow -up after discharge from inpatient rehabilitation: I. Activity outcomes. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 2006;87:1033-
1042.  
89. Dowdy DW, Bienvenu OJ, Dinglas VD, Mendez -Tellez PA, Sevransky J, Shanholtz C, Needham DM. Are intensive care 
factors associated with depres sive symptoms 6 months after acute lung injury? Crit Care Med 2009;37:1702- 1707.  
90. Dowdy DW, Dinglas V, Mendez -Tellez PA, Bienvenu OJ, Sevransky J, Dennison CR, Shanholtz C, Needham DM. Intensive 
care unit hypoglycemia predicts depression during early re covery from acute lung injury. Crit Care Med 2008;36:2726-
2733.  
91. Ely EW, Truman B, Shintani A, Thomason JW, Wheeler AP, Gordon S, Francis J, Speroff T, Gautam S, Margolin R, Sessler 
CN, Dittus RS, Bernard GR. Monitoring sedation status over time in ICU patients: reliability and validity of the 
Richmond Agitation- Sedation Scale (RASS). JAMA 2003;289:2983 -2991.  
92. Ely EW, Inouye SK, Bernard GR, Gordon S, Francis J, May L, Truman B, Speroff T, Gautam S, Margolin R, Hart RP, Dittus 
R. Delirium in mechanical ly ventilated patients: validity and reliability of the confusion assessment method for the 
intensive care unit (CAM -ICU). JAMA 2001;286:2703 -2710.  
93. Ely EW, Margolin R, Francis J, May L, Truman B, Dittus R, Speroff T, Gautam S, Bernard GR, Inouye SK. Ev aluation of 
delirium in critically ill patients: validation of the Confusion Assessment Method for the Intensive Care Unit (CAM -
ICU). Crit Care Med 2001;29:1370 -1379.  
94. Carver CS. You want to measure coping but your protocol's too long: consider the brie f COPE. Int J Behav Med 1997;4:92 -
100. 
95. Kanter JW, Mulick PS, Busch AM, Berlin KS, Martell CR. The behavioral activation for depression scale (BADS): 
psychometric properties and factor structure. Journal of Psychopathology and Behavioral Assessment 2007 ;29:191 -202. 
96. Connor KM, Davidson JR. Development of a new resilience scale: the Connor -Davidson Resilience Scale (CD -RISC). 
Depress Anxiety 2003;18:76- 82. 
97. Charlson ME, Pompei P, Ales KL, MacKenzie CR. A new method of classifying prognostic comorbidity in longitudinal 
studies: development and validation. J Chronic Dis 1987;40:373- 383. 
98. Groll DL, To T, Bombardier C, Wright JG. The development of a comorbidity index with physical function as the outcome. J 
Clin Epidemiol 2005;58:595 -602. 
99. Knaus W A, Draper EA, Wagner DP, Zimmerman JE. APACHE II: a severity of disease classification system. Crit Care Med 
1985;13:818- 829. 
100. Needham DM, Wozniak AW, Hough CL, Morris PE, Dinglas VD, Jackson JC, Mendez -Tellez PA, Shanholtz C, Ely EW, 
Colantuoni E, Hop kins RO, National Institutes of Health NAN. Risk factors for physical impairment after acute lung 
injury in a national, multicenter study. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2014;189:1214 -1224.  
101. Kho ME, Truong AD, Zanni JM, Ciesla ND, Brower RG, Palmer JB, Need ham DM. Neuromuscular electrical stimulation 
in mechanically ventilated patients: a randomized, sham -controlled pilot trial with blinded outcome assessment. J Crit 
Care 2015;30:32 -39. 
 
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007   
Page 23 of 24 
 
 102. Cronberg T, Lilja G, Horn J, Kjaergaard J, Wise MP, Pellis T, Hovde nes J, Gasche Y, Aneman A, Stammet P, Erlinge D, 
Friberg H, Hassager C, Kuiper M, Wanscher M, Bosch F, Cranshaw J, Kleger GR, Persson S, Unden J, Walden A, 
Winkel P, Wetterslev J, Nielsen N, Investigators TTMT. Neurologic Function and Health -Related Qualit y of Life in 
Patients Following Targeted Temperature Management at 33 degrees C vs 36 degrees C After Out -of-Hospital Cardiac 
Arrest: A Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA Neurol 2015;72:634- 641. 
103. Minns Lowe CJ, Wilson MS, Sackley CM, Barker KL. Blind outc ome assessment: the development and use of procedures 
to maintain and describe blinding in a pragmatic physiotherapy rehabilitation trial. Clin Rehabil 2011;25:264 -274. 
104. Jorm AF. A short form of the Informant Questionnaire on Cognitive Decline in the E lderly (IQCODE): development and 
cross -validation. Psychol Med 1994;24:145- 153. 
105. Herrmann C. International experiences with the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale --a review of validation data and 
clinical results. J Psychosom Res 1997;42:17- 41. 
106. Bjelland I, Dahl AA, Haug TT, Neckelmann D. The validity of the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale. An updated 
literature review. J Psychosom Res 2002;52:69 -77. 
107. Hayes JA, Black NA, Jenkinson C, Young JD, Rowan KM, Daly K, Ridley S. Outcome measure s for adult critical care: a 
systematic review. Health Technol Assess 2000;4:1 -111. 
108. Bienvenu OJ, Colantuoni E, Mendez -Tellez PA, Shanholtz C, Dennison -Himmelfarb CR, Pronovost PJ, Needham DM. 
Cooccurrence of and remission from general anxiety, depress ion, and posttraumatic stress disorder symptoms after 
acute lung injury: a 2- year longitudinal study. Crit Care Med 2015;43:642- 653. 
109. First MB, Williams JB, Karg RS, Spitzer RL. Structured Clinical Interview for DSM -5, Research Version (SCID -5 RV).  
Ame rican Psychiatric Publishing; 2015.  
110. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. 5th Edition.  APA; 2013.  
111. Lobbestael J, Leurgans M, Arntz A. Inter -rater reliability of the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM -IV Axis I Disorders 
(SCID I) and Axis II Disorders (SCID II). Clin Psychol Psychother 2011;18:75- 79. 
112. Segal DL, Hersen M, Van Hasselt VB. Reliability of the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM -III-R: an evaluative review. 
Compr Psychiatry 1994;35:316- 327. 
113. Skre I, Onstad S , Torgersen S, Kringlen E. High interrater reliability for the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM -III-R 
Axis I (SCID -I). Acta Psychiatr Scand 1991;84:167 -173. 
114. Zanarini MC, Frankenburg FR. Attainment and maintenance of reliability of axis I and II d isorders over the course of a 
longitudinal study. Compr Psychiatry 2001;42:369 -374. 
115. Jette AM, Haley SM. Contemporary measurement techniques for rehabilitation outcomes assessment. J Rehabil Med 
2005;37:339- 345. 
116. Jette AM, Haley SM, Tao W, Ni P, Mo ed R, Meyers D, Zurek M. Prospective evaluation of the AM -PAC -CAT in 
outpatient rehabilitation settings. Phys Ther 2007;87:385- 398. 
117. Jette AM. Boston University Activity Measure for Post -Acute Care (AM- PAC) User's Manual.  2009.  
118. Ruhl AP, Lord RK, P anek JA, Colantuoni E, Sepulveda KA, Chong A, Dinglas VD, Shanholtz CB, Pronovost PJ, 
Steinwachs DM, Needham DM. Health care resource use and costs of two -year survivors of acute lung injury. An 
observational cohort study. Ann Am Thorac Soc 2015;12:392 -401. 
119. Needham DM, Dinglas VD, Morris PE, Jackson JC, Hough CL, Mendez -Tellez PA, Wozniak AW, Colantuoni E, Ely EW, 
Rice TW, Hopkins RO, Network NNA. Physical and cognitive performance of patients with acute lung injury 1 year 
after initial trophic versus full enteral feeding. EDEN trial follow -up. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2013;188:567 -576. 
120. Oxman TE, Hegel MT, Hull JG, Dietrich AJ. Problem -solving treatment and coping styles in primary care for minor 
depression. J Consult Clin Psychol 2008;76:933- 943. 
121. Needham DM, Dennison CR, Dowdy DW, Mendez -Tellez PA, Ciesla N, Desai SV, Sevransky J, Shanholtz C, Scharfstein 
D, Herridge MS, Pronovost PJ. Study protocol: The Improving Care of Acute Lung Injury Patients (ICAP) study. Crit 
Care 2006;10:R9.  
122. Fillion L, Kovacs AH, Gagnon P, Endler NS. Validation of the shortened COPE for use with breast cancer patients 
undergoing radiation therapy. Current Pyschology 2002;21:17 -34. 
123. Nasreddine ZS, Phillips NA, Bedirian V, Charbonneau S, Whitehead V, Collin I, Cummings JL, Chertkow H. The Montreal 
Cognitive Assessment, MoCA: a brief screening tool for mild cognitive impairment. J Am Geriatr Soc 2005;53:695 -
699. 
124. Bienvenu OJ, Williams JB, Yang A, Hopkins RO, Needham DM. Posttraumatic stress disorder in surviv ors of acute lung 
injury: evaluating the Impact of Event Scale -Revised. Chest 2013;144:24 -31. 
125. Needham DM, Dinglas VD, Bienvenu OJ, Colantuoni E, Wozniak AW, Rice TW, Hopkins RO, Network NNA. One year 
outcomes in patients with acute lung injury randomi sed to initial trophic or full enteral feeding: prospective follow -up of 
EDEN randomised trial. BMJ 2013;346:f1532.  
126. Needham DM, Colantuoni E, Mendez -Tellez PA, Dinglas VD, Sevransky JE, Denn ison Himmelfarb CR, Desai SV, 
Shanholtz C, Brower RG, Pronovost PJ. Lung protective mechanical ventilation and two year survival in patients with acute lung injury: prospective cohort study. BMJ 2012;344:e2124.  
127. Needham DM, Yang T, Dinglas VD, Mendez -Tellez PA, Shanholtz C, Sevransky JE, Brower RG, Pronovost PJ, Colantuoni 
E. Timing of low tidal volume ventilation and intensive care unit mortality in acute respiratory distress syndrome. A prospective cohort study. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2015;191:177 -185. 
 
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007   
Page 24 of 24 
 
 128. Chan KS, Bienvenu OJ, Dinglas V, Cuthbertson BH, Porter R, Jones C, Hopkins RO, Needham DM. Distribution- based 
estimates of minimal important difference for hospital anxiety and depression scale and impact of event scale- revised in 
survivors of a cute respiratory failure. Gen Hosp Psychiatry 2016;In Press:  
129. Arnold DM, Burns KE, Adhikari NK, Kho ME, Meade MO, Cook DJ. The design and interpretation of pilot trials in 
clinical research in critical care. Crit Care Med 2009;37:S69 -74. 
130. Kistin C,  Silverstein M. Pilot Studies: A Critical but Potentially Misused Component of Interventional Research. JAMA 
2015;314:1561- 1562.  
131. Mokkink LB, Terwee CB, Patrick DL, Alonso J, Stratford PW, Knol DL, Bouter LM, de Vet HC. The COSMIN study 
reached interna tional consensus on taxonomy, terminology, and definitions of measurement properties for health -related 
patient -reported outcomes. J Clin Epidemiol 2010;63:737 -745. 
132. Prinsen CA, Vohra S, Rose MR, Boers M, Tugwell P, Clarke M, Williamson PR, Terwee CB. How to select outcome 
measurement instruments for outcomes included in a "Core Outcome Set" - a practical guideline. Trials 2016;17:449.  
133. Jutte JE, Needham DM, Pfoh ER, Bienvenu OJ. Psychometric evaluation of the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale 3  
months after acute lung injury. J Crit Care 2015;30:793- 798. 
 
 